Klaus Bohnert has been a Senior Principal Scientist at the ABB Corporate Research Center 
in Baden, Switzerland. Fields of research included nonlinear optics, ultrafast phenomena, 
and photorefractive effects in semiconductor materials. In 1986, he joined the Corporate 
Research Center of Brown Boveri Ltd (ABB Ltd since 1988) in Baden, Switzerland. There, 
his focus was on research and development of optical sensors for applications in the elec￾tric power industry, oil and gas industry, and chemical process industries. He has been an 
author or co-author of more than 130 scientific publications, about 130 conference presen￾tations, and an inventor on over 90 patents.
Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors is the first book to provide a complete, compre￾hensive, and up-to-date treatment of the domain of fiber optic and polarimetric sensors, 
covering fundamental operating principles, characteristics, and construction as well as 
their use for high voltage current and voltage sensing.
Written by one of the most recognized experts in polarimetric sensing, Optical Fiber 
Current and Voltage Sensors begins by covering the fundamentals of polarized light, as 
well as essential sensor components. The author goes on to outline various sensor types 
and their applications, with a focus on sensors for electric phenomena. The chapters then 
lay out the demands that sensors need to meet, the technical obstacles and limitations that 
need to be considered. The book also covers comparisons to corresponding traditional 
instruments, as well as covering alternative non-conventional sensors.
This book will be of interest to a broad audience of prospective readers ranging from 
graduate research students, to researchers in physics and engineering fields, to industry 
professionals active in the field who wish to learn about the technology and/or interested 
in the development of new commercial solutions based on polarimetric-type fiber 
sensing.
Optical Fiber Current and 
Voltage SensorsSeries in Fiber Optic Sensors
Series Editor: Dr. Alexis Mendez, MCH Engineering, LLC
This series of practical, concise, and modern guidebooks encompasses all types of fiber 
optic sensors, including fiber Bragg grating sensors, Fabry-Pérot sensors, interferomet￾ric sensors, distributed sensors, and biomedical sensors. The aim of the series is to give a 
broadly approachable, essential overview of the fundamental science, core technologies, 
design principles, and key implementation challenges in applications, such as oil, gas, and 
mining; renewable energy; defense/security; biomedical sciences; civil and structural engi￾neering; and industrial process monitoring. Scientists, engineers, technicians, and stu￾dents in any relevant field of practice or research will benefit from these unique titles.
Titles in the Series
Fiber-Optic Fabry-Pérot Sensors: An Introduction
Yun-Jiang Rao, Zeng-Ling Ran, Yuan Gong
An Introduction to Distributed Optical Fibre Sensors
Arthur H. Hartog
Plastic Optical Fiber Sensors: Science, Technology and Applications
Edited by Marcelo M. Werneck, Regina Célia S. B. Allil
Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
Klaus Bohnert
For more information about this series, please visit https://www.crcpress.com/Series-in-Fiber￾Optic-Sensors/book-series/CRCSERINFIBOptical Fiber Current and 
Voltage Sensors
Klaus BohnertDesigned cover image: Shutterstock_2222103149
First edition published 2024
by CRC Press
2385 NW Executive Center Drive, Suite 320, Boca Raton FL 33431
and by CRC Press
4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN
CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
© 2024 Klaus Bohnert
Reasonable efforts have been made to publish reliable data and information, but the author and publisher 
cannot assume responsibility for the validity of all materials or the consequences of their use. The authors and 
publishers have attempted to trace the copyright holders of all material reproduced in this publication and 
apologize to copyright holders if permission to publish in this form has not been obtained. If any copyright 
material has not been acknowledged please write and let us know so we may rectify in any future reprint.
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, transmit￾ted, or utilized in any form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, 
including photocopying, microfilming, and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, 
without written permission from the publishers.
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, access www.copyright.com or 
contact the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-
8400. For works that are not available on CCC please contact mpkbookspermissions@tandf.co.uk
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks and are used 
only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
ISBN: 978-0-367-55584-9 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-0-367-57007-1 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-1-003-10032-4 (ebk)
DOI: 10.1201/9781003100324
Typeset in Minion
by SPi Technologies India Pvt Ltd (Straive)v
Contents
Series Preface, xi
Preface, xiii
List of Abbreviations, xv
Introduction 1
CONVENTIONAL INSTRUMENT CURRENT AND VOLTAGE 
TRANSFORMERS 2
OPTICAL CURRENT AND VOLTAGE SENSORS 4
REFERENCES 6
Part I Fundamentals
 Chapter 1 ◾ Optical Fibers 9
1.1 LIGHT WAVE PROPAGATION 9
1.2 FIBER TYPES 13
1.3 POLARIZATION-MAINTAINING FIBERS 14
 Chapter 2 ◾ Polarization 17
2.1 POLARIZATION ELLIPSE 18
2.2 POINCARÉ SPHERE 22
2.3 LINEAR BIREFRINGENCE 23
2.4 CIRCULAR BIREFRINGENCE 24
2.5 PRISM POLARIZERS 25
2.6 LINEAR RETARDERS 26
2.7 JONES MATRIX CALCULUS 27
2.7.1 Jones Vectors 27
2.7.2 Jones Matrices 28
2.7.3 Linear and Circular Base 31vi ◾ Contents
2.7.4 Eigenpolarizations and Eigenvalues 33
2.7.5 Jones Matrix in Terms of Its Eigenvalues 35
2.7.6 N-Matrix 35
2.7.7 Jones Matrices for Backward Propagation 36
 Chapter 3 ◾ Sensing Methods 38
3.1 POLARIMETRIC SENSORS 38
3.2 TWO BEAM INTERFEROMETERS 40
3.3 FABRY-PÉROT INTERFEROMETER 41
3.4 COHERENCE 43
3.5 SENSOR COMPONENTS 44
3.5.1 Light Sources 44
3.5.2 Lyot Fiber Depolarizers 44
3.5.3 Fiber Polarizers 45
3.5.4 Directional Fiber Couplers 45
3.5.5 Sensing Fibers, Fiber Retarders, and Sensing Materials 45
3.5.6 Fiber Mirrors 45
3.5.7 Phase Modulators 45
3.5.8 Faraday Rotators, Rotator Mirrors, and Optical Isolators 45
3.5.9 Fiber Bragg Gratings 46
3.5.10 Fiber Fusion Splices and Mechanical Fiber Connectors 46
REFERENCES 47
Part II Magnetic Field and Current Sensors
 Chapter 4 ◾ Magneto-Optic Effects 53
4.1 FARADAY EFFECT 53
4.2 OTHER MAGNETO-OPTIC EFFECTS 55
4.3 MAGNETO-OPTIC MATERIALS 55
 Chapter 5 ◾ Current Sensing with Local Magneto-Optic 
Field Sensors 57
5.1 POINT MAGNETIC FIELD SENSORS 57
5.2 FIELD SENSORS IN MAGNETIC CORE 61
 Chapter 6 ◾ Glass Block Optical Current Sensors 65
6.1 SOME CONCLUSIONS ON GLASS BLOCK CURRENT SENSORS 70Contents ◾ vii
 Chapter 7 ◾ Optical Fibers for Current Sensing 72
7.1 INTRODUCTION 72
7.2 LIGHT WAVE PROPAGATION IN PERTURBED 
SINGLE-MODE FIBERS 73
7.3 FARADAY EFFECT IN THE PRESENCE LINEAR BIREFRINGENCE 76
7.3.1 Attempts of Linear Birefringence Compensation 79
7.4 TWISTED FIBER 80
7.5 SPUN HIGHLY BIREFRINGENT FIBERS 85
7.5.1 Coupled Mode Equations 87
7.5.2 Polarization State Evolution 90
7.5.3 Polarization State Evolution in Bent Spun Fiber 93
7.5.4 Magneto-Optic Sensitivity of Spun Fibers 93
7.5.5 Spun Fibers Operated with Broadband Light 97
7.5.6 Photonic Crystal Spun Fibers 98
7.6 HELICALLY WOUND FIBERS 98
7.7 HELICAL-CORE FIBERS 102
7.8 SPUN LOW BIREFRINGENCE FIBERS 102
7.9 THERMALLY ANNEALED FIBER COILS 103
7.10 FLINT GLASS FIBERS 104
7.11 FIBERS WITH ENHANCED MAGNETO-OPTIC SENSITIVITY 105
7.12 MULTIMODE FIBERS 106
7.13 LIQUID CORE FIBERS 106
7.14 MICROFIBER COILS 106
 Chapter 8 ◾ Fiber-Optic Current Sensors 108
8.1 OVERVIEW 108
8.2 BASIC POLARIMETRIC FOCS 109
8.2.1 Transmissive Operation Mode 109
8.2.2 Reflective Operation Mode 109
8.3 POLARIMETRIC FOCS WITH BIASING FARADAY ROTATOR 110
8.4 SAGNAC INTERFEROMETER CURRENT SENSORS 110
8.4.1 Sagnac Interferometer with Non-Reciprocal Phase Modulation 110
8.4.2 Sagnac Interferometer with 3×3 Fiber Coupler 115
8.5 FIBER-OPTIC CURRENT SENSORS WITH 
POLARIZATION-ROTATED REFLECTION 117
8.5.1 RFOCS with Non-Reciprocal Phase Modulation 117viii ◾ Contents
8.5.2 RFOCS with Static Phase Bias 121
8.6 TEMPERATURE COMPENSATION OF FOCS WITH 
POLARIZATION-ROTATED REFLECTION 123
8.6.1 Compensation of Low Birefringence Fiber Coils 123
8.6.2 Compensation of Spun Highly Birefringent Fiber Coils 129
8.7 FABRY-PÉROT RESONATOR AND LIGHT RECIRCULATING 
CURRENT SENSORS 132
8.8 FIBER LASER CURRENT SENSORS 133
8.9 INTEGRATED-OPTIC CURRENT SENSORS 135
8.10 FARADAY EFFECT IN FIBER BRAGG GRATINGS 135
8.11 MULTIPLEXED AND DISTRIBUTED CURRENT SENSING 136
 Chapter 9 ◾ Hybrid Current Transformers 137
9.1 ELECTRONIC CURRENT TRANSFORMERS (ECT) WITH OPTICAL 
COMMUNICATION 137
9.2 HYBRID OCT WITH PIEZOELECTRIC TRANSDUCERS 139
9.3 INTENSITY MODULATING AND MICRO-MACHINED OCT 141
 Chapter 10 ◾ Further Magnetic Field and Current Sensors 142
10.1 MAGNETOSTRICTIVE SENSORS 142
10.2 MAGNETIC FLUID-BASED SENSORS 145
10.3 NON-OPTICAL NON-CONVENTIONAL SENSORS 146
 Chapter 11 ◾ Accuracy, Precision, and Reliability of Optical 
Current Sensors 148
11.1 FOCS ACCURACY 148
11.1.1 Manufacturing Tolerances 148
11.1.2 Temperature Dependence of Optical Component Parameters 149
11.1.3 Stress Acting on Optical Components 150
11.1.4 Component Aging 150
11.2 FOCS PRECISION 150
11.2.1 Noise Sources 150
11.2.2 Controlling Precision 152
11.3 LONG-TERM RELIABILITY 153
 Chapter 12 ◾ Applications 157
12.1 ELECTRO-WINNING OF METALS 157
12.2 ELECTRIC POWER TRANSMISSION 158Contents ◾ ix
12.3 NUCLEAR FUSION RESEARCH 161
FURTHER READING 161
REFERENCES 162
Part III Electric Field and Voltage Sensors
 Chapter 13 ◾ Electro-Optic Effects 197
13.1 POCKELS EFFECT AND KERR EFFECT 197
13.2 ELECTRO-OPTIC MATERIALS 204
 Chapter 14 ◾ Electro-Optic Voltage Sensors 208
14.1 VOLTAGE SENSING METHODS 208
14.2 VOLTAGE SENSING WITH LOCAL ELECTRIC FIELD SENSORS 208
14.3 ELECTRIC FIELD INTEGRATING SENSORS 210
14.3.1 OVT Measuring True Line Integral of Electric Field 210
14.3.2 OVT with Discrete Field Summation 214
14.4 DC VOLTAGE SENSORS 216
14.5 INTEGRATED-OPTIC ELECTRIC FIELD SENSORS 217
14.6 FIBER TIP ELECTRIC FIELD SENSORS 219
14.7 KERR EFFECT-BASED SENSORS 221
14.8 ALTERNATIVE INTERROGATION TECHNIQUES 222
 Chapter 15 ◾ Electro-Optic Fibers 223
15.1 POLED FIBERS 223
15.1.1 Thermal Fiber Poling 223
15.1.2 Electro-Optic Effect in Poled Fibers 225
15.1.3 Poled Fiber Electric Field and Voltage Sensors 226
15.2 CRYSTALLINE FIBERS 227
15.2.1 Micro-Pulling-Down Growth of BGO Fibers 227
15.2.2 Molten Core Fabrication of BGO Fibers 229
15.2.3 Crystallized Glass Fibers 229
15.3 D-FIBERS COUPLED TO ELECTRO-OPTIC CRYSTAL SLABS 229
 Chapter 16 ◾ Piezo-Optic Voltage Sensors 231
16.1 THE PIEZOELECTRIC EFFECT 231
16.2 PIEZOELECTRIC MATERIALS 232
16.3 INTERFEROMETRIC PIEZOELECTRIC VOLTAGE SENSORS 234x ◾ Contents
16.3.1 Quartz Transducer with Dual-Mode Sensing Fiber 234
16.3.2 170 kV POVT for Gas-Insulated Switchgear 236
16.3.3 420 kV POVT for Air-Insulated Substations 238
16.4 PIEZOELECTRIC VOLTAGE SENSORS WITH FBG INTERROGATION 239
16.5 LIGHT INTENSITY MODULATING VOLTAGE SENSORS 241
16.6 PIEZOELECTRIC POLYMER-JACKETED FIBERS 242
 Chapter 17 ◾ Further Electric Field and Voltage Sensors 243
17.1 ELECTROSTRICTIVE SENSORS 243
17.2 LIQUID-CRYSTAL-BASED SENSORS 244
17.3 MICROELECTROMECHANICAL SENSORS 245
17.4 ELECTRO-LUMINOPHORES AND ELECTRO-ABSORBERS 246
17.5 STARK EFFECT-BASED ELECTRIC FIELD MEASUREMENT 247
17.6 ELECTRIC FIELD-INDUCED SECOND HARMONIC GENERATION 247
17.7 HYBRID VOLTAGE TRANSDUCERS 247
17.8 NON-OPTICAL NON-CONVENTIONAL SENSORS 248
FURTHER READING 248
REFERENCES 249
FINAL REMARKS, 267
INDEX, 268xi
Series Preface
Optical fibers are considered among the top innovations of the twentieth century, and 
Sir Charles Kao, a visionary proponent who championed their use as a medium for com￾munication, received the 2009 Nobel Prize in Physics. Optical fiber communications have 
become an essential backbone of today’s digital world and internet infrastructure, making 
it possible to transmit vast amounts of data over long distances with high integrity and low 
loss. In effect, most of the world’s data flows nowadays as light photons in a global mesh of 
optical fiber conduits. As the optical fiber industry turned fifty in 2016, the field might be 
middle-aged, but many more advances and societal benefits are expected of it.
What has made optical fibers and fiber-based telecommunications so effective and per￾vasive in the modern world? Its intrinsic features and capabilities make it so versatile and 
very powerful as an enabling and transformative technology. Among their characteristics 
we have their electromagnetic (EM) immunity, intrinsic safety, small size and weight, 
capability to perform multi-point and multi-parameter sensing remotely, and so on. 
Optical fiber sensors stem from these same characteristics. Initially, fiber sensors were lab 
curiosities and simple proof-of-concept demonstrations. Nowadays, however, optical fiber 
sensors are making an impact and serious commercial inroads in industrial sensing, bio￾medical applications, as well as in military and defense systems, and have spanned applica￾tions as diverse as oil well downhole pressure sensors to intra-aortic catheters.
This transition has taken the better part of thirty years and has now reached the point 
where fiber sensor operation and instrumentation are well understood and developed, and 
a diverse variety of commercial sensors and instruments are readily available. However, 
fiber sensor technology is not as widely known or deeply understood today as other more 
conventional sensors and sensing technologies such as electronic, piezoelectric, and MEMS 
devices. In part this is due to the broad set of different types of fiber sensors and techniques 
available. On the other hand, although there are several excellent textbooks reviewing 
optical fiber sensors, their coverage tends to be limited and does not provide sufficiently 
in-depth review of each sensor technology type. Our book series aims to remedy this by 
providing a collection of individual tomes, each focused exclusively on a specific type of 
optical fiber sensor.
The goal of this series has been, from the onset, to develop a set of titles that feature an 
important type of sensor, offering up-to-date advances as well as practical and concise 
information. The series encompasses the most relevant and popular fiber sensor types in 
common use in the field, including fiber Bragg grating sensors, Fabry-Pérot sensors, xii ◾ Series Preface
interferometric sensors, distributed fiber sensors, polarimetric sensors, polymer fiber sen￾sors, structural health monitoring (SHM) using fiber sensors, biomedical fiber sensors, 
and several others.
This series is directed at a broad readership of scientists, engineers, technicians, and 
students involved in relevant areas of research and study of fiber sensors, specialty optical 
fibers, instrumentation, optics, and photonics. Together, these titles will fill the need for 
concise, widely accessible introductory overviews of the core technologies, fundamental 
design principles, and challenges to implementation of optical fiber-based sensors and 
sensing techniques.
This series was originally made possible by the vision and enthusiasm of the first series 
manager, Luna Han, to whom I owe a debt of gratitude for his passion, encouragement, and 
strong support — from the initial formulation of the book project and throughout the ini￾tial series development.
I also wish to thank Carolina Antunes, the current Series Editor and manager at CRC 
Press, who has been a tremendous resource and facilitator, and a delight to work with in 
the various stages of development for this and the other series’ volumes.
Information — as the saying goes — is knowledge. And thanks to the dedication and 
hard work of the individual volume authors as well as chapter co-authors, the readers have 
enriched their knowledge on the subject of fiber-optic sensors. I thank all the authors and 
extend my deep appreciation for their interest and support for this series and for all the 
time and effort they poured into its writing.
To the reader, I hope that this series is informative, fresh, and of aid in his/her ongoing 
research, and wish much enjoyment and success!
Alexis Méndez, Ph.D.
Series Editor
President
MCH Engineering, LLC
Alameda, CAxiii
Preface
For more than half a century, optical current and voltage sensors have been a subject of 
research and development in academia and industry. The most important applications of 
the sensors are in electric power transmission and distribution. Further applications are in 
industry, e.g., in the electro-winning of metals in traction (railways), sciences, and other 
fields. In the electric power world, the lightweight sensors are alternatives to heavy tradi￾tional instrument transformers. Besides saving tons of material, optical current and volt￾age sensors provide a more accurate image of the primary current or voltage waveforms, 
offer high application flexibility, ease of installation, and are safer to operate. Moreover, 
the sensors perfectly fit into modern digital systems for substation communication and 
control.
This book aims to trace the history of optical current and voltage measurement, present 
the numerous sensing concepts that have been developed in the course of time, and explain 
the physics behind the technology. The presentation portrays important transducer mate￾rials and their properties, special sensing fibers and dedicated optical components, and 
depicts examples of theoretical and experimental performance data. The book also points 
out the considerable technical obstacles that had to be overcome on the path to viable sen￾sors capable of meeting the stringent industry demands. Examples of practical applications 
illustrate the benefits of optical current and voltage sensors versus conventional solutions. 
With somewhat lesser emphasis, the book also considers optical magnetic and electric field 
sensors for other purposes such as field mapping, e.g., on antennas, high frequency elec￾tronic circuits, or in electro-magnetic compatibility studies. Another important objective 
is a comprehensive overview of the literature in the field. The citations mostly refer to 
archival journal articles. Articles in conference proceedings are cited in the absence of a 
corresponding journal paper or for reasons of priority.
The book will be of interest to a broad audience ranging from graduate research stu￾dents, to researchers in physics and engineering fields, to industry professionals active in 
the field who wish to learn about the technology and its applications. The first part of the 
book on Fundamentals introduces readers less intimate with the field of optics to the basics 
of optical fibers, polarized light, the Jones matrix calculus for describing the propagation 
of polarized light through birefringent media, and polarimetric and interferometric sens￾ing techniques. Part II and Part III then present the actual sensors, the underlying physics, 
and applications.xiv ◾ Preface
I am indebted to many former colleagues at ABB Ltd for fruitful collaborations, an 
inspiring and enjoyable work atmosphere, and countless discussions. They are too numer￾ous to mention all by name. Special thanks are due to my former team colleagues at 
Corporate Research: Philippe Gabus, Andreas Frank, Berkan Gülenaltin, Lin Yang, Xun 
Gu, Georg Müller, Miklos Lenner, Stephan Wildermuth, Sergio Marchese, Hubert Brändle, 
and Jürgen Nehring. I would like to thank Alexis Méndez, the editor of the book series, for 
his encouragement to undertake this endeavor. I also thank several professional societies, 
particularly Optica, IEEE, and CIGRE, for granting permission to reprint various Figures 
as indicated in the corresponding captions. Not least, I would like to thank the staff at 
Taylor & Francis for their support in the preparation of the manuscript.xv
List of Abbreviations
AIS Air insulated switchgear/substations
BS Beam splitter
CT Current transformer
CVD Capacitive voltage divider
DFB Distributed feedback
DGD Differential group delay
DOP Degree of polarization
EOVT Electro-optic voltage transducer (transformer)
FOCS Fiber-optic current sensor
FRM Faraday rotator mirror
FSR Free spectral range
FWHM Full width at half maximum
GIS Gas-insulated switchgear
HV High voltage
HVDC High voltage direct current
IEC International Electrotechnical Commission
LC Liquid crystals
LED Light-emitting diode
LHC Left-handed circular
LN Lithium niobate, LiNbO3
MEMS Micro electromechanical system
MIOC Multi-functional integrated optical chip
MMF Multimode fiber
MNF Microfibers and nanofibers
MOCT Magneto-optic current transducer
MV Medium voltage
NEC Noise equivalent current
NLC Nematic liquid crystals
OCS Optical current sensor
OCT Optical current transducer (transformer)
OTDR Optical time domain reflectometry
OVS Optical voltage sensorxvi ◾ List of Abbreviations
OVT Optical voltage transducer (transformer)
PCF Photonic crystal fiber
PD Photodiode
PDL Polarization dependent loss
PER Polarization extinction ratio
PM Polarization maintaining
PMF Polarization maintaining fiber
PMB Polarization mode beat
POVT Piezo-optic voltage transducer
PZT Piezo-electric transducer
RFOCS Reflective fiber-optic current sensor
RHC Right-handed circular
RT Room temperature
SLED Superluminescent light-emitting diode
SMF Single-mode fiber
SOP State of polarization
VT Voltage transformer
WDM Wavelength division multiplexerDOI: 10.1201/9781003100324-1 1
Introduction
Optical current and voltage sensors have been developed predominantly as alternatives to 
conventional instrument current and voltage transformers in alternating current (ac) elec￾tric power transmission and distribution. Further fields of application include high voltage 
direct current (HVDC) power transmission, railways, electro-winning of metals and fur￾ther industrial uses, scientific applications, e.g., in plasma physics and particle accelerators, 
and others. Conventional instrument current and voltage transformers for high voltage 
(HV) substations, commonly referred to in the industry as CT and VT, respectively, are 
bulky, typically oil and paper insulated devices (SF6 gas insulation is an alternative), and 
heavy – with weights as large as several tons. By contrast, the all-dielectric nature of opti￾cal sensors drastically reduces size and weight, inherently insulates secondary equipment 
from high voltage, and provides new options for the integration of current and voltage 
measurement in HV systems. The oil-free insulation eliminates any risk of explosive fail￾ure, e.g., during earthquakes. Furthermore, the sensors’ large bandwidth and absence of 
phenomena like magnetic saturation or ferro-resonances provide a more accurate image of 
the primary current or voltage waveforms, especially during faults, and the sensors’ digital 
electronics is in line with modern digital substation communication and control.
On the other hand, whereas CT and VT devices are well-established instruments that 
have been optimized over many years, not least in terms of cost, optical current and voltage 
sensors represent a new technology in a conservative industry and had to overcome con￾siderable challenges. The electric power industry demands high measurement accuracy, 
often to within ±0.2% at outdoor conditions. Reliability of the sensors, especially at trans￾mission voltages (voltages from 110 kV onwards), are of utmost importance. The lifetime of 
conventional measurement transformers is in excess of 30 years and often taken as a refer￾ence. Obstacles have also included non-conventional signal formats that complicated the 
sensors’ interfacing to conventional substation control and protection equipment and 
unfamiliar handling and installation procedures. The cost of conventional transformers 
rapidly rises with increasing system voltage, while this is much less so for optical sensors. 
Hence, optical sensors may be very cost-attractive at high rated voltages yet find it more 
challenging to compete with traditional solutions at lower voltages.2   ◾  Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
CONVENTIONAL INSTRUMENT CURRENT AND VOLTAGE 
TRANSFORMERS
Figure I.1 depicts conventional current transformers in a HV substation and illustrates a 
typical environment of current and voltage measurement in ac electric power transmis￾sion. CT generate via magnetic induction from the primary current Ip on high voltage a 
secondary current Is
 of typically 1 A at the rated primary current Ir (2 A and 5 A or further 
options), that serves as input to metering or relaying devices [1]. Usually, CTs have sev￾eral ferromagnetic cores optimized for metering and protection functions. Metering cores 
typically cover currents up 1.2 Ir
, whereas protection cores cover the much larger ranges of 
fault currents, e.g., up to 30 Ir
. In a so-called, top-core CT as shown in Figure I.1, the cores 
reside in a tank at the CT top, whereas in hairpin style CTs, schematically illustrated in 
Figure I.2a, they reside inside a tank at the bottom.
FIGURE I.1 Conventional 380 kV current transformers in a high-voltage substation.Introduction ◾  3
In electric power transmission, typical rated currents are from 400 A up to 6 kA, and 
rated voltages range from 110 kV to 800 kV; even systems up to 1200 kV have been deployed. 
(Note: Throughout the book, the stated alternating voltages are root-mean-square (rms) 
values, if not specified otherwise.) Fault currents can well exceed 100 kA over a few current 
cycles until a protective relay initiates current interruption. A CT must comply with rele￾vant industry standards like IEC60044-8 [2]. Among many other things, those standards 
specify allowed error limits for various accuracy classes, which must also be observed by 
corresponding optical sensors. The frequently applied IEC measuring class 0.2, for instance, 
requires accuracy to within ±0.2% between 100% and 120% of the rated current, ±0.35% at 
0.2 Ir
, and ±0.75% at 0.05 Ir
. Phase error limits range from ±30 min at 0.05 Ir to ±10 min at 
Ir
. Classes 0.2s and 0.1 specify even tighter limits (Table I.1). These limits are valid at the 
rated power frequency (50 Hz or 60 Hz); wider limits apply at harmonics. Larger errors are 
allowed for protective CT at fault currents (IEC class 5P requires ±5%). CTs in regional 
power distribution grids at voltages between 1 kV and 36 kV often obey accuracy classes 
FIGURE I.2 (a) Schematic illustration of a hairpin-type current transformer; Np and Ns
 are the 
number of primary and secondary windings, respectively (Np = 1); (b) equivalent circuit diagram of 
a capacitive voltage divider.
TABLE I.1 Limits of Current and Phase Errors at Rated Power Frequency for Measuring Current 
Transformers [2]
Accuracy Class
± Percentage Current Error Limits
Current in % of Rated Current
± Phase Error Limits (minutes)
Current in % of Rated Current
1 5 20 100 120 1 5 20 100 120
0.1 – 0.4 0.2 0.1 0.1 – 15 8 5 5
0.2s 0.75 0.35 0.2 0.2 0.2 30 15 10 10 10
0.2 – 0.75 0.35 0.2 0.2 – 30 15 10 10
0.5 – 1.5 0.75 0.5 0.5 – 90 45 30 30
1 – 3 1.5 1.0 1.0 – 180 90 60 604   ◾  Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
0.5 or 1.0. Ideally, an optical current sensor should cover both metering and protection 
current ranges, if the sensor is to replace a multiple-core conventional CT.
Conventional voltage transformers for transmission voltages are either inductive trans￾formers (VT) or capacitive voltage dividers (CVD). Externally, they look similar to CT. 
CVD are commonly the more economic option at voltages above 145 kV. Particularly at 
medium voltages (in the 1 kV to 36 kV range), resistive capacitive voltage dividers are 
another option. CVD comprise two connected series of capacitors C1 and C2 that divide the 
primary voltage Vp in voltages V1 and V2 (Figure I.2b) [1]. With C1 ≪ C2, voltage V2 across 
the bottom capacitor series C2 is much lower than V (and V1) and corresponds, e.g., to 
22 kV/√3 at the rated voltage Vr
. An auxiliary inductive transformer then steps down V2 to 
a standard output voltage, which is typically is 110 V/√3 in Europe (ratings in other regions 
may differ but are similar). Again, V2 serves as an input to a metering instrument or substa￾tion/grid control and protection. It should be noted that the rated primary voltage Vr refers 
to the rms voltage between two phases, whereas voltage transformers measure the phase￾to-ground voltage, which is Vr/√3. Naturally, voltage transformers must meet similarly 
strict accuracy requirements as current transformers. Commonly, HV metering and mea￾surement VT meet IEC accuracy class 0.2, which specifies voltage error limits of ±0.2% and 
phase error limits of ±10 min at voltages between 80% and 120% of Vr (Table I.2). Voltage 
error limits of protective VT according to class 3P are ±3% between 0.05Vr and Fv Vr
, where 
the rated voltage factor Fv can be Fv = 1.2, 1.5, or 1.9. The maximum allowed phase error is 
±120 min [3].
OPTICAL CURRENT AND VOLTAGE SENSORS
Initial exploratory research work on optical current sensors (OCS), also called optical 
current transformers or transducers (OCT), began in the 1960s and early 1970s both in 
academia and industry. From early on, the prospect of replacing heavy instrument trans￾formers by a simple optical fiber around the current conductor fascinated the research￾ers. Electric power product manufactures with corresponding research projects included 
Siemens, Brown Boveri & Cie, Asea, AEG, and Alsthom in Europe, General Electric and 
Westinghouse in North America, and several companies in Japan including Toshiba, 
Hitachi, and Tokyo Electric Power Company (TEPCO). Even though there was no lack 
of field demonstrations, often those early sensors were still premature and far from viable 
products. Hence, for a long time, many in the industry considered the sensors as interesting 
TABLE I.2 Limits of Voltage and Phase Errors at Rated Power Frequency for 
Measuring Voltage Transformers [3]
Accuracy Class
± Percentage Voltage Error Limits
Voltage in % of Rated Voltage
± Phase Error Limits (minutes)
Voltage in % of Rated Voltage
80 100 120 80 100 120
0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 5 5 5
0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 10 10 10
0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 20 20 20
1 1 1 1 40 40 40Introduction ◾  5
but exotic, and it was not before the 2000s until optical sensors, in particular current sen￾sors, started to become a more serious alternative to traditional instruments.
The vast majority of optical current sensors make use of the Faraday effect, i.e., the phe￾nomenon that the plane of polarization of linearly polarized light rotates by a certain angle 
when the light traverses a transparent medium such as glass in the presence of a longitudi￾nal magnetic field. Over several decades, researchers investigated numerous sensor designs. 
Magneto-optic sensing media included bulk pieces of glass, crystalline materials, and par￾ticularly optical fibers. The works benefitted from the advances in optical fiber communi￾cation and opto-electronics. Many communication system components such as fibers, fiber 
polarizers, directional couplers, connectors, phase modulators, polarization rotators, light 
sources, and photodetectors have also found uses in numerous optical sensors including 
current and voltage sensors. In addition, dedicated specialty fibers were developed.
Simple Faraday effect current sensors derive the current from a local magnetic field 
measurement in the vicinity of the current conductor but can be prone to field distur￾bances and crosstalk from neighbor currents. The combination of such sensors with a 
magnetic flux concentrating core around the conductor significantly improves the robust￾ness of the current signal. True current sensors measure the current according to Ampere’s 
law as a closed-loop integral ∮H · ds of the magnetic field around the conductor, and hence 
are largely insensitive to geometrical parameters, varying field distributions, and cross￾talk. Corresponding glass block current sensors guide the light by multiple internal reflec￾tions around the conductor but offer little flexibility in form factor and sensitivity. By 
contrast, all-fiber-optic current sensors (FOCS) with a coil of sensing fiber around the 
conductor can be easily adapted to wide ranges of current and conductor cross-section. 
Early FOCS, however, were severely limited by mechanical and temperature-dependent 
stresses acting on the fiber. Particularly, the bending of the fiber to a coil, the fiber coating, 
and packaging were sources of stress. Also, mechanical shock and vibration could produce 
signal perturbations in excess of the current signal. Inadequate sensor components and 
manufacturing challenges represented further obstacles. But finally, specialty sensing 
fibers, sensor configurations that intrinsically cancelled mechanical disturbances and 
influences of temperature, and other measures resulted in robust FOCS with accuracy as 
high as ±0.1% in wide temperature ranges (Figure I.3).
Other optical magnetic field and current sensors make use of magnetostriction, field￾induced refractive index changes in magnetic fluids, or Lorentz forces in micromachined 
devices. Hybrid HV current transducers combine traditional instrumentation with optical 
interrogation techniques and as a result, they too significantly reduce expenditures for 
electric insulation.
Optical voltage sensors (OVS) have been developed in parallel to optical current sensors. 
Commercial OVS were introduced as early as the 1990s but have not quite reached the 
appeal of fiber-optic current sensors. FOCS are attractive in that a simple optical fiber 
around the conductor measures a closed-loop integral ∮H · ds, that is the current. An 
equivalent optical voltage sensor would need to measure the path integral of the electric 
field ∫E · ds between ground and high voltage potentials. Conventional optical fibers are 
unsuited for this task. Researchers have made attempts towards electro-optic fibers, but the 6   ◾  Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
works did not proceed beyond exploratory stages. Instead, most optical voltage sensors 
employ electro-optic crystals or piezoelectric transducers with fiber-optic readout. 
Commonly, OVS for air-insulated HV substations require substantial efforts and expendi￾tures for electric insulation and field steering, which to a certain degree outweigh the ben￾efits of the optical technology.
Besides the linear electro-optic effect (Pockels effect) and converse piezoelectric effect, a 
variety of other phenomena have been employed for optical electric field and voltage sens￾ing that include the Kerr effect, Stark effect, electro-absorption, electro-luminescence, 
electro-striction, electrostatic forces, and field-induced second harmonic generation. 
Further applications of electric field sensitive devices include mapping of electric field dis￾tributions, e.g., on antennas, high speed electronic circuits, electric power equipment, etc., 
electromagnetic compatibility studies, accelerators in high energy physics, or high power 
electromagnetic pulse detection to name a few.
REFERENCES
1. R. Minkner and J. Schmid, The Technology of Instrument Transformers (Springer Vieweg, 2021).
2. Standard of the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), IEC60044-1, Instrument 
transformers – Part 1: Current transformers (2003).
3. Standard of the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), IEC60044-7, Instrument 
transformers – Part 7: Electronic voltage transformers (1999).
4. M. Lenner, A. Frank, L. Yang, T. M. Roininen, and K. Bohnert, “Long-term reliability of fiber￾optic current sensors,” IEEE Sens. J. 20(2), 823–832 (2020), doi: 10.1109/JSEN.2019.2944346
FIGURE I.3 Three-phase fiber-optic current sensor system (redundant) for integration in HV 
circuit breakers. Each ring contains two optical fiber coils (Chapter 12) [4].7
PART I
FundamentalsDOI: 10.1201/9781003100324-3 9
CHAPTER 1
Optical Fibers
Fused silica optical fibers with loss below 20 dB/km became available in the early 1970s 
after breakthroughs in the fiber preform preparation and fiber drawing at Corning Glass 
Works [1, 2]. (Before 1970, typical fiber loss had been on the order of 1000 dB/km [3].) By 
the end of the 1970s, NTT in Japan had reduced losses to 0.2 dB/km at 1550 nm, close to 
the fundamental limit by light scattering [4]. The advent of low loss fibers initiated the era 
of optical fiber communication and in parallel opened up the field of optical fiber sensing. 
Fibers for sensors serve to guide light to and from a discrete sensing element, or the fiber 
itself—often a specialty fiber—acts as the sensing element. This chapter summarizes some 
basics of optical fibers. Readers can find more comprehensive information in several excel￾lent books and reviews on the subject, e.g., [5–9].
1.1 LIGHT WAVE PROPAGATION
A standard step-index optical fiber consists of a cylindrical core with radius a and refrac￾tive index nco and a cladding with radius b and index ncl, where nco > ncl (Figure 1.1) [8]. 
The light is guided in the core by total internal reflection at the core/cladding interface. In 
a simple geometrical optics picture, light rays impinging at the interface at angles θ larger 
than the critical angle θc, defined by sinθc = ncl/nco, remain confined to the core, whereas 
rays at θ <θc gradually leak out. Accordingly, the acceptance angle θi
 for guided light and 
the numerical aperture NA in air (n0 = 1) is defined by
= = − θ ( )
1/2 2 2 sin . NA n n i co cl (1.1)
Typical optical fibers are weakly guiding waveguides (nco ≈ ncl); the NA can then be 
approximated by
= ∆ ( )
1/2 2 , NA nco (1.2)
with Δ = (nco − ncl)/nco. The NA of single-mode fibers (see below) is typically between 
0.1 and 0.3, whereas multimode fibers often have an NA as high as 0.4–0.5. Besides the 10 ◾ Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
meridional rays depicted in Figure 1.1, these are rays that repeatably intersect the fiber axis; 
a fiber also supports so-called skew rays (not shown) not intersecting the axis and having 
an azimuthal path component.
Most optical fibers are made from fused silica. The fiber core commonly contains GeO2
dopants that raise the refractive index, while the cladding is of pure silica (ncl = 1.444 at a 
wavelength l of 1.55 mm). The index difference nco − ncl is typically in the range 10−3 to 10−2
[8]. Modern long-haul communication systems employ fibers having a core of pure silica 
and a cladding with fluorine dopants that lower the refractive index. A pure silica core 
slightly reduces transmission loss.
Geometrical optics describes the light propagation reasonably well in multimode fibers 
with large cores (a ≫ l). More accurately, the optical field in a fiber is derived from the wave 
equation, which follows from Maxwell’s equations for electromagnetic waves. The solu￾tions of the wave equation for the given boundary conditions, that is, the refractive index 
profile and wavelength, are specific spatial distributions of the electromagnetic field, called 
fiber modes [5–8]. There are three categories of modes: Guided or core modes, cladding 
modes, and a continuum of unconfined radiation modes. In the following, we will only 
consider guided core modes. (Cladding and radiation modes commonly terminate in the 
protective coating of a fiber (not shown in Figure 1.1).) The guided modes are denoted as 
HElm or EHlm (l, m = 1, 2, 3, …) and are hybrid modes, because they have non-zero electric 
and magnetic field components, Ez and Hz, where z is propagation direction (fiber axis). In 
HE modes, Hz dominates over Ez, while the opposite is true for EH modes. The radial and 
azimuthal field components Er
, Eϕ, and Hr
, Hϕ of the modes are not independent but can be 
expressed in terms of Ez and Hz. In addition to the hybrid HE and EH modes, the core 
modes include purely transverse modes; those are the electric modes TE0m and the mag￾netic modes TM0m with Ez = 0 and Hz = 0, respectively. The HE and EH modes correspond 
to the skew rays, and the TE and TM modes correspond to the meridional rays of the geo￾metrical optics picture. Mathematically, the modes are orthogonal, i.e., there is no 
FIGURE 1.1 Multimode and single-mode optical fibers.Optical Fibers ◾ 11
crosstalk between the modes of an ideal fiber, and their spatial field distributions remain 
constant as the light propagates along the fiber. (Perturbations such as fiber bends or fiber 
inhomogeneities couple the modes, however.)
Each mode has a characteristic propagation constant b that represents the mode’s opti￾cal phase shift per unit length of fiber. Accordingly, the mode’s effective refractive index is 
n = b/k, where k is the vacuum wavenumber: k = 2p/l; n lies in a range ncl < n < nco. 
Normalization of b in terms of the fiber parameters results in a normalized propagation 
constant b (0 < b < 1) [10]:
( )
( )
β − = −
2 2
2 2
/ . cl
co cl
k n
b
n n
(1.3)
For weakly guiding fibers (nco ≈ ncl), b is approximately equal to
(β ) − − ≈ = − −
/ . cl cl
co cl co cl
k n n n b
nn nn
(1.4)
Whereas n determines the phase velocity vp = c/n, that is, the velocity of a strictly mono￾chromatic light wave, the group refractive index ng determines the group velocity vg = c/ng, 
that is, the velocity at which the envelope of a light pulse propagates through a medium [8]:
ϖ
ϖ
= + , g
dn
n n (1.5)
where ϖ is the optical frequency. The group index also determines the optical path length 
L of a mode in a fiber of length l (L = ngl), e.g., in fiber interferometers.
In weakly guiding fibers, both Ez and Hz are close to zero. The modes are then often 
approximated by linearly polarized modes, designated as LPlm [5, 10]. A given LP-mode has 
2l field maxima along an azimuthal line around the core center and m maxima along a 
radius vector. Figure 1.2 schematically depicts the electric field distributions of the three 
FIGURE 1.2 Transverse electric field distribution (schematically) of the three lowest order LP￾modes. The arrows indicate the field directions (based on [3, 10, 12]).12 ◾ Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
lowest order LP modes. The modes with l ≥ 1 can assume one of two spatial distributions 
(denoted as even and odd). Their fields along the azimuthal coordinate ϕ vary in propor￾tion to cos(lϕ) and sin(lϕ), respectively. The modes are polarized either along the x coordi￾nate or along the y coordinate. For a fiber with perfect circular symmetry, the spatial and 
polarization sub-states of a given mode are degenerate, i.e., all four states have the same 
propagation constants. Deviations from circular symmetry lift the degeneracy, for exam￾ple, in fibers with an elliptical core that are used in certain types of optical fiber sensors 
[11]. It should be mentioned that each LP mode can be related to one or several exact fiber 
modes. For instance, the LP01 mode corresponds to the HE11 mode, while the LP11 mode 
corresponds to a superposition of the HE21, TM01, and TE01 modes, all of which have simi￾lar propagation constants [10]. Analytic formulas for the modal field distributions can be 
found in [10].
Another important parameter of a fiber is its normalized frequency V or V-number:
( ) π = − λ
1/2 2 2 2 . V an n co cl (1.6)
Figure 1.3 shows the normalized propagation constants of some lower order modes as a 
function of V [10]. Step index fibers with V < 2.405 only support the fundamental mode 
LP01. Such fibers are called single-mode fibers (SMF), as opposed to few mode fibers or 
multimode fibers with V > 2.405. The first higher order mode LP11 is cut off at the so-called 
cut-off frequency Vc = 2.405. At Vc, the LP11 effective refractive index equals ncl and mode 
guiding ceases. It is obvious that the cut-off frequencies increase with increasing mode 
order (the corresponding cut-off wavelengths decrease). Note that at Vc → ∞, ne of all 
modes approaches nco. The number of guided modes in a fiber with V ≫ 1 is approximately 
V2/2 [10].
FIGURE 1.3 Normalized propagation constant b vs. normalized frequency V for some low order 
LP-modes (after Gloge [10], with permission from © The Optical Society).Optical Fibers ◾ 13
The formulas for the modal field distributions are somewhat cumbersome. In practice, 
the fundamental mode LP01 is often approximated by a Gaussian function [8]:
( ) ( )   = −   
2
2 0 exp , r Er E
w
(1.7)
where w is the so-called mode field radius, that is, the radius where the mode field has 
dropped to 1/e and the intensity to 1/e2. It is important to note that the fields of the guided 
modes are not restricted to the fiber core but extend into the cladding. The power frac￾tion of the fundamental mode propagating in the core, called confinement factor Γ, is the 
smaller the lower the V-number and given by [8]:
  Γ= − −   
2
2
2 1 exp . a
w
(1.8)
Whereas at V = 2, about 75% of the mode power propagates in the core, that fraction 
reduces to 20% at V = 1. Therefore, telecommunications fibers commonly operate in the 
range 2 < V < 2.4 [8]. Optical fiber sensors often combine different types of fibers. The 
transmission of a splice between two fibers having mode field radii w1 and w2 is [7]:
  =     +
2
1 2
2 2
1 2
2 . w w T
w w
(1.9)
An important characteristic, in particular of telecommunication fibers, is dispersion. 
Contributions are material dispersion, waveguide dispersion, and intermodal dispersion 
(only in multimode fibers). Dispersion sets an upper limit to the bandwidth of the trans￾mitted signal. However, dispersion plays hardly a role in the fiber sensors of the present 
text. We will consider dispersion when necessary, in particular polarization mode dis￾persion in specialty fibers, but otherwise refer the interested reader to the literature cited 
further above.
1.2 FIBER TYPES
As already noted, optical fibers are either single-mode or multimode fibers. Single-mode 
fibers only support the fundamental mode HE11 (LP01). They also can be operated as few 
mode fibers by choosing a wavelength of operation below the cut-off wavelength. The most 
important application of SMF is long haul communication. Having no intermodal disper￾sion, SMF provide much higher bandwidths than MMF. Typical core diameters of SMF 
for telecom wavelengths (1.3–1.6 nm) are 9–10 μm. The standard outer diameter is 125 μm 
(not counting the protective buffer coating). Single-mode fiber doped with rare earth ions 
such as erbium ions are employed in fiber amplifiers, fiber lasers, and broadband fiber light 
sources [13].
Fibers designated as multimode fibers typically have core diameters ranging from 
50 μm to about 1 μm and support hundreds or even thousands of fiber modes. Due to 14 ◾ Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
their large core, MMF can be combined with inexpensive LED sources; alignment toler￾ances, e.g., at fiber connectors, are less critical than with SMF. MMF are often employed for 
short haul communication. In sensors, they serve to send light to or return light from a 
bulk sensing element such as an electro-optic crystal. In certain hybrid current and voltage 
sensors, MMF provide optical power to electronic circuits on high voltage potential.
Graded index fibers represent a subcategory of MMF and have a parabolic index profile 
that reduces intermodal dispersion and thus enhances the bandwidth. Further MMF types 
include hard clad silica (HCS) fibers with a silica core and a polymer cladding. HCS fibers 
are particularly suited for harsh environments. Polymer optical fibers (POF) are low-cost 
and easy-to-install solutions for short distances. At this point, it is also worth mentioning 
that more recently, multicore fibers, each core supporting several modes, have become the 
subject of intense research. By combing wavelength-division multiplexing (WDM) and so￾called space-division multiplexing (SDM), the transmission capacity of the fibers reaches 
into the Pbit/s regime [9].
The optical attenuation in fused silica fibers strongly increases beyond 1.8 nm [8]. For a 
review on fiber glasses and fiber types for the infrared, see, e.g., Tao et al. [14]. Another 
important class of fibers that has been developed since the 1990s are photonic crystal fibers 
(PCF), or more generally, micro-structured fibers [15]. PCFs have also found uses in optical 
fiber sensors [16]. Other than conventional fibers, PCFs do not guide the light via a radially 
varying material composition, but an array of air holes parallel to the fiber axis makes for 
the wave guiding. PCF properties including the dispersion, birefringence, or nonlinear 
optical characteristics can be custom-designed within wide limits.
An important component of any glass fiber is a protective buffer coating. Typically, 
fibers are provided with a UV cured dual acrylate coating consisting of a soft inner layer 
that prevents fiber micro-bending and a harder outer layer for mechanical robustness. A 
standard overall diameter of acylate coated 125-mm-diameter fibers is 245 μm. Acrylate 
coatings are suited for temperature from −55°C to 85°C. Special acrylates enable operation 
at somewhat higher temperatures. Fibers with polyimide coatings can be operated up to 
about 300°C [17]. Other coating options for harsh environments include metal coatings 
and carbon coatings (hermetically sealed fibers) [18].
1.3 POLARIZATION-MAINTAINING FIBERS
The two orthogonal polarization states of the fundamental mode, HE11,x and HE11y, of 
an ideal single-mode fiber are degenerate, i.e., they have the same propagation constants 
(bx = by). Hence, an ideal fiber will preserve the polarization of injected light. In practice, 
perturbations like a non-perfectly circular core, fiber bends, and others lift the degeneracy 
of the orthogonal states. As a result, the light assumes varying elliptical polarization states 
along the fiber. Polarization maintaining fibers (PMF) are highly birefringent fibers with 
well-defined birefringent axes x, y (see Figure 1.4 below). The propagation constants bx, by
differ significantly, so that coupling between the orthogonal polarization modes is strongly 
suppressed. Typically, the birefringence of PMF is due to an elliptical core or a stress field 
embedded into the fibers (Figure 1.4) [19]. Elliptical core fibers [11] are easier to manufac￾ture, and the birefringence varies less with temperature, which can be beneficial in sensor Optical Fibers ◾ 15
applications. On the other hand, the elliptical mode field may result in higher loss at splices 
to circular core fibers.
Typical ratios of the major and minor core axis are between 1.5 and 4. The cladding of 
fibers with stress-induced birefringence comprises so-called stress applying parts (SAP). 
The SAP cross-sections may be circular (the fibers are then called Panda fibers), bowtie 
shaped (bowtie fiber), or the SAP may be designed as an inner elliptical cladding. 
Commonly, the SAP are doped with boron (B2O3) and have a larger thermal expansion 
coefficient than the pure silica cladding. Hence, a stress field builds up when the fiber cools 
down after drawing. The slow and fast birefringent axes are oriented as indicated in Figure 
1.4. A linear state of polarization (SOP) injected with its polarization parallel to a principal 
axis (x or y) is preserved.
A PMF is characterized by its beat length LB, that is, the length of fiber over which the 
two orthogonal polarization modes accumulate a phase difference of 2p [19]:
λ π
β β = = −
2 B . x y
L
B (1.10)
The phase birefringence B is defined as
= − , Bn n x y (1.11)
where nx and ny are the effective refractive indices of the two orthogonal SOP (slow and 
fast indices). A linear SOP (or any other SOP, for that matter) injected at 45° to x passes as 
a function of z through a sequence of elliptical polarization states including circular that 
repeats itself with a period of LB (see Figure 2.3 further below). Typical beat lengths at 1310 
nm are between 2 mm and 4 mm, i.e., B is between 10−3 and 10−4. Significantly smaller beat 
lengths (LB < 0.5 mm) have been achieved with photonic crystal PMF [20]. The beat length 
is a measure for the resistance of a PMF against external perturbations; the smaller LB, the 
more mechanical stress, e.g., due to bending, a PMF tolerates before modal cross-coupling 
FIGURE 1.4 Cross-sections of some polarization-maintaining fibers.16 ◾ Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
becomes too large. Assuming that the light is injected into the fiber with its polarization 
parallel to x, the polarization crosstalk in units of dB is defined as [19]:
(dB 10 log , ) = 10
y
x
x
P
CT
P (1.12)
where Py and Px are the optical powers measured at the fiber end behind an ideal polarizer 
aligned parallel to x and y, respectively. An analogous equation holds for CTy. At fiber lengths 
l on the order of 10 m, polarization crosstalk in an undisturbed PMF is typically in the 
range of 35 to 40 dB [19]. The h-parameter of a PMF is a measure for the polarization cross￾coupling per unit length. For sufficiently high CT-values, h can be approximated as [19]:
  ≈    
10 1 10 .
CT
h
l (1.13)
It should be mentioned that there are fundamental limits to the polarization preserving 
properties of a PMF because the orthogonal modes of a PMF inherently lack perfect lin￾ear polarization [21]. Besides the phase birefringence B and corresponding beat length, 
another important parameter is the group birefringence Bg, which determines the optical 
path length difference of the orthogonal modes. It is worth noting that, depending on 
wavelength, B and Bg can significantly differ in elliptical core fibers, whereas B and Bg are 
similar in fibers with stress-induced birefringence [22–24].
PMF applications include coherent communication, polarimetric and interferometric 
fiber sensors, and others. PMF for applications like fiber-optic gyroscopes that require 
tight fiber bending often have a reduced diameter (80 μm instead of 125 μm) to limit 
bending-induced stress and birefringence. At a given bending radius, bending-induced 
birefringence decreases quadratically with decreasing fiber diameter [25]. Parts II and III
will present current and voltage sensors that utilize PMF. We will also encounter spun 
PMF that preserve circular polarization states.DOI: 10.1201/9781003100324-4 17
CHAPTER 2
Polarization
An electric or a magnetic field applied to a sensing medium, e.g., an electro-optic crystal 
or an optical fiber, alters the medium’s indices of refraction via electro-optic or magneto￾optic effects, that is, the fields induce linear or circular birefringence. The birefringence, 
in turn, alters the state of polarization (SOP) of light propagating through the medium. 
The change in the SOP then serves as a measure for the applied field. The following sub￾sections explain the nature of polarized light and introduce the Jones matrix formalism 
that describes the propagation of polarized light through birefringent media.
In this context, it is necessary to define the handedness of circular and elliptical polar￾ized light and the sense of polarization rotation in optically active media, as conventions 
differ, unfortunately. We will refer to circular or elliptically polarized light as right-handed, 
if, at a given point on the optical path, the electric field vector rotates clockwise as seen by 
an observer looking against the propagation direction, and left-handed, if the rotation 
sense is counterclockwise. This is the common convention in physics and chemistry; by 
contrast, engineers usually define the rotation sense conversely. Likewise, optics textbooks 
commonly define the angle of polarization rotation in an optically active medium (that is, 
a circularly or elliptically birefringent medium) as positive (right-rotatory) if the polariza￾tion rotation as seen by an observer looking towards the light source is clockwise, and 
negative (left-rotatory) if the polarization rotation is counterclockwise. This chapter will 
adhere to this convention. However, the literature on the Faraday effect and optical activ￾ity of twisted fiber and spun fiber defines the sense of polarization rotation opposite. The 
following chapters will follow this convention for consistency. Two articles by D. Clarke 
recall the history of the nomenclature of polarized light and point out the differences 
between the “snapshot picture” of a polarization state and the “angular momentum per￾spective” [26, 27].18   ◾  Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
2.1 POLARIZATION ELLIPSE
The electric field of a monochromatic plane light wave propagating through a medium 
with refractive n (n = 1 in vacuum) is characterized by its amplitude E0, wave vector k, and 
angular frequency w:
E k   E w 0 cos  t z u. (2.1)
The wave vector points in the propagation direction, that is, the positive z-axis of a Cartesian 
coordinate system. The electric field vector E at a given location z then lies in the x, y-plane; 
u is a unit vector pointing the direction of the field. The absolute value of the wave vector, 
called wave number, is defined as k = 2pn/l with l being the wavelength in vacuum. The 
magnetic field component of the light wave can be neglected for most practical purposes 
due to its weakness. An arbitrary state of polarization (SOP) of monochromatic light is 
commonly represented as the vector sum of two orthogonal linearly polarized field con￾stituents Ex, Ey having amplitudes E0x, E0y and additional phase terms dx, dy:
E x x x   E t 0 cos ,     kz  x  (2.2)
E y y y   E t 0 cos .     kz  y  (2.3)
For dy ≠ dx, the tip of the sum vector E = Ex + Ey follows a helical path around the propaga￾tion direction z. As an example, Figure 2.1 shows the special case of two waves Ex, Ey with 
equal amplitudes and a phase difference of d = dy − dx = p/2 (Ey leads Ex), which results in 
(right-handed) circular polarization. (Note: In modern literature, the phase term is often 
written as [kz − wt + d] rather than [wt – kz + d] as above. In that case, Ey lags behind Ex for 
FIGURE 2.1 The vector sum of two orthogonal light fields Ex, Ey of equal amplitude with Ey leading 
Ex by d = p/2 results in right-handed circularly polarized light.Polarization ◾  19
positive d; d = +p/2 then results in left-handed circular polarization. Moreover, the polar￾ization variable that we will introduce further below is then given by χ = Ex/Ey rather than 
by χ = Ey/Ex; the alternative notation also leads to sign swaps in the Jones matrices below).
The projection of the helix into the x, y-plane is called polarization ellipse (Figure 2.2) 
[28–31]:
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
x
x
y
y
x
x
y
0 y
2
0
2
0 0
2 

 

 







  

 









cos  sin . 2  (2.4)
The polarization ellipse is characterized by its ellipticity e = b/a (−1 ≤ e ≤ 1) or corre￾sponding ellipticity angle ψ, azimuth θ, and sense of rotation; a, b are the lengths of the 
semi-major and semi-minor axis of the ellipse, respectively. θ and ψ can be expressed in 
terms of E0x, E0y, and d as follows [30]:
tan t   2 2     an  cos / p 2 p 2/ ,  
 a d   
sin  2 2    sin s   in p 4/ / p 4,  
 a d   
tan /     . E
E
a y
x
0
0
0 2 p (2.5)
The ellipticity angle in terms of a and b is defined by [30]
tan /        / b
a
p p 4 4 (2.6)
The electric field E vibrates in a fixed plane, and the polarization is said to be linear (e = 0, 
ψ = 0) if Ex and Ey are in phase or anti-phase (d = mp, m = 0, ±1, ±2 …). All other d result 
in elliptical polarization. The special case of E0x = E0y and d = p/2 + 2mp (Ey leads Ex by p/2 
modulo 2p) corresponds to right circularly polarized light, RHC (e = 1, ψ = 45°), and the 
special case of E0x = E0y and d = −p/2 + 2mp (Ey lags Ex by p/2 modulo 2p) corresponds to 
FIGURE 2.2 Polarization ellipse characterized by its azimuth θ and ellipticity angle ψ. The indicated 
state of polarization is right-handed (ψ > 0).20   ◾  Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
left circularly polarized light, LHC (e = −1, ψ = −45°). As already noted in the introduction 
above, the polarization is referred to as right-handed circular (or right-handed elliptical) 
if the electric field vector at a given point z rotates clockwise and left-handed circular (left￾handed elliptical) if the electric field vector rotates counterclockwise as seen by an observer 
looking against the propagation direction; ψ > 0 indicates clockwise rotation and ψ <0 
counterclockwise rotation.
Figure 2.3 shows for the special case of E0x = E0y how the azimuth and ellipticity of the 
polarization ellipses vary at changing phase d. Independent of d, the SOP azimuth equals 
±45° if Ex, Ey have equal amplitudes. Note also that the superposition of left and right cir￾cular waves of equal amplitude (and wavelength) results in linear polarization. The linear 
polarization is parallel to x if the circular SOP is in phase and rotates counterclockwise if 
the LHC-state advances versus the RHC-state. The sign of the azimuth angle θ is com￾monly defined in the mathematical sense, i.e., in a right-handed coordinate system, θ is 
positive in the direction indicated in Figure 2.2 [28, 30].
Any elliptical polarization state, defined by its ellipticity angle ψ and azimuth θ, can be 
expressed in the form of a single complex number, that is, the ratio of the orthogonal field 
constituents (Cartesian complex-plane representation) [28]:
    E   
E
E
E
e
E
E
e y
x
y
x
i y
x
0 y x i
0
0
0
   . (2.7)
The polarization variable χ contains the full information on the polarization ellipse and 
can be expressed in terms of ψ and θ as

 
   

tan tan
tan tan . i
1 i
(2.8)
The real axis of the complex χ-plane represents all linear SOP (the origin represents x-polar￾ized light (χ = 0), infinity corresponds to y-polarized light); the upper half-plane represents 
all right-handed elliptical SOP, and the lower half-plane represents all left-handed ellipti￾cal SOP; χ = ±i correspond to right and left circular light. Note that the polarization state 
orthogonal to χ is given by




orth    
1 2 (2.9)
FIGURE 2.3 Polarization ellipses for equal amplitudes of the orthogonal constituents Ex, Ey and 
selected values of their phase difference d; Ey leads Ex by d.Polarization ◾  21
with  orth  orth     1. The asterisk indicates the complex conjugate. Orthogonal 
polarization states have the same ellipticity, their azimuths are mutually orthogonal, and 
their polarization ellipses are traced in opposite senses. If a polarization state χ is known, 
its ellipticity and azimuth angles are given by
sin 2 , 2
1 2 

    

Im  (2.10)
tan
Re
2 . 2
1 2  

    

(2.11)
As an alternative to the Cartesian complex-plane representation, a polarization state may 
also be represented as a point in the circular complex-plane with left and right circular 
SOP, EL and ER, as basis states (Figure 2.4) [28]. The polarization variable χcirc is given by

 
circ   E   
E
E
E
e R
L
R
L
0 i R L
0
(2.12)
where E0R, E0L, δR and δL are the amplitudes and phases of the circular SOP. χcirc may also 
be expressed in terms of ψ and as
 
  circ   

 

  tan .
4
2 e i (2.13)
FIGURE 2.4 Circular complex-plane representation of polarization states with left and right circu￾lar SOP, EL and ER, as basis states; see text for details.22   ◾  Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
Conversely, ψ and θ are given in terms of χcirc as
tan , 

 circ
circ
circ
   

1
1
(2.14)
    1 2/ arg    . circ (2.15)
The origin and infinity of the circular complex plane correspond to left and right circular 
polarizations, respectively; points on the unit circle (solid line) correspond to linear SOP 
(EL = ER). Points inside the unit circuit represent left-handed elliptical SOP (EL > ER), and 
points outside the unit circuit represent right-handed elliptical SOP (EL < ER). SOP of equal 
ellipticity (ψ = constant) are on concentric circles around the origin, while SOP of equal 
azimuth (θ = constant) are on radial rays from the origin to infinity.
2.2 POINCARÉ SPHERE
The Poincaré sphere representation of polarized light visualizes polarization states χ as 
points on the surface of a sphere and is essentially equivalent to the complex-plane repre￾sentations [28]). (In fact, the Poincaré sphere follows from the Cartesian or circular com￾plex-plane representation through corresponding stereographic projections.) The twofold 
azimuth and ellipticity angles, 2θ (−p ≤ 2θ ≤ p) and 2ψ (−p/2 ≤ 2ψ ≤ p/2), represent the 
SOP’s longitude and latitude, respectively, as indicated in Figure 2.5. Starting at horizon￾tal linear polarization, θ is positive in the eastern hemisphere and negative in the west￾ern hemisphere; ψ is positive in the northern hemisphere and negative in the southern 
hemisphere.
FIGURE 2.5 The Poincaré sphere visualizes polarization states according to the azimuth θ and ellip￾ticity angle ψ of the corresponding polarization ellipse. Points on the equator correspond to linearly 
polarized light (ψ = 0); points in the northern hemisphere correspond to right-handed elliptical 
polarizations. The North pole (2ψ = 90°) corresponds to right-handed circular polarization (RHC). 
Analogously, points in southern hemisphere indicate left-handed senses of rotation.Polarization ◾  23
Accordingly, points on the equator correspond to linearly polarized light (ψ = 0); points 
in the northern hemisphere correspond to right-handed elliptical polarizations. The North 
pole (2ψ = 90°) represents right-handed circular polarization (RHC). Analogously, points 
in the southern hemisphere correspond to left-handed elliptical polarizations; the south 
pole (2ψ = −90°) corresponds to left-handed circular polarization (LHC). Points on equal￾latitude circles represent SOP of equal ellipticity. A full revolution around the equator is 
equivalent with a 180°-polarization rotation of linearly polarized light (corresponding to a 
360°-change in the phase d). Any pair of antipodes on the sphere represents orthogonal 
polarization states. The corresponding polarization ellipses have equal ellipticity but with 
opposite handedness and their major axes are mutually orthogonal. The SOP evolution of 
light propagating through birefringent media is often visualized as a trajectory on the 
Poincaré sphere, as we will see in Chapter 7 for specialty optical fibers for current sensing.
2.3 LINEAR BIREFRINGENCE
In optically isotropic materials such as glass or crystals of cubic symmetry (examples are 
sodium chloride, silicon, or gallium arsenide), the speed of light is independent of the 
direction of propagation, i.e., these materials have a single index of refraction. Crystals 
with trigonal, hexagonal, or tetragonal symmetry are uniaxial crystals in which the light 
propagation is governed by an ordinary and extraordinary index of refraction (no, ne). Such 
materials are said to be double-refractive or (linearly) birefringent, since light impinging 
on their surfaces is, apart from special orientations, refracted in two different directions 
[31]. Well-known examples are calcite (CaCO3, no = 1.658, ne = 1.486 at 589.3 nm) and 
quartz (no = 1.544, ne = 1.553 at 589.3 nm). Corresponding materials are called positive uni￾axial, if ne − no > 0, and negative uniaxial, if ne − no < 0. Amorphous materials like glasses 
or plastics also become birefringent when their anisotropy is perturbed by unidirectional 
pressure. Crystals of still lower symmetry (orthorhombic, monoclinic, and triclinic crystal 
classes) are biaxial and exhibit three different indices of refraction.
The index ellipsoid or indicatrix serves to illustrate the phenomenon. The indicatrix is 
defined by the equation
x
n
y
n
z
x y nz
2
2
2
2
2
2   1, (2.16)
where nx r   x , ny r   y , nz r   xz . er,x, er,y, er,z are the principal relative permittivities 
(dielectric constants) at the optical frequency ϖ [32]. Figure 2.6 shows the index ellipsoid of 
a positive uniaxial crystal [32] with the z-coordinate axis coinciding with the optical axis 
of the crystal. The cross-section of the ellipsoid in the x, z and y, z planes is then an ellipse 
with semi-major and semi-minor axes given by ne (nz = ne) and no (nx = ny = no), respectively, 
while the cross-section in the x, y-plane is a circle with radius no. The electric field vector 
of light traveling parallel to the optical axis (z) lies in the x, y-plane. The light then sees an 
index of refraction given by no, independent of the field direction (polarization direction) 
and is called ordinary wave (o-ray). Light traveling along y has its field in the x, z-plane and 24   ◾  Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
experiences a refractive index of no for the field component polarized along x and of ne for 
the component polarized along z. The latter is called extra-ordinary wave (e-ray). Finally, 
the orthogonal polarization components of light traveling at an arbitrary angle α to the 
z-axis experience refractive indices of no and ne(α) < ne, as illustrated in Figure 2.6. As this 
type of birefringence affects two orthogonal linearly polarized components of a light wave, 
it is commonly referred to as linear birefringence, in contrast to circular birefringence, 
which relates to orthogonal circular polarization states. We will return to index ellipsoids 
in the context of electro-optic voltage sensors (Chapter 13).
2.4 CIRCULAR BIREFRINGENCE
Media with chiral structure exhibit circular birefringence (optical activity), i.e., the plane 
of vibration of linearly polarized light rotates by an angle ar = Αr d, when the light propa￾gates through a medium of thickness d; the so-called rotary power Αr measures the polar￾ization rotation per unit length. If the light is elliptically polarized, the major axis of the 
polarization ellipse rotates by ar
. The polarization rotation is due to different indices of 
refraction, nL and nR, and hence different phase velocities of the left and right circular con￾stituents of the SOP. In terms of nL and nR, the rotary power is [28, 30, 31]:
Ar
n n R L      
 . (2.17)
In analogy to linear retarders, optically active media are called circular retarders. Examples 
are aqueous solutions of sugars such as glucose and fructose and crystals with chiral struc￾ture such as quartz (Αr = 21.7°/mm, |nR − nL | = 7.1 × 10−5 at 670.8 nm for light propagating 
along the optic axis [31]). The medium is called right-rotary (Αr is positive, nL > nR) if the 
polarization rotates clockwise (looking towards the source) and left-rotary for counter￾clockwise rotation (Αr is negative, nL < nR). Materials under torsional stress, for example, 
a twisted optical fiber, also exhibit optical activity (Chapter 7). Furthermore, a magnetic 
FIGURE 2.6 Index ellipsoid of a positive uniaxial crystal with ordinary and extraordinary indices 
of refraction no, ne (ne − no > 0). The wavevector k indicates the propagation direction of the light.Polarization ◾  25
field applied to any medium induces circular birefringence as a result of the Faraday effect 
for light propagating parallel to the field. The Faraday effect is the basis of many optical 
magnetic field and current sensors. It is important to note that the Faraday effect is non￾reciprocal, i.e., opposite beam directions with respect to the field direction result in polar￾ization rotation of opposite sense. By contrast, optical activity is a reciprocal effect, i.e., the 
sense of rotation is the same for forward and backward propagating beams.
2.5 PRISM POLARIZERS
Birefringent prism polarizers split an incoming beam of polarized or unpolarized light into 
two spatially separated beams with orthogonal linear polarization states that correspond 
to ordinary and extra-ordinary rays. A variety of schemes is known, all of which make use 
of the difference between no and ne [31]. Figure 2.7 shows two important examples. The 
Glan-Foucault polarizer (Figure 2.7a) consists of two calcite prisms separated by a narrow 
air gap. The optic axis of the prisms is perpendicular to the plane of projection as indicated. 
The light enters the prism at normal incidence. The electric field component vibrating per￾pendicular to the optic axis (arrows) is reflected at the air gap by total internal reflection 
(o-ray) and is commonly discarded, while the field component parallel to the optic axis 
(dots) is transmitted (e-ray). The condition for total internal reflection of the o-ray is ne < 
1/sin θ < no, where θ is the angle of incidence at the calcite/air interface. The prism angles 
must be chosen accordingly. Polarizers with the two prisms cemented together instead of 
having an air gap are known as Glan-Thompson polarizers.
Wollaston prisms (Figure 2.7b) serve as polarizing beam splitters and are of particular 
interest for applications that make use of both the o-ray and e-ray (Chapter 5). Other than 
in a Glan-Foucault polarizer, the optic axes of the two prisms (calcite or quartz) are per￾pendicular to each other as indicated. As a result, the o-ray and e-ray are refracted at the 
interface into two different directions. High-quality prism polarizers provide polarization 
extinction ratios (PER) in excess of 105
 (50 dB) compared to PER of around of 103
 (30 dB) 
or less of typical wire-grid-type polarizers. On a logarithmic scale, the polarization extinc￾tion ratio is defined as
PER d  B   
 

 10
0
90 10
0
log ,
P
Pc
(2.18)
FIGURE 2.7 Glan-Foucault (a) and Wollaston prisms (b) [31].26   ◾  Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
where P(0°) and P(90°) are the light powers transmitted by the polarizer, when oriented at 
0° and 90°, respectively, to the polarization direction of linearly polarized input light.
2.6 LINEAR RETARDERS
Linear retarders, also called wave plates, consist of a birefringent crystal material such as 
quartz with refractive indices no and ne [31]. The optic axis lies in the plane of the plate. A 
linear polarization state parallel to the optic axis sees the refractive index ne, while a polar￾ization state orthogonal to the optic axis sees the index no. As a result, the two polarization 
states accumulate a relative path difference DL and corresponding differential phase delay δ:
L n     0 n d e , (2.19)
    2 / ,   n n 0  e d (2.20)
where d is the thickness of the plate. The most common retarders are quarter-wave retard￾ers (QWR) and half-wave retarders (HWR) that generate path differences corresponding 
to a quarter of a wavelength and half of a wavelength, respectively (i.e., phase delays of 90° 
and 180°). Figure 2.8 schematically depicts a quarter-wave retarder. The slow (fast) axis 
corresponds to the polarization direction with the larger (smaller) of the two indices no, ne. 
In case of quartz (no < ne), the optic axis is the slow axis. It is obvious that a QWR converts 
incoming linear polarization states at ±45° to the slow axis to right circular (Ey leads Ex) 
or left circular polarization, respectively. Vice versa, incoming circular polarization is con￾verted to linear polarization. A QWR is said to be of zero order, if DL = l/4. Higher order 
QWR have delays of (3/4)l, (5/4)l, etc. A quartz zero-order retarder for a wavelength of 1550 
nm has a thickness of about 52 mm. Zero-order retarders are delicate to handle but less 
sensitive to deviations from the nominal operating temperature. It should be mentioned 
that the optical activity of quartz is not evident in a retarder, since the light propagates 
perpendicular to the optic axis.
Another common retarder material is the biaxial crystal mica, mostly in the form of 
muscovite [31]. Whereas quartz must be cut and polished, mica can be easily cleaved, and 
its principal axes (slow and fast axes) lie in the cleavage planes. At normal incidence, mica 
then behaves like a uniaxial crystal; (|n0 − ne|) = 0.005 (at 589.3 nm).
FIGURE 2.8 Quarter-wave retarder.Polarization ◾  27
Half-wave retarders are commonly utilized as polarization rotators. A HWR rotates a 
linear polarization state oriented at an angle θ to the slow axis by an angle of −2θ. The same 
applies to the azimuth of elliptical polarization. In particular, a linear SOP at 45° is rotated 
by −90°, i.e., the transmitted linear SOP is orthogonal to the incident SOP. Furthermore, 
HWR convert left-handed elliptical SOP to right-handed elliptical SOP and vice visa; the 
SOP ellipticity remains unchanged.
2.7 JONES MATRIX CALCULUS
The Jones calculus, established by the American physicist R. C. Jones in 1941 [33], serves to 
describe the propagation of polarized light through (lossless) non-depolarizing optical ele￾ments such as polarizers, beam splitters, or linearly and circularly birefringent retarders. 
Often, such elements are referred to as polarization elements. In Chapters 7 and 8, we will 
apply the Jones calculus to the polarization evolution in optical fibers for current sensing 
and to derive the corresponding sensor signals.
2.7.1 Jones Vectors
Jones vectors describe the polarization of a light wave in vector form (Jones vector) and 
read in complex notation [28–31]:
E =
E
E
x
y
x
y
x i
y
i
E e
E e
x
y


 

 








0
0




. (2.21)
The oscillatory terms exp[i(ϖt − kz)] of the fields can be dropped in this context. Note that 
the ratio Ey/Ex of the two vector components is the polarization variable χ from (2.7). The 
product E†
E corresponds to the light wave intensity (or irradiance) I:
† 22 0 0 . x y I EE = = + E E (2.22)
The dagger superscript † indicates the Hermitian adjoint (complex conjugate of the trans￾pose matrix). (Note: The intensity in units of W/cm2
 is (1/2)ε0c E†
E, but the pre-factor is 
commonly omitted, when only relative intensities are of interest.) Often, it is convenient to 
only consider the relative phase d = jy − jx of the two components and normalize the light 
intensity to unity:
E
x
y 









1
0
2 0
2
0
E E 0
E
E e x y
x
y i

 · . (2.23)
It is obvious from (2.7) that the Jones vector can be expressed in terms of the complex 
polarization variable χ (the unit vectors are omitted):
E 


 


1
 . (2.24)28   ◾  Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
Two Jones vectors E1 and E2 are said to be normal if they satisfy the condition E E1 2 = 0, 
E E2 1 = 0. Polarization states corresponding to orthogonal Jones vectors correspond to a 
pair of antipodes on the Poincaré sphere. If, in addition, the vectors satisfy the conditions 
E E1 1 = 1 and E E2 2 = 1, they are called an orthonormal pair of Jones vectors. Table 2.1
depicts the normalized Jones vectors of selected polarization states.
2.7.2 Jones Matrices
The Jones matrix J of a polarization element is a 2×2-matrix of complex elements that 
relates the Jones vector of the transmitted light field Et
 to the Jones vector of the incident 
field Ei
:
E J t i = E (2.25)
or in expanded notation
E
E
E
E
tx
ty
ix
iy
a b
c d


 

 


 




 

. (2.26)
The diagonal matrix elements a, d represent transmission ratios without polarization 
change, whereas the off-diagonal elements b, c describe cross-coupling of the orthogonal 
fields. If the light passes a series of optical elements with matrices J1, J2, … Jn, the transmit￾ted field is given by
E J t n  J J 2 1 Ei . (2.27)
TABLE 2.1 Normalized Jones Vectors of Selected Polarization States
Polarization State Jones Vector
Linear parallel to x (horizontal) 1
0








Linear parallel to y (vertical) 0
1








Linear at 45° to x 1
2
1
1








Linear at −45° to x 1
2
1
1








Linear at angle θ to x cos
sin










Left-handed circular (Ey lags Ex by 90°) 1
2
1








i
Right-handed circular (Ey leads Ex by 90°) 1
2
1
i







Polarization ◾  29
It is important to note that the matrices Ji
 do not commute and must be applied in proper 
order. Inserting the input and output Jones vectors from (2.24) into (2.25) gives a relation￾ship between the input and transmitted polarization states, χi
 and χt
 [28]:


 t
i
i
c d
a b  
 . (2.28)
Table 2.2 lists the Jones matrices of important polarization elements for orientations typi￾cally utilized in optical sensors, both in a Cartesian (linear) basis and a circular basis (the 
transformation between bases is described further below) [28–31].
In particular, the Jones matrix of a linear retarder with retardation d = dy – dx (2.20) and 
a principal axis parallel to x reads in a linear basis [30]:
J 






  
e
e
i
i


/
/ .
2
2
0
0
(2.29)
(A positive argument indicates a relative phase advance). The Jones matrix of a quarter￾wave retarder (d = p/2) with the fast axis parallel to x is
J 







 


 

 
e
e
e
i
i
i
i



/
/
/ .
4
4
4 0
0
1 0
0
(2.30)
If J is the Jones matrix of a polarization element in a Cartesian coordinate system (x, y, z), 
the Jones matrix Jrot of the same element rotated about z by an angle θ with respect to its 
initial orientation (counterclockwise looking into the beam), the Jones matrix Jrot of the 
rotated element reads [28]
Jrot   R J     R , (2.31)
where R(θ) is the rotation matrix:
R 
 
     


 


cos sin
sin cos . (2.32)
For example, the Jones matrix of a quarter-wave retarder with the fast axis at an angle θ to 
x reads
JQWR 
 
 
  
  
 

 

 


 

 
cos sin
sin cos
cos sin
sin
e
i
i
4 1 0
0  
 
 

cos
cos sin sin cos
sin cos si
/


 


    
  
e
i i
i
i 4
2 2 1
1
‚ ‚
n cos . 2 2   







 i
(2.33)30   ◾  Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
Stated in words, the orthogonal constituents of the input field parallel to the fast and slow 
retarder axes f and s (coinciding with x and y before rotation) are projected onto the fast 
and slow axes of the rotated retarder f’ and s’; the resulting fields parallel to f’ and s’ accu￾mulate a differential phase shift of p/4 in the retarder and finally are projected back onto 
the axes x and y. At θ = 45°, the matrix reduces to
JQWR      

 

  45 1
2
1
1
i
i . (2.34)
TABLE 2.2 Jones Matrices in Linear (Cartesian) and Circular Bases of Important 
Polarization Elements
Jones Matrix
Optical Element Linear Basis Circular Basis
Free space 1 0
0 1








1 0
0 1








Linear polarizer at 0° (parallel to x) 1 0
0 0








1
2
1 1
1 1








Linear polarizer at 90° 0 0
0 1








1
2
1 1
1 1










Linear polarizer at 45° 1
2
1 1
1 1








1
2
1
1
i
i








Linear polarizer at −45° 1
2
1 1
1 1










1
2
1
1
 







i
i
Quarter-wave retarder with fast axis at 0°
e i
i/4 1 0
0 








1
2
1
1
i
i








Quarter-wave retarder with fast axis at 90°
e i
i/4 1 0
0








1
2
1
1










i
i
Quarter-wave retarder with fast axis at 45° 1
2
1
1
i
i








1
2
1 1
1 1
 







Half-wave retarder with fast axis at 0° 1 0
0 1








0 1
1 0








Half-wave retarder with fast axis at 45° 0
0
i
i








0 1
1 0
 







Ideal mirror (normal incidence) 







1 0
0 1
0 1
1 0










Optical activity: polarization rotation by angle αr
(cw for αr > 0, nL > nR; ccw for αr < 0, nL < nR) cos sin
sin cos
a a
a a
r r
 r r








e
e
ia
ia
r
r
 







0
0Polarization ◾  31
Similarly, if
JP 


 


1 0
0 0 (2.35)
is Jones matrix of a linear polarizer oriented parallel to x (θ = 0), the Jones matrix of the 
same polarizer oriented at an angle θ to x reads
JP 
  
     








cos sin cos
sin cos sin .
2
2 (2.36)
2.7.3 Linear and Circular Base
The Jones matrices in the left column of Table 2.2 are valid in a Cartesian or linear basis, 
i.e., a given SOP is represented as a superposition of orthogonal linear SOP:
E
E
E 


 


x
y
, (2.37)
where Ex, Ey are the complex fields from (2.23). In case of circular or elliptical birefringent 
optical elements, it is often convenient to work with a circular basis and express the input 
and output optical fields as a linear combination of left circular and right circular polariza￾tion states EL and ER:
E
E
E
  circ 


 

 L
R
. (2.38)
The light intensity in terms of EL and ER is
I   L L R R   E E E E . (2.39)
A base change matrix F and its inverse F−1 relate the field components in the circular base 
to the components in the linear base, and vice versa [28]:
E
E
F
E
E
x
y
L
R


 

  

 

, (2.40)
E
E
F
E
E
L
R
x
y


 

  

 

 1 , (2.41)32   ◾  Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
where F and F−1
 are given by
F  


 

 1
2
1 1
i i , (2.42)
F   


 

 1 1
2
1
1
i
i . (2.43)
F is a unitary matrix satisfying the condition F−1 = F†
. The matrix columns of F are so￾called basis vectors and correspond to the Jones vectors of left and right circular polariza￾tion states (see Table 2.1).
The Jones matrix Jcirc in the circular base is obtained from the Jones matrix Jcart in the 
Cartesian base and vice versa by the following transformations [28]:
J F circ  J F cart 1 , (2.44)
J F cart  J F circ 1
. (2.45)
If we express Jcart and Jcirc as
J cart 


 


a b
c d (2.46)
and
J circ 


 


A B
C D , (2.47)
the elements of the circular Jones matrix in terms of the elements of the corresponding 
Cartesian Jones matrix are [28]
J
A B
C D
a d i b c a d i b c
a d i b c a d circ 


 

               
       
1
2      







 i b c , (2.48)
and, conversely, the elements of the Cartesian Jones matrix follow from the elements of the 
circular Jones matrix as
J
a b
c d
A B C D i A B C D
i A B C D A B C D cart 


 

           
          
1
2








. (2.49)Polarization ◾  33
For example, the circular Jones matrix of a circularly birefringent polarization element 
(optical rotator) reads
J circ    








 e
e
ia
ia
r
r
0
0 , (2.50)
where ar is the polarization rotation angle (corresponding to half the differential phase 
shift between the LHC and RHC polarization states); also see Table 2.2. Note that other 
than in the linear basis (Table 2.2), there are no off-diagonal matrix elements. Their 
absence indicates that the left and right circular basis states propagate through the rotator 
unchanged, apart from a relative phase shift of 2ar
. By contrast, a linear retarder couples 
the two circular states in a circular basis as indicated by the non-vanishing off-diagonal 
matrix elements [28]:
J circ
lin r. etarder cos / sin /
sin / cos
 
     
 
 



2 2
2
2
2
ie
ie
i
i    / 2







 (2.51)
Here, δ is again the retardation and θ the angle of the fast axis to x.
Note that the Jones matrices of lossless polarization elements such as retarders are uni￾tary and have the form [28, 38]
J cart 
 









a b
b a , (2.52)
J circ 
 









A B
B A , (2.53)
with |a|
2
 + |b|
2
 = 1 and |A|
2
 + |B|
2
 = 1. The asterisks again indicate the complex conjugate.
2.7.4 Eigenpolarizations and Eigenvalues
The eigenpolarizations of a so-called homogeneous polarization element are orthogo￾nal states of polarization, χe1 and χe2, that, apart from a phase shift, propagate unaltered 
through the element and are obtained by setting χout = χin in (2.28). Note, however, that the 
SOP of the overall light field may change during the propagation. The eigenpolarizations 
of a linear retarder, e.g., a quarter-wave retarder, are orthogonal linear polarization states 
parallel to the fast and slow retarder axes, and the eigenpolarizations of a circularly bire￾fringent element (circular retarder) are LHC and RHC states. An element with both linear 
and circular birefringence (elliptic retarder) has orthogonal elliptical SOP as eigenpolar￾izations. In contrast to homogeneous polarization elements, non-homogeneous elements 
do not have orthogonal eigenpolarizations [37]. For example, skew rays through optical 34   ◾  Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
systems or some meta-materials can be inhomogeneous [36]. Also, certain combinations 
of homogeneous elements are inhomogeneous such as a linear polarizer combined with 
quarter-wave retarder to a circular polarizer, which has only one eigenpolarization.
The orthogonal eigenvectors of the (Cartesian) Jones matrix, Ee1 = (Ee1.x, Ee1.y) and Ee2 = 
(Ee2.x, Ee2.y), represent the field constituents of the eigenpolarizations, χe1 and χe2, respec￾tively, and satisfy the following relationships [28, 35, 36] (The analog holds for the eigen￾vectors and eigenvalues in the circular basis):
JE E e e 1 1   1, (2.54)
JE E e e 2 2   2, (2.55)
and
† † EE EE ee e e 12 21 = = 0, 0 (2.56)
Here, the dagger symbol † again denotes the conjugate transpose (Hermitian conjugate); λ1, 
λ2 are the commonly complex eigenvalues of the Jones matrix (1 2  
 and 1 2  1). Analog 
to (2.24), the Jones eigenvectors can be expressed in terms of the orthogonal eigenpolariza￾tions χe1 2, as
Ee
e
1 2
1 2
1 ,
,
 . 

 



(2.57)
χe1, 2 follow from (2.28):
e1 2 b d a d a bc 2
,    1 2/ ,         4 

 

 (2.58)
with  e e 1 2  e e 1 2 1      . The commonly complex eigenvalues λ1, λ2 are given by
1 2
2
,    1 2/ .         4 

 

 d a d a bc (2.59)
The arguments of the eigenvalues give the relative phase shift that the two eigenpolariza￾tions accumulate in the polarization element:
  i arg /     . 1 2 (2.60)
By reversing the above procedure, one can construct the Jones matrix of a polarization ele￾ment from the Jones eigenvectors and eigenvalues of the element [28, 30]:
J  Q Q  1
. (2.61)Polarization ◾  35
The orthogonal Jones eigenvectors from (2.57) represent the columns of Q:
Q 


 


1 1
  e e 1 2
, (2.62)
Q  




 

 1 1 1
2 1 1
2
  1

e e 
e
e
. (2.63)
Λ is the diagonal eigenvalue matrix
 


 




1
2
0
0 . (2.64)
The Jones matrix in terms of χei and λi
 then reads
J       

 
   






1 1 2  2 1 1 2 1 2
1 2 2 1 1 1 2 2
/  
     
        e e 
. (2.65)
2.7.5 Jones Matrix in Terms of Its Eigenvalues
Naturally, the Jones matrix in the basis of the eigenpolarizations of a given polarization 
element (eigenbasis) is a diagonal matrix with the eigenvalues representing the matrix 
elements:
J eigen 


 




1
2
0
0 . (2.66)
For example, the eigenvalues of a linear retarder in the Cartesian basis are   1 2  

 

 exp
i
and   2 2   

 

 exp
i ; (the fast axis is parallel to x). The Jones matrix in another basis, e.g., 
the circular basis, is obtained from Jeigen, analog to (2.44) and (2.45), by the transformation
J  F J F 1 eigen , (2.67)
where the columns of F are formed by the basis vectors of the new basis.
2.7.6 N-Matrix
So far, we have assumed that the properties of the considered optical element are con￾stant along the propagation direction z of the light. For example, the orientation of the 
birefringent axes of a linear retarder and its birefringent phase shift per unit length can 
be taken as independent of z. In optically anisotropic media, this assumption is no longer 
valid. An example is an optical fiber that is both linearly and circularly birefringent. The 
problem is also well-known from liquid crystals. The two-component Jones vector E of the 36   ◾  Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
propagating light wave then becomes a function of z. The variation of the field in an infini￾tesimally thin slab of thickness dz of the medium can be written as [28]
E J   z d  z z   E  z , (2.68)
where J(z) is the (local) Jones matrix of the slab. The variation of E as a function of z can be 
expressed by a differential equation
d z
dz
z z
E
N E       . (2.69)
In expanded form and a Cartesian basis, this set of coupled differential equations reads
d
dz
n n
E E E x   11 x y 12 , (2.70)
d
dz
n n
E
E E y   21 x y 22 . (2.71)
The 2×2 N-matrix with elements nij, also introduced by Jones, is called differential propa￾gation Jones matrix [28], and relates to the Jones matrix as follows:
d z
dz
z z
J N J       . (2.72)
If the N-matrix elements are independent of z, the overall Jones matrix J(z) of the optical 
device is easily obtained by integration of (2.72); see [28] for details. Otherwise, the coupled 
equations are commonly solved numerically. In Chapter 7, we will encounter N-matrices 
and corresponding Jones matrices in the context of optical fiber current sensors.
2.7.7 Jones Matrices for Backward Propagation
Some optical sensors of the following chapters are operated in a reflective mode, i.e., after 
having passed the sensing element, the light reflects off a mirror and traverses the sensing 
element a second time, now in backward direction (−z-direction). The Jones matrix of an 
elliptical retarder (with linear and circular retarders being special cases) has the general 
form as given by (2.52) and (2.53), i.e., the Cartesian Jones matrix for light propagation in 
+z-direction reads
J
a b
b a cart
  forward

 
 







. (2.73)Polarization ◾  37
The Cartesian Jones matrix of a reciprocal elliptical retarder (linear birefringence and 
optical activity) for propagation in −z-direction is obtained by replacing the off-diagonal 
matrix elements by their complex conjugate [36]:
J
a b
b a cart
  backward
  
 







. (2.74)
Furthermore, if
J
A B
B A circ
  forward

 
 






 (2.75)
is the circular basis Jones matrix for forward propagation, the circular Jones matrix of a 
reciprocal retarder for backward propagation reads [38]
J
A B
B A circ
  backward
   







 (2.76)
and is the transpose of Jcirc
  forward
. Other than optical activity (e.g., of a sugar solution), mag￾netic field-induced circular birefringence (Faraday effect) is non-reciprocal, and the signs 
of the corresponding phase angles in the Jones matrices for backward propagation must be 
adapted accordingly; their signs switch opposite to those of optical activity.
Finally, it should be mentioned that Stokes vectors and Mueller matrices are alternatives 
to Jones vectors and Jones matrices for describing propagation of polarized light through 
an optical system [28–31]. The 4-element Stokes vector characterizes a polarization state — 
including the state of partially polarized light — in terms of light intensities, and the 4×4 
Mueller matrix of a system relates the input and output Jones vectors to each other. One of 
the many applications of the Mueller calculus include, for example, the light transmission 
through scattering and depolarizing media such as biological tissue. For a description of 
the relationship between Mueller and Jones matrices, the reader is referred to [39]. However, 
we will not make use of the Mueller calculus in this book.38 DOI: 10.1201/9781003100324-5
CHAPTER 3
Sensing Methods
3.1 POLARIMETRIC SENSORS
In polarimetric sensors, the external field to be measured induces linear or circular 
birefringence in a sensing medium or modifies the birefringence of naturally birefrin￾gent materials. Measurands that can generate linear birefringence include mechani￾cal stress, hydrostatic or acoustic pressure, temperature, or electric fields [40–42]. By 
contrast, mechanical torsion or a magnetic field induces circular birefringence [42, 43]. 
The induced linear birefringence causes a phase shift between two orthogonal linear 
polarization states, whereas circular birefringence can be observed as a rotation of a 
linear polarization state. The external field may act directly on the sensing medium, for 
instance, an electro-optic crystal for electric field and voltage sensing, or the field may 
induce birefringence via a transducer. An example of the latter is a quartz disk that 
transmits a voltage-induced piezoelectric deformation onto a polarization-maintaining 
optical fiber (Chapter 16). Figure 3.1a depicts a basic polarimetric sensor set-up for 
measuring induced linear birefringence. Chapter 5 will depict a slightly modified set￾up for circular birefringence. A combination of a polarizer (P1) and a quarter-wave 
retarder (QWR) circularly polarizes the probe light before the light enters the sensing 
medium. P1 is oriented, for example, at 0° to the horizontal. The principal axes of the 
retarder and induced birefringence are at ±45° to the polarizer. The sensing medium 
converts the circular input SOP into an elliptical SOP depending on the magnitude 
of the measurand. After a beam splitter (BS), one fraction of the elliptical state passes 
polarizer P2, and the other fraction passes polarizer P3. P2 and P3, oriented at 0° and 
90°, respectively, bring the two orthogonal constituents (oriented at ±45°) of the ellipti￾cal SOP to interference.
The interference intensities I1 and I2 at the photodetectors are [31]
II K 1 0 = + ( /2 1 cos , )( ϕ ) (3.1)
II K 2 0 = − ( /2 1 cos . )( ϕ ) (3.2)Sensing Methods ◾ 39
Here, I0 is proportional to the light source power; φ is the total phase difference between 
the two orthogonal SOP:
π ϕθ φ = + +∆ , 2 (3.3)
where θ is the phase shift due to intrinsic birefringence of the sensing element, if any, the 
(p/2)-term is the QWR retardation, and Δϕ is the birefringent phase shift induced by the 
measurand. (It is assumed that principal axes of the intrinsic and induced birefringence 
coincide.) The fringe contrast K, also called fringe visibility, is defined as
− = +
max min
max min
, I I K
I I (3.4)
where Imax and Imin correspond to the interference intensities at constructive and destruc￾tive interference, respectively. K equals unity at ideal conditions, i.e., if the interfering fields 
are fully coherent and have equal amplitudes. Partial coherence reduces K. Often, the field 
to be measured is an ac field that produces a sinusoidal birefringent phase modulation 
Δϕ = ϕ0sin(ϖt) with amplitude ϕ0 and frequency ϖ: The difference of the two detector 
signals divided by their sum gives a signal independent of the light intensity I0:
ϕ − = = +
1 2
1 2
cos .
I I S K
I I (3.5)
FIGURE 3.1 (a) Basic set-up of a polarimetric sensor; P: polarizer, QWR: quarter-wave retarder, BS: 
beam splitter; (b) Signal I1 vs. birefringent phase shift φ and modulation Δϕ by an external ac field 
with the operating point at quadrature.40 ◾ Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
With the assumptions θ = 0 and ϕ0 ≪ 1, S can be approximated as
SK t = φ ϖ 0 sin , ( ) (3.6)
i.e., the signal is proportional to the measurand. Note that to this end, the p/2-phase shift 
by the retarder moves the operating point of the sensor into the linear range of the cosine 
transfer function (Figure 3.1b).
Parts II and III will present polarimetric current and voltage sensors with both bulk and 
fiber-optic sensing media.
3.2 TWO BEAM INTERFEROMETERS
Figure 3.2 depicts three examples of interferometric optical fiber sensors [44, 45]. In the 
fiber Mach-Zehnder interferometer, a 1×2 directional fiber coupler splits the input light 
into the two fiber arms of the interferometer. The external field to be measured modulates 
the optical phase in one fiber arm (sensing arm), here via a transducer. The other arm 
serves as a reference. The light waves in the two arms interfere in a second fiber coupler. 
For maximum interference contrast, the interfering waves must have the same polariza￾tion states. This requires the use of polarization-maintaining fibers or active polarization 
control. The signals I1 and I2 are the same as in a polarimetric sensor; Eqs. (3.1)–(3.6), 
but the phase terms now refer to phase differences between the two interferometer arms. 
The quasi-static phase difference θ depends on the optical length difference of the fiber 
arms and typically varies with temperature and other disturbances such as fiber bend￾ing. Various detection techniques are known to avoid signal fading at changing θ. (Signal 
fading occurs when the operating point of the interferometer approaches a maximum or 
minimum of the cosine transfer function.) With the homodyne phase tracking method, 
the signal processor applies a phase tracking signal to a piezoelectric transducer (PZT) in 
one arm of the interferometer. The phase tracker keeps the operating point at quadrature, 
that is, at θ = p/2 modulo 2p, by keeping the difference of the quasi-static components of 
FIGURE 3.2 Interferometric optical fiber sensors.Sensing Methods ◾ 41
I1 and I2 at zero [46]. Another method is phase-generated carrier demodulation [47]. Here, 
the phase difference of the two interferometer arms is modulated at a frequency ϖmod well 
above the frequency ϖ of the measurand. The modulation is achieved, for example, by 
means of a piezoelectric transducer or by modulating the wavelength of the light source. 
The interferometer output (I1 or I2) then contains two sets of sideband signals centered 
about even and odd multiples of ϖmod, respectively. The amplitudes of the two signal sets 
vary in proportion to cosθ (t) and sinθ (t), i.e., if one set fades away, the other reaches a 
maximum. Relatively simple signal processing then yields the measurand induced phase 
shift Δϕ = ϕ0sin(ϖt) independent of variations in θ. Further techniques to overcome signal 
fading have been demonstrated in [48].
The fiber Michelson interferometer (Figure 3.2b) differs from the Mach-Zehnder inter￾ferometer in that the two fiber branches are terminated by mirrors. Hence, the light waves 
return to the input fiber coupler, where they interfere. As a result, the sensitivity doubles 
compared to an equivalent Mach-Zehnder interferometer. The fiber Sagnac interferometer 
(Figure 3.2c) comprises a fiber coil with two counter-propagating light waves. A rotation of 
the coil produces a differential phase shift of the counter-propagating waves (Sagnac effect). 
Sagnac interferometers form the basis of fiber-optic gyroscopes for rotation sensing [45]. In 
Sagnac interferometer current sensors, the phase shift is produced by the magnetic field of 
a current passing through the coil aperture (Faraday effect). We will encounter corre￾sponding sensors and signal processing methods in Chapter 8.
Still other fiber interferometers make use of the interference of the fundamental fiber 
mode LP01 with at least one higher order mode [49, 50]. Voltage sensors employing an 
interferometric two-mode fiber will be presented in Chapter 16.
3.3 FABRY-PÉROT INTERFEROMETER
A Fabry-Pérot interferometer comprises an optical cavity between two parallel partially 
reflecting mirrors and relies on multiple beam interference. If the cavity consists of a 
solid medium — here the sensing medium — with partially reflecting surfaces, it is called 
Fabry-Pérot etalon (Figure 3.3, left). A light field with amplitude E0 impinging on the cav￾ity reflects multiply back and forth within the cavity. Assuming a lossless medium, the 
total intensity It
 of the transmitted fields as a function of the round-trip phase shift φ and 
normalized by the input intensity Ii
 is known as the Airy function (Figure 3.3, right) and 
given by [31]
ϕ =   +    
t
i 2
1 .
1 sin
2
ˆ
I
I F
(3.7)
The coefficient of finesse ˆ
F is given by
  =     −
2
2
ˆ . 2
1
r F
r
(3.8)42 ◾ Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
Here, r is the amplitude reflection coefficient (r2
 gives the reflectance R). At normal inci￾dence, the round-trip phase shift φ (phase shift between two successively transmitted 
waves) reads
π
ϕ λ = 4 nd, (3.9)
where n and d are the refractive index and thickness of the etalon, respectively. The relative 
intensity Ir/Ii
 reflected from the cavity is the complementary of the Airy function: Ir/Ii
 = 
1 – It
/Ii
. The finesse F of the cavity is the ratio of the separation of adjacent maxima of the 
Airy function to the full width at half maximum of the transmission peaks and given by
= (π /2 . ) ˆ F F (3.10)
It is obvious that, depending on the cavity finesse, Fabry-Pérot interferometers can reach 
much higher sensitivity (that is, intensity change per change in the optical length nd) 
than two beam interferometers but at the expense of a smaller unambiguous measure￾ment range. Illumination of the interferometer with a broad-band spectrum results in an 
Airy-function-like transmission spectrum. The transmission peaks at normal incidence 
are separated in wavelength by the free spectral range of the cavity:
λ ≈
2
0 FSR ,
2nd (3.11)
where l0 is the center wavelength of the spectrum. A change in the optical cavity length 
can then be observed as a shift of the spectral fringes. Another frequently used parameter 
to characterize a Fabry-Pérot cavity is its Q-factor, Q = no/Dn for high Q-cavities, where no
and Dn are the frequency and line width of the resonance (full width at half maximum, 
FIGURE 3.3 Multiple reflections in a Fabry-Pérot etalon, r, r’ and t, t’ are amplitude reflection and 
transmission coefficients, respectively (left); Airy function vs. phase shift φ for various mirror reflec￾tances R and corresponding coefficients of finesse ˆ
F (right).Sensing Methods ◾ 43
FWHM), respectively [31]. Parts II and III will show how certain types of optical current 
and voltage sensors make use of Fabry-Pérot etalons.
3.4 COHERENCE
Not being monochromatic, all practical light sources have a finite coherence length lc. For 
high fringe visibility, the optical path imbalance ΔL of the interfering waves in polarimet￾ric and interferometric sensors should be well within lc, and the waves should have equal 
amplitudes E01, E02. The fringe visibility is given by [31, 51]
= γ (∆ ) +
 
 1 2
12
1 2
2 . I I K L
I I (3.12)
Here,  
1 2 I I, are the intensities of the interfering waves:  = 2 1 01 I E /2 and  = 2 2 02 I E /2. γ12(ΔL) is 
the complex degree of temporal coherence, that is, the normalized self-coherence function: 
γ12(τ) = Γ(τ)/Γ(0), where τ = ΔL/c is the relative time delay of the waves. The self-coherence 
function Γ(τ) is the inverse Fourier transform of the power spectral density of the light 
source. The absolute value |γ12(ΔL)| equals unity at DL = 0, when the interfering waves are 
fully coherent and becomes zero at DL → ∞, when the waves are incoherent. In between the 
two limits, i.e., when 0 < (|γ12(ΔL)| < 1), the waves are said to be partially coherent. With 
E01 = E02, K reduces to
K L = ∆ γ 12 ( ) . (3.13)
Frequently, the coherence length lc of a light source is defined as the path length difference 
at which |γ12| has dropped to one half. This length depends to some extent on the shape of 
the source spectrum. For a Gaussian spectrum — |γ12(ΔL)| is then also a Gaussian —, one 
obtains [52]
λ
π λ = ∆
2
0 c
4 ln2 l , (3.14)
where l0 is the center wavelength and Dl the full width at half maximum (FWHM). A 
Lorentzian line shape gives half this value, and |γ12(ΔL)| decays exponentially [52]. (The 
reader should be aware, though, that the definitions of lc vary in the literature.) The coher￾ence length of stabilized narrow line width lasers can exceed 100 km. By comparison, the 
coherence length of simpler single longitudinal mode laser diodes is on the order of some 
100 m or shorter. Many of the polarimetric sensors in the following chapters work with 
broad band sources, particularly superluminescent diodes (SLED) with coherence lengths 
of a few tens of mm. As an example, the coherence length of a 1310-nm SLED with a 
Gaussian spectrum and a FWHM of 40 nm is 38 mm; Eq. (3.14). Typically, the group delay 
of the interfering waves, e.g., in a polarimetric sensing fiber, well exceeds this length. (The 
relative delay of the orthogonal SOP in conventional PM fibers is a few hundred mm per 
meter of fiber.) The delay is then compensated in an appropriately oriented second fiber 44 ◾ Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
section. A short coherence length helps to suppress disturbing interference signals from 
parasitic waves that are generated, for instance, by undesired polarization cross-coupling, 
back-reflections at interfaces, or Rayleigh scattering.
3.5 SENSOR COMPONENTS
This subsection briefly describes the functions and gives some specifications of optical 
components of the optical current and voltage sensors (OCS and OVS) discussed in more 
detail in the subsequent chapters. More details can be found in those chapters and the 
literature cited below.
3.5.1 Light Sources
Typical light sources of OCS and OVS are light-emitting diodes (LED), laser diodes, and 
most importantly, superluminescent diodes (SLED) [53, 54]. Occasionally, fluorescent fiber 
sources have also been employed [55]. LED are economic solutions for sensors with bulk 
optic sensing elements that are pigtailed with multimode fiber leads, but high insertion 
loss essentially excludes them from single-mode fiber sensors. By contrast, laser diodes 
and SLED are much better adapted to the small SMF cores. Most early sensors operated 
at wavelengths in the 780–850 nm window. With increasing availability of inexpensive 
optical fiber products from telecom suppliers and corresponding light sources, operating 
wavelengths have shifted to 1310 nm and 1550 nm. SLED at those wavelengths are based 
on InP and provide fiber-coupled output powers up to several 10 mW. Typical output pow￾ers in OCS and OVS are between 5 mW and 10 mW, and typical spectral widths (FWHM) 
are between 30 nm and 40 nm. SLED emitting flattop spectra with widths up to 150 nm, 
having lower coherence lengths, are available for optical coherence tomography (OCT). 
The output power of uncooled SLED (and other semiconductor sources, for that matter) 
degrades towards elevated temperatures, and the emission wavelength exhibits a signifi￾cant redshift (by several 100 pm/K in case of 1310-nm SLED). Frequently, a thermoelectric 
cooler stabilizes the SLED chip temperature; the whole assembly is then mounted in a fiber 
pigtailed so-called butterfly housing. Uncooled SLEDs mostly are packaged inside TO style 
cans.
3.5.2 Lyot Fiber Depolarizers
Commonly, the emission from a SLED chip is linearly polarized with a polarization extinc￾tion ratio of roughly 20 dB. At the end of the SLED’s fiber pigtail, however, the polarization 
is often an arbitrary elliptical state, subject to fiber bending and other stresses. A fiber Lyot 
depolarizer inserted into the optical path after the SLED serves to prevent random power 
fluctuations after a polarizer further down the line. The depolarizer consists of two sections 
of PM fiber with a length ratio of 1:2 and the slow axis of the second section at 45° to the 
slow axis of the first section [19, 56, 57]. The differential group delay of the orthogonal polar￾ization states in both PMF sections is much longer than the source coherence length. As a 
result, the orthogonal constituents of the input elliptical SOP become incoherent; the light 
is then said to be pseudo depolarized (not to be confused with unpolarized light). Typical 
lengths of the depolarizer fiber sections range from tens of centimeters to several meters.Sensing Methods ◾ 45
3.5.3 Fiber Polarizers
The prism polarizers discussed in Section 2.5 are often used in laboratory experiments but 
are too bulky and too expensive for commercial OCT (Optical Current Transducers) and 
OVT (Optical Voltage Tranducers). Sensors commonly employ thin polarizing platelets 
with fiber pigtails or polarizing fiber. Platelet polarizers can be as thin as 30 mm and con￾tain oriented elongated metal particles (e.g., from silver) in a glass matrix. Typical polar￾ization extinction ratios (PER) are around 25 dB. Polarizing fibers are mostly coiled PMF 
operated in a wavelength window where only one of the orthogonal SOP of the fundamen￾tal mode is guided, while the other mode leaks out [19, 58]. Polarizing fibers achieve PER 
of at least 30–35 dB. PER as high as 62 dB have been reported in [58].
3.5.4 Directional Fiber Couplers
Directional fiber couplers are fiber-optic beam splitters. In a 2×2-coupler, the claddings of 
two single-mode fibers are fused together so that over some distance the fiber cores are in 
close proximity and the fiber modes couple via their evanescent fields [59]. The couplers 
can be designed for virtually any splitting ratio. Most common are 3 dB couplers with a 
splitting ratio of 1:1. 3x3-couplers are employed in passively interrogated fiber interferom￾eters (Section 8.4) [60].
3.5.5 Sensing Fibers, Fiber Retarders, and Sensing Materials
Specific sensing fibers, fiber retarders as well as magneto-optic, electro-optic, and piezo￾electric sensing materials will be discussed in context of the corresponding sensors.
3.5.6 Fiber Mirrors
Many of the sensors in the following chapters are operated in reflective mode. The end 
of the sensing fiber is then coated with a metallic coating (e.g., Cr/Au) or a multiple layer 
dielectric coating. Typical reflectance values are well over 90%.
3.5.7 Phase Modulators
Simple fiber-optic phase modulators consist of a piezoelectric disk or hollow cylinder with 
several loops of pre-strained fiber wrapped around the circumferential surface [46]. A 
piezoelectric deformation of the transducer shifts the optical phase of the guided light via a 
change in the physical length of the fiber and associated refractive index change due to the 
elasto-optic effect. Piezoelectric modulators are employed to control the operating point 
of polarimetric and interferometric sensors or for sinusoidal phase modulation, for exam￾ple, in interferometric sensors with phase generated carrier demodulation. Piezoelectric 
modulators have the benefit of simplicity, but the usable frequency and amplitude ranges 
are limited. Higher-performing integrated-optic lithium niobate phase modulators will be 
discussed in Chapter 8.
3.5.8 Faraday Rotators, Rotator Mirrors, and Optical Isolators
A Faraday rotator mirror rotates linear polarization states upon reflection by 90°. Rotator 
mirrors are often used in fiber sensors operated in reflective mode such as fiber Michelson 46 ◾ Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
interferometers [61]. Birefringent optical phase shifts that the light accumulated on the for￾ward path cancel on the return path. As a result, the input SOP is again restored after the 
round-trip. Rotator mirrors consist of a magneto-optic material, typically a high Verdet 
constant garnet, in a permanent magnet. One-way polarization rotation is 45°. Optical 
isolators serve, for instance, to prevent back reflections out of a sensor from disturbing 
the light source, particularly in case of laser diode sources. Simple isolators consist of 
45°-rotators between polarizers oriented at 45°.
3.5.9 Fiber Bragg Gratings
Fiber Bragg gratings (FBG) are periodic modulations in the refractive of the fiber core, 
typically over distances from a few mm to a few cm [62]. Most often, the gratings are 
laser-written from the side by means of a phase mask. When illuminated with broad band 
light, a FBG reflects a narrow spectral band centered at the Bragg wavelength lB. The Bragg 
wavelength equals twice the optical period of the grating: lB = 2nL, where n is the effective 
refractive index of the fiber and L the physical grating period. The peak reflectivity can 
reach close to 100%. Typical spectral widths range from below 100 pm to several 100 pm 
(FWHM). FBG serve, for example, as spectral filters or narrow-band mirrors in fiber lasers. 
Chirped or aperiodic gratings can be used for dispersion compensation. FBG applications 
also include strain and temperature sensing [63]. Strain and temperature change the opti￾cal grating period and hence cause a shift in lB. FBG in fused silica fibers have a sensi￾tivity to strain of 1.2 pm/mstrain at 1550 nm; the sensitivity to temperature is 10 pm/K. 
Particularly attractive features of FBG-based sensors are the wavelength-encoded output 
and the fact that multiple gratings with the same or different Bragg wavelengths can be 
multiplexed along a common fiber [63]. The following chapters will show how certain types 
of OCTs and OVTs employ FBG for measuring magnetic or electric field-induced strains of 
piezoelectric or magneto-strictive transducer materials.
3.5.10 Fiber Fusion Splices and Mechanical Fiber Connectors
Different fiber sections of a sensor are commonly joined by fusion splices. Fusion splicers 
for PM fibers automatically orient the principal fiber axes with accuracy to within <±2°. 
Polarization cross-coupling at well-done splices is below −30 dB (Chapter 11). By contrast, 
the fiber leads of a sensor are often connected to the opto-electronics and signal processing 
unit by mechanical connectors for convenient installation. This is relatively uncritical as 
long as the fibers are standard single-mode or multimode fibers. Learned from longtime 
experience, though, there is always a risk of improper connector handling by service per￾sonnel and contamination of the connector ferrules and fiber end faces by dirt. Therefore, 
fusion splices are preferred whenever possible. Connectors for PMF, even though com￾mercially available, are especially critical. Typically, the polarization extinction ratio of a 
PM connector joint is hardly better than 25 dB and varies with temperature (Chapter 11).47
References
1. F. P. Kapron, D. B. Keck, and R. D. Maurer, “Radiation losses in glass optical waveguides,” Appl. 
Phys. Lett. 17(10), 423–425 (1970).
2. J. Hecht, City of Light, the Story of Fiber Optics (Oxford University Press, New York, 1999).
3. N. S. Kapany, Fiber Optics: Principles and Applications (Academic Press, San Diego, CA, 1967).
4. T. Miya, Y. Terunuma, T. Hosaka, and T. Miyoshita, “Ultimate low-loss single-mode fibre at 
1.55 mm,” Electron. Lett. 15(4), 106–108 (1979).
5. L. B. Jeunhomme, Single-Mode Fiber Optics (Marcel Dekker, 1983).
6. A. W. Snyder and J. D. Love, Optical Waveguide Theory (Chapman and Hall, London, 1983).
7. D. Marcuse, Theory of Dielectric Optical Waveguides, 2nd ed. (Academic Press, San Diego, CA, 
1991).
8. G. P. Agrawal, Fiber-Optic Communication Systems (John Wiley & Sons, 2012).
9. P. J. Winzer, D. T. Neilson, and A. R. Chraplyvy, “Fiber-optic transmission and networking: the 
previous 20 and the next 20 years [Invited],” Opt. Express 26, 24190–24239 (2018).
10. D. Gloge, “Weakly guiding fibers,” Appl. Opt. 10(10), 2252–2258 (1971).
11. R. B. Dyott, Elliptical Fiber Wavesguides (Artech House, 1995).
12. C. D. Poole, J. M. Wiesenfeld, D. J. DiGiovanni, and A. M. Vengsarkar, “Optical fiber-based 
dispersion compensation using higher order modes near cutoff,” J. Lightwave Technol. 12(10), 
1746–1758 (1994), doi: 10.1109/50.337486
13. M. J. Digonnet, Rare-Earth-Doped Fiber Lasers and Amplifiers, Revised and Expanded (CRC 
Press, 2001).
14. G. Tao, H. Ebendorff-Heidepriem, A. M. Stolyarov, et al., “Infrared fibers,” Adv. Opt. Photonics
7(2), 379–458 (2015).
15. P. St. J. Russell, “Photonic-crystal fibers,” J. Lightwave Technol. 24(12), 4729–4749 (2006).
16. A. M. Pinto and M. Lopez-Amo, “Photonic crystal fibers for sensing applications,” J. Sens.
(2012) Article ID 598178, 2012.
17. A. A. Stolov, D. A. Simoff, and J. Li, “Thermal stability of specialty optical fibers,” J. Lightwave 
Technol. 26(20), 3443–3451 (2008).
18. C. Emslie, “Harsh environment optical fiber coatings: beauty is only skin deep,” Laser Focus 
World 51(4), 41–47 (2015).
19. J. Noda, K. Okamoto, and Y. Sasaki, “Polarization-maintaining fibers and their applications,” 
J. Lightwave Technol. 4(8), 1071–1089 (1986).
20. A. Ortigosa-Blanch, J. C. Knight, W. J. Wadsworth, et al., “Highly birefringent photonic crystal 
fibers,” Opt. Lett. 25(18), 1325–1327 (2000).
21. M. P. Varnham, D. N. Payne, and J. D. Love, “Fundamental limit to the transmission of linearly 
polarized light by birefringent optical fibers,” Electron. Lett. 20, 55–56 (1984).48   ◾  References
22. A. Kumar and R. K. Varshney, “Propagation characteristics of highly elliptical core waveguides: 
a perturbation approach,” Opt. Quant. Electron. 16, 349–354 (1984).
23. M. Legre, M. Wegmuller, and N. Gisin, “Investigation of the ratio between phase and group 
birefringence in optical single-mode fibers,” J. Lightwave Technol. 21(12), 3374–3378 (2003).
24. T. Geisler and S. Herstrøm, “Measured phase and group birefringence in elliptical core fibers 
with systematically varied ellipticities,” Opt. Express 19(26), B283–B288 (2011).
25. R. Ulrich, S. C. Rashleigh, and W. Eickhoff, “Bending-induced birefringence in single-mode 
fibers,” Opt. Lett. 5(6), 273–275 (1980).
26. D. Clarke, “Nomenclature of polarized light: linear polarization,” Appl. Opt. 13(1), 3–5 (1974).
27. D. Clarke, “Nomenclature of polarized light: elliptical polarization,” Appl. Opt. 13(2), 222–224 
(1974).
28. R. M. A. Azzam and N. M. Bashara, Ellipsometry and Polarized Light (North-Holland Pub. 
Co., sole distributors for the U.S.A. and Canada, Elsevier North-Holland, North-Holland, 
Amsterdam, 1979).
29. E. Collett, Polarized Light: Fundamentals and Applications (Marcel Dekker, New York, 1993).
30. D. Goldstein, Polarized light, 2nd ed. (Marcel Dekker, New York, 2003).
31. E. Hecht and A. Zajac, Optics (Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, 1974).
32. J. N. Nye, Physical Properties of Crystals (Oxford University Press, London, 1967).
33. R. C. Jones, “A new calculus for the treatment of optical systems. I. Description and discussion 
of the calculus,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. 31(7), 488–493 (1941).
34. A. Gerald and J. M. Burch, Introduction to Matrix Methods in Optics (John Wiley & Sons, 1975), 
ISBN 978-0471296850.
35. S. N. Savenkov, O. I. Sydoruk, and R. S. Muttiah, “Conditions for polarization elements to be 
dichroic and birefringent,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 22(7), 1447–1452 (2005).
36. C. Menzel, C. Rockstuhl, and F. Lederer, “Advanced Jones calculus for the classification of peri￾odic metamaterials,” Phys. Rev. A 82, 053811 (2010).
37. S.-Y. Lu and R. A. Chipman, “Homogeneous and inhomogeneous Jones matrices,” J. Opt. Soc. 
Am. A 11(2), 766–773 (1994).
38. R. Dändliker, “Rotational effects of polarization in optical fibers,” in Optical Wave Sciences and 
Technology, Anisotropic and Nonlinear Optical Waveguides, C. G. Someda and G. Stegeman, 
Eds. (Elsevier, 1992), pp. 39–76, ISSN 09275479, ISBN 9780444884893.
39. D. G. Anderson and R. Barakat, “Necessary and sufficient conditions for a Mueller matrix to be 
derivable from a Jones matrix,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 11(8), 2305–2319 (1994).
40. S. C. Rashleigh, “Acoustic sensing with a single coiled monomode fiber,” Opt. Lett. 5(9), 392–394 
(1980).
41. N. Fürstenau, M. Schmidt, W. J. Bock, and W. Urbanczyk, “Dynamic pressure sensing with a 
fiber-optic polarimetric pressure transducer with two-wavelength passive quadrature readout,” 
Appl. Opt. 37(4), 663–671 (1998).
42. G. A. Massey, D. C. Erickson, and R. A. Kadlec, “Electromagnetic field components: their measure￾ment using linear electrooptic and magnetooptic effects,” Appl. Opt. 14(11), 2712–2719 (1975).
43. A. Papp and H. Harms, “Magnetooptical current transformer. 1: principles,” Appl. Opt. 19(22), 
3729–3734 (1980).
44. T. G. Giallorenzi, J. A. Bucaro, A. Dandridge, et al., “Optical fiber sensor technology,” IEEE 
Trans. Microw. Theory Tech. 30(4), 472–511 (1982).
45. D. A. Jackson, “Monomode optical fibre interferometers for precision measurement,” J. Phys. E: 
Scient. Instrum. 18(12), 981 (1985).
46. D. A. Jackson, R. Priest, A. Dandridge, and A. B. Tveten, “Elimination of drift in a single-mode 
optical fiber interferometer using a piezoelectrically stretched coiled fiber,” Appl. Opt. 19(17), 
2926–2929 (1980).References ◾  49
47. A. Dandridge, A. B. Tveten, and T. G. Giallorenzi, “Homodyne demodulation scheme for 
fiber optic sensors using phase generated carrier,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech. 30(10), 
1635–1641 (1982).
48. S. K. Sheem, T. G. Giallorenzi, and K. Koo, “Optical techniques to solve the signal fading prob￾lem in fiber interferometers,” Appl. Opt. 21(4), 689–693 (1982).
49. J. N. Blake, S. Y. Huang, B. Y. Kim, and H. J. Shaw, “Strain effects on highly elliptical core two￾mode fibers,” Opt. Lett. 12, 732–734 (1987).
50. H. Wang, S. Pu, N. Wang, S. Dong, and J. Huang, “Magnetic field sensing based on singlemode￾multimode-singlemode fiber structures using magnetic fluids as cladding,” Opt. Lett. 38, 
3765–3768 (2013).
51. J. W. Goodman, Statistical Optics (Wiley, New York, 1985), Chaps 5 and 7.
52. C. Akcay, P. Parrein, and J. P. Rolland, “Estimation of longitudinal resolution in optical coher￾ence imaging,” Appl. Opt. 41(25), 5256–5262 (2002).
53. T.-P. Lee, C. Burrus, and B. Miller, “A stripe-geometry double-heterostructure amplified￾spontaneous-emission (superluminescent) diode,” IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 9(8), 820–828 
(1973), doi: 10.1109/JQE.1973.1077738
54. C. Holtmann, P.-A. Besse, and H. Melchior, “High power superluminescent diodes for 1.3 μm 
wavelengths,” Electron. Lett. 32, 1705–1706 (1996).
55. P. F. Wysocki, M. J. F. Digonnet, B. Y. Kim, and H. J. Shaw, “Characteristics of erbium-doped 
superfluorescent fiber sources for interferometric sensor applications,” J. Lightwave Technol.
12(3), 550–567 (1994).
56. K. Bohm, K. Petermann, and E. Weidel, “Performance of Lyot depolarizers with birefringent 
single-mode fibers,” J. Lightwave Technol. 1(1), 71–74 (1983), doi: 10.1109/JLT.1983.1072097
57. W. Burns, “Degree of polarization in the Lyot depolarizer,” J. Lightwave Technol. 1(3), 475–479 
(1983), doi: 10.1109/JLT.1983.1072136
58. M. P. Varnham, D. N. Payne, A. J. Barlow, and E. J. Tarbox, “Coiled-birefringent-fiber polar￾izers,” Opt. Lett. 9(7), 306–308 (1984).
59. P. D. McIntyre and A. W. Snyder, “Power transfer between optical fibers,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. 63, 
1518–1527 (1973).
60. R. G. Priest, “Analysis of fiber interferometer utilizing 3 x 3 fiber coupler,” IEEE Trans. Microw. 
Theory Tech. 30(10), 1589–1591 (1982), doi: 10.1109/TMTT.1982.1131294
61. A. D. Kersey, M. J. Marrone, and M. A. Davis, “Polarisation-insensitive fibre optic Michelson 
interferometer,” Electro. Lett. 27, 518–520 (1991).
62. K. O. Hill and G. Meltz, “Fiber Bragg grating technology – fundamentals and overview,” 
J. Lightwave Technol. 15(8), 1263–1276 (1997).
63. A. D. Kersey, M. A. Davis, H. J. Patrick, et al., “Fiber grating sensors,” J. Lightwave Technol.
15(8), 1442–1463 (1997).51
PART II
Magnetic Field and Current SensorsDOI: 10.1201/9781003100324-7 53
CHAPTER 4
Magneto-Optic Effects
4.1 FARADAY EFFECT
Michael Faraday, in 1845, observed that in a piece of glass the plane of polarization of lin￾early polarized light experienced a rotation in the presence of a magnetic field parallel to the 
propagation direction of the light (Figure 4.1) [1]. The Faraday effect, also called magneto￾optic effect, occurs in solids, liquids, and gases. The angle of rotation φF is given by
ϕ =′ ⋅ ∫ F
0
,
l
V B dl (4.1)
where V′ is the Verdet constant in units of rad/(Tm) [2], B the magnetic flux density, and l
the length of the traversed medium. Instead of V′, literature on optical current sensors often 
states the term V = m0V′ (with units of rad/A); m0 = 1.256 × 10−6 Vs/(Am) being the free space 
permeability, for V indicates the polarization rotation per unit current. The polarization 
rotation is the result of field-induced circular birefringence, Dnc = nR − nL (see Section 2.4):
π ( ) ϕ λ
− = R L
F , n n
l (4.2)
where nR and nL are the refractive indices of the right and left circular constituents, respec￾tively. Note that (4.1) and (4.2) assume that the medium is free of linear birefringence and 
optical activity. In wavelength regions of normal dispersion (∂n/∂l < 0), the Verdet constant 
of diamagnetic materials is positive by convention. The polarization rotation is then coun￾terclockwise (left-rotary, nL < nR) for an observer looking against the source and a mag￾netic field that points in the light propagation direction. φF is counted as positive in this 
case; see introduction to Chapter 2 on conventions. The polarization rotation is clockwise 
(right-rotary, nL > nR) and jF is negative if the field points against the propagation direction.
The Faraday effect varies with wavelength l and temperature T and is strongest near 
absorption lines or electronic bandgaps, where the refractive index dispersion n(l) is 54 ◾ Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
strongest. An (approximate) relationship for the Verdet constant of diamagnetic materials 
versus wavelength was first given by Becquerel and reads in the cgs system [3]
(λ ) λ
λ
∂
′=−
∂ . 2
e n
V
mc
(4.3)
Here, e and m are the electron charge and mass, respectively, and c is the speed of light 
in vacuum. An explicit expression for the Verdet constant dispersion of fused silica can 
be found, for example, in [4]. Note that the presence of dopants like in fused silica fiber 
somewhat modifies the effective Verdet constant [5]. At wavelengths well on the red side 
of the resonances, V′ varies in good approximation in proportion to inverse square of the 
wavelength, that is,
( ) ( ) λ λ λ
λ
′ =′
2
0 0 2 V V , (4.4)
where λ0 is a reference wavelength [6–8]. More sophisticated phenomenological dispersion 
models for both diamagnetic and paramagnetic materials can be found in [9] and refer￾ences therein.
In a simple classical explanation of the Faraday effect, the magnetic field induces a pre￾cession of the oscillating charges of the medium at the Larmor frequency wL = (e/m) B. The 
LHC and RHC components then experience dispersion curves shifted by −wL and wR, 
respectively, compared to the case without applied magnetic field. Consequently, the 
refractive indices, nL and nR, and phase velocities of the two circular components differ, 
that is, the medium becomes circularly birefringent: nL − nR = n(w + wL) − n(w − wL) = 
2(∂n/∂w)wL. The different phase velocities of the circular constituents show up as a polar￾ization rotation of the resultant linear light. A more rigorous theoretical treatment of the 
Faraday effect involves a quantum mechanical description of the magnetic splitting of the 
electronic energy states of the medium (Zeeman effect) [10–12]. Whereas the sign of the 
Verdet constant in diamagnetic materials is positive (in regions of normal dispersion), it is 
negative in paramagnetic and ferrimagnetic materials. The difference is due to the opposite 
alignment of the magnetic moments in diamagnetic and paramagnetic materials with 
respect to the field direction. A theoretical expression for the Verdet constant of paramag￾netic materials is given in [13] and references therein. As already mentioned in Part I, the 
Faraday effect is a non-reciprocal effect, i.e., the polarization rotation doubles, if the light, 
FIGURE 4.1 Faraday effect.Magneto-Optic Effects ◾ 55
after reflection at a mirror, traverses the medium a second time in the opposite direction. 
This is in contrast to optical activity in chiral materials, e.g., sugar molecules dissolved in 
water, which undo the polarization rotation on the return trip.
4.2 OTHER MAGNETO-OPTIC EFFECTS
It should be noted that besides the Faraday effect (and underlying Zeeman effect), there 
are further magneto-optic effects, in particular the Cotton-Mouton and Voigt effects, the 
magneto-optic Kerr effect and magneto-optic dichroism [8, 14, 15]. The Cotton-Mouton 
effect is the magnetic counterpart of the Kerr electro-optic effect and gives rise to linear 
birefringence at light propagation perpendicular to the field direction. The birefringence 
is proportional to the square of the magnetic field strength but very small under most 
circumstances. The still smaller Voigt effect describes the same macroscopic phenomenon 
but is of different origin (transverse Zeeman effect). The magneto-optic Kerr effect is a 
reflection anisotropy, and magneto-optic dichroism refers to anisotropic absorption of left 
and right circular light in some ferrimagnetic materials.
4.3 MAGNETO-OPTIC MATERIALS
Table 4.1 lists selected diamagnetic, paramagnetic, and ferrimagnetic materials and their 
Verdet constants that have been used in magnetic field and current sensors. Diamagnetic 
glasses such as fused silica have relatively small Verdet constants that vary relatively little 
TABLE 4.1 Verdet Constants and Temperature Dependences of Selected Magneto-Optic Materials
Material
Type of 
Magnetism
Verdet Constant 
(rad T−1 m−1)
Wavelength 
(nm)
(1/V0) (dV/dT) 
(10−4 K−1) References
Fused silica glass diamagnetic 3.6 633 0.69 [28]
Borosilicate glass, BK-7 diamagnetic 4.30 633 0.63 [28, 29]
Flint glass, SF-57 diamagnetic 20.1 633 1.26 [28]
Fused silica fiber
(Ge:SiO2 core)
diamagnetic 6.11
3.25
1.83
0.54
458
633
825
1523
0.69 [28, 30]
Flint glass fiber diamagnetic 3.2 1550 1.2 [31, 32]
B12SiO20 (BSO) diamagnetic 29.1 870 1.4 [33]
B12GeO20 (BGO) diamagnetic 101
55
633
850
– [34]
[35]
Bi4Ge3O12 (BGO) diamagnetic 30.8 633 – [36]
Tb-doped flint glass, FR-5 paramagnetic −71.3
−32
633
870
−38 [37]
[35]
Tb-doped silica fiber paramagnetic −15.5 1300 – [38]
Tellurite glass fiber paramagnetic −28.1 633 – [39]
Terbium gallium garnet 
(TGG, Tb3Ga5O12)
paramagnetic −128 633 −34.7 [39–41]
Ga:Yttrium iron garnet
(Ga:YIG, Y3Fe4 Ga O12)
ferrimagnetic −869001 1300 – [42]
1
 Samples with a demagnetization factor Nd = 0.08.56 ◾ Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
(but by no means negligibly) as a function of temperature, and the materials can easily 
be drawn into fiber. Appropriate glass dopants or special glass compositions can signifi￾cantly enhance the Verdet constant but commonly lead to higher optical attenuation. Flint 
glass with a high lead oxide content is of interest due to its small stress optic coefficients, 
as Section 7.10 will explain in more detail. Ferrimagnetic crystals such as yttrium iron 
garnets (YIG) and related materials are typically two to three orders more sensitive than 
diamagnetic glasses. However, ferrimagnetic domain movement at varying field strength 
often leads to a nonlinear response, hysteresis, and magnetic saturation at high fields. 
Furthermore, the geometric demagnetization factor Nd of the samples must be accounted 
for (0 < Nd < 1), that is, the sample dimensions influence the effective internal magnetic 
field and polarization rotation [16, 17]. The internal field is Hin = H − Nd M, where H is 
the external field and M is the sample magnetization. A long cylinder has a demagnetiza￾tion factor Nd ≪ 1 along its axis, whereas a thin plate has a demagnetization factor close 
to unity for fields normal to the plate. Apart from magnetic field sensors, ferrimagnetic 
materials are employed, for example, in optical isolators and rotators [9]. Further infor￾mation on Verdet constants, Verdet constant measurement, dispersion, and temperature 
dependence can be found, for example, in [18–42].DOI: 10.1201/9781003100324-8 57
CHAPTER 5
Current Sensing with Local 
Magneto-Optic Field Sensors
5.1 POINT MAGNETIC FIELD SENSORS
Point magneto-optic field sensors infer the current from the magnetic field at a single point 
in the vicinity of the electric conductor and represent a simple way of optical current mea￾surement. Exploratory work on such sensors for use in electric power systems began at sev￾eral institutions in the 1960s and early 1970s [43–59]. In the basic set-up, a magneto-optic 
material, e.g., a glass rod, is arranged between a polarizer and an analyzer and placed near 
the conductor such that the light path is parallel to the field, that is, the light propagation 
is perpendicular to the conductor direction (Figure 5.1). The polarization directions of the 
polarizer and analyzer are at 45° to each other. Often, a Wollaston prism instead of a single 
analyzer — or equivalently a beam splitter and two orthogonal analyzers — translate the 
field-induced polarization rotation into two anti-phase signals
II K 1 0 = + ( /2 1 sin 2 , )  ( ϕF )   (5.1)
II K 2 0 = − ( /2 1 sin 2 , )  ( ϕF )   (5.2)
where I0 is proportional to the light source power, and K is the fringe contrast defined in 
Section 3.1. The signal S = (I1 – I2) / (I1 + I2) is independent of I0 and provides the rotation 
angle φF and hence the current [47, 56]:
S K= sin 2 . ( ϕF ) (5.3)
Typically, φF remains sufficiently small, so that S varies in proportion to φF. Sensors for 
alternating current often work with only a single detector and normalize the signal by 
dividing the alternating component by the signal’s dc offset I0/2 or by controlling the light 
source power by means of a feedback circuit such that the dc offset remains constant.58 ◾ Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
Already in the 1960s, Saito et al. at the University of Tokyo were among the first who 
demonstrated such a sensor, designed for current measurement at voltages up to 500 kV 
and beyond (Figure 5.2) [44–46]. The Faraday element was a 5-cm-long flint glass rod (33) 
in proximity to the current carrying conductor (321) at the top of a hollow-core support 
insulator. The Helium-neon laser source (31) and a Glan-Thompson analyzer (37) resided 
at ground potential. The laser beam propagated through free space, as optical fibers were 
still in an embryonic state at the time. A second flint glass rod (35) in a closed-loop feed￾back circuit compensated the Faraday rotation of the sensing rod. The circuit generated a 
secondary current in a wire coil (36) around the compensating rod and kept the difference 
of the two anti-phase detector signals at zero. Hence, drifts in the optical power, electronic 
gains, etc., and the temperature dependence of the Faraday effect were automatically 
FIGURE 5.1 Faraday effect magnetic field sensor.
321
322
33 34 32
411
35
37 39
350 36
32 31
38A
INTEGRATION CIRCUIT
38B410
SUPPORTING
INSULATOR
FIGURE 5.2 Early magneto-optic current sensor by Saito et al. (from US patent 3,597,683 [46].)Current Sensing with Local Magneto-Optic Field Sensors ◾ 59
compensated. Moreover, the signal varied linearly with the applied current, also at rotation 
angles approaching ±45° and beyond. At the time, sensor tests were performed at the 
Shiobara Laboratory of the Central Research Institute of Japan’s Electric Power Industry. It 
is worth noting that the researchers also explored interrogation of the sensing medium by 
microwaves [45, 46].
In parallel to Saito et al.’s work, similar systems were developed by Pelenc et al. at Merlin 
& Gerin SA, Grenoble, France [47, 48] and G. Lesueur at Alstom, France [51, 52]. Somewhat 
later, in the early 1970s, A. J. Rogers, then at the Central Electricity Research Laboratories 
in Leatherhead, UK, explored such sensors, again with interrogation via free space, but 
with direct rather than closed-loop detection and with the sensing flint glass rod operated 
in reflective mode [56–58]. K. Mollenbeck at Siemens, Germany, invented a system where 
conventional means including an analog-to-digital converter first converted the high volt￾age current into a series of electric pulses with amplitude proportional to the instanta￾neous current amplitude. The pulses controlled the transmission of a YIG magneto-optic 
modulator interrogated by a free-space laser beam [50].
Sensor interrogation via free space became obsolete, after low-loss fibers became avail￾able during the 1970s. Moreover, LED and semiconductor laser light sources replaced 
incandescent sources and gas lasers. In 1982, K. Kyuma demonstrated a multimode fiber 
coupled flint-glass-based sensor using AlGaAs-based LED and laser diode sources, achiev￾ing accuracy to within ±0.5% between −25°C and 80°C. The magnetic fields ranged from 
1.6 × 103
 to 40 × 103
 A/m and corresponded to currents up to 5 kA [35, 60]. A drawback of 
the above sensors is that the Faraday rotation is often relatively small, resulting in a modest 
signal-to-noise ratio at low currents. Arrangements for multiple light passes through the 
sensing medium helped to enhance the sensitivity [53, 61–64]. N. Inoue et al. demonstrated 
a current sensor utilizing a highly sensitive Bi-doped garnet optimized for low temperature 
dependence (−2.6 × 10–4°C–1 between 0°C and 70°C) [65]. Besides glasses and garnets, dia￾magnetic crystals such as Bi12SiO20 and Bi4Ge3O12 were also explored [33, 66–71]. The mate￾rials have relatively high Verdet constants (see Table 4.1) and can be employed for 
simultaneous current and voltage measurement [36]. Mihailovic et al. exploited the intrin￾sic optical activity of Bi12SiO20 for temperature compensation of the current signal [71].
Obvious downsides of point magneto-optic current sensors are a signal that varies with 
geometry, in particular the sensor’s distance to the current conductor, and cross-sensitivity 
to neighbor currents. The effects can be mitigated with appropriate sensor arrangements 
and calibration strategies [56, 72–77]. A method to lessen cross-sensitivity is to place two 
sensors at opposite sides of the conductor, where the field directions are also opposite. By 
contrast, the signals from adjacent currents are to a large extent common mode and thus 
can be eliminated by taking the difference of the two signals [56, 73]. Perciante et al. uti￾lized a modified conductor geometry with the magnetic field at the sensor location essen￾tially orthogonal to the fields from neighbor phases [74]. Di Rienzo et al. and Ma et al. 
investigated crosstalk reduction by means of circular (albeit non-magneto-optic) sensor 
arrays around the conductor [75, 76]. In a three-phase sensor system, cross-sensitivity is 
commonly accounted for by appropriate calibration. The instantaneous signal of each sen￾sor is determined by the instantaneous currents of all three phases, i.e., the signals Si
 are 60 ◾ Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
related to the currents Ii
 by a matrix of sensitivity coefficients si,j
, i, j = 1…3, obtained by 
calibration [77]:
= σ . S I i ij j (5.4)
Naturally, the geometry must not change during sensor operation, and crosstalk from 
potential further currents nearby is not excluded. The influence of an inhomogeneous field 
at the sensor location and the resulting Cotton-Mouton effect were studied by Li et al. and 
Perciante [78, 79].
Even though there have been demonstrations of point magneto-optic current sensors in 
high voltage power transmission (besides the references above, see, e.g., [80–83]), the resid￾ual errors due to crosstalk and sensitivity to position (e.g., at temperature variations) and 
other errors limit the achievable accuracy and have prevented wider use in demanding 
protection and metering applications at transmission voltages, that is, at voltages from 
about 70 kV to 800 kV and beyond. In this context, G. W. Day et al. presented a detailed 
analysis of the limitations of early electro-optic and magneto-optic sensors in a 1987 
National Bureau of Standards (now NIST) report [84]. Point sensors, however, have been 
successfully introduced for monitoring, diagnostics, and fault localization in medium volt￾age distribution grids and at power cables (medium voltages are typically from about 1 kV 
to 35 kV) [85–87]. The passive nature of the sensors allows utilities to operate sensors for 
fault localization kilometers away from the nearest substation without needing any local 
electric infrastructure. Another benefit is the option of designing the sensors as clamp-on 
devices for easy retrofit installation [88, 89]. In particular, the Danish company PowerSense 
(later acquired by Landis+Gyr) has developed sensors for distribution grids, including 
clamp-on versions [88]. A challenge for medium voltage systems is to reach sufficiently low 
cost. Zubia et al. reported an example of a low-cost sensor [90] that consists of a flint glass 
rod (length of 20 mm and diameter of 5 mm), a 650 nm LED light source, and otherwise 
low-cost plastic optical components (Figure 5.3). Tests up to 800 A at constant temperature 
FIGURE 5.3 Low-cost magneto-optic current sensor by Zubia et al.: (a) Set-up with 650 nm LED 
light source, plastic optical fiber leads (POF), collimating lenses (L1, L2), polarizer, flint glass rod, 
analyzer, and photodetector (PD); (b) Close-up view of the magneto-optic rod (adapted from Zubia 
et al. [90].)Current Sensing with Local Magneto-Optic Field Sensors ◾ 61
showed accuracy to within ±1% above 175 A and ±5% between 30 A and 175 A. Methods 
for compensation of the temperature dependence of the Verdet constant of such sensors 
were reported in [34, 91–93].
Besides current measurement, magnetic field sensors have numerous uses in other areas 
such as automation, automotive, aerospace, data storage, or mineral prospecting, to name 
a few. However, compared to magneto-resistive, Hall effect, fluxgate sensors, and others, 
magneto-optic sensors play only a minor role. For reviews of magnetic field sensors and 
their applications, see, e.g., [94–96]. Magneto-optic sensors can be beneficial in environ￾ments with strong electro-magnetic interference. They have also been used for magnetic 
field mapping on integrated electronic circuits [97], sub-surface material defect evaluation 
[98], plasma science [99], and power semiconductors [100]. Deeter et al. studied yttrium￾iron-garnet-based sensors for sensing of high-frequency fields and, using a YIG rod with a 
length of 3 mm and a diameter of 5 mm, achieved a hysteresis-free response up to 60 mT, 
a minimum detectable field of 10 nT/√Hz, and a usable bandwidth from dc to 700 MHz 
[16, 101–103]. Supplementing the sensor with magnetic concentrators improved the noise 
equivalent field to 6 pT/√Hz, albeit at a reduced 3dB-bandwidth of 10 MHz [103]. Similar 
work was reported in [104, 105].
5.2 FIELD SENSORS IN MAGNETIC CORE
E. J. Casey and C. H. Titus at General Electric Corp., US, in 1963, invented a current 
transducer that combined traditional technology and a magneto-optic sensing element 
(Figure 5.4) [106]. In one version (Figure 5.4, left), a circular magnetic core (30) around the 
current conductor (10) concentrated the magnetic field in a gap of the core. The Faraday 
104 106
10
20
48
18
46
PHOTO-ELECTRIC
CELL
CURRENT
REGULATOR
AMPLIFIER
53 50 54 56 61
60
73 72
71
70
41
44
45
46 48
18 12 20
10
30
6536 32 34 47 49
42 40
102 12
108
FIGURE 5.4 Early magneto-optic current sensors with magnetic core. Left: A magneto-optic flint 
glass sensor element (12) measures the magnetic field in the gap of a magnetic core (30) around the 
current conductor (10). Right: The magnetic core (108) around the conductor (10) has a secondary 
winding (104). The induced current produces a magnetic field at magneto-optic sensor element (12) 
(from US Patent 3,324,393 [106].)62 ◾ Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
element of flint glass (12) with thin glass laminated polarizers (18, 20) resided in that gap. 
Fiber-optic “light conveyors” (fibers as known today were still to come) guided the mono￾chromatically filtered light from an incandescent lamp (40) on ground to the Faraday ele￾ment and back to a photoelectric cell (30). A feedback circuit controlled the light source 
such that the dc optical power received at the photocell remained constant. In another 
version (Figure 5.4, right), a closed magnetic core featured a secondary electric winding 
(104); the current conductor being the primary. The induced secondary current flowed 
through a serial wire coil (102) which contained the Faraday element (12). In later years, 
many other researchers also reported magnetic-core-assisted sensors, e.g., [61, 67, 85, 104, 
107, 108–119].
The magnetic concentrator (Figure 5.4, left) leads to a significant enhancement of the 
sensor signal. Furthermore, the method strongly reduces sensitivity to the conductor posi￾tion and crosstalk. However, the core material and shape should be chosen for small hys￾teresis and small eddy current loss. Laminated cores limit the latter. Moreover, no saturation 
should occur within the specified current range. Core materials have included alloys of 
FeNi, FeSi, and others. Cores consisting of a compressed powder of multiple alloys (e.g., 
from Fe, Ni, Mo) in a dielectric matrix are another option. For a given core material, larger 
core diameter and cross section enhance the saturation field. Narrower core gaps result in 
higher gap fields and reduce residual crosstalk but leave less space for the sensing element. 
The magnetic flux density Bg on the central axis of the (air) gap of a ring-shaped core is 
approximately given by [61]
( ) 0 r g
r
. 2 1
I B
r d
µ µ
π µ = + −
(5.5)
Here, mr
, r, and d are the relative core permeability, core radius, and gap width, respectively. 
For large permeabilities and sufficiently small core radii, Bg can be further approximated as
g 0 . I B
d = µ (5.6)
The flux density is then enhanced by a factor of 2p r/d compared to a sensor at a distance r
from the conductor without a field concentrator.
Itoh et al. reported an example of a particularly compact sensor set-up [110]. The magnetic 
field probe was configured in a separate casing for insertion into the air gap of the core 
(Figure 5.5). An 880-nm LED served as a light source. The magneto-optic element was a thin 
film of a high Verdet constant rare-earth iron garnet with a thickness of 60 mm and cross￾sectional area of 2 mm2
 sandwiched between 0.5-mm-thick glass polarizers and 90°-reflect￾ing prisms. The total probe width was only 5 mm. The magnetic core from a high permeability 
material had inner and outer diameters of 15 mm and 35 mm, respectively, and an air gap of 
6 mm. The sensor provided a linear output within ±1% up to 300 A with a noise equivalent 
current of 1.8 mA/√Hz. The isolation ratios against external currents in the immediate 
vicinity of the core ranged from −53 dB to −75 dB, as indicated in Figure 5.5. The probe Current Sensing with Local Magneto-Optic Field Sensors ◾ 63
signal (without core) was temperature-stable within ±1% between −20°C and 80°C. Others 
have worked with lower Verdet constant materials and compensated the smaller Faraday 
effect with multiple roundtrips of the light through the sample (Figure 5.6) [61, 107, 108, 116].
FIGURE 5.5 Faraday current sensor with magnetic core: Field sensor probe (a); magnetic core with 
sensor probe and isolation ratios in dB for nearby external currents (b) (adapted with permission 
from [110] © The Optical Society.)
FIGURE 5.6 Faraday current sensor with magnetic core: Multiple round-trips of the light through 
the sensing element enhance the sensitivity. The Faraday rotation angle jF follows from three spatially 
separated signals R, S, T with mutual phase differences of 120° (adapted with permission from [108] 
© The Optical Society.)64 ◾ Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
Of particular practical interest are portable, clamp-on sensor versions that can be easily 
attached to a power line [109, 114, 115, 119]. Figure 5.7 shows a corresponding line-hanging 
sensor developed by Micatu (Horseheads, NY, USA) for use in medium voltage distribu￾tion grids [119]. The sensor has a D-shaped magnetic core in the movable part of the clamp. 
Closing the clamp moves the core over the prism-shaped sensing element in the base under 
the clamp. The sensor is specified for currents between 10 A and 1000 A at voltages up to 
35 kV and achieves accuracy to within 0.5% at temperatures between −30°C and 70°C. The 
assembly also contains an optical voltage sensor.
FIGURE 5.7 Clamp-on current sensor for medium voltage distribution grids (courtesy of Micatu, 
Horseheads, NY, USA).DOI: 10.1201/9781003100324-9 65
CHAPTER 6
Glass Block Optical Current 
Sensors
The glass block current sensors of this chapter, as well as the all-fiber sensors of Chapter 8
further below, are “true” current sensors in the sense that they measure a closed-loop inte￾gral of the magnetic field around the current conductor. To this end, the light travels in the 
magneto-optic medium along one of several closed-loop paths around the conductor. The 
polarization rotation angle φF is then given as
F 0 ϕ µ =′ =′ NV Bdl NV Hdl,   ∫ ∫ (6.1)
and can be rewritten as
ϕF = NVI (6.2)
where N is the number of loops and V = μ0V′. The integral ∮Hdl represents, according 
to Ampère’s law, the electric current. Other than in the case of point-like magnetic field 
sensors, φF is now independent of any geometrical parameters, in particular, of the loop 
diameter and conductor position inside the loop. Moreover, currents outside the loop have 
no influence. Closed-loop integration significantly enhances the application flexibility of 
the sensors and also avoids a magnetic core and its limitations.
Research and development of bulk glass current sensors, often called MOCT — 
Magneto-Optic Current Transformers — primarily took place in the 1980s and 1990s 
[120–169]. Several electric power equipment manufacturers designed and made such 
devices commercially available, as an optical equivalent to the so-called current trans￾formers commonly used up to that point to measure high voltage electric currents . At the 
time, all-fiber current sensors still suffered from limitations of the fibers, and bulk sensor 
types allowed researchers to circumvent those limitations. Typically, the packaged glass 66 ◾ Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
block with attached input/output polarizers and collimators is mounted at the high voltage 
current conductor. Multimode fibers run through a high voltage insulator to ground and 
connect the sensor head to the light source and one or two photo-detectors. T. Sato et al. at 
Hitachi invented the classical MOCT design in 1982 (Figure 6.1) [121, 122].
The sensing element was a square block (40), e.g., of fused silica, crown glass, or flint 
glass, with a central aperture for the current conductor (20). The light (red path) entered 
the block at a corner through a collimator (11) and polarizer (12), and experienced two 
ortho-conjugate total internal reflections at each of the other three corners, before again 
leaving the block at the entrance corner. A Wollaston prism generated two output signals 
according to (5.1) and (5.2), from which the rotation angle φF and current I followed. Total 
internal reflection occurs at angles of incidence larger than the critical angle θc, given by 
θc = asin(n1/n2), where n2 is the glass refractive index and n1 the index of the outer medium 
(air) [170]. The critical angle of a fused silica/air interface, for instance, corresponds to 
43.5° (n2 = 1.454) at 780 nm. The two consecutive total internal reflections at each corner 
served to maintain the linear light polarization. Upon the first reflection, the polarization 
components parallel and perpendicular to the plane of incidence (p- and s-polarizations) 
experience a relative phase shift; hence, the light is elliptically polarized along the corner 
path segments parallel to the conductor. The p- and s-polarized components of the first 
reflection become s- and p-polarizations at the second reflection, respectively, so that the 
phase shift is reversed and linear polarization restored.
Since the path segments of elliptical polarization contribute only with reduced sensitivity, 
the closed-loop integration is, strictly speaking, imperfect. In most practical cases, resulting 
errors, for example, due to higher cross-sensitivity, are negligible, though, because the cur￾rent magnetic fields are largely orthogonal to those segments. The effects of non-polarization 
20
30
40
12
11 15
16
14
18
17
10A
IO
19
Pa
Pa–Pb
Pa+Pb
Pb
OUTPUT
LIGHT SOURCE
FIGURE 6.1 Magneto-optic current transformer (MOCT) with ortho-conjugate total internal light 
beam reflections: MOCT body (40, 30), current conductor (20), connecting optical fibers (10A, 17, 
18), collimators (11, 15, 16), polarizer (12), input/output prism (41), Wollaston prism (14) (adapted 
from US Patent 4,564,754 [121].)Glass Block Optical Current Sensors ◾ 67
preserving reflections in MOCT were numerically investigated by Bush et al., in particular, 
the resulting non-linearity in the response, sensitivity to the conductor position, and cross￾talk [129, 131]. Related work was reported by Wang et al. [141]. It should be noted that a 
square-shaped bulk glass current sensor had already been proposed by R. Lenz 
(Transformation Union Ltd, Germany) in 1970, albeit with non-polarization-preserving 
reflections at the corners instead of ortho-conjugate reflections [120].
Square-shaped bulk glass sensors with ortho-conjugate beam steering reflections were 
developed for commercial use by further companies including the Westinghouse T&D 
division (acquired by ABB in 1989) (Figure 6.2) [125–128], Siemens [144–146], Areva T&D 
/ GEC Alsthom [158, 159], Square D Company [123, 124], and Japanese companies [150]. 
(Square D’s sensor was not a monolithic block, however, but was composed of several indi￾vidual glass segments.) A MOCT field installation will be illustrated further below.
As an alternative to the design of Figure 6.1, Chu et al. at the University of Kent, UK, 
demonstrated a triangular-shaped sensing element of flint glass with total internal reflec￾tions at the critical angle (Figure 6.3) [132, 133]. Flint glass has a refractive index n of 1.799 
at 633 nm, which results in a critical angle θc of 33.774°. At this angle, the light is reflected 
without losing its linear polarization state. The method eliminates the need for ortho￾conjugate reflections and thus results in a significantly simpler sensing element. On the 
other hand, the sensor signal is strongly sensitive to deviations from the correct angle. At 
smaller angles, the reflection coefficients for s- and p-polarizations differ; at larger angles 
the coefficients are equal but the phases of the two components differ [170]. Already small 
deviations from the critical angle significantly reduce the sensor’s response to current, and 
the sensor becomes sensitive to the conductor position within the triangle and crosstalk. 
According to [132], the sensitivity reduces by about 20% if the angle of incidence is 0.5° 
lower than the critical angle, and by 6% if the angle is 0.5° higher. The variation of the glass 
FIGURE 6.2 MOCT glass block (polarizers, collimators, and fiber leads are omitted). The light path 
is schematically indicated [128].68 ◾ Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
refractive index and critical angle with temperature introduced a small extra temperature 
dependence of 0.16%/100°C (in addition to the contribution of Verdet constant of 
1.26%/100°C [28]). The sensor had a sensitivity of 2.35 × 10−5 rad/A at 633 nm and a noise 
equivalent current of 20 mA/√Hz. A split triangular sensing element for clamp-on mount￾ing was demonstrated in [133].
Figure 6.4 shows a circular sensing element as a further alternative, demonstrated by Y. 
N. Ning et al., also at Kent University [130]. The light entered the flint glass ring with inner 
and outer diameters of 35 mm and 80 mm, respectively, through a roof-top prism and expe￾rienced 15 internal reflections at the critical angle before again leaving the ring through the 
FIGURE 6.3 Triangular sensing element with polarization-maintaining reflections at critical angle 
θc (adapted with permission from [132] © The Optical Society.)
FIGURE 6.4 Glass ring sensing element with 15 internal, polarization-maintaining reflections at 
critical angle. The light encircles the current conductor five times (adapted with permission from 
[130] © The Optical Society).Glass Block Optical Current Sensors ◾ 69
prism. The light encircled the conductor five times with correspondingly enhanced polar￾ization rotation. Another version was with 44 internal reflections and 14 light loops. The 
latter had a sensitivity of 3.9 × 10−4 rad/A (0.022 deg/A) at 780 nm.
Besides internal reflections that imperfectly maintain the linear polarization state of the 
light, another potential error source of MOCT is that the optical path between input and 
output polarizers is inherently not fully closed. In the glass ring of Figure 6.4, for example, 
input and output beams intersect inside the roof top prism, whereas the polarizers (not 
shown) are located not at that point but outside the prism. Several researchers investigated 
dedicated reflecting layers and MOCT designs to overcome those deficits [151, 153, 155, 
168, 169]. Yoshino et al. explored a 60-mm-square flint glass MOCT with dielectrically 
coated, polarization preserving total reflection surfaces on three sides (Figure 6.5) [153]. 
The coating consisted of Ta2O5 and SiO2 films and permitted some tolerances to deviations 
from the 840-nm-design-wavelength and the nominal 45°-angles of incidence. An input/
output prism of small size and less field-sensitive BK7 glass kept signal contributions of 
unclosed optical path segments negligible. Crosstalk from currents at 60 mm distance 
from the MOCT center varied between 0.1% and 0.66%, with the highest contribution 
when external conductor faced the input/output prism. Wang et al. conceived a bulk glass 
current sensor immune to reflection phase shifts consisting of a magneto-optic glass ring 
with inner and outer graded index boundary layers [166].
A noteworthy miniature MOCT for the measurement of small currents in wide fre￾quency ranges was reported by Rockford and Rose et al. [42], [168]. The sensor consisted of 
four YIG rods with a diameter of 2 mm and a length of 2.5 arranged as a square and joined 
by corner prisms with low birefringent reflective coatings. The sensor, operated at 1300 nm, 
FIGURE 6.5 MOCT with dielectrically coated, polarization-preserving total reflection layers 
(adapted with permission from [153] © The Optical Society).70 ◾ Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
achieved a −3-dB bandwidth of 500 MHz with a noise-equivalent current of 840 nA/Hz/ 2 
at 1.8 kHz and linear range of 10 A.
Finally, Figure 6.6 illustrates the installation of commercial MOCT from ABB Ltd in a 
high voltage substation. Details can be found in [125–128].
6.1 SOME CONCLUSIONS ON GLASS BLOCK CURRENT SENSORS
MOCT have demonstrated accuracy to within ±0.2% in outdoor temperature ranges, 
appropriate for high-end protection and metering in electric power transmission [125, 
126]. A significant number of devices have been installed in power grid substations world￾wide. Nevertheless, MOCT have been largely replaced by all-fiber current sensors from 
about the mid-2000s onwards. The following discusses some MOCT limitations, many of 
which fiber-optic current sensors (FOCS) have resolved:
• A severe limitation of MOCT is the fixed form factor with a limited aperture for the 
current conductor — commonly some tens of millimeters. Applications requiring 
larger apertures remain out of reach. Examples are generator circuit breakers, gas￾insulated switchgear, bushings, or high dc in the electro-chemical industry. Also, 
thermal issues may arise at currents beyond a few kA.
• Most MOCT are with only a single optical loop. Hence, compared to FOCS, the sen￾sitivity is smaller and cannot be adapted to particular rated currents. High Verdet 
constant glasses such as flint glass, which is about six times more sensitive than fused 
FIGURE 6.6 Commercial MOCT: sensor installation in substation (left); sensor housing on high 
voltage insulator (middle top), MOCT glass body with input/output prims, collimators, and fiber 
pigtails (right top), interior of sensor housing (right bottom) [128].Glass Block Optical Current Sensors ◾ 71
silica (see Table 4.1), mitigate the problem. However, while on one hand a high Verdet 
constant enhances the signal-to-noise ratio at low currents, on the other hand, it 
reduces the maximum measurable current. For MOCT of fused silica, polarization 
rotations of ±45° correspond to currents of about ±300 kA at 825 nm. (The usable 
linear range is much smaller of course.) The minimum detectable current is typically 
around 1 A/√Hz. (The corresponding polarization rotation is 2.7 mrad/√Hz).
• Temperature-dependent birefringence in the glass block, e.g., due to intrinsic stress, 
material combinations of unmatched thermal expansion, or inadequate packag￾ing, has been a frequent source of instability, which may result in poor production 
yield [145, 149, 162–165]. Here again, flint glass, with its low stress-optic coefficients, 
is beneficial. Other mitigation measures have been thermal annealing of the glass 
block, special signal processing [145, 163], compensation of birefringent phase shifts 
by operating the sensor in reflective mode utilizing a Faraday rotator mirror (FRM) 
[164] or a quadruple-reflection prism [149], and others [124, 168].
• The typically multimode fiber links of MOCT are sensitive to mechanical shock and 
vibration. Corresponding signal perturbations are mostly uncritical in electricity 
metering, as signal filtering can be applied, but may not be acceptable in relaying, 
for a shock signal is difficult to distinguish from a sudden current surge due to 
a fault. Researchers have developed MOCT with two independent counterpropa￾gating beams, making use of the non-reciprocity of the Faraday effect. Taking the 
difference of the two corresponding signals doubles the current signal and largely 
cancels common-mode mechanical effects [136, 143, 146]. However, the method 
adds significant complexity and cost. In particular, optical crosstalk between the 
two channels must be accounted for, for example, via modulating the intensity of the 
beams at two different frequencies or working with two wavelengths. A mechanical 
noise canceling scheme utilizing a pulsed source and time multiplexing has been 
reported in [135].
• Cross-sensitivity to neighbor currents as a result of imperfect closed-loop integration 
of the magnetic field is commonly not a serious error source but should be kept in 
mind when choosing the sensor location.
• MOCT for accurate current measurement (to within <±1%) at outdoor temperatures 
commonly need a temperature sensor or other means to account for the influence of 
temperature. This of course also applies to the all-fiber current sensors.
• Last but not least, the production and assembly cost of a bulk glass sensor head is 
significantly higher than the cost of FOCS fiber coils.72 DOI: 10.1201/9781003100324-10
CHAPTER 7
Optical Fibers for Current 
Sensing
7.1 INTRODUCTION
In fiber-optic current sensors (FOCS), also called fiber-optic current transducers (FOCT), 
fibers not only serve to guide the source light to and from the sensor head, but the sensing 
element itself is also an optical fiber. This does not exclude discrete non-fiber components 
such as polarizer platelets, beam splitters, modulators, polarization rotators, and others. 
All-fiber current sensors have fascinated researchers in the electric power world since the 
advent of low-loss optical fibers around 1970. The sensors promised to replace massive 
inductive current transformers by simple optical fibers.
The operating principle is straightforward. One or several loops of sensing fiber must 
enclose the current conductor. The degree of polarization rotation of light traveling through 
the fiber, caused by the Faraday effect, serves a proportional measure of the electronic cur￾rent flowing in the encircled conductor (Figure 7.1). Like the bulk glass sensors of the previ￾ous section, the sensors measure a closed loop integral to the magnetic field around the 
current conductor according to (6.2). In the ideal case, the signal is only given by the cur￾rent and independent of any geometrical parameters such as the loop diameter or the con￾ductor position inside the fiber coil. Currents outside the coil have no influence.
The early investigations soon identified linear fiber birefringence as a serious obstacle on 
the path to viable sensors. Notable causes of birefringence were mechanical stress from 
fiber bending, inadequate fiber coatings, and fiber imperfections such as deviations from 
circular core shape [171–180]. Other hurdles were sensitivity to temperature, mechanical 
shock and vibration [179, 181], and, to a lesser extent, cross-sensitivity to neighbor currents 
[182, 183]. Over time, dedicated fibers and sensor topologies were developed to overcome 
those limitations. The following illustrate the various developments towards viable sensors 
that took place over several decades.Optical Fibers for Current Sensing ◾  73
7.2 LIGHT WAVE PROPAGATION IN PERTURBED SINGLE-MODE 
FIBERS
The propagation of light through dielectric waveguides such as optical fibers is governed by 
the wave equation which follows from Maxwell’s equations [184]:
∈ µ
∂ ∇ =
∂
2 2
2 . t
E E (7.1)
Here, ∇2
 is the Laplacian operator, E is the electric field vector, e = e0er is dielectric permit￾tivity with e0 being the vacuum permittivity, and er the relative permittivity (or dielectric 
constant); m = m0 mr is the magnetic permeability, where m0 is the vacuum permeability 
and mr the relative permeability, which is close to unity in dielectric materials such as opti￾cal fibers.
The equation can be rewritten as
εµ µ
∂ ∂ ∇= +
∂ ∂
2 2 2 00 0 2 2 . t t
E P E (7.2)
Here, P is the induced electric polarization: P = e0 χel E, χel is the electric susceptibility.
In an ideal fiber, e(r) is a scalar function of the radial distance r from the fiber axis and 
defines the refractive index profile of the fiber; n(r) = √er(r). With appropriate boundary 
conditions, i.e., the refractive index difference between the fiber core and cladding (nco−ncl), 
the core diameter, and the wavelength, the solution of the wave equation is a single guided 
mode (HE11 mode), as we have already seen in Chapter 1 [184]. In the limit of a weakly 
guiding fiber (nco ≈ ncl), the modal field approaches a plane wave solution. The field can be 
represented as the vector sum of two degenerate orthogonal polarization eigenmodes. We 
assume that the fiber axis corresponds to the z-axis of a Cartesian coordinate system, and 
FIGURE 7.1 Basic concept of a fiber-optic current sensor. The Faraday polarization rotation angle 
is φF = VNI, where N, V, and I are the number of fiber loops, the Verdet constant, and the current, 
respectively.74   ◾  Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
the modal fields vibrate in x- and y-directions. The superposition of the two modes results 
in a transverse electric field, which, at a given location z along the fiber, can be expressed as 
[185–190]
EE E (xyz xyz xyz ,, ,, ,, , ) = + x y ( ) ( ) (7.3)
where Ex(x, y, z) and Ey(x, y, z) read in complex notation
( ) = ( )   (ϖ β − )   0 , , , exp ˆ, E x x xyz E A xy i t z x x x (7.4)
( ) = ( )   (ϖ β − )   0 , , , exp ˆ. E y y xyz E A xy i t z y y y (7.5)
Here, the E0i
 are the mode amplitudes, the terms Ai
(x,y), normalized to unity, describe the 
variation of the two mode fields in transverse directions and are commonly approximate 
Gaussians; the bi
 denote the modal propagation constants (bx = by for degenerate modes), 
w is the angular frequency, and xˆ and yˆ are unit vectors. Modal phase offsets δm such as in 
(2.2) and (2.3) are assumed as zero. The propagation constants are defined as
β πλ ii i = = nk n (2/ ,) (7.6)
where the ni
 are the effective refractive indices of the modes, and k = 2p/l is the wave num￾ber with l being the wavelength in vacuum.
In an ideal unperturbed fiber, the mode amplitudes E0i
 and propagation constants bi
 can 
be assumed as independent of z. A linear or circular polarization state is then maintained 
while the light propagates through the fiber. Mechanical perturbations of the fiber, e.g., due 
to fiber bending, fiber twist, lateral forces, etc., as well as deviations from a perfectly circu￾lar fiber core, break the circular symmetry of an ideal fiber and lift the degeneracy of the 
orthogonal modal fields. The modified dielectric permeability tensor e´ can be expressed as
εε ε ′= +∆ . (7.7)
In case of mechanical perturbations, the elements of the perturbation tensor De (x,y,z) are 
given by [191, 192]
ε
  ∆ =    
1 , ijkl kl
ij
p S (7.8)
where pijkl is the fourth-rank photoelastic tensor, and the Skl represent the strain tensor. The 
permeability changes induced by a magnetic field Hz are De12 = −De12 = −2ine
V/k [186]. Optical Fibers for Current Sensing ◾  75
The perturbation gives rise to an extra dielectric polarization DP = e0De E, so that the total 
polarization is given as
0 ( ). P EE = +∆ εχ ε el (7.9)
Typically, the perturbation can be assumed as weak (De ≪ e). The extra polarization DP
and corresponding changes in the effective refractive indices lift the degeneracy of the 
orthogonal modes and/or couples the modes. The complex amplitudes of the modes Ei
 = E0i
exp(−ibi
z) uˆi = E0i
 exp(−ibi z) (with ˆui
 standing for the unit vectors) then become functions 
of z and are described by a set of coupled mode equations [186–189]:
∂ ∂= + x xy (z zi z z )/ ,   κ κ 11 ( ) 12 ( )   E EE (7.10)
∂ ∂= + y xy (z zi z z )/ .   κ κ 21 ( ) 22 ( )   E EE (7.11)
For simplicity, we have dropped the oscillatory terms exp(iωt). In short form, the equations 
read
    =
 
, x x
y y
d i
dz
E E
K
E E (7.12)
with
κ κ
κ κ
 
=    
11 12
21 22
K . (7.13)
The coupling coefficients κmn depend on the nature of the perturbation De(x,y) and the 
overlap of the extra dielectric polarization DP(x,y) with the mode fields Ai
(x,y) and can be 
written as [189]:
κ ε ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ∗ =− ∫ ∆     mn / 2 , , , , k nW dxdyA x y x y A x y n n m (7.14)
where n is the effective refractive index of the unperturbed fiber. The terms Wn are defined 
via the orthogonality relation
( ) ( ) δ ∗ ∫ = ,, . dxdyA x y A x y W n m n nm (7.15)
dnm is the Kronecker symbol. (The asterisk indicates complex conjugation.) Here, De is 
assumed as independent of z. The diagonal coefficients κ11 and κ22 describe changes in the 76   ◾  Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
propagation constants bx, by of the orthogonal modes. Unequal coefficients κ11, κ22 lift the 
degeneracy of the modes and result in spatial mode beating with a beat length of LB = l/
[2(κ11 − κ22)]. The off-diagonal coefficients κ12 and κ21 (κ κ∗ 12 21 = ) describe the mutual cou￾pling of the modes that results in an interchange of power. For example, an applied mag￾netic field Hz results in κ12 = −κ21 = −i2VHz. In a lossless fiber, the total power of the modes 
is preserved and the matrix K is Hermetian, i.e., κ11 and κ22 are real numbers and κ12 = κ21*
.
It should be remembered that the mode fields have, besides the transverse field components 
along x and y, a small longitudinal component in z-direction. Fiber twist, for example, 
mutually couples the transverse components of a given mode to the longitudinal compo￾nent of the respective orthogonal mode resulting in circular birefringence [186].
The coupled-mode equations thus describe the evolution of the local polarization along 
a perturbed fiber. In order to obtain, for a given input polarization state at z = 0, the cor￾responding output polarization state after a fiber length z, the coupled mode equations 
must be integrated. The integration results in the Jones matrix J of the fiber piece (2.7.2). 
The Jones matrix relates to the matrix K of coupling coefficients as follows:
= = . d i
dz J KJ NJ (7.16)
The product iK is the N-matrix introduced in 2.7.2. One should mention that in case 
of monochromatic light, only the state of polarization varies in a perturbed fiber but 
not the degree of polarization. By contrast, in case of non-monochromatic light with 
frequency-dependent propagation constants, the two orthogonal modes gradually lose 
their coherence and the light becomes depolarized, as we will discuss in more detail 
further below.
In the following, we will first consider how linear birefringence, e.g., from fiber bending, 
deteriorates magneto-optic current measurement. The subsequent sections will then pres￾ent special fiber types and fiber arrangements for current sensing. Some of those fibers 
suppress linear birefringence by intentional perturbations De.
7.3 FARADAY EFFECT IN THE PRESENCE LINEAR BIREFRINGENCE
Bending a single-mode fiber to a coil increases the effective refractive index for light polar￾ized parallel to the coil normal (slow axis, index ns
) and decreases the index for light polar￾ized in the plane of the coil (fast axis, index nf
), i.e., the fiber becomes birefringent. The 
linear birefringence quenches the Faraday polarization rotation, particularly if the fiber 
length l approaches and exceeds a quarter of the linear beat length Lb. The index difference 
of the orthogonal polarization modes is [173, 193]
( ) ( ) 2 2 1/2 / , ∆=− = n n n EC r R bsf (7.17)
where, r is the fiber radius, and R is the fiber loop radius. E and C are Young’s modulus and 
the stress-optic coefficient of the fiber, respectively; E = 7.5 × 1010 Pa and C = 3.28 × 10−12 Pa−1Optical Fibers for Current Sensing ◾  77
for fused silica fiber [194]. The corresponding difference in propagation constants or bire￾fringent phase retardation per unit length is
β β β πλ b yx =−= − (2/ . )(n n s f ) (7.18)
Here, it has been assumed that the x-coordinate axis is aligned parallel to the fast fiber 
axis. A linear input state of polarization (SOP) with arbitrary orientation with respect to a 
principal axis of the birefringence is not maintained but evolves through a series of ellipti￾cal polarizations. We will discuss the SOP trajectory on the Poincaré sphere further below. 
In a Cartesian basis, the matrix of coupling coefficients in the presence of a magnetic field 
Hz is [186, 189]
β
β
  − =   −  
/ 2 , / 2
b z
z b
iVH
iVH
K (7.19)
where, in a fiber free of linear birefringence, 2VHz is the phase retardation per unit length 
between right-handed circular SOP (RHC) and left-handed circular SOP (LHC) as a result 
of the Faraday effect:
2 2/ . VHz = − ( π λ )(n n R L ) (7.20)
The signs in (7.19) indicate that the fast and slow fiber axes are parallel to x and y, respec￾tively (the x-polarized field component leads the y-polarized component), and the mag￾netic field is in the light propagation direction (nL < nR, LHC leads RHC). Integration of the 
coupled mode equation gives the Jones matrix of the fiber of length l [171, 189, 195]:
2 cos sin sin
22 2 , 2 sin cos sin
2 22
b z
z b
VH li l l
VH l li l
γβγ γ
γ γ
γ γβγ
γ γ
        +         =    − −        
J (7.21)
where γ is the elliptical birefringence that results from the superposition of the linear bire￾fringence bb and the magnetic field-induced circular birefringence 2VHz:
γ β ( )   = +    
1/2 2 2 2 . b z VH (7.22)
The reader can easily verify that by setting bb or 2VHz to zero in (7.21), one obtains the 
Jones matrix of a linear retarder or circular retarder (polarization rotator), respectively; see 
Section 2.7. Utilizing the conversion equations of that section, one obtains the Jones matrix 
in a circular basis as [189]78   ◾  Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
γγ γ β
γ γ
β γ γγ
γ γ
          +       =       −
    
circ
2
cos sin sin
22 2 . 2
s o
2
in c s sin
2 2
z b
b z
VH li l i l
VH i l li l
J (7.23)
(Note: The reader should be aware that definition of the linear fiber birefringence in [189] 
differs by a factor of 2 from the definition in the present text and others. The present equa￾tions differ from [189] accordingly.) If the fiber is operated in a polarimetric sensor setup 
according to Figure 5.1, the electric fields E1, E2 arriving at two detectors are given by
1 45 0 in = ° ° , E J JJ E P P (7.24)
2 45 0 in = −° ° . E J JJ E P P (7.24)
Here, Ein is the field arriving at the input polarizer; JP0° is the Jones matrix of the input 
polarizer, oriented at 0° to a principal fiber axis, and JP45° and JP − 45° are the Jones matrices 
of the output polarizers at ±45° to the input polarizer. (In Figure 5.1, the output polarizers 
are represented by a Wollaston prism.) The detected intensities I1 and I2 are proportional to 
square of the field amplitudes:
∗ = =1,2. i ii I i E E (7.26)
The resulting sensor signal S = (I1 − I2) / (I1 + I2) is given by [171, 196, 197]
(γ )
γ = sin
2 . z
l
S VH l
l (7.27)
Often, the Faraday rotation is much smaller than the linear birefringence (2VHz ≪ bb). 
S can then be approximated by
(β )
β = sin
2 . b
z
b
l
S VH l
l (7.28)
In the opposite case (2VHz ≫ Dbb), the signal becomes S = sin (2VHzl), i.e., approaches the 
signal of an ideal fiber. As an example, the retardation db = bbl of a coil with 10 windings, 
a coil diameter of 150 mm, and a fiber diameter of 125 μm corresponds to about 110 deg at 
1310 nm. The corresponding beat length Lb = 2p/bb is 15.4 m. By comparison, a current of 
1000 A produces a Faraday rotation of 0.65 deg. It should be noted that additional birefrin￾gence arises if the fiber is coiled under tension onto a drum [174–176].Optical Fibers for Current Sensing ◾  79
It is obvious from (7.27) and (7.28) that the signal normalized to the signal of an ideal 
fiber coil, Snorm = S/(2VHzl), oscillates as a function of the fiber length and vanishes, where 
bbl corresponds to multiples of p (Figure 7.2). Hence, the maximum usable fiber length for 
current sensing corresponds to roughly a quarter of the beat length Lb. Moreover, the sig￾nal is no longer strictly proportional to sin(2VHz), and the sensor becomes sensitive to the 
diameter of the fiber coil and conductor position within the coil cross-section.
7.3.1 Attempts of Linear Birefringence Compensation
From early on, researchers have tried various methods to compensate bend-induced bire￾fringence or lessen its impact:
• Feldtkeller et al. at Siemens compensated birefringence by winding consecutive fiber 
loops in two planes orthogonal to each other. The respective second loops reversed 
the birefringent phase retardation of the preceding loops and prevented build-up of 
excessive birefringent phase shifts [198–201]. Thirty-five years later, non-planar fiber 
winding was again reported by Perciante et al. [202].
• Others compensated linear birefringence by operating the fiber in reflection-mode 
employing a 90°-Faraday-polarization-rotator mirror at the fiber end [203–205].
• Ben-Kish and Tur reported a sensor where the fiber formed a square with 270°-loops 
at three of the four corners. Whereas the straight sections were free of birefringence, 
the loops of 10-mm radius acted as 2p-waveplates and preserved the polarization 
state [206].
• J. W. Dawson et al. disclosed an arrangement with three straight fiber sections that 
formed a triangle around the current conductor and were connected by pieces of 
polarizing fiber [207].
FIGURE 7.2 Normalized sensor signal, Snorm = S/(2VHzl), as a function fiber birefringence (2VHz
≪ bb).80   ◾  Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
• Ulmer showed that the disturbing effects of birefringence could be minimized by 
choosing an appropriate angle of the input polarization relative to a principal axis 
of the birefringence. That angle depended, however, on the amount of birefringence 
and current [124]. Similar work was reported by Forman et al. [208]. Menke et al. 
combined the method with ac-dc signal evaluation [209, 210], and Liu et al. sepa￾rated the Faraday effect from linear birefringence by a full analysis of the transmit￾ted polarization state [211]. Similar work was done by Flores-Nunez et al. [212] and 
Fisher et al. [213].
• Day et al. maintained efficient Faraday rotation by choosing the circumference of 
the fiber coil equal to the beat length of the birefringence caused by bending [214]. 
Similarly, Stolen et al. showed that efficient Faraday rotation in birefringent media 
could be obtained by switching the magnetic field direction at spatial intervals cor￾responding to the linear beat length or by spacing sections of the medium with and 
without field at such intervals [215].
• Perciante et al. compensated bend-induced birefringence by applying lateral pressure 
onto the fiber loops. To this end, the fiber was wound on an aluminum cylinder, and 
a compressed spring co-wound with the fiber exerted pressure in a direction orthogo￾nal to the loop plane [216].
• Ren et al. separated the Faraday rotation and linear birefringence by alternatingly 
switching between linearly and circularly polarized input light [197].
• In more recent work, Huang et al. proposed a closed loop system with a sensing fiber 
coil and an additional compensation coil [217].
Most of the above methods had no lasting impact, as they did not truly solve the underly￾ing problem and were not compatible with efficient sensor fabrication and flexible usage. 
The following sections present alternative solutions, some of which led to commercial sen￾sors with robust performance.
7.4 TWISTED FIBER
Fiber twisting was an early solution for suppressing bend-induced linear birefringence in 
fiber-optic current sensors [189, 218–233]. The twist-induced shear strains (Syz, Szx) mutu￾ally couple the small longitudinal field component of one fiber mode with the transverse 
field of the respective orthogonal mode. Since the two fields are p/2 out of phase, twisting 
produces circular birefringence (optical activity) given by [186]
α τ = g . (7.29)
Here, τ is the twist rate (twist angle per unit length), and the unitless parameter g is given 
as g = −n2(p11 − p12)/2, p11, p12 being the relevant photoelastic coefficients (g ~ 0.16 for fused 
silica fiber). Positive t stands for right-handed twist and produces left-rotary optical activ￾ity (nR > nL), assuming the observer looks towards the source [186]. An observer looking in Optical Fibers for Current Sensing ◾  81
the light propagation direction will notice that the polarization rotation follows the twist, 
albeit at a rate reduced by a factor of g/2. Note that the sense of twist expresses a “snapshot 
picture” of the twist helix and is therefore, other than the convention for the polarization 
rotation sense, independent of the viewing direction. The eigenpolarizations of a twisted 
fiber free of linear birefringence are right and left circular light waves. They accumulate a 
relative phase shift per unit length of
α α α πλ τ = − = −= ( R L ) (2 / )(nn g R L ) , (7.30)
where, aL and aR are the propagation constants of the eigenpolarizations. The correspond￾ing polarization rotation angle is ar = a/2. a is usually taken as positive for positive τ (left￾rotary optical activity, nR > nL ) opposite to the sign convention for optical activity in optics 
textbooks, for example, [170]; see introduction to Chapter 2.
Figure 7.3 illustrates the trajectories C(z) on the Poincaré sphere of selected input polar￾ization states propagating through fibers with both linear and circular birefringence [186, 
234]. According to (2.7), the polarization states are defined in a linear basis as
(β β ) χ − − = 0
0
y i z y x
x
E
e
E (7.31)
and in a circular basis as (2.12)
(α α ) χ − −
circ = . R i z R L
L
E
e
E (7.32)
The latitude and azimuth angles of the polarization states, 2θ and 2ψ, on the Poincaré sphere 
are then given by (2.10) and (2.11), respectively. For a given input polarization state, the 
evolution of the field amplitudes as function of z follows from the coupled mode equations 
and corresponding Jones matrix. First, Figure 7.3a shows the case of a fiber coil according 
to the previous section with only bend-induced linear birefringence. It is assumed that 
the slow axis is parallel to x and corresponds to horizontal polarization on the Poncaré 
sphere. The fiber’s slow and fast eigenpolarizations then correspond to horizontal and ver￾tical polarization, respectively, and are indicated by red dots.
In order to find the evolution of an arbitrary elliptical input polarization state, the bire￾fringence is represented by the birefringence vector bb (7.18). The vector points from the 
origin of the sphere to the slow eigenpolarization. Polarization states evolve along circles 
(red) on the sphere’s surface centered about the direction of bb. (The normal of the circle 
planes is parallel to bb.) As an example, the red great circle illustrates the evolution of a 
linear input polarization state oriented at θ = 45° to x at z = 0 (fiber entrance). The trajectory 
starts at the corresponding +45°-point on the equator (azimuth 2θ = 90°), evolves through 
RHC polarization (North pole, Ey leads Ex by 90°), again reaches linear polarization but 
now at −45°, passes through LHC (south pole), and finally again assumes its initial linear 82   ◾  Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
polarization after a full revolution (when Ey and Ex have accumulated a differential phase 
shift of 2p). The smaller red circle indicates the evolution of a linear input state oriented at 
z = 0 at an angle in the range 0 < θ < 45°.
Figure 7.3b shows the case of a straight twisted fiber with only circular birefringence. It 
is assumed that the optical activity is left-rotary (nR > nL, α is positive, the twist is right￾handed), i.e., the RHC state is the slow eigenpolarization and the LHC-state is the fast 
eigenpolarization. The circular birefringence vector a points along the positive polar axis 
from the origin to the slow circular eigenpolarization (North pole). The polarization states 
now evolve along circles centered about a (i.e., the circle planes are parallel to the equato￾rial plane). In particular, linear input states evolve along the equator, i.e., they remain lin￾early polarized. The smaller red circle shows the evolution of a right-handed elliptical SOP 
in the northern hemisphere.
Finally, Figure 7.3c shows the polarization evolution in a fiber with both linear and cir￾cular birefringence (slow axis of linear birefringence again horizontal). The eigenpolariza￾tions are now right and left elliptical SOP. The elliptical birefringence vector γ is the sum of 
FIGURE 7.3 Polarization state evolution on Poincaré sphere in fibers with various types of bire￾fringence: (a) fiber with only linear (bend-induced) birefringence; (b) straight twisted fiber with 
only circular birefringence; (c) coil of twisted fiber with linear and circular birefringence. The twist 
is right-handed. The red dots indicate the slow and fast eigenpolarizations. The polarization states 
evolve along circles (red) centered about the slow eigenvector of the corresponding birefringence. A 
full 2p-revolution corresponds to a beat length of the corresponding eigenpolarizations.Optical Fibers for Current Sensing ◾  83
bb and a, γ = bb + a, and points to the slow elliptical eigenpolarization (right-handed eigen￾polarization). The circular trajectories are now centered about γ. For example, a linear 
input state oriented at 45° to the fast axis starts at the 45°-point on the equator, evolves 
through right-handed elliptical states in the northern hemisphere, then assumes −45°-linear￾polarization, and further evolves through left-handed elliptical states in the southern 
hemisphere, before the state again returns to its initial 45°-linear-polarization; the two 
underlying orthogonal elliptical eigenpolarizations have then accumulated a 2p-phase 
relative shift. Note that the graphs are somewhat unphysical in that the radius of the 
Poincaré sphere is, other than the birefringence vectors, unitless. However, only the rela￾tive lengths of the vectors are relevant for the illustration.
The direction and velocity of the SOP evolution are determined by the vector product of 
γ and C(z):
( ) ( ), d z
z
dz
= ×
C
γ C (7.33)
where the unit vector C(z) points from the origin to the given SOP on the corresponding 
trajectory. The magnitude of the elliptical birefringence, which is the relative phase shift 
per unit length of the elliptical eigenpolarizations, is
γ βα = + ( )
1/2 2 2 . b (7.34)
The corresponding elliptical beat length is LE = 2p/γ. A full 2p-revolution around any circle 
corresponds to a length of fiber equal to the beat length of the corresponding birefrin￾gence; for instance, the fiber length corresponding to a revolution around the γ-vector 
equals LE.
 It is obvious from Figure 7.3c, that if |a| is made much larger than |βb|, a twisted 
fiber essentially becomes circularly birefringent and largely preserves a linear input polar￾ization state (or any other SOP), apart from an azimuth rotation. Roughly speaking, the 
linear birefringence of a given fiber section having a length of a quarter of the twist period 
is cancelled in the following section of the same length as a consequence that, on average, 
such section is rotated by p/2 as compared to the first section [222].
In the presence of an applied magnetic field, the additional circular birefringence 2VHz
simply adds to the twist-induced optical activity, so that γ reads
γβ α ( )   =+ +    
1/2 2 2 2 . b z VH (7.35)
The optical activity and magnetic field-induced circular birefringence are both left-rotatory 
(ccw, nR > nL), if 2VHz is positive (field points in the light propagation direction) and a is 
also positive (right-handed twist). Commonly, |2VHz| is much smaller than |a|, so that 
the field only moderately modifies the positions of the eigenpolarizations on the Poincaré 84   ◾  Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
sphere and the ecliptic of the circular contours. Note, however, that a full revolution around 
a contour corresponds to somewhat different fiber lengths with and without field. The dif￾ference between the azimuth rotations at a fixed fiber length z with and without field rep￾resents the current to be measured.
In a linear basis, the mode coupling coefficients of a twisted fiber with bend-induced 
birefringence and an applied magnetic field are
( )
( )
β α
α β
  − + =  
+ −  
/ 2 / 2 . / 2 / 2
b z
z b
i VH
i VH
K (7.36)
Since the eigenmodes of a twisted fiber are elliptically polarized, it is often more conve￾nient to work in a basis of circular polarizations. The coupling coefficients are then [189]:
( )
α β
β α
  + =   − +   circ
/2 /2 . / 2 / 2
z b
b z
VH
VH
K (7.37)
The corresponding Jones matrix reads [189]:
( )
( )
γ α γ βγ
γ γ
β γ γ α γ
γ γ
    +       +               =     +   −              
circ
2
cos sin sin
22 2 . 2
sin cos sin
22 2
z b
b z
VH
l i l i l
VH
i l l i l
J (7.38)
With |α|»|βb|, the phase shift Df between the left and right near-circular polarizations at the 
output of a fiber of length l can be approximated as [189]:
∆= ≈ + φγ α l VH l 2 . ( z ) (7.39)
Apart from the twist induced phase offset al, the phase shift corresponds to the magneto￾optic phase shift DfF = 2VHzl of an ideal fiber. A general expression for the signal of a 
polarimetric current sensor with linear and twist-induced circular birefringence can be 
found, for example, in [222, 233].
It should be noted that high twist rates are necessary to sufficiently suppress the linear 
birefringence. Twist rates up to several tens of 2p-turns per meter have been applied [172, 
176, 189]. Still higher rates risk fiber breakage. According to (7.29), 30 turns per meter result 
in circular birefringence of about 30 rad/m. The corresponding beat length is 21 cm. For 
comparison, the phase retardation and linear beat length due to bend-induced birefringence 
are 0.41 rad/m and 15.4 m, respectively, at 1310 nm for the fiber and coil radii in the previous 
section (r = 62.5 mm, R = 75 mm). With decreasing coil diameters, fiber twisting becomes 
more and more ineffective, as the linear birefringence increases in proportion to R−2.Optical Fibers for Current Sensing ◾  85
It is obvious from Figure 7.3c, that at finite twist rates a linear input polarization state 
evolves through a series of elliptical SOP with linear polarization being restored at inter￾vals of LE/2 (or LE if the input polarization is at 0° or 90°). As a result, the magneto-optic 
sensitivity varies along the fiber with the same periods. Since the elasto-optic coefficients 
change with temperature, the SOP ellipticity at the fiber end (SOP latitude on Poincaré 
sphere) varies as a function of temperature, which adds to the temperature dependence of 
the Verdet constant. The phenomenon is discussed in more detail in context of spun sens￾ing fibers below.
Furthermore, the twist-induced polarization rotation (SOP azimuth) also varies with 
temperature – (1/g)∂g/∂T = 4.95 × 10−4 K−1 at 633 nm for fused silica fiber — causing shifts 
in the signal’s dc offset [180, 235]. Compensation measures include operating the fiber in 
reflective mode (the reciprocal twist-induced polarization rotation is undone on the 
return path, while the non-reciprocal rotation by the Faraday effect doubles) or utilizing 
two serial fiber sections of equal length but opposite sense of twist [236, 237]. Other down￾sides of twisted fiber include complicated coil fabrication, mechanical means for holding 
the torsion which introduce new stress and birefringence, and poor application flexibility. 
Fiber twisting was largely abandoned after spun highly birefringent fibers became avail￾able in the late 1980s and 1990s. It is worth mentioning that in a 1979 patent application, 
Barkmann and Winterhoff at AEG (a former German company) proposed to hold the 
twist by the fiber coating. To this end, the fiber was to be spun during the coating applica￾tion at the draw tower, a method that came close to the fabrication procedure of spun 
fibers [238].
7.5 SPUN HIGHLY BIREFRINGENT FIBERS
In view of the inadequate performance of fiber-optic current sensors at the time, David 
Payne and co-workers at the University of Southampton, U.K., began in the early 1980s to 
develop spun highly birefringent fiber for current sensing [239–241]. Since then, numer￾ous theoretical and experimental studies on spun fibers have been published [242–272]. 
Meanwhile, spun fiber has become the fiber of choice for most commercial FOCS. Spun 
fiber is fabricated by rapidly spinning the preform of a highly birefringent fiber during the 
drawing process. As a result, the slow and fast principal fiber axes rotate along the fiber 
at a rate ξ = 2p/p, where p is the spin pitch (Figure 7.4). By convention, the spin rate ξ is 
positive for a right-handed spin and negative for a left-handed spin. An internal stress field 
like in bowtie or Panda fibers, an elliptical core, or an appropriate fiber micro-structure 
generates the embedded linear birefringence. In a local coordinate system S’(x’, y’, z) that 
co-rotates with the birefringent fiber axes, the combination of circular and linear birefrin￾gence results in two orthogonal elliptically polarized (quasi) eigenmodes with opposite 
handedness and different phase velocities, that is, the propagating modes preserve their 
ellipticity, and the azimuths of the polarization ellipses coincide with the birefringent axes. 
The modes are also referred to as helical polarization modes [234, 263]. In contrast to a 
linearly polarization-maintaining fiber or twisted fiber, a spun fiber has no eigenmodes 
in the laboratory coordinate system S(x, y, z), i.e., in a fixed coordinate system, the SOP 86   ◾  Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
continuously change along the fiber [189]. An illustrative description of the physics behind 
the formation of the quasi eigenmodes can be found in [234]. It is worth mentioning that, 
unlike in twisted fiber, shear strain does not significantly contribute to the circular bire￾fringence of spun fibers owing to the state of low viscosity during the drawing and spin￾ning process.
Rather, the circular birefringence is a consequence of the rotating linear birefringence 
and does not exist independently of the linear birefringence.
The choice of the spin pitch and embedded linear birefringence (birefringence of an 
equivalent unspun fiber) determines the ellipticity of the quasi eigenmodes, the fiber’s 
apparent magneto-optic sensitivity, and robustness against external perturbations. 
Commonly, the spin pitch is a few mm; a lower practical limit is about 2.5 mm. With the 
spin pitch fixed, the beat length LB of the embedded linear birefringence then determines 
the crucial fiber properties. The ratio x = 2LB/p is referred to as spin ratio. A small beat 
length (comparable to the spin pitch or smaller, i.e., x < ≈2) enhances the robustness of the 
fiber against bending-induced birefringence and other external perturbations such as low￾temperature stress from the fiber coating. On the other hand, a small beat length reduces 
the ellipticity e of the quasi eigenmodes and hence lowers the fiber’s sensitivity to magnetic 
fields. (Note that e = 0 corresponds to linear polarization, and e = ±1 corresponds to right 
and left circular polarizations.) A further parameter to consider is the temperature depen￾dence of the linear beat length. Especially at relatively small spin ratios, the contribution of 
the linear birefringence to the temperature dependence of the sensor signal can be signifi￾cantly higher than the contribution of the Faraday effect alone (Section 8.6). By compari￾son, the spin pitch is almost independent of temperature due to small thermal expansion 
coefficient of fused silica fiber (0.5 × 10−6 K−1). In many cases, a reasonable compromise is a 
linear beat length of 3–10 times the spin pitch [249]. It is interesting to note that a spun 
fiber with a spin ratio that gradually increases as function of z from x = 0 to x ≫1 acts a 
polarization converter that converts linearly polarized light into circularly polarized light 
on the forward path (+z-direction) and vice versa on the backward path [247, 273–276].
FIGURE 7.4 Spun highly birefringent Panda fiber with right-handed spin: the birefringent fiber 
axes rotate along the fiber at a rate ξ = 2p/p, where p is the spin pitch.Optical Fibers for Current Sensing ◾  87
7.5.1 Coupled Mode Equations
The coupling coefficients of a spun fiber are z-dependent. In the presence of an applied 
magnetic field Hz and absence of bend-induced linear birefringence, they are given in a 
circular basis as [189, 245, 251, 263]
ξ
ξ
β
β −
          =   −      
2
circ
2
2 .
2
B i z z
B i z z
VH e
e VH
K (7.40)
The coefficients in a linear basis are more intricate and can be found, for example, in [249, 
250]. bB = (2p/l)(ns
 – nf
) is the difference in propagation constants associated with the 
embedded linear birefringence (slow axis parallel to x); the linear beat length is LB = l/B, 
B = DnB = ns
 – nf
; ξ is the spin rate: ξ = 2π/p. The solutions of the coupled-mode equations 
are left and right elliptically polarized waves with orthogonal azimuths and represent the 
quasi eigenpolarizations. As already mentioned above, the axes of the modal polarization 
ellipses rotate at a rate ξ along the fiber and coincide with the principal axes of the embed￾ded birefringence. The optical waves propagating in +z-direction are given by [263]
−( )γ = /2
1 1 , i z E e e (7.41)
( )γ = /2
2 1 . i z E e e (7.42)
(For an alternative representation, see [244].) Here, γ is again the elliptical phase birefrin￾gence, i.e., the differential phase shift (rad/m) that the two quasi eigenmodes accumulate 
per unit length:
γ ξβ ( )   = −+    
1/2 2 2 22 . VHz B (7.43)
The vectors e1, e2 are
ξ
− ξ
  =     +  
1 2
1 ,
1
i z
i z
e
A Ae
e (7.44)
ξ
− ξ
  − =     +  
2 2
1 .
1
i z
i z
Ae
A e
e (7.45)88   ◾  Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
The relative amplitude A is
( ) − = +− 2 Ax x 1 1, (7.46)
where x is the spin ratio introduced further above:
ξ
β = = 2 2 . B
B
L
x
p (7.47)
See [263] for sign changes, if the light travels in −z-direction. The ellipticity of the modes 
(ratio of minor and major ellipse axes) equals e = tanψ with
ψ = ± = (1/ 2 tan 2 / 1/ 2 tan , )a Lp a x ( B ) ±( ) ( ) (7.48)
where 2ψ is the latitude of the respective SOP on the Poincaré sphere. Positive ψ stands for 
right-handed rotation and negative ψ for left-handed rotation. The absolute value of e can 
also be written as [263]:
( ) ( ) ( ) − − =− + = + − 2 1 abs 1 / 1 1 . e A A xx (7.49)
At long linear beat lengths (2LB ≫ p), i.e., small embedded linear birefringence (|βB| ≪
|2ξ|), abs(e) approaches unity, that is, the modes approach circular polarization, whereas at 
large linear birefringence (LB ≪ p, (|βB| ≫ |2ξ|), the modes approach linear polarization. 
Figure 7.5 illustrates the polarization ellipses (e = ±0.72) of the fast and slow quasi eigen￾polarizations of left-handed and right-handed spun fibers with a spin ratio of x = 3 [234].
FIGURE 7.5 Elliptical (quasi) eigenpolarizations of a left-handed (a) and right-handed (b) spun 
fiber with a spin ratio of x = 3 in the local coordinate system S’ co-rotating with the principal fiber 
axes. The slow axis is parallel to x’.Optical Fibers for Current Sensing ◾  89
The effective refractive indices of the two modes are
nn k 1,2 = ± (γ /2 ,) (7.50)
where n is the average refractive index. In the local coordinate system S’(x’, y’, z), the ellip￾tical beat length ′
LE, i.e., the length of fiber the light must travel until a given input polariza￾tion state repeats itself, is ′
LE = 2p/γ or [245, 246]:
′ =
+2 2
.
4
B
E
B
p L L
p L
(7.51)
Here, Hz is assumed as zero (typically the Faraday phase shift 2VHz is much smaller than 
2ξ). At high spin ratios (2LB ≫ p), ′
LE can be approximated as ′ ≈ / 2. L p E The elliptical phase 
birefringence in the local system is DnE = ( 2 2 ∆ +∆ n n B c)
1/2. The spin rate ξ determines the 
circular birefringence Δnc = nR − nL according to
α ξ α α πλ =− = − = − 2 ( R L ) (2/ . )(n n R L ) (7.52)
The circular birefringence is negative (nR < nL) for spun fibers with right-handed spin (posi￾tive ξ) and positive (nR > nL) for fibers with left-handed spin (negative ξ). Note that this is 
different from twisted fiber, where right-handed twist results in nR > nL.
In the laboratory coordinate system, the elliptical phase birefringence is given by DnE = 
(∆ +∆ 2 2 n n B c)
1/2 − Dnc or, in units of rad/m, by γ − 2ξ. The corresponding elliptical beat 
length is LE = 2p/(γ − 2ξ) or, in terms of p and LB [246],
=
+2 2
.
4 –2
B
E
B B
p L L
pLL
(7.53)
For 2LB ≫ p, LE is in good approximation equal to LE = 2xLB = 4 2 L p B / . For example, p = 5 
mm and LB = 10 mm (x = 4) result in LE = 81 mm (see Figure 7.8 further below). Other than 
the elliptical beat length of twisted fiber, LE is not a length after which a polarization state 
repeats itself. Nevertheless, LE is a measure for the robustness of the fiber against external 
perturbations.
Another important parameter of spun fibers is the elliptical group birefringence Dng,E, 
in particular when the fiber is operated with broadband light [269]:
∆ =∆ − ∆ n n dn d gE E , λ λ ( E / .) (7.54)
Other than the elliptical phase birefringence DnE, the elliptical group birefringence Dng,E is 
independent of the chosen coordinate system. Koval et al. determined a simple relationship 
between the linear group birefringence Dng,B and elliptical group birefringence Dng,E [269]:90   ◾  Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
, , ( ) ( ) 2 2 , B
g E g B
B c
n
n n
n n
λ λ
∆
∆= ∆
∆ +∆
(7.55)
where Dng,B is given by
∆ =∆ − ∆ n n dn d gB B , λ λ ( B / .) (7.56)
Elliptical-core fibers and micro-structured fibers often exhibit strong chromatic dispersion, 
and hence the linear group birefringence may significantly differ from the linear phase 
birefringence. The same is then true for the elliptical group and phase birefringence [277].
Integration of the coupled mode equations (7.40) gives the Jones matrix of the spun 
fiber, which reads in a circular basis [189, 251]
( )
( ) circ
2 2
cos sin sin
22 2 . 2 2
sin cos sin
2 22
z i l B i l
z B i l i l
VH
l i l e i le
VH
i le l i l e
ξ ξ
ξ ξ
γ ξ γ β γ
γ γ
β γ γ ξ γ
γ γ
− −
      −           −                       =
          −     +                        
J
(7.57)
For high spin ratios (|2ξ| ≫ |βB|), a spun fiber behaves like a circular birefringent fiber. For 
2VHz = 0, the Jones matrix can then be approximated as [189]
α
α −
    =  
   
2
circ
2
ˆ
ˆ
0 .
0
i l
i l
e
e
J (7.58)
Compared to the spin rate ξ, the apparent optical activity αˆ (rad/ m) is small [189]:
β α π
ξ = =
2
2 ˆ 1 . 4 2
B
B
p
L (7.59)
Reports on the experimental characterization of spun fibers, in particular by spectral 
polarimetry and Bragg gratings imprinted into the fiber, can be found, for example, in 
[243, 249, 250, 256, 260, 264, 268, 269].
7.5.2 Polarization State Evolution
An input polarization state with the ellipticity, azimuth, and handedness of one of the two 
quasi eigenmodes of the fiber is mapped one-to-one onto that mode. For all other input Optical Fibers for Current Sensing ◾  91
SOP, the light field E in the fiber is a superposition of the two eigenmodes with amplitudes 
C1, C2 [263]:
− − = + 1 2
1 2 . ikn z ikn z Ee e Ce C e 1 2 (7.60)
The evolution of arbitrary input SOP has been investigated by R. Ulrich [186] and in more 
detail by R. Dändliker [189], Y. Wang et al. [250], and Y. V. Przhiyalkovsky et al. [234]. 
Figure 7.6a,b depicts the SOP trajectories in the local system S’ co-rotating with the bire￾fringent fiber axes for linear input SOP at 45° and 0° to the slow fiber axis. The sense of spin 
is assumed as left-handed, i.e., ξ is negative, and the RHC state is the slow circular state 
FIGURE 7.6 Evolution (schematically) of linear input polarization states oriented at 45° (a), (c) and 
0° (b), (d) with respect to the slow fiber axis in a left-handed spun fiber with a spin ratio x = 3: (a), (b): 
SOP in the local coordinate system S’ co-rotating with the principal fiber axes (red circles). The red 
dots indicate the elliptical eigenpolarizations. (c), (d): SOP in the laboratory system S (red cycloids). 
The blue circles depict the evolution of the right-handed elliptical eigenpolarization. (Note that in S
the vectors bB and γ rotate at a rate ξ, i.e., their azimuths as indicated are only valid at z = mp, m = 0, 
1, 2, …)92   ◾  Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
(7.52). The Poincaré sphere is again oriented such that the horizontal polarization coincides 
with the slow fiber axis. The illustration is only schematic but resembles the situation of 
a spin ratio of x = |2ξ/βB| = 3, which is in a range of interest to current sensing. The linear 
birefringence vector bB points from the origin to the slow linear polarization state, while 
the vector −2ξ (= a) points to the slow circular polarization state (RHC). The right-handed 
and left-handed eigenpolarizations (red dots) lie in the directions ±γ, respectively; γ = bB
−2ξ. Their latitudes 2ψ are ±71.6°, and their ellipticities e are ±0.72. The SOP trajectories in 
the local system are analog to the ones of a twisted fiber with bend-induced linear birefrin￾gence (Figure 7.3c) and are circular contours, with γ being the normal to circular planes. 
The starting points at z = 0 are marked by black dots. A full revolution corresponds to a 
fiber section of length ′
LE.
The SOP trajectories on the Poincaré sphere of the laboratory system S (Figure 7.6c,d) 
are obtained by superimposing to the S’-trajectories a revolution at a rate of ξ about the 
south-north direction. The eigenpolarizations then evolve along circles parallel to the 
equator (blue circles), whereas the linear input SOP evolve on cycloids (red lines). The 
cycloids of the 45°-input polarization are centered about the equator, i.e., the SOP elliptic￾ity alternates between right-handed elliptical, linear, and left-handed elliptical polariza￾tion, while the SOP azimuth varies according to the progressing longitude (Figure 7.6c). 
The linear input SOP at 0° (parallel to the slow axis) periodically evolves through right￾handed elliptical polarization states (in the northern hemisphere), becoming linear at 
points were the cycloids touch the equator (Figure 7.6d). A full 2p-revolution around the 
sphere corresponds to the beat length LE, and the period of the cycloids corresponds to ′
LE. 
Accordingly, the (non-integer) number N of periods over a full revolution is N = ′ / L L E E; 
N = 19.5 for x = 3. N increases with increasing spin ratio and is approximately equal to 2x2
for sufficiently large x. For example, N equals 3.4 for x = 1 and 52 for x = 5.
The amplitude of the cycloids decreases with increasing spin ratio, i.e., the variations in 
the SOP ellipticity become smaller and disappear in the limit of very large x, when the 
eigenpolarizations essentially coincide with poles of the sphere (Figure 7.7). An observer in 
FIGURE 7.7 Evolution (schematically) of a linear input polarization state oriented at 0° to the slow 
axis in a left-handed spun fiber with spin ratios x = 3 (a) and x = 5 (b); laboratory system.Optical Fibers for Current Sensing ◾  93
the local coordinate system S’ advancing in a frozen-in optical field a distance ′
LE ( ′
LE = 
0.474 p for x = 3) will see an SOP azimuth rotation by θ = 180°, and a rotation of the labora￾tory system S by 170.8°; S will have rotated by 180° only after a distance p/2. Hence, in the 
laboratory system, the SOP azimuth will have rotated by θ = −9.2°. Obviously, this rotation, 
quantified by (7.59) for large x, will continue to grow as the observer moves further down 
the fiber. An observer in the laboratory system looking in the direction of the light propa￾gation will see that, in contrast to twisted fibers, the SOP azimuth as a function of z rotates 
in a direction opposite to the sense of spin. When x approaches infinity and ′
LE reaches p/2, 
the SOP azimuth naturally ceases to rotate in the laboratory system. Further information 
can be found in [189] and [234].
7.5.3 Polarization State Evolution in Bent Spun Fiber
Bending a spun fiber to a coil of constant radius introduces additional bending-induced 
birefringence bb. The elliptical birefringence vector γ is then the sum of the vectors bB, −2ξ, 
and bb. Typically, bb is much smaller than bB. The direction of bb as a function of z remains 
constant in the laboratory system, while bB rotates at a rate of ξ. As a result, the ellipticity 
of the two orthogonal polarization modes is no longer constant but changes synchronously 
with the principal axis rotation. Moreover, tight bending radii reduce the mean ellipticity 
of the modes and hence the magnetic field sensitivity of the fiber. In a circular base, the 
coupling coefficients of a bent spun fiber read [189, 249, 263]
ξ ϕ
ξ ϕ
β β
β β − −
          +       =       + −        
2 2
circ
2 2
2 2
2 2
B i z b i z
B i z b i z
VH e e
e e VH
K (7.61)
where φ is the angle between the xz-plane in Figure 7.4 and the plane of the coiled fiber. 
The coupled-mode equations have no exact analytical solutions and are commonly solved 
numerically or by perturbation theory [249, 251, 270, 271]. Approximate analytical solu￾tions were presented by Przhiyalkovskiy et al. [263]. At decreasing R, the ellipticity versus z
of the two polarization modes begins to (unharmonically) oscillate about the ellipticity e of 
a straight fiber; at x > 1 with a period of ≈p/2. At further decreasing R, the mean ellipticity 
and hence the sensitivity to current decrease, as Figure 7.9 below will show.
7.5.4 Magneto-Optic Sensitivity of Spun Fibers
7.5.4.1 Intrinsic Magneto-Optic Sensitivity
The non-circularity of the (quasi) eigenpolarizations results in a reduced magneto-optic 
sensitivity s compared to an ideal fiber with perfectly circular eigenpolarizations and the 
same Verdet constant:
spun ideal s =∆ ∆ φ φ / . (7.65)94   ◾  Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
Here, Dfspun is the differential magneto-optic phase shift per unit length of the elliptical 
eigenpolarizations, and Dfideal = 2φF = 2VHz is the corresponding phase shift of the left 
and right circular SOP in an ideal fiber; Dfspun corresponds to the change of the ellipti￾cal birefringence γ in a magnetic field. Assuming small values of the Faraday rotation 
φF and negligible bending-induced birefringence βb, the relative phase γ (φF) per unit 
length of the elliptical modes can be approximated as γ(φF) = γ (φF = 0) + sφF, where s = 
dγ/dφF is given by [263]
( )
ξ
ϕ
′
− = = = <
+ 2 =
1 2 2 1.
ã 0 1
E
F
L
s
p x
(7.66)
The sensitivity can also be written as [252]
s = sin 2 . ( ψ ) (7.67)
According to (7.48), 2ψ is the latitude of the eigenpolarizations on the Poincaré sphere, and 
e = atan(ψ) is their ellipticity. At large x, s approaches unity (limit of circular polarization 
modes), and at small x, s approaches zero (limit of linearly polarized modes), as illustrated 
in Figure 7.8. The Figure also depicts the elliptical beat length LE versus x for two different 
values of the spin pitch.
7.5.4.2 Intrinsic Magneto-Optic Sensitivity of Coiled Fiber
Bending the fiber to a coil reduces the intrinsic magneto-optic sensitivity of a coiled fiber 
as follows [263]:
FIGURE 7.8 Intrinsic magneto-optic sensitivity s of a straight spun fiber (solid blue line) as a func￾tion of the spin ratio x = 2LB/p and (average) sensitivity (av)
pol s when the fiber is operated in a polari￾metric sensor (dashed line). The sensitivity is normalized to the sensitivity of an ideal fiber with the 
same Verdet constant [263]. The yellow and orange lines indicate the elliptical beat length LE for spin 
pitches p of 2.5 mm and 5 mm, respectively.Optical Fibers for Current Sensing ◾  95
− −
=
+ +

 2 2
1 1 .
1 1
s
x x
(7.68)
An equivalent expression was also reported in [241]. The first term in (7.68) is the sensitiv￾ity of a straight fiber (7.66), and the second term describes the sensitivity reduction as a 
result of the fiber bending with x equal to
( ) (γ ξ )
β
−  = + 2 2
1 .
b
x A (7.69)
The parameter A has been defined by (7.46). Note that s is the average sensitivity and does 
not account for the mentioned ellipticity oscillations of the polarization modes of a bent 
fiber. Figure 7.9 shows s as a function of the bending radius R for a spin pitch of p = 5 mm 
and two different beat lengths LB of the embedded linear birefringence; βb is according 
to (7.18) at l = 1310 nm. The fiber diameters are 125 mm (solid lines) and 80 mm (dashed 
lines). It is obvious that smaller linear beat lengths at a given spin pitch allow for smaller 
bend radii but somewhat reduce the sensitivity at large R, where s flattens out. Still, the 
fibers tolerate bend radii as small as 30 mm (125-μm fiber) and 20 μm (80-μm fiber), before 
the sensitivity starts to drop.
7.5.4.3 Magneto-Optic Sensitivity of a Polarimetric Current Sensor with Spun Fiber
The sensitivities s and s refer, as noted, to the differential magneto-optic phase shift of the 
helical polarization modes of a spun fiber. The actual sensitivity or scale factor of a current 
sensor with spun fiber varies with the ellipticity and azimuth of the input SOP and, more￾over, depends on the detection scheme (polarimetric or interferometric); the detection 
FIGURE 7.9 Intrinsic magneto-optic sensitivity s of a bent spun fiber at 1310 nm as function of the 
bend radius R for a spin pitch of p = 5 mm and two different values of the beat length LB. The solid 
and dashed lines correspond to fiber diameters of 125 μm and 80 μm, respectively.96   ◾  Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
scheme matters because a spun fiber not only lowers the magneto-optic phase shift but also 
the interference fringe contrast K. Polarimetric sensors are subject to both effects, whereas 
interferometric sensors with phase demodulation only react to the phase shift [266].
Assuming a polarimetric detection scheme as in Figure 5.1, monochromatic input light 
linearly polarized at 45° to a principal fiber axis, and a straight fiber with length equal to a 
multiple of half the beat length ′
LE (i.e., the linear input polarization is restored at the fiber 
end), the Jones matrix formalism gives a small signal current sensitivity (jF ≪ 1) normal￾ized to the sensitivity of an ideal fiber as follows [241]:
− = <
+
pol 2
1 1.
1
s
x
(7.70)
Note that spol is the square of the intrinsic sensitivity s and, since s < 1, spol is smaller than s. 
In case of monochromatic light, the current sensitivity oscillates as a function of the fiber 
length with a period equal to ′
LE/2 if the input light is polarized at 45° at z = 0; and a period 
of ′
LE if the input light is polarized at 0° or 90° ( ′
L p E ≈ / 2 for large x). The oscillations reflect 
the SOP ellipticity variations along the fiber according to the SOP trajectories of Figure 7.6. 
spol represents the maxima of this periodic function. The average sensitivity corresponds to 
( ) = av 2
pol pol s s (dashed line in Figure 7.8):
( )
( ) −
= <
+
av
pol 2 2
1 1.
1
s
x
(7.71)
For x ≫ 1, the amplitude of the oscillations relative to the average is approximately x−2, i.e., 
large spin ratios help to reduce the amplitude. The oscillations also occur at a fixed fiber 
length but varying temperature, since the beat length LB and hence ′
LE are functions of 
temperature. For LB = 12.5 mm, p = 5 mm (x = 5), the peak-to-peak oscillation amplitude 
corresponds to 8% of the average sensitivity. The oscillation period depends on the fiber 
parameters and fiber length and often is in the range of a few degrees C. Such behavior 
would be unacceptable in most sensor applications. However, a broadband light source and 
fiber operation in reflection mode — the polarization modes swap their handedness upon 
reflection — helps to average out the oscillations to uncritical levels. The magneto-optic 
sensitivity is then given by (av)
pol s [241].
These measures will not prevent, however, that the variation of LB with temperature also 
changes (monotonously) the average sensitivity (av)
pol s . Again, the effect is strongest at small 
spin ratios and can easily cause signal changes of several percent per 100°C for spun fibers 
with stress-induced birefringence [266]. By comparison, the contribution of the Verdet 
constant is only 0.7%/100°C. Section 8.5 will show that interferometric current sensors, in 
contrast to polarimetric sensors, can be set up in a way that the signal becomes immune 
against variations in LB.
The sensitivity of a bent spun fiber exhibits, in addition to the oscillations of period ′
LE, 
( ′
LE ≈p/2 at sufficiently large x), an additional modulation with a period corresponding to Optical Fibers for Current Sensing ◾  97
the much longer elliptical beat length LE (LE = 4 2 L p B / for 2LB ≫ p) [249–251]. The oscilla￾tion amplitude is smaller for fibers with larger embedded birefringence and grows with 
tighter bending radii but can be suppressed to zero by an appropriate choice of the input 
polarization state [249]. Whereas the short period oscillations hardly affect the line inte￾gration of the magnetic field, the long period oscillations may result in an imperfect inte￾gration if they are not appropriately accommodated or suppressed [278].
7.5.5 Spun Fibers Operated with Broadband Light
In the previous sections, the light was assumed as monochromatic. However, most fiber￾optic current sensors work with a broadband source such as a super-luminescent diode 
(SLED). Typically, the source spectra have center wavelengths l0 of 1310 nm or 1550 nm, 
and a spectral width Dl (full width at half maximum, FWHM) of about 20–40 nm. The 
low coherence length (a few tens of micro-meters) helps to suppress disturbing interfer￾ences from parasitic light waves that result, for example, from polarization cross-coupling 
at imperfect fiber splices. Because the linear birefringence bB is wavelength-dependent, the 
different spectral constituents accumulate different birefringent phase delays. Accordingly, 
at a given position z, the spectral components of an arbitrary input SOP have different 
ellipticities and azimuths, resulting in a reduced degree of polarization, DOP. The DOP (0 
≤ DOP ≤ 1) is defined as
DOP / , = + I II p pu ( ) (7.62)
where Ip and Iu are the intensity fractions of polarized and unpolarized light. The length of 
fiber at which the phase delays have spread out over a 2p-range, i.e., over a full circle on the 
Poincaré sphere, is referred to as depolarization length ldep [234]. It should be noted that the 
underlying quasi eigenmodes themselves remain polarized (DOP = 1), since the spectral 
constituents of an eigenmode maintain common SOP ellipticities and azimuths. At z ≫
ldep, the DOP depends on how the input field distributes itself onto the two eigenmodes 
(amplitudes C1, C2 in [7.60]). The DOP becomes zero (fully depolarized) if the input light 
is linearly polarized at 45° to the slow axis (C1 = C2), and the DOP reaches a maximum, 
dependent on the spin ratio x, if the input light is polarized at 0° or 90°. For circular input 
light, the output DOP is independent of the input azimuth and only determined by x; see 
[255] for more details.
The description in terms of depolarization is equivalent to saying that, at z > ldep, the two 
quasi eigenmodes have accumulated a group delay longer than the vacuum coherence 
length lc of the light source. The fiber length lc,f
 corresponding to lc equals lc,f
 = lc/Dng,E. The 
vacuum coherence length of a SLED with a near-Gaussian spectrum is Lc = 0.88( 2 λ0 /Dl); see 
Section 3.4. Neglecting the dispersion of DnB (i.e., assuming Dng,B = DnB), one can rewrite 
Dng,E of (7.54) in agreement with [234] as follows:
ξ λ
π
−
− ∆ =
+
2
, 0 2 .
1
g E
x
n
x
(7.63)98   ◾  Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
The fiber length lc,f
 is then
π λ
ξ λ
−
−
+ = ∆
2 0 , 2
1 0.88 . c f
x l
x (7.64)
For small spin ratios (x ≪ 1), lc,f
 is independent of the spin pitch p and approximately 
equals lc, f
 = 0.88LB(λ0/Δλ). For large x, lc,f
 increases in proportion to x: lc,f
 = 0.88xLB(λ0/Dl) 
[234]. As an example, lc,f
 is about 4.8 m for p = 5 mm and LB = 12.5 mm (x = 5), assuming 
a 1310 nm-light-source with a FWHM of 30 nm. It is obvious that no Faraday polarization 
rotation occurs at fiber lengths much longer than lc,f
, where the quasi eigenmodes have 
lost their coherence. Therefore, spun fibers are often operated in reflection mode (the dif￾ferential group delay is compensated on the return trip) or in a Sagnac interferometer with 
counter-propagating beams.
7.5.6 Photonic Crystal Spun Fibers
Several research groups have reported micro-structured elliptical or circular birefringent 
spun fiber [279–289]. Analog to conventional spun highly birefringent fiber, A. Michie 
et al. fabricated such fiber by spinning the preform of a micro-structured polarization￾maintaining fiber during fiber drawing. Three rings of different-sized air holes around a 
solid elliptical core resulted in a (group) beat length of the embedded linear birefringence 
of 1 mm at 1550 nm. The spin pitch was 4.4 mm [280]. Since such a fiber is largely free of 
internal stress and consists of pure fused silica, the embedded linear birefringence hardly 
changes with temperature. Consequently, only the Verdet constant should contribute to 
the temperature dependence of a corresponding current sensor [282]. Chamorovskiy et 
al. demonstrated a miniature fiber coil with 100 turns and a diameter of only 5 mm made 
from micro-structured spun fiber. Its magneto-optic sensitivity reached 70% of the ideal 
value [283].
Whereas the fibers reported by Michie et al. and Chamorovskiy et al. were, like a con￾ventional spun fiber, elliptically birefringent, R. Beravat et al. presented a photonic crystal 
spun fiber that was purely circularly birefringent [287, 288]. The fiber structure consisted of 
a hexagonal array of hollow air holes arranged around a central solid glass core. The sixfold 
symmetry of the air holes resulted in negligible linear birefringence. Here, the differing 
reflection coefficients for left and right circularly polarized light at the helically curved 
interfaces between the core and the air holes gave rise to circular birefringence. The bire￾fringence could be tuned via the diameter-to-spacing ratio of the air holes. Owing to the 
fiber’s circular eigenmodes, there was no reduction in the magneto-optic sensitivity as 
compared to a corresponding unspun fiber.
7.6 HELICALLY WOUND FIBERS
Helical fiber windings represent a further technique for supressing bending-induced linear 
birefringence in fiber-optic current sensors. Like spun highly birefringent fibers, helically 
wound fibers are elliptical birefringent. The circular component of the elliptical birefrin￾gence is the result of Berry’s topological phase, i.e., is of geometrical origin. “Berry’s phase” Optical Fibers for Current Sensing ◾  99
was initially introduced in a quantum mechanical context [290], but also plays a role in 
other areas of physics. A particular manifestation of Berry’s phase is the optical activity 
of a fiber describing a nonplanar curve in space. In an early paper on the matter, R. N. 
Ross theoretically quantified and experimentally demonstrated the effect in single-mode 
fibers [291]. Numerous subsequent authors have further investigated the topological opti￾cal phase, particularly in helically wound fibers [189, 292–303].
The line a curved fiber describes in space is characterized by a moving trihedron of 
orthogonal unit vectors t, n, and b, also known as Serret-Frenet coordinate system, where 
at any point z along the fiber, t is a tangential to the fiber, n is the normal vector that points 
to the center of curvature, and the binormal b is orthogonal to both, t and n (Figure 7.10a) 
[291]. The angle between b1 and b2 at two fiber points P1 and P2 separated by an infinitesi￾mal distance dz is t dz, where t = t(z) is the geometrical torsion of fiber:
d dz b n / . = −τ (7.72)
Light traveling from P1 to P2, being linearly polarized at an angle θ1 with respect to b1 at 
point P1, will be polarized at an angle θ2 with respect to b2 at P2 [291]:
θ θτ 2 1 = − (z dz ) . (7.73)
Here, it is assumed that the fiber is so thin that linear birefringence bc due to the fiber 
curvature is negligible and the fiber is free of torsional stress (fiber twist). The geometric 
polarization rotation θ(z) over a longer distance z is then obtained by integration:
θθ τ ( ) = − ( ) ( ) ∫
0
0 .
z
z z dz (7.74)
The polarization evolution in the presence of both geometric polarization rotation and 
non-negligible linear birefringence as a result of the fiber curvature is again described by 
coupled mode equations [296]. The coupled mode equations for a fiber helix of constant 
pitch p and radius R are independent of z and obtained from the equations of a (straight) 
spun birefringent fiber by replacing 2ξ and bB in (7.40) with 2t and bc, respectively [189]. 
The principal axes of the linear birefringence bc coincide with the n and b axes of the 
Serret-Frenet frame and hence rotate at a constant rate t along the fiber, equivalent to the 
axes rotation in a spun fiber; albeit in a spun fiber, the rotation rate is commonly much 
higher. It should be noted that the reference coordinate system for the dielectric perturba￾tion tensor De of (7.8) and coupled mode equations of a helical fiber is Tang’s coordinate 
frame [189, 304]. The z-axis of Tang’s frame coincides with the t-axis of the Serret-Frenet 
frame (fiber direction), whereas the x and y axes rotate with respect to the n and b axes of 
Serret-Frenet frame at a rate of −t. Tang’s frame is thus equivalent to the laboratory frame 
in case of a spun fiber.100   ◾  Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
Consequently, a helically wound fiber supports, like a spun fiber, right-handed and left￾handed elliptical polarization modes of constant ellipticity. Their azimuths coincide with 
the n and b axes of the Serret-Frenet frame. The elliptical birefringence (rad/m) in the 
Serret-Frenet frame is [296, 305]
γ τβ ( )   = +    
1/2 2 2 2 . c (7.75)
The geometrical geometric torsion t equals
( )
π π
τ
π = = + 2 2 2
2 2 , 2
p p
p R s (7.76)
with s being the arc length (fiber length per turn): s = (p2 + (2pR)2
)
1/2. τ is positive for a 
right-handed helix, which means that a right circular SOP propagates faster than a left 
circular SOP. With the material parameters of fused silica fiber, the linear birefringence 
bc equals [305]
(σ ) β λ λ
 
∆= =  
 
2 2
2
1 1 cos
0.77 0.77 . c
k
r r
R R (7.77)
Here, r is fiber radius, and Rk is the radius of fiber curvature, Rk = π
      +        
2
1
2
p R
R
, and s is 
the pitch angle, s = atan(p/2pR). Analog to a spun fiber, the ellipticity of the modes is given 
by e = tan ψ, ψ = ±(1/2)atan(2τ/Db). The maximum torsion occurs at s = 45° (i.e., if p = 2πR) 
and amounts to t = 1/(2R) [189]. As an example, for a helix diameter 2R of 30 mm, a pitch 
p of 188.5 mm (at s = 45°), a fiber diameter 2r of 125 mm, and a wavelength of 1310 nm, 
one obtains a torsion (and geometrical polarization rotation) of τ = 33.3 rad/m and linear 
birefringence of Dbc = 2.55 rad/m. The elliptical birefringence is γ = 66.6 rad/m (~2τ), and 
the corresponding beat length is 94 mm.
For current sensing, an integer number N of helical windings of a low birefringent 
single-mode fiber are wound with constant pitch and radius, either on a cylindric carrier 
body with the current conductor along the cylinder axis as shown (Figure 7.10a) [189, 
306–308] or on a toroidal carrier with the conductor passing through the center of the 
torus (Figure 7.10b) [136, 309, 310]. The magneto-optic phase retardation of the two polar￾ization modes is then again unaffected by conductor movements and, provided Dbc ≪ 2τ, 
given by [305]
∆= ∆ φ τγ φ (2/ , ) ideal (7.78)Optical Fibers for Current Sensing ◾  101
with Dfideal = 2NVHz, equivalent to (7.66) for a spun fiber. Here, a cylindric carrier body has 
been assumed. It is obvious that a toroidal helical fiber configuration results in additional 
bent-induced fiber birefringence bb that influences the sensor scale factor in the same way 
as it does for a spun fiber [296].
Papp and Harms theoretically and experimentally characterized helically wound fibers 
for current sensing in form of liquid-core multimode fibers already in 1977, well before the 
above cited works on geometric polarization rotation in nonplanar solid fibers [306]. More 
than 10 years later, Maystre et al. reported what was presumably one of the first experimen￾tal demonstrations of a fused silica helical fiber current sensor [305]. That sensor consisted 
of a single turn of low birefringent fiber with a pitch angle of 30 degrees and an arc length 
of 17 cm on a cylindrical carrier. The fiber was operated as a Fabry-Pérot resonator which 
resulted in a fourfold enhancement of the magneto-optic sensitivity versus a single-pass 
sensor. The helix parameters and elliptical birefringence were chosen for a single-pass bire￾fringent phase retardation g of the near-circular polarization modes equal to p. Short et al. 
[309] investigated a toroidal helical current sensor with a torus radius of R = 150 mm, a 
carrier body radius of r = 5 mm, and 12 fiber turns. The experiments showed that it was 
important to wind the fiber with slight axial strain for well-defined principal axes of the 
linear birefringence from the fiber curvature. Zhang et al. presented theoretical and exper￾imental investigations of such sensors in further detail and showed how the geometrical 
parameters of the fiber helix affect the scale factor [310]. The final sensor had a toroidal 
quartz glass carrier (R = 90 mm, r = 6 mm) with a total of 35 helical windings that made 
six revolutions around the torus. The total fiber length was 21.3 m. The authors achieved 
scale factor stability to within ±0.1% between −40°C and 60°C at a current of 1200 A rms. 
It is interesting to note that already in 1978, the German company AEG filed a patent 
claiming straight and toroidal helical glass fiber coils. The patent did not consider the topo￾logical phase, however, but the helical geometry was to mimic a twisted fiber. To this end, 
the fiber ends were prevented from rotating, while the initially straight and torsion-free 
fiber was wound into a helix [311].
Advantages of helical fiber current sensors are that the sensing fiber is a simple low￾birefringent single-mode fiber and is less affected by temperature than spun fibers with 
stress-induced linear birefringence. The geometrical circular birefringence is fully 
temperature-independent. On the other hand, helical fiber current sensors are more 
FIGURE 7.10 Helically wound fiber on a cylindrical carrier (a) and on a toroidal carrier (b). The 
fiber helix is described by a moving trihedron of orthogonal unit vectors t, n, and b (Serret-Frenet 
frame).102   ◾  Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
complicated to manufacture [310] and offer less application flexibility. As a result, they 
have found little, if any, practical use.
7.7 HELICAL-CORE FIBERS
Helical-core fibers [312–316] are fabricated by spinning the preform of a single-mode fiber 
with an off-center core. As a result, the core follows a helical path. An ideal helical-core 
fiber is purely circularly birefringent (assuming that the core is circular and the fiber free 
of internal stresses). The circular birefringence is again the result of Berry’s topological 
phase, i.e., the equations of the previous section apply again but with vanishing linear 
birefringence. At a given pitch angle, the helical-core pitch can be made much smaller than 
the pitch of a helically wound fiber, which results in significantly stronger circular birefrin￾gence. Husey et al. reported the first helical core fibers in the mid-1980s [312]. The fibers 
had a cladding diameter of 110 mm and a core diameter of 20 mm and were fabricated 
with various core pitches. The circular beat lengths were as small as 4.3 mm at a pitch of 
8.6 mm and a wavelength of 633 nm. One must assume, though, that the small curvature 
radii of the helical core resulted in considerable loss. Birch investigated helical-core fibers 
with larger diameters ranging from 450 mm to 800 mm and core offsets from the fiber axis 
between 170 mm and 340 mm, respectively. The 800-mm-diameter fiber had a core pitch 
of 2 mm with a circular beat length of 3.6 mm at 633 nm [315].
In principle, the high circular birefringence of helical-core fibers should make them 
good candidates for fiber-optic current sensors. Nevertheless, apart from some exploratory 
research, little is known about the use of helical-core fibers for current sensing. Obviously, 
the core offset makes optical coupling more cumbersome, and large fiber diameters exclude 
small fiber coil diameters. In more recent times, helical-core optical fibers have found 
interest for use in fiber lasers [317]. Also, photonic crystal fibers with chiral micro-structures 
have been the subject of active research, [318] and references therein.
7.8 SPUN LOW BIREFRINGENCE FIBERS
Early single-mode fibers still had considerable intrinsic linear birefringence as a result of 
imperfect circular core shapes and frozen-in stress. Birefringent phase retardations as high 
as several hundred degrees per meter were not unusual [222, 233]. It was found, however, 
that spinning the preform during the fiber drawing process restored an average circular 
symmetry and effectively eliminated the birefringence [222, 319–324]. To this end, the spin 
pitch should be smaller than the linear beat length of the unspun fiber by a factor of 10 or 
more. Barlow et al. reduced the linear birefringence from 60 deg/m at 633 nm (LB = 6 m) 
to less than 1 deg/m by spinning with a pitch of 5 mm [222]. Already a few years earlier, 
in 1978, Schneider et al. at Siemens had reported unspun low-bi (low bi-refringence) fibers 
with retardations of less than 6°/m [200]. As the spinning occurs at a state of low glass vis￾cosity, low birefringence fibers have, other than twisted fibers, negligible intrinsic circular 
birefringence. Fiber spinning has also been employed to reduce polarization mode disper￾sion in telecom fibers [222, 325].
A low birefringence fiber comes close to an ideal fiber for current sensing but remains 
sensitive to bending-induced fiber birefringence and other external perturbations. Optical Fibers for Current Sensing ◾  103
Bending-induced birefringence is well-defined and rather stable, however, and in many 
cases can be kept sufficiently small (e.g., db < 20°) by accordingly choosing the diameter of 
the fiber coil and number of fiber windings. Here, fibers with a diameter of 80 μm instead 
of standard 125 μm are beneficial, as the birefringence varies in inverse proportion to the 
square of the diameter; eq. (7.17).
By contrast, other sources of birefringence such as stresses from the fiber coating, par￾ticularly at low temperature, and coil packaging often have poor repeatability and may 
introduce intolerable temperature dependence. Bohnert et al. eliminated coating and 
packaging related stress by inserting a bare low birefringence fiber, i.e., with the coating 
removed, into a thin lubricant-filled capillary of fused silica (320-mm inner diameter). 
Depending on the sensor application, the capillary was either embedded in a flexible strip 
of fiber-reinforced epoxy [326] or wound up to a coil and placed into a rigid coil housing 
(Figure 7.11) [327, 328]. In combination with measures for intrinsic temperature compensa￾tion (Section 8.6), the sensors were accurate to within ±0.1% between −40°C and 85°C.
7.9 THERMALLY ANNEALED FIBER COILS
In the 1980s and early 1990s, G. W. Day and co-workers at the National Bureau of Standards 
and Technology (now NIST) in Boulder, Colorado, developed thermal annealing for the 
removal of bending-induced linear birefringence in fused silica fiber coils [7, 193, 233, 329–
331]. The method was successfully applied to coils with diameters between 5 mm and 100 
mm and up to 200 and more fiber turns. To this end, the coils were placed into a circular 
channel in a ceramic annealing fixture and annealed in air at 850°C for 24 hours. The 
temperature was then gradually lowered to room temperature at a rate of 0.2°C/min. A 
complete annealing cycle lasted 3–4 days [193]. Shorter cycle times were reported in later 
work [331, 334, 335]. The fiber coating burned off during the initial temperature up-ramp 
(5°C/min). It was important to first loosen the coating by means of a solvent in order to 
avoid fiber breakage. The annealed coils were placed into a plastic housing with a circular 
aperture for the current conductor. The interior of the housing featured a channel similar 
to the one of the annealing fixture, within which the fiber windings resided in a viscous 
lubricant. The fibers were various types of single-mode communication fiber with cut-off 
FIGURE 7.11 Bare low birefringence fiber operated in reflection mode and packaged in a thin capil￾lary of fused silica; for simplicity, only one capillary winding is shown.104   ◾  Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
wavelengths between 600 and 900 nm. The annealing effectively removed the bending￾induced birefringence and partially also the intrinsic birefringence due to imperfect circu￾lar symmetry and embedded stress. (The latter birefringence corresponded to some tens of 
degrees per meter.) Pre-twisting the fibers also helped to reduce the intrinsic birefringence 
to near zero [233].
The technique was commercialized by the 3M company in the 1990s. The commercial 
coils were fully packaged and had polarizing fiber leads for interfacing. Reports showed 
Verdet-constant-limited performance between −20°C and 80°C with an error bar of less 
than ±0.2% [332–334].
Bohnert et al. reported inherently temperature-compensated coils of low birefringence 
fiber packaged and annealed in a thin capillary of fused silica with residual temperature 
dependence of the current signal of −0.14 × 10−4 K−1 between −35°C and 85°C that was about 
five times smaller than the temperature dependence of the Verdet constant [335–337].
It should be noted that annealing can lead to changes in the fiber’s spectral transmission 
and dispersion, shifts in the cut-off wavelength, and higher attenuation. The severity of the 
effects depends on the type and concentration of the fiber dopants. The modifications 
become more pronounced at annealing temperatures beyond 850°C [193]. Another phe￾nomenon, especially above 1000°C, is devitrification, i.e., the formation of crystallites. 
Consequences are substantial scattering losses and depolarization resulting in a reduction 
of the measured Faraday rotation. Furthermore, devitrification may severely diminish the 
mechanical strength of the fiber [331].
Thermal annealing has resulted in fiber coils with excellent performance over wide tem￾perature ranges and, with proper packaging, good reliability. Nevertheless, after spun 
highly birefringent fibers became commercially available, the method was largely aban￾doned. Downsides were the lengthy fabrication process and delicate handling and splicing 
of the brittle coils.
7.10 FLINT GLASS FIBERS
In the early 1990s, Kurosawa and co-workers developed flint glass fiber for current sensing 
in a collaboration between the Tokyo Electric Power Company and Hoya Corporation [31, 
32, 338–341]. Flint glass contains a high fraction of lead oxide which results in relatively high 
refractive indices between 1.5 and 2.0. Fibers from flint glass are of interest to current sens￾ing due to their small stress-optic coefficient that is about 740 times smaller than in fused 
silica fiber. At 633 nm, the corresponding numbers are 4.58 × 10−15 m2/N [339] and 3.40 × 
10−12 m2/N [194], respectively. Hence, bending-induced birefringence in flint glass fiber is 
negligibly small. Circular birefringence due to fiber twist is about two orders of magnitude 
lower than in fused silica fiber [339], and the near-infrared Faraday polarization rotation is 
about six times stronger [31]. Its variation as function of temperature is 1.0 × 10−4 K−1 and 
only slightly larger than in fused silica (0.7 × 10−4 K−1). The phase retardation of the fabri￾cated fibers due to intrinsic fiber birefringence corresponded to a few degrees per meter.
However, the optical loss (about 1 dB/m at 850 nm [32], 1.3 dB/m at 1550 nm [341]) is 
much larger than in fused silica fiber but in many cases still tolerable due to the relatively 
short fiber lengths. It should also be mentioned that flint glass fiber cannot readily be Optical Fibers for Current Sensing ◾  105
spliced to fused silica fiber. Typically, bulk analyzer optics interfaces the flint glass fiber 
coil with fused silica leads [32, 341]. FOCS with flint glass fiber have been successfully 
deployed in numerous electric power facilities in Japan (see, for example, [341] and refer￾ences therein). While flint-sensing fiber has had some success in Japan, commonly, other 
fiber solutions have been preferred elsewhere.
7.11 FIBERS WITH ENHANCED MAGNETO-OPTIC SENSITIVITY
The Faraday effect in fused silica fiber is relatively small. The polarization rotation is well 
sufficient at the high currents in electric power transmission and other high current appli￾cations, but precise measurement of small currents, e.g., in the milliampere range, would 
require an excessive number of fiber loops. Adding appropriate dopants to the fiber core 
can significantly enhance the Faraday effect. Suitable dopants include rare earth irons such 
as Eu3+, Ce3+, Tb3+, or Pr3+ [342–344] or nanoparticles, e.g., of cobalt [345], CdSe [346, 
347], or Gd2O3 [348]. Further dopants may be added to control the refractive index differ￾ence between the fiber core and cladding or to prevent dopant clustering at high concen￾trations. Compound glass fibers also exhibit an enhanced Faraday effect [31, 32, 349–352]. 
Table 7.1 lists the Verdet constants and optical attenuation (if specified) for a selection of 
TABLE 7.1 Doped Fibers and Compound Glass Fibers with Enhanced Magneto-Optic Sensitivity
Host Material / 
Glass Type Dopants
Verdet Constant 
(rad T−1 m−1)
Optical Loss 
(dB/m)
Wavelength 
(nm) References
Doped fibers
Fused silica Tb3+ −24.5 – 1053 [343]
Fused silica Tb3+ −15.5 8 1300 [38]
Fused silica Eu3+ −4.56
−3.43
−1.37
−0.98
– 660
802
1310
1550
[344]
Flint glass CdSe quantum dots 7.2 – 633 [347]
Alumino-silicate Gd2O3 nano particles 3.19 – 650 [348]
Compound glass 
fibers
Schott F7 (93 mol% 
SiO2)
– ~8.3
~5.2
0.77
0.49
633
789
[349]
Tellurite glass 
(multimode fiber)
– −28
–
–3.5
2.6
633
980
1550
[350]
TZN glass (75TeO2-
20ZnO-5Na2O)
– 26.1 – 633 [39]
Flint glass fiber 
(undoped)
– ~20
~11
3.2
–11.3 633
850
1550
[31, 32]
For comparison
Fused silica fiber – 3.25
1.83
0.54
negligible 633
825
1523
[28, 30]106   ◾  Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
doped fibers and compound glass fibers as well as of fused silica fiber for comparison. 
Note that doped fibers have negative Verdet constants due to the paramagnetic nature of 
the dopants. Commonly, the stronger Faraday effect is accompanied by significant optical 
loss. Hence, higher signal noise increasingly eats up the precision gains as the fiber length 
increases. Beyond a certain length, fused silica fiber will again be superior. For a Schott F7 
glass fiber having relatively low attenuation (see Table 7.1), this length is about 50 m at 633 
nm and a detection bandwidth of 1 Hz [349]. The corresponding lengths of doped fibers 
with higher attenuation can be much shorter, though.
7.12 MULTIMODE FIBERS
Early researchers have also explored the Faraday effect in graded-index multimode fibers 
[353, 354]. Multimode fiber sensors may incorporate other low-cost components such as an 
LED light source or thin film polarizers and allow for an economic sensor solution. On the 
other hand, internal birefringence, modal dispersion, and mode coupling due to internal 
and external perturbations tend to reduce the degree of polarization at the fiber end and 
make such sensors rather prone to environmental disturbances. Corresponding sensors 
can be adequate for some diagnostic and monitoring purposes but are commonly not an 
option for accurate and reliable current measurement. Wessel et al., for instance, used a 
straight piece of multimode fiber to monitor magnetic field pulses of a flux compression 
generator with peak fields of 160 T and rise times of 3 T/ns [355]. Shiyu et al. investigated 
the Faraday effect in a Tellurite glass multimode fiber [350].
7.13 LIQUID CORE FIBERS
Without going into detail, it is worth mentioning that early works also explored liquid core 
fibers for current measurement [356, 357]. To this end, Papp and Harms filled thin glass 
capillaries with hexachlorobutadiene (C4Cl6) as a magneto-optic liquid. The linear bire￾fringence associated with bending the capillaries into a coil was suppressed by configuring 
the capillary along a helical path as mentioned further above or in form of orthogonal 
loops [201, 306]. Frenkel et al. arranged four straight tubes containing toluene or mineral 
oil along the sides of a square around the current conductor with ortho-conjugate prisms 
for beam steering at the corners [358].
7.14 MICROFIBER COILS
Microfibers and nanofibers (MNF) [359, 360] are typically produced by tapering a section 
of standard single-mode fiber via heating and stretching to a diameter of a few micro￾meters or less (Figure 7.12) [361]. In the process, the dopants of the original core diffuse out 
over the taper cross-section. The taper then represents the new core. A significant fraction 
of the optical power propagates as an evanescent wave outside of the taper. MNF have been 
demonstrated as sensors for refractive index, humidity, biochemical parameters, gases, 
and physical quantities such as temperature, acceleration, rotation, or acoustic waves [360, 
361]. Also, current sensors based on the Faraday effect in micro-fiber coils have been inves￾tigated [362–365]. Micro-fibers enable millimeter-sized fiber coils with potential detection 
bandwidths in the GHz range due to short transit time of the light. Challenges have been Optical Fibers for Current Sensing ◾  107
the birefringence and stress-free packaging of the coils [361]. Chen et al. demonstrated a 
spun birefringent microfiber coil with a fiber diameter of 2 mm, a spin rate of 24 turns/cm, 
and embedded linear birefringence of 10−3. The latter was produced by side polishing the 
original fiber. The coil consisted of 7.5 turns around a 1-mm-thick electric wire and had a 
sensitivity of 8.6 mrad/A [363]. In related work, microfiber coils were also demonstrated as 
indirect current sensors, where the current produced, via ohmic heating, thermal optical 
phase shifts in the fiber. Commonly, the fibers were operated as resonators or in an inter￾ferometer [366–372]. Given the thermal detection principle, the sensitivity decreased with 
increasing current frequency [366].
FIGURE 7.12 Optical micro-fiber with an external medium such as a liquid or gas (grey) represent￾ing the cladding (adapted from Chen et al. [361].)108 DOI: 10.1201/9781003100324-11
CHAPTER 8
Fiber-Optic Current Sensors
8.1 OVERVIEW
Over the years, researchers have explored many versions of all-fiber optical current sensors 
(FOCS) based on the Faraday effect. Naturally, there are different ways to categorize the 
sensors. Here, we group them as follows:
• Basic polarimetric FOCS
• Transmissive configurations
• Reflective configurations
• Polarimetric FOCS with biasing Faraday rotator
• Sagnac interferometer current sensors
• Phase-modulated Sagnac interferometers
• Sagnac interferometers with 3×3 fiber directional coupler
• FOCS with polarization-rotated reflection
• Phase-modulated sensors
• Sensors with static phase bias
• Fabry-Pérot and light recirculating current sensors
• Fiber laser current sensors
• Integrated optical current sensors
• Faraday effect in fiber Bragg gratings
• Multiplexed and distributed current sensingFiber-Optic Current Sensors ◾  109
8.2 BASIC POLARIMETRIC FOCS
8.2.1 Transmissive Operation Mode
The earliest all-fiber current sensors substituted the discrete Faraday sensor elements of 
Chapter 5 by an optical fiber coil, again employing polarimetric detection schemes such 
as illustrated in Figure 5.1. S. Yoshikawa and A. Ueki from the Nippon Selfoc Company 
were, in 1968, among the first to propose the concept [373]. Others followed in subsequent 
years [171, 196, 214, 226, 320, 374–376]. As already discussed, bend-induced fiber bire￾fringence proved to be a serious obstacle to reliable current measurement. Furthermore, 
mechanical perturbations of the fiber coil and its fiber leads, e.g., by bending and vibration, 
caused prohibitively large signal perturbations. Similarly, as in the case of bulk-optic sen￾sors [136, 143, 146], configurations with counter-propagating light helped to improve the 
situation, albeit at the cost of higher complexity (Figure 8.1). By taking the difference of the 
two signals, the non-reciprocal Faraday effect doubles, whereas reciprocal effects tend to 
cancel out [136, 377–380]. Note, however, that the light propagation in the sensing fiber is 
fully reciprocal only at zero current. Hence, the compensation becomes less effective with 
increasing Faraday phase shifts. Fang et al. reported detailed theoretical and experimental 
studies of the matter for different types of sensing fiber [378, 379]. Over time, transmissive 
polarimetric sensors were largely abandoned. Not least, accurate measurement of direct 
currents (dc) has remained elusive for simple designs. It is worth mentioning that closed￾loop detection for polarimetric sensors was also explored, where an additional wire coil 
compensated the polarization rotation by the primary current, as in the case of the mag￾netic field sensor in Figure 5.2 [381]. Heterodyne detection schemes with a frequency or 
intensity modulated light sources were reported in [382, 383].
8.2.2 Reflective Operation Mode
A sensor coil operated in reflection mode (also called in-line configuration, Figure 8.2) sim￾plifies the sensor setup, and the free end of the sensing fiber allows for winding the fiber 
around the conductor without opening the electric circuit [205, 227, 253, 257, 286, 384–390]. 
Often, the sensors employ a Faraday rotator mirror that rotates the polarization azimuth by 
90°. As a result, phase shifts on the forward path due to linear birefringence cancel out on the 
return path (this is strictly true only at zero current, however), and the rotated polarization 
significantly reduces sensitivity to vibration [384, 385, 389]; see [205] for a theoretical analy￾sis. Pistoni et al. measured 30 dB rejection of mechanical disturbances [384]. Note, however, 
FIGURE 8.1 Polarimetric all-fiber current sensor with counter-propagating beams for vibration 
compensation [377–380].110   ◾  Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
that quenching of the Faraday effect in standard single-mode fibers by bend-induced linear 
birefringence continues to persist.
8.3 POLARIMETRIC FOCS WITH BIASING FARADAY ROTATOR
The sensor configuration is similar as in the previous section with the difference that a 
22.5°-Faraday rotator in front of the fiber coil rotates the polarization by 2 × 22.5° on a 
roundtrip of the light, that is, the rotator introduces a 90°-phase bias between the left and 
right circular constituents (Figure 8.3) [31, 261, 391–394]. The entry polarizer can then also 
serve as an exit polarizer (analyzer), as the rotator makes a 45°-relative analyzer orienta￾tion obsolete. The sensor in Figure 8.3 utilizes a birefringent prism instead of a polarizer to 
generate two anti-phase signals. Insensitive single-mode fibers guide the light to and from 
the sensor head. It is obvious that the concept results in a simple overall design. Kurosawa 
et al. at Tokyo Electric Power Co. developed a corresponding sensor with flint glass sensing 
fiber that was subsequently commercialized by Adamant Kogyo Co., Japan [31, 393].
8.4 SAGNAC INTERFEROMETER CURRENT SENSORS
8.4.1 Sagnac Interferometer with Non-Reciprocal Phase Modulation
The 1980s saw the development of the first optical fiber gyroscopes as alternatives to 
mechanical and laser gyroscopes for applications, e.g., in navigation systems. Fiber gyros 
utilize the Sagnac effect in a coil of polarization maintaining fiber (PMF) to measure rota￾tion velocities. The two counter-propagating light waves in the coil accumulate a differential 
FIGURE 8.2 Polarimetric FOCS operated in refection mode; BS: beam splitter, FRM: Faraday rota￾tor mirror [384, 385].
FIGURE 8.3 Polarimetric FOCS with 22.5°-Faraday rotator for phase biasing (lenses not shown) 
(adapted from US patent 7,176,671 [392].)Fiber-Optic Current Sensors ◾  111
phase shift in proportion to the rotation velocity about the coil normal. The fundamentals 
of fiber gyros are described in [395, 396] and references therein. It was soon recognized that 
fiber gyroscopes could easily be adapted to current sensing by replacing the PMF with a 
circularly birefringent or low birefringence fiber and additional quarter-wave retarders, as 
illustrated in Figure 8.4 [336, 398–409].
Typically, the light source is a temperature-stabilized 1310-nm or 1550-nm superlumi￾nescent diode (SLED) with a spectral width of 30–40 nm, FWHM. Two linearly polarized 
light waves (here parallel to x) travel through PM fiber leads to the fiber coil. (In this con￾text, the term wave represents the whole spectrum of waves emitted by the source.) Quarter￾wave retarders at the entrances to the coil convert the linear polarization states into circular 
polarizations of equal handedness. Upon leaving the coil, the retarders convert the circular 
polarizations back to linear states, again parallel to x. The linear SOP interfere in the coil￾side 1×2 fiber coupler. The interference intensity from the reciprocal port of that coupler 
represents the optical signal. Initially, loops of single-mode fiber, the loop normal at 45° to 
x, served as all-fiber retarders. With appropriate loop diameter, the bend-induced birefrin￾gence gave 90°-phase retardation [410, 411, 402]. Later, short sections of PM fiber were 
introduced as more convenient and reliable solutions [404, 336].
8.4.1.1 Open-Loop Operation
The two counter-propagating light waves accumulate a differential magneto-optic phase 
shift given by
  2VNI. (8.1)
Here, the fiber coil is assumed as ideal, i.e., with a sensing fiber free of linear birefringence 
and perfect quarter-wave retarders. The Verdet constant V is about 1.0 mrad/A at 1310 nm 
and 0.7 mrad/A at 1550 nm [7]. Without further measures, the interference signal is
I I        
 0/ c 2 1 os  . (8.2)
FIGURE 8.4 Sagnac interferometer current sensor (© 2002 IEEE. Reprinted, with permission from 
[336].)112   ◾  Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
To generate an output that varies (at small signals) linearly with Δϕ, a modulator intro￾duces an additional differential phase modulation ϕ(t) of the two waves with amplitude ϕm
and angular frequency ϖm = 2pνm (Figure 8.5) [395]:
  t t    m m sin .   (8.3)
Simple phase modulators consist of a piezoceramic disk (PZT) with a few fiber loops attached 
to it. The modulator is located at one end of the Sagnac loop, and, ideally, half the modulation 
period corresponds to the transit time t of the light through the loop, i.e., νm = 1/(2t). 
FIGURE 8.5 Sagnac sensor with non-reciprocal phase modulation (open-loop operation): (a) 
Without applied current (Df = 0), the operating point of the interferometer (red) is at the maximum 
of the cosine interference function, and the output signal is modulated at frequency 2ϖm; (b) With 
applied current (Df > 0), the 1st harmonic signal in the sensor output (red curve) is proportional to 
sin(Df).Fiber-Optic Current Sensors ◾  113
The modulation of the cw and ccw waves is then anti-phase, which maximizes the net mod￾ulation amplitude ϕm. This kind of phase bias modulation is commonly referred to as non￾reciprocal. The interferometer output is now
I I        m mt  
 0/ c 2 1 os    , (8.4)
which can be expanded in a series of Bessel functions:
I I J J m k t
k
     k m     m













 



 0 0
1
2 2
1 2   cos c 2   os 
2 2 1
1
2 1
k
J k k m mt


         






  




	

  cos sin  .
(8.5)
The magneto-optic phase shift Df then follows from the ratio of the signals at frequencies 
ϖm and 2ϖm:
 


   
 
 
 







 a
J
J
I
I
m
m
m
m
tan . 2
1 2
(8.6)
At small currents (Df ≪ 1), the first harmonic signal I(ϖm) varies in proportion to the cur￾rent. Typically, ϕm is chosen at the first maximum of J1(ϕm), i.e., ϕm = 1.84 rad, which ascer￾tains the best signal-to-noise ratio. As the modulation amplitude of PZT modulators can 
significantly vary with temperature, the ratio of the signals at the 2nd and 4th harmonic is 
often utilized as feedback to stabilize the amplitude ϕm [412]:
I
I
J
J
m
m
m
m
2
4
2
4




 
    
 . (8.7)
If the magneto-optic phase shift is alternating at frequency νac, the first harmonic signal 
splits in two side bands at frequencies νm ± νac. Open-loop operation is straightforward 
to implement, but the sinusoidal response limits, like in polarimetric sensors, the usable 
measurement range. Moreover, the piezoelectric modulators are commonly operated on a 
resonance much lower than the proper frequency νp = 1/(2t) of the Sagnac loop. For exam￾ple, the PZT frequency may be on the order of 100 kHz, whereas νp is 1 MHz for a Sagnac 
loop length of 100 m and correspondingly higher at shorter lengths. For compensation, 
the modulators must be driven at correspondingly higher amplitude to obtain the desired 
modulation depth of ϕm = 1.84 rad. For these reasons and others, high-end gyros and cor￾responding current sensors work with electro-optic modulators, in particular integrated￾optic lithium niobate modulators and closed loop detection circuits. Still, PZT-based gyros 
with closed-detection are also known [413].114   ◾  Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
8.4.1.2 Closed-Loop Operation
Electro-optic modulators provide much larger bandwidths than the PZT modulators of 
open-loop detection circuits. (Details on the lithium niobate electro-optic modulators will 
follow further below.) Typically, the modulators are combined with all-digital signal pro￾cessing and generate a square-wave phase bias modulation with amplitude of ±p/2 at the 
proper frequency νp (Figure 8.6) [395, 414]. Hence, at zero current (Df = 0), the output 
signal exhibits a flat plateau with a series of spikes at intervals of τ (Figure 8.6a). At finite 
current (Df > 0) and open-loop operation, the plateau splits into lower and upper plateaus 
with a separation proportional to J1sin(Df) (Figure 8.6b). At closed-loop operation, the 
signal processor generates, in addition to the bias modulation, a step-wise phase ramp 
synchronous with the bias modulation that compensates the current-induced phase shift 
Df (Figure 8.6c). At constant Df, the average slope of the phase ramp is ∂ϕramp/∂t = −(1/t)Df, 
i.e., a step of the ramp having a width t equals −Df. Hence, the ramp slope is a measure for 
FIGURE 8.6 Sagnac sensor with digital signal processing and square-wave phase modulation at 
frequency νp = 1/(2τ): (a) no applied current, Df = 0; (b) Df > 0, open-loop operation; (c) Df > 
0, closed-loop operation: a digital phase ramp with steps of -Df compensates the current-induced 
phase shift Df.Fiber-Optic Current Sensors ◾  115
the current. Once the ramp voltage reaches its positive or negative limits, the processor ini￾tiates a 2p-phase reset. Note that Figure 8.6 only illustrates the very basics of the method. 
Numerous modifications and upgrades have been reported, such as multiple level modula￾tion and additional feedback loops, most of which aim to reduce potential errors, e.g., due 
to thermal drifts, dead zones, and others; see [415–418] for a few examples.
As mentioned, eq. (8.2) assumes ideal sensor components. The influence of imperfec￾tions such as non-ideal retarders and sensing fibers has been investigated in [336, 406, 411, 
419] and will be discussed in context of a sensor version operated in reflective mode fur￾ther below. An advantage of a Sagnac interferometer is that, other than in polarimetric 
sensors, changes in any reciprocal circular birefringence does not affect the signal. Likewise, 
relative polarizer/analyzer alignment drifts cannot occur. In combination with non-recip￾rocal phase modulation, Sagnac current sensors are therefore well suited for dc. On the 
other hand, Sagnac sensors still have significant sensitivity to dynamic mechanical pertur￾bations such as vibrations, particularly if the perturbations occur near the fiber loop ends 
where the time delay between the counter-propagating waves is largest. Moreover, the 
Sagnac effect translates any rotational movement of the sensor into a signal perturbation. 
Special fiber winding can eliminate the effect, however [276]. Sagnac current sensors with 
non-reciprocal phase modulation became largely obsolete after the invention of a more 
attractive sensor version with polarization-rotated reflection in the early 1990s.
8.4.2 Sagnac Interferometer with 3×3 Fiber Coupler
Sagnac interferometers with a 3×3 fiber coupler instead of a 2×2 coupler provide three 
signals with mutual phase differences of 120°. Appropriate processing results in a small 
signal output that varies linearly with the applied current. Hence, a 3×3 coupler is a simple 
passive alternative to an active phase modulator. In the 1980s, Sheem and others demon￾strated Sagnac fiber gyros with 3×3 couplers [420–424]. Corresponding Sagnac current 
sensors soon followed [425–432]. Figure 8.7 illustrates an implementation with a polariza￾tion-maintaining 3×3 coupler that otherwise stays close to the configuration of Figure 8.6
[432]. A 3×3 matrix of coupling coefficients, κm,n, n, m = 1,2,3, relates the optical field Eo,m
at output port m of the coupler to the input fields Ei,n. The coefficients of an ideal lossless 
coupler with (1/3)-power-splitting-ratios are [420–423]
mn    1 3 / exp  i m  / , 2  n (8.8)
mn    1 3 / exp  i m / . 6  n (8.9)
If light is sent into one of the three input ports, the two cross-coupled transmitted fields 
(m ≠ n) are phase shifted with respect to the directly transmitted field (m = n) by 120°. It is 
then straightforward to show that for input light intensity I0 (I0 = 1, middle port), the three 
interference signals Ii
, i = 1,2,3, are (Figure 8.8) [425, 426]
I1    2 9/ c   1 os , (8.10)116   ◾  Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
I2    2 9 1    120  
  / cos  , (8.11)
I3    2 9 1    120  
  / cos  . (8.12)
The difference of I2 and I3 is proportional to sin Df:
I I 2 3     2 9/ s 3 in. (8.13)
It is obvious that the method only works if the two counter-propagating waves have circu￾lar (or near circular) polarization in the sensing fiber. The effect of non-circular states has 
been investigated by Rochford et al. [426]. As an alternative to the quarter-wave retarders 
in Figure 8.7 for generating the circular states, Haywood et al. at the University of Sydney 
reported a polarizing spun high birefringence fiber [429, 431]. In the window between the 
two cut-off wavelengths of the first order higher mode, the fiber guides only one of the two 
circular polarization states, while the other state leaks out. Hence, apart from the sensing 
fiber, all-fiber components, including the 3×3 coupler, can be from standard single-mode 
fiber.
It should be noted that the optical paths of the two counter-propagating waves in the 
3×3 coupler are not reciprocal. Since the amplitudes and phases of the transmitted fields of 
a practical coupler vary with temperature, the non-reciprocity can lead to prohibitive 
errors [429]. Basset, Hayward, et al. have addressed the problem by sending light into all 
three input ports of the coupler and recording all together nine interference signals. 
Appropriate signal processing then cancelled coupler imperfections to first order 
(Figure 8.9) [428–431]. To this end, the light source (a 1540 nm SLD or 1532 nm superfluo￾rescent fiber source) was pulsed with a pulse width of 200 ns and a repetition period of 
5 ms, and its light coupled into a 1×3 fiber coupler followed by fiber delay coils (of 70 m and 
140 m lengths). Then, derived from each initial emitted pulse, three pulses were generated, 
separated in time due to the delay cause by the fiber coils, were then fed into the 
FIGURE 8.7 Sagnac interferometer current sensor with 3×3 PM fiber coupler (adapted from US 
patent 7,492,977B2 [432].)Fiber-Optic Current Sensors ◾  117
source-side ports of the 3×3 coupler. Hence, each of the three returning interference sig￾nals consisted of a train of three pulses. Further delay lines (210 m and 420 m) separated 
the trains, and a single avalanche photodiode recorded the nine time-separated pulses. At 
a current of 400 A, the measurement error was less than ±0.2% between −25°C and 8°C 
[429, 431]. Sensing fiber coils with 100 and 300 windings were mentioned [429]. The tem￾perature dependence of the Verdet constant was removed via a temperature measurement. 
The sensor was commercialized by a University of Sydney spin-off (Smart Digital Optics, 
SDO, founded in 2004) for applications in electric power transmission and industry.
8.5 FIBER-OPTIC CURRENT SENSORS WITH POLARIZATION￾ROTATED REFLECTION
8.5.1 RFOCS with Non-Reciprocal Phase Modulation
Reflective fiber-optic current sensors (RFOCS) with non-reciprocal phase modulation, 
also referred to as in-line Sagnac interferometer current sensors, were derived from the 
phase-modulated Sagnac current sensor and arguably have become the most successful 
type of FOCS. At least half a dozen companies have developed corresponding commercial 
FIGURE 8.9 Sagnac interferometer current sensor with non-reciprocity compensation of the 3×3 
fiber coupler (according to Matar et al. [431].)
FIGURE 8.8 Signals I1, I2, and I3 as a function of the Faraday phase shift Δϕ.118   ◾  Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
products. The underlying technique was first demonstrated by K. Goto in 1972 in the con￾text of traveling wave light intensity modulators [433]. In 1987 A. Enokihara demonstrated 
a corresponding magnetic-optic field sensor, albeit with static phase biasing and a 50-mm 
long glass rod as Faraday medium [434]. In the early 1990s Frosio et al. at the University 
of Neuchatel, Switzerland [435, 436] and, independently, Blake et al. [437], then at Texas 
A&M University, demonstrated the first fiber-optic current sensors of this type, with both 
static and dynamic phase biasing. Further development by Blake et al. [309, 404–406, 438] 
and Bohnert et al. at ABB [326, 336, 439, 440] led to the first commercial applications in the 
2000s. Since then, numerous further works on various sensor aspects have been published, 
e.g., [251, 254, 265, 266, 441–457].
Figure 8.10 illustrates a typical sensor setup [266]. Light from a broadband source first 
passes a depolarizer (not shown) and a fiber polarizer and then excites at a 45°-fiber splice 
the two orthogonal polarization modes of a PM fiber. A fiber-optic quarter-wave retarder at 
the near end of the sensing fiber coil converts the linear SOP into left and right circular 
polarizations. Upon reflection at the coil’s far end, the circular waves swap their polarization 
states, i.e., left circular becomes right circular, and vice versa. The fiber retarder converts the 
returning circular waves back to orthogonal linear SOP, the polarization directions of which 
are also swapped versus the ones of the forward traveling waves. Finally, the orthogonal 
waves interfere at the fiber polarizer, and the interference signal is recorded at a photodiode. 
An integrated-optic birefringence modulator in a closed-loop circuit modulates the differ￾ential phase of the orthogonal waves, analog to the modulation of a Sagnac interferometer. 
The roundtrip Faraday phase shift is twice as large as in a Sagnac interferometer:
  4VNI. (8.14)
Typically, the modulator is an integrated-optic lithium niobate modulator [458, 459]. 
Piezoelectric modulators in combination with open-loop detection have also been used, 
FIGURE 8.10 Fiber-optic current sensor with polarization-rotated reflection (© 2019 IEEE. 
Reprinted with permission from [266].)Fiber-Optic Current Sensors ◾  119
however, e.g., in [436, 405, 336], but for the same modulation depth the modulator must 
provide much stronger actuation than in a Sagnac sensor. The retarder is commonly a 
short piece of appropriately oriented PM fiber with a length corresponding to a quarter of 
a beat length. Retarders from elliptical-core fiber are preferred due to their comparatively 
low temperature dependence. Retarders from polarization-transforming fibers have also 
been demonstrated [254, 276]. It should be noted that the orthogonal modes of the PM fiber 
link accumulate a differential optical path difference much longer than the source coher￾ence length, i.e., the modes are incoherent when they arrive at the fiber coil, but they regain 
their coherence on the return trip due to the swapped polarization states. The differential 
group delay per meter of PM fiber is typically several hundred mm, whereas the source 
coherence length is about 30 mm.
It is obvious that the integrated-optic modulator is a critical component of the optical 
circuit. The waveguide is produced by in-diffusion of titanium into a lithium niobate sub￾strate, which increases both the material’s ordinary and extraordinary indices of refrac￾tion. The substrate is either x-cut or z-cut (that is, the crystallographic x-axis or z-axis is 
perpendicular to the plane of the substrate), and the waveguide is in the y-direction. 
Naturally, the crystal cut determines the arrangement of the electrodes relative to the 
waveguide. Particularly for z-cut substrates, the electrodes reside on transparent and con￾ducting buffer layers to prevent optical loss and buildup of pyroelectric charges on the 
z-faces. The half-wave voltage, i.e., the voltage to produce a p-phase shift between the 
orthogonal polarization modes, commonly amounts to a few volts; for details, see [458, 
459] and references therein. A parameter important to the FOCS signal stability is the 
polarization extinction ratio (PER) of the modulator and its stability versus temperature 
and time. The PER is defined as
PER d  B 10 10   0 log / P P , c (8.15)
where P0 is the optical power injected into a given polarization mode, and Pc is the power 
cross-coupled into the orthogonal mode. Cross-coupling mainly occurs at the fiber-to￾waveguide junctions. By comparison, cross-coupling within the waveguide is negligible. It 
can be shown that crosstalk at the source-side junction is largely uncritical, whereas cross￾talk at the coil-side junction enhances the apparent magneto-optic phase shift but also 
generates incoherent light that does not contribute to the signal [449, 454, 460]. If the sen￾sor signal is to remain stable to within 0.1%, the modulator PER must remain above 32 dB 
within the optoelectronic unit’s temperature range of operation, e.g., from −25°C to 65°C. 
Off-the-shelf modulators from the telecom industry were found to have an extinction ratio 
of only around 23–26 dB at room temperature. Design adaptions and improved assembly 
procedures consistently increased the PER of the fiber-to-waveguide junctions to values 
above 35 dB between −25°C and 65°C [460]. In contrast to PER changes, variations in the 
modulator’s half-wave voltage with temperature do not affect the signal, as the closed-loop 
signal processing continuously recalibrates the voltage in terms of optical phase via the 
2p-resets of the phase ramp.120   ◾  Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
FOCS with polarization-rotated reflection have resolved persistent shortcomings of ear￾lier sensor types:
• The sensor is highly immune to mechanical shock and vibration [336, 405]. Compared 
to the Sagnac sensor of Figure 8.4, for instance, the sensitivity of the PM lead fiber is 
inherently lower by factors of 100 to 1000 depending on the type of PM fiber, as the 
differential phase of the orthogonal waves is much harder to disturb than the phases 
of the two individual waves of the Sagnac sensor. Moreover, in both cases counter￾propagating beams help to cancel phase perturbations down to a level determined by 
the location and frequency spectrum of the disturbance.
• The signal processing technique derived from fiber gyros provides high accuracy not 
only for ac but also dc due to superior scale factor and zero-point stability.
• Closed-loop detection results in a linear signal up to magneto-optic phase shifts of at 
least ±p, corresponding to about ±780 kA at 1310 nm for single fiber loop.
• The fiber retarder can be adjusted for balancing the temperature dependence of the 
fiber coil. This way, sensor accuracy to within ±0.1% between −40°C and 85°C has 
been achieved without an extra temperature sensor (Section 8.6) [265, 266, 336].
• A minimum of optical components makes possible economic sensor fabrication.
Figure 8.11 shows an alternative implementation of the optical circuit [326, 439]. Here, a 
MIOC (multi-functional integrated optical chip) lithium niobate modulator known from 
fiber gyroscopes replaces the birefringence modulator of Figure 8.10. The modulator wave￾guides are produced by proton exchange with subsequent high temperature annealing 
[458, 459]. Replacement of lithium ions by protons increases the extraordinary index and 
leaves the ordinary index essentially unchanged. As a result, the waveguides are polarizing 
FIGURE 8.11 Reflective fiber-optic current sensor with gyro-type modulator (MIOC); PMC: polar￾ization-maintaining fiber coupler (© 2007 IEEE. Reprinted with permission from [326].)Fiber-Optic Current Sensors ◾  121
with a PER typically above 50 dB. A fiber polarizer is no longer needed. A polarization￾maintaining fiber coupler, PMC (alternatively a 2×1 integrated-optic splitter), with a 
90°-splice in one of the two fiber branches after the MIOC combines the two parallel linear 
SOP to two orthogonal SOP in the PM fiber link to the coil. Light waves that have traveled 
on reciprocal paths upon their return to the modulator interfere at the waveguide junction. 
By contrast, light waves on non-reciprocal paths return with SOP that are blocked by the 
modulator. Moreover, they accumulate a relative path delay that renders them incoherent 
[326]. The configuration makes it possible to operate a FOCS with a virtually unmodified 
fiber gyro module. Other than with a birefringence modulator, there is no risk of signal 
deterioration by insufficient modulator PER, as the modulator blocks returning parasite 
waves or they become incoherent. For the same reasons, the configuration also enables the 
use of PM fiber connectors with modest PER in the PM fiber arms after the MIOC without 
negative effect on the signal stability [454].
A certain drawback of the above sensor configurations is the need for a PM fiber between 
the opto-electronic unit and the fiber coil. Distances well above 100 m are preferably 
avoided. Also, a PM fiber makes fiber splicing in the field or the use of fiber connectors 
more demanding or may exclude connectors altogether in high-end applications [454, 
460]. The sensor version of the next section is an alternative that works with a static phase 
bias and employs a standard single-mode fiber link.
8.5.2 RFOCS with Static Phase Bias
Static phase biasing by means of a quarter-wave retarder is an economic alternative to an 
integrated-optic phase modulator. In the basic setup, the orthogonal polarization modes 
returning from the fiber coil reflect off a beam splitter and pass the biasing retarder plate￾let before they interfere at a polarizer [435]. Commonly, sensors with static phase biasing 
are less accurate, though, as packaging stress and its variation with temperature and time 
may result in bias drift and changes in fringe visibility. This particularly concerns dc 
measurement but, to a lesser degree, is also true for ac. In a sensor with one fiber loop, a 
bias uncertainty of 1°, for instance, corresponds to a dc current uncertainty of 4.3 kA at 
1310 nm.
To address the issue, Bohnert et al. have developed a sensor that employs an integrated￾optic 1×3-polarization-splitter (IOPS) for passive interrogation of the coil and demon￾strated accuracy for AC between −40°C and 85°C on par with corresponding phase 
modulated sensors [266, 328]. Figure 8.12 depicts the sensor setup. The depolarized light 
from a SLED travels through a single-mode fiber to the IOPS, which is part of the sensor 
head assembly. A thin polarizer platelet at the source-side facet of the IOPS (P1, 25-m 
thick) polarizes the light at 45° to the principal axes of a short PM fiber link to the coil, i.e., 
both orthogonal polarization modes of the fiber are again excited with equal amplitude. A 
principal fiber axis is orthogonal to the splitter plane. After a roundtrip through the coil, 
the two orthogonal modes again return with swapped polarization states and interfere at 
polarizers P1 and P2. The two interference signals travel through single-mode fibers to the 
opto-electronics unit. A quarter-wave retarder platelet (QWR) in the source channel of the 
IOPS introduces the p/2-phase-bias between the interfering waves.122   ◾  Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
The IOPS is derived from a commercial 1×3-planar-lightwave-circuit (PLC) splitter 
from the telecom industry with waveguides produced in a glass substrate by means of elec￾tric field-assisted ion exchange [461]. Even though the waveguides are weakly birefringent, 
the roundtrip differential phase retardation between the orthogonal polarization states in 
the IOPS is small (less than 2° – 3°) due to the polarization-rotated reflection at the coil 
end. The quartz QWR platelet is of zeroth or first order (the corresponding thicknesses are 
38.7 m and 116 m, respectively) and resides in a recess in the source-side IOPS facet. 
Embedding in a soft gel prevents stress from affecting the bias; see [328] for further details.
The difference of the two (pre-normalized) photodiode signals I1, I2 divided by their sum 
gives a normalized final signal from which the magneto-optic AC phase shift Df is derived 
[328]:
S k  K cos /       2 sin ,    (8.16)
with θ = (θ1 + θ2)/2 and Δ θ = θ1 − θ2. Here, θ1, θ2 are the deviations from a perfect p/2-
phase bias in the two channels. Deviations originate in the QWR temperature dependence 
((∂θi
/∂T) = −0.0274 deg/°C for a first-order retarder) and residual IOPS waveguide contri￾butions. The parameter k is given as
k K     VNI    
 


1 4 2 1
cos s   in  / , (8.17)
where K = Ks Kc is the fringe contrast with contributions Ks
 and Kc from the IOPS and fiber 
coil, respectively (Kc = 1 for an ideal coil). For small magneto-optic phase shifts (Df ≪ 1) 
and θ1 = θ2, (8.16) reduces to
S K      . (8.18)
The phase angle θ and hence the dc offset of S vary linearly with temperature. (The varia￾tion of Ks
 is negligible.) In case of AC currents, the dc offset can be utilized to compensate 
any thermal scale factor variation associated with the IOPS [328]. An important benefit of 
FIGURE 8.12 Reflective fiber-optic current sensor with integrated-optic polarization splitter (IOPS); 
P: polarizer, QWR: quarter-wave retarder (© 2019 IEEE. Reprinted with permission from [266].)Fiber-Optic Current Sensors ◾  123
the sensor is the standard single-mode fiber link instead of a PM fiber between the opto￾electronics and sensor head. Single-mode fibers facilitate splicing during field installation, 
are less sensitive to external stresses, and allow for longer distances.
In similar work, Min-Cheol Oh and co-workers at Pusan National University in Korea 
developed a polymer integrated-optic chip for sensor interrogation. The chip unites the 
functions of directional couplers, polarizers, and quasi-static thermo-optic phase biasing 
[462–464]. The group also reported a chip with an additional multimode interference 
coupler that generated two transfer functions at quadrature [465, 466]. H. Lin et al. at the 
National Sun Yat-Sen University, Taiwan, reported a polarimetric sensor with polariza￾tion-rotated reflection, where a 22.5°-Faraday rotator after the coil’s quarter-wave retarder 
generated the static 90°-phase bias [467–469]. The group also demonstrated time-division 
multiplexing of several coils [470]. And in a 2005 patent application, J. Blake positioned 
the rotator at the source-side end of the PM fiber link [471]; a theoretical analysis followed 
in [472].
8.6 TEMPERATURE COMPENSATION OF FOCS WITH 
POLARIZATION-ROTATED REFLECTION
The above equations for the magneto-optic phase shift Df or sensor signal S assume an 
ideal fiber coil, i.e., the circular birefringence of the Faraday effect is the only birefringence, 
and the fiber retarder at the coil entrance is a perfect quarter-wave retarder. In practice, 
linear birefringence from coiling a nominally low birefringence fiber or the embedded 
linear birefringence of a spun fiber modify the detected phase shift. Likewise, a retarder 
that deviates from perfect p/2-retardation (or is imperfectly oriented with the respect the 
PM fiber axes) also modifies the signal. Moreover, the variation of the retarder and sens￾ing fiber parameters with temperature may cause considerable temperature dependence 
of the signal adding to the contribution of the Verdet constant. The following shows how 
the retarder can be employed to balance the overall temperature dependence of the fiber 
coil. The coils include both, coils made from low birefringence fiber with bend-induced 
birefringence and coils from spun fiber. We will see that there are significant differences in 
this regard between phase-modulated FOCS and FOCS with static phase bias. For simplic￾ity, we call the two sensor types according to their detection techniques Interferometric 
FOCS and Polarimetric FOCS, respectively, also since the interferometric FOCS roots in 
the interferometric Sagnac sensor.
8.6.1 Compensation of Low Birefringence Fiber Coils
The Jones matrix calculus gives for the interferometric FOCS of Figures 8.10 and 8.11 and a 
coil of low birefringence fiber a magneto-optic phase shift [326]
   arctan . 2
1 2
T
T
(8.19)
Here, the parameter T stands for the ratio T  j j   12 12 / , where j′
12 and j′′12 are the real and 
imaginary parts, respectively, of the matrix element j
12 j j   12   21
 of the system Jones 124   ◾  Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
matrix J (in a linear base) that describes a roundtrip of the light through the fiber coil 
including the fiber retarder; stated differently, Δϕ corresponds to the difference in the 
arguments of the output optical fields Ex
  out
, Ey
  out
 parallel to the birefringent axes, x and y, 
of the PM fiber lead. T is obtained as
T
VNI
b

  
2
2
tan
cos sin cos
tan ,


    

(8.20)
        
 
 b VNI 2 2 1 2
2
/
. (8.21)
Here, ε is the deviation of the fiber retarder with retardation r from perfect p/2-retarda￾tion (ε = r − p/2), δb is the (one way) bend-induced birefringent phase retardation of the 
coil, and a is the angle between the slow retarder axis and slow axis of the bend-induced 
birefringence (coil normal). (At this point, all other parameters of the optical circuit are 
assumed as ideal). For small linear birefringence and small magneto-optic phase shifts (g
≪ 1) and a perfect p/2-retarder (ε = 0), (8.19) reduces to [309, 326]
    4 1    1 3 2 VMI b / . (8.22)
We now first consider temperature compensation for the simple case of a fiber coil with 
negligible linear birefringence. An example is a single large-diameter fiber loop for the mea￾surement of high dc at aluminum smelters [326]. Hence, only the Verdet constant and the 
retarder change with temperature. With 4VNI ≪ 1, Δϕ is then given by [309, 326, 336, 435]
   4VNI/cos . (8.23)
Figure 8.13a shows the small signal scale factor SF normalized to the scale factor 4VNI of 
an ideal coil as function of the retarder retardation r:
SF      

4   
1 1
VNI cos cos /2 . (8.24)
At sufficiently small ε, the scale factor follows a parabola centered at r = 90° (e = 0°). We 
assume an elliptical-core fiber retarder of zero order with a temperature coefficient (1/r) 
∂r/∂T = −2.2 × 10−4 K−1 [326] and set the room temperature retardation r0 to 100.4°. The red 
curve segment then shows the variation of the scale factor by the retarder between −40°C 
and 90°C. This variation balances to first order the linear increase of the Verdet constant 
with temperature; (1/V) ∂V/∂T = 0.7 × 10−4 K−1 [28] (Figure 8.13b). The residual scale factor 
change due to the retarder’s second-order contribution is only 0.06% over the given tem￾perature range compared to 0.91% without compensation.Fiber-Optic Current Sensors ◾  125
In case of non-negligible bend-induced birefringence db, the scale factor becomes a func￾tion of the retarder orientation a; eq. (8.19). Figure 8.14a shows the scale factor versus r for 
a low-bi fiber coil with db = 16° and three characteristic retarder orientations. db = 16° cor￾responds to a coil with four 172-mm-diameter windings and a fiber diameter of 80 m [328]. 
The scale factor for db = 0 is indicated for comparison (black dotted curve). At retarder 
orientations of a = 0°, 90°, bend-induced birefringence shifts the parabola vertices to r = 
90° − db and r = 90° + db, respectively, i.e., the coil birefringence adds to or subtracts from 
the retarder birefringence. The scale factors at the vertices are below unity which reflects 
the quenching of the Faraday effect by the coil linear birefringence. The curves for a = ±45° 
coincide and are centered about r = 90° for reasons of symmetry. It is obvious that all 
parabolas must intersect at r = 90°, where the injected SOP are circular. Temperature com￾pensation works like for db = 0 if the room temperature retardation is adjusted accordingly, 
as the red curve segment indicates for a = 0°; here with (1/r) ∂r/∂T = −3.2 × 10−4 K−1 [328]. 
The coil birefringence db(T) also contributes to the overall temperature dependence but 
only weakly [180], and is included in the compensation.
The corresponding normalized scale factor of the polarimetric FOCS is (Figure 8.14b) [328]
SF       







1
2
2
2 2
2
2 cos
sin
sin cos
sin
 . 

   

b (8.25)
For db = 0°, SF reduces to
SF  cos .  (8.26)
Note that the scale factor parabolas of the polarimetric sensor are essentially inverted ver￾sions of the parabolas of the interferometric sensor. The red curve segment in Figure 8.14b
FIGURE 8.13 (a) Normalized scale factor versus retardation r of fiber retarder for a sensing fiber 
free of linear birefringence. A retarder with a room temperature retardation of 100.4° decreases the 
scale factor between −40°C and 90°C along the red curve segment. (b) The retarder thus balances 
to first order the increase of the Verdet constant with temperature (© 2002 IEEE. Reprinted with 
permission from [336].)126   ◾  Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
indicates temperature compensation for a = 90° with the same retarder and fiber param￾eters as in Figure 8.14a.
The curves of Figure 8.14 reflect the interference of several pairs of orthogonal waves 
(again, the term wave is to include the whole source spectrum). A fiber retarder deviating 
from 90° partially cross-couples the orthogonal polarization states both on the forward and 
return path. As a result, not only one pair of orthogonal SOP returns from the coil but alto￾gether four pairs, as Figure 8.15 illustrates [328, 336, 454]. Two pairs return with swapped 
polarization states and are coherent, whereas the other two pairs return with unswapped 
polarizations and therefore have become incoherent. The primary waves (Ax, Ay) have not 
cross-coupled at the retarder but return with reduced amplitude of cos2
(ε/2) (at δb  = 0); 
assuming an amplitude of unity for the original parent waves and neglecting other optical 
loss. The pair of secondary waves (Bx, By) with amplitude sin2
(ε/2) results from twofold cross￾coupling at the retarder during a roundtrip and is 180° out of phase with the primary waves 
(Ax, Ay). A-waves and B-waves experience Faraday phase shifts 2φF (φF = VNI) of opposite 
direction as indicated by the arrows. This, in combination with the 180°-phase difference, 
enhances the apparent magneto-optic phase shift ∆Φ. Hence, the scale factor increases in the 
interferometric sensor as ρ moves away from a parabola vertex (Figure 8.14a).
By contrast, in the polarimetric sensor, the same effects, in combination with the static 
p/2-phase bias, reduce the slope of the signal S(I), that is, the scale factor drops as ρ moves 
away from a parabola vertex, as seen in Figure 8.14b. The two pairs of C-waves (Cx, Cy) with 
amplitude cos(ε/2)sin(ε/2) represent light that has cross-coupled only once, either on the 
forward or backward path. The C-waves accumulate group delays of DLg = ±lDng with 
respect to the A and B waves, where l is the PM fiber length and Dng the group linear bire￾fringence; in addition, there may be the delays by the modulator or IOPS. The C-waves 
FIGURE 8.14 Normalized scale factor versus retardation of fiber retarder for a low-bi fiber coil 
with bend-induced linear birefringence of δβ = 16° and three characteristic angles a between the 
slow retarder axis and fiber coil normal: (a) interferometric FOCS, (b) polarimetric metric FOCS. 
The solid (red) curve segments indicate the scale factor variation between −40°C and 85°C due to 
the temperature dependence of the fiber retarder which balances the temperature dependence of the 
Faraday effect in temperature-compensated sensors. For comparison, the scale factors for δβ = 0° are 
also indicated (© 2019 IEEE. Reprinted with permission from [328].)Fiber-Optic Current Sensors ◾  127
represent incoherent background light that reduces in both sensor versions the fringe vis￾ibility [328, 336].
Therefore, the enhancement of the apparent magneto-optic phase shift of the interfero￾metric FOCS by a non-p/2-retarder does not improve but does somewhat reduce the signal￾to-noise ratio. As noted, the curves in Figure 8.14 depict the small signal scale factor 
(4VNI ≪ 1). Sensors in electric power transmission typically operate in this regime. At 
larger magneto-optic phase shifts the temperature compensation effect weakens — the 
parabolas flatten out — and vanishes at 4VNI = p [326, 441, 473]. Moreover, it was assumed 
that the fiber retarder axes are perfectly aligned at 45° to the PM fiber axes. Misalignment 
by an angle Da, e.g., due to fabrication tolerances, changes the normalized scale factor in 
proportion to 1/cos(2Da) in interferometric FOCS and cos(2Da) in polarimetric FOCS 
[436, 445]. This scale factor change is independent of operation conditions, however, and 
inherently accounted for by the sensor calibration.
Figure 8.16a shows the measured signal as a function of the coil temperature of a tem￾perature compensated polarimetric FOCS (low-bi fiber coil with four 172-mm-diameter 
fiber windings, 80-m-fiber, packaged in a fused-silica capillary, as illustrated in Figure 7.11
[328]. The signal is independent of temperature within about ±0.03% between −40°C and 
85°C and agrees well with the theoretical signal; solid (red) line. Figure 8.16b shows the 
signal versus time during an endurance test. Here, the polarization splitter and fiber coil 
were jointly exposed to temperature cycles between −45°C and 85°C over more than 200 
hours, including 48-hour dwelling periods at the extreme temperatures. The signal remains 
within ±0.05% without any noticeable drift.
Figure 8.17 shows for the same sensor the measurement error versus current up to about 
1400 A. Each data point represents the average of 50 measurements, each measurement over 
ten 60-Hz current cycles, that is, ten 167-ms time periods. The error bars indicate the stan￾dard deviation (±1σ) of the 50 measurements. For four fiber windings, the corresponding 
noise-equivalent current is about 10 mA/√Hz. This corresponds to a minimum detectable 
magneto-optic phase shift of 0.16 μ rad/√Hz.
FIGURE 8.15 Interfering light waves at zero phase bias and zero current in case of a fiber retarder 
deviating from p/2. The arrows indicate the magneto-optic phase shift directions at applied current 
with jF = VNI (© 2019 IEEE. Reprinted with permission from [328].)128   ◾  Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
Typical rated currents in electric power transmission are between 400 A and 6000 A. 
Electricity metering according to IEC metering class 0.2s [474] requires that the sensor is 
accurate to within ±0.2% between 20% and 120% of the rated current. Allowed phase 
errors are ±10 min. Somewhat larger errors are allowed between 1% and 20% of the rated 
current. The dashed and solid lines in Figure 8.17 indicate the amplitude error limits of 
class 0.2s and the less strict class 0.2, respectively, for a rated current of 400 A. The error 
limits are the same at higher rated currents but with the current range shifted in 
proportion.
At normal operating conditions, the magneto-optic phase shift Df remains small, and 
linearization of the sinusoidal response is not necessary. By contrast, fault currents, e.g., in 
FIGURE 8.16 Polarimetric FOCS with a temperature-compensated low-bi fiber coil: (a) Signal vs. 
coil temperature at a constant alternating current (1000 A, 60 Hz). The solid (red) line represents the 
calculated signal; (b) Signal vs. time during repeated temperature cycling of sensor head including 
polarization splitter and fiber coil between −45°C and 85°C (© 2019 IEEE. Reprinted with permis￾sion from [328].)
FIGURE 8.17 Measurement error vs. current and error limits according to IEC metering classes 0.2s 
and 0.2. The error bars represent the standard deviation (±1σ) of 50 individual measurements of ten 
60-Hz current cycles (© 2019 IEEE. Reprinted with permission from [328].)Fiber-Optic Current Sensors ◾  129
case of a short circuit, may well exceed 100 kA and require linearization of the sine func￾tion. This, however, is not particularly critical, since typical error limits in that regime are 
±5% (IEC protection class 5P [474]). Tests showed that with linearization the sensor stays 
within the ±0.2%-accuracy limits up to magneto-optic phase shifts of ±(35°–45°). The ±5%-
error margins are reached only beyond ±75° (corresponding to 327 kA turns). Equivalent 
results for temperature-compensated interferometric FOCS can be found in [326, 327].
8.6.2 Compensation of Spun Highly Birefringent Fiber Coils
Interferometric and polarimetric FOCS with spun fiber exhibit the same basic phenomena 
as with low-bi fiber. However, polarimetric sensors are more sensitive to variations of the 
fiber’s linear birefringence with temperature. Whereas interferometric sensors can be pre￾pared such that the temperature dependence of the birefringence does not appear in the 
signal, this is not possible for polarimetric sensors. Therefore, a careful choice of adequate 
fiber parameters is particularly critical for polarimetric sensors.
At a given spin pitch p, the scale factors of both sensor versions and their variation with 
temperature are governed by the Verdet constant V(T), the embedded linear beat length 
LB(T), and the orientation a of the slow retarder axis relative to the slow spun fiber axis at 
the retarder-side fiber facet. (We assume that bend-induced birefringence is sufficiently 
quenched and can be disregarded; see Figure 7.9.) Assuming 4VNI ≪ 1, the magneto-optic 
phase shift of the interferometric FOCS is [266]

 

        
    
4
1 2 2 2 1
VNI
sin /x x cos tan sin /
,

(8.27)
where x = 2LB/p is the spin ratio introduced in Section 7.5. Furthermore, we assume that 
the spun fiber’s quasi eigenmodes accumulate a group delay much larger than the source 
coherence length in order to suppress disturbing interference effects from secondary polar￾ization states generated upon reflection of the modes at the far end of the fiber [256]. For 
spun fiber orientations α = ±45°, (8.27) reduces to
     
    45 2 1
4
1
VNI
x x cos c  ot
(8.28)
and for a = 0° and a = 90° to

   0 90  4 , cos . VNI (8.29)
Figure 8.18a shows again the normalized scale factor, SF = Δϕ/4VNI, as a function of the 
retarder deviation e from p/2 for the four characteristic spun fiber orientations a. The 
assumed spin ratio of x = 4 provides good robustness against fiber bending with only mod￾est loss of sensitivity (see Figures 7.8 and 7.9). It is interesting to note that at a = 0°, 90° (8.29), 130   ◾  Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
a spun fiber provides the same magneto-optic phase shift as an ideal non-birefringent fiber. 
In particular, the scale factor corresponds to unity at r = 90° (e = 0), and the fiber’s embed￾ded linear birefringence and its variation with temperature does not affect the signal. The 
similarity can be understood from the fact that (8.27) reduces to (8.29) as the spin ratio 
approaches infinity, which represents a non-birefringent fiber. However, a difference to an 
ideal fiber is that the retarder/spun fiber combination generates additional secondary light 
states that return with unswapped polarization directions and reduce the fringe contrast.
If the fiber orientation changes from a = 0°, 90° to a = ±45°, the parabola minima shift 
from ε = 0 to ε = cot−1x. At those retardations, the left and right elliptical SOP emerging 
from the fiber retarder map one-to-one onto the quasieigenmodes of the spun fiber. Note, 
that the scale factor at the minima corresponds to the intrinsic magneto-optic sensitivity 
of a spun fiber according to (7.66): SFmin, α = ±45° = (1 + x−2)−1/2. At all other α and ε, the SOP 
emerging from the retarder excite, besides the primary pair of eigenmodes, a secondary 
pair of modes with respective opposite handedness. The amplitude and phases of the sec￾ondary pair depend on α and ε [256]. The secondary pair again enhances the recovered 
magneto-optic phase shift through the mechanisms illustrated in Figure 8.15.
The small signal scale factor (4VNI≪ 1) of the polarimetric sensor with spun fiber reads [266]
SF 
  
        
    
1 
1
1 2 2 2 2
2 1
x
sin /   x x cos t  an sin / . (8.30)
At spun fiber orientations α = ±45°, this expression becomes
SF
x    x 
 
   45    2 3 2
1 1
1
/ cos c  ot , (8.31)
FIGURE 8.18 Scale factor vs. ε for a spun fiber coil with a spin ratio x = 4 and different angles α
between the retarder and spun fiber slow axes: (a) Interferometric FOCS, (b) Polarimetric FOCS. 
The thick curve segments indicate the scale factor variation between −40°C and 80°C, which bal￾ances the variations of the Verdet constant and embedded linear fiber birefringence with tempera￾ture (© 2019 IEEE. Reprinted with permission from [266].)Fiber-Optic Current Sensors ◾  131
and at α = 0, 90°, one obtains
SF    

   0 90   2 2
1
1 , cos .
x
 (8.32)
In the limit of an infinite spin ratio x, the scale factor reduces to cos(ε), that is, the scale 
factor of a polarimetric FOCS with low-bi fiber. Compared to the interferometric FOCS, 
the scale factor parabolas of the polarimetric version (Figure 8.18b) are again inverted. But 
in contrast to the interferometric sensor, the scale factor depends on the spin ratio x at all 
fiber orientations a, i.e., the intrinsic linear birefringence always contributes to the temper￾ature dependence of the signal. The vertices at α = ±45° are again located at ε = cot−1x and 
now correspond to a scale factor of SFmax,α = ±45° = (1 + x−2)−3/2, which is the product of two 
terms, namely the intrinsic magneto-optic sensitivity of the spun fiber, that is (1 + x−2)−1/2, 
and the reduced fringe contrast, (1 + x−2)−1. Other values of α and ε (for which the elliptical 
SOP from the retarder do not match the quasi eigenmodes of the spun fiber) further reduce 
the fringe contrast and scale factor. All curves intersect at the vertex at ε = 0 (α = 0°, 90°) 
with a scale factor of SFmax, α = 0°,90° = (1 + x−2)−2.
Figure 8.19 shows the calculated contribution of the fiber’s embedded linear birefrin￾gence to the temperature dependence of the two sensor versions for α = 0°, 90° and α = ±45°. 
The beat length and spin pitch are LB = 10 mm (at 20°C) and p = 5 mm, respectively, which 
gives a spin ratio of x = 4. The temperature coefficient of the beat length is 1.0 × 10−3°C−1
(which is typical for spun fiber with stress-induced birefringence such as bowtie spun fiber; 
typically, LB increases with temperature). As mentioned, the signal of the interferometric 
sensor is independent of the beat length at α = 0° and 90° (Figure 8.19a, solid line), and 
changes at a rate of 0.6 × 10−4°C−1 at α = ±45° (dashed line). The corresponding slopes for the 
polarimetric sensor are 2.4 × 10−4°C−1 and 1.8 × 10−4°C−1, respectively (Figure 8.19b).
Since the temperature coefficients of the beat length contribution (if any) and Verdet 
constant (0.7 × 10−4°C−1) are both of positive sign, the embedded fiber birefringence 
FIGURE 8.19 Contribution of the spun fiber linear beat length LB(T) to the temperature depen￾dence of the scale factor: (a) interferometric and (b) polarimetric FOCS; RT: room temperature, 
20°C (© 2019 IEEE. Reprinted with permission from [266].)132   ◾  Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
enhances the temperature dependence. It is obvious that thermal beat length variations 
affect the polarimetric sensor much more than the interferometric sensor. The temperature 
dependence of the polarimetric sensor can be minimized, however, by orienting the fiber at 
α = ±45°. Reducing the spin pitch p at a given beat length reduces the temperature depen￾dence, e.g., from 1.8 × 10−4°C−1 at p = 5 mm to 0.5 × 10−4°C−1 at p = 2.5 mm (dash-dotted 
line). Doubling the beat length from 10 mm to 20 mm and leaving the pitch at 5 mm has the 
same effect, but the fiber becomes more prone to bending; see [266] for experimental data. 
It is obvious that polarimetric sensors are preferably operated with spun fiber types such as 
elliptical-core fiber that have smaller temperature coefficients of the birefringence.
In spite of their differences, interferometric and polarimetric sensors with spun fiber 
can be temperature-compensated analog to the sensors with low-bi fiber. For x = 4, tem￾perature coefficients for LB and ρ of 1.0 × 10−3°C−1 and -3.2 × 10−4°C-1, respectively, and fiber 
retarders of zero order, εRT must be set to εRT = −1° (ρRT = 89°) in the interferometric sensor 
(with α = +45°) and to εRT = −10° (ρRT = 80°) in the polarimetric sensor (with α = -45°). The 
heavy line segments in Figure 8.18 indicate again the corresponding scale factor variations 
between −40°C and 80°C due to the retarder that offset the thermal changes of the Verdet 
constant and embedded linear birefringence. Experimental results demonstrate tempera￾ture compensation for both sensors to within about ±0.1% between −40°C and 85°C [266].
8.7 FABRY-PÉROT RESONATOR AND LIGHT RECIRCULATING 
CURRENT SENSORS
Placing a magneto-optic material into a resonant Fabry-Pérot cavity can greatly enhance the 
Faraday polarization rotation [475–479]. Cavity-enhanced polarization rotation has been of 
interest, e.g., in the context of optical isolators [476, 477], but was also explored for magnetic 
field and current sensing [305, 479]. Already in 1964, Rosenberg et al. demonstrated 180-fold 
rotation increase in Freon gas (CCl2F2) at 662.8 nm in an 83-cm-long cavity with spherical 
mirrors of 98.9% reflectivity [475]. In an applied magnetic field, the Airy function of the cavity 
splits into two functions corresponding to the left and right circular constituents of linearly 
polarized input light. On resonance (i.e., the single pass phase shift in the absence of a mag￾netic field equals an integer multiple of p), the transmitted circular constituents again add up 
to a linear polarization state that is rotated against the input state by an angle [475, 478]
F F
R
R
  FP  



 

 arctan tan ,
1
1
(8.33)
where R is the power reflectivity of the cavity mirrors, and φF is the single-pass Faraday 
polarization rotation of (4.1). Hence, at small φF, the cavity enhances the Faraday rotation 
by a factor (1 + R)/(1 − R). In the high reflectivity limit (R approaches R = 1), the accumu￾lated small signal Faraday rotation approaches 45°. Without an analyzer, the cavity trans￾mission is [478]
I
I
R
R R
t
F 0
2
2 2
1
1 4    
    sin , 
(8.34)Fiber-Optic Current Sensors ◾  133
and with an analyzer oriented at 0° to the entry polarizer, the transmission becomes
I
I F
t F
F 0
2
2 2 2
1
  
   
cos
sin
, 

(8.35)
with F   2 1 R R / .   As already noted in context of helically wound fibers, Maystre et 
al. reported a Fabry-Pérot current sensor consisting of a single helical fiber loop with an 
arc length of 17 cm, as shown in Figure 7.10a. Reflective coatings with reflectivity of 58% 
and 97% resulted in a measured cavity finesse of F′ = 6 and a fourfold enhancement of the 
Faraday effect [305].
Wang et al. presented a fiber cavity formed by 100 m of standard single-mode fiber, 
birefringence-compensating Faraday rotator mirrors (FRM) at both ends, and an in-cavity 
fiber coupler for light incoupling and outcoupling. The cavity resulted in 6 dB signal gain. 
(Note that this cavity is not strictly a Fabry-Pérot resonator, however [480].) Other research￾ers aimed to increase the sensitivity by recirculating continuous wave (cw) or pulsed light 
multiple times through the fiber coil [481–485].
8.8 FIBER LASER CURRENT SENSORS
Polarimetric fiber laser sensors have been explored for the measurement of physical param￾eters such as lateral force, strain, temperature, torsion, or hydrostatic pressure [486–489]. 
The laser cavity may comprise separate fiber sections for gain and sensing, or the two func￾tions may be combined in a single fiber. The laser emission is made up of two trains of 
longitudinal modes associated with the two orthogonal linear polarization eigenmodes. At 
zero net cavity birefringence, the two mode trains are degenerate. Birefringence induced 
by an external disturbance lifts the degeneracy and frequency-shifts the mode trains rela￾tive to each other. The frequency shift is detected as a polarization mode beat (PMB) fre￾quency proportional to the magnitude of the disturbance. Preferably, at least one of the 
cavity reflectors is a narrow-band fiber Bragg grating in order to limit the number of active 
modes and improve the lasing stability. Distributed feedback (DFB) fiber laser sensors sup￾port only a single longitudinal mode at each polarization [490]. The easy-to-monitor fre￾quency encoded output is an attractive feature of fiber laser sensors.
Fiber laser magnetic field and current sensors must operate with left and right circular 
eigenpolarizations rather than linear polarization states. To this end, B. Y. Kim and co￾workers replaced one of the cavity reflectors by a Faraday rotator mirror (FRM) (Figure 
8.20) [491–493]. With (single pass) FRM circular birefringence of p/2 and a cavity free of 
linear birefringence, the modes are LHC and RHC polarized throughout the cavity. In the 
presence of linear birefringence, the modes assume various degrees of elliptical polariza￾tion with correspondingly reduced magnetic field sensitivity; see [491] for a Jones matrix 
analysis. An Er3+-doped fiber section before the FRM acts as a gain medium and is pumped 
by a 980-nm DFB laser via a wavelength division multiplexer (WDM, 980/1550 nm). A 
second, unpumped Er3+-doped fiber section at the other side of the WDM acts as saturable 134   ◾  Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
absorber and serves for magnetic field sensing [492]. The standing wave patterns in the cav￾ity lead to gain and absorption gratings in the respective doped fiber sections.
According to the authors, nonlinear gain and loss at those gratings reduce the number 
of active longitudinal modes to one per circular SOP. Due to the relative phase shift at the 
FRM, the LHC and RHC longitudinal modes trains are displaced against each other by 
half a free spectral range at zero magnetic field. The corresponding frequency difference is 
fSFR/2 = c/4nL and constitutes the zero-field PMB frequency; see bottom part of Figure 8.20; 
(c is the speed of light, n is the effective refractive index, and L is geometrical length of the 
cavity). An applied magnetic field increases the FSR for one circular SOP and decreases the 
FSR for the other and, depending on the field direction, accordingly increases or decreases 
the PMB frequency. The PMB frequency is monitored after a polarizer outside the cavity. 
The PMB frequency shift as a function of the current is DfPMB = [(NVc)/(nLp)]I, assuming 
that the sensing fiber section forms an N-windings coil around the conductor (V is again 
the Verdet constant of the fiber). A laser sensor setup as shown in Figure 8.20 with a cavity 
length of 9 m resulted in a free spectral range of 11 MHz and a PMB frequency shift of 8 
kHz/Ap-p with a solenoid of 1528 turns. The noise equivalent current was 460 mArms/√Hz 
at 60 Hz [492]. In other works, Takahashi et al. demonstrated a flint glass fiber ring laser 
for current sensing [494], and Cheng et al. reported a DFB fiber laser for magnetic field 
sensing [495, 496]. In spite of the attractive frequency-encoded output, laser current sen￾sors have had little practical impact. Particularly, long-term stable operation under field 
conditions has remained unproven.
FIGURE 8.20 Fiber laser current sensor (top) and LHC and RHC polarized longitudinal laser modes 
(bottom) with and without applied magnetic field (dashed and solid lines, respectively); active lasing 
modes are indicated in red. FRM: Faraday rotator mirror, M: mirror, PD: photodiode, WDM: wave￾length division multiplexer, fFSR: free spectral range, fPMB: polarization mode beat frequency (adapted 
with permission from [491, 492] © The Optical Society.)Fiber-Optic Current Sensors ◾  135
8.9 INTEGRATED-OPTIC CURRENT SENSORS
Integrated optical current sensors found some interest in the early and mid-1990s as an 
alternative to twisted fiber coils [497–501]. The single-mode waveguides were formed in a 
glass substrate (e.g., from soda-lime silicate or borosilicate glass) by means of electric field 
assisted ion exchange, a technique also used for the fabrication of PLC splitters [461, 502]. 
For current sensing, the waveguide encircles a central aperture in the substrate for the cur￾rent conductor. Straight waveguide sections to the substrate edges allow for fiber coupling. 
The architecture may include a waveguide spitter and polarizers for the generation of two 
polarimetric anti-phase signals [497]. Again, sufficiently low linear birefringence of the 
waveguides (Dn < 10−6) constituted a practical challenge. Minier et al. reduced the initial 
birefringence (around 10−5) to about 0.5 × 10−6 by thermal annealing and achieved 90% 
sensitivity of an ideal waveguide. That sensor had a single waveguide loop with a radius 
of 20 mm [500]. Further development reduced the birefringence of multi-loop sensors to 
Dn < 0.5 × 10−7 at waveguide losses of <0.15 dB/cm [501]. But with the advent of good qual￾ity spun fibers, interest in integrated optical sensors soon waned.
8.10 FARADAY EFFECT IN FIBER BRAGG GRATINGS
In a magnetic field, the Bragg wavelengths λB of a fiber grating slightly differ for left and 
right circularly polarized light as a result of the circular birefringence, Dn = nR – nL, 
induced by the Faraday effect [503]:
B R,  2nR, (8.36)
B L, nL  2 , (8.37)
where Λ is the grating period. With Dn from (4.2), the Bragg wavelength split DlB = lB,L – lB,R is
  B V B   / .   (8.38)
It is obvious, that even at magnetic flux densities as high as 1 T, the wavelength split is less 
than 1 pm for a 1550-nm grating in fused silica fiber and therefore hardly observable in the 
grating’s reflection spectra. (The spectral widths [FWHM] of typical FBG are 100 pm and 
more.) Instead, researchers have tried to extract the Faraday polarization rotation interfer￾ometrically [503] or from the grating’s spectra of polarization dependent loss (PDL) [504, 
505, 506], circular polarization dependent loss (CDL) [507, 508], and the differential group 
delay (DGD) [506]. Using an unbalanced fiber Mach-Zehnder interferometer for measur￾ing the Bragg wavelength shifts of a 1300-nm grating, Kersey et al. achieved a resolution 
of a 400-Hz ac magnetic field of 4 × 10−4 T at a detection bandwidth of 0.15 Hz. Wu et al. 
measured a dc magnetic field-induced CDL of 1 dB at 1.15 T for a 1550-nm grating in an 
Er-doped fiber with strongly enhanced Faraday effect (V = −11 rad/T/m) [508]. But again, 
intrinsic linear birefringence of the host fiber and photo-induced birefringence of the grat￾ing itself compromised the achievable field resolution. For improvement, Descamps et al. 136   ◾  Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
computed from the Mueller matrix of the FBG the field-induced rotation of the diattenu￾ation vector [509] in order to discriminate between linear and field-induced circular bire￾fringence [506]. They achieved a resolution of 0.1 T at dc fields up to 1 T with a 5-mm 
long 1550-nm grating written in hydrogen-loaded standard fused silica fiber. Orr et al. 
investigated compound distributed feedback grating structures with resonantly enhanced 
Faraday effect and predicted an achievable resolution of 0.1 mT/√Hz [510, 511].
8.11 MULTIPLEXED AND DISTRIBUTED CURRENT SENSING
Various reports have concerned multiplexed fiber coils and distributed current sensing. 
As already noted further above, Lin et al. reported on time-division multiplexed sensors 
with polarization-rotated reflection [470]. Yong et al. investigated frequency-division￾multiplexed fiber laser current sensors that operated at different wavelengths [512]. Other 
multiplexing architectures were presented in [485, 513]. Palmeri et al. measured spatially 
resolved dc current in electric power cables by extracting the Faraday polarization rotation 
from the polarization analysis of backscattered light [514]. A loose-tube packaged standard 
single-mode fiber was helically wound with a pitch of 0.1 m and a radius of 45 mm on two 
parallel 20-m-long cables. The total length of the wound fiber was 130 m. Using polariza￾tion optical frequency domain reflectometry (POFDR), the team achieved under station￾ary conditions a current resolution of 100 A and a spatial resolution of 4 m at currents up 
to 2.5 kA.DOI: 10.1201/9781003100324-12 137
CHAPTER 9
Hybrid Current Transformers
Hybrid current transformers utilize conventional means to convert a high voltage current 
into a small electric signal and then encode that signal into optical information. An opti￾cal fiber transmits the optical signal from high voltage to ground potential. Compared to 
traditional current transformers, the hybrid approach drastically reduces the expenditures 
for electric insulation. The following presents three classes of hybrid current transformers.
9.1 ELECTRONIC CURRENT TRANSFORMERS (ECT) WITH OPTICAL 
COMMUNICATION
Electronic current transformers (ECT) employ a conventional transformer core (CT core) 
with a secondary winding, a Rogowski coil, or a precision shunt to derive from the primary 
current a small secondary current [515–531]. A burden resistor R converts that current 
into a voltage proportional to the primary current or, in the case of a Rogowski coil, a 
voltage proportional to the time-derivative of the current. For the case of direct current 
(DC), a precision shunt serves as the primary transducer. Low power electronics encode 
that voltage signal, and an optical transmitter, commonly an LED, sends the encoded sig￾nal via fiber optics to a photodetector on ground. After amplification and processing, the 
electronics located on the ground system, would send a standardized-format signal to sub￾station control equipment. Hence, ECTs eliminate the need for massive oil- or gas-filled 
insulators of traditional current transformers. Already in 1965, E. R. Perry reported one 
of the first transformers of this type [515]. In that case, the electronics on high voltage 
was powered by a second CT core with energy from the power line. An obvious drawback 
of a powerline supply is that the electronics is not operational at zero current flow, i.e., a 
defective transducer and a status of zero current are not distinguishable. Therefore, subse￾quent work focused on optically powered ECTs, where a laser diode on ground potential 
energized dedicated low power electronics, either via a second fiber link or via the com￾munication fiber [520–523, 528–531]. M. Adolfsson et al. at the Swedish company Asea 
(later ABB) developed an optically powered ECT, particularly for use at HVDC converter 
stations, series capacitor banks for grid control, and line filters (Figure 9.1) [520, 532]. Since 
the mid-1990s, ABB has deployed numerous dc and ac systems for various rated currents 138 ◾ Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
and accuracy classes. Bandwidths reach up to 100 kHz. Commonly, the transducers are 
mounted on existing high voltage infrastructure, so that an extra support insulator is not 
necessary. The fibers are protected in a thin suspension-mounted insulator with silicone 
sheds for sufficient electric creep distance. The transformer can also be employed for volt￾age sensing by combining it with a capacitive voltage divider.
More recently, Bassan et al. reported a clamp-on transformer for the measurement of 
current, voltage, and temperature in medium voltage distribution grids [531]. The voltage 
signal was obtained via a capacitive divider. The sensor unit on high voltage was powered 
by a 976-nm, 2-W laser via a multimode fiber. Two further multimode fibers transmitted 
the digitized sensor data and corresponding clock data to a processing unit on ground. 
Two low power vertical cavity surface emitting lasers (VCSEL, 850 mn) served as emitters 
on high voltage. At room temperature, the voltage sensor met the requirements of 
IEC61869-11 accuracy class 0.5 (accuracy to within ±0.5% between 80% and 120% of the 
rated voltage) [533] at 11.9 kV, 13.8 kV and 23.0 kV (phase-to-phase voltages), and the cur￾rent sensor met IEC61869-10 accuracy class 0.5 [534] at a rated current of 25 A and class 0.2 
at a rated current of 750 A. Tests versus temperature (0–70°C) showed that both sensors 
maintained their accuracy after temperature compensation. (The errors were significantly 
larger, however, before compensation). The sensors were successfully tested in the field.
Whereas the sensors above use active electronics with power supply for signal conver￾sion, simpler techniques have used passive electronics for direct LED modulation [521, 
535–537]. If the LED is operated in the linear range of its response curve, the intensity 
modulation is largely proportional to the primary current (but strongly dependent on tem￾perature) [521]. In [536], a spectral edge filter converted the shifts of the LED spectrum at 
changing drive voltage into an intensity modulation, and in [537] the sinusoidal current to 
be measured was encoded in the temporal width of light pulses emitted by the source by 
setting a current threshold below which the source was switched off.
FIGURE 9.1 Electronic current transformer with optical powered electronics (according to [532]).Hybrid Current Transformers ◾ 139
9.2 HYBRID OCT WITH PIEZOELECTRIC TRANSDUCERS
Like ECT, optical current transformers (OCT) with piezoelectric transducers again employ 
a CT core, a Rogowski coil, or a shunt for first converting the primary alternating cur￾rent into a low voltage signal. A piezoelectric transducer converts that voltage in a peri￾odic mechanical deformation (converse piezoelectric effect), and an optical fiber sensor 
measures the deformation (Figure 9.2). The transducers are typically made from poled 
piezoelectric ceramics (lead zirconium titanate, PbZrxTi1−xO3, PZT) [538] that exhibit a 
large piezoelectric effect. The first OCT of this type utilized optical fiber interferometers 
for PZT interrogation [134, 539–542]. Ning et al. reported an OCT consisting of a CT core 
(with a 3000:1 current conversion ratio) as a primary converter, burden resistors of 10 Ω
and 100 Ω, and a tube-type PZT with 12 fiber loops operated in a fiber Michelson inter￾ferometer at 780 nm (Figure 9.2b) [539]. With the 10-Ω resistor, currents up to 140 A were 
measured in a frequency range from 30 Hz to 10 kHz and a resolution of 0.1A/√Hz at 
50 Hz. A clamp-on sensor for currents up to 43 kA was demonstrated in [540].
Fiber interferometers for PZT readout were soon replaced by more attractive fiber Bragg 
gratings (FBG), Figure 9.2c [543–549]. Here, a fiber grating is attached to a stack of PZT 
elements. Interlaced electrodes expose each PZT element to the full derived voltage for suf￾ficiently large piezoelectric strain ε = Dd/d:
ε = d Vd 33 ( / .) (9.1)
Here, Dd is the voltage-induced thickness change of a piezoelectric element with thickness 
d, and d33 is the relevant piezoelectric strain coefficient (piezoelectric charge constant). 
Broadband light, e.g., from a super-fluorescent doped fiber source, illuminates the grat￾ing. Out of the broad spectrum (some tens of nanometers), the grating reflects a narrow 
FIGURE 9.2 Hybrid optical current transformer with piezoelectric transducers: (a) System set-up; 
(b) interferometric interrogation of a PZT tube; (c) fiber-Bragg-grating-based interrogation of a PZT 
stack; the arrows indicate the alternating poling directions.140 ◾ Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
wavelength band with a center wavelength lB = 2nL, where n is the average refractive, and L
is the grating period. A typical spectral width is 200 pm (FWHM) for gratings with Bragg 
wavelengths around 1550 nm. A change in voltage DV shifts the Bragg wavelength by [545]
∆ = λ B 33 kd V d ( / ,) (9.2)
where k is the strain sensitivity of the grating (1.2 pm for strain change of 10−6 at 1550 nm) 
[550]. A spectrometer such as a scanning Fabry-Pérot filter measures the wavelength shift. 
For example, a voltage of 200 V, 1-mm thick PZT elements, and d33 = 200 pm/V result in a 
wavelength shift of 48 pm. Typically, this shift is measured with a resolution of about 1 pm. 
A hybrid OCT that converted the CT current into a Bragg wavelength shift by heating the 
grating was demonstrated in [551].
Hybrid sensors with FBG-based readout are attractive in several aspects:
• A significant number of sensors can be multiplexed along the same fiber for dis￾tributed current measurement (e.g., distributed fault monitoring) [552]; the cost per 
measurement point reduces accordingly.
• In contrast to interferometric interrogation, the wavelength encoded signal is largely 
insensitive to mechanical fiber perturbations.
• The distances between the interrogator and the sensors can amount to tens of km [552], 
enabling current measurement at remote locations without electric infrastructure.
On the other hand, there is a relatively long chain of conversion stages from the primary 
current to the final signal with corresponding sources of error. In particular, the proper 
choice of the PZT material and its pre-aging are critical. PZTs are known for non-linear 
response, hysteresis, and dielectric loss, and their dielectric and piezoelectric properties 
exhibit relatively large temperature dependence. Also, PZTs age according to a logarithmic 
function of time. These negative effects tend to be less pronounced in so-called “hard” 
ceramics and more pronounced in “soft” ceramics [538]. But the piezoelectric effect is typi￾cally stronger in soft ceramics. More information on PZT materials is given in Chapter 16
on piezo-optic voltage transducers.
Hendersen et al. demonstrated one of the first hybrid sensors with FBG-based readout, 
but still utilizing a tube-shaped PZT, and achieved a current resolution of 0.7 A/√Hz [543, 
544]. Dziuda et al., aiming at applications in the oil industry (downhole), introduced a sen￾sor with a stacked PZT (six stack layers, each with a thickness of 1.5 mm) and a scanning 
Fabry-Pérot tunable filter for FBG interrogation. A specially designed CT core with 2000 
secondary windings and a 6 kΩ burden resistor generated a voltage of 150 V at the rated 
current of 50 A. The signal-to-noise ratio at that current was of 36 dB. Between 20°C and 
90°C, the signal rose by 4.6% without temperature compensation and was within ±2% after 
compensation [545]. Numerical techniques for PZT hysteresis compensation were reported 
in [546, 547]. The use of a Rogowski coil as a primary converter instead of CT was Hybrid Current Transformers ◾ 141
investigated in [553]. Various examples of the application of multiplexed sensors to power 
grid monitoring and control, fault localization, etc., were reported in [554–556]. A dedi￾cated FBG interrogator for multiplexed sensors combining a switchable wavelength divi￾sion multiplexer and a passive unbalanced Mach-Zehnder interferometer with a 3×3 output 
coupler was presented in [557]. Corresponding sensors have been commercialized by the 
UK company Synaptec Ltd.
9.3 INTENSITY MODULATING AND MICRO-MACHINED OCT
P. Wei et al. reported hybrid OCT which incorporated a light intensity modulator. Here, 
the voltage signal from the primary converter controlled, by means of an optically powered 
electronic circuit, a variable optical attenuator or a reflective MEMS device (micro electro￾mechanical system). The attenuator or MEMS modulated the intensity of a light beam in 
proportion to the primary current [558–560]. MEMS directly modulated by the current 
magnetic field were investigated in [561, 562]. Duplessis et al. proposed a sensor where a 
small current derived from the primary current caused a Lorentz-force-induced vibration 
of a reflecting diaphragm. The diaphragm movement was interrogated with a multimode 
fiber bundle vibration sensor. The central fiber of the bundle illuminated the diaphragm; 
the other fibers collected the reflected light. The returning light was modulated according 
to the current-dependent gap between the fiber facets and diaphragm [563]. A hybrid OCT 
powered by the line and working with liquid crystal-based chromatic light modulation was 
reported in [564]. And Bull et al. presented a hybrid OCT consisting of a Rogowski coil, 
a passive integrator, and an integrated electro-optic modulator. At currents between 30 A 
and 30 kA, the reported measurement error was less than 0.3% at temperatures between 
−30°C and 70°C [565].142 DOI: 10.1201/9781003100324-13
CHAPTER 10
Further Magnetic Field and 
Current Sensors
10.1 MAGNETOSTRICTIVE SENSORS
Magnetostriction, discovered in 1842 by J. P. Joule at a sample of iron [566], is the phe￾nomenon that a ferromagnetic material changes its dimensions when exposed to a mag￾netic field H. Magnetostriction results from the reorientation of ferromagnetic domains 
in the material, which minimizes the free energy of the system. Today, magnetostric￾tion is employed in sensors and a wide variety of transducers including motors, acoustic 
noise and vibration cancelling, ultrasonic cleaning, sonar communication, etc. [567, 568]. 
Magnetostriction is also the cause of the well-known humming noise of transformers at 
twice the line frequency. Like magnetization, magnetostriction is a nonlinear function of 
the magnetic field, goes into saturation above a material-dependent saturation field Hs, and 
exhibits hysteresis. Well below Hs/2, the magneto-strictive strain parallel to the field, often 
denominated as l, is approximately proportional to the square of the field strength [569]:
2 λ =∆ = l l CH / . (10.1)
Here, l is the sample length, Dl the length change, and C is a material-dependent constant, 
which can be positive or negative. More sophisticated models can be found, for example, 
in [570] and references therein. Accordingly, l can be expressed in a 3-parameter model 
(omitting hysteresis) as (Figure 10.1)
( ) s
3 1 , cosh 2 H
λ λ
κ
  = −   −  
(10.2)
where ls is the saturation magnetostriction, and κ = m0AsHs; As is a parameter determined 
by the material’s susceptibility and saturation magnetization. The magneto-strictive strain 
perpendicular to the field direction is −l/2, since the sample volume remains constant. Further Magnetic Field and Current Sensors ◾  143
Magneto-strictive materials include monoatomic ferromagnetic metals (such as iron, 
cobalt, or nickel) and ferromagnetic alloys. Well-known examples of the latter are Galfenol 
(FexGa1−x) and Terfenol-D (TbxDy1−xFe2). Another frequently used material is the amor￾phous alloy Fe0.81B13.5Si3.5C2 (trade name Metglass 2605SC) and related metallic glasses. 
Table 10.1 compares ls and the magnetic flux densities Bs at saturation for some selected 
materials [568], and references therein.
In 1980, A. Yariv and H. V. Windsor proposed to employ magnetostriction for optical 
fiber magnetic field measurement [571]. In the same year, A. D. Dandridge et al. experimen￾tally demonstrated a corresponding sensor [572]. Since then, magneto-strictive optical fiber 
sensors for magnetic fields and currents have been an active area of research [573–629]. 
Typically, the fiber is coated with the magneto-strictive material [573, 585, 597], bonded to a 
magneto-strictive slab or strip [575, 579], or wrapped on a magneto-strictive cylinder 
[576, 580]. The longitudinal strain transmitted from the magneto-strictive material onto the 
fiber is measured in a fiber interferometer [572–585] or by a Bragg grating written into the 
fiber [589–629]. Fabry-Pérot-cavity-based sensors were also reported [587, 588]. In the 1980s 
and early 1990s, much of the pioneering work was done at the Naval Research Laboratory in 
FIGURE 10.1 Magneto-strictive strain l as a function of applied magnetic field H; the blue traces 
schematically represent alternating input magnetic fields and corresponding strain signals with and 
without a bias field Hdc.
TABLE 10.1 Saturation Magnetostriction ls and Saturation Magnetic Flux Density Bs
of Selected Materials; [568] and References Therein
Material (3/2)ls(mm/m) Bs(T)
Fe −14 2.15
Ni −50 0.61
Co −93 1.79
Co(50%)Fe(50%) 87 2.45
TbFe2 2630 1.1
Tb0.3Dy0.7Fe2 (Terfenol-D) 1620 1.0
Fe0.81B13.5Si3.5C2 (Metglass 2605SC) 60 1.65144   ◾  Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
Washington, D.C. A focus was on sensors for small and slowly varying magnetic fields; such 
sensors can be utilized for the tracking of vessels and submarines via their perturbations of 
the earth’s magnetic field [572–583]. The magneto-strictive material (frequently a strip of 
metallic glass, about 10 cm long with 1 m of fiber attached to it) modulated the optical phase 
in an arm of a Mach-Zehnder or Michelson interferometer. In the low frequency regime, 
however, environmental and thermal noises tend to mask small magneto-strictive strain 
signals. Here, Koo et al. [576] and Kersey et al. [577] made use of the quadratic response at 
small fields and applied, in addition to the field Hdc to be measured, an ac dither field Hac of 
constant amplitude. The frequency νd of the dither field was above the cut-off frequency of 
the servo loop that kept the interferometer at quadrature. The strain signal of (10.1) is then
λ = = + = ++ ( ) ( ) 2 2 2 2 CH C H H C H H H H dc ac dc ac dc ac 2 . (10.3)
Hence, the interferometer output CHdcHac at frequency νd is directly proportional to Hdc
and unaffected by low frequency noise. Closed loop operation (a second servo loop adds a 
compensating field −Hdc) resulted in a hysteresis-free linear range of more than five orders 
of magnitude with a detection sensitivity of 10−10 T at frequencies below 2 Hz [578, 579]. 
For comparison, the earth’s magnetic field at the equator is about 30 mT.
It is obvious that unbiased ac magnetic fields with frequency νac result in a rectified 
strain response at frequency 2νac (Figure 10.1). Adding an appropriate dc bias field Hdc, e.g., 
by means of a solenoid, provides an output at the fundamental frequency that varies over a 
limited range largely proportional to the input ac field. F. Bucholtz et al. reported a corre￾sponding interferometric magneto-strictive magnetometer with a resolution of 70 fT/√Hz 
near 34 kHz [582]. Sedlar et al. demonstrated for a ceramic-jacketed fiber (cobalt-doped 
nickel ferrite coating over 1m) operated in a Mach-Zehnder interferometer a field resolu￾tion of 2.5 × 10−3 A/m/√Hz (equivalent to 3.1 × 10−9 T/√Hz in air) at frequencies below 2 
kHz. With a bias field of 13.5 kA/m, the signal was free of hysteresis up to 20 kA/m. The 
jacketed fiber exhibited mechanical resonances between 0.5 and 1.5 kHz [585].
Most subsequent magneto-strictive sensors employed fiber Bragg gratings for interroga￾tion [589–629]. FBG-based sensors commonly do not achieve the high field resolution of 
their interferometric counterparts but have the benefit of simplicity. Nazare et al., for 
example, measured a Bragg wavelength shift at 1540 nm of 1.45 nm/T (induced strain of 
1.2 × 10−3/T) for a FBG on a Terfenol-D rod [622]. Assuming a wavelength resolution of 
5 pm, the corresponding magnetic flux resolution is about 3.5 mT. Distributed and quasi￾distributed magneto-strictive field sensors were reported in [600, 601, 603, 604, 617].
Whereas most FBG-based sensors focused on the measurement of local magnetic fields, 
several publications have been dedicated to ac current measurement [618–629]. Typically, 
the magneto-strictive material with an attached FBG is part of a toroidal assembly around 
the current conductor. The required dc bias magnetic field is generated by permanent mag￾nets [618, 620, 623], mechanical stress applied to the magneto-strictive material [618, 621, 
626], or a combination of both. Note that mechanical stress generates a bias field through 
the inverse magneto-strictive effect (Villari effect). As an example, Figure 10.2 shows a sen￾sor developed by A. Dante et al. [624, 625]. Magnets generated the dc bias field; steel ring Further Magnetic Field and Current Sensors ◾  145
segments concentrated the bias field as well as the ac field of the current to be measured 
onto a Terfenol-D (TD) rod with an attached FBG. The magnetic flux concentration allowed 
the authors to reduce the mass of the expensive TD to 5.6 g, and after further optimization, 
to 2.0 g. The Bragg wavelength shift as a function of an applied ac current (60 Hz) showed 
good linearity with a slope of 0.42 pm/A up to about 650 A (Figure 10.2). At higher cur￾rents, the TD rod went into saturation. The Bragg wavelength resolution of ±10 pm corre￾sponded to a current resolution of 24 A. Lopez et al. reported similar designs with the TD 
masses as small as 0.42 g [627, 628]. At ac up to 800 A, nonlinearity errors were less than 
1% of the full-scale current. In that case, the magneto-strictive transducer was a composite 
with TD particles dispersed in epoxy resin. A certain drawback of magneto-strictive cur￾rent transducers is the inherent phase delay of the output signal with respect to applied 
current (e.g., 4.8° in [627]). For a review on magneto-strictive optical current sensors and 
the preparation of magneto-strictive composites and their characterization, see [629].
10.2 MAGNETIC FLUID-BASED SENSORS
Magnetic fluids (MF), or ferrofluids, are colloidal dispersions of ferromagnetic nanopar￾ticles in a liquid carrier [630]. Carrier liquids include water and oils. The particles consist 
of materials such as Fe, Co, or magnetite (Fe3O4) and are commonly coated with a surfac￾tant like hydroxyl or carboxyl to prevent clustering. Particularly, Fe3O4-based fluids are 
frequently used for sensing. Typical particle diameters are about 10 nm; particle volume 
fractions in the carrier liquid are on the order of 1%. Without an applied magnetic field, 
the particles are essentially uniformly distributed in the carrier liquid, whereas in a field, 
they tend to form chain-like structures parallel to the field [631]. The particle rearrange￾ment is accompanied by changes in the refractive index and absorption spectra of the 
fluid [631, 632]. Also, induced birefringence and dichroism have been observed [633–635]. 
FIGURE 10.2 Magneto-strictive current sensor (left) and peak-to-peak Bragg wavelength shift vs. 
applied ac current (right) (reprinted from Dante et al. [624], with permission.)146   ◾  Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
Like magnetostriction, the effects are nonlinear and saturate above a certain field strength. 
Naturally, response times are relatively slow (on the order of 10 s). With 1.8 vol% of Fe3O4-
particles dispersed in water, Zhao et al. measured a refractive index change of about 2.0 × 
10−2 between 0 mT and 70 mT for fields parallel to the optical path and −1.0 × 10−2 for 
fields perpendicular to the optical path [631]. The index changed roughly linearly with 
the field strength between 20 mT and 50 mT before reaching saturation. The field-induced 
refractive index change has been utilized in numerous magnetic field sensors. The sen￾sor concepts include MF-filled Fabry-Pérot cavities [636–638], etched, tilted, or tapered 
fiber Bragg gratings [639–641], long period gratings [642, 643], fiber mode interferences 
[644–650], micro-fiber devices [651–653], silicon micro-ring resonators [654], light refrac￾tion [655, 656], fiber Mach-Zehnder and Sagnac interferometers [657, 658], fiber ring-down 
cavities [659], and others. Typically, the sensitive fiber section resides in a MF-filled capil￾lary and interacts with the fluid via the evanescent field. As a result, compact and simple 
sensors become possible. Also, sensors based on transmission changes of photonic crystal 
fiber with MF infiltrated air holes were reported [660, 661]. Current measurement with 
MF-based sensors was reported in [636, 646, 654, 662]. It is worth mentioning that mag￾netic fluids also exhibit the Faraday effect. Martinez et al. reported a very high Verdet 
constant of 1.2 × 105
 rad/T/m at 633 nm for a homemade magnetite-based fluid [663]. For 
reviews of MF H-field sensors and further references, see [638, 664].
10.3 NON-OPTICAL NON-CONVENTIONAL SENSORS
Optical current sensors are particularly advantageous at high voltages, as they inherently 
provide electric insulation for ground-based equipment. Also, optical sensors are benefi￾cial at high currents (tens or hundreds of kiloamps), as they are free of saturation and can 
easily be adapted to application-specific conductor geometry. On the other hand, optical 
sensors are commonly not the solution of choice for lower voltage systems (e.g., in factories 
or power electronics) and small currents, not least for economic reasons. Besides more tra￾ditional current transducers based on shunts, Rogowski coils, or Hall effect devices, other 
non-conventional techniques have become available, which include fluxgate sensors, GMR 
sensors (gigantic magneto resistance), and AMR sensors (anisotropic magneto resistance). 
Often, the actual sensor element is within a gap of a magnetic core enclosing the current 
conductor and operated in a closed-loop circuit for linear response. These sensors are out￾side the scope of this book but have been reviewed, for example, by Lenz et al. [665] and 
S. Ziegler et al. [666].
Moreover, several institutions and companies have developed in the context of “smart 
grids” line-powered, wireless instrumentation for monitoring of medium and high voltage 
power lines. Typically, these devices are attached to the transmission line using a clamp-on 
style device; and may monitor a multitude of parameters like current and voltage wave￾forms including high frequency content, line temperature, line inclination angle, and sag. 
While these sensors do not replace conventional measurement and protective instrument 
transformers or corresponding optical sensors, they are complementary and do help 
improve the electric grid’s performance and efficiency by allowing a wide-area monitoring 
of possible faults, disturbances, or abnormal operating conditions (such as voltage Further Magnetic Field and Current Sensors ◾  147
volatility or unbalanced load between phases), as well as facilitating the integration of 
renewable energy sources, while reducing operating expenses [667–671].
Other non-conventional alternatives for monitoring power line currents and voltages 
are low-cost magnetic and electric field sensors located on ground beneath the power lines. 
Sensors include inductive sensors, Hall effect sensors, magneto-resistive sensors, and 
capacitive probes. The number of sensors is equal (or larger) than the number of power 
lines to be monitored. A matrix of conversion coefficients, obtained by simulation or cali￾bration, relates the sensor signals to the line currents or voltages [672–677].148 DOI: 10.1201/9781003100324-14
CHAPTER 11
Accuracy, Precision, and 
Reliability of Optical Current 
Sensors
Applications of optical current sensors in the electric power industry demand accuracy 
as high as ±0.1% at temperatures that can range, for example, from −40°C to 85°C. The 
sensors are expected to maintain their accuracy over extended periods of service time. 
(Traditional instrument current transformers service times are more than 30 years.) The 
accuracy specification of a sensor indicates how close the mean of repeated measurements 
(at constant current) is to the true current. By contrast, the precision is a measure for the 
scattering of repeated measurements about their mean value [678]. Ideally, a sensor is both 
accurate and precise. However, a sensor can be accurate (the mean of repeated measure￾ments is close to the true current) but unprecise (individual measurements strongly scat￾ter) and, vice versa, a sensor can be inaccurate but precise. Furthermore, the sensors are 
expected to be reliable, i.e., they should be free of deficiencies and failures that could cause 
accuracy loss or signal loss. The following sections consider accuracy, precision, and long￾term reliability for the example of FOCS with polarization-rotated reflection (Figure 8.10), 
but many of the findings also apply to the other sensor configurations discussed above and 
the voltage sensors of Part III.
11.1 FOCS ACCURACY
Manufacturing tolerances, inadequate sensor components, and poor packaging may lead 
to systematic scale factor instability and signal errors. Error causes include:
11.1.1 Manufacturing Tolerances
Manufacturing tolerances most notably concern the relative orientations of the polar￾izer, principal axes of the modulator, if applicable, PM fiber segments including the fiber 
retarder, and the sensing fiber (see Figure 8.10). There is also some tolerance in the length Accuracy, Precision, and Reliability of Optical Current Sensors ◾  149
and retardation of the retarder. Imperfect axes alignment at PM fiber splices or fiber-to￾modulator interfaces results in cross-coupling between the orthogonal polarization modes 
and hence parasitic light waves propagating through the optical circuit. Deviations of the 
polarizer from perfect 45°-orientation reduce the interference fringe contrast but leave 
the scale factor unchanged [445, 449]. Polarization cross-coupling at a point between the 
polarizer and the modulator, particularly at the source-side modulator facet, also does 
not affect the scale factor. Cross-coupling at the coil-side modulator facet and at splices 
along the PM fiber link to the sensing coil enhances the scale factor — in proportion to 
1/cos(2Da), where Da is the misalignment angle — and reduces the fringe contrast, simi￾larly as an imperfect 90°-retarder does, as shown in Figure 8.13 [406, 436, 445, 449, 454]. 
Imperfect 45°-orientation of the retarder with respect to PM fiber also enhances the scale 
factor. Scale factor changes resulting from a single misaligned PM fiber splice or imperfect 
retarder orientation are stable and accounted for by the sensor calibration. Therefore, they 
do not impact the sensor accuracy. On the other hand, multiple cross-coupling at serial 
PM fiber splices can seriously degrade a sensor, as will be explained below. The retardation 
and orientation of the fiber retarder affects the temperature dependence of the sensor, as 
we have seen further above (Figures 8.13, 8.14, 8.18).
11.1.2 Temperature Dependence of Optical Component Parameters
Typically, the sensing optical fiber contributes the most to the overall temperature depen￾dence of a current sensor (Verdet constant, plus embedded linear birefringence in the 
particular case of a spun fiber). The corresponding scale factor changes are repeatable 
(provided the fiber is not exposed to excessive stress) and can be intrinsically compensated 
by means of the retarder as described in Section 8.6 or a temperature sensor. Residual 
errors may remain, e.g., due to temperature gradients. It is obvious that the remaining 
error can be more significant with the larger overall temperature dependence of the sens￾ing fiber. Ideally, the signal variation to be compensated should not exceed 1–2% for a 
sensor with specified accuracy of ±0.2%. As Figure 8.16 has illustrated, residual errors can 
be kept below 0.1% for a properly designed and fabricated sensor, even over a temperature 
range as wide as 125°C.
The modulator’s response (p-voltage) changes by several percent per 100°C but does not 
enter into the signal for reasons already discussed. The center wavelength of an uncooled 
1310 nm SLED varies by about 0.6 nm/°C, which would result in an (unacceptable) scale 
factor change of about 0.09%/°C due to the wavelength dependence of the Verdet con￾stant. Temperature stabilization of the SLED chip by a thermo-electric cooler (TEC) 
reduces the wavelength excursions to just a few hundred picometers between −25°C and 
65°C [460]. The corresponding scale factor changes (within about ±0.025%) can be easily 
calibrated out.
As already indicated, multiple polarization cross-coupling at subsequent PM fiber 
splices or other coupling points may represent a more serious problem if not handled prop￾erly, even though principal axes misalignment is commonly less than 1–2° with state-of￾the-art PM fiber splicers. In case of a single cross-coupling point, the pair of cross-coupled 
orthogonal waves becomes incoherent with respect to their parent waves after a distance 150   ◾  Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
l ≫ lc/Dng and will not affect the recovered magneto-optic phase shift. (lc is the source 
coherence length and Dng the group index difference of the orthogonal modes.) If a second 
cross-coupling event occurs within a distance lc/Dng from the first coupling point, the pair 
of double cross-coupled waves is at least partially coherent with the primary wave pair. At 
changing temperature, the phase between the primary and double cross-coupled waves 
varies. As a result, the sensor signal as a function of temperature exhibits oscillations with 
a peak-to-peak amplitude that can easily reach some tenths of a percent of the true current 
signal and a period (often a few °C) determined by the separation of the coupling points. 
Separating the coupling points by a distance l ≫ lc/Dng removes the oscillations. Assuming 
a typical 1310-nm SLED and Panda PM fiber, the term lc/Dng is on the order of 10 cm. 
Ideally, l should then amount to several tens of centimeters. Whereas this is easily imple￾mented for two coupling points, the task becomes more challenging for multiple coupling 
points, as their separations must be properly staggered to exclude mutual coherence of a 
multitude of parasitic wave pairs. Moreover, the group delay of a spun birefringent sensing 
fiber must also be considered.
11.1.3 Stress Acting on Optical Components
Polarimetry is an excellent method to measure stress. A current sensor should measure 
exclusively the actual electric current flowing in the conductor, but not any “apparent cur￾rent signal” caused by stress-induced effects on the device. Therefore, a significant part 
of the development of high-end FOCS is the identification and elimination of potential 
sources of random stress, as stress inevitably leads to unstable performance as a function 
of temperature and signal drift. Among the most common sources of possible stress acting 
on these devices are improper packaging of the sensing fiber, fiber feedthroughs (e.g., into 
the modulator housing), inadequate fiber coatings (especially at low temperature), splice 
protecting sleeves, poorly fabricated PM fiber cables, fiber connectors. Commercially avail￾able PM fiber connectors, for instance, even if upgraded for use in FOCS, were found to be 
incompatible with class 0.2 accuracy [452, 460].
11.1.4 Component Aging
Component aging is another potential cause for accuracy loss or even sensor failure and 
will be addressed separately further below.
11.2 FOCS PRECISION
11.2.1 Noise Sources
The precision of a sensor is limited by signal noise. Noise sources in FOCS are thermal 
noise (also known as Johnson-Nyquist noise), photon shot noise (Poisson noise), and light 
source intensity noise. Thermal noise reflects the thermal movement of the conduction 
electrons in the electric circuit and is independent of the received light power. Shot noise 
relates to the fundamental statistical fluctuations of the number of photons per time inter￾val in a light beam and is proportional to the square root of the light power P (or number 
of photons per time interval). Hence, at increasing optical power the relative shot noise 
decreases in proportion to 1/√P. Source intensity noise has its origin in the beating of Accuracy, Precision, and Reliability of Optical Current Sensors ◾  151
spectral components at random phases and increases in proportion to the light power. 
Higher power will therefore not reduce the relative source intensity noise. Most commonly, 
a light source’s intensity noise is higher the narrower the spectral width of the source’s 
emitted light (see [679] for details on RIN of broadband sources). Since the three noise 
sources are uncorrelated, the total noise power is the sum of the individual powers (rather 
than the square of the sum of the noise rms amplitudes) [679, 680]:
〈 〉=〈 〉+〈 〉+〈 〉 22 2 2 th sh in . niiii (11.1)
Here, 〈 〉〈 〉〈 〉 222
th sh in iii , , are the time-averaged contributions from thermal, shot, and source 
intensity noise, respectively. The rms amplitudes of the three noise currents in the photo￾detector signal are
th = ∆ L
4 , kT i f R (11.2)
i ei f sh = 〈 〉∆ 2 , (11.3)
2
in
e
, i i f 〈 〉 = ∆
∆ν (11.4)
where k is the Boltzmann constant, T the absolute temperature, RL the load resistance that 
the photocurrent experiences, e the electron charge, 〈i〉 the mean photodetector current, 
Dne the effective source spectral width, and Df the detection bandwidth.
An important characteristic of a fiber-optic current sensor is the noise equivalent cur￾rent (NEC), that is, the current that produces a signal equal to the noise rms amplitude and 
represents the low end of the measurement range. Assuming a current sensor with 
polarization-rotated reflection and 90°-phase bias, the optical power arriving at the photo￾detector generates a photocurrent
i rP d 0 = +∆ ( /2 1 sin , )( φ ) (11.5)
where r is the power-to-photocurrent conversion coefficient (InGasAs photodiodes that 
are typically used at 1310 nm or 1550 nm have conversion coefficients close to r = 1 A/W), 
P0 is the optical power at constructive interference, and Δϕ = 4VNI; the fringe visibility 
is assumed as K = 1. Considering only shot noise for a moment, the corresponding noise 
equivalent current (sh) NE I follows from (11.3) and (11.5) by setting the average photocurrent 
〈i〉 equal to rP0/2 and the current-induced signal change Did = r(P0/2)Δϕ equal to the shot 
noise ish (with Δϕ ≪ 1):
( ) = ∆ sh
NE
0
1 . 2
e I f VN rP (11.6)152   ◾  Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
The noise equivalent currents associated with thermal noise and intensity noise, (th) NE I and 
(in) NE I , follow analogously. The total noise equivalent current is then
( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) = ++ ( ) 222 th sh in
NE NE NE , NE II I I (11.7)
and the signal-to-noise ratio is SNR = I/INE. Figure 11.1 shows the individual noise equiva￾lent currents as well as the total as a function of the optical power P0 for a fused silica fiber 
coil with a single loop (N = 1), a detection bandwidth of 1 Hz, a broadband source centered at 
1310 nm, Dne = 5.2 × 10−12 Hz (Dle = 30 nm), and r = 1 A/W. It is obvious that thermal noise 
(here for RL = 1 MΩ) plays a role only at optical powers well below 1 mW. Shot noise domi￾nates up to about 5 mW. Above that level, intensity noise takes over as the main contribution. 
Note that optical power increase will improve the signal-to-noise ratio only up to about 5–10 
mW, i.e., in the regime where shot noise dominates. Naturally, the noise equivalent current 
decreases with increasing number of fiber loops. Increasing the signal averaging time t = 
1/Df reduces the noise equivalent current in proportion to 1/√t. The noise-equivalent cur￾rent of a well-designed sensor with passive polarimetric detection is close to the theoretical 
limit. In sensors with active open-loop or closed loop detection circuits, the signal process￾ing typically adds some extra noise and correspondingly increases the NEC.
11.2.2 Controlling Precision
At m repeated measurements of the current signal, the individual measurement samples xi
form a Gaussian distribution about their mean value m. The half-width at half maximum 
is the standard deviation σ of the samples:
( )
2
1
1 ,
m
i
i
x
m
σ µ
=
= − ∑ (11.8)
FIGURE 11.1 Contributions to noise equivalent current of thermal noise (RL = 1 MΩ), shot noise, and 
source intensity noise vs. optical power P0 for a FOCS with polarization-rotated reflection having a sin￾gle fused silica fiber loop; l = 1310 nm, Dne = 5.2 × 10−12 Hz, r = 1. The detection bandwidth is Df = 1 Hz.Accuracy, Precision, and Reliability of Optical Current Sensors ◾  153
1
1 m
i
i
ì x
m =
= ∑ (11.9)
s is equal to the noise equivalent current of (11.7): s = INE. Hence, 68.3% of the samples are 
within a range of m ±σ, 94.4% within m ±2σ, and 99.7% within m ±3σ. For further illus￾tration, we consider the IEC accuracy class 0.2s for current transformers, which requires 
accuracy to within ±0.2% at currents between 20% and 120% of the rated primary current, 
±0.35% at 5% and ±0.75% at 1% of the rated current [474]. Naturally, systematic sensor 
errors should be well within those limits. Furthermore, one may desire a precision corre￾sponding to ±1σ, ±2σ, or even ±3σ, that is, 68.3%, 94.4%, or 99.7% of all samples should lie 
within the error limits. At a given optical power P0, the precision can be controlled via the 
number N of fiber loops and bandwidth Df, i.e., the signal averaging time t, t = 1/Df; Eq. 
(11.7). As an example, we assume a rated primary current of 1 kA. The low end of the speci￾fied current range is then 10 A (1% of 1 kA) with error limits of ±0.75%. Figure 11.2 shows 
for the three cases the relative precision, defined as iINE/I, i = 1, 2, 3, at I = 10 A as function 
of t for P0 = 5 mW and N = 4. It is seen that the signal samples must be time-averaged over 
at least over 0.22 s, 0.9 s, and 2.0 s to limit their scatter to ±0.75% of 10 A (75 mA) with σ, 
2σ, and 3σ-precision, respectively. Whereas averaging times of seconds and longer are eas￾ily acceptable for measuring and metering purposes, protective relaying (recognition and 
interruption of faults) requires response times on a millisecond time scale. On the other 
hand, accuracy demands for protective current transformers are more relaxed. The fre￾quently requested accuracy class 5P requires accuracy to within ±1% at the rated primary 
current; in our example, that accuracy is reached with 2σ-precision already after 50 ms.
11.3 LONG-TERM RELIABILITY
Most applications of fiber-optic current sensors are in the harsh environments of the elec￾tric power industry. Reliable operation is of utmost importance to the industry. Fiber-optic 
current sensors represent a new technology and, naturally, experience about their long-term 
FIGURE 11.2 Relative sensor precision (σ, 2σ, and 3σ) vs. signal averaging time at a current I of 10 
A with N = 4 and P0 = 5 mW (see text for details).154   ◾  Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
reliability and performance is still limited. Over a period of several years, the author’s team 
at ABB has carried out extensive accelerated aging tests on the individual optical FOCS 
components and field tests of the full system for phase-modulated FOCS with polarization￾rotated reflection as depicted in Figure 8.10; see [460] and references therein. Typically, the 
component manufacturers qualify the components for the telecom industry and other uses 
[681]. Most of those tests only partially address the needs of FOCS. For example, long-term 
drift of the source wavelength may not be particularly critical in applications like optical 
coherence tomography but could lead to inacceptable accuracy loss in FOCS. Likewise, a 
polarization extinction (PER) of the integrated-optic modulator of 20–25 dB in a limited 
temperature range may suffice for cable television distribution but is again inadequate for 
FOCS and requires device improvements and subsequent long-term tests.
Prior to the tests, an extensive Failure Mode and Effects Analysis (FMEA) [682] of the 
sensor system as such and its essential components helped to define the tests. The compo￾nents were exposed to temperature cycling (up to 15,000 cycles between −25°C and 65°C) 
and damp heat (85% relative humidity at 85°C for up to 7900 hours). Thermal cycling 
serves to discover potential failure modes associated with thermo-mechanical stress or 
fatigue at repeated differential thermal expansion of the involved materials. Damp heat 
accelerates diffusion and oxidation processes and is known to trigger packaging and mate￾rial related failure modes [683–688]. Various PM fiber samples were exposed to constant 
high temperature at dry conditions (up to 115°C for up to 20,000 hours) to determine 
potential coating degradation and PER reduction [689, 690].
The tested optical components included SLED light sources in a butterfly package with 
integrated thermo-electric cooler, integrated-optic lithium niobate birefringence modula￾tors, fiber polarizers, fiber couplers, photodiodes, custom-made PM fiber connectors, and 
fiber coatings. All tests involved multiple samples of each component, often from several 
suppliers. During the accelerated aging process, the components were repeatedly recharac￾terized at defined intervals to determine drifts, if any, or, in the worst case, component 
failure. Overall, the tests showed high maturity of the components, but also some differ￾ences among suppliers and a few component failures (that led to follow-up measures). The 
PER stability of PM fiber connectors, even with custom-adaptation, was found to be insuf￾ficient for 0.2%-accuracy, however; also see [454]. Hence, fiber splicing was determined as 
the more appropriate solution.
As an example, Figure 11.3 shows the evolution of the center wavelength of six 5-mW, 
1310-nm SLDs from two suppliers during long-term temperature cycling. The symbols 
indicate the center wavelength measured at a constant drive current and a TEC tempera￾ture of 25°C. Note that the vertical lines are not error bars but indicate the residual wave￾length excursions during temperature cycling (which in a sensor are accounted for by 
calibration). The long-term variations in the center wavelength were from ±190 pm to ±380 
pm and well within the tolerances for accuracy class 0.2. Changes in the output power 
remained uncritical.
Figure 11.4 depicts the evolution of the polarization extinction ratio vs. temperature over 
15,000 temperature cycles of one of the two fiber-to-waveguide junctions of a modulator. 
(Recall that only PER variations at the coil-side junction affect the sensor scale factor). Accuracy, Precision, and Reliability of Optical Current Sensors ◾  155
The already high PER at the beginning of the test (black squares) further improved with 
increasing number of cycles. The corresponding scale factor changes would be well 
below ±0.1%.
Finally, Figure 11.5 shows data from a 3-year field trial of a 3-phase FOCS system inte￾grated in 420-kV high voltage circuit breakers at a substation in Sweden (details are 
described in Section 12.2 below). The deviations of the optical sensors from corresponding 
conventional current transformers remained well within ±0.2% during the entire test 
(upper panel), independent of the ambient temperature (lower panel). Supplementary 
FIGURE 11.3 SLED center wavelengths vs. number of temperature cycles (between −25°C and 
65°C). The wavelengths were measured at a constant drive current and a TEC temperature of 25°C. 
The symbols represent the center wavelengths at an ambient temperature of 25°C. The vertical bands 
indicate the residual wavelength excursions during the temperature cycles. SLED 1–4: Supplier 1. 
SLED 5, 6: Supplier 2 (© 2020 IEEE. Reprinted with permission from [460].)
FIGURE 11.4 Birefringence modulator: Polarization extinction ratio at a fiber-to-waveguide 
junction vs. modulator temperature at increasing number of temperature cycles (© 2020 IEEE. 
Reprinted with permission from [460].)156   ◾  Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
recordings of light source and modulator parameters also did not indicate any significant 
degradation in the power source, the modulator p-voltage, or insertion loss. Accelerated 
aging test results for magneto-optic current sensors with a glass rod sensing element were 
reported in [691]. And a review on measurement errors in optical current transducers was 
given in [692].
FIGURE 11.5 Field test of 3-phase FOCS integrated in high voltage circuit breakers: Difference 
vs. time between optical and conventional current measurement signals for the three phases (top); 
ambient temperature vs. time (bottom) (© 2020 IEEE. Reprinted with permission from [460].)DOI: 10.1201/9781003100324-15 157
CHAPTER 12
Applications
The following sections describe a few applications of all-fiber current sensors and illustrate 
some of their benefits versus conventional solutions.
12.1 ELECTRO-WINNING OF METALS
One of the first successful commercial applications of fiber-optic current sensors was in the 
electro-winning of metals, most importantly, aluminum. First introduced in 2005 by ABB, 
FOCS rapidly gained a significant market share in that industry. Other FOCS manufactur￾ers including DynAmp/NxtPhase (USA) and Smart Digital Optics (Australia) followed 
soon afterwards. Aluminum is won by electrolysis (Hall-Héroult process) from aluminum 
oxide (alumina) dissolved in molten cryolite (Na3AlF6) according to 2Al2O3 + 3C → 4Al + 
3CO2. Al2O3 is chemically extracted from Bauxite ore in a preceding process, and the car￾bon stems from the carbon anodes of the Hall-Héroult process [693, 694]. The electrolysis 
takes place in a chain of smelter pots at dc currents as high as 600 kA. The process con￾sumes large amounts of energy — about 15.7 kWh per kg Al. Accordingly, large factories 
require several 100 MW of power. The current flows from groups of rectifiers through 
multiple parallel busbars into the serial smelter pots. Often, the busbars occupy an overall 
cross-section on the order of square meters (Figure 12.1). For process efficiency control, the 
total current must be measured with accuracy to within ±0.1%. Traditionally, Hall effect 
current transducers with magnetic flux compensation have done the task. The transduc￾ers have a segmented magnetic core surrounding the busbars with magnetic-field sensi￾tive Hall elements positioned in air gaps of the core segments. Solenoids in closed-loop 
feedback circuits nullify the magnetic fields in the core segments. The total of the solenoid 
currents is then a measure for the smelter current.
Additionally, simpler open-loop Hall transducers with somewhat lower accuracy often 
serve to measure the currents of the individual rectifier groups. Hall transducers with flux 
compensation, although very precise, are rather complex devices, can weigh more than 
2000 kg and may consume some kW of electric power. Installation and commissioning are 
time consuming and often require magnetic centering to prevent magnetic overload of 158 ◾ Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
individual transducer segments. By contrast, a fiber-optic current sensor, as shown in 
Figure 12.1, measures the current with a single loop of fiber around the busbars [326, 440]. 
Here, the sensor is configured, as shown in Figure 8.11, and the sensing fiber resides in a 
fused-silica capillary embedded in a flexible strip of fiber reinforced epoxy (inset in 
Figure 12.1). A modular frame composed of hollow segments of fiber reinforced epoxy and 
mounted to the busbars accommodates the sensing strip. By adjusting the lengths of the 
fiber and straight frame segments, the sensor can be easily adapted to different conductor 
cross-sections (Figure 12.2). Magnetic centering is no longer necessary; the sensor cor￾rectly measures the current with the required accuracy even in strongly inhomogeneous 
fields, e.g., at angled conductors or in the presence of neighbor currents. Other important 
industrial FOCS applications include the electro-refining of copper and electrolytic pro￾duction of chlorine.
12.2 ELECTRIC POWER TRANSMISSION
Conventional current transformers (CT) in air-insulated HV substations are typically 
stand-alone devices, as shown in the introduction. In a corresponding stand-alone FOCS, 
the fiber coil is mounted on top of a support insulator, similarly like the bulk-optic sensor 
of Figure 6.6. However, the flexible and compact design of FOCS sensing coils also allow 
for new installation options. As an example, Figure 12.3 illustrates the integration of FOCS 
into a double chamber high voltage circuit breaker [327]. The sensor head housing with two 
fiber coils for redundancy sits at the top end of the breaker’s support insulator and inside 
the breaker’s insulation gas volume. The current path is modified such that the current 
makes a detour through the aperture of the coil housing. Two three-phase opto-electronic 
FIGURE 12.1 Fiber-optic current sensor mounted to the current-carrying busbars of an alumi￾num smelter. The rated current is 260 kA. The width of the sensor head housing is 2.25 m. Inset: 
The sensing fiber resides in a flexible strip of fiber reinforced epoxy (© 2007 IEEE. Reprinted with 
permission from [326]).Applications ◾ 159
units reside in a nearby cubicle and interrogate all six fiber coils of a three-phase breaker 
system. The fiber cable of a given sensor head runs through the hollow insulator column 
to ground and leaves the breaker through a gastight feed-through — the insulator also 
contains the breaker drive rod. The opto-electronic units send the six digital sensor sig￾nals (sampled values) via an optical process bus according to the IEC61850-9-2LE proto￾col to secondary electronics for metering or relaying in the substation control house. The 
integration of FOCS into breakers saves the space for conventional CT and results in a 
substantial footprint reduction. Moreover, there is less installation work in the field. The 
sensor heads are already mounted in the factory; the same applies to the opto-electronic 
units in the cubicle. Figure 12.4 shows a photograph of 420 kV circuit breakers in the field 
with integrated FOCS. As an alternative to full integration, others have mounted the FOCS 
FIGURE 12.2 Sensor heads for different busbar cross-sections and opto-electronics module with 
analog and digital interfaces. The inner diameter of the smallest head is about 73 cm (© 2007 IEEE. 
Reprinted with permission from [440]).160 ◾ Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
fiber coil outside the breaker chambers at one of the terminals and guided the fiber lead to 
ground in a separate insulator column [695].
FOCS with large-diameter coils are not only of interest to the industrial applications of the 
previous section, but also to current measurement at generator circuit breakers, gas-insulated 
FIGURE 12.3 Integration of redundant FOCS in double chamber HV circuit breaker [327].
FIGURE 12.4 Live tank circuit breakers (420 kV) with integrated FOCS in HV substation [327].Applications ◾ 161
switchgear (GIS) [227], or the base of high voltage bushings, e.g., of power transformers, dead 
tank circuit breakers (Figure 12.5), or HVDC converter stations [443, 696, 697]. Note that in 
the latter cases, current measurement occurs at ground potential. Another FOCS application 
that has gained particular interest is the protection of mixed overhead/underground power￾lines, since the problem is difficult to solve with conventional CT [341, 698]. The identifica￾tion of a potential fault on the underground cable section requires current measurement at 
both ends of the cable. Often, those locations are several km away from the nearest substa￾tions and without electric infrastructure. Other than conventional CT, FOCS fiber coils at 
those locations can be remotely interrogated. To this end, existing fibers in the optical ground 
wire cable of the power line may be used as optical links. Obviously, corresponding FOCS 
must work with non-PM fiber leads such as the ones in Figure 8.9 or Figure 8.12. More appli￾cation examples can be found in the references of the previous chapters.
12.3 NUCLEAR FUSION RESEARCH
Fiber-optic current sensors with large-diameter fiber loops have also been developed for 
use in plasma physics, particularly at tokamaks for nuclear fusion research such as ITER 
(International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor) in France. Here, the sensors are to be 
optimized for pulsed currents with peaks that can reach into the MA-range. Like in FOCS 
for electric power, much of the work has been dedicated to the exploration and mitigation 
of limiting effects due to birefringence, vibration, imperfect components, noise, etc. [225, 
390, 699–703].
FURTHER READING
Since the 1980s, many papers have reviewed the status of optical current sensors at various 
stages of progress [134, 662, 704–718].
FIGURE 12.5 FOCS at a bushing of a dead tank circuit breaker [697].162
References
1. M. Faraday, “I. Experimental researches in electricity – nineteenth series,” Phil. Trans. R. Soc. 
136, 1–20, 1846, doi: 10.1098/rstl.1846.0001
2. E. Verdet, “On the optical properties developed in transparent bodies by the action of magne￾tism,” Ann. Chim. Phys. 41, 570 (1854).
3. H. Becquerel, “Sur une interprétation applicable au phénomène de Faraday et au phénomène 
de Zeeman,” Comptes Rendus 125, 679–685 (1897).
4. Y. Tamaru, H. Chen, A. Fuchimukai, et al., “Wavelength dependence of the Verdet constant in 
synthetic quartz glass for deep-ultraviolet light sources,” Opt. Mater. Express 11, 814–820 (2021).
5. T. Yoshino, “Theory for the Faraday magneto-optic effect in optical fiber,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. B. 
22(9), 1856–1860 (2005).
6. J. Noda, T. Hosaka, Y. Sasaki, and R. Ulrich, “Dispersion of Verdet constant in stress-birefringent 
silica fibre,” Electron. Lett. 20, 906–908 (1984).
7. A. H. Rose, S. M. Etzel, and C. M. Wang, “Verdet constant dispersion in annealed optical fiber 
current sensors,” J. Lightwave Technol., 15(5), 803–807 (1997), doi: 10.1109/50.580818
8. S. Donati, V. Annovazzi-Lodi, and T. Tambosso, “Magneto-optical fibre sensors for electri￾cal industry: analysis of performances,” IEE Proc. Optoelectron. 135(5), 372–382 (1988), doi: 
10.1049/ip-j.1988.0069
9. D. Vojna, O. Slezák, A. Lucianetti, and T. Mocek, “Verdet constant of magneto-active materi￾als developed for high-power Faraday devices,” Appl. Sci. 9, 3160–3180 (2019), doi:10.3390/
app9153160
10. L. I. Schiff, Quantum Mechanics, 3rd ed. (McGraw-Hill, Tokyo, 1968).
11. M. Battiato, G. Barbalinardo, and P. M. Oppeneer, “Quantum theory of the inverse Faraday 
effect,” Phys. Rev. B89, 014413 (2014).
12. A. K. Zvezdin and V. A. Kotov, Modern Magnetooptics and Magnetooptical Materials, 1st ed. 
(Taylor & Francis Group, New York, NY, USA, 1997), pp. 1–109.
13. D. Imaizumi, T. Hayakawa, and M. Nogami, “Faraday rotation effects of Mn2+-modified 
Tb2O3-B2O3 glass in pulsed magnetic field,” J. Lightwave Technol. 20(4), 740–744 (2002).
14. P. S. Pershan, “Magneto‐optical effects,” J. Appl. Phys. 38, 1482–1490 (1967), doi: 10.1063/
1.1709678
15. M. Freiser, “A survey of magnetooptic effects,” IEEE Trans. Magn. 4(2), 152–161 (1968).
16. M. N. Deeter, A. H. Rose, and G. W. Day, “Sensitivity limits to ferrimagnetic Faraday effect 
magnetic field sensors,” J. Appl. Phys. 70, 6407 (1991), doi: 10.1063/1.349910
17. D.-X. Chen, J. A. Brug, and R. B. Goldfarb, “Demagnetization factors for cylinders,” IEEE Trans. 
Magn. 27(4), 3601–3619 (1991).
18. R. C. Booth and E. A. D. White, “Magneto-optic properties of rare earth iron Garnet crystals in 
the wavelength range 1.1–1.7μm and their use in device fabrication,” J. Phys. D Appl. Phys. 17, 
579–587, 1984. doi: 10.1088/0022-3727/17/3/015References ◾ 163
19. C. Z. Tan and J. Arndt, “The Faraday effect in silica glasses,” Physica B Condens. Matter 233(1), 
1–7 (1997).
20. C. Z. Tan and J. Arndt, “Wavelength dependence of the Faraday effect in glassy SiO2,” J. Phys. 
Chem. Solids 60, 1689–1692 (1999).
21. R. Yasuhara, S. Tokita, J. Kawanaka, et al. “Cryogenic temperature characteristics of Verdet 
constant on terbium gallium garnet ceramics,” Opt. Express 15(18), 11255–11261 (2007).
22. J. L. Flores and J. A. Ferrari, “Verdet constant dispersion measurement using polarization￾stepping techniques,” Appl. Opt. 47(24), 4396–4399 (2008).
23. K. Turvey, “Determination of Verdet constant from combined ac and dc measurements,” Rev. 
Scient. Instrum. 64(6), 1561–1568 (1993),. doi: doi.org/10.1063/1.1144027
24. R. B. Wagreich and C. C. Davis, “Accurate magneto-optic sensitivity measurements of some 
diamagnetic glasses and ferrimagnetic bulk crystals using small applied AC magnetic fields,” 
IEEE Trans. Magn. 33(3), 2356–2361 (1997), doi: 10.1109/20.573856
25. M. Sofronie, M. Elisa, B. A. Sava, L. Boroica, M. Valeanu, and V. Kuncser, “Rapid determination 
of Faraday rotation in optical glasses by means of secondary Faraday modulator,” Rev. Scient. 
Instrum. 86(5), 053905 (2015).
26. A. Shaheen, H. Majeed, and M. S. Anwar, “Ultralarge magneto-optic rotations and rotary dis￾persion in terbium gallium garnet single crystal,” Appl. Opt. 54, 5549–5554 (2015).
27. A. Kruk and M. Mrozek, “The measurement of Faraday effect of translucent material in the entire 
visible spectrum,” Measurement 162, 107912 (2020), doi: 10.1016/j.measurement.2020.107912
28. P. A. Williams, A. H. Rose, G. W. Day, T. E. Milner, and M. N. Deeter, “Temperature depen￾dence of the Verdet constant in several diamagnetic glasses,” Appl. Opt. 30(10), 1176–1178 
(1991).
29. S. Kumari and S. Chakraborty, “Study of different magneto-optic materials for current sensing 
applications,” J. Sens. Sens. Syst. 7(1), 421–431 (2018), doi: 10.5194/jsss-7-421-2018
30. J. L. Cruz, M. V. Andres, and M. A. Hernandez, “Faraday effect in standard optical fibers: dis￾persion of the effective Verdet constant,” Appl. Opt. 35, 922–927 (1996).
31. K. Kurosawa, K. Yamashita, T. Sowa, and Y. Yamada, “Flexible fiber Faraday effect current sen￾sor using flint glass fiber and reflection scheme,” IEICE Trans. Electron. E83-C(3), 326–330 
(2000).
32. K. Kurosawa, “Optical transducer using flint glass fiber as the Faraday sensor element,” Opt. 
Rev. 4(1A), 38–44 (1997).
33. H. Katsukawa, H. Ishikawa, H. Okajima, and T. W. Cease, “Development of an optical cur￾rent transducer with a bulk type Faraday sensor for metering,” IEEE Trans. Power Deliv. 11(2), 
702–707 (1996). doi: 10.1109/61.489326
34. S. Petricevic and P. Mihailovic, “Compensation of Verdet constant temperature dependence by 
crystal core temperature measurement,” Sensors 16, 1627 (2016).
35. K. Kyuma, S. Tai, M. Nunoshita, T. Takioka, and Y. Ida, “Fiber optic measuring system for elec￾tric using a magnetooptic sensor,” IEEE J. Quant. Electron. 18(10), 1619–1623 (1982).
36. C. Li and T. Yoshino, “Simultaneous measurement of current and voltage by use of one bismuth 
germanate crystal,” Appl. Opt. 41(25), 5391–5397 (2002).
37. A. B. Villaverde and E. C. C. Vasconcellos, “Magnetooptical dispersion of Hoya glasses: AOT-5, 
AOT-44B, and FR-5,” Appl. Opt. 21, 1347–1348 (1982).
38. D. Huang, S. Srinivasan, and J. E. Bowers, “Compact Tb doped fiber optic current sensor with 
high sensitivity,” Opt. Express 23, 29993–29999 (2015).
39. Q. Chen, Q. Ma, H. Wang, and Q. Chen, “Diamagnetic tellurite glass and fiber based magneto￾optical current transducer,” Appl. Opt. 54, 8664–8669 (2015).
40. N. P. Barnes and L. B. Petway, “Variation of the Verdet constant with temperature of terbium 
gallium garnet,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 9, 1912–1915 (1992).
41. O. Slezák, R. Yasuhara, A. Lucianetti, and T. Mocek, “Temperature-wavelength dependence of 
terbium gallium garnet ceramics Verdet constant,” Opt. Mater. Express 6(11), 3683–3691 (2016).164 ◾ References
42. A. H. Rose, M. N. Deeter, and G. W. Day, “Submicroampere-per-root-hertz current sensor 
based on the Faraday effect in Ga:YIG,” Opt. Lett. 18, 1471–1473 (1993).
43. G. V. Golodolinski, “Application of the Faraday effect for current measurement,” Electrichestvo
8 (1956).
44. S. Saito, Y. Fujii, K. Yokoyama, J. Hamasaki, and Y. Ohno, “C1 – The laser current transformer 
for EHV power transmission lines,” IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 2(8), 255–259 (1966). doi: 
10.1109/JQE.1966.1074032
45. S. Saito, J. Hamasaki, Y. Fujii, and Y. Ohno, “12.4 – Development of the laser current trans￾former for the extra-high-voltage power transmission lines,” IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 3(11), 
589–597 (1967). doi: 10.1109/JQE.1967.1074399
46. S. Saito, “Current transformer…,” U.S. Patent 3597683, Nov. 17, 1965.
47. Y. Pelenc, et al., “Apparatus for current measurement by means of the Faraday effect,” U.S. 
Patent 3419802, Apr. 10, 1965.
48. Y. Pelenc and G. Bernard, “Prototype industriel de transformateur de courant a effet magneto￾optique,” Revue Générale de l’Electricité (France) 76(7–8), 1055–1064 (1967).
49. S. Takeshita and T. Sasano, “Measurement of impulse current by laser current transformer,” 
Proc. IEEE 56(8) 1404–1405 (1968). doi: 10.1109/PROC.1968.6622
50. K. Mollenbeck, “Device for measuring currents in a high voltage conductor….,” U.S. Patent 
3679974, Aug. 1, 1969.
51. G. Lesueur, “Current reducers using the Faraday effect”, U.S. Patent 3743929, Nov. 6, 1969.
52. G. Lesueur, “Optical current transformer”, U.S. Patent 3708747, Oct. 23, 1970.
53. A. Jaecklin and M. Lietz, “Elimination of disturbing birefringence effects on Faraday rotation,” 
Appl. Opt. 11(3), 617–621 (1972).
54. A. Jaecklin, U.S. Patent 3693082, Dec. 23, 1969.
55. H. Harms and E. Feldtkeller, “Automatic recording of Faraday rotation and circular dichroism,” 
Rev. Sci. Instrum. 44, 742 (1973).
56. A. J. Rogers, “Optical technique for measurement of current at high voltage,” Proc. IEEE 120(2), 
261–267 (1973).
57. A. J. Rogers, “Method for simultaneous measurement of current and voltage on high voltage 
lines using optical techniques,” Proc. IEE 123, 957–960, 1976.
58. A. J. Rogers, “Optical methods for measurement of voltage and current on power systems,” Opt. 
Laser Technol. 9, 273 (1977).
59. G. A. Massey, D. C. Erickson, and R. A. Kadlec, “Electromagnetic field components: their measure￾ment using linear electrooptic and magnetooptic effects,” Appl. Opt. 14(11), 2712–2719 (1975).
60. K. Kyuma, S. Tai, and M. Nunoshita, “Development of fibre optic sensing systems – a review,” 
Opt. Lasers Eng. 3(3), 155–182, (1982).
61. G. Li, M. G. Kong, G. R. Jones, and J. W. Spencer, “Sensitivity improvement of an optical cur￾rent sensor with enhanced Faraday rotation,” J. Lightwave Technol. 15(12), 2246–2252 (1997), 
doi: 10.1109/50.643549
62. G. D. Li, R. A. Aspey, M. G. Kong, J. R. Gibson, and G. R. Jones, “Elliptical polarization effects 
in a chromatically addressed Faraday current sensor,” Meas. Sci. Technol. 10(1), 25–30 (1999).
63. B. Yi, C. B. Chu, K. S. Chiang, and H. S. H. Chung, “New design of optical electric-current 
sensor for sensitivity improvement,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 49(2), 418–423 (2000), doi: 
10.1109/19.843089
64. W. C. Michie, A. Cruden, P. Niewczas, et al., “Harmonic analysis of current waveforms using 
optical current sensor,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 51(5), 1023–1026 (2002).
65. N. Inoue and K. Yamasawa, “Stabilizing the temperature dependencies of the Verdet constant 
of a Bi doped garnet and development of a highly sensitive optical magnetic field sensor,” Trans. 
IEE Jpn. 115-A, 1114–1120 (1995).
66. K. Kyuma, Shuichi Tai, M. Nunoshita, N. Mikami, and Y. Ida, “Fiber-optic current and volt￾age sensors using a Bi12GeO20 single crystal,” J. Lightwave Technol. 1(1), 93–97 (1983). doi: 
10.1109/JLT.1983.1072069References ◾ 165
67. Y. Hasegawa, Y. Ichikawa, H. Katsukawa, N. Tanaka, and Y. Sakurai, “Development of a new 
type of optical transducer for measuring fault current,” IEEE Trans. Power Deliv. 9(3), 1245–
1252 (1994). doi: 10.1109/61.311150
68. C. Li and X. Cui, “An optical voltage and current sensor with electrically switchable quarter 
waveplate,” Sens. Actuator. A Phys. 126(1), 62–67 (2006).
69. C. Li and T. Yoshino, “Single-crystal magneto-optic sensor with electrically adjustable sensitiv￾ity,” Appl. Opt. 51(21), 5119–5125 (2012).
70. L. Wang, Y. Huang, C. Deng, C. Hu, and T. Wang, “A compact polarimetric fiber-optic sensor 
based on Bi4Ge3O12 crystal for ultra-high surge current sensing,” in 26th Int. Conf. on Optical 
Fiber Sensors, OSA Technical Digest (Optical Society of America, 2018), paper WF96.
71. P. M. Mihailovic, S. J. Petricevic, and J. B. Radunovic, “Compensation for temperature￾dependence of the Faraday effect by optical activity temperature shift,” IEEE Sens. J. 13(2), 
832–837 (2013), doi: 10.1109/JSEN.2012.2230322
72. A. C. S. Brigida, I. M. Nascimento, S. Mendonça, et al., “Experimental and theoretical analy￾sis of an optical current sensor for high power systems,” Photonic Sens. 3, 26–34 (2013), doi: 
10.1007/s13320-012-0092-1
73. L. N. Bjorn, “Faraday effect current sensor,” U.S. Patent application US2010/0711004A1, Nov. 
30, 2007.
74. C. D. Perciante and J. A. Ferrari, “Magnetic crosstalk minimization in optical current Sensors,” 
IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 57(10), 2304–2308 (2008). doi: 10.1109/TIM.2008.919913
75. L. Di Rienzo, R. Bazzocchi, and A. Manara, “Circular arrays of magnetic sensors for current 
measurement,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 50(5), 1093–1096 (2001). doi: 10.1109/19.963165
76. X. Ma, Y. Guo, X. Chen, Y. Xiang, and K. Chen, “Impact of coreless current transformer posi￾tion on current measurement,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 68(10), 3801–3809 (2019). doi: 
10.1109/TIM.2019.2927544
77. P. Niewczas, W. I. Madden, W. C. Michie, A. Cruden, and J. R. McDonald, “Magnetic crosstalk 
compensation for an optical current transducer,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 50(5), 1071–1075, 
(2001), doi: 10.1109/19.963160
78. Y. Li, W. Zhang, M. Wang, and J. Liu, “Optical current sensing mechanism under a non-uniform 
magnetic field,” Appl. Opt. 58(20), 5472–5478 (2019).
79. C. D. Perciante, “Evolution of the polarization state in material media with uniform linear bire￾fringence and an applied nonhomogeneous external magnetic field: application to bulk-type 
Faraday current sensors,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 25(8), 1994–2000 (2008).
80. D. C. Erickson, “The use of fiber optics for communications, measurement and control within 
high voltage substations,” IEEE Trans. Power Appar. Syst.1 PAS-99(3), 1057–1065 (1980).
81. T. Sawa, K. Kurosawa, T. Kaminishi, and T. Yokota, “Development of optical instrument trans￾formers,” IEEE Trans. Power Deliv. 5(2), 884–891 (1990), doi: 10.1109/61.53098
82. A. Cruden, Z. J. Richardson, J. R. NcDonald, and I. Andonovic, “Optical crystal based devices 
for current and voltage measurement,” IEEE Trans. Power Deliv. 10(3), 1217–1223 (1995), doi: 
10.1109/61.400899
83. A. Cruden, Z. J. Richardson, J. R. McDonald, I. Andonovic, W. Laycock, and A. Bennett, 
“Compact 132 kV combined optical voltage and current measurement system,” IEEE Trans. 
Instrum. Meas. 47(1), 219–223 (1998), doi: 10.1109/19.728822
84. G. W. Day, P. D. Hale, M. Deeter, T. E. Milner, D. Conrad, and S. M. Etzel, “Optical power line 
voltage and current measurement systems. Volume 1: limits to precision of electro-optic and 
magneto-optic sensors,” Final Report National Bureau of Standards, Washington, DC, Sept. 1987.
85. G. Katsuta, K. Muraoka, N. Inoue, S. Sakai, T. Tsunekage, and K. Ando, “Fault section detection 
system for 66 kV underground branch transmission lines using optical magnetic field sensors,” 
IEEE Trans. Power Deliv. 7(1), 1–9, (1992). doi: 10.1109/61.108882
86. Y. Yoshida, S. Kawazoe, K. Ibuki, K. Yamada, and N. Ochi, “New fault locating system for air￾insulated substations using optical current detector,” IEEE Trans. Power Deliv. 7(4), 1805–1812 
(1992). doi: 10.1109/61.156982166 ◾ References
87. N. Inoue, T. Tsunekage, and S. Sakai, “Fault section detection system for 275-kV XLPE￾insulated cables with optical sensing technique,” IEEE Trans. Power Deliv. 10(3), 1148–1155, 
(1995). doi: 10.1109/61.400891
88. F. Sorensen, EP Patent application EP 2128631A1, May 30, 2008.
89. I. M. Nascimento, A. C. S. Brígida, J. M. Baptista, et al., “Novel optical current sensor for meter￾ing and protection in high power applications,” Instrum. Sci. Technol. 44(2), 148–162, 2016.
90. J. Zubia, L. Casado, G. Aldabaldetreku, et al., “Design and development of a low-cost optical 
current sensor,” Sensors 13, 13584–13595 (2013).
91. S. H. Zaidi and R. P. Tatam, “Faraday-effect magnetometry: compensation for the temperature￾dependent Verdet constant,” Meas. Sci. Technol. 5, 1471 (1994).
92. C. D. Perciante and J. A. Ferrari, “Faraday current sensor with temperature monitoring,” Appl. 
Opt. 44(32), 6910–6912 (2005).
93. H. Wang, J. Jiang, H. Hu, et al. “Temperature compensation of optical alternating magnetic 
field sensor via a novel method for on-line measuring,” Opt. Express 28(9), 13682–13693 
(2020).
94. J. Lenz and A. S. Edelstein, “Magnetic sensors and their applications,” IEEE Sens. J. 6(3), 631–
649 (2006).
95. P. Ripka and M. Janosek, “Advances in magnetic field sensors,” IEEE Sens. J. 10(6), 1108–1116 
(2010), doi: 10.1109/JSEN.2010.2043429
96. C. P. Gooneratne, B. Li, and T. E. Moellendick, “Downhole applications of magnetic sensors.” 
Sensors 17(10), 2384 (2017), doi:10.3390/s17102384
97. M. Iwanami, M. Nakada, H. Tsuda, and K. Ohashi, “Ultra small magneto-optic field probe 
fabricated by aerosol deposition,” IEICE Electron. Express 4(17), 542–548 (2007), doi: 10.1587/
elex.4.542
98. S. J. Lee, S. H. Song, D. C. Jiles, and H. Hauser, “Magnetooptic sensor for remote evaluation of 
surfaces,” IEEE Trans. Magn. 41(7), 2257–2259 (2005), doi: 10.1109/TMAG.2005.851858
99. D. Gerber and J. Biela, “High-dynamic and high-precise optical current measurement system 
based on the Faraday effect,” IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci. 43(10), 3550–3554 (2015), doi: 10.1109/
TPS.2015.2437395
100. S. Rietman and J. Biela, “Sensor design for a current measurement system with high bandwidth 
and high accuracy based on the Faraday effect,” in 2019 21st European Conference on Power 
Electronics and Applications (EPE ’19 ECCE Europe), Genova, Italy, 2019, pp. P.1–P.10, doi: 
10.23919/EPE.2019.8915122
101. M. N. Deeter, A. H. Rose, and G. W. Day, “Fast, sensitive magnetic-field sensors based on the 
Faraday effect in YIG,” J. Lightwave Technol. 8(12), 1838–1842 (1990). doi: 10.1109/50.62880
102. M. N. Deeter, “High sensitivity fiber-optic magnetic field sensors based on iron garnets,” IEEE 
Trans. Instrum. Meas. 44(2), 464–467 (1995). doi: 10.1109/19.377881
103. M. N. Deeter, “Fiber-optic Faraday-effect magnetic-field sensor based on flux concentrators,” 
Appl. Opt. 35(1), 154–157 (1996).
104. N. Itoh, H. Minemoto, D. Ishiko, and S. Ishizuka, “Small optical magnetic field sensor probe 
using rare-earth iron garnet crystals,” J. Magn. Soc. Jpn. 21(4), 637–640 (1997).
105. O. Kamada, T. Nakaya, and S. Higuchi, “Magnetic field optical sensors using Ce:YIG single 
crystals as a Faraday element,” Sens. Actuator. A119, 345–348 (2005).
106. E. J. Casey and C. H. Titus, “Magneto-optical electric current sensing arrangement,” U.S. Patent 
3324393, July 26, 1963.
107. E. Feldtkeller, “Magneto-optic measuring transducer for very high currents/voltages,” U.S. 
Patent 3980949, Sept. 17, 1973.
108. M. Hercher, “Ultra-high resolution interferometric sensor,” OSA Optics & Photonics News, Nov. 
1991, pp. 24–29.
109. A. E. Petersen, “Portable optical AC- and proposed DC-current sensor for high voltage applica￾tions,” IEEE Trans. Power Deliv. 10(2), 595–599 (1995), doi: 10.1109/61.400873References ◾ 167
110. N. Itoh, H. Minemoto, D. Ishiko, and S. Ishizuka, “Small optical magnetic-field sensor that uses 
rare-earth iron garnet films based on the Faraday effect,” Appl. Opt. 38(10), 2047–2052 (1999).
111. T. Yoshino, K. Minegishi, and M. Nitta, “A very sensitive Faraday effect current sensor using a 
YIG/ring-core transformer in a transverse configuration,” Meas. Sci. Technol. 12(7), 850–853 
(2001).
112. B. Yi, B. C. B. Chu, and K. S. Chiang, “Magneto-optical electric-current sensor with enhanced 
sensitivity,” Meas. Sci. Technol. 13, N61–N64 (2002).
113. T. Yoshino, S. Torihata, M. Yokota, and N. Tsukada, “Faraday-effect optical current sensor with 
a garnet film/ring core in a transverse configuration,” Appl. Opt. 42(10), 1769–1772 (2003).
114. P. Mihailovic, S. Petricevic, Z. Stojkovic, and J. B. Radunovic, “Development of a portable fiber￾optic current sensor for power systems monitoring,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 53(1), 24–30 
(2004), doi: 10.1109/TIM.2003.821500
115. S. J. Petricevic, Z. Stojkovic, and J. B. Radunovic, “Practical application of fiber-optic current 
sensor in power system harmonic measurement,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 55(3), 923–930 
(2006), doi: 10.1109/TIM.2006.873793
116. X. Wan, J. Zhao, and M. Wang, “A novel design of the sensor head for avoiding the influence of 
the reflection phase shift in optical current transducer,” Opt. Lasers Eng. 48(3), 325–328 (2010).
117. M. H. Samimi, S. Bahrami, A. A. S. Akmal, and H. Mohseni, “Effect of nonideal linear polar￾izers, stray magnetic field, and vibration on the accuracy of open-core optical current transduc￾ers,” IEEE Sens. J. 14(10), 3508–3515 (2014), doi: 10.1109/JSEN.2014.2328873
118. M. H. Samimi, A. A. S. Akmal, H. Mohseni, and J. Jadidian, “Open-core optical current trans￾ducer: modeling and experiment,” IEEE Trans. Power Deliv. 31(5), 2028–2035 (2016), doi: 
10.1109/TPWRD.2015.2490720
119. P. B. Davis et al., “Electro-optic current sensor with high dynamic range and accuracy,” U.S. 
patent 10006944B2, Nov. 6, 2017.
120. R. Renz, “Apparatus for measuring very high currents particularly direct currents,” U.S. Patent 
3746983, July 20, 1970.
121. T. Sato, G. Takahashi, and Y. Inui, “Method and apparatus for optically measuring a current,” 
U.S. Patent 4564754, priority Mar. 8, 1982.
122. M. Kanoi, G. Takahashi, T. Sato, M. Higaki, E. Mori, and K. Okumura, “Optical voltage and 
current measuring system for electric power systems,” IEEE Trans. Power Deliv. 1(1), 91–97 
(1986), doi: 10.1109/TPWRD.1986.4307893
123. E. A. Ulmer and T. J. Meyer, “Ring optical current transducer,” U.S. Patent 5124634, April 25, 1990.
124. E. A. Ulmer, “A high accuracy optical current transducer for electric power systems,” IEEE 
Trans. Power Deliv. 5(2), 892–898 (1990).
125. T. W. Cease and P. Johnston, “A magneto-optic current transducer,” IEEE Trans. Power Deliv. 
5(2), 548–555 (1990), doi: 10.1109/61.53056
126. T. W. Cease, J. G. Driggans and S. J. Weikel, “Optical voltage and current sensors used in a rev￾enue metering system,” IEEE Trans. Power Deliv. 6(4), 1374–1379 (1991).
127. T. D. Maffetone and T. M. McClelland, “345 kV substation optical current measurement sys￾tem for revenue metering and protective relaying,” IEEE Trans. Power Deliv. 6(4), 1430–1437 
(1991), doi: 10.1109/61.97673
128. K. Bohnert, P. Gabus, H. Brändle, and A. Khan, “Fiber-optic current and voltage sensors for 
high-voltage substations,” in Proc. 16th Int. Conference on Optical Fiber Sensors, 2003, pp. 
752–755.
129. S. P. Bush and D. A. Jackson, “Dual-channel Faraday-effect current sensor capable of simulta￾neous measurement of two independent currents,” Opt. Lett. 16(12), 955–957 (1991).
130. Y. N. Ning, B. C. B. Chu, and D. A. Jackson, “Miniature Faraday current sensor based on mul￾tiple critical angle reflections in a bulk-optic ring,” Opt. Lett. 16(24), 1996–1998 (1991).
131. S. P. Bush and D. A. Jackson, “Numerical investigation of the effects of birefringence and total 
internal reflection on Faraday effect current sensors,” Appl. Opt. 31(25), 5366–5374 (1992).168 ◾ References
132. B. C. B. Chu, Y. N. Ning, and D. A. Jackson, “Faraday current sensor that uses a triangular￾shaped bulk-optic sensing element,” Opt. Lett. 17(16), 1167–1169 (1992).
133. Y. N. Ning and D. A. Jackson, “Faraday effect optical current clamp using a bulk-glass sensing 
element,” Opt. Lett. 18(10), 835–837 (1993).
134. Y. N. Ning, Z. P. Wang, A. W. Palmer, K. T. V. Grattan, and D. A. Jackson, “Recent progress in 
optical current sensing techniques,” Rev. Sci. Instrum. 66(5), 3097–3111, (1995).
135. A. G. Podoleanu, N. E. Fisher, D. A. Jackson, “A single fibre-optic down-lead Faraday current 
sensor,” Sens. Actuator. A Phys. 58(3), 225–228 (1997).
136. A. J. Rogers, J. Xu, and J. Yao, “Vibration immunity for optical-fibre current measurement,” in 
Proc. SPIE 2360, Tenth Int. Conf. Optical Fibre Sensors, 1994, doi: 10.1117/12.184958
137. J. Song, P. G. McLaren, D. J. Thomson, and R. L. Middleton, “A prototype clamp-on magneto￾optical current transducer for power system metering and relaying,” IEEE Trans. Power Deliv. 
10(4), 1764–1770 (1995), doi: 10.1109/61.473382
138. N. E. Fisher and D. A. Jackson, “Vibration immunity and Ampere’s circuital law for a near per￾fect triangular Faraday current sensor,” Meas. Sci. Technol. 7(8), 1099–1102 (1996).
139. G. A. Woolsey, N. E. Fisher, and D. A. Jackson, “Tuning a bulk-glass optical current sensor by con￾trolling conditions external to its reflecting surfaces,” Sens. Actuator. A Phys. 63(1), 27–32 (1997).
140. N. E. Fisher, D. A. Jackson, and G. A. Woolsey, “Faraday current sensors and the significance of 
subtended angles,” Sens. Actuator. A Phys. 63(2), 5 (1997).
141. Z. P. Wang, W. M. Sun, Z. J. Huang, C. Kang, S. L. Ruan, Y. H. Luo, A. W. Palmer, and K. T. V. 
Grattan, “Effects of reflection-induced retardance on the immunity of bulk optic-material cur￾rent sensors,” Appl. Opt. 37(31), 7293–7297 (1998).
142. I. W. Madden, W. C. Michie, A. Cruden, P. Niewczas, and J. R. McDonald, “Temperature compen￾sation for optical current sensors,” Opt. Eng. 38(10), 1699–1707 (1999), doi: 10.1117/1.602222
143. P. Niewczas, A. C. W. Craig Michie, I. W. Madden, and J. R. McDonald, “Vibration compen￾sation technique for an optical current transducer,” Opt. Eng. 38(10), 1708–1714 (1999), doi: 
10.1117/1.602296
144. T. Bosselmann and P. Menke, “Intrinsic temperature compensation of magnetooptic AC cur￾rent transformers with glass ring sensor head,” in Proc. SPIE 2360, pp. 20-23, 10th Int. Conf. on 
Optical Fibre Sensors, 1994, doi: 10.1117/12.185043
145. P. Menke and T. Bosselmann, “Temperature compensation in magnetooptic AC current sen￾sors using an intelligent AC-DC signal evaluation,” J. Lightwave Technol. 13(7), 362–1370 
(1995), doi: 10.1109/50.400675
146. M. Willsch and T. Bosselmann, “Vibration compensation for a glass ring type magnetooptic 
current sensor,” in Optical Fiber Sensors (Optical Society of America, 1996), paper We14.
147. T. Sato and I. Sone, “Development of bulk-optic current sensor using glass ring type faraday 
cells,” Opt. Rev. 4, A35 (1997), doi: 10.1007/BF02935986
148. J. L. Arce-Diego, R. López-Ruisánchez, J. M. López-Higuera, and M. A. Muriel, “Model of an 
openable Faraday-effect hybrid-current optical transducer based on a square-shaped structure 
with internal mirror,” Appl. Opt. 36, 6242–6245 (1997).
149. L. Erning, J. M. K. MacAlpine, L. Yanbing, and Y. Benshun, “A novel optical current transducer 
for power systems,” Electr. Power Syst. Res. 46(1), 21–25 (1998).
150. T. Fujimoto, M. Shimizu, H. Nakagawa, I. Sone, K. Kawashima, and E. Mori, “Development 
of an optical current transformer for adjustable speed pumped storage systems,” IEEE Trans. 
Power Deliv. 12(1), 45–50 (1997), doi: 10.1109/61.568224
151. T. Yoshino, M. Gojyuki, Y. Takahashi, and T. Shimoyama, “Single glass block faraday effect 
current sensor with homogeneous isotropic closed optical circuit,” Appl. Opt. 36, 5566–5573 
(1997).
152. T. Yoshino, Y. Takahashi, and M. Gojyuki. “Imperfection errors in glass block Faraday effect 
current sensor,” Opt. Rev. 4(1), A108–A110, (1997).References ◾ 169
153. T. Yoshino, M. Yokota, K. Aoki, K. Yamamoto, S. Itoi, and M. Ohtaka, “Fiber-linked Faraday 
effect current sensor by use of a flint glass cell with dielectric-coated retardation-compensated 
total reflection surfaces,” Appl. Opt. 41, 5963–5968 (2002).
154. X. Ma and C. Luo, “A method to eliminate birefringence of a magneto-optic AC current trans￾ducer with glass ring sensor head,” IEEE Trans. Power Deliv. 13(4), 1015–1019 (1998), doi: 
10.1109/61.714435
155. Z. P. Wang, Z. J. Huang, C Kang, et al., “Optical current sensing element with single medium 
layers for high voltage applications,” Opt. Laser Technol. 31(6), 455–458 (1999).
156. B. Yi, B. Chu, K. S. Chiang, “New design of a detachable bulk-optic Faraday effect current 
clamp,” Opt. Eng. 40(6) (2001), doi: 10.1117/1.1365106
157. K. Kong, B. Chu, H. Chung, K. S. Chiang, “Triangular-shaped bulk-optic glass sensor for simul￾taneous measurement of three ac currents,” Opt. Eng. 42(2), 421 (2003), doi: 10.1117/1.1533037
158. D. Chatrefou, “Device for optically measuring current intensity”, European Patent 0613017B1, 
Feb. 22, 1994.
159. D. Chatrefou and G. F. Montillet, “A series of implementation of optical sensors in high voltage 
substations,” in 2003 IEEE PES Transmission and Distribution Conference and Exposition (IEEE 
Cat. No.03CH37495), Dallas, TX, USA, 2003, vol. 2, pp. 792–797, doi: 10.1109/TDC.2003.
1335376
160. Z. P. Wang, X. Wang, X. Liu, C. Ouyang, and Q. Tan, “Effect of the spectral width of optical 
sources upon the output of an optical current sensor,” Meas. Sci. Technol. 16(8), 1588–1592 
(2005).
161. Z. P. Wang, Q. B. Li, Y. Qi, Z. J. Huang, J. H. Shi, “Wavelength dependence of the sensitivity of 
a bulk-glass optical current transformer,” Opt. Laser Technol. 38(2), 87–93 (2006).
162. Z. P. Wang, Q. B. Li, and Q. Wu, “Effects of the temperature features of linear birefringence 
upon the sensitivity of a bulk glass current sensor,” Opt. Laser Technol. 39(1), 8–12 (2007).
163. Z. P. Wang, X. Y. Liu, Y. M. Zhang, “Theoretical analysis of the effects of linear birefringence 
upon optical glass current transformers with different optical designs,” Measurement 40(9–10), 
811–815 (2007).
164. Z. Wang, C. Kang, Z. Huang, and X. Zhang, “Faraday mirror-typed optical current transform￾ers and its theoretical analysis,” Opt. Laser Technol. 39(2), 368–371 (2007).
165. X. Deng, Z. Li, Q. Peng, J. Liu, and J. Tian, “Research on magneto-optic current sensor for high￾current pulses,” Rev. Scient. Instrum. 79, 083106 (2008).
166. M. Wang, J. Zhao, S. Liu, et al., “Optical current sensor immune to reflection phase shift based 
on graded-index magneto-optical glass,” Appl. Opt. 48(32), 6264–6270 (2009).
167. N. Correa, H. Chuaqui, E. Wyndham, et al., “Current measurement by Faraday effect on 
GEPOPU,” Appl. Opt. 51(6), 758–762 (2012).
168. K. B. Rochford, A. H. Rose, M. N. Deeter, and G. W. Day, “Faraday effect current sensor with 
improved sensitivity–bandwidth product,” Opt. Lett. 19, 1903–1905 (1994).
169. Y. Li, J. Wan, W. Zhang, and Jun Liu, “Analysis of antimagnetic interference properties and 
structural optimization of magneto-optical glass current sensors,” Appl. Opt. 59, 1123–1129 
(2020).
170. E. Hecht and A. Zajac, Optics (Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, 1974).
171. A. M. Smith, “Polarization and magnetooptic properties of single-mode optical fiber,” Appl. 
Opt. 17(1), 52, 1978.
172. A. M. Smith, “Birefringence induced by bends and twists in single-mode optical fiber,” Appl. 
Opt. 19, 2606–2611 (1980).
173. R. Ulrich, S. C. Rashleigh, and W. Eickhoff, “Bending-induced birefringence in single-mode 
fibers,” Opt. Lett. 5, 273–275 (1980).
174. S. C. Rashleigh and R. Ulrich, “Magneto-optic current sensing with birefringent fibers,” Appl. 
Phys. Lett. 34, 768–770 (1979).170 ◾ References
175. S. C. Rashleigh and R. Ulrich, “High birefringence in tension-coiled single-mode fibers,” Opt. 
Lett. 5, 354–356 (1980).
176. S. C. Rashleigh, “Origins and control of polarization effects in single-mode fibers,” J. Lightwave 
Technol. 1(2), 312–331 (1983).
177. N. Imoto, N. Yoshizawa, J. Sakai, and H. Tsuchiya, “Birefringence in single-mode optical fiber 
due to elliptical core deformation and stress anisotropy,” IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 16(11), 
1267–1271 (1980), doi: 10.1109/JQE.1980.1070382
178. J. Sakai and T. Kimura, “Birefringence and polarization characteristics of single-mode optical 
fibers under elastic deformations,” IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 17(6), 1041–1051 (1981), doi: 
10.1109/JQE.1981.1071213
179. J. Sakai and T. Kimura, “Polarization behavior in multiply perturbed single-mode fibers,” IEEE 
J. Quantum Electron. 18(1), 59–65 (1982), doi: 10.1109/JQE.1982.1071368
180. Z. B. Ren, P. Robert, and P.-A. Paratte, “Temperature dependence of bend- and twist-induced 
birefringence in a low-birefringence fiber,” Opt. Lett. 13, 62–64 (1988).
181. A. J. Rogers, “A vibration-insensitive optical fiber current sensor,” J. Opt. Sens. 1, 361–370 
(1986).
182. T. W. MacDougall and T. F. Hutchinson, “Stray magnetic-field response of linear birefringent 
optical current sensors,” Appl. Opt. 34(21), 4373–4379 (1995).
183. S. Cheng, Z.-Z. Guo, G.-Q. Zhang, W.-B. Yu, and Y. Shen, “Distributed parameter model for 
characterizing magnetic crosstalk in a fiber optic current sensor,” Appl. Opt. 54, 10009–10017 
(2015).
184. D. Marcuse, Theory of Dielectric Optical Waveguides (Academic Press, New York, 1974).
185. R. Ulrich, “Representation of codirectional coupled waves,” Opt. Lett. 1(3), 109–111 (1977).
186. R. Ulrich and A. Simon, “Polarization optics of twisted single mode fibers,” Appl. Opt. 18(13), 
2241–2251 (1979).
187. A. Yariv, “Coupled-mode theory for guided-wave optics,” IEEE J. Quantum Electron. QE-9, 
919–933 (1973).
188. M. Monerie and L. Jeunhomme, “Polarization mode coupling in long single-mode fibres,” Opt. 
Quantum Electron. 12, 449–461 (1980).
189. R. Dändliker, “Rotational effects of polarization in optical fibers,” in Optical Wave Sciences and 
Technology, Anisotropic and Nonlinear Optical Waveguides, C. G. Someda and G. Stegeman, 
Eds. (Elsevier, 1992), pp. 39–76. ISSN 09275479, ISBN9780444884893, doi: 10.1016/
B978-0-444-88489-3.50006-1
190. C. R. Menyuk and P. K. A. Wai, “Polarization evolution and dispersion in fibers with spatially 
varying birefringence,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 11, 1288–1296 (1994).
191. J. N. Nye, Physical Properties Of Crystals (Oxford University Press, London, 1967).
192. Z. Fang, F. Yang, H. Cai, and R. Qu, “Coupled-mode equation of polarization modes of twisted 
birefringent fibers in a unified coordinate,” Appl. Opt. 52(3), 530–537 (2013).
193. D. Tang, A. H. Rose, G. W. Day, and S. M. Etzel, “Annealing of linear birefringence in single￾mode fiber coils: applications to optical fiber current sensors,” J. Lightwave Technol. 9(8), 1031–
1037 (1991).
194. Y. Namihira, “Opto-elastic constant in single-mode optical fibers,” J. Lightwave Technol. 3, 
1078–1083 (1983).
195. W. J. Tabor and F. S. Chen, “Electromagnetic propagation through materials possessing both 
Faraday rotation and birefringence: experiments with Ytterbium Orthoferrite,” J. Appl. Phys. 
40, 2760–2765 (1969).
196. A. Papp and H. Harms, “Magneto-optical current transformer. 1: Principles,” Appl. Opt. 19(22), 
3729–3734 (1980).
197. Z. B. Ren and Ph. Robert, “Polarization multiplexing applied to a fiber current sensor,” Opt. 
Lett. 14, 1228–1230 (1989).References ◾ 171
198. E. Feldtkeller, H. Harms, and A. Papp, “Magneto-optic high voltage current measuring trans￾ducer,” U.S. Patent 4070620, Sept. 15, 1975.
199. H. Harms and E. Feldtkeller, “Magneto-optic high voltage current measuring transducer,” U.S. 
Patent 4070622, Sept. 26, 1975.
200. H. Schneider, H. Harms, A. Papp, and H. Aulich, “Low-birefringence single-mode optical 
fibers: preparation and polarization characteristics,” Appl. Opt. 17(19), 3035–3037 (1978).
201. H. Aulich, W. Beck, N. Douklias, H. Harms, A. Papp, and H. Schneider, “Magneto-optical cur￾rent transformer. 2: Components,” Appl. Opt. 19(22), 3735–3740 (1980).
202. C. D. Perciante, S. Aparicio, R. Illa, and J. A. Ferrari, “Nonplanar fiber-optic sensing head for 
the compensation of bending-induced birefringence in Faraday current sensors,” Appl. Opt. 54, 
5708–5714 (2015).
203. M. J. Marrone, R. D. Esman, and A. D. Kersey, “Fiber-optic magnetic field sensor with an 
orthoconjugating loop mirror,” Opt. Lett. 18, 1556–1558 (1993).
204. S. Zhou and X. Zhang, “Simulation of linear birefringence reduction in fiber-optical current 
sensor,” IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett. 19(19), 1568–1570 (2007), doi: 10.1109/LPT.2007.904344
205. P. Drexler and P. Fiala, “Utilization of Faraday mirror in fiber-optic current sensors,” 
Radioengineering 17(4), 101–107 (2008).
206. A. Ben-Kish, M. Tur, and E. Shafir, “Geometrical separation between the birefringence compo￾nents in Faraday-rotation fiber-optic current sensors,” Opt. Lett. 16(9), 687–689 (1991).
207. J. W. Dawson and T. W. MacDougall, “Concatenated magneto-optic field sensors,” U.S. patent 
5736737, filed Nov. 22, 1995.
208. P. R. Forman and F. C. Jahoda, “Linear birefringence effects on fiber-optic current sensors,” 
Appl. Opt. 27(15), 3088–3096 (1988).
209. P. Menke and T. Bosselmann, “Temperature compensation in magnetooptic AC current sen￾sors using an intelligent AC-DC signal evaluation,” J. Lightwave Technol. 13(7), 1362–1370 
(1995), doi: 10.1109/50.400675
210. S. Mohr and T. Bosselmann, “A high dynamic magnetooptic current transformer with advanced 
signal processing,” IEEE Sens. J. 3(1), 87–94 (2003), doi: 10.1109/JSEN.2003.810104
211. Y. Liu, L. Ma, and Z. He, “Birefringence variation independent fiber-optic current sensor using 
real-time SOP measurement,” IEEE Photonics J. 9(5), 1–9 (2017), art no. 7105409, doi: 10.1109/
JPHOT.2017.2746764
212. J. L. Flores-Nuñez, J. A. Ferrari, and C. D. Perciante, “Faraday current sensor using space￾variant,” Opt. Eng. 47(12) 123603 (2008), doi: 10.1117/1.3041772
213. N. E. Fisher and D. A. Jackson, “Improving the sensitivity of a Faraday current sensor by vary￾ing its operating point,” Meas. Sci. Technol. 6(10) 1508, (1995).
214. G. W. Day, D. N. Payne, A. J. Barlow, and J. J. Ramskov-Hanson, “Faraday rotation in coiled 
mono-mode optical fibers: isolators, filters, and magnetic sensors,” Opt. Lett. 7(5), 238–240 
(1982).
215. R. H. Stolen and E. H. Turner, “Faraday rotation in highly birefringent fibers,” Appl. Opt. 19(6), 
842–845 (1980).
216. C. D. Perciante and J. A. Ferrari, “Cancellation of bending-induced birefringence in single￾mode fibers: application to Faraday sensors,” Appl. Opt. 45, 1951–1956 (2006).
217. Y. Huang, L. Xia, F. Pang, Y. Yuan, and J. Ji, “Self-compensative fiber optic current sensor,” J. 
Lightwave Technol. 39(7), 2187–2193 (2021), doi: 10.1109/JLT.2020.3044935
218. P. McIntyre and A. W. Snyder, “Light propagation in twisted anisotropic media: Application to 
photoreceptors,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. 68, 149–157 (1978).
219. L. Jeunhomme and M. Monerie, “Polarisation-maintaining single-mode fibre cable design,” 
Electron. Lett. 16(24), 921–922 (1980), doi: 10.1049/el:19800656
220. M. Monerie and P. Lamouler, “Birefringence measurement in twisted single-mode fibres,” 
Electron. Lett. 17(7), 252–253 (1981), doi: 10.1049/el:19810178172 ◾ References
221. A. J. Barlow and D. N. Payne, “Polarisation maintenance in circularly birefringent fibres,” 
Electron. Lett. 17(11), 388–389 (1981), doi: 10.1049/el:19810272
222. A. J. Barlow, J. J. Ramskov-Hansen, and D. N. Payne, “Birefringence and polarization mode￾dispersion in spun single-mode fibers,” Appl. Opt. 20, 2962–2968 (1981).
223. J. Lizet, S. Valette, and D. Langeac, “Reduction of temperature and vibration sensitivity of a 
polarimetric current sensor,” Electron. Lett. 19(15), 578–579 (1983), doi: 10.1049/el:19830394
224. G. I. Chandler and F. C. Jahoda, “Current measurements by Faraday rotation in single‐mode 
optical fibers,” Rev. Scient. Instr. 56, 852 (1985), doi: 10.1063/1.1138070
225. G. I. Chandler, P. R. Forman, F. C. Jahoda, and K. A. Klare, “Fiber-optic heterodyne phase-shift 
measurement of plasma current,” Appl. Opt. 25(11), 1770–1774 (1986).
226. X. P. Dong, B. C. B. Chu, and K. S. Chiang, “An electric-current sensor employing twisted fibre 
with compensation for temperature and polarization fluctuations,” Meas. Sci. Technol. 8(6), 
606–610 (1997).
227. M. Takahashi, H. Noda, and K. Terai, et al., “Optical current transformer for gas insulated 
switchgear using silica optical fiber,” IEEE Trans. Power Deliv. 12(4), 1422–1427 (1997), doi: 
10.1109/61.634155
228. H. S. Kang, J. H. Lee, and K. S. Lee, “A stabilization method of the Sagnac optical fiber cur￾rent sensor with twist control,” IEEE Phot. Technol. Lett. 10(10), 1464–1466 (1998). doi: 
10.1109/68.720295
229. X. Dong, B. C. B. Chu, K. H. Kong, and K. S. Chiang, “Phase drift compensation for electric 
current sensor employing a twisted fiber or a spun highly birefringent fiber,” IEEE J. Sel. Top. 
Quantum Electron. 6(5), 803–809 (2000), doi: 10.1109/2944.892621
230. T. Chartier, A. Hideur, C. Özkul, F. Sanchez, and G. M. Stéphan, “Measurement of the elliptical 
birefringence of single-mode optical fibers,” Appl. Opt. 40, 5343–5353 (2001).
231. D. Tentori and A. Garcia-Weidner, “Jones birefringence in twisted single-mode optical fibers,” 
Opt. Express 21, 31725–31739 (2013).
232. P. Dey, R. Shukla, and A. Sharma, “Simplified high-current measurement probe based on a 
single-mode optical fiber,” Rev. Scient. Instrum. 89, 103110 (2018), doi: 10.1063/1.5022228
233. A. H. Rose, Z. B. Ren and G. W. Day, “Twisting and annealing optical fiber for current sensors,” 
J. Lightwave Technol. 14(11), 2492–2498 (1996), doi: 10.1109/50.548146
234. Y. V. Przhiyalkovsky, S. A. Vasiliev, O. I. Medvedkov, S. K. Morshnev, and E. M. Dianov, 
“Polarization state evolution in spun birefringent optical fibers,” J. Appl. Phys. 122(12), 123104 
(2017).
235. Z. Ren, Y. Wang, and P. Robert, “Faraday rotation and its temperature dependence mea￾surements in low-birefringence fibers,” J. Lightwave Technol. 7(8), 1275–1278 (1989), doi: 
10.1109/50.32393
236. W.-D. Barkmann and H. Winterhoff, German Patent DE2924804C2, filed June 20, 1979.
237. S. C. Rashleigh and R. Ulrich, German Patent application DE 3116149A, Apr. 23, 1981.
238. H. Winterhoff and W.-D. Barkmann, German Patent DE3010005C2, filed Mar. 15, 1980.
239. L. Li, J. R. Qian, and D. N. Payne, “Current sensors using highly birefringent bow-tie fibres,” 
Electron. Lett. 22(21), 1142–1144 (1986).
240. L. Li, J. R. Qian, and D. N. Payne, “Miniature multi-turn fibre current sensors,” Int. J. Opt. Sens. 
2(1), 25–31 (1987).
241. R. I. Laming and D. N. Payne, “Electric current sensors employing spun highly birefringent 
optical fibers,” J. Lightwave Technol. 7(12), 2084–2094 (1989), doi: 10.1109/50.41634
242. I. M. Bassett, “Design principle for a circularly birefringent optical fiber,” Opt. Lett. 13(10), 
844–846 (1988), doi: 10.1364/OL.13.000844
243. S. B. Poole, J. E. Townsend, D. N. Payne, et al., “Characterization of special fibers and fiber 
devices,” J. Lightwave Technol. 7(8), 1242–1255, (1989), doi: 10.1109/50.32389
244. I. G. Clarke, “Temperature-stable spun elliptical-core optical-fiber current transducer,” Opt. 
Lett. 18(2), 158–160 (1993), doi: 10.1364/ol.18.000158References ◾ 173
245. J. R. Qian, Q. Guo, and L. Li, “Spun linear birefringence fibres and their sensing mechanism 
in current sensors with temperature compensation,” IEE Proc. Optoelectron. 141(6), 373–380 
(1994).
246. J. R. Qian, “A note on the beat length of spun linear birefringence fiber,” Microw. Opt. Technol. 
Lett. 16(4), 225–227 (1997).
247. H.-C. Huang, “Practical circular-polarization-maintaining optical fiber,” Appl. Opt. 36(27), 
6968–6975 (1997), doi: 10.1364/AO.36.006968
248. X. Dong, B. C. B. Chu, K. H. Kong, and K. S. Chiang, “Phase drift compensation for electric 
current sensor employing a twisted fiber or a spun highly birefringent fiber,” IEEE J. Sel. Top. 
Quantum Electron. 6(5), 803–809 (2000), doi: 10.1109/2944.892621
249. P. Polynkin and J. Blake, “Polarization evolution in bent spun fiber,” J. Lightwave Technol. 
23(11), 3815–3820 (2005).
250. Y. Wang, C.-Q. Xu, and V. Izraelian, “Characterization of spun fibers with millimeter spin peri￾ods,” Opt. Express 13(10), 3841–3851 (2005).
251. V. P. Gubin, V. A. Isaev, S. K. Morshnev, et al., “Use of spun optical fibres in current sensors,” 
Quantum Electron. 36(3), 287–291 (2006).
252. A. Michie, J. Canning, I. Bassett, J. Haywood, et al., “Spun elliptical birefringent photonic crys￾tal fibre,” Opt. Express 15(4), 1811–1816 (2007).
253. I. L. Lovchii, “Numerical modelling and investigation of a polarimetric current transducer with 
a spun-type light-guide,” J. Opt. Technol. 77(12), 755–761 (2010).
254. N. Peng Y. Huang, S. Wang, et al., “Fiber optic current sensor based on special spun highly 
birefringent fiber,” IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett. 25(17), 1668–1671 (2013), doi: 10.1109/
LPT.2013.2272974
255. Y. V. Przhiyalkovsky, S. K. Morshnev, N. I. Starostin, and V. P. Gubin, “Propagation of broadband 
optical radiation in a spun high-birefringent fibre,” Quantum Electron. 43(2), 167–173 (2013).
256. S. K. Morshnev, V. P. Gubin, Y. V. Przhiyalkovsky, N. I. Starostin, “Temperature dependences of 
phase and group birefringence in spun fibres,” Quantum Electron. 43(12), 1143–1148 (2013).
257. Y. V. Przhiyalkovsky, Sergey K. Morshnev, Nikolay I. Starostin, and V. P. Gubin, “Modified 
sensing element of a fibre-optic current sensor based on a low-eigen ellipticity spun fibre,” 
Quantum Electron. 44(10), 957–964 (2014).
258. Y. V. Przhiyalkovsky, S. K. Morshnev, N. I. Starostin, and V. P. Gubin, “Propagation of polarized 
light in bent hi-bi spun fibers,” Quantum Electron. 45(11), 1075 (2015).
259. S. K. Morshnev, V. P. Gubin, N. I. Starostin, Y. V. Przhiyalkovsky, and A. I. Sazonov, “Effect of 
protective coating on random birefringence variations in anisotropic optical fibres in response 
to temperature changes,” Quantum Electron. 46(10), 911–918 (2016).
260. S. A. Vasiliev, Y. V. Przhiyalkovsky, P. I. Gnusin, O. I. Medvedkov, and E. M. Dianov, 
“Measurement of high-birefringent spun fiber parameters using short-length fiber Bragg grat￾ings,” Opt. Express 24(11), 11290–11298 (2016), doi: 10.1364/OE.24.011290
261. Y. V. Przhiyalkovsky, V. P. Gubin, N. I. Starostin, and S. K. Morshnev, “Detection of electric cur￾rent pulses by a fibre-optic sensor using spun fibre,” Quantum Electron. 48(1), 62–69 (2018).
262. S. K. Morshnev, V. P. Gubin, N. I. Starostin, Y. V. Przhiyalkovsky, and A. I. Sazonov, “Temperature 
evolution of interferometer visibility in a small radius fibre coil current sensor,” Quantum 
Electron. 48(3), 275–282 (2018).
263. Y. V. Przhiyalkovskiy, N. I. Starostin, S. K. Morshnev, and A. I. Sazonov, “Polarization dynamics 
of light propagating in bent spun birefringent fiber,” J. Lightwave Technol. 38(24), 6879–6885 
(2020), doi: 10.1109/JLT.2020.3017795
264. J. Wen, W. Liu, Y. Huang, et al., “Spun-related effects on optical properties of spun silica optical 
fibers,” J. Lightw.Technol. 33(12), 2674–2678 (2015).
265. G. M. Müller, X. Gu, L. Yang, A. Frank, and K. Bohnert, “Inherent temperature compensation 
of fiber-optic current sensors employing spun highly-birefringent fiber,” Opt. Express 24(10), 
11164–11173 (2016).174 ◾ References
266. G. M. Müller, A. Frank, L. Yang, X. Gu, and K. Bohnert, “Temperature compensation of inter￾ferometric and polarimetric fiber-optic current sensors with spun highly birefringent fiber,” J. 
Lightwave Technol. 37(18), 4507–4513 (2019), doi: 10.1109/JLT.2019.2907803
267. H.-C. Chen, J.-X. Wen, Y. Huang, et al., “Influence of linear birefringence on Faraday effect 
measurement for optical fibers,” Optoel. Lett. 13, 147–150 (2017).
268. Z. Xu, X. S. Yao, Z. Ding, et al., “Accurate measurements of circular and residual linear birefrin￾gences of spun fibers using binary polarization rotators,” Opt. Express 25, 30780–30792 (2017), 
doi: 10.1364/OE.25.030780
269. D. Kowal, G. Statkiewicz-Barabach, M. Napiorkowski, et al., “Measurement of birefringence 
and ellipticity of polarization eigenmodes in spun highly birefringent fibers using spectral 
interferometry and lateral point-force method,” Opt. Express 26, 34185–34199 (2018).
270. G. B. Malykin and V. I. Pozdnyakova, “Linear transformation of the polarization modes in 
coiled optical spun-fibers with strong unperturbed linear birefringence. I. Nonresonant trans￾formation,” Opt. Spectrosc. 124, 360–372 (2018), doi: 10.1134/S0030400X18030177
271. G. B. Malykin and V. I. Pozdnyakova, “Linear transformation of the polarization modes in coiled 
optical spun fibers. II. Resonant transformation,” Opt. Spectrosc. 125(4), 543–550 (2018).
272. H. Hu, J. Huang, Y. Huang, L. Xia, and J. Yu, “Modeling of the birefringence in spun fiber,” Opt. 
Comm. 473, 125919 (2020).
273. A. H. Rose, N. Feat, and S. M. Etzel, “Wavelength and temperature performance of polarization￾transforming fiber,” Appl. Opt. 42, 6897–6904 (2003).
274. X. Zhu and R. Jain, “Detailed analysis of evolution of the state of polarization in all-fiber polar￾ization transformers,” Opt. Express 14, 10261–10277 (2006).
275. Z. Shi, S. Bi, M. Ji, and L. Wang, “Performance analysis for all-fiber polarization transformer 
with specific spun rate profile,” Opt. Comm. 392, 20–24 (2017).
276. M. H. Kang, Y. L. Wang, L. Y. Ren, et al., “Design of vibration-insensitive Sagnac fiber-optic 
current sensors using spun high-birefringence fibers,” J. Mod. Opt. 61(14), 1120–1126 (2014).
277. A. Kumar and R. K. Varshney, “Propagation characteristics of highly elliptical core waveguides: 
a perturbation approach,” Opt. Quantum Electron. 16, 349–354 (1984).
278. J. N. Blake, “Fiber-optic current sensor with improved isolation,” U.S. patent 6,356,351B1, Mar. 
12, 2002.
279. Y. Fujii and C. D. Hussey, “Design considerations for circularly form-birefringent optical 
fibers,” IEE Proc. J. 133, 249–255 (1986), doi: 10.1049/ip-j.1986.0040
280. A. Michie, K. Digweed, J. Canning et al., “Spun highly birefringent photonic crystal fibre for 
current sensing,” in Optical Fiber Sensors, OSA Technical Digest (CD) (Optical Society of 
America, 2006), paper ThE56.
281. A. Michie, J. Canning, I. Bassett, et al., “Spun elliptically birefringent photonic crystal fibre for 
current sensing,” Meas. Sci. Technol. 18(10), 3070–3074 (2007).
282. A. Michie, J. Canning, I. Bassett, et al., “Spun elliptical birefringent photonic crystal fibre,” Opt. 
Express 15(4), 1811–1816 (2007).
283. Y. K. Chamorovskiy, N. I. Starostin, M. V. Ryabko et al., “Miniature microstructured fiber coil 
with high magneto-optical sensitivity,” Opt. Comm. 282(23), 4618–4621 (2009).
284. M. A. Schmidt, L. Wondraczek, H. W. Lee, N. Granzow, N. Da, and P. S. J. Russell, “Complex 
Faraday rotation in microstructured magneto-optical fiber waveguides,” Adv. Mater. 23(22–
23), 2681–2688 (2011), doi: 10.1002/adma.201100364
285. A. Argyros, J. Pla, F. Ladouceur, and L. Poladian, “Circular and elliptical birefringence in spun 
microstructured optical fibres,” Opt. Express 17, 15983–15990 (2009).
286. V. P. Gubin, S. K. Morshnev, N. I. Starostin, et al., “Efficient direct magneto-optical phase modu￾lation of light waves in spun microstructured fibres,” Quantum Electron. 41(9), 815–820 (2011).
287. R. Beravat, G. K. L. Wong, X. M. Xi, M. H. Frosz, and P. St. J. Russell, “Current sensing using cir￾cularly birefringent twisted solid-core photonic crystal fiber,” Opt. Lett. 41, 1672–1675 (2016).References ◾ 175
288. P. St. J. Russell, R. Beravat, and G. K. L. Wong, “Helically twisted photonic crystal fibres,” Phil. 
Trans. R. Soc. A. 375: 20150440 (2016), doi: 10.1098/rsta.2015.0440
289. H. Gao, G. Wang, W. Gao, et al. “A chiral photonic crystal fiber sensing coil for decreasing the 
polarization error in a fiber optic current sensor.” Opt. Commun. 469, 125755 (2020).
290. M. V. Berry, “Quantal phase factors accompanying adiabatic changes,” Proc. R. Soc. Lond. Ser. 
A 392, 45–57 (1984).
291. J. N. Ross, “The rotation of the polarization in low birefringence monomode optical fibers due 
to geometric effects,” Opt. Quantum Electron. 16, 455–461 (1984), doi: 10.1007/BF00619638
292. M. P. Varnham, R. D. Birch, and D. N. Payne, “Helical-core circularly-birefringent fibers,” 
in Proceedings of the International Conference on Integrated Optics and Optical Fibre 
Communications–European Conference on Optical Communications (Instituto Internazionale 
delle Communicazione, Genova, Italy, 1985), pp. 135–138.
293. A. Tomita and R. Y. Chiao, “Observation of Berry’s topological phase by use of an optical fibre,” 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 57, 937–940 (1986).
294. X.-S. Fang and Z.-Q. Lin “Field in single-mode helically wound optical fibers,” IEEE Trans. 
Microw. Theory Tech. MTT-33, 1150–1154 (1985).
295. X.-S. Fang and Z.-Q. Lin, “A coupled-mode approach to the analysis of fields in space-curved 
and twisted waveguides,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech. 35(11), 978–983 (1987).
296. J. Qian, “Coupled-mode theory for helical fibres,” IEE Proc. J. 135, 178–182 (1988).
297. T. Eftimov and T. Kortenski, “State of polarization in open- and closed-loop helices of single￾mode fibres,” J. Mod. Opt. 36, 287 (1989), doi: 10.1080/09500348914550331
298. R. Castelli, F. Irrera, and C. G. Someda, “Circularly birefringent optical fibres: new proposals – 
Part I. Field analysis,” Opt. Quantum Electron. 21, 35–46 (1989).
299. C. G. Someda, “Circularly birefringent optical fibres: new proposals – Part II. Birefringence and 
coupling loss,” Opt. Quantum Electron. 23, 713–725 (1991).
300. G. Chen and Q. Wang, “Local fields in single-mode helical fibres,” Opt. Quantum Electron. 27, 
1069–1074 (1995).
301. E. M. Frins and W. Dultz, “Rotation of the polarization plane in optical fibers,” J. Lightwave 
Technol. 15, 144–147 (1997).
302. F. Wassmann and A. Ankiewicz, “Berry’s phase analysis of polarization rotation in helicoidal 
fibers,” Appl. Opt. 37, 3902–3911 (1998).
303. D. Tentori, C. Ayala-Díaz, F. Treviño-Martínez, F. J. Mendieta-Jiménez, and H. Soto-Ortiz, 
“Birefringence evaluation of helically wound optical fibres,” J. Mod. Opt., 48(11), 1767–1780, 
(2001), doi: 10.1080/09500340108231432
304. C. H. Tang, “An orthogonal coordinate system for curved pipes (Correspondence),” IEEE Trans. 
Microw. Theory Tech. 18(1), 69–69 (1970), doi: 10.1109/TMTT.1970.1127150
305. F. Maystre and A. Bertholds, “Magneto-optic current sensor using a helical-fiber Fabry–Perot 
resonator,” Opt. Lett. 14, 587–589 (1989).
306. A. Papp and H. Harms, “Polarization optics of liquid-core optical fibers,” Appl. Opt. 16, 1315 (1977).
307. S. Xu, W. Li, Y. Wang, and F. Xing, “Stray current sensor with cylindrical twisted fiber,” Appl. 
Opt. 53(24), 5486–5492 (2014).
308. S. Xu, W. Li, F. Xing, et al., “An elimination method of temperature-induced linear birefrin￾gence in a stray current sensor,” Sensors 17, 551 (2017).
309. S. X. Short, J. U. de Arruda, A. A. Tselikov, and J. N. Blake, “Elimination of birefringence 
induced scale factor errors in the in-line Sagnac interferometer current sensor,” J. Lightwave 
Technol. 16, 1844–1850 (1998).
310. C. Zhang, C. Li, X. Wang, et al., “Design principle for sensing coil of fiber-optic current sensor 
based on geometric rotation effect,” Appl. Opt. 51(18), 3977–3988 (2012).
311. H. Winterhoff and W.-D. Barkmann, German Patent DE2855337C2, filed Dec. 21, 1978.
312. C. D. Hussey, R. D. Birch, and Y. Fujii, “Circularly birefringent single-mode optical fibres,” 
Electron. Lett. 22(3), 129–130 (1986), doi: 10.1049/el:19860090176 ◾ References
313. J. Qian and C. D. Hussey, “Circular birefringence in helical-core fibre,” Electron. Lett. 22(10), 
515–517 (1986).
314. Y. Fujii and C. D. Hussey, “Design considerations for circularly form-birefringent optical fibres,” 
IEE Proc. J. 133, 249 (1986).
315. R. D. Birch, “Fabrication and characterisation of circularly birefringent helical fibres,” Electron. 
Lett. 23(1), 50–52 (1987), doi: 10.1049/el:19870037
316. M. Napiorkowski and W. Urbanczyk, “Rigorous simulations of a helical core fiber by the use 
of transformation optics formalism,” Opt. Express 22, 23108–23120 (2014), doi: 10.1364/
OE.22.023108
317. P. Wang, L. J. Cooper, J. K. Sahu, and W. A. Clarkson, “Efficient single-mode operation of a 
cladding-pumped ytterbium-doped helical-core fiber laser,” Opt. Lett. 31(2), 226–228 (2006).
318. Y. Chen and P. St. J. Russell, “Frenet–Serret analysis of helical Bloch modes in N-fold rotation￾ally symmetric rings of coupled spiraling optical waveguides,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 38, 1173–1183 
(2021).
319. S. R. Norman, D. N. Payne, M. J. Adams, and A. M. Smith, “Fabrication of single-mode fibres 
exhibiting extremely low polarisation birefringence,” Electron. Lett. 15(11), 309–311, (1979), 
doi: 10.1049/el:19790219
320. A. M. Smith, “Optical fibres for current measurement applications,” Opt. Laser Technol. 12(1), 
25–29 (1980).
321. A. J. Barlow, D. N. Payne, M. R. Hadley, and R. J. Mansfield, “Production of single-mode fibres 
with negligible intrinsic birefringence and polarisation mode dispersion,” Electron. Lett. 17(20), 
725–726 (1981).
322. D. N. Payne, A. J. Barlow, J. J. Ramskov-Hansen, M. R. Hadley, and R. J. Mansfield, “Fabrication 
and properties of low birefringence spun fibers,” in Fiber-Optic Rotation Sensors and Related 
Technologies, S. Ezekiel, H. J. Arditty, Eds. (Springer Series in Optical Sciences, Berlin, 
Heidelberg, Germany, 1982), vol. 32, pp. 185–195, doi: 10.1007/978-3-540-39490-7_20
323. D. N. Payne, A. J. Barlow and J. J. Ramskov-Hansen, “Development of low- and high￾birefringence optical fibers,” IEEE J. Quantum Electron. QE-18, 477–487 (1982).
324. C. D. Poole, “Statistical treatment of polarization dispersion in single-mode fiber,” Opt. Lett. 
13(8), 687–689 (1988).
325. L. Palmieri, “Polarization properties of spun single-mode fibers,” J. Lightwave Technol. 24, 
4075–4088 (2006).
326. K. Bohnert, P. Gabus, J. Nehring, H. Brändle, and M. G. Brunzel, “Fiber-optic current sensor 
for electrowinning of metals,” J. Lightwave Technol. 25(11), 3602–3609 (2007), doi: 10.1109/
JLT.2007.906795
327. K. Bohnert, A. Frank, G. M. Müller, L. Yang, M. Lenner, P. Gabus, X. Gu, and S. V. Marchese, 
“Fiber optic current and voltage sensors for electric power transmission systems,” in Fiber Optic 
Sensors and Applications XV, A. Mendez, C. S. Baldwin, and Henry H. Du, Eds., Proc. of SPIE, 
vol. 10654, 1065402, 2018, doi: 10.1117/12.2303945
328. K. Bohnert, A. Frank, L. Yang, X. Gu, and G. M. Müller, “Polarimetric fiber-optic current sen￾sor with integrated-optic polarization splitter,” J. Lightwave Technol. 37(14), 3672–3678 (2019), 
doi: 10.1109/JLT.2019.2919387
329. G. W. Day and S. M. Etzel, “Annealing of bend-induced birefringence in fiber current sensors,” 
in Tech. Dig. IOOCIECOC ’85, Venice, Italy, pp. 871–874 (1985).
330. J. Stone, “Stress-optic effects, birefringence, and reduction of birefringence by anneal￾ing in fiber Fabry-Perot interferometers,” J. Lightwave Technol. 6(7), 1245–1248 (1988), doi: 
10.1109/50.4122
331. A. H. Rose, “Devitrification in annealed optical fiber,” J. Lightwave Technol. 15(5), 808–814 
(1997).
332. T. W. MacDougall, D. R. Lutz, and R. A. Wandmacher, “Development of a fiber optic current sen￾sor for power systems,” IEEE Trans. Power Deliv. 7(2), 848–852 (1992), doi: 10.1109/61.127089References ◾ 177
333. J. W. Dawson, T. W. MacDougall, and E. Hernandez, “Verdet constant limited temperature 
response of a fiber-optic current sensor,” IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett. 7(12), 1468–1470 (1995), 
doi: 10.1109/68.477285
334. D. R. Lutz, T. W. MacDougall, et al., “Faraday effect sensing coil with stable birefringence,” U.S. 
patent 5463312, filed Mar. 3, 1994.
335. L. Yang, A. Frank, R. Wüest, et al., “A study on different types of fiber coils for fiber optic cur￾rent sensors,” in Key Engineering Materials (Trans Tech Publications, Ltd., 2014), vol. 605, pp. 
283–286, doi: 10.4028/www.scientific.net/kem.605.283
336. K. Bohnert, P. Gabus, J. Nehring, and H. Brändle, “Temperature and vibration insensitive fiber￾optic current sensor,” J. Lightwave Technol. 20(2), 267–276 (2002).
337. M. Lenner, R. Wüest, A. Frank, and K. Bohnert, “Effects of thermal fiber annealing on the tem￾perature compensation of interferometric fiber-optic current sensors,” in SENSORS 2012 IEEE, 
Taipei, 2012, pp. 1–4, doi: 10.1109/ICSENS.2012.6411054
338. K. Kurosawa, I. Masuda, and T. Yamashita, “Faraday effect current sensor using flint glass fiber 
for the sensing element,” in Tech. Dig. 9th Optical Fiber Sensors Conf., 1993, pp. 415–418.
339. K. Kurosawa, S. Yoshida, and K. Sakamoto, “Polarization properties of the flint glass fiber,” 
J. Lightwave Technol. 13(7), 1378–1384 (1995).
340. S. Yoshida, K. Kurosawa, and O. Sano, “Development of an optical current transducer using a 
flint glass fiber for a gas circuit breaker,” in Tech. Dig. 11th Optical Fiber Sensors Conf., 1996, pp. 
172–175.
341. K. Kurosawa, “Development of fiber-optic current sensing technique and its applications in 
electric power systems,” Photonic Sens. 4(1), 12–20 (2014), doi: 10.1007/s13320-013-0138-z
342. L. Sun, S. Jiang, J. D. Zuegel, and J. R. Marciante, “Effective Verdet constant in a terbium-doped￾core phosphate fiber,” Opt. Lett. 34, 1699–1701 (2009).
343. L. Sun, S. Jiang, and J. R. Marciante, “All-fiber optical magnetic-field sensor based on Faraday 
rotation in highly terbium-doped fiber,” Opt. Express 18, 5407–5412 (2010).
344. Y. Huang, H. Chen, W. Dong, et al., “Fabrication of europium-doped silica optical fiber with 
high Verdet constant,” Opt. Express 24, 18709–18717 (2016).
345. H. C. Y. Yu, M. A. van Eijkelenborg, Sergio G. Leon-Saval, et al., “Enhanced magneto-optical 
effect in cobalt nanoparticle-doped optical fiber,” Appl. Opt. 47, 6497–6501 (2008).
346. P. R. Watekar, H. Yang, S. Ju, and W.-T. Han, “Enhanced current sensitivity in the optical fiber 
doped with CdSe quantum dots,” Opt. Express 17, 3157–3164 (2009).
347. P. R. Watekar, S. Ju, S.-A. Kim, et al., “Development of a highly sensitive compact sized optical 
fiber current sensor,” Opt. Express 18, 17096–17105 (2010).
348. S. Ju, J. Kim, K. Linganna, P. R. Watekar, et al., “Temperature and vibration dependence of the 
Faraday effect of Gd2O3 NPs-doped alumino-silicate glass optical fiber,” Sensors 2018, 18, 988, 
doi: 10.3390/s18040988
349. H. O. Edwards, K. P. Jedrzejewski, R.I. Laming, and D. N. Payne, “Optimal design of optical 
fibers for electric current measurement,” Appl. Opt. 28, 1977–1979 (1989).
350. Y. Shiyu, J. Lousteau, M. Olivero, et al., “Analysis of Faraday effect in multimode tellurite glass 
optical fiber for magneto-optical sensing and monitoring applications,” Appl. Opt. 51, 4542–
4546 (2012).
351. Q. Chen, H. Wang, and Q. P. Chen, “Elliptical measurement for Faraday rotation in multimode 
TZN fiber for magneto-optical current sensor application,” Adv. Mater. Res. 785, 1367–1373 
(2013).
352. H. Wang, Q. Wang, and Q. P. Chen, “Faraday rotation influence factors in tellurite-based glass 
and fibers,” Appl. Phys. A 120, 1001–1010 (2015).
353. A. Papp and H. Harms, “Polarization optics of index-gradient optical waveguide fibers,” Appl. 
Opt. 14, 2406–2411 (1975).
354. H. Harms, A. Papp, and K. Kempter, “Magnetooptical properties of index-gradient optical 
fibers,” Appl. Opt. 15(3), 799–801 (1976).178 ◾ References
355. F. J. Wessel, N. C. Wild, H. U. Rahman, A. Ron, and F. S. Felber, “Faraday rotation in a multi￾mode optical fiber in a fast rise-time high magnetic field,” Rev. Sci. Instrum. 57(9), 2246–2249 
(1986).
356. W. A. Gambling, D. N. Payne, and H. Matsumura, “Mode excitation in a multimode optical￾fibre waveguide,” Electron. Lett. 9(18), 412–414 (1973), doi:10.1049/el:19730303
357. S. A. Planas, E. Bochove, and R. Srivastava, “Geometrical characterization of liquid core fibers 
by measurement of thermally induced mode cutoffs and interference,” Appl. Opt. 21, 2708–
2715 (1982).
358. R. B. Frenkel, “Optical sensing of high electric currents using the Faraday effect in a rigid single 
turn of liquid,” Meas. Sci. Technol. 4(9), 976–981 (1993).
359. L. M. Tong, J. Y. Lou, and E. Mazur, “Single-mode guiding properties of subwavelength￾diameter silica and silicon wire waveguides,” Opt. Express 12, 1025–1035 (2004).
360. G. Y. Chen, M. Ding, T. P. Newson, and G. Brambilla, “A review of microfiber and nanofiber 
based optical sensors,” Open Opt. J. 7, 32–57 (2013).
361. G. Y. Chen, D. G. Lancaster, and T. M. Monro, “Optical microfiber technology for current, tem￾perature, acceleration, acoustic, humidity and ultraviolet light sensing,” Sensors 2018, 18, 72.
362. G. Y. Chen, T. Lee, R. Ismaeel, G. Brambilla, and T. P. Newson, “Resonantly enhanced Faraday 
rotation in an microcoil current sensor,” IEEE Photonics. Technol. Lett. 24, 860–862 (2012).
363. G. Y. Chen, G. Brambilla, amd T. P. Newson, “Spun optical microfiber,” IEEE Photonics Technol. 
Lett. 24, 1663–1666 (2012).
364. G. Y. Chen, T. P. Newson, and G. Brambilla, “Birefringence treatment of non-ideal optical 
microfibre coils for continuous Faraday rotation,” Electron. Lett. 49, 714–715 (2013).
365. G. Y. Chen, T. P. Newson, and G. Brambilla, “Optical microfibers for fast current sensing,” Opt. 
Fiber Technol. 19(6), Part B, 802–807 (2013).
366. M. Belal, Z.-Q. Song, Y. Jung, G. Brambilla, and T. Newson, “An interferometric current sensor 
based on optical fiber micro wires,” Opt. Express 18, 19951–19956 (2010).
367. M. Belal, Z. Song, Y. Jung, G. Brambilla, and T. P. Newson, “Optical fiber microwire current 
sensor,” Opt. Lett. 35, 3045–3047 (2010).
368. K. S. Lim, S. W. Harun, S. S. A. Damanhuri, et al., “Current sensor based on microfiber knot 
resonator,” Sens. Actuator. A Phys. 167, 60–62 (2011).
369. X. Xie, J. Li, L.-P. Sun, et al., “A high-sensitivity current sensor utilizing CrNi wire and microfi￾ber coils,” Sensors 14(5), 8423–8429 (2014).
370. S. Yan, B. Zheng, J. Chen, F. Xu, and Y. Lu, “Optical electrical current sensor utilizing a graphene￾microfiber-integrated coil resonator,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 107, 053502 (2015).
371. S. Yan, Y. Chen, C. Li, F. Xu, and Y. Lu, “Differential twin receiving fiber-optic magnetic 
field and electric current sensor utilizing a microfiber coupler,” Opt. Express 23, 9407–9414 
(2015).
372. A. A. Jasim, J. Faruki, M. F. Ismail, and H. Ahmad, “Fabrication and characterization of micro￾bent inline microfiber interferometer for compact temperature and current sensing applica￾tions,” J. Lightwave Technol. 35, 2150–2155 (2017).
373. S. Yoshikawa and A. Ueki, Japanese patent application 83680/68, priority Nov. 16, 1968, US 
patent 3605013, filed, Nov. 7, 1969.
374. H. Harms and A. Papp, “Magnetooptical current transformer. 3: Measurements,” Appl. Opt. 19, 
3741–3745 (1980).
375. Z. Wang, Y. Liao, S. Lai, H. Zhao, and X. Chen, “A novel method for simultaneous measurement 
of current and voltage using one low-birefringence fiber,” Opt. Laser Technol. 30(5), 257–262 
(1998), doi: 10.1016/S0030-3992(98)00018-8
376. Y. Li, X. Liu, W. Zhang, and J. Liu, “Error characteristic analysis and experimental research on 
a fiber optic current transformer,” Appl. Opt. 57, 8359–8365 (2018).
377. A. J. Rogers, J. Xu, and J. Yao, “Vibration immunity for optical-fiber current measurement,” J. 
Lightwave Technol. 13, 1371–1377 (1995).References ◾ 179
378. X. Fang, A. Wang, R. G. May and R. O. Claus, “A reciprocal-compensated fiber-optic electric 
current sensor,” J. Lightwave Technol. 12(10), 1882–1890 (1994), doi: 10.1109/50.337503
379. X. Fang and R.O. Claus, “Optimal design of IRIS-based polarimetric intrinsic fiber optic cur￾rent sensors,” J. Lightwave Technol. 14(7), 1664–1673 (1996).
380. M. Willsch, H. Hertsch, U. Augustad, P. Kraemmer, and T. Bosselmann, “Fiber optical cur￾rent sensor design for accurate measurement of DC currents,” in Technical Digest, 16th Int. 
Conference on Optical Fiber Sensors, Nara, Japan 2003, paper WEP-2.
381. M. Berwick, J. D. C. Jones, and D. A. Jackson, “Alternating-current measurement and nonin￾vasive data ring utilizing the Faraday effect in a closed-loop fiber magnetometer,” Opt. Lett. 12, 
293–295 (1987).
382. A. Kersey and D. Jackson, “Current sensing utilizing heterodyne detection of the Faraday 
effect in single-mode optical fiber,” J. Lightwave Technol. 4(6), 640–644 (1986), doi: 10.1109/
JLT.1986.1074778
383. J. A. Ferrari, A. Dubra, A. Arnaud, and D. Perciante, “Current sensor using heterodyne detec￾tion,” Appl. Opt. 38, 2808–2811 (1999).
384. N. C. Pistoni and M. Martinelli, “Vibration-insensitive fiber-optic current sensor,” Opt. Lett. 18, 
314–316 (1993).
385. D. Alasia and L. Thévenaz, “A novel all-fibre configuration for a flexible polarimetric current 
sensor,” Meas. Sci. Technol. 15(8), 1525–1530 (2004).
386. H. Zhang et al., “Temperature and vibration robustness of reflecting all-fiber current sen￾sor using common single-mode fiber,” J. Lightwave Technol. 32(22), 4311–4317 (2014), doi: 
10.1109/JLT.2014.2357687
387. S. Xu, W. Li, Y. Wang, and F. Xing, “Effect and elimination of alignment error in an optical fiber 
current sensor,” Opt. Lett. 39(16), 4751–4754 (2014).
388. S. Xu, W. Li, F. Xing, and Y. Wang, “Polarimetric current sensor based on polarization division 
multiplexing detection,” Opt. Express 22(10), 11985–11994 (2014).
389. H. Zhang, Y. Qiu, Z. Huang, J. Jiang, G. Li, H. Chen, and H. Li, “Temperature and vibration 
robustness of reflecting all-fiber current sensor using common single-mode fiber,” J. Lightwave 
Technol. 32(22), 3709–3715 (2014).
390. M. Aerssens, F. Descamps, A. Gusarov, et al., “Influence of the optical fiber type on the per￾formances of fiber-optics current sensor dedicated to plasma current measurement in ITER,” 
Appl. Opt. 54, 5983–5991 (2015).
391. F. Brifford, L. Thevenaz, P.-A. Nicati, A. Küng, and P. A. Robert, “Polarimetric current sensor 
using an in-line Faraday rotator,” IEICE Trans. Electron. E83-C(3), 331–334 (2000).
392. K. Kurosawa et al., “Current measuring device,” U.S. patent 7,176,671B2, priority date: Mar. 1, 
2002.
393. R. Kondo and K. Kurosawa Kiyoshi, “A method for improving temperature dependence of an 
optical fiber current sensor,” IEEJ Trans. Power Energy 130(4), 414–420 (2010), doi: 10.1541/
ieejpes.130.414
394. G. Müller, X. Gu, A. Frank, and K. Bohnert, “Fiber-optic current sensor with passive phase 
biasing employing highly birefringent spun fiber,” OSA Applied Industrial Optics, 2013, paper 
ATuB.4.
395. R. Bergh, H. Lefevre, and H. Shaw, “An overview of fiber-optic gyroscopes,” J. Lightwave 
Technol. 2(2), 91–107 (1984), doi: 10.1109/JLT.1984.1073580
396. H. Lefèvre, The Fiber-Optic Gyroscope (Artech House, 1993).
397. P. Ferdinand and J. Lesne, “Induced circular birefringence and ellipticity measurement in a 
Faraday effect fiber ring interferometer,” in Fiber-Optic Rotation Sensors, S. Ezekiel and H. J. 
Arditty, Eds. (Springer Verlag, Berlin 1982), pp. 215–221, doi: 10.1007/978-3-540-39490-7_24
398. P. A. Leilabady, A. P. Wayte, M. Berwick, J. D. C. Jones, and D. A. Jackson, “A pseudo reciprocal 
fiber optic Faraday rotation sensor: current measurement and data communication applica￾tions,” Opt. Comm. 59, 173–176 (1986).180 ◾ References
399. A. D. Kersey and A. Dandridge, “Optical fibre Faraday rotation current sensor with closed-loop 
operation,” Electron. Lett. 21(11), 464–466 (1985), doi: 10.1049/el:19850329
400. P.-A. Nicati and P. Robert, “Stabilized current sensor using Sagnac interferometer,” J. Phys. E: 
Sci. Instrum. 21, 791–796 (1988).
401. P.-A. Nicati and P.-A. Robert, “Numerical analysis of second-order polarization effects in a 
Sagnac current sensor,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 39(1), 219–224 (1990), doi: 10.1109/19.50448
402. G. Frosio, K. Hug, and R. Dändliker, “All fiber Sagnac interferometer current sensor,” in Opto 
92 (ESI Publications, Paris, 1992), pp. 560–564.
403. K. Bohnert, H. Brändle, and G. Frosio, “Field test of interferometric optical fiber high-voltage 
and current sensors,” in 10th International Conference on Optical Fibre Sensors, B. Culshaw, J. 
D. C. Jones, Ed., Proc. SPIE 2360, 1994, pp. 16–19.
404. J. Blake, P. Tantaswadi, and R. T. de Carvalho, “In-line Sagnac interferometer current sensor,” 
IEEE Trans. Power Deliv. 11(1), 116–121 (1996).
405. S. X. Short, P. Tantaswadi, R. T. de Carvalho, B. D. Russell, and J. N. Blake, “An experimental 
study of acoustic vibration effects in optical fiber current sensors,” IEEE Trans. Power Deliv. 11, 
1702–1706 (1996).
406. S. X. Short, A. A. Tselikov, J. U. de Arruda and J. N. Blake, “Imperfect quarter-waveplate com￾pensation in Sagnac interferometer-type current sensors,” J. Lightwave Technol. 16(7), 1212–
1219 (1998).
407. A. Tselikov, J. U. de Arruda, and J. Blake, “Zero-crossing demodulation for open-loop Sagnac 
interferometers,” J. Lightwave Technol. 16(9), 1613–1619 (1998).
408. M. Takahashi, K. Sasaki, K. Terai, Y. Hirta and T. Nakajima, “Optical current transformer for 
245 kV integrated air insulated switchgear,” in 2003 IEEE PES Transmission and Distribution 
Conference and Exposition (IEEE Cat. No.03CH37495), 2003, vol. 1, 389–392, doi: 10.1109/
TDC.2003.1335254
409. M. Takahashi, K. Sasaki, A. Ohno, Y. Hirata, and K. Terai, “Sagnac interferometer-type fibre-optic 
current sensor using single-mode fibre down leads,” Meas. Sci. Technol. 15(8), 1637–1641 (2004).
410. H. C. Lefevre, “Single-mode fibre fractional wave devices and polarization controllers,” Electron. 
Lett. 16(20), 778–780 (1980).
411. G. Frosio, “All-fiber adjustable retardation plate,” in EFOC Proc., IGI Europe, Boston, MA, 
1989, pp. 350–355.
412. E. Kiesel, “Impact of modulation-induced signal instabilities on fiber gyro performance,” in 
Fiber Optic and Laser Sensors V, Proc. SPIE 838, 1987, pp. 129–139.
413. M. Skalský, Z. Havránek, and Jirí Fialka, “Efficient modulation and processing method for 
closed-loop fiber optic gyroscope with piezoelectric modulator,” Sensors 19, 1710 (2019), 
doi:10.3390/s19071710
414. H. C. Lefevre, Ph. Graindorge, H.J. Arditty, S. Vatoux and M. Papuchon, “Double closed-loop 
hybrid fiber gyroscope using digital phase ramp,” in Proc. of OFS, 1985, pp. PDS7-1-4.
415. G. Spahlinger, “Fiber optic Sagnac interferometer with digital phase ramp resetting via 
correlation-free demodulator Control,” U.S. Patent 5,123,741, 1992.
416. X. Li, Y. Zhang, and Q. Yu, “Four-state modulation in fiber optic gyro,” in 2008 IEEE 
International Conference on Mechatronics and Automation, 2008, pp. 189–192, doi: 10.1109/
ICMA.2008.4798749
417. A. M. Kurbatov and R. A. Kurbatov, “Methods of improving the accuracy of fiber-optic gyros,” 
Gyroscopy Navig. 3(2), 132–143 (2012).
418. J. Chamoun and M. J. F. Digonnet, “Pseudo-random-bit-sequence phase modulation for 
reduced errors in a fiber optic gyroscope,” Opt. Lett. 41(24), 5664–5667 (2016).
419. L. H. Wang, M. Cao, et al., “Modeling and experimental verification of polarization errors in 
Sagnac fiber optic current sensor,” Optik 126, 2743–2746 (2015).
420. S. K. Sheem, “Fibre-optic gyroscope with 3x3 directional coupler,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 37(10), 
869–871 (1980).References ◾ 181
421. R. Priest, “Analysis of fiber interferometer utilizing 3x3 fiber coupler,” IEEE J. Quant. Electronics
18(10), 1601–1603 (1982), doi: 10.1109/JQE.1982.1071386
422. K. P. Koo, A. B. Tveten, and A. Dandridge, “Passive stabilization scheme for fiber interferom￾eters using (3×3) fiber directional couplers,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 41, 616–618 (1982).
423. J. Pietsch, “Scattering matrix analysis of 3x3 fiber couplers,” J. Lightwave Technol. 7(2), 303–307 
(1989).
424. G. F. Trommer, H. Poisel, W. Buhler, E. Hartl, and R. Muller, “Passive fiber optic gyroscope,” 
Appl. Opt. 29, 5360–5365 (1990).
425. L. Veeser and G. Day, “Faraday effect current sensing using a Sagnac interferometer with a 3x3 
coupler,” in Proc., Optical Fibre Sensors Conf., Sydney, 1990.
426. K. B. Rochford, G. W. Day, and P. R. Forman, “Polarization dependence of response functions 
in 3x3 Sagnac optical fiber current sensors,” J. Lightwave Technol. 12(8), 1504–1509 (1994).
427. A. Yu and A. S. Siddiqui, “Practical Sagnac interferometer based fibre optic current sensor,” IEE 
Proc. Optoelectron. 141(4), 249–256 (1994).
428. I. M. Bassett, “Passive 3x3 sagnac interferometer with reciprocity and correction for small depar￾tures from ideal coupler properties,” in Proc. SPIE 4185, Fourteenth International Conference on 
Optical Fiber Sensors, 41852Q, 2000,https://doi.org/10.1117/12.2302241
429. J. H. Haywood, I. M. Bassett, and M. Matar, “Application of the NIMI technique to the 3x3 
Sagnac fibre optic current sensor – Experimental results,” in Technical Digest 15th International 
Optical Fibre Sensors Conference, Portland, OR, USA, 2002, pp. 553–556.
430. J. Haywood, I. Bassett, M. Matar “Restoring reciprocity to the 3x3 Sagnac interferometer using 
the NIMI technique,” in Technical Digest 17th International Optical Fibre Sensors Conference, 
Bruges, 2002, pp. 553–556.
431. M. Matar, I. M. Bassett, and J. H. Haywood, “Experimental trial of a modulated depolarised Er￾doped SFS with the NIMI 3x3 Sagnac fibre optic current sensor,” in Optical Fiber Sensors, OSA 
Technical Digest (CD) (Optical Society of America, 2006), paper ThE82.
432. Y. Huang, “All-fiber current sensor,” U.S. patent 7,492,977B2, Feb. 17. 2009.
433. K. Goto, T. Sueta, and T. Makimoto, “Traveling-wave light-intensity modulators using the 
method of polarization-rotated reflection,” IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 8(6), 486–493 (1972), 
doi: 10.1109/JQE.1972.1077092
434. A. Enokihara, M. Izutsu, and T. Sueta, “Optical fiber sensors using the method of 
polarization-rotated reflection,” J. Lightwave Technol. 5(11), 1584–1590 (1987). doi: 10.1109/
JLT.1987.1075449
435. G. Frosio and R. Dändliker, “Reciprocal reflection interferometer for a fiber-optic Faraday cur￾rent sensor,” Appl. Opt. 33(25), 6111–6122 (1994).
436. G. Frosio, “Reciprocal interferometers for fiber-optic current sensors,” Ph.D. thesis, University 
of Neuchatel, Switzerland, June 15, 1992.
437. J. Blake, P. Tantaswadi, and R. T. de Carvalho, “In-line Sagnac interferometer for magnetic field 
sensing,” in Proc. 10th Optical Fibre Sensors Conf., 1994, pp. 419–422.
438. F. Rahmatian, G. Polovick, B. Hughes, and V. Aresteanu, “Field experience with high-voltage 
combined optical voltage and current transducers,” Cigre Session, 2004, paper A3-111.
439. K. Bohnert, P. Gabus, J. Kostovic, and H. Brändle, “Optical fiber sensors for the electric power 
industry,” Opt. Lasers Eng., Special Issue “Optics in Switzerland,” Editor Erwin Hack 43(3–5), 
511–526 (2005).
440. K. Bohnert, H. Brändle, M. G. Brunzel, P. Gabus, and P. Guggenbach, “Highly accurate fiber￾optic DC current sensor for the electrowinning industry,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Appl. 43(1), 180–
187 (2007), doi: 10.1109/TIA.2006.887311
441. R. Wüest, A. Frank, S. Wiesendanger, P. Gabus, U. E. Meier, J. Nehring, and K. Bohnert, 
“Influence of residual fiber birefringence and temperature on the high-current performance of 
an interferometric fiber-optic current sensor,” Proc. SPIE 7356, 73560K (2009).182 ◾ References
442. V. P. Gubin, V. A. Isaev, S. K. Morshnev, et al. “All-fiber optical sensor of electric current with a 
spun fiber sensing element,” Proc. SPIE 6251, 1–9 (2010).
443. M. Takahashi, K. Sasaki, Y. Hirata, et al., “Field test of DC optical current transformer for 
HVDC link,” in Proc. IEEE PES General Meeting 2010, doi: 10.1109/PES.2010.5589349
444. W. Wang, X. F. Wang, J. L. Xia, “The nonreciprocal errors in fiber optic current sensors,” Opt. 
Laser Technol. 43, 1470–1474 (2011).
445. L. Wang, X. Xu, X. Liu, T. Zhang, and J. Yan, “Modelling and simulation of polarization errors 
in reflective fiber optic current sensor,” Opt. Eng. 50(7), 074402 (2011).
446. G. M. Müller, A. Frank, M. Lenner, K. Bohnert. G. Gabus, and B. Guelenaltin, “Temperature 
compensation of fiber-optic current sensors in different regimes of operation,” in Proceedings 
IEEE Photonics Conference, 2012, 745–746.
447. Z. Wang, Y. Wang, S. Sun, “Effect of modulation error on all optical fiber current transformers,” 
J. Sens. Technol. 2, 172–176 (2012), doi: 10.4236/jst.2012.24024
448. Y. Hirata et al., “Application of an optical current transformer for cable head station of 
Hokkaido-Honshu HVDC link,” Proc. PES T&D 1-6 (2012), doi: 10.1109/TDC.2012.6281570
449. J. Yu, C. Zhang, C. Li, X. Wang, Y. Li, and X. Feng, “Influence of polarization-dependent cross￾talk on scale factor in the in-line Sagnac interferometer current sensor,” Opt. Eng. 52(11), 
117101 (2013).
450. R. Zhang, H. Lu, Y. Liu, X. Mao, H. Wei, J. Li, and J. Guo, “Polarization-maintaining photonic 
crystal fiber-based quarter waveplate for temperature stability improvement of fiber optic cur￾rent sensor,” J. Mod. Opt. 60(12), 963–969 (2013).
451. K. Sasaki, M. Takahashi, and H. Hirata, “Temperature insensitive Sagnac-type optical current 
transformer,” J. Lightwave Technol. 33(12), 2463–2467 (2015).
452. G. M. Müller, Q. Wei, M. Lenner, L. Yang, A. Frank, and K. Bohnert, “Fiber-optic current 
sensor with self-compensation of source wavelength changes,” Opt. Lett. 41(12), 2867–2870 
(2016).
453. X. Wang, Z. Zhao, C. Li, J. Yu, and Z. Wang, “Analysis and elimination of bias error in a fiber￾optic current sensor,” Appl. Opt. 56, 8887–8895 (2017).
454. K. Bohnert, C.-P. Hsu, L. Yang, A. Frank, G. M. Müller, and P. Gabus, “Fiber-optic current 
sensor tolerant to imperfections of polarization-maintaining fiber connectors,” J. Lightwave 
Technol. 36(11), 2161–2165 (2018).
455. H. Hu, J. Huang, Li Xia, Z., Yan, S. Peng, “The compensation of long‐term temperature induced 
error in the all fiber current transformer through optimizing initial phase delay in λ/4 wave 
plate,” Microw. Opt. Technol. Lett. 61(7), 1769–1773 (2019).
456. V. Temkina, A. Medvedev, A. Mayzel, “Research on the methods and algorithms improving 
the measurements precision and market competitive advantages of fiber optic current sensors,” 
Sensors 20, 5995 (2020).
457. M. Wang, N. Zhang, X. Huang, et al., “High sensitivity demodulation of a reflective 
interferometer-based optical current sensor using an optoelectronic oscillator,” Opt. Lett. 45, 
4519–4522 (2020).
458. M. Lawrence, “Lithium niobate integrated optics,” Rep. Prog. Phys. 56(3), 363–429 (1993).
459. E. L. Wooten, et al., “A review of lithium niobate modulators for fiber-optic communications 
systems,” IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron. 6(1), 69–82 (2000), doi: 10.1109/2944.826874
460. M. Lenner, A. Frank, L. Yang, T. M. Roininen, and K. Bohnert, “Long-term reliability 
of fiber-optic current sensors,” IEEE Sens. Journal 20(2), 823–832 (2020), doi: 10.1109/
JSEN.2019.2944346
461. K. Forrest, S. J. Pagano, and W. Viehmann, “Channel waveguides in glass via silver – sodium 
field assisted ion exchange,” J. Lightwave Technol. 4(2), 140–150 (1986).
462. M.-C. Oh, J.-K. Seo, K.-J. Kim, H. Kim, J.-W. Kim, and W.-S. Chu, “Optical current sensors 
consisting of polymeric waveguide components,” J. Lightwave Technol. 28, 1851–1857 (2010).References ◾ 183
463. M.-C. Oh, W.-S. Chu, K.-J. Kim, and J.-W. Kim, “Polymer waveguide integrated-optic current 
transducers,” Opt. Express 19, 9392–9400 (2011).
464. W.-S. Chu, S.-M. Kim, and M.-C. Oh, “Integrated optic current transducers incorporating pho￾tonic crystal fiber for reduced temperature dependence,” Opt. Express 23, 22816–22825 (2015).
465. S.-M. Kim, W.-S. Chu, S.-G. Kim, and M.-C. Oh, “Integrated-optic current sensors with a mul￾timode interference waveguide device,” Opt. Express 24, 7426–7435 (2016).
466. S.-M. Kim, T.-H. Park, G. Huang, and M.-C. Oh, “Bias-free optical current sensors based on 
quadrature interferometric integrated optics,” Opt. Expr. 26(24), 31599–31606 (2018).
467. H. Lin, W.-W. Lin, M.-H. Chen, and S.-C. Huang, “Fiber-optic current sensor using passive 
demodulation interferometric scheme,” Fiber Integr. Opt. 18, 79–92 (1999).
468. H. Lin, W. W. Lin, M.-H. Chen, and S.-C. Huang “Vibration insensitive optical fiber current 
sensor with a modified reciprocal reflection interferometer,” Opt. Eng. 38(10), 1722–1729 
(1999), doi: 10.1117/1.602224
469. H. Lin, W. W. Lin, and M.-H. Chen, “Modified inline Sagnac interferometer with passive 
demodulation technique for environmental immunity for a fiber-optic current sensor,” Appl. 
Opt. 38(13), 2760–2766 (1999).
470. H. Lin and S. C. Huang, “Fiber-optics multiplexed interferometric current sensors,” Sens. 
Actuator. A Phys. 121(2), 333–338 (2005).
471. J. N. Blake, Int. patent application WO2007/033057, priority date: Sep. 12, 2005.
472. F. Ferdous, A. H. Rose, and P. Perkins, “Passively biased inline Sagnac interferometer-optical 
current sensor: theoretical review,” Opt. Eng. 60(5), 057102 (8 May 2021), doi: 10.1117/1.
OE.60.5.057102
473. K. Bohnert, P. Gabus, J. Nehring, S. Wiesendanger, A. Frank, and H. Brändle, “Nonlinearities 
in the high current response of interferometric fiber-optic current sensors,” Proc. SPIE 7004, 
70040E (2008).
474. Standard of the International Electrotechnical Commission, “IEC60044-8, Instrument 
transformers – Part 8: Electronic current transformers;” (new: “IEC61689-2, Instrument 
transformers – Part 2: Additional requirements for current transformers”).
475. R. Rosenberg, C. B. Rubinstein, and D. R. Herriott, “Resonant optical Faraday rotator,” Appl. 
Opt. 3(9), 1079–1083 (1964).
476. J. Stone, R. M. Jopson, L. W. Stulz, and S. J. Licht, “Enhancement of Faraday rotation in a fiber 
Fabry–Perot cavity,” Electron. Lett. 23, 849–851 (1990).
477. R. M. Jopson, J. Stone, L. W. Stulz, and S. J. Licht, “Nonreciprocal transmission in a fiber Fabry￾Perot resonator containing a magnetooptic material,” IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett. 2(10), 702–
704 (1990), doi: 10.1109/68.60765
478. H. Y. Ling, “Theoretical investigation of transmission through a Faraday-active Fabry–Perot 
étalon,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 11, 754–758 (1994).
479. R. B. Wagreich and C. C. Davis, “Magnetic field detection enhancement in an external cavity fiber 
Fabry-Perot sensor,” J. Lightwave Technol. 14(10), 2246–2249 (1996), doi: 10.1109/50.541214
480. H. Zhang, Y. Dong, J. Leeson, L. Chen, and X. Bao, “High sensitivity optical fiber current sensor 
based on polarization diversity and a Faraday rotation mirror cavity,” Appl. Opt. 50, 924–929 
(2011).
481. F. Liu, Q. Ye, J. Geng, R. Qu, and Z. Fang, “Study of fiber-optic current sensing based on degree 
of polarization measurement,” Chin. Opt. Lett. 5, 267–269 (2007).
482. H. Zhang, Y. Qiu, Hui Li, et al., “High-current-sensitivity all-fiber current sensor based on fiber 
loop architecture,” Opt. Express 20, 18591–18599 (2012).
483. J. Du, Y. Tao, Y. Liu, et al., “Highly sensitive and reconfigurable fiber optic current sensor by 
optical recirculating in a fiber loop,” Opt. Express 24, 17980–17988 (2016).
484. H. Zhang, J. Jiang, Y. Zhang, et al., “A loop all-fiber current sensor based on single-polarization 
single-mode couplers,” Sensors 17, 2674 (2017).184 ◾ References
485. J. Jiang, H. Zhang, Y. He, and Y. Qiu, “Hybrid structure multichannel all-fiber current sensor,” 
Sensors 17(8), 1770 (2017).
486. H. K. Kim, S. K. Kim, H. G. Park, B. Y. Kim, “Polarimetric fiber laser sensors,” Opt. Lett. 18, 
317–319 (1993).
487. H. K. Kim, S. K. Kim, B. Y. Kim, “Polarization control of polarimetric fiber-laser sensors,” Opt. 
Lett. 18, 1465–1467 (1993).
488. G. A. Ball, G. Meltz, and W. W. Morey, “Polarimetric heterodyning Bragg-grating fiber-laser 
sensor,” Opt. Lett. 18, 1976–1978 (1993).
489. K. Bohnert, A. Frank, E. Rochat, K. Haroud, and H. Brändle, “Polarimetric fiber laser sensor for 
hydrostatic pressure,” Appl. Opt. 43, 41–48 (2004).
490. J. T. Kringlebotn, W. H. Loh, and R. I. Laming, “Polarimetric Er3+-doped fiber distributed￾feedback laser sensor for differential pressure and force measurements,” Opt. Lett. 21, 1869–
1871 (1996).
491. H. Y. Kim, B. K. Kim, S. H. Yun, and Byoung Yoon Kim, “Response of fiber lasers to an axial 
magnetic field,” Opt. Lett. 20, 1713–1715 (1995).
492. J. S. Park, S. H. Yun, S. J. Ahn, and B. Y. Kim, “Polarization- and frequency-stable fiber laser for 
magnetic-field sensing,” Opt. Lett. 21, 1029–1031 (1996).
493. M. L. Lee, J. S. Park, W. J. Lee, S. H. Yun, Y. H. Lee, B. Y. Kim, “A polarimetric current sensor 
using an orthogonally polarized dual-frequency fibre laser,” Meas. Sci. Technol. 9, 952–959, 
(1998).
494. Y. Takahashi and T. Yoshino, “Fiber ring laser with flint glass fiber and its sensor applications,” 
J. Lightwave Technol. 17, 591–597 (1999).
495. L. Cheng, J. Han, Z. Guo, L. Jin, and B.-O. Guan, “Faraday-rotation-based miniature magnetic 
field sensor using polarimetric heterodyning fiber grating laser,” Opt. Lett. 38, 688–690 (2013).
496. L. Cheng, J. Han, L. Jin, Z. Guo, and B.-O. Guan, “Sensitivity enhancement of Faraday effect 
based heterodyning fiber laser magnetic field sensor by lowering linear birefringence,” Opt. 
Express 21, 30156–30162 (2013).
497. R. Stierlin, “Optical current transformer,” U.S. patent 5304920, priority date: Sep. 28, 1990.
498. P. Debergh and O. Parriaux, “Current sensing by magneto-optic coupling in a birefringent 
waveguide,” in Proc. of ECIO’93, Neuchâtel, Switzerland, 1993, pp. 12–36 .
499. V. Minier, D. Persegol, J. L. Lovato, and A. Kévorkian, “Integrated optical current sensor for 
high-power systems,” in Optical Fiber Sensors (Optica Publishing Group, 1996), paper We23.
500. V. Minier, D. Persegui, J. L. Lovato, and A. Kévorkian, “Integrated optical current sensor 
with low-birefringence optical waveguides,” in 12th International Conference on Optical Fiber 
Sensors, Vol. 16 of 1997 OSA Technical Digest Series (Optica Publishing Group, 1997), paper 
OWA4.
501. V. Minier, “Waveguide birefringence temperature sensitivity in multi-turn integrated optics 
current sensors,” in Proc. SPIE 3746, 13th Int. Conf. on Optical Fiber Sensors 37462C, 1999, doi: 
10.1117/12.2302074
502. R. V. Ramaswamy and R. Srivastava, “Ion-exchanged glass waveguides: a review,” J. Lightwave 
Technol. 6(6) 984–1000 (1988), doi: 10.1109/50.4090
503. A. D. Kersey and M. J. Marrone, “Fiber Bragg grating high-magnetic-field probe,” in Tenth Int. 
Conf. Optical Fibre Sensors, Proc. SPIE 2360, 1994, pp. 53–56.
504. Y. Su, Y. Zhu, B. Zhang, J. Li, and Y. Li, “Use of the polarization properties of magneto-optic 
fiber Bragg gratings for magnetic field sensing purposes,” Opt. Fiber Technol. 17(3), 196–200 
(2011).
505. H. Peng, Y. Su, and Y. Li, “Evolution of polarization properties in circular birefringent fiber 
Bragg gratings and application for magnetic field sensing,” Opt. Fiber Technol. 18(4), 177–182 
(2012).
506. F. Descamps, D. Kinet, S. Bette, and C. Caucheteur, “Magnetic field sensing using standard 
uniform FBGs,” Opt. Express 24, 26152–26160 (2016).References ◾ 185
507. B. Wu, C. Li, K. Qiu, and L. Cheng, “Characteristics of light polarization in magneto-optic fiber 
Bragg gratings with linear birefringence,” Chin. Opt. Lett. 9, 010601 (2011).
508. B. Wu, F. Wen, K. Qiu, et al., “Magnetically-induced circular-polarization-dependent loss of 
magneto-optic fiber Bragg gratings with linear birefringence,” Opt. Fiber Technol. 19(3), 219–
222 (2013).
509. D. Goldstein, “The mathematics of the Mueller matrix,” in Polarized Light, 2nd ed. (CRC Press, 
2003), Chap 9.
510. P. Orr, P. Niewczas, M. Stevenson, and J. Canning, “Compound phase-shifted fiber Bragg struc￾tures as intrinsic magnetic field sensors,” J. Lightwave Technol. 28(18), 2667–2673 (2010).
511. P. Orr and P. Niewczas, “An optical fibre system design enabling simultaneous point measure￾ment of magnetic field strength and temperature using low-birefringence FBGs,” Sens. Actuator. 
A Phys. 163(1), 68–74, (2010).
512. J. C. Yong, S. H. Yun, M. L. Lee, and B. Y. Kim, “Frequency-division-multiplexed polarimetric 
fiber laser current-sensor array,” Opt. Lett. 24, 1097–1099 (1999).
513. Z. Huang, H. Zhang, J. Jiang, et al., “A quasi-distributed all-fiber current sensor based on series 
structure,” Opt. Fiber Technol. 32, 1–5 (2016).
514. L. Palmieri, D. Sarchi, and A. Galtarossa, “Distributed measurement of high electric current by 
means of polarimetric optical fiber sensor,” Opt. Express 23, 11073–11079 (2015).
515. E. R. Perry, “Laser measures current,” Instrum. Contr. Syst. 38(7), 121–124 (1965).
516. A. Braun and J. Zinkernagel, “Optoelectronic electricity meter for high-voltage lines,” IEEE 
Trans. Instrum. Meas. 22(4), 394–399 (1973).
517. J. S. Subjak, “An EHV current transducer with feedback-controlled encoding,” IEEE Trans. 
Power Appar. Syst. 94(6), 2124–2130 (1975).
518. L. E. Berkebile, S. Nilsson, and S. Sun, “Digital EHV current transducer,” IEEE Trans. Power 
Appar. Syst. PAS-100(4), 1498–1504 (1981), doi: 10.1109/TPAS.1981.316497
519. R. Malewski, “High-voltage current transformers with optical signal transmission,” Opt. Eng. 
20(1) 200154 (1981), doi: 10.1117/12.7972662
520. M. B. Adolfsson, C. H. Einvall, P. Lindberg, J. Samuelsson, L. Ahlgren, and H. Edlund, “EHV 
series capacitor banks: a new approach to platform to grounds signalling, relay protection and 
supervision,” IEEE Trans. Power Deliv. 4(2), 1369–1378 (1989), doi: 10.1109/61.25624
521. Y. N. Ning, T. Y. Liu, and D. A. Jackson, “Two low‐cost robust electro‐optic hybrid current 
sensors capable of operation at extremely high potential,” Rev. Sci. Instrum. 63(12), 5771–5773 
(1992), doi: 10.1063/1.1143361
522. N. A. Pilling, R. Holmes, and G. R. Jones, “Optically powered hybrid current measurement 
system,” Electron. Lett. 29(12), 1049–1051 (1993).
523. A. Tardy, A. Derossis, and J. Dupraz, “A current censor remotely powered and monitored 
through an optical Fiber Link,” Opt. Fiber Technol. 1, 181–185 (1995).
524. G. Zhang, S. Li, Y. Qin, and Z. Zhang, “A new electro-optic hybrid current-sensing scheme 
for current measurement at high voltage,” Rev. Sci. Instrum. 70(9), 3755–3758 (1999). 
doi:10.1063/1.1149988
525. E. F. Donaldson, J. R. Gibson, G. R. Jones, N. A. Pilling and B. T. Taylor, “Hybrid optical cur￾rent transformer with optical and power-line energisation,” IEE Proc. Gener. Transm. Distrib., 
147(5), 304–309 (2000), doi: 10.1049/ip-gtd:20000604
526. G. Zhang, S. Li, Z. Zhang, and W. Cao, “A novel electro-optic hybrid current measurement 
instrument for high-voltage power lines,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 50(1) 59–62 (2001), doi: 
10.1109/19.903878
527. M. M. Werneck and A. C. S. Abrantes, “Fiber-optic-based current and voltage measuring sys￾tem for high-voltage distribution lines,” IEEE Trans. Power Deliv. 19(3), 947–951 (2004), doi: 
10.1109/TPWRD.2004.829916
528. Y. Wang, L. Zheng, P. Hou, and C. Hu, “Research on optically powered ultra current trans￾former,” Opt. Lasers Eng. 43(10), 1145–1150 (2005).186 ◾ References
529. Y. Wang, J. Yuan, H. Wang, and J. Liu, “Design and research of fiber optically powered Rogowski 
coil current transformer,” Procedia Eng. 15, 886–890 (2011).
530. F. V. B. de Nazare and M. M. Werneck, “Hybrid optoelectronic sensor for current and tempera￾ture monitoring in overhead transmission lines,” IEEE Sens. J. 12(5), 1193–1194 (2012), doi: 
10.1109/JSEN.2011.2163709
531. F. R. Bassan, J. B. Rosolem, C. Floridia, et al. “Power-over-fiber LPIT for voltage and current 
measurements in the medium voltage distribution networks,” Sensors 21, 547, (2021), doi: 
10.3390/s21020547
532. ABB Instrument Transformers: Application Guide, Edition 4 (2015).
533. IEC 61869-11. Instrument Transformers—Part 11: Additional requirements for low power 
passive voltage transformers; International Electrotechnical Commission IEC: Geneva, 
Switzerland, 2017.
534. IEC 61869-10. Instrument Transformers—Part 10: Additional requirements for low power 
passive current transformers; International Electrotechnical Commission IEC: Geneva, 
Switzerland, 2017.
535. A. Erez, “Low-frequency electrical signal measurement by electrooptical methods,” IEEE Trans. 
Instrum. Meas. 21(4), 358–360 (1972).
536. R. M. Ribeiro, L. Martins, and M. M. Werneck, “Wavelength demodulation of ultrabright 
green light-emitting diodes for electrical current sensing,” IEEE Sens. J. 5(1), 38–47 (2005), doi: 
10.1109/JSEN.2004.838663
537. J. L. Flores, G. A. Ayubi, J. Matias di Martino, et al., “Hybrid ac-current sensor based on the 
time modulation of an autonomous light source,” Optik 152(1), 29–35 (2018).
538. B. Jaffe, W. R. Cook, and H. Jaffe, Piezoelectric Ceramics (Academic Press, New York, 1971).
539. Y. N. Ning, B. C. B. Chu, and D. A. Jackson, “Interrogation of a conventional current trans￾former by a fiber-optic interferometer,” Opt. Lett. 16, 1448–1450 (1991).
540. C. M. Davis, “Phase-modulated fiber-optic current transformer/voltage transformer,” EPRI 
final report EL-7421, Research Project 2734-3, Optical Technologies Inc., Herndon, VA, 1991.
541. C. McGarrity, Y. N. Ning, J. L. Santos, and D. A. Jackson, “A fiber‐optic system for three‐phase 
current sensing using a hybrid sensing technique,” Rev. Scient. Instrum. 63, 2035–2039 (1992), 
doi: 10.1063/1.1143810
542. T. Wang, C. Luo, and S. Zheng, “A fiber-optic current sensor based on a differentiating Sagnac 
interferometer,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 50(3), 705–708 (2001), doi: 10.1109/19.930443
543. P. J. Henderson, N. E. Fisher, and D. A. Jackson, “Current metering using fibre-grating based 
interrogation of a conventional current transformer,” in 12th Int. Conf. Optical Fiber Sensors, 
Vol. 16 of 1997 OSA Technical Digest Series (Optica Publishing Group, 1997), paper OWC11.
544. N. E. Fisher, P. J. Henderson, and D. A. Jackson, “The interrogation of a conventional current 
transformer using an in-fibre Bragg grating,” Meas. Sci. Technol. 8(10), 1080 (1997).
545. L. Dziuda, G. Fusiek, P. Niewczas, G. M. Burt, and J. R. McDonald, “Laboratory evaluation of a 
hybrid fiber-optic current sensor,” Sens. and Actuator. A Phys. 136(1), 184–190 (2007).
546. G. Fusiek, “Hysteresis compensation for a piezoelectric fiber optic voltage sensor,” Opt. Eng. 
44(11), 114402 (2005).
547. G. Fusiek, Pawel Niewczas, James R. McDonald, “Improved method of hysteresis compen￾sation for a piezoelectric fiber optic voltage sensor,” Opt. Eng. 46(3), 034401 (2007), doi: 
10.1117/1.2714931
548. P. Niewczas and J. R. McDonald, “Advanced optical sensors for power and energy systems 
applications,” IEEE Instrum. Meas. Mag. 10(1), 18–28 (2007), doi: 10.1109/MIM.2007.339552
549. G. Fusiek, P. Niewczas, and J. McDonald, “Feasibility study of the application of optical volt￾age and current sensors and an arrayed waveguide grating for aero-electrical systems,” Sens. 
Actuator. A Phys. 147(1), 177–182 (2008).
550. A. D. Kersey, et al., “Fiber grating sensors,” J. Lightwave Technol. 15(8), 1442–1463 (1997), doi: 
10.1109/50.618377References ◾ 187
551. P. M. Cavaleiro, F. M. Araujo, and A. L. Ribeiro, “Metal-coated fibre Bragg grating sensor for 
electric current metering,” Electron. Lett. 34(11), 1133–1135 (1998).
552. P. Orr, G. Fusiek, P. Niewczas, et al., “Distributed photonic instrumentation for power sys￾tem protection and control,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 64(1), 19–26 (2015), doi: 10.1109/
TIM.2014.2329740
553. P. Orr, P. Niewczas, C. Booth, G. Fusiek, A. Dysko, and F. Kawano, “An optically-interrogated 
Rogowski coil for passive multiplexable current measurement,” IEEE Sens. J. 13(6), 2053–2054 
(2013).
554. P. Orr, G. Fusiek, P. Niewczas, et al., “Distributed photonic instrumentation for power sys￾tem protection and control,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 64(1), 19–26 (2015), doi: 10.1109/
TIM.2014.2329740
555. D. Tzelepis A. Dysko, G. Fusiek, et al., “Single-ended differential protection in MTDC net￾works using optical sensors,” IEEE Trans. Power Deliv. 32(3), 1605–1615 (2017), doi: 10.1109/
TPWRD.2016.2645231
556. D. Tzelepis, A. Dysko, C. Booth, G. Fusiek, et al. “Distributed current sensing technology for 
protection and fault location applications in high-voltage direct current networks,” J. Eng. 
2018(15), 1169–1175 (2018).
557. P. Orr and P. Niewczas, “High-speed, solid state, interferometric interrogator and multiplexer 
for fiber Bragg grating sensors,” J. Lightwave Technol. 29(22), 3387–3392 (2011).
558. P. Wei, C. Cheng, X. Wang, et al. “A high-performance hybrid current transformer based on a 
fast variable optical attenuator,” IEEE Trans. Power Deliv. 29(6), 2656–2663 (2014).
559. P. Wei, C. Cheng, and T. Liu, “A photonic transducer-based optical current sensor using back￾propagation neural network,” IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett. 28(14), 1513–1516 (2016), doi: 
10.1109/LPT.2016.2557339
560. P. Wei, C. Cheng, L. Deng, and H. Huang, “A hybrid electro-optic current transducer using a 
photodiode-based primary supply,” IEEE Sens. J. 17(9), 2713–2717 (2017).
561. R. L. Heredero, R. F. de Caleya, H. Guerrero, et al., “Micromachined optical fiber current sen￾sor,” Appl. Opt. 38(25), 5298–5305 (1999).
562. R. L. Heredero, J. L. Santos, R. F. de Caleya, and H. Guerrero, “Micromachined low-finesse 
Fabry-Perot interferometer for the measurement of DC and AC electrical currents,” IEEE Sens. 
J. 3(1), 13–18 (2003), doi: 10.1109/JSEN.2003.810112
563. J. Duplessis and J. Barker, “Intelligent measurement for grid management & control,” in USA 
Pacworld Conference 2014, paper 0903.
564. N. A. Pilling, R. Holmes, and G. R. Jones, “Optical fibre current measurement system using 
liquid crystals and chromatic modulation,” IEE Proc. C140(5), 351–356 (1993), doi: 10.1049/
ip-c.1993.0052
565. J. D. Bull, N. A. F. Jaeger, and F. Rahmatian, “A new hybrid current sensor for high-voltage 
applications,” IEEE Trans. Power Deliv. 20(1), 32–38 (2005), doi: 10.1109/TPWRD.2004.833889
566. J. P. Joule, “On a new class of magnetic forces,” Ann. Electr. Magn. Chem. 8, 219–224 (1842).
567. E. Trémolet de Lacheisserie, Magnetostriction – Theory and Applications of Magnetoelasticity
(CRC Press, 1993).
568. M. J. Dapino, “On magnetostrictive materials and their use in adaptive structures,” Struct. Eng. 
Mech. 17(3–4), 303–330 (2004).
569. J. D. Livingston, “Magnetomechanical properties of amorphous metals,” Physica Status Solidi 
(a) 70(2), 591–596 (1982).
570. L. Daniel, “An analytical model for the magnetostriction strain of ferromagnetic materials sub￾jected to multiaxial stress,” Eur. Phys. J. Appl. Phys. 83(3), article 30904 (2018).
571. A. Yariv and H. V. Windsor, “Proposal for detection of magnetostrictive perturbation of optical 
fibers,” Opt. Lett. 5, 87 (1980).
572. A. Dandridge, A. B. Tveten, G. H. Sigel, E. J. West, and T. G. Giallorenzi, “Optical fiber mag￾netic field sensors,” Electron. Lett. 17(15), 408–409 (1980).188 ◾ References
573. J. Jarzynski, J. H. Cole, J. A. Bucaro, and C. M. Davis, “Magnetic field sensitivity of an optical 
fiber with magnetostrictive jacket,” Appl. Opt. 19(22), 3746–3748 (1980).
574. S. C. Rashleigh, “Magnetic-field sensing with a single-mode fiber,” Opt. Lett. 6(1), 19–21 (1981).
575. K. P. Koo and G. H. Sigel, “Characteristics of fiber-optic magnetic-field sensors employing 
metallic glasses,” Opt. Lett. 7, 334–336 (1982).
576. K. Koo, A. Dandridge, A. Tveten, and G. Sigel, “A fiber-optic DC magnetometer,” J. Lightwave 
Technol. 1(3), 524–525 (1983), doi: 10.1109/JLT.1983.1072141
577. A. D. Kersey, M. Corke, D. A. Jackson, and J. D. C. Jones, “Detection of DC and low frequency 
AC magnetic fields using an all single-mode fiber interferometer,” Electron. Lett. 19, 469–471 
(1983).
578. K. P. Koo and G. H. Sigel, “Detection scheme in a fiber-optic magnetic-field sensor free from 
ambiguity due to material magnetic hysteresis,” Opt. Lett. 9, 257–259 (1984).
579. F. Bucholtz, K. Koo, G. Sigel, and A. Dandridge, “Optimization of the fiber/metallic glass bond 
in fiber-optic magnetic sensors,” J. Lightwave Technol. 3(4), 814–817 (1985), doi: 10.1109/
JLT.1985.1074286
580. A. Kersey, D. Jackson, and M. Corke, “Single-mode fibre-optic magnetometer with DC bias 
field stabilization,” J. Lightwave Technol. 3(4), 836–840 (1985), doi: 10.1109/JLT.1985.1074285
581. K. Koo, A. Dandridge, F. Bucholtz, and A. Tveten, “An analysis of a fiber-optic magnetometer 
with magnetic feedback,” J. Lightwave Technol. 5(12), 1680–1685 (1987).
582. F. Bucholtz, D. M. Dagenais, K. P. Koo, and S. Vohra, “High-frequency fibre-optic magnetom￾eter with 70 fT/square root (Hz) resolution,” Electron. Lett. 25, 1719 (1989).
583. K. P. Koo, F. Bucholtz, D. M. Dagenais, and A. Dandridge, “A compact fiber-optic magnetom￾eter employing an amorphous metal wire transducer,” IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett. 1(12), 464–
466 (1989), doi: 10.1109/68.46051
584. D. Y. Kim, H. J. Kong, and B. Y. Kim, “Fiber-optic DC magnetic field sensor with balanced detec￾tion technique,” IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett. 4(8), 945–948 (1992), doi: 10.1109/68.149918
585. M. Sedlar, I. Paulicka, and M. Sayer, “Optical fiber magnetic field sensors with ceramic magne￾tostrictive jackets,” Appl. Opt. 35, 5340–5344 (1996).
586. N. Rajkumar, V. Jagadeesh Kumar, and P. Sankaran, “Fiber sensor for the simultaneous mea￾surement of current and voltage in a high-voltage system,” Appl. Opt. 32, 1225–1228 (1993).
587. K. D. Oh, J. Ranade, V. Arya, A. Wang, and R. O. Claus, “Optical fiber Fabry-Perot interfero￾metric sensor for magnetic field measurement,” IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett. 9(6), 797–799 
(1997).
588. K. D. Oh, A. Wang, and R. O. Claus, “Fiber-optic extrinsic Fabry–Perot dc magnetic field sen￾sor,” Opt. Lett. 29, 2115–2117 (2004).
589. J. Mora, A. Diez, J. L. Cruz, and M. V. Andres, “A magnetostrictive sensor interrogated by fiber 
gratings for DC-current and temperature discrimination,” IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett. 12(12), 
1680–1682 (2000), doi: 10.1109/68.896347
590. K. S. Chiang, R. Kancheti, and V. Rastogi, “Temperature-compensated fiber-Bragg-grating￾based magnetostrictive sensor for DC and AC currents,” Opt. Eng. 42(7), 1906–1909 (2003).
591. D. Davino, C. Visone, C. Ambrosino, S. Campopiano, A. Cusano, A. Cutolo, “Compensation of 
hysteresis in magnetic field sensors employing fiber Bragg grating and magneto-elastic materi￾als,” Sens. Actuator. A Phys. 147(1), 127–136 (2008).
592. C. Ambrosino, S. Campopiano, A. Cutolo, and A. Cusano, “Sensitivity tuning in Terfenol-D 
based fiber Bragg grating magnetic sensors,” IEEE Sens. J. 8(9), 1519–1520 (2008), doi: 10.1109/
JSEN.2008.925159
593. X. Wang, S. Chen, Z. Du, et al., “Experimental study of some key issues on fiber-optic interfero￾metric sensors detecting weak magnetic field,” IEEE Sens. J. 8(7), 1173–1179 (2008).
594. X. Wang, X. Li, Z. Du, X. Wang, and J. Chen, “Experimental investigation on temperature 
dependence of the performance in a magnetostrictive fiber-optic interferometric magnetic 
field sensor,” IEEE Sens. J. 9(10), 1234–1239 (2009).References ◾ 189
595. M. Yang, J. Dai, C. Zhou, and D. Jiang, “Optical fiber magnetic field sensors with TbDyFe mag￾netostrictive thin films as sensing materials,” Opt. Express 17(23), 20777–20782 (2009).
596. S. M. M. Quintero, A. M. B. Braga, H. I. Weber, A. C. Bruno, J. F. D. F. Araújo, “A magnetostric￾tive composite-fiber Bragg grating sensor,” Sensors 10(9), 8119 (2010).
597. S. M. M. Quintero, C. Martelli, A. M. B. Braga, L. C. G. Valente, and C. C. Kato, “Magnetic field 
measurements based on Terfenol coated photonic crystal fibers,” Sensors 11(12), 11103–11111 
(2011).
598. G. Lanza, G. Breglio, M. Giordano, A. Gaddi, S. Buontempo, and A. Cusano, “Effect of the 
anisotropic magnetostriction on Terfenol-D based fiber Bragg grating magnetic sensors,” Sens. 
Actuator. A Phys. 172(2), 420–427 (2011).
599. H. Liu, S. W. Or, and H. Y. Tam, “Magnetostrictive composite–fiber Bragg grating (MC–FBG) 
magnetic field sensor,” Sens. Actuator. A: Phys. 173(1), 122–126 (2012).
600. Y. Du, T. Liu, Z. Ding, K. Liu, B. Feng, and J. Jiang, “Distributed magnetic field sensor based 
on magnetostriction using Rayleigh backscattering spectra shift in optical frequency-domain 
reflectometry,” Appl. Phys. Express 8(1), 012401 (2014).
601. A. Masoudi and T. P. Newson, “Distributed optical fiber dynamic magnetic field sensor based 
on magnetostriction,” Appl. Opt. 53, 2833–2838 (2014).
602. R. Amat, H. García-Miquel, D. Barrera, G.V. Kurlyandskaya, and S. Sales, “Magneto-optical 
sensor based on fiber Bragg gratings and a magnetostrictive material,” Key Eng. Mat. 644, 232–
235 (2015).
603. Y. Du, T. Liu, Z. Ding, et al., “Distributed magnetic field sensor based on magnetostriction 
using Rayleigh backscattering spectra shift in optical frequency-domain reflectometry,” Appl. 
Phys. Express 8, 012401 (2015).
604. Z. Ding, Y. Du, T. Liu, K. Liu, B. Feng, and J. Jiang, “Distributed optical fiber current sensor 
based on magnetostriction in OFDR,” IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett. 27(19), 2055–2058 (2015), 
doi: 10.1109/LPT.2015.2450237
605. I. M. Nascimento, J. M. Baptista, P. A. S. Jorge, J. L. Cruz, and M. V. Andrés, “Intensity￾modulated optical fiber sensor for AC magnetic field detection,” IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett. 
27(23), 2461–2464 (2015), doi: 10.1109/LPT.2015.2470135
606. I. M. Nascimento, J. M. Baptista, P. A. S. Jorge, J. L. Cruz, and M. V. Andrés, “Passive interfero￾metric interrogation of a magnetic field sensor using an erbium doped fiber optic laser with 
magnetostrictive transducer,” Sens. Actuator. A Phys. 235, 227–233 (2015).
607. H. Yan, X. Thao C. Zhang, et al., “A novel current fiber sensor with magnetostrictive material 
based on the plasmon response,” Optik 127(3), 1323–1325 (2016).
608. J. Han, H. Hu, H. Wang, et al., “Temperature-compensated magnetostrictive current sensor based 
on the configuration of dual fiber Bragg gratings,” J. Lightwave Technol. 35, 4910–4915 (2017).
609. I. M. Nascimento, G. Chesini, J. M. Baptista, C. M. B. Cordeiro, and P. A. S. Jorge, “Vibration 
and magnetic field sensing using a long-period grating,” IEEE Sens. J. 17(20), 6615–6621 
(2017), doi: 10.1109/JSEN.2017.2743112
610. N. Kaplan, J. Jasenek, J. Červeňová, and M. Ušáková, “Magnetic optical FBG sensors using 
optical frequency-domain reflectometry,” IEEE Trans. Magn. 55(1), art no. 4000704 (2019), doi: 
10.1109/TMAG.2018.2873405
611. S. Xu, Q. Peng, F. Xing, et al., “A low-cost current sensor based on semi-cylindrical magneto￾strictive composite,” Electronics 9(11), 1833 (2020).
612. W. Li, X. Kewen, W. Ling, “Model and experimental study on optical fiber CT based on 
Terfenol-D,” Sensors 20(8), 2255 (2020).
613. M. Zhou, Y. Zhao, G. Wang, et al., “Simultaneous AC and DC measurement based on an FBG￾magnetostrictive fiber sensor,” Appl. Opt. 60(24), 7131–7135 (2021).
614. D. Feng, Y. Gao, T. Zhu, M. Deng, X. Zhang, and L. Kai, “High-precision temperature￾compensated magnetic field sensor based on optoelectronic oscillator,” J. Lightwave Technol. 
39, 2559–2564 (2021).190 ◾ References
615. J. D. Lopez, A. Dante, C. C. Carvalho, R. Allil, and M. M. Werneck, “Simulation and experi￾mental study of FBG-based magnetic field sensors with Terfenol-D composites in different 
geometric shapes,” Measurement 172, 108893 (2021).
616. B. Zhan, T. Ning, Li Pei, et al., “Terfenol-D based magnetic field sensor with temperature 
independence incorporating dual fiber Bragg gratings structure,” IEEE Access 9, 32713–32720 
(2021).
617. R. Sun, L. Zhang, H. Wei, et al., “Quasi-distributed magnetic field fiber sensors integrated with 
magnetostrictive rod in OFDR system,” Electronics 11(7), 1013 (2022).
618. D. Satpathi, J. A. Moore, and M. G. Ennis, “Design of a Terfenol-D based fiber-optic current 
transducer,” IEEE Sens. J. 5(5), 1057–1065 (2005).
619. J. Mora, L. Martínez-León, A. Díez, J. L. Cruz, and M.V. Andrés, “Simultaneous temperature 
and ac-current measurements for high voltage lines using fiber Bragg gratings,” Sens. Actuator. 
A Phys. 125, 313–316 (2006).
620. D. Reilly, A. J. Willshire, G. Fusiek, P. Niewczas, and J. R. McDonald, “A fiber-Bragg-grating￾based sensor for simultaneous AC current and temperature measurement,” IEEE Sens. J. 6(6), 
1539–1542 (2006).
621. A. O. Cremonezi, E. C. Ferreira, A. J. B. Filho, and J. A. S. Dias, “A fiber Bragg grating RMS 
current transducer Based on the magnetostriction effect using a Terfenol-D toroidal-shaped 
modulator,” IEEE Sens. J. 13(2), 683–690 (2013), doi: 10.1109/JSEN.2012.2226333
622. F. V. B. de Nazaré, M. M. Werneck, R. P. de Oliveira, et al., “Development of an optical sensor 
head for current and temperature measurements in power systems,” J. Sens., Art. no. 393406 
(2013), doi: 10.1155/2013/393406
623. F. V. B. de Nazaré and M. M. Werneck, “Compact optomagnetic Bragg-grating-based current 
sensor for transmission lines,” IEEE Sens. J. 15(1), 100–109 (2015), doi: 10.1109/JSEN.2014.
2337518
624. A. Dante, J. D. Lopez, T. Trovão, R. W. Mok, C. C. Carvalho, R. C. da Silva Barros Allil, and M. 
M. Werneck, “A compact FBG-Based toroidal magnetostrictive current sensor with reduced 
mass of Terfenol-D,” in OSA Optical Sensors and Sensing Congress 2019 (Optical Society of 
America, Washington, DC, USA, 2019).
625. A. Dante, J. D. Lopez, C. C. Carvalho, R. C. da Silva Barros Allil, and M. M. Werneck, “A 
Compact FBG-based magnetostrictive optical current sensor with reduced mass of Terfenol-D,” 
IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett. 31(17), 1461–1464 (2019), doi: 10.1109/LPT.2019.2932112
626. S. Wang, F. Wan, H. Zhao, W. Chen, W. Zhang, and Q. Zhou, “A sensitivity-enhanced fiber grat￾ing current sensor based on giant magnetostrictive material for large-current measurement,” 
Sensors 19(8), 1755 (2019).
627. J. D. Lopez, A. Dante, R. M. Bacurau, et al., “Fiber-optic current sensor based on FBG and opti￾mized magnetostrictive composite,” IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett. 31(24), 1987–1990 (2019).
628. J. D. Lopez, A. Dante, A. O. Cremonezi, et al., “Fiber-optic current sensor based on FBG and 
Terfenol-D with magnetic flux concentration for enhanced sensitivity and linearity,” IEEE Sens. 
J. 20(7), 3572–3578 (2020), doi: 10.1109/JSEN.2019.2959231
629. S. Xu, Q. Peng, C. Li, et al., “Optical fiber current sensors based on FBG and magnetostrictive 
composite materials,” Appl. Sci. 11(1), 161 (2020).
630. E. Blums, A. Cebers, and M.M. Majorov, Magnetic Fluids (De Gruyter, Berlin 1996), ISBN 
3-11-014390-9.
631. Y. Zhao, R. Q. Lv, H. Li, and Q. Wang, “Simulation and experimental measurement of magnetic 
fluid transmission characteristics subjected to the magnetic field,” IEEE Trans. Magn. 50(5), 
1–5 (2014).
632. Y. Zhao, D. Wu, R. Q. Lv, and Y. Ying, “Tunable characteristics and mechanism analysis of 
the magnetic fluid refractive index with applied magnetic field,” IEEE Trans. Magn. 50(8), 1–5 
(2014).References ◾ 191
633. Z. Di, X. Chen, S. Pu, X. Hu, and Y. Xia, “Magnetic-field-induced birefringence and particle 
agglomeration in magnetic fluids,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 89(21), art. no. 211106 (2006).
634. P. Zu et al., “Enhancement of the sensitivity of magneto-optical fiber sensor by magnifying the 
birefringence of magnetic fluid film with Loyt Sagnac interferometer,” Sens. Actuator. B Chem. 
191, 19–23 (2014).
635. M. Xu and P. J. Ridler, “Linear dichroism and birefringence effects in magnetic fluids,” J. Appl. 
Phys. 82(1), 326–332 (1997).
636. J. Xia, Q. Wang, X. Liu, and H. Luo, “Fiber optic Fabry-Perot current sensor integrated with 
magnetic fluid using a fiber Bragg grating demodulation,” Sensors 15, 16632–16641 (2015), doi: 
10.3390/s150716632
637. R. Lv, Y. Zhao, D. Wang, and Q. Wang, “Magnetic fluid-filled optical fiber Fabry–Perot sensor 
for magnetic field measurement,” IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett. 26(3), 217–219 (2014).
638. Y. Zhao, X. Liu, R.-Q. Lv, Y.-N. Zhang, and Q. Wang, “Review on optical fiber sensors based on 
the refractive index tunability of ferrofluid,” J. Lightwave Technol. 35, 3406–3412 (2017), doi: 
10.1109/JLT.2016.2573288
639. J. Dai, M. Yang, X. Li, et al., “Magnetic field sensor based on magnetic fluid clad etched fiber 
Bragg grating,” Opt. Fiber Technol. 17(3), 210–213 (2011).
640. J. Zheng, X. Dong, P. Zu, et al., “Magnetic field sensor using tilted fiber grating interacting with 
magnetic fluid,” Opt. Express 21(15), 17863–17868 (2013).
641. X. Li, X. Lyu, F. Lyu et al., “An all-fiber current sensor based on magnetic fluid clad microfiber 
knot resonator,” Int. J. Smart Sens. Intell. Syst. 7(5) (2020).
642. L. Gao et al., “Long-period fiber grating within D-shaped fiber using magnetic fluid for magnetic￾field detection,” IEEE Photonics J. 4(6), 2095–2104, (2012), doi: 10.1109/JPHOT.2012.2226439
643. J. Luo et al., “A magnetic sensor based on a hybrid long-period fiber grating and a magnetic 
fluid,” IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett. 27(9), 998–1001 (2015), doi: 10.1109/LPT.2015.2405079
644. Y. Chen, Q. Han, T. Liu, et al., “Optical fiber magnetic field sensor based on single-mode–mul￾timode–single-mode structure and magnetic fluid,” Opt. Lett. 38, 3999–4001 (2013).
645. H. Wang, S. Pu, N. Wang, S. Dong, and J. Huang, “Magnetic field sensing based on single￾mode–multimode–singlemode fiber structures using magnetic fluids as cladding,” Opt. Lett. 
38, 3765–3768 (2013).
646. L. Li, Q. Han, Y. Chen, T. Liu, and R. Zhang, “An all-fiber optic current sensor based on fer￾rofluids and multimode interference,” IEEE Sens. J. 14(6), 1749–1753 (2014), doi: 10.1109/
JSEN.2014.2302812
647. C. Li, T. Ning, X. Wen, et al., “Magnetic field and temperature sensor based on a no-core fiber 
combined with a fiber Bragg grating,” Opt. Laser Technol. 72, 104–107 (2015).
648. G.-H. Su, J. Shi, D.-G. Xu, et al., “Simultaneous magnetic field and temperature measurement 
based on no-core fiber coated with magnetic fluid,” IEEE Sens. J. 16 (23), 8489–8493 (2016).
649. H. Tian, Y. Song, Y. Li, and H. Li, “Fiber-optic vector magnetic field sensor based on mode 
interference and magnetic fluid in a two-channel tapered structure,” IEEE Photonics J. 11(6), 
1–9, art no. 7104309 (2019), doi: 10.1109/JPHOT.2019.2944931
650. Y. Li, S. Pu, Y. Zhao, et al. “All-fiber-optic vector magnetic field sensor based on side-polished 
fiber and magnetic fluid,” Opt. Express 27, 35182–35188 (2019).
651. X. Li and H. Ding, “Temperature insensitive magnetic field sensor based on ferrofluid clad 
microfiber resonator,” IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett. 26(24), 2426–2429 (2014).
652. Z. Ma, Y. Miao, Y. Li, et al., “A highly sensitive magnetic field sensor based on a tapered micro￾fiber,” IEEE Photonics J. 10(4), 1–8, art no. 6803308 (2018), doi: 10.1109/JPHOT.2018.2862949
653. P. Li, H. Yan, Z. Xie, Y. Li, and X. Zhao, “An intensity-modulated and large bandwidth magnetic 
field sensor based on a tapered fiber Bragg grating,” Opt. Laser Technol. 125, 105996 (2020).
654. M. Luo, Q. Yang, Y. He, and R. Liu, “Current sensor based on an integrated micro-ring resona￾tor and superparamagnetic nanoparticles,” Opt. Express 28, 5684–5691 (2020).192 ◾ References
655. H. Ji, S. Pu, X. Wang, and G. Yu, “Magnetic field sensing based on V-shaped groove filled with 
magnetic fluids,” Appl. Opt. 51(8), 1010–1020 (2012).
656. H. Ji, S. Pu, X. Wang, et al., “Magnetic field sensing based on capillary filled with magnetic 
fluids,” Appl. Opt. 51(27), 6528–6538 (2012).
657. P. Zu, C. C. Chan, W. S. Lew, et al., “Magneto-optical fiber sensor based on magnetic fluid,” Opt. 
Lett. 37, 398–400 (2012).
658. Y. Zhao, D. Wu, R. Lv, and J. Li, “Magnetic field measurement based on the Sagnac interfer￾ometer with a ferrofluid-filled high-birefringence photonic crystal fiber,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. 
Meas. 65(6) 1503–1507, (2016), doi: 10.1109/TIM.2016.2519767
659. Q. Wang, J. Xia, X. Liu, Y. Zhao, J. Li, and H. Hu, “A novel current sensor based on magnetic 
fluid and fiber loop cavity ring-down technology,” IEEE Sens. J. 15(11), 6192–6198 (2015), doi: 
10.1109/JSEN.2015.2454451
660. R. Gao, Y. Jiang, and S. Abdelaziz, “All-fiber magnetic field sensors based on magnetic fluid￾filled photonic crystal fibers,” Opt. Lett. 38, 1539–1541 (2013).
661. J. Wang, L. Pei, J. Wang, et al., “Magnetic field and temperature dual-parameter sensor based on 
magnetic fluid materials filled photonic crystal fiber,” Opt. Express 28, 1456–1471 (2020).
662. C. Liu, T. Shen, H. B. Wu, et al., “Applications of magneto-strictive, magneto-optical, mag￾netic fluid materials in optical fiber current sensors and optical fiber magnetic field sensors: a 
review,” Opt. Fiber Technol. 65, 102634 (2021).
663. L. Martinez, F. Cecelja, and R. Rakowski, “A novel magneto-optic ferrofluid material for sensor 
applications,” Sens. Actuator. A Phys. 123–124(23), 438–443 (2005).
664. N. Alberto, M. F. Domingues, C. Marques, P. André, and P. Antunes, “Optical fiber magnetic 
field sensors based on magnetic fluid: a review,” Sensors 18, 4325 (2018), doi: 10.3390/s18124325
665. J. Lenz and A. S. Edelstein, “Magnetic sensors and their applications,” IEEE Sens. J. 6(3), 631–
649 (2006).
666. S. Ziegler, R. C. Woodward, H. H. C. Iu, and L. J. Borle, “Current sensing techniques: a review,” 
IEEE Sens. J. 9(4), 354–376 (2009).
667. V. C. Gungor, B. Lu, and G. P. Hancke, “Opportunities and challenges of wireless sensor net￾works in smart grid,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. 57(10), 3557–3564 (2010).
668. K.-L. Chen, Y.-R. Chen, Y.-P. Tsai, and N. Chen, “A novel wireless multifunctional electronic 
current transformer based on ZigBee-based communication,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid 8(4), 
1888–1897 (2017).
669. A. Bergström, “Vattenfall goes real time,” T&D World Magazine, Nov. 2014.
670. J. H. Hines, A. T. Hines, D. Yaney, and D. Kirkpatrick, “Remotely powered line monitor,” U.S. 
patent 10,620,238, filed Oct. 20, 2016.
671. T. Otto, S. Kurth, S. Voigt, et al., “Integrated microsystems for smart applications,” Sens. Mater. 
30(4), 767–778 (2018).
672. X. Sun, Q. Huang, Y. Hou, L. Jiang, and P. W. T. Pong, “Noncontact operation-state monitor￾ing technology based on magnetic-field sensing for overhead high-voltage transmission lines,” 
IEEE Trans. Power Del. 28(4), 2145–2153 (2013).
673. J. S. Boboski et al., “Calibrated single-contact voltage sensor for high-voltage monitoring appli￾cations,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 64, 923 (2015).
674. D. Lawrence et al., “Non-contact measurement of line voltage,” IEEE Sens. J. 10(24), 8990 (2016).
675. Y. Cui et al., “Relative localization in wireless sensor networks for measurement of electric 
fields under HVDC transmission lines,” Sensors 15, 3540 (2015).
676. K. Zhu, “Non-contact capacitive-coupling based and magnetic field-sensing assisted technique 
for monitoring voltage of overhead power transmission lines,” IEEE Sens. J. 17, 1069 (2017).
677. Y. Xiang, K. Chen, Q. Xu, Z. Jiang, and Z. Hong, “A novel contactless current sensor for 
HVDC overhead transmission lines,” IEEE Sens. J. 18(11), 4725–4732 (2018), doi: 10.1109/
JSEN.2018.2828807References ◾ 193
678. ISO 5725-1: “Accuracy (trueness and precision) of measurement methods and results - Part 1: 
General principles and definitions” (1994).
679. S. Shin, U. Sharma, H. Tu, W. Jung, and S. A. Boppart, “Characterization and analysis of relative 
intensity noise in broadband optical sources for optical coherence tomography,” IEEE Photonics 
Technol. Lett. 22(14), 1057–1059 (2010), doi: 10.1109/LPT.2010.2050058
680. R. C. Rabelo, R. T. de Carvalho, and J. Blake, “SNR enhancement of intensity noise-limited 
FOGs”, J. Lightwave Technol. 18(12), 2146–2150 (2000).
681. Telcordia Standard GR-1221-CORE-1999, “Generic reliability assurance requirements for pas￾sive optical components,” Telcordia Technologies, 1999.
682. D. H. Stamatis, Failure Mode and Effect Analysis: FMEA from Theory to Execution, Milwaukee
(ASQ Quality Press, WI, USA, 2003).
683. International Electrotechnical Commission, “Reliability of fiber optic interconnecting devices 
and passive components—part 2: quantitative assessment of reliability based on accelerated 
aging tests—temperature and humidity” (2001).
684. International Electrotechnical Commission, “Reliability of fiber optic interconnecting devices 
and passive components—part 3: relevant tests for evaluating modes and failure mechanisms 
for passive components” (2001).
685. J. Park and D. S. Shin, “Degradation of fiber optical communication devices under damp-heat 
aging,” IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett. 15(8), 1106–1108, 2003.
686. H. Nagata, Y. Li, K. R. Voisine, and W. R. Bosenberg, “Reliability of nonhermetic bias-free 
LiNbO3 modulators,” IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett. 16(11), 2457–2459 (2004).
687. A. Birolini, Reliability Engineering (Springer Verlag, Berlin, Germany, 2007).
688. G. Nicholson, “Reliability considerations: optical sensors for the control and measurement of 
power,” in Proc. of 2001 IEEE/PES Transmission and Distribution Conference and Exposition. 
Developing New Perspectives, vol. 1, pp. 122–126 (2001), doi: 10.1109/TDC.2001.971220
689. A. A. Stolov, D. A. Simoff, and J. Li, “Thermal stability of specialty optical fibers,” J. Lightwave 
Technol. 26(20), 3443–3451 (2008).
690. M. Lenner, L. Yang, A. Frank, and K. Bohnert, “Influence of optical fiber coatings on the long￾term accuracy of interferometric fiber-optic current sensors,” Procedia Eng. 168, 1735 (2016).
691. D. Yin, W. Yu, Z. Xiao, L. Han, and G. Wang, “Reliability assessment of an optical current sen￾sor based on accelerated aging tests,” Appl. Opt. 58, 5107–5114 (2019).
692. M. H. Samimi, A. A. S. Akmal, and H. Mohseni, “Optical current transducers and error sources 
in them: a review,” IEEE Sens. J. 15(9), 4721–4728 (2015).
693. “Aluminum” Wikipedia, Wikimedia Foundation, 12 October, 2023, https://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Aluminium
694. International Aluminium Institute https://international-aluminium.org/
695. F. Rahmatian and J. N. Blake, “Applications of high-voltage fiber optic current sensors,” in 
2006 IEEE Power Engineering Society General Meeting, Montreal, QC, Canada, doi: 10.1109/
PES.2006.1709517
696. T. Kumai, H. Nakabayashi, Y. Hirata, et al., “Field trial of optical current transformer using 
optical fiber as Faraday sensor,” in IEEE Power Engineering Society Summer Meeting, 2002, vol. 
2, pp. 920–925, doi: 10.1109/PESS.2002.1043498
697. K. Bohnert, A. Frank, T. Roininen, et al., “Fiber-optic current and voltage sensors as modern 
alternatives to conventional instruments transformers,” in Technical Digest of IEEMA TECH-IT 
2014, Third International Conference on Instrument Transformers.
698. F. J. M. Herrera, “Mixed line protection,” T&D World Magazine, Feb. 2015, https://www.
tdworld.com/overhead-transmission/article/20965194/mixedline-protection
699. Y. Barmenkov and F. Mendoza-Santoyo, “Faraday plasma current sensor with compensation 
for reciprocal birefringence induced by mechanical perturbations,” J. Appl. Res. Technol. 1, 
157–163 (2003).194 ◾ References
700. F. Descamps, M. Aerssens, A. Gusarov, et al., “Simulation of vibration-induced effect on plasma 
current measurement using a fiber optic current sensor,” Opt. Express 22, 14666–14680 (2014).
701. R. Motuz, W. Leysen, P. Moreau, et al., “Theoretical assessment of the OTDR detector noise on 
plasma current measurement in tokamaks,” Appl. Opt. 58, 2795–2802 (2019).
702. M. M. Xue, D. L. Chen, B. Shen, et al., “Upgrade of poloidal field coils current measurement 
system on Experimental Advanced Superconducting Tokamak,” Fusion Eng. Des. 148, 111264 
(2019).
703. P. Dandu, A. Gusarov, P. Moreau, et al., “Plasma current measurement in ITER with a 
polarization-OTDR: impact of fiber bending and twisting on the measurement accuracy,” Appl. 
Opt. 61, 2406–2416 (2022).
704. R. Malewski, “High-voltage current transformers with optical signal transmission,” Opt. Eng. 
20(1), 200154 (1981), doi: 10.1117/12.7972662
705. G. W. Day and A. H. Rose, “Faraday effect sensors: the state of art,” Proc. SPIE 985, 138–150 
(1988).
706. G. W. Day, M. N. Deeter and A. H. Rose, “Faraday effect sensors: a review of recent progress,” 
Proc. SPIE, PM07, 11–26 (1992).
707. Y. N. Ning and D. A. Jackson, “Review of optical current sensors using bulk-glass sensing ele￾ments,” Sens. Actuator. A Phys. 39(3), 219–224 (1993).
708. “Optical current transducers for power systems: a review,” IEEE Trans. Power Deliv. 9(4), 1778–
1788 (1994), doi: 10.1109/61.329511, paper jointly prepared by the Emerging Technologies 
Working Group of the Power Systems Instrumentation and Measurements Committee and 
the Fiber Optics Sensors Working Group, Fiber Optics Substation Committee, Power Systems 
Communications Committee.
709. Z. P. Wang, S. Q. Zhang, and L. B. Zhang, “Recent advances in optical current-sensing tech￾niques,” Sens. Actuator. A Phys. 50(3), 169–175 (1995).
710. “Optical Current Sensor Technology (Chapter 7),” in Optical Fiber Sensor Technology Vol. 3 – 
Applications and Systems, K. T. V. Grattan and B. T. Meggitt, Eds. (Kluwer Academic Publishers, 
London, 1998).
711. M. El-Hami and K. T. V. Grattan, “An overview of optical-fibre technology applications in elec￾trical power systems,” Meas. Control 33(10), 296–302 (2000).
712. A. H. Rose and G. W. Day, “Optical fiber current and voltage sensors for the electric power 
industry,” in Handbook of Optical Fibre Sensing Technology, Jose Miguel Lopez-Higuera, Ed. 
(Wiley & Sons, Ltd., West Sussex, England, 2002), pp. 569–618, Chapter 27.
713. S. Q. Xu, S. X. Dai, et al., “Recent progress of all-fiber optic current sensors,” Laser Optoelectron. 
Prog. 41(1), 41–45 (2004).
714. P. Niewczas and J. R. McDonald, “Advanced optical sensors for power and energy systems 
applications,” IEEE Instrum. Meas. Mag. 10(1), 18–28 (2007), doi: 10.1109/MIM.2007.339552
715. P. Ripka, “Electric current sensors: a review,” Meas. Sci. Technol. 21(11), 112001 (2010).
716. R. M. Silva, H. Martins, I. Nascimento, et al., “Optical current sensors for high power systems: 
a review,” Appl. Sci. 2(3), 602–628 (2012).
717. R. Wang, S. Xu, W. Li, et al., “Optical fiber current sensor research: review and outlook,” Opt. 
Quantum Electron 48(9), article 422 (2016), doi: 10.1007/s11082-016-0719-3
718. P. Mihailovic and S. Petricevic, “Fiber-optic sensors based on the Faraday effect,” Sensors 21, 
6564 (2021), doi: 10.3390/s21196564195
PART III
Electric Field and Voltage SensorsDOI: 10.1201/9781003100324-17 197
CHAPTER 13
Electro-Optic Effects
13.1 POCKELS EFFECT AND KERR EFFECT
Many optical electric field and voltage sensors make use of the linear electro-optic effect, 
also called Pockels effect after the German physicist Friedrich C. A. Pockels, who first 
described the phenomenon in 1893. The quadratic electro-optic effect, or Kerr effect, dis￾covered in 1875 by the Scottish physicist John Kerr, is much weaker and has largely been 
reserved for the measurement of high impulse fields. The Pockels and Kerr effects result 
from anharmonic terms in the excursion of bound electrons in a medium under the influ￾ence of an applied electric field. At given optical frequency ϖ, the medium’s polarization 
vector P(ϖ, E) in the presence of static or low frequency field E = E(Ω) of frequency Ω ~ 0, 
expanded in a power series of E, is [1]
( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) 12 3
0 opt opt opt ϖ εχ ϖ ϖ χ ϖ ϖ χ ϖ ϖ : ,   , = ⋅ + + +…   P E E EE EEE (13.1)
where e0 is the vacuum permeability, χ(m)
 (m = 1, 2, …) is the mth order susceptibility, and 
Eopt(ϖ) is the optical field; χ(m)
 is a tensor of rank m + 1. More explicitly, the ith component 
of P at frequency ϖ is
( ) ( ) ( ) εχ χ χ
= = = = = =
 
=   + + +…
 
∑ ∑∑ ∑∑∑
3 3 3 333
12 3
0 ,opt ,opt ,opt
1 1 1 1 11
. i ij j ijk j k ijkl jkl
j j k jkl
P E E E EEE (13.2)
Eq. (13.1) implies a field-dependent dielectric displacement D = ε0εr
E and, consequently, a 
field-dependent permittivity (dielectric constant) [2]:
( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) εϖ ε ϖ ε ϖ ε ϖ( ) = + + +…    
12 3
r rr r , . E E EE (13.3)198   ◾  Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
The first term in (13.3), εr
(1), defines the refractive indices of the medium (n = √εr), while 
the higher order terms represent field-induced index changes and corresponding linear 
birefringence. The term linear in E describes the Pockels effect, and the term quadratic in 
E is the dc Kerr effect. (Note that in nonlinear optics, the χ(2)-term represents second-order 
nonlinearities such as optical frequency doubling, and the χ(3)-term represents third order 
effects like four-wave mixing, self-focusing, and optical-field-induced birefringence, that 
is, the ac Kerr effect. All fields in [13.1] are then optical fields.) For symmetry reasons, the 
Pockels effect only occurs in media without inversion symmetry. Out of the 32 crystallo￾graphic point groups, 20 groups exhibit the Pockels effect [2, 3]. By contrast, the dc Kerr 
effect is always present but commonly only of interest in media with a center of symmetry 
such as glasses, liquids, or gases, where it is not masked by the Pockels effect. Even though 
the index changes are relatively small, they can easily be exploited for electric field sensing.
The refractive optical properties of a crystal are often represented by the index ellipsoid 
or indicatrix (see Section 2.3):
++=
2 2 2
222 1.
xyz
x z y
nnn
(13.4)
The directions x, y, and z are the principal dielectric axes, i.e., the directions along which 
D and E are parallel, and the axis lengths correspond to the principal refractive indices ni
.
More generally, the index ellipsoid is written as [2]
=1, Bxx ij i j (13.5)
where Bij represents the impermeability tensor: Bij = ε0δEi
/δDj
 with Dj
 being the electric 
displacement. The elements of Bij correspond to the inverse squares of the refractive indi￾ces. In expanded form and with xi
 = x, y, z, (13.5) reads
+++ + + =
2 2 2
2222 2 2
2 2 2 1.
xx yy zz yz zx xy
x z xz y yz xy
nnnn n n
(13.6)
Eq. (13.6) reduces to (13.4), if x, y, and z are chosen parallel to the principal dielectric 
axes of the crystal. An electric field E = (Ex, Ey, Ez) alters the size, shape, and/or orientation 
of the ellipsoid. The modification can be represented by a power series expansion of the 
index terms ( ) −2 nij E [2, 3]:
( ) ( )
  =  + + +…   =   2 2 ∑ ∑,
1 1 . 0 ijk k ijkl k l
ij ij k k l
r E q EE
n n E E
(13.7)
The coefficients rijk constitute the linear electro-optic tensor (Pockels effect), and the coef￾ficients qijkl constitute the quadratic electro-optic tensor (dc Kerr effect); i, j, k, l = 1, 2, 3. Electro-Optic Effects ◾  199
In the following, we restrict ourselves to the Pockels effect. Kerr-effect-based sensors will 
be discussed in Section 14.7. Since Bij = Bji and nij = nji, it follows that rijk = rjik [2]. This 
reduces the number of independent coefficients rijk from 27 to 18. The crystal symmetry 
determines how many of the 18 coefficients rij (i = 1, 2, …6, j = 1, 2, 3) are non-zero and the 
relationships between them. With
( ) ( )
     ∆ = − =…        =    22 2
11 1 , 1,2, .6
0 i i i
i
n nE nE (13.8)
(13.7) then becomes
=
  ∆ =     ∑
3
2
1
1 , ij j
i j
r E
n (13.9)
or written in matrix form
2
1
11 12 13
2 21 22 23 2
31 32 33
2
3 41 42 43
51 52 53
2
4 61 62 63
2
5
2
6
1
1
. 1
1
1
1
x
y
z
n
rrr
E
n rrr
E
rrr
E
n rrr
rrr
n rrr
n
n
      ∆     
      ∆                =         ∆                
        ∆                   ∆     
      ∆     
(13.10)
In the presence of an electric, the index ellipsoid field then reads [2, 3]
2 2 2
22 2
123 2 2 2222
1 2 3456
2 2 2 1,
1 1 1111
x y z yz zx xy
nnn
n n nnnn
+ + +++=       +∆ +∆ +∆ ∆ ∆ ∆            
(13.11)
where n1, n2, n3, are the indices at E = 0. In general, the principal axes x′, y′, z′ of the new 
ellipsoid do not coincide with the principal axes x, y, z of ellipsoid without applied field. 
The orientation and lengths of the new axes follow from the eigenvalues of the matrix [3–4]200   ◾  Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
       +∆ ∆    ∆   
   ∆   +∆ ∆   
   ∆   ∆ + ∆
    
2
1 22 2
16 5
2
2 2 22
6 24
2
3 22 2
54 3
11 1
1 11 .
11 1
n
nn n
n
n nn
n
nn n
(13.12)
For further illustration, we consider the electro-optic effect in Bi4Ge3O12 (BGO), a material 
frequently used in electro-optic voltage sensors. BGO belongs to the cubic crystal class 43m 
(zincblende structure) and has a 4-fold inversion rotation axis (this is by convention the z￾direction), four 3-fold axes (corresponding to the body diagonals of the cubic lattice), and a 
mirror plane. Crystals of this class are free of natural birefringence (nx = ny = nz = n0), and the 
matrix of electro-optic coefficients has the simple form [2]
41
41
41
000
000 , 000
0 0
0 0
0 0
rij
r
r
r
   
  =  
 
 
 
     
(13.13)
that is, the only nonvanishing elements are r41, r52, and r63, having identical values r41. 
With (13.10) and (13.11), we obtain the index ellipsoid in the presence of an electric field as 
follows:
+++ + + = ( ) 2 2 2
41 222
000
2 1. x yz
x z y r E yz E xz E xy
nnn
(13.14)
If we choose the field parallel to z, i.e., E = (0, 0, Ez), (13.14) becomes
+++ =
2 2 2
41 222
000
2 1. z
x z y r E xy
nnn
(13.15)
The mixed terms yz, xz, and xy in (13.14) indicate that the major axes of the index ellipsoid 
are no longer parallel to x, y, and z. In the new coordinate system with axes x′, y′, z′ parallel 
to the major axes of the modified ellipsoid, (13.14) reduces to
′′′
′ ′ ′ ++= 222
2 2 2
1.
xyz
x z y
nnn
(13.16)Electro-Optic Effects ◾  201
With E = (0, 0, Ez), (13.16) can be transformed into [3]
2 2 2 41 41 2 22
0 00
1 1 1. z z
z rE x rE y
n nn
      + ′+ − ′+ =
  
(13.17)
The z′-axis of the new coordinate system coincides with the z-axis of the field-free crystal, 
whereas x′ and y′ are rotated against x and y by 45° in counterclockwise direction. Finally, 
assuming −  2 rE n 41 0 z and with dn = − (n3
/2)d(2/n2
), we obtain the new principal indices 
as [3]
′ = −
3
0
0 41 , 2 x z
n n n rE (13.18)
′ = +
3
0
0 41 , 2 y z
n n n rE (13.19)
′ = = 0 . n nn z z (13.20)
Figure 13.1 shows the corresponding BGO crystal orientation and a cross-section of the 
index ellipsoid in the (x, y)-plane. The light propagates in z-direction (4-fold crystal axis, 
[001]-direction, perpendicular to [001]-crystal plane) and is linearly polarized along x
([100]-direction); for the designation of crystal lattice directions and planes, see [5]. In the 
absence of an electric field, the propagation velocity is determined by the index n0, inde￾pendent of the polarization direction. An electric field parallel to the propagation direction 
reduces the refractive index nx′
 for the optical field component parallel to x′ ([110]-direc￾tion) and enhances the refractive index ny′
 for the optical field component parallel to y′
([110]-direction) according to (13.18) and (13.19). (A reversal of the field direction changes 
the signs of the index changes.) Hence, the two orthogonal polarization components paral￾lel to x′ and y′ accumulate a phase difference Δϕ given by
( ) 3 ∆= π φ λ 2 / nr El 0 41 z (13.21)
or
∆= π φ λ ( ) 3 2/ , nr V 0 41 (13.22)
where l is the optical wavelength, l is the crystal length, and V = Ez/l corresponds to the 
applied voltage. The product 3 n r0 41 serves as a figure of merit for the sensitivity of an electro￾optic material. Note that for the longitudinal electro-optic effect (the electric field is parallel 
to the propagation direction), a given voltage always produces the same phase shift indepen￾dent of the crystal length. In the configuration Figure 13.1a, transverse field components 
(Ex, Ey) leave the relative phase of the orthogonal SOP unchanged, i.e., a corresponding 202   ◾  Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
sensor measures the line integral ∫E · ds along light propagation path z [4, 6]. No phase 
retardations occur for x or y propagation directions.
Figure 13.2 shows a common geometry of the transverse electro-optic effect. The light 
propagates in the     110 -direction, and the field is in the [110]-direction, orthogonal to the 
optical path. Both directions are perpendicular to z. The x and y directions lie in the (001)-
plane at angles of ±45° to the (110)-plane. The electric field has components E = (Ex, Ey, 0) 
with Ex = Ey = (1/√2)E. The new principal axes x′, y′, z′ are obtained by rotating the axes x, y, 
z by 90° about the field direction. z′ is parallel to the optical path, and x′ and y′ are parallel to 
the (110)-facet and at ±45° to the (110)-plane [7, 8]. The differential electro-optic phase retar￾dation of the polarization components parallel to x’ and y’ is
3
0 41
2 , l
nr V
d φ λ
π ∆ = (13.23)
where d is the crystal thickness in field direction and V = Ed. Note that the retardation 
now increases with the crystal length l. Again, there is no phase retardation for orthogonal 
beam directions, and only the field component in [110]-direction causes a retardation [4]. 
In another possible transverse configuration, the electric field is perpendicular to a (111)-
plane, but the phase retardation is then reduced by a factor (1/2)√3 [7, 9].
FIGURE 13.1 (a) Longitudinal electro-optic effect in crystals of class 43m; polarization compo￾nents parallel to x′, y′ of light propagating in z-direction accumulate an electro-optic phase differ￾ence Δϕ; (b) cross-sections of the index ellipsoid in the (x′, y′)-plane without electric field E (black) 
and with electric field (blue).Electro-Optic Effects ◾  203
Similarly, as in Figure 3.1, a combination of a quarter-wave retarder and a Wollaston 
prism (alternatively a beam splitter and two orthogonal polarizers) convert the phase retar￾dation Df into two anti-phase signals I1, I2 proportional to the sine of Δϕ. The voltage fol￾lows from the signal S = (I1 – I2) / (I1 + I2):
S = ∆ sin . ( φ ) (13.24)
Here, we have again assumed a perfect fringe contrast (K = 1). A frequently given specifica￾tion of a sensor is its half-wave voltage Vp, that is, the voltage at Δϕ = p. Vp of the longitudi￾nal electro-optic effect of B4Ge3O12 is about 74 kV at 1310 nm (48 kV at 850 nm). Obviously, 
S is proportional to Δϕ only at voltages V ≪ Vp and becomes ambiguous beyond Vp. An 
unambiguous detection technique for voltages V > Vp will be discussed further below. As 
noted, the phase retardation of the longitudinal electro-optic effect in B4Ge3O12 (and any 
other crystal of zincblende structure, 43m) corresponds to the line integral ∫E · ds. Other 
crystal classes suited for field integration include 42m, 23, 62m, and 2mm. Table 13.1 lists 
the corresponding orientations and gives examples of materials [6]. Crystals of classes 62m
and 2mm have natural birefringence, but the principal axes of the natural and electro-optic 
birefringence coincide and the corresponding phase retardations simply add up. Crystal 
classes with natural birefringence for which this is not the case have been omitted in the 
Table. A study on the measurement of field components, choice of crystals, and their ori￾entation has also been reported by L. Duvillaret et al. [4].
FIGURE 13.2 (a) Transverse electro-optic effect in crystals of class 43m; (b) cross-sections of the 
index ellipsoid in the (x′, y′)-plane without electric field E (black) and with electric field (blue).204   ◾  Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
The linear electro-optic effect is accompanied by the converse piezoelectric effect, i.e., an 
applied electric field also induces piezo-electric strains or stresses in the crystal (Chapter 
16). Alternating fields at frequencies well above the acoustic resonances of the crystal (e.g., 
in the microwave range) prevent the crystal from deforming, that is, the crystal is in a state 
of constant strain but periodic piezoelectric stress. The crystal is then said to be clamped. 
The additional stress-induced piezoelectric field adds to the external field and enhances the 
electro-optic effect. By contrast, unclamped crystals are free to deform and are in a state of 
constant stress. The latter applies to high voltage sensors operated at power line frequencies 
of 50 Hz or 60 Hz. For distinction, the electro-optic coefficients of unclamped and clamped 
crystals, T
rij and S rij , are commonly marked with superscripts T and S, respectively. Very 
roughly, the coefficients S rij exceed the coefficients T
rij by a factor of 2.
Finally, it should be mentioned that whereas electro-optic voltage sensors mostly oper￾ate as polarimetric sensors, sensors for electric field mapping often measure the Pockels 
effect in an integrated-optic Mach-Zehnder interferometer or a Fabry-Pérot resonator 
[10–12].
13.2 ELECTRO-OPTIC MATERIALS
Many criteria should be considered in the selection of an adequate electro-optic material 
for voltage sensing:
• Obviously, the material should be available in good quality, with adequate dimen￾sions, and at a reasonable price.
• Other general prerequisites are mechanical stability and chemical inertness under 
the respective conditions of operation.
• Optical loss at the wavelength of operation, typically in the near infrared, should be 
small. (Most inorganic electro-optic crystals are transparent from the visible well 
into the infrared.)
• The sensitivity, i.e., the term (n3
/2)r, should be of sufficient magnitude.
TABLE 13.1 Some Crystal Classes for Line Integration of the Electric Field with a Polarimetric 
Pockels Sensor
Crystallographic 
Point Group
Crystal Axis Parallel 
to Light Propagation Direction of Electro-Optic Axes Materials
43m 4-fold axis [001] [110], [110] Bi4Ge3O12, Bi4Si3O12
23 2-fold axis [001] [110], [110] ZnTe, ZnSe,
42m 4-fold axis [001] [110], [110] GaAs
62m 2-fold axis [001] Parallel and orthogonal to 3-fold 
axis
Bi12GeO20, Bi12SiO20, NaClO3
2mm 2-fold axis [001] [100], [010] KH2PO4 (KDP)LiNaCO3
MgBaF4Electro-Optic Effects ◾  205
• The temperature dependence of the electro-optic effect should be small.
• Preferably, the material should be free of natural birefringence to avoid a temperature￾dependent polarimetric phase bias, an effect particularly adverse in dc voltage sens￾ing. But poor quality (imperfections, built-in stress) may cause birefringence also in 
isotropic crystals [13].
• For similar reasons, materials exhibiting optical activity and electro-gyration (rota￾tion of linear polarization in a transverse electric field) can be less suited.
• A small dielectric constant er with little sensitivity to temperature is advantageous 
if the sensing element is used without electrodes. This applies to sensors for electric 
field mapping but also to many voltage sensors. A large permittivity screens the elec￾tric field and reduces the sensitivity.
• In the absence of electrodes, the shape of the sensing element determines the depo￾larization factor and together with er the strength of the internal field [14–16].
• A small er also helps to limit field distortions and reduce the risk of partial discharge 
and dielectric breakdown at high voltages.
• If exposed to high voltages (hundreds of kilovolts), the material’s dark resistivity 
should be sufficiently high to avoid excessive ohmic heating by resistive currents. 
As the free carrier concentration increases exponentially with temperature, resistive 
heating may initiate a thermal runaway effect and dielectric breakdown. Therefore, 
semiconductor materials such as GaAs or ZnTe should be considered with some cau￾tion in high voltage sensing [17]. In photorefractive crystals such as BGO, optical 
excitation of free carriers may give rise to photoconductivity, especially at short wave￾lengths [18].
• Dielectric loss (loss factor tan d) should be small to minimize response delays and 
internal heating.
Many reported electro-optic voltage sensors have used the ternary materials bismuth ger￾manate (BGO) [8, 13, 17–38], or bismuth silicate (BSO) [39–45]. BGO has modifications 
Bi4Ge3O12 and Bi12GeO20, and BSO has modifications Bi4Si3O12 and Bi12SiO20. BGO and 
BSO also serve as scintillators in high energy physics or nuclear medicine and are there￾fore readily available. Bi12GeO20 and Bi12SiO20 belong to crystal class 23, and Bi4Ge3O12 and 
Bi4Si3O12 to class 43m. Both classes have cubic symmetry. Bi12GeO20 and Bi12SiO20 give 
significantly larger electro-optic phase retardations than Bi4Ge3O12 and Bi4Si3O12 but are 
optically active and of higher permittivity. Both crystal classes are free of natural bire￾fringence, and their electro-optic tensors have identical forms; Eq. (13.13). Therefore, the 
orientations of Figure 13.1 apply all four BGO and BSO modifications with the difference 
that the z-direction corresponds to the 4-fold axis in class 43m crystals and to the 2-fold 
axis in class 23 crystals. Among the four materials, Bi4Ge3O12 [18, 46] has arguably become 
the most widely used transducer material in high voltage sensing. Typically grown by the 206   
◾  Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
TABLE 13.2 Selected Electro-Optic Materials and Their Properties; The Optical Parameters Are Valid at l = 632.8 nm, If Not Stated Otherwise; 
Trij and S rij Are Unclamped and Clamped Electro-Optic Coefficients, Respectively; [4, 18, 31, 45, 52, 71–73] and References Therein.
Material Crystallographic Point Group
Relative Permittivity
er Refractive Index
Electro-Optic 
Coefficients (pm/V) Optical Activity
Dark Resistivity 
(Ωcm)
BGO
(Bi4Ge3O12)
43m
Isotropic
16 2.1 r41 = 0.96
41
Tr = 0.95
NA 5.2 × 1014
BGO
(Bi12GeO20)
23
Isotropic
38 2.548 r41 = 3.67 9.6°/mm, 850 nm 1011
− 1013
BSO
(Bi4Si3O12)
4
3m
Isotropic
– 2.05
41
Tr = 0.54 NA –
BSO
(Bi12SiO20)
23
Isotropic
56 2.54
41
Tr = 4.25 10.5°/mm, 870 nm 0.2 × 1013
BTO
(Bi12TiO20)
23
Isotropic
– 2.56
41
Tr = 5.75r41 = 3.81 2.8°/mm, 870 nm –
ZnTe 43m
Isotropic
10.1 2.894
41
S r = 4.3 NA –
Lithium niobate
(LiNbO3)
3m
Uniaxial
er,o = 43
er,e = 28
no = 2.286
ne = 2.200
13
S r = 8.6
33
S r = 30.8
51
S r = 28
22
S r = 3.4
NA –
Lithium tantalate
(LiTaO3)
3m
Uniaxial
er,o = 41
er,e = 43
no = 2.176
ne = 2.180
13
S r = 7.5
33
S r = 33
51
S r = 20
22
S r = 1.0
NA –
KD*P
(KD2PO4)
4
2m
Uniaxial
er,o = 58
er,e = 48
no = 1.503
ne = 1.465
r41 = 1.4
41
S r = 8.8
r51 = 3.3
63
S r = -24.3
NA –
Quartz
(SiO2)
32
Uniaxial
er,o = 4.514
er,e = 4.634
no = 1.534
ne = 1.543
r11 = −0.45
r41 = 0.19
17.3°/mm, 656 nm ~1016
Poled polymer
(example)
∞mm
Uniaxial
4 no = 1.66
ne = 1.74
r13 = 23
r33 = 70
NA -Electro-Optic Effects ◾  207
Czochralski method [47, 48], Bi4Ge3O12 has favorable mechanical and electric properties, is 
optically transparent from 350 nm to 4 μm, free of natural birefringence, non-hydroscopic, 
and not pyroelectric. Moreover, the temperature dependence of the electro-optic effect is 
relatively small: (1/T)δ[(n3
/2)r]/δT = 1.54 × 10−4 °C−1 [46].
Other materials explored for high voltage sensing include bismuth titanate (Bi12TiO20, 
BTO) [49–51], lithium niobate (LiNbO3), a material frequently used in electro-optic modu￾lators [52–60], potassium dihydrogen phosphate (KH2PO4, KDP and KD2PO4, KD*P), 
known from nonlinear optics [14, 61, 62], a-quartz [63–68], and others [69]. However, KDP 
and KD*P are hydroscopic, while lithium niobate is pyroelectric and its electro-optic effect 
has a large temperature dependence, Bi12TiO20 is like Bi12GeO20 optically active. Quartz has 
many excellent properties but exhibits a comparatively small electro-optic effect; also, 
optical activity and electro-gyration complicate matters. A further option is poled poly￾mers [70]. They have the benefit of large electro-optic coefficients and small permittivity, 
but typically exhibit larger temperature dependence, and the poling-induced electro-optic 
effect tends to decay over time, especially at elevated temperatures. Table 13.2 summarizes 
properties of selected electro-optic materials.208 DOI: 10.1201/9781003100324-18
CHAPTER 14
Electro-Optic Voltage Sensors
14.1 VOLTAGE SENSING METHODS
Figure 14.1 illustrates some basic configurations for high voltage sensing that subsequent 
sections will discuss in more detail [74]. First, Figure 14.1a shows an ideal albeit not exist￾ing voltage sensor that measures the path integral ∫E · ds between ground and high voltage 
potential by means of an electro-optic fiber. A field integrating sensor is appealing in that 
it is immune to crosstalk from neighboring power lines and perturbations of the electric 
field, e.g., by nearby structures or weather. By contrast, an electric field sensor as depicted 
in Figure 14.1b that only measures the field at a single point near the power line provides a 
more indirect measure for the line voltage and is sensitive to variations in the field distribu￾tion [75, 76]. As an alternative, the sensor may be arranged in a capacitive voltage divider 
(Figure 14.1c), where it measures a small but well-defined fraction of the primary voltage V
(V = V1 + V2 with V2 ≪ V1). Corresponding solutions have been demonstrated for both air￾insulated outdoor substations (AIS) [77–79] and indoor SF6 gas-insulated switchgear (GIS) 
[80–81]. In Figure 14.1d, a cylinder-shaped transducer crystal is exposed to the full line 
voltage. The relatively short crystal lengths (typically 100–250 mm) result in high electric 
field strengths that require a careful dielectric design of the sensor to prevent breakdown, 
especially at over-voltages. But with proper crystal symmetry and orientation, the sensor 
measures the path integral ∫E · ds, i.e., the true line voltage [17, 82, 83]. Finally, the system 
of Figure 14.1e consists of several local field sensors that approach the path integral by a 
discrete summation of local fields [37, 38].
14.2 VOLTAGE SENSING WITH LOCAL ELECTRIC FIELD SENSORS
Many of the early works on electro-optic voltage sensors from the 1970s to the 1990s 
investigated basic polarimetric Pockels cells, implemented with a variety of electro-optic 
materials. Typically, the researchers applied voltages up to a few kilovolts, mostly in trans￾verse geometry, in order to study sensitivity, linearity, frequency response, or temperature 
dependence [13, 14, 19, 21, 24, 30, 31, 33, 34, 39, 40–43, 45, 50–66], as well as adverse effects 
due to linear birefringence [59], optical activity and electro-gyration [63, 65, 84], photo￾refractivity [85], or beam misalignment [54], etc. Methods for temperature compensation Electro-Optic Voltage Sensors ◾ 209
were investigated in [21, 35, 43] and methods for birefringence compensation in [13, 86, 87]. 
Typical crystal lengths were around 10–30 mm. In the same period, first demonstrations 
and installations of such devices at high voltage substations were reported. Massey et al. 
mounted KD*P electric field sensors at the top of hollow insulator columns in 500 kV ac 
and 400 kV dc facilities according to the scheme of Figure 14.1b. Free-space laser beams 
through the insulators interrogated the crystals [75, 76]. Sasano et al. [88] and Rogers [89] 
reported similar implementations.
Christensen demonstrated a 132-kV voltage sensor, where, on top of an insulator, an 
electro-optic field probe (Bi4Ge3O12) with multimode fiber leads resided in a recess of an 
elevated ball-shaped ground electrode mounted inside a dome-shaped high voltage elec￾trode as schematically illustrated in Figure 14.2a. The design resulted in a relatively stable 
field distribution and enhanced field strength. Sulphur hexafluoride gas (SF6) between the 
electrodes provided sufficient dielectric strength. The signal varied linearly with voltage, 
and the temperature-dependent error was within ±1.3% between −40°C and 70°C [25].
Sensors for gas-insulated switchgear (GIS) often employed a capacitive voltage divider 
and measured only a small but defined fraction of the total voltage. GIS substations are 
much more compact than air-insulated stations (AIS) and, therefore, often the solution of 
choice in densely populated areas. Figure 14.2b illustrates a sensor configuration for single 
phase encapsulated GIS [81]. The current carrying high voltage busbar runs through a con￾centric SF6-gas-filled enclosure at ground potential. The voltage between a concentric elec￾tric electrode at floating potential and ground is applied to the sensor. (The voltage seen by 
the sensor was 1.6 kV in [81] at a phase-to-ground voltage of 220 kV/√3.) A capacitive￾divider-based voltage sensor for 300 kV 3-phase encapsulated GIS was reported in [60]. 
From 2% to 110% of the rated voltage, amplitude errors at constant temperature were 
within ±1% and phase errors within ±40 min. Between 20°C to 60°C, the signal stayed 
within ±1%. A divider-based sensor for 132 kV air-insulated substations was reported by 
FIGURE 14.1 Basic methods for sensing of power line voltages [74].210 ◾ Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
Tonnesen et al. [77]. Today, the direct conversion of the stepped-down voltage into a digital 
optical output by means of digital electronics and an optical transmitter is often a more 
economical alternative [90].
14.3 ELECTRIC FIELD INTEGRATING SENSORS
14.3.1 OVT Measuring True Line Integral of Electric Field
Figure 14.3 depicts an electro-optic voltage transducer (EOVT) from ABB Ltd [17, 91]. Led 
by R. C. Miller, its development began at Westinghouse in the 1980s, and continued at ABB 
after ABB’s purchase of Westinghouse’s T&D business in 1989. The ABB EOVT has prob￾ably become the most widely deployed optical voltage transducer for transmission grids 
with rated voltages between 110 kV and 550 kV. On special request, some 800 kV EOVT 
were also built. The total line voltage is longitudinally applied to a rod-shaped Bi4Ge3O12
crystal according to the scheme of Figure 14.1d. Operated in reflective mode, the crystal is 
FIGURE 14.2 Examples of early electro-optic voltage transducer: (a) OVT for air-insulated substa￾tions (according to [25]); (b) OVT for SF6-gas-insulated switchgear (according to [81]).
FIGURE 14.3 245-kV optical metering unit (OMU), consisting of an electro-optic voltage trans￾ducer (EOVT) and a magneto-optic current transducer (MOCT, left); EOVT assembly with elec￾trodes in SF6 gas-filled hollow insulator (center); EOVT optical assembly (right) [91].Electro-Optic Voltage Sensors ◾ 211
oriented as shown in Figure 13.1a. Hence, the sensor measures the path integral ∫E · ds and 
is unaffected by field perturbations, stray fields, thermal changes in dielectric constants, 
thermal expansion, etc. The crystal length is between 100 mm and 250 mm, depending on 
the rated voltage, and the diameter is 20 mm or less. (The maximum length of good qual￾ity Czochralski-grown crystals is about 300 mm.) Polarized at 45° to the electro-optic axes 
x′, y′, 850-nm light from an LED enters the crystal at the ground potential side, makes a 
round-trip through the crystal and finally splits into two exit channels, each with an ana￾lyzer parallel to the entrance polarizer. A quarter-wave retarder in one of the two channels 
introduces a 90°-phase shift between the two polarimetric signals. Multimode fibers guide 
the light to and from the sensor. The electro-optic phase shift Df between two vertices of 
the voltage results in multiple interference fringes (Figure 14.4); the half-wave voltage (Vp) 
is 24 kV in this configuration. But appropriate processing of the two signals (called base 
and quadrature signals in Figure 14.4) unambiguously returns the voltage amplitude and 
waveform [92, 93].
The high field strengths in the vicinity of the crystal require careful control of the field 
distribution by appropriately designed and positioned electrodes to prevent partial dis￾charge and dielectric breakdown. The sensor must be able to withstand not only the rated 
voltage but over-voltages as well as lightning and switching impulse voltages according to 
industry standards [94]. For example, at a rated voltage of 420 kV (phase-to-ground voltage 
of 420 kV/√3), the sensor must withstand an over-voltage of 520 kV for 1 min as well as 15 
consecutive lightning and switching impulses of 1425 kV-peak and 1050 kV-peak, respec￾tively, of positive and negative polarity. Specified rise and decay times are 1.2 ms and 50 ms, 
respectively, for lightning impulses, and 250 ms and 2500 ms for switching impulses. The 
rise time is defined as time to peak; the decay as time to half value. The switching impulse 
tests must also be performed at wet conditions, i.e., while the transducer is being sprinkled 
with water. At the peak of a 1425 kV impulse, the average field along a 200-mm long crystal 
is about 7.1 kV/mm. For comparison, the breakdown field of air is about 3 kV/mm.
Particularly crucial are so-called triple points, i.e., points or lines where three media 
with different dielectric constants meet each other, for example, the BGO crystal, optics 
FIGURE 14.4 Simulated base and quadrature signals as a function of applied voltage in units of 
Vp (left); voltage waveform and corresponding base and quadrature signals as a function time for a 
peak-to-peak voltage of about 150 kV and Vp = 24 kV (right) (© 2013 IEEE. Reprinted with per￾mission from [93].)212 ◾ Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
components, and the surrounding insulation gas. To lower the field strengths in those 
zones, the crystal is equipped with a pair of tube-like inner electrodes that protrude over 
the crystal ends (not shown in Figure 14.3). The electrodes are in electric contact with 
transparent and conducting indium tin oxide (ITO) layers on the respective crystal end 
faces. The optical assembly including the inner electrodes is mounted in a fiber reinforced 
epoxy tube. Layers of foam mechanically decouple the assembly from the remainder of the 
transducer. The epoxy tube connects a pair of outer electrodes that also protrude over the 
crystal ends (Figure 14.3, center); see [17] for further details.
The whole assembly resides in a hollow core insulator column filled with SF6 gas at a 
pressure around 600 kPa. The SF6 breakdown field is 9 kV/mm/100 kPa. The diameter of 
the insulator column is such that the electric field on the outer surface remains well below 
the breakdown field of air. The transducer meets class-0.2 accuracy in outdoor tempera￾ture ranges. An optical temperature sensor serves to compensate the temperature depen￾dence of the Pockels effect. Often, the EOVT has been combined with the magneto-optic 
current transducer (MOCT) of Figure 6.5 to an optical metering unit (OMU); Figure 14.3
left. Figure 14.5 shows an OMU retrofit installation in a HV substation. Scarce space made 
it necessary to mount the OMU hanging upside down from an existing line entrance tower 
which hardly would have been possible for conventional VT and CT [91].
In further work, ABB researchers developed an EOVT version with all-solid-state insul￾tation. The modifications make the transducer maintenance-free (no gas pressure moni￾toring) and result in considerably slimmer insulators. Figure 14.6 depicts a 300 kV 
demonstrator [95–96]. The insulator builds on technology adopted from high voltage 
bushings [97]. The BGO crystal with a length of 200 mm and diameter of 5 mm resides in 
FIGURE 14.5 Optical metering units (OMU) in HV substation [91].Electro-Optic Voltage Sensors ◾ 213
the 25-mm diameter bore of a 2.44-m-long condenser core made of resin impregnated 
paper (RIP). The crystal is operated in transmission-mode (at 1310 nm) to minimize the 
lateral dimensions of the optical assembly. An outer 2.7-m-long insulator column of fiber￾reinforced epoxy provides sufficient mechanical strength (Figure 14.6, center). (The insula￾tor column can be omitted if the core is made of resin impregnated fiber instead of RIP.)
The core contains two sets of concentric and appropriately staggered aluminum foils. 
The two innermost foils are at ground and high-voltage potentials, respectively, whereas 
the other foils are on floating potential. The foils steer the planes of equipotential such that 
on the outer insulator surface the voltage drops sufficiently uniformly over the full insula￾tor length keeping the field strengths within safe bounds for air, whereas inside the insula￾tor the voltage drops over a 170-mm-long cavity containing the crystal. The graph in 
Figure 14.6 shows the field on the insulator axis (red) and outer insulator surface (blue) at a 
phase-to-ground voltage of 250 kV-peak; that voltage corresponds to the voltage vertices at 
the rated voltage of 300 kV: (300 kV/√3) × √2. The field on the insulator axis is about 
1.5 kV/mm at the crystal location and essentially zero elsewhere. The field on the outer insu￾lator surface stays below 0.25 kV/mm apart from the HV end, where it rises towards 
0.5 kV/mm. The crystal is again equipped with tube-type electrodes that are in contact with 
the respective ground and HV potentials and house the collimator and polarizer optics. The 
remaining bore volume is filled with compressible silicone foam.
The sensor passed high voltage stress tests according to the relevant industry standards. 
The signal remained undisturbed by water or ice on the silicone sheds, stray fields from 
neighbor phases, or severe distortions of the external field. Figure 14.7a shows the relative 
error between 1 kV and 545 kV. The sensor meets the accuracy requirements of IEC meter￾ing class 0.2 and protection class 3P. The respective voltage ranges (80–120% and 5–190% 
FIGURE 14.6 Electro-optic voltage transducer (300 kV) with solid state insulation (left) [74], BGO 
crystal in hollow-core insulator with embedded field steering metal foils, photograph of crystal with 
electrodes (center); simulated electric field strengths on insulator axis (red) and along outer insulator 
surface (blue) at 250 kV phase-to-ground (corresponding to the peak voltages at the rated alternat￾ing voltage of 300 kV) (© 2013 IEEE. Reprinted with permission from [95]).214 ◾ Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
of the rated voltage) are indicated. The variation of the signal with temperature 
(1.54 ×10−4°C−1) between −40°C and 85°C (Figure 14.7b, squares, left-hand scale) is consis￾tent with the temperature dependence of the Pockels effect in BGO [46]. Using a multiple￾order quarter-wave retarder, the thermal variation of the differential phase between the 
base and quadrature signals (Figure 14.7b, dots, right-hand scale) can be used for tempera￾ture compensation.
As mentioned, two optical signals at quadrature serve to resolve the EOVT signal ambi￾guity at large phase shifts. As an alternative, Santos et al. developed a multisegmented 
sensing element consisting of thin BGO slices separated by transparent dielectric spacers, 
so that the total electro-optic phase shift remained within ±p/2 [26, 27]. Eight BGO slices, 
each with a thickness of 1 mm, and 7 spacers with thicknesses of 14.6 mm totaled a length 
of 110 mm. The segmentation raised the halfwave voltage at 1310 nm by a factor of 198 to 
about 14 MV. Note that in this configuration, the relatively high dielectric constant of BGO 
(er =16) significantly reduces the effective field strength. Measurement errors (at constant 
temperature) were within ±0.1% for alternating voltages between 40 kV and 170 kV and 
±0.2% for dc voltages between 50 kV and 230 kV [27]. Potential errors of multisegmented 
OVT and their mitigation by additional field-controlling elements were investigated in [98, 
99]. Finally, Kumada et al. reported a transducer, where the voltage (up to 220 kV peak) was 
applied to eight serial BGO rods, each with a length of 120 mm resulting in a total length 
of 960 mm. The sensor was operated at two different wavelengths (1300 nm and 1550 nm) 
for removing the signal ambiguity [30].
14.3.2 OVT with Discrete Field Summation
A team at the University of British Columbia and subsequently at NxtPhase Corporation 
developed an electro-optic voltage transducer according to the concept of Figure 14.1e [38, 
100, 101]. Here, an insulator column with electrode plates at the top and bottom ends con￾tains N Pockels cells placed at position zi
 on the longitudinal insulator axis (Figure 14.8a). 
FIGURE 14.7 (a) Measurement error vs. applied voltage (phase-to-ground). The voltage ranges rel￾evant for metering (80–120% of Vr/√3, green) and protection (5–190% of Vr/√3, blue) are indicated 
for a rated voltage of 300 kV (phase-to-phase) (© 2013 IEEE. Reprinted with permission from 
[95]). (b) Signal at constant voltage (57 kV rms) vs. temperature and quadrature signal phase (rela￾tive to base signal) for temperature compensation; blue and green symbols correspond to two con￾secutive temperature ramps [74].)Electro-Optic Voltage Sensors ◾ 215
The sum of the weighted fields ai
Ez(zi
) at the locations zi
 serves as a measure for the applied 
voltage V:
α ( ) =
≅∑1
,
N
iz i
i
V Ez (14.1)
where ai
 is the weight of the ith field sensor. The number of required sensors depends on 
the expected worst-case perturbation of the field distribution; obviously, a single sensor 
would suffice in a perturbation-free situation. Moreover, the insulator contains a concen￾tric shielding tube of a slightly conductive material of high permittivity that is to mini￾mize field perturbations inside the insulator when the external field distribution changes 
[37, 102]. The remaining field perturbation along the insulator axis z can be expressed in 
terms of a polynomial r(z) that relates the perturbed field ( ) ( ) p E z z to the unperturbed field 
E(z): ( ) ( ) p E z z = r(z)E(z). For the assumed worst-case scenario, the so-called quadrature 
method then yields the number of required sensors, the sensor positions zi
, and weight 
factors ai
 [100, 101].
In the specific case of a 230 kV transformer, three miniature Pockels cells resided in an 
insulator column with a height of 2245 mm, an outer diameter of 312 mm, and filled with dry 
nitrogen. The Pockels crystals were 20 mm long, had a diameter of 3.5 mm, and measured the 
z-components of the field. The longitudinal crystal axes and light propagation directions 
were parallel to z. The fiber-pigtailed field sensors were mounted in a fiber glass tube (not 
shown in Figure 14.8) with an inner diameter of 198 mm at distances from the ground elec￾trode of z1 = 231 mm, z2 = 1230 mm, and z3 = 1998 mm, z2 being the location with the smallest 
field perturbation. The corresponding weight factors were a1 = 0.60, a2 = 1.00, and a3 = 0.41. 
FIGURE 14.8 (a) Schematic setup of NxtPhase electro-optic voltage transducer (adapted from US 
patent 6,252,388B1 [100]); (b) field installation of combined 550 kV optical voltage and current 
transducers (Reprinted with permission from CIGRE, ©2004 [109]).216 ◾ Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
NxtPhase, in collaboration with the University of British Colombia, reported multiple 
field installations with rated voltages between 138 kV and 550 kV (Figure 14.8b) [103–109]. 
It was shown that the transducers were compliant with IEC accuracy class 0.2 and ANSI/
IEEE class 0.3 over wide temperature ranges. Figure 14.9 depicts corresponding data mea￾sured during an extended field trial of 550 kV voltage and current transducers. The accu￾racy was well maintained in the presence of severe field distortions and pollution. Even so, 
subsequent owners have further pursued the concept.
14.4 DC VOLTAGE SENSORS
DC voltage transformers have applications, for example, in high voltage direct current 
(HVDC) power transmission and corresponding ac/dc power converters. Optical dc volt￾age transducers are an alternative to resistive capacitive voltage dividers. Integrated in 
HVDC switchgear on converter platforms of offshore wind parks, for instance, optical sen￾sors can help to save weight and space [110]. Electro-optic dc voltage measurement poses 
several challenges, however. Dark currents and space charge accumulation at the crystal 
surfaces (of electrode-less sensors) cause the field distribution in the crystal to change with 
time and temperature [23, 111–115]. Charge migration can also lead to local field enhance￾ments in the vicinity of the crystal and result in partial discharge and a reduced breakdown 
voltage. And without further measures, electro-optic dc phase changes are indistinguish￾able from thermally or stress-induced phase shifts. For BGO in a transverse electric field, 
Kurosawa et al. reported signal drift due to space charge accumulation of up to 10% of the 
saturated signal over time periods of some tens of minutes after dc voltages of a few hun￾dred volts were applied [23]. The electro-optic signal of a bare LiNbO3 crystal was observed 
to exponentially decay on a time scale of a few hours [115].
In 1985, Robertson et al. showed for cylinder-shaped LiNbO3 and Bi4Ge3O12 crystals in 
transverse dc fields up to 100 kV/m that signal drift could be eliminated by rotating the 
crystals around their longitudinal axes at a frequency of 20 Hz that was high enough to 
FIGURE 14.9 Field trial of NxtPhase 550 kV voltage and current transducers at a BC Hydro substa￾tion near Vancouver: relative signal difference between optical and conventional voltage and current 
measurements for phase A. (Reprinted with permission from CIGRE, ©2004 [109].)Electro-Optic Voltage Sensors ◾ 217
prevent charge migration [52]. Already in 1982, Hidaka et al. had applied the technique to 
the measurement of discharge fields [116]. More recently, new studies on a rotating BGO 
crystal sensor were reported by Li et al. [117]. Instead of rotating the sensor, Zhang et al. 
rotated one of the electrodes of an integrated-optic lithium niobate field sensor to circum￾vent the problem of fiber pigtailing a rotating sensor [118]. Kurosawa et al. measured dc 
voltages of up to ±187.5 kV by chopping the down-stepped voltage from a resistive divider 
before transversely applying the voltage to a Bi4Ge3O12 crystal. Errors were well within 1% 
at voltages above 20 kV and smaller than 5% below. The device was tested in a 1-year field 
trial at a converter station of the Tokyo Electric Power Company (TEPCO) [23].
Signal drifts due to space charges and dark currents can effectively be suppressed by 
operating the sensor in a longitudinal configuration. In the development towards a 320 kV 
dc voltage transducer for gas-insulated HVDC switchgear, Gu et al. exposed 5-mm-thick 
BGO samples (Bi4Ge3O12) to a constant dc voltage of 5 kV and measured the electrical con￾ductivity as well as the longitudinal electro-optic phase shift over a period of 11 days. The 
results showed that, while a slow conductivity decay reflected a redistribution of the elec￾tric field inside the crystal (consistent with dielectric spectroscopy measurements), the 
electro-optic phase shift exhibited no signs of drift [110]. Kumada et al. also observed stable 
operation of longitudinally operated BGO crystals under dc voltage, albeit over shorter 
time periods [30].
14.5 INTEGRATED-OPTIC ELECTRIC FIELD SENSORS
Integrated-optic electric field and voltage sensors have been developed since the 1980s in 
parallel with integrated-optic modulators. Applications include electro-magnetic compat￾ibility, microwave fields, electromagnetic impulses, accelerators for high energy physics, 
and electric power transmission. The literature on the subject is extensive, and this sec￾tion can only give a short overview. Mostly based on lithium niobate (LN), the devices are 
either directly immersed into the electric field, or a voltage is applied to electrodes parallel 
to the waveguides. Device lengths range from a few mm to some tens of mm. Figure 14.10
illustrates some common designs. Often, the waveguides form a Mach-Zehnder interfer￾ometer (MZI) with electrodes as schematically illustrated in Figure 14.10a. Bulmer et al. 
and Kuwabara et al. were among the pioneers of integrated-optic MZI [12, 119–123]. The 
waveguides are commonly generated by titanium in-diffusion into the LN substrate and 
support TM and TE modes with polarizations orthogonal and parallel to the plane of the 
substrate, respectively. A SiO2 buffer layer separates the electrodes from the substrate to 
minimize optical loss. In Figure 14.10a, the substrate is x-cut (the crystallographic x-axis is 
orthogonal to the substrate), the waveguides are along y, and the voltage is applied in ±z￾directions. Hence, the MZI operates in a push-pull fashion, that is, the electro-optic phase 
shifts in the two interferometer arms have opposite signs. The probe light arrives through a 
polarization-maintaining fiber (PMF) and excites the TE mode. The interference intensity 
at the output reads in normalized units [12]
π
θ π     
=+ +           0
1 1 cos . 2
V I
V (14.2)218 ◾ Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
The halfwave voltage Vp is given by
π
λ
δ = 3
33
, 2
g V
nr L
(14.3)
where l is the wavelength, δ is an efficiency factor, n is the relevant refractive index, r33 is 
the relevant electro-optic coefficient, and L and g are the electrode length and gap width, 
respectively. The phase biasθ0 is
θ λ 0 = π∆ (2 /. n l) (14.4)
Here, Dl is the length difference between the interferometer arms. For operation in the 
linear range, θ0 must be tuned to p/2 (modulo p), e.g., by an added dc voltage, asymmetric 
arm lengths [12], laser ablation in one interferometer arm [120, 121], or applied stress [123].
The sensor of Figure 14.10b is without electrodes and directly immersed into the electric 
field to be measured. One of the two interferometer arms runs through a region of the z-cut 
LN substrate with inverted ferroelectric polarization. The z-directions in the inverted and 
non-inverted zones are anti-parallel, which results in opposite electro-optic phase shifts at 
a common field direction [124–127]. Alternatives to domain inversion are MZI with asym￾metric arm lengths [12] or unequal effective mode indices in the two arms [128]. A sensor 
FIGURE 14.10 Integrated electro-optic lithium niobate electric field and voltage sensors: (a) Mach￾Zehnder interferometer (MZI) with electrodes for push-pull operation; (b) MZI with a domain￾inverted interferometer arm for direct immersion into an electric field; (c) single waveguide sensor 
utilizing the electro-optic phase shift between TM and TE modes; (d) sensor with dipole antenna for 
electric field mapping.Electro-Optic Voltage Sensors ◾ 219
as in Figure 14.10b has comparatively low sensitivity, since the high permittivity of LN 
causes significant field screening, but this is commonly not an issue in high field applica￾tions. Figure 14.10c shows another example of an electrode-less sensor [129]. The sensor 
consists of a single waveguide in y-cut lithium niobate. The input light is polarized at 45° 
to y and excites both orthogonal modes, TM and TE, propagating in z-direction [130–133]. 
A field along y increases the refractive index of the TE-mode and decreases the index of the 
TM-mode by ±(1/2) 3 n0 r22Ey, respectively. In z-cut substrates, the difference of r33 and r13
governs the phase shift [134]. Electrodes equipped with an antenna or antenna array, as 
schematically illustrated in Figure 14.10d, enhance the sensitivity for electric field mapping 
in selected frequency ranges [123, 129, 133, 135, 136]. Besides the sensor types of Figure 
14.10, sensors based on integrated optic 1×2-directional couplers were also studied [137, 138], 
and Gutierrez-Martinez et al. reported sensor interrogation by low coherence interferometry, 
which circumvented the need for bias tuning [134, 139, 140].
The following gives a few selected examples of sensor demonstrations and achieved per￾formances: Bulmer et al. demonstrated MZI according to Figure 14.10a with 1.1-mV sensi￾tivity and an 84-dB linear range for a detection bandwidth of 3 kHz. With 14-mm long 
electrodes, the Vp-voltage was 2 V at 1310 nm [12]. Jaeger et al. measured with a similar 
sensor the voltage between the concentric ground and high voltage conductors of gas￾insulated HV switchgear [78]. To this end, a simple voltage divider down-stepped the GIS 
voltage of 50 kV to a voltage of 9.5 V that was applied to the y-cut MZI. The MZI was inten￾tionally made with a large Vp of 50 V at 633 nm. The same team also demonstrated an 
electrode-less single waveguide sensor as in Figure 14.10c for direct sensing of HV electric 
fields. Here, the y-cut, z-propagating waveguide was 28.5-mm long and had an Ep-field of 
146 V/mm at 670 nm [130]. For a similar sensor, Gutierrez-Martinez et al. reported a mea￾surement range from 18 V/mm to 350 V/mm at frequencies up to 20 kHz [134]. Sun et al. 
reported a MZI device with an antenna array capable of measuring high frequency fields 
from 10 kHz to 18 GHz with a minimum detectable field of 0.4 V/m at 1 GHz [136]. Sensors 
for intense pulsed electric fields were reported, for example, in [141–143], and voltage mea￾surement on overhead transmission lines was investigated in [144]. Finally, it is worth men￾tioning that compact micro-ring waveguide resonators evanescently coupled to electro-optic 
thin films have also been demonstrated for electric field sensing. Chen et al. coupled a thin 
lithium niobate layer to a (non-electro-optic) silicon ring resonator with a radius of 20 mm. 
In spite of the small size, the device reached sensitivity of 4.5 (V/m)/√Hz at radio fre￾quency fields of 1.86 GHz due to a quality factor of 13,000 [145].
14.6 FIBER TIP ELECTRIC FIELD SENSORS
Reflective fiber tip electro-optic sensors are of particular interest for electric field map￾ping, for example, on antennas and high-speed electronic devices. They are less intrusive 
than metallic probes and can provide spatial resolutions as small as 10 mm and band￾widths up to tens of GHz [146]. Often, the sensors apply a modulation technique for con￾trolling the operating point and down-converting the high frequency signal into a lower 
frequency regime [147–149]. Early sensors were commonly configured as polarimetric 
devices with a small electro-optic crystal mounted in a dielectric ferrule at the distant 220 ◾ Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
end of an optical fiber and the analyzer optics positioned at the source side end of the 
fiber (Figure 14.11a) [147–152]. Typical crystal diameters were 1–2 mm and crystal lengths 
several mm. Stationary devices without a fiber lead have been developed, for example, for 
monitoring the fabrication quality of complex radio frequency devices [149]. Others have 
configured the electro-optic element as a fiber tip Fabry-Pérot etalon. This has resulted in 
a dramatic miniaturization and higher spatial resolution at still adequate sensitivity [147, 
153–156]. Lee et al., for example, reported lithium niobate (LN) etalons with thicknesses 
of 0.5 mm and 0.35 mm and calculated Q-factors of 1.1 × 104
 and 2.0 × 105, respectively 
(Figure 14.11b) [155]. They demonstrated field mapping with a spatial resolution of 50 mm 
at field strengths between 1 V/m and 104
 V/m and frequencies up to 3 GHz.
Calero et al. reduced the fiber tip device to a circular thin film with a diameter of 125 μm 
and a thickness of 700 nm. A photonic crystal structure confined the light within the LN 
film and resulted in a spatial resolution of under 20 mm and a frequency range from 1 Hz 
to tens of GHz. (The theoretical bandwidth was 1012 Hz.) A Fano resonance increased the 
effective electro-optic phase shift by a factor of 400 with respect to bulk LN and gave a field 
detection threshold of 32 (V/m)/√Hz. By comparison, typical thresholds of much longer 
bulk crystals are on the order of 100 (mV/m)/√Hz [146, 157]. Besides lithium niobate, probe 
materials have included LiTaO3 [147, 154, 156], Bi12SiO20 [158], and semiconductors like 
GaAs [159], AlGaAs [153], and ZnTe [152]. Three-dimensional vectorial field measurement 
was demonstrated, for example, in [160–162], and Poynting vector sensors were reported in 
[163, 164]. There is extensive further literature on field mapping sensors and their applica￾tions. However, a more detailed review is beyond the scope of this book.
FIGURE 14.11 Fiber tip electro-optic sensors for electric field mapping: (a) polarimetric sensor; 
(b) Fabry-Pérot etalon sensor (Adapted/reprinted with permission from [150, 155] © The Optical 
Society). Pol: polarizer, BS: beam splitter, PMF: polarization-maintaining fiber, GRIN: graded index 
lens, M: mirror.Electro-Optic Voltage Sensors ◾ 221
14.7 KERR EFFECT-BASED SENSORS
In 1875, the Scottish physicist John Kerr discovered that an isotropic transparent substance 
becomes birefringent when exposed to an electric field perpendicular to the propagation 
direction of the light. The refractive index difference for light waves polarized parallel and 
perpendicular to the field is
∆= − = ⊥ λ 2 || 0 n n n KE . (14.5)
The Kerr constant K is proportional to the difference of the elements χ1111 and χ1122 of the 
susceptibility tensor χ(3) in eq. (13.2). K is largest in polar liquids such as nitrobenzene 
(C6H5NO2), nitrotoluene (C7H7NO2), or propylene carbonate (C4H6O3), whereas nonpolar 
liquids and glasses exhibit only a small Kerr effect (Table 14.1). Other than nitrobenzene 
and nitrotoluene, propylene carbonate has the benefit of being nontoxic. At least since the 
1960s, Kerr cells have been routinely used in laboratory environments for the recording 
of ac voltages and short HV pulses up to hundreds of kilovolts [165–169]. The Kerr effect 
has also served to study electric field distributions, space charge, and charge transport 
phenomena both in liquids and gases, e.g., in the development of electric power equipment 
[170–174]. Kerr effect-based optical fiber sensors were also reported.
In 1981, Rogers proposed an optical fiber voltage sensor comprising a single-mode fiber 
arranged on a helical path between ground and high voltage potentials. Polarization￾optical time domain reflectometry was to spatially resolve the Kerr optical phase shift in 
the fiber. Appropriate signal processing would then yield the line integral of the field [175]. 
However, no experimental demonstration was given. Han et al. reported a silica micro￾wire electric field sensor. The micro-wire — 65-mm long, with 1-mm radius, and immersed 
in propylene carbonate — formed one arm of a fiber Mach-Zehnder interferometer. The 
evanescent wave of the micro-fiber saw the field-induced refractive index change of the 
liquid, which led to a shift of the MZI interference fringes. The minimum and maximum 
detectable fields were 59 V/cm and 14 kV/cm, respectively, measured for 50 Hz ac fields and 
200-ms impulses [176]. Hou et al. presented a propylene-carbonate-coated microfiber reso￾nator for electric fields from 200 V/cm to 4000 V/cm [177].
TABLE 14.1 Kerr Constants of Selected Liquids and Solids at Room Temperature
Substance Kerr Constant K (10−14 mV−2) Wavelength (nm) References
Nitrobenzene 245 589 [178]
Nitrotoluene 137 589 [178]
Propylene carbonate 110 589 [172]
Water 5.2 589 [178]
Transformer oil 0.25 633 [170]
Flint glass SF-57 0.11 633 [179]
Fused silica fiber 0.053 633 [180]222 ◾ Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
14.8 ALTERNATIVE INTERROGATION TECHNIQUES
The sensors of the previous sections employed polarimetric detection schemes, integrated￾optic Mach-Zehnder interferometers, or Fabry-Pérot cavities to measure the electro-optic 
phase shift. The adaptation of the polarization-rotated reflection technique from inter￾ferometric current sensors (Figure 8.10) to voltage sensing is a further alternative [181]. 
Wildermuth et al. first demonstrated the method for a piezo-optic voltage transducer [182, 
183]. Subsequently, numerous further researchers studied the method in the context of 
electro-optic voltage sensors, e.g., [87, 110, 184–191]. Figure 14.12 illustrates the basic setup. 
Whereas the current sensor works with circular states of polarizations (SOP), the electro￾optic sensor works with orthogonal linear SOP. Accordingly, a 45°-Faraday rotator replaces 
the fiber quarter-wave retarder of the current sensor and provides the necessary round￾trip polarization rotation of 90°. The method is attractive in that the same interrogation 
technique can be used for current and voltage, particularly if the voltage sensing element 
is a fiber like in poled fiber sensors or in the piezo-optic sensors presented below. In case 
of bulk electro-optic crystals, however, the need to combine single-mode fibers with bulk 
optics and added cost tend to outweigh such advantages. Optical voltage transducers with 
polarization-rotated reflection and passive polarimetric detection were reported in [151, 
192, 193]. Still other detection methods for Pockels sensors can be found in [194–196].
FIGURE 14.12 Electro-optic voltage sensor interrogated by a polarization-rotated reflection tech￾nique (Adapted from [110, 181]). GRIN: graded index lens, FR: Faraday rotator.DOI: 10.1201/9781003100324-19 223
CHAPTER 15
Electro-Optic Fibers
15.1 POLED FIBERS
15.1.1 Thermal Fiber Poling
Electric poling of glass leads to a permanent frozen-in electric field in the glass matrix. The 
field lifts the centro-symmetry of the structure and thus induces a non-zero second-order 
nonlinearity χ(2) and linear electro-optic effect. Poling techniques include temperature￾assisted poling [197], UV-assisted poling [198, 199], electron beam irradiation [200], 
corona discharge poling [201], induction poling [202, 203], and others. Optical fiber poling 
is commonly done with temperature-assisted electric poling or thermal poling in short; 
for reviews on poling techniques and poled fiber devices, see [203, 204]. Thermal poling 
of bulk fused silica was first demonstrated by Myers et al. in 1991, achieving an induced 
second-order nonlinearity of χ(2) ≈ 1 pm/V [197]. The corresponding electro-optic coef￾ficient is about r ≈ 2χ(2)/n0
4, where n0 is the refractive index of the glass. With n0 ≈ 1.45, 
r is roughly χ(2)/2 in silica-based glasses and fibers [198, 205]. In 1994, Kazansky et al. 
demonstrated the first thermally poled fibers with an effective χ(2) of 0.2 pm/V. The ger￾manosilicate fibers had a D-shaped cladding, and the poling field was applied via external 
electrodes [206]. The following year, Fujiwara et al. reported poling of a germanosilicate 
fiber with electrodes inserted in hollow channels in the fiber cladding parallel to the core 
achieving about 1 pm/V [207]. Numerous further publications on poled fibers followed, 
motivated by the perspective of all-fiber devices such as modulators or switches for optical 
communication. Direct measurement of the Pockels effect in poled glass and fibers was 
reported in [198, 208–212]. Moreover, noteworthy work has been done on poled polymers 
and poled polymer fibers; see, for example, [213, 214].
Explanations of the poling-induced χ(2) and linear electro-optic effect have included 
dipole alignment, buildup of spatially separated space charges in the fiber, and charge 
injection from the environmental air under the influence of the poling voltage [215–218]. 
Experimental evidence strongly points to space charge fields as the dominating cause [204, 
216, 218–223]. Figure 15.1 schematically illustrates thermal poling of a twin hole fiber. The 
poling voltage (typically a few kilovolts) is applied to the two electrode wires (e.g., from 
tungsten) inserted into the twin holes through side-polished openings in the fiber 224 ◾ Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
cladding. The anode wire is commonly close to the core (within about 5 micrometers) for 
maximum effect. Upon heating the fiber to the poling temperature (250–325°C), positively 
charged alkali ions such as K+, Li+, and Na+, attached to defects in the glass matrix become 
mobile and drift under the influence of the poling field towards the cathode wire, leaving 
behind a negative space charge. As a result, an electric screening field builds up between 
the separated positive and negative space charges. The width of the layer depleted of impu￾rity ions is relatively narrow and on the order of 10 mm [197]. After dwelling at the poling 
temperature for about 1–2 hours, the fiber is led to cool down with the poling voltage still 
applied. After removal of the voltage, the space charges and recorded space charge field Erec
remain frozen-in and ascertain a persisting, non-zero χ(2) (Figure 15.1c). In 2009, Margulis 
et al. introduced a modified, cathode-less thermal poling process with both electrodes at 
the same anodic potential. This reduced the risk of dielectric breakdown during poling 
[224]. A more detailed description of the poling mechanism can be found in [203, 204]. It 
is worth mentioning that, not surprisingly, only small second-order nonlinearities (<0.1 
pm/V) were achieved in pure silica fiber [225, 226].
The diameter of the electrode wires is on the order of 20–50 μm; the twin hole separa￾tion is typically 10–20 μm [227], and the lengths of the inserted wires may range from a few 
centimeters to some tens of centimeters. Electrode lengths of up to 200 m were obtained by 
co-drawing a mono-hole fiber together with an electrode wire and coating the fiber with 
conductive polyimide that served as the second electrode; but only a modest electro-optic 
coefficient of 0.085 pm/V was measured [204, 228]. An alternative to solid electrodes are 
conducting liquids, e.g., mercury, gallium, or alloys such as AuSn or BiSn [229, 230]. Liquid 
electrodes are easier to insert over longer distances and give a more reproducible pattern of 
the poling field. Fokine et al. reported BiSn electrodes with lengths of up to 22 m [229].
Even though the poling-induced second-order nonlinearity commonly exhibits good 
long-term stability at room temperature, it is subject to decay as a result of reversed charge 
migration and recombination, especially at elevated temperatures [211, 231–236]. Usually, 
there is an initial fast decay, followed by a slower decay — both governed by Arrhenius’s 
law. The different decay times are associated with different mobilities and/or activation 
energies of the involved cations and therefore strongly depend on the glass composition. 
Janos et al. reported a lifetime of the induced electro-optic effect of only 45 days at room 
FIGURE 15.1 (a) SEM image of the cross section of a 125-μm twin hole fiber for poling. (Reprinted 
with permission, from [230] © The Optical Society); (b) thermal poling of a twin hole fiber; (c) poled 
fiber with recorded space charge field Erec.Electro-Optic Fibers ◾ 225
temperature in boron co-doped germanosilicate fiber [234]. Xu et al. observed a decay rate 
in a twin hole fiber with a pure silica cladding of 2.6% per day at 110°C after the initial fast 
decay. The rate was reduced to 0.6% per day in a fiber with a borosilicate layer on the inside 
of the anode hole [211]. Much longer lifetimes were reported by Sugihara et al. for thin film 
waveguides of poled germanosilicate glass on a silica substrate. The team extrapolated a 
room temperature lifetime of 310 years. Deparis et al. found strongly enhanced χ(2)-stability 
in aluminosilicate and aluminoborosilicate glasses with a lifetime increase by at least five 
orders of magnitude with respect to silica [236].
15.1.2 Electro-Optic Effect in Poled Fibers
The nonlinear polarization of eq. (13.1) is associated with a field-dependent refractive 
index. With the intrinsic susceptibility χ(2) = 0, the refractive index of a poled fiber is given 
in a simplified scalar form as [237]
( )
( ) χ =+ +
3 2
0 rec app
0
3 , 2
nn E E
n (15.1)
( )
( ) χ =+ + +
3
2 2 0 rec app rec app
0
3 2 .
2
nn E E EE
n (15.2)
Here, Erec is the recorded field, and Eapp is the applied field to be measured. The quadratic 
terms in (15.2) represent the dc Kerr effect; the third term is proportional to the applied 
field and represents the poling-induced linear electro-optic effect. The recorded field thus 
results in an effective second-order susceptibility proportional to Erec:
( ) ( ) χ χ = 2 3
eff 3 . Erec (15.3)
The matrix of electro-optic coefficients of poled glass is equivalent to the one of the crystal 
classes 4 mm and 6 mm [205] and given by
   
  =  
 
 
 
     
13
13
33
13
13
0 0
0 0 . 0 0
0 0
0 0
000
ij
r
r
r
r
r
r
(15.4)
Here, it assumed that the poling direction is parallel to z. An applied field in that direction 
induces electro-optic index changes for optical polarizations parallel and orthogonal to z. 
The modified indices read [205]:
′ ′ = = −
3
0 0 13 , 2 x y z
n n n n rE (15.5)226 ◾ Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
′ = −
3
0
0 33 . 2 z z
n n n rE (15.6)
Hence, the polarimetric electro-optic phase shift in a poled fiber with an applied electric 
field parallel to the poling direction is
( ) 3
0 33 13 app φ nr r El, λ
π ∆= − (15.7)
where l is the length of the poled fiber section. Fields orthogonal to the poling direction 
have no effect. In particular, a field parallel to the propagation direction of the fiber will not 
produce an electro-optic phase shift. For symmetry reasons, the theoretical ratio of r33:r11
is 3:1 [205, 238]. Experimental data for poled bulk glass were found to be well in line with 
that ratio [205]. By contrast, poled fibers have exhibited somewhat smaller ratios. Long 
et al., for instance, reported a ratio of 2.4:1 [210], Fujiwara et al. of (2–3):1 [198], and Michie 
et al. a ratio as small as 1.15:1 [204, 212]. The causes for the lower ratios in fibers were still 
speculative at the time.
15.1.3 Poled Fiber Electric Field and Voltage Sensors
A poled optical fiber can be employed to line integration of the electric field. To this end, 
the fiber (with the electrodes removed) is wound as a helix with constant pitch and radius 
onto an insulator rod between ground and high voltage potentials (Figure 15.2a). The pol￾ing direction must be aligned parallel to the longitudinal helix axis — or, more precisely, 
parallel to the binormal of the helix, that is, the direction normal to the radius and tangent 
vectors. Another prerequisite is that the electro-optic coefficients are constant along the 
fiber. Given the twin hole fiber structure, the fiber is polarization maintaining and can be 
polarimetrically interrogated.
A team at the Optical Fiber Technology Centre (OFTC) at the University of Sydney devel￾oped, with support from industry, a corresponding voltage transducer for demonstration 
FIGURE 15.2 (a) Schematic illustration of a poled fiber voltage sensor with helical fiber path; (b) 
poled fiber voltage transducer developed at OFTC (Sydney) with self-aligning fiber; from [204].Electro-Optic Fibers ◾ 227
purposes (Figure 15.2b) [204, 239–241]. The twin hole fiber with a linear electro-optic effect 
of ≈0.16 pm/V had two flat cladding surfaces for self-alignment [242] and was wound on an 
insulator rod with a diameter of 95 mm and a length of 500 mm. Low coherence interferom￾etry was applied to determine the voltage-induced differential group delay between the 
orthogonal modes. The transducer showed good linearity at 50-Hz voltages between 2.5 and 
12 kV, but dielectric breakdown occurred at the latter voltage. In other work, Magalhães et 
al. proposed distributed electric field sensing with a poled fiber interrogated by time domain 
reflectometry (OTDR) [237], and optical fiber electric field sensors based on poled polymers 
were reported in [243, 244].
As a final note, a high voltage transducer according to Figure 15.2 appears to be an 
attractive all-fiber solution. Nonetheless, to the author’s knowledge, no such sensor was 
ever tested in the field. The finite lifetime of the electro-optic effect, particularly at higher 
temperature, has remained a concern. Further work towards poled fibers with significantly 
enhanced stability would still be necessary. Low stress and high voltage proof packaging of 
the fiber is another challenge. Also, optical phase shifts due to shock and vibration may 
require compensation measures [245].
15.2 CRYSTALLINE FIBERS
A crystalline electro-optic fiber with proper crystal symmetry and orientation enables 
electric field integration and voltage measurement according to the concept of Figure 14.1a 
and arguably might be considered an ideal high voltage transducer. Other than a poled 
fiber, a crystalline fiber can bridge the distance between ground and high voltage poten￾tials in a straight line, i.e., there is no need for helical fiber winding and axis orientation. 
As a result, the fiber can be packaged in a slim and flexible high voltage proof fiber cable. 
Also, the electro-optic effect is inherently long-term stable. Moreover, a fiber of appropri￾ate length significantly lowers the average field strength compared to field integration with 
shorter bulk crystals. Alas, such a fiber does not exist at present. However, there have been 
a few attempts towards crystalline electro-optic fibers, some of which we will consider in 
the following.
15.2.1 Micro-Pulling-Down Growth of BGO Fibers
Bulk crystals such as BGO are typically grown by the conventional Czochralski method. 
That method, however, is not suited to the growth of sub-millimeter thick fibers. 
Techniques for crystalline fiber growth include the laser-heated pedestal growth technique 
[246–248] and the micro-pulling-down (mPD) technique [249–255]. Both techniques have 
been applied to the growth of single crystal fibers such as Nd:YAG or Yb:YAG fibers for 
fiber lasers [248, 250] or LiNbO3 fibers for nonlinear optical and electro-optical devices 
[247, 251]. mPD-grown crystal fibers have also included fibers from KNbO3, Tb3Ga5O12
(TGG), and others [254]. Of particular interest has been the mPD-growth of BGO 
(Bi4Ge3O12) and BSO (Bi4Si3O12) fibers [252–255]. As already noted, BGO and BSO are 
scintillating materials. Grown as fibers, they can be readily cut to small-sized pixels for 
spatially resolved radiation measurements. FiberCryst S.A.S., Villeurbanne (France), a 228 ◾ Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
spin-off from the University of Lyon and one of the pioneers in the field, in collaboration 
with ABB has endeavored to grow Bi4Ge3O12 fibers with optical quality and crystal orienta￾tion adequate for high voltage sensing [256]. Figure 15.3 schematically illustrates the fiber 
growth apparatus. Czochralski-grown BGO material was molten in an induction-heated 
platinum crucible. The melt flowed through a micro-capillary at the bottom of the crucible 
and crystallized at an appropriately oriented seed crystal beneath the exit nozzle. The seed 
crystal was then slowly pulled downwards at a speed of typically 0.5–1 mm/min. For stable 
growth, the temperature of the nozzle zone had to be kept in a narrow range of about 5°C 
around 1115°C. (The BGO melting point is at 1050°C.) To this end, an after-heater with 
closed-loop control served to stabilize the temperature. It was also important to suppress 
Bi2O3 evaporation from the melt due to its high vapor pressure to maintain the correct melt 
stoichiometry [254].
BGO fiber samples with lengths of up to 850 mm (limited by the apparatus) and diam￾eters between 0.3 mm and 3 mm were grown [256]. Due to thermal issues, the fiber sec￾tions free of buckles or bends were only 150–200 mm long, however (Figure 15.3). A visual 
inspection indicated good optical quality without major defects. The absorption coeffi￾cients at 633 nm of 18 samples from three different growth runs were between <0.005 cm−1
and 0.045 cm−1, with most samples near 0.01 cm−1. For comparison, absorption coefficients 
between 0.0005 cm−1 and 0.03 cm−1 have been reported for conventionally grown bulk 
BGO [257]. The birefringent phase retardation of a 150-mm-long sample with a diameter 
of 3 mm was 0.6 rad (34°) at 1310 nm compared to 0.1–0.2 rad of good-quality Czochralski￾grown crystals of similar lengths. The crystal orientation, determined by x-ray diffraction, 
was essentially constant along the sample length, but the [001]-direction was off from the 
desired direction (longitudinal axis) by about 20°, which was attributed to a misaligned 
seed crystal. Measurements with a longitudinally applied 60-Hz voltage showed a linear 
electro-optic response up to the maximum voltage of 30 kV. The BGO fiber samples did not 
yet have a core/cladding structure for guided wave propagation. Two concentric crucibles 
with appropriately doped BGO melts might enable the growth of fibers with a core/clad￾ding index step [258]. But the success probability was judged as too uncertain, and no 
further work was attempted.
FIGURE 15.3 Micro-pulling-down apparatus for BGO fiber growth (left) and images of grown 
fiber samples (right) [256].Electro-Optic Fibers ◾ 229
15.2.2 Molten Core Fabrication of BGO Fibers
Molten core crystal fiber fabrication has been pioneered, among others, by J. Ballato and 
coworkers at Clemson University. The initial focus was on semiconductor core fibers 
[259–261], but the fabrication of crystalline oxide core fibers was also investigated [262]. 
The fibers or canes are drawn on a regular drawing tower from a preform that typically 
consists of a cladding glass tube containing the core material, either in form of a crys￾tal rod derived from a Czochralski-grown single crystal boule or in powder form. The 
core material melts during drawing but remains encapsulated in the viscous glass clad￾ding. Compared to other crystal growth methods, the molten core method enables higher 
growth speed, longer sample lengths, and provides a core/cladding structure for optical 
waveguiding. On initiative from ABB, the Clemson group started a project towards molten 
core fabrication of Bi4Ge3O12 core fibers [263]. The ultimate vision was a fiber with single 
crystalline core of defined orientation over a few meters of fiber. The investigations pro￾vided important new insights, but high voltage sensing-based molten core fabricated fibers 
remained elusive at the time; see [263] for details.
15.2.3 Crystallized Glass Fibers
Thermal treatment of glasses at sufficiently high temperatures leads to devitrification, that 
is, the formation of crystallites in the glass matrix. In special glass ceramics, the crystal￾lites have a non-centrosymmetric structure and exhibit strong second-order nonlinearities 
and a linear electro-optic effect. Researchers in Japan have explored fresnoite-type glass 
ceramics, particularly BaO-TiO2-SiO2 and BaO-TiO2-GeO2 (BTGS), and optical fibers 
drawn from these materials as candidates for active optical devices such as switches or 
modulators [264–269]. In appropriately prepared transparent ceramics, they found highly 
oriented crystallized layers of long-range order which ascertained a macroscopic electro￾optic effect. For a ceramic composition of 30BaO-20TiO2-50SiO2, Iwafuchi et al. reported 
electro-optic coefficients r13 and r33 of 3.15 and 1.00 pm/V, respectively, at 633 nm and a 
field frequency of 100 Hz, which roughly amounted to 60% of the coefficients of corre￾sponding fresnoite single crystals [266]. Ohara et al. demonstrated the electro-optic effect 
in BTGS-based double clad fibers [268, 269]. Laser irradiation space-selectively crystal￾lized the inner cladding around the fiber core over lengths of 1 cm and 2 cm. The crystal￾lized structures were found to be oriented with the c-axis in radial direction. A transverse 
electric field produced an electro-optic phase shift between polarizations parallel and 
orthogonal to the field of 0.1 rad/cm at 1.55 mm and a field strength of 12.5 kV/mm. The 
propagation loss was 1.8 dB/cm.
15.3 D-FIBERS COUPLED TO ELECTRO-OPTIC CRYSTAL SLABS
Slab-coupled electro-optic field sensors (SCOS) have been extensively investigated by a 
team at Brigham Young University (Utah) [70, 270–276]. The sensors consist of a fiber 
with D-shaped cross-section attached to a thin electro-optic slab of refractive index n0 and 
thickness t (some tens of micrometers) (Figure 15.4a). The close proximity of the fiber core 
to the slab results in resonant coupling and power transfer between the excited polarization 230 ◾ Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
mode of fiber and the multiple modes of the slab. (Note that a D-fiber is polarization￾maintaining with eigen-polarizations parallel and perpendicular to the flat cladding sur￾face.) To this end, the distance d between the core and flat of the pristine fiber is reduced by 
wet etching, e.g., from d = 13 μm to d = 1.5 μm [270]. The resonance wavelengths appear as 
dips in the fiber’s transmission spectrum (Figure 15.4b) and are given by [70]
λ = −2 2
0
2 m , t
n n
m (15.8)
where n is the effective refractive index of excited fiber mode and m is the slab mode num￾ber. An applied electric field changes the slab index n0 and shifts the resonance wavelengths. 
The shift can be measured as a change in the transmitted optical power at an appropriately 
chosen wavelength of operation; see [70] for a detailed transmission analysis. Typically, the 
sensor is designed to measure the field component perpendicular to the flat fiber surface. 
SCOS can be made very small with a cross-sectional diameter around 0.2 mm and a length 
of a few mm or less (Figure 15.4c). Slab materials have included poled polymers [70, 272] 
and inorganic crystals, in particular, lithium niobate (LiNbO3) [270, 271, 274–276]. Poled 
polymers have the advantage of a small permittivity and large electro-optic coefficients, 
er = 4.0 and r33 = 70 in [70], but suffer from limited long-term stability. Sensors with lithium 
niobate slabs have been employed, for example, to the measurement of pulsed electric fields 
from 1.5 kV/mm to 18 kV/mm [274] and alternating and pulsed voltages in coaxial high 
voltage cables [276]. Reported accuracies were 0.7% for a 100 kV voltage pulse, and 28% 
and 128% for 2-kHz alternating voltages of 500 Vpp and 100 Vpp, respectively. Slab-coupled 
electric field sensors were also reported in [277, 278].
FIGURE 15.4 (a) Cross-section of an SCOS electric field sensor consisting of a D-fiber coupled 
to an electro-optic slab; (b) SCOS transmission spectrum; (c) Image of an SCOS sensor. (Adapted/
reprinted with permission from [70, 271] © The Optical Society.)DOI: 10.1201/9781003100324-20 231
CHAPTER 16
Piezo-Optic Voltage Sensors
16.1 THE PIEZOELECTRIC EFFECT
The piezoelectric effect, discovered in 1880 by the French brothers Jacques and Pierre Curie, 
is the phenomenon that occurs when mechanical stress applied to certain crystalline mate￾rials such as quartz leads to an electric polarization of the materials proportional to the 
stress [279]. The stress alters the separation between positive and negative charges in each 
crystal unit cell, resulting in net surface charges and a macroscopic electric field across the 
material samples. Conversely, when an electric field is applied to a piezoelectric material, 
the material deforms slightly. This is known as the converse or inverse piezoelectric effect. 
Like the Pockels effect, the piezoelectric effect occurs in crystals with no inversion symme￾try. The direct and converse piezoelectric effects have found numerous applications, e.g., in 
actuators, ultrasonic transducers, motors, inkjet printing, ignitors, energy harvesting, and 
sensors, including optical electric field and voltage transducers.
The piezoelectric strains Sjk induced by the components Ei
 of an applied electric field are 
given by [2]
= , S dE jk ijk i (16.1)
where dijk is a third rank tensor of piezoelectric coefficients. Like the tensor rijk of the 
Pockels coefficients, dijk can be reduced to a 2 × 2 matrix. Eq. (16.1) then reads
S dE i j j ij i = = = … , 1,2,3; 1,2, ,6 . ( ) (16.2)
Here, S1, S2, S3 are tensile strains in x, y, and z directions, respectively, and S4, S5, S6 are shear 
strains about x, y, z. Optical electric field and voltage sensors convert a piezoelectric strain 
into an optical signal, for example, by means of a fiber interferometer, a Fabry-Pérot cavity, 
a fiber Bragg grating, or a displacement sensor.232 ◾ Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
16.2 PIEZOELECTRIC MATERIALS
Crystalline quartz and tourmaline are two classical piezoelectric materials. Quartz is best 
known for its use as a high-Q oscillator in watches. The most widespread piezo materials 
are lead zirconate titanate ceramics, in short PZT (PbZrxTi1−xO3) [280]. These polycrystal￾line ferroelectrics of perovskite crystal structure obtain their macroscopic piezoelectric 
properties by electric poling of the sintered ceramics at elevated temperature. Their piezo￾electric coefficients dij, also called charge constants, are 2–3 orders of magnitude larger 
than in quartz. The electric and mechanical properties of PZT can be adapted within wide 
ranges to specific applications. In particular, one distinguishes so-called hard PZT and soft 
PZT, as already mentioned in Section 9.2.
Soft PZT have comparatively large piezoelectric coefficients and permittivity but poorer 
linearity and more pronounced hysteresis, higher dielectric loss, and are more susceptible 
to depolarization due to smaller Curie temperatures and coercive field strengths. The 
opposite is generally true for hard PZT. PZT are available in many different shapes such as 
hollow tubes, disks, plates, or hemispheres. The high piezoelectric coefficients have also 
made PZT a material of choice for voltage sensing. However, PZT materials have several 
properties that may hamper the performance and stability of a sensor and must be taken 
into consideration when selecting an adequate material:
• The poling decays logarithmically over time (Arrhenius’s law). Accordingly, param￾eters such as the charge constants dij decrease according to dij = dij(t0) – a(T) log(t), 
where t0 is the starting time, and a is a temperature-dependent aging rate coefficient 
(a increases with temperature) [281]. Even though the rate of change slows over time 
and can be partially forestalled by pre-aging, the effect should be borne in mind, 
especially in hot climates. Commonly, soft PZT age faster than hard PZT.
• The piezoelectric coefficients dij and dielectric constants eij have comparatively high 
temperature dependence, and the temperature coefficients themselves are often func￾tions of temperature. The temperature coefficients of the dij are roughly in the range 
(2−10) × 10−4 K−1; those of the eij can even be larger [282, 283].
• Dielectric losses are relatively high and cause corresponding phase delays between 
input voltage and output signal. The loss factor tan δ of PZT-5A, for instance, is 
around 0.02 at 100 Hz and 20°C. For comparison, quartz has a loss factor of ≈10−5.
• The coercive field strengths Ec are typically between 0.5 and 1.5 kV/mm. The maxi￾mum field strength a sensor is exposed to should be kept sufficiently far below Ec at all 
conditions of operation, including potential over-voltages, to prevent depolarization 
and damage.
• Given the above criteria, hard PZT are commonly preferential for voltage sensing [284].
Polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) is another interesting piezoelectric material, as it can be 
produced in thin flexible foils. It is made piezoelectric by stretching and subsequent poling 
[285]. Table 16.1 summarizes properties of selected piezoelectric materials.Piezo-Optic Voltage Sensors 
◾ 233
TABLE 16.1 Selected Piezoelectric Materials and Their Properties
Material
Crystallographic 
Point Group
Piezoelectric Coefficients
dij
(10−12 C/N)
Temperature Coefficient
(1/dij) ∂dij/∂T
(10−4 K−1)
Relative Permittivity
(Unclamped)
er
Temperature Coefficient
(1/er) ∂er/∂T
(10−4 K−1)
Dielectric Loss
tan δ References
Quartz 32 d11 = 2.31
d14 = −0.72
Td11: −2.15
Td14: 12.9
e11 = 4.52
e33 = 4.64
Te11 : 0.28
Te33 : 0.39
10−5 [286, 282]
LiNbO3 3m d31 = −0.85
d33 = 6
d22 = 20.8
d15 = 69.2
Td11: −8.9
Td33: 3.0
Td22: 2.3
Td15: 2.6
e11 = 99.5
e33 = 38.5
Te11 : 4.11
Te33 : 9.4
10−4 [282, 287, 
288]
ZnO 6mm d31 = −5.12
d33 = 12.3
d15 = 8.3
e11 = 8.67
e33 = 11.3
[282, 289]
PZT – 5A ∞mm d31 = −171
d33 = 374
d15 = 584
See text e33 = 1700 See text 0.02
(1 kHz)
[282, 283]
PZT – 5H ∞mm d31 = −274
d33 = 593
d15 = 741
See text e13 = 3130
e13 = 3400
See text 0.02
(1 kHz)
[282, 283]
PVDF 2mm d31 = 18
d33 = −30
er = 12 0.05
(100 Hz)
[282]234 ◾ Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
16.3 INTERFEROMETRIC PIEZOELECTRIC VOLTAGE SENSORS
16.3.1 Quartz Transducer with Dual-Mode Sensing Fiber
Bohnert et al. at ABB have developed interferometric high voltage sensors based on the 
converse piezoelectric effect in quartz. In spite of its relatively small piezoelectric coeffi￾cients, quartz offers superior material properties (see Table 16.1), including low permittivity 
and hence little field distortion, relatively small temperature dependence of the piezoelec￾tric and dielectric constants, high resistivity (7.5 × 1017 Ωm) and negligible dielectric loss, 
chemical inertness and excellent long-term stability [290]. Quartz belongs to the crystallo￾graphic point group 32 and possesses a threefold crystal axis, conventionally referred to as 
the z-axis, and three twofold axes (x-axes). The matrix of piezoelectric coefficients reads [2]
  −   = − −
 
11 11 14
14 11
0 00
0 0 00 2.
0 0 00 0 0
ij
dd d
d d d (16.3)
The basic transducer element is a quartz disk or cylinder with a polyimide-coated opti￾cal fiber wrapped with constant pitch and defined tension onto the circumferential sur￾face (Figure 16.1a). The longitudinal transducer axis coincides with a twofold crystal 
axis (x-axis). An alternating electric field Ex applied along that axis produces alternating 
piezoelectric strains along y and x and hence a modulation of the transducer’s circum￾ferential length l. The relative length change, given by Dl/l = −(1/2)d11Ex, is transmitted 
to the fiber and measured interferometrically. The chosen crystal orientation is selected 
because the electric field’s components in the plane of the disk (Ey and Ez) to a first order, 
FIGURE 16.1 (a) Quartz transducer crystal with attached elliptical-core dual-mode fiber and 
LP01/LP11 modal interference patterns (in the near field) at characteristic phase differences ϕs. An 
electric field in positive x-direction causes compressive strain along y (green arrows). (b) Sensor sig￾nal (absolute value) vs. angle φ between electric field and transducer normal (2-fold axis) (Adapted/
reprinted with permission from [291] © The Optical Society.)Piezo-Optic Voltage Sensors ◾ 235
do not contribute to the signal. Hence, the transducer is only sensitive to Ex (Figure 16.1b) 
[291]. Hence, a sensor comprising a series arrangement of multiple quartz elements (with 
optional dielectric spacers between the elements) or a long solid quartz cylinder measures 
the line integral of the field, as demonstrated in [292]. Alternatives to quartz disks and 
cylinders are quartz slabs with the fiber attached in a straight line. Further crystal classes 
suitable for field integration and corresponding transducer/fiber orientations are listed in 
[291], for both disk- and slab-shaped transducers.
The sensing fiber has an elliptical-core and supports at the wavelength of operation two 
spatial modes, namely the fundamental LP01 mode and even LP11 higher order mode [293, 
294]. The modes are polarized either along the major or minor core axis. The alternating 
fiber strain results in a modulation of the differential phase of the two modes and is detected 
by low coherence interferometry (Figure 16.2) [83, 295, 296]. To this end, a second dual￾mode fiber of the same type, being part of the detection system, acts as a receiver interfer￾ometer. The light source is a low-coherent 780-nm multimode laser diode with 4-mW rated 
output power. Insensitive single-mode elliptical-core fibers guide the light to and from the 
remote sensor head. The different fiber sections are joined by fusion splices made with lat￾eral offsets such that the LP01 mode of the single-mode fibers couples approximately equally 
to the LP01 and the LP11 modes of the dual-mode fibers, or vice versa. The two modes of the 
sensing fiber propagate with different group velocities and accumulate an optical path dif￾ference DLs, which falls into a minimum of the multiple-peak fringe visibility function of 
the laser diode [297, 298], that is, the modes are incoherent at the sensing fiber end. The 
relative modal delay DLr in the receiver fiber matches DLs, which restores partial coherence 
at the end of the receiver fiber. Per meter of fiber, the modes accumulate delays DLs,r of 
about 3–4 mm depending on the fiber parameters [83, 296]. Two photodiodes detect the 
two anti-phase lobes of the modal interference pattern with intensities I1,2:
=± −   (φ φ )   0 1,2 1 cos , r s 2
I I K (16.4)
where I0 is proportional to the light source power, K is the fringe visibility of the partially 
coherent light (K = 1/2 at ideal conditions), and ϕr
, ϕs are the relative modal phases in the 
FIGURE 16.2 Piezo-optic voltage transducer; PMF: polarization maintaining fiber. (Adapted with 
permission from [83] © The Optical Society.)236 ◾ Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
two dual-mode fiber sections. Phase ϕs is composed of a quasi-static term θs that varies 
with temperature and an alternating term ϕ0ssinϖt with amplitude ϕ0s produced by the 
applied ac voltage:
φ θ φϖ s s 0s (tt t ) = + ( ) sin . (16.5)
The receiver dual-mode fiber is wrapped onto two tube-type PZT transducers that are part 
of a closed-loop homodyne phase tracking system [299]. The phase tracker controls the 
receiver fiber phase ϕr such that the intensities I1 and intensities I2 of the two interference 
lobes are kept balanced. The combined phase difference ϕr − ϕs is then locked at quadra￾ture, and the feedback voltage from the phase tracker images the phase modulation ϕs(t) 
of the sensor fiber. Large quasi-static phase excursions due to temperature, θs(T) or θr(T), 
initiate 2p-phase resets. It should be mentioned that in [183, 300, 301], adapted versions of 
non-reciprocal phase modulation, equivalent to the one in Figure 14.12, were presented as 
an alternative to coherence-tuned interrogation.
16.3.2 170 kV POVT for Gas-Insulated Switchgear
Figure 16.3 shows a piezo-optic voltage transducer (POVT) for 170 kV gas-insulated switch￾gear (GIS) [83]. The full phase-to-ground voltage (170 kV/√3) is applied to a quartz crystal 
with a length of 100 mm, a diameter of 30 mm, and 24 bifilarly wound loops of sensing 
fiber (see photograph in Figure 16.2). The crystal resides in a compact housing that can be 
plugged into accordingly prepared GIS. An insulator tube from fiber-reinforced epoxy con￾nects the high voltage and ground potential parts of the housing. Pieces of silicone foam 
help to insulate the crystal from mechanical shock and vibration. (A method for canceling 
mechanical noise has been disclosed in [301].) The tube interior stands in gas exchange with 
the GIS system. The housing and the electrodes are designed such that the field strength at a 
750-kV lightning impulse voltage (the highest test voltage according to IEC standards [94]) 
does not exceed an empirically determined safety limit of 23 kV/mm at any location in the 
FIGURE 16.3 Piezo-optic voltage transducer for 170 kV gas-insulated switchgear (sensing fiber not 
shown). The overall height is 260 mm. (Reprinted with permission from [83] © The Optical Society.)Piezo-Optic Voltage Sensors ◾ 237
SF6 gas volume and of 15 kV/mm within the epoxy insulator. For instance, the maximum 
field strengths at 750 kV are 22.7 kV/mm at the HV electrode, 9.6 kV/mm on the quartz sur￾face, and 10.7 kV/mm at the insulator tube. The fiber causes local field enhancements by a 
factor of 1.64. The transducer passed the required HV tests according to IEC standards that 
included an over-voltage withstand test (50 Hz ac voltage of 365 kV applied for 2 min) and 
lightning impulse tests (15 repetitive 750-kV impulses of positive and negative polarity). It 
was also confirmed that the transducer was free of partial discharge (PD) at the 1.1-fold of 
the rated voltage before and after the tests. PD onset and breakoff were above 200 kV.
The transducer was successfully tested in laboratory experiments and an extended field 
trial at a GIS substation in Germany (Figure 16.4) [83]. The minimum detectable voltage 
corresponded to 11.3 V/√Hz at 60 Hz and was equivalent to a modal phase modulation ϕs
of 2 × 10−5 rad/√Hz at 60 Hz. Above 1 kV, the deviations from a reference voltage probe 
were within ±0.2% (Figure 16.4a,b). The phase modulation amplitude at the rated phase-to￾ground voltage (98.1 kV) was 0.173 rad, corresponding to an rms fiber length change δl2p of 
93 mm, here for the polarization parallel to the major core axis. The signal was essentially 
frequency independent up to the first piezoelectric resonances of the quartz transducer 
above 10 kHz. Crosstalk between two neighboring sensors was below 5 × 10−4. The signal 
at constant voltage decreased with temperature at a rate of −2.12 × 10−4 K−1 (Figure 16.4c), 
governed by the temperature dependence of the d11 piezoelectric coefficient of quartz 
(Table 16.1), i.e., there was no significant contribution from the polyimide-coated sensing 
FIGURE 16.4 170 kV POVT test data: (a) Signal vs. voltage; (b) Relative error vs. voltage; (c) Signal 
at constant voltage vs. temperature; (d) Relative signal difference between optical and conven￾tional voltage transducers versus time during a field test in 110 kV GIS (63.5 kV phase-to-ground). 
(Reprinted with permission from [83] © The Optical Society.)238 ◾ Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
fiber. Temperature can be accounted for either by a temperature measurement or by mak￾ing use of the temperature-dependent interference fringe contrast [302]. The field trial con￾firmed accuracy to within ±0.2% (Figure 16.4d).
16.3.3 420 kV POVT for Air-Insulated Substations
Figure 16.5 depicts a 420-kV POVT for outdoor air-insulated substations with maintenance￾free solid-state insulation [303]. Here, the line voltage (242.5 kV phase-to-ground) drops 
across a series of four quartz crystals, each with a length of 300 mm and a diameter of 30 
mm. The crystals share a common sensing fiber with 22 fiber loops per crystal. Electrodes 
at the crystal ends provide a relatively homogeneous field along the crystals. Aluminum 
tubes with flexible joints establish electric contact between the crystals and to ground and 
high voltage potentials. Partitioning of the voltage on several crystals reduces the electric 
field strengths and makes it possible to mount the whole assembly in a slender and light 
insulator tube with a length of 3.2 m and inner and outer diameters of 80 mm and 92 mm, 
respectively. Soft polyurethane resin fills the remaining hollow volume in the insulator. 
The sum of the individual voltages Vi
 across the quartzes corresponds to the total line volt￾age V0. The individual voltage fractions Vi
 can be controlled via the quartz positions on the 
insulator axis and the geometry of the corona ring depicted in Figure 16.5. Ideally, all Vi
 are 
equal to V0/4. From top to bottom, the actual voltage drops are V1 = 0.30V0, V2 = 0.282V0, 
V3 = 0.201V0, and V4 = 0.217V0. For the given number of quartzes, the insulator dimensions 
have been chosen such that the electric field strength at the peak of a 1425 kV impulse volt￾age (IEC test requirement) does not exceed an empiric limit of 3.5 kV/mm at any surface 
exposed to air; for details, see [303]. The transducer passed the IEC-required high volt￾age tests (320 kV ac overvoltage, ±1425-kV lightning impulses, and ±1050-kV switching 
FIGURE 16.5 Piezo-optic voltage transducer for 420 kV outdoor substations [303].Piezo-Optic Voltage Sensors ◾ 239
impulses at dry and wet conditions). It should be mentioned, that even though success￾fully tested, the POVT concept was eventually abandoned in favor of ABB’s Electro-Optic 
Voltage Transducer (EOVT) described in Section 14.3.1, as the EOVT was already more 
established at the time. PZT-type sensors with interferometric readout were studied, for 
example, in [304–306].
16.4 PIEZOELECTRIC VOLTAGE SENSORS WITH FBG 
INTERROGATION
Fiber Bragg gratings (FBG), for the most part, replaced interferometric techniques for piezo￾optic voltage transducers after gratings became readily available in the 1990s. Pacheco et 
al., in 1999, were among the first to demonstrate a PZT/FBG transducer [284]. The FBG was 
radially attached to a flat surface of a 6.33-mm-thick PZT disk, which resulted in a linear 
output up to 6.3 kV with a resolution of 150 V. Extensive further work towards PZT/FBG￾based current and voltage transducers for electric power networks has been carried out at 
Strathclyde University, Glasgow, and its spin-off, Synaptec Ltd, for example, [307–313]; see 
also Section 9.2 on corresponding current sensors. The voltage is either directly applied 
to the transducer [311, 312] or, at higher voltages, the transducer is operated in conjunc￾tion with a capacitive voltage divider (CVD). Figure 16.6 shows a transducer module for 
combination with a CVD [313]. The CVD output is applied to a rod-shaped PZT (PIC181 
from Physik Instrumente; a hard PZT material) with a length of 20 mm and a diameter of 
5 mm, a piezoelectric charge constant d33 of 265 pm/V, and a maximum permissible field 
strength of 2.5 kV/mm. The FBG is suspended between two ceramic holders attached to the 
electrodes protruding over the PZT end faces. At the rated line voltage (here, 76 kV phase￾to-ground, 132 kV phase-to-phase), the voltage seen by the transducer is 1 kV and results 
in peak-to-peak Bragg wavelength shifts of ±39 pm, measured with a commercial FBG 
interrogator. Laboratory tests at room temperature showed that the transducer module 
FIGURE 16.6 (a) PZT/FBG-transducer module for combination with a capacitive voltage divider 
(CVD); (b) CVD parameters for a voltage divider ratio (VDR) of 76. The output voltage V2 applied 
to the transducer is 1 kV at the rated phase-to-ground voltage V of 76 kV. (Adapted from [313].)240 ◾ Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
can meet the IEC requirements of metering class 0.1 and protection class 1P, as specified in 
[94]. Hysteresis of the hard PZT material was found to be minimal.
Figure 16.7 depicts a medium voltage transducer from the same team, where a 
40-mm-thick PZT cylinder (PIC181) resides in a medium voltage hollow core insulator, 
and the line voltage (6.35 kV phase-to-ground, 11 kV phase-to-phase) is directly applied to 
the PZT [311]. The FBG is mounted at the PZT, as in Figure 16.6. An improved version with 
PZT protection against lightning impulses was reported in [312].
Similar work towards PZT/FBG voltage sensors for MV power distribution was also 
reported by Werneck et al. at the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro [314–316]. As an 
example, Figure 16.8 depicts a transducer for power quality monitoring in 13.8 kV 
FIGURE 16.7 (a) PZT transducer with attached FBG in hollow core medium voltage insulator; (b) 
photograph of the device. (Adapted from [312].)
FIGURE 16.8 (a) PZT/FBG voltage transducer comprising a stack of 10 PZT rings; (b) combination 
of the transducer with a 13.8 kV capacitive voltage divider (CVD). (Adapted from [316].)Piezo-Optic Voltage Sensors ◾ 241
networks, to detect voltage sags or swells, for instance, unbalances between phases, or line 
interruption [316]. The transducer consists of a stack of 10 PZT rings with inner and outer 
diameters of 38.0 and 50.8 mm, respectively (PZT-4, again a hard PZT material with d33 = 
300 pm/V). The total height of the stack is 80 mm. The PZT rings are electrically con￾nected in parallel, that is, each ring is exposed to the external voltage. The fiber with the 
FBG runs along the longitudinal axis of the stack. A special mechanism transmits the 
PZT strains to the FBG with a sensitivity of 232 pm/kV. The maximum allowed trans￾ducer voltage is 4 kV. At 13.8 kV, the transducer is therefore combined with a CVD, as 
illustrated in Figure 16.8b. The experimental evaluation showed that the transducer was 
capable of reproducing transient voltage variations up to the 41st harmonic without sig￾nificative distortion and impulsive surges up to 2.5 kHz. In still other work, He et al. 
reported multiplexed PZT/FBG voltage transducers [317–319]. Similar work is also known 
from Law et al. [320].
16.5 LIGHT INTENSITY MODULATING VOLTAGE SENSORS
Here, the PZT vibration caused by an applied ac voltage modulates the optical power trans￾mitted by the transducer. In the example of Figure 16.9, reported by Lukens et al., light 
emitted from the central fiber of a multimode fiber bundle reflects off from a PZT surface 
(PZT-4 with dimensions 12 × 1.5 × 0.5 mm3
) and is collected by six fibers surrounding the 
emitting fiber [321]. The collected light power is a function of the gap width between the 
PZT and fiber bundle and thus varies as a function of the voltage — Section 9.3 presented 
an analog sensor for current measurement. With the steady state gap width adjusted to 
280 mm, the minimum detectable displacement was 1.5 nm at 100 Hz. The maximum 
displacement was chosen as 3 mm and corresponded to an applied voltage of 20 V. Higher 
voltages again require a CVD. The frequency response was flat from 10 Hz to 500 Hz and 
had a resonance at 2 kHz. Other PZT-based intensity modulating voltage sensors were 
reported, for example, in [322, 323].
FIGURE 16.9 Intensity modulating voltage sensor in combination with a capacitive voltage divider, 
according to [321].242 ◾ Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
16.6 PIEZOELECTRIC POLYMER-JACKETED FIBERS
In the 1980s, Koo et al. and others explored fibers attached to poled PVDF films or with 
poled PVDF jackets for electric field sensing and optical phase modulation [324–328]. The 
fibers were interrogated in a Mach-Zehnder interferometer and sensitive to a field com￾ponent perpendicular to the fiber. Imai et al. reported a field-induced phase shift of 1.5 × 
10−7 rad/(V/m) per meter of vinylidene fluoride/trifluoroethylene-jacketed fiber [328], and 
Mermelstein et al. estimated a minimum detectable field of 33 mV/m for a 1-km-long fiber 
on PVDF film [327]. The field became dormant in later years, however.DOI: 10.1201/9781003100324-21 243
CHAPTER 17
Further Electric Field and 
Voltage Sensors
The following sections are short overviews of further methods for optical electric field and 
voltage sensing. For details, the reader is referred to the cited literature.
17.1 ELECTROSTRICTIVE SENSORS
The electric field-induced strains in a medium commonly include, in addition to the first￾order terms associated with the converse piezoelectric effect (if present), terms that also 
vary in proportion to the square of the field. The latter phenomenon is referred to as elec￾trostriction. In a sense, electrostriction is the electric analog to magnetostriction (Section 
10.1). Whereas the piezoelectric effect only occurs in materials with no inversion symme￾try, electrostriction occurs in all crystal classes as well as in isotropic media such as glasses 
and liquids. In order to include electrostriction, eq. (16.1) of the converse piezoelectric 
effect must be supplemented as follows [2]:
= +γ , S d E EE jk ijk i iljk i l (17.1)
where γiljk is a fourth rank tensor symmetrical in i and l and in j and k. In isotropic mate￾rials, electrostriction results in an elongation in the direction of the field (independent of 
the sign of the field) and contraction in orthogonal directions according to the Poisson 
ratio. The relative elongation is Dl/l = γE2, where γ is the relevant electrostrictive coefficient. 
While electrostriction is rather small in most materials, the electrostriction of so-called 
relaxor ferroelectrics that include, e.g., lead magnesium niobate (PMN) or lead lanthanum 
zirconate titanate (PLZT) ceramics, is sufficiently large for practical applications [329].
Vohra et al. at the Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, D.C., have developed inter￾ferometric dc and low frequency field and voltage sensors, as well as ac sensors based on 
electrostrictive ceramics [330–333]. As in the case of magnetostrictive sensors (Section 
10.1), a carrier field Ew of high frequency ϖ is superimposed to the low frequency field EΩ
to be measured. Due to the nonlinearity, the low frequency field can be detected as 244 ◾ Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
sidebands (ϖ ± Ω) of the carrier in a frequency regime far away from low frequency 
noise, which strongly improves the strain resolution. The strain-induced optical phase 
shifts fw ± Ω at the sideband frequencies are proportional to the product EwEΩ. DC fields Edc
generate a phase shift fw at the carrier frequency proportional to EwEdc. Operating the trans￾ducers in a fiber Mach-Zehnder interferometer, Fabiny et al. measured voltage resolutions of 
40 nV/√Hz at 1 Hz and 129 nV/√Hz at 0.03 Hz [332]. Vohra et al. demonstrated a field reso￾lution of 7 (mV/m)/√Hz for an ac electric field sensor operated at a transducer resonance 
(32.5 kHz) and biased with 100 Vdc. The equivalent voltage resolution was 1 nV/√Hz [331].
Tomic et al. reported an electrostrictive sensor for 50-Hz voltages comprising a multi￾layer PMN ceramic rod with a length of 10 mm. The researchers applied voltages up to 50 V 
parallel to the longitudinal rod axis (without a bias field) and measured the electrostrictive 
rod elongations with a displacement sensor based on a 3 × 3 optical fiber coupler operated 
at 1310 nm. They achieved a voltage resolution of about 10 mV (corresponding to a rod 
elongation of 1 nm); the temperature dependence was 2.5%/°C [334]. Electrostrictive field 
sensors employing FBG for readout were reported in [335, 336].
17.2 LIQUID-CRYSTAL-BASED SENSORS
Liquid crystals (LC) [337] are best known for their use in flat panel displays. However, the 
variation of the optical anisotropy of LC as a function of an applied electric field also lends 
itself to electric field and voltage sensing. LC electric field sensors mostly work with nem￾atic LC (NLC). (Other well-known LC phases are the smectic and cholesteric phases.) The 
rod-shaped NLC molecules lack positional order but tend to align in a common direction 
(called the director) over macroscopic scales. Most nematic phases are uniaxial (others are 
biaxial), i.e., they have ordinary and extraordinary refractive indices, no and ne, with the 
director representing the optical axis (see indicatrix of Figure 2.6). In an electric field, the 
LC molecules tend to align in the direction of the field. Probe light experiences the realign￾ment as a change in the effective NLC index or birefringence. It should be mentioned, how￾ever, that the optical response often exhibits hysteresis, strongly depends on temperature, 
and is comparatively slow. Early LC electric field sensors comprised simple LC cells with 
fiber pigtails, for instance, for monitoring the presence of voltage in HV equipment [338, 
339]. Other researchers have dispersed LC micro-droplets in an isotropic polymer matrix 
(PDLC) [340–342]. Without an applied field, the orientations of the LC molecules vary 
from droplet to droplet. Refractive index mismatches between the LC droplets and the 
polymer matrix then attenuate the transmitted light by scattering. An applied field parallel 
to the light propagation direction forces the molecules to align in this direction. Hence, 
the effective indices of the droplets approach the ordinary index no, which matches the 
polymer index. As a result, the PDLC transmission increases. PDLCs have been designed 
as thin films [340, 342] or used as a cladding material on short sections of fiber [341]. 
Scherschener et al., for instance, reported a PDLC thin film sensor (10-mm thick, indium 
tin oxide electrodes) for 50-Hz ac voltages between 0 and 10 V [342]. A dc offset-voltage of 
40 V moved the operating point into the linear regime of the sensor. The measured sensor 
response at 633 nm exhibited good linearity, but the slope strongly depended on tempera￾ture. The response time was about 0.5–1 s.Further Electric Field and Voltage Sensors ◾ 245
Further research has been focused on micro-structured optical fibers (MSOF), in par￾ticular photonic crystal fibers (PCF), with LC infiltrated air holes. LC infiltrated PCF 
have found significant interest, because their spectral and polarization properties are 
tunable by temperature or external electric fields; see, for example, [343] for a review. Not 
surprisingly, LC infiltrated PCF also have been explored as electric field and voltage sen￾sors, for example, in [343–352]. Typically, the devices translate an applied field into a 
polarimetric optical phase shift (in case of a polarization maintaining fiber) [344, 345], a 
shift of the optical loss spectrum [348, 350–352], or optical attenuation at a fixed wave￾length [346, 347]. As an example, Figure 17.1 depicts data reported by Mathews et al. 
[347]. The sensor comprised a PCF with solid 8.5-mm diameter core surrounded by 7 
rings of 2.5-mm diameter air holes (Figure 17.1a). The air holes of the fiber were infil￾trated with nematic liquid crystal over a length of about 5 mm by capillary action. AC 
electric fields of positive polarity up to 6 kV/mm and frequencies of 50 Hz and 1 kHz were 
applied. Above a threshold field of about 2.5 kV/mm, the transmission decreased by about 
15–30 dB depending on temperature (Figure 17.1b). The threshold field depended on the 
size of the air holes and should decrease with increasing hole size. Electric field sensors 
based on fiber gratings embedded in liquid crystals were investigated in [353, 354], and 
Ko et al. presented a NLC Fabry-Pérot electric field sensor interrogated by a wavelength￾swept laser [355].
17.3 MICROELECTROMECHANICAL SENSORS
Microelectromechanical sensors (MEMS) for electric fields and voltages make use of the 
deflection of mechanical micro-structures due to field-induced charge displacement and 
electrostatic forces. Such structures include diaphragms, interleaved combs, or cantilever 
beams. Mostly, the sensors are electrically interrogated, e.g., based on capacitance changes 
or piezo-resistivity [356, 357], but optically interrogated sensors are also known. Here, the 
deflection typically tunes a Fabry-Pérot cavity or is measured by optical position detection 
means [358–364], or the device acts as a field-controlled variable shutter for transmitted 
light [365]. The sensors are of interest, for example, to monitoring atmospheric electrostatic 
fields or fields under high voltage power lines.
FIGURE 17.1 (a) PCF with NLC infiltrated air holes; (b) transmission at 1550 nm vs. ac electric 
field strength at various temperatures between 10°C and 90°C. (Reprinted with permission from 
[347] © The Optical Society.)246 ◾ Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
Already in 1993, Mendez et al. reported a fiber tip Fabry-Pérot diaphragm microsen￾sor for HV fields up to 300 kV/m, but still with a modest resolution of 40 kV/m [358]. 
Priest et al. measured electric fields between 135 kV/m and 650 kV/m near the sphere of 
a Van de Graaff voltage generator by means of a thin aluminum cantilever and low 
coherence Fabry-Pérot interferometry [360]. Javernik et al. reported a micro-machined 
fiber Fabry-Pérot sensor for dc and ac voltages up to 1 kV with resolutions between 0.1 
V and 5 V [363], and Kainz et al. presented a field-controlled MEMS optical shutter 
with a resolution of 100 (V/m)/√Hz up to fields of tens of kV/m and frequencies up to 
300 Hz [365]. Wang et al. presented an electric field sensor consisting of an optical fiber 
cantilever with a thin pre-charged polyimide jacket (Figure 17.2) [364]. By appropriately 
choosing the cantilever length, the sensor resonance frequency was adjusted to electric 
power frequencies of 50 Hz or 60 Hz. Two fiber Bragg gratings formed an in-fiber Fabry￾Pérot cavity to measure the cantilever vibration. The sensor had a linear response for 
fields up to 16 kV/m and saturated above 30 kV/m. The minimum detectable field was 
0.16 V/m.
17.4 ELECTRO-LUMINOPHORES AND ELECTRO-ABSORBERS
Electro-luminophores emit light when exposed to an alternating electric field. The light 
intensity is proportional to exp(−b/E), where E is the electric field strength and b a mate￾rial constant. Typical electro-luminophores are doped II–VI semiconductors such as 
ZnS:Cu emitting between 500 nm and 600 nm [366]. Electro-luminophores can be uti￾lized to visualize surface electric fields, as demonstrated by Yang et al. [367]. They spray￾coated an insulator disk with epoxy containing ZnS:Cu powder. The disk with inner 
and outer diameters of 20 mm and 60 mm, respectively, separated two coaxial cylin￾dric electrodes. The arrangement resembled the geometry of gas-insulated switchgear. At 
ac voltages between 20 kV and 48 kV, the recorded emission images yielded the electric 
field strength with errors within 6%. Pustelny measured electric fields up to 1.3 kV/mm 
based on the emission of a fiber-coupled ZnS:Cu cell. The accuracy was within ±1% above 
1 kV/mm and a few percent below [366]. An InP multiple quantum well waveguide act￾ing as an electro-absorber with electric field dependent optical attenuation was reported 
by Heinzelmann et al. [368]. The device was designed for broadband operation up to the 
microwave regime.
FIGURE 17.2 (a) Fiber cantilever electric field sensor with in-fiber Fabry-Pérot cavity and electri￾cally charged polyimide (PI) tubing; (b) sketch of space charges in PI tubing; (c) scheme of vibrating 
sensor in an ac electric field. (Adapted from [364].)Further Electric Field and Voltage Sensors ◾ 247
17.5 STARK EFFECT-BASED ELECTRIC FIELD MEASUREMENT
The Stark effect, named after the German physicist Johannes Stark, describes the shift￾ing and splitting of atomic and molecular energy levels in an applied electric field, which 
leads to modifications of the dispersion and absorption spectra of the medium. Reports on 
electric field measurements based on the Stark effect are rare. Höjer et al. reported spatially 
resolved field measurement in SF6-gas-insulated high voltage components based on the 
Stark effect [369]. In their experiments, they added ammonia (NH3) as a trace gas to the 
insulating SF6-gas and probed with a CO2 laser the strong field-induced NH3 absorption 
changes around 9.5 mm, thus achieving a lateral spatial resolution of 1 mm and a field 
resolution of 0.25 kV/cm at fields up to 45 kV/cm.
17.6 ELECTRIC FIELD-INDUCED SECOND HARMONIC 
GENERATION
Electric field-induced second harmonic generation (EFISHG) is a third-order optical non￾linearity, which generates in the presence of a dc (or low frequency) electric field E(dc) sec￾ond harmonic light of frequency 2ϖ from optical fields at a fundamental frequency ϖ. 
According to eq. (13.2), the induced polarization of the material at frequency 2ϖ is
( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ϖ χ ϖ ϖϖ ϖ ϖ ∝ ( ) ( ) 3 dc 2 2 ;0, , , Pi ijkl EE E j k l (17.2)
where (dc) Ej is the external electric field, and Ek, l
(ϖ) are optical fields at frequency ϖ. The 
intensity of the second harmonic is proportional to the square of the polarization:
( ϖ ϖ ) ∝ ( )
2
2 2. i I P (17.3)
Efficient EFISHG requires high electric field strengths, typically above 1 kV/mm, and short 
optical pulses and has mostly been used for scientific studies, e.g., to measure fields in 
semiconductor quantum wells [370], piezoelectric fields in semiconductors [371], fields in 
plasma engineering [372], or 3D fields in liquid crystals [373], to name a few examples.
17.7 HYBRID VOLTAGE TRANSDUCERS
Hybrid voltage transformers utilize, like the hybrid current transformers of Chapter 9, 
conventional techniques to first convert a high voltage into an electric signal. Low power 
electronics then encode that signal into an optical signal and transmit it via an optical 
fiber ground. Werneck et al. have developed combined hybrid voltage and current trans￾ducers for 13.8 kV medium voltage distribution lines with currents up to 800 A [374]. The 
clamp-on type transducers can be mounted on live power lines. Resistors on a printed 
circuited board inside an insulator convert the voltage between two electric phases into 
a small electrical current. A battery-powered transmitter converts that current together 
with the signal from an inductive current probe into a pulse-frequency-encoded signal. 248 ◾ Optical Fiber Current and Voltage Sensors
The encoded signal controls an 860-nm LED for transmission to ground via a multimode 
fiber cable. The reported accuracy is within ±2.5% for the voltage transducer and ±1.5% for 
the current transducer.
17.8 NON-OPTICAL NON-CONVENTIONAL SENSORS
Besides optical electric field and voltage sensors, a variety of non-conventional electric 
sensors have been developed for MV and HV power line monitoring. Typically, the devices 
are not meant for metering or relaying but are economic means for grid supervision. 
Besides voltage, they also often monitor current, temperature, and other parameters. Line￾mounted sensors capacitively extract a signal representing the electric field near the line 
and transmit the signal wirelessly to a base station [375], while harvesting the required 
energy from the power line. Some sensor types utilize a surface acoustic wave (SAW) tag 
and radio frequency readout (RFID) of a pulse position modulated (PPM) signal [376, 377]. 
Others have developed ground-based field sensor arrays that estimate power line voltages 
from the electric fields beneath the lines; see, for example, [378]. These topics are beyond 
the scope of this book, however, and interested readers are referred to the extensive litera￾ture on the matter.
FURTHER READING
Selected topics of optical electric field and voltage sensing have been reviewed in [343, 
379–385].249
References
1. Y. R. Shen, The Principles of Nonlinear Optics (John Wiley and Sons, 1984), Chap. 4, pp. 53–57.
2. J. N. Nye, Physical Properties of Crystals (Oxford University Press, 1957, 1985).
3. A. Yariv, Quantum Electronics (John Wiley and Sons, 1975), Chap. 14.
4. L. Duvillaret, S. Rialland, and J.-L. Coutaz, “Electro-optic sensors for electric field measure￾ments. II. Choice of the crystals and complete optimization of their orientation,” J. Opt. Soc. 
Am. B 19, 2704–2715 (2002).
5. N. W. Ashroft and N. D. Mermin, Solid State Physics (Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1976), Chap. 5.
6. K. Bohnert and J. Nehring, “Method and device for the optical determination of a physical 
quantity,” U.S. Patent 5,715,058 (1998).
7. S. Namba, “Electro-Optical Effect of Zincblende,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. 51, 76–79 (1961).
8. C. Li and T. Yoshino, “Simultaneous measurement of current and voltage by use of one bismuth 
germanate crystal,” Appl. Opt. 41, 5391–5397 (2002).
9. Q. Chen, M. Tani, Z. Jiang, and X.-C. Zhang, “Electro-optic transceivers for terahertz-wave 
applications,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 18, 823–831 (2001).
10. L. Duvillaret, S. Rialland, and J. L. Coutaz, “Electro-optic sensors for electric field measure￾ments I. Theoretical comparison among different modulation techniques,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. B
19, 2692–2703 (2002).
11. A. J. Vickers, R. Tesser, R. Dudley, and M. A. Hassan, “Fabry-Perot enhancement electro-optic 
sampling,” Opt. Quantum Electron. 29, 661–669 (1997).
12. C. H. Bulmer, W. K. Burns, and R. P. Moeller, “Linear interferometric waveguide modulator for 
electromagnetic-field detection,” Opt. Lett. 5, 176–178 (1980).
13. K. S. Lee, “Electrooptic voltage sensor: birefringence effects and compensation methods,” Appl. 
Opt. 29, 4453–4461 (1990).
14. G. A. Massey, D. C. Erickson, and R. A. Kadlec, “Electromagnetic field components: their mea￾surement using linear electrooptic and magnetooptic effects,” Appl. Opt. 14, 2712–2719 (1975).
15. J. A. Osborn, “Demagnetizing factors of the general ellipsoid,” Phys. Rev. 67(11–12), 351–357 
(1945).
16. A. Garzarella and D. H. Wu, “Optimal crystal geometry and orientation in electric field sensing 
using electro-optic sensors,” Opt. Lett. 37, 2124–2126 (2012).
17. C. P. Yakymyshyn, M. A. Brubaker, P. M. Johnston, and C. Reinbold, “Manufacturing chal￾lenges of optical current and voltage sensors for utility applications,” Proc. SPIE 3201, Sensors 
and Controls for Advanced Manufacturing, 1998, doi: 10.1117/12.298003
18. G. Montemezzani, S. Pfändler, and P. Günter, “Electro-optic and photorefractive properties of 
Bi4Ge3O12 crystals in the ultraviolet spectral range,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 9, 1110–1117 (1992).
19. M. Kanoi, G. Takahashi, T. Sato, et al., “Optical voltage and current measuring system for elec￾tric power systems,” IEEE Trans. Power Deliv. PWRD-1, 91–97 (1986).250 ◾ References
20. I. J. Laurensse, C. G. A. Koreman, W. R. Rutgers, and A. H. van der Wey, “Applications for opti￾cal current and voltage sensors,” Sens. Actuat. A 17, 181–186 (1989).
21. A. H. Rose and G. W. Day, “Optical fiber voltage sensors for broad temperature ranges,” SPIE
1580, 95–103 (1992).
22. T. W. Cease, J. G. Driggans, and S. J. Weikel, “Optical voltage and current sensors used in a 
revenue metering system,” IEEE Trans. Power Deliv. 6(4), 1374–1379 (1991).
23. K. Kurosawa, S. Yoshida, E. Mori, G. Takahashi, and S. Saito, “Development of an optical instru￾ment transformer for DC voltage measurement,” IEEE Trans. Power Deliv. 8(4), 1721–1726 
(1993), doi: 10.1109/61.248279
24. O. Kamada and K. Kakishita, “Electro-optical effect of Bi4Ge3O12 crystals for optical voltage 
sensors,” Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 32, 4288–4291 (1993).
25. L. H. Christensen, “Design, construction, and test of a passive optical prototype high volt￾age instrument transformer,” IEEE Trans. Power Deliv. 10(3), 1332–1337 (1995), doi: 10.1109/
61.400913
26. J. C. Santos and K. Hidaka, “Optical high voltage measurement technique using Pockels device,” 
Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 1997, 36(Part 1, No. 4A), 2394–2398 (1997).
27. J. C. Santos, M. C. Taplamacioglu, and K. Hidaka, “Pockels high-voltage measurement system,” 
IEEE Trans. Power Deliv. 15(1), 8–13 (2000), doi: 10.1109/61.847221
28. C. Li, X. Cui, and T. Yoshino, “Optical electric-power sensor by use of one bismuth germanate 
crystal,” J. Lightwave Technol. 21(5), 1328–1333 (2003).
29. F. Pan, X. Xiao, Y. Xu, and S. Ren, “An optical AC voltage sensor based on the transverse Pockels 
effect,” Sensors 11, 6593–6602 (2011).
30. A. Kumada and K. Hidaka, “Directly high-voltage measuring system based on Pockels effect,” 
IEEE Trans. Power Deliv. 28(3), 1306–1313 (2013), doi: 10.1109/TPWRD.2013.2250315
31. K. Kyuma, S. Tai, M. Nunoshita, N. Mikami, and Y. Ida, “Fiber optic current and voltage sen￾sors using a Bi12GeO20 single crystal,” IEEE/OSA J. Lightwave Technol. 1(1), 93–97 (1983).
32. Y. Kuroda, Y. Abe, H. Kuwahara, and K. Yoshinaga, “Field test of fiber-optic voltage and current 
sensors applied to gas insulated substation,” Proc. SPIE 586, 30–37 (1986).
33. M. Norimatsu and M. Shirasaki, “Bi12SiO20 crystal application for voltage sensor in optical 
fibers,” Ferroelectrics 75, 189–196 (1987).
34. P. Lemaire and M. Georges, “Electro-optic coefficient measurements: correction of electric￾field inhomogeneities in the transverse configuration,” Opt. Lett. 17, 1411–1413 (1992).
35. P. Mihailovic, S. Petricevic, S. Stankovic, and J. Radunovic, “Temperature dependence of the 
Bi12GeO20 optical activity,” Opt. Mat. 30, 1079–1082 (2008).
36. S. Petricevic, P. Mihailovic, and J. Radunovic, “A miniature Pockels cell with novel electrode 
geometry,” Sensors 9, 5298–5307 (2009).
37. P. P. Chavez, F. Rahmatian, and N. A. F. Jaeger, “Accurate voltage measurement with electric 
field sampling using permittivity-shielding,” IEEE Trans. Power Deliv. 17(2), 362–368 (2002), 
doi: 10.1109/61.997900
38. F. Rahmatian, P. P. Chavez, and N. A. F. Jaeger, “230 kV optical voltage transducers using mul￾tiple electric field sensors,” IEEE Trans. Power Deliv. 17(2), 417–422 (2002), doi: 10.1109/61.
997909
39. Y. Hamasaki, H. Gotoh, M. Katoh, and S. Takeuchi, “OPSEF: an optical sensor for measure￾ment of high electric field intensity,” Electron. Lett. 16, 406–407 (1980).
40. Y. Hamasaki, T. Miyamoto, Y. Kuhara, et al., “Optical fiber sensor for the measurement of elec￾tric field intensity and voltage (OPSEF),” Fiber Integr. Opt. 3(4), 383–389 (1981).
41. Y. Kuhara, Y. Hamasaki, A. Kawakami, et al., “BSO/fibre-optic voltmeter with excellent tem￾perature stability,” Electron. Lett. 18, 1055–1056 (1982).
42. A. Cruden, Z. J. Richardson, J. R. McDonald, and I. Andonovic, “Optical crystal based devices 
for current and voltage measurement,” IEEE Trans. Power Deliv. 10(3), 1217–1223 (1995), doi: 
10.1109/61.400899References ◾ 251
43. J. Niewisch, P. Menke, P. Krammer, and T. Bosselmann, “Temperature drift compensation of 
a potential transformer using a BSO Pockels cell,” in Optical Fiber Sensors (Optica Publishing 
Group, 1996), paper We15.
44. A. Cruden, Z. J. Richardson, J. R. McDonald, I. Andonovic, W. Laycock, and A. Bennett, 
“Compact 132 kV combined optical voltage and current measurement system,” IEEE Trans. 
Instrum. Meas. 47(1) 219–223 (1998).
45. T. Mitsui, K. Hosoe, H. Usami, and S. Miyamoto, “Development of fiber-optic voltage sen￾sors and magnetic-field sensors,” IEEE Trans. Power Deliv. 2(1), 87–93 (1987), doi: 10.1109/
TPWRD.1987.4308077
46. P. A. Williams, A. H. Rose, K. S. Lee, D. C. Conrad, G. W. Day, and P. D. Hale, “Optical, thermo￾optic, electro-optic, and photoelastic properties of bismuth germanate (Bi4Ge3O12),” Appl. 
Opt. 35(19), 3562–3569 (1996).
47. J. C. Brice, The Growth of Crystals from the Melt (Wiley, 1965).
48. Y. A. Borovlev, N. V. Ivannikova, V. N. Shlegel, Y. V. Vasiliev, and V. A. Gusev, “Progress in 
growth of large sized BGO crystals by the low-thermal-gradient Czochralski technique,” 
J. Cryst. Growth 229(1–4), 305–311 (2001).
49. V. N. Filippov, A. N. Starodumov, Y. O. Barmenkov, and V. V. Makarov, “Fiber-optic voltage 
sensor based on a Bi12TiO20 crystal,” Appl. Opt. 39(9), 1389–1393 (2000).
50. V. N. Filippov, A. N. Starodumov, V. P. Minkovich, and F. G. P. Lecona, “Fiber sensor for simul￾taneous measurement of voltage and temperature,” IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett. 12(11), 1543–
1545 (2000), doi: 10.1109/68.887742
51. F. Peña-Lecona, J. F. Mosiño, V. N. Filippov, et al., “An electro-optic fibre sensor with double 
pass configuration for measuring high ac voltage,” Meas. Sci. Technol. 15(6), 1129–1132 (2004).
52. S. R. M. Robertson and A. J. Rogers, “Measurement of DC electric fields using the electro-optic 
effect,” IEE Proc. 132, 195–198 (1985).
53. Y. J. Rao, H. Gnewuch, C. N. Pannell, and D. A. Jackson, “Electro-optic electric field sensor 
based on periodically poled LiNbO3,” Electron. Lett. 35(7), 596–597 (1999).
54. H. Hamada, “Investigation of the beam dependence of a fiber-optic voltage sensor by use of a 
LiNbO3 crystal,” JOSA B 18(4), 444–456 (2001).
55. M. Passard, C. Barthod, M. Fortin, C. Galez, and J. Bouillot, “Design and optimization of a 
low-frequency electric field sensor using Pockels effect,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 50(5), 
1053–1058, (2001), doi: 10.1109/19.963157
56. C. Li, X. Cui, and T. Yoshino, “Measurement of AC electric power based on dual transverse 
Pockels effect,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 50(5), 1375–1380 (2001).
57. Y. Li, C. Li, and T. Yoshino, “Optical electric-power-sensing system using Faraday and Pockels 
cells,” Appl. Opt. 40, 5738–5741 (2001).
58. C. Li and T. Yoshino, “Optical voltage sensor based on electrooptic crystal multiplier,” 
J. Lightwave Technol. 20(5), 843–849 (2002), doi: 10.1109/JLT.2002.1007938
59. A. Garzarella, S. B. Qadri, D. H. Wu, and R. J. Hinton, “Responsivity optimization and stabiliza￾tion in electro-optic field sensors,” Appl. Opt. 46, 6636–6640 (2007).
60. T. Sawa, K. Kurosawa, T. Kaminishi, and T. Yokota, “Development of optical instrument trans￾formers,” IEEE Trans. Power Deliv. 5(2), 884–891 (1990), doi: 10.1109/61.53098
61. H. M. Hertz and P. Thomsen, “Optical wideband high-voltage measurement system,” Rev. 
Scient. Instrum. 58(9), 1660 (1987).
62. T. S. Robinson, F. Consoli, S. Giltrap, et al., “Low-noise time-resolved optical sensing of elec￾tromagnetic pulses from petawatt laser-matter interactions,” Scient. Rep. 7, 983 (2017), doi: 
10.1038/s41598-017-01063-1
63. A. J. Rogers, “The electrogyration effect in crystalline quartz,” Proc. R. Soc. Lond. Ser. A 353, 
177–192 (1977).
64. E. Ballik and D. Liu. “Measurement of high-voltage pulses employing a quartz Pockels cell,” 
IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 19(7), 1166–1168 (1983).252 ◾ References
65. W. Epping, A. Kuchler, and A. Schwab, “Elektrische Feldstärkemessung mit doppelbrechenden 
und optisch aktiven Kristallen,” Arch. Elektrotech. 67, 329–339 (1984).
66. A. Garzarella, S. B. Qadri, T. J. Wieting, and D. H. Wu, “Piezo-induced sensitivity enhance￾ments in electro-optic field sensors,” J. Appl. Phys. 98, 043113 (2005).
67. J. Kobayashi, T. Asahi, and S. Takahashi, “Simultaneous measurements of electrogyration and 
electrooptic effects of α-quartz,” Ferroelectrics 75, 139–152 (1987).
68. V. Ivanov, M. Levichev, Y. Nozdrin, and M. Novikov, “Temperature dependence of electro-optic 
effect and natural linear birefringence in quartz measured by low-coherence interferometry,” 
Appl. Opt. 54(33), 9911–9918 (2015).
69. V. Ivanov, A. Stepanov, V. Alenkov, and O. Buzanov, “Langasites as electro-optic materials for 
high-voltage optical sensors,” Opt. Mater. Express 7, 3366–3376 (2017).
70. S. Chadderdon, R. Gibson, R. H. Selfridge, et al., “Electric-field sensors utilizing coupling 
between a D-fiber and an electro-optic polymer slab,” Appl. Opt. 50(20), 3505–3512 (2011).
71. M. J. Weber, Handbook of Optical Materials (CRC Press, 2003).
72. R. E. Aldrich, S. L. Hou, and M. L. Harvill, “Electrical and optical properties of Bi12SiO20,” J. 
Appl. Phys. 42(1) 493–494 (1971).
73. J. C. Brice, “Crystals for quartz resonators,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 57(1), 105–146 (1985).
74. K. Bohnert, A. Frank, G. M. Müller, L. Yang, M. Lenner, P. Gabus, X. Gu, and S. V. Marchese, 
“Fiber optic current and voltage sensors for electric power transmission systems,” in Fiber Optic 
Sensors and Applications XV, A. Mendez, C. S. Baldwin, H. H. Du, Eds., Proc. of SPIE, vol. 
10654, 1065402, 2018, doi: 10.1117/12.2303945
75. G. A. Massey, J. C. Johnson, and D. C. Erickson, “Laser sensing of electric and magnetic fields 
for power transmission applications,” SPIE 88, 91–96 (1976).
76. D. C. Erickson, “The use of fiber optics for communications, measurement and control within 
high voltage substations,” IEEE Trans. Power Appar. Syst., PAS-99 (3), 1057–1065 (1980), doi: 
10.1109/TPAS.1980.319736
77. O. Tonnesen, F. Birck, T. Hansen, et al., “A new 132 kV SF6 insulated electrooptic instrument 
transformer,” in Proc. EPRI Conference on Optical Sensing in Utility Applications, 1991.
78. N. A. F. Jaeger and L. Young, “High-voltage sensor employing an integrated optics Mach￾Zehnder interferometer in conjunction with a capacitive divider,” J. Lightwave Technol. 7(2), 
229–235 (1989), doi: 10.1109/50.17760
79. H. Y. Yang, “Construction principle and application test of 220kV self-healing optical voltage 
sensor,” Appl. Mech. Mater. 511–512, 116–119 (2014), doi: 10.4028/www.scientific.net/amm.
511-512.116
80. S. Kobayashi, et al., “Development and field test evaluation of optical current and voltage 
transformers for gas insulated switchgear,” IEEE Trans. Power Deliv. 7(2), 815–821 (1992), doi: 
10.1109/61.127085
81. K. Bohnert, H. Brändle, and G. Frosio, “Field test of interferometric optical fiber high-voltage 
and current sensors,” in 10th Int. Conf. on Optical Fibre Sensors, B. Culshaw, J. D. C. Jones, Eds., 
Proc. SPIE 2360, pp. 16–19, 1994.
82. K. Bohnert and J. Nehring, “Fiber-optic sensing of voltages by line integration of the electric 
field,” Opt. Lett. 14, 290–292 (1989).
83. K. Bohnert, M. Ingold, and J. Kostovic, “Fiber-optic voltage sensor for SF6 gas-insulated high￾voltage switchgear,” Appl. Opt. 38, 1926–1933 (1999).
84. M. Ohtsuka and S. Teruo, “Influence of optical rotary power on optical voltage sensor using 
BGO crystal,” Electron. Commun. Jpn. (Part II: Electronics) 77(5), 21–31 (1994).
85. A. Garzarella, S. B. Qadri, T. J. Wieting, and D. H. Wu, “The effects of photorefraction on 
electro-optic field sensors,” J. Appl. Phys. 97, 113108 (2005).
86. K. S. Lee, “New compensation method for bulk optical sensors with multiple birefringences,” 
Appl. Opt. 28, 2001–2011 (1989).References ◾ 253
87. L. Li, W. Zhang, H. Li, and R. Pan, “Linear birefringence-free optical voltage sensor based on 
dual-crystal structure,” Appl. Opt. 52, 8706–8713 (2013).
88. T. Sasano, “Laser CT and laser PD for EHV power transmission lines,” Electr. Eng. Jpn. 93, 
91–98 (1973).
89. A. J. Rogers, “Optical measurement of current and voltage on optical power systems,” Electr. 
Power Appl. 2(4), 120–124 (1979).
90. H. D. Schlemper, D. Füchsle, G. Ramm, and J. Widmer, “Test and application of non-conventional 
multi-purpose voltage and current transducers,” in CIGRE Conference 2004, paper A3-108.
91. K. Bohnert, P. Gabus, H. Brändle, and A. Khan, “Fiber-optic current and voltage sensors for 
high-voltage substations,” in Proc. 16th Int. Conference on Optical Fiber Sensors, 2003, pp. 
752–755.
92. R. C. Miller, “Method of deriving an AC waveform from two phase shifted electrical signals,” 
U.S. Patent 5,001,419, Mar., 1991.
93. O. Steiger, S. V. Marchese, J. Pascal, K. Bohnert, and S. Wildermuth, “Signal processing for 
electro-optic voltage sensor,” in Proceedings IEEE Sensors, 2013, pp. 1932–1936, doi: 10.1109/
ICSENS.2013.6688615
94. Standard of the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), IEC 60044-7: Instrument 
transformers, Part 7: Electronic voltage transformers (1999); IEC 61869; Instrument trans￾formers—Part 11: Additional requirements for low-power passive voltage transformers. IEC: 
Geneva, Switzerland, 2017.
95. S. V. Marchese, K. Bohnert, S. Wildermuth, J. L. M. van Mechelen, O. Steiger, L. C. Rodoni, G. 
Eriksson, J. Czyzewski, “Electro optic voltage sensor based on BGO for air insulated high volt￾age substations,” in Proceedings IEEE Photonics Conference 2013, paper ThA3.2, doi: 10.1109/
IPCon.2013.6656441
96. S. Wildermuth, K. Bohnert, N. Koch, et al., “High voltage sensor with axially overlapping elec￾trodes,” U.S. patent 9291650B2, priority date Apr. 25, 2013.
97. J. S. Graham, “High voltage bushings,” in High Voltage Engineering and Testing, H. M. Ryan, Ed. 
(Institution of Electrical Engineers, London, 2001), pp. 467–492.
98. Q. Tan, Q. Xu, L. Chen, and Y. Huang, “A new method to improve internal electric field distribu￾tions of Pockels OVS,” IEEE Sens. J. 17(13), 4115–4121 (2017), doi: 10.1109/JSEN.2017.2703600
99. Z. Fu, Q. Xu, X. Cai, and W. He, “Defects and improvements of Pockels transducer voltage seg￾mentation,” IEEE Sens. J. 19(1), 138–143 (2019), doi: 10.1109/JSEN.2018.2876500
100. N. A. F. Jaeger, F. Rahmatian, P. P. Chavez, et al., “Method and apparatus for measuring voltage 
using electric field sensors,” U.S. patent 6,252, 388 B1, priority date Dec. 4, 1998.
101. P. P. Chavez, N. A. F. Jaeger, and F. Rahmatian, “Accurate voltage measurement by the quadrature 
method,” IEEE Trans. Power Deliv. 18(1), 14–19, (2003), doi: 10.1109/TPWRD.2002.801428
102. P. P. Chavez, F. Rahmatian, N. A. F. Jaeger, and C. P. Yakymyshyn, “Voltage sensor,” U.S. patent 
6380725B1, Apr. 30, 2002.
103. F. Rahmatian, P. P. Chavez, and N. A. F. Jaeger, “Wide-band 138 kV distributed-sensor optical 
voltage transducer: study of accuracy under pollution and other field disturbances,” in 2001 
IEEE PES Power Summer Meeting, 2001, vol. 1, pp. 156–161.
104. F. Rahmatian, P. P. Chavez, N. A. F. Jaeger, “Resistively shielded optical voltage transducer,” 
in 2001 IEEE/PES Transmission and Distribution Conference and Exposition, 2001, vol. 1, pp. 
117–121.
105. P. P. Chavez, F. Rahmatian, N. A. F. Jaeger, “230 kV optical voltage transducer using a dis￾tributed optical electric field sensor system,” in 2001 IEEE/PES Transmission and Distribution 
Conference and Exposition, 2001, vol. 1, pp. 131–135.
106. F. Rahmatian, P. P. Chavez, N. A. F. Jaeger, “138 kV and 345 kV wide-band SF6-free optical 
voltage transducers,” in 2002 IEEE Power Engineering Society Winter Meeting, 2002, vol. 2, pp. 
1472–1477.254 ◾ References
107. F. Rahmatian and N. A. F. Jaeger, “High accuracy optical electric field and voltage sensors,” in 
Technical Digest of 15th Optical Fiber Sensors Conference 2002, pp. 411–414 (paper ThD3).
108. F. Rahmatian and P. P. Chavez, “SF6-free 550 kV combined optical voltage and current trans￾ducer system,” in 2003 IEEE PES Transmission and Distribution Conference and Exposition 
(IEEE Cat. No. 03CH37495), 2003, vol. 1, pp. 379–382.
109. F. Rahmatian, G. Polovick, B. Hughes, and V. Aresteanu, “Field experience with high-voltage 
combined optical voltage and current transducers,” in CIGRE Conference 2004, paper A3-111.
110. X. Gu, S. Marchese, K. Bohnert, and U. Riechert, “Development of an electro-optic voltage 
sensor for high voltage direct current applications,” in 26th International Conference on Optical 
Fiber Sensors, OSA Technical Digest (Optica Publishing Group, 2018), paper TuE35.
111. M. Bordovsky, F. Cecelja, and W. Balachandran, “Comparative study of cubic crystals perfor￾mance in bulk electro-optic sensor for DC and extra-low-frequency measurements,” Proc. SPIE
2389, 166–173 (1999).
112. F. Cecelja, M. Bordovsky, and W. Balachandran, “Lithium niobate sensor for measurement of 
DC electric fields,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 50(2), 465–469 (2001), doi: 10.1109/19.918167
113. F. Cecelja, M. Bordovsky, and W. Balachandran, “Electro-optic sensor for measurement of DC 
fields in the presence of space charge,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 51(2), 282–286 (2002), doi: 
10.1109/19.997825
114. F. Cecelja, W. Balachandran, and M. Bordowski, “Validation of electro-optic sensors for mea￾surement of DC fields in the presence of space charge,” Measurement 40, 450–458 (2007).
115. J. O. Grasdijk, X. F. Bai, I. Engin, et al., “Electro-optic sensor for static fields,” Appl. Phys. B 125, 
212 (2019), doi: 10.1007/s00340-019-7326-5
116. K. Hidaka and H. Fujita, “A new method of electric field measurements in corona discharge 
using Pockels device,” J. Appl. Phys. 53(9), 5999–6003 (1982).
117. Y. Li, L. Gao, J. Wan, and J. Liu, “Optical DC electric field sensing based on the Pockels effect 
using bismuth germanate crystals,” Appl. Opt. 59, 6237–6244 (2020).
118. J. Zhang and F. Chen, “An electro-optic sensor for measurement of intensive DC electric field,” 
IEEE Photonics J. 14(2), 1–7 (2022).
119. C. H. Bulmer, “Sensitive, highly linear lithium niobate interferometers for electromagnetic field 
sensing,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 53, 2368–2370 (1988), doi: 10.1063/1.100232
120. C. H. Bulmer, W. K. Burns, and A. S. Greenblatt, “Phase tuning by laser ablation of LiNbO3
interferometric modulators to optimum linearity,” IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett. 3(6), 510–512 
(1991), doi: 10.1109/68.91017
121. A. S. Greenblatt, C. H. Bulmer, R. P. Moeller, and W. K. Burns, “Thermal stability of bias point 
of packaged linear modulators in lithium niobate,” J. Lightwave Technol. 13(12), 2314–2319 
(1995), doi: 10.1109/50.475569
122. N. Kuwabara, K. Tajima, R. Kobayashi, and F. Amemiya, “Development and analysis of elec￾tric field sensor using LiNbO3 optical modulator,” IEEE Trans. Electromagn. Compat. 34(4), 
391–396 (1992), doi: 10.1109/15.179271
123. K. Tajima, R. Kobayyashi, N. Kuwabara, and M. Tokuda, “Development of optical isotropic 
E-field sensor operating more than 10 GHz using Mach-Zehnder interferometer,” IEICE Trans. 
Electron. E85-C, 961–967 (2002).
124. S. A. Kingsley and S. Sriram. “Parallel-plate integrated optic high-voltage sensor,” Electron. Lett.
31(13), 1096–1097 (1995).
125. M. Yamada, M. Saitoh, and H. Ooki, “Electric-field induced cylindrical lens, switching and 
deflection devices composed of the inverted domains in LiNbO3 crystals,” Appl. Phys. Lett.
69(24), 3659–3661 (1996).
126. D. H. Naghski, J. T. Boyd, H. E. Jackson, et al., “An integrated photonic Mach-Zehnder inter￾ferometer with no electrodes for sensing electric fields,” J. Lightwave Technol. 12(6), 1092–1098 
(1994), doi: 10.1109/50.296204References ◾ 255
127. N. A. F. Jaeger and L. Huang, “Push-pull integrated-optics Mach-Zehnder interferometer with 
domain inversion in one branch,” Opt. Lett. 20, 288–290 (1995).
128. N. A. F. Jaeger and L. Young, “Asymmetric slab and strip-loaded integrated optic devices for the 
measurement of large electric fields,” J. Lightwave Technol. 5(6), 745–750 (1987).
129. E. Bonek, D. Hornbachner, E. Riedl-Bratengeyer, W. Hadrian, and R. Jobst, “Electro-optic ELF 
field sensor,” Electron. Lett. 21(28), 1994–1995 (1992).
130. N. A. F. Jaeger and F. Rahmatian, “Integrated optics Pockels cell high-voltage sensor,” IEEE 
Trans. Power Deliv. 10(1), 127–134 (1995).
131. T. Takahashi, K. Hidaka, and T. Kouno, “New optical-waveguide pockels sensor for measuring 
electric fields,” Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 35, 767–771 (1996).
132. O. Ogawa, T. Sowa, and S. Ichizono, “A guided-wave optical electric field sensor with improved 
temperature stability,” J. Lightwave Technol. 17(5), 823–830 (1999), doi: 10.1109/50.762899
133. Z. Li, H. Yuan, Y. Cui, Z. Ding, and L. Zhao, “Measurement of distorted power-frequency elec￾tric field with integrated optical sensor,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 68(4), 1132–1139 (2019), 
doi: 10.1109/TIM.2018.2864019
134. C. Gutierrez-Martinez and J. Santos-Aguilar, “Electric field sensing scheme based on matched 
LiNbO3 electro-optic retarders,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 57(7), 1362–1368 (2008), doi: 
10.1109/TIM.2008.917174
135. T. Meier, C. Kostrzewa, K. Petermann, and B. Schuppert, “Integrated optical E-field probes 
with segmented modulator electrodes,” J. Lightwave Technol. 12(8), 1497–1503 (1994), doi: 
10.1109/50.317540
136. B. Sun, F. Chen, K. Chen, Z. Hu, and Y. Cao, “Integrated optical electric field sensor from 
10 kHz to 18 GHz,” IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett. 24(13), 1106–1108 (2012), doi: 10.1109/
LPT.2012.2195780
137. M. W. Howerton, C. H. Bulmer, and W. K. Burns, “Linear 1×2 directional coupler for electro￾magnetic field detection,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 52(22), 1850–1852 (1988).
138. H. Jung, “Electro-optic electric-field sensors utilizing Ti:LiNbO3 1×2 directional coupler with 
dipole antennas,” Opt. Eng. 52(6), 064402 (2013).
139. C. Gutierrez-Martinez and R. Ricardez-Trejo, “Remotely biasing the electro-optic response of 
an electric field sensing-detection system using LiNbO3 asymmetric Mach-Zehnder optical 
retarders,” Appl. Opt. 57(32), 9677–9682 (2018).
140. C. Gutierrez-Martinez, G. Trinidad-Garcia, and J. Rodriguez-Asomoza, “Electric field sens￾ing system using coherence modulation of light,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 51(5), 985–989 
(2002), doi: 10.1109/TIM.2002.806017
141. R. Zeng, B. Wang, Z. Yu, and W. Chen, “Design and application of an integrated electro-optic 
sensor for intensive electric field measurement,” IEEE Trans. Dielectr. Electr. Insul. 18(1), 312–
319 (2011), doi: 10.1109/TDEI.2011.5704523
142. J. Zhang, F. Chen, B. Sun, K. Chen, and C. Li, “3D integrated optical E-field sensor for light￾ning electromagnetic impulse measurement,” IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett. 26(23), 2353–2356 
(2014), doi: 10.1109/LPT.2014.2355209
143. J. Zhang, C. Luo, and Z. Zhao, “Design and application of integrated optics sensor for measure￾ment of intense pulsed electric field,” J. Lightwave Technol. 37(4), 1440–1448 (2019).
144. H. Wang, C. Zhuang, R. Zeng, S. Xie, and J. He, “Transient voltage measurements for overhead 
transmission lines and substations by metal-free and contactless integrated electro-optic field 
sensors,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. 66(1), 571–579 (2019), doi: 10.1109/TIE.2018.2826455
145. L. Chen and R. M. Reano, “Compact electric field sensors based on indirect bonding of lithium 
niobate to silicon microrings,” Opt. Express 20, 4032–4038 (2012).
146. V. Calero, M.-A. Suarez, R. Salut, et al., “An ultra wideband-high spatial resolution-compact 
electric field sensor based on Lab-on-Fiber technology,” Scient. Rep. 9, 8058 (2019), doi: 
10.1038/s41598-019-44644-y256 ◾ References
147. D.-J. Lee and J. F. Whitaker, “An optical-fiber-scale electro-optic probe for minimally invasive 
high-frequency field sensing,” Opt. Express 16(26), 21587–21597 (2008).
148. D.-J. Lee and J. F. Whitaker, “Optimization of sideband modulation in optical-heterodyne￾downmixed electro-optic sensing,” Appl. Opt. 48(8), 1583–1590 (2009).
149. K. Sasagawa and M. Tsuchiya, “Low-noise and high-frequency resolution electrooptic sensing 
of RF near-fields using an external optical modulator,” J. Lightwave Technol. 26(10), 1242–1248 
(2008).
150. M. Bernier, G. Gaborit, L. Duvillaret, A. Paupert, and J.-L. Lasserre, “Electric field and tem￾perature measurement using ultra-wide bandwidth pigtailed electro-optic probes,” Appl. Opt.
47(13), 2470–2476 (2008).
151. H. Togo, N. Kukutsu, N. Shimizu, and T. Nagatsuma, “Sensitivity-stabilized fiber-mounted 
electrooptic probe for electric field mapping,” J. Lightwave Technol. 26(15), 2700–2705 (2008).
152. S. Hisatake and T. Nagatsuma, “Continuous-wave terahertz field imaging based on photonics￾based self-heterodyne electro-optic detection,” Opt. Lett. 38(13), 2307–2310 (2013).
153. S. M. Chandani, “Fiber-based probe for electrooptic sampling,” IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett.
18(12), 1290–1292 (2006).
154. D.-J. Lee, J.-Y. Kwon, N.-W. Kang, and J. F. Whitaker, “Calibrated 100-dB-dynamic-range 
electro-optic probe for high-power microwave applications,” Opt. Express 19(15), 14437–14450 
(2011).
155. W.-B. Lee, S.-U. Baek, and S.-S. Lee, “Highly sensitive electro-optic probe incorporating an 
ultra-high Q-factor LiNbO3 etalon,” Appl. Opt. 57(28), 8343–8349 (2018).
156. S. Kim, Y.-P. Hong, and D.-J. Lee, “Polarization insensitive electro-optic probe using 
birefringence-free interferometric modulation,” Opt. Lett. 44(11), 2895–2898 (2019).
157. V. Calero, et al., “Towards highly reliable, precise and reproducible fabrication of photonic 
crystal slabs on lithium niobate,” J. Lightwave Technol. 37, 698–703 (2019).
158. F. Consoli, R. De Angelis, L. Duvillaret, et al., “Time-resolved absolute measurements by 
electro-optic effect of giant electromagnetic pulses due to laser-plasma interaction in nanosec￾ond regime,” Scient. Rep. 6, 27889 (2016), doi: 10.1038/srep27889
159. K. Yang, L. P. B. Katehi, and J. F. Whitaker, “Electro-optic field mapping system utilizing exter￾nal gallium arsenide probes,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 77(4), 486–488 (2000).
160. W.-K. Kuo, Y.-T. Huang, and S.-L. Huang, “Three-dimensional electric-field vector measure￾ment with an electro-optic sensing technique,” Opt. Lett. 24(22), 1546–1548 (1999).
161. G. Gaborit, J.-L. Coutaz, and L. Duvillaret, “Vectorial electric field measurement using isotropic 
electro-optic crystals,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 90, 241118 (2007), doi: https://doi.org/10.1063/1.2748364
162. G. Gaborit et al., “Single shot and vectorial characterization of intense electric field in vari￾ous environments with pigtailed electrooptic probe,” IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci. 42(5), 1265–1273 
(2014), doi: 10.1109/TPS.2014.2301023
163. E. Suzuki, S. Arakawa, M. Takahashi, et al., “Visualization of Poynting vectors by using electro￾optic probes for electromagnetic fields,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 57(5), 1014–1022 (2008).
164. C.-C. Chen and J. F. Whitaker, “An optically-interrogated microwave-Poynting-vector sensor 
using cadmium manganese telluride,” Opt. Express 18(12), 12239–12248 (2010).
165. D. C. Wunsch and A. Erteza, “Kerr cell measuring system for high voltage pulses,” Rev. Sci. 
Instrum. 35(7), 816–820 (1964).
166. E. C. Cassidy, H. N. Cones, and S. R. Booker, “Development and evaluation of electro-optical 
high-voltage pulse measurement techniques,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 19(4), 395–402 
(1970).
167. R. E. Hebner and E. C. Cassidy, “Measurement of 60 Hz voltages using the Kerr effect,” Rev. Sci. 
Instrum. 43(12), 1839–1841 (1972).
168. R. E. Hebner, E. C. Cassidy, and J. E. Jones, “Improved techniques for the measurement of high￾voltage impulses using the electrooptic Kerr effect,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 24(4), 361–366 
(1975), doi: 10.1109/TIM.1975.4314460References ◾ 257
169. R. E. Hebner, R. A. Malewski, and E. C. Cassidy, “Optical methods of electrical measurements 
at high voltage levels,” Proc. IEEE 65(11), 1524–1548 (1977).
170. A. Törne and U. Gäfvert, “Measurement of the electric field in transformer oil using Kerr tech￾nique with optical and electrical modulation,” Proc. ICPADM 1, 61–64 (1985).
171. R. Shimizu, M. Matsuoka, K. Kato, et al., “Development of Kerr electro-optic 3-d electric field 
measuring technique and its experimental verification,” IEEE Trans. Dielect. Electr. Insul. 3(2), 
191–196 (1996), doi: 10.1109/94.486769
172. A. Helgeson and M. Zahn, “Kerr electro-optic measurements of space charge effects in high 
voltage pulsed propylene carbonate using parallel-plate electrodes,” IEEE Trans. Dielect. Electr. 
Insul. 9(5), 838–844 (2002).
173. T. Kamiya, S. Matsuoka, A. Kumada, and K. Hidaka, “High voltage measuring apparatus based 
on Kerr effect in gas,” IEEE Trans. Dielect. Electr. Insul. 22(2), 760–765 (2015), doi: 10.1109/
TDEI.2015.7076773
174. C. Gao, B. Qi, Y. Gao, Z. Zhu, and C. Li, “Kerr electro-optic sensor for electric field in large￾scale oil–pressboard insulation structure,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 68(10), 3626–3634 
(2019), doi: 10.1109/TIM.2018.2881803
175. A. J. Rogers, “Polarization-optical time domain reflectometry: a technique for the measure￾ment of field distributions,” Appl. Opt. 20(6), 1060–1074 (1981).
176. C. Han, F. Lv, C. Sun, and H. Ding, “Silica microwire-based interferometric electric field sen￾sor,” Opt. Lett. 40, 3683–3686 (2015).
177. J. Hou, H. Ding, B. Wei, et al., “Microfiber knot resonator based electric field sensor,” Instrum. 
Sci. Technol. 45(3), 259–267 (2017).
178. E. Hecht and A. Zajac, Optics (Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, 1974).
179. N. F. Borrelli, B. G. Aitken, M. A. Newhouse, and D. W. Hall, “Electric-field-induced birefrin￾gence properties of high-refractive-index glasses exhibiting large Kerr nonlinearities,” J. Appl. 
Phys. 70(5), 2774–2779 (1991).
180. M. C. Farries and A. J. Rogers, “Temperature dependence of the Kerr effect in a silica optical 
fibre,” Electron. Lett. 19(21), 890–891 (1983).
181. K. Bohnert, “Optical voltage sensor,” European patent EP2095135B1, priority date Dec. 22, 
2006.
182. S. Wildermuth, K. Bohnert, and H. Brändle, “Interrogation of birefringent fiber sensors using 
non-reciprocal phase modulation,” in 20th International Conference on Optical Fibre Sensors, 
Proc. SPIE 7503, 2009, pp. 598–601.
183. S. Wildermuth, K. Bohnert, and H. Brändle, “Interrogation of a birefringent fiber sensor by 
nonreciprocal phase modulation,” IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett. 22(18), 1388–1390 (2010), doi: 
10.1109/LPT.2010.2060321
184. C. Zhang, X. Feng, S. Liang, C. Zhang, and C. Li, “Quasi-reciprocal reflective optical volt￾age sensor based on Pockels effect with digital closed-loop detection technique,” Opt. Comm.
283(20), 3878–3883 (2010).
185. X. Feng, L. Li, X. Wang, C. Zhang, J. Yu, and C. Li, “Birefringence elimination of bismuth germ￾anate crystal in quasi-reciprocal reflective optical voltage sensor,” Appl. Opt. 52(8), 1676–1681 
(2013).
186. X. Feng, X. Wang, L. Li, et al., “Influences of imperfect polarization induced effects to the quasi￾reciprocal reflective optical voltage sensor,” J. Lightwave Technol. 31(16), 2777–2784 (2013), 
doi: 10.1109/JLT.2013.2272875
187. H. Li, L. Cui, Z. Lin, L. Li, R. Wang, and C. Zhang, “Signal detection for optical AC and DC 
voltage sensors based on Pockels effect,” IEEE Sens. J. 13(6), 2245–2252 (2013), doi: 10.1109/
JSEN.2013.2249581
188. H. Li, L. Bi, R. Wang, L. Li, and C. Zhang, “Design of closed-loop detection system for optical 
voltage sensors based on Pockels effect,” J. Lightwave Technol. 31(12), 1921–1928 (2013).258 ◾ References
189. H. Li, L. Cui, Z. Lin, L. Li, and C. Zhang, “An analysis on the optimization of closed-loop detec￾tion method for optical voltage sensor based on Pockels effect,” J. Lightwave Technol. 32(5), 
1006–1013 (2014), doi: 10.1109/JLT.2013.2296518
190. L. Liu, H. Li, Z. Fu, and L. Feng, “Analysis on the optimization of high-frequency performance 
for optical voltage sensors based on Pockels effect,” IEEE Sens. J. 17(15), 4826–4833 (2017), doi: 
10.1109/JSEN.2017.2700998
191. W. Deng, H. Li, C. Zhang, and P. Wang, “Optimization of detection accuracy of closed-loop 
optical voltage sensors based on Pockels effect,” Sensors 17, 1723 (2017), doi: 10.3390/s17081723
192. W. Chu, S. Heo, and M. Oh, “Polymeric integrated-optic bias chip for optical voltage transduc￾ers,” J. Lightwave Technol. 32(24), 4730–4733 (2014).
193. W. Chu, S. Kim, X. Wu, L. Wen, and M. Oh, “Optical voltage sensors based on integrated 
optical polarization-rotated reflection interferometry,” J. Lightwave Technol. 34(9), 2170–2174 
(2016), doi: 10.1109/JLT.2016.2527685
194. Y. Huang, Q. F. Xu, Q. Tan, and Z. Xu, “An OVT based on conoscopic interference and position 
sensitive detector,” IEEE Sens. J. 17(2), 340–346 (2017), doi: 10.1109/JSEN.2016.2629493
195. F. da Cruz Pereira, J. H. Galeti, R. T. Higuti, et al., “Real-time polarimetric optical high-voltage 
sensor using phase-controlled demodulation,” J. Lightwave Technol. 36, 3275–3283 (2018).
196. D. Wang and N. Xie, “An optical voltage sensor based on wedge interference,” IEEE Trans. 
Instrum. Meas. 67(1), 57–64 (2018), doi: 10.1109/TIM.2017.2756798
197. R. A. Myers, N. Mukherjee, and S. R. J. Brueck, “Large second-order nonlinearities in poled 
fused silica,” Opt. Lett. 16(22), 1732–1734 (1991).
198. T. Fujiwara, D. Wong, Y. Zhao, S. Fleming, S. Poole, and M. Sceats, “Electro-optic modulation 
in germanosilicate fibre with UV-excited poling,” Electron. Lett. 31(7), 573–575 (1995).
199. J. M. B. Pereira, A. R. Camara, F. Laurell, O. Tarasenko, and W. Margulis, “Linear electro-optical 
effect in silica fibers poled with ultraviolet lamp,” Opt. Express 27, 14893–14902 (2019).
200. P. G. Kazansky, A. Kamal, and P. St. J. Russell, “High second-order nonlinearities induced in 
lead silicate glass by electron-beam irradiation,” Opt. Lett. 18, 693–695 (1993).
201. J. M. B. Pereira, O. Tarasenko, Å. Claesson, F. Laurell, and W. Margulis, “Optical poling by 
means of electrical corona discharge,” Opt. Express 30, 20605–20613 (2022).
202. F. De Lucia, D. Huang, C. Corbari, N. Healy, and P. J. A. Sazio, “Optical fiber poling by induc￾tion: analysis by 2D numerical modeling,” Opt. Lett. 41, 1700–1703 (2016).
203. F. De Lucia and P. J. A. Sazio, “Optimized optical fiber poling configurations,” Opt. Mater.: X, 1, 
100016 (2019), doi: 10.1016/j.omx.2019.100016
204. S. C. Fleming and H. An, “Poled glasses and poled fibre devices,” J. Ceram. Soc. Jpn. 116(1358), 
1007–1023 (2008).
205. X.-C. Long, R. A. Myers, and S. R. J. Brueck, “The electro-optic effect in poled amorphous 
silica,” Opt. Lett. 19(22), 1819–1821 (1994).
206. P. G. Kazansky, L. Dong, and P. St. J. Russell, “High second-order nonlinearities in poled silicate 
fibers,” Opt. Lett. 19(10), 701–703 (1994).
207. T. Fujiwara, D. Wong, and S. Fleming, “Large electrooptic modulation in a thermally￾poled germanosilicate fiber,” IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett. 7(10), 1177–1179 (1995), doi: 
10.1109/68.466582
208. X.-C. Long, R. A. Myers, and S. R. J. Brueck, “Measurement of linear electro-optic effect in 
temperature/electric-field poled optical fibers,” Electron. Lett. 30(25), 2162–2163 (1994).
209. P. G. Kazansky, P. St. J. Russell, L. Dong, and C. N. Pannell, “Pockels effect in thermally poled 
silica optical fibres,” Electron. Lett. 31(1), 62–63 (1995).
210. X.-C. Long, R. A. Myers, and S. R. J. Brueck, “A poled electrooptic fiber,” IEEE Photonics. 
Technol. Lett. 8(2), 227–229 (1996).
211. W. Xu, P. Blazkiewicz, D. Wong, S. Fleming, and T. Ryan, “Specialty optical fibre for stabilis￾ing and enhancing electro-optic effect induced by poling,” Electron. Lett. 36(15), 1265–1266 
(2000).References ◾ 259
212. A. Michie, I. Bassett, and J. Haywood, “Electric field and voltage sensing using thermally poled 
silica fibre with a simple low coherence interferometer,” Meas. Sci. Technol. 17(5), 1229–1233 
(2006).
213. S. Bauer, “Poled polymers for sensors and photonic applications,” J. Appl. Phys. 80, 5531 (1996), 
doi: 10.1063/1.363604
214. D. J. Welker, J. Tostenrude, D. W. Garvey, et al., “Fabrication and characterization of single￾mode electro-optic polymer optical fiber,” Opt. Lett. 23, 1826–1828 (1998).
215. P. G. Kazansky and P. St. J. Russell, “Thermally poled glass: frozen-in electric field or oriented 
dipoles?” Opt. Commun. 110(5–6), 611–614 (1994).
216. T. G. Alley and S. R. J. Brueck, “Visualization of the nonlinear optical space-charge region of 
bulk thermally poled fused-silica glass,” Opt. Lett. 23, 1170–1172 (1998).
217. V. Pruneri, F. Samoggia, G. Bonfrate, P. G. Kazansky, and G. M. Yang, “Thermal poling of silica 
in air and under vacuum: the influence of charge transport on second harmonic generation,” 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 74(17), 2423–2425 (1999).
218. P. Blazkiewicz, W. Xu, D. Wong, and S. Fleming, “Mechanism for thermal poling in twin-hole 
silicate fibers,” JOSA B 19(4), 870–874 (2002).
219. P. G. Kazansky, A. R. Smith, P. S. J. Russell, G. M. Yang, and G. M. Sessler, “Thermally poled 
silica glass: laser induced pressure pulse probe of charge distribution,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 68(2), 
269–271 (1996).
220. D. Wong, W. Xu, S. Fleming, M. Janos, and K-M. Lo, “Frozen-in electrical field in thermally 
poled fibers,” Opt. Fiber Technol. 5(2), 235–241 (1999).
221. Y. Quiquempois, N. Godbout, and S. Lacroix, “Model of charge migration during thermal pol￾ing in silica glasses: evidence of a voltage threshold for the onset of a second-order nonlinear￾ity,” Phys. Rev. A 65, 043816-1–043816-14 (2002).
222. N. Myrén and W. Margulis, “Time evolution of frozen-in field during poling of fiber with alloy 
electrodes,” Opt. Express 13(9), 3438–3444 (2005).
223. H. An and S. Fleming, “Hindering effect of the core-cladding interface on the progression of 
the second-order nonlinearity layer in thermally poled optical fibers,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 87(10), 
101108 (2005).
224. W. Margulis, O. Tarasenko, and N. Myrén, “Who needs a cathode? Creating a second￾order nonlinearity by charging glass fiber with two anodes,” Opt. Express 17, 15534–15540 
(2009).
225. C. Corbari, P. G. Kazansky, S. A. Slattery, and D. N. Nikogosyan, “Ultraviolet poling of pure 
fused silica by high-intensity femtosecond radiation,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 86(7), 071106 (2005).
226. H. An and S. Fleming, “Creating second-order nonlinearity in pure synthetic silica optical 
fibers by thermal poling,” Opt. Lett. 32(7), 832–834 (2007).
227. P. Blazkiewicz, W. Xu, D. Wong, S. Fleming, and T. Ryan, “Modification of thermal poling evo￾lution using novel twin-hole fibers,” J. Lightwave Technol. 19(8), 1149–1154 (2001).
228. K. Lee, P. Hu, J. L. Blows, D. Thorncraft, and J. Baxter, “200-m optical fiber with an integrated 
electrode and its poling,” Opt. Lett. 29(18), 2124–2126 (2004).
229. M. Fokine, L. E. Nilsson, Å. Claesson, D. Berlemont, L. Kjellberg, L. Krummenacher, and W. 
Margulis, “Integrated fiber Mach-Zehnder interferometer for electro-optic switching,” Opt. 
Lett. 27(18), 1643–1645 (2002).
230. N. Myrén, H. Olsson, L. Norin, N. Sjödin, P. Helander, J. Svennebrink, and W. Margulis, “Wide 
wedge-shaped depletion region in thermally poled fiber with alloy electrodes,” Opt. Express 12, 
6093 (2004).
231. N. Mukherjee, R. A. Myers, and S. R. J. Brueck, “Dynamics of second-harmonic generation in 
fused silica,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 11, 665–669 (1994).
232. O. Sugihara, T. Hirama, H. Fujimura, and N. Okamoto, “Second-order nonlinear optical prop￾erties from poled silicate channel-waveguide,” Opt. Rev. 3(3), 150–152 (1996).260 ◾ References
233. O. Sugihara, M. Nakanishi, H. Fujimura, C. Egami, and N. Okamoto, “Thermally poled silicate 
thin films with large second-harmonic generation,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 15, 421–425 (1998).
234. M. Janos, W. Xu, D. Wong, H. Inglis, and S. Fleming, “Growth and decay of the electrooptic 
effect in thermally poled B/Ge codoped fiber,” J. Lightwave Technol. 17(6), 1037 (1999).
235. D. W. Wong, W. Xu, and S. C. Fleming, “Charge dynamics and distributions in thermally poled 
silica fiber,” Proc. SPIE 3847, 88–93 (1999).
236. O. Deparis, C. Corbari, P. G. Kazansky, and K. Sakaguchi, “Enhanced stability of the second￾order optical nonlinearity in poled glasses,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 84(24), 4857–4859 (2004).
237. R. Magalhães, J. Pereira, O. Tarasenko, et al., “Towards distributed measurements of electric 
fields using optical fibers: proposal and proof-of-concept experiment,” Sensors 20(16), 4461 
(2020).
238. P. G. Kazansky, A. Kamal, and P. St. J. Russell, “High second-order nonlinearities induced in 
lead silicate glass by electron-beam irradiation,” Opt. Lett. 18(9), 693–695 (1993).
239. A. Michie, I. M. Bassett, J. H. Haywood, and J. Ingram, “Sensing electric fields using thermally 
poled silica optical fibre at 50Hz,” in Optical Fiber Sensors, OSA Technical Digest (CD) (Optica 
Publishing Group, 2006), paper TuC3.
240. A. Michie, I. Bassett, J. Haywood, and J. Ingram, “Electric field and voltage sensing at 50 Hz 
using a thermally poled silica optical fibre,” Meas. Sci. Technol. 18(10), 3219–3222 (2007).
241. A. Michie, J. Ingram, I. M. Bassett, J. H. Haywood, P. Hambley, and P. Henry, “Lab tests of an all 
fibre voltage sensor system,” Proc. SPIE 7004, 70043I (2008), doi: 10.1117/12.786914
242. P. Hambley, A. Michie, I. Bassett, P. Henry, and J. Ingram, “Self aligning fibre for a fibre optic 
voltage sensor,” Proc. SPIE 7004, 70042W (2008), doi: 10.1117/12.786031
243. E. K. Johnson, J. M. Kvavle, R. H. Selfridge, et al., “Electric field sensing with a hybrid polymer/
glass fiber,” Appl. Opt. 46(28), 6953–6958 (2007).
244. J. M. Kvavle, J. Young, E. Gutierrez, et al., “Robust in-fiber electric field sensors using AJL8/
APC electro-optic polymer,” IEEE Sens. J. 11(9), 2057–2064 (2011).
245. K. Bohnert, S. Wildermuth, and H. Brändle, “High voltage measuring device using poled fiber,” 
European patent EP2,274,569B1, priority May 14, 2008.
246. C. A. Burrus and J. Stone, “Single-crystal fiber optical devices: a Nd:YAG fiber laser,” Appl. Phys. 
Lett. 26(6), 318–320 (1975).
247. K. Nagashio, A. Watcharapasorn, R. C. DeMattei, and R. S. Feigelson, “Fiber growth of near 
stoichiometric LiNbO3 single crystals by the laser-heated pedestal growth method,” J. Cryst. 
Growth 265, 190–197 (2004).
248. S. Bera, C. D. Nie, M. G. Soskind, and J. A. Harrington, “Optimizing alignment and growth of 
low-loss YAG single crystal fibers using laser heated pedestal growth technique,” Appl. Opt. 56, 
9649–9655 (2017).
249. D.-H. Yoon, I. Yonenaga, T. Fukuda, and N. Ohnishi, “Crystal growth of dislocation-free LiNbO3
single crystals by micro pulling down method,” J. Cryst. Growth 142(3–4), 339–343 (1994).
250. V. I. Chani, A. Yoshikawa, Y. Kuwano, K. Hasegawa, and T. Fukuda, “Growth of Y3Al5O12:Nd 
fiber crystals by micro-pulling-down technique,” J. Cryst.Growth 204(1–2), 155–162 (1999).
251. J. W. Shur, W. S. Wang, S. J. Suh, et al., “Growth and characterization of Er-doped stoichiomet￾ric LiNbO3 single crystal fibers by the micro-pulling down method,” J. Cryst. Growth 229(1–4), 
223–227 (2001).
252. J. B. Shim, J. H. Lee, A. Yoshikawa, M. Nikl, D. H. Yoon, and T. Fukuda, “Growth of Bi4Ge3O12
single crystal by the micro-pulling-down method from bismuth rich composition,” J. Cryst. 
Growth 243(1), 157–163 (2002).
253. J. B. Shim, A. Yoshikawa, A. Bensalah, et al., “Luminescence, radiation damage, and color center 
creation in Eu 3+-doped Bi4Ge3O12 fiber single crystals,” J. Appl. Phys. 93(9), 5131–5135 (2003).
254. V. Chani, K. Lebbou, B. Hautefeuille, O. Tillement, and J.-M. Fourmigue, “Evaporation induced 
diameter control in fiber crystal growth by micro-pulling-down technique: Bi4Ge3O12,” Cryst. 
Res. Technol. 41(10), 972–978 (2006).References ◾ 261
255. M. Zhuravleva, V. I. Chani, T. Yanagida, and A. Yoshikawa, “The micro-pulling-down growth 
of Bi4Si3O12 (BSO) and Bi4Ge3O12 (BGO) fiber crystals and their scintillation efficiency,” J. Cryst. 
Growth 310(7–9), 2152–2156 (2008).
256. S. Wildermuth, K. Bohnert, H. Brändle, J.-M. Fourmigue, and D. Perrodin, “Growth and char￾acterization of single crystalline Bi4Ge3O12 fibers for electrooptic high voltage sensors,” J. Sens., 
article ID 650572 (2013), doi: 10.1155/2013/650572
257. V. D. Golyshev, M. A. Gonik, and V. B. Tsvetovsky, “Spectral absorptivity and thermal con￾ductivity of BGO and BSO melts and single crystals,” Int. J. Thermophys. 29(4), 1480–1490 
(2008).
258. B. M. Epelbaum, K. Inaba, S. Uda, et al., “A double-die modification of micro-pulling-down 
method for in situ clad/core doping of fiber crystal,” J. Cryst. Growth 179(3–4), 559–566 (1997).
259. J. Ballato, T. Hawkins, P. Foy, et al., “Silicon optical fiber,” Opt. Express 16, 18675–18683 (2008).
260. J. Ballato, T. Hawkins, P. Foy, et al., “Binary III-V semiconductor core optical fiber,” Opt. Express
18, 4972–4979 (2010).
261. J. Ballato, T. Hawkins, P. Foy, et al., “Advancements in semiconductor core optical fiber,” Opt. 
Fiber Technol. 16(6), 399–408 (2010).
262. J. Ballato, C. McMillen, T. Hawkins, et al., “Reactive molten core fabrication of glass-clad amor￾phous and crystalline oxide optical fibers,” Opt. Mater. Express 2, 153–160 (2012).
263. B. Faugas, T. Hawkins, C. Kucera, K. Bohnert, and J. Ballato, “Molten core fabrication of bis￾muth germanium oxide Bi4Ge3O12 crystalline core fibers,” J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 101(9), 4340–4349 
(2018).
264. H. Masai, T. Fujiwara, Y. Benino, and T. Komatsu, “Large second-order optical nonlinearity 
in 30BaO–15 TiO2–55GeO2 surface crystallized glass with strong orientation,” J. Appl. Phys.
100(2), 023526 (2006).
265. H. Masai, N. Iwafuchi, Y. Takahashi, T. Fujiwara, S. Ohara, Y. Kondo, and N. Sugimoto, 
“Preparation of crystallized glass for application in fiber-type devices,” J. Mater. Res. 24(1), 
288–294 (2009).
266. N. Iwafuchi, M. Hirokazu, Y. Takahashi, and T. Fujiwara, “Electro-optic measurement in glass 
ceramics with highly oriented crystalline layers,” Electron. Lett. 46(1), 69–71 (2010).
267. N. Iwafuchi, H. Masai, Y. Takahashi, T. Fujiwara, S. Ohara, Y. Kondo, and N. Sugimoto, 
“Crystallization behavior of optical fibers with multi layered structure for nonlinear optical 
devices,” J. Ceram. Soc. Jpn. 116(1358), 1115–1120 (2008).
268. S. Ohara, H. Masai, Y. Takahashi, T. Fujiwara, Y. Kondo, and N. Sugimoto, “Fabrication of BaO￾TiO2-GeO2-SiO2 based glass fiber,” J. Ceram. Soc. Jpn. 116(1358), 1083–1086 (2008).
269. S. Ohara, H. Masai, Y. Takahashi, T. Fujiwara, Y. Kondo, and N. Sugimoto, “Space-selectively 
crystallized fiber with second-order optical nonlinearity for variable optical attenuation,” Opt. 
Lett. 34(7), 1027–1029 (2009).
270. R. Gibson, R. Selfridge, S. Schultz, W. Wang, and R. Forber, “Electro-optic sensor from high Q 
resonance between optical D-fiber and slab waveguide,” Appl. Opt. 47(13), 2234–2240 (2008).
271. R. Gibson, R. Selfridge, and S. Schultz, “Electric field sensor array from cavity resonance 
between optical D-fiber and multiple slab waveguides,” Appl. Opt. 48(19), 3695–3701 (2009).
272. J. Kvavle, S. Schultz, and R. Selfridge, “Ink-jetting AJL8/APC for D-fiber electric field sensors,” 
Appl. Opt. 48(28), 5280–5286 (2009).
273. D. Perry, S. Chadderdon, R. Forber, et al., “Multiaxis electric field sensing using slab coupled 
optical sensor,” Appl. Opt. 52(9), 1968–1977 (2013).
274. N. Stan, F. Seng, L. Shumway, R. King, R. Selfridge, and S. Schultz, “High electric field measure￾ment using slab-coupled optical sensors,” Appl. Opt. 55, 603–610 (2016).
275. F. Seng, N. Stan, R. King, et al., “Optical sensing of electric fields in harsh environments,” 
J. Lightwave Technol. 35(4), 669–676 (2017).
276. N. Stan, F. Seng, L. Shumway, R. King, and S. Schultz, “Non-perturbing voltage measurement 
in a coaxial cable with slab-coupled optical sensor,” Appl. Opt. 56(24), 6814–6821 (2017).262 ◾ References
277. H. Sun, A. Pyajt, J. Luo, et al., “All-dielectric electrooptic sensor based on a polymer microreso￾nator coupled side-polished optical fiber,” IEEE Sens. J. 7(4), 1515–1524 (2007).
278. Z.-Y. Cheng, X.-D. Liu, L.-C. Ma, and M. Chen, “Developing highly efficient and electric-field￾sensitive fiber-waveguide evanescent couplers,” Appl. Opt. 60(17), 5087–5093 (2021).
279. W. Cady, Piezoelectricity (Dover Publications, New York, 1964).
280. B. Jaffe, W. Cook Jr., and H. Jafffe, Piezoelectric Ceramics (Academic Press, New York, 1971).
281. A. Barzegar, R. Bagheri, and A. Karimi Taheri, “Aging of piezoelectric composite transducers,” 
J. Appl. Phys. 89, 2322–2326 (2001), doi: 10.1063/1.1339853
282. Landoldt-Börnstein, Elastic, Piezoelectric, Piezooptic, and Electrooptic Constants of Crystals, K.-
H. Hellwege and A. M. Hellwege, Eds., New Series III 1, 2 (Springer-Verlag, 1966) and refer￾ences therein.
283. M. W. Hooker, “Properties of PZT-based piezoelectric ceramics between-150 and 250 C,” 
NASA Tech. Rep. 1.26: 208708 (Langley Research Center 1998).
284. M. Pacheco, F. Mendoza Santoyo, A. Méndez, and L. A. Zenteno, “Piezoelectric-modulated 
optical fibre Bragg grating high-voltage sensor,” Meas. Sci. Technol. 10(9), 777–782 (1999).
285. G. M. Sessler, “Piezoelectricity in polyvinylidene fluoride,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 70(6), 1596–1608 
(1981).
286. R. Bechmann, “Elastic and piezoelectric constants of alpha-quartz,” Phys. Rev. 110(5), 1060–
1061 (1958).
287. R. T. Smith and F. S. Welsh, “Temperature dependence of the elastic, piezoelectric, and dielec￾tric constants of lithium tantalate and lithium niobate,” J. Appl. Phys. 42(6), 2219–2230 (1971).
288. S. Bouchy, R. J. Zednik, and P. Bélanger, “Characterization of the elastic, piezoelectric, and 
dielectric properties of lithium niobate from 25 °C to 900 °C using electrochemical impedance 
spectroscopy resonance method,” Materials 15(13), 4716 (2022).
289. I. B. Kobiakov, “Elastic, piezoelectric and dielectric properties of ZnO and CdS single crystals 
in a wide range of temperatures,” Solid State Comm. 35(3), 305–310 (1980).
290. J. C. Brice, “Crystals for quartz resonators,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 57(1), 105–146 (1985).
291. K. M. Bohnert and J. Nehring, “Fiber-optic sensing of electric field components,” Appl. Opt.
27(23), 4814–4818 (1988).
292. K. Bohnert and J. Nehring, “Fiber-optic sensing of voltages by line integration of the electric 
field,” Opt. Lett. 14(5), 290–292 (1989).
293. B. Y. Kim, J. N. Blake, S. Y. Huang, and H. J. Shaw, “Use of highly elliptical core fibers for two￾mode fiber devices,” Opt. Lett. 12(9), 729–731 (1987).
294. J. N. Blake, S. Y. Huang, B. Y. Kim, and H. J. Shaw, “Strain effects on highly elliptical core two￾mode fibers,” Opt. Lett. 12(9), 732–734 (1987).
295. J. Brooks, R. Wentworth, R. Youngquist, et al., “Coherence multiplexing of fiber-optic inter￾ferometric sensors,” J. Lightwave Technol. 3(5), 1062–1072 (1985).
296. K. Bohnert, C. C. de Wit, and J. Nehring, “Coherence-tuned interrogation of a remote 
elliptical-core, dual-mode fiber strain sensor,” J. Lightwave Technol. 13(1), 94–103 (1995), doi: 
10.1109/50.350640
297. A. S. Gerges, T. P. Newson, and D. A. Jackson, “Coherence tuned fiber optic sensing system, with 
self-initialization, based on a multimode laser diode,” Appl. Opt. 29(30), 4473–4480 (1990).
298. Y. Ning, K. T. Grattan, A. W. Palmer, and B. T. Meggitt, “Characteristics of a multimode laser 
diode in a dual-interferometer configuration,” J. Lightwave Technol. 8(12), 1773–1778 (1990).
299. D. A. Jackson, R. Priest, A. Dandridge, and A. B. Tveten, “Elimination of drift in a single-mode 
optical fiber interferometer using a piezoelectrically stretched coiled fiber,” Appl. Opt. 19(17), 
2926–2929 (1980).
300. H. Yang, Y. Guo, S. Xu, et al., “Vibration characteristics of quartz crystal and analysis of system 
error in fiber optic voltage sensor,” Front. Phys. 8, 607724 (2020).
301. K. Bohnert, “Fiber-optical voltage sensor,” European patent application, published as 
WO2022/029046A1, 2022-02-10.References ◾ 263
302. K. Bohnert and P. Pequignot, “Inherent temperature compensation of a dual-mode fiber volt￾age sensor with coherence-tuned interrogation,” J. Lightwave Technol. 16(4), 598–604 (1998), 
doi: 10.1109/50.664069
303. K. M. Bohnert, J. Kostovic, and P. Pequignot, “Fiber optic voltage sensor for 420 kV electric 
power systems,” Opt. Eng. 39(11), 3060–3067 (2000), doi; 10.1117/1.1315023
304. T. Yoshino, K. Kurosawa, K. Itoh, and T. Ose, “Fiber-optic Fabry-Perot interferometer and its 
sensor applications,” IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 18(10), 1624–1633 (1982).
305. L. Martinez-Leon, A. Diez, J. L. Cruz, and M. V. Andres, “A frequency-output fiber optic volt￾age sensor with temperature compensation for power systems,” Sens. Actuator. A Phys. 102(3), 
210–215 (2003).
306. S. Kim, J. Park, and W.-T. Han, “Optical fiber AC voltage sensor,” Microw. Opt. Technol. Lett.
51(7), 1689–1691 (2009).
307. P. Niewczas, L. Dziuda, G. Fusiek, and J. R. McDonald, “Design and evaluation of a preproto￾type hybrid fiber-optic voltage sensor for a remotely interrogated condition monitoring sys￾tem,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 54(4), 1560–1564 (2005), doi: 10.1109/TIM.2004.851072
308. G. Fusiek, P. Niewczas, and J. R. McDonald, “Feasibility study of the application of optical volt￾age and current sensors and an arrayed waveguide grating for aero-electrical systems,” Sens. 
Actuator. A Phys. 147(1), 177–182 (2008).
309. G. Fusiek, P. Niewczas, and M. Judd, “Towards the development of a downhole optical voltage 
sensor for electrical submersible pumps,” Sens. Actuator. A Phys. 184, 173–181 (2012).
310. P. Orr, G. Fusiek, P. Niewczas, et al., “Distributed photonic instrumentation for power sys￾tem protection and control,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 64(1), 19–26 (2015), doi: 10.1109/
TIM.2014.2329740
311. G. Fusiek, J. Nelson, P. Niewczas, et al., “Optical voltage sensor for MV networks,” IEEE Sens. 
2017, 1–3 (2017), doi: 10.1109/ICSENS.2017.8234104
312. G. Fusiek and P. Niewczas, “Photonic voltage transducer with lightning impulse protection for 
distributed monitoring of MV networks,” Sensors 20(17), 4830 (2020).
313. G. Fusiek and P. Niewczas, “Construction and evaluation of an optical medium voltage trans￾ducer module aimed at a 132 kV optical voltage sensor for WAMPAC systems,” Sensors 22(14), 
5307 (2022).
314. R. C. Allil and M. M. Werneck, “Optical high-voltage sensor based on fiber Bragg grating 
and PZT piezoelectric ceramics,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 60(6), 2118–2125 (2011), doi: 
10.1109/TIM.2011.2115470
315. A. Dante, R. M. Bacurau, C. C. Carvalho, et al., “Optical high-voltage sensor based on fiber 
Bragg gratings and stacked piezoelectric actuators for a.c. measurements,” Appl. Opt. 58(30), 
8322–8330 (2019).
316. M. N. Gonçalves and M. M. Werneck, “Optical voltage transformer based on FBG-PZT for 
power quality measurement,” Sensors 21(8), 2699 (2021).
317. Q. Yang, Y. He, S. Sun, M. Luo, and R. Han, “An optical fiber Bragg grating and piezoelectric 
ceramic voltage sensor,” Rev. Scient. Instrum. 88(10), 105005 (2017), doi: 10.1063/1.4986046
318. Y. He, Q. Yang, S. Sun, et al., “A multi-point voltage sensing system based on PZT and FBG,” Int. 
J. Electr. Power Energy Syst. 117, 105607 (2020).
319. Y. He, Q. Yang, L. Huang, et al., “Frequency optimization of PZT-FBG voltage sensor based 
on temperature-independent demodulation method,” IEEE Sens. J. 21(23), 26821–26829 
(2021).
320. C. T. Law, K. Bhattarai, and D. C. Yu, “Fiber-optics-based fault detection in power systems,” 
IEEE Trans. Power Deliv. 23(3), 1271–1279, (2008), doi: 10.1109/TPWRD.2008.919233
321. J. M. Lukens, N. Lagakos, V. Kaybulkin, C. J. Vizas, and D. J. King, “Intensity-modulated fiber￾optic voltage sensors for power distribution systems,” arXiv:2001.05412v1 [eess.SY] (2020).
322. F. Sun, G. Xiao, Z. Zhang, and C. P. Grover, “Piezoelectric bimorph optical-fiber sensor,” Appl. 
Opt. 43(4), 1922–1925 (2004).264 ◾ References
323. M. Ndiaye, “A fiber optic voltage sensor based on intensity modulation,” Proc. SPIE 9098, 183–
191 (2014).
324. K. P. Koo and G. H. Sigel, “An electric field sensor utilizing a piezoelectric polyvinylidene fluo￾ride (PVF2) film in a singlemode fiber interferometer,” IEEE J. Quantum Electron. QE18(4), 
670 (1982).
325. L. J. Donalds, W. G. French, W. C. Mitchell, et al., “Electric field sensitive optical fibre using 
piezoelectric polymer coating,” Electron. Lett. 18(8), 327–328 (1982).
326. P. D. DeSouza and M. D. Mermelstein, “Electric field detection with a piezoelectric polymer￾jacketed single-mode optical fiber,” Appl. Opt. 21(23), 4214–4218 (1982).
327. M. D. Mermelstein, “Optical-fiber copolymer-film electric field sensor,” Appl. Opt. 22(7), 1006–
1009 (1983).
328. M. Imai, H. Tanizawa, Y. Ohtsuka, Y. Takase, and A. Odajima, “Piezoelectric copolymer jack￾eted single-mode-fibers for electric-field sensor applications,” J. Appl. Phys. 60(6), 1916–1918 
(1986).
329. L. M. Levinson, Ed., Electronic Ceramics, Properties, Devices and Applications (Dekker, New 
York, 1988).
330. S. T. Vohra, F. Bucholtz, and A. D. Kersey, “Fiber-optic dc and low-frequency electric-field sen￾sor,” Opt. Lett. 16(18), 1445–1447 (1991).
331. S. T. Vohra and F. Bucholtz, “Fiber-optic ac electric-field sensor based on the electrostrictive 
effect,” Opt. Lett. 17(5), 372–374 (1992).
332. L. Fabiny, S. T. Vohra, and F. Bucholtz, “High-resolution fiber-optic low-frequency voltage sen￾sor based on the electrostrictive effect,” IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett. 5(8), 952–953 (1993), doi: 
10.1109/68.238266
333. L. Fabiny, S. T. Vohra, F. Bucholtz, and A. Dandridge, “Three-channel low-frequency fiber￾optic voltage sensor,” Opt. Lett. 19(3), 228–230 (1994).
334. M. C. Tomic, J. M. Elazar, and Z. V. Djinovic, “Voltage measurement based on the electrostric￾tive effect with simultaneous temperature measurement using a 3 × 3 fiber-optic coupler and 
low coherence interferometric interrogation,” Sens. Actuat. A Phys. 115 (2–3), 462–469 (2004).
335. J. Zhao, H. Zhang, Y. Wang, and H. Liu, “Fiber-optic electric field sensor based on electrostric￾tion effect,” Appl. Mech. Mater. 187, 235–240 (2012).
336. F. Marignetti, E. de Santis, S. Avino, et al., “Fiber Bragg grating sensor for electric field measure￾ment in the end windings of high-voltage electric machines,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. 63(5), 
2796–2802 (2016), doi: 10.1109/TIE.2016.2516500
337. P. G. de Gennes and J. Prost, The Physics of Liquid Crystal (Clarendon, Oxford, UK, 1995).
338. S. Sato and T. Hara, “Applications of a ferroelectric liquid-crystal cell to an electric field sensor,” 
Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 32, 3664–3665 (1993).
339. F. Anagni, C. Bartoletti, U. Marchetti, et al., “Optical sensors for electric substations: a voltage 
presence detector using a liquid crystal cell,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 43(3), 475–480 (1994), 
doi: 10.1109/19.293470
340. B. M. Lacquet, P. L. Swart, and S. J. Spammer, “Polymer dispersed liquid crystal fiber optic 
electric field probe,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 46(1), 31–35 (1997), doi: 10.1109/19.552153
341. M. Tabib-Azar, B. Sutapun, T. Srikhirin, et al., “Fiber optic electric field sensors using polymer￾dispersed liquid crystal coatings and evanescent field interactions,” Sens. Actuator. A Phys.
84(1–2), 134–139 (2000).
342. E. Scherschener, C. D. Perciante, E. A. Dalchiele, et al., “Polymer-dispersed liquid-crystal volt￾age sensor,” Appl. Opt. 45(15), 3482–3488 (2006).
343. S. Ertman, K. Rutkowska, and T. R. Woliński, “Recent progress in liquid-crystal optical fibers 
and their applications in photonics,” J. Lightwave Technol. 37(11), 2516–2526 (2019).
344. L. Wei, L. Eskildsen, J. Weirich, et al., “Continuously tunable all-in-fiber devices based on ther￾mal and electrical control of negative dielectric anisotropy liquid crystal photonic bandgap 
fibers,” Appl. Opt. 48, 497–503 (2009).References ◾ 265
345. S. Ertman, T. R. Wolinski, D. Pysz, et al., “Low-loss propagation and continuously tunable bire￾fringence in high-index photonic crystal fibers filled with nematic liquid crystals,” Opt. Express
17(21), 19298–19310 (2009).
346. S. Mathews, G. Farrell, and Y. Semenova, “Directional electric field sensitivity of a liquid crystal 
infiltrated photonic crystal fiber,” IEEE Photonics. Technol. Lett. 23(7), 408–410 (2011), doi: 
10.1109/LPT.2011.2107319
347. S. Mathews, G. Farrell, and Y. Semenova, “Liquid crystal infiltrated photonic crystal fibers for 
electric field intensity measurements,” Appl. Opt. 50, 2628–2635 (2011).
348. Y. Huang, Y. Wang, C. Mao, et al., “Liquid-crystal-filled side-hole fiber for high-sensitivity 
temperature and electric field measurement,” Micromachines 10(11), 761 (2019), doi: 10.3390/
mi10110761
349. L. Silvestri, Y. Chen, Z. Brodzeli, et al., “A novel optical sensing technology for monitoring 
voltage and current of overhead power lines,” IEEE Sens. J. 21(23), 26699–26707 (2021), doi: 
10.1109/JSEN.2021.3119580
350. Q. Liu, P. Xue, Q. Wu, et al., “Electrically sensing characteristics of the Sagnac interferometer 
embedded with a liquid crystal-infiltrated photonic crystal fiber,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas.
70, art no. 9511209 (2021), doi: 10.1109/TIM.2021.3097402
351. Md. S. Islam, Md. A. Mollah, A. F. Alkhateeb, et al, “Surface plasmon resonance voltage sensor 
based on a liquid crystal-infiltrated hollow fiber,” Opt. Mater. Express 12, 4630–4642 (2022).
352. W. L. Wang, Q. Liu, Z. Liu, et al., “Simulation of a temperature-compensated voltage sensor 
based on photonic crystal fiber infiltrated with liquid crystal and ethanol,” Sensors 22(17), 6374 
(2022).
353. A. Czapla, W. J. Bock, T. R. Woliński, et al., “Improving the electric field sensing capabilities 
of the long-period fiber grating coated with a liquid crystal layer,” Opt. Express 24, 5662–5673 
(2016).
354. X. Chen, F. Du, T. Guo, et al., “Liquid crystal-embedded tilted fiber grating electric field inten￾sity sensor,” J. Lightwave Technol. 35, 3347–3353 (2017).
355. M. O. Ko, S. J. Kim, J. H. Kim, et al., “Dynamic measurement for electric field sensor based on 
wavelength-swept laser,” Opt. Express 22(13), 16139–16147 (2014).
356. P. Yang, X. Wen, Z. Chu, et al., “AC/DC fields demodulation methods of resonant electric field 
microsensor,” Micromachines 11(5), 511 (2020).
357. J. Li, J. Liu, C. Peng, et al., “Design and testing of a non-contact mems voltage sensor based 
on single-crystal silicon piezoresistive effect,” Micromachines 13, 619 (2022), doi: 10.3390/
mi13040619
358. A. Mendez, T. F. Morse, and K. A. Ramsey, “Fiber optic electric-field microsensor,” Proc. SPIE
1795, 153–164 (1993).
359. A. Roncin, C. Shafai, and D. R. Swatek, “Electric field sensor using electrostatic force deflection 
of a micro-spring supported membrane,” Sens. Actuator. A Phys. 123–124, 179–184 (2005).
360. T. S. Priest, G. B. Scelsi, and G. A. Woolsey, “Optical fiber sensor for electric field and electric 
charge using low-coherence, Fabry-Perot interferometry,” Appl. Opt. 36(19), 4505–4508 (1997).
361. L. M. Zhou, W. Huang, T. Zhu, and M. Liu, “High voltage sensing based on fiber Fabry-Perot 
interferometer driven by electric field forces,” J. Lightwave Technol. 32(19), 3337–3343 (2014).
362. T. Chen, C. Shafai, A. Rajapakse, et al., “Micromachined ac/dc electric field sensor with modu￾lated sensitivity,” Sensor. Actuator. A Phys. 245, 76–84 (2016).
363. A. Javernik and D. Donlagic, “Miniature micro-machined fiber-optic Fabry-Perot voltage sen￾sor,” Opt. Express 27(9), 13280–13291 (2019).
364. L. Wang and N. Fang, “Power-frequency electric field sensing utilizing a twin-FBG Fabry-Perot 
interferometer and polyimide tubing with space charge as field sensing element,” Sensors, 19(6), 
1456 (2019).
365. A. Kainz, H. Steiner, J. Schalko, et al., “Distortion-free measurement of electric field strength 
with a MEMS sensor,” Nat. Electron. 1(1), 68–73 (2018).266 ◾ References
366. T. P. Pustelny, “Electroluminescent optical fiber sensor for detection of a high intensity electric 
field,” Photonics Lett. Pol. 12(1), 19–21 (2020).
367. X. Yang, Y. Jia, L. Gao, S. Ji, and Z. Li, “A method for measuring surface electric field intensity 
of insulators based on electroluminescent effect,” Energy Rep. 6, 1537–1543 (2020).
368. R. Heinzelmann, A. Stohr, M. Groz, et al., “Optically powered remote optical field sensor sys￾tem using an electroabsorption-modulator,” in Proc. IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symposium
1998, pp. 1225–1228.
369. S. Höjer and H. Ahlberg, “Spatially resolved measurements of electric field distributions in gas￾insulated high voltage components using a CO2 laser probe beam,” Appl. Opt. 27(18), 3908–
3913 (1988).
370. A. Fiore, F. Rosencher, V. Berger, and J. Nagle, “Electric field induced interband second har￾monic generation in GaAs/AlGaAs quantum wells,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 67(25), 3765–3767 (1995).
371. C. K. Sun, S. W. Chu, S. P. Tai, et al., “Piezoelectric-field distribution in gallium nitride with 
scanning second-harmonic generation microscopy,” Scanning 23(3), 182–192 (2001).
372. M. S. Simeni, Y. Tang, Y.-C. Hung, et al., “Electric field in Ns pulse and AC electric discharges 
in a hydrogen diffusion flame,” Combust. Flame 197, 254–264 (2018).
373. I.-H. Chen, S.-W. Chu, F. Bresson, et al., “Three-dimensional electric field visualization utiliz￾ing electric-field-induced second-harmonic generation in nematic liquid crystals,” Opt. Lett.
28, 1338–1340 (2003).
374. M. M. Werneck and A. C. S. Abrantes, “Fiber-optic-based current and voltage measuring sys￾tem for high-voltage distribution lines,” IEEE Trans. Power Deliv. 19(3), 947–951 (2004).
375. R. Moghe, A. R. Iyer, F. C. Lambert, and D. M. Divan, “A low-cost wireless voltage sensor 
for monitoring MV/HV utility assets,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid 5(4), 2002–2009 (2014), doi: 
10.1109/TSG.2014.2304533
376. A. Fransen, G. W. Lubking, and M. J. Vellekoop, “High-resolution high-voltage sensor based on 
SAW,” Sens. Actuator. A Phys. 60(1–3), 49–53 (1997).
377. M. Yazdani, D. J. Thomson, and B. Kordi, “Passive wireless sensor for measuring AC electric 
field in the vicinity of high-voltage apparatus,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. 63(7), 4432–4441 
(2016), doi: 10.1109/TIE.2016.2546845
378. K. Zhu, W. K. Lee, and P. W. T. Pong, “Non-contact voltage monitoring of HVDC transmission 
lines based on electromagnetic fields,” IEEE Sens. J. 19(8), 3121–3129 (2019), doi: 10.1109/
JSEN.2019.2892498
379. V. M. N. Passaro, F. Dell’Olio, F. De Leonardis, “Electromagnetic field photonic sensors,” Prog. 
Quantum Electron. 30(2–3), 45–73 (2006).
380. D.-J. Lee, N.-W. Kang, J.-H. Choi, J. Kim, and J. F. Whitaker, “Recent advances in the design of 
electro-optic sensors for minimally destructive microwave field probing,” Sensors 11, 806–824 
(2011).
381. R. Zeng, B. Wang, B. Niu, and Z. Yu, “Development and application of integrated optical sen￾sors for intense E-field measurement,” Sensors 12, 11406–11434 (2012).
382. L. J. Li, W. H. Zhang, H. Li, and P. Pan, “An overview of optical voltage sensor based on Pockels 
effect,” Adv. Mat. Res. 694–697, 987–991 (2013).
383. J. Peng, S. Jia, J. Bian, et al., “Recent progress on electromagnetic field measurement based on 
optical sensors,” Sensors 19, 2860 (2019).
384. Y. Zhao, L. Wang, and Y. Zhou, “Research status of optical fiber voltage transformer,” J. Phys. 
Conf. Ser. 1920(1), 012003 (2021).
385. F. Behague, C. Calero, A. Coste, et al., “Minimally invasive optical sensors for microwave￾electric-field exposure measurements,” J. Opt. Microsyst. 1(2), 020902 (2021).267
Final Remarks
In the course of this book, we have seen that optical current and voltage sensors have made 
their way into the electric power world and other industries. Nevertheless, conventional 
current and voltage transformers still dominate electric power transmission and distribu￾tion and will probably continue to do so for a long time to come. CT and VT are well estab￾lished, have been cost-optimized over decades, and the addition of digital interfaces and 
optical communication makes them compatible with modern digital substations. Besides, 
the conceptional simplicity of inductive transformers is hard to beat.
However, the benefits of optical sensors have been recognized. Many power companies 
have installed optical sensors to gain experience with the new technology. Especially in the 
case of non-standard requirement specifications that may include special physical con￾straints, remote measurement locations like in mixed line protection, or the wish to measure 
frequency contents as high as several 100 kHz, optical sensors are often the solution of 
choice. Optical sensors also have unique advantages on the DC side of HVDC transmission 
systems, and in electro-winning of metals and chlorine, FOCS have been well established 
for more than a decade already.
Another application field is medium voltage grids. The distributed integration of renew￾able energy increases the need of current and voltage measurement for maintaining grid 
stability and power quality. This includes the monitoring of voltage volatility, unbal￾anced loads between phases, and high harmonics. These tasks can be met with relatively 
simple local optical field sensors with moderate accuracy that can be easily retrofit and 
clamp-on mounted to power lines, attached to underground power cables, or integrated 
into switching cabinets. Wireless electronic sensors are a competing option, though.
Still, challenges remain. Further proof of long-term reliability and cost reduction, espe￾cially at lower-rated voltages, continue to remain priorities. Continued simplification of 
the sensors without loss of performance, modular designs that ease installation and 
exchange, sensors dedicated to specific tasks instead of all-in-one solutions, and optimized 
and automated production methods may help to make “light work of current and voltage 
measurement.”268
Index
Pages in italics refer to figures and pages in bold refer to tables.
A
active polarization control, 40
Adamant Kogyo Co., 110
Ahlgren, L., 137
air-insulated outdoor substations (AIS), 208–209
Airy function, 41–42
Aldabaldetreku, G., 90
amorphous materials, 23
Aoki, K., 69
B
Bassett, I. M., 116
Bazzocchi, R., 59
beam splitter (BS), 38
Beravat, R., 98
Bernard, G., 59
Berry’s topological phase, 98–99
Birck, F., 210
birefringence modulator, 155
bismuth germanate (BGO), 205
Blazkiewicz, P., 225
Bohnert, K., 103–104
Borle, L. J., 146
Brandle, H., 104
Bucholtz, F., 144, 243–244
Bull, J. D., 141
Burt, G. M., 140
C
capacitive voltage divider (CVD), 4, 239
Cartesian coordinate system, 18, 29, 73
Carvalho, C. C., 144, 145
Casado, L., 90
Casey, E. J., 61
Cecelja, F., 146
Chamorovskiy, Y. K., 98
Cheng, C., 140
Cheng, L., 134
Cheng, S., 107
Chen, K., 59
Chen, X., 59
Chu, B. C. B., 68
circular polarization dependent loss (CDL), 135
Clarke, D., 17
Claus, R.O., 109
coherence, 43–44
Corke, M., 144
Cotton-Mouton effect, 55, 60
coupled-mode equations, 76, 87, 93
Coutaz, J.-L., 203
Cruden, A., 98
crystalline electro-optic fiber
BGO fibers
micro-pulling-down growth of, 227–228
molten core fabrication of, 229
crystallized glass fibers, 229
Curie, Pierre, 231
D
Dagenais, D. M., 144
Dandridge, A., 143–144
Dante, A., 144, 145
da Silva Barros Allil, R. C., 144, 145
Day, G. W., 60, 69, 103
DC voltage sensor, 216–217
Deeter, M. N., 69
differential group delay (DGD), 44, 119, 
135, 227
Di Rienzo, L., 59
Djinovic, Z. V., 244
Dong, L., 223
Duvillaret, L., 203
Dziuda, L., 140Index ◾ 269
E
Edelstein, A. S., 146
Edlund, H., 137
eigenpolarizations, 33–35
eigenvalues, 33–35
Einvall, C. H., 137
Elazar, J. M., 244
electric field-induced second harmonic generation 
(EFISHG), 247
electric field mapping, 204–205, 218, 219, 220
electro-absorber, 246
electro-luminophores, 246
electronic current transformers (ECT)
with optical communication, 137–138
with optical powered electronics, 138
electro-optic effect, 6
electro-optic modulators, 114
electro-optic voltage transducer (EOVT), 210, 239
electrostrictive sensors, 243–244
elliptical core fibers, 14, 16, 90, 119, 124, 132, 235
elliptical polarization, 14–15, 19–20, 23, 27, 66, 77, 
92, 100, 133
Erickson, D. C., 209
F
Fabry-Pérot cavity, 132, 245
-based sensors, 143
Fabry-Pérot filter, 140
Fabry Perot interferometer, 41–43
Failure Mode and Effects Analysis (FMEA), 154
Fang, X., 109
Faraday effect, 53–55, 54, 108, 110, 123, 125, 146
current sensors, 5, 63
in fiber bragg gratings, 135–136
in fused silica fiber, 105
magnetic field sensor, 58
multimode fibers, 106
non-reciprocal, 25, 37, 54, 109
in presence linear birefringence, 76–80
Faraday, Michael, 53
Faraday phase shift Δϕ, 117
Faraday rotator mirrors (FRM), 133
Felber, F. S., 106
Ferrari, J. A., 59
fiber Bragg gratings (FBG), 46, 108, 135–136, 139, 
144, 146, 239, 246
Fiber cantilever electric field sensor, 246
fiber coils
low birefringence, 123–129
spun highly birefringence, 129–132
fiber laser current sensors, 108, 133–134,
134, 136
fiber optical current sensors (FOCS), 5, 108
accuracy
component aging, 150
manufacturing tolerances, 148–149
optical component parameters, 149–150
stress measuring, 150
applications
electric power transmission, 158–161
electro-winning of metals, 157–158
nuclear fusion research, 161
bushing of dead tank circuit breaker, 161
current-carrying busbars of aluminum 
smelter, 158
double chamber HV circuit breaker, 160
Faraday effect, 76–79
Faraday polarization rotation angle, 73
light wave propagation, 73–76
live tank circuit breakers (420 kV), 160
normalized sensor signal, 79
precision
controlling precision, 152–153
noise sources, 150–152
reliability, 153–155
fiber tip electro-optic sensors, 219–221
Fleming, S., 225
flint glass fiber, 104–105
Frenkel, R. B., 106
Frosz, M. H., 98
Fujii, Y., 58
Fujita, H., 217
full width at half maximum (FWHM), 43–44, 46, 98, 
111, 135, 140
Fusiek, G., 140
G
Gabus, P., 104
Gao, L., 217
gas-insulated switchgear (GIS), 70, 208–209, 210, 
236–238, 246
Gaussian spectrum, 43
geometric polarization rotation, 99, 101
Giallorenzi, T. G., 143
Glan-Foucault polarizer, 25
Glan-Thompson analyzer, 58
Glan-Thompson polarizers, 25
Guan, B.-O., 134
Guo, Y., 59
Guo, Z., 134
Guo, Z.-Z., 107270 ◾ Index
H
hairpin-type current transformer, 3
half-wave retarders (HWR), 26
Hall effect, 61, 146–147, 157
Hamasaki, J., 58
Han, J., 134
Hansen, T., 210
hard clad silica (HCS), 14
Haywood, J. H., 116
helical-core fibers, 102
helically wound fibers, 98–102
helical polarization modes, 85
Hidaka, K., 217
high voltage direct current (HVDC), 1, 216
high voltage substation, 2, 70, 209
Hirata, Y., 134
Hoya Corporation, 104
Huang, S. C., 136
hybrid voltage transformers, 247–248
I
indium tin oxide (ITO), 212
integratedoptic 1.3-polarization-splitter (IOPS), 121
integrated optical current sensors, 108, 135
interferometric optical fiber sensors, 40, 40
interferometric piezoelectric voltage sensors
quartz transducer
with dual-mode sensing fiber, 234, 234–236
piezoelectric resonances of, 237
piezo-optic voltage transducer, 235
for air-insulated substations, 238, 238–239
for gas-insulated switchgear, 236–237, 236–238
Itoi, S., 69
Iu, H. H. C., 146
J
Jackson, D. A., 68, 144
Jacques, 231
Jaeger, N. A. F, 141
Jin, L., 134
Johnson, J. C., 209
Jones, J. D. C., 144
Jones matrix, 28–31, 30
for backward propagation, 36–37
calculus, 123
eigenvalues, 35
Jones, R. C., 27
Jones vectors, 27–28, 28
Joule, J. P., 142
K
Kainz, A., 246
Kaybulkin, V., 242
Kazansky, P. G., 223
Kerr effect-based sensor, 199, 221
Kerr electro-optic effect, 55
Kerr, John, 221
Kersey, A. D., 144, 243
Kevorkian, A., 135
Kim, B. Y., 136
King, D. J., 242
Koo, K. P., 144, 242
Kronecker symbol, 75
Kumada, A., 217
Kurosawa, K., 106, 110
Kyuma, K., 59
L
Lagakos, N., 242
Laplacian operator, 73
lead lanthanum zirconate titanate (PLZT) 
ceramics, 243
lead magnesium niobate (PMN), 243
Lee, M. L., 136
left-handed circular polarization (LHC), 
19, 23
left-handed circular SOP, 77
Lenz, J., 146
Li, C., 214
light-emitting diodes (LED), 19, 23, 44
light intensity modulating voltage sensors, 241
Lindberg, P., 137
linear birefringence
compensation, 79–80
Faraday effect, 76–79
linear electro-optic effect, 6, 197–198, 204, 223, 225, 
227–229
Lin, H., 136
liquid crystals (LC) sensor, 244–245, 247
Liu, J., 217
Liu, S., 69
Li,Y., 217
longitudinal electro-optic effect, 201, 202, 
203, 217
Lopez, J. D., 144, 145
Lorentzian line shape, 43
Lousteau, J., 106
Lovato, J. L., 135
Lukens, J. M., 242
Lyot fiber depolarizers, 44Index ◾ 271
M
Mach-Zehnder interferometer (MZI), 40, 40, 135, 
141, 144, 217, 222, 242
Magalhaes, R., 227
magnetic fluids (MF) sensor, 145–146
magneto-optic current transducer (MOCT), 212
elliptical polarization, 66
glass block, 67
limitations, 70–71
ortho-conjugate total internal light beam 
reflections, 66
square-shaped bulk glass sensors, 67
Wollaston prism, 66
magneto-optic effect, 53
magneto-optic Kerr effect, 55
magneto-optic materials, 55, 55–56
magnetostriction, 15, 142–143, 143, 146, 243
magneto-strictive materials, 143–144
magneto-strictive strain, 143
Manara, A., 59
Margulis, W., 224
Martinez, L., 146
Massey, G. A., 209
Matar, M., 116
Ma, X., 59
Maxwell’s equations, 10, 73
May, G., 109
McDonald, J. R., 140
mechanical perturbation, 74
Mendez, A., 246
Michelson interferometer, 41, 139, 144
Michie, W. C., 98
microelectromechanical sensors (MEMS), 245–246
microfibers and nanofibers (MNF), 106–107, 107
micro-structured optical fibers (MSOF), 245
Miller, R. C., 210
Min-Cheol Oh, 123
Minier, V., 135
Mok, R. W., 144, 145
Mollenbeck, K., 59
Morse, T. F., 246
multi-functional integrated optical chip, 120
multimode fiber, 9–10, 12–13, 44, 46, 59, 66, 71, 105, 
106, 138, 141, 209, 211, 241, 248
Myren, N., 224
N
National Bureau of Standards and Technology 
(NIST), 103
Nehring, J., 104, 234
nematic liquid crystals (NLC), 244–245
Niewczas, P., 98, 140
Ning,Y. N., 68
Nippon Selfoc Company, 109
noise equivalent current (NEC), 62, 68, 70, 127, 134, 
151–153
O
Ohno, A., 134
Ohno, Y., 58
Ohtaka, M., 69
Olivero, M., 106
open-loop Hall transducers, 157
optical coherence tomography (OCT), 44, 154
optical current sensors (OCS), 4, 146
optical current transformers (OCT), 4
fiber Bragg gratings, 139
hybrid, 139
optical fibers
light wave propagation, 9–13
multimode and single-mode, 10
types, 13–14
Optical Fiber Technology Centre (OFTC), 226
optical frequency domain reflectometry (POFDR), 
136
optical metering unit (OMU), 212, 212
optical voltage sensors (OVS), 5
optic voltage transducer (OVT)
with discrete field summation, 214–216
true line integral of electric field, 210–214
P
Payne, David, 85
Pelenc, Y., 59
Perciante, C. D., 59
Pereira, J., 227
Perry, E. R., 137
Persegui, D., 135
photonic crystal fibers (PCF), 14, 245
piezoceramic disk (PZT), 112
piezoelectric effect, 139–140, 231, 234, 243
piezoelectric materials, 232, 233
piezoelectric polymer-jacketed fibers, 242
piezoelectric transducer (PZT), 40
piezoelectric voltage sensors
capacitive voltage divider, 239
fiber Bragg gratings, 239
PZT/FBG-transducer module, 239
PZT/FBG voltage transducer, 240
PZT transducer with attached FBG, 240
piezo-optic sensors, 222272 ◾ Index
planar-lightwave-circuit (PLC), 122
Pockels and Kerr effects
Crystal Classes, 204
electro-optic material, 204–207, 206
electro-optic voltage sensors, 200
field-dependent dielectric displacement, 197
indicatrix, 198
linear electro-optic tensor, 198
longitudinal electro-optic effect, 202
orthogonal polarization components, 201
periodic piezo-electric stress, 204
principal dielectric axes, 198
transverse electro-optic effect, 203
Pockels effect, 197–199, 204, 212, 214, 223, 231
Pockels, Friedrich C. A., 197
Pockels sensors, 204, 222
point magneto-optic field sensors
Faraday effect, 58
Faraday rotation, 58
in high voltage power transmission, 60
with magnetic core, 61, 61–64, 63–64
Wollaston prism, 57
polarimetric fiber laser sensors, 133–134
polarimetric FOCS
Faraday rotator, 110, 110
in-line configuration, 109–110, 109–110
interferometric and, 129
transmissive operation mode, 109
polarimetric sensors, 38
basic set-up of, 39
polarimetry, 90, 150
polarization
circular birefringence, 24–25
eigenpolarizations and eigenvalues, 33–35
ellipse
azimuth and ellipticity, 20
Cartesian complex-plane representation, 21
Cartesian coordinate system, 18
circular complex-plane representation, 21
ellipticity and azimuth angles, 21
ellipticity angle ψ and azimuth θ, 20
equal amplitudes of the orthogonal 
constituents, 20
right-handed circularly polarized light, 18
SOP of monochromatic light, 18
Jones calculus
Jones matrices, 28–31
in eigenvalues, 35
for backward propagation, 36–37
Jones vectors, 27–28
linear and circular base, 31–33
Jones matrix in basis of eigenpolarizations, 35
linear birefringence, 23–24
linear retarders, 26–27
N-matrix, 35–36
Poincaré sphere, 22, 22–23
prism polarizers, 25–26
polarization extinction ratios (PER), 25, 154
polarization-maintaining fiber (PMF), 14–16, 15, 110
polarization mode beat (PMB), 133
poled fibers
electric field and voltage sensors, 226–227
electro-optic effect, 225–226
thermal fiber poling, 223
polymer optical fibers (POF), 14
polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF), 232
pulse position modulated (PPM) signal, 248
Q
quarter-wave retarder (QWR), 26, 38, 121
quartz transducer crystal, 234
R
radio frequency readout (RFID), 248
Rahman, H. U., 106
Rahmatian, F, 141
Rakowski, R., 146
Ramsey, K. A., 246
Rayleigh scattering, 44
reflective fiber-optic current sensors (RFOCS)
non-reciprocal phase modulation, 117–121
static phase biasing, 121–123
resin impregnated paper (RIP), 213
Rialland, S., 203
right-handed circular polarization (RHC), 18, 22–23
right-handed circular SOP (RHC), 18, 20, 22, 23, 28, 77
Robertson, S. R. M., 216
Rogers, A. J., 59, 216
Ron, A., 106
Rose, A. H., 69
Russell, P. St. J., 223
Ryabko, M. V., 98
Ryan, T., 225
S
Sagnac interferometer
with 3x3 fiber coupler, 115–117
non-reciprocal phase modulation
closed-loop operation, 114–115
open-loop operation, 111–113
Sagnac interferometer current sensor, 111Index ◾ 273
Saito, S., 58, 58–59
Samuelsson, J., 137
Santos, J. C., 214
Sasaki, K., 134
Schalko, J., 246
sensor components
directional fiber couplers, 45
Faraday rotator, 45–46
fiber Bragg gratings, 46
fiber mirrors, 45
fiber polarizers, 45
fusion splices, 46
light sources, 44
Lyot fiber depolarizers, 44
phase modulators, 45
sensing fibers, fiber retarders and sensing 
materials, 45
Serret-Frenet coordinate system, 99
Sheem, S. K., 115
Shen, Y., 107
Shiyu, Y., 106
Sigel, G. H., 143–144, 242
single-mode communication fiber, 103
Sowa, T., 110
space-division multiplexing (SDM), 14
spun fiber
bare low birefringence fiber, 103
with broadband light, 97–98
coupling coefficients of, 87–90
input polarization state, 90–93
magneto-optic sensitivity
of coiled fiber, 94–95
fiber with enhanced, 105–106
intrinsic, 93–94
polarimetric current sensor, 95–97
photonic crystal, 98
Stark effect, 6, 247
Stark, Johannes, 247
Starostin, N. I., 98
states of polarizations (SOP), 15, 17–18, 19,
76–77, 222
of equal ellipticity, 22–23
of monochromatic light, 18
Steiner, H., 246
St. J. Russell, P., 98
superluminescent diodes (SLED), 43–44, 97
surface acoustic wave (SAW), 248
T
Takahashi, Y., 134
Tarasenko, O., 224, 227
tellurite glass multimode fiber, 106
Terai, K., 134
thermo-electric cooler (TEC), 149
three-phase fiber-optic current sensor system, 6
Titus, C. H., 61
Tokyo Electric Power Company (TEPCO), 4, 104, 
110, 217
Tomic, M. C., 244
Tonnesen, O., 210
top-core CT, 2
transverse electric field distribution, 11
transverse electro-optic effect, 202, 203
Trovao, T., 144, 145
Tveten, A. B., 143–144
twisted fiber
arbitrary elliptical input polarization state, 81
eigenpolarization, 81
elliptical SOP, 85
with linear and circular birefringence, 82, 82–83
with only circular birefringence, 82, 82
Poincaré sphere, 81, 82
twist-induced polarization rotation, 85
twist-induced shear strains, 80
U
Ueki, A., 109
V
Verdet constant, 54–56, 59, 61, 63, 70–71, 73, 104, 
123, 149
vertical cavity surface emitting lasers (VCSEL), 138
Vizas, C. J., 242
Vohra, S. T., 144, 243–244
voltage sensing
electric field sensor, 208–210
electro-optic voltage transducer, 210
methods, 208
sensing of power line voltages, 209
W
Wang, A., 109
Wang, M., 69
Wang, X., 141, 214
Wan, J., 217
wavelength-division multiplexing (WDM), 14, 133
wave plates, 26–27
Wei, P., 141
Werneck, M. M., 144, 145
Wessel, F. J., 106274 ◾ Index
West, E. J., 143
Wild, N. C., 106
Windsor, H. V., 143
Wollaston prisms, 25, 25, 57, 66, 78, 203
Wong, D., 225
Wong, G. K. L., 98
Woodward, R. C., 146
X
Xiang, Y., 59
Xi, X. M., 98
Xu, W., 225
Y
Yamada, Y., 110
Yamamoto, K., 69
Yamashita, K., 110
Yariv, A., 143
Yokota, M., 69
Yokoyama, K., 58
Yong, J. C., 136
Yoshikawa, S., 109
Yoshino, T., 69
yttrium iron garnets (YIG), 55, 56, 61
Yun, S. H., 136
Yu, W.-B., 107
Z
Zhang, C., 214
Zhang, G.-Q., 107
Zhao, J., 69
Ziegler, S., 146
Zubia, J., 90
