Optimization and Computing 
using Intelligent Data‑ Driven 
Approaches for 
Decision‑ Making
This book comprehensively discusses nature‑inspired algorithms, deep 
learning methods, applications of mathematical programming, and arti‑
ficial intelligence techniques. It will further cover important topics such 
as linking green supply chain management practices with competitiveness, 
Industry 4.0, and social responsibility.
This book:
• Addresses solving practical problems such as supply chain manage‑
ment, take‑off, and healthcare analytics using intelligent computing.
• Presents a comparative analysis of machine learning algorithms for 
power consumption prediction.
• Discusses a machine learning‑based multi‑objective optimization 
technique for load balancing in an integrated fog cloud environment.
• Illustrates a data‑driven optimization concept for modeling environ‑
mental and economic sustainability.
• Explains the use of heuristics and metaheuristics in supply chain net‑
works and the use of fuzzy optimization in sustainable development 
goals.
The text is primarily written for graduate students and academic research‑
ers in diverse fields, including electrical engineering, electronics and com‑
munications engineering, mathematics and statistics, computer science, and 
engineering.Intelligent Data‑Driven Systems and Artificial Intelligence
Series Editor: Harish Garg
Cognitive Machine Intelligence: Applications, Challenges, and Related 
Technologies
Inam Ullah Khan, Salma El Hajjami, Mariya Ouaissa, Salwa Belqziz and 
Tarandeep Kaur Bhatia
Artificial Intelligence and Internet of Things based Augmented Trends for 
Data Driven Systems
Anshu Singla, Sarvesh Tanwar, Pao‑Ann Hsiung
Modelling of Virtual Worlds Using the Internet of Things
Edited by Simar Preet Singh and Arun Solanki
Data‑Driven Technologies and Artificial Intelligence in Supply Chain: 
Tools and Techniques
Mahesh Chand, Vineet Jain and Puneeta Ajmera
Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data‑Driven Approaches 
for Decision‑Making: Artifical Intelligence Applications
Irfan Ali, Umar Muhammad Modibbo, Asaju La’aro Bolaji, and 
Harish Garg
For more information about this series, please visit: www.routledge.com/
Intelligent‑Data‑Driven‑Systems‑and‑Artificial‑Intelligence/book‑series/
CRCIDDSAAIOptimization and 
 Computing using 
I ntelligent Data‑Driven 
Approaches for 
Decision‑Making
Artificial Intelligence Applications
Edited by
Irfan Ali, Umar Muhammad Modibbo, 
Asaju La’aro Bolaji, and Harish GargDesigned cover image: shutterstock
First edition published 2025
by CRC Press
2385 NW Executive Center Drive, Suite 320, Boca Raton FL 33431
and by CRC Press
4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN
CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
© 2025 selection and editorial matter, Irfan Ali, Umar Muhammad Modibbo, Asaju La’aro Bolaji 
and Harish Garg; individual chapters, the contributors
Reasonable efforts have been made to publish reliable data and information, but the author and 
 publisher cannot assume responsibility for the validity of all materials or the consequences of 
their use. The authors and publishers have attempted to trace the copyright holders of all material 
 reproduced in this publication and apologize to copyright holders if permission to publish in this 
form has not been obtained. If any copyright material has not been acknowledged please write and 
let us know so we may rectify in any future reprint.
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, 
transmitted, or utilized in any form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or 
hereafter invented, including photocopying, microfilming, and recording, or in any information 
storage or retrieval system, without written permission from the publishers.
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, access www.copyright.
com or contact the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 
01923, 978‑750‑8400. For works that are not available on CCC please contact mpkbookspermissions@
tandf.co.uk
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks and are 
used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
ISBN: 9781032781112 (hbk)
ISBN: 9781032821207 (pbk)
ISBN: 9781003503057 (ebk)
DOI: 10.1201/9781003503057
Typeset in Sabon
by codeMantrav
Contents
About the editors vii
List of contributors x
1 Linking green supply chain management practices with 
competitiveness, Industry 4.0, and social responsibility 1
SHABNAM REKABI, KOUROSH MOKHTARI, AND FARIBA GOODARZIAN
2 Comparative analysis of machine learning algorithms for 
the power consumption prediction 13
M.A. HAMBALI, ANDREW ISHAKU WREFORD, AND Y.A. OLASUPO
3 Prediction of cardiovascular disease using information 
gain, artificial neural network, and CART 5.0 algorithms 37
ASAJU LA’ARO BOLAJI, ANDREW ISHAKU WREFORD, AND 
BRIDGET MICHAEL‑OGBONNA
4 Weighting of logistics management factors by SWARA and 
DELPHI methods 55
HAKAN TURAN AND TAYFUN UTA¸S
5 Evaluation of daily management with standard deviation 
and MOOSRA tools in hospitals 72
HAKAN TURAN AND TAYFUN UTA¸S
6 Machine learning‑based multi‑objective optimization 
technique for load balancing in integrated fog‑cloud 
environment 86
NIVA TRIPATHY, SUBHRANSHU SEKHAR TRIPATHY, 
AND SATYANANDA CHAMPATI RAIvi Contents
7 Perishable inventory fuzzy optimization model with 
uncertain deterioration and preservation investment 99
ANSHIKA SINGH AND ABHINAV GOEL
8 Employing fuzzy inference system in ant colony 
optimization for travelling salesman problems 111
M. K. SHARMA, VANSH VERMA, TARUN KUMAR, LAXMI RATHOUR, AND 
VISHNU NARAYAN MISHRA
9 Type‑2 Gaussian neuro‑fuzzy VIKOR technique in 
multi‑criteria decision‑making for medical diagnostic 128
NIVEDITA, SEEMA AGRAWAL, M. K. SHARMA, LAXMI RATHOUR, 
AND VISHNU NARAYAN MISHRA
10 Overview of AI and explainable AI decision‑making 
(XAIDM) 152
MOHAMMAD MAHDI SADEGHI, KOUROSH MOKHTARI, 
AND FARIBA GOODARZIAN
11 Harnessing the power of Industry 4.0: Synergizing smart 
manufacturing, supply chain, and reshoring strategies 167
SADAF FARBOODI, FARIBA GOODARZIAN, 
AND ALIREZA ABBASZADEH MOLAEI
12 Digital revolution in cold supply chain management related 
to the food industry 181
ALIREZA ABBASZADEH MOLAEI, FARIBA GOODARZIAN, 
AND SADAF FARBOODI
13 The impact of blockchain technology and decentralized 
supply chain on production 193
KOUROSH MOKHTARI, SEYYDEH ATEFEH MOUSAVI ABANDANSARI, 
AND FARIBA GOODARZIAN
Index 209vii
About the editors
Irfan Ali earned B.Sc., M.Sc., M.Phil., and Ph.D. degrees from Aligarh 
Muslim University. He is currently a working faculty member with the 
Department of Statistics and Operations Research, Aligarh Muslim 
University. He received the Post‑Graduate Merit Scholarship Award during 
his M.Sc. (statistics) and the UGC‑BSR Scholarship Award during his Ph.D. 
(statistics) program. His research interests include applied statistics, survey 
sampling, reliability theory, supply chain networks and management, math‑
ematical programming, fuzzy optimization, and multi‑objective optimiza‑
tion. He has supervised M.Sc., M.Phil., and Ph.D. students in Operations 
Research (OR). He has completed a research project UGC–Start‑Up Grant 
Project, UGC, New Delhi, India. He has published more than 100 research 
articles in SCI/SCIE and other reputed journals and serves as a reviewer for 
several journals. He has published some edited books with international 
publishers, and some are in the process of publication. He has currently 
published one textbook Optimization with LINGO‑18 Problems and 
Applications. This book is helpful for academicians, practitioners, stu‑
dents, and researchers in the field of OR. He is a lifetime member of vari‑
ous professional societies: Operational Research Society of India, Indian 
Society for Probability and Statistics, Indian Mathematical Society, and 
The Indian Science Congress Association. He has delivered invited talks in 
several universities and institutions. He also serves as associate editor for 
some journals and guest editor for SCI/SCIE.
Umar Muhammad Modibbo is a Senior Lecturer at the Modibbo Adama 
University, Yola, Nigeria. He earned his Ph.D. in Operations Research 
at the Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh, India, in 2022, specializing 
in Applied Mathematical Programming and Computing. He earned his 
Master of Technology (M.Tech.) and Bachelor of Technology (B.Tech.) 
degrees in Operations Research at the Federal University of Technology, 
Yola, Nigeria (now the Modibbo Adama University, Yola) in 2016 and 
2010, respectively. He is a recipient of the university grant to study M.Tech. 
Operations Research in 2014 and the Nigerian Tertiary Education Trust 
Fund (TETFund) to study Ph.D. Operations Research in 2018. He received viii About the editors
the Young Researcher Award and the Research Excellence Award from 
the Institute of Scholars (InSc), India, 2020. He specialized in Applied 
Mathematical Programming and Computing. His research areas include 
mathematical programming and its applications, reliability optimization, 
fuzzy programming, multi‑objective optimization, inventory and supply 
chain management, renewable energy, circular economy, sustainability, and 
soft computing. He is a Fellow and President of the Operations Research 
Institute for Decision Sciences & Analytics of Nigeria (ORIDSAN) and a 
lifetime and execrative member of the African Federation of Operations 
Research Societies (AFROS) and the International Federation of Operational 
Research Societies (IFORS). He has published over 50 research articles in 
journals of national and international repute with over 800 Google Scholar 
citations. He delivered an invited talk and attended conferences and work‑
shops in his domain area. He is a reviewer of many journals. He served as 
guest editor in several journals published by Elsevier, CRC Press, MDPI and 
Frontiers. He is currently writing a book on the United Nations Sustainable 
Development Goals.
Asaju Bolaji La’aro earned his Ph.D. in Computer Science, majoring in 
Artificial Intelligence and Operations Research from the University of 
Science Malaysia, in 2014. He earned his M.Sc. in Mathematics from the 
University of Ilorin in 2006 and B.Sc. in Physics/Computer Science from 
the Federal University of Technology, Minna, in 2000. He is currently 
the Dean of the Faculty of Computing and Information Systems, Federal 
University Wukari, Taraba State. He is also the Head of the AI and OR 
Research Group (ECRG) which publishes numerous scientific publications 
in high‑quality and well‑reputed journals and conferences. He has over 
21 years of teaching experience in higher education institutions. He has 
taught several Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence courses at the 
university. In addition to his research, teaching, and administrative capabil‑
ities, Prof. Asaju has special strength in developing web‑based applications 
that build more than 12 academic web systems related to research, quality 
assurance, e‑learning, and postgraduate platforms.
Harish Garg is an Associate Professor at Thapar Institute of Engineering & 
Technology, Deemed University, Patiala, Punjab, India. He is ranked in the 
World’s Top 2% Scientists list and ranked No. 1 in India and No. 229 in 
World Rank, which was published by Stanford University in four consecu‑
tive years: 2020, 2021, 2022, and 2023. He received the Most Outstanding 
Researcher Award in the field of Mathematics from Carrer 360 Academy. 
He is also the recipient of the International Obada‑Prize 2022  –  Young 
Distinguished Researchers. He is also the recipient of the Top‑Cited paper 
by an India‑based author (2015–2019) from Elsevier publisher. He serves 
as an advisory board member of the Universal Scientific Education and About the editors ix
Research Network (USERN). He is a Research Fellow of INTI International 
University, Malaysia. His research interests include computational intel‑
ligence, multi‑criteria decision‑making, evolutionary algorithms, reliabil‑
ity analysis, expert systems and decision support systems, computing with 
words, and soft computing. He has authored more than 520 papers (over 
500 are SCI) published in refereed international journals, including IEEE 
Transactions, Elsevier, and Springer. His Google citations are over 24,490 
with H‑index – 88. He is one of the leading researchers in the world related 
to the MCDM and soft computing approaches. He also serves on editorial 
boards of several leading international journals, including the Founding 
Editor‑in‑Chief of the Journal of Computational and Cognitive Engineering. 
He is also the Associate Editor of Alexandria Engineering Journal, Journal 
of Intelligent & Fuzzy Systems, Journal of Industrial & Management 
Optimization, CAAI Transactions on Intelligence Technology, etc.
For more details about him, kindly follow his webpage https://sites.google.
com/site/harishg58iitr/homex
List of contributors
Seyydeh Atefeh Mousavi 
Abandansari
Department of Industrial 
Engineering
Mazandaran University of Science 
and Technology
Babol, Iran
Seema Agrawal
Department of Mathematics
SSVPG College
Hapur, India
and
Chaudhary Charan Singh 
University
Meerut, India
Asaju La’aro Bolaji
Computer Science Department
Federal University Wukari
Wukari, Nigeria
Sadaf Farboodi
Department of Industrial 
Engineering
Babol Noshirvani University of 
Technology
Babol, Iran
Abhinav Goel
Department of Mathematics
Graphic Era (Deemed to be 
University)
Dehradun, India
Fariba Goodarzian
Edinburgh Business School (EBS) 
and School of Social Sciences
Heriot‑Watt University
Riccarton, Currie
M.A. Hambali
Federal University Wukari
Wukari, Nigeria
Tarun Kumar
Department of Mathematics
Ch. Charan Singh University
Meerut, India
Bridget Michael‑Ogbonna
Computer Science Department
Federal University Wukari
Wukari, Nigeria
Vishnu Narayan Mishra
Department of Mathematics
Indira Gandhi National Tribal 
University
Amarkantak, IndiaList of contributors xi
Kourosh Mokhtari
Microelectronics Institute of Sevilla
Seville, Spain
Alireza Abbaszadeh Molaei
Department of Industrial
Engineering
Babol Noshirvani University of 
Technology
Babol, Iran
Nivedita
Department of Mathematics
SSVPG College
Hapur, India
and
Chaudhary Charan Singh
University
Meerut, India
Y.A. Olasupo
Federal University Wukari
Wukari, Nigeria
Satyananda Champati Rai
School of Computer Engineering
KIIT Deemed to be University
Bhubaneswar, India
Laxmi Rathour
Department of Mathematics
National Institute of Technology
Aizawl, India
Shabnam Rekabi
School of Industrial Engineering,
College of Engineering
University of Tehran
Tehran, Iran
Mohammad Mahdi Sadeghi
QAHE
London & Birmingham Campus,
Ulster University
Belfast, North Ireland, United
Kingdom
M. K. Sharma
Department of Mathematics
Ch. Charan Singh University
Meerut, India
Anshika Singh
Department of Mathematics
Graphic Era (Deemed to be 
University)
Dehradun, India
Niva Tripathy
Department of Computer Science
& Engineering
DRIEMS Autonomous College
Cuttack, India
Subhranshu Sekhar Tripathy
School of Computer Engineering
KIIT Deemed to be University
Bhubaneswar, India
Hakan Turan
Kocaeli University
İzmit, Turkey
Tayfun Utaş
Istinye University
Istanbul, Turkey
Vansh Verma
Department of Mathematics
Ch. Charan Singh University
Meerut, India
Andrew Ishaku Wreford
Computer Science Department
Federal University Wukari
Wukari, NigeriaDOI: 10.1201/9781003503057-1 1
Chapter 1
Linking green supply chain 
management practices with 
competitiveness, Industry 
4.0, and social responsibility
Shabnam Rekabi, Kourosh Mokhtari, 
and Fariba Goodarzian
1.1 INTRODUCTION
The adoption of the environmental standards of ISO 14001 is increasing 
in most countries; for this reason, supply chain management has increas‑
ingly played an important role in organizational environmental measures 
(Wang et al., 2020). Today, green supply chain management is considered 
as the integration of innovative green activities involved in a product or 
service such as green purchasing, green production, green packaging, green 
marketing, and reverse logistics from primary sources to final customers 
(Gandhi et al., 2015), which is an ideal method for companies to achieve 
higher profits; minimize resource loss; improve ecological efficiency; bal‑
ance the economic, social, and environmental issues of the company; and 
promote organizational sustainability (Luthra et al., 2016). Green supply 
chain management and the results from the perspective of corporate social 
responsibility can provide valuable insight for companies in the field of 
green supply chain adoption and implementation and help them to adopt 
green supply chain management by taking corporate social responsibility 
as a stimulus and improve the company’s performance for success. Another 
issue that affects the creation of a green supply chain is I4.0. The main 
goal of Industry 4.0 is to make production operations and systems efficient, 
independent, and sustainable (Koh et  al., 2019). I4.0 is the latest evolu‑
tion of the industry that strives to build intelligent systems by integrating 
physical objects with digital technologies (Fatorachian and Kazemi, 2018). 
Its capabilities not only offer greater productivity and flexibility but also 
help to advance an organization’s sustainability goals (Schroeder et  al., 
2019). Considering the economic dimension of sustainability, Industry 4.0 
technologies can reduce setup time, lead time, labor, and material costs; 
increase production and design flexibility; and increase productivity and 
customization. On the environmental side, reducing energy and resource 2 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
consumption leads to reduced waste or CO2 emissions throughout produc‑
tion processes and the supply chain (Sarkis and Zhu, 2018).
Therefore, in this chapter, we will further investigate the relationship 
between Industry 4.0 and the green supply chain. In addition to social 
responsibility and Industry 4.0, another issue that affects the green supply 
chain is competition. International organizations may seek to gain com‑
petitive advantage through sustainable development, such as introducing 
innovation in production; improving environmental protection methods 
to comply with international regulations; increasing green marketing, 
agile systems, and environmentally friendly policies to address customer 
concerns about environmental issues; and minimizing the environmental 
impact of production and service activities (Cankurtaran and Beverland, 
2020). The organizational environment can become volatile, especially 
during an unpredictable event such as COVID‑19, which was declared a 
pandemic in March 2020, causing uncertainty and panic around the world 
(Brosseau et al., 2019). SMEs are struggling with their survival plans dur‑
ing the disruptive events of COVID‑19, which requires careful attention to 
the integration and coordination of supply chain management to manage 
customer and supplier demand (Cankurtaran and Beverland, 2020).
In addition, environmental awareness is growing rapidly with the expan‑
sion of information and communication technology and social media, 
another challenge that organizations face in a competitive business envi‑
ronment (Luqman et al., 2021). According to the issues raised above in this 
chapter, we seek to establish a connection between the three indicators of 
social responsibility, Industry 4.0, and competitiveness with a green supply 
chain. In the following sections, we will explain the desired indicators in 
more detail: Section 1.2 provides an explanation of green supply chain man‑
agement and its influencing factors. Section 1.3 explains competitiveness in 
organizations and its relationship with the green supply chain. Section 1.4 
deals with Industry 4.0 and its impact on green supply chains. Section 1.5 
discusses the issue of social responsibility and its connection with the green 
supply chain. Section 1.6 looks at how organizations can ensure that their 
supply chain practices are simultaneously aligned with Industry 4.0, social 
responsibility, and green principles. Finally, Section 1.7 summarizes the 
results of this chapter according to the discussions presented.
1.2 GREEN SUPPLY CHAIN MANAGEMENT
Supply chain management is generally defined as the systematic and strate‑
gic coordination of traditional business functions and tactics among these 
business functions in a particular company and among the businesses of 
individual companies in order to improve long‑term performance (Mentzer 
et al., 2001). The integration of environmental concerns into the literature Green supply chain management practices 3
on supply chain management gave rise to the term “green supply chain 
management”. Green supply chain management refers to the integration 
of sustainable and environmentally friendly practices into supply chain 
operations. This includes reducing carbon emissions, minimizing waste 
generation, adopting renewable energy sources, and promoting sustainable 
resources.
In the past, “green” or “sustainable” issues were not the main focus of 
the logistics business, but this has changed. Today, public attention is very 
much focused on these issues, and it has become a main competitive fac‑
tor. In addition, analysts and rating agencies evaluate companies in terms 
of their sustainability maturity. Greening is a never‑ending debate between 
competitors of any company, especially in the last decade; applying green 
supply chain practices instead of traditional methods can help organiza‑
tions develop win‑win strategies that help them achieve profit and market 
share goals by reducing environmental risks and impacts while increasing 
their environmental performance (Zhu et al., 2007). Green supply chain 
management can be defined as the integration of environmental issues into 
supply chain management, from product design processes to end‑of‑life 
management of the product after its useful life (Ahmadini et  al., 2021). 
There are various stimulators that encourage companies to go green in 
their supply chains. On the one hand, external forces such as government 
laws, society, customers, third parties, and corporate partnerships encour‑
age companies to use green practices in their supply chain (Ball and Craig, 
2010). On the other hand, internal forces such as stakeholder pressures are 
also considered as the main drivers of green efforts (Foerstl et al., 2015). A 
series of factors are effective in the creation of a green supply chain, and an 
investigation of the relationship between these factors and the creation of 
a green supply chain will explain it. For a better understanding of the rela‑
tionship between these factors, refer to Figure 1.1. Also, in the following 
sections, we will talk about these factors and their impact on the formation 
of the green supply chain.
1.3 COMPETITIVENESS
Market competition arises in a market in which many competitors com‑
pete with each other; however, a factor allows the company to produce 
goods or services better or cheaper than others, such as environmentally 
friendly products, higher turnover, higher market share, and higher exports 
(Cronjé and du Plessis, 2020). This helps them earn more profit compared 
to the company’s competitors. Due to globalization, organizations around 
the world are under pressure to balance sustainable development related to 
social, economic, and environmental issues and to modify their activities to 
be competitive and sustainable. Recent environmental and climate changes 4 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
have forced organizations to consider green supply chain management and 
create a corporate environmental strategy for all products and processes to 
reduce waste and pollution that affect supply chain performance, competi‑
tive advantage, long‑term survival, profitability, and business performance. 
During the last few decades, several environmental changes have occurred, 
which require eco‑friendly actions for the competitiveness and survival of 
organizations. Organizations are facing environmental challenges and need 
green technologies to improve their environmental performance and com‑
petitive position. Eco‑friendly processes and technologies prevent and reduce 
waste, including greenhouse gas emissions, and create a competitive advan‑
tage (Yunus and Michalisin, 2016).
Green supply chain management improves green performance, which in 
turn increases the competitiveness of organizations. Internal green prac‑
tices affect external green cooperation, which affects the organization’s 
green performance. Green supply chain management strategy and com‑
petitive strategy are closely related. Organizations use green supply chain 
management to differentiate their products and services and minimize the 
risk created by suppliers (Laari et al., 2017). Therefore, organizations must 
integrate environmental management into their supply chain strategy to 
create sustainable competition. The environmental sustainability of the 
supply chain is critical for logistics service providers and their competitive 
advantage. Organizations should focus on total supply chain management 
to design and develop an environmentally friendly and sustainable sup‑
ply chain network to increase both competitiveness and sustainability (Yu 
et al., 2014). A literature review of many research articles showed that green 
supply chain practices create sustainable competitive advantages. Finally, 
organizations that adopt green supply chain management practices often 
Green supply chain
management
Competitiveness
Industry 4.0
Figure 1.1 Linking three pillars with green supply chain management.Green supply chain management practices 5
gain a positive brand image that can differentiate them from competitors 
and attract more stakeholders. The above shows that implementing green 
supply chain management is not an option. It is imperative for all organiza‑
tions, whatever they do and wherever they work, to be able to sustain their 
business, improve their performance, and gain a competitive advantage.
1.4 INDUSTRY 4.0
Industry 4.0 is characterized by a combination of smart products, smart 
factories, smart logistics, and the Internet of Things to enable real‑time 
information on several activities throughout the entire supply chain (de 
Sousa et al., 2017). Industry 4.0 is a new business mindset to help organiza‑
tions transition to sustainable development with its technologies. Intelligent 
systems based on Industry 4.0 capabilities have several sustainability 
effects, such as the optimal use of resources and technology (Felsberger 
et al., 2020). According to the UK Automotive Sustainability Report 2019, 
extensive efforts have been made to digitize the automotive industry, and 
the next step in the digitization of automotive manufacturing is to connect 
manufacturers with wider supply chain operations. Although not explicitly 
stated, it emphasizes the importance of increasing the use of Industry 4.0 
technologies to further improve the efficiency and effectiveness of automo‑
tive supply chains. The automobile industry is undoubtedly the largest and 
most dominant production sector in the world. This industry is facing many 
environmental challenges, including inefficient end‑of‑life management of 
vehicles, increasing air pollution, adverse effects of climate change, and 
compliance with strict government laws and regulations (Orsato and Wells, 
2007).
In addition, customer expectations are constantly changing due to rapid 
advances in digital technology. In recent times, major automotive giants 
have introduced driverless cars that employ several digital technologies such 
as the Internet of Things, artificial intelligence, and cyber‑physical systems. 
In addition, global automotive organizations and their supply chains are 
under constant pressure to maintain strict environmental regulations with‑
out compromising innovation and technological advancements (Farahani 
et al., 2017). Several Industry 4.0 technologies such as 3D printing, robot‑
ics, and artificial intelligence can improve product design, manufacturing, 
and supply chain efficiency, respectively (Ghadge et  al., 2020; Modibbo 
et  al., 2022). Such technologies are bound to influence new paradigms, 
principles, and models in supply chain management. See Figure 1.2 for the 
application of Industry 4.0 technologies in sustainable logistics.
Industry 4.0 technologies will have a positive effect on the implementa‑
tion of an automotive green supply chain. In addition, Industry 4.0 technol‑
ogies positively improve green supply chain performance measures and thus 6 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
provide evidence that Industry 4.0 technologies help organizations transi‑
tion toward sustainable development (Bonilla et al., 2018). In addition, it is 
also evident that the impact of Industry 4.0 on green supply chain methods 
indirectly leads to improved green performance of automotive supply chains, 
which supports the findings of Kamble et al. (2020). Future supply chains 
must focus on driving and connecting technologies such as the Internet of 
Things, cyber‑physical systems, and blockchain to effectively implement a 
green supply chain. When combined with GSCM practices, Industry 4.0 can 
optimize supply chain operations, increase transparency, and enable real‑time 
environmental performance monitoring. For example, IoT sensors can track 
energy consumption, artificial intelligence algorithms can optimize route 
planning to minimize carbon emissions, and big data analytics can identify 
areas for sustainability improvement. Green supply chain practices, mainly 
reverse logistics and green purchasing, are heavily influenced by disruptive 
technologies and are critical to improving green supply chain performance. 
Identifying and linking Industry 4.0 technologies with green supply chain 
practices will help organizations make evidence‑based decisions to improve 
sustainability performance.
1.5 SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
Social responsibility in the supply chain is the term for the moral and ethi‑
cal standards that businesses uphold to guarantee the welfare of people 
and the environment throughout the supply chain’s operations. It entails 
considering the social, environmental, and financial effects of obtaining 
raw materials, producing goods, and distributing them to customers. Social 
responsibility of the company is an important business strategy to promote 
Industry 4.0
• More data
• Enabled connectivity
• Enhanced intelligence
• Flexible automation
Sustainable
development
• Economic dimension
• Environmental dimension
• Social dimension
Logistics 
operations
Purchasing
Manufacturing
Transportation
Warehousing
Information
Figure 1.2 The application of Industry 4.0 technologies in sustainable logistics.Green supply chain management practices 7
the sustainable development of companies. Social responsibility includes 
companies that engage in environmental conservation efforts, ethical 
work practices, philanthropy, and promoting volunteerism. For example, 
a company may change its production process to reduce carbon emissions. 
Researchers distinguish between internal and external corporate social 
responsibilities in terms of a company’s social actions, which are related to 
internal and external stakeholders, respectively. On the one hand, the inter‑
nal social responsibility of the company is related to the policies and prac‑
tices of the company regarding the psychological and physiological health 
of employees. These measures include respect for human rights, the health 
and safety of employees, the balance of work life, the training of employees, 
and the creation of equal and diverse opportunities. On the other hand, the 
external social responsibility of the company is related to the environmental 
and social actions of the company, which help to strengthen the legitimacy 
and reputation of the company among its external stakeholders (Hameed 
et al., 2016). Considering that the role of economic businesses has changed 
in society and the units are expected not only to increase their profitability 
but also to be accountable to society and to be committed to society, social 
responsibility has become a key factor in today’s society (Arab Salehi et al., 
2013).
Applying social responsibility as a business model has many benefits, such 
as improving reputation, creating a positive impact on the environment and 
communities, attracting more customers, increasing employee retention in a 
purposeful company, increasing capital growth, and creating a resilient sup‑
ply chain. Companies that are environmentally responsible can benefit from 
increased customer loyalty and a positive brand reputation. By adopting 
sustainable practices and promoting them through marketing campaigns, 
companies can help create positive change and contribute to a more sustain‑
able future. The benefits of applying social responsibility to improve supply 
chain management include the following:
• Increasing brand recognition
• Increasing public trust
• Rapid capital growth
• Retention of employees
• More stability
In addition to the above, Figure 1.3 shows the benefits of social responsi‑
bility better. Overall, social responsibility in the supply chain is essential 
for businesses to support sustainable growth, cultivate customer trust, and 
reduce risks brought on by unethical actions. It acknowledges that busi‑
nesses have a vital role in influencing a more socially and environmentally 
conscious world and that they have a responsibility that extends beyond 
their own activities.8 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
With respect to what was mentioned about the benefits of social respon‑
sibility in creating a green supply chain, it is expected that social responsi‑
bility can be effective in the use and implementation of green supply chain 
management. Green supply chain management methods related to social 
responsibility address the broader social impact of supply chain operations. 
By considering the social and ethical implications, organizations can make 
a positive contribution to the communities in which they operate. This can 
include fair labor practices, promoting diversity and inclusion, respecting 
human rights, and participating in humanitarian or community develop‑
ment initiatives.
1.6 HOW CAN ORGANIZATIONS ENSURE THAT 
THEIR SUPPLY CHAIN PRACTICES ALIGN WITH 
INDUSTRY 4.0, SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY, AND 
GREEN PRINCIPLES SIMULTANEOUSLY?
To ensure that supply chain methods are aligned with Industry 4.0, social 
responsibility, and green principles, organizations can take the following 
steps:
• Collaboration: Work closely with supply chain partners, stakehold‑
ers, and industry experts to develop a shared understanding of goals 
and values related to Industry 4.0, social responsibility, and green 
Safety
Social
responsibility
Social welfare
Environmental
protection
Employee growth
Figure 1.3 Impact of social responsibilities on a supply chain.Green supply chain management practices 9
principles. Joint efforts can lead to better alignment and innovative 
solutions.
• Technology Adoption: Embrace digital technologies such as the 
Internet of Things, artificial intelligence, blockchain, and data analyt‑
ics. These technologies can optimize supply chain processes, increase 
visibility, and enable better decision‑making, ultimately aligning with 
Industry 4.0.
• Sustainable Packaging and Logistics: Optimize packaging to reduce 
waste and use eco‑friendly materials. Implement efficient logistics 
methods to minimize greenhouse gas emissions, such as route optimi‑
zation, consolidation, and alternative transportation methods.
• Ethical Labor Practices: Ensure fair working conditions, fair wages, 
and compliance with labor laws throughout the supply chain. Regular 
audits and certifications can help verify ethical work practices.
• Supply Chain Transparency: Promote transparency throughout the 
supply chain. Encourage suppliers to disclose information about their 
operations, including social and environmental impacts. This trans‑
parency enables organizations to assess suppliers’ compliance with 
social responsibility and green principles.
• Continuous Improvement: Embrace a culture of continuous improve‑
ment by setting goals, monitoring progress, and optimizing supply 
chain practices over time. Regularly review and update strategies to 
align with evolving Industry 4.0 developments, social responsibility 
frameworks, and green principles.
By integrating these steps into their supply chain practices, organizations 
can simultaneously align with Industry 4.0, social responsibility, and green 
principles and create a more sustainable and responsible supply chain 
ecosystem.
1.7 CONCLUSION
Incorporating green supply chain management practices in the context of 
Industry 4.0 can increase competitiveness and contribute to social respon‑
sibility. With the advancements provided by Industry 4.0 technologies 
such as automation, the Internet of Things, and data analytics, businesses 
can optimize their supply chain processes to reduce environmental impact 
and improve efficiency. By implementing sustainable practices such as 
green logistics, environmentally friendly packaging, and renewable energy 
sources, organizations can minimize carbon dioxide emissions, conserve 
resources, and meet the growing expectations of socially responsible con‑
sumers. Such initiatives not only align with environmental goals but also 
enhance brand reputation, attract environmentally conscious customers, 10 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
and strengthen long‑term competitiveness in an evolving business land‑
scape. Ultimately, integrating green supply chain management practices 
with Industry 4.0 supports economic success and societal well‑being by 
promoting sustainability and social responsibility. In addition, linking 
green supply chain management practices with competitiveness, Industry 
4.0, and social responsibility offers significant benefits to business and soci‑
ety. By adopting environmentally friendly practices in their supply chains, 
companies can increase their competitiveness in the market. This is because 
consumers are increasingly willing to support brands that prioritize sus‑
tainability and have ethical business practices. The integration of Industry 
4.0 technologies such as automation, data analytics, and the Internet of 
Things can further optimize supply chains, boost efficiency, and reduce 
waste. In addition, carrying out social responsibility by considering the wel‑
fare of stakeholders and communities can enhance a company’s reputation 
and build customer trust. Therefore, the integration of green supply chain 
practices, Industry 4.0, and social responsibility contributes to a more sus‑
tainable and successful future for business and society.
Overall, linking GSCM practices with competition, Industry 4.0, and 
social responsibility allows organizations to align their operations with 
sustainable practices, gain a competitive advantage, drive innovation, and 
contribute to a greener and more socially responsible world.
REFERENCES
Ahmadini, A. A. H., Modibbo, U. M., Shaikh, A. A., & Ali, I. (2021). Multi‑objective 
optimization modelling of sustainable green supply chain in inventory and pro‑
duction management. Alexandria Engineering Journal, 60(6), 5129–5146.
Arab Salehi, M., Sadeghi, G., & Moeen, A. M. (2013). Social relationship with the 
financial performance of listed companies in Tehran Stock Exchange. Journal 
of Sport Psychology, 3(9), 1–20.
Ball, A., & Craig, R. (2010). Using neo‑institutionalism to advance social and envi‑
ronmental accounting. Critical Perspectives on Accounting, 21(4), 283–293. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpa.2009.11.006.
Bonilla, S. H., Silva, H. R. O., da Silva, M. T., Gonçalves, R. F., & Sacomano, J. B.
(2018). Industry 4.0 and sustainability implications: A scenario‑based analysis 
of the impacts and challenges. Sustainability, 10(10), 3740.
Brosseau, D., Ebrahim, S., Handscomb, C., & Thaker, S. (2019). The Journey to an 
Agile Organization. McKinsey & Company, May, 10, 14–27.
Cronjé, D. F., & du Plessis, E. (2020). A review on tourism destination competitive‑
ness. Journal of Hospitality and Tourism Management, 45, 256–265.
Cankurtaran, P., & Beverland, M. B. (2020). Using design thinking to respond to 
crises: B2B lessons from the 2020 COVID‑19 pandemic. Industrial Marketing 
Management, 88, 255–260.Green supply chain management practices 11
de Sousa, J., Beatriz, A., Vazquez‑Brust, D., Jabbour, C. J. C., & Latan, H. (2017). 
Green supply chain practices and environmental performance in Brazil: Survey, 
case studies, and implications for B2B. Industrial Marketing Management, 66, 
13–28.
Farahani, P., Meier, C., & Wilke, J. (2017). Digital supply chain management agenda 
for the automotive supplier industry. In Oswald, G., & Kleinemeier, M. (eds), 
Shaping the Digital Enterprise (pp. 157–172). Springer, Cham.
Fatorachian, H., & Kazemi, H. (2018). A critical investigation of Industry 4.0 in man‑
ufacturing: Theoretical operationalization framework. Production Planning & 
Control, 29(8), 633–644.
Felsberger, A., Qaiser, F. H., Choudhary, A., & Reiner, G. (2020). The impact of 
Industry 4.0 on the reconciliation of dynamic capabilities: Evidence from the 
European manufacturing industries. Production Planning & Control, 33(2–3), 
277–300.
Foerstl, K., Azadegan, A., Leppelt, T., & Hartmann, E. (2015). Drivers of supplier 
sustainability: Moving beyond compliance to commitment. Journal of Supply 
Chain Management, 51(1), 67–92. https://doi.org/10.1111/jscm.12067.
Gandhi, S., Mangla, S. K., Kumar, P., & Kumar, D. (2015). Evaluating factors in imple‑
mentation of successful green supply chain management using DEMATEL: A 
case study. International Strategic Management Review, 3(1), 96–109. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ism.2015.05.001.
Ghadge, A., Kara, M. E., Moradlou, H., & Goswami, M. (2020). The impact of 
Industry 4.0 implementation on supply chains. Journal of Manufacturing 
Technology Management, 31(4), 669–686.
Hameed, I., Riaz, Z., Arain, G. A., & Farooq, O. (2016). How do internal and exter‑
nal CSR affect employees’ organizational identification? A perspective from 
the group engagement model. Frontiers in Psychology, 7, 1–13. https://doi.
org/10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00788.
Kamble, S., Gunasekaran, A., & Dhone, N. C. (2020). Industry 4.0 and lean manu‑
facturing practices for sustainable organisational performance in Indian manu‑
facturing companies. International Journal of Production Research, 58(5), 
1319–1337. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2019.1630772.
Koh, L., Orzes, G., & Jia, F. J. (2019). The fourth industrial revolution (Industry 
4.0): Technologies disruption on operations and supply chain management. 
International Journal of Operations & Production Management, 39(6–8), 
817–828.
Laari, S., Töyli, J., & Ojala, L. (2017). Supply chain perspective on competitive 
strategies and green supply chain management strategies. Journal of Cleaner 
Production, 141, 1303–1315.
Luqman, A., Talwar, S., Masood, A., & Dhir, A. (2021). Does enterprise social media 
use promote employee creativity and well‑being? Journal of Business Research, 
131, 40–54.
Luthra, S., Garg, D., & Haleem, A. (2016). The impacts of critical success factors 
for implementing green supply chain management towards sustainability: 
An empirical investigation of Indian automobile industry. Journal of Cleaner 
Production, 121, 142–158. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.01.095.12 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
Mentzer, J. T., DeWitt, W., Keebler, J. S., Min, S., Nix, N. W., Smith, C. D., & Zacharia, 
Z. G. (2001). Defining supply chain management. Journal of Business Logistics, 
22(2), 1–25. https://doi.org/10.1002/j.2158‑1592.2001.tb00001.x.
Modibbo, U. M., Gupta, N., Chatterjee, P., & Ali, I. (2022). A systematic review on the 
emergence and applications of Industry 4.0. In Ali, I., Chatterjee, P., Shaikh, A. 
A., Gupta, N., & Al Arjani, A. (eds), Computational Modelling in Industry 4.0: 
A Sustainable Resource Management Perspective (pp. 1–9), Springer, Singapore.
Orsato, R. J., & Wells, P. (2007). The automobile industry & sustainability. Journal 
of Cleaner Production, 15(11–12), 989–993.
Sarkis, J., & Zhu, Q. (2018). Environmental sustainability and production: Taking 
the road less travelled. International Journal of Production Research, 56(1–2), 
743–759.
Schroeder, A., Ziaee Bigdeli, A., Galera Zarco, C., & Baines, T. (2019). Capturing the 
benefits of Industry 4.0: A business network perspective. Production Planning 
& Control, 30(16), 1305–1321.
Wang, C., Zhang, Q., & Zhang, W. (2020). Corporate social responsibility, green sup‑
ply chain management and firm performance: The moderating role of big‑data 
analytics capability. Research in Transportation Business and Management, 37, 
100557.
Yu, H., Solvang, W. D., & Chen, C. (2014). A green supply chain network design 
model for enhancing competitiveness and sustainability of companies in high 
north arctic regions. International Journal of Energy and Environment, 5, 
403–418.
Yunus, E. N., & Michalisin, M. D. (2016). Sustained competitive advantage through 
green supply chain management practices: A natural‑resource‑based view 
approach. International Journal of Services and Operations Management, 25, 
135–154.
Zhu, Q., Sarkis, J., & Lai, K. (2007). Green supply chain management: pres‑
sures, practices and performance within the Chinese automobile industry. 
Journal of Cleaner Production, 15(11), 1041–1052. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jclepro.2006.05.021.DOI: 10.1201/9781003503057-2 13
Chapter 2
Comparative analysis 
of machine learning 
algorithms for the power 
consumption prediction
M.A. Hambali, Andrew Ishaku Wreford, 
and Y.A. Olasupo
2.1 INTRODUCTION
The exponential growth of the humans’ population and rapid technological 
advancements have led to a sharp increase in power consumption world‑
wide (Kim and Cho 2019b). As electricity is consumed simultaneously with 
its generation at power plants, accurate energy consumption prediction has 
become crucial to ensure stable power supply. Understanding the energy 
structure, which represents the proportion of electricity, gas, cold, and heat 
in total energy consumption (Li et al. 2021), is essential for effective man‑
agement. End‑use energy refers to the energy directly consumed by users, 
such as electricity, gasoline, and natural gas, while primary energy is har‑
vested from natural resources and requires energy conversion technology 
to be usable. Researchers have focused on electric power consumption and 
forecasting due to the increasing consumption and the significance of its 
details (Salam and El Hibaoui 2018). Electricity companies invest substan‑
tial resources in effectively controlling and managing their power supply. 
In the past decade, electric power consumption has surged due to economic 
development and population growth, particularly in the industrial and 
domestic sectors.
Energy consumption is influenced by various factors, including weather, 
population, electricity prices, and consumer behavior (Salam and El 
Hibaoui 2018; Olagoke et al. 2016; Hambali et al. 2017). The complex‑
ity of these factors makes energy prediction more challenging. As a result, 
there is a pressing need for accurate and sophisticated methods to forecast 
energy consumption in today’s dynamic and evolving landscape.
The accurate prediction of electricity power consumption is of para‑
mount importance in optimizing the performance and efficiency of utility 
systems. Among various approaches, machine learning models have demon‑
strated remarkable accuracy in this task. In this study, we focus on predict‑
ing electricity power consumption for A‑day intervals and aim to identify 
the most effective machine learning algorithm for this purpose. To achieve 14 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
this, we conduct a comparative analysis of several popular machine learn‑
ing models, including random forest, Lasso regression, logistic regression, 
XGBoost regression, and K‑nearest neighbors (KNN) regression. The data‑
set used for this comparative analysis consists of historical data obtained 
from three power distribution networks in Tetouan city, located in north‑
ern Morocco. This dataset was collected from the Supervisory Control and 
Data Acquisition System (SCADA) at 10‑minute intervals, covering the 
period from January 1, 2017, to December 31, 2017.
Our primary objective is to determine which machine learning approach 
yields the most accurate power consumption predictions. To ensure the 
validity of our results, we employ rigorous evaluation metrics to assess the 
performance of each model. By evaluating the prediction errors and accu‑
racy of each algorithm, we aim to identify the model that provides the best 
results for electricity power consumption forecasting. The findings from 
this study will not only contribute to enhance the efficiency of utility sys‑
tems but also offer valuable insights into the application of machine learn‑
ing algorithms for power consumption prediction.
2.2 REVIEW OF RELATED WORKS
Olagoke et al. (2016) proposed an approach for short‑term load forecasting 
one day ahead, using an artificial neural network (ANN). They used genetic 
algorithms to generate the hidden layer of the ANN model and trained it with 
the Levenberg Marquardt algorithm. The data used for training and valida‑
tion were obtained from a substation in Kwara State, Nigeria. The model 
was implemented using MATLAB and evaluated using the mean absolute 
percentage error (MAPE), achieving a value of 4.705 for the forecasted day.
Hambali et  al. (2016) focused on electric power load forecasting and 
experimented with decision tree algorithms, including classification and 
regression tree (CART), reduced error pruning tree (REPTree), and deci‑
sion stump using data from Yola/Jimeta Power Transmission Company. 
The study found that the REPTree decision tree technique performed better 
than other decision tree algorithms, providing accurate load forecasts. The 
findings are particularly relevant for power transmission, generation, dis‑
tribution, and marketing companies to enable them forecast electric power 
load and provide appropriate advice and decisions in a timely manner.
Hambali et  al. (2017) proposed an artificial neural network (ANN) 
approach for electric load forecasting. They collected historical data from 
a power transmission company in Nigeria and employed data preprocess‑
ing and mining algorithms. Two ANN algorithms; multilayer‑perceptron 
model (MLP) with radial basis function (RBF) and the sequential minimal 
optimization (SMO) algorithm were compared, and the results indicated 
that MLP achieved an accuracy of 86% with a mean absolute error (MAE) Comparative analysis of machine learning algorithms 15
of 0.016, RBF achieved 76% accuracy with MAE of 0.030, and SMO 
achieved 85% accuracy with MAE of 0.090.
Salam and El Hibaoui (2018) conducted a comparative study to predict 
electricity power consumption at intervals of 10 minutes and/or every hour. 
They compared various machine learning models, including feedforward 
neural network, random forest, decision tree, and support vector machine 
for regression (SVR) with RBF kernel. The models were optimized using the 
grid‑search method. The study utilized data from three power distribution 
networks in Tetouan city, Morocco, collected every 10 minutes from the 
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition System (SCADA). The results 
showed that the random forest model outperformed the other models in 
terms of prediction accuracy.
Pramanik et  al. (2019) presented a comprehensive analysis of smart‑
phone power consumption, examining internal and external factors. The 
paper provided literature reviews on power consumption assessment, 
power consumption management, smartphone batteries, and mitigation of 
battery‑related issues. Recent empirical research works were analyzed and 
discussed in detail, providing insights into power consumption reduction 
measures for each factor.
As the global energy demand increases, the significance of the energy 
management system (EMS) is growing (Kim and Cho 2019a). The research‑
ers introduced a deep learning approach based on an autoencoder to predict 
energy demand in various scenarios. This model consists of a projector that 
determines an appropriate state for a given situation and a predictor that 
forecasts energy demand based on the defined state. The proposed model 
generates consumption predictions for different time intervals, including 
15, 30, 45, and 60 minutes, with reference to the demand up to 60 min‑
utes ago. Through experiments conducted on household electric power 
consumption data spanning 5 years, the model demonstrates superior per‑
formance compared to conventional models, with a mean squared error of 
0.384. Furthermore, the model enhances the interpretability of prediction 
results by visualizing the state using the t‑SNE algorithm. Despite being 
based on unsupervised representation learning, the authors validate that 
the proposed model effectively defines the state and accurately predicts 
energy demand. Their proposed model performs well in predicting energy 
consumption for various timespans and exhibits improved performance 
compared to conventional models using household electric power consump‑
tion data. However, the limitations include the lack of comparison with 
state‑of‑the‑art models, uncertainty assessment, and potential challenges in 
real‑world deployment.
Le et  al. (2019) introduced electric energy consumption  –  consumer 
base load (EECP‑CBL) framework, a combination of convolutional 
neural network (CNN) and bi‑directional long short‑term memory 
(Bi‑LSTM), designed to predict electric energy consumption in households. 16 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
The framework consists of three modules: CNN extracts relevant informa‑
tion from the dataset, Bi‑LSTM uses the extracted data and time series 
trends for predictions, and fully connected layers produce final energy con‑
sumption forecasts. Experimental results demonstrate that EECP‑CBL out‑
performs state‑of‑the‑art models in predicting energy consumption across 
various timespans of the dataset. Overall, the proposed framework offers a 
promising and accurate solution for energy consumption prediction, show‑
casing its superiority over existing methods. The scope includes evaluating 
the model on the IHEPC dataset across different timespans. However, the 
limitations include the lack of comparison with other advanced techniques, 
uncertainty in data availability, and potential challenges in model com‑
plexity and interpretability. It was stated that to address these gaps, future 
research could explore the generalization of the model to other datasets, 
compare it with other state‑of‑the‑art methods, and provide insights into 
variable selection and model interpretability.
In the study of Shao et al. (2020), the authors investigate the energy con‑
sumption of hotel buildings by creating a support vector machine (SVM) 
energy consumption prediction model. The SVM model uses weather and 
operating parameters of the hotel’s air‑conditioning system as input vari‑
ables and determines critical values of these parameters to enhance predic‑
tion stability by avoiding the influence of outliers. The RBF kernel function 
is employed to optimize the SVM model’s accuracy. The final model achieves 
a mean squared error (MSE) value of 2.22% and an R‑squared (R2) value 
of 0.94, allowing visual assessment of the hotel’s actual energy usage and 
offering suggestions for operational improvements to reduce energy con‑
sumption. In another paper, the authors analyze the influence mechanism 
of energy consumption structure, dividing it into three subsystems: society 
and economy, energy consumption, and carbon emission (Li et al. 2021). 
They use system dynamics theory to build a prediction model that considers 
the characteristics of regional energy consumption structure. The model is 
validated, and predictions for the energy consumption structure of Liaoning 
province from 2019 to 2038 are made. The results indicate that with policy 
support and technological progress, the proportion of coal, oil, natural gas, 
and other fossil energy will decrease gradually, while the growth rate of car‑
bon emissions will slow down. They suggest further implementation of the 
“two substitutes” policy to promote power substitution and energy utiliza‑
tion technological advancements. There is a need for comparative analysis, 
expanding the scope of hotel buildings studied, evaluating the model on 
external data, and addressing interpretability. Also, potential gaps include 
validation and sensitivity analysis, ensuring data availability and reliability, 
and considering additional external factors in the prediction model.
Li et  al. (2023) proposed a framework called Predictive Exit for deep 
learning applications, which enhances computation and energy efficiency 
by incorporating a low‑cost prediction engine. By adding additional layers 
to deep learning networks, early termination of inference is possible while Comparative analysis of machine learning algorithms 17
maintaining accuracy. However, the decision of whether to continue or 
exit the next layer is determined passively, requiring the evaluation of each 
pre‑placed exiting layer before termination. Moreover, adjusting comput‑
ing platform configurations as the inference progresses proves challenging. 
Predictive Exit addresses these issues by forecasting the exit point of the 
network, effectively determining the number of remaining layers needed 
to complete the inference. This approach significantly reduces computation 
cost by avoiding the execution of unnecessary pre‑placed exiting layers. 
Additionally, it enables the selection of appropriate computing configura‑
tions (e.g., frequency and voltage) based on the number of remaining lay‑
ers, resulting in energy savings. Extensive experimental results demonstrate 
that Predictive Exit achieves impressive performance compared to classic 
deep learning networks and early exit strategies. Specifically, it achieves up 
to a 96.2% reduction in computation and a 72.9% reduction in energy con‑
sumption compared to classic deep learning networks, while maintaining 
the same level of accuracy and latency. Furthermore, compared to early exit 
strategies under state‑of‑the‑art exiting strategies, Predictive Exit achieves 
a 12.8% reduction in computation and a 37.6% reduction in energy con‑
sumption, again with equivalent accuracy and latency.
In summary, the related work focuses on various aspects of energy con‑
sumption and forecasting, including electricity power consumption pre‑
diction, short‑term load forecasting, electric power load forecasting using 
machine learning techniques, and smartphone power consumption analy‑
sis. Each study contributes to understanding and improving energy effi‑
ciency in different domains.
2.3 RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
This section presents the research methodology utilized in the prediction of 
Tetouan power consumption. Furthermore, it provides the general descrip‑
tions of the machine learning algorithm used, the dataset description, and 
the performance evaluation metrics proposed for the validation of each 
algorithm’s performance.
In solving real‑world problems relating to formal engineering practice, the 
design of a research methodology is essential for achieving feasible results. 
Hence, the design of a research methodology gives this research legitimacy 
and thus provides sound findings regarding the power consumption of the 
Tetouan research in Morocco. It further provides a detailed plan that helps 
to keep the research on track, while making the process smooth, effective, 
and manageable. The methodology designed takes into cognizance three 
steps. The first step entails reading the dataset, the conductance of data 
preprocessing, and data splitting into train and test proportions; the second 
step entails feeding the training dataset to the models so as to enable the 
models to learn about the power consumption patterns of Tetouan during 18 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
the course of the model training. The last step entails the evaluation of the 
model performance via the root mean square and absolute mean error to 
identify if the result is acceptable or not. In a scenario where the result is 
not good, step 2 is repeated to obtain a feasible model, and thus, if the result 
is feasible, the model is accepted. The flow of the methodology is shown in 
Figure 2.1.
Tetuan dataset
Start
Data-preprocessing
Data-split Training-data
Random forest
Linear regression
Lasso regression
KNN
XGBoost
Models
Un-acceptable
Prediction
Accuracies?
Acceptable
Successful
model
Stop
Test-data
Figure 2.1 Research methodology.Comparative analysis of machine learning algorithms 19
2.3.1 Dataset description
The data utilized in this research constitutes historical power consumption 
data from Tetouan city located in north Morocco. The data was collected 
every 10  minutes during the period spanning from January 1, 2017, at 
00:00:00 to December 31, 2017, at 23:50:00. The power usage information 
was gathered from the Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition System 
(SCADA) belonging to Amendis, a public service provider responsible for 
distributing both drinking water and electricity since 2002 in Morroco. This 
dataset is unique and complete, with no missing data, comprising informa‑
tion on the date, time, and consumption for the three distribution networks. 
These distribution networks are supplied by three source stations: Quads, 
Smir, and Boussafou. The data can be accessed from Kaggle repository at 
https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/fedesoriano/electric‑power‑consumption
2.3.2 Models description
In this study, we employ five different machine learning models to predict 
power for each of the distribution networks. The details of each model are 
provided in the following subsections.
2.3.2.1 Random Forest
A random forest is an ensemble technique capable of performing both 
regression and classification tasks with the use of multiple decision trees 
and a technique called bootstrap aggregation (commonly known as bag‑
ging) (Sarica et al. 2017). Ensemble defines a technique of combining mul‑
tiple models, trained over the same data while averaging the results of each 
model ultimately and hence producing a more powerful predictive result 
(Sarica et  al. 2017). The aforementioned bootstrapping term defines the 
process of randomly sampling a subset of a dataset over a given number 
of iterations and a given number of variables. Bootstrapping is an example 
of an applied ensemble model (Schonlau and Zou 2020). Hence, the basic 
idea of the random forest algorithm is to combine multiple decision trees 
in determining the final output rather than relying on individual trees. The 
pseudocode for random forest is presented in Algorithm 2.1.
2.3.2.2 Linear regression
Linear regression (LR) is a linear modeling approach that tries to find 
the relationship between one or more independent variables (predictors) 
denoted as X and the dependent variable (target) denoted Y (Maulud and 
Abdulazeez 2020). Computationally, the algorithm greatly depends on find‑
ing the best‑fit line for the training as well as test data. The best‑fit line can 20 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
be found by minimizing the distance between all data points and its dis‑
tance to the regression line (by calculating the error (sum of squares error), 
we can find the minimum distance), i.e., the distance between the points 
and the line should be minimum. This is done in a recursive method. The 
pseudocode for LR is presented in Algorithm 2.2.
2.3.2.3 Lasso regression
Lasso regression, also known as L1 regularization, is a linear regression 
algorithm that adds a penalty term to the cost function in order to avoid 
overfitting (Ranstam and Cook 2018). This penalty term is proportional 
to the absolute values of the model coefficients, and it encourages the coef‑
ficients to be sparse, which means that many of them will be exactly zero. 
Lasso regression works by initializing the model coefficients with small ran‑
dom values, calculating the cost function, which is the mean squared error 
plus a penalty term based on the absolute values of the coefficients before 
updating the model coefficients based on the gradient of the cost function 
with respect to each coefficient, the process is repeated for some number of 
steps until convergence or a maximum number of iterations is reached. The 
pseudocode for Lasso regression is presented in Algorithm 2.3.
Algorithm 2.1: Random Forest
Input: training data X, training labels y, number of trees n, maximum 
depth of trees max_depth, number of features to consider at each split 
max_features
Output: trained Random Forest model
For i to n:
Step 1: Randomly select a subset of the training data with a replacement
Step 2: Train a decision tree on the subset of the train‑data
Fit a decision tree to the subset using the following steps:
‑ Starting with the root node, select the feature that maximizes the 
information gain or the Gini impurity
‑ Split the data based on the selected feature
‑ Recursively repeat the process for each child node until the maxi‑
mum depth is reached or the node contains too few instances
‑ Stop the tree‑growing process when the maximum depth is reached 
or the node contains too few instancesComparative analysis of machine learning algorithms 21
Step 3: Store the trained decision tree in the forest
Step 4: Make predictions using the Random Forest
for each instance in the test data:
 make a prediction using each decision tree in the Random Forest
 combine the predictions using either the average or the majority vote
Return trained Random Forest model
2.3.2.4 KNN
K‑nearest neighbors (KNN) is a type of supervised learning algorithm used 
for both regression and classification (Kohli et al. 2020). KNN predicts by 
calculating the distance between the test data and all the training points 
and then selects the K number of points which is closest to the test data. 
Hence, the algorithm calculates the probability of the test data belonging 
to the classes of ‘K’ training data, and the class that holds the highest prob‑
ability will be selected (Dorigo et al. 2022). In the case of regression (as 
in the case of this study), the value is the mean of the ‘K’ selected training 
points. In summary, KNN uses ‘feature similarity’ to predict the values for 
test data/new data points. When considering regression problems, KNN 
uses Euclidean to calculate the distance between data points (Kohli et al. 
2020). The Euclidean distance is calculated as
= − ∑( ) =
x y
i
k
ED i i
1
2
The pseudocode for KNN is presented in Algorithm 2.4.
Algorithm 2.2: Linear Regression
Initialize variables:
n: number of data points
x: array of input values,
y: array of output values
sumx: sum of all x values
sum : y  sum of all y values
sum : xy sum of  *x y for all data points
sumx2: sum of x2 for all datapoint
Calculate means:
meanx x :sum /n
meany y :sum /n22 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
Calculate slope and intercept:
slope= (sumxy − − n n *mean *x y      mean ) /sumx x * mean 2 2
 intercept m= − ean s y x     lope*mean
Return the fitted line:
 y x predicted = + slope* intercept
Algorithm 2.3: Lasso Algorithm
Input: training data X, training labels y, regularization parameter 
lambda, learning rate alpha
Output: learned Lasso regression model, n maximum iterations
Initialize the model coefficients with small random values
For i to n:
 Step 1: Calculate the cost function
 Calculate the mean squared error of the predictions
Add the penalty term based on the absolute values of the 
coefficients
Calculate the total cost function
 Step 2: Update the model coefficients
Calculate the gradient of the cost function with respect to 
each coefficient
Update each coefficient using the learning rate and gradient
 Step 3: Check for convergence
Calculate the change in the coefficients from the previous 
iteration
If the change is below a threshold, break out of the loop
Return learned Lasso regression model
Algorithm 2.4: KNN
Parameter: sum : x  sum of x  for all datapoint 2 2
Step‑1: Select the k number of neighbors
Step‑2: Calculate the Euclidean distance= ∑( ) −
=
x y
i
k
i i
1
2
Step‑3: Take the K‑nearest neighbors as per the calculated Euclidean 
distance.Comparative analysis of machine learning algorithms 23
Step‑4: Via the k‑neighbors, count the number of the data points in each 
category.
Step‑5: Assign the new data points to that category for which the number 
of the neighbor is maximum.
2.3.2.5 XGBOOST
XGBoost (eXtreme Gradient Boosting) is a powerful machine learning 
algorithm for regression, classification, and ranking tasks. It is a highly 
efficient implementation of the gradient boosting algorithm, and it uses an 
optimized data structure for the decision tree to enable fast parallel pro‑
cessing (Mitchell and Frank 2017). XGBoost working process includes the 
initialization of the model parameters, such as the learning rate, the number 
of trees, the maximum depth of each tree, and the regularization param‑
eters. Split the training data into subsets and create a decision tree for each 
subset and hence for each three, calculate the gradient and Hessian of the 
loss function with respect to the predicted values, before updating the pre‑
dicted values of the training data based on the gradient and Hessian values, 
using the learning rate and regularization parameters. These processes are 
repeated for the specified number of trees, before combing the predictions 
of all trees to make the final prediction. The pseudocode for XGBoost is 
presented in Algorithm 2.5.
2.3.3 Evaluation metrics
The performance of the model was evaluated using the below indicators:
Root mean squared error (RMSE): It is the average of the squared differ‑
ence between the predicted and actual value.
∑ ( ) =
− =
y y
n
i
n
i
f i
ob
RMSE 1
2
where:
yi
f
is the ith observed data,
yi
ob is the ith forecasted data,
n is the amount of data.
Mean absolute error: the mean absolute error (MAE) refers to the magni‑
tude of difference between the prediction of an observation and the true 
value of that observation. MAE takes the average of absolute errors for a 
group of predictions and observations as a measurement of the magnitude 
of errors for the entire group. MAE can also be referred as L1 loss function.24 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
∑ ( ) λ ( ) =
− =
abs y x
n
i
n
i i
MAE   1
where yi is the true target value for test instance, λ ( ) xi is the predicted tar‑
get value for test instance xi, and n is the number of test instances.
Accuracy: Accuracy refers to the overall rate of success in correctly pre‑
dicting instances.
Algorithm 2.5: XGBOOST Algorithm
Input: training data X, training labels y, model parameters, n number of 
trees Li
 regularization, w leaf weights
Output: trained XGBoost model
Initialize model parameters for i in range(n):
 Step 1: Split the train‑data into subsets and randomly select a subset 
of the train‑data
 Step 2: Create a decision tree for the subset
 Fit a decision tree to the subset using the following steps:
 ‑ Starting with the root node, select the feature that maximizes 
the information gain
 ‑ Split the data based on the selected feature
 ‑ Recursively repeat the process for each child node until the max‑
imum depth is reached or the node contains too few instances
 Step 3: Calculate the gradient and Hessian of the loss function
 Calculate the gradient and Hessian of the loss function with respect 
to the predicted values using the following steps:
 ‑ Calculate the negative gradient of the loss function with respect 
to the predicted values
‑ Calculate the Hessian of the loss function with respect to the 
predicted values
 ‑ Apply Li
 regularization to the gradient and Hessian if specified 
in the model parameters
 Step 4: Update the predicted values based on the gradient and HessianComparative analysis of machine learning algorithms 25
 Update the predicted values of the train‑data based on the gradi‑
ent and Hessian values, using the learning rate and regularization 
parameters:
 ‑ Calculate the w for each leaf node in the tree
 ‑ Update the predicted values of the train‑data for the current 
subset using the leaf weights
 Step 5: Combine the predictions of all trees for final predictions
return trained XGBoost model
2.4 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The original dataset was gathered during a span of 10 minutes, and our 
research aims to analyze it for predicting power consumption patterns over 
a day period intervals, thereby empowering utilities to make informed deci‑
sions. At the initial stage, the original dataset was analyzed and visual‑
ized zone by zone, where Zonal 1, 2 and 3 depict Quads, Boussafou, and 
Smir distribution, respectively. Figures 2.2–2.5 display the hourly (from 0 
to 23 hours), weekly (day 0–6), monthly, and quarterly output consump‑
tion data of the three distribution networks throughout the entire year of 
2017. Figure 2.2a–c shows the hourly distribution of power consumption 
for 24 hours, there is a power rise in the day, up to midnight before the 
power consumption starts to fall. This is due to a rise in temperature during 
the daytime and early part of the night. Figure 2.3a–c shows weekly distri‑
bution of power consumption. The power consumption patterns shift due 
to human behavior, showing variations between weekdays and weekends. 
Typically, on weekdays, household power usage decreases while it increases 
in factories, commercial spaces, and public establishments. Conversely, the 
opposite trend is observed during weekends, except in zone 3 (Figure 2.3c) 
which has a similar pattern of power usage. This indicates that zone 3 is a 
residential area that has commercial space within.
Furthermore, the three distribution networks share both commonalities 
and distinctions. They all experience a rise in power consumption during 
the summer months, attributed to hot weather and increased visitor num‑
bers, which boost the population. However, what sets them apart is the 
decreased power consumption observed in the Quads and Smir distribution 
networks during November and December, in contrast to the power usage 
of the Boussafou distribution (Figures 2.4b and 2.5b) during those same 
months.26 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
2.4.1 Experimental results
The effectiveness of the suggested approach relies heavily on the results 
derived from experiments conducted in various scenarios. Therefore, the 
results of these experiments play a pivotal role in the research field. The 
proposed method was implemented in a Python 3.9 environment and exe‑
cuted on a 64‑bit MacBook M1 chip (2.50 GHz) PC with 8 GB of RAM. 
Various date and time characteristics serve as inputs for the predictive mod‑
els. These include factors such as month, day of the month, hour, day of 
the year, week of the year, day of the week, quarter, and minute. The rela‑
tionship between these independent variables and dependent variables were 
illustrated in Figure 2.6 using a correlation matrix.
Following the application of data preprocessing, the original dataset 
was first normalized using Max–Min normalization. The dataset was then 
divided into training and testing subsets, with a split of 70% for train‑
ing and 30% for testing. To facilitate comparisons, we computed average 
(a)
(b) (c)
0
50000
45000
40000
35000
Zone 2 Power Consumption
Zone 1 Power Consumption
Zone 3 Power Consumption
30000
25000
20000
15000
12345678 9 10 1112
hour
Hourly Power consumption
Hourly Power consumption Hourly Power consumption
40000
30000
20000
10000 10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
35000
13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23
012345678 9 10 11 12
hour
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23
hour
13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23
Figure 2.2 Hourly distribution of power consumption for 24 hours.Comparative analysis of machine learning algorithms 27
values of 100 implementations for all the models. The parameters opti‑
mized through a search grid were specifically used for evaluating the A‑day 
power consumption dataset. Table 2.1 displays the fine‑tuned parameters 
of the comparative models, and it’s evident that the k parameter in KNN 
varies across different distributions. Figure 2.7a–c shows the graph of the 
k value against the power consumption predicted for each of the zones and 
the optimal value of k was picked for the experiment. Tables 2.2–2.4 pres‑
ent the results of each zone.
Table 2.2 presents the result of five predictive models employed to predict 
power consumption in zone 1 that is Quads distribution. The results show 
that XGBoost outperforms other models with the least value of 2643.41 
and 3179.15 in MAE and RMSE, respectively and then followed by Lasso 
50000
35000
40000
30000
20000
10000
30000
25000
20000
15000
10000
45000
40000
35000
30000
25000
20000
15000
0 123
day of week
Weekly Power consumption
Weekly Power consumption Weekly Power consumption
456
0 123
day of week
4 5 6 0123
day of week
4 5 6
Zone 1 Power Consumption
Zone 2 Power Consumption
Zone 3 Power Consumption
(a)
(b) (c)
Figure 2.3 Daily distribution of power consumption for a week.28 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
in MAE and RF in RMSE, while the highest values of MAE and RMSE 
were recorded in KNN.
Table 2.3 shows that the best result was achieved by the XGBoost model 
in zone 2 with the value of 3,141.07 and 4,116.36 in both MAE and RMSE, 
respectively. The highest value of MAE and RMSE was achieved by KNN 
with 5,303.54 and 6,216.83, respectively.
Also, Table 2.3 shows the results of the predictive model for zone 3. The 
best result was also achieved from the XGBoost model with the least MAE 
and RMSE values of 1,610.98 and 1,973.76, respectively. While Lasso gave 
the highest value of 6,005.38 MAE and LR achieved the highest value of 
RMSE of 6,939.19.
Figures 2.8–2.10 illustrate a comparison between the actual load data 
acquired from the original dataset, which closely aligns with the output 
data generated from predictive models for each zone distribution.
(a)
(b) (c)
1
50000
45000
40000
35000
30000
25000
20000
15000
35000
30000
25000
20000
15000
10000 10000
20000
30000
40000
234567
month
8 9 10 11 12
1234567
month
8 9 10 11 12 123456 7
month
8 9 10 11 12
Zone 1 Power Consumption
Zone 2 Power Consumption
Zone 3 Power Consumption
Monthly Power consumption Monthly Power consumption
Monthly Power consumption
Figure 2.4 Monthly distribution of power consumption for a year.Comparative analysis of machine learning algorithms 29
The accuracy of the predictive models was illustrated in Figures 2.11–
2.13 for each zone distribution. Figure 2.11 shows that KNN has the highest 
accuracy of 98.05%, followed by XGBoost 93.71%. The lowest accuracy 
achieved in the zone was 61.78% in Lasso and LR. Figure 2.12 depicts the 
accuracy for zone 2 distribution which indicates that KNN achieved the 
highest accuracy of 98.45%, followed by XGBoost with 93.49% accuracy 
while the lowest accuracy of 59.23% was obtained in Lasso and LR. Also, 
the highest accuracy recorded in zone 3 was achieved by KNN with 99.02% 
accuracy (Figure 2.13) followed by XGBoost with 96% accuracy and the 
worst accuracy of 48.75% was achieved in Lasso and LR. This indicates that 
in terms of accuracy, KNN outperformed other models, followed closely by 
XGBoost while Lasso and LR models performed worst. Though accuracy 
is not the best measure for regression tasks, but employed as an additional 
(a)
(b) (c)
50000
45000
40000
35000
30000
25000
20000
15000
1 2 3 4 quarter
1 234
quarter
1234
quarter
Zone 1 Power Consumption
Zone 2 Power Consumption 35000
30000
25000
20000
15000
10000
10000
20000
30000
40000
Zone 3 Power Consumption
Quarterly Power consumption
Quarterly Power consumption Quarterly Power consumption
Figure 2.5 Quarterly distribution of power consumption for a year.30 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
metric to ascertain the performance of the best model that gives a low error 
rate. Therefore, with indication from all the metrics used XGBoost per‑
formed better than all other models in all the three zone distribution.
Humidity
Wind Speed
General diffuse flows
Diffuse flows
Zone 1 Power Consumption
Zone 2 Power Consumption
Zone 3 Power Consumption
Temperature 1.0 –0.5 0.5 0.5 0.2 0.4 0.4 0.5
0.5 –0.1 1.0 0.1 –0.0 0.2 0.1 0.3
0.5 –0.5 0.1 1.0 0.6 0.2 0.2 0.1
0.2 –0.3 –0.0 0.6 1.0 0.1 0.0 –0.0
0.4 –0.3 0.2 0.2 0.1 1.0 0.8 0.8
0.4 –0.3 0.1 0.2 0.0 0.8 1.0 0.6
0.5 –0.2 0.3 0.1 –0.0 0.8 0.6 1.0
–0.5 1.0 –0.1 –0.5 –0.3 –0.3 –0.3 –0.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
–0.2
–0.4
Humidity
Wind Speed
General diffuse flows
Diffuse flows
Zone 1 Power Consumption
Zone 2 Power Consumption
Zone 3 Power Consumption
Temperature
Figure 2.6 Correlation diagram.
Table 2.1 Parameters setting for classifier algorithms
Model Parameter(s)
RF No of estimators = 300
Max features = ‘sqrt’
Max depth = 5
Random state = 18
XGBoost Objective = ‘reg:squarederror’
Col sample by tree = 0.7
Learning rate = 0.01
Max depth = 5
Min child weight = 3
No of estimators = 500
Subsample = 0.5
KNN k = 9 (for zone 1 and 2)
k = 7 (for zone 3)Comparative analysis of machine learning algorithms 31
6200 0 2800
5300
5200
5100
5000
4900
4800
4700
4600
2750
2700
2650
2600
2550
2500
6150
6100
6050
6000
5950
5900
0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0 12.5 15.0 17.5 0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0 12.5 15.0 17.5
0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5
(a)
(b) (c)
10.0 12.5 15.0 17.5
0
0
Figure 2.7 Graph of the k value against the power consumption predicted for each of 
the zones
Table 2.3 MAE and RMSE comparison of the models for a day power consumption 
for zone 2 distribution
Performance metrics Lasso RF LR XGBoost KNN
MAE 3,979.81 3,603.73 3,976.12 3,141.07 5,303.54
RMSE 5,064.76 4,745.61 5,060.55 4,116.36 6,216.83
Table 2.2 MAE and RMSE comparison of the models for a day power consumption 
for zone 1 distribution
Performance metrics Lasso RF LR XGBoost KNN
MAE 3,567.95 3,608.36 3,571.49 2,643.41 3,680.37
RMSE 4,420.12 4,205.77 4,424.12 3,179.15 4,615.0232 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
2.5 CONCLUSION
Accurately forecasting power consumption plays a pivotal role in the effi‑
cient, productive, and sustainable management of electricity systems. In 
this study, we applied a range of machine learning techniques, including 
random forest, Lasso regression, logistic regression, XGBoost, and KNN 
Table 2.4 MAE and RMSE comparison of the models for a day power consumption 
for zone 3 distribution
Performance metrics Lasso RF LR XGBoost KNN
MAE 6,005.38 2,245.07 6,013.02 1,610.98 1,812.37
RMSE 6,931.40 2,587.94 6,939.19 1,973.75 2,467.99
45000
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
(e)
40000
35000
30000
power watts 25000
20000
2017-12-15 2017-12-17 2017-12-19 2017-12-21 2017-12-23
Lasso Power consumptions Predictions for zone one
date
2017-12-25 2017-12-27 2017-12-29 2017-12-31
2017-12-31
45000
40000
35000
30000
power watts 25000
20000
2017-12-15 2017-12-17 2017-12-19 2017-12-21 2017-12-23
Random Forest Power consumptions Predictions for zone one
date
2017-12-25 2017-12-27 2017-12-29 2017-12-31
45000
40000
35000
30000
power watts
25000
20000
45000
40000
35000
30000
power watts
25000
20000
45000
40000
35000
30000
power watts
25000
20000
2017-12-15 2017-12-17 2017-12-19 2017-12-21 2017-12-23
XGBoost Power consumptions Predictions for zone one
KNN Power consumptions Predictions for zone one
Logistic Regression Power consumptions Predictions for zone one
date
2017-12-15 2017-12-17 2017-12-19 2017-12-21 2017-12-23 2017-12-25 2017-12-27 2017-12-29
date
2017-12-25 2017-12-27 2017-12-29 2017-12-31
2017-12-15 2017-12-17 2017-12-19 2017-12-21 2017-12-23
date
2017-12-25 2017-12-27 2017-12-29 2017-12-31
Actual Value
Predictions
Actual Value
Predictions
Actual Value
Predictions
Actual Value
Predictions
Actual Value
Predictions
Figure 2.8 Models power consumption comparison between the actual load and pre￾dicted load for zone 1.Comparative analysis of machine learning algorithms 33
regression, to predict power consumption in three distribution networks 
within Tetouan city. Our primary objective was to evaluate the performance 
of these algorithms and determine the most effective one for energy fore‑
casting. We utilized a dataset sourced from the Kaggle dataset repository, 
enabling us to predict power consumption for a single day while incorpo‑
rating predictive variables related to calendar and weather conditions. Our 
analysis revealed that the hour of the day and temperature emerged as the 
most influential predictive factors. To optimize the comparative models, we 
employed grid search to identify the best‑suited parameters. Our findings 
demonstrated that the XGBoost model consistently outperformed the other 
models when predicting electricity consumption in Tetouan city, achieving 
the lowest error rates. Looking ahead, we also intend to undertake a finan‑
cial analysis to gauge the economic impact of our predictive models.
Lasso Power consumptions Predictions for zone two Random Forest Power consumptions Predictions for zone two
XGBoost Power consumptions Predictions for zone two
KNN Power consumptions Predictions for zone two
Logistic Regression Power consumptions Predictions for zone two
35000
30000
25000
20000
15000
10000
2017-12-15 2017-12-17 2017-12-19 2017-12-21 2017-12-23
date
2017-12-25 2017-12-27 2017-12-29 2017-12-31
power watts
35000
30000
25000
20000
15000
2017-12-15 2017-12-17 2017-12-19 2017-12-21 2017-12-23
date
2017-12-25 2017-12-27 2017-12-29 2017-12-31
power watts
35000
30000
25000
20000
15000
10000
2017-12-15 2017-12-17 2017-12-19 2017-12-21 2017-12-23
date
2017-12-25 2017-12-27 2017-12-29 2017-12-31
power watts
35000
30000
25000
20000
15000
2017-12-15 2017-12-17 2017-12-19 2017-12-21 2017-12-23
date
2017-12-25 2017-12-27 2017-12-29 2017-12-31
power watts
35000
30000
25000
20000
15000
2017-12-15 2017-12-17 2017-12-19 2017-12-21 2017-12-23
date
2017-12-25 2017-12-27 2017-12-29 2017-12-31
power watts
Actual Value
Predictions
Actual Value
Predictions
Actual Value
Predictions
Actual Value
Predictions
Actual Value
Predictions
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
(e)
Figure 2.9 Models power consumption comparison between the actual load and pre￾dicted load for zone 2.34 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
(a) (b)
(e)
(c) (d)
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
16000
18000
20000
2017-12-15 2017-12-17 2017-12-19 2017-12-21 2017-12-23
date
2017-12-25 2017-12-27 2017-12-29 2017-12-31
power watts 6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
16000
18000
20000
2017-12-15 2017-12-17 2017-12-19 2017-12-21 2017-12-23
date
2017-12-25 2017-12-27 2017-12-29 2017-12-31
power watts
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
16000
18000
2017-12-15 2017-12-17 2017-12-19 2017-12-21 2017-12-23
date
2017-12-25 2017-12-27 2017-12-29 2017-12-31
power watts 6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
16000
18000
2017-12-15 2017-12-17 2017-12-19 2017-12-21 2017-12-23
date
2017-12-25 2017-12-27 2017-12-29 2017-12-31
power watts
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
16000
18000
2017-12-15 2017-12-17 2017-12-19 2017-12-21 2017-12-23
date
2017-12-25 2017-12-27 2017-12-29 2017-12-31
power watts
Lasso Power consumptions Predictions for zone three Random Forest Power consumptions Predictions for zone three
XGBoost Power consumptions Predictions for zone three
KNN Power consumptions Predictions for zone three
Logistic Regression Power consumptions Predictions for zone three
Actual Value
Predictions
Actual Value
Predictions
Actual Value
Predictions
Actual Value
Predictions
Actual Value
Predictions
Figure 2.10 Models power consumption comparison between the actual load and pre￾dicted load for zone 3.
Lasso Regression
Random Forest
Classifier Logistic Regression
XGBoost Regression
KNN Regression
0 20 40 60
Accuracy %
Model Accuracy
80 100
Figure 2.11 Model accuracy for zone 1 distribution.Comparative analysis of machine learning algorithms 35
REFERENCES
Dorigo, Tommaso, Sofia Guglielmini, Jan Kieseler, Lukas Layer, and Giles C. 
Strong. 2022. “Deep Regression of Muon Energy with a K‑Nearest Neighbor 
Algorithm.” ArXiv Preprint ArXiv:2203.02841.
Hambali, Moshood Abiola, Oladunjoye Johm Abiodun, Akinyemi Adesina Adesina, 
and Nje Yusuf. 2016. “Electric Power Load Forecast Using Decision Tree 
Algorithms.” Computing, Information Systems, Development Informatics and 
Allied Research Journal 7 (4): 29–42.
Lasso Regression
Random Forest
Classifier
Logistic Regression
XGBoost Regression
KNN Regression
0 20 40 60
Accuracy %
80 100
Model Accuracy Zone Three
Figure 2.13 Model accuracy for zone 3 distribution.
Lasso Regression
Random Forest
Classifier
Logistic Regression
XGBoost Regression
KNN Regression
0 20 40 60
Accuracy %
80 100
Model Accuracy Zone Two
Figure 2.12 Model accuracy for zone 2 distribution.36 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
Hambali, Moshood A., Yakub. K. Saheed, Morufat. D. Gbolagade, and Muhammad 
Gaddafi. 2017. “Artificial Neural Network Approach for Electric Load 
Forecasting in Power Distribution Company.” E‑Academia Journal 6 (2): 
80–90.
Kim, Jin‑Young, and Sung‑Bae Cho. 2019a. “Electric Energy Consumption Prediction 
by Deep Learning with State Explainable Autoencoder.” Energies 12 (4): 739.
Kim, Tae‑Young, and Sung‑Bae Cho. 2019b. “Predicting Residential Energy 
Consumption Using CNN‑LSTM Neural Networks.” Energy 182: 72–81.
Kohli, Shreya, Gracia T. Godwin, and Siddhaling Urolagin. 2020. “Sales Prediction 
Using Linear and KNN Regression.” In: Patnaik, S., Yang, XS., Sethi, I. (eds) 
Advances in Machine Learning and Computational Intelligence: Proceedings 
of ICMLCI 2019, pp. 321–329. Springer, Singapore
Le, Tuong, Minh T. Vo, Bay Vo, Eenjun Hwang, Seungmin Rho, and Sung W. Baik. 
2019. “Improving Electric Energy Consumption Prediction Using CNN and 
Bi‑LSTM.” Applied Sciences 9 (20): 4237.
Li, Hongyan, Bin Li, and Dongxiao Niu. 2021. “Prediction on the Energy 
Consumption Structure in Liaoning Province Based on System Dynamics.” 
Polish Journal of Environmental Studies 30: 5593–5604.
Li, Xiangjie, Chenfei Lou, Yuchi Chen, Zhengping Zhu, Yingtao Shen, Yehan Ma, 
and An Zou. 2023. “Predictive Exit: Prediction of Fine‑Grained Early Exits 
for Computation‑and Energy‑Efficient Inference.” Proceedings of the AAAI 
Conference on Artificial Intelligence 37: 8657–8665.
Maulud, Dastan, and Adnan M. Abdulazeez. 2020. “A Review on Linear Regression 
Comprehensive in Machine Learning.” Journal of Applied Science and 
Technology Trends 1 (4): 140–147.
Mitchell, Rory, and Eibe Frank. 2017. “Accelerating the XGBoost Algorithm Using 
GPU Computing.” PeerJ Computer Science 3: e127.
Olagoke, Mahrufat D., Adeseko A. Ayeni, and Moshood. A. Hambali. 2016. “Short 
Term Electric Load Forecasting using Neural Network and Genetic Algorithm.” 
International Journal of Applied Information Systems 10 (February): 22–28.
Pramanik, Pijush K. D., Nilanjan Sinhababu, Bulbul Mukherjee, Sanjeevikumar 
Padmanaban, Aranyak Maity, Bijoy K. Upadhyaya, Jens B. Holm‑Nielsen, and 
Prasenjit Choudhury. 2019. “Power Consumption Analysis, Measurement, 
Management, and Issues: A State‑of‑the‑Art Review of Smartphone Battery 
and Energy Usage.” IEEE Access 7: 182113–182172.
Ranstam, Jonas, and Jonathan A. Cook. 2018. “LASSO Regression.” Journal of 
British Surgery 105 (10): 1348.
Salam, Abdulwahed, and Abdelaaziz El Hibaoui. 2018. “Comparison of Machine 
Learning Algorithms for the Power Consumption Prediction: Case Study of 
Tetouan City–.” In 2018 6th International Renewable and Sustainable Energy 
Conference (IRSEC), Rabat, Morocco pp. 1–5. IEEE.
Sarica, Alessia, Antonio Cerasa, and Aldo Quattrone. 2017. “Random Forest 
Algorithm for the Classification of Neuroimaging Data in Alzheimer’s Disease: 
A Systematic Review.” Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience 9: 329.
Schonlau, Matthias, and Rosie Y. Zou. 2020. “The Random Forest Algorithm for 
Statistical Learning.” The Stata Journal 20 (1): 3–29.
Shao, Minglei, Xin Wang, Zhen Bu, Xiaobo Chen, and Yuqing Wang. 2020. 
“Prediction of Energy Consumption in Hotel Buildings via Support Vector 
Machines.” Sustainable Cities and Society 57: 102128.DOI: 10.1201/9781003503057-3 37
Chapter 3
Prediction of cardiovascular 
disease using information 
gain, artificial neural network, 
and CART 5.0 algorithms
Asaju La’aro Bolaji, Andrew Ishaku Wreford, 
and Bridget Michael‑Ogbonna
3.1 INTRODUCTION
The heart is of no doubt one of the most significant organs of the human system. 
It pumps and circulates blood all over the human anatomy (Purusothaman 
and Krishnakumari, 2015). Hence, its failure to function effectively 
immensely affects the proper functionalities of other body systems such as 
the brain, and thus, within an infinitesimal period, an individual might meet 
his/her demise. According to the World Health Organization data from 2019, 
heart‑related diseases account for 17.9 million deaths, especially coronary 
heart disease, representing a global mortality rate of 32%, with an annual 
mortality rate of greater than 17.7 million. Consequentially, heart disease 
accounts for one‑third of deaths globally every year as noted by the World 
Health Organization (2019). Some of the typical symptoms for patients hav‑
ing cardiovascular disease (CVD) are chest pain, dizziness, nausea, shortness 
of breath, radiating pain in the arms, left shoulders, and elbows, discomfort 
while walking, high blood pressure, fatigue, etc., while the risk factors caus‑
ing CVD are cholesterol, hypertension, genetic or heredity, obesity, diabetes, 
dietary habits, aging, etc. (Purusothaman and Krishnakumari, 2015).
Over the past year, the application of intelligent systems in the medical dis‑
cipline has gained massive proliferation and breakthroughs in the successful 
issuance of treatment and diagnostics (Golande and Pavan, 2019). Moreover, 
the use of machine learning and deep learning techniques can be of great 
benefit to cardiac surgeons for cardiovascular diagnostic and operational 
purposes through the examination of cardiovascular datasets provided by 
scholars. Furthermore, it will allow physicians to provide better and improved 
outcomes for patients through scalable and dynamic applications via the hos‑
pitalized cardiovascular patient medical records gathered through routine 
blood samples and non‑hematological patient information such as age, gender, 
and smoking while empowering the proper identification of CVDs at an early 
stage via machine learning algorithms (Sumaira et al., 2022).38 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
Therefore, regarding the early identification of CVD, several authors over 
the past decade have attempted the application of various machine learn‑
ing‑ and deep learning‑based algorithms for the development of an efficient 
CVD prediction system. In regard to the machine learning algorithms, Shao 
et al. (2014) applied logistic regression and multivariate adaptive regression; 
Shilaskar and Ghatol (2013) in their study utilized the viability of the sup‑
port vector machine; furthermore, Amin et al. (2019) applied the viability 
of multiple machine learning algorithms such as the Naïve Bayes, K‑nearest 
neighbor, logistic regression, and decision tree algorithms, while applied the 
support vector machine, K‑nearest neighbor, and decision tree algorithms. 
In regard to the deep learning techniques, Rakibul et al. (2021) applied the 
radial basis function network (RBFN), the convolutional neural network, 
and the artificial neural network for the early identification of CVDs; Chitra 
and Jayalakshimi (2022) in their study on heart disease applied the recur‑
rent neural network for the prediction of heart disease; and Bhavekar and 
Goswami (2022) in their study evaluated the viability of the long short‑term 
memory in the prediction of CVD, while Subhadra and Vikas (2019) experi‑
mentally evaluated the viability of the multilayer perceptron. Furthermore, 
Inbarani et al. (2014) applied the artificial intelligence method using particle 
swarm optimization; Dangare and Apte (2012) also applied particle swarm 
optimization extended with the Naïve Bayes algorithm in the prediction of 
CVD. All these authors have achieved feasible results in their experiment 
and have thus proven the viability of artificial intelligence methods in clas‑
sifying CVDs while providing a platform for the exploration of machine 
learning and deep learning algorithms in the early identification and classifi‑
cation of cardiovascular diseases. This has motivated this study to develop a 
cardiovascular disease prediction model using the artificial neural network 
and classification and regression tree (C5.0) algorithms for estimating the 
likelihood of a patient having cardiovascular disease at an early stage from 
an analytical cardio‑heart disease dataset obtained from the UCI Machine 
Learning Repository, considering that the research on using machine learn‑
ing‑ and deep learning‑based algorithms to tackle heart disease and its 
related issues are currently at its peak with a high demand for better and 
more feasible prediction systems as the anticipation of cardiovascular dis‑
ease in advance makes it easier for doctors to proffer necessary prescriptions 
and diagnostic. A contribution to knowledge is the application of feature 
selection techniques using an information gain algorithm.
3.2 LITERATURE REVIEW
Several techniques have been applied to solve heart disease detection. This 
section presents some machine and deep learning algorithms applied by 
several researchers to solve cardiovascular heart disease problems.Prediction of cardiovascular disease using information gain 39
3.2.1 Machine learning approaches
Nazrul et  al. (2017) carried out a cardiovascular disease (CVD) predic‑
tion from an electrocardiogram using machine learning. They presented a 
population‑based project, which was a case‑control experiment carried out 
on about 65 subjects with ages ranging from 35 to 65 years. Five different 
parameters were used, including the R‑R interval and root mean square of 
successive differences extracted from the electrocardiogram (ECG), systolic 
and diastolic blood pressures, and total cholesterol level, which were sta‑
tistically significant in predicting CVD. Nazrul et al. (2017) adopted six 
machine learning algorithms to perform the prediction; the algorithms are 
as follows: linear discriminant analysis (LDA), linear and quadratic support 
vector machines (SVMs), decision tree (DN), k‑nearest neighbor (KN), and 
artificial neural network (ANN). These algorithms were implemented for 
evaluation in order to identify the one with the best algorithm for predict‑
ing CVD risk. The result showed that ANN performed better compared to 
the other algorithms with 90% specificity, 90% sensitivity, and 90% accu‑
racy. From the result above, Nazrul et al. (2017) inferred that the predictive 
model, which consists of ECG, SBP, DBP, and total cholesterol, can be used 
to predict CVD risk with almost 90% precision by using the ANN machine 
learning technique.
Amin et  al. (2019) researched the identification of significant features 
and data mining techniques for predicting heart disease. To classify the 
most relevant attributes of heart disease prediction, they optimized seven 
classification algorithms, namely Naïve Bayes (NB), K‑nearest neighbor 
(KNN), linear regression (LR), decision tree (DT), support vector machine 
(SVM), and voting classifier. The dataset utilized by the authors was the 
Cleveland dataset obtained from the UCI Machine Learning Repository. 
The dataset consists of 303 records and 76 attributes. During their model 
training and testing, they used the tenfold cross‑validation method due to 
the minimal sample size of the dataset. Their experimental result using ten‑
fold validation revealed that the voting classifier outperformed other data 
mining techniques and achieved a higher accuracy of 87.4%.
Mohan et al. (2019) proposed an effective heart disease prediction system 
using machine learning techniques. The authors focused on finding signifi‑
cant features by applying machine learning techniques that improved the 
accuracy of their model in the prediction of CVD. The prediction model 
was introduced with different combinations of features and several known 
classification techniques. The authors claimed to produce an enhanced 
performance level with an accuracy level of 88.7% through the prediction 
model for heart disease with the hybrid random forest with a linear model.
Shah et  al. (2020) presented a heart disease prediction system using 
machine learning techniques. The model utilized by the authors was based 
on supervised learning algorithms such as the Naïve Bayes, DT, K‑nearest 
neighbor, and random forest algorithms on the Cleveland dataset for heart 40 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
disease sourced from the UCI Machine Learning Repository. The dataset 
as reported by the authors comprises 303 instances with 76 attributes. Of 
these 76 attributes, only 14 attributes were considered for testing and train‑
ing by Shah et al. (2020). The experimental results according to the authors 
portrayed that the highest accuracy score was achieved with the K‑nearest 
neighbor algorithm.
Anna et al. (2020) in their study on classification models for heart disease 
prediction using feature selection and principal component analysis (PCA) 
utilized a dimensionality reduction method and found the best features of 
heart disease by applying a feature selection technique. The heart disease 
dataset utilized was obtained from the UCI Machine Learning Repository. 
The dataset contains 74 features and a label that the authors validated using 
six machine learning (ML) classifiers. The authors noted that chi‑square 
and principal component analysis (CHI‑PCA) with random forests (RFs) 
had the highest accuracy, with 98.7% for Cleveland, 99.0% for Hungarian, 
and 99.4% for Cleveland‑Hungarian (CH) datasets. From their analysis, 
a chi‑square selector was used to derive features of anatomical and physi‑
ological relevance, such as cholesterol, highest heart rate, chest pain, fea‑
tures related to ST depression, and heart vessels. Their experimental results 
proved that the combination of chi‑square with PCA obtained greater 
performance in most classifiers. They further noted that the use of PCA 
directly from the raw data computed lower results and thus required greater 
dimensionality to improve the results.
Kavitha et al. (2021) developed a hybrid ML model for heart disease pre‑
diction. They utilized the UCI Cleveland heart disease dataset and applied 
some data mining techniques such as linear regression (LR), random forest, 
and the DT to the dataset. Their experimental result as reported by the 
authors produced an accuracy level of 88.7% for the heart disease predic‑
tion model via their hybridized model. Furthermore, the authors designed 
an interface to get the user’s input parameter and thus predict the heart 
disease via their hybrid model (DT and random forest).
Sarah et al. (2022) presented a heart disease prediction system using core 
ML techniques. The authors’ focus was concerned with the comparison 
of the various models and the determination of the most suitable method 
for heart disease prediction. The ML models optimized by the authors are 
as follows: logistic regression, DT, Naïve Bayes, support vector machine 
(SVM), K‑nearest neighbors, and random forest. Their experimental result 
revealed that the logistic regression performed best with an accuracy of 
85.25% (Sarah et al., 2022).
Rani et al. (2022) developed a novel hybrid imputation method to predict 
missing values in medical datasets. Their proposed hybrid imputation opti‑
mizer by classifier (HIOC) was developed using some classifiers to combine 
multivariate imputation by chained equations (MICE), K‑nearest neighbors 
(KNNs), and mean and mode imputation methods in an optimum way. Prediction of cardiovascular disease using information gain 41
The authors validated their model on the UCI Cleveland heart disease and 
breast cancer datasets. The performance of their hybrid imputation opti‑
mizer by classifier (HIOC) model was compared to MICE (multivariate 
imputation by chained equations), K‑nearest neighbor, and mean and mode 
imputation methods using root‑mean‑square error (RMSE). In conclusion, 
their experiment results revealed that the hybrid imputation optimizer by 
classifier (HIOC) is the most appropriate method for predicting missing 
data in medical datasets and provides stable performance even when the 
rate of missing data is increased from 10% to 30%. They further provided 
a reduction in RMSE (root‑mean‑square error) up to 18.06% in the heart 
disease dataset and 24.62% in the breast cancer dataset (Rani et al., 2022).
Abdul et al. (2022) developed a method for improving the prediction of 
human heart disease using several ML algorithms, including linear regres‑
sion (LR), multinomial Naïve Bayes, CART, support vector machine (SVM), 
latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA), random forest, and XGBoost, on the UCI 
Cleveland dataset. To train and validate the ML algorithms, they utilized 
the standard K‑fold cross‑validation technique. Then, for evaluating the 
performance of their models, they utilized different performance evalua‑
tion metrics, such as sensitivity, specificity, F‑measure, and classification 
accuracy. The experimental result of the authors indicated that a maximum 
precision of 98% was achieved by support vector machine (SVM) for posi‑
tive classes and thus concluded that SVM showed generally the best per‑
formance in the recall, precision, F‑measure, and accuracy of 98%, 98%, 
98%, and 96.76%, respectively.
3.2.2 Deep neural network approaches
Rakibul et al. (2021) developed an efficient heart disease prediction sys‑
tem using a deep learning algorithm. The authors collected clinical‑related 
heart disease records from an open‑source dataset that consists of 1,190 
samples and also a multivariate feature dataset that was sourced from the 
UCI Machine Learning Repository. From the dataset, a total of 14 features 
were selected by the researchers. They conducted data normalization on 
the dataset features to take care of irrelevant values and thus achieve better 
results upon training the models. The authors utilized three deep learning 
algorithms, namely the radial basis function network (RBFN), the convolu‑
tional neural network (CNN), and the artificial neural network (ANN) to 
train, validate, and test them with the selected, normalized, and separated 
data features. The researchers achieved classification scores of 98.24% and 
98.49% for the radial basis function network (RBFN) and the artificial 
neural network (ANN), respectively. Furthermore, the authors claimed that 
the convolutional neural network (CNN) model achieved higher accuracy 
than the other models, with 98.75% accuracy.42 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
Chitra and Jayalakshmi (2022) developed a heart and kidney disease pre‑
diction based on the Internet of Things using the recurrent neural network 
(RNN) algorithm. The main focus of the authors was to establish a predic‑
tive model for the chronic kidney disease (CKD) and heart disease datas‑
ets, to analyze different open‑source Python modules, and also to achieve 
better prediction outcomes. The authors claimed that 96% prediction and 
precision ML methods can be established by comparison with various algo‑
rithms such as K‑nearest neighbors (KNNs) and recurrent neural networks 
(RNNs) with the target of optimizing an instance prediction system. The 
dataset utilized by the authors was gathered from the patient’s medical 
history and was predicted by using the recurrent neural network (RNN) 
algorithm. In conclusion, the authors noted that, based on the amount of 
potassium in the patient’s blood, the predicted value provides a better clari‑
fication of whether the person will develop chronic kidney disease (CKD) 
or not.
Bhavekar and Goswami (2022) proposed a hybrid model for heart disease 
prediction using deep learning techniques. The author utilized the viabilities 
of the recurrent neural network (RNN) and the long short‑term memory 
(LSTM) in their experiment as a hybrid approach. For classifying synthetic 
data, they utilized different cross‑validation methods. The system’s perfor‑
mance was also evaluated using a variety of ML methods and soft comput‑
ing approaches. During their classification process, they employed three 
separate activation functions for the recurrent neural network (RNN). To 
balance the data, certain preprocessing methods were used to sort and clas‑
sify the data. The extraction of features was carried out based on relational, 
bigram, and density approaches. In conclusion, the authors claimed that 
their deep hybrid learning approaches, i.e., the recurrent neural network 
(RNN) and the long short‑term memory (LSTM), are more accurate than 
either classic deep learning or ML techniques used alone.
Modak et al. (2022) developed a heart disease prediction system using a 
machine and deep learning approach. They optimized the adaptive infinite 
feature selection and deep neural networks. They claimed that, in recent 
years, several ML techniques have been used to aid in fast prediction by 
learning from the data, but the prediction accuracy remains low, and thus 
noted that the reason was due to the lower number of records contained 
in the databases available. As such, they proposed a new method of heart 
disease prediction using a modified variation of infinite feature selection 
and multilayer perceptron. The method showed a high accuracy of 87.70%, 
a high f1 score of 87.21%, a high sensitivity of 88.50%, a high specificity 
of 87.02%, and a high precision in prediction of 86.05%, for Cleveland, 
Hungarian, Switzerland, Long Beach, and Statlog datasets. For evaluation 
purposes, they combined all the datasets and then divided the combined 
dataset into training and test samples with 20% of the dataset instances 
allocated for testing.Prediction of cardiovascular disease using information gain 43
Subhadra and Vikas (2019) utilized a multilayer perceptron neural net‑
work (MLP‑NN) with backpropagation for training a model in heart dis‑
ease prediction. To evaluate their system’s performance, they employed 
recall, accuracy, precision, and F‑measure as their evaluation metrics. The 
training of the model was conducted using the Cleveland dataset from the 
UCI Machine Learning Repository. The dataset consists of 303 instances 
of records and has 76 attributes. The authors utilized the 14  most rele‑
vant attributes from the heart disease dataset. Their experimental results 
revealed that the multilayer perceptron neural network obtained a higher 
accuracy of 93.39% within a 3.86‑second time frame.
3.3 RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
The methodology adopted by this paper incorporates three key steps: a data 
preprocessing step to remove irrelevant noisy data and the treatment of Na 
values, followed by a feature selection technique that is targeted at reducing 
data complexity and reducing computational cost for the proposed models 
before splitting the dataset into a standardized ML data split proportion of 
70:30 ratios for the train and test sets, respectively. The feature selection 
technique adopted by this study is the utilization of information gain (IG). 
Lastly, the application of the model, which is the artificial neural network 
(ANN) and C5.0 after the adaptation of a standardized data split ratio for 
the training and test data. Finally, the evaluation of the model performance 
was done using both deep neural network and ML accuracy and loss evalu‑
ation metrics. The steps are shown in Figure 3.1.
3.3.1 Dataset description
The cardiovascular heart disease dataset used is the Cleveland heart dis‑
ease dataset sourced from the Kaggle Machine Learning Repository. The 
dataset initially contains 76 attributes, but of all the attributes, the pub‑
lished experimental attributes contain 14 subsets of the main attributes. 
In particular, the Cleveland database is the only one that has been used 
by ML researchers to this date. The targeted goal is to detect the presence 
of heart disease in the patient. It is an integer value from 0 (no presence) 
to 1. Experiments with the Cleveland database have concentrated on sim‑
ply attempting to distinguish presence (values 1, 2, 3, and 4) from absence 
(value 0). The 14 attributes consist of the patient’s age, sex, cp, trestbps, 
chol, fbs, restecg, thalach, exang, oldpeak, slope, ca, thal, and num that 
represent the predicted attribute.44 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
3.3.2 Data preprocessing
The data preprocessing after acquiring the dataset includes the treatment 
of missing values using NumPy built‑in function for the replacement of 
Na value via the ones and zeros functionalities. Label encoding techniques 
use the Label Encoder function, which is targeted at transforming data 
values into categorical form. A data scaling technique uses the standard 
scaler function to scale the dataset attributes to a range between zero and 
one, and lastly, a feature selection technique is targeted at reducing the 
Start
get
cardio.CSV
Data preprocessing
Feature selection
(information gain)
Data splitting
Test data Train data
Step 2
Step 1
Step 3
Cart 5.0 ANN
Stop
Prediction / performance
evaluation
Figure 3.1 Research methodology.Prediction of cardiovascular disease using information gain 45
dimensionality considering that the adapted dataset has huge feature sets. 
Figure 3.2 shows the data preprocessing steps.
3.3.3 Feature selection
The dimensionality problem is a widely recognized challenge when it comes 
to implementing statistical learning algorithms. Dimensionality reduction 
can be approached in two ways: feature extraction and feature selection. 
In this study, the feature selection approach was employed to reduce the 
dimensionality of the dataset using the information gain (IG) feature selec‑
tion mechanism. IG is a univariate filter technique that provides an ordered 
ranking of all attributes and selects based on a threshold value by quan‑
tifying how much information (relevant) is gained from a dataset’s class 
prediction based on the presence or absence of the target label (Malathi and 
Manimekalai, 2021). IG is measured mathematically as follows:
Figure 3.2 Data preprocessing.46 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
IG = − HY HY ( ) ( ) | ( X H= X Y| ) (3.1)
where X and Y are random features from the independent and dependent 
variables and H is the entropy of either X or Y.
3.3.4 Classification algorithm
3.3.4.1 Artificial neural network (ANN)
An artificial neural network (ANN) is one of the most powerful com‑
putational models in the deep neural network for solving a wide range 
of complex real‑world problems. It emulates the behaviors of the human 
biological neural system to conduct comprehensive and extensive data 
analysis (Abiodun et al., 2018). Typically, the neurodes are arranged in 
a layer or vector, with the output of one layer serving as the input to 
the next layer and possibly other layers. Furthermore, each neurode can 
be connected to all or a subset of the neurodes in the subsequent layer, 
with these connections simulating the synaptic connections of the brain. 
Moreover, the weighted data signals entering each neurode emulate the 
electrical excitation of a nerve cell and consequently the transference of 
information within the network or brain. The input values to a process‑
ing element, in, are multiplied by a connection weight, wn m, , which simu‑
lates the strengthening of neural pathways in the brain. It is through 
the adjustment of the connection strengths or weights that learning is 
emulated in ANN.
3.3.4.2 CART (C5.0)
The C5.0 algorithm is a successor to the C4.5 algorithm and was devel‑
oped by Quinlan (1994). The idea is to generate several classifiers (either 
DTs or rulesets) rather than just one. When a new case is to be classified, 
each classifier votes for its predicted class, and the votes are counted to 
determine the final class. Thus, the C5.0 algorithm provides a binary tree 
or a multi‑branch tree as it emerged from the decision tree paradigm. As 
a splitting criterion, C5.0 uses IG (entropy) with a binomial confidence 
limit method as its pruning technique to prevent the model from overfit‑
ting by removing parts of the tree that have a high predicted error rate on 
data instances. In pruning, values smaller than the default (25%) cause 
more of the initial tree to be pruned, while larger values result in less 
pruning. To handle missing values, C5.0 estimates missing values as a 
function of other attributes or apportions the case statistically among 
the results.Prediction of cardiovascular disease using information gain 47
3.3.5 Measures of performance evaluation
To evaluate the performance of the artificial neural network (ANN) with 
multilayer perceptron and the C5.0 DT algorithm, the following metrics 
were used:
i. Precision: It is the percentage of the number of correctly predicted 
positive outcomes divided by the total number of predicted positive 
outcomes:
Precision = TP
TP+FP
 (3.2)
ii. Recall: It measures the classifier’s completeness. It is the percentage 
of correctly predicted positive output to the actual number of positive 
outcomes from the dataset. Therefore, recall indicates the number of 
related predictions identified:
Recall = TP
TP+FN (3.3)
iii. F‑Measure (or F‑Score): It is a measure that defines the harmonic 
mean of the model precision and recall and thence combines the val‑
ues of the recall and precision to output a single score:
= ×
×
+
F‑Measure 2 Precision Recall
Precision Recall (3.4)
iv. Accuracy: Of all the evaluation metrics, accuracy is the most impor‑
tant model’s performance evaluation metric. It is measured as a per‑
centage of the number of correctly predicted cardio diseases to the 
total number of cardio diseases present in the dataset. Thus, the accu‑
racy calculates the ratio of inputs in the test set correctly labeled by 
the classifier:
Accuracy = TP+TN
TP+TN+FP+FN (3.5)48 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
3.4 RESULT PRESENTATION
3.4.1 Environmental setup
The Python programming language via the Anaconda programming envi‑
ronment was utilized to implement the cardiovascular heart disease pre‑
diction models on a Windows operating system with a dual‑core Intel 
Core I5 processor and 4GB RAM. The Python packages utilized include 
Sklearn, TensorFlow Application Programming Interface, NumPy mod‑
ules for numerical dimensional operation, pandas for reading the dataset, 
Matplotlib and Seaborn, and an ML model targeted at data visualization.
3.4.2 Parameter settings
Table 3.1 presents the parameters used for the adapted MLP and CART 5.0 
architectures. The parameters for the MLP model include the batch size, 
max epochs, verbose, learning rate, dropout, loss, and activation function. 
The max depth defines the maximum leaf depth for the CART algorithm. 
Each parameter variable is defined with its corresponding value used.
3.4.3 Feature selection output
Considering the proposal for feature dimensionality reduction using IG, the 
features selected using the IG algorithm are shown in Table 3.2.
3.4.4 Performance evaluation and result
This module is dedicated to the evaluation of the performance of the devel‑
oped MLP and CART 5.0 models after applying IG as the feature selection 
technique. The performances of the models were evaluated based on the accu‑
racy score evaluation metric and were interrogated via the precision, recall, 
Table 3.1 Parameter Settings
Parameter Value
Batch size 32
Max epochs 100
Verbose 2
Initial learn rate 0.001
Optimizer Adam
Drop 0.3
Loss Binary cross-entropy
Activation function ReLu and sigmoid
Max depth 10Prediction of cardiovascular disease using information gain 49
and f1 score evaluation metrics. Essentially, the MLP has an accuracy of 
96%, a precision of 97% and 95% (for the malignant and benign class 
labels, respectively), a recall of 95% and 97% (also corresponding to the 
class labels), and a f1 score of 96% (for both class labels). The CART 
5.0 model has an accuracy of 99%, a precision of 97% and 100% (for the 
malignant and benign class labels), a recall of 100% and 97% (also cor‑
responding to the two class labels), and a f1 score of 99% (for both class 
labels). Table 3.3 shows the results of the two models.
3.4.5 Receiver operating characteristic (ROC)
To rigorously assess the goodness of the classifier’s prediction, the receiver 
operating characteristic (ROC) curve and the area under the curve (AUC) 
were employed. A metric like ROC can give a graphical representation of the 
performance of the developed models in Figure 3.3. An excellent model has 
an AUC near 1, which means it has a good measure of separability of two 
classes. A poor model has an AUC near 0, which means it has the worst mea‑
sure of separability. The AUC score of each model is appended to the receiver 
operating characteristic graph. The MLP and CART models have an AUC 
score of 96% and 99%, respectively, as shown in Figures 3.3 and 3.4.
Table 3.2 Features Selected Using 
Information
No. UCI Heart Disease Dataset
1 Chol
2 Thalach
3 Oldpeak
4 Cp
5 Ca
6 Exang
7 Age
8 Trestbps
9 Slope
10 Sex
Table 3.3 Result Presentation
S. No.
Classification 
Model
Evaluation Metrics for the Classification Models
Accuracy
%
Precision
(0/1)%
Recall
(0/1)%
F1 Score
(0/1)%
1 MLP 96 97/95 95/97 96/96
2 CART 5.0 99 97/100 100/97 99/9950 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
3.4.6 Result comparison
To evaluate the performance of the implemented models, we compared the 
performance of the two utilized algorithms (MLP and CART) against four 
other authors’ works reviewed. Table 3.4 shows the result of the compari‑
son. The table consists of five columns representing the features used for 
the comparison. These features include the authors, the dataset employed, 
the algorithm utilized, the best algorithm among those applied by those 
researchers, and the corresponding scores in the last column. Remarkably, 
as highlighted in bold in Table 3.3, the CART 5.0 model trained in this 
study exhibited superior performance, achieving an accuracy of 99%.
A visual representation of the state‑of‑the‑art model comparison is 
provided in Figure 3.5, which is illustrated using a bar chart. The x‑axis 
defines the researchers, while the y‑axis defines their corresponding accu‑
racy scores.
ANN AUC(ROC curve)
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
False positive rate
0.2
0.0
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6
True positive rate
0.8 1.0
AUC TEST = 0.9609270892823149
Figure 3.3 MLP receiver operating characteristic (ROC) and AUC graph.Prediction of cardiovascular disease using information gain 51
3.5 CONCLUSION
In this paper, the multilayer perceptron and CART 5.0 algorithms were 
applied to the University of California Irvine heart disease dataset with 
IG as the feature selection technique. The effectiveness of the devel‑
oped models was validated via some performance evaluation metrics, 
including accuracy score, precision, recall, and f1 score for a scenario of 
applying IG and without applying IG as the feature selection technique. 
To further evaluate the performance of the models, the goodness of the 
models was also validated against the receiver operating characteristic and 
area under the curve (AUC) evaluation metrics. The result of the experi‑
ment revealed that the CART 5.0 model emerged as the best model with 
an accuracy of 99% even when compared with some of the state‑of‑the‑art 
algorithms on heart disease prediction reviewed.
C5.0 AUC(ROC curve)
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
False positive rate
0.2
0.0
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6
True positive rate
0.8 1.0
AUC TEST = 0.9854368932038835
Figure 3.4 CART receiver operating characteristic (ROC) and AUC graph.52 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
Table 3.4 Result Comparison
Authors Dataset Used Algorithm Used Best Algorithm Accuracy
Kavitha et al.
(2021)
UCI Cleveland 
heart disease 
dataset
DT-RF DT-RF 88.7%
Sarah et al.
(2022)
UCI Cleveland 
heart disease 
dataset
LR, DT, NB,
SVM, KNN, 
and RF
LR 85.25
Abdul et al.
(2022)
UCI Cleveland 
heart disease 
dataset
LR, NB, CART,
SW, LDA, RF, 
and XGBoost
SVM 96.76
Subhadra and 
Vikas (2019)
UCI Cleveland 
heart disease 
dataset
NB NB 96.23
Current study UCI Cleveland 
heart disease 
dataset
CART and MLP CART 99
Model comparison
100
80
60
Score
40
20
0
Kavitha et al., (2021) Serah et al., (2022) Abdul et al., (2022)
Authors
Subhadra and 
Vikas (2017)
Current study (2023)
Figure 3.5 State-of-the-art model comparison.Prediction of cardiovascular disease using information gain 53
REFERENCES
Abdul, S., Muhammad, U., Sikandar, A., Ali, S., Muhmmad, F. A., and Najeeb, U. 
(2022). A method for improving prediction of human heart disease using 
machine learning algorithms. Mobile Information Systems, 2022(1), 1410169. 
https://doi.org/10.1155/2022/1410169.
Abiodun, O. I., Jantan, A., Omolara, A. E., Dada, K.V., Mohamed, N. A., and Arshad,
H. (2018). State‑of‑the‑art in artificial neural network applications: A survey. 
Heliyon, 4(11), e00938.
Amin, M. S., Chiam, Y. K., and Varathan, K. D. (2019). Identification of significant 
features and data mining techniques in predicting heart disease. Telematics and 
Informatics, 36, 82–93.
Anna, K. G. E., Amir, H. E., and Emmanuel, A. (2020). Classification models for heart 
disease prediction using feature selection and PCA. Informatics in Medicine 
Unlocked, 19, 100330. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.imu.2020.100330.
Bhavekar, G. S., and Goswami, A. D. (2022). A hybrid model for heart disease 
prediction using recurrent neural network and long short‑term memory. 
International Journal of Information Technology, 14(4), 1781–1789. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s41870‑022‑00896‑y.
Chitra, S., and Jayalakshmi, V. (2022). Prediction of heart disease and chronic kid‑
ney disease based on Internet of Things using RNN algorithm. In Proceedings 
of Data Analytics and Management: ICDAM 2021, Volume 1 (pp. 467–479). 
Springer, Singapore. https://doi.org/10.1007/978‑981‑16‑6289‑8_40.
Dangare, C. S., and Apte, S. S. (2012). Improved study of heart disease prediction 
system using data mining classification techniques. International Journal of 
Computer Applications, 47(10), 44–48.
Golande, A., and Pavan, T. K. (2019). Heart disease prediction using effective 
machine learning techniques. International Journal of Recent Technology and 
Engineering, 8(1), 944–950.
Inbarani, H. H., Azar, A. T., and Jothi, G. (2014). Supervised hybrid feature selection 
based on PSO and rough sets for medical diagnosis. Computer Methods and 
Programs in Biomedicine, 113(1), 175–185.
Kavitha, M., Gnaneswar, G., Dinesh, R., Sai, Y. R., and Suraj, R. (2021). Heart disease 
prediction using hybrid machine learning model. In International Conference 
on Inventive Computation Technologies (ICICT), pp. 1329–1333. Coimbatore, 
India. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICICT50816.2021.9358597.
Malathi, R., and Manimekalai, M. (2021). Ant colony–information gain based fea‑
ture selection method for weather dataset. Annals of the Romanian Society for 
Cell Biology, 25(2), 3838–3850.
Modak, S., Abdel‑Raheem, E., and Rueda, L. (2022). Heart disease prediction using 
adaptive infinite feature selection and deep neural networks. In International 
Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Information and Communication 
(ICAIIC), pp. 235–240. Jeju Island, Korea, Republic of Korea.
Mohan, S., Thirumalai, C., and Srivastava, G. (2019). Effective heart disease predic‑
tion using hybrid machine learning techniques. IEEE Access, 7, 81542–81554.
Nazrul, A. K. M., Ara, I., Mira, M., and Fairooz, S. (2017). BER performance analysis 
of an optical M‑ary PPM over FSO turbulent channel with pointing error using 
PIN receiver. In 2017 IEEE International Conference on Telecommunications 
and Photonics (ICTP), pp. 242–246. Dhaka, Bangladesh.54 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
Purusothaman, G., and Krishnakumari, P. (2015). A survey of data mining techniques 
on risk prediction: Heart disease. Indian Journal of Science and Technology, 
8(12), 0974–6846.
Quinlan, S. (1994, May). Efficient distance computation between non‑convex objects. 
In Proceedings of the 1994 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and 
Automation, pp. 3324–3329. IEEE.
Rakibul, I., Abhijit, R. B., Al‑Habib, I., Asif, K., Sami, A., and Sanzida, A. M. (2021). 
A performance‑based study on deep learning algorithm in the efficient predic‑
tion of heart disease. In IEEE International Conference on Informatics and 
Software Engineering, pp. 234–344. Ankara, Turkey.
Rani, P., Kumar, R., and Jain, A. (2022). A novel hybrid imputation method to pre‑
dict missing values in medical datasets. In Mobile Radio Communications and 
5G Networks: Proceedings of Second MRCN 2021, pp. 195–210. Singapore: 
Springer Nature Singapore. https://doi.org/10.1007/978‑981‑16‑7018‑3_16.
Sarah, S., Gourisaria, M. K., Khare, S., and Das, H. (2022). Heart disease predic‑
tion using core machine learning techniques—A comparative study. In Advances 
in Data and Information Sciences: Proceedings of ICDIS 2021, pp. 247–260. 
Singapore: Springer Singapore. https://doi.org/10.1007/978‑981‑16‑5689‑7_22.
Shah, D., Patel, S., and Bharti, S. K. (2020). Heart disease prediction using machine 
learning techniques. Springer Nature of Computing Science, 1, 345. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s42979‑020‑00365‑y.
Shao, Y. E., Hou, C. D., and Chiu, C. C. (2014). Hybrid intelligent modelling schemes 
for heart disease classification. Applied Soft Computing, 14, 47–52.
Shilaskar, S., and Ghatol, A. (2013). Feature selection for medical diagnosis: 
Evaluation for cardiovascular diseases. Expert Systems with Applications, 
40(10), 4146–4153.
Subhadra, K., and Vikas, B. (2019). Neural network‑based intelligent system for 
predicting heart disease. International Journal of Innovative Technology and 
Exploring Engineering, 8(5), 484–487.
Sumaira, A., Salahuddin, S., Farwa, I., Muhammed, F., Hathal, S.A., Faheem, K., and 
Fawwad, H. (2022). Prediction of cardio vascular disease on self‑augmented 
datasets of heart patients using multiple machine learning models. Journal of 
Sensor, 2022, 1–9.
World Health Organization. (2019). Cardiovascular Diseases (CVD). https://www.
who.int/news‑room/fact%20sheets/detail/cardiovascular‑diseases‑(cvds).DOI: 10.1201/9781003503057-4 55
Chapter 4
Weighting of logistics 
management factors by SWARA 
and DELPHI methods
Hakan Turan and Tayfun Utas¸
4.1 INTRODUCTION
Road transportation is the oldest and most used form of transportation, 
which means moving or transferring goods using appropriate transporta‑
tion resources. Its main purpose is to meet the transportation needs and 
transportation demands of the specified user group. The biggest advantage 
of road transportation is that goods can be transferred from source to des‑
tination and therefore it is also known as “door‑to‑door” transportation 
(Islam, 2014). The increasing need for transportation requires the need to 
constantly monitor and optimize transportation processes with a rational 
method (Stević et al., 2017). Therefore, it is important to have and mea‑
sure performance indicators of logistics processes. Applying these metrics 
helps improve and control the effectiveness of both processes and activities 
undertaken in the organization (Pacana et  al., 2021). At the same time, 
after the measurement, companies observe their successes and failures and 
take precautions. In its most basic sense, the measure is to increase profits, 
which is the primary goal of production enterprises, and to reduce costs 
(Raghav et al., 2022). In line with this goal, the effectiveness and efficiency 
of logistics activities are one of the priorities of managers. Following this 
priority, it is necessary to decide how to measure the difference between the 
current and the future. This measurement unit is performance indicators. 
For this reason, key performance indicators (KPIs) should be related to the 
strategies determined by the company’s vision and mission and should be 
included in the manager’s agenda and provide the most basic integration. 
Thus, managers can take precautions by monitoring whether KPIs contrib‑
ute to the strategy (Pacana and Czerwińska, 2020).
Since these indicators will be effective in managing not only logistics but 
also the entire process, the supply chain, it is necessary to focus on priority 
activities and their indicators. For this reason, the evaluation and selection 
of critical performance indicators (KPIs) of every company is very impor‑
tant. Correct strategic decisions can be made by using these criteria and 
multi‑criteria decision‑making analysis methods (Stević, 2017). In deter‑
mining strategic performance indicators, Zavadskas et al. (2018) used the 56 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
Balanced Scorecard and SWOT analysis method to help determine strate‑
gies. On the other hand, the integration of multi‑criteria decision‑making 
methods has gained great popularity in recent years (Zavadskas et  al., 
2018). MCDM techniques are at the center of attention of researchers in 
solving qualitative problems in real life. Although there are many MCDM 
techniques in the literature, it is difficult to practically determine the best 
one among the existing methods. However, researchers can determine the 
method according to the complexity of the problem and the type of topic 
being investigated (Modibbo et al., 2022).
It is important to understand the relationships between KPI performance 
indicators and their implicit interactions. There may be many performance 
indicators within the organization, and monitoring all of them will cause 
loss of time and resources (Wudhikarn, 2017). As in every sector, many 
KPIs have been defined in the logistics sector. Gözaçan and Lafci (2020) 
conducted a study on key performance indicators with the analytical hier‑
archy process (AHP) and SMART goal setting integrated method in KPI 
selection for the logistics sector. Radović and Stević (2018) determined 
performance indicators with stepwise weight assessment ratio analysis 
(SWARA) and DELPHI survey management in their study on the transpor‑
tation sector. Similarly, Pajić et al. (2021) analyzed 15 KPIs of supply logis‑
tics and 12 KPIs of distribution logistics to identify the five most important 
KPIs for each process. For this, SWARA and Quality Function Deployment 
(QFD) techniques were used. Wudhikarn (2017) creates an intellectual 
capital management model to improve the traditional management process 
with the DELPHI method using KPIs. Shaik et al. (2018) applied a hybrid 
multi‑criteria approach combining DEMATEL, fuzzy ANP and AHP meth‑
ods in determining performance for reverse logistics operations. Bentaleb 
et al. (2015) evaluated the KPIs determined for port loading and unloading 
works with the survey method and MACBETH. Modibbo et  al. (2022) 
applied fuzzy‑TOPSIS MCDM in supplier selection, which is an impor‑
tant input of the logistics industry. Jain and Singh (2017) logistics supplier 
selection criteria were determined according to industry need and product 
type. In this study, fuzzy Kano model was applied to classify the criteria 
into different clusters, and SWARA and range of values (ROV) value range 
methods were applied in supporting weighting. In the study of Ulutaş and 
Karaköy (2019), the logistic performance indexes of G20 countries were 
determined with standard deviation (SD) and the LPI ranking values of the 
countries were determined with WASPAS.
Considering the above studies, in this chapter, KPIs covering the entire 
logistics sector, which is an important link of supply chain management, and 
the critical ones have been determined using the DELPHI survey method. It 
is envisaged that the selected KPIs will be weighted with SWARA MCDM. 
Unlike other studies, the SWARA method, which has a significant impact 
on high‑level decision‑making, was specifically chosen to determine KPIs. Weighting of logistics management factors 57
SWARA method is easier in the decision‑making process and superior in 
obtaining the weight values of the criteria (Zolfani and Bahrami, 2014; 
Zolfani and Saparauskas, 2013). The study was also supported by the 
results of the DELPHI technique by comparing it with the KPIs most used 
by researchers.
The remaining sections of this chapter are as follows: In Section 4.2, 
the concept of logistics is explained under the name of literature study. In 
Section 4.3, integrated studies with KPI and process performance indicators 
implemented by companies are examined. In Section 4, a study was carried 
out on the selection of which KPIs to study with the DELPHİ technique 
and the weighting method with SWARA MCDM. Section 5 completed the 
research by presenting results and suggestions.
4.2 LITERATURE REVIEW
The concept of logistics has evolved into the integration of globalization, 
supply chain management, enterprise resource management and sales and 
operations planning. The structure of the Council for Logistics Management 
(CLM) has been changed to the Council of Supply Chain Management 
Professionals (CSCMP). This change is a sign that the conceptual confu‑
sion between supply chain and logistics continues (Stank et al., 2005). The 
simple definition of logistics is the activity related to the movement and 
storage of the product, taking into account efficiency and effectiveness. The 
relevant council defines logistics management as effective and efficient plan‑
ning and control of information about products and services within the 
scope of supply chain management. The main emphasis includes manag‑
ing the transportation, inventory and order fulfillment process in line with 
the customer’s demand. In summary, the Council identified the factors of 
logistics management as transportation network and management, storage 
methods and techniques, transportation management and inventory. From 
another perspective, flows within the physical process include all processes 
and activities of logistics systems, and these activities can be divided into 
five managerial areas: network design, information, transportation, inven‑
tory, warehousing, material handling and packaging. According to Rushton 
et  al. (2010), logistics, storage, warehousing and material handling, are 
essential factors in logistic management.
It consists of packaging and unitization, inventory, transportation infor‑
mation and control processes. Its importance is increasing day by day due 
to the increase in logistics costs of countries. Logistics costs are on average 
10%. Logistics costs create new market opportunities and increase sales 
by reducing the cost of transportation of products to customers. Logistics 
skills, which are the most important competitive strategy of countries/com‑
panies, benefit the simplification and diversification of trade. As a result, 58 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
delivery times decrease (Engblom et al., 2012). Therefore, logistics activities 
are an important function. They do not compromise on the activities that 
need to be done to the demands of important consumers, so daily activities 
are significantly at the forefront (Kayalı et al., 2020).
There are also many MCDM applications that include concepts used 
within the logistics industry. There is a need for KPI studies to improve the 
internal organization efficiency, customer relations, competitiveness and 
strategy planning of tanker transportation companies in Greece.
Jain and Singh (2017) applied the SWARA method and the ROV method 
for supplier selection criteria and weighting of the criteria and ranking of 
alternatives, respectively.
Shaik and Abdul‑Kader (2018) presented a multi‑criteria performance 
measurement model to evaluate the performance of the organization in 
the field of reverse logistics, taking into account performance characteris‑
tics such as product life cycle stages, strategies, processes, capabilities and 
perspectives and measures. DEMATEL is a hybrid multi‑criteria approach 
model that combines fuzzy ANP and AHP methods in the development of 
the performance measurement model.
Bentaleb et al. (2015) determined the KPIs for port loading and unload‑
ing activities from 63 KPIs to 20 KPIs with survey management, and these 
KPIs were analyzed with MACBETH.
Mladenovic et al. (2013) used the Balanced Scorecard model (BSC) in 
their research by combining financial (cost) and non‑financial performance 
indicators. In addition, since the indicators are not independent of each 
other, the analytical network process (ANP) method, a powerful multi‑cri‑
teria decision‑making technique, was used to analyze the interrelationships.
Moons et al. (2017) used the ANP technique in their study in the health 
sector. The proposed ANP‑based framework selected and prioritized logis‑
tics objectives and relevant KPIs.
Lai et al. (2004) conducted a self‑assessment of transport logistics perfor‑
mance in Hong Kong in their service‑based transport logistics study. They 
used TOPSIS for this. They performed sensitivity analysis to evaluate the 
results. Recently, Ali et al. (2023) have used fuzzy‑TOPSIS in COVID‑19 
analysis for supply chain distribution.
Joshi et  al. (2011) developed a benchmarking framework that evalu‑
ates the cold chain performance of a company in the retail industry. The 
retail cold chain, equipment and processes that keep perishable products 
in air‑conditioned environments have been analyzed. The research meth‑
odology was carried out by applying the DELPHI method to identify and 
prioritize key performance factors, followed by the application of AHP and 
TOPSIS to identify alternatives.
Kurtuluş and Çetin (2020) investigated the potential for modal shift 
with the situation selection experiment technique, taking into account the 
behavioral aspects of transport mode selection in short‑distance inland Weighting of logistics management factors 59
container transportation. When making the selection, statistically signifi‑
cant transportation cost, transit time, delay percentage, frequency and free 
time criteria were defined. Elasticities show that transportation cost has the 
largest impact on mode choice and that modal shift is more sensitive to road 
transportation costs than to intermodal rail transportation costs.
Berqvist and Monios (2016) developed a high‑capacity transportation 
model for the entire intermodal transportation chain and especially for the 
preliminary and final transportation processes. They determined that the 
cost gap related to final transportation was eliminated with the developed 
model.
Li et  al. (2016), on the other hand, developed a non‑linear dynamic 
intermodal transport network model for the assignment of container flow 
between deep‑sea terminals and inland terminals, in order to cope with the 
complex transport demand and traffic conditions in the intermodal trans‑
port network.
Additionally, My Abdelbar et al.’s (2019) study consists of two parts. In 
the first part, costing and PERT methods based on time process movements 
are used to analyze overall equipment efficiency in terms of time and cost. 
In the second part, a formula that finds the overall equipment efficiency 
quality component is proposed using AHP and Six Sigma. This study offers 
a three‑dimensional analysis based on time, cost and quality criteria.
de Castro Laudares et al. (2019) developed a Monte Carlo simulation 
model as an alternative to the PERT method in order to improve the risk 
perception of deadlines in the processes of defense projects for logistics sup‑
port and compared the results with PERT. It has been shown that Monte 
Carlo simulation can be applied to the initial stage of risk management to 
improve risk perception.
4.2.1 Logistic KPI
Companies are faced with a more complex and dynamic environment in the 
face of rapid changes in production processes and product life cycles and 
changes in customer demands. In order to get ahead in the competition, it 
is necessary to take into account the logistics baseline performance and its 
indicators due to cost and quality impacts. Many companies have an inter‑
nal supply chain management that cannot meet the logistics performance 
targets set by the management (Schmidt et al., 2019). In current competitive 
conditions, KPIs need to be constantly monitored. Therefore, it is necessary 
to have an effective performance measurement system (PMS) and to define 
meaningful metrics that will support the accuracy of the data and deci‑
sion‑making processes (Carlucci, 2010). Performance indicators are created 
to measure operational processes and their operational targets. As Lord 
Kelvin rightly stated, “If you can’t measure it, you can’t improve it” (Chae, 
2009). To achieve long‑term goals, the benchmark needs to be determined. 60 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
These indicators become able to measure development and continuity as the 
corporate memory of the company. Criteria should be compatible with the 
existing structure and comparisons should be possible. KPIs should be in 
a structure that includes cost, quality, service, flexibility, time, technology 
and location. A frequently recurring theme in logistics research is that an 
organization’s logistics capabilities directly affect firm performance (Grant, 
2012).
Bourne et al. (2000) studied performance measurement systems. It was 
evaluated in three stages: design of the system, implementation of criteria 
and use of criteria. The design phase includes determining the objectives 
and designing criteria accordingly. The criteria implementation phase is the 
collection of data and the implementation of systems to process the col‑
lected data. The use of criteria phase is the phase where the function of the 
applications and the success of the strategies are reviewed. Lebas (1995) 
stated that the objectives of performance measurement should be deter‑
mined correctly at the beginning of performance measurement and stated 
five reasons why measurement is needed:
• To ensure that the past situation is known,
• To be able to analyze the current situation,
• To enable the determination of the correct goals and activities,
• To present the road map to achieve the designed goals, activities and 
targets,
• It should be determined whether the goals have been achieved or not.
KPIs are excellent indicators for monitoring performance. KPIs contribute 
to achieving short‑ and long‑term goals. Databases such as Science Direct, 
Taylor & Francis, Emerald Insight and Google Scholar were used in the 
research. An extensive literature review was conducted in this research. As 
a result of the literature review, 116 KPIs were observed, 5 KPIs frequently 
mentioned in the literature were identified, and these KPIs were expanded 
to 8 (Table 4.1). The five KPIs include: on‑time delivery‑shipment lead, time 
stockout, shipping error and fill rates (Gözaçan and Lafci, 2020). In addi‑
tion to the research, the data collected from various sources on the web were 
categorized and 21 KPIs were created, which were determined as important 
criteria in logistics consultancy companies (Figure  4.2). All studies were 
categorized and Table 4.1 was created. Since the study focuses on logistics 
operational processes, the 8 KPIs selected are critical KPIs obtained from 
resources. DELPHİ survey method was used in the selection of these KPIs.Weighting of logistics management factors 61
Table 4.1 Logistic KPIs
Source Logitic KPI Açıklama Logistic index
Logistic 
criterion
Celik et al. (2014), Chae 
(2009), Gözaçan and 
Lafci (2020), Jothimani 
and Sarmah (2014),
Lödding (2012), Moons 
et al. (2019), Pajić et al. 
(2021), Radović and 
Stević (2018) and 
Rodrigues et al. (2021)
c1 On-time 
delivery
Track your 
average 
delivery time 
in detail
Responsiveness Procesess
Celik et al. (2014),
Gözaçan and Lafci 
(2020), Javaid et al.
(2022), Jothimani and 
Sarmah (2014), Moons 
et al. (2019), Pajić et al.
(2021), Radović and 
Stević (2018) and 
Rodrigues et al. (2021)
c2 Order cycle Order cycle 
time,
replenishment 
cycle time
Responsiveness Procesess
Bai and Sarkis (2014),
Gözaçan and Lafci 
(2020), Jothimani and 
Sarmah (2014) and 
Pajić et al. (2021)
c3 
Transportation 
cost
Track all 
related costs 
Cost measures Financial 
Celik et al. (2014),
Gözaçan and Lafci 
(2020), Jothimani and 
Sarmah (2014), Moons 
et al. (2019), Pajić et al.
(2021), Radović and 
Stević (2018) and 
Rodrigues et al. (2021)
c4 Inventory 
turnover
Track how 
many times 
your entire 
inventory is 
sold
Cost measures Financial
Bai and Sarkis (2014),
Celik et al. (2014), Chae 
(2009), Jothimani and 
Sarmah (2014), Moons 
et al. (2019), Pajić et al.
(2021), Radović and 
Stević (2018) and 
Rodrigues et al. (2021)
c5 Order fill 
rate
Dividing the 
number of 
orders that 
were shipped 
by the total 
number of 
orders placed
Responsiveness Procesess
Celik et al. (2014), 
Gözaçan and Lafci 
(2020), Jothimani and 
Sarmah (2014), Moons 
et al. (2019), Pajić et al. 
(2021), Radović and 
Stević (2018) and 
Rodrigues et al. (2021)
c6 Dwell 
time – Lead 
time
Reduce the 
time drivers 
are waiting to 
drop off or 
pick up 
orders or 
without 
waiting time 
Responsiveness Customer 
(Continued)62 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
4.3 RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
Step 1: Literature Review
Step 2: Creating KPIs
Step 3: Categorizing KPIs
Step 4: KPI Expert Evaluation
Step 5: KPI Literature Reference
Step 6: KPI Sorting
Step 7: Determining Critical KPIs
Step 8: Implementing DELPHI
Step 9: Applying SWARA
The contents of the necessary steps are outlined below. In this study, a lot 
of literature was scanned, but it was seen that many different KPIs could be 
used. As a support, it was also checked with the KPI on the logistics com‑
panies’ websites and it was seen that it coincided with the KPI in the pub‑
lications. The general structure of the methodology is shown in Figure 4.1.
As a methodological step, the information obtained from the sources and 
the KPIs that need to be monitored were asked to the experts using the sur‑
vey method DELPHI. The 21 KPIs asked are shown in Figure 4.2. Experts, 
as senior management, evaluated the logistics indicators that affect the 
entire supply chain between 1 and 5. According to this:
5. Very important, must watch
4. Important to watch
3. Must be in the list of trackable top management KPIs
2. Not indicative of top management but may be necessary depending on 
the situation
1. Not required to be monitored as a top management indicator
Table 4.1 (Continued) Logistic KPIs
Source Logitic KPI Açıklama Logistic index
Logistic 
criterion
Celik et al. (2014), 
Gözaçan and Lafci 
(2020), Jothimani and 
Sarmah (2014), Moons 
et al. (2019), Pajić et al.
(2021), Radović and 
Stević (2018) and 
Rodrigues et al. (2021)
c7 Capacity 
utilization
Is your 
equipment 
enough for 
your 
workforce?
Flexibility Procesess 
Celik et al. (2014),
Jothimani and Sarmah 
(2014), Moons et al. 
(2019), Pajić et al.
(2021), Radović and 
Stević (2018) and 
Rodrigues et al. (2021)
c8 Damage/loss 
rate
How many 
orders 
without 
errors?
Reliability Financial Weighting of logistics management factors 63
They were asked to evaluate as follows and Table 4.2 was created. According 
to this table, eight KPIs were determined as priority KPIs for the operation.
4.3.1 SWARA method
Multiple decision‑making is a challenging task for managers in any manu‑
facturing organization. Although there are many MCDM techniques in the 
literature, it is not practically possible to determine the best one among the 
existing methods. However, researchers choose the method(s) to be applied 
depending on the complexity of the problem and the type of research 
(Modibbo et al., 2022). Preferences are used in many problem situations in 
both individual and organizational decision‑making processes. A number 
of effective decision‑making methods have emerged in the last decade that 
support decisions under multi‑criteria conditions (Zavadskas and Turskis, 
Expert opinion Literature survey
Selection and
categorization
SWARA
DELPHI
Finalization logistic
KPI and Sb metric
Determination of best
and worst metric
Critical KPI chosen 8 
sub metrics for logistics
Determine the coefficient
Detemine the 
recalculated weight
Calculate the 
weight values
Developing logistic metrics
which are aligned
with strategy
Rating of main 
metrics 1-9
Optimal local weight
for logistic main
metrics
Prioritisation and 
ranking
Figure 4.1 General structure of the methodology.6
4
O
p
t
i
m
i
z
a
t
i
o
n
a
n
d
C
o
m
p
u
t
i
n
g
u
s
i
n
g
I
n
t
e
l
l
i
g
e
n
t
D
a
t
a
-
D
r
i
v
e
n
A
p
p
r
o
a
c
h
e
s
Pick and pack Capacity utilization
Equipment utilization
Use of packing material
Pick and pack cycle
Number of shipment
Truck turn over
Drive performance
KPI
Result Result
Lead time
Delivery time
Order accuracy rate
Quality rate
Order cycle
Sick leave
Safety
Time to fill open
Operation cost
Net profit ratio
Inventory turn over
Financial leverage
Inventory to sales ratio
Result Result Result
Financial logistics KPI
examples
Supply and inventory
logistics KPI examples
Transportation logistics
KPI examples
Delivery logistics KPI
examples
Labor logistics KPI
examples
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Figure 4.2 Selected KPI list.Weighting of logistics management factors 65
2011). SWARA is one of these methods. That’s why the SWARA method 
was applied in this study.
The procedure for determining weights with the SWARA method includes 
the following steps (Radović et al., 2018; Yazdani et al., 2016):
Step 1: All criteria should be listed in descending order of their impor‑
tance as assessed by experts.
Step 2: Experts express the relative importance of criterion j compared 
to the previous criterion j− 1, starting from the second criterion. In 
this way, the comparative importance of the mean value (Sj
) for each 
criterion is determined.
Step 3: Determine the coefficient kj
 as follows:
= =
+ >





k j
s j j
j
1, 1
1, 1 (4.1)
Step 4: Determine the recalculated weight
qj
 as follows:
=
=
+
>






q
j
a
k j j j
j
1, 1
1, 1 (4.2)
Step 5: Calculate the weight values of criteria as follows:
∑
=
=
w q
qk
j
j
k
n
1
 (4.3)
where wj
 represents the relative weight value of the criterion j.
4.4 CASE STUDY
In this study, it was aimed to determine the importance weights of KPIs 
used in logistics management. For this purpose, KPIs were determined 
based on past literature studies. To evaluate these, the opinions of experts 
who are supply chain managers were taken. The DELPHI study was con‑
ducted to reduce the 21 criteria that were first determined. The evaluation 
for DELPHI is presented in Table 4.2.66 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
According to the scores in Table 4.2, 8 KPIs that affect each other and are 
higher than 50 were selected. The KPIs in Table 4.3 are the KPIs that should 
be weighted. The selected KPI list is presented in Table 4.3.
Eight criteria taken from the selected list were evaluated by five decision 
makers (DM). In this evaluation, it was determined according to step 1 of 
SWARA method. These evaluation results are shown in Table 4.4.
The weights of the criteria are calculated using the formulas of Eqs. 
(4.1)–(4.3). The weights of the criteria are presented in Table 4.5.
When the results were examined, on‑time delivery was the most impor‑
tant KPI. This is followed by the order cycle. On the other hand, damage/
loss rate was found to be the least important criterion.
Table 4.2 Evaluation for DELPHI
KPI KPI desciription Expert Expert Expert Expert Expert Expert Expert Expert Expert Expert Expert Expert
1
Total
Pick and Pack 
This logistics key performance indicator measures all costs 
332322233233 31
2
lowest cost and most efcient processes.
Operation Cost 544454544445 52
3
This logistics metric shows the cost of running the business.
Net Prot Ratio
associated with picking and packing products. It includes
everything from the equipment used to move items, to the
packing materials and the labor involved. Studying this metric 
will give the logistics managers the opportunity to nd the 
This logistics KPI could be interpreted in two ways. It could 
32222223222 2 26
4
or with the total asset value.
either compare the after taxes prots with the amount of sales
Inventory Turn Over 445555445545 55
5 Financal Leverange 24242 the company 3344322 35
6 Order Cycle
This logistics key performance indicator evaluates how fast 
products move through a company. This ratio determines the
number of times inventory is renewed during a period of time
This logistics metric is the ratio of total debts to total assets of 
Order cycle isthe average time between when you receive an
4454 5
operations.
454454 5 53
7 Capital Utilaziton 
order and when you hand it to a carrier for delivery to the 
customer, excluding the actual shipping period. It is a
necessary KPI to measure the efciency of your supply chain
This logistics KPI measures the use of a company’s resources. 
2323332223 2
goods through the company.
2 29
8 Equipment Utilaztion 
This logistics key performance indicator is closely related to
Every company has a maximum capability when it comes to 
manufacturing and production. By monitoring capacity 
utilization, logistics managers can better manage production 
rates, lower operating costs, and ensure a sustainable flow of
544544445544 52
9
delayed due to equipment shortage.
Use of Packing Metarial 
This logistics KPI tracks the amount of packaging material
capacity utilization. Equipment utilization rate measures
whether your business has enough (or too many) equipment
for the job. Most businesses opt for an equipment utilization 
rate target of between 70%-90%. If a business is consistently
using its equipment at higher rates than the target, then it’s 
time to purchase new equipment to ensure production isn’t 
2
items
2332322332 3 30
10 Pick and Pack Cycle 
This logistics metric measures the amount of time it takes a 
it.
333232332332 32
11
warehouse employee to pick a product off the shelf and pack 
used during the pick and pack process. In order to lower 
operating costs and reduce the environmental impacts of the 
business, logistics managers should aim to not only use less 
material, but also use more ecofriendly products to package 
Number of Shipment
This logistics metric monitors the number of orders that are
354534544334 47
12
consequently increase revenue.
Truck Turn Over 
Truck turnaround rate as a logistics key performance indicator
shipped out of the warehouse. Analyzing this trend will
provide the logistics team with insight into the busiest hours of 
the month or the year. Logistics managers could use this
information to increase manpower accordingly and
233223223223 29
13
unloading efciency and should be kept low.
Drive Performance 
measures the time from when a delivery truck enters the 
warehouse to collect or deliver products to when it exits the 
facility. This metric is a measure of company’s loading and
Driver performance is a combination of multiple transportation 
2 2434443323 2 36
14
occurrences, and many more
Lead Time 
KPIs that are used to evaluate the quality of the trucks and the 
drivers; KPIs such as speed, idle time, hard-braking 
When it comes to logistics, shipping is often one of the rst 
5554
unloaded.
4554455 5 56
15 On time Delivery Time 
This logistics metric is yet another measure of process
components that come to mind. In trucking or ground
shipping, dwell time is the total amount of time a truck spends 
at a facility. The term is often used interchangeably with
detention, which is the time a truck waits to be loaded or
554454545555 56
16
the moment of receipt by customer.
Order Fill Rate
efciency within the logistics group. Delivery time is the 
duration between the moment of shipment from warehouse to
This logistics key performance indicator measures the number
544445555544 54
17
products and a loss in revenue
Quality Rate 5 54555454555 57
18
Damage and and losses rate during the delivery 
Sick Leave
of orders that are processed, shipped, and delivered perfectly
and without mishaps. Order accuracy plays a direct role in
operating costs. A low order accuracy rate leads to returned
This metric highlights the health and safety of staff. By tracking
3332333
disruptions.
3223 3 33
19 Safety
sick leave within the organization, managers can prevent the
spread of diseases in the workplace and minimize labor
455555444444 53
20
These KPIs enforce a sense of responsibility in the workforce 
and ensure adherence to safety protocols
Time to Fill Open 23223223223 3 29
21 Stock Out No Product to buy by custumers 443444434434 45
This metric gauges the quality and effectiveness of business 
planning and recruitment processes. Time to ll open 
positions is the duration of time from when the job requisition 
is approved to when the candidate accepts the position.Weighting of logistics management factors 67
4.5 CONCLUSION
The complexity of logistics processes in terms of content and the fact that a 
number of variables significantly affect the performance of operations that 
concern all processes require monitoring and optimizing logistics processes. 
Huge data is produced in logistics processes. This big data is of vital impor‑
tance for decision‑making mechanisms for the future of logistics processes. 
Table 4.3 Selected KPI list
Logistic KPI Reference rank 
c1 On-time delivery 56
c2 Order cycle 53
c3 Transportation cost 52
c4 Inventory turnover 55
c5 Order fill rate 54
c6 Lead time 56
c7 Capacity utilization 52
c8 Damage/loss rate 57
Table 4.4 Listing the criteria in order of importance
Criteria DM1 DM2 DM3 DM4 DM5
C1 1 4 1 2 1
C2 4 6 6 6 4
C3 6 1 2 1 2
C4 2 2 4 4 6
C5 7 7 3 5 8
C6 3 3 7 8 7
C7 8 5 8 7 3
C8 5 8 5 3 5
Table 4.5 Weights of criteria
Criteria Abbr. Weighting
On-time delivery C1 0.191462
Order cycle C2 0.171124
Transportation cost C3 0.150189
Inventory turnover C4 0.120229
Order fill rate C5 0.10564
Lead time C6 0.096192
Capacity utilization C7 0.088265
Damage/loss rate C8 0.07689868 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
However, this data must be accurate and reliable, as well as meeting the 
needs. Therefore, determining and weighting priorities is an important 
input that the decision maker needs. This study aims to guide researchers 
and practitioners in order to be useful in analyzing the effects that indica‑
tors can have on logistics processes and the benefits and risks they will 
create. The study also highlights that it is important to measure data accu‑
rately and continuously in order to implement a number of methods and 
applications that can increase the total benefit and reduce risks and costs 
thanks to the use of big data. A study found that many companies have an 
internal supply chain structure that cannot meet the logistics performance 
targets determined by the management, which is an indication that much 
more progress needs to be made in this regard (Schmidt et al., 2019). This 
study is designed to increase awareness of necessary and unnecessary indi‑
cators used in logistics activities and the importance of creating decision 
mechanisms based on data that is beneficial to the process. The next recom‑
mendation is to capture the hidden relationships of the data with different 
MCDM techniques and increase the efficiency of the process. As a result 
of the study, eight major KPIs were weighted with SWARA management. 
The evaluation was made by five decision makers who hold managerial 
positions in the supply chain. As a result of the study, on‑time delivery was 
found to be the most effective KPI. Order cycle was found to be the second 
most important criterion by a very small margin. Other criteria determined 
on this subject may also be used in future studies. At the same time, differ‑
ent experts can be included in the study as decision makers. The number of 
decision makers can also be increased.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank Bahar BOZKURT from Altınoluk in Balıkesir for 
her contribution to obtaining data.
REFERENCES
Ali, I., Charles, V., Modibbo, U. M., Gherman, T., & Gupta, S. (2023). Navigating 
COVID‑19: unraveling supply chain disruptions through best‑worst method 
and fuzzy TOPSIS. Benchmarking: An International Journal, 31(5), 1548–1589.
Bai, C., & Sarkis, J. (2014). Determining and applying sustainable supplier key per‑
formance indicators. Supply Chain Management: An International Journal, 
19(3), 275–291.
Bentaleb, F., Mabrouki, C., & Semma, A. (2015). Key performance indicators evalua‑
tion and performance measurement in dry port‑seaport system: a multi criteria 
approach, 3(2), 97–116. DOI: 10.5505/jems.2015.88597Weighting of logistics management factors 69
Bergqvist, R., & Monios, J. (2016). The last mile, inbound logistics and intermodal 
high capacity transport‑the case of Jula in Sweden. World Review of Intermodal 
Transportation Research, 6(1), 74–92.
Bourne, M., Mills, J., Wilcox, M., Neely, A., & Platts, K. (2000). Designing, imple‑
menting and updating performance measurement systems. International 
Journal of Operations & Production Management, 20(7), 754–771.
Carlucci, D. (2010). Evaluating and selecting key performance indicators: an ANP‐
based model. Measuring Business Excellence, 14(2), 66–76.
Celik, E., Gumus, A. T., & Alegoz, M. (2014). A trapezoidal type‑2 fuzzy MCDM 
method to identify and evaluate critical success factors for humanitarian 
relief logistics management. Journal of Intelligent & Fuzzy Systems, 27(6), 
2847–2855.
Chae, B. (2009). Developing key performance indicators for supply chain: an indus‑
try perspective. Supply Chain Management: An International Journal, 14(6), 
422–428.
de Castro Laudares, A., Ricco, M. F. F., & dos Santos, R. A. S. (2019). When does 
it end? Monte carlo simulation applied to risk management in defense logis‑
tics’ procurement processes.  Brazilian Journal of Operations & Production 
Management, 16(1), 149–156.
Engblom, J., Solakivi, T., Töyli, J., & Ojala, L. (2012). Multiple‑method analysis of 
logistics costs. International Journal of Production Economics, 137(1), 29–35.
Grant, A. M. (2012). Leading with meaning: Beneficiary contact, prosocial impact, 
and the performance effects of transformational leadership.  Academy of 
Management Journal, 55(2), 458–476.
Gözaçan, N., & Lafci, Ç. (2020). Evaluation of key performance indicators of logis‑
tics firms. Logistics, Supply Chain, Sustainability and Global Challenges, 11(1), 
24–32.
Islam, D. M. Z. (2014). Barriers to and enablers for European rail freight transport 
for integrated door‑to‑door logistics service. Part 1: barriers to multimodal rail 
freight transport. Transport Problems, 9(3), 43–56.
Jain, N., & Singh, A. R. (2017). Fuzzy Kano integrated MCDM approach for sup‑
plier selection based on must be criteria. International Journal of Supply Chain 
Management, 6(2), 49–59.
Javaid, M., Khan, I. H., Singh, R. P., Rab, S., & Suman, R. (2022). Exploring con‑
tributions of drones towards Industry 4.0. Industrial Robot: The International 
Journal of Robotics Research and Application, 49(3), 476–490.
Joshi, R., Banwet, D. K., & Shankar, R. (2011). A Delphi‑AHP‑TOPSIS based bench‑
marking framework for performance improvement of a cold chain. Expert 
Systems with Applications, 38(8), 10170–10182.
Jothimani, D., & Sarmah, S. P. (2014). Supply chain performance measurement for 
third party logistics. Benchmarking: An International Journal, 21(6), 944–963.
Kayalı, N., Yereli, A. N., & Gökay, O. (2020). Application of evaluation for business 
managers’ opinions on logistics costs. The Journal of Social Sciences Institute, 
47, 303–324.
Kurtuluş, E., & Çetin, İ. B. (2020). Analysis of modal shift potential towards inter‑
modal transportation in short‑distance inland container transport. Transport 
Policy, 89, 24–37.70 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
Lai, K. H., Ngai, E. W. T., & Cheng, T. C. E. (2004). An empirical study of supply 
chain performance in transport logistics. International Journal of Production 
Economics, 87(3), 321–331.
Lebas, M. J. (1995). Performance measurement and performance management. 
International Journal of Production Economics, 41(1–3), 23–35.
Li, Z. C., Yin, Y., Lam, W. H., & Sumalee, A. (2016). Simultaneous optimization of 
fuel surcharges and transit service runs in a multimodal transport network: a 
time‑dependent activity‑based approach. Transportation Letters, 8(1), 35–46.
Lödding, H. (2012). Handbook of Manufacturing Control: Fundamentals, 
Description, Configuration. Heidelberg; New York; Dordrecht; London: 
Springer Science & Business Media.
Mladenovic, G., Vajdic, N., Wündsch, B., & Temeljotov‑Salaj, A. (2013). Use of key 
performance indicators for PPP transport projects to meet stakeholders’ per‑
formance objectives. Built Environment Project and Asset Management, 3(2), 
228–249.
Modibbo, U. M., Hassan, M., Ahmed, A., & Ali, I. (2022). Multi‑criteria decision 
analysis for pharmaceutical supplier selection problem using fuzzy TOPSIS. 
Management Decision, 60(3), 806–836.
Moons, K., Waeyenbergh, G., Pintelon, L., Timmermans, P., & De Ridder, D. (2019). 
Performance indicator selection for operating room supply chains: an applica‑
tion of ANP. Operations Research for Health Care, 23, 100229.
My Abdelbar, K., Bouami, D., & Elfezazi, S. (2019). New approach towards formula‑
tion of the overall equipment effectiveness. Journal of Quality in Maintenance 
Engineering, 25(1), 90–127.
Pacana, A., & Czerwińska, K. (2020). Improving the quality level in the automotive 
industry. Production Engineering Archives, 26(4), 162–166.
Pacana, A., Czerwińska, K., & Grebski, M. E. (2021). Analysis of the possibility of 
using key performance indicators in the systems of logistics and production 
enterprises. Modern Management Review, 26(1), 37–47.
Pajić, V., Andrejić, M., & Kilibarda, M. (2021). Evaluation and selection of KPI 
in procurement and distribution logistics using SWARA‑QFD approach. 
International Journal for Traffic and Transport Engineering (IJTTE), 11(2), 
267–279.
Radović, D., & Stević, Ž. (2018). Evaluation and selection of KPI in transport using 
SWARA method. Transport & Logistics: The International Journal, 8(44), 
60–68.
Radović, D., Stević, Ž., Pamučar, D., Zavadskas, E. K., Badi, I., Antuchevičiene, J., 
& Turskis, Z. (2018). Measuring performance in transportation companies in 
developing countries: a novel rough ARAS model. Symmetry, 10(10), 434.
Raghav, Y. S., Varshney, R., Modibbo, U. M., Ahmadini, A. A. H., & Ali, I. (2022). 
Estimation and optimization for system availability under preventive mainte‑
nance. IEEE Access, 10, 94337–94353.
Rodrigues, D., Godina, R., & da Cruz, P. E. (2021). Key performance indicators 
selection through an analytic network process model for tooling and die indus‑
try. Sustainability, 13(24), 13777.
Rushton, A., Croucher, P., & Baker, P. (2010). The Handbook of Logistics and 
Distribution Management, 4th edn. London: Kogan Page Publishers, p. 7.Weighting of logistics management factors 71
Schmidt, M., Maier, J. T., & Härtel, L. (2019). Data based root cause analysis for 
improving logistic key performance indicators of a company’s internal supply 
chain. Procedia CIRP, 86, 276–281.
Shaik, M. N., & Abdul‑Kader, W. (2018). A hybrid multiple criteria decision making 
approach for measuring comprehensive performance of reverse logistics enter‑
prises. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 123, 9–25.
Stank, T. P., Davis, B. R., & Fugate, B. S. (2005). A strategic framework for supply 
chain oriented logistics. Journal of Business Logistics, 26(2), 27–46.
Stević, Ž. (2017). Modeling performance of logistics subsystems using fuzzy 
approach. Transport & Logistics: The International Journal, 17(42), 30–39.
Stević, Ž., Pamučar, D., Kazimieras Zavadskas, E., Ćirović, G., & Prentkovskis, 
O. (2017). The selection of wagons for the internal transport of a logistics 
company: a novel approach based on rough BWM and rough SAW methods. 
Symmetry, 9(11), 264.
Ulutaş, A., & Karaköy, Ç. (2019). Measurement of logistics performance index 
of G‑20 countries with multi‑criteria decision‑making model. Cumhuriyet 
University Journal of Economics and Administrative Sciences, 20(2), 71–84.
Wudhikarn, R. (2017). Determining key performance indicators of intellectual capi‑
tal in logistics business using Delphi method. In 2017 International Conference 
on Digital Arts, Media and Technology (ICDAMT) (pp.  164–169). Chiang 
Mai: IEEE.
Yazdani, M., Hashemkhani Zolfani, S., & Zavadskas, E. K. (2016). New integration 
of MCDM methods and QFD in the selection of green suppliers. Journal of 
Business Economics and Management, 17(6), 1097–1113.
Zavadskas, E. K., Stević, Ž., Tanackov, I., & Prentkovskis, O. (2018). A novel mul‑
ticriteria approach–rough step‑wise weight assessment ratio analysis method 
(R‑SWARA) and its application in logistics. Studies in Informatics and Control, 
27(1), 97–106.
Zavadskas, E. K., & Turskis, Z. (2011). Multiple criteria decision making (MCDM) 
methods in economics: an overview. Technological and Economic Development 
of Economy, 17(2), 397–427.
Zolfani, S. H., & Bahrami, M. (2014). Investment prioritizing in high tech indus‑
tries based on SWARA‑COPRAS approach. Technological and Economic 
Development of Economy, 20(3), 534–553.
Zolfani, S. H., & Saparauskas, J. (2013). New application of SWARA method in 
prioritizing sustainability assessment indicators of energy system. Engineering 
Economics, 24(5), 408–414.72 DOI: 10.1201/9781003503057-5
Chapter 5
Evaluation of daily management 
with standard deviation and 
MOOSRA tools in hospitals
Hakan Turan and Tayfun Utas¸
5.1 INTRODUCTION
If the consumer equalizes the distribution and cost weighting of his options 
between the service and the product, profit maximization is maximized. 
On the other hand, businesses have goals and strategies regarding profit, 
responsibility, and efficient use of resources. A win‑win situation needs to 
happen. One of the most important tools of the lean technique for effi‑
cient use of resources is daily management. On the other hand, daily man‑
agement is a methodology of lean origin and is widely used in production 
sectors (Liker et  al., 2008). Lean management is the management style 
developed by Totoya (Katayama and Bennett, 1996). The successes of lean 
management systems have been the subject of western researchers (Vamsi 
and Kodali, 2014). Lean is a term that describes the application of quality 
improvement techniques developed in Japan and popularized by work at 
Toyota (Teich and Faddoul, 2013). In a lean system, after a while, due to 
the nature of human behavior, there will be slowdowns and deviations in 
change; as a result, lean systems have to rely on daily management systems 
to ensure continuity (Donnelly, 2014).
In the production and service sectors, tactics based on strategies are devel‑
oped to achieve the right job at the right time and at low cost. This situation 
has become related to the continuity of assets (Çavmak, 2018). The most 
important of these needed strategies is the lean management system and the 
tools used under it. Lean daily management (LDM) is a systematic approach 
that focuses on daily activities and performance measurements for continu‑
ous improvement and integration with company goals. LDM is primarily 
concerned with monitoring daily performance and problem‑solving at the 
operational level. LDM promotes a culture of continuous improvement, 
rapid response to problems, and team participation through regular team 
meetings and the use of visual tools (Mann, 2005). LDM is applied not only 
in the industrial sector but also in many large‑scale companies. It is seen 
that LDM, which is applied in many areas, is also applied in the healthcare 
sector. However, studies on KPIs of LDM are as follows.Evaluation of daily management with standard deviation 73
Poksinska et al. (2013) researched the subject of LDM and leadership in 
the healthcare sector and investigated the change of the concept of leader‑
ship with lean management through their case study. It was concluded in 
the study that it played a transformative role with issues such as tracking 
goals and using LDM tools for the development of employees.
Donnelly (2014) implemented LDM on the basis of morning meetings and 
covering all clinical and non‑clinical units. These studies were carried out 
in a structure that included measurements, evaluations, and responsibilities.
As seen from the studies, KPI‑based LDM applications are limited in 
hospitals. Moreover, no MCDM study has ever been seen to weight these 
criteria. In this study, the weighting of KPIs used in LDM application in 
hospitals was done using the standard deviation method. Afterward, the 
MOOSRA method was applied to rank the units in the hospital with this 
weighting.
The general structure of the study is as follows. In Chapter 2, the litera‑
ture review is described. LDM‑based KPIs are written in Chapter 3. The 
methodology is explained in Chapter 4. Implementation is discussed in 
Chapter 5, and in the last section, the results are interpreted.
5.2 LITERATURE REVIEW
Daily management is an ongoing process used to monitor the progress of 
business transactions. The history of LDM is intertwined with the Lean 
system. The improvements made during this process are expected to be in 
line with the companies’ goals and strategies (Ferro and Gouveia, 2015). 
Additionally, teamwork and communication are critical. Daily manage‑
ment meetings provide daily communication for people within the team to 
connect with each other. Daily meetings are designed to engage staff on a 
regular basis to discuss current or business problems that have arisen within 
24 hours. These are informational meetings about how things are going. 
This way, everyone is aware of the problems or suggestions. Teamwork and 
communication are important activities of daily management. It increases 
communication through daily meetings (Kerstjens et al., 2020). They allow 
for a brief conversation that will create “situational awareness” about the 
complexities of the service or production environment for that day. In addi‑
tion, a meeting enables the participation of relevant departments for faster 
and more efficient implementation of solutions. Although the standing 
meeting feature of daily management has not been the subject of much 
research, employees’ meetings after their shift returns have similar content. 
Likewise, in hospitals, the nursing team’s transfers and information about 
the patient to the incoming teams contribute to the development of daily 
management. In summary, although there is insufficient information about 
its application in the West, such practices were being carried out under the 74 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
Japanese or TQM. The structure of DM is related with Toyota produc‑
tion’s respect for people, self‑discipline, group and process management, 
and Japanese management’s emphasis on learning and employee abilities 
(Poksinska et al., 2013).
The idea of lean management first emerged in the industrial world. 
Increases in production process costs have caused businesses to turn to dif‑
ferent pursuits. Toyota broke a new ground in its field of operations and 
succeeded in establishing the Toyota Production System. This change is the 
emergence of lean management. LDM, which originated and was developed 
in the production sector, is a real‑time evidence‑based system used by lean 
systems and aims to maximize the profits of people and businesses. The 
main goal is to reduce waste to reduce costs (Ohno, 1988). It is a form of 
management under the name of field management in different organiza‑
tions, and the system is called shop floor management (SFM). The aim is 
a field activity that includes problems and short solutions (Koenigsaecker, 
2009). The focus of day‑to‑day management is on continuous improvement 
and employee performance management. It is aimed at solving problems 
that occur within 24 hours through determined indicators and data. Field 
management (Gemba) is an activity aimed at business problems or pos‑
sible improvement opportunities by observing the area where production 
or service takes place. It is called daily management in lean systems. Some 
businesses practice field management under the name of shop floor man‑
agement. These activities are also monitored daily. Its purpose is to detect 
and solve problems (Koenigsaecker, 2009). SFM is called daily management 
within the lean system (Poksinska et al., 2013).
Wirtz et al. (2021) found that the very long meetings they held in the 
integration of LDM into the ASP health system became productive with 
weekly 15 minutes of meetings, and they also produced 5 new KPIs and col‑
lected and monitored the data. Employee participation increased to 88%, 
and delivery and quality improved by more than 10%.
Barnas (2011) made decisions to implement lean systems in a community 
health system in Wisconsin. After drawing the value map, improvements 
were made at some points, but they could not achieve the targets. After this 
failure, they integrated the work with lean by establishing a system that 
tracks daily management. However, the process did not progress as it first 
started and entered a period of constant progress. They showed difficulty 
with initial ownership. As a result, they found that the internal dynamics of 
daily management were very different.
Mariz et al. (2019) determined the construction company operating in 
Brazil as the research subject in their study on daily management. As a 
result of the work carried out, the problems were solved very quickly, and 
visual controls did not cause any problems related to work and materi‑
als. Company employees have increased their problem‑solving skills and Evaluation of daily management with standard deviation 75
improved teamwork. Also, very importantly, leaders have moved to an 
advanced stage in terms of being on the field.
5.3 LDM CRITERIA
In the articles reviewed, no collective study was found on critical factors 
related to LDM. In this sense, this study will fill an important gap. The 
critical factors identified regarding LDM were selected from the articles. 
Researchers have attributed the importance to a single factor or an article. 
In this context, Table 5.1 has been created.
Mariz et al. (2019) studied the sub‑criteria of daily management in his 
article. The basic criteria for daily management evaluation are determined 
as visual management, teamwork, problem‑solving, supply chain support, 
and leadership. In his study, he compiled information obtained from sources 
related to daily management.
Sachdev and Agrawal (2017) stated that the aim includes identifying 
and interpreting the factors affecting the effect of daily management. A 
Daily Management System is a system that ensures that everyone in the 
Table 5.1 LDM criteria and express
Criteria Expression References
Leadership and standard DMS is a top-down 
management activity. 
Requests from top 
management play an 
important role in the 
successful implementation 
of the daily management 
system. Leaders enable 
employees to participate 
through coaching:
• Conducting meetings
• KPI monitoring
• Giving opinions and 
suggestions
• Monitor improvements
• Making future plans
Donnelly (2014), Liker and 
Convis (2012), Mariz et al. 
(2019), Nicholas (2023),
Poksinska et al. (2013), and 
Tunçer (2013)
Visual management These are dashboards 
where visual data is 
tracked for planned 
meetings.
Visual expressions used to 
inform
Graphics showing visual 
representations and 
benefits of improvements
Donnelly (2014), Schatz and 
Bergren (2022), Wahjoedi 
and Reviews (2023), Wirtz 
et al. (2021), and Zarbo 
et al. (2015)
(Continued)76 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
organization knows what they need to do to make the system run smoothly. 
This includes what needs to be measured and controlled to achieve company 
goals. Additionally, maintaining sustainable implementation of reporting, 
control, and change management is critical to sustainability. It constitutes 
the structure of some management controls and reporting systems that pro‑
vide high benefit to direct operations, especially short‑term improvements. 
The results are successful, thanks to the participation of all the employees 
and the strong participation of the senior management.
Donnelly et al.’s (2016) study was conducted in the radiology department 
of a private hospital, where leadership, visual control, responsibility, and disci‑
pline were identified as important key factors for daily management. As a result 
of the study, the ability to identify and manage problems has improved, and the 
ability to communicate and solve problems has improved greatly. He saw that 
they managed to solve 39 monthly complex problems in 5.5 days. He found 
that daily meetings bring people together and develop a culture of togetherness.
Table 5.1 (Continued) LDM criteria and express
Criteria Expression References
Gemba walk Gemba walking is a 
technique used to observe 
and understand how work 
is done. Gemba is taken 
from the Japanese word 
gembutsu, meaning “real 
thing” or “real place”, and 
the Gemba walk includes 
the following elements: 
observation (watching 
people do business in 
person); location 
(observing people in the 
actual location where 
work is done); team 
building (interacting with 
the people doing the 
work). Continuous 
improvement 
opportunities are sought 
through on-site 
monitoring and coaching
Donnelly (2014), Barnas 
(2011), Berlanga and 
Husby (2016), Biskupska 
and Ratnayake (2019),
Dalton and Dalton (2019),
Hajiani et al. (2013),
Hopkins et al. (2017),
Mann (2005), Mariz et al.
(2019), Mihaljevic (2020), 
Nicholas (2023), Petersson 
(2013), Poksinska et al. 
(2013b), Sachdev and 
Agrawal (2017), Schatz and 
Bergren (2022), Schlauch 
et al. (2020), Wahjoedi 
(2023), Warén (2013),
White (2016), Wirtz et al. 
(2021), Yerian et al. (2012),
and Zarbo et al. (2015)
Performance monitoring It is to monitor 
performance data 
compatible with strategies.
Donabedian (2005),
Donnelly (2014),
Goldenhar et al. (2013),
Kennedy (2019), and Wirtz 
et al. (2021)
Hunddel Daily short standing 
meetings
Donnelly (2014), Maurer 
et al. (2018), Nicholas 
(2023), Schatz and Bergren 
(2022), and Stewart and 
Johnson (2007)Evaluation of daily management with standard deviation 77
5.4 METHODOLOGY
In this study, an LDM study was conducted in a hospital in Istanbul. For 
this purpose, eight criteria were determined in line with the results of the 
experts’ experiences and determined in the literature. These criteria are 
leadership engagement, visual management, standardized work processes, 
Gemba walks, empowered teams, continuous training, feedback mecha‑
nisms, and KPI monitoring.
Eight departments were determined for LDM measurement in the hos‑
pital. These are General Surgery (GS), Eye Health (EH), Intensive Care 1 
(IC1), Intensive Care 2 (IC2), Internal Diseases (ID), Emergency (E), Ear 
Nose Throat (ENT), and Pediatric Intensive Care (PIC).
The weights of the criteria were first determined based on the unit evalu‑
ation results. Then, eight departments are listed depending on this weight. 
The standard deviation method was applied to weight the eight criteria. The 
MOOSRA method was applied to rank the eight departments. The criteria 
were explained in the previous section. The duties of the departments are 
given below.
5.4.1 Hospital departments
5.4.1.1 Intensive care 1–2 (IC1–2)
Intensive care departments, which are the subject of the article, are the 
most complex business line of hospitals, and the place where intense and 
urgent decisions are made. In the health system, intensive care is the center 
where high‑level technology is used to provide the maximum possible ben‑
efit for the patient whose life is in danger. At BU, decisions other than the 
individual’s decision are made and applied as treatment. In ICU, decisions 
must be made quickly and accurately. Important KPI indicators monitored 
in intensive care are mortality rate, pressure sores, and infection.
5.4.1.2 Internal diseases (ID)
Diseases, such as dizziness, allergy, pain, Mediterranean anemia, diabetes, 
goiter, gastritis, hepatitis, hemophilia, constipation, cancer, diarrhea, liver 
cancer, cyst leukemia, ulcer, obesity, overweight, cyst, sweating, and diges‑
tive system diseases, are treated in the department.
5.4.1.3 Emergency (E)
Providing service 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, Central Hospital Emergency 
Service provides first aid to all types of patients and works in coordina‑
tion with other units for further examination and treatment as a result of 
the necessary consultations. General surgery specialists, family physicians, 78 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
emergency medicine specialists, and general practitioners work in the 
Emergency Department, while gynecology and obstetrics, pediatrics and 
intensive care departments support the emergency service 24 hours a day. 
All rooms have central oxygen and aspiration systems. The Emergency 
Department, where time and teamwork are extremely important, has the 
capacity to serve all kinds of patients with its 13‑bed observation room, 
intervention, and plaster rooms.
5.4.1.4 Ear nose throat (ENT)
Diseases such as sore throat, tonsillitis, angina, pharyngitis, nose, ear infec‑
tion, snoring, sinusitis, hay fever, salivary gland, vertigo, larynx, dizziness 
are treated in the ear, nose, and throat department.
5.4.1.5 Pediatric intensive care (PIC)
Children from the end of the neonatal period, which lasts the first 28 days, 
until the age of 18. They have great differences compared to adults in terms 
of body structure, functioning, and diseases. For this reason, in cases 
requiring intensive care and treatment, adult intensive care units are inad‑
equate to meet the treatment and care needs of children. Pediatric inten‑
sive care units developed for this purpose are equipped with equipment 
for the treatment and control of emergency cases in all periods of infancy 
and childhood. Multidisciplinary teams formed by physicians, nurses, and 
allied health personnel specializing in pediatric diseases work in pediatric 
intensive care units.
5.4.1.6 General surgery (GS)
Hernia, appendicitis, hemorrhoids, small intestine, hemorrhoids, large 
intestine, stomach, large intestine, gallbladder, and liver diseases are exam‑
ined in the surgery department.
5.4.1.7 Eye health (EH)
In the Department of Eye Health and Diseases, vitreo‑retinal diseases, 
cataract‑refractive surgery, oculoplastic surgery, glaucoma, macular degen‑
eration diagnosis and treatment, refraction–refraction errors, strabismus, 
pediatric ophthalmology, premature retinopathy, retina, and corneal dis‑
eases are treated in the ophthalmology department.Evaluation of daily management with standard deviation 79
5.4.2 Standard deviation method
This method was developed by Diakoulaki et al. (1995). The importance 
values of the criteria are calculated according to the standard deviation. 
The steps of the method are as follows:
In the first step, a decision matrix containing criteria and alternatives is 
created.
In the second step, criterion values were normalized in Eqs. (5.1) and (5.2) 
according to the benefit and cost situation.
′ = −
− = = =
= =
min ( )
max ()min ( ) 1,2,... ; 1,2,...n,(forbeneficial) 1
1 1
x
x x
x x
i m j ij
ij i
m ij
i
m ij i
m ij (5.1)
′ = −
− = = =
= =
max ( )
max ()min ( ) 1,2,... ; 1,2,...n,(forbeneficial) 1
1 1
x
x xy
x x
i m j ij
i
m ij
i
m ij i
m ij (5.2)
In the third step, if we express m criteria and n alternatives, standard devia‑
tion is found with Eq.(5.3).
= ∑ ′ − ′ =
SDV 1 ( )2
m 1 j i x x j y i
m
(5.3)
5.4.3 MOOSRA method
The MOOSRA method has significant advantages over methods such as 
AHP, TOPSIS, VIKOR, ELECTRE, and PROMETHEE, such as shorter 
calculation time, fewer mathematical operations, high reliability, and sim‑
ple applicability (Das et al., 2012).
The application steps of the MOOSRA method first start with creating 
the decision matrix of the problem, and the second step is the normalization 
of the decision matrix. While all performance values of each alternative are 
calculated in the MOOSRA method, the sum of useful and non‑beneficial 
values and normalized performance values is obtained by the simple ratio 
method (Balezentiene et al., 2013).
Step 1: Creating the Decision Matrix: This methodology starts with defin‑
ing the decision matrix where the criteria and alternatives are listed. The 
performance of each alternative is formed as the following Eq.(5.4).
=












....
....
....
11 12 13
21 22 23
1 2
X
X X X
X X X
X X X
ij
m m mn
(5.4)80 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
Step 2: Normalizing the Decision Matrix: The process of converting the 
attribute value to the range 0–1 is called normalization. In multi‑cri‑
teria decision ‑making, the values in the decision matrix need to be 
converted from different units to a single type of unit, and the normal‑
ization process is used for this reason. Xij
* value expresses the normal‑
ized value of ith alternative on jth with Eq.(5.5).
∑
=∗
=
2
1
X x
x
ij
ij
ij i
n (5.5)
Step 3: Defining Alternative Values: The performance values (Yi
) of all 
alternatives were calculated by taking the simple ratio of the weighted 
sums of useful and non‑useful criteria. In this calculation, Eq.(5.6) 
below was used.
G refers to the maximized value and (n‑g) refers to the mini‑
mized value. If Wj
; jth refers to the weight value to which the value 
is related.
∑
∑
=
∗
=
∗
= +
1
1
Y
w X
w X
i
j ij j
g
j ij j g
n (5.6)
Step 4: Ranking of Alternatives: In the last step, the ranking of alter‑
natives is carried out with Eq.(5.7). When alternatives are listed in 
descending order, the best alternative is the one with the highest value.
∑
∑
=
∗
=
∗
= +
1
1
Y
X
X
i
ij j
g
ij j g
g (5.7)
5.5 CASE STUDY
In this study, LDM application in a hospital in Istanbul was discussed. 
As mentioned above, eight criteria and eight departments were taken to 
evaluate LDM. Weighting was done with standard deviation in weighting 
eight criteria. Afterwards, the MOOSRA method was applied to rank the 
eight departments in the light of these weights. For Table 5.2 given below, 
the weights in Table 5.3 were obtained by applying Steps 1–3 in standard 
deviation.
Continuous training was found to be the most important criterion in 
LDM. Feedback mechanisms followed this criterion. On the other hand, it 
was observed that the other criteria were very close to each other.Evaluation of daily management with standard deviation 8
1
Table 5.2 Decision matrix
Alternatives
Leadership 
engagement 
Visual 
management
Standardized work 
processes Gemba walks 
Empowered 
teams 
Continuous 
training 
Feedback 
mechanisms:
KPI 
monitoring
IC1 70 80 65 77 44 66 60 25
ENT 64 27 87 76 50 45 38 35
EH 67 26 22 40 65 61 100 53
ID 66 45 93 65 30 88 85 91
E 35 45 59 36 20 40 45 60
GS 76 54 62 84 73 92 35 85
PIC 66 56 44 79 45 32 73 74
IC2 72 75 56 59 44 67 88 75
Table 5.3 Weights of criteria
Leadership 
engagement 
Visual 
management
Standardized 
work processes
Gemba 
walks 
Empowered 
teams 
Continuous 
training 
Feedback 
mechanisms 
KPI 
monitoring
10.68 12.77 11.09 13.26 11.27 14.56 13.92 12.4482 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
Then, the ranking of the departments was obtained by applying Eqs. 
(5.4–5.7) in the MOOSRA method (Table 5.4).
When you examine the results, General Surgery (GS) emerged as the most 
important department. ID has followed this department.
5.6 CONCLUSION
In recent years, LDM has begun to be used in many different sectors other 
than production. In this way, lean production has the ability to monitor 
its goals on a daily basis through an important tool. Its use in hospitals 
has also begun to gain momentum in Turkey. This provides a more effec‑
tive management of hospitals serving in the field of human health. It suf‑
fered many losses of life and property due to the disasters it experienced. 
Therefore, taking quick action on this issue ensures that patients receive 
better service. Correct evaluation of LDM is an extremely important issue. 
It will be an important tool in measuring the success of the units. In this 
study, the importance weights of LDM’s KPI criteria were discussed with 
the standard deviation method. Thus, a separate importance value was 
determined for each KPI. Based on these weights, eight departments in the 
hospital were evaluated. It is aimed to be determined and selected according 
to the right points. In addition, the ROV method was applied to correctly 
rank the logistics centers among the alternatives determined for the disaster 
area. Continuous training was determined to be the most important of the 
eight criteria. Feedback mechanisms follows the continuous training crite‑
rion with a slight difference. It has been observed that the other criteria dif‑
fer from each other with minor differences. However, more sensitive results 
were obtained than if all of them were considered equal. MOOSRA method 
was applied according to these criterion weights and taking into account 
the performance values of eight departments. Accordingly, General Surgery 
has become the most successful department. Internal diseases came in sec‑
ond. With this study, it has been shown that the importance values of KPIs 
Table 5.4 Ranking of alternatives
Alternatives Si Ranking
IC1 0.4371 4
ENT 0.3592 7
EH 0.3805 6
ID 0.4999 2
E 0.3059 8
GS 0.5012 1
PIC 0.4180 5
IC2 0.4831 3Evaluation of daily management with standard deviation 83
and the ranking of departments can be made in patients. Different MCDM 
methods can be used in future studies. Additionally, different criteria and 
departments can be added or removed. Different sector applications can 
also be made.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank Bahar BOZKURT from Altınoluk in Balıkesir for 
her contribution to obtaining data.
REFERENCES
Balezentiene, L., Streimikiene, D., & Balezentis, T. (2013). Fuzzy decision support 
methodology for sustainable energy crop selection. Renewable and Sustainable 
Energy Reviews, 17(1), 83–93.
Barnas, K. (2011). ThedaCare’s business performance system: Sustaining continuous 
daily improvement through hospital management in a lean environment. The
Joint Commission Journal on Quality and Patient Safety, 37(9), 387–AP8.
Berlanga, G. A., & Husby, B. C. (2016). Lean Daily Management for Healthcare 
Field Book. CRC Press.
Biskupska, D., & Ratnayake, R. C. (2019). On the need for effective Lean Daily 
Management in engineering design projects: development of a framework. 
Perap Presented at the 2019 IEEE International Conference on Industrial 
Engineering and Engineering Management (IEEM), Macao. Çavmak, D. Ç. (2018). Lean management in healthcare services: An evaluation of 
a private hospital coronary intensive care. International Journal of Health 
Management and Strategies Research, 4(1), 54–73.
Dalton, J., &Dalton, J. (2019). Gemba walks. In Jeff Dalton (ed.), Great Big Agile: 
An OS for Agile Leaders, pp.173–174. Berkely, CA: Apress.
Das, M. C., Sarkar, B., &Ray, S. (2012). Decision‑making under conflicting envi‑
ronment: A new MCDM method. International Journal of Applied Decision 
Sciences, 5(2), 142–162.
Diakoulaki, D., Mavrotas, G., & Papayannakis, L. (1995). Determining objec‑
tive weights in multiple criteria problems: The critic method. Computers & 
Operations Research, 22(7), 763–770.
Donabedian, A. (2005). Evaluating the quality of medical care. The Milbank 
Quarterly, 83(4), 691.
Donnelly, L. F. (2014). Daily management systems in medicine. Radiographics, 34(2), 
549–555.
Donnelly, G. E., Ksendzova, M., Howell, R. T., Vohs, K. D., & Baumeister, R. F. 
(2016). Buying to blunt negative feelings: Materialistic escape from the self. 
Review of General Psychology, 20(3), 272–316.
Ferro, J., & Gouveia, R. (2015). How to create an effective daily management sys‑
tem. Planet Lean.84 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
Goldenhar, L. M., Brady, P. W., Sutcliffe, K. M., & Muething, S. E. (2013). Huddling 
for high reliability and situation awareness. BMJ Quality & Safety, 22(11), 
899–906.
Hajiani, P., Nateghinia, S., & Jalali,R. (2013). Hospitals ranking based on balanced 
scorecard (BSC) approach and multi‑criteria decision‑making (MCDM) tech‑
niques; case study: Hospitals of Boushehr. European Journal of Social Sciences, 
39(1), 58–66.
Hopkins, S., Walter, M., & Collins, S. (2017). Lean daily management: Exploring the 
effectiveness in reducing product returns and overnight shipment occurrences 
in a materials management department. Health Care Manager (Frederick), 
36(3), 267–272.
Katayama, H., & Bennett, D. (1996).Lean production in a changing competi‑
tive world: A Japanese perspective. International Journal of Operations & 
Production Management, 16(2), 8–23.
Kennedy, R. K. (2019). Understanding, Measuring, and İmproving Daily 
Management: How to Use Effective Daily Management to Drive Significant 
Process İmprovement. CRC Press.
Kerstjens, H. A., Maspero, J., Chapman, K. R., van Zyl‑Smit, R. N., Hosoe, M., Tanase, 
A. M.,... & D’Andrea, P. (2020). Once‑daily, single‑inhaler mometasone–inda‑
caterol–glycopyrronium versus mometasone–indacaterol or twice‑daily flutica‑
sone–salmeterol in patients with inadequately controlled asthma (IRIDIUM): 
a randomised, double‑blind, controlled phase 3 study. The Lancet Respiratory 
Medicine, 8(10), 1000–1012.
Koenigsaecker, G. (2009). Leading the Lean Enterprise Transformation, 2nd edn. 
Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press Tylor & Francis Group
Liker, J. K., & Convis, G. L. (2012). Toyota Way to Lean Leadership: Achieving 
and Sustaining Excellence through Leadership Development. New York: 
McGraw‑Hill Education.
Liker, J. K., Hoseus, M., & Center for Quality People and Organizations. (2008). 
Toyota Culture. McGraw‑Hill Publishing, New York.
Mann, D. (2005). Creating a Lean Culture: Tools to Sustain Lean Conversions. 
Productivity Press.
Mariz, R. N., Galvao, E. L., Picchi, F. A., Melo, R. S. S., & Barcelos, M. C. B. (2019). 
Daily management application in a dam construction project. Paper Presented 
at the Proc.  27th Annual Conference of the International Group for Lean 
Construction (IGLC), Ireland. Maurer, M., Browall, P., Phelan,C., Sanchez, S., Sulmonte, K., Wandel, J., &Wang, A. 
(2018). Continuous improvement and employee engagement, part 2: Design, 
implementation, and outcomes of a daily management system. Journal of 
Nursing Administration, 48(4), 209–215.
Mihaljevic, T. (2020).Tiered daily huddles: The power of teamwork in managing 
large healthcare organisations. BMJ Quality & Safety, 29(12), 1050–1052.
Nicholas, J. (2023). Lean daily management in healthcare: origins, practices, 
and associations with lean leadership and lean sustainability. Total Quality 
Management & Business Excellence, 34(11–12), 1526–1552.
Ohno, T. (1988). Toyota Production System: Beyond Large‑Scale Production. 
Productivity Press, Portland, OR.Evaluation of daily management with standard deviation 85
Petersson, P. (2013). Leadership: Making LEAN a Success. Part Media.
Poksinska, B., Swartling,D., & Drotz, E. (2013).The daily work of Lean lead‑
ers – Lessons from manufacturing and healthcare. Total Quality Management 
& Business Excellence, 24(7–8), 886–898.
Sachdev, A., & Agrawal, J. (2017). Application of policy deployment and daily man‑
agement in service sector. International Journal of Quality Innovation, 3(1), 
1–17.
Schatz, M., & Bergren, M. D. (2022). The huddle: A daily dose of communication. 
NASN School Nurse, 37(2), 76–78.
Schlauch, M., Rogers, P., Pyne, R., Tomchik, C., Ellis, C., & Gartrell, K. (2020). 
Implementation of lean daily management: A vascular access team qual‑
ity improvement project to enhance nurses’ workflow and patient outcomes.
Journal of the Association for Vascular Access, 25(3), 18–27.
Stewart, E. E., & Johnson, B. C. (2007). Huddles: Improve office efficiency in mere 
minutes. Family Practice Management, 14(6), 27–29.
Teich, S. T., & Faddoul,F. F. (2013). Lean management: The journey from Toyota to 
healthcare. Rambam Maimonides Medical Journal, 4(2).
Tunçer, P. (2013). Performance evaluation and motivation in organizations. Jourrnal 
of Court of Accounts, 88, 87–108.
Vamsi, K. J. N., & Kodali, R. (2014). A literature review of empirical research 
methodology in lean manufacturing. International Journal of Operations & 
Production Management, 34(8), 1080–1122.
Wahjoedi, T. (2023). Daily management system as corporate culture for organi‑
zational sustainability. International Journal of Research Publication and 
Reviews, 4(4), 3978–3985.
Warén, J. (2013). Lean daily management, visual management and continuous 
improvement.
White, B. (2016). Lean Daily Management for Healthcare: A Strategic Guide to 
Implementing Lean for Hospital Leaders. CRC Press.
Wirtz, A. L., Monsees, E.A., Gibbs, K. A., Myers, A. L., Burns, A. N., El Feghaly, 
R. E., Weddle, G. M., Day, J. C., Purandare, A. V., & Goldman, J. L. (2021).
Integration of a lean daily management system into an antimicrobial steward‑
ship program. Pediatric Quality & Safety, 6(2).
Yerian, L. M., Seestadt, J. A., Gomez, E. R., & Marchant, K. K. (2012). A collabora‑
tive approach to lean laboratory workstation design reduces wasted technolo‑
gist travel. American Journal of Clinical Pathology, 138(2), 273–280.
Zarbo, R. J., Varney, R. C., Copeland, J. R., D’Angelo, R., & Sharma, G. J. A. J. O. 
C. P. (2015). Daily management system of the Henry Ford Production System: 
QTIPS to focus continuous improvements at the level of the work. American 
Journal of Clinical Pathology, 144(1), 122–136.86 DOI: 10.1201/9781003503057-6
Chapter 6
Machine learning‑based 
multi‑objective optimization 
technique for load 
balancing in integrated 
fog‑cloud environment
Niva Tripathy, Subhranshu Sekhar Tripathy, 
and Satyananda Champati Rai
6.1 INTRODUCTION
In today’s hyper‑connected digital landscape, the demand for seamless and 
efficient computing resources has skyrocketed, driven by the proliferation of 
Internet of Things (IoT) devices, edge computing, and data‑intensive appli‑
cations [1]. The convergence of fog and cloud computing has emerged as a 
promising solution to meet these escalating computational requirements. 
Fog computing, characterized by its proximity to edge devices, brings com‑
putation and data storage closer to the point of data generation, reducing 
latency and improving real‑time processing. However, the integration of fog 
and cloud computing also poses new challenges, and one of the most critical 
ones is load balancing.
Load balancing in an integrated fog‑cloud environment involves distrib‑
uting computational workloads optimally across fog nodes and cloud serv‑
ers to ensure efficient resource utilization, low latency, and high availability. 
Traditional load balancing techniques may fall short in this complex envi‑
ronment due to its dynamic nature, varying workloads, and the need to 
optimize multiple objectives simultaneously. To address these challenges, 
machine learning‑based multi‑objective optimization techniques have 
emerged as a cutting‑edge solution.
Machine learning techniques [2], particularly deep learning and rein‑
forcement learning, have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in handling 
complex and dynamic scenarios. When combined with multi‑objective 
optimization approaches, they can significantly enhance load balancing in 
integrated fog‑cloud environments. This integration enables decision‑mak‑
ing processes that consider various objectives simultaneously, such as 
minimizing latency, maximizing energy efficiency, and ensuring resource 
availability.Machine learning-based multi-objective optimization technique 87
In this context, this paper introduces a novel approach: “Machine 
Learning‑Based Multi‑Objective Optimization Technique for Load 
Balancing in Integrated Fog‑Cloud Environment.” This approach leverages 
the power of machine learning to make informed decisions about resource 
allocation while simultaneously addressing multiple objectives, such as min‑
imizing latency, maximizing throughput, and ensuring resource efficiency.
In this research endeavor, we will delve into the intricate interplay between 
machine learning algorithms, multi‑objective optimization, and the unique 
challenges posed by fog‑cloud environments. By harnessing the potential of 
AI‑driven load balancing, we aim to propel fog‑cloud computing into a new 
era of efficiency and performance, catering to the ever‑evolving demands 
of modern computing paradigms. The ensuing chapters will explore the 
theoretical foundations, implementation methodologies, and experimental 
results, shedding light on the promising future of this innovative approach 
to load balancing.
6.2 RELATED WORK
A literature survey on Machine Learning‑Based Multi‑Objective Optimization 
Techniques for Load Balancing in Integrated Fog‑Cloud Environments reveals 
a rapidly evolving field with a growing body of research that addresses the 
challenges and opportunities in optimizing resource allocation in these com‑
plex environments.
Bebortta et al. [3] and Eleyan A and Eleyan D [4] proposed a compre‑
hensive overview of machine learning techniques applied to fog computing, 
including load balancing. It covers various aspects of fog computing and 
discusses the potential of machine learning in optimizing resource alloca‑
tion and load balancing.
Buyya et al. [5] focused on multi‑objective optimization for fog com‑
puting and discussed energy efficiency and low‑latency task offloading. It 
employs a machine learning‑based approach to optimize these objectives in 
a fog environment.
Eleyan A and Eleyan D [4] explored the use of reinforcement learning 
techniques for multi‑objective optimization in fog computing, addressing 
challenges like load balancing and resource allocation. It discusses how RL 
can adapt to dynamic environments effectively.
Deng et al. [6] presented a machine learning‑driven approach for resource 
allocation in fog‑cloud environments, specifically tailored for IoT services. 
It discusses the benefits of machine learning in balancing resource usage 
and ensuring low‑latency IoT applications.
 Sahman et al. [7] provided insights into the integration of fog computing 
and machine learning in IoT environments. While not specifically focused 88 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
on load balancing, it discusses the broader context of how machine learning 
enhances fog computing in various aspects.
Naderi and Azab [8] focused on smart manufacturing; this paper dis‑
cusses fog computing in industrial settings and how machine learning 
can play a crucial role in optimizing resource allocation, including load 
balancing.
Gao and Chen [9] proposed specific application of machine learning for 
load balancing in IoT scenarios within edge and fog computing environ‑
ments. It discusses the use of machine learning algorithms to adaptively 
allocate resources.
These research papers offer a comprehensive overview of the state of the 
art in machine learning‑based multi‑objective optimization techniques for 
load balancing in integrated fog‑cloud environments. Researchers and prac‑
titioners interested in this field can delve deeper into these papers to gain a 
more thorough understanding of the current trends, challenges, and oppor‑
tunities in this domain.
6.3 SYSTEM MODEL
Designing a system model for a cloud‑fog integrated machine learning 
approach involves defining the components, their interactions, and the flow 
of data and processes within the system. Here’s a high‑level system model 
for such an approach (Figure 6.1):
Fog nodes [10,11] are distributed edge devices or nodes that collect and 
process data from sensors and IoT devices in real time. Fog nodes deploy 
lightweight machine learning models for real‑time data analysis and deci‑
sion‑making. These models can perform tasks like anomaly detection, data 
preprocessing, and local predictions. Fog nodes preprocess and filter incom‑
ing data, optimizing it for local processing and reducing the amount of data 
sent to the cloud. Preprocessing may include data cleaning, feature extrac‑
tion, and data reduction. Fog nodes balance data and computation loads 
locally based on their processing capabilities and resource availability. 
Machine learning algorithms assist in dynamic load balancing. Fog‑cloud 
interface manages the communication between fog nodes and the cloud. It 
optimizes data transmission, ensuring that only relevant and summarized 
data is sent to the cloud for further processing.
Cloud Layer [12,13] consists of powerful servers and data centers equipped 
with more sophisticated machine learning infrastructure. Cloud servers are 
responsible for training complex and resource‑intensive machine learn‑
ing models on aggregated data from multiple fog nodes. Training involves 
deep learning algorithms and extensive data processing. The cloud layer 
stores historical data, model parameters, and insights generated by machine 
learning models. It provides a centralized repository for data analytics and Machine learning-based multi-objective optimization technique 89
long‑term storage. Cloud servers manage machine learning models, includ‑
ing updates, version control, and deployment to fog nodes.
Machine learning models deployed in fog nodes are responsible for 
real‑time inference and prediction tasks, such as predicting equipment fail‑
ures, recognizing patterns, or recommending actions. The system dynami‑
cally selects the appropriate machine learning models for specific tasks based 
on data characteristics and objectives. This dynamic selection is guided by 
cloud‑based insights. Machine learning models in fog nodes can receive 
updates from the cloud as new training data becomes available, allowing 
for continuous improvement. Machine learning models perform real‑time 
anomaly detection and raise alerts when abnormal behavior is detected.
The architecture is designed to scale horizontally [14] and vertically 
to accommodate increasing data volumes and computational demands. 
Redundancy mechanisms are implemented at critical points to ensure high 
availability and fault tolerance.
This system model integrates machine learning seamlessly into a cloud‑fog 
environment, enabling real‑time decision‑making at the edge while leverag‑
ing the cloud’s capabilities for complex analytics and model training. It 
optimizes data flow, processing, and resource allocation across fog and 
Sensor date
aggregation
node
ML
Predictive
model
Evaluate
system
Train the
system
Recognizing
patterns &
features
Figure 6.1 Proposed architecture.90 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
cloud layers, providing a flexible and efficient solution for a wide range of 
applications.
6.3.1 Machine learning approach for task 
offloading and load balancing
Machine learning approaches for task scheduling [15] and load balanc‑
ing [16] in distributed computing systems can enhance the allocation of 
resources, optimize task execution, and improve overall system perfor‑
mance. Here’s a step‑by‑step guide to implementing such an approach:
1. Data Collection: Gather data related to the distributed computing 
environment, including information about available resources (e.g., 
CPU, memory, and bandwidth), task characteristics (e.g., computa‑
tional requirements and deadlines), historical task execution data, 
and current system status.
2. Feature Extraction: Extract relevant features from the collected data. 
These features may include task attributes, resource availability, net‑
work conditions, and historical performance metrics.
3. Problem Formulation: Define the task scheduling and load balancing 
problem as a machine learning problem. Determine the objectives you 
want to optimize, such as minimizing task completion time, maximiz‑
ing resource utilization, or reducing energy consumption.
4. Machine Learning Model Selection: Choose or develop machine 
learning models appropriate for the task scheduling and load balanc‑
ing objectives. Potential models include the following:
Regression Models: For predicting task execution times based on his‑
torical data and resource requirements.
Classification Models: For categorizing tasks into different priority 
levels or resource classes.
Reinforcement Learning Models: For learning optimal task schedul‑
ing policies through interactions with the environment.
5. Model Training: Use historical data to train the selected machine 
learning models. Train the models with labeled data, which includes 
input features and target labels (e.g., task execution time and resource 
allocation).Fine‑tune the models to optimize their performance for 
the specific objectives and constraints of your distributed computing 
environment.
6. Task Scheduling and Load Balancing: When a new task is submitted 
to the system, use the trained machine learning model to make sched‑
uling decisions. Consider the predicted task execution time, resource 
requirements, and system status. Implement load balancing strategies Machine learning-based multi-objective optimization technique 91
that allocate tasks to the available resources while considering factors 
like resource utilization, latency, and fairness. For dynamic environ‑
ments, use reinforcement learning models to learn scheduling policies 
that adapt to changing conditions in real time.
7. Monitoring and Feedback: Continuously monitor the system’s per‑
formance, including task completion times, resource utilization, and 
load distribution.
Collect feedback data to retrain the machine learning models peri‑
odically. This ensures that the models remain accurate and adaptive 
to evolving conditions.
8. Optimization: Optimize [17] the machine learning‑based task sched‑
uling and load balancing algorithms as needed to achieve the desired 
system objectives. Consider using techniques like hyper parameter 
tuning and model ensembling.
9. Security and Privacy Considerations: Implement security measures 
to protect against unauthorized access, data breaches, and malicious 
attacks on the scheduling and load balancing system. Ensure that sen‑
sitive data, such as task content and resource availability, is handled 
securely.
10. Evaluation:
Assess the performance of the machine learning‑based approach using rel‑
evant metrics, such as task completion time, resource utilization efficiency, 
and system throughput. Compare the results to baseline scheduling and 
load balancing methods to quantify improvements.
Implementing machine learning for task scheduling and load balancing 
in distributed computing systems can lead to more efficient resource uti‑
lization, reduced latency, and improved user experience. By continuously 
adapting to changing workloads and system conditions, machine learning 
models can help optimize task allocation in dynamic and complex comput‑
ing environments.
6.3.2 Proposed load balancing technique
Creating a complete algorithm for a machine learning‑based load balanc‑
ing technique can be complex and highly specific to the system, data, and 
machine learning models involved. However, I can provide a simplified 
algorithm outline to give you a sense of the steps involved. Please note that 
this is a high‑level representation and does not cover all the details of a 
real‑world implementation. You will need to adapt this outline to your spe‑
cific use case and machine learning framework.92 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
Step 1: Data collection and preparation
Collect real‑time system data
current_resource_utilization = measure_resource_utilization()
task_arrival_rates = get_task_arrival_rates()
historical_performance_data = load_historical_data()
Step 2: Extract relevant features from collected data
features = extract_features(current_resource_utilization, task_
arrival_rates, historical_performance_data)
Step 3: Machine learning model training
Choose a machine learning model suitable for the problem (e.g., 
regression, classification, and reinforcement learning).Train the 
selected model using historical data and labeled data
model = train_machine_learning_model(features, labeled_data)
Step 4: Load balancing
while True:
Continuously monitor the system’s state
current_state=measure_system_state()
Step 5: Use the trained machine learning model to make load balancing 
decisions
load_balancing_decision = predict_load_balancing_decision
(model, current_state)
Step 6: Implement the load balancing decision (e.g., distribute tasks to 
resources)
execute_load_balancing(load_balancing_decision)
Repeat the process periodically or as needed
Step 7: Monitoring and feedback
Continuously monitor the system’s performance and collect feed‑
back data
Step 8: Optimization (optional)
Fine‑tune the machine learning model and load balancing algo‑
rithm based on feedback
Step 9: Security and privacy considerations (not shown in this outline)
Implement security measures to protect against unauthorized 
access and data breaches
Step 10: EvaluationMachine learning-based multi-objective optimization technique 93
6.3.3 Assess the performance of the load 
balancing technique using relevant metrics
This program is a simplified demonstration that uses random data and a 
linear regression model for load balancing decision‑making. In a real‑world 
scenario, you would replace the simulated data with actual system metrics 
and implement more advanced machine learning models and load balancing 
logic tailored to your specific use case. Additionally, consider integrating 
this with a broader distributed computing system for practical application.
6.4 PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS AND EVALUATION
The experimentation setup and evaluation of results are performed to ensure 
the effectiveness of the projected system. Later, the obtained outcome of the 
introduced model is compared with five state‑of‑art existing met heuris‑
tic algorithms. We have utilized the FogSim simulator in this scheduling 
to generate the dataset. An energy‑efficient open‑source tool is used for 
modeling and simulating resource management in fog/edge computing. 
The FogSim is integrated with CloudSim to deal with the actions between 
fog computing environments. In CloudSim, different parameters, like data 
centers, use communication processes for transmission. Parameter settings 
Te performance of the social spider optimization (SSO) algorithm on solv‑
ing job scheduling is coded using FogSim with CloudSim under Windows 
10 on an Intel i5 processor with 3.4GHz and 16GB RAM. Te empirical 
result is compared with other state‑of‑art metaheuristic algorithms, namely 
SSO [18], grasshopper optimization algorithm (GOA) [19], slap swarm 
algorithm (SSA) [20], grey wolf optimization (GWO) [21], and whale opti‑
mization algorithm (WOA) [22]. For all experimentation algorithms, the 
population size, maximum iterations, and number of runs are fixed as 60, 
100, and 20, respectively.
6.4.1 Result analysis
The dataset is generated with the aid of a FogSim‑based simulation tool. 
All the proposed and compared algorithms are iterated for 100 epochs for 
each test case with varying tasks, and obtained results are graphically plot‑
ted. Further, we experimented on two test cases concerning the number of 
processors and fog nodes. For the first case, the number of processors var‑
ies from 4, 8, 12, 16, 20, and 24 with 20, 40, 80, 160, 320, and 400 tasks, 
respectively. Each task is allocated to an adequate number of fog servers, 
and processing orders are determined by solution representation as speci‑
fied in DOL‑based SSO algorithm section. For the second case, the number 
of fog nodes varies from 5, 10, 15, and 20 with respect to different jobs.94 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
Case 1: Experimentation based on the number of processors in the first 
case, we have created varying numbers of processors with various tasks. 
Te experimentation results are measured, and the introduced model is con‑
trasted with five met heuristic algorithms: GOA, SSA, GWO, WOA, and 
SSO. Figure 6.2 determines the average resource utilization concerning the 
number of processors. Figure 6.2 shows that the proposed DOL‑SSP algo‑
rithm provides better than GOA, SSA, GWO, WOA, and SSO. Te standard 
SSA algorithm competes with the proposed algorithm but fails during itera‑
tions. At the same time, the proposed DOL‑SSO algorithm utilizes the pro‑
cessors effectively by allocating adequate tasks to the available machines. 
GWO and WOA algorithms provide moreover similar results in resource 
utilization. Overall, average resource utilization by DOLSSO was improved 
on average by 12% more than the standard SSA algorithm. Te average 
energy depletion ratio concerning the number of processors is represented 
in Figure 6.2. In this experimentation, we achieved a lower energy con‑
sumption method. Te standard SSO algorithm and the proposed algorithm 
achieve the same results due to the random initialization of populations. 
Also, several ways consume more energy than the proposed algorithm. 
Though the proposed algorithm attains the same output in eight proces‑
sors, the resources are more effectively utilized than the standard SSO algo‑
rithm (Figure 6.3).
Number of processors
4
20
30
40
50
Average resource utilization
60
70
80
8 12 16 20 24
GOA
SSA
GWO
WOA
SSO
DOL-SSO
Figure 6.2 Average resource utilization vs no of processor.Machine learning-based multi-objective optimization technique 95
Case 2: Experimentation based on the number of fog nodes Te efficacy of 
the proposed model on fog computing scenarios is validated by varying fog 
nodes from 5 to 20 with a varying number of jobs. CPU clock rate and allo‑
cated memory for heterogeneous nodes are taken from [23]. We have con‑
sidered four cases of fog nodes; the maximum number of iterations is 8,000 
in all test cases with 20 runs. Te introduced model is contrasted with five 
existing met heuristic algorithms like GOA, SSA, GWO, WOA, and SSO. 
For evaluation, two performance metrics are utilized: execution time and 
allocated memory for jobs with respect to completion time. Once the server 
is distributed with a specific number of jobs, it is locked until it completes 
its execution. The pictorial representation of allocated memory for jobs is 
illustrated in Figure 6.4. As observed from the results, Figure 6.5 specifies 
that the concert of the DOLSSO method outperforms well than compared 
algorithms. Te maximum allocated memory concerning 20 fog nodes for 
various determined jobs attained by DOLSSO (2.6GB) is lesser than the 
standard SSO (2.9GB). In addition, allocated memories for jobs achieved by 
GWO (2.8GB) and SSO (2.9GB) are closer. Based on the experimentation 
results, incorporating the DOL strategy into SSO improves performance by 
eradicating local optimal struck and a better convergence rate.
Number of processors
4
6.2
6.4
6.6
6.8
7.0
Average resource utilization7.4
7.2
7.6
7.8
8 12 16 20 24
GOA
SSA
GWO
WOA
SSO
DOL-SSO
Figure 6.3 Average energy consumption vs no of processor.96 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
6.5 CONCLUSION
Machine learning‑based load balancing in cloud‑fog systems represents a trans‑
formative approach to address the complex and dynamic resource allocation 
challenges posed by modern distributed computing environments. Through
20
15
10
Fog nodes #
5
46 48 50 52 54 56 58
DOLSSO
Execution time in terms of CPU frequency
SSO
WOA
GWO
SSA
GOA
DO
SSO
WO
GW
SSA
GO
Figure 6.4 Execution time vs number of fog nodes.
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
Memory (GB)
5 10 15
#Fog nodes
20
DOLSSO
SSO
WOA
GWO
SSA
GOA
Figure 6.5 Memory consumed vs number of fog nodes.Machine learning-based multi-objective optimization technique 97
the integration of machine learning techniques, load balancing in such systems 
can achieve remarkable improvements in efficiency, resource utilization, and 
overall system performance. Machine learning models can adapt to changing 
workloads, resource availability, and network conditions in real time. This 
adaptability ensures that the system can efficiently allocate resources and dis‑
tribute tasks as the environment evolves. By making data‑driven decisions, 
machine learning‑based load balancing minimizes resource wastage and max‑
imizes utilization. This leads to cost savings and reduced energy consumption,
contributing to sustainability. Machine learning algorithms can prioritize
tasks based on their importance and service‑level agreements, ensuring that 
critical workloads receive the required resources and attention. These tech‑
niques can scale to handle large and complex cloud‑fog environments, accom‑
modating increasing workloads and data volumes.
However, it’s important to acknowledge that machine learning‑based 
load balancing is not without its challenges. It requires careful model selec‑
tion, training, and continuous monitoring to ensure optimal performance. 
Moreover, considerations regarding data privacy, security, and the poten‑
tial for model biases must be addressed.
In summary, machine learning‑based load balancing in cloud‑fog systems 
is a promising avenue that offers the potential to revolutionize resource 
allocation, making distributed computing environments more efficient, 
responsive, and adaptable. As the technology matures and evolves, it holds 
the promise of delivering even greater benefits to a wide range of industries 
and applications, from IoT deployments to critical infrastructure services.
REFERENCES
1. Harika S, Krishna BC (2022) Multi‑objective optimization‑oriented resource 
allocation in the fog environment: a new hybrid approach. Int J Inf Technol 
Web Eng 17(1):1–25.
2. Santos J, Wauters T, Volckaert B, De Turck F (2021) Reinforcement learning 
for service function chain allocation in fog computing. In: Communication 
Networks and Service Management in the Era of Artificial Intelligence and 
Machine Learning, Nur Zincir‑Heywood, Marco Mellia,and Yixin Diao 
(eds), Wiley, pp. 147–173.
3. Bebortta S, Tripathy SS, Modibbo UM, Ali I (2023) An optimal fog‑cloud 
offloading framework for big data optimization in heterogeneous IoT net‑
works. Decis Anal J 8:100295.
4. Eleyan A, Eleyan D (2015) Forensic process as a service (FPaaS) for cloud 
computing. In: Intelligence and Security Informatics Conference (EISIC), 
2015 European, pp 157–160. IEEE; The Network.Cisco Delivers Vision of 
Fog Computing to Accelerate Value from Billions of Connected Devices. 
https://newsroom.cisco.com/pressrelease‑content?articleId=1334100.M.
5. Buyya R, Yeo CS, Venugopal S, Broberg J, Brandic I (2009) Cloud computing 
and emerging IT platforms: vision, hype, and reality for delivering computing 
as the 5th utility. Futur Gener Comput Syst 25(6):599–616.98 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
6. Deng R, Rongxing L, Lai C, Luan TH, Liang H (2016) Optimal workload 
allocation in fog‑cloud computing toward balanced delay and power con‑
sumption. IEEE Internet Things J 3(6):1171–1181.
7. Şahman MA (2021) A discrete spotted hyena optimizer for solving distrib‑
uted job shop scheduling problems. Appl Soft Comput 106:107349.
8. Naderi B, Azab A (2014) Modeling and heuristics for scheduling of distrib‑
uted job shops. Expert Syst Appl 41(17):7754–7763.
9. Gao J, Chen R (2011) A hybrid genetic algorithm for the distributed permuta‑
tion fowshop scheduling problem. Int J Comput Intell Syst 4(4):497–508.
10. Samann FE, Abdulazeez AM, Askar S (2021) Fog computing based on 
machine learning: a review. Int J Interact Mobile Technol 15(12): 21–45.
11. Wu D, Terpenny J, Zhang L, Gao R, Kurfess T (2016) Fog‑enabled architecture 
for data‑driven cyber‑manufacturing systems. In: International Manufacturing 
Science and Engineering Conference, Vol. 49903, p. V002T04A032. American 
Society of Mechanical Engineers, Blacksburg, Virginia, USA.
12. Al Moteri M, Khan SB, Alojail M (2023) Machine learning‑driven ubiquitous 
mobile edge computing as a solution to network challenges in next‑generation 
IoT. Systems 11(6):308.
13. Cuevas E, Cienfuegos M (2014) A new algorithm inspired in the behavior of the 
social‑spider for constrained optimization. Expert Syst Appl 41(2):412–425.
14. Saremi S, Mirjalili S, Lewis A (2017) Grasshopper optimisation algorithm: 
theory and application. Adv Eng Softw 105:30–47.
15. Mirjalili S, Gandomi AH, Mirjalili SZ, Saremi S, Faris H, Mirjalili SM 
(2017) Salp swarm algorithm: a bio‑inspired optimizer for engineering design 
problems. Adv Eng Softw 114:163–191.
16. Natesan G, Chokkalingam A (2019) Task scheduling in heterogeneous cloud 
environment using mean grey wolf optimization algorithm. ICT Express
5(2):110–114.
17. Jiang T, Zhang C, Zhu H, Jiuchun G, Deng G (2018) Energy‑efcient scheduling 
for a job shop using an improved whale optimization algorithm. Mathematics
6(11):220.
18. Xie J, Gao L, Pan Q‑k, Fatih Tasgetiren M (2019) An effective multi‑objective 
artificial bee colony algorithm for energy efficient distributed job shop sched‑
uling. Proc Manufact 39:1194–1203.
19. Lei D (2008) Pareto archive particle swarm optimization for multiobjective 
fuzzy job shop scheduling problems. Int J Adv Manuf Technol 37(1):157–165.
20. Rossi A, Dini G (2007) Flexible job‑shop scheduling with routing flexibil‑
ity and separable setup times using ant colony optimisation method. Robot 
Comput Integr Manuf 23(5):503–516.
21. Costa B, Bachiega Jr J, de Carvalho LR, Araujo AP (2022) Orchestration in 
fog computing: a comprehensive survey. ACM Comput Surv 55(2): 1–34.
22. Ren Q, Liu K, Zhang L (2022) Multi‑objective optimization for task offload‑
ing based on network calculus in fog environments. Digit Commun Netw
8(5):825–833.
23. Bitam S, Zeadally S, Mellouk A (2017) Fog computing job scheduling optimi‑
zation based on bees swarm. Enterp Inf Syst 12(4):1–25.DOI: 10.1201/9781003503057-7 99
Chapter 7
Perishable inventory fuzzy 
optimization model with 
uncertain deterioration and 
preservation investment
Anshika Singh and Abhinav Goel
7.1 INTRODUCTION
Inventory management frequently uses optimization to balance expenses 
and satisfy consumers’ demands. Management becomes much more impor‑
tant when dealing with perishable goods, such as food or medicine. The 
optimization problem becomes more complex due to the ambiguous dete‑
rioration of these components over time. Perishable items are sensitive to 
several unknowns, such as changes in temperature, humidity, and other 
environmental conditions. To reduce the risk of spoilage while maximizing 
revenues, an optimization model can take these uncertainties into account 
and assist in determining the ideal order quantity, reorder points, and stor‑
age conditions. In a deterministic inventory model, Kumar et al. (2012) took 
the time‑dependent deterioration rate into account. An inventory model for 
immediately decaying goods with seasonal prices was developed by Sharma 
et al. (2020). Kumar et al. (2022) proposed the analysis for the study of 
the green inventory model for the imperfect quality of deteriorating items. 
The smart production system with partial backlog and deterioration in an 
inflationary environment was the focus of Yadav et al.’s (2023) research.
Investment is needed for preservation techniques of perishable commodi‑
ties like refrigeration or controlled environments. Mathematical models can 
be used to best determine whether to invest in preservation and to what 
amount. The optimization model may consider elements like the price of 
preservation equipment, energy usage, and the effect on product shelf life. 
In an economic order quantity model, Shastri et al. (2014) investigated the 
impact of preservation technology on perishable goods like fruits and fresh 
fish. By obtaining the optimal batch size, number of shipments, and pres‑
ervation investment values to maximize the profit, Yadav et  al.’s (2021) 
approach seeks to eliminate waste. The approach by Mahapatra et  al. 
(2022) uses preservation technologies to build a continuous review inven‑
tory model with full back ordering under uncertain demand. To maximize 
the preservation investment, Rana et al. (2023) created an inventory model 
using the deterioration rate as a random variable with a double triangular 
distribution.100 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
Fuzzy optimization is particularly helpful when working with ambiguous 
or imprecise data, which is frequently the situation in managing perishable 
inventory. Fuzzy logic can be incorporated into the optimization model to 
produce more accurate results by representing ambiguous or fuzzy informa‑
tion, such as the deterioration rate of perishable goods. A multi‑objective, 
multi‑item fuzzy inventory model was created by Waliv et al. (2020) for 
degrading objects under the constraints of space shortage and capital invest‑
ment. In a fuzzy inventory model created by Poswal et al. (2022), costs like 
ordering, shortages, and deterioration are represented as pentagonal fuzzy 
integers that are defuzzified using a graded mean representation approach. 
Rajput et al. (2022) used the signed distance method to optimize the over‑
all cost while taking the demand rate as an octagonal fuzzy number. By 
using machine learning approaches to address defective and deteriorating 
products, Singh and Mishra (2023) developed a novel strategy to manage 
inventories. They perceived product deterioration and defects as fuzzy vari‑
ables because of the uncertainty involved. In Padiyar et al.’s (2023) supply 
chain model, the deterioration rate is treated as a triangular fuzzy number 
because it is unpredictable.
The remainder of this chapter presents notation and assumption in 
Section 7.2 and mathematical formation and solution procedure in Sections 
7.4 and 7.5, respectively. Section 7.6 addresses numerical analysis, while 
Section 7.7 deals with sensitivity analysis and graphical analysis. Section 
7.8 offers managerial perspectives, while Section 7.9 concludes by outlining 
the research’s future directions.
7.2 NOTATIONS AND ASSUMPTIONS
7.2.1 Notations
Table 7.1 provides a summary of the terms used in the paper to create the 
mathematical model.
7.2.2 Assumptions
2.2.1. Demand is based on selling price, i.e., D p( ) = − a bp.
2.2.2. Inflation rate r is taken into account.
2.2.3. Shortages are permitted, and they are partially backlogged.
2.2.4. The amount of investment in preservation technology is used to 
model the rate of deterioration, which is considered as a triangular 
fuzzy number.
2.2.5. The expenditure on preservation technologies determines 
the rate of deterioration. Reduction of deterioration is defined as 
ξ θ = − − ξ E e c ( ) (1 ), where c is the simulation constant, ξ ≥ 0, and θ≥0.
2.2.6. The inventory system deals with a single product.Perishable inventory fuzzy optimization model 101
7.3 MODEL FORMULATION
The retailer’s inventory is represented in Figure 7.1. Here, the retailer’s cycle 
starts from the point t= 0, where inventory is maximum, i.e., I0. Then, it 
decreases because of both demand and deterioration in the interval [0, t1].
Shortage occurs at the interval [t1, T] and is backlogged partially with 
Table 7.1 Notations
D(p) Demand
p Selling price
r Rate of inflation
T Cycle length
E(ξ) Reduction in deterioration
Θ Original deterioration rate
Δ Partial backlogging rate
B Maximum shortage fulfilled
C Simulation coefficient
co Ordering cost (Rs./order)
c1 Carrying cost within the interval [0, t1]
cp Purchasing cost (Rs./cycle)
cd Deterioration cost (Rs./unit)
l
s Lost sales cost (Rs./unit)
ξ Preservation investment
I0 
0 t1 T
Figure 7.1 Illustration of inventory level with time.102 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
backlogging parameter δ. The retailer’s model is represented by the follow‑
ing equations:
( ) ( ) θ ξ( ) ( ) = − − − − ≤ ( ) ≤
dI t
dt a bp E I t 0 t t 1
1 1 (7.1)
Boundary condition I I 1 0 ( ) 0 = .
Utilizing the boundary condition and solving Eq. (7.1), I1(t) is given as 
follows:
θ θ
() () ( ) = +  −




 − −
ξ
θ
− ξ
−
−
− ξ
I t I a bp
e
e
a bp
e c
t e
c
c
1 0 (7.2)
( )δ ( ) = − − ≤ ≤
dI t
dt a bp t t T 2
1 (7.3)
Boundary conditions are I t 2 1 ( ) = 0 and I T2 ( ) = −B.
Solving Eq. (7.3) and using boundary conditions, we get the following 
equations:
I t 2 1 ( ) = − ( ) a bp t δ ( ) − t (7.4)
B a = − δ ( ) bp ( ) T t − 1 (7.5)
By the equation of continuity,
I t 1 1 () () = I t 2 1
θ ( ) ( ) = − − ξ
θ ξ ( ) −
− I a bp
e
e c
t c
0 1 1 1 (7.6)
7.3.1 Cost calculation
3.1.1. Ordering cost
= c
T
OC . 0 (7.7)
3.1.2 Carrying costPerishable inventory fuzzy optimization model 103
∫ = ( ) −
T
c e I t dt rt t
CC 1 1 1 . 0
1
θ ( ) θ θ
( )( ) ( ) = − − − +
+  −













ξ θ ξ
ξ
− − + ( ) ( ) − ξ c e
T
e a bp
r
e
re
I a bp e c rt t r c
c
c
CC
1 . 1
1
0
1
 (7.8)
3.1.3 Purchasing cost
= c I
T
p PC . 0 (7.9)
3.1.4 Preservation cost
∫ ξ =
− e
T
dt
t rt
PTC . 0
1
ξ ( ) = − − e rt
PTC
1
Tr .
1
 (7.10)
3.1.5 Deterioration cost
∫ = − ( ) θ ξ( ) ( ) 

 

 c −
T
E I t e dt d rt t
DC . 1
0
1
θ
θ ( )
( ) ( ) ( ) = ( ) ( ) − − −
−
+
+ −










θ ξ
ξ
ξ
( ) ( ) − − − +
c
T
e
r
a bp
e
re
I a bp e d
rt t c r
c
c DC
1 1
.
1
0
1
 (7.11)
3.1.6 Lost sales cost
∫ = − ( ) δ ( ) − l
T D p e dt s rt
t
T
LC 1 . 1
δ ( )( ) ( ) = − − − − − l a bp e e s rt rT LC 1
Tr . 1 (7.12)
3.1.7 Shortage cost
∫ = ( ) −s −
T
I t e dt c rt
t
T
SC 2 . 1104 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
δ ( ) ( ) = ( ) − − + − − − s a bp
e e rt c rt rT SC
Tr
1 Tr . 2 1 1 (7.13)
Total cost of retailer:
TC O= + C CC PC P + + TC + + DC LC + SC (7.14)
Total cost in crisp model:
θ θ θ
ξ
δ
θ
θ
δ
( )
( )
( ) ( )
( ) ( )
( ) ( )
( )
( ) ( )
( ) ( ) ( )
( )
( )
( )
= + − − − +
+
 −













+ + −
− − − + − − −
−
+
+ −










+ − − + −
ξ θ ξ
ξ
ξ
θ ξ
ξ
ξ
( )
( )
( )
( )
− − + − −
− −
− − − +
− −
TC
1 1
1
Tr
1 1
Tr
1 Tr .
0 1
1
0
0
1
0
2 1
1 1
1
1
1
C
T
c e
T
e a bp
r
e
re I
a bp e c I
T
e
Tr
l a bp e e c
T
e
r a bp
e
re I a bp e
s a bp e e rt
c rt t r c
c
c
p
rt
s rt rT d
rt t c r
c
c
c rt rT
 (7.15)
Total cost in fuzzy sense:
We presume that the deterioration rate may alter within certain bounds 
because it is difficult to define the parameters accurately due to uncertainty. 
Let 
θ be the triangular fuzzy number. Then, 
θ = ( ) θ θ 1 2 , ,θ3 and total fuzzy 
cost TC is given as follows:
θ θ θ
ξ
δ
θ
θ
δ
( )
( ) ( )
( ) ( )
( ) ( )
( )
( ) ( )
( ) ( ) ( )
( )
( )
( )
= + − − − +
+
 −













+ + −
− − − + − − −
− 

 


+
+ −










+ − − + −
ξ θ ξ
ξ
ξ
θ ξ
ξ
ξ
( )
( )
( )
( )
− − + − −
− −
− − − +
− −
  
 



TC
1 1
Tr
1 1 1
Tr
1 Tr
0 1
1
0
0
1
0
2 1
1 1
1
1
1
C
T
c e
T
e a bp
r
e
re I
a bp e c I
T
e
l
Tr
a bp e e c
T
e
r a bp
e
re I a bp e
s a bp e e rt
c rt t r c
c
c
p
rt
s rt rT d
rt t c r
c
c
c rt rT (7.16)
Using the signed distance approach, we defuzzify the fuzzy total cost, which 
is given as follows: 
= + + 

 
 TC  1
4 SDM S TC DM1 2 2TC T SDM S C . DM3 (7.17)Perishable inventory fuzzy optimization model 105
where TCSDMi for i=1,2,3, is given as follows:
θ θ θ
ξ
δ
θ
θ
δ
( )
( )
( ) ( )
( ) ( )
( ) ( )
( )
( ) ( )
( ) ( ) ( )
( )
( )
( )
= + − − − +
+
 −













+ + −
− − − + − − −
−
+
+ −










+ − − + −
ξ θ ξ
ξ
ξ
θ ξ
ξ
ξ
( )
( )
( )
( )
− − + − −
− −
− − − +
− −
TC
1 1
Tr
1
Tr
1 1
Tr
1 Tr
SDM
0 1
1
0
0
1
0
2 1
1 1
1
1
1
C
T
c e
T
e a bp
r
e
re I
a bp e c I
T
e
l a bp e e c
T
e
r a bp
e
re I a bp e
s a bp e e rt
c rt
i
t r c
i c
c
i
p
rt
s rt rT d
rt t c r
i c i c
c rt rT
i
i
 (7.18)
7.4 SOLUTION METHODOLOGY
To minimize the total cost function per unit time TCSDM (ξ, T) and to find 
out the optimal values of preservation investment ξ and cycle length T, solve 
the following equations simultaneously:
ξ
∂
∂ = ∂
∂ = TC TC
T
0 and 0 SDM SDM (7.19)
They satisfy the following conditions:
ξ
∂
∂ >
∂
∂ >
T
TC 0, TC 0.
2 SDM
2
2 SDM
2 (7.20)
and
ξ ξ
∂
∂






∂
∂





 − ∂
∂ ∂





 >
T T
TC TC TC 0.
2 SDM
2
2 SDM
2
2 SDM
2
 (7.21)
7.5 NUMERICAL ANALYSIS
The numerical experiments are carried out using an improved algorithm, 
which is provided in this section. Assume that the produced model’s con‑
straints have the following values: demand parameter a= 4.5, shape param‑
eter b= 5, rate of inflation r= 0.79, backlogging parameter δ= 0.3, per cycle 
ordering cost co = 300, per unit holding cost c1 = 3, per unit purchasing cost 
cp =8.8, per unit deteriorating cost cd = 2.9, lost sales cost ls= 3, original 
deterioration θ= 0.2, θ1 = 0.1, θ2 = 0.2, and θ3 = 0.3, selling price p= 9, per 
unit shortage cost sc= 4.5, and t1 = 2. Using the above values and solving Eq. 106 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
(7.19), which satisfies Eqs. (7.20) and (7.21), the optimal value for preserva‑
tion investment and cycle time is Rs. 600 and 6.6925 weeks, respectively 
(Table 7.2).
7.6 SENSITIVITY AND GRAPHICAL ANALYSIS
The sensitivity analysis and graphical results shown below indicate the 
effectiveness of the designed model. Here, the sensitivity analysis is per‑
formed by altering a single parameter by 20%, 10%, 20%, or 20% while 
leaving the other parameters at their original values (Table 7.3).
The findings of the sensitivity analysis are as follows:
Table 7.2 Optimal solution
ξ T TCSDM
Rs. 600 6.6925 weeks Rs. 172740
Table 7.3 Sensitivity analysis
Parameter % Change ξ T (weeks) TCSDM
a= 4.5 −20 619.7413 4.8507 383,541
−10 609.8713 5.61188 234,665
10 590.1273 8.9789 150,075
20 580.2532 6.6924 106,891
b= 5 −20 402.2555 8.6924 613,435
−10 501.2050 6.6919 353,600
10 698.6572 4.7957 151,618
20 797.2045 1.1089 93,075
r= 0.79 −20 550.0942 7.9924 44,973
−10 575.3757 6.0125 112,939
10 624.7300 4.0914 501,032
20 649.9707 1.4800 796,728
co=300 −20 659.0508 0.5378 104,269
−10 629.5206 4.1780 134,358
10 570.4892 7.6924 213,438
20 540.9886 8.9458 294,269
δ= 0.3 −20 600.1494 6.6691 195,000
−10 600.0747 6.6814 183,874
10 599.9252 6.7024 160,476
20 599.8505 6.7113 150,474
(Continued)Perishable inventory fuzzy optimization model 107
6.1 The optimal value of the total cost TCSDM increases slightly with the 
increase in per unit lost sales cost ls.
6.2 The overall cost TCSDM decreases as demand parameter a and form 
parameter b are increased.
6.3 The optimal value of the total cost TCSDM increases moderately with 
an increase in ordering cost oc, per unit holding cost c1, and per unit 
shortage cost sc.
6.4 The optimal value of the total cost TCSDM decreases slightly with an 
increase in backlogging rate δ.
6.5 The optimal value of the total cost TCSDM rises swiftly as inflation 
rate r, unit purchasing cost pc, and selling price p rise.
In relation to the decision variables T and ξ, Figure 7.2 depicts the convexity 
of the total cost TCSDM.
Table 7.3 (Continued) Sensitivity analysis
Parameter % Change ξ T (weeks) TCSDM
c1 =3 −20 569.5834 7.6513 138,661
−10 584.7927 6.6924 152,346
10 615.2051 5.1563 180,274
20 630.4083 4.1227 204,604
cp= 8.8 −20 457.6646 8.1253 91,727
−10 528.8776 7.0156 112,740
10 671.0429 4.9140 262,977
20 742.0166 3.6643 472,599
l
s =3 −20 596.3101 7.3212 161,694
−10 598.1550 6.9751 167,875
10 601.8449 6.4556 176,533
20 603.6900 6.2533 179,394
p= 9 −20 402.2555 7.0943 93,435
−10 501.2086 6.9234 120,124
10 698.6572 4.7957 416,185
20 797.2040 2.1089 683,080
sc =4.5 −20 598.5680 6.9375 141,641
−10 599.2840 6.8024 159,608
10 600.7159 6.6008 185,647
20 601.4319 6.5230 198,444108 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
7.7 MANAGERIAL INSIGHTS
Optimum inventory strategies, such as the order quantity and preservation 
investment for each perishable commodity, can be recommended specifi‑
cally by the optimization model. With the help of this insight, inventory lev‑
els are kept at levels that satisfy client demand while minimizing spoilage. 
Decision‑makers can learn when and how much money to invest in pres‑
ervation techniques. Sensitivity analysis can be used to determine which 
output parameters have the most effects on the outcomes of optimization. 
To achieve optimal performance, managers can concentrate on observing 
and managing these crucial aspects.
7.8 CONCLUSION
In the current corporate environment, managing perishable commodities 
is a complicated challenge, mainly because of their inherent uncertainty 
and variability in deterioration rates, as well as other factors like inflation 
Figure 7.2 Graphical representation of ξ vs. T vs. TCSDM.Perishable inventory fuzzy optimization model 109
and demand variations. The research offers a novel approach to this prob‑
lem of an unpredictable deterioration rate by modeling it as a triangular 
fuzzy number based on the amount of preservation technology invested. 
Recognizing that the interaction of these factors has a substantial impact on 
decision‑making in the management of perishable inventory, it also consid‑
ers the impact of market‑driven demand and partial backlogs of shortages. 
The signed distance approach is used to defuzzify the cost function to deter‑
mine the best course of action. The study emphasizes the sensitivity of solu‑
tions to parameter changes through sensitivity analysis, particularly in the 
context of preservation considerations. The study determines the ideal cycle 
duration and preservation investment while considering the lowest man‑
ufacturing costs and utilizing traditional optimization. To improve deci‑
sion support, other strategies might investigate more complex optimization 
techniques, use real‑time data streams, and incorporate advanced analytics. 
The concept of trade credit policy can also be incorporated. Overall, the 
study’s findings offer insightful recommendations for enhancing perishable 
inventory management and supply chain operations, which will eventually 
help businesses succeed and endure in today’s economic environment.
REFERENCES
Kumar, M., Chauhan, A., & Kumar, R. (2012). A deterministic inventory model 
for deteriorating items with price‑dependent demand and time‑varying hold‑
ing cost under trade credit. International Journal of Soft Computing and 
Engineering, 2(1), 99–105.
Kumar, A., Joshi, K., Bhagat, N., Punetha, N., & Padiyar, S. V. S. (2022). Mathematical 
modelling and analysis on green inventory model with shortage space for 
imperfect quality of deteriorating items with trapezoidal type demand. 
Neuroquantology, 20(14), 2468–2478.
Mahapatra, A. S., Dasgupta, A., Shaw, A. K., & Sarkar, B. (2022). An inventory 
model with uncertain demand under preservation strategy for deteriorating 
items. RAIRO‑Operations Research, 56(6), 4251–4280.
Padiyar, S. V. S., Gupta, V., & Rajput, N. (2023). Multi‑echelon supply chain inven‑
tory model for perishable items with fuzzy deterioration rate and imperfect 
production with two‑warehouse under inflationary environment. International 
Journal of Business Performance and Supply Chain Modelling, 14(2), 144–172.
Poswal, P., Chauhan, A., Rajoria, Y. K., Boadh, R., & Goel, A. (2022). Fuzzy opti‑
mization model of two parameter weibull deteriorating rate with quadratic 
demand and variable holding cost under allowable shortages. Yugoslav Journal 
of Operations Research, 32(4), 453–470.
Rajput, N., Chauhan, A., Goel, A., & Tanwar, D. V. (2022). FEOQ model with octag‑
onal fuzzy demand rate and optimize with signed distance method. Yugoslav 
Journal of Operations Research, 32(4), 471–481.110 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
Rana, R. S., Kumar, D., & Prasad, K. (2023). Sustainable production‑inventory sys‑
tem for perishables under dynamic fuel pricing and preservation technology 
investment. Environmental Science and Pollution Research, 1–27.
Sharma, A., Kumar, M., & Saraswat, A. K. (2020). Inventory model for instant dete‑
riorating items with seasonal price and time dependent ramp type demand. 
International Journal of Procurement Management, 13(5), 653–664.
Shastri, A., Singh, S. R., Yadav, D., & Gupta, S. (2014). Supply chain management 
for two‑level trade credit financing with selling price dependent demand under 
the effect of preservation technology. International Journal of Procurement 
Management, 7(6), 695–718.
Singh, R., & Mishra, V. K. (2023). Machine learning based fuzzy inventory model 
for imperfect deteriorating products with demand forecast and partial backlog‑
ging under green investment technology. Journal of the Operational Research
Society, 1–16.
Singh, S., Sharma, S., & Singh, S. R. (2019). Inventory model for deteriorating items 
with incremental holding cost under partial backlogging. International Journal 
of Mathematics in Operational Research, 15(1), 110–126.
Waliv, R. H., Mishra, U., Garg, H., & Umap, H. P. (2020). A nonlinear program‑
ming approach to solve the stochastic multi‑objective inventory model using 
the uncertain information. Arabian Journal for Science and Engineering, 45, 
6963–6973.
Yadav, D., Chand, U., Goel, R., & Sarkar, B. (2023). Smart production system with 
random imperfect process, partial backordering, and deterioration in an infla‑
tionary environment. Mathematics, 11(2), 440.
Yadav, D., Kumari, R., Kumar, N., & Sarkar, B. (2021). Reduction of waste and 
carbon emission through the selection of items with cross‑price elasticity of 
demand to form a sustainable supply chain with preservation technology. 
Journal of Cleaner Production, 297, 126298.DOI: 10.1201/9781003503057-8 111
Chapter 8
Employing fuzzy inference 
system in ant colony 
optimization for travelling 
salesman problems
M. K. Sharma, Vansh Verma, Tarun Kumar, 
Laxmi Rathour, and Vishnu Narayan Mishra
8.1 INTRODUCTION
Numerous developments have been made in the field of combinatorial opti‑
mization over the years. The travelling salesman problem (TSP), which 
involves determining the quickest route through a list of cities and back 
to the starting point, is a classic issue in this field [1]. TSP’s origins can be 
traced to mathematical formulations, but major progress in combinatorial 
optimization has come through the hunt for effective solution methods. The 
introduction of fuzzy sets by Zadeh marked a revolutionary shift in dealing 
with imprecision and uncertainties prevalent in various applications, includ‑
ing assignment problems and scheduling [2,3,4,5]. Earlier, Motzkin paved 
the way for assignment problem research, which later branched into sev‑
eral related areas [6]. Subsequently, Votaw and Orden contributed valuable 
insights into personnel assignment problems [7]. Noteworthy contributions 
in the same vein were the development of the Hungarian method for the 
assignment problem by Kuhn [8] and the progression of visual interactive 
computer solutions for the TSP by Hurrion [9]. Emerging in this scenario 
was the bio‑inspired ant colony optimization (ACO) algorithm, simulating 
the behaviour of ants searching for food. Dorigo et al.’s introductory work 
positioned the ACO as a robust tool for optimization problems, including 
TSP [10–20]. Additionally, genetic algorithms surfaced as a reliable alterna‑
tive for tackling TSP [21,22].
The beginning of the 21st century brought a flurry of sophisticated 
advancements. In addition, fuzzy self‑organizing maps and Gaussian 
kernel‑based fuzzy inference systems (FISs) began to gain popularity for 
high‑dimensional regression and optimization issues [23–27], and many 
job facilities were added to TSP considerations [28]. The TSP also found 
use in plane truss optimization, job‑shop scheduling, and redundancy allo‑
cation [10,29,30]. Research widened to accommodate multiple travelling 
salesmen and time‑dependent considerations, leading to nuanced versions 112 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
of the TSP [31–34]. Green inventory‑routing problem‑solving was another 
frontier, tackled with augmented tabu search algorithms [35]. The com‑
plexity of the problem saw the utilization of optimization algorithms like 
the grey wolf optimizer and the Harris Hawk optimization algorithm 
[36,37]. Contemporary research employs cutting‑edge technology, such as 
CNN deep learning techniques and Type‑2 fuzzy environments, for prob‑
lem‑solving [20,38]. Furthermore, continuous space optimization [39], mul‑
tiple time windows, hotel selection [32], multiple drones for parcel delivery 
[33], and congestion scenarios have been integrated into the versatile TSP 
problem‑solving spectrum [34].
In this research, we present an innovative strategy that seamlessly blends 
the ability of ant colony optimization (ACO) and the sophistication of fuzzy 
inference systems (FIS) to craft optimal solutions for the travelling sales‑
man problem (TSP). Within the ACO paradigm, the movement of artificial 
‘ants’ is guided by the amount of ‘pheromone,’ a metaphorical trail that 
reflects the appeal of possible routes. A key aspect of this strategy is the 
evaluation of ‘attractiveness,’ which for the TSP is influenced by a variety of 
factors, including distance, traffic conditions, and the cost associated with 
each inter‑node connection. The FIS emerges as an indispensable compo‑
nent, quantifying these disparate parameters into a unified attractiveness 
measure. Designed to imitate the natural inclinations of ants, the algorithm 
is biased towards nodes exuding greater attractiveness, propelling the itera‑
tive process until the ants return to their starting point. To elucidate the 
efficacy of this novel approach, we implement it in two diverse numerical 
examples, offering a comprehensive account of its application.
The outcomes not only highlight the robust optimization potential of 
coupling FIS with ACO in tackling the TSP, but they also pave the way 
for future explorations and practical deployments. As such, this research 
marks a significant milestone, signposting an exhilarating journey in both 
academic inquiry and pragmatic applications. Our chapter unfolds over six 
meticulously constructed sections. The opening segment sets the stage with 
an introduction followed by the second segment, which crystallizes math‑
ematical modelling. In the third segment, we unveil our innovative approach 
to tackling the TSP. The fourth segment enriches the text with numerical 
demonstrations of the proposed methodology. An exhaustive analysis of the 
numerical problem is offered in the fifth segment, leading up to a comprehen‑
sive conclusion that wraps up our discourse in the sixth and final segment.
8.2 MATHEMATICAL MODELLING
8.2.1 The travelling salesman (routing) problem (TSP)
Imagine a scenario where a salesman is tasked with visiting a set number 
of cities. He possesses knowledge of the distance, time, or cost associated 
with the journey between every pair of cities on his list. His challenge lies Employing fuzzy inference system in ant colony optimization 113
in identifying a route that begins in his home city, proceeds to each city 
exactly once, and returns him to his starting point with the minimum dis‑
tance travelled, least time consumed, or lowest cost incurred. This dilemma 
can be categorized into two distinct forms:
1. Symmetrical: In cases where the distance, cost, or time between every 
pair of cities remains constant irrespective of the direction of travel, 
the problem is defined as symmetrical.
2. Asymmetrical: Conversely, if the distance, cost, or time between one 
or more pairs of cities varies depending on the direction of travel, the 
problem is classified as asymmetrical.
8.2.2 Formulation of a travelling salesman 
problem as an assignment
Consider xij = 1 if the salesman travels directly from city Ai to city Aj and 
zero if otherwise. Furthermore, let Cij represent the distance, time, or cost 
from city Ai to city Aj
. The objective is to minimize the total distance, time, 
and cost represented by ∑∑CijXij, with the constraint that each city is visited 
only once until the tour of all cities is completed. Specifically, the salesman 
cannot travel directly from city Ai to city Aj
.
To ensure this condition in the minimization process, we establish the 
convention Cij = ∞ when i = j. This condition ensures that xij = 1 can never 
be unity when the salesman is in the same city (i = j). Consequently, only one 
xij = 1 for each value of i and j. The matrix representing the distance, time, 
or cost for this problem is detailed in Table 8.1.
The variable xij can be excluded from the problem’s parameters. Our 
challenge then becomes identifying a set of n elements from the matrix, 
selecting one from each row and column, with the aim to minimize the 
cumulative sum of these chosen elements.
Note:
A scenario akin to the travelling salesman problem (TSP) emerges when 
we are producing n items, denoted as Ai
, i = 1, 2,..., n, continuously on a 
machine. In this case, Cij (where i, j = 1, 2,..., n) represents the setup cost of
Table 8.1 Production and Setup Cost of TSP
A1 A2 ………………………………. An
A1 ∞ C12 …………………………. C1n
A2 C21 ∞ …………………………. C2n
An Cn1 Cn2 …………………………. ∞114 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
the machine when item Ai
 is succeeded by item Aj
. This scenario comes with 
two specific constraints. Firstly, item Ai
 cannot be followed immediately by 
the same item Ai
. Secondly, an item cannot be produced again until every 
other item has been produced at least once.
8.2.3 Fuzzy inference system (FIS)
Fuzzy inference is the method of creating a connection from a specific input 
to an output, guided by the concepts of fuzzy logic. This mapping lays the 
groundwork for decision‑making and pattern recognition.
8.2.3.1 Key characteristics of FIS
1. The fuzzy inference system (FIS) consistently generates an output in 
the form of a fuzzy set, regardless of whether the input is fuzzy or 
crisp.
2. An FIS requires a fuzzy output when functioning as a controller.
3. FIS incorporates a defuzzification module which transmutes fuzzy 
variants into their clear‑cut equivalents.
Essential Components of the FIS: The structure of the FIS can be under‑
stood through five fundamental blocks:
1. Rule Repository: This segment includes the collection of fuzzy 
IF‑THEN constructs.
2. Knowledge Bank: This constituent specifies the function that deter‑
mines membership within the fuzzy sets involved in the creation of 
fuzzy directives.
3. Decision Execution Block: This block carries out operations based on 
the established rules.
4. Fuzzification Conversion Module: This module is responsible for 
transmuting precise quantities into their fuzzy counterparts.
5. Defuzzification Conversion Module: This segment reconverts the 
fuzzy values into their original precise quantities.
6. These components provide a comprehensive view of the construc‑
tion of a fuzzy inference system (FIS), as depicted in the following 
(Figure 8.1) block diagram.
8.2.4 Mathematical model of ant colony 
optimization
Consider (i, j) to be a linkage between city i and city j. Each of these link‑
ages, or edges (i, j), is assigned a measure, dij, denoting the span between Employing fuzzy inference system in ant colony optimization 115
cities i and j. The max‑min ant system for the travelling salesman problem 
(TSP) is outlined as follows:
8.2.4.1 Pheromone updating rule
Once an iteration is complete, ants leave their pheromone on the margins of 
everything they move through. Following are the definitions for each edge’s 
sum pheromone:
τ ij( 1 t t + =) ( ∆ + τ ρ ij 1 ) − τ ij( ) (8.1)
In this context, ρ resides within the range of (0,1). Here, 1 − ρ signifies the 
endurance rate of the preceding pheromone, while ρ is identified as the 
amount of pheromone evaporation. Within the framework of the max‑min 
ant system, only the ant demonstrating the highest performance is respon‑
sible for updating the pheromone trails, with the pheromone value itself 
being subject to certain constraints.
The pheromone updating rule is therefore provided by,
τ + = ∆ + τ ρ − τ τ
τ ij( 1 t t ) [ ij (1 ) (ij )] best
min
max (8.2)
where the pheromone’s upper and lower boundaries are indicated by τmax
and τmin, respectively; and ∆τ ij
best is,
−





i j
ij
best
1
best if( , )belongstothebest tour,
0 Otherwise
Knowledge base
Rule
base
Data
base
Crisp
output
Decision-making unit
Fuzzification
inference unit
Crisp
input
Defuzzification
conversion module
Figure 8.1 FIS.116 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
In the formula, Lbest represents the expense associated with the optimal 
solution. This could be the best iteration, the overall best up to this point, 
or a mix of both (8.2).
8.2.5 RULES FOR ANT’S MOVEMENT
Ants transition between cities based on probabilities. Initially, the cities 
that have been visited are added to a prohibited table. The kth ant’s allowed 
set is defined as the group of cities it has yet to visit. Additionally, a visibility 
factor, ηij, is defined, with ηij equalling the reciprocal of
∑ τ η
= τ η
∈






α β
α β ∈ p t
t
t j
ij
k
ij ij
ij ij k k ( )
[ ( ) [ ]
[ ( ) [ ] , allowed
0, else
allowed (8.3)
The likelihood of the kth ant selecting a city is subsequently computed 
based on these factors.
Ants transition from one city to another based on a certain probabil‑
ity. Initially, the visited cities must be catalogued in a taboo table. Let us 
define ‘allowedk’ as the set of cities that the kth ant has not yet visited. 
Subsequently, we establish a visibility factor, denoted by ηij, where ηij = 1/dij. 
The probability of the kth ant selecting a city can be expressed as follows:
∑ τ η
= τ η
∈






α β
α β ∈ p t
t
t j
ij
k k
ij ij
( ) k ij ij
[ ( ) [ ]
[ ( ) [ ] , allowed
0, else
allowed (8.4)
In this context, α and β are crucial parameters. These parameters govern the com‑
parative influence exerted by the trail pheromone and the heuristic intelligence.
This study utilizes the pseudo‑random proportional regulation as its 
methodology, as provided in the given equation, mirroring the approach 
used in ant colony optimization (ACO).
{ } τ η
=
 ≤




β
∈ j
t p p
J
k ij ij k
arg max ( )[ ] , if
else
allowed 0
(8.5)
Let’s consider p as a randomly assigned number, uniformly spread within 
the range of [0,1]. Therefore, the most advantageous step, as indicated by 
the pheromone track and the heuristic data, is executed with a probability 
within the 0 ≤ p0 < 1 range (denoting the act of exploitation). On the other 
hand, with a 1 − p0 probability, a choice is made driven by the arbitrary 
variable J, whose distribution is defined by the Eq. (8.4), showcasing the 
principle of biased exploration.Employing fuzzy inference system in ant colony optimization 117
8.2.5.1 Pheromone trail initialization stage
In the pheromone trail initialization stage, we establish τmax = 1/{(1 – ρ)Cnn}, 
and τmin = τmax /2N. We also set the initial pheromone values as τij (0) = τmax. 
Here, N represents the total amount of cities, and Cnn signifies the span of a 
journey crafted by the nearest‑neighbour heuristic method.
8.2.5.1.1 Stopping rule
Ants can cease moving under a variety of circumstances, including Central 
Processing Unit (CPU) time restrictions, iteration number restrictions, and 
the optimum solution.
Flowchart of ACO is shown in Figure 8.2.
8.3 THE STRATEGIC FRAMEWORK
The methodology is explained in the following steps:
Step 1
We begin by taking into account TSP as outlined in Section 8.2. The task 
at hand involves initiating a journey from city Ai
, traversing through all the 
cities until city An, and then returning to the starting point, ensuring each 
city is visited only once. The transition probability values between these cit‑
ies are established at random. Table 8.2 provides a glimpse into the general 
transition probability matrix.
Start 
Iteration 
End 
Update
pheromone value 
Preparation of
partial solution
Final solution
Initialization 
process
Figure 8.2 Flowchart of ACO.118 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
Step 2
Place a set of m ants at the starting city. Develop a fuzzy inference system 
(FIS), using input factors such as distances, traffic conditions, costs, and 
others between these cities. Construct corresponding fuzzy rules: the out‑
put of which will serve as the attractiveness value for the ants in the ACO 
process. A visual representation of the FIS working within MATLAB is 
depicted in Figure 8.3.
Step 3
Cities possessing a transition probability value greater than the attractive‑
ness value will be shortlisted. In scenarios where more than one city meets 
this criterion, we’ll once again employ the fuzzy inference system (FIS) to 
refine our selection until only one city is chosen. To determine the subse‑
quent city, the input values of the fuzzy rules within the FIS will be adjusted 
Table 8.2 Transitions Probability Matrix for TSP
A1 A2 ………………………………. An
A1 ∞ p12 …………………………. p1n
A2 p21 ∞ …………………………. p2n
An pn1 pn2 …………………………. ∞
FIS
(mamdani)
Traffic_condition
Distance
Attractiveness
Cost
Figure 8.3 Working of FIS in MATLAB.Employing fuzzy inference system in ant colony optimization 119
in line with the realistic conditions amongst the remaining cities. This pro‑
cess continues iteratively until all cities have been visited and the route loops 
back to the starting city.
Step 4
Determine the objectives, which could include factors like distance, cost, 
and travel time, for the selected route. Reiterate this process to pinpoint the 
optimal route. The entire procedure of choosing the subsequent city is visu‑
ally represented in Figure 8.4.
8.4 NUMERICAL COMPUTATIONS
Problem
As we have discussed above, now we are going to observe a numerical prob‑
lem (shown in Table 8.3) of travelling salesman problem (TSP).
Begin by initializing the transition probability matrix, drawing its values 
from realistic scenarios. For instance, in this situation, since the cost between 
𝐴1 and 𝐴5 is lower, the likelihood of selecting this route is heightened.
Now, FIS is designed as follows:
After employing the fuzzy inference system (FIS) in MATLAB, we derived 
an attractiveness value of 0.755, as depicted in Figure 8.5. Upon applying 
this value to filter Table 8.4, we observe the remaining entries as follows 
(Tables 8.5–8.7).
As we encountered two values exceeding our initial attractiveness score, 
we redeployed the fuzzy inference system (FIS), which resulted in a revised 
attractiveness value of 0.832, as illustrated in Figure 8.5. After applying 
Initialize
transition
TS
Attractivene
ss value
Filter transition probability
matrix by attractiveness
More than
one value
obtained
Fuzzy
inference
STO
Choose
corresponding
city
One
value
obtained
after
Figure 8.4 Process of choosing next city.120 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
this newly calculated score as a filter, we are left with a single remaining 
value (Table 8.8).
The process of deriving the attractiveness value within MATLAB is 
depicted in Figures  8.5 and 8.6. The red line displayed in these figures 
Table 8.3 Data of Initial TPM for TSP
A1 A2 A3 A4 A5
A1 ∞ 2 5 7 1
A2 6 ∞ 3 8 2
A3 8 7 ∞ 4 7
A4 12 4 6 ∞ 5
A5 1 3 2 6 ∞
Table 8.4 Data of Successive TPM for TSP
A1 A2 A3 A4 A5
𝐴1 ∞ 0.782 0.498 0.351 0.852
A2 0.456 ∞ 0.718 0.246 0.791
A3 0.271 0.347 ∞ 0.584 0.602
A4 0.192 0.621 0.527 ∞ 0.618
A5 0.852 0.759 0.412 0.693 ∞
Table 8.5 Linguistic Variables Data for TSP
Input factors Linguistic variables
Distance (0–20) km (Short) (10–40) km (Medium) 30 km and above 
(Long)
Traffic conditions (0–4) unit (Good) (3–7) unit (Moderate) 6 unit and above (Bad)
Cost (0–1,000) Rs. (Low) (500–2,500) Rs. 
(Medium)
2,000 Rs. (High)
Table 8.6 Fuzzy rules and linguistic data for TSP
Fuzzy rules
Input variables Output
Distance Traffic conditions Cost Attractiveness
1 Short Good Low High
2 Short Moderate Medium High
3 Medium Good Medium High
4 Long Bad High Low
5 Long Moderate Medium Medium
6 Medium Bad Medium MediumEmploying fuzzy inference system in ant colony optimization 121
Table 8.7 Calculated score for TSP
A1 A2 A3 A4 A5
A1 ∞ – – – 0.852
A2 – ∞ – – 0.791
A3 – – ∞ – −
A4 – – – ∞ –
A5 0.852 0.759 – – ∞
Table 8.8 Final calculated score for TSP
A1 A2 A3 A4 A5
A1 ∞ – – – 0.852
A2 – ∞ – – –
A3 – – ∞ – −
A4 – – – ∞ –
A5 0.852 – – – ∞
1
Distance = 10.9 Trafic_condition = 6.54 Cost = 761 Attractiveness = 0.755
2
3
4
5
6
0 50 0 10 0
0
2500
1
Figure 8.5 Attractiveness value using FIS in MATLAB.122 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
allows us to adjust the values of input factors based on existing conditions, 
thereby acquiring an updated attractiveness value.
Hence,
A5 city will be chosen and becomes a starting point for the ants, and the 
remaining city will be the next targets for the ants. In the similar way, we 
implement the methodology and complete the cycle. We get the following 
cycle: A1 → A5 → A3 → A4 → A2 → A1. The cost corresponding to this cycle 
is 1 + 2 + 4 + 4 + 6 = 17. On doing second iteration, we get the following 
cycle A1 → A2 → A3 → A4 → A5 → A1. The cost corresponding to this cycle 
is 2 + 3 + 4 + 5 + 1 = 15.
8.5 FINDINGS AND INTERPRETATIONS
Utilization of the suggested method was demonstrated effectively using a 
concrete example, specifically the classic scenario of the travelling salesman 
problem (TSP). In our representative model, we considered a network of five 
cities. We chose one city as the point of origin and meticulously detailed the 
1
Distance = 10.9 Trafic_condition = 3.21 Cost = 761 Attractiveness=0.832
2
3
4
5
6
0 50 0 10 0
0
2500
1
Figure 8.6 Updated attractiveness value using FIS in MATLAB.Employing fuzzy inference system in ant colony optimization 123
comprehensive process employed to identify the optimal path to the next 
city within this setting.
This complex task resulted in the discovery of eight potential routes, each 
unique in its path and consequences. These routes have been meticulously 
catalogued and presented for clear understanding in Table 8.9. To further 
facilitate comprehension and comparison, we visually represented the costs 
associated with each possible route in Figure 8.7. This illustrative compar‑
ison provides a nuanced understanding of the trade‑offs inherent in the 
route selection process.
When we integrated the fuzzy inference system (FIS) with ant colony opti‑
mization (ACO), we found that our model was able to simulate real‑world 
conditions effectively. This integration offered significant help in determin‑
ing an efficient and realistic route. It is, however, worth noting that this 
model also highlighted a commonly observed trade‑off in route optimiza‑
tion: the best routes, those that promise smooth and unimpeded travel, 
might come with higher costs. Yet, these optimal routes can provide an 
Cost
Cost
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Route Route Route Route Route Route Route Route
12345678
Figure 8.7 Comparison of costs between routes.
Table 8.9 Solution summary for TSP
Iteration no. Route Cost
1 A1 → A5 → A3 → A4 → A2 → A1 17
2 A1 → A2 → A3 → A4 → A5 → A1 15
3 A5 → A1 → A2 → A3 → A4 → A5 15
4 A1 → A5 → A2 → A3 → A4 → A1 23
5 A1 → A2 → A5 → A3 → A4 → A1 24
6 A5 → A3 → A4 → A2 → A1 → A5 17
7 A2 → A5 → A1 → A3 → A4 → A2 16
8 A3 → A5 → A1 → A2 → A4 → A3 24124 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
overall superior travel experience, making the potential higher expenditure 
a worthwhile consideration.
8.6 CONCLUSION
In this research, we have introduced an innovative strategy that effectively 
amalgamates the capabilities of ACO and the nuanced sophistication of 
fuzzy inference systems (FISs). This strategy provides a dynamic solution 
for resolving the complexities inherent in the TSP. Within the paradigm 
of ACO, we simulate the behaviour of artificial ‘ants,’ the path of which 
is determined by the intensity of the ‘pheromone’ trails, a metaphorical 
concept symbolizing the attractiveness of potential routes. A central aspect 
of our strategy is the calculation of this ‘attractiveness,’ a multifaceted mea‑
sure impacted by various factors, including distance, prevailing traffic con‑
ditions, and the cost implicated in each inter‑node connection. Here, the 
role of FIS becomes crucial, as it allows us to integrate these diverse param‑
eters into a comprehensive measure of attractiveness.
Our algorithm, designed to mimic ant behaviour, favours attractive nodes, 
driving the iterative process until the completion of the journey. Its effec‑
tiveness was showcased through a numerical example, demonstrating its 
practical application. Notably, the model successfully simulates real‑world 
scenarios. It highlights a trade‑off: optimal routes may be costlier but offer 
advantages that justify the expenditure, adding a crucial aspect to route 
optimization discussions. The findings of this research underscore the sub‑
stantial optimization capabilities of integrating FIS with ACO for resolv‑
ing the TSP. Moreover, these results also chart a clear path for subsequent 
investigations and real‑world implementations. Hence, this study represents 
a remarkable achievement, serving as an encouragement for future aca‑
demic research and practical applications alike.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The second author acknowledges receiving financial assistance from the 
University Grants Commission (UGC).
INTEREST CONFLICT STATEMENT
The authors declare no competing interests.Employing fuzzy inference system in ant colony optimization 125
REFERENCES
[1] Hoffman, K.L., Padberg, M., and Rinaldi, G. (2013). Traveling salesman 
problem. In Encyclopedia of Operations Research and Management Science 
Saul I. Gass and Michael C. Fu (eds), pp. 1573–1578. Springer New York, NY.
[2] Zadeh, L.A. (1965). Fuzzy sets. Information and Control 8(3):338–353.
[3] Zadeh, L.A. et  al. (1996). Fuzzy Sets, Fuzzy Logic, Fuzzy Systems. World 
Scientific Press, Singapore.
[4] Kumar, A. and Gupta, A. (2011). Methods for solving fuzzy assignment prob‑
lems and fuzzy travelling salesman problems with different membership func‑
tions. Fuzzy Information and Engineering 3(1):3–21.
[5] Cuong, B.C. (2014). Picture fuzzy sets. Journal of Computer Science and 
Cybernetics 30(4):409–420.
[6] Motzkin, T.S. (1953). The assignment problem. In Proc. of Sixth Symposium on 
Applied Mathematics, Santa Monica City College, Santa Monica, California, US.
[7] Votaw, D.F. and Orden, A. (1952). The personnel assignment problem. 
Symposium on Linear Inequalities and Programming, SCOOP 10, USAF, 
University of Michigan, USA, pp. 155–163.
[8] Kuhn, H.W. (1955). The Hungarian method for the assignment problem. 
Naval Research Logistics Quarterly 2:83–97.
[9] Hurrion, R. (1980). Visual interactive (computer) solutions for the travelling 
salesman problem. Journal of the Operational Research Society 31:537–539.
[10] Colorni, A., Dorigo, M., Maniezzo, V., and Trubian, M. (1994). Ant system 
for job‑shop scheduling. Belgian Journal of Operations Research, Statistics 
and Computer Science 34:39–53.
[11] Dorigo, M., Maniezzo, V., and Colorni, A. (1996). Ant system: Optimization 
by a colony of cooperating agents. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and 
Cybernetics – Part B 26(1):29–41.
[12] Dorigo, M. and Stützle, T. (2004). Ant Colony Optimization. MIT Press, 
Cambridge, MA.
[13] Dorigo, M. and Blum, C. (2005). Ant colony optimization theory: A survey. 
Theoretical Computer Science 344(2–3):243–278.
[14] Liao, T., Stützle, T., de Oca, M.A.M., and Dorigo, M. (2014). A unified 
ant colony optimization algorithm for continuous optimization. European 
Journal of Operational Research 234(3):597–609.
[15] Du, K.L., Swamy, M.N.S., Du, K.L., and Swamy, M.N.S. (2016). Search 
and Optimization by Metaheuristics. Ant Colony Optimization Ke‑Lin Du 
and M. N. S. Swamy (eds), pp. 191–199. Springer International Publishing, 
Birkhäuser Cham Switzerland.
[16] Janakiraman, S. (2018). A hybrid ant colony and artificial bee colony opti‑
mization algorithm‑based cluster head selection for IoT. Procedia Computer 
Science 143:360–366.
[17] Liu, Y. and Cao, B. (2020). A novel ant colony optimization algorithm with 
Levy flight. IEEE Access 8:67205–67213.
[18] Zhao, D., Liu, L., Yu, F., Heidari, A.A., Wang, M., Oliva, D., & Chen, 
H. (2021). Ant colony optimization with horizontal and vertical crossover 
search: Fundamental visions for multi‑threshold image segmentation. Expert 
Systems with Applications 167:11418.126 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
[19] Zhou, X., Ma, H., Gu, J., Chen, H., and Deng, W. (2022). Parameter adap‑
tation‑based ant colony optimization with dynamic hybrid mechanism. 
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 114:105139.
[20] Kavitha, R., Jothi, D.K., Saravanan, K., Swain, M.P., Gonzáles, J.L.A., 
Bhardwaj, R.J., and Adomako, E. (2023). [Retracted] Ant Colony Optimization‐
Enabled CNN Deep Learning Technique for Accurate Detection of Cervical 
Cancer. BioMed Research International, 2023(1), 1742891.
[21] Larranaga, P., Kuijpers, C.M.H., Murga, R.H., Inza, I., and Dizdarevic, S. 
(1999). Genetic algorithms for the travelling salesman problem: A review of 
representations and operators. Artificial Intelligence Review 13:129–170.
[22] Xu, J., Pei, L., and Zhu, R.Z. (2018). Application of a genetic algorithm with 
random crossover and dynamic mutation on the travelling salesman problem. 
Procedia Computer Science 131:937–945.
[23] Chaudhuri, A., De, K., and Chatterjee, D. (2008). A study of the traveling 
salesman problem using fuzzy self organizing map.  2008 IEEE Region 10 
and the Third international Conference on Industrial and Information Systems, 
Kharagpur, India, pp. 1–5, doi:10.1109/ICIINFS.2008.4798469.
[24] Cai, Q., Hao, Z., and Yang, X. (2012). Gaussian kernel‑based fuzzy inference 
systems for high dimensional regression. Neurocomputing 77(1):197–204.
[25] Khan, S.A., Daachi, B., and Djouani, K. (2012). Application of fuzzy inference 
systems to detection of faults in wireless sensor networks. Neurocomputing
94:111–120.
[26] Chaudhari, S. and Patil, M. (2014). Study and review of fuzzy inference sys‑
tems for decision making and control. American International Journal of 
Research in Science, Technology, Engineering & Mathematics 5(1):88–92.
[27] Fahmy, R., Zaher, H., and Elfattah Kandil, A. (2015). A comparison between 
fuzzy inference systems for prediction (with application to prices of fund in 
Egypt). International Journal of Computer Applications 109(13):6–11.
[28] Das, S. and Ahmed, N. (2001). A travelling salesman problem (TSP) with 
multiple job facilties. OPSEARCH 38:394–406.
[29] Liang, Y. and Smith, A. (2004). An ant colony optimization algorithm for 
the redundancy allocation problem (RAP). IEEE Transactions on Reliability
53(3):417–423.
[30] Serra, M. and Venini, P. (2006). On some applications of ant colony 
optimization metaheuristic to plane truss optimization. Structural and 
Multidisciplinary Optimization 32(6):499–506.
[31] Bektas, T. (2006). The multiple travelling salesman problem: An overview of 
formulations and solution procedures. Omega 34:209–219.
[32] Baltz, A., El Ouali, M., Jager, G., Sauerland, V., and Srivastav, A. (2015). 
Exact and heuristic algorithms for the travelling salesman problem with mul‑
tiple time windows and hotel selection. Journal of the Operational Research 
Society 66:615–626.
[33] Murray, C.C. and Raj, R. (2020). The multiple flying sidekicks travelling 
salesman problem: parcel delivery with multiple drones. Transportation 
Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 110:368–398.
[34] Bock, S. (2020). Optimally solving a versatile travelling salesman problem 
on tree networks with soft due dates and multiple congestion scenarios. 
European Journal of Operational Research 283(3):863–882.Employing fuzzy inference system in ant colony optimization 127
[35] Alinaghian, M., Tirkolaee, E.B., Dezaki, Z.K., Hejazi, S.R., and Ding, W. (2021). 
An augmented tabu search algorithm for the green inventory‑routing problem 
with time windows. Swarm and Evolutionary Computation 60:100802.
[36] Panwar, K. and Deep, K. (2021). Discrete grey wolf optimizer for symmetric 
travelling salesman problem. Applied Soft Computing 105:107298.
[37] Gharehchopogh, F.S. and Abdollahzadeh, B. (2022). An efficient harris hawk 
optimization algorithm for solving the travelling salesman problem. Cluster 
Computing 25(3):1981–2005.
[38] Changdar, C., Mondal, M., Giri, P.K., Nandi, U., and Pal, R.K. (2023). A 
two‑phase ant colony optimization‑based approach for single depot mul‑
tiple travelling salesman problem in type‑2 fuzzy environment. Artificial 
Intelligence Review 56(2):965–993.
[39] Liu, X. (2009). Ant colony algorithm for continuous space optimization. 
Journal of Computer Applications 29(10):2744–2747.128 DOI: 10.1201/9781003503057-9
Chapter 9
Type‑2 Gaussian neuro‑fuzzy 
VIKOR technique in 
multi‑criteria decision‑making 
for medical diagnostic
Nivedita, Seema Agrawal, M. K. Sharma, 
Laxmi Rathour, and Vishnu Narayan Mishra
9.1 INTRODUCTION
Medical diagnosis involves the identification of diseases based on signs 
and symptoms, and the necessary data for diagnosis is collected from 
the patient’s medication record, bodily check‑ups, and various pathologi‑
cal tests, including blood tests and imaging tests. Due to the non‑specific 
nature of many symptoms and signs, multiple diagnostic attempts are often 
required. For example, redness of the skin (known as erythema) can be 
indicative of various illnesses, making it challenging for healthcare profes‑
sionals to determine an accurate diagnosis. In addition to these, similar 
signs and symptoms may also be present in multiple diseases, further com‑
plicating the decision‑making procedure for decision‑makers. This com‑
plexity leads to the exploration of the simultaneous diagnosis of multiple 
diseases.
In MCDM, imprecise and uncertain information is common due to sev‑
eral aspects, that is, the absence of correct data and limitations for the 
decision‑makers’ attention and data‑processing abilities. Therefore, pre‑
vious results are often focused on addressing MCDM problems within a 
fuzzy environment. Chen initially introduced a multi‑criteria group deci‑
sion analysis with generalized interval‑valued fuzzy numbers, incorporating 
the signed distances and imperfect weights. Additionally, Chen also pre‑
sented a second approach for utilizing the interval type‑2 fuzzy sets [1,2]. 
Furthermore, Chen et al. also contributed to the field by presenting fuzzy 
multiple attribute group decision‑making, also based on the ranking of 
interval type‑2 fuzzy sets [3]. Consequently, numerous valuable approaches 
have been established to mark a broad extent of decision‑making difficul‑
ties. In line with this, Wang et al. also presented a knowledge‑based system 
with an interval type‑2 fuzzy environment for multi‑attribute group deci‑
sion‑making models [4]. The concept of a linguistic variable, which was also 
introduced in 1975 and applied to approximate reasoning, represents a gen‑
eralization of traditional type‑1 fuzzy sets [5]. Type‑2 fuzzy sets outperform Type-2 Gaussian neuro-fuzzy VIKOR technique 129
type‑1 fuzzy sets as they can be modelled into second‑order uncertainties. 
Mittal et al. also conducted a comprehensive analysis on the applications 
of type‑2 fuzzy logic, highlighting its strengths in handling complex uncer‑
tainties [6]. The perception of type‑2 fuzzy logic was found for the applica‑
tion in diverse fields, including industrial contexts. Dereli et al. provided a 
brief evaluation in 2011, focusing specifically on the industrial applications 
of type‑2 fuzzy sets and systems [7]. In the field of differential diagnosis, 
Di Lascio et al. also introduced a medical differential diagnosis approach 
utilizing the type‑2 fuzzy sets [8]. Chen further contributed to the field by 
presenting a bilateral technique for multi‑criteria group decision analysis 
by using the interval type‑2 fuzzy sets. This method was applied in medi‑
cal decision‑making problem. Additionally, Chen also introduced another 
approach called the extended QUALIFLEX technique that utilizes the inter‑
val type‑2 fuzzy sets for multi‑criteria decision analysis and its application 
to medical decision‑making problem. These advancements were developed 
in 2013 [9,10]. In 2021, Chen et al. extended their research by introducing 
a fuzzy frequent pattern mining algorithm. This algorithm incorporates a 
weighted sliding window and type‑2 fuzzy sets for the effective analyses 
of the medical data streams [11]. In 2015, Özkan et al. also presented a 
hybrid multi‑criteria decision‑making methodology that utilized type‑2 
fuzzy sets. This methodology was specifically designed for selecting among 
various energy storage alternatives [12]. In 2009, Own conducted research 
on the switching between type‑2 fuzzy sets and intuitionistic fuzzy sets, 
focusing on its application in medical diagnosis [13]. In 2012, Hagras and 
Wagner provided an overview by highlighting the widespread utilization 
of type‑2 fuzzy logic systems in real‑world applications [14]. Similarly, in 
2018, Abdullah et al. proposed an approach for determining the ambulance 
location preferences. They also employed a decision‑making technique that 
relied on interval type‑2 fuzzy sets [15]. In 2018, LathaMaheswari con‑
ducted a review focusing on the application of type‑2 fuzzy logic in the 
field of biomedicine [16]. In 2017, Sadat and Zarandi developed a type‑2 
fuzzy expert system specifically designed for the diagnosis of leukaemia 
[17]. In 2004, Opricovic and Tzeng conducted a comparative analysis of 
two popular multi‑criteria decision‑making (MCDM) methods, VIKOR 
and TOPSIS, with a focus on their ability for finding compromise solutions. 
In 2010, Chang [18] introduced a modification to the VIKOR method for 
multi‑criteria analysis. Modification approach was successfully applied to 
the various MCDM problems [19]. Additionally, in 2007, Opricovic and 
Tzeng expanded the VIKOR method and compared it with other outranking 
methods to enhance its effectiveness in multi‑criteria decision‑making [20].
In 2012, Wang and Tzeng presented a brand marketing approach aimed 
at creating brand value. They proposed a multi‑criteria decision‑making 
(MCDM) model that combined DEMATEL (Decision‑Making Trial and 
Evaluation Laboratory) with ANP (analytic network process) and VIKOR 130 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
methods [21]. In 2017, Debbarma worked on a comparative study exploring 
the PROMETHEE II and VIKOR methodologies in a multi‑criteria deci‑
sion‑making (MCDM) approach. The goal of the study was to identify the 
hydrogen‑biofuel dual fuel project’s best performance‑emission trade‑off 
benefit [22]. In 2013, Chiu developed a new hybrid MCDM model combin‑
ing DANP with VIKOR to improve e‑store business [23]. In 2010, Vahdani 
made an extension to the VIKOR method by incorporating interval‑valued 
fuzzy sets [24]. Additionally, in 2007, Tong proposed the optimization of 
multi‑response processes utilizing the VIKOR method [25]. In 2022, Wu 
introduced a probabilistic linguistic VIKOR method as a solution to tackle 
multi‑criteria decision‑making (MCDM) problems with inconsistent crite‑
ria across different alternatives [26]. In 2009, Sayadi also extended VIKOR 
method for decision‑making problem with interval numbers [27].
Given the abundance of common symptoms, identifying the specific 
disease for a patient suffering becomes challenging. Consequently, this 
research employs an MCDM approach to correct and accurately detect the 
presence of any of the diseases having common symptoms.
In this study, we focused on the following goals:
a. Enhancing the VIKOR method by incorporating type‑2 fuzzy sets to 
address problems in higher dimensionality.
b. Developing a system for the type‑2 Gaussian fuzzy sets to manipulate 
MCDM problems, in order to substitute the resolute through fuzzy 
ranking methodology.
c. Creating a neuro‑fuzzy system utilizing the VIKOR methodology to 
assist doctors and medical practitioners in making decisions for the 
diagnosis of diseases.
d. Validating the effectiveness of the proposed model with the help of 
numerical illustrations.
The work is structured into eight sections, each serving a specific pur‑
pose. Introduction: Provides an overview and context for the study. Basic 
Concepts: Explains the fundamental concepts related to the work.
Data Collection: Discusses the process of collecting data for the study. 
Mathematical Formulation: Presents the mathematical framework for the 
proposed model. VIKOR Method‑Based Neuro‑Fuzzy System: Introduces 
the algorithm and architecture of the proposed model, utilizing the VIKOR 
method. Numerical Computations: Demonstrates the validation of the pro‑
posed model through numerical calculations. Interpretation of Numerical 
Computation: Provides insights and interpretations of the numerical 
results. Conclusion: Summarizes the entire work and presents the conclud‑
ing remarks.Type-2 Gaussian neuro-fuzzy VIKOR technique 131
9.2 BASIC PERCEPTIONS
9.2.1 Type‑2 fuzzy set
A type‑2 fuzzy set ‘T’ on a universal set ‘U’ is a fuzzy set that incorporates 
ambiguity in its truth values.
It can be represented as follows:
T = ∈ { , () () rs rs , , µT r : , r s ∈ ⊆ J [ ] 0, 1 }
here, ‑Jr represents the prime membership function; μt
 represents the subor‑
dinate membership function and
The membership or truth values, denoted by μT(r,s), range from 0 to 1.
In essence, a type‑2 fuzzy set is three‑dimensional, comprising the pri‑
mary variable, the secondary variable (representing the degree of belong‑
ing in type‑1 sets, known as the primary membership function), and the 
third variable known as the subordinate membership function (as exposed 
in Figure 9.1).
9.2.2 Gaussian fuzzy number
A Gaussian fuzzy membership function ‘gF’ on a universal set ‘U’ can be 
expressed as:
= [ ] 






 ∈ ∈ ⊆










σ σ −  −

 

 −  −

 


g s F e s U e J
s c s c
r , :  ,  0, 1
1
2
1
2
2 2
S
U
0
(r,s)
1
1
0
Figure 9.1 Geometric representation of type-2 fuzzy set.132 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
here, ‘c’ is the mean, and ‘σ’ represents the spread of the curve (standard 
deviation) of Gaussian membership function.
9.2.3 Type‑2 Gaussian fuzzy number
A Gaussian type‑2 fuzzy set ‘gT’ on a universal set ‘U’ can be defined as:
= µ [ ] 














 ∈ ∈ ⊆










σ σ σ −  −

 

 −  −

 

 −  −

 


g r T e r e r U e J
r c
g
r c r c
r , ,   ,  :  ,  0, 1
1
2
1
2
1
2
2 2 2
Jr : primary membership function
µg : secondary membership function
0 1 ≤ ≤ µg
here, ‘c’ is the mean, and ‘σ’ represents the spread of the curve (standard 
deviation) of Gaussian type‑2 membership function.
9.2.4 Multi‑criteria decision‑making (MCDM)
MCDM, which is also recognized as multi‑criteria decision analysis 
(MCDA), mentions the process of addressing results and scheduling dif‑
ficulties that involve several criteria. Its aim is to assist decision‑makers 
in tackling such complex situations. Typically, there is no single optimum 
result for such difficulties, and it becomes essential to utilize decision‑mak‑
ers’ primacies to distinguish among several results.
The concept of ‘solving’ an MCDM problem can be understood in diverse 
ways. It may involve choosing the ‘best’ option from a set of existing choices, 
where ‘best’ represents the most favourable choice as per decision‑makers’ 
perspective. Another clarification of ‘explaining’ might be identifying a 
smaller set of viable options or categorizing options into dissimilar pref‑
erence sets. In a more comprehensive approach, it may involve finding all 
‘efficient’ or ‘non‑dominated’ solutions.
The trouble of the problem arises from the existence of multiple criteria. 
While an MCDM problem may have a unique (optimal) solution without 
considering preference data, the notion of a solution can be exchanged by 
a set of undominated results. A result is considered undominated if it can‑
not be improved upon in one criterion without sacrificing performance in 
another criterion. Hence, it is sensible for experts or decision‑makers to 
choose a solution from the undominated set, as it represents a trade‑off 
between different criteria. Alternatively, one can aim for satisfying or opti‑
mizing performance across multiple criteria.Type-2 Gaussian neuro-fuzzy VIKOR technique 133
Mathematically, the MCDM problem in various fields is characterized as:
Max z
Constraints to
z ∈ Z
Here, z represents the vector, and Z denotes the feasible set. If Z is explicitly 
demarcated (through a set of choices), the resultant difficulty is known as a 
multi‑criteria evaluation problem. On the contrary, if Z is implicitly defined 
(through a set of conditions), the problem is mentioned as ‘multiple‑criteria 
design problem’.
9.2.5 VIKOR method
The VIKOR method is an MCDM or MCDA technique designed to address 
decision problems involving conflicting criteria with different units. It oper‑
ates under the supposition that compromise is admissible for determining 
conflicts, aiming to identify the best possible solution that closely aligns 
with the desired outcome. The VIKOR method ranks the availability of 
the options and selects the most favourable solution that is most favourable 
and closest to the desired result. The VIKOR method comprises four major 
steps, which are outlined as follows:
i. Find the + fh best value and − fh worst value of all including factors.
= = + − max , max , f xf x h h lg lg
ii. Compute the indexes Hh h  and 
∑ω ω ( )
( )
( )
( ) = ⊗ −
− = ⊗ −
− =
+
+ −
+
+ − ;  max
1
n
n n
H  f r
f f
f r
f f h
h
n h h
h h
h
h
n h h
h h
iii. Compute the index h
ν ν ( )
( )
( )
( )
( ) = −
− + − −
−
+
− +
+
− + 
 
 
H H
H H
1
h
h h
h h
h h
h h
here, = = = = + − + − H H h h min , h h   m H H axh h ,   h h min , h h   m   axh h
 iv. The ranking order categorization by the values of Hh h ,   and h.
Let the set of diseases be   ,  = { }   1 2   ,   3……… h and the set of symp‑
toms be  = … { } ı ı 1 2 ,  ,  .. ı ı 3 …… n and the set of number of patients be 134 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
℘ = ℘{ } 1 2 ,  ,  ℘ ℘3……℘n . Then, we can define a relation matrix  between 
symptoms and diseases as:
ı ı 1 2  ın
=














℘
℘
℘
1
2
11 12 1
12 22 2
1 2







   

t t t
t t t
h t t h h th
flm is the fuzzy number, where l h = = 1, 2, 3......  and  1 m ,2,3……℘ given by
  , f s lm = ∈ { }   : µ µ F F lm () () s s U s , :U → ⊆ [ ] 0,1 0[ ] , 1
And tlm is the type‑2 fuzzy number, where l h = = 1, 2, 3...... and 1 m ,2,3……℘
given by
  , t r lm = ∈ { } ( ) ( )   , s r   , µ T r lm ( )s r :  Χ ∈ , s 0 J ⊆ [ ] , 1
Jr :  primary membership function
µ Tlm : secondary membership function
0 1 ≤ ≤ µT
Let  be the fuzzy relation decision matrix on the set of symptoms and the 
set of diseases to choose a resultant disease.
and m n = … 1,2,3 …
 
µ µ µ
µ µ ( ) µ
( ) ( ) ( )
( ) ( )
() () ( )
() () ( )
=














℘
℘
,    ,  ,
,    ,  ,
11 12 1
 1  2
M L

  

s s s s s s
s s s s s s
f f f
fh th fh
Let RF N be the normalized decision matrix by multiplying some weight to 
normalize the above decision matrix.Type-2 Gaussian neuro-fuzzy VIKOR technique 135
 
ω
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
= ⊗
−
− + −
− + + −
−
−
− + −
− + + −
−






















+
+ −
+
+ −
℘
+ ℘
℘
+ ℘
−
+
+ −
+
+ −
℘
+ ℘
℘
+ ℘
−
   
        
        
1 11
1 1
2 12
2 2
1
1  1
1 1
2  2
2 2


  

R
f s
f f
f s
f f
f s
f f
f s
f f
f s
f f
f s
f f
F
h h h
N
here, yhn = performance value of hth alternative (disease) over ℘th criteria 
(symptom), and also, ∑ω = 1.
Let Q be the matrix of performance scores based on the result of normal‑
ized decision matrix. Q is the addition of the ∑RF N and maximum of each 
row of RF N with the multiplication of some weight.
 
ν
ν
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
= ⊗
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−






















+ −
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−












































℘
+
℘
− ℘
+
℘
+
℘
− ℘
+
℘ ℘+
℘
− ℘
+
℘
+
℘
− ℘
+
℘
+
℘
− ℘
+
℘ ℘
+
℘
− ℘
+
℘
+
℘
− ℘
+
℘
+
℘
− ℘
+
℘ ℘+
℘
− ℘
+
℘
+
℘
− ℘
+
℘
+
℘
− ℘
+
℘ ℘
+
℘
− ℘
+
(1 )max
11 12 1
1 2
11 12 1
1 2



  


  

H H
H H
H H
H H
H H
H H
H H
H H
H H
H H
H H
H H
H H
H H
H H
H H
H H
H H
H H
H H
H H
H H
H H
H H
QF
h h h
h h h
The relational fuzzy decision matrix RT based on type‑2 Gaussian fuzzy set 
is represented by136 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
 
µ µ µ
µ µ ( ) µ
( ) ( ) ( )
( ) ( )
() ()() () () ()
() ()() () () ( )
=














℘
℘
, ,  ,    , ,  , , ,  ,
, ,  ,    , ,  , , ,  ,
11 12 1
1 2


  

R
rs rs rs rs rs rs
rs rs rs rs rs rs
T
t t t
t t h h th
Let RT N be the normalized decision matrix by multiplying some weight to 
normalize the above decision matrix.

ω
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
= ⊗
−
− + −
− + + −
−
−
− + −
− + + −
−






















+
+ −
+
+ −
℘
+ ℘
℘
+ ℘
−
+
+ −
+
+ −
℘
+ ℘
℘
+ ℘
−
   
          
          
1 11
1 1
2 12
2 2
1
1 1
1 1
2 2
2 2


  

R
t r
t t
t r
t t
t r
t t
t r
t t
t r
t t
t r
t t
T
h h h
N
here, rhn = performance value of hthalternative (disease) over ℘th criteria 
(symptom), and also, ∑ω = 1.
Let Q be the matrix of the performance scores based on the result of nor‑
malized decision matrix. Q is the addition of the ∑RT N and maximum of 
each row of RT N with the multiplication of some weight.

ν
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
= ⊗
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−






















+
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−












































℘
+
℘
− ℘
+
℘
+
℘
− ℘
+
℘ ℘+
℘
− ℘
+
℘
+
℘
− ℘
+
℘
+
℘
− ℘
+
℘
+
℘
− ℘
+
℘
+
℘
− ℘
+
℘
+
℘
− ℘
+
℘ ℘+
℘
− ℘
+
℘
+
℘
− ℘
+
℘
+
℘
− ℘
+
℘
+
℘
− ℘
+
(1
)max
11 12 1
1 2
11 12 1
1 2
n
n



  


  

H H
H H
H H
H H
H H
H H
H H
H H
H H
H H
H H
H H
H H
H H
H H
H H
H H
H H
H H
H H
H H
H H
H H
H H
Q
V
F
m m h
h m hType-2 Gaussian neuro-fuzzy VIKOR technique 137
In this MCDM approach, we utilized the VIKOR method to address the 
problem at hand. Once we obtained the performance scores (Q), we pro‑
ceeded for the defuzzification of the values represented as type‑2 fuzzy sets. 
This defuzzification step was crucial in finalizing our resulting output or 
disease determination.
9.2.6 Neuro‑fuzzy system (NFS)
The NFS is a hybrid method that combines fuzzy inference system with 
neural network techniques. It combines human reasoning through fuzzy 
sets and linguistic variables with the learning capabilities of neural net‑
works. The basic construction of the NFS consists of several layers, as illus‑
trated in Figure 9.2:
i. Input Layer:
This layer captures the symptoms of patients as numerical data col‑
lected from the hospital.
ii. Fuzzification:
In the fuzzification layer, the numerical data is transformed into 
type‑2 fuzzy sets to facilitate further analysis.
iii. Fuzzy Rules:
From this layer, fuzzy rules are employed to define the relations 
between input variables and output decisions. However, in this study, 
we adopted the MCDM framework. Therefore, we utilized the VIKOR 
In-layer Out- layer
Hidden layer
(fuzzification, fuzzy rules 
and aggregation etc.,)
ƍ ƍ ƍ
Figure 9.2 Neuro-fuzzy system.138 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
process to explain the MCDM involving type‑2 Gaussian fuzzy sets. 
With the VIKOR method, we derived three indexes to rank the alter‑
natives based on their score values.
iv. Aggregation:
In this layer, the values obtained from the previous layer, represent‑
ing the three indexes, are combined or aggregated.
v. Defuzzification:
The defuzzification layer converts the aggregated values of the three 
indexes into a crisp representation. These defuzzified values are used 
to assign ranks for selecting the disease.
vi. Output Layer:
In the final layer, a ranking method is applied to the defuzzified val‑
ues obtained from the previous layer. This process helps in selecting 
the final disease, which serves as the output or result for our problem.
9.3 DATA COLLECTION PROCESS
During this study, data was collected from the district hospital in Mainpuri 
to analyse various diseases. Consultations with numerous doctors were 
also conducted to gather valuable insights. Based on these consultations, 
membership degree was defined for the diseases in our proposed work. For 
instance, when considering tuberculosis (TB), the following symptoms were 
identified: persistent cough with phlegm for more than two weeks, night 
sweats, difficulty in breathing for over 15 days, and significant weight loss 
(around 10 kg) within a six‑month period. This disease primarily affects 
individuals between the ages of 30 and 40. Additionally, chest pain lasting 
more than 15 days is commonly observed.
On one hand, cancer is a long‑term disease typically diagnosed in old 
age. Symptoms associated with cancer include coughing up blood for more 
than three weeks, absence of fever, difficulty in breathing for over 15 days, 
and noticeable weight loss. On the other hand, asthma is a childhood 
disease characterized by allergies and respiratory issues that persist from 
childhood. Symptoms of asthma include breathing difficulties, chest pain, 
and no weight loss.
Likewise, pneumonia is also a childhood disease that primarily occurs 
due to blood infection in children. It exhibits rapid reactions, including high 
fever, chest pain, significant breathing problems, and no weight loss due to 
oxygen deficiency. Bronchitis, another disease with a short history, is char‑
acterized by phlegm, high fever, cough, mild breathing difficulties, chest 
pain, and no weight loss. It is often associated with smoking, tobacco use, 
and alcohol consumption, which gradually weaken the individual’s immune 
system.Type-2 Gaussian neuro-fuzzy VIKOR technique 139
Overall, consultations with doctors and the collection of data from 
the district hospital helped us define the symptoms and characteristics of 
different diseases, enabling us to analyse and differentiate between them 
effectively.
9.4 MATHEMATICAL FORMULATION 
OF THE PROBLEM
This segment focuses on addressing a MCDM in the domain of medical dis‑
eases, specifically asthma, bronchitis, pneumonia, tuberculosis (TB), and 
cancer. These diseases are considered as input factors within our proposed 
type‑2 Gaussian fuzzy MCDM‑based neuro‑fuzzy system. By incorporat‑
ing these diseases as inputs, our aim is to develop a comprehensive frame‑
work for decision‑making that considers multiple criteria and utilizes the 
power of fuzzy logic and neuro‑fuzzy systems.
Next, we proceed with the fuzzification of each input by representing them 
as type‑2 Gaussian fuzzy sets, allowing us to control increased ambiguity 
within the system. This process is depicted in Figure 9.3. Mathematically, 
the type‑2 fuzzy set for each input is described as follows:
t r j t = ∀ { } ( ) ()() , u r , , µ j   : u r     ∈ ∈ X u,  Ir ⊆ [ ] 0, 1
Here, tj represents the type‑2 fuzzy set for the jth input, (r, u) represents an 
element within the fuzzy set, and µtj ( ) r u,  represents the truth degree of (r, 
u) in the fuzzy set tj. The values of u belong to the interval Ir, which is a 
subset of the unit interval [0, 1].
Now compute the indexes with the weights ω = … ∑ω
=
l l
l
i ; 1,2,  and 
1
n
n
ω ( )
( ) = ⊗ −
−
+
H + − 1
1 1 t r 1
t t
h
h h
ω ( )
( ) = ⊗ −
−
+
H + − 2
2 1 t r 2
t t
h
h h
ω ( )
( ) = ⊗ −
−
+
H + − 3
3 1 t r 3
t t
h
h h
ω ω ( ) ω ω
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( ) = ⊗ −
− +
⊗ −
− +
⊗ −
− + +
⊗ −
−
+
+ −
+
+ −
+
+ −
+ ℘
+ −
1 1 2 2 3 3
H  t r
t t
t r
t t
t r
t t
t r
t t
h
h h
h h
h h
h h
h h
h h
n h h
h h140 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
ership function plot Membership function plot Degree of membership Degree of members
Membership function plot Membership function plot
Membership function plot Membership function plot
Membership function plot Membership function plot
Memb
Membership function plot
Degree of membership Degree of membership Degree of membership Degree of membership
Degree of membership
hip Degree of membership Degree of membership
Figure 9.3 Type-2 Gaussian membership functions.Type-2 Gaussian neuro-fuzzy VIKOR technique 141
and
ω ω ( ) ω ω
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( ) = ⊗ −
−
⊗ −
−
⊗ −
− … ⊗ −
−










+
+ −
+
+ −
+
+ −
+ ℘
+ − 1 max ,  ,  , , 1 11 2 12 3 13 1

t r
t t
t x
t t
t x
t t
t r
t t
h
h h
h
h h
h
h h
n h
h h
ω ω ( ) ω ω
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( ) = ⊗ −
−
⊗ −
−
⊗ −
− … ⊗ −
−










+
+ −
+
+ −
+
+ −
+ ℘
+ − 2 max ,  ,  , , 1 21 2 22 3 23 2

t r
t t
t x
t t
t x
t t
t r
t t
h
h h
h
h h
h
h h
n h
h h
ω ω ( ) ω ω
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( ) = ⊗ −
−
⊗ −
−
⊗ −
− … ⊗ −
−










+
+ −
+
+ −
+
+ −
+ ℘
+ − 3 max ,  , , , 1 31 2 32 3 33 3

t r
t t
t r
t t
t r
t t
t r
t t
m
h h
m
h h
m
h h
n m
h h
ω ω ( ) ω
( )
( )
( )
( )
( ) = ⊗ −
−
⊗ −
− …… ⊗ −
−










+
+ −
+
+ −
+ ℘
+ − max , , .. 1 1 1
1 1
2 2 2
2 2

t x
t t
t x
t t
t x
t t
h
h h n h h
h h
and
ν ν ( )
( )
( )
( )
( ) = −
− + − −
−
+
− +
+
− + 
 
 
H H
H H
1
1
1 1
1 1
1 1
1 1
ν ν ( )
( )
( )
( )
( ) = −
− + − −
−
+
− +
+
− + 
 
 
H H
H H
1
2
2 2
2 2
2 2
2 2
ν ν ( )
( )
( )
( )
( ) = −
− + − −
−
+
− +
+
− + 
 
 
H H
H H
1
3
3 3
3 3
3 3
3 3
ν ν ( )
( )
( )
( )
( ) = −
− + − −
−
+
− +
+
− + 
 
 
H H
H H
1
h
h h
h h
h h
h h
By applying fuzzy ranking method on the indexes Hh , h     and h, we got 
the required solution.
9.5 PROPOSED ALGORITHM OF TYPE‑2 
GAUSSIAN FUZZY VIKOR METHOD
Find the +
th type‑2 fuzzy best value and −
th type‑2 fuzzy worst value of all 
including factors.
= = + − t x h l max , h h   m t x in ,  lh142 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
i. Compute the indexes Hh h  and 
∑ω ω ( )
( )
( )
( ) = ⊗ −
− = ⊗ −
− =
+ ℘
+ −
+ ℘
+ − ;   max
1
H 
t x
t t
t x
t t
h
h
n n h h
h h
h
h
n h h
h h
ii. Compute the index h
ν ν ( )
( )
( )
( )
( ) = −
− + − −
−
+
− +
+
− + 
H H
H H
1 R R
R R
h
h h
h h
h h
h h
where = = = = + − + − H H h h min , h h H max , h h H   m   h h in ,  h h   maxh h
iii. The ranking order of all factors are obtained using the crisp value of 
Hh h ,   and h
Based on the given algorithm, the architecture of proposed type‑2 
fuzzy set‑based neuro‑fuzzy system is described by Figure 9.4.
The projected model architecture comprises several layers. The first layer 
is the input layer; in this layer, we input the numerical values of symptoms. 
The second layer represents the fuzzification process, specifically using the 
Gaussian type‑2 fuzzy sets.
S1,R1 I1
MCDM Fuzzy
ranking
Type-1 Output
fuzzification
Input
layer
I2
I3
I4
I5
I6
I7
I8
I9 t2(I9)
t2(I8)
t2(I7)
t2(I6)
t2(I5)
t2(I4)
t2(I3)
t2(I2)
t2(I1)
S2,R2
S3,R3
S4,R4
S5,R5
d1
d2
d3 d
d4
d5
Qi
S6,R6
S7,R7
S8,R8
S9,R9
Figure 9.4 Construction of the projected model.Type-2 Gaussian neuro-fuzzy VIKOR technique 143
Moving ahead, we go to the MCDM layer, where we calculate the 
Hh , h  and h indexes. Following that, we have the fuzzy ranking method 
layer, where we employ a ranking system to determine the result. Finally, 
we have the output layer, which represents the finalized disease after the 
ranking process.
9.6 NUMERICAL COMPUTATIONS
In this segment, we analyse the data collected from the laboratory of the 
District Hospital in Mainpuri, Uttar Pradesh, India, for the purpose of 
multi‑disease diagnosis. The study focused on five diseases: tuberculo‑
sis, pneumonia, bronchitis, asthma, and lung cancer. These diseases were 
selected due to their common symptoms, which include coughing up blood, 
chest pain, fever, breathing problems, weight loss, age, smoking, alcohol 
consumption, and tobacco use.
Example 1: Now, we considered a patient with tuberculosis (TB) and 
their corresponding symptomatic values are as follows:
Gaussian Type‑2 fuzzy VIKOR Method for the decision‑making of 
same disease
Example 2: Now we have taken another patient of pneumonia with 
their symptomatic values as follows:
9.7 RESULT INTERPRETATIONS
In Table 9.1, we presented the data of a TB patient that was collected from 
the district hospital in Mainpuri. In Table 9.2, we applied the fuzzy VIKOR 
method to rank various diseases based on their values, and we found that 
TB obtained the first rank. Table  9.3 displays the membership values in 
the formation of type‑2 fuzzy sets for the patient’s symptoms related to 
different diseases. For each disease, two membership values are provided 
according to the patient’s data. These values are depicted in graphical form 
in Figure 9.3.
In Table 9.4, we computed the values of the HTB and TB indexes using the 
provided expressions and the type‑2 fuzzy membership values.
Table 9.1 Data of the patient
Coughing up 
blood (days/
weeks)
Chest pain 
(days/
weeks)
Fever 
(°F)
Breathing 
problem 
(days/
weeks)
Weight 
loss 
(kg)
Age 
(in 
years)
Smoking 
(quantity)
Alcohol 
(quantity)
Tobacco 
(quantity)
18 days 23 days 100 20 days 12 38 8 7 5144 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
ω ω ( ) ω
( )
( )
( )
( )
( ) = ⊗ −
− +
⊗ −
− +
⊗ −
−
+
+ −
+
+ −
℘
+
℘
+ ℘
−
℘
TB
1 1 TB
1 1
2 2 TB
2 2
1 2 TB
H  t r
t t
t r
t t
t r
t t
n
ω ω ( ) ω
( )
( )
( )
( )
( ) = ⊗ −
−
⊗ −
−
⊗ −
−










+
+ −
+
+ −
℘
+
℘
+ ℘
−
℘
TB max , , 1 1 TB
1 1
2 2 TB
2 2
1 2 TB
  t r
t t
t r
t t
t r
t t
n
where ω = 0.11
In Table 9.5, the value of the TB index was computed using the HTB and 
TB indexes, as per the given expression.
ν ν ( )
( )
( )
( )
( ) = −
− + − −
−
+
− +
+
− + 
 
 
H H
H H
1
TB
TB TB
TB TB
TB TB
TB TB
where ν = 0.5
After that, we aggregated all three indexes, i.e., HTB, TB and TB for 
defuzzifying the performance score m index by using the given expression.
The defuzzification of the type‑2 Gaussian fuzzy number 
=  + + −  
 H   1
3
1 TB TB TB B
After defuzzifying the TB index, we ranked the various diseases based 
on the least value, and TB obtained the least value, resulting in the first rank 
in Table 9.5.
Subsequently, we applied our proposed model to different data related 
to the five given diseases for improved results. In this sequence, Table 9.6 
presents the data of a pneumonia patient. Table 9.7 displays the rankings 
attained with the fuzzy VIKOR system, and Table 9.8 provides the grades 
or positions attained by means of the type‑2 fuzzy VIKOR system.
Table 9.2 h index (performance score), defuzzification, and rank-based values (fuzzy
VIKOR) 
ν ν ( )
( )
( )
( )
( ) = −
− + − −
−
+
− +
+
− + F
F F F
F F
F F F
F F
 
 
H H
H H
1
TB
TB TB
TB TB
TB TB
TB TB
 Where νF = 0.5
HF TB F TB F TB Ranking
TB 0.38141785 0.11 1 1
Pneumonia 0.11 0.11 0.644199 3
Bronchitis 0 0 0 NA
Asthma 0.22 0.11 0.788398 2
Lung cancer 0.11 0.11 0.644199 3Ty
p
e
-2 G
a
u
s
s
i
an n
e
u
r
o
-
f
u
z
zy V
I
K
OR t
e
c
h
n
i
q
u
e
1
4
5
Table 9.3 Decision matrix t r TB = ∈ { } () () ,  ,  ,  :  s r µt r TB s r Χ ∈ ,  s 0 J ⊆ [ ] , 1
Coughing up blood 
(days/weeks) Chest pain Fever
Breathing 
problem Weight loss Age
Smoking 
(quantity)
Alcohol 
(quantity)
Tobacco 
(quantity)
TB 0.229007 4.88E-06 0.937072 5.82E-06 0.854316 0.509505 0.7924313 0.7832303
Pneumonia 0.517252
Bronchitis 0 0.912588 0.8225976 0.9225222
Asthma 0.080974 0.854013
Lung cancer 0.99043 0.0955 0.082808
Max 0.229007 0.080974 0.99043 0.517252 0.854316 0 0.912588 0.8225976 0.9225222
where xTB℘= performance value of TBth alternative (disease) over ℘th criteria (symptom).146 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches Table 9.4 Normalized decision matrix ω ω ( ) ω ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) = ⊗ − − + ⊗ − − + ⊗ − − + + − + + − + + − n n n n t r t t t r t t t r t t t TB TB n H  1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 TB TB 1 2 ω ω ( ) ω ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) = ⊗ − − ⊗ − − …… ⊗ − −   + + − + + − + + − n n n n t r t t t r t t t r t t t n  max , , .. 1 1 TB 1 1 2 2 TB 2 2 TB TB 1 2 here ωt = 0.11 St TB Rt TB TB NA 0.11 0 0.11 0 0.11 0.11 0.11 0.44 0.457060032 Pneumonia 0 0 0.11 Bronchitis NA 0 0 0 0 0 Asthma 0 0.015985 0.015984871 0.11 Lung cancer 0.11 0.089692 0.11 0.30969181 0.11 − − Ht t TB TB ,   0.44 0.457060032 + + Ht t TB TB ,   0 0Type-2 Gaussian neuro-fuzzy VIKOR technique 147
Table 9.5 Qh index (performance score), defuzzification, and rank-based values 
ν ν ( )
( )
( )
( )
( ) = −
− + − −
−
+
− +
+
− + t
t t T
T T
t t T
T T
 
 
H H
H H
1
TB
TB TB
TB TB
TB TB
TB TB
 Where νt = 0.5
Ht TB t TB t TB Ranking
TB 0.44 0.457060032 1 1
Pneumonia 0 0.11 0.5 4
Bronchitis 0 0 0 NA
Asthma 0.015984871 0.11 0.518165 3
Lung cancer 0.30969181 0.11 0.851923 2
The defuzzification of the Gaussian type-2 fuzzy number =  + + −  
 Ht t  t
1
3
1 TB TB TB .
Table 9.6 Data of the patient
Coughing up 
blood (days/
weeks)
Chest pain 
(days/
weeks)
Fever 
(˚f)
Breathing 
problem 
(days/weeks)
Weight 
loss 
(kg)
Age 
(in 
years)
Smoking 
(quantity)
Alcohol 
(quantity)
Tobacco 
(quantity)
06 days 15 days 103 07 days 07 04 1–2 0 0
Table 9.7 h index (performance score), defuzzification, and
rank-based values (fuzzy VIKOR)
HF P F P F P Ranking
TB 0.11 0.11 0.75 2
Pneumonia 0.11 0.11 0.75 2
Bronchitis 0.11 0.11 0.75 2
Asthma 0.22 0.11 1 1
Lung cancer 0 0 0 3
Table 9.8 h index (performance score), defuzzification, and 
rank-based values (type-2 fuzzy VIKOR)
Ht P t P t P Ranking
TB 0.11 0.11 0.666666667 2
Pneumonia 0.33 0.11 1 1
Bronchitis 0.11 0.11 0.666666667 2
Asthma 0.11 0.11 0.666666667 2
Lung cancer 0 0 0 NA148 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
9.8 COMPARATIVE STUDY
In this section, we give some outcomes of our comparative study with 
Gaussian fuzzy logic‑based VIKOR method and by using Gaussian type‑2 
VIKOR method. First, we make Gaussian membership function (see 
Figure 9.5) by using the following equation:
= [ ] 






 ∈ ∈ ⊆










σ σ −  −

 

 −  −

 


g s F e s U e J
s c s c
r , :  ,  0, 1
1
2
1
2
2 2
Now, we make the Gaussian type‑2 membership function for each input 
factor and make a comparison table for comparative study and the obtained 
outcomes are given in Table 9.8.
As of Table 9.9, it is evident that the accuracy of the type‑2 Gaussian fuzzy 
logic‑based approach is superior to the fuzzy logic method. The sequence 
Figure 9.5 Gaussian fuzzy membership functions.
Table 9.9 Comparison between fuzzy logic-based VIKOR method and Gaussian type-2 
fuzzy logic-based VIKOR method
Diseases
Gaussian fuzzy 
logic‑based VIKOR 
method
Gaussian type‑2 fuzzy 
logic‑based VIKOR method
Over TB data TB , > > A P LC > B TB L > > C A P >
Over pneumonia (P) data A P > > , , B TB LC P B > , A, TB
Over asthma (A) data A P > > B > > LC TB A P > > TB,LC > B
Over lung cancer (LC)
data
B > > TB, L A P C > LC > > B P > TB
Over bronchitis (B) data TB , > > P B A,LC B P > > TBType-2 Gaussian neuro-fuzzy VIKOR technique 149
of diseases, namely bronchitis, lung cancer, TB, pneumonia, and asthma, 
aligns with the first choice for the patients affected by these conditions.
9.9 CONCLUSION
In this research paper, we have introduced a neuro‑fuzzy system based on 
type‑2 Gaussian fuzzy sets to address the challenges of MCDM using the 
VIKOR method. Our proposed model can handle the complex relationships 
between diseases and symptoms in a type‑2 fuzzy environment. We have 
developed score index functions based on type‑2 Gaussian fuzzy sets and 
assigned appropriate weights within the neuro‑fuzzy system to effectively 
handle the multi‑disease diagnosis problem. Furthermore, we have applied 
a fuzzy ranking process using the obtained score index values. The pro‑
posed type‑2 Gaussian fuzzy set‑based system demonstrates its capability 
to handle the problem in a three‑dimensional space, utilizing the second‑
ary membership value. Throughout our work, we have provided a numeri‑
cal interpretation of the data collected from the laboratory of the district 
hospital in Mainpuri, Uttar Pradesh, India. The proposed system exhibits 
efficiency and flexibility, making it superior to existing approaches due to 
its simplicity and adaptability.
REFERENCES
1. Chen, T.‑Y. (2012a). Multiple criteria group decision‑making with general‑
ized interval‑valued fuzzy numbers based on signed distances and incomplete 
weights. Applied Mathematical Modelling, 36(7), 3029–3052. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.apm.2011.09.080.
2. Chen, T.‑Y. (2012b). A signed‑distance‑based approach to importance assess‑
ment and multi‑criteria group decision analysis based on interval type‑2 
fuzzy set. Knowledge and Information Systems. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10115‑012‑0497‑6.
3. Chen, S.‑M., Yang, M.‑W., Lee, L.‑W., & Yang, S.‑W. (2012). Fuzzy mul‑
tiple attributes group decision‑making based on ranking interval type‑2 
fuzzy sets. Expert Systems with Applications, 39(5), 5295–5308. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.eswa.2011.11.008.
4. Wang, W., Liu, X., & Qin, Y. (2012). Multi‑attribute group decision making 
models under interval type‑2 fuzzy environment. Knowledge‑Based Systems, 
30, 121–128. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.knosys.2012.01.005.
5. Zadeh, L. A. (1975). The concept of a linguistic variable and its application 
to approximate reasoning‑I. Information Sciences, 8(3), 199–249. https://doi.
org/10.1016/0020‑0255(75)90036‑5.150 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
6. Mittal, K., Jain, A., Vaisla, K. S., Castillo, O., &Kacprzyk, J. (2020). A com‑
prehensive review on type 2 fuzzy logic applications: Past, present and future. 
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence, 95, 103916. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.engappai.2020.103916.
7. Dereli, T., Baykasoglu, A., Altun, K., Durmusoglu, A., & Türksen, I. B. 
(2011). Industrial applications of type‑2 fuzzy sets and systems: A concise 
review. Computers in Industry, 62(2), 125–137. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
compind.2010.10.006.
8. Di Lascio, L., Gisolfi, A., & Nappi, A. (2005). Medical differential diagnosis 
through type‑2 fuzzy sets. In The 14th IEEE International Conference on Fuzzy 
Systems, 2005, FUZZ’’05 (pp.  371–376). IEEE. https://doi.org/10.1109/
FUZZY.2005.1452422.
9. Chen, T. Y. (2013). An interactive method for multiple criteria group decision 
analysis based on interval type‑2 fuzzy sets and its application to medical 
decision making. Fuzzy Optimization and Decision Making, 12(3), 323–356. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10700‑013‑9158‑9.
10. Chen, T. Y., Chang, C. H., & Lu, J. F. R. (2013). The extended QUALIFLEX 
method for multiple criteria decision analysis based on interval type‑2 
fuzzy sets and applications to medical decision making. European Journal 
of Operational Research, 226(3), 615–625. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ejor.2012.11.038.
11. Chen, J., Li, P., Fang, W., Zhou, N., Yin, Y., Zheng, H.,... & Wang, R. (2021). 
Fuzzy frequent pattern mining algorithm based on weighted sliding window 
and type‑2 fuzzy sets over medical data stream. Wireless Communications 
and Mobile Computing, 2021. https://doi.org/10.1155/2021/6662254.
12. Özkan, B., Kaya, İ., Cebeci, U., & Başlıgil, H. (2015). A hybrid multicrite‑
ria decision making methodology based on type‑2 fuzzy sets for selection 
among energy storage alternatives. International Journal of Computational 
Intelligence Systems, 8(5), 914–927. https://doi.org/10.1080/18756891.2015.
1084715.
13. Own, C. M. (2009). Switching between type‑2 fuzzy sets and intuitionistic 
fuzzy sets: An application in medical diagnosis. Applied Intelligence, 31(3), 
283–291. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10489‑008‑0126‑y.
14. Hagras, H., & Wagner, C. (2012). Towards the wide spread use of type‑2 fuzzy 
logic systems in real world applications. IEEE Computational Intelligence 
Magazine, 7(3), 14–24. https://doi.org/10.1109/MCI.2012.2200621.
15. Abdullah, L., Adawiyah, C. W. R., & Kamal, C. W. (2018). A decision mak‑
ing method based on interval type‑2 fuzzy sets: An approach for ambulance 
location preference. Applied Computing and Informatics, 14(1), 65–72. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aci.2017.04.003.
16. Lathamaheswari, M., Nagarajan, D., Udayakumar, A., & Kavikumar, J. 
(2018). Review on type‑2 fuzzy in biomedicine. Executive Editor, 9(12), 338. 
https://doi.org/10.5958/0976–5506.2018.01855.7.
17. Sadat Asl, A. A., & Zarandi, M. H. F. (2017). A type‑2 fuzzy expert sys‑
tem for diagnosis of leukemia. In North American Fuzzy Information Processing 
Society Annual Conference (pp. 52–60). Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.10
07/978‑3‑319‑67137‑6_6.Type-2 Gaussian neuro-fuzzy VIKOR technique 151
18. Opricovic, S., & Tzeng, G. H. (2004). Compromise solution by MCDM 
methods: A comparative analysis of VIKOR and TOPSIS. European 
Journal of Operational Research, 156(2), 445–455. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0377‑2217(03)00020‑1.
19. Chang, C. L. (2010). A modified VIKOR method for multiple criteria analy‑
sis. Environmental Monitoring and Assessment, 168(1), 339–344. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s10661‑009‑1117‑0.
20. Opricovic, S., & Tzeng, G. H. (2007). Extended VIKOR method in compari‑
son with outranking methods. European Journal of Operational Research, 
178(2), 514–529. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2006.01.020.
21. Wang, Y. L., & Tzeng, G. H. (2012). Brand marketing for creating brand value 
based on a MCDM model combining DEMATEL with ANP and VIKOR 
methods. Expert Systems with Applications, 39(5), 5600–5615. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.eswa.2011.11.057.
22. Debbarma, B., Chakraborti, P., Bose, P. K., Deb, M., & Banerjee, R. (2017). 
Exploration of PROMETHEE II and VIKOR methodology in a MCDM 
approach for ascertaining the optimal performance‑emission trade‑off van‑
tage in a hydrogen‑biohol dual fuel endeavour. Fuel, 210, 922–935. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2017.08.016.
23. Chiu, W. Y., Tzeng, G. H., & Li, H. L. (2013). A new hybrid MCDM model 
combining DANP with VIKOR to improve e‑store business. Knowledge‑Based 
Systems, 37, 48–61. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.knosys.2012.06.017.
24. Vahdani, B., Hadipour, H., Sadaghiani, J. S., & Amiri, M. (2010). Extension 
of VIKOR method based on interval‑valued fuzzy sets. The International 
Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology, 47(9), 1231–1239. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s00170‑009‑2241‑2.
25. Tong, L. I., Chen, C. C., & Wang, C. H. (2007). Optimization of multi‑response 
processes using the VIKOR method. The International Journal of Advanced 
Manufacturing Technology, 31(11), 1049–1057. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00170‑005‑0284‑6.
26. Wu, X., Liao, H., Zavadskas, E. K., & Antuchevičienė, J. (2022). A probabi‑
listic linguistic VIKOR method to solve MCDM problems with inconsistent 
criteria for different alternatives. Technological and Economic Development 
of Economy, 28(2), 559–580. https://doi.org/10.3846/tede.2022.16634.
27. Sayadi, M. K., Heydari, M., & Shahanaghi, K. (2009). Extension of VIKOR 
method for decision making problem with interval numbers. Applied 
Mathematical Modelling, 33(5), 2257–2262. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apm.2008.06.002.152 DOI: 10.1201/9781003503057-10
Chapter 10
Overview of AI and explainable 
AI decision‑making (XAIDM)
Mohammad Mahdi Sadeghi, 
Kourosh Mokhtari, and Fariba Goodarzian
10.1 INTRODUCTION
AI, with its capability of deep learning, is not a substitution but an enhance‑
ment to human roles in various business sectors, revolutionizing processes 
by continuously analysing and learning from past scenarios. It finds its 
applications in numerous areas, including business analytics and personal 
modelling, enhancing decision‑making processes by providing reliable deci‑
sions and forecasts. The technology of XAIDM emerges as a breakthrough, 
acting as a bridge between complex AI decision‑making processes and user 
understanding. It mitigates the complex nature of autonomous systems, 
enabling users to comprehend and have trust in AI decisions by fostering 
transparency and reliability (Frąckiewicz, 2023).
Ethical considerations in explainable AI invoke serious questions about 
the accountability and dependability of autonomous systems, emphasizing 
the importance of transparency provided by XAIDM. This transparency 
augments public trust and holds autonomous systems accountable, espe‑
cially in critical situations, elucidating the importance of understanding the 
rationale behind decisions made by such systems. The ongoing advance‑
ments in XAIDM are predicted to unlock immense potential, revolution‑
izing the relationship dynamics between humans and autonomous systems 
and ensuring safety.
Furthermore, the integration of decision support systems (DSSs) and AI 
translates basic data into significant knowledge, aiding in informed deci‑
sion‑making by simulating human thought processes and behaviours and 
recognizing patterns via neural networks (Zheng, 2023). However, chal‑
lenges do arise, particularly in expert systems, a subfield of AI, which faces 
difficulties in automating processes and translating expert knowledge into 
electronic systems while lacking common sense and judgement. Despite 
these challenges, they are crucial in enhancing customer service, reducing 
errors, and providing stability in decision‑making.
This comprehensive integration of studies uncovers the transformative 
impact and the intertwined implications of AI and XAIDM, showcasing the Overview of AI and explainable AI decision-making (XAIDM) 153
potential harmony between human and artificial intelligence and projecting 
innovations that could potentially reshape humanity’s future.
10.2 EXPLORING THE BENEFITS OF 
EXPLAINABLE AI DECISION‑MAKING 
FOR AUTONOMOUS SYSTEMS
While these systems can offer significant benefits in terms of efficiency and 
safety, the complexity of their decision‑making processes can be difficult 
to understand. As a result, many experts are now advocating for the use 
of explainable AI decision‑making (XAIDM), which is designed to make 
the decision‑making process of autonomous systems more transparent and 
understandable (Frąckiewicz, 2023).
Explainable AI decision‑making is an emerging technology that seeks to 
bridge the gap between the complex decision‑making process of AI and the 
human user. By providing explanations of the reasoning behind decisions, 
XAIDM can enable users to better trust and understand the autonomous 
system. For example, an autonomous vehicle may be able to explain why it 
decided to turn right at a particular intersection, even if the driver had not 
seen the incoming traffic.
In addition, XAIDM can help to improve the accuracy and reliability 
of autonomous systems. By providing explanations of why a decision was 
made, users can better identify and address any errors in the decision‑mak‑
ing process. This can help to ensure that autonomous systems are making 
the right decisions and that any errors can be quickly corrected.
Finally, the use of XAIDM can help to build trust between users and 
autonomous systems. By providing explanations of why a decision was 
made, users can better understand the autonomous system and be more 
confident in its decision‑making process. This can help to build trust in the 
system, which is essential for users to feel comfortable using it.
Overall, the use of explainable AI decision‑making for autonomous 
systems can offer many benefits. By providing explanations of the deci‑
sion‑making process, users can better trust and understand the system, 
helping to improve accuracy and reliability (Frąckiewicz, 2023).
10.3 EXAMINING THE IMPACT OF 
EXPLAINABLE AI DECISION‑MAKING 
ON AUTONOMOUS SYSTEM DESIGN
However, these systems are often complex and difficult to understand, 
making it difficult to explain the decisions they make. This lack of explain‑
ability has been a major source of concern for many when considering the 
use of autonomous systems (Bader and Kaiser, 2019).154 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
To address this issue, researchers are exploring the use of explainable AI 
decision‑making (XAIDM) to make autonomous systems more interpre‑
table and accountable. XAIDM is a collection of approaches that aim to 
make the decisions of an AI system more transparent and understandable. 
By providing explanations for the decisions made by an AI system, it is 
hoped that XAIDM can help improve the trust and acceptance of autono‑
mous systems.
Initial research on XAIDM has shown promising results, with some stud‑
ies demonstrating that the use of XAIDM can help improve the accuracy 
and reliability of autonomous systems. Additionally, XAIDM has been 
found to be beneficial in helping users better understand the decision‑mak‑
ing process of autonomous systems, which can lead to increased trust and 
acceptance (Frąckiewicz, 2023).
The potential benefits of XAIDM could be significant for the develop‑
ment of autonomous systems. By making these systems more transparent 
and understandable, XAIDM could open the door for more widespread 
acceptance and use of autonomous systems. As a result, XAIDM could play 
a key role in the future design of these systems.
Given the potential of XAIDM, it is important to continue to examine its 
impact on autonomous system design. Studies should focus on investigating 
how XAIDM can be used to improve the accuracy and reliability of autono‑
mous systems, as well as how it can help foster greater trust and acceptance 
of these systems. Further research into this critical area could provide key 
insights into the use of XAIDM in autonomous system design.
10.4 ASSESSING THE CHALLENGES OF 
IMPLEMENTING EXPLAINABLE AI 
DECISION‑MAKING IN AUTONOMOUS SYSTEMS
As autonomous systems become increasingly commonplace, the need for 
explainable AI decision‑making (XAIDM) is becoming more pressing. 
XAIDM is designed to provide explanations for the decisions made by AI 
systems, allowing users to gain insight into how their decisions are being 
made. The challenge of implementing XAIDM in autonomous systems, 
however, is considerable (Frąckiewicz, 2023).
One of the primary challenges of implementing XAIDM in autonomous 
systems is the complexity of the underlying AI algorithms. Autonomous 
systems often employ complex decision‑making algorithms, which can 
make it difficult to explain their decisions in a meaningful way. In addition, 
the decisions made by autonomous systems are often based on data from a 
variety of sources, making it even more challenging to provide an explana‑
tion for their decisions (Frąckiewicz, 2023).Overview of AI and explainable AI decision-making (XAIDM) 155
A second challenge of implementing XAIDM in autonomous systems is 
the difficulty of verifying the accuracy of the explanations provided by the 
system. In order to be useful, explanations must be accurate, but verifying 
their accuracy can be difficult. Furthermore, autonomous systems must be 
able to provide explanations in real time, which can be a challenge given the 
complexity of their algorithms (Bader and Kaiser, 2019).
Finally, another challenge of implementing XAIDM in autonomous sys‑
tems is the risk of introducing bias into the explanations provided by the 
system. As autonomous systems become increasingly reliant on AI algo‑
rithms, it is important to ensure that they do not introduce bias into their 
explanations. This can be a difficult task, as it requires an understanding of 
both the AI algorithms and the data that they are based on.
Despite these challenges, XAIDM is an important part of autonomous 
systems, and the need to implement it is becoming more pressing. As such, 
it is essential that researchers and developers work to address the challenges 
associated with implementing XAIDM in autonomous systems. Doing so 
will ensure that autonomous systems are able to provide meaningful, accu‑
rate, and unbiased explanations for their decisions.
10.5 UNDERSTANDING THE ETHICAL IMPLICATIONS 
OF EXPLAINABLE AI DECISION‑MAKING 
IN AUTONOMOUS SYSTEMS
The emergence of explainable artificial intelligence (AI) in autonomous 
systems is ushering in a new era of technological development and ethi‑
cal implications. Autonomous systems are increasingly becoming common‑
place in everyday life, from self‑driving cars to smart home devices that 
can be controlled via voice commands. These systems are powered by AI 
and are capable of making decisions and performing tasks without human 
intervention.
However, these systems also raise important ethical questions regarding 
the trustworthiness and accountability of AI. Explainable AI decision‑mak‑
ing is a type of AI that is designed to provide more transparent, logical 
explanations for decisions made by autonomous systems. This type of AI is 
becoming increasingly important as it can help to ensure that autonomous 
systems are making the right decisions and that the decisions are based on 
valid logic.
The ethical implications of explainable AI decision‑making can vary 
depending on the context and nature of the autonomous system. For exam‑
ple, in the context of self‑driving cars, explainable AI decision‑making can 
be used to provide an explanation for why a car made a certain decision in a 
given situation, such as why it decided to go straight instead of turning left. 
This kind of transparency can help to improve public trust in autonomous 
systems, as people can better understand the decisions being made and why.156 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
Additionally, explainable AI decision‑making can also help to ensure that 
autonomous systems are held accountable for their actions. For example, 
if an autonomous vehicle is involved in an accident, explainable AI deci‑
sion‑making can provide an explanation for why the car made the decision 
it did. This can help to ensure that the car is not held responsible for the 
accident if it is not at fault.
In conclusion, explainable AI decision‑making is an important part of 
the development of autonomous systems and has important implications for 
the ethical considerations of these systems. Explainable AI decision‑making 
can help to provide more transparency and accountability, which can help 
to ensure that autonomous systems are making the right decisions and that 
they are held responsible for their actions.
10.6 INVESTIGATING THE ROLE OF EXPLAINABLE 
AI DECISION‑MAKING IN THE FUTURE 
OF AUTONOMOUS SYSTEMS
As autonomous systems become increasingly prevalent in today’s world, 
the importance of explainable AI decision‑making (XAIDM) is growing 
exponentially. XAIDM is an artificial intelligence technique that provides 
an explanation of the system’s decision‑making process, allowing humans 
to understand the reasons behind the system’s actions. This is especially 
important in the context of autonomous systems, where the implications of 
decisions are often severe. In addition to ensuring safety, XAIDM can also 
be used to help humans trust and better interact with autonomous systems.
In recent years, research into XAIDM has grown significantly and vari‑
ous techniques have been developed to enable automated systems to explain 
their decisions. There are numerous potential applications of XAIDM, such 
as in healthcare, robotics, and autonomous vehicles. For example, an auton‑
omous vehicle’s explanation of why it stopped at a particular intersection 
could be invaluable for understanding the road conditions and helping to 
improve the system’s performance.
The potential of XAIDM is immense, and it is likely to play a key role in 
the future of autonomous systems. As autonomous systems become more 
complex, the need for explanations of their decisions will become ever 
more crucial. XAIDM will enable humans to better understand the sys‑
tem’s behaviour, increasing trust in the system and helping to ensure that it 
operates safely and efficiently. In addition, XAIDM can be used to improve 
system performance by providing insight into the decision‑making process, 
allowing humans to identify potential problems and develop solutions.
It is clear that explainable AI decision‑making is set to become an essen‑
tial part of the future of autonomous systems. As research into XAIDM 
continues to advance, it is likely that more applications and benefits of the Overview of AI and explainable AI decision-making (XAIDM) 157
technology will be discovered. Ultimately, XAIDM has the potential to rev‑
olutionize the way humans interact with autonomous systems (Frąckiewicz, 
2023).
10.7 DECISION SUPPORT STEPS AND 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
The mentioned items compare a cheap supplier to an expensive supplier but 
with fewer returns and faster delivery time. Choose one of the three strate‑
gies of leadership in cost differentiation and focus. In this section, we’ll look 
at the tools IT has at its disposal to turn business information into business 
intelligence. Management Review: “The most successful companies in the 
future will be the ones with low volume and intelligence: Big of brain and 
small of mass” (Zheng, 2023). Figure 10.1 shows decision support steps.
10.7.1 The first model
10.7.1.1 Four stages of decision
a. Detecting and Interpreting Signals That Indicate Situations That 
Require More Attention: “Detect and interpreting signals” Example: 
Continuous requests from customers to add new features to the prod‑
uct A threat caused by a new competitor, reduced sales, increased 
costs.
b. Design Solution Design Considering All Possible Avenues: 
Problem‑solving/Raising a need/Taking advantage of opportunities 
solutions regardless of whether it is feasible or not, or its strengths 
and weaknesses (Borr et al., 2019).
c. Choosing Choice: Choosing the best solution to try and evaluate each 
solution, estimating and estimating the consequences of each and 
choosing the best ones that might not be done. Pay attention to fac‑
tors such as cost, implementation barriers, implementation time, etc.
The “prescriptive” section of the model proposes “taking action on 
a series of things.”
d. Implementation: Implement the selected solution, monitor it, and cor‑
rect it as needed to set up and execute accurately in complex problems 
or changing environments.
Figure 10.1 Decision support steps.158 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
The four stages of the decision‑making, a four‑step process, are not neces‑
sarily linear. It is usually necessary to refer to the previous stage or steps to 
further examine the topic (Zheng, 2023).
Example: Selecting the best solution in the selection stage Awareness of 
the possibility of implementing another new solution Refer to the design 
stage to review the new solution ←Revisit the selection stage and compare 
it to other solutions ←Choose the best solution.
10.7.2 The second model
Satisficing = Satisfied + Sufficient in a way that the needs of the organization 
are met but not necessarily the best decision possible (Zheng, 2023).
Maximal growth versus good growth → Optimizing Strategy → Good 
growth → Satisficing Strategy
In a good growth strategy → the amount of growth is determined exactly 
as any number can be, and if we achieve that number, we can say, “We have 
succeeded.”
10.7.2.1 Satisfactory decision
Classification by two criteria:
• The extent of decision structure. Structured vs. Unstructured
• Repeated Decision‑Making. Recurring vs. Nonrecurring.
10.7.2.2 Satisfactory decision‑making of 
unstructured decisions
There are multiple correct answers to them. Lack of clear rules to get the 
right answer. There is no guarantee of finding the best solution.
Example: Examples of decision‑making in a business context include 
launching a new product line, implementing a new marketing plan, or 
reshaping the corporate image to influence customer perceptions. In real 
life, such decisions often involve a balance between structured factors, like 
income and benefits in career choices, and unstructured factors, such as 
future advancement opportunities (Zheng, 2023).
10.7.2.3 Structured decision satisfactory
A structured decision is deemed satisfactory when it follows a clear, logical 
process, leading to a well‑informed outcome that meets predefined objec‑
tives. Such decisions typically involve systematic analysis, where all relevant 
data is considered, and the decision‑making process is guided by established 
criteria. The satisfaction in a structured decision stems from the confidence Overview of AI and explainable AI decision-making (XAIDM) 159
that the choice made is backed by thorough evaluation and alignment with 
organizational goals.
10.7.2.4 Decision processing
Decision processing involves handling data in a specific, systematic man‑
ner, where there is no need for intuition or emotions. These processes are 
programmable and are designed to achieve the correct result most of the 
time (Borr et al., 2019). For example, calculating the amount paid to hourly 
employees is a task that can easily be automated and managed by IT systems.
Example: Calculating the amount paid to hourly employees: “Making 
such decisions can be easily left for IT.”
10.7.3 Making a satisfactory decision
10.7.3.1 Satisfaction
Decision‑Making Recurring Decisions: Decision Repetition Usually in 
Certain Periods: Weekly, Monthly, Quarterly, and so on.
Example: Calculating the sale price of a product Ad hoc or nonrecurring 
decision: Case decisions that we may encounter only once. Possibility of 
different decision criteria each time. Example: Setting up a new branch in 
another location Integration with another organization.
10.7.3.2 Decision support system (DSS)
The DSS is fully flexible, interactive system designed to support unstructured 
decisions. Main Objective: Improve the effectiveness of the decision‑maker 
by strengthening his or her insight into decision‑making. creating integra‑
tion and a coalition between user knowledge and experiences with a mass 
of information and speed of the IT system (Zheng, 2023).
10.7.3.3 DSS decision support systems brought to the user
DSS decision support systems offer a range of benefits to users, particularly 
when enhanced by IT. These benefits include:
• Increased Productivity: Streamlines decision‑making processes, 
allowing for more efficient use of time and resources.
• Enhanced Speed: Accelerates the processing of information and 
decision‑making.
• Improved Intuition and Insight: Supports users in developing a deeper 
understanding of complex data and decisions.160 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
• Better Understanding of Information: Enhances the user’s ability to 
comprehend and analyze information effectively.
• Refined Judgment: Aids in making more informed and accurate 
decisions.
• Increased Knowledge Processing Capabilities: Facilitates the manage‑
ment and analysis of large volumes of information.
• Greater Flexibility: Allows for adaptable decision‑making processes 
in response to changing conditions.
• Reduced Complexity: Simplifies complex decision‑making tasks, 
making them more manageable.
• Cost Reduction: Lowers the overall costs associated with deci‑
sion‑making by improving efficiency and accuracy.
10.7.3.4 DSS decision support
Decision Support Systems (DSS) can analyze data to identify trends and 
patterns, such as determining that married male landlords aged 40 years 
and older have the lowest risk of repeat violations. As a result, insurance 
companies may reduce premiums for this category of customers, which in 
turn can lead to increased sales.
10.7.3.5 Model management decision support systems
Model Management Decision Support Systems are designed to store, main‑
tain, and manage the use of various models based on the type of decision 
to be made and the specific analysis required. These systems integrate key 
components, such as data management, user interface management, and 
user relationship management (Borr et al., 2019).
DDS (Decision Support Systems) utilize four different types of models:
• What‑if Models: Used to explore different scenarios by altering input 
variables to see possible outcomes.
• Optimizing Models: Focus on finding the best solution from a set of 
possible options based on specific criteria.
• Goal‑Seeking Models: Work backward from a desired outcome to 
determine the necessary inputs to achieve that goal.
• Statistical Models: Employ statistical methods to analyze data and 
support decision‑making.
10.7.3.6 Data management decision support systems
Data management in Decision Support Systems (DSS) involves storing, 
maintaining, and managing the various types of information that the sys‑
tem uses. This information typically comes from three different sources:Overview of AI and explainable AI decision-making (XAIDM) 161
1. Organizational Information: Internal data specific to the organization.
2. External Information: Data obtained from outside sources.
3. Personal Information: User‑specific data that may influence deci‑
sion‑making (Zheng, 2023).
10.7.3.7 User Interface Management in 
Decision Support Systems
The user interface in a DSS is the component through which users interact 
with the system. It is the visible part of the system, enabling users to input 
their information and requests. For a DSS to be effective, the user interface 
must be:
• Flexible: Adaptable to the user’s needs and preferences.
• Inclusive: Capable of accommodating a wide range of users and 
scenarios.
• Simple: Easy to use and understand, ensuring that users can efficiently 
communicate with the system.
10.7.4 Geographic information systems
GIS are a type of DSS designed to analyse spatial and geographic infor‑
mation. Environmental information includes any information that can be 
displayed on a map, such as roads, population dispersal information, and 
hurricane paths. Organizations use GIS software to analyse information, 
create business intelligence and assist in decision‑making (Zheng, 2023).
There is no limit to the type of information to be displayed by GIS: road 
paths, income levels of people in different areas, their health conditions, or 
crime rates in different areas. Embed the information layer with a mouse 
click.
10.8 ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE: AI
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is the science of creating machines that mimic 
human thought and behavior. In the realm of financial management, AI 
is commonly used in areas such as asset management and stock market 
investment. Beyond finance, AI is widely utilized in industries like insur‑
ance, meteorology, engineering, and space exploration. Key components of 
AI include:
• Expert Systems
• Neural Networks (including Fuzzy Logic)
• Genetic Algorithms
• Intelligent Agents162 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
10.8.1 Expert systems‑1
Knowledge‑based system is an artificial intelligence system that employs 
the ability of reasoning to achieve results. Expertise is usually required to 
do things, and the place of expertise in people is their minds. But artificial 
intelligence with an expert system allows you to gain expertise. Therefore, 
people who do not have the expertise can also use this system to solve the 
problem. Help with problem‑solving or help with problem‑solving. systems 
solve diagnostic and prescriptive problems by expert systems. Diagnostic 
problems are issues that require answering the question of what a problem 
is and are related to the intelligence stage in Herbert Simon’s decision‑mak‑
ing model. Prescription problems are questions that require answering the 
question “What to do?” and relate to the choice stage in Herbert Simon’s 
decision‑making model. An expert system is usually created for a specific 
application area called a domain (Zheng, 2023).
Examples of several domains of expert system application include 
accounting for auditing, tax planning, etc:
In the Case of Medicine: To prescribing antibiotics many considerations 
should be considered such as the patient’s medical history, the origin of the 
infection, as well as the price of available medications. Process control: for 
example, to control the printing process.
In the Case of Human Resource Management: It helps managers deter‑
mine whether the hiring process complies with hiring rules. Financial 
Management: To determine violations in bank accounts and loans.
10.8.2 Expert systems are different in 
nature than decision support
They can work in harmony with each other.
Difference: To use a DSS the user must have relevant field information 
and expertise. DSS helps the user make decisions، but the user must know 
what questions to ask، how to answer، and how to proceed to the next 
step. But in using an expert system, there is knowledge and information 
in the system itself, and the user only has to transmit the data and signs 
of the problem. The source of the knowledge and expertise that leads to 
problem‑solving is another person who has embedded the system.
10.8.2.1 Expert systems‑2
Expert systems use information technology to acquire and apply human 
expertise. An expert system can handle a significant amount of informa‑
tion. Reduce errors. Collect information from different sources. Improve 
customer service. Stability in decision‑making. Providing new information. 
Reduce the time spent by employees to complete their tasks. Reduce the 
cost.Overview of AI and explainable AI decision-making (XAIDM) 163
Problems of an Expert System: One of the significant challenges of devel‑
oping an expert system is the difficulty in translating an expert’s knowledge 
and expertise into a functional electronic system. This is because experts 
often find it hard to articulate how they know certain information; they are 
not always fully aware of the reasoning processes in their minds. Much of 
their decision‑making is based on intuition or a “feel” for how a problem is 
solved, which can be challenging to codify into a structured system.
The Difficulty of Automating the Process: Expert systems can only solve 
problems that are designed for them, not entirely new ones. An expert sys‑
tem cannot learn from previous experience, and if the situation is too com‑
plicated or ambiguous, the process of automating it will be difficult (Zheng, 
2023).
Lack of Common Sense and Judgement: One of the early expert systems 
mounted on the F‑16 allowed the pilot to tie the plane’s wheel while still on 
the ground, or to drop a bomb while flying vertically to the ground.
Neural Networks: An intelligent system capable of recognizing and 
distinguishing patterns. A neural network learns through examples and 
examples and can adapt to new concepts and knowledge. Neural networks 
a nervous system identify important patterns and relationships in a large 
volume of information. Neural networks are useful for identifying, classify‑
ing, and predicting when there is a large amount of information available. 
They are also commonly known as prediction systems because they can see 
patterns in large volumes of information (Zheng, 2023).
10.9 NEURAL NETWORKS ARE THE ADVANTAGES 
OF LEARNING NEURAL NETWORKS
Neural networks offer several advantages, including the ability to learn and 
adapt to new situations. They are capable of simultaneous processing, even 
in the presence of defects or missing information, thanks to their structured 
operations. Neural networks excel in handling large amounts of data and 
working with numerous dependent variables. Additionally, they are par‑
ticularly effective in analyzing nonlinear relationships within the informa‑
tion (Zheng, 2023).
10.9.1 Fuzzy logic: A method of reaching 
results based on vague information
Because so much information cannot be placed in monopoly categories, 
people make decisions based on approximate information.
Fuzzy Logic Algorithm: A set of steps that express inaccurate informa‑
tion and individual perceptions. A genetic algorithm is an artificial intelli‑
gence system that mimics the evolutionary process to create better solutions 164 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
to a problem. In other words, it is an optimizing system that finds a combi‑
nation of inputs that give the best outputs (Zheng, 2023).
10.9.2 Evolutionary principles of genetic algorithm
Selection: Survival of the Most Appropriate Selection.
Crossover: Combining part of the desired output to get a better result.
Transformation: Stochastic combinations and evaluation of outputs.
Genetic algorithms combine thousands or even millions of solutions over 
and over again to achieve the optimal solution. They work much faster and 
more accurately than humans.
Genetic algorithm According to David Goldbert، the pioneer of genetic 
algorithms، evolution is the oldest and most powerful algorithm that exists،
and three billion years of evolution cannot be wrong (Zheng, 2023).
10.9.3 A smart agent is software that helps the user
Smart agents are software agents that help the user or instead perform 
repetitive tasks related to the computer.
10.9.4 Types of smart agents
Smart agents can be categorized based on their specific functions, which 
include:
• Intelligence Factors: Agents designed for tasks related to shopping and 
managing shopping malls.
• Monitoring and Surveillance Factors: Agents focused on monitoring 
activities and providing surveillance.
• Data Mining: Agents that analyze large datasets to extract useful 
information.
• User or Personal Factors: Agents tailored to individual users’ needs 
and preferences.
10.9.5 Purchasing agents: Purchasing
Agents search through a network (usually the Internet) and find and pres‑
ent information or products and services to you. Shopping agents are also 
known as shopping centres.
Monitoring and monitoring agents are intelligent agents that perform 
necessary observations and reports on the effects of problems, often used to 
monitor complex computer networks.Overview of AI and explainable AI decision-making (XAIDM) 165
A data mining agent operates in a data warehouse to discover informa‑
tion. A data warehouse collects information from several different sources. 
Data mining is the process of searching the data warehouse to find the 
required information. A change identifies the main trend or index and also 
detects the presence of new information (Zheng, 2023).
10.9.6 User agents are intelligent 
agents acting in place
• Checking and sorting messages
• Instead of your counterpart in computer games
• Searching and finding the information you want
Biomimicry: Learning from ecosystems and adapting their characteristics to 
humans and organizational situations. In a multi‑agent system, intelligent 
agent groups have the ability to work independently and mutually influ‑
ence each other. Agent‑based modelling is a method of simulating human 
organizations using intelligent agents, each of which follows a simple set of 
rules and can adapt themselves to changing conditions (Borr et al., 2019).
10.9.7 Ant colonies and collective intelligence
Collective intelligence: the collective behaviour of groups of agents capable 
of devising solutions when problems arise that ultimately lead to coherent 
patterns.
Collective intelligence creates and maintains systems that have four 
characteristics:
1. Flexibility: It allows the system to respond to changes in the 
environment.
2. Strenuity: Causes work to be done even if some members fail to do 
their job.
3. Decentralization: Everyone has a relatively simple task to do without 
a supervisor.
4. Self‑organization: Problem‑solving methods are not predetermined by 
a central authority (Zheng, 2023).
REFERENCES
Bader, V. and Kaiser, S. (2019). Algorithmic decision‑making? The user inter‑
face and its role for human involvement in decisions supported by 
artificial intelligence. Organization, 26(5), pp.  655–672. https://doi.
org/10.1177/1350508419855714.166 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
Borra, S., Dey, N., Bhattacharyya, S. and Bouhlel, M.S. (2019). Intelligent Decision 
Support Systems: Applications in Signal Processing. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter 
GmbH.
Chen, Z. (1999). Computational Intelligence for Decision Support. CRC Press.
Frąckiewicz, M. (2023). TS2 SPACE [online]. Available at: https://ts2.space [Accessed 
19 September 2023].
Isidro,I. (2019). How Artificial Intelligence Is Going to Improve the Decision‑Making 
Process ‑ Work from Home and Start a Home Business | PowerHomeBiz [online]. 
Available at: https://www.powerhomebiz.com/managing‑and‑growing/technol‑
ogy/how‑artificial‑intelligence‑is‑going‑to‑improve‑the‑decision‑making‑pro‑
cess.htm [Accessed 21 September 2023].
Kondratenko, Y.P., Vladik, K., Witold, P., Arkadii, C. and Gil‑Lafuente, A.M. (2023). 
Artificial Intelligence in Control and Decision‑making Systems. Springer 
Nature.
Sharda (2020). Analytics, Data Science, & Artificial Intelligence: Systems for Decision 
Support, Global Edition. Pearson.
Zheng, M. (2023). AI for Decision Making. Independently Published.DOI: 10.1201/9781003503057-11 167
Chapter 11
Harnessing the power 
of Industry 4.0
Synergizing smart manufacturing,
supply chain, and reshoring strategies
Sadaf Farboodi, Fariba Goodarzian, 
and Alireza Abbaszadeh Molaei
11.1 INTRODUCTION
Digitalization, which is the application of digital technologies, is deemed 
equally important as mechanization, electrification, and the rise of informa‑
tion technologies—the earlier industrial revolutions. Hence, it is called ‘the 
Fourth Industrial Revolution (Abdel‑Basset & Shawky, 2019)’. The SM is 
one of the reputable digitalization in Industry 4.0. The SM system consists 
of both hardware and software components, which is defined as unified and 
compatible networks (Machado et al., 2020). Also, the intricate structure 
and principles of SM pose difficulties in monitoring it. In addition, SM’s 
vulnerability affects many types of faults in the entire system. The resil‑
iency and sustainability of the system can be affected by SM (Cioffi et al., 
2020). However, Industry 4.0 has been embraced by numerous of today’s 
most valuable companies. These companies leverage advanced digital tech‑
nologies through their business models and SC (Choi et al., 2019). To cope 
with some main challenges in digital servitization, Industry 4.0 technolo‑
gies can help managers to support the realization of inter‑organizational 
logic, improve the management of supply chains, and reshape inter‑organi‑
zational processes (Rad et al., 2022). Therefore, the importance of study‑
ing the influence of Industry 4.0 technologies on supply chains is obvious 
(Palmié et al., 2022). A multi‑level complex structure is known as an SC, 
composed of diverse entities. There are two forms of SCs, including local 
and global forms, and they have various structures, such as forward‑flow 
production‑distribution networks or closed‑loop ones. Due to the proper‑
ties’ improper design and methodology plan, SCs have become more vul‑
nerable to operational or disruption risks (Tang, 2006). The likelihood of 
facing these risks is raised due to the lack of suitable forecast models, and 
the complex instincts of the SCs (Cardoso et al., 2015). Thus, analyses of 
these risks have been stepped up by managers following their impact and 
probability (Cunha et  al., 2019). Recently, many firms have backed the 
value‑chain activities, particularly production, in their countries, known 168 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
as reshoring (Manning, 2014). Reshoring has become increasingly popular 
in Europe and the United States (Moser, 2019). To increase control, offset 
location problems, or even obtain potential new benefits from new policies, 
firms may evaluate the option of bringing back operations to their region 
(Pegoraro et al., 2022).
11.2 LITERATURE REVIEW
11.2.1 Smart manufacturing
Lately, the globalization and dynamicity of high market, permanent changes 
in the preferences of customers, the short life cycle of commodities, and striv‑
ing to increase customer satisfaction have caused changing companies’ strate‑
gies to stay in a competitive market. The existing circumstance has brought 
this need to design and control manufacturing systems to respond rapidly 
to changes, delays, and opportunities to boost their performance. Thus, SM 
or Industry 4.0 as a new revolutionary industrial paradigm was applied by 
the German government in 2010 (Lu, 2017). SM is emerging from the con‑
cept of cyber‑physical systems and digital twins (Schmitt et al., 2017; Tao 
et al., 2019). Cyber information and communication assets (data platforms, 
computing models, and artificial intelligence) integrate physical (machine 
processes and devices) and organizational manufacturing assets (strategy, 
project management, and conflict resolution systems). New business models, 
such as geographically distributed production, are embraced by SM, which 
can respond with greater efficiency and waste reduction. In SM, low‑cost 
sensors measure production activity and digitize them; this way promises 
more efficient and sustainable manufacturing (Chen, 2016; Da Xu, 2014). 
Thus, SM is a product of the integration between the Internet of Things (IoT) 
and Industrial Information Integration Engineering (IIIE) (Sheth & Kusiak, 
2022). A systematic review of the emergence of Industry 4.0 and its applica‑
tions has been extensively studied and reported (Modibbo et al., 2022).
11.2.2 Reshoring
In recent years, several developed countries have encouraged restoration by 
subsidizing their local manufacturers for external benefits including provid‑
ing more domestic jobs or improving industrial structure, especially after 
the COVID‑19 pandemic started. Accordingly, several types of research 
were done considering reshoring. Fernández‑Miguel et  al. (2022) used 
the functional decomposition technique to analyze the SC for the Italian 
ceramic sector. Then, they provided scenarios as potential remedies for the 
unexpected termination of the Ukrainian plastic clay supply. Their analysis 
of the ceramic industry showed the supply risk reduction and had a posi‑
tive impact on the environment by considering reshoring and nearshoring. Harnessing the power of Industry 4.0 169
To find out the impact of reshoring on a firm’s supply network owing to 
the associated location decisions, Choudhary et  al. (2023) investigated 
two large‑scale supply networks of Apple and Jaguar Land Rover consist‑
ing of 2,066 and 1,283 firms, respectively. Then, they presented the result 
of reshoring on sustainability and resilience of the network. There are 
many other fields in which scholars are required to focus on reshoring; 
for instance, the shortage of antibiotics has become a common problem in 
Europe due to various reasons such as offshoring of the production of active 
pharmaceutical ingredients for many of these products to low production 
cost countries, including China and India. Therefore, this research was 
done by focusing on antibiotics SC from the perspective of a small coun‑
try (Sweden) and the advantages and disadvantages of back‑shoring and 
nearshoring alternatives. In this paper, the reduction of availability risk by 
reshoring was shown. However, the authors show that no simple and best 
solution exists for reshoring and both back‑shoring and nearshoring entail 
pros and cons for different stakeholders (Baraldi et al., 2022). Furthermore, 
in the manufacturing industry and assembly operations, offshoring strate‑
gies were used because of different reasons, but these decisions have been 
revised relocating production activities either to the home country or the 
same region. Therefore, Morales Contreras et al. (2022) analyzed the off‑
shoring and reshoring decisions by considering the design of the SC of bike 
manufacturing, the footprint of drivers, and barriers. In another article, 
Chen et al. (2022) investigated the determinants of firms’ decisions to local‑
ize manufacturing under the high levels of uncertainty brought about by the 
ongoing US–China trade war and the COVID‑19 pandemic. They tested the 
proposed conceptual framework by using survey data collected from 702 
Taiwanese firms with manufacturing in China. They concluded that tariffs 
and SC completeness, which are SC factors, and labor cost and material 
cost, which are non‑location‑bound factors, were critical determinants of 
the decision to localize under uncertainty. Based on earlier research on the 
effects of reshoring, a study presented work employs an event study meth‑
odology and aims to understand under which circumstances the market 
perceives reshoring as potentially more (or less) value‑creating. The authors 
analyzed 64 samples of reshoring between 2005 and 2019. They concluded 
that investors are more confident when they invest in home activities instead 
of overseas due to some reasons: (i) the reshoring instance is communi‑
cated as a ‘plan’, (ii) no state‑ or government‑induced financial incentives 
are involved, and (iii) the motivations are primarily ‘cost‑efficiency seeking’ 
(Karatzas et al., 2022). Additionally, according to Calignano & Mercurio 
(2023) research, reshoring offers some other benefits; for example, imple‑
mentation of this strategy mitigates logistic costs, provides government aid, 
and reduces coordination. Finally, Sawik (2023) presented a scenario‑based 
stochastic mixed integer programming model for risk‑neutral or risk‑averse 
optimization of supply chain reshoring to the domestic region, under the 
ripple effect propagated from a foreign disruption source region. The 170 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
computational result, partially modeled after a SC reshoring problem in the 
smartphone industry, was provided.
11.3 IMPORTANCE OF SM IN LOCALIZATION
In the past decade, we have witnessed challenges in manufacturing envi‑
ronments in which both global manufacturing and supply chains are faced. 
These environments have to adapt to products in the market undergoing 
rapid customization, short life cycles, and new manufacturing technolo‑
gies. Also, manufacturing technologies have converged with Information 
and Communication Technologies, collectively referred to as ICT. For 
the SCSM, the supply chain should be ‘smart’, and ICT should be unified 
and incorporated. ‘Smart’ is defined as the ability of an object to autono‑
mously identify itself the purpose to be achieved, comprehend and perform 
tasks efficiently, and have a flexible response to any changes or variations. 
Furthermore, such SM systems include the Internet of Things (IoT), big 
data analytics, cloud computing, the cyber‑physical system (CPS), artificial 
intelligence (AI), virtual reality and augmented reality (VR & AR), and 
3D printing technology (Carvalho et al., 2018). The goals of SCSM align 
with the traditional supply chain, which aims to make a balance between 
demand and supply while maximizing customer contentment at minimal 
expense. However, there are various ways to achieve goals whether ICT is 
used in the supply chain network or not. A communication network can 
be designed to connect all components in the SCSM, and this network 
can collaborate on customized products and services by Information and 
Communication Technologies. It should be noted that the SCSM has three 
basic attributes including connection, collaboration, and customization 
(Oh & Jeong, 2019). According to the findings, SC localization is an insti‑
tutional process that causes cognitive and normative changes in the system 
and improves economic, environmental, and social performance (Seman 
et al., 2019; Vasantha, 2023). Localization is defined as the placement of 
the organization, physical assets, and supply chain functions. From the 
industrial perspective, local presence is essential to meet market demands 
for faster, more cost‑efficient, reliable, and flexible product and service 
delivery. Localization is a strategic solution to secure suppliers from supply 
chain disruptions and external risk factors. It minimizes distance‑related 
issues, transportation costs, international currency fluctuations, global 
market changes, geopolitical risks, and so forth (Christopher, 2022).
11.3.1 Attributes of localization
Collaboration with nearby suppliers, partners, non‑governmental organiza‑
tions, and services plays a crucial role in boosting trustworthiness, ensuring Harnessing the power of Industry 4.0 171
market stability, and generating societal benefits. Engaging with local and 
regional allies mitigates the risks posed by megatrends in the 2020s, such as 
challenges associated with COVID‑19, the climate crisis, social movements, 
globalization, and AI. In the aftermath of the COVID‑19 pandemic, the 
interest of retailers, suppliers, and supply chain participants has increased in 
reshoring to manage supply chain disruptions and risks effectively (Nicolae 
& Nicolae, n.d.; Sakthivel et al., 2021).
11.3.1.1 Localized approach
Suppliers can recognize processes associated with planning, Research and 
Development (R&D), procurement, sourcing, manufacturing, distribution, 
and recycling efforts in reshoring. Due to these processes and emerging 
technologies, they can achieve the highest quality while minimizing time, 
cost, and transportation (Nandi et al., 2021; Sadeghi et al., 2022).
11.3.1.2 Enhancing local capabilities
Suppliers can engage in making opportunities for communities by oper‑
ating local businesses and tapping into local skills, expertise, financial 
resources, technologies, equipment, and facilities (Reza‐Gharehbagh et al., 
2020). They have the potential to use emerging technologies to enhance 
local economic prosperity and foster nearby businesses to raise living stan‑
dards (Sadeghi et al., 2022).
11.3.1.3 Managing local waste
To minimize raw material usage, design out waste, and develop recovery 
the traditional linear model of “take‑make‑waste” does not work in supply 
chain management anymore. Therefore, we demand to application of sus‑
tainable approaches such as circular economy. This standard indicates the 
endeavors of suppliers to prolong products as long as possible within local 
closed loops and to create novel products from local waste (Sillanpaa & 
Ncibi, 2019).
11.3.2 Attributes of SCSM
In SCSM, there are some significant attributes including collaboration, 
customization, value exchange using information technology (IT), virtual‑
ization and dematerialization, supply chain atomization, and connection. 
These fundamental attributes and their key ICTs are discussed in this sec‑
tion. A summary of SCSM attributes is shown in Figure 11.1.172 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
11.3.2.1 Collaboration
The ability to communicate, cooperate, and coordinate among members is 
defined as collaboration. As SCSM operates as a virtually connected plat‑
form, enhancing the efficiency of both physical and cyber components is 
possible through collaboration among its members. There are other chal‑
lenges in addition to risks and damage in the supply chain such as fluctua‑
tions in demand and supply. To make members more cooperative, promote 
mutual learning and understanding, and drive an evolutionary process, col‑
laboration is a significant criterion. There are some key ICTs through this 
purpose including cloud computing, AI, and robotics (Lee & Lee, 2015; 
Zhong & Nof, 2015).
11.3.2.2 Customization
The pivotal driver of competitiveness is considered as customization, 
which is a fundamental goal. Since the 20th century, to meet customer 
demand to remain competitive, supply chains have been striving to increase 
Figure 11.1 Significant attributes of SCSM.Harnessing the power of Industry 4.0 173
profitability with lower costs. In the current landscape, there is more diver‑
sity in customers, commodities have shorter production cycles, and produc‑
tion systems have become more flexible. Advanced manufacturing (AM) 
technologies such as 3D printing enable manufacturers to produce more 
customized products with reduced lead times and affordable costs. AM 
with 3D printer for production, AM as a complementary tool for sale, and 
all technologies of connection and collaboration are key ICTs in customiza‑
tion (Gaub, 2016; Parker, 2016).
11.3.2.3 Exchanging value by IT infrastructures
There are three parallel flows in the supply chain service flow, information 
flow, and financial flow. Suppliers can use comprehensive technology stacks 
(software, hardware, and infrastructure) to facilitate the exchange of value 
with other supply chain participants (Mahmoudi et al., 2022).
11.3.2.4 Virtualization and dematerialization
Technological innovations have the potential to replace physical goods and 
services with digital equivalents. This shift toward dematerialization results 
in remote service delivery, resource‑saving, and reduced reliance on physi‑
cal resources. Suppliers leverage technological platforms for minimizing 
unnecessary travel and face‑to‑face meetings (Al Humdan et al., 2020).
11.3.2.5 Automizing the supply chain
To enhance the value proposition in a real‑time and cost‑effective manner 
a range of technologies such as computing, physical, and digital ones (i.e., 
IoT, AI, and robotics), this criterion is applied. Suppliers can benefit from 
self‑executing contracts, automated processes and operations, and intelli‑
gent information systems by using these technologies. There are some visible 
enhancements in information transparency, immutability, reliability, and 
traceable data for real‑time SCM by using these technologies (Büyüközkan 
& Göçer, 2018).
11.3.2.6 Connection
There is a link among all members and components within a supply chain, 
whether through wired or wireless connections, in information and com‑
munication networks. A supply chain network is enabled by this connection 
to share and transmit essential information from a real‑time base; accord‑
ingly, it may transform into an intelligent, multi‑functional, informative, 
and shareable resource. An SCSM can become an efficient problem solver 
with comprehensive connectivity, which can access all necessary resources 
and information. There is a disability to share information, when there is 174 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
no connection among components, which leads to a decline in operational 
efficiency. It is the connection that makes SCSM different from the conven‑
tional supply chain. Key ICTs that facilitate this connectivity are IoT, CPS, 
cloud computing, big data analytics, and sensors (Miorandi et al., 2012; 
Oh & Jeong, 2019).
11.3.3 Connection of SCSM and localization
Scholars generally concur that reshoring is more than just the relocation 
of operations, it is a reconfiguration (Mugurusi & de Boer, 2014). These 
comprehensive changes encompass critical resource transformation from 
offshoring to reshoring, the acquisition of new resources, the redesigning 
of the supply chain, the changing of production processes, and ensuring 
change in the degree of control. The complexity of reshoring decisions 
has risen in required adjustments to the process. As new technologies are 
introduced at a lightning‑fast pace, they have opened up a range of new 
opportunities to tackle some challenges tied to high‑cost countries’ reloca‑
tion (Hofmann & Rüsch, 2017). The increased maturity of ICT and cost 
reduction of hardware and software have contributed to a rapid pace in 
design and manufacturing capabilities enabled by these technologies. In 
Figure 11.2, three significant factors elaborated upon later for considering 
reshoring strategies in SCSM are illustrated.
11.3.3.1 Flexibility‑oriented localization
Some firms choose to relocate their operations to high‑cost countries not 
just because of the diminishing cost advantages but of their motivation to 
Figure 11.2 Orientations to connect SCSM and localization.Harnessing the power of Industry 4.0 175
increase demand customization and make flexible production (Cachon & 
Terwiesch, 2012; De Backer et al., 2018). However, the greater the pro‑
duction variety, the higher the logistics costs, as production units have to 
deliver each product in smaller batches and retain extra inventory to cope 
with unpredictable variations in customer demand. To tackle these chal‑
lenges, it is important to reduce the costs associated with flexible produc‑
tion (Lu, 2017). To make variety affordable, robotics can play a beneficial 
role in localization initiatives with flexibility‑oriented strategies. There are 
other technologies, like 3D printing, that are reshaping the business mod‑
els of global logistics companies. They are turning them into collaborators 
with their key customers, enabling customization at the point of delivery. 
The following case serves as an example to show the advantages of reshor‑
ing and automation for a flexibility‑oriented.
11.3.3.2 Cost‑oriented localization
Over the past three decades, companies have offshored their production, 
often alongside outsourcing, to benefit economies of scale and lower labor 
expenses. However, several factors have eroded the benefits of producing 
in such countries, for instance, escalating transportation and inventory 
costs, declining energy costs, and concerns regarding product quality (Tate, 
2014). In this light, firms that choose to localize their operations may find 
the new generation of automated and digital technologies act as “equal‑
izers” for location costs. These technologies can return manufacturing to 
high‑cost countries both feasible and sustainable in the medium‑long term. 
This goal can be achieved by reducing the dependence on labor, improving 
productivity, and decreasing scraps (Bals et al., 2016). By considering the 
following statements, it is obvious that robotics is a necessary condition for 
reshoring companies that focus on the costs.
11.3.3.3 Quality‑oriented localization
This criterion is linked to product upgrading, which boosts the overall 
knowledge and value added to their operations when firms move toward 
more sophisticated product lines (Humphrey & Schmitz, 2002). Product 
upgrading in addition to increased value‑added operations indicates a 
greater likelihood of integration, such as R&D and marketing. Therefore, 
this requires cross‑functional information sharing and collaboration. In 
such cases, localization can represent a rational solution to the intercon‑
nectedness of development and production systems and the interdependence 
between buyers and suppliers in new product development (Ketokivi et al., 
2017). These companies may not achieve primary benefits from robotics 
but rather from adopting technologies like 3D printing or CPS connecting 
production and development.176 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
11.4 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In conclusion, this chapter has delved into the intricate combination of 
SCSM and localization. The importance of these factors in responding to 
disruptions and enhancing the overall efficiency of manufacturing systems 
is illustrated. One of the pivotal components in Industry 4.0 is the SM. 
The primary aim of SM was to enhance manufacturing efficiency and sus‑
tainability by integrating low‑cost sensors and digitizing production pro‑
cesses. SM makes manufacturing systems more efficient and sustainable 
by integrating cost‑effective sensors and digitalizing production processes. 
Nonetheless, some challenges such as complexity and vulnerability in SM 
systems make them susceptible to operational disruptions. Thus, the neces‑
sity of creative solutions in SM is obvious. On the contrary, some reasons 
such as the COVID‑19 pandemic and geopolitical tensions have caused 
global supply chains to various risks; accordingly, reshoring strategies can 
be considered as a beneficial solution to mitigate supply chain risks. This 
shift toward reshoring shows the trend of restructuring procedures, which 
is guided by technological advancements. Also, the attributes of reshor‑
ing and their alignment with the goals of SCSM are underscored in this 
chapter. The involvement of localization is more than physical relocation; 
it encompasses collaboration, customization, value exchange through IT, 
virtualization, and dematerialization. The various scenarios showed the 
synergy between SM, SC, and localization. In this case, flexibility‑oriented 
localization focuses on customer demand diversity and supply chain flex‑
ibility through technologies like robotics and 3D printing. To make reshor‑
ing finance viable and offset high labor costs the cost‑oriented localization 
leverages automation and digital technologies. Finally, product upgrading 
and cross‑functional collaboration through technological usage such as 3D 
printing and cyber‑physical systems are presented in quality‑oriented local‑
ization. Nowadays, rapid technological advancement can be a promising 
path to integrate SM, SC, and localization. Manufacturers and stakehold‑
ers can enable their companies to respond more effectively to disruptions 
and enhance their production flexibility by applying this point of view. Due 
to the continuous Fourth Industrial Revolution, understanding and har‑
nessing the potential of these synergies can be fruitful for the future.
REFERENCES
Abdel‑Basset, M., & Shawky, L. A. (2019). Flower pollination algorithm: a compre‑
hensive review. Artificial Intelligence Review, 52(4), 2533–2557.
Al Humdan, E., Shi, Y., Behnia, M., & Najmaei, A. (2020). Supply chain agility: 
a systematic review of definitions, enablers, and performance implications. 
International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management, 50(2), 
287–312.Harnessing the power of Industry 4.0 177
Bals, L., Kirchoff, J. F., & Foerstl, K. (2016). Exploring the reshoring and insourcing 
decision making process: toward an agenda for future research. Operations 
Management Research, 9, 102–116.
Baraldi, E., Ciabuschi, F., & Fratocchi, L. (2022). The pros and cons of reshoring 
to address the problems of shortages in global pharmaceutical value chains: 
the case of antibiotics. Journal of Global Operations and Strategic Sourcing
(ahead‑of‑print).
Büyüközkan, G., & Göçer, F. (2018). Digital supply chain: literature review and a 
proposed framework for future research. Computers in Industry, 97, 157–177.
Cachon, G., & Terwiesch, C. (2012). EBOOK: Matching Supply with Demand: An 
Introduction to Operations Management. McGraw Hill.
Calignano, F., & Mercurio, V. (2023). An overview of the impact of additive manu‑
facturing on supply chain, reshoring, and sustainability. Cleaner Logistics and 
Supply Chain, 7, 100103.
Cardoso, S. R., Barbosa‑Póvoa, A. P., Relvas, S., & Novais, A. Q. (2015). Resilience 
metrics in the assessment of complex supply‑chains performance operating 
under demand uncertainty. Omega, 56, 53–73.
Carvalho, N., Chaim, O., Cazarini, E., & Gerolamo, M. (2018). Manufacturing in 
the fourth industrial revolution: a positive prospect in sustainable manufactur‑
ing. Procedia Manufacturing, 21, 671–678.
Chen, C. (2016). Grand Challenges in Measuring and Characterizing Scholarly 
Impact, Vol. 1, pp. 4. Frontiers Media SA.
Chen, H., Hsu, C.‑W., Shih, Y.‑Y., & Caskey, D. A. (2022). The reshoring decision 
under uncertainty in the post‑COVID‑19 era. Journal of Business & Industrial 
Marketing, 37(10), 2064–2074.
Choi, T.‑M., Wen, X., Sun, X., & Chung, S.‑H. (2019). The mean‑variance approach 
for global supply chain risk analysis with air logistics in the blockchain tech‑
nology era. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation 
Review, 127, 178–191.
Choudhary, N. A., Ramkumar, M., Schoenherr, T., Rana, N. P., & Dwivedi, Y. K. 
(2023). Does reshoring affect the resilience and sustainability of supply chain 
networks? The cases of Apple and Jaguar Land Rover. British Journal of 
Management, 34(3), 1138–1156.
Christopher, M. (2022). Logistics and Supply Chain Management. Pearson, London, 
UKk.
Cioffi, R., Travaglioni, M., Piscitelli, G., Petrillo, A., & De Felice, F. (2020). Artificial 
intelligence and machine learning applications in smart production: progress, 
trends, and directions. Sustainability, 12(2), 492.
Cunha, L., Ceryno, P., & Leiras, A. (2019). Social supply chain risk management: a 
taxonomy, a framework and a research agenda. Journal of Cleaner Production, 
220, 1101–1110.
Da Xu, L. (2014). Enterprise Integration and Information Architecture: A Systems 
Perspective on Industrial Information Integration. CRC Press.
De Backer, K., DeStefano, T., Menon, C., & Suh, J. R. (2018). Industrial robotics and 
the global organisation of production.178 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
Fernández‑Miguel, A., Riccardi, M. P., Veglio, V., García‑Muiña, F. E., Fernández 
del Hoyo, A. P., & Settembre‑Blundo, D. (2022). Disruption in resource‑inten‑
sive supply chains: reshoring and nearshoring as strategies to enable them to 
become more resilient and sustainable. Sustainability, 14(17), 10909.
Gaub, H. (2016). Customization of mass‑produced parts by combining injection 
molding and additive manufacturing with Industry 4.0 technologies. Reinforced 
Plastics, 60(6), 401–404.
Hofmann, E., & Rüsch, M. (2017). Industry 4.0 and the current status as well as 
future prospects on logistics. Computers in Industry, 89, 23–34.
Humphrey, J., & Schmitz, H. (2002). How does insertion in global value chains 
affect upgrading in industrial clusters? Regional Studies, 36(9), 1017–1027.
Karatzas, A., Ancarani, A., Fratocchi, L., Di Stefano, C., & Godsell, J. (2022). When 
does the manufacturing reshoring strategy create value? Journal of Purchasing
and Supply Management, 28(3), 100771.
Ketokivi, M., Turkulainen, V., Seppälä, T., Rouvinen, P., & Ali‑Yrkkö, J. (2017). Why 
locate manufacturing in a high‑cost country? A case study of 35 production 
location decisions. Journal of Operations Management, 49, 20–30.
Lee, I., & Lee, K. (2015).The Internet of Things (IoT): applications, investments, and 
challenges for enterprises. Business Horizons, 58(4), 431–440.
Lu, Y. (2017). Industry 4.0: a survey on technologies, applications and open research 
issues. Journal of Industrial Information Integration, 6, 1–10.
Machado, C. G., Winroth, M. P., & Ribeiro da Silva, E. H. D. (2020). Sustainable 
manufacturing in Industry 4.0: an emerging research agenda. International 
Journal of Production Research, 58(5), 1462–1484.
Mahmoudi, A., Sadeghi, M., & Deng, X. (2022). Performance measurement of con‑
struction suppliers under localization, agility, and digitalization criteria: fuzzy 
ordinal priority approach. Environment, Development and Sustainability, 
1–26.
Manning, S. (2014). Mitigate, tolerate or relocate? Offshoring challenges, strate‑
gic imperatives and resource constraints. Journal of World Business, 49(4), 
522–535.
Miorandi, D., Sicari, S., De Pellegrini, F., & Chlamtac, I. (2012). Internet of things: 
vision, applications and research challenges. Ad Hoc Networks, 10(7), 
1497–1516.
Modibbo, U. M., Gupta, N., Chatterjee, P., & Ali, I. (2022). A systematic review on 
the emergence and applications of Industry 4.0. In Computational Modelling 
in Industry 4.0: A Sustainable Resource Management Perspective, pp. 1–9.
Morales Contreras, M. F., Fratocchi, L., Leporati, M., & Alonso Monge, J. (2022). 
Reshoring decisions and redesigning the supply chain. The case study of a bike 
manufacturer.
Moser, H. (2019). Reshoring was at record levels in 2018. Is it enough? Industry 
Week, 8.
Mugurusi, G., & de Boer, L. (2014). Conceptualising the production offshoring 
organisation using the viable systems model (VSM). Strategic Outsourcing: An 
International Journal, 7(3), 275–298.
Nandi, S., Sarkis, J., Hervani, A. A., & Helms, M. M. (2021). Redesigning supply 
chains using blockchain‑enabled circular economy and COVID‑19 experiences. 
Sustainable Production and Consumption, 27, 10–22.Harnessing the power of Industry 4.0 179
Nicolae, E. E., & Nicolae, M. (n.d.). The Asian world–are we ready for it? In Time 
of Changes: Digitalization from Economic and Cultural Perspectives, p. 137.
Oh, J., & Jeong, B. (2019). Tactical supply planning in smart manufacturing supply 
chain. Robotics and Computer‑Integrated Manufacturing, 55, 217–233.
Palmié, M., Miehé, L., Oghazi, P., Parida, V., & Wincent, J. (2022). The evolution of 
the digital service ecosystem and digital business model innovation in retail: 
the emergence of meta‑ecosystems and the value of physical interactions. 
Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 177, 121496.
Parker, C. J. (2016). Human acceptance of 3D printing in fashion paradox: is mass 
customization a bridge too far? WIT Transactions on Engineering Sciences, 
113, 373–380.
Pegoraro, D., De Propris, L., & Chidlow, A. (2022). Regional factors enabling manu‑
facturing reshoring strategies: a case study perspective. Journal of International 
Business Policy, 5(1), 112–133.
Rad, F. F., Oghazi, P., Palmié, M., Chirumalla, K., Pashkevich, N., Patel, P. C., & 
Sattari, S. (2022). Industry 4.0 and supply chain performance: a systematic lit‑
erature review of the benefits, challenges, and critical success factors of 11 core 
technologies. Industrial Marketing Management, 105, 268–293.
Reza‐Gharehbagh, R., Hafezalkotob, A., Asian, S., Makui, A., & Zhang, A. N. 
(2020). Peer‐to‐peer financing choice of SME entrepreneurs in the re‐emer‑
gence of supply chain localization. International Transactions in Operational 
Research, 27(5), 2534–2558.
Sadeghi, M., Mahmoudi, A., & Deng, X. (2022). Blockchain technology in con‑
struction organizations: risk assessment using trapezoidal fuzzy ordinal pri‑
ority approach. Engineering, Construction and Architectural Management
(ahead‑of‑print).
Sakthivel, A. R., Kandasamy, J., & Davim, J. P. (2021). Managing Supply Chain Risk 
and Disruptions: Post COVID‑19. Springer.
Sawik, T. (2023). Reshore or not reshore: a stochastic programming approach to 
supply chain optimization. Omega, 118, 102863.
Schmitt, R., Permin, E., Kerkhoff, J., Plutz, M., & Böckmann, M. G. (2017). 
Enhancing resiliency in production facilities through cyber physical systems. 
In Industrial Internet of Things: Cybermanufacturing Systems, pp. 287–313.
Seman, N. A. A., Govindan, K., Mardani, A., Zakuan, N., Saman, M. Z. M., Hooker, 
R. E., & Ozkul, S. (2019). The mediating effect of green innovation on the 
relationship between green supply chain management and environmental per‑
formance. Journal of Cleaner Production, 229, 115–127.
Sheth, A., & Kusiak, A. (2022). Resiliency of smart manufacturing enterprises via 
information integration. Journal of Industrial Information Integration, 28, 
100370.
Sillanpaa, M., & Ncibi, C. (2019). The Circular Economy: Case Studies about the 
Transition from the Linear Economy. Academic Press.
Tang, C. S. (2006). Perspectives in supply chain risk management. International 
Journal of Production Economics, 103(2), 451–488.
Tao, F., Qi, Q., Wang, L., & Nee, A. (2019). Digital twins and cyber–physical systems 
toward smart manufacturing and industry 4.0: correlation and comparison. 
Engineering, 5(4), 653–661.180 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
Tate, W. L. (2014). Offshoring and reshoring: US insights and research challenges. 
Journal of Purchasing and Supply Management, 20(1), 66–68.
Vasantha, S. (2023). Green supply chain management methods to enhance sustain‑
able supply chain‑a literature review. Journal of Pharmaceutical Negative 
Results, 14(3).
Zhong, H., & Nof, S. Y. (2015). The dynamic lines of collaboration model: collab‑
orative disruption response in cyber–physical systems. Computers & Industrial 
Engineering, 87, 370–382.DOI: 10.1201/9781003503057-12 181
Chapter 12
Digital revolution in cold 
supply chain management 
related to the food industry
Alireza Abbaszadeh Molaei, 
Fariba Goodarzian, and Sadaf Farboodi
12.1 INTRODUCTION
Today, digital technologies have caused a change in people’s interac‑
tions with their surroundings. Technological novelties such as smart‑
watches, smartphones, personal computers, advanced televisions, drones, 
and self‑driving cars have changed the way information is obtained and 
exchanged in today’s societies. Currently, 76% of the world’s population 
has Internet access, and half of them regularly use social media. By 2020, 
it is anticipated that 37% of all created data will be stored on the cloud 
(Büyüközkan & Göçer, 2018). It is now simpler to access, create, and save 
information thanks to the development of information and communica‑
tion technology/technologies. Additionally, it makes simpler connections 
between electronic systems and people (Ibem & Laryea, 2014). Through 
the development of new features, information and communication tech‑
nologies have significantly advanced over the previous decade (Bharadwaj 
et al., 2013). In many aspects of daily life, digitalization is crucial. In the 
industrial setting, an increasing number of businesses are likewise working 
to digitize their processes by integrating technology into business processes 
(Roth, 2016). Information and communication technology tools are often 
called digital technologies and are shaping the way people live, work, and 
communicate, breaking the barriers of space and time. Some organizations 
have successfully perfected these digital technologies in the past decade, 
leading to the emergence of companies such as Amazon, Google, Apple, 
and Netflix (McDonald & Rowsell‑Jones, 2012). The term “Industry 4.0” 
or the “Fourth Industrial Revolution” was coined around ten years ago to 
describe a picture of the future’s factories as being fully autonomous, with 
digitalized processes, data‑driven smart applications, and seamlessly inte‑
grated supply chains (Khan et al., 2022). Today, many companies and orga‑
nizations are under pressure to respond to the needs of customers and to 
face competitive pressure, and they need to change. To achieve this change, 
the majority of these businesses and companies engage in what is known as 
a “digital transformation initiative” (McAffee et al., 2011; Bharadwaj et al., 
2013). Undoubtedly, these new technologies are effective in every industry, 182 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
including logistics services and supply chains (Büyüközkan & Göçer, 2018). 
While in the past, the majority of operational processes in supply chains 
used to be carried out independently within traditional organizational 
structures, but due to technological advancements, this is no longer the 
case for the majority of these operations. As a result, supply chain manage‑
ment is similar to other industries in that it can benefit from the profound 
effects of digital transformation. As a result, the impact of digital technol‑
ogy will significantly alter how materials, information, and financial flows 
are managed in an integrated business network. Digital transformation can 
be attributed to a number of cutting‑edge technology ideas, including cloud 
computing, cyber‑physical systems, and artificial intelligence (Schlüter & 
Hetterscheid, 2017). In one definition, supply chains are a series of inter‑
connected activities that include the planning, coordination, and control 
of materials, products, and services throughout the supply chain network. 
Due to technological developments, many of these organizational struc‑
tures are no longer self‑sufficient (Büyüközkan & Göçer, 2018). The digital 
supply chain coordinates the activities of supply chain partners. A digital 
supply chain is composed of subsystems such as hardware, software, and 
communication networks that support interactions among globally distrib‑
uted organizations (Bhargava et al., 2013). Digital technologies can be used 
in processes to the advantage of businesses and organizations. Using digital 
options provides companies with a competitive edge.
12.2 DIGITAL SUPPLY CHAIN
The digital supply chain is an interconnected set of activities in the supply 
chain that are performed with new technologies (Nasiri et  al., 2020). A 
business‑oriented method for utilizing cutting‑edge information technology 
and establishing a competitive edge to produce and maintain outstanding 
performance is digital supply chain management (Uhl & Gollenia, 2014). 
A lot has changed and evolved in recent years as a result of the idea of 
“digitalization,” including aspects of personal life, health, communication, 
company management, and public services. A specialized research topic 
called “digital transformation” that focuses on analyzing the function of 
digital technologies in enterprises and organizations has emerged as a result 
of the significance of using digital technology as a transformative instru‑
ment. This growth has also had an impact on the supply chain, a network 
of several companies and agents, and supply chain management (SCM) has 
incorporated many distinctive digital tools that make many changes and 
improvements to the traditional supply chain. The creation is the outcome 
of the efficient application of digital technology in SCM (Farajpour et al., 
2022). The concept of supply chain is developing and becoming an innova‑
tion. The traditional supply chain no longer simply moves items from one Digital revolution in cold supply chain management 183
location to another. Today’s supply chains require a large number of com‑
plex tasks, all of which require coordination and tracking (Büyüközkan & 
Göçer, 2018; Ahmadini et al., 2021). Many globally successful companies 
and businesses today have a competitive advantage in their supply chains. In 
fact, from some perspectives, the primary rivalry between companies might 
be referred to as the rivalry between their supply chains. In Apple’s iPad 
supply chain, design and branding are done in the United States, assembly 
is done in another country, semiconductor components are made in three 
countries, and monitors are imported from other countries (Xu, 2014). 
Therefore, digitalization enables the development of the next generation of 
flexible and effective supply networks. Since digital solutions are changing 
traditional supply chains, we can imagine various differences between digi‑
tal supply chains and traditional supply chains, some of which distinguish 
traditional supply chains and digital supply chains (Büyüközkan & Göçer, 
2018). Eleven of these main features with their characteristics that the goal 
of the digital supply chain is to achieve them are shown in Table 12.1.
Table 12.1 Features of the digital supply chain
Feature Characteristics
Proactive The digital supply chain imposes preventive actions to 
prevent possible disruptions (Büyüközkan & Göçer, 2018)
Real-time inventory Controlling raw material inventories at the same time and 
making sure there are enough raw materials to meet 
consumers’ demand but not too many (Büyüközkan & 
Göçer, 2018; Hanifan et al., 2014)
Speed Rapidly reacting to demand, the digital supply chain enables 
quick response to demand and expedites delivery 
(Büyüközkan & Göçer, 2018; Raj & Sharma, 2014)
Intelligent Better decision-making, automated implementation, and 
operational innovation are made possible by a digital supply 
chain with characteristics generated from technology 
enablers (Bechtold et al., 2014; Hanifan et al., 2014)
Flexibility The digital supply chain can monitor circumstances and take 
appropriate action almost immediately using collected and 
modeled information thanks to its operational agility and 
ease of adaption (Büyüközkan & Göçer, 2018; Hanifan et al., 
2014)
Global connectivity The digital supply chain makes it possible to create efficient 
global hubs that can locally supply goods and services rather 
than shipping them across the globe for a sole order 
(Hanifan et al., 2014)
Innovative Technological advances are used by digital supply chains to 
improve operations and remain competitive, which require 
constant adjustments and the incorporation of new 
technology (Büyüközkan & Göçer, 2018)
(Continued)184 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
12.3 FOOD COLD SUPPLY CHAINS
The food supply chain is a network that makes it possible to transmit food 
items from the producer to pre‑ and post‑production activities and then to 
the ultimate consumer while taking into account timing and quality consid‑
erations. This interconnected chain is crucial because poor product quality 
or shipping delays result in the products’ expiration (Govindan, 2018). The 
food supply chain is frequently more complicated and challenging to man‑
age than other supply chain items since the products are perishable and 
have a limited shelf life (Tamplin, 2018). The management of the entire 
food supply chain, including retailers, customers, suppliers, distributors, 
and manufacturers, who collaborate to deliver a high‑quality, tempera‑
ture‑sensitive, and dynamic product, is known as food supply chain man‑
agement (Bourlakis & Weightman, 2004). This industry has evolved into a 
difficult one from the perspective of supply chain management, necessitat‑
ing more sophisticated control systems in the field of perishable products, 
strict safety requirements, and food sustainability.
Cold supply chain management has been one of the supply chain manage‑
ment approaches that has garnered a lot of attention recently (Mercier et al., 
2017). In recent years, due to people’s increasing desire for a high stan‑
dard of living, cold supply chains for food preservation have attracted more 
attention. These chains are composed of perishable goods with distinctive 
shapes that require special conditions and facilities for distribution, produc‑
tion, sale, and storage. Also, the importance of these cold supply chains has 
caused them to receive a lot of attention in academia and industry (Mercier 
Table 12.1 (Continued) Features of the digital supply chain
Feature Characteristics
Scalability The supply chain’s digitization makes it easier to scale supply 
chains up or down. This makes procedures more efficient 
and repeatable and makes it simpler to spot errors and 
anomalies (Bechtold et al., 2014)
Cost-effective Costs are reduced by digital technology practically in every 
area. The use of technology enablers and excellent supply 
chain management make the digital supply chain 
cost-effective for businesses (Büyüközkan & Göçer, 2018)
Eco-friendly The digital supply chain can extend the eco-friendly 
capabilities of traditional supply chains and can help reduce 
potential disruptions from negative news, legislation, or 
public awareness (Büyüközkan & Göçer, 2018)
Transparency By anticipating and modeling the network, generating what-if 
scenarios, and altering the chain in real time based on 
changing circumstances, this capability helps businesses to 
have transparency and be ready for disruptions (Büyüközkan 
& Göçer, 2018)Digital revolution in cold supply chain management 185
et al., 2017). The term “food cold supply chains” refers to a group of strat‑
egies for integrating the participants in the supply chain whose goal is to 
manufacture and distribute frozen and cold food products (Tassou et al., 
2015). The management of items like blood transfusions, pharmaceuticals, 
dairy products, vegetables, food, meat, fruit, flowers, and other perishable 
things that need to be provided every day and at a specific time is known as 
cold chain management (Montanari, 2008). Cold chains are primarily used 
to manage and transport two types of products, food and medical. Fresh 
protein materials and meat, raw fruits and vegetables, frozen food, blood, 
vaccines, and medicines are sensitive to temperature changes. All of these 
depend on a dense global network of sourcing, warehousing, and transpor‑
tation (Bozorgi et al., 2014). It is crucial to use a cold chain to ensure food 
safety and decrease food waste (Zhao et al., 2018). Transportation, espe‑
cially refrigerated transportation, which is heavily reliant on the regulation 
of food transportation conditions and environmental factors, is one of the 
biggest issues facing the food industry (Filina‑Dawidowicz & Stankiewicz, 
2020). Therefore, in order to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of 
cold chain logistics, this industry needs transportation systems that provide 
real‑time monitoring of product status. These systems must also maintain 
cargo safety, reduce transportation time and cost, prevent product quality 
contamination, and minimize product waste.
12.4 INDUSTRY 4.0
The economy and business environment of human cultures have changed 
as a result of industrial revolutions. With the help of the steam engine, the 
First Industrial Revolution reshaped the agricultural economy and primar‑
ily changed rural, agricultural societies into urban, industrial societies. The 
Second Industrial Revolution was assisted by the development of power 
plants and combustion engines, while the Third Industrial Revolution was 
characterized by the automation of production due to advancements in elec‑
tronics and technology. The Fourth Industrial Revolution, often known as 
the digital revolution, portrays a future with traits like robotic technol‑
ogy, artificial intelligence, pervasiveness, the Internet of Things, robotic 
technology, and sensors (Jideani et al., 2020; Strozzi et al., 2017; Da Xu, 
2020; Modibbo et al., 2022). The Fourth Industrial Revolution, the cre‑
ation of cyber‑physical systems, and autonomous systems have all been 
together referred to as Industry 4.0. The development of several significant 
digital technologies is one of Industry 4.0’s primary drivers. Among these 
cutting‑edge innovations are blockchain, 3D printing and scanning, the 
Internet of Things, sophisticated robotics, artificial intelligence, big data 
analytics, and virtual reality/augmented reality (Bayramova et  al., 2021; 
Patterson et al., 2003). The term “digital supply chain” is frequently used to 186 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
describe how to create, deploy, and integrate cutting‑edge digital technolo‑
gies in supply chain processes (such as the Internet of Things, blockchain, 
and machine learning). Actually, that is merely supply chain management 
with additional layers of digital technologies. These tools aid in demand 
analysis, demand forecasting, and customization optimization. They also 
speed up assembly in the supply chain with automated completion solu‑
tions. The efficient implementation of the digital supply chain is crucial for 
businesses and companies. It is crucial for businesses and organizations to 
integrate the digital supply chain correctly. The best technologies help firms 
become robust to disruptions and changes in supply chains and enable them 
to be responsive, compatible, and flexible to various market situations. 
This intelligent supply chain that uses revolutionary technologies such as 
the Internet of Things and artificial intelligence is known as Supply Chain 
4.0 (Nozari et al., 2021). Supply Chain 4.0 is defined as a set of continu‑
ous activities related to the planning, coordination, and control of services 
and products between suppliers and consumers. It seeks to develop new 
techniques for enhancing value for suppliers and consumers while boosting 
income through the integration and coordination of activities and processes 
(Rasool et al., 2022). Most organizational operations must be digitalized in 
order for Industry 4.0 to be implemented. Through digitization, the issue of 
chain disintegration is resolved, and the chain transforms into a fully inte‑
grated ecosystem that is transparent to all parties involved (Mastos et al., 
2021; Queiroz et al., 2021). Supply chains encounter a number of difficul‑
ties, including cost, complexity, fragility, and uncertainty. To solve these 
problems, supply chains must be intelligent and outfitted with a technol‑
ogy foundation that enables the incorporation of information and physi‑
cal flows into supply chain operations. Due to these situations, the supply 
chain is going through a digital transition known as Industry 4.0, which 
is brought on by the development of cutting‑edge information and digital 
technology (Abdel‑Basset et al., 2018; Ghobakhloo, 2020; Gilchrist, 2016). 
The improvement of the consumer experience during the supply chain pro‑
cess through e‑commerce, digital marketing, social media, etc., is known as 
the “digital supply chain.” Because of this, businesses have a critical need 
for digital supply chains (Lee et al., 2022). Based on the definitions of the 
intelligent supply chain, the six characteristics of a digital supply chain due 
to the technologies enabled by the fourth industrial generation presented by 
Wu et al. (2016) are shown in Figure 12.1.
12.5 INTERNET OF THINGS
One of the Internet of Things’ most notable uses is in the perishable food 
supply chain (Tsang et  al., 2018). Food products that spoil quickly call 
for a sophisticated supply chain management strategy, namely cold chain Digital revolution in cold supply chain management 187
management. Preserving the quality of refrigerated food during cold tran‑
sit requires effective monitoring of the cold chain’s environmental factors, 
including humidity, temperature, and light, which helps to advance business 
interests and ensure individual health (Luo et al., 2016). Major food compa‑
nies with cold supply chains around the world are looking for real‑time cold 
chain monitoring solutions to reduce the risk of mismanagement and cold 
chain losses; this is where the Internet of Things, with the aid of sensors, 
artificial intelligence, machine learning, and analysis, outperforms other 
technologies in this space. Companies involved in the food industry that 
have a cold chain should consider the Internet of Things solution as a way 
to increase customer happiness, decrease costs, minimize corruption, speed 
up the time to market, and improve supply chain performance (Luo et al., 
2016; Pang et al., 2015). The actual value of the Internet of Things is in its 
ability to fundamentally alter how businesses operate (Zhao et al., 2015).
Figure 12.1 Characteristics of smart Supply Chain 4.0.188 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
The Internet of Things facilitates communication between people and 
objects at anytime, anywhere, and with anything or anybody with the aid 
of technologies including embedded devices, sensors, communication net‑
works, and Internet protocols. The Internet of Things allows physical items 
to communicate with one another, share information, and make decisions 
in order to hear, see, think, and act (Al‑Fuqaha et al., 2015). The Internet 
of Things technology has been around for a few years now and has reached 
a mature stage. More food firms are prepared to use such technologies 
now that the costs associated with digitizing supply chains have decreased 
significantly due to advancements in the Internet of Things technologies. 
Taking the lead in using this technology will allow you to benefit in the long 
run and earn a sizable market share before everyone else does. Adopting 
the Internet of Things technologies throughout all facets of food supply 
chains would help to improve and raise the supply chain’s sustainability. 
The Internet of Things would be able to improve production, detect and 
avert emerging issues, and automate several processes within food supply 
chains thanks to advantages including increased transparency, monitoring, 
and control over diverse food operational activities (Jagtap et al., 2021).
12.6 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS
This chapter discussed how important digital technology is to the food cold 
supply chains. The development of digital technologies has made the food 
cold chain an intelligent sector. The use of these technologies can signifi‑
cantly reduce food waste, improve product quality and safety, and enhance 
the consumer experience. With the application of digital technologies, the 
food cold supply chains, which involves the manufacturing, delivery, and 
storage of food at low temperatures, has experienced a significant revolu‑
tion. The Internet of Things, digitization, and other related technologies, 
as well as Industry 4.0, all contribute significantly to raising the effective‑
ness and caliber of this supply chain. The reduction of transportation lags 
and delays is one of the key effects of digital technologies on the food cold 
supply chains. It is feasible to trace shipments and their storage conditions 
precisely and in real time by using sensors and other network‑connected 
equipment. This data is utilized to enhance transportation planning speed 
and accuracy, which reduces food loss and related expenses. Digital tech‑
nology is also commonly used in the processes of preserving and storing 
cold food. Systems that automatically and intelligently regulate tempera‑
ture, humidity, and other environmental factors continuously monitor the 
circumstances and, if necessary, make adjustments. As a result, food is kept 
safe and in good condition while being stored. Additionally, the improve‑
ment of trust and openness in the food cold supply chains is significantly 
facilitated by digital technologies. The origin of food, the manufacturing Digital revolution in cold supply chain management 189
process, the route of transit, and the conditions of storage may all be accu‑
rately and transparently tracked using blockchain technology. All par‑
ties, from producers to consumers, are given access to this trustworthy 
information, increasing confidence and lowering fraud and falsification. 
Therefore, the development and better utilization of digital technologies, 
such as Industry 4.0, the Internet of Things, and digitization, play a very 
important role in improving the food cold supply chains. They reduce food 
waste, improve transportation efficiency and quality, increase transparency 
and reliability, and maintain food quality during storage. Also, it can be 
claimed that digital technologies have a big impact on the food cold chain, 
improving product quality and safety, lowering costs, boosting profitabil‑
ity, and enhancing customer experience. Therefore, it is crucial to apply 
these technologies in the food cold chain. The food cold supply chains is 
generally improved by digital transformation in terms of efficiency, error 
reduction, control and tracking, security, and process optimization. These 
innovations support businesses in overcoming the difficulties in the food 
cold supply chains and achieving improved planning and management. Like 
any other technology, the digital cold supply chain has obstacles to over‑
come and problems that could develop in the future. Data security, stan‑
dardization, coordination, sustainability and adaptability, communication 
and collaboration, and organizational culture transformation are some of 
the difficulties that the digital cold supply chain must overcome.
REFERENCES
Abdel‑Basset, M., Manogaran, G., & Mohamed, M. (2018). Internet of Things (IoT) 
and its impact on supply chain: A framework for building smart, secure and 
efficient systems. Future Generation Computer Systems, 86(9), 614–628.
Ahmadini, A. A. H., Modibbo, U. M., Shaikh, A. A., & Ali, I. (2021). Multi‑objective 
optimization modelling of sustainable green supply chain in inventory and pro‑
duction management. Alexandria Engineering Journal, 60(6), 5129–5146.
Al‑Fuqaha, A., Guizani, M., Mohammadi, M., Aledhari, M., & Ayyash, M. (2015). 
Internet of things: A survey on enabling technologies, protocols, and applica‑
tions. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 17(4), 2347–2376.
Bayramova, A., Edwards, D. J., & Roberts, C. (2021). The role of blockchain tech‑
nology in augmenting supply chain resilience to cybercrime. Buildings, 11(7), 
283.
Bechtold, J., Kern, A., Lauenstein, C., & Bernhofer, L. (2014). Industry 4.0‑the 
Capgemini consulting view. Capgemini Consulting, 31, 32–33.
Bharadwaj, A., El Sawy, O. A., Pavlou, P. A., & Venkatraman, N. V. (2013). Digital 
business strategy: Toward a next generation of insights. MIS Quarterly, 
471–482.
Bhargava, B., Ranchal, R., & Othmane, L. B. (2013). Secure information sharing in 
digital supply chains. 2013 3rd IEEE International Advance Computing Conference 
(IACC), pp. 1636–1640.190 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
Bourlakis, M., & Weightman, P. (2004). Introduction to the UK food supply chain. 
Food Supply Chain Management, 1–10.
Bozorgi, A., Pazour, J., & Nazzal, D. (2014). A new inventory model for cold 
items that considers costs and emissions. International Journal of Production 
Economics, 155, 114–125.
Büyüközkan, G., & Göçer, F. (2018). Digital supply chain: Literature review and a 
proposed framework for future research. Computers in Industry, 97, 157–177.
Da Xu, L. (2020). The contribution of systems science to Industry 4.0. Systems 
Research and Behavioral Science, 37(4), 618–631.
Farajpour, F., Hassanzadeh, A., Elahi, S., & Ghazanfari, M. (2022). Digital supply 
chain blueprint via a systematic literature review. Technological Forecasting 
and Social Change, 184, 121976.
Filina‑Dawidowicz, L., & Stankiewicz, S. (2020). Organization and implementa‑
tion of intermodal transport of perishable goods: Contemporary problems of 
forwarders. Sustainable Design and Manufacturing 2020: Proceedings of the 7th 
International Conference on Sustainable Design and Manufacturing (KES–SDM 
2020), pp. 543–553.
Ghobakhloo, M. (2020). Determinants of information and digital technology imple‑
mentation for smart manufacturing. International Journal of Production 
Research, 58(8), 2384–2405.
Gilchrist, A. (2016). Industry 4.0: The Industrial Internet of Things. Springer.
Govindan, K. (2018). Sustainable consumption and production in the food sup‑
ply chain: A conceptual framework. International Journal of Production 
Economics, 195, 419–431.
Hanifan, G., Sharma, A., & Newberry, C. (2014). The digital supply network. In A
New Paradigm for Supply Chain Management, Accenture Strategy.
Ibem, E. O., & Laryea, S. (2014). Survey of digital technologies in procurement of 
construction projects. Automation in Construction, 46, 11–21.
Jagtap, S., Duong, L., Trollman, H., Bader, F., Garcia‑Garcia, G., Skouteris, G., Li, 
J., Pathare, P., Martindale, W., & Swainson, M. (2021). IoT technologies in the 
food supply chain. In Food Technology Disruptions (pp. 175–211). Elsevier.
Jideani, A. I. O., Mutshinyani, A. P., Maluleke, N. P., Mafukata, Z. P., Sithole, M. 
V., Lidovho, M. U., Ramatsetse, E. K., & Matshisevhe, M. M. (2020). Impact 
of industrial revolutions on food machinery – An overview. Journal of Food 
Research, 9(5), 42–52.
Khan, M. D., Schaefer, D., & Milisavljevic‑Syed, J. (2022). Supply chain management 
4.0: Looking backward, looking forward. Procedia CIRP, 107, 9–14.
Lee, K., Azmi, N., Hanaysha, J., Alzoubi, H., & Alshurideh, M. (2022). The effect 
of digital supply chain on organizational performance: An empirical study 
in Malaysia manufacturing industry. Uncertain Supply Chain Management, 
10(2), 495–510.
Luo, H., Zhu, M., Ye, S., Hou, H., Chen, Y., & Bulysheva, L. (2016). An intelli‑
gent tracking system based on internet of things for the cold chain. Internet 
Research, 26(2), 435–445.
Mastos, T. D., Nizamis, A., Terzi, S., Gkortzis, D., Papadopoulos, A., Tsagkalidis, 
N., Ioannidis, D., Votis, K., & Tzovaras, D. (2021). Introducing an application 
of an industry 4.0 solution for circular supply chain management. Journal of 
Cleaner Production, 300, 126886.Digital revolution in cold supply chain management 191
McAffee, A., Ferraris, P., Bonnet, D., Calméjane, C., & Westerman, G. (2011). Digital 
transformation: A roadmap for billion‑Dollar organizations. MIT Sloan 
Management Review.
McDonald, M. P., & Rowsell‑Jones, A. (2012). The Digital Edge: Exploiting 
Information & Technology for Business Advantage. Gartner. Inc, Stamford.
Mercier, S., Villeneuve, S., Mondor, M., & Uysal, I. (2017). Time–temperature 
management along the food cold chain: A review of recent developments. 
Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety, 16(4), 647–667.
Modibbo, U. M., Gupta, N., Chatterjee, P., & Ali, I. (2022). A systematic review on 
the emergence and applications of Industry 4.0. In Computational Modelling 
in Industry 4.0: A Sustainable Resource Management Perspective (pp. 1–9).
Montanari, R. (2008). Cold chain tracking: A managerial perspective. Trends in 
Food Science & Technology, 19(8), 425–431.
Nasiri, M., Ukko, J., Saunila, M., & Rantala, T. (2020). Managing the digital supply 
chain: The role of smart technologies. Technovation, 96, 102121.
Nozari, H., Fallah, M., Kazemipoor, H., & Najafi, S. E. (2021). Big data analy‑
sis of IoT‑based supply chain management considering FMCG industries. 
Бизнес‑Информатика, 15(1 (eng)), 78–96.
Pang, Z., Chen, Q., Han, W., & Zheng, L. (2015). Value‑centric design of the inter‑
net‑of‑things solution for food supply chain: Value creation, sensor portfolio 
and information fusion. Information Systems Frontiers, 17, 289–319.
Patterson, K. A., Grimm, C. M., & Corsi, T. M. (2003). Adopting new technologies 
for supply chain management. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and
Transportation Review, 39(2), 95–121.
Queiroz, M. M., Pereira, S. C. F., Telles, R., & Machado, M. C. (2021). Industry 4.0 
and digital supply chain capabilities: A framework for understanding digitali‑
sation challenges and opportunities. Benchmarking: An International Journal, 
28(5), 1761–1782.
Raj, S., & Sharma, A. (2014). Supply chain management in the cloud. Accenture 
Global Management Consulting, 1–12.
Rasool, F., Greco, M., & Grimaldi, M. (2022). Digital supply chain performance 
metrics: A literature review. Measuring Business Excellence, 26(1), 23–38.
Roth, A. (2016). Industrie 4.0–Hype oder revolution? In Einführung Und Umsetzung 
von Industrie 4.0: Grundlagen, Vorgehensmodell Und Use Cases Aus Der 
Praxis (pp. 1–15).
Schlüter, F., & Hetterscheid, E. (2017). Supply chain process oriented technol‑
ogy‑framework for Industry 4.0. Digitalization in Supply Chain Management 
and Logistics: Smart and Digital Solutions for an Industry 4.0 Environment.
Proceedings of the Hamburg International Conference of Logistics (HICL), Vol. 23, 
pp. 275–299.
Strozzi, F., Colicchia, C., Creazza, A., & Noè, C. (2017). Literature review on the 
‘Smart Factory’ concept using bibliometric tools. International Journal of 
Production Research, 55(22), 6572–6591.
Tamplin, M. L. (2018). Integrating predictive models and sensors to manage food 
stability in supply chains. Food Microbiology, 75, 90–94.
Tassou, S. A., Gowreesunker, B. L., Parpas, D., & Raeisi, A. (2015). Modelling cold 
food chain processing and display environments. Modeling Food Processing 
Operations, 185–208.192 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
Tsang, Y. P., Choy, K. L., Wu, C.‑H., Ho, G. T. S., Lam, C. H. Y., & Koo, P. S. (2018). An 
Internet of Things (IoT)‑based risk monitoring system for managing cold sup‑
ply chain risks. Industrial Management & Data Systems, 118(7), 1432–1462.
Uhl, A., & Gollenia, M. L. A. (2014). Digital Enterprise Transformation: A 
Business‑Driven Approach to Leveraging Innovative IT. Ashgate Publishing, 
Ltd.
Wu, L., Yue, X., Jin, A., & Yen, D. C. (2016). Smart supply chain management: 
A review and implications for future research. The International Journal of 
Logistics Management, 27(2), 395–417.
Xu, J. (2014). Managing Digital Enterprise: Ten Essential Topics. Springer.
Zhao, H., Liu, S., Tian, C., Yan, G., & Wang, D. (2018). An overview of current sta‑
tus of cold chain in China. International Journal of Refrigeration, 88, 483–495.
Zhao, X., Fan, H., Zhu, H., Fu, Z., & Fu, H. (2015). The design of the internet 
of things solution for food supply chain. 2015 International Conference on 
Education, Management, Information and Medicine, pp. 314–318.
Zhao, H., Liu, S., Tian, C., Yan, G., & Wang, D. (2018). An overview of current sta‑
tus of cold chain in China. International Journal of Refrigeration, 88, 483–495.DOI: 10.1201/9781003503057-13 193
Chapter 13
The impact of blockchain 
technology and decentralized 
supply chain on production
Kourosh Mokhtari, Seyydeh Atefeh Mousavi Abandansari, 
and Fariba Goodarzian
13.1 INTRODUCTION
Blockchain, as a distributed data infrastructure, provides the possibil‑
ity of secure data exchange (Pilkington, 2016; Pant & Taghipour, 2023). 
Blockchain as a technology can affect the way organizations run and the 
structure of supply chain relationships (Kosba et al., 2016). Considering 
that the development and dissemination of blockchain technology are in its 
early stages and the impact of blockchain technology on the supply chain is 
being investigated, its benefits are uncertain and its destructive effects are 
unpredictable. Studies show that blockchain has the potential to cause both 
positive and negative disruptions in the supply chain (Wang et al., 2019; 
Taghipour et al., 2021). Blockchains increase the accuracy and security of 
data, increase transparency and reduce fraud in the supply chain. Studies 
also show that they are looking for how blockchain can create integra‑
tion and cooperation throughout the supply chain (Pszewczyk et al., 2023). 
Blockchains allow individuals and organizations to permanently record 
information without a central authority and provide the infrastructure for 
a democratic digital economy (Zutshi et al., 2021). Blockchain technology 
can direct the economic market as a Web 3.0 network, bring new businesses 
into the market, accelerate digital, decentralized, and automated markets 
and be a permanent source of innovation and economic growth (Chen, 
2022).
Due to the complexity of the supply chain’s multifaceted nature, block‑
chain can create integration and cooperation in different parts of this 
network (Oriekhoe et al., 2018). According to the connection between dif‑
ferent parts of the supply chain, including logistics, transportation, and 
production and retail, blockchain estimates the integrity of the entire net‑
work. Due to the complexity of the supply chain, the cost of related factors 
and the delay in payment between the manufacturer and the supplier or the 
customer and the seller, this network can be balanced with blockchain asset 
management (Dujak & Sajter, 2019).194 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
On February 1, 2018, the European Commission, with the support 
of the European Parliament, launched a two‑year project, including the 
Blockchain Observatory and Forum, which will strengthen European 
engagement with multiple stakeholders involved in blockchain activities 
(Szewczyk et al., 2019).
Blockchain technology creates a high level of security and traceability in 
online economic transactions. Given that blockchain technology is expected 
to affect digital services and business models, such as health care, insur‑
ance, finance, energy, logistics, and management of intellectual property 
rights or government services, and create changes, the current situation is 
reviewed. The global supply chain and the application of blockchain are the 
subjects of some projects of the European Union Blockchain Observatory 
(Lyons, 2019).
The complexity of the supply chain is constantly increasing, and the rapid 
transformation of the product to the end customer is of great importance. 
An independent company as a logistics provider is necessary to create a sup‑
ply chain plan. A decentralized supply chain is proposed to minimize the 
sharing of information between the manufacturer and the logistics provider 
(Jung et al., 2008(.
In the decentralized supply chain network, organizations try to maxi‑
mize their profit despite their common goal, which leads to an increase in 
the profit of the entire network. Since the mid‑1990s, the concept of col‑
laborative agent has increasingly emerged in the field of computer program‑
ming (Bordini et al., 2009). An agent organization always tries to maximize 
its profit and reduce its costs, and in the meantime, a decentralized supply 
chain network is necessary to maintain private information and privacy 
(Lee et al., 2002).
The existence of blockchain technology with decentralized data archiving 
in supply chain processes estimates the security of big data and helps the 
optimal performance of data (Ghahremani‑Nahr et al., 2022).
Blockchains can be used to improve payment processing in the supply 
chain, where buyers use a supply chain financing (SCF) platform to pay 
their suppliers’ invoices (Nozari & Nahr, 2022).
Achieving customer satisfaction requires integration and cooperation 
throughout the supply chain (suppliers, manufacturers, retailers, logistics 
service providers, banks, and regulators) (Szmelter‑Jarosz, 2022).
Organizations are looking for transparency, flexibility and agility in the 
decentralized chain to fix and control any disruptions that increase costs, 
decrease income and intensify the inefficiency of processes. Blockchain as 
a part of efficient technology in the decentralized supply chain of organi‑
zations creates trust, transparency and profit for stakeholders and creates 
flexible business results. Blockchains can improve the efficiency of functions 
related to the supply chain, including monetary exchanges, operational 
transactions, contracts and sourcing without the need for a centralized sys‑
tem (Nozari & Nahr, 2022).Blockchain technology and decentralized supply chain 195
Given that the supply chain is a network of facilities that performs various 
tasks such as the preparation of materials, the transformation of materials 
or intermediate and final products, and the distribution of final products to 
customers (Sadana et al., 2023).
Most companies use decentralized control to manage various facilities in 
the field of supply.
A blockchain‑based decentralized supply chain system with secure infor‑
mation sharing can provide security and confidentiality of the supply chain 
management (SCM) system without relying on any intermediaries (Bader 
et al., 2023). Considering that the increasing competition and the globaliza‑
tion of the market force organizations to participate independently in the 
supply chain, the supply chain system should be looked at from a decentral‑
ized point of view.
The structure and operational characteristics of the decentralized sup‑
ply chain lead to the creation of different cooperative and competitive 
relationships. Contrary to the proximity of companies and enterprises to 
each other in this decentralized network, companies only care about their 
profits and interests (Zhou et al., 2022). Zhou et al. (2022) in the evalu‑
ation results of the BLP model showed that in decentralized supply chain 
models, changing the role of leader and follower (producer and distributor) 
leads to a difference in the distribution of benefits between the producer 
and the distributor.
In this chapter, according to the investigations carried out in the continu‑
ation of previous studies, the impact of blockchain technology and decen‑
tralized supply chain on the production and work process of organizations 
is examined. Currently, the goal is security analysis and performance 
evaluation of decentralized supply chain based on blockchain technology. 
Blockchain technology is studied due to the feature of secure sharing of 
information, transparency and traceability of manufactured and distrib‑
uted products and lack of access to private information.
13.2 BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY
Blockchain is a decentralized and public digital distributed ledger. It is 
made as a chain of records called blocks, where each block in this chain 
stores various types of data and information (such as records and trans‑
actions). Blockchain distributes data across a network of computers and 
therefore does not require a centralized authority to manage its database. 
Blockchain can permanently, immutably and transparently record all trans‑
actions and data. After the information is recorded in the blockchain, it 
can never be changed. Anything of value, whether physical or non‑physical, 
can be exchanged in this network. Chaining blocks together ensures data 
security and minimizes the possibility of changing it.196 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
13.2.1 Types of blockchain networks
Blockchain networks are divided into four categories based on the level of 
access and participation of users in the network:
13.2.1.1 Public blockchain
This type of network is easily accessible, and anyone can participate in the 
network as a node. These nodes are responsible for confirming transac‑
tions, generating new blocks and receiving the network’s currency pass‑
word. These networks have maximum transparency and decentralization, 
and they have high complexity and energy consumption.
13.2.1.2 Private blockchain networks
These types of networks are controlled by a certain organization or group, 
and only authorized members can access them. These types of networks 
have minimum transparency and maximum efficiency, but they have dis‑
advantages such as the lack of protection of users’ rights and the risk of 
censorship.
13.2.1.3 Commercial blockchain networks 
(blockchain consortium)
These types of networks are managed by several organizations or groups 
with the purpose of cooperation in a specific project or field, and only 
selected nodes are allowed to confirm transactions. This network has a 
good balance between transparency and efficiency, but it has disadvantages 
such as the lack of certainty in the rules and standards of the network. 
Maintaining and managing these networks is the responsibility of all the 
organizations included in it.
13.2.1.4 Hybrid blockchain networks
These types of networks are a combination of public and private networks 
that allow users to choose the level of access and participation. These net‑
works have the advantages of both types of networks, but disadvantages 
such as technical complexity and non‑compliance with laws and regula‑
tions also threaten them.
13.2.2 Blockchain technology applications
Blockchain has constantly grown in its evolution and has the ability to inte‑
grate into various industries. Any platform that needs to record and transfer 
information or messages can use blockchain. Some applications of block‑
chain in industries are shown in Figure 13.1.Blockchain technology and decentralized supply chain 197
13.2.2.1 Smart contracts
Blockchain helps companies to sign processes for smart contracts, pro‑
viding their digitalization, approval and automatic implementation. This 
action increases the trust between the parties to the contract.
13.2.2.2 Decentralized financial affairs
Decentralized finance or DeFi allows users to access financial services, and 
these services are completely decentralized. By using different DeFi solu‑
tions, users can borrow the funds they want to complete the transaction. 
All of these are managed without a centralized reference on the blockchain.
Financial
department
Banking
Electronic
commerce
Sport
Services
Automobile
manufacturing
Healthcare
Blockchain
applications
Entertainment
Real
estate
Education
Election
Blockchain
applications
Blockchain
applications
Retail
Government
Supply
chain
Insurance
Figure 13.1 Applications of blockchain technology.198 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
13.2.2.3 Non‑symbolic tokens
Non‑equivalent tokens or unique Non‑fungible tokens (NFTs) cannot 
be exchanged peer‑to‑peer of the same value. One of their applications 
is copyright law and authentication of works of art. Something that can 
confirm their authenticity and ownership and prevent their unauthorized 
copying.
13.2.2.4 Supply chain
The use of blockchain technology in the supply chain can help track and 
prove the true origin of raw materials, food and consumer goods of busi‑
nesses. Any information about the supply chain is recorded in the block‑
chain without any changes. A completely transparent process is used to 
prevent any fraud.
13.2.2.5 Insurance claims
The user can send insurance requests online to the blockchain so that after 
checking, if he has the conditions to use the insurance, the payment will be 
made automatically and instantly.
13.2.2.6 Identity confirmation
Blockchain helps companies to securely verify the identity of users and pre‑
vent theft. All personal information data in digital birth certificates are 
stored securely and completely privately in the blockchain.
13.2.2.7 Internet of things
Blockchain allows companies to use objects to exchange information and 
perform transactions. By using blockchain, information is transferred 
between different devices safely and without intermediaries.
13.2.2.8 Archive and file storage
Blockchain and smart contracts can provide the necessary security to some 
extent for storing information.
13.2.2.9 Voting system
Blockchain as a security technology can be used safely and transparently to 
conduct electronic elections. Blockchain helps to reduce the possibility of 
election fraud by guaranteeing transparency and security.Blockchain technology and decentralized supply chain 199
13.2.2.10 Health care
Due to the transparency and security of blockchain technology, it is pos‑
sible to create a suitable and practical platform for safe storage of medical 
data. By using a private key in the blockchain, this file is accessible only to 
certain people.
13.2.2.11 Property ownership records
The use of blockchain in the real estate industry can largely solve human 
errors in registering ownership rights and keep ownership records accurate 
and permanent.
13.2.3 Blockchain decentralized structure
Blockchain is a tool to coordinate different people and organizations 
together. In this case, blockchain can act as a distributed ledger using game 
theory and other technologies.
It is not controlled by any institution. Therefore, it can be considered that 
the ledger belongs to all people at the same time, and for any change in it, 
the majority must agree.
13.2.4 Advantages of blockchain technology
Blockchain technology, with its complexity, is almost limitless as a decen‑
tralized form of record keeping. Some of the advantages of this technology 
are given as follows:
13.2.4.1 Increasing accuracy by eliminating human 
intervention in the verification process
To verify blockchain network transactions, computers and devices partici‑
pate in the network, and therefore, nothing is done manually. More detailed 
information is recorded. If a computer in the network makes a miscalcula‑
tion, this error will only exist in one copy of the blockchain and the net‑
work will reject it.
13.2.4.2 Cost reduction by eliminating 
third‑party intermediaries
Despite blockchain, there are no intermediaries and third parties and only 
one fee is paid. With blockchain, there is no need to pay for banking trans‑
actions and sign a document in a notary public. The existence of block‑
chain eliminates third parties such as banks and payment companies from 
transactions.200 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
13.2.4.3 Decentralization and difficulty of manipulation
Considering that the blockchain does not store any of its information in 
a central place, copies of the information are distributed among all the 
computers in the network (Tliche et al., 2023). Whenever a new block is 
added to the blockchain, this updated version is simultaneously available 
to all computers in the network. By spreading information across the net‑
work instead of a central database, blockchain becomes more difficult to 
manipulate.
13.2.4.4 Efficient, private and secure transactions
Transactions in some blockchains are completed within a few minutes; for 
cross‑border transactions, blockchain is much more efficient than banks. 
After registering the transaction, the blockchain network confirms its 
authenticity, and after confirmation, the transaction is added to the block 
in the blockchain. It is impossible to change blocks, and this guarantees the 
security of transactions.
13.2.4.5 Transparency of technology
Most blockchains are completely open source, and the codes are visible, but 
no authority can control or edit their codes. Anyone can suggest changes or 
upgrade the system, and according to the agreement of all users, changes 
can be applied to the blockchain.
13.2.4.6 Banking without a bank
Blockchain is a suitable alternative to a bank and a way to secure confiden‑
tial information of citizens living in underdeveloped countries.
13.2.5 Disadvantages and limitations 
of blockchain technology
Blockchain technology, despite its advantages, is still in the early stages of 
development and improvement, and it has problems and limitations (listed 
in Figure 13.2). Therefore, some of the problems and limitations associated 
with blockchain are given as follows:
13.2.5.1 Exorbitant cost of blockchain‑related technologies
Blockchain can save transaction costs, but this technology is not free. The 
network’s proof‑of‑work system consumes a lot of computing power to vali‑
date transactions.Blockchain technology and decentralized supply chain 201
13.2.5.2 Low transaction rate per second (TPS)
The number of transactions that the blockchain network can process per 
second is very low. The discussion of changing the block size is one of the 
issues that has been studied for a long time for blockchain scalability and 
high TPS.
13.2.5.3 Illegal activities
Even though the confidentiality of activities in the blockchain network pro‑
tects users from hacking, we should not ignore the platform that it provides 
for criminals for illegal activities in the network.
13.2.5.4 Network expansion
Blockchain, like all distributed systems, faces attacks and grows over time, 
and for this, it needs a large network of users. Determining the right size 
and maintaining, it is very important and challenging.
13.2.5.5 Unavoidable security flaw
There is a significant security flaw in blockchain that if more than half of 
the computers acting as nodes in the network lie, the lie becomes the truth.
13.2.5.6 Human error
If blockchain is used as a database, the data stored in it must be of high qual‑
ity. Blockchain systems support the principle of Garbage Input, Garbage 
Output (GIGO), and if the input data is wrong or invalid, the output will 
also be declared invalid.
Figure 13.2 Disadvantages and limitations of blockchain technology.202 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
13.3 DECENTRALIZED SUPPLY CHAIN
The supply chain of a product is a network of all organizations, compa‑
nies, people, resources, activities and technologies involved in the creation 
and sale of a product. The entire network includes procurement, supply, 
production, distribution and delivery to the customer in the chain. Due to 
the existence of conflicts and complexities in the decisions of supply chain 
entities, coordination between members is usually realized. Due to organi‑
zational barriers between facilities and limited information flow, complete 
centralized control of material flow in a supply chain may not be possible. 
Organizations use decentralized control in managing different facilities in 
a supply chain. One of the main structures of the supply chain for deci‑
sion‑making is a decentralized structure.
In supply chain, with a decentralized structure, each member of the 
chain makes decisions independently of each other and individually. Each 
member of the decentralized supply chain pursues its own interests and 
optimizes its goals independently, which leads to conflict of interests 
between chain members. Decisions made by each member of the chain in a 
decentralized structure have direct and indirect effects on other members 
of the chain.
In a decentralized supply chain, a decision that is optimal for one 
chain member may result in high costs for other chain members. The 
inefficiency of the process of supply, production, distribution and deliv‑
ery of goods to customers leads to a decrease in the performance and 
level of service to customers. The structure of such decisions is shown in 
Figure 13.3.
Figure 13.3 Decentralized supply chain, production and distribution.Blockchain technology and decentralized supply chain 203
13.3.1 The decentralized structure of 
the two‑level supply chain
13.3.1.1 Supplier and retailer
In the two‑level supply chain, the retailer keeps less inventory in his ware‑
house due to high maintenance costs. Often, this decision results in the 
retailer facing a shortage. As a result, the chain will face lost sales. Given 
that the supplier’s interests are in selling more products, therefore, the sup‑
plier’s interests are affected by the retailer’s decision and the profitability of 
the entire chain is reduced.
13.3.1.2 Manufacturer and retailer
Considering that the retailer is in direct contact with the customer. The 
quality of the final product is very important for the retailer. Since the 
production of quality products requires more costs, the manufacturer may 
lower the product to reduce costs. This will reduce sales and market share.
13.3.2 Hierarchical system in 
decentralized supply chain
In this system, the high‑level member makes decisions and the low‑level 
member determines his optimal strategy by observing the decision taken. 
Assuming that there is complete information about the decision‑making 
process of the lower member, the high‑level decision‑maker will be able to 
predict the reaction strategy of the low‑level decision‑maker and make a 
decision accordingly. The high‑level decision‑maker is known as the leader, 
and the low‑level decision‑maker is known as the follower. Hierarchical 
decision‑making process in economics goes back to the famous Steckelberg 
game in game theory, which was first introduced in 1952 by Van Steckelberg.
13.4 THE IMPORTANCE OF BLOCKCHAIN 
TECHNOLOGY IN THE DECENTRALIZED 
SUPPLY CHAIN
Supply chain is an important resource for improving production efficiency 
and reducing management costs. However, it may be subject to manipula‑
tion and lead to illegal modification of the product origin record. Also, the 
lack of transparent and mutual trust among the stakeholders of this chain 
is a challenging issue. Therefore, with the existence of a blockchain‑based 
decentralized supply chain system with safe information sharing, the secu‑
rity of the history of product origin is guaranteed without any intermediary. 
In fact, the supply chain network is a centralized system architecture and is 204 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
built and implemented by relying on centralized authorities or any kind of 
intermediaries, which lead to issues such as single‑point processing, storage 
and failure. Blockchain technology is simply a decentralized, distributed 
and immutable ledger. This technology transforms digital currency trans‑
actions into a programmable environment for building decentralized and 
trusted applications to address various use cases and problems in the world. 
With blockchain technology, the supply chain industry can be decentral‑
ized. A decentralized blockchain network with a consensus protocol com‑
patible with the enterprise blockchain concept can provide programmable 
smart contracts and a distributed file storage system to develop a scientific 
and immutable provenance tracking and management platform. Blockchain 
technology or other distributed ledger technologies built with decentralized 
networks as a potential framework for creating a modern, decentralized 
supply chain innovation. This technology as a potential framework for cre‑
ating a modern, decentralized, reliable, responsive, transparent and secure 
supply chain innovation is used against fake attacks.
13.5 CONCLUSION
The optimal value obtained from the decentralized and independent deci‑
sions of the chain members is different from the optimal values obtained 
from the decisions of the entire chain. Considering that blockchain technol‑
ogy is still in the early stages of its evolution, for the final development of this 
new technology, a positive and extensive development must be presented in 
the field of the global supply chain. According to the research conducted on 
blockchain technology, this technology can optimize businesses and gov‑
ernment operations more accurately, more efficiently and more securely. 
Considering that the security of the blockchain network is the result of the 
use of innovative ideas in the field of cryptography and economics, in this 
chapter, we tried to briefly explain its technical and scientific aspects and 
the applications of blockchain in various fields.
According to the explanations provided, although blockchain is not 
immune from hacking, its decentralized nature provides more security 
than decentralized systems such as banks. As more nodes participate in the 
blockchain, instead of creating security concerns, the security of the net‑
work increases. Despite the challenges in the supply chain industry, and the 
content presented in this chapter of the book, a platform can be provided 
in a decentralized network that will create a transformation in the security 
and transparency of the industry by providing technologies in the supply 
chain
In fact, a blockchain‑based decentralized supply chain can lead the manu‑
facturing industry in a direction that involves less risk and greater security.Blockchain technology and decentralized supply chain 205
REFERENCES
Alinezhad, A. (2018). Performance evaluation of supply chain under decentralized 
organization mechanism. Iranian Journal of Optimization, 10(1), 9–17.
Bader, M., Hilbig, B. E., Zettler, I., & Moshagen, M. (2023). Rethinking aversive 
personality: Decomposing the Dark Triad traits into their common core and 
unique flavors. Journal of Personality, 91(5), 1084–1109.
Bordini, R. H., Dix, J., & Seghrouchni, A. E. F. (2009). Multi‑agent programming. 
M. Dastani (Ed.). Springer US.
Centobelli, P., Cerchione, R., Del Vecchio, P., Oropallo, E., & Secundo, G. (2022). 
Blockchain technology for bridging trust, traceability and transparency in cir‑
cular supply chain. Information & Management, 59(7), 103508.
Chang, S. E., Chen, Y. C., & Lu, M. F. (2019). Supply chain re‑engineering using 
blockchain technology: A case of smart contract based tracking process. 
Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 144, 1–11.
Chen, C., Zhang, L., Li, Y., Liao, T., Zhao, S., Zheng, Z., ... & Wu, J. (2022). When 
digital economy meets Web3. 0: Applications and challenges. IEEE Open 
Journal of the Computer Society, 3, 233–245.
Dujak, D., & Sajter, D. (2019). Blockchain applications in supply chain. SMART 
Supply Network, 21–46.
Dursun, T., Birinci, F., Alptekin, B., Sertkaya, I., Hasekioglu, O., Tunaboylu, B., 
& Zaim, S. (2022). Blockchain technology for supply chain management. 
In Industrial Engineering in the Internet‑of‑Things World: Selected Papers 
from the Virtual Global Joint Conference on Industrial Engineering and Its 
Application Areas, GJCIE 2020, August 14–15, 2020 (pp. 203–217). Springer 
International Publishing.
Erhun, F., & Keskinocak, P. (2011). Collaborative supply chain management. In 
Planning Production and Inventories in the Extended Enterprise: A State of 
the Art Handbook (pp. 233–268), Vol. 1.
Ghahremani‑Nahr, J., Aliahmadi, A., & Nozari, H. (2022). An IoT‑based sustainable 
supply chain framework and blockchain. International Journal of Innovation 
in Engineering, 2(1), 12–21.
Golpîra, H. (2023). Closing the loop of a global supply chain through a robust 
optimal decentralized decision support system. Environmental Science and 
Pollution Research, 30(39), 89975–90005.
Goyat, R., Kumar, G., Rai, M. K., & Saha, R. (2019). Implications of blockchain 
technology in supply chain management. Journal of System and Management 
Sciences, 9(3), 92–103.
Gurtu, A., & Johny, J. (2019). Potential of blockchain technology in supply chain 
management: A literature review. International Journal of Physical Distribution 
& Logistics Management, 49(9), 881–900.
Jung, H., Chen, F. F., & Jeong, B. (2008). Decentralized supply chain planning frame‑
work for third party logistics partnership. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 
55(2), 348–364.
Kosba, A., Miller, A., Shi, E., Wen, Z., & Papamanthou, C. (2016). Hawk: The block‑
chain model of cryptography and privacy‑preserving smart contracts. In 2016 
IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP) (pp. 839–858). IEEE.206 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
Lee, H. L., & Billington, C. (1993). Material management in decentralized supply 
chains. Operations Research, 41(5), 835–847.
Lee, H., & Whang, S. (1999). Decentralized multi‑echelon supply chains: Incentives 
and information. Management Science, 45(5), 633–640.
Lee, Y., Jeon, K., Lee, J. T., Kim, S., & Kim, V. N. (2002). MicroRNA maturation: 
stepwise processing and subcellular localization. The EMBO Journal, 4663– 
4670. https://doi.org/10.1093/emboj/cdf476
Leng, K., Bi, Y., Jing, L., Fu, H. C., & Van Nieuwenhuyse, I. (2018). Research on agri‑
cultural supply chain system with double chain architecture based on block‑
chain technology. Future Generation Computer Systems, 86, 641–649.
Lim, M. K., Li, Y., Wang, C., & Tseng, M. L. (2021). A literature review of block‑
chain technology applications in supply chains: A comprehensive analysis of 
themes, methodologies and industries. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 
154, 107133.
Lin, F., Chung, D., Shayo, C., & Beer, F. (2019). A framework of blockchain technol‑
ogy. Communications of the IIMA, 17(1), 6.
Lyons, L. (2019). Digitalisation: Opportunities for heating and cooling. Publications 
Office of the European Union: Luxembourg, 38.
Madumidha, S., Ranjani, P. S., Vandhana, U., & Venmuhilan, B. (2019a). A theoreti‑
cal implementation: Agriculture‑food supply chain management using block‑
chain technology. In 2019 TEQIP III Sponsored International Conference on 
Microwave Integrated Circuits, Photonics and Wireless Networks (IMICPW) 
(pp. 174–178). IEEE.
Madumidha, S., Ranjani, P. S., Varsinee, S. S., & Sundari, P. S. (2019b). Transparency 
and traceability: In food supply chain system using blockchain technology 
with internet of things. In 2019 3rd International Conference on Trends in 
Electronics and Informatics (ICOEI) (pp. 983–987). IEEE.
Miyaoka, J., & Hausman, W. H. (2008). How improved forecasts can degrade decen‑
tralized supply chains. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 
10(3), 547–562.
Nandi, M. L., Nandi, S., Moya, H., & Kaynak, H. (2020). Blockchain tech‑
nology‑enabled supply chain systems and supply chain performance: A 
resource‑based view. Supply Chain Management: An International Journal, 
25(6), 841–862.
Nozari, H., & Nahr, J. G. (2022). The impact of blockchain technology and the 
Internet of Things on the agile and sustainable supply chain. International 
Journal of Innovation in Engineering, 2(2), 33–41.
Oriekhoe, O. I., Oyeyemi, O. P., Bello, B. G., Omotoye, G. B., Daraojimba, A. I., 
& Adefemi, A. (2024). Blockchain in supply chain management: A review of 
efficiency, transparency, and innovation. International Journal of Science and 
Research Archive, 11(1), 173–181.
Pant, P., & Taghipour, A. (2023). Machine learning and blockchain for 5G‑enabled 
IIoT. In Blockchain Applications in Cryptocurrency for Technological Evolution
(pp. 196–212). IGI Global.
Perboli, G., Musso, S., & Rosano, M. (2018). Blockchain in logistics and supply 
chain: A lean approach for designing real‑world use cases. IEEE Access, 6, 
62018–62028.Blockchain technology and decentralized supply chain 207
Pilkington, M. (2016). Blockchain technology: Principles and applications (September 
18, 2015). In Research Handbook on Digital Transformations, edited by F. 
Xavier Olleros and Majlinda Zhegu. Edward Elgar.
Qian, X., & Papadonikolaki, E. (2021). Shifting trust in construction supply chains 
through blockchain technology. Engineering, Construction and Architectural 
Management, 28(2), 584–602.
Rahmadika, S., Kweka, B. J., Latt, C. N. Z., & Rhee, K. H. (2018). A prelimi‑
nary approach of blockchain technology in supply chain system. In 2018 
IEEE International Conference on Data Mining Workshops (ICDMW) 
(pp.  156–160). IEEE.
Sadana, S., Spees, C., & Taylor, C. (2023). Perceived impact of dietary patterns on 
cancer among Asian Indians living in US. Journal of Nutrition Education and 
Behavior, 55(7), 11.
Shakhbulatov, D., Medina, J., Dong, Z., & Rojas‑Cessa, R. (2020). How blockchain 
enhances supply chain management: A survey. IEEE Open Journal of the 
Computer Society, 1, 230–249.
Szmelter‑Jarosz, A., Chmiel, B., & Nozari, H. (2023). The mobility choices in Poland: 
Is there a chance to transition from owned cars to a shared ones?. European 
Journal of Transformation Studies, 206.
Szewczyk, P. (2019). Application of Blockchain Technology in Supply Chain 
Management. Zeszyty Naukowe. Organizacja i Zarządzanie/Politechnika 
Śląska.
Taghipour, A., Murat, S., & Huang, P. (2021). E‑supply chain management: A review. 
International Journal of e‑Education, e‑Business, e‑Management and e‑Learn‑
ing, 11(2), 51–61.
Tliche, Y., Taghipour, A., Mahfod‑Leroux, J., & Vosooghidizaji, M. (2023). 
Collaborative bullwhip effect‑oriented bi‑objective optimization for infer‑
ence‑based weighted moving average forecasting in decentralized supply chain. 
International Journal of Information Systems & Supply Chain Management, 
16(1).
Tse, D., Zhang, B., Yang, Y., Cheng, C., & Mu, H. (2017). Blockchain application in 
food supply information security. In 2017 IEEE International Conference on 
Industrial Engineering and Engineering Management (IEEM) (pp.  1357–1361). 
IEEE.
Wang, K., Dong, J., Wang, Y., & Yin, H. (2019) Securing data with blockchain and 
AI. IEEE Access, 7, 77981–77989. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2921555.
Wang, M., Wu, Y., Chen, B., & Evans, M. (2020). Blockchain and supply chain 
management: A new paradigm for supply chain integration and collaboration. 
Operations and Supply Chain Management: An International Journal, 14(1), 
111–122.
Wang, Y., Han, J. H., & Beynon‑Davies, P. (2019). Understanding blockchain 
 technology for future supply chains: A systematic literature review and research 
agenda. Supply Chain Management: An International Journal, 24(1), 62–84.
Wu, H., Cao, J., Yang, Y., Tung, C. L., Jiang, S., Tang, B.,... & Deng, Y. (2019). Data 
management in supply chain using blockchain: Challenges and a case study. 
In 2019 28th International Conference on Computer Communication and 
Networks (ICCCN) (pp. 1–8). IEEE.208 Optimization and Computing using Intelligent Data-Driven Approaches
Yiu, N. C. (2021a). Decentralizing supply chain anti‑counterfeiting systems using 
blockchain technology. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.01456.
Yiu, N. C. (2021b). Decentralizing supply chain anti‑counterfeiting and traceability 
systems using blockchain technology. Future Internet, 13(4), 84.
Yontar, E. (2023). The role of blockchain technology in the sustainability of supply 
chain management: Grey based dematel implementation. Cleaner Logistics and 
Supply Chain, 8, 100113.
Zareiyan, B., & Korjani, M. (2018). Blockchain technology for global decentralized 
manufacturing: Challenges and solutions for supply chain in fourth industrial 
revolution. International Journal of Advanced Robotics and Automation, 3(2), 
1–10.
Zhou, X., Tian, J., Wang, Z., Yang, C., Huang, T., & Xu, X. (2022). Nonlinear bilevel 
programming approach for decentralized supply chain using a hybrid state 
transition algorithm. Knowledge‑Based Systems, 240, 108119.
Zutshi, A., Grilo, A., & Nodehi, T. (2021). The value proposition of blockchain 
technologies and its impact on Digital Platforms. Computers & Industrial 
Engineering, 155, 107187.209
Index
Note: Bold page numbers refer to tables and italic page numbers refer to figures.
accuracy 13–15, 24, 34, 35, 47, 199
of predictive models 29
SVM model 16
ACO see ant colony optimization 
(ACO)
analytical hierarchy process (AHP) 56
analytical network process (ANP) 56, 
58, 129
DEMATEL (Decision‑Making Trial 
and Evaluation Laboratory) 
with 129–130
ANN see artificial neural network 
(ANN)
ANP see analytical network process 
(ANP)
ant colonies, and collective 
intelligence 165
ant colony optimization (ACO) 111
flowchart of 117
mathematical model of 114–115
pheromone trail initialization stage 
117
pheromone updating rule 115–116
rules for ant’s movement 116–117
artificial intelligence (AI) 152
decision support steps and 157, 157
decision processing 159
decision stages 157–158
first model 157–158
geographic information 
systems 161
satisfactory decision‑making
158–161
second model 158–159
structured decision satisfactory 
158–159
expert systems 162–163
artificial neural network (ANN) 14, 
39, 41, 43, 47
ASP health system 74
automobile industry 5
automotive organizations, global 5
autonomous system
design, XAIDM on 153–154
explainable AI decision‑making 
for 153
bi‑directional long short‑term memory 
(Bi‑LSTM) 15, 16
blockchain decentralized structure 199
blockchain networks 196
private 196
public 196
blockchain technology 193–195
advantages of 199–200
applications 196, 197
archive and file storage 198
decentralized financial
affairs 197
health care 199
identity confirmation 198
insurance claims 198
internet of things 198
non‑symbolic tokens 198
property ownership records 199
smart contracts 197
supply chain 198
voting system 198210 Index
blockchain technology (cont.)
banking without a bank 200
cost reduction 199
decentralization and difficulty of 
manipulation 200
in decentralized supply chain 
203–204
disadvantages and limitations of 
200–201, 201
efficient, private and secure 
transactions 200
exorbitant cost 200
human error 201
human intervention in verification
process 199
illegal activities 201
low transaction rate per second 201
network expansion 201
transparency of technology 200
unavoidable security flaw 201
bootstrap aggregation 19
cardiovascular disease (CVD) 37
deep neural network approaches 
41–43
identification of 38
machine learning approaches 39–41
performance evaluation 
measurement 47–48
research methodology 43, 44
artificial neural network 46
CART (C5.0) algorithm 46
classification algorithm 46
data preprocessing 44–45
dataset description 43
environmental setup 48
feature selection 45–46, 48
parameter settings 48, 48
performance evaluation and 
result 48–49, 49
receiver operating characteristic
49, 50
state‑of‑the‑art model
comparison 50, 51, 52, 52
chi‑square and principal component 
analysis (CHI‑PCA) with 
random forests 40
chronic kidney disease (CKD) 42
classification and regression tree 
(CART) 14
classification and regression tree (C5.0) 
algorithms 38, 46
CLM see Council for Logistics 
Management (CLM)
cloud‑fog integrated machine learning 
approach 88
cloud layer 88
cloud servers 88
CNN see convolutional neural network 
(CNN)
cold supply chain management 184
collective intelligence, ant colonies and 
165
commercial blockchain networks 
(blockchain consortium) 196
communication assets, cyber 
information and 168
competitiveness 3–5
convolutional neural network (CNN) 
15, 16, 38, 41
Council for Logistics Management 
(CLM) 57
Council of Supply Chain Management 
Professionals (CSCMP) 57
COVID‑19 pandemic 169, 171
CSCMP see Council of Supply Chain 
Management Professionals
(CSCMP)
customer expectations 5
CVD see cardiovascular disease (CVD)
cyber information, and communication 
assets 168
daily management 73
data management, in decision support 
system 160–161
data scaling technique 44
decentralized finance (DeFi) 197
decentralized supply chain 202, 202
blockchain technology in 203–204
hierarchical system in 203
decision makers (DM) 66, 74
decision‑making
model, Herbert Simon 162
multiple 63
recurring decisions 159
decision support steps and artificial 
intelligence 157, 157
decision process 159
decision stages 157–158
first model 157–158
geographic information systems 161
satisfactory decision‑making 
158–161Index 211
second model 158–159
structured decision satisfactory
158–159
decision support system (DSS) 159–160
data management in 160–161
expert systems 162
geographic information systems 161
integration of 152
model management 160
user interface management in 161
DELPHI method 56, 58, 60, 62, 63, 
65, 66
DEMATEL (Decision‑Making Trial 
and Evaluation Laboratory) 
58
with ANP (analytic network 
process) 129–130
digitalization 167, 181–183
digital revolution 185
digital supply chain (DSC) 182–183, 
185–186
efficient implementation of 186
features of 183–184
digital transformation 181–182, 189
“door‑to‑door” transportation 55
DSC see digital supply chain (DSC)
DSS see decision support system (DSS)
ear nose throat (ENT) 78
electric energy consumption–consumer
base load (EECP‑CBL) 
framework 15
electricity companies 13
electricity power consumption 13
EMS see energy management system
(EMS)
end‑use energy 13
energy
consumption 13
structure 13
energy management system (EMS) 15
environmental awareness 2
environmental concerns, integration
of 2–3
environmental standards of 
ISO 14001 1
environmental sustainability of supply 
chain 4
erythema 128
ethical labor practices 9
European Union Blockchain 
Observatory 194
explainable AI decision‑making
(XAIDM) 152, 153
assessing the challenges of 
implementing 154–155
for autonomous systems 153–154
implications of explainable 155–156
investigating the role of 156–157
potential benefits of 154
eXtreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost) 
23
eye health (EH) 78
First Industrial Revolution 185
fog‑cloud interface 88
FogSim 93
food cold supply chains 184–185
food supply chain 184
Fourth Industrial Revolution see
Industry 4.0
fuzzy frequent pattern mining 
algorithm 129
fuzzy inference system (FIS) 114
characteristics of 114
essential components of 114, 115
Gaussian kernel‑based 111
fuzzy inventory model, multi‑item 100
fuzzy Kano model 56
fuzzy logic 100
algorithm 163–164
perception of type‑2 129
fuzzy number, type‑2 Gaussian 132
fuzzy optimization 100
fuzzy self‑organizing maps 111
fuzzy sets, type‑2 128, 131
Gaussian fuzzy membership function 
131, 148
Gaussian fuzzy number 131
type‑2 132
Gaussian kernel‑based fuzzy inference 
systems (FISs) 111
Gaussian membership function 132, 
140, 148
Gemba walk criteria 76
general surgery (GS) 78
genetic algorithm, evolutionary 
principles of 164
geographic information system (GIS) 
161
decision support system 161
global automotive organizations 5
globalization 3, 57, 168, 195212 Index
goal‑seeking models 160
green inventory‑routing
problem‑solving 112
green supply chain management 1–4, 4
GSCM 6, 10
Herbert Simon’s decision‑making 
model 162
heuristic algorithm 94, 95
high‑capacity transportation model 59
Hunddel criteria 76
Hungarian method 111
hybrid blockchain networks 196
hybrid imputation optimizer by 
classifier (HIOC) 40, 41
ICT 170–174
Industry 4.0 1–2, 5–6, 6, 167, 181, 
185–186
supply chain practices align with 
8–9
information gain (IG) 43, 45
intensive care 1–2 (IC1–2) 77
internal diseases (ID) 77
Internet of Things (IoT) 86, 168, 170, 
186–188
sensors 6
intuitionistic fuzzy set 129
inventory management 99
inventory model, for immediately 
decaying goods 99
Kano model, fuzzy 56
key performance indicators (KPIs) 55, 
56, 64, 67
logistic 59–60, 61–62
K‑nearest neighbors (KNNs) 21–23, 
40, 42
knowledge‑based system 162
Label Encoder function 44
label encoding techniques 44
Lasso regression 20, 22
LDM see lean daily management 
(LDM)
leadership and standard criteria 75, 75
lean daily management (LDM) 72, 73
case study 80, 81, 82, 82
criteria 75–76
and express 75–76
hospital departments
ear nose throat (ENT) 78
emergency 77–78
eye health 78
general surgery 78
intensive care 1–2 77
internal diseases 77
pediatric intensive care 78
MOOSRA method 79–80
standard deviation method 79
lean management 72, 74
learning neural networks 163–165
linear regression (LR) 19–22
load balancing 86
machine learning approach for 
90–91
task scheduling and 90–91
technique 91–92
using relevant metrics 93
logistic key performance indicators 
59–60, 61–62
long short‑term memory (LSTM) 42
LR see linear regression (LR)
L1 regularization see Lasso regression
LSTM see long short‑term memory 
(LSTM)
MACBETH 56, 58
machine learning (ML) algorithm 
13–17, 89, 86
classifiers 40
for task offloading and load 
balancing 90–91
Tetouan power consumption 25–30, 
27–35, 30–32
dataset description 19
evaluation metrics 23–24
K‑nearest neighbors 21–23
Lasso regression 20, 22
linear regression 19–22
models description 19
random forest 19–21
research methodology 17–18, 18
XGBoost 23–25
machine learning‑based 
multi‑objective optimization 
technique 86–88
performance analysis and evaluation 
93–95, 94–96
system model 88–90
load balancing technique using 
relevant metrics 93
machine learning approach 
90–91Index 213
proposed load balancing 
technique 91–92
MAE see mean absolute error (MAE)
MAPE see mean absolute percentage 
error (MAPE)
market competition 2
mathematical model 99
of ant colony optimization 114–115
MCDA see multicriteria decision
analysis (MCDA)
MCDM see multicriteria
decision‑making (MCDM)
mean absolute error (MAE) 14, 23–24
mean absolute percentage error 
(MAPE) 14
mean squared error (MSE) 15, 16, 20
medical diagnosis 128–130
medical discipline, intelligent systems
in 37
membership function 131
Gaussian 132, 140, 148
Gaussian fuzzy 131, 148
mining algorithm, fuzzy frequent 
pattern 129
MLP see multi‑layerperceptron model 
(MLP)
MLP‑NN see multi‑layer perceptron 
neural network (MLP‑NN)
MOOSRA method 79–80
multi‑attribute group decision‑making
models, type‑2 fuzzy 
environment for 128
multicriteria decision analysis 
(MCDA) 132
multicriteria decision‑making (MCDM) 
56, 63, 132–133
applications 58
for medical diagnostic 128–130
comparative study 148, 
148–149, 149
data collection process 138–139
mathematical formulation of
problem 139–141, 140
numerical computations 143
result interpretations 143–144, 
143–147
type‑2 Gaussian fuzzy Vikor 
method 141–143, 142
multi‑item fuzzy inventory model 100
multi‑layerperceptron model (MLP) 14
multi‑layer perceptron neural network 
(MLP‑NN) 43
multiple decision‑making 63
multivariate imputation by chained
equations (MICE) 40, 41
neural networks 163
advantages of learning neural 
networks 163–165
ant colonies and collective 
intelligence 165
evolutionary principles of genetic 
algorithm 164
fuzzy logic 163–164
purchasing agents 164–165
smart agent 164
user agents 165
neuro‑fuzzy system (NFS) 137, 
137–138
non‑fungible tokens (NFTs) 198
optimal solution 106, 112, 116, 132
optimization model 99, 160
organization’s sustainability goals 1
PCA see principal component analysis 
(PCA)
pediatric intensive care (PIC) 78
performance indicators 59
performance measurement system 
(PMS) 59
performance monitoring criteria 76
perishable inventory fuzzy 
optimization model 99–100
assumptions 99
cost calculation 102–105
managerial insights 108
model formulation 101–102
notations 99, 101
numerical analysis 105–106
sensitivity and graphical analysis 
106–107, 106–107, 108
solution methodology 105
PERT method 59
pheromone 112, 115–117
PMS see performance measurement 
system (PMS)
precision 39, 41, 42, 47, 51
Predictive Exit for deep learning 
applications 16
principal component analysis 
(PCA) 40
private blockchain networks 196
public blockchain networks 196214 Index
purchasing agents, neural networks 
164–165
Python programming language 48
QUALIFLEX technique 129
Quality Function Deployment 
(QFD) 56
radial basis function (RBF) 14
kernel, support vector machine for 
regression with 15
radial basis function network (RBFN) 
38, 41
random forest 19–21
range of values (ROV) method 
56, 58, 82
RBF see radial basis function (RBF)
RBFN see radial basis function 
network (RBFN)
recall 47
receiver operating characteristic (ROC) 
49, 50
recurrent neural network (RNN) 
algorithm 42
reduced error pruning tree (REPTree) 
14
regression
Lasso 20, 22
linear 19–22
models 90
reinforcement learning 86, 87
model 90, 91
REPTree decision tree technique 14
reshoring 168–170
risk‑averse optimization of supply 
chain 169
risk‑neutral optimization of supply 
chain 169
RMSE see root‑mean‑square error 
(RMSE)
road transportation 55
root‑mean‑square error (RMSE) 23, 41
satisfactory decision‑making 158
SCADA see Supervisory Control and 
Data Acquisition System 
(SCADA)
SCM see supply chain management 
(SCM)
SCSM 170
attributes of 171, 172
automizing the supply chain 173
collaboration 172
connection 173–174
customization 172–173
exchanging value by IT 
infrastructures 173
virtualization and
dematerialization 173
connection of SCSM and 
localization 174, 174
cost‑oriented localization 175
flexibility‑oriented localization
174–175
quality‑oriented localization 175
Second Industrial Revolution 185
sensors, IoT 6
sequential minimal optimization 
(SMO) algorithm 14
SFM see shop floor management (SFM)
shop floor management (SFM) 74
situational awareness 73
smart agent, neural networks 164
smart manufacturing (SM) 
167, 168
attributes of localization 170–171
enhancing local capabilities 171
importance of 170
localized approach 171
managing local waste 171
social responsibility 6–8, 8
social spider optimization (SSO) 
algorithm 93
statistical models 160
stepwise weight assessment ratio 
analysis (SWARA) 56–58, 63, 
63, 65
stochastic mixed integer programming 
model 169
Supervisory Control and Data 
Acquisition System (SCADA) 
14, 15, 19
supply chain (SC) 167, 182, 186, 187
decentralized 202, 202
hierarchical system in 203
decentralized structure of 
two‑level 203
environmental sustainability of 4
food cold 184–185
manufacturer and retailer 203
network, decentralized 194
practices, align with Industry 4.0 
8–9
risk‑averse optimization of 169Index 215
supplier and retailer 203
transparency 9
supply chain financing (SCF) 
platform 194
supply chain management (SCM) 182, 
195
cold 184
green 1–4, 4
support vector machine (SVM) 
15, 38, 41
energy consumption prediction
model 16
model accuracy 16
support vector machine for regression 
(SVR), with RBF kernel 15
sustainable packaging and logistics 9
SWARA see stepwise weight 
assessment ratio analysis 
(SWARA)
system dynamics theory 16
task offloading, machine learning 
approach for 90–91
Tetouan power consumption 25–30, 
27–35, 30–32
dataset description 19
evaluation metrics 23–24
K‑nearest neighbors 21–23
Lasso regression 20, 22
linear regression 19–22
models description 19
random forest 19–21
research methodology 17–18, 18
XGBoost 23–25
Third Industrial Revolution 185
Toyota Production System 74
transportation
cost 59, 61, 67
“door‑to‑door” 55
road 55
travelling salesman problem (TSP) 
111–113
findings and interpretations 
122–124, 123, 123
formulation of 113–114
numerical computations 119–122,
120, 121, 121, 122
strategic framework 117–119, 118, 
118, 119
t‑SNE algorithm 15
TSP see travelling salesman problem 
(TSP)
type‑2 fuzzy environment, for 
multi‑attribute group 
decision‑making models 128
type‑2 fuzzy logic, perception of 129
type‑2 fuzzy sets 128–129, 131, 131
type‑2 Gaussian fuzzy number 132
type‑2 Gaussian fuzzy Vikor method 
141–143, 142
UCI Machine Learning Repository 
38–41, 43
UK Automotive Sustainability Report 
2019 5
user agents, neural networks 165
user interface management, in decision 
support system 161
Vikor method 129, 130, 133–137
type‑2 Gaussian fuzzy 
141–143, 142
visual management criteria 75
what‑if models 160
XAIDM see explainable AI
decision‑making (XAIDM)
XGBoost (eXtreme Gradient Boosting) 
23–25
