Order without Design
How Markets Shape Cities
Alain Bertaud
The MIT Press
Cambridge, Massachusetts
London, England© 2018 Alain Bertaud
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form by any electronic or
mechanical means (including photocopying, recording, or information storage and retrieval) without
permission in writing from the publisher.
This book was set in Palatino by Westchester Publishing Services. Printed and bound in the United
States of America.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Bertaud, Alain, author.
Title: Order without design : how markets shape cities / Alain Bertaud.
Description: Cambridge, MA : MIT Press, [2018] | Includes bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2018008743 | ISBN 9780262038768 (hardcover : alk. paper)
Subjects: LCSH: Urban economics. | City planning.
Classification: LCC HT321 .B478 2018 | DDC 330.9173/2--dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2018008743To my wife, Marie-Agnes Roy BertaudContents Acknowledgments
1      Economists and Urban Planners: Two Visions of Cities That Need
to Be Merged
2      Cities as Labor Markets
3      Formation of Urban Spatial Structures: Markets versus Design
4      Spatial Distribution of Land Prices and Densities: Models
Developed by Economists
5      Mobility: Transport Is a Real Estate Issue—The Design of Urban
Roads and Transport Systems
6      Affordability: Household Incomes, Regulations, and Land Supply
7      Alternative Urban Shapes and Utopias
8      Urban Planners and Urban Economists Have an Important Role
to Play If They Manage to Work Together
IndexList of Figures
Figure 2.1 Distribution of commuting times in US cities, Paris, and in Gauteng, South Africa.
Sources: United States: US Census Bureau, 2010 American Community Survey, tables S0802 and
B08303; South Africa: Statistics South Africa, Department of Transport Gauteng Households Travel
Survey, figure 3.10, Pretoria, South Africa, 2009; Paris: Direction des statistiques démographiques et
sociales, “Enquête nationale transport et déplacements 2007–2008,” Institut national de la statistique
et des études économiques, Paris, 2011.
Figure 2.2 Distribution of workers’ residences and job locations in a hypothetical linear city.
Figure 2.3 Labor market type, speed of travel, and job location.
Figure 2.4 Average number of jobs accessible to workers in various US cities, 2010.
The labor market shapes the pattern of commuting trips. Source: David Levinson, “Access across
America,” Center for Transportation Studies, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, 2013.
Figure 2.5 Model trip patterns in metropolitan areas.
Figure 2.6 Trip patterns in metropolitan Paris. Sources: “Les déplacements des Franciliens en 2001–
2002,” Direction regionale de l’equipement d’Île-de-France, 2005, Paris Cedex 15; built-up area,
digitization of satellite imagery by Marie-Agnes Bertaud.
Figure 2.7 Changes in population and job distributions over time, Seoul metropolitan area. Sources:
Population and job data: Seoul Metropolitan Government Statistical Unit, Census 2000, 2010; built￾up areas and densities: GIS analysis by Marie-Agnes Bertaud.
Figure 3.1 Vacant cotton mills in Mumbai, 1990.
Figure 3.2 Street patterns in New York (Wall Street area) and in Paris (Marais).
Figure 3.3 Plan of Miletus, sixth century B.C. Source: Illustration by A. V. Gerkan and B. F. Weber,
1999, in The Archaeology of Byzantine Anatolia: From the End of Late Antiquity until the Coming of
the Turks, ed. Philipp Niewöhner (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2017).
Figure 3.4 The author, with his two assistants, tracing new streets in Yemen, 1970.
Figure 3.5 Le Corbusier’s Plan Voisin for Paris. Sources: Paris built-up background map:
OpenStreetMap®; Plan Voisin: three-dimensional model by author based on plans and drawings from
the “Fondation Le Corbusier” website and from Le Corbusier, The City of Tomorrow and Its
Planning (New York: Dover Publications, Inc., 1987).
Figure 3.6 Application of the sun rule—footprint of danwei housing in Beijing, Ningbo, and
Guangzhou.
Figure 3.7 Distance between buildings in China, determined by the angle of the sun on the winter
solstice.
Figure 3.8 The design of buildings in a block in Chandigarh (left) and Brasília (right). Sources:
Topographical maps with built-up areas from Department of Urban Planning Chandigarh
Administration, 2005, updated with the help of Google Earth satellite imagery, 2008.
Figure 3.9 Pudong: Shanghai’s new financial center.Figure 3.10 The design and construction of roads and subway links to Pudong, 1992 and 2013.
Figure 3.11 Relationship between population, land, and floor space consumption. It is assumed that
prices are set by market supply, and demand/supply are constrained by topography and other
variables.
Figure 4.1 Profile of land price versus distance from city center.
Figure 4.2 Calculation of the density gradient using a regression based on observed densities in a
real city.
Figure 4.3 Profile of densities in 12 metropolises.
Figure 4.4 Profile of land prices in Paris, 1990.
Figure 4.5 Density profile of Los Angeles. Sources: Population: US Census data, 2000; built-up
area: interpretation and vectorization of satellite imagery by Marie-Agnes Bertaud.
Figure 4.6 Schematic representation of access to the labor market in a city with a uniform
distribution of job locations.
Figure 4.7 Moscow population density profile, 1989. Sources: 1989 All-Union Census data, State
Committee for Statistics Moscow, 1990; vectorization of satellite imagery by author.
Figure 4.8 Change over time in the density gradients in Tianjin (1988 and 2000) and Paris (1990 and
2006). Sources: Tianjin Population Census and Survey data, Tianjin Statistical Yearbook, Tianjin;
Paris Population 1990 National Census, population 2006 estimate by Institut National de la
Statistique et des Études Économiques, Paris; vectorization of satellite data by Marie-Agnes Roy
Bertaud.
Figure 4.9 Sale price and rents of very small apartments in Paris, 2014.
Figure 4.10 Price of urban land and agricultural land define the limit of urbanization.
Figure 4.11 Limit of urbanization when agricultural land prices are distorted.
Figure 4.12 Built-up area and premier cru vineyards, Beaune.
Figure 4.13 Profile of urban and agricultural land prices along the AB axis, Beaune.
Figure 4.14 Limit of urbanization, taking into account the cost of land development.
Figure 4.15 Existing villages east of the immediate expansion area of Luoyang, China. Source:
Vectorization of Google Earth Images, 2015; population estimates based on village surveys.
Figure 4.16 Informal subdivision at the fringe of urbanization in Mexico City (left image) and
Surabaya, Indonesia (right image; same scale for both images).
Figure 4.17 Hanoi existing land use in 2010 and Hanoi’s capital master plan for 2030.
Figure 5.1 Mode share work at home versus public transport in some US cities. Source: Wendell
Cox, NewGeography, May 30, 2015.
Figure 5.2 Accessibility of a suburban location in Buenos Aires by public transport and by car.
Source: Wb.BA.analyst.conveyal.com.
Figure 5.3 Modes of urban transport.Figure 5.4 Changes in the dominant transport mode, Beijing (left) and Hanoi (right). Source: Beijing
Transport Research Center, 2015.
Figure 5.5 Changes in the dominant transport mode, Mexico City (left) and Paris (right). Sources:
Mexico City: “Gradual Takeover of Public Mass-Transit by Colectivos, 1986–2000,” Secretaria de
Transito y Viabilidad (SETRAVI) Embarq—World Resources Institute; Paris: Syndicat des
Transports d’Île-de-France website, www.stif.info.
Figure 5.6 Average door-to-door public transport travel time for commuters in the Paris municipality
and Beijing metropolitan area. Sources: Data for Paris: “Etude sur les deplacements,” Regie
Autonome des Transports Parisiens, 2014; Beijing: “Beijing, the 4th Comprehensive Transport
Survey Summary Report,” Beijing Transportation Research Center (BTRC), Beijing Municipal
Commission of Transport, Beijing, China, 2012.
Figure 5.7 Door-to-door commuting time from suburb to downtown New York (case study, no
statistical significance).
Figure 5.8 Extreme commuting in Gauteng (South Africa) case study. Source: “National
Development Plan Vision 2030,” President’s National Planning Commission, South Africa, 2011.
Figure 5.9 Average commuting travel time by transport mode, Singapore, Hong Kong, Dallas–Fort
Worth, Paris, and New York. Sources: Data for United States: “Commuting in America 2013,” US
DOT Census Transportation Planning Products Program, Washington, DC, 2013; Paris: “Les
deplacements des Franciliens en 2001–2002,” Direction régionale de l’équipement d’Île-de-France,
Paris, 2004; Hong Kong: “Travel Characteristics Survey-Final Report 2011,” Transport Department,
Government of Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, Hong Kong, 2011; Singapore:
“Singapore Land Transport Statistics in Brief 2010,” Land Transport Authority, Singapore
Government, Singapore, 2010.
Figure 5.10 Peak hour congestion in the Beijing metro network, 2014. Source: “Beijing the 4th
Comprehensive Transport Survey Summary Report,” Beijing Transportation Research Center
(BTRC), Beijing Municipal Commission of Transport, Beijing, China, 2015.
Figure 5.11 Road area per person or per job in various neighborhoods.
Figure 5.12 Street area requirements for cars running at different speeds with 2-second reaction
time.
Figure 5.13 Speed versus vehicle density (left) and lane capacity (right) for cars.
Figure 5.14 Speed versus lane capacity for buses and cars along M1 corridor in Manhattan.
Figure 5.15 Speed versus lane capacity for various transport modes along M1 corridor in Manhattan.
Figure 5.16 Map of a typical station and right-of-way for the Curitiba BRT (Eixo Sul line).
Figure 5.17 BRT use of road space per passenger when headways vary. Dashed horizontal line
indicates the road area per passenger for a car moving at 30 km/h with a headway of 2 seconds.
Figure 5.18 Transport system speed and capacity versus speed, BRT and Metro. Sources: BRT data
are from Walter Hook, “Bus Rapid Transit: An International View,” Institute for Development &
Transport Policy, New York, 2008; “Mass Transit Railway: Business Overview, Operations and
Services,” www.MTR.com.HK, Hong Kong, 2014.Figure 5.19 Evolution of vehicular speeds at peak hours, Singapore. Source: Data are from
“Singapore Land Transport Statistics, 2005–2014,” Land Transport Authority, Singapore, 2015.
Figure 5.20 Changes in gasoline-car pollutant emissions in Germany, 1990–2013. Sources: Table 2:
Fuel-specific IEF for passenger cars, in Fkg/TJ, Ministry of the Environment, Federal Environment
Agency (Umweltbundesamt, UBA), Dessau-Roßlau, Germany.
Figure 5.21 Average mandatory CO2-e emission standards in various countries, 2000–2020. Sources:
Data for Europe, Korea, and Japan: “Monitoring CO2 Emissions from New Passenger Cars and Vans
in 2015,” EEA Report No 27/2016, European Environment Agency, Copenhagen, Publications Office
of the European Union, Luxemburg, 2016; United States: “Light-Duty Vehicle Greenhouse Gas
Emission Standards and Corporate Average Fuel Economy Standards; Final Rule,” U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the Department of Transportation’s National Highway
Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA), Federal Register, Vol. 75, No. 88, May 7, 2010, Rules and
Regulations.
Figure 5.22 Emissions of CO2-e per kilowatt-hour for the electrical grids of selected countries.
Sources: United States: United States Environmental Protection Agency, 2018, eGRID Summary
Tables 2016, https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2018-
02/documents/egrid2016_summarytables.pdf; Europe: Alberto Moro and Laura Lonza, “Electricity
Carbon Intensity in European Member States: Impacts on GHG Emissions of Electric Vehicles,”
Transportation Research Part D: Transport and Environment, Elsevier, July 2017, https://ac.els￾cdn.com/S1361920916307933/1-s2.0-S1361920916307933-main.pdf?_tid=60efef4a-0c3a-4e20-
a91b-04dfdd346516&acdnat=1523304207_75045ee3d86fb842b4de3ff23f425ce0.
Figure 5.23 Tailpipe emissions of CO2 per passenger-kilometer for various cars and public transport
modes, 2015. Sources: United States: United States Environmental Protection Agency, 2018, eGRID
Summary Tables 2016, https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2018-
02/documents/egrid2016_summarytables.pdf; Europe: Alberto Moro and Laura Lonza, “Electricity
Carbon Intensity in European Member States: Impacts on GHG Emissions of Electric Vehicles,”
Transportation Research Part D: Transport and Environment, Elsevier, July 2017, https://ac.els￾cdn.com/S1361920916307933/1-s2.0-S1361920916307933-main.pdf?_tid=60efef4a-0c3a-4e20-
a91b-04dfdd346516&acdnat=1523304207_75045ee3d86fb842b4de3ff23f425ce0; and various car
manufacturers, 2016.
Figure 5.24 Changes in energy use per passenger-kilometer for different modes of transport, 1970–
2012. Source: US Department of Energy, Transportation Energy Data Book, 33rd ed., Washington,
DC, 2014.
Figure 5.25 Urban trip patterns in a typical metropolitan area compared to that of an urban cluster.
Figure 5.26 Comparison of the catchment area of traditional subways and that of high-speed
suburban rail associated with individual urban vehicles.
Figure 5.27 The Toyota i-Road personal mobility vehicle (left) and the Beijing three-wheeler (right)
already provide on-demand trips from station to door and from door to station.
Figure 6.1 Price/income ratios for a selection of world cities, 2015. Source: Wendell Cox and Hugh
Pavletich, 12th Annual Housing Affordability Survey (Belleville, IL: Demographia, 2016).
Figure 6.2 Price/income ratios and affordability for 10 selected cities. Source: Wendell Cox and
Hugh Pavletich, 12th Annual Housing Affordability Survey (Belleville, IL: Demographia, 2016).Figure 6.3 Percentage of renting households’ income spent on rent and the price/income ratios of
homeowners for 10 selected cities, 2015. Sources: Price/income ratio data: Wendell Cox and Hugh
Pavletich, 12th Annual Housing Affordability Survey (Belleville, IL: Demographia, 2016); Rental
household income data: American Community Survey, Furman Center, New York University, New
York.
Figure 6.4 Poster advertising a room to rent in a subdivided apartment in a suburb of Beijing, 2013.
Figure 6.5 Share of young people aged 25–34 living with their parents in Europe and in the United
States, 2010. Source: Pew Research Center, Washington, DC.
Figure 6.6 New York City minimum acceptable housing standards since 1860.
Figure 6.7 Informal and formal settlements, northern suburbs, Mumbai.
Figure 6.8 Shanghai household income distribution, 1998. Source: Jie Chen, Qianjin Hao, and Mark
Stephens, Assessing Housing Affordability in Post-Reform China: A Case Study of Shanghai
(London: Routledge, 2010).
Figure 6.9 Shanghai changes in household income distribution between 1998 and 2003. Source: Jie
Chen, Qianjin Hao, and Mark Stephens, Assessing Housing Affordability in Post-Reform China: A
Case Study of Shanghai (London: Routledge, 2010).
Figure 6.10 Hanoi’s income distribution related to housing typology, 2005. Source: Data are from
Hanoi Integrated Development and Environmental Programme (HAIDEP) Hanoi Institute of
Statistics, 2005, and author’s estimations from field surveys and satellite images.
Figure 6.11 Hanoi’s household income distribution (bottom) and floor consumption (top). Source:
Data are from Hanoi Integrated Development and Environmental Programme (HAIDEP) Hanoi
Institute of Statistics, 2005.
Figure 6.12 Income and housing consumption—market outcome.
Figure 6.13 Impact on housing consumption of removing supply side constraints.
Figure 6.14 Housing consumption with mortgage for some.
Figure 6.15 Government set minimum consumption.
Figure 6.16 Theoretical effects of housing vouchers (partial equilibrium).
Figure 6.17 Impact of public housing supply side subsidies on housing consumption.
Figure 6.18 Number of units supplied under the RDP housing subsidy program and land use
requirements.
Figure 6.19 Gauteng’s spatial distribution of population density, 2001. Sources: Census 2001
Municipal report Gauteng, Statistics South Africa, Pretoria, 2003; vectorization of built-up area using
satellite imagery by Marie-Agnes Bertaud.
Figure 6.20 Typical subsidized RDA housing project in Gauteng.
Figure 6.21 Household income distribution in New York, 2012, showing income ranges that benefit
from inclusionary zoning (red bars) and those that generate subsidies (blue bars). Source: Derived
from US Census American Community Survey, Integrated Public Use Microdata Series, Furman
Center, New York University.Figure 6.22 Market rents and subsidized rent at the VIA 57 building, New York. Sources: Data is
from application from for subsidized apartment at VIA 57 and developer advertisement for market
rate rental in same building.
Figure 6.23 Rents and subsidies received by inclusionary zoning beneficiaries residing in the VIA 57
building, New York. Source: Application form for subsidized apartment at VIA57 and developer
advertisement for market rate rental in same building. http://www.via57west.com/#neighborhood￾gallery; http://www.57and11lottery.com/assets/VIA_Ad_and_ApplicationUpdated￾d02a4451c02942f28cc0fb5af0b9b5f4312dab4999438b7c85c4f01a3071151d.pdf.
Figure 6.24 Kampung and middle-class housing site plans in Surabaya, Indonesia. Source: GIS
analysis of Surabaya topographical map by Marie-Agnes Bertaud.
Figure 6.25 Three-dimensional view and typical land use of a Shenzhen handshake village.
Figure 7.1 Map of regulatory heights within Paris municipality.
Figure 7.2 Regulation of altitudes of the tops of buildings in areas of protection. Meter NGF
(Nivellement General de la France) measured from sea level.
Figure 7.3 Jobs gained and lost in the Paris municipal area and immediate suburbs, between 1996
and 2006. Source: Chambre régionale de commerce et d’industrie, Institut national de la statistique et
des études économiques, Institut d’aménagement et d’urbanisme de d’Île-de-France, 2008.
Figure 7.4 How floor area ratio (FAR) is calculated.
Figure 7.5 M1-5A and M1-5B manufacturing districts in SoHo/NoHo, Manhattan. Source: NYC
Zoning District Map data containing the neighborhood south of Washington Square: M1-5A and M1-
5B. Districts used with the permission of the New York City Department of City Planning. All rights
reserved.
Figure 7.6 FAR values for the commercial zone C4 and its subdivisions.
Figure 7.7 Average increase in population and built-up area in a sample of 200 cities between 2000
and 2013, by region. Sources: Atlas of Urban Expansion 2016, Marron Institute, New York
University; UN Habitat, Lincoln Institute of Land Policy.
Figure 7.8 Urban land consumption per person between 2000 and 2014, by region. Sources: Atlas of
Urban Expansion 2016, Marron Institute, New York University; UN Habitat, Lincoln Institute of
Land Policy.
Figure 7.9 UN Sustainable Development Goals.
Figure 8.1 Monitoring an urban database.
Figure 8.2 Objective tree: impact, outcome, output, and input. Source: Adapted from Roberto Mosse
and Leigh Ellen Sontheimer, “Performance Monitoring Indicators Handbook,” Technical Paper No
334, World Bank, Washington, DC, September 1996.
Figure 8.3 Urban planners and line agencies.
Figure 8.4 Rates of urbanization and urban growth rates by region, 2010–2015. Source: World Bank,
“3.12 World Development Indicators: Urbanization,” Washington, DC, 2017.
Figure 8.5 Population growth rates of Japanese cities above 500,000 people, between 2005 and
2010. Source: Wendell Cox, “Japan’s 2010 Census: Moving to Tokyo,” New Geography, GrandForks, ND, 2011, http://www.newgeography.com/content/002227-japan%E2%80%99s-2010-census￾moving-tokyo.
Figure 8.6 Urban growth rates by region and city size, between 2000 and 2014. Sources: Data are
from United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division (2014).
World Urbanization Prospects: The 2014 Revision, Highlights (ST/ESA/SER.A/352).List of Tables
Table 2.1 Seoul: Spatial changes in the distribution of population and jobs, 2000–2010.
Table 4.1 Density gradient of 12 cities.
Table 4.2 Increase in population and built-up area within the third ring road, Tianjin, 1988–2000.
Table 5.1 Ratio between door-to-door speed and transport vehicle speed.
Table 5.2 Density and share of public transport trips in five sample cities.
Table 5.3 Street area per person, New York and London.
Table 5.4 Densities, percentage of road area, and road area per person in various neighborhoods.
Table 5.5 Street area consumption per person for various modes of transport operating at various
speeds.
Table 5.6 Comparison of distances between stations, speeds, and catchment areas for traditional
subways and high-speed suburban rail.Acknowledgments
The possibility to write this book on cities rested on a few favorable
circumstances that allowed extensive travel during several years and many
chance encounters with skilled and knowledgeable people. Some people
contributed to this book with facts and case studies; some clarified theories
and concepts; some helped focus the book on its essential message; some
encouraged the writing process by their interest in the subject; some had the
essential role of prodding me to keep writing; others, in the final writing
phase, helped improved the clarity of ideas, language, and syntax.
I do not believe a book on cities can be written on a mountain top. It can
only be written while immersed in its subject matter—a large city. The
essence of cities is neither their buildings nor their streets but their people,
who, in close proximity, constantly stimulate one another with new ideas
and invent better ways of doing things. It is fitting, therefore, that the final
phase of this book was completed in New York, a city of many encounters.
It is also in New York that I met by chance John Turner in 1970, just
before leaving for Yemen. Turner’s powerful ideas about the power of
grassroots urban development, forcefully expressed in Freedom to Build,
the book he later edited in 1972, have been constantly on my mind during
my professional career.
New York is a city of these kinds of chance encounters. My wife and I
were very lucky to meet Brent Brolin and his wife, Jean Richard, at an
office party a few weeks after we had arrived in New York in 1968. We
have remained close friends to this day. Brent is an architecture critic and
historian and the author of several books. He believes that architecture and
planning, but most particularly housing, should emerge and evolve from
grassroots cultures, which make them better adapted to their user mores and
to the environment. When we first met Brent, his ideas went completely
against the zeitgeist that promoted an international style pretending to bederived from a universal logic to be applied worldwide. His advocacy of
grassroots solutions has greatly influenced me since. Some of the positive
housing policies and outcomes in China and Indonesia, which I describe in
chapter 6, are a direct illustration of Brent Brolin’s ideas.
It was also in 1968 that we met Rosalie Siegel in a French bookstore in
Manhattan. Rosalie was a bilingual literary agent, immersed in the world of
book publishing her entire life. Years later, she convinced me to write this
book and have it published formally, instead of pursuing my first idea of
just disseminating these chapters in the form of online blog posts. Rosalie
and her husband Evan Wolarsky have remained close friends to this day.
Meeting John Turner, Brent Brolin, and Rosalie Siegel by chance in New
York, and how they subsequently contributed in different ways to this book,
are a vivid example of the spillover effects that can occur in a large city, as I
describe it more theoretically in chapter 2.
Favorable Circumstances: Living and Working in Many Cities
To write a book on cities, it is necessary to know many of them. Cities are
like people—they all share a similar physiology but have very different
personalities that have been formed by their history and their environment.
Urban planners very rarely create new cities from a tabula rasa, although
many dream of being able to do so. Planners must work in existing cities
with long histories. Their job is to improve the way cities function and
eventually help them adapt to changing circumstances. The job of an urban
planner is in many ways like that of a family doctor who tries to heal the
illness of patients and to advise them on how to maintain a healthy life in
the future. Nobody would trust a doctor who has treated only one patient. In
the same way, to contribute to the knowledge and management of cities, an
urban planner should know many cities. Serious working knowledge of
cities’ physiology and pathologies cannot be acquired by just visiting them
while collecting data. To acquire the necessary urban knowledge, an urban
planner must live a nomadic life for an extended time. The possibility to
live this nomadic life over several years was the first favorable
circumstance that allowed me to write this book.
The credit for allowing this favorable circumstance to happen is due
largely to my wife, Marie-Agnes, whose enthusiasm for change and travel
allowed us to move from city to city during our first 15 years of marriage.The observations made at close range during this period of our life
established this book’s empirical foundation.
Marie-Agnes and I were married in Oran, Algeria in 1965. For the next
15 years, we kept moving with our growing family, following the
happenstance of new assignments, driven by our curiosity for new
professional experiences. From Oran, we moved successively to Tlemcen,
Paris, New York, Sana’a, Port-au-Prince, Washington, DC, San Salvador,
back to Washington, then to Bangkok, and finally we settled in Washington,
DC, in 1980. This nomadic life, changing countries and cities 10 times over
15 years, was essential to the gestations of many ideas presented in the
chapters in this book. Marie-Agnes, therefore, deserves the first and more
important credit for this book. Our three children—Yann, Veronique, and
Marion-Xochitl—each born in a different country, accompanied us also in
this initial itinerant life.
Marie-Agnes not only created and maintained a new home in successive
cities as we kept moving, she also shared my passion for understanding the
hidden mechanisms that make cities work. Her experience as a woman
working in series of constantly changing cultures provided many insights,
which contributed to forming our ideas about how cities function and
evolve. In addition, on the job, she developed strong skills in surveying,
mapping, and geographical information systems that she used either
independently as a consultant to international organizations or as a partner
contributing to my own work and to some graphs and maps appearing in
this book.
International Organizations as Collectors and Disseminators of Ideas
The other favorable circumstance that allowed me to write this book was
the possibility of working for international organizations, first the United
Nations Development Programme, then the World Bank, and finally as a
freelance consultant. Working as a consultant for these organizations for the
first 15 years allowed me to live a nomadic life, accumulating observations
and urban knowledge. Later, joining the staff of the World Bank gave me
the chance to work with an international select team of urban economists—
Solly Angel, Patricia Annez-Clarke, Robert Buckley, Man Cho, Larry
Hannah, Kim Kyung-Hwan, Steve Malpezzi, Steve Mayo, Bertrand
Renaud, and Jim Wright—all widely traveled, sharing my passion for
understanding how cities function, and finding out which policies work andwhich do not. While during the 15 years of nomadic life I accumulated
empirical knowledge, during my years as Bank staff, I was able to relate my
field experience to urban economic theory due to the conversations,
debates, and work with my urban colleagues. Many of the concepts
developed in this book came from this interchange.
An added benefit of working for the World Bank Urban Department was
extensive travel to some of the major cities of the world, where I was able
to participate in their development. The identification, appraisal, and
supervision of large urban infrastructure projects and housing policy
reforms allowed me to work with local professionals over a period several
years in the same cities. I gained enormously from this team work with
people who had an intimate knowledge of the potential and the limitations
of their own city. Many of these professionals met during my fieldwork
deeply influenced my understanding of cities. I credit particularly Madame
Bai in Tianjin, Cai Jianmin and Guo Jifu in Beijing, Ronald Contreras and
Alberto Harth in San Salvador, Bimal Patel in Ahmedabad, Vidyadhar
Phatak in Mumbai, Hendropranoto Suselo in Jakarta, Sidhijai Thanpipat in
Bangkok, and Wu Zheng Tong in Shanghai.
The World Bank also gave me an opportunity to meet eminent urban
economists whose books I had read and who had contributed to a better
theoretical understanding of field observations. Meeting in person scholars
like Jan Brueckner, Paul Cheshire, Richard Green, and Edwin Mills was a
privilege.
During the 1990s, working in Russia was a new learning experience.
While the former Soviet Union was certainly not a model of good urban
management, my Russian colleagues, Michael Berezin, Sergei Istomin,
Olga Kaganova, and Leonid Limonov, demonstrated that the failure of the
system was not due to mediocre human capital but to the rigid Leninist
ideology that did not allow brilliant professionals any initiative. The major
failure of Western liberal democracies in dealing with the former Soviet
Union was a failure to recognize that extremely capable people could be
found in failing political systems. The massive technical assistance directed
to former command economies was too often paternalistic, irrelevant, and
humiliating for the local professionals and managers, who could have
carried out the reforms from the inside but were submitted to the “tyranny
of experts” as my New York University colleague William Easterly has
argued in a book.The role of international organizations is often misunderstood, often even
by themselves. Their main role is not to transfer knowledge or resources
from rich countries to poor ones, or from “advanced” to “less advanced.”
The record shows that they are notoriously inefficient at doing so. Their
usefulness is their possibility to acquire knowledge from all the countries
where they operate and disseminate it widely. They play an indispensable
role, like pollinating insects. Insects do not create pollen, they just carry it
randomly from plant to plant. Cities, like plants, are not mobile, they need
an agent that transmits ideas from city to city. This includes documenting
and disseminating successful innovations as well as documenting failed
ones. In a modest way, this book aims at disseminating further the
knowledge accumulated while working in these organizations.The Marron Institute
Finally, when we moved back to the New York area after leaving the World
Bank, another favorable circumstance presented itself. I met the economist
Paul Romer, nearly by chance, through Bob Buckley. Paul had recently
moved from Palo Alto, California, to New York, intending to dedicate his
vast talent and imagination to urban development. Within the academic
structure of New York University, he created and became the director of the
Marron Institute, an institute dedicated to improving the performance of
cities, their spatial development and also their health, safety, mobility, and
inclusiveness. He generously asked me to join the staff, with the
understanding that one of my main tasks would be to finish writing this
book. In the small but select staff of the Marron Institute, I found a
stimulating intellectual environment composed of people sharing the same
passion: developing a better understanding of how cities work, and how
they could be improved through key infrastructure investments and better
regulations. Under the stimulating direction of Paul Romer and the
management of Brandon Fuller, the focus of the Marron Institute has been
operational, relying on the development of quantitative indicators in the
context of a solid theoretical framework.
In the Institute, most of my contacts were with the Urban Expansion
project, led by Solly (Shlomo) Angel. I was happy to work with Solly again.
We had first met in Bangkok in the late 1970s. Years later, we worked
together again in Russia in the 1990s, keeping in loose contact in between.
Although we spent several years without seeing each other, Solly’s urban
ideas and mine ended up converging into one concept: cities should be
allowed to expand as they develop and become wealthier. The main
objective of the planner should be to maintain mobility and housing
affordability as a city’s population increases and it diversifies its activities.
Efforts to coerce a city’s shape into an arbitrary predetermined form or an
arbitrarily set density would always result in adverse consequences for
mobility and affordability.
Marie-Agnes and I soon immersed ourselves in the debates and
conferences organized by the Marron Institute. I found among my new
colleagues the same intense intellectual stimulant that I had found earlier in
the urban group at the World Bank. I am grateful for the exchange and
feedback that they gave me when I gave talks about the main ideas behindthe different chapters of this book. I particularly thank Nicolas Galarza, Eric
Goldwyn, Achilles Kallergis, Patrick Lamson-Hall, and Jonathan Stewart
for the time they spent with me clarifying many of the topics found in the
following chapters. In addition, Jonathan played a particularly important
role in reviewing the early chapters of the book and providing his insights
as an economist.
Eventually, when the writing of this book was sufficiently advanced, I
was asked to teach a course to New York University students. The course,
called “Markets, Design, and the City,” followed the sequence of the book’s
chapters. It was a good way to test its content on the critical minds of NYU
graduate students. It became an occasion for further exchanges of ideas and
perspectives, as the students came from many different countries. We still
meet regularly with some of them, who by now are pursuing careers in
urban planning: Eduard Cabré-Romans, Javier Garciadiego Ruiz, Hannah
Kates, Simon Lim, Jwanah Qudsi, and Amalia Toro Restrepo. Marie-Agnes
and I find these regular reunions with the younger generation particularly
rewarding. We feel privileged to be able to exchange ideas with some of the
new crop of urban professionals who are soon going to influence the
development of the cities of tomorrow.
The Final Phase: Editing and Publishing
Ideas are not enough; a book must be written and published for ideas to be
of any use. I therefore must give credit to the people who encouraged me to
start and to keep writing. Discussing the early drafts with me, they kept me
focused on the story. Marie-Agnes, Robert Buckley, Paul Romer, and my
colleagues at the Marron Institute played this important role with
competence and tenacity. Their obstinate and friendly interest made it
impossible for me to give up half way, despite the difficulties and the
periodic self-doubts. Again, without their friendly prodding and advice, this
book would never have been finished.
During the writing stage, Laura Fox edited the many drafts of this book.
She was the first person to read all the chapters. Laura’s understanding of
urban economics and her familiarity with many cities in the world made her
exceptionally competent as an editor. Laura looked at each chapter’s
structure with a critical eye and underlined with severity any logical
inconsistency; she also corrected with patience the recurring Gallicisms,
and removed any redundant text like a gardener prunes a fruit tree. Shefurther scrutinized the numerous graphs and maps, suggesting changes
when she saw inconsistencies between graphs and text, or a lack of clarity. I
am particularly grateful for this last task. As a former student at the École
des Beaux-Arts, I often reproach economists for their neglect of the
language of graphs. I was glad that Laura was not affected by this bias and
did not hesitate to spend a large amount of time reviewing the quality of the
maps and the graphs contained in this book.
Finally, I must thank MIT Press for having agreed to publish this book
with no hesitations and no red tape. Jane Macdonald established the first
contact at a conference at NYU and reviewed the first three chapters. As the
writing progressed, Emily Taber took over from Jane and finalized the
agreement to publish with MIT Press. Emily provided further guidance on
putting the manuscript in its final phase. I thank Emily for giving friendly,
quick, and clear answers to all the questions, possibly naive, coming from
an author publishing his first book. I also thank the four anonymous
reviewers who provided very useful comments that improved the final
version of the manuscript.1 Economists and Urban Planners: Two Visions of Cities That
Need to Be Merged
Nations stumble upon establishments, which are indeed the result of human action, but not the
execution of any human design.
—Adam Ferguson, An Essay on the History of Civil Science, 1782
Order generated without design can far outstrip plans men consciously contrive.
—Friedrich Hayek, The Fatal Conceit, 1988Markets and Design
This book is about the observed interaction between economic markets and
design in the development of a few cities around the world. Markets are
impersonal, transactional mechanisms resulting from human action (e.g.,
exchanges of value, movement of goods) but not from human design, as
expressed by the Enlightenment-era Scottish philosopher Adam Ferguson.
Indeed, markets create an order generated without design, as argued by
Frederich Hayek, an Austrian-British economist and philosopher who
taught at the London School of Economics, the University of Chicago, and
the University of Freiburg in the middle of the twentieth century. The order
created by markets manifests itself in the shape of cities. Markets transmit
through prices the information generating the spatial order. When prices are
distorted, so is the order generated by markets.
Urban planners—on behalf of politicians—aim to modify that order through
design. These design interventions implemented by planners consist mostly
of regulations and the building of infrastructure and public spaces. The
objective of planning regulations is to modify the outcome of unconstrained
markets to increase the welfare of citizens. What is the extent of the
modification of market outcome achieved by planners? It varies from only
slight modification in a city like Houston, Texas, to complete obliteration in
a city like Brasília, Brazil, and in some cities of the former Soviet Union.
We are facing a strangely paradoxical situation in the way cities are
managed: the professionals in charge of modifying market outcomes
through regulations (planners) know very little about markets, and the
professionals who understand markets (urban economists) are seldom
involved in the design of regulations aimed at restraining these markets. It
is not surprising that the lack of interaction between the two professions
causes serious dysfunction in the development of cities. It is the story of the
blind and the paralytic going their own ways: The planners are blind; they
act without seeing. The economists are paralyzed; they see but do not act.
The main objective of this book is to improve operational urban planning,
as practiced in municipal planning departments, by applying urban
economists’ knowledge (and models) to the design and planning of
regulations and infrastructure. Urban economists understand the functioning
of markets, while planners are often baffled by them. Unfortunately, thevery valuable knowledge that has accumulated in urban economics
literature has not had much impact on operational urban planning. My aim
is not to develop a new urban theory but to introduce already existing urban
economics knowledge into urban planning practices.Urban Planning versus Urban Economics
Urban planning is a craft learned through practice. Planners must make
rapid decisions that have an immediate impact on the ground. The width of
streets, the minimum size of land parcels, and the heights of buildings are
usually based on planners’ decisions. Urban planners are “normative,” that
is, they base their decisions on best professional practices that usually rely
on rules of thumb transmitted from generation to generation. Urban
planners use expressions that are often more qualitative than quantitative.
They like to use adjectives like “sustainable,” “livable,” “compact,”
“resilient,” and “equitable” to characterize their planning objectives.
However, planners seldom feel the need to link these qualitative objectives
to measurable indicators. It is therefore impossible to know if the planning
strategies used are indeed “sustainable” or “livable.” In the absence of
quantitative indicators, one might conclude that these terms are only labels
that provide a kind of moral high ground to whatever urban plan is
proposed.
By contrast, urban economics is a quantitative science, based on theories,
models, and empirical evidence that are developed mostly in academic
settings. Papers published in academic journals are the primary output of
urban economists, and urban economists mostly exchange ideas with other
urban economists. They seldom have direct contact with people in planning
departments who make decisions on zoning or on the alignment of a new
subway line. Economists’ contacts with cities are usually indirect,
consisting mostly of obtaining databases that they analyze with great skill.
There is no obligation to give feedback to the planners.
I believe that applying the theories of urban economics to the practice of
urban planning would greatly improve the productivity of cities and the
welfare of urban citizens; I have seen the benefits of this approach in my
own practice as well as for a small subset of planners. In addition,
convincing urban economists to participate directly in the day-to-day work
of municipal planning departments might, as an added benefit, focus
academic research on current crucial urban development issues. Cities
generate a large amount of data, often recorded in urban departments, but it
remains unused; planners, busy with their day-to-day operational
responsibilities, lack the time and the theoretical background to fully use
the data to guide their decision making. New technologies are creating anabundance of new sources of urban data. Starting in the 1980s, the
availability of satellite imagery allows year-by-year monitoring of the
development of cities; NASA night light imagery provides a useful proxy
for urban economic development; and data from GPS-enabled phones
permits measurement of traffic congestion and commuting times at any time
of the day. The usefulness and significance of these new data sources have
seldom been explored. Economists working in urban departments should be
able to make good use of the data available. This would rapidly increase our
understanding of cities for the greatest benefits of their citizens.A Personal Journey of Discovery
This book is largely based on my personal experience as a practicing urban
planner and on what I learned from urban economists on the job. Urban
planning is a craft learned mostly in the field. I worked in many cities and
many countries during a professional career of about 55 years. Every new
project and every new city contributed to my experience and knowledge. I
have been a resident urban planner for seven cities and consulted for more
than fifty cities. I’m now working at New York University, where I teach
planners and urban economists from around the world. I try to reflect this
experience throughout this book.
Some readers might deplore the fact that I do not devote much space to a
critical review of urban planning theory. Indeed, in this book I do not refer
often to academic debates about the nature of urban planning, or to the
urban planning literature. By contrast, I often quote academic urban
economists, precisely because this discipline appears to me more relevant to
understanding the problem at hand. In writing this book, I have been
inspired by the approach used by Albert Hirschman when confronted with
world development economics. Hirschman’s method was to observe reality
on the ground, analyze the facts, and then develop a theory. He had a
marked skepticism for imported theories and expert opinion. One of his
major books, aptly named Development Projects Observed,
1
is entirely
based on a field survey of development projects around the world. He
summarizes his field method this way: “Immersion in the particular proved,
as usual, essential for the catching of anything general.”
Three major events significantly improved my understanding of cities.
The first was in 1965, when I became, by chance, responsible for
authorizing building permits for the city of Tlemcen in Algeria. I then
discovered how arbitrary and harmful some urban regulations could be, no
matter how well intentioned their original objective had been.
The second major event was in 1974, when for the first time I had the
opportunity to work with an urban economist on a specific project in Haiti
—the master plan of Port-au-Prince. I discovered there that there were
economic theories that explained some of the empirical observations I had
made about cities.
The third event came much later, in 1983 in China and in 1991 in Russia,
when I had the opportunity to work in countries that were just transitioningfrom command economies to markets. By then, I already knew the
indispensable role that land prices and rents played in shaping the spatial
structure of cities. In China and Russia, I witnessed for the first time the
absurdity resulting from planners having to allocate land among users
without the help of land prices, the primary driver of urban markets.
The experience of working in the 1980s and 1990s in China and Russia
was particularly valuable and unique. Large command economies have now
disappeared. The cities of the last two command economies in the world,
North Korea and Cuba, are seldom analyzed. Command economies have
never been very open about sharing data. Unfortunately, the memory of the
poor outcomes created by the command economy experience in the
development of cities seems to have been lost. In this book I will
occasionally remind the reader of the outcomes of the utopian system I
personally witnessed, not only the Marxist experiment in urban planning,
but also other equally utopian ideas based on the design of inspired planners
like Le Corbusier, Lúcio Costa, or Oscar Niemeyer. I sometimes meet
younger colleagues or students taking my course on Market and Design at
New York University who are tempted by the idea of cities designed
entirely by planners without the guidance—they would say hindrance—of
land prices. I hope this book will convince them that there is no need to
repeat this costly utopia.
Approving and Rejecting Building Permits in Tlemcen, Algeria
In 1965, I had not yet completed my architectural and planning studies in
Paris. At that time France still had a military draft, and my student
deferment period had expired. I was lucky enough to spend the last year of
my military service in Algeria as a civilian technical assistant, a sort of
French version of the Peace Corps. Algeria had been independent for only 2
years after a bitter war to free itself from colonial rule. At the time, there
were so few Algerian urban planners that the government appointed me
“Inspecteur de l’Urbanisme” or “Urban Inspector” for Tlemcen, a city of
about 80,000 people in the Western part of Algeria. My job consisted of
preparing new land development plans, but mostly it required spending the
majority of my mornings deciding the fate of building permit applications.
A very experienced administrative assistant, many years my senior,
reviewed the building permit applications the day before I had to make the
final decisions. She prepared letters addressed to the applicants thatapproved or rejected their applications. I had only to sign the letters. The
decision to approve or reject building permits was based on whether the
plans provided by the applicant conformed to the rules contained in the
Code de l’urbanisme. The huge book that contained the rules, norms, and
regulations for land development and construction looked like a family
bible. It certainly had the authority of a Holy Book for urban planners and
for the employees working in the urban planning department. Because
independence was so recent, the Algerian administration had to rely on the
regulations previously imposed by the colonial power. Therefore, the
provisions of the Code de l’urbanisme reflected the practices and norms of
France, a country very different from Algeria in terms of income, culture,
traditions, and climate.
On my first day on the job, to my dismay, about eight out of ten
residential building permits were to be refused. The letters of rejection were
already typed in their final form, including references to the articles of the
“code” that were violated by the plans attached to the request. Most of the
violations had to do with inadequate setbacks as well as window sizes and
locations.
The violations of the code were easy to explain from an economic and
cultural point of view. In the cities of newly independent Algeria, vacant
lots facing a formal street were rare and expensive. The price of land was
such that lots tended to be small in order to remain affordable. Traditional
houses in the old medina of Tlemcen were designed around a central
courtyard, while the building surrounding the courtyard occupied the entire
lot up to the property lines. Because privacy was highly valued, there were
few windows opening onto streets, and these windows were narrow and
placed high on the walls to prevent any direct view from the street into the
house. The applicants for building permits were trying to design a house as
close as possible to their preferred model, but the regulations were designed
to produce a suburban detached house like the ones found in the suburbs of
Paris. The small size of the lots the applicants could afford combined with
the generous setbacks demanded by the regulations made the floor size of
the prospective house much smaller than they would have been if
regulations had allowed them to build a house, with a central courtyard, that
occupied the entire lot. In addition, the requirement of large windows
opening onto the streets was a direct violation of their cultural norms.I had traveled extensively in the Middle East as a student and was well
aware of the cultural differences between the design of houses in the
Southern and Eastern part of the Mediterranean and those of continental
Western Europe. I had also visited some of the elegant houses in the old
medina of Tlemcen and found them, not surprisingly, much better adapted
to the climate and mores of Algeria than were detached French suburban
homes.
During my first 3 days on the job, I reluctantly signed the letters prepared
by my administrative assistant, but with a guilty conscience. By enforcing
the regulations, I was forcing on local people an inadequate design and an
inefficient use of scarce land in the name of abstract norms established long
ago in a distant land with a different climate and culture. I was also aware
that by rejecting building permit applications I was slowing down and
increasing the cost of construction of new dwellings that Algerians
desperately needed. Most of the new immigrants moving from the
countryside to Tlemcen could not afford a formal house, so they built
whatever they could afford in the informal settlements surrounding the city.
By rejecting building permits, I was likely to further increase the growth of
informal settlements. With the end of the war, people were moving to cities
from rural areas in great numbers. They formed tightly packed informal
settlements filling vacant land around cities. These settlements lacked
running water, sewer, and electricity, but the new settlers found their
location close to a city more desirable than the isolation of the scattered
villages and hamlets of the countryside.
On the fourth day, I did not sign the letters but went to see the prefect of
the region. The prefect was the representative of the central government in
Tlemcen and had authority over all the functionaries of the state, including
me. I explained the problem to him: by enforcing the law I was decreasing
the welfare of the inhabitants of the region. As an architect, I asked him for
permission to use my own professional judgment and common sense in
providing building permits, even when some norms were at variance with
the code. The prefect was a young military officer who had fought in the
armies of the National Liberation Front and, like me, was a little puzzled by
all the administrative rules that he was supposed to enforce. He heartily
gave me permission to use common sense. In any other circumstances,
giving permission to ignore the law would have been a crime, but in thefrontier atmosphere of newly independent Algeria, we both got away with
it.Poor Regulations Are Still Common
This episode in my early professional life gave me a healthy skepticism
toward urban regulations that are based on norms whose rationale is seldom
challenged. The dimensional norms that I was supposed to apply were
imposed by the code solely to impose a preset design on residential areas.
They were conceived for the sole purpose of preventing a deviation from
the design that was predominant in the suburbs of French cities. The
regulations had nothing to do with safety or sanitation—I would not have
doubted the wisdom of these types of regulations without expert evidence.
In this case, the circumstances were exceptional. Algeria’s urban
regulations had been imposed by a colonial power, and there had not yet
been time to modify them. My current experience, more than 50 years later,
makes me fear that the same regulations are still on the books in Algeria. To
this day, when working in India, I am still stumbling on some remnants of
the British Town and Country Planning Act passed in 1932, causing similar
welfare reductions in India as the Code de l’urbanisme did in Algeria in
1965.
I do not deny the necessity of urban regulations. But their impact should
be regularly audited to weed out those regulations that have become
irrelevant or even noxious. The original objectives of urban regulations are
often lost and therefore are difficult to question. Urban rules are often
transmitted through generations as traditional wisdom that is seldom
challenged. However, circumstances change, and rules, specifically urban
rules, must be adapted to these new circumstances.
At the time I revolted against the regulations applied to Algeria, I was not
yet aware that the urban economics literature had an abundance of papers
that evaluated the costs and benefits of urban regulations. Unfortunately, to
this day the knowledge accumulated in this economic literature seldom
percolates into urban operational planning practices, and urban regulations
detrimental to the welfare of citizens still survive unchallenged. The
inadequacy of poorly designed urban regulations is not an idiosyncrasy of a
recently independent Algeria. In a recent report, Edward Glaeser,
2 a
prominent American urban economist at Harvard University, writes about
US urban regulations:
Arguably, land use controls have a more widespread impact on the lives of ordinary Americans than
any other regulation. These controls, typically imposed by localities, make housing more expensiveand restrict the growth of America’s most successful metropolitan areas. These regulations have
accreted over time with virtually no cost-benefit analysis.
Although Glaeser is writing about US land use regulations, based on my
worldwide professional experience, his comments also apply to the urban
regulations of most world cities.
I want to make clear that I do not advocate “deregulation” as an
ideological doctrine. Some urban regulations are indispensable. I only
advocate periodically auditing urban regulations to eliminate the ones that
are irrelevant or malignant. This is an exercise that every urban planner
should do on a regular basis. Auditing urban regulations is like periodically
pruning a tree: the objective is not to cut branches but to allow the tree to
develop fully.
The Fortuitous Encounter of an Economist and an Urban Planner in a
Capital City of the Caribbean
My first encounter with an urban economist took place in Port-au-Prince,
Haiti, in 1974. That year, I was going to be the lead urban planner of a
multinational team assembled to prepare the master plan of Port-au-Prince,
a project financed by the United Nations Development Programme. In the
preceding years I had worked as resident urban planner in several cities
around the world, including Chandigarh, India; Tlemcen, Algeria; Sana’a,
Yemen; and Karachi, Pakistan. My experience in those cities had been
purely operational, setting standards for new areas to be developed,
designing low-income housing, and planning new public transport routes. In
addition, I had worked for 2 years in New York City for the Urban Planning
Commission, where I had been conducting some research on the possible
redevelopment of air rights over Park Avenue in Harlem.
I was considered experienced enough by my employers—the United
Nations and a Washington-based US consulting firm for which I worked—
to lead the preparation of a master plan for a capital city; a project that
would require 2½ years of residence at Port-au-Prince. Among the team
members that I met in Port-Au-Prince when we assembled there for the first
time was Jim Wright, a 30-year-old American urban economist who had
graduated from Georgetown University and who had already worked in
Zambia and Bolivia in the Peace Corps.
It was my first encounter with an economist, despite my several years of
urban planning practice. My degree in architecture and urban planning fromthe École des Beaux-Arts in Paris had taught me that a city was to be
designed just like a building—only the scale varied. Urban problems could
be solved through good design. I did not have a clear view of what urban
economists did. Like most urban planners, I did not even make a clear
distinction between an urban economist’s job and that of a financial analyst
or even an accountant. In 2017, I still often encounter urban planners who
do not have a clear view of the difference between economics and
accounting. In their view, an economist is someone who will add up the
costs of an urban project they propose and probably will argue that the costs
are too high despite their “good design.”
During my professional practice, I had observed patterns in the way cities
were spontaneously organized. Land prices decreased as one got farther
away from city centers. When land prices were high, households and firms
consumed less land, and as a consequence, population density increased.
While the objective of urban planning regulations was nearly always to
limit densities, I noticed that they had very little success in doing so when
the price of land was high compared to household income.
These were personal observations on the relationships between densities
and prices. I did not know that a rich theoretical and empirical literature on
the subject helped explain, with the help of mathematical models, why
those patterns emerge spontaneously. Using simple models, economists
could predict in which directions densities were likely to change with
changes in variables like income, price of transport, or price of agricultural
land.
Some readers might think that I may have been an exceptionally ignorant
urban planner. I do not think that I was exceptional: I was rather typical in
my ignorance. In the planning profession, high land prices are often
deplored but are usually thought to be caused by speculators. To this day,
few planners make a connection between land prices and rents, and the
supply of land and floor space. That is why planners who design regulations
that severely limit the extension of cities (e.g., through measures such as
green-belts, designations between urban and agricultural land, etc. explored
in chapter 4) are often surprised by increasing land prices and attribute them
to external factors for which they were not responsible.
The Port-au-Prince ExperienceBecause of the very open personality of Jim Wright, his enthusiasm, and his
competence in his field, I soon learned that urban economics could provide
a theoretical framework and solid empirical evidence to explain facts that I
had observed but could not explain. I was like somebody who, after
spending years observing the planets, has suddenly gained access to
Newton’s law of gravitation.
Our first professional exchange concerned the population growth of Port￾au-Prince. Both the Haitian government and some “experts” sent by the
United Nations had declared that the growth of Port-au-Prince—636,000
inhabitants in 1973, growing at about 5 percent a year—should be stopped
and that the government policy should be to divert migration toward smaller
towns. Jim and I thought this policy absurd, but for different reasons.
I had three main arguments against policy limiting the growth of Port-au￾Prince. The first was that no known urban planning instrument could
prevent people from migrating to large cities, even under the dictatorship of
Jean-Claude Duvalier, who was then Haiti’s “President for Life.”
The second was that I knew that people moved to large cities to find jobs.
They had other choices as well—like migrating to smaller cities or staying
in their villages—but most did not make those decisions. Instead, they
moved into the dense slums of Port-au-Prince, where living conditions were
terrible. This decision was motivated by the living conditions in the rural
areas from which they came, which were even worse.
The fact that, after moving to Port-au-Prince, migrants survived and
remained in the city demonstrated that they could support their families by
the income from their work in the informal or the formal sector. Haiti was
not a welfare state, and their mere survival proved their ingenuity at
integrating into the urban economy. I had often talked to slum dwellers in
India, Algeria, and Yemen, and always found them very practical and full of
common sense. We planners had to trust that migrants moving to the big
city had knowledge that we did not have about living conditions in the city
slums compared to those in the countryside.
Finally, I believe in democracy. In Haiti, under Jean-Claude Duvalier’s
dictatorship, people could not express themselves through the ballot box,
but at least they could vote with their feet by moving to the place that would
enhance their welfare. This form of primitive democracy had to be
respected. The size of cities should be decided by the inhabitants
themselves; cities will stop growing only when the misery of urban slumsbecomes greater than that of the countryside. Only migrants themselves can
make this assessment.
At that time, planners were debating about the optimum size of cities,
usually advocating for a size between half a million and a million people. I
was firmly convinced that the size and growth rate of cities could not be
modified by expert opinion, no matter how scholarly that opinion was.
However, I had to recognize that my strong conviction was only based on
personal observations and anecdotal evidence collected during a short
professional career.
A conversation about the size of cities with Jim Wright, the first
economist I had ever met, was enough to make me aware of a vast
economic literature about the efficiency of large labor markets. I realized
that the field of urban economics complemented urban planning. Jim
Wright shared my opinion about the absurdity of planning Port-au-Prince
assuming a constant or even decreasing future population. However, he
could back up his opinion with a large body of economic literature, based
on both theoretical and empirical evidence. Jim then patiently explained to
me the concept of scale economy, knowledge spillovers, and why large
labor markets were often more productive than smaller ones.
Our professional exchange was not only one way, however. To do his job
as an economist, Jim needed data on Port-au-Prince, and except for the
census and a set of recently taken aerial photographs, very little data were
available. Jim had never worked with an urban planner before. It was my
turn to explain to him that I could rapidly produce data on densities,
housing prices and rents, and time and cost of transport from different parts
of the city just by measuring and interpreting aerial photographs, and
superimposing on the photographs census tracts drawn on tracing paper.
While we were in Yemen, my wife Marie-Agnes, who is also a planner,
and I had developed a set of survey techniques based on the interpretation
of aerial photographs associated with stratified sampling that required only
rapid field surveys. Using these techniques, we could generate credible
urban spatial data in a short time. There was no GIS at that time.
Calculations were done using slide rules, and areas had to be measured on
paper maps using a mechanical planimeter. It was a lengthy and tedious
process, but the information that emerged justified the effort. As planners,
we were using the data generated by our surveys to project the need for
infrastructure and social services per neighborhood, and we could link theseservices to the ability to pay for them based on an evaluation of household
income, rents, and house values in each neighborhood. But our measures
were static: We did not have models to predict trends in population
densities.
Jim, of course, was delighted to learn that he would soon have access to
spatial data, and he was planning to use the data for much more
sophisticated analysis and projections than we had done so far for
infrastructure and services. This is when we decided that our two fields
were indeed complementary and that by working together—an economist
and an urban planner—we could rapidly produce the evidence that would
convince the Haitian government and the United Nations that a larger city
could also become more affluent if we could plan and implement the
minimum physical and social infrastructure that would accommodate the
rapid spatial extension of Port-au-Prince. Jim and I became not only close
professional partners but also good friends, and we have maintained our
close friendship ever since.
Cities without Land and Labor Markets: China 1983, Russia 1991
Planners believe in norms. They happily regulate minimum lot sizes,
minimum dwelling floor sizes, maximum heights of buildings, minimum
street widths, and so forth. However, when trying to enforce these
regulations, they often run into the harsh reality of land prices. What should
be done when many households cannot afford the minimum regulatory lot
size because of high land prices? Planners see land prices as the main
obstacle to affordability. If a government were to replace land markets with
design based on norms, the major obstacle to housing affordability—and to
good planning in general—would be solved. Additionally, land could be
allocated in sufficient quantity to low-, middle-, and high-income housing
on a map. To this day, this is the essence of most master plans.
This urban planner’s dream—where designed norms replace markets for
allocating land—existed in the Soviet Union from 1922 to 1991, and from
1947 to around 2000 in the People’s Republic of China. I had the chance to
work in China and in Russia before land markets were reintroduced, and I
could observe from the inside how a planner’s dream could transform itself
into a terribly wasteful utopia.
My first trip to China was in 1983. I was part of a World Bank team that
was appraising, for prospective financing, a major sewer project inShanghai. My job consisted of assessing population densities, spatial urban
structures, and development trends to ensure that the sewer system financed
by the World Bank maximized economic rate of return for the city and
would benefit a large number of low-income households. I was also asked
to collect data on housing conditions in China to explore the possibility of
housing reform, as the Chinese government had shown a tentative interest
in the subject.
Observing the inner workings of a command economy was an incredible
opportunity to see a live experiment of what happens to a city when prices
are not used to allocate resources. Urban planners have few opportunities to
experiment on the real world. Economists may build mathematical models
mimicking command economies, but observing first hand the impact of an
economic system so different from anything we had seen before was
fascinating for the entire team. Nothing provides a better understanding of
markets than observing a city where market forces do not apply.
Brain surgeons greatly improved their understanding of the functioning
of the brain when they had to treat victims of accidents and wars who had
severe brain injuries. In the same way, planners and economists, familiar
with the functioning of market economies, who worked in China in the
1980s and Russia in the 1990s, improved their understanding of markets by
observing on the ground the spatial outcome of this gigantic social
experiment.Cities without Land Markets
In 1983, China had already started some reforms, but the country was still
largely a command economy. Housing was provided by state-owned
companies. Housing was not considered a commodity to be bought and sold
but a factor of production owned by enterprises that provided housing to
their workers practically rent free.
Salaries were set for each economic sector by the central government.
There was no real labor market, as employees were expected to have
lifelong employment in the same state firm. While changing jobs was
theoretically possible, it usually had to be initiated by the state employer.
Salaries appeared incredibly low to outsiders. My urban planners’
colleagues were paid about US$25 monthly. This was not their real income,
though. In a command economy, the state collects about 90 percent of the
value that a worker produces and gives only “pocket money” in cash to the
worker. Most of a worker’s income is distributed in kind in the form of
housing, food in the enterprise cafeteria, and heavily subsidized clothing
and other consumer items available at nominal prices in each enterprise’s
commissary. Even vacations were usually provided by the work unit. Of
course, as everything was either free or heavily subsidized, rationing and
shortages were the only way to balance supply and demand.
For a planner, the absence of land markets created a striking difference in
land use between Chinese cities and market economies’ cities. According to
the Chinese constitution, land belonged to the “people” and could not be
sold or bought. However, the right to use land was allocated to firms, and
sometimes households, by the Land and Planning Bureau. In the absence of
land prices, the quantity of land to be allocated to different activities was
based on norms established by architects and engineers. These norms were
often originally developed in the Soviet Union in the 1950s and eventually
passed on to the People’s Republic of China. I had an occasion to discuss
norms with my Chinese colleagues, and they were curious to compare their
norms with Western ones. I remember a discussion about the number and
size of barber shops that should be planned per 1,000 people in residential
neighborhoods. I had to use the favorite response of economists to answer
the question from my Chinese counterpart on planning barber shops norms
in the United States: “It all depends!”
Cities without Markets Are an Urban Planner’s Dream …The allocation of urban land following design norms without taking land
prices into account is of course an urban planner’s dream. But for planners
working in market economies, it remained a dream, while in China it was
the daily reality. Planners and engineers like to reason in terms of “needs,”
while urban economists think in terms of scarce resource allocation. Asked
to provide an opinion on the optimum density of a residential area, a
planner will usually provide a number, say, 150 people per hectare. This
estimate would be based on norms—for instance, the density required if the
walking distance to a primary school of optimum size should be less than
15 minutes, or the optimum density to be able to operate a network of
public transport buses that arrive every 15 minutes. Asked the same
question, an urban economist would answer, and rightly so, “it all depends.”
This answer will infuriate urban planners. However, it is obviously correct.
Urban land is a scarce resource, and its price indicates how scarce it is in a
specific location. Therefore, depending on its price, land should be used
parsimoniously where the price is high, resulting in high density, and more
lavishly where it is cheap, resulting in lower densities. From an economist’s
point of view, there is no optimum population density, as density, which is a
land consumption indicator, depends on several variables whose values
change over time even for the same location.
But Norms Are Unable to Allocate Land among Multiple Users
The absence of land prices in China and Russia had an important impact on
the structure of their cities. Because the land occupied by a firm was not
recognized to have value per se, it could not be recycled for another use or
passed to another user, who, in a market economy, would have been bidding
for it. As Chinese cities expanded, there were pockets of industrial land
located close to the city center that could not be reconverted for other uses,
because no mechanism existed to do so.
In a market economy, when the potential rent of a lot is higher than for its
current use, the owner of the lot has a strong incentive to sell or redevelop
the land for a more profitable use. In this way, low-rise buildings are
transformed into high-rise buildings, and warehouses into office buildings.
The increased price of the land under the new use pays for the demolition
and relocation of the obsolete building. The land use transformation process
is triggered by land prices. There is no need for a planner’s intervention to
initiate land use change. The dynamic of market prices is so powerful thatoften planners impose land use regulations to slow down the transformation
triggered by the land market.
In a command economy, there are no price signals, so an obsolete land
use is likely to remain in effect for a very long time. Let us take the
example of a factory built long ago near a city’s central business district, on
what would now be a very desirable piece of land for a department store or
an office building because of its accessibility. The state firm owning the
land use rights cannot move its factory to a different part of town that would
be more convenient for operating a factory, because the land occupied by
the factory has no market value. The firm can only request the government
to provide a new parcel of land in a new location, while probably also
requesting funds to cover the cost of relocating the factory. As one can
imagine, this is not likely to happen often. In a command economy, a land
use change always appears as a cost without any direct apparent benefit
either to the owner of the land use right or to the government department
that will have to authorize the change and pay for it. Even the loss of
productivity due to a poor location will not appear in obvious ways to the
managers of an enterprise, as prices for production are established by the
central government independently of the cost of inputs.
This has consequences for the structure of cities in command economies.
The newest buildings are always found in areas newly developed in the
suburbs. In Russia, for instance, factories built in the nineteenth century or
in the first half of the twentieth century found themselves located in what is
now the downtown area. High-rise residential buildings are found on the
periphery of cities, while low-rise buildings are found closer to the center.
High population densities are found in the suburbs, where land values
would be the lowest if located in a market economy, and low densities are
found close to the city center, where land values would be the highest. One
of my colleagues, an economist from the World Bank named Bertrand
Renaud, and I wrote a paper titled “Cities without Land Markets,” 3 which
summarized our observations of the impact of the absence of prices on land
use in Russian cities.
Does this difference of urban spatial outcome between command and
market economies matter? A Russian colleague, head of a construction
kombinat,
4 once told me, “The Soviet Union had a wonderful system; we
just ran out of money!” This was precisely the point. The inefficiencies of
urban spatial structure, the lack of labor market mobility, the inability of aneconomy based on norms to adjust to evolving technology and to changing
demand for land, contributed to the economic collapse of the Soviet Union,
despite its very well educated and skilled urban population and its abundant
natural resources.
In cities of market economies, urban planners still tend to prefer norms to
prices when allocating land and floor space. In the cities where they are
successful, they may waste land in a way that resembles what happened in
the Soviet Union.
The system allocating resources in the former Soviet Union was so
inefficient that its economy collapsed suddenly. There was not much time to
ensure a smooth transition from one system to another. It resulted in a rapid
and opaque privatization of many state enterprises that produced oligopolies
that only remotely resemble markets. Some Russian cities have real land
market; in others the system of land allocation is less clear.
Under Deng Xiaoping, China chose a different path. It gradually reformed
its system until it made a progressive, orderly transition from a command to
a market economy. However, the shift of the system in China was not due to
an ideological conversion. As Ronald Coase and Ning Wang explained in
their book on China’s reform, “China became capitalist while it was trying
to modernize socialism.” 5 Indeed, the Chinese government allowed cities to
experiment with small-scale labor and land market liberalization before
expanding successful experiments to the entire country. It was only in 2013
that the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party declared that:
The basic economic system should evolve on the decisive role of the market in resource allocation. 6
Urban planners, who still dream about the wonderful cities that they
could design without the hindrance of land markets, should get acquainted
with the experiments made by the Communist Party of China, whose results
drove them to decide that using market prices was a good way to allocate
resources. The Chinese now advocate adopting market mechanism to
allocate land because:
• it sends strong signals through prices when land is underused or the use is
unsuitable for its location;
• it provides a strong incentive to users to use as little land as possible in
areas where there is strong demand, in particular in areas well served by
transport networks; and• it stimulates innovation in construction: without land prices, there would
have been no skyscrapers, no steel frame structures, and no elevators.
A Channel of Communication Is Needed between Urban Planners and
Urban Economists
Do I exaggerate the knowledge gap that exists between urban planning
practices and urban economics? Even today, a first encounter at mid-career
between an experienced urban planner and an economist could still happen.
But unfortunately, most of the time the economist and the planner are likely
to talk past each other, because they are not familiar with the vocabulary
and professional jargon specific to the other’s field.
I think that, worldwide, the unfamiliarity with basic urban economic
concepts by those in charge of managing cities is one of the major problems
of our time. This is a serious issue at a time when cities are the major
engines of economic growth, and living in cities is the only hope of
escaping poverty for billions of people. The constraints put on the supply of
urban land and floor space by restrictive regulations, which have nothing to
do with preserving the environment, are causing severe urban dysfunctions,
which I explore in depth in the following chapters. In poor countries, these
supply constraints are responsible for the severe hardships imposed on
households living in informal settlements. In richer countries, they are
responsible for a lack of mobility of poorer households toward the cities,
where they would be the most productive.
Urban Planners Usually Have a Deep Knowledge of Their Own City
Although, in the following chapters I will at times be critical of the
planning profession, I think that urban planners are often very competent in
managing the day-to-day operations of the city they work in. They usually
know their city in great detail, including the history behind the complex
features of the built environment. They work under great pressure because a
city is constantly transforming itself, and this constant evolution cannot be
delayed by asking for more time for reflection or further studies. They are
also subject to pressure from various interest groups that have a stake in the
changes affecting cities. Some pressure groups would like the city to stay
still; other groups would prefer to accelerate changes. Each of these groups
has a valid point to make. In many cases urban economics could helpprovide a solution based on quantitative reasoning rather than on an
arbitrary normative preference.
Finally, urban planners are also subject to pressure from elected officials,
who want to get things done or at least want to show that they are doing
something in the short time frame of their terms. Land use decisions are,
and should be, political, because there is no scientific way to know what is
best for the future. However, mayors and planners who design the
regulations that modify the outcome of their land markets would greatly
benefit from better knowledge of the way markets function. This
understanding would be more likely to help them develop regulations that
result in an implementation of their objectives.
Urban Planners Are Usually Unfamiliar with Basic Urban Economics
Some urban planners are indeed familiar with urban economics, and they
might regularly contribute papers to economic journals. I know a few of
them, for instance, V. K. Phatak, a Mumbai urbanist, who over the years has
relentlessly pushed to introduce economic thinking into the reform of
Mumbai land use regulatory system. But I am afraid they are not numerous.
I have worked in many cities during my years as Principal Urban Planner of
the World Bank, and later as an independent consultant working directly for
municipalities all over the world. I have found that many urban planners,
even in the very affluent cities of Western Europe, North America, and East
Asia, not only seldom understand how markets work, but are proud to
pretend to ignore them. I have heard mayors and planners complain that
their city had too low density, while simultaneously complaining that land
prices were far too high.
Over the past few years I have reviewed many new master plans for cities
located in various parts of the world. None of them mentioned real estate
markets, land prices, transportation costs, commuting times, or basic supply
and demand concepts. All of them recommended specific densities in
various locations. These densities were selected as if densities were
generated by planners’ design and not by the laws of supply and demand for
land and floor space.
In chapter 4, I give an example of a master plan recently prepared for the
city of Hanoi by a reputable international consulting firm. This urban
development plan, typical of many other plans prepared by planners and
infrastructure engineers, never uses the words “markets,” “land prices,” oreven “household incomes.” As I was taught nearly 55 years ago, it seems
that urban planning is all about design and “needs.”
Urban Economists Are Too Removed from Day-to-Day Operations of
Cities
Urban economists are not innocent, either. They certainly strive for rigor in
their reasoning, and they constantly try to better understand how cities
function and operate. But they seem to avoid being involved in the day-to￾day decisions made in urban planning departments. Possibly they are not
given the opportunity, because they speak a different language,
unintelligible to urban planners. Most of their analytical work, whether
theoretical or empirical, is aimed at their academic peers; the products of
their efforts are papers published in prestigious peer-reviewed journals. I
have not seen many efforts to make the results of urban economic research
operational for cities, framed to have a direct impact on decisions made in
the day-to-day operations of a city.
Of course, I am not the first urban professional to raise the alarm over the
impact of poorly conceived urban regulations that ignore basic urban
economic concepts. Many economists have certainly attempted to influence
how decisions are made by cities. For instance, in the United Kingdom, the
work of Kate Barker, Paul Cheshire, and Alan Evans, among others, has
shown convincingly how urban regulations can have an adverse impact on
land prices and housing supply if poorly conceived. In the United States,
Jan Brueckner, William A. Fischel, Edward Glaeser, and Stephen Malpezzi,
among others, have also looked at the costs and benefits of urban
regulations. Many urban economists have contributed to shaping the
policies of the US Department of Housing and Urban Department (HUD) at
the federal level. Many economists have testified in front of municipal
planning boards and city councils. But the ones who have raised the alarm
about the lack of theoretical and empirical evidence justifying many urban
regulations have always been economists who do not directly participate in
the design of these regulations. No matter how eloquent and convincing
their papers are, they have no way to change a practice in which they do not
directly participate. I have never met an urban economist working as a team
member in a planning department at the time land use regulations were
being designed. In this sense, my working experience in Port-au-Prince
with Jim Wright was rather unique.The Purpose of This Book
I wrote this book with two objectives in mind. First, to familiarize those
urban planners who have not yet met an urban economist with basic urban
economic concepts and how these concepts apply to issues encountered in a
municipal urban planning office. Second, to generate an interest among
urban economists in working in the trenches, side by side with urban
planners. In this way, they could provide economic input to the design of
urban regulations, infrastructure, and urban development strategies when
they are conceived, not after they have been approved by the mayor and
city council.
I would like to convince some economists to participate directly in the
decision making of an urban planning department. For this to happen, urban
economists and urban planners should speak the same language and
understand each other’s jargon. It is impossible to avoid jargon when
practicing a profession. Jargon is a short cut for specialized concepts.
Avoiding it may be possible in a newspaper article aimed at a mass
audience, but rarely in professional communication.
I hope that this book will contribute to the communication between urban
economists and planners by familiarizing planners with concepts like
negative externalities and opportunity costs, and helping urban economist
learn about the different ways of calculating a floor area ratio or population
density.Notes
1. Albert O. Hirschman, Development Projects Observed (Washington, DC: Brookings Institution
Press, 1967), 296.
2. Edward Glaeser, “Reforming Land Use Regulations,” in Series on Market and Government
Failures (Washington, DC: Brookings Institution, Center on Regulation and Markets, March 2017),
2.
3. Alain Bertaud and Bertrand Renaud, “Socialist Cities without Land Markets,” Journal of Urban
Economics 41, no. 1 (1997): 137–151.
4. Kombinats in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe were large vertical monopolies that usually
spanned one industrial sector. For instance, the kombinat in this story operated sand quarries, cement
factories, concrete panel factories, and housing construction for a region. Sometimes the kombinat
also extended horizontally, operating farms to provide food to its workers.
5. Ronald Coase and Ning Wang, How China Became Capitalist (London: Palgrave Macmillan,
2012), 154.
6. China Daily (Beijing), November 16, 2013, “Decisions on Major Issues Concerning
Comprehensively Deepening Reforms,” adopted during the Third Plenary Session of the eighteenth
meeting of the Communist Party of China Central Committee on November 12, 2013.2 Cities as Labor Markets
The Efficiency of Large Labor Markets Is the Main Cause of Ever￾Growing CitiesCities Are Primarily Labor Markets
Cities are primarily labor markets. This claim may seem terribly
reductionist to the many among us who love cities. Certainly, the attractions
offered by the amenities of a large city cannot be reduced such that the
whole is seen merely as a place where firms are looking for labor and
people are looking for jobs.
During the French “cultural revolution” of May 1968, students were
deriding a life reduced to only three activities: “Metro, boulot, dodo,”
which can be roughly translated by “commuting, working, sleeping.” This
became one of the most ubiquitous tags on Paris walls. The students were
revolting against what I, more pedantically, call an urban labor market.
They had a strong point: I have seen such reduced forms of urban life in
many malfunctioning cities with dysfunctional labor markets. Better land
use and transport improve the way that labor markets function, allowing for
the core indispensable values of urban life beyond “Metro, boulot, dodo”:
• a commute short enough that one has time for leisure activities,
• an open job market that allows one to change jobs and—through trial and
error—find a job that best suits, and
• a residence from which access to social life or nature is quick and easy.
So even though I am not implying that a city’s only purpose is as a labor
marketplace, I am arguing that without a functioning labor market, there is
no city. Try thinking of an alternative explanation for the existence of very
large cities. A city nucleus might have been created originally as a
commercial port, a trading post, an administrative center, a military
stronghold, or a center of religious pilgrimage, but over the years, the
growth of a diversified labor force would be the only possible cause for the
expansion of the original urban nucleus. While most cities offer a lot more
than job opportunities, it is important to recognize that the expansion of job
markets makes everything else possible. A well-functioning labor market
brings together people with varied but complementary knowledge and skills
—the preconditions for innovation. A well-functioning labor market makes
possible every other urban attraction—symphonic orchestra, museums, art
galleries, public libraries, well-designed public spaces, and great
restaurants, among many others. In turn, these typically urban amenities
require additional specialized jobs and attract an even more diversepopulation, which becomes the source of future innovations and a more
interesting urban life.
Usually when a city’s population is growing, it means that its labor
market is growing. But a segment of any urban population (usually between
35 and 50 percent) does not participate directly in the labor market.
Statisticians rightly call the nonactive segment the “dependent” population.
Its members—including retired people, infants, students, and prison inmates
—are not part of the labor market and participate in the urban economy
only as consumers. 1
People migrating from other cities once they have reached retirement age
may be the cause of the growth of a few cities whose growth is more driven
by consumer markets than by labor markets. These types of cities might
become more common in the twenty-first century with the projected aging
of the world population. The retiree population of these cities is expected to
consume a lot of services in health care facilities, restaurants, and
entertainment venues. The growth of these “retiree” cities would then be
caused by the dual effect of both the retirees’ migration and that of
additional workers to staff the services required by the retirees. These
retiree cities would not require spatial concentration and are unlikely to
create much economic dynamism. The eventual growth of retiree cities is
the only exception to growth created by the efficiency of large labor
markets. And, of course, the retirement income of retirees will have been
generated by efficiently working labor markets in other large cities.
Large Labor Markets Are More Productive Than Small Ones
Economists have convincingly demonstrated the productivity advantage of
larger cities over smaller ones. Large cities generate economies of scale that
allow enterprises to reduce their costs by increasing output, thereby
reducing costs per unit. Economies of scale are only possible in cities with a
large labor market. When many related activities are located in close
proximity, they generate what economists call “knowledge spillovers.” New
ways of doing things in one firm are soon imitated by other firms and
eventually by other sectors as a result of the proximity and close contact
among workers of different firms and sectors in the urban economy.
For instance, the first users of electronic spreadsheets on microcomputers
(in the early 1980s) were mostly accountants and financial analysts. The use
of spreadsheets soon became common in all sectors of the economy, but thespillover occurred first in large cities, spreading from MIT in Cambridge,
Massachusetts, where it was originally invented. Knowledge spillovers are
responsible for agglomeration economies (i.e., economies that increase
productivity due to the rapid dissemination of new ideas because of large
numbers of workers in close contact). 2 Agglomeration economies also
result from a lowering of transaction costs in larger cities because of the
proximity of competing suppliers and consumers.
Economic literature linking the wealth of cities to spatial concentration is
quite abundant and is no longer controversial in academic circles. National
accounts show that the output share of large cities is always much higher
than their share of the national population. The 2009 World Bank
Development Report “Reshaping Economic Geography,” and the report of
the Commission on Growth and Development “Urbanization and Growth”
(published the same year) exhaustively summarize and document the
theoretical and empirical arguments justifying the economic advantage
provided by the spatial concentration of economic activities in large cities.
But if larger cities are more productive than smaller ones, why are large
cities not growing faster than small ones? And why do many households
and firms choose to remain in or even move to smaller cities when they
could instead settle in the more productive environment provided by larger
cities?
The Proportion of Smaller Cities to Larger Ones Stays Constant over
Time: On Average, All Grow at about the Same Rate
Data on city size distribution by country or by region show that the
proportion of small to medium and large cities stays roughly constant over
time. When households decide to migrate and firms decide to select a
location for a new enterprise, they are as likely to choose a small city as a
larger one.
The Canadian economist Vernon Henderson, who pioneered work on the
growth rate and size distribution of cities in various countries, shows the
regularities found in the distribution of city size across countries except for
anomalies in the former Soviet Union and China. In his book Planet of
Cities, Shlomo Angel summarizes previous studies on the subject and
addresses the issue of worldwide city size distribution. 3 Angel based his
analysis on a reliable worldwide database. His conclusions confirm
previous, less exhaustive studies.Planet of Cities proves that on average, large cities are growing at about
the same rate as medium and small cities in the same countries or regions. It
seems that cities’ growth rates follow Gibrat’s law of proportionate effect,
which states that the size of a city is not an indicator of its future growth
rate—that is, cities’ growth rates are random, with the same average
expected growth rate and same variance. In any given region, the
distribution of cities of various sizes therefore remains stable. The
population of larger cities keeps growing, but on average, so do smaller
cities. This seems paradoxical, given that larger cities are more productive
than smaller ones. However, larger cities do not play the same economic
role as smaller ones do. They complement each other’s activities. The
increased productivity of larger cities is therefore linked to the existence
and growth of smaller cities. In turn, smaller cities’ economic growth is
dependent on larger cities’ innovations and inventions.
Some Cities Keep Growing, While Others Don’t
The rate of population growth is determined by economic opportunity,
which in turn is largely determined by the comparative advantage of a city’s
location and its population’s capacity for innovation. But the economic
advantage provided by location is not necessarily permanent; it may
increase, decrease, or even vanish with technological change. Being close to
an obsidian mine might have been a decisive advantage for the early Middle
Eastern cities like Çatalhöyük described by Jane Jacobs, 4 but that
advantage disappeared when obsidian ceased to be the preferred material
for tools and weapons. The Anatolian cities, whose economies had not been
able to diversify into activities other than obsidian’s craft and trade,
inevitably shrank and eventually disappeared. The dominance of New York
as the United States’ main eastern seaport was made possible by the
comparative advantage provided by the Erie Canal. By the time railways
made waterway transport obsolete, New York’s population had accumulated
such a high level of diversified, specialized skills that it continued to thrive
without having to rely on the advantage conferred by proximity to the canal.
The history of the world’s cities is full of examples of large cities
dominating their regions for a time and then shrinking back to a smaller size
or even into oblivion. In 1050, Cordoba, in the south of Spain, was the
largest city in Europe with 450,000 inhabitants, followed by Palermo,
Sicily, with a population of 350,000. By the middle of the fourteenthcentury, the population of both cities had shrunk to 60,000 and 50,000,
respectively, because their respective locations had become less important
to eastbound trade routes. In the eleventh century, Kaifeng in China was
probably the largest city in the world, with 700,000 people, while Shenzhen
was not even on the map. Today, Shenzhen has 10 million people, and over
the past 10 centuries, Kaifeng’s population has barely increased to 800,000
people—a stasis determined by the economic center and political capital
having moved to other cities in later dynasties.
Why Don’t Households and Firms All Migrate to Larger Cities, Where
Productivity and Salaries Are Higher?
In spite of the prospect of higher productivities, only some types of firms
can benefit from moving to a larger city. Firms established in larger cities
require greater capital and higher operation and maintenance costs than
those located in smaller cities. Land and rents are more expensive in larger
cities than in smaller ones. Distances traveled are longer, and the
“congestion tax” is higher. In addition, not every enterprise can benefit from
economies of scale or agglomeration economies.
Moving to a smaller city where land is cheaper and salaries are lower
makes economic sense for firms whose activities require a lot of land and
labor that is not particularly specialized. For instance, activities like
furniture making require a lot of land and easy truck access to transport the
bulky materials necessary for the finished product. They require skilled, but
not particularly specialized, labor. Furniture manufacturers therefore have
no reason to relocate to a large city, where land and labor would be
expensive and where moving bulky raw materials and finished products in
and out of the factory would be inefficient and costly. These types of firms
tend to locate their manufacturing activities in smaller cities. However,
furniture makers may require innovative designers, who may not be found
in smaller cities. In such cases, these businesses may need to subcontract
the design of furniture to a firm located in a large city, where talented
designers are more likely to be found and where agglomeration economies
and idea spillover, both important for a design firm, are also more likely to
occur. Such firms as furniture makers can carry out their highly specialized
and innovative activities—design and marketing, for instance—in large
cities. Their repetitive and land-intensive activities (manufacturing) can be
carried out in smaller cities. In this way, they can enjoy the advantages ofboth a large city (innovation, specialized labor) and a smaller one (low land
and labor costs).
Speedier and cheaper communication over the past 20 years, including
widespread adoption of the Internet, has contributed to the splitting up of
large firms into various departments located in cities of different sizes.
Specialized tasks (e.g., design, marketing, export promotion) can take place
in larger cities, where the requisite innovators and specialized labor force
are more likely to be found, while more routine manufacturing can take
place in smaller cities. In addition, large firms increasingly subcontract
tasks to smaller firms that are often located in different areas. The same
factors have likely led to the growth of both large and small cities, allowing
them to specialize in what they do best.
For instance, the corporate headquarters of Herman Miller, a company
specializing in office furniture of high design quality, is based in Zeeland,
Michigan, a town of about 5,500 people. However, it recently advertised for
a creative director to be located in its New York City office. By splitting the
location where manufacturing and design take place, Herman Miller is
taking advantage of the cheap land and labor in Zeeland, and of the
innovative environment of New York. In this case the economies of both
cities benefit. A similar rationale could be applied by workers who prefer
either to remain in large cities or to migrate to smaller cities: the latter have
lower salaries but also lower rents, lower commuting costs, and often a
better natural environment.
Some services are likely to thrive in both large and small cities and are
thus not dependent on the advantage provided by location. Fast food
restaurants, barber shops, and laundry services, for instance, follow the
labor force of more specialized firms wherever they locate, contributing to
the even growth rate of small and larger cities.
The Planners’Anti-Big-City Bias and Their Attempts to Balance
Growth
Cities grow when their labor markets expand. This economic expansion is
usually the result of a comparative advantage gained from location or an
exceptional concentration of skilled workers. The rate of a city’s population
growth cannot be attributed to advance planning. Instead it is due to a
combination of exogenous and endogenous circumstances. To the chagrinof urban planners, a city’s growth rate over the mid or long term is largely
unpredictable, and it is futile to pretend it is the result of careful planning.
Planners and city managers have traditionally been concerned about the
unplanned growth of large cities because of the complexity involved in
managing them, the difficulty integrating poor migrants from rural areas
into city life, and an instinctive aversion to anything that seems
“undesigned.” Planners have even described the growth of large, dominant
cities like Paris or Mexico City as “cancerous.”
The aversion to unplanned or to asymmetrical spatial patterns is quite
apparent in most urban planners’ approach. Some planners look at a
country’s map and observe that some regions contain many cities while
others have only a few. They incorrectly conclude that this “imbalance”
represents an inequity due to parasitic urban activities or to other market
failures. In their view, it then becomes the responsibility of the government
to modify the imbalance and to remove this regional inequity through
national spatial planning, with the declared objective of restoring a regional
symmetry in the spatial distribution of cities. However, the assumption that
national spatial planning can modify the distribution of urban populations in
order to reach a new, planner-designed spatial equilibrium is false.
Cities that have a decisive comparative advantage, either because of their
location or because of their large specialized and innovative labor pool, are
likely to grow. People migrate toward cities where economic and social
opportunities are best, from their point of view. The idea that a city’s
economic and demographic growth rate is due to parasitic activities
occurring to the detriment of other cities is fanciful—unless, of course,
piracy, smuggling, or other unlawful or predatory activities are its main
cause.
The assumption that the preparation of national or regional plans would
result in a predictable urban growth rate for each individual city in a region
is also demonstrably false. Unfortunately, in many countries this common
planning conceit has resulted in misallocated public investments and
regulatory impediments that have decreased cities’ productivity. In reality,
planners have very little influence on city size distribution and city growth
rates, unless they take active, targeted measures to destroy the urban
economies of the cities that have grown “too large.” The Khmer Rouge’s
urban policy applied to Cambodia in the late 1970s was an extreme andbrutal example of planners’ temporarily successful attempt to manage city
size by forcefully reallocating urban population to rural areas.
As a consequence of the planners’ hubris about the necessity of managing
city size, many regional plans designed in the second half of the twentieth
century have promoted regulatory limits on the growth of large cities. These
were combined with planned infrastructure investment aimed at stimulating
the growth of smaller cities, which were deemed more manageable. A
seminal and influential paper published in 1947, calling for a national plan
for the spatial development of France, was titled “Paris and the French
Desert,” implying that the growth of Paris had occurred at the expense of
the French provincial towns. Anyone familiar with French provincial towns
would recognize their comparison to a barren desert as a slightly comical
but gross exaggeration. While it is possible that the centralizing tendency of
successive governments since the French Revolution of 1789 contributed to
Paris’s rapid growth, the problem, if it exists, lies with the political system.
Preventing investments in the capital while directing large resources toward
provincial towns is unlikely to change a city size hierarchy caused by an
idiosyncratic political system whose reforms fail to allow for more
decentralized decisions.
In 1956, the Indian government adopted a policy dictating that new
industries should locate in “backward areas.” At the same time, it prevented
further development of manufacturing in large cities. 5 Through this policy,
the government committed itself to correcting regional imbalance and to
preventing further industrial growth in cities of more than 500,000. In 1988,
the negative impact of the policy was compounded by an interdiction that
new industries locate less than 50 kilometers from cities with a population
of more than 2.5 million and within 30 kilometers of cities with a
population between 1.5 million and 2.5 million. As one can easily imagine,
the latter policy didn’t prevent the growth of industries in successful cities
like Mumbai or Bangalore with a population significantly bigger than 2.5
million; it just made it more expensive for these industries to expand there.
More tragically, it diverted scarce government infrastructure resources to
regions with weak potential while starving large metropolitan areas of
desperately needed investment, even though the latter areas were where
most people were migrating. The current poor performance of public
infrastructure—roads, transport, sewer, drainage, and power—in majorIndian cities is in part the result of misguided national spatial policy
conducted over the past 50 years.
If planners are unable to control the growth rate of cities, how can we
explain the successful growth of entirely planned cities like St. Petersburg;
Brasília, Brazil; or Shenzhen, created ex nihilo by powerful rulers as
diverse as Peter the Great, Juscelino Kubitschek, and Deng Xiaoping?
These planned cities became large and successful as the result of two major
factors:
• First, each city’s location was selected because of a geopolitical necessity
6
 and not because of an abstract planning concept.
• Second, each city had the strong political and financial support of a
powerful ruler of a very large country. This support allowed these cities to
sink large amounts of money into infrastructure investment without having
to borrow and tax their own initially fledgling economies.
Other examples of this abound. Politicians created new capital cities like
Washington, DC (United States), Canberra (Australia), Islamabad
(Pakistan), Abuja (Nigeria), and Naypyidaw (Myanmar). All are capitals of
large countries and were initially without economic base beyond the
national government bureaucracy. The “cost is no object” concept presided
over their construction and ensured their initial survival, as they were
financed by taxes paid by the rest of the country, and they constituted a
captive labor market composed of government employees. Eventually, a
more diversified labor market grafted itself onto the government activities.
During the 70 years of the Soviet Union, planners decided which cities
should grow and which should not. No city could grow without supporting
resources allocated from the Gosplan, 7 a specialized ministry in Moscow.
The government had the means to enforce the movement of people, and
migrations toward selected locations in the Soviet Union’s vast hinterland
were often involuntary. Many new cities were created for various political
or perceived economic reasons, but none of these cities was the result of
voluntary migration of firms and people toward areas that represented better
opportunities.
In 2010, traveling to Moscow as a consultant, I was asked by the ministry
of construction to provide advice on how to proceed for the “closing” of 60
cities that the Russian government had identified as no longer viable. The
government could not continue to support social services and infrastructurein cities that had been abandoned by the large monopolistic industries that
were originally their raison d’être. The labor market had disappeared, but
the laborers were still there; closing down these cities would entail another
forced migration of several million people. Apartments that had recently
privatized represented most people’s only asset; however, because the
apartments had become worthless, their owners were unable to move. The
closing of cities in Russia is an extreme illustration of the danger of creating
cities based on so-called planning criteria without an economic base and of
using forced migrations or heavy subsidies to promote urban growth.
Why Planners Should Not Try to Alter the Distribution of City Sizes
In countries and regions, a natural equilibrium is reached between the size
of the population and the firms choosing to settle in small, medium, and
large cities. This equilibrium is created by the accumulated decisions of
firms and households to “vote with their feet,” thereby selecting to move to
the cities that will grow and to leave the cities or villages that have less
potential. The spontaneous spatial equilibrium created by the sum of
uncoordinated, individual decisions illustrates the principle of Order
without Design that will be further developed in this book.
With the exception of the few geopolitical examples mentioned above,
planners have no credible rationale for intervening directly in the location
and growth rate of cities. Planners should no more “encourage”—a favorite
word in the planning literature—the growth of large cities at the expense of
smaller cities than they should discourage that growth. History has shown
that these types of planner initiatives are bound to fail or, worse, to create
serious diseconomies, making a country poorer. The size of a city does not
make it automatically more productive—large, dense refugee camps are less
productive than small towns, although they may provide shelter to several
hundred thousand inhabitants. To increase productivity, a city must have
certain preconditions:
1.  Firms and households have the freedom to stay put or migrate at will,
2.  Travel within the city remains fast and cheap, and
3.  Real estate is sufficiently affordable that it does not distort the allocation
of labor.
I will review each of these preconditions in the following sections. For
each, because households and firms have the most invested in the
successful outcomes of their moves, we have to trust that the majority ofthem have enough information to justify their choices. Planners, in contrast,
lack the information about the economy of individual firms and households
that would be necessary to make informed decisions about the advantages
and disadvantages of locating in a small, medium, or large city.
We will see below that planners’ “optimum design” hubris is not limited
to the size and location of cities. Within cities, too, they attempt to regulate
both where households and firms should locate and the quantity of land and
floor space they should consume. As we will also see, planners do have a
crucial role to play in the development of cities, in particular in the
development of their infrastructure. However, it must be clear that
allocating land and floor space in specific locations is not their role.
A City’s Productivity Depends on Its Ability to Maintain Mobility as Its
Built-Up Area Grows
Mobility, which I would argue is the centerpiece of our national productivity, is neither highly valued
nor understood among public officials.
—Alan Pisarski, Commuting in America III: The Third National Report on Commuting Patterns and
Trends, 2006
Good management can therefore increase indefinitely the “optimal” size of a city.
—Rémy Prud’homme and Chang-Woon Lee, Size, Sprawl, Speed and the Efficiency of Cities, 1998
Larger labor markets are made possible by an increase in the mobility of
people and goods. Advances in urban transport technology have improved
the mobility of people and goods, which in turn has contributed to the
growth of large cities during the past 150 years. Improvements to transport
technology have also made possible the spatial concentration of both people
and fixed capital. Economists describe fixed capital as factories, office
buildings, houses, apartment buildings, community facilities, and
infrastructure. In the past 50 years, increasing returns to scale in
agglomeration economies as a result of this spatial concentration have led to
the emergence of megacities.
The potential economic advantages of large cities are reaped only if
workers, consumers, and suppliers are able to exchange labor, goods, and
ideas with minimum friction and to multiply face-to-face contacts with
minimum time commitments and cost. As a city grows, it is important to
monitor mobility by comparing how average travel times and transport
costs vary over time, as productivity cannot increase without fast and cheaptravel (see chapter 5 for a full discussion of travel times and transport
costs).
The Daily Human Tide: The Challenge of Moving People and Goods
The necessity of managing urban growth rather than to trying to slow it
down is finally being understood by mayors, city managers, and urban
planners. An increase in city size is not the only condition necessary to
increase productivity. Productivity increases with city size only if the
transportation network is able to connect workers with firms and providers
of goods and services with consumers. This connectivity is difficult to
achieve in large cities as it requires consistency among a number of factors:
land use and investments for transport networks; pricing decisions for road
use, parking, and transit fares; and collection of local taxes and user fees. In
their 2009 book, aptly titled Mobility First, Sam Staley and Adrian Moore
describe in detail the cross-disciplinary reforms in road and urban transport
design and in road pricing, among other things, that would be required to
maintain mobility in cities in the twenty-first century. 
8
Failure to manage urban transportation in a manner that maintains
mobility results in congestion. Congestion decreases labor mobility and
productivity and is in fact avoidable in large cities. Its presence represents a
failure on the part of city managers. Congestion has a dual negative effect:
It acts as a tax on productivity by tying down people and goods, and it
degrades the environment and increases greenhouse gas emissions. It is
conceivable that in the future, some mismanaged large cities may reach a
level of congestion and pollution whose combined negative effects could
offset the economic advantage of spatial concentration. These cities would
then stop growing, and the economic advantage of spatial concentration
would be taxed away by congestion and an unsafe environment.
Given this potential scenario, the positive economic effect of
agglomeration must be very powerful in cities like Bangkok and Jakarta,
where urban productivity continues to offset the price of chronic
congestion. It is difficult to assess a city’s productivity just by visiting, but
traffic congestion is clearly apparent even on a short visit to either city. But
even the spectacular and semi-permanent traffic congestion in these
economic powerhouses (or in Beijing as well) does not cancel the
productivity advantage of their large population concentrations.Maintaining mobility while a city’s built-up area and its population are
growing is not easy. For centuries of urban development, walking was an
adequate means of urban transportation. At the beginning of the industrial
era, one could walk from the periphery to the center of each of the largest
European and American cities in less than an hour. In the 1830s, the area
occupied by each of the three largest cities in the Western world—Moscow,
London, and Paris—was less than 60 square kilometers. By contrast, the
built-up areas of today’s largest cities cover several thousand square
kilometers each. In large modern cities, mobility can be maintained only
with an elaborate system of transport, usually combining private and public
modes of travel. The frequency of face-to-face contact among the millions
of people living in large cities depends entirely on the efficiency of a
motorized urban transport system.
The Spatial Pattern of Labor Mobility
Every day in urban areas, the millions of people who constitute the active
population leave their homes to travel to their places of work, usually
located in parts of the metropolitan area other than the ones in which they
live. Every evening these same people come back home. In between, they
may drop off their children at school, stop to buy groceries, or meet friends
at a coffee shop. These daily trips originate and terminate at people’s homes
but also include their workplaces and any number of amenities—
restaurants, museums, supermarkets, cinemas, and the like. The commute
constitutes a daily tide moving back and forth in a predictable manner, with
peak hours and ebb times, from home to workplace and amenities and back.
In addition to trips by commuters and consumers originating in
residential areas, economic activities generate freight trips between firms’
locations and increasingly, with the growth of e-commerce, from firms
directly to their consumers in residential locations. Firms in large cities
need to be constantly supplied both with merchandise to be sold in shops
and with the materials and parts to be used in manufacturing. These freight
trips do not follow the same patterns as commuting trips and are often
ignored by planners. In a typical city in an OECD 9 country, freight trips
may represent 10−15 percent of the total vehicle kilometers traveled. When
roads are congested, the tax on productivity affects both labor and freight
mobility.A city’s economy is therefore dependent on the repetitive flow of
commuting and freight trips. If by chance a snowstorm, a flood, or a public
transport strike forces these trips to be canceled, the city’s economy freezes
immediately and remains frozen until the daily commuting tide resumes.
Commuting Time and Commuting Cost Limit the Size of Labor
Markets
Obviously, the money and time that workers are willing to spend on
commuting are limited. These limits impose a constraint on the commuting
distance, and as a consequence, on the size of the urban labor market. For
very-low-income workers—whose income is nearly entirely devoted to
food and shelter—the cost of commuting is a more binding constraint than
the time spent commuting. As a household’s disposable income increases,
the cost of transport becomes a smaller fraction of income (typically less
than 15 percent), and the time spent commuting becomes the major
constraint for workers, limiting the size of the labor market. Because the
time spent commuting is a dead loss for both individuals and employers, the
size and efficiency of a labor market depends on how short, cheap, and
comfortable the commute is. The maximum cost in time and cash that
workers are willing to spend commuting will therefore dictate the size of
the labor market and, by extension, the productivity of a city.
Urban commuting surveys indicate that the median travel time across
cities and countries is, and for a long time has been, remarkably stable, with
an approximate mean of 30 minutes each way. Only a small percentage of
commuters in large cities have a total commuting time of more than 1 hour
per day. In 2009, the mean travel time in US metropolitan areas was 26
minutes; however, in New York, the largest US metropolitan area, with 19
million people, it was 35 minutes.
Figure 2.1 compares the distribution of commuting travel time (one way)
between an average of US metropolitan areas; the Paris metropolitan area;
and Gauteng, the South African metropolitan area that includes
Johannesburg and Pretoria (12.3 million people in 2011). Gauteng has one
of the worst dispersions of population and jobs that I have ever
encountered. This dispersion is caused by the legacy of apartheid that will
take many more years to cure, and by an unfortunate housing policy that is
discussed in chapter 6.Figure 2.1
Distribution of commuting times in US cities, Paris, and in Gauteng, South Africa. Sources: United
States: US Census Bureau, 2010 American Community Survey, tables S0802 and B08303; South
Africa: Statistics South Africa, Department of Transport Gauteng Households Travel Survey, figure
3.10, Pretoria, South Africa, 2009; Paris: Direction des statistiques démographiques et sociales,
“Enquête nationale transport et déplacements 2007–2008,” Institut national de la statistique et des
études économiques, Paris, 2011.
In spite of the difference in their economies, urban structures, cultures,
and topographies, approximately a third of commuters in Gauteng, Paris,
and US cities spend 15−29 minutes on travel time one way. The percentage
of commuters who spend less than 15 minutes on travel time is significantly
higher in the US cities, and the percentage who spend either 30−59 minutes
or more than 60 minutes is significantly higher in Gauteng. In addition,
Gauteng has an unemployment rate of 25 percent in 2014. It is possible that,
given Gauteng’s population dispersion, the poorer workers living in dense
but remote townships cannot afford the cost of commuting to those jobs that
are farthest away from their homes. If they were able to afford the trip cost,
their commuting time would probably increase the number of commuters in
the more-than-60 minutes category.
The distribution of commuting time for metropolitan areas around the
world is unfortunately not often measured outside major OECD cities. It is,
however, important data for assessing the effective size of labor markets.
The distribution of US city commuting times represents probably one of the
best in the world (this assertion may seem surprising to some; it will be
discussed in detail in chapter 5). From my own experience, Gauteng must
represent one of the worst commuting-time distributions in the world. If this
is true, then the graph shown on Figure 2.1 shows a good approximation of
the variations in commuting time distribution in large metropolitan areas at
the beginning of the twentieth century. The goal of urban planning shouldbe to reduce the commuting time of the worst performers by improving the
speed of transport and decreasing the regulatory constraints that tend to
disperse population artificially.
In the following chapters, I will consider that an hour’s commute (one
way) is the absolute limit when defining the spatial extent of a labor market.
For a worker, the number of jobs that can be reached within a travel time of
less than 1 hour defines the size of his labor market.
One could argue that the number of jobs for which a particular worker
would be qualified or in which he would be interested would be much
smaller than the total number of jobs accessible within an hour of his home.
This is true, but increasingly specialized jobs have led to a greater
dependence on the physical proximity of people with other specialties and
skills. In the service industry in particular, which constitutes a large portion
of the jobs in large cities, wide varieties of skills are needed in close
proximity. For instance, a lawyer who specializes in European agriculture
regulations would not be very productive if she were surrounded only by
people with the same skills. To be effective, she will have to be in close
contact with other specialists in taxation and import tariffs, and she will
need to engage the services of workers who will fix her computer, clean her
office, deliver coffee to the board room, and prepare and serve the food that
she will eat at lunch. In the same way, an unskilled industrial worker is
likely to work in a factory requiring a large array of workers specialized in
electronics, mechanics, labor law, insurance, and so on.
The idea that a lawyer needs to access only areas where lawyers are
likely to work while an industrial worker needs to access only industrial
areas no longer corresponds to the reality of job distribution in a large
modern city. Our European agriculture regulations specialist may only be
interested in a few jobs, and these few jobs are likely to be randomly
distributed among many other jobs. For this reason, the larger the total
number of jobs is, the greater will be the chances that a few highly
specialized jobs are among them. In addition, the larger the number of jobs
accessible within an hour’s commute, the better will be the ability to change
jobs when desired. This type of labor mobility—the ability to change jobs
in different economic sectors—benefits both individual workers and the city
economy by redistributing labor where it will provide the most benefits.The Effective Size of the Labor Market Depends on Travel Time and
the Spatial Distribution of Jobs
The impact of travel time, size of labor markets, and spatial distribution of
jobs on urban productivity has been convincingly demonstrated for
European and Korean cities by Prud’homme and Lee 10 and for US cities by
Melo, Graham, Levinston, and Aarabi. 11 Prud’homme and Lee’s paper,
titled “Size, Sprawl, Speed and the Efficiency of Cities,” shows that
productivity per worker is closely correlated to the average number of jobs
per worker that are reachable in less than 60 minutes. In Korean cities, a 10
percent increase in the number of jobs accessible per worker corresponds to
a 2.4 percent increase in workers’ productivity. Additionally, for 25 French
cities, a 10 percent increase in average commuting speed, all other things
remaining constant, increases the size of the labor market by 15−18 percent.
In the United States, Melo et al. show that the productivity effect of
accessibility, measured by an increase in wages, is correlated to the number
of jobs per worker accessible within a 60-minute commuting range.
Productivity increases as accessibility does due to the following: when
individuals are able to optimize individual labor decisions, firms have the
most productive people in jobs, and aggregate output increases. Beyond 20
minutes of travel time, worker productivity still increases, but its rate
decays and practically disappears beyond 60 minutes.
Both papers demonstrate that workers’ mobility—their ability to reach a
large number of potential jobs in as short a travel time as possible—is a key
factor in increasing the productivity of large cities and the welfare of their
workers. Large agglomerations of workers do not ensure high productivity
in the absence of worker mobility. Therefore the time spent commuting
should be a key indicator in assessing the way large cities are managed.
As Prud’homme and Lee write in their paper (p. 2), “the benefits
associated with city size are only potential, they are contingent on the
quality of management. City size would therefore define an efficiency
frontier, with effective efficiency often significantly below this frontier.”
The “quality of management” as defined by Prud’homme and Lee in large
part is the ability of the local government to adapt the transport system to
the spatial structure so that workers can access a maximum number of jobs
in less than 60 minutes of one-way-trip travel time.The effective size of a city’s labor market is, therefore, not necessarily
equal to the number of jobs available in its metropolitan area but to the
average number of jobs per worker accessible in a 1-hour commute.
Depending on the speed of the transport system, the effective size of the
labor market could be equal to the total number of jobs available in a city or
to only a fraction of it. The location of workers’ residences relative to their
jobs and the commute time will determine the effective size of a labor
market and, therefore, the additional productivity that could be gained by
the economies of scale and agglomeration described earlier.
I will illustrate the relationship between speed of transport, effective size of
labor market, and spatial distribution of jobs by using a schematic
representation of a city as shown in figure 2.2. Imagine a linear city, where
workers’ residences are spread evenly between a and e. Jobs are
concentrated in only three locations b, c, and d. Each location contains 1/3
of all jobs. The speed of transport is uniform within the city and is
represented by the arrows showing travel times between different points. It
takes 2 hours to travel from a to e, which are on opposite outer edges of the
hypothetical city.
Figure 2.2
Distribution of workers’ residences and job locations in a hypothetical linear city.
Workers living between b and d can reach 100 percent of the jobs in less
than 1 hour, but workers living between a and b can reach only the jobs
located in b and c in less than 1 hour; jobs located in d are out of reach for
workers living between a and b. Similarly, workers living between d and e
can reach only the jobs located in c and d; the jobs located in b are out of
reach. As a consequence, 50 percent of the workers (those living between b
and d) have access to 100 percent of the jobs in less than 1 hour of travel
time, while the other 50 percent (those living between a and b and betweend and e) only have access to 2/3 of all the jobs. Therefore, the effective size
of the labor market represented in figure 2.2 is only 83 percent of all the
jobs available in the city: (50 percent × 3/3) + (50 percent × 2/3) = 83.3
percent. If the speed of transport could be increased so that one could travel
from a to d and from e to b within 1 hour, rather than the 90 minutes each
trip currently takes, then the effective size of the job market would be 100
percent of all jobs available (100 percent × 3/3 = 100 percent).
The effective size of a labor market depends on commuting travel speeds
and the relative location of workers’ residences to their jobs. This
dependence may be illustrated in a less abstract way by representing a city
as a two-dimensional object (rather than the one-dimensional linear
representation of figure 2.2) and by showing alternative arrangements for
travel speeds and job locations.
Equation 2.1 Calculation of the effective size of labor markets
Equation 2.1: Size of labor market calculation
In a less schematic description of a city, the effective size of labor markets can be calculated
as follows. Let us assume that the city is divided into polygons identified by their number i.
The effective size of its labor market can be expressed aswhere
J is an indicator of the effective size of the labor market expressed as the average
percentage of total jobs accessible in less than 1 hour of commute time per worker;
wi
 is the number of workers living in location i;
ji
 is the number of jobs accessible in less than 1 hour of commute time of location i; and
ni
 is the number of jobs in location i.
This type of calculation would have been prohibitively labor intensive before the
availability of GIS technology, but it is now quite feasible to update this indicator regularly.
Different transport modes and networks could be tested for their potential impact on the
effective size of the labor market.
Figure 2.3 shows a schematic representation of a built-up urban area,
represented by a circle. In this circle, smaller red circles represent job
locations. Horizontally, I have shown three types of spatial distribution for
jobs: monocentric, where all jobs are concentrated in a central business
district (CBD); polycentric, where jobs are concentrated in three clusters;
and dispersed, where jobs are uniformly distributed in the built-up area. For
each pattern of job distribution, an arrow shows the maximum travel
distance that a worker can cover in 1 hour from the outer edge of the urban
area. The different arrow lengths correspond to different travel speeds.
Figure 2.3
Labor market type, speed of travel, and job location.
We will see how different commuting speeds have an impact on the
effective size of the labor market, depending on the spatial distribution of
jobs.
In the three graphs in the top row of figure 2.3, I have adjusted the speed
of travel to allow for accessibility to all jobs in less than 1 hour. On the
bottom row, at a lower travel speeds, the workers residing on the peripherycan access only a fraction of the jobs in less than 1 hour. The labor market
in this case is fragmented and is therefore less efficient than the unified one
represented in the top row. In a monocentric or polycentric clustered area,
workers who live in a more central area may have access to all jobs in the
built-up area, but workers living on the periphery have access to only a
fraction of the total jobs available in the city. In this case, the implied
productivity of a large labor market is not fully realized. A decrease in
commuting travel speed fragments large labor markets into smaller ones
and results in a decrease in urban productivity. Increasing travel speed
decreases the difference between the effective labor market (the number of
jobs accessible in an hour’s commute) and the nominal labor market (the
total number of jobs in a metropolitan area).
For a given built-up area, the pattern of job distribution is important when
defining access to the labor market. When jobs are clustered in a CBD, the
distance from all jobs to all residential locations is much shorter than it is
when jobs are randomly distributed in the built-up area. This does not
necessarily demonstrate that the CBD model is the most efficient pattern or
that it will ensure full access to the labor market for everyone. It is true that
a centrally located CBD 12
that contains 100 percent of all jobs would
decrease the distance from one’s residence to one’s job for everyone.
However, the size of labor markets is limited not only by distance but also
by travel time. Therefore, speed of transport (distance/time) is the key
parameter that allows access to the maximum number of jobs.
The convergence of all commuting routes 13
toward a CBD usually
creates congestion and slows the speed of travel. In contrast, when jobs are
dispersed in suburban locations, there is no convergence of routes, and
transport speed is usually faster. The average surface transport speed in the
center of Paris (within 5 kilometers of City Hall) is about 12 km/h; rush￾hour speeds in the suburbs (20 kilometers from City Hall) are about 50
km/h. (Thanks to improvement in GPS technology, we are now able to
check variations in rush hour speeds on the Internet in real time for many
cities in the world.)
In areas where the major road network was originally designed for a
monocentric city, commuting routes from suburb to suburb may be less
direct than they should be; this is the case in Paris, Atlanta, and Shanghai.
Initially, suburb-to-suburb commuting routes may have to follow minor
roads and may include awkward major-road crossings. There is usually along time lag before a municipality is able to adjust the design of a major￾road network from monocentric to a gridlike pattern that will better serve
new, emerging routes among suburbs.
In chapter 5, I discuss the influence of different transport modes—cars,
public buses, or subways—on transport costs and travel times for various
types of urban spatial structure in which population and job densities are
distributed differently in the built-up area.
The schematic representation of spatial structure in figure 2.3 is very
crude, but it clearly illustrates the impact of speed of travel and job location
on the effective size of a labor market. In the next chapter, we will explore
more complex and more realistic urban forms and their impact on mobility
and land affordability.
In cities where job accessibility has been measured, the number of jobs
accessible by commuting time shows large variations. For instance,
Prud’homme and Lee (p. 6) noted that in Seoul, “in 1998 the average
worker has in 60 minutes access to only 51% of all the jobs offered by the
city; and the average enterprise has 56% of all the workers at less than 60
minutes.” The additional subway lines built since that date must have
increased the effective size of the labor market in Seoul. A comparison of
car commuting across US cities in 2010 calculated by David Livingston 14
shows amazing differences in accessibility between US cities ( figure 2.4).
Within a 30-minute drive, 2.4 million jobs can be accessed in Los Angeles
compared with 0.6 million in Atlanta. However, four of the five cities
represented in figure 2.4 allow access to all jobs within 60 minutes.Figure 2.4
Average number of jobs accessible to workers in various US cities, 2010.
The labor market shapes the pattern of commuting trips. Source: David Levinson, “Access across
America,” Center for Transportation Studies, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, 2013.
As we have seen in Figure 2.3, a majority of jobs may be concentrated in
a central business district, be clustered in several centers, or be completely
dispersed across a metropolitan area. I will discuss in more detail in
chapters 3 and 4 why jobs are located where they are and how this pattern
usually evolves with time. For the moment, let us look only at the possible
trip patterns that would allow the labor market to function within each of
the following spatial distributions of jobs.
Figure 2.5 illustrates in a schematic manner the most typical trip patterns
in metropolitan areas. These trip patterns are based on the structure of the
labor market (see figure 2.3). Two labor market structures impact trip
patterns—monocentric and dispersed—resulting in three observed models
of commuting-route patterns based on labor market structure, labeled from
A to C in figure 2.5:
Figure 2.5
Model trip patterns in metropolitan areas.
A. The monocentric model—most jobs are concentrated in a dense CBD;
trip routes follow radial roads and converge on the CBD. Of course, no real
city is ever strictly monocentric; a number of jobs are necessarily found
inside residential areas, for instance in schools, dispensaries, gas stations,
and grocery stores. Monocentricity is really measured by degree rather than
in absolute terms. A city where more than 50 percent of the jobs are located
in the CBD is predominantly monocentric. To my knowledge, no
metropolitan area with a population of more than 5 million meets this
criterion.
B. The dispersed model—most jobs are concentrated in small clusters or
completely dispersed among residential areas; trip routes are randomlydistributed in the built-up area. If speed of transport allows it, some workers
will commute from one edge of the metropolitan area to its opposite edge.
As in the monocentric model, workers residing closer to the centroid of the
built-up area are closer to all jobs than are workers residing at the edge.
Firms located closer to the built-up area centroid are also closer to all
workers. However, because commuting speeds are usually not the same
near the centroid and at the periphery, firms located close to the periphery
might be accessible in shorter time by more workers than firms located
close to the centroid. In part, this explains why firms do not cluster close to
the centroid, even though doing so would put them at a shorter distance
from all their potential workers.
C. The composite model—a significant fraction of all jobs are
concentrated (say, 30 percent) in a dense CBD, but most jobs are randomly
distributed in the rest of the built-up area. Trip routes toward the CBD
follow radial roads, while trip routes toward dispersed jobs are randomly
distributed but usually avoid the congestion of the CBD. This is the most
usual pattern of trips in large cities in Asia and Europe today.
There is also a fourth model of trips that doesn’t exist in the real world
but is very often presented in master plans as being a desirable alternative to
the three trip patterns described above. Because of the prevalence of this
conceit in many urban master plans, this utopian alternative trip pattern,
labeled D in figure 2.5, needs to be discussed:
D. The so-called Urban Village Model—jobs are concentrated in many
small clusters. In this model, there are many centers, but commuters travel
only to the center that is closest to their residence. The trips toward each job
cluster follow radial routes centered on each cluster and behave as if each
cluster were an isolated, monocentric city. According to this model, a large
city can be made up of many self-sufficient, small monocentric cities.
Unfortunately, the urban village model exists only in the minds of urban
planners. Otherwise, it would be a very attractive model, which is why
urban planners favor it, as it would not require significant investment in
transportation or roads. Furthermore, it would dramatically reduce vehicle
kilometers traveled and, as a result, greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions.
According to the proponents of this model, everybody could walk or
bicycle to work, even in a very large metropolis. To allow a city to grow, it
would only be necessary to add more clusters. The assumption behind thismodel is either that urban planners would be able to perfectly match work
places and residences, or that workers and employers would spontaneously
organize themselves into the appropriate clusters.
This model does not exist in the real world, because it contradicts the
economic justification of large cities: the efficiency of large labor markets.
Employers do not select their employees based on their places of residence;
neither do specialized workers select their jobs based on proximity from
their residences.
The urban village model implies a systematic fragmentation of labor
markets in a large metropolis and does not make economic sense in the real
world. A firm that would be satisfied to restrict the selection of its
employees to the vicinity of its factory or office would not need to locate in
a large metropolis where rents and salaries are higher. This firm could
locate in a small town where the unspecialized workers it seeks could be
recruited for a lower salary. In the same way, a worker living in a large city
and looking for a new job would try to maximize job satisfaction measured
in part through salary, level of interest in the work and its compatibility
with skillset, attractiveness of the work environment, and so forth. The time
spent commuting might certainly be a consideration in seeking a job, but if
the commuting time were less than 1 hour, it would likely not be a
determining factor.
The five satellite towns built around Seoul are an example of an attempt
to implement the urban village concept. The government built the new
towns under the assumptions that they would be self-contained and that
most inhabitants would work and live within their own towns. To achieve
this objective, planners carefully balanced the number of projected jobs in
each town with the number of projected inhabitants. However, subsequent
surveys showed that most people living in the new satellite towns
commuted to work in the Seoul metropolitan area, and most of the jobs in
the satellite towns were filled by people living outside them. 15 The trip
pattern found in satellite towns is consistent with the hypothesis stated at
the beginning of this chapter: A large unified labor market is the
justification for large cities. It’s likely that some households initially
decided to move to Seoul’s satellite towns because apartments were cheaper
than in Seoul’s core city or because the environment was better and newer.
It is also probable that when these households moved, the heads of
household were already employed somewhere in Seoul. After all, had theynot been employed, they likely would not have been able to buy a new
apartment. Furthermore, after moving to a satellite town, it is unlikely that
they would quit their current jobs to find equivalent jobs in the town. The
same line of reasoning holds for firms moving to a satellite town. A firm
might move from the central city to find cheaper rent or more space, but
many of its employees would likely decide to keep their jobs and commute
from the core city to the satellite town.
How Common Are Each of the Three Models of Spatial Arrangement?
The spatial distributions of jobs, and as a consequence commuting trip
patterns, evolve as cities become larger and more affluent. The monocentric
model is a simple, primitive city model that inevitably evolves over time
into a more complex form, more closely resembling the composite model.
Once jobs have dispersed into a pattern similar to the dispersed model or
composite model, it is unlikely that they will eventually concentrate again
in a dense, central CBD. This path dependency 16 rule, common to all
evolving shapes, is a reality that should seriously limit the freedom of
planners to dream up new urban forms. Planners should take into account
the path dependency of city shapes when designing new transport systems,
as we will see in chapter 5 on mobility.
None of the three models discussed above are immutable. Future urban
labor markets, for instance, might not require as many face-to-face
interactions among employees, customers, and suppliers as they have in the
past. New models of trip patterns might emerge in the future that reflect the
new requirements of an evolving labor market. For instance, the recent
emergence of telecommuting has put into question not only the pattern of
commuting trips but also the very need for commuting. So we should
remain agnostic regarding the patterns of commuting trips 20 years from
now. However, we can look at the trend in trip patterns over the past
decades to inform our understanding going forward. This trend reflects path
dependency, as mentioned above.
What effect could a large increase in telecommuting have on current trip
patterns? So far, the effect has been modest. In fact, there is a hint that this
modest trend may reverse itself among high-tech companies that were the
first to initiate it. In 2013, Yahoo’s new CEO announced a reversal of its
telecommuting policy, which confirmed what we already knew: thatserendipitous face-to-face contacts between professionals are necessary for
innovation.
However, the question remains: How often should those face-to-face
interactions occur? Once a week? Every other day? How large should the
groups needing face-to-face interaction be? How much serendipity is
required to generate innovation? Whatever the answer, telecommuting will
certainly decrease daily commuting flow and change traffic flows, but it
will not completely eliminate a worker’s need for spatial proximity to his
employer or to other workers with complementary skills. It is quite possible
that telecommuting will decrease in firms requiring innovation and increase
in firms engaged in routine data processing. But one lesson is clear: we
cannot plan for it, and we must monitor carefully the spatial implication of
this trend and support it with adequate transport infrastructure.
Although the large metropolises of the world show a great variety of
histories, cultures, and incomes, the trends (when the data exist to measure
them) seem to converge to a greater spatial dispersion of jobs. This trend
seems counterintuitive, particularly as the CBDs in an increasing number of
cities compete for the distinction of world’s tallest skyscraper. But we must
realize that a prime office skyscraper contains fewer workers per hectare
than the five-story sweatshop that it likely replaced.
Because of the very low built-up densities of US cities, their spatial trend
might not be representative of most world cities. However, the US trend has
the advantage of being well documented and may still provide some
insights into the way changes in labor markets impact urban land use. In
1995 and 2005, Alan Pisarski conducted the most comprehensive
nationwide studies of commuting in the United States. The trends he
measured over a 10-year interval are clear: the ratio between jobs and
resident workers is decreasing in central cities and increasing in suburban
areas. Pisarski’s studies clearly show that, on average, US metropolitan
areas are slowly evolving from a composite model (figure 2.5, pattern C), to
a more dispersed model (pattern B). Furthermore, Pisarski’s studies indicate
that the job concentration in the traditional CBD is constantly decreasing
not in absolute terms but as a proportion of the total number of metropolitan
jobs.
Pisarski’s reports show that in smaller US metropolitan areas, those with
fewer than 100,000 people, commuting trips 17
to the CBD represent about
50 percent of all trips—a good approximation of the monocentric model.However, for larger metropolitan areas, those with populations of more than
2 million people, the trips to the CBD drop to about or below 24 percent.
This is also observed in very large metropolises with a well-marked,
dominant CBD, such as Seoul, New York, or Paris. For instance, in the New
York metropolitan area, 24.3 percent of trips are from the suburbs to
Manhattan or within Manhattan; 2.1 percent of trips are from Manhattan to
the suburbs, and most trips (73.6 percent) are from suburb to suburb. The
pattern of trips in metropolitan New York illustrates what I have called the
composite model (figure 2.5, pattern C).
Outside the United States, the trends of large metropolitan areas also
seem to move toward the composite model, even in cities like Paris, with a
historically dominant and prestigious center and a radial/concentric transit
system providing excellent access to the center. In the Paris metropolitan
area (defined as the Île-de-France region), trips within and to the Paris
municipality (historical Paris) represent 30 percent of the total commuting
trips, and 70 percent of trips are from suburb to suburb ( figure 2.6).
Figure 2.6
Trip patterns in metropolitan Paris. Sources: “Les déplacements des Franciliens en 2001–2002,”
Direction regionale de l’equipement d’Île-de-France, 2005, Paris Cedex 15; built-up area, digitization
of satellite imagery by Marie-Agnes Bertaud.
Large metropolitan areas of Asia, although much denser than US or
European cities, display the same trends in the suburbanization of jobs and
people. Seoul’s metropolitan area, with a population of 24.7 million in
2010, is representative of the trend in prosperous East Asian cities that haveseen a significant increase in population and household income in the past
30 years ( figure 2.7). In Seoul, between 2000 and 2010, the population
decreased by 0.5 percent in the central city,
18 and it increased by 92 percent
in outer suburbs located more than 20 kilometers from the city center due to
the development of transport infrastructure ( table 2.1). During the same 10-
year period, the spatial distribution of jobs has been more dispersed, with
16 percent of the new jobs being added to the CBD, while 59 percent were
added to outer suburbs more than 20 kilometers from the CBD. Seoul,
however, still remains more monocentric than Paris or New York, with 31
percent of all metropolitan jobs concentrated in the central city.
Figure 2.7
Changes in population and job distributions over time, Seoul metropolitan area. Sources: Population
and job data: Seoul Metropolitan Government Statistical Unit, Census 2000, 2010; built-up areas and
densities: GIS analysis by Marie-Agnes Bertaud.
Table 2.1
Seoul: Spatial changes in the distribution of population and jobs, 2000–2010.
As we can see from the historical trend, the monocentric model tends to
break down when a city becomes larger. However, empirical evidence does
not show an obvious population size threshold beyond which cities cease to
thrive as dominantly monocentric. Sometimes topography—rivers or
mountains—prevents direct communication from suburb to suburb andtherefore maintains monocentricity in spite of a large population. An
original network of primary radial roads will reinforce a high degree of
monocentricity as a city expands by making it easier to go to the CBD than
to peripheral locations. This type of radial network can be seen in European
cities like Berlin, Copenhagen, and Paris. By contrast, a primary grid
network would rapidly encourage the creation of subcenters with good
overall accessibility as a city develops. This has been the case for Los
Angeles, Houston, and Omaha. The grids in these cities sometimes become
irregular, but the availability of wide roads, perpendicular to the radial roads
at the fringe of urbanization, stimulates the creation of subcenters and
perhaps even encourages job dispersion, because wide roads allow for
higher driving speeds and, therefore, for faster accessibility to areas farther
away from the radial roads. Thus a grid network of roads encourages an
early shift toward polycentricity.
The Efficient Operation of Labor Markets Requires Mobility and
Affordability
Mobility should be understood in two ways, while affordability ensures that
mobility is not distorted:
1.  Firms and households have the freedom to stay put or migrate at will.
2.  Travel within the city remains fast and cheap.
3.  Real estate is sufficiently affordable that it does not distort the allocation
of labor.
The ability of households and firms to choose where they locate depends
on the availability of land and floor space in the areas of the city they deem
to have the most favorable benefits—for households, the proximity to jobs
and amenities; and for firms, the proximity to clients, employees, and
suppliers. Theoretically, the lowest-income household or the least well￾capitalized firm should be able to locate anywhere in a city, even where
land is the most expensive, if they are allowed to consume as little land as
they require. The food carts of Manhattan and the tiny paanwalas 19 stalls of
Mumbai demonstrate this point. These small businesses sell cheap products
but thrive in their expensive locations by consuming only 2 or 3 square
meters of land, as opposed to the several hundred square meters occupied
by most shops in the same area. Farmers’ markets and flea markets are otherexamples of the trade-off between location and land consumption allowing
low-margin businesses to thrive in expensive locations.
Equivalent examples exist for housing; for instance, Paris’s chambres de
bonne 20 are located in the city’s most expensive neighborhoods. Typically
as small as 9 square meters, they allow students or low-income workers to
afford housing in a very favorable location. The residential plots in
Indonesia’s kampungs 21 are another example of the demand for centrally
located residences with low land and floor consumption. The availability of
these residences allows the poor to consider the trade-offs they want to
make regarding location and land consumption. If water, sanitation, and
refuse management are adequate, a small, inner city location might be a
desirable trade-off compared to a suburban one far from jobs, amenities,
and social services. Whether chambres de bonnes or kampungs, the
neighborhoods in which such dwellings are located are by no means slums,
in spite of the very small size of their dwellings (to be discussed in depth in
chapter 6).
Unfortunately, well-intentioned regulations often prevent the poor from
making these trade-offs between floor space consumption and location.
Urban regulations typically require a “generous” minimum floor space
standard for housing. These well-intentioned regulations exclude the poor
because the high price of floor area makes it too expensive for them to
afford the minimum standard. In Paris, chambres de bonne exist only in
housing built before 1930; they are prohibited in apartment buildings that
are more recent. These unfortunate regulations reduce the mobility of the
poor. As a consequence, their participation in the full labor market is also
restricted. In chapter 4, I describe in more detail other urban regulations that
reduce the mobility of the poor.
In South Africa, the government housing program for the poor illustrates
how well-intentioned planners may limit residents’ mobility, reduce their
participation in the labor market, and increase their travel time. Starting in
1995, the government embarked on a massive housing program to improve
the living conditions of the victims of apartheid. The program aimed to
provide subsidized housing to about 80 percent of the poorest South
Africans. By 2012, it had already delivered 3.5 million urban dwelling
units, a unique quantitative achievement for a government housing
program. The standards are generous: 400 square meters per lot, 65 square
meters of floor space per house, wide vehicular access roads, and schoolsequipped with large sports grounds and within walking distance, among
other things. The space standards are fixed and similar all over urban South
Africa. The subsidy is also fixed, amounting to about 150,000 rand
(US$16,000) per dwelling in 2012. The only dependent variable is the price
of land. Land for this massive program must be very cheap to allow
beneficiaries to enjoy the high space standards prescribed by the program.
As a result, the new subsidized housing projects are all located in the far
periphery of cities, in settlements that are too dispersed to be easily serviced
by public transport. Because of the remote location, the beneficiaries of
these projects have a hard time finding employment. Those who are
employed pay as much as 50 percent of their income on transport, even
when sharing taxis with other commuters. This dramatic example illustrates
why planners should not make trade-off decisions involving location and
land consumption for households and firms.
In the case of South Africa, the outcome is indeed comfortable housing
for poor people, but the large subsidy attached to a house in a distant
location prevents the beneficiaries from participating in the labor market.
High-standard housing provided to poor people in a remote location
becomes a poverty trap. The subsidies are not to blame here. The error is
not only tying the subsidy to a specific location but also deciding on the
location versus land consumption trade-off without having solicited input
from the beneficiaries. A portable subsidy—that is, a lump sum given to
poor households to use for shelter anywhere in the metropolitan area—is
significantly preferable.
Because planners lack information to make informed decisions about the
difficult trade-offs between location and land consumption, they shouldn’t
have the authority to make these types of decisions. Only a free market
allows households and firms to choose the trades-offs that best allow them
to maximize their comfort and their participation in the labor market. In the
following chapters, I will use the mobility and affordability criteria to assess
the efficiency of different urban forms. To benefit fully from a large labor
market, households and firms must have ease of mobility. As such, there
must be sufficient, affordable options that allow them to make the trade-off
decisions between location and land consumption that best suit their needs.
Cities Viewed as Labor Markets: Operational ImplicationsLooking at cities as unified labor markets should change the generally
negative views that urban planners hold regarding mobility. Planners
believe that one of their most important tasks is to decrease nuisances
created by urbanization, particularly vehicular traffic. They are right—
decreasing congestion and pollution is one of the most pressing challenges
brought on by urbanization. However, planners, in their enthusiasm to
reduce nuisances, often fail to understand the differences between the
objective of increasing mobility and the constraint of decreasing the
nuisances it creates.
One of the main objectives of urban planning is maintaining mobility—
preventing an increase in commuting time as the size of the labor market
increases. In other words, the main objective of planning should be to
increase the speed of urban transport as a city’s size increases. Decreasing
the level of nuisances due to transport is a constraint that may increase the
cost of achieving the objective. But this cost is fully justified if the marginal
cost of reducing nuisances is lower than the marginal increase in
productivity due to the expansion of the labor market. For instance,
charging vehicles in proportion to the pollution they create or imposing tolls
on highways to reduce congestion would increase the cost of transport but
at the same time would also increase its efficiency, allow for higher speeds,
and improve environmental quality.
However, too often planners substitute the constraint for the objective.
For instance, advocates of “smart growth” imply that the reduction of
congestion and pollution is the main objective of urban planning. They soon
realize that nothing will reduce congestion and pollution more certainly
than a decrease in mobility. Reducing mobility is then considered a
desirable outcome and is the logical consequence of the confusion between
objectives and constraints. For this reason, planners design “urban village”
spatial arrangements (see figure 2.5, pattern D), which implicitly reduce
mobility.
Matching employment location with residence in large metropolitan areas
has become the Holy Grail of urban planners. This recurrent conceit,
motivating many master plans and many land use regulations, 22 can only be
explained by ignorance of the economic efficiency of large labor markets
and the mobility that large labor markets require to function. The choice of
spatial location is best left to households and firms themselves.In the following chapters, the functioning of labor markets will be my
guiding principle in evaluating alternative spatial arrangements. I will use
“mobility” to designate the ability to reach any area of a metropolitan area
in as short a travel time as possible. I will use “affordability” to designate
the ability of households and firms to locate in whichever area they deem
will maximize their welfare. Increasing mobility and affordability are the
two main objectives of urban planning. These two objectives are directly
related to the overall goal of maximizing the size of a city’s labor markets,
and therefore, its economic prosperity.Notes
1. Edward L. Glaeser, Jed Kolko, and Albert Saiz, “Consumer City,” Journal of Economic
Geography 1, no. 1 (2001): 27–50.
2. The Internet is certainly able to spread knowledge quickly without requiring spatial concentration.
However, the impact of the Internet on disseminating knowledge might be similar to that of books: it
makes knowledge available quickly and cheaply, but it doesn’t replace the serendipity of a random
meeting of people with similar interests.
3. Shlomo Angel, Planet of Cities (Cambridge, MA: Lincoln Institute of Land Policy, 2012).
4. Jane Jacobs, The Economy of Cities (New York: Random House, 1969). I do not wish to involve
myself in the debate raised by Jane Jacobs, whether cities preceded agriculture. The existence of an
obsidian industry in Çatalhöyük ca. 7000 B.C. is well established by archeologists.
5. Industrial Policy Resolution of the Government of India adopted in 1956 under the provisions of
the Industrial Development and Regulation Act, 1951.
6. St. Petersburg was created by Peter the Great to open a port toward Western Europe in order to
gain new technology through trade and cultural contact. Brasília, created by President Juscelino
Kubitschek of Brazil, was part of an effort to develop the center of the country and to make the
capital more politically independent from the large cities on the coast. Deng Xiaoping’s main
objective in creating Shenzhen was to graft and test within a limited perimeter some of the market
institutions and technical knowhow used across the border by his Chinese compatriots in Hong Kong.
7. In Russian: “Gosudarstvennaya Planovaya Comissiya” [State Planning Committee], in charge of
the Soviet economy.
8. Sam Staley and Adrian Moore, Mobility First (Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers,
Inc., 2009).
9. The OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development) is a club of 34 rich
countries each with a high human development index and committed to a market economy and
democracy.
10. Rémy Prud’homme and Chang-Woon Lee, “Size, Sprawl, Speed and the Efficiency of Cities,”
Observatoire de l’Économie et des Institutions Locales, Université de Paris 13, 1998.
11. Patricia Melo, Daniel Graham, David Levinson, and Sarah Aarabi, “Agglomeration, Accessibility,
and Productivity: Evidence for Urbanized Areas in the US,” paper submitted to the Transportation
Research Board, Washington, DC, 2013.
12. Not all CBDs are located at the center of the built-up area. Mumbai’s CBD, for instance, is
located at the Southern tip of a peninsula, while the centroid of the built up area is located more than
15 kilometers to the north. This situation is relatively rare, as market forces tend to re-center the CBD
toward the center of gravity of a city’s population.
13. The term “commuting routes” defines an itinerary from one place to another, which may have to
follow minor roads in the absence of major roads linking the point of origin to the desired
destination. Commuting routes are therefore independent from the existing design of major roads,
which may often converge on a central point.
14. David Levinson, “Access across America,” Center for Transportation Studies, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, 2013.15. Chang-Moo Lee and Kun-Hyuck Ahn, “Five New Towns in the Seoul Metropolitan Area and
Their Attractions in Non-working Trips: Implications for Self-Containment of New Towns,” Habitat
International 29 (2005): 647–666.
16. Path dependency refers to situations in which options taken in the past limit the number of
options available in the future. The concept is commonly used in history, evolutionary biology, and
economics but is obviously applicable to urban development as well. For instance, in evolutionary
biology a group of primitive living cells could possibly evolve in into a mammal or into a fish. But
once the cells have evolved into a fish, they cannot possibly evolve into a mammal and vice versa.
17. Commuting trips include only trips between a residence and a workplace. Other trips, for
shopping, social life, or leisure, are counted separately. Commuting trips are often a fraction of all
trips, but they are the most important for proper functioning of the labor market. In addition, most
commuting trips take place at rush hour and therefore test the capacity of the transport system.
18. In this case, I defined Seoul central city as the area within a circle of 10 km radius centered on
Seoul City Hall. This area includes three distinct CBD-like areas with an intense spatial
concentration of jobs.
19. Paanwalas sell paan, a mixture of betel leaf, areca nuts, and tobacco. They are small, informal,
thriving retail businesses in the streets of Indian cities.
20. Chambres de bonnes or “maids’ rooms” were independent rooms of about 9–12 square meters
built under the roofs of opulent buildings in Paris and provincial towns, usually with common
bathroom facilities on the same floor. When the households in these buildings could not afford maids
anymore, the rooms became the cheapest rental rooms on the market. Their low cost has been
maintained over the years in spite of their excellent location because they are often located on the
fifth or sixth floors of buildings without elevators.
21. A Kampung, which means “village” in Bahasa Indonesian, is an informal but legal residential
neighborhood in Indonesian cities. The lot sizes vary by income, with the smallest being around 10
square meters. Streets in a Kampung are usually 2 or 3 meters wide; some passages between houses
are no wider than a half meter.
22. For instance, Stockholm urban regulations require a job–housing balance in each neighborhood,
in spite of statistics showing that when this balance is achieved, it does not decrease trip length.
Allowing mixed land use where firms and housing can be found in the same location is an excellent
policy, but mandating it is illusory and only slows down the development process. In addition, the
number of jobs per commercial structure can vary significantly over time.3 Formation of Urban Spatial Structures: Markets versus
Design
The basic economic system should evolve on the decisive role of markets in resource allocation.
—Third Plenary Session of the 18th Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, November
11, 2013
In the previous chapter, we discussed how firms and households relate to
each other through the labor market. The labor market obliges firms and
households to locate at distances involving commuting times shorter than 1
hour.
Households need land for shelter. Firms need land for workspace.
However, for a given population, the larger the area of land consumed per
household and per worker, the longer will be the commuting distance
between firms and households. It appears, therefore, that there is a trade-off
between land consumption and commuting distance.
But commuting distance is only a proxy for commuting time and cost,
which are the real constraints limiting the efficiency of a labor market’s
concentration. Different transport technologies imply different commuting
speeds and commuting costs and therefore make distance an imperfect
proxy for labor market efficiency. The real trade-off is thus between land
consumption and commuting times and costs by different means of
transport. This leads to a few logical questions:
• How will the optimum trade-off be achieved between the land consumed
and the commuting speed and cost such that the welfare of both firms and
households is simultaneously maximized?
• Is it possible to identify an urban spatial structure that would optimize the
trade-off between land consumption and commuting speed for all firms and
households?• What is the best way to reach equilibrium between land consumption and
commuting distance as population size and household incomes grow and
transport technology changes?
To answer these questions, economists tend to favor markets, while urban
planners tend to favor design. 1
In the title of this chapter, I have set markets against design. This chapter
will debate the following issues.
• How do markets and design contribute to the development of cities?
• Are markets or is design more likely to shape a city in such a way that an
equilibrium is achieved between land consumption and commuting speed?
• Should planners substitute their own designs for market forces to obtain a
better spatial outcome or, on the contrary, should planners rely more on
markets to guide urban development?
• If the efficiency of spatial urban structures rests on a trade-off between
land consumption and commuting speed and cost, what indicators should
planers develop to monitor progress in urban structure efficiency?
The Role of Markets and Design in Shaping Cities in Market
Economies
In market economies, the combined effect of market forces and deliberate
government design generates urban spatial structures. In the last two
command economies left in the world, Cuba and North Korea, design is
officially the only factor shaping cities. Let us see how markets and design
contribute to the shape of most of the cities in the world.
Markets as Urban-Shape Creators
Markets create a blind mechanism that produces and constantly modifies
urban shapes, in the same way as evolution creates a blind mechanism that
produces and modifies living organisms.
Markets shape cities through land prices. High demand for specific
locations creates the large differences in land prices observed in cities. Land
prices, in turn, shape cities by creating high concentrations of floor space—
tall buildings—where land prices are high and low concentrations—short
buildings—where land prices are low. Very high demand for floor space in
a limited area explains the concentration of skyscrapers in central business
districts (CBD); similarly, low land prices and high incomes explain thespread of low-density suburbs. Very low household incomes explain the
high residential density in slums, even in areas where land prices are
relatively low. The changing balance between supply and demand, the
variations in firms’ and households’ incomes, and the cost of transport can
explain the extreme variety of building shapes and their spatial distribution
in a metro politan area. Urban shapes produced by markets illustrate
perfectly what Adam Ferguson, the eighteenth-century Scottish
Enlightenment philosopher, called “the result of human action, but not the
execution of any human design.”
Markets and the Price of Urban Transport
Markets generate different land prices for each location in a city. In most
cities, the price of land is usually the highest in the central part, because
workers and consumers can travel to it in the shortest time and at the least
cost. The price of transport—measured in time consumed and money spent
—has traditionally been one of the main “shapers” of urban form. Large
industrial cities of the nineteenth century, where walking or riding in a
horse-drawn carriage were the most common commuting modes of
transport, required very high densities. The high cost of transport in either
time or money restricted the extent of the built-up area, as did the absence
of mechanized transport. Consequently, the size of the labor market could
grow only by accommodating more people and jobs in the area accessible
in less than 1 hour, resulting in very high population and job densities. A
city’s labor market could keep growing, but only if a large proportion of the
population accepted consuming less land every year. The high density of the
Dickensian slums was the consequence.
At the end of the nineteenth century, the introduction of various
mechanized forms of urban transport allowed higher commuting speeds at
lower costs. The first underground rail urban transport was built in London
in 1862; it was soon imitated in many large cities in Europe and the United
States. The introduction of mechanized transport had two main effects on
the shape of cities. First, it increased the area accessible within an hour, and
therefore increased the size of the labor market even while allowing
population densities to decrease. Second, it dramatically increased the
accessibility of the city center where the mechanized transport lines
converged, increasing the price of land in the central area while decreasing
it in the suburbs. Rapid rail transport also suddenly made large areas ofrural land accessible from the old city centers. The large increase in land
supply made new suburban row houses affordable to the former inner-city
slum dweller. This new, emerging transport technology made the concept of
Ebenezer Howard’s “garden cities” not so utopian after all. 2
In the mid-1930s, the mass production of cars at a price affordable to the
middle class further increased the radius of cities by giving rapid access to
areas not yet served by the suburban rail networks. This spatial expansion,
made possible by the introduction of a new transport technology, allowed a
rapid growth in the size of the labor market while further differentiating the
price of land between the city center and distant suburbs and allowing for
an increase in the land consumption of suburban dwellers and firms.
The Ratio between Land and Floor Space in Different Locations
The spatial expansion of cities requires land, but the final product of
urbanization is floor space, not land. Because land is an indispensable input
for the building of floor space, a high demand for floor space in a specific
location increases the price of land at this location.
Floor space is the sum of the area built on land, whether public or private.
In areas where the price of land is high, developers can decrease the area of
land they use to produce a given area of floor space by building taller
buildings. As a result, the quantity of land required to build a unit of floor
space varies greatly in and across cities, reflecting the large variations in the
spatial distribution of land prices set by the market.
For instance, the Shanghai World Financial Center, a spectacular office
tower built in Pudong, Shanghai’s new financial district, has 101 floors with
a total floor space area of 377,000 square meters. This office tower was
built on a lot measuring 27,800 square meters. The ratio of floor to land
(also called the floor area ratio, or FAR) is therefore about 13.5. In other
words, to build the Shanghai World Financial Center tower, the developer
used only 1 square meter of land to build 13.5 square meters of floor space.
By contrast, in Huaxinzhou, a suburb of Shanghai located 24 kilometers
from the SWFC, a developer building single-family houses used as much as
1,350 square meters of land to build 300 square meters of floor space; this
corresponds to a FAR of 0.22. Thus in Shanghai, building 1 square meter of
floor space in Huaxinzhou occupies about 61 times more land than in
Pudong! The large differences in land consumption to produce 1 meter offloor space in two different locations in the same city reflect the large
differences in the price of land set by the land market.
In the New York metropolitan area, we see a similar scenario. Let us
compare the FARs of Midtown Manhattan (New York’s CBD) with those of
Glen Rock, a New York suburb 26 kilometers from Midtown. We see that
building 1 square meter of floor space in the suburban location used about
60 times more land than in the CBD, a result very similar to that for
Shanghai.
The decision to build tall buildings or short ones is therefore not a design
choice left to a planner, an architect, or a developer. It is a financial decision
based on the price of land, reflecting the demand for floor space in a
particular location. Tall buildings are more expensive to build per unit of
floor space than are shorter buildings, but the potential higher sale price by
unit of floor space due to high demand compensates for the higher
construction cost. The higher FAR values lower the cost of land per unit of
floor space sold.
A high or low FAR is therefore not a design parameter. The FAR captures
the conversion from land to capital in providing floor space. It is purely an
economic decision depending on the price of land in relation to the price of
construction. If the price of land is much lower than the price of
construction, there is not much reason to construct buildings taller than two
or three floors. For instance, in Glen Rock, the New York suburb mentioned
above, the cost of land is about $450/m2
, and the construction cost of a
typical wooden frame home is about $1,600/m2
. Therefore, there is not
much incentive to substitute capital for land, and as a result, the FAR of
most houses is low, about 0.25. By contrast, in New York’s Midtown area,
the price of land is about $25,000/m2
, and the construction cost of a prime
office building is roughly $5,000/m2
, only 20 percent of the price of land.
The high cost of land in Midtown significantly increases the incentive to
substitute capital for land and thus explains why the FAR of office buildings
is about 15. As in Pudong, the existence of tall buildings in Midtown New
York does not reflect a design choice but an economic necessity imposed by
markets and reflecting high consumers’ demand for this location.
Some urban planners may disagree with me and argue that the existence
of tall buildings is mainly the result of a design decision imposed by zoning
plans, which fix maximum FAR values through regulation. Here is why
they may hold this mistaken notion.In most cities, planners strictly regulate FAR values, because they assume
that tall buildings impose large negative externalities on the surrounding
neighborhood. Tall buildings indeed cast long shadows and may create
congestion in adjacent streets because of the large number of people who
are likely to live or work in them. In many cities, because of FAR
regulations, the height of buildings is constrained at much lower levels than
market demand would suggest. In areas where maximum regulatory FARs
are much lower than demand for floor space suggests, most buildings are
likely to make full use of the limited FAR permitted by regulations.
Eventually, the city’s planners may decide to increase the value of the
regulatory FAR over the one currently allowed. Developers will then make
use of the entire, newly permitted FAR value and will, therefore, build taller
buildings. The timing correlation between the increase in regulatory FAR
and the construction of taller buildings gives an illusion of causality
between regulations and tall buildings. Consequently, some planners think
that fixing a FAR regulatory value is a design decision and that new
buildings will automatically use the entire FAR value set by regulations.
While this may be true in areas where demand for floor space was
previously constrained by regulations, increasing the regulatory FAR value
where no demand for taller buildings exists would have no effect on the
height of future buildings. In Glen Rock, the New York suburban area
mentioned above, the FAR value used in most buildings varies from 0.2 to
0.3, while the maximum permitted FAR is about 0.4. There is not much
demand now for the floor space allowed by the current FAR regulations. If
planners were to authorize a FAR value of, say, 5, no tall buildings would
be constructed following the zoning change.
Markets React to Exogenous Factors That Planners Cannot Anticipate
Changing exogenous forces are constantly modifying the market’s
equilibrium, and as a result, urban shapes and land uses created by the
market constantly evolve as well. These exogenous forces are becoming
more numerous and their effects more volatile because of globalization. For
instance, some 30 years ago, the skills, salary levels, and availability of
clerical workers in India had no impact on the demand for clerical workers
in European and American cities. Today, information technology allows
clerical workers from India to compete with those from Europe. This
outside competition may affect the demand for European clerical workers;consequently, the demand for and location of office buildings in European
cities might change. This change in technology as well as the availability
and salary levels of Indian workers contribute exogenous forces that may
affect European cities’ land use. These globally generated exogenous
factors likewise impact land use in Indian cities. For example, the recent
mushrooming of call centers in Indian cities, a type of land use unknown
only a few years ago, is a direct consequence of the availability of new
technology and of the higher salaries of European and American clerical
workers compared to their Indian counterparts.
Markets react quickly to worldwide changes. Falling demand for some
activities translates into lower rents for the buildings where these activities
are taking place, triggering demand for rapid land use change. Land use
changes caused by markets often occur well before urban planners could
possibly be aware of the change in demand, such as global macroeconomic
events, shifts in consumer demand and therefore industrial production, or
even rapid gentrification.
In cities, markets create new types of land use and make others obsolete.
Marx’s observation in his Communist Manifesto that markets produced
“everlasting uncertainty and agitation” and that as a result “all that is solid
melts into air” is still true today and could refer to the changes taking place
in the most dynamic cities of emerging economies. Economist and Harvard
professor Joseph Schumpeter, giving a more optimistic version of Marx’s
original insight, called this process “creative destruction.” Markets thus
recycle obsolete land use quasi-automatically through rising and falling
prices. This constant land recycling is usually very positive for the long￾term welfare of the urban population. In the short term, changes in land use
and in the spatial concentration of employment are disorienting and
alarming for workers and firms alike.
Responding to the disruptions caused by land use changes, local
governments are often tempted to intervene in order to slow down the rate
of change and prevent the recycling of obsolete land use by reducing the
FAR, mandating commer cial versus residential zoning, or freezing
particular industrial land uses. However, the long-range effects of
maintaining obsolete land use through regulations are disastrous for future
employment levels and for the general welfare of urban dwellers.
Preventing the transformation of obsolete land use also prevents new jobs
from being created in its place. Regulations can prevent land use changesbut cannot stop jobs from disappearing from the obsolete areas. A city’s
labor market then shrinks when the government maintains land under a use
for which there is no more demand. Freezing obsolete land use does not
prevent Schumpeterian destruction, but it prevents the creation associated
with it. “All that is solid melts into air,” but the destruction is not followed
by any new creation.
Land Use Change: Mumbai
The story of Mumbai’s cotton mills best illustrates the tragic consequences
of freezing obsolete land uses in the hope of preserving jobs. Indian
entrepreneurs built Mumbai’s first cotton mills in the middle of the
nineteenth century in what was then an industrial suburb of Mumbai. In
1861, the American Civil War contributed to a large price increase for
Indian cotton cloth (an external shock already occurring long before the
spread of globalization). Consequently, the mills multiplied to employ, at
their peak in the 1930s, more than 350,000 workers; they occupied an area
of 280 hectares, not including worker housing. However, subsequent
competition from other Asian countries and from more modern mills built
in smaller Indian cities made the higher price of cotton fabric manufactured
in Mumbai increasingly uncompetitive on the world market. Because of
outside competition, some mills had to close.
After World War II, more mills started closing, partly because as Mumbai
developed, their locations in the middle of a dense and congested
metropolis made them too expensive to operate. The productivity of the
mills also kept decreasing: Given land expenses, no updates had been made
to factories, making the factory layout and technology obsolete. A workers’
strike lasting more than a year in 1982 delivered the coup de grâce to
Mumbai’s cotton mills. The story of the growth and decay of a textile
industry is not unique to Mumbai; many European industrial cities, like
Manchester and Ghent, went through the same cycles, produced by the
same external forces.
However, as the Mumbai mills were closing, the municipality and
workers’ unions, fought to preserve the high taxes and the well-paying
industrial jobs produced by the mills. As a result, they prevented mills’
owners from selling the potentially expensive land on which the now￾deserted mills had been built. Later, when it became clear that the mills
would never open again, the local government imposed such draconianconditions 3 on the redevelopment of the land that it became frozen in court
cases. As a consequence, over the course of more than 40 years, an
increasing number of mills stood empty in the middle of Mumbai, obliging
the city to expand its infrastructure farther north while by-passing the 280
hectares of already well-serviced area occupied by the empty mills ( figure
3.1). In 2009, when some of the land formerly occupied by the mills was
finally auctioned, the price reached more than US$2,200 per square meter!
The total value of the mill land unused for about 30 years would be
therefore around US$6 billion in 2009, or more than five times Mumbai’s
capital budget for 2014. 4
Figure 3.1
Vacant cotton mills in Mumbai, 1990.
The failure to realize that urban activities are transient and subject to
uncontrollable external market forces led the municipality and workers to
try, through regulations, to maintain obsolete activities and land use. They
assumed that the problem of the failing mills was local and could be solved
through bargaining among local stakeholders. In doing so, they prevented
new jobs from being created on the very valuable land occupied by the
vacant mills. The misunderstanding caused enormous hardship for theworkers and damaged the city’s economy. It prevented new jobs from being
created to replace the ones that had been lost. It forced an extension of the
city’s infrastructure into new, more distant areas while already well-serviced
land stood empty.
Land Use Change: Hartford, Connecticut
The case of Hartford, Connecticut, referred to as the “insurance capital of
the world” in the 1950s, dramatically illustrates how a change in technology
can impact local land use and the prosperity of a city that is heavily reliant
on one industry. Hartford reached its peak population in 1950, when
insurance companies required a high concentration of clerical staff working
in close proximity to one another and to management. The digital revolution
of the 1980s and 1990s removed the necessity of such concentration.
Consequently, many insurance companies decentralized their operations
and moved out of Hartford. By 2010, Hartford’s population had decreased
30 percent from its 1950 peak, and about 32 percent of the remaining
population was living below the poverty line. Hartford’s decline was not
due to a slump in the insurance sector but to a technology change that in
turn had an impact on location requirements. Of course, land use planners
had no way to anticipate the changes affecting the insurance companies.
However, if they had tried to diversify the type of activities authorized by
land use regulations, they may have attracted other industries or services
that would have reduced the chances of long-term unemployment for
insurance industry workers.
Land Use Change: Hong Kong
Changes in employment location and land requirements are not limited to
changes in a particular sector of a city’s economy, as was the case for
Hartford. The disappearance of some economic sectors and the emergence
of new ones may also cause changes in employment location. These rapid
changes in economic trends require equally rapid changes in land use if the
urban labor market is to keep functioning through the transition and avoid
the costly mistakes made in Mumbai’s mills.
For example, by the early 1960s, Hong Kong’s textile manufacturing
industry was the most successful in Asia. In 1980, the percentage of Hong
Kong workers still employed in the manufacturing industry represented 46
percent of total employment, and the manufacturing sector represented 24
percent of Hong Kong’s nominal gross domestic product (GDP). By 2010,manufacturing had fallen to 1.8 percent of GDP, and employment in
manufacturing had been reduced to 3.4 percent of total employment.
This drastic change in the share of the manufacturing sector over 20 years
required an equally drastic change in land use and job location.
Manufacturing jobs in Hong Kong were largely replaced by new jobs in the
service sector. But the location and land requirements of the service sector
are completely different from those of the manufacturing sector. The
replacement of manufacturing employment by service employment could
not be done simply by replacing factories with office buildings. Instead,
because Hong Kong planners were often the lessors of office space (and
therefore exposed directly to market pricing), they were able to understand
market demands to completely reallocate land use and modify urban
transport to adapt to a new spatial pattern of job concentration.
These changes in Hong Kong’s economy were not the result of deliberate
plans made by Hong Kong planners but were imposed from the outside by
geopolitical changes, such as the opening of mainland China’s economy.
The spectacular achievements of Hong Kong urban planners in managing
land use changes were not because they had made plans in advance to
change land use. Instead, once these economic changes imposed by the
world’s economy had become clear, they reacted rapidly to adjust the city
land use and infrastructure to the new economy.
The Role of Markets in Historical Preservation
Historical preservation is one of the few exceptions for which urban
managers might want to prevent the spontaneous land recycling caused by
market forces. Historical heritage buildings are fossil buildings produced by
ancient market forces. Preserving the highest-quality buildings of the past
has many economic and cultural justifications. Conserving historical
buildings against market forces seems to contradict the lessons gained from
the case studies that I have just discussed. There are important differences,
however. The objective of historical preservation is to preserve high-quality
buildings rather than a specific type of land use. Indeed, the best way to
preserve historical buildings is to allow a new type of utilization that will be
compatible with conservation while also providing the new users with a
location that is compatible with their businesses’ activities.
There are many successful examples of well-preserved historical
buildings sheltering successful modern activities: the historical center ofBologna, whose medieval and Renaissance buildings became the
prestigious headquarters for banks and retail enterprises; SoHo–Cast Iron
Historic District in New York, where the textile sweatshops and printing
shops were replaced by artist lofts and high-end retail; Chinatown, next to
Singapore’s financial district, where traditional restaurants were gradually
upgraded to adapt to a business clientele and where small manufacturing
workshops were changed into offices for small consultancy firms. In all
these examples, the conservation of existing historical buildings involved a
significant change in the use of the floor space inside the buildings. The
higher rents charged for the new land use covered the higher maintenance
costs required by historical buildings and ensured their preservation.
Design Complements Markets in Shaping Cities
We have seen that market mechanisms are effective in increasing the urban
land supply, transforming land use, and setting the quantity of land and
floor space consumed and the height of buildings. Markets shape cities
through land price variations in space and time. Markets are therefore only
effective when land and building transactions are taking place at regular
intervals. However, the land occupied by streets and public open space—
what economists call public goods—is never subject to market transactions.
Consequently, top-down design is the only way to allocate land to streets
and to public open space.
Design, as opposed to the blindness of markets, implies the existence of a
rational designer, a human control behind the process directing the creation
of designed objects. A designer creates objects that meet explicit objectives
and functions. 5 In contrast with shapes created by markets, shapes created
by design are permanent and are incapable of spontaneous evolution until
they are destroyed or modified by a new iteration of rational design.
Modifying designed shapes requires the deliberate intervention of a rational
designer.
Why Road Networks and Public Open Space Are Not Provided through
Market Mechanisms
Why can’t street networks be built by the private sector, and therefore, be
subject to market forces? There are two reasons for this apparent
impossibility. First, major roads need to be aligned and to follow a pre￾established path often dictated by topography or by the geometry of a roadnetwork. Therefore, there is no possible competition among multiple sellers
and multiple buyers to acquire the land required for road rights-of-way; the
government must intervene to acquire land through eminent domain, not
through a free market transaction. Second, once a road network has been
built, it is impractical to allocate and to recover its cost from beneficiaries,
since not only roads users but also landowners benefit from better
accessibility and hence increased land values.
However, because of improvements in technology, it might soon be
possible to generalize the recovery of congestion tolls on most major roads
by pricing road usage differently at different times of day. The income from
tolls might or might not be able to recover the capital costs incurred in
building roads, but at least they should be able to adjust supply and demand
in the use of roads. Although the tolls may provide an incentive to create
more roads, there will still be no supply and demand mechanism that would
automatically increase supply where demand is high in the same way that
market forces adjust for consumer goods (e.g., for smartphones).
The same problem occurs with the provision of public open space. On
occasion, the private sector can provide and maintain parks and public open
spaces, but private provision alone cannot ensure supply in adequate
quantity to respond to demand. In addition, a government is more likely
than a private developer to provide public access to privileged topographic
areas, like sea frontages, lakes, forests, hills, and mountains—only a
government can provide the possibility of free public access to these
exceptional environmental assets. Because the land market price of such
assets is likely to be high, it would normally be impractical for the private
sector to provide free access. In addition, there is usually a consensus across
cultures that such exceptional assets should belong to an entire nation and
not be parceled out to private individuals who could bar access to the
public.
Consequently, we cannot rely on market mechanisms to supply major
roads and public open space. The quantity, location, and standards of roads
and public open space have to be designed by government. There is no
possibility of supply elasticity when demand is high (e.g., the quantity of
roads cannot be increased when demand for roads in a specific location
becomes very high). Government has to substitute design for markets to
ensure an adequate supply of all public goods, including roads. An adequate
supply of urban roads is particularly important, as roads provide theindispensable mobility that allows labor markets to function and cities to
exist.
Eventually, governments have to use the power of eminent domain to
purchase land for road alignment to link together local, privately built road
segments. While the government may well compensate landowners for their
land at an equivalent market price, the acquisition of the land under eminent
domain is not a market operation. There is only one buyer: the government,
and the seller of the land has no choice but to sell, regardless of whether she
is willing to do so.
Increasingly, governments are using contracts with private firms to build
major, discrete lengths of road or rail infrastructure. These build-operate￾transfer (BOT) or build-operate-own-transfer (BOOT) contracts, however,
do not in any way remove the primary responsibility from the government
for initiating the design, deciding on the specifications, and imposing the
contractual arrangement. In BOT or BOOT arrangements, the government
is always the initiator. Therefore, regardless of a BOT contract, the outcome
is the same: A major road is always the product of government design, not
of market mechanisms, even when a private contractor builds it, maintains
it, and collects tolls from its users.
When goods are provided through markets, a high demand for goods will
automatically trigger a supply response; eventually, production quantities
and prices will reach a supply and demand equilibrium. By contrast, when
goods like roads or parks are provided by a government’s design, high
demand creates congestion, but it does not increase the supply of additional
roads or parks.
Urban Road Networks Made of Privately Developed Access Roads
Results in Poor Metropolitan Road Networks
So far, cities have yet to find a way to entirely rely on the private sector to
design, finance, and operate a metropolitan network of roads without any
government intervention.
It is important to distinguish the provision of local access roads from a
road network serving an entire metropolitan area. Private developers
routinely provide roads in or at the edges of their property lines. Eventually,
ownership of these access roads is typically transferred to a local authority
and, later, integrated into the public domain to form a network of
interconnected streets. An aggregation of originally privately developedroads constitutes the core of many cities, and the two maps shown in figure
3.2 illustrate this process well. The street networks in the Wall Street area in
the historical core of New York and in the Marais neighborhood of Paris
have many similarities. The street networks followed original property lines
with some internal subdivision created by the original developers. They
each constitute a nonhierarchical network, providing access to adjacent
properties, but not providing road networks or overall mobility across a
large metropolitan area. The aggregation of privately built access roads does
not constitute a metropolitan network that would allow the labor market to
function in the way described in chapter 2.
Figure 3.2
Street patterns in New York (Wall Street area) and in Paris (Marais).
The New York and Paris neighborhood maps also demonstrate how
resilient street networks are once they have been designed. The Wall Street
area’s street pattern dates from the seventeenth century and the Marais
street pattern from the thirteenth century. The buildings in the blocks have
been demolished and rebuilt many times since the road network was
designed. However, the rights-of-way, setting a limit between public good
and private good, have barely changed since they were created centuries
ago.
To build an effective citywide circulation network, a city needs to
connect these privately built local roads with a government-designed
network of major roads, linking various neighborhoods and allowing travel
speeds consistent with the efficient functioning of the labor market.
Road Network Entirely Designed by Government
In chapter 5, I discuss in more detail the various shapes that a metropolitan
road network can take and the impact of network shapes on land values andurban spatial structures. In this chapter, I will only discuss why government
intervention is desirable for the design of a street network.
Early in the history of urbanization, local governments recognized the
limitations of creating a street network by simply connecting the residual
space left between property lines. In the sixth century B.C., the local
governments of several Greek trading ports in Asia Minor developed one of
the earliest coherently designed plans separating public and private space in
advance of settlements. The plan of Miletus, today in Turkey, shows one of
the first known examples 6
in the Mediterranean world of a complete street
network designed in advance by a local government ( figure 3.3).
Figure 3.3
Plan of Miletus, sixth century B.C. Source: Illustration by A. V. Gerkan and B. F. Weber, 1999, in The
Archaeology of Byzantine Anatolia: From the End of Late Antiquity until the Coming of the Turks, ed.
Philipp Niewöhner (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2017).
Hippodamus, one of the earliest known urban planners, designed the plan
of Miletus in the sixth century B.C. Incidentally, Miletus was also the
birthplace of Thales, the mathematician and philosopher.The plan by Hippodamus established the boundaries between public
space and private lots. In addition to streets’ rights-of-way, Hippodamus
also planned the location of public buildings and the amenities that
contemporary Greeks considered indispensable to the functioning of a city:
an agora (where business, justice, and politics were conducted) and an
amphitheater (for the staging of dramas and comedies). Hippodamus
selected the site for the theater ahead of time because, contrary to a modern
theater, a Greek amphitheater had to be built on a favorable slope to
improve acoustics, allow for the carving of terraced bleachers, and reduce
construction costs.
The plan of Miletus had two advantages. First, it distinguished clearly
and in advance the private areas that could be developed by markets from
the areas that would remain unsalable (i.e., public goods). Second, it
provided a coherent, well- connected, citywide street network that allowed
for easy communication among different parts of the city. While
Hippodamus identified the locations of public buildings and of the large
open space required by the agora, he did not attempt to plan or to control
the use of buildings in the private blocks. The excavations of the Miletus
site have shown that shops and workshops were built in the areas that
anybody familiar with modern land markets could have predicted: along the
main axis and near the two ports and the agora.
The design of the street network in Washington, D.C., by L’Enfant in
1792 followed an approach similar to that of Miletus. L’Enfant designed a
citywide street pattern and selected the locations of the principal
government buildings, but he abstained to exert any explicit control over
the use and development of private lots. Indeed, L’Enfant had no way of
knowing that K street would be used mainly for lobbyists’ offices or that the
political and bureaucratic elite would choose to live mainly in Georgetown,
a village located outside the perimeter of his plan. L’Enfant’s biographies
tell us that he was far from modest, but even so, he did not have the hubris
of modern planners who attempt to design and control the type of use of
every private block in a city.
The advance design of an entire city’s street network, as done in Miletus
and Washington, D.C., is a rather rare occurrence in the history of cities.
Most cities start as unplanned villages with a street network formed by the
aggregation of residual space between property lines, similar to the patterns
shown in figure 3.2 for Paris and New York. However, when a city’spopulation becomes larger than, say, 100,000 people, this nonhierarchical
street pattern hinders the speed of travel between distant locations in the
city. Some cities then plan the extension of their street network to new areas
for future urban growth, to avoid the replication ad infinitum of the original
village’s street pattern. In the nineteenth century, the New York
commissioner’s plan provided a better-designed extension of the existing
street network, adding the famous Manhattan grid to the original “village”
pattern of streets, which still exists today in the area south of Houston
Street. In a similar way, the extension plan designed by Ildefons Cerdà for
Barcelona was added to the original Barri Gòtic (“Gothic Quarter”)
network, which also still exists today. The objective of both extensions was
simply to design the streets’ rights-of-way in order to preempt developers
from defining the street networks from the residual space left between
property lines. However, neither design prescribed specific uses or densities
for the private plots delimited by the new road network.
Modifying an existing road network—rather than planning a greenfield
extension, as was done in New York and Barcelona—is very difficult and
consequently, has occurred rarely in the past. The new street network
designed by Georges-Eugène Haussmann in 1865 for Paris is one of the rare
examples of extensive modification of an existing street network.
Haussmann’s design did not aim to provide an extension to the existing
street network but to modify the original network itself by opening major
streets across the pattern of narrow medieval lanes that covered most of the
city at the time. Haussmann’s approach is rare, since the necessary use of
eminent domain to relocate houses and business makes it very costly and
greatly disrupts the social and economic life of the city during its
implementation. Haussmann could implement his plan for Paris because he
had the strong support of the emperor, Napoleon III. In a democracy,
Haussmann’s approach would probably never have been possible. In
modern times, the muscular and energetic urban management typical in
some Chinese cities allows a restructuration of the street network that I
would characterize as neo-Haussmannian.
L’Enfant, Cerdà, and Haussmann designed the new city street layouts of
Washington, Barcelona, and Paris, respectively, but each design was limited
to the layout of streets and to the location of a few civic monuments. The
design was limited to marking out the lines separating public goods—
streets and parks—from private goods—private plots. Markets remained themain factor shaping the land use in the blocks between streets. Long after
the new streets were built, markets remained responsible for the constant
modification of the location of commercial activities and for the changes in
residential and job densities.
Land readjustment, 7 used at times in several countries (e.g., Japan, India,
South Korea, and Germany) is an alternative to eminent domain to acquire
street rights-of-way. Land readjustment requires a strong government
involvement in allocating land among original landowners, in particular to
make sure that the design of local streets is consistent with a metropolitan￾wide network. Land readjustment is currently the most common mode of
land development in the largest cities in the State of Gujarat in India. While
land readjustment does not involve the use of eminent domain, the resulting
street network is the result of design based on norms and urban planners’
decisions, not on market mechanisms.
Because there is no known market mechanism for creating a network of
streets that consistently corresponds to changing demands for accessibility
and transport, planners play an important role in designing street layouts in
advance of urbanization. L’Enfant, Cerdà, and Haussmann had no
knowledge of the future densities in the areas served by the streets they
designed. But their choices of street widths and block lengths, however
arbitrary, were beneficial in the absence of a market alternative. The
designed networks separated, clearly and in advance, public nonsalable land
from private land and enabled land markets to work more efficiently by
removing uncertainty regarding the location of new streets.
Tracing streets in Yemeni cities in advance of urban development.
From 1970 to 1973, I was an urban planner in Sana’a, Yemen. It is there that I experienced
firsthand the urgency of developing a street network in advance of urbanization.
I had been sent by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), to work for the
Government of Yemen as an “urban planning adviser.” There had never been an urban
planning department in the history of Yemen before my arrival. My direct bosses were the
minister of Public Works and his deputy. To form the embryo of an Urban Planning
Department in the ministry, I was asked to hire a staff among high school graduates.
The civil war that gave rise to the Yemen Arab Republic had ended just 2 years before my
arrival. During those 2 years, the country had begun to open to the outside world for the first
time in its history, triggering a massive urbanization process.
Sana’a, the capital city, was still largely a medieval city, lacking piped water supply or
sewage lines. Its population was still small, about 100,000 people. The United Nationsestimated that it was growing at a rapid pace of 7 percent per year (a figure later confirmed by
formal surveys and census). Forty-seven years later, Sana’a has a population of about 2 million
people, and its suburbs expand into the fertile Sana’a valley as well as the slopes of an extinct
volcano located on the city’s eastern side.
During my time there, the main urbanization problem was not the growth of slums—
Yemeni are skilled masons who build sturdy houses out of stones, bricks, or adobe—but the
development of far-flung large new settlements. Many of these settlements did not link to any
system of roads, a necessary infrastructure component in a city whose population was
doubling every 10 years.
My most urgent duty was clearly not to write reports to the minister about how Sana’a
should develop, but to create a system to rapidly separate public space from private space in
advance of urbanization. In Sana’a I would have to play the exalted role that L’Enfant played
in Washington, DC, and Cerdà in Barcelona, but in an extremely modest way, as I had no
draftsmen, no surveyors, and no topographical map of the area to be developed. But I did have
a set of aerial photographs recently taken by the United Nations, a transit (a simple optical
surveying instrument), and a couple of measuring tapes.
It was clear that just designing a plan for the extension of Sana’a and having it approved by
the government would not produce any change on the ground. To have an impact, I would
have to use the land itself as my drafting board, drawing streets directly on the ground with the
agreement of the farmers and tribal chiefs who owned this land.
The challenge was to transfer a simple conceptual plan from a piece of paper to a network
of actual streets. Tracing over the aerial photographs, I made a map of the main future arterial
roads. To do so, I sought out the layout of existing rural tracks, identified the fastest
developing areas, and made a rapid sketch of the network of streets for areas of about a square
kilometer at a time.
The minister and his deputy were extremely supportive of my direct approach. They were
practical men with no experience or taste for bureaucracy, and they understood the urgency of
creating a major road network. Through the Ministry of Public Works, I managed to contact
groups of landowners in the area where new streets were to be traced. Daily I would present to
each group of landowners my preliminary sketch for roads pinned to a board. I then explained
the principle of the road network for the area and how it would be connected to the city’s main
arterial network. They were all aware of the advantage of having their lots connected to a
designed, surfaced network. They sometime requested modification of my initial sketch when
it was designed on the ground, and often argued between themselves about the merits of some
street alignments, but they usually agreed on a final layout after a few hours of discussion.
They also greatly appreciated my innocence as a foreigner; I clearly had no monetary interest
in the outcome, and they readily accepted me as an honest broker in the matter.
Figure 3.4 illustrates the rudimentary surveying exercise preceding the tracing of new urban
roads in Yemen in 1970. The Land Rover shown on the photograph was also an essential tool
for tracing roads with its wheels in the dry clay of the fields and stone hills.Figure 3.4
The author, with his two assistants, tracing new streets in Yemen, 1970.
The first implementation stage was to trace the axes of streets directly onto the ground,
using the transit tool to trace straight lines. My assistants then poured lime along the axis line.
The landowners would then discuss the width of street. The wider the street, the more land
they would lose; alternatively, they also understood that wide streets would enhance the value
of their lots. After some discussion, we agreed on a width, and we drew two parallel lines that
became the limits of the new street’s right-of-way.
I traced quite a number of streets during the first 2 years of my stay in Yemen. During my
third year, the ministry recognized the importance of tracing new streets and hired trained
surveyors from other countries of the Middle East, thus amplifying the efforts (and relieving
me from drawing streets on the ground).
I wrote several reports on housing, densities, and transport recommendations regarding the
development of Sana’a, but I am convinced that tracing streets—the task of separating public
space from private space in advance of urban development—was certainly the activity that had
the highest rate of return for the urbanization of the city. Looking now at a Google Earth image
of Sana’a, I can still see some of these streets, now asphalted and densely lined with buildings.
Planners Attempt to Shape Cities beyond Designing Street Layouts
For some planners, however, limiting planning to the design of a street
layout is not ambitious enough. Although the quantity of land allocated to
different urban private uses is more appropriately determined by markets,
planners believe they can significantly improve it through design. Their
lack of information about future users’ requirements does not deter themfrom extending their design activities from road networks to private blocks,
thus substituting themselves for markets.
Some land uses have obvious negative impact on neighbors—like
allowing a lead smelter to be built next to a school—and planners are
legitimately called on to separate these incompatible uses. But such
incompatible uses are few in a modern city and easily identifiable. Planners
have taken the nuisance issue much further by trying to systematically
control not only what activity can take place on private plots but also what
height and area of floor space can be built on it. The ways that planners now
attempt to reverse past controls and restrictions likely best highlight why
this is folly:
• Planners use new regulations to allow mixed land use in many residential
areas, where past regulations were aiming precisely at segregating various
uses, like commerce and residence.
• Planners use transit-oriented development (TOD) aimed at increasing FAR
around transit stations. If FAR had not been regulated around the stations in
the first place, they would have long ago reached the level corresponding to
demand in these areas. However, TOD could benefit from coordinated
urban design to provide better pedestrian access to public transport. TOD is
a good example of the arbitrariness that characterizes modern land use
planning: a new regulation to correct the effect of an older regulation to
obtain the exact outcome that would have been achieved if the first
regulation had not existed!
Fortunately, planners’ advance designs for entire cities, including every
building in the city, are relatively rare and mainly pertain to new capitals.
However, the concept of planner design as a substitute for markets is
creeping into most urban regulations, implicitly setting land and floor space
consumption both through minimum plot and floor area regulations and
through maximum FARs. When substituting design for markets, the
negative impact on the welfare of inhabitants is not trivial. I show in
chapter 6 how planners’ detailed designs by regulatory proxy are mostly
responsible for the terrible environmental conditions found in the slums of
developing countries.
Utopia and Design Substituting for Markets in Distributing Land and
Floor SpaceI now give two examples of planners’ decisions replacing markets in
determining the quantity and heights of buildings. In these examples,
markets had no influence on the physical outcome. Consumption of both
land and floor space was based, in the first case, on an idiosyncratic design
and, in the second, on a pseudoscientific norm. The first example, a design
proposed by Le Corbusier in 1925, was an attempt at redesigning the center
of Paris to be free from the rule of markets. The second example consists of
a simple “scientific” housing design norm used in China before the reforms
of 1990; these reforms resulted in replacing normative design by market
forces in all new urban residential areas in China.
Design Instead of Markets: Le Corbusier’s Plan Voisin for the Paris
CBD
In 1925, the architect-planner Le Corbusier proposed to replace the old,
traditional center of Paris with a “correctly” designed new center called
“Plan Voisin” ( figure 3.5). 8 Le Corbusier thought that the primary and
overwhelming objective in the building of cities was to give each dwelling
an optimum amount of sunlight and immediate access to large parks. Being
physiologically similar, he concluded that all humans had the same space
and sunlight requirements, hence his repetitive tower design. This project,
fortunately never implemented, is typical of the design approach to
planning. The quantity of floor space produced and of land developed and
the number and size of apartments are not driven by supply and demand but
by what the designer thinks is the correct design norm based on perceived
“needs.” Le Corbusier’s doctrine consisted of deliberately ignoring markets
and of designing neighborhoods, and even entire cities, based on the norms
he selected and on his interpretation of rational human needs.Figure 3.5
Le Corbusier’s Plan Voisin for Paris. Sources: Paris built-up background map: OpenStreetMap®; Plan
Voisin: three-dimensional model by author based on plans and drawings from the “Fondation Le
Corbusier” website and from Le Corbusier, The City of Tomorrow and Its Planning (New York:
Dover Publications, Inc., 1987).
Counterintuitively, the design approach to urban planning often results in
repetitive design, while the market approach results in a variety of designs.
This apparent paradox is easy to understand. Design is based on rationality,
and rationality has the ambition of being universal. Once the correct,
rational design is found, it would be irrational to alter it just for the sake of
variety. The Plan Voisin for Paris, shown in figure 3.5, demonstrates this
point.
The rational norm argument is useful for designing some manufactured
products. For instance, when a rational norm is found for the design of, say,
incandescent light bulbs, there is no advantage to endlessly tweaking the
norm; repetition of the same design results in a big advantage for all. But
incandescent light bulbs have a simple function and a simple objective,
about which everyone can agree. By contrast, cities are extremely complex
objects inhabited by extremely diverse human beings, whose preferences
and circumstances change over time. Consequently, the design of cities
cannot be reduced to a simple objective—be that optimum access to
sunlight and parks or some other worthy objective. Markets are messy and,
indeed, are only muddling toward constantly moving states of equilibrium.
However, markets, even when working imperfectly, can easily integrate the
complexity of information required to shape cities.While the Plan Voisin was never implemented, Le Corbusier’s ideas had an
immense influence on city planning during the second half of the twentieth
century. His ideas were given international and universal legitimacy
through the periodic meetings of the CIAM 9 and the publication of the
“Charte d’Athènes,” which promoted his design concept of high residential
towers implanted in parks to optimize access to natural light and green
areas. The ideological message was that scientific design should replace
markets in allocating land and floor space consumption. This message fit
well with intellectuals’ attraction to totalitarian ideology, which was
unfortunately widely shared during most of the twentieth century.
Le Corbusier’s influence was felt less through the design of new cities
and more through land use regulations and the design of public housing.
Practically all housing projects built in the Soviet Union and in China
before 1980 were based on norms with foundations in Le Corbusier’s
concepts. In the liberal democracies of Western Europe and North America,
Le Corbusier’s influence was limited to the design of large, government￾sponsored public housing projects, for instance, Sarcelles in the northern
suburbs of Paris and the Pruitt–Igoe housing project in St. Louis, Missouri.
The repetitive design of public housing buildings is not due to a lack of
architectural skill but to a “design” based on a mythical optimum norm,
used as a substitute for markets and pretending to represent universal
values. This supposed universal system leads to many negative externalities
when confronted with real life. For example, the monotony of the design
leads to disaffection for the neighborhood, and lack of access to necessities
(like grocery stores and transport) that would have been normally provided
through markets creates additional costs for the residents.
Through his books and conferences, Le Corbusier clearly expressed his
view that the main objective of urban planning and architecture should be to
maximize access to sunlight and to parks and open space. But to my
knowledge, he never attempted to optimize his ideas through mathematical
formulas. However, his followers in China tried to do just that.
Design Replacing Markets: Chinese Residential Areas, 1960–1985
Having rejected market mechanisms and real estate transactions based on
price, countries guided by Marxist ideology had to find a different way to
allocate land to various users. Marxists claimed that rationality and science
formed the base of their ideology. It was therefore natural that Chineseurban planners tried to find a universal “scientific” rule to allocate land in
residential areas in a country as large and diverse as China.
An urban regulation established in China in the 1950s specified that at
least one room per apartment should be able to receive a minimum of 1
hour of sunlight on the day of the winter solstice (December 21), when the
sun is at its lowest in the northern hemisphere. 10 This rule was applied to
government and enterprise housing built between 1950 and the mid-1980s.
While this rule is no longer applied in China, the housing stock built during
the 30-year pre-reform period is still largely intact, and it is worth exploring
the impact that this design rule has had on the spatial structure of Chinese
cities.
At first sight, this single design requirement seems innocuous. Nobody
would argue against sunlight. For central planners, substituting scientific
rationalism for the messy and unpredictable outcome of markets provides a
powerful legitimacy. In addition, a uniform norm for the entire country
gives the impression of equality under the law. The norm was used as a rule
when designing municipal housing estates or for housing built by state
enterprises for their workers. The remnants of these housing estates are
trading at the low end of the market and can still be seen in Chinese cities,
designated popularly as “danwei housing.”
Because the norm had to be used by local governments, every household
living at the same latitude would consume the same amount of land, and
regardless of that latitude, every household would enjoy a minimum of 1
hour of sunlight every day. The whimsical, idiosyncratic design aspect of
Le Corbusier’s Plan Voisin disappears and is replaced by a simple
mathematical formula (equation 3.1).
Equation 3.1
Equation 3.1 is a mathematical formula for calculating the distance between buildings that
allows a minimum of 1 hour of direct sunlight per unit per day for each unit in a building. The
distance d between buildings is determined by the height of building h multiplied by the
tangent of the angle α of the sun on the winter solstice at 11:30 in the morning using solar
time:A regulation expressed through a mathematical formula linked to the
movement of the sun appears to have scientific and universal legitimacy. In
reality, it is only pseudoscientific. Even though the height of the sun at noon
on the winter solstice at a given latitude is an indisputable, scientific fact, 1
hour of sun exposure per day in one room per apartment is not an
established scientific necessity.
Figure 3.6
Application of the sun rule—footprint of danwei housing in Beijing, Ningbo, and Guangzhou.
The “1 hour of sun” rule sets the distance between apartment blocks for
every city in the country and makes this distance dependent on the city’s
latitude. Figure 3.7 illustrates the implication of using such a formula for
allocating land to housing at the latitude of Beijing. The sun requirement
implicitly sets the distance between buildings based on their height. Most
housing blocks in China had five stories 11 during the period when this rule
was used, the norm therefore inevitably fixed the ratio between floor space
and land for every other number of floors. The table in Figure 3.7 shows the
required distance between five-story buildings as dictated by the norm at
Beijing’s latitude. That distance, in turn, fixed the population density that
could be housed by estimating an average floor space per apartment. The
solar norm, therefore, implicitly mandated for Beijing latitude, for instance,
a density of 700 people per hectare, assuming a gross floor space of 65 m2
per household and 3.5 persons per household.Figure 3.7
Distance between buildings in China, determined by the angle of the sun on the winter solstice.
In addition, figure 3.6 shows the predictable repetitive site plan that such
a regulation produces. As we have already observed with Le Corbusier’s
Paris plan, a scientific design norm inevitably results in uniformity. By
contrast, markets are more likely to create variety in individual designs, as
each supplier tries to innovate in an effort to capture a larger share of
consumer demand.
The implications for urban forms of this alleged rational norm are
staggering. First, it implicitly sets the same area of land consumed per area
of floor space built for every location at the same latitude, regardless of
whether a location is in a large city or a small one, in the center of a city or
in a suburb. Second, it implies that more land should be used to produce
one unit of floor space at northern latitudes than at southern latitudes. Or, in
other words, it suggests that densities should be lower in Beijing and higher
in Hainan! If this rule was applied to the United States, it would prescribe
that the densities of Chicago and New York should be much lower than
those of Houston and Phoenix.
When I was working on housing reform in China in the 1980s, this norm
was constantly cited as a main constraint by my Chinese counterparts when
discussing the possibility of looking for an alternative housing design that
would make more efficient use of land. But was this design approach really
followed in all housing projects in China?
From a limited survey of sample site plans in Chinese cities selected at
various latitudes, it appears that indeed this norm was widely applied: in
Beijing (latitude 39.9° N), Ningbo (latitude 29.9° N), and Guangzhou
(latitude 23.1° N), with greater variation toward higher densities in cities
farther away from Beijing (figure 3.7). Indeed, the densities vary with the
latitude: higher densities in lower latitudes. The table in figure 3.7 shows
the variations between the actual building distances and those prescribed by
strict application of the 1-hour rule.
After the market reforms of the 1980s, Chinese municipalities rapidly
abandoned the allocation of land through design norms and replaced it with
a more pragmatic approach, relying on the market price obtained through
auction of land use rights. Post-reform Chinese cities had a strong incentive
to abandon the wasteful, normative use of urban land, because they derived
a large part of their revenue from the market price sale of land use rights todevelopers. In spite of having been abandoned, the use of this regulatory
norm still had an enormous impact on the structure of Chinese cities. That
impact is typical of the unintended consequences of many land use
regulations. In chapter 6, I discuss additional examples of regulatory impact
on urban forms in greater detail.
Design Extended to the Private Blocks of Entire Cities
Very few cities have been designed in their entirety, including street layouts
and buildings, with no provisions made for land use to be modified by
market forces in the future. Illustrative attempts to control everything
through design—examples like New Delhi, India; Brasília, Brazil;
Canberra, Australia; or Chandigarh, India—are very different in concept
from Miletus, Washington, or Haussmann’s Paris.
In addition to the street networks for these cities, planners imposed
detailed regulations specific to each private block. These regulations were
so detailed they essentially designed each block’s buildings. They specified
the use of land, the size of lots, the height of buildings, the area of
dwellings, the lot coverage, among other things. These planner-designed
regulations completely prevented market forces from contributing to the
shape of the city.
Figure 3.8 shows detailed plans of residential areas in Chandigarh and
Brasília. Originally, every building—whether a community facility, an
apartment block, or a commercial area—was designed in advance through
regulations. Nothing was left to markets: prices were ignored, FARs were
set for every single block, and land was allocated to residential and
commercial use based on arbitrary design norms. However, in Chandigarh,
the government originally sold leaseholds for housing units and over the
years allowed market forces to transform the original housing design. This
did not happen in Brasilia.
Figure 3.8The design of buildings in a block in Chandigarh (left) and Brasília (right).
Sources: Topographical maps with built-up areas from Department of Urban Planning Chandigarh
Administration, 2005, updated with the help of Google Earth satellite imagery, 2008.
In chapter 7, I discuss planners’ attempts to shape market-driven cities
through complex regulations.
The Growth of Pudong: Markets and Design
Many of the examples that I have used so far to illustrate the role of markets
and design in the development of cities were taken from the past—the
oldest, Miletus, in the sixth century B.C.; the most recent, Chandigarh and
Brasília, dating from 1960. Let us look now at markets and design at work
using the example of Pudong, the new financial center of Shanghai, built
over the past 25 years.
At first sight, design seems to be entirely responsible for the stunning
skyline of Pudong, as seen from the west bank of the Huangpu River (
figure 3.9). Architectural firms working for developers have designed the
unique shape of each skyscraper. The skyline, formed by the sum of each
individual building’s design, appears also to be the product of design.
Paradoxically, this is not the case.
Figure 3.9
Pudong: Shanghai’s new financial center.
Pudong Was Created by Market Forces
The skyline of Pudong, as seen in the picture of figure 3.9, was created by
the high demand for floor space in this area, reflecting its high accessibility
to Shanghai’s labor force. Developers, anticipating a high demand for office
space at a price point higher than building costs (including the cost of land),
initiated, and financed the building of skyscrapers.Tall, thin buildings constitute a large part of the skyline’s aesthetic
attraction. A concentration of tall buildings is always the product of market
forces. In Pudong, due to high demand, land is expensive, and as such,
developers are obliged to substitute capital for land by building tall
buildings. Tall buildings are more expensive to build per square meter of
floor space than are squat buildings. However, each additional floor built
decreases the cost of land per unit of floor space. Therefore, where land is
expensive, the high price of land obliges developers to substitute capital for
land by constructing taller buildings. In aggregate, therefore, the
skyscrapers of Pudong are not created by design but by market forces. In
the absence of market demand for office space, there would be no
skyscrapers. If land had been cheap in Pudong, there would have been no
skyscrapers, only squat office buildings of 3 or 4 stories as are seen in
suburban office parks!
Developers hired architects to design individual buildings on specific
plots of land. They told the architects how much floor space they had to
accommodate on each land parcel. Variations in the height and shape of a
building depend both on the shape of the original lot and on the financial
risk a developer is willing to take in projecting demand and sale prices. The
first buildings in Pudong were only moderately high. When the demand for
office space in Pudong became more firmly established, land prices
increased and developers became bolder. Ready to take more financial risk,
developers commissioned architects to build taller, more expensive
buildings. Thus, the variety of building heights, shapes, and textures, which
define Pudong’s aesthetic quality, is the product of market forces; however,
the design ability of individual architects is still apparent in each building.
Markets produce a great variety of designs because economic conditions
change over time and therefore require different designs. In addition,
innovative designs in newer developments attract tenants or buyers through
more attractive buildings. Markets imply competition; competition
stimulates innovation in technology and design. Compare Pudong’s skyline
to the Le Corbusier Plan Voisin for Paris shown in figure 3.5. The diversity
of building shapes and heights in Pudong suggests markets, while the
uniformity of building shapes and heights in Paris’s Plan Voisin,
Chandigarh, and Brasília suggest government design. However, Pudong
could not have been built without some initial infrastructure design
provided by government.Design Contribution to the Development of Pudong Financial District
While market forces were responsible for the construction of skyscrapers in
Pudong, the design and construction of roads, bridges, tunnels, and
underground metro lines were responsible for the changes in land prices
that triggered these market forces.
Pudong is located on the east bank of the Huangpu River, about 500
meters across the river from “the Bund,” the traditional CBD of Shanghai.
Before 1991, ferries provided the only link between Pudong and the rest of
Shanghai, and Shanghai had no underground metro before 1993. Because of
its poor accessibility and lack of infrastructure, Pudong was only partially
developed with a few low-rise industrial buildings and warehouses linked to
the port (map on left in figure 3.10). Agricultural land still occupied large
areas east of the river, less than 2 kilometers from the Shanghai CBD. In the
1980s, the demand for new office buildings in Shanghai was mostly met
along an east-west corridor between the traditional CBD and the old
Hongqiao Airport. The poor accessibility of Pudong kept land prices low,
which explained the prevalence of low-rise, low-value buildings.
Figure 3.10
The design and construction of roads and subway links to Pudong, 1992 and 2013.
The land in Pudong started to increase in value in 1991, after the
municipal government decided to build the first bridge across the Huangpu
River, linking “the Bund” and Pudong. Eventually, the construction of two
more bridges, four road tunnels, and four underground metro lines put
Pudong within a few minutes of Shanghai’s traditional CBD (map on right
in figure 3.10). The increased accessibility of the new Pudong financial
district, combined with the dynamism of Shanghai’s economy, increased
demand for office space in the area, further raising land values andtriggering the construction of the skyscrapers that gave shape to today’s
stunning skyline.
By themselves, roads, bridges, and tunnels do not increase land values;
they do so only if they provide access to land for which there is a
potentially high demand. In the case of Pudong, the designers of the bridges
and tunnels correctly anticipated the reaction of markets to the increased
accessibility created by the new transport infrastructure.
The infrastructure linking Pudong to the rest of Shanghai was created by
design, not by market forces, but the anticipated increases in land market
value in Pudong guided the design and justified the government’s
investment. Markets could not have provided the transport infrastructure
linking Pudong to the rest of Shanghai, because the beneficiaries of this
infrastructure were dispersed throughout the entire city and because no
direct cost recovery was possible except through some form of government
taxation. The development of Pudong illustrates perfectly the
complementary roles of markets and design in the most successful cities,
particularly designs to facilitate expansion. The government let the price of
land determine both the building heights and FARs while providing the
large infrastructure investment that was required for the price of land to
reach its full potential, given the short distance between Pudong and the
Bund. Government planners in the case of Pudong understood the
mechanism of markets. They designed and built the infrastructure that
would maximize the value of land across the river and support the densities
created by markets.
Urban Managers Should Understand How Markets and Design
Interact to Allow Cities to Adjust to Change
Confusion between Market and Design: The Planning of Densities
Planners who advocate “smart growth” dream of a clever design
arrangement that would achieve an optimum trade-off between land
consumption and commuting distance. They usually advocate designs with
higher population densities 12
to reduce commuting distances. If densities
are the object of design, then there must be “good densities” and “bad
densities,” just as there is “good design” and “bad design.”
In the real world, it is only markets that determine land and floor
consumption and, therefore, population densities. Indeed, households’
decisions concerning their consumption of land and floor space are basedon prices and locations, which themselves are based on supply and demand,
the variations of which are determined by the market. The area of floor
space that a household consumes is dependent on its income (the demand
side) and on the price of floor space and the cost of commuting (the supply
side). The equilibrium between supply and demand for floor space evolves
over time and certainly cannot possibly depend on the design choice of a
well-intentioned planner.
For instance, densities in historical parts of New York, Paris, and
Shanghai have decreased over time by more than half. These changes in
densities are entirely due to market mechanisms, reflecting, in part,
improvements in transport and increases in income. These changes in
densities could have been foreseen or expected, but they could not have
been designed.
This distinction between markets and design has practical, operational
implications in the management of cities. Imagine a city in which the mayor
considers it a priority to increase the consumption of floor space per
household (as was the case in Chinese cities in the 1980s). If we agree that
consumption is a market issue, then planners could consider several
possible solutions based on market mechanisms that would increase
consumption. For instance, planners could increase the supply of developed
land by increasing the speed of transport so that more land could be opened
for development; they could lower the cost of construction by increasing the
productivity of the building industry or by decreasing the transactions costs
linked to building permits and land acquisition. Planners could also use a
demand side approach, stimulating demand by increasing access to
mortgage credit or even by indirectly causing an increase in salaries by
opening the city to outside investments in manufacturing or services. All
these measures are likely to contribute to an increase in housing
consumption per household. Incidentally, the Chinese government took all
these steps in the period of reform starting in the late 1990s, resulting in a
nine-fold increase in urban housing consumption from 1978 to 2015!!
By contrast, a design solution to increase the average consumption of
floor space might establish a minimum regulatory house size to prevent
developers from building small houses, or it would require the government
to subsidize and build a sufficient number of large apartments for low￾income households every year. As the consumption of floor space is a
market outcome, design solutions, which aim to increase consumption,never work in the long run. I will discuss this design failure in detail in
chapter 7.
Links between Markets, Design, and Urban Indicators
A simple schematic flowchart ( figure 3.11), whose inputs and outputs can
be calculated in a simple spreadsheet, could help differentiate the role of
markets and design in the development of cities. The flowchart should be
helpful for understanding the mathematical relationships among people,
jobs, floor space, land, and road infrastructure in the framework that I have
been using: differentiating between markets and design.
Figure 3.11
Relationship between population, land, and floor space consumption. It is assumed that prices are set
by market supply, and demand/supply are constrained by topography and other variables.
From this flowchart, we will be able to derive the three most important
urban indicators that will allow for monitoring spatial changes and
comparing different urban spatial structures. The three indicators are the
population density, the built-up FAR, and the road area per capita.
• The built-up FAR 13 establishes the numbers of units of floor space that are
built on one unit of land area, including land used for streets and utilities.
• The population density measures the spatial concentration of people per
unit of land, but it is also a measure the consumption of land per person 14
in
cities.
• The road space per capita is calculated by dividing the total road area by
the total population of a city. The road space per capita is directly linked tomobility and could be used as an indicator to measure the compatibility of
street area per person with different modes of transport.
I will show that a city’s average population density is entirely dependent
on markets and therefore is not subject to planners’ designs. The built-up
FAR should be entirely determined by markets; however, its maximum
value is often constrained by regulations. Some regulatory constraints on
FAR or building heights are of course completely legitimate when they are
required for heritage protection or for obvious physical constraints such as
the proximity of an airport. However, most of FAR regulations are arbitrary.
The road space per capita is dependent on both design and markets: road
design norms and regulations set by governments and population density
determined by markets.
The Organization of the Flowchart Linking Markets and Design
Variables
The flowchart shown in figure 3.11 is divided vertically into two streams—
markets and design. Columns a and b correspond to the market stream;
column d corresponds to the design stream, and column c contains
intermediary results and indicators. The flowchart is divided into nine rows
of boxes that contain categories like “households” or such formulas as
“Population × Residential floor space per capita = Total residential floor
area.” Arrows indicate the relationship between input and output variables.
To identify specific boxes in the flowchart, note that “box 5b,” for instance,
relates to the box located on row 5 in column b.
Quantities of Private Goods Are Determined by Markets, While
Quantities of Public Goods Depend on Design
The built space of a city contains two types of goods: private goods and
public goods (row 3 in figure 3.11). Residential and commercial buildings
are private goods. Private goods are bought and sold on the market. For
private goods, the quantity and unit price of the floor space built and the
land developed depend on supply and demand (i.e., on markets). By
contrast, roads and large public open spaces are usually public goods.
Contrary to private goods, the quantity of public goods produced is
determined by design, not by markets. Because users do not pay for public
goods, it is impossible for markets to determine the quantity that should be
produced to reach equilibrium between supply and demand. Instead,governments rely on design standards, projections, and norms to provide
the “right quantity” of public goods.
Firms’ and Households’ Floor and Land Consumption Drive
Urbanization, Not Governments or Urban Planners
Firms and households are consumers of private goods. Households
consume residential floor space, while firms consume commercial floor
space (rows 4, 5, columns a, b in figure 3.11). I have included under the
label “firms” all buildings such as offices, shops, warehouses, and factories.
Amenities, like museums, theaters, and restaurants function like firms; their
employees are part of the labor force, and their patrons are consumers. Less
obviously, I have also included under “firms” government-owned and -
operated facilities, such as government office buildings, schools, hospitals,
jails, and post offices. For the purpose of the labor market, they function
exactly as firms. In a school, teachers and staff are the labor; the school is a
firm that sells education, a service, to the students, who are the consumers.
This is the case even when parents indirectly pay for the service their
students consume through their taxes. More generally, I consider all levels
of government to be firms; they employ labor that distributes services to
their customers, the citizens. For the same reasons, government-owned
facilities are under the “market” category, as the real estate they represent
should easily be bought, sold, or rented at market price. The fact that only a
few governments sell land back to the public or rent buildings from the
private sector 15 should not justify putting them in a different category.
Nothing should prevent governments from selling or renting land and floor
space or from leasing land and floor space from the private sector. It would
be quite healthy for governments to routinely assess the capital values of
their land holdings and to estimate whether they are using urban land
efficiently. 
16
Let us now look at the linkage between variables. We will have two
streams of quantitative relationships: the first one concerning the provision
of private goods through market forces, the second concerning the provision
of public goods through government design.
The Driver of Urbanization: Number of People and Jobs (Row 4,
Columns a and b)
The first input is the city population (row 4), which is exogenous in the
flowchart. The size of the population determines both the number of peoplewho will consume residential floor space and the number of workers
consuming commercial floor space. The population multiplied by the
percentage of active population (people between 16 and 65 years old) times
the labor participation rate 17
times the employment rate is equal to the
number of jobs. In the flowchart, this would be equal to the number of
workers requiring commercial floor space.
Market, Independent Variable: Consumption of Floor Space per capita
(Row 5, Columns a and b)
Firms and households consume floor space. The consumption of floor space
per person and per worker depends on supply and demand. This
consumption is not fixed but varies constantly, depending on economic
conditions. Most regulations set minimum norms for floor consumption
based on “optimum” design, but in reality, the floor area actually consumed
is entirely defined by that which firms and households can afford, given
their incomes and the current land and construction prices. Land and
construction prices depend on the supply of land and on the productivity of
the real estate industry. The consumption of floor space per person and per
worker is therefore purely determined by markets; it is not a design
parameter.
Population multiplied by residential floor space per person provides the
total area of residential floor space. The number of jobs times the
commercial floor space per worker is equal to the total area of commercial
floor space. We can see that the total floor space, residential and
commercial, built in a city depends entirely on markets and is not subject to
design. This total floor space will change with time, depending on
population and market conditions. The prosperity of a city depends on the
elasticity of the supply of floor space as economic and demographic
conditions change. The quantity of floor space cannot be contingent on a
fixed design established in advance by a master plan.
Market, Independent Variable: FAR, the Substitution of Capital for
Land (Row 6, Columns a and b)
The area of land required for building the total floor area (calculated in
boxes 5a and 5b in figure 3.11) depends on the FARs for residential and
commercial areas, as discussed at the beginning of this chapter. The FAR
depends on the price of land relative to the price of construction. If a unit of
land is more expensive than a unit of construction, then it will be necessaryto substitute capital for land (i.e., build taller buildings with higher FARs).
The FAR is therefore a parameter best set by markets. However, planners
often restrict FARs because of the possible negative externalities generated
by tall buildings.
Total residential floor area divided by the residential FAR will be equal to
the total area of residential land. We will do the same operation for the
commercial floor area to obtain the total area of commercial land. As we
have seen, these two areas depend entirely on market conditions. In cities
where the FAR is heavily restricted by regulations (i.e., by design), land
consumption will be higher per person or per worker than in cities where it
is not.
The Flow of Public Goods Is Dependent on Government Design and
Investment
The areas occupied by public goods in this model are reduced to two
components: total road area and total public open/park area (column d in
figure 3.11). Both components are created by design, as there is no known
market mechanism that can accurately supply an area of road that
corresponds to its demand. The same could be said for large parks and open
spaces and for the protection of cultural heritage sites or exceptional
environmental assets. The identification of these public goods and the
quantities provided can only be done by arbitrary design or norm. Once the
norm has been decided, there will be no market mechanism that can adjust
supply or demand. Only a revision of the original design, as arbitrary as the
first design decision, can modify the supply of public goods.
Design, Independent Variable: Urban Road Standards (Row 6, Column
d)
Governments usually set urban road standards for highways, arterial roads,
and secondary and tertiary roads. Master plans, norms, or regulations
usually establish the desired distance between each type of road. The result
of the various norms can usually be summarized by the percentage of total
area developed that must be used for roads. For instance, a norm mandating
the creation of a grid system of arterial roads 30 meters wide every 800
meters would implicitly require that 7.6 percent of the total area developed
be devoted to arterial roads. In Manhattan’s grid, a typical block is 280
meters (920 feet) long with 30-meter- (100-foot)-wide avenues and 18-
meter- (60-foot)-wide streets, corresponding to a street area of 33 percent ofthe total area developed (measured from the four intersections of the axis of
streets and avenues). Obviously, the norms for roads are based on rules of
thumb and assumptions about the multiple functions of streets: providing
light and ventilation for buildings, handling pedestrian and vehicular traffic,
providing recreational space and parking, allowing for the planting of trees,
and so forth. There is neither a “scientific” nor a market approach for the
allocation of land for street space.
In the flowchart in figure 3.11, I assume that the various road regulatory
norms are summarized as a single number representing the percentage of
the total built-up area (box 5d). This percentage applied to the residential
and commercial land area allows for calculating the total road area
corresponding to the regulatory norm (box 6d).
Design, Independent Variable: Park and Open Space Standards (Box
6d)
Parks and open spaces are sometimes the object of a regulatory norm in
land subdivision regulations, but most of the provisions for parks and open
spaces are opportunistic. For instance, a riverbank or sea frontage is often
allocated as public space. The quantity of land provided as open space often
depends on what I will call topographical or historical opportunities. For
instance, in Seoul, most of the public open space has been allocated because
of topographical opportunities along the Han River and on the slopes of
undevelopable hills. In Paris, by contrast, most of the large open spaces,
Bois de Boulogne, Parc de Vincennes, and the Tuileries and Luxembourg
gardens, were originally part of the royal domain and were latter
transformed into public parks. The area and location of parks in Paris are
therefore the results of historical opportunities.
The provision of open space is typically a designed component of urban
land use. Because of the idiosyncratic nature of large open spaces, I do not
include large parks in the calculation of the built-up areas of cities.
Dependent Variables: Total Consumption of Floor Space and Land and
Density Indicators
The demographic, market, and design inputs of the flowchart, as described
above, allow us to calculate the dependent variables, which are the total
built-up area and the following three indicators:
1.  average built-up FAR,2.  average built-up density, and
3.  average road area per person.
These indicators are the most important for monitoring the way a city
structure evolves over time. Below, I will explain why these indicators are
so important and how to use them to monitor the evolution of cities with
regard to maintaining affordability and mobility. These indicators measure
the impact of the combined effect of markets and design on a city’s
structure.
Indicator: Built-Up Average FAR (Boxes 9a and 9b)
The average built-up FAR measures the number of units of floor space that
can be built per unit of land. It is the average rate of conversion between
land and floor space. As floor space is the real end-product of urban
development and land is often the most expensive input needed to produce
it, this is a very important urban indicator. The demand for urban land
depends sensitively on the value of this indicator. For the same population,
a doubling of the average FAR decreases the demand for land by half.
Despite its importance, to my knowledge, the average built-up FAR 18
is
never part of a city’s urban indicators, and master plans never mention it.
Master plans usually constrain the maximum FAR value on individual
private lots in different ways, depending on location (New York’s zoning
plan has more than 20 different values for maximum FARs in various
zoning categories). However, for some reason master plans never aggregate
the overall impact of these detailed regulations on the overall demand for
land. Therefore, they fail to evaluate the maximum area of floor space that
users can legally build in a master plan area. The average FAR is important
in planning because it allows forecasting of the demand for land based on
the projected demand for floor space and on the design norms for roads.
An increase in average FAR does not always increase population density.
Recently the number of “smart growth” advocates has increased. These advocates think that
planners can increase urban population densities simply by increasing regulatory FAR values.
Increasing maximum regulatory FAR values will cause densities to increase only in those
areas where FAR regulations have been constraining demand for floor space. An increase in
the permitted FAR will have no impact in areas where the ratio between land price and
construction cost is low, because in these areas, there will be no reasons to substitute capital
for land.In cities like Mumbai, for instance, where FAR values have been heavily regulated, there is
no doubt that an increase in regulatory FAR will greatly increase the number of high-rise
buildings. However, the cost of construction of high-rise buildings is much greater than it is
for low-rise buildings. In cities that have a significant number of households below the poverty
line, like Mumbai, new high-rise buildings would be affordable only for the higher income
groups, who will consume much more floor space per capita than lower income groups. This
explains why in Mumbai very high residential densities about 1,000 people per hectare are
found in horizontal slums, while in high-rise buildings, the density barely reaches 400 people
per hectare. This paradoxical situation is explained in detail with a specific examples in
chapter 6.
In the central areas of affluent cities like New York or Shanghai, it has been observed that
the average FAR increases significantly while the density decreases, because households
increase their consumption of floor space faster than the growth in FAR. According to Solly
Angel, 1 Manhattan density was 575 people per hectare in 1910 but decreased to 350 people
per hectare in 2010, in spite of a proliferation of high-rise residential buildings and the
conversion of high-rise office buildings into residential use in the Wall Street area.
Population densities, therefore, depend on several economic factors and are not determined
by the design of buildings.
__________
1. Shlomo (Solly) Angel and Patrick Lamson-Hall, “The Rise and Fall of Manhattan’s
Densities 1800–2010,” Marron Institute, New York University, New York, 2015.
Indicator: Average Built-Up Population Density (Box 9c)
The average built-up population density is an indicator of land consumption
per person. It combines the impact of markets and design (in the form of
roads) on the overall consumption of land. Although population density is a
routinely measured indicator, planners often consider density as a design
option rather than a market outcome.
While population density is a useful indicator to project demand for land
in the future, there is no reason to consider higher densities or lower
densities as a desirable planning objective. However, higher floor space
consumption for at least the poorer segment of the urban population might
be a legitimate planning objective. Depending on the FAR, it might result in
higher or lower densities.
Indicator: Road Area per Person (Box 9d)
The road area per person is a consumption indicator that depends mostly on
markets and partly on design. Because the area of roads usually does not
change after they have been designed and built, variations in the road areaper person depend mostly on the change in densities, which is a market
variable.
The measure of the road area per person is an indicator of potential
congestion as commuters consume road space at peak hours to travel to
jobs. Because the area of roads cannot be adjusted easily after they have
been built, the road area per person is a useful guide for transport system
designers. Transport systems should be designed to adjust to current spatial
structure, not the other way around, as is often advocated. In chapter 5, I
discuss the values of road area per person found in various cities and the
corresponding implications for urban transport systems. Let us remember
that, except in contemporary Chinese cities, the possibility of increasing the
street area of large cities seldom exists; the operation conducted in Paris by
Haussmann in the middle of the nineteenth century is extremely rare,
because of its financial risk and high social cost.Building a More Complex Flowchart
The objective in developing the land use flowchart described above (see
figure 3.11) was to demonstrate that population densities are the result of
market forces, themselves reacting to exogenous events. I recommend that
planners make density projections to evaluate, for instance, the likely future
demand for land to be converted to urban use. However, planners must base
their projections on credible markets scenarios based on income and prices
and not on their own design preferences for low or high densities.
To be able to make more credible density projections, planners might
want to make the flowchart more complex. For instance, disaggregating the
population by income group would allow for differentiation between floor
and land consumption for several household-income intervals. In the same
way, disaggregating commercial land use into various land use types—
retail, office, and industrial—would make the projection more realistic.
Planners Should Understand the Role of Markets and Design in
Shaping Cities
Most master plans, prepared at great expense to taxpayers, are often
ineffective and soon irrelevant; this is particularly true in cities that are
developing fastest. The confusion between the impact of market and that of
design is mostly responsible for this dismal record.Projections Should Not Become Regulations
However, this does not mean that planning based on projections is useless.
On the contrary, plans able to project urban growth and mobilize the
resources to address this growth are indispensable. However, to be
effective, plans must rest on credible projected consumption levels based on
realistic market assumptions, not on utopian design preferences or populist
dogmas.
Planners too often transform their land use projections into regulations.
For instance, often projections for industrial land, based on past demand,
become zoning laws, fixing the boundaries and the area of future industrial
land. Projections are just that—they are always a guess, even if based on
past trends. Planners should therefore constantly monitor demand through
the evolution of land prices and rent, and adjust their projections
accordingly. Zoning plans often misallocate land despite obvious demand
change, because erroneous demand projections morphed into zoning laws.
The contrast between the attitudes of the planners in Mumbai and Hong
Kong (described earlier in the chapter) illustrates the advantages of
monitoring demand to allow land use change.
Planners should therefore fully understand market mechanisms. Every
planning department should monitor the spatial distribution of changes in
real estate prices. Attention should be given to the supply side, including the
elasticity of land supply, the productivity of the real estate industries, and
the reduction of transaction costs imposed on building permits and property
title transfers.
Planners Can Influence Consumption by Using Markets, Not by
Imposing Norms
Clearly separating markets from design in the development of cities does
not mean that planners should just passively monitor markets. For instance,
planners should certainly be concerned by very low housing consumption
among lower-income households and should act to increase it. However,
they should be aware that the way to increase housing consumption is better
achieved through market mechanisms (e.g., increasing supply or lowering
transactions costs) rather than through regulatory design (e.g., fixing by law
a minimum floor area or lot area or the rent per apartment). If planners want
to have more influence over urban development, they should develop a set
of indicators, such as land prices, rent, average commuting time underdifferent transport modes. These indicators should be considered as
“blinking red” when they pass a certain threshold. Planners should
immediately respond to these red-alert levels by removing supply
bottlenecks. Supply bottlenecks might include obsolete regulations but also
insufficient investment in roads and transport infrastructure. The role of
planners in reacting to indicators is discussed in chapter 8.Notes
1. I differentiate “urban planning” from “design”: planning involves various tasks, many of them
being projections, for instance, demographic and traffic projections or projection of future demand
for water or energy. Design is a more specific part of urban planning that involves imposing physical
limits on the built environment. Design involves producing the plans of individual buildings but also
drawing up zoning plans, limiting the height of buildings, separating land use, establishing urban
growth boundaries, and similar activities.
2. Ebenezer Howard (1850–1928) was the founder of the garden city movement. He was a social
reformer and utopian planner dedicated to improving the social conditions of workers in England in
the latter part of the Industrial Revolution. His concept consisted of building clusters of self￾sufficient cities of approximately 30,000 people surrounded by fields and forest and linked together
by a network of railways. The goal was to escape the polluted and insalubrious environment of the
large, dense industrial cities of his time. In a way he anticipated the creation of modern low-density
suburbs, although modern suburbs are certainly not self-sufficient.
3. Maharashtra State government policy (DCR 58, 2001) allowed the mill owners to retain only one￾third of their land for commercial purposes. The other two-thirds had to be given free of charge to the
state for the development of low-income housing, open spaces, and social amenities.
4. Mumbai capital expenditure for the years 2014–2015 was about 73.5 billion Indian rupees or
US$1.07 billion.
5. Designs created by artists do not need any rational justification but are by definition idiosyncratic.
I am using here the other definition of design given by Webster’s Dictionary: “to create, plan, or
calculate for serving a predetermined end.”
6. Many ancient cities of China were also planned along a square grid like Chang’an the capital of
the Sui and Tang dynasties dating from the sixth century AD.
7. Land readjustment is a technique for converting agricultural land or low-density suboptimal land
to urban land use without using eminent domain to provide areas for streets and open spaces.
Landowners receive a parcel of developable land smaller than the original agricultural parcel but with
a much higher value because of infrastructure. The agency, public or private, that manages land
readjustment schemes pays for the infrastructure either by levying a fee from landowners or by
taking a percentage of land from the original landowners.
8. Voisin was an airplane manufacturer who partly sponsored Le Corbusier’s research work.
9. CIAM (Congrès Internationaux d’Architecture Moderne, or International Congresses of Modern
Architecture) was created by a group of famous architects and artists in 1928 and met regularly until
1959. They were responsible for spreading the ideas of Le Corbusier, who was their main guide.
10. The regulation was national but was specified through local ordinances. In Shanghai it was
specified in the “Code of Urban Residential Areas Planning and Design” (circular GB50180-93).
11. Five floors was the maximum number allowed for apartment blocks without requiring an
elevator. Given the shortage of power in pre-reform China, practically all apartment blocks built were
five stories high.
12. Urban population densities are typically measured in people per hectare. For instance, a density
of 50 people per hectare corresponds implicitly to a land consumption of 200 square meters per
person (10,000/50 = 200). Higher densities correspond to lower land consumption per person.13. The built-up FAR is the ratio between the total floor area built in a city and the total land area
developed, including roads but excluding large open spaces. It differs from the plot area ratio, which
measures the ratio between the area of floor space built on a private plot and the area of the plot,
excluding the roads around the plot.
14. Urban population density, d, is usually expressed in number of people per hectare. As a hectare is
equal to 10,000 square meters, the consumption of land per person, c, is equal to 10,000/d. For
instance, a population density of 50 people per hectare is equivalent to a land consumption of 200
square meters per person.
15. The government of Singapore regularly rents or buys space in shopping malls for the greater
convenience of its citizen. This practice allows the government of Singapore more transparency in its
operating costs, as the rents of its real estate properties are valued at market rates.
16. Unfortunately, most governments consider their land assets to be inalienable. There is no reason
to think so. South Africa and New Zealand are, to my knowledge, the only countries in the world that
value government land assets at their market value and levy a municipal tax on them. Even if the tax
is often underestimated, it is an excellent step forward in forcing government to value their land
assets and, eventually, to sell them when not needed.
17. The labor participation rate is expressed as the percentage of people in the age group 16–65 years
who are employed. The labor participation rate varies widely from country to country; from a low of
42 percent in Jordan to a high of 85 percent in Ethiopia. The world average in 2012 was 64 percent
(World Bank http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/).
18. The average built-up FAR measures the ratio between the total floor area of an entire
neighborhood or an entire city and divides it by the built-up area of the neighborhood or the city. The
average built-up FAR therefore includes private plots as well as street areas and small open spaces in
the built-up area. By contrast, FAR regulations measure only the ratio between floor space and
private plots, and therefore they grossly underestimate the total area of land required for building one
unit of floor space.4 Spatial Distribution of Land Prices and Densities: Models
Developed by Economists
The Need to Understand the Functioning of Markets
We have seen that markets are responsible for population densities. High
demand for a specific location increases density, while low demand
decreases it. Density is an indicator of land consumption, reflecting the
equilibrium between supply and demand for land in a specific location.
Population density is therefore an indicator dependent on market
parameters, mainly household income, land supply elasticity, and transport
speed and cost.
In other words, population densities reflect the preferences of consumers
when they must make a choice between variously priced options. Large
density variations in the same city reflect the diversity of household
preferences. This diversity reflects income differences across households,
but it also reflects different choices made by households of similar incomes
but different urban environments—inner city or suburb, for example.
Planners therefore cannot impose densities through design. However,
planners need to be able to project population densities based on their
understanding of markets and consumer preferences. Planners’ ability to
project densities as accurately as possible is important; an accurate
projection will greatly facilitate the design of infrastructure and community
facilities. However, planners should be aware that markets are subject to
external shocks that nobody can anticipate and that their projections are
only educated guesses at best. They should abstain from freezing their
density projections into land use regulations, and they should be prepared to
adjust the capacity of existing infrastructure to the density generated by
markets.To anticipate the likely densities generated by markets, planners should
have a good understanding of the way land markets work. Markets do not
work in mysterious ways. For instance, increasing households’ income or
decreasing land supply has consequences on housing prices that economists
can easily anticipate. When markets are submitted to unanticipated external
shocks—say, a sudden variation in gasoline prices—the impact on urban
spatial structures is not immediate, and planners have time to adjust their
projections, providing they understand the implications of the changes.
In this chapter I show that density variations in cities—where the highs
and the lows are located—are usually predictable thanks to the
contributions of urban economists. The predictability of market forces and
the peril of ignoring them is the main message of this chapter.
Economists have contributed greatly to this predictability by enhancing
our understanding of the spatial patterns caused by land market
mechanisms. Urban economists have developed a family of mathematical
models that predict relationships among location, land rent, and quantity of
land consumed. The predictive quality of these theoretical models—despite
being crude simplifications of a real city—has proved to be largely verified
by empirical data, as we will see below.
In the second part of the chapter I show how theoretical models
developed by economists can identify potential conflicts between urban
development strategies and the predictable functioning of labor and land
markets.
Urban strategies that are in obvious conflict with economic reality have
little chance of being implemented, and if implemented, are extremely
costly to a city’s economy. Poorly conceived urban strategies are not just
innocent utopias. They misdirect scarce urban investments toward locations
where they are the least needed and, in doing so, greatly reduce the welfare
of urban households. These failed strategies make housing less affordable
and increase the time spent commuting.
Quantitative Models Used by Economists
Planners and urban economists do not have the same objectives. Planners
strive to transform existing cities. They like to speak about their plans in
terms of “vision.” 1 The vision is often expressed with abstract
nonquantifiable qualifying terms, such as “livable city,” “resilient city,” or
“sustainable city.” An urban planner’s vision can be achieved throughdesign, regulations, and capital investments. Economists, by contrast, are
content to play a less ambitious but more analytical role. They are mostly
interested in understanding the way market forces and government actions
interact in shaping cities. Economists attempt to identify the causes that are
changing urban prices and shapes by analyzing empirical data. Economists,
like other social scientists, specialize; most neglect the spatial dimension of
the economy. But urban economists focus specifically on spatial
organization.
Economists develop theories and hypotheses that they represent with
mathematical models that are usually based on extreme simplifications of
the urban reality. However, the purpose of these models is to have both
descriptive and predictive powers. Economists test the relevance of their
models by comparing the descriptive and predictive values they generate
with empirical data collected in real cities.
Simplification is not necessarily a bad thing when we attempt to
understand how something works. After all, the maps used by urban
planners are also an extreme simplification of the real world. However,
despite being a very simplified version of reality, the practical uses of maps
are not in doubt. A map at the scale of 1 to 1 would not be very useful. We
should not reject a priori a theoretical construct because it rests on a model
that is a crude simplification of a real and very complex city. The standard
urban model described below is the necessary and appropriate starting point
for understanding the way a city’s spatial structure is shaped by land prices
and how these prices emerge and evolve.
The Monocentric Model or Standard Urban Economics Model
The monocentric city model, or standard urban economics model, that was
initially developed and refined over the 1960s and 1970s by William
Alonso, Edwin Mills, Richard Muth, and William Wheaton, is exceedingly
simple, even simplistic. However, the monocentric model has turned out to
be a robust guide or benchmark against which to compare the form of many
large and complex cities, and economists therefore usually call it the
standard urban model. I will use that term in the rest of this book.
The standard urban model provides the building blocks for more complex
models, in which some of the initial simplifying assumptions are relaxed.
The more complex models—such as the regional economy, land use, and
transportation model (RELU-TRAN), 2 developed by Alex Anas—requiremany more inputs than the monocentric model. Many of these inputs, in
particular the spatial configuration of the main circulation network, are city
specific. As a consequence, these models provide more accurate results
when some inputs change, as in the case of the RELU-TRAN model’s
calculations of projected commuting time and nonjob-related trips.
However, because these more complex models require many city-specific
inputs, using them makes it more difficult to draw general conclusions
about the way markets influence shapes and population densities in cities
with different spatial configurations.
For this reason, in this chapter I discuss only the use of the standard
urban model. Strangely, not only is the simplest version of this model based
on an extreme simplification of the spatial structure of real cities, but its
assumptions depart significantly from the way real cities are organized.
Despite its loose approximation of reality, the standard urban model has
strong descriptive and predictive powers concerning the structure of most
existing cities, including cities that are not monocentric at all, like Atlanta,
Georgia, or Los Angeles.
The standard urban model is not a curious paradox limited to academic
debates in specialized journals; planners can use it to solve practical
everyday problems, including expected land pricing and population
densities. For instance, I will show how a simple form of the model can be
used to assess whether a city might be consuming an excessive amount of
land at the expense of rural land, what the popular press would call
“sprawl.” The use of economic models should help clarify many issues
concerning densities and land use that are too often approached in a more
emotional than quantitative way.
By contrast, cities built without land markets—as cities in the former
Soviet Union were—are the only ones for which the standard urban model
has no descriptive and predictive power. However, as the model is explicitly
built to reflect the effect of land markets on urban structures, this exception
should be expected. In addition, when cities that had developed during
several decades under a command economy—like the cities of Eastern
Europe—resume operating under market conditions, their structures tend to
converge again toward the pattern predicted by the model. 3
The simplest version of the standard urban model is based on the following
assumptions:1.  The city is located in a featureless plain where agricultural land has a
uniform rent.
2.  All jobs are concentrated in a central business district (CBD).
3.  People commute to work following an infinite number of straight radial
roads.
The reader can see that I was not exaggerating when I spoke about a
gross simplification of real cities!
The model aims to predict the variations in land price and density (i.e.,
land consumption) when land users compete with one another and when
their transport costs are proportional to the distance between their residence
and the city center. However, planners and economists can also use the
standard urban model to analyze a specific city, because it is relatively easy
to relax some of the assumptions to reflect reality. For instance, real road
distances could be substituted for the “as the crow flies” distances assumed
by the model. This is particularly useful when considering cities with
unusual topographies, like Abidjan, Rio de Janeiro, or Hong Kong.
The equations predicting land price and population density at a given
distance from the CBD constitute the most useful properties of the standard
urban model. 4 These equations show that rents, land prices, and population
densities will be the highest in the CBD and will fall as the distance from
the center increases.
Urban land prices are driven by transport costs paid by users (direct cost
of transport, e.g., transit fares, tolls, or gasoline costs, plus the opportunity
cost of the time spent traveling). Transport costs increase with distance
from the city center. The trade-off made by land users between the cost of
transport in different locations and their desire to consume land results in
land prices decreasing as transport costs increase. Land users react to
differences in land prices by consuming less land where land is expensive
and more where it is cheaper. As a result, density decreases when the
distance to the center increases. The negatively sloped density curve reflects
the way households and firms use land more sparingly when its price
increases closer to the city center ( figure 4.1). Land users are able to reduce
their land consumption by building taller buildings where land is expensive
(close to the city center) and less tall ones where land is cheap (on the
periphery). The declining price of land from the center to the periphery is
responsible for the decrease in density as the distance to the centerincreases. Put another way, households and firms are compensated for their
longer commutes by being able to use more land and floor space.
Figure 4.1
Profile of land price versus distance from city center.
It is important to realize that high land prices are causing high densities
and not the other way around. I will expound on the importance of the
relationship of land prices → density in the second part of this chapter,
which evaluates Hanoi’s master plan.
The standard model implies that the land rent function falls with distance
and its functional form depends on underlying assumptions. The price of
land is therefore expected to decrease as the distance from the center
increases, following a profile similar to the one shown in figure 4.1.
The equation that gives the variation of population densities by distance
to the center is given by equation 4.1.
Equation 4.1 Relationship between distance and population densities
where
D is the population density at distance x from the center of a city;
D0 is the density at the center;
e is the base of natural logarithms; and
g is the density gradient, or the rate at which the population density falls from the city
center.The gradient g for density is the most important output of the model, as it
provides the rate at which densities change with distance from the city
center. The more expensive the transport (in time) and money (relative to
households’ income) is, the steeper the gradient will be.
In a real city, we can easily calculate the existing density gradient by
running a regression analysis on observed price or density points at various
distances from the center ( figure 4.2).
Figure 4.2
Calculation of the density gradient using a regression based on observed densities in a real city.
The graphs in figures 4.1 and 4.2 respectively show the average price and
density as a function of distance from the city center. However, in some
cities there could be significant variations in price and density gradients,
depending on the direction along which the prices and densities are
measured. For instance, in cities like Paris—where household incomes are
much higher in the western part than in the eastern part of the city—the
gradient would be flatter on the west side than on the east side, as the
gradient depends on the ratio between household income and transport
costs. The same asymmetry would be observed in Chicago for the north
side versus the south side of the city.
The profile of densities shown in figure 4.2 will change over time as
income and transport technology change. For instance, an increase in
household income, a decrease in cost, and an increase in speed of transport
would flatten the profile of both prices and densities. Inversely, an increase
in population, everything else being equal, would increase both land prices
and densities.In many cities during the past 50 years, household incomes have
increased while transport technology has made commuting trips faster and
cheaper. As a result, the gradients of land prices and densities have become
flatter. The expected flattening in the density profile is such that urban
economist Stephen Malpezzi claims that “the monocentric model contains
the seeds of its own destruction!” Why? Because as a city grows, as
incomes rise, as transport costs fall, paradoxically what starts out as a
monocentric city becomes polycentric, and the original “steep”
price/rent/density gradients flatten inexorably. These are features and
predictions built into the model.
Does the Spatial Distribution of Land Prices Correspond to an
Optimum Spatial Organization?
The economists who developed the standard urban model are not proposing
it as an absolute optimum urban structure. They are only saying that, given
transport costs, income, and total population, this is the way market forces
will distribute prices and densities around a central point, providing the
assumptions of the model are met. The objective of the model is to be
descriptive and predictive, but not prescriptive. For instance, if transport
costs decrease by x percent, with everything else staying constant, the city
is likely to expand by y kilometers.
However, economists assume that if the utilities and production functions
forming the base of the model are correct, then the welfare of households
and firms would be optimized when the land prices and densities reach the
equilibrium profile predicted by the model. Households and firms settling
farther away from the center are being compensated for their higher
transport costs with lower land prices.
The model assumes that if the land market is able to function without too
many distortions, the profile of prices and densities will correspond to a
distribution of land among users that will reflect the “best and highest use.”
There is therefore a hint of spatial optimization when subsidies, taxes, or
regulations are not distorting land prices and transport costs. While these
conditions are probably never met in the real world, the model indicates in
which directions the prices and population densities would be moving if the
distortions were removed.
For instance, in countries where the price of gasoline is heavily
subsidized, like Egypt, Iran, or Mexico, the standard model tells us rightaway that cities will extend much farther away from the center than in cities
where the price of gasoline reflects market prices. 5 In these countries, it is
useless for planners to try to devise regulatory barriers against “sprawl”; it
is only necessary to remove the subsidies on gasoline to get closer to an
optimum equilibrium between distance and quantity of land consumed. The
use of an abstract theoretical model can therefore suggest practical solutions
in the real world in which planners are working.
The users of urban roads seldom pay market rents for the road area they
occupy 6 while commuting; their transport cost is therefore subsidized by
the amount of rent they are not paying for using the roads. Users of the
standard urban model can then infer that the subsidy for the use of road
space increases the built-up area of the city by an area that can eventually
be calculated. Pricing the use of roads through tolls could eventually restore
land consumption to an optimum level. Using market mechanisms to
improve land use efficiency would achieve better results than trying to
design regulations to obtain the same results.
Because the model provides the profile of densities and prices under
undistorted market conditions, it is possible to compare the current price
and density profiles of a city to what the model predicts and calculate the
costs of the distortions. For instance, using the standard urban model, the
economist Jan Brueckner and I calculated the unnecessary expansion in the
city of Bangalore in India created by the poorly designed height regulations
restrictions. 7 In another interesting practical application, Jan Brueckner
applied the model to calculate the welfare gains obtained by dismantling
apartheid policy in the cities of South Africa. He analyzed the changes in
prices and land consumption when freedom of residential location is
granted to all citizens and demonstrated that there has been a large
aggregate welfare gain (i.e., with less spent on transport, it is possible to
spend more on goods like housing and food) from eliminating the spatial
distortion imposed by the apartheid land use regulations. 8 The results hold
for all sorts of segregation imposed by land use regulations or
discrimination of various types, income segregations being the most
common.
In this chapter I demonstrate that the model is a fairly good predictor of
the spatial distribution of prices and densities when a city develops under
not-too-distorted market conditions. And, as a corollary, that the model can
be used both to test actual market distortions in existing cities and whether aplanned spatial strategy contradicts the predictable pattern of land prices
and densities set by markets. I will use the Hanoi master plan case study to
illustrate this example in the operational use of the standard model.
How Well Does the Standard Urban Model Fit Real Cities?
The standard urban model claims to be both descriptive and predictive. To
determine the operational usefulness of the model, it is therefore necessary
first to verify how accurately its equations describe the variations in
densities and land prices in existing cities, and second, to determine
whether changes in density patterns and price follow the predictions of the
model when variables like income, transport costs, and population size
change.
Testing the Descriptive Quality of the Model
Testing the accuracy of the standard urban model on real cities is relatively
easy, though time-consuming. Densities by neighborhood are easier to
calculate than prices; the prices of land transactions are not always
accurately recorded. With my colleague Stephen Malpezzi and my wife,
Marie-Agnes Roy Bertaud, I have calculated population densities in
intervals of 1 kilometer from the city center for about 50 metropolitan areas
around the world. 9
Figure 4.3 shows density profiles from a sample of 12 cities in Asia,
Europe, and North and South America. The horizontal axis shows distance
from the city center from 0 to 30 kilometers, and the vertical axis shows the
variations in built-up densities from 0 to 350 people per hectare. The bars in
the graph show the measured density within each annulus located at 1-
kilometer intervals from 1 to 30 kilometers from the city. I obtained the
average density by dividing the population of the portion of census tracts in
each annulus by the total built-up area in the annulus. The use of GIS
software makes this operation not quite as cumbersome as it sounds!Figure 4.3
Profile of densities in 12 metropolises.
The cities selected have widely different cultures, histories, economies,
climates, and topographies. None of these cities meets the strictly
monocentric criteria specified by the model. Some have a dense center with
a high job concentration, like Paris, New York, and Barcelona. Others have
extremely dispersed job locations, like Atlanta and Los Angeles. Most
others are in between.
How well do the density profiles of the 12 cities in figure 4.3 fit the
predictions of the standard urban model? The model predicts that the
population density of a city will decrease from a central point toward the
periphery following a negatively sloped exponential curve. The profiles of
observed densities for the 12 cities (represented by blue bars in figure 4.3)
fit an exponential density curve as predicted by the model. The fit between
the actual density profile and the model exponential curve (represented by
red lines in the figure) is striking. Table 4.1 shows the R2 values 10
representing the similarities between the observed density at each kilometer
interval and the exponential curve predicted by the model. With the
exception of Rio de Janeiro, all R2 values are above 0.8, and 7 out of 12 are
above 0.9!
Table 4.1
Density gradient of 12 cities.City Gradient
R
2
Beijing
−
0
.
1
7
0
.
9
2
Warsaw
−
0
.
1
7
0
.
8
6
Jakarta
−
0
.
1
2
0
.
9
7
Barcelona
−
0
.
1
0
.
8
9
Paris
−
0
.
1
0
.
9
0
Bangkok
−
0
.
0
8
0
.
9
2
New 
York
−
0
.
0
7
0
.
9
0
Buenos Aires
−
0
.
0
5
0
.
9
5Atlanta
−0.04 0.84
Mexico City
−0.03 0.81
Los Angeles
−0.03 0.91
Rio de Janeiro
−0.02 0.37
Why is Rio de Janeiro the only city in my sample of 12 with a significant
but mediocre fit, having an R2 equal to 0.37? Rio has a beautiful but
complex topography with numerous ocean inlets and steep rocky hills
fragmenting the built-up area. The model assumption that all distances are
counted along radial roads converging on the city center is a good enough
approximation for cities like Beijing, Buenos Aires, or Paris, which are built
on flat plains. However, the approximation is not good enough for cities
like Rio de Janeiro, in which topography constitutes a barrier to direct
access that lengthens some distances and not others. The model’s
assumption of radial roads could easily be relaxed for cities with difficult
topography by replacing radial distance by real distance measured on the
existing road network. The graph in figure 4.3 for the density profile of Rio
de Janeiro could then be redrawn to represent real travel distances from the
center, following existing roads rather than imaginary radials. If this were
done, the fit would probably be better.
Reliable spatial data on land prices or rents is more difficult to collect than
it is for densities. There are some difficulties in finding reliable transaction
data in cities of developing countries, where many land transactions areinformal and even formal transactions are often underreported because of
high taxes on title transfers. However, a vast amount of literature covers the
changes in land prices by distance from the city center in OECD cities for
which reliable data are available. Figure 4.4 shows the land price profile for
Paris by distance from the city center (Hotel de Ville). The fit between
observed prices and the expected exponential curve predicted by the model
(R2 = 0.87) is quite good. Some studies, using historical prices, 11 show that
the price gradient moves in directions predicted by the standard urban
model when income increases and the cost of transport decreases. One
problem is that in very large cities, it is sometimes difficult to agree on what
constitutes the center of the city. For instance, the study on historical prices
in New York uses City Hall at the central point of reference, while a much
more recent study conducted by Andrew Haughwout for the entire New
York Metropolitan area in 2008 12 used the Empire State Building as the city
center.
Figure 4.4
Profile of land prices in Paris, 1990.
We can learn a lesson from the density profiles in figure 4.3 and the price
profile for Paris in figure 4.4. Densities and land prices are not produced by
design but by market forces. A planner thinking that a city would be
improved by having higher densities should therefore advocate higher land
prices. More expensive or slower transport would increase the desirability
of neighborhoods closer to the city center and therefore increase their land
prices, everything else being equal.
The advocates of “compact cities” should realize that a compact city—
defined as a city that uses less land for sheltering the same number of
people as another city—has a price. This price will not be paid by the urbanplanner advocating it but by the households and firms who will live in that
compact city. Planners advocating a compact city strategy, however, think
that it will happen by just assigning densities for different city locations on
a master plan.
I am not exaggerating here. Many master plans “design” densities the
way an architect may decide on the color of a building. In the last part of
this chapter, I give a concrete example of arbitrarily planned densities—
Hanoi’s master plan—and the problems it causes.
Why Does the Model Seem to Fit Obvious Acentric Cities Like Los
Angeles?
Why does the model seem to apply equally well to monocentric cities and
to acentric cities like Los Angeles and Atlanta, which have only a weak
concentration of employment in their CBD? Figure 4.5 shows the same
population density profile of Los Angeles as in figure 4.3, just at a larger
scale. The highest density is only 50 people per hectare in the center. At 30
kilometers from the center, it drops by 60 percent to about 20 people per
hectare. The decrease in density in Los Angeles is small compared to that in
Bangkok, for instance, where densities drop by 93 percent at the same
distance from the center. However, with R2 = 0.91, the density profile
follows the prediction of the model, even though the city does not meet the
initial assumption that all jobs are concentrated in the CBD. Los Angeles’s
CBD, which is roughly located at the centroid of the metropolitan built-up
area, contains only a small percentage of jobs compared to the rest of the
metropolitan region (about 11 percent of all jobs in the city, according to
O’Sullivan). 13 Let us try to find out why the distribution of densities should
be consistent with the one predicted by the standard urban model.Figure 4.5
Density profile of Los Angeles.
Sources: Population: US Census data, 2000; built-up area: interpretation and vectorization of satellite
imagery by Marie-Agnes Bertaud.
Consider an imaginary circular city with a radius of 12 kilometers where
jobs are uniformly distributed in the built-up area ( figure 4.6). I will call
this type of city “acentric” to distinguish it from the monocentric and
polycentric types of spatial organization, where jobs are concentrated in one
or several locations. In an acentric city, jobs are evenly distributed in the
built-up area. This is roughly similar to the distribution of jobs in Los
Angeles. Because, by definition, the acentric city doesn’t have any area
with a high job concentration, it doesn’t have a CBD. But it does have a
centroid. The centroid is the point from which the sum of the distances to
all other locations within the shape is the smallest.
Consider three workers who are living at different locations, A, B, and C,
and let us measure how many jobs they could potentially access in an
arbitrarily fixed travel time of 30 minutes at an average travel speed of 20
km/h, which corresponds to a circle with a radius of 10 kilometers. For
simplicity, I will assume that the travel time is the same for all three
workers in all directions. Below or within 30 minutes’ travel time, each of
the three workers would be able to reach any job located in an area
corresponding to a circle with a 10 kilometer radius. While the area that can
be reached in 30 minutes is the same for all three workers, the number of
jobs located in the 30 minute travel range would be different, depending on
the location of their dwellings in the city.
Figure 4.6
Schematic representation of access to the labor market in a city with a uniform distribution of job
locations.
Let’s examine the worker residing at point A, located at the centroid of
the city shape (left graph of figure 4.6). Traveling 30 minutes from A, thisworker can reach 69 percent of the built-up area in 30 minutes (the ratio of
the 10 kilometer radius circle accessible in 30 minutes and the entire area of
the city). This worker can therefore access 69 percent of all job locations in
the city, as our hypothesis was that job locations were evenly distributed in
the built-up area.
The second worker is located at point B (middle graph in figure 4.6),
which is 6 kilometers from the built-up area’s centroid or halfway between
the city center and the edge of the built-up area. She will have access to
only 54 percent of jobs, as the area she can reach by traveling 30 minutes
does not completely overlap with the city’s built-up area where the jobs are
located.
The third worker is located in C, at the edge of the built-up area (right
graph in figure 4.6). He will be able to reach only 28 percent of the built-up
area and therefore only 28 percent of the jobs in the city. If worker C wants
to reach the same number of jobs as, say, worker A, he could do it by
traveling for more than 30 minutes.
From this schematic graphic example, we can see that, even in an
acentric city where jobs are evenly distributed in a city, the advantage of a
central location still exists in terms of access to the labor market and to
amenities. Although jobs and amenities are uniformly distributed in the
built-up area, a household located close to the center of the urban shape (it
does not need to be a CBD) has access to more jobs and amenities than does
a household located at the periphery in the same travel time. This locational
advantage would generate more demand for more centrally located housing,
and it explains the existence of a density gradient with densities decreasing
outward from the centroid of the urban shape, as demonstrated by the
density profile of Los Angeles (see figure 4.5).
The accessibility advantage of a centrally located household is not as
strong in an acentric city as it would be in a monocentric one, but it is still
significant. If the hypothesis illustrated by figure 4.6 is correct, we would
expect acentric cities with a uniform or quasi-uniform job distribution to
have a density gradient that still shows a decrease in densities with distance
from the centroid of the built-up area, even in the absence of an identifiable
CBD.
Obviously, an acentric city would have a lower density gradient than
cities that have retained a dominant CBD, like Beijing, Barcelona, and
Paris. The value of the Los Angeles density gradient (table 4.1) is onlyabout 1/6 of Beijing’s and about 1/3 of the gradients of Barcelona and Paris,
which is consistent with our hypothesis on acentric cities. The small sample
presented in table 4.1 does not constitute irrefutable proof that population
density gradients decrease when job dispersion increases in a metropolitan
area, but it shows that the standard urban model remains relevant for cities
that are polycentric or acentric.
Why a Few Cities Do Not Fit the Model at All and Why It Reinforces
the Model’s Credibility
Empirical evidence shows that the standard urban model’s negatively
sloped exponential curve can aptly represent population density variations
in most monocentric, polycentric, and acentric cities. However, if the use of
the standard urban model were limited to a description of existing density
patterns in cities, it would be of little use to planners. Existing densities are
relatively easy to measure, as seen above, and there would be no need for a
model. The model is important because it can predict what will happen to
densities and land prices when the values of some market variables change
over time. Because I put so much confidence in the predictive power of the
model, it is necessary at this point to explain why the density profiles of
some cities do not fit the negatively sloped density profile and why cities
with completely dispersed job locations fit the predictions of the model very
well.
Among the 53 cities for which I collected data, a few do not fit the model
at all. For example, the standard urban model does not accurately describe
the densities of Moscow in 1990 ( figure 4.7), Brasília in 2000, and
Johannesburg in 1990. 14 Their densities not only fail to decrease
exponentially from their city centers, sometimes they actually increase or
follow a U-shaped profile. But these exceptions should not surprise us.
After all, the main claim of the model is that it reflects the spatial structure
generated by free land markets. Planners and engineers designed these
anomalous cities in a political system that allowed them to ignore land
prices.Figure 4.7
Moscow population density profile, 1989. Sources: 1989 All-Union Census data, State Committee for
Statistics Moscow, 1990; vectorization of satellite imagery by author.
The absence of a market generates alternative forms to the one predicted
by the standard urban model. Supply and demand forces, which are absent
in a command economy, shape the urban structures predicted by the model.
The Predictive Capability of Economic Models Is Important for
Operational Urban Planning
Economic models, in spite of their theoretical simplifications, are most
useful for their predictive capabilities. The operational value of economic
models rests on their ability to forecast general directions in land and
housing price levels and densities when income, land supply, transport cost,
and transport speed change. Economic models cannot provide accurate
projections of densities in specific areas of the city, but they are useful for
anticipating the general direction of relative prices and densities. One of the
main lessons to be learned from the use of economic models is that
variations in densities and land price are usually predictable and are caused
by variations in households’ and firms’ incomes, transport costs, and by the
elasticity of a city’s land supply.
Land and housing prices and densities obey the basic demand and supply
mechanism. The high land values created at the center of large cities
decrease with distance in the same way that the force of gravity of a planet
diminishes with distance from this planet. Planning future land use while
ignoring the predictable land value based on location makes no more sense
than trying to ignore gravity when designing an airplane. The real-worldexample of Hanoi’s master plan, discussed later in the chapter, will illustrate
a typical case of planners trying to “design” densities, therefore implicitly
designing land values instead of basing their plans on the projection of land
values and densities created by predictable variations in income and
transport costs.
Fall of Population Densities over Time
The standard urban model predicts that the population density gradient will
fall in absolute value as urban incomes rise and transport costs decrease.
Shlomo Angel and colleagues observed this flattening of the density curve
across a large number of modern cities they surveyed. 15 Angel explores in
detail the historical evolution of densities in world cities. He provides
historical data for 30 large cities in all five continents, showing the
evolution of built-up densities between 1800 and 2000. His data show that,
while densities in these cities often peaked around 1900, densities have
since significantly declined in all of them, mostly due to increases in
income, decreases in transport costs, and progress in transport technology.
Another set of data analyzed by Angel shows the density changes in 120
world cities between 1990 and 2000. The data show that densities have
increased in only 16 of the 120 cities, all in developing countries. All of the
others showed a decline in built-up densities. Angel points out that the
decrease in built-up densities was strongly correlated with rising household
incomes and decreasing transport costs in proportion to income, which is
consistent with the standard urban model predictions. Angel’s exhaustive
urban density database therefore seems to confirm the predictive quality of
the model.
While average overall urban densities tend to fall when incomes and
transport costs decrease, how do neighborhood densities change in an urban
area under the same conditions? The standard urban model forecasts a
decrease in the density gradient. In other words, the profile of densities
becomes flatter over time, with densities in the center decreasing and those
in the periphery increasing slightly. Figure 4.8 shows the variations in built￾up densities in Tianjin between 1988 and 2000 and in Paris between 1990
and 2006. While the history and the economic bases of the two cities have
very little in common, the increase in household income and decrease in
transport costs relative to income produced the same spatial transformation.
Tianjin’s density gradient decreased by 1.1 percent per year, while Paris’sgradient decreased by a more modest 0.4 percent per year. This difference
in density gradient decrease is consistent with the faster increase in
household incomes in Tianjin compared to Paris.
Figure 4.8
Change over time in the density gradients in Tianjin (1988 and 2000) and Paris (1990 and 2006).
Sources: Tianjin Population Census and Survey data, Tianjin Statistical Yearbook, Tianjin; Paris
Population 1990 National Census, population 2006 estimate by Institut National de la Statistique et
des Études Économiques, Paris; vectorization of satellite data by Marie-Agnes Roy Bertaud.
The change in density profile is relatively slow in both cities. Even the
faster change in Tianjin is still modest in light of the massive economic and
construction boom that took place in Tianjin between 1988 and 2000. Urban
structures are very resilient and change slowly. The direction of the change
in density profiles in both Tianjin and Paris is consistent with the
predictions of the standard urban model.
Regulations That Distort Land Prices
Regulations may decrease the total area of floor space that can be built on a
given area of land. These types of regulations would of course change the
price and density profiles that the standard urban model would project for
unconstrained markets. For instance, regulations routinely restrict the
heights of buildings or impose a maximum limit on the number of dwelling
units that can be built per hectare. If these regulations are binding—that is,
if the regulations reduce the number of dwellings that developers would
have built to respond to consumers’ preferences for these areas—then the
regulations will create a shortage of floor space in areas of high demand. As
a result of this shortage, the price of floor space will increase compared to
what it would have been without the regulations. In turn, the increase in
price might result in higher densities, as some consumers might decide to
use less floor space to be able to afford an expensive but desirable location.
The limitation on building height imposed by the municipality of Paris
illustrates this point. There is a high demand for living in the center of Parisbecause of its high level of amenities and its high concentration of jobs.
Because of the limitation on the supply of floor space imposed by the height
limitation, the size of apartments decreases and their price increases. The
real estate posting in figure 4.9 shows the very high prices of tiny rooms,
between 9 and 11 square meters, whether for rent or for sale. The absence
of elevators in some historical buildings helps lower the price of
apartments, which is the case for the 11-square-meter studio whose
advertisement is shown on the left in figure 4.9. The enormous difference
between the price of this room (US$17,945 per square meter) and the price
of a one bedroom apartment (US$1,944 per square meter) located in the
center of Chicago next to City Hall shows that the impact of regulations on
real estate prices is not trivial!
Figure 4.9
Sale price and rents of very small apartments in Paris, 2014.
I am not suggesting here that the municipality should necessarily amend
its building height restrictions in the city central core. The regulation’s
aesthetic objective is achieved; it perfectly preserves the historical skyline
of Paris. However, many in Paris lament the extremely high housing prices
and the smallness of apartments. High prices and low housing floor
consumption are the direct consequence of preserving historical Paris. If the
height restrictions were widely relaxed, it would increase the supply of
residential floor space and lower housing prices, but by removing one of the
chief attractions of Paris, it might also decrease the demand for a central
location that would have a lower aesthetic quality.
In cities other than Paris, most regulatory constraints on floor area ratio
aim to control densities and therefore create an artificial shortage of floor
space or developed land. Consequently, these regulations usually increase
densities—the opposite of the desired result. Mumbai, where planners
attempted to reduce densities by limiting the floor area ratio in a draconian
fashion, has, as a result, one of the highest average built-up densities in the
world. 16The same is true for regulations aimed at increasing densities. In the
absence of consumer demand, planners cannot increase densities by
regulatory fiat. Regulations that limit the number of dwellings per hectare,
for instance, are an attempt to design densities through the proxy of
regulations.
There is nothing wrong with planners attempting to project the number of
dwellings per hectare that the market is likely to supply in a given
neighborhood. But to attempt to transform that guess into a regulation is
both detrimental and delusional.
Sprawl: The Standard Model and the Expansion of Cities
Models developed by urban economists help explain how land markets
shape cities. We have seen that land markets—not planners’ designs—
generate population densities. Densities are indicators of land consumption.
17 If markets generate densities, then they also define how much total land a
city will consume and, by extension, the boundaries between urban and
rural land. As I will show below, the standard urban model explains how
and why markets, whether distorted or not, establish this limit.
The expansion of cities into the countryside, often called “sprawl” when
this expansion is considered wasteful, is probably one the most emotional
urban issues discussed by the popular press and by advocacy groups. A
Google search for the word “sprawl” 18
 returns 5.9 million entries!
The concern about the ever-expanding limits of cities is at the core of the
popular advocacy for “smart growth” and for “sustainable cities,” which ask
for the forceful containment of cities’ expansion. Many urban critics and
planners argue that unregulated cities expand too far into the countryside,
causing increased commuting distances and dangerously decreasing the
amount of land devoted to agriculture. These critics call “sprawl” what they
judge as excessive urban expansion at what they think are too low densities.
Presumably there is some population density threshold above which a
city’s development is “non-sprawl” and below which development is
sprawl. However, the anti-sprawl advocates clamoring for more compact
cities have not yet defined this population density threshold. Opponents of
sprawl puzzlingly use the term to describe both American cities like Atlanta
and Chinese cities like Tianjin, which have densities of 6 and 170 people
per hectare, respectively. At what density would the critics of sprawl say a
city is using land reasonably?Even the World Bank, in 2014, has recently joined the anti-sprawl chorus
in its report on urbanization in China by titling a map of the Shanghai￾Suzhou-Changzhou conurbation “Sprawl in Shanghai Metropolitan Region
between 2000 and 2010.” 19 The map just shows the urban expansion that
had occurred in this highly economically successful metropolitan region
over 10 years. No data presented in the World Bank report constitutes proof
that the urban expansion shown on the map is either wasteful or inefficient.
Given the large increases in this area’s population and household income
that occurred during this period, certainly some land expansion would be
expected and not troubling. How can we know whether land use is
efficient? The standard urban model could provide us with a more rational
and less emotional assessment of the matter.
Concern for the Loss of Agricultural Land
Often cities must expand into valuable agricultural land, which might
appear to be a zero-sum game between the area devoted to agriculture and
the area occupied by cities. Because the reduction of agricultural area is
linked in people’s mind to a loss in food production, it is understandingly an
emotional issue. In reality, increases and decreases in food production have
more to do with changes in land productivity and climatic variations than
the area under nominal cultivation. But given the historical famines that
plagued South and East Asia as recently as the twentieth century, 
20
it is
quite understandable that a possible decrease in agricultural land raises
concern.
The Chinese government, alarmed by the fast pace of urban expansion,
has set urban land development quotas that severely restrict the conversion
of agricultural land into urban land. The National Plan on New
Urbanization (2014–2020), published by the Government of China to guide
urbanization until 2020, prescribes a minimum density of 100 people per
hectare for every new urban settlement in order to preserve agricultural
land. In addition, the use of costly conversion quotas is required for any
urban expansion requiring the loss of cultivated land.
Many observers of rapid urbanization in Asia are alarmed by the fact that
cities’ land coverage expands at a faster pace than the urban population.
While I was advising on the development of Tianjin in 2007, the city’s
managers were alarmed by this phenomenon: Tianjin’s developed land area
was expanding at a faster pace than its population ( table 4.2). Over 12years, the population of Tianjin had increased by 22 percent, while the
built-up area had increased by 63 percent. However, household income in
Tianjin increased in real terms by about 55 percent between 1988 and 2000.
Residential floor space during the same period increased from 14 square
meters per person to 22 square meters, consistent with the increase in
household incomes. The increase in land consumption is not alarming when
compared with the increase in household income. If income had increased
but land and floor consumption had been stagnant, there would be cause for
alarm.
Table 4.2
Increase in population and built-up area within the third ring road, Tianjin, 1988–2000.
Year
1988 2000
Population 3,499,718 4,264,577
Built-up area (square kilometers)
153.72 250.74
Density (people per hectare) 228 170
Area of built-up land per person (square meters) 44 59
Increase in population (percent) 22
Increase in built-up area (percent) 63
Increase in land consumption per person (percent) 34
The standard urban model has shown that densities will decrease when
urban household incomes increase, and urban transportation costs decrease
in proportion to income. This change in density is easy to explain without
using the model’s equation. As incomes increase, households wish to
consume more floor space. Firms, formerly operating dense sweatshops,
acquire more land to provide more working space for their employees and
for the more sophisticated machinery they operate; roads become wider to
accommodate the increasingly heavy flow of traffic. All these factors imply
more land consumption per capita. Therefore, a decreasing density during
economic expansion is not necessarily an indicator of wasteful landconsumption. It all depends on household and firm incomes, the cost and
speed of transport, and the price of agricultural land during the period.
Expecting that cities expand at the same densities as their core implies that
densities should be uniform from the core to the periphery and that densities
had been already optimal since the city’s foundation.
The standard urban model tells us that densities will decline as household
incomes increase and transport technology improves. This is not a sign of
inefficiency but a rational reallocation of inputs. As most of the new land
development occurs on the periphery, it is normal that the density of newly
developed land will be lower than the city average.
Low density at the edge of urban development is a normal and rational
component of development, as it represents a maximization of utility for
firms and households when market prices are not distorted. However, it is
important to have a yardstick to measure objectively whether land
developed at the fringe of cities has an inefficiently low density.
The anti-sprawl movement, while being vocal, does not represent a
unanimous opinion. Some planners and many economists, such as Peter
Gordon and Harry Richardson, have argued that an elastic land supply is
indispensable to maintaining affordable housing prices as a city’s
population and income rise. This is also one of the main arguments
developed by my colleague Shlomo Angel in his book Atlas of Urban
Expansion, mentioned earlier. Robert Bruegmann, in his aptly titled book
Sprawl, puts the question of cities’ extension in context and debunks many
of the urban legends that are an unfortunate feature of the discourse on
cities and that brand them as voracious land consumers.
The work of urban economists demonstrates that there is nothing
idiosyncratic about how much land cities occupy, where the limit of
urbanization is located, and what the main variables on which this limit
depends are. The area occupied by cities and the location of the built-up
boundary depend on the relative value of three ratios: rural to urban income,
commuting cost to urban income, and agricultural land rent to urban rent.
The land area used by cities, whether sprawled or compact, has very little to
do with greedy developers, rapacious landowners, or irresponsible car￾happy commuters.
My goal is not to review, comment, or paraphrase the work of urban
economists but to explain how planners can utilize their work to better
understand how cities use land when their population increases and whateconomic and population variables are responsible for setting densities. I
focus on what the standard urban model can teach us about the limits of
urbanization and, by extension, what determines the area of cities.
The Standard Urban Model Helps Explain How Far a City Expands
and Why
Urban land prices decrease as distance from the city center increases,
reflecting the decreasing utility of land to the consumer, whether firm or
household, due to increasing transportation costs. The graph in figure 4.10
shows the curve U representing the variations of land price of an imaginary
city as distance from the center increases. The line A represents the price of
agricultural land at the periphery of this city. It is assumed that that this
price does not vary with distance and represents the capitalized rent that
farmers obtain from their crops. The more fertile and productive the soil,
the higher the price of agricultural land will be. 21 The urban land price
curve U intersects the horizontal line A representing the price of agricultural
land at a point d at distance x from the city center. The outer limit of built￾up area of the city will be located at distance x. At a distance shorter than x,
developers will be able to outbid the agricultural price that farmers could
otherwise get, enticing them to sell their land. Therefore, at a distance
shorter than x, land will be converted from agricultural to urban use.
Beyond the distance x, developers can only offer a price lower than the
agricultural price of land. Farmers will therefore be unlikely to sell their
land, and the land will remain agricultural. The higher the price of
agricultural land, the smaller will be the radius of urbanization x, everything
else being equal.Figure 4.10
Price of urban land and agricultural land define the limit of urbanization.
This has an important, interesting implication about the way cities
expand. For a given population, a city’s land prices and densities will be
higher if it expands in highly priced agricultural land.
This dynamic is rather straightforward. Setting the limit of urbanization
does not require conspiracy theories involving greedy developers in cahoots
with devious car manufacturers, as one of the most persistent urban legends
would have it. 22
We can see, if we accept the firms’ and households’ utility functions
implicit in the model, that the areas and densities of cities (implicit in the
location of x), have no normative “good practice” value but depend on the
price of urban land at the fringe of urbanization compared to the price of
agricultural land. Cities expanding into very productive agricultural land
will have a smaller footprint, and therefore a higher density, than cities
expanding into a desert, everything else being equal. Imposing a minimum
normative density, such as the 100 people per hectare in China, may result
in resource misallocation. This density might be too low for cities
expanding into valuable agricultural land, while it might be too high for
cities expanding into land with little alternative uses, like desert or mud
flats.
The Urban–Rural Boundary When the Price of Agricultural Land Is
Distorted
The point d on figure 4.10, showing the limit of urbanization, is at the
distance x where the price of urban land equals the price of agricultural
land. If neither of these prices is distorted, this distance—and by extension
the entire built-up area of the city—could be considered optimal. In other
words, this distance and built-up area would maximize the utility of urban
dwellers and firms as well as the farmers cultivating land at the edge of the
city.
However, if one or both prices were distorted, the point d would no
longer represent the optimal limit of urbanization. For instance, let us look
at the consequence on the urbanization limit, and therefore on a city’s land
consumption, when the acquisition price of agricultural land is undervalued
compared to its real market value when based on agricultural productivity (
figure 4.11).Figure 4.11
Limit of urbanization when agricultural land prices are distorted.
Let us suppose that the acquisition price of agricultural land (line A1) is
lower than its real implicit market value (line A2). This distortion in the
price of agricultural land could be caused by a government using eminent
domain to expropriate land occupied by farmers and paying a lower price
than what they would obtain in a free market in which the agricultural land
price had been based on the capitalization of the rent produced by the land.
This type of expropriation happens often at the fringe of cities in China and
in India,
23 where governments use an administrative price that is usually
lower than the market price for compensating farmers for expropriated land.
Figure 4.11 illustrates this situation. The price of urban land becomes
equal to the undervalued price of agricultural land at point d1 at a distance x1
from the center. However, if the market price of agricultural land had been
used, then the limit of urbanization will have been in d2 where the urban
land price crosses the line A2 at a distance x2 from the city center. We can
see that x1, the limit of urbanization with an undervalued agricultural price,
is significantly farther away than x2. Undervaluing the price of agricultural
land would therefore contribute to an overconsumption of land by urban
users at the expense of agricultural land and is therefore a misallocation of
resources.
Prices Distortions May Cause an Over- or Underconsumption of Urban
Land
The use of the standard urban model is unlikely to allow us to calculate the
exact distance corresponding to an undistorted agricultural price. However,it does allow us to be certain that an undervaluation of the price of
agricultural land will lead to an overconsumption of land by cities. People
concerned about the potential loss of agricultural land caused by
urbanization can use the standard urban model to identify distortions that
will eventually lead to the overconsumption of urban land. The use of the
model points to the obvious solution to reduce land consumption to a more
optimal level. The solution is for developers to pay a market price for
agricultural land. The alternative solution, drawing a regulatory urban
growth boundary (UGB) 24 or a greenbelt at distance x2 to prevent further
urban extension, will not work for two reasons. First, the model is not
accurate enough to calculate an accurate x2 distance. Second, if it was
possible to establish x2 accurately, this distance would not be optimal for
long; agricultural productivity, urban incomes, and transport costs are likely
to change over time, requiring a displacement of x2.
Prices can be distorted in other ways. Agricultural prices can be inflated
by subsidized irrigation, for instance, resulting in a misallocation of land,
this time at the expense of urban land. Urban land prices themselves can
also be distorted by large infrastructure subsidies, transport subsidies, or
gasoline subsidies. Governments should correct the misallocation of land
between urban and agricultural use through the suppression—or at least a
decrease—of price distortions, not through design solutions such as zoning
regulations.
To remedy perceived excessive urban land consumption, which may or
may not exist, planners usually advocate imposing greenbelts or UGBs that
use design to limit the city expansion. Economic models allow us to
understand which conditions might lead cities to consume an excessive
amount of land. When overconsumption occurs, the models tell us what to
do to correct it using market mechanisms rather than arbitrarily designed
solutions.
Market solutions constantly adjust to changes. Design solutions, such as a
UGB à la Portland, Oregon, create rigidities and exacerbate distortions.
What Happens to the Urban Built-Up Boundary When Agricultural
Land Price Is Not Uniform?
The most simplified form of the standard urban model assumes that
agricultural land prices are uniform around a city. Cities where this
assumption approximates reality are expected to develop symmetricallyaround the traditional city center with a built-up area approximating a circle
centered on the traditional CBD. This is roughly the case for Beijing,
London, and Paris, for instance.
However, the standard urban model implies that where large differences
in agricultural price exist for different directions, a city would logically
develop asymmetrically. The city would expand much farther toward the
cheap agricultural land than toward the expensive land. Let us test the way
the standard model adapts in a real city where the price of agricultural land
is not uniform in every direction. The city of Beaune, located in the middle
of the Burgundy wine country in France, illustrates what the standard model
would predict when agricultural land price is much higher in one direction
than in another.
Every year, an international wine auction involving some of the most
prestigious and expensive wines in the world takes place in Beaune’s
medieval city center. Beaune plays the role of Wall Street for Burgundy
wine. The vineyards providing the most expensive “grand cru” (Aloxe￾Corton and Puligny-Montrachet) and “premier cru” Burgundy wines are
exclusively located to the west of the city, along gentle slopes exposed to
the southeast morning sun, as shown in figure 4.12.
Figure 4.12
Built-up area and premier cru vineyards, Beaune.
The land price of vineyards in this area was estimated at about US$500
per square meter in 2013. This is of course an exceptionally high price for
agricultural land. By comparison, the average price of agricultural land in
Kansas in 2013 was about US$0.50 per square meter. To the east of Beaune,the price of vineyards, because of different soil and sun exposure, drops
below US$200 per square meter.
We have to adapt the standard model to reflect the asymmetrical
agricultural land prices around Beaune. Instead of averaging the price of
urban land by distance from the city center, as it was done in the previous
figures, let us use the standard model to represent the price of land along an
axis AF passing through the city center in a southeast direction (figure
4.12). I represent the profile of the price of urban land prices and the
various vineyards’ land prices along the axis AF in figure 4.13.
Figure 4.13
Profile of urban and agricultural land prices along the AB axis, Beaune.
We can see from both the map and the graph that the city expansion is
asymmetrical around the city center as predicted by the model. Toward the
northwest, the short distance from the medieval city would make land
attractive for development, but urban developers cannot outbid the high
premier cru (premier vineyard area) vineyard price. The city’s built-up
boundary toward the northwest is therefore set at a short distance from the
city center. By contrast, toward the southeast, the much cheaper price of
vineyards—where “Bourgogne AOC” (second-grade vineyard area) wines
are produced—allows the city to expand more freely in this direction. The
exceptionally high price of agricultural land surrounding Beaune constrains
the expansion of the city and is likely to make urban land exceptionally
expensive. Apartments for sale in Beaune near the historical center were
advertised at US$4,000 per square meter in 2014.
The Beaune example shows that urban and agricultural prices shape
cities. The asymmetry of Beaune’s built-up area has nothing to do with
design but reflects market price differences. The very valuable land onwhich premier cru wines are produced does not need to be protected by a
green-belt or zoning. It is protected by the high price of Burgundy wine on
the world market. This example also shows that, when needed, the
assumptions of the standard urban model can be selectively relaxed and
adapted to circumstances that differ significantly from the initial
assumptions.
Land Development Cost and the Limit of Urbanization
In the previous paragraphs, I have assumed that rural land could be
converted, without cost, into urban land. In the real world, this is usually
not the case.
In many cities, land subdivision regulations 25 are setting minimum
standards that developers have to meet to transform agricultural land into
developable urban lots. Complying with these regulations imposes four
types of costs:
1.  civil work costs for roads, sidewalks, and infrastructure;
2.  land costs, as some of the land bought from farmers has to be set aside
for roads, social facilities, and open space;
3.  overhead costs that include design, supervision, and “paper pushing” to
obtain the various permits from different departments; and
4.  financial costs represented by interest during construction (interest has to
be paid on the amount disbursed between the time land is acquired and the
time when the plots are ready to be sold to builders).
The total area of land sold by developers to urban land users is therefore
less than the area that developers buy from farmers. The roads and open
spaces built by developers are usually transferred free of charge to the local
authority. The total cost per square meter of salable developed land that will
have to clear the market (i.e., that will be on or below the curve U in figure
4.14) is given by equation 4.2.
Equation 4.2 Cost per square meter of salable developed land that will clear the market
, wherek = land development cost per square meter of salable urban land;
a = price of agricultural land per square meter;
c = cost of civil works per square meter;
h = developer overhead;
f = financial cost; and
r = percent of developed land to be devoted to roads and open space.
Figure 4.14
Limit of urbanization, taking into account the cost of land development.
The variable k represents the development cost of developing land. The
profit of the developer will be the difference between k and the sale price of
developed land when it will finally be sold to builders. Because it takes a
long time (several years for large projects) between the time agricultural
land is acquired and developed plots are ready to be sold to builders, the
price of developed land at the time of the sale is often quite uncertain. 26
This sale price could be higher or lower than k. If it is lower than k, the land
developer will have to take a loss on the project or wait for the price of
developed land to increase in the area until it is higher than k. However,
during this period the developer will have to pay interest on k, further
increasing the cost of developed land.
Comparing the price of agricultural land to the sale price of developed
land and assuming that the difference represents the developer’s profit is
therefore completely misleading.
Let us assume that a developer buys land from farmers at $100 per square
meter; that civil works, overhead, and financial costs amount to $50 per
square meter; and that regulations require roads and open space to occupy40 percent of the land developed. Under these conditions, the price of
developed land that will clear the market in this location will have to be at
least $250 per square meter. 
27 The more “generous” the land development
standards imposed by the local authority, the higher the price will be that
the final land user will have to pay for developed land.
The land development costs itemized in equation 4.2 occur only once, at
the time when land use changes from rural to urban.
The large difference between the sale price of agricultural land at the
fringe of cities and the sale price of developed land often gives the
impression that either landowners or developers are making an
extraordinarily high profit in the process. In reality, most of what appears to
be a large capital gain often reflects high values for the parameters c, h, f,
and k, reflecting a complex and difficult regulatory process rather than some
speculative binge by one player or another.
The ratio between k and a, relating the price of undeveloped agricultural
land to the price of developed land, is an important urban indicator that has
been measured in 53 cities around the world by Shlomo Angel for his work
on the Housing Indicators Program, conducted in 1994 for the World Bank.
Angel calls this indicator the “land development multiplier.” In his book,
Housing Policy Matters,
28 Angel analyzes the implications of this indicator
for housing affordability. He found that in 1990, the median value of the
land development multiplier was equal to 4.0 in developing countries and
2.4 in industrialized countries. Thus the expansion of cities in developing
countries is even more constrained than in industrialized countries, resulting
in higher prices for land and housing. A combination of unrealistically high
regulatory development standards and high transaction costs due to poor
property registration and bureaucratic red tape are the cause of these higher
costs.
Let us now revisit the distance between the limit of urbanization and the
city center after taking into account the land development costs set by local
regulations (figure 4.14). Line A, which corresponds to the market price of
agricultural land (similar to line A on the graph shown on figure 4.10),
intercepts the urban land price U at the point d1 corresponding to a distance
x1. Line B corresponds to the land development cost k (which includes
agricultural land price in addition to the other costs of developing land).
The intersection d2 of line B with curve U defines the new limit of
urbanization for formal land development. We see that when the cost ofland development is taken into account, the limit of urbanization decreases
from x1 to x2, reducing the total area of land developed. The higher the cost
k of formal infrastructure development, the shorter will be the distance x2
compared to x1 and the smaller the total area of developed land—and
consequently, the higher the average built-up density will be, everything
else being equal. The value of k, largely defined by planners’ design, has a
double impact on developed land cost: it increases the cost of developed
land at the edge of cities, and it decreases the supply of developable land
(by increasing the distance between x1 and x2), thus increasing the price of
land everywhere else in the city.
Market forces governed by set regulations (such as those dictating road
area percentages and overhead costs) impose an urban development limit at
x2. However, an informal building sector that ignores regulations exists in
many countries. This informal sector includes individuals as well as
developers building houses and commercial buildings that do not meet the
minimum standards imposed by regulations, and therefore for whom the x2
limit is irrelevant. The area between x1 to x2 is likely to become an urban
fringe area, where the urban labor market will expand by including farmers
progressively switching to urban jobs, and where informal settlements will
develop in countries with weak law enforcement. In the next section I
describe the conditions under which this extension of the urban fringe will
occur.
The Labor Market May Expand beyond x2: Villages at the Fringe of
Cities
No new formal urban development will normally occur beyond the distance
x2 shown in figure 4.14. However, farmers already living beyond x2 might
find that the difference between urban wages and rural wages is worth the
expense of commuting to a city job. These farmers already live in a farm
beyond x2, they do not have to buy any land to be able to participate in the
city’s labor market, and they do not have to pay land development cost k. If
the cost of commuting to the city is lower than the difference between their
potential urban salary and their current rural salary, they are likely to decide
to join the urban labor force, even though they live beyond the urban built￾up boundary. The availability of cheap motorcycles that can move easily on
rural roads greatly decreases the cost of individual commuting without the
need to be connected to a major road or transit network. The use ofindividual transport, when affordable, greatly increases the size of labor
markets beyond the visible limits of urbanization. We will see the
consequence of the extension of the urban labor markets in rural areas when
discussing Hanoi’s master plan later in this chapter.
Many Asian cities are located in the middle of dense rural areas. The
population living in rural areas adjacent to big cities often contributes to an
increase in the size of the labor market without requiring migration. This
increase might be important in parts of Asia where the rural population
densities are high, as in Bangladesh, Southeast Asia, and eastern China. For
instance, figure 4.15 shows the large number of villages located 20–30
kilometers to the east of Luoyang, China. There is no trace of formal
urbanization in the area, but a motorcycle would allow farmers to commute
to Luoyang in less than 40 minutes. The populations of these villages may
participate in the urban labor force long before any agricultural land is
converted to urban use. These villages are likely to be incorporated into the
built-up area of the city when the price of urban land in their area becomes
higher than the price of agricultural land.
Figure 4.15
Existing villages east of the immediate expansion area of Luoyang, China. Source: Vectorization of
Google Earth Images, 2015; population estimates based on village surveys.
What Type of Development Might Take Place between x1 and x2? The
Emergence of the Informal Sector and Parallel Markets
What is likely to happen between x1 and x2? Between these two points, 29 at
the fringe of cities, farmers are likely to be willing to sell their land todevelopers at a price higher than the agricultural price. However, formal
developers cannot bypass a building permit if they want to apply for
construction finance. They will therefore not buy land between x1 and x2, as
the cost of development that would meet regulatory standards will not clear
the market (between x1 and x2, k is above curve U).
Some consumers, however, may be quite satisfied by land development
standards that are lower than the ones prescribed by regulations if they
result in cheaper housing. When there is such demand, informal developers,
not relying on the formal financial system, will be willing to buy land from
farmers and develop it at standards that cost less than k. Between x1 and x2,
farmers will only receive an offer for their land at a price above the
agricultural price from informal developers. Some farmers might prefer to
continue farming and wait for urban land prices to increase further to allow
them to sell later to formal developers. 30 However, some farmers may
decide to sell to informal developers or even informally develop their own
land. In cities where urban regulations make land unaffordable to a part of
the population, we can expect to see scattered urbanization made up of
informal settlements between x1 and x2.
Informal developments might be built by developers in a planned fashion
or might be created spontaneously by squatters on government land.
Developer-driven informal development is, in my experience, much more
common than squatter settlements, although there is no hard data on the
subject worldwide. I am using the term “informal development” to
designate a settlement developed by developers at standards below the
regulatory requirements but meeting the demand of one segment of the
population, and in general below the cost k as defined in equation 4.2.
Informal developments are likely to develop at the fringe of urbanization
in cities where the costs of land development are higher than what a portion
of the population can afford (or is willing to pay). When a large part of the
urban population cannot afford the cost of the minimum standards imposed
by regulation, the enforcement of the planning rules becomes impossible. In
many cities of developing and emerging economies, informal settlements
typically represent 20–60 percent of the total housing stock. In Mumbai, for
instance, the most prosperous city in India, informal settlements represented
more than 55 percent of the housing stock in 2010. 31 The growth of
informality is not necessarily driven by poverty but by the arbitrariness and
high cost of land use regulations.In advanced economies where new land development is strictly
controlled, an informal sector is likely to appear in the built-up area in the
form of illegal subdivisions and extensions of existing houses and
apartments. A 2008 paper 32 estimates that about 114,000 units of illegal
new dwellings were built in New York City between 1990 and 2000. These
new units were created by subdividing and expanding legally acquired
houses built in existing developments. Therefore, the informal sector
created by unaffordable urban regulations exists in both developed and
developing countries. In developing countries, the informal sector mostly
takes the form of illegal land development; in developed countries, illegal
subdivisions and extension of houses or apartments in formal developments
are more common. The growth of informal sectors in developed and
developing countries has the same cause: poorly conceived land use
regulations that do not take into account the income of poor households.
In countries where control over land development is weak, the urban land
price curve defined by the standard urban model will reflect two types of
development: new formal development that will be located in areas between
the city center and x2, and new informal development that is likely to grow
between x2 and x1. Eventually, as household income increases and transport
costs decrease, urban land prices will increase, pushing the formal
development boundary farther to the right of x2. Formal and informal
development will then be found side by side in the same area, while new
informal settlements will develop beyond the new x2 point.
Informal development is a market response to the design rigidity imposed
by regulations. Informal land development introduces a form of land supply
elastic ity in cities where the effects of regulations on markets significantly
decrease the land supply (x2 is smaller than x1). In the absence of new
informal developments, the increase in the supply of housing units for low￾income households can happen only through the densification of existing
low-income neighborhoods, which reduces the amount of land and floor
space that low-income households consume. Therefore, the enforcement of
urban planning rules frequently contributes to lowering the quality and
quantity of housing affordable to the poor (as explained in depth in chapter
6). The two aerial images in figure 4.16 show informal developments at the
fringe of Surabaya, Indonesia, and Mexico City’s Federal District. In
Surabaya, villagers have jointly developed agricultural land below the
minimum standards for street width and plot sizes established by theirgovernment. However, the Indonesian government rightly tolerates this
form of development, provided they form an organized community called a
“kampung” which is in many ways similar to a condominium. The local
government will later negotiate with the kampung leadership to connect the
kampung with the municipal networks of infrastructure.
Figure 4.16
Informal subdivision at the fringe of urbanization in Mexico City (left image) and Surabaya,
Indonesia (right image; same scale for both images).
The informal settlements in Mexico City, shown on the right in figure
4.16, are very different from the Indonesian kampungs because they are and
remain illegal. The land development standards—such as street width, plot
size, and setbacks—are lower than the ones prescribed by regulations, but
the settlement shown is located in an area that is not allowed to urbanize as
per the master plan. The settlement is located on a 30 percent slope in the
southwestern part of the Federal District in an area where any development
is forbidden for environmental reasons. We can see that the area around
Mexico City’s informal settlements is still farmed. Regardless of whether
the area is designated for development by the master plan, the price gradient
defined by the standard urban model still defines land prices. Land would
probably sell at a discount in an area where regulations forbid any
development. But it is the distance to the Mexico City labor market that will
ultimately decide the urban land price. If this urban land price is higher than
the price of agricultural land, the area will likely urbanize. In an area with a
30 percent slope, agricultural land values might not be very high; therefore,
the chance that farmers will sell their land to developers is rather high.
I am not giving these examples as advocacy for disregarding all urban
regulations. The environmental regulations that aim to prevent development
on the slopes of the volcanoes surrounding Mexico City are certainly sound.
However, the price of urban land dictated by distance to the city labor
market is still there. The designation of no-construction areas on the master
plan does not render the land price irrelevant. Mexican municipalitiesshould acknowledge the strong economic incentives that poor people have
to break those regulations. Regulations have a cost. In this case, the cost of
the land use regulation is the destruction of the value of the land, owned by
the undoubtedly poor farmers toiling on the slopes of the volcanoes. The
solution might be to compensate farmers for continuing to farm in the area,
providing enough incentive so that the informal development alternative
will not be attractive to them. Simultaneously, the government should allow
the development of more land that is affordable for low-income households
in other areas of Mexico City that are not under such an environmental
constraint. Whatever the solution, we can see the link between land
development standards and informality, and how the standard urban model
can help urban planners anticipate what is likely to happen at the fringe of
cities.
A Concrete Application of the Standard Urban Model: An Evaluation
of the Hanoi Master Plan
About once every 10 years, many cities prepare a new master plan to guide
future development. The master plan preparation usually follows the
availability of new decadal census results. Typically, a master plan consists
of three components:
• a review of past development trends and an identification of current
issues;
• a declaration of development objectives and priorities; and
• a proposal for future development (including a land use map of areas to be
developed, a proposal for new zoning regulations, and a list of public
investments in civil work and social infrastructure consistent with the
implementation of the plan’s objectives).
In democratically elected municipalities, public hearings and public
participation are expected during the various phases of preparation and
before final approval by the municipal government.
The need to review periodically and to adjust a city’s development
objectives and ongoing infrastructure investments is certainly justified.
However, whether this review should be done at set 10-year intervals
regardless of other urban dynamics and involving a massive data-gathering
exercise is rather dubious. The traditional master plan exercise seems to bea fossil left over from the time when the planning practices of command
economies fascinated the world. It would make more sense for cities to
monitor data and indicators in real time and to adjust policy and
investments according to what works and what does not, rather than waiting
10 years to assess results and eventually changing direction. Some cities,
like Singapore and Hong Kong, have adopted a real-time monitoring
adjustment approach for managing their development. Their management
system has become more similar to that of corporations, which have to
adapt rapidly to external shocks.
The master plan concept is based on the false assumption that city
development is similar to large civil works projects, requiring the
preparation of a detailed blueprint that will be followed by a construction
period of 10 years. While I consider the preparation of master plans a waste
of money and energy, the reality is that most large cities in developing
countries hire large engineering consulting firms to prepare these master
plans. It is therefore important to look at their impact on the development of
cities. Often, many large international lending institutions, such as the
World Bank and bilateral development agencies, finance part of the urban
infrastructure in developing countries. For these institutions, master plans,
“structural plans,” or “city strategies” are a convenient way to provide them
with a list of potential investments from which they may select their
medium-term lending programs. They therefore tend to support, at times
financially, the preparation of such documents, because it simplifies their
appraisal process.
Master plans provide a spatial blueprint for the development of cities
based on an engineering design approach to city development.
Consequently, they usually completely ignore the market forces linking
land prices and densities described in the preceding sections of this chapter.
They use a top-down design approach and project the spatial distribution of
jobs and people across a metropolitan area based on the preferences of the
designer, often justified as a “scientific approach” that identifies “needs.”
The master plan for Hanoi reviewed below is unfortunately quite
representative of most of the master plans that I have reviewed during the
past 40 years while working for the World Bank and other urban
development organizations. We will see that the spatial development
blueprint it contains violates most of the theoretical and empirical principles
related to the standard urban model.Hanoi: A Master Plan Based on “Scientific Principles”
In 2010, an international consortium made of reputable international
consulting firms prepared a master plan for Hanoi, called the “Hanoi
Capital Construction Master Plan to 2030 and Vision to 2050,” projecting
population, land use, and infrastructure needs for 2030. The plan received
the Merit Award for Urban Design in 2011 from the American Institute of
Architects of New York.
The authors of Hanoi’s master plan say that their design for the spatial
distribution of population is based on “scientific design principles.” 33 The
words “markets” or “land prices” do not appear even once in the entire
report, in spite of the declared strategy of the Government of Vietnam to
increase the use of market mechanisms to allocate resources. Vietnam
joined the World Trade Organization in 2007, a decisive step in moving
from a command to a market economy. There is a buoyant real estate
market in Vietnam, with many players ranging from small entrepreneurs to
large international developers. In her 2008 book, Annette Kim described the
functioning and peculiarities of the early stage of Vietnam’s real estate
markets. 34 Since then, the Vietnamese real estate market has gained in
sophistication, and its impressive realizations are seen everywhere, from
low-income town houses built by farmers to large urban development that
mixes high-end commerce, offices, and residential towers. Walking through
the streets of Hanoi, no one could miss the dynamism and creativity of the
various entrepreneurs who are busy building this fast-developing city. In
contrast with this on-the-ground reality, the absence of a role for those
entrepreneurs in Hanoi’s master plan projections is astonishing.
The Master Plan’s Objectives
I quote the master plan objectives from the plan’s introduction:
Among the most important features of the plan is the accepted recommendation that 70% of Hanoi—
including its remaining natural areas and most productive agricultural land—be permanently
protected from further development as part of a broad sustainability strategy. 
35
Protecting agriculture is explicitly declared to be the main objective that
will guide the physical expansion of Hanoi! This is an odd primary
objective for the development of a city of 3.5 million in 2012, which grew
at 3.5 percent per year between 2000 and 2010. According to the master
plan, the projected population for the metropolitan region will increase to 9
million in 2030. Planning the expansion of the city and a transport systemthat would allow the labor market to function is likely to become a major
challenge. Transportation planning is worthy of significant attention in a
master plan, but these authors instead focus on preserving agricultural land.
Unfortunately, this ignores the reality that tripling the popu lation will
require at least a tripling of developed land, which will in the long run lead
to poor infrastructure if this expansion is not taken into account. This, in
turn, will be detrimental to the goal of sustainability that the authors purport
to pursue.
The Master Plan’s Spatial Concept: Preserving Agriculture
The schematic projected land use plan is shown on the right in figure 4.17.
The existing land use map of the metropolitan area in the year 2010 is
shown on the left in the figure. The spatial concept consists of an
agricultural belt about 16 kilometers wide splitting the population of Hanoi
into two parts: the core city (including the current Hanoi’s CBD) and high￾density satellite towns. In the agricultural belt, three “Eco￾Township/villages” of 60,000 people each will be created, but only agro￾industries would be allowed in these villages. Some new expressways,
parkways, and rapid rail transits crossing the agricultural belt would link the
satellite towns to the main core city (figure 4.17). The land use in 2010
shows that the agricultural belt includes many villages that already occupy
about 24 percent of the area. According to the 2009 census, a population of
2 million already lives in the villages in the agricultural belt. The authors of
the master plan assume that the population already in the agricultural belt
will remain rural and will keep cultivating the area.
Figure 4.17
Hanoi existing land use in 2010 and Hanoi’s capital master plan for 2030.The concern for the conservation of fertile agricultural land that
surrounds the southwestern part of Hanoi is the justification for fragmenting
the city’s extension on both sides of the agricultural belt. The authors of the
master plan provide three reasons to prevent Hanoi’s expansion into the
immediately adjacent rice paddies. First, the energy saved on transport in
bringing rice to Hanoi will be significant compared to the energy required
to transport rice from other parts of Vietnam. Second, the rice fields would
provide a greatly needed green area next to the high-density core city.
Third, the existing paddy fields surrounding Hanoi are prone to flooding
and would have been expensive to develop.
The master plan does not provide numbers to justify these assertions,
which are central to the spatial development strategy. We will see below
that the costs that the inhabitants of Hanoi will incur by preventing the
urbanization of the agricultural belt will be extremely high and will far
outweigh any benefits implied by these arguments. My main objection to
the creation of an agricultural belt that would split the city into two parts is
that it will disrupt residents’ ability to interact with one another and to
participate efficiently in labor and real estate markets. By ignoring what we
know about labor and real estate markets, it will prove to be extremely
costly for Hanoi’s households and firms.
Let us test the consistency of the master plan spatial concept shown in
figure 4.17 with what we know about the workings of labor and land
markets. If the spatial extension of the population prescribed by the master
plan contradicts the way labor and land markets work, it is unlikely to be
implemented because of the high cost that will be incurred by households
and firms. Therefore, it is likely that the city will grow following a different
spatial pattern from the one projected by the plan. Unfortunately, it is also
likely that the government will build the infrastructure as planned. This will
result in further waste, as the infrastructure will not be built where the new
population has settled. This is a common outcome of master plans. I have
seen it happen in cities as diverse as Karachi and Cairo.
The Master Plan Spatial Concept Is Inconsistent with the Functioning
of Labor Markets
The master plan projects that 9 million people will live in the Hanoi
metropolitan area in 2030. Among them, 3 million will remain “rural,” not
because they will live in areas that are too remote to participate in the urbanlabor market, but because they happen to live within the perimeter of what
the planners have zoned as the agricultural belt. The agricultural belt,
however, is much closer (from 8 to 24 kilometers) to the center of Hanoi
than are the satellite towns. The current land use map on the left in figure
4.17 shows that numerous villages are already located in the projected
agricultural belt. According to the 2009 population census, the rural
population in the belt is about 2 million people. Many of these villages are
already about 40 minutes or less by motorcycle from the center of Hanoi.
With the new highways planned, the commuting time to Hanoi will become
even shorter in the future.
Workers who are currently cultivating rice in Hanoi’s agricultural belt are
likely to have wages similar to rice farmers in other parts of Vietnam. If
they receive higher wages, then the rice produced in the agricultural belt
will have to be sold at a higher price than the rice produced elsewhere, soil
productivity being equal. The lower transport cost involved in bringing rice
to Hanoi’s consumers is unlikely to compensate for the cost of the higher
salary of agricultural workers if their wages have to be aligned with those of
Hanoi’s urban workers. As rice is a commodity good with standard prices
set by the market, the price of rice will not rise, so therefore the wages of
workers will not rise, resulting in lower incomes for those employed in
agriculture than for farmers who decide to seek urban employment. The
short distance from the agricultural belt to Hanoi’s city center—and
increase in the number of roads projected to be built by the master plan,
further deceasing travel times—will provide a significant employment
advantage to farmers seeking urban jobs over the workers in satellite towns
located much farther away. The master plan’s assignment of workers to
rural or urban jobs is based purely on whether they will live within the
arbitrary perimeter of the designated agricultural belt, not on distance from
urban jobs.
The arbitrary assignment of workers to rural or urban jobs is solely based
on planners’ choice and is therefore unlikely to be implemented: no zoning
regulations can force people to work in one sector of the economy rather
than another! It is very likely that in 2030, owners of rice paddy fields in
the agricultural belt will face difficulties finding enough labor to work in
their fields, because of the competition with better paying urban jobs.
Preventing urban development in the agricultural belt is therefore unlikely
to meet its main objective, which was to preserve rice production in thisarea. Plans that contradict the functioning of labor markets are unlikely to
be successful.
The Master Plan Spatial Concept Is Inconsistent with the Functioning
of Land Markets
The villages currently in the agricultural belt occupy about 23 percent of the
belt area (figure 4.17). As soon as the planned road infrastructure is built,
the transport time and cost to commute to Hanoi’s main employment areas
will likely decrease. Consequently, the price of houses in these villages will
increase and will likely follow an urban price gradient centered on Hanoi’s
city center, as predicted by the standard urban model. The likely high rent
generated by floor space located in these villages will be a strong incentive
for farmers to increase the number of floors of existing houses or to build
new ones in their backyards. The area is likely therefore to densify,
sheltering the families of urban farmers and additional urban workers. The
density in these villages will increase in the same way that the density in the
villages in Hanoi’s closer periphery has increased in the past.
The cultivated land around the villages of the agricultural belt will of
course be under the same developmental pressure as the land occupied by
villages. Initially, the price of land in the agricultural belt will reflect the
income generated from cultivating rice. But as urban household incomes
increase and transport cost to the center of Hanoi decreases, the demand for
urban land from households and firms will increase. Consequently, the price
of land in the agricultural belt will increase and become much higher than
the price of land under agricultural use. The profile of land prices and
population densities will follow the profile predicted by the standard urban
model and will be similar to that shown in figure 4.10, with the peak land
price and density located in Hanoi’s CBD. We may safely assume that most
of the agricultural land in the planned agricultural belt will soon have an
urban land value much higher than its agricultural value. Already,
observations by Google Earth imagery taken in 2014 show that new formal
and informal housing developments are appearing in the agricultural belt,
consistent with the predictions of the standard urban model.
The Spatial Distribution of Population as Designed by the Master Plan
Is Unlikely to Ever Be Implemented
It is unlikely that regulations, even if the government were ready to enforce
them, would be enough to prevent urban development in the agriculturalbelt. In principle, all land in Vietnam belongs to the state. However, farmers
have a collective land use right to the land they occupy. And since the
reforms of 2005, farmers have been allowed to sell land to developers,
though the local government often intervenes as an intermediary, extracting
substantial revenue in the process.
Under the spatial concept of the plan, farmers outside the agricultural belt
would therefore be allowed to sell their land to developers, raising
substantial revenues for themselves and the local government, while
farmers inside the agricultural belt limits will have no other option but to
keep growing rice on their land. Obviously, this would generate a lot of
political resistance, in particular because the limit establishing the
agricultural belt is arbitrary. Farmers, local government, and developers will
lose a great deal of potential revenue because of the creation of the
agricultural belt; they will form a powerful coalition to prevent the belt’s
implementation. Households seeking low rents or cheap housing in areas
with good job accessibility would prefer to settle in the agricultural belt
than to be forced to live in satellite towns at a much farther distance from
jobs.
The apparent drop in land value caused by the interdiction to build the
agricultural belt may also become a large source of inequity and corruption.
Local government could expropriate land from farmers, paying agricultural
land prices for it—as officially this would be the only use permitted. Later,
an unscrupulous intermediary could resell the land to a developer at a much
higher price after obtaining an amendment to the master plan by creating
enclaves of urban development in the agricultural belt.
What Would Be the Consequences of Constructing the Infrastructure
Designed in the Master Plan?
Because the planners who designed the master plan failed to consider how
labor and real estate markets work, the spatial distribution of densities in
2030 is likely to be very different from the designed densities shown in the
plan. Higher population densities will be concentrated in the eastern part of
the agricultural belt, decreasing toward the west. If the government
implements the infrastructure investments programmed in the master plan,
there will be a mismatch between the infrastructure built and the actual
spatial distribution of the population. The new dense developments that will
emerge in the green-belt will generate many trips with no matching roadand transport network. The large, newly urbanized areas in the agricultural
belt will be deprived of a comprehensive sewer and drainage network that
could protect the environment and prevent periodic flooding. Indeed,
maintaining the rice paddies in the agricultural belt will require preserving
the current irrigation network. An urban storm drainage system preventing
seasonal flooding is incompatible with irrigation. Eventually, at a much
later period when the agricultural belt is fully urbanized, the government
will have to build a comprehensive sewer and drainage system, as is being
done in Bangkok and Jakarta, but at a far greater cost than if it had been
designed before urbanization had taken place. Building a regional storm
drainage and sewer system in the monsoon countries where Hanoi is located
requires complex hydrological studies of the area, which have not been
conducted, because the agricultural belt has been designated to remain rice
paddies.
The lack of well-designed recreation areas will be another casualty of the
master plan. The plan considers the rice paddies a “green reserve” by
themselves and consequently does not identify specific areas in the
agricultural belt reserved for recreation. As the rice paddies are
progressively replaced by informal urbanization, strategically well-located
open spaces may well disappear. Two rivers cross the agricultural belt,
feeding ponds and small lakes. In view of the inevitable urbanization of the
agricultural belt, it is critical to create a buffer zone around the existing
water bodies, which would become formal public parks that should be
integrated into the urban storm drainage system.
Would Any Social Benefits Result If the Government Could Enforce
the Spatial Distribution of Population Prescribed by the Master Plan?
Most master plans have the same flaws as Hanoi’s master plan and
consequently are not implemented. Eventually, through derogations of the
plan or through the growth of the informal sector, the distribution of
densities and land prices will follow a pattern based on the demand for land
needed by households and firms, as predicted by the standard urban model.
This is predictably the fate of Hanoi’s master plan.
Presumably, an authoritarian government, through a draconian
enforcement of land use regulations, could prevent the development of the
agricultural belt. We can assess the impact of such actions on the welfare ofthe population through two indicators: the affordability of land and the
average commuting distance.
The impact that the plan would have on urban land and housing prices is
obvious. The agricultural belt covers 870 square kilometers, an area slightly
larger than the 850 square kilometers planned for the total built-up area of
Hanoi in 2030! Removing such a large area from the land supply would
increase land prices in the residual area where the plan authorizes urban
development. It would also further increase densities in the already very
dense core city, increasing congestion and decreasing the land and floor
consumption of poorer households. The impact of greenbelts on land and
housing prices has been well documented by many urban economists,
including Jan Brueckner, Edwin Mill, and Kyung-Hwan Kim.
The implementation of the plan would also significantly increase
commuting time and energy used by urban transport compared to what it
would have been if development prices and densities had followed the
standard urban model. The agricultural belt—from 20 to 30 kilometers wide
—separates the core city from the satellite towns. This distance will add to
the commuting time for those who live in the satellite towns but work in the
core city, and for those who live in the core city but work in the satellite
towns.
Would the implementation of the master plan create any benefits that
could compensate for the higher cost of housing and transport? The master
plan mentions three major benefits that would be directly derived from its
proposed spatial arrangement. First, the agricultural belt will save on the
cost of transport for the rice consumed by Hanoi’s urban population.
Second, the belt will provide a useful green space for recreation. And third,
by avoiding development in rice paddies, the belt will decrease the cost of
infrastructure development.
The argument that creating an agricultural belt in the middle of Hanoi’s
metropolitan area will save on agricultural transport cost is naive at best. It
would be much cheaper to transport bags of rice once a year after harvest
from any location in Vietnam than to transport millions of people twice a
day across Hanoi’s metropolitan area.
The second argument—the agricultural belt would constitute a needed
recreation area—is no more valid than the first argument. The rice paddies
that occupy the agricultural belt in the master plan would be a poor
recreational area, considering that they are flooded a large part of the time.The area represented by the agricultural belt is about 10 times the area of
Hanoi’s core city. It would be large enough to fit more than 300 parks the
size of New York’s Central Park! If the agricultural areas around Hanoi
were urbanized, it certainly would be possible to reserve recreational areas
along the two rivers and the several lakes, creating a large and pleasant
green space easily accessible from adjacent neighborhoods. Hanoi already
has many examples of well-designed and well-used parks along rivers and
lakes in the middle of dense neighborhoods.
The third argument, that paddy fields are prone to flooding and are
expensive to develop, has somewhat more validity than the first two
arguments. However, in 2010, villages inhabited by a population of about 2
million people already occupied 23 percent of the area in the agricultural
belt. It therefore seems that the area is not impossible to develop. Anyway,
it would be even more expensive to develop a network of highways and
rapid transit (see figure 4.17) across the same paddy fields as the ones
proposed by the master plan without using the land adjacent to the
highways. Many large cities of Southeast Asia, among them Bangkok and
Jakarta, have been developed on former paddy fields. Land development in
paddy areas requires careful planning of an elaborate drainage system, but it
has been done all over South East Asia.
The Final Evaluation of Hanoi’s Master Plan
The problem with Hanoi’s master plan is not caused by an unfortunate
design decision but by a faulty concept. Allocating urban land and activities
is not a pure design exercise: It requires an understanding of how labor and
land markets work. It is impossible to design the future expansion of a city
without taking into account the impact of the labor and land markets on the
future distribution of the population. Land prices, rents, and commuting
times are not mentioned even once in the master plan’s nearly thousand
pages of text, maps, and tables. It is a rather typical document that exposes
the hubris of planners who think that a city needs only to be designed by a
clever engineer, without taking into account market mechanisms that are
constantly at play. Trying to obstruct markets always has grave
consequences.
The standard urban model has shown us that the price of land in large
cities is similar to the gravity field of large planets that decreases withdistance at a predictable rate. Ignoring land prices when designing cities is
like ignoring gravity when designing an airplane.
The Operational Applications of the Standard Urban Model
An understanding of the standard urban model is indispensable when
making informed choices to manage cities. Let us summarize the
operational implications of the spatial distribution of prices and densities as
derived from the model.
Concerns about the overconsumption of land by cities (“sprawl”) are best
addressed by identifying possible distortions in the land market, caused by
abusing the use of eminent domain, underpricing agricultural land, and
subsidizing gasoline. Setting arbitrary spatial barriers to urban expansion,
such as green-belts and UGBs, however, results in higher land and housing
prices, longer commute times, and other negative outcomes as demonstrated
in Hanoi’s master plan.
Land prices and population densities are closely related and are produced
by market forces. We have also seen that there is no optimum density for
urban development, and within the same city, densities may vary by orders
of magnitude from the center to the periphery. The population density in a
particular neighborhood is determined by trade-offs between households’
desire to consume more land and floor space and the commuting cost in
time and money. Households with different preferences and incomes make
different trade-offs. Some low-income households prefer to reduce
drastically their land and floor space consumption in order to reduce
commuting costs. Other households with similar incomes may make
different trade-offs. Planners cannot possibly know the reasons households
may have for selecting a specific housing location and level of land
consumption. Therefore, planners should abstain from arbitrarily fixing
densities through regulations. Neither should they try to distribute
population according to a designed spatial pattern, no matter how clever the
geometric arrangement appears to be.
Planners should use the standard urban model to better understand how
markets work in the city they are managing. They can use the model to
anticipate the effect of regulations and infrastructure on land prices and
rents. They can plan, finance, and build the infrastructure that would
increase the supply of land and therefore decrease housing costs. They can
design transport systems that decrease commuting time and cost, anotherway of increasing the supply of land and increasing mobility. They should
design transport systems that are consistent with the densities set by the
land markets rather than design densities that would make a preselected
transport system feasible.
The standard urban model is a very crude instrument that provides an
understanding of the basic movement of land prices and rent as income,
transport costs, and land supply change over time. Planners could design
more complex models to anticipate price movements or commuting patterns
in cities with specific constraints, in particular topographical constraints
like bodies of water or steep mountains. However, no infrastructure or
regulatory design decision should be taken without accounting for its
impact on the land market.
In general, fixing minimum consumption for land and floor space through
regulations on such things as minimum plot size, maximum floor area ratio,
and maximum number of dwelling units per hectare introduces rigidities in
the market that have negative impacts on poorer households for whom these
regulations are binding (discussed in more detail in chapter 6). Planners
should therefore abstain from using these regulatory constraints on
minimum land and housing consumption, as they hurt the poor the most and
trigger the growth of informal markets.
Only after they have a good understanding of how local real estate
markets function can planners anticipate future land market values and then
plan infrastructure networks that will be consistent with anticipated
densities. Constant monitoring of land prices and rent could provide
planners with feedback that could help them amend their infrastructure
plans if their projection appears to diverge from reality.
Unaffordable housing is a plague affecting many large cities. Monitoring
the ratio between median income and median housing price allows us to
constantly measure housing affordability. When the price-to-income ratio
becomes higher than 4, planners should take immediate action. This action
could be to increase land supply through new infrastructure development or
to audit land use regulations and building permit practices that may make
developed land and housing prices artificially high. Urban planners should
be held responsible for unaffordable high price/income ratios in the same
way that public health officials are held responsible for infectious disease
epidemics, or police are held responsible for high crime.In the case of Hanoi’s master plan, planners should have surveyed house
rents and the price of land in new housing developments in the agricultural
belt. If they had done so, the very high cost imposed on the 2 million
farmers already living there by preventing further development in the
agricultural belt would have become evident. A quick survey of agricultural
wages compared to urban wages would have also allowed planners to
anticipate that most agricultural workers would eventually switch to urban
jobs as soon as they had access to them through better transport networks.
The lack of understanding of land and labor markets led the planners to
design a metropolitan infrastructure that will be at odds with the likely
spatial distribution of the population.
Notes
1. The formulation of a vision to guide urban development is expressly recommended as one of the
eight steps required to design an Urban Development Strategy by the World Bank and the Cities
Alliance. See http://www.citiesalliance.org/sites/citiesalliance.org/files/CA_Docs/resources/cds/cds￾guidelines/cds_guidelines_final.pdf.
2. Alex Anas and Yu Liu, “A Regional Economy, Land Use, and Transportation Model (RELU￾TRAN): Formulation, Algorithm Design, and Testing,” Journal of Regional Science 47, no. 3 (2007):
415–455.
3. See Alain Bertaud, “The Spatial Structures of Central and Eastern European Cities: More
European Than Socialist?” Presented at the International Symposium on Post-Communist Cities,
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, June 2004, http://alainbertaud.com/wp￾content/uploads/2013/08/AB_Central-European-Spatial-Structure_Figures_2.pdf.
4. Readers not familiar with the standard urban model and curious to learn how these equations were
derived are referred to chapter 2 in Jan K. Bruekner, Lectures on Urban Economics (Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press, 2011), and for a most complete discussion of the empirical data to chapter 8 in Arthur O’
Sullivan, Urban Economics (Homewood, IL: Richard. D. Irwin, 1993).
5. The taxpayer who pays the gasoline subsidy pays the price for the misallocation of resource.
6. One of the few exceptions might be in Singapore, where the tolls for using central city roads are
constantly adjusted to reflect the equilibrium between supply and demand.
7. Alain Bertaud and Jan K. Brueckner, “Analyzing Building-Height Restrictions: Predicted Impacts
and Welfare Costs,” Regional Science and Urban Economics 35 (2005): 109–125.
8. Jan Brueckner, “Welfare Gains from Removing Land-Use Distortions: An Analysis of Urban
Change in Post-Apartheid South Africa,” Journal of Regional Science 36, no. 1 (1996): 91–109.
9. See Alain Bertaud and Stephen Malpezzi, “The Spatial Distribution of Population in 52 World
Cities: Recurrent Patterns and Some Implications for Public Policy,” working paper, University of
Wisconsin, Madison, 2007.
10. R
2
is a statistical measure of goodness of fit, i.e., how close the observed values are to the values
predicted by a mathematical model. The range of possible values for R
2 varies from a minimum of 0,implying no fit at all, to a maximum of 1, indicating perfect fit.
11. Jeremy Atack and Robert A. Margo 1998, “Location, Location, Location!” The Price Gradient for
Vacant Urban Land: New York, 1835 to 1900,” Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics 16,
no. 2 (1998): 151–172.
12. Andrew Haughwout, James Orr, and David Bedroll, “The Price of Land in the New York
Metropolitan Area,” Current Issues in Economics & Finance 14, no. 3 (2008), Federal Reserve Bank
of New York.
13. Arthur O’ Sullivan, Urban Economics (Homewood, IL: Richard. D. Irwin, 1993), 282.
14. For a discussion of cities developed without land markets in command economies, see Alain
Bertaud and Bertrand Renaud, “Socialist Cities without Land Markets,” Journal of Urban Economics
41, no. 1 (1997): 137–151.
15. Shlomo Angel, Alejandro M. Blei, Jason Parent, Patrick Lamson-Hall, and Nicolás Galarza
Sánchez, Atlas of Urban Expansion, vol. 1: Areas and Densities (New York: New York University,
Nairobi: UN-Habitat, and Cambridge, MA: Lincoln Institute of Land Policy, 2016).
16. Alain Bertaud, “Mumbai FAR/FSI Conundrum: The Four Factors Restricting the Construction of
New Floor Space in Mumbai,” 2011, http://alainbertaud.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/AB￾Mumbai-FSI-Conundrun-Revised_June-2013_kk-ab1.pdf.
17. A density of, say, 50 people per hectare is equivalent to a land consumption of 200 square meters
per person (1 hectare = 10,000 square meters, 10,000/50 = 200).
18. Merriam-Webster’s Dictionary defines sprawl as “to spread or develop irregularly or
ungracefully” and gives an example: “the city sprawls without apparent logic or plan to the west,
north, and south—American Guide Series: Rhode Island.”
19. World Bank, “China’s Next Transformation: Making Urbanization Efficient, Inclusive, and
Sustainable,” Supporting Report 2, “Planning and Connecting Cities for Greater Diversity and
Livability” (New York: World Bank, 2014), 143, map 2.2.
20. The most damaging famines of Asia, in Bengal in 1943 and in China during the Great Leap
Forward in 1961, were caused by government policy and subsequent inaction and had nothing to do
with a decrease in agricultural land area.
21. I have assumed a uniform agricultural productivity in space, and therefore A is a horizontal line.
22. Among others, see http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/General_Motors_streetcar_conspiracy.
23. In China, the discontentment of farmers with the price given by local government for their land is
the source of numerous protests. In India in 2006, the government of West Bengal used eminent
domain to expropriate about 4 square kilometers of farmland to allow a private company to build a
car factory. Violent protest over the low price paid for the acquisition obliged the government of West
Bengal to abandon the project, which was eventually relocated to another state.
24. Portland, Oregon, was one of the first cities in the United States to impose a UGB. It consists of a
boundary, reviewed every 4 years, that limits the extension of the city to the area within the
boundary. A large literature exists on the effect of the UGB on land and housing prices. The UGB
concept applies to all larger cities in the state of Oregon.
25. Land subdivision regulations concern mostly new greenfield developments. They define (1) the
geometry of development—e.g., minimum plot size, minimum street width, minimum areas to be left
as public open space, parking requirements, and (2) the construction standards for, e.g., roads, storm
water drains, water, and sewers. By contrast, land use and zoning regulations usually concern therestrictions on the type of use (e.g., commercial, residential) and intensity of use (e.g., maximum
floor area ratio, maximum height, setbacks) of a specific lot.
26. The market price of an empty lot reflects what consumers are ready to pay for the flow of
anticipated rent that the lot will generate over time. This price is usually higher than the original
development cost + agricultural land cost, but not necessarily so. In South Africa, for instance, in
large housing projects developed by the government for low-income households, some lots are
selling on the free market for only one-third of the cost of developing them. I have found the same
negative difference between market prices and costs in government-built housing projects in India
and in Thailand.
27. Using equation 4.2: (100 + 50)/0.6 = 250.
28. Shlomo Angel, Housing Policy Matters: A Global Analysis (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
2000).
29. We are working here on a simplified version of reality. In real cities the distance from the center
to the points x1 and x2 might varies depending on the geographic location.
30. As the population expands, incomes increase, and the price of transport relative to income
decreases, both x1 and x2 will eventually shift to the right.
31. Patricia Clarke Annez, Alain Bertaud, Bimal Patel, and V. K. Phatak, “Working with the Market:
Approach to Reducing Urban Slums in India,” Policy Research Working Paper 5475, World Bank,
Washington, DC, November 2010.
32. Robert Neuwirth, “New York’s Housing Underground: A Refuge and a Resource,” Pratt Center
for Economic Development and Chhaya Community Development Corporation, New York, 2008.
33. This review is based on the report “Hanoi Capital Construction Master Plan to 2030 and Vision to
2050 (3rd report—comprehensive text report—11/2009),” PPJ and JIAP Consortium, Hanoi, 2009.
The references to “scientific principles” are on pages 41, 54, 55, among others.
34. Annette Kim, Learning to be Capitalists: Entrepreneurs in Vietnam’s Transition Economy (New
York: Oxford University Press, 2008).
35. The original master plan land use map and this citation can be found at
http://www.perkinseastman.com/project_3407114_hanoi_capital_master_plan_to_2030.5 Mobility: Transport Is a Real Estate Issue—The Design of
Urban Roads and Transport Systems
The Need for Mobility
Cities are primarily large labor and consumer markets. These markets work
best when the possibility of contact increases between workers and firms,
among firms themselves, and between consumers and commercial and
cultural amenities. The term “mobility,” in the context of this book, defines
the ability to multiply these contacts with a minimum of time and friction.
A worker’s ability to choose among many jobs and a firm’s ability to
select the most qualified workers depends on mobility. Mobility is not
defined by the ability to get to one’s current job quickly, but by the ability
to choose among all jobs and amenities offered in a metropolitan area while
spending less than 1 hour commuting. Mobility increases when the number
of jobs and amenities that can be reached within a specific amount of time
increases. Because of the impact of mobility on the welfare of a city, it is
important to measure it and monitor its variations—up or down—as a city’s
population increases, its land use changes, and its transport system
improves or deteriorates. I will propose ways to measure and compare
mobility in different cities in the section “Mobility and Transport Modes”
later in this chapter.
The objective of an urban transport strategy should be to minimize the
time required to reach the largest possible number of people, jobs, and
amenities. Unfortunately, many strategies, such as “compact cities,” only
aim to minimize the distance traveled by inhabitants. These strategies
reduce the income of the poor, for whom employment opportunities are
reduced to jobs located within a narrow radius of their homes.Cities thrive on changes, possibilities, and innovations. Therefore, an
urban transport system that would solely minimize travel time between
home and current jobs for all workers would result in poor mobility, as in
the future, workers might not be able to reach many alternative jobs that
would improve their job satisfaction or salary.
Mobility and Recent Immigrants
During a recent visit to the Tenement Museum in New York, a docent told us that in the 1850s,
immigrants who were “fresh off the boat” would typically stay only a few months in a
tenement; they would then keep moving as their employment and financial circumstances
changed. A typical length of stay in the same tenement would be about 6–8 months. My wife
and I then looked at each other, remembering that this was exactly what we did when—in
January 1968—we were also “fresh off the boat” in New York. We changed apartments three
times in 30 months. We moved from a flophouse on the Upper East Side that was soon going
to be demolished, to a studio apartment in an “old law tenement” on the Upper East Side, and
then to an entire floor in a townhouse in Brooklyn Heights. I also changed job three times.
Each time, I changed for a more interesting job and a higher salary. This is the type of mobility
that we will discuss in this chapter: the ability to move from job to job and from dwelling to
dwelling made possible by a transport infrastructure that gives access to millions of potential
jobs in less than 1 hour of commuting time.
This mobility was made possible by a buoyant housing and job market, ensuring a low
transaction cost of changing jobs and location. By contrast, in Paris (where we came from),
housing mobility was hampered by 2-year leases that could not be broken without penalties.
Additionally, job mobility was frowned on as a sign of instability—changing jobs three times
in 30 months would have resulted in a resume that raised a lot of eyebrows.
When—after just 6 months with my first employer in New York—I found a job that was a
better fit with my long-term interests, I was terribly embarrassed by the prospect of telling my
employer that I was quitting. My colleagues at work reassured me that this was done all the
time in New York, and that a higher salary was a very honorable reason to change jobs.
Indeed, my employer gave me a good luck party when I quit!
This is mobility. A flexible labor market, an open housing market—the flophouse with its
low standards but very low rent was essential to getting us started—and a transport system that
is fast, affordable, and extensive enough to allow individuals to look for jobs in an entire
metropolitan area rather than just in limited locations.
The benefits of urban mobility are not limited to saving on commuting
time. Mobility is also necessary to facilitate random face-to-face encounters
between individuals of different cultures and fields of knowledge. These
serendipitous encounters increase cities’ creativity and productivity. The
multiplicity of easily accessible meeting places available outside the worksetting increases the possibilities of chance encounters and therefore
increases the spillover effects found in large cities. The agora of ancient
Greek cities or the forum of Roman cities were precisely fulfilling these
needs. Agoras and forums were places where people assembled to conduct
business, to meet friends, to attend religious ceremonies and political
meetings, to receive justice, and to frequent public baths. Modern cities
have many of these functions in separate locations. Unfortunately, rigid
zoning regulations often constrain the existence and location of these
multifunction places.
When transport systems provide adequate mobility, then the large
concentration of people in metropolitan areas increases productivity and
stimulates creativity. Empirical data confirm the link between large human
concentrations and productivity. Physicists from the Santa Fe Institute have
shown that, on average, when the population of a city doubles, its economic
productivity per capita increases by 15 percent. 1
The interesting findings of the Santa Fe Institute’s scientists should be
qualified, though. Their database included 360 US metropolitan areas with,
by world standards, a very good transport infrastructure network that
ensures mobility together with spatial concentration. In a way, these
scientists’ use of the word “cities” assumes the availability of
transportation. It would be wrong to interpret their work as demonstrating
that human concentration alone increases productivity.
Mobility explains the link between city size and productivity. Human
concentration alone does not increase productivity. Some rural areas in Asia
have gross densities that are higher than the density of some North
American cities like Atlanta or Houston, for instance. However, in these
rural areas, mobility is poor to nonexistent between villages. In absence of
mobility, there is no increase in productivity despite the high density. The
productivity of cities therefore requires both concentration of people and
high mobility.
When the time and cost required to move across a city increase, mobility
decreases. When this happens, workers have fewer choices among the
potential jobs available in a city, and firms have fewer choices when
recruiting workers. In these conditions, metropolitan labor markets tend to
fragment into smaller, less productive ones; salaries tend to decrease, while
consumer prices increase because of lack of competition. In practical terms,
labor market fragmentation means that a worker might not find the job forwhich she is qualified, because she cannot commute in less than 1 hour to
the firm who could employ her. Conversely, the firm looking for a worker
with specialized knowledge cannot find him because he cannot reach the
firm in less than a 1-hour commute. Workers having to commute for more
than 1 hour each way are penalized by a social cost that progressively
destroys their personal life. Poor mobility may also result in high transport
overhead cost for firms having to exchange goods and services in an urban
area. Increasing mobility in urban metropolitan areas is therefore
indispensable to the welfare of urban households as well as to the creativity
and prosperity of firms.
In a city, a worker’s mobility often depends on his income. In some large
Indian cities, for instance, the poorest workers can only afford to walk to
work. Even a very long walk of 90 minutes would give them access to a
very small number of possible jobs, decreasing their potential earnings.
Planners should measure separately the mobility of different income groups,
accounting for the modes of transport that each group can afford.
Mobility generates not only benefits but also costs, including congestion,
pollution, noise, and accidents. To reduce those nuisances, many urban
planners advocate limiting or at least discouraging mobility. They dream of
creating cleverly planned land use arrangements that would require only
short trips easily covered by walking or bicycling, even in megacities.
These utopian land use arrangements usually rely on complex land use
regulations 2
that would enable planners to match employers’ locations with
employees’ residences.
Mobility is an urban necessity that must be encouraged, not curtailed.
Poor mobility keeps much of the economic potential of existing large cities
from being realized. Unfortunately, in many cities, the lowest-income
households suffer the most from poor mobility. They would enormously
benefit if their mobility increased, so that they could look for jobs as well as
cultural and commercial amenities throughout an entire metropolitan area.
Instead, they are limited to the small area around their homes,
circumscribed by their limited mobility.
As urban metropolitan areas increase in size and population, their
potential large labor markets may fragment into smaller markets because of
the lack of mobility. It is therefore necessary to differentiate between the
potential and actual size of the labor market. The potential size is equal tothe number of workers and jobs in a city. Its real size equals the average
number of jobs that a worker can reach in a 1-hour commute.
Commuting Trips and Other Trips
Throughout this chapter, we will examine mobility in the context of
commuting trips (trips from home to work and back), even though
commuting trips are only a fraction of urban trips. In the United States in
2013, commuting trips represented only 20 percent of weekday urban trips,
28 percent of vehicle kilometers traveled, and 39 percent of public transport
passenger-kilometers traveled. 3
Households and firms generate many types of trips that have different
purposes (e.g., trips to work, to school, to visit friends, to shop). Many trips
have multiple purposes. Transport engineers call such excursions chained
trips or linked trips. On a chained trip, a person might drop a child off at
school, go to work, and shop, for instance. Chained trips are both
convenient for the commuter and efficient in terms of transportation, as they
save time and reduce the distance traveled compared with the same trips
done separately. For the United States, the Pisarski and Polzin study
indicates that 19 percent of all women’s trips are chained trips compared to
14 percent for men. While chained trips are transport efficient, they are
nearly incompatible with public transport and carpooling.
Despite commuting trips representing only a fraction of all trips, I will
continue to use them to measure mobility. For the economic viability of a
city, the most important trips are those to and from work—the commuting
trips—as the labor market generates the wealth that makes the other trips
possible. In addition, the timing of commuting trips is usually not chosen by
the traveler. Instead, they often occur at peak hours, and they are the ones
causing most congestion and pollution. Therefore, the transport
infrastructure capacity needs to be calibrated on the demand during peak
hours, largely determined by commuting trips.
Some elective trips, like holiday shopping or leisure trips on summer
weekends, may also cause heavy congestion, but they are seasonal and
therefore do not have such high annualized costs as the daily congestion
caused by commuting trips.
Improving Mobility Is Not As Simple As Making Cities Denser
Ideally, the closer people and firms are to each other, the shorter the trips
required to meet and transact business would be. In an urban area with agiven population, people, firms, and amenities are closer to one another
when population and job densities are higher. It may seem, therefore, that
for a given population, mobility simply increases when density also
increases due to the shorter distances between households and firms.
Similarly, it would seem that mobility would decrease as the distance
between firms and employees increases.
Unfortunately, things are not that simple. Let us consider the average
distance d of commuting trips between random points A and B selected in a
city built-up area. For a given population, the distance d will indeed be
shorter if the city’s density is higher. However, mobility increases when the
time t needed to cover the trip distance d from A to B decreases, and not
necessarily when d alone decreases. Therefore, mobility increases not only
when the trip distance d decreases but also when the trip travel speed v
increases (t = d/v). The trip’s speed v depends on the mode of transport and
the area devoted to roads. Therefore, increasing densities may decrease the
average distance d between people and jobs, but it may also increase
congestion and therefore decrease travel speed v.
Let’s make this come alive through an example. Nineteen-century London,
with its sweatshops and slums, was extremely compact. In 1830, according
to Shlomo Angel and colleagues, 
4 London’s population density had reached
a very high density of 325 people per hectare. By 2005, however, the
density of London had decreased to only 44 people per hectare. The large
decrease in London’s density since the Industrial Revolution has not caused
a corresponding decrease in mobility. On the contrary, transport modes in
London in 1830, largely walking and horse carriages, were much slower
than those available in 2015 London with its choice of various motorized
transport modes. In 2015, commuters can reach the city center from the
suburbs as far as 26 kilometers away in less than 1 hour by public transport.
In contrast, in 1830, commutes from the edge of London, about 7
kilometers from its center, would have taken about 1.5 hours. In this case, a
seven fold decrease in density did not result in a decrease in mobility; on
the contrary, an improvement in transport technology generated an increase
in mobility despite the sharp fall in population density.
The goal is to reduce the time spent traveling and the cost of transport,
not necessarily to reduce the distance between trip origin and destination.
The mode of transport and the design of the transport network will have a
much more impact on mobility than distance traveled.How to Increase Mobility as Cities Expand
The population of successful cities is constantly increasing because of the
economic advantages provided by large labor markets. To maintain mobility
as city populations increase, urban transport systems must adapt to the new
size of cities. In relatively small cities—around 200,000 people, like Oxford
or Aix-en-Provence—a combination of transport modes like walking,
bicycles, and city buses provide adequate means of transport in the
downtown area, while individual cars and motorcycles are used for trips in
the periphery. However, when a city’s population increases above 1 million,
these means of transport become inadequate, and new means of faster
transport must be built. Because the land in the center of large cities
becomes more expensive, new transport must not only be faster but also
should use less of the expensive urban land, hence the necessity to develop
underground or elevated transport systems.
Transport systems that may be adequate for a given city size soon
become deficient in a larger city. Transport systems cannot just be scaled up
but need to be entirely redesigned when cities grow larger. It is futile to use
Amsterdam’s or Copenhagen’s transport system as a model for much larger
cities like Mumbai or Shanghai.
As the size of cities increases and traditional land use patterns keep
changing, it is imperative to keep monitoring mobility, the direct cost borne
by commuters, and the negative impact it creates on the city environment.
Mobility Creates Friction
Urban mobility creates friction. The larger the city, the more severe the
frictions caused by mobility will become. These frictions include the time
and cost required to go from one part of a city to another and the congestion
and pollution created by doing so.
The frictions caused by urban transport are not new. Urban congestion
did not begin with the advent of cars. A golden age when cities were
congestion free never existed. The Latin poet Juvenal, in his Satire III,
mentioned the difficulties of moving around ancient Rome in the first
century. Traffic congestion in the Roman Empire is even the subject of a
recently published book! 5 In the seventeenth century, the poet Boileau
wrote a satirical poem about les embarras de Paris (the gridlocks of Paris).
At the end of the nineteenth century, pollution due to transport was such a
concern that some saw it as a limiting factor in the growth of cities. Londonwas at the time the largest city in the world, with 6 million people. The
pollution so reviled then was the enormous quantity of horse manure
produced daily by horse-drawn buses and cabs. Indeed, it was a major
health concern. Acknowledging London’s future increase in population,
scientists projected that the quantity of horse manure produced by transport
would soon bury the city like a modern Pompeii! With hindsight, we know
that the introduction of the automobile saved London from submersion in
manure, but congestion and pollution remain a major constraint in urban
transport today.
Various frictions caused by urban transport have been a constant concern
since the dawn of urbanization. They cannot be eliminated, at least with
current technology, but they can be decreased. These frictions will be
discussed separately below: they include direct travel cost, time spent
traveling, congestion, pollution, and other indirect costs. Any city that can
significantly decrease frictions due to transport will see a corresponding
increase in productivity and the welfare of its citizens because more time
will be left for work and leisure.
A primary task of city managers should be to minimize the frictions
caused by urban transport. This job is never done—as a city expands, the
distance covered by commuting trips becomes longer. A city structure and
its transport system must adapt continuously to its changing scale. As a city
expands from 1 million to 10 million (e.g., as Seoul Municipality did
between 1950 and 2015), the original transport system cannot simply be
expanded; it must change in nature and technology to reflect the new scale
of the labor market being served. The goal is to maintain mobility such that
the majority of commuting trips stay below 1 hour, in spite of the much
longer distances involved.
The unfortunate tendency of many current traffic managers is to restrict
trips to avoid congestion. Instead they should better manage the road space
available or adopt new technology to allow even more and faster trips.
The Death of Distance Has Been Greatly Exaggerated
In the “Star Trek” television series, the words “beam me up” were all that
was needed to transport people and goods anywhere instantly through the
teleportation machine. This imaginary technology allowed universal
frictionless mobility. Unfortunately, it was fictional.If frictionless mobility were possible, the dense concentration of people
in cities would not be required. I could start the morning in a small town in
New Jersey, a few minutes later have coffee and a croissant in a café in
Paris, and a few seconds after finishing my coffee, I could start working in
an office in Mumbai, or anywhere else in the world. In a world allowing
frictionless mobility, location would no longer matter. Most of us have
already replaced some physical trips by virtual ones. For instance, I used to
visit bookstores on a regular basis; I now buy my books online, and they are
delivered to me electronically. The visit to the bookstore was a face-to-face
encounter that has been replaced by a “beam me up” operation, except that
it is the book that is being beamed up, not a person.
While the teleportation machine from Star Trek is likely to remain
fiction, would communication technology—in particular, increasingly
realistic teleconferencing—make location obsolete, providing a substitute
for frictionless mobility? Or, in simpler terms, could communication
technology replace the face-to-face contacts that generate most of our
commuting trips? Indeed, it is much cheaper to move data than to move
people. This is precisely the main argument developed by Frances
Cairncross in her book The Death of Distance (2001). Cairncross suggests
that the Internet and the global spread of wireless technology are
increasingly making distance irrelevant. Communication technology would
make face-to-face contact obsolete, and, in this sense, we would be getting
closer to a Star Trek–like frictionless mobility, replacing the mobility of
individuals by that of data. Virtual reality encounters would replace the
necessity of “in the flesh” face-to-face encounters.
Work-at-Home Individuals
The increasing share of people working at home but constantly connected to
a front office seems to confirm Cairncross’ prediction. Among eight of the
ten US cities with the largest number of work-at-home individuals ( figure
5.1), the share of people working at home is larger than the share of workers
using public transport. In all nine cities, the increase of work-at-home
individuals has been larger than the increase in public transport users.
However, with the exception of San Francisco, all the cities shown on
figure 5.1 have rather low densities by world standards. This may explain
the low proportion of growth of urban transport compared to the growth of
work at home. In addition, many workers commute only a few days a weekand are only working at home part-time. If this trend continues, could the
home become the main place of work, rendering commuting obsolete and
resulting in trips mostly for leisure or personal reasons?
Figure 5.1
Mode share work at home versus public transport in some US cities. Source: Wendell Cox,
NewGeography, May 30, 2015.
Working from home is not new, of course. Up to the early twentieth
century, artisans and service workers were often working from home,
delivering their finished work to their employers weekly. These included
washerwomen and lace makers, but also Swiss farmers making watch
mechanical parts. What is new, however, is that clerical and technical
workers, who traditionally worked in large office pools, have replaced these
manual workers working from home. But is it likely that a very large part of
the workforce—say, more than 25 percent—will start working from home
full time, significantly reducing peak hour traffic? So far, this possibility
seems limited.
A recent Yahoo human resource department’s memo requested employees
working from home to resume working at the office, arguing, “Some of the
best decisions and insights come from hallway and cafeteria discussions,
meeting new people and impromptu team meetings. Speed and quality are
often sacrificed when we work from home.” In Silicon Valley, the most
successful firms, like Google and Facebook, are building very large
headquarters in addition to the large office buildings they recently acquired
in downtown San Francisco. These large and costly real estate acquisitions
suggest that they do not anticipate that a large part of their workforce will
be working full time from home in the future.The design of the largest Silicon Valley offices, offering their employees
an unusual environment with gourmet food cafeterias, gyms, and
kindergarten, demonstrates the intention of management to encourage their
employees to work in their office and to interact with one another socially
as well as professionally. In a way, it seems that Silicon Valley firms are
trying to intensify within their offices the knowledge spillovers that are
known to happen in large cities. For these reasons, I believe that the number
of work-at-home individuals might soon reach a peak and may not affect
commuting flow significantly in the future.
If Cairncross had been right in 2001, by 2015 we should have already
seen large changes in the price of urban land across the world. The most
environmentally attractive but remote rural areas of the world would have
higher prices, while the least environmentally attractive, highest-density
areas would have lost value. This is not happening. Real estate prices in
New York, London, Delhi, and Shanghai are still climbing, proving that the
death of distance might have been greatly exaggerated. High real estate
prices demonstrate that even in cities where mobility causes severe friction
—as in New York, London, or Shanghai—being physically close to a large
concentration of people, jobs, and amenities is still worth a very high price.
Measuring a City’s Mobility
A Decrease in Congestion and Pollution Is Not a Measure of Mobility
The objective of urban transport is to increase mobility to maximize the
effective size of labor markets. Congestion and pollution are very important
constraints on the mobility objective, but they are only constraints.
Confusing objectives and constraints when solving problems can lead to
false solutions. Urban managers too often try to solve transport problems by
focusing exclusively on reducing congestion and pollution without giving
much consideration to mobility, as if the objective of urban transport was
limited to decreasing the nuisances it causes.
Some policies rely on reducing trip length, others on forcing more
commuters into slower transport modes. None of these policies effectively
reduces pollution or congestion, but they reduce mobility.
Planners who think that decreasing pollution and congestion is the main
objective of urban transport might logically try to fragment a large
metropolitan labor market into smaller ones. For instance, some planners
suggest that matching the number of jobs with the size of the workingpopulation in every neighborhood would significantly decrease trip length
to the point where walking and bicycling could provide access to all the
jobs in a neighborhood.
Of course, there is nothing wrong with having mixed-use neighborhoods,
provided that demand from households and firms drives the land use mix.
Even where planners can achieve a perfect match between the number of
jobs and housing units, as in satellite towns, experience has shown that
workers prefer access to wider labor markets and that there is no decrease in
trip length. This has been shown in Seoul’s well-planned satellite towns. 6
After an exhaustive survey of land use and trip length in California, the
transport economist G. Giuliano concludes that “regulatory policies aimed
at improving jobs-housing balance are thus unlikely to have any measurable
impact on commuting behavior, and therefore cannot be justified as a traffic
mitigation strategy.” 7
Understanding why job-housing balance does not reduce trip length is
easy. If it did, it would imply that at least one of the following propositions
is true:
• All workers within a household only look for jobs within a short distance
from their home.
• When workers change jobs, they also change homes, and moving from
one home to another has a negligible transaction cost.
• Proximity to work is the only consideration when selecting a home.
Obviously, common sense shows that none of these propositions is true
for the majority of households. If any of these propositions were true, then
we would observe a fragmentation of labor markets and a decrease in
mobility, and therefore a decrease in urban productivity.
The job-housing balance policy is, of course, not implementable in a
market economy. This is because the number of jobs and the number of
workers is always fluid, and no government, however authoritarian, can
force people to live and work in a specific location. Even in the Soviet
Union and in pre-reform China, where large state-owned enterprises
provided housing for their workers, who often spent their entire career
working for the same enterprise, planners could not achieve a spatial match.
As I was working on housing issues in China in the 1980s and in Russia in
the 1990s, I was surprised to see that, even in command economies, the
utopian dream of matching jobs and housing location could not beachieved. Large enterprises had to expand in locations distant from their
workers’ housing, and they had to build new workers’ residential estates in
areas where they could find the land, which was not necessarily close to
their factories. As soon as labor markets opened in both countries, the job￾housing balance deteriorated further. A fluid labor market (which is what
makes large cities so attractive) and a job-housing balance are incompatible.
However, despite these negative experiences, planners still devise land use
regulations aimed at matching people with jobs. For instance, a regulation
in Stockholm requires developers to match the number of jobs and the
number of dwelling units in new suburban locations. Allowing mixed-use
development is a good land use policy, as it allows households and firms to
select locations that best meet their needs without the rigidity of arbitrary
top-down land use zoning. Requiring a perfect match between population
and jobs in each neighborhood in order to reduce trip length is an
unattainable utopia.
Other policies also eagerly sacrifice mobility to reduce pollution and
congestion. For example, several Latin American cities (e.g., Bogotá,
Santiago, and Mexico City) have instituted a vehicle rationing system called
“pico y plata” that restricts the circulation of vehicles on 2 days per week,
depending on the last number of the vehicle’s license plate. This policy
reduces mobility.
8 It forces drivers either to switch to public transport or to
carpool for 2 days per week. The change of transport mode is likely to
require a longer commute time during the days drivers are obliged to
switch. If public transport were faster, they would have used it before the
restriction on driving was put in place.
Studies show that drivers circumvent “pico y plata” regulations by
buying a second car with a different last number on the license plate. Traffic
and congestion initially decreases after this regulation is implemented, but
then increases again when the second cars join the traffic. The result is more
pollution, because there are more cars on the road and because the second
car bought is usually an older, more polluting model. Many studies across
cities in different countries and incomes have confirmed this result.
However, the regulation, which restricts mobility in order to reduce
pollution and congestion, is still popular among city managers. This stance
is counterproductive.
In some cities, exceptional climatic events may cause extremely
dangerous pollution peaks on some days. In this case, restricting individualcar use is, of course, legitimate as an emergency measure—as it is
legitimate to ask factories to stop operating during the emergency—but it is
not efficient to use such restrictions as permanent policy.
Accessibility and Mobility: What Is the Best Way to Measure Urban
Mobility?
Transport policy should aim to increase mobility while decreasing
congestion and pollution. Often, reports that claim to quantify mobility in
fact only measure the cost of car congestion and pollution. For instance, the
“mobility report” 9 prepared by Texas A&M Transportation Institute (2012)
argues that a shift from car to public transport, which indeed obviously
reduces road congestion, is considered an improvement in mobility. For
some reason, the reduction in the time spent commuting for the drivers who
keep driving is considered a benefit, while the longer commuting times for
the drivers who have shifted to public transport is not considered a cost.
Mobility would increase only if the commuting time of the driving
commuters who have changed to public transport becomes shorter because
of the shift. However, if commuting by public transport were faster than
commuting by car, drivers would have switched modes already.
Congestion clearly decreases mobility, but measuring it is not a substitute
for measuring mobility. For instance, imagine a person having to walk 1
hour to work because of poverty but eventually being able to afford a
collective taxi to make the same trip in 30 minutes. The collective taxi will
contribute to congestion; walking did not. However, the mobility and
welfare of this worker shifting from walking to a collective taxi ride would
have increased. We should therefore measure and monitor the variations in
mobility for different income groups.
While congestion is usually measured for car traffic only, congestion can
occur at bus and Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) stops and in metro stations.
While attempting to use the BRT in Mexico City in 2014, I saw three buses
pass the station where I was waiting without being able to board, the buses
being able to take only a few passengers among the more than 100
individuals waiting on the platform. This is also congestion, which planners
should measure. Trying to shift commuters from one congested transport
mode to another congested mode doesn’t decrease congestion problems. To
my knowledge, the Beijing Transport Research Center is the onlymonitoring institution measuring daily congestion in metro stations. This
institution measures the time required to board a train at peak hours.
Consequently, measuring and monitoring mobility for all modes of
transport at the metropolitan level is an indispensable step for improving
urban transport. A quantitative index measuring mobility improvements or
setbacks is necessary to provide substance to urban transport policy.
Advocating “mobility” without a way of measuring it will just add a new
faddish slogan similar to “sustainability” and “livability.” Both slogans are
unmeasurable and are too often used by urban planners to justify whatever
policies they favor. Measuring mobility is not easy. I will describe some of
the methods currently used and some that are emerging thanks to new data￾recording technology.
In chapter 2, I explained why large labor markets are the raison d’être of
cities. Large labor markets result in higher productivity than smaller ones.
However, the size of a labor market is not necessarily equal to the number
of jobs in a city. If inadequate or unaffordable transport prohibits workers
from accessing all of a city’s jobs within an hour’s commute, the effective
size of the labor market is only a fraction of the total number of jobs in the
city. The productivity of a city is proportional to the effective size of its
labor market. Mobility allows workers to have access to a measurable
number of jobs within a specified travel time and can therefore be measured
by the effective size of a city’s labor markets given a specific travel time.
A useful measure of urban mobility would calculate the average number
of jobs that workers can commute to within, say, an hour one way. We could
calculate such a mobility measurement by aggregating the number of jobs
accessible in less than 1 hour from every census tract, weighted by their
population. A mobility index, therefore, would have to be calculated in two
stages: first, by calculating the number of jobs accessible from every census
tract within a selected time limit; second, by calculating the worker￾weighted average of the accessibility of all census tracts to form an index
reflecting the entire metropolitan area.
Traditionally, transport planners have measured job accessibility from
different census tracts in a metropolitan area by measuring the number of
jobs accessible from the census tract corrected by coefficients that reflect
distance, cost, and elasticity of demand related to distance. The formulas
used to measure accessibility of census tracts are usually similar to the ones
I highlight in equations 5.1 and 5.2.Equation 5.1 Job accessibility per census tract
The index of accessibility can be calculated using the equation
where Ai is the index of accessibility of census tract i, Kj is the number of jobs in census tract
j, e is the base of natural logarithm, β is an elasticity coefficient, c is the unit cost of traveling
the distance dij between census tract i and census tract j. While these formulas provide a way
of measuring access to jobs or amenities from a specific location, the measurement they
provide is an abstract index dependent on the way distances, costs and speed, and cost
elasticity are calculated. Transport planners have a tendency to make accessibility measures
more complex by adding more variables reflecting the complexity of commuters’ behavior.
Unfortunately, this complexity renders accessibility calculations more difficult to interpret. As
a result, their “black box” effect prevents their use in formulating transport policies that non
specialists like mayors or city councils must approve. It is therefore indispensable to develop a
much simpler accessibility index, based solely on the size of the labor market available to
residents of a particular census tract based purely on travel time using existing transport
modes. The advances in Geographical Information System (GIS) technology allow interactive
use of maps where areas accessible within a given travel time can easily be verified, as shown
by the Buenos Aires example below.
Equation 5.2 Number of jobs accessible by census tract within a set travel time
The first step in developing a mobility measurement that reflects the number of jobs accessed
within a set travel time would be to change the traditional accessibility formula into the
simpler and more explicit:
where Ai is the number of jobs accessible from census tract i within a commuting time lower
or equal to maximum travel time T, and v is the average travel speed to cover the distance dij
between tract Ai
 and tract Kj
 using the network of the mode of transport selected.
The values of v and dij are dependent on the mode of transport: public transport, bicycle, or
car. Therefore, we should calculate the different value taken by Ai for each mode of transport.
This accessibility index measuring the number of jobs accessed in less than a trip time T
would be repeated for all census tracts in the urban area and for the major mode of transport
available: public transport, cars, motorcycles, bicycles.A few years ago, such calculations would have been extremely
cumbersome and costly and, if performed, unlikely to be repeated for
periodic monitoring. Two factors now allow for easy monitoring of an
urban mobility index. First, new GIS-based technology enables the
development of interactive tools accessible to any user. Second, the
standardization of transport data networks (the General Transit Feed
Specification, or GTFS) 10
is becoming universal. This allows for the
calculation of accessibility based on real transport networks and real travel
times—including transfers between stations and walking times to and from
stations—instead of crude “as the crow flies” distances between census
tracts. In the following paragraphs, I use data extracted from research
conducted by Tatiana Quirós and Shomik Mehndiratta 11
 for Buenos Aires.
Figure 5.2 shows the area accessible within 60 minutes by car (left) and
public transport (right) from an arbitrarily selected suburban census tract
(marked by a small red circle) in Buenos Aires. By overlaying the job
census data with these maps, one can calculate the total number of jobs
accessible in less than 60 minutes from the census tract marked by the
circle. The number of jobs that can be reached in less than 60 minutes are
5.1 million jobs (95 percent of the total number of jobs in Buenos Aires) for
workers commuting by individual cars and 0.7 million jobs (15 percent of
the total number of jobs) for workers using public transport. 12
Figure 5.2
Accessibility of a suburban location in Buenos Aires by public transport and by car. Source:
Wb.BA.analyst.conveyal.com.
The difference in accessibility between the two different modes of
transport is striking. However, it is not true that if every worker in Buenos
Aires switched to cars, the average mobility would be increased. The
commuting speed of the car users depends in large part on the number ofcars on the road. An increase in car users would increase congestion and
possibly cause gridlock, decreasing the speed and therefore the mobility of
car users. I discuss below the necessary complementarity of various
transport mode in improving mobility.
Additionally, there are two caveats for car commuting: first, the speed
implied in figure 5.2 is an average speed and is not adjusted for different
times of day; second, the availability of parking in different locations is not
considered. In some areas, the scarcity or cost of parking might
significantly decrease the practicality of commuting by car.
My purpose in showing the Buenos Aires accessibility map here is
limited to providing a concrete example of the twin concepts of
accessibility and mobility. The interactive map found on the website allows
any Buenos Aires citizen to test its accuracy compared to their own
experience. This can reduce the black box effect that habitually decreases
the impact of sophisticated transport studies on urban policies.
Using this method, we could calculate a mobility index for an entire
metropolitan area (equation 5.3). This global measure would be an indicator
that planners should monitor regularly as a city develops.
Equation 5.3 City mobility index
After obtaining the job accessibility index of every census tract, we can calculate a city
mobility index that represents the average job accessibility of all census tracts weighted by
their population. The mobility index M expressed by the formula below shows the number of
total jobs reachable within a commuting time T, for a given transport mode, for the average
city resident,
where M is the mobility index, Ai is the number of jobs accessible from census tract i in less
than T travel time, n is total number of census tracts, Pi is the active population in tract i, and P
is the total active metropolitan population.
From an operational point of view, it is necessary to be able to measure
mobility by location: how many jobs a worker can reach from a given
location within a given time by different modes of transport. This type of
data would show the most transport-deficient areas of a city. Variouscombined factors may explain the high unemployment rate in some urban
neighborhoods. Indeed, an adequate transport system that gives easy access
to jobs in the metropolitan region is often a prerequisite to decreasing local
unemployment.
Measuring the Cost of Mobility
Mobility is a benefit provided by urban transport, but it has a cost. There is
no point in advocating for increased mobility without also measuring the
marginal cost associated with this increase. However, the economic costs of
transport systems are particularly difficult to evaluate. Typically, urban
commuters—whether they use public transport or individual vehicles—pay
only a small fraction of the real cost of their trips.
Urban transport is different from other consumer products because its
users pay only a part of its cost. Car users pay a market price for their car
and the gasoline they consume (in most countries), but they are usually not
paying for the public road space they use, or for the pollution, congestion,
and other costs they have imposed on others. Users of publicly operated
transport pay a fare that represents only a small part of the system’s
operational and maintenance costs and usually pay nothing for the capital
cost of the system. Obviously, car owners and public transport users
eventually pay collectively all these costs through their taxes, but the cost
they pay is not related to the quantity of the service they use. Because of the
lack of real pricing, we can expect urban transport to be overused and
undersupplied. Because of our inability to recover the cost of trips, mobility
is significantly less than it could be. Therefore urban productivity could be
greatly increased if we could price urban trips at their real costs.
Evaluating these costs is difficult, as many subsidies are not transparent.
In addition, the cost of what economists call “negative externalities” (i.e.,
the cost imposed on others, like congestion and pollution) is not easy to
evaluate. Since the 1980s, it has become clear that we should add the cost
of global warming to the other traditional externalities. A worldwide price
for carbon emission should reflect the cost of global warming caused by
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. However, because of the worldwide
failure to price carbon, pricing different modes of transport and comparing
their price to their performance is even more difficult.
Faced with the difficulty in calculating the real cost of trips, many
transport policy advocates renounce any attempt to make even anapproximate calculation and just append the word “sustainable” to the mode
of transport they favor. When comparing the cost and benefits of different
modes of transportation, I will differentiate the transport costs that have a
clear cash value (e.g., the cost of a car or of a subway ticket) from those like
pollution or GHG emissions, which I will evaluate in units of gas emitted
per vehicle/km or passenger/km without attempting to price it. In the same
way, I will not attempt to give a cash value to the time spent commuting,
but will just provide the average speed or time traveled. Transport
economists attribute a dollar value to the time spent commuting based on
the opportunity cost of the time of the person traveling. Using this
convention, the cost of an hour of travel by a worker earning the minimum
wage is lower than the cost of the same hour of travel by an executive paid
a multiple of the minimum wage. Although this type of calculation is
legitimate to calculate the aggregate economic cost of urban transport, it
does not necessarily reflect how individuals select their choice of travel
mode. Besides, the social cost of long commutes for low-income workers
might be much higher than the one reflected by their hourly salary.
Mobility and Transport Modes
Classification of Urban Transport Modes
Until the middle of the Industrial Revolution—about 1860—walking was
the dominant mode of urban transport. The area that workers could reach by
walking less than an hour severely limited the expansion of cities. Because
of the limitation on the speed of transport, urban labor markets grew
primarily through the densification of the existing built-up area.
Metropolitan Paris in 1800, before the Industrial Revolution, 13 had a
density evaluated by Angel at about 500 people per hectare compared to
about 55 today. Since then, many mechanized modes of urban transport
have allowed cities to grow geographically, densities to decrease, and labor
markets to expand. These larger labor markets, in turn, allowed more labor
specialization, which has increased the productivity of cities. Faster and
better-performing urban transport modes are therefore a crucial element in
the growth and prosperity of cities. In addition to increasing the size of the
labor market, faster and more flexible transport modes allow urban land
supply to expand and respond quickly to growing demand for new and
better housing and new commercial areas.Since the Industrial Revolution, many mechanical urban transport modes
have been added to walking, among them cars, bicycles, motorcycles,
buses, subways, tramways, and BRTs. Governments had an important role
in allowing or funding the different modes of transport that were becoming
available as technology changed.
The modes of urban mechanized transport that were already available at
the beginning of the twentieth century have not changed much since then.
The efficiency in using energy and the speed of cars, buses, and metros
have certainly improved, but no new mode of urban transport has emerged.
The invention of the BRT system in Curitiba, Brazil, in 1974 is only the
application to buses of a technology applied to tramways at the end of the
nineteenth century. However, it is quite possible that during the next 20
years, we will see the emergence of completely new modes of transport.
The possibilities presented by the combination of vehicle sharing and
autonomous vehicles could completely revolutionize urban transport as we
know it today.
While no new mode of urban transport has emerged during the past 100
years, the dominant mode is often changing rapidly in emerging economies.
The changes in mode reflect changes in income, city size, and the
geographic coverage of public transport systems. Changes in dominant
transport modes are instructive, as they reflect users’ choices and the way
they adapt to the performance—speed, cost, and spatial coverage—of the
various modes of transport available.
Individual Modes of Transport versus Public Transport
In a typical medium- or high-income city, commuters choose between a
number of transport modes: walking, bicycling, driving, riding in a taxi, or
using public transport. They select the mode of transport—or combination
of modes—that is the most convenient for their trip, taking into account
time of travel, direct cost, comfort, and whether their trip has to be chained
with several activities (e.g., working, picking up children at school,
shopping). When selecting their means of transport, travelers do not take
into account the cost of the negative externalities they create—pollution,
global warming, noise, and congestion.
Modes of transport are highly diverse, but they can be conveniently
divided into three categories: individual transport, shared individual
transport, and collective transport or public transport ( figure 5.3).Individual transport and shared individual transport give access to the entire
road network, while the various public transport modes are restricted to a
network, which by necessity is a fraction of the entire road network.
Because individual transport modes use the entire road network, they
provide door-to-door travel without the need to change modes of transport
on the way. Additionally, individual transport provides continuous 24/7
service, while public transport services are restricted to preset schedules
with low frequencies outside peak hours.
Figure 5.3
Modes of urban transport.
Individual motorized modes of urban transport present many advantages
over public transport, especially on-demand door-to-door service. Given
these advantages over public transport, why did private firms and then the
government provide public transport services?
Complementarity of Various Modes of Transport
In many cities, most modes of transport listed in figure 5.3 coexist. Some
modes are heavily dominant, like the motorcycle in Hanoi, which represents
80 percent of commuting trips, or the car in US metropolitan areas (86
percent of all trips). However, in most cities, several transport modes
coexist, and their relative share of total commuting trips varies with time.
These variations reflect consumers’ choices, which respond to changing
conditions in household income, urban structure, or transport mode
performance.
Dominant Modes of Urban Transport May Change RapidlyThe shift in dominant modes of transport reflects an increase in population
and household income. The share of passengers by transport mode reflects
commuters’ preferences but also government action. This supply and
demand tends to change rapidly in cities whose economies are growing fast;
less so in cities where population and income are more stable. Figures 5.4
and 5.5 illustrate the rapid evolution of dominant modes of transport in
cities like Beijing, Hanoi, and Mexico City compared to the relative
stability found in Paris.
Figure 5.4
Changes in the dominant transport mode, Beijing (left) and Hanoi (right). Source: Beijing Transport
Research Center, 2015.
Figure 5.5
Changes in the dominant transport mode, Mexico City (left) and Paris (right). Sources: Mexico City:
“Gradual Takeover of Public Mass-Transit by Colectivos, 1986–2000,” Secretaria de Transito y
Viabilidad (SETRAVI) Embarq—World Resources Institute; Paris: Syndicat des Transports d’Île-de￾France website, www.stif.info.
Beijing’s transport mode underwent a radical change between 1986 and
2014. The bicycle was the main mode of transport in 1986, although the
city population was already above 5 million. Many bicycle and public
transport users shifted to private cars in the late 1990s. The shift from
bicycle and public transport to car trips between 1994 and 2000 corresponds
with the rapid increase in household income during this period of about 47
percent. It was certainly not driven by government policy. The massive
investment in public transport—the tenfold increase in the distance covered
by subway lines from 53 kilometers in 1990 to 527 kilometers in 2014—
reversed the decline in public transport’s share of commuting trips. Cartraffic congestion combined with a quota system for buying new cars
stabilized the growth of car trips. Meanwhile, the share of bicycle users
kept decreasing.
Hanoi’s transport transformation has been even more dramatic than
Beijing’s. From 1995 to 2008, the share of bicycle trips dropped from 75
percent to barely 4 percent! But unlike Beijing, the motorcycle became the
only dominant mode of transport in Hanoi, accounting for 80 percent of all
trips (cars and public transport together account for only about 15 percent).
As in Beijing, Hanoi’s commuters reacted to changing local conditions.
Increased income allowed them to replace bicycles with motorcycles,
significantly lowering commuting time—the average commuting time in
Hanoi was 18 minutes in 2010. Large areas of Hanoi are accessible through
narrow, winding roads that are nearly inaccessible to cars and even less
accessible to buses, which were the only means of public transport in 2014.
Motorcycles also gave easy access to residents of suburban former villages
with only rural unpaved road access, expanding the supply of housing
affordable to low-income migrants.
In Mexico City between 1986 and 2007, commuters have dramatically
reduced their use of public transport in favor of minibuses and private cars
despite strong municipal governmental policies to discourage these private
alternatives. The change in dominant mode reflects rising incomes but also
a change in the city structure of Mexico. Jobs have dispersed to suburban
areas, in part due to government land use restrictions in the Federal District,
and traditional public transport networks are less efficient for commuting
from suburb to suburb. When jobs are dispersed, minibuses and cars
become more convenient. However, the congestion created by cars and
minibuses considerably slows down traffic in a city as dense as Mexico City
(average density is about 100 people per hectare in the metropolitan area).
In contrast with these three cities, metropolitan Paris between 1976 and
2010 (shown on the right if figure 5.5) does not show any large shift in
transport mode. Paris’s population and household income have been much
more stable than those of Beijing, Hanoi, or Mexico City. The relative share
of car and public transport trips reflects the structure of the city: a very
dense core of about 2 million people and suburbs of 8 million. Commuters
use public transport for most trips within and toward the core, but they use
cars for the roughly 70 percent of commuting trips that originate and end in
suburbs (reflecting the same share of job distribution). The extension of fasttrains in the far suburbs of Paris has somewhat increased the share of public
transport since the mid-1990s. However, car travel remains the dominant
mode, reflecting the spatial structure of the city with a majority of
population and jobs located in suburbs and, as a consequence, trips
originating and ending in suburbs.
The change in transport mode in Beijing and Paris shows that increasing
the size of the public transport network impacts commuters’ transport mode
preferences. However, household income and a city’s spatial structure are
the main determinants of commuter choice. For instance, in Beijing,
multiplying the length of subway lines tenfold between 1990 and 2014 has
only increased the share of public transport trips by 12 percent. And while
Hanoi is building a new subway system that could eventually increase the
very low share of public transport, sub way trips are unlikely to compete
with the speed and spatial coverage provided by the motorcycle.
The existence of various modes of transport reflects the choice of
commuters. Commuters choose transport modes based on where they live,
where they work, what time they go to work, what time they return home,
and what share of their income they are willing to allocate to transport. No
transport mode is perfect. Unsurprisingly, residents are often dissatisfied by
urban transport. Car commuters complain about congestion and pollution,
while public transport users complain about crowding, schedule irregularity,
and lack of geographic coverage. In the following sections, I will analyze
the pros and cons of the various transport modes accounting for their speed
and the various negative externalities they create: congestion, pollution, and
GHG emissions. However, we must remember that in the end, the primary
objective is to increase mobility while decreasing the negative externalities
imposed by that mobility.
Travel Time, Speed, and Travel Mode
The Measure of Travel Time to Work (Commuting)
As already mentioned, average commuting travel time is a common proxy
used for measuring mobility. Average travel time becomes a meaningful
proxy for mobility if it only includes trips to work and excludes other types
of trips when calculating the average. Obviously, an average between travel
time to work and travel time to go shopping or to the barbershop would
have no meaning as a proxy measure for mobility.The measurement of commuting travel time should be “door-to-door.”
Travel time should include the time of travel from the moment the
commuter leaves home to the moment she reaches her workplace. In
addition, commuting time should be disaggregated by transport mode.
The examples of average public transport commuting time in the
municipality of Paris and in Beijing’s metropolitan area illustrate the
importance of door-to-door time measurement when assessing mobility (
figure 5.6). The average door-to-door commuting time for trips using the
subway in Paris municipality is 31 minutes, but the actual time spent on the
train is only 15 minutes. The time required to go to the station and board the
train, and then to walk from the station to the workplace, represents 52
percent of the door-to-door commuting time. For the longer trips in
Beijing’s metropolitan area, the proportion of “access time” is lower and
represents 36 percent of total commuting time.
Figure 5.6
Average door-to-door public transport travel time for commuters in the Paris municipality and
Beijing metropolitan area. Sources: Data for Paris: “Etude sur les deplacements,” Regie Autonome
des Transports Parisiens, 2014; Beijing: “Beijing, the 4th Comprehensive Transport Survey Summary
Report,” Beijing Transportation Research Center (BTRC), Beijing Municipal Commission of
Transport, Beijing, China, 2012.
We should do the same door-to-door calculation for car commuting trips,
which typically start from one’s driveway in a suburban home but may end
in a parking lot or underground garage, involving a sizable amount of
walking time to get to the work place. I could not find statistics
disaggregating travel time for car travel that include walking to and from a
parking place. My own weekly car commuting from Glen Rock, New
Jersey, to New York University in Greenwich Village in Manhattan takes on
average 55 minutes of driving time and requires an additional 7.5 minutes
walking from an underground parking garage to the university ( figure 5.7).
Access time is then only 12 percent of total commuting time.Figure 5.7
Door-to-door commuting time from suburb to downtown New York (case study, no statistical
significance).
Because the access time to transport is usually high, the speed of various
modes of transport is a poor indicator of door-to-door commuting time.
When trying to increase mobility, reducing access time to various modes of
transport is as important as increasing the speed of the motorized part of
transport. Table 5.1 shows the ratio between door-to-door speed and vehicle
speed for Paris, Beijing, and the New York case study. As a city size
increases, public transport networks become more complex and less dense,
and they often require transfers between modes (e.g., buses to suburban
trains). The increasing distance from home to stations and the necessity of
transfers tend to increase access time. Car trips are less vulnerable to long
access times, if an allocated parking lot exists at the destination. Trips by
car from suburb to suburb have very little access time, because usually
parking is available very close to the trip origin and destination. The lower
value of suburban land explains why this availability is taken for granted.
Table 5.1
Ratio between door-to-door speed and transport vehicle speed.
Commuting mode
Paris Beijing New York
Subway Bus and subway Car
Total average commuting distance (kilometers) 9 19 38
Door-to-door trip time (minutes) 31 66 63
Transport vehicle speed (km/h)a 33 25 40
Door-to-door speed (km/h) 17 17 36
Ratio of door-to-door speed to vehicle speed (percent) 53 68 89
a. For Beijing, this is an average speed for bus and subway.
In the examples above, commuters in Paris and Beijing were walking to
access the main motorized transport mode, but, of course, many othermeans of transport could be combined in a single commuting trip. A
commuting case study in Gauteng, South Africa, describes one of the most
complex and long commuting trips I have ever heard of. 14 A single mother
of four children commutes every weekday from her home in Tembisa, a
township in Gauteng’s metropolitan area (which includes Johannesburg and
Pretoria), to Brummeria, a business district of Pretoria, where she cleans
offices. She leaves home at 5:00 A.M. to be at the office at 7:30 A.M. She
starts her commute with a 2-kilometer walk to a collective taxi stand, where
a taxi takes her to a train station. The train brings her to Pretoria, where she
takes another collective taxi to a stop in Brummeria, from which she walks
to her workplace ( figure 5.8). The entire commute one way takes 2.5 hours,
including walking and waiting for taxis and the train. Her commuting
distance is 47 kilometers. Her average commuting speed is about 18 km/h,
although most of the distance she covers is on a commuter train going at an
average speed of 46 km/h. Because of the need to connect to the rail
network to avoid the higher cost of the collective taxi, the distance she
travels (47 kilometers) is much longer than the shorter road distance of 29
kilometers between her home and her workplace. If she had access to a
motorcycle or even to a moped, she could commute in about 1 hour, instead
of 2.5 hours. Access to a moped would allow her to gain 3 hours a day of
disposable time!
Figure 5.8
Extreme commuting in Gauteng (South Africa) case study. Source: “National Development Plan
Vision 2030,” President’s National Planning Commission, South Africa, 2011.
For a given home and job location, commuting time may show large
variations depending on the main mode of transport, the number of
transfers, and access time. In the case described here, a moped with a speed
of 30 km/h would result in much higher mobility than using a suburban
train with an average speed of 46 km/h.
Average Commuting Time by Transport ModeCommuting by public transport takes longer on average than commuting by
individual car. Given the amount of urban congestion plaguing most large
cities in the world, this seems surprising. Urban congestion affects public
buses as much as it does individual cars, but we would expect that public
transport trips would be shorter in cities where many commuters are using
underground public transport and dedicated bus lanes. Unfortunately, this is
not the case. In a comprehensive and authoritative book, 15 Robert Cervero,
a fervent advocate of urban public transport, admits that faster travel time
by car, even in public transport-based European and Japanese cities, is the
main challenge in increasing the share of public transport over car trips all
over the world. Let us try to understand why that is the case by looking at a
sample of specific cities.
Commuting time in five large cities—Dallas–Fort Worth, Hong Kong,
New York, Paris, and Singapore ( figure 5.9)—confirms Cervero’s
observation: commuting travel time by car is significantly shorter than by
public transport in all these cities. The increase in travel time between
public transport and car commuting ranges from 53 percent for New York to
100 percent in Singapore.
Figure 5.9
Average commuting travel time by transport mode, Singapore, Hong Kong, Dallas–Fort Worth, Paris,
and New York. Sources: Data for United States: “Commuting in America 2013,” US DOT Census
Transportation Planning Products Program, Washington, DC, 2013; Paris: “Les deplacements des
Franciliens en 2001–2002,” Direction régionale de l’équipement d’Île-de-France, Paris, 2004; Hong
Kong: “Travel Characteristics Survey-Final Report 2011,” Transport Department, Government of
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, Hong Kong, 2011; Singapore: “Singapore Land
Transport Statistics in Brief 2010,” Land Transport Authority, Singapore Government, Singapore,
2010.These differences measure average travel times for trips that have many
different origins and destinations. The averages may mask a number of trips
where the ratio between public transport and car travel time is reversed (i.e.,
trips that are shorter using public transport than using cars). For instance,
some trips in Manhattan or in Paris Municipality are most certainly faster
by public transport than by car. Suburban trips for people who live very
close to a station and whose workplace is also close to a station might also
be shorter using public transport than using a car. We can be confident that
when this is the case, commuters choose the faster means of transport.
However, average commuting time shows that in all these cities, commuters
using cars spend less time commuting than those using public transport. Let
us try to find out why it is so.
I did not randomly select the five cities in figure 5.9. Their characteristics
are shown in table 5.2. Four of the selected cities have a significant share of
public transport use, ranging from 26 percent for New York to 88 percent
for Hong Kong. The fifth city, Dallas–Fort Worth, is an outlier with less
than 2 percent of commuting trips using public transport. Hong Kong’s and
Singapore’s public transport systems are relatively recent, and they benefit
from their modernity and are known for their efficiency. The five cities
selected show a large variety of densities. Hong Kong and Singapore have
high densities, while New York and Paris have medium densities but high
job and population densities in their core area, which favors public transport
use and makes car use more difficult. Dallas–Fort Worth is the only city in
the sample with a very low density (12 people per hectare) but with a
population of 6.2 million, about equivalent to Hong Kong’s 6.8 million
(2011). Given the very low density of Dallas–Fort Worth, car usage is
predictably very high at 98 percent of commuting trips.
Table 5.2
Density and share of public transport trips in five sample cities.
City
Population
(millions)
Transit share of
commuting trips
(percent)
Density
(people per
hectare)
Built-up area
(square kilometers)
Dallas–Fort Worth
6.20
2 12 5,167New York
Metropolitan
Statistical Area 20.30
26 18 11,278
Paris (Ile De France)
11.80
34 41 2,878
Singapore
5.60
52 109 514
Hong Kong
6.80
88 264 258
Sources: Population: Census 2010. Density and built-up area: author’s measurements. Transit:
Dallas–Fort Worth and New York, Summary of Travel Trends, 2009, National Household Travel
Survey, U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration, Washington, DC;
Paris, E 2008 Enquête Nationale Transports et Déplacements, Table 5.1. Commissariat général au
Développement durable, Paris 2008; Singapore, Land Transport Authority Singapore Land Transport,
Statistics in Brief 2010, Singapore Government, 2010; Hong Kong, “Travel Characteristics Survey￾Final Report 2011,” Transport Department, Government of Hong Kong Special Administrative
Region, Hong Kong, 2011.
However, one should not conclude that because current car trips are
usually faster than public transport trips, a shift of public transport trip
toward cars would decrease the average commuting time and therefore
increase mobility. In the four cities with medium and high densities
mentioned above, the current speed of cars depends on the proportion of
commuters using public transport. Indeed, in Singapore, the government
periodically adjusts the cost of using a car to decrease demand for car trips
with the explicit goal of maintaining a minimum speed of car travel for
those who can afford it. Most cities where public transport is an important
mode of transport also try to control demand for car use, although in a
manner less explicit and muscular than in Singapore. Reducing demand for
car trips takes many forms. For instance, New York increases tolls for carsin bridges and tunnels, Paris reduces the number of car lanes, and Hong
Kong increases taxes on car purchases. Beijing establishes yearly quotas for
the purchase of new cars and uses a lottery to determine who may purchase
a car. Stockholm, London, and Rome have a special charge to discourage
car traffic in the core city. All cities heavily subsidize public transport
operation cost to convince commuters to shift from cars to public transport
because of the cost difference.
The higher speed of commuting cars in dense and moderately dense cities
is due to the high number of trips using public transport. In these cities, the
two modes, car and public transport, complement each other. In Dallas, by
contrast, the short commuting time is entirely due to low density. As I will
show later, low suburban densities provide larger road areas per households
than in high-density cities. This large area of road per person allows higher
speeds. As I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, compact dense
cities like Hong Kong and Singapore, while decreasing the average
commuting distance, are often associated with a much longer commute than
very-low-density cities like Dallas–Fort Worth. The potential advantages of
shorter commuting trips in high-density cities are entirely offset by the
slower speed caused by congestion, including congestion in transit.
Travel Cost
As mentioned above, I drive once a week from Glen Rock in suburban New
Jersey to New York University in south Manhattan. The trip length one way
is 37 kilometers. The cost of tolls amounts to $14, plus $17 for parking (of
which 18.4 percent is a special municipal tax on parking), plus another $5
for about 2 gallons of gasoline, for a total of $36 for a return commuting
trip by car (not counting insurance, maintenance, and capital cost). The
commuting time door-to-door, one way, is about 63 minutes on average,
corresponding to an average speed of 35 km/h.
The same return trip using public transport (bus plus metro) would cost
only $14 but would require 102 minutes door-to-door one way, or an
average speed of 22 km/h. In addition, outside peak hours, buses to and
from Glen Rock leave only every hour. On a two-way commuting trip
driving my car, I am spending an additional $22 to gain 78 minutes over
public transport travel time, implying an opportunity cost of my time about
$17 per hour. This personal case study has no statistical value, but it does
explain the way many commuters select their transport mode. The transportcosts that I pay for both public transport and car commuting do not reflect
the real cost of providing the transport service that I am using—whether car
or public transport. The fare of most public transport trips covers only a
fraction of operating cost, and usually no capital cost at all. In the same
way, tolls and gasoline costs may not reflect all the maintenance cost of the
roads and traffic management service I use during my trip, and even less of
the negative externalities on the environment and the congestion I impose
on others by using my car.
So far, if we look only at the speed and duration of commuting trips, it
seems that car trips have an advantage over public transport. Indeed, as jobs
tend to disperse into suburbs and household income increases in many large
cities of the world, it seems that the ratio of car trips over public transport
trips is also increasing, to the alarm of transport planners. The congestion
created by cars is a major concern. I alluded to this problem by warning that
in denser parts of cities, the shorter commuting time made possible by
traveling by car depended on the number of commuters using public
transport. The larger the number of commuters using public transport, the
higher the speed of commuters using cars will be. This trend explains the
popular support for public transport investments in cities like Atlanta, where
most commuters are using cars and intend to keep using cars in the future.
Speed, Congestion, and Mode of Transport
Road congestion is a real estate problem. Through regulations, planners or
developers allocate portions of urban land to streets when the land is
originally developed. Once a neighborhood is fully built, increasing the area
allocated to streets is extremely costly financially and socially, as it requires
decreasing the land allocated to uses that produce urban rents while
increasing the area of street that produces no rents. It also requires the
relocation of households and businesses.
In most cases, cars, buses, and trucks do not pay for the street space they
consume; they have, therefore, no incentive to reduce their land
consumption. The mismatch between the supply of land allocated to streets
and the demand for street space creates congestion—too many users for too
little street space.
Congestion decreases travel speed and therefore decreases mobility. In
our quest to increase mobility, it is important to measure the street area
consumed per passenger for each mode of urban transport and eventually toprice it so that users who use large road areas would pay a higher price than
those who use small road areas. Being able to price congestion in term of
real estate rental value would enable us to increase mobility, not so much by
increasing supply as by decreasing consumption. The objective remains to
increase mobility by pricing congestion, not to select or “encourage” a
preferred mode of transport.
In the next sections, I describe how to measure congestion and various
attempts to increase road supply to manage demand.
Measuring Congestion
Congestion is the expression of a mismatch between supply and demand for
street space. Traffic engineers define a road as congested when the speed of
travel is lower than the free flow speed. The free flow speed of vehicles
establishes the noncongestion speed, which traffic engineers use as a
benchmark to measure congestion. 16 Any speed below the free flow speed
is indicative of congestion and is measured by the travel time index (TTI),
which is the ratio of travel time in peak periods to travel time in free flow
conditions. For instance, a car driving at 15 km/h on Fifth Avenue in New
York at peak hours would indicate a TTI of 2.8, if we assume that the free
flow speed in New York is equal to the maximum regulatory speed limit of
40 km/h. The mobility report published by Texas A&M Transportation
Institute in 2012 evaluates the urban average TTI in 498 US urban areas at
1.18. Los Angeles, with 1.37, has the highest TTI among US cities. New
York’s TTI is slightly lower at 1.33. The use of TTI allows us to measure
the number of additional hours spent driving compared to what they would
have been at free flow speed, and by extrapolation, the additional gasoline
spent. From TTI, it is then possible to calculate the direct cost of
congestion: the opportunity cost of the driver time plus the additional cost
of gasoline compared to what it would have been under free flow
conditions.
Using TTI to measure congestion is convenient, but is, of course,
arbitrary. Starting November 1, 2014, New York City reduced its speed
limit from 30 miles per hour (48 km/h) to 25 (40 km/h). The new regulatory
limit is bound to reduce the free flow speed. If we take the new regulatory
speed of 40 km/h as the free flow speed, then the TTI for a car running at 15
km/h has consequently decreased from 3.2 to 2.8 between October 31 and
November 1. The reduction of the New York speed limit, aimed at reducingfatal car accidents involving pedestrians, obviously did not result in a
reduction of average commuting time; it has even probably slightly
increased it, in spite of the decrease in TTI implying the opposite. In the
case of New York, the decrease in TTI in the fall of 2014 will be a false
positive!
Using TTI to measure congestion is useful as a relative measure of
mobility in a city (providing the benchmark free flow speed has not
changed, of course, as it did in New York in 2014). It is also useful to
identify streets where traffic management needs to be improved. However,
TTI is not a good proxy for mobility when comparing cities. What is
important for mobility is the changes in average travel time.
Passengers using motorbuses are also subjected to road congestion,
although they are not the main cause of it, as they consume—at least at
peak hours, when the bus is full—very little road space per passenger
compared to drivers alone in their car, as we will see later. However, in
addition to delays due to congestion, public transport users are also delayed
when buses and trains are overcrowded and they are unable to board or
when the schedule is unpredictable because of mismanagement or poor
maintenance.
Public transport overcrowding is a form of congestion internal to the
public transport system, as it does not affect commuters using other modes
of transport. To my knowledge, the municipality of Beijing is the only one
to monitor in real time public transport overcrowding, measured as a
percentage of train capacity. Figure 5.10 shows that a significant portion of
Beijing’s metro network is severely congested at peak hours. Trains and
buses are assumed to exceed capacity when the density inside the vehicle
exceeds 6.5 people per square meter! The discomforts caused by congestion
are therefore quite different when alone listening to the radio in a passenger
car sitting in traffic versus when sharing a square meter with six other
persons in a crowded bus or metro car, or stuck in a subway station unable
to board overcrowded cars!Figure 5.10
Peak hour congestion in the Beijing metro network, 2014. Source: “Beijing the 4th Comprehensive
Transport Survey Summary Report,” Beijing Transportation Research Center (BTRC), Beijing
Municipal Commission of Transport, Beijing, China, 2015.
However, public transport congestion does not just result in discomfort
for passengers; it also increases travel time and therefore reduces mobility.
In Beijing, in spite of the spectacular increase in the length of metro lines
built since 2000, reaching 523 kilometers in 2015, the congestion is so
extreme during the rush hour that public transport employees have to limit
the number of passengers who can board each train to prevent the train from
becoming dangerously overcrowded. In 2015, about 64 Beijing metro
stations (about 20 percent of total number of stations) had restrictions on
boarding during rush hour. Beijing’s metro system had an additional 340
kilometers of lines under construction in 2015. It is hoped that these new
lines will decrease public transport congestion.
The Supply Side: Increasing the Area Devoted to Transport
Increasing Road Supply in Already Dense Areas Is Nearly Impossible
Roads are the default transportation system in every city of the world.
Roads are indispensable for the construction of a city. The road network is
the backbone of any public transport system. Government is usually
responsible for the design, construction, and maintenance of the primary
road system.Could the government act like an economic market and supply the road
space that would match existing demand? The government or developers
are routinely supplying new roads as cities expand into the countryside and
in low-density suburban areas. However, attempts to increase the road
supply in already dense built-up areas (where demand is highest) have had
very limited success in the past.
Haussmann obviously managed to cut into dense existing neighborhoods
in the Paris of the nineteenth century (see chapter 3). However, if
Haussmann’s work is so well known in the history of planning, it is
precisely because it has been nearly impossible to replicate it, and it had
few precedents. Besides, all the boulevards created by Haussmann are now
congested, and it is clearly impossible and even undesirable to widen them
further to accommodate current traffic demand.
Demand for more road space usually occurs in areas located in the most
attractive and expensive parts of a city. Because of the high value of the real
estate bordering Fifth Avenue in New York, Rue de Rivoli in Paris, or
Huaihai road in Shanghai, it is unthinkable to widen these streets, although
they are extremely congested. The widening of these streets would destroy
valuable real estate that makes them attractive, as well as increase the
proportion of unpriced land—the roads—at the expense of high-priced land
—the shops, offices, and residences bordering the roads. In addition,
pedestrians are also major users of street area in central urban districts;
increasing traffic flow in downtown areas is usually incompatible with safe
and pleasant pedestrian traffic.
As an alternative to road widening, planners have often attempted to
increase street area by building elevated highways above existing streets.
Elevated highways, while not quite as destructive as widening existing
streets, significantly decrease the value and livability of the neighborhoods
they cross. In addition, getting in and out of an elevated highway requires
the use of ramps, which involves the destruction of additional valuable real
estate while obstructing pedestrian flows.
The plan proposed by Robert Moses for the Lower Manhattan
Expressway in New York was an attempt to increase street supply in a high￾demand area. The popular grassroots movement, led by Jane Jacobs, against
the destruction that the expressway would have caused put a stop to the
project. Indeed, the negative impact of elevated highways in dense urban
areas is not limited to the eventual destruction of existing side buildings; itoften extends for several blocks around. Because of the negative impact and
high cost of elevated highways, not only has their construction been
practically halted around the world, but a reverse movement advocating the
demolition of existing ones is spreading.
Supply Side: Using Existing Road Space More Efficiently
Using existing street space more efficiently could increase the area of street
available for the circulation of pedestrians, surface public transport, and
cars. Many cities that allow extensive on-street parking in their dense core
decrease the area available for the movement of pedestrians, bicycles,
buses, and cars. On a typical street in Manhattan, parked cars are using 44
percent of the street area available to vehicles (not including sidewalks).
Given the scarcity of road space, transferring all on-street parking to
privately operated underground garages would greatly increase city
mobility, the safety of pedestrians, and the pleasantness of a city in general.
The political feasibility of doing so is remote, as many users of free or
quasi-free on-street parking consider it as a basic human right. Any mayor
attempting to improve mobility for pedestrians, surface public transport,
and cars by removing on-street parking would probably not be reelected or
might even be impeached.
Clever use of traffic engineering could also improve mobility without the
need to increase the area devoted to streets. Samuel Staley and Adrian
Moore, in their book aptly named Mobility First,
17 devote an entire chapter
titled “Seven Steps to Expanding Current Road Capacity” to the various
methods that can improve the speed of vehicles in urban areas. These vary
from redesigning intersections to introducing “hot lanes.” New technology
in traffic light management could also improve mobility of the existing road
network. Particularly promising is the swarm technology, which consists of
real-time updating of traffic light patterns to respond to shifting traffic
volume and unexpected events, like accidents or civil events. However,
these measures, when taken, would undoubtedly enhance mobility but
would not solve the problem of congestion durably without being
associated with a demand side solution.
Supply Side: Tunneling to Increase the Street Area
The first underground railway dedicated to urban transport opened in
London in 1863. It had a modest length of 6 kilometers and used steam
locomotives. The cost was high, but it was an alternative to Haussmann’swidening of Paris streets, which had started a few years earlier. The more
democratic and liberal nature of London’s political system in the middle of
the nineteenth century would not have permitted an Haussmann-type
operation in London. The decision to create an underground urban transport
system in London was justified by the high price of land.
Building a transport system underground is a way of substituting capital
for land. While the capital cost might be high, it should be approximately
equal to the value of the road area it saves. The economics of building the
first subway system in London must have seemed sound, as new subways
were soon built in other capitals of Europe and in the main cities of the
United States. By 1914, 13 cities 18 worldwide had already built urban
underground transport networks.
Building tunnels under the dense downtown area of existing cities is
expensive. For example, in January 2017, three stations in a tunnel 2.7
kilometers long, part of the projected Second Avenue Subway, opened in
midtown Manhattan at a cost of $4.45 billion (2015) or $1.6 billion per
kilometer. It seems an astronomical sum for a relatively short addition to the
New York subway network. Is it worth it? The object of the tunnel is to
substitute capital for land, or in other words, to create new land by spending
capital. To determine whether this cost makes sense, we could compare the
cost of the land “created” to the price of land in areas adjacent to the tunnel.
A study of land value conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York 19
in 2008 valued the prime land in midtown Manhattan at about
$5,500 per square foot or about $60,000 per square meter. If we calculate
the cost of the new area created by the tunnel, assuming a right of way of 25
meters and three underground stations of 6,000 square meters each, we find
that the cost per square meter of new land created by the tunnel is around
$50,000. This is similar to the prime land price of $60,000 per square meter
assessed in the area by the Fed report in 2008. In the context of Manhattan
land prices, the $4.45 billion investment in a subway tunnel appears
reasonable. In addition, it is likely that the new subway line, when
completed, will increase the value of the land along Second Avenue
compared to its 2008 value.
We should therefore always associate transport issues to real estate
prices. High land prices indicate to planners that there is a high demand for
the area, and therefore, a high volume of commuters will try to have access
to it. At the same time, high land prices preclude widening streets toaccommodate traffic. The justification for an underground network of
transport depends on the ratio between the unit price of land and the unit
cost of tunneling. If this ratio is about equal to or greater than 1, the
underground network may make economic sense. If the ratio is much below
1, then another solution should be found.
Note that the construction cost of $1.6 billion per kilometer of subway is
probably a world record. The cost of tunneling and constructing
underground tracks and stations varies with many factors, including depth,
width, geology, labor costs, and technology used. A brief survey of recent
subway construction costs shows very large variations, from $600 million
per kilometer for the latest Singapore MRT line, to $43 million per
kilometer for Seoul line 9 built in 2009. These variations show that
underground transport may make economic sense even in cities where land
prices are much lower than in Manhattan.
Supply Side: How Much Land Is Available Anyway?
We may not be able to increase the area of street in already built-up cities,
but do we even know how much is available to make better use of such a
scarce resource?
Some cities’ land use statistics provide a percentage of the built-up area
devoted to streets. For instance, the percentage of street area in New York
City is 26.6 percent, for London it is 20.8 percent. These numbers are
difficult to interpret. It would seem that New York City has about a 28
percent larger street area than London. While the two cities (defined as
within municipal boundaries and not as metropolitan area) have about the
same population of about 8 million, their population density differs
significantly ( table 5.3). Because of the difference in density, while the
share of road is higher in New York, the area of road per capita is lower in
New York than in London. If we assume that the need for street space is
proportional to the population, then London offers 9 percent more road
space per person than does New York, in spite of a significantly lower
percentage of road.
Table 5.3
Street area per person, New York and London.
New York London
Census year 2010 2011Population 8,175,133 8,173,941
Built-up area (square kilometers) 666 941
Population density (people per hectare) 123 87
Percentage of street area
26.6 20.8
Area of street per person (square meters) 22 24
I am using this example to show that any normative approach to fix the
area of urban road to an optimum to avoid congestion is a mirage. The
population densities in New York and London have varied widely long after
the road areas had been fixed forever by property lines. Densities vary with
time, and road areas are fixed by history; as a result, the area of road per
person, which is clearly correlated with congestion, varies over time.
Transport systems have to adjust to what road area is available and not the
opposite.
Population and job densities vary enormously from one part of a city to
another; so does the percentage of land occupied by streets. The need for
street area is related to neighborhood densities. For instance, in midtown
Manhattan, the density of jobs reaches an astonishingly high 2,160 jobs per
hectare. By contrast, in Glen Rock, a suburb of New York, the residential
density is only 19 people per hectare. Clearly, the local demand for road
space will be different in these two neighborhoods. If we combine
neighborhood densities with percentage of land devoted to streets, we
obtain the area of street per person or per job in different neighborhoods,
which is already a little more useful than the aggregate at the city level.
Figure 5.11 shows the variations of road space per person or per job in a
select number of neighborhoods in various large cities of the world. Table
5.4 shows the infinite combination of densities and areas devoted to streets
that explains the large variations in road area per person in each
neighborhood.Figure 5.11
Road area per person or per job in various neighborhoods.
Table 5.4
Densities, percentage of road area, and road area per person in various neighborhoods.
City—Neighborhood
Density (people per
hectare)
Road area
(percent)
Road area per person
(square meters)
Cairo—Al Mounira 1,566
19.0 1.2
New York—Midtown, jobs 2,158
36.0 1.7
Mumbai—Null Bazar 1,649
27.9 1.7
New York—Wall Street, jobs 1,208
23.1 1.9
Ahmedabad, India—Walled
City
588
16.0 2.7Hanoi—Dong Da 929
27.3 2.9
Tianjin—Heping 271
24.0 8.9
Mexico City—Tultepec 121
11.9 9.8
Paris—6 arrondissement 266
28.8 10.8
Ahmedabad, India—
Vijaynagar
492
54.0 11.0
Cairo—Zamalek 178
21.8 12.2
Gauteng, South Africa—
Sebokeng
182
23.5 12.9
Singapore—Toa Payoh 186
26.9 14.4London—Bromley 49
17.4 35.4
Atlanta—Dogwood Drive,
Fulton Co.
22
12.2 56.3
Los Angeles—Martinez
Drive
35
28.8 81.5
New York MSA—Glen Rock,
NJ
19
15.7 84.8
The road space per person can be below 2 square meters in some
neighborhoods in Cairo, New York, and Mumbai, and above 50 square
meters in some suburbs of Atlanta, Los Angeles, and New York. The road
area per person could be an interesting indicator for mode of transport
compatibility. In midtown New York, for instance, because of the very low
area of street per person, workers would more than entirely fill the street
with vehicles if each of them were using an automobile. At the other
extreme, within the suburbs of New York, Atlanta, or Los Angeles, the road
area per person is large enough to accommodate a large number of
individual vehicles.
The numbers in figure 5.11 and table 5.4 demonstrate that any normative
approach applied to densities or road design for an entire city in order to
provide better transport is bound to fail. Planners should design transport
systems that are adapted to the densities and street design of the
neighborhood they are supposed to serve. In the following section, I
evaluate the area of street that is consumed per passenger for various mode
of transport.
Going beyond SupplyHistory and the experience of existing cities demonstrate that the possibility
of increasing the supply of roads in existing built-up areas is extremely
limited. Widening streets or doubling the street area by creating an elevated
highway destroys the very quality that attracts traffic in the first place.
Tunneling is very costly, and while indispensable in the downtown of large
dense cities, it cannot be applied in cities where land is less expensive but
where congestion is still very real.
Increasing mobility (i.e., decreasing the time required to go from one part
of a metropolitan area to another) therefore requires a concerted action on
the demand side. The demand side includes calculating how much street
space each commuter consumes and what measures could be taken to
decrease not demand for trips but demand for street space.
The Demand Side: Measuring Land Consumption per Commuter per
Transport Mode
There are only two ways of decreasing the commuters’ demand for street
space: reducing the consumption of street space per commuter and reducing
the demand for trips at peak hours. Let us first look at the consumption of
street space per commuter related to the various modes of transport.
Measuring the Consumption of Street Space per Commuter and Road
Capacity in Passengers per Hour
A vehicle moving on a city street uses the area corresponding to the
vehicle’s dimension plus the area required to prevent a collision with the
preceding vehicle. The safe distance between two moving vehicles is set by
the time that would be required for the following vehicle to stop if the front
vehicle had to stop suddenly. The slow reaction time of drivers, not the size
of the vehicles, is responsible for most of the road area required by moving
cars. Therefore, the area of street required by vehicle depends on the speed
of the vehicle: the higher the speed, the larger the area required will be.
The formal way to calculate the minimum safe distances between moving
vehicles involves a number of parameters, including human reaction time,
maximum braking deceleration, the adherence of the road surface, among
other things. In reality, drivers are told that they should allow a reaction
time of 2 seconds 20
 between two vehicles.
On congested streets, it is difficult to maintain a 2-second interval, as
vehicles change speed continuously and average intervals tend to increase,further reducing the flow capacity of the road. In the rest of this chapter, I
assume a standard safe interval of 2 seconds for moving vehicles except for
buses moving in exclusive lanes, where the distances between buses will be
fixed by the bus schedule.
When a car is moving at 40 km/h, the safety buffer zone required to
maintain a 2-second interval represents 82 percent of the total street area
consumed by the moving car. This area increases with speed, as shown in
figure 5.12. Because cars move in a lane of standard width, and because
most of the street area required by a car is dictated by the 2-second interval,
smaller cars do not consume significantly less road space, except at very
low speeds, as we will see below.
Figure 5.12
Street area requirements for cars running at different speeds with 2-second reaction time.
There are only two ways to decrease the street area consumed by moving
cars: the first would be to decrease the width of vehicles so that two
vehicles fit in the width of one lane (e.g., a motorcycle); the second would
be to decrease safely the 2-second reaction time by using technology like
self-driving cars. We will explore these possibilities later on.
For vehicles moving on a road, the consumption of street area per
passenger is therefore dependent on four parameters: the length of the
vehicle, the reaction time to ensure a safe distance between vehicles, the
speed of the vehicle, and the number of passengers.
For instance, a commuter driving alone on a New York street at the
maximum allowed speed of 25 miles per hour (40 km/h) is de facto required
to use 84 square meters of street area per vehicle to stay at a safe distance
from the preceding vehicle running at the same speed (figure 5.12). If the
car’s driver is the only passenger, then the consumption of street space is 84
square meters per commuter. However, in the United States, on average,
there are about 1.25 passengers per car in urban areas. An average
commuter driving a car in the United States is therefore consuming 67
square meters when in a car running at 40 km/h. The more passengers pervehicle, the less the consumption of street space, as the distance between
vehicles stays constant at the same speed.
The number of cars on a segment of road of a given length determines the
speed of the vehicles because of the necessity of keeping a safe interval of
about 2 seconds between vehicles. For instance, maintaining the maximum
speed limit of 40 km/h allowed in New York City would require that there
are no more than 38 cars per lane over a distance of 1 kilometer (left graph
in Figure 5.13). If more cars enter the lane, the speed of all the cars will
have to decrease to maintain the 2-second interval between cars. If the
number of cars per kilometer of lane increases to 100, then the speed of all
cars in the lane will drop to 11 km/h. This decrease in speed will also
reduce the capacity of the lane to carry passengers. At the speed limit of 40
km/h, one lane can carry 1,900 passengers in one direction; at 10 km/h, this
capacity is reduced to 1,360 passengers (right graph in figure 5.13). In
reality, the capacity will probably be reduced further, because as new cars
enter the lane, drivers have trouble adjusting quickly the interval between
cars; it then becomes difficult to maintain a constant 2-second interval.
Empirical data show that this interval tends to increase as speed adjusts
downward, resulting in even lower passenger capacity than the one shown
on figure 5.13, which assumes that the 2-second interval between cars
remains constant.
Figure 5.13
Speed versus vehicle density (left) and lane capacity (right) for cars.
Therefore, in New York City for instance, every car added to traffic in a
lane with a density of more than 38 cars per kilometer decreases the speed
of all the cars in the lane. This additional car reduces travel speed, therefore
increases commuting time, and therefore decreases mobility. In addition, it
decreases the existing road capacity to bring commuters to their destination.
In spite of these well-documented problems, traffic planners have not yet
found any direct way to control the number of cars entering a street in orderto maintain a preselected speed. In other areas of the economy,
“gatekeepers” are matching demand with existing capacity in the short
term. This is what happens, for instance, in cinemas or restaurants where
peak demand may often significantly exceed capacity. If more customers
than seats available present themselves, gatekeepers will prevent the
customers from entering the cinema or the restaurant. In the long run, prices
will be adjusted to adjust demand to supply, or eventually extra capacity
will be added to match supply to demand. This is unfortunately not possible
for roads. If the road users’ demand is higher than the road capacity, in the
absence of gatekeepers or price adjustments, all users will have to reduce
speed until all demand has been satisfied, even if this demand results into
total gridlock!
I discuss below the indirect means currently used to decrease the number
of cars entering an urban network; except for adjustable congestion pricing
as used in Singapore, most methods are often clumsy and ineffective.
So far, we have only looked at the links between vehicle density, speed,
and lane capacity for cars, which could be taxis or private cars. Let us now
compare these relations for various types of moving vehicles.
Table 5.5 shows the street area required per passenger at different speeds
for motorcycles, ordinary cars, short cars (“smart cars”), and urban buses
using equation 5.4.
Equation 5.4 Street area used per passenger
The street area used per passenger in moving vehicles can be expressed as a function of the
vehicle speed S and four parameters: R, L, W, and P:
where
A is the area of street per passenger in square meters,
S is the speed of vehicle in km/h,
R is the reaction time required from drivers to prevent two vehicles from crashing into each
other, expressed in seconds,
L is the length of the vehicle in meters,
W is the width of a lane in meters, and
P is the number of passengers per vehicle.Predictably, people riding bicycles and motorcycles consume less street
space than cars (I have assumed that three bicycles and two motorcycles are
riding in parallel on a 3.2-meter-wide standard street lane). Smaller cars
consume only slightly less than regular cars, and the difference decreases as
speed increases. However, the surprising information provided by table 5.5
is how little street area passengers in a full city bus are using compared to
any other mode of transport. At 40 km/h, a passenger in a car consumes
more than 50 times the street area used by his counterparts riding at the
same speed in an admittedly crowded bus! 21
Table 5.5
Street area consumption per person for various modes of transport operating at various speeds.
This is an argument often used by people who advocate eliminating cars
from city streets. It is also the subject of a poster produced by the city of
Munster, Germany, in 2001, which went viral on the Internet. 22 The poster
shows three side-by-side views of the same street with the area of street
used by cars, bicycles, and buses to carry the same number of passengers.
The goal of the poster is to dramatize the difference of road consumption
per person between cars, bicycles, and motorbuses. The street areaconsumption figures in table 5.5 seem to support the poster’s claim that cars
as a mean of transport are extremely wasteful compared to buses.
If it were possible to transport passengers in a bus at 40 km/h across a
city using only 1.3 square meters of street per passenger, as implied by the
numbers in table 5.5, it would probably justify banning all cars from cities.
Unfortunately, both bus consumption numbers in the table and the claims of
the Munster poster are grossly misleading.
Speed and Road Capacity
All types of vehicles listed in table 5.5 follow each other at a distance
required by safety. However, buses cannot follow each other the way cars
can. Buses have to keep a larger distance between each other than cars do,
as we will see below. This is why the very low street area consumption
shown on table 5.5 is theoretically correct but irrelevant for practical
purposes.
Bus departures from bus stops have to be spaced at regular time intervals,
called headways, which are much longer than the few seconds that are
required between two successive cars. Typical headways in city centers
range from 1 to 10 minutes, not the 2- to 3-second headways required for
car safety. It is not possible to fill a city street entirely with buses running at
2-second intervals. For this reason, the very small street area that buses use
per passenger is irrelevant, as buses using the same bus stop have to run at
several hundred meters from each other, and the space between successive
buses have to be filled with cars or be left empty.
Why do city buses have to be spaced at headways of often several
minutes? The buses must stop at regular intervals to let passengers board
and alight, which usually takes between 10 seconds to a minute for each
stop. The time buses spend at bus stops is called the dwell time. The dwell
time depends on the time required by passengers who are boarding and
alighting. The more numerous the passengers boarding and alighting at a
bus stop, the longer the dwell time will be. Therefore, dwell time is longer
at rush hour, and it has an element of unpredictability, as it depends on the
passengers’ agility when boarding and on the number of passengers. Bus
headways must take into account the possible accidental variations of dwell
time.
Imagine a column of buses following each other in a lane between two
stops at a 2-second safety interval. The entire column will have to stop, say,20 seconds to allow the first bus at the head of the column to let its
passengers board and alight. The process will repeat itself for every bus in
the column. Therefore, the speed of this imaginary column of buses will be,
at best, the length of a bus every 20 seconds or about 2.2 km/h, about less
than half of a pedestrian walking speed.
The departure of each bus must be timed in such a manner that there will
be a sufficient time interval between buses to prevent following buses from
bunching up at bus stops if the preceding bus is detained at the stop. To
avoid this problem, the timing between buses is tightly scheduled. Setting
headways is a major constraint in the operation of city buses in dense areas
where bus stops are close to each other.
In New York, for instance, a typical city bus stops every 160 meters;
express buses, operating only at rush hour, stop about every 550 meters and
alternate with regular buses. The bus route M1 going from Harlem to
Greenwich Village (running nearly the full length of Manhattan) has an
average headway of 5 minutes during rush hour (between 7:00 and 9:30
A.M.), including both regular and express buses. The M1 route schedule
indicates that the average rush hour speed varies between 9 and 12 km/h
over the length of the line for both express and regular buses, express bus
average speeds being closer to 12 km/h while regular bus speeds are about 9
km/h. The main advantage of running express buses is to be able to
decrease headway. As these buses alternate with regular buses but bypass
many stops and have longer runs between stops, the risk of their bunching
at bus stops decreases.
Let us compare the speed and lane capacity for buses and cars on a
segment of Fifth Avenue between 110th Street and 8th Street, at rush hour
between 7:00 and 8:30 A.M. I will use the speed and lane capacity of the M1
route alone and that of the three other bus routes that use the same segment
of Fifth Avenue as the M1 route. These other bus routes use different bus
stops, which allows compressing headways without bunching. While the
average headway of M1 is 5 minute at rush hour, the combined headway of
the four bus routes using the same road segment is 1 minute and 48
seconds. Using different bus stops for different routes on the same street
allows operators to increase headways and therefore the road capacity for
public transport passengers.
Let us now look at the performance of buses and cars as shown in table
5.5 in terms of speed and capacity expressed as passengers per hour perlane ( figure 5.14). The lane capacity for cars varies with speed, while the
capacity for buses is independent of speed (horizontal lines on the graph)
but depends only on headway. Obviously, lane capacity for cars also
depends on distances between cars that vary with speed, while public
transport headways are independent of speed.
Figure 5.14
Speed versus lane capacity for buses and cars along M1 corridor in Manhattan.
The speed and therefore the lane capacity of ordinary cars depends on the
density of cars per kilometer, as we have seen in figure 5.13. If the cars’
density allows a speed of between 20 and 40 km/h, the lane capacity will
vary from about 1,650 to 1,900 passengers per hour per lane. If the density
is such that the speed drops below 5 km/h, then the capacity will drop
rapidly to close to 0, when congestion creates gridlock.
By contrast, the number of passengers per hour carried by buses is
independent of bus speed; it depends only on headway, which is designed to
be constant (equation 5.5).
Equation 5.5 Lane carrying capacity
where
C is the lane capacity in passenger per hour per direction,
H is the headway expressed in minutes, and
P is the number of passengers per vehicle.In New York, the M1 buses that depart at 5-minute average headways are
therefore able to carry only 1,032 passengers per hour ((60/5) × 86), less
than cars when they are running at speeds above 6 km/h (figure 5.14).
However, when the four bus routes that are using this segment of Fifth
Avenue are taken into account, the combined capacity of the buses reaches
2,800 passengers per hour.
In practice, the buses are practically using the right lane exclusively and
the second lane partially to allow express buses to overtake regular buses.
The other lanes cannot be used by buses and are therefore used by cars. The
total capacity of the three usable lanes on Fifth Avenue when buses are
combined with cars reaches about 5,000 passengers per hour per direction.
This is more than the capacity that would be obtained if this segment of
Fifth Avenue was used exclusively by cars or exclusively by buses.
Therefore, as currently designed, cars might be clumsy and inefficient, but
they are an indispensable component of urban transport systems. In
addition, if the density of cars could be kept below, say, 50 cars per lane￾kilometers, then they will provide a faster way of moving around the city
than does public transport. However, the complementarity of the two means
of transport is important. In dense urban areas like New York, London, or
Shanghai, the large number of public transport passengers contributes to
keeping the car density low, and therefore allows their passengers a higher
mobility.
Let us now look at the comparative performance of all the various
transport modes shown on table 5.4. We will look at speed and road
capacity expressed as passengers per hour per lane (equation 5.5). The
parameters used to draw the curves in figure 5.15, like reaction time, length
of vehicle, lane width, and number of passenger per vehicles, are the same
as those used in table 5.5.Figure 5.15
Speed versus lane capacity for various transport modes along M1 corridor in Manhattan.
We see that bicycles provide a much higher road capacity at speeds below
15 km/h than any other mode of transport. This result is based on the
assumption that bicycles are running on an entire lane dedicated to them, as
is often still the case in Chinese cities but is not common in European and
American cities. However, this performance in most cases remains
theoretical, as demand for 5,000 bicyclists an hour along one road is
unlikely in most large, dense cities. The more modest narrow bicycle lanes
provided in many cities like New York or Paris have very low bicycle
densities. However, figure 5.15 shows that in cities where traveling by
bicycle is culturally well accepted (i.e., where there is a high demand for
bicycle trips), bicycle lanes could contribute significantly to mobility. The
low speed of the bicycle, however, prevents it from becoming a significant
mode of commuting in cities of more than 1 million people. Because of
their higher speed and increased comfort, electric bicycles, where they are
authorized (as in Chengdu, China), could meaningfully compete with buses
or cars as a means of commuting in larger cities.
Motorcycles also prove to be an interesting alternative to buses in terms
of both speed and road capacity (figure 5.15). In countries where they are
culturally well accepted, as in the countries of Southeast Asia, motorcycles
could become a very efficient means of mass transportation on a
metropolitan scale. Motorcycles use both energy and street space more
efficiently than cars do. The noise and pollution associated with traditional
motorcycles are soon becoming a problem of the past with the proliferation
of electric motorcycles. The increased risk of accident associated with two-wheelers is real, but it is compounded by the neglect shown by urban
managers in adapting traffic engineering and design to motorcycles in cities
like Hanoi, where they are the major mode of transport. The emergence of
more stable, fully enclosed tilting electric three-wheelers like the Toyota i￾Road 23 suggests that the mobility advantage enjoyed by the citizens of
Hanoi could be provided in the future without the nuisance, risks, and
discomfort caused by the traditional motorcycle.
By contrast, compared to the motorcycle, compact Smart car performance
(except for energy use) in terms of road capacity is not much better than
that of an ordinary car (figure 5.15). The width of the vehicle, not its length,
is the important parameter to consider when trying to reduce street area
consumption. A compact Smart car is 166 cm wide, while a Toyota i-Road
vehicle is only 87 cm wide, allowing two vehicles to run in parallel on a
standard 320-cm wide lane.
Figures 5.14 and 5.15 show us that speed and road capacity are equally
important when assessing the performance of different transport modes. We
will see below that the exclusive focus on road capacity, while disregarding
speed, may lead to decreased mobility while apparently reducing
congestion.
Demand Side: Allocating Street Area to a Preferred Mode of Transport
We have seen that the consumption of street area per commuter varies with
transport mode. A passenger riding a bus filled at capacity running at a
speed of 30 km/h consumes about 1 square meter of street space, while a
passenger in a car running at the same speed with an average occupancy of
1.25 passengers per car consumes 55 square meters.
Given that congestion is a major problem in most large cities of the
world, it is understandable that urban managers try to prioritize allocation
of road space to transport modes that use less street space per passenger in
order to increase street capacity. For instance, many municipalities reserve
lanes for the exclusive use of buses and taxis. Many suburban highways
have special lanes reserved for high-occupancy vehicles (HOVs) in an
attempt to decrease the area of road used per commuter by encouraging
carpooling. Commuters will use the HOV lanes when these are not
congested and, therefore, they will be rewarded by higher speed. However,
carpooling has been decreasing in the United States from 19.7 percent of all
commuting trips in 1980 to only 9.7 percent in 2010. 24 This trend can beexplained by the higher commuting times involved in carpooling. In the
United States, apparently, the potential reduction of travel time offered by
HOV lanes is not a sufficient incentive to compensate for the additional
time required to pick up carpooling passengers. Carpoolers will gain time
by using HOV lanes only if they can maintain a speed close to free flow,
say, 60 km/h. That supposes a distance between vehicles of about 33 meters
or a density of about 30 cars per kilometer of lane. If there are more than 30
cars per kilometer of HOV lane, the speed of vehicles will decrease and
possibly become equal to non-HOV lanes. If the car density is less than 30
cars per kilometer, then the speed in HOV lanes will be free flow and
carpooling would become an attractive alternative to driving alone.
However, if the density falls much below 30 cars per kilometer, then the
highway capacity will be reduced and the HOV lane would increase
congestion for the majority rather than reduce it.
High-occupancy toll (HOT) lanes are likely to replace HOV lanes in the
future. HOT lanes are reserved for HOVs and cars that are willing to pay a
toll to go faster. The definition of a HOV is more restrictive than in
traditional HOV lanes, which ensures that the traffic in HOT lanes is fluid
while the number of vehicles per hour is sufficient to ensure full use of the
lane capacity.
HOV and HOT lanes are attempts by local governments to allocate scarce
road area to the vehicles that use it more efficiently. We will see below how
the use of congestion pricing and technology might one day be generalized
to ensure an even more efficient use of urban roads.
The recent multiplication of BRT systems constitutes another way of
allocating street area to the exclusive use of one mode of transport. Let us
explore how successful this new mode of transport had been in increasing
mobility.
Allocation of Roads for BRT Systems
The invention of Bus Rapid Transit in Curitiba, Brazil, in 1974 provides a
more radical example of road allocation among transport modes. The first
BRT was created in Curitiba as an affordable substitute to a subway. The
challenge was to show that it was possible to increase the carrying capacity
of a street lane to approach the capacity of a subway at a fraction of the
cost. An ordinary bus line with a full load of 86 passengers per vehicle and
a 3-minute headway is able to transport about 1,720 passengers per hour perdirection (PPHPD). Curitiba BRT is able to carry about 10,800 passengers
per hour per direction per lane. More recent BRTs, like Bogota
TransMilenio, are able to carry up to 33,000 PPHPD by adding additional
express lanes and wider rights-of-way than the one used in Curitiba. A
typical subway carries from 22,000 (London Victoria line) to 80,000
PPHPD (Hong Kong Metro).
Since Curitiba’s success, many cities around the world have adopted
similar BRT systems with some variations in design and performance.
Mayors and urban planners have often celebrated the invention of BRT as a
silver bullet that could solve the problem of mass transport in large cities
without the heavy capital investment required for the construction of
underground metro systems. BRT’s objective is not to add road area, as the
BRT is usually created on existing roads, but to increase the capacity of
existing roads by allocating existing road space to the most efficient users.
A BRT has two main features: an existing road area reserved to the
exclusive use of buses and a system of specially designed bus stations
where passengers pay their fares before entering the bus and where they can
board and alight quickly, reducing dwell time to 20 seconds or less. The
BRT vehicles are usually specially designed with many large doors to
reduce dwell time and large passenger capacity: often up to 270 passengers
in articulated buses. The high PPHPD capacity is made possible by running
very large buses at very short intervals with headways of about 90 seconds.
Does BRT use street area more efficiently than ordinary buses?
In Curitiba, an elevated curb physically separates the BRT lanes from the
lanes used by cars. Stations from which passengers board and alight are
located about every 500 meters. Figure 5.16 shows the layout of a two￾block portion of Curitiba’s BRT Eixo Sul line on Avenida Sete Setembre.
The BRT lanes and station use 44 percent of the total road space exclusively
for the use of BRT vehicles. In addition, to maintain speed and avoid traffic
lights, crossings are minimized by interrupting about three cross-streets out
of five.
Figure 5.16Map of a typical station and right-of-way for the Curitiba BRT (Eixo Sul line).
A bus sharing a lane with cars uses only the street area that it needs to
keep a safe distance from the vehicle in front of it. At 30 km/h, the
passengers of ordinary buses use only about 1 square meter of road per
person (see table 5.4). However, for a BRT, the street area used per
commuter is different from that of an ordinary bus. A BRT uses its own
road space, which is not available to other vehicles. Equation 5.6 defines
the area of street used per passenger for a BRT.
Equation 5.6 Area of street used per passenger for a BRT
where
A is the area of street per passenger in square meters,
H is the headway in seconds,
S is the speed of the bus in km/h,
W is the average width of the BRT’s right-of-way, and
P is the number of passengers per bus.
The area of street consumed per BRT passenger varies with headway (
figure 5.17). The larger the headway, the more street area a passenger
consumes. To increase capacity, BRT operators have a strong incentive to
reduce headway and to increase the number of passengers per bus.
Increasing the number of passengers per bus has the added incentive of
reducing operating costs, as the salary of drivers usually represents more
than 60 percent of bus operating cost. This is why Curitiba’s BRT uses very
large articulated buses, each with a capacity of 270 passengers.Figure 5.17
BRT use of road space per passenger when headways vary. Dashed horizontal line indicates the road
area per passenger for a car moving at 30 km/h with a headway of 2 seconds.
Headways, however, have a lower limit. When the headway gets too
short, say, below 1 minute, buses run the risk of catching up with preceding
buses, resulting in bunching at bus stations. Some Curitiba reports are
mentioning headways of 90 seconds. This is extremely tight for articulated
buses containing 270 passengers. Most common headways for BRT at rush
hour seem to be about 2 minutes. 25 The use of road space per passenger is
dependent on headways and bus occupancies. I show in figure 5.17 how the
road area used by passenger varies with headway and vehicle occupancy.
For a headway of 90 seconds and full bus occupancy, the street
consumption per passenger is an impressively low 8 square meters (figure
5.17), about seven times less than the road space used by a commuter in a
car running at 30 km/h. However, BRT street consumption per passenger
increases rapidly as the headway increases and the occupancy decreases, as
can be seen in figure 5.17. With a 6-minute headway and 60 percent
occupancy, the road consumption of a passenger riding a BRT is similar to
that of a commuter in a car. A 2004 report 26 on Curitiba’s BRT analyzing
data from various sources shows that headway on the north-south axis
varies from 3 to 7 minutes. Checking the schedule of bus 507 at 7 P.M. in
2015 confirms a headway of 7 minutes. If these are the range of operational
headways for BRT, the resulting street area consumption per passenger for
the highest headway is 40 square meters at full occupancy and 66 square
meters at 60 percent occupancy. This consumption is not any more
impressive when compared to the 55 square meters consumed by a
passenger in a car running at 30 km/h.By contrast, at any speed and even at less than 10 percent occupancy, the
road consumption per passenger of an ordinary bus remains a small fraction
of the consumption of passengers in a car. To be efficient, BRT lines have to
be built along an axis where the demand for capacity at peak hours ensures
full occupancy and justifies the very short headways. It is often the case that
after initial operation, headways are increased. Based on the basic statistics
of bus movement, it appears that the actual headway at peak hours on the
main BRT axes varies from 3 to 10 minutes.
BRT requires an existing rather wide right-of-way of at least 36 meters
and preferably 42 meters for higher performance. However, because of the
more efficient use of road space and their relatively low cost, BRT systems
have spread rapidly all over the world in the past 20 years and, in particular,
in cities that already had a subway system. Do they constitute an alternative
breakthrough to the traditional bus and subway systems by providing
mobility while avoiding congestion? BRT is an innovative way of using
scarce road space, but its application will be limited in the future by three
factors: first, the wide right-of-way it requires; second, the monocentric or
linear city structure it implies; and third, its limited speed, which makes it
inadequate for large cities.
BRT’s ability to reduce significantly the demand for street space is very
much dependent on a continuous high operating performance: maintaining
very short headways and high occupancy. Because of the typical distance
between stations of about 500 meters in a BRT, maintaining headways as
short as 90 seconds requires a faultless system. The dwell time spent by a
bus at a station for letting passengers board and alight should not be above
20 seconds. Any delay occurring during boarding or alighting will cause
buses to queue at the same station, as the distance between stations is too
short to make up the dwelling time delay by increasing bus speed.
It is important to realize that the road capacity expressed in PPHPD,
whether high or low, does not imply anything about speed. Figure 5.18
shows the PPHPD corresponding to eight BRT systems and eight different
cities’ subway lines currently in operation and their respective speeds.
These speeds are the average speed of buses and trains from beginning to
end of the line; the vehicular speeds are much higher than the actual speeds
of passengers when traveling from their origins to their destinations.Figure 5.18
Transport system speed and capacity versus speed, BRT and Metro. Sources: BRT data are from
Walter Hook, “Bus Rapid Transit: An International View,” Institute for Development & Transport
Policy, New York, 2008; “Mass Transit Railway: Business Overview, Operations and Services,”
www.MTR.com.HK, Hong Kong, 2014.
While the capacity of the best-performing BRT may overlap with that of
the worst-performing subway line, no BRT can match the speed of a
subway line. Hong Kong’s subway has a capacity seven times larger than
Curitiba’s BRT and a speed about 75 percent higher.
The limited speed of BRT systems (figure 5.18) suggests that there is a
city size beyond which BRT is too slow to provide the mobility required in
very large cities. For instance, Seoul’s metropolitan area extends across a
circle of more than 100 kilometers in diameter. It is obvious that at a speed
of 25 km/h, even the fastest BRT would not be able to provide access to the
full job market of a large metropolitan area like Seoul. BRT, however,
might be useful for providing high-capacity mobility in a restricted area
(like a CBD) or for joining two dense job clusters. However, trips in large
metropolitan areas would have to be provided by faster means of transport.
The argument that high-capacity public transport reduces congestion is not
convincing if the resulting trip duration is longer than what it would have
been in a vehicle subject to congestion.
In addition, BRTs and subways are usually designed to serve radio￾concentric trips, from periphery to CBD with high job concentration.
However, in large metropolitan areas, employment is dispersing into
suburbs. The high capacity at relatively slow speeds provided by BRT lines
are not well adapted to the newly emerged spatial pattern of dispersed
employment. The increase in the number of motorcycles and collective
taxis in cities as diverse as Mexico and Johannesburg suggests thatcommuters are selecting the modes of transport that are more adapted to
their trip patterns: low capacity on many diverse routes at higher speed.
Unfortunately, most city managers do not accept motorcycles and collective
taxis as legitimate means of transport and consequently do not provide road
design and lane marking that would increase these vehicles’ efficiency and
safety.
Decreasing Congestion by Managing Demand through Pricing
We have seen that, through design and regulations, local government may
decide to allocate scarce street space to a preferred mode of transport. The
allocation of street space to HOV lanes, exclusive bus lanes, and BRT
corridors is motivated by a desire to use street area more efficiently. An
administrative allocation of land may be justified in some cases, but it
might often result in an inefficient use of street area when demand for road
space shifts. For instance, HOV lanes are often either not used enough or
are congested. The same problem may plague BRT lines that are justified
only when the demand for capacity is high, when headways are below 2
minutes, and when vehicle occupancy or load factor is close to 100 percent
design capacity. Administrative allocation of street space to a specific mode
of transport may result in some positive outcomes in some circumstances,
but it also introduces a rigidity when demand fluctuates at different hours of
the day or over time. The rigidity introduced by an administrative allocation
of street area to a preferred mode of transport may result in a loss of
mobility.
In market economies, supply and demand is matched through pricing
mechanisms. Would it be possible to have a pricing system that determines
the optimum mix of different modes of transport through a pricing
mechanism without relying on administrative allocation of street space to
an exclusive mode of transport?
As I have suggested earlier, we should approach urban transport as a real
estate problem. A municipality is the owner of the streets. The rent charged
for using the street should be based on how large an area, how long, when,
and where a commuter is using it. A commuter using an urban street should
be submitted to the same type of pricing system as a traveler renting a room
in a hotel or on an airline flight. The price to pay for a hotel room depends
on its location, its size, the date of rental, and how long it is rented. Ideally,
matching supply and demand perfectly would require that a similar rentalsystem be applied to vehicles using urban roads. The charge, as it is
practiced for hotel rooms, should be adjusted to maintain as close to full
road occupancy as possible. In the case of urban roads, the objective of the
congestion charge is not to maximize a city’s income but to prevent
congestion above a set level. A car should therefore be charged for the
increased travel time imposed on all other drivers due to its presence on the
road.
Congestion pricing adjusts demand for roads in two ways: it discourages
driving during peak hours for trips that could be done at other hours, and it
encourages using vehicles more efficiently, either by increasing occupancy,
sharing vehicles, or using less road-intensive means of transport (e.g.,
motorcycles or public transport).
Singapore is probably the only city in the world so far that is
progressively getting toward this theoretical pricing ideal, although the
practicality of converting this ideal into reality has not been fully achieved
yet.
Singapore was the first city to implement congestion pricing, which it did
in 1975. Initially, it was just a toll collected to enter the business district.
Eventually, as new technology became available, electronic road pricing
was introduced in 1998. The objective of road pricing in Singapore is to
guarantee a minimum peak-hour speed for cars in the CBD, main arterial
roads, and expressways. The toll is adjusted during the day for time and
location. The monitoring of vehicle speed is done continuously, and toll
rates are adjusted quarterly to maintain the minimum speed. In addition,
measures have been taken to limit the number of cars on the island by
auctioning periodically the right to buy new cars.
The effectiveness of Singapore’s congestion pricing policy is
demonstrated by figure 5.19. Between 2005 and 2014, the average speed at
peak hours has only varied between 61 and 64 km/h for expressways and
between 27 and 29 km/h in the business district and arterial roads. During
the same period, Singapore’s population increased by 31 percent!Figure 5.19
Evolution of vehicular speeds at peak hours, Singapore. Source: Data are from “Singapore Land
Transport Statistics, 2005–2014,” Land Transport Authority, Singapore, 2015.
The Singapore congestion pricing system is the closest in the world to the
theoretical model I suggested above: charging a rent for roads the way one
is charged for a hotel room (ideally, for a room rented by the hour of use).
The toll is charged through gantry when entering different zones. However,
the charge is not adjusted for the time passed in the area of high demand,
although the rate is adjusted depending on the time of entry and the type of
vehicle. I have no doubt that the Government of Singapore will keep
improving its pricing system as new technology becomes available that
allows charging by time of road use without high transaction costs.
Some cities like London and Stockholm are charging a fee for entering
the downtown area, but this is a fee and not a rent, as it does not reflect the
area consumed or the length of time it is consumed.
Charging for Road Maintenance and Capital Cost
The objective of the congestion fee is to prevent congestion, or rather to
maintain commuters’ travel at a set speed during peak hours. However,
there is another issue facing urban travel: users are not charged for all the
costs involved in building and maintaining roads. This implicit subsidy
given to road users may result in an overuse of roads and, therefore, an
increase in congestion.
Typically, governments recover the cost of maintaining roads, if not
building them, through a tax levied on gasoline price. However, many
governments impose a gasoline tax that is much too low to cover the
maintenance of urban roads. For instance, in the United States, the Federal
gasoline tax is only 18.4 cents per gallon. The tax was last raised in 1993
and is not indexed to inflation. Each state adds its own tax to the Federaltax, but the amount varies widely even in adjacent states and is clearly more
influenced by local political considerations than by a desire to rationalize
transport economics.
In any case, the imposition of a tax on gasoline to recover from users the
cost of roads is rather clumsy, even when the tax is indexed to inflation.
Cars built more recently—including hybrid cars—consume much less
gasoline per kilometer than older ones, paying even less tax per kilometer
of road and further distorting the real cost of using roads. In addition, cars
that are entirely electric will soon replace a large part of the current gasoline
car fleet, making the cost of driving even more remote from its real cost. In
addition, energy and, in particular, gasoline is often subsidized in many
countries, further distorting the real cost of using roads.
Pricing urban transport closer to its real cost, including energy used,
negative externalities generated (pollution, global warming, and accidents),
and real estate utilized, would greatly increase the economic efficiency of
urban transport. New GPS technology and transponders should allow users
to pay the real cost of trips by distance traveled, including fixed costs like
insurance. With a more transparent cost per kilometer traveled, trip
decisions and transport mode choices might be different. This would
include the choice between owning or sharing a car, or using public
transport. The pricing of trips closer to their real economic cost may also
alter urban land use in the long run. With a transparent real price for
transport, it is urban users, in all their diversity, that will decide the proper
mix of transport mode and the proper densities, rather than being submitted
to clumsy top-down urban planning decisions. “Getting the prices right” is
not just an economist’s theoretical dream. It could result in a more
grassroots-driven urban environment, improved mobility with less
congestion and pollution, and a better supply of affordable housing.
Street Space Allocated to Parking
In every city, a large part of the street area is not allocated to moving traffic
but to on-street parking. The possibility of stopping curbside for loading or
unloading people and goods is indispensable to the operation and
maintenance of cities. Unloading goods to be sold in a store, food to be
prepared in a restaurant, and materials to build or repair a building are
necessary activities that keep a city functioning. However, it is absurd to
use scarce street area to permanently park idle cars on congested streets.On most Manhattan streets, 53 percent of the street area is allocated to
vehicle use, of which 44 percent (usually two lanes) is reserved for on-street
parking. Only a small portion of this area is subject to metered parking fees.
In Washington, DC, residents of many neighborhoods have to pay only $25
annually to park their cars permanently on the street. A parking space in a
private parking garage costs from $200 to $350 per month. Because cars
parked permanently occupy most of the street curb space, the indispensable
loading and unloading function requires double parking and reduces further
the area devoted to traffic, causing more congestion.
Why should a municipality allocate so much scarce street space to
permanent parking and subsidize its use? Originally, the high transaction
cost of recovering parking fees discouraged pricing parking. However, new
technology makes it much easier.
The difficulty has always been to differentiate loading/unloading from
permanent parking. The solution, as for traffic congestion, is pricing. The
parking fee for each neighborhood could be set so that 20 percent or even
75 percent of the curb space is always vacant. It is the same principle as
congestion pricing.
New York implements metered pay parking reserved for commercial
vehicles to load and unload in a few streets in Manhattan CBD. The parking
time is limited to 3 hours per vehicle with a slightly increasing rate starting
at $4 an hour for the first hour, increasing to $5 an hour for the third hour.
While the rate progressivity is a step in the right direction, the rate is far too
low to maintain enough empty space during the day. The high cost of
enforcement—a municipal employee having to check time of parking
printed on a ticket deposited on the vehicle dashboard—is unlikely to deter
delinquency and abuse. High transaction costs to enforce payments based
on parking meters prevent the policy from being effective. The free or
underpriced use of public street space for parking will really disappear
when technology can automatically identify the vehicle parked (as well as
how long and at what time it was parked) and automatically debit the
vehicle’s owner for the rent accrued—a system similar to the transponders
already used on toll roads.
Concluding Thoughts on Pricing as Affected by Supply and Demand
Congestion is due to a mismatch between road space supply and demand.Because increasing the supply of urban roads is expensive and difficult,
the most efficient way to reduce congestion is to address the demand side.
Charging commuters for the use of roads is the best way to adjust demand
to supply and to reduce congestion. Tolls are increasingly used to reduce
demand for urban road space. However, urban tolls are usually a fixed
amount irrespective of how long street space is used. Tolls are therefore a
clumsy way to charge for the temporary use of a good in short supply.
Considering that urban roads are not a public good but are part of the real
estate market, municipalities should charge a rent for their use. The rent
charged should vary with the time of day, the location, the area, and length
of time the road is used. The rent charged for roads should be similar to the
fares charged by airlines to passengers or the room rates charged by hotels,
except that the rate would not be for a fixed 24 hours but for the number of
minutes the roads are actually used.
Up to now, the transaction cost of charging vehicles for this type of road
rent would have been prohibitive. However, current technology could easily
be used to charge road users a “road rent” that would reflect all the
characteristics of real estate rents for short-term users. The effect of road
rents on congestion would be immediate. Commuting trip departure would
be spread more efficiently throughout the day or night. For instance, truck
delivery would be strongly incentivized to be done at night. Smaller￾footprint vehicles would be rewarded, thus decreasing congestion without
decreasing the mobility of individual commuters. Charging road rents
would have also a beneficial effect on land use. Many activities that
generate a lot of vehicular traffic would have an immediate strong incentive
to locate in areas where demand for road is low compared to their supply
(i.e., suburban areas). Carpooling achieved by electronically matching
similar itineraries would also reduce demand for road space while not
reducing the mobility of commuters.
Mobility, Pollution, and GHG Emissions Due to Transport
Mobility, Pollution, and GHG Emissions
Mobility consumes energy. Since the Industrial Revolution, energy has been
cheap, and its source has come mostly from fossil fuels. Consequently,
urban mobility has been a major source of pollution and GHGs. Urban
planners, alarmed by pollution caused by transport, are advocating for a
reduction of the footprint of cities (increasing the price of housing) insteadof concentrating on transport technology that would reduce the pollution
created by transport. Constraining land use is the wrong strategy; promoting
pollution free transport is the right strategy, and it is now achievable.
Because of technology changes, increasing mobility by allowing longer and
faster trips is not necessarily the equivalent of more pollution and GHG
emissions. It is possible to increase mobility by increasing a trip’s speed and
length while both reducing the energy used per passenger and reducing
pollution and GHGs per unit of energy used, as I show below.
Pollution and GHG Emissions Are Two Different Problems
Concerns for pollution and GHG emissions are often lumped together under
the “sustainability” agenda. In reality, pollution and GHG emissions are two
very different issues that require different approaches. Pollution due to
transport causes more harm when it is concentrated in central urban areas.
The same quantity of pollutant creates very little damage when dispersed
over a large area, but it can be lethal when concentrated in a densely
populated urban area. In addition, some tailpipe pollutants, like carbon
monoxide, are not stable in the long run and are soon changed into
innocuous gases. By contrast, GHGs—mainly carbon dioxide—are not
dangerous at the location of emission, even if concentrated; however,
carbon dioxide is extremely stable and accumulates in the atmosphere. The
dangers and associated costs posed by transport pollutants and GHGs are
therefore completely different and should be addressed separately.
Urban Mobility and Pollution
Urban transport is responsible for a large part of urban pollution emissions.
However, the effect of these pollutants on human health varies widely
depending on concentration. Concentration is dependent on three factors:
the concentration of vehicles in one location, the rate of emissions of
individual vehicles, and a city’s topography and climate. Cities like Los
Angeles, Delhi, Beijing, and Paris could have surges of very dangerous
levels of pollution when wind and temperature combine to prevent pollutant
dispersion. Therefore, the impact of urban pollution on health could be very
different among cities whose vehicles are meeting the same emission
standards. Measures to curb pollution should therefore be adjusted for each
city depending on its climate and topography.Trends in Pollution Due to Gasoline Vehicles over the Past 20 Years
There is a clear consensus on the necessity of curbing pollution emissions
from urban transport vehicles. Ideally, charging for pollution measured at
the tailpipe would eventually reduce pollution to an acceptable level or even
to zero. So far, the technology to do so is not yet available. The
heterogeneity of urban transport vehicles using different types of engines
and different fuel qualities makes direct as-you-go measurement difficult.
Governments in North America, Europe, and Japan have established
mandatory maximum pollution standards that they impose on new cars. In
the fall of 2015, the scandal caused by Volkswagen’s deliberate evasion of
new car emission testing shows that government standards are not
foolproof, and more progress must be made not only in setting standards but
in enforcing them. However, the trend in pollution reduction over the past
30 years has been conclusive in the more affluent countries that maintain
maximum pollution standards, in spite of the enforcement shortcomings.
In the United States, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
describes the evolution of pollution due to cars between 1970 and 2004 as
follows:
The Clean Air Act required EPA to issue a series of rules to reduce pollution from vehicle exhaust,
refueling emissions and evaporating gasoline. As a result, emissions from a new car purchased today
are well over 90 percent cleaner than a new vehicle purchased in 1970. This applies to SUVs and
pickup trucks, as well. Beginning in 2004, all new passenger vehicles—including SUVs, minivans,
vans and pick-up trucks—must meet more stringent tailpipe emission standards. 27
Figure 5.20 shows the changes in pollution in Germany from new
gasoline nondiesel cars over several decades. The changes show that
government mandates, while imperfect tools, are still effective at triggering
the technological changes necessary to reduce pollution that markets, in the
absence of pricing mechanisms, have been unable to provide.Figure 5.20
Changes in gasoline-car pollutant emissions in Germany, 1990–2013. Sources: Table 2: Fuel-specific
IEF for passenger cars, in Fkg/TJ, Ministry of the Environment, Federal Environment Agency
(Umweltbundesamt, UBA), Dessau-Roßlau, Germany.
The decrease in pollution emissions shown in figure 5.20 is due to a
combination of technological change allowing a decrease in gasoline used
per kilometer and changes in engine and exhaust treatment that reduce
tailpipe pollutants.
The data presented in the figure concerns only gasoline vehicles. In the
past few years, hybrid cars and electric cars have been manufactured
commercially, although they still represent a very small portion of the
overall urban transport vehicle fleet. In addition, hydrogen fuel cell vehicles
have moved beyond their experimental phase and are slowly appearing in
selected cities. 28
Electric cars and hydrogen fuel cell vehicles, when they eventually
become a sizable part of the urban transport fleet, will completely change
the environmental quality of cities. The pollution emission will not occur at
the multiple tailpipes of vehicles but at the electricity source. This would
not necessarily mean an absence of pollution, but at least it would avoid the
pollution concentration in urban areas and will liberate cities in unfavorable
climates and topographies from the peak of pollution that currently affects
them. The enforcement of pollution standards at electricity sources would
be much easier than the current system obliging environmental agencies to
test periodically millions of vehicles. This would also greatly improve the
possibility of emission control in less-affluent cities that cannot afford
periodic pollution control of urban vehicles. Finally, the pricing of pollution
at the source of electricity generation would have a better chance of being
implemented without large transaction costs or political resistance.
Urban Mobility and GHG Emissions
Gas-Powered Vehicles
As we have seen, pollution due to transport is difficult to measure and price
at its real cost. The measurement of GHG emissions poses an even greater
challenge.
The simplest measure consists of measuring tailpipe carbon emissions,
also called tank-to-wheel emissions. This is rather simple, as every liter ofgasoline burned in an engine releases about 2.3 kg of CO2. Therefore, the
lower the gasoline consumption, the lower the CO2 contribution will be to
global warming. The GHG measurement appears to be simpler than for
pollution, which depends not only on gasoline consumption but also on the
design of the engine and of the exhaust system. However, this simplicity is
only apparent. Many argue, with reason, that what we should measure is the
well-to-wheel carbon emission: the carbon emitted when extracting,
refining, and transporting 1 liter of gasoline to the tank of a car. This well￾to-wheel measurement adds about 10 percent more CO2 to the tank-to￾wheel emission, increasing GHGs emissions to about 2.73 kilograms per
liter of gasoline. Finally, to be more accurate when measuring the GHG
emissions due to transport, it might be legitimate to include the GHG
emissions produced when manufacturing the vehicle, maintaining and
recycling it, building and maintaining roads, and so forth. This “life span”
emission calculation might be tempting to tackle, but it is probably
counterproductive, because the complexity of the calculation and its many
attendant assumptions might require the development of an entire academic
field. Should the GHG emitted by the workers commuting from home to the
factory manufacturing the vehicle be included in the final calculation of the
CO2 emitted by a liter of gasoline burned in an internal combustion engine?
I can imagine every country’s department of transportation becoming a
gigantic accounting office, similar to the Soviet Union’s Gosplan, preparing
gigantic input-output tables to calculate ever more accurate GHG numbers
emitted by a single liter of gasoline. In the following paragraphs, I will use
the well-to-wheel emission figure for gasoline-powered vehicles.
We should not forget that a market economy avoids the Kafkaesque
complexity of the Soviet Union’s Gosplan by simply using prices to
transmit information through the entire economy. If our governments could
agree to put a price on carbon, there would be no need to calculate a vehicle
life cycle emissions of GHGs. Emissions would decrease in all industries in
proportion to the cost of reducing them. The carbon price would stimulate
the creation of new technology that would reduce emission across
industries.
In the absence of carbon pricing, the second-best solution is for the
government to impose industrywide standards. In the United States, the
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration and the EPA issued jointly
a new national program to regulate fuel economy and GHG emissions forcars built between 2012 and 2016. The European Union, Japan, and Korea
are also issuing their own annual mandatory CO2-equivalent (CO2-e) 29
maximum emission standards for new cars. The changes in emission
standards for new cars since 2000 are shown in figure 5.21.
Figure 5.21
Average mandatory CO2-e emission standards in various countries, 2000–2020. Sources: Data for
Europe, Korea, and Japan: “Monitoring CO2 Emissions from New Passenger Cars and Vans in
2015,” EEA Report No 27/2016, European Environment Agency, Copenhagen, Publications Office of
the European Union, Luxemburg, 2016; United States: “Light-Duty Vehicle Greenhouse Gas
Emission Standards and Corporate Average Fuel Economy Standards; Final Rule,” U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the Department of Transportation’s National Highway
Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA), Federal Register, Vol. 75, No. 88, May 7, 2010, Rules and
Regulations.
The emission standards reflect only new cars, not the entire fleet.
However, they anticipate the average emissions of the entire national fleet
in the near future. The actual GHG emissions from 2000 to 2014 in the EU
have decreased by 23 percent, and if the target is met in 2020, it would
represent a decrease of 44 percent. It shows that in the absence of more
efficient price signals, mandatory standards are effective in decreasing
GHGs.
Hybrid, Electric, and Fuel Cell Vehicles
The standards shown in figure 5.21 concern only gasoline, hybrids, and
diesel cars. Increasingly, electricity or hydrogen fuel cells are likely to
power an increasing share of the vehicles used for commuting in urban
areas. Currently, the market share of electric cars is very small. In 2014, San
Francisco, with 5.5 percent of all vehicles, had the largest market share of
electric and hybrid cars among major US cities. However, given the R&Dinvestment being poured into electric cars and batteries, it is likely that the
market share of electric vehicles will eventually dominate the urban fleet.
The drop in the price of oil in 2016, reflecting an oversupply, might be a
damper on the development of electric cars. However, electric technology
presents many advantages for urban transport, in particular the absence of
noise and pollution. This superior technology will eventually prevail on its
own in the future. As a Saudi oil minister once remarked at an OPEC
meeting, “The end of the Stone Age was not caused by a shortage of
stones!”
For electric vehicles, the power plant generators alimenting the electrical
grid will then produce the GHGs, not the car engine itself. Concerns for
GHG emissions would then shift to the source of electric power generation
and away from car manufacturers.
Currently, there is a wide difference in GHGs emission in various
electrical grids, depending on the source of energy fueling the generators (
figure 5.22). The low emissions from Swedish and French grids are
explained by a combination of nuclear and hydroelectric generation, while
the high emissions of the Polish and US grids stem from the use of coal as a
fuel in some generators. However, the emissions from the California grid
are nearly half those of the US average! The regional differences in
emissions in the US grid are also explained by the differences in fuels used
for electricity generation: California has a high proportion of
hydroelectricity and nuclear plants, while in Michigan generation plants the
dominant production fuels are coal and crude oil.
Figure 5.22Emissions of CO2-e per kilowatt-hour for the electrical grids of selected countries. Sources: United
States: United States Environmental Protection Agency, 2018, eGRID Summary Tables 2016,
https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2018-02/documents/egrid2016_summarytables.pdf;
Europe: Alberto Moro and Laura Lonza, “Electricity Carbon Intensity in European Member States:
Impacts on GHG Emissions of Electric Vehicles,” Transportation Research Part D: Transport and
Environment, Elsevier, July 2017, https://ac.els-cdn.com/S1361920916307933/1-s2.0-
S1361920916307933-main.pdf?_tid=60efef4a-0c3a-4e20-a91b￾04dfdd346516&acdnat=1523304207_75045ee3d86fb842b4de3ff23f425ce0.
Anybody concerned with GHG emissions should certainly switch to
electric cars in Sweden, France, and California, but should use gasoline
when driving in Michigan or Poland!
CO2 Emissions by Various Modes of Transport
Let us now compare the GHG emissions from urban transport vehicles in
grams per passenger-kilometer (g/pkm), depending on the brand and the
technology used ( figure 5.23). For gasoline and hybrid cars, the amount of
CO2 equivalent is calculated at the exhaust pipe. The real amount of GHG
emission per vehicle is in reality higher than the tailpipe emission, as
additional GHG-emitting energy is required to produce and transport the
volume of gasoline consumed by the vehicle engine itself. For electric cars
that get their energy solely from the electric grid, I have used the average
GHG emissions in grams by kilowatt-hour of the electric grid available in
the country where the car operates. However, the GHG emissions of the
electric grid in various countries is calculated from well-to-wheel (i.e., the
emission figures are taking into account the GHG emitted during extraction
and transport of the source of energy of each national or regional grid). I
have selected the Nissan Leaf as a typical example of electric car among the
several models currently available on the market. This GHG emission per
kilowatt-hour is then multiplied by the average number of kilowatt-hours
required to transport one passenger for 1 kilometer. The large variations in
GHG emissions shown in figure 5.23 for electric cars with the same
kilowatt-hour consumption reflects the different sources of energy used to
produce electricity in their respective countries, as was shown in figure
5.22.Figure 5.23
Tailpipe emissions of CO2 per passenger-kilometer for various cars and public transport modes,
2015.
Sources: United States: United States Environmental Protection Agency, 2018, eGRID Summary
Tables 2016, https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2018-
02/documents/egrid2016_summarytables.pdf; Europe: Alberto Moro and Laura Lonza, “Electricity
Carbon Intensity in European Member States: Impacts on GHG Emissions of Electric Vehicles,”
Transportation Research Part D: Transport and Environment, Elsevier, July 2017, https://ac.els￾cdn.com/S1361920916307933/1-s2.0-S1361920916307933-main.pdf?_tid=60efef4a-0c3a-4e20-
a91b-04dfdd346516&acdnat=1523304207_75045ee3d86fb842b4de3ff23f425ce0; and various car
manufacturers, 2016.
Figure 5.23 includes data on the emissions in New York, the most widely
used public transport system in the United States. Measured in grams of
CO2-e by passenger-kilometer, city buses emit about three times more
GHGs than do subways. The explanation is simple: subway lines follow the
routes with the highest demand. Many buses are feeders to subway stations
and often serve suburban areas with less demand. To maintain patronage for
public transport, buses have to run nearly empty outside peak hours. In
addition, because drivers’ salaries are one of the major operating costs for a
bus service, the size of buses has been increased to carry the maximum
number of passengers per driver. This is financially efficient during peak
hours but is energy inefficient when the demand is low (i.e., when very
large buses carry few passengers outside peak hours). Bus stops are
typically located every 150 meters, obliging buses to accelerate and brake at
full load very often. This contributes to more energy use, and therefore
more emissions. By contrast, New York subways are connected to the New
York grid, which according to EPA, emits 411 grams of CO2-e per kilowatt￾hour—a rather low emission rate compared to the average US grid.The bottom of figure 5.23 shows the CO2-e in g/pkm emissions for the
most common cars in the US fleet. The trip of a commuter riding in an
average US car is responsible for more than twice the CO2-e g/pkm emitted
by a trip of the same length by a commuter riding a subway. However, this
car trip produces significantly less CO2-e than the same trip by a commuter
using a city bus. Commuting trips using hybrid cars, still a very small part
of the total number of urban trips, produce about the same CO2-e as the
same trip riding a subway. Finally, trips from commuters in electric cars in
some Western Europe countries and in California emit about half the CO2-e
of a passenger in a New York subway, while the CO2-e emissions from
electric cars in Sweden are practically insignificant. Actually, the 5 g/pkm
CO2 emission of a Nissan Leaf being driven in Sweden will be less than the
6 grams per kilometer exhaled by a person weighing 70 kilograms and
walking at 4.7 km/h! 30
The point of figure 5.23 is not to advocate that commuters shift from city
buses to Nissan Leaf cars but to show that we should not exclude individual
vehicles as a potential transport mode in modern cities because of a concern
about global warming. As we have seen, mobility in cities would increase if
some trips were made by individual vehicles, possibly shared. Because of
the rapidly changing technology, the inclusion of redesigned, possibly
shared, individual vehicles as a major transport mode might decrease GHG
emissions compared to current modes of transport, whether public transport
or individual traditional gasoline cars.
Trends in energy use per passenger-kilometer by mode of transport (
figure 5.24) in the past few years confirm the results of figure 5.23. The
energy used by commuter rail (including subway and suburban rail) has
remained roughly constant and is the most energy efficient compared to
traditional gasoline cars and buses. The energy efficiency of public
transport (buses and rail) depends in great part on the load factor (the
number of passenger per vehicle), which can vary a lot as a city’s spatial
structure changes and as incomes increase. By contrast, the load factor of
cars used for commuting remains roughly constant (about 1.3 passengers
per car in urban areas). Technological improvements stimulated by
government fuel economy mandates are responsible for the decrease in the
energy per passenger-kilometer in individual cars over time. The large
increase in energy per passenger used by city buses is probably due to thetwo factors discussed earlier in this subsection: the extension of bus
services into low-density suburbs and the increase in the size of city buses.
Figure 5.24
Changes in energy use per passenger-kilometer for different modes of transport, 1970–2012. Source:
US Department of Energy, Transportation Energy Data Book, 33rd ed., Washington, DC, 2014.
Finally, the newest cars like the Toyota Prius hybrid and the “plug in” all￾electric Nissan Leaf are far more energy efficient than all prior modes of
transport, whether public transport or gasoline cars. However, these cars are
still using scarce road space inefficiently. While they could be a better
solution for low-density suburb-to-suburb trips, they would cause as much
congestion in dense city core areas as do traditional cars. In addition, at the
moment, these cars represent an insignificant part of the urban car fleet.
Mobility in Evolving Metropolitan Urban Structures
The Three Plagues of Current Transport Modes
Current urban transport systems inflict three major plagues on the cities
they serve: congestion, heavy pollution concentration, and high GHG
emissions. I have discussed these different aspects in the preceding sections
of this chapter. Here I briefly summarize the contribution of each transport
mode to the “three plagues.”
• Individual cars. Their major problem is congestion. The valuable real
estate that a car, whether running or parked, occupies in the densest part of
a city is extremely costly and is usually unpriced. The concentration of
pollution is still a serious problem but could be solved in the long run by a
change in technology that is clearly emerging. Cars still contribute a sizable
part of GHG emissions. In spite of their shortcomings, they are the fastestmode of transport for suburb-to-suburb trips and therefore are likely to
remain an important mode of urban transport in spite of their shortcomings.
• Motorcycles. Their use of street real estate is efficient, but they are noisy,
polluting, and dangerous. Municipalities do not take them seriously as a
means of transport, and consequently these vehicles do not benefit from
elementary traffic management measures like special lane marking. They
are fast and efficient for providing access to suburbs where the municipality
has not yet provided proper roads. They are likely to become a major mode
of transport in lower-middle-income cities. The shift from gasoline to
electricity or fuel cells would eventually solve the noise, pollution, and
global warming problems that these vehicles contribute to.
• Collective taxis and rickshaws. They usually are a major source of
pollution and congestion. They provide route flexibility and are often the
only means of transport affordable to lower income workers, but they are
difficult to manage, their drivers often compete violently for the same
routes, and the municipalities are usually more interested in suppressing
these vehicles than in managing them efficiently. They have the advantage
of adapting rapidly to changing demand in newly developed areas.
• City buses. They use scarce road space efficiently, have flexible routes,
and are efficient for short distances. However, they are too slow for long
distances in large cities, because they have to stop too often, and they are
energy inefficient because of the low load factors outside peak hours. They
are inefficient for suburb-to-suburb routes.
• Bus rapid transit (BRT). These systems are higher capacity than buses, but
too slow for large cities and long commuting distances. They are not easily
adaptable to changing routes, because they require the use of already
existing wide right-of-ways. They use too much real estate per passenger
outside peak hours. BRTs considerably slow down freight and other traffic
because of the dedicated lanes they occupy. And they are not useful for low￾volume suburb-to-suburb trips.
• Subways and suburban rail. These systems do not contribute to the
pollution of cities. Their contribution to GHG emissions depends on the
electrical grid efficiency. They are space efficient in the core of dense cities
like New York, London, and Seoul. They are efficient modes of transport
for trips from suburb to core city but are subject to heavy congestion in very
dense cities like Beijing or Shanghai. They are inefficient for suburb-to-suburb commuter trips. High capital costs limit their extension in low￾income cities.
Expanding Current Urban Transport Modes into Ever-Larger Cities
Will Not Work
Currently, commuters choose between some mode of public transport and
individual vehicles. Many public transport users use two modes, rail and
feeder buses, resulting in long commutes because of the long transfer times
between modes. Few commuters combine cars and public transport because
of the high cost or unavailability of parking around stations. Most
metropolitan transport policies consist of trying to increase the number of
public transport commuters and decrease the number of car commuters,
even in cities where public transport is heavily congested, as in Mumbai.
However, in most cities, public transport users’ travel times are always
longer than that of car users. It seems that the purpose of many public￾transport-focused policies is not to decrease overall travel time but to
decrease car travel time for those who can still afford it, as observed by
David Levinson in his article aptly titled “Who Benefits from Other
People’s Transit Use?” 31
The objective of an urban transport policy should be to increase for
everybody the number of jobs and amenities accessible in less than 1 hour,
not to decrease travel time for those who already have the shortest travel
times (car users). The new technologies that have emerged in the past 20
years should allow radical changes in urban transport modes, which have
not changed in the previous 100 years! Tentatively, let us now explore (1)
the changing special structure of large cities, (2) how transport must adapt,
and (3) the role of new demand-driven technologies in driving change.
The Spatial Structures of Large Metropolitan Areas Are Changing
The spatial structures of cities are changing in most of the world. Large
lower-density suburbs are developing around the traditional urban core and
CBDs. In Asia, where urbanization is still low compared to the rest of the
world (except Africa), we are seeing the emergence of large urban clusters
like Delhi, Mumbai, Beijing-Tianjin, Shanghai-Suzhou, the Pearl River
Delta, and Seoul-Incheon.
These cities of more than 20 million people are evolving into much larger
clusters with populations expected to exceed 30 million people by 2020.The spatial structures of these cities are demand driven and reflect the
modernization of their economies, wherein large supply chains of services
and manufacturing have different spatial requirements than the ones
encountered in the traditional monocentric city of the past.
As these cities develop different spatial forms, current transport systems
—consisting of mass public transport, collective taxis, and individual
transport—are becoming inefficient. Transport inefficiency results in the
fragmentation of potentially large productive labor markets into smaller,
less efficient ones. In addition, transport inefficiency results in increased
congestion, pollution, and high GHG emissions.
Transport Systems Have to Adapt to Constantly Evolving City
Structures
Alarmed by the poor performance of current urban transport modes,
municipalities and planners often try to contain urban expansion in a more
compact form that they feel would be easier to serve with traditional public
transport modes: public mass transport and city buses. Policies constraining
the emerging demand for land required by the new economy result in
extremely high land prices and, in many cases, informal developments not
served by adequate infrastructure expansion—as is the case in Mexico City,
for instance. Advocates of compact cities often ignore the fact that the
compact part of their city is already extremely congested and that
governments are unable to provide the public transport line intensity that
would prevent congestion for commuters using public transport as well as
individual cars. The example of the congestion in Beijing’s new subway
lines (see figure 5.10) discussed above is a good illustration of this issue.
Municipalities and planners should face the reality of changing urban
land use required by the new economy. Instead of fighting the expansion of
cities, which is largely demand driven, to preserve an obsolete and
congested type of land use, planners should try to create new transport
systems that could serve both the traditional high-density CBDs and the
more recent dispersed forms of urban clusters. The schematic representation
shown in figure 5.25 illustrates the changes in spatial structures occurring in
many large cities and the trip patterns that they generate. The left schematic
in figure 5.25 is representative of cities like New York or London, where
already more than 70 percent of commuting trips are from suburbs to
suburbs. The right schematic in the figure represents the emergingstructures of megacities like Delhi, Beijing, or Shanghai, where commuting
and freight trips suburb-to-suburb are becoming more numerous and are
evolving into even more complex routes. The current urban transport
systems in these cities, consisting largely of radio-concentric public
transport lines fed by city buses and complemented by cars and collective
taxis or rickshaws, are ill adapted to serve the complex urban shapes shown
on the right in figure 5.25.
Figure 5.25
Urban trip patterns in a typical metropolitan area compared to that of an urban cluster.
Emerging Demand-Driven Technology Could Allow Labor Markets to
Function in Large Clusters
How should transport systems adapt to new urban forms? The emergence of
large urban clusters expanding to distances of about 100 kilometers across
and including high-density cores surrounded by low-density suburbs where
jobs are mixed with residential areas suggests that we will see major
changes in urban transport modes. Emerging technological changes would
facilitate this transition.
First, cars will have to become more compact to use less road space and
less energy, making them look more like a hybrid between cars and
motorcycles. Examples of such vehicles already exist and are being
manufactured, for instance, the Toyota i-Road.
Second, individual compact vehicles should become available at subway
or suburban rail stations on a rental or share basis. This is already
happening—the Toyota i-Road is available at some Tokyo suburban stations
and at the Grenoble (France) main railway station. Such vehicles will allow
commuters to combine the convenience of individual vehicles with thespeed of suburban rails on longer distances for large intra-metropolitan
trips.
Third, subway and suburban rails should have fewer stations and run at
higher speeds to allow commuters to cross an entire urban cluster in less
than 1 hour. That would require rail speed of about 150 km/h. The
catchment area of stations would be increased to more than 200 square
kilometers because of the availability of individual vehicles at stations
(compared to the current 2 square kilometers limited by the 800 meter
walking distance from stations). Figure 5.26 and table 5.6 compare the
catchment area of a traditional subway with stations spaced 1 kilometer
apart to that of a suburban rail system with stations spaced every 10
kilometers but accessible by small individual vehicles (ranging from
bicycles to the Toyota i-Road) with a range of 8 kilometers. Using the speed
assumptions shown in the table, a commuter could travel a distance of up to
66 kilometers in less than 1 hour and have access to a destination area of
more than 600 square kilometers.
Figure 5.26
Comparison of the catchment area of traditional subways and that of high-speed suburban rail
associated with individual urban vehicles.
Table 5.6
Comparison of distances between stations, speeds, and catchment areas for traditional subways and
high-speed suburban rail.
Traditional subway and
walking
Fast suburban train and individual
vehicle
Suburban rail line length (kilometers) 50 50
Average train speed (km/h) 32 110
Distance between stations (km) 1 10Number of stations 50 5
Radius distance to station (km) walk
0.8
vehicle 8
Speed from trip origin to station
(km/h)
5 35
Catchment area of one station
(square kilometers)
.01
201.06
Total catchment area of the line
(square kilometers)
53.79 623.76
Train riding time for 50 kilometers
(minutes)
94 27
Walking or individual vehicle riding
time (minutes)
19.2
27
Total trip time (minutes) 113 55
Total trip length (kilometers)
51.6 66.0
Total trip time (minutes) 113 55
Average speed (km/h) 27 72
Fourth, self-driving minibuses should be able to pick a few passengers
running on the same route and drive them to individual final destinations
without having to stop on the way to pick up and drop off other passengers.
Local governments should not favor a specific mode of transport but
should favor and facilitate a large mix of transport modes, including
combining fast heavy rail with individual vehicles for the same trip.Subway and fast suburban train stations should be designed with large areas
for loading and unloading passengers for self-driving vehicles ( figure
5.27).
Figure 5.27
The Toyota i-Road personal mobility vehicle (left) and the Beijing three-wheeler (right) already
provide on-demand trips from station to door and from door to station.
Calls to Action for the Future of Mobility
1.  Maintaining mobility is an essential task for municipalities and urban
planners. This is best done by allowing multimode transport systems to
reflect consumer demand. Commuters should be able to choose among the
various transport modes available those that best fit their commuting needs.
2.  Planners should not select densities and urban spatial structures in order
to best fit an existing preselected transport system. Instead, new transport
systems should adapt to evolving spatial structures.
3.  Because pricing of pollution and GHG emissions are currently difficult
to apply without large transactions costs, governments should set pollution
and GHG emission targets as a substitute for price (until technology is
available to directly charge for pollution emitted and GHGs released).
4.  The pricing of road space is also an important metropolitan authority
task. Flat tolls on roads should be progressively replaced by congestion
pricing that constantly adjusts depending on time and location to maintain a
set speed on specific road segments. As currently practiced in Singapore,
the target set speed is different in the CBD and in the suburban arterial
roads. The technology to do this is currently available.
5.  Eventually, individual commuter cars will have to be redesigned to
reduce their road footprint and their weight. Emerging new personal
mobility vehicles, such as the Toyota i-Road, are examples of a possible
replacement for the traditional car that would provide more mobility for less
road space and less energy, pollution, and GHG emissions per kilometer.6.  Finally, the possibility of sharing small self-driving vehicles on demand
could provide a very efficient alternative in the future for many suburb-to￾suburb trips. Self-driving cars would have three important advantages over
traditional cars. First, they would save street space by being able to run
closer to one another without requiring the 2-second reaction time that
human drivers require; that would save about 65 percent of road space at
speeds of about 60 km/h. Second, they would dramatically reduce accidents
and, therefore, the unpredictability of road commuting times. Third, they
would not require large parking spaces in the center of cities where real
estate is the most expensive.
Many new technologies are emerging that will have a large impact on
urban transport. These technologies could reduce pollution to near zero,
greatly reduce urban transportation’s contribution to global warming,
prevent most transportation accidents, and increase the capacity of existing
urban roads without creating congestion.
A little more than 100 years ago, the horse as the only nonpedestrian
means of urban transport was replaced by mechanical vehicles. These
vehicles completely changed cities by allowing them to expand without
densifying into Dickensian slums, while enlarging the potential labor
markets that greatly increased the productivity and welfare of urban
dwellers. Since that time, the automobile, buses, and subways as major
modes of urban transport have not changed much. We might now be on the
verge of an urban transport revolution that could be comparable to the
replacement of animal traction by mechanical traction and could also
greatly enhance the welfare of the very large part of humanity that is likely
to live in cities toward the end of the twenty-first century.
The emergence of small footprint, on-demand, shared vehicles (very
different from large buses running on fixed schedules and routes) will
change the way urban transport is organized. The pattern of roads and
arterials may also change to adapt to these new modes of urban transport.
Instead of concentric traffic on a few high-capacity highways or arterials,
numerous smaller low-capacity roads would allow the flexibility required
by trips from dispersed origins to dispersed destinations.
New types of specialized urban vehicles—collective or individual, shared
or not shared, self-driving or with drivers—are likely to multiply in the
future. The speed, street footprint, and size of these vehicles will be adapted
to the types of trips and commuters that they serve. The types of urbanvehicles will therefore be different in very large, dense cities like New York
and Mumbai from much smaller cities like Amsterdam and Key West.
Notes
1. Luis Bettencourt and Geoffrey West, “A Unified Theory of Urban Living,” Nature 467 (2010):
912–913; and Luıs Bettencourt, Horacio Samaniego, and Hyejin Youn, “Professional Diversity and
the Productivity of Cities,” Scientific Reports,” June 2014, and http://newsoffice.mit.edu/2013/why￾innovation-thrives-in-cities-0604.
2. A current New York City zoning regulations called “Joint Live-Work Quarters for Artists” or
JLWQA is trying to match artists’ residence, workshops, and art galleries within a few blocks of Soho
by obliging developers to offer a quota of loft-apartments with reduced rents for city-approved
artists!
3. Steven E. Polzin and Alan E. Pisarski, “Commuting in America 2013: The National Report on
Commuting Patterns and Trends,” American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials, Washington, DC, 2013.
4. Shlomo Angel, Jason Parent, Daniel L. Civco, and Alejandro M. Blei, “The Persistent Decline in
Urban Densities: Global and Historical Evidence of Sprawl,” Working Paper WP10SA1, Lincoln
Institute, Cambridge, MA, 2011.
5. Cornelis Van Tilburg, Traffic and Congestion in the Roman Empire (Abingdon and New York:
Routledge, 2007).
6. Lee Chang-Moo and Kun-Hyuck Ahn, “Five New Towns in the Seoul Metropolitan Area and Their
Attractions in Non-working Trips: Implications for Self-Containment of New Towns,” Habitat
International 29 (2005): 647–666.
7. G. Giuliano, “Is Jobs-Housing Balance a Transportation Issue?” Transportation Research Record:
Journal of the Transportation Research Board 1305 (1991): 305–312, quote on 311.
8. Francisco Gallego, Juan-Pablo Montero, and Christian Salas, “The Effect of Transport Policies on
Car Use: Theory and Evidence from Latin American Cities,” Working Paper 407, Pontificia
Universidad Catolica de Chile, Instituto de Economia, Santiago, December 2011.
9. David Schrank, Bill Eisele, Tim Lomax, Jim Bak, 2015 Urban Mobility Scorecard (College
Station: Texas A&M Transportation Institute and INRIX, Inc., 2015).
10. GTFS is a data standard format that allows developers to build apps providing accessibility data
to transit users but also to business and real estate professionals. The GTFS formatted data can be
used with disaggregated transport data to provide alternative travel times and accessibility between
two urban locations.
11. Tatiana Peralta Quirós and Shomik Raj Mehndiratta, “Accessibility Analysis of Growth Patterns
in Buenos Aires, Density, Employment and Spatial Form,” World Bank Transportation Research
Board, Washington, DC, 2015.
12. This interactive map of Buenos Aires can be accessed at http://wb-ba-analyst.dev.conveyal.com/.
The interactive map allows one to test the job accessibility from any location in Buenos Aires using
four different modes of transport: walking, bicycling, transit, and individual cars. The map also
provides the breakdown among types of jobs: commerce, services, manufacturing, etc.13. In France, the Industrial Revolution started around 1815, roughly after the end of the Napoleonic
wars, much later than in England, where it started around 1760.
14. Described in Presidency’s National Planning Commission, “National Development Plan Vision
2030,” Johannesburg, South Africa, November 2011.
15. Robert Cervero, The Transit Metropolis; A Global Inquiry (Washington, DC: Island Press, 1998),
see pages 43, 327, and 435.
16. Free Flow Speeds calculated by Texas A&M Transportation Institute are derived from speed of
vehicles traveling at night found in the INRIX speed database. These are observed speeds influenced
by regulatory speed limits but also traffic lights coordination and other physical features of the street
network.
17. Samuel Staley and Adrian Moore, Mobility First: A New Vision for Transportation in a Globally
Competitive Twenty-First Century (Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 2009).
18. Seven cities were in Western Europe, and six were on the American continents (five US cities
plus Buenos Aires).
19. Andrew Haughwout, James Orr, and David Bedoll, “The Price of Land in the New York
Metropolitan Area,” Current Issues 14, no. 3 (April/May 2008), Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
20. Most countries’ driving codes recommend a 3-second tip-to-tail interval between vehicles to
allow drivers to react to vehicles in front of them slowing down drastically. Observation shows that
most city drivers use a lower interval of about 2 seconds, thus reducing the area per vehicle at a given
speed but increasing the risk of collision and therefore further congestion.
21. The inside area of a usable for passengers of city bus 12 meters long is about 19 square meters.
When at full capacity, with 86 passengers, the inside density is 4.5 passengers per square meter, not
quite as comfortable as riding in a car, but common at rush hour. It seems that in urban buses and
subways, the absolute maximum capacity used by transport companies is 6.5 passengers per square
meter of internal vehicle space. However, these numbers do not appear in congestion statistics.
22. See http://www.geo.sunysb.edu/bicycle-muenster/.
23. See http://www.toyota￾global.com/innovation/smart_mobility_society/next_generation_urban_traffic_systems/.
24. US Census, American Community Survey 2010.
25. Robert Cervero, “Bus Rapid Transit (BRT): An Efficient and Competitive Mode of Public
Transport,” Working Paper 2013-01, Berkeley Institute of Urban and Regional Development,
Berkeley, CA, August 2013.
26. Leroy W. Demery, Jr. “Bus Rapid Transit in Curitiba, Brazil—An Information Summary,” public
transit.us Special Report 1, Public Transit US, Vallejo, CA, December 11, 2004.
27. http://www3.epa.gov/airquality/peg_caa/carstrucks.html.
28. The first Toyota Mirai fuel cell electric vehicles started operating commercially in the United
Kingdom in the fall of 2015.
29. CO2-e account for the non-CO2 GHG, such as methane, perfluorocarbons, and nitrous oxide, that
a vehicle might emit together with CO2. For each GHG, the mass of CO2 that will create the same
global warming effect is calculated and added to the total.
30. Leon Arundell, “Estimating Greenhouse Emissions from Australian Capital Territory Travel
Modes,” Working Paper 1.5, Leon Arundell, independent analyst publication, Canberra, 2012.31. David Levinson, “Who Benefits from Other People’s Transit Use?” New Geography, May 24,
2015, http://www.newgeography.com/content/004928-who-benefits-from-other-peoples-transit-use.6 Affordability: Household Incomes, Regulations, and Land
Supply
“The Need to Do Something” Affordable Housing
A major impediment to a more efficient spatial allocation of labor is housing supply constraints.
These constraints limit the number of US workers who have access to the most productive of
American cities. In general equilibrium, this lowers income and welfare of all US workers.
—Chang-Tai Hsieh and Enrico Moretti 1
We have seen that prosperous cities depend on well-functioning labor
markets. Hsieh and Moretti, two economists, found that the high price of
housing in some otherwise extremely successful US cities has a ripple
effect, distorting the spatial allocation of labor nationwide. They calculate
the cost of this misallocation to about 9.4 percent of US GDP. Housing
affordability is therefore not a trivial issue. Hsieh and Moretti argue that
regulatory housing supply constraints contribute significantly to the high
price of housing, a position with which I concur and support in this chapter.
Some affordability problems are due to poverty, but in most cases, they are
created or exacerbated by human-made constraints on the supply of land
and floor space.Household Dilemma
For labor markets to work, households and firms must find an affordable
space in which to locate. When selecting this affordable space, they must
make trade-offs between rent, floor area, and location. Their final location
choice will reflect the trade-off that maximizes their welfare. Location is of
course extremely important, as the location provides access to the rest of the
city and its labor market. The well-worn real estate developers’ cliché
“location, location, location” reflects a reality and a wisdom that many
government housing affordability experts tend to forget. The floor area,
location, and price per square meter of a household’s housing unit constitute
its current level of “affordability” for each potential occupant. This
currently occupied “affordable housing unit” represents each household’s
best possible choice among all other housing choices offered by the market.
However, even in a free market, lower-income households’ optimal
housing options often do not meet socially acceptable standards (e.g.,
access to water and sanitation, floor space standards per person, or distance
to labor markets). In low- and moderate-income countries, these homes are
often poorly constructed and are considered unacceptable by standard
metrics. In high-income countries, the housing quality is usually socially
acceptable; however, other metrics may be unacceptable, such as floor
space per person relative to their neighbors, paying more than 30 percent of
income in rent, or driving more than an hour to work. Some households
therefore may consume deficient housing (e.g., in quality, price, or distance
to labor markets) when they cannot afford the high cost of land and
construction in a large city.Government Response
The low housing standards and the high rent that affect the lower-income
population will legitimately soon attract public attention. Social pressure
will eventually force governments to “do something about housing.”
This need to “do something” pushes governments to formulate new
housing policies that will provide socially acceptable housing standards at
an affordable price for all. Angus Deaton, in his book, The Great Escape,
writes “the need to do something tends to trump the need to understand
what needs to be done. And without data, anyone who does anything is free
to claim success.” 2 This perfectly characterizes the design of many housing
policies.
Unfortunately, governments often exacerbate the high cost of housing in
a city by limiting the supply of housing through regulations and
underinvesting in urban expansion.
In their search for solutions, urban managers often ignore that
households’ housing choices are driven by a combination of three attributes:
floor area, location, and price per square meter. Because floor area and
construction quality are the most visible of the three attributes, planners
tend to concentrate on improving the design and increasing the area of
dwellings when drafting a housing policy. They tend to ignore housing
location and its corollary access to a city’s labor market.
For example, government affordable housing programs are never
designed to entice households who live in a different city or rural area to
move to the city providing the housing. On the contrary, social housing
programs usually specify that potential beneficiaries must have resided in
the city several years to qualify for government help. This resident-only
policy is meant to prevent an immigration stampede to the city, but it misses
an important point: unacceptably long commutes to labor markets by
workers.
When low housing standards are largely due to poverty, ignoring location
to provide larger homes might devastate the very population the policy is
supposed to help. Some examples in this chapter illustrate this point.
In this chapter, I show how improving low-income households’ housing
standards requires identifying the relative role of both factors—poverty and
inflated housing prices—caused by supply constraints. I discuss housing
affordability policies in several cities and show how these policies haveimpacted four key attributes: floor area, land area, price of land, and price
of construction per square meter (equation 6.1).
Equation 6.1 Price of housing (P) for households
where P is the price of housing.
The rent paid will also be related to the four variables on the right side of equation 6.1.
The price of land depends on location; a location with high job accessibility or close to
high-quality amenities will correspond to a high price of land. In general, a highly desirable
location has a high land price.
The cost of construction depends on the quality of construction. It is possible to build an
informal shelter made of lumber, plastic, and corrugated iron roof for as little as US$25 per
square meter; while the price of construction for an apartment fully equipped with kitchen and
bathrooms may cost several thousand US dollars per square meter (about US$2,500 per square
meter in New York in 2013 for residential buildings three to seven stories tall).
Therefore, households searching for housing at a given price have to make a trade-off
between location, land and floor area, and quality of construction. At times, I will use location
as a proxy for the price of land, and quality of construction as a proxy for price of
construction.
As we will see, the homes that families end up occupying are starkly
different from those they would have chosen if their incomes had simply
increased by the implicit subsidy they receive. I will judge the merits of
various housing policies by comparing the homes they end up with to those
they would have chosen with an income subsidy.
For developers, the cost components of producing housing units are much
more complex. In addition to the physical cost described above, developers’
cost will include financial costs, overhead, management, and design costs.
The ratio between the land and floor area will be usually constrained by
regulations. The cost of construction will also depend in part on regulations.
However, for households, the price of land and the price of construction
aggregate all these cost components.Defining and Measuring Housing Affordability
Housing Affordability Is Different from the Affordability of Any Other
Consumer Product
“Affordable” means something different when it is used for housing instead
of for other objects, say, a cell phone or a car. A person who cannot afford a
cell phone or a car does not have one. However, when housing is said to be
unaffordable for households below an income of X, it does not mean that all
households with incomes less than X are homeless. It only means that these
households are living in housing units that are unacceptable in quality or
floor area, or that these households are spending an unacceptably high
proportion of their incomes on rent or mortgage payments.
Housing affordability therefore determines whether housing is “socially
acceptable,” not whether a household occupies a housing unit. When we
read that housing is unaffordable to households with incomes below X, it
means that the trade-offs necessary for these households to rent their current
dwelling units are inadequate in terms of rent paid as a portion of income,
floor area, quality of construction, or location.
The socially accepted minimum housing standards in each city do not
correspond to a scientifically accepted universal norm. In this it differs from
many other norms. For instance, minimum nutritional daily intake is a
universal norm defined for all human beings. Most air pollution norms are
established by the World Health Organization and are accepted as universal.
By contrast, minimum acceptable housing standards are related to the
prevailing standards in the city where they are applied. The socially
acceptable minimum housing standards in Stockholm are very different
from the standards in Dhaka. This is due to differences in climate and
culture in addition to differences in household incomes between the two
cities.
While many households in Dhaka might happily live in homes meeting
the minimum norms prevalent in Stockholm, there is no evidence that
Dhaka’s households suffer irreparable damage by living in houses of
significantly lower standards. Minimum housing standards are thus always
arbitrary and contextual. These standards might be useful as a benchmark,
but when they become enshrined in laws and regulations, they can do great
harm to the very population they are supposed to help, as we will see below.In many countries, such as South Africa, the government identifies a set
of minimum housing standards that define a national norm for minimum
housing. Setting minimum housing standards is a political act. Governments
tend to select high standards as an optimistic signal for the future of the city,
the sort of optimistic projection that politicians are all obliged to make.
Statisticians then compare the standards of the existing urban housing stock
(obtained through surveys and the census) with the national minimum
housing norm established by the government. The number of existing
dwelling units below the national housing norm is said to constitute a
housing “backlog.” To eliminate this backlog, the government commits
itself to building enough housing units each year to clear the backlog. For
example, South Africa created new housing stock for 38 percent of its
citizens over a period of 17 years—a feat that we will investigate as a case
study later in the chapter. Note that the housing program was defined only
through two attributes: price and a physical housing standard. Location is
absent from the policy, leading the South African government to build some
homes as far as 30 kilometers from a city center. In any case, it would be
difficult to define a location standard at the national scale. South Africa’s
housing program provides a warning of the adverse consequences of
ignoring location when defining housing affordability.
How governments define housing affordability is therefore very
important when developing housing programs to help the poor. Government
bureaucrats tend to make different trade-offs than the households would
make for themselves when choosing between price, location, area, and
quality. If the trade-offs made by government differ a lot from those that
households would make, then the housing program will fail despite the
money invested and the good intentions of the expert designers. Urban
planners do not have enough information to enable them to select an
optimum combination of rent, floor area, and location for each household
and firm. The choice of the quantity of land and floor area consumed in a
specific location is therefore better left to the end user when possible.
I have seen many governments implement “slum relocation” programs
that send households from slums to high-quality and subsidized formal
housing units in a remote location. To the dismay of government officials,
the former slum dwellers often abandon their formal housing to return to a
slum, where building quality is lower but access to the job market is better.
This return is often attributed to slum dwellers’ lack of judgment. This isnot the case. The residents return because they prefer a well-located home
of lower quality than a poorly located home of higher quality. Policymakers
had failed to choose the best trade-off between rent, location, and housing
standards.
This is not meant to imply that deficiencies in housing quality are a
government invention. Many low-income households aspire to much higher
quality housing than what they can currently afford. In many cases, the
insalubrity or bad location of their dwelling slows low-income households’
integration into the more productive part of the urban economy.
“Affordable housing” policy aims to increase low-income households’
housing consumption until they have reached a socially acceptable level. To
design this policy, we need to establish and quantify a fact base: first, the
minimum socially acceptable housing consumption level, and second, the
number of households who consume less housing than this level. Once
these two numbers are identified, municipal governments can have an
informed discussion about what they can do to address the affordability
issue. Should they build affordable housing at or above the minimum
standard and then sell or rent this housing below market prices? Open up
new areas for urban development to increase housing supply and lower
market prices? Revise regulations that restrict developers from providing
housing that meets the minimally acceptable standard? Expand the financial
sector to provide mortgages to lower-income households? Or directly
subsidize households’ incomes so that these households can afford a higher￾quality dwelling in a location of their choice?
Almost always, affordability issues require several simultaneous actions
involving investment programs and regulatory reforms. No silver bullet can
easily solve housing affordability. However, governments cannot design a
credible policy without first establishing a clear fact base. Therefore, before
discussing specific policies in detail, let us first discuss the various methods
of measuring the affordability threshold and the number of households that
fall below it. Fuzzy data on household incomes and current housing
standards is a significant impediment to creating sensible affordable
housing policies.
A Simple Affordability Index: The Price/Income RatioThe price/income ratio (PIR) measures housing affordability in a city by
comparing the median price of a dwelling with the median household
income. This simple definition makes it is easy to compare the price of
housing in different cities that have different income levels. However, this
index does not say anything about how much housing a household gets for
the median price or where this dwelling is located. The PIR also applies
only to sales and not to rentals, although a rent/income ratio could be
developed using the median income.
The Demographia International Housing Affordability Survey,
3
issued
every year since 2004, compares the PIRs for some 367 metropolitan
markets in nine developed countries. Among these cities, 87 metropolitan
areas have a population larger than 1 million. Because the index
consistently uses the same methodology, it provides a valuable tool for
comparing PIRs between cities as well for watching how these ratios evolve
over time.
Let us look at the PIR for 30 cities in the year 2015 ( figure 6.1). The
cities selected are representative of the variations of PIR shown in the entire
Demographia survey. Among the selected cities, Atlanta has the lowest PIR
(3.1), while Sydney has the highest (12.2). Why are there such large
variations in affordability? We notice that many of the cities—San
Francisco, Auckland, Vancouver, and Sydney—with high PIRs have a
difficult (though beautiful) topography. The mix of water and land makes
for attractive cities but restricts the land available for development. This
topographical constraint on the land supply is likely to have an impact on
land prices and therefore on housing prices. But while topography certainly
explains some of the variations in PIR, it is not the entire story. Cities like
Chicago, Washington, DC, and Tokyo-Yokohama also have important water
areas close to their CBDs but have successfully managed these issues.
Those cities have PIRs that are less than Sydney’s. We will see below that
land use policy and regulations constraining city expansion are often largely
to blame for high PIRs.Figure 6.1
Price/income ratios for a selection of world cities, 2015. Source: Wendell Cox and Hugh Pavletich,
12th Annual Housing Affordability Survey (Belleville, IL: Demographia, 2016).
What Does It Mean for a City to Have a PIR above 8?
Intuitively, we feel that households’ welfare should be higher in a city with
a low PIR than in a city with a higher one. If a smaller proportion of income
is spent on housing, more can be spent on other items. However, a very low
PIR might indicate economic stress. In the Demographia survey for 2015,
Detroit’s PIR is a low 2.8. Some Russian cities with heavy population
losses have home prices close to zero in the absence of demand. Obviously,
the PIR needs interpretation. While low housing cost compared to income is
generally a good thing, it might also indicate other problems. Given the
city’s economic woes, it would be absurd to use Detroit’s PIR to justify
using that city as a model of good housing policy and affordable housing.
What PIR value would indicate an affordable housing stock?
Demographia suggests that housing is affordable in cities where the PIR is
equal to or below 3. None of the cities shown in figure 6.1 qualifies,
although Atlanta, with a PIR of 3.1, comes close. Demographia’s complete
degree of affordability categories are as follows:Category PIR valueAffordable ≤ 3Moderately unaffordable 3.1–4.0Seriously unaffordable 4.1–5.0Severely unaffordable ≥ 5.1
Households usually borrow money to buy their first dwelling, so let us
calculate the mortgage payments associated with various PIR values. Figure
6.2 relates the cost of housing as a percentage of yearly income for different
values of PIR under three possible borrowing interest rates: 5, 7, and 9
percent (for 25 years with a down payment of 20 percent). Mortgage
lenders usually provide loans to households only when their monthly
payment does not exceed 30 percent of their income; the horizontal dashed
line in figure 6.2 represents this affordability threshold. When the interest
rate is 5 percent, only in Atlanta, Houston, Tokyo, and Singapore will the
median household be able to obtain a mortgage for the median priced home.
With a higher interest rate of 9 percent, only in Atlanta and Houston will
households with median incomes be able to obtain a mortgage for the
median priced home. What would happen to households in the other cities,
where the high PIR implies that households at the median income would
not be able to afford a mortgage to buy a median priced dwelling?
Figure 6.2
Price/income ratios and affordability for 10 selected cities. Source: Wendell Cox and Hugh Pavletich,
12th Annual Housing Affordability Survey (Belleville, IL: Demographia, 2016).
Some households might have bought a dwelling some years before when
the PIR was still in the affordable range. These households then live in a
house that they could not afford to buy now with their income alone, but the
increase in PIR means that their capital assets have increased. They could,
however, afford to buy a new house by selling their current house, even
though the PIR shows that a new house would be unaffordable. Thesehouseholds are therefore probably quite satisfied by the increasing PIR
value, even if it shows that housing is unaffordable to them. This fact may
explain the regulatory policy of some cities that seems intended to
constantly increase housing prices by restricting new supply.
However, households that have not benefited from previous PIR
increases but live in a high-PIR city cannot afford to buy a new dwelling.
Some might decide to move to a different city with a lower PIR, but
changing cities has social and financial costs and risks. More likely, the new
household will try to find an alternative to buying a home. For instance,
newly formed households might rent rather than buy a dwelling. Often, in
high-PIR cities, monthly rents are lower than mortgage payments for
equivalent dwellings. I have compared the PIR of new owners to the
percentage of income spent on rent in a sample of 10 US cities ( figure 6.3).
This allows us to understand the relationship between buyers’ and renters’
incomes devoted to housing—both data sources are reported by the
government and remain constant even as interest rates change. While the
percentage of income spent on rent tends to increase in cities with higher
PIRs, renting tends to be more affordable than buying dwellings. San
Francisco is an outlier with a very high PIR of 9.4 but rents at a rather
affordable 32 percent of renter income. 4
Figure 6.3
Percentage of renting households’ income spent on rent and the price/income ratios of homeowners
for 10 selected cities, 2015. Sources: Price/income ratio data: Wendell Cox and Hugh Pavletich, 12th
Annual Housing Affordability Survey (Belleville, IL: Demographia, 2016); Rental household income
data: American Community Survey, Furman Center, New York University, New York.
However, given market equilibrium, the number of dwelling units
available for rent might decrease when the PIR is high, as landlords wouldhave an incentive to sell due to high home prices and low rents.
Some households might choose to leave the city and look for a city with a
lower PIR, even if this means having a lower income. But the majority of
households will have two options. Either adjust their living standards and
opt for a lower standard of housing, or spend a much higher part of their
incomes on housing. When households opt for lower-quality housing to
continue living in a city, this choice has a cascade effect, where people are
consuming lower-quality housing and outbidding those at lower-income
tiers than themselves. This leaves the lowest-income households unable to
afford existing units, with options to leave the city or accept much smaller
units (e.g., by subdividing and sharing existing spaces). In Auckland, New
Zealand, for example with a PIR of 9.7 in 2015, it is reported that some
households are living in garages, trailers, or their parents’ homes. These are
households near the bottom of the income scale that cannot outbid any
lower-income group. In Mumbai, some median-income households, while
their incomes have been rising, have been forced to move into slums as the
PIR has increased faster than their incomes have.
The PIR Is a Useful Index for Identifying an Affordability Problem, but
It Is Too Crude to Identify a Policy Solution
The PIR is a useful and easily understood index to identify an affordability
problem in high-income cities. However, it only relates the median income
to the median home price. It has nothing to say about the quality or location
of the house at the median price. While the PIR is simple and
uncontroversial, collecting income and home price data can be difficult in
countries that do not have a systematic sale-registration system and in cities
that have a large informal sector. This is why Demographia does not yet
cover developing countries. Finding the median housing price implies that
all transactions are equally well known. In many developing countries, it is
easier to find prices at the high end of the housing market than at the low
end. It is also easier to find prices of new housing than that of existing
houses. In many cities, the data required to calculate a credible PIR do not
exist.
How Do Households Adjust to Unaffordable PIRs?
In cities with a high PIR, housing is assumed to be unaffordable not only to
the poor but to the middle class. However, we do not see people leavinghigh-PIR cities en masse for more affordable cities. It seems that in cities
like Sydney, Vancouver, or San Francisco, life goes on as usual despite a
very high PIR. The same could be said of cities for which no PIR can be
calculated but that have notoriously high real estate prices, such as Mumbai,
Lagos, and Jakarta. Obviously, the vast majority of households adapt to
“unaffordable” prices by choosing not to leave their current city. We even
see that the population keeps growing in cities with unaffordable prices
because of migration and the formation of new households.
But high real estate prices are anything but benign. This apparent
business-as-usual response to rapidly increasing housing prices might hide a
deteriorating quality of urban life for all but the most affluent residents.
Households adapt to housing prices that rise faster than their incomes by
consuming less floor space and spending a higher share of their incomes on
rent or by commuting longer distances.
High prices or absolute poverty force poorer households to consume less
housing than the minimum socially acceptable level set by regulations, as
mentioned above. Falling below this minimum will further decrease the
housing standards of the poor. Consuming less housing than what is
prescribed as socially acceptable often prevents their housing from attaining
legal status and permanence. This will compound their misery through a
vicious cycle as poverty that causes low housing consumption which causes
more poverty.
In middle- and high-income countries, many less-affluent people can
respond to high prices by subdividing existing dwellings into smaller units,
formally or informally. In other cases, new households cohabit with their
parents or other relatives much longer than either party might wish. In
either case, high housing costs result in lower housing consumption. Two
case studies discussed below illustrate these forced adjustments: the
subdivision of apartments in Beijing suburbs and the cohabitation of adult
children with their parents in Europe.
Finally, sometimes cities revise their socially acceptable minimum
housing consumption to reflect the demand from a changing socioeconomic
group. This occurred in 2016 in New York, where the existence of many
single-person households convinced city regulators to lower the minimum
housing standard. This case is also discussed more in detail below, as it
illustrates the futility of setting minimum socially acceptable standards in
the first place.Informal Subdivision of Apartments in China
Chinese cities have very few identifiable informal settlements. However,
the housing consumption of low-income households is often difficult to
measure. Many of the new apartments built on the periphery of Chinese
cities are too large to be affordable for low-income households. As a result,
low-income residents afford housing by renting a room in a subdivided
apartment. The street poster appearing in 2013 in a northern suburb of
Beijing ( figure 6.4) advertises an 18 square meter room to be rented in a
larger apartment with a kitchen and bathroom to be shared by other tenants.
Fortunately, Beijing’s government tolerates this practice, although some
apartment owners in the same condominium complex protest the practice
and routinely try to convince the municipality to ban it. From a housing
supply point of view, this adjustment is desirable, because it transforms the
built housing stock into housing that is affordable. Once a block of
apartments has been built, it is very difficult to reduce the size of units to
meet the demand for smaller units. Informally subdividing existing
apartments is the fastest way to match supply and demand. This situation
need not be permanent. Over time, the supply of newly built housing can
better match demand, and the practice of subdividing apartments will
disappear by itself.
Figure 6.4
Poster advertising a room to rent in a subdivided apartment in a suburb of Beijing, 2013.
Governments should monitor but not ban the practice of subdividing
apartments. If the practice of subdividing apartments persists over time,
regulations may be to blame. For example, an arbitrary minimum apartment
size, or a maximum number of dwellings per block, might be responsiblefor the mismatch between supply and demand. Removing these regulations,
which have no discernable benefits, would allow the housing market to
respond to changing consumer demand.
Young People Living with Their Parents
In affluent countries, assessing the impact of high price-to-income ratios on
the housing consumption of specific income groups can be difficult. A 2013
Pew Research Center survey shows the proportion of people aged 25–35
who live with their parents in European countries and the United States (
figure 6.5). This percentage varies from 1.8 percent for Denmark to 56.6
percent for the Czech Republic. Cultural factors may explain some of the
differences among countries. However, economic factors, like employment
rates and housing supply issues, also affect the rate. Whatever the reasons
for the international differences, my point is that housing consumption
adjusts when there is a discrepancy between supply and demand for
housing.
Figure 6.5
Share of young people aged 25–34 living with their parents in Europe and in the United States, 2010.
Source: Pew Research Center, Washington, DC.
Lowering “Minimum Socially Acceptable” Housing Standards: Mini￾and Micro-Apartments in New York
In New York, a 1987 city zoning regulation specified that the area of
apartments should be at least 37.2 square meters. But the supply of
apartments of this size is constrained by another zoning regulation that puts
a maximum limit on the number of dwelling units per area, thus implicitlyreducing the number of small apartments that could be built in a block,
regardless of whether there is a demand for such apartments.
However, the demand for small apartments has been increasing as the
number of people per household has decreased over the past 50 years. In
2015, the number of nonfamily households (i.e., households formed by a
single person or unrelated individuals) represented 38 percent of all
households. Recognizing this problem, in 2015, the zoning board allowed
the construction of 55 mini-apartments ranging from 24 to 33 square
meters, in a single nine-story building on the East Side of Manhattan. This
was a timid step toward using a commonsense approach to repeal minimum
socially acceptable standards.
When the 55 mini-apartments appeared on the market, there were 4,300
applicants for each apartment! This demonstrated the large demand for
small units, which is arbitrarily constrained by the regulation on minimum
apartment size. The apartment building is centrally located with excellent
access to New York’s labor market. Relaxing the minimum apartment size
gave individuals the freedom to make their own choice in the trade-off
between larger apartments in less central locations and centrally located
smaller apartments.
However, if the municipality removed the apartment minimum-size
constraint for the entire city, developers would still not build more mini￾apartments. Another regulation limiting the number of dwelling units per
block would prevent that. Limiting the number of dwelling units per block
was meant to limit residential density. But since the regulation was put in
place, residential density has fallen as the average household size has fallen.
Layers of regulations, whose original objective has often been forgotten,
prevent housing supply from matching demand. These multiple layers of
regulations must be repealed for housing supply to become responsive to
housing demand.
In New York, minimum housing regulations have evolved over centuries.
Figure 6.6 shows examples of floor plans of apartments of the smallest
acceptable size at different dates. In 1860, housing construction standards
were practically unregulated. Developers responded to housing demand
from all socioeconomic groups. The typical floor plan of a tenement (plan A
in figure 6.6), built in 1860, shows each floor has four apartments of 27.2
square meters each. Each apartment has three rooms. Only one room in
each apartment has windows. Bathrooms were shared among all buildingtenants and provided on the ground floor in the back yard. The apartments
are designed such that households could occupy only one room or several
connected rooms. At the time, households were very large, often six or
seven persons per household. The population density in tenement
neighborhoods was about 660 people per hectare in 1860. 5 The density
peaked at 1,530 persons per hectare in 1910 and fell to 390 persons per
hectare in 2010.
Figure 6.6
New York City minimum acceptable housing standards since 1860.
The minimum socially acceptable housing standard evolved over time,
and a reform movement resulted in the Tenement House Act in 1879 (plan
B in figure 6.6), which required rooms to have access to ventilation shafts.
In addition, regulations required a bathroom and toilet on every floor shared
by the tenants. The smallest apartment was 26.7 square meters.
In more recent times, these “Old Law Tenements” were renovated by
moving the interior walls and introducing a kitchen and a bathroom,
creating a studio apartment with a total area of 26.7 square meters (plan C
in figure 6.6). My wife and I lived in such a tenement with our toddler for a
year after our arrival in New York. The floor space per person for our
family was 8.9 square meters. As kitchens and bathrooms are not
considered rooms, we were occupying a dwelling with three persons perroom. We were just at the limit of the socially acceptable minimum standard
set by the state of New York, 6 which is 50 square feet per person per livable
room, as our only room had an area of 14 square meters (or 150.7 square
feet)! The UN Habitat defined overcrowding as more than three persons per
room, so we barely qualified for not transforming our tenement into a UN￾designated slum! In reality, the individual bathroom, a gas stove, and air
conditioning made our life significantly more comfortable than that of the
original tenement occupants must have been. We thoroughly enjoyed our
stay in this tenement because of its great location.
In 1987, the minimum apartment size allowed by regulations was 37.2
square meters. The plan of a studio of this size, built in 2016, is shown in
plan D in figure 6.6. Finally, the plan of one of the 55 micro-apartments of
28 square meters to be built in the middle of Manhattan mentioned above is
shown in plan E. The micro-apartments are still slightly larger than the
renovated Old Law Tenements that still form a significant part of
Manhattan and Brooklyn housing stock (I could not find the exact number
of Old Law Tenements still being used in New York City, but they are easily
identifiable on Google Earth imagery).
These examples illustrate the futility of controlling maximum densities or
minimum floor area per person by regulations. The very high densities of
the tene ments in the 1860s were not generated by design or regulations but
by the market. The tenements’ excellent locations and the tenants’ very low
incomes created the high density.
Many of these Old Law Tenements survive to this day in Manhattan. A
study by Stephen Smith and Sandip Trivedi, published in the New York
Times in 2016, 7 shows that about 40 percent of the existing buildings in
Manhattan could not be built today because of the compound effect of
overlapping regulations! It is difficult to understand the rationale for such
regulations, although practically every city in the world has similar rules.
Informal Subdivisions in New York Can Create Affordable Housing
below the Minimum Socially Acceptable Standard
Subdividing large apartments into rooms individually rented to people who
share a kitchen and bathroom is usually legal in many cities (with some
restrictions, e.g., New York limits this right to no more than three unrelated
individuals per apartment). However, subdividing apartments or houses intoindividual independent units with their own kitchen and bathroom is illegal
in most cities.
In New York, a 2008 study 8 showed that between 1990 and 2000, about
114,000 new housing units were illegally created by subdividing existing
houses and transforming basements and garages into new units. These
unauthorized dwellings accounted for half of the housing stock added in
New York in the 1990s. The dwellings represented about 4 percent of the
total housing stock, and provided shelter to about 300,000 to 400,000
people.
Subdividing homes like this is illegal, but the action creates affordable
new units without any government subsidies. Another study describes the
plight of new emigrants from Bangladesh who settle in New York. Most of
these households have very low incomes and would be unable to afford any
legally built dwelling. Several families pool their resources to buy a
detached house in a low-income part of Queens. They then subdivide it into
several independent units where they live. These illegal units enter the
market and are subsequently either sold or rented.
The city sends inspectors to prevent this from happening. The argument
against these informal subdivisions is that they overload the utility system,
urban transport, and schools because of the higher population density they
create. However, it is unlikely that the utility system is really affected,
because of the decrease in most household sizes over the past 30 years.
School might indeed become overcrowded, because immigrants tend to
have more children than native-born households. However, a primary
function of a municipality is to provide school space to all the city’s
children. It does not make sense to prevent families from settling in a
neighborhood under the pretext that the existing number of classrooms is
insufficient. The interdiction against subdividing is usually a pretext to hide
the municipality’s inability to provide adequate numbers of classroom to its
residents. Many zoning regulations are established to prevent changes of
any nature, including preventing lower-income families from living in
middle-income neighborhoods. In the case of the Bangladeshi migrants,
they outbid their more affluent neighbors by consuming less floor space
than the existing residents. It is the opposite of gentrification. While the city
planning department claims social inclusion (i.e., neighborhoods with
mixed household incomes) as its objective, it prevents the emergence of
mixed-income neighborhoods by creating zoning laws that block lower-income households from being able to afford to live in higher-income
neighborhoods.
The above examples show how households adjust to high prices by
consuming less housing. Ideally, there would be a match between housing
supply and demand. Because of the inevitable lag between changes in
demand and supply—for instance when households size decreases—
regulations should allow these informal adjustments to occur legally.
When the Poor Are Unable to Substitute Capital for Land
As cities expand, centrally located land becomes more expensive.
Households and firms respond to this by moving into multistory buildings
—apartments and office towers—which reduce their land consumption. By
this action, they substitute capital for land. By building multistory
structures, they can increase their consumption of floor space while
decreasing their consumption of land. By substituting capital for land and
therefore consuming less land per dwelling unit, lower-income households
can compete with higher-income households for the same land.
This is possible in cities where lower-income households can afford the
increased cost of multistory construction, a structure of at least about 18
square meters 9
in reinforced concrete, which would be structurally strong
enough to support stacking up apartments one above another. In the lowest￾income countries, where construction is the cheapest, households would
need to be able to afford at least US$6,000 for a studio of 12 square meters;
US$6,000 is the global market commodity price for the basic construction
materials of concrete and steel required to build 12 square meters. In other
words, substituting capital for land requires a minimum of capital. In some
cities, the poorest households cannot afford this minimum cost threshold.
Because they are unable to substitute capital for land (i.e., build higher), the
floor space they consume is even smaller than the land they occupy. They
can afford a shelter by consuming very little land and even less floor space.
For example, in figure 6.7 (column A), informal settlements consume a 1.16
ratio of area of land to floor space. Additionally, the extremely narrow
passageways found in slums in many cities is not due to “poor design” but
is a rational choice for households who desperately need more floor space
and are ready to trade off street space for additional floor space, as they are
too poor to build higher houses. This results in a more than 30 percentdifference in land allotted for roads and open space in informal versus
formal settlements (figure 6.7).
Figure 6.7
Informal and formal settlements, northern suburbs, Mumbai.
1
Including common corridors and staircases.
Let’s investigate this further—the following example, taken from
Bhayandar West, a northern suburb of Mumbai, illustrates the consequence
of being unable to substitute capital for land. Figure 6.7 shows two
settlements built side by side. On the left, settlement A is a very-low￾income community living in an informal settlement, where houses are built
of scavenged wood and corrugated iron, structures too weak to be extended
vertically. On the right (settlement B) is a middle-class community made up
of apartments in seven-story buildings. Community A is too poor to
substitute capital for land; community B can afford do so. Let us compare
the way their consumption of land and floor space differs, shown on the
table in figure 6.7.
The middle-class community B consumes an average of 23 square meters
of floor space per person, while the poor community A consumes only 3.5
square meters. However, the land consumption of both communities is
relatively close: 4 square meters for the poor versus 6 square meters for the
middle class. The poor households who cannot afford the minimum
building cost of US$6,000 for one room in an apartment block are obligedto use more valuable land per unit of floor space than the wealthier
households in the formal settlement B. The poor households in settlement A
must use 1.16 square meters of land per square meter of floor space, while
households in B use only 0.27 square meters of land per square meter of
floor space. Households in B, because they can afford apartments in
multistory buildings, can also afford to allow 46 percent of the land to
remain as open space compared to 13.5 percent in the horizontal settlement
A.
Despite consisting of only ground-floor structures, the residential density
of the horizontal settlement A is much higher than that of the vertical
settlement B.
The housing units in the informal settlement A have been built mostly by
the households themselves, often by recycling scavenged materials.
However, as soon as a dwelling is erected, its sell price or rent is established
through the informal market. The main constraint for very poor households
is therefore access to land. Although settlements A and B consume about the
same area of land per dwelling, the layout of settlement A is not tolerated by
regulations but the one of settlement B is.
It seems that about US$6,000 (in 2016) is the cost threshold below which
poor households who cannot afford this sum are condemned to live in
informal horizontal developments. In large cities where land is expensive,
the poorest households are often obliged to consume more land per unit of
floor space than are higher-income households. This results in extremely
low housing consumption for low-income households.
By contrast, in cities where poor households can afford to spend more
than US$6,000 per house, the horizontal slums shown in figure 6.7 tend to
disappear and be replaced by multistory apartments that allow a much
higher consumption of floor space. The urban village housing in Shenzhen
discussed below will illustrate this case.
The development and diffusion of building technology, like prestressed
small prefabricated beams, could substantially lower the US$6,000 cost for
an apartment in a multistory building. Such technology would therefore
increase the housing consumption of the poor far beyond the savings in
construction costs, because it would allow a much larger number of
households to substitute capital for land, as higher-income groups are
routinely doing.In addition, constructing multistory apartment buildings typically
requires financing. It is nearly impossible for households to self-finance
such a structure, the way they can for horizontal housing, which can be
improved in stages. A city’s financial sector must therefore be able to
provide mortgages as well as construction finance for developers to
improve land efficiency.
Measuring Income Distribution in Relation to Housing Consumption Is
Indispensable for Sound Policy Formulation
Using Household Income Distributions for Cities
Using a median income to measure affordability is a justified simplification
when comparing different cities or when looking for a trend in a time series.
It is also an acceptable simplification for cities with a large middle class for
which most household incomes are closely clustered around the median
income. However, when trying to improve housing affordability in a
specific city, it is necessary to look at income distributions in which
households with median incomes may represent only a very small
socioeconomic group. This is particularly true in large cities in developing
countries, where incomes are more widely dispersed than in more affluent
cities.
Figure 6.8 shows the distribution of household income in Shanghai in
1998. The income is displayed in equal intervals along the horizontal axis.
The bars show the number of households in each interval (using the scale
on the left axis). The dashed red curve superimposed on the bar chart shows
the cumulative percentage of households within each income interval (using
the scale on the right axis). The graph displays the number of households in
different socioeconomic groups that compete for land and housing. This
graphic representation of all income groups in a city conveys much more
information than using median income or the imprecise terms “low
income,” “medium income,” and so on. For instance, using figure 6.8, it is
clear that the 180,000 households with annual incomes below 6,000 yuan
have a very different affordability problem than the 260,000 households
with annual incomes around 14,000 yuan. However, both groups have
incomes well below Shanghai’s median income of about 21,000 yuan
(horizontal dash-dot line in figure 6.8). A city’s income distribution curve is
an indispensable tool for analyzing and quantifying housing affordability
issues.Figure 6.8
Shanghai household income distribution, 1998. Source: Jie Chen, Qianjin Hao, and Mark Stephens,
Assessing Housing Affordability in Post-Reform China: A Case Study of Shanghai (London:
Routledge, 2010).
Housing Stock and Flow, and the Trickle-Down Theory
The shape of the income distribution curve may also help anticipate the
policy impact of affordability. The graph enables testing of whether the
“trickle-down” affordability theory 10
is likely to be relevant. For instance,
imagine that developers increase by 10 percent the number of new housing
units affordable to households with an income of about 14,000 yuan (or
about 24,000 new units). This would improve affordability for households
with incomes lower than 14,000 yuan, as the number of dwellings vacated
by the beneficiaries will likely trickle down to lower-income groups and
have a significant impact, as these groups have fewer members than the
original beneficiaries. However, if the same 10 percent increase in new
housing units is built for households with incomes around 36,000 yuan (or
about 10,000 new units), the increase in number of housing units will also
trickle down toward lower-income groups but will soon have an
insignificant impact because of the much larger number of households
among the lower-income group. The trickle-down effect does occur in every
case, but its effect will be completely diluted if the increase in dwelling
units is targeted to households whose income is much to the right of the
distribution mode (in the case of Shanghai shown in figure 6.8, the mode
corresponds to households with incomes of about 22,000 yuan). If the
number of households in each income interval were equal (if the bars were
all of the same height), then the trickle down would work perfectly.Of course, the trickle-down effect could also become a trickle up.
Imagine that a government constrains the housing supply of higher-income
groups and favors exclusively the building of lower-cost housing units (say,
for incomes of about 12,000 yuan in figure 6.8). In the absence of new
supply, higher-income groups will outbid the lower-income group to occupy
the only new units on the markets. The trickle down will then become a
trickle up. Trickle up means that housing units previously affordable to
lower-income households are being bought by upper-income groups
(gentrification). This happens quite often in government-subsidized housing
when the overall housing market is heavily constrained by land use
regulations or the lack of infrastructure expansion, which constrains land
supply. Higher-income groups then “invade” the housing stock of the lower￾income groups. The effect is particularly severe when higher-income groups
acquire existing dwellings only to reassemble them into larger ones, thus
decreasing the number of housing units in the entire stock.
In Chennai, India, in the 1970s, the municipal government had a vigorous
program to build subsidized public housing while constraining the
development of land for all other income categories through regulations and
inadequate infrastructure development. However, low-income households,
who had been carefully selected based on income to benefit from public
housing, often sublet or informally sold their apartments to higher-income
households. The government did not react by adjusting its housing policy to
release more land for housing. Instead, it concentrated on preventing
trickle-up sales or subletting. It required all members of households in
public housing to have identity cards with photographs that could be
presented to inspectors who conducted random visits. This was an example
of a trickle-up effect that is quite common when land development policy
and regulations are at odds with housing policy. I will discuss this topic in
more detail below when looking at housing policy options. The reaction of
the Chennai government is also typical of governments in many countries.
When data show that a policy is not working—as when beneficiaries sell
their subsidized dwellings to higher-income groups—governments try to
force the policy’s success by imposing more regulations.
Household income distribution curves show the complexity of any
housing policy aimed at ensuring a supply of affordable housing to all
households, especially when incomes vary widely. I will use the income
distribution curve as a major tool to test housing policy options.What Happens When Incomes Increase Rapidly?
Figure 6.8 shows Shanghai’s 1998 income distribution. The shape of the
curve will likely be quite different after only a few years. New unskilled
migrants might increase the number of very low-income households on the
left side of the graph, while the income of other households, who have been
urbanized for a longer time, might increase rapidly because of increased
productivity and skills. The increase in income will add households to the
middle and right side of the graph. The change in household income
distribution will change the demand for housing and require an adjustment
in the supply of new housing units. The price and standards of new housing
should adjust to the new demand.
Let us compare the income distribution profile of Shanghai of 1998 with
that of 2003 ( figure 6.9). During this period, Shanghai’s median income
increased from 21,000 yuan to 32,000 yuan in real terms, a 58 percent
increase for an average annual rate of 8.8 percent. 11 This very high growth
rate of incomes is exceptional. In Shanghai, it was a period when bold
economic reforms and large infrastructure investments implemented in the
previous decade dramatically increased urban productivity. During the same
period, the number of households increased by 17 percent, or an average of
3.3 percent a year, also an exceptional growth rate for a city with a
population of 15.5 million in 1998. The natural demographic growth rate of
Shanghai during this period was slightly negative, at −0.08 percent. The
population growth rate was therefore entirely due to migration.
Figure 6.9
Shanghai changes in household income distribution between 1998 and 2003. Source: Jie Chen,
Qianjin Hao, and Mark Stephens, Assessing Housing Affordability in Post-Reform China: A Case
Study of Shanghai (London: Routledge, 2010).While the population and income growth rate of Shanghai are exceptional,
they provide insight into housing affordability issues that emerge when
urban income distributions are changing. The changes in Shanghai are
compressed over a short period of 5 years. In other cities, comparable
changes may be spread over a longer period, say, 10 years, but they are
nevertheless daunting and need to be addressed. In managing a city, nothing
is more damaging than assuming a static situation.
The 58 percent increase in the median income does not reflect a uniform
increase among all income classes. The way household incomes are
distributed has important implications for housing affordability. In spite of
the large increase in median income, the number of households in the very￾low-income group, below 6,000 yuan per year, increased by 53 percent,
representing 70,600 additional households. This increase is consistent with
the high rate of migration. A large number of immigrants are coming from
the countryside and have not yet acquired the skills needed to obtain
productive urban jobs.
In the next category, low middle-income from 6,001 to 24,000 yuan, the
number of households decreases by 1.9 million or −58 percent compared to
the number of households in this category in 1998! By contrast, the income
group above 24,000 yuan increased by 2.09 million households (an increase
of 124 percent over the number of households in 1998).
According to the Shanghai Municipal Statistics Bureau, 153.8 million
square meters of residential floor area were built during this period, or
about 165 square meters per additional household. In aggregate, it seems
that the supply of housing has more than kept pace with the growth of
population—a remarkable achievement given Shanghai’s fast demographic
growth. However, the aggregate amount of floor space does not tell us the
total number of units built, how large they were, their price or location or
what category of households were able to afford them.
Housing affordability should not be calculated in aggregate but by
income group. Square meters of floor space are not sold individually but in
lumps as apartments in specific locations that determine their price. Low￾income households therefore may not have access to all the floor space
built. Affordability assessment also cannot be done in aggregate by
comparing new household formation to new housing units built. The flow
of new supply, measured in housing units rather than aggregate floor space,
should be disaggregated by the number of new units put on the market thatare affordable to specific income groups. When conducting affordability
evaluations to test the effectiveness of a policy, it is necessary to
disaggregate the number of units produced with respect to price and
incomes, floor consumption, and location.
Income Distribution Related to Housing Typology
I have shown the wide variation of income that exists in a city. Every
household whose income is represented on an income distribution curve
lives in some kind of shelter that it can afford under current conditions.
However, the quality of this shelter may range from 2 square meters of
cardboard on a sidewalk to a luxury villa with an indoor swimming pool. To
identify the real affordability issue, we will have to match income
distribution with shelter consumption and to decide at what point the shelter
consumption has fallen below the socially acceptable minimum. In looking
for a policy solution, we will have to know how many households currently
live in a shelter below the minimum acceptable home quality. The policy
options will be different, depending on the number of households that fall
under this minimum. Imagine that in a city of 1 million people, only 500
people are living in shelters made of cardboard and plastic. The solution is
probably a welfare budget allocation to move these 500 households to
adequate shelters in a central location, while providing them with education
and training so that they eventually integrate into the city’s labor force.
However, if in the same city, 30 percent of the population lives in cardboard
and plastic houses, the policy solution will require a very different approach
that involves looking carefully at demand and supply for land and housing.
The solution to the housing problem will require a market intervention,
even if some demand subsidies are also used. Developing a housing policy
therefore necessarily relates housing affordability deficiencies to the
number of households who suffer these deficiencies. This is what I propose
in the following section. Whether looking at housing affordability issues in
Mumbai or in New York, the household income distribution curve will be
the first building block in developing a solution. It is necessary to quantify
the problem in terms of the proportion of households that fall below the
socially acceptable minimum standard.
Household income distribution should then be related to housing
consumption by income range; an important dimension that is missing from
the PIR index. It is important to link housing payments with whathouseholds get for their money. The objective of a housing policy is to
increase the housing consumption of households who consume an
unacceptably low standard of housing due to their low incomes. Therefore,
a housing policy should never aim just to supply a certain number of
housing units per year to fill a “backlog” of substandard housing. This
approach would only be valid if the old units needed to be demolished. The
example of the renovated Old Law Tenements in New York, described
earlier in the chapter, shows that there is often no need to destroy every old
unit.
All the households shown in the left-hand graph of figure 6.10 live in
dwellings that can be observed on the ground or from above through
satellite imagery or aerial photography. High-resolution satellite imagery
can be analyzed to identify housing types that can be ranked by their cost
and physical characteristics. The area occupied by each housing type can be
measured. The entire residential housing supply of a city can then be
divided into housing types. Census data and field surveys can complement
the information obtained by satellite image interpretation. The entire
population of a city can then be distributed among different housing types.
Each housing type corresponds to a housing price or rent range that can be
related to a household income. It is then possible to merge the type of
income distribution graph shown in figure 6.8 with the housing typology
data to obtain a representation of the distribution of the entire set of
households by income group and housing type. Figure 6.10 illustrates the
results of this method. It shows Hanoi’s household income distribution on
the right and the housing typology superposed on the income distribution on
the left. The graphs show what type of housing is currently affordable to
each income group—as they are currently living in it—and the number of
households in each housing type.
Figure 6.10
Hanoi’s income distribution related to housing typology, 2005. Source: Data are from Hanoi
Integrated Development and Environmental Programme (HAIDEP) Hanoi Institute of Statistics,2005, and author’s estimations from field surveys and satellite images.
Hanoi’s population has been distributed among eight housing types.
These housing types are specific to Hanoi and can easily be identified in
satellite imagery. There is no standard housing typology that can be used
across cities; for each city, a new typology has to be defined, reflecting the
local history and culture. In the case of Hanoi, two housing types are
specific to Vietnam—urbanized village housing and “tube houses.”
Urbanized village housing corresponds to housing units that were originally
located in villages that were on Hanoi’s periphery but have been absorbed
by the city’s expanding urban footprint. These villages retain their original
street layout and plot sizes. “Tube houses” are traditional row houses with a
frontage of about 3.5 meters and a depth of 22 meters. They can sometimes
have up to six or seven stories. They may be used by one extended family
or subdivided into apartments or may even be rented room by room. The
income groups that can afford tube houses can therefore vary greatly from
neighborhood to neighborhood and over time.
The choice of a typology is important when analyzing housing policy.
The number of units of certain house types can increase over time, while
other types are bound to decrease. For instance, the housing stock
constituted by old tube houses and old apartments located in the historical
core of Hanoi cannot expand and can only slowly disappear through
demolition and transformation into other types of housing, for instance,
“new apartments,” which would be affordable to a different, usually higher￾income group.
Figure 6.10 shows only a snapshot of the housing situation in Hanoi at
the time of the survey. The income distribution will change, and the housing
stock will be transformed by demolition, reconstruction, and extension into
new greenfield development. Neighborhoods rarely remain static; they are
subject to gentrification or its opposite: degentrification. In general, when
incomes are increasing rapidly, as in Shanghai in the 2000s, higher-income
groups tend to move toward newly built units, while lower-income groups
replace them in the older units they previously occupied. However, higher￾income groups may also move back into renovated housing units in older
neighborhoods when these neighborhoods are either well located or have
historical cachet.For instance, in Beijing the hutong neighborhoods were often inhabited
by high- and middle-income households before the revolution. They were
subdivided when the Communist government took over in 1947, resulting
in densification and subsequent degentrification. In the 1980s, the
municipal government considered the dense hutongs to be slums and
bulldozed them to replace them with high-rise apartments. In the early
2000s, some hutong areas became popular and were subsequently
regentrified into low-density one-family compounds or into pricey hotels.
The cycle between degentrification and regentrification lasted about 50
years. Most cities’ ancient neighborhoods have similar stories with longer
or shorter cycles between gentrification, degentrification, and
regentrification—for instance, the West Village in New York, the Marais in
Paris, and Soho in London.
The main lesson to draw from the constant transformation of historical
cities is that the entire housing stock might transform. An affordable
housing policy should therefore project the likely housing stock and flows.
The stock and flow approach is more useful when applied to a housing
typology. For instance, in the case of Hanoi, we know that the “old
apartment” flow will be by necessity negative, while the villas and new
apartments are likely to have positive flows.
It is a common mistake to look at only a slice of the housing market, such
as low-income neighborhoods, and concentrate on new supply through
greenfield development, while the entire housing stock is subject to
transformation. In particular, low-income households are usually better-off
moving into existing centrally located neighborhoods newly affordable to
them than moving into newly developed low-income housing on the
periphery with long and expensive commutes.
Relating Income Distribution with Housing Consumption
After relating household incomes to a housing type, it is necessary to relate
household incomes to actual measured housing consumption. Many
consumption indicators could be used: floor space per household, land area
per household, residential utility consumption (e.g., water and electricity),
access to transport, and community facilities. We could also use a
composite index that reflects the weighted aggregate housing consumption
of households, including all of these components.Whatever consumption measures we select, all housing units are
distributed among households according to their price rank. This price will
theoretically be directly related to household income. By relating household
housing consumption to income distribution, we can identify the groups that
are particularly deprived and develop a housing policy to address this
deprivation.
Hanoi’s income distribution is related to consumption of floor space in
figure 6.11.
Figure 6.11
Hanoi’s household income distribution (bottom) and floor consumption (top). Source: Data are from
Hanoi Integrated Development and Environmental Programme (HAIDEP) Hanoi Institute of
Statistics, 2005.
Figure 6.11 reproduces the household distribution in figure 6.10 at the
bottom of the figure, and I have added a new graph above with the same
horizontal axis corresponding to household income but with a vertical axis
representing floor area per household as it varies with income. The solid
line in each graph is an average per income; different households mayconsume different quantities of floor areas depending on their
circumstances, preferences, and home location. However, these variations
between people in the same income group average out across income
groups. This is why consumption can be conveniently represented by a
curve showing the average consumption per income interval rather than by
a scatterplot including all the surveyed cases.
The two graphs in figure 6.11 show how many households consume how
much housing. The initial step for most housing policies consists of
defining the socially acceptable minimum housing consumption, usually in
term of floor area. The use of an income distribution curve linked to
average housing consumption per income interval would allow one to
evaluate the number of households that are below a set consumption
threshold. The policy and possibly the threshold could be adjusted
accordingly. For example, in Hanoi, 50 percent of households consume less
than 40 square meters of housing (figure 6.11). Should the government set a
standard that more than 50 percent of its population currently does not
meet? Obviously not! The average floor area consumption per income
interval could also be replaced by other consumption indicators linked to
income, for instance, water consumption or any other indicator.
The representation of the two graphs in figure 6.11 is a simplification of
reality, as many households with the same income might show different
housing consumption levels, but it is a useful one for understanding and
discussing policy options, as we will see in the following sections.
Using the Income–Consumption Relation to Test Policy Options
We can use the graphs relating income, number of households, and housing
consumption to test alternative housing policies. To test alternative policies,
I will use a hypothetical case not related to a specific city, to avoid
describing the idiosyncratic circumstances that may affect outcome or
policies. Later in this chapter, I will use the income–consumption graph to
discuss the efficiency of various housing policies in specific case study
cities.Housing Policy Options
Governments often declare that the poor housing quality affecting a large
part of their urban population is due to a market failure. In reality, the very
poor quality of some of the housing stock is due to poverty. As we know,
the market is a blind and cold mechanism that is not subject to compassion.
The market will predictably provide very-low-quality housing to
households with very low incomes, and no housing at all to households who
must spend their low incomes almost entirely on food. In a city that
includes a significant number of very-low-income households, the market is
unlikely to provide them with anything looking like a dwelling. Should the
government then provide housing to households with the lowest incomes?
There is nothing wrong with governments substituting themselves for
markets to provide socially acceptable housing units to the very poor. In
fact, it is precisely one of the roles of government. If these housing units are
also associated with decent schools and health facilities, their provision is
not only a compassionate effort but also an investment in the future welfare
of all urban citizens. For instance, the government should obviously provide
a shelter to homeless people. There are no market solutions for people with
no income.
However, as soon as the government decides to build housing for low￾income households, five questions have to be answered:
1.  How many households should be included? Expressed another way:
How far along the income scale should the government become a substitute
for the market?
2.  What standards should be provided?
3.  How many housing units should the government subsidize every year?
4.  How many years would be required to provide a subsidized housing unit
to all potential beneficiaries?
5.  What budget allocation would be required yearly?
The government should provide clear answers to these questions at the
very start of formulating its housing policy. The final policy formulation
would require some iterations until the number of beneficiaries and the
standards selected correspond to an annual cost that the government can
afford. Too often, public housing programs include only numbers
responding to only one or two of the five questions. The numbers usuallyreflect perceived needs rather than what can credibly be done. As a result,
many housing programs lose credibility in a very short time due to the low
standards provided and less volume supplied than promised due to budget
problems, administration constraints, and the like.
A credible public housing program should include a quantitative
evaluation relating standards, beneficiaries’ incomes, and total number of
beneficiaries. There is often a temptation to overreach and to include a large
number of beneficiaries whose housing cost will be beyond the means of
the government.
Income Distribution, Housing Consumption, and Market Outcome
Linking Income Distribution to Housing Consumption as a Diagnostic
Tool
I show a typical income–consumption curve in figure 6.12. The bottom
panel shows the demand side—the relationship between income and
number of households. The top panel shows the supply side—the
relationship between income and consumption. The vertical axis displays an
index reflecting housing quality that includes floor area but also
characteristics like connection to safe water. Alternatively, the housing
quality index could be replaced by only one parameter contributing to
housing quality, such as floor area per dwelling or water consumption per
person.Figure 6.12
Income and housing consumption—market outcome.
The curve ab in the upper panel shows the variations of housing quality
under market conditions in the absence of subsidies. The curve passes
through the origin (0, 0), because with zero income the market allows only
zero consumption. Usually, as income increases above zero, housing
consumption initially increases only very slowly. It then increases faster
when household incomes reach the middle-class level.
The consumption curve ab relating housing consumption to household
income reflects market conditions. The market is only a mechanism. It does
not have feelings or respect moral values. The slums and the very low
housing consumption found in many cities of low- or middle-income
countries do not indicate market failures; they only show the market
outcome under the specific equilibrium between supply and demand. For
instance, in figure 6.12, a household with income d will consume a quantity
of housing g.The Objective of a Housing Policy Is to Modify Current Housing
Consumption
The objective of a housing policy is to modify the profile of the housing
consumption curve ab so that the housing consumption of households with
the lowest incomes increases to socially acceptable levels. Government
policy in some social sectors (e.g., health and education) should aim toward
an egalitarian distribution across incomes—although this ideal distribution
is rarely achieved in the real world. A horizontal line crossing the vertical
axis at g, for instance, would show an equalitarian distribution of housing.
Housing policy, however, rarely aims at an equalitarian distribution—all
households living in identical houses, whatever their income. In the former
Soviet Union and in pre-reform Communist China, housing was considered
a factor of production, not an object of consumption that could be bought
and sold and would reflect consumer preferences. There was indeed an
effort to produce identical dwelling units differing only slightly by the
number of rooms adjusted by household size. My experience of working in
Russia in the early 1990s and in China in the 1980s convinced me that even
in a regime driven by ideological equalitarianism, the housing equality
objective had been impossible to achieve; even if “equal” sized units are
provided, one unit may be in the city center while 30 more are kilometers
away, signifying a very unequal access to the place of work and a resulting
unequal desirability value of the actual housing stock. Housing policy
objectives usually ensure that the lower-income groups do not fall below
some minimum housing consumption, but the policy is indifferent to the
consumption of higher-income groups.
In the following paragraphs, I will assume that the majority of urban
citizens want the lowest-income households to be able to afford a minimum
housing consumption that is determined by a number of physical standards.
These physical standards could be such things as minimum floor area,
minimum water consumption, access to sanitation, refuse disposal, storm
drainage, or community services.
Impact of an Increase in Urban Land Supply Figure 6.12 shows the
relationship between housing consumption and income under current
market conditions in a specific city at time t. Household income distribution
and housing consumption are usually changing over time, as we have seen
above in the case of Shanghai.Without any changes in household incomes, the government could
increase housing consumption by removing supply side constraints. Some
supply side constraints are simply administrative, for instance, the
prescribed process for obtaining building permits. Other measures are
regulatory, such as mandating the height of a building; density of the
surrounding area; floor space of the unit; barriers to urban expansion
(greenbelts); or even limits on construction design, inno vation, or
technology. Other types of supply side measures would require investments;
for instance, increasing the supply of developable land by expanding the
primary road and infrastructure network. The dashed line ac in figure 6.13
shows the potential increase in housing consumption for all households
when supply side constraints are removed. The positive impact of removing
supply side constraints varies with income groups. For instance, households
with income d would see their consumption increase from g to j after the
government has removed some of the constraints on housing supply.
Figure 6.13
Impact on housing consumption of removing supply side constraints.While in the long run every household benefits from removing supply
side constraints, the size of the benefits is not the same for all income
groups. We can see in figure 6.13 that the benefits of very-low-income
households (to the left of the income distribution curve) are much lower
than the benefits accruing to middle-income groups. Even with better￾functioning markets, very-low-income groups may still have very low
housing consumption; new units are purchased by middle- to high-income
groups and do not directly benefit low-income groups. It is therefore often
necessary for governments to take additional actions to increase the housing
consumption of the very poor, even after supply side reforms have been
successfully implemented.
The increase in housing consumption after removing supply side
constraints could be quite large, and it is usually not very costly to
governments (and actually could increase the tax revenue base, assuming
more people are able to live in more units). Why don’t governments
systematically audit their administrative rules and regulatory system to
provide the benefit of increased housing consumption to all its citizens?
One possible reason is that supply side reforms typically take several years
to show results. It is therefore difficult for the reforms initiators to take
credit for the improvement of the housing stock, so the incentive to enact
change is lower. There is also a lack of clarity on how regulations affect
private sector decisions, which are incentivized by profit calculations.
Therefore, very few predictive math-based models are created by cities to
project how regulations affect private developer profits and incentives to
build new housing stock at different income levels. And, as we have seen
earlier, the desire “to do something” about housing, and to do it fast, trumps
the necessity of taking the time to understand the problem through surveys
and regulatory audits.
Access to Mortgages May Increase the Housing Consumption of a
Large Number of Households
Access to housing finance in the form of mortgages tends to increase the
housing consumption of those who can qualify for them. Instead of relying
entirely on their own savings to purchase a dwelling, households may
borrow a part of the necessary sum from a bank. That allows them to buy a
larger or better located house than if they were relying solely on their own
savings. Households having access to mortgages may also buy additionaldwelling units that they could rent out, thus significantly increasing the
housing stock. The availability of mortgage finance therefore tends to
increase the consumption of housing for those who qualify for it, as shown
in figure 6.14. I assume that banks will provide mortgages to households
with income higher than d. The housing consumption of households with an
income of d increases from g to g1, and all households with incomes higher
than d will increase their consumption in a proportional way. I assume here
that the supply of housing is elastic (i.e., that when demand increases for
better houses, developers are able to respond quickly to demand). In this
case the new consump tion curve is no longer continuous and instead
consists of two segments a−f and f1−b.
Figure 6.14
Housing consumption with mortgage for some.
However, imagine that because of regulations, or because of lack of
developable land, developers are not able to respond to the increased
demand generated by the availability of mortgages. The increased resources
of households who have access to mortgages are then concentrated on thefew houses that are produced, and the result is likely to be a general
increase in housing prices rather than in an increase in consumption. Any
demand stimulus, whether it comes from increased income or increased
purchasing power, while very desirable in an urban economy, would result
in higher housing prices if the supply of housing is constrained by poor
regulations and a shortage of developable land.
In figure 6.14, I have assumed that only households with an income
higher than d would have access to a mortgage. That represents roughly
about the wealthiest third of the total population. This situation would be
typical of a low- to medium-income economy in which capital is scarce and
the financial sector is still rather shallow and undeveloped.
Why are mortgages provided only to households with incomes higher than
d? The financial sector may not have been able to mobilize much savings,
and because capital is scarce, banks lend to the most affluent first as they
are perceived to represent lower risk. As the financial sector develops, the
lower lending limit will move toward the left, including increasingly more
middle-income households. Eventually it could reach possibly up to 70
percent of urban households. Countries like Malaysia and Thailand have
achieved this penetration, but that was the result of continuous, consistent
policy aimed at developing the financial sector. The results are spectacular,
but they appear over the long term.
However, a large number of households with informal employment and
uncertainty over land titles may also combine to limit the number of
households having access to mortgage financing. Governments could
therefore increase housing consumption by setting the rules that would
allow the financial sector to develop.
Fixing Minimum Housing Consumption Increases the Size of the
Informal Housing Sector
Why Would Governments Fix Minimum Housing Consumption?
Under normal housing market operations, the relationship between
household incomes and housing consumption becomes similar to the curves
in figure 6.12: the poorer households consume much less housing than
middle-class households. In cities with a high annual migration rate, the
number of poor households is larger, and their housing consumption is even
lower. Newly arrived migrants with low urban skills are crowded into denseslums. Slums are characterized by not only very low consumption of land
and floor space but also by very low consumption of urban utilities (e.g.,
water and sanitation) and a low level of community facilities (e.g., schools
and health clinics). When the number of slum dwellers becomes large, and
therefore visible to higher-income groups, political pressure forces the local
government to “do something.”
The first reaction of government is usually to set minimum housing
standards, below which it will be illegal to build new housing. All the
countries I worked in had minimum housing standards. New regulations
then specify minimum housing consumption, usually expressed as a
combination of minimum plot sizes, minimum floor areas, maximum
densities and floor area ratio (FAR), in addition to minimum standards for
road width and open space. Regulators pretend that preventing by law the
construction of housing units deemed socially unacceptable will also
prevent the crowding and unsanitary conditions in which low-income
households are living.
By regulating minimum housing consumption, governments are de facto
trying to regulate their cities out of poverty. Regulating minimum housing
consumption has the opposite effect. The minimum housing standards
defined by regulations correspond to a minimum cost. When this cost is
above what a certain number of households can possibly pay, the only effect
of minimum housing consumption regulations is to render illegal those
settlements that have been built below the new standards. In addition, the
regulations expand into the future the extent of illegal settlements that are
the only ones affordable to the poor.
The inhabitants of illegal settlements become by association illegal and
may not be able to receive services and the normal protection of the laws
against evictions. The settlements whose houses do not meet the minimum
standards are usually called “the informal sector” or even slums.
The regulations fixing minimum housing consumption are therefore not
benign, even when they are not enforced—and usually they are largely
unenforceable. Their only effect is to make more difficult the life of poor
households living in settlements below the minimum standards. The people
living in informal settlements are usually poor, and their poverty is further
exacerbated by the very regulations that make their settlements informal.
For the poor, the costs of informality are high. First, informality implies
an enhanced degree of tenure uncertainty, and therefore the possibility ofdemolition and expropriation without compensation. Second, many
municipal services like water supply, storm drainage, and refuse disposal
are often denied to informal settlements. Third, social services like health
and education, if provided at all, are often substandard, because the
informality of settlements implies an impermanency, and no government
would invest in building schools or dispensaries in impermanent
settlements.
Let us look at the impact of minimum-standard regulations on the
housing consumption of households at the bottom of the income
distribution in figure 6.15. Government sets the minimum housing
consumption at level m on the vertical axis of the top graph. This
consumption level m intersects at point h the market housing consumption
curve C. From h we draw a vertical line that intersects at n the horizontal
axis of the bottom graph showing household income. The number of
households living in settlements below the minimum standards is shown in
the area under the curve c to the left of the line hn shown in dark blue in the
bottom graph. The neighborhoods containing the households to the left of
hn become illegal because of the regulations.Figure 6.15
Government set minimum consumption.
If the government increases the standards m, the number of households in
illegal settlements will increase. When m is lower, the number of
households in illegal settlement decreases.
The choice of a minimum housing standard is arbitrary. There is no such
thing as an optimal housing standard. I would suggest that access to safe
water and sanitation is indispensable, but there are many ways of providing
this minimum service without imposing a minimum area for floor space,
land, and access road. And when specifying a minimum access to water and
sanitation, what quantity of water per person and per day should be
included in the standard? The 30 liters per capita per day (lpcpd)
corresponding to the consumption provided through a public tap shared by
five households? Or 150 lpcpd as in Europe? Or 863 lpcpd as in California?
The same reasoning could be used for minimum plot size or minimum size
of floor area. We will see the positive impact of avoiding setting minimumstandards in the case study below describing the kampung policy in
Indonesia.
Regulating minimum housing standards is not a technical task but a
political act. In many cities in developing countries, but also in cities like
New York and Paris, the minimum standards are unreasonably high. It
seems that there is a minimum political cutoff value for housing standards.
No local politician would approve a minimum standard value below this
cutoff. Politicians feel that by accepting very low consumption standards,
which may be the only one affordable to a part of the population, they
somehow accept poverty as a permanent state, and that by setting high
standards they are being progressive.
Another even less benign explanation for the existence of unreasonably
high housing standards is the desire to keep poor migrants out of cities and
poor households out of specific neighborhoods. Many of the residential
zoning laws in developed countries are designed to ensure a “homogenous”
community—that is, to prevent people with lower incomes from moving
into the neighborhood.
What are the consequences of regulating minimum housing consumption
values? People consume very little housing because they are too poor to
afford more. The regulations will not lift the poor out of poverty.
However, the regulations will prevent the construction of the only type of
housing poor households can afford. If some developers are ready to
continue building housing below the minimum standard, these houses will
become illegal, exposing poor households to expulsion or to demolition of
the only type of house they can afford. Regulations fixing minimum
housing consumption thus deprive poor households of property rights.
The households who cannot afford housing standards meeting the
minimum regulatory value are therefore confronted with two choices; live
in an illegal settlement in the city of their choice or return to a rural area
where housing is cheaper or where housing is not regulated. Obviously, the
great majority makes the former choice. The ubiquity of slums in many
cities in developing countries demonstrates that often a large number of
households can only afford a primitive form of housing without much of the
infrastructure that makes an urban high density environmentally tolerable.
Slums are due to poverty, but government imposition of minimum housing
standards makes poverty worse. It denies such basic services as watersupply, sanitation, and refuse disposal to households who live in settlements
that are illegal only because the people living in them cannot afford the
arbitrary standards imposed by minimum consumption regulations.
Infrastructure providing a minimum of safe water supply and sanitation
and removing solid waste is relatively cheap to provide compared to
housing. The lack of safe water and sanitation has a much more devastating
effect on the health of the poor than does the size or construction quality of
their dwellings.
It is of course legitimate for a government to wish that every citizen
should enjoy at least a certain amount of floor space, infrastructure, and
social amenities. However, this government should be ready to complement
through a subsidy the difference in rent that households would have to pay
to afford these minimum standards. The debate on the minimum housing
consumption level is therefore one of affordability. What households cannot
afford should be affordable to the government. Too often governments set
high housing consumption standards together with the promise of
subsidizing housing but without having the resources to do so. The outcome
for poor households is then similar to the one shown in figure 6.15. Because
the government has set the minimum standards so high that neither
households nor government can afford them, poor households end up living
in illegal settlements that cannot be connected to urban services, as the
municipality assumes that a government program would soon provide a
“decent” housing unit to every household living in illegal settlements.
Contrary to popular belief, governments setting housing standards too
high are not just guilty of benign economic optimism but are making
decisions that have disastrous effects on the poor.
If minimum housing standards have such an obvious disastrous
consequences for the poor, why do most urban planners continue to include
them in their master plans? The only answer I can think of is planners’
propensity for utopia and their dislike for reality. A quotation from Albert
Hirschman, “an oppression of the weak by the incompetent,” 12 best
illustrates this point.
Let us now look at housing policy options open to responsible
governments that are interested in improving the housing consumption of
the lowest-income groups and are ready to make the reforms and invest the
taxpayers’ money that would be required to do so.Demand Side Subsidy: Impact of a Demand Side Subsidy Program
Imagine that a local government decides that all households should at least
enjoy a level of housing consumption corresponding to m in the top graph
of figure 6.16. To achieve this objective, the government decides to allocate
a voucher to every household whose income is insufficient to afford the
housing standard corresponding to m. The amount of the voucher will be
equal to the difference between the market rent of a housing unit of
standard m and the rent that a household can afford, expressed as a set
percentage of the household’s income (say, 30 percent). Or the government
could decide that any household whose income is below n (bottom graph in
figure 6.16) would receive a voucher to allow consumption of at least m on
the current housing market.
Figure 6.16
Theoretical effects of housing vouchers (partial equilibrium).The voucher system is currently used in a number of countries—in the
United States 13 and Chile, 14 for instance. It appears to be the most sensible
way to ensure a minimum housing consumption to all and to make the
financing of the subsidy transparent. In addition, the voucher system allows
households to select both their housing standards and location, which
supply side subsidies do not allow. Let us look in more in detail at some of
the issues raised by housing voucher programs.
The new housing consumption profile when vouchers are distributed to
all beneficiaries is the curve mhb in figure 6.16. The cost per household for
each income interval is the difference between the line mh and the curve
ah. The subsidy from government decreases as the income of the
beneficiaries increases. The number of beneficiaries is represented
graphically by the area shaded in yellow on the income distribution curve. It
is easy to calculate the total cost to the government by multiplying the
number of beneficiary households in each income category by the subsidy
to which they are entitled. For households with incomes close to zero, the
voucher pays the entire rent. When the income increases, the voucher
adjusts to a smaller portion of the rent.
Depending on the government resources, it might be necessary to adjust
the consumption standards m by increasing or decreasing it. It might also be
possible to have h slightly higher than m, so that all beneficiary households
have an incentive to increase their income to have a better house. When the
number of beneficiaries is known, the government should make the voucher
available over a relatively short time. In addition, based on demographic
and economic projections, the government should calculate how many new
households every year will require a voucher and what yearly budgetary
allocation will be required in the future to support the program.
Governments are often tempted to select a standard m or a qualified
income n without looking into the budgetary implications caused by the
number of beneficiaries who would qualify for vouchers. We can see in
figure 6.16 that a higher qualifying income n or a higher housing standard
m would increase the total number of households who should be able to
benefit from the voucher. This number is represented by the yellow area in
the figure.
The government has only a limited budget to allocate to vouchers;
therefore, when selecting either m or n, it should make sure that all current
households who qualify should get their voucher after getting on a waitinglist no more than, say, 3 years. If the average time on a waiting list is much
longer than 3 years, there is not much point in designing the program for
such a large number of beneficiaries if they cannot obtain a voucher
anyway. Housing policy based on a low-odds lottery (as New York has
resorted to) is a little cruel for those who are deemed as deserving a subsidy
but might never win it.
In September 2016, an NGO website assisting applicants for vouchers
through the Section 8 program in New York City had this ominous warning:
“There are nowhere near enough vouchers to meet the need of everyone
who qualifies for and applies for them. Once waiting lists are open,
agencies are flooded with applications. You only have a few days to apply.”
15
In fact, in January 2016, 86,610 households in New York were currently
receiving vouchers, but 143,033 qualified households were on a waiting list.
The government does not tell prospective voucher beneficiaries how long
the wait will be before obtaining vouchers. It might well be infinite.
A voucher program should be able to disburse rapidly to the qualified
households. However, a fast disbursement would create a large demand
increase for new dwellings. The housing supply should be able to respond
rapidly to the new demand. If the vouchers are distributed within a few
years and if the number of beneficiaries is large, it is not certain that
developers will be able to provide immediately a large number of houses of
standard m. If there is a supply constraint—if land is difficult to buy or
takes a long time to acquire, if building permits are slow to process—the
additional capital suddenly injected into the building sector may create an
increase in prices, and reaching the housing standard m might require
higher cost than envisaged at the time the program was designed. This
inflation created by the voucher program might result in higher prices for
all low-income households. So in reality the program could cause a decline
in standards compared to the initial situation represented by the original
consumption curve ab.
This occurred in Malaysia in the 1980s, resulting in an increase in
housing prices of about 19 percent per year over a period of 10 years, while
nominal income increased by 10.5 percent per year. A World Bank study
that I coauthored indicated that regulatory supply constraints combined with
a financial stimulus in the form of subsidized mortgage interest rates were
largely to blame for higher housing prices. 16This problem is extremely common. Housing supply bottlenecks occur in
many cities. They might be caused by a lack of infrastructure that prevents
new land from being developed, by greenbelts or other urban growth
boundaries, or by regulatory constraints on land development or on
construction itself. Less frequent are constraints in the building industry
itself, such as a shortage of labor or materials. A voucher system can be
successful only when the government has been able to remove all supply
bottlenecks. Removing supply bottlenecks would have the opposite effect of
inflation; it would push the consumption curve ab upward, as shown by the
dashed line in figure 6.13.
Demand side subsidies like vouchers (or other types of subsidies directly
given to households) address the main cause of low housing consumption:
the very low income of part of the urban population. It allows households to
make their own trade-offs between dwelling size and location. It allows a
variety of housing designs and technical innovations. The subsidy involved
is transparent and allows governments to include it in its budgets. It allows
financing a large number of dwellings without creating a vast bureaucracy.
However, it requires that the government be able to afford the cost of the
vouchers, so that low-income households are not given the false hope of a
low-odds lottery. It also requires that supply constraints on land and
construction be removed in advance of the distribution of vouchers.
Supply Side Subsidies: Public Housing, Inclusive Zoning, and Rent
Control
In spite of the advantages of demand side subsidies, many governments
prefer supply side subsidies. Supply side subsidies do not give the subsidies
directly to households but to developers to build a predetermined type of
housing in a specific location for a specific price.
To benefit from supply side subsidies, households have to move to the
dwelling that receives the subsidy, whose location, size, and design have
been selected by planners, not by the end user. To keep the subsidy,
beneficiaries have to remain in the subsidized dwelling. They therefore lose
mobility; they cannot change dwelling type or location when their
circumstances change without losing the subsidy (getting on a new waiting
list). Let us look at the impact of supply side subsidies on the housing stock
by using a graph linking income distribution and consumption ( figure
6.17).Figure 6.17
Impact of public housing supply side subsidies on housing consumption.
Let us assume that a government decides to address the problem of low
housing consumption of slum dwellers by establishing a public housing
program. The government makes all decisions concerning the location, size,
and design of all housing units to be rented to a selected target group. The
beneficiaries are usually identified by their incomes. In the graph the
income of beneficiaries is between q and n, and the number of qualified
beneficiaries is represented in blue on the income distribution curve (graph
1 in figure 6.17). The current housing consumption of this income group
varies from p to h on the consumption curve ab. The government builds a
number of flats to move the beneficiaries represented by the red area
between q and n. The standards of the newly built public housing are
between p1 and h1, significantly higher than the original standards p to h of
the target beneficiary group, which is precisely the objective of the public
housing program. The rent paid by the beneficiaries is set by the
government and represents an affordable fixed percentage of their income
not directly related to the cost of providing housing of standard p1–h1.
The government could renew the operation until the entire target
beneficiary group, represented by the blue area on the graph, has been
housed in public housing units. This is unlikely to happen, as it would
require an enormous annual financial commitment, plus the need to
expropriate large tracts of urban land, not an easy process in a democracy.
Still, at the end, a number of low-income households would have seen their
housing standards increase significantly compared to what they could affordon the open market. So, what is wrong with the public housing approach?
Many things, which I will now describe!The major problem with this approach is that the households that benefit
end up with higher housing standards than households that have higher
incomes, because of the way the income brackets of beneficiaries are
selected. The housing standards of households in public housing at incomes
below or equal n are much higher than the standards of households with
higher income shown to the right of n in figure 6.17. Some households
benefiting from public housing are likely to cash the potential rent by
subletting their public housing apartment to higher-income groups, who
under current market conditions can only afford housing standards that are
below the level shown as h2 in graph 2 of figure 6.17. The number of
households who are then potential beneficiaries of the public housing
program becomes much larger. The informal extension of the group of
beneficiaries reaches the income n1, and the additional number of potential
beneficiaries is represented as the shaded area below the income curve
included between the line n−h1 and n1−h2.
Why should a household receiving a subsidized housing from
government be tempted to sublet it to a higher-income household?
Subletting obliges the household to move into a substitute housing unit, for
which it will have to pay a market rent. The subletting makes sense
providing the market rent of the subsidized housing, minus the market rent
of the substitute housing, minus the rent of the subsidized housing, is
positive and therefore produces a flow of additional income to the original
beneficiary of the subsidized housing unit. A household receiving a
subsidized housing unit would have a strong incentive to sublet if the
household placed a higher value on the extra income resulting from
subletting than on the higher standard of the subsidized housing.
Subletting will likely occur when the standard of the subsidized unit is
sufficiently high to be attractive to households with much higher incomes
compared to that of the original beneficiary. This is what is represented
graphically in figure 6.17 where housing standard h1 is high enough to be
attractive to households with an income n1, much higher than the income n
of the beneficiary household. The subsidized housing units generated by
New York’s inclusive zoning schemes, described below, meet these
conditions. Subletting of subsidized housing units, when it occurs, shows
that the beneficiary household would prefer the cash value of the subsidy
rather than the value in kind represented by the higher housing standard.The subletting or the informal sale of public housing by their
beneficiaries is relatively common. Nearly all public housing regulations
strictly forbid subletting and spend significant resources trying to control it
—demonstrating that subletting is an endemic issue in public housing. I
have already mentioned that to avoid the subletting of public housing units
by its intended beneficiaries, the Tamil Nadu Housing Board in Chennai,
India, issued identity cards to all its public housing tenants to allow periodic
checking by inspectors that the original beneficiaries were indeed
occupying the apartments. Although enforcement is usually not as
cumbersome as what I observed in Tamil Nadu, forbidding the subletting of
public housing units is not unique to Chennai; it is also forbidden in New
York, Paris, Bangkok, and most other large cities. The only difference
between cities is the way the law is enforced.
Subletting by itself should not be a problem, in spite of being usually
forbidden. After all, the beneficiaries, while not the intended ones, have
housing standards below what the housing board considered minimum. The
real problem is that it expands the number of beneficiaries to a much larger
proportion of the population, and it discourages the private production of
housing in this income range.
But the increase in the number of beneficiaries is not the only problem
created by public housing. As I mentioned earlier, planners, not the
beneficiaries themselves, have selected the location, size, and design of the
public housing dwelling units. Consequently, public housing projects create
ghettos by segregating households with similar low incomes in a housing
project design selected by members of a board, who, while usually meaning
well, do not have a clue about the priorities of low-income households. The
absence of commercial sites (like stores and service-oriented shops), which
is typical in public housing projects, is symptomatic of the artificiality of
the design.
Furthermore, households in public housing units cannot change dwellings
without losing the subsidy that they are receiving, or if they are permitted to
do so, they have to move to another public housing project subject to
availability. Households whose income increases beyond the income limit n
either have to move and lose their subsidies or stay while disguising their
increased income.
Finally, because of the lengthy bureaucratic process involved in all
government contracts, the government is usually unable to deliver thenumber of apartments to all the potential beneficiaries of public housing.
The number of households obtaining apartments remains a small fraction of
the number of households in the target group, as shown in figure 6.17.
Many applicants typically remain for more than 10 years on a waiting list to
benefit from public housing. For example, in Paris, the current wait is 19
years if one divides the number of qualified applications (234,000) by the
number of yearly assignments (12,000).
Other housing programs are relying on supply side subsidies. In the
United States, the Low-Income Housing Tax Credit provides a tax credit to
developers who provide rental units affordable to households who have
incomes below 60 percent of the area’s median gross income. Inclusive
zoning programs, like the New York project discussed below, rely on a mix
of tax incentives and zoning bonuses. Rent-control programs make the
private sector pay entirely for the subsidy, although the municipality loses
property tax income because of the low value of rent-controlled properties.
Many of these supply side subsidy programs suffer from the same problem
as public housing. They prevent beneficiary mobility, because the subsidy is
linked to a specific housing unit, which will be lost if the household moves
to another apartment.
If the shortcomings of supply side subsidies are so evident and well
documented, why do so many municipal governments seem to prefer them
to demand side subsidies? I suggest that politicians like to cut ribbons in
front of tangible brick and mortar projects; they do not have this
opportunity for demand side subsidies like vouchers. In addition, in many
countries the large bureaucracy in charge of building public housing is a
reliable source of patronage jobs and contracts. The assignment of
subsidized units to beneficiaries also becomes a source of patronage that
politicians find difficult to resist.
Four “Affordable” Housing Approaches; Four Outcomes
In this section, I describe four different approaches to the provision of
affordable housing that I had the opportunity to observe on the ground and
to talk with their local advocates and detractors. The first one, in Gauteng,
South Africa, is a traditional supply side public housing strategy. The
second, New York Inclusionary Zoning, is also a supply side subsidy
strategy, but the cost is supposed to be borne by developers receiving tax
and regulatory incentives, which are not costless. The third, the KampungImprovement Program (KIP), in Surabaya, Indonesia, consists of setting
aside formal urban perimeters where land use regulations are waived, but
where government subsidizes infrastructure. The fourth example, in
Shenzhen, China, is similar to the Indonesian KIP waiver of land use
regulations in well-delimited enclaves, except that the enclaves operate as a
condominium, where all local infrastructure costs are borne by the
beneficiaries; the government provides only bulk connection to the city
infrastructure. We will see how these four different strategies to provide
affordable housing perform in terms of supply and meeting the needs of the
target income group.
Example 1: Supply Side Housing Subsidies in Gauteng, South Africa
Most public housing programs in the world consist of building rental
apartments in multistory buildings. Public housing programs usually fail to
deliver the number of units planned because of the high cost to the treasury
and the difficulty of acquiring land in a timely manner. Consequently, the
number of actual beneficiaries is small compared to the announced target,
and the waiting list for subsidized housing gets longer every year.
South African Supply Side Housing Subsidies Are Different in Nature
and Performance
By contrast, South Africa’s subsidized housing performance, in terms of
number of units delivered, is spectacularly better than public housing
programs in most other countries. However, as we will see, in spite of its
success in delivering large numbers of affordable housing units, it shows
some of the unavoidable shortcomings associated with supply side
subsidies.
The South African Constitution includes a citizen’s right to “adequate
housing.” One of the main priorities of the post-apartheid government,
which came to power in 1994, was to embark on an ambitious housing
program to fulfill its constitutional obligations.
Given the complexity of the housing delivery problem, the South African
government wisely created several housing subsidy instruments—many
addressing the supply side, some directed to the demand side. These
included eight instruments encompassing demand side subsidies like
personal subsidized loans to buy in the existing stock, or even loans to
repair and expand existing houses for low-income households.However, the political necessity to provide rapidly a large number of new
housing units pushed the government to devote most government resources
to supply-driven initiatives, including an instrument called the “project
linked subsidy,” later named “Reconstruction and Development Program”
(RDP). The RDP consisted of providing subsidies directly to suppliers,
often private, provided they would build units following the adequate￾housing norms mentioned in the constitution. The qualified beneficiaries of
RDP, contrary to most public housing programs, immediately become the
owners of their dwellings. The subsidy was therefore transmitted
immediately from the government to the developer and passed on to the
beneficiary. Indeed, project-linked subsidy programs are faster to
implement on a large scale, as appraisal of housing units to qualify for the
subsidy can be done in bulk for thousands of identical housing units at the
project level. The government provides the subsidy to the supplier, who
passes it on to the beneficiary. Supply side subsidies are simpler to
administer, because the beneficiaries do not have to be consulted about
housing design or location. There is also a clear economy of scale that
reduces building costs by implementing very large contiguous projects.
The Definition of “Adequate Housing” in South Africa
The first step in implementing RDP required defining what constituted the
“adequate housing” stipulated in the constitution. The government recruited
a group of technical experts and politicians that established a set of
standards covering housing, roads, public services, schools, and health
facilities. The standards of adequate housing set by a group of experts
included a house of 40 square meters on a lot of 250 square meters. The
land use in the new communities was also fixed at about 50 percent of the
land to be used for residential lots, 30 percent for roads, and 20 percent for
open spaces and community facilities. This uniform normative definition of
adequate housing greatly facilitated project appraisal and contractual
relations between the government’s housing agency and private developers
building the units, thus improving the chance of a speedy delivery for a
large number of units. However, it constituted an enormous built-in rigidity
when selecting potential sites, privileging the choice of very large empty
building sites, where land was cheap, and therefore far away from urban
centers.The same standards were to be applied to all urban housing under RDP,
irrespective of location or local land prices. This uniformity was politically
logical, in the sense that it gave an apparent sense of equality in housing
consumption among citizens. When market principles are abandoned in
allocating resources, there is no reason to use market benchmarks to price
what has been allocated administratively. A 250 square meter lot will have a
very different market value depending on whether it is located at a distance
of 5 or 20 kilometers from the center of Johannesburg. The large difference
in the values of similar lots depending on their location would in reality
result in economic inequality among beneficiaries. But the appearance of
equality is often more important than its reality as soon as housing program
administrators decide to ignore markets.
This argument about inequality in market values of different lots became
moot anyway, as most RDP projects were located in such distant locations
that the value of the land on which they were built did not differ much and
was mostly uniformly very low. The setting of generous land use standards
and the high land consumption involved (see the land use table in figure
6.18) ensured that RDP projects could be built only on very cheap land at
great distances from city centers.
Figure 6.18
Number of units supplied under the RDP housing subsidy program and land use requirements.Estimating the Number of Beneficiaries
The second step required estimating the potential number of beneficiaries.
To do so, the government conducted a complete survey of existing housing
standards across cities. The results of the survey were used to compare the
existing housing stock to the adequate-housing standard. The government
then calculated the housing backlog that represented the difference between
the number of housing units meeting the adequate-housing standard and the
existing stock. Adjusting for population increase, the government found that
about 8.5 million households, or about 84 percent of the population in 2000,
would have to receive a subsidy in order to get rid of the housing backlog,
thus allowing the South African government to fulfill its constitutional
obligations to supply adequate housing.
The staggering number of potential beneficiaries raises the question of
whether the RDP was really an asset redistribution program from the rich to
the poor as intended, or a way of mobilizing fiscal resources from the entire
population (via the corporate and individual tax base) and redistributing it
in kind in the form of housing.
The strategy worked extraordinary well when it came to delivering a
large number of housing units at a set price. For instance, in Gauteng alone,
17 an average of about 50,000 subsidized units were delivered every year
from 1995 to 2014 (figure 6.18). The 925,000 households who benefited
from the program represented about 38 percent of all households living in
Gauteng in 2014. This percentage is short of the “backlog,” but it is an
extraordinary logistical achievement nevertheless, compared to similar
supply side subsidy programs in other countries.
Housing Supply and Labor Markets Where the South African Program
Failed
However, building a large number of housing units rapidly does not ensure
the success of a public housing program. A large metropolis like Gauteng
exists because of the efficiency of large labor markets. The low-income
households who should benefit from the subsidy program would have a
chance to escape poverty only if they are able to be part of the urban labor
force. Therefore, a good access to the job markets is the most important
characteristic that new housing for the poor should provide.The spatial structure of South African cities still shows the mark of pre￾1994 apartheid. Low-density, high-income neighborhoods—not very
different from those found in US suburbs—still occupy the central areas of
cities. Jobs are dispersed in many subcenters across metropolitan areas
surrounded by low-density affluent communities. Under apartheid, black
African workers were located in distant denser “townships” separated from
white suburbs by wide buffer zones. The structure of South African
apartheid cities was the reverse of urban spatial structures generated by
markets, where high densities of jobs and people are concentrated in central
areas. Unfortunately, the supply mechanism of the RDP housing program
unintentionally contributed to reinforcing the deficient spatial structure
inherited from apartheid, continuing to concentrate the poor in high
densities in areas far away from the city center. The map of population
densities in 2001 already shows the spatial impact of the program and the
dispersion of population ( figure 6.19). The spatial distribution of
households in 2001 still reflects the characteristics of apartheid urban
structure, not markets.
Figure 6.19
Gauteng’s spatial distribution of population density, 2001. Sources: Census 2001 Municipal report
Gauteng, Statistics South Africa, Pretoria, 2003; vectorization of built-up area using satellite imagery
by Marie-Agnes Bertaud.While the new communities built under RDP were all well connected by
major roads and sometimes suburban trains to the rest of the metropolitan
area, the distances to employment centers are extremely large, sometimes
more than 30 kilometers. In addition, jobs in Gauteng are dispersed over a
large area, making mass transit uneconomical.
The type of suburban housing where the white minority lived at the time
of apartheid inspired the layout of RDP projects, although at somewhat
lower standards. Removing glaring racial differences in housing types was
indeed the point. However, individual transport is the only viable means of
commuting for this type of suburban settlement. Most of the low-income
households in the subsidized projects cannot afford individual motorized
vehicles. The collective taxis that low-income households are obliged to use
in Gauteng to access jobs are slow, expensive, and require long waits for
transfers. They have also proved very difficult to regulate, often resulting in
violent turf wars between drivers.
The massive subsidized housing projects may have further fragmented
the labor market of South African cities, contributing significantly to
lowering their productivity. Unemployment rates in South Africa have been
hovering around 22–26 percent between 2006 and 2016. 18 This high
unemployment rate cannot be entirely attributed to the poor location of the
subsidized housing scheme, but certainly, this massive program of building
individual housing units in widely dispersed communities with no economic
and speedy means of transport did not help.
The lack of access to jobs from the newly created communities is not
merely a regrettable design oversight. It is engrained in the system of
uniform building norms in which the price of land is the only variable in a
housing project. This is the characteristic of most public housing projects.
Let us look at the mechanism that created these inaccessible large
communities.
Developers had to use the same spatial norms (e.g., plot size, house area,
area for community facilities, and width of streets) whatever the location of
the project. To achieve the maximum economy of scale and deliver rapidly
the maximum number of units at the agreed-on price, developers had to
look for large vacant areas of land at a low price. A developer will find large
vacant land parcels only in the far periphery of cities. Any developer would
normally adjust land use variables—height and size of building, open
spaces, and street width—to the land prices in the area where her project islocated. In the case of RDP projects, all the land use variables were fixed to
fit the adequate-housing norms. The developer is then limited to finding a
location where the low price of land would make the project financially
viable when using fixed spatial norms. This location is bound to be a
faraway suburb where land is cheap because the area is not very desirable
for any other uses.
Although the RDP projects are land intensive, their density—about 70
people per hectare—is still higher than the higher-income suburbs that are
closer to one of the several urban centers of Gauteng, such as Johannesburg,
Pretoria, or Sandton. The projects contributed to a reverse density gradient
—densities higher in the periphery than in the center—and therefore in
longer commuting trips and an increase in the dispersion of the population.
Was a Better Alternative Possible?
Given the extraordinary political circumstances that preceded the adoption
of RDP as a housing policy, could the South African government have
possibly designed a different strategy? Theoretically, yes. It should have
removed immediately all zoning regulations that preserved large single￾house residential lots in centrally located areas. It could have adjusted its
minimum standards concerning plot size and house size to make housing
affordable to low-income groups in centrally located areas. It could have
chosen a demand side approach involving vouchers that low-income
households would have been free to use anywhere in the metropolitan area.
But these are only theoretical recommendation. In reality, given the time
it takes in a democracy to adjust existing land use regulations, it is unlikely
that the regulatory constraints on the supply side would have been removed
until much later, probably more than a decade later. In the absence of supply
side reform, any large demand side program, like vouchers, would have
only generated higher prices, not more housing. The expectations at the fall
of apartheid were extremely high. Sadly, I have to admit that the RDP
program, however defective, was probably the only politically feasible one
at the time it was implemented. After all, the South African government had
already designed many alternative housing subsidy schemes. If the RDP
received the bulk of the resources, it is because it was the only one that
could deliver rapidly a large number of dwelling units.
How Can the Households Living in RDP Projects Be Integrated into the
Metropolitan Labor Market?What are the options now that millions of individual low-income houses
have been built in distant suburbs of South African cities? This is a much
more relevant question than what should have been done in the past. The
government should now focus on getting housing beneficiaries into the
labor market as the only way to escape poverty. How to connect low￾income people living in distant suburbs to jobs in an urban structure similar
to the one shown in figure 6.20?
Figure 6.20
Typical subsidized RDA housing project in Gauteng.
Right now, collective taxis represent the most common mode of transport
available to low-income households (72 percent of all public transport
trips). In an urban structure like that of Gauteng, this means of transport is
expensive and slow, but it is the only one serving the low-income
population.
Traditional mass transit (like buses, BRTs, or suburban trains) is unlikely
to be very useful in a dispersed urban structure like Gauteng. Recently built
BRT lines between the center of Johannesburg and the Orlando stadium and
Gautrain, and a modern rapid train linking Tambo International Airport with
the centers of Johannesburg and Pretoria are certainly useful additions to
Gauteng’s transport network, but they will not be of much use for low￾income households having to commute from dispersed suburbs.
In most cases, using light electric motorcycles that run at a maximum
speed of 35 km/h and can take a more direct route between origin and
destination would be the best way to improve the mobility of workers living
in RDP projects. These motorcycles could also link residences with
suburban railways and Gautrain stations. Petty crime and the possibility of
motorcycles being stolen when parked might well prevent the spread of this
mode of transport. The government could ensure the safety of these vehicles
on the road by creating specially marked lanes and, at destinations, bycreating safe guarded parking garages. What is clear is that the many
housing units built by RDP in South African cities are here to stay. The
challenge is now to link workers with their places of work by commuting
trips of less than 1 hour. Two lessons are to be learned from the South
African experience: Housing policy should not be designed without
understanding labor markets; and new urban transport systems have to be
designed to serve existing urban structures, no matter how flawed these
structures may be.
Example 2: Inclusionary Zoning in New York
The South African RDP experiment has delivered a large number of low￾income housing units at a high cost to the central government budget.
However, the total housing program cost has been transparent and the
annual number of units delivered regularly published. While many
governments want to appear “to do something” about housing affordability,
they may not be politically ready to allocate a large part of their budgets to
low-income housing the way the South African government did.
Inclusionary Zoning Is the Latest Stage of the Long Quest for a
Costless Solution to Affordable Housing
Finding a costless solution to providing affordable housing for the poor has
been the Holy Grail of many governments. The goal is to appear to do
something about an obvious social problem while not spending too much
taxpayer money on it. Creative new housing regulations had been the
approach most commonly used to find costless solutions to housing
affordability.
Having developers pay housing subsidies to poor households is the main
objective of these creative regulations. These types of policies are
politically attractive, as they appear generous to the poor without involving
any apparent disbursement of taxpayer money. Developers are usually not a
particularly popular social class and have the reputation of being rich. This
is the ultimate Robin Hood approach: take from the rich to give to the poor.
Here I briefly survey the various types of “costless” approaches to housing
affordability, and I will illustrate the inclusionary zoning strategy with a
recent example (2016) from New York.
The oldest and rather primitive regulatory approach simply tried to
outlaw poverty by establishing minimum standards that should obligedevelopers to provide “decent housing” for the poor. Formal developers
have to build houses at standards above the legal minimum. The minimum
standards have a minimum cost, which is usually higher than what the poor
can pay. Consequently, poor households cannot find a house they can afford
in the formal market. The poor who cannot find affordable formal housing
do not leave the city; they find housing in the informal sector, which by
definition supplies housing at prices the poor can afford but at standards
below the minimum legal ones.
The minimum-standard rules, as we have seen earlier, contribute to the
deterioration of housing conditions of low-income households by creating
an informal sector—either slums in poor countries or overcrowding and
informal subdivision of formal housing in rich countries.
A more recent and more sophisticated regulatory approach, usually
named “inclusive zoning” or “inclusionary zoning,” consists of enacting
municipal zoning ordinances that request developers of housing projects
above a certain size (usually above about 200 units) to provide from 20 to
30 percent of units at a price or rent fixed by the municipal government
below market price and defined as affordable. For the rest of the units, the
developer is free to use market prices or rents. Usually, as an incentive the
municipal government gives the developer a development bonus in the form
on an increase in FAR above the current one imposed by the zoning. In
some cities, the bonus may include property tax reductions for a number of
years. The current value of the FAR increase and of the tax reduction is
seldom calculated and is anyway off budget.
This strategy, seemingly providing affordable housing at no apparent cost
to the municipal government, has spread all over the world and is practiced
in many municipalities in various forms, from New York City to Mumbai!
Is there anything wrong with this method? Could it resolve the low housing
consumption problem common to many poor as well as economically
prosperous cities?
The inclusive zoning strategy is typical of what Angus Deaton,
previously quoted, calls the “need to do something” that trumps any real
analysis of the problem. Inclusive zoning belongs to the category of “free￾lunch” strategies, and as with any promise of a free lunch, it has some
major hidden flaws that I describe below using a specific example.
The Supply Mechanism of Inclusionary ZoningIt is obvious that private developers are not going to decrease the market
price of a percentage of the housing units they build out of charity. The
households who pay market price for their dwellings will eventually have to
pay for the subsidy provided to the below-market units. While the price of
the numbers of so-called affordable units produced is going to be lower than
market price, the prices of the majority of units sold at market prices are
going to become higher, in particular in cities where inclusionary zoning
becomes generalized. As a consequence, if the process is implemented over
a long period, the number of potential beneficiaries is going to increase,
because market housing prices will increase and the number of households
that can afford to generate the subsidy will decrease.
Let us look at a specific recent inclusionary zoning project in New York
as implemented in 2016. The building, called VIA 57, located on the West
Side of midtown Manhattan, has a total of 709 units, of which 142 (20
percent) are being offered as affordable housing to selected beneficiaries.
The annual income of potential beneficiary households is set by the city. To
qualify, potential beneficiaries must have an annual income between a
minimum of US$19,000 to a maximum of $50,000. In New York in 2016,
about 888,000 households were in this income bracket, and they represent
about 29 percent of all households, shown by red bars in the city’s income
distribution graph ( figure 6.21). The households who rent at market price in
the same building have an annual income varying from US$160,000 to
$470,000. Their income group, representing about 9 percent of all New
York households (about 240,000 households), is shown by blue bars in
figure 6.21.
Figure 6.21Household income distribution in New York, 2012, showing income ranges that benefit from
inclusionary zoning (red bars) and those that generate subsidies (blue bars). Source: Derived from US
Census American Community Survey, Integrated Public Use Microdata Series, Furman Center, New
York University.
The above numbers demonstrate that a limited number of households can
be a source of the cross-subsidy, one of the main flaws of inclusionary
zoning policy. In New York, the annual flow of affordable housing intended
to benefit 29 percent of the population depends on the number of housing
units being built each year for the 9 percent of the wealthier households.
Every eight newly built market units generate only two units of affordable
housing. The mismatch between the limited supply and the large potential
demand from eligible households is embedded in the concept itself of
inclusionary zoning.
Recent data confirm the mismatch. There were 91,000 applicants for the
254 affordable units available in a recently built apartment under
inclusionary zoning located on 42nd Street, in the same area of Manhattan
as the VIA 57 project. Final beneficiaries must be selected through lottery.
Indeed, the program is likely to have the same distributional impact as a
lottery, rather than that of a social program aiming to provide affordable
housing to low- to middle-income populations.
The mismatch between supply and demand is not the only problem faced
by inclusionary zoning. The very large difference between the market rent
and the subsidized rent of units in the same building with the same very
high standards is raising several issues over potential misattribution and
equity.
Luxury Apartments for the Happy Few Poor
One of the stated objectives of the inclusionary zoning in New York is to
provide a mix of incomes and social interactions in each neighborhood. It is
certainly a desirable objective. However, the objective of income mix in a
neighborhood has been extended to income mix in a building. The new
rules in New York stipulate that all subsidized apartments have to be mixed
randomly in the building: all subsidized apartments must have the same
design and standards as market ones. As inclusionary zoning can be
provided only in areas of very high demand and high prices, it means that
subsidized apartments have to have the same area, design, and standards asluxury apartments. For instance, three-bedroom apartments have to have
three bathrooms as expected in luxury apartments.
These new rules were applied as a reaction to the “poor door” incident. 19
In 2015, in a new apartment building that had subsidized units under
inclusionary zoning, the developer provided a separate entrance to give
access to subsidized apartments, which were all located in a segregated part
of the building. This created a popular outcry against the “poor door.” As a
result, it was decided that henceforth subsidized apartments had to be mixed
with markets units and to be of identical design. This new rule resulted in a
de facto objective shift.
The original objective of the inclusionary zoning was to provide as many
affordable housing units as possible to a specific low-income group. After
the identical-unit rule, the policy objective shifted to providing similar
housing units for rich and poor. From redistribution to equality. While an
equalitarian objective is desirable in the delivery of health, justice, and
education, it might not be feasible for housing without lowering
substantially the housing standards of everybody else. This was the policy
used in the Soviet Union and in pre-reform Communist China. A standard
design for housing was applied throughout the country and was made
available to all (with the exception of a few high-level party cadre).
Let us look at the equity consequences of the current New York
inclusionary policy. Figure 6.22 shows both the subsidized and the market
rents paid by tenants in the same building. The subsidized rent varies from
US$565 to $1,067 per month depending on apartment size, household size,
and household income. The market rents, as advertised by the developer on
its website, range from US$3,400 to $8,700 per month. These are the lowest
rents, advertised as “starting at. …” The subsidies consisting of the
difference between the market rent and the subsidized rent are increasing
with income and apartment size. The highest subsidy of US$8,957 per
month goes to households with yearly incomes of US$29,000–40,000 for a
three-bedroom apartment. The yearly rent subsidy of US$107,000
represents 3.7 times the beneficiary’s income!Figure 6.22
Market rents and subsidized rent at the VIA 57 building, New York. Sources: Data is from application
from for subsidized apartment at VIA 57 and developer advertisement for market rate rental in same
building.
Is the enormous rent subsidy per household an efficient way to use the
large tax collected from market tenants—about US$1,000 per month per
market apartment? (See figure 6.23 for details on aggregated subsidies.) If a
household qualifying for the subsidy was given the choice between
receiving an additional income of US$107,000 a year or the possibility of
living in a three-bedroom apartment in the VIA 57 building for a monthly
rent of US$857, would the household prefer the apartment to the additional
income? My guess is that the additional income would be likely to be
preferred. With this additional income, the household would rent a more
modest apartment with one bathroom and three bedrooms and would use
the difference between the market rent and the subsidy for other needs. The
value of the subsidized apartment to the beneficiary tenant is less than the
cost of subsidy that the taxpayer is paying for it. Urban economists call this
the consumer surplus. For instance, Richard Green and Stephen Malpezzi
have written convincingly on the issue of consumer surplus in subsidized
apartments. 20 In many cases the consumer surplus is lower than the
taxpayer cost representing the subsidy and therefore results in a net loss to
general welfare. Green and Malpezzi demonstrate that forcing a large
subsidy on poor households, when this subsidy can be obtained only by
living in an apartment that the household would not have selected, is a very
inefficient way of allocating tax dollars.Figure 6.23
Rents and subsidies received by inclusionary zoning beneficiaries residing in the VIA 57 building,
New York. Source: Application form for subsidized apartment at VIA57 and developer advertisement
for market rate rental in same building. http://www.via57west.com/#neighborhood-gallery;
http://www.57and11lottery.com/assets/VIA_Ad_and_ApplicationUpdated￾d02a4451c02942f28cc0fb5af0b9b5f4312dab4999438b7c85c4f01a3071151d.pdf.
The large subsidies also raise a serious equity issue. The income
distribution curve in figure 6.21 shows that the subsidy is restricted to
households with incomes ranging from US$19,000 to $50,000 per year. The
limit is obviously arbitrary. Under the inclusionary zoning, households
earning US$49,000 a year might get a subsidy that amounts to US$100,000
every year, but those earning US$51,000 a year will get nothing. The
inequity is even worse for poorer households earning less than US$19,000 a
year who will not qualify for any rent subsidies under the program.
The housing consumption profile shown in figure 6.12 is suddenly
broken in segments with a small group of low earners consuming much
more than households that earn just a little more than the group members.
This is not equitable. Equity could ensure that every household below a set
income is guaranteed a minimum level of housing consumption, not that
some consume a lot and others very little.
The benefits of being in the required income brackets are so high that
there are large incentives to try to game the system, for instance, by
underreporting income or for one member of a household to abstain from
working during the application period so that the household’s income
remains within the beneficiary bracket.
A Frozen Pool of Affordable Housing
Do the newly built subsidized units under inclusionary zoning constitute a
pool of affordable housing that will be available in the future to households
with a qualifying income? To constitute a permanent pool of affordable
housing, the households living in them should be able to move when the
units no longer fit their needs, as happens for those households in themarket part of the housing stock. It would mean that the subsidized units
should have a constant vacancy rate of about 4 or 5 percent, so that new
tenants can progressively replace the original tenants. This is unlikely to
happen, as the subsidy, obtained through a lottery system, is linked to the
apartment and not to the household. The subsidy is not transportable, and it
is so large that the original tenant is unlikely to enjoy an increase in income
that would be large enough to convince them to give up the subsidy.
Imagine a young household, for instance, a schoolteacher having just
obtained a job at a school in the neighborhood. The household’s income
would most probably qualify them for inclusionary zoning. Would they ever
find a vacancy in the VIA 57 building or any other similar building in the
neighborhood? This would be very unlikely, as no subsidized original
tenant is likely to ever abandon her subsidy. By contrast, in market rentals,
households with increasing income are likely to move out of their current
housing units and look for an alternative corresponding better to their new
income or to a new job location. However, with such a large subsidy, no
original tenant in subsidized inclusionary zoning apartment is likely to ever
move out, even if their income increases twofold, as moving out would
represent an immediate large drop in housing consumption. In New York,
the subsidy is granted in perpetuity. It is therefore likely that descendants of
original tenants will succeed their parents when they retire, as currently
happens for rent-controlled apartments. The inclusionary zoning apartments
are, therefore, unlikely to constitute a pool of affordable housing in the
future. In addition, the large subsidy attached to a specific apartment tends
to decrease the mobility of tenants who benefit from it.Incentive to Sublet
If presented with a possibility to receive the monthly subsidy as income,
tenants would probably prefer this option rather than remaining in the
luxury apartment allocated to them. But this possibility is not legally open
to them. However, the large difference between the subsidized rent and the
market price constitutes a strong incentive to cash the subsidy informally, if
there is such a possibility. A tenant with a monthly income of US$2,500,
paying a subsidized monthly rent of US$843 for a three-bedroom apartment
with a monthly market rent of US$9,800, must have a powerful incentive to
sublet it informally to a more affluent household for, say, US$8,000. The
total monthly income of the original tenant becomes 8,000 + 2,500 − 843 =
US$9,657 per month. With this income, the tenant can easily find an
apartment in a less desirable location and with more modest amenities for a
monthly rent of, say, US$1,500, which is equal to the median rent in
Manhattan in 2014. 21 The new disposable income of the tenant (income
minus rent) becomes 9,657 − 1,500 = US$8,157 per month, instead of 2,500
− 843 = US$1,657 per month if the tenant remains in the subsidized unit.
This is a very powerful incentive. Whether the tenant takes the risk of
subletting illegally or not, it is clear that she will be better-off with a
monthly disposable income of US$9,657 compared to US$1,657. Anybody
interested in the welfare of this tenant should advocate for her right to
sublet at market price. After all, she won the lottery!
The Real Cost to Government to Provide Incentives to Developers
So far, I have discussed the impact of inclusionary zoning on tenants
benefiting from such zoning regulations. Let us now look at inclusionary
zoning from the perspective of developers and governments. Developers
cannot provide 20 percent of the apartments they produce at below-market
rents without going bankrupt if other developers are allowed to rent 100
percent of their apartments at the full market rate. A government wanting to
use inclusionary zoning to provide housing units below market price
therefore has only two choices: make inclusionary zoning voluntary but
provide fiscal and regulatory incentives to compensate developers’ cost, or
make inclusionary zoning compulsory for all developers in some designated
area, thus leveling up the playing field for all developers who are competing
in the same neighborhood.The incentive approach has a high cost to government and to the public,
as we will see, but at least it can be tested and monitored to adjust
incentives. The compulsory approach can be applied to a smaller number of
neighborhoods where the demand for high-priced apartments is known to
be high. This approach greatly reduces the number of subsidized units that
can be produced. The compulsory approach acts as a direct tax on market
units and therefore increases their price and reduces demand. In a city like
New York—and specially in Manhattan, where vacancies are scarce—
reducing the supply of housing units in general might not be a good idea.
Whether the voluntary or compulsory approach is used to produce
affordable housing, inclusionary zoning does not look like a free lunch
anymore.
When inclusionary zoning is voluntary, the government must provide
developers with incentives, either a regulatory change allowing more
apartments to be built on the same parcel, or a tax abatement (or both). The
regulatory change offered as an incentive is usually a bonus in FAR (i.e.,
permission to build more floor space than the current zoning allows) in
exchange for building a set number units priced below market rents. In New
York, the inclusionary zoning program, in addition to a zoning bonus of
about 20 percent, used to include a tax incentive called 421-a that exempted
the developer from an increase in property tax due to development for up to
20 years. The 421-a exemption expired in June 2015, but some new
buildings are still receiving it because they applied for it before the
termination of the program. It is uncertain whether the New York state
legislature will ever renew it because of its cost. New inclusionary zoning
projects will have to rely entirely on the FAR bonus as an incentive. That
might be the reason the city has just established new areas in which
inclusionary zoning is now compulsory.
The Cost of a Free Lunch: Tax Incentives and FAR Bonuses
According to a June 2015 report from the New York City Independent
Budget Office, the current 421-a tax incentive program costs the city
US$905,000 per apartment rented below market for the duration of the tax
incentive (amounting to an annual tax cost of US$45,000 per housing unit).
The yearly tax incentive per apartment is slightly less than the average
subsidy per year per apartment (shown in figure 6.23) calculated for theVIA 57 project. So much for the Robin Hood policy of taking from the rich
to give to the poor!
The annual cost to government is equivalent to the annual incomes of
beneficiaries at the high end of the target income bracket. The tax incentive
is obviously very costly, and its impact on New York’s budget increases
every time new below-market units are created. For obvious reasons, it is
politically more expedient to approve tax incentives than to dedicate a part
of the municipal budget to subsidize below-market housing. The cost to
government is the same, but the calculation of tax incentives (such as the
421-a program) that extend far into the future is complex and therefore not
very transparent. A tax incentive sounds much more innocent than a
taxpayer-paid subsidy, but of course the amount paid by the taxpayer is the
same. The lack of transparency and the fact that the incentive is paid by
installment into the future make it easier to allocate subsidies in the form of
tax incentives to developers than to provide an equivalent direct subsidy to
households to buy or rent an apartment of the quality and location of their
choice.
The 421-a tax incentive program was initiated in 1971 as a stimulus for
the construction of residential buildings in Manhattan, and even luxury
hotels qualified. For instance, the Grand Hyatt Hotel in mid-Manhattan,
completed in 1980, received a tax subsidy that was evaluated at US$359
million by the New York Times.
22 Initially, to receive the tax incentive,
developers were not required to construct some affordable housing units.
This requirement was added only recently.
In addition to the tax incentive, the developer who agrees to provide 20
percent of below-market-rent units receives a FAR bonus of about 20
percent on average. This means that if the current zoning allows a developer
to build an area of floor space equivalent to 10 times the lot area (FAR =
10), under the incentive zoning, the developer will be able to build a floor
area equal to 12 times the lot area (FAR = 12).
This bonus FAR increase raises an interesting question. FARs are
supposed to be limited by regulations because of the negative externalities
that they might produce, for instance, casting shadows on other buildings,
sidewalk overcrowding, or other problems. But the government practice of
increasing FAR at will as an incentive for developers to do something that
is deemed socially desirable demonstrates that the negative externality does
not really exist, or at least is so low that it can be overlooked easily byurban planners when convenient. A government using regulatory constraints
limiting FAR to negotiate with developers has a strong incentive to increase
these constraints to the point of making development financially infeasible,
so that developers are forced to negotiate with the city. By keeping FAR
relatively low in areas where demand for floor space is high, the city creates
an artificial shortage of floor space and contributes to the high price of
housing. In areas where demand for floor space is much higher than the
floor space allowed by the regulatory FAR, the city can then demand that
developers provide for “free” something that the city wants. It might be a
plaza, a park, or any amenity the city would like to have built. Under this
system, the city acts like a monopolist on the supply of new floor space. It
has an incentive to keep the supply of floor space low in order to keep the
price of floor space high. Thus, it is ironic that the city feels obliged to
increase regulatory pressure and thus makes housing more expensive for
everybody in order to be able to produce a limited number of housing units
below market price!
The welfare cost to citizens of keeping the FAR below demand is difficult
to calculate. As for tax incentive, the difficulty of calculating the cost of the
FAR incentive is one of the main political advantages for adopting such a
system. This is probably why FAR incentives are increasingly used around
the world, under the pretext of extracting a few affordable units from
developers of luxury apartments. The restrictions on FAR have devastating
effects in cities like Mumbai.
Inclusionary Zoning Is an Expensive Way of Creating a Few
“Affordable” Apartments
Inclusionary zoning is obviously not the miracle solution that planners and
politicians would like us to believe it is. Inclusionary zoning shows the
shortcomings common to all housing supply side subsidies. It prevents
mobility for households benefiting from it, because the subsidy is attached
to a specific housing unit; its cost is not transparent and usually increases
with time. It fails to adjust the subsidy to changing income. It makes
beneficiary households overconsume housing at a high cost to the
community. And finally, it fails to respond to demand for housing at a
specific rent in sufficient quantities. According to the New York City
Department of Housing Preservation and Development, an average of only172 units per year have been produced through inclusionary zoning
between the start of the program in 1988 and 2013!
In many ways, New York is a very successful city. It remains one of the
world leaders in art, culture, fashion, finance, engineering, and technology.
However, its housing policy, which in the past has been mainly based on
supply side subsidies, remains a failure. In 2015, 42 percent of all dwelling
units in New York (or 1.3 million housing units) were subsidized and rented
below market price. In addition, a total of 405,000 households are currently
on various waiting lists for rent assistance. There is nothing wrong with
subsidizing the housing of the poorest households, but when the number of
households being subsidized is coming close to half the city’s households, it
might be time to look for different solutions. Subsidies imply the transfer
from the majority to the poorest. But when the recipients of subsidies are
close to becoming the majority, it is evident that in the end their city taxes
are paying largely for their own subsidies.
Tinkering with more supply side subsidy schemes to add more subsidized
units to the current ones might not help anymore. It is time to look for
radically different solutions. One of them, already partially in use, has been
demand side rent subsidies or what is called in the United States “Section 8
housing.” It consists of complementing qualifying households’ income with
a housing subsidy that allows them to search for housing units produced by
the market, in the location and standards that households select themselves.
When the household’s income increases, the subsidy is progressively
decreased. Households whose income rises above the maximum cease to
qualify for the subsidy, but they may stay in the same apartment and pay the
market rent. Because their subsidy is portable, households may change
location and keep the same rent subsidy. Section 8 housing thus removes
the more serious downsides of supply side subsidies.
Up to March 2016, in New York, 90,150 households have benefited from
Section 8 rental subsidies, and an additional 147,000 are on a waiting list
for the program. However, demand side subsidies increase the demand for
housing by adding the subsidies to the income of beneficiaries. If the supply
of new housing is constrained by arbitrary regulations like low FARs, for
instance, or by a poor urban transport system, the demand subsidies may
result in higher housing prices, not in more housing units.
A change in housing policy would require a general audit of all zoning
regulations and construction practices that currently are responsible for highhousing prices. Many neighborhoods in the New York metropolitan area are
zoned for detached individual housing. There is a strong case to
progressively amend these zoning regulations to allow the construction of
townhouses in the locations where demand is high and where access to
transit is adequate. The informal and illegal subdivision of detached houses
in some suburbs of New York indicates a demand for more housing units on
smaller lots. Finally, the limits on FAR should not be imposed to obtain a
strong bargaining position when the city is negotiating with developers.
FAR and height limitations should be set purely as a response to real
quantifiable constraints, such as historical preservation or, say, air-traffic
flight paths.
Finally, housing supply could be greatly increased by improving the
urban transport system. Areas with low demand because of poor
accessibility to jobs have necessarily a low density. Improving accessibility
to jobs by increasing transport speed or introducing new transport
technology should increase the de facto land supply of cities. Unless the
regulatory and infrastructure housing supply constraints are removed,
adding new subsidies to housing, whether supply side or demand side,
would have very little effect on the welfare of the city’s lowest-income
households.
The above example of inclusionary zoning is not just an anecdotal
illustration of a poorly designed housing policy. It represents a trend in
many of the most economically successful cities in the world. The
increasing regulatory frenzy that characterizes some cities like New York
imposes large economic costs on the entire country. In a paper published in
2015, the economists Chang-Tai Hsieh and Enrico Moretti found that,
between 1964 and 2009, the high cost of housing in some US cities relative
to wages had lowered aggregate US GDP by 13.5 percent:
Most of the loss was likely caused by increased constraints to housing supply in high productivity
cities like New York, San Francisco and San Jose. Lowering regulatory constraints in these cities to
the level of the median city would expand their work force and increase U.S. GDP by 9.5%. 23
Many of the regulations recently introduced in cities around the world
that aim to improve the housing consumption of low-income households,
not only do not deliver the number of housing units promised, but also
contribute to lowering the economic opportunity of the very people they are
supposed to help. It is time to audit these regulations and policies, taking
into account the increasingly valuable economic literature on the subject.Cities Are Reluctant to Accept Housing Standards That Are Affordable
for the Poor: The Exceptions
Cities in low-income countries, where urban migration annually adds a
large number of unskilled people, cannot afford to subsidize the housing of
the large number of poor. However, cities in Indonesia, using an
“integration” approach to low-income settlements, have been successful in
absorbing new migrants into the urban labor force while maintaining an
acceptable level of environmental health in the poorest neighborhoods.
In many Asian countries, large numbers of people migrating to cities
have been creating dense urban villages in an urban setting but without any
urban infrastructure. These small, simple structures provided the shelter
these people needed at a price they could afford. It also allowed them to
participate in the urban economy. However, the lack of connection to the
city infrastructure soon created unacceptable sanitary conditions when these
urban villages aggregated in large contiguous neighborhoods of several
hundred thousand people. In addition, the lack of schools and health
facilities contributed to slowing down or even preventing the integration of
younger generations into urban society.
The predictable first reaction of governments has usually been to set
minimum urbanization standards to prevent the legal construction of these
unsanitary urban villages. The regulations made the situation worse, as they
prevented these informal settlements from obtaining normal urban services
from the municipality. They also created a risk of future demolition, which
discouraged housing improvement that the households would have naturally
done themselves. Eventually, many governments slowly regularized the
older informal settlements in a piecemeal fashion, as is the practice in India,
for instance. But the regularization of informal settlements usually had been
conducted with a provision that after a set date, no more informal
settlements would be regularized.
The outcome of these successive policies—first ostracism, then benign
neglect followed by reluctant integration—has been disastrous. A
significant share of the urban labor force, otherwise gainfully employed,
live in large “informal” settlements often with unsafe water supplies,
deficient sanitation, and sporadic solid waste collection. In Mumbai, one of
the economic powerhouses of Asia, 60 percent of the population lives in
slums.I discuss below two case studies in Indonesia and China. These countries,
for different reasons and in different ways, took a different approach to
integrating affordable low housing standards into the city infrastructure.
The outcome for the poor migrant households was significantly better than
in the countries where a strict regulatory approach had been followed. In
these two countries, the government allowed low-income households to use
the standards they could afford and to make their own trade-offs between
location, road space, lot space, and floor space. The government role was
limited to providing connections from these settlements to the trunk city
networks for transport, water, sewer, and storm drainage.
Example 3: Indonesia’s Urban Enclaves with No Minimum Standards
In the densely populated island of Java, expanding cities absorb large
existing villages, called “kampungs,” whose population then integrates
rapidly into the urban labor force. The former agricultural fields are soon
built on by formal developers, while new informal constructions are added
in the kampungs that have been absorbed into the city. So far, this is not too
different from what happens in the rest of Asia, where countries are
urbanizing rapidly.
There is one important difference. Indonesian kampungs always had a
formal robust administrative structure based on traditional laws, and that
administrative structure has been able to survive their absorption into a
larger urban municipality. Confronted with urbanization, the kampung
traditional leadership organized themselves to absorb newcomers. Lots
were subdivided, but always on the initiative of the original owner, and
within the kampung traditional regulatory constraints and social norms. To
use modern terminology, we could compare kampungs to a form of
condominium association: They have their own internal regulations and
norms, forming a sort of local authority at the lower level than a
municipality or a ward. One difference from a condominium is that the
kampung local microgovernment also has jurisdiction over land use.
Therefore, adjustments can be made to plot size, width of access to
individual lots, and drainage of waste water by using traditional norms
developed over centuries of practice of good-neighbor rules while
overruling the development standards imposed by the municipality that
surrounds the kampung. Formal developers building on adjacent greenfieldland, however, had to follow the municipal land use standards rules
concerning land development and subdivisions.
Because the income and preferences of new settlers were well known to
the original kampung inhabitants, land use standards evolved to adjust to
the new economic reality facing kampungs; standards were adjusted to
increasing land values, so that plots would remain affordable to newcomers,
who were usually poor migrants. Because the local traditional norms were
respected, it did not result in an anarchic aggregation of houses that would
be wasteful of land, as often happens in spontaneous squatter settlements
where migrants aggregate without forming an organized community. A
network of small roads, footpaths, and passages was maintained, reflecting
the former village structure.
As Indonesian cities developed, the kampungs located closer to city
centers densified more rapidly, as expected by their favorable locations
closer to employment. The low income of their inhabitants, the lack of
access to finance, the fragmentation of properties into small lots, and the
lack of access to infrastructure prevented the construction of multistory
buildings. However, the subdivision of existing village lots and the
narrowness of internal access streets reflected the opportunity cost of land
and soon resulted in much higher densities than that of the original villages,
often resulting in densities of more than 500 people per hectare.
However, this increased density has a downside. The traditional source of
water and means of sanitation—consisting of shallow wells and seepage
pits—became grossly inadequate to serve the new higher densities. The low
absorption capacity of the traditional sanitary system transformed the
kampungs into dense unsanitary slums. The traditional storm drainage
network, built around former irrigation canals, was insufficient to prevent
flooding during the monsoon because of enhanced impermeability of the
area caused by urbanization. 24
Innovative Housing Policy Concentrating Subsidies on Infrastructure,
Not on Housing Structure
So far the history of the Indonesian kampungs does not appear to be very
different from that of informal settlements in many other developing
countries. What made a difference was a decision taken in 1969 by the
government of Indonesia to concentrate its resources on the improvement of
the kampungs’ infrastructure without trying to remove or restructure theexisting housing, however small or inadequate it was. The provision of
urban infrastructure and services to kampungs was called the Kampung
Improvement Program (KIP). Compared to the prevailing housing policies
of developing countries in the 1960s, which consisted mostly of bulldozing
informal settlements to relocate their inhabitants in public housing flats, this
approach was revolutionary.
And, even more exceptional, since 1969 to this day, the Indonesian
government’s support for KIP has been unwavering, in spite of political
upheaval and constitutional changes. The government housing policy
objective consists of allowing the poor to settle in and around existing
villages at the standards of their choice, while the government concentrates
its efforts not on housing construction but on gradually improving
residential infrastructure and services to all residential settlements. The
policy has proved largely successful. The living and sanitary standards in
most kampungs of Indonesia are far above what is found in informal
settlements in countries with similar GDPs.
No kampung was ever bulldozed. No large groups of households were
promised free housing. No large central government institution has tried to
replace the many small KIP contracts for civil work on infrastructure in
kampungs with larger contracts involving the construction of a massive
program of public housing.
Operationally, the KIP continues to provide financial and technical
assistance to the existing kampungs’ traditional administrative structure to
build connections to the municipal water supply network, to pave foot
paths, to build drains using existing rights-of-way, to establish a system of
solid waste collection that feeds into main collection bins that are part of the
municipal solid waste collection system. The maintenance of the internal
network and waste collection was and to this day is managed by the
kampung community itself, with some financial assistance from the
municipal government. The decentralization of decision making and the
participation of the communities were embedded in the KIP from the
beginning.
The KIP has been complemented with citywide investments in transport
and, most importantly for Southeast Asia, in storm drainage networks to
prevent periodic flooding of residential areas.
Indonesia, with a GDP per capita of US$10,500 in 2015, remains a lower￾middle-income country, according to the World Bank. The overall standardsof living reflect this income category. However, because the government
concentrated its scarce resources on providing urban infrastructure to all
urban residents, instead of increasing the housing consumption of a few
poor households selected by lottery for public housing, every poor
Indonesian received benefits. And these benefits increase over time. The
government focus on infrastructure assistance allowed households to use
their own resources to invest in their own housing, either as self-occupied
dwellings or as investment in rental housing. The housing standards,
defined as the size and quality of the structure, may therefore vary from
very low to good in the same neighborhood, but access to safe water,
sanitation, education, and health is ensured for all.
The demand-driven land use standards allowed by regulations in
Indonesia are illustrated by the site plans of two neighborhoods in
Surabaya, Indonesia, as surveyed in 2010 ( figure 6.24). On the left in the
figure, a kampung site plan shows the variety of plot and housing sizes that
are possible in the same neighborhood. Some structures located in the back
of lots facing the main passageways are very small and of poor quality, but
they have access to safe water and sanitation. They have also access to the
same schools and health facilities as their more affluent neighbors.
Figure 6.24
Kampung and middle-class housing site plans in Surabaya, Indonesia. Source: GIS analysis of
Surabaya topographical map by Marie-Agnes Bertaud.
The road system allows only emergency and construction vehicles but is
adequate for local motorcycle and pedestrian traffic. On the right in the
figure, a site plan designed by a formal developer, which shows a different,
more standard type of residential layout with much less variety in lot size
and more homogeneity in house area, reflecting middle-class standards.Kampung Integration Policy Has Successfully Provided a Flow of Low￾Income Housing
Because the kampung boundaries have always been protected since
Indonesia started its rapid urbanization, kampungs are found in every
neighborhood of Indonesian cities. Consequently, kampungs are always
located side by side with commercial areas and higher-income areas,
providing a socially desirable income mix at the neighborhood level.
Because kampungs and middle-class areas share the same trunk
infrastructure for water and sanitation, little discrimination is possible in
public investment.
I have observed kampungs’ evolution and improvement on a regular
basis, since my first work trip to Indonesia in 1977. Many housing units in
kampung areas look more middle class than low income. This reflects the
increase in household incomes in Indonesia over this period. The inability
to use a car as a means of transport in kampungs (because of the narrowness
of the streets) prevents any large displacement of the poor from the best￾located kampungs. The low road standards are the best guarantee against
massive gentrification.
Some households that have reached sufficiently high incomes are likely
to leave the kampung and move into formal development neighborhoods.
This movement creates vacancies in the kampungs that are immediately
filled with poorer households who rent or buy a dwelling. Low-income
households do not need to be on a waiting list and do not have to submit a
proof of their income to buy or rent in a kampung. Expansion zoning plans
are reserving land around existing kampungs located in the periphery to
ensure a flow of new low-income housing in the future.
The Indonesia kampungs and the KIP program demonstrate that it is
possible for a government to provide large benefits to its large low-income
population without creating long waiting lists. It shows that allowing
standards to adjust and, consequently, population densities to float, not only
provides affordable housing but also improves the city structure by allowing
higher densities in areas accessible to jobs.
Example 4: China’s Urban Villages
Legal Status of Land in Chinese Villages
As in Indonesia, many cities in China are absorbing large numbers of
villages as they expand. I will use the term “urban villages” to indicate thevillages surrounded by an urban area administered by a municipality. The
land occupied by these villages has a special status by law. The use of
village land is controlled by a village collective, not by the municipality,
although according to the constitution of China, all land belongs “to the
people” (i.e., the central government). But there is a difference between full
ownership, which involves the ability to sell property, and ownership of
land use rights only, which is limited to the right to develop land and to rent
floor space or land to a third party. Villagers in China are free to set their
own building standards and land use; they can rent land and whatever
structure they build to a third party, but they cannot sell either the structure
or the land. Only the government can acquire land from farmers by
expropriation with compensation.
For Chinese farmers living in urban villages, therefore, the value of their
land parcel is represented by the present value of the flow of rents generated
by whatever structure they can build on this parcel. Contrary to farmers
living in traditional market economies, they do not have any incentive to
sell their land to a developer, as the compensation price they would receive
from the government is likely to be less than the capitalized value of the
flow of rents. This explains why villagers in China resist selling land to the
government whenever they can, and many protest forcible acquisition.
When the built-up area of an expanding city reaches a village, the
municipal government expropriates the fields around it but usually abstains
from expropriating the village itself, as the compensation paid to villagers is
based on a “replacement value” of the floor space demolished, while the
fields are compensated based on the value of crops. Expropriating the
village and providing alternative housing units is therefore much more
expensive for government than expropriating open fields. As a result,
villages are often initially spared demolition and become an enclaved urban
village with a special status over the control of land use. As a city expands,
the land value increases in the villages that were initially at the fringe of
urbanization, to the point of becoming higher than the compensation to be
paid to farmers for whatever structures they have built. The municipal
government then tends to evict farmers after compensation or relocation
and sell the land to developers. However, the process is long and
cumbersome, and many urban villages survive a long time before
redevelopment occurs.Redevelopment of Villages Driven by Demand for Housing
While the village survives, the outcome is roughly similar to that in the
Indonesian kampungs. That is, the villages form legal enclaves where the
use of land is controlled by a small community—the village collective—
that is independent of the municipality surrounding it. As in Indonesia, the
land use within the village boundaries is driven by demand rather than by
urban regulations designed by distant urban planners. As a result, land use
standards—heights of buildings, areas of apartments, widths of streets—are
the object of trade-offs reflecting the priority of the inhabitants as rents keep
increasing as the cities expand.
Why Are Villages Major Suppliers of Low-Cost Housing?
Most of the residential land in formally developed areas over greenfields is
auctioned to developers, who build and sell apartments as condominiums.
Chinese developers usually do not build apartments for rental, as is done in
US and European cities. The demand for apartments for sale comes from
the newly affluent and well-educated city dwellers whose family have been
living and working in cities for one or more generations. Recent migrants
do not have the accumulated capital and regular income that would allow
them to buy an apartment with a mortgage and a substantial down payment.
Rental opportunities are few in the formal market.
In Chinese cities, therefore, the supply of housing units affordable to new
migrants is mainly provided by rental units in urban villages. The standards
and the rents of newly developed housing units constantly adjust to
demand. As in Indonesia, some housing units might be overcrowded, they
may have to share a bathroom with other units, but all of them have access
to a safe water supply and sanitation, solid waste is removed regularly, and
all housing units in urban villages are close to urban transport. Because
urban incomes in China are much higher than in Indonesia, urban villagers
can afford to build several-story buildings, if the projected flow of market
rent is sufficient to ensure an attractive financial return.
Land use in a village collective is therefore entirely market driven,
without any hindrances from regulations. Therefore, it evolves rapidly to
reflect economic changes and the priorities of the prospective tenants.
Chinese urban villages located in cities where incomes have risen rapidly
are therefore a unique laboratory to observe what happens when urban land
use standards are continuously being reevaluated as a function of changingrents. This is in contrast to the majority of cities in market economies,
where land use is deliberately constrained by regulations to prevent
changes, even when these changes would make economic sense and
increase the welfare of the city.
Rapid Adaptation to Economic Changes in Shenzhen
In no other city in the world has economic change has been more rapid than
in Shenzhen—a city with special economic status, created by Deng
Xiaoping, China’s leader from 1978 to 1989. The territory surrounding the
fishing town of Shenzhen was declared a special economic zone in May
1980. This special status allowed markets to drive prices, rents, and salaries
within the perimeter of the zone. This was truly revolutionary for China.
Outside Shenzhen, at the time, salaries and prices were still largely fixed by
governments, and housing was provided for a token rent by employers or
municipalities. In Shenzhen, salaries were much higher than in the rest of
China, but workers had to find housing on the market. Some employers
provided dormitories for their workers, but a market rent was deducted
from their salaries. 25
In 1980, the town of Shenzhen itself had a population of only 30,000
people. However, it was surrounded by villages whose aggregate population
numbered around 300,000 that were soon integrated into Shenzhen’s labor
market. By 2015, Shenzhen’s population had reached 14 million people,
having grown at an astonishing average yearly growth rate of 11 percent!
The high productivity level of the Shenzhen labor force and the consequent
higher salaries compared to the rest of China explain the rapid demographic
growth rate. In 2014, Shenzhen per capita GDP reached US$25,000, the
highest GDP per capita in China. The combination of free markets, a
libertarian approach to housing standards in urban villages, and a very high
population and household income growth rates produced Shenzhen’s
unusual low-income housing design that I describe below.
In the 1980s, the initial pattern of Shenzhen village streets was irregular
and the lots uneven, with the majority of houses having two floors covered
by a traditional tile roof. The original occupants of the village were farmers
or fishermen. They were soon deprived of their farming land and of their
fishing boat landings as the land was acquired by the government to
develop the infrastructure, factories, administrative buildings, and formal
housing that formed the backbone of Shenzhen economic development. Theindividual plots of land on which their houses were built were the only
assets remaining to the former farmers and fishermen. By building
additional rooms that could be rented at market prices to migrants, villagers
could produce a flow of revenue that would more than compensate their
former agricultural or fishing incomes. In less than 10 years, the job of
Shenzhen’s farmers changed from collective rural laborer to real estate
investors, managers, and builders!
Many villages were located close to the new Shenzhen city center. They
became soon close to newly built metro stations that provided access to
many more jobs in a shorter commuting time. The demand for housing in
the villages’ favorable locations increased as more jobs were created within
commuting distance. The demand for floor space from migrant workers
became so high that it became difficult to increase the number of floors
around the irregular street pattern of the original villages.
The Startling Physical Layout of Shenzhen Villages
To increase the potential return on the land they controlled, Shenzhen
former farmers formed associations to pool their resources in land and
capital, then redesigned and redeveloped their original irregular street
layout to optimize the use of land. In the new design, the villagers were not
constrained by regulations; instead they were guided only by their
knowledge of the requirement of prospective residential or business renters
and their own priorities, as most of the original villagers still live within the
redesigned villages.
To obtain a higher ratio of floor space to land, villagers designed a grid
pattern with square blocks of about 14 meters along the street axis. Street
widths varied from a very low 2.6 to 6 meters. The footprint of buildings
covered 100 percent of the lots. A staircase gave access to a central hall,
with access to four apartments of about 22 square meters each, including a
small kitchen and toilet. Lower floors located on the wider streets are often
rented for retail shops, businesses, or even small manufacturing.
These types of new development were nicknamed “handshake” buildings
because of the short distance between the windows of apartments on
opposite sides of a street. On average apartment buildings were about seven
floors high ( figure 6.25). Within the village perimeter, the population
density is about 3,000 people per hectare. By contrast, densities in mostnew urban residential developments in China are about 700 people per
hectare.
Figure 6.25
Three-dimensional view and typical land use of a Shenzhen handshake village.
The contiguous area of individual urban villages redeveloped as
handshake buildings are limited to a few hectares per village. Apartment
buildings are seldom more than five buildings removed from a main road
with access to public transport. While the streets giving access to apartment
blocks are extremely narrow and can give access only to construction and
emergency vehicles, no block is farther away than about 80 meters from a
main road.
The first Shenzhen urban villages redeveloped in this dense and unusual
pattern were eventually copied by other villages in the metropolitan area,
but to my knowledge, never outside Shenzhen. This suggests that this
unusual residential design received wide acceptance from renters and
owners in Shenzhen but also that the trade-offs that generate the design are
also unique to Shenzhen.
There are regional cultural precedents for the high densities of handshake
buildings. The old walled city of Kowloon was located in the Hong Kong
Special Administrative Region, just 27 kilometers from Shenzhen. It was
demolished in 1993. The old walled city had a similar structure and gave
shelter to about 33,000 people with a density of about 12,000 people per
hectare on a total area of about 2.6 hectares, or about four times the density
of Shenzhen handshake villages. The acceptance of high population
densities depends more on cultural factors than on a normative rationale.Design Evaluation
The physical layout of handshake housing is so unusual that it deserves
some comments. I do not know of a city in any part of the world where this
type of building could pass local land use regulations. However, the original
design has been replicated with some variants across the Shenzhen area,
demonstrating its appeal and acceptability. Walking through the alleys and
streets of a handshake village is a unique experience of thriving intense
urban life usually absent from “affordable housing” built to government
norms. While the geometry of the handshake buildings offers few
variations, except for an occasional wider commercial street, the inside of
the identical buildings with their central hall on each floor allows for a
maximum of flexibility. The rooms can be assembled in larger apartments
or fragmented into individual smaller units of one room only.
The handshake buildings contradict everything we expect from a modern
residential area in terms of abundant fresh air and green walking areas.
Their design makes a deliberate extreme trade-off between maximum floor
space on a minimum amount of land, in the best possible location to access
a maximum number of jobs in a minimum commuting time. Is there any
justification for the complete abandonment of public open spaces in a
residential area? For reducing street dimensions and distance between
buildings to the width of an emergency vehicle? To have windows through
which the sun will never shine? The most radical architect-planner,
including myself, would never dare propose such types of standards. Only
the users themselves could generate such a radical residential design and
justify these extreme trade-offs between open space and access to jobs and
amenities.
From Ebenezer Howard to Le Corbusier, we have been taught to value
fresh air, trees, and open space as the indispensable design attributes of
residential areas. But Howard and Le Corbusier were themselves reacting to
the nineteenth-century hovels produced by the Industrial Revolution in the
dismal cold and humid climates of London and Paris. Their revolutionary
proposals were linked to a historic moment and to a specific geographical
location.
A review of the design of public housing around the world may suggest
that Ebenezer Howard and Le Corbusier may have set residential norms that
are permanent in time and universal across cultures, climates, and incomes.However, user-generated design, typified by Shenzhen handshake
buildings, demonstrates that communities living in a completely different
cultural, climatic, and technological contexts may select different values
expressed as a set of new standards for what would constitute desirable
housing. Indeed, the trade-offs that generated the handshake buildings make
a lot of sense when seen in their urban and climatic context. It is quite
understandable why the original Shenzhen farmers adopted this design and
why many migrant workers compete to rent them.
Let us look at light, ventilation, and the absence of open space in the
Shenzhen context. The climate of Shenzhen is tropical, usually hot and
humid for about 8 months of the year. The average winter temperature in
January doesn’t fall below 13° C and hovers around 33° C in the summer
months. This is not the climate of Dickens’s London! Most of the urban
villages are located close to the abundant well-landscaped public parks
provided by the city. While the residents of urban villages are often workers
with relatively low incomes, the rooms rented have a steady supply of
electricity, all have fans, and increasingly they have air conditioning. The
ubiquitous access to a steady electricity supply in a tropical country where
direct sunlight into rooms is seldom desirable makes the Shenzhen
handshake building design much more viable. Social gatherings take place
in shared public spaces or in the numerous lively restaurants and tea houses
found at street level. The function of apartments is reduced to places for
sleeping and storing personal property. The apartment concept of handshake
buildings is like cabins on a cruise ship—by the way, a model advocated by
Le Corbusier himself after crossing the Atlantic on a trip to New York!
When residents of handshake buildings want fresh air and exercise, they
can easily obtain it in parks within a walking distance from their houses.
This is not the case in most areas of other large cities of Asia, where
electricity is sporadic in low-income areas and public parks are nonexistent.
The design of handshake buildings allows many low-income households
to have rapid access to a large number of jobs and to be close to numerous
urban amenities, like shops, restaurants, and entertainment. In addition, the
possibility of using the ground floor for small businesses increases the
economic advantages of the area.
Let us compare the low-cost housing neighborhoods provided by the
South African government’s RDP with Shenzhen’s handshake villages. In
South Africa, experts designed comfortable houses surrounded by a smallgarden, but with poor access to jobs and amenities. The poor living there
have plenty of fresh air, their children can play soccer in the streets or even
in formal soccer fields, but they cannot access jobs without spending a large
part of their incomes on transport. Streets are devoid of basic shopping
amenities. The poor households living in these isolated neighborhoods are
likely to stay poor, although in relative comfort. The workers in Shenzhen
handshake buildings now have much higher incomes than their South
African counterparts, but when they initially migrated to the city, most of
them were as poor as the South African typical migrants. It is the access to
multiple jobs and urban amenities that lifted them out of poverty. When
designing a housing policy, we should remember that a city is above all a
labor market. Ignoring the functioning of a labor market in providing
housing creates poverty traps for the beneficiaries of housing projects.
While recognizing urban villages’ contribution to the supply of affordable
housing, Chinese municipal authorities are usually not thrilled by their
existence. They mostly argue that urban villages are out of control. Indeed,
they are. This is precisely the reason for their success. Some of the
handshake buildings in Shenzhen no doubt shelter some illicit activities,
like gambling, bootlegging, and prostitution. Because of the fluidity of the
rental market, authorities have difficulties keeping track of people living in
them. But these administrative problems have nothing to do with the
narrowness of streets and the lack of sunlight. When Shenzhen’s migrant
workers’ incomes increase to the point of allowing them to find a more
desirable affordable alternative, they will certainly abandon handshake
buildings. Meanwhile, it is premature to envisage eradicating an imperfect
but popular housing model that gives shelter to millions. Governments
eager to get rid of handshake buildings should first allow the building of
alternative models, then wait to see whether they are successful before
suppressing the only part of the housing stock currently affordable to new
migrant workers. If attractive alternatives to handshake buildings existed in
Shenzhen, their tenants would rapidly move out to the better-quality
housing. The handshake building sites, empty of tenants, will then be ready
for redevelopment. But before this happens, demolishing the only source of
low-income rental housing would only harm the city and the welfare of its
inhabitants.
Lessons from These Four Urban ExamplesI have discussed above the performance of four types of low-income
housing projects in Gauteng, New York, Surabaya, and Shenzhen. In the
first two cities, the government substitutes itself for the market: in Gauteng,
by building subsidized housing sold at a nominal price to low-income
households; in New York, by obliging private developers to set aside some
apartments at a rent set by the government as a function of the income of
the beneficiary household. By contrast, in Surabaya and Shenzhen, the
private sector builds housing for a price or a rent that households can afford.
And since the trade-off between prices and standards are set by user
preferences, the government’s role is reduced to connecting these
settlements to the city infrastructure and providing social facilities.
Let us summarize the outcome of the four policies. In Gauteng, the
housing design standards are comfortable, but the location of the housing
projects is such that the very long commuting times and high costs result in
beneficiaries having a good chance of remaining unemployed. In New York,
the location and housing design are both excellent, but there is no hope for
the large number of potential beneficiaries ever having access to these
attractive apartments except as winners of a lottery with very low odds.
In Surabaya, the housing designs range from poor to excellent, and the
location allows residents to participate in the city labor market; the number
of kampung housing units expands with demand as the city grows. In
Shenzhen, the housing constitutes an adequate shelter: the location is
excellent for participating in the labor market and having access to city
amenities. The space standards adjust to what households can pay. Both
Surabaya and Shenzhen have a wide range of incomes within the same
housing project, thus avoiding income segregation.
These are only four case studies illustrating different approaches to the
provision of “affordable” housing. Next let us review the different
approaches that are possible for maintaining a housing stock that is
affordable for the wide range of incomes found in successful cities.
Maintaining Housing Affordability: Quantifying, Monitoring, and
Considering Alternative Policies
Here I summarize the various operational steps that a local government can
take to improve the housing consumption of the lowest-income groups. The
objective of a housing policy should be to increase housing consumption,
understood as the optimum trade-off between location and floor space madeby the end user. I may, however, use the term “affordable housing” as a
short cut because of its wide use in the press and in the housing literature.
I have defined housing as “unaffordable” when housing absorbs an
abnormally large part of households’ income (say, when rent represents
more than 35 percent of income) or when the housing standards that are
affordable fall in quality or quantity below a socially acceptable standard. It
is understood that this minimum socially acceptable housing standard may
vary across cities and may vary in time within the same city. I will use this
definition of affordability in the rest of this section.Housing Markets and Government Interventions
Most cities of the world are now operating in a market economy. Housing is
a consumer product. Well-functioning markets are supposed to respond to
consumer demand and to supply housing in quantities and quality
corresponding to demand. When there is evidence that the housing market
does not do that, the government has to intervene, first to improve the
functioning of markets, and eventually to supplement the income of the
households that fall below an agreed-on housing consumption threshold.
The first government task is to find the cause of high housing costs. The
second is to quantify the number of households affected by it (i.e., the
number of households occupying unaffordable housing units). The third
task is to develop a housing policy. Finally, the fourth task consists of
constantly monitoring the impact of the selected policy on households’
housing consumption.
The above appears rather obvious. However, most housing policy takes
for self-evident that the poor housing conditions of lower-income
households are due to market failure. Therefore, the first two tasks are
ignored, and a housing policy is developed, consisting of ignoring markets
and providing housing units at below market rents, whether these units are
newly built or existing. We have seen that this approach has two drawbacks:
It usually falls short in delivering the number of subsidized housing units
needed, and it prevents households from exerting their choice among
different options (including prices, housing standards, and location).
A recurring myth consists of declaring that the real estate industry would
never provide low-income housing and is only interested by developing
high-income housing. For the believers, it logically follows that the
government has to be the monopolist provider of housing for a segment of
the population. While this is true for the temporarily homeless, the
observable evidence shows otherwise for the rest of the population. When
regulations do not allow the formal market to provide affordable housing,
the informal market takes over.
Before we discuss the interaction of government and markets in
providing affordable housing, I want to make clear that I am not implying
here that all housing issues can be solved through market solutions. Many
cases of homelessness, for instance, particularly in affluent cities, stem from
social welfare policies and require an immediate government action. It isimportant from the beginning to clearly separate emergency social welfare
from housing policy. Too often, housing policy is conceived as an extension
of social welfare applied to the middle class.
The Need for Emergency Shelter and Social Housing
In every large city, a small number of households—some may be one￾person households—are unable to pay for their housing. They end up in the
streets. These households may be permanently or temporarily disabled—
physically or mentally—or may have experienced bad luck that results in
long unemployment periods. It is certainly the duty of the government to
provide a shelter for them as an emergency service. Once in an emergency
shelter, social workers can identify those who are likely to be permanently
unable to earn an income and then direct them toward a social housing
shelter, where specialized staff will follow up on their case. Other homeless
households may need only temporary help to find a job and a house they
can afford before they rejoin the city’s active population. The provision of
homeless shelters is not part of a housing policy, as it has little to do with
supply and demand.
In Large Cities, a Temporary Mismatch between Housing Supply and
Demand Is Unavoidable
Urban housing prices are constantly adjusting to changes in supply and
demand. An increase in housing demand is usually due to demographic
changes—increases in population or decreases in household size—or to an
economic change. An increase in household incomes will increase the
demand for larger or more modern housing units. An increase in job
creation will also increase demand for housing. There is not much a planner
should do about increasing housing demand, except rejoice and monitor it
carefully. Fortunately, the time is largely past when planners were trying
actively to prevent urbanization by decreasing deliberately the housing
supply.
Increases in housing demand—by itself a good thing—will have the
effect of increasing housing prices, unless supply (the number of new
houses built) increases immediately by the same quantity as demand. This is
unlikely to happen because of the complexity of the supply chain that
produces new housing units. Usually, the larger the city is, the longer it
takes to acquire land, obtain financing, get development approval, and
secure all the permits and inspections required to complete construction.Therefore, planners can expect to see housing prices rise when demand for
housing unexpectedly increases. The actions or inaction of planners to these
movements in housing demand will have a large impact on housing supply
and therefore on housing prices.
Unfortunately, many planner initiatives, described below, often contribute
to a decrease in or stagnation of the housing supply. Let us look at the
housing supply chain, and where the more common bottlenecks are that
prevent housing supply from responding to housing demand—and most
importantly, what a planner can do about it.
Reforming the Supply Side Should Precede Demand Side Housing
Subsidies
High housing prices are often due to constraints on the development of land
and on the construction of floor space. In consumption sectors other than
housing, the market usually responds adequately to demand coming from
the wide range of income groups found in a city. This market response can
be observed for the supply of clothing or food. Expensive designer clothing
stores coexist with cheap or even second-hand clothing stores. In every city,
shops supply designer shoes as well as cheap plastic sandals. The same can
be observed for food: expensive and fast food restaurants are found side by
side, while even cheaper meals can be bought from food carts. Fast food
restaurants, catering to a wide range of incomes are even more likely to
succeed than very expensive specialized restaurants.
Why should housing be different from other consumption products? I
believe that land development and the construction sectors are uniquely
constrained by the regulations that restrict the availability of developable
land and the construction of floor space. I am here talking only about
regulations that prescribe a minimum consumption of land (like FAR,
building height, or building footprint) and a minimum consumption of floor
space (like minimum dwelling area). Sometimes these regulations are not
binding. A regulation is not binding when the demand is lower than the
maximum imposed by the regulation. For instance, if a regulation requires
all buildings to be lower than five floors in an area where there is no
demand for tall buildings, the regulation is not binding.
All binding urban regulations increase the cost of housing—I insist: all
binding regulations. Indeed, regulations always require builders to use more
land than the market would require by fixing maximum FARs, maximumheights, and minimum lot sizes; and similarly to use more floor space by
fixing minimum dwelling areas. Incredibly, regulations impose higher land
consumption for consumers of housing, while at the same time they reduce
the supply of developable land by putting arbitrary limits on city expansion
(such as green-belts or urban growth boundaries). The result is predictably
higher prices.
Removing regulatory barriers to city expansion is essential but it is not
enough. As discussed in chapter 3, government has a de facto monopoly on
the development of primary infrastructure—the network of trunk roads that
transform greenfields into developable land. To maintain a responsive
supply of developed land, municipalities must therefore finance and build
the expansion of primary infrastructure into a city’s periphery. With few
exceptions, like the Texas Municipal Utility District bonds, many
municipalities have no easy way to do that. Removing supply side
constraints on housing will therefore require two types of government
action: first, reforming what I will call the supply side (i.e., land use and
building regulations), and second, creating easy to use mechanisms to
finance and build infrastructure at the periphery of cities.
When the supply side is fully reformed and the real estate market
functions satisfactorily, it is possible that a number of urban households
might still be too poor to be able to afford a housing unit that meets the
minimum socially acceptable standard. In this case, a direct addition to their
income (i.e., a demand side subsidy program, such as housing vouchers)
might be necessary. If demand side subsidy programs are started before the
supply side reforms have been completed, it is likely that these subsidies
will result in higher prices rather more housing. Indeed, demand side
subsidies increase housing demand, and if housing supply is irresponsive
because of regulatory barriers, we can only expect higher prices.
For a government rightly impatient “to do something” about high housing
prices, waiting for supply side reform to take effect before providing direct
assistance to low-income households through vouchers is particularly
frustrating. The attempt at supply side regulatory reform in the United
Kingdom described below is illustrative of the difficulties encountered
when changing existing regulations, even when the sources of supply
rigidity are extremely well analyzed and when feasible solutions are clearly
proposed.Reforming the Regulations That Constrain Housing Supply Is Very
Difficult
Reforming existing land use regulations is not easy, precisely because of the
impact of regulations on land prices. Current escalating land prices usually
reflect constraints on land supply. Removing these constraints will reduce
some land prices—which is precisely the objective. Obviously, owners of
properties whose price will decrease because of the regulatory reforms will
see a decrease in the capital value of their land assets. Banks that have used
land as collateral for making equity loans might even be in jeopardy. While
the overall welfare of society would improve (in particular the welfare of
low-income households), land use reforms will create winners and losers. In
the long run, there will be more winners than losers, but in the short run, the
losers will be very vocal to prevent reforms, often in the name of saving the
environment or preserving agricultural land. The recent attempt to reform
land use in the United Kingdom provides a good example of the difficulty
of reforming land use regulations.
In 2003, because of concerns that extremely high housing prices in the
United Kingdom could create macroeconomic imbalances, the British
government appointed Kate Barker, an economist and member of the
Monetary Policy Committee of the Bank of England, to review housing
supply in the country. In 2004, Kate Barker issued her report “Review of
Housing Supply.” 26 Her diagnostic was dramatic: “In 2001, the
construction of new houses in the UK fell to its lowest level since the
second world war. Over the ten years to 2002, output of new homes was
12.5 per cent lower than for the previous ten years.” And “over the last 10–
15 years, supply has become almost totally unresponsive, so as prices have
risen, the supply of houses has not increased at all.”
She found that the planning process was in large part responsible for this
situation. Her extraordinary observation that “One of the striking features of
the local planning process is the lack of any reference to price signals”
could unfortunately apply to most planning process that I have known in
affluent countries as well as in developing countries. The United Kingdom
has been the birthplace of many world-renowned economists, from Adam
Smith to John Maynard Keynes. It is striking to think that British urban
planners and municipal managers have run cities without the help of urbaneconomists who could have initiated them to supply and demand
mechanisms.
In 2005, Kate Barker was asked to follow up on her first report and focus
her recommendations on the planning process itself, as she had identified it
as one of main bottlenecks in the housing supply. In 2006 she issued
“Barker Review of Land Use Planning Final Report—Recommendations
2006.” 27 Her findings and recommendations were more specific to the
planning process but her main conclusion was: “The failure of planning to
respond sufficiently to market and price signals, including the impact on
land prices of restricted supply, needs to be addressed, particularly in the
context of the likely contribution of land supply constraint to high
occupation costs.” She also mentioned the problem of financing and
building new infrastructure to increase the supply of urban land: “there is
particular concern that necessary infrastructure, including that which is
environmentally desirable, is not being delivered quickly enough.”
The report was well received and was commented on extensively in the
press, academic circles, and Parliament. However, in 2014, 11 years after
Kate Barker’s initial report, three British economists, Paul Cheshire, Max
Nathan, and Henry Overman, published the book Urban Economics and
Urban Policy: Challenging Conventional Policy Wisdom, arguing that the
urban planning bottlenecks identified by Kate Barker are still intact and are
continuing to produce escalating housing prices. In a section of their book
titled “Evidence of the Economic and Social Costs of the Current Planning
System,” they distinguish between direct and indirect costs of urban
planning. The direct costs are limits put on construction and the transaction
cost imposed by lengthy administrative processes; the indirect costs are the
impact of planning restrictions on real estate market prices. The story of
land use restrictions in the United Kingdom shows that the resilience of
restrictive urban planning practices is extremely high, even when the issues
and solutions has been very well described by respected and highly
competent economists.
This sounds like a very pessimistic assessment of the possibility of
regulatory reform, even in cities with a well-functioning local democracy, a
free press, and a core of competent scholars and practitioners. It seems to
confirm that in cities like San Francisco, London, or Mumbai that have set
up very restrictive urban planning regulations, housing prices are bound toincrease, and reforms that would bring them down are impossible to
implement.
I have often compared very restrictive urban regulations to hard drugs
and cities that practice them to drug addicts. Trying to suddenly remove
their drug fix creates severe side effects, because their organism is used to
the drug and needs it, even as they are being destroyed by it. My guess is
that any serious reformer should approach urban regulatory reform in the
same way as a doctor develops a treatment for a drug addict: a progressive
withdrawal planned over the long term.
The main lesson to draw is that any city contemplating a drastic set of
regulations to restrict floor supply and land development should carefully
explore their possible negative side effects on housing prices before
embarking on implementation. Kate Barker’s two reports and Paul
Cheshire’s book should be compulsory reading for every urban planner
concerned with housing price and housing affordability. In chapter 8, I will
describe more in detail what, in my opinion, planners should do to improve
their performance and their contribution to the management of cities.Notes
1. Chang-Tai Hsieh and Enrico Moretti, “Why Do Cities Matter? Local Growth and Aggregate
Growth,” NBER Working Paper 21154, National Bureau of Economic Standards, Cambridge, MA,
May 2015 (revised June 2015).
2. Angus Deaton, The Great Escape: Health, Wealth, and the Origins of Inequality (Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press, 2013), 16.
3. The 12th Annual Demographia International Housing Affordability Survey covers 87 major
metropolitan markets with populations of more than 1,000,000 in Australia, Canada, Hong Kong,
Ireland, Japan, New Zealand, Singapore, the United Kingdom, and the United States:
http://www.demographia.com/dhi.pdf.
4. The percentage of income spent on rent is calculated using the median income of renters, which is
on average about 65 percent lower than the median income of the total population.
5. Solly Angel and Patrick Lamson-Hall, “The Rise and Fall of Manhattan’s Densities, 1790–2010,”
Working Paper Series 18, Marron Institute of Urban Management, New York, December 2014.
6. Source Document: 19NYCRR 1226 - Property Maintenance Code of New York State (PMCNYS)
Topic: Overcrowding (Occupancy Standards) January 1, 2003
7. Quoctrung Bui, Matt A.V. Chaban, and Jeremy White, “40 Percent of the Buildings in Manhattan
Could Not Be Built Today,” New York Times, May 20, 2016, from data compiled by Stephen Smith
and Sandip Trivedi, Quantierra.
8. Robert Neuwirth and Chhaya Community Development Corporation, “New York’s Housing
Underground: A Refuge and a Resource,” Pratt Center for Community Development, Chaya
Community Development Corporation, New York, 2008.
9. This area includes staircases and corridors that are indispensable for multistory structures. The
number assumes a living space of about 12 square meters.
10. The trickle-down affordability theory assumes that any increase in the housing stock, no matter at
what unit price, will eventually improve the housing supply of every household, even the poorest.
Households benefiting from the supply increase would move up to the new housing, thus freeing an
equivalent number of units that will become affordable to households with income lower than that of
the beneficiaries of new housing. Eventually, the cycle of moving up into better housing will repeat
itself, and the benefits will “trickle down” to the lowest-income groups.
11. See http://www.inflation.eu/inflation-rates/china/historic-inflation/cpi-inflation-china-2000.aspx.
12. Albert O. Hirschman, Exit, Voice and Loyalty: Responses to Decline in Firms, Organisations and
States (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1970), 59.
13. See http://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/HUD?
src=/program_offices/public_indian_housing/programs/hcv/about/fact_sheet.
14. See http://www.huduser.gov/portal/periodicals/cityscpe/vol16num2/ch15.pdf.
15. See http://www.sectioneightapplication.com/info/section_8_waiting_list.
16. Lawrence M. Hannah, Alain Bertaud, Stephen J. Malpezzi, and Stephen K. Mayo, “Malaysia—
The Housing Sector: Getting the Incentives Right,” World Bank Report 7292-MA, Infrastructure
Division Country Department II, Asia Regional Office, World Bank, Washington, DC, April 10,
1989.17. Gauteng is the name of the post-apartheid urban metropolitan area including Johannesburg,
Pretoria, and some smaller municipalities.
18. See http://www.tradingeconomics.com/south-africa/unemployment-rate.
19. Mireya Navarro, “88,000 Applicants and Counting for 55 Units in ‘Poor Door’ Building,” New
York Times, April 20, 2015.
20. Richard K. Green and Stephen Malpezzi, US Housing Markets and Housing Policy, AREUEA
monograph series 3 (Washington, DC: Urban Institute Press, 2003), 126.
21. Maxwell Austensen, Vicki Been, Luis Inaraja Vera, Gita Khun Jush, Katherine M. O’Regan,
Stephanie Rosoff, Traci Sanders, Eric Stern, Michael Suher, Mark A. Willis, and Jessica Yager “State
of New York City’s Housing and Neighborhoods in 2015,” Furman Center, New York University,
New York, 2016.
22. See http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/18/nyregion/donald-trump-tax-breaks-real-estate.html?
hp&action=click&pgtype=Homepage&clickSource=story-heading&module=first-column￾region&region=top-news&WT.nav=top-news.
23. Chang-Tai Hsieh and Enrico Moretti, “Why Do Cities Matter? Local Growth and Aggregate
Growth,” NBER Working Paper 21154, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA,
May 2015 (revised June 2015), 4.
24. See an analysis of kampung infrastructure issues and improvement in the World Bank document
by Alcira Kreimer, Roy Gilbert, Claudio Volonte, and Gillie Brown, “Indonesia Impact Evaluation
Report—Enhancing the Quality of Life in Urban Indonesia: The Legacy of Kampung Improvement
Program,” World Bank, Washington, DC, June 29, 1995. Available at http://www￾wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/1999/07/28/000009265_3961029
220705/Rendered/PDF/multi_page.pdf.
25. The autobiographical novel by Sheng Keyi, Northern Girls (New York: Viking, Penguin Books,
2012), gives a feel of what life was like for migrant workers in Shenzhen at the time of its creation.
26. Kate Barker, Review of Housing Supply: Delivering Stability: Securing Our Future Housing
Needs, Final Report—Recommendations, March 2004, pages 3, 13, and 14, available at
http://image.guardian.co.uk/sys-files/Guardian/documents/2004/03/17/Barker.pdf.
27. Kate Barker, Barker Review of Land Use Planning, Final Report—Recommendations, December
2006, page 4 and foreword, available at
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/shared/bsp/hi/pdfs/05_12_06_barker_finalreport.pdf7 Alternative Urban Shapes and Utopias
Could a city be designed and managed like a machine or a factory or around
a social order different from markets? In the previous chapters I have
expressed the view that cities grow mostly according to a self-organizing
principle created by markets. I have recommended limiting the role of
planners to fixing street rights-of-way and designing transport systems that
serve the shape and densities created by markets. In this chapter, I explore
the possible validity of an opposite view.
Can a rational argument be made for planners to deliberately modify
through regulations the shape of cities that otherwise would be created by
markets?
Should planners regulate land use to serve an objective that they set
themselves? This objective could be aesthetic (like forcing the use of a
traditional regional design style of architecture) or utilitarian (like setting by
regulation a pattern of development and densities that would ensure the
financial viability of a preferred public transport mode).
And finally, would it be desirable for a benevolent planner to design all
aspects of a new city based on clearly expressed rational principles, the way
machines or factories are designed?
The Search for an Objective Function That Could Guide Design
The main challenge in both cases—modifying existing cities or creating
new ones—is to find the rational principle that will justify the shape
modification or guide the design. While it is usually rather simple to define
a rational objective to design an object that has a well-known and specific
purpose, it is much more difficult to do so when designing a city whose
objective is difficult to define.Indeed, a city is very different from typical designed objects. Let us use a
bridge as an example of a designed object. A bridge has a well-defined
purpose that can be easily quantified. For instance, the span of the bridge
will be 100 meters, it should handle four lanes of traffic, the vehicles will
run at a maximum speed of 110 km/h, and the weight of each vehicle will
not exceed 44 tons. A bridge engineer will be able to propose several
designs that meet these clearly quantified objective criteria, with variances
that minimize construction cost or make the design more aesthetically
pleasing. The final design selected will respond to objective criteria that
everybody agrees on. Differences in opinion will likely exist for variables
not included in the objective criteria, for example, some may prefer a more
elegant but costlier bridge over a cheaper but less pleasing design.
It would be difficult to apply an equivalent set of specifications to a city,
because a city doesn’t have a clear function that can be described by
numbers, unlike a bridge, a washing machine, or a phone. Further, as
discussed before, a city’s main quality resides in its ability to evolve rapidly
and to react to the outside world. A bridge, a washing machine, and a phone
are not designed to evolve. When their design becomes obsolete, the bridge
is demolished and the washing machine and phone are discarded and their
materials hopefully recycled. The smartphones designed by Apple are
famous for their design excellence, but nobody expects an iPhone 7 to
evolve by itself into an iPhone 8. We just discard our old iPhones when an
iPhone 8 appears on the market. The excellence of the design of iPhone 7 is
only temporary, until a better design emerges that results in the
abandonment of the previous model. History tells us that some cities have
been discarded by their inhabitants: for example, Fatehpur Sikri in
sixteenth-century India; more recently, 60 Russian cities abandoned by
government fiat in the twenty-first century; or even a city like Detroit, so
hopelessly mismanaged that it has been abandoned by its most mobile
inhabitants. However, most of the time it is expected that cities will survive,
even when they are tossed around by external shocks. “Fluctuat nec
mergitur” is the motto of the City of Paris. It roughly translates as “it is
tossed around but does not sink.” This motto is the closest thing to an
objective function for a city. However, this pseudoobjective function would
certainly not be able to guide a designer of cities who is deciding the layout
of streets and the height of buildings. A function that would be limited to
requiring constant adaptation to external unpredictable forces is no longeran objective function. A city has to be submitted to a Darwinian
evolutionary process, negating the very concept of design with a known
finality.
In his book, Antifragile,
1 Nassim Nicholas Taleb introduces the concept
of institutions and systems that can increase their resilience precisely when
they are subjected to unpredictable random shocks. Taleb argues that by
trying to protect systems from shocks, we fragilize them and eventually
contribute to their destruction. Taleb’s insight can be applied to cities. The
failure of Mumbai’s cotton mills, described in chapter 3, could be attributed
to the government fragilizing the city—rather than taking measures to adapt
to change and external shocks. Trying to protect a city (or a country) from
external shocks by building a protective wall around it is a fool’s errand.
Cities are thriving by multiplying exchanges with the world: Cut them off
from the world and they will waste away. Herbert Spencer illustrates this
principle in a flippant way: “The ultimate result of shielding men from the
effects of folly, is to fill the world with fools.” 2
Unfortunately, urban planners have not been discouraged by the extreme
difficulty of defining a function that will guide city design. Attempts to
codify these objective functions—and to justify attempts to design a city—
are typically done through initial blueprints or ongoing regulations.
The Search for the Objective Function of a City
We have seen in chapter 3 that, in the 1950s, Chinese planners’ attempts at
using the angle of the sun over the horizon to define “rationally” the
distance between buildings resulted in a silly outcome, with urban
residential densities fixed solely by latitude rather than by the complex
interaction of land prices, transport technology, topography, history,
income, and cultural preferences.
Planners who choose to dismiss the market forces that have shaped cities
for centuries must replace them with a credible objective function. It is not
a simple task, as we will see. In this chapter, I identify the objective
functions that are currently used or have been used in the past to modify or
replace the city shape that would have resulted from market outcomes. I
will concentrate on four kinds of objective functions currently used to
justify planners’ intervention in the spatial development of cities:
• aesthetics as the objective function (e.g., Paris historical preservation),• limiting externalities or public interest as objective functions (e.g., New
York zoning regulations),
• containing urban expansion as the objective function, and
• aspirations as objective functions (e.g., sustainability, livability, and
resilience).
After identifying the design objective function and the way it is applied
(whether through initial plans or ongoing regulations), I then test the
outcome to compare it to the objective. To be of any use in guiding city
design, an objective function must be expressed clearly, and the outcome
has to be measurable.
Aesthetics as Objective Function: Paris Historical Preservation
Most of Paris’s 3
land use regulations are explicitly aimed at preserving the
aesthetic of historical Paris. The last large transformation of Paris started in
1854 with the urban surgery conducted by Baron Haussmann and ended
during the Universal Exhibitions of the Fin de Siècle that gave Paris the
Eiffel Tower (1889) and the Grand and Petit Palais (1900).
This period of rapid urban transformation was followed by a public
consensus on the need for historical preservation of what had been built so
far and an aversion to additional transformation of the Paris urban
landscape. The only changes to the Paris skyline occurred during the last
part of the twentieth century. These modern era changes were limited to the
construction of four isolated state-sponsored “monuments” rather than
large-scale urban development: the destruction and periodic redesign and
rebuilding of les Halles (1971–2016), the Tour Montparnasse (1973; the
only skyscraper in Paris), the Pompidou Museum (1977), and the
Bibliothèque Nationale de France (1988). In addition, some increase in
height and limited and very controlled development was tolerated in the
Paris fringe, like part of the fifteenth arrondissement. These few minor
changes to Paris skyline were generally received with scorn by public
opinion and the press. A popular consensus seemed to have emerged
supporting the maintenance of the status quo in the appearance of the Paris
streetscape.
The Objective of Most of the Paris Land Use Regulations Is to
Maintain a Fin de Siècle LandscapeTo preserve the landscape of fin de siècle Paris, the municipality created a
set of elaborate regulations that maintains the continuity of facade and
perspectives of historical Paris even for buildings that are newly built and
have no historical significance. However, contrary to many zoning
regulations in other cities, the regulations are not so much concerned with
preventing internal land use changes but are instead largely focused on the
appearance and alignment of buildings facing the streets.
Since the beginning of the twentieth century, Parisians have decided that the
main virtue and attraction of Paris was to stay identical through time.
Regulations dictate the height of buildings, the alignment and material of
roofs, traditional street facades, and anything that could change the
appearance of Paris streets. In reality, Paris is changing continuously, but
only within its historical facades as the use of a building or even part of a
building easily can be changed from residential to commercial and back
again. The building envelope is frozen, but within this envelope land use
changes are often rapid. Paris is like a set of boxes; the boxes do not change
but their content does. This immobility concerns only Paris municipality,
limited by the extent of Paris Boulevard Peripherique, itself following the
lines of fortifications during the siege of the city during the Franco-Prussian
war of 1870. The population of Paris municipality represents only about 18
percent of the Paris metropolitan population.
The economic growth of Paris has been possible, in spite of the freezing
of the built envelope of historical Paris, due to the rapid growth of suburban
Paris. Suburban Paris is much less regulated, and the government has
actively promoted and subsidized some high-density developments, like La
Defense business district and the five “new cities” within commuting
distance of central Paris that are served by an elaborate system of rapid rail
transit and highways.
Let us focus now on the height restrictions that have the most impact on
the shape of Paris and on real estate prices. Figure 7.1 displays the
permissible maximum heights of buildings in the Paris municipality.
4 The
range of permissible heights varies from 18 meters to 37 meters. The
highest permissible buildings therefore have about 10 floors and are mostly
located in the periphery of the municipal area. The height regulations
impose short buildings in the most ancient areas of Paris, like the Marais
and the sixth arrondissement. These areas, where floor space is the most
restricted by regulations, are also among the most accessible areas of Parisbecause of their centrality and the convergence of an elaborate system of
public regional transport. In this sense, Paris regulations completely
contradict expected market forces: They prevent the increase of floor space
in areas of high demand and force densification in peripheral areas and
outside the municipal limits where demand is low. However, Paris
regulations do not pretend to alleviate traditional externalities like
congestion or to increase economic growth. They are explicitly aimed at
maintaining intact an aesthetic, historical, and prestigious cityscape. In that,
they indisputably succeed.
Figure 7.1
Map of regulatory heights within Paris municipality.
Height restrictions are common to many cities. However, it is rare for a
large capital city to restrict building to a maximum of 10 floors and even
fewer floors in its most central area. What is even more uncommon is to
have restrictions not only on building height measured from the street level
but also in some areas measured from the sea level. This is the case in some
areas of Paris shown in red in figure 7.1. These special regulatory areas,
named “fuseaux de Protection” (perspective protection), are very specific to
Paris and require some explanation.
These red areas are special protection areas where the altitude from sea
level of the top of buildings is restricted as opposed to the height of
buildings measured from the level of the streets in the yellow areas of figure
7.1. These special zones are established to protect the perspective view
from different parts of the city toward landmark monuments (Hôtel des
Invalides, Sacré-Coeur de Montmartre, Notre-Dame de Paris, Panthéon,
etc.). In these special protection zones, the permissible height as measuredfrom the street level varies continuously, depending on the location of the
building in the zone and depending on the topography.
The example shown in figure 7.2 illustrates this point. Between A, on the
edge of the Seine river, and B, the monument whose perspective view is to
be protected, the maximum allowable height of buildings is determined by
an oblique plane passing through A and B and shown as the line AB. The
heights of A and B that define the line AB are not measured from local
street levels but from altitude from sea level. The topography of Paris is
hilly; consequently, the permissible height of buildings between A and B
will vary as a function of street levels. On the graph, we see that because of
the different altitudes of streets levels the height of buildings may vary from
17 to 25 meters. The enforcement of such rules requires an extremely
detailed survey of the entire area. However, the regulations as formulated
are highly effective at preserving perspective viewpoints for the main
monuments of Paris.
Figure 7.2
Regulation of altitudes of the tops of buildings in areas of protection. Meter NGF (Nivellement
General de la France) measured from sea level.
This perspective protection constitutes an enormous constraint on the
development of the central area of Paris. Imagine what midtown New York
would look like if regulations required that St. Patrick Cathedral had to be
visible from Central Park and from Washington Square!
The Objectives and Cost of Height Regulations in Paris
When evaluating regulations, two aspects should be investigated: first,
whether the objectives of the regulation are met and, second, the benefits
and costs to the city. Let us see how this applies to the control of building
heights in Paris.The objectives of Paris height regulations are very clear: they are purely
based on aesthetic protection of historical Paris. The objectives are not
limited to the protection of individual monuments but extend to the
protection of monumental perspectives in the tradition of French classical
seventeenth-century architecture.
The geometry, at time complicated to establish, is also clear and creates a
regulatory envelope defined by an array of points whose Cartesian
coordinates are well defined by their altitudes from sea level, as established
by the general survey map of the country. Do the regulations achieve their
declared objectives? Clearly, yes. The objective is the regulatory geometry
itself. One could argue whether the perspective from a specific location of
Paris adequately protects a monument like the Sacré Coeur of Montmartre,
for instance, but these are only details. The objectives are certainly
consistent with the formulation of the regulations.
What Are the Benefits of the Height Regulations?
The benefits of draconian heritage conservation are obvious; Paris is a city
that attracts many visitors. In 2015, Paris was the most visited city in the
world. The preservation of the perspective on the monuments and streets of
Paris are certainly a part of the attraction. The well-preserved historical
settings and carefully maintained extensive urban perspectives are an
excellent background for the luxury goods for which Paris is famous:
fashion, art, and gastronomy. In this sense, the benefits are much larger than
the simple tourist revenue: They establish Paris as a desirable location for
headquarters of luxury brands. The aesthetics of its large parks and avenues
enhance the quality of life of the people who can afford to live and work
there. The high benefits of maintaining Paris streets as they were at the time
of the Impressionists implies that what modern architects could design to
replace them would be inferior in aesthetic quality compared to what
architects achieved in the nineteenth century. It is rather humbling for
modern architects, but probably true.
And What Are the Costs?
What costs are implied by these regulations? Obviously, the regulatory
heights create an envelope that severely limits the construction of new floor
space in Paris, and they do so precisely in the area where there is most
demand and where an extensive network of public transport converges. In
addition, the quality of life enhancement provided by the regulations makesParis even more attractive. The regulations clearly work against market
forces: the floor area in the location generating the most demand for both
firms and households is not allowed to grow. The supply of floor space
limited by regulations pushes real estate prices higher as the economy of the
city keeps growing. The obvious impact of the regulations is on real estate
prices, resulting in a reduction in floor consumption per household—we
have seen in chapter 4, that “apartments” of 9 square meters were renting
for US$750 per month in 2014.
The scarcity, combined with the environmental quality, induced by
regulations has created a continuous process of gentrification. Traditionally,
the arrondissements 5
located in the western and southern parts of the city
were considered bourgeois, while the arrondissements to the east and north
were considered working class. In 2016, the entire area within Paris
municipality is becoming bourgeois. The distinction is now between type of
bourgeoisie: “old bourgeois” like the sixteenth arrondissement or
“bourgeois-bohemian” like the nineteenth or twentieth. This massive
gentrification is a direct result of the land use regulations that restrict the
construction of additional floor space while making Paris more attractive.
Middle- and low-income households who were traditionally living in the
eastern and northern arrondissements are obliged to progressively move out
toward the suburbs outside the municipal boundary, limiting their access to
transportation and jobs in the city center. The municipality of Paris is
attempting to slow down gentrification by purchasing apartments in old
buildings and renting them below their market value to middle-income
households. However, the impact of such rearguard action against
gentrification is very limited because of its high cost.
The restrictions on building height in Paris have therefore contributed to
shaping the city in a way that was not part of the regulations’ objectives.
Paradoxically, regulations, aimed at freezing the building envelope of the
city as it was at the end of the nineteenth century, have resulted in two large
spatial changes. The first one is an exile of the middle class and lower￾middle class to outside the municipal boundary, and the second is a spread
of many jobs toward the periphery. The population in Paris municipality
peaked in 1921 at 2.9 million people. In 2014 it was 2.2 million. The
number of jobs in Paris municipality has also decreased.
How Are the Regulations “Redesigning” the Paris Metropolitan Area?How can a major world capital like Paris survive without the possibility of
vertical expansion that has characterized other large cities, such as São
Paulo, New York, London, Shanghai, and Seoul? The government has
deliberately built a new CBD—La Defense—outside the Paris municipal
boundary, 10 kilometers to the west of the traditional Paris CBD to absorb
the demand for new office space that could not be accommodated in the
center of Paris because of the height regulations. In addition, the
government also created five new cities on the periphery to concentrate
public facilities serving the suburbs and to attract commercial growth along
public transport axes. All these new mini-CBDs have been linked by rapid
transit to the capital subway network. Figure 7.3 shows the spatial trend in
job location in the Paris metropolitan area, away from Paris municipality
and around suburban transport nodes. Between 1996 and 2006 Paris
municipality lost 1,700 jobs while 221,000 new jobs were created in the
immediate periphery, most of them within 5 kilometers of the Paris
municipal boundary, as shown in figure 7.3.
Figure 7.3
Jobs gained and lost in the Paris municipal area and immediate suburbs, between 1996 and 2006.
Source: Chambre régionale de commerce et d’industrie, Institut national de la statistique et des études
économiques, Institut d’aménagement et d’urbanisme de d’Île-de-France, 2008.
If there had been no limits to building heights, or rather if the height
limits had been like the ones imposed on New York, London, Shanghai, or
Seoul, there would have been more office and residential floor space built
in Paris. While the free market creates a dispersion of jobs in the periphery
and an increase in real estate value in the center in many large cities, the
Paris height regulations accelerated and increased this market-driven trend.
It is ironic that Paris historical preservation regulations aim at preserving
a type of land use that other regulations would forbid outside the historicalParis perimeter! For instance, local land use regulations would prevent any
developer from reproducing the pattern of streets, building heights, and site
coverage found in the most expensive neighborhoods of historical Paris,
like Le Marais or the St Germain des Pres area.
A Final Assessment: Are the Regulations Protecting Historical Paris
“Bad” or “Excessive”?
Paris is a special case, where land use regulations are mostly guided by the
desire for historical preservation and special priority is given to
monumental perspective effects that restrict the heights of buildings. For the
development of the city, these are extreme constraints that are very costly
for firms and for households. However, they create a quality of life that is
unique and is reflected by the very high real estate prices.
To quote the American economist Steve Malpezzi, “regulations per se are
neither good nor bad. What matters is the cost and benefit of a specific
regulation under specific market conditions.” 6 I will add another criterion
to judge regulations: Do they meet their declared objectives? The worst
regulations are those that have a high cost while not meeting their
objectives.
The declared objectives of the Paris building heights regulations are
extremely clear: maintaining Paris city center as it looked at the time of the
Impressionists. There is no pretense, as in many other regulations, that
preventing the transformation of existing buildings would prevent
congestion or would protect the environment. There is a clear honesty in the
regulations and their outcome. Parisians complain about the high cost of
housing and the tiny size of apartments. However, I believe that no mayor
could ever be elected in Paris if she or he proposed to do away with the
current height restrictions. In the case of Paris, it would be possible to
calculate the cost of height regulations but much more complex to calculate
the benefits that are mostly aesthetic. Every Parisian is aware of these
nonquantifiable benefits and, so far, is willing to pay their costs. However,
the gentrification that progressively will prevent low- and middle-income
households from living in the municipal boundary is a much more serious
social problem. No amount of social housing with below-market rents, as
promoted by the municipality, could reverse meaningfully the gentrification
trend.In this book, I have often compared markets versus design. In Paris, the
opposition between the two concepts is clear. There is a very large market
demand for floor space in Paris municipality. Current regulations impose a
design that prevents floor space supply to respond to this demand. But the
regulatory tool used to design the city is transparent, and its objective
clearly formulated.
My final conclusion on Paris building height regulations is that they are
very costly, but they successfully do exactly what they are supposed to do.
In this case therefore, there is no reason to pass a technical judgment on the
regulations. The maintenance or relaxation of the regulations belongs to the
political domain. Do Parisians feel that they are paying too high a price for
these regulations or that the price they pay is well worth it? This can be
expressed freely during municipal elections. The job of the planner is to
explain the cost of regulations, not to approve or disapprove of them.
Limiting Externalities or Public Interest as Objective Functions: New
York Zoning Regulations
New York built its first skyscraper in 1888, at about the time that Paris’s
golden construction age was about to end. While Paris was opting to freeze
its historical skyline, New York, mostly in Manhattan, embarked on vertical
expansion that continues today at an accelerating pace. The emergence of
skyscrapers in New York was not due to the implementation of an inspired
urban planner’s vision, like the Plan Voisin that Le Corbusier proposed for
Paris in 1920 (as discussed in chapter 3), but instead was the product of
market forces. Although the individual builders and architects that built the
skyscrapers were certainly creative, inspired, and talented, they only
responded with great competence to their clients’ demands for buildings
that provided a high concentration of office space on a small lot.
The high price of land in the Wall Street area and the difficulty of
expanding (except to the north) were powerful incentives to explore ways to
stack large areas of office space vertically. The management of large
companies needed many accountants and “scriveners,” whose collated work
would feed aggregated data to executives, enabling them to make timely
business decisions. The circulation of information was done nearly entirely
through ledgers and documents written on paper that had to be physically
carried from the various departments to management and back. The high-rise building was particularly appropriate for facilitating this type of
communication.
While the construction of skyscrapers was induced by market forces,
changes in technology, like the invention of steel frame construction and
elevators, allowed it to happen. In addition, no developer could have built a
very tall building without the availability of generous credit from banks. All
these preconditions, technological and financial, were met in New York at
the end of the nineteenth century.
Skyscrapers were initially conceived exclusively for office buildings; it
was only much later that the skyscraper was considered fit for residential
use. Today in New York, out of 17 skyscrapers built or under construction
between 2010 and 2016, eight are either mixed use or entirely residential. In
addition, a few older skyscrapers in the Wall Street area recently have been
converted to residential use.
The story and evolution of the skyscraper would constitute a book by
itself, and no book written on the subject is as complete and interesting as
Jason Barr’s “Building the Skyline” published in 2016. 7 In his book, Barr, a
professor of economics at Rutgers University, provides a comprehensive
history of the emergence of skyscrapers in New York, the regulations that
followed, and the dialectic that established itself among regulations,
developers, economics, and skyscraper design. Although Barr’s book
focuses exclusively on Manhattan, it is one of the most comprehensive
books on the interaction among design, markets, regulations, and
technology in the development of cities. The sequence and content of New
York land use regulations described in the following paragraphs is largely
based on my interpretation of Jason Barr’s insights, together with my own
insights from working for the Urban Design Group of the New York City
Planning Commission in 1968–1969 in the Mayor Lindsay administration.
The first skyscraper built, a modest 12 floors, caused wonderment but
also worries. We would now call it a disruptive technology in that era. The
negative effects on neighbors were evident: the skyscraper obstructed direct
sunlight to adjacent buildings. At the end of the nineteenth century, artificial
light was expensive. A tall new building casting a shadow on other shorter
office buildings generated a cost that could be quickly evaluated in terms of
an increase in artificial lighting costs. It was natural that citizens asked the
local government to step in and regulate the dimensions of skyscrapers to
decrease the clear negative externalities they caused on the neighborhood.New York land use regulations concerning the buildings’ “bulk” 8 started
appearing at the beginning of the twentieth century because of the
proliferation of ever taller skyscrapers. The comprehensive zoning plan of
1916 aimed to regu late the size of buildings by putting restrictions on
buildings’ bulk (i.e., altering the shapes of buildings to decrease their
impact on neighbors). These restrictions varied, depending on the use of the
zone where the buildings were located. The regulations were mostly
entirely concerned with correcting the negative externalities created by the
shadow of tall buildings, and to a lesser extent, sidewalk congestion. The
regulations of 1916 related the heights of buildings to the width of street but
gave height “bonuses” to developers providing setbacks from the street.
However, many exceptions existed, such as if a skyscraper’s footprint was
no larger than 25 percent of the plot it occupied and if it was set back from
the street, its height was not limited.
As observed by Jason Barr when commenting on the 1916 plan, “the plan
represented the outcome of negotiations between the real estate industry,
business owners, city planners, and government officials.” 9 This is still the
way new regulations are established in New York, as illustrated by the
development of the Hudson Yard project on the west side of Manhattan in
2016. The success of New York as one of the major business centers of the
world, maintained for more than a century, is based on this conversation
between real estate developers and urban planners. However, as we will see,
since 1964, complex regulation overlays and lengthy change approval
processes have been applied in such a way that, to quote Jason Barr again,
“large public buildings like new subways or new zoning regulations seem
impossible today. A severe status quo bias has set in as we resist and fear
large-scale changes that were embraced to build New York into the world’s
greatest metropolis.”
The Turning Point in 1961: Planners Using Regulations to “Design” the
City
The regulations of 1916 limiting the bulk of buildings were clearly aimed at
decreasing obvious negative externalities caused by the shadows cast by tall
buildings. Over the years, many amendments were made to the original
regulations, but the objectives remained the same: reducing negative
externalities caused by the height of buildings.A turning point occurred in 1961 when a new zoning plan was published.
The objectives of the new plan were explicitly aimed at modifying the
shape of the city, and were no longer limited to decreasing negative
externalities. Increasingly, planners used regulations to substitute their
design for market forces in shaping cities. To be able to shape the city, the
city’s urban planners declared that they were acting in the public interest,
which is far too vague a concept to be an objective for guiding human-made
design. The notion of public interest is subjective and cannot be quantified
as was possible when regulations aimed at reducing the impact of shadows
cast by buildings.
Under the new 1961 zoning, planners were using regulations to achieve
those new “design quality” objectives. The “shaping” objective is clearly
acknowledged on the current New York City Urban Planning website with a
topic named “Introduction & Shaping New York City through Zoning, 1961
to the Present.” 10 The prime objective of zoning has become shaping the
city, that is, “quality urban design” or possibly optimizing land use. It is an
enormous departure from the original objective of zoning, but it seems that
at the time nobody noticed the implications for the city.
In a democratically elected city administration, planners cannot simply
impose the design they prefer on the developers of private buildings.
However, in a very dynamic and innovative city like New York, where
change is a constant necessity, it becomes possible to impose a city
planners’ design on a private developer by setting regulations that would
allow an increase in floor area only on condition of modifying the design of
a building and its use according to the wishes of the planners.
For instance, let us imagine that a city’s planners think that a plaza open
to the public but built on private land would make the city more pleasant
and is therefore desirable. Expropriating the land required to create the
plaza is out of the question. However, if a zoning regulation has been set to
limit the floor area of the building, the city could then allow an increase in
floor area above the current legal limit, on the condition that the new larger
building meets the design requirement (a plaza open to the public) highly
desired by planners. The developer is presented with a choice: be limited to
the current floor space allowed by zoning, or build a plaza and be given a
floor area “bonus” that will increase the buildable floor space of the land
parcel.If the developer thinks that the bonus is worth it (e.g., allows the
developer to make additional profit), the regulations will then have created
an open plaza, whose dimension and design can be decided by city planners
and not by the developer. A new city amenity has been created at apparently
no cost to the taxpayers. We will see below that it is not the case.
This system of design through regulation may provide leverage to planners
only if two conditions are met: first, the building for which it is applied is in
a location where there is a high demand for new commercial or residential
floor space; second, the planners’ design request may not be so
extravagantly costly to the developer that no new building would be
financially possible when the conditions are met. We are back to Jason
Barr’s remark that in New York, regulators and developers must consult
each other so that the constraints imposed by the former do not bankrupt the
latter. The more constraining the regulations are that limit the size of
existing buildings, the more leverage the planners will have to design the
city through regulations.
So planners who want to have regulatory leverage to impose their design
on developers should have a clear strategy. First, limit the use and bulk of
building as close as possible to the current one to prevent “free” addition of
floor space; second, provide a generous increase in buildable floor area
compared to the area allowed by regulations in exchange for land use
change and any other design attribute that the planners might desire. Zoning
regulations that would allow much more floor area than the area of existing
buildings and flexibility in land use would provide no leverage for planners
to request design features that the developers are unwilling to provide. By
contrast, a regulatory-induced shortage of floor space increases the price of
floor space and therefore increases the leverage of planners over
developers.
Where draconian limits on floor space expansion in areas of high demand
are imposed, planners have then the leverage to “design” the city by
providing floor area bonuses in exchange for desired land use change. For
instance, planners can impose the inclusion on private land of plaza and
open spaces, whose design they may specify. They may also impose the
addition of a certain type of land use, for instance, shops on the ground
floor, or “affordable housing” whose characteristic and number they can
specify, as described in chapter 6. Here we are very far from correcting theclear negative externalities that justified the first New York zoning
regulations of 1916!
Planners’Attempts to Shape Private Buildings Have a Cost
Any modification in the design of a building has a cost, and potentially a
benefit, although no money is exchanged. The design changes imposed by
zoning would be justified if the benefits are higher than the costs.
Three cases are possible: the planners’ imposed design increases the
value of the building more than its cost; the design does not increase the
value of the building but provides benefits to others; and finally, the design
does not provide benefits for anyone. If the addition of a design feature, like
a public plaza, would increase the market value of a building, it is most
probable that the developer would have already included it in the initial
design. If the plaza does not increase the value of a building but improves
the street experience of passers-by, then the city is asking the building’s
users—households or firms—to pay through increased rents for a benefit
accruing to the city’s general population. It concentrates the cost of a public
facility on a few citizens. The planners’ imposed design therefore always
increases the cost of new buildings and therefore most probably decreases
the quantity of floor that would have been built if the design constraints did
not exist.
By using FAR regulations to impose restrictions on the flow of additional
floor area that can be built in a city, planners are de facto creating a new
currency, consisting of bonus additional floor space that they will use to
purchase from developers the urban design feature they desire—plazas,
affordable housing, or anything else. The higher the scarcity of floor space,
the higher is the value of the bonus FAR currency, and therefore the higher
the design variations planners can purchase from developers ( figure 7.4).
The FAR bonus will have a high exchange value only if the regulations are
sufficiently restrictive to maintain a scarcity of floor space. If the supply of
floor space were completely elastic, then the value of “bonus FAR
currency” would lose its value, and eventually fall to zero. Planners would
then lose all leverage over developers. Thus the practice of incentive bonus
FARs requires maintaining a tight supply of floor space over an entire city
that increases the price of commercial and residential floor space for all
firms and households. As we have seen in chapter 6, the few so-called
affordable housing units created by inclusive zoning FAR bonusesdistributed through lottery does not justify increasing the price of housing
and commercial space for everybody else.
Figure 7.4
How floor area ratio (FAR) is calculated.
The Origin of Incentive Zoning: The Seagram Building in Manhattan
The Seagram Building was built in 1958 in New York, just before incentive
zoning of 1961 was invented. It was designed by the German-American
architect Ludwig Mies van der Rohe to meet his client’s demand for a
prestigious corporate headquarters representative of the International Style,
the post-World War II offshoot of the Bauhaus movement. The skyscraper
of 38 floors included an open plaza, facing Park Avenue at the center of
midtown Manhattan. The quality of the design of the skyscraper and its
plaza made the Seagram building an icon for good urban design and
became a textbook example of enlightened corporate architecture. This was
exactly what the owner of the Seagram building wanted to achieve and the
reason they hired Mies van der Rohe as its architect.
By pure luck, my first job in the United States in January 1968 was
located in the office of the architect Philip Johnson at the top floor of the
Seagram Building, and I can testify that working in such a building and
taking my lunch break on the plaza was an extraordinary experience. The
Seagram had a well-deserved reputation of exemplary urban design. It also
created a new category of land use: privately owned public space.
New York urban planners thought that by using clever regulations, they
could replicate Mies van der Rohe’s excellent design, and that it would be
desirable to do so. Obviously, they could not mandate developers to
replicate it, but they could create regulatory incentives to reproduce the
plaza and create new privately owned public spaces at no cost to taxpayer
money.City planners decided to use the regulatory tool of FAR bonuses as an
incentive to incite developers to build plazas similar to the one found in
front of the Seagram Building. Originally, new regulations stipulated that
for every square foot of urban plaza created, developers could get 10 square
feet of saleable space in addition to the floor area they were entitled to
under current zoning. The maximum floor area bonus obtainable, though,
was limited to an additional 20 percent of the permissible floor area under
current zoning.
The regulatory incentive set by planners did work. Several new
skyscrapers were recessed from the street and provided public open space in
front of the building. However, the attractiveness of the open space
provided never matched the one offered by the Seagram building. For
instance, on Sixth Avenue, between 47th and 50th streets, three consecutive
plazas were built. But because they were next to each other on the same
side of the avenue, they didn’t provide the feeling of an open plaza but just
a widening of the avenue. In addition, because the plazas were designed
mostly to obtain an additional floor bonus, not to improve the quality of the
building, the design of the plazas—streetscape, flowerbeds, and steps—
seemed to be placed to discourage use rather than to serve as a pedestrian
attraction. Indeed, privately owned public space has a number of
considerations: it may be subject to lawsuits by users, and it must be
privately maintained and policed, creating a potential liability and a sizable
additional maintenance cost. Making the plaza unattractive to “vagrants”
and even to passers-by somewhat decreases the potential for liability and
the cost of maintenance. Subsequently, New York urban planners tried to
tighten rules and expand the detailed specifications for the design of plazas
in the pursuit of more effective privately owned public spaces. However, it
is difficult to get good urban design just by regulation. The website of New
York City Department of City Planning recognizes as much when it
mentions that “the open spaces created by incentive zoning provisions have
not always been useful or attractive.” 11
Do these “not always useful or attractive” plazas have a cost? After all,
they were created by a few paragraphs added to the zoning code, clearly not
a significant expense for the city budget. However, any architectural or
urban design feature created through incentive zoning has a cost to the
developer that is eventually passed on to the user. If the developers thought
that these features would add to the value of a building, they would nothave required an incentive to create them. For instance, the plaza of the
Seagram building was built without incentive, because it added value to the
building and its cost was considered less than the value it added.
Commonly, developers add height to the lobby of prestigious office
buildings and cover the walls with marble without requiring incentive. They
do that because the additional cost is less than the value added. Incentive
zoning adds two types of cost to the floor space built in a city. First, the
capital cost and the recurring maintenance cost of the feature added because
of the incentive, a cost borne mostly by the buildings’ users, owners, or
tenants. The second type of cost is borne by all the city’s inhabitants and
workers and results from the intentional shortage of floor space (due to
restrictive regulations) that must be created for the incentive to work.
Therefore, New Yorkers pay for the cost of these “not always useful or
attractive” plazas. Let us not forget that incentive zoning can work only by
creating a general shortage of floor space and releasing it slowly only for
buildings that have features that planners would consider useful and
attractive.
Did planners learn from this failure? Not really. In November 2011, to
celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of the 1961 zoning resolution, the New
York City Department of City Planning organized a conference “to cultivate
new thinking about zoning as a governmental tool that may be used to
address major economic, social, environmental, and physical challenges.” 12
The various presentations described how zoning could make the city more
“competitive, equitable, and sustainable.” We are far from the use of
regulations to correct tall buildings’ negative externalities: shadows and
sidewalk overcrowding. I challenge any planner to explain how severely
restricting the bulk of buildings and releasing it piecemeal for some
preferred usage and dimensions would make the city more competitive,
equitable, and sustainable—even if quantitative indicators could be
developed for these objectives. Adding new fuzzy objectives to zoning
regulations will only add more complicated restrictions on the use of land
and floor space.
Let us not forget that zoning can only restrict buildings’ dimensions and
types of use. When added to zoning, floor area bonuses act as a bribe to add
building elements or usage that would not happen otherwise. By definition,
the design through regulations promoted by floor area bonuses cannot be
innovative, as they always promote the replication of an architecturalfeature or a usage from an existing building that particularly pleased urban
planners. The Seagram Building plaza was innovative—it was built at the
initiative of the architect. The plazas in front of the Sixth Avenue Midtown
buildings were just bad copies of a past innovation. The practice of floor
area ratio bonuses is to urban design innovation what a “paint by number”
canvas is to painting by artists!
By contrast, architectural and urban design innovations can be only
created by individuals working alone or in groups who do things in a new
way, or even by some architects who break the rules and get away with it.
Do Additional Floor Bonuses Decrease the Credibility of FAR
Regulations?
FAR bonuses—rewarding architectural features that urban planners value—
negates the very justifications for regulations that restrict FARs. The
restrictions put on FAR were originally aimed at limiting negative
externalities created by the shadows of tall buildings.
Let us consider the case of several blocks where the FAR is fixed at 15 by
the zoning plan—as it is the case in large areas of midtown Manhattan. In
some blocks, the FAR may be increased to 18, for buildings having a
feature that urban planners consider attractive, whether this feature is a
plaza, a theater, or some affordable housing units. We cannot but conclude
that the FAR value of 15 was arbitrary in the first place, as none of the
added feature are likely to correct the negative externality caused by a
higher building. The regulations restricting FAR to a level much below the
demand for floor space in the area are therefore only an instrument of
coercion, creating an artificial scarcity that will oblige developers to include
features that planners deem to be an improvement on city quality.
One could still argue that an added plaza would provide much needed
space for pedestrians, whose number would increase with the additional
floor space built because of the bonus. This argument does not hold up to
scrutiny. At the standard FAR of 15, the sidewalk of a building using the
same lot area as the Seagram building will have an area of 913 square
meters, or 1.12 square meters of sidewalk space for 100 square meters of
office space. If the building gets a bonus and the FAR increases by 20
percent and a plaza similar to the Seagram is added, the area of total
pedestrian space available—sidewalk and plaza—become 3.35 square
meters per 100 square meters of office space. If we assume that the numberof employees in an office building is proportional to its floor area, it means
that an increase of 20 percent of the floor area would triple the area
available to pedestrians at the street level. Clearly, if the concern is the
space available to pedestrians around the building, the plaza is
overdesigned.
No matter how pleasant the Seagram Plaza is, it is not costless. For a
given floor area, leaving a large open plaza increases the number of floors
and decreases the usable floor area on each floor. In the Seagram building,
the area used for elevators and utility shafts occupies 31 percent of the area
of a typical floor. If the Seagram had no plaza and occupied the entire site,
like some neighborhood buildings do, the entire floor area could fit in 11
floors only, and the elevators and utility shaft would occupy only 7 percent
of the total floor area, increasing significantly the saleable area. In other
words, the plaza makes the construction of the floor space significantly
more expensive.
The lavishness of the Seagram Building—use of travertine in corridors
and lobby and bronze on the facade in addition to the vast plaza—was a
deliberate decision made by its owner. For the Seagram Company, the
prestige building sheltering its New York headquarters had a value for the
brand beyond the potential market value of the building or the value of its
rents. Planners who wanted to generalize this quality in all office buildings
significantly increased the cost of office buildings in New York. FAR
bonuses are therefore not innocent and costless.
We have seen that multiplying plazas does not necessarily increase the
livability of the city. We cannot regulate good design. On the contrary, we
should rely on private initiative and the imagination of individual architects
to provide new types of Seagram buildings. The Rockefeller Center in New
York is also a magnificent example of urban design and Art Deco building,
but it would be absurd to draft regulations so that new buildings would get a
bonus if they copy the layout of Rockefeller Center. New York is full of
attractive buildings like the Woolworth or the Chrysler building, or the Flat
Iron building; none of them was built because of regulatory incentives.Micromanaging Land Use through Zoning
Since 1961, planners in New York City, in their enthusiasm for using zoning
to make the city more “competitive, equitable, and sustainable,” have
engaged in micromanaging land use by superimposing layers of regulations
that are going much further than designing plazas on private land. One of
the most extreme cases of a zoning micromanagement rule I have ever seen
is named the “Joint Living-Work Quarters for Artists.” This rule is an
overlay in the M1-5A and M1-5B zoning districts in SoHo/NoHo in New
York City. While the current land use in the area is mostly commercial and
residential, it is still zoned Manufacturing. Indeed, at the end of the
nineteenth century, the neighborhood was used mostly by garment industry
sweatshops. The “Joint Living-Work Quarters for Artists” rule stipulates
that only artists may live in these areas zoned manufacturing but only if
they occupy a joint living-work quarters. Here is the wording of this
extraordinary zoning regulation: “Section 12-10 of the New York City
Zoning Resolution refers to individual lofts in Soho and Noho as ‘arranged
and designed for use by … not more than four nonrelated artists,” including
“adequate working space reserved for [each] artist.” An artist is further
described “under Sections 275-6 of Article 7.B of the Multiple Dwelling
Law, an ‘artist’ is defined—for the purpose of qualifying for joint living￾working quarters.” The text further defines the purpose of the zone: “The
SoHo Zoning Resolution permits fine artists working on a professional
level who demonstrate a need for a live/work loft to reside in specific lofts
zoned for manufacturing. Artist certification provides the document that
equates the person named therein with a light manufacturer.”
To reside and work in the area zoned for manufacturing, an artist must
obtain an “Artist Certification” that is issued by the Director of Artist
Certification at the NYC Department of Cultural Affairs. If readers are
interested, they can apply and fill in the form on the New York City
Government website. 13
As zoning was invented to protect citizens from negative externalities,
one would assume that a special artist zoning category created in a
manufacturing area would aim at isolating artists from the rest of the
population, the way a tannery or a lead smelter would be put into a special
zone. It could be argued that artists may create negative externalities
because of the bohemian life they are assumed to lead. However, this notthe case. The rule was created to protect artists’ housing and working space
against nonartists who would compete with them for renting or buying the
same floor space. The argument of the planners is that art is a vital part of
New York cultural and economic life and needs protection.
Indeed, originally, artists found it convenient to occupy illegally lofts
abandoned long ago by the manufacturing sector in the Soho/NoHo area.
The city regulators, made aware of this zoning violation, had the good sense
to not expel the artists for zoning violations. But instead of amending the
zoning by allowing a new type of mixed work/residential use that obviously
did not create any nuisance to neighbors, the city planners created a new
type of zoning rule that excluded nonartists.
An artist, however, usually does not have a city-issued license, like a
barber, a plumber, or a mortician. To be able to enforce the new zoning
resolution, the city therefore had to create an artist certification, not to
restrict the exercise of the profession but to allow the zoning law to be
enforced. The total area in SoHo/NoHo area zoned M1-5A and M1-5B that
is restricted to artists is only 58 hectares ( figure 7.5). Outside this area,
New York artists must compete in the open market to find a work/living
space area.
Figure 7.5
M1-5A and M1-5B manufacturing districts in SoHo/NoHo, Manhattan. Source: NYC Zoning District
Map data containing the neighborhood south of Washington Square: M1-5A and M1-5B. Districts
used with the permission of the New York City Department of City Planning. All rights reserved.
To have a legal lease or purchase a loft in the SoHo/NoHo manufacturing
area where “Joint Living-Work Quarters for Artists” is authorized, artists
must apply to the department of cultural affairs to obtain a certification as
an artist, which should include a portfolio for a visual artist, or scores and
tapes for a musician! A municipal employee, after reviewing the portfolio orthe musical score, will then decide whether the artist deserves a loft. One
can imagine Jackson Pollock or Andy Warhol dutifully sending a portfolio,
hoping for an approval by the Department of Cultural Affairs! And after
being refused the qualification of artist by the city (apparently about 45
percent of applications are refused) moving to Omaha, Nebraska, to the loss
of New York City.
I am telling this long story about this bizarre zoning category not to make
fun of the NYC Planning Department but to show to what extreme zoning
boards can err by excess of zeal in their desire to design city land use to its
smallest detail. It is also an obvious example in which the zoning rule is
unlikely to have any impact on the zoning objective of promoting art in
New York City.
In addition, the “Joint Living-Work Quarters for Artists” zoning rule has
a cost. The M1-5A and M1-5B zoning district in SoHo/NoHo is located in
one of the most desirable retail and residential neighborhoods of New York,
and there is high demand for residential quarters in these areas. Developers
wanting to renovate buildings in the area must take into account the
restriction that will limit the potential buyers or renters to registered artists.
Furthermore, given the complex housing affordability problems faced by
New York City, with around 60,000 homeless people living in shelters in
2016, it is astonishing to learn that municipal employees will spend time
looking at artists’ portfolios to decide whether they deserve to be able to
rent a loft.
Abusive Separation of Functions Aimed at Slowing Down and
Increasing the Cost of Land Use Changes
The new zoning plan of 1961 aimed at separating functions more
thoroughly, and this separation has been increasing ever since. The three
types of use districts—residential, commercial, and industrial—of the 1916
plan have been subdivided in the 1961 plan. Subsequent revisions created a
multiplicity of new zones, each one subdivided into subzones with their
own bulk requirements and potential for bonuses increasing the floor area.
For example, the general commercial district is now subdivided into 72
specific zoning districts, themselves modified by overlays that further
define what can be built. The multiplication of zoning types allowed closely
reflects the existing land use of each block. A slight change in projected useby a developer would then require a variance or a zoning change, which
could be exchanged for a new design feature requested from the developers.
For instance, the areas zoned commercial are subdivided into eight types
of district named C1 to C8, each one limiting the type of commercial
activity that could take place in them. However, each zone is divided into
subdistricts, for instance district zone C4 is subdivided into 17
subcategories, each with different FAR limits and requirements and the
possibility of additional FAR bonuses ( figure 7.6). For a given land parcel,
the amount of floor area that can be built is not completely apparent without
calculations and assumptions about the possibility of FAR bonuses. For
instance, a slight zoning change from C4-4 to C4-4A would increase FAR
by 18 percent. District C4-6 would qualify for a 20 percent FAR bonus if a
public plaza is built on the lot, but would lose this qualification if the
district become a C4-6A district instead.
Figure 7.6
FAR values for the commercial zone C4 and its subdivisions.
As the market price of urban land in Manhattan is established by the area
of floor space that can be built on it, the value of a parcel of land is de facto
dependent on the designation of its zoning. For instance, in New York, the
price of a parcel of land is evaluated in dollar per allowed buildable square
foot, not in dollar per square foot of land. Therefore, a slight zoning change
could change the price of land instantly. This assumes that the FAR
restrictions impose a limit below market demand. That seems to be the case
in most of New York, and it is consistent with the incentive that planners
have for restricting FAR below demand to maintain maximum leverage for
incentive zoning.
Looking at the multiplication of zoning district designations, one cannot
avoid thinking that the differences between two zones are often largely
arbitrary and subject to change. Planners have the power to change the
value of urban land at whim. This is precisely what gives power to zoning
boards. Looking at the variations in FAR just for the C4 commercialdistricts (figure 7.6), it is difficult to perceive a clear objective in the
differentiation, unless the objective is opacity.
One of the Objectives of New York Zoning Is to Slow Down Changes
Caused by Markets
The distinctions between permitted commercial uses in different
commercial zones are extremely detailed, and it is difficult to understand
the reason for their complexity, except to maintain control or to slow down
land use changes. Here is a partial declaration of objective from the New
York City Department of City Planning:
Numerous zoning districts are mapped in the City’s diverse neighborhoods to preserve their varying
density and character. These limits help give shape to neighborhoods and predictability to their
future. The City continues to adapt the Zoning Resolution as the land use patterns in the City change
through private and public actions. 14
The following example concerning a zoning change illustrates the high cost
of maintaining regulatory fetters to prevent even small land use changes. A
public hearing at the city planning commission in 2014 agreed to change
the zoning of an existing shopping center in Queens from C2-2 to C4-1.
Under C2-2, the shopping center was limited to such uses as hardware store
or athletic goods store. But under the new C4-1 change, it became possible
to allow shops selling furniture and appliances retail uses, which were not
permitted previously! The city planning commission agreed unanimously to
the change, while the land use lawyer that had argued the case in front of
the commission declared that the change “would provide greater leasing
flexibility and enhance the future economic viability of the shopping
center.” Indeed! It is difficult to understand the type of concern for the
public good that incited planners to restrict the sale of appliances in a
commercial area that allows hardware stores.
Complex Zoning and Land Price Formation
A specialized trade website relates that it took 16 years for a large New
York developer to transform from industrial to residential the zoning
category of a lot he had purchased on the East Side of Manhattan. In 2018,
a new 140-meter-high residential tower has been built on the lot. This delay
in adapting zoning to demand raises two issues. First, it increases the cost of
building. During the 16 years, the capital used to purchase the land was
frozen, and the buildings had obsolete land use. In addition, the legal
overhead of obtaining the zoning change was certainly not negligible.Second, because the time and cost involved in getting a zoning change
could not have been known with precision by either the developer or the
land seller, it would have been difficult to establish a land price. Each side
was taking a risk. The seller’s risk was underpricing the land if the zoning
change could have been obtained quickly. The buyer’s risk was to overpay
for the land in case the zoning change, if ever obtained, took longer than he
thought. These risks and costs in holding underused properties are
eventually reflected in New York real estate prices.
The ability to change land prices by slightly modifying zoning district
categories creates a major problem when pricing land. Only a very
specialized zoning lawyer would be able to evaluate the total area of floor
space that could be built on a given parcel of land in New York City, given
the many possibilities of zoning changes, development rights transfers,
bonuses of all sorts, the potential of using 421-a (a property tax exemption),
and so forth. This creates an asymmetry of information that is extremely
detrimental to the good functioning of markets. Because of the complexity
of the zoning code, a creative zoning lawyer is far more likely to increase
the profitability of a future building than a creative architect or engineer.
The incentive zoning paradigm that was supposed to improve urban design
through clever regulations might in the long run have the opposite effect.
We should not forget that most of the beloved New York buildings still
standing now, from the Woolworth building to the Seagram tower, were
built without the “help” of modern zoning. A New York Times’ article
written in 2016 and relying on a detailed database notes that 40 percent of
the existing buildings in Manhattan could not be built today because they
contradict some land use zoning rules. 15 Many of these buildings are
clustered together in the most expensive parts of Manhattan. Therefore, not
meeting land use regulations does not seem to decrease their value, which
would tend to demonstrate that zoning rules do not correct any perceivable
negative externalities.
What advantages did the multiplicity of zoning categories and
corresponding bulk add to the New York streetscape since 1961? One could
compare the opacity of New York current zoning with the transparency
established by the planners who conceived and surveyed the Manhattan grid
in 1811. The existence of the grid and its survey markers immediately
established clarity in the value of buildable land for the entire island of
Manhattan. The value of land parcels facing avenues, on side streets, and atblocks corners could immediately be evaluated, with the same information
available to the seller and the buyer clearly apparent on the plan. By
contrast, the value of two adjacent land parcels, one zoned M1-5B and the
other C6-2 on the zoning map of figure 7.5, is impossible to assess without
the help of highly specialized zoning lawyers. I am sure that whoever
established the distinction between the two zones had a rationale for doing
so, but this rationale is not explicit, has a very high cost to New Yorkers,
and is possibly as futile as the special zoning category for artists.
Urban Design Should Be Site Specific, Not Defined through
Regulations
I am not suggesting here that planners should not impose any conditions on
developers when significant land use changes are envisaged. But the
modification required to the design of a building must be focused on the
tangible negative externalities that it may generate. Shadows cast by
buildings are not an important issue any more in high-density cities. Air
conditioning and cheap artificial light have taken care of that. The demand
for the transformation of office buildings into residential buildings in the
Wall Street area demonstrates that fact. In high-demand areas, high FARs
should be a right guaranteed to individuals.
However, tall buildings may generate urban design problems at their
junction with the street. A redesign of the public space may be required
because of the pedestrian traffic tall buildings may generate. For instance,
the entrances of traditionally designed subway stations may obstruct
sidewalks in high-density areas. Clearly, in such a case, design coordination
between urban planners and the design of a very tall office building is to the
advantage of all parties. The most creative urban design solutions are
always site specific. No regulation can provide an optimum solution for
every case. Instead of relying on bonus FAR to obtain a design change, it
would be better if the city urban planners had a fund that could be used
specifically to improve and adapt the design of streets and parks to the
changing city land use. In a certain way, the use of FAR bonuses in
incentive zoning is a barter system. It would be better to use a monetary
instrument like an impact fee to replace this barter system. City urban
planners would then be able to use the urban design fund that the impact
fees would generate to redesign and adjust the design of public space.
Location-specific design modifications could be required on the groundfloor or mezzanine of buildings to link seamlessly with the new public
realm features. This method is used routinely in Singapore and Hong Kong
to increase the pedestrian areas to link private buildings with the street and
with public transport.
The tendency today is in the opposite direction. The trend is to increasing
the use of barter through incentive zoning, while decreasing the city’s
financial resources with the bizarre practice of providing the 421-a property
tax exemption to large buildings 16
in addition to floor area bonuses. Tax
exemption and floor area bonuses are given in exchange for something the
city wants: plaza, arcades, or affordable housing. The use of tax exemptions
reduces the city’s resources. Consequently, the city has to resort to
draconian zoning to barter zoning changes with developers in order to
obtain a simple urban design feature like an underground connection to a
subway station.
Some examples of site-specific design features have already been used in
New York for large projects like Hudson Yards and the Vanderbilt Corridor,
which address directly the issue of pedestrian access to transit close to large
new buildings. New York has also a history of “transit bonuses” 17
that use
FAR increases to induce private developers to pay for improvement to
subway stations. These cases illustrate legitimate “design” dialogue
between developers and urban planners to solve site-specific accessibility
issues raised by increasing densities. I regret only that the currency used is
always an increase to FAR rather than a site-specific impact fee on the
increased office floor area that caused the negative externality.
New York Zoning Objectives: Slowing Down Unavoidable Change
As mentioned, New York’s current zoning regulations have in fact two
implicit objectives: shaping the city to the preference of urban planners and
slowing down the land use changes that markets demand. Achieving these
objectives through regulations has a cost that is paid by all New Yorkers in
the form of higher rents and chronic housing shortages.
Because New York has a vibrant democratic government, the attempt to
slow down land use change must have a constituency that represents a
significant part of public opinion. Indeed, NIMBYism 18
is common to all
large cities. People resist change. Any land use change, even if it is as
benign as the disappearance of a corner grocery store, seems to be an
unacceptable evolution to people who have lived in a neighborhood for along time. In contrast, a city’s mayor is well aware that citizens expect more
jobs, housing, and the establishment of abundant retail and services, which
require large and rapid land use changes. New York’s planning department
has managed this contradictory mandate by devising an extremely complex
zoning system that has a well-oiled mechanism to permit change but makes
change slow and costly. In this way, they satisfy both sides of their
constituency, the side that wants no change and the one that wants new jobs
and housing.
Containing Urban Expansion as an Objective Function
Paris and New York zoning plans illustrate how planners try to modify the
shape of cities through regulations that constrain firm and household
demands for floor space. Paris planners’ zoning efforts resulted in the
effective conservation of urban heritage and the acceleration of the
dispersion of economic activity and population to the suburbs. In New
York, planners successfully created new privately paid urban design
features, some privately produced “affordable housing units,” and a slowing
down of the pace of land use change.
These two examples are very city specific and are not necessarily part of
a general urban policy trend advocated by planners. By contrast, the policy
variously called “containment,” “compact cities,” “smart growth,” or “anti￾sprawl,” have been advocated in many cities around the world. I will use
the word “containment” to characterize these policies. Containment policy
advocates place physical restrictions on the expansion of cities, which is yet
another attempt to design cities through regulations.
Containment Is a Recent Reversal of Two Centuries of Urban
Expansion Policies
Containment is a policy that dates to the fin de siècle twentieth century and
developed momentum at the beginning of the twenty-first century.
Planners’ support for containment has several origins. There was always a
concern among planners that the gradual “encroachment” of urban areas on
agricultural land would eventually result in food shortage—a concern
currently embraced by the Chinese government. Hence, the necessity to
slow down the spatial growth of urban areas by increasing the densities of
cities.The agricultural land shortage argument for containment was further
reinforced by petroleum price volatility that occurred at the junction of the
twentieth and twenty-first centuries. Households living in suburban
developments relying on individual car transport cost were adversely
affected by the unpredictability of gasoline prices. Households having
shorter commuting trips or able to use public transport were much less
vulnerable to these transport cost variations. The desirability of shorter
commuting distances and therefore higher densities was added to the
objective of saving agricultural land. Transport planners, involved in the
development of public transport, joined the containment movement as
public transport cannot operate efficiently in low-density suburbs. The large
subsidies reducing the fare paid by public transport users have to become
even larger when serving low-density areas.
At the beginning of the twenty-first century, the emergence of the gradual
consensus on the serious threat caused by global warming gave an
additional impetus to the containment movement, as urban transport is
responsible for a large part of CO2 emissions—about 20 percent of US
GHG emissions in 2014.
All these concerns are based on real issues. My skepticism about the
policy of urban containment does not reflect a rejection of the potential
issues described above. I think that containment is simply the wrong
solution for preserving food supply, improving mobility, and decreasing the
production of GHGs. Not only is containment policy unable to solve these
issues, but its systematic implementation can have serious consequences for
housing affordability and for the welfare of urban households in general. I
will argue these points in the following paragraphs.
Containment is a sharp reversal from urban planning doctrines of the
nineteenth century and of most of the twentieth, when affluent cities were
eager to expand and carefully planned their expansion. In the nineteenth
century, large planned expansion of cities like Barcelona and New York
were considered a sign of modernity and sophistication. Whether
theoreticians advocated low-density suburban development like Ebenezer
Howard’s Garden Cities or the denser skyscrapers in the park of Le
Corbusier, nobody doubted that the urbanized areas of cities had to expand.
And expand they did. Levittown, a more modest version of the Howard
design, together with its many imitators in the United States and Western
Europe, provided a large part of the new urban housing stock affordable to arapidly expanding middle class. These rapid suburban expansions lowered
the high (and deadly) densities in the London of Dickens, the Paris of Zola,
and the Chicago of Theodore Dreiser.
Distortion in Land Markets Could Result in Excessive Development of
Urban Land
Containment policy assumes that land markets overallocate land to urban
use at the expense of agricultural use or open space. Thus, cities use more
land than what would be required, resulting in inefficient transport,
pollution, and losses of valuable agricultural land. Planners in favor of
containment advocate setting physical boundaries to prevent cities from
expanding beyond what they deem is the right amount of land to be
allocated to urban expansion. Greenbelts and urban growth boundaries set
the physical limits of suburban expansion, ensuring that they do not exceed
the preset “right amount” of land.
Eminent urban economists like Jan Brueckner and David Fansler, in a
paper published in 1983, 19 already mentioned the “emotionally charged
indictment of sprawl” (sprawl is the opposite of containment):
The economist’s view of urban expansion stands in stark contrast to this emotionally-charged
indictment of sprawl. Economists believe that urban spatial size is determined by an orderly market
process which correctly allocates land between urban and agricultural uses. The model underlying
this view … suggests that urban spatial size is determined in a straightforward way by a number of
exogenous variables.
Urban economists, however, do not deny that some of the exogenous
variables, like the price of transport or of agricultural land might be at times
distorted, and that these possible distortions may have an impact on the
quantity of land used by cities. Urban economists have therefore identified
the many factors that could distort urban land markets, such as the inability
to price road congestion; the subsidies given to infrastructure and fuel
prices; the abusive use of eminent domain underpricing rural land; and
finally, the land use regulations that force households and firms to use more
land than they need—minimum lot sizes, maximum densities, and
maximum FARs.
These distortions could indeed result in an excessive expansion of urban
land, and removing them would make expanding cities more efficient and
the area they occupy closer to an economic optimum. For instance,
Brueckner, in a paper titled “Urban Sprawl: Lessons from Urban
Economics,” 20 provides an analysis of the possible causes for land marketdistortions and identifies practical remedies. For each possible cause of
distortion, a theoretical model can be built that calculates the impact of the
distortion on urban land consumption. For instance, in a country that
subsidizes gasoline, an economist can calculate the impact of the subsidy on
a city built-up area and the reduction in urbanized land that would result
from removing the subsidy. The calculation would be part of a theoretical
model that considers other parameters, such as population growth,
household incomes, the cost of commuting time, and the price of
agricultural land. The optimum equilibrium area of land for expansion
depends on the value of many variables that are specific to the city studied.
For these reasons, economists never recommend an urban optimum
density corresponding to a permanent equilibrium, as this density might
change when model inputs like household incomes and transport price and
speed change over time. However, by correcting distortions, such as
removing fuel subsidies and pricing pollution and congestion, a city is more
likely to get closer to an ever-changing optimum built-up area.
Brueckner argues that first correcting the distortions and then relying on
markets to find a new equilibrium is a much more efficient way to improve
urban land efficiency than trying to correct distortions by arbitrarily
reducing the area of urban expansion through regulations like greenbelts
and urban growth boundaries. He warns that reducing arbitrarily the urban
area generated by distorted market forces might reduce urban welfare
significantly, without addressing the negative effects created by the
distortions.
Many urban economists have argued against containment policy, pointing
to its social cost and its unconvincing environmental advantages. Edward L.
Glaeser and Matthew E. Kahn write: 21
Sprawl has been associated with significant improvements in quality of living, and the environmental
impacts of sprawl have been offset by technological change. Finally, we suggest that the primary
social problem associated with sprawl is the fact that some people are left behind because they do not
earn enough to afford the cars that this form of living requires.
For Glaeser and Khan, the main problem caused by sprawl is the
potential lack of mobility that it creates for households at the bottom of the
income scale. Obviously, densification through containment will not
alleviate the situation of the poor, as it would likely increase housing prices.
Other economists have analyzed the extent of the urban area of specific
cities that have been constrained by greenbelts. For instance, MartialEchenique, a British economist, modeled three urban regions in England,
including London and the Wider South East Region, 22 all constrained by
green-belts. Echenique’s model analyzed three options: containment (i.e.,
continuation of green-belt policy); dispersed development; and contiguous
market-driven expansion. His conclusions are unambiguous:
The current planning policy strategies for land use and transport have virtually no impact on the
major long-term increases in resource and energy consumption. They generally tend to increase costs
and reduce economic competitiveness. The relatively small differences between options are
overwhelmed by the impacts of socioeconomic change and population growth.
I have also quoted (in chapter 6) the work of Kate Barker and Paul
Cheshire on the large social cost of London’s greenbelt and its lack of
evident environmental benefits.
Despite the overwhelming evidence that the preferred tools used by
planners to constrain urban expansion are socially costly and do not provide
any of the environmental and economic benefits expected, containment is
still a widely advocated urban policy.
An Example of the Rationalization for Containment
More recently, containment policy seems to have been initiated and
supported mostly by international institutions that gave a voice and
designed a pseudotheoretical framework to better articulate the various
antigrowth and NIMBY grassroots movements emerging from cities
themselves. For instance, the World Bank, the Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development (OECD), the World Resource Institute, UN
Habitat, and the Sierra Club have all advocated compact cities and
containment with various degrees of stridency.
I am not arguing that these institutions should not be concerned with an
uneconomic use of urban land, as this is indeed often a serious problem. I
suggest that they should address market distortions by advocating the
improvement of the pricing of what is poorly priced (like transport and
parking) or is still mostly unpriced (e.g., congestion, pollution, emissions of
GHGs). By skipping the economic analysis that should be carried out in
each individual city and in essence implying that all cities overexpand and
that higher densities are always better than lower densities, they are
providing a terrible disservice to their urban audience. Their systematic
advocacy for constraining urban land supply results in inflated land prices,
exacerbated housing shortages that particularly affect the poor, and ingeneral stalled creation of many social amenities that require affordable
urban land.
Compact City Policies: A Comparative Assessment,
23 an OECD report
published in 2012, best summarizes the institutional rationale for
containment. This report is representative of arguments found in many
documents issued by other institutions advocating containment. The main
diagnosis developed in the report is that, first, urban population is growing
rapidly in developing countries and, second, that in cities where the urban
built-up area is growing faster than the urban population, action is required
to limit urban extension to make cities more compact.
The diagnosis to determine whether a city is consuming too much land is
therefore quite simple in this analysis. If the rate of growth of urban land is
larger than the rate of growth of population, the city consumes too much
land, and containment should become the main feature of its development
policy.
The OECD report goes further in its recommendation for containment:
Throughout its long history, the compact city concept has evolved and enlarged its scope and policy
objectives. From a simple urban containment policy to protect the local natural environment or
agricultural land from urban encroachment, it has gradually acquired new policy objectives:
energy savings, quality of life and livability, etc.
Containment—because of its many supposed side benefits—has become
a quasireligious dogma. Planners continue to affiliate other benefits to the
practice of containment, even when true causal links do not exist. The
OECD report argues that the population of compact cities is closer to
agricultural areas and therefore, “nearby farming encourages local food
consumption and reduces the distance travelled by food, which also helps
reduce CO2 emissions.”
We are getting farther and farther from the models developed by
economists and closer to New Age mantras! It is ironic that Amsterdam,
which is the iconic city for containment advocates, is located in a country
that is the second largest world agricultural exporter after the United States!
Obviously, all the food produced around Amsterdam is not entirely
consumed by its inhabitants.
There are many ways in which advocating for containment could be
counterproductive, even in one of containment’s biggest claims: that
containment could lower global warming. Two examples:• One could imagine a city where photovoltaic panels on roofs linked to
batteries would provide most of the power needed for residential
consumption and urban transport. In such a city, high density and multistory
housing should be forbidden as they would be unable to produce the
photovoltaic energy required per household.
• Today urban transport might often be inefficient in using energy and
consequently might be contributing excessively to global warming.
However, the obvious solution is to follow Brueckner’s advice, and to
remove market distortions through better pricing of transport (rather than
add additional distortions through containment). This in turn would
stimulate technology change that would make urban transport use more low
carbon energy.
Do the Built-Up Areas of Most Cities Expand at a Faster Rate Than
Their Populations?
We have seen that economically successful cities need space to expand.
Their success attracts more households and firms, and each of the
newcomers adds to the floor space and land consumed by the city. In
countries where the ratio between urban and total population is still low,
like China and India, the need for urban spatial expansion is even higher
than it is in countries where a large part of population is already urbanized,
as in Latin America. As mentioned in the preceding chapters, urban
households’ rising incomes create more demand for floor space and land.
The size of households decreases, but they consume more floor space per
capita. Higher-income households create a demand for more commercial
and cultural facilities, therefore more floor space and more urban land. The
standard urban model, described in chapter 4, suggests that cities with
increasing incomes and a low rate of urbanized population would need large
areas to expand as the quantity of urbanized land per capita is bound to
increase. In chapter 4, we have seen the example of Tianjin, China, where
over 12 years the consumption of land per person had increased by 34
percent, the population increased by 22 percent, while the built-up area
increased by 63 percent.
The recent work conducted by my NYU colleague Solly Angel with the
Urban Expansion Project 24 at the Marron Institute confirms the predictions
of the standard urban model in most of the world’s cities. As part of this
work, Angel and his team have published an Atlas of Urban Expansionshowing how the populations and built-up areas of a sample of cities of
100,000 people or more have grown during the past 25 years (1990–2014).
The Atlas of Urban Expansion—2016 Edition 25 focuses on the land
converted to urban use over the past 14 years in a global representative
sample of 200 cities. The results by region provided by the Atlas are
summarized in figure 7.7. In the cities of every region, on average the urban
built-up area has grown faster than the population, resulting in an increase
in the consumption of land per person over the period of study. In the East
Asia region, where cities and income developed the fastest, the average
increase in urban land has been twice as large as the increase in population,
resulting in an average increase in land consumption per person of about 30
percent.
Figure 7.7
Average increase in population and built-up area in a sample of 200 cities between 2000 and 2013, by
region. Sources: Atlas of Urban Expansion 2016, Marron Institute, New York University; UN
Habitat, Lincoln Institute of Land Policy.Implications of Containment Policy
Containment policy has only one measurable indicator: the difference
between the rate of growth of the population and of the built-up area. If this
difference is positive, containment is successful; if the difference is
negative, it is not successful.
Containment policy, therefore, implies that as a city develops, its current
built-up density should stay constant or increase—so that the population
growth rate would be equal to or higher than the built-up area growth rate.
In other words, a decrease in land consumption per person is always better
than an increase.
This implies that the allocation of land for urban expansion is no longer
related to income, cost of transport, and price of agricultural land, but
simply mechanically linked to the rate of growth of the population.
Let us review where and when variations of average urban densities
occur.
Is It Possible for Urban Populations to Grow at the Same Pace as the
Built-Up Area?
The need for containment, according to its advocates, is demonstrated when
the growth rate of a city’s build-up area is growing faster than its
population. Cities that adopt a containment policy should therefore try to
limit the land area they use for expansion in a given period in such a way
that within time interval t1 to t2 the ratio between the population and the
built-up area remain equal to a constant K, as shown in equation 7.1.
Equation 7.1
Containment policy often implies that the following condition be met:
where P1 and P2 are the population at times t1 and t2, respectively; and A1 and A2 are the built￾up areas at time t1 and t2, respectively.
So if the city’s population grows by 10 percent in the interval between t1
and t2, then the built-up area also will be limited to growing by 10 percentor less.
However, the whole purpose of cities is to increase the welfare of the
population. This welfare is expressed in terms of increased income, and
therefore in increased residential floor space consumed. With increased
income households consume more floor space used by community facilities
like school and neighborhood parks and amenities like commerce and
services.
Even in very affluent cities like New York, London, and Paris, planners
are concerned about housing overcrowding, too few affordable dwelling
units, too small schools with too large class sizes, and lack of community
facilities and neighborhood open space. Most urban citizens consider that
the creation of new libraries, museums, theaters, and concert halls is highly
desirable. New services emerge, like indoor gyms. As incomes increase,
firms also tend to consume more floor space per worker. Sweatshops are
replaced by spacious factories. Office buildings include more meeting
rooms and more office space per worker.
Consequently, as incomes increase, the consumption of total floor space
per person also increases. This increase is not due to extravagant
consumption but to the very raison d’être of cities. Even the stricter
containment advocates would agree with the desirability of increasing total
urban floor space per person as population and incomes increase.
However, new increased floor areas need to be built over land.
Evaluating the quantity of land that this new floor space will require is what
separates containment planning from market-driven planning. Under
containment, the built-up area of a city should not increase faster than its
population. Under the market-driven approach that I advocated in the
preceding chapter, it is the price of land that determines the amount of land
consumed per person, and by extension how much land should be
developed.
Market-driven land development allocates the new floor space to be built
in new development zones (greenfields), or by adding new floor space to
existing built-up areas, either by replacing existing buildings by taller ones
or by using more intensively already developed land (for instance, by
building “granny flats” in backyards). The allocation of new floor space
between greenfields and existing built-up area is determined by land prices
and construction costs. The height of a building is determined by land
prices in various locations.Containment-driven land development from the start puts an upper limit
to the area of greenfield that can be developed. Putting a limit on greenfield
development increases the price of land in the entire city, and therefore
would tend to favor taller buildings in both the existing built-up areas and
the greenfield development.
Let us explore the spatial consequences on the development of a city
when containment planning, rather than market prices, is used to allocate
land for urban extension. It is possible to calculate the change in building
height, or rather in FAR that would be required to accommodate an increase
if floor area consumption when the conditions of equation 7.1 are strictly
met (equation 7.2).
Equation 7.2
A city total built-up area A can be defined as a function of its population P, of the floor area
consumed per capita Flc and of the built-up floor area ratio Far:
The built-up floor area ratio (A) is the ratio between the total floor area of a city (Far)—
aggregating all floor area, residential, commercial and industrial—and the total built-up area
(Flc)—including private lots, roads, and small parks, as defined in chapter 3.
To assess the impact of containment policy on a city shape, assume that the floor area per
capita will increase between t1 and t2, reflecting improved housing and more amenities, but
that the rate of increase of the built-up area will be strictly controlled by containment policy to
be equal to the rate of increase of the population. We will then determine the gross floor area
ratio of the city at time t2 as the dependent variable.
Between t1 and time t2 then to satisfy equation 7.1, we should have
and therefore,
Therefore, to satisfy a containment policy, where the built-up area is
constrained to grow at the same rate as the population, the built-up floor
area ratio between time t1 and t2 should grow at the same rate as floor area
consumed per capita during the same period. For instance, if the floor areaper person grows by 30 percent, then the average floor area ratio has also to
grow by 30 percent to allow the built-up area to grow at the same rate as the
population—as required by the containment policy. If the average floor area
ratio grows at a slower pace than the floor area per capita, then the total
built-up area will grow faster than the population and the goal of the
containment policy will not be met.
The imposed parity between the rate of growth of the population and the
built-up area has an unintended impact on the shape of the city and in
particular on its density profile.
Imagine a city whose mayor decides to adopt a containment policy. The
city’s current built-up area is equal to S. The projected rate of growth of the
population g will allow this area S to grow by an additional area P = S ∙ g.
Because the population density should remain constant to maintain the
containment requirement, any increase in floor consumption should be
provided by a proportional increase in the FAR.
The average floor area ratio within S will not be able to grow much, as it
would require the demolition of existing buildings to replace them with
taller ones. This is a slow process. The bulk of the new FAR will have
therefore to be built within the perimeter of P using a FAR much higher
than the one within S, as the area of P is fixed in advance by the policy.
This would result in densities being higher in the periphery P than in the
more central area S, contradicting all empirical and theoretical evidence we
have discussed in chapters 3 and 4 for the standard urban model.
When containment policy is applied to a city, the main result is to
increase both land and floor prices. The growth of floor space consumption
envisaged in the scenario above would not really take place. With
increasing land and floor prices, the increase in residential floor area per
person will likely not happen; neither would the construction of pre-K
schools or the new restaurants that increases in household incomes would
have made possible.
Cities whose land supply is constrained by topography, like San
Francisco, New York, Hong Kong, Vancouver, Sydney, and Auckland, all
have high price—income ratios (as have we have seen in chapter 6). The
containment policy, when it is enforced, has the same impact as topographic
constraints.
This spatial outcome is not surprising. We have seen that the FAR of a
building is not subject to design but is a real estate outcome. Buildings havehigh FARs where the unit price of land is expensive compared to the unit
cost of construction, and it is low when the opposite is true. Proponents of
containment, arbitrarily constraining the land area to be developed, are
acting like planners in a command economy.
In market-driven cities, as we have seen in chapter 4, high densities and
high land values are found in the highly accessible city center, while lower
densities and lower land values are found in the periphery. Containment
policy, if strictly applied, would result in a reverse density gradient
compared to the standard urban model.
Cities with reverse density gradients do exist, for instance, Moscow in
1990 and Johannesburg under apartheid. All such cities were built without
land markets. Interestingly, the density profile of Portland, Oregon (a city
renowned for its “Urban Growth Boundary” containment strategy) that I
measured in 1990, also shows an increase in density toward its periphery.
Is an Increase in Land Consumption a Sign of Wasteful Use?
Supporters of containment policy are concerned about an excessive use of
urban land per person. However, to my knowledge, no containment policy
advocate has ever defined what area per person would constitute an
efficient consumption of land. Urban land consumption per person varies
widely from one city to another, often by more than an order of magnitude.
Figure 7.8 shows the change in average urban land consumption per person
in cities grouped by regions between 2000 and 2014. In all regions, the
consumption per person has increased significantly.
Figure 7.8
Urban land consumption per person between 2000 and 2014, by region. Sources: Atlas of Urban
Expansion 2016, Marron Institute, New York University; UN Habitat, Lincoln Institute of Land
Policy.Other Objective Functions: Is Sustainability an Objective Function for
a City?
Currently, the planning profession and the popular press are formulating
guiding principles for the development of cities expressed as a single
qualifier that is variously expressed as cities should be “sustainable,”
“resilient,” and “livable.” Practi cally every urban planning department in
universities all around the world has added “Sustainable” to their title. For
instance, Oxford University offers a Master of Science in Sustainable Urban
Development.
Is sustainable development different from just development? And could
being sustainable guide the design of cities better than market mechanisms
can?
In 2015, the United Nations proposed 17 Sustainable Development
Goals, listed in figure 7.9, that must be achieved by 2030. It is difficult to
disagree with any of these goals. Then, could they be used as the starting
point to develop an objective function to design a city? The only goal
mentioning cities explicitly is goal 11: Sustainable Cities and Communities.
This Sustainable Development Goal seems to be an unfortunate kind of
circular reference and is clearly unable to guide us. Let us then select two
goals that might be applicable to cities, goal 1 (No Poverty) and goal 7
(Affordable and Clean Energy). Let us try to develop quantitative objectives
to clarify these goals when applied to cities.Figure 7.9
UN Sustainable Development Goals.
Countries with rapidly developing economies, like China and India, are
running into the dilemma of choosing between the goals of No Poverty and
Affordable and Clean Energy. So far it seems that they have opted to
privilege No Poverty combined with Affordable Energy while postponing
the Clean Energy component. Indeed, the available technology does not yet
allow most poor countries with abundant coal resources to have affordable
clean energy.
Neither the Chinese or Indian government is willing to wait for
affordable clean energy technology to start increasing their electricity
production. Have they been right in their prioritization? Nobody knows.
The environmental cost of their policy is obviously high, but keeping
millions of people in poverty while waiting for cheaper renewable energy
might have an even higher social cost. There is no objective function as
there is for the design of bridges.
The choice between affordable and clean energy is purely political.
Reducing poverty now using affordable polluting energy or waiting for the
availability of affordable clean energy to reduce poverty in the future is a
typical trade-off that politicians must make. There is no computable
optimum, only choices.Conclusions
The Problem with Designing New Cities
We may use science to predict what might happen. We are unable to
scientifically define what should happen. This is the main problem with
urban planners wanting to substitute their judgment for the self-organization
of markets. They become messianic, like the proponents of containment.
Their proposals are based on dogma: compact is better than not compact,
bicycles are better than motorized transport. Planners, like economists,
should just tell politicians “if you do this, that will likely happen.” They
should provide several options. The choice among options is political or
possibly ideological. It is not the place of planners to make this choice.
Planners may have personal preferences for a type of city—personally, I
prefer to live in dense cities like New York and Hong Kong—but my
personal preferences are irrelevant when providing technical advice to a
mayor. A quotation 26 from Yuval Harari should guide planners when giving
technical advice to mayors:
Science can explain what exists in the world, how things work, and what might be in the future. By
definition, it has no pretensions to knowing what should be in the future. Only religions and
ideologies seek to answer such questions.Notes
1. Nassim Nicholas Taleb, Antifragile: Things That Gain from Disorder (New York: Random House,
2014).
2. Herbert Spencer, “State-Tamperings with Money and Banks,” in Essays: Scientific, Political, &
Speculative, vol. 3 (London and Edinburgh: Williams and Norgate, 1891), 354.
3. In this section I use the word “Paris” to designate the 20 arrondissements that constitute the Paris
municipality and have a population of 2.2 million people, compared to the 12 million corresponding
to the Paris metropolitan area known as Île-de-France.
4. See http://pluenligne.paris.fr/plu/sites-plu/site_statique_37/pages/page_791.html.
5. Paris is divided into 20 arrondissements that are administrative boundaries, but they are also
closely identified with type of lifestyle and real estate prices.
6. Alain Bertaud and Stephen Malpezzi, “Measuring the Costs and Benefits of Urban Land Use
Regulation: A Simple Model with an Application to Malaysia,” Journal of Housing Economics 10,
no. 3 (2001): 393.
7. Jason M. Barr, Building the Skyline: The Birth and Growth of Manhattan’s Skyscrapers (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2016).
8. Bulk regulations, as defined by the NYC Department of City Planning, are the combination of
controls (lot size, floor area ratio, lot coverage, open space, yards, height, and setback) that determine
the maximum size and placement of a building on a zoning lot.
9. Barr, Building the Skyline, 163, 343.
10. See http://www1.nyc.gov/site/planning/about/city-planning-history.page?tab=2.
11. See http://www1.nyc.gov/site/planning/about/city-planning-history.page?tab=2.
12. NYC Department of City Planning, NYC Zoning History, Zoning the City—2011, Conference
Description, https://www1.nyc.gov/site/planning/about/city-planning-history.page.
13. The website is http://www.nyc.gov/html/dcla/downloads/pdf/artist_certification.pdf.
14. See http://www1.nyc.gov/site/planning/zoning/about-zoning.page.
15. See http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2016/05/19/upshot/forty-percent-of-manhattans￾buildings-could-not-be-built-today.html.
16. The 421-a tax exemption reduces the property tax of developer to what it would have been before
development for a period varying from 15 to 30 years. In exchange, the developer has to provide
something the city would like, for instance 20 percent subsidized rental units, or a special urban
design feature like a connection to a subway station. It is barter, and not a very transparent one.
17. See http://www1.nyc.gov/assets/planning/download/pdf/plans-studies/vanderbilt￾corridor/history_of_transit_bonuses.pdf.
18. From NIMBY, “not in my backyard,” an expression used by pressure groups to prevent
development of any type, including indispensable public services like hospital and homeless shelters.
19. Jan K. Brueckner and David A. Fansler, “The Economics of Urban Sprawl: Theory and Evidence
on the Spatial Sizes of Cities,” Review of Economics and Statistics 65, no. 3 (1983): 479–482, quote
on 479.20. Jan K. Brueckner, “Urban Sprawl: Lessons from Urban Economics,” Brookings-Wharton Papers
on Urban Affairs, Brookings Institution, Washington, DC, 2001.
21. Edward L. Glaeser and Matthew E. Kahn, “Sprawl and Urban Growth,” NBER Working Paper
9733, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA, May 2003.
22. Marcial H. Echenique, Anthony J. Hargreaves, Gordon Mitchell, and Anil Namdeo, “Growing
Cities Sustainably,” Journal of the American Planning Association 78, no. 2 (2012): 121–137. DOI:
10.1080/01944363.2012.666731.
23. OECD (2012), Compact City Policies: A Comparative Assessment, OECD Green Growth
Studies, OECD Publishing, http://dx.doi.org/10A 787/9789264167865-en.
24. See http://marroninstitute.nyu.edu/programs/urban-expansion.
25. See http://www.atlasofurbanexpansion.org/. Shlomo Angel, Alejandro M. Blei, Jason Parent,
Patrick Lamson-Hall, and Nicolás Galarza Sánchez, with Daniel L. Civco, Rachel Qian Lei, and
Kevin Thom, Atlas of Urban Expansion—2016 Edition, vol. 1, Areas and Densities (Cambridge,
MA: Lincoln Institute of Land Policy, 2016).
26. Yuval Noah Harari, Sapiens: A Brief History of Humankind (New York: HarpersCollins, 2016).8 Urban Planners and Urban Economists Have an Important
Role to Play If They Manage to Work Together
Mayors and Urban Planners Should Be Enablers and Facilitators, Not
the Creators or Shapers of Cities
The productivity of cities comes from the proximity of households and
firms. However, this close physical proximity, which is so essential to the
creativity of cities, requires special rules, shared investments, and common
services. Local governments are created specifically to set and enforce the
rules that make proximity viable. In addition, local governments manage
shared capital goods (e.g., infrastructure and public open space) and provide
social services. Shared capital investment and services need to be paid for
through local taxes, tolls, and user fees.
The role of mayors and their municipal staff, including urban planners
and economists, is therefore rather like the role of a well-coordinated team
of competent managers and janitors. The mayor, with his team of municipal
managers, is not the city’s ruler, nor is he the city’s designer. A city is
entirely created by its citizens’ initiatives. These citizens are required to act
within a set of “good neighbor” rules, and to be supported in their
endeavors by a network of physical and social infrastructure managed by a
mayor and a city council.
In a large city, the municipal budget is often much larger than the
individual budgets of most of the city’s firms and households. The political
power provided by the large municipal budget to mayors, municipal
councils, and their planning staff seems out of proportion with the modest
role of managers and of competent janitors that the function would require.
Hence the temptation to use this power in an abusive manner, as shown in
the preceding chapters.Some municipal governments conclude that the power provided by their
large budget entitles them to “design” the city, and that their role should not
be limited to competently providing the infrastructure and services required
to support the activities of their citizens. We have seen an expression of
municipal hubris in the preceding chapter. New York City zoning rules are
no longer limited to establishing good-neighbor norms and to mitigating
obvious negative externalities but are now aimed at designing the city
through regulations. A municipality is fulfilling its proper role when it
simply coordinates municipal public investments with the investments of
private developers, as it has done, for instance, in the development of the
Hudson Yard project in New York.
While they do not have to design the city, urban planners and economists
have a very important role to play in managing their city’s land assets, like
streets and open space, and its infrastructure capital assets. In particular,
planners have a major role to play in improving mobility and ensuring
housing affordability. In this chapter, I describe the important role that
urban planners should play in maintaining and hopefully increasing the
welfare of the cities they work for. In doing so, I first have to describe the
deviation from this role that has been prevalent during the past 50 years.
Do We Really Want Our Mayors and Planners to Have a Vision?
For about a quarter of century, many municipalities have been describing
their development plans as a “vision.” Calling a simple municipal action
and investment program “a vision” is symptomatic of the grandiose
misunderstanding that municipalities have concerning their role. Merriam￾Webster’s Dictionary defines vision as “the act or power of imagination.”
This is not what you would expect from your janitor! A vision is normally
the outcome of a personal religious, artistic, or scientific insight, and should
not be used to qualify a plan to extend a sewer network, to adjust a property
tax, or to collect tolls on bridges. The use of the word “vision” to define a
municipal works program has spread worldwide. A Google search of words
“mayor vision” produces 50.2 million entries! A search in French and
Spanish gives similar results. It seems that all over the world, mayors feel
obliged to manage their cities through “vision.”
Here are some of the results from the Internet search:
• “Hilton Head hires consultant to help jumpstart mayor’s ‘vision’ process.”
• “My Vision For Seattle—Mayor. seattle.gov.”• “Quezon City mayor’s vision for an inclusive city.”
• “Vision for London—Sadiq Khan Labour candidate for Mayor of
London.”
Does it matter if mayors use the word “vision” to describe their
municipal program? I think it does. George Orwell wrote “but if thought
corrupts language, language can also corrupt thought.” 1
A mayor convinced of the necessity of having a vision to manage a city
would feel less inclined to respond in a supportive way to the changes
brought by the activities and innovations of the city’s population. A
visionary mayor may feel compelled to impose her unique insights on the
life of her Philistine citizens. The hubris of mayoral visions would be a
clear example of what Orwell was thinking about when he wrote about the
possibility of language corrupting thought. A mayor with a vision needs to
be followed. She should not be questioned by people who lack vision.
Visionary leadership implies a top-down approach. We have seen in the
preceding chapters that a city is mostly created from the bottom up.
However, a top-down approach is required to design infrastructure and
services, but only as they are needed to support citizens’ activities. The
support role involved in this top-down design is not trivial and requires
good data and outstanding technical and financial skills, but a personal
vision is not a requirement. It might rather be a hindrance.
Where Did the Vision Come from in Silicon Valley?
Silicon Valley has been the world’s most innovative urban concentration
during the past half century. The creation of Silicon Valley is a perfect
example of the advantages of a grassroots citizens’ vision, as opposed to a
top-down mayoral vision. Silicon Valley was not created by a visionary
mayor but by a large group of brilliant tinkerers, at times collaborating, but
certainly not coordinating, their actions by implementing a common plan.
The tinkerers had visions. Hewlett Packard and Apple were started in
garages, in violation of local zoning laws! The deans and provosts of
Stanford University had vision, as they encouraged their students and
researchers to start their own enterprises, and provided start-up incubator
workspaces on land belonging to the university. But no visionary mayors or
urban planners were involved in the creation of Silicon Valley.
Silicon Valley extends over about 18 municipalities. Maybe the limited
size of the municipalities tempered the urban planners’ ambition to controlwhat the brilliant tinkerers were doing. The fragmentation of municipal
power prevented planners from creating a special zone where anybody
dealing with electronics would have to operate. One shudders at the thought
that the municipal planners in Silicon Valley could have circumscribed the
coders to a special coder zone, like the zone reserved for artists created in
New York, as described in chapter 7! The planners of the various Silicon
Valley municipalities deserve credit, though, for not having killed through
land use regulations the activities of the emerging electronics industry. This
industry, with its mix of coding, venture finance, and light manufacturing
did not readily fit any traditional zoning district description.
I have worked in a few cities where “visionary planners” pretended to
include the design of new “Silicon Valley” satellite towns in their Master
Plans. These visions never took off. By contrast, where some of Silicon
Valley conditions are met—a great university next to open land with
flexible land use—similar creative activities may emerge. This has been the
case in Beijing, for instance, in the area located between Peking University
and Tsinghua University, and in some areas of the Pearl River Delta in
southern China.
However, the role played by nonvisionary but competent planners was
indispensable to the success of Silicon Valley. Indeed, its success depended
on the municipal management teams being able to adjust to changing
demand for urban services and infrastructure that were required by the
sudden transformation of an area, originally largely residential, to a new
type of land use. The competence of the municipal staff and their mayors
was therefore indispensable for the successful growth of Silicon Valley.
However, this role was not driven by a top-down “vision” but involved
great professional competence in many sectors: land use and traffic
management, transport, infrastructure building and maintenance, education,
refuse disposal, security, taxation, and tariffs, among others. They did not
need vision, but extreme competence.
In this chapter, I describe the important tasks that a municipal urban
planning team has to fulfill, together with the type of working relationship
between the municipal planning department and the other technical
departments that form the staff of a municipality.
One of the major urban planners’ tasks is to constantly monitor the city’s
welfare through quantitative indicators. The planners, detecting through
data an impending deterioration in the quality of city life, warn the mayor,who decides what resources and priority to dedicate to the issue. Planners
then propose strategies to address the mayor’s priority objectives. The role
of planners is therefore mostly technical and data driven. Although in the
rest of this chapter, I will use the words “urban planners” to designate the
professional staff in the municipal urban planning department, the term also
covers urban economists working closely with the more traditional urban
planners whose professional background includes architecture, physical
planning, engineering, and urban geography. Urban economists able to
understand the functioning of real estate and labor markets have to be
integrated into the team of more traditional urban planners.
Urban planners’ more important tasks can be divided into three major
groups:
1.  Monitoring important indicators and turning on blinking red lights when
real estate prices, average commuting time, and other indicators point to an
incoming crisis;
2.  Developing and monitoring strategic projects to implement mayors’
municipal objectives; and
3.  Designing new land use regulations and extension plans, and auditing
existing regulations.
The Role of Planners in Monitoring Indicators and Turning On
Blinking Red Lights
Publicly traded companies are subject to elaborate and codified reporting
requirements concerning their financial flows, their assets and liabilities.
Municipalities maintain financial records about their operating budget but
usually do not systematically maintain a database that monitors changes in
the private and public assets on which their tax income and expenditures
depend. The changes in a city’s built environment largely determine its
future income and expenditures. Of course, beyond being useful in
projecting future municipal financial situations, the changes in the built
environment and its value, determined by rents and real estate prices, are
essential to be able to manage what I suggest is the main function of urban
planners: maintaining mobility and housing affordability. In many cities,
these essential databases concerning the built environment are either not
maintained or are poorly maintained. And when they do exist, they are
rarely analyzed and used to guide policy. I will repeat Angus Deaton’squotation that cited in chapter 6: “Without data, anyone who does anything
is free to claim success.”
In the past 20 years, many municipalities have developed spatial
databases in GIS format that are open for public use. However, I doubt
whether these databases are routinely analyzed for decision making. When
downloading the data, it often happens that they are incomplete, that links
are broken, and that many fields are just left empty. For instance, the city of
Atlanta maintains a database called “Strategic Community Investment
Report Data” (SCI, 2013). Recently, when one of my students tried to use
the database, it appears that 18 percent of the original SCI parcel dataset
had null values for the areas of buildings, and 22 percent of parcels had a
lot size recorded as zero. The poor maintenance of the records suggests that
the dataset has not been routinely used to identify urban issues and to
develop urban policy. I had the same experience many times when trying to
use the database of other cities in OECD countries.
The poor maintenance of municipal databases confirms my assertion that
very few urban economists are involved in the daily policy making in cities.
Urban economists are all data hungry, and if they were actively
participating in policy making, they would make sure the city IT department
properly maintains their databases. Traditional urban planners being more
used to a qualitative approach to urban management—expressed by fuzzy
words like “livable,” “resilient,” and “sustainable”—are likely to seldom
use the municipal database.The Master Plan Fallacy
Preparing a master plan—typically every 10 years—is a ritual that
constitutes the “creative” part of the job of urban planners. In many cities,
the urban planning department—with the help of consultants—prepares a
master plan that includes two main parts: a large database and a set of maps,
typically showing existing and future land use and urban extension. This
would be a useful exercise if the database and maps were used as a
permanent management tool and were periodically updated, say, every
quarter. But this is seldom the case. After the master plan has been
completed and approved by the local government, the team of consultants is
disbanded, and the database is archived and is not updated. It is assumed
that the data were only necessary for the preparation of the master plan, but
once the master plan is completed, all that is needed is to implement it.
The decennial preparation of master plans is based on the false assumption
that a city is like a very large building that needs to be periodically
renovated and expanded. The master plan constitutes the renovation and
expansion blueprint. Over the decade between master plans, it is assumed
that the planners’ role is to simply implement the features found in the
blueprint. In reality, most master plans are only very partially implemented
or not at all. This blunt negative assertion is based on my own experience
during my 55 years as a practicing urban planner. 
2
Despite this poor record, every decade, master planning exercises are
repeatedly initiated at great expense. Why? Municipalities feel that a master
plan will help project an optimistic view of the future and is a great public
relations exercise. It also shows that “they are doing something” to address
municipal issues like traffic congestion and unaffordable housing. The
master plan document usually includes many volumes of charts and data,
providing gravitas to the final maps and drawings showing what the city
will look like a decade later.
Most of the time, the master plan is a very costly public relations
operation for the municipality. However, I have met a large number of
people who sincerely thought that it was an indispensable document to
ensure a brighter future. These people, invariably disappointed by the final
decadal outcome, attribute its failure to a lack of political will on the part of
the municipality to faithfully implement the plan. The failure of master
plans is not due to the human imperfections of those in charge ofimplementing them but to a conceptual conceit: A city is not a large
building requiring a detailed blueprint before being built. I will suggest
below urban management tools that would be useful substitutes for master
plans.
Maintaining a Database Generating Important Indicators
A large city must be managed on a day-to-day basis. It cannot be run on
autopilot for 10 years, as the concept of a master plan seems to imply. A
municipality’s financial department maintains its accounts daily, updating
constantly its income and expenditures, making projections and updating
these projections regularly, and communicating to the mayor major changes
to be expected in the budget forecast. In contrast to the municipal budget,
which is carefully updated by a team of accountants and bookkeepers, in
many cities, the quantity and value of the assets on which the revenue of the
municipality are based—its land under different uses, its buildings that
provide rents and property tax, the income of households and firms that pay
utility fees for municipal services—are not monitored on a regular basis,
outside of the periodic master plan exercise.
Too often, the staff of the planning department fails to monitor the prices,
rents, and land use changes that may anticipate a future crisis. Data
essential to the welfare of citizens—such as the monthly number of building
permits issued and the size, prices, and rents of the residential units built
every month—are seldom published and analyzed on a regular basis,
although the data are routinely collected and are available in a
disaggregated form in ledgers dispersed in various municipal departments.
In the same way, the data concerning the addition and demolition of
commercial and industrial space, which is routinely entered in ledgers when
registering buildings and occupation permits, is seldom entered in an
accessible geographical database. Hence, crucial information about future
housing affordability, traffic, and commuting patterns is lost.
Monitoring the changes of neighborhood real estate prices is extremely
important for the management of the city. These prices show when and
where the equilibrium between supply and demand might be shifting.
Planners, de facto, control the supply of land and floor space through
regulations and infrastructure investments; they can therefore act in advance
to adjust the supply elasticity that would decrease real estate price volatility.This price volatility too often creates extreme hardships for low-income
households and small enterprises.
A city planning department should therefore create, maintain, and
monitor an extensive urban database. Simple models should link raw data to
indicators. For instance, changes in a neighborhood population and floor
space can be linked to population densities and rents, producing indicators
whose changes in value would need interpretation but could lead to
municipal action. In the same way as publicly owned firms are obliged to
publish quarterly financial indicators to inform the public of the state of
their finances, municipalities should publish quarterly a set of indicators
that will inform the public about the welfare of its inhabitants. The local
municipal democratic process would be greatly enhanced by such actions.Turning On Blinking Light Indicators
At times, the value of some urban indicators may change rapidly. Often, the
change is benign and just indicates the normal adjustment of a city land use
to a changing economic environment. At other times, the changes may
indicate a deterioration of living conditions for the entire city or for some
socioeconomic group. For instance, a rapid increase in density and decrease
in floor space consumption in a specific neighborhood may indicate a
decrease in the housing standards of the socioeconomic group living in this
neighborhood. Urban planners should then warn the mayor about
“indicators blinking red.” They should provide an explanation for the
change in density and propose alternative strategies to deal with it if in their
opinion it may result in a loss of welfare in the future.
Just a few years before the housing finance collapse of 2007, I heard the
words “blinking indicators” for the first time during a talk on mortgage risk
and housing policy given by the late John M. Quigley, an American
economist. Quigley, together with some of his colleagues, had assembled
and regularly monitored a number of housing and financial indicators for
the United States. At the conference, he used the expression “those
indicators are all blinking red.” His tone of urgency was striking. The
mortgage crisis of 2008 followed his warning a year later.
I thought that the concept of blinking indicators could be applied to many
city metrics, for instance, rent-to-income ratio, floor consumption per
capita, and median commuting time. By maintaining a regularly updated
urban database, well-trained urban planners and economists could detect
changes as they are occurring and act before the problem becomes too
acute. For instance, rapid increases in housing prices could signal an
emerging constraint in the supply of floor space or developable land, or
both. If a plan of action to remove a potential supply bottleneck is
implemented quickly, it could prevent a further large increase in housing
prices and a future affordability crisis that would have serious consequences
for the welfare of the population and city productivity. The presence of
blinking indicators by themselves does not suggest an automatic diagnosis,
and they need to be interpreted in the local context. For instance, a rapid
increase in housing prices could be caused by poorly formulated
regulations, by land tenure issues, or by a lack of investment in primary
infrastructure and transport. Or in a more benign way, by a large increase inhouseholds’ income and in housing quality. Only after planners and urban
economists have been able to establish a correct diagnosis will it be
possible to design a strategy that will bring back the indicators to a value
that would predict a return to smooth sailing.
The role of planners in monitoring databases could then be divided into
three series of tasks shown schematically in figure 8.1. The series are:
Figure 8.1
Monitoring an urban database.
• creating and monitoring a municipal database,
• identifying blinking indicators, and
• proposing strategies with relevant line agencies.
Those series are in turn divided into three main topics:
• spatial structural changes,
• mobility, and
• affordability.
The items in the database suggested in the left column in figure 8.1 are
only indicative. Different cities will have different ways of measuring a
city’s spatial structure. There are useful papers proposing various sets of
indicators. I recommend in particular those developed specifically for
housing by Stephen Malpezzi and Stephen Mayo, 3
two urban economists,
and those developed by Shlomo Angel, 4 an urban planner with a worldwide
experience of cities.
Every year, the technology used to create and monitor urban databases is
offering more information collected at a much lower cost. Each city should
establish its database depending on the level of technology that is locallyavailable and as a function of the city’s priorities and morphology. In some
cities, for instance, the locations where running water is available is limiting
the expansion of the city. Obviously, in this case the area covered by the
water supply network will be part of the spatial database. In other cities,
areas vulnerable to flooding are a major hindrance to their development.
Clearly, in these cities planners should include in the database a very
detailed topographical study and modeling of potential flooding under
various climatic assumptions.
The urban planning database should not duplicate the databases
maintained by the line agencies in charge of transport, infrastructure, or
social services. Line agencies are better at maintaining a detailed database
for their sectors and have idiosyncrasies that should be respected. However,
land use and demographic data, including projections, should be maintained
exclusively by the urban planning department. I have seen too often line
agencies making their own projections for land use and demography, simply
in order to justify a technological choice made by them. I have seen sewer
and storm drainage departments planning to use oxidation ponds for sewage
treatment in areas where the trend in land prices suggested future high
population densities. The sewer engineers were assuming a projected low
density compatible with the use of oxidation ponds to justify their
technology choice. This is again an area where an in-house urban economist
would be better able to contribute to decision making—in this case the
trade-offs between a land-intensive but low-cost hardware technology like
oxidation ponds versus a traditional sewer system, much more capital
intensive but with low-land requirements.
The Role of Planners in Developing and Monitoring Strategies to
Implement a Mayor’s Municipal Objectives
Municipal Policy Objectives, Alternative Strategies, and Impact
Indicators
Mayors and city councils set up city policy objectives. These objectives are
political, and rightly so. There is no scientific way to set up urban
development objectives. However, while the priority objectives are
political, the issues they aim to address can be resolved only through a
technical approach expressed through a strategy. It is the role of planners to
prepare alternative strategies to meet the mayor’s objectives. Much too
often, the strategies proposed are unfortunately limited to identifyinggovernment inputs and do not explore the potential impact, which will
indicate whether the strategy is succeeding or failing in meeting its original
objectives.
For instance, let us suppose that a mayor’s objective is to improve public
transport. The typical response will consist of announcing the financial
inputs required to address the issue: how many million dollars from the
municipal budget will be allocated to transport; some output indicators
might be added, for instance, how many new buses or light rail lines will be
added. However, what is important for the citizens is the impact of the
municipal investment on their daily commute—how timely and less crowed
buses will be and how much shorter the average commuting time might
become.
If a quantified measure of the impact on commuting time has not been
made explicit, there will be no way to measure whether the investment
associated with the strategy has been successful in meeting the mayor’s
original objective. If success is measured solely by the amount of money
spent and the number of buses procured, despite no measurable positive
impact on urban transport, faulty strategies could be repeated at great
expense without any results. It is impossible for citizens to evaluate a
municipality’s performance if the proper indicators of success—impact
indicators—are not declared in advance.
The role of measurable indicators is not limited to monitoring progress
and eventual success but is also part of the preparation of a properly
formulated strategy. Indeed, the objective of a public transport strategy is
not to buy new buses but to reduce travel times and to increase the
commuting comfort of citizens. Unless this objective is clearly expressed
and quantified as an impact indicator, there is no way to know whether the
strategy succeeded or failed. Once the municipal council has declared an
objective, finding the proper impact indicators is the first step in developing
the strategy.
Strategies should include several types of indicators to
• identify the strategy,
• monitor whether the strategy has been successful, and
• eventually modify some element of the strategy to improve its
performance.The formulation of indicators while the strategy is being developed help
focus on the desired result and not on the initial steps, like budget inputs,
the purchase of equipment, or the construction of civil work. Many urban
strategies have failed because the proper indicators were not initially
imbedded in the strategy.
The design and implementation of a strategy requires identifying four
types of indicators: impact, outcome, output, and input. I will illustrate the
relationship between policy objectives, strategy, and indicators with an
example summarized graphically in figure 8.2.
5 Obviously, during the
strategy design phase, the indicators’ sequence will have to be iterated
several times. A desired impact when first formulated might prove to
require inputs that are beyond the financial means or staffing capability of a
municipality. The indicators will then have to be iterated until the inputs are
found feasible while the expected impact is still worth pursuing.
Figure 8.2
Objective tree: impact, outcome, output, and input. Source: Adapted from Roberto Mosse and Leigh
Ellen Sontheimer, “Performance Monitoring Indicators Handbook,” Technical Paper No 334, World
Bank, Washington, DC, September 1996.
During the strategy preparation phase, the indicators will be prepared in
the following sequence: impact, outcome, outputs, inputs. During the
various phases of strategy implementation, the indicators will be measured
in the reverse order, reflecting the sequence of project implementation:
inputs, outputs, outcome, impact. I have shown in figure 8.2 the indicators
in the order that should be used during strategy preparation.
Using figure 8.2 and starting from a municipal objective, I will follow the
sequence required to identify a strategy and the indicators that will allowquantification of the results expected during the different phases of a
strategy.
Let us assume that a mayor and her city council have decided that
alleviating poverty in a specific neighborhood X is a major policy objective
as part of a citywide development program.
Several alternative or concurrent strategies could be developed to
alleviate poverty. One strategy could aim at increasing household incomes
by improving employment opportunities, thus decreasing unemployment or
underemployment. Other concurrent strategies could consist of transferring
resources to the target population, or increasing the supply of social
services, like health and education.
Let us select the first type of strategy aimed at increasing household
incomes by improving employment opportunities in neighborhood X.
Employment opportunities could increase in neighborhood X if workers had
faster and cheaper access to the metropolitan labor market. Improving
access to the labor markets usually decreases unemployment and increases
salaries, as discussed in chapter 2. The values of the indicators, as discussed
below, will be first projected during the design phase and then monitored
during the implementation phase. The difference between the target
numbers at the strategy design phase and those monitored during and after
strategy implementation will indicate the degree of success of the strategy
and help identify the elements that were crucial for the success or failure of
the strategy.Impact Indicators
The values of the impact indicators quantify the original municipal
objective of the selected strategy. The objective is to decrease poverty in
neighborhood X. The strategy selected to achieve the objective is to
increase employment opportunities by providing faster and cheaper access
to high-employment areas. The impact indicators during strategy design
will fix a target decrease in both poverty and unemployment. For instance,
if unemployment in neighborhood X is currently 25 percent, the strategy
target will aim at decreasing this number to, say, 10 percent over 5 years, or
adding a total number of newly employed workers 6 equal to N1. If the
number of commuters out of neighborhood X is currently N2, the strategy
implies that, every day, a target number of workers equal to N3 = N1 + N2
should be able to use a faster and cheaper means of transport than is
currently available. I assume here that new employment will be located
outside the neighborhood. Creating new jobs within the neighborhood
would be part of a different strategy.
During the strategy implementation phase, the impact indicator will
monitor the rate of unemployment in neighborhood X every 6 months and
compare it to unemployment in a neighborhood with similar socioeconomic
conditions but without a transport project. The variations of the impact
indicator over time will show whether providing better access to high￾employment areas might decrease unemployment. It will indicate whether
the strategy is likely to be effective. If the impact indicator shows that it is
not, the strategy should be modified, or an entirely new alternative strategy
should be tried.Outcome Indicators
At this stage of strategy preparation, planners should find the more effective
way to transport N3s number of people at peak hour from location X to
location Y and Z, where many jobs are located. Depending on the size of N3
and the distance D between origin X and destinations Y and Z, alternative
transport modes will be considered, from collective taxis to buses or urban
rail. Individual means of transport like electric mopeds or motorcycles
might also be considered. Let us assume that at this phase of preparation, it
is found that an express bus line is the most effective commuting mode to
transport N3 passengers from X to locations Y and Z.
During the design phase of the strategy, the outcome indicators will set
the target number of passengers using the buses, and then the schedule,
frequency, and speed of the express buses from origin X to their
destinations.
During the implementation phase, the outcome indicators will monitor
and compare the occupancy rate of the buses, schedules, and speed to the
target established during the design phase. During implementation, the
outcome indicators might be used to modify the strategy if they are inferior
to the target outcome indicators. For instance, if the new express bus line
has a low occupancy rate and is underused, some alternative routes and
different time schedules should be tried.
The outcome indicator is important to monitor, but the fact that a bus line
is well used does not necessarily mean that the objective of the investment
has been met. People may take the bus for other reasons than commuting to
work. Or possibly, the passengers of the new bus line have shifted from a
less convenient route that they were previously using to commute to work.
A positive outcome indicator might only indicate that trips to and from the
neighborhood are becoming more convenient, not necessarily that the
poverty alleviation objective has been met. The outcome indicator is not a
substitute for the impact indicator.Output Indicators
During the strategy design phase, the output indicator will show the number
of express buses that will be required to carry N3 passengers to their
destinations. The output indicators will then include the number of buses
required to ensure the service, and the number and location of bus stations.
The output indicators will also include the number of staff hours of
surveyors, traffic engineers, and statisticians that will be required to monitor
the implementation of the strategy and eventually to modify it.
During implementation, output indicators are used to measure potential
cost overrun—fewer buses than originally planned for the money invested,
for instance. The output indicator does not tell us whether anybody is using
the buses, how frequent they are and even less if the new buses result in an
increase in employment. The output indicators are important intermediary
indicators but are not indicative of a successful strategy, even if they meet
their targets.Input Indicators
During the strategy design phase, the input indicators will include the total
investment cost of the project: including design and supervision, the capital
cost of the buses and of the construction of the bus stations, the operation
and maintenance cost of the bus line and eventual subsidies, and the
projected cash flow of the project, including fares and eventual operation
subsidies. Some inputs, including operation and maintenance subsidies,
might be recurring over time.
It is usual that during the design phase, the total inputs required to
implement a strategy exceed the municipal budget or staff capacity. The
planners will then have to iterate the four types of indicators until a
consistency between expected impact and budget capacity is reached.
Going through iterations during the design phase usually stimulates
creativity and innovation.
During implementation, the input indicators will show whether budgetary
and staff commitments have been met. Obviously, slowness in cost
disbursement will have a negative effect on project performance and might
cause a strategy failure. Ensuring that disbursements of project costs occur
on schedule is a prerequisite for strategy success, but it does not guarantee
it.
Indicators Have to Be Used to Weed Out Failing Strategies
It is normal that some strategies will fail. What is abnormal is to continue
implementing a failing strategy. Designing and monitoring indicators is the
only way to weed out failing strategies. The four types of indicators—
impact, outcome, output, and input—are indispensable for designing and
monitoring strategies, as well as for eliminating failing strategies.
Without calculating impact indicators, it is impossible to know whether
the project investment contributed to the policy objective or not. In the
example above, new buses may well be running on time, but they may have
no impact at all on unemployment. The intermediary indicators—inputs,
outputs, and outcome—provide us with important information about the
design of the project, despite not telling us whether the strategy objective
has been met. The intermediary indicators show how the performance of the
project could be improved. For instance, if the buses are too slow and result
in very long trips, corrective action could be taken, for instance, byimproving the design of road intersections and the traffic management
along the route.Economic Rate of Return
By combining the results of the input and impact indicators, it is possible to
calculate the internal economic rate of return of the project. The economic
rate of return will calculate the present value of a discounted cash flow of
the expenditures and the benefits (the additional flow of income coming to
the neighborhood because of newly employed workers). For instance, in the
example depicted in figure 8.2, in addition to the economic rate of return, it
will be possible to calculate what the capital and yearly recurring cost of the
strategy is per new employed worker. It may then be found that either the
selected strategy provides a high economic return on the municipal
investment, or possibly that the return is very low and alternative strategies
should be explored that would increase the welfare of the citizens at a lower
cost.
If we look at the way an industrial producer creates new products, we see
a long list of trials and errors and eventually improvement in quality at a
lower cost. Urban policies and strategies, by contrast, often do not follow
this logic; they are often repeated even when it is well known that they
failed. For instance, policies like rent control, greenbelts, new light rail
transports, among others, are constantly repeated in spite of a near
consensus on their failure to achieve their objectives. A quantitative
evaluation of the failure of these policies is usually well documented
through special reports or academic papers; it is seldom produced internally
by cities, however, and the information does not seem to reach urban
decision makers. Only a systematic analysis of data through indicators
allows urban policies to be improved over time and failing policies to be
abandoned. But as Angus Deaton wrote: “without data, anyone who does
anything is free to claim success.” 7
Most Institutions, Cities, and Development Banks Monitor Mostly
Input and Output
Unfortunately, most urban strategies tend to focus on input and output,
seldom on outcome and almost never on impact. The output is often
misunderstood to be the objective. Developing the four types of indicators
when developing the strategy obliges us to think about the real long-term
policy objective and avoid being solely focused on our immediate tasks,
which are only intermediary phases to accomplish the real objective.Robert McNamara, while he was the president of the World Bank, from
1968 to 1981, tried to impose this methodology during the appraisal of
projects financed by the Bank. McNamara, who strongly reoriented the
Bank toward fighting poverty, required the staff to quantify the number of
direct project beneficiaries distributed by income percentile of the country
or the city where a World Bank–financed project was located. That was the
best way to evaluate the impact of projects financed by the World Bank
whose objective was to decrease poverty.
In 1971, as a practicing urban planner working for the Government of
Yemen under the United Nations Development Programme, I learned for
the first time to use this quantitative approach for project evaluation, as I
participated as “the local urban planner” in the appraisal of two urban
World Bank projects. I was greatly impressed by this rigorous quantitative
approach, which was completely new to me. It was in part because of this
first very favorable professional impression that I decided to join the World
Bank several years later when, with my family, we finally settled in
Washington, DC.
In the post-McNamara period, unfortunately, there was a strong tendency
in the World Bank to focus mainly on input and output indicators, as these
indicators were directly under the control of Bank staff and affected directly
the institution as it worked as a bank. A project was deemed successful if
the funds were dis bursed on time—input—and if there was no project cost
overruns—output. This was apparent in World Bank statistics that presented
the amount of loans disbursed per sector and per country. For instance, in
transport projects the outputs were the number of buses that were purchased
and the length of the bus lines built. The numbers measuring outcome and
impact could not easily be aggregated into country statistics, because their
nature varied so much between projects. Therefore, there was much less
pressure to monitor carefully these numbers after projects were completed.
While some projects included the full set of indicators during the project
appraisal phase, it was rare that outcome and impact indicators were
carefully quantified and monitored during the supervision phase of the
project. By contrast, inputs and output indicators made or broke the
reputation of professional staff.
The World Bank was aware of this problem. It had instituted an
independent review of project performance by an Operations Evaluation
Department (OED) and more recently by the Independent EvaluationGroup. These departments, reporting directly to the president, tried to
evaluate more systematically project outcomes and impacts for a selected
numbers of completed projects. Inevitably, the results were published long
after projects were completed. By the time the evaluation results were
available, the team that originally prepared the projects had been dispersed
to different countries and sometimes to different sectors. Usually, the OED
reports constituted a very professional and detailed analysis of what went
right or wrong during project conception and implementation. However,
lessons were seldom learned, as new teams started new types of projects in
different contexts in different cities, and the evaluation phase was seldom
taken into account when designing new projects.
Can a City Avoid the Problem Encountered by the World Bank in
Monitoring Strategies and Project Impact?
The problems inherent in monitoring and evaluating World Bank projects as
I experienced them are unavoidable in centralized organization like the
World Bank, which is physically remote from the location of the project. I
think it is unavoidable that international organizations and central
governments are likely to focus on the input and output performances of
their strategies, as these are the only numbers that they can easily monitor
and aggregate.
Development banks, such as the World Bank and its regional
counterparts, like Asian Development Bank and Banco Interamericano de
Desarrollo, are, first and foremost, banks. The speed of loan disbursement
and the correct enforcement of procurement rules are likely to preoccupy
bank staff, whose performance is largely judged by management mainly on
these criteria, which directly affect banking viability. While the merits of
different strategies and their impact on development are the objects of
passionate intellectual debates, at the end of the day, the staff performance
is judged through its ability to disburse a loan rapidly while following strict
procurement rules. Disbursement and procurement are typically monitored
through input and output indicators. Indicators linked to outcome and
impact, while extensively discussed during project preparation, tend to be
rapidly forgotten during project implementation.
Why then would I advocate a methodology to develop urban
development strategies that I have seen fail repeatedly? I think that
committed mayors and their planning staff are much more likely to followthrough and be interested by impact if given the tools to do so. City-states,
like Singapore and Hong Kong, manage independently their own finances
and policy without interferences from a remote central government, and
they are notoriously good at monitoring policies and taking rapid correcting
steps as soon as they perceive that strategies are not performing as
expected.
By contrast, a central organization cannot feel directly accountable for
the details of projects implemented at the local level. Input and output are
what they effectively control and therefore are likely to monitor carefully.
For instance, a central government’s ministry of Housing and Urban
Development may commit itself to creating a target number of affordable
housing units in a large number of cities. It has no way to aggregate at the
national-level statistics on whether the units created are well located, or
whether they result in increased welfare for the target population. The only
things the ministry can usefully monitor and aggregate at the national level
are the total capital outlays and the number of units created—input and
output indicators. The staff of the ministry, if ever alerted that the dwelling
units are not fulfilling the original objectives, will be unable to aggregate
the different outcome and impact indicators if these are produced by the
cities that benefit from the program. The ministry staff will face the same
problem as the World Bank staff faced. By the time the indicator results
arrive from the various cities, the ministry’s staff that prepared the strategy
might well have moved to other activities in other sectors. No lesson will
ever be learned. By contrast, in a city administration, continuity is more
likely. The issues arising during implementation of the strategies are more
likely to be known in real time, and there will be a strong incentive to
address the issues as they arise, if the mayor and the local staff have any
control over the implementation of housing strategy even if it is financed at
the national level. Maybe this is why city-states like Singapore and Hong
Kong are more effective in managing their development than are equivalent
cities that are part of large states.
For instance, let us look at the case of South Africa discussed in chapter 6.
The policy objective was to provide as quickly as possible affordable
housing to a very large segment of the urban population defined by its low
income. The strategy adopted focused immediately on inputs and outputs:
how many houses could be built each year, what should be their standards,
and how large were the subsidies needed. The alternative strategiesconsidered were only focused on the way to finance the program. The
impact on the income of beneficiaries was never considered, although the
main objective of the program was in reality to alleviate poverty. The output
—the number of housing units built each year—was carefully monitored
and because of their large number, the program was initially deemed
successful. It was only after about 10 years of implementation that the
serious shortcomings of the South African housing strategy were finally
detected. The damage done in building large numbers of dwelling units in
areas inaccessible to the metropolitan job markets is nearly irreversible.
Designing New Land Use Regulations and Auditing Existing
Regulations
The necessity of living and working in close proximity requires rules that
will minimize friction. Because the economic and technological
environment is changing constantly, the rules have to be constantly adapted
to the new environment. For instance, the introduction of self-driving cars
in cities in the near future will require new regulations, just as new
regulations were required when cars replaced horse carts as a main mode of
urban transport.
Past regulations also have to be periodically reviewed for their relevance.
As described in chapter 7, the shadows cast by very tall buildings were a
major issue for the first part of the twentieth century, until indoor lighting
and air conditioning became efficient and cheap. Being able to concentrate
large areas of floor space where demand is very high increases the city
welfare much more than restricting densities because of the need to ensure
that every building receives direct sunlight and natural ventilation. The
slender and very tall skyscrapers, residential and commercial, being built in
New York’s Wall Street area would have been extremely objectionable for
their neighbors at the beginning of the twentieth century.
Urban planners should therefore constantly revise old land use
regulations (or create new ones) to adapt them to the new economic and
cultural realities of the time. Unfortunately, urban planning departments
tend to prefer designing new regulations over reviewing existing ones for
their relevance. As a result, a city’s land use depends on layers of
regulations that often contradict one another and whose objectives have
been lost with time. Digging into urban regulations is often like digging intoan archeological site; one often encounters elaborate artifacts whose
original purpose baffles the mind.
This criticism of baffling regulations is not a new idea. In a book chapter
published in 1979, Morris Hill and Rachelle Alterman wrote: 8
Typically [planning standards] are handed down as “rule of thumb” from one situation to another,
adapted by cumulated experience. Such norms are characteristically expressed as a simple inflexible
per a given population, sometimes also including locational specifications. From the norms as usually
expressed it is impossible to know the substantive justification—whether functional, economic,
behavioral, social, psychological or environmental. Therefore, there is no easy way of modifying
them to meet particular situations in a reasoned manner.
Planners Should Regularly Audit Land Use Regulations to Eliminate
Those That Are Obsolete
The regulatory deadwood accumulated over the years constrains
development and affects land prices and the supply of floor space, as these
regulations limit what can be built. While nobody usually remembers the
objectives of such regulations, planners and citizens assume that they were
established as a result of lost wisdom and that it might be hazardous to
remove them from the books.
I was confronted with such a situation some years ago in Malaysia, 9
when I was asked to find out why housing was so expensive in a country
that is well endowed with developable land. I found that in residential areas,
the regulations required extremely short blocks of 60 meters, resulting in an
extremely high percentage of road areas that would not be normally
required for horizontal housing (for example, a Manhattan block length
averages about 240 meters). Additional land use regulations resulted in less
than 44 percent of the land being developed for residential use in a housing
project in Malaysia, compared to 60–65 percent in similar projects in other
countries of the region.
Nobody in the Kuala Lumpur planning office knew why blocks had to be
so short, but they assumed that there must be a good reason—drainage
during the monsoon perhaps? I finally found a senior municipal engineer
who told me that the practice was to locate fire hydrants at the end of a
block and that the fire hose used by firemen was usually 30 meters long,
hence the 60 meter length of a residential block. There was a great
reluctance in changing the standard, in spite of firemen using different
equipment and the possibility of locating fire hydrants differently.The cost of these regulations to the housing sector and to the environment
was extremely large while bringing no real benefits to citizens. Indeed,
these regulations—by requiring more land for residential development
artificially—extended the area of cities into the countryside while
increasing the impermeable area of the development. In a monsoon country
like Malaysia, this contributed to increased water run-off during the rainy
season, requiring larger drains and, at times, causing erosion. The eventual
revision of this set of land use regulations resulted in substantial savings in
land development and environmental cost for the entire country.
The urban regulations of every city contain a number of what I would call
“deadwood regulations.” Regulations whose objectives have been forgotten
and whose benefits can no longer be identified. It is therefore necessary to
periodically audit all land use regulations to remove the ones that are
obsolete and contribute to the high cost of urbanization.Designing New Regulations
New technology and changes in the way cities develop may require
planners to design new regulations. These should be designed with great
care and tested before being imposed citywide. Land use regulations are
very much like new medical drugs—they are supposed to provide benefits
but they may also have serious negative side effects that may become
apparent many years after they have been applied. All regulations should be
submitted to a cost-benefit analysis. In addition, land use regulations that
have a direct impact on housing and residential development should be
tested for affordability for various income groups.
Regulations should be designed and tested with great caution, in the same
way as what is required before a new drug is put on the market. Before
imposing new regulations, urban planning departments should ask teams of
independent urban economists to evaluate their impact on the spatial
development of the city and on the cost of urban development.
The Role of the City Planning Department in a MunicipalityStaff and Line Agencies
A municipality is a team composed of a political body, the mayor and the
city council, and a technical core composed of “staff” and “line” agencies (
figure 8.3). The staff agencies provide policy options to the mayor and
policy objectives and support to the line agencies. The line agencies
implement and maintain specialized services and infrastructure. The city
planning department maintains a set of indicators to ensure that strategies
meet the policy objectives of the mayor and the city council. The City
Planning Department should be located among staff agencies.
Unfortunately, this is seldom the case; most of the time City Planning is just
one of the line agencies.
Figure 8.3
Urban planners and line agencies.
Why should the City Planning Department be among the staff agencies?
Practically all line agencies are consuming land or have an impact on land
prices. All line agencies’ actions, from education to the fire department, are
related to the number of people in a neighborhood and their incomes,
usually linked to other socioeconomic indicators, such as household sizes,
education, language spoken at home. The changes in the number and
socioeconomic characteristics of a population are driven by the real estate
market and the competitive demand for floor space coming from
households and firms. Data on the use of land and on population changes
should not be maintained in separate databases by each line agency butshould be coordinated and centralized in the planning department, which
should feed the data to the line agencies at regular interval.
The Planning Department Staff Should Include Economists
Instead of being exclusively focused on land use and regulatory issues, the
planning department should be also involved in economic analysis on a
day-to-day basis. Therefore, I suggest calling the city planning department
“City Planning and Economics” (figure 8.3).
In many cities around the world, the city planning departments where I
worked were staffed mostly by urban planners, architects, engineers, and
lawyers. While economists, working as consultants, were occasionally
asked to produce a report on a specific subject, I have never met an in￾house economist providing inputs on a day-to-day basis on proposed land
use regulations, monitoring changing of land prices, or warning other staff
of the Planning Department of their policies’ potential consequences. As we
have seen in previous chapters, land use changes and population and job
density changes are mostly driven by markets. Urban economists are
uniquely trained to monitor and interpret market movements. The presence
of an in-house economist would also help trigger ad hoc specialized
economic analysis conducted by universities. This would have the double
benefit of both tapping a wider and deep economic expertise as well as
prodding academic economists into getting involved in “operational
economics” at the city level.
The City Planning and Economics staff agency has three main functions:
• developing and maintaining an urban database that monitors among other
things, land use, demographics, household incomes, and land prices and
rents;
• identifying potential issues derived from observing variations in
indicators; and
• working with line agencies to propose policy and strategic solutions to
respond to identified issues and to respond to special requests from the
mayor and the city council.
The alignment of the City Planning and Economics department as a staff
agency is vital, because of its need to relate with all line agencies. Line
agencies must develop their own detailed technical databases, but they
should refer to the land use and demographic database from the planningdepartment to develop policy. The consistency between the technical
projects developed by the line agencies and the city development policy and
the strategy developed in the City Planning Department is essential. It
seems obvious, but it is not always the case.
Some years ago, I was working for the city planning department of the
Jakarta metropolitan area (covering the area called Jabotabek). In liaison
with the housing department and a major mortgage bank, we were
developing land development standards that should be affordable to
households between the fortieth and sixtieth percentiles of Jakarta’s
household income distribution. Our conclusion was that to be affordable,
taking into account current market prices for land and construction,
population densities in the housing projects financed by the mortgage bank
would have to have between 300 and 400 people per hectare. Land use
subdivision regulations were amended to allow these densities. However,
the City Planning department did not amend density projections for the
entire city to reflect these changes, as it was considered too far from the
traditional planning approach based on design norms and perceived needs.
During the same period, some of my Indonesian colleagues were
conducting a feasibility study for a regional sewer and wastewater disposal
system for Jabotabek area. Their conclusion was that if the population
density in the suburban area of Jakarta could be maintained below a
maximum of 50 people per hectare, it would be possible to build a system
of septic tanks, seepage pits, and oxidation ponds that would be much
cheaper than building a reticulated sewer systems with traditional sewer
treatment plants. They assumed that through adequately enforced land use
regulations, the government would be able to keep the density below this
maximum and as a consequence, they were proposing an investment budget
for sewer and wastewater disposal based on this low-cost technology.
A third project, consisting of the planning and construction of a light rail
urban transport system, was being developed by the urban transport
department with the assistance of a bilateral donor. The light rail being
developed consisted of one line crossing Jabotabek from east to west. The
feasibility study assumed that the government would be able to regulate
population densities in such a way that an east-west spine of high
population density of about 300 people per hectare would be concentrated
along the catchment area of the light rail line, while regulations would
maintain low density in areas not served by the light rail. The financialprojections were entirely based on this optimistic density scenario that
would have ensured a high occupancy rate for the light rail.
The three projects were based on completely different and incompatible
assumptions about the future spatial distribution of the population of
Jabotabek. The feasibility of each project depended on different mutually
exclusive spatial distributions of the population. The urban planning
department maintained a map of projected densities and a map of zoning
regulations, but there was no administrative links between the department
of environment protection in charge of sewers and the department of
transport. I found out about the three different density projections by
accident, because I knew some of the engineers working on the two other
projects.
This anecdote is not an isolated case. Looking at the municipal
organization design of most cities, these types of inconsistencies happen all
the time. I am not suggesting that to avoid these problems the Urban
Planning and Economics Department supervise every sectoral project, but
that any assumption about densities and in general on the spatial
distribution of population be cleared with the Urban Planning and
Economics Department to avoid these internal contradictions. In transport
projects, the many occurrences of overestimation of projected passengers
boarding are typical of self-serving projections of future urban densities
along transport routes. It is possible to commit errors when projecting the
spatial distribution of future populations, but it is inexcusable to maintain
alternative projections within each line agency in the same municipality,
especially when a centrally managed projection based on markets would
invalidate the feasibility of a project.
Past and Future Growth Trends for Cities
Urban Growth Should Not Be Taken for Granted
The examples used in the preceding chapters concern urban issues that
arose during the past 50 years. Should we expect different types of urban
development challenges in the next 50 years?
I have always assumed that successful cities were magnets that attracted
people eager to join their large labor markets. Most of my work as an urban
planner has been focused on finding ways to manage urban growth by
improving mobility and housing affordability as cities were expanding. The
supply of new citizens born in, or immigrating to, cities seemedinexhaustible. Usually developing coun tries’ cities were growing faster
than those in rich countries, but the process of expansion was basically the
same, and all were expanding.
At the beginning of the twenty-first century, I realized that the world
population had crossed a demographic watershed and that the cities of the
world were going to be divided between those who were growing and those
who were shrinking. The cause of the shrinking ranges from internal causes
like poor management—as has been the case for the decline of Detroit—to
external causes like demographic reversal and rates of urbanization.
In 2010, during a work visit to Moscow, I learned that the government
was planning to close 60 cities, whose populations were decreasing and
aging to such an extent that maintaining their public services was no longer
viable. Closing cities is an extreme case, but decreasing population has also
affected many other cities. Among the 13 Russian cities with a population
larger than a million people, only four were still growing; the others,
including St. Petersburg as the second-largest city in the country, had
declining populations. I was asked if I could give some advice on what to
do in cities with decreasing populations. I declined and claimed
incompetence; in 50 years of my international urban planning practice, I
had never been confronted with the issues arising from decreasing urban
populations.
More recently, during a visit to Toyama, a city of 1.2 million on the
western coast of Japan, local urban planners described to me the problems
faced by a city with an aging population, increasingly abandoned by its
younger generation migrating to Tokyo to find work.
Japan and Russia are representative of countries with high income, low
fertility, a high rate of urbanization, and a low rate of international
immigration. Decreasing fertility in high-income countries that are already
highly urbanized creates low urban growth, as the natural growth rate and
the migration rate decrease simultaneously when the country’s rural areas
are not sending additional migrants to the cities.
Figure 8.4 shows the relationship between urban growth rates and rates of
urbanization and income by region and type of income. We see clearly the
correlation between high income, high rate of urbanization, and urban
growth rate. Women in high-income countries tend to have a low fertility
rate, reducing the natural growth rate caused by the difference between the
number of births and deaths. The high urbanization rate in these high-income countries implies that there is not much excess labor left in rural
areas to migrate toward cities and compensate for the low natural growth
rate with immigrants from the countryside.
Figure 8.4
Rates of urbanization and urban growth rates by region, 2010–2015. Source: World Bank, “3.12
World Development Indicators: Urbanization,” Washington, DC, 2017.
These cities of the rich world are eventually doomed to have a stagnating
and eventually decreasing population, unless they deliberately open
themselves to international migration and can draw migrants from countries
with high fertility rates and low rates of urbanization.
Traditionally, large economically dynamic city-states like Singapore and
the cities of the Emirates, who could not draw migrants from a populous
rural hinterland, have relied on controlled immigration to increase the labor
force that keeps their economy growing, thus increasing the income of their
national population. In Singapore, the foreign nonresident population
represents 29 percent of the total population. In Singapore as in the
Emirates, most of the nonresident population is not intended to eventually
become citizens. They remain on short-term contracts. This allows the cities
to target the skills they need for the development of their economies. The
nonresident emigrants are carefully selected among two groups: highly
skilled professionals and low-skilled labor force for services. These city￾states understand that the development of their economies, and therefore of
the welfare of their native citizens, depends on an expanding labor force
and that immigration is indispensable to their economies.
By contrast, countries of Western Europe and North America have a
different approach to immigration. In these countries, immigrants areassumed to eventually become citizens, but contrary to Singapore or the
Emirates, the national governments of Europe and North America do not
explicitly link immigration with urban economic self-interest.
While the United States and Canada have traditionally been dependent on
immigration for developing their economies over the past two centuries, the
economic self-interest argument for immigration is seldom explicitly made.
The popular argument for welcoming immigrants from foreign countries
rests more on a sense of generosity and hospitality than on self-interest. The
verses engraved in bronze on the Statue of Liberty in New York express
perfectly the generous feeling apparently allowing immigration to the
American continent:
Give me your tired, your poor,
Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free,
The wretched refuse of your teeming shore.
While no successful immigration can occur without a minimum of
generosity and benevolence, the economic benefits of immigrations are
very large and should in themselves be the prime motivation of immigration
policy. The economic case for immigration is often confused with the
human rights case for refugees, which is of course a quite different
argument.
While immigration is indispensable to fuel the economic growth of cities
located in countries with low birth rates and with an already high
urbanization rate, the pace of immigration should be controlled. To become
fully economically effective, new immigrants must have time to adapt to the
social norms and language of the host country, and this adaption takes
resources that must be allocated in a national budget or at least by
motivated NGOs. Without these resources and a minimum of assistance, the
lowest-income immigrants might become an underclass separated from the
host population by language and unfamiliarity with the social norms of the
host country. In this case, the economic stagnation of the less-educated
migrants reinforces the nativist anti-immigrant hostility, contributing to
closing borders and to the decay of cities with aging populations.
The political upheaval of 2016, whose main outcomes were Brexit in
Europe and the presidential election results in the United States, was caused
in great part by two antagonistic perceptions of immigration. The
populations of large cities were aware of the economic benefits of foreign
immigration, while the populations of smaller cities and rural areas sawimmigrants as job stealers rather than as contributors to the national
economy. In New York in 2015 the foreign-born population represented 38
percent of the total city population. In London in 2011, 37 percent of the
population was born outside the United Kingdom. No wonder that both
cities voted against the anti-immigration parties in the 2016 vote!
Immigration is therefore a necessity for the economic survival of large
cities in affluent countries with declining birth rates. However, because
immigration policy is decided by national government and not by the cities
themselves, it is quite possible that cities in affluent countries will see their
economies decline, as the aging of their population will not be compensated
by an influx of younger and more vigorous immigrants. Some large US
cities, which include many foreign-born workers, are well aware of the
problem and have declared themselves to be “sanctuary cities.” Sanctuary
cities like New York, San Francisco, and others have declared that their
municipal police will not enforce emigration laws and will not cooperate
with Federal departments to enforce them either. This demonstrates the
differing interest between economically dynamic large cities and more
stagnant smaller cities and rural areas.
Cities like London, Paris, Berlin, and possibly New York will soon be faced
with the same problems encountered by Toyama. Looking at figure 8.4, it
appears that it might take one or two decades before the cities of Latin
America will face the same problems as European cities.
This book is about operational urban planning. It might be worthwhile
therefore to explore what is likely to happen to the cohort of cities in
affluent countries that will be starved of immigrants by their national
government. We can use the example of Japan as a precursor of urban
planning in cities with aging and shrinking populations.
Effect of Aging Populations on the Growth of Cities in Japan
The population of Japan peaked at 128 million in 2010. It is projected to
decrease to 107 million, or 17 percent by 2040. Between 2010 and 2040,
the active population 10
is projected to decrease from 64 percent to 53
percent and the dependency ratio (dependent population/active population)
will increase from 57 percent in 2010 to 85 percent in 2040. 11 The decrease
in population and the increase in the dependency ratio is more severe in
smaller cities than in larger ones. In the three major metropolitan areas
(Tokyo, Kyoto-Osaka, and Nagoya), the dependency ratio is less than thenational ratio and is projected to increase more slowly from 49 percent in
2010 to 76 percent in 2040.
By comparison, in 2014, the dependency ratio of New York was 45
percent and that of the Singapore resident population (excluding foreigners)
was 37 percent. Including foreigners, Singapore’s dependency ratio would
be even lower. The Japanese government, however, currently has no plan to
encourage foreign immigration to compensate for the aging population.
There were 2.1 million foreigners residing in Japan in 2014, much less than
the 3.2 million foreign-born residents found the same year in New York
alone. The way Japanese cities cope with declining populations will
constitute an example for urban planners in cities of Europe and other
places with an increasingly aging population not compensated for by an
increase in foreign immigration. As we will see, the urban development
problems encountered by cities with declining populations are very
different from the ones described in the preceding chapters of this book.
Six of the eight Japanese cities of more than 5 million people had a
positive population growth rate between 2005 and 2010 ( figure 8.5).
Tokyo, the largest city with 13 million people (Tokyo Prefecture), saw the
largest population increase at 4.7 percent. By contrast, among the 39 cities
between half a million and 5 million, the growth was negative for all but
three of them. An aging population, apparently, does not prevent the larger
cities from growing, although modestly, but it contributes to an accelerating
decrease in population for smaller cities.
Figure 8.5
Population growth rates of Japanese cities above 500,000 people, between 2005 and 2010. Source:
Wendell Cox, “Japan’s 2010 Census: Moving to Tokyo,” New Geography, Grand Forks, ND, 2011,
http://www.newgeography.com/content/002227-japan%E2%80%99s-2010-census-moving-tokyo.The mayor of Toyama, a city of 1.2 million with a loss of population of
1.7 percent between 2005 and 2010, considers that the population decrease
is the major challenge faced by his municipality. Local planners explain that
Toyama’s young adults tend to emigrate toward larger cities like Tokyo or
Osaka, where they are likely to find more new jobs than in a city like
Toyama. This emigration of young people from smaller cities further
decreases the size of their local labor market, making them even less
attractive for new investment and creating a disinvestment spiral. The fiscal
base of these cities and their budgets are also severely affected by the
increasing pensions and social services they have to provide to the old
while their tax base is shrinking.
What kind of urban projects become a priority in a city with a shrinking
population? In Toyama in 2016, the major planning projects consisted of
trying to regroup aged people from the suburbs to a more central location
where they could be taken care of at a lesser cost. Some suburban areas are
even demolished and citizens are given a subsidy to move toward more
centralized locations. Public transports are redesigned to provide more
mobility to the handicapped. Schools are reconverted to care centers for the
aged. One of the major objectives of the municipality is to maintain the
mobility of the elderly who can no longer drive, either by providing them
with motorized wheelchairs and special wheelchair lanes on sidewalks or
by organizing easy-to-board public transport in neighborhoods where the
elderly have been regrouped.
At the same time, with tax subsidies, the municipality is trying to retain
or create jobs outside the geriatric health sector, the only sector that is
thriving. The municipality is also trying to make the city more culturally
attractive to retain the young. These descriptions from Toyama are of course
anecdotal evidence of what urban planning consists of in a city with a
shrinking population. Most urban planners, including myself, are
completely unprepared to manage cities who will be in a similar situation as
Toyama and many other smaller Japanese towns. It is possible that
technology, for which the Japanese have a demonstrated expertise, could
partially solve the problem of an aging population. There is also a
possibility that in the future the Japanese birth rate will stabilize at a level
that allows the country to maintain a constant urban population and a
corresponding stable urban economy.Growing and Shrinking Cities Will Not Be Randomly Geographically
Distributed
Most cities of the world will not face the trials of Toyama. There are still
many countries with very young populations who are ready to move from
rural areas to urban areas, or to emigrate anywhere in the world toward the
dynamic cities that would welcome them. From the beginning of the
twenty-first century we will see a strong divergence between very dynamic
megacities like the Pearl River Delta cities, for instance, and shrinking
cities in Europe and some parts of the North American continent. Let us
now look at the potential for dynamic cities.
In 2014 the United Nations published a report titled “World Urbanization
Prospects 2014.” I reproduce one of the major graphs from the report in
figure 8.6. The graph displays the growth rates between 2000 and 2014 for
world cities sorted by continents and by size class. We see immediately a
large dispersion of annual growth rates from 10 percent to −1.5 percent. The
largest dispersion is on the Asian continent, where megacities of more than
10 million have been growing from about 0.5 percent to 5 percent.
Figure 8.6
Urban growth rates by region and city size, between 2000 and 2014. Sources: Data are from United
Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division (2014). World
Urbanization Prospects: The 2014 Revision, Highlights (ST/ESA/SER.A/352).
The cities with negative growth rates are found mostly among medium￾sized cities of one to five million people and smaller cities between half a
million to one million. The negative growth of many cities below five
million people is consistent with the Japanese experience.The distribution of cities in figure 8.6 shows the preponderance of urban
development in Africa and Asia, areas with the highest growth rates for
megacities as well as for smaller cities. The shift in the economic center of
gravity of the world, from North America and Western Europe toward Asia,
which occurred at the beginning of the twenty-first century, is put in
evidence on the graph; while some megacities in Asia are growing at more
than 3 percent a year, megacities in Europe, Latin America, and North
America are growing at less than 2 percent a year.
In Asia, the large investment in infrastructure that took place during the
past 20 years has stimulated the growth of more cities by making trade
easier and transport less costly. In 2013, the government of China
announced an initiative called “The Silk Road Economic Belt and the
Twenty-First Century Maritime Silk Road,” usually abbreviated as “One
Belt, One Road.” This initiative will link the cities of central Asia with
newly expanded port facilities in cities of South and Southeast Asia. This
will create an enormous transcontinental trading zone of a scale never seen
before. The planned infrastructure will provide access to the sea for central
Asia countries, with their vast natural resources. The increased exchanges
following the newly created maritime routes will further stimulate the
growth of cities in the region and the migration of population toward large
cities.
Some large cities of Asia, in particular in China and India, may already
be affected by low birth rates linked to newly found affluence. However,
these cities are in countries that still have a large reserve of surplus labor in
rural areas. Their continuous growth for the medium term is therefore
ensured. The possibility of extensive communication and cultural exchange
between Asian countries with different and deep cultural traditions will
certainly greatly stimulate the creativity and innovation of cities of the
region.
African cities still have the largest unrealized potential. Their growth will
benefit from a much younger population than the other continents possess.
Their major challenge will be to develop in a timely fashion the
infrastructure that is required for humans to live in close proximity in very
large cities.
What Will Cities Look Like in the Middle of the Twenty-First Century?As I have suggested, we will see two types of cities by the middle of the
twenty-first century:
• First, cities that are growing fast and attracting immigrants from their own
country and internationally.
• Second, cities that are losing populations and have increasingly high
dependency ratios.
Both types of cities will pose serious urban planning challenges. The fast￾growing cities will reach sizes that are unprecedented and for which current
transport technologies are inadequate. The shrinking cities will require
regrouping the population within a smaller perimeter as their fiscal
resources will dwindle with their population.
Let us look first at the larger fast-growing cities of Asia. The recent
Chinese policy of looking at the development of cities in clusters, instead of
as one central city surrounded by its large suburbs, is a significant departure
from past urban practices. City clusters already exist of course, like the
Randstad in the Netherlands, which links Amsterdam, Rotterdam, The
Hague, and Utrecht. The urban development around San Francisco Bay
could also be considered a city cluster. What is different with the Chinese
concept of cluster is their scale. The Randstad connects only 7 million
people, while San Francisco Bay (including Silicon Valley) has only 6.2
million people. By contrast, the urban cluster of the Pearl River Delta
already had 65 million people in 2010, larger than the entire population of
the United Kingdom but concentrated on less than 10,000 square
kilometers! The recent urban cluster including Beijing–Tianjin–Hebei links
together more than 105 million people.
Will these gigantic urban agglomerations really constitute unified labor
markets, with the capacity for innovation and productivity commensurate
with their labor market sizes? For the moment, the urban transport
technology that would allow these large labor markets to integrate does not
exist. The existing urban clusters of Asia work well as supply chains, but
their labor markets are still fragmented into several smaller overlapping
ones. These overlapping but fragmented labor markets certainly provide a
comparative productivity advantage over smaller ones like San Francisco
Bay or the Randstad, but they do not allow the productivity that could be
obtained by linking 100 million people in commuting trips of less than 1
hour.The main challenge of urbanization in the future therefore rests on the
development of urban transport technology. Very fast trains combined with
individual means of transport that would provide fast door-to-door trips (or
door-to-station and station-to-door trips) would allow the integration of
these labor markets. The emerging self-driving technology and small
vehicle sharing will probably be a major factor in unifying fragmented labor
markets. The allocation of land and the standards used for housing will also
constitute a major challenge, as a large movement of labor will be expected.
Cities that lose population will also pose serious challenges until they
eventually stabilize. Can a city adapt to a stable population and a stable
dependency ratio? We do not have models, as the last century was
characterized by a general massive migrations from the rural areas to urban
areas.
Whatever model of cities prevail, large urban clusters grouping 100
million people or cities of half a million losing population, urban planning
in the middle of the twenty-first century will be very different from what we
have known so far.Notes
1. George Orwell, Politics and the English Language (London: Horizon, 1946), 6.
2. I have directly participated as one of the main authors in the preparation of seven master plans in
cities of North and Central America, the Caribbean, Europe, North Africa, and Asia. In addition, as a
consultant, I have been asked to review countless master plans for cities located all over the world.
3. Stephen Malpezzi and Stephen Mayo, “Housing and Urban Development Indicators: A Good Idea
Whose Time Has Returned,” Real Estate Economics 25, no. 1 (1997): 1–12.
4. Shlomo Angel, “Housing Policy Matters,” in House Price, Rent, and Affordability (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2000), 232–249.
5. This graph is adapted from an evaluation manual produced by the World Bank in 1996. See
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/BRAZILINPOREXTN/Resources/3817166-
1185895645304/4044168.1186409169154/24pub_br217.pdf.
6. N1 = 0.15 ∙ P, where P is the active population looking for jobs in neighborhood X.
7. Angus Deaton, The Great Escape: Health, Wealth, and the Origins of Inequality (Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press, 2013), 16.
8. Morris Hill and Rachelle Alterman, “The Problem of Setting Flexible Norms for Land Allocation
for Public Facilities,” in New Trends in Urban Planning, ed. Dan Soen (Oxford: Pergamon Press,
1979), 94–102.
9. Lawrence Hannah, Alain Bertaud, Stephen Malpezzi, and Stephen Mayo, “Malaysia: The Housing
Sector; Getting the Incentives Right,” World Bank Sector Report 7292-MA, World Bank,
Washington, DC, 1989.
10. Defined as population aged between 15 and 64 years.
11. Source: Table 1-1 Total population, population by the major three age groups (under 15, 15–64,
and 65 and over), Population Projections for Japan (January 2012): 2011 to 2060, National Institute
of Population and Social Security Research in Japan, Tokyo, Japan, 2012, http://www.ipss.go.jp/site￾ad/index_english/esuikei/gh2401e.asp.Index Note: Figures and tables are indicated by “f” and “t”
respectively, following page numbers.
Adequate housing, 269–270
Affordability in China, 230–231, 230f, 293–300, 297f
demand side subsidies in, 260–263, 262f, 267–268
Demographia International Housing Affordability Survey for, 224–225, 225f
for developing countries, 372–373
economics of, 341–342
in Gauteng (South Africa), 268–271, 270f, 272f, 273–275, 275f
government for, 220–221, 231–235, 232f–233f, 301–302, 304–306
household income in, 219–220, 222–224, 239, 240f, 242–244, 243f, 247, 248f, 249–251, 251f, 254–
256, 255f
housing policy and, 249–250, 252
housing typology in, 244–247, 245f, 302–303
incentives in, 283–284
in Indonesia, 288–292, 291f
informal housing for, 256–260, 258f
in land use, 334
minimum standards for, 235–236
in New York, 275–281, 278f, 280f–281f
PIR in, 224–230, 225f, 227f–228f, 231
policy for, 267–268, 300–301, 328–329, 356–357, 357f
poverty and, 236–239, 238f, 287–288
in South Africa, 366–367, 388n26
subletting in, 282–283
subsidies in, 303–304
supply side subsidies in, 264–267, 265f
tax incentives in, 284–285
technology and, 345–346, 346f
theory of, 49, 219, 301
trickle-down theory for, 240–241, 391n10
urban land supply in, 252–254, 253f
zoning in, 281–282, 285–287
Affordable housing, 276–277, 281–282, 285–287
Agricultural land in Hanoi (Vietnam), 135–136land price and, 135–136
land readjustment for, 385n7
spatial distribution of, 114–116, 115t, 118, 119f, 120–122, 121f–122f
in urban economics, 122–124, 125f
urban land compared to, 115–118, 117f, 119f, 122f
Algeria, 4–6
Alonso, William, 95
Alterman, Rachelle, 367–368
Alternative urban shapes containment policy in, 334–335, 340–341
demographic projection in, 341–344
density and, 339–340, 340f
economics of, 329–330, 330f
government and, 332–333
markets and, 335–337
New York as, 317–326
Paris as, 310–317, 311f, 316f
politics of, 337–339, 346–347
theory of, 307–310, 329–330, 333, 346–347
zoning for, 326–332, 328f, 330f
Amsterdam, 338–339
Anas, Alex, 95
Angel, Shlomo, 21–22, 110, 116, 147–148, 339–340
Antifragile (Taleb), 308–309
Apple (company), 308, 351
Art Deco building (New York), 326
Asia. See specific cities; specific countries Asian Development Bank, 365
Atlanta, 353
Atlas of Urban Expansion (Angel), 116, 339–340, 340f
Auckland (New Zealand), 228
Auditing, 365, 367–369
Banking Asian Development Bank, 365
Banco Interamericano de Desarrollo, 365
equity loans in, 305
for land development, 364–367
mortgages in, 226–227, 254–255, 255f, 356
in urban economics, 318
Barcelona (Spain), 66–67
Barker, Kate, 18, 305–306, 337
Barr, Jason, 318–319
Beaune (France), 120–122, 121f–122f
Beijing (China) transit in, 173–175, 174f
transport in, 162–165, 163f, 166–168, 167t
urban planning in, 73–77, 74t, 75f–76f, 352
Bertaud, Marie-Agnes, 10–11, 101
Bibliothèque Nationale de France (Paris), 310
Blinking light indicators, 355–358, 357fBrazil, 77–78, 77f
Brexit, 375
BRT. See Bus rapid transit
Brueckner, Jan, 18, 335–336, 339
Bruegmann, Robert, 116
Buenos Aires (Argentina), 156–158, 158f, 389n12
Building permits, 4–7
Building the Skyline (Barr, Jason), 318
Bulk regulations, 393n8
Bus rapid transit (BRT), 274–275. See also Transit
congestion pricing and, 185, 212
dwell time and, 186, 192, 195
headways for, 191–197, 192f, 194f, 196f
for mobility, 191–197, 192f, 194f, 196f
urban planning for, 155, 160–162, 162f
Cairncross, Frances, 150–152
Canada, 375
Carbon Dioxide. See CO2 equivalent
Cars. See Transit; Transport
Çatalhöyük, 22
Central business districts (CBDs), 384n12
congestion pricing in, 217
data for, 42–45, 44f–45f, 195–196, 196f
density and, 105–108, 106f–107f
environment and, 80–81, 80f
floor area consumption in, 52–53
for labor markets, 96–97
for municipal governments, 315, 316f
in Paris, 71–73, 72f
as residential areas, 318, 327–328, 328f
transit in, 311
in urban planning, 36, 36f, 37–42, 38f–39f
Cerdà, Ildefons, 66–68
Cervero, Robert, 168
Chambres de bonnes (maids’ rooms), 385n20
Cheshire, Paul, 18, 306, 337
Chicago, 335
Chile, 261
China. See also Beijing
affordability in, 230–231, 230f, 293–300, 297f
demographic projection in, 242–243, 243f, 295
design in, 4
economics and, 54, 295–296
France compared to, 79–80
government in, 82, 114–115, 246, 299–300
growth in, 380Guangzhou in, 73–77, 74t, 75f–76f
handshake buildings in, 296–300, 297f
Hauxinzhou in, 54
health in, 388n20
household income in, 239, 240f, 242–244, 243f
India compared to, 59–60, 339, 346
Indonesia compared to, 288
informal settlements in, 230–231, 230f
Kaifeng in, 22
Kowloon in, 296–297
Land use in, 11–13, 15, 381
low-income housing in, 294
Ningbo in, 73–77, 74t, 75f–76f
Pudong in, 54, 78–81, 78f, 80f, 386n10
residential areas in, 73–77, 74t, 75f–76f
Shenzhen in, 22, 295–300, 297f, 300
South Africa compared to, 299
technology in, 386n11
Tianjin in, 114–115, 115t, 339
urban planning in, 73–77, 74t, 75f–76f, 309
US compared to, 189–190
villages in, 293
Chrysler building (New York), 326
Cities, 28–32, 32f
as labor markets, 19–27, 33–41, 35f–36f, 38f–39f, 48–49
Planet of Cities (Henderson), 21–22
“Size, Sprawl, Speed and the Efficiency of Cities” (Prud’homme/Lee), 33–34
City Planning Departments, 369–372, 371f
City-states, 366
Clean energy, 345–346
CO2 equivalent (CO2-e), 205–211, 206f–207f, 209f–210f, 390n29
Coase, Ronald, 15
Codes for congestion, 390n20
for design, 5
engineering in, 312–313, 313f
for preservation, 312
in Shanghai (China), 386n10
for zoning, 324, 329
Command economies, 14
Commercial districts, 330, 330f
Communism, 4, 15–16, 26–27, 56, 73–74, 246
Communist Manifesto (Marx), 56
Commuting. See Transport; Travel time
Commuting routes, 384n13
Commuting trips, 384n17
Compact City Policies: A Comparative Assessment (OECD), 338
Complex zoning, 331–332Composite model (transport), 39f, 40
Congestion codes for, 390n20
data for, 168–175, 169f, 170t, 174f
for environment, 148–149, 152–154
GHG emissions from, 165
mobility and, 172–175, 174f
Mobility First (Staley/Moore), 176
policy for, 154–158, 158f, 190–199, 192f, 194f, 196f, 198f
theory of, 201
Congestion pricing, 191
BRT and, 185, 212
in CBDs, 217
for government, 23–24, 30
mobility and, 357f
policy for, 170–172
in Singapore, 184, 197–199, 198f
tolls as, 23–24, 49, 201, 217
Containment policy in alternative urban shapes, 334–335, 340–341
Compact City Policies: A Comparative Assessment (OECD), 338
demographic projection in, 339–340, 340f
for government, 337
theory of, 337–339, 341–344
Cordoba (Spain), 22
Costa, Lúcio, 4
Culture cultural politics, 327–329
of economics, 18
of household income, 282
housing typology and, 231
of informal subdivisions, 235–236
of Kampungs, 288–289, 385n21
of New York, 262
of NIMBY, 337–338
politics of, 5–6, 367–368
of poverty, 256–257, 296–300
preservation of, 326–327
technology and, 384n6
of urban planning, 18
of US, 335
of welfare, 284–285
Curitiba (Brazil), 191–196, 192f, 194f, 196f
Data. See also Spatial data
for CBDs, 42–45, 44f–45f, 195–196, 196f
for congestion, 168–175, 169f, 170t, 174f
Demographia International Housing Affordability Survey for, 224–225, 225f
for demographic projection, 178–180, 178t, 179f, 180t, 373–374, 374f
for density, 13–15, 46t, 110–111, 111f, 245, 271, 272f, 273, 296–297, 297f, 386n12for economics, 12
for FAR, 83, 84f, 85–86
for floor area consumption, 252–253, 253f
Free Flow Speeds, 390n16
for GHG emissions, 159
of growth, 378–380, 379f
GTFS data, 156, 389n10
for housing policy, 242
income distribution as, 239, 240f
income distribution curve for, 280–281, 281f
for indicators, 354–355
for informal subdivisions, 235
for migration, 294
for mobility, 152–158, 158f, 168–172, 169f, 170t, 185t, 186–190, 188f–189f
for motorcycles, 162–164, 162f–163f
PIR data, 225–228, 227f–228f
quantitative models for, 94–95
from Seoul (Korea), 45f, 46t
spatial data, 11, 30, 39–45, 39f, 44f–45f, 46t, 212–216, 214f–215f, 216t
Strategic Community Investment Report Data, 353
technology for, 3, 101–102, 102f, 145, 156–158, 158f
theory of, 146–147
for transit, 361–362
on transport, 31–33, 32f, 355
for transport modes, 157f, 161–162, 162f, 184t–185t, 188–191, 188f–189f
for travel time, 165–171, 166f, 167t, 168f–169f, 170t
for urban economics, 171–172, 229–230
for urban planning, 84f, 90, 305, 353, 355–358, 357f
Deadwood regulations, 368–369
The Death of Distance (Cairncross), 150
Deaton, Angus, 220, 277, 353, 364
La Defense (Paris), 315, 316f
Degentrification, 246–247
Demand-driven land use, 291
Demand side subsidies, 260–263, 262f, 267–268, 286, 303–304
Demographic projection, 24–25, 86, 370–373, 385n1. See also Density
in alternative urban shapes, 341–344
in China, 242–243, 243f, 295
in containment policy, 339–340, 340f
data for, 178–180, 178t, 179f, 180t, 373–374, 374f
Demographia International Housing Affordability Survey, 224–225, 225f
in design, 93
for government, 91–92, 262, 358
growth in, 372–376, 374f
infrastructure and, 137–138
for labor markets, 150–152, 151fmobility and, 147–148
spatial distribution and, 110–111, 111f
theory of, 212–213
transport and, 169–170, 170t
for urban planning, 109–110, 160–161, 175–176
Demographics. See Density
Deng Xiaoping, 15, 26, 384n6
Density, 386n14
alternative urban shapes and, 339–340, 340f
CBDs and, 105–108, 106f–107f
data for, 13–15, 46t, 110–111, 111f, 245, 271, 272f, 273, 296–297, 297f, 386n12
density profiles, 102f, 104f, 106f, 109f, 111f, 342–343
FAR and, 84f, 88–90
in floor area consumption, 355
for Kampung Improvement Program (KIP), 292
labor markets and, 114–115, 115t
land price and, 140
land use and, 387n17
markets and, 242–244, 243f
in master plans, 105
maximum density, 235–236
policy for, 336
RDP for, 273–274
science of, 20–28
spatial data and, 46t
tax incentives and, 377–378
in theory, 108–109, 109f
topography, 84f
in urban economics, 356
in urban planning, 93–94, 100–101, 110–111, 111f, 372–376, 374f
in US, 59
vehicle density, 182–183, 182f–183f
Density gradients reverse density gradients, 273, 344
theory of, 97–100, 98f–99f, 103t, 107–111, 111f
Department of Housing And Development (HUD), 18
Design. See also Alternative urban shapes
in China, 4
codes for, 5
demographic projection in, 93
economics in, 140–141
environment in, 312
of Garden Cities, 335
government and, 175–176, 315, 316f, 369
greenbelts in, 336–337
in Hanoi (Vietnam), 17
headways in, 186–190, 188f–189f
manufacturing and, 23–24markets compared to, 1–2, 81–90, 84f
in New York, 319–321
objective functions for, 307–309
policy for, 223–224, 322–324, 346–347, 359–361, 360f
of Port-au-Prince, 4
in Russia, 4
of skylines, 78, 78f
theory of, 8–9
urban economics and, 61, 150–152, 151f
urban planning compared to, 385n1
for urban spatial structures, 71–78, 72f, 74t, 75f–77f
for urban village model, 297–300
zoning in, 321–322, 322f
Detroit, 373
Developing countries, 372–373
Development Projects Observed (Hirschman), 3–4
Dispersed model (transport), 39–40, 39f
Dreiser, Theodore, 335
Duvalier, Jean-Claude, 9–10
Dwell time, 186, 192, 195
Dynamic cities, 378–380, 379f
Echenique, Martial, 337
Economics. See also Poverty; Urban economics
of affordability, 341–342
of alternative urban shapes, 329–330, 330f
China and, 54, 295–296
command economies, 14
of communism, 26–27
of congestion pricing, 30
culture of, 18
data for, 12
in design, 140–141
economic rate of return, 363—364
economies of scale, 20–21
of engineering, 326
of FAR, 84f, 86, 330, 330f
of floor area consumption, 324
of France, 47
government and, 111–113, 112f
growth and, 310–311, 311f
of health, 376–378, 378f
of height regulations, 313–315
housing policy and, 260–263, 261f
of housing supply, 302–303
of Indonesia, 47
of investments, 362–363of Kombinats, 383n4
of labor markets, 155–156, 381
of land development, 120–125, 125f, 283–284, 302–303
of land markets, 12–13
of land price, 8–9
of land use, 236–239, 238f, 329–330
for London, 178–180, 178t, 179f, 180t
market economies, 14
mobility and, 45, 46t, 47–48, 158–160, 190–191, 196–199, 198f, 201
of mortgages, 226–227
for New York, 178–180, 178t, 179f, 180t, 284–285
path dependency in, 384n16
of PIR, 229, 244
policy and, 25, 152–154, 287
politics and, 375
of Port-au-Prince, 8–9
of poverty, 242–243
in Pudong (China), 54
of real estate, 27–28, 112f, 304, 331–332
of rentals, 317, 391n4
scale economy, 10
of Shenzhen (China), 295–296
of Singapore, 374, 376
of spatial distribution, 93–97, 98f–99f, 99, 109–110, 120–125, 134f
of subsidies, 100–101
technology and, 367–368
theory in, 240–241, 253–254
of transit, 158–160, 362
of transport, 19–20
trickle-down theory in, 240–241, 391n10
Urban Economics and Urban Policy (Cheshire/Nathan/Overman), 306
urban planning and, 1–4, 8–9, 16–18, 144–146
of urban-rural boundaries, 118, 119f
of urban spatial structures, 81–90, 84f
in US, 338–339, 356
World Bank for, 11–12
World Trade Organization for, 132
Eiffel Tower, 309
Electric cars. See Technology
Emergency shelter, 302
Emirates, 374
Engineering clean energy in, 345–346
in codes, 312–313, 313f
economics of, 326
FAR in, 342–343
in France, 309–310
theory of, 322–323urban planning compared to, 307–308, 354
Environment. See also Sustainability
CBDs and, 80–81, 80f
CO2-e for, 205–208, 206f–207f
congestion for, 148–149, 152–154
in design, 312
GHG emissions and, 40, 204–205, 334–335, 338
grid carbon content for, 207–209, 207f, 209f, 212
for Le Corbusier (architect), 298
mobility and, 201–204, 204f, 206–208, 207f
policy for, 222
politics of, 337–339
preservation of, 312
technology and, 204–208, 206f–207f
topography of, 202
in US, 208–211, 209f–210f
zoning and, 153–154
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 203–206
Equity loans, 305
Europe. See specific cities; specific countries Evans, Alan, 18
Externalities government and, 317–319
negative externalities, 18, 55, 73, 86, 159–161, 165, 171, 199, 284, 318–321, 324–327, 331–332,
349
traditional externalities, 311–312, 317–319
Facebook, 151
Fansler, David, 335–336
FAR. See Floor area ratio
Farmers, 135–137, 296
Ferguson, Adam, 1
Firms, 83–85, 84f
Fischel, William A., 18
Fixed capital, 28
Flat Iron building (New York), 326
Floor area consumption, 52–53, 342
data for, 252–253, 253f
density in, 355
economics of, 324
in Hanoi (Vietnam), 247, 248f, 249
in incentives, 321–322, 325
land supply and, 339–340, 340f
land use and, 320
policy for, 243
in urban economics, 331–332, 341–342
Floor area ratio (FAR), 342, 386n13, 386n18
data for, 83, 84f, 85–86
density and, 84f, 88–90economics of, 84f, 86, 330, 330f
in engineering, 342–343
for government, 321–322, 322f, 325–326, 330f
as incentives, 329, 332–333
in land development, 276–277
in land use, 84f, 88, 297–298
minimum standards for, 256–260, 258f
as policy, 323
politics of, 283–284, 286
poverty and, 284–285
TOD and, 70–71
in urban economics, 321–322, 322f
in urban planning, 296–297, 297f
in urban spatial structures, 54–56
France. See also Paris
Beaune in, 120–122, 121f–122f
Bibliothèque Nationale de France, 310
China compared to, 79–80
economics of, 47
engineering in, 309–310
transport in, 31–33, 32f
urban economics in, 25
Free Flow Speeds, 390n16
Functions in markets, 329–330
objective functions, 307–310, 317–319, 334, 344–346, 345f–346f
Garden Cities, 335, 385n2
Gauteng (South Africa), 31–33, 32f, 392n17
affordability in, 268–271, 270f, 272f, 273–275, 275f
government in, 300
GDP. See Gross domestic product
General Transit Feed Specification (GTFS), 156, 389n10
Gentrification, 246–247
Germany, 203–204, 204f
GHG emissions. See Greenhouse gas emissions
Gibrat’s law, 21–22
Giuliano, G., 152–153
Glaeser, Edward, 7, 18, 337
Global Warming. See Environment; Greenhouse gas emissions
Good neighbor rules, 349
Google, 151
Government, 276. See also Municipal governments
for affordability, 220–221, 231–235, 232f–233f, 301–302, 304–306
in Algeria, 4–6
alternative urban shapes and, 332–333
auditing of, 367–368
building permits and, 4–6in China, 82, 114–115, 246, 299–300
congestion pricing for, 23–24, 30
containment policy for, 337
deadwood regulations for, 368–369
demographic projection for, 91–92, 262, 358
design and, 175–176, 315, 316f, 369
economics and, 111–113, 112f
for emergency shelter, 302
externalities and, 317–319
FAR for, 321–322, 322f, 325–326, 330f
in Gauteng (South Africa), 300
household income and, 219–220, 256–260, 258f, 356–357
housing consumption and, 256–260, 258f, 366–367
in housing policy, 301
housing supply for, 302–306
in India, 25–26, 241, 288
in Indonesia, 300
informal settlements and, 288, 290
in land development, 285
land use and, 15–16, 146, 196–200, 198f, 318–319, 368–369, 388n25
markets and, 249–250, 252, 301–302, 316–317
master plans and, 47
mobility and, 64, 65f, 66–70, 69f
Monetary Policy Committee (UK), 305
in New York, 176, 230, 231–235, 232f–233f, 267, 283–284, 300, 376–377
in Paris, 315–317, 316f
for plot size, 256, 274
in policy, 9–11, 118–120, 138–139, 141, 162–163, 252–254, 253f, 255–256
politics of, 259–260, 314–315, 319–321
poverty for, 290–292, 291f
for public housing, 264–267, 265f
regulations and, 6–7
for rentals, 277–278, 278f
rent control by, 264–267, 265f
in Russia, 26–27
in Shenzhen (China), 300
in Singapore, 386n15
for social housing, 302
in South Africa, 222–223, 268–269, 274
in supply mechanisms, 325
supply mechanisms for, 302–304
tax credits from, 267
technology for, 369
transport modes and, 148, 152, 274–275
TTI for, 172–175, 174f
in UK, 18
urban economics for, 283–284, 312–313, 313ffor urban planning, 16–17, 319–321
in US, 18, 375
in voucher systems, 260–263, 261f
in zoning, 91–92, 235–236, 264–267, 265f, 310–312, 311f, 324–325
The Great Escape (Deaton), 220
Green, Richard, 280
Greenbelts, 335–337
Greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, 207, 207f, 212, 390n29
from congestion, 165
data for, 159
mobility and, 204–206, 206f, 208–211, 209f–210f
theory of, 40, 201–202, 334–335, 338
urban economics and, 338–339
urban expansion and, 334–335
in urban planning, 202–204, 204f
Grid carbon content, 207–209, 207f, 209f, 212
Gross domestic product (GDP), 219, 290–291
Growth in China, 380
data of, 378–380, 379f
in demographic projection, 372–376, 374f
economics and, 310–311. 311f
growth rates, 378–379, 379f
in Japan, 376–378, 378f
markets and, 314–315, 340–344
mobility and, 28–29
policy for, 113–114
science of, 21–22
in Shenzhen (China), 22
skylines and, 317–319
smart growth, 334
theory of, 27–28
transport and, 49
urban growth, 372–376, 374f
urban growth boundaries, 344
for urban planning, 24–27
GTFS. See General Transit Feed Specification
Guangzhou (China), 73–77, 74t, 75f–76f
Haiti. See Port-au-Prince
les Halles (Paris), 310
handshake buildings, 296–300, 297f
Hanoi (Vietnam) agricultural land in, 134–135
design in, 17
floor area consumption in, 247, 248f, 249
housing typology for, 245–246, 245f
master plans for, 110, 130–136, 134f
plot size in, 246politics of, 138–139
theory for, 138–139
transport in, 162–165, 163f
Harari, Yuval, 347
Haussmann, Georges-Eugène, 66–68, 175–177, 309
Hauxinzhou (China), 54
Hayek, Friedrich, 1
Headways for BRT, 191–197, 192f, 194f, 196f
in design, 186–190, 188f–189f
Health, 360, 376–378, 378f, 388n20
Height regulations, 311–315, 311f, 313f
Henderson, Vernon, 21
Hewlett Packard, 351
Hill, Morris, 367–368
Hippodamus, 64–66
Hirschman, Albert, 3–4, 260
Historical preservation, 60–61
Homeless population, 302
Hong Kong, 59–60. See also China
Household income in affordability, 219–220, 222–224, 239, 240f, 242–244, 243f, 247, 248f, 249–
251, 251f, 254–256, 255f
in China, 239, 240f, 242–244, 243f
culture of, 282
government and, 219–220, 256–260, 258f, 356–357
mobility for, 285
theory of, 221
Housing consumption government and, 256–260, 258f, 366–367
housing consumption profiles, 261–262
income distribution and, 247, 248f, 249, 250–252, 251f
land development and, 252–254, 253f
minimum housing consumption, 256–260, 258f
mortgages for, 254–256, 255f
policy for, 252
theory of, 302–303
Housing flow, 240–241
Housing policy affordability and, 249–250, 252
data for, 242
economics and, 260–263, 261f
government in, 301
politics of, 262
RDP as, 274
Housing pools, 281–282
Housing stock, 240–241, 246–247
Housing subdivisions, 230–231, 230f
Housing supply, 271, 272f, 273–274, 287, 302–306. See also Housing consumption; Subsidies
Housing typology, 231, 244–247, 245f, 302–303
HOV lanes, 196–197Howard, Ebenezer, 53, 298, 335, 385n2
Hsieh, Chang-Tai, 219
HUD. See Department of Housing And Development
Hudson Yards (New York), 333, 350
Hybrid cars. See Technology
Illegal settlements, 257–258, 258f
Immigration, 374–376, 374f
Impact indicators, 358–361, 360f, 361, 364–365
Incentives in affordability, 283–284
FAR as, 329, 332–333
floor area consumption in, 321–322, 325
for land development, 320–321
in New York, 282–283, 319
property taxes in, 393n16
tax incentives, 284–285, 377–378
theory of, 328–329
transit bonuses as, 333
Incentive zoning, 322–325, 329–330
Inclusionary zoning in New York, 275–276, 279–281, 281f
theory of, 276–278, 278f, 282–287
Inclusive zoning, 264–267, 265f
Income-consumption relation, 249
Income distribution as data, 239, 240f
housing consumption and, 247, 248f, 249, 250–252, 251f
income distribution curve, 280–281, 281f
shelter consumption and, 244–247, 245f
India. See also Mumbai
China compared to, 59–60, 339, 346
government in, 25–26, 241, 288
informal settlements in, 238f
policy in, 383n5, 385n3
urban economics in, 17, 237–239, 238f, 308–309
urban planning in, 77–78, 77f, 236
Indicators blinking light indicators, 355–358, 357f
data for, 354–355
impact indicators, 358–361, 360f, 364–365
Input indicators, 362–365
in low-income housing, 366–367
monitoring of, 352–353
outcome indicators, 361–362, 364–365
output indicators, 362, 364–365
for policy, 363
for transport, 361
for urban planning, 361–365
Indonesia affordability in, 288–292, 291f
China compared to, 288economics of, 47
government in, 300
Kampungs in, 288–292, 291f
KIP in, 267–268, 290–292, 291f
road networks in, 292
urban planning in, 128–129, 129f
Informal housing, 235–236, 256–260, 258f
Informal sector, 125–130, 127f, 129f
Informal settlements, 6, 16, 125
in China, 230–231, 230f
GDP and, 290
government and, 288, 290
in India, 238f
poverty in, 257
theory of, 128–130, 129f, 288
urban planning for, 236–239, 238f
Informal subdivisions, 235–236
Infrastructure, 137–138, 260, 290–292, 291f
Input indicators, 362–365
Integration policy, 292
Internet, 383n2
Investments, in transit, 362–363
Jacobs, Jane, 22, 383n4
Japan growth in, 376–378, 378f
Russia compared to, 373
Toyama in, 373, 376–379, 378f
Jeanneret, Charles-Édouard. See Le Corbusier
Jobs. See Labor markets
Johnson, Philip, 323
Joint Living-Work Quarters for Artists rule, 326–329, 328f
Kahn, Matthew E., 337
Kaifeng (China), 22
Kampung Improvement Program (KIP), 267–268, 290–292, 291f
Kampungs, 288–292, 291f, 385n21, 392n24
Keyi, Sheng, 392n25
Keynes, John Maynard, 305
KIP. See Kampung Improvement Program
Kombinats, 383n4
Kowloon (China), 296–297
Kubitschek, Juscelino, 26, 384n6
Labor markets CBDs for, 96–97
cities as, 19–27, 33–41, 35f–36f, 38f–39f, 48–49
commuting trips in, 384n17
The Death of Distance (Cairncross), 150
demographic projection for, 150–152, 151fdensity and, 114–115, 115t
economics of, 155–156, 381
for farmers, 134–135
housing supply and, 271, 272f, 273–274, 287
labor participation rates, 386n17
metropolitan labor markets, 274–275, 275f
in Seoul (Korea), 43
spatial distribution and, 126
theory of, 45, 46t, 47–48, 219–220, 314–315
transport and, 34, 35f–36f, 36–41, 38f–39f
in urban economics, 359–360, 360f
urban planning and, 11–15, 57–59, 58f, 84f, 85, 106–107, 107f, 143, 220–221
in US, 42–43
Labor mobility, 30
Land development banking for, 364–367
containment-driven planning in, 342
economics of, 120–124, 125f, 283–284, 302–303
FAR in, 276–277
government in, 285
housing consumption and, 252–254, 253f
incentives for, 320–321
market-driven planning in, 342
markets for, 388n26
municipal governments in, 358–361, 360f
policy for, 233–234, 303–304, 365–367
politics of, 364–365
RDP for, 268–269
technology for, 380–381
theory of, 383n4
urban economics of, 273
of urban land, 335–337
in US, 236–237
Land markets, 12–13, 96
Land price agricultural land and, 135–136
complex zoning for, 331–332
density and, 140
economics of, 8–9
land price gradients, 104, 104f
profile for, 104f
in spatial distribution, 100–101, 111–113, 112f
theory of, 304–305
tolls and, 97, 100
for Wall Street, 317–318
Land readjustment, 385n7
Land supply, 305–306, 339–340, 340f, 344
Land use affordability in, 334
in China, 11–13, 15, 381demand-driven land use, 291
density and, 387n17
economics of, 236–239, 238f, 329–330
FAR in, 84f, 88, 297–298
floor area consumption and, 320
government and, 15–16, 146, 196–200, 198f, 318–319, 368–369, 388n25
in Hong Kong, 59–60
markets for, 333
in Paris, 310–312, 311f
policy for, 304–306, 326–329, 328f, 330, 330f, 344, 367–368
politics of, 337–338
in Russia, 11, 13–15
technology for, 10–11
for urban economics, 336
urban planning and, 48
in US, 7, 59
Latin America. See also specific cities; specific countries Buenos Aires (Argentina), 156–158, 158f,
389n12
Rio de Janeiro (Brazil), 102f, 103–104, 103t
urban planning in, 339–340, 340f
Le Corbusier (architect), 4
environment for, 298
for Paris, 71–74, 72f, 74t, 335
skylines for, 317
Lee, Chang-Woon, 28, 33, 38
L’Enfant, 66–68
Levittown, 335
Line agencies, 369–370
London, 335
economics for, 178–180, 178t, 179f, 180t
greenbelts in, 337
markets in, 53
transit in, 176–177transport modes in, 147–148
Los Angeles, 105–108, 106f–107f
Low-income housing, 249–250, 267, 294, 302–303, 366–367. See also Poverty
Luxury rentals, 279–281, 280f–281f, 282–283
Maids’ rooms, 385n20
Malaysia, 263, 368
Malpezzi, Stephen, 18, 99, 101, 280, 316, 357
Manufacturing, 23–24
Maps, 353–354
Markets. See also Labor markets
alternative urban shapes and, 335–337
command economies, 14
density and, 242–244, 243f
design compared to, 1–2, 81–90, 84f
functions in, 329–330
government and, 249–250, 252, 301–302, 316–317
growth and, 314–315, 340–344
for land development, 388n26
land markets, 12–13, 96
for land use, 333
in London, 53
market-driven planning, 342
market economies, 14
market equilibrium, 228
in New York, 330, 330f
parallel markets, 126–130, 127f, 129f
policy for, 302
“Size, Sprawl, Speed and the Efficiency of Cities” (Prud’homme/Lee), 33–34
theory of, 303–304
of urban economics, 369–370
urban spatial structures in, 53, 56–57, 60–63, 91–92
Marx, Karl, 56
Marxism, 4, 56, 73–74
Master plans density in, 105
government and, 47
for Hanoi (Vietnam), 110, 130–136, 134f
models for, 39–41, 39f, 108–109, 109f
in Silicon Valley, 351–352
spatial distribution in, 131–140, 134f
theory of, 4, 8, 11, 394n2
for transport, 28–30
for urban planning, 353–354
Maximum density, 235–236
Mayo, Stephen, 357
Mayors. See Municipal governments
McNamara, Robert, 364–365Mehndiratta, Shomik, 156
Merriam-Webster’s Dictionary, 350, 388n18
Metropolitan labor markets, 274–275, 275f
Mexico City, 129–130, 129f, 162–165, 163f
Middle East, 22
Mies van der Rohe, Ludwig, 322–323
Migration, 289, 294
Miletus (Greece), 64–65
Mills, Edwin, 95
Minimum housing consumption, 256–260, 258f
Minimum standards for affordability, 235–236
for FAR, 256–260, 258f
for plot size, 274–276, 275f
in standard urban model, 288–289
theory of, 222–224
in zoning, 231–235, 232f–233f
Mobility BRT for, 191–197, 192f, 194f, 196f
commuting and, 146–147
congestion and, 172–175, 174f
congestion pricing and, 357f
data for, 152–158, 158f, 168–172, 169f, 170t, 185t, 186–190, 188f–189f
demographic projection and, 147–148
economics and, 45, 46t, 47–48, 158–160, 190–191, 196–199, 198f, 201
environment and, 201–204, 204f, 206–208, 207f
GHG emissions and, 204–206, 206f, 208–211, 209f–210f
government and, 64, 65f, 66–70, 69f
growth and, 28–29
for household income, 285
labor mobility, 30
parking and, 200
technology and, 149–152, 151f, 214–216, 215f, 216t
theory of, 48–49
tolls and, 357f
transit and, 165–168, 166f–168f, 191–196, 192f, 194f, 196f
transport and, 143–149, 160–165, 162f–163f, 175–185, 178t, 179f, 180t, 182f–183f, 185t, 211–214,
214f
transport modes and, 92, 143, 160–165, 162f–163f
in urban planning, 48–49, 216–218, 217f, 337
Mobility First (Staley/Moore), 176
Models descriptive model, 101–105, 102f, 103t, 104f
Los Angeles as, 105–108, 106f–107f
for master plans, 39–41, 39f, 108–109, 109f
quantitative models, 94–95
standard urban model, 95–97, 98f–99f, 99, 101, 113–114, 115–118, 117f, 129–130, 140–141, 288–
289
Monetary Policy Committee (UK), 305
Monitoring, of indicators, 352–353Monocentric model (city). See Standard urban model
Monocentric model (transport), 39, 39f
Moore, Adrian, 176
Moretti, Enrico, 219
Mortgages, 226–227, 254–256, 255f, 356
Moses, Robert, 176
Motorcycles, 126, 135, 148, 190, 275
data for, 162–165, 162f–163f
policy for, 211
travel time and, 167–168
Mumbai (India), 17, 57–59, 58f, 308–309, 384n12
Municipal governments, 276–277, 304
CBDs for, 315, 316f
in land development, 358–361, 360f
policy for, 352, 364–365
urban economics for, 314–315, 354–355
in urban planning, 349–351, 369–372, 371f
Muth, Richard, 95
NASA, 3
Nathan, Max, 306
Negative externalities theory of, 18, 55, 73, 86, 159–161, 165, 171, 199, 284
in zoning, 318–321, 324–327, 331–332, 349
New York, 63f
affordability in, 275–281, 278f, 280f–281f
affordable housing in, 281–282, 285–287
Art Deco building in, 326
Chrysler building in, 326
culture of, 262
design in, 319–321
economics for, 178–180, 178t, 179f, 180t, 284–285
Flat Iron building in, 326
government in, 176, 230, 231–235, 232f–233f, 267, 283–284, 300, 376–377
height regulations in, 315
historical preservation in, 60–61
Hudson Yards in, 333, 350
incentives in, 282–283, 319
incentive zoning in, 322–325
inclusionary zoning in, 275–276, 279–281, 281f
Independent Budge Office for, 284–285
informal housing in, 235–236
markets in, 330, 330f
objective functions in, 317–319
Paris compared to, 334
policy in, 200, 208–209, 209f
poverty in, 287–288
private space in, 321–322, 322fRockefeller Center in, 326
Seagram building in, 322–326, 331
Silicon Valley compared to, 351
South Africa compared to, 275–276
tolls in, 170–172
transit in, 186–188, 188f
transport modes in, 165–167, 166f, 167t
urban planning in, 54–55, 144, 326–329, 328f, 393n8
Vanderbilt Corridor in, 333
Wall Street in, 317–318
Woolworth building in, 326, 331
zoning in, 318–319, 326–329, 328f, 349–350, 389n2
New Zealand, 228, 386n16
Niemeyer, Oscar, 4
NIMBY, 333, 337–338, 393n18
Ningbo (China), 73–77, 74t, 75f–76f
Nissan Leaf, 208–210, 209f
Northern Girls (Keyi), 392n25
Not In My Back Yard. See NIMBY
Objective functions, 307–310, 317–319, 334, 344–346, 345f–346f
OECD. See Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
OED. See Operations Evaluation Department
Old Law Tenements, 231–235, 232f–233f
Open spaces, 84f, 87–88
Operational applications, 140–141
Operations Evaluation Department (OED), 365
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), 337–338, 353, 384n9
Outcome indicators, 361–362, 364–365
Output indicators, 362, 364–365
Overman, Henry, 306
Parallel markets, 126–130, 127f, 129f
Paris, 63f, 104f, 392n3, 393n5
Bibliothèque Nationale de France in, 310
CBDs in, 71–73, 72f
Chambres de bonnes (maids’ rooms) in, 385n20
La Defense in, 315, 316f
Eiffel Tower in, 309
government in, 315–317, 316f
les Halles in, 310
height regulations in, 312–314, 313f
land use in, 310–312, 311f
Le Corbusier for, 71–74, 72f, 74t, 335
New York compared to, 334
objective functions in, 309–310
Pompidou Museum in, 310Tour Montparnasse in, 310
transit in, 176–177
transport in, 44, 44f, 164–165
transport modes in, 165–167, 166f, 167t
urban economics in, 314–315
Parking, 200
Park spaces, 84f, 87–88
Path dependency, 384n16
People’s Republic of China. See China
Permits. See Building permits
Phatak, V. K., 17
PIR. See Price income ratio
Pisarski, Alan, 28, 42–43
Planet of Cities (Angel), 21–22
Plot size, 246, 256, 274–276, 275f, 289
Policy. See also Containment policy
for affordability, 267–268, 300–301, 328–329, 356–357, 357f
bulk regulations as, 393n8
Compact City Policies: A Comparative Assessment (OECD), 338
for congestion, 154–158, 158f, 190–199, 192f, 194f, 196f, 198f
for congestion pricing, 170–172
deadwood regulations as, 368–369
for density, 336
for design, 223–224, 322–324, 346–347, 359–361, 360f
economics and, 25, 152–154, 287
for environment, 222
FAR as, 323
for floor area consumption, 243
Good neighbor rules as, 349
government in, 9–11, 118–120, 138–139, 141, 162–163, 252–254, 253f, 255–256
for growth, 113–114
for housing consumption, 252
housing policy, 242, 249–250, 252, 260–263, 261f, 274, 301
for housing pools, 281–282
housing stock and, 246–247
for immigration, 375–376
income-consumption relation for, 249
in India, 383n5, 385n3
indicators for, 363
integration policy, 292
Joint Living-Work Quarters for Artists rule in, 326–329, 328f
for land development, 233–234, 303–304, 365–367
for land use, 304–306, 326–329, 328f, 330, 330f, 344, 367–368
for markets, 302
for motorcycles, 211
for municipal governments, 352, 364–365
in New York, 200, 208–209, 209fNIMBY as, 333
OECD for, 337–338
for poverty, 366–367
real estate and, 229–230
reform for, 304–306
for road networks, 180–185, 182f–183f, 185t
in Russia, 279
Sierra Club for, 337–338
subletting as, 266–267
for taxes, 279–280, 280f
technology for, 97–198, 208–211, 209f–210f, 214–218, 215f, 216t, 217f
theory of, 332–333
for transport modes, 211–213
travel time in, 363
by UN, 234
UN Habitat for, 337–338
for urban economics, 111–113, 112f
Urban Economics and Urban Policy (Cheshire/Nathan/Overman), 306
for urban planning, 358–361, 360f
World Bank for, 337–338, 364–365
for zoning, 277–278, 278f, 283–284
Politics of alternative urban shapes, 337–339, 346–347
of building permits, 6–7
of communism, 15–16, 246
cultural politics, 327–329
of culture, 5–6, 367–368
economics and, 375
of environment, 337–339
of FAR, 283–284, 286
of government, 259–260, 314–315, 319–321
of Hanoi (Vietnam), 138–139
of health, 360
of housing policy, 262
of Kampungs, 290–292, 291f
of KIP, 290–291, 291f
of land development, 364–365
of land use, 337–338
Marxism, 4
of migration, 289
of poverty, 220–221, 287–288, 301–302, 361
of preservation, 316–317
of public space, 1–2, 25–27, 323–324
of South Africa, 101
in UK, 375
of urban economics, 303–304, 320–321
of urban planning, 306
in US, 350–351for world Bank, 365–367
Pompidou Museum (Paris), 310
Population. See Density
Port-au-Prince (Haiti), 4, 8–11
Portland (Oregon), 344, 388n24
Poverty affordability and, 236–239, 238f, 287–288
culture of, 256–257, 296–300
economics of, 242–243
FAR and, 284–285
gentrification and, 246–247
for government, 290–292, 291f
homeless population in, 302
in informal settlements, 257
infrastructure and, 260
in New York, 287–288
plot size for, 289
policy for, 366–367
politics of, 220–221, 287–288, 301–302, 361
rentals for, 279–281, 280f–281f
section 8 for, 286
in South Africa, 47–48
subsidies and, 273
theory of, 16
in urban economics, 82, 141, 362
urban planning for, 53, 223–224, 249–250
welfare for, 284–285
zoning for, 277
Preservation, 312, 313–314, 316–319, 326–327
Price/income ratio (PIR) in affordability, 224–230, 225f, 227f–228f, 231
data from, 225–228, 227f–228f
economics of, 229, 244
theory of, 224–228, 225f, 227f–228f, 244
topography in, 224–225, 225f
Private space, 63–64 63f, 321–322, 322f
Property taxes, 355, 393n16
Proportionate effect, 21–22
Prud’homme, Rémy, 28, 33, 38
Psychology, in urban planning, 367–368
Public housing, 250, 264–267, 265f
Public space politics of, 1–2, 25–27, 323–324
for transport, 311–312
in urban planning, 61–63, 332–333
zoning for, 319–320
Pudong (China), 54, 78–81, 78f, 80f, 386n10
Quantitative models, 94–95
Quigley, John M., 356Quirós, Tatiana, 156
RDP. See Reconstruction and Development Program
Real estate economics of, 27–28, 112f, 304, 331–332
low-income housing and, 302–303
policy and, 229–230
urban planning and, 319
Reconstruction and Development Program (RDP), 268–271, 270f, 272f, 273–275, 275f
Reform, for policy, 304–306
Regulations. See Building permits; Codes; Government
Regulatory leverage, 320–321
RELU-TRAN (transportation model), 95
Rentals economics of, 317, 391n4
for government, 277–278, 278f
luxury rentals, 279–283, 280f–281f
rent control, 264–267, 265f
section 8 for, 286
subletting of, 266–267, 282–283
supply mechanisms for, 314
taxes for, 283–284
Research, 21, 263
Residential areas CBDs as, 318, 327–328, 328f
in China, 73–77, 74t, 75f–76f
Reverse density gradients, 273, 344
Rio de Janeiro (Brazil), 102f, 103–104, 103t
Road networks commuting routes and, 384n13
in Indonesia, 292
policy for, 180–185, 182f–183f, 185t
topography and, 61
urban economics of, 175–180, 178t, 179f, 180t
urban spatial structures and, 63–64, 63f, 65f, 66–70
Vanderbilt Corridor (New York), 333
Rockefeller Center (New York), 326
Rural areas, 126–129, 127f, 129f, 134–135
Russia design in, 4
government in, 26–27
Japan compared to, 373
Kombinats in, 383n4
land use in, 11, 13–15
policy in, 279
Sanctuary cities, 376
San Francisco, 227–228, 227f, 227f–228f
Scale economy, 10
Science, 2–3, 9, 13–15, 20–28, 40
Seagram building (New York), 322–326, 331
Section 8, 286Seoul (Korea), 38, 43, 45f, 46t, 384n18
Shanghai (China). See China; Pudong
Shelter consumption, 244–247, 245f
Shenzhen (China), 22, 295–300, 297f, 392n25
Sierra Club, 337–338
Silicon Valley, 351–352
Singapore, 184, 197–198, 198f, 374, 376, 386n15, 387n6
“Size, Sprawl, Speed and the Efficiency of Cities” (Prud’homme/Lee), 33–34
Skylines, 78, 78f, 317–319, 318
Smart growth, 334
Smith, Adam, 305
Social housing, 302
South Africa, 386n16. See also Gauteng
affordability in, 366–367, 388n26
China compared to, 299
government in, 222–223, 268–269, 274
New York compared to, 275–276
politics of, 101
poverty in, 47–48
RDP in, 268–271, 270f, 272f, 273–275, 275f
spatial distribution in, 271, 272f, 273
supply side subsidies in, 268–269
transit in, 274–275
transport modes in, 167–168, 168f
Soviet Union (USSR). See Russia
Spatial data, 11, 46t
theory of, 30, 39–45, 39f, 44f–45f
for urban planning, 212–216, 214f–215f, 216t
Spatial distribution of agricultural land, 114–116, 115t, 118, 119f, 120–122, 121f–122f
density and, 110–111, 111f
descriptive model for, 101–105, 102f, 103t, 104f
economics of, 93–97, 98f–99f, 99, 109–110, 120–124, 134f
labor markets and, 126
land price in, 100–101, 111–113, 112f
in Los Angeles, 105–108, 106f–107f
in master plans, 131–140, 134f
in South Africa, 271, 272f, 273standard urban model for, 101, 113–114, 115–118, 117f, 130–131, 140–141
theory of, 126–130, 127f, 129f
of urban land, 118–120
for urban planning, 108–109, 109f
Sprawl. See Standard urban model
Sprawl (Bruegmann), 116
Staff agencies, 369–370
Staley, Samuel, 176
Standard of living, 290–291
Standard urban model, 388n18
minimum standards in, 288–289
for spatial distribution, 101, 113–114, 115–118, 117f, 129–130, 140–141
Sprawl (Bruegmann), 116
theory of, 95–97, 98f–99f, 99, 335–336
“Urban Sprawl: Lessons from Urban Economics” (Brueckner), 336
Stanford University, 351
Stockholm, 385n22
St. Petersburg (Russia), 373, 384n6
Strategic Community Investment Report Data, 353
Streetscapes, 331–332
Street space. See Road networks
Subdivisions, 230–231, 230f
Subletting, 266–267, 282–283
Subsidies in affordability, 303–304
demand side subsidies, 260–263, 262f, 267–268, 286, 304
economics of, 100–101
for infrastructure, 290–292, 291f
poverty and, 273
supply side subsidies, 264–269, 265f, 285–286
Subways. See Transit; Transport
Supply mechanisms, 277–278, 278f, 302–304, 314, 325, 391n10
Supply side subsidies, 264–269, 265f, 303–304
Surabaya. See Indonesia; Kampungs
Sustainability in Amsterdam, 338–339
as objective functions, 344–346, 345f–346f
sustainable cities for, 113–114, 131–133, 134f
theory of, 326–329, 328f, 345–346, 345f–346f
Sustainable cities, 113–114, 131–133, 134f
Taleb, Nassim Nicholas, 308–309
Taxes congestion pricing, 23–24, 30
policy for, 279–280, 280f
property taxes, 355, 393n16
for rentals, 283–284
tax credits, 267
tax incentives, 284–285, 377–378
in urban economics, 349Technology affordability and, 345–346, 346f
in Buenos Aires (Argentina), 389n12
in China, 386n11
culture and, 384n6
for data, 3, 101–102, 102f, 145, 156–158, 158f
economics and, 367–368
environment and, 204–208, 206f–207f
for government, 369
Internet as, 383n2
for land development, 380–381
for land use, 10–11
microcomputers, 21
mobility and, 149–152, 151f, 214–216, 215f, 216t
Nissan Leaf for, 208–210, 209f
for policy, 97–198, 208–211, 209f–210f, 214–218, 215f, 216t, 217f
sustainable cities as, 113–114, 131–133, 134f
for transport, 51–52, 161–162, 162f, 176
in urban economics, 352
in urban planning, 239–240, 380–381
in US, 199–200
Telecommuting, 42
Thailand, 256
Theory of adequate housing, 269–270
of affordability, 49, 219, 301
of affordable housing, 276–277
of alternative urban shapes, 307–310, 329–330, 333, 346–347
of city-states, 366
of congestion, 201
of containment policy, 337–339, 341–344
of data, 146–147
of demographic projection, 212–213
of density gradients, 97–100, 98f–99f, 103t, 107–111, 111f
density in, 108–109, 109f
of design, 8–9
in economics, 240–241, 253–254
of engineering, 322–323
of GHG emissions, 40, 201–202, 334–335, 338
Gibrat’s law, 21–22
of growth, 27–28
for Hanoi (Vietnam), 138–139
of height regulations, 311–312, 311f
of household income, 221
of housing consumption, 302–303
of incentives, 328–329
of incentive zoning, 329–330
of inclusionary zoning, 276–278, 278f, 282–287
of income-consumption relation, 249of informal settlements, 127–130, 129f, 288
KIP, 267–268
of labor markets, 45, 46t, 47–48, 219–220, 314–315
of land development, 383n4
of land markets, 96
of land price, 304–305
of markets, 303–304
of master plans, 4, 8, 11, 394n2
of minimum standards, 222–224
of mobility, 48–49
of negative externalities, 18, 55, 73, 86, 159–161, 165, 171, 199, 284
of PIR, 224–228, 225f, 227f–228f, 244
of policy, 332–333
of poverty, 16
proportionate effect, 21–22
of regulatory leverage, 320–321
of sanctuary cities, 376
science and, 2–3
of smart growth, 334
of spatial data, 30, 39–45, 39f, 44f–45f
of spatial distribution, 126–130, 127f, 129f
of standard urban model, 95–97, 98f–99f, 99, 335–336
of sustainability, 326–329, 328f, 345–346, 345f–346f
of telecommuting, 42
for transport modes, 212–217, 216t
trickle-down theory, 240–241, 391n10
of urban economics, 2–3, 13, 17
of urban planning, 27–33, 32f
of urban spatial structures, 52–53
of wasteful use, 344
Tianjin (China), 114–116, 115t, 339
TOD. See Transit-oriented development
Tolls, 387n6
as congestion pricing, 23–24, 49, 201, 217
land price and, 97, 100
mobility and, 357f
in New York, 170–172
in Singapore, 387n6
in urban planning, 61–62, 349–350
Topography density, 84f
of environment, 202
in land supply, 344
in PIR, 224–225, 225f
in Rio de Janeiro, 103–104
road networks and, 61
in urban planning, 43–44, 44f
in zoning, 308, 312Tourism, 313–314
Tour Montparnasse (Paris), 310
Toyama (Japan), 373, 376–379, 378f
Toyota, 216–217, 217f
Traditional externalities, 311–312, 317–319
Trains. See Transit; Transport
Transit, 390n21
in Beijing (China), 173–175, 174f
in CBDs, 311
data for, 361–362
economics of, 158–160, 362
GTFS for, 156, 389n10
investments in, 362–363
in London, 176–177
mobility and, 165–168, 166f–168f, 191–196, 192f, 194f, 196f
in New York, 186–188, 188f
in Paris, 176–177
in South Africa, 274–275
transit bonuses, 333
transport modes and, 156, 158, 160–161, 209f, 211–212
travel time and, 358–359
Transit-oriented development (TOD), 70–71
Transport. See also Bus rapid transit
in Beijing (China), 162–165, 163f, 166–168, 167t
CO2-e and, 208–211, 209f–210f
composite model, 39f, 40
data on, 31–33, 32f, 355
demographic projection and, 169–170, 170t
dispersed model for, 39–40, 39f
economics of, 19–20
in France, 31–33, 32f
growth and, 49
in Hanoi (Vietnam), 162–165, 163f
indicators for, 361
labor markets and, 34, 35f–36f, 36–41, 38f–39f
master plan for, 28–30
in Mexico City, 162–165, 163f
mobility and, 143–149, 160–165, 162f–163f, 175–185, 178t, 179f, 180t, 182f–183f, 185t, 211–214,
214f
monocentric model for, 39, 39f
in Paris, 44, 44f, 164–165
public space for, 311–312
RELU-TRAN for, 95
in Seoul (Korea), 38
technology for, 51–52, 161–162, 162f, 176
telecommuting and, 42
travel time and, 184–185, 185t, 384n17urban village model for, 39f, 40–41
Transport modes BRT as, 191–196, 192f, 194f, 196f
data for, 157f, 161–162, 162f, 184t–185t, 188–191, 188f–189f
government and, 148, 152, 274–275
in London, 147–148
mobility and, 92, 143, 160–165, 162f–163f
in New York, 165–167, 166f, 167t
in Paris, 165–167, 166f, 167t
policy for, 211–213
in South Africa, 167–168, 168f
theory for, 212–217, 216t
transit and, 156, 158, 160–161, 209f, 211–212
urban economics of, 176–181, 178t, 179f, 180t
Travel time data for, 165–171, 166f, 167t, 168f–169f, 170t
motorcycles and, 167–168
in policy, 363
transit and, 358–359
transport and, 184–185, 185t, 384n17
urban planning for, 213–214, 214f
Travel time index (TTI), 172–175, 174f
Trickle-down theory, 240–241, 391n10
TTI. See Travel time index
Tunneling. See Road networks
UK. See United Kingdom
UN. See United Nations
United Kingdom (UK), 18, 305–306, 375. See also London
United Nations (UN) policy by, 234
UN Habitat, 337–338
United Nations Development Programme, 8–9, 68–70, 69f
in urban planning, 345–346, 346f
for Yemen, 364
United States (US), 231. See also specific cities Canada compared to, 375
China compared to, 189–190
culture of, 335
density in, 59
economics in, 338–339, 356
environment in, 208–211, 209f–210f
EPA in, 203–206
GDP in, 219
government in, 18, 375
HUD in, 18
labor markets in, 42–43
Land development in, 236–237
land use in, 7, 59
politics in, 350–351
technology in, 199–200urban economics in, 238–239
voucher system in, 261
Urban containment. See Containment policy
Urban economics. See also Price/income ratio
agricultural land in, 122–124, 125f
banking in, 318
data for, 171–172, 229–230
density in, 356
design and, 61, 150–152, 151f
economic rate of return for, 363—364
FAR in, 321–322, 322f
floor area consumption in, 331–332, 341–342
in France, 25
GHG emissions and, 338–339
for government, 283–284, 312–313, 313f
in India, 17, 237–239, 238f
labor markets in, 359–360, 360f
of land development, 273
land supply in, 305–306
land use for, 336
markets of, 369–370
Marxism in, 56
in Mumbai (India), 308–309
for municipal governments, 314–315, 354–355
in Paris, 314–315
policy for, 111–113, 112f
politics of, 303–304, 320–321
in Port-au-Prince, 9–11
poverty in, 82, 141, 362
of road networks, 175–180, 178t, 179f, 180t
in Singapore, 197–198, 198f
supply mechanisms for, 391n10
taxes in, 349
technology in, 352
theory of, 2–3, 13, 17
of Toyama (Japan), 373, 376–379, 378f
of transport modes, 176–181, 178t, 179f, 180t
urban planning and, 354–355
“Urban Sprawl: Lessons from Urban Economics” (Brueckner), 336
in US, 238–239
of villages, 294
villages in, 126–130, 127f, 129f
Urban Economics and Urban Policy (Cheshire/Nathan/Overman), 306
Urban expansion, 334–335, 339–340
Urban growth, 372–376, 374f
Urban growth boundaries, 344
Urbanization. See specific topics Urban land agricultural land compared to, 115–118, 117f, 119f, 122fland development of, 335–337
spatial distribution of, 118–120
urban land supply, 252–254, 253f
Urban model. See Standard urban model
Urban planning Atlas of Urban Expansion (Angel), 116, 339–340, 340f
auditing for, 368–369
in Beijing (China), 73–77, 74t, 75f–76f, 352
in Brazil, 77–78, 77f
for BRT, 155, 160–162, 162f
CBDs in, 36, 36f, 37–42, 38f–39f
in China, 73–77, 74t, 75f–76f, 309
City Planning Departments for, 369–372, 371f
containment-driven planning, 342
culture of, 18
data for, 84f, 90, 305, 353, 355–358, 357f
demographic projection for, 109–110, 160–161, 175–176
density in, 93–94, 100–101, 110–111, 111f, 372–376, 374f
density profiles in, 342–343
design compared to, 385n1
economics and, 1–4, 8–9, 16–18, 144–146
engineering compared to, 307–308, 354
FAR in, 296–297, 297f
GHG emissions in, 202–204, 204f
goods in, 83–87, 84f
government for, 16–17, 319–321
growth for, 24–27
immigration in, 374–375, 374f
in India, 77–78, 77f, 236
indicators for, 361–365
in Indonesia, 128–129, 129f
informal housing in, 256–260, 258f
for informal settlements, 236–239, 238f
labor markets and, 11–15, 57–59, 58f, 84f, 85, 106–107, 107f, 143, 220–221
land use and, 48
in Latin America, 339–340, 340f
maps for, 353–354
market-driven planning, 342
Marxism in, 73–74
master plans for, 353–354
mobility in, 48–49, 216–218, 217f, 337
municipal governments in, 349–351, 369–372, 371f
NASA for, 3
in New York, 54–55, 144, 326–329, 328f, 393n8
objective functions in, 309
operational applications for, 140–141
policy for, 358–361, 360f
politics of, 306for poverty, 53, 223–224, 249–250
preservation in, 317–319
of private space, 321–322, 322f
private space in, 63–64 63f
psychology in, 367–368
public space in, 61–63, 332–333
real estate and, 319
Silicon Valley in, 351–352
spatial data for, 212–216, 214f–215f, 216t
spatial distribution for, 108–109, 109f
for streetscapes, 331–332
technology in, 239–240, 380–381
theory of, 27–33, 32f
tolls in, 61–62, 349–350
topography in, 43–44, 44f
for travel time, 213–214, 214f
UN in, 345–346, 346f
United Nations Development Programme for, 8–9
urban economics and, 354–355
Urban Economics and Urban Policy (Cheshire/Nathan/Overman), 306
villages in, 126
World Urbanization Prospects (2014) for, 378–380, 379f
Urban road standards, 84f, 87
Urban-rural boundaries, 118, 119f
Urban spatial structures design for, 71–78, 72f, 74t, 75f–77f
economics of, 81–90, 84f
FAR in, 54–56
in markets, 53, 56–57, 60–63, 91–92
in Mumbai, 57–59, 58f
in Pudong, 78–81, 78f, 80f
road networks and, 63–64, 63f, 65f, 66–70
theory of, 52–53
“Urban Sprawl: Lessons from Urban Economics” (Brueckner), 336
Urban village model, 39f, 40–41, 296–300, 297f
US. See United States
USSR. See Russia
Utopias. See Alternative urban shapes
Vanderbilt Corridor (New York), 333
Vehicle density, 182–183, 182f–183f
Vietnam. See Hanoi
Villages, 293–294
as rural areas, 126–130, 127f, 129f
urban village model, 39f, 40–41, 296–300, 297f
Voucher systems, 260–263, 261f
Wall Street, 317–318Wang, Ning, 15
Washington, D.C., 66–67
Wasteful use, 344
Welfare, 284–285
Wheaton, William, 95
Woolworth building (New York), 326, 331
Workers. See Labor markets
World Bank, 11–12, 21, 263, 337, 364–367
World Trade Organization (WTO), 132
World Urbanization Prospects (2014), 378–380, 379f
Wright, Jim, 8–11, 18
WTO. See World Trade Organization
Yemen, 68–70, 69f, 364
Zoning. See also Inclusionary zoning
in affordability, 281–282, 285–287
for alternative urban shapes, 326–332, 328f, 330f
codes for, 324, 329
for commercial districts, 330, 330f
complex zoning, 331–332
in design, 321–322, 322f
environment and, 153–154
government in, 91–92, 235–236, 264–267, 265f, 310–312, 311f, 324–325
incentive zoning, 322–325, 329–330
inclusive zoning, 264–267, 265f
minimum standards in, 231–235, 232f–233f
negative externalities in, 318–321, 324–327, 331–332, 349
in New York, 318–319, 326–329, 328f, 349–350, 389n2
policy for, 277–278, 278f, 283–284
for poverty, 277
for public space, 319–320
for rural areas, 133–135
supply mechanisms for, 277–278, 278f
topography in, 308, 312
