ORGANIC FARMING FOR 

SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
 Current Advances in Biodiversity, Conservation, 
and Environmental Sciences 
ORGANIC FARMING FOR 

SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
 
Edited by 
Jeyabalan Sangeetha, PhD
 
Kasem Soytong, PhD
 
Devarajan Thangadurai, PhD
 
Abdel Rahman Mohammad Al-Tawaha, PhD
  
First edition published 2023 
Apple Academic Press Inc. 
1265 Goldenrod Circle, NE, 
Palm Bay, FL 32905 USA 
760 Laurentian Drive, Unit 19, 
Burlington, ON L7N 0A4, CANADA 
CRC Press 
6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, 
Suite 300, Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742 USA 
4 Park Square, Milton Park, 
Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN UK 
© 2023 by Apple Academic Press, Inc. 
Apple Academic Press exclusively co-publishes with CRC Press, an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, LLC 
Reasonable efforts have been made to publish reliable data and information, but the authors, editors, and publisher cannot assume 
responsibility for the validity of all materials or the consequences of their use. The authors, editors, and publishers have attempted 
to trace the copyright holders of all material reproduced in this publication and apologize to copyright holders if permission to 
publish in this form has not been obtained. If any copyright material has not been acknowledged, please write and let us know so 
we may rectify in any future reprint. 
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, transmitted, or utilized in any 
form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying, microfilming, and 
recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without written permission from the publishers. 
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, access www.copyright.com or contact the Copyright 
Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. For works that are not available on CCC 
please contact mpkbookspermissions@tandf.co.uk 
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks and are used only for identification 
and explanation without intent to infringe. 
Library and Archives Canada Cataloguing in Publication 
Title: Organic farming for sustainable development / edited by Jeyabalan Sangeetha, PhD, Kasem Soytong, PhD, 
Devarajan Thangadurai, PhD, Abdel Rahman Mohammad Al-Tawaha, PhD. 
Names: Sangeetha, Jeyabalan, editor. | Soytong, Kasem, editor. | Thangadurai, D. (Devarajan), 1976- editor. | Al-Tawaha, 
Abdel Rahman Mohammad, editor. 
Series: Current advances in biodiversity, conservation, and environmental sciences (Series) 
Description: First edition. | Series statement: Current advances in biodiversity, conservation, and environmental sciences | 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
Identifiers: Canadiana (print) 20220220697 | Canadiana (print) 20220220727 | Canadiana (ebook) 20220220727 | 
ISBN 9781774910207 (hardcover) | ISBN 9781774910214 (softcover) | ISBN 9781003284055 (ebook) 
Subjects: LCSH: Organic farming. | LCSH: Sustainable agriculture. 
Classification: LCC S605.5 .O73 2022 | DDC 631.5/84—dc23 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
CIP data on file with US Library of Congress 
ISBN: 978-1-77491-020-7 (hbk) 
ISBN: 978-1-77491-021-4 (pbk) 
ISBN: 978-1-00328-405-5 (ebk) ABOUT THE CURRENT ADVANCES IN 
BIODIVERSITY, CONSERVATION AND 
ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCES BOOK 
SERIES 
Series Editors 
Jeyabalan Sangeetha, PhD 
Assistant Professor, Central University of Kerala, Kasaragod, Kerala, 
India 
Devarajan Thangadurai, PhD 
Associate Professor, Karnatak University, Dharwad, Karnataka, India 
•	 Biodiversity and Conservation: Characterization and Utilization 
of Plants, Microbes, and Natural Resources for Sustainable 
Development and Ecosystem Management 
Editors: Jeyabalan Sangeetha, PhD, Devarajan Thangadurai, PhD, 
Hong Ching Goh, PhD, and Saher Islam, PhD
 
•	 Beneficial Microbes for Sustainable Agriculture and Environmental 
Management 
Editors: Jeyabalan Sangeetha, PhD, Devarajan Thangadurai, PhD, 
and Saher Islam, PhD
 
•	 Algal Genetic Resources: Cosmeceuticals, Nutraceuticals, and 
Pharmaceuticals 
Editors: Jeyabalan Sangeetha, PhD, and Devarajan Thangadurai, PhD 
•	 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
Editors: Jeyabalan Sangeetha, PhD, Kasem Soytong, PhD, 
Devarajan Thangadurai, PhD, and Abdel Rahman Mohammad Al-Tawaha, PhD
 ABOUT THE EDITORS
 
Jeyabalan Sangeetha, PhD 
Assistant Professor, Central University of Kerala, Kasaragod, Kerala, 
South India 
Jeyabalan Sangeetha, PhD, is an Assistant Professor at Central University 
of Kerala, Kasaragod, South India. She has edited/co-edited several books 
in her research areas, including environmental toxicology, environmental 
microbiology, environmental biotechnology, and environmental nanotech￾nology. She earned her BSc in Microbiology and PhD in Environmental 
Science from Bharathidasan University, Tiruchirappalli, Tamil Nadu, India. 
She holds an MSc in Environmental Science from Bharathiar University, 
Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, India. She is the recipient of a Tamil Nadu Govern￾ment Scholarship and a Rajiv Gandhi National Fellowship of the University 
Grants Commission, Government of India, for her doctoral studies. She 
served as the Dr. D.S. Kothari Postdoctoral Fellow and UGC Postdoctoral 
Fellow at Karnatak University, Dharwad, South India, during 2012–2016. 
Kasem Soytong, PhD 
Associate Professor, King Mongkut’s Institute of Technology Ladkrabang, 
Bangkok, Thailand 
Kasem Soytong, PhD, is currently serving as an Associate Professor in the 
Department of Plant Production Technology in the Faculty of Agricultural 
Technology, King Mongkut’s Institute of Technology Ladkrabang, Bangkok, 
Thailand. He is the President of the Association of Agricultural Technology 
in Southeast Asia; Editor-in-Chief of the International Journal of Agricul￾tural Technology; Director of Research and Development for BioAgritech 
Co. Ltd, Vietnam; Executive Research Director at CAS Bio-Agricultural 
Bio-engineering, China; Director of Research for Shew Khant Kyaw Co. Ltd. 
(Organic Biofertilizer), Myanmar; Organic Consultant, CGC Lao Coffee, 
Laos; Organic Consultant, Natural, and Premium Food Co. Ltd, Thailand; and 
Director, AATSEA Organic Agriculture Model Farm, Thailand. He is an author/ 
co-author of more than 150 scientific publications, including research articles, 
reviews, book chapters, and books. viii About the Editors 
He obtained his PhD in Plant Pathology (Mycology) from the University 
of the Philippines Los Banos (UPLB), Philippines, under the SEMEO￾SEARCA Scholarship. His research interests include nanotechnology for 
agriculture, bioactive metabolites for disease control and immunity, organic 
agriculture research, and plant pathology. He holds patent rights and product 
registrations in Thailand, China, Laos, Vietnam, and IFOAM (International 
Federation of Organic Agriculture Movements). He also has international 
research collaborations with scientists from Sweden, Russia, Finland, 
the USA, New Zealand, Australia, Japan, China, Philippines, Cambodia, 
Myanmar, Vietnam, Lao PDR, Egypt, and Iran. 
Also he is the recipient of several awards and honors, including 1981 Gold 
Medal of First Class Honor in BSc conferred by His Majesty the King of 
Thailand; 1991 Distinguished Alumnus Award in Research Work conferred 
by Her Majesty the Princess Sirindhorn of Thailand (RIT-Chantaburi, 
Thailand); 1994 Distinguished Alumnus Award in Research Work (UPLB, 
Philippines); 1995 National Research’s Inventor Award (National Research 
Council of Thailand); 1997 Excellency Research Award in Agriculture and 
Biology (National Research Council of Thailand); 1998 IFS/Silver Jubilee 
Research Award (IFS, Sweden); 2007 Outstanding Research Award from 
King Rama IV Foundation by Her Royal Highest Princess Sirindhorn; 2015 
Best Research Paper Award at the International Conference in Agriculture 
and Environment for Sustainable Development, National Research Center, 
Cairo, Egypt; 2017 Best Research Paper Award at the International Confer￾ence on Advanced Technologies and Their Application in Agriculture, Cairo, 
Egypt; 2017 Distinguished Alumnus Award, University of the Philippines 
Los Banos (UPLB, the Philippines), 2018 Commemorative Certificate for 
Research Contribution Award, Faculty of Agricultural Technology, KMITL, 
Bangkok, Thailand; 2018 India-Guest of Honor Award at the International 
Conference on Bioproducts Development in Agricultural Inputs for Organic 
Crop Production, Bharathiyar Arts and Science College for Women, Attur, 
India; 2019-Recognition Award from China at the International Modern 
Organic Agriculture Forum, Songyang, Zhejiang, China; 2019 The Second 
Prize 2019 for the New Entrepreneurial and Innovative Competition in Wuxi, 
Jiangsu, China by CAS Asian Agriculture. About the Editors ix 
Devarajan Thangadurai, PhD 
Associate Professor, Karnatak University, Dharwad, Karnataka, South India 
Devarajan Thangadurai, PhD, is an Associate Professor at Karnatak Univer￾sity in South India and Editor-in-Chief of the international journals Biotech￾nology, Bioinformatics, and Bioengineering and Acta Biologica Indica. He 
has authored/edited over 25 books with national and international publishers. 
He has visited 24 countries in Asia, Europe, Africa, and the Middle East 
for academic visits, scientific meetings, and international collaborations. He 
received his PhD in Botany from Sri Krishnadevaraya University in South 
India as a CSIR Senior Research Fellow with funding from the Ministry of 
Science and Technology, Government of India. He served as a Postdoctoral 
Fellow at the University of Madeira, Portugal; University of Delhi, India; 
and ICAR National Research Centre for Banana, India. He is the recipient of 
a Best Young Scientist Award with a Gold Medal from Acharya Nagarjuna 
University, India, and the VGST-SMYSR Young Scientist Award of the 
Government of Karnataka, Republic of India. 
Abdel Rahman Mohammad Al-Tawaha, PhD 
Professor, Al-Hussein Bin Talal University, Jordan 
Abdel Rahman Mohammad Al-Tawaha, PhD, is a Professor of Plant Science 
and former Head of the Department of Biological Sciences as well as 
former Director of the Planning, Information and Quality Unit at Al Hussein 
Bin Talal University, Jordan. He is author/coauthor of more than 200 
publications in plant science in leading peer-reviewed journals and chapters 
in edited volumes and books on a broad range of development issues. He is 
the Founder and Editor-in-Chief of the journal Advances in Environmental 
Biology. He is also participated in many international conferences as chair or 
member of the scientific committees. Dr. Al-Tawaha obtained his PhD from 
McGill University, Montreal, Canada. Contributors........................................................................................................... xv
 
Abbreviations ........................................................................................................ xix
 
Symbols .................................................................................................................xxv
 
Preface ............................................................................................................... xxvii
 
PART I: Agrofriendly Microbes and Their Metabolites for 
Sustainable Agriculture .................................................................................1 
1.	 Trichoderma: An Eco-Friendly Biopesticide for 
Sustainable Agriculture .................................................................................3 
Aparna B. Gunjal 
2.	 Arbuscular Mycorrhizas: Applications in Organic 
Agriculture and Beyond ..............................................................................23 
Charles Oluwaseun Adetunji, Osikemekha Anthony Anani, 
Devarajan Thangadurai, and Saher Islam
 
3.	 Azospirillum Bioinoculant Technology: Past to Current 
Knowledge and Future Prospects............................................................... 51 
Palani Saranraj, Abdel Rahman M. Al-Tawaha, 
Panneerselvam Sivasakthivelan, Abdel Razzaq M. Al-Tawaha, Kangasalam Amala, 
Devarajan Thangadurai, and Jeyabalan Sangeetha 
4.	 Application of Phosphate Solubilizing Microorganisms for 
Effective Production of Next-Generation Biofertilizer: 
A Panacea for Sustainable Organic Agriculture .......................................77 
Charles Oluwaseun Adetunji, Osikemekha Anthony Anani,
 
Devarajan Thangadurai, and Saher Islam
 
5.	 Recent Trends in the Utilization of Endophytic Microorganisms 
and Other Biopesticidal Technology for the Management of 
Agricultural Pests, Insects, and Diseases.................................................105 
Charles Oluwaseun Adetunji, Osikemekha Anthony Anani, Saher Islam, and 
Devarajan Thangadurai
 
6.	 Secondary Metabolites and Their Biological Activities 
From Chaetomium...................................................................................... 133 
Kasem Soytong and Somdej Kanokmedhakul 
CONTENTS
 PART II: Organic Amendments and Sustainable Practices for 
Plant and Soil Management......................................................................163 
7.	 Garlic Products for Sustainable Organic Crop Protection....................165
 
Anjorin Toba Samuel and Adeniran Lateef Ariyo 
8.	 Efficacy of Organic Substrates for Management of Soil-Borne
Plant Pathogens..........................................................................................183
 
Malavika Ram Amanthra Keloth, Meenakshi Rana, and Ajay Tomer 
9.	 Organic Farming Improves Soil Health Sustainability and 
Crop Productivity ......................................................................................207 
Abdel Rahman M. Al-Tawaha, Elif Günal, İsmail Çelik, Hikmet Günal, 
Abdulkadir Sürücü, Abdel Razzaq M. Al-Tawaha, Alla Aleksanyan, 
Devarajan Thangadurai, and Jeyabalan Sangeetha 
10.	 Use of Biochar in Agriculture: An Inspiring Way in 
Existing Scenario........................................................................................239 
Imran, Amanullah, Abdel Rahman M. Al-Tawaha, Abdel Razzaq M. Al-Tawaha, 
Samia Khanum, Devarajan Thangadurai, Jeyabalan Sangeetha, Hiba Alatrash, 
Palani Saranraj, Nidal Odat, Mazen A. Ateyya, Munir Turk, Arun Karnwal, 
Sameena Lone, and Khursheed Hussain 
11.	 The Role of Organic Mulching and Tillage in Organic Farming..........259
 
Shah Khalid, Amanullah, Abdel Rahman M. Al-Tawaha, Nadia, Devarajan Thangadurai, 
Jeyabalan Sangeetha, Samia Khanum, Munir Turk, Hiba Alatrash, Sameena Lone, 
Khursheed Hussain, Palani Saranraj, Nidal Odat, and Arun Karnwal 
12.	 Weed Management in Organic Cropping Systems.................................277
 
Abdel Rahman M. Al-Tawaha, Zahra Farrokhi, Nandhini Yoga, Poonam Roshan, 
Imran, Amanullah, Abdel Razzaq M. Al-Tawaha, Alla Aleksanyan, Samia Khanum, 
Devarajan Thangadurai, Jeyabalan Sangeetha, Abdur Rauf, Shah Khalid, 
Palani Saranraj, Abdul Basit, Ayşe Yeşilayer, Hiba Alatrash, Mazen A. Ateyya, 
Munir Turk, Arun Karnwal, Sameena Lone, and Khursheed Hussain 
PART III: Organic Agriculture for Food Safety .............................................301
 
13.	 Organic Production Technology of Rice ..................................................303
 
Shah Khalid, Amanullah, Nadia, Imranuddin, Mujeeb Ur Rahman, 
Abdel Rahman M. Al-Tawaha, Devarajan Thangadurai, Jeyabalan Sangeetha,
 
Samia Khanum, Munir Turk, Hiba Alatrash, Sameena Lone, Khursheed Hussain,
 
Palani Saranraj, and Arun Karnwal
 
14.	 Prospects of Organic Agriculture in Food Quality and Safety ..............321
 
Akbar Hossain, Debjyoti Majumder, Shilpi Das, Apurbo Kumar Chaki, 
Mst. Tanjina Islam, Rajan Bhatt, and Tofazzal Islam
 
xii	 Contents 15.	 Organic Foods in Sub-Saharan Africa: Health Impact, 
Farmers’ Experiences, and International Trade .....................................363 
Osebhahiemen Odion Ikhimiukor, Oluwadamilola Mathew Makinde, 
Chibuzor-Onyema Ihuoma Ebere, Toba Samuel Anjorin, and 
Fapohunda Stephen Oyedele 
Index....................................................................................................................383
 
Contents	 xiii CONTRIBUTORS
 
Charles Oluwaseun Adetunji 
Microbiology, Biotechnology, and Nanotechnology Laboratory, 
Department of Microbiology Edo State University Uzairue, Auchi, Nigeria 
Hiba Alatrash 
General Commission for Scientific Agricultural Research, Syria 
Alla Aleksanyan 
Institute of Botany aft. A.L. Takhtajyan NAS RA/Department of Geobotany and Plant Eco-Physiology, 
Yerevan, Armenia 
Abdel Rahman M. Al-Tawaha 
Department of Biological Sciences, Al-Hussein Bin Talal University, P.O. Box 20, Maan, Jordan 
Abdel Razzaq M. Al-Tawaha 
Department of Crop Science, Faculty of Agriculture, University Putra Malaysia, Serdang–43400, 
Selangor, Malaysia 
Kangasalam Amala 
Department of Microbiology, Sacred Heart College (Autonomous), Tirupattur–635601, 
Tamil Nadu, India 
Amanullah 
Department of Agronomy, The University of Agriculture, Peshawar, Pakistan 
Osikemekha Anthony Anani 
Laboratory of Ecotoxicology and Forensic Biology, Department of Biological Science, 
Faculty of Science, Edo State University Uzairue, Auchi, Nigeria 
Toba Samuel Anjorin 
Department of Crop Protection, Faculty of Agriculture, University of Abuja, Nigeria 
Adeniran Lateef Ariyo 
Department of Veterinary Physiology and Biochemistry, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, 
University of Abuja, Nigeria 
Mazen A. Ateyya 
Faculty of Agricultural Technology, Al Balqa Applied University, Al-Salt–19117, Jordan 
Abdul Basit 
Department of Plant Pathology, Agriculture College, Guizhou University, Guiyan–550025, P.R. China 
Rajan Bhatt 
Regional Research Station-Kapurthala, Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana, Punjab–144601, India 
İsmail Çelik
Çukurova University, Faculty of Agriculture, Department of Soil Science and Plant Nutrition, Adana, Turkey xvi Contributors 
Apurbo Kumar Chaki 
School of Agriculture and Food Sciences, University of Queensland, QLD–4072, Australia; 
On-Farm Research Division, Bangladesh Agricultural Research Institute (BARI), Gazipur, 
Dhaka, Bangladesh 
Shilpi Das 
Bangladesh Institute of Nuclear Agriculture, Mymensingh–2202, Bangladesh; 
School of Agriculture and Food Sciences, University of Queensland, QLD–4072, Australia
 
Chibuzor-Onyema Ihuoma Ebere 
Department of Microbiology, School of Science and Technology, Babcock University, 
Ilishan-Remo, Nigeria 
Zahra Farrokhi 
College of Agriculture and Natural Resources, University of Tehran, Iran 
Elif Günal 
Gaziosmanpaşa University, Faculty of Agriculture, Department of Soil Science and Plant Nutrition, 
Tokat, Turkey 
Hikmet Günal 
Gaziosmanpaşa University, Faculty of Agriculture, Department of Soil Science and Plant Nutrition, 
Tokat, Turkey 
Aparna B. Gunjal 
Department of Microbiology, Dr. D. Y. Patil Arts, Commerce, and Science College, Pimpri, 
Pune–411018, Maharashtra, India 
Akbar Hossain 
Bangladesh Wheat and Maize Research Institute, Dinajpur – 5200, Bangladesh 
Khursheed Hussain 
Division of Vegetable Science, SKUAST-Kashmir, Jammu and Kashmir, India 
Osebhahiemen Odion Ikhimiukor 
Environmental Microbiology and Biotechnology Laboratory, Department of Microbiology, 
University of Ibadan, Nigeria 
Imran 
Department of Agronomy, The University of Agriculture, Peshawar, Pakistan 
Imranuddin 
Department of Horticulture, The University of Agriculture, Peshawar, Pakistan 
Mst. Tanjina Islam 
Department of Agronomy, Hajee Mohammad Danesh Science and Technology University, 
Dinajpur–5200, Bangladesh 
Saher Islam 
Institute of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Faculty of Biosciences, 
University of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, Lahore, Pakistan 
Tofazzal Islam 
Institute of Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering (IBGE), Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman 
Agricultural University, Gazipur – 1706, Bangladesh 
Somdej Kanokmedhakul 
Department of Organic Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Khon Khan University, Khon Khan, Thailand Contributors xvii 
Arun Karnwal 
Department of Microbiology, School of Bioengineering and Biosciences, Lovely Professional University, 
Phagwara, Punjab, India 
Malavika Ram Amanthra Keloth 
Department of Plant Pathology, School of Agriculture, Lovely Professional University, 
Phagwara–144411, Punjab, India 
Shah Khalid 
Department of Agronomy, The University of Agriculture, Peshawar, Pakistan 
Samia Khanum 
Department of Botany, University of the Punjab, Lahore, Pakistan 
Sameena Lone 
Division of Vegetable Science, SKUAST-Kashmir, Jammu and Kashmir, India 
Debjyoti Majumder 
Uttar Banga Krishi Viswavidyalaya, Cooch Behar, West Bengal, India 
Oluwadamilola Mathew Makinde 
Department of Microbiology, School of Science and Technology, Babcock University, 
Ilishan-Remo, Nigeria 
Nadia 
Department of Agronomy, The University of Agriculture, Peshawar, Pakistan 
Nidal Odat 
Department of Medical Laboratories, Al-Balqa Applied University, Al-Salt–19117, Jordan 
Fapohunda Stephen Oyedele 
Department of Microbiology, School of Science and Technology, Babcock University, 
Ilishan-Remo, Nigeria 
Mujeeb Ur Rahman 
Department of Horticulture, The University of Agriculture, Peshawar, Pakistan 
Meenakshi Rana 
Department of Plant Pathology, School of Agriculture, Lovely Professional University, 
Phagwar–144411, Punjab, India 
Abdur Rauf 
Department of Chemistry, University of Swabi, Anbar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Pakistan 
Poonam Roshan 
Department of Biotechnology, Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, Punjab–143005, India 
Anjorin Toba Samuel 
Department of Crop Protection, Faculty of Agriculture, University of Abuja, PMB 117, Abuja, Nigeria 
Jeyabalan Sangeetha 
Department of Environmental Science, Central University of Kerala, Kasaragod–671316, Kerala, India 
Palani Saranraj 
Department of Microbiology, Sacred Heart College (Autonomous), Tirupattur–635601, Tamil Nadu, India 
Panneerselvam Sivasakthivelan 
Department of Agricultural Microbiology, Faculty of Agriculture, Annamalai University, 
Chidambaram–608002, Tamil Nadu, India xviii Contributors 
Kasem Soytong 
Department of Plant Production Technology, Faculty of Agricultural Technology, 
King Mongkut’s Institute of Technology Ladkrabang, Bangkok, Thailand 
Abdulkadir Sürücü 
Harran University, Faculty of Agriculture, Department of Soil Science and Plant Nutrition, Şanliurfa, 
Turkey 
Devarajan Thangadurai 
Department of Botany, Karnatak University, Dharwad, Karnataka – 580003, India 
Ajay Tomer 
Department of Plant Pathology, School of Agriculture, Lovely Professional University, 
Phagwara – 144411, Punjab, India 
Munir Turk 
Department of Plant Production, Jordan University of Science and Technology, Irbid, Jordan 
Ayşe Yeşilayer
Faculty of Agriculture, Tokat Gaziosmanpasa University, Tokat, Turkey 
Nandhini Yoga
Department of Agronomy, Tamil Nadu Agricultural University, Coimbatore – 641003, Tamil Nadu, 
India ABBREVIATIONS
 
ABA abscisic acid 
AC active cells 
ACC aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid 
ADD anaerobically digested dairy 
ADIs acceptable daily intakes 
ADP anaerobically digested pig slurry 
ADS anaerobically digested slurry 
AGE aged garlic extract 
Al aluminum 
Al3+ aluminum trication 
AlPO4 aluminum phosphate 
AM arbuscular mycorrhizal 
AMF arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi 
AMS agricultural marketing service 
AQPs aquaporins 
ARA acetylene reduction assay 
As arsenic 
ASD anaerobic soil disinfestation 
ATP adenosine triphosphate 
ATUs active taxonomic units 
AUDPC area under disease progress curve 
BC Botrytis cinerea 
BGA blue-green algae 
BMI body mass index 
BOF bio-organic fertilizer 
BP bone phosphate 
BPB bromophenol blue 
Bt Bacillus thuringiensis 
C3 carbon three 
C4 carbon four 
C6
H6
Ca6
O24P6 calcium phytate 
Ca calcium 
Ca2+ calcium dication xx Abbreviations 
Ca3
(PO4
)2 tricalcium phosphate 
CaHPO4 dicalcium phosphate 
CC cork compost 
Cd cadmium 
CH4 methane 
CL50 concentration limit 
Co cobalt 
CO2 carbon dioxide 
Cr (VI) hexavalent chromium 
Cr chromium 
Cu copper 
CV cultivar 
DADS diallyl disulfide 
DAPG 2,4-diacetylphloroglucinol 
DAS diallyl sulfide 
DATS dimethyl trisulfide 
DDT dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane 
DNA deoxyribonucleic acid 
DOR dry olive residues 
DSR direct-seeded rice 
ECV essential climate variables 
EPHs enhanced plant holobiomes 
EU European Union 
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization 
FC Fusarium culmorum 
Fe iron 
Fe3+ iron trication 
FOL Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. lycopersici 
FTIR Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy 
FYM farmyard manure 
GHGs greenhouse gas 
GIS geographic information system 
GM green manure 
GMC grape marc compost 
GSPC global strategy for plant conservation 
H2
PO4 dihydrogen phosphate 
HCl hydrochloride 
HCl-P phosphorus hydrochloride 
HKC heat-killed cells Abbreviations xxi 
HMEC human microvascular endothelial cells 
HMs heavy metals 
HPLC high-pressure liquid chromatography 
HPO42-Ca calcium-hydrogen phosphate 
HS humic substances 
HWSC harvest weed seed control methods 
IAA indole-3-acetic acid 
IBA indole-3-butyric acid 
IFOAM International Federation of Organic Agriculture Movements 
IPM integrated pest management 
IPNS integrated plant nutrition system 
ISAC Institute for Sustainable Agricultural Communities 
ISR induced systemic resistance 
ITS internal transcribed spacer 
K potassium 
LC50 lethal concentration 
LPS lipopolysaccharide 
LSM liquid swine manure 
M mycorrhizal 
Mabs monoclonal antibodies 
MALDI-TOF matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization-time of flight 
MAO monoamine oxidase 
MAP kinases mitogen-activated protein kinase 
MDG millennium development goals 
Mg magnesium 
Mg2+ magnesium dication 
MMN mineral nutrients solution 
Mn manganese 
MRLs maximum residue level 
MS mass spectrometry 
MSM mustard seed meal 
N nitrogen 
Na15NO3 sodium nitrate 
NAA naphthalene acetic acid 
NaCl sodium chloride 
NaOH-P phosphonium hydroxide 
NBRIP National Botanical Research Institute Phosphate 
NH4 ammonium 
Ni nickel xxii Abbreviations 
NM nonmycorrhizal 
NMDS non-metric multidimensional scaling 
NMR nuclear magnetic resonance 
NO2 nitrous oxide 
NO3 nitrate 
NOP national organic program 
NPK nitrogen, phosphorous, and potassium 
OFS organic farming system 
OPB inorganic plant breeding 
OPPs organophosphorus pesticides 
P phosphate 
P2
O5 iron (III) phosphate 
Pb lead 
PCR polymerase chain reaction 
PCR-DGGE polymerase chain reaction-denaturing gradient gel 
electrophoresis 
PDA potato dextrose agar 
PGPB plant growth-promoting bacteria 
PGPM plant growth-promoting microorganisms 
PGPR plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria 
pH degree of acid and base 
PHB poly β-hydroxybutyrate 
PM poultry manure 
PR-protein pathogenesis-related proteins 
PSB phosphate solubilizing bacteria 
PSI phosphate solubilizing index 
PSM phosphate solubilizing microorganism 
PSRB phosphate solubilizing rhizospheric bacteria 
PVK Pikovskaya 
Rb rubidium 
rDNA ribosomal DNA 
RLSBX relative length of stem with brown xylem 
ROS reactive oxygen species 
RP rock phosphate 
S sulfur 
SAC S-allycysteine 
SANRU Sari Agricultural Sciences and Natural Resources University 
SAR systemic acquired resistance 
SM sclerotinia minor Abbreviations xxiii 
SMAC S-allylmercaptocysteine 
SOM soil organic matter 
sp. species 
SSA Sub-Saharan Africa 
SSF solid-state fermentation 
SSP single super phosphorus 
TA titratable acidity 
TCP tricalcium phosphate 
TLC thin layer chromatography 
UNCTAD United Nations Conference on Trade and Development 
UNEP United Nations Environment Program 
USA United States of America 
USDA U.S. Department of Agriculture 
UV ultraviolet 
VAM vesicular arbuscular mycorrhizas 
VFA volatile fatty acid 
ZBNF zero budget natural farming 
Zn zinc 
ZnO zinc oxide SYMBOLS
 
% percentage 
β beta 
µm micrometer 
µmolL–1 micro per mole 
1° first degree 
3° third degree 
CFU/ml colony-forming unit per milliliters 
dSm–1 decisiemens per meter 
g gram 
h hour 
ha hectare 
kg ha–1 kilogram per hectare 
kg kilogram 
kg–1 kilo per gram 
m meter 
mg kg–1 milligram per kilogram 
mg milligrams 
mg/l milligrams per liter 
mg/mL milligrams per milliliter 
min minute 
ml milliliter 
mm millimeter 
mM millimolar 
ng/mL nanograms per milliliter 
°C degree Celsius 
α alpha 
β beta 
μg ml–1 microgram per liter 
μm micrometer PREFACE
 
The gravity of organic farming has increased in recent past decades with the 
concern with the vast deleterious effect of conventional agricultural practices, 
which employ chemical fertilizers, pesticides, and herbicides for large-scale 
food production. Organic farming has become an important paradigm for 
sustainable development as it prevents jeopardizing the ecological balance 
and secures the natural resources for upcoming generations. In general, 
organic farming methods make use of natural resources such as compost, 
bone meals, green/animal manure, microorganisms, and crop rotation to 
improve soil quality and nurture plants, which enhance the good health and 
well-being of humans as well as the biological functioning of the soil, water, 
and the natural niche. The quality of food in terms of nutrition, fertility of the 
soil, and the surrounding ecosystem such as micro and macroflora has been 
retained for the long term. In this way, we can efficiently and cost-effectively 
use natural and available resources to produce healthy food by reducing the 
lethality of environmental issues. 
Compared to conventional farming, which is more output-oriented rather 
than health concerned, natural farming includes various cultivating rationale 
that is ecofriendly and aids in tacking the hazardous consequences of chemi￾cals on the environment. Rather than concentrating on the quantity of food 
production using conventional farming techniques, if we target equitably on 
both qualities of food and environment, it can bring about the sustainable 
development of the ecosystem and the socio-economy of any nation. As it is 
a question of the existence of the whole planet, organic farming has gained 
in importance and solemnness on a global basis. On average of 2.8 million 
farmers in around 186 countries worldwide are now following this farming 
method. 
The current status of organic cultivation is at its advancing stages in 
developing countries. Up date, only a few fractions of total agricultural 
farmlands are producing organic cultivars. Conversely, suppose we utilize 
the remaining portions of farmlands for organic farming. In that case, we can 
expeditiously increase the nutrients content of our food. We would be able to 
manage the organic wastes coming from other sectors, such as cattle farms, 
without polluting the surroundings. This is the key benefit of organic farming xxviii Preface 
wherein we can make use of the waste products from one sector as the raw 
material for another agricultural sector. 
As mentioned earlier, one of the significant aspects of this farming 
method is the maintenance of ecological balance; that is, a prerequisite factor 
for the conservation of biodiversity. It can also be employed correspond￾ingly on ecological poles and economic levels of national and international 
markets because of the products’ high nutrition value in comparison with 
traditionally grown food products. Organic farming is a kind of give-and￾take approach whereby we can use natural resources for our needs, and we 
take responsibility to sustain an ecological balance, which is the main agenda 
of this farming method. 
However, one of the widely discussed demerits of organic farming is its 
low output in bulk quantity, and it is more labor-intensive. Nevertheless, 
suppose we implement more sustainable methods in organic farming, in that 
case, that might increase the quantity and quality of crop production, and we 
can set aside or reduce the environmental repercussions and thereby sustain 
the ecosystem in and of itself for the future era. 
The present book mainly focuses on the application of different natural 
resources as manure for organic farming. Section I discusses in detail the 
application of microorganisms such as Trichoderma sp., Azospirillum sp., 
endophytic microorganisms, arbuscular mycorrhiza, Chaetomium sp., and, 
and bioactive secondary metabolites thereof in the organic farming practices. 
Section II explores the potential applications of organic amendments and 
sustainable practices for plant growth and soil health using garlic products, 
organic substrates, biochar, organic mulching, and tillage and weed manage￾ment. In addition, Section III summarizes the impact and prospects of organic 
crop production technology on health, food safety, and quality. 
—Jeyabalan Sangeetha, PhD 
Kasem Soytong, PhD 
Devarajan Thangadurai, PhD 
Abdel Rahman Mohammad Al-Tawaha, PhD PART I
 
Agrofriendly Microbes and Their 

Metabolites for Sustainable Agriculture
 CHAPTER 1
 
TRICHODERMA: AN ECO-FRIENDLY 
BIOPESTICIDE FOR SUSTAINABLE 
AGRICULTURE 
APARNA B. GUNJAL 
Department of Microbiology, Dr. D. Y. Patil Arts, Commerce, 
and Science College, Pimpri, Pune–411018, Maharashtra, India 
ABSTRACT 
The use of chemical pesticides to kill the insects and pests in agriculture is 
toxic, costly, and causes harm to the environment. This is a serious issue 
and needs attention. The biological approach is necessary to be applied. 
The introduction, category, and market demand of biopesticides are taken 
into account. Trichoderma-based biopesticide is gaining importance. This 
chapter focuses on features of Trichoderma biopesticide, formulations, and 
mechanism of action of Trichoderma biopesticide for sustainable agricul￾ture. The production of Trichoderma-based biopesticide, spore production of 
Trichoderma, methods for application in agriculture, and how Trichoderma 
biopesticides are effective against diseases caused by phytopathogens are 
also highlighted. The root colonization and interaction of Trichoderma with 
other microorganisms is also highlighted in this chapter. The application 
of Trichoderma-based biopesticide has importance as it is eco-friendly, 
easy to use, economical, and safe to the environment. Biopesticides now 
are alternatives to chemical pesticides and have emerged as novel tools 
to control insects and pests in agriculture. The use of Trichoderma sp. in 
agriculture will increase the yield of various plants. This will also lead to 
organic farming and organic products, which will be healthy and safe. This 
chapter thus highlights the development of Trichoderma-based biopesticide.  
 
 
4 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
1.1 INTRODUCTION 
Agriculture is the most essential aspect. The uses of chemical fertilizers and 
pesticides are toxic, costly, and harmful to humans as well as the environment 
(Prabha et al., 2016). The use of chemical pesticides disturbs the balance 
of the ecosystem. Biopesticides are made from living microorganisms 
(bacteria, fungi, and viruses) and plants. They protect the plants and crops 
against insects, pests, and nematodes (Senthil-Nathan, 2015). These are of 
three types, viz., plant-incorporated protectants, microbial, and biochemical 
pesticides. The biopesticides have advantages, viz., target-specific, very 
eco-friendly, economical, non-toxic, and can be used in trace amounts 
(Kumar, 2012). Due to their advantages are gaining immense importance in 
comparison to synthetic chemical pesticides (Chandrasekaran et al., 2012). 
Biopesticides, in combination with integrated pest management (IPM) 
programs, help to reduce the use of chemical pesticides and increase the 
growth of plants (Sharma and Malik, 2012). They do not harm the ecosystem 
and are easily biodegradable. They have gained immense value in the market 
due to many advantages (Prabha et al., 2016). The demand for biopesticides 
has increased all over the world. They also have an excellent role to play in 
IPM. Biopesticides are safe to be used by farmers and maintain a sustainable 
approach (Kumar et al., 2014a). The health consciousness of humans has 
immensely increased the need for organic food. This, in turn, has increased 
the scope for biopesticides. The use of biopesticides has increased by the 
farmers in agriculture (Kandpal, 2014). The major biopesticides are Bacillus 
thuringiensis, Pseudomonas fluorescens, Fusarium, Pythium, Penicillium, 
Verticillium, Trichoderma harzianum, T. viride, and Beauveria bassiana 
(Gupta and Dikshit, 2010; Kachhawa, 2017). There are 15 biopesticides 
registered in India. In the United States of America (USA) and European 
countries, about 200 and 60 biopesticide products are available respectively 
in the market (Kumar and Singh, 2015). The use of biopesticides increases 
by 10% every year (Kumar and Singh, 2015). 
1.2 CATEGORIES OF BIOPESTICIDES 
1.2.1 MICROBIAL PESTICIDES 
These consist of microorganisms used for the control of insects, nematodes, 
and pests. The most common biopesticide is Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt). B. 
thuringiensis produces Bt toxin, which when consumed by insects, pests, or  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Eco-friendly Trichoderma for Sustainable Agriculture 5 
nematodes, breaks the gut cells (Chandler et al., 2011) and kills the insects 
or pests. The Bt toxin causes the death of insects or pests in about 48 h. 
1.2.2 BIOCHEMICAL PESTICIDES 
Biochemical pesticides are also termed herbal pesticides (Pal and Kumar, 
2013). They control insects and pests by a non-toxic mechanism. 
1.2.3 PLANT-INCORPORATED-PROTECTANTS 
Plant-Incorporated-Protectants are the biopesticides produced from plants 
the way of genetic engineering (Tijjani et al., 2016). 
1.3 FORMULATIONS OF BIOPESTICIDES 
The biopesticides are available in three forms, viz., powder, emulsion, and 
granules (Singh et al., 2014). 
1.3.1 DRY FORMULATIONS 
1.3.1.1 DUSTABLE POWDERS 
The dustable powder formulation of biopesticide is prepared by adsorption 
of active ingredient on talc or clay (Tijjani et al., 2016). The concentration of 
active ingredients used is 10%. 
1.3.1.2 GRANULES 
The concentration of active ingredient used is 2–20% which either coat 
or adsorb on the granules. The granules size range between 100 and 600 
microns and can be made using kaolin, silica, and starch (Tijjani et al., 2016). 
1.3.1.3 SEED DRESSING 
In this biopesticide formulation, the carrier is coated onto the seeds for 
adherence. In some cases, some coloring agent may also be used along with 
the carrier to ensure safety (Woods, 2003).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
1.3.1.4 WETTABLE POWDERS 
The wettable powders are prepared by mixing active ingredients with surfac￾tants and inert fillers. These can be applied after suspension in water and can 
be stored for a long period (Tijjani et al., 2016). 
1.3.2 LIQUID FORMULATIONS 
1.3.2.1 EMULSION 
Emulsion formulations can be oil in water or water in oil. The loss due to 
evaporation is minimized (Brar et al., 2006). 
1.3.2.2 SUSPENSION CONCENTRATE 
This biopesticide formulation is prepared by proper mixing of active ingre￾dient in water. The active ingredients become readily available to the plants 
due to the minimum size of the particles (1–10 μm). 
1.3.2.3 SUSPO-EMULSION 
This formulation is a combination of emulsion and suspension concentrate. 
This formulation of biopesticides has more demand in the market (Tijjani et 
al., 2016). 
1.3.2.4 OIL DISPERSION 
This formulation is prepared similar to suspension concentrate. The active 
ingredients should be properly selected. 
1.3.2.5 CAPSULE SUSPENSION 
In capsule suspension, the active ingredients are enclosed in capsules. The 
capsules can be prepared using gelatin, starch, or cellulose. This formulation 
of biopesticides can be applied by interfacial polymerization.  
 
Eco-friendly Trichoderma for Sustainable Agriculture 7 
1.4 SCOPE AND MARKET DEMAND OF BIOPESTICIDES
 
There is worldwide immense scope for biopesticides to control the insects 
and pests in the field due to their advantages (Oguh et al., 2019). The market 
demand for biopesticides has tremendously increased in the last few years. 
The reason behind this is conventional chemicals are toxic, costly, and cause 
pollution (Glare et al., 2012). The biopesticides are very safe to use. The 
world biopesticides market is expected to be around $7.7 billion by 2021 
(Ruiu, 2018). In the USA, the USA and European market around 200 and 
60 biopesticide products, respectively, are there in the market (Kumar and 
Singh, 2015). The biopesticide use increases by 10% each year, which is 
expected to increase more (Kumar and Singh, 2015). Trichoderma biopesti￾cide will have good market globally. 
1.5 MECHANISM OF ACTION OF BIOPESTICIDES 
The mechanisms of action of biopesticides are antibiosis, where the micro￾organisms produce antibiotics to inhibit the pathogens (Rikita and Utpal, 
2014); competition where the biopesticides colonize the substrates and 
control the growth of harmful microorganisms. There can be competition for 
the nutrients and minerals among the microorganisms, where the most potent 
microorganism will survive in competition. Antibiotics are reported to have 
some role in biocontrol activity (Hamid and Mohiddin, 2018). The antibiotics 
secreted by some fungi can control the growth of harmful fungi. Trichoderma 
biopesticide has been reported to control the pathogen Erysiphe pisi (Patel et 
al., 2016). Trichoderma produces toxic metabolites, viz., viridin, tricholin, 
and alamethicins (Gajera et al., 2013). Also, there is a report on Trichoderma 
for control of various plant diseases (Kumar et al., 2017). Hyper parasitism 
is another mechanism of action of biopesticide. In hyper parasitism, Tricho￾derma sp. due to chitinase enzyme, degrades chitin and enters the cell wall 
of the host (Hamid and Mohiddin, 2018). T. lignorum usually parasitizes 
the hyphae of Rhizoctonia solani. Due to this, Trichoderma spores can be 
applied to prevent damping off disease in Citrus plants (Rikita and Utpal, 
2014). Synergism is also the mechanism of action of biopesticides which is 
a combination of hydrolytic enzymes and antibiotics (Tijjani et al., 2016). T. 
asperellum also stimulates induced systemic resistance (ISR), which helps 
in the control of plant diseases (Yedidia et al., 2003). There is a report where 
Trichoderma harzianum T-39 showed ISR against Botrytis cinerea (BC) and  
8 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
Podosphaera xanthil, where the Cucumis sativus, Solanum lycopersicum, 
Phaseolus vulgaris and Fragaria × ananassa plants were protected from 
foliar diseases by stimulation of beneficial microorganisms (Levy et al., 
2015). The mechanism of Trichoderma-based biopesticide is represented in 
Figure 1.1. 
FIGURE 1.1 Mechanism of action of Trichoderma-based biopesticide. 
1.6 VARIOUS FUNGI AS BIOPESTICIDES 
The various fungi as biopesticides are represented in Figure 1.2. 
FIGURE 1.2 Various fungi as biopesticides. Eco-friendly Trichoderma for Sustainable Agriculture 9 
1.7 TRICHODERMA SP.
 
Various Trichoderma spp. are used as biocontrol agents against plant 
pathogens (Sharma et al., 2014). Trichoderma sp. is free-living fungi and 
interacts highly with the roots of the plants. Trichoderma belongs to the 
subdivision of Deuteromycotina, classes Deuteromycetes, and familia 
Tuberculariaceae (Suparno et al., 2016). They have been found effective 
to control plant diseases caused by Rhizoctonia solanii (Gal-Hemed et al., 
2011). The species of Trichoderma are T. piluliferum, T. polysporum, T. 
hamatum, T. koningii, T. aureoviride, T. harzianum, T. longibrachyatum, 
T. pseudokoningii, T. reessei, T. asperellum, T. parareesei, T. gamsii, T. 
virens, and T. viride (Waghunde et al., 2016; Zeilinger et al., 2016). There 
are more than 100 species of Trichoderma (Thapa et al., 2020). The mode 
of reproduction in Trichoderma sp. is asexual. Trichoderma sp. is found 
dominantly in soil and their characteristic feature is they produce spores. 
Trichoderma sp. is a strong opportunistic invader and produces antibiotics. 
Trichoderma has antagonistic properties (Reyes et al., 2012) and are known 
to produce biomass, primary metabolites (e.g., enzymes like cellulase, 
chitinase, organic acids, antibiotics, etc.); secondary metabolite (e.g., 6 
pentyl-alpha-pyrone) and; spores. These are found to play a good role in 
the control of plant diseases. Also, the study is done on Trichoderma sp. as 
biocontrol of Colletotrichum sp. and F. oxysporum causing disease in chili 
(Su et al., 2018; Utami et al., 2019). 
Trichoderma grows fast without much need of nutrients. Conidiophores 
are branched, either loosely or compactly tufted or formed in concentric 
rings. The main branch produces paired or unpaired branches. The phialides 
are seen arising near the tip of the main branch. The primary branches 
produce secondary branches either paired or unpaired. The longest secondary 
branch is seen close near the tip of the primary branch. This gives Tricho￾derma conidiophores a pyramid look. Phialides are held at 90° clustered 
or solitary, either cylindrical or globose in shape. Conidia are dry, smooth, 
ellipsoidal, or tuberculate and measure 3–5×2–4 µm. The conidia are green 
in color. Chlamydospores are unicellular or multicellular, subglobose in 
shape and present inside the hyphal cells. Stromata are present which may 
be brown, yellow, or orange in color and are pulvinate in shape. There are 
several reports where Trichoderma is used as biofertilizer (Gu et al., 2016; 
Kamal, 2018; Tawfeeq Al-Ani, 2018; Kumar et al., 2019). Trichoderma as 
biofertilizer has shown an increase in the yield of Triticum plant (Mahato 
et al., 2018).  
10 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
1.7.1 SPORE PRODUCTION OF TRICHODERMA 
For the preparation of biological control agents on a large scale by solid￾state fermentation (SSF), spore biomass is necessary. SSF process occurs 
in the absence of water by using a variety of economical and non-toxic 
substrates, viz., rice, and wheat husk, bagasse, corn cob, pressmud, 
sawdust, coconut husk, etc. T. harzianum can be used for spore produc￾tion by SSF (Ming et al., 2019). The spore production of T. harzianum 
is represented in Figure 1.3. Glucose, starch, fructose inorganic salt, 
magnesium, phosphorus, iron, and rice bran help in good sporulation of 
Trichoderma (Ming et al., 2019). There is a report on production of T. 
asperellum spores by SSF using mango waste (Sala et al., 2019; Santos￾Villalobos et al., 2012). Study is done T. harzianum spore production on 
rice husk by SSF (Sala et al., 2020). Mycelial growth favors the spore 
production (Hiba et al., 2019). In the case of liquid-state fermentation, 
Trichoderma is grown in potato dextrose broth on a rotary shaker at 28°C 
for 10–12 days for the production of biomass of Trichoderma (Hamid and 
Mohiddin, 2018). 
FIGURE 1.3 Spore production of T. harzianum.  
 
 
Eco-friendly Trichoderma for Sustainable Agriculture 11 
1.8 ROOT COLONIZATION BY TRICHODERMA 
Trichoderma colonizes roots of plants which alters plant metabolism 
(Brotman et al., 2012). They help the plants to acquire nutrients (Khatabi 
et al., 2012). T. harzianum penetrates the roots of plants by the help of 
enzymes. The enzyme endopolygalacturonase (ThPG1) from T. harzianum 
helps to penetrate the roots of plants. Trichoderma takes help of swollenin 
protein which has a cellulose-binding module, disrupts the cell wall of 
plants and helps in root colonization of plants (Druzhinina et al., 2011). The 
molecular mechanism in root colonization of plants by Trichoderma is still 
not known clearly. 
1.8.1	 INTERACTION OF TRICHODERMA WITH OTHER 
MICROORGANISMS 
Trichoderma sp. has applications in agriculture to improve the plant yield. 
Trichoderma interacts mostly with pathogenic fungi by various mechanisms. 
There can be competition for nutrients, minerals, and space which can 
suppress the activity of pathogenic fungi (Thapa et al., 2020). There are 
studies done on the interaction of Trichoderma viride with Azotobacter and 
Rhizobium. T. hamatum interaction with Rhizobium sp. has been reported 
to improve the productivity of V. mungo (Badar and Qureshi, 2012). 
Trichoderma spp. on interaction has also offered too many fungi in the soil 
(Khan et al., 2017; Fiorentino et al., 2018). The interaction of Trichoderma 
sp. with other microorganisms leads to the secretion of antibiotics, which 
can kill other pathogenic fungi. Sometimes interaction of Trichoderma sp. 
with other fungi leads to the secretion of enzymes which can be helpful for 
biological control and provide resistance to the plants against many diseases. 
1.8.2	 TRICHODERMA AS A BIOPESTICIDE FOR SUSTAINABLE 
AGRICULTURE 
Trichoderma-based biofungicides have immense importance in the agri￾cultural market. More than 50 formulations are registered products of 
Trichoderma sp. (Waghunde et al., 2016). Trichoderma as biopesticide 
has been studied by Kachhawa (2017). These products have application 
as strong biocontrol agents. Trichoderma-based biocontrol agents are  
 
12 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
more effective as compared to other fungi. T. harzianum is widely used 
biopesticide in agriculture (Lorito et al., 2010; Prakash et al., 2019). 
Trichoderma sp. is antagonistic against various phytopathogens and this 
minimizes the diseases in crops (Monte, 2001). The antagonistic activity 
of Trichoderma sp. is due to ‘trichodermin’ which makes them strong 
biocontrol agents (Tvetdyukov et al., 1994). The secondary metabolites 
produced by Trichoderma sp. have immense applications (Ramteke, 2019). 
There is a report on the use of Trichoderma in sustainable agriculture by 
plant disease management (Tawfeeq Al-Ani, 2018). There is a report on 
the use of these secondary metabolites from Trichoderma for the plant 
growth. Also, there is a report on Trichoderma sp. effective against fungal 
phytopathogens, viz., Clerotinia sclerotiorum and Sclerotinia minor (SM), 
which causes major loss to many crops (Ibarra-Medina et al., 2010). There 
is a report on role of Trichoderma as effective biopesticide (Khandelwal 
et al., 2012; Ramteke, 2019). The efficacy of T. viride to control insects 
and pests is 60–90%. There is a report on the use of Trichoderma in 
agriculture (Sachdev and Singh, 2020). Trichoderma brevicompactum has 
been reported to show activity against Sclerotium rolfsii, Colletotrichum 
gloesporioides, Verticillium dahliae, Fusarium oxysporum, and Cylindro￾cladium sp. (Marques et al., 2018). 
1.8.3	 FEATURES OF TRICHODERMA BIOPESTICIDE 
The features of Trichoderma biopesticide are, viz., effective, contains essen￾tial nutrients and minerals, good quality, non-toxic, easy to use, eco-friendly, 
and has good shelf-life. 
1.8.4	 MECHANISM OF ACTION OF T. HARZIANUM AS 
BIOCONTROL AGENT 
T. harzianum establishes in the rhizosphere region of the plants or crops. 
The rhizosphere is the region where abundant beneficial microorganisms 
are present near the roots of the plants. There are different mechanisms of 
action which makes T. harzianum strong biocontrol agent. The growth of T. 
harzianum forms a barrier and prevents the growth of fungal phytopathogens. 
T. harzianum also utilizes the excess nutrients available in the root system, 
due to which the growth of fungal phytopathogens is inhibited. The second 
reason is T. harzianum produces chitinase enzyme which degrades chitin  
 
Eco-friendly Trichoderma for Sustainable Agriculture 13 
and ruptures the cell wall. This allows the entry of other microorganisms. 
These mechanisms help T. harzianum to prevent the growth of other fungal 
phytopathogens and thus help to control diseases in the plants (Gajera et al., 
2013). This also enables to increase the growth and yield of the plants. 
1.8.5	 PRODUCTION OF TRICHODERMA-BASED BIOPESTICIDE 
There is a report on production of biopesticide of T. viride (Arora et al., 
2017). The production of Trichoderma-based biopesticide is represented in 
Figure 1.4. The fungal biopesticides are produced by submerged and SSF. 
Mostly SSF is usually used for the production of fungal biopesticides. SSF is 
the fermentation in the absence of water using beneficial microorganisms to 
get value-added product. For the production of biopesticide, Trichoderma is 
isolated from the rhizosphere region of the plants. It is grown on solid agar 
medium viz., potato dextrose agar (PDA). A pure is obtained which can be 
used for further production of the spores. The spores can be mixed with a 
suitable carrier such as talc and then applied in the field on a large scale. 
FIGURE 1.4 Production of Trichoderma-based biopesticide. 
1.8.6	 METHODS OF APPLICATION OF TRICHODERMA FOR 
BIOLOGICAL CONTROL IN AGRICULTURE 
In seed treatment, 10 g Trichoderma formulation per lit cow dung slurry for 
the treatment of 1 kg of seed prior to sowing is used. The second method  
14 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
is cutting and seedling root dip where 10 g L–1 Trichoderma formulation is 
used to treat the seedlings for 10 min prior to planting. In the case of soil 
treatment method of application, 1 kg of Trichoderma formulation + 100 
kg of farmyard manure (FYM) is covered for a week with polythene and 
mixed properly to apply in the field. The foliar spray application is also used 
where Trichoderma sp. can be applied as foliar spray to control the plant 
diseases (Mishra et al., 2018). The application of Trichoderma in agriculture 
is represented in Figure 1.5 (Kumar et al., 2014b). 
FIGURE 1.5 Application of Trichoderma in agriculture. 
1.8.7	 APPLICATION OF TRICHODERMA SP. BIOPESTICIDES 
AGAINST VARIOUS DISEASES 
The application of Trichoderma sp. biopesticides against various diseases 
is represented in Table 1.1. There is a report where T. harzianum and T. 
hamatum are biocontrol agents against Fusarium oxysporum which causes 
lentil wilt (El-Hassan et al., 2013). Trichoderma biopesticide is used to control 
wilt and root rot diseases caused by Fusarium sp., R. solani, R. bataticola, 
Sclerotium rolfsii and Sclerotium sclerotiorum in crops (Chaudhary et al., 
2004; Mishra et al., 2015). There is a report on eco-friendly management of 
red rot disease of Saccharum officinarum with Trichoderma strains (Singh et 
al., 2008). Also, there is a report of Trichoderma from mangrove sediments 
as biocontrol against Fusarium strains (Filizola et al., 2019). Trichoderma 
is reported to exhibit various mechanisms, viz., mycoparasitism, antibiosis, 
and competition which will be essential for use by farmers in agriculture to  
Eco-friendly Trichoderma for Sustainable Agriculture 15 
control diseases caused by pests and insects (Patil et al., 2016). The control 
of plant diseases by Trichoderma is shown in Figure 1.6. 
TABLE 1.1 Application of Trichoderma sp. Biopesticides Against Various Diseases 
Bioagent Pathogen Crop References 
T. harzianum Puccinia sorghi Oryza sativa Dey et al. (2013) 
Pyricularia oryzae 
Alternaria alternata Nicotina tabacum Gveroska and Ziberoski 
(2012) 
Phytophthora capsici Red pepper Savitha and Sriram (2015) 
Fusarium oxysporum Cicer arietinum Shabir-U-Rehman (2013) 
T. viride Colletotrichum capsici Capsicum frutescens Jagtap et al. (2013) 
Phytophthora capsici Piper nigrum Mathew et al. (2011) 
Trichoderma 
sp. 
Botrytis cinerea Solanum lycopersicum Tucci et al. (2011) 
– Fragaria × ananassa Mutiya and Prilya (2017) 
R. solani Oryza sativa Chakravarthy and 
Nagamani (2007) 
Fusarium and Phoma 
sp. 
Solanum tuberosum Gogoi et al. (2007) 
F. oxysporum and 
F. solani 
Phaseolus vulgaris Abd-El-Elshahawy et al. 
(2019) 
T. atroviride R. solani Cucumis sativus Yobo (2005) 
FIGURE 1.6 Control of plant diseases by Trichoderma.  
16 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
1.9 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE PROSPECTS 
Trichoderma is excellent biopesticide and will have immense use in 
agriculture. This will be very easy, eco-friendly, and economical. The use of 
Trichoderma as biopesticide is safe to the humans and to the environment. 
The Trichoderma-based biopesticide is an organic product as it is prepared 
using microbial approach. It will also help in the growth of various plants 
and crops. Trichoderma-based biopesticide will also protect many plants 
and crops against various phytopathogens. The farmers will benefit due to 
the use of Trichoderma-based biopesticide. The biopesticides will have an 
immense advantage in the global market. The use of biopesticides will be 
definitely very fruitful in the control of insects, nematodes, and pests. The 
biological approach is thus always interesting and safe as compared to the 
use of hazardous and toxic chemicals. The ban of chemicals is safe for the 
human and environment. The research on biopesticides should be carried 
on large-scale, and the molecular aspect related to the exact mechanisms 
of biopesticides needs to be studied. New biopesticides should also be 
developed for the control of insects, pests, and nematodes on crops and 
other plants. The availability of good quality Trichoderma biopesticides 
at an economical price should be maintained. The awareness regarding 
biopesticide enterprises should be increased. 
KEYWORDS 
• Bacillus thuringiensis 
• induced systemic resistance 
• integrated pest management 
• pesticides 
• potato dextrose agar 
• solid state fermentation 
• sustainable agriculture 
REFERENCES 
Abd-El-Khair, H., Elshahawy, I. E., & Haggag, H. K., (2019). Field application of Trichoderma 
spp. combined with thiophanate-methyl for controlling Fusarium solani and Fusarium 
oxysporum in dry bean. Bull. Natl. Res. Cent., 43, 1–9. Eco-friendly Trichoderma for Sustainable Agriculture 17 
Al-Ani, L. T., (2018). Trichoderma: Beneficial role in sustainable agriculture by plant disease 
management. In: Plant Microbiome: Stress Response (pp. 105–126). Springer. 
Arora, A., Kaur, P., Kumar, M., & Saini, V., (2017). Production of biopesticides namely 
Trichoderma viride and Beauveria bassiana. Ind. J. Sci. Technol., 10, 1–7. 
Badar, R., & Qureshi, S. A., (2012). Comparative effect of Trichoderma hamatum and host￾specific Rhizobium species on growth of Vigna mungo. J. Appl. Pharm. Sci., 2, 128–132. 
Brar, S. K., Verma, M., Tyagi, R. D., & Valero, J. R., (2006). Recent advances in downstream 
processing and formulations of Bacillus thuringiensis based biopesticides. Proc. 
Biochem., 41, 323–342. 
Brotman, Y., Lisec, J., Méret, M., Chet, I., Willmitzer, L., & Viterbo, A., (2012). Transcript 
and metabolite analysis of the Trichoderma-induced systemic resistance response to 
Pseudomonas syringae in Arabidopsis thaliana. Microbiol., 139–146. 
Chakravarthy, S. K., & Nagamani, A., (2007). Efficacy of non-volatile and volatile compounds 
of Trichoderma species on Rhizoctonia solani. J. Mycol. Plant Pathol., 37, 82–86. 
Chandler, D., Bailey, A., Tatchell, G. M., Davidson, G., Greaves, J., & Grant, W. P., (2011). 
The development, regulation and use of biopesticides for integrated pest management. 
Phil. Trans. Royal Soc. Bull., 386, 2–13. 
Chandrasekaran, R., Revathi, K., Nisha, S., Kirubakaran, S. A., Sathish-Narayanan, S., & 
Senthil-Nathan, S., (2012). Physiological effect of chitinase purified from Bacillus 
subtilis against the tobacco cutworm Spodoptera litura fab. Pestic. Biochem. Physiol., 
104, 65–71. 
Chaudhary, R. G., Shukla, N., & Prajapati, R. K., (2004). Biological control of soil-borne 
diseases: An update in pulse crops. In: Shahid, & Narain, (eds.), Eco-friendly Management 
of Plant Diseases (pp. 178–200). Daya Publishing House, New Delhi. 
Dey, U., Harlapur, S. L., & Dhutraj, D. N., (2013). Bioassay of fungicides, botanicals, 
bioagents and indigenous technology knowledge against Pyricularia oryzae Cav. causal 
agent of blast of rice. J. Plant Dis. Sci., 8, 102–106. 
Druzhinina, I., Seidl-Seiboth, V., Herrera-Estrella, A., Horwitz, B., Kenerley, C., Enrique, M. 
E., Mukherjee, P., et al., (2011). Trichoderma: The genomics of opportunistic success. 
Nat. Rev. Microbiol., 9, 749–759. 
El-Hassan, S. A., Gowen, S. R., & Pembrok, B., (2013). Use of Trichoderma hamatum for 
biocontrol of lentil wilt diseases. J. Plant Prot. Res., 53, 12–17. 
Filizola, P., Luna, M., de Souza, A., Coelho, I., Laranjeira, D., & Campos-Takaki, G., (2019). 
Biodiversity and phylogeny of novel Trichoderma isolates from mangrove sediments and 
potential of biocontrol against Fusarium strains. Microbial Cell Fact., 18, 1–14. 
Fiorentino, N., Ventorino, V., Woo, S. L., Pepe, O., De Rosa, A., Gioia, L., Romano, I., et al., 
(2018). Trichoderma-based biostimulants modulate rhizosphere microbial populations 
and improve N uptake efficiency, yield, and nutritional quality of leafy vegetables. Front. 
Plant Sci., 9, 1–15. 
Gajera, H., Domadiya, R., Patel, S., Kapopara, M., & Golakiya, B., (2013). Molecular 
mechanism of Trichoderma as biocontrol agents against phytopathogen system: A 
review. Curr. Res. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 1, 133–142. 
Gal-Hemed, I., Atanasova, L., Komon-Zelazowska, M., Druzhinina, I. S., Viterbo, A., & 
Yarden, O., (2011). Marine isolates of Trichoderma spp. as potential halotolerant agents 
of biological control for arid-zone agriculture. Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 77, 5100–5109. 
Glare, T., Caradus, J., Gelernter, W., Jackson, T., Keyhani, N., Kohl, J., Marrone, P., Morin, L., 
& Stewart, A., (2012). Have biopesticides come of age? Trends Biotechnol., 30, 250–258. 18 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
Gogoi, R., Saikia, M., Helim, R., & Ullah, Z., (2007). Management of potato diseases using 
Trichoderma viride formulations. J. Mycol. Plant Pathol., 37, 227–230. 
Gu, X., Chen, W., Cai, F., Pang, G., & Li, R., (2016). Effect of Trichoderma biofertilizer 
on continuous cropping cucumber cultivation with reduced rates of chemical fertilizer 
application. Acta Pedol. Sin., 53, 1296–1305. 
Gupta, S., & Dikshit, A. K., (2010). Biopesticides: An ecofriendly approach for pest control. 
J. Biopest., 3, 186–188. 
Gveroska, B., & Ziberoski, J., (2012). Trichodema harzianum as a biocontrol agent against 
Alternaria altermata on tobacco. Appl. Technol. Innov., 7, 67–76. 
Hamid, B., & Mohiddin, F. A., (2018). Trichoderma as a potential biocontrol agent. Int. J. 
Adv. Res. Sci. Eng., 7, 68–76. 
Hiba, A., Laid, D., Omrane, Z., Sabri, A., & Thonart, P., (2019). Production of Trichoderma 
harzianum (127a and 127b) spores by fermentation (LF and SSF). Int. J. Innov. Appr. 
Agric. Res., 3, 376–384. 
Ibarra-Medina, V. A., Ferrera-Cerrato, R., Alarcon, A., Lara-Hernandez, M. E., & Valdez￾Carrasco, J. M., (2010). Isolation and screening of Trichoderma strains antagonistic to 
Sclerotinia sclerotiorum and Sclerotinia minor. Revista Mexicana de Micologia Impresa 
en Mexico, 31, 53–63. 
Jagtap, G. P., Mali, A. K., & Utpal, D., (2013). Bioefficacy of fungicides, bio-control agents 
and botanicals against leaf spot of turmeric incited by Colletotrichum capsici. Afr. J. 
Microbiol. Res., 7, 1865–1873. 
Kachhawa, D., (2017). Microorganisms as biopesticides. J. Entomol. Zool. Stud., 5, 468–473. 
Kamal, R. K., (2018). Trichoderma: A most common biofertilizer with multiple roles in 
agriculture. Biomed. J. Sci. Tech. Res., 4, 4136–4137. 
Kandpal, V., (2014). Biopesticides. Int. J. Environ. Res. Develop., 4, 191–196. 
Khan, M. Y., Haque, M. M., Molla, A. H., Rahman, M. M., & Alam, M. Z., (2017). Antioxidant 
compounds and minerals in tomatoes by Trichoderma-enriched biofertilizer and their 
relationship with the soil environments. J. Integr. Agric., 16, 691–703. 
Khandelwal, M., Datta, S., Mehta, J., Naruka, R., Makhijani, K., Sharma, G., Kumar, R., & 
Chandra, S., (2012). Isolation, characterization and biomass production of Trichoderma 
viride using various agro products: A biocontrol agent. Pelagia Res. Lib., 3, 3950–3955. 
Khatabi, B., Molitor, A., Lindermayr, C., Pfiffi, S., Durner, J., Von, W. D., Kogel, K., & 
Schafer, P., (2012). Ethylene supports colonization of plant roots by the mutualistic 
fungus Piriformospora indica. PLoS One, 7, 1–8. 
Kumar, A., Patel, A., Singh, S., & Tiwari, R., (2019). Effect of Trichoderma spp. in plant 
growth promotion in chilli. Int. J. Curr. Microbiol. Appl. Sci., 8, 1574–1581. 
Kumar, G., Maharshi, A., Patel, J., Mukherjee, A., Singh, H., & Sarma, B., (2017). Trichoderma: 
A potential fungal antagonist to control plant diseases. SATSA Mukhapatra, 21, 206–218. 
Kumar, S., & Singh, A., (2015). Biopesticides: Present status and the future prospects. J. 
Fertil. Pestic., 6, 1–2. 
Kumar, S., (2012). Biopesticides: A need for food and environmental safety. J. Biofertil. 
Biopestic., 3, 4. 
Kumar, S., Palanisamy, V., & Pandian, R., (2014b). Trichoderma: A Biocontrol Weapon for 
Sustainable Agriculture (Vol. 2, pp. 143–148). Popular Kheti. 
Kumar, S., Thakur, M., & Rani, A., (2014a). Trichoderma: Mass production, formulation, 
quality control, delivery and its scope in commercialization in India for the management 
of plant diseases. Afr. J. Agric. Res., 9, 3838–3852. Eco-friendly Trichoderma for Sustainable Agriculture 19 
Levy, N. O., Meller, H. Y., Haile, Z. M., Elad, Y., David, E., Jurkevitch, E., & Katan, J., (2015). 
Induced resistance to foliar diseases by soil solarization and Trichoderma harzianum. 
Plant Pathol., 64, 365–374. 
Lorito, M., Woo, S. L., Harman, G. E., & Monte, E., (2010). Translational research on 
Trichoderma: From omics to the field. Annu. Rev. Phytopathol., 48, 395–417. 
Mahato, S., Bhuju, S., & Shrestha, J., (2018). Effect of Trichoderma viride as biofertilizer on 
growth and yield of wheat. Malaysian J. Sust. Agric., 2, 1–5. 
Marques, E., Martins, I., & Marques De, M. S., (2018). Antifungal potential of crude extracts 
of Trichoderma spp. Biota Neotrop., 18, 1–5. 
Mathew, S. K., Mary, C. F., Gleena, G. K., & Surendra, G. D., (2011). Antagonistic activity 
of endophytic Trichoderma against Phytophthora rot of black pepper (Piper nigrum L.). 
J. Biol. Cont., 25, 48–50. 
Ming, S., Rong, J., Zhang, C., Li, C., Zhang, C., Zhang, Y., Zhou, R., & Li, G., (2019). The 
solid fermentation state’s optimization of Trichoderma harzianum M1. IOP Conference 
Series: Materials Science and Engineering, 022111. 
Mishra, R. K., Bohra, A., Kamaal, N., Kumar, K., Gandhi, K., Sujayanand, G., Saabale, P., et 
al., (2018). Utilization of biopesticides as sustainable solutions for management of pests 
in legume crops: Achievements and prospects. Egyptian J. Biol. Pest Cont., 28, 1–11. 
Mishra, R. K., Saabale, P. R., Naimuddin, Jagadeeswaran, R., & Mishra, O., (2015). Potential 
Trichoderma sp. from Pulses Rhizosphere (p. 3). Pulses Newsletter. 
Monte, E., (2001). Understanding Trichoderma: Between biotechnology and microbial 
ecology. Int. Microbiol., 4, 1–41. 
Mutia, D., & Prilya, F., (2017). Exploration of Trichoderma spp. and fungal pathogen that 
causes a strawberry anthracnose and examination of in-vitro antagonistic activity. 
Biotika, 5, 58–68. 
Oguh, C. E., Okpaka, C. O., Ubani, C. S., Okekeaji, U., Joseph, P. S., & Amadi, E. U., (2019). 
Natural pesticides (Biopesticides) and uses in pest management: A critical review. Asian 
J. Biotechnol. Genet. Eng., 2, 1–18. 
Ortuno, N., Castillo, J., Miranda, C., Claros, M., & Soto, X., (2017). The use of secondary 
metabolites extracted from Trichoderma for plant growth promotion in the Andean 
highlands. Renew Agric. Food Syst., 32, 366–375. 
Pal, G. K., & Kumar, B., (2013). Antifungal activity of some common weed extracts against 
wilt causing fungi, Fusarium oxysporum. Curr. Discov., 2, 62–67. 
Patel, J., Sarma, B., Singh, H., Upadhyay, R., Kharwar, R., & Ahmed, M., (2016). Pseudomonas 
fluorescens and Trichoderma asperellum enhance expression of Gα subunits of the pea 
heterotrimeric G-protein during Erysiphe pisi infection. Front. Plant Sci., 6, 1–13. 
Patil, A. S., Patil, S. R., & Paikrao, H. M., (2016). Trichoderma secondary metabolites: Their 
biochemistry and possible role in disease management. In: Choudhary, D., & Varma, 
A., (eds.), Microbial-Mediated Induced Systemic Resistance in Plants (pp. 69–102). 
Springer, Singapore. 
Prabha, S., Yadav, A., Kumar, A., Yadav, A., Yadav, H., Kumar, S., Yadav, R., & Kumar, R., 
(2016). Biopesticides: An alternative and eco-friendly source for the control of pests in 
agricultural crops. Plant Arch., 16, 902–906. 
Prakash, N., Kumari, B., & Karn, S., (2019). Biopesticides: Introduction and its prospects. Int. 
J. Curr. Microbiol. Appl. Sci., 8, 2960–2964. 
Ramteke, A. S., (2019). Trichoderma species: Isolation, characterization, cultivation and their 
role as effective biopesticides. Int. J. Res. Rev., 6, 315–320. 20 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
Reyes, Y., Infante, D., Garcia-Borrego, J., Del, P. E., Cruz, A., & Martínez, B., (2012). 
Compatibilidad de Trichoderma asperellum Samuels con herbicidas de mayor uso en el 
cultivo del arroz. Proteccion Veg., 27, 45–53. 
Rikita, B., & Utpal, D., (2014). An overview of fungal and bacterial biopesticides to control 
plant pathogens/diseases. Afr. J. Microbiol. Res., 8, 1749–1762. 
Ruiu, L., (2018). Microbial biopesticides in agroecosystems. Agron., 8, 1–12. 
Sachdev, S., & Singh, R. P., (2020). Trichoderma: A multifaceted fungus for sustainable 
agriculture. In: Bauddh, K., Kumar, S., Singh, R., & Korstad, J., (eds.), Ecological and 
Practical Applications for Sustainable Agriculture. Springer, Singapore. 
Sala, A., Artola, A., Sanchez, A., & Barrena, R., (2020). Rice husk as a source for fungal 
biopesticide production by solid-state fermentation using B. bassiana and T. harzianum. 
Bioresour. Technol., 296, 122322. 
Sala, A., Barrena, R., Artola, A., & Sanchez, A., (2019). Current developments in the 
production of fungal biological control agents by solid-state fermentation using organic 
solid waste. Crit. Rev. Environ. Sci. Technol., 49, 655–694. 
Santos-Villalobos, S., Hernandez-Rodriguez, L., Villasenor-Ortega, F., & Pena-Cabriales, J., 
(2012). Production of Trichoderma asperellum T8a spores by a “home-made” solid-state 
fermentation of mango industrial wastes. Bioresour., 7, 4938–4951. 
Savitha, M. J., & Sriram, S., (2015). Morphological and molecular identification of 
Trichoderma isolates with biocontrol potential against Phytophthora blight in red pepper. 
Pest Manage. Horti. Ecosyst., 21, 194–202. 
Senthil-Nathan, S., (2015). A review of biopesticides and their mode of action against insect 
pests. In: Thangavel, P., & Sridevi, G., (eds.), Environmental Sustainability (49–63). 
Springer, India. 
Shabir-U-Rehman, Dar, W. A., Ganie, S. A., Javid, A. B., Mir, H. G., Lawrence, R., Sumati, 
N., & Singh, P. K., (2013). Comparative efficacy of Trichoderma viride and Trichoderma 
harzianum against Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. ciceris causing wilt of chickpea. Afr. J. 
Microbiol., Res., 7, 5731–5736. 
Sharma, P., Sharma, M., Raja, M., & Shanmugam, V., (2014). Status of Trichoderma research 
in India: A review. Ind. Phytopath., 67, 1–19. 
Sharma, S., & Malik, P., (2012). Biopesticides: Types and applications. Int. J. Adv. Pharm. 
Biol. Chem., 1, 508–515. 
Singh, A., Jain, A., Sarma, B. K., Upadhyay, R. S., & Singh, H. B., (2014). Rhizosphere 
competent microbial consortium mediates rapid changes in phenolic profiles in chickpea 
during Sclerotium rolfsii infection. Microbiol. Res., 169, 353–360. 
Singh, V., Joshi, B. B., Awasthi, S. K., & Srivastava, S. N., (2008). Eco-friendly management 
of red rot disease of sugarcane with Trichoderma strains. Sugar Tech., 10, 158–161. 
Su, D., Ding, L., & He, S., (2018). Marine-derived Trichoderma species as a promising source 
of bioactive secondary metabolites. Mini-Rev. Med. Chem., 18, 1702–1713. 
Suparno, Sukoso, Hakim, L., & Aidawati, N., (2016). Trichoderma spp. as agent of biocontrol 
in local rice diseases in Tidal Swamplands in South Kalimantan, Indonesia. J. Agric. 
Veter. Sci., 9, 1–6. 
Thapa, S., Sotang, N., Limbu, A., & Joshi, A., (2020). Impact of Trichoderma sp. in agriculture: 
A mini-review. J. Biol. Today’s World, 9, 1–5. 
Tijjani, A., Bashir, K. A., Mohammed, I., Muhammad, A., Gambo, A., & Musa, H., (2016). 
Biopesticides for pests control: A review. J. Biopest. Agric., 3, 6–13. Eco-friendly Trichoderma for Sustainable Agriculture 21 
Tucci, M., Ruocco, M., De Masi, L., De Palma, M., & Lorito, M., (2011). The beneficial 
effect of Trichoderma spp. on modulated by the plant genotype. J. Mol. Plant Pathol., 
12, 341–354. 
Tvetdyukov, A. P., Nikonov, P. V., & Yushchenko, N. P., (1994). Trichoderma. Rev. Plant 
Pathol., 739, 273. 
Utami, U., Nisa, C., Putri, A., & Rahmawati, E., (2019). The potency of secondary metabolites 
endophytic fungi Trichoderma sp. as biocontrol of Colletotrichum sp. and Fusarium 
oxysporum causing disease in chili. International Conference on Biology and Applied 
Science (ICOBAS), AIP Conference Proceedings 2120 (pp. 1–6). AIP Publisher. 
Waghunde, R., Shelake, R., & Sabalpara, A., (2016). Trichoderma: A significant fungus for 
agriculture and environment. Afr. J. Agric. Res., 11, 1952–1965. 
Woods, T. S., (2003). Pesticide formulations. In: AGR 185 in Encyclopedia of Agrochemicals 
(pp. 1–11). John Wiley and Sons, New York. 
Yedidia, I., Shoresh, M., Kerem, Z., Benhamou, N., Kapulnik, Y., & Chet, I., (2003). 
Concomitant induction of systemic resistance to Pseudomonas syringae pv. lachrymans 
in cucumber by Trichoderma asperellum (T-203) and accumulation of phytoalexins. 
Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 69, 7343–7353. 
Yobo, K. S., (2005). Biological Control and Plant Growth Promotion by Selected Trichoderma 
and Bacillus Species. PhD Thesis, KwaZulu-Natal University, South Africa. 
Zeilinger, S., Gruber, S., Bansal, R., & Mukherjee, P., (2016). Secondary metabolism in 
Trichoderma-chemistry meets genomics. Brit. Mycol. Soc., 30, 74–90. CHAPTER 2 
ARBUSCULAR MYCORRHIZAS: 
APPLICATIONS IN ORGANIC 
AGRICULTURE AND BEYOND 
CHARLES OLUWASEUN ADETUNJI,1 
 
OSIKEMEKHA ANTHONY ANANI,2 DEVARAJAN THANGADURAI,3 
and SAHER ISLAM4 
1
Microbiology, Biotechnology, and Nanotechnology Laboratory, 
Department of Microbiology Edo State University Uzairue, Auchi, 
Nigeria 
2
Laboratory of Ecotoxicology and Forensic Biology, 
Department of Biological Science, Faculty of Science, 
Edo State University Uzairue, Auchi, Nigeria 
3
Department of Botany, Karnatak University, Dharwad, Karnataka, India 
4
Institute of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Faculty of Biosciences, 
University of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, Lahore, Pakistan 
ABSTRACT 
The role of beneficial microorganisms, including arbuscular mycorrhizal 
fungi (AMF), has been recognized as a feasible, economical, and reliable 
biotechnological tool that could contribute towards the achievement of 
sustainable organic agriculture. Some of the important functions of AMF 
in sustainable organic agriculture include: (i) improvement of plant nutri￾tion through enhancing nutrient uptake; (ii) improvement of soil texture and 
structure; (iii) ecorestoration of heavily polluted soil; (iv) mitigation of biotic 
and abiotic stresses; and (v) application as biopesticides in place of synthetic  
24 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
pesticides. This chapter reviews the modes of action employed by AMF and 
provides some recommendations on areas where further studies are needed 
to be able to fully harness the potential of these products. 
2.1 INTRODUCTION 
The significant role of soil microorganisms for the improvement of plant 
health, soil fertility, inhibition of plant pathogenic microorganisms, increase 
in the biomass of crops and their effect against the effect of climate change 
have severely been demonstrated. Such beneficial microorganisms include 
arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (AMF). These organisms play a crucial role 
in enhancing the uptake of nutrients by crops. This they do by enhancing 
the absorptive surface area of the host plant root systems. The hyphae of 
these symbiotic fungi also possess the capacity to increase the surface area 
for enhanced interaction with other beneficial microorganisms. Additionally, 
they possess the capability to improve the process of translocation in plants 
(Gianinazzi et al., 2002). 
Several anthropogenic activities have been observed to affect the natural 
functions of mycorrhizosphere organisms. These include intensive agricul￾tural practices such as tillage (McGonigle and Miller, 1996; Sturz, et al., 
1997) and application of synthetic pesticides (Gianinazzi et al., 1994, 2002; 
Adetunji et al., 2019a–d; Adetunji, 2019; Adetunji and Ugbenyen, 2019). 
These activities have over time led to a drastic reduction of beneficial micro￾bial diversity and activity (Meader et al., 2002). There is therefore need to 
adopt agricultural practices that could encourage the shift from conventional 
intensive management to those that could support sustainable farming. AMF 
have been reported to develop a strong symbiotic relationship with several 
plant species (Read et al., 1992; Richardson et al., 2000; Sramek et al., 
2000). Specifically, about 6,000 fungal species have the capacity to develop 
mycorrhizas with about 240,000 plant species (Bonfante and Perotto, 1995). 
The application of AMF has the capacity to be utilized for several develop￾mental programs, and most especially for low-input agriculture (Schreiner 
and Bethlenfalvay, 1996). 
It has been reported that the occurrence of AMF in plants varies depending 
on the types of crops, which may be 79% of monocotyledonous and 83% of 
a dicotyledonous plant. They also occur in about 1,000 genera of plants from 
200 families. Some other benefits of AMF in sustainable agriculture include 
enhanced plant production, increase in the production of growth-regulating  
 
Arbuscular Mycorrhizas in Organic Agriculture 25 
substances (Danneberg et al., 1992), facilitating rapid uptake of nutrients￾most especially micronutrients and phosphorus (Douds and Millner, 1999), 
development of high resistance to pests and diseases (Ho, 1998), enhance￾ment of soil aggregate stability (Azizah and Idris, 1996), remediation of 
toxic metals (Bonifacio et al., 1999), absorption of water (Jastrow et al., 
1998), improvement of N2
-fixation through increased P supply (Kucey and 
Paul, 1982), absorption of essential micronutrients (Marschner and Dell, 
1994), improvement of water uptake and, osmotic adjustment when exposed 
to drought stress (Masri, 1997). Comprehensive knowledge about the role of 
AMF is essential in helping institute measures for a sustainable enhancement 
of soil fertility and an increase in crop production. 
This chapter provides a comprehensive review of the application of AMF 
in organic agriculture, their modes of action, and the role they play in the 
ecorestoration of heavily polluted soils. Future perspectives of AMF are also 
elaborated, with the mechanisms of action described in detail. The practical 
application of AMF is also elaborated using specific examples. 
2.2	 APPLICATIONS OF ARBUSCULAR MYCORRHIZAL FUNGI 
(AMF) 
Arbuscular mycorrhiza is one of a group of fungi that colonizes the roots 
of higher plants. It infiltrates the cortical chambers of the roots and forms 
arbuscles (networks of hyphae in certain fungi) in the vascular tissues. These 
arbuscles aid the fungi to absorb nutrients such as micronutrients [P (Phos￾phate), S (Sulphur), N (Nitrogen)], and trace-nutrients from the soil. One of 
the benefits of AM is therefore its utilization as agro-fertilizer (Timmer and 
Leyden, 1980; Grant, 2005; Berruti et al., 2016). 
2.3	 APPLICATION AMF AS BIOFERTILIZER 
Laila et al. (2019) investigated the effect of AMF on Allium cepa L. as a 
permanent replacement to phosphorus synthetic fertilizer. Maximum yields 
were recorded in the plant treated with AMF, attesting to its potential for use 
as a fertilizer. Carina et al. (2016) evaluated the effect of co-inoculation of 
Azospirillum and AMF on micro-propagated banana seedlings. The result 
obtained indicates that 1.5 × 108
 CFU/ml of Azospirillum and 200 g of 
AMF had the highest growth and yield output when compared to the control 26 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
plant. Their study showed a synergetic effect between the fungus-bacteria 
inoculum used during this experiment. The high doses showed an enhanced 
nutritional improvement. After all, it gives that plant a better nitrogen and 
phosphorus absorption because it enables the microorganism to solubilize 
the nutrients available for the plant nutrient uptake when compared to the 
treatment without microbial inoculum. 
Igiehon and Babalola (2017) did a review on the sustainable utilization 
of AMF as biofertilizers. They noted that AMF could help in the reduction 
of wide usage of inorganic chemical fertilizers. AM aids in the uptake of 
chemical nutrients in the soil and transports them to various vascular tissues 
in the plant with the aid of a phosphate trans-mobilizer. They stressed the 
cons facing the possible massive production of AM because of the inhibi￾tion of plant-host microbes. However, the utilization of AMF in several 
biological controlled settings (greenhouse and field assay trials) indicated 
that it has persisted and portends the capability to colonize some tested 
plants like soybeans while they could also enhance the growth and develop￾ment in all ramifications. The authors stated that AM has been proposed as 
a first-class new generation bio-fertilizer because it could contribute to the 
control and upkeep of agronomic expansion, aid in the controlling of some 
soil degradation factors, augmenting phytoremediation and elimination of 
other microbes that might hinder the growth of the root system. 
Sadhana (2014) wrote an extensive review of the utilization of AM as a 
bio-fertilizer. The author demystifies those major microbes (cyanobacteria, 
bacteria, and fungi) are used as bio-fertilizers to boosting the soil quality 
and vigor for speedy growth and development. That plant plays some 
symbiotic association with most of these microbes. Apart from the other 
microorganisms and their related strains, a species of fungi AM (arbus￾cular mycorrhizal), has an extensive and unique potential feature above 
the others. The author stated that the sporulation of AMF is controlled 
by certain soil edaphic and climatic conditions. That soil-based pot assay 
is the most widely biological controlled method in the fungal inoculum 
production of AM. The authors recommend that a plant’s growth and 
nutritional requirements solely reside on the role AM plays in forestry 
and agricultural purposes. To boost the plants’ efficiency towards adverse 
edaphic and climatic conditions, AMF can be utilized in dual inoculum 
forms; Rhizobium, and other bacteria species in different field trials to test 
its efficacy and future advances. 
Junior et al. (2019) tested and evaluated how agroecological coffee 
management influences the positive utilization and diversity of AMF. The Arbuscular Mycorrhizas in Organic Agriculture 27 
authors stressed the ecosystem services’ potential and biological importance 
of AMF in modern agricultural practices to reduce the impacts of nutrient 
deficiency and boost plant growth and development. The biological controlled 
experiments were done during the phenological phases (flowering, grain 
filling, harvesting) of the coffee plant. Different root and soil samples were 
obtained from three controlling systems and areas. The asexual reproductive 
bodies (Spores) from the fungi community were removed, identified, and 
were assayed using a PCR-DGGE (polymerase chain reaction denaturing 
gradient gel electrophoresis). The results from the dendrograms and bio￾informatics indicated no differences between the management systems 
and the richness of the morphospecies, the duration, and areas. However, a 
little information about some tropical species was noted. The PCR-DGGE 
(molecular analysis) also indicated that the organic forest was similar to 
the agroecological controlling structure and a high variety of indices were 
observed in conservative management. The findings from this study revealed 
that there is a need to relate traditional taxonomic valuations with genetic 
methods because diverse methods can result in dissimilar results. In conclu￾sion, the authors provided suggestions for sustainable agricultural manage￾ment via agroecological coffee management. 
Baslam et al. (2011) tested and evaluated the impact and association of 
AMF on the development and growth of lettuce in a greenhouse setting. The 
results of the tested biological controlled experiment indicated that the AM 
elicited the growth of the lettuce plant, therefore, boosting other macro and 
micronutrients (carotenoids, Ca, anthocyanins, Fe, phenolics, Mn, and Cu) 
in the tested plant than a none AM symbiotic plants. 
Oladele and Awodun (2014) tested and evaluated the reaction of lowland 
Oryza sativa to bio-fertilizers inoculated with AMF and its impacts on plant 
growth and yield. The results revealed a significant difference in the impact 
of the bio-fertilizer, showing positive development and growth on the repro￾ductive and vegetative parts of the rice plant. 
Casazza et al. (2017) tested and evaluated the richness and variety of 
AMF and how they are related to the soil interaction talus gradient in terms 
of plant sustenance and tension tolerance in Florida greeneyes plant. Samples 
of the plants were examined and analyzed via molecular assay to determine 
the community structure of AM in the plant. The results of the biological 
controlled experiment revealed that the AM in Florida greeneyes roots was 
subjugated by Endomycorrhizal fungus common to three talus gradient. The 
septate endophytes were totally different from the ones formed by AM as 
well as the vegetation coverage and the percentage (%) root colonization 28 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
did not impact the plant community positively. The results of the abundance 
of AM in the root system of the Florida green eyes showed that there was 
a positive correlation between the physical and chemical properties of the 
soil, therefore indicating the effect of AM on the quality of the soil. Hence, 
the degree of this influence was also correlated with the NMDS (non-metric 
multidimensional scaling) initiation of AM showing strong diversity and 
community composition at various regions both on the soil quality and the 
talus gradient. In conclusion, the authors opined that gradient prompted the 
physical disruption of the mountain taluses, which may also result in the 
assortment of disorders in the AM group and finally led to different fungi￾plant congregations. 
Yeasmin (2017) tested and evaluated the relationship between AM as a 
bio-fertilizer and plant growth. The author stressed the need for sustainable 
farming using organic fertilizer; bio-fertilizer to replace the widely used 
inorganic ones and to combat the food insecurity caused by soil infertility, 
nutrient instability, pest resistance, and soil degradation. The introduction 
of beneficial microorganisms such as AM fungi can remediate the dire need 
for food security. The results of the symbiotic association of the AM in the 
root mottled between 10% and 90% with 85% of the plants surveyed. It was 
observed that the AM fungi played a significant role in the growth rate of the 
plant as well as protection. The rate of the soil phosphorus greatly increased, 
and there was a positive correlation between the AM fungi with potassium, 
calcium, total nitrogen, soil texture, water holding capacity, phosphate, and 
soil pH which as well greatly influences the plant growth. The spores of the 
vesicular AM fungi were later abstracted using the wet sieving technique; 
slope centrifugation. The plant garden croton was used as a stock inoculum 
of AM fungi for bio-fertilizer. The results indicated a sharp improvement 
in plant growth, rapid productivity, nutrients stability, and crop yield. In 
conclusion, the author recommended AM fungi as a future sustainable green 
bio-fertilizer candidate for reducing edaphic and environmental problems 
related to inorganic chemicals. 
Andrade et al. (2009) did a review on the relationship between AM and 
coffee plants. The authors stressed the need to look at the relationship between 
the subject areas because of the paucity of literature. However, because of 
the economic importance of coffee species, AM association or utilized as a 
bio-fertilizer can improve the dietary status and lessen environmental stress 
commonly faced by the plant species in the tropics. The authors also eluci￾date and evaluate the natural manifestation of AM fungi in varied soil types Arbuscular Mycorrhizas in Organic Agriculture 29 
in cultivated coffee farms and propose an advance survey on the prospective 
benefits it tends to portend to related plant species. 
Itelima et al. (2018) did a review on the major role of endo and ecto 
AM fungi in eliciting and boosting soil fertility and plant productivity. The 
authors heralded that plant nutrient is significant in the sustenance of the 
ever-teeming growing population. That of recent, chemical fertilizers have 
resulted in serious degradation of essential environmental parameters in the 
ecosystem, and humans are on the verge of ecological and health risks. A 
sustainable agricultural practice of using an ecosystem friendly, eco-safety, 
non-toxic, and economical bio-fertilizer for farming are not negotiable at this 
extant food security era! The authors heralded that bio-fertilizers can serve 
as essential ingredients in nutrient management. In conclusion, the authors 
propose AM as a potential bio-fertilizer in improving certain non-living 
(abiotic) and living (biotic) factors that militating against plant growth. That 
it will help farmers to manage the cost of procuring inorganic chemicals, 
thus protecting the ecosystem, and bringing sustainable eco-balance and 
productivity of farm plants. 
Mycorrhiza formation is recognized to change numerous features of 
plant physiology, including hormonal balance, mineral nutrient constituents, 
and carbon distribution patterns. Demür (2004) evaluated the influence of 
AMF Glomus intraradices Schenck and Smith on the physiological develop￾ment of pepper. For the proper description of the physiological growth of the 
target plant to be carried out, some physiological growth parameters were 
evaluated in the leaves and the shoots of nonmycorrhizal (NM) and mycor￾rhizal (M). It was observed that all the evaluated physiological parameters 
were enhanced in the M pepper plants (by 12%–47%) when compared to 
NM plants. It was also discovered that the level of phosphorus concentration 
showed a positive correlation with sugar and chlorophyll contents. Their 
study showed that enhanced phosphorus concentration might be linked to the 
mycorrhizal symbioses with positively influence the physiological activity 
of pepper plants. 
Berruti et al. (2016) reviewed the past achievements of AMF as an organic 
bio-fertilizer. AMF is one of the obligate biotrophic fungi that are symbiotic 
to about 80% of higher plants. AMF is considered a bio-fertilizer because of 
the roles it plays in nutrients and water uptake in plants, anabolic processes 
such as photosynthesis, and protecting plants from disease-causing organ￾isms. In other words, it plays self-ecosystem services in re-instituting and 
balancing the missing nutrient links and an alternative to the conventional 
inorganic fertilizer in agriculture. That, the key approach to this method is 30 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
by the introduction and reintroduction of the inoculates into the targeted 
soil. The authors stressed the need for a genetic engineering procedure in 
advancing the genomes of AM to interact with plant-soil host microorgan￾isms that can inhabit its functional role in the ecosystem. The authors, in 
conclusion, recommend the use of AM in field trials because it has the 
potential to correct the environmental degradation caused by the wildly used 
inorganic fertilizers. 
Binh et al. (2019) tested and evaluated the effects of AM fungus in the 
development and sustenance of 15 agronomic plant species (vegetables, 
legumes, and cereals). The authors reconnoitered varied plant types (C4, C3, 
dicots, monocots, and non-nitrogen fixer) on how they respond to AM colo￾nization. The results of the study showed that leek plants had more coloniza￾tion potentials, wet, and dry (biomass) responses, and high nutrient contents 
compared to the rest of the test plants. More so, the metal (Zn and Cu), 
phosphate, and sulfate contents were generally enhanced by the inoculation 
of the AM fungus and the ionomes (inorganic chemical nutrients of cellular 
organisms in trace composition) fluctuated between the AM fungus and the 
plant species. In conclusion, the authors propose a further study of ionomics 
in AM fungus to better elucidate its potential role in prospective agricultural 
practices to standardize growth and development in crops. 
Knerr et al. (2018) tested and evaluated AM fungi associated with natural 
and conventional Allium cepa grown in the Pacific Northwest USA. In this 
study, the authors compared the AM fungi associations with the root coloni￾zation in field trials fumigated with metam-sodium vs. non-fumigated fields. 
The results of the biological controlled experiment revealed that the AM 
fungi colonize the roots of Allium cepa in the midsummer in the conservative 
fields (67 vs. 51%) than the non-fumigated conservative fields (45 vs. 67%). 
A molecular assay using a pyro-sequencing denoted 4 AM fungi of different 
orders: Diversispora, Claroideoglomus, Glomus, and Paraglomus, and four 
main active taxonomic units (ATUs); [Glomus (MO_G17), Funneliformis 
mosseae, Whitfield type 17 Glomus, and Claroideoglomus lamellosum]. The 
results of the AM fungi gotten from plants at the midsummer were richer in 
organic acid than the conventional form, and the diversity was also greater. 
There was no significant influence of organic vs. conservative plants on main 
ATUs. However, little richness of ATUs was observed in the organic fields, 
but not in conventional fields. The findings of the study indicated that there 
was no significant impact of metam-sodium chemigation on the AM fungi 
groups found in the Allium cepa crops. The authors recommend sustainable 
agricultural practices by the utilization of natural and conservative methods  
Arbuscular Mycorrhizas in Organic Agriculture 31 
in cultivating Allium cepa and the usage of metam sodium to fumigate soil 
does not seem to be the chief teamsters of AM fungi populations. 
2.4	 AMF USED IN THE ECORESTORATION OF HEAVILY 
POLLUTED SOIL, DISEASE, AND ENVIRONMENTAL STRESS 
Nurbaity et al. (2016) tested and evaluated the application of Endomycor￾rhizal fungus (Glomus sp.) and Gammaproteobacteria (Pseudomonas 
diminuta) to lessen the utilization of inorganic fertilizers in the cultivation of 
Ipomoea batatas. A biological controlled greenhouse trial was conducted to 
test the efficacy of the Endomycorrhizal and Gammaproteobacteria on potato 
cultivated on different soil types (Inceptisols and Andisols) mixed with N 
(Nitrogen), P (Phosphorus), and K (Potassium) fertilizer of concentration; 
0, 25, 50, 75, and 100%. The results of the biological controlled experiment 
revealed that the application of the Endomycorrhizal and Gammaproteo￾bacteria microbes lessen the inorganic fertilizer (NPK) to 50%, increase 
the uptake of nutrients, and elicited rapid growth in the Ipomoea batatas 
plant. The results of the responses of the different soils used indicated that 
Inceptisols had a better positive reaction compared to Andisols. The findings 
in this study revealed that bio-fertilizers can lessen the impact of inorganic 
chemical fertilizers. The authors proposed the sustainable utilization of 
bio-fertilizers to forestall and economically viable plant production and a 
greener ecosystem for Ipomoea batatas production. 
Pozo et al. (2002) tested and evaluated the local impact of AM fungi on 
the security of tomato crops against plant infection and total cleanses of it. 
Two AM fungi (G. intraradices and G. mosseae) were used to provoke local 
resistance to the tomato root disease (P. parasitica). The results of the study 
revealed that G. mosseae was able to effectively reduce the disease signs 
caused by P. parasitica contagion. The facts indicated a mixture of both 
systemic and local mechanisms elicited by bio-protector (AM fungi) impact 
from the biochemical analysis. These effects were new hydrolytic enzymic 
defense iso-forms (superoxide dismutase, chitinase, and β-1,3-glucanase, 
chitosanase) generated by the AM strain to induce fortification against 
oxidative stress in the tomato plant cell. However, a systemic modification 
of the action of some of the defense iso-forms was also noticed in some root 
parts of non-mycorrhizal plants. The results of the root protein analysis also 
supported the systemic impact of the symbiotic AM fungi on the effective 
resistance of the tomato plant to the P. parasitica disease. 32 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
Barea et al. (1998) tested and evaluated the biocontrol impact of the strain 
of AM fungi in the control of soil-borne plant disease. In this study, 3 (three) 
strains of AM fungi [F113, F113G22, and F113 (pCU203)] were tested. 
The result of the study showed that strain F113 which is the wild-form and 
strain F113G22 which is then transformed type elicited the development of 
mycelial and spores from G. mosseae growing in a colonized tomato. While 
strain F113 (pCU203) had no negative impact on the mycelial growth, but 
not to the spore development of G. mosseae but, sensitive to a concentration 
(10 μM) of DAPG, that can cause the production of the rhizosphere. The 
findings of the study showed that F113 had the ability to produce DAPG 
(2,4-diacetylphloroglucinol) which is capable of controlling soil-borne plant 
diseases. 
Garg and Chandel (2010) did a review on the sustainable advances of AM 
fungi in the biocontrol of environmental stressors. The authors opined those 
environmental variations caused by natural and anthropogenic activities have 
intensified air, water, and soil pollution, which have led to the contamination 
of agricultural lands and results in the global reduction of farm yields, capital 
returns, and food insecurity. The use of novel technology like bio-fertilizer 
derived from microbes to combat agro-chemicals like heavy metals (HMs) 
is a restoration model for a sustainable ecosystem. AM fungi play a pivotal 
role in soil fertility, crop productivity, and the bio-control of environmental 
contaminants and plant pathogens, the authors stated. They do this by 
secreting specific enzymes that will induce the plant cell to be resistant to 
infection and the soil microbes to mutual degrade some chemical structure 
therein. The authors recounted that in-depth scientific information on the 
biological composition of AM fungi is still lacking. However, recommend 
AM as a first-class bio-control organism against environmental stress, heavy 
metal control, and for the control of plant pathogens because it was environ￾mentally friendly, non-toxic, and cheap. 
Hussain et al. (2017) did a review on AM fungi as a biocontrol agent 
in contemporary sustainable agro practices. The authors condemned the 
indiscriminate use of inorganic chemicals, which has resulted in various 
deteriorations of the quality of the environment. The use of inorganic chemi￾cals such as fertilizers have changed the natural settings of the soil and water 
contents and caused serious ecological and health impacts on the ecosystem. 
To bring about environmental and food safety, a sustainable approach to 
agricultural fertilizers; using AM fungi as a bio-fertilizer and bio-control of 
environmental pollutants and pathogen have been recommended by many 
schools of scientific thought because it is environmentally safe, non-toxic, Arbuscular Mycorrhizas in Organic Agriculture 33 
and cheap. The authors opined that vesicular AM fungi have the potentials 
beyond normal usage and portend to be one of the bio-control tools for future 
sustainable management of problems encountered in modern agriculture. 
The mode of action of this fungus is via integrated pattern with similar fungi 
strains and soil bacteria, colonize the roots of the plant and affect the physi￾ological activities of the host plant, thereby accelerating plant nourishment, 
and improve the soil structure, quality, and health status. The authors, in 
conclusion, recommend vesicular AM fungi as a special candidate for large 
scale use as a bio-control agent. However, still, at its nascent stage, it has 
the potential to correct the anomalies caused by the conversion of inorganic 
chemicals in the environment. 
Cabral et al. (2015) did a review of the phytoremediation potentials of AM 
fungi on sites contaminated with HMs. The authors recounted the complex 
role microbes play in decontaminating pollutants in the environment. The 
role of AM has been stressed by numerous researchers in the bio-control of 
pathogens, chemicals, and nutrient stabilization in deficient agricultural soils. 
AM has been considered as the most viable organism because of its broad￾spectrum presence in the soil and roots of higher plants and the symbiotic 
role it plays in their bio-mechanism. The authors remarked that one of the 
phytoremediation potentials of AM is the possession of natural contrivances 
in resisting and tolerating heavy and trace metals in the media they habit. 
Because of this, the authors recommend the utilization of AM fungi because 
of the benefits it tends to portend for a sustainable phytoremediation purpose. 
Garg et al. (2017) did a review on the molecular and physiological 
mechanism of AM fungi and its ability to tolerate HM in the plant. The 
authors recounted that AM a symbiotic fungus has been recorded as one 
of the plant root fungi to reduce HM stress in crops. This is because of its 
biochemical, physiological, and molecular variations of the rhizosphere 
(root micro-biome) in the plant they inhabit. The authors backed these 
facts by establishing that the node of the actions of AM fungi; chelating of 
noxious metal ions to the wall of the plant cell, secretion of bio-chemical 
organic compounds (enzymes) such as oxalic and citric acids, glomalin, and 
glycoprotein have aided it to bind and reduce the HMs absorption in plants. 
Also, AM fungi likewise, augment the antioxidant defense reactions to offset 
HMs oxidative pressure. More so, it regulates the genome responsible for 
nutrient absorption of phytochelatins and metallothioneins, thus stimulating 
the sequestration of HMs in the mycorrhizal as well in the plant host plant 
structures. On this ground, the authors recommend AM fungi as a potential 
cleaning agent of HMs in agricultural soils. 34 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
Medina and Azcón (2010) did a review on the efficacy of the utilization 
of AM fungi as a natural cleanser to advance the performance and quality of 
plant under serious environmental stress. The authors recounted the stressed 
plant undergoes serious HMs contamination from polluted sites and adverse 
weather conditions. That to improve this dire state, AM fungi which have 
been documented and proposed to be one of the bio-control microbes can 
be utilized to buffer such conditions, creating a mechanism that will enable 
the plant to be HMs tolerant and drought resistant. In the same vein, the 
application of this natural buffer can aid, alter the degradation of the soil 
characteristics. Some agricultural wastes (rock phosphorus, sugar beet, and 
dry lime cake), can be used as a mixture or bio-sorption substrate with AM 
to increase its vigor and bio-control abilities; increase the enzyme produc￾tion, nutrient availability, tolerance to arid and HMs conditions of the plants. 
In conclusion, the author proposed an integrated treatment of soil with AM 
and agricultural waste residues as a re-vegetation method for plants recital 
in phosphate deficiency soil under serious arid region and the treatment of 
inorganic waste residues in agricultural land. This will serve as an effective 
bio-tech apparatus for the recovery of HMs polluted soils. 
Hashem et al. (2019) tested and evaluated tolerance of chickpea to arid 
conditions by using AM fungi as a biocontrol agent. The authors recounted 
the utilization of AM with biochar to improve the quality of plants to 
ameliorate some environmental stressors. The biological controlled experi￾ment involved two treatments (AM and bio-char). They were applied as 
individual and combined treatment(s) of chickpea crop plants. The results 
of the biological study revealed that the treatments provoked the growth 
and development of the root and shoot length and other sprouting parts of 
the plant when inoculated. It was also noticed that the resistance rate of the 
arid condition also increased, therefore stabilizing the water content and 
membrane stability index of the plant vascular systems. When both treat￾ments were combined, the rate of anabolism specifically, photosynthesis 
increased and led to net photosynthetic effectiveness. Individual treatment 
with AM fungi and bio-char respectively, or in amalgamation, alleviated 
the poisonous impacts to a significant amount and initiated an important 
improvement in water content and membrane stability index of the plant 
vascular systems under standard settings. More so, alterations with AM 
fungi and bio-char inoculation augmented the N-fixation qualities as well 
as the amount and load of protuberances, leg-hemoglobin substances, and 
activity of some enzymes is related to the control plants. The findings of their 
study indicated that chickpea was able to adapt to drought conditions after Arbuscular Mycorrhizas in Organic Agriculture 35 
the treatment with the mixtures (AM fungi and bio-char), able to regulate 
the uptake or absorption of phosphate and nitrogen and production of chlo￾rophyll for photosynthetic processes. The authors recommend the bio-char 
and AM as potential bio-control agents for sustainable agricultural purposes. 
Agely et al. (2005) tested and evaluated the use of AM fungi as and 
hyper-accumulator of toxic Arsenic (As) from the Chinese brake fern. The 
authors recounted the hyper-accumulative potential of Chinese brake fern 
from previous literature on its role in the uptake of As from contaminated 
soils in South America. A greenhouse biological controlled three factorial 
experiment was conducted with a concentration of As (0, 50, and 100 mg 
kg–1) and phosphate (0, 25, and 50 mg kg–1) and with or without Chinese 
brake fern contaminated The results of the biological controlled experiment 
showed that the AM fungi tolerated the altered concentrations of the As, as 
well as increased the leaf biomass of the fern plant. Besides, the fungi also 
amplified the absorption of As across an assortment of phosphate concentra￾tions, whereas phosphate uptake was in general enhanced on the condition of 
no As alteration. The findings from this study revealed that AM fungi have 
significant hyper-accumulative potentials towards As uptake by Chinese 
brake fern. In conclusion, the authors recommend the use of AM fungi as 
a phyto-cleanser to remediate the impact of any polluted soil and propose a 
commercial production for agricultural purposes. 
Sara et al. (2008) tested and evaluated the influence of AM fungi on the 
growth of Zea mays under cadmium stressed environment and phosphate 
source. The bio-control roles of AM fungi in the mitigation of environmental 
stressors were documented from various kinds of literature by the authors. 
The biological controlled experiment was done in a water system devoid of 
the soil environment (hydroponic) in an arbitrary 2×2×2 factorial setting. 
The plant Zea mays was inoculated with a strain of AM fungi Glomus 
macrocarpum and exposed to 0–20 µmolL–1 and 0–20 µmolL–1 nutrient 
concentration of Cd and P, respectively. The results of the study showed that 
AM fungi elicited the growth of the Zea mays while Cd lessen the dry mass 
content of the plant. The accumulation of Cd was strictly found in the root 
region. While there was no significant impact between Cd in the AM fungi 
and the non-inhabited AM plants. Further results showed traces of Cd in the 
root cell wall compared with the cytoplasm of the cell, and 26% in the cell 
wall of the non-inhabited AM plant compared to the cytoplasm of the same 
cell. The results of the comparison of the root and shoot system showed more 
Cd in the AM inhabited plants compared to the non-inhabited AM plants. 
The length and colonization of the mycorrhizal mycelium were reduced by 36 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
the addition of Cd addition. This was the result of the high phosphate supply. 
When guaiacol peroxidase and some protein, nutrients were added to the 
Cd, the AM fungi mycelium showed no root induction indicating maximum 
tolerance to Cd reaction. The author concluded in their findings that Cd 
affected the AM fungi relationship with the plant roots, however, an addition 
of nutrients and enzyme (peroxidase) to the media, made it more efficient to 
subdue cadmium stress. 
Christophersen et al. (2012) tested and evaluated the extrication and the 
colonization effects of AM fungi to As (Arsenic) tolerance in barrel clover 
plants. The authors tested three hypotheses and measured the genetic expres￾sion of the plants as well as the impact of As on the plant’s genome. The results 
of the biological controlled experiment revealed that the plants displayed 
high gene expression (MtPT4) and those injected with G. mosseae showed 
higher selectivity counter to As and much lesser expression (MtPht1:1) and 
a specific degree of MtPht1:2 expressions to G. intraradices injected with 
non-Mycorrhizal plants. The findings of their study showed active phosphate 
and/or As selectivity in AM plants specifically to G. mosseae. That, the degree 
to which this selectivity is not clear. However, depended on the uptake of the 
phosphate and As in their cell wall. The clear, up-regulation of the genomes 
(PCS and ACR) gene in AM fungi, plants, might also be involved and need 
an additional inquiry. 
Clark and Zeto (1996) isolated and tested Fe (iron) acquirement by AM 
fungi in Zea mays cultivated in a high pH (alkaline) soil. The results of the 
roots and shoot biomass were higher in AM fungi, plants than what was 
obtained in non-AM fungi plants. The result of the contents and concentra￾tions of elemental nutrients in the plant leaf was slightly more in AM fungi, 
plants compared to non-AM fungi plants. There was an improvement of iron 
contents under severe Fe conditions of the Zea mays plant when inoculated 
with AM strain. Findings from the study indicated that the benefits (booting 
of Fe deficiency by AM fungi) derived by the plant, cannot be replicated in a 
field setting because the outputs were extremely low for a rapidly developing 
plant of such. In conclusion, the authors recommend better host plants and 
the addition of phosphate to boost the uptake and control of iron by the AM 
fungi. 
Evelin et al. (2009) did a review on the mitigation of salinity stress in soil 
using AM fungi. The authors recounted the environmental stress faced by 
plants under serious saline conditions. AM fungi use enhance mechanism in 
alleviating saline stress in the plant which is nutrient acquirement; Ca, Mg, 
N, and P, upkeep of the Na+
-K+
 ion potentials of the plant K, biochemical Arbuscular Mycorrhizas in Organic Agriculture 37 
alterations and balance of some plant chemicals; antioxidants, carbohydrates, 
polyamines, betaines, and prolines, physiological alteration and balance of 
some plant activities; N-fixation, root nodulation, accumulation of abscisic 
acid (ABA), the hydro status of the plant, relative penetrability and efficacy 
of photosynthesis and molecular alteration of gene expression of some plant 
extreme-structures such as LsP5CS, Lslea, Na(+)/H(+), Lsnced, antiporters, 
and PIP, antiporters, Lsnced, Lslea, and LsP5CS. The authors in conclusion 
recommend that extreme structural and molecular alterations of AM fungi 
should be looked into for further research and large-scale production. 
Ferrol et al. (2009) did a review of the survival methods of AM fungi in 
the copper polluted ecosystem. The authors recounted that the mechanism 
that AM fungi use in the mitigation of copper in polluted soils are found in 
their intra-cellular media and cell cytoplasm-cytosol. The copper is therefore 
trans-located to the several sub-cellular parts via the root vacuoles that may 
create lesser damage to the plant. The AM fungi have also evolved with 
time some compartmentalization approaches or strategies with extra-radical 
reproductive structure and intra-radical vesicles. More so, they have an 
antagonistic mechanism to reduce the oxidative stress of copper as well as to 
repair damaged tissues induced by the toxic Cu. 
Ferrol et al. (2016) tested and evaluated the HMs absurdity in AM fungi, 
its mechanism, and prospective utilization. That is a close association of AM 
fungi with the root cortex of plants; the external hyphae absorb nutrients 
such as phosphate, manganese, iron, zinc, and copper. Above and beyond, 
the AM fungi not only improve the nutrient quality of the plant but also aid in 
the remediation of the HMs impacts as well. This makes AM fungi a potent 
bio-regulatory organism against nutrient deficiency in the soil and alleviation 
of soil toxins. In conclusion, the authors proposed an in-depth investigation 
of the homeostatic response of AM fungi to plant HMs acquirement under 
lacking and noxious HMs conditions. 
Galli et al. (1994) did a review on the potential ability of AM fungi on 
chelating HMs from the soil to eke plant growth (nutrients) and alleviating 
eco-stress. The authors stated that this has also been demonstrated by many 
studies. However, the extra-matrical mycelium of the fungi cell wall has 
mechanisms such as melanin, cellulose, and chitin that allow the chelating 
of HMs and enable the fungi to decontaminate the toxic soil. In conclusion, 
the authors proposed the utilization of multi chains of phosphate granules 
with mixtures of nitrogen and sulfur as bio-sorption agents for effective soil 
remediation.  
38 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
Jambon et al. (2018) wrote a comprehensive review on the application 
of mycorrhizal fungi for their bioremediation potential of an inorganic and 
organic pollutant that is available in the groundwater and soil. Also, their 
effectiveness in promoting plant growth was emphasized. The authors also 
highlighted the synergetic effects of mycorrhizal fungi with free-living 
saprotrophs and bacteria for their degradative potential for highly polluted 
environments. Profiting from improved knowledge of microbial community 
structure and their gathering gives a proper understanding of how holobiont 
can be altered to increase their rate of pollutant degradation and drastic 
improvement of agricultural plant growth. The authors provide a holistic and 
proper understanding of plant-bacteria-fungi interfaces and the prospects of 
utilizing these tripartite interfaces to improve the efficiency of phytoreme￾diation of organic pollutants. 
Chen et al. (2018) reviewed the ecological role of AMF and its advanta￾geous services in agriculture. The authors hailed AM as one of the most effec￾tive symbionts with several ecological functions including plant boosters, 
stress-tolerant, and resistance, soil pH buffer, soil profile management, and 
fertility enhancer. The ability of AMF to interact with most plant species 
especially, tree fruits, vegetables, cereals, and legumes make it a sustainable 
bio-fertilizer for agriculture. The authors stated several types of research 
that have stressed the utilization of AM and re-echo its signaling trails as 
a further intervention for ecosystem reconstruction and management. Still, 
they stressed the exchange of nutritional benefits the association tends to get 
during the interactive biological functioning. Because of the benefits, the 
authors concluded that AM stands the chance to be used in different related 
areas (landscaping and horticulture) apart from agriculture and recommend 
it for novel developments in these areas. 
2.5 IMPROVEMENT OF SOIL STRUCTURE AND BIODIVERSITY 
It has been observed that the effect of AMF on various soil activities is a very 
complex process to define because there is the various level of variation which 
depends on types of plants, environmental condition, and the types of fungal 
genotypes. In view of the aforementioned, Hamel wrote a comprehensive 
review on the effect of AMF-microbe interactions, mobilization of nitrogen 
and phosphorus most especially in the root zone, the types of mycorrhizo￾sphere as well as the significance of AMF in the root zone of the phosphorus 
and nitrogen dynamics. It was observed that the spatial arrangement of the 
hyphae and the roots in the soil gives a better understanding that AMF may Arbuscular Mycorrhizas in Organic Agriculture 39 
increase the process of reabsorption of nutrients losses mainly through root 
exudation. These fungi portend the capability to influence other soil micro￾organisms, which infers that they play a crucial role in various biochemical 
reactions that occur in the soil, such as nitrification and mineralization of 
organic matter. They also highlighted that AMF has the potential to utilize 
organic sources of nitrogen and nitrogen while AMF has been highlighted 
to have the capability to enhance the capability of the plant to compete with 
saprotrophs for the absorption of nitrogen and phosphorus. This might be 
liked by the fact that AMF could utilize amino-acid-N, their capability to 
produce phosphatase enzymes as well as the production of organic anions. 
It has been stated that AMF possesses improved competitive capacity of 
mycorrhizal plants under conditions of low soil Nitrogen and phosphorus 
level which could minimize the populations of saprotrophic populations, 
and whenever this occurs, it could regulate soil matter production rate. This 
shows that adequate management of beneficial soil resources could be led to 
an effective sustainable cropping system for effective crop production. 
Berardia subacaulis Vill has been recognized as a monospecific genus 
that is endemic to the southwestern Alps where it is cultivated on alpine 
screes, which are life-threatening environments characterized by limiting 
growth conditions and soil disturbance. The rate of root colonization in this 
region by AMF has been recognized as highly significant to these regions 
because it plays a high impact on the stress tolerance and plant nutrition as 
well as amendment and restructuring of soil. 
Casazza et al. (2017) evaluated the biotic factor and soil features that 
enhance the community composition and abundance of AMF in the roots 
of B. subacaulis, which had formerly been discovered to be mycorrhizal. 
Hence, the authors evaluate the effects of environmental and soil properties 
of AMF community composition and abundance available in the roots of B. 
subacaulis, sampled on three different scree slopes were analyzed. The result 
indicated that the dark septate endophytes and vegetation coverage did not 
affect the plant community and the percentage of AMF colonization. The 
abundance of the AMF in the roots could be linked to the presence of some 
chemicals mainly inform of potassium and calcium and AMF colonization, 
physical properties such as field capacity, cation exchange, and electrical 
conductivity which indicated that AMF could enhance the quality of the soil 
tested. The NMDS experiment performed on the AMF community indicates 
that the diversity of AMF present on various sites was stimulated by the 
slope and the quality of the soil. Their study showed that slope stimulates 40 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
physical disturbance of alpine screes which might have led to disruption 
tolerant AMF taxa, which constitutes various plant-fungus assemblages. 
Biological invasions have been recognized as a significant Biological 
invasions alteration that can influence the soil diversity and ecosystem 
function. It has been acknowledged that soil microorganisms play a crucial 
role in plant development and their eventual establishment. But there is a 
need to establish their role in biological inversions. The fastest approach 
to it is to inquire whether invasive plants host has numerous microbes than 
their nearby native plant species. Because of the aforementioned, DeBellis 
et al. (2019) evaluated the variation that occurs in the related microorganism 
of native exotic Norway maple (A. platanoides L.) and sugar maple (Acer 
saccharum Marsh.) obtained from a forested reserve in eastern Canada. The 
authors utilized microscopy to investigate root fungi and high-throughput 
sequencing for the molecular characterization of the fungal, bacteria, and AM 
communities of the maple species. The result obtained indicates that there 
was variation in the root-related fungal and bacterial community between 
the host species. Moreover, the operational taxonomic units of the fungal 
and bacterial found in the Norway maple was greater than the operational 
taxonomic units while the indicator species evaluation shows that there were 
three bacterial and nine fungal operational taxonomic units with special refer￾ence for sugar maple Also, the highest dominant bacterial phyla discovered 
on the roots of both maple species were Proteobacteria and Actinobacteria 
respectively. The following fungal species discovered with the sugar maple 
were Hypocreales, Agaricales, Helotiales, Capnodiales, Pleosporales, while 
those found on the Norway maple roots were Trechisporales, Helotiales, 
Pleosporales, Hypocreales Agaricales, respectively. The highest dominant 
orders discovered in the sugar maple were Hypocreales and Capnodiales 
while the level of Dark septate fungi colonization was significant in sugar 
maple, but the rates of colonization by the arbuscular mycorrhizal fungal 
communities were not observed. Their study indicated that two congeneric 
plant species planted at a close distance can harbor specific root microbial 
communities. Their study provides a baseline for the significance of plant 
species in the structuring root-related microbe community. Also, the high 
level of colonization detected in the Norway maple showed that AMF had 
great compatibility in the introduced range. Their study also showed that 
plant-related microbial communities could influence host fitness and role 
in numerous ways. Hence their study indicated that biotic interaction could 
play a role in the dynamics between invasive and native species.  
 
Arbuscular Mycorrhizas in Organic Agriculture 41 
2.6	 BIOLOGICAL CONTROL 
Wehner et al. (2009) wrote a comprehensive report on the protective roles 
of AMF against some pathogens that could affect the root of crops, and the 
modes of actions of these fungi were also highlighted. It has been stated 
that there is a tendency that the AMF taxa differ in numerous ways that 
they could limit the adverse effects of pathogens on the host plants, but 
the synergetic effect among different members of AMF assemblages and 
communities might lead to enhanced protection of pathogen. Therefore, the 
authors described the between AM and pathogenic fungi and cited some 
specific examples that compare the efficacy of single- and multi-species AM 
fungal assemblages. The authors also highlight the specific modes of action 
by which AMF exhibits their protective role against their pathogens, and 
special interests were placed on the functional diversity among AM fungal 
taxa in terms of their modes of action. The authors proposed that functional 
complementarity among AMF fungal taxa in relationship with pathogen 
might be linked to the reason for the association between plant productivity 
and AMF fungal diversity. 
2.7	 MODES OF ACTION OF AMF AGAINST PESTS AND 
PATHOGENS 
AMF has the capability to mitigate against the biotic stress using several 
approaches such as competition with the pathogens or through indirect 
means mainly by plant-mediated influence. The direct influence includes 
completion for nitrogen, carbon, and other growth factors and survival 
for niches or specific infection sites. It has been highlighted that AMF 
possesses the capacity to minimize the effect of pathogenic fungi present in 
the root region of plants (Filion et al., 2003). Apparently, AMF and patho￾genic utilized the available resources within the root, containing infection/ 
establishment location, space, and the rate of their photosynthesis (Whipps, 
2004). Moreover, it has been documented that a negative correlation exists 
among the pathogenic microorganisms and AMF that dwells in the soil and 
the roots (St. Arnaud and Elsen, 2005). 
Cordier et al. (1998) also affirmed that arbusculated cells could inhibit 
pathogenic oomycete Phytophthora. Also, AMF has the capacity to cause 
changes in the root system structure in morphology as well as in the root 
exudates (Pivato et al., 2008). The alteration may affect the rate of infec￾tion against the invading pathogens, and this may also affect the microbial  
42 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
population of the mycorrhizosphere which empowers the capability of the 
microbiota to inhibit many pathogens (Badri and Vivanco, 2009). 
Vos et al. (2011) also affirmed that alteration in the level of root exuda￾tion may affect the nematodes and microbial pathogens. Recently it was 
documented that AMF has the capacity to regulate the capability of AMF 
to reorganize or regulate the rate of expression available in plants gene 
(Campos-Soriano et al., 2012). This may also influence the rates of secondary 
or primary metabolism of the plant which are all utilized in plant defense 
(Lopez-Raez et al., 2010a, b). 
Moreover, it has been observed that AMF has the capability to stimulate 
plant defense response at the beginning of attachment to their plant host 
just like other biotrophs (Paszkowski, 2006). Hence, after the successful 
colonization, the AMF has the capability to endure the plant counter-reaction 
which it could overcome as time goes on and energetically modify plant 
defense rejoinders. This then led to stimulation of the plant defense after a 
challenger attack which is referred to as priming (Pozo and Azcon-Aguilar, 
2007). Priming helps the plant to get ready for any attack by forging a body 
that may be faster and/or stronger compared to a plant that has not been 
previously exposed to prime stimulus thereby enhancing the plant resistance 
(Walters and Heil, 2007). 
2.8 REGULATION OF THE PLANT HOST IMMUNE SYSTEM 
The stimulation of resistance around the root of the pant by AMF does not 
require direct stimulation of defense mechanisms but can be obtained can result 
from sensitization of the tissue upon suitable prompt to show basal defense 
mechanisms more proficiently after successive pathogen attack (Jung et al., 
2012). The stimulation of resistance that occurs whenever AMF colonizes a 
plant might not need direct stimulation of the defense mechanism but could be 
from the triggering of the tissue by necessary stimulation to show dense action 
more enhanced after the pathogen attack (Jung et al., 2012). The priming of 
the immune system of the plant has been documented to be common when￾ever beneficial microorganisms come in contact with the plant host system in 
comparison to direct stimulation of the defense (Conrath, 2009). Several modes 
of action have been highlighted to be involved in the stimulation of the primed 
state as a moderate build-up of defense-associated molecules such as chromatin 
modifications and transcription factors or MAP kinases (mitogen-activated 
protein kinase) (Pastor et al., 2012). Benhamou et al. (1994) stated that there was 
a strong defense mechanism that was triggered as the Mycorrhizal-transformed  
 
Arbuscular Mycorrhizas in Organic Agriculture 43 
carrot roots showed a powerful defense reaction as the location when attacked 
by Fusarium. 
Moreover, it has been observed that in tomato, AM colonization systemi￾cally guilds the root of tomato plant against the action of Phytophthora 
parasitica infection but the AMF develop a papilla-like structure around the 
location of pathogen infection through the dropping of non-esterified callose 
and pectins that could avert the action pathogens from spreading around 
the plant hosts. They also prompt the build-up of β-1,3 glucanases and 
mycorrhizal-transformed carrot roots displayed stronger defense reactions 
at sites challenged by Fusarium (Benhamou et al., 1994). In tomato, AM 
colonization systemically protected roots against Phytophthora parasitica 
infection. Only mycorrhizal plants formed papilla-like structures around the 
sites of pathogen infection through deposition of non-esterified pectins and 
callose, preventing the pathogen from spreading further, and they accumu￾lated significantly more PR-1a than those that are not mycorrhizal plants 
upon Phytophthora attack (Pozo et al., 1999, 2002). 
Also, the build-up of the following compounds such as solavetivone, 
phytoalexins, and rishitin were discovered inside mycorrhizal potatoes when 
Rhizoctonia infection but interestingly AMF does not have any influence on the 
level of these compounds (Yao et al., 2003). The build-up of several phenolic 
compounds could be linked to the protective role against F. oxysporum by date 
palm trees (Jaiti et al., 2007), while the action of the priming has also been 
confirmed as a protective mechanism against nematode (Hao et al., 2012). 
Also, the primed response is not limited to plant roots but could also be found 
in the shoot region (Pozo et al., 2010). Moreover, it was observed that a high 
level of induced systemic resistance (ISR) was observed in the tomato plant 
against the action of necrotrophic foliar pathogen Botrytis cinerea (BC). It was 
discovered that the amount of the pathogen available in mycorrhizal plants 
was significantly reduced while there was an enhanced manifestation of some 
defense-associated, jasmonate-regulated available in the plants (Pozo et al., 
2010). The application of tomato mutants impaired in jasmonate acid signaling 
affirmed that jasmonate acid is necessary for AM-induced resistance against 
Botrytis (Jung et al., 2012). 
2.9 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE DIRECTION 
This chapter has established the significance of AMF in sustainable organic 
agriculture. This chapter has also validated the sustainable application of 
AMF for their effectiveness against pest and plant pathogens, their application 44 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
as a biofertilizer, they restructure of dilapidated soil, and ecorestoration of 
heavily polluted soil. It was also affirmed that the colonization of AMF with 
roots of the plant could enhance the host plant physiology. This also plays 
a crucial role in regulating the capacity of the plants to regulate abiotic and 
abiotic stress. The modes of action utilized by AMF have been discussed 
extensively in this chapter. Also, the role of AMF in the maintenance of 
soil diversity and its functions with other beneficial microorganisms has 
been elucidated in detail. Furthermore, specific examples have been cited 
that illustrates the potential of AMF as a plant enhancer for improvement of 
the plant in term of yield and growth parameters after applying them as an 
inoculant to various crops. 
KEYWORDS 
• abiotic stresses 
• arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi 
• biofertilizer 
• biotic stress 
• ecorestoration
 
• organic agriculture
 
REFERENCES 
Adetunji, C. O., & Ugbenyen, A. M., (2019). Mechanism of action of nanopesticide derived 
from microorganism for the alleviation of abiotic and biotic stress affecting crop 
productivity. In: Nanotechnology for Agriculture: Crop Production and Protection. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-32-9374-8_7. 
Adetunji, C. O., (2019). Environmental impact and ecotoxicological influence of bio-fabricated 
and inorganic nanoparticle on soil activity. In: Panpatte, D., & Jhala, Y., (eds.), Nanotech￾nology for Agriculture.Springer, Singapore. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-32-9370-0_12. 
Adetunji, C. O., Egbuna, C., Tijjani, H., Adom, D., Khalil, L., Al-Ani, T., & Partick-Iwuanuyanwu, 
K. C., (2019). Pesticides, home made preparation of natural biopesticides and application. 
In: Natural Remedy for Pest, Diseases and Weed Control (pp. 1–12). Elsevier. 
Adetunji, C. O., Kumar, D., Raina, M., Arogundade, O., & Sarin, N. M., (2019b). Endophytic 
microorganisms as biological control agents for plant pathogens: A panacea for sustainable 
agriculture. In: Plant Biotic Interactions. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-26657-8_1. 
Adetunji, C. O., Oloke, J. K., Bello, O. M., Pradeep, M., & Jolly, R. S., (2019d). 
Isolation, structural elucidation and bioherbicidal activity of an eco-friendly  
Arbuscular Mycorrhizas in Organic Agriculture 45 
bioactive 2-(hydroxymethyl) phenol, from Pseudomonas aeruginosa (C1501) and its 
ecotoxicological evaluation on soil. Env. Tech. Innov., 13(2019), 304–317. 
Adetunji, C. O., Panpatte, D., Bello, O. M., & Adekoya, M. A., (2019c). Application of 
nanoengineered metabolites from beneficial and eco-friendly microorganisms as biological 
control agents for plant pests and pathogens. In: Nanotechnology for Agriculture: Crop 
Production and Protection. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981–32-9374-8_13. 
Agely, A. L., Sylvia, D. M., & Ma, L. Q., (2005). Mycorrhizae increase arsenic uptake by the 
hyperaccumulator Chinese brake fern (Pteris vittata L.). J. Env. Qual., 34(6), 2181–2186. 
Andrade, S. A. L., Mazzafera, P., Schiavinato, M. A., & Silveira, A. P. D., (2009). Arbuscular 
mycorrhizal association in coffee. The J. Agri. Sci., 147(2), 105–115. https://doi.org/ 
10.1017/S0021859608008344. 
Azizah, H., & Idris, Z. A., (1996). Microbes: How they can do wonders to soil fertility. 
Malaysian Technol. Bull. 4, 92–94. 
Badri, D. V., & Vivanco, J. M., (2009). Regulation and function of root exudates. Pl. Cell Env., 
32, 666–681. 
Barea, J. M., Andrade, G., Bianciotto, V., Dowling, D., Lohrke, S., Bonfante, P., O’Gara, F., & 
Azcon-Aguilar, C., (1998). Impact on Arbuscular mycorrhiza formation of Pseudomonas 
strains used as inoculants for biocontrol of soil-borne fungal plant pathogens. Appl. Env. 
Microb., 64(6), 2304–2307. 
Baslam, M., Garmendia, I., & Goicoechea, N., (2011). Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (AMF) 
improved growth and nutritional quality of greenhouse-grown lettuce. J. Agri. Food 
Chem., 59(10), 5504–5515. https://doi.org/10.1021/jf200501c. 
Benhamou, N., Fortin, J. A., Hamel, C., St Arnaud, M., & Shatilla, A., (1994). Resistance 
responses of mycorrhizal Ri T-DNA-transformed carrot roots to infection by Fusarium 
oxysporum f. sp. chrysanthemi. Phytopathology, 84, 958–968. 
Berruti, A., Lumini, E., Balestrini, R., & Bianciotto, V., (2016). Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi 
as natural biofertilizers: Let’s benefit from past successes. Fron. Microbiol., 6(426). 
https://doi.org/ 10.3389/fmicb.2015.01559. 
Binh, T. T., Tran, A. B., Stephanie, J., Watts-Williams, A. C., & Cavagnaro, T. R., (2019). 
Impact of an arbuscular mycorrhizal fungus on the growth and nutrition of fifteen crop and 
pasture plant species. Func. Plant Biol., 46(8), 732–742. https://doi.org/10.1071/FP18327. 
Bonfante, P., & Perotto, D. S., (1995). Strategy of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi when infecting 
host plants. New Phytology, 130, 3–21. 
Bonifacio, E., Nicolotti, G., Zanini, E., & Cellerino, G. P., (1999). Heavy metal uptake by 
mycorrhizae of beech in contaminated and uncontaminated soils. Fresenius Environ. Bull., 
7, 408–413. 
Cabral, L., Soares, C. R., Giachini, A. J., & Siqueira, J. O., (2015). Arbuscular mycorrhizal 
fungi in phytoremediation of contaminated areas by trace elements: Mechanisms and 
major benefits of their applications. World J. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 31(11), 1655–1664. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11274–015–1918-y. 
Carina, V. T., Emilia, M. M., Miguel, U. S., Ortiz, D. R., Manjunatha, B., Thangaswamy, S., 
& Mulla, S. I., (2016). Effect of Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (AMF) and Azospirillum 
on growth and nutrition of banana plantlets during acclimatization phase. J. Appl. Pharm. 
Sci., 6(06), 131–138. 
Casazza, G., Lumini, E., Ercole, E., Dovana, F., Guerrina, M., Arnulfo, A., et al., (2017). The 
abundance and diversity of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi are linked to the soil chemistry 
of screes and to slope in the Alpic paleo-endemic Berardia subacaulis. PLoS One, 12(2), 
e0171866. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0171866.  
46 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
Chen, M., Arato, M., Borghi, L., Nouri, E., & Reinhardt, D., (2018). Beneficial services of 
arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi-from ecology to application. Front. Plant Sci., 4. |https:// 
doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2018.01270. 
Christophersen, H. M., Smith, F. A., & Smith, S. E., (2012). Unraveling the influence of 
arbuscular mycorrhizal colonization on arsenic tolerance in Medicago: Glomus mosseae 
is more effective than G. intraradices, associated with lower expression of root epidermal 
Pi transporter genes. Front. Physiol., 13(3), 91. doi:10.3389/fphys.2012.00091. 
Clark, R. B., & Zeto, S. K., (1996). Iron acquisition by mycorrhizal maize grown on alkaline 
soil. J. Plant Nutr., 19, 2. 
Conrath, U., (2009). Priming of induced plant defense responses. In: Loon, L. C. V., (ed), 
Advances in Botanical Research (pp. 361–395). Academic Press. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
S0065-2296(09)51009-9. 
Cordier, C., Pozo, M. J., Barea, J. M., Gianinazzi, S., & Gianinazzi-Pearson, V., (1998). Cell 
defense responses associated with localized and systemic resistance to Phytophthora 
parasitica induced in tomato by an arbuscular mycorrhizal fungus. Mol. Plant-Microbe 
Interact., 11, 1017–1028. 
Danneberg, G., Latus, C., Zimmer, W., Hundes-Hagen, B., Schneider-Poetsch, H., & Bothe, 
H., (1992). Influence of vesicular-arbuscular mycorrhiza on phytohormone balances in 
maize (Zea mays L.). Journal of Plant Physiology, 141, 33–39. 
DeBellis, T., Kembel, S. W., & Lessard, J. P., (2019). Shared mycorrhizae but distinct 
communities of other root-associated microbes on co-occurring native and invasive 
maples. Peer J. https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj.7295. 
Demür, S., (2004). Influence of arbuscular mycorrhiza on some physiological growth 
parameters of pepper. Turk. J. Biol., 28, 85–90. 
Douds, D. D., & Millner, P., (1999). Biodiversity of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi in agroeco￾systems. Agri, Ecosys. Environ., 74, 77–93. 
Evelin, H., Kapoor, R., & Giri, B., (2009). Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi in alleviation of salt 
stress: A review. Annals Botany, 104(7), 1263–1280. https://doi.org/10.1093/aob/mcp251. 
Ferrol, N., Gonzalez-Guerrero, M., Valderas, A., Benabdellah, K., & Azcon-Aguilar, C., 
(2009). Survival strategies of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi in Cu-polluted environments. 
Phytochem. Rev., 8(3), 551–559. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11101-009-9133-9. 
Ferrol, N., Tamayo, E., Martínez, E., & Paola, V., (2016). The heavy metal paradox in 
arbuscular mycorrhizas: From mechanisms to biotechnological applications. J. Exp. Bot., 
67(22), erw403. https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/erw403. 
Filion, M., St Arnaud, M., & Jabaji-Hare, S. H., (2003). Quantification of Fusarium solani f. 
sp. phaseoli in mycorrhizal bean plants and surrounding mycorrhizosphere soil using real￾time polymerase chain reaction and direct isolations on selective media. Phytopathology, 
93, 229–235. 
Galli, U., Schüepp, H., & Brunold, C., (1994). Heavy metal binding by mycorrhizal fungi. 
Physiologia Plantarum, 92(2), 364–368. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1399-3054.1994. 
tb05349.x. 
Garg, N., & Chandel, S., (2010). Sustainable Development Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Networks: 
Process and Functions. a Review on Agronomy and Sustainable Development (Vol. 30, 
No. 3). Springer Verlag/EDP Sciences/INRA. 
Garg, N., Singh, S., & Kashyap, L., (2017). Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi and heavy metal 
tolerance in plants: An insight into physiological and molecular mechanisms. In: Varma, A., Arbuscular Mycorrhizas in Organic Agriculture 47 
Prasad, R., & Tuteja, N., (eds.), Mycorrhiza-Nutrient Uptake, Biocontrol, Ecorestoration. 
Springer, Cham., https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-68867-1_4. 
Gianinazzi, S., Schuepp, H., Barea, J. M., & Haselwandter, K., (2002). Mycorrhizal 
Technology in Agriculture-From Genes to Bioproducts (p. 296). Springer, Basel. https:// 
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-0348-8117-3. 
Grant, C., Bitman, S., Montreal, M., Plenchette, C., & Morel, C., (2005). Soil and fertilizer 
phosphorus: Effects on plant supply and mycorrhizal development. Canadian J. Plant 
Sci., 85, 3–14. https://doi.org/doi:10.4141/P03-182. 
Hamel, C., (2004). Impact of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi on N and P cycling in the root 
zone. Can. J. Soil Sci., 84, 383–395. 
Hao, Z., Fayolle, L., Van, T. D., Chatagnier, O., Li, X., Gianinazzi, S., & Gianinazzi-Pearson, 
V., (2012). Local and systemic mycorrhiza-induced protection against the ectoparasitic 
nematode xiphinema index involves priming of defense gene responses in grapevine. J. 
Exp. Bot., 63, 3657–3672. 
Hashem, A., Kumar, A., Al-Dbass, A. M., Abdulaziz, A. A., FahadAl-Arjani, A. B., Garima, 
S., Farooq, M., & Fathi, A. E., (2019). Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi and biochar 
improves drought tolerance in chickpea. Saudi J. Biol. Sci., 26(3) 614–624. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.sjbs.2018.11.005. 
Hussain, M., Hussain, D. Z. D., & Reshi, A., (2017). Vesicular arbuscular mycorrhizal (VAM) 
fungi-as a major biocontrol agent in modern sustainable agriculture system. Russian 
Agri. Sci., 43(2), 138–143. https://doi.org/10.3103/S1068367417020057. 
Igiehon, N. O., & Babalola, O. O., (2017). Bio-fertilizers and sustainable agriculture: 
Exploring arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 101(12). https:// 
doi.org/10.1007/s00253-017-8344-z. 
Itelima, J. U., Bang, W. J., Onyimba, I. A., & Egbere, O. J., (2018). A review: Biofertilizer; 
a key player in enhancing soil fertility and crop productivity. J. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 
Rep., 2(1), 22–28. 
Jaiti, F., Meddich, A., & El Hadrami, I., (2007). Effectiveness of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi 
in the protection of date palm (Phoenix dactylifera L.) against bayoud disease. Physiol. 
Mol. Plant Pathol., 71, 166–173. 
Jambon, I., Thijs, S., Weyens, N., & Vangronsveld, J., (2018). Harnessing plant-bacteria￾fungi interactions to improve plant growth and degradation of organic pollutants. J. Plant 
Interactions, 13(1) 119–130. https://doi.org/10.1080/17429145.2018.1441450. 
Jastrow, J. D., Miller, R. M., & Lussenhop, J., (1998). Contributions of interacting biological 
mechanisms to soil aggregate stabilization in restored prairie. Soil Biol. Biochem., 30, 
905–916. 
Jung, S. C., Martinez-Medina, A., Lopez-Raez, J. A., & Pozo, M. J., (2012). Mycorrhiza￾induced resistance and priming of plant defenses. J. Chem. Ecol., 38, 651–664. 
Junior, P. P., Moreira, B. C., Da Silva, M. C. S., Veloso, T. G. R., Stürmer, S. L., Fernandes, R. 
B. A., De Sá Mendonça, E., & Kasuya, C. M., (2019). Agroecological coffee management 
increases arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi diversity. PLoS One, 14(1), e0209093. https://doi. 
org/10.1371/journal.pone.0209093. 
Knerr, A. J., Wheeler, D., Schlatter, D., Sharma-Poudyal, D., Du Toit, L. J., & Paulitz, T. C., 
(2018). Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungal communities in organic and conventional onion 
crops in the Columbia Basin of the Pacific Northwest United States. Phytobiomes J., 2, 
194–207. 48 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
Kucey, R. M. N., & Paul, E. A., (1982). Carbon flow, photosynthesis and N2
 fixation in 
mycorrhizal and Nodulated fababeans (Vicia faba L.). Soil Biol. Biochem., 14, 407–412. 
Laila, A., Trisnaningrum, N., & Hamawi, M., (2019). Significant potential of arbuscular 
mycorrhizae fungi to increase on yield of Shallot. IOP. Conf. Series: Earth Environ. Sci., 
292, 012017. https://doi.org/10.1088/1755-1315/292/1/012017. 
Lopez-Raez, J. A., Flors, V., Garcia, J. M., & Pozo, M. J., (2010b). AM symbiosis alters 
phenolic acid content in tomato roots. Plant Signal Behav., 5, 1138–1140. 
Lopez-Raez, J. A., Verhage, A., Fernandez, I., García, J. M., Azcón-Aguilar, C., Flors, V., 
& Pozo, M. J., (2010). Hormonal and transcriptional profiles highlight common and 
differential host responses to arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi and the regulation of the 
oxylipin pathway. J. Exp. Bot., 61(10), 2589–2601. 
Maeder, P., Fliessbach, A., Dubois, D., Gunst, L., Fried, P., & Niggli, U., (2002). Soil fertility 
and biodiversity in organic farming. Science, 296(5573), 1694–1697. 
Marschner, H., & Dell, B., (1994). Nutrient uptake in mycorrhizal symbiosis. Plant Soil, 159, 
89–102. 
Masri, B. M., (1997). Mycorrhizal Inoculation for Growth Enhancement and Improvement of 
the Water Relations in Mangosteen (Garcinia mangostana L.) Seedlings. Ph.D. Thesis. 
Universiti Putra Malaysia, Serdang, Malaysia. 
McGonigle, T. P., & Miller, M. H., (1996). Development of fungi below ground in association 
with plants growing in disturbed and undisturbed soils. Soil Biol. Biochem., 28, 263–269. 
Medina, A., & Azcón, R., (2010). Effectiveness of the application of arbuscular mycorrhiza 
fungi and organic amendments to improve soil quality and plant performance under stress 
conditions. J. Soil Sci. Plant Nut., 10(3), 354–372. 
Nurbaity, A., Sofyan, E. T., & Hamdani, J. S., (2016). Application of Glomus sp. and 
Pseudomonas diminuta reduce the use of chemical fertilizers in the production of potato 
grown on different soil types. IOP Conf. Ser. Earth Env. Sci., 41(1), 012004. https://doi. 
org/10.1088/1755-1315/41/1/012004. 
Oladele, S., & Awodun, M., (2014). Response of lowland rice to bio-fertilizer inoculation and 
their effects on growth and yield in Southwestern Nigeria. J. Agric. Environ. Sci., 3(2), 
371–390. 
Pastor, V., Luna, E., Mauch-Mani, B., Ton, J., & Flors, V., (2012). Primed plants do not forget. 
Environ. Exp. Bot. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.envexpbot.2012.02.013. 
Paszkowski, U., (2006). Mutualism and parasitism: The yin and yang of plant symbioses. 
Curr. Opin. Plant Biol., 9, 364–370. 
Pivato, B., Gamalero, E., Lemanceau, P., & Berta, G., (2008). Cell organization of Pseudomonas 
fluorescens C7R12 on adventitious roots of Medicago truncatula as affected by arbuscular 
mycorrhiza. FEMS Microbiol. Lett., 289, 173–180. 
Pozo, M. J., & Azcon-Aguilar, C., (2007). Unraveling mycorrhiza-induced resistance. Curr. 
Opi. Plant Biol., 10, 393–398. 
Pozo, M. J., Azcon-Aguilar, C., Dumas-Gaudot, E., & Barea, J. M., (1999). β-1,3-glucanase 
activities in tomato roots inoculated with arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi and/or Phytophthora 
parasitica and their possible involvement in bioprotection. Plant Sci., 141, 149–157. 
Pozo, M. J., Cordier, C., Dumas-Gaudot, E., Gianinazzi, S., Jose, M. B., & Azcón-Aguilar, 
C., (2002). Localized versus systemic effect of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi on defense 
responses to Phytophthora infection in tomato plants. J. Exp. Bot., 53(368), 525–534. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/jexbot/53.368.525. Arbuscular Mycorrhizas in Organic Agriculture 49 
Pozo, M. J., Jung, S. C., Lopez-Raez, J. A., & Azcon-Aguilar, C., (2010). Impact of arbuscular 
mycorrhizal symbiosis on plant response to biotic stress: The role of plant defense 
mechanisms. In: Kapulnick, Y., & Douds, D. D., (eds.), Arbuscular Mycorrhizas: 
Physiology and Function (pp. 193–207). Springer, Dordrecht. 
Read, D. J., Lewis, D. H. A., Fitter, H., & Alexander, I. J., (1992). Mycorrhizas in Ecosystems. 
CAB International, Oxford. 
Richardson, D. M., Allsopp, N., Antonio, C. M. D., Milton, S. J., & Rejmanek, M., (2000). 
Plant invasions-the role of mutualisms. Biol. Reviews Cambridge Philos. Soc., 75, 65–93. 
Sadhana, B., (2014). Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (AMF) as biofertilizers: A review. Int. J. 
Curr. Microbiol. Appl. Sc., 3(4), 384–400. 
Sara, A. L. D. A., & Adriana, P. D., D. S., (2008). Mycorrhiza influence on maize development 
under Cd stress and P supply. Braz. J. Plant Physiol., 20(1). http://dx.doi.org/10.1590/ 
S1677-04202008000100005. 
Schreiner, R. P., & Bethlenfalvay, G. J., (1996). Mycorrhizae, biocides, and biocontrol. 4. 
Response of a mixed culture of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi and host plant to three 
fungicides. Biol. Fertil. Soils., 23, 189–195. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00336062. 
Sramek, F., Dubsky, M., & Vosatka, M., (2000). Effect of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi and 
Trichoderma harzianum on three species of balcony plants. Rostlinna Vyroba, 146, 
127–131. 
St Arnaud, M., & Elsen, A., (2005). Interaction of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi with soil-borne 
pathogens and non-pathogenic rhizosphere microorganisms. In: Declerck, S., Fortin, J. A., 
& Strullu, D. G., (eds.), In Vitro Culture of Mycorrhizas (pp. 217–231). Springer, Berlin. 
Sturz, A. V., Carter, M. R., & Johnston, H. W., (1997). A review of plant disease, pathogen 
interactions and microbial antagonism under conservation tillage in temperate humid 
agriculture. Soil Tillage Res., 41, 169–189. 
Timmer, L., & Leyden, R., (1980). The relationship of mycorrhizal infection to phosphorus￾induced copper deficiency in sour orange seedlings. New Phytologist, 85, 15–23. https:// 
doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-8137.1980.tb04443.x. 
Vos, C., Claerhout, S., Mkandawire, R., Panis, B., De Waele, D., & Elsen, A., (2011). Arbuscular 
mycorrhizal fungi reduce root-knot nematode penetration through altered root exudation 
of their host. Plant Soil, 354, 335–345. 
Walters, D., & Heil, M., (2007). Costs and trade-offs associated with induced resistance. 
Physiol. Mol. Plant Pathol., 71, 3–17. 
Wehner, J., Antunes, P. M., Powell, J. R., Mazukatow, J., & Rillig, M. C., (2009). Plant 
pathogen protection by arbuscular mycorrhizas: A role for fungal diversity? Pedobiologia, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pedobi.2009.10.002. 
Whipps, J. M., (2004). Prospects and limitations for mycorrhizas in biocontrol of root 
pathogens. Can J Bot., 82, 1198–1227. 
Yao, M. K., Desilets, H., Charles, M. T., Boulanger, R., & Tweddell, R. J., (2003). Effect 
of mycorrhization on the accumulation of rishitin and solavetivone in potato plantlets 
challenged with Rhizoctonia solani. Mycorrhiza, 13, 333–336. 
Yeasmin, T., (2017). Association of arbuscular mycorrhizas in plants: Future perspectives 
of biofertilizer in Bangladesh. In: 10th International Conference on Agriculture and 
Horticulture. London, UK.  
CHAPTER 3 
AZOSPIRILLUM BIOINOCULANT 
TECHNOLOGY: PAST TO CURRENT 
KNOWLEDGE AND FUTURE 
PROSPECTS 
PALANI SARANRAJ,1
 ABDEL RAHMAN M. AL-TAWAHA,2 
PANNEERSELVAM SIVASAKTHIVELAN,3 
ABDEL RAZZAQ M. AL-TAWAHA,4 KANGASALAM AMALA,1 
DEVARAJAN THANGADURAI,5
 and JEYABALAN SANGEETHA6 
1
Department of Microbiology, Sacred Heart College (Autonomous), 
Tirupattur–635601, Tamil Nadu, India 
2
Department of Biological Sciences, Al-Hussein Bin Talal University, 
Maan, Jordan 
3
Department of Agricultural Microbiology, Faculty of Agriculture, 
Annamalai University, Chidambaram–608002, Tamil Nadu, India 
4
Department of Crop Science, Faculty of Agriculture, 
University Putra Malaysia, Selangor, Malaysia 
5
Department of Botany, Karnatak University, Dharwad, 
Karnataka–580003, India 
6
Department of Environmental Science, Central University of Kerala, 
Kasaragod–671316, Kerala, India 
ABSTRACT 
Azospirillum is a curve-shaped vibroid Gram-negative, measuring about 
1–1.5 μm in diameter, motile because of possessing Peritrichous flagella that 
are capable of fixing atmospheric nitrogen under microaerophilic conditions  
52 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
in association with the roots of cereals. Azospirillum was well known for 
many years as PGPR because it was isolated from the rhizosphere region 
of many grasses and cereals universally in tropical as well as in temperate 
climates. Azospirillum is considered as the most valuable bioinoculant in 
the group of plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria (PGPR) because it is 
not only the microorganism capable of colonizing the roots of agricultural 
crops, along with root colonization Azospirillum sp. have the tendency of 
producing more beneficial compounds which are highly beneficial to crops. 
Azospirillum biofertilizers have a history going back to the beginning of the 
20th century. However, researchers still must find innovative and novel strains 
and improve production strategies and methods of application and mode 
of action. Azospirillum is one of the widely used biofertilizers in organic 
farming. Azospirillum sp. contribute to increased yields of cereal and grasses 
by improving root development in properly colonized roots, increasing the 
rate of water and mineral uptake from the soil, and by biological nitrogen 
fixation. A better understanding of the basic biology of the Azospirillum 
microbe and plant root interaction may lead to greater efficacy in its appli￾cation as an effective biological nitrogen-fixing biofertilizer. The products 
containing Azospirillum strains and their use begin to play an important role 
in recent agriculture and as an alternative to expensive chemical fertilizers 
and sometimes not environmentally friendly products. This chapter analyzes 
the genus Azospirillum, taxonomy, occurrence, distribution, characters, 
interactions, nitrogen fixation, growth hormones, siderophore production, 
and nutrient uptake. 
3.1 INTRODUCTION 
India is one of the important countries which are playing a major role in 
bio inoculants production and consumption for agricultural purposes. It was 
predictable that the current level of biological fertilizer usage is relatively 
low, and it is expected to increase to 80,000–85,000 tons by 2025 (Bhat￾tacharyya and Kumar, 2000). In order to enhance the productivity of agri￾cultural land, different types of crop nutrients are contributing and playing a 
vital role in the maximization of growth, yield, and biochemical parameters 
of agricultural crops. Out of various nutrients required, the highly required 
nutrient for increasing plant growth is nitrogen, phosphorous, and potassium 
(NPK), and in the short term, it is referred to as NPK. 
Microorganisms are commonly used as bioinoculants and the most 
commonly used microbial fertilizers are Nitrogen-fixing bacteria (Rhizobium Azospirillum Bioinoculant Technology 53 
sp., Bradyrhizobium sp., Azospirillum sp. and Azotobacter sp.), nitrogen￾fixing cyanobacteria or blue-green algae (BGA) (Anabaena sp.), phosphate 
solubilizing bacteria (PSB) or phosphate solubilizers (Pseudomonas putida), 
biocontrol agents (Pseudomonas fluorescens, Bacillus sp. and Trichoderma 
sp.), microbial insecticides (Bacillus thuringiensis, Beauveria bassiana, 
Metarhizium sp. and Verticillium sp.) and arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) fungi 
(Pindi, 2012). When applied to the agricultural field, the microbial inocu￾lants promote the plant growth by various beneficial activities, viz., fixation 
of atmospheric nitrogen, production of plant growth-promoting phytohor￾mones, solubilization of complex phosphates into simple phosphates, and 
solubilization of various minerals and nutrients for plant uptake. An efficient 
microbial inoculant should be viable for a minimum of six months. The 
major factors responsible for the viability of microbial biofertilizers during 
mass production, formulation, storage, transportation, and field application 
are related directly to the plant growth-promoting potential of a biofertilizer 
formulation. 
Plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria (PGPR) which is familiarly 
called PGPR, plays a key role in cycling of various nutrients, producing 
plant-growth-promoting hormones, preventing from various phytopatho￾gens, solubilizing inorganic phosphates, maintaining the soil fertility, and 
establishing the positive interactions with plant roots in agro environment 
through Rhizosphere and Phyllosphere. In the current research, agricultural 
scientists are giving more interest in the improvement of the positive interac￾tions and beneficial associations between microorganisms and plants (Bilal 
et al., 2014). Microbial colonization in plant roots is influenced by various 
biotic and abiotic factors such as dynamics of microbial population, nature of 
soil, and characteristics of plants. Biological and chemical alterations of the 
rhizosphere environment also influence the health of plants through various 
factors like production of plant growth-promoting hormones, mobilizing 
various nutrients, and suppressing the phytopathogens through induced 
systemic resistance (ISR). 
Azospirillum is a Gram-negative spiral-shaped bacteria that are capable 
of fixing atmospheric nitrogen under microaerophilic conditions in associa￾tion with the roots of cereals, particularly paddy (Oryza sativa L.) (Bashan 
and Levanony, 1990). The genus Azospirillum is distributed widely in the 
rhizosphere of tropical and sub-tropical grasses, particularly cereals (Bashan 
and Holguin, 1997). The mechanisms by which Azospirillum sp. can exert 
a positive effect on plant growth were probably composed of multiple 
effects (Pereyra et al., 2007). However, these beneficial effects by Azospi￾rillum inoculation are not consistent (Shanon, 2013). In the mid-70s, it was  
 
54 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
recognized that the strains of Azospirillum are abundantly associated with 
the rhizosphere region in the roots of cereals and millets and helps in fixing 
substantial amounts of nitrogen. The Azospirillum sp. is the most widely 
studied PGPR than the other rhizosphere microorganisms because of its 
multiple benefits to the agricultural crops, particularly cereals (Bashan and 
de-Bashan, 2010). 
3.2 THE GENUS AZOSPIRILLUM AND ITS TAXONOMY 
The soil nitrogen-fixing bacterium Azospirillum sp. was first isolated in 
the year 1925 and described by a Dutch Microbiologist M. W. Beijerinck 
from nitrogen-poor sandy soils of the Netherlands (Beijerinck, 1925). That 
was a significant landmark in the contribution in the field of non-symbiotic 
nitrogen-fixing microorganisms. In 1976, Dobereiner and Day reported a 
new diazotrophic association between a curved bacterium and the grass 
Digitaria decumbens and named as Spirillum lipoferum. At the time of its 
isolation from soil, the soil bacterium Azospirillum was originally named 
as Spirillum lipoferum. The Spirillum lipoferum was classified under genus 
Spirillum of the order Pseudomonadales by Breed et al. (1957). Becking 
(1963) described the Azospirillum as Spirillum of vibrioid in nature and 
worked on the taxonomy of the bacterium. After few decades, the genus 
Spirillum was renamed as Azospirillum. 
Dobereiner et al. (1976) reported that the occurrence of Azospirillum 
lipoferum in tropical soil and they are responsible for the nitrogen fixation 
in grasses because of their occurrence near the root regions and with the 
root tissues. Worldwide, Azospirillum species has been isolated from the 
roots of numerous grasses, cereals, legumes, millets, and other non-cereal 
crop plants and from tropical, subtropical, and temperate soils (Tilak, 1997; 
Purushothaman, 2002). 
Azospirillum is a Gram-negative, motile, and spiralor vibrioid shaped 
bacilli, which is the common inhabitant of root and soil. Among the various 
species, the most thoroughly studied Azospirillum species are Azospirillum 
brasilense and Azospirillum lipoferum. A number of physiological 
and morphological characteristics differentiates the various species of 
Azospirillum. In Brazil, Azospirillum amazonense is an acid-tolerant 
species, isolated from the grasses and palm trees. In Pakistan, Azospirillum 
halopareferens was isolated from the root surface of Leptochloa fusca 
(Reinhold et al., 1987).  
Azospirillum Bioinoculant Technology 55 
The occurrence of Azospirillum in the rhizosphere of cereal crops was 
varied from 1% to 10% of total rhizosphere population was reported by Okon 
(1985). More than 100 Azospirillum sp. are present in the soil and compara￾tively the populations of Azospirillum species are more in rhizosphere soil 
than in the non-rhizosphere soils (De Coninck et al., 1988). Michiels et 
al. (1989) recorded the presence of Azospirillum species in different agro￾climate zones in crops which are prevalent in all over the universe. Sumner 
(1990) reported the occurrence of multiple number of Azospirillum sp. in 
various agricultural crops like rice, maize, sorghum, wheat, and pearl millet. 
According to Krieg (1976), the Spirillum lipoferum belong to the 
genus Azospirillum but its taxonomic position was completely uncertain. 
Azospirillum is having a distinct feature that is the production of Poly-β￾hydroxybutyrate granules, in the short term, it is called PHB (Dobereiner 
and Day, 1976; Okon et al., 1976). Spirillum lipoferum was rearranged into 
three major groups based on its denitrification efficiency when cultures were 
grown with ammonium nitrate (Neyra and Dobereiner, 1977). Strains with 
high denitrification rate were placed under Group I. The Azospirillum strains 
which are failed to exhibit the disappearance of nitrate were included in the 
Group III. Strains with intermediate level of nitrite are coming under the 
Group II. At present, seven species, viz., Azospirillum brasilense, Azospi￾rillum lipoferum, Azospirillum amazonense, Azospirillum halopraeferens, 
Azospirillum irakense, Azospirillum largimobile and Azospirillum doberein￾erae have been described in the genus Azospirillum. 
3.3 OCCURRENCE, DISTRIBUTION, AND ISOLATION OF 
AZOSPIRILLUM 
Azospirillum was well known for many years as PGPR because it was 
isolated from the rhizosphere region of many grasses and cereals universally 
in tropical as well as in temperate climates (Steenhoudt and Vanderleyden, 
2000). Since the 1970s, the Azospirillum sp. has the consistency and was 
proven as very promising PGPR because this bacterium was the selective 
microflora for fixing the atmospheric nitrogen in the environment (Bashan 
et al., 2004). 
The global occurrence and distribution of Azospirillum from various 
geographical regions of our universe was reported by Amer et al. (1977). 
They reported the occurrence of Azospirillum sp. in the rhizosphere and rhizo￾plane of agricultural crops which are belonging to the family Leguminosae, 56 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
Cruciferceae, Gramineae, Solanaceae, and Tiliaceae. The occurrence of 
Azospirillum from continuous cultivation of the barely was reported by 
Idris et al. (1981). Nayak (1981) isolated the Azospirillum lipoferum and 
analyzed that the variations in their nitrogen-fixing efficiencies was wide in 
the surface of root and leaf of multiple medicinal plants such as Euphorbia 
hirta, Ipomoea repens, Phyllanthus niruri, Clerodentron viscosum, Pistilla 
stratiotes, Leucas aspera, Cyprus sp. and Marsilia quadrifolia. Tilak and 
Murthy (1981) documented the occurrence of Azospirillum brasilense as a 
microaerophilic because it requires only the minute quantity of oxygen for 
its survival, and this cannot be able to survive in the presence of high level 
of oxygen. They also noticed the Azospirillum sp. as non-symbiotic nitrogen 
fixer because of its association with the roots of agricultural crops like rice, 
sorghum, and maize. 
Purusothaman and Oblisami (1985) reported the presence of nitrogen￾fixing Azospirillum sp. in the rhizosphere region of herbal plants like 
Cynodon dactylon, Boerhavia diffusa, Ipomea sp. and Cyperus rotundus 
which are growing in the stress-tolerant saline and alkaline soils. Widespread 
geographic distributions of Azospirillum sp. are documented by a number of 
researchers, and its abundance was particularly observed in the rhizosphere 
region of tropical soils. Climatically, Azospirillum sp. is able to survive 
and grow in both cold and temperate climates. In the rhizosphere region, 
the occurrence of Azospirillum sp. was varied from 1% to 10% of the total 
rhizosphere microbial population. According to DeConinck et al. (1988), 
the population of Azospirillum sp. in the rhizosphere soil was comparatively 
more than the soil of the non-rhizosphere region. 
Michiels et al. (1989) isolated the Azospirillum sp. globally from the 
wide variety of plants from tropical region, temperate region, salt-affected 
soil region, desert soil region to water flooded conditions. Likewise, Sumner 
(1990) also reported the occurrence of Azospirillum sp. in the rhizosphere 
region of field crops such as rice, maize, wheat, sorghum, and pearl millet. 
The rare air-borne phase dispersal of Azospirillum sp. in air was reported 
by Bashan (1990). Under diverse agronomic practices, George (1990) 
detected the Azospirillum from the roots of the coconut plant. The presence 
of Azospirillum sp. in the roots of sunflower was recorded in the research 
of Fages and Lux (1991) and the prevalence of Azospirillum sp. in the phyl￾losphere region of marine mangrove plants was proposed by Chaudhury 
and Sengupta (1991). 
Roots of non-graminaceous crops also act as a source of Azospirillum 
brasilense. In Japan, Gamo and Alm (1991) isolated the Azospirillum sp. Azospirillum Bioinoculant Technology 57 
from the roots of five non-graminaceous crops including Spinacia oleracea, 
Brassica chinesis, Brassica rapa, Glycine max and Cucumis sativas. Singh 
(1992) isolated the Azospirillum sp. within the stem and root nodules and 
stems of Aeschynomene indica and Aeschynomene aspera. Azospirillum 
mostly lives in association with the plants, particularly in their rhizosphere 
region of the root as Ectosymbiont (on the root surface) and to a lesser extent 
as Endosymbiont (inside the root) (Saha et al., 2001). 
In the Tundra and Canadian high arctic region, Nosko et al. (1994) 
isolated the Azospirillum species from the 10 graminoid root species which 
are adjacent to the soil. Bashan and Holguin (1995) reported that the species 
of Azospirillum are able to colonize an average of 64 plant species, and 
among that, 18 plant species were belonged to weed species. Baldani et 
al. (1997) grouped the nitrogen-fixing bacteria into three categories based 
on their colonizing ability in graminaceous plants. The three categories are 
rhizosphere diazotrophs, facultative endophytic diazotrophs and obligate 
endophytic diazotrophs. Nath et al. (1997); Webber et al. (1999); and 
Hartman and Bashan (2009) isolated the Azospirillum sp. from the crop plants 
including grasses and cereals. Kirchhof et al. (1997) isolated the endophytic 
Azospirillum lipoferum from the rhizosphere of Muscanthus sp., Muscanthus 
sinensis, Pennisetum purpureum and Spartina pectinata. 
Kavitha (2000) isolated the Azospirillum spp. from the wetland rice 
field and reported that the 18% of the heterotrophic population of bacteria 
are belonged to the genus Azospirillum. Yu and Mohan (2001) isolated the 
thermotolerant strains of Azospirillum from an aerated lagoon, where pulp 
and paper mill effluent are treated. Ravi Kumar et al. (2002) isolated the 
high-density saline tolerant Azospirillum strain from the roots of Avicennia 
marina which was more prevalent in the alkaline soils. 
Around 300 isolates of Azospirillum sp. was isolated from the root tissues 
of cashew and its characteristics were completely studied by Purushothaman 
(2002). Azospirillum sp. has a tendency to survive in both saline and non￾saline soils. The work of Saleena et al. (2002) was an evidence for that. They 
studied the diversity of Azospirillum in the rhizosphere of paddy plants which 
are grown in the soil of coastal agro-ecosystem with saline and non-saline 
nature. They also reported the predominance of two different Azospirillum 
sp. viz., Azospirillum brasilense and Azospirillum lipoferum on the coastal 
soil. Rao and Charyulu (2003) stated the rhizosphere region soil of foxtail 
millet contains associative symbionts like Azospirillum spp. 
Yasmin et al. (2004) isolated and characterized different plant growth￾promoting bacteria (PGPB) Azospirillum sp. in four soils and evaluated their  
58 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
potential use as biofertilizers for rice. Azospirillum sp. were isolated from the 
rhizosphere and rhizoplane of certain medicinal herbs, viz., Catharanthus 
roseus, Ocimum sanctum, Phyllanthus amarus, Coleus forskholii and Aloe 
vera and arid mine tailings. 
Usha and Kanimozhi (2011) isolated the 10 strains of Azospirillum from 
the paddy field soil and characterized based on its morphological characters, 
cultural characters, and biochemical characters. Salt tolerance of the identi￾fied isolates was studied and it was observed that out of 10 strains, four 
strains were highly tolerant up to 70 mM. They concluded that the coastal 
environment frequently using the Azospirillum species for the cultivation of 
paddy plants. 
Somayeh et al. (2012) tested the effectiveness of Azospirillum strains 
which are isolated from the wheat rhizosphere soil of saline stress environ￾ment under greenhouse conditions. In their experiment, they irrigated the 
wheat plants with different electrical conductivities of 0.7 dSm–1, 4 dSm–1, 
8 dSm–1 and 12 dSm–1. They reported that the plants inoculated with saline 
tolerant species of Azospirillum had higher nitrogen concentrations at all 
water salinity levels. 
Ramyaanandan et al. (2013) selected five regions for paddy field rhizo￾sphere soil collection and isolated 13 Azospirillum species. Among the 13 
isolates, five were screened on the basis of sub-surface pellicle formation, 
size in micrometry, indole acetic acid production, and exopolysaccharide 
production. Out of five isolates, two Azospirillum isolates had shown 
more amounts of indole acetic acid and exopolysaccharide production, 
so that two isolates were selected for mass cultivation and seed dressing. 
With these two Azospirillum biofertilizers, pot culture experiments were 
conducted, and the plant growth parameters were evaluated under drought￾prone conditions. 
3.4 CHARACTERISTICS OF AZOSPIRILLUM 
Azospirillum is a curve-shaped vibroid Gram-negative, measuring about 
1–1.5 μm in diameter, motile because of possessing peritrichous flagella for 
swarming and a polar flagellum for swimming. The reserved cell inclusion 
energy is stored in the form of poly β-hydroxybutyrate (PHB) granules for 
preventing the cell during the lack of energy (Okon et al., 1976). Dobereiner 
et al. (1976) reported the Azospirillum sp. as an aerobic microorganism, 
but they are able to grow under microaerophilic conditions too that require Azospirillum Bioinoculant Technology 59 
oxygen at a low level. Surprisingly, it was observed that the Azospirillum sp. 
was highly effective in fixing atmospheric nitrogen under microaerophilic 
conditions. 
Carbon source is the major nutrient requirement for the growth of bacteria 
and act as a backbone for the bacteria cell. Around 50% of the dry weight 
of bacteria is due to the carbon source. The salts present in the organic acids 
like acids like malate, succinate, lactate, and butyrate were preferably have 
been found to be an efficient and satisfactory carbon and energy sources for 
Azospirillum growth (Okon et al., 1976). 
Loh (1982) reported that the growth of Azospirillum brasilense was good 
and luxuriant in the presence of succinate, but glucose does not showed any 
growth. In contrast, Azospirillum lipoferum could able to grow on both succi￾nate and glucose. Both Azospirillum brasilense and Azospirillum lipoferum 
were differed in another way also. The Azospirillum brasilense could grow 
well and luxuriant on fructose, gluconate, galactose, and arabinose. Whereas, 
glucose, mannose, sorbose, and α-keto glutaric acid supported the growth of 
Azospirillum lipoferum to a greater extent. This shows that the nutritional 
requirements of Azospirillum brasilense and Azospirillum lipoferum were 
completely different (Del Gallo et al., 1984). 
Chemotaxis is the process of movement of bacteria towards food (posi￾tive chemotaxis) and away from the toxic substance (negative chemotaxis). 
Azospirillum exhibit positive chemotaxis towards root exudates, organic 
acids, sugars, amino acids, and aromatic compounds (Zhulin and Armitage, 
1993; Lopez de Victoria et al., 1994). Next to carbon source, the most needed 
nutrient requirement for microbial growth is nitrogen source. Ammonium 
or ammonia, nitrate, nitrite, amino acids, and molecular nitrogen can serve 
as nitrogen sources (Hartmann and Zimmer, 1994). 
Azospirillum species can form the cyst under unfavorable conditions such 
as desiccation (extreme dryness) and nutrient limitation (lack of essential 
nutrients) (Sadasivan and Neyra, 1987). Tal et al. (1990) noticed that under 
conditions of stress and starvation, the accumulation of abundant poly-ß￾hydroxybutyrate granules during encystations can serve as carbon and 
energy source for microorganisms. When compared to the other free living 
nitrogen fixing bacteria, Azospirillum is considered to be more efficient 
with nitrogenase properties comparatively better than other nitrogen fixing 
microorganisms (Okon, 1985). Phytohormone production and nitrogen fixa￾tion processes are the potential attributes for the plant growth-promoting 
character of Azospirillum (Steenhoudt and Vanderleyden, 2000). 60 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
3.5 AZOSPIRILLUM-PLANT INTERACTION 
Nitrogen fixation is the key function of the Azospirillum sp. (Dobereiner 
and Day, 1976). Nitrogen fixation is the key function of the Azospirillum 
sp. The process of fixation of atmospheric nitrogen was carried out only 
under anaerobic conditions because the major enzyme required for nitrogen 
fixation is nitrogenase was sensitive to oxygen, and the process will be 
disturbed in the presence of oxygen (Steenhoudt and Vanderleyden, 2000). 
Further studies on the Azospirillum bioinoculant pinpointed the various 
beneficial effects on morphological and physiological changes in plants in 
the inoculated roots that would lead to an improvement in uptake multiple 
numbers of minerals and enhancement of water uptake (Okon and Kapulnik, 
1986). Other physiological changes like getting resistance against the abiotic 
stresses also reported in the Azospirillum inoculated plants. Creus et al. 
(2005) inoculated the Azospirillum on the wheat seedlings and observed the 
development of osmotic stress. The growth efficiency of wheat with Azospi￾rillum inoculated and non-inoculated seedlings was compared. It was found 
that the bioinoculant inoculated seeds has showed more fresh weight and 
yield of wheat when compared to non-inoculated seeds. 
Plants exposed to salt stress have a possibility of suffering from water 
deficient. It was proved that inoculating with 108
 cells of Azospirillum 
brasilense on root seedlings and thereafter exposed to mild and severe salt 
stress significantly reversed part of the negative effects. Casanovas et al. 
(2003) carried out the field experiments with the bioinoculant Azospirilla on 
Sorghum bicolor and Zea mays. Results have shown a significant increase in 
the growth, yield, and biochemical composition of crops along with better 
water and mineral uptake. Creus et al. (2004) reported that the Azospirillum￾inoculated with the wheat seedlings were able to survive when exposed to 
the excess saline concentration up to 320 mM NaCl (sodium chloride) for an 
average of three days. The inoculation technology with Azospirillum sp. was 
extended to arid soil regions where the water scarcity was very high in order 
to protect the crops against drought conditions. Results of the experiments 
showed the significant increase in water content of plant, relative water 
content, water uptaking potential, apoplastic water fraction and lower cell 
wall modulus of elasticity values in Azospirillum-inoculated plants. 
The beneficial effect of Azospirillum sp. in plants relies on the good 
colonization of roots and rhizosphere region. Root colonization is consid￾ered an important factor for creating the relationship of microorganisms 
with the plant, not only in infection caused by soil-borne phytopathogens 
(Negative effect) but also for the beneficial association with the plant growth  
Azospirillum Bioinoculant Technology 61 
supporting microorganisms (positive effect). During the positive effect, the 
first event in the colonization process is the adhesion of the bacteria to the 
plant roots. This Azospirillum-root interaction is a two-step process. The first 
step is adsorption mediated by the help of bacterial proteins. The second step 
is anchoring involved by the bacterial polysaccharides. The root coloniza￾tion of Azospirillum sp. was highly depending on the active motility and 
chemotaxis towards the root exudates (Creus et al., 2004). 
The distribution of Azospirillum isolates in the plant roots was studied 
by using the technique which analyzes the GFP-protein and tag bacteria. 
Liu et al. (2003) confirmed the colonizing pattern of Azospirillum sp. 
with plant roots. Some nitrogen-fixing strains of Azospirillum lipoferum 
and Azospirillum brasilense are established on the plant root surface, but 
other strains are not capable of colonizing the root interior surface in the 
apoplast and intercellular spaces. This ability means the lower vulnerability 
to harsh conditions that are imposed by the soil environment, which in turn 
supports the plant growth-promoting activities (Sturz and Nowak, 2000). 
The rhizobacteria which are establishing their relationship inside the plant 
roots are considered as endophytes. These microorganisms stimulate the 
plant growth by producing plant-growth-promoting hormones, enhance 
plant disease resistance against plant pathogens or improve the mobilization 
of nutrients in soil. 
3.6 NITROGEN FIXATION BY AZOSPIRILLUM 
Biological nitrogen fixation is a combination of microbiological and 
biochemical process in which atmospheric nitrogen is converted into simple 
ammonia that plants can use. Many workers reported the beneficial role of 
Azospirillum inoculation in enhancement of total nitrogen content, shoot, 
and grain yield of multiple plants (de Freitas, 2000; Saubidet et al., 2002; 
Kim et al., 2005; Felici et al., 2008; Bashan and DeBashan, 2010). In the 
beginning, the mode of action of Azospirillum sp. has not been well defined 
and not agreed up to 20 years of research. Although, Hartmann and Zimmer 
(1993) well defined the physiological properties of Azospirillum. Among 
them, the important characteristics are phytohormones production and its 
activities, nitrogen fixation ability, undefined signal molecules that interfere 
with plant metabolism, nitrite production and uptake of minerals. 
The free-living Azospirillum bacterial strains are playing a vital role in 
the nitrogen cycle by fixing the atmospheric nitrogen efficiently, and they are 
associated with the rhizosphere region of the plant roots and participate in 62 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
the nitrogen cycle (Heulin et al., 1987). The nitrogen balances in the plants 
are balanced through the nitrogen cycle. Among the various roles, the major 
role played by the Azospirillum species for improving the plant growth is 
nitrogen fixation through the nitrogen cycle. The acetylene reduction assay 
(ARA) is the method which was used to evaluate the incorporation of atmo￾spheric nitrogen into the host plant by Azospirillum sp. (Van Berkum and 
Bohlool, 1980). 
Tarrand et al. (1978) reported the efficiency of seed inoculation with 
Azospirillum in enhancing the seedling growth and vigor index in maize, 
sorghum, sunflower, bhendi, cotton, and rice. Kapulnik et al. (1985) reported 
an increase in the total nitrogen content in the shoots and grains of the plants 
inoculated with Azospirillum sp. According to Lima et al. (1987), 50% of 
the nitrogen content was supplied to the agricultural crops like Sugarcane, 
Panicum maximum and Paspalum notatum through Azospirillum sp. Mallik 
et al. (1987) showed that the grass derived its 30% to 60% of atmospheric 
nitrogen from Azospirillum brasilense. Kucey (1988) indicated that the 
inoculation of Azospirillum sp. in wheat and maize maximize the efficiency 
of nitrogen fixation in plants up to 18%. 
Inoculation of Azospirillum increased the dry weight of root, shoot, and 
grain yield in finger millet (Rai, 1991), growth of jute (Bali and Mukerji, 
1991), fruit production in pepper (Bumgardner and Mardon, 1992), increased 
germination in giant cactus (Puente and Bashan, 1993), increased number 
of seed per cob in maize (Fulchieri and Frioni, 1994) and increased seed 
germination and vigor index of chilies (Devi et al., 1995). Ignatov et al. 
(1995) proposed that the efficiency of nitrogen fixation was enhanced by 
Azospirillum brasilense in addition with wheat germ agglutinin. Bashan and 
Dubrovsky (1996) reported the nitrogen-fixing efficiency of Azospirillum 
isolates as 4.0 g N ha–1 day–1 in sorghum and 15 to 25 g N ha–1 day–1 in Corn. 
Nitrogenase enzyme is an enzyme that plays a major role in the fixation of 
atmospheric nitrogen. Nitrogen fixation by an aerobic bacterium is a highly 
energy-requiring process that requires an efficient oxidative phosphoryla￾tion process for the generation of ATP (adenosine triphosphate), while the 
oxygen is toxic for the nitrogenase complex. The nitrogenase activity of 
single Azospirillum inoculum is comparatively less when compared to the 
dual Azospirillum inoculum and in other bacterial mixed cultures even if they 
originate from the entirely different ecosystem (Holguin and Bashan, 1996). 
Ghosh and Puste (1997) concluded that the Azospirillum lipoferum 
inoculation in rice-wheat cropping sequence have the ability to increase the 
nitrogen content in soil between 35% and 36% and 7% to 9%. Christiansen￾Weniger (1997) found that the nitrogenase activity induced by Azospirillum  
Azospirillum Bioinoculant Technology 63 
sp. significantly increased the tumor structure inhibiting efficiency in plants 
when compared to the untreated control plants. Unexpectedly, Yoneyama 
et al. (1997) reported that the contribution of Azospirillum sp. in biological 
nitrogen fixation and nitrogen uptake in different varieties of sugarcane. 
Marchal and Vanderleyden (2000) suggested that the inoculation of Azospi￾rillum species might improve the nitrogen fixation efficiency and popula￾tion of beneficial bacteria on roots of agricultural crops and consequently 
increased the production of plant growth-promoting substances. 
In numerous greenhouse experiments and field experiments, inoculation 
of Azospirillum significantly reduces the required dose of nitrogen fertilizers 
in agricultural crops due to its replacement (Raja et al., 2006; Cassan et al., 
2009). Oedjijono et al. (2014) observed the occurrence of Azospirillum spp. 
in iron-rich sands and rhizosphere soils. It was reported that the Azospirillum 
isolates are capable of fixing atmospheric nitrogen, producing indole acetic 
acid, and solubilizing inorganic phosphates under laboratory conditions. 
Most of Azospirillum isolates were capable of fixing atmospheric nitrogen 
ranging from 5.73–99.539 ppm of iron. Bassam et al. (2014) evaluated the 
efficiency of Azospirillum bioinoculant for its biological nitrogen fixation 
capability in the presence of molybdenum and found that the pre-inoculation 
with Azospirillum increases the yield and biochemical characters of soybean. 
Siddhartha et al. (2014) evaluated the association of Cymbopogon winte￾rianus with the nitrogen-fixing bacteria, Azospirillum. 
3.7 GROWTH HORMONE PRODUCTION BY AZOSPIRILLUM 
Apart from nitrogen fixation, many Azospirillum isolates were proved to 
secrete other biologically significant growth hormones include indole acetic 
acid (IAA), indole lactic acid, indole-3-butyric acid (IBA), indole-3-ethanol, 
indole-3-methanol, unidentified indole compounds, gibberellins, abscisic 
acid (ABA) and cytokinins in lower quantities and auxin like phenylacetic 
acid (Bottini et al., 2004). Azospirillum uses the amino acid tryptophan as a 
precursor for IAA production. Since root exudates contain tryptophan, IAA 
production by Azospirillum will be of significant importance in the plant 
rhizosphere regions (Thuler et al., 2003). 
Horemans et al. (1986) compared the efficiency of IAA production by 
Azospirillum sp. Comparatively, Azospirillum brasilense produce extremely 
high amount of IAA than Azospirillum lipoferum. Zakharova et al. (2000) 
performed the biochemical studies and high-pressure liquid chromatography 
(HPLC) analysis of Azospirillum brasilense and revealed high motive force  
64 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
towards tryptophan for IAA synthesis and this shows that indole act as the 
precursors for IAA in a tryptophan-independent pathway. The concentration 
of IAA was varying during different growth phases of the bacteria. The IAA 
concentration was low during the logarithmic or exponential growth phase 
and rapidly increased in the beginning of stationary phase. The significant 
increase of IAA was due to the presence of tryptophan in the culture medium 
(Ona et al., 2003; Tank and Saraf, 2003; Malhotra and Srivastava, 2009). 
Phytohormones synthesized by Azospirillum indirectly influenced the 
uptake of minerals in the inoculated plants through (a) development of 
root hairs, (b) rate of respiration, (c) metabolism proliferation and (d) root 
proliferation (Molla et al., 2001; Radwan et al., 2002; Thuler et al., 2003). 
Naiman et al. (2009) inoculated the wheat with dual inoculants Azospirillum 
brasilense and Pseudomonas fluorescens strains and demonstrated that the 
development of roots and nitrogen-fixing efficiency was supported by the 
production of plant growth-promoting substances. The beneficial effect of 
Azospirillum sp. on plants has been initiated due to the production of gibber￾ellins. The production of gibberellins has the ability to increase the root hair 
density in plants. 
3.7.1 INDOLE ACETIC ACID (IAA) 
In the culture medium supplemented with tryptophan, the Azospirillum 
sp. produced high quantities of indole acetic acid (IAA). El-Khawas and 
Adachi (1999) found that the addition of supernatants of filter-sterilized 
Azospirillum culture have the tendency to increase the root elongation, root 
surface area, root dry matter, and development of lateral roots and root 
hairs. The concentration of the supernatant should be optimum. In case, 
the concentration of the supernatant is high means it strongly inhibited the 
root elongation, lateral root development and caused nodule-like tumors on 
the roots. According to Dobbelaere et al. (1999), the addition of tryptophan 
enhanced the root morphology of plants by replacing Azospirillum cells 
with indole acetic acid. 
Endophytic colonization of Azospirillum induces the formation of para￾nodules in the roots of rice through the Auxins, 2,4-D, naphthalene acetic acid 
(NAA), and IAA enhanced polygalacturonase activity (Sekar et al., 1999). 
Combination of plant growth-promoting substances and auxin produced as 
a result of Azospirillum inoculation leads to morphological changes in the 
plant roots (Bashan and Holguin, 1997). Further evaluation by Dobbelaere et 
al. (1999) showed that the biosynthesis of auxin by Azospirillum brasilense  
Azospirillum Bioinoculant Technology 65 
showed an alteration in morphology of roots in wheat. It shows that the indole 
acetic acid synthesized by Azospirillum brasilense helps in the proliferation 
of wheat roots. 
Zakharova et al. (2000) assessed the efficiency of Azospirillum brasi￾lense for the production of indole acetic acid by using chemical methods 
and with High-Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) of possible 
precursors like indole, anthranilic acid and tryptophan. It was revealed that 
the high motive force was must needed for the synthesis of tryptophan from 
chorismic acid and synthesis of indole acetic acid from tryptophan and 
unlikely this makes it anthranilic acid and indole that can act as a precursor 
for indole acetic acid through tryptophan-independent pathway. The regu￾lation of indole acetic acid synthesis by Azospirillum brasilense was also 
supported by vitamins. Trace amount of vitamin B, especially the pyridoxine 
and nicotinic acid supported the Azospirillum brasilense for the indole acetic 
acid production. 
Molla et al. (2001) reported that the cell-free supernatant of Azospirillum 
brasilense induced the highest number of roots and increased root length 
in soybean. Ona et al. (2003) conducted the research on indole acetic acid 
production by several strains of Azospirillum and confirmatory that the 
production of indole acetic acid was highly dependent on the culture media 
used and the availability of an amino acid tryptophan as a precursor. Among 
the multiple strains tested, Azospirillum brasilense produced the highest 
concentration of indole acetic acid among the strains tested. It was also 
observed that the pH of the culture medium has a significant effect on the 
level of indole acetic acid produced. 
3.7.2 GIBBERELLINS 
Next to indole acetic acid production, the beneficial effect of Azospirillum 
on plant was the production of gibberellins. The plant growth-promoting 
hormone gibberellins are responsible for increasing the root hair density. 
The gibberellin-producing strains Azospirillum lipoferum and Azospirillum 
brasilense produce gibberellin when cultured in the presence of glucosyl 
ester or glucoside of gibberellin A20 in the culture medium and hydrolyze 
the both conjugates. The findings of Piccoli et al. (1997) in vitro study 
supported the hypothesis that plant growth promotion was induced as a result 
of a combination of both gibberellin production and gibberellin-glucoside or 
glucosyl ester deconjugation by the Azospirillum species.  
 
66 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
Lucangeli and Bottini (1997) explained the involvement of Azospirillum 
produced gibberellin in promoting the growth and yield of maize. Piccoli et 
al. (1999) showed the effect of oxygen concentration and water potential on 
growth of Azospirillum lipoferum and its ability of gibberellin A3
 produc￾tion. It was observed that the increase in oxygen concentration and water 
potential was directly proportional to the production of gibberellin. Cassan et 
al. (2001) found that the bacterial enzyme 2-oxoglutarate-dependent dioxy￾genase produced by Azospirillum brasilense and Azospirillum lipoferum are 
responsible for the biosynthesis of plant growth-promoting gibberellin. 
3.8 SIDEROPHORE PRODUCTION BY AZOSPIRILLUM 
Siderophores (a Greek word which means “iron carrier”) is defined as an 
iron-chelating, low molecular weight substance (500–1000 Daltons) with 
virtual specific ligand and the term Siderophore was first coined by Lank￾ford (1973). Iron is the major component which supports the biosynthesis of 
siderophores, and they support the iron to the microbial cells. Siderophores 
play a major role in the uptake of iron by microbial cells. The PGPR secretes 
the iron-chelating compounds which are involved in sequestering of iron 
molecules in the root zone, making it unavailable to some rhizosphere 
microorganisms. Siderophores also bind to other metals such as Manganese, 
Chromium, Cadmium, and Lead (Birch and Bachofen, 1990) and act as a 
growth factor for enhancing plant growth and phytopathogenic suppressive 
agents for controlling plant diseases (Calvente et al., 2001). 
Siderophores produced by root colonizing microbes may provide Fe to plant 
that can use the predominant siderophores types (Crowley and Wang, 2004; 
Lenin and Jayanthi, 2012). Many microorganisms have the ability to produce 
siderophores. Iron act as a co-factor for various enzymes such as peroxidase, 
aconitase, catalase, nitrogenase complex and ribonucleotide diphosphate 
reductase (Byers and Arceneaux, 1977). Suslow and Sehroth (1982) concluded 
that many microorganisms are able to produce the siderophore produced by the 
Azospirillum species helps in improving the iron nutrition and offers protection 
and resistance against the phytopathogens in plants. 
3.9 ENHANCED MINERAL UPTAKE 
Inoculation of Azospirillum biofertilizer enhanced the uptake of minerals 
like NO3
–
, NH4
+
, PO4
2–, K+
, Rb+
 and Fe2+ (Sarig et al., 1988) and this kind of  
Azospirillum Bioinoculant Technology 67 
minerals uptake results in an increase in dry matter production and minerals 
accumulation in stem and leaves of plants. At the time of the plant reproduc￾tive period, these uptake minerals are transferred to the particles and spikes 
of plants and gives higher yield (Malhotra and Srivastava, 2009). 
An increase in the efficiency of mineral uptake by plants inoculated with 
Azospirillum sp. has been observed as an important factor for the significant 
increase in the volume of root and not as a specific enhancement because 
of the normal iron uptake mechanism (Murthy and Ladha, 1988). Increased 
mineral uptake was observed in the inoculated roots, provided by enhance￾ment in proton efflux activity of plant root particularly wheat inoculated 
with Azospirillum bioinoculant (Bashan et al., 1989; Bashan, 1995). This 
proton efflux activity is directly related to the balance of ions in plant roots. 
Conformity studies on the proton efflux phenomenon in wheat showed that 
Azospirillum inoculation enhanced the proton efflux and root elongation in 
wheat (Carillo et al., 2002; Creus et al., 2004). 
3.10 CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
In the present-day situation, intensive agriculture needs the use of integrated 
nutrient management systems involving organic and inorganic sources 
of plant nutrients to sustain the yield of crop plants. Biofertilizers form an 
integral part of IPNS (integrated plant nutrition system) and organic farming, 
which constitutes the present as well as the future mandate of agriculture. 
Azospirillum spp. is of ubiquitous distribution globally in tropical, subtropical, 
and temperate climatic conditions and with a widespread of agricultural crops 
grown in different spectrum of soil types. Azospirillum spp. fixes atmospheric 
nitrogen and has been isolated from the rhizosphere of a variety of tropical 
and sub-tropical non-leguminous plants. 
The occurrence of nitrogen-fixing Azospirillum species was observed in 
the roots of rice, sorghum, and maize. Various cereals have responded differ￾ently to field inoculation with this organism. Worldwide data accumulated 
over the past 20 years on field inoculation with Azospirillum has concluded 
that these bacteria are capable of increasing the yield of various agricultural 
crops in different soil and climatic regions. 
Some of the most promising organisms, capable of colonizing roots in 
large numbers and exerting beneficial effects on plants belong to the genus 
Azospirillum. Azospirillum enhances the proper usage of fertilizers applied 
and enriching the soil with nitrogen that is fixed in association with the 
roots. The Azospirillum inoculant is efficiently used so far as carrier-based 68 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
inoculant, and this is high adsorptive, easy to process, and non-toxic to 
Azospirillum. The use of a microbial inoculant is primarily concerned 
with crop productivity, not bacterial physiology nor ecology. Inoculant 
manufacturers must accept this reality and ensure that the probability of 
successful inoculation is maximized. Since crop response to inoculation, 
in most instances, is the result of appropriate strain selection and target 
organism population. 
Azospirillum is considered a commercial inoculant for improving crop 
yields. The development of an effective seed or soil applied legume inocu￾lant requires the integration of physical, chemical, and biological processes 
was stated by various researchers. Much research in this universe is done on 
Azospirillum strain selection and inoculation response. However, research 
conducted on inoculant production and formulation technologies is limited. 
A breakthrough is needed in inoculant technology to improve the shelf life 
and field efficacy of biofertilizers in India to make them commercially viable 
and acceptable to farmers. 
KEYWORDS 
• acetylene reduction assay 
• agricultural crops 
• Azospirillum species 
• enhanced mineral uptake 
• gibberellins 
• indole acetic acid 
• induced systemic resistance 
• nitrogen fixation 
• nitrogenase enzyme 
• phytohormones 
• plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria 
• plant rhizosphere 
• poly-ß-hydroxybutyrate granules 
• rhizosphere soil 
• siderophores Azospirillum Bioinoculant Technology 69 
REFERENCES
 
Amer, H. A., Eid, M., Hegazi, N. A., & Monib, M., (1977). A survey on the occurrence of N2 
fixing Spirillum in Egypt. Non-symbiotic N2
 Fixation Letters, 5(7), 101, 102. 
Baldani, J. I., Caruso, L., Baldani, V. L. D., Goi, S. R., & Dobereiner, J., (1997). Recent 
advances in BNF with non-legume plants. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 29(9), 911–922. 
Bali, M., & Mukerji, K. G., (1991). Interaction between VA mycorrhizal fungi and root 
microflora of jute. Agricultural Management and Ecology, 24(1), 396–401. 
Bashan, Y., & de-Bashan, L. E., (2010). How the plant growth-promoting bacterium Azospirillum 
Promotes plant Growth-A critical Assessment. Advances in Agronomy, 108(5), 78–122. 
Bashan, Y., & Holguin, G., (1995). Azospirillum-plant relationships: Environmental and 
physiological advances (1990–1996). Canadian Journal of Microbiology, 43(1), 103–121. 
Bashan, Y., & Holguin, G., (1997). Nitrogen fixation and phytohormones production by 
Azospirillum. Canadian Journal of Microbiology, 54(7), 560–568. 
Bashan, Y., & Levanony, H., (1989). Factors affecting adsorption of Azospirillum brasilense Cd 
to root hairs as compared with root surface of wheat. Canadian Journal of Microbiology, 
35(2), 936–944. 
Bashan, Y., & Levanony, H., (1990). Current status of Azospirillum inoculation technology￾Azospirillum as a challenge for agriculture. Canadian Journal of Microbiology, 36(4), 
591–608. 
Bashan, Y., (1995). Short exposure to Azospirillum brasilense cd. inoculation enhanced 
proton efflux of intact wheat roots. Canadian Journal of Microbiology, 36(9), 419–425. 
Bashan, Y., Holguin, G., & De Bashan, L. E., (2004). Azospirillum-plant relationships: 
Physiological, molecular and environmental advances (1997–2003). Canadian Journal 
of Microbiology, 50(3), 521–577. 
Bassam, K. A. J., Halimi, M. S., Radziah, O., Sheikh, H. H., Hossain, K., & Saikat, H. B., 
(2014). Effect of Azospirillum in association with molybdenum on enhanced biological 
nitrogen fixation, growth, yield and yield contributing characters of soybean. Journal of 
Food, Agriculture and Environment, 12(2), 302–306. 
Becking, J. H., (1963). Fixation of molecular nitrogen by an aerobic Vibrio or Spirillum. 
Antonie von leeweenhook. Journal of Microbiology, 29(3), 326–328. 
Beijerinck, M. W., (1925). Zentrabl. bakteriol. parasitenkol, infekionskr. Journal of Agricultural 
Advances, 263(2), 353–359. 
Bhattacharya, P., & Kumar, R., (2000). Liquid biofertilizer-Current knowledge and future 
prospect. Paper Presented in National Seminar on Development and Use of Biofertilizers 
(pp. 45–53). Biopesticides and organic manures, Kalyani, West Bengal, India. 
Bilal, G., Rasul, J. A., Quershi, K. A., & Malik, A., (2014). Characterization of Azospirillum 
and related diazotrophs associated with roots of plant growing in saline soils. World 
Journal of Microbiology and Biotechnology, 6(4), 46–52. 
Birch, L., & Bachofen, R., (1990). Complexing agents from microorganisms. Experimental 
Biology, 46(1), 827–834. 
Bottini, R., Cassan, F., & Piccoli, P., (2004). Gibberellin production by bacteria and its 
involvement in plant growth promotion and yield increase. Applied Microbiology and 
Biotechnology, 65(2), 497–503. 
Breed, R. S., Murray, E. G. D., & Smith, N. R., (1957). Bergey’s Manual of Determinative 
Bacteriology (pp. 254–257). Williams and Wilkins, Baltimore, Maryland. 70 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
Bumgardner, C. J., & Mardon, D., (1992). Effects of Azospirillum lipoferum on dry matter 
accumulation and fruit production in greenhouse-grown bell pepper (Capsicum annuum) 
plants. Transactions of the Kentucky Academy of Science (USA), 53(9),101–108. 
Byers, B. R., & Arceneaux, J. E. L., (1977). Microbial transport and utilization of iron. In: 
Weintberg, E.D., & Marceli, D., (eds.), Microorganisms and Minerals. New York. 
Calvente, V., De Orellano, M. E., Sansone, G., Benuzzi, D., & Sanz De, T. M. I., (2001). 
Effect of nitrogen sources and pH on siderophore production by Rhodotorula strains 
and their application to biocontrol of phytopathogenic moulds. Journal of Industrial 
Microbiology and Biotechnology, 26(7), 226–229. 
Carillo, G. A., Li, C. Y., & Baston, T., (2002). Increased acidification in the rhizosphere of cactus 
seedlings induced by Azospirillum brasilense. Naturwissenschaften, 89(2), 428–432. 
Casanovas, E. M., Barassi, C. A., Andrade, F. H., & Sueldo, R. J., (2003). Azospirillum 
inoculated maize plant responses to irrigation restraints imposed during flowering. 
Cereal Research Communications, 31(3), 395–402. 
Cassan, F., Bottini, R., Schneider, R., & Piccoli, P., (2001). Azospirillum brasilense and 
Azospirillum lipoferum hydrolyze conjugates of GA20 and metabolize the resultant 
aglycones to GA1 in seedlings of rice dwarf mutants. Plant Physiology, 125(5), 
2053–2058. 
Cassan, F., Maiale, S. O., Masciarelli, A., Vidal, V., Luna, V., & Ruiz, O., (2009). Cadaverine 
production by Azospirillum brasilense and its possible role in plant growth promotion 
and osmotic stress mitigation. European Journal of Soil Biology, 45(5), 12–19. 
Chaudhury, S., & Sengupta, A., (1991). Association of nitrogen-fixing bacteria with leaves 
of Avicennia officinalis L. a tidal mangrove tree of Sundarban. Indian Journal of 
Microbiology, 31(7), 321–322. 
Creus, C. M., Sueldo, R. J., & Barassi, C. A., (2004). Water relations and yield in Azospirillum￾inoculated wheat exposed to drought in the field. Canadian Journal of Botany, 82(4), 
273–281. 
Creus, C., Graziano, M., Casanovas, E., Pereyra, M., Simontacchi, M., Puntarulo, S., Barassi, 
C., & Lamattina, L., (2005). Nitric oxide is involved in the Azospirillum brasilense￾induced lateral root formation in tomato. Planta, 221(2), 297–303. 
Crowley, D. E., & Wang, D., (2004). Utilization of microbial siderophores in iron acquisition 
by oat. Plant Physiology, 87(8), 680–685. 
Day, J. M., & Dobereiner, J., (1976). Physiological aspects of nitrogen fixation by a Spirillum 
from Digitaria roots. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 8(6), 45–50. 
De Freitas, J. R., (2000). Yield and N assimilation of winter wheat (Triticum aestivum L., var 
Norstar) inoculated with rhizobacteria. Pedobiologia, 44(3), 97–104. 
DeConinck, K., Horemans, S., Randombage, S., & Vlassak, K. (1988). Occurrence and 
survival of Azospirillum spp. in temperate regions. Plant Soil, 110(1988), 213–218. 
Del, G. M., Martinez, D. G., Goebel, E. M., Burris, R. H., & Krieg, N. R., (1984). Carbohydrate 
metabolism in Azospirillum spp. In: Veeger, C., & Newton, W. B., (eds.), Advances 
in Nitrogen Fixation Research (p. 220). Martin Nijhoff. Dr. W. Junk Publishers, The 
Hague. 
Devi, S. N., Vahab, M. A., & Mathew, S. K., (1995). Seedling vigor of chili as influenced by 
seed treatment with Azospirillum. South Indian Horticulture, 43(9), 54–56. 
Dobbelaere, S., Croonenborghs, A., Thys, A., Van De, B. A., & Van, D. L. J., (1999). 
Phytostimulatory effect of Azospirillum brasilense wild type and mutant strains altered 
in IAA production on wheat. Plant and Soil, 212(7), 155–164. Azospirillum Bioinoculant Technology 71 
Dobereiner, J., & Day, J. M., (1976). First international on nitrogen fixation, In: Newton, W. 
E., & Nyman, C. J., (eds.), Proceedings of International Symposium on Nitrogen Fixation 
(pp. 518–538). Washington, State University Press, Pullman, W.A. 
Dubrovsky, J. G., Puente, M. E., & Bashan, Y., (1994). Arabidopsis thaliana as a model 
system for the study of the effect of inoculation by Azospirillum brasilense Sp 243 on 
root heir growth. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 26(4), 1657–1664. 
El-Khawas, H., & Adachi, K., (1999). Identification and quantification of auxins in culture 
media of Azospirillum and Klebsiella and their effect on rice roots. Biology and Fertility 
of Soils, 28 (1), 377–381. 
Fages, J., & Lux, J., (1991). Azospirillum and its effect on paddy cultivation. Bioresource 
Technology, 13(5), 1156–1162. 
Felici, C., Vettori, L., Giraldi, E., Forino, L. M. C., Toffanin, A., Tagliasacchi, A. M., & Nuti, 
M., (2008). Single and co-inoculation of Bacillus subtilis and Azospirillum brasilense on 
Lycopersicon esculentum: Effects on plant growth and rhizosphere microbial community. 
Applied Soil Ecology, 40(2), 260–270. 
Fulchieri, M., & Frioni, L., (1994). Azospirillum inoculation on maize (Zea mays): Effect of 
yield in a field experiment in Central Argentina. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 26(4), 
921–924. 
Gamo, T., & Ahn, S. B., (1991). Growth promoting Azospirillum spp. isolated from the 
roots of several non-gramineous crops in Japan. Soil Science and Plant Nutrition, 37(7), 
455–461. 
George, M., (1990). Azospirillum for nitrogen fixation in coconut (a research note). Philippines 
Journal of Coconut Studies, 15(10), 1–3. 
Ghosh, A., & Puste, A. M., (1997). Effect of irrigation and seed inoculation with Azospirillum 
lipoferum on growth and yield of wheat and residual total soil Nitrogen in rice-wheat 
cropping sequence. Oryza, 34(12), 77–79. 
Hartmann, A., & Bashan, Y., (2009). Ecology and application of Azospirillum and other plant 
growth-promoting bacteria (PGPB). European Journal of Soil Biology, 45(9), 1–2. 
Hartmann, A., & Zimmer, W., (1994). Physiology of Azospirillum. In: Okon, Y., (ed.), 
Azospirillum-Plant Associations. CRC Press, Florida, USA. 
Heulin, T., Guckert, A., & Balandreau, J., (1987). Stimulation of root exudation of rice seedlings 
by Azospirillum strains: Carbon budget under gnotobiotic conditions. Biological Fertilizers 
and Soils, 4(1), 9–14. 
Holguin, G., & Bashan, Y., (1996). Nitrogen-fixation by Azospirillum brasilense Cdis 
promoted when co-cultured with a mangrove rhizosphere bacterium (Staphylococcus sp). 
Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 28(4), 1651–1660. 
Horeman, S., De coninck, K., Neuray, J., Hermans, R., & Vlassak, K., (1986). Production of 
plant growth substances by Azospirillum sp. and other rhizosphere bacteria. Symbiosis, 
5(11), 341–346. 
Idris, M., Memon, G., & Vinther, F. P., (1981). Occurrence of Azospirillum and Azotobacter 
and potential nitrogenase activity in Danish agriculture soils under continuous barley 
cultivation. Acta Agricultural Science, 31(2), 433–437. 
Ignatov, V., Stadnik, G., Iosipenko, O., Selivanov, N., Iosipento, A., & Sergeeva, E., (1995). 
Interaction between partners in the association. Wheat Azospirillum brasilense sp. 245. 
NATO Series, 37(6), 271–278. 
Kapulnik, Y., Okon, Y., & Henis, Y., (1985). Changes in root morphology of wheat caused by 
Azospirillum inoculation. Canadian Journal of Microbiology, 31(8), 881–887. 72 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
Kavitha, K., (2000). Studies on Azospirillum Associated with Rice (Oryza sativa L.) (p. 139). 
MSc (Ag.) Thesis, TNAU, Coimbatore. 
Kim, C., Kecskes, M. L., Decker, R. J., Gilchrist, K., Newpeter, B., Kennedy, I. R., Kim, S., 
& Tongmin, R., (2005). Wheat root colonization and nitrogenase activity by Azospirillum 
isolates from crop plants in Korea. Canadian Journal of Microbiology, 51(11), 948–956. 
Kirchhof, G., Schloter, M., Assmuss, B., & Hartmann, A., (1997). Molecular microbial 
ecology approaches applied to diazotrophs associated with non-legumes. Soil Biology 
and Biochemistry, 29(7), 853–862. 
Krieg, N. R., (1976). Taxonomic studies of Spirillum lipoferum. In: Hollander, A., (ed.), 
Genetic Engineering for Nitrogen Fixation (pp. 462–472). Plenum Press, New York. 
Kucey, R. M. N., (1988). Alternation of size of wheat root systems and nitrogen fixation by 
associative nitrogen-fixing bacteria measured under field conditions. Canadian Journal 
of Microbiology, 34(3), 735–739. 
Lankford, C., (1973). Bacterial assimilation of iron. CRC Critical Reviews of Microbiology, 
2(5), 273–331. 
Lenin, G., & Jayanthi, M., (2012). Indole acetic acid, gibberellic acid and siderophore production 
by PGPR isolates from rhizospheric soils of Catharanthus roseus. International Journal of 
Pharmaceutical and Biological Archives, 3(4), 933–938. 
Lima, E., Boddey, R. M., & Doberenier, J., (1987). Quantification of biological nitrogen 
fixation associated with sugarcane using a 15N aided nitrogen balance. Soil Biology and 
Biochemistry, 19(7), 165–170. 
Liu, Y., Chen, S. F., & Li, J., (2003). Colonization pattern of Azospirillum brasilense yu62 on 
maize roots. Acta Botany, 45 (2), 748–752. 
Loh, W. H., (1982). Carbon Metabolism of Azospirillum and Associative Nitrogen Fixing 
Microorganism (p. 147). Ph.D. Thesis, Ohio State University, Ohio. 
Lopez De, V. G., Fielder, D. R., Zimmer, R. K., & Lovell, C. R., (1994). Motility behavior 
of Azospirillum species in response to aromatic compounds. Canadian Journal of 
Microbiology, 41(9), 705–711. 
Lucangeli, C., & Bottini, R., (1997). Effects of Azospirillum spp. on endogenous gibberellin 
content and growth of maize (Zea mays L.) treated with uniconazole. Symbiosis, 23(3), 
63–72. 
Malhotra, M., & Srivastava, S., (2009). Stress-responsive indole-3-acetic acid biosynthesis by 
Azospirillum brasilense SM and its ability to modulate plant growth. European Journal 
of Soil Biology, 45(9), 73–80. 
Mallik, K. A., Zafar, Y., Bilal, R., & Azam, F., (1987). Use of 15N isotope dilution for 
quantification of N2 fixation associated with roots of Kallar grass (Leptochloa fusca). 
Biological Fertilizers and Soils, 4(3), 103–108. 
Marchal, K., & Vanderleyden, J., (2000). The oxygen paradox of dinitrogen-fixing bacteria. 
Biological Fertilizers and Soils, 30(1), 363–373. 
Michiels, K., Vanderleyden, J., & Van, G. A., (1989). Azospirillum plant root associations. 
Biological Fertilizers and Soils, 8(2), 356–368. 
Molla, A. H., Shamsuddin, Z. H., Halimi, M. S., Morziah, M., & Puteh, A. B., (2001). 
Potential for enhancement of root growth and nodulation of soybean co-inoculated with 
Azospirillum and Bradyrhizobium in laboratory systems. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 
33(5), 457–463. 
Murthy, M. G., & Ladha, J. K., (1988). Influence of Azospirillum inoculation on the mineral 
uptake and growth of rice under hydroponic conditions. Plant Soil, 108(8), 281–285. Azospirillum Bioinoculant Technology 73 
Naiman, A., Latronico, A., & Salamone, G., (2009). Inoculation of wheat with Azospirillum 
brasilense and Pseudomonas fluorescens impact on the production and culturable 
rhizosphere microflora. European Journal of Soil Biology, 45(2), 44–51. 
Nath, D. J., Bhattacharjee, R. N., Devi, M. R., & Patgori, S. R., (1997). Widespread occurrence 
of Azospirillum in North Eastern Region of India. Advances in Plant Science, 10(5), 
189–194. 
Nayak, D. N., (1981). Studies on Factors Influencing Nitrogen Fixation in Rice Soils (p. 171). 
Ph.D., Thesis, Utkal University, Bhubaneswar. 
Neyra, C. A., & Dobereiner, J., (1977). Nitrate reduction and nitrogenase activity in Spirillum 
lipoferum. Canadian Journal of Microbiology, 23(5), 306–310. 
Nosko, P., Bliss, L. C., & Cook, F. D., (1994). The association of free-living nitrogen-fixing 
bacteria with the roots of High Arctic graminoids. American Journal of Applied Research, 
26(4), 180–186. 
Oedjijono, N., Endang, S. S., Sukarti, M., & Heru, A. D., (2014). Promising plant growth￾promoting rhizobacteria of Azospirillum spp. isolated from iron sand soils, Purworejo 
coast, Central Java, Indonesia. Advances in Applied Science Research, 5(3), 302–308. 
Okon, Y., & Kapulnik, Y., (1986). Development and function of Azospirillum-inoculated 
roots. Plant and Soil, 90(10), 3–16. 
Okon, Y., (1985). Azospirillum is a potential inoculant for agriculture. Trends in Biotechnology, 
3(5), 223–228. 
Okon, Y., Albrecht, S. L., & Burris, R. H., (1976). Carbon and ammonia metabolism of 
Spirillum lipoferum. Journal of Bacteriology, 128(7), 592–597. 
Ona, O., Smets, I., Gysegom, P., Bernaerts, K., Impe, J. V., Prinsen, E., & Vanderleyden, 
J., (2003). The effect of pH on indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) biosynthesis of Azospirillum 
brasilense sp7. Symbiosis, 35(5), 199–208. 
Pereyra, M. A., Gonzalez, R. L., Creus, C. M., & Barassi, C. A., (2007). Root colonization 
vs. seedling growth, in two Azospirillum-inoculated wheat species. Cereal Research 
Communications, 35(7), 1621–1629. 
Piccoli, P., Lucangeli, C. D., Schneider, G., & Bottini, R., (1997). Hydrolysis of (17,17­
2H2
) gibberellin A20-glucoside and (17,17-2H2
) gibberellin A20-glucosyl ester by 
Azospirillum lipoferum cultured in a nitrogen-free biotin-based chemically-defined 
medium. Plant Growth Regulation, 23(7), 179–182. 
Piccoli, P., Masciarelli, O., & Bottini, R., (1999) Gibberellin production by Azospirillum 
lipoferum cultured in chemically defined medium as affected by oxygen availability and 
water status. Symbiosis, 27(12), 135–145. 
Pindi, G., (2012). Gibberellin production by bacteria and its involvement in plant growth 
promotion. Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology, 65(10), 497–503. 
Puente, M. E., & Bashan, Y., (1993). Effect of inoculation with Azospirillum brasilense 
strains on the germination and seedling growth of the giant columnar card on cactus 
(Pachycereus pringlei). Symbiosis, 15(6), 49–60. 
Purushothaman, D., (2002). Biology of Azospirillum associated with cashew (Anacardium 
occidentale). In: National Symposium and XII Southern Regional Conference on 
Microbial Inoculants. Annamalai University, India. 
Purusothaman, D., & Oblisami, G., (1985). Occurrence of Azospirillum in certain problem 
soils of Tamilnadu. Symposium on Soil Biology. HAU, Hissar. 
Radwan, F. I., Innes, R. W., Kuempel, P. L., & Rolfe, B. C., (2002). Production of vitamins by 
Azospirillum brasilense in chemically-defined media. Plant Soil, 153(2), 97–101. 74 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
Rai, R., (1991). Studies on nitrogen fixation by antibiotic-resistant mutants by Azospirillum 
brasilense and their interaction with Cheena (Panicummili aceum L.) in calcareous soils. 
Journal of Agricultural Science, 105(4), 57–58. 
Raja, P., Uma, S., Gopal, H., & Govindarajan, K., (2006). Impact of bio inoculants consortium 
on rice root exudates, biological nitrogen fixation and plant growth. Journal of Biological 
Science, 6(6), 815–823. 
Ramyaanandan, A., Lakshmipriya, D., & Rajendran, P., (2013). Screening of Azospirillum 
for enhanced indole acetic acid production and exopolysaccharide for maximizing its 
survival rates in drought-prone paddy fields. International Journal of Biology, Pharmacy 
and Allied Sciences, 2(12), 2300–2311. 
Rao, K. V. B., & Charyulu, P. B., (2003). Population dynamics and nitrogen fixation by 
diazotrophic bacteria in the rhizosphere of foxtail millet. Indian Journal of Microbiology, 
43(9), 233–236. 
Ravi, K. S., Ramanthan, G., Subha, N., Jeyaseeli, L., & Sukumaran, M., (2002). Qualification 
of halophilic Azospirillum from mangroves. Indian Journal of Modern Science, 31(7), 
157–160. 
Reinhold, B., Hurek, T., & Fendrik, I., (1987). Strain specific chemotaxis of Azospirillum sp. 
Journal of Bacteriology, 162(8), 190–195. 
Sadasivan, L., & Neyra, C. A., (1987). Cyst production and brown pigment formation in 
aging cultures of Azospirillum brasilense ATCC 29145. Journal of Bacteriology, 169(3), 
1670–1677. 
Saha, A. K., Deshpande, M. V., & Kapadnis, B. P., (2001). Studies on survival of Rhizobium 
in the carriers at different temperatures using green fluorescent protein marker. Current 
Science, 80(5), 669–671. 
Saleena, L. M., Rangarajan, S., & Nair, S., (2002). Diversity of Azospirillum strains isolated 
from rice plants grown in saline and non saline sites of coastal agricultural ecosystem. 
Microbial Ecology, 44(7), 271–277. 
Sarig, S., Blum, A., & Okon, Y., (1988). Improvement of the water status and yield of field￾grown grain sorghum (Sorghum bicolor) by inoculation with Azospirillum brasilense. 
Journal of Agricultural Sciences, 110(10), 271–277. 
Saubidet, M. I., Fatta, N., & Barne, A. J., (2002). The effect of inoculation with Azospirillum 
brasilense on growth and nitrogen utilization by wheat plants. Plant Soil, 245(10), 215–222. 
Sekar, C., Prasad, N. N., & Sundaram, M. D., (1999). Enhancement of polygalacturonase activity 
during auxin induced paranodulation and endorhizosphere colonization of Azospirillum in 
rice roots. Indian Journal of Experimental Biology, 38(11), 80–83. 
Shanon, M. C., (2013). Effect of salinity on growth and accumulation of organic and inorganic 
ions in cultivated and wild tomato species. Journal of American Society and Horticulture 
Science, 112(20), 446–449. 
Siddhartha, P. S., Adrita, G., Kalpataru, D. M., Animesh, G., Rumi, K., Himangshu, L., & 
Nabanita, H., (2014). Effect of 2,4-D treatment and Azospirillum inoculation on growth 
of Cymbopogon winterianus. African Journal of Microbiology Research, 8(9), 955–960. 
Singh, K. P., (1992). Influence of stimulated water stress on free proline accumulation in 
wheat (Triticum aestivum L.). Indian Journal of Plant Physiology, 29(3), 319–321. 
Somayeh, H. N., Mohammad, J., Farhad, R., & Verma, A., (2012). Yield and yield components 
of wheat as affected by salinity and inoculation with Azospirillum strains from saline or 
non-saline soil. Journal of the Saudi Society of Agricultural Sciences, 11(12), 113–121. Azospirillum Bioinoculant Technology 75 
Steenhoudt, O., & Van, D. L. J., (2000). Azospirillum a free-living nitrogen-fixing bacterium 
closely associated with grasses: genetic, biochemical and ecological aspects. FEMS 
Microbiology Reviews, 24(10), 487–506. 
Sturz, A. V., & Nowak, J., (2000). Endophytic communities of rhizobacteria and the strategies 
required to create yield enhancing associations with crops. Applied Soil Ecology, 15(2), 
183–190. 
Sumner, M. E., (1990). Crop responses to Azospirillum inoculation. Advances in Soil Science, 
12(11), 53–123. 
Suslow, T. V., & Schroth, M. N., (1982). Rhizobacteria of sugar beet: Effect of seed application 
and root colonization on yield. Phytopathology, 72(2), 199–206. 
Tal, S., & Okon, Y., (1990). Purification and characterization of β-hydroxybutyrate 
dehydrogenase from Azospirillum brasinlense. Journal of General Microbiology, 
136(10), 645–653. 
Tank, N., & Saraf, M., (2003). Phosphate solubilization, exopolysaccharide production and 
indole acetic secretion by rhizobacteria isolated from Trigonella foenum-graecum. Indian 
Journal of Microbiology, 43(9), 37–40. 
Tarrand, J. J., Krieg, N. R., & Dobereiner, J., (2015). A taxonomic study of the Spirillum 
lipoferum group with description of a new genus, Azospirillum and two species, 
Azospirillum lipoferum (Beijerinck) comb.nov. and Azospirillum brasilense nov. 
Canadian Journal of Microbiology, 24(12), 967–980. 
Thuler, D. S., Floh, E. J. S., Handro, W., & Barbosa, H. R., (2003). Plant growth regulators 
and amino acids released by Azospirillum sp. in chemically defined media. Letters in 
Applied Microbiology, 37(9), 174–180. 
Tilak, K. V., & Murthy, B. N., (1981). Occurrence of Azospirillum in association with the 
roots and stems of different cultivars of barley (Hordeum vulgare). Current Science, 
50(1), 496–498. 
Tilak, K. V., (1997). Recent developments in Azospirillum plant associations. In: Reddy, S. 
M., Srivastava, H. P., Purohit, K., &. Ram, R. S., (eds.), Microbial Biotechnology (pp. 
41–51). Scientific Publishers, New Delhi. 
Usha, D. K., & Kanimozhi, K., (2011). Isolation and characterization of saline tolerant 
Azospirillum strains from paddy field of Thanjavur district. Advances in Applied Science 
Research, 2(3), 239–245. 
Van, B. P., & Bohlool, B. B., (1980). Evaluation of nitrogen fixation by bacteria in association 
with roots of tropical grasses. Microbiology Reviews, 44(8), 491–517. 
Webber, O. B., Baldani, V. L. D., Teiveira, K. R. S., Kirchoff, G., Baldani, J. I., & Dobereiner, 
J., (1999). Isolation and characterization of diazotrophic bacteria from banana and 
pineapple plants. Plant and Soil, 210(10), 103–113. 
Weniger, C. C., (1997). Ammonium-excreting Azospirillum brasilense C3: Gus A inhabiting 
induced tumors along stem and roots of rice. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 29(12), 
943–950. 
Yasmin, S., Rahman, B. M. A., Malik, K. A., & Hafeez, F. Y., (2004). Isolation characterization 
and beneficial effect of rice associated plant growth-promoting bacteria from Zanzibar 
soils. Journal of Basic Microbiology, 44(7), 241–252. 
Yoneyama, T., Muraoka, T., Kim, T. H., Dacaney, E. V., & Nakanishi, Y., (1997). The natural 15N abundance of sugar cane and neighboring plants in Brazil, the Philippines and Miyako 
(Japan). Plant Soil, 189(3), 239–244. 76 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
Yu, Z., & Mohn, W. W., (2001). Bacterial diversity and community structure in aerated lagoon 
by ribosomal intergenic spacer analysis and 16S ribosomal DNA sequencing. Applied 
and Environmental Microbiology, 67(5), 1565–1574. 
Zakharova, E. A., Iosipenko, A. D., & Ignatov, V. V., (2000). Effect of water-soluble vitamins 
on the production of indole-3-acetic acid by Azospirillum brasilense. Microbiology 
Research, 155(7), 209–214. 
Zhulin, I. B., & Armitage, J. P., (1993). Motility, chemokinesis and methylation-independent 
chemotaxis in Azospirillum brasilense. Journal of Bacteriology, 175(10), 952–958.  
CHAPTER 4 
APPLICATION OF PHOSPHATE 
SOLUBILIZING MICROORGANISMS 
FOR EFFECTIVE PRODUCTION OF 
NEXT-GENERATION BIOFERTILIZER: 
A PANACEA FOR SUSTAINABLE 
ORGANIC AGRICULTURE 
CHARLES OLUWASEUN ADETUNJI,1 
OSIKEMEKHA ANTHONY ANANI,2 DEVARAJAN THANGADURAI,3 
and SAHER ISLAM4 
1
Microbiology, Biotechnology, and Nanotechnology Laboratory, 
Department of Microbiology Edo University Iyamho, Edo State, Nigeria 
2
Laboratory of Ecotoxicology and Forensic Biology, 
Department of Biological Science, Faculty of Science, Edo University 
Iyamoh, Edo State, Nigeria 
3
Department of Botany, Karnatak University, Dharwad, Karnataka, India 
4
Institute of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Faculty of Biosciences, 
University of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, Lahore, Pakistan 
ABSTRACT 
Phosphorus has been identified as one of the most numerous elements that 
are available in the earth’s crust which exists in the form of both inorganic 
and organic forms. The presence of phosphorus is available in a very high 
concentration but only 0.1% of the entire phosphorus are made available to 
the plant which might be linked to their poor solubility and it could form a  
78 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
complex with other metallic elements in the soil such as Fe, Ca, Al to form 
ferrous phosphate, calcium phosphate, and aluminum phosphate which are 
unavailable to the plants. The application of synthetic fertilizer has several 
health and environmental hazards such as soil fertility depletion, pollution of 
the environment, and eutrophication has necessitated the need to search for an 
alternative approach that could help in feeding the ever-increasing population. 
The application of phosphate-solubilizing microorganisms has been identi￾fied as a sustainable, ecofriendly, green, biocompatible biotechnological tool 
that could lead to an increase in agricultural production and ecorestoration 
of heavily polluted soil. Therefore, this chapter intends to provide a holistic 
detail about the application of phosphorus solubilizing microorganisms and 
their interaction with the agricultural crop, their application as a plant growth 
promoter, and their utilization for the ecorestoration of heavily polluted soil. 
The modes of action utilized by these phosphate-solubilizing microorganisms 
were also highlighted. Special emphasis was also laid on the application of 
bacterial strain and fungal strains that have been reorganized as phosphorus 
solubilizing microorganisms while their relative performance when exploring 
under in situ conditions that could lead to enhanced phosphorus solubilization 
was also discussed. 
4.1 INTRODUCTION 
The sudden rise in the level of the global population has necessitated an 
increase in the request for enhanced food production and the high rates of 
anthropogenic problems majorly on the environment have resulted in several 
challenges in Agriculture yield (Adetunji et al., 2019a–d; Adetunji, 2019; 
Adetunji and Ugbenyen, 2019). These problems have led stimulates several 
reactions, and it is of global concern. Therefore, if rapid attention is not given 
to these highlighted challenges, it might lead to high rates of inefficiency in 
feeding the global population (Ladeiro, 2012). The present population of the 
globe has been approximating to be 7 billion but there is a greater tendency 
that it will rise drastically to 10 billion in the next 50 years. Hence, there is a 
need to identified agricultural methodologies and stratagems that could help 
to resolve the problem of feeding the ever-increasing populations (Glick, 
2014). Some other specific examples include rapid loss in the production 
of agricultural produce, which might be linked to abiotic and biotic stress 
imposed on crops planted in the field. 
Abiotic stress has been identified as a significant factor that mitigates 
against an increase in the production of agricultural production. Examples Phosphate Solubilizing Microorganisms for Sustainable Organic Agriculture 79 
of such abiotic stress include environmental temperature, soil salinization, 
drought, soil pH, soil sodification, and rapid loss of soil nutrition. Among 
all them, soil sodification and soil salinization have been highlighted as the 
major pervasive soil degradation practices that affect the earth jeopardizing 
the prospective utilization of soils (Rengasamy, 2006; Ladeiro, 2012). Also, 
water and wind erosion is another abiotic factor that could cause a dangerous 
impact and led to a high rate of soil degradation (Ladeiro, 2012). 
Biotic stress has been highlighted as another serious factor that could 
result in a drastic reduction of agricultural yield, which might lead to 
diseases and high infestation by agricultural pests. Typical examples of 
these microorganisms include parasites, bacteria, viruses, and fungi. These 
pathogenic microorganisms could result in a 30% reduction in annual agri￾cultural increases (Fisher et al., 2012). Therefore, there is a need to search 
for a sustainable agricultural solution such as the utilization of safe and more 
effective pesticides, enhanced agricultural land management, enhanced 
application of chemical fertilizers, improved planting of transgenic crops, 
and more farm mechanization. Hence, all the aforementioned solutions 
could only resolve agricultural challenges for a limited period of time 
because of limited resources. This implies that there is a need to search for 
more effective solutions that could support sustainable organic agriculture. 
The application of eco-friendly biological solutions through the application 
of beneficial microorganisms has been highlighted as a striking technology 
hypothesized that could mitigate various challenges affection agricultural 
challenges. 
Phosphorous has been recognized as one of the numerous metallic 
elements discovered in the earth’s crust available in the soil in both organic 
and inorganic forms (Gyaneshwar et al., 2002). It is normally absorbed and 
utilized by plants in the form of the inorganic form (H2
PO4
-and HPO42–) 
(Hinsinger, 2001). It plays a crucial function in the metabolic process which 
includes prevention of plant diseases, enhancement of crop qualities, energy 
transfer, fixing of nitrogen, improvement in the rate of photosynthesis, 
signal transduction, and all these features are related to phosphorous nutri￾tion (Khan et al., 2014). Moreover, it has been discovered that phosphorus 
constitutes major parts of microorganisms and plays a vital role such as the 
movement and storage of energy, and constitutes a major part of the DNA 
(deoxyribonucleic acid) of all microorganisms. 
Phosphorus plays a crucial role in the carbon metabolism, membrane 
formation and photosynthesis, elongation of plant roots, and it has been 
observed that the deficiency of phosphorus might lead to high instability in 
the root architecture (Williamson et al., 2001; Wu, 2005). The significant  
 
80 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
constituent of phosphorus takes in by the plant is build up ingrain in the 
form of phytic acid which later become immobile to plants and consequently 
affect the development of crops (Richardson, 1994). 
The stratagem of improving the presence of a low quantity of phosphorus 
fertility production has been recognized as a problem most especially in acid 
soils because the high level of phosphorus that will be required might not be 
economically and environmentally viable in bioremediation of these soils 
(Hinsinger, 2001). The microbial population has been recognized as a major 
component of the soil-plant continuum where they play a crucial role in the 
development of plants, most especially in sustainable agriculture (Vassilev 
et al., 2006). 
Phosphorus solubilizing microorganisms have been that they possess 
the capability to mineralize phosphorus and solubilize from organic and 
inorganic pools of total soil phosphorus and may be applied as inoculants to 
enhance P-availability to plants (Richardson, 1994, 2001). 
Therefore, this chapter intends to provide a comprehensive review of the 
application of phosphorus solubilizing microorganism and their application 
in sustainable agriculture for adequate enhancement of agriculture. Special 
emphasis was laid on some of their role as biofertilizers, mineralization, and 
solubilization of phosphorus, and their methodologies used in the selection 
of these potential strains were also highlighted. The mechanism of action 
involved in the solubilization was also discussed in detail. 
4.2	 ISOLATION OF MICROBIAL STRAINS WITH PHOSPHORUS 
SOLUBILIZING CAPABILITY 
Several beneficial microorganisms have been recognized for their capability 
to perform their beneficial role in the plant. Many of them are related to the 
plant rhizosphere, and they are commonly referred to as rhizobacteria and 
because they possess the capability to enhance plant growth, they are called 
plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria. Typical examples of such bacteria 
include Serratia, Alcaligenes, Acinetobacter, Rhizobium, Arthrobacter, 
Pseudomonas, Azospirillum, Paenibacillus, Burkholderi, Bacillus, Flavo￾bacterium, Erwinia, and Enterobacter. They are utilized as a biofertilizer 
for the enhancement of crops. Phosphorus has been identified as the second 
mineral element to nitrogen that could prevent adequate development of 
crops. Phosphorus has been identified as an essential element necessary 
for the adequate development of plants and constitutes about 0.2% of plant Phosphate Solubilizing Microorganisms for Sustainable Organic Agriculture 81 
dry weight. The plant needs phosphorus from the soil solution as phosphate 
anions. Conversely, it has been discovered that phosphate anions are exceed￾ingly reactive and may be immobilized through precipitation with cations 
such as Al3+, Ca2+, Fe3+, Mg2+ which varies depending on the types of the soil. 
This makes phosphorous not to be available to plant in this form. But several 
reports have been documenting the capability of bacterial species to solubi￾lize insoluble inorganic phosphate compounds such as dicalcium phosphate, 
rock phosphate (RP), tricalcium phosphate (TCP), and hydroxyapatite. 
Microbial solubilization of phosphorus from insoluble phosphates is an 
environmentally friendly and cost-effective approach in sustainable soil 
management. Introducing the indigenous microorganisms to soil requires 
a shorter adaptation period and causes fewer ecological distortions than 
exogenous microorganisms. This study was conducted to isolate and 
identify the indigenous fungi for phosphate solubilization in Mazandaran, 
Iran. A potent phosphate solubilizing fungus was isolated from an Iranian 
phosphate mine and selected for solubilization of RP. The identified fungus 
was characterized by calmodulin-based polymerase chain reaction (PCR) 
method as Aspergillus tubingensis SANRU (Sari Agricultural Sciences and 
Natural Resources University). The phosphate solubilization ability of the 
fungal strain was carried out in shake flask leaching experiments containing 
various concentrations of RP (1%, 2%, 4%, or 8% w/v). The maximum P 
solubilization rate of 347 mg/l was achieved at 1% of RP concentration on 
day 9. The regression analysis indicated that the P solubilized mainly through 
acidification. This study shows the possibility of using A. tubingensis SANRU 
for application in the management of P fertilization. It has been recognized 
that numerous proportions of phosphate solubilizing microorganisms (PSMs) 
is available in the rhizosphere, and they show more activity than any other 
sources (Vazquez et al., 2000). 
Normally, 1 gram of fertile soil contains 101 to 1010 bacteria and their 
live weight may go beyond 2,000 kg ha–1. It has been observed that the total 
number of soil bacterial varies in shapes which include a high proportion 
of PSM is concentrated in the rhizosphere, and they are metabolically more 
active than from other sources (Vazquez et al., 2000). Usually, one gram of 
fertile soil contains 101 to 1010 bacteria, and their live weight may exceed 
2,000 kg ha–1. Soil bacteria are in spiral (1–100 μm), cocci (sphere, 0.5 μm), 
and bacilli (rod, 0.5–0.3 μm). 
However, bacilli have been documented as the most common of all 
of them but spirilli are very rare in natural environments (Baudoin et al., 
2002). The population of the phosphorus solubilizing microorganism varies  
82 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
from the soil but depends majorly on the numerous soil features such as 
phosphorus content, physical, and chemical properties, organic matter, and 
cultural activities (Kim et al., 1998; Yahya and Azawi, 1998; Fallah, 2006). 
4.3	 PHOSPHATE SOLUBILIZING MICROORGANISMS (PSMS) AS 
BIOFERTILIZER ON THE FIELD, GREENHOUSE, POT ASSAY, 
AND LABORATORY TRIALS 
The agriculture sector plays a pivotal role in food production. Food is a 
major necessity for human health and well-being. Day in, day out, crop 
productivity in agro-activities requires the use of inorganic fertilizer to boost 
its viability and consistent availability to the teeming hungry population of 
the world. However, this chemical (fertilizers), especially the widely used 
form; N (Nitrogen), P (Phosphorus), and K (Potassium) in different ratios, 
have been used indiscriminately to advance crop output. 
Phosphorus, one of the major ingredients used as inorganic fertilizer 
is very important in plant development and growth. However, just a small 
percentage of it is directly absorbed by the root system of plants, while the 
rest is washed away by erosion to nearby water bodies. This might serve 
as a precursor of eutrophication if the quantity used or applied during 
planting and persistent usage is very high. More so, some of the residues will 
combine with specific trace metals (Aluminum, Iron, and Calcium) that the 
plants cannot absorb directly because they are in an insoluble state or form. 
The role of PSMs in the sustainable utilization and regulation of insoluble 
phosphate chelate with specific trace metals in the agro-fertilizer applica￾tion is very important in plummeting the encumbrance faced by farmers in 
improving the health, ecological, and productivity status of food crops. It 
has been revealed that Phosphate-solubilizing fungi possess the potential to 
improve the availability of phosphorus in the soil, most especially in the soil 
where there are P-limiting regions. In this regard, Zhang et al. (2018) isolated 
two strains AspN-JX16 and TalA-JX04 from the rhizosphere soil of moso 
bamboo (Phyllostachys edulis). These strains isolated have been affirmed 
to be P-limiting regions in China. The strains were identified as Aspergillus 
neoniger and Talaromyces aurantiacus based on morphologic and phyloge￾netic characteristics. They were cultured in a submerged medium containing 
potato dextrose liquid medium with six different initial pH values which 
vary from 6.5 to 1.5 to assess acid resistance. The phosphate-solubilizing 
fungi were cultured in Pikovskaya’s (PVK) liquid media with numerous 
pH which entails C6
H6
Ca6
O24P6
, Ca3
(PO4
)2
, AlPO4
, FePO4
, and CaHPO4
 to Phosphate Solubilizing Microorganisms for Sustainable Organic Agriculture 83 
assess their P-solubilizing potential. The results obtained show that there 
was no significant difference in the biomass of all the fungi cultivated in the 
media with numerous initial pH showing that these fungi could be cultivated 
when subjected to acid stress. The P-solubilizing potential of TalA-JX04 had 
the maximum value followed by CaHPO4
, followed by Ca3
(PO4)2
, FePO4
, 
C6
H6
Ca6 P6
, and AlPO4 O among all the six types of initial pH treatment 24
while the P-solubilizing capacity of AspN-JX16 was more significant when 
compared to that of TalA-JX04. It was also observed that the fungi enhance 
the dissolution of phosphorous potential, which indicates that it had a nega￾tive correlation to the pH of the fermentation broth. This indicates that the 
dissolution of Phosphorus sources by producing organic acids. Our result 
indicated that AspN-JX16 and TalAJX04 could survive in an acidic environ￾ment and these two fungi have the capability to liberate soluble phosphorus 
by breaking the P-breaking down compound, most especially that contain 
aluminum, phytate, calcium, iron phosphates. The two had the capacity to be 
utilized in the mass production of environment-friendly biofertilizers most 
especially in the subtropical bamboo ecosystem. 
Phosphorus has been highlighted as one of the most crucial macronutrients 
that are important for plant development and growth. It has been observed 
that inorganic phosphorus (P), which constitutes 70% of the total P content 
in soils could exist inform of iron-complexed, calcium, and aluminum which 
are not made available for plant utilization. P2
O5
 has been applied as a fertil￾izer to augment the nutrient for crop development as a consequence of this 
mineral phosphorus. The application of phosphate-solubilizing microorgan￾isms has been applied to decrease the incorporation of mineral phosphorus 
to agricultural soils. Sharon et al. (2016) discovered that some bacteria could 
solubilize phosphate present in the soil. It was discovered that Pantoea 
sp. could solubilize TCP (Ca3
(PO4
)2
) which was determined at the rate of 
956 mg L–1. The phosphorus solubilizing producing bacterial strain could 
generate different types of gluconic, propionic acids, organic acids, formic, 
and acetic. The experiment performed in the greenhouse with a tomato plant 
that has been inoculated with Pantoea sp. showed more enhanced biomass 
and phosphorus when compared to the uninoculated. 
Walpola et al. (2013) isolated a phosphate-solubilizing bacterium and 
evaluated their influence on the development of mung bean (Vigna radiata 
[L.] R. Wilczek) plants. Their study showed that only two strains possess 
that capability to solubilize phosphorous which were Burkholderia anthina 
(PSB-2) and Pantoea agglomerans (PSB-1). The highest phosphorus 
solubilizing value of 720.75 μg mL–1 was obtained from the cultures that  
84 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
were co-inoculated with B. anthina and P. agglomerans. Their result also 
indicated that some level of correlation exists between the phosphorus solu￾bilization, pH, the concentration of soluble phosphorus, and titratable acidity 
(TA). The two tested strains indicate an increase in the shoot and root dry 
matter, phosphorus uptake of mung bean plants, while the addition of TCP 
with PSB inoculation enhanced the development of the tested plant. The 
incorporation of TCP and phosphorus solubilizing bacteria strains enhanced 
the development and uptake of phosphorus mung bean plants. Their study 
indicated that they could be applied as a sustainable alternative that could 
reduce the challenges of phosphorus in agricultural soils. 
The application of phosphate solubilizing bacteria (PSB) for the produc￾tion of biofertilizer has enhanced the absorption of phosphorus adsorption 
in plants and enhanced the yields in numerous crop species. Baliah et al. 
(2016) evaluate the capability of different PSB that dwell in the rhizosphere 
of the soil from eggplant, okra, tomato, chili, and cotton. The result indicated 
that the population dynamics of PSB were detected in higher content in the 
rhizospheric soil of tomato followed by brinjal. It was observed that 6 strains 
out of the 10 evaluated strains could solubilize phosphate. The isolated 
strains include Pseudomonas putida, P. fluorescens, and Bacillus megate￾rium. Their study showed that the selected strains could utilize amino acid, 
vitamin, carbon, and nitrogen as their sources of the nutrient. 
The phosphate-solubilizing capability of the microbial community that 
dwells in the rhizosphere of mangroves plants was carried out with culture 
media. Besides the insoluble type tribasic calcium phosphate was incubated 
with the root of white [Laguncularia racemosa (L.) Gaertn.] and black 
(Avicennia germinans L.) mangrove. Vazquez et al. (2000) demonstrated the 
phosphate-solubilizing effectiveness of some bacterial strains isolated from 
the rhizosphere of the mangroves. Examples of the isolated strain include 
Chryseomonas luteola, Enterobacter aerogenes, Bacillus amyloliquefaciens, 
Bacillus licheniformis, Pseudomonas stutzeri, Kluyvera cryocrescens, 
Bacillus atrophaeus, Enterobacter asburiae, Paenibacillus macerans, 
Enterobacter taylorae, and Xanthobacter agilis. Their study showed that 
Aspergillus niger was isolated from the rhizosphere of black mangroves. The 
phosphate-solubilizing activity of all the isolates was detected using a solid 
medium having tribasic calcium phosphate which serves as a source of phos￾phorus. Their study showed that the Spectrophotometric quantification of the 
solubilized phosphate indicated that the A. niger and all the isolated bacterial 
strains had an enhanced solubilization activity when tested in submerged 
fermentation. Hence, it was observed that V. proteolyticus was the best 
solubilizing strain among all the isolated bacteria. The gas chromatographic Phosphate Solubilizing Microorganisms for Sustainable Organic Agriculture 85 
evaluation showed the presence of 11 numerous unidentified non-volatiles 
and volatiles organic acids. The highest isolated compounds include isobu￾tyric, acetic acids, lactic, and isovaleric. It was observed that all the bacterial 
species generated more than one organic acid while the A. niger generates 
only succinic acid. Their study showed that the generation of organic acid by 
these mangrove rhizosphere microorganisms represent the modes of action 
these microorganisms applied in the solubilization of insoluble calcium 
phosphate. 
Inorganic phosphate-solubilizing bacteria have been highlighted as a 
significant component of microbial populations that occur in the lake sedi￾ments. Moreover, the liberated phosphorous becomes a significant source of 
phosphorous for eutrophic algae. Li et al. (2019) isolated and screened inor￾ganic phosphate-solubilizing bacteria mainly from the sediments of Sancha 
Lake using the National Botanical Research Institute’s phosphate (NBRIP) 
plates. The molecular characterization of these strains was later performed 
using the 16S rDNA method. The TCP-solubilizing capability of the Inor￾ganic phosphate-solubilizing strains was eased utilizing PVK liquid medium 
and NBRIP-bromophenol blue (BPB). The capability of the Inorganic phos￾phate-solubilizing to liberate phosphorous from the sediments was carried 
out by mimicking the lake environment. The authors isolated and screened 
a total of 43 Inorganic phosphate-solubilizing strains from the sediments of 
Sancha Lake that could be categorized into 10 genera, eight families, and 
three phyla. Their study indicated that SWSI1734 and SWSI1728 which 
could be classified as Bacillus and a novel strain SWSI1719 belong to the 
family Micromonosporaceae. It was discovered that the inorganic phosphate￾solubilizing were very diverse, while it was discovered that Paenibacillus 
and Bacillus were the two dominant strains. It was also observed that 30 of 
the 43 out of the inorganic phosphate-solubilizing bacteria showed a clear 
zone of inhibition on the plates when tested in the liquid culture experiment, 
and it was affirmed that all the strains possessed the capacity to soften TCP. 
The phosphate-solubilizing capability of the strains was varied significantly 
and the strain SWSI1725 of the Bacillus genus indicated the strongest 
capability with enhanced phosphate-solubilizing content of 103.57 mg/L. 
The sterilized systems indicated significantly enhanced breaking down of 
phosphorus hydrochloride (HCl-P) and liberation from the sediments after 
inoculation of inorganic phosphate-solubilizing strains, but there was no 
significant influence for phosphonium hydroxide (NaOH-P). Their study 
indicated that Inorganic phosphate-solubilizing available in the sediments 
of Sancha Lake possesses rich diversity and the capability to liberate phos￾phorus in sediments. 86 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
Nutrient management has been identified as one of the most crucial 
factors required for the successful planting of plants. Biofertilizers can influ￾ence the quality and quantity of the crop. The low phosphate solubility has 
been recognized as one of the most crucial factors that prevent adequate 
growth of plant growth in the soil. Numerous microorganisms can enhance 
the solubility of phosphate, but little has been documented regarding the 
magnitude of their phosphorus solubility. 
The local population of phosphate-solubilizing bacteria and fungi were 
studied in numerous rhizospheres soil samples collected from banana plant 
and its effect on spinach plant (Amaranthus cruentus L.) was studied by Reena 
et al. (2013). Their result indicated that Aspergillus species (234.12 mm) was 
the largest phosphate solubilizers together with (160.82 mm) followed by 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa (126.11), Penicillium sp. (99.02), and Micrococcus 
sp. (89.4). The best optimization condition that showed that the maximum 
condition for fungi and bacteria were the temperature of 37 and 28°C. 
Trichoderma sp. has been identified as a known biological control agent 
against numerous phytopathogens. Given the aforementioned, Kapri et al. 
(2010) evaluates the potentials of 14 strains of Trichoderma sp. isolated from 
forest tree rhizospheres of oak, pinus, guava, and bamboo using Trichoderma 
selective medium. These isolates were evaluated for their P-solubilizing 
capability utilizing National Botanical Research Institute Phosphate (NBRIP) 
broth having TCP as the sole Phosphorus source in comparison to the stan￾dard culture of T. harzianum. The result obtained shows that the cultures 
were discovered to possess the capability to solubilize TCP but with different 
potentials. It was discovered that isolate DRT-1 exhibited the highest level 
of soluble phosphate with 404.07 μg.ml–1 followed by the 386.42 μg.ml–1 
obtained for the standard culture of T. harzianum after 96 hours of incubation 
of 30+10C. The alkaline phosphatases and extra-cellular acid produced from 
fungus were induced in the presence of insoluble phosphorus source while 
isolate DRT-1 had the highest extra-cellular alkaline phosphatase activity 
value of 14.50 U.ml–1 followed by 13.41 U.ml–1 recorded by the standard 
culture at 72 hours. It was observed that the culture revealed a much small 
acid phosphatase activity. It was observed that Trichoderma sp. inoculation 
enhanced the chickpea (Cicer arietinum) growth parameters, most espe￾cially in the phosphorus-deficient soil having only bound phosphate when 
performed under the greenhouse. The shoot weight was enhanced by 33% 
and 23% by the isolate DRT-1 when amended with 200 and 100 mg TCP kg–1 
soil, respectively after 60 d of sowing. Their study indicates the capability 
of Trichoderma sp. for the solubilization of fixed phosphates available in the 
soil which could improve the level of soil fertility and plant growth. Phosphate Solubilizing Microorganisms for Sustainable Organic Agriculture 87 
Numerous microorganisms have been established to possess the capa￾bility to change the insoluble forms of phosphorus to an accessible soluble 
form, thereby contributing to the rate of plant nutrition as plant growth￾promoting microorganisms (PGPM). Oliveira et al. (2009) isolated, screen, 
and assessed the phosphate solubilization potential of microorganisms 
available in the rhizosphere of maize for the management of soil microbial 
communities and to obtain potent microbial inoculants. The authors isolated 
45 isolates from 371 colonies derived from the rhizosphere of the soil of 
maize cultivated in an oxisol of the Cerrado Biome having phosphorus 
deficiency. These microorganisms were selected based on their capability to 
solubilize organic and inorganic phosphate sources using a modified PVK 
liquid medium culture containing TCP (Ca3
(PO4
)2
), sodium phytate (phytic 
acid), aluminum phosphate (AlPO4
), and soybean lecithin. These isolated 
were characterized using internal transcribed spacer (ITS) rDNA for fungi 
and 16S ribosomal DNA (rDNA) for bacteria using the data obtained from 
the nucleotide sequence of these microorganisms. Their result indicated that 
bacteria generated the highest level of solubilization in medium having TCP. 
The most efficient strain was identified as Burkholderia sp. B5 and Bacillus 
sp. B17 with 58.5 and 67% total P (Ca3
(PO4
)2
) after 10 days after 10 days 
and were obtained from the rhizosphere of phosphorus efficient L3 maize 
genotype when performed under phosphorus stress. It was documented that 
the fungal population showed the most effective solubilizing phosphorous 
sources of lecithin, aluminum, and phytate. Moreover, more diversity of 
phosphorus solubilizing microorganisms was observed in the rhizosphere of 
phosphorous efficient maize genotypes which shows that the phosphorous 
effectiveness in these cultivars could be related to the capability to increase 
the microbial relationship of phosphorous solubilizing microorganisms. 
Beneficial microorganisms that dwell around the rhizosphere of most 
plants have been shown to have high solubilization potentials to insoluble 
phosphate compounds in crop nutrition (Chen et al., 2006; Malboobi et al., 
2009). These potentials are based on the ability of the microorganisms to 
utilize phosphate in soil via soluble radical forms (carboxyl and hydroxyl) 
concerning their low molecular mass, thence converting them into usable 
and absorbable forms. PSMs have been used widely as one of the green 
biotechnologies in agriculture as a potential green biofertilizer that could be 
applied to replace the most widely NPK based inorganic fertilizers. Because 
of this, about 30–40 kg of P2
O5
 per ha and 50–60% PSMs are needed to boost 
the quality of crops in farm operation or productivity. Apart from other strains 
that dwells in the rhizosphere, other strains of microorganisms like P13 
(Pseudomonas putida), P5 (Pantoea agglomerans), and P7 (Microbacterium 88 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
laevaniformans) have been identified as a potential PSMs (Baas et al., 2016). 
PSMs have been shown to have inducing potentials by immobilizing certain 
heavy metals (HMs) in the soil such as Pb and Fe, and remediating polluted 
soil with a low amount of phosphate that cannot cause eutrophication (Park 
et al., 2011; Romano et al., 2017). 
Mondal et al. (2017) evaluated the use of PSMs as biofertilizer in Zea 
mays field at West Bengal in India. The authors stated that phosphorus plays 
a significant role in plant growth. That is because of its poor absorption via 
the soil to the root system of plants, a more efficient and green application 
of PSMs is highly needed. That PSMs aid the rapid increase and uptake of 
phosphate by the plant roots. The authors tested and screened different strains 
of microorganisms with Halo-zone and pH background checks. The results 
of their biological controlled study showed that PSMs can improve the soil 
quality, elicit plant growth, and developments when applied to the maize 
fields. The authors recommend PSMs as first-class biofertilizer because they 
have a greater potential to increase plant productivity when used, their eco￾friendly nature, and their economic benefits. 
Anand et al. (2016) did an extensive review on the potentials of PSMs 
as substitute biofertilizer in farmland soil. The author stressed the need for 
phosphorus as an active ingredient in the ecosystem because of the essential 
role it plays in the physiology of plants’ growth and development. However, 
it is known as one of the least mobile earth macronutrients as compared to 
its likes. The utilization of PSMs to facilitate the exchange and the possible 
availability of phosphorus to plants via chelate mineralization is highly 
recommended. The mode of action is enhanced by the pH, enzyme secre￾tion from the microbes of the soil, and through the mineralization of certain 
organic acids. In conclusion, they suggested the non-application of inorganic 
phosphates openly to the soil because of the potential environmental compli￾cations, it portends and recommends the utilization of biofertilizers (PSMs) 
as a substitute because it is cheap and eco-friendly. 
Din et al. (2019) tested the efficacy of phosphorus solubilizing Aspergillus 
niger on Lagenaria siceraria (bottle gourd) and Abelmoschus esculentus 
(Okra) as biofertilizers on agricultural field trials. The Vanadomoybdate 
technique was used in quantity the solvable phosphorous and the Heinonen 
technique was used to evaluate the concentration of the soil enzymes (phytase 
and phosphatase) in the media. The results of the laboratory study indicated 
that Aspergillus strain gave out specific catalytic chemicals (phytase and 
phosphatase) of amount (133 and 170UI), respectively, after 48 hours of 
fermentation, which has the potential to solubilize the hard soil phosphate and 
make it accessible or absorbable for plant uptake. Further field trials using Phosphate Solubilizing Microorganisms for Sustainable Organic Agriculture 89 
the same plant species, indicated that the phosphate solubilizing microbe 
(Aspergillus sp.) was able to elicit significant growth and development in 
several parts of the studied plants when compared with their control. Also, 
plants that were inoculated together with a nitrogen-fixing microorganism 
(Azotobacter) and phosphate solvable microorganism (Aspergillus sp.) had 
well developed and vigorous recital as compared to those that were inocu￾lated along with separate biofertilizer only. In conclusion, the authors recom￾mend Aspergillus sp. as a first-class eco-friendly, non-toxic, and economical 
biofertilizers for agricultural practices. 
Adnan et al. (2017) tested and evaluated the antagonistic impact of PSB 
on the bioavailability of phosphate in highly alkaline and calcification soils. 
The authors examined different media (inoculated and control); SSP (single 
super phosphorus) (SSP), RP, PM (poultry manure), and FYM (farmyard 
manure) with different soil, sea-green (lime) concentrations; 4.78, 10, 15, 
and 20%, respectively in the highly alkalized soils for a period of 56 days. 
The results of their study indicated that PSB increased the phosphate contents 
in the PM and FYM more than the SSP and RP. The addition of the sea-green 
to the agricultural soils sharply decreased the bioavailability of the soil phos￾phate, but this was contrarily adverse and buffered by the inoculation of the 
PSB when added to the media. In conclusion, they discovered that there were 
antagonistic impacts on the soil calcium and phosphate levels. They recom￾mend that PSB with organic manure utilization will aid in improving the 
agriculture soil nutrients when used synergistically in agricultural purposes. 
Kaur and Reddy (2014) tested and evaluated two PSBs (Pantoeo sp. and 
Pseudomonas sp.) isolates on agricultural fields to ascertain their solubility 
potentials on RP to elicit fertility substances in soil (nitrogen fixation) and 
crop productivity (siderophores and indole-acetic acid; IAA). The results of 
their study indicated that both microbes efficiently solubilized and utilized 
the RP and free important amount of the phosphate (> 271 µgml–1) in the 
laboratory medium. The application of the laboratory trial in the field study, 
which lasted for 2 years on wheat and maize plants with and without the 
RP, yielded a positive correlation and caused the growth, developments, and 
increased enzymatic activities of the plants and soil fertility as related to the 
organic carbon contents and RP fertilization associated with their controls. 
The authors finally suggested that Pantoea sp. and Pseudomonas sp. along￾side RP, play a significant part in refining crop efficiency in natural farming. 
Wu et al. (2019) tested and evaluated the impact of two natural PSBs 
JX285 (B. aryabhattai) and HN038 (P. auricularis) on the physiological and 
biological uptake of nutrients in Tea-oil seedlings. The results of their study 
indicated a sharp significant preferment of the growth of Tea-oil plants after 90 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
inoculation three times, stimulation of the nitrogen and phosphorus concen￾trations in the leaf of the plant, and elevation of the nitrogen, phosphate, 
and potassium concentrations in the examined field soils. The authors, in 
conclusion, recommended PSBs as an alternative biofertilizer because it aids 
in the boosting of the productivity of Tea-oil plants, aid in the decrease of 
soil pollution and improves nutrient stabilization in soil. 
Walpola and Yoon (2013) isolated and tested the impact of PSBs on 
the growth and development of Mung bean. Out of the 31 of the isolated 
strains, 2 strains [PSB-1 (Pantoea sp.) and PSB-2 (Burkholderia sp.) were 
identified to be more efficient strains and were utilized for advanced studies. 
The results of their study revealed high phosphate solubilization of 720.75 
μgmL–1 obtained from a combined inoculated culture of Burkholderia anthina 
and Pantoea agglomerans. Besides, a positive relationship was observed 
between the solvable phosphate and the pH of the medium, and the TA with 
the solvable phosphate. The effective strains were later tested in greenhouse 
conditions and were observed to improve the growth and development of all 
the parts of the Mung bean plants. The authors suggested the utilization of 
PSBs as a favorable substitute to abate the phosphorus issues in cultivated 
soils. 
Suleman et al. (2018) isolated and characterized PSBs to improve the 
calcium and phosphate uptake in wheat plants. Around 15 PSBs were used 
in this study and were isolated from rhizospheric wheat soils in two regions 
of Pakistan. The isolates were later identified with the aid of a light micro￾scope and a 16S rRNA protein sequence machine correspondingly. Among 
the identified isolates, two species or strains [MS16 (Pseudomonas sp.) and 
MS32 (Enterobacter sp.)] that have the potential to efficiently solubilize 
phosphate were resolved numerically (136±280 μgmL–1) and found to both 
have the index of solubility of 3.2±5.8. This laboratory in vitro of the effi￾cient strains yielded several acids [22.5±11.8 (gibberellic acid), SI 2.8±3.3 
(solubilized zinc compounds), 1-Aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid 
deaminase, and 25.6±28.1 μgmL–1 (IAA)]. The results of the in vitro study 
revealed that the PSBs treated with wheat sprouts developed effectively with 
an 11% increment as related to the control. There were positive effects in 
terms of growth when the strain Pseudomonas sp. was used in the grain pot 
assay of 38.5% augmentation and the field trials of 17±18% augmentation 
as related to their control, respectively. The results of the acids produced by 
the effective strains revealed that the PSBs gluconic acid-producing strains 
(Pseudomonas sp.) could be an economical and eco-friendly contender for 
advanced plant development and phosphate uptake when used to cultivate 
wheat plants. Phosphate Solubilizing Microorganisms for Sustainable Organic Agriculture 91 
Saeed et al. (2015) did comparative work on the impact of chemical 
and biofertilizers on the development, biology, and chemical structures of 
Cucumis sativus (cucumber). The biological control experiment was done 
in four duplicates; T1: Control, T2: Biofertilizer, T3: Chemical, and T4: 
Blend treatment (biofertilizer and half-chemical). The results of their study 
revealed the momentous variance between the chemical and biofertilizer 
when applied to the cucumber. They had a distinct impact and improved the 
production and development characters of the study plants. The results of 
the relationship between the fruit output and sum fruit mass per crop showed 
a strong positive regression of 0.89 which yielded about 50% of the fruit 
output difference. The authors recommended the use of the biofertilizer s 
because it has improved the crop yield and biological contents significantly. 
Atia (2018) isolated and tested the potentials of rhizospheric PSBs in 
promoting the characters, growth, and development of Wheat (Triticum 
aestivum). Around 30 isolates were obtained and derived from the rhizo￾sphere and 10 efficient solubilizing strains (WumS-3, WumS-4, WumS-5, 
WumS-11, WumS-12, WumS-21, WumS-24, WumS-25, WumS-26, and 
WumS-28). The results from their study revealed the high solubilizing ability 
of the effective designated strains were 4–7 µg/ml index of solubilization 
and in the agar dish and 30–246 µg/ml in liquid bouillabaisse respectively. 
The best possible environmental conditions for the phosphorus solubili￾zation in the in vitro state were at pH 7 (neutral) and temperature 35°C, 
glucose as a good carbon source, and ammonium nitrate as a good nitrogen 
source. The findings of the study also revealed that the selected strain was 
able to produce plant hormones (IAA), siderophore, HCN, and NH3. The 
PSBs showed significant improvement in the seed growth (50–80%), shoot 
dimension, and shoot elongation (10–90%) at P<0.05 to their control in the 
laboratory. While in normal (natural) settings, there was a significant differ￾ence at P<0.05 in the seed growth (40–80%) shoot elongation (5–34.8%) and 
shooting dimension (5–96%) were noticed also. The authors concluded that 
the phosphate solubilizing rhizospheric bacteria (PSRB) elicited the plant 
growth and development rate of the plant. They recommended the utilization 
of the effective strains as a perfect substitute for inorganic fertilizer for the 
cultivation of the wheat plant. 
Wu et al. (2005) evaluated and tested the efficacy of the sustainable use of 
biofertilizer obtained from microbes as a potential candidate and substitute 
to inorganic fertilizer for soil productivity and crop output in agriculture. The 
authors utilized four biofertilizers comprising of strains of arbuscular mycor￾rhizal fungus, nitrogen-fixing bacteria, PSB, and potassium solubilizing 92 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
bacteria on the soil characteristics and the development of maize plants. The 
result of their study showed that the utilization of the mycorrhizal fungus and 
the three species of bacteria meaningfully amplified the development of the 
maize plant. The microorganisms not only boosted the nutritional values of 
the plant but also elicited the soil characteristics. In contrast, of these fungi 
beneficial amplification, they also caused or provoked inhibiting impacts 
on the PSMs or bacteria, which resulted in the inability for them to fix the 
soil nutrients, instead of forming a higher association of colonization during 
the greenhouse trials. They recommended multiple applications of different 
biofertilizers in agricultural practices, but with the exception of the ones that 
have inhibiting potentials. 
Vikram and Hamzehzarghani (2008) assessed and tested the effect 
of PSBs on the nodule-growth and development features of Greengram 
(Vigna radiata). Around 16 strains of PSBs were used in the biological 
control experiment (greenhouse settings) to improve the nodule-growth 
and development features of Vigna radiata. Triplicates of 18 treatments 
were used. The results of their study indicated that the Vigna radiata seeds 
(PSBV-13 and PSBV-14) had the highest protuberance amount in terms of 
biomass; wet, dry, and total matter of the root and shoot system after 45 
days of planting. Most of the PSBs (PSBV-4, PSBV-9, PSBV-12, PSBV-13, 
PSBV-14, and PSBV-15), strained used in the study also tested positive in 
stimulating the nodule-growth and developmental parameters of the plant. 
In conclusion, the authors recommended that the competent PSBs could be 
verified for their effectiveness in field settings before endorsing them for 
marketable use. 
Din et al. (2019) evaluated the impact and utilization of N-fixing 
bacteria (Azotobacter)-SR-4 and PSBs (Aspergillus niger)-as biofertilizer 
on Lagenaria siceraria (bottle gourd) and Abelmoschus esculentus (okra). 
The method of Kjeldahl was used to determine the biological field control 
strains, the Vanadomoybdate method was used to quantify the PSBs and 
the Heinonen method was used to evaluate the amount of the enzymes 
(phosphatase and phytase) in the media. The results of the field-controlled 
experiment revealed that the N-fixer bacteria were able to fix 35.08 mg of 
N/g of C after 3 days (72 h) fermentation. In the same way, the PSBs strain 
was able to produce biological enzymes of 133 and 170 UI (phosphatase 
and phytase) respectively, after 2 days (48 h) which can break and make 
soluble rock phosphorus, and make it accessible to the crops. The findings of 
their study showed that the tested biofertilizers were able to elicit the growth 
and developmental patterns of the plants by increasing their shoot, root, Phosphate Solubilizing Microorganisms for Sustainable Organic Agriculture 93 
leaves, and fruits when related to their control. In conclusion, the authors 
recommend the inoculation of the seeds of the tested plants as well as related 
species with the tested biofertilizer because they may substitute expensive 
and non-eco-friendly noxious inorganic fertilizers. 
Fenta and Assefa (2017) isolated and characterized PSBs in Rhizosphere 
tomato soil, and evaluated their effect under Green House settings. The 
authors examined 11 PSBs (PSB1, PSB2, PSB4, PSB5, PBS6, PSB7, PSB8, 
PSB9, PSB10, and PSB11) of which PSB1, PSB2, PSB4, PSB5, and PSB7 
were designated out of the 11 strains and were identified to be in the genus 
Pseudomonas. Several media were used in culturing the PSBs [TCP, RP, 
and BP (bone phosphate)] and were found to be effective after 5, 10, and 20 
days incubation periods. The results of their study revealed that all the PSBs 
species inoculated in the TCP solubilized effectively at P<0.05 as against 
the control. Higher phosphate solubilization (7.64 mg/50 ml) was observed 
on day 5, caused by the strain PSB1 while strains PSB4 and PSB5 had 4.79 
mg/50 ml on the same day. On day 10, the highest phosphate solubilizing 
efficiency was recorded in strains PSB1 and PSB2; 8.19 mg/50 ml and 8.10 
mg/50 ml, respectively. The highest phosphate solubilizing efficiency of 
11.77 mg/50 ml and 11.33 mg/50 ml in PSB2 and PSB7, respectively were 
recorded on day 20. While the least phosphate solubilizing efficiency (5.44 
mg/50 ml) was recorded in the strain PSB5. The results of the RP revealed 
no significant difference at P>0.05 as against the control at day 5. On day 10, 
the highest phosphate solubilizing efficiency (5.02 mg/50 ml) was recorded 
in the isolate PSB5 while the lowest (3.46 mg/g) was recorded from strain 
PSB4. The highest phosphate solubilizing efficiency (7.928 mg/50 ml) was 
recorded in the isolate PSB7 on day 20 while the lowest (4.025 mg/50 ml) 
efficiency was in PSB4. The results of the BP showed that the highest phos￾phate solubilizing efficiency (3.020 mg/50 ml) was recorded in strain PSB7 
as related to the control. The highest phosphate solubilizing efficiency (7.37 
mg/50 ml and 7.025 mg/50 ml) values on day 10 were noticed in isolated 
PSB5 and PSB7, respectively while the least (5.47 mg/50 ml) was noticed 
in isolated PSB2. The highest phosphate solubilizing efficiency (11.09 mg/ 
50 ml) recorded on day 20 was noticed in the isolate PSB7 while the least 
(9.06 mg/50 ml) was noticed in strain PSB4. The findings of their biological 
controlled greenhouse experiment revealed rapid root and shoot elongation 
of the plant. The biomass contents of the treated plant showed positive growth 
exempting PSB4 with TCP while PSB2, PSB4, and PSB7 revealed strong 
maximum uptake of phosphate when compared with the positive control. In 
conclusion, the authors recommend the use of PSMs (Rhizosphere strains) 94 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
as a first choice in substituting the health and environmental hazards posed 
by the inorganic fertilizer because of their non-toxic nature and eco-safety. 
Karpagam and Nagalakshmi (2014) isolated and characterized PSMs for 
agricultural utilization. The sum of 37 PSMs associations was isolated in agar 
medium (PVK) comprising unsolvable TCP sourced from farm soil. Colo￾nies showing Halo zone were classified as phosphate solubilization. Around 
38 of the PSMs were used in this study in which eight effective phosphate 
solubilizing strains were utilized for further study having PSI (phosphate 
solubilizing index) of 1.13–3.00. The results of the study showed that the 8 
effective isolates had three maximum agar phosphate solubilization PS1 (0.37 
mgL–1), PS2 (0.30 mgL–1), and PS6 (0.28 mgL–1) in the bouillabaisse media. 
The findings of the biological controlled experiment showed that the 3 potent 
strains were from the genus Pseudomonas, Bacillus, and Rhizobium corre￾spondingly. This fact was based on their structural differences, biology, and 
chemical characterizations. In conclusion, the potency isolates were chosen as 
first-class candidates (biofertilizer) over the toxic inorganic fertilizer because 
they were able to elicit growth in plants when used for agricultural purposes. 
Sharon et al. (2016) isolated and evaluated the efficiency of PSBs on 
tomato plant growth. The results of the biological pot experiment showed 
that the most efficient microorganism, Pantoea sp. in Pot 1, was able to 
solubilize TCP (Ca3
(PO4
)2
) at the proportion of 956 mg L–1. It was able 
to manufacture a variety of natural acidic; propionic, acetic formic, and 
gluconic. The results of the greenhouse experiment revealed that Pantoea 
sp. In pot 1 also solubilize and assimilate the soil phosphate, which is used to 
manufacture additional biomass as compared with the control but in contrast 
with other tomatoes not inoculated with Pantoea sp. 
Bahadir et al. (2018) isolated and utilized phosphorus solubilizing bacteria 
species in promoting the growth of plants. Around 440 bacteria strains 
(Bacillus sp.) from diverse sources were selected qualitatively and quan￾titatively for their effectiveness in solubilizing phosphorus and producing 
organic acid. The results of the biological controlled experiments revealed 
the mean range of the phosphorus solubilization to be 6.9–95.5 μgmL–1 for 
the bacteria strain. While the mean range of the organic acid in considerable 
amounts was 70.70–619.20 μgmL–1. The results of the relationships between 
the parameters in the media (phosphate, pH, and total organic acid contents) 
were positive. Six best phosphate solubilizing strains were further used 
in in vitro seed pot trial germination, tested for high IAA (indole-3-acetic 
acid) production and molecular identification. The findings of the controlled 
biological experiment showed that the strains were able to improve the 
plumule and radicle parts of the tested plants. On this ground, the authors  
Phosphate Solubilizing Microorganisms for Sustainable Organic Agriculture 95 
recommend that the bacteria strains have the potential to elicit growth and 
development in crops and should be considered as a first-class biofertilizer. 
4.4	 ENVIRONMENTAL UTILIZATION OF PSMs FOR THE 
CLEANING OF POLLUTED ENVIRONMENT 
Tirry et al. (2018) isolated and screened 27 resistant microorganisms that 
have the potential to stimulate the growth of the plant and abate heavy metal 
impacts. The microorganisms were confirmed for Cr (VI) diminution, phos￾phate solubilizing efficiency, production of IAA; IAA, siderophores, Cr, Zn, 
Cu, Ni, Pb, and Co reduction. The results of their study reveal that the micro￾organism strain was able to repel the metal contents in the media. The results 
of the phosphate solubilizing efficiency of the strains showed that about 
37.14% of the strains have the ability of solubilization of phosphorus, about 
28.57% of the spores (siderophores) were produced and all the strains were 
able to produce effective growth-stimulating hormones (IAA). The results 
of a 16S rDNA sequence, identified an isolate to be Cellulosimicrobium sp. 
A further Pot essay analysis done in a greenhouse setting indicated that the 
isolate was able to elicit growth and development of alfalfa plant as related 
to the control and regulated the uptake of the examined metals via the soil 
to the plant. In conclusion, the authors recommend Cellulosimicrobium sp. 
for the bio-remediation as well as for the promotion of plant growth because 
it has importance in the controlling of ecological contaminants in the soil. 
Ahemad (2015) did a review on the role of PSBs in remediation of soil 
contaminants. The author stressed the importance of toxic metals in the soil. 
Those toxic metals reduce the efficiency of plant crops. That PSBs applica￾tion to agricultural soil aid in the reduction of the setbacks encounters by 
crops and ensure bioavailability of the proper nutrient uptake by plants. 
Lin et al. (2018) evaluated and tested the role of PSBs in improving 
copper polluted soil for the efficacy and growth of Wedelia trilobata. The 
results of their biological controlled experiment indicated that showed that 
the removal efficiency of Cu from soil was facilitated by the impact of the 
PSBs and it also spurred the growth and development of the tested plant. The 
positive effect on the soil and the plant led to the Cu assimilation by the root 
system, translocation, and excellent results. 
Min et al. (2017) evaluated a review of the remediation of soil contami￾nated by HMs using PSBs. The authors stressed the role of PSB; biofertilizers 
in remediating soil polluted with toxic metals. That PBSs can decontaminate 
HMs by improving the plant vigor and resistance capability. Besides, the 96 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
authors also state that PSBs also improve the plants against numerous 
maladies and fortify the persistence effectiveness in the phyto-remediating 
toxic concentration of HMs. This chapter provides an overview of PSMs 
research status and summarizes the remediation effects and mechanisms 
of heavy metal contaminated soils by PSMs. The disadvantages of PSMs 
for remediation, heavy metal contaminated soils are also analyzed, and the 
future research orientation is pointed out accordingly. 
Chen et al. (2019) tested and evaluated the application of basic bio-char 
obtained from rice husk and sludge with PSBs in the remediation of lead. The 
results of their study indicated that the bio-chars rice husk and sludge were 
able to remediate the Pb2+ efficiently of about 18.61 and 53.89% correspond￾ingly. But when PSBs were introduced, the percentage remediating efficiency 
increased for both bio-chars rice husk and sludge for 24.11 and 60.85%, indi￾vidually. Besides, the PSBs were able to improve significantly the creation 
of steady pyromorphite on superficial of sludge bio-char consequent of the 
uniformly spread of phosphate and controlled pH released by the microbes. 
Furthermore, minor elements lesser than <0.074 mm on the surface, indicated 
the production of high pyro-morphite induced by the microbes on the rice and 
sludge bio-chars. Nonetheless, the sludge biochar showed higher bio-sorption 
potentials which spur the microbes to provide an opposite platform to decon￾taminate the toxic metal. The authors, therefore, recommend the integration 
of PSBs and conglomerates of bio-char as the first-class candidate for the 
decontamination of toxic HMs in agricultural soils. 
Ren et al. (2019) isolated and tested the effect of growth-promoting 
microorganisms in decontaminating high concentrations of Cu in agronomic 
soils. The authors used metal impervious growth-promoting microorganisms 
[J62 (B. cepacia), Y1-3-9 (P. thivervalensis), and JYC17 (M. oxydans)] in the 
toxic soil decontamination and enhancement of the growth of B. napus. The 
biological control experiment lasted for 50 days. The results of their study 
revealed that the Rape plant was able to absorb Cu when inoculated with B. 
cepacia, P. thivervalensis, and M. oxydans and increase of biomass (113.38, 
66.26, and 67.91%) correspondingly. More so, there was evidence of an 
increase in a translocation rate/factor (0.85) when B. cepacia was inoculated 
after the 50 days trials, which later elicited the remediation potentials of the 
Rape plant to Cu bioavailability to Cu in the soil. The results also showed 
that B. cepacia and P. thivervalensis also impacted the soil Cu bioavail￾ability and the water-Cu-water solubility potentials by 10.13 and 41.77% 
correspondingly, as related to the control. The results of the antioxidant 
actions in the plant leaves indicate that the plant was impacted positively 
by the tested microbes via increased concentrations of the antioxidant  
Phosphate Solubilizing Microorganisms for Sustainable Organic Agriculture 97 
non-enzymatic materials; glutathione and ascorbic acid by 9.89–17.67% 
and 40.24–91.22% individually. These activities brought down the oxidative 
strain brought about by the toxic metal and the concentration of the peroxi￾dase and thiobarbituric acid-reactive substances. A further analysis using the 
PCR-denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis indicated that the DGGE bands 
were dominated by the microbe’s rhizosphere and endosphere, which serve 
as important components in the culturing media. The result of an advanced 
correlation showed a positive relationship between bacterial communities; 
dependent and impendent with the root rhizosphere and endosphere. The 
authors concluded that the microbes were able to decontaminate the soil and 
recommend the strains as perfect bioremediation organisms. 
4.5	 MECHANISMS OF PHOSPHORUS SOLUBILIZATION 
MICROORGANISMS 
Some bacterial species possess the capability to solubilize and perform 
mineralization capacity for inorganic and organic phosphorus (Hilda and 
Fraga, 2000; Khiari and Parent, 2005). Phosphorus solubilizing activity is 
evaluated by the capability of the microorganisms to release metabolites 
which include organic acid using their carboxyl and hydroxyl groups chelate 
the cation joined to the phosphate, which is later converted to soluble forms 
(Sagoe et al., 1998). The process of Phosphate solubilization occurs mainly 
by numerous microbial processes and modes of action entailing proton extru￾sion and organic acid production (Surange, 1995). These beneficial micro￾organisms could recycle the insoluble organic and inorganic soil phosphates 
mainly by bacteria and fungi (Banik and Dey, 1982). Whitelaw (2000) stated 
that phosphorus solubilization is performed by numerous numbers of a large 
number of saprophytic fungi and bacteria which could solubilize soluble soil 
phosphates through chelation-mediated modes of action. 
The inorganic phosphorus is solubilized by the effect of inorganic and 
organic acids produced by phosphorus solubilizing bacteria in which carboxyl 
and hydroxyl groups of acids chelate cations such as Ca, Al, and Fe and 
reduce the pH available in the basic soil (Stevenson, 2005). The phosphorus 
solubilizing bacteria possess the capability to dissolve the soil. Through the 
generation of low molecular weight organic acids which consists of keto 
gluconic acids and gluconic and together with the reduction in the pH of the 
rhizosphere (Deubel et al., 2000). 
The reduction in the pH of the rhizosphere could be through the 
following process such as gaseous (O2
/CO2
) exchanges, biotical production  
98 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
of the proton, and bicarbonate release (anion/cation balance). The rate of 
phosphorus solubilization could be linked to the level of pH of the medium. 
The liberation of the root exudates such as organic ligands could change 
the concentration of phosphorus available in the soil solution (Hinsinger, 
2001). The organic acid generated by the phosphorus solubilizing bacteria 
could solubilize the phosphorus by reducing the pH, chelation of cations, 
and conflicting with phosphate for adsorption locations available in the 
soil (Nahas, 1996). Some inorganic acids such as hydrochloric acid could 
also solubilize phosphate, but they have a lower efficacy when compared 
to organic acid when applied at the same pH (Kim et al., 1997). Moreover, 
phosphate solubilization is stimulated by the induction of phosphate starva￾tion (Gyaneshwar et al., 1999). 
4.6 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE RECOMMENDATION 
This chapter has provided comprehensive information on the application 
of phosphorus solubilizing microorganisms and their wide application for 
the increment of agricultural crop production and their utilization for the 
ecorestoration of heavily polluted soil. The modes of action explored by these 
beneficial strains were highlighted. There is a need to utilize the application 
of genetic engineering for the beneficial microorganisms for the production 
of an improved strain that could increase the rise in the production of 
absorbable phosphorus by the plant. There is a need to explore the utilization 
of agricultural wastes for the mass production of effective strain that could 
lead to an increase in the production of phosphorus. 
KEYWORDS 
• biofertilizer 
• ecorestoration 
• modes of action 
• phosphorus solubilizing microorganism 
• plant growth-promoting microorganisms 
• sustainable agriculture 
• tricalcium phosphate  
Phosphate Solubilizing Microorganisms for Sustainable Organic Agriculture 99 
REFERENCES
 
Adetunji, C. O., & Ugbenyen, A. M., (2019). Mechanism of action of nanopesticide derived 
from microorganism for the alleviation of abiotic and biotic stress affecting crop 
productivity. In: Nanotechnology for Agriculture: Crop Production and Protection. 
Springer, Singapore, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-32-9374-8_7. 
Adetunji, C. O., (2019). Environmental impact and ecotoxicological influence of biofabricated 
and inorganic nanoparticle on soil activity. In: Panpatte, D., & Jhala, Y., (eds.), Nanotech￾nology for Agriculture. Springer, Singapore. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-32-9370-0_12. 
Adetunji, C. O., Egbuna, C., Tijjani, H., Adom, D., Khalil, L., Al-Ani, T., & Partick-Iwuanuyanwu, 
K. C., (2019a). Pesticides, home made preparation of natural biopesticides and application. 
In: Natural Remedy for Pest. Diseases and Weed Control (pp. 1–12), Elsevier. 
Adetunji, C. O., Kumar, D., Raina, M., Arogundade, O., & Sarin, N. M., (2019b). Endophytic 
microorganisms as biological control agents for plant pathogens: A panacea for sustainable 
agriculture. In: Varma, A., Tripathi, S., & Prasad, R., (eds.), Plant Biotic Interactions. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-26657-8_1. 
Adetunji, C. O., Oloke, J. K., Bello, O. M., Pradeep, M., & Jolly, R. S., (2019d). Isolation, structural 
elucidation and bioherbicidal activity of an eco-friendly bioactive 2-(hydroxymethyl) 
phenol, from Pseudomonas aeruginosa (C1501) and its ecotoxicological evaluation on 
soil. Environ. Technol. Innov., 13, 304–317. 
Adetunji, C. O., Panpatte, D. G., Bello, O. M., & Adekoya, M. A., (2019). Application of 
nanoengineered metabolites from beneficial and eco-friendly microorganisms as 
biological control agents for plant pests and pathogens. In: Panpatte, D., & Jhala, Y., (eds.), 
Nanotechnology for Agriculture: Crop Production and Protection. Springer, Singapore, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-32-9374-8_13. 
Adnan, M., Shah, Z., Fahad, S., Arif, M., Alam, M., Khan, I. A., Mian, I. A., Basir, A., et al., 
(2017). Phosphate-solubilizing bacteria nullify the antagonistic effect of soil calcification 
on bioavailability of phosphorus in alkaline soils. Scientific Reports, 7, 16131. https:// 
doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-16537-5. 
Shumaila. B., & Atia, I., (2018). Phosphate solubilizing rhizobacteria as alternative of 
chemical fertilizer for growth and yield of Triticum aestivum (var. Galaxy 2013). Saudi J. 
Biol. Sci. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sjbs.2018.05.024. 
Baas, P., Bell, C., Mancini, L. M., Lee, M. N., Conant, R. T., et al., (2016). Phosphorus 
mobilizing consortium Mammoth P™ enhances plant growth. Peer. J., 4, e2121. doi: 
10.7717/peerj.2121. 
Bahadir, P. S., Liaqat, F., & Eltem, R., (2018). Plant growth-promoting properties of phosphate 
solubilizing Bacillus species isolated from the Aegean Region of Turkey. Turk. J. Bot., 
42, 183–196. https://doi.org/10.3906/bot-1706-51. 
Baliah, N. T., Pandiarajan, G., & Kumar, B. M., (2016). Isolation, identification and 
characterization of phosphate solubilizing bacteria from different crop soils of 
Srivilliputtur Taluk, Virudhunagar District, Tamil Nadu. Trop. Ecol., 57(3), 465–474. 
Banik, S., & Dey, B. K., (1982). Available phosphate content of an alluvial soil as influenced 
by inoculation of some isolated phosphate solubilizing microorganisms. Plant Soil, 69, 
353–364.
 Baudoin, E., Benizri, E., & Guckert, A., (2002). Impact of growth stages on bacterial 
community structure along maize roots by metabolic and genetic fingerprinting. Appl. 
Soil Ecol., 19, 135–145. 100 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
Chen, H., Zhang, J., Tang, T., Su, M., Tian, D., Zhang, L., Li, Z., & Hu, S., (2019). Enhanced 
Pb immobilization via the combination of biochar and phosphate solubilizing. Environ. 
Int., 127, 395–401. 
Chen, Y. P., Rekha, P. D., Arun, A. B., Shen, F. T., Lai, W. A., & Young, C. C., (2006). Phosphate 
solubilizing bacteria from subtropical soil and their tricalcium phosphate solubilizing 
abilities. Appl. Soil Ecol., 34(1), 33–41. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsoil.2005.12.002. 
Deubel, A., Gransee, & Merbach, W., (2000). Transformation of organic rhizodeposits by 
rhizoplane bacteria and its influence on the availability of tertiary calcium phosphate. J. 
Plant Nutr. Soil Sci., 163, 387–392. 
Din, M., Nelofer, R., Salman, M., Abdullaha, Faisal, H. K., Khana, A., Ahmada, M., Jalila, 
F., Ud, D., & Khand, M., (2019). Production of nitrogen-fixing Azotobacter (SR-4) and 
phosphorus solubilizing Aspergillus niger and their evaluation on Lagenaria siceraria 
and Abelmoschus esculentus. Biotech. Rep., 20, e00323. 
Fallah, A., (2006). Abundance and distribution of phosphate solubilizing bacteria and fungi in 
some soil samples from north of Iran. In: 18th World Congress of Soil Science. Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania, USA. 
Fenta, L., & Assefa, F., (2017). Isolation and characterization of phosphate solubilizing 
bacteria from tomato (Solanum L.) rhizosphere and their effect on growth and phosphorus 
uptake of the host plant under greenhouse experiment. Int. J. Adv. Res., 1–49. 
Fisher, M. C., Henk, D. A., Briggs, C. J., Brownstein, J. S., Madoff, L. C., McCraw, S. L., 
& Gurr, S. J., (2012). Emerging fungal threats to animal, plant and ecosystem health. 
Nature, 484, 186–194. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature10947. 
Glick, B. R., (2014). Bacteria with ACC deaminase can promote plant growth and help to feed 
the world. Microbiol. Res., 169, 30–39. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.micres.2013.09.009. 
Gyaneshwar, P., Parekh, L. J., Archana, G., Podle, P. S., Collins, M. D., Hutson, R. A., & Naresh, 
K. G., (1999). Involvement of a phosphate starvation inducible glucose dehydrogenase 
in soil phosphate solubilization by Enterobacter asburiae. FEMS Microbiol. Lett., 171, 
223–229. 
Hilda, R., & Fraga, R., (2000). Phosphate solubilizing bacteria and their role in plant growth 
promotion. Biotech. Adv., 17, 319–359. 
Hinsinger, P., (2001). Bioavailability of soil inorganic P in the rhizosphere as affected by 
root-induced chemical changes: A review. Plant Soil, 237, 173–195. 
Jamshidi, R., Jalili, B., Bahmanyar, M. A., & Salek-Gilani, S., (2016). Isolation and identifi￾cation of a phosphate solubilizing fungus from soil of a phosphate mine in Chaluse, Iran. 
Mycology, 7(3), 134–142. https://doi.org/10.1080/21501203.2016.1221863. 
Kapri, A., & Tewari, L., (2010). Phosphate solubilization potential and phosphatase activity 
of rhizospheric Trichoderma spp. Braz. J. Microbiol., 41(3), 787–795. https://doi.org/ 
10.1590/S1517-83822010005000031. 
Karpagam, T., & Nagalakshmi, P. K., (2014). Isolation and characterization of phosphate 
solubilizing microbes from agricultural soil. Int. J. Curr. Microbiol. App. Sci., 3(3), 601–614. 
Kaur, G., & Reddy, M. S., (2014). Role of phosphate-solubilizing bacteria in improving the 
soil fertility and crop productivity in organic farming. Archives of Agronomy and Soil 
Science, 60, 4. 
Khan, M. S., Zaidi, A., & Wani, P. A., (2007). Role of phosphate-solubilizing microorganisms 
in sustainable agriculture: A review. Agron. Sustain. Dev., 27, 29–43. 
Khiari, L., & Parent, L. E., (2005). Phosphorus transformations in acid light-textured soils 
treated with dry swine manure. Can. J. Soil Sci., 85, 75–87.  
Phosphate Solubilizing Microorganisms for Sustainable Organic Agriculture 101 
Kim, K. Y. D., Jordan, D., & McDonald, G. A., (1997). Solubilization of hydroxyapatite by 
Enterobacter agglomerans and cloned Escherichia coli in culture medium. Biol. Fert. 
Soils., 24, 347–352. 
Kim, K. Y., Jordan, D., & McDonald, G. A., (1998). Effect of phosphate-solubilizing bacteria 
and vesicular-arbuscular mycorrhizae on tomato growth and soil microbial activity. Biol. 
Fert. Soils, 26, 79–87. 
Kumar, A., Baby, K., & Mallick, M. A., (2016). Phosphate solubilizing microbes: An effective 
and alternative approach ass biofertilizers. Int. J. Phar. Pharm. Sci., 8(2), 37–40. 
Ladeiro, B., (2012). Saline agriculture in the 21st century: Using salt contaminated resources 
to cope food requirements. J. Bot. https://doi.org/10.1155/2012/310705. 
Li, Y., Zhang, J., Zhang, J., Xu, W., & Mou, Z., (2019). Characteristics of inorganic phosphate￾solubilizing bacteria from the sediments of a eutrophic lake. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public 
Health., 16, 2141. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph16122141. 
Lin, M., Jin, M., Xu, K., He, L., & Cheng, D., (2018). Phosphate-solubilizing bacteria 
improve the phytoremediation efficiency of Wedelia trilobata for Cu-contaminated soil. 
Int. J. Phytoremed., 813–822. https://doi.org/10.1080/15226514.2018.1438351. 
Malboobi, M. A., Owlia, P., Behbahani, M., Sarokhani, E., Moradi, S., Yakhchali, B., Deljou, 
A., & Heravi, K. M., (2009). Solubilization of organic and inorganic phosphates by three 
highly efficient soil bacterial isolates. World J. Microbiol. Biotech., 25(8), 1471–1477. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11274-009-0037-z. 
Min, L., Zedong, T., & Mingyang, S., (2018). Research advances in heavy metal contaminated 
soil remediation by phosphate solubilizing microorganisms. Acta Ecologica Sinica, 
38(10) https://doi.org/10.5846/stxb201703100406. 
Munees, A., (2015). Phosphate-solubilizing bacteria-assisted phytoremediation of metalliferous 
soils: A review. 3 Biotech, 5, 111–121. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13205-014-0206-0.
 
Nahas, E., (1996). Factors determining rock phosphate solubilization by microorganisms 
isolated from soil. World J. Microb. Biotechnol., 12, 18–23. 
Oliveira, C. A., Alves, V. M. C., Marriel, I. E., Gomes, E. A., Scotti, M. R., Carneiro, N. P., 
Guimaraes, C. T., et al., (2009). Phosphate solubilizing microorganisms isolated from 
rhizosphere of maize cultivated in an oxisol of the Brazilian Cerrado biome. Soil Biol. 
Biochem., 41, 1782–1787. 
Park, J. H., Bolan, N., Megharaj, M., & Naidu, R., (2011). Isolation of phosphate solubilizing 
bacteria and their potential for lead immobilization in soil. J. Haz. Mat., 185(2), 829–836. 
Reena, T., Dhanya, H., Deepthi, M. S., & Pravitha, D., (2013). Isolation of phosphate 
solubilizing bacteria and fungi from rhizospheres soil from banana plants and its effect 
on the growth of Amaranthus cruentus L. IOSR J. Pharm. Biol. Sci., 5(3), 6–11. 
Ren, X. M., Shi-Jun, G., Wei, T., Chen, Y., Han, H., Chen, E., Li, B. L., et al., (2019). Effects 
of plant growth-promoting bacteria (PGPB) inoculation on the growth, antioxidant 
activity, Cu uptake, and bacterial community structure of rape (Brassica napus L.) grown 
in Cu-contaminated agricultural soil. Front. Microbiol., 10, 1455. 
Rengasamy, P., (2006). World salinization with emphasis on Australia. J Exp. Bot., 57, 
1017–1023. https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/erj108. 
Richardson, A. E., (1994). Soil microorganisms and phosphorus availability. In: Pankhurst, 
C. E., Doulse, B. M., Gupta, V. V. S. R., & Grace, P. R., (eds.), Soil Biota Management in 
Sustainable Farming System (pp. 50–62). CSIRO, Australia. 
Richardson, A. E., (2001). Prospects for using soil microorganisms to improve the acquisition 
of phosphorus by plants. Austr. J. Plant Physiol., 28, 897–906. 102 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
Romano, S., Bondarev, V., Kölling, M., Dittmar, T., & Schulz-Vogt, H. N., (2017). Phosphate 
limitation triggers the dissolution of precipitated iron by the marine bacterium Pseudovibrio 
sp. FO-BEG1. Frontiers in Microbiology, 8, 364. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.00364. 
Saeed, K. S., Ahmed, S. A., Hassan, I. A., & Ahmed, P. H. (2015). Effect of biofertilizer and 
chemical fertilizer on growth and yield in Cucumber (Cucumis sativus) in greenhouse 
condition. Pak. J. Biol. Sci. 18(3), 129–134. 
Sagoe, C. I., Ando, T., Kouno, K., & Nagaoka, T., (1998). Relative importance of protons and 
solution calcium concentration in phosphate rock dissolution by organic acids. Soil Sci. 
Plant Nutr., 44, 617–625. 
Sandhimita, M., Dutta, S., Banerjee, A., Banerjee, S., Datta, R., Roy, P., Podder, A., et al., 
(2017). Production and application of phosphate solubilizing bacteria as biofertilizer: 
Field trial at maize field, Uchalan, Burdwan District, West Bengal. Int. J. Env. Agric. 
Res., 3, 1. 
Sharon, J. A., Hathwaik, L. T., Glenn, G. M., Imam, S. H., & Lee, C. C., (2016). Isolation of 
efficient phosphate solubilizing bacteria capable of enhancing tomato plant growth. J. 
Soil Sci. Plant Nutr., 16(2), 525–536. 
Stevenson, F. J., (2005). Cycles of Soil: Carbon, Nitrogen, Phosphorus, Sulfur, Micronutrients. 
John Wiley and Sons, New York. 
Suleman, M., Yasmin, S., Rasul, M., Yahya, M., Atta, B. M., & Mirza, M. S., (2018). 
Phosphate solubilizing bacteria with glucose dehydrogenase gene for phosphorus uptake 
and beneficial effects on wheat. PLoS One, 13(9), e0204408. https://doi.org/10.1371/ 
journal.pone.0204408. 
Surange, S., Wollum, A. G., Kumar, N., & Nautiyal, C. S., (1995). Characterization of 
Rhizobium from root nodules of leguminous trees growing in alkaline soils. Can. J. 
Microbiol., 43, 891–894. 
Tirry, N., Joutey, T., Sayel, H., Kouchou, A., Bahafid, W., Asri, M., & El Ghachtouli, N., 
(2018). Screening of plant growth-promoting traits in heavy metals resistant bacteria: 
Prospects in phytoremediation. J. Genet. Eng. Biotech., 16, 613–619. 
Vassilev, N., Vassileva, M., & Nikolaeva, I., (2006). Simultaneous P-solubilizing and biocontrol 
activity of microorganisms: potentials and future trends. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 71, 
137–144. 
Vazquez, P., Holguin, G., Lopez-Cortes, A., & Bashan, Y., (2000). Phosphate-solubilizing 
microorganisms associated with the rhizosphere of mangroves in a semiarid coastal 
lagoon. Biol. Fertil. Soils., 30, 460–468. 
Vikram, A., & Hamzehzarghani, H., (2008). Effect of phosphate solubilizing bacteria on 
nodulation and growth parameters of green gram (Vigna radiata L. Wilczek). Res. J. 
Microbiol., 3, 62–72. https://doi.org/10.3923/jm.2008.62.72. 
Walpola, B. C., & Yoon, M. H., (2013). Phosphate solubilizing bacteria: Assessment of their 
effect on growth promotion and phosphorous uptake of mung bean (Vigna radiata [L.] R. 
Wilczek). Chilean J. Agr. Res., 73(3). https://doi.org/10.4067/S0718-58392013000300010. 
Whitelaw, M. A., (2000). Growth promotion of plants inoculated with phosphate solubilizing 
fungi. Adv. Agron., 69, 99–151. 
Williamson, L. C., Ribrioux, S. P. C. P., Fitter, A. H., & Leyser, H. M. O., (2001). Phosphate 
availability regulates root system architecture in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol., 126, 875–882. 
Wu, F., Li, J., Chen, Y., Zhang, L., Zhang, Y., Wang, S., Shi, X., Li, L., & Liang, J., (2019). 
Effects of phosphate solubilizing bacteria on the growth, photosynthesis, and nutrient 
uptake of Camellia oleifera Abel. Forests, 10, 348. https://doi.org/10.3390/f10040348. Phosphate Solubilizing Microorganisms for Sustainable Organic Agriculture 103 
Wu, H., (2005). Identification and characterization of a novel biotin synthesis gene in 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 71(11), 6845–6855. 
Wu, S. C., Cao, Z. H., Lib, Z. G., Cheung, K. C., & Wonga, M. H., (2005). Effects of 
biofertilizer containing N-fixer, P and K solubilizers and AM fungi on maize growth: A 
greenhouse trial. Geoderma, 125, 155–166. 
Yahya, A., & Azawi, S. K. A., (1998). Occurrence of phosphate solubilizing bacteria in some 
Iranian soils. Plant Soil, 117, 135–141. 
Zhang, Y., Chen, F. S., Wu, X. Q., Luan, F. G., Zhang, L. P., Fang, X. M., Wan, S. Z., et 
al., (2018). Isolation and characterization of two phosphate-solubilizing fungi from 
rhizosphere soil of moso bamboo and their functional capacities when exposed to 
different phosphorus sources and pH environments. PLoS One, 13(7), e0199625. https:// 
doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0199625.  
CHAPTER 5
 
RECENT TRENDS IN THE UTILIZATION 
OF ENDOPHYTIC MICROORGANISMS 
AND OTHER BIOPESTICIDAL 
TECHNOLOGY FOR THE 
MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL 
PESTS, INSECTS, AND DISEASES 
CHARLES OLUWASEUN ADETUNJI,1 
OSIKEMEKHA ANTHONY ANANI,2
 SAHER ISLAM,3
 and 
DEVARAJAN THANGADURAI4 
1
Microbiology, Biotechnology, and Nanotechnology Laboratory, 
Department of Microbiology Edo State University Uzairue, Auchi, 
Nigeria 
2
Laboratory of Ecotoxicology and Forensic Biology, 
Department of Biological Science, Faculty of Science, 
Edo State University Uzairue, Auchi, Nigeria 
3
Institute of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Faculty of Biosciences, 
University of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, Lahore, Pakistan 
4
Department of Botany, Karnatak University, Dharwad, Karnataka, India 
ABSTRACT 
The high rate of over-dependence on the utilization of synthetic chemicals 
for crop production has resulted in numerous injurious effects such as the 
outbreak of secondary pests, pest resurgence, high level of pest resistance 
which led to the over-application of these synthetic pesticides to achieve the 
expected control outcome. The application of biopesticides derived from a  
106 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
beneficial microorganism such as endophytic microorganisms has been high￾lighted as a biotechnological technique that could help in the mitigation of 
all the highlighted challenges. This might be linked to the fact that microbial 
pesticides possess some special and unique features such as relatively low 
toxicity, broad-spectrum against pests and pathogens, insects, high level of 
compatibility with smallholder farming, easy production. Therefore, this 
chapter discussed the general overview of the application of endophytic 
microorganisms and other recent biopesticidal approaches for the manage￾ment of pests and pathogens affecting agricultural productivity. The modes 
of action exploited by the endophytic microorganism and other advances in 
biopesticidal technology such as nanotechnology, metagenomics, and encap￾sulations were also highlighted. The merits and demerits of biopesticides over 
synthetic pesticides were also discussed. Necessary suggestions and future 
recommendations were also provided. 
5.1 INTRODUCTION 
Pesticides are utilized for protecting crops from the adverse effect of harmful 
agricultural pest and pathogens which normally affect the increase in agri￾cultural production and normally leads to economic losses. The application 
of synthetic pesticides has been observed to show several adverse effects on 
natural resources and nature with hazardous effects on the environment and 
human health (Sinha, 2012; Adetunji et al., 2019a–d; Adetunji, 2019; Adetunji 
and Ugbenyen, 2019). Typical examples of such synthetic pesticides include 
pyrethroids, DDT (dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane), methyl bromide, 
organophosphates which have all been highlighted to exhibit numerous health 
challenges, environmental, development of high resistance on targeted pests 
as well as an increase in the public awareness about the adverse effect of 
synthetic pesticides to discover substitutes for crop protection. Therefore, 
there is a need to search for an alternative and sustainable which supports 
eco-friendly approaches for the management of these agricultural pests and 
pathogens. The application of biopesticides has been recognized as a sustain￾able, eco-friendly, the economical approach that could mitigate against all 
the highlighted challenges associated with synthetic pesticides (Khater, 2012; 
Fareed et al., 2013). 
The world health organization has estimated the level of mortality as 
high as 20,000 globally every year besides the adverse effect of pesticides 
which includes accumulation as food residues, carcinogenicity, neural 
disorders, longer degradation periods, and high and acute residual toxicity.  
Endophytic Microorganisms for Pest, Insect and Disease Management 107 
The application of biopesticides has been identified as a biotechnological 
tool with several merits when compared to synthetic pesticides, which 
include enhancement, water solubility, complete biodegradability, and eco￾friendly (Thakore, 2006). The biopesticides derived from microorganism 
has been recognized as an alternative path because of their high safety to 
the ecosystem and human and their non-target effect to both individual and 
organism whenever the biopesticides are applied in individual applications 
and within integrated pest management (IPM) (Gašić and Tanović, 2013). 
The application of endophytic microorganisms has been highlighted to 
be rising most especially in crop production. This might be linked to the role 
in the stimulation of plant growth, the supply of nitrogen to plants, stress 
alleviation, biological control of pests and pathogens (Beltran-Garcia et al., 
2014b; Santoyo et al., 2016; Maksimov et al., 2018; White et al., 2018). 
The increase in crops by endophytic microorganisms could be linked to the 
production of plant growth regulation. 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic 
acid (ACC) deaminase activity fixing of nitrogen, and solubilization of 
phosphorus. Furthermore, diazotrophic endophytes have been recognized as 
versatile microbes because they possess the capability to give nutrients to 
the plant even in the presence of nodules which could be called ‘associative 
nitrogen fixation’ (Carvalho et al., 2014). 
Therefore, this chapter intends to discuss detailed information on the appli￾cation of endophytic microorganisms. The modes of action utilized by these 
beneficial microorganisms were also highlighted. Some examples of recent 
advances in biopesticides were also highlighted, such as nanotechnology, 
metagenomics, encapsulations were also highlighted. Future direction and 
recommendation of the application of biopesticides were elucidated. 
5.2	 AGRICULTURAL SIGNIFICANCE OF ENDOPHYTIC 
MICROORGANISMS AS A POTENTIAL BIOTECHNOLOGICAL 
TOOL 
Endophytic microorganisms have been recognized as a biotechnological 
tool that could be used in the management of several agricultural challenges 
mitigating against the increase in agricultural production, most especially 
increase in food production. Some of these endophytic microorganisms 
have the potential to protect the plant against pests, diseases, and insects, 
which have been recognized as potential enemies of crops (Azevedo et al., 
2000). The biotechnological potential of endophytic microorganisms has 
been identified in several sectors ranging from industries, agriculture, food, 108 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
pharmaceutical but most especially in the agrochemical industries for the 
mass production of agrochemicals as well as genetic vectors (Souza et al., 
2004). These endophytic microorganisms have been identified to possess 
the capability to generate several biologically active compounds, antibiotics, 
toxins, which play a crucial role in the maintenance of their host plant by 
offering higher resistance to several biotic and abiotic stress conditions, 
generation of phytohormones, and altering physiological features (Azevedo 
et al., 2000). It has been highlighted that these beneficial endophytic micro￾organisms possess the capability to induce a systemic resistance against 
several pests and pathogens, which constitutes the major basis for their 
utilization as a biological control agent for agricultural pests and pathogens. 
They could alter the cell structure of the walls (deposition of lignin) as well 
as physiological and biological alteration which could lead to the generation 
of proteins and chemical substances which play a crucial role in the defense 
of their host. Moreover, the significance of plant growth-promoting bacterial 
could be linked to their capability to stimuli generated in the plant itself 
by the action of various metabolites such as ethylene, salicylic acid, and 
jasmonic acid. The compound could serve as elicitors that could induce a 
high level of resistance to external pathogens or pests. This process could lead 
to resistance induction which could make the plant generate the enhanced 
generation of proteinase-inhibitor compounds as well as plants inhibitors 
such as aspartate, serine, and cysteine. The plant may stimulate the build-up of 
secondary metabolites such as phenylpropanoids, synthesis of siderophores 
and phytoalexins as well as generation of pathogenesis-related proteins 
(PR-protein). Phytoalexins has been recognized as a microbial feature which 
build-up around the infection site while Phenylpropanoids could catalyze 
the development of trans-cinnamic acid-precursor of numerous compounds 
used in plant defense. PR-protein, most especially the peroxidase of phenols, 
is involved in the lignification of plant cells and cell walls which play a 
crucial role during their defense against pests and pathogens. This could 
also trigger hypersensitive response and development of papilla which 
could prevent the invasion of pathogenic microorganisms and establishment 
in their host. Therefore, the interpretation of the ecological roles of these 
beneficial microorganisms as an effective biotechnological tool could lead 
to sustainable organic agricultures most especially as a protective agent and 
enhancement of plant growth through the prevention of pests and pathogens 
(Peixoto et al., 2002). Most of this growth-promoting could be evaluated 
using molecular techniques which permit the quantification of genes involved 
in the anticipated characteristics while biochemical test could also help in the 
establishment of these microorganisms which have several potential such as  
Endophytic Microorganisms for Pest, Insect and Disease Management 109 
phosphate solubilization, nitrogen fixation, production of indole acetic acid 
(Kuklinsky-Sobral et al., 2004), production of siderophores (Compant et al., 
2005), generation of high resistance, biological control of diseases and pests 
(Ramamoorthy et al., 2001). Endophytic microorganisms are one of the most 
promising microbes that intend to boost agricultural output, defend flora 
from herbivores by generating ancillary metabolites with unpleasant and/ 
or noxious taste to the plant-eating animals and display pesticidal features 
examples are I. diterpenes, Nodulisporium sp. and B. daphnoides. AR37 and 
AR1 strains have been recognized or rated to have potentials in combating 
plant-insects invasion. P. indica and E. coenophiala are the most widely 
utilize endophytes that colonize the root system of plants, which assist in 
the resilience, development, and growth in plants and aid in the resistance to 
abiotic and biotic environmental stresses. P. eupatoriis aids in the inhibition 
of the phytopathogen, P. infestans. Some species of endophytes also increase 
the uptake of soil phosphate and nutrients in plants. 
5.3	 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL PEST AND INSECTS 
USING ENDOPHYTES 
Entomopathogenic fungi are universally utilized as inundate sprays to prevent 
plants from the attached of agricultural pests. They possess the capability to 
establish themselves as fungal endophytes, which consequently give several 
benefits to including protection against numerous agricultural pests. Given 
the aforementioned, Bamisile et al. (2019) evaluated one strain of Isaria 
fumosorosea and two fungal strains of Beauveria bassiana and assessed their 
pathogenicity test against adults of Asian citrus psyllid (Diaphorina citri). 
The result obtained shows that the tested biological control strains cause 
a 50% reduction in the survival rate of D. citri adults after exposure for 5 
days. Moreover, the capability of the 3 fungal strains to endophytically colo￾nize Citrus limon was also evaluated while the influence of the endophytic 
fungi to stimulate systemic establishment on 3 sequential generations of D. 
citri feeding on colonized plants was assessed. The Citrus seedlings were 
also inoculated at 4 months post-planting with these fungal strains using 
foliar spraying. It was observed that B. bassiana effectively colonized the 
seedlings while BB Fafu-13, which was one of the B. bassiana colonization 
was maintained for 12 weeks in the colonized seedlings while strain BB 
Fafu-16 was obtained back from the plant after 8 weeks post-inoculation. 
Moreover, it was observed that Isaria fumosorosea (IF Fafu-1) did not show 
any colonization on the plant while the two strains of B. bassiana stimulates 110 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
enhance the development of plant height and level fabrication in endophyti￾cally colonized seedlings. Moreover, the endophytic B. bassiana resulted in 
10–15% D. citri adult death after exposure for 7 days while it was observed 
that the Female D. citri that fed on the plants inoculated with B. bassiana 
laid smaller eggs in comparison to the plant without endophytes inocula￾tion. Also, a decrease in adult emergence was observed on the plant that 
was treated with B. bassiana. Their study showed that B. bassiana could be 
used as endophytic fungi for the biological control of agricultural pests that 
normally affect citrus plants. 
Banana (Musa spp.) has been recognized as a significant crop globally 
but is normally affected by black Sigatoka disease which could be linked to 
the fungus Pseudocercospora fijiensis that affects fruit production. Macedo￾Raygoza et al. (2019) evaluated the significance of Klebsiella pneumonia 
and Enterobacter cloacae as endophytic microorganisms with biological 
potential against P. fijiensis. The role of these endophytic strains for the 
support of plant nutrients in the soil that has a small amount of N-transfer. 
These strains were identified using 16S rRNA sequence evaluation and 
MALDI-TOF (matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization-time of flight) 
mass spectrometry (MS). The result obtained indicated that the endo￾phytic bacteria possess the capability to solubilize phosphate, fix nitrogen, 
produce indole acetic acid, negative for 1-aminocyclopropane 1-carboxylic 
acid deaminase, and demonstrated a biological control activity against P. 
fijiensis. To determine the influence of the endophytes on the plant growth, 
a non-endophyte using E. coli strain and two endophytic plant-bacteria were 
inoculated for 60 days as heat-killed cells (HKC) and active cells (AC) into 
plant microcosms deprived of nutrients and likened to a water-only treat￾ment and a mineral nutrients solution (MMN) treatment. The result obtained 
shows that the plant treated with the bacterial endophytes enhances all the 
growth parameters and mitigates enhanced senescence which was detected in 
MMN treatments which serve as the control. There was the mortality of the 
plant after 20 days of applying irrigation water while the plant treated with 
MMN enhanced the plants to produce new leaves with almost 30% weight 
loss during this period. Moreover, it was observed that the plant inoculated 
endophytic bacteria demonstrated an enhanced growth while those plants 
treated with E. cloacae AC treated plants exhibited an increase in biomass 
when compared to the E. cloacae HKC. Moreover, the plant treated with 
E. cloacae AC demonstrated the presence of intracellular bacteria within 
root cells, which indicated that an established symbiosis exists between 
the endophytic bacterial and the host plant. The authors also validated the Endophytic Microorganisms for Pest, Insect and Disease Management 111 
movement of organic N from bacteria into the plants using three bacteria 
that were cultivated with Na15NO3
 and NH4
Cl as a source of nitrogen source. 
The rate of movement of the nutrient from the endophytic bacteria into the 
plant was evaluated using pheophytin isotopomer abundance. The relative 
abundance of the isotopomers obtained at 874.57, 876.57, 872.57, 875.57, 
and 873.57 showed that the plant absorbed 15N atoms directly from bacterial 
cells utilizing them as a source of nitrogen to enhance the plant growth in 
the soil deprived of nutrients. Their study showed that E. cloacae could be 
utilized for the improvement of plant growth and increasing the health of 
banana crops. 
Azevedo et al. (2000) did a review on the current developments in the 
control of agricultural insects of tropical plants using endophytic microbes. 
The authors addressed the mechanism of action and the role of endophytic 
microbes in stimulating eco-physiological balance against pest and insect 
invasion, rebound, and its influence in boosting plant ability to cope with 
environmental stress concerning how endophytic microbes regulate the 
invasion of plant pest and insect is based on their ability to secrete noxious 
substances that can influence the biological genome of the plant to respond 
to the pest-insect attack as well as to adapt to variation of environmental 
changes. The authors also stressed the importance of entomo-pathogenic 
endophytic fungi for the control of insects and pests. In conclusion, they 
proposed the utilization of endophytic bacteria and fungi micro-biota 
sourced from several citrus trees and medicinal plants as a future driver for 
the control of insects and pests’ invasion and rebound in agricultural land. 
Kumar et al. (2008) did a review on the management of pests and diseases 
using endophytic fungi. The authors stated that endophytic microbes reside 
in the inside of vascular tissues of good physical shape plants. That the 
microbes have healthy potentials are yet to be tapped. They recounted 
that various wild and domesticated plants have been shown to have endo￾phytic metabolites such as isocoumarin, sesquiterpenes, indole, alkaloids 
pyrrolizidine, and guanidine derivatives which have been shown to have 
special antimicrobial and pesticidal against plant pests and diseases causing 
organisms. In conclusion, the authors proposed new ways of engineering 
endophytes for sustainable agriculture. 
Clifton et al. (2018) tested and evaluated the impact of the endophytic￾entomopathogenic strain of fungi on Glycine max to Aphis glycines and the 
proof of identity of Metarhizium brunneum and Beauveria bassiana strains 
from agro fields. The authors stated that land-dwelling plants tend to harbor 
endophytes on their root system, especially strains of fungi, which may cause 112 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
vicissitudes in plant chemical make-up as well as affect the relationship with 
other plant-eating animals. The results from their study showed that the 
population of Glycine max was increased with the inoculation of Metarhizium 
brunneum strain. However, there was no significant impact of Beauveria 
bassiana on Aphis glycines. An endophytic relationship was established in the 
stem system of the examined plant, indicating Beauveria bassiana to be more 
than Metarhizium brunneum. The authors also stated Metarhizium brunneum 
was recovered from the plant stem only, while Beauveria bassiana was 
recovered from the leaves and stem, respectively. The study also showed that 
some entomo-pathogenic endophytes in Glycine max might harm the plant 
as related to their growth, development, and susceptibility to Aphis glycines. 
To mitigate this, the authors did genetic phylogenetic sequence analysis on 
the strain Metarhizium and identify M. robertsii as the causative agent. The 
finding of this study revealed a close wide range of what was obtained in 
previous works. In conclusion, the authors suggested that dynamic results 
are important in understanding what sustainable environmental approaches 
can be utilized in the mitigation of pest-insect invasion and rebound. 
Ben et al. (2016) did a mini-review on the sustainable utilization of endo￾phytic fungi for good crop yield and output. The authors stated that endo￾phytic fungi play a vital role in the ecosystem habitation of plants, boost plant 
protection and performance against pests, diseases, and ecological stressors. 
They can do these because of encrypted second level organic unstable 
metabolites. More so, endophytic fungi are also used to correct post-harvest 
problems faced in agricultural practices, especially in cereals preservation 
and management. The authors contended that agricultural practices such as 
uncontrolled chemical application, seed treatments, and plant breeding, are 
one of the reasons endophytic fungal loss their vegetative spores, which in 
turn reduce their effectiveness and diversity in their primary symbiotic role 
in the ecosystem. In conclusion, they proposed sustainable approaches to 
mitigate these negative effects in contemporary agro practices. 
Li et al. (2015) isolated, tested, and evaluated the interaction of some 
endophytic plant bacteria on some plant pests. Around 84 endophytic bacteria 
were isolated from six congregations of plants designated for required char￾acteristics (cultivars) of attractive plantain lilies (hostas). From the isolates, 
five strains were identified after morphological characterization using rDNA￾16S sequence scrutiny. The results from the DNA scrutiny revealed that the 
isolates ‘Blu-v2’ was identified from a ‘blue Umbrella’ cultivar as Bacillus 
amyloliquefaciens and exhibited strong anti-fungal qualities and the ability 
to prevent feeding by Spodoptera fruigiperda (Fall armyworms). The result 
of the lipo-peptides of Blu-v2 did not display any noxiousness to the larvae Endophytic Microorganisms for Pest, Insect and Disease Management 113 
of Spodoptera fruigiperda. A further test of strain (Blu-v2) in a greenhouse 
setting inoculated into small sprouts of hosta leaves of infected bacteria and 
non-affected bacteria, in a 7-day trial period, revealed a significant reduction 
in the weights of the Fall armyworms larvae nourished with infected bacteria 
(E+) as compared to non-affected bacteria (E−) plants. The results of the 
death rate of Fall armyworms larvae nourished with non-affected bacteria 
leaves was lesser (3.33%) as compared to that of Fall armyworms larvae 
fed infected bacteria leaves (30%). In conclusion, the authors recommend 
that endophytic bacteria of strain Blu-v2 has probable worth as a bio-control 
mediator to decrease harm from fungal causative agents or pathogens as well 
as insect-pest plantain lilies cultivars. 
Harman and Uphoff (2019) did a review on the ecological benefits derived 
from soil-root endophytic symbiotic microorganisms. The authors opined 
those plants should not be considered as an object onto themselves, nonethe￾less as the noticeable fragment of flora-microbe multiplexes which are best 
known as genome or “holobiomes.” That some microbes, when given the 
chance to dwell in the rooted flora will take the advantage of becoming root￾rot symbiont. In such association, the microorganisms spur the development, 
growth, and yield of the roots and shoots system of the plant via absorption, 
fixation, and uptake of nutrients, enhancement of photosynthetic reactions, 
protection against ecological stress (abiotic and biotic), and resistance against 
pest invasion and rebounds. An extensive phylogenetical literature was done 
on various improved holobiomes on Piriformospora indica, Trichoderma, 
Rhizobiaceae, and Arbuscular mycorrhizae. These species exhibit various 
styles of inhabiting flora parts especially the root system. However, they 
all possess useful to localize and systemic variations in the flora genome; 
reactive oxygen species (ROS), which are biochemical reactive species 
encompassing oxygen which are alike. The authors recounted that ROS have 
been shown to regulate overexcitation of photosynthetic pigment and reduce 
ecological pressures on flora. They also stated that ROS controls the cellular 
environment of floral biochemical compositions as well as the gene expres￾sion. Enhanced plant holobiomes (EPHs) have the ability to intensify photo￾synthesis, development, and growth of plants alongside the organic matter 
of the soil. The synergy of the EPHs and the soil organic matter (SOM) 
have been shown to improve the CO2
 quality in the atmosphere, reduction of 
greenhouse gases (GHGs), and aid in the stabilization of climatic factors in 
the ecosystem. In conclusion, the author proposes the development of EPHs 
as an enterprise that has the prospect to improve farm crops against pest and 
insect attack as well as reduces global warming episodes. 114 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
Gonzalez et al. (2016) did a review on the novel prospects for the incor￾poration of microbes into natural pest regulatory flora greenhouse settings. 
The authors stated the need to use natural enemies of pests to combat pest 
infestation in an ever-multifaceted ecosystem. They also stated that these 
natural pest enemies are too expensive to purchase, rarely available, and not 
really effective enough. Based on these, the use of natural control microbes 
(‘microbials’), a novel development, are utilized. The authors opined in their 
review, that, there is the possible need to integrate natural enemies of the 
pest with microbials to explore better future ways of controlling plant pests 
and climatic management. They also explore different ways of the utilization 
of microbes, for example, endophytes in the bio-control of insect-microbes 
associations. In conclusion, the authors recommend the integrated optimiza￾tion of insect-microbials as natural enemies to arthropod pests in greenhouse 
agro cultivation. 
Kitherian (2017) did a review on the control of insect pests using bio￾nano and nano-particles. Food security has been on the forefront in a call 
for sustainable development worldwide. The call for safe food by food 
scientists has triggered diverse several green novel technologies ways of 
securing food for the present and future generations. The authors stressed 
the need for sustainable agriculture to mitigate the problems facing food 
such as pesticide accumulation, pest, and insect outbreaks, stunted growth in 
plants, pre, and post-harvest storage. The authors, in conclusion, propose the 
utilization of bio-nano particles for the control of pest-insect in agricultural 
farms, because, it is cheap, eco-friendly, and green. 
Bong and Sikorowski (1991) discovered that Pseudomonas maltophila 
possess the capability to induce changes in larval development and a decrease 
in the development of Helicoverpa zea. Thuler et al. (2006) affirmed that 
strains of EN5 of Alcaligenes piechaudii and EN4 of Kluyvera ascorbata 
could decrease the viability of Plutella xylostella in about 80 to 50% which 
could be applied for intensive field trial for the management of these insects. 
Moreover, Praça (2012) discovered that B. thuringiensis strains S1905 and 
S2122 could induce 100% of mortality in caterpillars in the 3° instar of 
Plutella xylostella in assessment implemented 48 h after caterpillars had been 
wide-open to discriminating bioassays, whereas S2124 triggered 58.33% of 
death after the similar period and 98.33% of death after 96. 
Moreover, the CL50 values vary from 2.33 to 4.84 ng/mL possesses a 
similar result when toxicity was carried out in comparison to the control. 
Viana et al. (2009) discovered that 12 out of the 58 strains of B. thuringiensis 
evaluated against caterpillars of Plutella xylostella possessed that capability Endophytic Microorganisms for Pest, Insect and Disease Management 115 
to induce 100% mortality within 24–48 h: 3A.140, T3A.259, T08.024, E1, 
E26, 2.7L, 1.7L, E22, 22.7L, 49.19A, and E2. Also, Castelo Branco et al. 
(2003) reported 100% of death for larvae of Plutella xylostella, most espe￾cially in the 2° instar when B. thuringiensis was applied. 
Castelo et al. (2003) observed 100% mortality for larvae of Plutella 
xylostella in the 2° instar with the application of B. thuringiensis. Macedo et 
al. (2012) also reported that some local strains of B. thuringiensis (S1301, 
S1264, S602) could inhibit 75% of mortality after dilution of 50 times. 
Moreover, it was discovered that among all the tested strains S602 and S1264 
showed 75% mortality after dilution of 50 times to D. saccharalis. Melatti 
et al. (2010) also discovered that B. thuringiensis could prevent the develop￾ment of cotton aphid (Aphis gossypii). It was later discovered that Bacillus 
kurstaki S1168 and Bacillus aizawai S1576, S29, S616, S40, exhibited the 
highest mortality rate against Aphis gossypii which led to more than 50% 
mortality rate. Amongst the evaluated strains, S1168 and S29 were the most 
active in the selective bioassay, producing deaths of 73 and 76% against A. 
gossypii, respectively. 
In a similar study, Polanczyky et al. (2003) evaluated the biological 
potential of 58 subspecies of Bacillus thuringiensis against S. frugiperda. 
The result obtained indicated that Bacillus thuringiensis morrisoni triggered 
80% of death in caterpillars. In a similar vein, Berlitz et al. (2003) evaluate 
the effect of 24 isolates of Bacillus thuringiensis derived from rice-growing 
regions of Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil for the biological control of S. frigi￾perda. The result obtained reveals the greatest death rates between 31.6% 
and 100% with only 5 isolates. 
Also, Campanini et al. (2012) evaluated the biological control potential 
of B. thuringiensis against Sphenophorus levis and Spodoptera frigiperda. 
It was later discovered that IB8.2 and IB17.3 were the most effective in the 
biological control of caterpillars of S. frugiperda while it was discovered that 
IB26.2 showed more than 75% mortality against the larvae S. levis. 
Lucho (2004) discovered that the CL50 of Cry proteins of Bacillus 
thuringiensis aizawai destroy the caterpillars of S. frugiperda in the 3° instar. 
The outcomes showed that CL50 of 2.22, 0.41, and 0.18 μg/mL for 2, 3, and 4 
days after the treatment of the biological control agent. It was discovered that 
a very high level of inhibition was demonstrated by the following proteins 
such as Cry1D, Cry1Aa, Cry1C, and Cry1Ab respectively from Bacillus 
thuringiensis aizawai against Spodoptera frugiperda. Furthermore, Knaak 
et al. (2007) established that proteins Cry1Ac and Cry1Ab produced by 
Bacillus thuringiensis kurstaki HD73 and Bacillus thuringiensis aizawai  
 
 
116 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
407 showed a CL50 9.29 and 1.79 μg/cm2
 against caterpillars in the 1° instar. 
Azambuja and Fiuza (2003) also affirmed that two natural isolates Bacillus 
thuringiensis isolated from rice-growing regions of Rio Grande do Sul, 
Brazil could inhibit the caterpillars of Anticarsia gemmatalis. 
Pinto et al. (2003) utilized six isolates of Bacillus thuringiensis that possess 
genes from the class cry3 or cry7 that could be stimulated and regulate the 
activity of class cry3 or cry7 that could synthesize the production of proteins 
insecticidal to coleopterous. The authors’ evaluated the influence of these 
proteins against the Oryzophagus oryzae. The result revealed that 2 induced 
corrected killing of 100%, 3 between 59% and 67%, and 1 around 50%. 
Steffens et al. (2001) recorded 53.41% mortality of larvae of O. oryzae from 
isolates of B. thuringiensis having cry3 genes with inhibitory activity against 
coleopterous. The high rate of inhibition might be linked to the presence of 
the two genes such as cry7 and cry3 genes, which categorize proteins explicit 
to coleopterous. 
Castilhos-Fortes et al. (2002) evaluated 57 strains of these bacteria and 
discovered that seven showed an enhanced activity. These strains had the 
following inhibitory such as B. thuringiensis kurstaki (Btk) with 28.57%, 
B. thuringiensis roskildiensis (Btr) and B. thuringiensis sooncheon (Bts) 
with 100%, B. thuringiensis colmeri (Btc) with 42.85%, B. thuringiensis 
huazhongensis (Bth) with 57.1%, B. thuringiensis yunnanensis (Bty) with 
71.4% and B. thuringiensis brasiliensis (Btb) with 52.3% mortality after 
7th day after treatment application. The author later utilized isolate B. 
thuringiensis roskildiensis and B. thuringiensis sooncheon which induced 
100% of death in the pre-selective assays. Broderick et al. (2000) evaluated 
the synergetic effect of zwittermycin A of Bacillus cereus when combined 
with B. thuringiensis against lepidopterous Lymantria dispar (L.). The result 
obtained showed that the combinatory effect of zwittermycin A of Bacillus 
cereus when combined with B. thuringiensis resulted in 35% in the mortality 
of the lepidopterous Lymantria dispar. Ma et al. (2008) tested the effect of 
B. bassiana and Cry 1Ac protein of B. thuringiensis and evaluated their 
effectiveness against Ostrinia furnacalis. The result obtained showed that 
the induced high mortality against the tested larvae of Ostrinia furnacalis. 
5.4	 MANAGEMENT OF ROOT BORNE DISEASES AFFECTING 
CROPS USING ENDOPHYTES 
Dutta et al. (2014) did a review on the utilization of endophytes as an 
apparatus for phyto-protection. The authors recounted that bacterial or fungi Endophytic Microorganisms for Pest, Insect and Disease Management 117 
microbes that are endophytes are symptom-less organisms that are cosmo￾politan in all living flora species parts. These symbiotic plant-microbes can 
inhabit the inner tissues of the plant and thus improving their performance. 
Numerous fungal-bacteria endophytic organisms secrete second-level 
growth hormones or metabolites, for example, gibberellin and auxin in the 
plant host they inhabit. Most of these secondary or second level metabolites 
elements or substances found in the plants have antibacterial and antifungal 
qualities that can powerfully inhibit the growing of additional microbes 
as well as disease-causing organisms in crops. The authors, in conclusion, 
recommend the utilization of bacterial-fungi endophytes in the mitigation of 
plant diseases. 
Khare et al. (2018) did a review on the connections between different 
flora and endophytic organisms and their prospects. The authors stated the 
benefits derived from endophytic microbes such as defense retort against 
diseases causing organisms. An interesting aspect of this is the possession 
of metabolites that aid in the protection of the plant against pathogens. 
The authors were able to explore several areas endophytic microbes can 
be utilized in agriculture as well as in human health protection from plant 
pathogens. 
Gond et al. (2010) did a review on the role endophytic fungal play in 
plant protection. The authors recounted that every flora inhabits endophytes 
in their tissues without endangering or resulting in any disease therein. 
However, they harbor latent natural or biological products that serve as 
warfare against disease-causing organisms. Examples of such biological 
properties are immunosuppressive substances, insecticide, nematicide, 
antioxidant, antiviral, antimycotic, antibiotic, and anticancer. Some of the 
natural products derived from endophytic microbes are taxol, 3-hydroxy￾propionic acid, loliterm B, cryptocandin, jesterone, oocydin, ambuic acid, 
noxious alkaloids, and cytochalasines. The authors, in conclusion, propose 
microbial endophytes as first-class engineering industries. 
Muthukumar et al. (2017) did a review on the role of endophytes in the 
control of plant disease. The authors stated that plant roots are dominated 
with endophytes in the following ranks fungi > bacteria > virus. That the 
present techniques used in the control of flora disease are the application 
of agricultural chemicals. This method has been known for its noxious 
ecological and human health concerns. However, a novel natural method 
using biological optimize endophytic microbes in the biological control of 
several flora pathogens. They can combat diseases using a series of asso￾ciations like trophobiotic, commensalism, cannibalistic, and mutualistic in 118 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
enhancing plant-microbes resistance. The authors concluded that endophytes 
are the first choice in phyto-protection of plants against pre- and post-harvest 
preservations. 
Rabiey et al. (2019) did a review on the bio-control of tree pathogens 
using endophytic microorganisms. Tress disease has been managed with 
agrochemicals which have been shown to have residual effects in the 
ecosystem. Nonetheless, several pressures on the concern ecological and 
health risks associated with their usage have necessitated the proposition of a 
green bio-endophytic anti-disease agent for the management of tree diseases. 
Its usage has shown to be environmentally friendly, cheap, and increase the 
plant’s adaptability to future disease rebounds. The authors stressed when 
these endophytic microorganisms are deploying in the soil as inoculants, 
they stimulate the environment of the plants (phyto-sphere). Examples of 
such organisms are the phylloplane microbes (fungi, yeasts, and bacteria). 
These microorganisms have the potential to bio-control plant pathogens 
and overcome several challenges faced by the plants. The utilization and 
optimization of these groups of microbes are competent and more effective 
in phyto-disease control because of the genome found in their chromosomes. 
However, the authors stated that the selective latent advantageous and utiliz￾able pattern of most endophytic organisms has not been fully understood. In 
conclusion, the authors were able to explain how the endophytes can upset 
and interact with each other in the bio-control of diseases. 
Waqas et al. (2015) did a tested and evaluated how endophytic microbes￾fungi promote growth in plants as well as mitigate root-rot disease. The 
authors opined that crops that are resistant to disease have a genetic trait that 
can be used for an agro purpose. Endophytes, especially fungi have growth 
stimulating enzymes-gibberellins, which have little or no role in the preven￾tion of plant disease. The authors looked at the role of two strains of fungi 
(P. citrinum and A. terreus) in stimulating growth and bio-control of diseases 
in Helianthus annuus as well as the ability to control signaling hormone as 
regards to plant defense against Sclerotium rolfsii, in a biological controlled 
experiment for three days interval; in a 12-day trial period (3, 6, and 12 
days). The results of their study indicated that chlorophyll content, photo￾synthesis, transpiration, diameter, length, and biomass of the shoot system 
were elicited by the inoculated fungi as compared to their control within the 
trial periods. The findings of their study revealed other negative influences 
caused by Sclerotium rolfsii. The authors also noticed that P. citrinum had 
a more positive influence on the sunflower than A. terreus to Helianthus 
annuus. In conclusion, the endophytic fungi were able to restructure the flora  
Endophytic Microorganisms for Pest, Insect and Disease Management 119 
growth during the pathogenic invasion and respond swiftly in the defense of 
the flora immune system against the pathogen. They propose the utilization 
of both strains of fungi for the sustainable management of crops because of 
their eco-friendly nature and economical usage as against the widely used 
agro fungicide(s). 
5.5	 MANAGEMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION BY 
HEAVY METAL USING ENDOPHYTES 
Ikram et al. (2018) tested and evaluated the potential effects of indole-3­
acetic acid (IAA) generating endophytic fungi in the remediation of heavy 
metal in wheat crops cultivated in polluted soils. The authors stressed the 
need of utilizing endophytic microorganisms for the remediation of heavy 
metals (HMs) in seriously impacted agricultural soils. Those cheap and 
effective ways are needed to make different strains of endophytes available 
for efficient plant growth. The authors applied IAA P. roqueforti strain as 
well as a mixture of it with waste effluents, to remediate heavy metal in 
wheat polluted soils. The results of the study revealed that the mixtures (P. 
roqueforti and wastes effluents), elicited the nutrients level, growth of the 
roots and reduced drastically the HMs in the soils of shoots and roots of 
the plants. In contrast, the wheat plants not inoculated under HMs stress 
were underdeveloped with signs of chlorosis. The findings from their study 
revealed that the endophyte used was able to establish a closed nonparasitic 
association with the plant host and was a useful tool for phytoremediation 
and bio-stabilization of soil HMs in and agroecosystem. 
Domka et al. (2019) did a review on the role of endophytic fungi in 
the adaptability of HMs noxiousness in soil cultivated plants. The authors 
recounted the environmental problems caused by HMs in the ecosystem. 
That micro-remediation is an effective substitute for a sustainable environ￾ment as against other conventional methods. Microbes such as endophytic 
fungi have been shown to have high tolerance limits to HMs toxicity and 
other soil stressors. In conclusion, the authors proposed endophytic fungi as 
a first-class candidate for effective remediation of HMs toxicity in agricul￾tural soils. 
Rizvi et al. (2017) tested and evaluated the stress mitigation of HMs 
and the bio-toxic influence on Triticum aestivum (wheat plant), using effec￾tive endophyte, Pseudomonas aeruginosa. The authors opined that speedy 
development and uncontrolled HMs release the ecosystem have warranted  
120 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
serious concerns both locally and globally. The biological controlled experi￾ment involved the bio sequencing of strains of rhizosphere using 16S rDNA. 
The results of the analysis indicated Pseudomonas aeruginosa as the main 
isolates. The strain was later subjected to some HMs (Cr, Cd, and Cu) of 
various concentrations. The results of the biological controlled experi￾ments revealed that P. aeruginosa strain was able to endure a high level 
of Cr, Cd, and Cu of concentrations 1000 μg ml–1, 1000 μg ml–1, and 1400 
μg ml–1 respectively. The results of the phytotoxic impacts on the Triticum 
aestivum, amplified with increases in the levels of Cr, Cd, and Cu. The strain 
inoculated Triticum aestivum had better yields and growth under the studied 
HMs stress. The dry mass (biomass) of the roots inoculated flora root was 
improved by 48, 28, and 44% at the rate of 204 mg/kg (Cr), 36 mg/kg (Cd), 
and 2007 mg/kg (Cu) correspondingly. The findings of this study showed 
that P. aeruginosa strain had the potential to mitigate HMs in polluted soils 
as well as stimulate growth and development in Triticum aestivum plant. 
5.6	 THE APPLICATION OF NANOAGROPARTICLES AS A 
REPLACEMENT FOR PESTICIDES 
Several pieces of research around the world have raised numerous concerns 
on the detrimental effects of synthetic pesticides. Some typical examples 
include neonicotinoids, clothianidin, and thiamethoxam have been high￾lighted to be very toxic to terrestrial and aquatic microorganisms, and a high 
level of pollution has been recorded in the ecosystem (Krupke et al., 2012). 
Numerous organophosphorus pesticides (OPPs) have been reported to lead 
to a high level of toxicity and they possess the capability to build up in the 
body which results in a high level of biomagnification in higher tropical 
organisms, which might lead to disruption in the food chain and ecosystem 
(Gill and Garg, 2014). Some OPPs possess the capability to enter into the 
water bodies and give rise to a high level of pollution in drinking water 
(Baker et al., 2013c). Moreover, some commonly applied OPPs the herbicide 
glyphosate was discovered to have a diverse effect against human beings 
(Guyton et al., 2015). The OPPs possess the capability to enter into the 
food system of a human being, most especially their diet, and their presence 
has been identified in the breast milk. Some adverse effect associated with 
these synthetic pesticides includes diabetes, cancer, infertility, neurological 
effects, respiratory diseases, genetic disorders, Parkinson disorder, and fetal 
diseases (Hu et al., 2015).  
Endophytic Microorganisms for Pest, Insect and Disease Management 121 
Several drastic measures have been put in place for the reduction of the 
high level of pollutants using conventional techniques such as transporta￾tion of pollutants to offsite dumping yards, vitrification, the addition of 
reactants, excavation, excavation (Singh et al., 2016). However, most of 
these processes involved several expensive techniques for the management 
of these pollutions most especially in developing countries where there is 
a lack of economic development and scientific advancement (Kang, 2014). 
Therefore, the application of biopesticides has been identified as sustain￾able from beneficial microorganisms for the production of agrochemical-based 
products that are environmentally friendly in nature. Furthermore, the intro￾duction of nanotechnology for the synthesis of nanobiopesticides has been 
identified as a sustainable biotechnological tool that could help to overcome 
all the highlighted challenges associated with synthetic pesticides. One of the 
merits of eco-friendly based biopesticides is that they are unable to meet up 
with the market demand and deprived performance, which has instigated the 
scientific community to invent new alternative strategies. Hence, the utiliza￾tion of beneficial microorganisms such as endophytic microorganisms for the 
synthesis of nanobiopesticides will go a long way in mitigating all the negative 
challenges associated with synthetic pesticides. 
Teodoro et al. (2010) stated the insecticidal action of nanostructured 
aluminum against Rhyzopertha dominica and Sitophilus oryzae, which 
are a major pest of stored food. The result obtained showed that the nano￾aluminum exhibited a high death rate when compared to the commercial 
insecticidal dust used as control. Liu et al. (2006) also evaluated the effect of 
silica nanoparticles as a vehicle for effective delivery of pesticides such as 
validamycin for improvement of activity and decrease the level of toxicity 
in comparison to free validamycin. The study established that the action 
of nanoparticles and their release rate depend mainly on the temperature 
and pH of the dissolution medium. Also, the action of silver-zinc and silver 
combined nanoparticles was evaluated against Aphis nerii Boyer de Fonsco￾lombe which led to mortality LC50 at 539.46 and 424.67 mg/mL respectively 
(Rouhani et al., 2012). 
5.7	 DIFFERENT TYPES OF NANOPARTICLES UTILIZED IN THE 
AGRICULTURAL SYSTEM 
Nanoagroparticles have been identified as a new paradigm that could enhance 
and led to an increase in agricultural production and that could mitigate against 
several challenges affecting the increase in agricultural production. There is  
122 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
numerous class of nanoparticles used in agriculture and their action depend 
on the mechanism of action. Examples of nanoparticles include aluminum, 
silver, zinc, copper, silica, gold, multiwalled carbon nanotubes (Sabir et al., 
2014). In sustainable agriculture, their application depends on features of the 
nanoparticles such as control release of the component, solubility, non-self￾decomposition, specificity most especially, the nanoagroparticles normally 
utilized as conjugated or tagged with carrier molecules that could lead to 
the development of liposome-based products, polymerization, immobilized 
association, emulsion, and hydrogel. Some other features of designed nano￾agroparticles include highly sensitive with negligible usage and maximum 
action, cost-effective, biocompatible that could enhance and lead to an 
increase in agricultural crop productivity. 
5.8	 APPLICATION OF NANOAGROPARTICLES AS POTENT 
ANTIMICROBIAL AGENTS AGAINST PHYTOPATHOGENS 
In the agriculture sector, effective management of microbial infestation is 
an important factor, and pathogenic microorganisms can cause a deleterious 
effect on crop productivity (Bhardwaj et al., 2014). In recent years, the 
emergence of drug-resistant microorganisms has posed a risk to mankind 
(Baker and Satish, 2015). The inappropriate and over usage of microbicidal 
chemicals agents, especially fungicides and bactericides, have resulted in the 
development of the application of beneficial microorganisms as an active 
antimicrobial agent in the preparation of nanoagroparticles against phyto￾pathogens. In the agricultural sector, the application of nanoagroparticles has 
been recognized to play a crucial role in the management of microbial infes￾tation and most especially for the treatment of pathogenic microorganisms 
which cause deleterious effect on crop productivity (Bhardwaj et al., 2014). 
The increase in the high level of resistance from the constant application of 
synthetic pesticides has led to the development of a high resistance which 
results in the pathogens invading crops (Baker and Satish, 2015). Therefore, 
the application of nanoagroparticles has been recognized as sustainable and 
effective eco-friendly nanobiopesticides with a novel mechanism of action 
that could reduce the high level of resistance caused by highly resistant patho￾genic strains. The sizes of these nanoagroparticles enable them to destroy the 
cell wall of different pathogenic microorganisms and cause a high level of 
destabilization on the cell membrane, which eventually leads to an eruption of 
the cellular contents and which eventually causes the interaction of the nano￾agroparticles. The crucial cellular contents of the pathogenic microorganisms  
Endophytic Microorganisms for Pest, Insect and Disease Management 123 
lead to disruption in the metabolism (Baker and Satish, 2012, 2015; Baker et 
al., 2015). 
5.9	 APPLICATION OF NANOAGROPARTICLES AS POTENTIAL 
FUNGICIDES 
Fungal diseases have been highlighted to be responsible for almost 70% 
of the crop diseases in comparison with pathogens which are responsible 
for high economic losses on agricultural food commodities (Agrios, 2005). 
Several crops such as grapevine, rice, groundnut, wheat, barley have b 
discovered to have a high susceptibility to the attack of fungal pathogens 
(Dhekney et al., 2007). The application of fungicides has been utilized for 
the management of this fungal pathogen, but their application is endowed 
with several environmental and health hazards that affect the ecosystem and 
also non-targeted microorganisms (Patel et al., 2014). 
Therefore, the application of nanoagroparticles derived from a beneficial 
microorganism such as endophytes could be a sustainable biotechnological 
tool for the management of agricultural fungal pathogens (Marziye et al., 
2014). The utilization of silver nanoparticles has been described as an effec￾tive nanobiopesticides with enhanced activity against rice blast disease 
triggered by Magnaporthe grisea. The utilization of silver nanoparticles 
has been recorded to prevent the utilization of synthetic fungicides such as 
azoxystrobin and isoprothiolane. 
Ouda (2014) discovered that 15 mg/L of copper nanoparticles could 
suppress the effect of Botrytis cinerea (BC) and Alternaria alternata. Also, 
Wani and Shah (2012) discovered that magnesium and zinc oxide (ZnO) 
exhibited an enhanced inhibitory effect against the spores of several patho￾genic fungal such as Mucor plumbeus, A. alternata, Rhizopus stolonifer, 
Fusarium oxysporum silver nanoparticles fabricated from Al-Othman 
et al. (2014), also validated the effect of Aspergillus terreus (KC462061) 
against aflatoxin producing isolates of Aspergillus flavus. Parizi et al. (2014) 
established that magnesium oxide nanoparticles could be used against F. 
oxysporum f. sp. lycopersici which have been highlighted to be responsible 
for the wilting in the tomato plant. 
Ramy and Ahmed (2013) evaluated the influence of ZnO nanoparticles 
against F. oxysporum and Penicillium expansum in an in vitro antifungal 
assay. The result obtained indicates that the antifungal action exhibited by 
the nanoparticles is concentration-dependent. The 12 mg/L ZnO nanopar￾ticle’s highest inhibitory effect was recorded against the mycelia growth  
 
124 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
was discovered to be 100 and 77% against P. expansum and F. oxysporum, 
respectively. Furthermore, these nanoparticles also reduced the level of 
mycotoxins production. The scanning electron microscopy was used to 
establish that the nanoparticles from the ZnO-induced several malformations 
on the treated pathogens. Ouda (2014) also compared the antifungal activities 
of copper and silver nanoparticles against B. cinerea and A. alternata. The 
result obtained showed that 15 mg/L concentration of silver nanoparticles 
demonstrated a very high inhibitory effect against fungal hyphae growth. 
The microscopic evaluation also affirmed that the nanoparticles exhibited a 
high level of damage against the conidia and the hyphae. Also, high damage 
was observed on the lipid content, sugar, n-acetyl glucosamine when treated 
with silver nanoparticles. 
5.10	 APPLICATION OF NANOAGROPARTICLES AS POTENTIAL 
NANOBACTERICIDES 
Several scientists have validated the effect of nanoparticles with enhanced 
antimicrobial activity against several pathogenic bacteria (Baker et al., 
2015). Chowdhury et al. (2014) tested the antibacterial of silver nanoparticles 
against multidrug-resistant (LBA4404 MDR) Agrobacterium tumefaciens 
and the normal strain (LBA4404). Their study showed that spherical silver 
nanoparticles with 5–40 nm exhibited the highest antifungal effect against 
these tested bacterial pathogens. 
5.11	 APPLICATION OF BIONANO-HYBRID AGROPARTICLES 
AGAINST PHYTOPATHOGENS 
Bio-nano hybrid agroparticles has been identified as a complex nanosystem 
which absolutely depends on bioconjugation chemistry. Bioconjugation 
gives significant interest in the biology of insightful activities. In this 
regard, biomolecules are utilized together with molecules or biomolecules 
with nanoparticles have been identified as significant Biotechnological 
tools. The biosynthesis of the bioconjugation approached highlighted the 
biochemical properties and physicochemical features of the nanomaterials as 
well as the biological materials. The relationship between biomolecules and 
nanoparticles depends on the functional moieties and electrostatics forces 
on the nanoparticles, which might lead to the development of functionalized 
nanoparticles in a reversible manner (Bagwea et al., 2003). The functional  
 
 
Endophytic Microorganisms for Pest, Insect and Disease Management 125 
moieties can develop a hydrophobic relationship and covalent bonding (Baker 
and Satish, 2012, 2015). The utilization of active metabolites and biologi￾cally active molecules from endophytic microorganisms could be used for 
the development of bio-nano-hybrid conjugates which could prevent all the 
adverse effects of pesticides resistance developed by agricultural pathogen 
whenever synthetic pesticides are applied for the management of agricultural 
pests and diseases. 
5.12	 APPLICATION OF ENCAPSULATION FOR ENHANCEMENT 
OF BIOPESTICIDE ACTIVITY 
Encapsulation has been identified as techniques used for the preservation 
of the active ingredients present in the formulation in close contact. The 
delivery of encapsulated viral particles has been recognized as a preferred 
delivery system to prevent the loss of the activity when exposed to solar 
radiation and protect the viral insecticidal activity. Nucleopolyhedrovirus of 
Heliotis and Bacillus thuringiensis have been successfully encapsulated in 
starch granules. Some encapsulation materials such as maize starch, gelatin, 
calcium alginate, and chitin have been used to maintain the viability of 
active ingredients. Moreover, Spodoptera frugiperda Nucleopolyhedrovirus 
(SfNPV) has been successfully encapsulated using Eudragit-S100 micropar￾ticles. It was discovered that the resulting particles showed more resistance to 
UV-inactivation rather than using Nucleopolyhedrovirus alone (Ravishankar 
and Venkatesha, 2010; Haase et al., 2015). 
5.13	 APPLICATION OF METAGENOMIC TECHNIQUES FOR 
ENHANCEMENT OF BIOPESTICIDE ACTIVITY 
Metagenomic study involves identification, determination, characterization, 
and functional evaluation of novel strains, most especially from environ￾mental samples, entails the isolation of DNA from the soil and detection, 
isolation, and screening of oppressive compounds from microorganisms. 
The utilization of next-generation, sequencing, new genomic techniques 
offer a novel and economical fast technology that could depict microbial 
diversity without any need to utilize cultural techniques (Hirsch et al., 2012). 
The application of metagenomics identification has been recognized in the 
identification of beneficial microorganisms, most especially the endophytic 
microorganisms, and other related microbes, and their interaction with  
126 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
agricultural pests. This has been recognized to be visible because metage￾nomics could be used to establish that some endophytic fungi possess the 
capability to exhibit toxic reactions for plant pathogens through the produc￾tion of secondary metabolites and inhibition of their growth (Porras-Alfaro 
and Bayman, 2011). 
5.14 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE RECOMMENDATION 
This chapter has provided a comprehensive report on the application of 
endophytic microorganisms as well as their application for the biological 
control of pests, insects, and pathogens affecting increases in agricultural 
production. Moreover, the modes of action utilized by these beneficial endo￾phytic microorganisms were also highlighted. Therefore, there will be a need 
to know the diversity of these endophytic, their function, and frequency to 
have proper knowledge that will expand the Biotechnological application 
of these beneficial microorganisms, most especially their application in the 
production of eco-friendly agrochemicals. This will also serve as eco-friendly 
biotechnology approaches for the management of a heavily contaminated 
environment. There is a need to explore the biotechnological potential of 
endophytic microorganism that dwell in a marine region and the detection as 
well as structural elucidation of diverse and unique biological active metabo￾lites with enhanced activity for the management of pests and diseases. This 
will also enhance a resourceful, cost-effective, and ecological substitute for 
the resolution of damages instigated by pest insects in agriculture. 
The regulatory authorities also need numerous knowledge on microbial 
pesticides an identification, evaluation of their adverse effect on the environ￾ment and humans as well as affirming their efficacy against pests. There 
is also a need to define and harmonize regulatory techniques for microbial 
pesticides in different regions of the world. The process of regional harmo￾nization in facilitating regulations is one most significant barrier to the 
great implementation of microbial pesticides. There is a need to develop 
several areas of microbial pesticides adaptation and development. These 
include enhancing the product range targeting the major plant protection 
challenges, development of resilient microbes, production of quantity and 
quality product in the market, guaranteeing satisfactory intellectual property 
rights for examining, generate a healthy supervisory atmosphere, regulatory 
coordination across the region, and inspiring public-private partnerships to 
fascinate more small-medium entrepreneurship into the microbial pesticide 
industry. Endophytic Microorganisms for Pest, Insect and Disease Management 127 
KEYWORDS 
• endophytes 
• heavy metals 
• indole-3-acetic acid 
• mineral nutrients solution 
• modes of action 
• nanotechnology
 
• organophosphorus pesticides
 
• pathogens 
REFERENCES 
Adetunji, C. O., & Ugbenyen, A. M., (2019). Mechanism of action of nanopesticide derived 
from microorganism for the alleviation of abiotic and biotic stress affecting crop 
productivity. In: Nanotechnology for Agriculture: Crop Production and Protection. https:// 
doi.org/10.1007/978-981-32-9374-8_7. 
Adetunji, C. O., (2019). Environmental impact and ecotoxicological influence of biofabricated 
and inorganic nanoparticle on soil activity. In: Panpatte, D., & Jhala, Y., (eds.), Nanotech￾nology for Agriculture. Springer, Singapore. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-32-9370-0_12. 
Adetunji, C. O., Egbuna, C., Tijjani, H., Adom, D., Khalil, L., Al-Ani, T., & Partick-Iwuanuyanwu, 
K. C., (2019a). Pesticides, home made preparation of natural biopesticides and application. 
In: Natural Remedy for Pest, Diseases and Weed Control (pp. 1–12) Elsevier. 
Adetunji, C. O., Kumar, D., Raina, M., Arogundade, O., & Sarin, N. M., (2019b). Endophytic 
microorganisms as biological control agents for plant pathogens: A panacea for sustainable 
agriculture. In: Varma, A., Tripathi, S., & Prasad, R., (eds.), Plant Biotic Interactions. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-26657-8_1. 
Adetunji, C. O., Oloke, J. K., Bello, O. M., Pradeep, M., & Jolly, R. S., (2019d). Isolation, structural 
elucidation and bioherbicidal activity of an eco-friendly bioactive 2-(hydroxymethyl) 
phenol, from Pseudomonas aeruginosa (C1501) and its ecotoxicological evaluation on 
soil. Environ. Technol. Inno., 13(2019), 304–317. 
Adetunji, C. O., Panpatte, D. G., Bello, O. M., & Adekoya, M. A., (2019c). Application 
of nanoengineered metabolites from beneficial and eco-friendly microorganisms as 
biological control agents for plant pests and pathogens. In: Panpatte, D., & Jhala, Y., 
(eds.), Nanotechnology for Agriculture: Crop Production and Protection. Springer, 
Singapore, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-32-9374-8_13. 
Al-Othman, M. R., El-Aziz, A. R. M. A., Mahmoud, M. A., Eifan, S. A., El-Shikh, M. S., & 
Majrashi, M., (2014). Application of silver nanoparticles as antifungal and antiaflatoxin 
B1 produced by Aspergillus flavus. Dig. J. Nanomater. Biostruct., 9, 151–157. 
Azambuja, K., & Fiuza, L. M., (2003). Isolation of Bacillus thuringiensis pathogenic to 
Anticarsia gemmatalis (Lepidoptera, Noctuidae). In: Shows of Scientific Initiation of 
Unisinos. São Leopoldo. 128 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
Azevedo, J. L., Maccheroni, J. W., Pereira, J. O., & Araujo, W. L., (2000). Endophytic micro￾organisms: A review on insect control and recent advances on tropical plants. Elect. J. 
Biotech., 3(1), 40–65. 
Bagwea, R. P., Xiaojun, Z., & Weihong, T., (2003). Bioconjugated luminescent nanoparticles 
for biological applications. J. Dispers. Sci. Technol., 24, 453–464. 
Baker, S., & Satish, S., (2012). Endophytes: Towards a vision in synthesis of nanoparticles for 
future therapeutic agents. Int. J. Bio-Inorg. Hybrid Nanomater., 1, 67–77. 
Baker, S., & Satish, S., (2015). Biosynthesis of gold nanoparticles by Pseudomonas veronii 
AS41G inhabiting Annona squamosa L. Spectrochim. Acta Mol. Biomol. Spectrosc., 150, 
691–695. 
Baker, S., Kumar, K. M., Santosh, P., Rakshith, D., & Satish, S., (2015). Extracellular 
synthesis of silver nanoparticles by novel Pseudomonas veronii AS41G inhabiting Annona 
squamosa L. and their bactericidal activity. Spectrochim. Acta Mol. Biomol. Spectrosc., 
136, 1434–1440. 
Baker, S., Vinayaka, A. C., Manonmani, H. K., & Thakur, M. S., (2013c). Development 
of dipstick-based immuno-chemiluminescence techniques for the rapid detection of 
dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane. Luminescence, 27, 524–529. 
Bamisile, B. S., Dash, C. K., Akutse, K. S., Qasim, M., Aguila, L. C. R., Wang, F., Keppanan, 
R., & Wang, L., (2019). Endophytic Beauveria bassiana in foliar-treated citrus lemon 
plants acting as a growth suppressor to three successive generations of Diaphorina 
citri Kuwayama (Hemiptera: Liviidae). Insects, 10, 176. https://doi.org/10.3390/insects 
10060176. 
Beltrán-García, M. J., (2019). Enterobacter cloacae, an endophyte that establishes a nutrient￾transfer symbiosis with banana plants and protects against the black sigatoka pathogen. 
Front. Microbiol., 10, 804. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2019.00804. 
Beltran-Garcia, M. J., White, J. F., Padro, F. M., Prieto, K. R., Yamaguchi, L. F., Torres, M. S., 
Kato, M. J., et al., (2014b). Nitrogen acquisition in Agave tequilana from degradation of 
endophytic bacteria. Sci. Rep., 4, 6938. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep06938. 
Ben J. J. L., John R. C., & Linda, J. J., (2016). Fungal endophytes for sustainable crop 
production. FEMS Microbiology Ecology, 92(12), fiw194. https://doi.org/10.1093/femsec/ 
fiw194. 
Berlitz, D. L., Azambuja, D. L., Azambuja, A. O., Antonio, A. C., Oliveira, J. V., & Fiuza, L. 
M., (2003). New insulated and Cry Proteins from Bacillus thuringiensis applied in the 
control of caterpillars of Spodoptera frugiperda. In: III Brazilian Congress of Irrigated 
Rice and XXV Meeting of the Irrigated Rice Culture. Camboriú. Analls. Camboriú. 
Bhardwaj, D., Ansari, M. W., Sahoo, R. K., & Tuteja, N., (2014). Biofertilizers function as 
key player in sustainable agriculture by improving soil fertility, plant tolerance and crop 
productivity. Microb. Cell Fact., 13, 66. 
Bong, C. F. J., & Sikorowski, P. P., (1991). Effects of cytoplasmic polyhedrosis virus and 
bacterial contamination on growth and development of the corn earworm, Helicoverpa 
zea. J. Invert. Pathol., 57(3), 406–412. 
Broderick, N. A., Goodman, R. M., Raffa, K. F., & Handelsman, J., (2000). Synergy 
between zwittermicin A and Bacillus thuringiensis subsp. kurstaki against gypsy moth 
(Lepidoptera: Lymantriidae). Biol. Contr., 29(1), 101–107. 
Campanini, E. B., Davolos, C. C., Alves, E. C. C., & Lemos, M. V. F., (2012). Characterization 
of new isolates of Bacillus thuringiensis for control of important insect pests of agriculture. 
Bragantia, 71(3), 362–369. Endophytic Microorganisms for Pest, Insect and Disease Management 129 
Carvalho, T. L. G., Balsemao-Pires, E., Saraiva, R. M., Ferreira, P. C. G., & Hemerly, A. 
S., (2014). Nitrogen signaling in plant interactions with associative and endophytic 
diazotrophic bacteria. J. Exp. Bot., 65, 5631–5642. https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/eru319. 
Castelo, B. M., França, F. H., Pontes, L. A., & Amaral, P. S. T., (2003). Evaluation of the 
susceptibility to insecticides in the moth populations in moth-of-cruciferous some areas 
of Brazil. Hort. Braz., 21(3), 549–552. 
Castilhos-Fortes, R., Matsumura, A. T., Diehl, E., & Fiuza, L. M., (2002). Susceptibility of 
Nasutitermes ehrhardti (Isoptera: Termitidae) to Bacillus thuringiensis subspecies. Braz. 
J. Microb., 33(3), 219–222. 
Chowdhury, S., Basu, A., & Kundu, S., (2014). Green synthesis of protein capped silver 
nanoparticles from phytopathogenic fungus Macrophomina phaseolina (Tassi) goid with 
antimicrobial properties against multidrug-resistant bacteria. Nanoscale Res. Lett., 9, 365. 
Clifton, E. H., Jaronski, S. T., Coates, B. S., Hodgson, E. W., & Gassmann, A. J., (2018). 
Effects of endophytic entomopathogenic fungi on soybean aphid and identification of 
Metarhizium isolates from agricultural fields. PLoS One, 13(3), e0194815. https://doi. 
org/10.1371/journal. pone.0194815. 
Compant, S., Duffy, B., Nowak, J., Clement, C., & Barkai, E. A., (2005). Mini-review: Use of 
plant growth-promoting bacteria for biocontrol of plant diseases: Principles, mechanisms 
of action, and future prospects. Appl. Environ. Microb., 71(9), 4951–4959. 
Dhekney, S., Li, A., Anaman, M., Dutt, M., Tattersall, J., & Gray, D., (2007). Genetic 
transformation of embryogenic cultures and recovery of transgenic plants in Vitis vinifera, 
Vitis rotundifolia, and Vitis hybrids. Acta Hortic., 738, 743–748. 
Domka, A. M., Rozpaądek, P., & Turnau, K., (2019). Are fungal endophytes merely 
mycorrhizal copycats? the role of fungal endophytes in the adaptation of plants to metal 
toxicity. Front. Microbiol. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2019.00371. 
Dutta, D., Puzari, K. C., & Gogoi, R., (2014). Endophytes: Exploitation as a tool in plant 
protection. Biol. Technol., 57, 5. http://dx.doi.org/10.1590/S1516-8913201402043. 
Fareed, M., Pathak, M. K., Bihari, V., Kamal, R., Srivastava, A. K., & Kesavachandran, C. 
N., (2013). Adverse respiratory health and hematological alterations among agricultural 
workers occupationally exposed to organophosphate pesticides: A cross sectional study 
in North India. PLoS One, 8(7). 
Gašić, S., & Tanović, B., (2013). Biopesticide formulations, possibility of application and 
future trends. Pesticidii Fitomedicina, 28(2), 97–102. 
Gill, H. K., & Garg, H., (2014). In: Soloneski, S., (ed.), Pesticides: Environmental Impacts and 
Management Strategies, Pesticides-Toxic Aspects. InTech, London. http://dx.doi.org/10. 
5772/57399. 
Gond, S., Verma, V. C., Mishra, A., Kumar, A., & Kharwar, R. N., (2010). Role of fungal 
endophytes in plant protection. In: Arya, A., & Perrello, A., (eds.), Management of 
Fungal Plant Pathogens. CAB International, UK. 
Gonzalez, F., Tkaczuk, C., Dinu, M. M., Fiedler, Ż., Vidal, S., Zchori-Fein, E., & Messelink, 
G. J., (2016). New opportunities for the integration of microorganisms into biological pest 
control systems in greenhouse crops. J. Pest Sci., 89, 295–311. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s10340-016-0751-x. 
Guyton, K. Z., Loomis, D., Grosse, Y., El Ghissassi, F., Benbrahim-Tallaa, L., Guha, N., 
Scoccianti, C., et al., (2015). Carcinogenicity of tetrachlorvinphos, parathion, malathion, 
diazinon, and glyphosate. Lancet Oncol., 16, 490–491. 130 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
Haase, S., Sciocco-Cap, A., & Romanowski, V., (2015). Baculovirus insecticides in Latin 
America: Historical overview, current status and future perspectives. Viruses, 7, 2230–2267. 
Harman, G. E., & Uphoff, N., (2019). Symbiotic root-endophytic soil microbes improve crop 
productivity and provide environmental benefits. Scientifica. https://doi.org/10.1155/ 
2019/9106395. 
Hirsch, J., Strohmeier, S., Pfannkuchen, M., & Reineke, A., (2012). Assessment of bacterial 
endosymbiont diversity in Otiorhynchus spp. (Coleoptera: Curculionidae) larvae using 
a multitag 454 pyrosequencing approach. BMC Microbiology, 12(1), S6. http://dx.doi. 
org/10.1371/journal.pone.0029268. 
Hu, R., Huang, X., Huang, J., Li, Y., Zhang, C., Yin, Y., Chen, Z., et al., (2015). Long and short 
term health effect of pesticides exposure: A cohort study from China. PLoS One., 10. 
Ikram, M., Ali, N., Jan, G., Jan, F. G., Rahman, I. U., Iqbal, A., & Hamayun, M., (2018). IAA 
producing fungal endophyte Penicillium roqueforti Thom. enhances stress tolerance and 
nutrients uptake in wheat plants grown on heavy metal contaminated soils. PLoS One, 
13(11), e0208150. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0208150. 
Kang, J. W., (2014). Removing environmental organic pollutants with bioremediation and 
phytoremediation. Biotechnol. Lett., 36, 1129–1139. 
Khater, H. F., (2012). Prospects of botanical biopesticides in insect pest management. 
Pharmacologia, 3(12), 641–656. 
Kitherian, S., (2017). Nano and bio-nanoparticles for insect control. Res. J. Nanosci. 
Nanotech., 7(1), 1–9. 
Knaak, N., Rohr, A. A., & Fiuza, L. M., (2007). In vitro effect of Bacillus thuringiensis strains 
and cry proteins in phytopathogenic fungi of paddy rice-field. Braz. J. Microb., 38(3), 1–7. 
Krupke, C. H., Hunt, G. J., Eitzer, B. D., Andino, G., & Given, K., (2012). Multiple routes 
of pesticide exposure for honey bees living near agricultural fields. PLoS One, e29268. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0029268. 
Liu, F., Wen, L., Li, Z., Yu, W., Sun, H., & Chen, J., (2006). Porous hollow silica nanoparticles 
as controlled delivery system for water-soluble pesticide. Mater. Res. Bull., 41, 2268–2275. 
Lucho, A. P. R., (2004). Management Spodoptera frugiperda (J. E. Smith 1797) (Lepidoptera: 
Noctuidae) in irrigated rice. São Leopoldo: Dissertation (Master). Diversity and Wildlife 
Management (p. 73) Universidade do Vale do Rio dos Sinos, Sao Leopoldo, UNISINOS. 
Ma, X. M., Liu, X. X., Ning, X., Zhang, B., Guan, X. M., Tan, Y. F., & Zhang, Q. W., (2008). 
Effects of Bacillus thuringiensis toxin Cry 1Ac and Beauveria bassiana on Asiatic corn 
borer (Lepidoptera: Crambidae). J. Invert. Pathol., 99(2),123–128. 
Macedo, C. L., Martins, E. S., Macedo, L. L. P., Santos, A. C., Praça, L. B., Góis, L. A. B., & 
Monnerat, R. G., (2012). Selection and characterization of Bacillus thuringiensis strains 
effective against Diatraea saccharalis (Lepidoptera: Crambidae). Pesq. Agrop. Braz., 
47(12), 1759–1765. 
Macedo-Raygoza, G. M., Valdez-Salas, B., Prado, F. M., Prieto, K. R., Yamaguchi, L. F., 
Kato, M. J., Canto-Canché, B. B., et al., (2019). Enterobacter cloacae, an endophyte that 
establishes a nutrient-transfer symbiosis with banana plants and protects against the black 
sigatoka pathogen. Front. Microbiol. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2019.00804. 
Maksimov, I. V., Maksimova, T. I., Sarvarova, E. R., & Blagova, D. K., (2018). Endophytic 
bacteria as effective agents of new-generation biopesticides. Appl. Biochem., 54, 128–140. 
https://doi.org/10.1134/S0003683818020072. 
Marziye, A. P., Yazdan, M., Roostaei, A., Khani, M., Negahdari, M., & Rahimi, G., (2014). 
Evaluation of the antifungal effect of magnesium oxide nanoparticles on Fusarium  
Endophytic Microorganisms for Pest, Insect and Disease Management 131 
oxysporum f. sp. lycopersici, pathogenic agent of tomato. Eur. J. Exp. Biol., 4(3), 
151–156. 
Melatti, V. M., Praça, L. B., Martins, E. S., Sujii, E., Berry, C., & Monnerat, R. G., (2010). 
Selection of Bacillus thuringiensis strains toxic against cotton aphid, Aphis gossypii 
glover (Hemiptera: Aphididae). Bioassay, 5(2), 1–4. 
Muthukumar, A., Regunathan, U., & Ramasamy, N., (2017). Role of bacterial endophytes 
in plant disease control. In: Endophytes: Crop Productivity and Protection. https://doi. 
org/10.1007/978-3-319-66544-3_7. 
Ouda, S. M., (2014). Antifungal activity of silver and copper nanoparticles on two plant 
pathogens, Alternaria alternata and Botrytis cinerea. Res. J. Microbiol., 9, 34–42. 
Parizi, M. A., Moradpour, Y., Roostaei, A., Khani, M., Negahdari, M., & Rahimi, G., (2014). 
Evaluation of the antifungal effect of magnesium oxide nanoparticles on Fusarium 
oxysporum f. sp. lycopersici, pathogenic agent of tomato. Eur. J. Exp. Biol., 4, 151–156. 
Patel, N., Desai, P., Patel, N., Jha, A., & Gautam, H. K., (2014). Agro-nanotechnology 
for plant fungal disease management: A review. Int. J. Curr. Microbiol. Appl. Sci., 3, 
71–84. 
Peixoto, N. P. A. S., Azevedo, J. L., & Araujo, W. L., (2002). Endophytic microorganisms. 
Biotechnol. Sci. Dev., 29, 62–77. 
Polanczyk, R. A., Silva, R. F. P., & Fiuza, L. M., (2003). Screening of Bacillus thuringiensis 
isolates to Spodoptera frugiperda (J.E Smith) (Lepidoptera: Noctuidae). Arq. Inst. Biol., 
70(1), 69–72. 
Porras-Alfaro, A., & Bayman, P., (2011). Hidden fungi, emergent properties: Endophytes and 
microbiomes. Phytopathology, 49(1), 291. 
Praça, L. B., (2012). Interactions between Bacillus thuringiensis Strains and Hybrids of 
Cabbage for the Control of Plutella xylostella and Plant Growth Promotion (p. 141). 
Brasília: UNB, 2012. Thesis (Doctoral)-Faculty of Agronomy and Veterinary Medicine, 
University of Brasília, Brasília. 
Rabiey, M., Hailey, L. E., Roy, S. R., Mahira, K. G., Al-Zadjali, A. S., Barrett, G. A., & Jackson, 
R. W., (2019). Endophytes vs tree pathogens and pests: Can they be used as biological 
control agents to improve tree health? Euro. J. Plant Pathol., 1–19. 
Ramamoorthy, V., Viswanathan, R., Raguchander, T., Prakasan, V., & Samiyappan, R., 
(2001). Induction of systemic resistance by plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria in crop 
plants against pests and diseases. Crop Protect., 20(1), 1–11. 
Ramy, S. Y., & Ahmed, O. F., (2013). In vitro study of the antifungal efficacy of zinc oxide 
nanoparticles against Fusarium oxysporum and Penicillium expansum. Afr. J. Microbiol. 
Res., 7, 1917–1923. 
Ravishankar, B., & Venkatesha, M., (2010). Effectiveness of SlNPV of Spodoptera litura 
(Fab.) (Lepidoptera: Noctuidae) on different host plants. J. Biopest., 3(1), 168–171. 
Rizvi, A., & Khan, M. S., (2017). Biotoxic impact of heavy metals on growth, oxidative stress 
and morphological changes in root structure of wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) and stress 
alleviation by Pseudomonas aeruginosa strain CPSB1. Chemosphere, 185, 942–952. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2017.07.088. 
Rouhani, M., Samih, M. A., & Kalantri, S. (2012). Insecticidal effect of silica and silver 
nanoparticles on the cowpea seed beetle, Callosobruchus maculatus F. (Col.: Bruchidae). 
J. Entomol. Res., 4, 297–305. 
Sabir, S., Arshad, M., & Chaudhari, S. K., (2014). Zinc oxide nanoparticles for revolutionizing 
agriculture, synthesis and applications. Sci. World J., 1–8. 132 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
Santoyo, G., Moreno-Hagelsieb, G., Orozco-Mosqueda, M. C., & Glick, B. R., (2016). Plant 
growth-promoting bacterial endophytes. Microbiol. Res., 183, 92–99. http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.micres.2015.11.008. 
Schloss, P. D., & Handelsman, J., (2003). Biotechnological prospects from metagenomics. 
Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 14(3), 303–310. 
Singh, M., Pant, G., Hossain, K., & Bhatia, A. K., (2016). Green remediation. Tool for safe 
and sustainable environment: A review. Appl. Water Sci. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/ 
s13201-016-0461-9. 
Sinha, B., (2012). Global biopesticide research trends: A bibliometric assessment. Indian J. 
Agricul. Sci., 82(2), 95–101. 
Souza, A. Q. L., Astolfi, F. S., Belem, P. M. L., Sarquis, M. I. M., & Pereira, J. O., (2004). 
Antimicrobial activity of endophytic fungi isolated from toxic plants in the Amazon: 
Palicourea longiflora (Aubl.) Rich and Strychnos cogens Bentham. Acta Amaz., 34(2), 
185–195. 
Steffens, C., Azambuja, A. O., Pinto, L. M. N., Oliveira, J. V., Menezes, V. G., & Fiuza, 
L. M., (2001). Pathogenicity of Bacillus thuringiensis in larvae of Oryzophagus oryzae 
(Coleoptera: Curculionidae) In: II Brazilian Congress of Irrigated Rice and XXIV Meeting 
of the Irrigated Rice Culture. Porto Alegre, Annals. Porto Alegre. 
Teodoro, S., Micaela, B., & David, K. W., (2010). Novel use of nano-structured alumina as an 
insecticide. Pest Manag. Sci., 66, 577–579. 
Thakore, Y., (2006). The biopesticide market for global agricultural use. Industrial 
Biotechnology, 2(3), 194–208. 
Thuler, R. B., Barros, R., Mariano, R. L. R., & Vendramim, J. D., (2006). Effect of plant 
growth-promoting bacteria (BPCP) in developing Plutella xylostella (L.) (Lepidoptera: 
Plutellidae) in cabbage. Sci., 34(2), 217–222. 
Umar, S., Kaushik, N., Edrada-Ebel, R., Ebel, R., & Proksch, P., (2008). Endophytic fungi 
for pest and disease management. In: Ciancio, A., & Mukerji, K., (eds.), Integrated 
Management of Diseases Caused by Fungi, Phytoplasma and Bacteria; Integrated 
Management of Plant Pests and Diseases (p. 3). Springer, Dordrecht. 
Viana, C. L. T. P., Bortolo, A. S., Thuler, R. T., Goulart, R. M., Lemos, M. V. F., & Ferraudo, A. 
S., (2009). Effect of new isolates of Bacillus thuringiensis Berliner on Plutella xylostella 
(Linnaeus, 1758) (Lepidoptera: Plutellidae). Sci., 37(1), 22–31. 
Wani, A. H., & Shah, M. A., (2012). A unique and profound effect of MgO and ZnO 
nanoparticles on some plant pathogenic fungi. J. Appl. Pharm. Sci., 2, 40–44. 
Waqas, M., Khan, A. L., Hamayun, M., Shahzad, R., Kang, S. M., Kim, J. G., & Lee, I. J., 
(2015). Endophytic fungi promote plant growth and mitigate the adverse effects of stem rot: 
An example of Penicillium citrinum and Aspergillus terreus. J. Plant Interactions., 510, 1. 
White, J. F., Kingsley, K. L., Verma, S. K., & Kowalski, K. P., (2018). Rhizophagy cycle: 
An oxidative process in plants for nutrient extraction from symbiotic microbes. 
Microorganisms, 6, 1–20. http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/microorganisms6030095. CHAPTER 6
 
SECONDARY METABOLITES AND 
THEIR BIOLOGICAL ACTIVITIES FROM 
CHAETOMIUM 
KASEM SOYTONG1
 and SOMDEJ KANOKMEDHAKUL2 
1
Department of Plant Production Technology, Faculty of Agricultural 
Technology, King Mongkut’s Institute of Technology Ladkrabang, 
Bangkok, Thailand 
2
Department of Organic Chemistry, Faculty of Science, 
Khon Khan University, Khon Khan, Thailand 
ABSTRACT 
Chaetomium spp. has been searched by many researchers for years and has 
discovered the secondary metabolites against human, animal, and plant patho￾gens. Our research findings on Chaetomium spp. have been conducted since 
1986. There are many species found to produce active metabolites against plant 
and human pathogens viz., Ch. brasiliense, Chaetomium cochliodes, Chae￾tomium cupreum, Chaetomium elatum, Chaetomium globosum, Chaetomium 
lucknowense, Chaetomium longirostre, and Chaetomium siamense which most 
of them have been developed to be biofungicide for disease control as agri￾cultural input for organic agricultural production. Therefore, Chaetomium spp. 
viz. Ch. amygdalisporum, Ch. brasiliense, Ch. coarctatum, Ch. cochliodes, 
Ch. Cupreum, Ch. elatum, Ch. funicola, Ch. globosum, Ch. gracile, Ch. molli￾cellum, Ch. murorum, Ch. olivaceum, Ch. quadrangulatum, Ch. retardatum, 
Ch. seminudum, Ch. siamense, and Ch. trilaterale were reported to produce 
natural active metabolites against Plasmodium falciparum, Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis, antibacterial, antifungal, cytotoxicity against cancer cells, anti￾Alzheimer, and anti-inflammatory, human tumor cell lines, human breast cancer  
 
134 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
(Bre04), human neuroma (N04) cell lines and human lung (Lu04), cytotoxicity 
against cholangiocarcinoma cell lines at IC50 3.41–86.95 μM, the human HL-60 
leukemia and murine P388 leukemia cell lines. Those metabolites found from 
several species of Chaetomium are reported for antimicrobial activity against 
anaerobic bacteria, especially Bacteroides fragillis, Propionibacterium acnes, 
Escherichia coli W3110, Staphylococcus aureus 209P, Cladosporium resinae, 
Bacillus subtilis, Trichophyton mentagrophytes, Candida albicans, Salmonella 
typhimurium, Streptococcus pyogenes, Escherichia coli, Salmonella choler￾aesuis, Corynebacterium diphtheriae, Streptococcus aureus, and Aspergillus 
fumigatus. Chaetomium species are being discovered as the potential antago￾nistic fungi against phytopathogens, viz. Drechslera oryzae (leaf blight of 
maize), Pyricularia oryzae (rice blast disease), Cochliobolus lunatus (perfect 
stage) which the imperfect stage is known as Curvularia lunata (leaf spot 
disease), Pythium ultimum (damping-off disease of sugarbeet), Botrytis cinerea 
(BC) (gray mold disease of grape), Rhizopus stolonifer (postharvest disease) 
and Coniella diplodiella (grape white rot disease), Phytophthora infestans (late 
blight of potato), Phytophthora spp. and Pythium spp. (root rot of plants). Inter￾estingly some Chaetomium spp. reported to release the metabolite that showed 
excellent insecticidal activity against Plutella xylostella. Biofungicides for plant 
disease control have developed Chaetomium species and their active metabo￾lites have also investigated to be natural products of nanoparticles used for 
plant immunity. Those bioproducts are used to promote the non-agrochemical 
production (NAP) and organic agriculture (OA), which has been contributed 
for farmers use in many countries, e.g., Thailand, Myanmar, Vietnam, Laos, 
Cambodia, and China. 
6.1 INTRODUCTION 
Chaetomium species are one of the richest sources of biologically active 
compounds. Previous investigation of the authors and other researchers 
on secondary metabolites of Chaetomium spp. recorded to isolate various 
types of active compounds, e.g., benzoquinone derivatives, tetra-S-methyl 
derivatives, azaphilones, chaetochalasins, indol-3-yl-[13]cytochalasans, 
depsidones, anthraquinone-chromanone, globosumones, and orsellinic 
acid. Some of those secondary metabolites showed their biological activity 
against human diseases such as Plasmodium falciparum, Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis, antibacterial, antifungal, cytotoxicity against cancer cells, anti￾Alzheimer, and anti-inflammatory. In addition, some of those compounds 
were reported as fungal mycotoxins. The studied species, their structures and 
biological activities are discussed in this chapter. Bioactive Secondary Metabolites from Chaetomium 135 
6.2 BIOACTIVE SECONDARY METABOLITES FROM CHAETOMIUM
 
Our review literature found that Ch. amygdalisporum extract from the culture 
on rice medium of Ch. amygdalisporum strain NHL2874 encountered bis­
(3-indolyl)-dihydroxybenzoquinone, neocochlio-dinol (1) and mollicellin 
G (2) (Sekita, 1983). Chaetomium atrobrunneum is found by Okeke et al. 
(1993) who reported a mycotoxin, patulin (3) that inhibited the rice disease; 
Drechslera oryzae, Pyricularia oryzae, and Gerlachia oryzae. Hwang et al. 
(2000) found a novel metabolite, chaetoatrosin A (4) from broth culture of 
Ch. atrobrunneum F449. Compound 4 inhibited chitin synthase and antifungal 
activities against BC, Cryptococcus neoformans and Trichophyton mentagro￾phytes. Chaetomium aureum is recorded by Li et al. (2010) who found the 
compounds named chaetoaurin (5), eugenitol (6), eugenetin (7), chaetoquadrin 
A (8), chaetoquadrin B (9), chaetoquadrin G (10), and chaetoquadrin H (11). 
The investigation on the ethyl acetate extract of Ch. brasiliense (NRRL 
22999) found the new compound, chaetochalasin A (12), along with four known 
compounds: chaetoglobosin D (13), chaetoglobosin Fex (14), 19-O-acetyl￾chaetoglobosins A (15) and 19-O-acetylchaetoglobosins D (16) (Oh et al., 
1998). Chaetochalasin A (12) expressed cytotoxicity against the NCI’s panel 
of 60 human tumor cell lines and antibacterial activity against Bacillus subtilis 
(ATCC 6051) and Staphylococcus aureus (ATCC 25923). Later, Li et al. (2008) 
reported chromone, 2-(hydroxymethyl)-6-methylmethyleugenin (17), euge￾netin (18), O-methyl-sterigmatocystin (19), sterigmatocystin (20), chaetocin 
(21), and depsidones, mollicellin D (22) and mollicellins H-J (23–25). Molli￾cellins H and I (23 and 24) significantly inhibited the growth of human breast 
cancer (Bre04), human neuroma (N04) cell lines and human lung (Lu04). 136 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
Our research finding revealed that 10 depsidones, five known molli￾cellins B (26), C (27), E (28), F (29), H (23), and J (25), and four new, 
mollicellins K-N (30–33) from fungus Ch. brasiliense. It showed that 
compounds 25–28 and 30–32 expressed antimalarial activity against Plas￾modium falciparum. Only compound 30 resulted in antimicrobial activities 
against Candida albicans and Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Moreover, all 
compounds (23, 25–33) expressed cytotoxicity to KB, BC1, NCI-H187 and 
five cholangiocarcinoma cell lines (Khumkomkhet et al., 2009). 
Burrows et al. (1975) studied on Ch. coarctatum and found two metabo￾lites 2-(buta-1,3-dienyl)-3-hydroxy-4-(penta-1,3-dienyl)tetrahydro-furan, 
aureonitol (39) and 8-ethylidene-7,8-dihydro-4-methoxy-pyrano[4,3-b] 
pyran-2,5-dione, coarctatin (40). Chaetomium cochliodes is reported by 
Brewer et al. (1968) who isolated cochliodinol (41) from three strains of 
Ch. cochliodes (HLX 374, HLX 577 and HLX 366). Bioactive Secondary Metabolites from Chaetomium 137 
Thereafter, they further recorded that chetomin (42) from Ch. cochliodes 
(HLX 440) actively against several gram-positive bacteria and inhibited the 
mycelial growth of some fungi and protein synthesis in culture of HeLa cells 
(Brewer et al., 1972). Abraham et al. (1992) investigated the ethyl acetate 
extract of Ch. cochliodes DSM 63353 resulting two tetrahydrofurans, 2-(buta￾1,3-dienyl)-3-hydroxy-4-(Penta-1,3-dienyl)tetrahydrofuran, aureonitol (39) 
and a new spiroketal (1RS,9RS)-3-hydroxymethyl-8Z-(2′E-pentenylidene)­
2,6-dioxa-spiro[4,4]nonanol-9 (43). 
Li et al. (2006a) recorded that the ethyl acetate extract of Ch. cochliodes 
cultured in solid-state fermented rice medium found three new epipolythio￾dioxopiperazines, chaetocochins A-C (44–46), and dethio-tetra (methylthio) 
chetomin (47), and chetomin (42). It expressed those compounds 42, 44, and 
46 showed significantly cytotoxicity against cancer cell lines, Bre-04, Lu-04, 
and N-04.  
138 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
Our research investigation found that the extracts of fungal biomass of 
Ch. cochliodes VTh01 and Ch. cochliodes CTh05 yielded chaetochalasin 
A (12), two new azaphliones, chaetoviridines E and F (52 and 53), four 
new dimeric spiro-azaplilones named cochliodones A–D (48–51), a new 
epi-chaetoviridin A (54), chaetoviridin A (55), and five known showed 
that compounds 12, 53, and 57 expressed antimalarial activity against 
Plasmodium falciparum. Compounds 12, 50, 52, 53, and 57 resulted to 
antimicrobial activity against Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Moreover, 52 
and 53 recorded to be cytotoxic against the KB, BC1, and NCI-H187 cell 
lines (Pholkerd et al., 2008). 
Chaetomium cupreum CC3003 is first recorded by our investigation that 
discovered three new azaphilones named rotiorinols A-C (59–61), two new 
stereoisomers, (–)-rotiorin (62) and epi-isochromophilone II (63), and a Bioactive Secondary Metabolites from Chaetomium 139 
known compound, rubrorotiorin (64). It resulted those compounds 59, 61, 
62, and 64 exhibited antifungal activity against Candida albicans (Kanok￾medhakul et al., 2006). 
Moreover, we also recorded that Ch. cupreum RY202 released two new 
angular types of azaphilones, sochromophilonol (65), ochrephilonol (66), 
and known compounds clearanols A and B (67 and 68), rubrorotiorin (64), 
isochromophilone II (63), (-)-rotiorin (62), rotiorinols A–C (59–61). As a 
result, compounds 65, 66, and 68 expressed moderately cytotoxicity toward 
the KB and NCI-H187 cell lines of IC50 9.63–32.42 μg/mL (Panthama et 
al., 2015). 
Chaetomium elatum ChE01 is further found by our research group as 
the first recorded to discover the cytochalasans type, chaetoglobosin V (69), 
prochaetoglobosin III (70), prochaetoglobosin IIIed (71), chaetoglobosins B 
(72), C (73), D (13), F (74), G (75), and isochaetoglobosin D (76). These 
compounds expressed cytotoxicity against cholangiocarcinoma cell lines at 
IC 3.41–86.95 μM and human breast cancer at IC 2.54–21.29 μM (Thohi­ 50 50 
nung et al., 2010). Our further investigation also found the crude metabolites  
140 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
and nano-particles constructed from Ch. elatum gave the effective disease 
control of rice blast pathogen (Magnaporthe oryzae) (Song et al., 2020b). 
Payne et al. (2002) found a series of tricyclic natural products, SB236049 
(77), SB236050(78), andSB238569 (79) fromCh.funicola. These compounds 
exhibited activity against broad-spectrum of metallo-β-lactamases. Chaeto￾mium globosum has been investigated by many researchers. Brewer et al. 
(1968) found that two strains of Ch. globosum (HLX 707 and HLX 819) 
produced a purple pigment, named cochliodinol (41). They also further 
recorded to discover chetomin (42) from two strains of Ch. globosum (HLX 
581 and HLX 707) (Brewer et al., 1972). In 1973, Sekita et al. recorded three 
cytotoxic indol-3-yl-[13]cytochalasans, chaetoglobosins A (80), B (72), and 
C (73) from Ch. globosum who defined the structures of chaetoglobosins 
(73), D (13), E (81), and F (82) G (83) and J (84) (Sekita et al., 1976, 1977). 
Itoh et al. (1980) displayed a new sesquiterpene antibiotic, heptelidic acid 
(85) from Ch. globosum (SANK 13379). This compound showed antimi￾crobial activity against anaerobic bacteria, especially Bacteroides fragillis Bioactive Secondary Metabolites from Chaetomium 141 
and Propionibacterium acnes. In 1981, Probst, and Tamm investigated the 
dichloromethane extract of Ch. globosum (Lederle H-124) and found five 
cytochalasans, chaetoglobosins A (80) and C (73), and 19-O-acetylchaeto￾globosins A (15), D (16), and B (86). 
Kikuchi et al. (1981) also isolated and structural elucidated a new metab￾olite, dethio-tetra (methylthio) chetomin (47) and a known chetomin (42) 
from the ethyl acetate extract of Ch. globosum. These metabolites expressed 
antimicrobial activity toward Escherichia coli W3110 and Staphylococcus 
aureus 209P. Moreover, Sekita et al. (1981) recorded that chaetoglobosin 
A (80) affected to the structure and functions of mammalian cells causing 
the inhibition of cellular movements and cell division motility, secretion, 
and phagocytosis, and the cell shape changes. Thereafter, Ch. globosum 
var. flavo-viridae (TRTC 66.631a) was reported by Takahashi et al. (1990) 
found four new azaphilones of angular type, named chaetoviridin A (55) as 
the major compound and chaetoviridins B-D (87–89) as the minor congers. 
It resulted that Chaetoviridin A (55) expressed a weak inhibitory activity on  
142 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
monoamine oxidase (MAO), and chlamydospore-like cells of Cochliobolus 
lunatus (perfect stage) which is a plant pathogen causing humans and 
animals disease but the imperfect stage is known as Curvularia lunata (leaf 
spot disease of plants) and inhibited the growth of Pyricularia oryzae (rice 
blast disease). 
Di Pietro et al. (1992) also recorded that Ch. globosum produced 
2-(buta-1,3-dienyl)-3-hydroxy-4-(Penta-1,3-dienyl)-tetrahydrofuran (39) 
and chetomin (42) which expressed activity against Pythium ultimum 
(damping-off disease of sugarbeet). Then, Tanida et al. (1992) reported 
TAN-1142 (90) from EtOAc extract of Ch. globosum I-319 (IFO 32395, 
FERM BP-3429) inhibited the growth of murine tumor cells. Yasukawa 
et al. (1994) penciled that chaetoviridin A (55) showed the inflamma￾tory activity of 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate in mice, a tumor￾promoting agent to the mouse ear resulted to induce inflammation. 
In 1996, Breinholt et al. found a novel compound of prenisatin (91), 
5-(3-methyl-2-butenyl)-indole-2,3-dione (5-prenylisatin) which derived from 
Ch. globosum. This compound exhibited antifungal activity in vitro against BC 
(gray mold disease of grape). Further investigation on Ch. globosum PF1138 
was done by Tabata et al. (2000) found the novel trans-epoxysuccinyl peptides 
named PF1138 A (92) and B (93) demonstrated inhibitory effect on cysteine 
proteases, e.g., cathepsin B, papain, and ficin, but no effect on serine protease, 
e.g., trypsin.  
Bioactive Secondary Metabolites from Chaetomium 143 
In 2002, our research finding on Ch. globosum strain KMITL-N0802 
resulted to record a novel anthraquinone-chromanone compound named 
chaetomanone (94) and seven known compounds, ergosterol (56), ergosterol 
palmitate (95), chrysophanol (96), chaetoglobosin C (73), alternariol monoethyl 
ether (97), echinulin (98), and isochaetoglobosin D (76). Chaetomanone (94) 
and echinulin (98) expressed antibacterial against Mycobacterium tuberculosis 
(Kanokmedhakul et al., 2002). 
Moreover, Jiao et al. (2004) stated that the metabolites of Ch. globosum 
strain CANU N60 can be found three novel compounds, chaetoglobosins 
Q (99), R (100), and T (101), six known compounds, chaetoglobosins A 
(80), B (72), D (13), and J (84) and prochaetoglobosins I (102) and II (103). 
With this, chaetoglobosins A (80), B (72), D (13), J (84), Q (99), and T 
(101) and prochaetoglobosins I (102) and II (103) expressed significantly 
cytotoxicity toward the P388 murine leukemia cell lines. While, chaetoglo￾bosins A (80), B (72), D (13), and J (84) and prochaetoglobosins I (102) 
and II (103) showed antimicrobial activities toward Cladosporium resinae, 
Bacillus subtilis, and Trichophyton mentagrophytes. Bashyal et al. (2005) 
recorded that Ch. globosum released three new esters of orsellinic acid, 
globosumones A-C (104–106) and three known compounds, orsellinic acid 
(107), orcinol (108), and trichodion (109). They stated that globosumones 
A and B (104 and 105) were moderately inhibited cell proliferation of four 
cancers cell lines; MCF-7, NCI-H460, SF-268 and MIA Pa Ca-2 (pancreatic 
carcinoma). 144 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
In 2006, Ding et al. recorded to isolate the metabolites from Ch. globosum 
IFB-E019 and discovered a new cytotoxic cytochalasin-based alkaloid 
named chaetoglobosin U (110), and four known analogs, chaetoglobosins C 
(73), E (81), and F (82) and penochalasin A (111). With this, Chaetochalasin 
U (110) showed cytotoxic activity against the human nasopharyngeal epider￾moid tumor KB cell lines, while 73, 81, 82, and 111 showed moderately 
against the cell lines. Wijeratne et al. (2006) found dihydroxyxanthenone, 
globosuxanthone A (112), tetrahydroxanthenone, globosuxanthone B (113), 
two xanthones, globosuxanthones C (114) and D (115), 2-hydroxyvertixan￾thone (116), and two anthraquinones, chrysazin (117) and 1,3,6,8-tetrahy￾doxyanthraquinone (118) from Ch. globosum. It showed that compound 112 
expressed strongly cytotoxicity toward the panel of seven human solid tumor 
cell lines, induced classic signs of apoptosis and disrupted the cell cycle 
resulting to accumulate cells in either G2
/M or S phase. Bioactive Secondary Metabolites from Chaetomium 145 
Lately, Yang et al. (2006) recorded that Ch. globosum which isolated from 
fermentation broth yielded two novel chemokine receptor CCR-5 inhibitors, 
Sch 210971 (119) Sch 210972 (120) and Sch 213766 (121) and encountered a 
major component 120 that showed a potent inhibition of the CCR-5 receptor 
binding. However, Wang et al. (2006) stated that the extracts of endophytic 
Ch. globosum which isolated from the inner tissue of the marine red alga 
Polysiphonia urceolata yielded a new benzaldehyde, chaetopyranin (122), 10 
known compounds including 2-(2,’3-epoxy-1,’3’-heptadienyl)-6-hydroxyl￾5-(3-methyl-2-butenyl) benzaldehyde (123) and isotetrahydroauroglaucin 
(124), two anthraquinone derivatives, erythroglaucin (125) and parietin 
(126), five asperentin derivatives including asperetin (127) which known 
as cladosporin), 5’-hydroxy-asperentin-8-methylether (128), asperentin￾8-methylether (129), 4’-hydroxyasperentin (130), and 5’-hydroxyasperentin 
(131), and the prenylated diketopiperazine congener neoechinulin (132). It 
showed that compound 122 expressed a moderately cytotoxicity towards three 
tumor cell lines, including human microvascular endothelial cells (HMEC), 
hepatocellular carcinoma cells (SMMC-7721), and human lung epithelial 
cells (A549). 146 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
In 2007, Wang et al. recorded four benzaldehyde derivatives from Ch. 
globosum which isolated from a marine-alga and defined as 2-(1-heptenyl)-
3,6-dihydroxy-5-(3-methyl-2-butenyl) benzaldehyde (133), 2-heptyl-3,6-di￾hydroxy-5-(3-methyl-2-butenyl) benzaldehyde (134), 2-(3,5-heptadienyl)-3,6­
dihydroxy-5-(3-methyl-2-butenyl) benzaldehyde (135), and 2-(1,3,5-hepta￾trienyl)-3,6-dihydroxy-5-(3-methyl-2-butenyl) benzaldehyde (136). More￾over, Yang et al. (2007) discovered that Ch. globosum from fermentation 
broth can be isolated a novel secondary metabolite, Sch 213766 (121). It 
showed activity in the CCR-5 receptor. 
In 2008, Yamada et al. isolated three new azaphilones, chaetomugilins A-C 
(137–139), chaetoglobosins A (80), and C (73) from Ch. globosum OUPS￾T106B-6 originated from the marine fish Mugil cephalus. These metabolites 
showed significant cytotoxicity against and the human HL-60 leukemia cell line 
and murine P388 leukemia cell line. In 2009, Qin et al. recorded the endophytic 
Ch. globosum ZY-22 from Ginkgo biloba to produce chaetomugilin A (137), 
chaetomugilin D (140) globosterol (139), chaetoglobosin A (80) and C 73). 
Further isolation of this fungus yielded globosterol (141), tetrahydroxylated 
ergosterol, (22E,24R)-ergosta-7,22-diene-3β,5α,6β,9α-tetraol (142). In addition, 
they found more compounds of cerebroside B (143), cerebroside C (144), and 
ergosta-4,6,8,22-tetraen-3-one (145). Moreover, Yamada et al. (2009) indicated 
that new azaphilones, seco-chaetomugilins A and D were produced by a marine￾fish-derived Ch. globosum and found Seco-chaetomugilins A (146) and D (147). Bioactive Secondary Metabolites from Chaetomium 147 
In 2010, a marine-derived endophytic fungus, Ch. globosum QEN-14 
reported to produce cytoglobosins A-G (148–154), isochaetoglobosin D 
(76), chaetoglobosins Fex (14), U (155), and 20-dihydrochaetoglobosin A 
(156), chaetomugilins A (137), 11-epi-chaetomugilin A (157), and 4´-epi￾chae-tomugilin A (158) (Cui et al., 2010). In the same year, Zhang et al. 
(2010) further recorded that cytotoxic chaetoglobosins V (159), W (160) and 
congeners (161–166) from the endophyte Ch. globosum. 
In 2011, Yamada et al. discovered chaetomugilins P-R (167–169), and 
11-epi-chaetomugilin I (170). While Borges et al. (2011) recorded the 
compounds chaetoviridins A-F, 5’-epi-chaetoviridin A (54), 4’-epi-chae￾toviridin A (171), 4’-epi-chaetoviridin F (172), 12β-hydroxy-chaetoviridin 
C (173), and chaetoviridins G-I (174–176) that isolated from the Ch. 
globosum. However, Ge et al. (2011) reported that four new metabolites 
chaetoglocins A-D (177–180) from the endophytic fungus Ch. globosum 
were found.  
148 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
In 2013, McMullin et al. recorded the new azaphilones nitrogenous, 
azaphilones; 4′-epi-N-2-hydroxyethyl-azachaetoviridin A(181), N-2-butyric￾azochaetoviridin E (182), and isochromophilone XIII (183), chaetoglobosins 
A (80), C (73), and F (82), chaetomugilin D (140), chaetoviridin A (54) from 
Ch. globosum (DAOM 240359). It showed that all compounds were antimi￾crobial activity by using quantitative growth inhibition assays. 
In 2016, Chen et al. found two new azaphilone derivatives, chaephilones A 
(198) and B (199) and four structurally related analogs chaetomugilin Q (168), 
chaetomugilin D (140), 11-epi-chaetomugilin A (157), and chaetomugilin S 
(200) which isolated from Ch. globosum. It showed that compounds 198 and 
199 expressed the cytotoxic activities against five human cancer cell lines 
(HL-60, SMMC-7721, A-549, MCF-7, and SW480) by the MTS method. 
Li et al. (2016) also recorded antifungal metabolites from endophytic 
Ch. globosum which isolated in Gingko biloba. Their found structures were 
elucidated as chaetoglobosin A (80), C (73), D (74), E (81), G (75), R (100)  
Bioactive Secondary Metabolites from Chaetomium 149 
and significantly inhibited the growth of Rhizopus stolonifer (postharvest 
disease) and Coniella diplodiella (grape white rot disease) at a concentration 
of 20 μg/disc. 
In 2017, Wang et al. reported to isolate two new cytochalasin derivatives, 
isochaetoglobosin Db
 (201) and cytoglobosin Ab (202) from Ch. globosum 
SNSHI-5 which has taken from extreme environment. They found isochaeto￾globosin Db (201), which expressed a potent cytotoxicity with IC50 value of 3.5 
μM, while cytoglobosin Ab
 was inactive (IC50 > 10 μM).  
150 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
In 2018, Ch. globosum isolated from the fermented Chinese yam 
(Dioscorea opposita) found two new oxidation products-related aureonitol 
and cytochalasin and defined as 10,11-dihydroxyl-aureonitol (203) and 
yamchaetoglobosin A (204). It showed that compound 204 significant 
inhibited the nitric oxide production in LPS-activated macrophages, anti￾acetylcholinesterase activity with inhibition ratio 92.5, 38.2% at concen￾tration of 50 μM, and cytotoxicity to HL-60, A-549, SMMC-7721, MCF-7 
and SW480 with the inhibition of 51–96% at concentration 40 μM (Ruan 
et al., 2018).  
Bioactive Secondary Metabolites from Chaetomium 151 
Recently of our research investigation on Chaetomium species, the 
endophytic Ch. globosum 7s-1 isolated from a plant species, Rhapis cochi￾nchinensis yielded a new xanthoquinodin B9 (205), three epipolythiodioxo￾piperazines, chetomin (42), chaetocochin C (46), dethio-tetra(methylthio) 
chetomin (47), four other compounds, chrysophanol (96), two known 
xanthoquinodins, xanthoquinodin A1 (206) and xanthoquinodin A3 
(207), emodin (208), alatinone (209) and ergosterol. It demonstrated that 
compounds 205–207, 42, 46, and 47 expressed the antimicrobial activity 
toward Gram positive bacteria at concentration of 0.02 pM to 10.81 µM. 
Moreover, these metabolites further expressed the cytotoxicity against a 
normal cell line (Vero cell) at IC50 values of 0.04−3.86 µM and cytotoxicity 
toward KB, MCF-7, NCI-H187 cancer cell lines at IC50 0.04−18.40 µM 
(Tantapakul et al., 2019). 
Chaetomium gracile is reported by Koyama and Natori (1987) who 
found the dichloromethane and bis(naphtho-γ-pyrone) derivatives named 
chaetochromins A-D (210–213). Chaetomium indicum is studied by Li et 
al. (2006b) who stated that the isoquinolines with novel skeletons named 
chaetoindicins A-C (214–216) was isolated from the solid-state fermented 
culture. 
In 2011, our research group investigation on ethyl acetate extract of Ch. 
longirostre found four new azaphilones, longirostrerones A-D (217–220) and 
three known sterols. Those compounds of 217–220 expressed strongly cyto￾toxicity toward KB cancer cell lines at IC50 0.23–6.38 µM. Only compound 152 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
217 resulted the effective cytotoxicity against MCF7 and NCI-H187 cell 
lines at IC50 0.24 and 3.08 µM, respectively. Moreover, compounds 217–219 
expressed the antimalarial activity against Plasmodium falciparum at IC50 
0.62–3.73 µM (Panthama et al., 2011). 
Our review literature for other species of Chaetomium are also demon￾strated. Chaetomium mollicellum is reported by Stark et al. (1978) who 
discovered the eight mollicellins (depsidones) which is the major products 
of Ch. mollicellum MIT M-37, mollicellins A (221), B (26), C (27), D (22), Bioactive Secondary Metabolites from Chaetomium 153 
E (28), F (29), G (2), and H (23). It showed that Mollicellins C (27) and 
E (28) were mutagenic and bactericidal to Salmonella typhimurium in the 
absence of microsomes, while mollicellins D (22) and F (29) which each 
contained a chlorine atom, were bactericidal effect but not mutagenic. Sekita 
et al. (1983) reported the structural elucidation of isocochliodinol (222), 
a metabolite of Ch. murorum NHL (78-SH-271-4) and NHL 2240. Saito 
et al. (1988) reported that ethyl acetate extract from Ch. nigricolor which 
cultured in rice medium found a dimeric epipolythiodioxopiperazine named 
chetracin A (223) with two tetrasulfide bridges and a known compound 
cochliodinol (41). 
Smetanina et al. (2001) recorded a pentacyclic triterpenoid, 
3-β-methoxyolean-18-ene (miliacin) (224) for the first time from the marine 
Ch. olivaceum. Moreover, Fujimoto et al. (2002) found that ethyl acetate 
extract of Ch. quadrangulatum strain 71-Ng-22 yielded the five novel chro￾mones (1,4-benzopyran-4-ones), three were tetracyclic and one contained a 
sulfonyl group, named chaetoquadrins A (8), B (9), C (225), D (226) and E 
(227) chaetoquadrins F (228), G (10), H (11), I (229), J (230) and K (231). 
These metabolites actively inhibited mouse liver MAO. One year later, they 
recorded six new constituents: chaetoquadrins F-K. It showed that chaeto￾quadrins G (10) and H (11) displayed appreciable MAO inhibitory activity 
(Fujimoto et al., 2003). Chaetomium retardatum is recorded in 1988, Saito’s 
group that the isolation of chetracin A (223) and 11α,11′α-dihydroxychaetocin 
(232) from Ch. retardatum TRTC 66.1778b. Chaetomium seminudum is 
further investigated by Fujimoto et al. (2004) who stated that the ethyl acetate 
extract of Ch. seminudum found a known epipolythiodioxopiperazine, chet￾omin (42), three new chetomin-related metabolites named chetoseminudins 
A-C (233–235). These four natural metabolites, 232 and 233, inhibited the 
blastogenesis of mouse splenic lymphocytes which stimulated by mitogens, 
concanavalin A (Con A) and lipopolysaccharide (LPS). 
The further of our research investigation is discovered a new species of 
Chaetomium in Thailand. In 2011, the soil planted to pineapple was isolated 
by baiting technique and identified as a new species, Ch. siamense sp. nov. 
We found the secondary metabolites of a new chaetoviridin G (236) and 
seven known compounds, ergosterol (56), 24(R)-5α,8α-epidioxyergosta-6-
22-diene-3β-ol, ergosterylplamitate (95), cochliodone D (51), chaetoviridin 
A (55), chaetoviridin F (53), chrysophanol (96) (Pornsuriya et al., 2011). 
This species is reported to be actively against some phytopathogens, e.g., 
Phytophthora spp. and Pythium spp. 154 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
Chaetomiumn subaffine is recorded by Oikawa et al. (1933) who found 
two new metabolites of chaetoglobosins, named chaetoglobosin Fex (14) and 
20-dihydrochaetoglobosin A (237). Chaetomium subspirale is reported by 
Rether et al. (2004) isolated oxaspirodion (238) which was a new inhibitor 
of inducible TNF-α expression. Chaetomium thielavioideum is investigated 
by Sekita et al. (1980) who found the metabolites of Ch. thielavioideum NHL 
2829 and isolated a new phenolic chaetochromin A (210), known compounds 
eugenitin (17), O-methyl-sterigmatocystin (19), sterigmatocystin (20), chaetocin 
(21), and ergosterol (56). In 1988, Saito’s group also isolated chaetocins B 
(239) and C (240) which were strongly inhibited S. aureus FDA 209P from Ch. 
thielavioidium NHL 2827. Chaetomium trilaterale is recorded by Cole et al.  
Bioactive Secondary Metabolites from Chaetomium 155 
(1974) who isolated a dibenzoquinone, oosporein (3,3′,6,6′-tetrahydroxy-5,5′­
dimethyl-2,2′-bi-benzoquinone) (241). Chaetomium trilaterale (Chivers, 1915) 
ATCC 24912. The compound was a moderately oral lethal dose in day-old 
cockerels and inhibited the plant growth and phytotoxic effects in some plant 
species. 
The studies on secondary metabolites of Chaetomium species are 
continuously conducted by several researchers. Some literature reviews 
have not been stated the specific epithet (species) which recorded only genus 
Chaetomium. There were many reports on unidentified Chaetomium species. 
Oka et al. (1985) found differanisole A (242) as a new defense inducing 
substance against leukemia cells from EtOAc extract from Chaetomium sp. 
RB-00. Imamura et al. (1993) reported a novel insecticidal, PF1093 (243), 
from Chaetomium sp. PF1093 (FERM P-12541) and the metabolite showed 
excellent insecticidal activity against Plutella xylostella. Kobayashi et al. 
(2005) found that Chaetomium sp. No. 217 produced a triterpene glucoside, 
FR207944 (244) which exhibited activities against Aspergillus fumigatus and 
Candida albicans. Moreover, Schlörke and Zeeck (2006) reported that the 
antibacterial orsellides A-E (245–249), novel esters consisting of orsellinic 
acid (107), and a 6-deoxyhexose (251) from Chaetomium sp. (strain Gö 156 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
100/9) together with the known metabolites globosumones A (104) and B 
(105). However, Jiao et al. (2006) recorded chaetominine (251), an alkaloidal 
metabolite from Chaetomium sp. IFB-E015, an endophytic fungus on the 
healthy leaves of Adenophora axilliflora. It showed that Chaetominine was 
more cytotoxic than 5-fluorouracil against the human leukemia K562 and 
colon cancer SW1116 cell lines. 
Lösgen et al. (2007) discovered three new fungal polyketide metabo￾lites, chaetocyclinones A-C (252–254), two known compounds, SB238569 
(79) and anhydrofulvic acid from Chaetomium sp. (strain Gö 100/2) which 
was isolated from a marine algae. It showed that chaetocyclinone A (252) 
inhibited the growth of selected phytopathogenic fungus, Phytophthora 
infestans, causing late blight of potato. Marwah et al. (2007) recorded 
a new furano-polyene, (–)-musanahol (255), a known furano-polyene, 
3-epi-aureonitol (256), and a fatty acid, linoleic acid (257) from Chaeto￾mium sp. isolated from tomato fruits and grown on YMG medium (yeast 
extract, glucose, malt extract and water). The (–)-musanahol (255) and  
Bioactive Secondary Metabolites from Chaetomium 157 
3-epi-aureonitol (257) were presented in the culture filtrate. The 3-epi-aure￾onitol (256) completely inhibited the growth of Streptococcus pyogenes, 
Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus aureus, Salmonella choleraesuis, and 
Corynebacterium diphtheriae, whereas (–)-musanahol (255) was no effect 
on the antimicrobial activity of compound 256 even if its similarity in their 
structures. Moreover, linoleic acid (257) resulted in inhibiting the growth 
of S. aureus and Bacillus subtilis. 
6.3 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE TRENDS 
It is concluded that Chaetomium spp. has been investigated by many 
researchers from years to find out the secondary metabolites against human, 
animal, and plant diseases. Our research investigation on Chaetomium spp. 
has been started from 1986 to find out the antagonistic effect against phyto￾pathogens as well as human pathogens. It is confirmed that further ongoing 
research has been developed on the selected active metabolites to formulate 
biofungicide for plant disease control to promote non-agrochemicals-based 
agriculture and organic agriculture and has been contributed for farmers use 
in many countries, e.g., Thailand, China, Myanmar, Vietnam, and Laos. The 
ongoing research is developed on the active metabolites from Chaetomium 
spp. which considered as natural products and nanoparticles thereof for plant 
immunity induction.  
158 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
KEYWORDS
 
• biofungicide 
• Chaetomium 
• lipopolysaccharide 
• monoamine oxidase 
• organic agriculture 
• plant disease control 
• Pyricularia oryzae 
REFERENCES 
Abraham, W. R., & Arfmann, H. A., (1992). Rearranged tetrahydrofurans from Chaetomium 
cochlioides. Phytochemistry, 31, 2405–2408. 
Bashyal, B. P., Wijeratne, E. M. K., Faeth, S. H., & Gunatilaka, A. A. L., (2005). Globosumones 
A-C, cytotoxic orsellinic acid esters from the Sonoran Desert endophytic fungus 
Chaetomium globosum. Journal of Natural Products, 68, 724–728. 
Borges, W. S., Mancilla, G., Guimaraes, D. O., Duran-Patron, R., Collado, I. G., & Pupo, M. 
T., (2011). Azaphilones from the Chaetomium globosum. Journal of Natural Products, 
74, 1182–1187. 
Breinholt, J., Demuth, H., Heide, M., Jensen, G., Moller, I., Nielsen, R., et al., (1996). 
Prenisatin (5-(3-methyl-2-butenyl)indole-2,3-dione) an antifungal isatin derivative from 
Chaetomium globosum. Acta Chemica Scandinavica, 50, 443–445. 
Brewer, D., Duncan, J. M., Jerram, W. A., Leach, C. K., Safe, S., Taylor, A., & Christensen, C. 
M., (1972). Ovine ill-thrift in Nova Scotia. 5. The production and toxicology of chetomin, 
a metabolite of Chaetomium spp. Canadian Journal of Microbiology, 18, 1129–1137. 
Brewer, D., Jerram, W. A., & Taylor, A., (1968). The production of cochliodinol and a related 
metabolite by Chaetomium species. Canadian Journal of Microbiology, 14, 861–866. 
Burrows, B. F., Turner, W. B., & Walker, E. R. H., (1975). 8-ethylidene-7,8-dihydro-4­
methoxypyrano[4,3-b]pyran-2,5-dione (Coarctatin), a metabolite of Chaetomium 
coarctatum. Journal of the Chemical Society, Perkin Transactions, 1, 999–1000. 
Chen, C., Jing, W., Hucheng, Z., Jianping, W., Yongbo, X., Guangzheng, W., et al., (2016). 
Chaephilones A and B, two new azaphilone derivatives isolated from Chaetomium 
globosum. Chem Biodivers., 13(4), 422–426. 
Chivers, A. H., (1915). A Monograph of the Genera Chaetomium and Ascotricha (Vol. 14, pp. 
155–240). Memoirs of the Torrey Botanical Club. 
Cole, R. J., Kirksey, J. W., Gutter, H. G., & Davis, E. E., (1974). Toxic effects of oosporein 
from Chaetomium trilaterale. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 22, 517–520. 
Cui, C. M., Li, X. M., Li, C. S., Proksch, P., & Wang, B. G., (2010). Cytoglobosins A-G, 
cytochalasans from a marine-derived endophytic fungus, Chaetomium globosum 
QEN-14. Journal of Natural Products, 73, 729–733. Bioactive Secondary Metabolites from Chaetomium 159 
Di Pietro, A., Gut-Rella, M., Pachlatko, J. P., & Schwinn, F. J., (1992). Role of antibiotics 
produced by Chaetomium globosum in biocontrol of Pythium ultimum, a causal agent of 
damping-off. Phytopathology, 82, 131–135. 
Ding, G., Song, Y. C., Chen, J. R., Xu, C., Ge, H. M., Wang, X. T., et al., (2006). Chaetoglobosin 
U, a cytochalasan alkaloid from endophytic Chaetomium globosum IFB-E019. Journal of 
Natural Products, 69, 302–304. 
Fujimoto, H., Nozawa, M., Okuyama, E., & Ishibashi, M., (2002). Five new chromones 
possessing monoamine oxidase inhibitory activity from an ascomycete, Chaetomium 
quadrangulatum. Chemical and Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 50, 330–336. 
Fujimoto, H., Nozawa, M., Okuyama, E., & Ishibashi, M., (2003). Six new constituents 
from an ascomycete, Chaetomium quadrangulatum, found in a screening study focused 
on monoamine oxidase inhibitory activity. Chemical and Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 51, 
247–251. 
Fujimoto, H., Sumino, M., Okuyama, E., & Ishibashi, M., (2004). Immunomodulatory 
constituents from an ascomycete, Chaetomium seminudum. Journal of Natural Products, 
67, 98–102. 
Ge, H. M., Zhang, Q., Xu, S. H., Guo, Z. K., Song, Y. C., Huang, W. Y., et al., (2011). 
Chaetoglocins A-D. Four new metabolites from the endophytic fungus Chaetomium 
globosum. Planta Medica, 77, 277–280. 
Hwang, E. I., Yun, B. S., Kim, Y. K., Kwon, B. M., Kim, H. G., Lee, H. B., et al., (2000). 
Chaetoatrosin A, a novel chitin synthase II inhibitor produced by Chaetomium 
atrobrunneum F449. The Journal of Antibiotics, 53, 248–255. 
Imamura, K., Gomi, S., Yaguchi, T., Moryama, C., & Iwata, M., (1993). Novel insecticidal 
PF1093 and its manufacture with Chaetomium. Jpn. Kokai Tokkyo Koho, 1–8. 
Itoh, Y., Takahashi, S., Haneishi, T., & Arai, M., (1980). Structure of heptelidic acid, a new 
sesquiterpene antibiotic from fungi. The Journal of Antibiotics, 33, 525–526. 
Jiao, R. H., Xu, S., Liu, J. Y., Ge, H. M., Ding, H., Xu, C., et al., (2006). Chaetominine, a 
cytotoxic alkaloid produced by endophytic Chaetomium sp. IFB-E015. Organic Letters, 
8, 5709–5712. 
Jiao, W., Feng, Y., Blunt, J. W., Cole, A. L. J., & Munro, M. H. G., (2004). Chaetoglobosins Q, 
R, and T, three further new metabolites from Chaetomium globosum. Journal of Natural 
Products, 67, 1722–1725. 
Kanokmedhakul, S. K., Nasomjai, P., Loungsysouphanh, S., Soytong, K., Isobe, M., 
Kongsaeree, K., Prabpai, S., & Suksamran, A., (2006). Antifungal Azaphilones from the 
fungus, Chaetomium cupreum CC3003. Journal of Natural Products, 69, 891–895. 
Kanokmedhakul, S., Kanokmedhakul, K., Phonkerd, N., Soytong, K., Kongsaeree, P., & 
Suksamrarn, A., (2002). Antimycobacterial anthraquinone-chromanone compound and 
diketopiperazine alkaloid from the fungus Chaetomium globosum KMITL-N0802. 
Planta Medica, 68, 834–836. 
Khumkomkhet, P., Kanokmedhakul, S., Kanokmedhakul, K., Hahnvajanawong, C., & 
Soytong, K., (2009). Antimalarial and cytotoxic depsidones from the fungus Chaetomium 
brasiliense. Journal of Natural Products, 72, 1487–1491. 
Kikuchi, T., Kodata, S., Nakamura, K., Nishi, A., Taga, T., & Kaji, T., (1981). Dethio-tetra 
(methylthio) chetomin, a new antimicrobial metabolite of Chaetomium globosum KINZE 
ex FR: Structure and partial synthesis from chetomin. Chemical and Pharmaceutical 
Bulletin, 30, 3846–3848. 160 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
Kobayashi, M., Kanasaki, R., Sato, I., Abe, F., Nitta, K., Ezaki, M., et al., (2005). FR207944, 
an antifungal antibiotic from Chaetomium sp. No. 217 I. Taxonomy, fermentation, and 
biological properties. Bioscience, Biotechnology, and Biochemistry, 69, 515–521. 
Koyama, K., & Natori, S., (1987). Chaetochromins B, C, and D; bis(naphtho-γ-pyrone) 
derivatives from Chaetomium gracile. Chemical and Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 35, 578–584. 
Li, G. Y., Li, B. G., Yang, T., Liu, G. Y., & Zhang, G. L., (2006b). Chaetoindicins A-C, three 
isoquinoline alkaloids from the fungus Chaetomium indicum. Organic Letters, 8, 3613–3615. 
Li, G. Y., Li, B. G., Yang, T., Liu, G. Y., & Zhang, G. L., (2008). Secondary metabolites from 
the fungus Chaetomium brasiliense. Helvetica Chimica Acta, 91, 124–129. 
Li, G. Y., Li, B. G., Yang, T., Yan, J. F., Liu, G. Y., & Zhang, G. L., (2006a). Chaetocochins 
A-C, epipolythiodioxopiperazines from Chaetomium cochliodes. Journal of Natural 
Products, 69, 1374–1376. 
Li, L. M., Zou, Q., & Li, G. Y., (2010). Chromones from an ascomycete, Chaetomium aureus. 
Chinese Chemical Letters, 21, 1203–1205. 
Li, W., Yang, X., Yang, Y., Duang, R., Chen, G., Li, X., Li, Q., et al., (2016). Anti-phytopathogen, 
multi-target acetylcholinesterase inhibitory and antioxidant activities of metabolites from 
endophytic Chaetomium globosum. Natural Product Research, 30, 2616–2619. 
Lösgen, S., Schlörke, O., Meindl, K., Herbst-Irmer, R., & Zeeck, A., (2007). Structure and 
biosynthesis of chaetocyclinones, new polyketides produced by an endosymbiotic 
fungus. European Journal of Organic Chemistry, 2191–2196. 
Marwah, R. G., Fatope, M. O., Deadman, M. L., Al-Maqbali, Y. M., & Husband, J., (2007). 
Musanahol: A new aureonitol-related metabolite from a Chaetomium sp. Tetrahedron, 
63, 8174–8180. 
McMullin, D. R., Sumarah, M. W., Blackwell, B. A., & Miller, J. D., (2013). New azaphilones 
from Chaetomium globosum isolated from the built environment. Tetrahedron Letters, 
54, 568–572. 
Oh, H., Swenson, D. C., Gloer, J. B., Wicklow, D. T., & Dowd, P. F., (1998). Chaetochalasin 
A: A new bioactive metabolite from Chaetomium brasiliense. Tetrahedron Letters, 39, 
7633–7636. 
Oikawa, H., Murakami, Y., & Ichihara, A., (1933). 20-Ketoreductase activity of chaetoglobosin 
A and prochaetoglobosins in a cell-free system of Chaetomium subaffine and the isolation 
of new chaetoglobosins. Bioscience, Biotechnology, and Biochemistry, 57, 628–631. 
Oka, H., Asahi, K., Morishima, H., Sanada, M., Shiratori, K., Iimura, Y., et al., (1985). 
Differanisole A, a new differentiation inducing substance. The Journal of Antibiotics, 
38, 1100–1102. 
Okeke, B., Seiglemurandi, F., Steiman, R., Benoitguyod, J., & Kaouaji, M., (1993). Identification 
of mycotoxin-producing fungal strains: A step in the isolation of compounds active against 
rice fungal disease. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 41, 1731–1735. 
Panthama, N., Kanokmedhakul, S., Kanokmedhakul, K., & Soytong, K., (2011). Cytotoxic and 
antimalarial azaphilones from Chaetomium longirostre. J. Nat. Prod., 74(11), 2395–2399. 
Payne, D. J., Hueso-Rodríguez, J. A., Boyd, H., Concha, N. O., Janson, C. A., Gilpin, M., 
Bateson, J. H., et al., (2002). Identification of a series of tricyclic natural products as potent 
broad-spectrum inhibitors of metallo-beta-lactamases. Antimicrob Agents Chemother., 46, 
1880–1886. 
Pholkerd, N., Kanokmedhakul, S., Kanokmedhakul, K., Soytong, K., Prabpai, S., & Kongsearee, 
P., (2008). Bis-spiro-azaphilones and azaphilones from the fungi Chaetomium cochliodes 
VTh01 and C. cochliodes CTh05. Tetrahedron, 64, 9636–9645. Bioactive Secondary Metabolites from Chaetomium 161 
Pornsuriya, C., Soytong, K., Poeaim, S., Kanokmedhakul, S., Khumkomkhet, P., Lin, F. C., 
Wang, H. K., & Hyde, K. D., (2011). Chaetomium siamense sp. nov., a soil isolate from 
Thailand, produces a new chaetoviridin, G. Mycotaxon, 115, 19–27. 
Probst, A., & Tamm, C., (1981). 19-O-acetylchaetoglobosin B and 19-O-acetylchaetoglobosin 
D, two new metabolites of Chaetomium globosum. Helvetica Chimica Acta, 64, 2056–2064. 
Qin, J. C., Gao, J. M., Zhang, Y. M., Yang, S. X., Bai, M. S., Ma, Y. T., et al., (2009). 
Polyhydroxylated steroids from an endophytic fungus, Chaetomium globosum ZY-22 
isolated from Ginkgo biloba. Steroids, 74, 786–790. 
Rether, J., Erkel, G., Anke, T., & Sterner, O., (2004). Oxaspirodion, a new inhibitor of 
inducible TNF-α expression from the Ascomycete Chaetomium subspirale. Production, 
isolation and structure elucidation. The Journal of Antibiotics, 57, 493–495. 
Ruan, B. H., Yu, Z. F., Yang, X. Q., Yang, Y. B., Hu, M., Zhang, Z. X., Zhou, Q. Y., et 
al., (2018). New bioactive compounds from aquatic endophyte Chaetomium globosum. 
Natural Products Research, 32, 1050–1055. 
Saito, T., Suzuki, Y., Koyama, K., Natori, S., Iitaka, Y., & Kinoshita, T., (1988). Chetracin A 
and chaetocins B and C, three new epipolythiodioxopiperazines from Chaetomium spp. 
Chemical and Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 36, 1942–1956. 
Schlörke, O., & Zeeck, A., (2006). Orsellides A-E: An example for 6-deoxyhexose derivatives 
produced by fungi. European Journal of Organic Chemistry, 1043–1049. 
Sekita, S., (1983). Isocochliodinol and neocochliodinol, bis(3-indolyl)-benzoquinones from 
Chaetomium spp. Chemical and Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 31, 2998–3001. 
Sekita, S., Yoshihira, K., & Natori, S., (1973). Structures of chaetoglobosin A and B, cytotoxic 
metabolites of Chaetomium globosum. Tetrahedron Letters, 23, 2109–2112. 
Sekita, S., Yoshihira, K., & Natori, S., (1976). Structures of chaetoglobosin C, D, E and 
F, cytotoxic indol-3-yl-[13]cytochalasans from Chaetomium globosum. Tetrahedron 
Letters, 17, 1351–1354. 
Sekita, S., Yoshihira, K., & Natori, S., (1980). Chaetochromin, a bis(naphthodihydropyran-4-one) 
mycotoxin from Chaetomium thielavioideum: Application of 13C-1
H long-range coupling to 
the structure elucidation. Chemical and Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 28, 2428–2435. 
Sekita, S., Yoshihira, K., & Natori, S., (1983). Chaetoglobosins, cytotoxic 10-(indol-3-yl)-[13] 
cytochalasans from Chaetomium spp. IV. 13C-nuclear magnetic resonance spectra and their 
application to a biosynthetic study. Chemical and Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 31, 490–498. 
Sekita, S., Yoshihira, K., Natori, S., & Chaetoglobosins, G. J., (1977). Cytotoxic indol-3­
yl[13]-cytochalasans from Chaetomium globosum. Tetrahedron Letters, 32, 2771–2774. 
Sekita, S., Yoshihira, K., Natori, S., Udagawa, S. I., Sakabe, F., Kurata, H., et al., (1981). 
Chaetoglobosins, cytotoxic 10-(indol-3-yl)-[13]cytochalasans from Chaetomium spp. I. 
production, isolation and some cytological effects of chaetoglobosins A-J. Chemical and 
Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 30, 1609–1617. 
Smetanina, O. F., Denisenko, V. A., Pivkin, M. V., Khudyakova, Y. V., Gerasimenko, A. V., 
Popov, D. Y., et al., (2001). 3β-methoxyolean-18-ene (miliacin) from the marine fungus 
Chaetomium olivaceum. Russian Chemical Bulletin, 50, 2463–2465. 
Song, J. J., Soytong, K., Kanokmedhakul, S., Kanokmedhakul, K., & Poeaim, S., (2020b). 
Antifungal activity of microbial nanoparticles derived from Chaetomium spp. against 
Magnaporthe oryzae causing rice blast. Plant Protection Science, 56, 180–190. 
Stark, A. A., Kobbe, B., Matsuo, K., Buchi, G., Wogan, G. N., & Demain, A. L., (1978). 
Mollicellins: Mutagenic and antibacterial mycotoxins. Applied and Environmental Micro￾biology, 36, 412–420. 162 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
Tabata, Y., Miiko, N., Yaguchi, T., Hatsu, M., Ishii, S., & Imai, S., (2000). PF1138A and B, 
novel trans-epoxysuccinate-type cysteine protease inhibitors produced by Chaetomium 
globosum. Meiji Seika Kenkyu Nenpo, 39, 55–64. 
Takahashi, M., Koyama, K., & Natori, S., (1990). Four new azaphilones from Chaetomium 
globosum var. flavo-viridae. Chemical and Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 38, 625–628. 
Tantapakul, C., Promgool, T., Kanokmedhakul, K., Soytong, K., Song, J., Hadsadee, S., Jungsut￾tiwon, S., & Kanokmedhakul, S., (2019). Bioactive xanthoquinodins and epipolythiodioxo￾piperazines from Chaetomium globosum 7s-1, an endophytic fungus isolated from Rhapis 
cochinchinensis (Lour.) Mart. Natural Product Research, 34, 494–502. 
Thohinung, S., Kanokmedhakul, S., Kanokmedhakul, K., Kukongviriyapan, V., Tusskorn, O., 
& Soytong, K., (2010). Cytotoxic 10-(indol-3-yl)-[13] cytochalasans from the fungus 
Chaetomium elatum ChE01. Arch Pharm. Res., 33, 1135–1141. 
Wang, S., Li, X. M., Teuscher, F., Li, D. L., Diesel, A., Ebel, R., et al., (2006). Chaetopyranin, 
a benzaldehyde derivative, and other related metabolites from Chaetomium globosum, an 
endophytic fungus derived from the marine red alga Polysiphonia urceolata. Journal of 
Natural Products, 69, 1622–1625. 
Wang, S., Zhang, Y., Li, X. M., & Wang, B. G., (2007). Benzaldehydes from endophytic 
fungus Chaetomium globosum separated from marine red alga Polysiphonia urceolata. 
Haiyang Yu Huzhao, 38, 131–135. 
Wang, X. Y., Yan, X., Fang, M. J., Wu, Z., Wang, D., & Qiu, Y. K., (2017). Two new 
cytochalasan derivatives from Chaetomium globosum SNSHI-5, a fungus derived from 
extreme environment. Natural Product Research, 31, 1669–1675. 
Wijeratne, E. M. K., Turbyville, T. J., Fritz, A., Whitesell, L., & Gunatilaka, A. A. L., (2006). A 
new dihydroxanthenone from a plant-associated strain of the fungus Chaetomium globosum 
demonstrates anticancer activity. Bioorganic and Medicinal Chemistry, 14, 7917–7923. 
Yamada, T., Doi, M., Shigeta, H., Muroga, Y., Hosoe, S., Numata, A., et al., (2008). Absolute 
stereostructures of cytotoxic metabolites, chaetomugilins A-C, produced by Chaetomium 
species separated from a marine fish. Tetrahedron Letters, 49, 4192–4195. 
Yamada, T., Muroga, Y., & Tanaka, R., (2009). New azaphilones, seco-chaetomugilins A and 
D, produced by a marine-fish-derived Chaetomium globosum. Marine Drugs, 7, 249–257. 
Yamada, T., Muroga, Y., Jinno, M., Kajimoto, T., Usami, Y., Numata, A., et al., (2011). New class 
azaphilone produced by a marine fish-derived Chaetomium globosum. The stereochemistry 
and biological activities. Bioorganic and Medicinal Chemistry, 19, 4106–4113. 
Yang, S. W., Mierzwa, R., Terracciano, J., Patel, M., Gullo, V., Wagner, N., et al., (2007). Sch 
213766, a novel chemokine receptor CCR-5 inhibitor from Chaetomium globosum. The 
Journal of Antibiotics, 60, 524–528. 
Yang, S. W., Mierzwa, R., Terrcciano, J., Patel, M., Gullo, V., Wagner, N., et al., (2006). 
Chemokine receptor CCR-5 inhibitors produced by Chaetomium globosum. Journal of 
Natural Products, 69, 1025–1028. 
Yasukawa, K., Takahashi, M., Natori, S., Kawai, K., Yamazaki, M., Takeushi, M., et al., 
(1994). Azaphilones inhibit tumor promotion by 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate 
in 2-stage carcinogenesis in mice. Oncology, 51, 108–112. 
Zhang, J., Ge, H. M., Jiao, R. H., Li, J., Peng, H., Wang, Y. R., et al., (2010). Cytotoxic chae￾toglobosins from the endophyte Chaetomium globosum. Planta Medica, 76, 1910–1914. PART II
 
Organic Amendments and Sustainable 

Practices for Plant and Soil Management
 CHAPTER 7
 
GARLIC PRODUCTS FOR 
SUSTAINABLE ORGANIC CROP 
PROTECTION 
ANJORIN TOBA SAMUEL1
 and ADENIRAN LATEEF ARIYO2 
1
Department of Crop Protection, Faculty of Agriculture, 
University of Abuja, PMB 117, Abuja, Nigeria 
2
Department of Veterinary Physiology and Biochemistry, 
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Abuja, Nigeria 
ABSTRACT 
The crop protection potential and pesticidal efficacy of garlic (Allium sativum 
L.) has been attributed to its production of several biologically active defense 
compounds. The plant is rich in organo-sulfur content, which has great poten￾tial to prevent and treat many diseases of plants and animals. Garlic phyto￾chemical contains alliinase which is released when it is chopped. Allinase 
is involved in catalyzing the formation of S-allyl cysteine sulfoxide (allin) 
which is the main active component of garlic. It is possible that constituents 
from garlic could be used to develop alternatives to conventional pesticides 
for the management of crop pests and disease-causing pathogens. This 
chapter describes the biochemical compounds found in garlic bulb, prepara￾tory procedures of garlic pesticidal products from fresh and aged bulbs, and 
the discovery process of bioactive phytochemical from garlic bulbs. It further 
explains the insecticidal, fungicidal, bactericidal, and nematicidal usage of 
garlic products and discusses issues on natural pesticides formulation from 
garlic. Usage of garlic herbal preparations by growers can reduce non-target 
exposure to hazardous pesticides and curb resistance development in pests, 
thus enabling sustainable organic crop protection.  
166 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
7.1 INTRODUCTION 
Concerns regarding the potential health and environmental impacts of 
synthetic chemical pesticides have led to increased interest in the develop￾ment and use of safer pest control alternatives such as plant-based pesticides. 
Botanical pesticides are generally developed from naturally and locally 
available plant renewable resources, instead of purchased chemical inputs, 
and hence reduce the need for synthetic pesticides (IFOAM, 2019). This 
enables food production with minimal or no harm to ecosystems, animals, or 
humans (Brooklyn Botanic Garden, 2000; Agama, 2015). Also, the involve￾ment of plant resources in crop protection can increase incomes and genera￾tion of employment for the populace (Auerbach et al., 2013). Allium sativum 
L.-family Alliaceae, has been used worldwide for medicinal and culinary 
purposes and currently been exploited as an organic pesticide (Petropoulos 
et al., 2018). Garlic bulb is made up of several concentric bulblets character￾ized by acid taste, pungent-smelling malicious odor. 
Garlic is native to central Asia and was first encountered by the man 
about some 7,000 years ago (Ellis and Bradley, 1992). Farmers have 
cultivated garlic in farms with other crops as companion crops to prevent 
insect and pest attacks like aphids, caterpillars on their farm crops (Lalla 
et al., 2013). Garlic products have been effectively used in the treatment 
of several plant pathogens and insects at different stages in their life cycle. 
The products have successfully been used against downy mildew, fruit rots 
and blight (Davidson, 1997; Sallam et al., 2012). The pesticidal efficacy 
of garlic has been attributed to its production of several biologically active 
defense compounds. 
Silva et al. (2001) attributed the biological activity of garlic to the presence 
of organosulfur compounds in the plant. The organosulfur compounds eluci￾dated in garlic include S-2-carboxypropylglutathione, S-allyl-L-cysteine￾sulfoxide, S-(trans-1-propenyl)-L-cysteine (Lalla et al., 2013; Lanzotti et al., 
2013; Beni et al., 2018). Synthesis of allicin may be categorized as the first 
line of defense against attack by pests and other pathogens (Kodera et al., 
2002). Other minerals and microelements found in garlic like iodine, zinc, 
copper, selenium, tocopherols, and metabolites like ascorbic acid, protein 
content and polyphenol are the components responsible for its medicinal 
properties (Borlinghaus et al., 2014). 
Release of allinase occurs when garlic clove is crushed. This enzyme 
quickly changes alliin to allicin. Separation of the allinase and alliin occur 
in garlic bulb membrane in-situ (Miron et al., 2000). Allicin is an unstable  
 
 
Garlic Products for Crop Protection 167 
organosulfur compound which can be stabilized by adding oil-soluble poly￾sulfide’s like dially (tetrasulfide, trisulfide, disulfide, and sulfide) (Block et 
al., 2017). 
In light of the significant pesticidal potential of garlic and with the advent 
of modern formulation techniques, there is a need for an extensive under￾standing of the plant especially on how best to extract its biologically active 
defense compounds. In this chapter, the biochemical components of the 
garlic bulb, the procedures for preparing the extracts for pesticidal purposes 
by the farmers, and the scientific procedures for isolating and formulating 
garlic-based pesticides are described. Update on critical issues on the current 
usage of garlic products for pest control are also provided. 
7.2 GARLIC PREPARATIONS AND THEIR PESTICIDAL PRODUCTS 
There are many pesticidal garlic products that are sold in the market, usually 
as raw garlic powder, oil, and homogenate which are the major garlic formu￾lation. The homogenate is made up of S-allylmercaptocysteine (SMAC) and 
S-allycysteine (SAC). Alliin is found in heat-treated and powdered garlic 
(Figure 7.1). The highly odoriferous oil and powder from garlic is used as 
pesticide while the supplement could be made from the odorless aged garlic 
product (Plata-Rueda et al., 2017). 
7.2.1 GARLIC HOMOGENATE FROM FRESH BULB 
Garlic homogenate can be achieved by pulverizing fresh garlic. One gram 
of garlic (peeled) is blended by adding 0.01 L of water, and the homogenate 
produced is left for between 2 and 5 min at 25°C, then a 0.01 L of methanol 
is added to the filtered homogenate to cause precipitation of the carbohydrate 
and protein present in the extraction. Allicin is a stable compound at 4°C for 
up to 36 h (Bayan et al., 2014). 
7.2.2 AGED GARLIC EXTRACT (AGE) 
Aged garlic extract (AGE) is usually prominent out of many other garlic 
extracts. Safe and stable sulfur compounds are usually extracted using 
15–20% ethanol at 25°C. This stable sulfur compound confers garlic the 
characteristics flavor and smell. S-allyl-mercaptocysteine and all other stable  
 
168 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
water-soluble, little oil-soluble allyl sulfides and minimal allicin are found in 
AGE (Ryu et al., 2017). All these compounds have appreciable antioxidant 
activities (Corzo-Martínez et al., 2007; Pérez-Torres et al., 2016). 
FIGURE 7.1 Garlic products and their major pesticidal organo-sulfur compounds. 
7.2.3 BLACK GARLIC 
Black garlic is obtained from fermented garlic. Fermentation of garlic at high 
humidity and temperature or (80–90% and 60–90°C) respectively reduces 
allicin and thus the offensive odor found in fresh garlic. Black garlic activity 
is as a result of the change in the physiological properties and this enhances 
its biological activities (Tan et al., 2019). 
7.2.4 GARLIC POWDER 
Garlic powder is made up of alliin and little oil-soluble sulfides. It is made 
from garlic cloves that were dehydrated and grounded. Allinase enzyme will  
 
Garlic Products for Crop Protection 169 
be deactivated through the processing heat dehydration of the garlic cloves. 
In order to prepare garlic powder, the garlic cloves are first separated, and 
then the skin is peeled away with fingers or cracked with a sterile knife. Each 
clove is thinly sliced and placed on a sheet lined with parchment paper. For 
it to dry, the sheets of garlic are placed into the oven and cooked for about 1 
h 30 mins at 65°C. The sheet of garlic is removed from the oven and allowed 
to cool before been ground into powder (Rahman et al., 2007). 
If a dehydrator is to be used to dry out garlic, set the temperature to 
about 51°C and allowed to dehydrate for about 8–12 h, when the garlic bits 
should be brittle indicating it has dried well (Iciek et al., 2009). In order to 
grind the dried garlic, a grinder, blender, food processor, spice mill or mortar 
and pestle could be used. The garlic powder should be stored in an airtight 
container somewhere cool, dry, and out of direct sunlight. Mason jars are a 
good storage container for locally-made garlic powder. Freezing your garlic 
powder is also an option. 
7.2.5 GARLIC OIL 
Garlic oil is mostly obtained by extracting it with ether followed by steam 
distillation, with a yield around 2.5–3.0 g/kg fresh garlic. In garlic oil, diallyl 
sulfide (DAS), diallyl disulfide (DADS), and dimethyl trisulfide (DATS), 
differing in their number of sulfur atoms, and allylmethyl sulfide are the 
four most abundant volatile allyl sulfides (Block et al., 2017). However, the 
composition of these ingredients may vary slightly based on the extraction 
method and garlic cultivar (Pérez-Torres et al., 2016). The types of commer￾cially available garlic products and their major pesticidal organo-sulfur 
compounds are shown in Figure 7.1. 
7.3	 PREPARATION OF PESTICIDE FROM CRUDE GARLIC 
EXTRACT 
For production of garlic extract, healthy cloves of garlic should be selected. 
The garlic bulbs are then stored in a cool, dry shady place. Garlic extract are 
obtained by first blending the cloves, followed by filtration of the mixture. 
Most of the times, garlic extract is prepared by thoroughly mixing garlic 
cloves with water in a blender in a ratio 1:2 w/w. The mixture is then filtered 
with the filtrate collected as garlic extract before being mixed with oil or 
organic solvents (Kaluwa and Kruger, 2012). Clean utensils should be used 170 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
and washed immediately after use, in order to avoid cross-contamination. 
In the preparation and application process, it should be ensured that there 
is no direct contact with the crude extract. Care must be taken not to spray 
the plant with garlic extract close to harvest time because sprayed garlic 
remains long on the plant. A potash-based soap like laundry soap can be 
added to the extract as an emulsifier. Appropriate clothing should always 
be worn while applying the extract and the hands should always be washed 
after handling the plant extract (Tafadzwa et al., 2016). Before going for 
large scale spraying of crops, it is advisable to first try the extract formu￾lated on few plants infested with the disease. Two out of various traditional 
preparation protocols are as follows: 
1.	 About 80 grams of garlic bulbs are chopped into small pieces by a 
clean and sterile sharp knife and ground with a grinder. About 600 
ml water and 3–4 drops of liquid soap are added to the mixture, 
stirred, and allowed to stand for 24 h and filtered through a fine 
cloth. As garlic components are volatile, the extract is to be stored 
in a tightly sealed container or vessel like bottle before use (Mikaili, 
2013). In order to use it, 1 part of the emulsion is diluted with 9 
parts of water and shaken well before spraying. Spraying on the 
infested plants should be thorough, preferably applied in early in 
the morning. 
2.	 About 85 grams of chopped or crushed garlic are added to 50 ml of 
mineral oil (vegetable oil) and allowed to stand for 24 h. The ratio 
of garlic extract to essential oil used could range from 0–70% garlic 
extract to 90–30% oil. 950 ml of water is then added and stirred in 
10 ml of liquid dish soap and filtered through a fine cloth (Tafadzwa 
et al., 2016). Such a mixture needed to be stored in a non-transparent 
container such as a bottle in a cool place before use in order to check 
thermo- and photo-degradation. For its use, 1 part of the emulsion 
is diluted with 19 parts of H2
O and shaken well prior to spraying. 
Spraying early in the morning of the infested plant thoroughly is 
advocated (Vijayalakshmi et al., 1999). A synergistic effect is often 
observed when garlic extract is combined with essential or mineral 
oils. These often result in improved natural insecticidal, bactericidal, 
and fungicidal qualities than when garlic extract only is used (Curtis 
et al., 2004). The essential volatile oils could be obtained from plants 
or seeds of cottonseed oil, soybean oil, castor oil, lemongrass oil, 
sesame oil, ginger oil (Edris, 2007).  
 
 
Garlic Products for Crop Protection 171 
7.4	 DISCOVERY PROCESS OF PESTICIDAL BIOACTIVE 
PHYTOCHEMICAL FROM GARLIC BULBS 
7.4.1	 EXTRACTION AND PURIFICATION OF MOLECULE FROM 
GARLIC 
The current use of crude extracts of garlic for pesticide formulation by the 
farmers is usually substandard. A standard and scientific stepwise proce￾dure for formulating pesticides from garlic bulb via bioassay evaluation 
is as shown in Figure 7.2. Garlic efficacy optimization depends on the 
extraction techniques and conditions. The crude extract can be reconsti￾tuted with all the organic solvent while the organic layer can be separated 
by drying over sodium sulfate and evaporated at 40°C on a Rota evapo￾rator. The crude extract obtained from this step could then be utilized for 
various biological activities (Atanasov et al., 2011). The contents could 
be subjected to a defatting process by pouring them into a solution of 10 
ml brine, 10 ml methanol and 20 ml hexane. This solution is then stirred 
for 15 min following which methanol/water layer is extracted with ethyl 
acetate. Extracted content is then subjected to flash chromatography and 
each fraction checked for activity (Kamleh et al., 2008). 
FIGURE 7.2 Bio-guided discovery process of pesticidal bioactive phytochemical from garlic
 
bulbs.
 
Source: Adapted from: Pino et al. (2013); http://scielo.sld.cu/pdf/rpv/v28n2/rpv01213.pdf.
 
7.4.2	 ISOLATION AND PURIFICATION OF GARLIC BIOACTIVE 
COMPOUNDS 
The purification and subsequent isolation of biologically active compound 
can be achieved through the use of column chromatography from garlic 172 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
before obtaining a standardized formulation. Highly valued separation can 
be accomplished through increase polarity of the mobile phases. However, a 
rapid analysis of the different compound present can be achieved through the 
use of thin-layer chromatography (TLC). Accelerating this process can occur 
through the use of high-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) accelerate 
the process of extracting the target structurally-related compound or purifi￾cation of the bioactive molecule. Each compound exhibits a peculiar peak 
when subjected to a definite chromatographic condition: the pure compound 
obtained from the garlic extract can then be used for structural elucidation 
and pesticidal activities (Pino et al., 2013). 
Spectroscopic data obtained from one- and two-dimensional nuclear 
magnetic resonance (NMR) mass spectrometry (MS), ultraviolet (UV) 
visible light, and infrared spectroscopy can be deployed in identifying 
isolated compound. Compounds that have powerful chromophore can be 
carried out using UV-visible spectroscopy (Ziegler et al., 2013). 
Immunoassays, monoclonal antibodies (Mabs) are part of non￾chromatographic technique required to identify pure isolate of garlic 
extract. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) offers a rapid 
and non-destructive investigation to fingerprint herbal extracts or 
powders (Zhang et al., 2018). 
The purity and characterization of active fractions that are obtained 
from the flash chromatography can be determined by HPLC using C-18 
column. The preparative HPLC is carried out using a C-18 column, elution 
is performed using acetonitrile/water (90/10) at a flow rate of 3 ml/min and 
detection when performed at λ254. These are performed using the procedure 
of Adetunji et al. (2019). HPLC system is made up of the solvent reservoir, 
or multiple reservoirs, a high-pressure Agilent 1200 series preparative pump, 
a column, injector system and the UV diode array detector. In vitro and in 
vivo evaluation of the activities of the crude extract is needed before isola￾tion and elucidation is carried out. 
The discovery and development of new compounds from garlic is 
extremely intensive but necessary. It is imperative to search for new and 
potent compound from garlic. This is an important strategy in order to 
overcome the challenge of widespread synthetic pesticide resistance. That 
is why additional phytochemical or essential oils are often added in the 
formulation of garlic-based products. Also, it is increasingly desirable 
to substitute some existing pesticides that are highly toxic with safe 
compounds that are only toxic to the pest and are environmentally safe 
(Clough and Godfrey, 1998).  
 
Garlic Products for Crop Protection 173 
7.5 PESTICIDAL USAGE OF GARLIC PRODUCTS
 
The increasing level of appreciation for the value of garlic as pesticides has 
been recorded, especially among organic farmers. The potency of garlic 
products has been reported in the management of several crop insect pests 
(Badoo, 2016). 
7.5.1 GARLIC USAGE AGAINST INSECT PESTS 
Garlic has been severally reported to have properties for controlling insect 
pests. These include African bollworm, African armyworm, onion thrips, 
whiteflies, termites, through their antifeedant properties and repellent prop￾erties (Prowse et al., 2006; Denloye, 2010; Kiani et al., 2012). The level of 
insecticidal activity of garlic components depends on the extracting solvent, 
concentration, and species susceptibility of target insect pest. Concentra￾tion dependent mortalities on pulse beetle has been recorded for the use of 
Sativum oil extract (Chaubey, 2017). The garlic extracted using methanol 
as a solvent has shown 76% mortality of maize weevil mortality at higher 
dosage treatment and 35.9% mortality at lower concentration (Ibrahim and 
Garba, 2011; Lalla et al., 2013). Other studies carried out by Mobki (2014) 
documented high fumigant toxicities of garlic extracts against red flour 
beetle-T. casteneum and S. zeamais. Use of 7.6 µl/L of garlic extract causes 
30% mortalities of Japanese termite (Park and Shin, 2005). D. domestica and 
D. radium larva mortality occurs upon exposure to garlic juice (Gareth et al., 
2006). The larvicidal effects of garlic juice were comparable to insecticidal 
activities of organophosphate pesticides. Dailly (disulfide and trisulfide) are 
the phyto-constituent with insecticidal properties which affect a large range 
of insect pest (Ouko et al., 2017). These organosulfur compound causes 
pathology in the respiratory organ of the insect (Yang, 2012). Additionally, 
products of ethanol extract identified include vinydithiins, allicin, ajoene, 
and diallyl methyl trisulfide which may be responsible for the insecticidal 
activities of the extract (Nwachuku and Asawalam, 2014). 
Low toxicity resulting in 24% mortality of S. zeamais has been associ￾ated with hexane extract of garlic bulb. The low polarity of hexane has been 
described to be the reason for the poor activity of the hexane extract since 
most of the compound with insecticidal activities has higher polarity. Ouko 
et al. (2017) recorded the use of higher polarity solvent for the extraction of 
Allium sativum since most of the Alky substance found in the plant is soluble  
174 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
in highly polar solvents. This could be attributed to the presence of potent 
compounds such as phenolic, flavonoids, and saponins in low concentration. 
The use of methanol/hexane in extracting garlic improves its activities 
again maize weevils than when the individual solvent is used. The extract 
showed 96% mortality while 88% mortality occurs within 24 h. This activity 
is comparable to actellic synthetic insecticide used in the treatment of insect 
pest. The activities displayed by methanol and hexane extract may be attrib￾uted to increase solubility of more alkyl compound and allicin in the garlic 
extract (Hamed et al., 2012). 
There were reports of high efficacy of garlic essential oils on rice and 
bean bruchid weevils (Lalla et al., 2013). Organosulfur compound from 
Alliaceae has an effect on several insect species. These compounds affect the 
respiratory cells of the insects (Adedire and Ajayi, 1996). The compounds 
induced inflammation through the activation of transient receptor potential 
Ankyrin-1 ion channel in the insect neural tube; this may be responsible for 
the mortality of insect observed (Nwachukwu and Asawalam, 2014). 
The presence of allicin and diallyl sulfide which are majorly organo￾sulfur compounds responsible for the pungent smell of garlic extract. The 
odor repels feeding insects (Karavina et al., 2014). The presence of diallyl 
trisulfide also deters insect oviposition on stored grains (Nwachukwu and 
Asawalam, 2014). The larvicidal and ovicidal activities of these biologically 
active constituent of garlic extract on larva and egg of beetles have been 
demonstrated (Ali et al., 2014). 
Effect of garlic extract on leaf miner disease which infest tomato showed 
that spraying the garlic extract thrice at 2-week interval starting from day 
40 significantly reduced the population of the leaf miner. Also, it increased 
tomato yield (Hussein et al., 2014). Also, the extract from garlic has activi￾ties against blights, downy mildew, rust, and fruit rots (Sallam et al., 2012). 
7.5.2 GARLIC USAGE AGAINST PATHOGENIC FUNGI 
Chips, extracts, and oil of garlic have been reported to inhibit the growth 
of fungi such as Phytophthora spp., Penicillium spp., Saccharomyces spp., 
Aspergillus fumigatus and Aspergillus parasiticus (Singh et al., 2001; Barile 
et al., 2007; Bayili et al., 2011; Perello et al., 2013). The antifungal activity 
of garlic was tested for controlling tomato early blight caused by Alternaria 
solani, in vitro and in vivo (Tagoe et al., 2011). In greenhouse experiments, 
the highest reduction of disease severity was achieved by the extracts of 
garlic at 5% concentration at this level, the fruit yield was increased by 76.2% Garlic Products for Crop Protection 175 
and 66.7% compared to the infected control. In vitro and in vivo experi￾ments have shown that garlic extract inhibited cyst growth, germination of 
sporangia and growth of germ tube of Phytophthora infestation of leaf. Also, 
allicin at concentration ranging from 50 μg to 1 g/mL causes appreciable 
reduction (50–100%) in cucumber downy mildew, a disease caused by Pseu￾doperonospora cubensis (Davidson, 1997). 
Garlic extract containing allicin has shown great activity against Drechslera 
tritici-repentis and Bipolaris sorokiniana, which are fungal contaminant of 
wheat seeds. Result obtained from the use of garlic extract to correct wheat 
seed poor germination is comparable to result from the use of synthetic pesti￾cide. Garlic extract induced structural modification of the conidia and hyphae 
of Bipolaris sorokiniana and Drechslera tritici-repentis, thus restricting these 
fungal colonies radial growth for up to 10 days. Significant antifungal activities 
have been associated with the essential oil extracted from garlic (Onyeagba et 
al., 2004). 
The essential oils extracted from garlic have been shown to possess 
significant antifungal properties. In separate studies by Salim (2011); and 
Tagoe (2011) documented broad-spectrum antifungal activities of garlic. 
The extract has shown between 60% and 82% growth inhibition of seed 
borne fungi of Penicillium and Aspergillus genera. The wide range antifungal 
effect may be due to the presence of allicin which can be converted to diallyl 
(trisulfide, disulfide, sulfide, and allymethyltrisulfide) ajoene and dithiins 
(Naganawa et al., 1996; Cowan, 1999). 
Garlic extract was found to completely inhibit the mycelial growth of 
Aspergillus ochraceus and OTA biosynthesis by A. ochraceus (Reddy et al., 
2010). Inhibition of Fusarium species found in cucumber by garlic tablet has 
been documented (Amin et al., 2009). Also, the allicin from garlic extract 
potently inhibited the growth of Botrytis and Alternaria (Perello et al., 
2013). Rice seedling treated with garlic extract show resistance to rice blast 
pathogen (M. grisea) attack, and the treated plant showed fever symptoms 
(Hubert et al., 2015). Use of garlic extract as the curative measure is less 
effective compared to its use as a prophylactic measure. 
Plant extracts including garlic reduced the activity of cucumber soil￾borne pathogens. Similarly, spraying of garlic extract has shown appreciable 
inhibition of downy mildew and cucumber soil borne disease which encour￾ages more cucumber yield. As well as controlling disease the sprays had 
a beneficial effect on cucumber yields (Hajano et al., 2012). The results 
indicated that the combination of garlic extracts with either cottonseed oil or 
cinnamon oil inhibited the growth of powdery mildew disease more effec￾tively than applications not in combination.  
 
176 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
Exposure of Fusarium species, Alternaria species and Colletotrichum 
species to garlic extract causes inhibition of their spore germination and halt 
their mycelial growth, especially when the extracts were applied after the 
spore has germinated (Singh et al., 2001). This may be due to the exchange 
reaction of the thiol-disulfide which elicit the antimicrobial action (Fass and 
Thorpe, 2018). 
7.5.3	 GARLIC USAGE AGAINST PATHOGENIC BACTERIA AND 
NEMATODES 
Rahman et al. (2007) determined the anti-microbial activity of different 
garlic products, which include garlic oil, dried garlic powder, commercially 
produced garlic products were tested against different selected bacte￾rial pathogen of plant (Rahman et al., 2007; Mikaili, 2013). The result 
indicated that the highest growth inhibition occurs in the lactic culture of 
Thermophilus, Streptococcus, Lactobacillus delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus. 
Moderate growth inhibition was observed in Staphylococcus aureus. While 
poor growth inhibition of garlic extract was seen in Bacillus cereus and 
Salmonella typhimurium. It was observed that the antimicrobial activities 
of the garlic products tested decreases with decreasing concentration of 
garlic powder. The temperature of the preparation of garlic products affects 
the antimicrobial properties. Increase temperature of mode of preparation 
decreases the antimicrobial activities of garlic products. 
Garlic extract showed comparable result in control of nematode causing 
root-knot in groundnut. Garlic extract showed appreciable effect through 
suppression of nematode, thus stimulating the growth of the plant (Fatema, 
2005). A 100% mortality was recorded in Heterodera cajanis second stage 
juvenile which is the cause of pigeon pea root-knot. This result was observed 
after 14 h exposure to garlic extract. Similarly, after exposure of Terranchus 
urticae to garlic extract, 100% mortality of the helminth was recorded (Singh 
et al., 2001). 
7.6	 ISSUES CONCERNING NATURAL PESTICIDES FORMULATION 
FROM GARLIC BULB 
Ordinarily, purified pesticidal natural compounds from garlic can either be 
used in pesticide formulation, as such compounds constitute the biologi￾cally active principle in the formulation mixture, sometime the mixture may  
Garlic Products for Crop Protection 177 
include synthetic material. Alternatively, such pure compounds obtained 
may be explored as a leading drug candidate in the design of novel synthetic 
drug (Gordon et al., 2013). 
The use of plant natural product as pesticide has been filled with a lot 
of problems. Many natural products are unstable under sunlight and high 
temperature that may be encouraged in the field; thus, they are not able to 
exert any toxic effect on plant pathogens. Also, due to lack of selectivity, 
many of the natural products exert their toxicity on plants and mammals. The 
suggestion of adding synthetic material to the natural products to overcome 
this limitation can definitely add to the overall cost of producing the natural 
products (Clough and Godfrey, 1998; Atanasov, 2015). 
In spite of the arguments above expressed and the difficulties to obtain a 
natural substance which can have pesticidal activity and stability at the same 
time, the researchers are continually searching new substances naturally 
occurring in nature with pesticidal properties so that in the future and after 
optimization could be used as commercial proposes. 
The use of garlic extracts to improve plant health and increase disease/ 
pest resistance are currently and largely unregulated. Thus, legislative 
control by various governments should be applied to ensure regulatory 
compliance of wherever pesticidal claims are made. When growing garlic 
for pest control, it has been observed that heavy doses of fertilizer can reduce 
the concentration of the effective substances in the garlic (Amagase, 1993). 
Apart from avoiding the use of large amounts of fertilizers, other factors that 
could influence the efficacy of garlic should be studied. 
7.7 CONCLUSION 
Research reports support the use of garlic extract as a useful, simple, cost 
effective and environmental-safe crop pest and diseases management 
strategy with the purpose to minimize the use of synthetic insecticides and 
fungicides. The combination of garlic natural ingredients when combined 
with other plant essential oils, have superior antifungal and anti-bacterial 
qualities, than if applied separately. However, most of the pesticidal studies 
of garlic in developing countries mostly involved crude extracts. Further 
studies on the isolation of pure compounds of A. sativum and determine the 
mode of action to obtain standard formulation is imperative. Also, because 
garlic has a broad-spectrum effect and might be non-selective, it should be 
used with caution or used as directed so that non-target beneficial organisms 
will be safe. 178 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
Although new pesticides based on natural plant extracts are continu￾ally developing, more research is necessary for optimizing applications 
and become a safe alternative for eliminating the chemical pesticides from 
agriculture. Though garlic products are safe pesticide, for the sake of IPM 
strategy, it should be applied together with low residual synthetic pesti￾cides. Due to the easy preparation of garlic products, systemic action after 
application, biodegradability products, and possible low-cost alternatives 
to agrochemicals, it is hoped that garlic-based pesticides would no doubt 
play a significant role in achieving sustainable crop protection in modern 
agriculture. 
KEYWORDS 
• bactericidal activity 
• bioactive phytochemicals 
• formulation procedure 
• fungicidal activity 
• garlic products 
• insecticidal activity 
• nematicidal activity
 
• organic crop protection
 
• organo-sulfur compounds
 
REFERENCES 
Adedire, C. O., & Ajayi, T. S., (1996). Assessment of insecticidal properties of some plants 
as grain protectants against the maize weevil, Sitophilus zeamais (Motsch.). Nig. J. Ent., 
13, 93–101. 
Adetunji, C. O., Olaniyi, O. O., & Ogunkunle, A. T. J., (2013). Bacterial activity of crude 
extracts of Vernonia amygdalina on clinical isolates. Journal of Microbiology and 
Antimicrobials, 5(6), 60–64. 
Agama, J., (2015). Africa: Latest development in organic agriculture in Africa. In: Willer, H., 
& Lernoud, J., (eds.), The World of Organic Agriculture (p. 15). Statistics and Emerging 
Trends FiBL-IFOAM Report. FiBL, Frick, and IFOAM-Organics International, Bonn. 
Ali, S., Sagheer, M., Hassan, M., Abbas, M., & Hafeez, F., (2014). Insecticidal activity of 
turmeric (Curcuma longa) and garlic (Allium sativum L.) extracts against red flour beetle, 
Tribolium castaneum: A safe alternative to insecticides in stored commodities. J. Entomol. 
Zool. Stud., 2, 201–205.  
Garlic Products for Crop Protection 179 
Amagase, H., & Milner, J. A., (1993). Impact of various sources of garlic and their constituents 
on 7,12-dimethylbenz[α]anthracene binding to mammary cell DNA. Carcinogenesis, 
14(8), 1627–1631. 
Amin, R. A. B. M., Rashid M. M., & Meah, M. B., (2009). Efficacy of garlic to control seed￾borne fungal pathogens of cucumber. J. Agric. Rur. Dev., 7(1–2), 135–138. 
Atanasov, A. G., Waltenberger, B., & Pferschy-Wenzig, E. M., (2011). Discovery and resupply 
of pharmacologically active plant-derived natural products: A review. Biotechnology 
Advances, 33(8), 1582–1614. 
Auerbach, R., Rundgren, G., & Scialabba, N. E., (2013). Organic Agriculture: African 
Experiences in Resilience and Sustainability. (p. 219) FAO Natural Resources Manage￾ment and Environment Department. 
Baidoo, P. K., & Mochiah, M. B., (2016). Comparing the Effectiveness of garlic (Allium 
sativum L.) and hot pepper (Capsicum frutescens L.) in the management of the major 
pests of cabbage (Brassica oleracea (L.). Sustainable Agriculture Research, 5(2), 83–91. 
Barile, E., Bonanomi, G., Antignani, V., Zolfaghari, B., Sajjadi, S. E., Scala, F., & Lanzotti, 
V., (2007). Saponins from Allium minutiflorum with antifungal activity. Phytochemistry, 
68, 596. 
Bayan, L., Koulivand, P. H., & Gorji, A., (2014). Garlic: A review of potential therapeutic 
effects. Avicenna J. Phytomed., 4(1), 1–14. 
Bayili, R. G., Abdoul-Latif, F., Kone, O. H., Diao, M., Bassole, I. H. N., & Dicko, M. H., 
(2011). Phenolic compounds and antioxidant activities in some fruits and vegetables 
from Burkina Faso. African Journal of Biotechnology, 10, 62. 
Beni, C., Casorri, L., Masciarelli, E., Ficociello, B., Masetti, O., Rinaldi, S., & Cichelli, A., 
(2018). Characterization of garlic (Allium sativum L.) aqueous extract and its hypothetical 
role as biostimulant in crop protection. Journal of Food Agriculture and Environment, 
16(3, 4), 38–44. 
Block, E., Bechand, B., Gundala, S., Vattekkatte, A., Wang, K., Mousa, S., Godugu, K., et al., 
(2017). Fluorinated analogs of organosulfur compounds from garlic (Allium sativum): 
Synthesis, chemistry and anti-angiogenesis and antithrombotic studies. Molecules, 22, 
2081. 
Borlinghaus, J., Albrecht, F., Gruhlke, M. C. H., Nwachukwu, I. D., & Slusarenko, A. J., 
(2014). Allicin: Chemistry and biological properties. Molecules, 19, 12591–12618. 
Brooklyn Botanic Garden, (2000). Natural Disease Control: A Commonsense Approach to 
Plant First Aid. Handbook No. 164. Brooklyn Botanic Garden, Inc., NY. 
Chaubey, M. K., (2017). Biological activities of Allium sativum essential oil against pulse 
beetle, Callosobruchus chinensis (Coleoptera: Bruchidae). Herba Polonica, 60, 41–55. 
Clough, J. M., & Godfrey, C. R. A., (1998). The strobilurin fungicides. In: Hutsun, D., & 
Miyamoto, J., (eds.), Fungicidal Activity, chemical and Biological Approaches to Plant 
Protection (p. 254). John Wiley and Sons Ltd., West Sussex, England. 
Corzo, M., Corzo, N., & Villamiel, M., (2007). Biological properties of onions and garlic. 
Trends in Food Science and Technology, 18(12), 609–625. 
Cowan, M. M., (1999). Plant products as antimicrobial agents. Clinical Microbiology Reviews, 
12(4), 564–582. 
Curtis, H., Noll, U., Störmann, J., & Slusarenko, A. J., (2004). Broad-spectrum activity of 
the volatile phytoanticipin allicin in extracts of garlic (Allium sativum L.) against plant 
pathogenic bacteria, fungi and oomycetes. Physiological and Molecular Plant Pathology, 
65, 79–89. 180 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
Davidson, P. M., (1997). Chemical preservatives and natural antimicrobial compounds. In: 
Doyle, M. P., Beuchat, L. R., & Montville, T. J., (eds.), Food Microbiology: Fundamentals 
and Frontiers (pp. 520–556). Washington D.C., ASM Press. 
Denloye, A. A., (2010). Bioactivity of powder and extracts from garlic, Allium sativum L. (Allia￾ceae) and spring onion, Allium fistulosum L. (Alliaceae) against Callosobruchus maculatus 
F. (Coleoptera: Bruchidae) on cowpea, Vigna unguiculata (L.) Walp. (Leguminosae) seeds. 
Entomology, 1–5. 
Edris, A., (2007). Pharmaceutical and therapeutic potentials of essential oils and their 
individual volatile constituents: A review. Phytotherapy Research, 21(4), 308–323. 
Ellis, B. W., Bradley, F. M., & Atthowe, H., (1996). The Organic Gardener’s Handbook of 
Natural Insect and Disease Control: A Complete Problem-Solving Guide to Keeping Your 
Garden and Healthy Without Chemicals. Emmaus: Rodale Press. 
Fatema, S., & Ahmad, M. U., (2005). Comparative efficacy of some organic amendments and 
a nematicide (Furadan-3G) against root-knot on two local varieties of groundnut. Plant 
Pathology Journal, 4, 54–57. 
Gareth, M. P., Tamara, S. G., & Andrew, F., (2006). Insecticidal activity of garlic juice in two 
dipteran pests. Agricultural and Forest Entomology, 8(1), 1–6. 
Gordon, M. C., & Newman, D. J., (2013). Natural products: A continuing source of novel 
drug leads. Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1830(6), 3670–3695. 
Gruhlke, M. C. H., & Slusarenko, A. J., (2018). The chemistry of alliums. Molecules, 23(1),143. 
Hajano, J. A., Lodhi, A. M., &. Pathan, M. A., & Shah, G. S., (2012). In-vitro evaluation of 
fungicides, plant extracts and bio-control agents against rice blast pathogen Magnaporthe 
oryzae Couch. Pakistan Journal of Botany, 44(5), 1775–1778. 
Hamed, R. K. A., Ahmed, S. M. S., Abotaleb, A. O. B., & El-Sawaf, B. M., (2012). Efficacy 
of certain plant oils as grain protectants against the rice weevil, Sitophilus oryzae 
(Coleoptera: Curculionidae) on wheat. EAJBS, 5, 49–53. 
Hubert, J., Mabagala, R. B., & Mamiro, D., (2015). Efficacy of selected plant extracts against 
Pyricularia grisea, causal agent of rice blast disease. American Journal of Plant Sciences, 
6(5), 602–611. 
Hussein, N. M., Hussein, M. I., Gadel-Hak, S. H., & Hammad, M. A., (2014). Effect of two 
plant extracts and four aromatic oils on population and productivity of tomato cultivar 
gold stone. Nature and Science, 12(7). 
Ibrahim, N. D., & Garba, S., (2011). Use of garlic powder in the control of maize weevil. 
Proceeding of the 45th Annual Conference of Agricultural Society of Nigeria (pp. 177–181). 
Iciek, M., Kwiecien, I., & Wlodek, I., (2009). Biological properties of garlic and garlic-derived 
organosulfur compounds. Environmental and Molecular Mutagenesis, 50(3), 24765. 
IFOAM, (2019). The IFOAM Norms for Organic Production and Processing, Version. The 
International Federation of Organic Agriculture Movements. 
Kaluwa, K., & Kruger, E., (2012). Natural Pest and Disease Control Handbook. KwaZulu￾Natal Department of Agriculture and Rural Development, Pietermaritzburg. 
Kamleh, A., Barrett, M. P., Wildridge, D., Burchmore, R. J., Scheltema, R. A., & Watson, D. 
G., (2008). Metabolomic profiling using Orbitrap Fourier transform mass spectrometry 
with hydrophilic interaction chromatography: A method with wide applicability to 
analysis of biomolecules. Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 22, 1912–1918. 
Karavina, C., Mandumbu, R., Zivenge, E., & Munetsi, T., (2014). Use of garlic (Allium sativum) 
as a repellent crop to control diamondback moth (Plutella xylostella) in cabbage (Brassica 
oleraceae var. capitata). Agric. Res., 52, 615–621. Garlic Products for Crop Protection 181 
Kiani, L., Yazdanian, M., Tafaghodinia, B., & Sarayloo, M. H., (2012). Control of western 
flower thrips, Frankliniella occidentalis (Pergande) (Thysanoptera: Thripidae), by plant 
extracts on strawberry in greenhouse conditions. Mun. Ent. Zool., 7(2), 12–22. 
Kodera, Y., Ayabe, M., Ogasawara, K., Yoshida, S., Hayashi, N., & Ono, K., (2002). Allicin 
accumulation with long-term storage of garlic. Chem. Pharm. Bull., 50, 405–407. 
Lalla, F. D., Ahmed, B., Omar, A., & Mohieddine, M., (2013). Chemical composition and 
biological activity of Allium sativum essential oils against Callosobruchus maculatus. 
IOSR-JESTFT, 3, 30–36. 
Lanzotti, V., Bonanomi, G., & Scala, F., (2013). What makes Allium species effective against 
pathogenic microbes? Phytochem. Rev., 12, 751–772. 
Mikaili, P., Maadirad, S., Moloudizargari, M., Aghajanshakeri, S., & Sarahroodi, S., (2013). 
Therapeutic uses and pharmacological properties of garlic, shallot, and their biologically 
active compounds. Iran J. Basic Med. Sci., 16(10), 1031–1048. 
Miron, T., Rabinkov, A., Mirelman, D., Wilchek, M., & Weiner, L., (2000). The mode of action 
of allicin: Its ready permeability through phospholipid membranes may contribute to its 
biological activity. Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1463, 20–30. 
Mobki, M., Safavi, S. A., Safaralizadeh, M. H., & Panahi, O., (2014). Toxicity and repellency 
of garlic (Allium sativum L.) extract grown in Iran against Tribolium castaneum (Herbst) 
larvae and adults. Arch. Phytopathol. Plant Protect., 47, 59–68. 
Naganawa, R., Iwata, N., Ishikawa, K., Fukuda, H., Fujino, T., & Suzuki, A., (1996). Inhibition 
of microbial growth by ajoene, a sulfur-containing compound derived from garlic. Appl. 
Environ. Microbiol., 62, 4238–4242. 
Nwachukwu, I. D., & Asawalam, E. F., (2014). Evaluation of freshly prepared juice from 
garlic (Allium sativum L.) as a biopesticide against the maize weevil, Sitophilus zeamais 
(Motsch.) (Coleoptera: Curculionidae). JPPR., 54, 132–138. 
Onyeagba, R. A., Ugbogu, O. C., Okeke, C. U., & Iroakasi, O., (2004). Studies on the 
antimicrobial effects of garlic (Allium sativum Linn.), ginger (Zingiber officinale Roscoe) 
and lime (Citrus aurantifolia Linn.). African Journal of Biotechnology, 3, 552–554. 
Ouko, R. O., Koech, S. C., Arika, W. M., Osano, K. O., & Ogola, P. E., (2017). Bioefficacy 
of organic extracts of A. sativum against S. zeamais (Coleoptera; Dryophthoridae). Biol 
Syst., 6(1), 174. 
Park, I. K., & Shin, S. C., (2005). Fumigant activity of plant essential oils and components 
from garlic (Allium sativum) and clove bud (Eugenia caryophyllata) oils against the 
Japanese termite (Reticulitermes speratus Kolbe). J. Agric. Food Chem., 53, 4388–4392. 
Perelló, A., Gruhlke, N., & Slusarenko, A. J., (2013). In vitro efficacy of garlic extract to 
control fungal pathogens of wheat. Journal of Medicinal Plants Research, 7(24). 
Pérez-Torres, I., Torres-Narváez, J., Pedraza-Chaverri, J., Rubio-Ruiz, M., Díaz-Díaz, E., 
Valle-Mondragón, L. D., Martínez-Memije, R., et al., (2016). Effect of the aged garlic 
extract on cardiovascular function in metabolic syndrome rats. Molecules, 21, 1425. 
Petropoulos, S. A., Fernandes, Â., Ntatsi, G., Petrotos, K., Barros, L., & Ferreira, I. C. F. 
R., (2018). Nutritional value, chemical characterization and bulb morphology of Greek 
garlic landraces. Molecules, 23(2), 319. 
Pino, O., Sánchez, Y., & Rojas, M. M., (2013). Plant secondary metabolites as an alternative in 
pest management. I: Background, research approaches and trends. Rev. Protección Veg., 
28(2), 81–94. 
Plata-Rueda, A., Martínez, L. C., Dos, S. M. H., Fernandes, F. L., Wilcken, C. F., Soares, M. 
A., Serrão, J. E., & Zanuncio, J. C., (2017). Insecticidal activity of garlic essential oil and  
182 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
their constituents against the mealworm beetle, Tenebrio molitor Linnaeus (Coleoptera: 
Tenebrionidae). Sci. Rep., 7, 46406.
 Prowse, G. M., Galloway, T. S., & Foggo, A., (2006). Insecticidal activity of garlic juice in 
two dipteran pests. Agricultural and Forest Entomology, 8, 1–6. 
Rahman, M. S., Houd, I. A. S., Al-Riziqi, M. H., Mothershaw, A., Guizani, N., & Bengtsson, 
G., (2007). Assessment of the anti-microbial activity of dried garlic powders produced by 
different methods of drying. International Journal of Food Properties, 9(1), 503–513. 
Reddy, K. R. N., Nurdijati, S. B., & Salleh, B., (2010). An overview of plant-derived products 
on control of mycotoxigenic fungi and mycotoxins. Asian J. Plant Sci., 9(3), 126–133. 
Ryu, P., & Kang, D., (2017). Physicochemical properties, biological activity, health benefits, 
and general limitations of aged black garlic: A review. Molecules, 22, 919. 
Salim, A. B., (2011). Effect of some plant extracts on fungal and aflatoxin production. Int. J. 
Acad. Res. 3(4), 116–120. 
Sallam, M. A., Nashwa, K., & Abo-Elyousr, K. A. M., (2012). Evaluation of various plant 
extracts against the early blight disease of tomato plants under greenhouse and field 
conditions. Plant Protect. Sci., 48(2), 74–79. 
Singh, U. P., Prithiviraj, B., Sarma, B. K., Mandadavi, S., & Ray, A. B., (2001). Role of garlic 
(Allium sativum L.) in human and plant diseases. Indian Journal of Experimental Biology, 
39, 310–322. 
Tafadzwa, M., Svotwa, E., & Katsaruware, R. D., (2016). Evaluating the efficacy of garlic 
(Allium sativum) as a bio-pesticide for controlling cotton aphid (Aphis gossypii). Sci. Agri., 
16(2), 54–60. 
Tagoe, D., Baidoo, S., Dadzie, I., Kangah, V., & Nyarko, H. A., (2011). Comparison of the 
antimicrobial (antifungal) properties of onion (Allium cepa), Ginger (Zingiber officinale) 
and garlic (Allium sativum) on Aspergillus flavus, Aspergillus niger and Cladosporium 
herbarum using organic and water based extraction methods. Res. J. Med. Plant, 5, 281–287. 
Tan, B. G. T., Pham, V., & Nam, T. N., (2019). Studies in Garlic. Intech Open, London. 
Vijayalakshmi, K., Subhashini, B., & Koul, S., (1999). Plants in Pest Control: Garlic and 
Onion (p. 15). Center for Indian Knowledge Systems. Chennai, India. 
Yang, F. L., Zhu, F., & Lei, C. L., (2012). Insecticidal activities of garlic substances against 
adults of grain moth, Sitotroga cerealella (Lepidoptera: Gelechiidae). Insect Science, 19, 
205–212. 
Zhang, L., Dou, X. W., Zhang, C., Logrieco, A. F., & Yang, M. H., (2018). A review of current 
methods for analysis of mycotoxins in herbal medicines. Toxins, 10(65), 1–39. 
Ziegler, S., Pries, V., Hedberg, C., & Waldmann, H., (2013). Target identification for small 
bioactive molecules: Finding the needle in the haystack. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl., 52, 
2744–2792.  
CHAPTER 8
 
EFFICACY OF ORGANIC SUBSTRATES 
FOR MANAGEMENT OF SOIL-BORNE 
PLANT PATHOGENS 
MALAVIKA RAM AMANTHRA KELOTH, MEENAKSHI RANA, and 
AJAY TOMER 
Department of Plant Pathology, School of Agriculture, 

Lovely Professional University, Phagwara–144411, Punjab, India
 
ABSTRACT 
Organic matter is obtained from living organisms which are returned to the 
soil, providing a large source of carbon-based compounds. It can improve the 
microbial diversity of the soil, nutrient availability to plants, and maintain soil 
texture and structure. Organic matters are delivered to the soil in various forms 
like cattle manure, swine manure, or poultry manure (PM) in the solid or liquid 
phase, S-H mixture, seed cakes, slurry, composts, and many others which help 
in disease suppression and reduction in the phytopathogenic population. They 
adopt various mechanisms in controlling plant diseases like competition, hyper￾parasitism, ineffective pathogen proliferation, induced resistance, and also 
through physicochemical properties of matter. They enable plant protection 
through their rich microbial community, regarded as bio-control agents that can 
ensure the elimination of the pathogen without harming other living organisms 
and the ecosystem. Amendment of soil using organic matter along with other 
agricultural practices is also giving good results in plant disease management. 
8.1 INTRODUCTION 
Since a few years back, the farming community has been found to rely 
on synthetic pesticides as it proved to give them the most immediate and  
184 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
successful results in controlling agricultural pests. But nobody was cautious 
regarding the after-effects of the unlimited use of these commercial pesti￾cides that has resulted in polluting soil as well as the natural resources. The 
practice of using animal manures and crop rotations were forsaken after 
World War II. In replacement to this, farmers practiced monoculturing, 
intensive tillage, use of synthetic pesticides and fertilizers, shortened rota￾tions, etc. (Katan, 1996). Before this scenario, our ancestors believed in 
implementing cultural practices and using organic matter, which might not 
have given them immediate results and required more labor. Eventually, 
they manipulated the soil ecology consciously and unconsciously (Bailey 
and Lazarovits, 2003). The realization of the advantages of organic matter 
and further studies related to it are advanced in the recent times. 
Organic matter is capable of influencing the microbial ecology, nutrient 
availability, drainage, water holding capacity, soil aeration, and soil structure 
(Davey, 1996). It directly affects the crop productivity and plant health and 
provides carbon to the beneficial organisms in the soil as an energy source. 
It also helps in minimizing the infections caused by soilborne pathogens 
and improves root health. The use of organic matter maintains resident 
microbial populations and makes the soil immune to various plant diseases 
(Cook, 1990). It can also replace crop rotation in some instances, sanitize the 
soil and nourish the farming system by influencing the biological, physical, 
and chemical processes (Mathre et al., 1999). According to a recent report 
United States generates about 1 billion inorganic and organic agricultural 
by-products like crop residue (400 million), cattle manure (50 million), 
municipal solid wastes (150 million), pulp, and paper industry by-products 
(10 million) and swine and poultry manure (PM) (30 million) every year 
(Edwards and Someshwar, 2000). Many research works have also repre￾sented organic matters to be an important entity competent against a broad 
category of plant pathogens and pests to reduce its incidence (Cook, 1986; 
Abawi and Widmer, 2000; Akhtar and Malik, 2000; Conn and Lazarovits, 
2000; Gamliel et al., 2000; Lazarovits et al., 2001). 
8.2	 MECHANISM OF DIFFERENT TYPES OF ORGANIC 
AMENDMENTS AND THEIR EFFICIENCY 
High nitrogen amendments are one such organic matter used which includes 
soymeal, blood meal, bone meal, fishmeal, meat meal, and PM (Figure 
8.1). Blood meal and fishmeal in pot trials are meant to have efficiency in 
reducing the pathogen causing Verticillium wilt of tomato (Wilhelm, 1951). Organic Substrates for Managing Soil Borne Plant Pathogens 185 
PMs, soymeal, bone meal and meat meal in field conditions at 37 tons/ha, 
are capable of reducing the incidence of pathogens like Streptomyces scabies 
causing common scab of potato, Verticillium dahliae or Verticillium albo￾atrum causing Verticillium wilt and few nematodes parasitizing plants (Conn 
and Lazarovits, 1999; Lazarovits et al., 1999). It also inhibited the germina￾tion of microsclerotia of Verticillium dahliae harboring the sandy soil in lab 
conditions (Hawke and Lazarovits, 1994) and field conditions of potato crop 
(Conn and Lazarovits, 1999). Few reports indicated that the harm caused 
to the phytopathogens was due to the accumulation of ammonia after the 
application of high nitrogen-based amendments which has a low C:N ratio 
that is less than 10 (Gilpatrick, 1969; Huber and Watson, 1970; Mian and 
Rodriquez-Kabana, 1982; Stirling, 1991; Shiau et al., 1999). Thus, micro￾sclerotia of Verticillium dahliae was killed due to the liberation of ammonia 
(Tenuta, 2001). The amount of application of organic amendments differs 
according to the type of soil. The amount of meat and bone meal required 
for loamy soil is twice the amount required for sandy loam soil to generate 
equal amounts of ammonia which shows that sandy loam soil can readily 
accumulate ammonia. It was observed that the various amendments used to 
mitigate pathogens or pathogen inoculum like microsclerotia in sandy soils, 
has urea as a major component which reacts with urease enzyme in soil to 
liberate ammonia (Rodriguez-Kabana et al., 1989; Stirling, 1991; Tenuta 
and Lazarovits, 2002). The efficacy of these amendments was confirmed by 
removing urea from them and observing that the latter mixture did not give 
supporting results (Huang and Huang, 1993). Soymeal and PM along with 
heated soil ensured an effective control over the plant diseases, even the 
heat-tolerant pathogens, as increasing temperatures declines the equilibrium 
point of ammonia or ammonium (Gamliel et al., 2000). Studies reported 
that nitrification products like nitrate and nitrite can also be the cause for 
the death of microsclerotia in Verticillium wilt disease. The fact is that the 
amendments applied at low rates became effective only after 2 weeks, along 
with the change in the soil pH to acidic (Tenuta and Lazarovits, 2002). At 
this pH ammonia cannot be present but the formation of nitrous acid (HNO2
) 
from nitrite can result in the depletion of the pathogen (Tsao and Oster, 1981; 
Loffler et al., 1986; Michel and Mew, 1998). Mineral soils comprising of 
less than 0.5% bone and meat meal, rapid nitrification rate and acidic soil 
tends to be the ideal condition for the presence of nitrous acid (Bailey and 
Lazarovits, 2003). 
Organic amendments like crab shell, soybean stalk, PM, peanut cake, 
wheat straw, rice chaff, and alfalfa were applied under pot and field conditions 
in order to examine their efficacy in inhibiting the incidence of Verticillium  
186 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
dahliae Kleb. causing Verticillium wilt in cotton crops (Huang et al., 2006). 
The application of the amendments under both pot conditions in which 
pathogen was inoculated and field condition in which pathogen-infected 
naturally, positive results of disease suppression were observed. The most 
efficient treatment out of these were that of crab shell (72%), followed by 
soybean stalk (60%) and alfalfa (56%) in inhibiting the growth of the fungi 
in vascular tissues. The moderate effect was observed for the treatment with 
rice chaff while less efficiency was depicted by peanut cake, PM, and wheat 
straw treatment with 28%, 21% and 11% growth inhibition of the pathogen, 
respectively in vascular tissues. The organic amendment also contributed in 
increasing the population of beneficial microorganisms like actinomycetes, 
fungi, and bacteria in the rhizosphere of the cotton crops. The microbial popu￾lation size varied according to the age of the crop. The crab shell treatments 
stimulated the maximum proliferation of antagonists, while the contribution 
of wheat straw, peanut cake, and PM in increasing the percentage of antago￾nists were comparatively less. The latter made only minute changes in the 
population of soil microbiota. Thus, the addition of organic amendment to the 
soil can cause an increase in the total amount of beneficial microbes and in 
inhibiting various soilborne phytopathogens. 
FIGURE 8.1 Different types of organic matter. 
8.2.1 PLANT SEED-BASED CAKES 
Efficacy of several plant seed-based cakes alone and in combination with 
biocontrol agents were observed in controlling many plant pathogens. Inhi￾bition of growth of phytopathogens of sunflower crop by the application or 
amendment of soil using neem seed cake, cottonseed cake, Datura fastuosa  
 
Organic Substrates for Managing Soil Borne Plant Pathogens 187 
and Steochospermum marginatum and each of them in combination with 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa were examined (Syed et al., 1998). All four of 
the above plant-based treatments successfully suppressed the population 
of Fusarium solani, cottonseed cake, and neem seed cake suppressed the 
growth of Rhizoctonia solani and Macrophomina phaseolina while Datura 
fastuosa and Steochospermum marginatum suppressed the population of 
Rhizoctonia solani. The beneficial microbe, Pseudomonas aeruginosa was 
capable of reducing the incidence of Fusarium solani, Rhizoctonia solani 
and Macrophomina phaseolina. Also, its combination with the plant-based 
treatments gave significant results in which, increased plant height and fresh 
weight of shoot was observed in treatment combining Pseudomonas aerugi￾nosa with neem seed cake and Steochospermum marginatum. 
8.2.2 SLURRY 
Anaerobically digested slurry (ADS) when applied to the soil delivered 
a significant reduction in the mycelial growth of Phytophthora capsici, 
causing Phytophthora root rot disease in chili pepper (Cao et al., 2014). It 
also restricted zoospore germination of the pathogen. The decrease in disease 
incidence and zoospore germination was observed more with anaerobically 
digested pig slurry (ADP) treatment than with anaerobically digested dairy 
(ADD) slurry treatment. Isolation of humic substances (HS) and exogenously 
applied ammonium from ADS was performed, in which a higher percentage 
of inhibition of hyphal growth and zoospore germination was observed for 
HS derived from ADP than that from ADD. High ammonium content and 
specific structure of HS extracted from ADP was the root cause for its ability 
to carry out better control of the disease. Further, the efficiency of pig slurry 
in eliminating Ralstonia solanacearum biovar 2 strain 1609 infecting potato 
crops was studied, which showed a decrease in the population of infected 
and diseased crops according to the soil suppressiveness tests (Gorissen et 
al., 2004). 
8.2.3 LIQUID SWINE MANURE (LSM) 
Liquid swine manure (LSM) amendment reduced the common scab, wilt 
diseases, and plant-parasitic nematodes in potato field for 3 years after 
its first application at 55 hLha−1 concentrations apart from the increasing 
occurrence of common scab disease due to application of animal manures  
188 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
(Conn and Lazarovits, 1999). The LSM, which is incorporated into the 
soil, destroyed the microsclerotia of the Verticillium wilt causing pathogen, 
Verticillium dahliae directly at 5 pH whereas at a higher pH of 6.5 their 
activity was not appreciated. From this we can incur that the effectiveness 
of amendment is depended upon the soil pH. Similarly, soil temperature, 
soil moisture and volatile fatty acid (VFA) mixtures are also responsible 
for the activity of the organic amendment against phytopathogens such as 
enhancement in toxicity against common scab disease due to rise in soil 
temperature, reduction in toxicity due to increase in soil moisture causing 
dilution of the active component and immediate fatality of the microscle￾rotia due to VFA mixtures. The functioning of microsclerotia was ceased 
in the presence of all the VFA compounds like acetic acid, valeric acid, 
butyric acid, isobutyric acid, and propionic acid, whereas it failed with one 
or few of the VFA compounds (Tenuta et al., 2002). VFAs produced by 
LSM are of no use at a higher pH above 8 while ammonia takes place the 
role of causing detrimental effects to the pathogen at this pH. VFA (pKa 
4.75) and nitrous acid play the essential role for the antifungal activity at 
low pH, showing the necessity of acidification of the organic amendments 
before applying in the soil (Tenuta et al., 2002). There was an increase 
in the amount of beneficial soil microbiota like Trichoderma when LSM 
acting as a stimulating agent for the microflora, was added to kill Verticil￾lium dahliae (Conn and Lazarovits, 1999). 
8.2.4 S-H MIXTURE 
Positive results were obtained using S-H mixture, a formulated soil amend￾ment, which included many industrial and agricultural wastes. The S-H 
mixture under greenhouse conditions was capable of controlling Pseudo￾monas solanacearum, which caused bacterial wilt disease in tomato, when 
applied at 0.5–1.0% (w/w) with the soil, one week prior to transplanting 
(Chang and Hsu, 1988). Further efficacy of the mixture by removing bagasse, 
rice husk powder, calcium superphosphate, potassium nitrate and oyster shell 
powder was evaluated, which depicted no reduction in the efficiency of S-H 
mixture in the soil, whereas the mixture devoid of urea or mineral ash gave 
less efficiency. And by applying the components of the mixture individually 
to the soil at the rate equivalent to the amount of each component present in 
0.75% (w/w) of S-H mixture, urea alone was found to cause a reduction in 
the disease severity but was less efficient than the mixture comprising all of 
them. Moreover, disease suppression was par equivalent with the efficiency Organic Substrates for Managing Soil Borne Plant Pathogens 189 
of S-H mixture, when urea was combined with mineral ash to amend the soil 
but not with each of any other constituents of the S-H mixture. The efficacy 
of urea amended soil was enhanced by increasing the period of treatment 
before planting the tomato seedlings, giving best results by planting after 2 
weeks of amendment of the soil with urea. 
Another bacteria infecting tomato crop was also inhibited by the S-H 
mixture in combination with plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria (PGPR). 
Ralstonia solanacearum (race 1, biovar 1) causing bacterial wilt disease in 
tomatoes were suppressed using soil amended with S-H mixture, acibenzolar￾S-methyl (Actigard) and PGPR; Bacillus pumilus SE 34, Pseudomonas 
putida 89B61, BioYield, and Equity (Anith et al., 2004). The S-H mixture 
constituted of those components discussed before, i.e., urea, mineral ash, 
bagasse, potassium nitrate, rice husk, calcium superphosphate and oyster 
shell powder. Bio-Yield (Gustafson, LLC, Dallas, TX) and Equity (Naturize 
Inc., Jacksonville, FL) are the formulations in which Bio-Yield includes 2 
strains of Bacillus spp.; B. amyloliquefaciens IN937a and B. subtilis GB03 
and Equity includes 40 different microbial strains. S-H mixture alone was 
capable to lessen the disease incidence when applied 14 days before the 
transplantation of the tomato seedlings in the bacteria-infested soil. On 
application of Pseudomonas putida 89B61, the PGPR to the transplants at the 
seeding time and one week before the inoculation of the bacteria, prevented 
the disease incidence. The formulated PGPRs viz. Equity was not capable 
of inhibiting the bacteria and BioYield was efficient in reducing the disease 
incidence in three experiments. Actigard treatment did not exhibit much 
result in inhibiting the bacteria at inoculum densities of 1 × 105
 and 1 × 106 
CFU/ml. The amendment of soil with Actigard and S-H mixture efficiently 
inhibited the incidence of Ralstonia solanacearum in the tomato crops. The 
combination of PGPR; P. putida 89B61 or BioYield with Actigard signifi￾cantly reduced the disease incidence compared to the control. 
Mediterranean countries are leading in olive oil production. But the 
olive oil mill wastewater (Kotsou et al., 2004) and dry olive residues (DOR) 
(Sampedro et al., 2004) have caused a threat to the environment due to its 
high organic load, phytotoxic, and antimicrobial properties. Studies show 
that these waste particles render huge amount of fertilizers when applied 
to the soil and can play the role of organic amendment with high nutrients 
and organic matter (Paredes et al., 1999). Despite of its agronomic value, 
DOR is also harboring antimicrobial properties (Capasso et al., 1995). The 
effects of DOR were experimented on the growth of four crop species, on the 
saprophytic growth of four fungi causing plant disease and the impact of soil 
amendment with the DOR on five systems of plant and pathogen, in which  
190 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
three systems were plant with soil enduring pathogen while two were plant 
with foliar pathogen (Bonanomi et al., 2006). The four crop species on which 
the DOR effect tested were Triticum aestivum, Lepidium sativum, Lactuca 
sativa and Lycopersicon esculentum. The four fungi whose saprophytic 
growth was examined were Botrytis cinerea (BC), Fusarium culmorum (FC), 
Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. lycopersici (FOL) and Sclerotinia minor (SM), 
the plant-soil borne pathogen systems were T. aestivum-FC, L. esculentum￾FOL and L. sativa-SM and plant-foliar pathogen systems were L. sativa-BC 
and L. esculentum-BC. Phytotoxic effects were shown by the residues on 
all plant species tested both under laboratory and greenhouse conditions in 
which the most sensitive ones were L. sativum and L. sativa which were 
followed by L. esculentum and T. aestivum. Favorable results were received 
in the tests against phytopathogenic fungi. Radial growth and hyphae density 
of the fungi were affected positively by the residues. In the plant pathogen 
systems under greenhouse conditions, no affirmative effects were observed 
for DOR amended soil. Thus, the report concludes that undecomposed DOR 
under controlled conditions cause phytotoxic effect on crop species, antimi￾crobial effect on plant pathogenic fungi and increased disease incidence with 
plant-fungus interaction systems. 
8.2.5 COMPOSTS 
The application of composts in the greenhouse has resulted in diminishing 
the soilborne diseases occurring in the plants (Hadar et al., 1992; Hoitink et 
al., 1993; Hoitink and Boehm, 1999). In the field conditions, these composts 
are also equipped with biocontrol agents that have a vital role in eliminating 
phytopathogens through parasitism (Keener et al., 2000). The population 
density of certain soilborne pathogens like Pythium and Rhizoctonia causing 
damping of disease and SM causing rotting in lettuce crops were declined by 
the application of composts due to elevated soil microbial activity (Lumsden 
et al., 1983, 1986). Due to the variability in the results of the composted 
products, the recommendation of these to the farmers remains as a major 
challenge. The outcome varies on the basis of different factors like season of 
application and the number of times they are applied. According to a report 
out of the 17 organic compounds derived from the household wastes, only 9 
were mildly effective while the others had no role in decreasing the Pythium 
infection (Erhart et al., 1999). The efficacy of bark composts in suppressing 
disease-causing pathogens was apprehensive, but its activity was unable to 
relate to the presence of phenol in its extracts and the total biological activity. Organic Substrates for Managing Soil Borne Plant Pathogens 191 
Application of composts derived from municipal biosolids, sugar mill filter 
press cake, cottonwood mixed with pine bark or hardwood and cotton gin 
trash were found to reduce Pythium arrhenomanes causing stubble decline 
in sugarcane (Dissanayake and Hoy, 1999). Fresh compost was equipped 
with a high concentration of chemical components of VFA like propionic 
acid, isovaleric acid, acetic acid, butyric acid and isobutyric acid, which can 
contribute to reduce disease incidence (DeVleeschauwer and Assche, 1981). 
Few of these components like butyric and propionic acid was found inhibi￾tory to seed germination and growth of the plant. The production of acetic 
acid was a major cause of phytotoxicity following anaerobic decomposition 
in wheat straw (Lynch, 1977, 1978). Such anaerobic conditions paved the 
way in reducing the inoculum of fungal pathogens like Rhizoctonia solani, 
Verticillium dahliae and Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. asparagi (Blok et al., 
2000). Some of the effectiveness of the composts as fungicides is due to 
the biological control agents harboring them. Pseudomonas fluorescens a 
biocontrol agent produces antibiotic 2,4-diacetylphloroglucinol (DAPG) 
that can reduce the incidence of take-all disease of wheat (Raaijamakers and 
Weller, 1988). Application of organic amendment cannot be definitely linked 
with the biological control agent in soil. Application of organic amendments 
due to which the hydrolysis of fluorescein diacetate resulting high microbial 
activity has caused a decrease in fungal pathogen Pythium causing damping 
of diseases (Keener et al., 2000). This relation between organic matter and 
soil microbial activity has managed to reduce the incidence of Corky root 
rot disease, Phytophthora parasitica causing root infections and Verticillium 
wilt disease (van Bruggen, 1995; Davis et al., 1996, 2001). Cellulolytic and 
hemicellulolytic actinomycetes are the other contributors in developing anti￾fungal activity in the organically amended soils (van Bruggen, 1995). 
A study has been carried out by taking into consideration the efficacy 
of 101 microorganisms from compost prepared from urban organic and 
yard wastes, from which 28 microbes appeared to be antagonists against 
Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. radicis-lycopersici causing tomato wilt (Pugliese 
et al., 2008). The test was carried out under laboratory conditions in petri 
plates constituting perlite medium where tomato seedlings were grown. 
Further under greenhouse, the compost was tested against three pathogens 
infecting three different crops, viz. Phytophthora nicotianae on tomato, 
Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. basilici on basil and Rhizoctonia solani on 
bean. A Fusarium strain K5 was capable of controlling the fungi infecting 
basil, with 69% inhibition and 32% increase in the biomass production 
of the crop compared to the control. A bacterial strain B17 controlled the 192 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
fungi Phytophthora nicotianae infecting tomato crop by 82% with 216% 
biomass production. Rhizoctonia solani causing stem rot and root rot in bean 
crop was controlled by E19 and P11 antagonists with 163% increase in the 
biomass production. Moreover, among these 28 microbes, best control at 
various dosages was imparted by two Trichoderma isolates; E28 and E36 
and three Fusarium isolates; K7, K9 and K11, from which two isolates of 
Fusarium, i.e., K7 and K9 were regarded as commercial bio-control agents 
with its antagonistic activity against F. oxysporum f. sp. basilica. And no 
microbe could control all the soilborne phytopathogens. Composted grape 
marc and composted separated cattle manure can be regarded as a biological 
control against Rhizoctonia solani and Pythium aphanidermatum and were 
tested under laboratory conditions by amending the media with composts 
(Hadar and Mandelbaum, 1992). Microbial activity during the process of 
composting is responsible for the action of disease suppression. A unique 
experiment was conducted using heavily infested crop residues which were 
incorporated into 2.5–4.6 m3 area of static compost heaps subjected to 
various temperature ranges (Bollen et al., 1989). On the basis of the type 
of crop residues, its location in the heap as well as the temperature to which 
it is subjected to, is changed. The temperature was brought up to 50–70°C 
in 6 days, which remained so for 2–3 weeks and later reduced below 40°C 
for 5 months using a.c. at maturation phase. Almost all the pathogens were 
eliminated after the test, while Olpidium brassicae and one formae speciales 
out of the four Fusarium oxysporum pathogen survived but were also less 
in inoculum. According to the study conducted, the elimination of phyto￾pathogens from the crop residues was due to the evolution of heat during 
the process of composting. A short heat phase, Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. 
melonis, Plasmodiophora brassicae and Olpidium brassicae were success￾fully eliminated, while during the long-lasting maturation phase, they 
survived without losing their viability. 
In order to eliminate the soil enduring pathogen, Fusarium oxysporum 
causing wilt in tomato, two residues from industrial and agricultural wastes 
were composted and evaluated (Borrero et al., 2004). Cork compost (CC) 
from cork (Quercus suber L.) production and grape marc compost (GMC) 
from alcohol producing industry (grape skins, seed, and stems) were 
compared with Sphagnum light peat (P) (Klasmann, Valinex, Palleter, Spain) 
and expanded vermiculite (V) (Vermiculitay derivadas, Gijón) and CC and 
GMC were used in its heated (60°C) form as CC-60 and GMC-60. Precisely 
6.26 to 7.97 were the pH range maintained in the growth media. All the treat￾ments were carried out in the growth media, and their effects were tabulated Organic Substrates for Managing Soil Borne Plant Pathogens 193 
under AUDPC (area under disease progress curve) and RLSBX (relative 
length of stem with brown xylem). On the basis of AUDPC and RLSBX, 
the most effective treatment was of GMC, which showed 92% reduction 
compared to vermiculate (V) or peat (P) treatments. P and V were the most 
conducive ones while CC, CC-60 and GMC-60 gave intermediate results. 
CC and GMC had increased β-glucosidase activity and with this variation in 
the disease severity. 
Beneficial microorganisms like Bacillus amyloliquefaciens strains QL-5 
and QL-18 were combined with organic fertilizers to inhibit the growth 
of bacterial wilt pathogen, Ralstonia solanacearum in tomato crops under 
greenhouse conditions and field (Wei et al., 2011). The two strains of Bacillus 
sp. were isolated from the rhizosphere soil of the tomato crop. The most 
effective results were obtained when both the strains QL-5 and QL-18 were 
mixed with the fertilizer to obtain fortified bio-organic fertilizer (BOF). The 
field results however relied on season and climatic conditions. Less effect 
of the BOF was noticed in autumn crop season in 2008 and 2009 while the 
disease incidence was successfully reduced in the spring crop season in 2009 
and 2010 significantly. The pathogen population in soil before transplantation 
of the tomato seedlings were found to be three times lower in the spring than 
autumn season. Significant and favorable results were obtained under field 
conditions when air temperature was correlated with the treatment while no 
correlations were observed with the relative humidity. 
Green wastes are used as composts in order to cause mycelial inhibi￾tion (100%) of FC causing foot rot, Gaeumannomyces graminis f. sp. tritici 
causing take-all disease and Pseudocercosporella herpotrichoides causing 
eyespot in winter wheat, inhibition (100%) of germination of pycniospores 
of Phoma medicaginis f. sp. pinodella causing black stem of garden pea, 
inhibition (100%) of spores of Plasmodiophora brassicae causing clubroot 
of Chinese cabbage (Tilston et al., 2002). Also, green wastes are meant 
to protect agricultural crops by inducing mycelial suppression (20%) of 
Rhizoctonia solani causing damping-off in radish and sugarbeet, Pythium 
ultimum causing damping-off in cucumber (Ryckeboer, 2001), Phytophthora 
cinnamomi causing root rot in lupin (Tuitert and Bollen, 1996), inhibiting 
mycelium by 33% of Pythium ultimum causing damping-off in cress (Fuchs, 
2002), inhibiting conidia by 10% of FOL causing wilt of tomato (Cotxarrera 
et al., 2002), inhibiting spore production by 30% of Mycosphaerella pinodes 
causing foot rot of pea (Schuler et al., 1993) and inhibiting zoospore produc￾tion by 100% of Phytophthora fragariae f. sp. fragariae causing red core in 
strawberry (Pitt et al., 1997).  
 
194 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
8.3 MODE OF ACTION OF COMPOSTS ON PHYTOPATHOGENS 
Composts comprising of various bio-control agents as discussed before 
conquer the pathogenic community through various mechanisms (Figure 8.2). 
Competition, physicochemical properties of the composts, antibiosis, inef￾fective pathogen proliferation, systemic acquired resistance (SAR), induced 
systemic resistance (ISR) and hyper-parasitism are the major factors to be 
considered (Mehta et al., 2014). These mechanisms are discovered, studied, 
and described by different researchers in order to control plant diseases and 
to maintain balance in the diversity of soil microbiota. 
FIGURE 8.2 Mode of action of the organic matter. 
8.3.1	 COMPETITION OF THE PATHOGEN WITH THE BIO￾CONTROL AGENT 
The beneficial microbes become a competitor for the pathogens for 
nutrients (Chen et al., 1988) and space (Serra-Wittling et al., 1996). Lack 
of nutrients, infection sites, and efficiency in colonizing roots can lead 
to disease suppression, especially in the case of pathogens like Pythium 
and Phytophthora, which are nutrient-dependent (Diánez et al., 2004). As 
mentioned previously, many pathogens infecting tomato crops like Rhizoc￾tonia solani, Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. radicis-lycopersici, Pythium 
ultimum, Pyrenochaeta lycopersici were eliminated in the soil amended by 
composts. The fact that composts are able to control these pathogens is due 
to the percentage increase in the siderophore production by the bio-control 
agents (de Brito-Alvarez et al., 1995). Siderophore are iron-chelating agents 
whose presence depletes the amount of iron required for the germination of 
the pathogen as well as its penetration in the host. Pseudomonas fluorescens  
 
Organic Substrates for Managing Soil Borne Plant Pathogens 195 
is one such bacteria which is capable of producing siderophore inhibit the 
germination of chlamydospore, the resting structure of Fusarium spp. 
(Elad and Baker, 1985). According to a recent report, Pseudomonas spp. 
also help in the growth of the plant without causing any direct effects and 
remain as a competitor for the phytopathogens (Kyselková and Moënne￾Loccoz, 2012). 
8.3.2 PROPERTIES OF COMPOSTS 
Physicochemical properties of the compost are also contributors to carry out 
protection of the crops from various disease-causing pathogens. Composts 
are rich in nutrients and organic compounds like phenolic, humic, or bioac￾tive compounds (Hoitink et al., 1997; Siddiqui et al., 2008; Spatafora and 
Tringali, 2012) which are responsible for providing ISR, toxicity to patho￾gens and advanced nutritional status for self-defense. Mass spectrometry 
(MS) helps in determining the presence of antioxidant and antimicrobial 
compounds along with their chemical composition (Shahat et al., 2011), and 
the presence of volatile organic compounds (Font et al., 2011). 
8.3.3 ANTIBIOSIS TO INHIBIT PATHOGEN GROWTH 
Antibiosis is a process of production of specific or non-specific metabo￾lites, volatile compounds, lytic agents, toxic substances, and enzymes by 
the bio-control agent to inhibit the development of pathogenic microbes 
(Jackson, 1965; Fravel, 1988). Pseudomonas and Bacillus are the two 
important microbe genus that carry out antibiosis by producing antibi￾otics to destroy the phytopathogens. Pseudomonas spp. cause disease 
control of potato scab, take-all disease in wheat, apple replant disease, 
Fusarium wilts (Weller et al., 2002) and also many pathogens infecting 
roots (Haas and Défago, 2005), while Bacillus cereus UW85 control 
diseases caused by oomycetes fungi like Phytophthora, Pythium, etc., 
by producing zwittermicin A and kanosamine (Silo-Suh et al., 1994; 
Milner et al., 1996). Two other bio-control agents from the composts 
are Trichoderma and Gliocladium (Howell et al., 1993) and another 
recently reported Zygosporium masonii which suppressed the anthrac￾nose disease-causing Colletotrichum capsici in bell pepper (Ajith and 
Lakshmidevi, 2012).  
 
 
196 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
8.3.4 COMPOSTS USED TO MIMIC TARGET HOST 
At some instances, pathogens are deceived to proliferate prior to the appear￾ance of the target host by the chemicals signals developed from the shoot 
or root exudates (Chen et al., 1988) of the composts. Usually, most of the 
pathogens are not capable of multiplication without any host other than the 
saprophytes, which even requires a dead medium to survive (Lockwood, 
1990). Composts applied as seed cover or plug substitutes in tomato crops 
gave positive results in suppressing the Fusarium root rot and crown rot 
pathogens (Cheuk et al., 2005). Thus, compost act as a stimulator that trigger 
the pathogen to germinate and proliferate before the growth of the host crop 
due to which crops can escape from the soilborne diseases (Cheuk et al., 
2005) and cause inactivation of the pathogens (Yogev et al., 2006). 
8.3.5 INDUCED RESISTANCE BY BIO-AGENTS 
Induced resistance is of many forms in which SAR and ISR are already devel￾oped in the plants before the infection of the pathogen (Vallad and Goodman, 
2004). The plants having this induced resistance are stated to possess improved 
defensive capacity on stimulation by the presence of a pathogen or PGPR or 
any other bio-control agent (Bakker et al., 2003). Generally, SAR takes place 
in the presence of beneficial microbe, pathogens, or chemicals (Maurhofer 
et al., 1994; Pieterse et al., 1996; De Meyer and Höfte, 1997). Substrates 
amended by the composts possess an immense variety of bioagents that can 
induce systemic resistance in crops (Wei et al., 1991; Liu et al., 1995). Many 
plants growth-promoting bacterial (PGPB) and fungal isolates are found 
capable to induce ISR in crops (van Loon et al., 1998). 
8.3.6 HYPER-PARASITISM CAUSING MYCELIAL LYSIS 
Hyper-parasitism is a process through which a bio-control agent directly 
parasitizes on the pathogen and suffocates them to death (Heydari and Pessa￾rakli, 2010). Generally, the agents imparting pathogenic control through 
hyper-parasitism are mainly classified into four categories, i.e., predators, 
obligate bacterial pathogens, facultative parasites and hypoviruses (Mehta 
et al., 2014). Trichoderma spp. are one of the most important microbes 
using this mechanism to kill pathogens in which, Trichoderma harzianum 
is commonly used to control the mycelial growth of Rhizoctonia solani  
Organic Substrates for Managing Soil Borne Plant Pathogens 197 
(Chet and Baker, 1980). Favorably, this bio-control agent often occurs in 
composts, as reported by the experiments conducted to suppress R. solani 
(Kuter et al., 1983). Many soilborne pathogens like Verticillium, Pythium, 
Rhizoctonia, Sclerotium, Phytophthora, and Sclerotinia are hyper parasitized 
by the bio-control agents through parasitization of their hyphae, mycelium, 
sclerotia or oospores (Diánez et al., 2005). In some cases, multiple hyper￾parasitism also takes place to give a complete control of the pathogens. One 
such example is the control of powdery mildew pathogen by Ampelomyces 
quisqualis, Acremonium alternatum, Cladosporium oxysporum, Gliocladium 
virens and Acrodontium crateriform (Kiss, 2003). Few actinomycetes and 
fungi like Verticillium chlamydosporium, Acremonium spp. and Humicola 
fuscoatra are found capable of parasitizing oospores of Phytophthora apsici 
which infects crops of Solanaceae, Cucurbitaceae, and Fabaceae families 
(Sutherland and Papavizas, 2008). 
8.4	 ENHANCED EFFECT OF ORGANIC AMENDMENTS IN 
COMBINATION WITH OTHER AGRICULTURAL PRACTICES 
The organic amendments have shown their efficacy in preventing disease 
incidence through various physical, chemical, and biological activities, but 
their outcome is slower compared to that of biofumigants and fungicides. 
Apart from this, these organic matters have a very advantageous factor that 
they give cumulative effects and are long-lasting. Merging of organic amend￾ments with various agricultural practices like soil solarization, soil flooding, 
etc., is also being significantly used in the existing farming community. 
Organic matter along with tarping is another treatment conducted to check 
the increase or decrease in the anti-fungal activity of them (Blok et al., 
2000). There was a significant inactivation in the inoculums of Rhizoctonia 
solani, Verticillium dahliae and Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. asparagi in the 
plots amended with organic matter and covered with plastic sheets (Blok 
et al., 2000). Here the amended materials were broccoli and grass, which 
contributed in inactivating the survival structures of the pathogen along with 
the rise in soil temperature due to the plastic sheet covering. The covered 
plots also facilitated anaerobic conditions for the soil microflora to activate 
their efficiency in parasitizing phytopathogens. 
However, the temperature increases in the soil in covered plots treatment 
amended with plant material, have well contributed to pathogen inactivation 
by devitalizing the structures of pathogen meant for perpetuation. It was also 
noticed that the pathogen propagules were devitalized when many of the 198 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
phytopathogens were exposed to sub-lethal temperatures (DeVay and Katan, 
1991). The covered plots developed anaerobic conditions readily, regardless 
of incorporation of organic amendment. Diffusion of oxygen from adjacent 
no covered soil, several oxidative processes and consumption of these by soil 
microbiota contributed in increasing the concentration of the latter in soil 
atmosphere. The glucosinolates present in the cruciferous crops are the volatile 
product that is responsible for the inactivation of the survival structures of the 
fungus (Lewis and Papavizas, 1971; Muehlchen et al., 1990; Kirkegaard et 
al., 1996; Smolinska et al., 1997; Subbarao et al., 1999). These volatiles can 
be trapped by the plastic sheets under the covered plots, thus contributing 
to the anti-fungal activity (Blok et al., 2000). The role of fermentation 
products has also reported in inactivating the pathogen propagules. There 
was a reduction in the concentration of propagules of Fusarium oxysporum 
f. sp. conglutinans (Mitchell and Alexander, 1962), Pyrenochaet aterrestris 
(Watson, 1964), Verticillium dahliae (Menzies, 1962; Watson, 1964) and 
Fusarium spp. (Watson, 1964) when easily metabolizable organic materials 
were incorporated into flooded soil. The accumulation of several compounds 
like carbon dioxide, methane, hydrogen, ethylene, alcohol, aldehydes, and 
organic acids temporarily was examined in reducing soil conditions and found 
that these products are having fungi toxic effect which helps to inactivate the 
phytopathogens (Ponnamperuma, 1972). Few antibiotic and toxin producers 
like Bacillus spp. and Clostridium spp. are the anaerobic microorganisms 
which can also contribute in pathogen inactivation. 
For controlling soil enduring pathogens, researchers have adopted many 
other methods keeping in consideration, anaerobic soil disinfestation (ASD) 
as their basic strategy. This approach has been carried out in different soil 
types, regions, and crop species along with various inputs considering the 
target pathogen (Rosskopf et al., 2015). It includes agricultural practices like 
application of carbon source, irrigating the field according to its optimum 
level and providing plastic tarp covering for the soil (Strauss and Kluepfel, 
2015). These practices can bring about changes in the total number of 
beneficial organisms residing in the soil and their composition, cause avail￾ability of volatile organic compounds and create anaerobic conditions that 
can bring in lethal effect. It causes disease suppression through biological 
control and oxygen depletion, suffocating the phytopathogenic microbes 
(Rosskopf et al., 2015). The carbon sources, plastic tarps, increased soil 
temperature and anaerobic conditions can create a favorable environment 
for controlling diseases and suppressing phytopathogens. Soil solarization, 
though not essential, is found to enhance the efficiency of ASD. With effect 
to environmental conditions, carbon sources like rice bran (dry formulation)  
Organic Substrates for Managing Soil Borne Plant Pathogens 199 
and ethanol (liquid formulation) are found extensively used. Application of 
ASD with rice bran, gave successful results in controlling the incidence of 
Macrophomina phaseolina causing charcoal rot in California strawberry 
(Muramoto et al., 2016). The experiment was also carried out with mustard 
seed meal (MSM) alone and with MSM along with ASD-rice bran, in which 
the latter gave intermediate effect while MSM failed in suppressing the 
pathogen. Further, Brassica seed meal amended soil has also shown suppres￾sion of Macrophomina phaseolina in the orchard and also prevented the 
recurrence of soilborne pathogens (Mazzola et al., 2016). It also resisted 
the re-infestation of Pratylenchus penetrans, a plant-parasitic nematode. It 
is more convincing to use these ASD strategies in areas where soil solariza￾tion is not possible and fumigant buffer zones, facilitating the enrichment of 
organic matter in soil (Rosskopf et al., 2015). Despite of providing enriched 
soil microbial community and disease suppression, the ASD technique shows 
its effect even after the first cropping system, preventing the recurrence of 
soilborne pathogens and nematodes (Rosskopf et al., 2015). 
The outcome of applying solarization process and pig slurry to the soil 
microorganisms and field plots of potato crop was examined to control 
the amount of inoculums of Ralstonia solanacearum biovar 2 strain 1609 
(Gorissen et al., 2004). Initially, the untreated soil was analyzed based on the 
suppressiveness assays, which depicted a slow reduction in the inoculum of 
the pathogen in about 9 weeks duration from 106
–107
 to 103
–104
 CFU (g dry 
soil)–1. According to immunofluorescence colony staining and polymerase 
chain reaction (PCR), wilting, and sign of the pathogen was recognized in 
the lower part of the stem of most of the potato crops grown in untreated 
soil. The application of pig slurry and solarization of the soil were carried out 
separately in which both the techniques brought about sufficient reduction 
in the amount of the pathogen inoculum, but solarization alone appeared 
to be incapable of improving the soil suppressiveness. But by combining 
both methods, enhanced results were obtained. The latent existence of the 
pathogen in the lower parts of the stem was confirmed in the healthy-looking 
crops which were subjected to pig slurry and solarization treatments. More￾over, pig slurry is efficient in changing the bacterial community structure in 
the treated soil ensuring disease suppressiveness. 
8.5 CONCLUSION 
In viewing the various environmental issues and consequences which are 
facing in this era, we must realize that the unlimited and unconditional 200 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
utilization of the synthetic products can only contribute to the immediate 
results. As discussed in this chapter as well as in many previous reports, the 
organic matters and other eco-friendly agricultural practices have the effi￾cacy in reducing diseases and pest incidence and maintaining soil health and 
growth of the plant for long term results though they show a slower rate of 
action. With further research and innovations, the exceptional ability of these 
organic materials will be revealed, and their use for management of soilborne 
diseases will expand. Thus, it is the responsibility of every living being that, 
they ensure the protection and conservation of nature and its products and 
make sustainable utilization with respect to the future generation. 
KEYWORDS 
• bio-control 
• composts 
• hyper parasitism 
• induced resistance 
• manure
 
• organic matter
 
• phytopathogenic 
• proliferation 
• seed cakes 
• s-h mixture 
• slurry 
• suppression 
REFERENCES 
Abawi, G. S., & Widmer, T. L., (2000). Impact of soil health management practices on soilborne 
pathogens, nematodes and root diseases of vegetable crops. Applied Soil Ecology, 15(1), 
37–47. 
Ajith, P. S., & Lakshmidevi, N., (2012). Zygosporium masonii: A new fungal antagonist against 
Colletotrichum capsici incitant of anthracnose on bellpeppers. Journal of Agricultural 
Technology, 8(3), 931–939. 
Akhtar, M., & Malik, A., (2000). Roles of organic soil amendments and soil organisms in the 
biological control of plant-parasitic nematodes: A review. Bioresource Technology, 74(1), 
35–47. Organic Substrates for Managing Soil Borne Plant Pathogens 201 
Anith, K. N., Momol, M. T., Kloepper, J. W., Marois, J. J., Olson, S. M., & Jones, J. B., 
(2004). Efficacy of plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria, acibenzolar-S-methyl, and soil 
amendment for integrated management of bacterial wilt on tomato. Plant Disease, 88(6), 
669–673. 
Bailey, K. L., & Lazarovits, G., (2003). Suppressing soilborne diseases with residue 
management and organic amendments. Soil and Tillage Research, 72(2), 169–180. 
Bakker, P. A. H. M., Ran, L. X., Pieterse, C. M. J., & Van, L. L. C., (2003). Understanding the 
involvement of rhizobacteria-mediated induction of systemic resistance in biocontrol of 
plant diseases. Canadian Journal of Plant Pathology, 25(1), 5–9. 
Blok, W. J., Lamers, J. G., Termorshuizen, A. J., & Bollen, G. J., (2000). Control of soilborne 
plant pathogens by incorporating fresh organic amendments followed by tarping. 
Phytopathology, 90(3), 253–259. 
Bollen, G. J., Volker, D., & Wijnen, A. P., (1989). Inactivation of soilborne plant pathogens 
during small-scale composting of crop residues. Netherlands Journal of Plant Pathology, 
95(1), 19–30. 
Bonanomi, G., Giorgi, V., Neri, D., & Scala, F., (2006). Olive mill residues affect saprophytic 
growth and disease incidence of foliar and soilborne plant fungal pathogens. Agriculture, 
Ecosystems and Environment, 115(1–4), 194–200. 
Borrero, C., Trillas, M. I., Ordovás, J., Tello, J. C., & Avilés, M., (2004). Predictive factors 
for the suppression of Fusarium wilt of tomato in plant growth media. Phytopathology, 
94(10), 1094–1101. 
Cao, Y., Chang, Z., Wang, J., Ma, Y., Yang, H., & Fu, G., (2014). Potential use of anaerobically 
digested manure slurry to suppress Phytophthora root rot of chilli pepper. Scientia 
Horticulturae, 168, 124–131. 
Capasso, R., Evidente, A., Schivo, L., Orru, G. E. R. M. A. N. O., Marcialis, M. A., & 
Cristinzio, G., (1995). Antibacterial polyphenols from olive oil mill wastewaters. Journal 
of Applied Bacteriology, 79(4), 393–398. 
Chang, M. L., & Hsu, S. T., (1988). Suppression of bacterial wilt of tomato by soil amendments. 
Plant Prot. Bull. 30, 349–359. 
Chen, W., Hoitink, H. A. J., & Madden, L. V., (1988). Microbial activity and biomass in 
container media for predicting suppressiveness to damping-off caused by Pythium 
ultimum. Phytopathology, 78(11), 1447–1450. 
Chet, I., & Baker, R., (1980). Induction of suppressiveness to Rhizoctonia solani in soil. 
Phytopathology, 70(10), 994–998. 
Cheuk, W., Lo, K. V., Copeman, R., Joliffe, P., & Fraser, B. S., (2005). Disease suppression on 
greenhouse tomatoes using plant waste compost. Journal of Environmental Science and 
Health, Part B, 40(3), 449–461. 
Conn, K. L., & Lazarovits, G., (1999). Impact of animal manures on verticillium wilt, potato 
scab, and soil microbial populations. Canadian Journal of Plant Pathology, 21(1), 81–92. 
Conn, K. L., & Lazarovits, G., (2000). Soil factors influencing the efficacy of liquid swine 
manure added to soil to kill Verticillium dahliae. Canadian Journal of Plant Pathology, 
22(4), 400–406. 
Cook, R. J., (1986). Plant health and the sustainability of agriculture, with special reference to 
disease control by beneficial microorganisms. Biological Agriculture and Horticulture, 
3(2, 3), 211–232. 
Cook, R. J., (1990). Twenty-five years of progress towards biological control. Biological 
Control of Soilborne Plant Pathogens, 1–14. 202 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
Cotxarrera, L., Trillas-Gay, M. I., Steinberg, C., & Alabouvette, C., (2002). Use of sewage 
sludge compost and Trichoderma asperellum isolates to suppress Fusarium wilt of 
tomato. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 34(4), 467–476. 
Davey, C. B., (1997). Nursery Soil Management-Organic Amendments (pp. 6–18). United 
States Department of Agriculture Forest Service General Technical Report, PNW. 
Davis, J. R., Huisman, O. C., Everson, D. O., & Schneider, A. T., (2001). Verticillium wilt of 
potato: A model of key factors related to disease severity and tuber yield in southeastern 
Idaho. American Journal of Potato Research, 78(4), 291. 
Davis, J. R., Huisman, O. C., Westermann, D. T., Hafez, S. L., Everson, D. O., Sorensen, L. 
H., & Schneider, A. T., (1996). Effects of green manures on Verticillium wilt of potato. 
Phytopathology, 86(5), 444–453. 
De Brito, A. M., Gagne, S., & Antoun, H., (1995). Effect of compost on rhizosphere microflora 
of the tomato and on the incidence of plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria. Applied and 
Environmental Microbiology, 61(1), 194–199. 
De Meyer, G., & Höfte, M., (1997). Salicylic acid produced by the rhizobacterium Pseudo￾monas aeruginosa 7NSK2 induces resistance to leaf infection by Botrytis cinerea on 
bean. Phytopathology, 87(6), 588–593. 
DeVay, J. E., & Katan, J., (1991). Mechanisms of pathogen control in solarized soils. Soil 
Solarization, 87–102. 
DeVleeschauwer, D., Verdonck, O., & Van Assche, P., (1981) Phytotoxicity of refuse compost. 
Biocycle, 22, 44. 
Diánez, F., Santos, M., & Tello, J. C., (2004). Suppression of soilborne pathogens by 
compost: Suppressive effects of grape marc compost on phytopathogenic oomycetes. In: 
International Symposium on Soilless Culture and Hydroponics (Vol. 697, pp. 441–460). 
Dissanayake, N., & Hoy, J. W., (1999). Organic material soil amendment effects on root 
rot and sugarcane growth and characterization of the materials. Plant Disease, 83(11), 
1039–1046. 
Edwards, J. H., & Someshwar, A. V., (2000). Chemical, physical, and biological characteristics 
of agricultural and forest by-products for land application. Land Application of 
Agricultural, Industrial and Municipal By-products, 6, 1–62. 
Erhart, E., Burian, K., Hartl, W., & Stich, K., (1999). Suppression of Pythium ultimum by 
biowaste composts in relation to compost microbial biomass, activity and content of 
phenolic compounds. Journal of Phytopathology, 147(5), 299–305. 
Font, X., Artola, A., & Sánchez, A., (2011). Detection, composition and treatment of volatile 
organic compounds from waste treatment plants. Sensors, 11(4), 4043–4059. 
Fravel, D. R., (1988). Role of antibiosis in the biocontrol of plant diseases. Annual Review of 
Phytopathology, 26(1), 75–91. 
Fuchs, J. G., (2002). Practical use of quality compost for plant health and vitality improvement. 
In: Microbiology of Composting (pp. 435–444). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg. 
Gamliel, A., Austerweil, M., & Kritzman, G., (2000). Non-chemical approach to soilborne 
pest management-organic amendments. Crop Protection, 19(8–10), 847–853. 
Gilpatrick, J. D., (1969). Role of ammonia in the control of avocado root rot with alfalfa meal 
soil amendment. Phytopathology, 59, 973–978. 
Gorissen, A., Van, O. L. S., & Van, E. J. D., (2004). Pig slurry reduces the survival of Ralstonia 
solanacearum biovar 2 in soil. Canadian Journal of Microbiology, 50(8), 587–593. 
Haas, D., & Défago, G., (2005). Biological control of soilborne pathogens by fluorescent 
Pseudomonas. Nature Reviews Microbiology, 3(4), 307–319. Organic Substrates for Managing Soil Borne Plant Pathogens 203 
Hadar, Y., & Mandelbaum, R., (1992). Suppressive compost for biocontrol of soilborne plant 
pathogens. Phytoparasitica, 20(1), S113–S116. 
Hadar, Y., Mandelbaum, R., & Gorodecki, B., (1992). Biological control of soilborne plant 
pathogens by suppressive compost. In: Biological Control of Plant Diseases (pp. 79–83). 
Springer, Boston, MA. 
Hawke, M. A., & Lazarovits, G., (1994). Production and manipulation of individual 
microsclerotia of Verticillium dahliae for use in studies of survival. Phytopathology. 
Heydari, A., & Pessarakli, M., (2010). A review on biological control of fungal plant pathogens 
using microbial antagonists. Journal of Biological Sciences, 10(4), 273–290. 
Hoitink, H. A. J., & Boehm, M. J., (1999). Biocontrol within the context of soil microbial 
communities: A substrate-dependent phenomenon. Annual Review of Phytopathology, 
37(1), 427–446. 
Hoitink, H. A. J., (1993). Mechanisms of suppression of soilborne plant pathogens in compost 
amended substrates. Science and Engineering of Composting: Design, Environmental, 
Microbiological and Utilization Aspects, pp. 601–621. 
Hoitink, H. A. J., Stone, A. G., & Han, D. Y., (1997). Suppression of plant diseases by composts. 
HortScience, 32(2), 184–187. 
Howell, C. R., Stipanovic, R. D., & Lumsden, R. D., (1993). Antibiotic production by strains 
of Gliocladium virens and its relation to the biocontrol of cotton seedling diseases. 
Biocontrol Science and Technology, 3(4), 435–441. 
Huang, H. C., & Huang, J. W., (1993). Prospects for control of soilborne plant pathogens by 
soil amendment. Current Topics in Botanical Research, 1, 223–235. 
Huber, D. M., & Watson, R. D., (1970). Effect of organic amendment on soilborne plant 
pathogens. Phytopathology, 60(1), 22–26. 
Jackson, R. M., (1965). Antibiosis and fungi stasis of soil microorganisms. In: Baker, K. F., & 
Snyder, W. C., (eds.), Ecology of Soilborne Plant Pathogens. 
Keener, H. M., Dick, W. A., & Hoitink, H. A., (2000). Composting and beneficial utilization 
of composted by-product materials. Land Application of Agricultural, Industrial and 
Municipal By-products, 6, 315–341. 
Kirkegaard, J. A., Wong, P. T. W., & Desmarchelier, J. M., (1996). In vitro suppression of 
fungal root pathogens of cereals by Brassica tissues. Plant Pathology, 45(3), 593–603. 
Kiss, L., (2003). A review of fungal antagonists of powdery mildews and their potential 
as biocontrol agents. Pest Management Science: Formerly Pesticide Science, 59(4), 
475–483. 
Kuter, G. A., Nelson, E. B., Hoitink, H. A. J., & Madden, L. V., (1983). Fungal populations in 
container media amended with composted hardwood bark suppressive and conducive to 
Rhizoctonia damping-off. Phytopathology, 73(10), 1450–1456. 
Kyselková, M., & Moënne-Loccoz, Y., (2012). Pseudomonas and other microbes in disease￾suppressive soils. In: Organic Fertilisation, Soil Quality and Human Health (pp. 93–140). 
Springer, Dordrecht. 
Lazarovits, G., Conn, K. L., & Potter, J., (1999). Reduction of potato scab, Verticillium 
wilt, and nematodes by soymeal and meat and bone meal in two Ontario potato fields. 
Canadian Journal of Plant Pathology, 21(4), 345–353. 
Lazarovits, G., Conn, K. L., Abbasi, P. A., & Tenuta, M., (2005). Understanding the mode 
of action of organic soil amendments provides the way for improved management of 
soilborne plant pathogens. Acta Horticulturae, 698, 215. 204 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
Lazarovits, G., Tenuta, M., & Conn, K. L., (2001). Organic amendments as a disease control 
strategy for soilborne diseases of high-value agricultural crops. Australasian Plant 
Pathology, 30(2), 111–117. 
Lewis, J. A., & Papavizas, G. C., (1971). Effect of sulfur-containing volatile compounds and 
vapors from cabbage decomposition on Aphanomyces euteiches. Phytopathology, 61, 
208–214. 
Liu, L., Kloepper, J. W., & Tuzun, S., (1995). Induction of systemic resistance in cucumber by 
plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria: Duration of protection and effect of host resistance 
on protection and root colonization. Phytopathology, 85(10), 1064–1068. 
Lockwood, J. L., (1990). Relation of energy stress to behavior of soilborne plant pathogens 
and to disease development. Biological Control of Soilborne Plant Pathogens, 197–214. 
Löffler, H. J. M., Cohen, E. B., Oolbekkink, G. T., & Schippers, B., (1986). Nitrite as a factor 
in the decline of Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. dianthi in soil supplemented with urea or 
ammonium chloride. Netherlands Journal of Plant Pathology, 92(4), 153–162. 
Lumsden, R. D., Lewis, J. A., & Millner, P. D., (1983). Effect of composted sewage sludge on 
several soilborne pathogens and diseases. Phytopathology, 73(11), 1543–1548. 
Lumsden, R. D., Millner, P. D., & Lewis, J. A., (1986). Suppression of lettuce drop caused by 
Sclerotinia minor with composted sewage sludge. Plant Disease, 70(3), 197–201. 
Lynch, J. M., (1977). Phytotoxicity of acetic acid produced in the anaerobic decomposition of 
wheat straw. Journal of Applied Bacteriology, 42(1), 81–87. 
Lynch, J. M., (1978). Production and phytotoxicity of acetic acid in anaerobic soils containing 
plant residues. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 10(2), 131–135. 
Mathre, D. E., Cook, R. J., & Callan, N. W., (1999). From discovery to use: Traversing the world of 
commercializing biocontrol agents for plant disease control. Plant Disease, 83(11), 972–983. 
Maurhofer, M., Hase, C., Meuwly, P., Metraux, J. P., & Defago, G., (1994). Induction of systemic 
resistance of tobacco-to-tobacco necrosis virus by the root-colonizing Pseudomonas fluo￾rescens strain CHA0: Influence of the gacA gene and of pyoverdine production. Phytopa￾thology, 84, 139–146. 
Mazzola, M., Hewavitharana, S. S., Strauss, S. L., Shennan, C., & Muramoto, J., (2016). 
Anaerobic soil disinfestation and Brassica seed meal amendment alter soil microbiology 
and system resistance. International Journal of Fruit Science, 16(S1), 47–58. 
Menzies, J. D., (1962). Effect of anaerobic fermentation in soil on survival of sclerotia of 
Verticillium dahliae. Phytopathology, 52(8), 743. 
Mian, I. H., & Rodriguez-Kabana, R., (1982). Survey of the nematicidal properties of some 
organic materials available in Alabama as amendments to soil for control of Meloidogyne 
arenaria. Nematropica, 235–246. 
Michel, V. V., & Mew, T. W., (1998). Effect of a soil amendment on the survival of Ralstonia 
solanacearum in different soils. Phytopathology, 88(4), 300–305. 
Milner, J. L., Silo-Suh, L., Lee, J. C., He, H., Clardy, J., & Handelsman, J. O., (1996). 
Production of kanosamine by Bacillus cereus UW85. Applied and Environmental 
Microbiology, 62(8), 3061–3065. 
Mitchell, R., & Alexander, M., (1962). Microbiological changes in flooded soils. Soil Science, 
93(6), 413–419. 
Muehlchen, A. M., Rand, R. E., & Parke, J. L., (1990). Evaluation of crucifer green manures 
for controlling Aphanomyces root rot of peas. Plant Disease, 74(9), 651–654. 
Muramoto, J., Shennan, C., Zavatta, M., Baird, G., Toyama, L., & Mazzola, M., (2016). 
Effect of anaerobic soil disinfestation and mustard seed meal for control of charcoal rot 
in California strawberries. International Journal of Fruit Science, 16(S1), 59–70. Organic Substrates for Managing Soil Borne Plant Pathogens 205 
Paredes, C., Cegarra, J., Roig, A., Sánchez-Monedero, M. A., & Bernal, M. P., (1999). 
Characterization of olive mill wastewater (alpechin) and its sludge for agricultural 
purposes. Bioresource Technology, 67(2), 111–115. 
Pieterse, C. M., Van, W. S. C., Hoffland, E., Van, P. J. A., & Van, L. L. C., (1996). Systemic 
resistance in Arabidopsis induced by biocontrol bacteria is independent of salicylic acid 
accumulation and pathogenesis-related gene expression. The Plant Cell, 8(8), 1225–1237. 
Pitt, D., Tilston, E. L., & Groenhof, A. C., (1997). Recycled organic materials (ROM) in the 
control of plant disease. International Symposium on Composting and Use of Composted 
Material in Horticulture, 469, 391–404. 
Ponnamperuma, F. N., (1972). The chemistry of submerged soils. Advances in Agronomy, 24, 
29–96. 
Pugliese, M., Liu, B. P., Gullino, M. L., & Garibaldi, A., (2008). Selection of antagonists 
from compost to control soilborne pathogens. Journal of Plant Diseases and Protection, 
115(5), 220–228. 
Raaijmakers, J. M., & Weller, D. M., (1998). Natural plant protection by 2,4-diacetylphloro￾glucinol-producing Pseudomonas spp. in take-all decline soils. Molecular Plant-Microbe 
Interactions, 11(2), 144–152. 
Rodriguez-Kabana, R., Boube, D., & Young, R. W., (1989). Chitinous materials from blue crab 
for control of root-knot nematode. I. Effect of urea and enzymatic studies. Nematropica, 
53–74. 
Rosskopf, E. N., Serrano-Pérez, P., Hong, J., Shrestha, U., Rodríguez-Molina, M. D. C., Martin, 
K., & Butler, D., (2015). Anaerobic soil disinfestation and soilborne pest management. 
In: Organic Amendments and Soil Suppressiveness in Plant Disease Management (pp. 
277–305). Springer, Cham. 
Ryckeboer, J., (2001). Biowaste and Yard Waste Composts: Microbiological and Hygienic 
Aspects-Suppressiveness to Plant Diseases (p. 278). Leuven, Belgium: Katholieke 
Universiteit Leuven (Doctoral Dissertation). 
Schüler, C., Pikny, J., Nasir, M., & Vogtmann, H., (1993). Effects of composted organic 
kitchen and garden waste on Mycosphaerella pinodes (Berk, et Blox) vestergr., causal 
organism of footrot on peas (Pisum sativum L.). Biological Agriculture and Horticulture, 
9(4), 353–360. 
Serra-Wittling, C., Houot, S., & Alabouvette, C., (1996). Increased soil suppressiveness to 
Fusarium wilt of flax after addition of municipal solid waste compost. Soil Biology and 
Biochemistry, 28(9), 1207–1214. 
Shahat, A. A., Ibrahim, A. Y., Hendawy, S. F., Omer, E. A., Hammouda, F. M., Abdel-Rahman, 
F. H., & Saleh, M. A., (2011). Chemical composition, antimicrobial and antioxidant 
activities of essential oils from organically cultivated fennel cultivars. Molecules, 16(2), 
1366–1377. 
Shiau, F. L., Chung, W. C., Huang, J. W., & Huang, H. C., (1999). Organic amendment of 
commercial culture media for improving control of Rhizoctonia damping-off of cabbage. 
Canadian Journal of Plant Pathology, 21(4), 368–374. 
Siddiqui, Y., Meon, S., Ismail, M. R., & Ali, A., (2008). Trichoderma-fortified compost 
extracts for the control of Choanephora wet rot in okra production. Crop Protection, 
27(3–5), 385–390. 
Silo-Suh, L. A., Lethbridge, B. J., Raffel, S. J., He, H., Clardy, J., & Handelsman, J., (1994). 
Biological activities of two fungistatic antibiotics produced by Bacillus cereus UW85. 
Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 60(6), 2023–2030. 206 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
Smolinska, U., Morra, M. J., Knudsen, G. R., & Brown, P. D., (1997). Toxicity of glucosinolate 
degradation products from Brassica napus seed meal toward Aphanomyces euteiches f. 
sp. pisi. Phytopathology, 87(1), 77–82. 
Spatafora, C., & Tringali, C., (2012). Valorization of vegetable waste: Identification of bioactive 
compounds and their chemo-enzymatic optimization. The Open Agriculture Journal, 6(1). 
Strauss, S. L., & Kluepfel, D. A., (2015). Anaerobic soil disinfestation: A chemical￾independent approach to pre-plant control of plant pathogens. Journal of Integrative 
Agriculture, 14(11), 2309–2318. 
Subbarao, K. V., Hubbard, J. C., & Koike, S. T., (1999). Evaluation of broccoli residue incorpora￾tion into field soil for Verticillium wilt control in cauliflower. Plant Disease, 83(2), 124–129. 
Sutherland, E. D., & Papavizas, G. C., (1991). Evaluation of oospore hyperparasites for the 
control of Phytophthora crown rot of pepper. Journal of Phytopathology, 131(1), 33–39. 
Tenuta, M., & Lazarovits, G., (2002). Ammonia and nitrous acid from nitrogenous amendments 
kill the microsclerotia of Verticillium dahliae. Phytopathology, 92(3), 255–264. 
Tenuta, M., Conn, K. L., & Lazarovits, G., (2002). Volatile fatty acids in liquid swine manure 
can kill microsclerotia of Verticillium dahliae. Phytopathology, 92(5), 548–552. 
Tilston, E. L., Pitt, D., & Groenhof, A. C., (2002). Composted recycled organic matter 
suppresses soilborne diseases of field crops. New Phytologist, 154(3), 731–740. 
Tsao, P. H., & Oster, J. J., (1981). Relation of ammonia and nitrous acid to suppression of Phytoph￾thora in soils amended with nitrogenous organic substances. Phytopathology, 71(1), 53–59. 
Tuitert, G., & Bollen, G. J., (1996). The effect of composted vegetable, fruit and garden 
waste on the incidence of soilborne plant diseases. In: The Science of Composting (pp. 
1365–1369). Springer, Dordrecht. 
Vallad, G. E., & Goodman, R. M., (2004). Systemic acquired resistance and induced systemic 
resistance in conventional agriculture. Crop Science, 44(6), 1920–1934. 
Van, B. A. H., (1995). Plant disease severity in high-input compared to reduced-input and 
organic farming systems. Plant Disease, 79(10), 976–984. 
Van, L. L. C., Bakker, P. A. H. M., & Pieterse, C. M. J., (1998). Systemic resistance induced 
by rhizosphere bacteria. Annual Review of Phytopathology, 36(1), 453–483. 
Watson, R. D., (1964). Eradication of soil fungi by a combination of crop residue flooding and 
anaerobic fermentation. Phytopathology, 54(12), 1437. 
Wei, G., Kloepper, J. W., & Tuzun, S., (1991). Induction of systemic resistance of cucumber 
to Colletotrichum orbiculare by select strains of plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria. 
Phytopathology, 81(11), 1508–1512. 
Wei, Z., Yang, X., Yin, S., Shen, Q., Ran, W., & Xu, Y., (2011). Efficacy of Bacillus-fortified 
organic fertilizer in controlling bacterial wilt of tomato in the field. Applied Soil Ecology, 
48(2), 152–159. 
Weller, D. M., Raaijmakers, J. M., Gardener, B. B. M., & Thomashow, L. S., (2002). Microbial 
populations responsible for specific soil suppressiveness to plant pathogens. Annual 
Review of Phytopathology, 40(1), 309–348. 
Wilhelm, S., (1951). Effect of various soil amendments on the inoculum potential of the 
Verticillium wilt fungus. Phytopathology, 41(8), 684–690. 
Yogev, A., Raviv, M., Hadar, Y., Cohen, R., & Katan, J., (2006). Plant waste-based composts 
suppressive to diseases caused by pathogenic Fusarium oxysporum. European Journal of 
Plant Pathology, 116(4), 267–278.  
 
CHAPTER 9
 
ORGANIC FARMING IMPROVES SOIL 
HEALTH SUSTAINABILITY AND CROP 
PRODUCTIVITY 
ABDEL RAHMAN M. AL-TAWAHA,1
 ELIF GÜNAL,2 İSMAIL ÇELIK,3 
HIKMET GÜNAL,2
 ABDULKADIR SÜRÜCÜ,4 
ABDEL RAZZAQ M. AL-TAWAHA,5
 ALLA ALEKSANYAN,6 
DEVARAJAN THANGADURAI,7
 and JEYABALAN SANGEETHA8 
1
Department of Biological Sciences, Al-Hussein Bin Talal University, 
P.O. Box 20, Maan, Jordan 
2
Gaziosmanpaşa University, Faculty of Agriculture, 

Department of Soil Science and Plant Nutrition, Tokat, Turkey
 
3
Çukurova University, Faculty of Agriculture, 

Department of Soil Science and Plant Nutrition, Adana, Turkey
 
4
Harran University, Faculty of Agriculture, 

Department of Soil Science and Plant Nutrition, Şanliurfa, Turkey
 
5
Department of Crop Science, Faculty of Agriculture, 

University Putra Malaysia, Serdang–43400, Selangor, Malaysia
 
6
Institute of Botany aft. A.L. Takhtajyan NAS RA/Department of 

Geobotany and Plant Eco-Physiology, Yerevan, Armenia
 
7
Department of Botany, Karnatak University, Dharwad–580003, 

Karnataka, India
 
8
Department of Environmental Science, Central University of Kerala, 

Kasaragod–671316, Kerala, India
  
208 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
ABSTRACT 
Organic farming increases soil sustainability and crop production. Demands 
for healthy food and a sustainable environment have increased interest in 
alternative conservative production systems and led to the introduction of 
the concept of organic farming. Plants are continually dealing with increas￾ingly evolving and potentially harmful external environmental factors. 
Organic farming is very important to protect the environment, minimize soil 
degradation and erosion, reduce pollution, optimize biological productivity, 
and promote a healthy state of health. Soil quality and fertility are a concern 
today to boost the sustainability of our agricultural system. Soil fertility is 
more important than the supply of macro and micronutrients to plants in 
organic farming systems (OFSs). Effective management of fertility takes 
into account plant, soil organic matter (SOM), and soil biology. This chapter 
focuses on: (i) impact of organic farming on physical properties of soils; (ii) 
status of organic farming; (iii) impact of organic farming on plant growth 
and yield. 
9.1 INTRODUCTION 
The growth of many plants is affected by many environmental factors that 
affect in more than one way the physiological and morphological changes of 
the plant (Hayyawi et al., 2018; Amanullah et al., 2019; Hani et al., 2019; 
Aludatt et al., 2019). Organic farming is a plant and animal production process 
that requires far more than opting not to use pesticides, fertilizers, GMOs, 
antibiotics, and growth hormones. In organic farming systems (OFSs), soil 
fertility means more than providing macro and micronutrients to plants. In 
organic farming, providing mineral nutrients are considered very key factor 
that limits plant biomass and productivity in many ecosystems (Turk et al., 
2003a–c; Nikus et al., 2004a, b; Tawaha and Turk, 2004; Turk and Tawaha, 
2004). Also, the effective fertility management considers plant, soil organic 
matter (SOM) and soil biology. Organic production is a comprehensive 
method designed to maximize the efficiency and health within the agroeco￾system of different populations, including soil species, plants, livestock, and 
humans. The key aim of organic production is the creation of sustainable 
enterprises in accordance with the climate. Many researchers (Al-Kiyyam 
et al., 2008; Al-Ajlouni et al., 2009; Al-Tawaha et al., 2010) reported about 
general principles for organic production:  
Organic Farming for Soil Health and Crop Productivity 209 
•	 Environmental protection, reduces soil degradation, reduces pollution, 
improves biological productivity, and promotes good health of the soil; 
•	 Maintaining long term soil fertility by enhancing soil biological activity; 
•	 Preserving the system’s biodiversity; 
•	 Provide care that promotes health and meets livestock behavioral 
needs; and 
•	 Preparation of organic products, stressing preparation procedures and 
thorough handling to protect the biological integrity and essential 
characteristics of products at all stages of production. 
9.2 STATUS OF ORGANIC FARMING 
Soil health and fertility is a matter of concern these days to make our agricultural 
system more sustainable (Al-Tawaha et al., 2005; Lee et al., 2005; Sulpanjan et 
al., 2005). On the other hand, adequate plant nutrition is essential for commer￾cial crop production (Amanullah et al., 2019a, b; Hani et al., 2019; Rajendran 
et al., 2019). For OFSs, soil fertility requires more than supplying macro and 
micronutrients to plants. Good fertility management takes plant, SOM, and soil 
biology into consideration. Ideally OFSs are planned to increase soil fertility so 
as to achieve multiple goals such as preserving and, if necessary, enhancing the 
soil’s physical condition such that the soil maintains healthy plants and living 
organisms in the soil and has the capacity to withstand and recover from stress 
such as flooding or violent tillage; maintaining the soil’s buffering capacity to 
reduce the deterioration of the environment caused by soil loss or the inability 
of the OFSs are designed to keep nutrients in organic reservoirs or bioavailable 
forms of minerals, rather than simply supplying nutrients through frequent 
fertilizer additions. This is accomplished as nutrients flow through organic 
reservoirs. Soil fertility is increased by organic matter control and not by input 
substitution (Tawaha et al., 2005; Yang et al., 2005; Assaf et al., 2006; Turk 
et al., 2006). Regardless of the most human food requirement the agriculture 
plays a vital role in human life. Traditional agriculture’s main objective was 
to achieve maximum productivity from a unit of agricultural land, and these 
farming methods are distinguished by a high degree of crop specialization and 
intensive land, labor-work, and capital contributions per unit of soil. Extensive 
use of natural resources in traditional agriculture has caused problems such 
as soil, water, and air contamination, food residues of agricultural chemicals, 
increased depletion of natural resources and, consequently, increased social 
cost of production. The transition to organic farming is described as one of the 
best strategies for achieving sustainable management of the agri-environment  
210 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
at national and international level. Organic agriculture is getting more and 
more relevant for agriculture and agro-industry in many developed and devel￾oping countries, due to public knowledge of the environment and health, and 
the negative effects of conventional agriculture (Rehber and Turhan, 2002). 
Organic farming is a modern method of processing in which agricultural pesti￾cides, concentrated feed and additives are avoided or eliminated from the farm 
completely. Organic activities rely on crop rotation, crop residues, compost, 
legumes, green manures (GMs), organic off-farm waste, mechanical agricul￾ture, mineral rocks, and techniques for pest control (Lampkin and Padel, 1994; 
Hameed et al., 2008; Al-Tawaha et al., 2010, 2017; Ananthi et al., 2017; Abu 
Obaid et al., 2018). 
Organic farming has the potential to provide advantages in terms of 
protecting the environment, preserving non-renewable resources, improving 
nutritional quality, reducing the production of surplus products and reori￾enting agriculture toward evolving market demand (Lampkin and Padel, 
1994). Demand for organic food, and hence trade in organic food and organic 
farming, is increasingly important worldwide, particularly in developed 
countries. Also reinforcing the development of organic farming is the new 
conservation of rural concepts, improving understanding of environmental 
issues and encouraging sustainable agricultural development. 
9.3 IMPACT OF ORGANIC FARMING ON SOIL HEALTH 
Demands on healthy food and sustainable environment increased the interest 
in alternative conservative production systems and gave rise to the introduc￾tion of organic agriculture concept (Sudjatmiko et al., 2018). The sustain￾ability of agricultural ecosystems to produce health food can be obtained by 
improving and maintaining soil health (Tully and McAskill, 2019). Higher 
amounts of antioxidants and less or negligible quantity of pesticides in organic 
foods attract the attention of consumers (Barański et al., 2014). Utilization 
of carbon-based soil amendments, diversifying the crop rotations, including 
cover crops during the fallow period, absence of synthetic agrochemicals, 
using organic mulches, weed control without herbicides, and integrating 
crop and livestock production are the main strategies of organic farming to 
improve the functioning potential of soils (Schonbeck et al., 2017). Therefore, 
organic cropping systems are expected to have an accumulation of organic 
C compared to conventionally agricultural production systems. Soil nutrient 
sources in organic farming are met by organic sources, including solid or 
liquid animal manure, GMs, crop residues, yard debris, and waste from food Organic Farming for Soil Health and Crop Productivity 211 
processing industries (Tully and McAskill, 2019). OFS plainly deals with the 
management of SOM, which in turn has a strong influence on the physical, 
chemical, and biological properties of soil (Stockdale et al., 2001). 
Despite the concerns on the low yield in organic agriculture (Wittwer et al., 
2017), organic production land is continuously increasing due to the detrimental 
impacts, such as erosion, degradation of soil structure, soil compaction, losses 
of SOMs, and nutrient depletion, of conventional farming systems (Abebe et 
al., 2005; Abera et al., 2005; Al-Tawaha et al., 2005, 2010; Elser et al., 2007; 
Al-Kiyyam et al., 2008; Bünemann et al., 2018). The area under organic 
farming was estimated at 57.8 million hectares worldwide in 2016, including 
in conversion areas. Total area of organic farming corresponds to 1.2% of the 
agricultural land in the world (Willer et al., 2018). The decrease in crop yield 
is the most common disappointment of the producers when converted from 
conventional to organic agriculture. The meta-analysis conducted by Niggly 
(2015) revealed that average crop yield in organic agriculture is lower between 
0.75 and 0.80 of conventional agriculture. However, most studies reported 
a gradual increase in crop yield overtime along with improved soil quality 
(Reeve and Drost, 2012; Suja and Sreekumar, 2014) associated mainly with 
increased soil biological activity (Knapp and van der Heijden, 2018). 
Organic farming enhances the delivery of several ecosystem services 
by improving the soil health, quality of surface and ground waters. Some 
of the important ecosystem services are increasing the efficiency nutrients 
use, preventing nutrient, buffering nutrients according to their removal, 
reducing the erosion by increasing the stability of aggregates and increasing 
the water holding capacity (Peigné et al., 2014; Abbott and Manning, 2015) 
(Figure 9.1). Organic amendments in organic farming significantly improve 
soil moisture retention, total organic carbon and nitrogen contents, popula￾tion, and diversity of microorganisms, and enzyme activities, which indicates 
significant enhancement on soil health (Nautiyal et al., 2010). 
Conventional tillage using plows are frequently used by organic farmers 
to prepare seedbed and control weeds prior to planting, bury intermediate 
crops, and incorporate organic fertilizers and amendments (Peigne et 
al., 2018). However, continuous, and intensive soil tillage by plows may 
neutralize positive effects to soil aggregates and functions due to loss of 
organic carbon, compaction, and crust formation (Crittenden et al., 2015), 
negative impact on infiltration, water retention capacity and nutrient cycling 
(Williams and Hedlund, 2013). Therefore, some studies indicated the positive 
effect of combining conservation tillage and organic farming on functioning 
potential soils. Introduction of reduced tillage without plowing in OFSs 212 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
improves soil physical health and helps to preserve long-term soil fertility 
compared to intensive tillage in organic farming (Cooper et al., 2016; Seitz 
et al., 2019) by decreasing erosion rate (Seitz et al., 2019) and promoting 
aggregation of microaggregates into macroaggregates (Puerta et al., 2018). 
In contrast, higher losses of microaggregates have been reported in tilled 
organic fields by Green et al. (2005). Peigne et al. (2018) indicated that 10 
years of very superficial tillage at 5 to 7 cm and superficial tillage at 15 cm 
increased organic carbon, total nitrogen, Olsen P in the 0 to 15 cm of soil 
surface compared to moldboard plowing treatments. 
FIGURE 9.1 Soil aggregates under organically managed field and conventionally managed 
adjacent field from central Anatolia, Turkey. 
Sustainable production in OFS relies on organic matter management to 
improve soil health and provide nutrients for growing plants (Turk and Tawaha, 
2001, 2002a, b; Tawaha and Turk, 2002a, b; Tawaha et al., 2003). The farmers 
in organic agriculture simulate the natural cycle to add essential nutrients 
to maintain and improve the soil health (Biswas et al., 2014). Productivity 
function of soils in organic farming is preserved or improved by the addition of 
GMs and organic amendments such as animal manure, compost, biochar, etc. 
More than 70 years of a conventional and an organic farming and permanent 
pasture without tillage resulted in 15, 24, and 46 g kg–1 organic matter content 
at 0–20 cm depth, respectively (Pulleman et al., 2003). 
Soil health is defined as the functioning ability or capacity of soils as an 
essential component of the living ecosystem that is vital to sustaining the lives 
of plants, animals, and humans (Moebius-Clune et al., 2016). Therefore, soil  
 
Organic Farming for Soil Health and Crop Productivity 213 
health management is a crucial issue to sustain the agricultural productivity 
and environmental quality (Reeves, 1997). 
The performance of soils for all its functions cannot be assessed by deter￾mining only crop yield, water quality, or any single soil property (USDA, 
2020). The application of organic amendments increases the concentration 
of essential nutrients in soils. Organic material in soil improves aggregation 
of mineral particles, increases the stability against destructive forces, thus; 
reduces soil compaction and erosion, increases porosity and consequently 
the water holding capacity (Kaje et al., 2018). 
9.3.1 IMPACT ON PHYSICAL PROPERTIES OF SOILS 
Physical quality of soil is closely related to the maintenance of the stable 
aggregates and an improved storing and transmitting potential of water, air, 
and nutrients to support crops and to reduce degradation (Reynolds et al., 
2007). The results conducted to assess the impacts of organic farming on the 
sustainability of agricultural production have shown the positive effects of 
animal manure and diversified crop rotations on soil quality (Schjonning et 
al., 2002). However, contrasting reports on the impacts of organic farming 
have been published for different soil physical properties. In general, soil 
physical environment in terms of soil pore volume and stability of aggregates 
favors sustainable use of organically managed arable lands (Papadopoulos et 
al., 2014). The incorporation of organic matter to soil activates biological 
processes that help to supply plant nutrients along with an increase in the 
strength and stability of soil structure for better plant growth environment 
(Abbott and Manning, 2015). Long-term conservative practices in organic 
farming are reported to result in lower bulk density and higher available 
water retention capacity compared to conventional farms. Improved soil 
physical health by the introduction of organic farming indicates a highly 
resistant soil environment to wind and water erosion, to the crusting and 
creating compaction, in addition, reduces plant stress related to the long￾term drought (Liebig and Doran, 1999). 
9.3.1.1 AGGREGATE STABILITY 
Soil organic C is the most important agent in the formation and stability of 
soil aggregates (Franzleubbers et al., 2000). Addition of greater amount of 
plant and animal biomass in OFSs result in a stable soil surface cover and  
214 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
increase proportion of water-stable macro aggregation (Pulleman et al., 2003; 
Mikha and Rice, 2004; Zhang et al., 2014), and aeration (Shukla et al., 2006) 
by stabilizing soil aggregates (Erhart and Hartl, 2009) and changing soil pore 
characteristics (Papadopoulos et al., 2014). However, the positive effects of 
organic farming on aggregate stability and soil porosity may not be constant 
over time. Aggregate formation is primarily related to the stabilization of 
organic matter and stability of long-term soil mass (Williams and Petticrew, 
2009), therefore, aggregate stability is positively correlated with the increase 
in soil organic C content (Green et al., 2005). Papadopoulos et al. (2014) 
reported significantly higher aggregate stability for short term (5 years) 
organically managed sandy loam soils (mean weight diameter, 1.24 mm) 
compared to conventionally managed soils (mean weight diameter, 0.64 
mm), while mean weight diameter in longer-term (>10 years) organically 
and conventionally managed silty clay soils was similar to each other (Table 
9.1). In addition to the commonly stated effects of organic carbon on the 
stability of aggregates, Lori et al. (2017) indicated the importance of bacteria 
and fungi on the improvement and stability of soil aggregates. 
9.3.1.2 SOIL WATER RETENTION 
Soil structure, pore-size distributions, SOM content, and soil texture that 
is influential on retention at higher matric potential, are the major determi￾nants of water holding capacity and water infiltration rate of a soil (Hillel, 
1998). Increasing the organic C content of soils under OFSs has a beneficial 
effect on soil hydraulic properties by improving the important soil physical 
properties. Soils under organic farming are reported to have higher soil 
water retention capacity, therefore, higher potential water-limited crop 
yields compared to soils under conventional farming (Crittenden et al., 
2015; Crittenden and Goede, 2016). Similarly, Nautiyel et al. (2010) also 
indicated that the addition of organic manure and crop residues in organic 
farming increased the moisture retention of sandy loam soils. Reducing soil 
surface evaporation by organic mulching increases the moisture content of 
soils (Bayer et al., 2006). 
Mechanical weed control in organic farming and intensive tractor 
passes in the field may cause a compaction, which decreases the volume 
of macropores, increases the volume of smaller pores. The average amount 
of macropores under organic farming (0.65%) was significantly lower than 
the macropores (0.82%) under conventional farming. The differences in 
pore size distribution between organic and conventional farming systems 215 
TABLE 9.1 Mean Weight Diameter (MWD), Aggregate Stability (AS) and Bulk Density Values for Organic (O) versus Conventional (C) 
Farming Systems
Duration
Year
Organic Practice Soil Type Depth
(cm) 
MWD (mm) AS (g g–1 ) BD (g cm–3 ) References 
O C O C O C 
37-year Green manure Silt Loam 0–10 – – – – 0.98 0.95 Reganold et al. (1987)
46-year
47-year
40-year 
Forage crop, animal manure Sandy loam 6–13 – – 0.51
0.87
0.64 
0.36
0.68
0.87 
1.54
1.35
1.36 
1.44
1.35
1.49 
Schjonning et al. (2002) 
>70-year 5.1 and 1.8 tDMha±1 yr±1
crop residue and animal
manure 
Loam 0–10
10–20 
5.3 & 
3.7 
0.6
0.5 
– – – – Pulleman et al. (2003) 
7-year Vetch cover
5.1 Mg/ha poultry litter 
– 0–5 0.40 0.40 0.31* 0.35* 1.53 1.53 Green et al. (2005) 
– – Silty
Silty Clay
Sandy Loam 
0–20 1.24
0.44
2.41 
0.64
0.33
3.09 
– – 1.06
1.27
1.05 
0.93
1.45
1.03 
Papdopoulos et al.
(2014) 
7-year 20–40 Mg/ha/yr (fresh
weight) slurry and/or solid
cow manure 
Clay Loam 0–10
10–20 
0.64
0.50 
0.42
0.45 
– – 1.42
1.42 
– Crittenden et al. (2015) 
8-year 0–10
10–20 
0.57
0.56 
– – 1.34
1.42 
– 
6-year Potato
Wheat
Oats/vetch
Spelt 
Silt Loam 0–40 – – – – 1.52
1.59
1.57
1.53 
1.50
1.57
1.57
1.49 
Glab et al. (2016) 
Organic Farming for Soil Health and Crop Productivity 216 TABLE 9.1 (Continued) 
Duration
Year
Organic Practice Soil Type Depth
(cm) 
MWD (mm) AS (g g–1 ) BD (g cm–3 ) References 
O C O C O C 
20-year Chipped pruned branches,
weeds, composted sheep
manure (10 Mg ha−1 ) 
Sandy Loam 0–10 – – – – 0.99 1.12 Hondebrink et al. (2017)
10-year Sandy loam 0–10 – – – – 1.67 1.67 
15-year – Sandy loam – – – – – 1.22 1.32 Sihi et al. (2017)
3-year Horse manure, green cover
crop (mustard) 
Silt 0–15 1.46 0.97 82.0% 76.9% 1.39 1.29 Morwan et al. (2018) 
* Macro aggregates (g/g); & : Wet sieving. 
Organic Farming for Sustainable Development  
Organic Farming for Soil Health and Crop Productivity 217 
were more evident for micropores (50–100 μm). The decrease in volume of 
macropores and increase in micropores have significant impacts on water 
retention characteristics of soils, especially at high matric potential resulting 
in a higher amount of plant-available water content (Glab et al., 2016). 
9.3.1.3 SOIL COMPACTION 
Pleasing positive effects of organic management on bulk density and 
hydraulic conductivity have been reported (Oquist et al., 2006). The 
increase in organic matter content of a silty clay soil under more than 10 
years of organic farming led to a significantly lower bulk density (1.27 g 
cm–3) compared to companion conventionally managed soils (1.45 g cm–3). 
However, the use of heavy machinery and conventional tillage methods may 
cause severe subsoil below plowing depth, even under OFSs (Schjonning et 
al., 2002). 
Intensive tractor traffic for mechanical weed protection under OFS resulted 
in higher bulk density value (1.54 g cm–3) compared to the conventional 
farming system (1.51 g cm–3) (Glab et al., 2016). Moreover, Pulleman et 
al. (2003) raised their concerns on a higher risk of soil compaction under 
organic farming applied with reduced or no-till practices, if not properly 
managed. Crittenden et al. (2015) also reported significantly higher mean 
weight diameter at 0–10 cm depth in conventional farming system compared 
to organic farming. Therefore, shallow mechanical disturbance was 
recommended in the organically managed fields to break up the aggregates 
in the very surface layer. 
Penetration resistance is a commonly used indicator of soil physical 
health and considered a representation of roots penetration through soil. The 
penetration resistance of a soil mainly depends on texture, water content, and 
dry bulk density of a soil (Crittenden et al., 2015). Reganold (1995) reported 
greater soil porosity and lower penetration resistance under organic compared 
to conventional management system. Compaction in organic farming has 
been reported to be a major constrain for plant growth, and cause of the 
yield losses. Around 10 years of shallow and very shallow tillage in organic 
agriculture increased the soil compaction, especially between 15 and 30 cm 
depth (Peigne et al., 2018). In contrast, positive effects of short-term organic 
farming (5 years) on microporosity have been reported by Papadopoulos et 
al. (2014), however, microporosity of silty clay soil was reduced in the longer 
term (more than 10 years) organically managed land (18.4%) in comparison 
to the conventionally managed land (25.0%).  
218 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
9.3.1.4 SOIL EROSION 
Soil erosion is an important agent of land degradation and causes severe 
environmental problems with detrimental impacts on the provisioning of 
ecosystem services (Smith et al., 2016). Sediment losses in organic farming 
including cover crop is significantly lower compared to conventional 
farming (Green et al., 2005). The greater amount of improved water-stable 
macroaggregates due to the increased organic matter content in organic 
farming has been correlated with the decrease in soil erosion (Lado et 
al., 2004). Therefore, Morwan et al. (2018) explained the runoff and soil 
loss differences by lower stability of soil aggregates under conventional 
farming compared to organic farming. Seitz et al. (2019) reported 30% 
less sediment loss (0.54 t ha−1 h−1) in organic farming than the conven￾tional farming. Repeated losses of sediments from surface layers decrease 
the thickness of the surface horizon. Despite the great sediment losses 
every year, farmers may not realize the severity of the problem in the 
short term due to the mixing with subsurface horizon by plowing. But 
in the long term (37 years), the thickness of the most productive layer 
(topsoil) has been substantially decreased by water and tillage erosion 
(Reganold et al., 1987). Average soil loss from organically managed fields 
was reported to be 8.3 tons ha–1 year–1, while it was fourfold higher (32.4 
tons ha–1 year–1) on conventionally managed fields (Table 9.2). Reganold 
et al. (1987) related the difference in erosion rates between organically 
and conventionally managed fields to the differences in crop rotations and 
tillage intensities of the production systems. 
Crop residues or other organic amendments applied to soil surface are 
incorporated and buried with conventional tillage practices, which accel￾erate the decomposition of biomass. Therefore, sediment loss in organic 
farming can be further decreased by the introduction of reduced tillage 
due to increased soil surface cover. Otherwise, conventional tillage using 
moldboard plow may nullify some of the benefits on physical proper￾ties expected from the addition of animal manure and plant residues in 
organic farming. Soil loss under conventional tillage and organic farming, 
in which moldboard plow and disk used before planting, and rotary 
hoeing for weed control, was estimated 7.5 and 5 times greater relative 
to no-tillage (Green et al., 2005). Therefore, unless conservational tillage 
practices are applied, the risk for nutrient loss through sediment transport 
in soils under organic farming are much higher than the non-organic 
reduced or no-till soils. 219 
TABLE 9.2 Macro Porosity (MP), Runoff, and Soil Loss Values for Organic (O) versus Conventional (C) Farming Systems
Duration Organic Practice Soil Type Depth MP (%) Runoff (mm/year) Soil Loss (Mg/ha/yr) References 
O C O C O C 
46
47
40 
Forage crop, animal
manure 
Sandy loam 6–13 cm 11.2
14.1
15.9 
15.9
14.9
11.0 
– – – – Schjonning
et al. (2002) 
7-year Vetch cover 5.1 Mg/ha 
poultry litter 
– 0–5 – – 108 116 43 64 Green et al.
(2005) 
– – Silty
Silty clay
Sandy loam 
0–20 23.0* 
20.6
21.1 
16.7* 
15.7
12.2 
– – – – Papdopoulos
et al. (2014) 
6-year Potato
Wheat
Oats/vetch
Spelt 
Silt Loam 0–20 0.428& 
0.402
0.406
0.423 
0.435
0.408
0.408
0.436 
– – – – Glab et al.
(2016) 
37-year Green manure Silt Loam 0–10 – – – – 8.3 32.4 Reganold et
al. (1987) 
13-year Bean
Potato
Radish
Cabbage 
25 different 
fields,
predominantly
sandy loam,
loamy sand 
0–30 – – – – 32.5
38.2
45.0
34.7 
32.8
30.6
54.8
34.7 
Arnhold et
al. (2014) 
& : Total porosity (cm3 cm –3 ). 
Organic Farming for Soil Health and Crop Productivity  
 
220 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
Soil loss under OFSs is closely related to the agricultural practices 
needed to grow crops. In general, OFSs have been reported to decrease the 
sediment loss in production of row crops due to the development of weeds 
in the furrows. Similarly, soil loss in radish growth was also decreased due 
to higher weed coverage. Conversely, potato cultivation has been reported to 
increase the sediment loss (Arnhold et al., 2014). 
9.3.2 IMPACT ON CHEMICAL PROPERTIES OF SOIL 
Long-term manure, compost or crop residue amendments in organic farming 
significantly influence the soil physical and chemical environments (Abbott 
and Manning, 2015). The extend of changes in the chemical properties of 
the soils are closely related to the nature of organic amendments (Mäder 
et al., 2002) and agricultural practices such as tillage (Peigne et al., 2018). 
Conservation tillage treatments are reported to have favorable effects on soil 
chemical components in the surface layer and contributed to the improve￾ment of the productivity function of soils (Peigne et al., 2018). 
9.3.2.1 SOIL PH 
Organic farming generally leads soil pH closer to neutral, higher macro 
and micronutrients, higher microbial biomass C and N as compared with 
conventional farms (Liebig and Doran, 1999) (Table 9.3). Di Prima et al. 
(2018) compared the impacts of organic and conventional management 
practices on soil characteristics of citrus orchards in eastern Spain. Although 
an increase in soil pH with long-term organic fertilization was found in 
several studies, addition of chipped pruned branches, weeds, and manure 
from sheep and goats (annually at 8 Mg ha−1) caused a lower soil pH over 
a decade and developed a 5 mm litter layer and a 3 mm organic layer. In 
contrast to lower soil pH with the incorporation of manure reported by Di 
Prima et al. (2018), higher soil pH was found for an organically managed 
sandy loam soil (Nautiyal et al., 2010). Similar to the findings of Nautiyal 
et al. (2010); and Nobile et al. (2020) also determined an increase in soil pH 
with 10 years of compost and slurry at high dose compared to the control 
soil by up to 0.7 and 1.2 units on average, respectively. The increase in pH 
under OFSs is mainly attributed to the alkaline nature of the applied organic 
amendments (von Arb et al., 2020). 221 
TABLE 9.3 Soil pH and Total Phosphorus (TP) Values for Organic (O) versus Conventional (C) Farming Systems
Duration Organic Practice Soil Type Depth pH TP (mg/kg) References 
O C O C 
>70-year 5.1 and 1.8
tDMha±1 yr±1 crop
residue and animal
manure 
Loam 0–10
10–20 
8.2
8.3 
8.4
8.3 
1.06 kg/m3 1.07 kg/m3 Pulleman et al.
(2003) 
6-year
5-year
3-year
2-year 
Cultivation of
Asparagus officinalis L. 
Silty clay loam 0–10 7.50
7.83
7.89
7.94 
7.99 – – Monokrousos et
al. (2006) 
9.4-year
10.3-year 
Animal manure and
cover crop 
Silt Loam
Loamy fine sand 
0–20 7.32
5.38 
7.39
5.46 
899.8
781.3 
868.6
784.7 
van Diepeningen
et al. (2006) 
5-year
4-year
5-year 
25–35 tons/ha in
2 years, mixture of
sheep and hen manure 
Silty clay loam
Clay loam
silt loam 
0–10 7.8
7.6
7.8 
7.9
7.6
7.8 
– – Garcia-Ruiz et al.
(2009) 
14-year 20 ton of composted
Cow manure per
hectare each year 
Sandy loam 0–15 7.9 6.5 * 85.5 kg/ha 94.5 kg/ha* Nautiyal et al.
(2010) 
20-year Chipped pruned
Branches, weeds,
composted sheep
manure (10 Mg ha−1 ) 
Sandy loam 0–10 7.48 7.65 – – Hondebrink et al.
10-year Sandy loam 0–10 7.75 7.52 – – (2017)
3-year Horse manure, green
cover crop (mustard) 
Silt 0–15 7.0 7.2 – – Morwan et al.
(2018) 
* Fallow grassland. 
Organic Farming for Soil Health and Crop Productivity 222 TABLE 9.4 Soil Organic Matter (SOM), Total Organic Carbon (TOC), and Total Organic Nitrogen (TON) Values for Organic (O) versus Conventional (C) Farming Systems
Duration Organic Practice Soil Type Depth SOM (g/kg) TOC (mg/kg) TON (mg/kg) References 
O C O C O C 
>70-year 5.1 and 1.8
tDMha±1 yr±1 crop
residue and animal
manure 
Loam 0–10
10–20 
24.9
23.2 
16.2
14.6 
– – – – Pulleman et
al. (2003) 
6-year Grass clover, cereal 
crops 
Sandy loam 0–15 – – 12.26 11.47 0.99 0.79 Bending et
al. (2004) 
7-year Vetch cover 5.1 Mg/
ha poultry litter 
– 0–5 – – 25.2 kg/m3 25.6 kg/m3 2.3 kg/m3 2.3 kg/m3 Green et al.
(2005) 
1993-09/2000
04/2001
11/2001 
Poultry composted
manure (8 t/ha),
green manuring of
cover crops residues 
Sandy Clay
Loam 
5–20 – – 0.90%
0.93%
0.99% 
0.87%
0.95%
0.93% 
0.20%
0.21%
0.12% 
0.17%
0.13%
0.08% 
Marinari et
al. (2006) 
20–35 – – 0.95%
0.81%
0.83% 
0.88%
0.80%
0.81% 
0.18%
0.22%
0.12% 
0.08%
0.13%
0.07% 
5-year
4-year
5-year 
25–35 tons/ha in
2 years, mixture
of sheep and hen
manure 
Silty clay loam
Clay loam
Silt Loam 
0–10 – – 8.2%
5.6%
8.9% 
7.9%
4.6%
7.8% 
0.33%
0.22%
0.21% 
0.26%
0.15%
0.13% 
Garcia-Ruiz
et al. (2009) 
14-year 20 ton of composted
cow manure per
hectare each year 
Sandy loam 0–15 – – 10.20% 0.81% 2.55% 0.08% Nautiyal et
al. (2010) 
Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 223 
TABLE 9.4 (Continued) 
Duration Organic Practice Soil Type Depth SOM (g/kg) TOC (mg/kg) TON (mg/kg) References 
O C O C O C 
– – Silty
Silty clay
Sandy loam 
0–20 5.0%
2.5%
8.2% 
3.5%
1.7%
7.9% 
– – – – Papdopoulos
et al. (2014) 
7-year 20–40 Mg/ha/yr
(fresh weight) slurry
and/or solid cow
manure 
Clay loam 0–10
10–20 
37.07* 
33.95 
32.33
31.00 
– – – – Crittenden et
al. (2015) 
8-year 0–10
10–20 
41.11*
35.94 
– – – – 
20-year Chipped pruned
branches, weeds,
composted sheep
manure (10 Mg
ha −1 ) 
Sandy loam 0–10 10.57% 3.50% – – – – Hondebrink
et al. (2017) 10-year Sandy loam 0–10 3.05% 2.03% – – – – 
15-year Manure (5 t/ha),
decorticated neem
cake (125 kg/ha),
green manure 
Sandy loam 0–15 1.37% 0.88% 0.80% 0.51% – – Sihi et al.
(2017) 
3-year Horse manure,
cover crop
(mustard) 
Silt 0–15 – – 13.3 g/kg 10.2 g/kg – – Morwan et
al. (2018) 
* Tillage systems were moldboard plowing. 
Organic Farming for Soil Health and Crop Productivity  
224 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
9.3.2.2 TOTAL ORGANIC CARBON AND NITROGEN 
Soil organic C (SOC) increases under steady high doses of animal manure 
or plant residue additions. The changes in SOC content of a soil at a given 
site rely on the duration of addition, soil texture, mineralogy, and structural 
stability, among other factors (Frossard et al., 2016). In contrast to some 
of the research findings which stated that organic farms significantly 
accumulated organic matter in the soil, Marinari et al. (2006) indicated 
that 7 years of consistent poultry manure (PM) (8 t ha–1) and cover crops 
residues additions were not sufficient to increase the SOC content under 
organic farming relative to the conventional farming (Table 9.4). The results 
of van Diepeningen et al. (2006) also found no significant increase in SOC 
content under organic farming, despite the repeated application of animal 
and GMs. Non-significant difference in SOC content between organic and 
conventional farming was attributed to the priming effect due to the high 
ratio of labile C species in manure and mechanical weed control, which 
accelerates the decomposition of organic matter. In addition, enzymatic 
activities as the reliable indicators of microbial activity are significantly 
higher in organically managed soil compared to conventional. Therefore, 
mineralization of organic matter is boosted with the increased enzymatic 
activities in the organically managed soil (Marinari et al., 2006). 
Low doses of organic matter amendments may not be sufficient to 
compensate the losses of SOM due to the tillage and mechanical weeding 
during the crop growth period (von Arb et al., 2020). Addition of manure, 
compost, and other organic amendments and using cover crops supply 
essential macro- and micronutrients to meet crop needs (Reeve et al., 
2016), though the carbon to nitrogen (C/N) ratio of organic amendments 
is the main determinant on the extent of impact on soil health. Expected 
benefit may not be obtained by the addition of organic materials with very 
low or very high C/N (Cates et al., 2015), organic amendments with C/N 
less than 20 decompose rapidly and become available to crops in a short 
time (Hadas et al., 2004). Total organic carbon and nitrogen contents, 
microbial biomass and enzymatic activities under 14-year of organically 
cultivated field were higher compared to adjacent fallow grassland soil. 
Total organic C content in organically managed field with additions of 
composted cow manure, crop residues and no-tillage for the 14 years was 
about 12.5 times compared to the fallow grassland soil, thus C/N ratio 
of organically managed soils was higher than the fallow grassland soils 
(Nautiyal et al., 2010).  
 
Organic Farming for Soil Health and Crop Productivity 225 
9.3.2.3 MICRO AND MACRO PLANT NUTRIENTS
 
SOM enhances the availability of micronutrients for crops (Li et al., 2007). 
The concentrations of nutrients in soils that were under long term OFSs in 
different parts of the world are not similar to each other (Maltais-Landry et 
al., 2015). Differences in soil nutrient concentrations between the studies can 
be associated with different rates of nutrient load of organic amendments, 
the extents of nutrient uptake by crops and losses such as leaching (Nobile et 
al., 2020), biomass removal, burning, etc. Long term repeated application of 
organic amendments, especially in high input system, progressively increases 
the levels of nutrients in organically managed farms. Therefore, nutrients 
concentrations usually exceed crop requirements, which cause a decrease in 
nutrient-use efficiency and potentially contribute to non-point source pollution 
through losses to the environment. In contrast, anaerobic N concentration in 
organic farms is reported higher than crop N requirement during the growing 
season. Therefore, the potential for nonpoint source pollution due to the low 
level of NO3
-N on organic farms is lower than the conventional farms (Liebig 
and Doran, 1999). Continues cow manure and crop residue incorporation in 
organic farming resulted in significantly higher Zn, Mn, and S, while lower P, 
K, Fe, and Cu concentrations as compared with fallow grassland (Nautiyal et 
al., 2010). Contrarily, application of organic fertilizers in organic farming led 
to a significant increase in total P concentration of soils. Nobile et al. (2020) 
reported that total P concentration was 4.3 g kg–1 in soil receiving 10 years of 
compost, likewise 10-year slurry addition caused P accumulation (4.2 g kg–1). 
Long-term compost and slurry applications decreased the soil inorganic P 
sorption capacity of Andolsols, principally due to the increasing soil pH level 
(Nobile et al., 2020). The decrease in inorganic P sorption was ascribed by 
the relationship between electric potential and pH level of soils (Antelo et al., 
2005). The electric potential of colloidal surfaces is lower at high pH levels, 
which causes an electrostatic repulsion between the charged surface and 
inorganic P and thus decrease in inorganic P sorption (Antelo et al., 2005). 
9.3.3 ORGANIC FARMING AND BIODIVERSITY 
Usually any agricultural activity as negative factor effects on biodiversity. 
First of all, agricultural activity leads exclusion of natural ecosystems and 
their transformation into semi-natural or full agroecosystems. The result is 
a change in the composition of biodiversity, extension of plant and animal 
species and the emergence of new ones: 226 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
•	 Agriculture has reduced habitat for wild species due to a 500% expan￾sion in the extent of cropland and pasture worldwide in the last 300 
years; 
•	 Agriculture has expanded into sensitive ecosystems and had far￾reaching effects on biodiversity, carbon storage and important envi￾ronmental services; 
•	 Clearing tropical forests for agriculture results in the loss of about 
5–10 million hectares of forest annually; 
•	 Habitat loss is now identified as the main threat to 85–90% of all 
species described by IUCN as threatened or endangered and is the 
most commonly recorded reason for species extinction during the last 
20 years. 
In the last 30 years, there has been a big change in use of agricultural 
lands and the same time an active development of alternative types of agri￾culture due to the deterioration of soil resources, decrease in the quality of 
food, the loss of biodiversity and the degradation of natural ecosystems as 
a result of their intensive use in agricultural production. The intensification 
and expansion of modern agriculture is amongst the greatest current threats 
to worldwide biodiversity. Over the last quarter of the 20th century, dramatic 
declines in both range and abundance of many species associated with 
farmland have been reported in Europe, leading to growing concern over the 
sustainability of current intensive farming practices (Hole et al., 2005). 
In Europe, loss of biodiversity is primarily reflected in the decline 
of many species of plants and in the disappearing of local and old plant 
varieties. In 2011, the European Parliament adopted the European Union 
(EU) Biodiversity Strategy to 2020 with the aim to preventing biodiversity 
loss and degradation of ecosystems (Bavec and Bavec, 2015). One of the 
options to reduce the negative impact of agriculture on biodiversity while 
maintaining productivity and product quality and the most common type of 
agriculture is organic agriculture. 
Organic agriculture is a complete system of production, reduced 
subsistence and viability of agro-ecosystems, maintaining, and restoring 
soil fertility; conservation of water resources, high biodiversity, production 
of quality products using technologies that do not harm the environment 
and human health. Organic agriculture must rely on all vital processes in 
ecosystems (EU Council Regulation No. 834/2007). At the same time, 
biodiversity, and soil fertility are the basis of the sustainable functionality of 
organic agriculture. In the process of formation of organic agroecosystem, Organic Farming for Soil Health and Crop Productivity 227 
it is necessary to use different agricultural techniques, contributing to 
conservation and increase of biodiversity of different living organisms, 
which will feed capacity and enhanced biodegradation of living organism 
and SOM. According to the results of investigations of last years, organic 
agriculture increased species richness by about 30% and had a greater effect 
on biodiversity, as the percentage of the landscape consisting of arable fields 
increased. It was found that organic fields had up to five times higher plant 
species richness compared to conventional fields, the same impact was 
recorded for different animal groups (Bavec and Bavec, 2015). However, 
very often, the increase in biodiversity both in the agricultural fields and on 
pastures occurs due to the increase of a number of weeds, and for insects due 
to the increase of agricultural pests. But on the other hand, the abundance of 
weeds and the absence of the use of chemical pesticides improve the condi￾tions for pollinating insects, which can increase the yield of entomophilous 
agricultural plants. Biodiversity is one of the most important ecosystem 
services of organic agriculture is connected to biocontrol and pollination 
services. Organic farming might decrease the biomass of the crop by 25%, 
but increases the diversity of most functional species groups. The abundance 
of cereal aphids was five-times lower in organic fields, while predator abun￾dances were 20 times higher in organic fields, indicating significantly higher 
potential for biological pest control in organic fields. Organic fields had 20 
times higher pollinator species richness compared to conventional fields. 
Pollinators and predator abundance was higher at field edges compared 
to field centers, highlighting the importance of field edges for ecosystem 
services. Edges provide important nesting, feeding, and sheltering sites for 
birds in agricultural areas (Krauss et al., 2011). 
The importance of organic agriculture in the maintenance and conserva￾tion of biodiversity, natural resources is reflected in the international agree￾ments and conventions, as well as the national laws and regulations. For 
example Convention on Biological diversity encourages the development 
of agricultural technologies and methods that not only increase the produc￾tivity, but also prevent degradation, as well as contribute to the restoration, 
rehabilitation, and enhancement of biological diversity, including organic 
agriculture (UN Convention on Biological Diversity). In addition, the CBD 
includes the global strategy for plant conservation (GSPC) (2010–2020), 
which considers organic agriculture as one of the sustainable uses of plant 
diversity. 
Organic fields usually accommodate a greater variety of plants, animals, 
and microorganisms. The organic agroecosystem is thus more resistant  
228 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
to stress and disturbance. The structure and species composition of plant 
communities in organic agricultural lands are very close to the natural ecosys￾tems, in contrast to traditional farms, which helps to preserve the natural 
appearance of the landscape and genetic diversity. In the surroundings of 
organic farms can occur localities of rare and endangered species. In total 
biodiversity of organic farms is 6 times higher than in traditional farms. With 
Organic agriculture is possible to create suitable conditions for beneficial 
insects, birds, other animals, soil mycoflora, micro, and macrofauna, which 
promotes the increase of plant biodiversity. 
According to different investigations for ecological balance of ecosystem, 
the optimal percentage ratio between the natural and transformed (agro) 
ecosystems in the same area should be 60:40 (Chernikov et al., 2000). 
Organic agriculture has a smaller negative impact on natural biodiversity, 
and has many advantages in this respect compared to modern intensive 
agriculture, including big potential for conservation of current biodiversity 
of agricultural landscapes and areas. 
As conclusion we should mention that in rural areas the transition from 
traditional to organic agriculture should not only help to reduce the negative 
impacts on natural biodiversity, but also to contribute the increase biodi￾versity. On the other hand, still there are not enough comparative scientific 
studies, which can prove that: organic agriculture approach provides 100% 
greater benefits to biodiversity than carefully targeted prescriptions applied 
to relatively small conventional agriculture habitats (agri-environmental 
schemes). This issue is especially important for mountainous countries, 
where a significant part of agriculture is built on the basis of small-sized 
fields and pastures. With organic agriculture there are: 
•	 Limitations of quantitative studies and analysis depends on method￾ological limitations 
•	 Big knowledge gap on long term impacts of organic agriculture in 
specific habitats and climatic conditions, sustainability under the 
climate change, etc. 
•	 Limitations and gaps in national and international regulations and strate￾gies on organic agriculture and relations with biodiversity conservation 
9.3.4 ORGANIC FARMING PLANT GROWTH AND YIELD 
Organic manure can help improve soil conditions such as pH rises in acid 
soils, soil water retaining efficiency, hydraulic conductivity and infiltration  
Organic Farming for Soil Health and Crop Productivity 229 
levels and the reduction in soil bulk density. Mahmoodabadi et al. (2010) 
reported that manure also offers sufficient plant nutrients and improves soil 
structure. Applying cow manure may enhance SOM. SOM enhances soil 
quality, thus increasing the supply of nutrient sources. Organic matter also 
contributes to crop growth and yields directly by providing nutrients and 
indirectly by modifying soil physical properties such as aggregate stability 
and porosity to increase root growth, rhizosphere, and stimulate plant growth. 
In addition, manure application also affects the accumulation of macro￾protected carbon. Silvester and Sujalu (2013) reported that the spread of cow 
manure may provide nutrients for the formation of leaves. On the other hand, 
organic fertilizer nutrients support the rapid root development (Baldi et al., 
2010), which may have increased the growth of the leaves towards the end 
of plant life. Ghosh et al. (2004) reported that the total content of chlorophyll 
was increased by an increase in the inorganic fertilizer dose complemented 
by organic fertilizer. 
When applied correctly, organic manure supports plants such as maize and 
increases in general size, height, and leaf count (Asiegbu and Uzo, 1984). If 
well supplied with organic materials, maize can tolerate sandy soil. On the 
heavier soil, the output is generally large and longer than the lighter soil. 
The use of organic manure (poultry dropping) improves the soil’s chemical 
and physical properties, thus increasing the growth and yield of maize, 
according to Okoroafor et al. (2013). Organic manure increases plant height, 
number of maize leaves, stem circumference, cob numbers and weight of fresh 
maize during harvest. Jeptoo et al. (2013) reported that the use of Tithonia 
diversifolia manure led to a higher fresh weight, dry root, and biomass and 
volume of the root compared to the control system. In season 1 and 2, the total 
yield of carrots subjected to 3.0 t/ha increased by 33% and 18%, respectively, 
compared with the control (Jeptoo et al., 2013). At the highest tithonia level 
the sweetness of carrot was influenced (Jeptoo et al., 2013). 
9.4 CONCLUSION 
Many environmental factors affect the growth of many plants, which 
influence the physiological and morphological changes of the plant in 
more than one way. Organic farming is a method of growing plants and 
animals that needs far more than deciding not to use pesticide, fertilizers, 
GMOs, antibiotics, and growth hormones. Soil fertility means more than 
supplying macro and micronutrients to plants in OFSs. In organic farming 
that supplies mineral nutrients, plant biomass and productivity are limited in 230 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
many ecosystems. On the other hand, organic farming has been planned to 
optimize the productivity and health of various communities, including soil, 
plants, livestock, and people, within the agroecosystem. 
KEYWORDS 
• agroecosystem 
• environment 
• farming systems 
• global strategy for plant conservation 
• micronutrients 
• mineral nutrients
 
• organic farming
 
REFERENCES 
Abbott, L. K., & Manning, D. A., (2015). Soil health and related ecosystem services in organic 
agriculture. Sustain Agriculture Res., 4(3), 116–125. 
Abebe, G., Hattar, B., & Al-Tawah, A. M., (2005). Nutrient availability as affected by manure 
application to cowpea (Vigna unguiculata L. Walp.) on calcareous soils. Journal of 
Agriculture and Social Sciences, 1(1), 1–6. 
Abera, T., Feyisa, D., Yusuf, H., Nikus, O., & Al-Tawaha, A. R., (2005). Grain yield of maize 
as affected by biogas slurry and NP fertilizer rate at Bako, Western Oromiya, Ethiopia. 
Bioscience Research, 2, 31–38. 
Abu, O. A. M., Melnyk, A. V., Onychko, V. I., Usmael, F. M., Abdullah, M. J., Rifaee, M. K., 
& Tawaha, A. M., (2018). Evaluation of six sunflower cultivars for forage productivity 
under salinity conditions. Advances in Environmental Biology, 12(7), 13–15. 
Al Zoubi, O. M., & Al-Tawaha, A. R., (2019). Allelopathic effect of beetroot (Beta vulgaris 
L.) on germination and growth Zea mays and Vigna umbellata. International Journal of 
Botany Studies, 4(4), 47–51. 
Al-Ajlouni, M. M., Al-Ghzawi, A. L. A., & Al-Tawaha, A. R., (2010). Crop rotation and 
fertilization effect on barley yield grown in arid conditions. Journal of Food, Agriculture 
and Environment, 88(3), 869–872. 
Al-Juthery, H. W., Habeeb, K. H., Jawad, F., & Altaee, K., AL-Taey, D. K. A., & Al-Tawaha, 
A. R. M., (2018). Effect of foliar application of different sources of nano-fertilizers on 
growth and yield of wheat. Bioscıence Research, 15(4), 3988–3997. 
Al-Kiyyam, M. A., Turk, M., Al-Mahmoud, M., & Al-Tawaha, A. R., (2008). Effect of plant 
density and nitrogen rate on herbage yields of marjoram under Mediterranean conditions. 
American-Eurasian Journal of Agricultural and Environmental Science, 3, 153–158. Organic Farming for Soil Health and Crop Productivity 231 
Al-Tawaha, A. M., & Turk, M. A., (2002a). Lentil (Lens culinaris Medic.) productivity as 
influenced by rate and method of phosphate placement in a Mediterranean environment. 
Acta Agronomica Hungarica, 50(2), 197–201. 
Al-Tawaha, A. M., & Turk, M. A., (2004). Field pea seeding management for semi-arid 
Mediterranean conditions. Journal of Agronomy and Crop Science, 190, 86–92. 
Al-Tawaha, A. M., Singh, V. P., & Turk, M. A., (2003). A review on growth, yield components 
and yield of barley as influenced by genotypes, herbicides, and fertilizer application. 
Research on Crop, 4(1), 1–9. 
Al-Tawaha, A. M., Turk, M., Hameed, K., Assaf, T., Tahhan, R., & Al-Jamali, A. F., (2010). 
Effects of application of olive mill by-products on lentil yield and their symbiosis with 
mycorrhizal fungi under arid conditions. Crop Research, 40(3), 66–75. 
AL-Tawaha, A. R. M., & Nidal, O. D. A. T., (2010). Use of sorghum and maize allelopathic 
properties to inhibit germination and growth of wild barley (Hordeum spontaneum). 
Notulae Botanicae Horti Agrobotanici Cluj-Napoca, 38(3), 124–127. 
Al-Tawaha, A. R. M., Turk, M. A., Lee, K. D., Zheng, W. J., Ababneh, M., Abebe, G., & 
Musallam, I. W., (2005). Impact of fertilizer and herbicide application on performance 
of ten barley genotypes grown in northeastern part of Jordan. International Journal of 
Agriculture and Biology, 7(2), 162–166. 
Al-Tawaha, A. R., Al-Karaki, G., Al-Tawaha, A. R., Sirajuddin, S. N., Makhadmeh, I., 
Wahab, P. E. M., Youssef, R. A., et al., (2018a). Effect of water flow rate on quantity and 
quality of lettuce (Lactuca sativa L.) in nutrient film technique (NFT) under hydroponics 
conditions. Bulgarian Journal of Agricultural Science, 245, 791–798. 
Al-Tawaha, A. R., Al-Tawaha, A. R., Alu’datt, M., Al-Ghzawi, A. L., Wedyan, M., Al-Obaidy, 
S. D. A., & Al-Ramamneh, E. A. D., (2018b). Effects of soil type and rainwater harvesting 
treatments in the growth, productivity, and morphological trains of barley plants cultivated 
in semi-arid environment. Australian Journal of Crop Science, 12(6), 975–979. 
Al-Tawaha, A. R., McNeil, D. L., Yadav, S. S., Turk, M., Ajlouni, M., Abu-Darwish, M. S., 
Al-Ghzawi, A. L. A., et al., (2010). Integrated legume crops production and management 
technology. In: Climate Change and Management of Cool Season Grain Legume Crops 
(pp. 325–349). Springer, Dordrecht. 
Al-Tawaha, A. R., Turk, M. A., Abu-Zaitoon, Y. M., Aladaileh, S. H., Al-Rawashdeh, 
I. M., Alnaimat, S., Al-Tawaha, A. R. M., et al., (2017). Plants adaptation to drought 
environment. Bulgarian Journal of Agricultural Science, 23(3), 381–388. 
Aludatt, M. H., Rababah, T., Alhamad, M. N., Al-Tawaha, A., Al-Tawaha, A. R., Gammoh, 
S., Ereifej, K. I., et al., (2019). Herbal yield, nutritive composition, phenolic contents and 
antioxidant activity of purslane (Portulaca oleracea L.) grown in different soilless media 
in a closed system. Industrial Crops and Products, 141, 111746. 
Ananthi, T., Amanullah, M. M., & Al-Tawaha, A. R. M. S., (2017). A review on maize-legume 
intercropping for enhancing the productivity and soil fertility for sustainable agriculture 
in India. Advances in Environmental Biology, 11(5), 49–63. 
Antelo, J., Avena, M., Fiol, S., López, R., & Arce, F., (2005). Effects of pH and ionic strength 
on the adsorption of phosphate and arsenate at the goethite-water interface. J Colloid 
Interface Sci., 285(2), 476–486. 
Arnhold, S., Lindner, S., Lee, B., Martin, E., Kettering, J., Nguyen, T. T., & Hume, B., (2014). 
Conventional and organic farming: Soil erosion and conservation potential for row crop 
cultivation. Geoderma, 219, 89–105. 232 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
Assaf, T. A., Hameed, K. M., Turk, M. A., & Al-Tawaha, A. M., (2006a). Effect of soil 
amendment with olive mill by-products under soil solarization on growth and productivity 
of faba bean and their symbiosis with mycorrhizal fungi. World Journal of Agricultural 
Sciences, 2(1), 21. 
Assaf, T. A., Hameed, K. M., Turk, M. A., & Al-Tawaha, A. M., (2006b). Effect of soil 
amendment with olive mill by-products under soil solarization on growth and productivity 
of faba bean and their symbiosis with mycorrhizal fungi. International Journal of Plant 
Production, 2(4), 341–352. 
Baldi, E., & Toselli, M., (2013). Root growth and survivorship in cow manure and compost 
amended soils. Plant Soil Environ., 59, 221–226. 
Barański, M., Średnicka-Tober, D., Volakakis, N., Sanderson, R., Stewart, G. B., Benbrook, 
C., Biavati, B., et al., (2014). Higher antioxidant and lower cadmium concentrations and 
lower incidence of pesticide residues in organically grown crops: A systematic literature 
review and meta-analyses. British J. Nutr., 112, 794–811. 
Bavec, M., & Bavec, F., (2015). Impact of organic farming on biodiversity. In: Lo, Y. H., 
& Blanco, J. A., (eds.), Biodiversity in Ecosystems-Linking Structure and Function (pp. 
1–18). doi: 10.5772/58974. 
Bayer, C., Martin-Neto, L., Mielniczuk, J., Pavinato, A., & Dieckow, J., (2006). Carbon 
sequestration in two Brazilian cerrado soils under no-till. Soil Till. Res., 86, 237–245. 
Bending, G. D., Turner, M. K., Rayns, F., Marx, M. C., & Wood, M., (2004). Microbial 
and biochemical soil quality indicators and the potential for differentiating areas under 
contrasting agricultural management regimes. Soil Biol. Biochem., 36(11), 1785–1792. 
Biswas, M. S., Ali, N., Goswami, R., & Chakraborty, S., (2014). Soil health sustainability and 
organic farming: A review. J. Food Agric. Environ., 12(3, 4), 237–243. 
Bünemann, E. K., Bongiorno, G., Bai, Z., Creamer, R. E., De Deyn, G., De Goede, R., 
& Pullman, M., (2018). Soil quality: A critical review. Soil Biol. Biochem., 120, 
105–125. 
Cates, A. M., Ruark, M. D., Hedtke, J. L., & Posner, J. L., (2015). Long term tillage, rotation 
and perennialization effects on particulate and aggregate organic matter. Soil and Till 
Research, 371–380. 
Chernikov, V., Aleksakhin, R., & Golubyev, A., (2000). Agroecology, Textbook for HEIs (p. 
536). Moskow. 
Cooper, J., Baranski, M., Stewart, G., Nobel-de, L. M., Bàrberi, P., Fließbach, A., & Crowly, 
O., (2016). Shallow non-inversion tillage in organic farming maintains crop yields and 
increases soil C stocks: A meta-analysis. Agron. Sustain. Dev., 36(1), 22. 
Crittenden, S. J., & De Geode, R. G. M., (2016). Integrating soil physical and biological 
properties in contrasting tillage systems in organic and conventional farming. Euro J. Soil 
Biol., 77, 26–33. 
Crittenden, S. J., Poot, N., Heinen, M., Van, B. D. J. M., & Pulleman, M. M., (2015). Soil 
physical quality in contrasting tillage systems in organic and conventional farming. Soil 
Till. Res., 154, 136–144. 
Di Prima, S., Rodrigo-Comino, J., Novara, A., Iovina, M., Pirastru, M., Keessta, S., & Cerda, 
A., (2018). Soil physical quality of citrus orchards under tillage, herbicide and organic 
managements. Pedosphere, 28(3), 463–477. 
Erhart, E., & Hartl, W., (2009). Soil protection through organic farming: A review. In: Organic 
Farming, Pest Control and Remediation of Soil Pollutants (pp. 203–226). Springer, 
Dordrecht. Organic Farming for Soil Health and Crop Productivity 233 
European Union Council, (2007). Regulation No. 834/2007 of 28 June 2007 on organic 
production and labelling of organic products and repealing Regulation No. 2092/91. 
Official Journal of the European Union, L189, 1–23. 
Franzleubbers, A. J., Wright, S. F., & Stuedemann, J. A., (2000). Soil aggregation and glomalin 
under pastures in the southern piedmont, USA. Soil Sci Soc Am J., 64, 1018–1026.
 
Frick, (2000). Organic Farming Enhances Soil Fertility and Biodiversity: Results from a 21 
Year old Field Trial (pp. 1–96). Research Institute of Organic Framing, Switzerland.
 
Frossard, E., Buchman, N., Bünemann, E. K., Kiba, D. I., Lompo, F., Oberson, A., & Traore, 
O. Y., (2016). Soil properties and not inputs control carbon: Nitrogen: Phosphorous ratios 
in cropped soils in the long term. Soil, 2(1), 83–99. 
García-Ruiz, R., Ochoa, V., Vingela, B., Hinojosa, M. B., Pena-Santiago, R., Liébanas, G., & 
Carreira, J. A., (2009). Soil enzymes, nematode community and selected physic-chemical 
properties as soil quality indicators in organic and conventional Olive oil farming: 
Influence of seasonality and site features. Appl. Soil Ecol., 41(3), 305–314. 
Ghosh, P. K., Ajay, B. K. K., Manna, M. C., Mandal, K. G., Misra, A. K., Hati, K. M., et al., 
(1984). Evaluation Principle in Fertilizer, 50. 
Ghosh, P. K., Ajay, B. K. K., Manna, M. C., Mandal, K. G., Misra, A. K., & Hati, K. M., 
(2004). Comparative effectiveness of cattle manure, poultry manure, phosphocompost 
and fertilizer-NPK on three cropping systems in vertisols of semi-arid tropics. II. 
Dry matter yield, nodulation, chlorophyll content and enzyme activity. Bioresource 
Technology, 95(1), 85–93. 
Głąb, T., Pużyńska, K., Pużyński, S., Palmowska, J., & Kowalik, K., (2016). Effect of organic 
farming on a Stagnic Luvisol soil physical quality. Geoderma, 282, 16–25. 
Green, V. S., Cavigelli, M. A., Dao, T. H., & Flanagan, D. C., (2005). Soil physical properties 
and aggregate-associated C, N and P distributions in organic and conventional cropping 
systems. Soil Sci., 170(10), 822–831. 
Hadas, A., Kautsky, L., Goek, M., & Erman, K. E., (2004). Rates of decomposition of plant 
residues and available nitrogen in soil, related to residue composition through the 
stimulation of carbon and nitrogen turnover. Soil Biol. Biochem., 36, 255–266. 
Hani, N. B., Al-Ramamneh, E. A. D., Haddad, M., Al-Tawaha, A. R., & Al-Satari, Y., (2019). 
The impact of cattle manure on the content of major minerals and nitrogen uptake from 
15N isotope-labeled ammonium sulphate fertilizer in maize (Zea mays L.) plants. Pakistan 
Journal of Botany, 51(1), 185–189. 
Hillel, D., (1998). Irrigation and water-use efficiency. In: Environmental Soil Physics (pp. 
617–646). Academic Press, London. 
Hole, D., Perkins, A., Wilson, J., Alexander, I., Grice, P., & Evans, A., (2005). Does organic 
farming benefit biodiversity? Biological Conservation, 122(1), 113–130. 
Hondebrink, M. A., Cammeraat, L. H., & Cedra, A., (2017). The impact of agricultural 
management on selected soil properties in citrus orchards in Eastern Spain: A comparison 
between conventional and organic citrus orchards with drip and flood irrigation. Sci Total 
Environ., 581, 153–160. 
Jeptoo, A., Aguyoh, J. N., & Saidi, M., (2013). Tithonia manure improves carrot yield and 
quality. GJBAHS, 2(4), 136–142. 
Kaje, V. V., Sharma, D. K., Shivay, Y. S., Jat, S. L., Bhatia, A., Purakayastha, T. J., & 
Bhattacharyya, A. N., (2018). Long-term impact of organic and conventional farming on 
soil physical properties under rice (Oryza sativa) – wheat (Triticum aestivum) cropping 
system in northwestern Indo-Gangetic plains. Indian J. Agric. Sci., 88(1), 107–113. 234 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
Khan, N., Khan, M. I., Khalid, S., Iqbal, A., & Al-Tawaha, A. R., (2019). Wheat biomass and 
harvest index increases with integrated use of phosphorus, zinc, and beneficial microbes 
under semiarid climates. Journal of Microbiology, Biotechnology and Food Sciences, 
242–247. 
Knapp, V. V., & Van, D. H. M. G., (2018). A global meta-analysis of yield stability in organic 
and conservation agriculture. Nat Commun., 9(1), 3632. 
Krauss, J., Gallenberger, I., & Steffan-Dewenter, I., (2011). Decreased functional diversity 
and biological pest control in conventional compared to organic crop fields. PLoS One, 
6(5), 1–9. 
Lado, M., Paz, A., & Ben-Hur, M., (2004). Organic matter and aggregate size interactions in 
infiltration, seal formation and soil loss. Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J., 68, 935–942. 
Lampkin, N., & Padel, S., (1994). The Economics of Organic Agriculture: An International 
Perspective. CAB International, Wallingford, UK. 
Leibig, M. A., & Doran, J. W., (1999). Impact of organic production practices on soil quality 
indicators. J. Environ. Qual., 28(5), 1601–1609. 
Li, B. Y., Zhou, D. M., Cang, L., Zhand, H. L., Fan, X. H., & Qin, S. W., (2007). Soil 
micronutrient availability to crops as affected by long-term inorganic and organic 
fertilizer applications. Soil Till. Res., 96, 166–173. 
Lori, M., Symnaczik, S., Mäder, P., De Deyn, G., & Gattinger, A., (2017). Organic farming 
enhances soil microbial abundance and activity: A meta-analysis and meta-regression. 
PLoS One, 12(7), 1–25, e0180442. 
Mäder, P., Fliessbach, A., Dubois, D., Gunst, L., Fried, P., & Niggli, U., (2002). Soil fertility 
and biodiversity in organic farming. Science, 296(5573), 1694–1697. 
Mahmoodabadi, M., Amini, R. S., & Khazaeepour, K., (2010). Using animal manure for 
improving soil chemical properties under different leaching conditions. Middle-East J. 
Sci. Res., 5 (4), 214–217. 
Maltais-Landry, G., Scow, K., Brennan, E., & Vitousek, P., (2015). Long-term effect of 
compost and cover crops on soil phosphorous in two California agroecosystems. Soi Sci 
Soc Am J., 79(2), 688–697. 
Marinari, M. M., Marinari, R., Campiglia, E., & Grego, S., (2006). Chemical and biological 
indicators of soil quality in organic and conventional farming systems in Central Italy. 
Ecolog. Indic., 6(4), 701–711. 
Mikha, M. M., & Rice, C. W., (2004). Tillage and manure effects on soil and aggregate￾associated carbon and nitrogen. Soil Sci. Am. J., 68, 809–816. 
Moebius-Clune, B. N., Moebius-Clune, D. J., Gugino, B. K., Idowu, O. J., Schindelbeck, R. 
R., Ristow, A. J., Van, E. H. M., et al., (2016). Comprehensive Assessment of Soil Health. 
The Cornell Framework, Edition 3.1. (p. 123). Cornell University, NY. 
Monokrousos, N., Papatheodorou, E. M., Diamantopoulos, J. D., & Stamou, G. P., (2006). 
Soil quality variables in organically and conventionally cultivated field sites. Soil Biol. 
Biochem., 38(6), 1282–1289. 
Moravan, X., Verbeke, L., Laratte, S., & Schneider, A. R., (2018). Impact of recent conversion 
to organic farming on physical properties and their consequences on runoff, erosion and 
crusting in a silty soil. Cetena, 165, 398–407. 
Nautiyal, C. S., Chauhan, P. S., & Bhatia, C. R., (2010). Changes in soil physicochemical 
properties and microbial functional diversity due to 14 years of conversion of 
grassland to organic agriculture in semi-arid agroecosystem. Soil Till. Res., 109(2), 
55–60. Organic Farming for Soil Health and Crop Productivity 235 
Niggli, U., (2015). Sustainability of organic food production: Challenges and innovations. Proc. 
Nutr. Soc., 74(1), 83–88. 
Nikus, O., Al-Tawaha, A. M., & Turk, M. A., (2004a). Effect of manure supplemented with 
phosphate fertilizer on the fodder yield and quality of two sorghum cultivars (Sorghum 
bicolor L.). Bioscience Research, 1, 1–7. 
Nikus, O., Al-Tawaha, A. M., & Turk, M. A., (2004b). Yield response of Sorghum 
(Sorghum bicolor L.) to manufacture supplemented with phosphate fertilizer under 
semi-arid Mediterranean conditions. International Journal of Agriculture and Biology, 
6, 889–893. 
Nobile, C. M., Bravin, M. N., Becquer, T., & Paillat, J. M., (2020). Phosphorous sorption 
and availability in an andosol after a decade of organic or mineral fertilizer application: 
Importance of pH and organic carbon modifications in soil as compared to phosphorous 
accumulation. Chemosphere, 239, 124709. 
Okoroafor, I. B., Okelola, E. O., Edeh, O., Nemehute, V. C., Onu, C. N., Nwaneri, T. C., & 
Chinaka, G. I., (2013). Effect of organic manure on the growth and yield performance 
of maize in Ishiagu, Ebonyi State, Nigeria. IOSR Journal of Agriculture and Veterinary 
Science, 5(4), 28–31. 
Oquist, K. A., Strock, J. S., & Mulla, D. J., (2006). Influence of alternative and conventional 
management practices on soil physical and hydraulic properties. Vadose Zone, 5, 
356–364. 
Papadopoulos, A., Bird, N. R. A., Whitmore, A. P., & Mooney, S. J., (2014). Does organic 
management leads to enhanced soil physical quantity. Geoderma, 213, 435–443. 
Peigné, J., Vian, J. F., Payet, V., & Saby, N. P., (2018). Soil fertility after 10 years of 
conservation tillage in organic farming, Soil Till. Res., 175, 194–204. 
Puerta, V. L., Pereira, E. I. P., Wittwer, R., Van, D. H. M., & Six, J., (2018). Improvement of 
soil structure through organic crop management, conservation tillage and grass-clover 
ley. Soil Till. Res., 180, 1–9. 
Pulleman, M., Jongmans, A., Marinissen, J., & Bouma, J., (2003). Effect of organic versus 
conventional arable farming on soil structure and organic matter dynamics in a marine 
loam in Netherlands. Soil Use Manag., 19(2), 157–165. 
Reeves, J. R., & Drost, D., (2012). Yields and soil quality under transitional organic high 
tunnel tomatoes. HortScience, 47(1), 38–44. 
Reeves, J. R., Hoagland, L. A., Villalba, J. J., Carr, P. M., Atucha, A., Cambardella, C., Davis, 
D. R., & Delate, K., (2016). Organic farming, soil health, and food quality: Considering 
possible links. In: Advances in Agronomy (pp. 319–367). Academic Press, London. 
Reeves, W. D., (1997). The role of soil organic matter in maintaining soil quality in continuous 
cropping systems. Soil Till. Res., 43, 131–167. 
Reganold, J. P., (1995). Soil quality and profitability of biodynamic and conventional farming 
systems: A review. Am. J. Alter. Agric., 10(1), 36–45. 
Reganold, J. P., Elliott, L. F., & Unger, Y. L., (1987). Long-term effects of organic and 
conventional farming on soil erosion. Nature, 330(6146), 370. 
Rehber, E., & Turhan, S., (2002). Prospects and challenges for developing countries in trade 
and production of organic food and fibers-The case of Turkey. British Food Journal, 104, 
371–390. 
Reynolds, W. D., Drury, C. F., Yang, X. M., Fox, C. A., Tan, C. S., & Zhang, T. Q., (2007). 
Land management effects on the near-surface physical quality of a clay loam soil. Soil 
Till. Res., 96, 316–330. 236 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
Schjønning, P., Elmholt, S., Munkholm, L. J., & Debosz, K., (2002). Soil quality aspects of 
humid sandy loams as influenced by organic and conventional long-term management. 
Agric. Ecosys. Environ., 88(3), 195–214. 
Schonbeck, B. M., Jerkins, D., & Ory, J., (2017). Soil Health and Organic Farming (pp. 1–44). 
Santa Cruz, USA. 
Seitz, S., Goebes, P., Puerta, V. L., Pereira, E. I. P., Wittwer, R., Six, J., & Scholten, T., (2019). 
Conservation tillage and organic farming reduce soil erosion. Agron Sustain Dev., 39(1), 4. 
Shukla, M. K., Lal, R., & Ebinger, M., (2006). Determination of soil quality indicators by 
factor analysis. Soil Till. Res., 87, 194–204. 
Sihi, D., Dari, B., Sharma, D. K., Pathak, H., Nain, L., & Sharma, O. P., (2017). Evaluation 
of soil health in organic vs. conventional farming of basmati rice in North India. J. Plant 
Nutr. Soil. Sci., 180(3), 389–406. 
Silvester, M. N., & Sujalu, A. P., (2013). Effects of organic and inorganic fertilizers on growth, 
activity of nitrate reductase and chlorophyll contents of peanuts (Arachis hypogaea). J. 
Agrofor., 7, 206–211. 
Smith, P., House, J. I., Bustamante, M., Sobocká, J., Harper, R., Pan, G., West, P. C., et al., 
(2016). Global change pressures on soils from land use and management. Glob. Chang. 
Biol., 22, 1008–1028. 
Stockdale, E. A., Lampkin, N. H., Hovi, M., Keatinge, R., Lennartsson, E. K. M., MacDonald, 
D. W., Padel, S., et al., (2001). Agronomic and environmental implications of organic 
farming systems. Adv. Agron., 70, 261–327. 
Sudjatmiko, S., Muktamar, Z., Chozin, M., Setyowati, N., & Fahrurrozi, F., (2018). Changes 
in chemical properties of soil in an organic agriculture system. In: IOP Conference Series: 
Earth and Environmental Science, 215(1), 012016. 
Suja, G., & Sreekumar, J., (2014). Implications of organic management on yield, tuber quality 
and soil health in yams in humid tropics. International Journal of Plant Production, 8(3), 
291–310. 
Tully, K. L., & Mc Askill, C., (2019). Promoting soil health in organically managed systems: 
A review. Org. Agr., 1–20. 
Turk, M. A., & Tawaha, A. M., (2001). Common vetch (Vicia sativa L.) productivity as 
influenced by rate and method of phosphate fertilization in a Mediterranean environment. 
Agricultura Mediterranea, 131, 108–111. 
Turk, M. A., & Tawaha, A. M., (2002a). Onion (Allium cepa L.) as influenced by rate and 
method of phosphorus placement. Crop Research, 23(1), 105–107. 
Turk, M. A., & Tawaha, A. M., (2002b). Impact of seeding rate, seeding date and method of 
phosphorous application in faba bean (Vicia faba L. Minor) in the absence of moisture 
stress. Biotechnology, Agronomy, Society and Environment, 6(3), 171–178. 
Turk, M. A., & Tawaha, A. M., (2003a). Allelopathic effect of black mustard (Brassica nigra 
L.) on germination and growth of wild oat (Avena fatua L.). Crop Protection, 22(4), 673. 
Turk, M. A., & Tawaha, A. M., (2003b). Allelopathic effect of black mustard (Brassica 
nigra L.) on germination and growth of wild barley (Hordeum spontaneum). Journal of 
Agronomy and Crop Science, 189(5), 298–303. 
Turk, M. A., & Tawaha, A. M., (2004). Effect of variable sowing ratios and sowing rates of 
bitter vetch on the herbage yield of oat-bitter vetch mixed cropping. In: Peltonen-Sainio, 
P., & Topi-Hulmi, M., (eds.), Proceedings 7th International Oat Conference. MTT. 
Turk, M. A., Hmaeed, K. M., Aqeel, A. M., & Tawaha, A. M., (2003c). Nutritional status 
of durum wheat grown in soil supplemented with olive mill by-products. Agrochimica, 
47(5, 6), 209–219.‏ Organic Farming for Soil Health and Crop Productivity 237 
Turk, M. A., Lee, K. D., & Tawaha, A. M., (2005). Inhibitory effects of aqueous extracts of 
black mustard on germination and growth of radish. Research Journal of Agriculture and 
Biological Sciences, 1(3), 227–231. 
Turk, M. A., Tawaha, A. M., & Samara, N., (2003b). Effects of seedling rate and date, and 
phosphorous application on growth and yield of carbon vetch (Vicia narbonensis). 
Agronomie, 23, 1–4. 
Turk, M. A., Tawaha, A. M., & Shatnawi, M., (2003a). Lentil (Lens culinaris Medik) response 
to plant density, sowing date, phosporous fertilization and Ethephon application in the 
absence of moisture stress. Journal of Agronomy and Crop Science, 189(1), 1–6. 
UN Convention on Biological Diversity, (1996). Conference of Parties Decision III/11 on 
Conservation and Sustainable Use of Agricultural Biological Diversity. Buenos Aires, 
Argentina. 
USDA, (2020) Natural Resources Conservation Service. Soil health assessment. https://www. 
nrcs.usda.gov/wps/portal/nrcs/main/soils/health/assessment/ (accessed on 12 July 2021). 
Van, D. A. D., De Vos, O. J., Korthals, G. W., & Van, B. A. H., (2006). Effects of organic 
versus conventional management on chemical and biological parameters in agricultural 
soils. App. Soil Ecol., 31(1, 2), 120–135. 
Von, A. C., Bünemann, E. K., Schmalz, H., Portmann, M., Adamtey, N., Musyoka, M. W., & 
Fliessbach, A., (2020). Soil quality and phosphorus status after nine years of organic and 
conventional farming at two input levels in the central highlands of Kenya. Geoderma, 
362, 114112. 
Willer, H., Lernoud, J., & Kemper, L., (2018). The world of organic culture 2018: Summary. 
In: The World of Organic Agriculture: Statistics and Emerging Trends (pp. 22–31). 
Research Institute of Organic Agriculture, FiBL and IFOAM-Organics International. 
Williams, A., & Hedlund, K., (2013). Indicators of soil ecosystem service in conventional and 
organic arable fields along a gradient of landscape heterogeneity in southern Sweden. 
Appl. Soil Ecol., 65, 1–7. 
Williams, N. D., & Petticrew, E. L., (2009). Aggregate stability in organically and conventionally 
farmed soils. Soil Use Manag., 25(3), 284–292. 
Wittwer, R. A., Dorn, B., Jossi, W., & Van, D. H. M. G., (2017). Cover crops support ecological 
intensification of arable cropping systems. Scientific Reports, 7, 41911. 
Zhang, X., Wu, X., Zhang, S., Xing, Y., Wang, R., & Liang, W., (2014). Organic amendment 
effects on aggregate-associated organic C, microbial biomass C and glomalin in agricultural 
soils. Catena, 123, 188–194.  
 
 
 
CHAPTER 10
 
USE OF BIOCHAR IN AGRICULTURE: 
AN INSPIRING WAY IN EXISTING 
SCENARIO 
IMRAN,1
 AMANULLAH,1
 ABDEL RAHMAN M. AL-TAWAHA,2 
ABDEL RAZZAQ M. AL-TAWAHA,3
 SAMIA KHANUM,4 
DEVARAJAN THANGADURAI,5
 JEYABALAN SANGEETHA,6 
HIBA ALATRASH,7
 PALANI SARANRAJ,8
 NIDAL ODAT,9 
MAZEN A. ATEYYA,10 MUNIR TURK,11 ARUN KARNWAL,12 
SAMEENA LONE,13 and KHURSHEED HUSSAIN13 
1
Department of Agronomy, The University of Agriculture, Peshawar, 
Pakistan 
2
Department of Biological Sciences, Al-Hussein Bin Talal University, 
P.O. Box 20, Maan, Jordan 
3
Department of Crop Science, Faculty of Agriculture, 
University Putra Malaysia, Serdang–43400, Selangor, Malaysia 
4
Department of Botany, University of the Punjab, Lahore, Pakistan 
5
Department of Botany, Karnatak University, Dharwad–580003, 
Karnataka, India 
6
Department of Environmental Science, Central University of Kerala, 
Kasaragod–671316, Kerala, India 
7
General Commission for Scientific Agricultural Research, Syria 
8
Department of Microbiology, Sacred Heart College (Autonomous), 
Tirupattur–635601, Tamil Nadu, India 
9
Department of Medical Laboratories, Al-Balqa Applied University, 
Al-Salt–19117, Jordan  
240 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
10Faculty of Agricultural Technology, Al Balqa Applied University, 

Al-Salt–19117, Jordan
 
11Department of Plant Production, 

Jordan University of Science and Technology, Irbid, Jordan
 
12Department of Microbiology, School of Bioengineering and 

Biosciences, Lovely Professional University, Phagwara, Punjab, India
 
13Division of Vegetable Science, SKUAST-Kashmir, Jammu and Kashmir, 

India
 
ABSTRACT 
Numerous factors restrain food crop production in semi-arid and Medi￾terranean regions. Soil fertility and plant nutrition have had a significant 
effect on crop production in the 20th century. Biochar has been utilized in 
agriculture to increase soil health, improve soil fertility, and increase crop 
productivity. Disturbed edaphic properties like high levels of rocks and a 
low pH level, high radiation levels, rapid drainage during the germination 
process, compaction of the soil, contamination, and other adverse effects, 
can be improved with biochar deposits. There is little understanding of the 
specific mechanisms that underlie biochar’s contribution to plant response. 
This chapter focuses on: (i) biochar application and phosphate starvation 
in plants; (ii) soil microbiota and biochar as a symbiosis for plant life; 
(iii) biochar act as a drought-resistant tool; (iv) reclamation of soil salinity 
through biochar amendments; (v) biochar and soil fertility; and (vi) biochar 
amendments and plant growth. 
10.1 INTRODUCTION 
Biochar application in agriculture is getting much attention in changing 
climatic scenario. A large number of environmental and agricultural factors 
limit the production of major food crops in semi-arid and Mediterranean 
regions (Turk and Tawaha, 2002b; Abebe et al., 2005a, b; Lee et al., 2005d; 
Nikus et al., 2005a). Biochar application paly an important role in soil 
organic carbon building and soil fertility status (Turk and Tawaha, 2001, Biochar in Agriculture 241 
2002a; Tawaha and Turk, 2002). Biochar is utilized in agriculture for the last 
decades, to enhance soil health, soil fertility, and crop production (Bos et al., 
2005; Chimenti et al., 2006; Brussaard et al., 2007; Ping et al., 2007; Zhan et 
al., 2011; Akhtar et al., 2015b; Khan et al., 2016). It is stated that soil biochar 
and nutrients stress is most harmful in combinations with other abiotic 
stress and could be treated with biochar application. These findings were 
concerning those of Roelofs et al. (2008) who revealed that abiotic stress 
reduce the grain yield of cereal crops. The production of major food crops 
is restricted by many environmental and agricultural factors. The integration 
of biochar and especially of biochar is an antique farming practice aimed at 
enhancing soil carbon, nutrient, soil porosity, soil quality, soil fertility, and 
water infiltration and water retention (Palta et al., 2006; Ping et al., 2007; 
Peng et al., 2008; Palm and Volkenburgh, 2012; Paz et al., 2014; Pant et al., 
2015). Biochar treatment with chemical and biological fertilizers may help 
in improved crop production and soil quality through successful manage￾ment. Integrated nutrients management is essential to improve crop growth, 
seed yield, nodulation, and crop quality (Tawaha et al., 2005a, b; Yang et al., 
2005; Zheng et al., 2005; Assaf et al., 2006). In this chapter, we have focused 
on biochar and it can be the right way to soil sustainability. Biochar applica￾tion plays a key role in providing nutrients, improving soil functions, and 
reducing soil degradation (Turk and Tawaha, 2002b; Turk et al., 2003a–c). 
Biochar application improves soil fertility and increases crop yield. When 
chemical fertilizer without organic amendments is continually applied to the 
soil, it decreases soil bulk density and increases the porosity and buffering 
capacity of the soil (Nikus et al., 2005b; Mesfine et al., 2005; Sulpanjani 
et al., 2005a). Adding organic carbon and biochar have agricultural and 
economical importance due to enhancing soil fertility, improving soil health 
and properties by providing important macro and micronutrients, as well as 
sustaining soil productivity such as, mobilization of nutrients and sorption 
capacity which, resulting in increasing crop growth and production. (Abebe 
et al., 2005c, d; Abera et al., 2005; Assefa et al., 2005; Lee et al., 2005a, b). 
The use of organic sources along with the application of chemical fertilizers 
has the potential to extend the assembly of soybean and maize. Frequent 
use of biochar with chemical fertilizers enhances crop production. Biochar 
amendments may help in improving soil properties by obtaining a high yield 
as compared to inorganic fertilizers. Adequate agricultural practices with 
the recycling of organic sources (plant biomass) and the addition of biochar 
into the soil help decrease soil fertility degradation, improve soil quality 
(chemical, physical, and biological characters), nutrients supply, and crop  
242 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
production, as well as enhance farmer’s income. Low soil quality and poor 
supply of nutrients are a major cause of low crop production. (Sulpanjani et 
al., 2005b, c; Tawaha et al., 2005a, b; Yang et al., 2005; Zheng et al., 2005; 
Assaf et al., 2006). Low soil quality and poor supply of nutrients are a major 
cause of low crop production. Regardless of soil types and crop seasons, 
organic applications are usually more effective to increase soil C and biochar 
status as compared to mineral fertilizers (Sulpanjani et al., 2005b, c; Tawaha 
et al., 2005a, b; Yang et al., 2005; Zheng et al., 2005; Assaf et al., 2006). 
10.2	 BIOCHAR APPLICATION AND PHOSPHATE STARVATION IN 
PLANTS 
World soil is lacking frequent availability of important plant nutrients of 
phosphorus plant (Prado et al., 2000; Palta et al., 2006; Ping et al., 2007; 
Peng et al., 2008; Paz et al., 2014; Pant et al., 2015). Manure, poultry manure 
(PM) and different sources of organic carbon and biochar provide organic 
material to the soil. Maize production is improved by adding PM which will 
provide essential nutrients to the soil which improves soil fertility. After 
the application of PM, the crop yield and yield component of maize were 
significantly increased. Some scientists have shown that growth attributes 
of rice were significantly increased after the application of biochar at 12.5 t 
ha–1 combined with Azospirillum (2 kg ha–1). On the other hand, biofertilizer 
application resulted in 6.5% in 1st year and 8.16% in 2nd year in rice due to 
biofertilizer application (Bos et al., 2005; Chimenti et al., 2006; Brussaard et 
al., 2007). Soil having maximum biochar and carbon is considered healthy 
and biologically diverse, resulting in more chances of the survival of the 
plant (Duan et al., 2007; Farahbakhsh, 2012; Imran and Khan, 2015, 2017; 
Imran, 2018). Biochar act synergistically to improve crop performance under 
harmful condition (Gonçalves-Alvim et al., 2001; Flowers, 2004; Gasco et 
al., 2012; González-Villagra et al., 2018). Several local conditions including 
climate, soil chemistry, and soil condition all influence biochar agronomic 
benefits (Lehmann et al., 2011; Imran et al., 2015–2018). Microbial biomass 
increased in biochar amended soils act as a biocontrol agent and mitigate 
abiotic stress induce damages (Heans, 1984; Imran and Khan, 2015; Imran 
et al., 2020). It has been shown that biochar application is a master regulator 
of P-starvation response in plants (González-Villagra et al., 2018). Biochar 
amended soil has been shown to regulate extensive secondary metabolites 
during phosphorus limitation stress (Bos et al., 2005; Brussaard et al., 2007).  
 
 
Biochar in Agriculture 243 
10.3	 SOIL MICROBIOTA AND BIOCHAR A SYMBIOSIS FOR 
PLANT LIFE 
Biochar has positive impacts on soil microbes. Lehmann et al. (2011) stated 
microbial biomass increased in biochar-amended soils (Palta et al., 2006; 
Ping et al., 2007; Peng et al., 2008; Palm and Volkenburgh, 2012; Paz et al., 
2014; Pant et al., 2015). Also, biochar application causes significant changes 
in microbial community composition and enzyme activities in both bulk soil 
and the rhizosphere (Lu and Vonshak, 2002; Lehmann et al., 2011; Lei et al., 
2011; Imran et al., 2020). 
10.4	 BIOCHAR ACT AS A DROUGHT RESISTANT TOOL 
Water is needed in so many essential processes in plant growth (Figure 10.1) 
and its scarcity can cause tremendous loss of economic yield (Van et al., 2001; 
Wang and Jin, 2007; Wolfe, 2007; Sidari et al., 2008; Tiwari et al., 2011; 
Zargar et al., 2017; Tombesi et al., 2018; Karim and Imran, 2019). Plants 
have come up with many strategies to deal with drought stress (Figure 10.2). 
One of the theses strategies is to increase the rate of water infiltration and 
soil porosity (Yeo et al., 1990; Xu et al., 2008; Zakaria et al., 2012; Younis et 
al., 2015; Zargar et al., 2017). Biochar application can enhance soil porosity 
and increasing water infiltration in various types of soil. It has been reported 
that biochar application regulating hormone secretion that maintains stomatal 
opening and closing. The hormone which is regulating by biochar application 
is abscisic acid (ABA). Current studies showed that levels of ABA increased 
in drought-stressed plants (Van et al., 2001; Wang and Jin, 2007; Wang and 
Xu, 2013). They reported that exposing plants to drought stress increases the 
levels of ABA in order to save whatever water they had in their leaves (Rubio 
et al., 2001; Shamsi and Kobraee, 2013; Savvides et al., 2015; Imran et al., 
2020). Additionally, biochar application can regulate another important factor 
that improves drought tolerance and water uptake aquaporins (AQPs). 
10.5	 RECLAMATION OF SOIL SALINITY THROUGH BIOCHAR 
AMENDMENTS 
Soil salinity which is one of the most serious abiotic stress that can be affect 
not only on the plants growth but also on the on the plant’s production 244 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
(Martinez-Beltran and Manzur, 2005; Lehmann and Joseph, 2009; Khan et 
al., 2010; Kammann et al., 2011; Lashari et al., 2013; Imran et al., 2015, 
2019; Imran and Amanullah, 2018), this problem is most significant in both 
dry and semi-arid area where there is a dearth of water resources (Martinez￾Beltran and Manzur, 2005; Maestre et al., 2007; Lei et al., 2011; Imran et al., 
2015, 2017; Imran, 2017, 2018). 
FIGURE 10.1 Biochar could mitigate drought stress and enhance the growth and productivity 
of soybean. 
FIGURE 10.2 Comparison of soybean crop under drought stress with and without biochar 
application.  
Biochar in Agriculture 245 
All stages of plants can be negatively affected because of the salinity of 
soil from the germination of seeds through to the vegetative growth stage 
and reproductive development. All these harmful effects lead to decrease in 
the plant production soil. Soil salinity causes ion poisoning, osmotic, and 
oxidative stresses, and nutrient deficiency (Bano and Fatima, 2009). This 
reduces the plant’s absorption of soil water which leads to inhibition of 
photosynthesis (Rubio et al., 2001; Lu and Vonshak, 2002; Lehmann et al., 
2011; Lei et al., 2011). One of the most important biochar applications to 
improve plant tolerance to salt stress is the disruption of the Na+
/K+
 ratio 
in the cytoplasm of the plant cell (Joseph and Jini, 2011; Jagatheeswari and 
Ranganathan, 2012; Kamara et al., 2014). 
Increasing concentrations of Na+
 in the soil can cause a decrease in the 
plant’s ability to utilize soil water; here application of organic carbon and 
biochar improved the physical, chemical, and biological properties of soil. 
Many studied showed the benefit of using biochar as fertilizers to improve 
the fertility of soil which can be resulted in the increase in production 
of plants (Bos et al., 2005; Chimenti et al., 2006; Brussaard et al., 2007) 
mentioned that using biochar increased the yield for the rice and in the same 
way increase in nutrient use efficiency. 
10.6 BIOCHAR AND SOIL FERTILITY 
Biochar application use is still very limited in the present agriculture scenario 
because of poor understanding of the mechanisms by which it improves soil 
fertility (Bruinsma, 1963; Capell and Doerffling, 1993; Bohnert and Jensen, 
1996; Bos et al., 2005; Chimenti et al., 2006; Brussaard et al., 2007). Addi￾tion of Biochar in the soil results in change of the microbial populations 
in the rhizosphere leading to the beneficial microorganism populations 
ultimately promoting plant growth and resistance to biotic stresses. Although 
the mechanism, resulting in the alteration of the microbial populations in the 
rhizosphere is still unknown. 
The development of systemic resistance towards several foliar patho￾gens in three crop systems has been shown earlier for biochar-induced 
plant protection against soil-borne diseases (Lehmann and Joseph, 2009; 
Khan et al., 2010; Lashari et al., 2013; Imran et al., 2015, 2019; Imran and 
Amanullah, 2018). Some studies pointed that biochar induces responses 
along with both systemic acquired resistance (SAR) and induced systemic 
resistance (ISR) pathways leading to a major controlling system (Lu and 
Vonshak, 2002; Lei et al., 2011). The result of biochar soil amendment on the  
246 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
different soil-plant-microbe interactions leading to a significant role in plant 
health is being studied in this review. 
Attainment of resistance to different diseases by the plant can be one of 
the benefits gained from applying biochar to soil (Raghothama, 1999; Prado 
et al., 2000; Rengasamy, 2002; Rashid et al., 2003; Ping et al., 2007; Peng 
et al., 2008; Roelofs et al., 2008; Raza, 2012; Paz et al., 2014; Imran, 2015, 
2018; Rajalakshmi et al., 2015; Iqbal et al., 2017). Application of biochar at 
12.5 t ha–1 significantly increased the growth and yield attributes and yield of 
rice as reported earlier by several researchers. 
Biochar is utilized in agriculture for the last decades, in improving soil 
quality, soil fertility, and crop productivity (Bos et al., 2005; Chimenti et al., 
2006; Brussaard et al., 2007; Ping et al., 2007; Zhan et al., 2011; Akhtar et 
al., 2015b; Khan et al., 2016). Mittler (2006) stated that nutrients stress is 
most harmful in combinations with other abiotic stress and could be treated 
with biochar application. These findings were about those of Roelofs et al. 
(2008) who revealed that salinity and drought stress combined limits the 
grain yield of maize. The production of major food crops is restricted by 
many environmental and agricultural factors. The integration of biochar is 
an antique farming practice aimed at enhancing soil air, nutrient provision, 
soil porosity, soil quality, soil fertility, and water infiltration and water 
retention. 
10.7 BIOCHAR AND PLANT PRODUCTION 
Biochar application has been applied to improve tolerance to abiotic stresses 
in crop plants. Biochar application enhances enzyme activation and may 
increase a stress-inducing chemical in the plant; hence, it stimulates the 
plant’s defense mechanism (Raghothama, 1999; Prado et al., 2000; Ping et 
al., 2007; Peng et al., 2008; Paz et al., 2014). So, when abiotic stress happens, 
the plant has already prepared defenses strategies that can be activated faster 
and improve tolerance (Lu and Vonshak, 2002). Over generations, many 
plants have mutated and built various strategies to reduce salinity effects 
(Rashid et al., 2003; Imran, 2015, 2018; Rajalakshmi et al., 2015; Iqbal 
et al., 2017). Biochar application has positive effects on regulating plant 
growth and development under stress conditions (Palta et al., 2006; Palm 
and Volkenburgh, 2012; Pant et al., 2015). With biochar application under 
stress conditions, plants respond very differently from one another, even 
from a plant living in the same area (Neto et al., 2004; Shamsi and Kobraee,  
Biochar in Agriculture 247 
2013; Savvides et al., 2015). Several studies have stated that adding charcoal 
to the soil increases the yield of moong, soybean, and pea (Raghothama, 
1999; Prado et al., 2000; Rengasamy, 2002; Rashid et al., 2003; Ping et 
al., 2007; Peng et al., 2008; Roelofs et al., 2008; Raza, 2012; Paz et al., 
2014; Imran, 2015, 2018; Rajalakshmi et al., 2015; Iqbal et al., 2017), also 
applying charcoal to the soil increase the shoot and root biomass of birch and 
pine (Rashid et al., 2003; Imran, 2015, 2018; Iqbal et al., 2017). Likewise, 
Sugi trees (Cryptomeria japonica) biomass production increased due to the 
soil application of charcoal (Sidari et al., 2008; Karim and Imran, 2019). 
Several studies reported that applying biochar to Colombian savannah soils 
increased the maize yield by 28 to 140% compared to the unamended control 
(Prado et al., 2000; Ping et al., 2007; Peng et al., 2008). 
10.8 BIOCHAR AMENDMENTS AND PLANT GROWTH 
The capacity of biochar to increase crop production, crop response can be 
attributed to direct effects via biochar-supplied nutrients (Munns, 2002; 
Munns et al., 2006; Munns and Tester, 2008), or to many other indirect 
effects, including: increasing the retention of nutrient and water in soil 
(Rengasamy, 2002; Rashid et al., 2003; Roelofs et al., 2008; Raza, 2012; 
Imran, 2015, 2018; Rajalakshmi et al., 2015; Iqbal et al., 2017). Biochar 
resulted in higher crop production with low P availability and enhanced the 
response to N and NP chemical fertilizer treatments (Munns, 2002; Neto et 
al., 2004; Munns et al., 2006; Munns and Tester, 2008; Nazarli et al., 2011). 
Utilizing biochar (30 and 60 t ha–1) in the Mediterranean basin improved the 
biomass and grain yield by up to 30% in durum wheat, and the effect lasted 
for two consecutive seasons (Neto et al., 2004; Nazarli et al., 2011). 
Generally, several results confirm the efficiency of biochar applications in 
improving crops production, which could be either through the direct effects 
via biochar-supplied nutrients (Munns, 2002; Munns et al., 2006; Munns and 
Tester, 2008), or through many other indirect effects, such as: (i) increasing 
the retention of nutrients and water in soil; (ii) increasing the cation exchange 
capacity in soil; (iii) improving the physical properties of the soil; (iv) 
improving the transformations and turnover of P and S (Rengasamy, 2002; 
Rashid et al., 2003; Roelofs et al., 2008; Raza, 2012; Imran, 2015, 2018; 
Rajalakshmi et al., 2015; Iqbal et al., 2017); (v) promoting the mycorrhizal 
fungi (Rajalakshmi et al., 2015); (vi) neutralizing the phytotoxic compounds 
in the soil (Rengasamy, 2002; Roelofs et al., 2008; Raza, 2012; Rajalakshmi  
248 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
et al., 2015); (vii) making changes in soil microbial populations and func￾tions (Rubio et al., 2001; Shamsi and Kobraee, 2013; Savvides et al., 2015). 
These effects are associated with each other and may act synergistically to 
enhance crop production (Rubio et al., 2001; Shamsi and Kobraee, 2013). 
There are many factors that influence on the physical and chemical prop￾erties of biochar and its agronomical benefits, such as, climate, chemical 
properties of the soil, conditions of the soil, and variation of biomass 
feedstocks and pyrolysis conditions (Savvides et al., 2015). The production 
of major food crops is restricted by many environmental and agricultural 
factors. The integration of biochar is an antique farming practice aimed at 
enhancing soil air, nutrient provision, soil porosity, soil quality, soil fertility, 
and water infiltration and water retention. The combination of organic 
and mineral fertilizers with inoculation of beneficial microbes enhances 
mutual output. Organic, chemical, and biological interactions not only help 
plant production and soil quality through successful management but also 
optimize the use of chemical fertilizers in various crop systems. Integrated 
management of P is crucial to enhance crop growth, seed yield, nodulation, 
and human health. This chapter discusses how organic amendments can be 
the right way to soil sustainability. 
Biochar application contains an essential role in providing nutrients, 
improving soil functions, and reducing soil degradation. The addition of 
organic carbon and biochar enhances soil fertility and increases crop produc￾tivity. Frequent use of fertilizers increases the soil porosity and decreases 
soil bulk density. Biochar is generally utilized in different forms. The use 
of organic sources along with the application of chemical fertilizers has the 
potential to extend the assembly of soybean and maize. Frequently use of 
biochar with chemical fertilizers enhances crop production. Biochar amend￾ments may help in improving soil properties by obtaining high yield as 
compared with inorganic fertilizers. 
10.9 CONCLUSION 
Biochar is an activated carbon soil conditioner that can alleviate the negative 
impacts of salinity, drought, heat, and cold, and heavy metal stresses. Soil 
fertility is harshly effected by drought and salt stress which ultimately reduce 
crop growth and development. It could be concluded that biochar application 
may be helpful for plant growth, biomass, and yield under either drought or 
salt stress. Biochar in Agriculture 249 
KEYWORDS
 
• amendments 
• biochar 
• drought 
• induced systemic resistance 
• plant production 
• soil fertility 
REFERENCES 
Abebe, G., Assefa, T., Harrun, H., Mesfine, T., & Al-Tawaha, A. M., (2005d). Participatory 
selection of drought-tolerant maize varieties using mother and baby methodology: A 
case study in the semi-arid zones of the central rift valley of Ethiopia. World Journal of 
Agricultural Sciences, 1(1), 22–27. 
Abebe, G., Hattar, B., & Al-Tawaha, A. M., (2005c). Nutrient availability as affected by 
manure application in cowpea [Vigna unguiculata (L.) Walp.] on calcareous soils. 
Journal of Agriculture and Social Science, 1(1), 1–6. 
Abebe, G., Sahile, G., & Al-Tawaha, A. M., (2005a). Evaluation of potential trap crops on 
Orobanche soil seed bank and tomato yield in the central rift valley of Ethiopia. World 
Journal of Agricultural Sciences, 1(2), 148–151. 
Abebe, G., Sahile, G., & Al-Tawaha, A. M., (2005b). Effect of soil solarization on Orobanche 
soil seed bank and tomato yield in the central rift valley of Ethiopia. World Journal of 
Agricultural Sciences, 1(2), 143–147. 
Abera, T., Feyisa, D., Yusuf, H., Nikus, O., & Al-Tawaha, A. M., (2005). Grain yield of maize 
as affected by biogas slurry and N-P fertilizer rate at Bako, Western Oromiya, Ethiopia. 
Bioscience Research, 2(1), 31–38. 
Akhtar, S. S., Andersen, M. N., & Liu, F., (2015a). Biochar mitigates salinity stress in potato. 
Journal of Agronomy and Crop Sciences, 201, 321–400. 
Akhtar, S. S., Andersen, M. N., & Liu, F., (2015b). Residual effects of biochar on improving 
growth, physiology, and yield of wheat under salt stress. Agricultural Water Management, 
158, 61–68. 
Akhtar, S. S., Andersen, M. N., Naveed, M., Zahir, Z. A., & Liu, F., (2015). Interactive effect 
of biochar and plant growth-promoting bacterial endophytes on ameliorating salinity 
stress in maize. Functional Plant Biology, 42, 770–781. 
Ali, I., Khan, A. A., Imran, Ullah, I., Khan, A., Asim, M., Ali, I., et al., (2019). Humic acids 
and nitrogen levels optimizing productivity of green gram (Vigna radiata L.). Russian 
Agriculture Sciences, 45(1), 43–47. 
Al-Tawaha, A. M., & Turk, M. A., (2001). Effects of dates and rates of sowing on yield 
and yield components of carbon vetch under semi-arid conditions. Acta Agronomica 
Hungarica, 49(1), 103–105. 250 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
Al-Tawaha, A. M., & Turk, M. A., (2002). Lentil (Lens culinaris Medic.) productivity as 
influenced by rate and method of phosphate placement in a Mediterranean environment. 
Acta Agronomica Hungarica, 50(2), 197–201. 
Al-Tawaha, A. M., Turk, M. A., Lee, K. D., Supanjani, Nikus, O., Al-Rifaee, M., & Sen, R., 
(2005a). Awnless barley response to crop management under Jordanian environment. 
Bioscience Research, 2(3), 125–129. 
Al-Tawaha, A. R. M., Turk, M. A., & Lee, K. D., (2005b). Adaptation of chickpea to cultural 
practices in a Mediterranean type environment. Research Journal of Agriculture and 
Biological Science, 1(2), 152–157. 
Amonette, J. E., & Joseph, S., (2009). Characteristics of biochar: Microchemical properties. 
In: Lehmann, J., & Joseph, S., (eds.), Biochar for Environmental Management: Science 
and Technology (pp. 33–52). Earthscan, London. 
Anwar, S., Israeel, Iqbal, B., Khan, A. A., Imran, Shah, W. A., Islam, M., et al., (2016). 
Nitrogen and phosphorus fertilization of improved varieties for enhancing phenological 
traits of wheat. Pure and Applied Biology, 5(3), 511–519. 
Armor, N. B., Hamed, K. B., Debez, A., & Grignonand, C. C., (2005). Physiological and 
antioxidant responses of perennial halophyte Crithmum maritimum to salinity. Plant 
Science, 168(4), 889–899. 
Arshad, M., Shaharoona, B., & Mahmood, T., (2008). Inoculation with Pseudomonas spp. 
containing ACC-deaminase partially eliminates the effects of drought stress on growth, 
yield, and ripening of pea (Pisum sativum L.). Pedosphere, 18, 611–620. 
Assaf, T. A., Hameed, K. M., Turk, M. A., & Al-Tawaha, A. M., (2006). Effect of soil 
amendment with olive mill by-products under soil solarization on growth and productivity 
of faba bean and their symbiosis with mycorrhizal fungi. World Journal of Agricultural 
Sciences, 2(1), 21–28. 
Assefa, T., Abebe, G., Fininsa, C., Tesso, B., & Al-Tawaha, A. M., (2005). Participatory bean 
breeding with women and smallholder farmers in eastern Ethiopia. World Journal of 
Agricultural Sciences, 1(1), 28–35. 
Ayaz, F. A., Kadioglu, A., & Turgut, T. R., (2000). Water stress effects on the content of 
low molecular weight carbohydrates and phenolic acids in Cienanthe setosa. Candian 
Journal of Plant Sciences, 80, 373–378. 
Badridze, G., Weidner, A., Asch, F., & Borner, A., (2009). Variation in salt tolerance within Georgian 
wheat germplasm collection. Genetic Resources and Crop Evolution, 56, 1125–1130. 
Bano, A., & Fatima, M., (2009). Salt tolerance in Zea mays (L.) following inoculation with 
Rhizobium and Pseudomonas. Biol. Fertility Soils., 45, 405–413. 
Baqa, S., Khan, A. Z., Inamullah, Imran, Khan, A. A., Anwar, S., Iqbal, B., Khan, S., & Usman, 
A., (2015). Influence of biochar and phosphorus application on yield and yield components 
of wheat. J. Pure Appl. Biol., 4(4), 458–464. 
Bates, L. S., Waldren, R. P., & Teare, I. D., (1973). Rapid determination of free proline for 
water-stress studies. Plant and Soil, 39, 205–207. 
Bohnert, H. J., & Jensen. R. G., (1996). Strategies for engineering water-stress tolerance in 
plants. Trends in Biotechnology, 14, 89–97. 
Bos, C., Juillet, B., Fouillet, H., Turlan, L., Dare, S., Luengo, C., Ntounda, R., et al., (2005). 
Postprandial metabolic utilization of wheat protein in humans. The American Journal of 
Clinical Nutrition, 81, 87–94. 
Bruinsma, J., (1963). The quantitative analysis of chlorophyll a and b in plant extract. 
Photochemistry and Photobiology, 2, 241–249. Biochar in Agriculture 251 
Brussaard, L., De Ruiter, P. C., & Brown, G. G., (2007). Soil biodiversity for agricultural 
sustainability. Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment, 121(3), 233–244. 
Capell, B., & Doerffling, K., (1993). Genotype specific difference in chilling tolerance of 
maize in relation to chilling induce changes in water status and abscisic acid accumulation. 
Physiologia Plantarum, 88, 638–646. 
Chimenti, C. A., Marcantonio, M., & Hall, J. A., (2006). Divergent selection for osmotic 
adjustment results in improved drought tolerance in maize (Zea mays L.) in both early 
growth and flowering phases. Field Crops Research, 95, 305–315. 
Conde, A., Chaves, M. M., & Gero´s, H., (2011). membrane transport, sensing and signaling 
in plant adaptation to environmental stress. Plant and Cell Physiology, 52(9), 1583–1602. 
Cramer, G. R., Urano, K., Delrot, S., Pezzotti, M., & Shinozaki, K., (2011). Effects of abiotic 
stress on plants: A systems biology perspective. BMC Plant Biology, 11, 163. 
Duan, D. Y., Li, W. Q., Liu, X. J., Ouyang, H. P., & An, P., (2007). Seed germination and 
seedling growth of Suaeda salsa under salt stress. Annales Botanici Fennici, 44, 161–169. 
Dubois, M., Gilles, K., Hammiltron, J. K., Robers, P. A., & Smith, F., (1951). A colorimetric 
method for the determination of sugars. Nature, 168, 167–168. 
Farahbakhsh, H., (2012). Germination and seedling growth in un-primed and primed seeds of 
fennel as affected by reduced water potential induced by NaCl. International Research 
Journal of Applied and Basic Sciences, 3, 737–744. 
Flowers, T. J., (2004). Improving crop salt tolerance. Journal of Experimental Botany, 55, 
307–319. 
Gasco, G., Paz-Ferreiro, J., & Mendez, A., (2012). Thermal analysis of soil amended with 
sewage sludge and biochar from sewage sludge pyrolysis. Journal of Thermal Analysis 
and Calorimetry, 108, 769–775. 
Giannopolitis, C. N., & Ries, S. K., (1977). Superoxide dismutase occurrence in higher plants. 
Plant Physiology, 59, 304–314. 
Gonçalves-Alvim, S. J., & Fernandes, G. W., (2001). Biodiversity of galling insects: historical, 
community and habitat effects in four neotropical savannas. Biodiversity and Conservation, 
10, 79–98. 
González-Villagra, J., Rodrigues-Salvador, A., Nunes-Nesi, A., Cohen, J. D., & Reyes-Díaz, 
M. M., (2018). Age-related mechanism and its relationship with secondary metabolism 
and abscisic acid in Aristotelia chilensis plants subjected to drought stress. Plant 
Physiology and Biochemistry, 124, 136–145. 
Heans, D. L., (1984). Determination of total organic carbon in soils by an improved chromic 
acid digestion and spectrophotometric procedure. Communications in Soil Science and 
Plant Analysis, 15, 1191–1213. 
Imran, & Amanullah, (2018). Global impact of climate change on water, soil resources and threat 
towards food security: Evidence from Pakistan. Adv. Plants Agric. Res., 8(5), 350‒355. 
Imran, & Khan, A. A., (2015). Effect of transplanting dates on yield and yield components 
of various rice genotypes in hilly area cold climatic region of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa￾Pakistan. Journal of Biology, Agriculture and Healthcare, 5(7), 1–9. 
Imran, & Khan, A. A., (2017). Canola yield and quality enhanced with Sulphur fertilization. 
Russian Agricultural Sciences, 43(2), 113–119. 
Imran, (2015). Effect of germination on proximate composition of two maize cultivars. 
Journal of Biology, Agriculture and Healthcare, 3(5), 123–128. 
Imran, (2017). Climate change is a real fact confronting to agricultural productivity. Int. J. 
Environ. Sci. Nat. Res., 3(3), 555613. 252 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
Imran, (2018). Biochar amendments improve soil health, productivity, and profitability of 
maize and soybean. Ann. Rev. Res., 1(3), 555–564. 
Imran, (2018). Phosphorous fertilization influenced weeds attributes and phenological 
characteristics of mung bean cultivars (Vigna radiata L.). Russian Agricultural Sciences, 
44(3), 229–234. 
Imran, Amanullah, Arif, M., Shah, Z., & Bari, A., (2020). Soil application of Trichoderma and 
Peach (Prunus persica L.) residues possesses biocontrol potential for weeds and enhances 
growth and profitability of Soybean (Glycine max). Sarhad Journal of Agriculture, 36(1), 
10–20. 
Imran, Amanullah, Bari, A., &Ali, R., (2018). Peach sources, phosphorous and beneficial 
microbes enhance productivity of soybean. Soy. Res., 16(2), 39–48. 
Imran, Amanullah, Khan, A. A., Bari, A., Ud Din, R., Ali, R., Naveed, S., Ullah, I., Zada, H., 
& Khan, G. R., (2019). Production statistics and modern technology of maize cultivation 
in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Pakistan. Plant Sci., 2(2) 1–12. 
Imran, Bari, A., Ali, R., Ahmad, N., Ahmad, Z., Khattak, M. I., Ali, A., et al., (2017). 
Traditional rice farming accelerate CH4
 and N2
O emissions functioning as a stronger 
contributors of climate change. Int. J. Environ. Sci. Nat. Res., 9(3), 89–92. 
Imran, Hussain, I., Khattak, I., Rehman, A., Ahmad, F., & Shah, S. T., (2015). Roots 
nodulation, yield and yield contributing parameters of mung bean cultivars as influenced 
by different phosphorous levels in Swat-Pakistan. J. Pure Appl. Biol., 4(4), 557–567. 
Imran, Hussain, I., Naveed, S., Shah, S., Rehman, A., Zada, H., Ullah, I., et al., (2016). Growth 
and yield of maize hybrids as effected by different sowing dates in Swat Pakistan. J. Pure 
App. Biol., 5(1), 114–120. 
Imran, Jamal, N., Alam, A., & Khan, A. A., (2017). Grain yield, yield attributes of wheat 
and soil physicochemical characteristics influenced by biochar, compost and inorganic 
fertilizer application. Agri. Res. Tech., 10(4), 555795. 
Imran, Khan, A. A., Irfanullah, & Ahmad, F., (2014). Production potential of rapeseed (Brassica 
napus L.) as influenced by different nitrogen levels and decapitation stress under the rainfed 
agro-climatic condition of swat Pakistan, J. Glob. Innov. Agric. Soc. Sci., 2(3), 112–115. 
Iqbal, A., Amanullah, Ali, A., Iqbal, M., Ikramullah, & Imran, (2017). Integrated use of 
phosphorus and biochar improve fodder yield of moth bean (Vigna aconitifolia Jacq.) 
under irrigated and dryland conditions of Pakistan. Journal of AgriSearch, 4(1), 10–15. 
Iqbal, B., Ahmad, B., Ullah, I., Imran, Khan, A. A., Anwar, S., Ali, A., Shahzad, K., & Khan, 
S., (2016). Effect of phosphorus, Sulphur and different irrigation levels on phenological 
traits of triticale. Pure and Applied Biology, 5(2), 303–310. 
Iqbal, B., Jan, M. T., Imran, Zar, M., Khan, A. A., Anwar, S., & Shahzad, K., (2015). Growth 
and phenology of maize as affected by integrated management of compost and fertilizers 
nitrogen. Journal of Pure and Applied Biology, 4. 
Iqbal, B., Jan, M. T., Inamullah, Imran, Khan, A. A., Muhammad, Z., Anwar, S., et al., (2015). 
Integrated management of compost type and fertilizer in Maize. J. Pure Appl Biol., 4(4), 
453–457. 
Iqbal, B., Jan, M. T., Muhammad, Z., Khan, A. A., Anwar, S., Imran, & Shahzad, K., (2016). 
Phenological traits of maize influenced by integrated management of compost and 
fertilizer nitrogen. J. Pure Appl Biol., 5(1), 58–63. 
Islam, M., Anwar, S., Bashir, S., Khattak, W. A., Imran, Ali, M., & Khan, N., (2015). Growth 
and yield components of wheat varieties as affected by dual-purpose practices. Journal 
of Pure and Applied Biology, 4(4), 491–496. Biochar in Agriculture 253 
ISTA, (2005). International Rules for Seed Testing. Zurich, Switzerland: International Seed 
Testing Association. 
Jackson, M., (1962). Soil Chemical Analysis (p. 496). Constable and Company Ltd, London. 
Jagatheeswari, D., & Ranganathan, P., (2012). Influence of mercuric chloride on seeds 
germination, seedling growth and biochemical analysis of green gram (Vigna radiata 
(L.) Wilczek. var. Vamban-3). International Journal of Pharmaceutical and Biological 
Archives, 3, 291–295. 
Joseph, B., & Jini, D., (2011). Development of salt stress-tolerant plants by gene manipulation 
of antioxidant enzymes. Asian Journal of Agricultural Research, 5, 17–27. 
Kamara, A., Kamara, A., Mansaray, M. M., & Sawyerr, P. A., (2014). Effects of biochar 
derived from maize stover and rice straw on the germination of their seeds. American 
Journal of Agriculture and Forestry, 2, 246–249. 
Kammann, C. I., Linsel, S., Gobling, J. W., & Koyro, H., (2011). Influence of biochar on 
drought tolerance of Chenopodium quinoa Willd and on soil-plant relation. Plant and 
Soil, 345, 195–210. 
Karim, S. A., & Imran, (2019). Reduction in substrate moisture content reduce the final yield 
of wheat. Biomed J. Sci. Tec. Res., 1–5. 
Khan, A. A., Imran, Ali, F., Inamullah, S., Laiq, Z., Muhammad, N., Muhammad, N., & 
Khan, K., (2015). Phenological traits of rice as influenced by seedling age and number of 
seedlings per hill under temperate region. Journal of Biology, Agriculture and Healthcare, 
5(3), 145–149. 
Khan, A. A., Khan, M. N., Inamuallah, Shah, S., Arshad, I. R., Muhammad, I., Zeb, A., & 
Imran, (2015). Effect of potash application on growth, yield and yield components of 
spring maize hybrids. Pure and Applied Biology, 4(2), 195–203. 
Khan, A. Z., Imran, Muhammad, A., Khalil, A., Gul, H., Akbar, H., & Wahab, S., (2016). 
Impact of fertilizer priming on seed germination behavior and vigor of maize. Pure and 
Applied Biology, 5(4), 744–751. http://dx.doi.org/10.19045/bspab.2016.50093. 
Khan, I., (2018). Climate change is a threat toward agronomy (base of food, fiber system), and 
food security. Food Nutr. J., 3(10), 1–8. 
Khan, M. A., Islam, E., Shirazi, M. U., Mumtaz, S., Mujtaba, S. M., Khan, M. A., Shereen, A., 
et al., (2010). Physiological responses of various wheat genotypes to salinity. Pakistan 
Journal of Botany, 42, 3497–505. 
Lashari, M. S., Liu, Y., Li, W., Pan, J., Pan, G., Zheng, J., et al., (2013). Effect of amendment 
of biochar manure compost in conjunction with pyroligneous solution on soil quality 
and wheat yield of a salt-stressed cropland from central China great plain. Food Crop 
Research, 144, 113–118. 
Lee, K. D., Tawaha A. R. M., & Supanjani, (2005d). Antioxidant status, stomatal resistance 
and mineral composition of hot pepper under salinity and boron stress. Bioscience 
Research, 2(3), 148–154. 
Lee, K. D., Turk, M. A., & Tawaha, A. M., (2005b). Nitrogen fixation in rice based farming 
system. Bioscience Research, 2(3), 130–138. 
Lee, K., Sulpanjani, D., Tawaha, A. M., & Min, Y. S., (2005a). Effect of Phosphorus application 
on yield, mineral contents and active components of Chrysanthemum coronarium L. 
Bioscience Research, 2(3), 118–124. 
Lehmann, J., & Joseph, S., (2009). Biochar for environmental management: An introduction. 
In: Lehmann, J., & Joseph, S., (eds.), Biochar for Environmental Management: Science 
and Technology (pp. 1–12). London: Earthscan. 254 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
Lehmann, J., Rillig, M. C., Thies, J., Masiello, C. A., Hockaday, W. C., & Crowley, D., (2011). 
Biochar effects on soil biota. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 43, 1812–1836. 
Lei, G., Shen, M., Li, Z., Zhang, B., Duan, K., Wang, N., Cao, Y., Zhang, W., & Ma, B., 
(2011). EIN2 regulates salt stress response and interacts with a MA3 domain-containing 
protein ECIP1 in Arabidopsis. Plant, Cell and Environment, 34(10). 
Lu, C., & Vonshak, A., (2002). Effects of salinity stress on photosystem II function in 
cyanobacterial Spirulina platensis cells. Physiol. Plant, 114, 405–413. 
Maestre, F. T., Cortina, J., & Bautista, S., (2007). Mechanisms underlying the interaction 
between Pinus halepensis and the native late-successional shrub Pistacia lentiscus in a 
semi-arid plantation. Ecography, 27(6), 776–786. 
Martinez-Beltran, J., & Manzur, C. L., (2005). Overview of salinity problems in the world and 
FAO strategies to address the problem. Proceedings of the International Salinity Forum 
(pp. 311–313). Riverside, California. 
Mazhar, R., Ilyas, N., Saeed, M., Bibi, F., & Batool, N., (2016). Biocontrol and salinity 
tolerance potential of Azospirillum lipoferum and its inoculation effect in wheat crop. 
International Journal of Agriculture and Biology, 3, 494–500. 
Mesfine, T., Abebe, G., & Al-Tawaha, A. M., (2005). Effect of reduced tillage and crop 
residue ground cover on yield and water use efficiency of sorghum (Sorghum bicolor (L.) 
Moench) under semi-arid conditions of Ethiopia. World Journal of Agricultural Sciences, 
1(2), 152–160. 
Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Livestock, (2007). Agricultural Statistics of Pakistan. 
Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Livestock, Government of Pakistan, Islamabad. 
Miri, Y., & Mirjalili, S. A., (2013). Effect of salinity stress on seed germination and some 
physiological traits in primary stages of growth in purple coneflower (Echinacea 
purpurea). International Journal of Agronomy and Plant Production, 4, 142–146. 
Mittler, R., (2006). Abiotic stress, the field environment and stress combination. Trends in 
Plant Science, 11(1), 15–19. 
Munns, R. R., James, A., & Lauchli, A., (2006). Approaches to increasing the salt tolerance of 
wheat and other cereals. Journal of Experimental Botany, 57, 1025–1043. 
Munns, R., & Tester, M., (2008). Mechanisms of salinity tolerance. Annual Review of Plant 
Biology, 59, 651–681. 
Munns, R., (2002). Comparative physiology of salt and water stress. Plant, Cell and 
Environment, 25, 239–250. 
Naveed, S., Ibrar, M., Khattak, I., Khan, I., Imran, Khan, M. I., & Khan, H., (2016). Anthelmintic, 
antilice, insecticidal, cytotoxic and phytotoxic potential of ethanolic extracts of two wild 
medicinal plants Iphiona grantioides and Pluchea arguta. J. Woulfenia, 23(11), 13–25. 
Nazarli, H., Faraji, F., & Zardashti, M. R., (2011). Effect of drought stress and polymer on 
osmotic adjustment and photosynthetic pigments of sunflower. Carcetriari Agronomica 
in Maldova, 1, 45. 
Neto, A. D. A., Prisco, J. T., Enéas-Filho, J., De Lacerda, C. F., Silva, J. V., De Costa, P. H. A., 
& Gomes-Filho, E., (2004). Effects of salt stress on plant growth, stomatal response and 
solute accumulation of different maize genotypes. Brazilian Journal of Plant Physiology, 
16(1), 31–38. 
Nikus, O., Abebe, G., Takele, A., Harrun, H., Chanyalew, S., Al Tawaha, A. M., & Mesfin, 
T., (2005b). Yield response of tef (Eragrostis tef (Zucc.) Trotter) to NP fertilization in 
the semi-arid zones of the central rift valley in Ethiopia. European Journal of Scientific 
Research, 4(4), 49–60. Biochar in Agriculture 255 
Nikus, O., Nigussie, M., & Al Tawaha, A. M., (2005a). Agronomic performance of Maize 
varieties under irrigation in Awash Valley, Ethiopia. Bioscience Research, 2(1), 26–30. 
Olsen, S. R., & Sommers, L. E., (1982). Phosphorous. In: Bunton, D., (ed.), Methods of Soil 
Analysis: Chemical and Microbiological Properties (pp. 403–427). Madison, WI: Soil 
science society of America. 
Palm, E., Brady, K., & Van, V. E., (2012). Serpentine tolerance in Mimulus guttatus does not 
rely on exclusion of magnesium. Functional Plant Biology, 39(8), 679. 
Palta, J. P. & Farag, K., (2006). Methods for Enhancing Plant Health, Protecting Plants from 
Biotic and Abiotic Stress-Related Injuries and Enhancing the Recovery of Plants Injured 
as a Result of Such Stresses. United States Patent, 7101828. 
Pant, B. D., Burgos, A., Pant, P., Cuadros-Inostroza, A., Willmitzer, L., & Scheible, W., (2015). 
The transcription factor PHR1 regulates lipid remodeling and triacylglycerol accumulation 
in Arabidopsis thaliana during phosphorus starvation. Journal of Experimental Botany, 
66(7), 1907–1918. 
Pant, B. D., Pant, P., Erban, A., Huhman, D., Kopka, J., & Scheible, W., (2015). Identification 
of primary and secondary metabolites with phosphorus status-dependent abundance in 
Arabidopsis, and of the transcription factor PHR1 as a major regulator of metabolic 
changes during phosphorus limitation. Plant, Cell and Environment, 38(1), 172–187. 
Paz-Ferreiro, J., Fu, S., Mendez, A., & Gasco, G., (2014). Interactive effects of biochar and 
the earthworm Pontoscolex corethrurus on plant productivity and soil enzymes activities. 
Journal of Soils Sediments, 14, 483–494. 
Peng, Y., Gao, Z., Gao, Y., Liu, G., Sheng, L., & Wang, D., (2008). Eco-physiological 
characteristics of alfalfa seedlings in response to various mixed salt-alkaline stresses. 
Journal of Integrative Plant Biology, 50, 29–39. 
Ping, J., Geo, K., & Ron, M., (2007). Understanding abiotic stress tolerance mechanisms: Recent 
studies on stress response in rice. Journal of Integrative Plant Biology, 49 (6), 742–750. 
Prado, F. E., Boero, C., Gallarodo, M., & Gonzalez, A. J., (2000). Effect of NaCl on 
germination, growth and soluble sugar content in Chenopodium quinoa Wil seeds. 
Botanical Bulletin-Academia Sinica Taipei, 14, 27–34. 
Raghothama, K. G., (1999). Phosphate acquisition. Annual Review of Plant Physiology and 
Plant Molecular Biology, 50(1), 665–693. 
Rajalakshmi, A. G., Kumar, S. K., Bharathi, C. D., Karthika, R., Visalakshi, K. D., Meera, 
R., & Mohanapriya, S., (2015). Effect of biochar in seed germination: In-vitro study. 
International Journal of Biosciences and Nanosciences, 2, 132–136. 
Rashid, A., Saleem, Q., Nazir, A., & Kazım, H. S., (2003). Yield potential and stability of nine 
wheat varieties under water stress conditions. International Journal of Agriculture and 
Biology, 5, 7–9. 
Raza, A., (2012). Grain and Field Annual 2012 Gain Report (pp. 1–3). Global Agricultural 
Information Network, USDA Foreign Agricultural Services. 
Rengasamy, P., (2002). Transient salinity and subsoil constraints to dryland farming in 
Australian sodic soils: An overview. Australian Journal of Experimental Agriculture, 42, 
351–361. 
Roelofs, D., Jiwan, P., & Kwangy, I., (2008). Functional ecological genomics to demonstrate 
general and specific responses to abiotic stress. Functional Ecology, 22, 8–18. 
Rubio, V., Linhares, F., Solano, R., Martín, A. C., Iglesias, J., Leyva, A., & Paz-Ares, J., (2001). 
A conserved MYB transcription factor involved in phosphate starvation signaling both 
in vascular plants and in unicellular algae. Genes and Development, 15(16), 2122–2133. 256 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
Samreen, U., Ibrar, M., Lalbadshah, Naveed, S., Imran, & Khatak, I., (2016). Ethnobotanical 
study of subtropical hills of Darazinda, Takht-e-Suleman range F.R D.I. Khan, Pakistan. 
Journal of Pure and Applied Biology, 5(1), 149–164. 
Savvides, A., Ali, S., Tester, M., & Fotopoulos, V., (2015). chemical priming of plants against 
multiple abiotic stresses: Mission possible?. Trends in Plant Science, 21(4), 329–340. 
Scholander, P. F., Hammel, H. T., Bradstreet, E. D., & Hemminogsen, E. A., (1965). Sap 
pressure in vascular plants: Negative hydrostatic pressure can be measured in plants. 
Plant Sciences, 148, 339–346. 
Shamsi, K., & Kobraee, S., (2013). Biochemical and physiological responses of three wheat 
cultivars (Triticum aestivum L.) to salinity stress. Annals of Biological Research, 4, 180–185. 
Sidari, M., Mallamaci, C., & Muscolo, A., (2008). Drought, salinity and heat differently affect 
seed germination of Pinus pinea. Journal of Forest Research, 13, 326–330. 
Sulpanjani, A., Yang, M. S., Tawaha, A. R. M., & Lee, K. D., (2005a). Effect of magnesium 
application on yield, mineral contents and active components of Chrysanthemum 
coronarium L. under hydroponics conditions. Bioscience Research, 2(2), 73–79. 
Supanjani, Tawaha, A. M., Min, Y. M. S., & Lee, K. D., (2005b). Role of calcium in yield and 
medicinal quality of Chrysanthemum coronarium L. Journal of Agronomy, 4 (3), 188–192. 
Supanjani, Tawaha, A. M., Yang, M. S., & Lee, Y. D., (2005c). Calcium effects on yield, 
mineral uptake and terpene components of hydroponic Chrysanthemum coronarium L. 
Research Journal of Agriculture and Biological Science, 1(1), 146–151. 
Tiwari, S., Singh, P., Tiwari, R., Meena, K. K., Yandigeri, M., Singh, D. P., & Arora, D. 
K., (2011). Salt-tolerant rhizobacteria-mediated induced tolerance in wheat (Triticum 
aestivum) and chemical diversity in rhizosphere enhance plant growth. Biology and 
Fertility of Soils, 47, 907–916. 
Tombesi, S., Frioni, T., Poni, S., & Palliotti, A., (2018). Effect of water stress “memory” 
on plant behavior during subsequent drought stress. Environmental and Experimental 
Botany, 150, 106–114. 
Turk, A. M., & Tawaha, A. M., (2002a). Impact of seeding rate, seeding date, rate and method 
of phosphorus application in faba (Vicia faba L. Minor) in the absence of moisture stress. 
Biotechnology, Agronomy, Society and Environment, 6(3), 171–178. 
Turk, A. M., & Tawaha, A. M., (2002b). Response of winter wheat to applied with or without 
ethrel spray under irrigation planted in semi-arid Environments. Asian Journal of Plant 
Sciences, 1(4), 464–466. 
Turk, M. A., & Tawaha, A. M., (2001). Influence of rate and method of phosphorus placement 
to garlic (Allium sativum L.) in a Mediterranean environment. Journal of Applied 
Horticulture, 3(2), 115–116. 
Turk, M. A., Hameed, K. M., Aqeel, A. M., & Tawaha, A. M., (2003c). Nutritional status of 
durum wheat grown in soil supplemented with olive mills by-products. Agrochimica, 
5(6), 209–219. 
Turk, M. A., Tawaha, A. M., Samara, N., & Latifa, N., (2003b). The response of six-row 
Barley (Hordeum vulgare L.) to nitrogen fertilizer application and weed control methods 
in the absence of moisture stress. Pakistan Journal of Agronomy, 2(2), 101–108. 
Turk, M. A., Tawaha, A. M., Taifor, H., Al-Ghzawi, A., Musallam, I. W., Maghaireh, G. A., 
& Al-Omari, Y. I., (2003a). Two row barley response to plant density, date of seeding 
and rate and method of phosphorus application in the absence of moisture stress. Asian 
Journal of Plant Science, 2(2), 180–183. Biochar in Agriculture 257 
Van, H. J. W., Nader, K., Hamdy, A., & Mastrorilli, M., (2001). Effect of salinity on yield and 
nitrogen uptake of four grain legumes and on biological nitrogen contribution from the 
soil. Agriculture Water Management, 51, 87–98. 
Vinebrooke, R. D., Cottingham, K. L., Norberg, J., Scheffer, M., Dodson, S. I., Maberly, S. 
C., & Sommer, U., (2004). Impacts of multiple stressors on biodiversity and ecosystem 
functioning: The role of species co-tolerance. Oikos, 104(3), 451–457. 
Wang, G., & Xu, Z., (2013). The effects of biochar on germination and growth of wheat in 
different saline-alkali soil. Asian Agricultural Research, 5, 116–119. 
Wang, H., & Jin, J., (2007). Effects of zinc deficiency and drought on plant growth and 
metabolism of reactive oxygen species in maize (Zea mays L.). Agricultural Sciences in 
China, 6, 988–995. 
Wang, W., Vinocur, B., & Altman, A., (2003). Plant responses to drought, salinity and extreme 
temperatures: Towards genetic engineering for stress tolerance. Planta, 218(1), 1–14.
 
Wolfe, A., (2007). Patterns of Biodiversity. Ohio State University. doi: 10.1016/j.agee.2006.12.013.
 
Xu, D., Huang, J., Guo, S., Yang, X., Bao, Y., Tang, H., & Zhang, H., (2008). Over-expression 
of a TFIII-type zinc finger protein gene ZFP252 enhances drought and salt tolerance in rice 
(Oryza sativa L.). Federation of European Biochemical Societies Letters, 582, 1037–1043. 
Yang, M. S., Tawaha, A. M., & Lee, Y. D., (2005). Effects of ammonium concentration on the 
yield, mineral content and active terpene components of Chrysanthemum coronarium L. 
in a hydroponic system. Research Journal of Agriculture and Biological Science, 1(2), 
170–175. 
Yeo, A. R., Yeo, M. E., Flowers, S. A., & Flowers, T. J., (1990). Screening of rice (Oryza 
sativa L.) genotypes for physiological characters contributing to salinity resistance, and 
their relationship to overall performance. Theoretical Applied Genetics, 79, 377–384. 
Younis, U., Athar, M., Malik, S. A., RazaShah, M. H., & Mahmood, S., (2015). Biochar 
impact on physiological and biochemical attributes of spinach Spinacia oleracea (L.) in 
nickel contaminated soil. Global Journal Environment Science Management, 1, 245–254. 
Zakaria, M., Daniel, S., Murphy, V., & Abbott, L. K., (2012). Biochars influence seed 
germination and early growth of seedlings. Plant Soil, 353, 273–87. 
Zargar, M. S., Nagar, P., Deshmukh, R., Nazir, M., Wani, A. A., Masoodi, K. Z., Agrawal, G. 
K., & Rakwal, R., (2017). Aquaporins as potential drought tolerance inducing proteins: 
Towards instigating stress tolerance. Journal of Proteomics, 169, 233–238. 
Zhan, H. X., Chang, Z. J., Wei, A. L., Zhang, X. J., & Li, X., (2011). Impact of drought to 
wheat physiological index. Journal of Shanxi Agriculture Sciences, 39, 1049–1051. 
Zheng, W. J., Tawaha, A. M., & Lee, K. D., (2005). In situ hybridization analysis of mcMT1 
gene expression and physiological mechanisms of Cu-tolerant in Festuca rubra cv 
Merlin. Bioscience Research, 1(1), 21–26.  
 
CHAPTER 11
 
THE ROLE OF ORGANIC MULCHING 

AND TILLAGE IN ORGANIC FARMING
 
SHAH KHALID,1
 AMANULLAH,1
 ABDEL RAHMAN M. AL-TAWAHA,2 
NADIA,1 DEVARAJAN THANGADURAI,3
 JEYABALAN SANGEETHA,4 
SAMIA KHANUM,5 MUNIR TURK,6 HIBA ALATRASH,7 
SAMEENA LONE,8
 KHURSHEED HUSSAIN,8 
PALANI SARANRAJ,9
 NIDAL ODAT,10 and ARUN KARNWAL11 
1
Department of Agronomy, The University of Agriculture, Peshawar, 
Pakistan 
2
Department of Biological Sciences, Al-Hussein Bin Talal University, 
Maan, Jordan 
3
Department of Botany, Karnatak University, Dharwad–580003, 
Karnataka, India 
4
Department of Environmental Science, Central University of Kerala, 
Kasaragod–671316, Kerala, India 
5
Department of Botany, University of the Punjab, Lahore, Pakistan 
6
Department of Plant Production, Jordan University of Science and 
Technology, Irbid, Jordan 
7
General Commission for Scientific Agricultural Research, Syria 
8
Division of Vegetable Science, SKUAST-Kashmir, Shalimar, 
Jammu and Kashmir, India 
9
Department of Microbiology, Sacred Heart College (Autonomous), 

Tirupattur–635601, Tamil Nadu, India
 
10Department of Medical Laboratories, Al-Balqa Applied University, 

Al-Salt–19117, Jordan
 
11Department of Microbiology, School of Bioengineering and 

BioSciences, Lovely Professional University, Phagwara, India
  
260 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
ABSTRACT 
The mulches are mainly used for increasing water infiltration, evaporation, 
soil temperature change, weed control, evaporation prevention, and crop 
yields increase. Increased biological activities in the soil, changed nutrient 
levels and contributed to the maintenance and/or increase of soil organic 
matter (SOM). There would also possibly be a favorable impact in the 
physical conditions in the soil under conditions of no-tillage or minimal 
tillage of fine-textured soils. Weeds can be monitored by Mulches in various 
ways: as physical barrier and related micro-climate transition, pH, C:N soil 
ratio, nutrient immobilization, allelopathic compounds inhibition, lower 
visible light reaching the surface of the ground. A large number of works is 
intended to loosen and homogenize the macroporousness of the soil and the 
structural uniformity of the tillage region, but some of the work is intended 
to shape or shape the soil. Some of the tillage effects are deliberate, whereas 
other effects, such as plow shape, increased vulnerability to compaction and 
erosion, are unintentional. On the positive hand, tillage has been part of most 
farm systems in the past since tillage can be used to achieve many agronomic 
goals. 
11.1 INTRODUCTION 
This section offers details on the use of organic farming systems (OFSs) of 
tillage and mulching. It provides a summary of how laboring and paving 
blends into organic farming standards and structures. It describes forms 
of tillage, implements tillage equipment, and refers, as used here, to any 
normal, uninterrupted covering of the soil. It refers to any additional material 
used as a covering of the ground. Consequently, this term is wide enough 
to generally include both organic and inorganic materials that are used as 
soil cover. The key focus in this context is, however, on traditional mulches 
of organic materials, where plant materials from external sources typically 
fully cover the soil to different depths. Often referred to are stubble or trash￾mulches, where the surface of the soil is normally filled in part only. The 
results generated are often quite similar but vary in degree, whether the soil 
is completely or only partially covered. In recent years, much research has 
shown that a very successful way of using crop residues in many ways is like 
mulches for growing crops, although sometimes the financial factors are not 
favorable. The mulch method ensures that the cultivation and soil retain as 
much time as possible to protect the soil surface. Through the decomposition  
Organic Mulching and Tillage in Organic Farming 261 
of crop residues, they eventually move through the activity of organic matter 
and then through to resistant humus. When soil is kept untouched, much 
of organic matter, as under virgin or forest conditions, tends to collect on 
the surface. Where every year’s crops are grown, the mulch is disturbed by 
dirt, and a large part of the mulch is mixed with 2–6 inches of ground every 
year. In any case, plant residues have the numerous physical, chemical, and 
biological effects so beneficial for plant development, i.e., the growth rate of 
good highly valued topsoil is accelerated. The fundamental ways of diversity 
are the rotation of organic crops. Crop rotation consists of the cultivation of 
various crops on the same soil in natural succession. Crop rotation offers 
many benefits to improve the quality of the soil, break disease and cycle of 
pests and ensure soil and water effects (Altieri et al., 2012). Farmers picked 
promising plant animals in organic agriculture and saved their offspring 
year after year to preserve genetic biodiversity. Time and space diversity 
increases crop resilience in many respects (Zehnder et al., 2007). Careful use 
of soil nutrients, avoid a chance of plant failure, improve genetic make-up of 
landraces (Bengtsson et al., 2005; Hole et al., 2005). 
11.2 THE ROLE OF TILLAGE AND ORGANIC FARMING 
The weakness in organic systems was highly dependent on tillage in order 
to manage the weeds. However, organic matter and soil structure are also 
shown to perform as well or better than traditional herbicidal systems with 
less soil disruption. organic systems generally perform better or better. This 
is due to imports of organic inputs including manures and compost, organic 
material recycling in farms and well-designed crop rotations (including 
decking plants and perennial drilling), which help to compensate for the 
negative impact of soil structure and organic matter layering. This can 
include lack of organic matter, increased soil strength, decreased penetra￾tion, compaction, and increased erosion. These are negative effects. Expe￾rienced organic farmers reduce the negative effects of tillage by taking 
careful account of the timing of tillage processes, machinery activity, soil 
conditions and crop rotation. Some crops, such as root vegetables, with 
intense soil perturbation during harvest and returning low crop residues 
can be rotated by crops with lower soil perturbations and more crop resi￾dues. Starting farmers have a lot to know about the art and science behind 
productive labor. In terms of the intensity of labor, often greater than tradi￾tional systems, policymakers need to understand where and where organic 
farmers can provide desired ecological services like carbon sequestration.  
 
262 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
Increased cooperation among agroecologists, agricultural engineers, and 
experienced farmers will lead to better tillage systems that enable strategic 
laying in the context of planned crop systems to more consistently gain and 
minimize negative side effects. 
11.2.1 ORGANIC MANURES AND TILLAGE 
Final Regulation of the national organic program (NOP) (United States 
Department of Agriculture (USDA), 2000) Certified organic farmers are to 
register their organic system plan tillage activities and procedures. The weed 
control measures permitted include hand weeding as well as mechanical 
cultivation. The frequency of application tillage must be recorded in the farm 
records. This can be accomplished in a variety of ways; the manufacturer 
should follow, along with other details required by the NOP standard, an 
organization, easy-to-use system for recording tillage, rotations, and amend￾ment history for each area. The inspector examines the farming plan of a 
producer to determine if the tillage practices are used, so that the physical, 
chemical, and biological condition of the soil is maintained or improved and 
so that soil erosion is minimized. 
11.2.2 IMPORTANCE OF TILLAGE 
Mechanical soil structure alteration is tillage. Tillage tools change the soil 
structure through a wide range of interactions between soil and instrument 
including cutting, milling, crushing, beating, and rebounding. Tillage 
tools expose the soil structure to compression, shear, and strain. When the 
stresses exceed the strength of the soil, the soil structure fails to collapse, 
if the ground is cold, or if the ground is deformed in a plastic condition. 
The result of interactions between soil and tools differs both with regard 
to the characteristics of the tillage activity such as depth, distance, speed, 
and the type of the tilling of the soil, such as texture, structure, humidity, or 
plasticity. If soil is too damp, it spreads out and produces clods that can last 
for the duration of the growing season. Clods are usually broken by winter 
freezing and thawing. A large number of works is intended to loosen and 
homogenize the macroporousness of the soil and the structural uniformity of 
the tillage region, but some of the work is intended to shape or shape the soil. 
Some of the tillage effects are deliberate, whereas other effects, such as plow 
shape, increased vulnerability to compaction and erosion, are unintentional.  
Organic Mulching and Tillage in Organic Farming 263 
On the positive hand, laying has been part of most agricultural processes 
over the years, as laying can be used to achieve many agricultural objectives 
(Amanullah et al., 2016, 2019a). Tillage’s value includes: 
1.	 Residue Management: The transfer, orientation, or sizing of residues 
such that harms or crop residues can be minimized and beneficial 
effects promoted. 
2.	 Incorporation and Combination: Placement or distribute, often from 
a less favorable position to a more favorable geographical distribution, 
substances such as fertilizers, manures, seeds, and residues. 
3.	 Soil Conditioning: Soil-structure changes to promote agricultural 
processes such as interaction with soils, root proliferation, soil 
heating, and water penetration. 
4.	 Crop and Pesticide Control: Direct end or disturbance of the cycles 
of weed and pests. 
5.	 Splitting: Rock consolidation, root clumps, soil crumb sizes, etc. 
6.	 Land Formation: Modifying the soil surface shape; perhaps the 
simplest variant is leveling; crest, roughing, and furrowing are also 
examples. 
7.	 Nutrient Release Stimulation: Accomplished by aeration and 
mixture; note that it can be a disadvantage if not targeted with crop 
uptake. 
More basic objectives of tillage include creating seedbeds, stalky 
seedbeds, minimizing the compression of crops by breaking of soil crusts, 
cutting, and/or drying of weeds, macerating biofumigant plant cover crops, 
soil biology stimulation and root crop harvesting. Organic farmers generally 
use a variety of tools for tillage similar employment, as changes in growth 
rates of weather, crops, and/or weeds will quickly force them to adjust strate￾gies. Owning or accessing a number of easy to attach and unlock tractors will 
save time for farmers (Table 11.1). 
11.2.3 EFFECTS OF MULCHES 
The mulches are mainly used for increasing water infiltration, evaporation, 
soil temperature change, weed control, evaporation prevention and crop 
yields increase. There is also a likelihood of a beneficial impact on the 
physical conditions in the ground under conditions of non-treeing or low 
tillage of fine-textured soils. 264 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development TABLE 11.1 Tillage Implement and Their Purpose Type of Tillage Implements Purpose Primary tillage Aggressive equipment including chisel plows, ripers, and subsoilers Create a soil state, from which a seedbed with secondary tillage devices can be prepared. The disruption of the soil is usually >6 inches deep. Primary laying is required if current soil conditions hinder the efficiency of secondary instruments. Aggressive tools like spaders and rotary tillers Moldboard and disk plows Secondary tillage Powered harrows, such as rotavators, rod weeders, and reciprocating harrows The preparation of the seedbed can include the sizing, leveling, and/or burial of residues. Typically, soil preparation is full field but can be concentrated in row zones. Used for seedbed preparation and can do more than draft tools in one pass. Most harrows are draft implements with gangs of tines, disks, rolling baskets, or combinations. Sweeps are used to push residues aside for conservation planting. Cultivation Guided (row) farmers are used to deduct or dislodge weeds between crops that are planted on broad lines (usually >2 feet). It is often used pre-emergent or shortly after large crops grow, but is sometimes also used on small or transmitted crops. Listers/cridge makers and blind farmers come in a wide range of forms and sizes and make beds 6 to 10 inches high, 30 to 40 inches apart, divided by a furrow (interrow). Chain harrows may be used to disperse residues and compost, seeds, and soil surface level. Tools to manage surface residue Mowers and flail choppers are used to manage standing biomass, cutting them into smaller parts to be distributed as a blade or incorporated into primary tillage. Mechanical herb and residue management. A variety of methods are used to handle residues, mulch, slaughter plants, and distribute soil materials.  
Organic Mulching and Tillage in Organic Farming 265 
11.2.4 MULCH AS A WEED’S CONTROLLER
 
The synergistic impact of all control methods to the farmer to track the weed 
populations at the level of a given lot is focused on the integrated weed 
management. This show will show the benefits of various weed control 
techniques, including plowing, flooding, nursery transplantation and crop 
rotation (Al-Tawaha et al., 2010). 
Increasingly, mulchery is used as a weed control measure, which is of 
special importance to organic cropping systems in the cultivation of high 
quality and safe food production plant raw materials (Bilalis et al., 2003; 
Petersen and Rover, 2005; Ramakrishna et al., 2006; Jordán et al., 2010; 
Imranuddin et al., 2017; Khalid et al. 2017; Amanullah et al., 2019a; 
Al-Tawaha et al., 2020; Amanullah and Khalid, 2020). Agricultural crop 
processing is used as a plant residue mix and has a multi-sectoral impact 
on the agroecosystem (Bajorienė et al., 2013). The weed control of mulches 
(straw, grass, and other) was calculated by Radics and Szné Bognár (2004); 
Petersen and Rover (2005); and Ramakrishna et al. (2006). Weeds can be 
monitored by Mulches in various ways. Their suppression of weeds is one 
of the most significant benefits, preventing cultivation in this way. Now that 
herbicides provide an alternative way of weed control, this advantage is 
slightly lower than before. However, in vegetable and flower gardens where 
herbicides are often dangerous, mulches are more commonly used in order to 
control weeds. After packing of at least two inches, ideally four inches, most 
natural mulches must be added to the depth to be successful in the control of 
weeds. As plant residues on permanent weeds and on many grasses normally 
do not work, they need to be removed prior to application. Although they can 
germinate, almost every year weed seedlings cannot develop through a thick 
mulch (Petersen and Rover, 2005; Ramakrishna et al., 2006). The energy 
supply of the seeds is too limited to allow significant growth without light. In 
weed control, some natural mulching materials are not very satisfactory either 
for tightly packaging and serving as good germination and growth medium 
or because weed seeds are contaminated by the painting material itself. The 
majority of artificial materials such as black or plastic paper and aluminum 
foil for the weed control is satisfactory if the ground is completely protected 
(Petersen and Rover, 2005; Ramakrishna et al., 2006). Typically, some annual 
weeds are used in the hollows or cracks as perforated sheets or in strips. 
Organic mulch keeps the temperature and humidity in the soil more 
stable, which leads to a better environment for living organisms in the soil 
(Ramakrishna et al., 2006). Soil biological properties primarily affect organic 
farming productivity (Amanullah et al., 2015, 2019a–d, 2020). Mulching is  
266 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
also used to affect the physical properties of the soil. Mulching is necessary 
for the growth and yield of crops, which helps to lower moisture evaporation, 
to decrease and sustain a more steady earth temperature (Ji and Unger, 2001). 
Eventually the natural organic mulch breaks up and returns the organic mate￾rial to the soil. The slow-releasing of nutrients is more synchronized with the 
plant needs during the decomposition process (Cherr et al., 2006). The soil 
appeared to increase the phosphorus and potassium content available in paint 
and in grass. It was noticed. The rapid decomposition of organic mulch is a 
significant source of plant nutrients. In grass-mulched plants, significantly 
greater crop yields were achieved not only because of smothering weeds, 
but because of increased soil plant nutrients and improved soil physical 
properties. Better plants are able to kill weeds in greater numbers. Some 
research indicates that mulching decreases annual weeds, but it does not 
influence perennial weeds. Plant residues (straws and other) used as a mulch 
were found in the breakup process to suppress the emergence and growth 
of weeds. A decrease in the amount of crop residues used for soil mulching 
in annual weeds has been noticed by many authors (Petersen and Rover, 
2005; Ramakrishna et al., 2006; Shah et al., 2019). As the soil cover levels 
increased, a decrease in weed density was created. Mulching decreases the 
volume of soil and shears, and increases porosity filled with air. Certain 
perennial weeds are grown on the ground. Some organic mulches are suit￾able for vast farms-overgrown wheat, turkeys, sawdust, stroke, and other 
agricultural residues. We may also use various bio-residues in small farms 
and gardens for the planting of mulching: grass, sunflower hulls, nuts, coffee 
beans, and others, regularly cut out from grassplots. 
11.2.5 ORGANIC MULCH AND SOIL MICRO FAUNA 
The nature of the soil provides the right amount of nutrients for the production 
of defined plants and the right balance for the development of soil fertility 
(Turk and Tawaha, 2001, 2002a, b; Tawaha and Turk, 2002; Turk et al., 
2003a–c). More research, on the other hand, has shown that low productivity 
mainly concerns dryland farming activities (Tawaha and Turk, 2001; Turk 
and Tawaha, 2002b; Abebe et al., 2005, 2005a–d; Assefa et al., 2005; Lee 
et al., 2005a–d; Nikus et al., 2005a, b; Mesfine et al., 2005; Sulpanjani et 
al., 2005a–c; Tawaha et al., 2005a, b; Yang et al., 2005; Zheng et al., 2005; 
Assaf et al., 2006). Bio-mulches boost activity of soil enzymes (Jordán et 
al., 2010), the biota soil quantity and diversity (Brévault et al., 2007). Earth￾worms are likely to be provided with soils which are naturally mulched with  
Organic Mulching and Tillage in Organic Farming 267 
tree blankets, grass sod, and different forms of plant residue, provided the 
soil is not too acidic or too dry. The same applies to gardens with residues of 
plants. One of the key reasons for their satisfactory living conditions is that 
mulches also provide them with plenty of food. In addition, worms, like most 
plants find their physical conditions in the soil. The plants in the area have a 
continuous supply even if the mulch itself is not a satisfactory food source. 
The lack of soil disturbance also promotes the population of high earthworm, 
which may stay intact throughout one or more seasons. The channels they 
produce through the soil. The mulches often keep the soil at a temperature 
that is more uniform and prevent the soil from freezing. Briefly, the many 
benefits from earthworms’ behaviors in soils which are matched with plant 
residues appear to reach a near limit. A grass sod is a perfect location for a 
population of high worms. Many plant materials often encourage the growth 
of other types of animal living, some of which are beneficial and some of 
which are harmful. However, harmful insects and some diseases are likely to 
encounter natural mulches, but this is typically a comparatively small factor 
in crop production. Multiples of plant materials also have a positive impact 
on the activities of soil microorganisms. This is partly because of the higher 
humidity and temperature throughout the whole year, but more particularly 
because of the ample supply of energy that is always available. In each rain, 
some energy-generating material is leached into the ground, and the insolvent 
materials collect on or in the surface layer of the soil as the mulch disinte￾grates. In addition, earthworms bring uncomposed plant materials continually 
into the soil. This naturally promotes a significant increase in the amount of 
soil microorganisms, but also speeds up the loss of the mulch itself. 
11.2.6 ORGANIC MULCH AND NUTRIENTS AVAILABILITY 
The effect of natural mulches on the amount of nutrients available to 
plants growing on the ground is mainly determined by the composition of 
the mulches (Table 11.2) and secondly by the rate of decomposition of the 
mulches (Amanullah et al., 2019d). This is clear because the floor finally 
reaches the ground, or the decomposition products that do not escape to the 
air. The final results are determined by what substance and how much of it 
is affected and how quickly it enters the ground. The most important factor 
involved is nitrogen, which is often unpredictable (Imranuddin et al., 2017; 
Shah, 2017; Khalid et al., 2018). It depends on the carbohydrate’s ratio of 
the mattress material and its ease of decomposition-in particular its lignin 
content-that the mulch can increase or decrease the available nitrogen under 268 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
the surface. The vital ratio is typically around 30 for most crop residues (N 
content 1.4–1.7). The larger the ratio, the closer the rotting residues are to 
nitrogen. Nitrogen-deficient crop waste used as mulches generally decreases 
the amount of nitrogen available in the soil, and therefore, unless additional 
nitrogen is added, the growth of plants growing in the mulched area can 
degrade. It can be less inhibited than when the mulching materials have been 
added into the soil. 
TABLE 11.2 Various Organic Mulches and Their Chemical Properties 
Material C/N Ash (%) Nitrogen (%) Carbon (%) 
Corn cobs 108 1.58 0.45 46.87 
Alfalfa hay 18 8.79 2.34 43.15 
Pea vines, mature (less pods) 29 8.5 1.5 44.02 
Moss peat 58 3.12 0.83 48.29 
Ponderosa pine sawdust 1064 0.33 0.05 53.18 
Douglas fir sawdust, fresh 996 0.17 0.05 49.8 
Wheat straw 373 8.54 0.12 44.7 
Rye straw 144 3.51 0.33 47.39 
Douglas fir sapwood 548 0.27 0.09 49.36 
Cannery waste, beans 10 – 3.17 31.47 
Rice hulls 72 19.83 0.55 39.8 
Douglas fir needles 58 7.02 0.96 55.75 
Red alder sawdust 134 1.21 0.37 49.63 
Cannery waste, beets 18 – 2.32 42.85 
Douglas fir cones 133 1.51 0.37 49.17 
Sewage sludge, digested 10 53.65 2.15 22 
Walnut leaves, weathered 26 43.42 1.12 29.48 
Pea vines, in bloom 17 10.71 2.69 45.3 
Meadow hay (rush and sedge) 43 8.46 1.07 45.6 
Douglas fir bark 491 0.45 0.11 53.97 
Oak leaves, weathered 26 32.33 1.36 35.11 
Bentgrass clippings 13 17.98 3.23 43.22 
Western red cedar sawdust 129 0.29 0.07 51.05 
Fiber flax, deseeded 373 3.73 0.12 44.7 
Vicente-Chandler (1953) notes that the correct type of mat, treated 
correctly, will provide plants with a cost-effective and permanent supply of 
nitrogen under heavy rainfalls. This is especially the case when the mulch 
is annually replaced. In addition to the essential ratio even mulches with  
 
Organic Mulching and Tillage in Organic Farming 269 
carbon-nitrogen ratios will have some existing nitrogen, where the materials 
would rot very quickly as under humid tropical conditions. The mat of rising 
roots usually found under such a pail would consume a large part of the 
nitrogen and other nutrients available before torrential rain can be extracted. 
Under such conditions, soluble fertilizer nitrogen will not stay in the root 
area for long. The majority of nitrogen-deficient mulches are also deficient 
in phosphorus and can need minor uses for both phosphate and nitrogen 
fertilizers. However, mulches are less likely to deplete phosphates than 
nitrogen. There is no risk of a natural muzzle becoming defective because of 
the needs of the microorganisms that decompose mulches for the other major 
and small components. Once a multitude of plant materials are added, and 
even before much decomposition occurs, they will be slowed by rain. More 
and more of these elements are likely to descend into the root zone as the 
decomposition continues. If the mulch is not discarded, the remaining matter 
eventually becomes a part of the soil, and the crop assimilates all major and 
minor elements originally in the mulch. 
11.2.7 ORGANIC MULCH AND SOIL ORGANIC MATTER (SOM) 
Their organic content is much greater than that of grown soil covered with 
mulches, which are dept enough to discourage weeds from growing and are 
not planted for long periods. This is partially due to the absence of cultivation, 
but if the temperature of the soil is lower in the summer, this is also a factor. 
Less wetting and drying cycles are also beneficial for the maintenance of 
organic matter. The major influence of organic mulches on the preservation 
of humus is the incorporation of organic matter, provided that the mulch is 
not extracted at intervals. The beneficial impact is very powerful in systems 
where the soil is maintained mulched and the mulch is filled annually. It is 
also marked if each spring or fall the old mulch is incorporated in the soil, 
with fresh mulching materials being changed each year. In the first instance, 
the upper one or two inches of soil can in organic matter become very high; 
in the second instance, the whole stuffed or discharged layer benefits from 
the addition of carbonate substances. 
11.2.8 SOIL PHYSICAL PROPERTIES 
Soils of medium or fine texture, cut, and stored with plant-residue mulches 
and scrubbed unusually or hot, typically have excellent physical quality or  
 
270 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
develop excellent quality. The structure or aggregation of these soils does 
not suffer from compaction due to tillage and weighting or drying of heavy 
equipment or aggregate interference. A small proportion of the products of 
disintegration and the synthetic products of micro-organisms are released 
into the ground as the organic mulch decomposes. Earthworms are also 
a bigger factor. These channels help to reduce bulk density and improve 
ventilation and drainage. The longer organic mat is on the ground, the more 
it appears to assume the characteristics of a virgin soil, which is the most 
physically good for many. Such paved soils have a high rate of infiltration 
and appear to retain the water to the end of the Zhe profile. Good physical 
characteristics also favor retention of water in the profile before the crop can 
use it. Factors of a physical nature like rising roots, wetting, and drying, and 
freezing and thawing appear to be the first in the formation of aggregates; 
microbe action products are of minor concern, as aggregate forms, and they 
are helping to keep the clay particles in close proximity. 
11.2.9 ORGANIC MULCH AND SOIL EROSION 
A large number of plant materials which are not easily transported by 
running water are extremely successful in erosion prevention. This state￾ment is obvious because poles absorb the energy of the dropping raindrop, 
increase runoff, allow less water to wash off and improve the soil’s quality. 
This statement is obvious from what is said. Often heavy rain can lead to 
mulching material and gullies, but this typically does not happen if there is a 
crop in the soil covering most of the region. Light-weight materials, such as 
sawdust and peat, can often be floating as gullies, but fibrous materials will 
not move. Obviously, the straw mulch improved surface sealing and reduced 
precipitation and runoff. In particular, erosion control is useful for natural 
mulches as they occur in forests, lands of waste and grassland. Multiples 
of artificial materials are typically often successful when they are attached 
enough and allow humidity to easily penetrate the soil. 
11.2.10 STUBBLE MULCHES 
Stubble-mulch or trash-mulch agriculture was started in semi-arid and 
wheat-growing areas in the US and Canada between 1930 and 1940. The 
system was built as a result of the extreme wind erosion at the time and 
was a major try to reduce as much as possible this harm. The damage  
Organic Mulching and Tillage in Organic Farming 271 
caused to the wind in the 1930s was exceptionally bad as a result of the 
extreme drought shortly after the planting of much land which was long in 
the native grasses. Stubble-mulch agriculture is generally described as an 
all-year route to manage residues in croplands in which the residues of the 
previous crop are selected, grown, seeded-prepared, and planted to leave on 
or close to the earth’s surface. The residues on the surface of the soil decay 
slower than when buried, and substantial residues can remain from season to 
season under some conditions. In a stubble-mulch farming method, this of 
course is quite attractive. The type of residue, temperature, moisture ratios 
and soil disturbance during laying operations depend on such decline resis￾tance. Working with the stubble-mulch method is usually maintained to the 
minimum required for the preparation of a proper seedbed and the control 
of weeds. The sweep or blade is usually used to raise the soil and kill the 
weeds first. It works at depths up to 6 inches with subsequent tillage at lower 
depths with different devices. The sweeping cultivator normally has around 
70 to 80% more specifications than the moldboard plow at the same depth. 
The stubble mulch system is particularly suitable for maintaining summer 
barrier trees and growing small grain crops. In any case, not only should the 
machinery used leave all crop residues on the soil, it should also be spread 
consistently. This farming method is also suitable for the cultivation of row 
crops such as maize or sorghum. The seed is put in the clean furrow of the 
residues between the ranks. To encourage seeding, a lister operated with a 
low depth can be used or a planter fitted with a furrow opener. Sweeps or 
other equipment which undercut residues can be used for cultivation. Weed 
control is often difficult, particularly of grass, and more crops than would 
otherwise be considered desirable may be required. When it comes to sodes, 
the moldboard plow is often used to cause inversion, and then a spring-tooth 
harrow is applied to get some residues over to the surface. In some ways 
now, but not for extensive scientific and economic purposes, herbicides are 
being used. 
11.2.11 ORGANIC MULCHING AND SOIL WATER 
Mulching affects soil and surface water greatly. Mulching reduces runoff 
by improving infiltration rate and by improving retention, improves water 
storage capacity. Low evaporation rates also help increase the time for soil 
moisture. Mulching dramatically improves the characteristics of the soil 
water, although various findings were published. Organic mulches on the 
surface of the soil induce optimum soil conditions for plant growth, retaining,  
272 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
and providing soil water and increasing macroporosity (Martens and Fran￾kenberger, 1907). Many studies have shown that mulch use can increase 
infiltration and decrease evaporation, leading to more water stowage and less 
rush (Smika and Unger, 1986). The best way to improve the preservation of 
water in the soil and to reduce soil evaporation is the wheat straw mulch. 
High usable water capacities at high mulching rates have been identified, and 
activities have been reduced or not. The fact that even low mulch concentra￾tions have a major effect on water content available found Mulumba and 
Lal (2008); and Jordan et al. (2010). Głąb and Kulig (2008), who found no 
impact on existing water content after applying mulch and various tillage 
systems, published comparative results. Results can differ from the top to the 
bottom layers of the soil profile as well. 
11.3 CONCLUSION 
Mulches are increasing soil biodiversity, increasing penetration by water, 
reducing evaporation, altering soil temperatures, controlling weeds, 
preventing evaporation, and increasing crop yield. Mulches can regulate 
weeds by different means, including a physical barrier and related micro￾climate changes. On the positive hand, tillage has been part of most farm 
systems in the past since tillage can be used to achieve many agronomic goals. 
KEYWORDS 
• herbicidal systems 
• mechanical cultivation
 
• organic farming
 
• organic manures
 
• organic mulch
 
• soil erosion 
• tillage 
REFERENCES 
Abebe, G., Assefa, T., Harrun, H., Mesfine, T., & Al-Tawaha, A. M., (2005d). Participatory 
selection of drought-tolerant maize varieties using mother and baby methodology: A Organic Mulching and Tillage in Organic Farming 273 
case study in the semiarid zones of the central rift valley of Ethiopia. World Journal of 
Agricultural Sciences, 1(1), 22–27. 
Abebe, G., Hattar, B., & Al-Tawaha, A. M., (2005c). Nutrient availability as affected by 
manure application in cowpea [Vigna unguiculata (L.) Walp.] on calcareous soils. 
Journal of Agriculture and Social Science, 1(1), 1–6. 
Abebe, G., Sahile, G., & Al-Tawaha, A. M., (2005a). Evaluation of potential trap crops on 
Orobanche soil seed bank and tomato yield in the central rift valley of Ethiopia. World 
Journal of Agricultural Sciences, 1(2), 148–151. 
Abebe, G., Sahile, G., & Al-Tawaha, A. M., (2005b). Effect of soil solarization on Orobanche 
soil seed bank and tomato yield in the central rift valley of Ethiopia. World Journal of 
Agricultural Sciences, 1(2), 143–147. 
Abera, T., Feyisa, D., Yusuf, H., Nikus, O., & Al-Tawaha, A. M., (2005). Grain yield of maize 
as affected by biogas slurry and N-P fertilizer rate at Bako, Western Oromiya, Ethiopia. 
Bioscience Research, 2(1), 31–38. 
Al-Tawaha, A. R. M., & Odat, N., (2010). Use of sorghum and maize allelopathic properties 
to inhibit germination and growth of wild barley (Hordeum spontaneum). Notulae 
Botanicae Horti. Agrobotanici Cluj-Napoca, 38(3), 124–127. 
Al-Tawaha, A. R. M., Al-Tawaha, A., Sirajuddin, S. N., McNeil, D., Othman, Y. A., 
Al-Rawashdeh, I., Amanullah, M., et al., (2020). Ecology and adaptation of legumes 
crops: A review. IOP Conference Series: Earth Environ. Sci., 012085. 
Altieri, M. A., Ponti, L., & Nicholls, C. I., (2012). Biodiversity and Insect Pests (pp. 72–84). 
John Wiley and Sons Ltd. 
Amanullah, & Khalid, S., (2020). Agronomy-food security-climate change and the sustainable 
development goals. Agronomy-Climate Change and Food Security. IntechOpen, London. 
Amanullah, Iqbal, A., Khan, A., Khalid, S., Shah, A., Parmar, B., Khalid, S., & Muhammad, 
A., (2019a). Integrated management of phosphorus, organic sources, and beneficial 
microbes improve dry matter partitioning of maize. Commun. Soil Sci. Plant Anal., 
50(20), 2544–2569. 
Amanullah, Khalid, S., Imran, Khan, H. A., Arif, M., Al-Tawaha, A. R., Adnan, M., Fahad, 
Sh., & Parmar, B., (2019). Organic matter management in cereals-based system: 
Symbiosis for improving crop productivity and soil health. In: Lal, R., & Francaviglia, 
R., (eds.), Sustainable Agriculture Reviews 29: Sustainable Soil Management: Preventive 
and Ameliorative Strategies (pp. 67–92). Cham: Springer International Publishing. 
Amanullah, Khalid, S., Khalil, F., & Imranuddin, (2020). Influence of irrigation regimes on 
competition indexes of winter and summer intercropping system under semi-arid regions 
of Pakistan. Sci. Rep., 10(1), 1–21. 
Amanullah, Khan, I., Jan, A., Jan, M. T., Khalil, S. K., Shah, Z., & Afzal, M., (2015). Compost 
and nitrogen management influence productivity of spring maize (Zea mays L.) under 
deep and conventional tillage systems in semi-arid regions. Commun. Soil Sci. Plant 
Anal., 46(12), 1566–1578. 
Amanullah, Khan, N., Khan, M. I., Khalid, Sh., Iqbal, A., & Al-Tawaha, A. R., (2019). 
Wheat biomass and harvest index increases with integrated use of phosphorus, zinc, and 
beneficial microbes under semiarid climates. J. Microbiol. Biotech. Food Sci., 242–247. 
Amanullah, Zahid, A., Iqbal, A., & Ikramullah, (2016). Phosphorus and tillage management 
for maize under irrigated and dryland conditions. Ann. Plant Sci., 5(3), 1304–1311. 
Assaf, T. A., Hameed, K. M., Turk, M. A., & Tawaha, A. M., (2006). Effect of soil amendment 
with olive mill by-products under soil solarization on growth and productivity of faba 274 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
bean and their symbiosis with mycorrhizal fungi. World Journal of Agricultural Sciences, 
2(1), 21–28. 
Assefa, T., Abebe, G., Fininsa, C., Tesso, B., & Al-Tawaha, A. M., (2005). Participatory bean 
breeding with women and smallholder farmers in eastern Ethiopia. World Journal of 
Agricultural Sciences, 1(1), 28–35. 
Bajorienė, K., Jodaugienė, D., Pupalienė, R., & Sinkevičienė, A., (2013). Effect of organic 
mulches on the content of organic carbon in the soil. Est. J. Ecol., 62(2), 100. 
Bengtsson, J., Ahnström, J., & Weibull, A. C., (2005). The effects of organic agriculture on 
biodiversity and abundance: A meta-analysis. J Appl Ecol., 42(2), 261–269. 
Bilalis, D., Sidiras, N., Economou, G., & Vakali, C., (2003). Effect of different levels of wheat 
straw soil surface coverage on weed flora in Vicia faba crops. J. Agron. Crop Sci., 189(4), 
233–241. 
Brévault, T., Bikay, S., Maldès, J. M., & Naudin, K., (2007). Impact of a no-till with mulch 
soil management strategy on soil macrofauna communities in a cotton cropping system. 
Soil Till. Res., 97(2), 140–149. 
Cherr, C. M., Scholberg, J. M. S., & McSorley, R., (2006). Green manure approaches to crop 
production: A synthesis. Agron. J., 98(2), 302–319. 
Głąb, T., & Kulig, B., (2008). Effect of mulch and tillage system on soil porosity under wheat 
(Triticum aestivum). Soil Til. Res., 99(2), 169–178. 
Hole, D. G., Perkins, A. J., Wilson, J. D., Alexander, I. H., Grice, P. V., & Evans, A. D., (2005). 
Does organic farming benefit biodiversity? Biol. Conserv., 122(1), 113–130. 
Imranuddin, Arif, M., Khalid, S., Nadia, Saddamullah, Idrees, M., & Amir, M., (2017). Effect 
of seed priming, nitrogen levels, and moisture regimes on yield and yield components of 
wheat. Pure Appl. Biol., 6(1), 369–377. 
Ji, S., & Unger, P. W., (2001). Soil water accumulation under different precipitation, potential 
evaporation, and straw mulch conditions. Soil Sci Soc Am J., 65(2), 442–448. 
Jordán, A., Zavala, L. M., & Gil, J., (2010). Effects of mulching on soil physical properties 
and runoff under semi-arid conditions in southern Spain. Catena, 81(1), 77–85. 
Khalid, S., Imranuddin, N., Nadeem, F., Saddamullah, A. M., & Ghani, F., (2017). Allelopathic 
effect of parthenium liquid extract on mung bean germination ability and early growth. 
Inter. J. Agron. Agri. Res., 11(4), 31–36. 
Khalid, S., Imranuddin, Nadeem, F., Azam, S., Ali, S., Nadia, Ikramullah, M., et al., (2019). 
Influence of source limitation on yield and yield components of wheat. Inter. J. Biol., 14(2), 
1–12. 
Khalid, S., Mhammad, Z. A., Imranuddin, Nadia, Faisal N., Muhammad, A., & Saddamullah, 
(2017). Effect of sulfur foliar fertilization on reproductive growth and development of 
canola. Inter. J. Agron. Agri. Res., 11(3), 61–67. 
Khalid, S., Munsif, F., Imranuddin, Nadia, Nadeem, F., Ali, S., Ghani, F., & Idrees, M., (2018). 
Influence of source limitation on physiological traits of wheat. Pure Appl. Biol., 7(1), 
85–92. 
Lee, K. D., & Tawaha, A. R. M., & Supanjani, (2005c). Antioxidant status, stomatal resistance 
and mineral composition of hot pepper under salinity and boron stress. Bioscience 
Research, 2(3), 148–154. 
Lee, K. D., Sulpanjani, Tawaha, A. M., & Yang, S. M., (2005a). Effect of Phosphorus application 
on yield, mineral contents and active components of Chrysanthemum coronarium L. 
Bioscience Research, 2(3), 118–124. Organic Mulching and Tillage in Organic Farming 275 
Lee, K. D., Turk, M. A., & Tawaha, A. M., (2005b). Nitrogen fixation in rice-based farming 
system. Bioscience Research, 2(3), 130–138. 
Martens, D. A., & Frankenberger, W. T., (1907). Modification of infiltration rates in an organic￾amended irrigated. Agron. J., 84(4), 707–717. 
Mesfine, T., Abebe, G., & Al-Tawaha, A. M., (2005). Effect of reduced tillage and crop 
residue ground cover on yield and water use efficiency of sorghum (Sorghum bicolor (L.) 
Moench) under semi-arid conditions of Ethiopia. World Journal of Agricultural Sciences, 
1(2), 152–160. 
Mulumba, L. N., & Lal, R., (2008). Mulching effects on selected soil physical properties. Soil 
and Tillage Research, 98(1), 106–111. 
Nikus, O., Abebe, G., Takele, A., Harrun, H., Chanyalew, S., Al Tawaha, A. M., & Mesfin, 
T., (2005b). Yield response of tef (Eragrostis tef (Zucc.) Trotter) to NP fertilization in 
the semi arid zones of the central rift valley in Ethiopia. European Journal of Scientific 
Research, 4(4), 49–60. 
Nikus, O., Nigussie, M., & Al Tawaha, A. M., (2005a). Agronomic performance of maize 
varieties under irrigation in Awash valley, Ethiopia. Bioscience Research, 2(1), 26–30. 
Petersen, J., & Rover, A., (2005). Comparison of sugar beet cropping systems with dead and 
living mulch using a glyphosate-resistant hybrid. J. Agron. Crop Sci., 191(1), 55–63. 
Radics, L., & Szné, B. E., (2004). Comparison of different mulching methods for weed 
control in organic green bean and tomato. Acta Hortic., 638, 189–196. 
Ramakrishna, A., Tam, H. M., Wani, S. P., & Long, T. D., (2006). Effect of mulch on soil 
temperature, moisture, weed infestation and yield of groundnut in northern Vietnam. 
Field Crops Res., 95(2–3), 115–125. 
Smika, D. E., & Unger, P. W., (1986). Effect of surface residues on soil water storage. In: 
Advances in Soil Science (pp. 111–138). Springer, New York. 
Sulpanjani, A., Yang, M. S., Tawaha, A. R. M., & Lee, K. D., (2005a). Effect of magnesium 
application on yield, mineral contents and active components of Chrysanthemum 
coronarium L. under hydroponics conditions. Bioscience Research, 2(2), 73–79. 
Supanjani, Tawaha, A. M., Yang, M. S., & Lee, K. D., (2005b). Role of calcium in yield 
and medicinal quality of Chrysanthemum coronarium L. Journal of Agronomy, 4(3), 
188–192. 
Supanjani, Tawaha, A. M., Yang, M. S., & Lee, Y. D., (2005c). Calcium effects on yield, 
mineral uptake and terpene components of hydroponic Chrysanthemum coronarium L. 
Research Journal of Agriculture and Biological Science, 1(1), 146–151. 
Tawaha, A. M., & Turk, M. A., (2001). Effects of dates and rates of sowing on yield and yield 
components of carbon vetch under semi-arid conditions. Acta Agronomica Hungarica, 
49(1), 103–105. 
Tawaha, A. M., & Turk, M. A., (2002). Lentil (Lens culinaris Medic.) productivity as 
influenced by rate and method of phosphate placement in a Mediterranean environment. 
Acta Agronomica Hungarica, 50(2), 197–201. 
Tawaha, A. M., Turk, M. A., Lee, K. D., Supanjani, Nikus, O., Al-Rifaee, M., & Sen, R., 
(2005a). Awnless barley response to crop management under Jordanian environment. 
Bioscience Research, 2(3), 125–129. 
Tawaha, A. R. M., Turk, M. A., & Lee, K. D., (2005b). Adaptation of chickpea to cultural 
practices in a Mediterranean type environment. Research Journal of Agriculture and 
Biological Science, 1(2), 152–157. 276 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
Turk, A. M., & Tawaha, A. M., (2002a). Impact of seeding rate, seeding date, rate and method 
of phosphorus application in faba (Vicia faba L. Minor) in the absence of moisture stress. 
Biotechnology, Agronomy, Society and Environment, 6(3), 171–178. 
Turk, A. M., & Tawaha, A. M., (2002b). Response of winter wheat to applied N with or 
without ethrel spray under irrigation planted in semi-arid environments. Asian Journal of 
Plant Sciences, 1(4), 464–466. 
Turk, M. A., & Tawaha, A. M., (2001). Influence of rate and method of phosphorus placement 
to garlic (Allium sativum L.) in a Mediterranean environment. Journal of Applied 
Horticulture, 3(2), 115–116. 
Turk, M. A., Hameed, K. M., Aqeel, A. M., & Tawaha, A. M., (2003c). Nutritional status of 
durum wheat grown in soil supplemented with olive mills by-products. Agrochimica, 5, 
209–219. 
Turk, M. A., Tawaha, A. M., Samara, N., & Latifa, N., (2003b). The response of six-row 
barley (Hordeum vulgare L.) to nitrogen fertilizer application and weed control methods 
in the absence of moisture stress. Pakistan Journal of Agronomy, 2(2), 101–108. 
Turk, M. A., Tawaha, A. M., Taifor, H., Al-Ghzawi, A., Musallam, I. W., Maghaireh, G. A., 
& Al-Omari, Y. I., (2003a). Two-row barley response to plant density, date of seeding 
and rate and method of phosphorus application in the absence of moisture stress. Asian 
Journal of Plant Science, 2(2), 180–183. 
Yang, M. S., Tawaha, A. M., & Lee, Y. D., (2005). Effects of ammonium concentration on the 
yield, mineral content and active terpene components of Chrysanthemum coronarium L. 
in a hydroponic system. Research Journal of Agriculture and Biological Science, 1(2), 
170–175. 
Zehnder, G., Gurr, G. M., Kühne, S., Wade, M. R., Wratten, S. D., & Wyss, E., (2007). 
Arthropod pest management in organic crops. Annu. Rev. Entomol., 52(1), 57–80. 
Zheng, W. J., Tawaha, A. M., & Lee, K. D., (2005). In situ hybridization analysis of mcMT1 
gene expression and physiological mechanisms of Cu-tolerant in Festuca rubra cv 
Merlin. Bioscience Research, 1(1), 21–26.  
 
 
 
CHAPTER 12
 
WEED MANAGEMENT IN ORGANIC 
CROPPING SYSTEMS 
ABDEL RAHMAN M. AL-TAWAHA,1
 ZAHRA FARROKHI,2 
NANDHINI YOGA,3
 POONAM ROSHAN,4
 IMRAN,5
 AMANULLAH,5 
ABDEL RAZZAQ M. AL-TAWAHA,6
 ALLA ALEKSANYAN,7 
SAMIA KHANUM,8 DEVARAJAN THANGADURAI,9 
JEYABALAN SANGEETHA,10 ABDUR RAUF,11 SHAH KHALID,5 
PALANI SARANRAJ,12 ABDUL BASIT,13 AYŞE YEŞILAYER,14 
HIBA ALATRASH,15 MAZEN A. ATEYYA,16 MUNIR TURK,17 ARUN 
KARNWAL,18 SAMEENA LONE,19 and KHURSHEED HUSSAIN19 
1
Department of Biological Sciences, Al-Hussein Bin Talal University, 
P.O. Box 20, Maan, Jordan 
2
College of Agriculture and Natural Resources, University of Tehran, Iran 
3
Department of Agronomy, Tamil Nadu Agricultural University, 
Coimbatore–641003, Tamil Nadu, India 
4
Department of Biotechnology, Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, 
Punjab–143005, India 
5
Department of Agronomy, The University of Agriculture, Peshawar, 
Pakistan 
6
Department of Crop Science, Faculty of Agriculture, 
University Putra Malaysia, Serdang–43400, Selangor, Malaysia 
7
Institute of Botany aft. A.L. Takhtajyan NAS RA/Department of 
Geobotany and Plant Eco-Physiology, Yerevan, Armenia 
8
Department of Botany, University of the Punjab, Lahore, Pakistan 
9
Department of Botany, Karnatak University, Dharwad–580003, 
Karnataka, India 278 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
10Department of Environmental Science, Central University of Kerala, 
Kasaragod–671316, Kerala, India 
11Department of Chemistry, University of Swabi, Anbar, 
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Pakistan 
12Department of Microbiology, Sacred Heart College (Autonomous), 
Tirupattur–635601, Tamil Nadu, India 
13Department of Plant Pathology, Agriculture College, 
Guizhou University, Guiyang–550025, P.R. China 
14Faculty of Agriculture, Tokat Gaziosmanpasa University, Tokat, Turkey 
15General Commission for Scientific Agricultural Research, Syria 
16Faculty of Agricultural Technology, Al Balqa Applied University, 
Al-Salt–19117, Jordan 
17Department of Plant Production, 
Jordan University of Science and Technology, Irbid, Jordan 
18Department of Microbiology, School of Bioengineering and 
BioSciences, Lovely Professional University, Phagwara, Punjab, India 
19Division of Vegetable Science, SKUAST-Kashmir, Jammu and Kashmir, 
India 
ABSTRACT 
Global climate changes such as increasing CO2
 levels, temperature increases, 
drought, etc., have been shown to adversely affect agricultural products. 
Weeds can be seen as a major problem because they seem to fight at the 
expense of the crop for resources such as light, water, and nutrients. Weed 
species are commonly favored in crops that are more closely associated with 
them. The association between weeds and crops is due to their similar growth 
habits. The basic strategy should be considered as the core of the organic 
weed control strategy: crop stand, crop rotation, crop cover, variety selec￾tion, clean seeds, soil health, soil structure, spring tillage, delayed planting, 
post-emergence tillage, hand weeding, mulches, and organic herbicides. 
This chapter focuses on: (i) classification of weed species; and (ii) weed 
management strategies under climate change.  
 
 
Weed Management in Organic Cropping Systems 279 
12.1 INTRODUCTION
 
Organic farming is a natural way of producing food while respecting the land and 
animals, and avoiding methods that are potentially harmful to the environment 
and human health. It is an integrated agricultural production system, based on 
ecological principles, which seeks to respect life and natural cycles. The use 
of synthetic pesticides, genetically modified organisms, synthetic fertilizers, 
and animal growth hormones is prohibited in organic farming. Weeds can be 
considered a significant problem because they tend to compete for resources 
such as light, water, and nutrients, at the expense of the crop (Tawaha et al., 
2001; Tawaha and Turk, 2001, 2001c, 2002; Turk and Tawaha, 2001a, b, 
2002a, b). Weeds are often documented as the most severe threat to organic 
crop production (Penfold et al., 1995; Stonehouse et al., 1996; Clark et al., 
1998). The foundation of an organic weed control strategy should take into 
consideration the following basic strategy: crop stand, crop rotation, cover 
crops, variety selection, clean seed, soil health, soil structure, spring tillage, 
delayed planting, pre-emerge tillage, post-emerge tillage, hand weeding, 
mulches, organic-based herbicides. This chapter discusses: (i) classification of 
weed species; (ii) strategies for weed management in organic farming system 
(OFS); and (iii) weed management strategies under climate change. 
12.2 CLASSIFICATION OF WEED SPECIES 
There are about 250 true weed species around the world that are classified 
by using several classification methods. These methods are based on habitat, 
physiology, morphology, origin, soil pH, and life cycle (Zimdahl, 2012). The 
lifecycle-based classification method has been widely exploited by many weed 
management strategies. This method classifies weeds into three classes of annual, 
biennial, and perennial, taking into account weed’s life span, growing season, the 
timing of growth and reproduction, and the reproductive form (Zimdahl, 2012). 
Such information may determine which weed species are favored in which 
crops (Ziska and Dukes, 2011), being a prerequisite for making the appropriate 
selection for the most effective control method (Monaco et al., 2002). 
12.2.1 ANNUAL SPECIES 
Weeds can be considered a major problem because they appear to fight for 
resources like light, water, and nutrients at the cost of the crop (Turk and  
280 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
Tawaha, 2002c–e, 2003a, b; Turk et al., 2003). Annuals are weeds that all 
their growth stages, including both vegetative and reproductive growth, occur 
within one growing season (less than one year) (Ziska and Dukes, 2011). 
They do not have any vegetative structures for reproduction and spread, and 
reproduce only by their seeds. High persistence of these species is due to 
their quick growth, short life span, and production of a significant number of 
dormant seeds (Ziska and Dukes, 2011). Annual weeds may find in different 
crop fields; however, they tend to be more abundant in annually tilled fields. 
Usually, eradication, prevention, and controlling of annual weeds are easier 
than perennial ones. The most appropriate time to control these weeds is 
during their seedling stage by clipping or pulling up (Zimdahl, 2012). 
Annual weeds are usually categorized into summer and winter annuals. 
Summer annuals tend to start growing in the spring (April to May), go to 
flower and produce seeds through the summer, then they die in the autumn. 
The weeds foxtails, goosegrass, common cocklebur, purse lane, water hemp, 
morning glories, pigweeds, common lambsquarters, crabgrass, common 
ragweed, and wild buckwheat are summer annual weeds. The seeds remain 
dormant in the soil during the winter months. Summer annual weeds are 
often problematic in summer-growing crops such as soybeans, corn, cotton, 
peanuts, sorghum, and many vegetables (Monaco et al., 2002). In contrast, 
winter annual weeds begin to grow in the autumn, form rosette (a form of 
plant with no central stem and of leaf-like structures) in the beginning of 
the cold period, then bloom and produce seeds in the spring, and die in the 
middle of the summer. Soil temperatures of 125°F or higher cause dormancy 
in the seeds of these weed species, preventing seed germination (Monaco et 
al., 2002). Some examples of winter annual weeds are downy brome, chick￾weed, pinnate tansy mustard, shepherd’s-purse, flixweed, hairy cress, cheat, 
field pennycress, corn cockle, cornflower, and henbit. They are troublesome 
mostly in winter crops such as winter cereal, early spring grains, fall-seeded 
crops, pastures, no-till fields, and in alfalfa, a perennial (Zimdahl, 2012). 
12.2.2 BIENNIAL SPECIES 
Biennials complete all their growth stages (vegetative and reproductive 
growth) in around 2 years. Their biological life cycle has two phases. During 
the first phase of growth, seeds germinate, and seedlings grow and form 
rosette at the beginning of the cold period. In the second phase, it elongates a 
flowering stalk, sets seed, and then it dies (Monaco et al., 2002). Because of  
 
Weed Management in Organic Cropping Systems 281 
having a lifespan of about two calendar years, they are sometimes confused 
by winter annual weeds. However, biennial weeds live for more than 1 year 
(12 months) and less than 2 years. In addition, they are usually longer and 
larger than annuals at maturity and have fleshy and thick roots (Radosevich 
et al., 2007). Like annuals, biennial weeds reproduce only sexually, and 
hence preventing seed production is the most effective way to control this 
class of weed species (Zimdahl, 2012). Biennial weed species are relatively 
few compared to the other weed species. Some examples include musk 
thistle, wild lettuce, bull thistle, common mullein, common burdock, and 
wild carrot. These weeds are typically inhabiting undisturbed fields for at 
least 2 years (min- or no-till fields or in perennial crops), and in pastures and 
non-crop areas like along roadsides, and fencerows (Monaco et al., 2002). 
12.2.3 PERENNIAL SPECIES 
Perennials are weeds that live for several years through regrown from the 
underground perennating structures (Radosevich et al., 2007). Unlike annuals 
and biennials, the life cycle of these species does not finish after flowering 
and can reproduce by vegetative organs, as well as by seeds. The perennials 
mainly find in no-till fields, pastures, roadsides, and sometimes in tilled fields. 
Based on the method of reproduction, these species are classified into two 
classes: stationary and creeping perennials. In the following, characteristics 
of the two mentioned classes are explained. 
12.2.3.1 STATIONARY PERENNIALS 
This group of perennials normally reproduces by seeds, and they have no 
normal means for vegetative reproduction. However, if their roots are cut 
or damaged, new plants can be regenerated from these damaged pieces 
(Zimdahl, 2012). Since the first infestation of stationary perennials relies on 
seed (as a major reproduction strategy), and therefore, many of these species 
can be removed by preventing seed production (Monaco et al., 2002). They 
have usually fleshy and deep taproots that grow vertically downward into 
soil. The root systems are separate and there is no underground joining among 
these plants (https://ag.umass.edu/sites/ag.umass.edu/files/fact-sheets/pdf/ 
weed_life_cycles). Some examples of simple perennials include broadleaf 
plantain, common pokeweed, broadleaf/curly dock, and dandelion.  
 
282 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
12.2.3.2 CREEPING PERENNIALS 
These perennial weeds establish by seeds and by vegetative reproduction. 
These weeds store carbohydrates in their underground overwintering struc￾tures allowing them to regrow without seed in the spring. Some examples of 
these vegetative organs include: above-ground (stolon) and below-ground 
(rhizomes) creeping stems, bulbs, corms, budding roots, and tubers. Regard￾less of management strategies, controlling creeping perennials is most 
difficult because they reproduce by vegetative structures as well as seeds. 
These structures are spread by tillage equipment from one field to another. 
In order to adequate control of these perennial weeds, management practices 
such as cultivation, mowing, and herbicides must be repeated or combined 
(Monaco et al., 2002). Most aquatic weeds (except algae), field bindweed, 
Johnson grass, leafy spurge, quack grass, purple, and yellow nutsedge, 
Canada thistle, Russian knapweed are some examples of creeping perennial 
weeds (Radosevich et al., 2007). 
It is to be noted that the lifecycle-based classification sometimes may be 
affected by local climate conditions. For example, in temperate climates, 
some biennial weeds may behave more like simple perennials, and under 
particular conditions, some annual weeds may act like more biennial weed 
(Radosevich et al., 2007). 
12.2.4 WHICH WEED SPECIES ARE FAVORED IN WHICH CROPS? 
Weed species are commonly favored in crops that have more association with 
them. The association between weed and crop are because of their similarity 
in growth habit (such as growth form, height), life cycle, etc., (Zimdahl, 
2012). For example, summer annual weeds prefer summer annual crops, and/ 
or perennial weeds are favored in perennial crops. This similarity in growth 
habits makes weed management very difficult, provides an opportunity for 
weeds to disperse their seeds, and makes difficult separation of weed and 
crop seeds due to the similar seed morphology (for example, nightshades in 
potatoes, tomatoes, and beans, Kochia, and lambs quarters in sugar beets, 
barnyard grass in rice, wild oat in wheat, or little seed canary grass in wheat) 
(Gbèhounou, 2013). 
Sometimes the tendency of a weed to a certain crop can be induced 
by different selection pressures including cultural practices (e.g., tillage, 
mowing, time of planting, irrigation, rotation, and soil preparation practices, 
and even post-harvest selection pressures such as winnowing and threshing),  
 
 
Weed Management in Organic Cropping Systems 283 
cropping system (mixed or monoculture), resistance or adaptation to 
imposed weed control tactics, and altering weed control methods over time 
(Tominaga and Yamasue, 2004). Weeds are evolving in order to adapt to the 
control measures or environment conditions (vegetative and seed mimicry 
or evade) under different selection pressures. Implementation of any cultural 
practice as selection pressure not only may favor the growth conditions of 
crop, but also can favor the growth conditions of specific weeds (Harlan, 
1982). Accordingly, some types of the relevant weeds are able to persist on 
a particular field, whereas they are rarely able to grow under another field 
conditions (crop-specific weeds) (Tominaga and Yamasue, 2004). 
A common example of selection pressure is applying herbicides. Because 
of more application of graminicides by farmers, broad-leaved weeds 
succession occurs in broad-leaved crops. Thus, these weeds become dominant 
over time and maybe more associated with that certain crop (https://www. 
researchgate.net/post/Why_weeds_are_crop_specific). Another example of 
exerted changes in weed communities related to selection pressure is tillage. 
A periodic soil disturbance in conventional tillage systems is prevailed in 
the annuals because they can reproduce earlier and produce a high number 
of seeds. In contrast, no-tillage farming dominates the perennial weeds 
(Carr et al., 2013a; Melander et al., 2013) because of reduction in physically 
damaging of underground organs and in exposing them to unfavorable 
weather conditions. The more example is a post-harvest selection pressure 
such ash and weeding that is evolved seed and vegetative mimicry of Lolium 
temulentum to barley and wheat, and the vegetative mimicry and physiological 
traits of Echinochloao ryzicola in rice (Tominaga and Yamasue, 2004). 
12.3 STRATEGIES FOR WEED MANAGEMENT 
12.3.1 CULTURAL METHODS 
In cultural methods of weed control, the cultural practices generally followed 
in a crop is employed, such as tillage, fertilizer application, crop rotation, 
allelopathy, etc. Some of them are discussed in subsections (Table 12.1). 
12.3.1.1 WEED-CROP COMPETITION 
Weeds compete with crops mainly for the water, light, space, and nutrients 
which affect the growth of the plants (Tables 12.2 and 12.3). 284 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development TABLE 12.1 Potential Allelopathy Crops with Their Allelochemicals and Their Usage in the Cropping System Name of the Crop Allelochemicals Present Ways to Use in Cropping Systems Rye (Tabaglio et al., 2013) ß-phenyllactic acid, protocatechuic acid, DIBOA (glucoside), vanillic acid, apigenin-glycosides, syringic acid, luteolinglucuronides, ρ-hydroxybenzoic acid, ρ-coumaric acid, benzoxazolinones BOA, cyanidin glycosides, ß-hydroxybutyric acid, isovitexinglucosides, DIMBOA (glucoside), gallic acid, and ferulic acid/conjugates Used in a cropping system as a rotational crop, cover crop, or mulch Sorghum (Weston et al., 2013) Hydrophobic ρ-benzoquinone (sorgoleone), phenolics, and acyanogenic glycoside (dhurrin) Used by planting allelopathic cultivars, applying sorghum residues as mulch, using sorghum as cover crop and intercrop, or including sorghum cultivars in a crop rotation Brassicas (Fahey et al., 2001) Glucosinate As cover crops, intercropping brassica crops with the main crop, crop rotation, or the use of brassica litter as mulch Sunflower (Alsaadawi et al., 2012) 16 allelochemicals (phenolic acids) Used either by growing allelopathic sunflower cultivars in a mixture with weeds, or applying the residues of sunflower cultivars to the wheat crop and its weeds  
 
Weed Management in Organic Cropping Systems 285 
TABLE 12.2 Insects Selected for the Control of Specific Weeds 
Weeds Insects Selected for the Control 
Prickly pear cactus (Opuntia inermis), 
Spiny prickly pear (Opuntia stricta) 
Cactoblastis cactorum 
Hypericum perforatum Chrysolina quadrigemina 
Parthenium hysterophorous Zygogramma bicolorata 
Eichhornia crassipes Weevils (Neochetina eichhorniae, N. bruchi) 
Salvinia molesta Paulina acuminata 
TABLE 12.3 Using Fungi on Specific Weed Control 
Pathogen Weed Controlled 
Alternaria sp. Crissum avenae 
A. helianthi Xanthium strumarium 
A. crassa Datura stramonium 
Bipolaris halopense Sorghum halepense 
Colletotrichum furariodes Asclepias sericea 
Phomopsis convolvulus Convolvulus arvensis 
12.3.1.1.1 Competition for Light 
Light is an important factor for the rapid growth of crop plants as well as 
weeds. Photosynthesis of the plants is dependent upon the light. Broadleaved 
weeds establish prior to the crop plants and restrict light to the crop plants 
through shading effect, thereby hindering the crop growth. It is estimated 
that weed competition reduces light intensity up to 85% in onions and beets, 
thus reducing yield by 60%. If there is adequate moisture and fertility levels, 
the competition will be more for light. Plants with higher leaf density are 
benefitted as it has higher leaf area index. The presence of higher leaf density 
affects the quality and quantity of light obtained to weeds. 
12.3.1.1.2 Competition for Water 
Weeds generally absorb and transpire more water than the crop plants (four 
times higher transpiration rate). Hence many weeds are considered as “water 
wasters.” During water stress conditions, weeds cause severe moisture 
depletion and transpire the moisture rapidly, up to 50% yield loss occurs  
 
286 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
through moisture competition alone. Rather than the above ground biomass, 
the below-ground biomass contributes more for the water extraction from 
soil through the root zone. Most of the perennial weeds have deeper rooting 
system, which is less affected by drought as it can acquire water from the 
deeper zones of soil. On the other hand, annual weeds are prone to drought, 
as it has a shallow root system. Some of the weeds like ragweed (Parthe￾nium hysterophorus), and common ragweed (Ambrosia sp.) require water to 
the extent of about three times than that of millets. Among the problematic 
weeds around the world, 14 weeds are C4
 plants and 76% of C3
 crops are the 
cultivated crop area. So under elevated CO2
 on drought conditions, C4
 crops 
has an advantage over the C3
 crops. 
12.3.1.1.3 Competition for Nutrients 
Weeds remove mineral nutrients from soil like nitrogen, phosphorous, 
and potassium (NPK) more rapidly and in large quantities than the crop 
plants and reduces the availability of these nutrients, especially nitrogen 
and potassium to the crops. Certain weeds have very deep and prolific root 
system than the crops and absorb nutrients causing a reduction in the crop 
yield. Some parasitic weeds like dodder (Cuscuta sp.), Loranthus sp., etc., 
absorb mineral nutrients directly from the host crops and destroy them. 
Amaranthus virdis, Chenopodium album, Portulaca quadrifida and Celosia 
argentea can remove 3.5 to 4.5% K2
O and 2.4 to 3.1% N from the soil during 
the crop period and become a potential competitor for nutrients. 
12.3.1.2 CROP ROTATIONS 
Crop rotation is the yearly sequence and arrangement of crops. The crop 
sequences will suppress and remove the weeds from the field. Also, the 
problematic weeds associated with crops have been reduced to some extent, 
but the overall weed diversity was increased. By growing the same crop year 
after year will increase the weed intensity, changing the crops grown year 
after year will reduce the weed intensity. Adeux et al. (2019) reported that 
changing the crop sequence reduced the usage of herbicides and increased 
the productivity. Different crops have different requirements, so it will 
disrupt the weed phase in a crop rotation.  
 
 
Weed Management in Organic Cropping Systems 287 
12.3.1.3 ALLELOPATHY
 
Allelopathy is a biological phenomenon by which an organism produces 
one or more biochemicals that influence the germination, growth, 
survival, and reproduction of other organisms from the same community. 
Allelochemicals are derived either from root exudates or leaching effect 
or through volatilization. The effect of the biochemicals may be direct 
or indirect on the plant species, affecting the germination, plant growth, 
survival, and reproduction of other organisms. The allelopathic plants can 
be used to control the weed by raising potential allelopathic cultivars, by 
intercropping them in the cropping system, as cover crops, and as well as 
plant residues. 
12.3.1.4 WEED ON WEED 
Cogon grass inhibits the emergence and growth of buttonweed by exudation 
of allelochemicals through rhizomes; Johnson grass showed an effect on 
giant foxtail and large crabgrass by inhibiting the growth through release of 
chemicals from living and decaying rhizomes and leaves. 
12.3.1.5 BIOLOGICAL CONTROL 
This method is one of the important and practically feasible ones on 
controlling weeds. Biological control means, “the utilization of any living 
organism for the control of insect pests, diseases, and weeds.” It means 
controlling the pest or weed population using the biotic agents either 
directly or indirectly. In a direct control, the biocontrol agent bores into 
the plant, weakens the plant structure causing it to collapse. The collapsed 
plants are destroyed by consuming the vital parts of the plant. On the other 
hand, indirect control reserves the competitive weed ability of weed over 
other plants and paves the way for favorable conditions for plant growth. 
There are natural enemies in the crop environment which will work against 
the crop pests that suppress the growth of the plant, while aiming on 
increasing these natural enemies both quantitatively and qualitatively is 
termed as biological control.  
 
 
 
288 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
12.3.1.5.1 Insects 
On selecting insects for biocontrol of weeds, the selected insect should target 
specifically the weed and should not feed on the crop plants for its survival. 
12.3.1.5.2 Plant Pathogens 
Using of plant pathogens to control weeds, especially fungi, is now 
becoming an important aspect of biological weed control. The pathogens 
are formulated as mycoherbicides on controlling the weed population. From 
these mycoherbicides, toxic compounds are released on targeted plants and 
it will degrade the cell wall. Also, it has the ability to reproduce on its own 
and can thrive in soil for years (Table 12.4). 
TABLE 12.4 Mycoherbicides, Their Formulations to Control Weeds 
Mycoherbicide Formulation of Fungus Weed Controlled 
Devine Phytophthora palmivora Morrania odorata 
Collego Colletotrichum gleosporioides f. 
sp. aeschynomene 
Aeschynomene verginicia 
Biomal C. gleosporioides f. sp. malvae Malvae pusilla 
Luboa 2 C. gleosporioides f. sp. cuscutae Cuscuta sp. 
Velgo C. coccodes Velvetleaf 
Caset Alternaria cassia Cassia obtusifolia 
ABG-5003 Cercospora rodmanii Eichornia crassipes (Water 
hyacinth) 
12.3.2 PHYSICAL WEED CONTROL METHODS 
Physical or mechanical control of weeds is the removal of weeds by 
implements. Some of the physical weed control methods are discussed in 
subsections. 
12.3.2.1 STUBBLE CULTIVATION 
After harvest of the grain crops, the stubbles are left in the field for a few days. 
Then the tillage operation is carried out to reduce the soil weed seed bank and  
 
 
Weed Management in Organic Cropping Systems 289 
perennial weeds by causing mechanical damage (Pekrun and Claupein, 2006). 
Stubble tillage additionally helps in controlling unnecessary evaporation and 
incorporation of crop residues for a quicker decomposition. Chikowo et al. 
(2009) reported that stubble cultivation along with crop diversification and 
delayed sowing reduced the use of chemical herbicides up to 77%. Melander 
et al. (2013) suggested that cover crops and stubble management practices 
strengthen the crop growth and reduced the weed growth. 
12.3.2.2 PLOUGHING 
Ploughing is generally practiced to control weeds in the summer season. It 
will uproot the weeds that are in the sub soil layer, exposed roots and stems 
are desiccated, and the plant will eventually die. The commonly used plow 
for controlling the weeds is moldboard plow. While seeds in the surface layer 
are buried deep down in the soil by moldboard plow. Usually plowing is 
used to break seed dormancy and initiate seed germination due to exposure 
of sunlight. This mechanism is taken into favor to control weeds by stale 
seedbed method. The weed seeds are made to germinate earlier before culti￾vating the crop and the weeds are eliminated by subsequent plowing opera￾tions. The number of weeds in a cropped area and the reduction of weed 
seeds in the soil seed bank is reduced through the stale seedbed technique 
(Lampkin, 2002). 
12.3.2.3 HARROWING AND SEED BED PREPARATION 
Harrowing is a tillage operation, where the implement consists of tines drill 
into the soil creating favorable conditions for crop growth. Generally, a shallow 
harrowing will reduce weed intensity. In seedbed preparation, stale seedbed 
or false seedbed reduces the weed intensity during the cropping period. The 
seedbed is prepared few days before the original planting, due to optimum 
moisture condition in the field, weeds will germinate and emerge. Then the 
emerged weeds are removed either by harrowing, flaming, or drilling. 
12.3.2.4 WEED HARROWING 
Weed harrowing is mechanical control of weeds applied to weed plants. 
Here harrows are being used as a weeder which will work both in intra-row  
 
290 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
and inter-row. But it cannot be used in the earlier stages of crop growth. 
The non-hydraulic drag harrow is used in vegetable crops, whereas the 
modern spring tine harrows are used in dicot and monocot crops. However, 
careful harrowing should be done in dicot crops in all the stages of the crop 
growth. Two types of harrowing such as pre-emergence and post-emergence 
harrowing are practiced. The pre-emergence harrowing is used for deep 
rooted crops, and the post-emergence harrowing is used after raising of crops 
to control small weeds in the early stages of crop growth. In the study of 
reducing quinoa weed density, harrowing, and hoeing showed lesser quinoa 
weed density. Also, it is suggested that harrowing can be used as a supple￾ment in inter-row hoeing (Jacobsen et al., 2010). 
12.3.2.5 INTER-ROW CULTIVATORS 
Inter-row cultivators are selective mechanical weed control methods. In 
harrowing, ineffective weed control and injuries to crop paved the way for 
specific technology like inter-row cultivators. In this, only the weeds are 
damaged without any impact on the crop. This is achieved by increasing the 
inter-row spacing of the crop to allow the hoe blade, which will effectively 
control the weeds by addition of cutting action with uprooting. The inter-row 
weeds are completely killed while the intra-row weeds are partially affected. 
For minimizing the intra-row weeds, increasing the population density will 
cause crop competition against weeds and suppress the intra-row weeds 
(Melander and Rasmussen, 2001). 
12.3.2.6 MOWING 
Mowing is cutting of grass and crops with a hand implement or a machine. 
It is mainly used in pastures, along roadside and also in waste places. It is 
primarily used to reduce weed seed production and to restrict weed growth. 
Mowing alone will not control the weeds effectively, but along the combina￾tion with other management methods it shows effectiveness. An even soil 
surface without any rocks is required for mowing the field. Mowers can 
be connected to a tractor with three-point hitches and used for cutting the 
weeds. With a high-speed velocity, rotary or disc mower will cut the plant 
tissue. The importance of mowing in the cropping system is maintaining the 
pastures, rangeland, cover crops, grassed waterways, field margins, orchards, 
tree plantations, vineyards, horticultural ornamentals, woody perennial, and  
 
 
Weed Management in Organic Cropping Systems 291 
lawns. Mowing is highly practiced in areas where there are no further soil 
disturbances. 
12.3.2.7 BRUSH WEEDING 
A mechanical instrument called a brush weeder is used for controlling the 
weeds through cutting action. It consists of rotating brushes placed in a 
vertical axis that revolves in higher speed velocity (Melander, 1998). Mostly, 
brush weeders are used to control weeds in the inter-rows between the plants. 
Horticultural crops use vertical brush weeders use rotating nylon bristles to 
pull weeds and aerate soil about 1 inch deep. 
12.3.2.8 RIDGING (POTATOES AND OTHER ROW CROPS) 
Ridging or earthing up is mounding the soil around the crop taken from 
between the rows of crop. By ridging, the plant will be in an upright posi￾tion, and it also helps to control the weeds. It can be followed in all row 
crops to prevent the growth of weeds, even though the main aim of ridging 
is to loosen the soil for aerating the root. Maize, pearl millet, groundnut, 
sugarcane, potato, ginger, and turmeric are some examples of crops which 
are following earthing up. In sugarcane, ridging is practiced three times at 
45, 120, and 180 days after planting. In potato crop, an early ridging is done 
and also further once or twice it can be done. 
12.3.2.9 FLAMING 
Using fire to control weeds is one of the physical measures to reduce the weed 
intensity. A directed flame from liquid propane increases the temperature 
of the weeds and causes to rupture the cell walls. In organic weed control 
practice, flaming, and rotary hoeing offered the same yield in corn crop. Also 
flaming is less invasive and preserves the soil structure (Mutch, 2008). 
12.4 WEED MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES UNDER CLIMATE CHANGE 
Climate change is represented as shifting of weather events (IPCC, 2014) 
due to fluctuations in essential climate variables (ECV). Bojinski et al.  
292 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
(2014) described ECVs as physical, chemical, or biological parameters that 
are critical for the characterization of climate or climate related changes. 
Some key parameters such as temperature, greenhouse gases (GHGs) 
(carbon dioxide (CO2
) and methane), rainfall, wind, precipitation, drought, 
water availability and light impart a pronounced role in the growth of plant 
species. Elevated levels of CO2
 and extreme weather events have emerged as 
serious threats to agricultural production, thereby posing a negative impact 
on the food security (IPCC, 2019). The changing climatic conditions also 
found to affect the growth and distribution pattern of weed species. Weeds 
are recognized as one of the key biological constraints that scuffle with crops 
for physical resources like water, sunlight, nutrients, aeration, etc., hence, 
reducing global crop productivity (Varanasi et al., 2016; Ray et al., 2019). 
Moreover, they act as reservoir hosts for various destructive pathogens such 
as bacteria, viruses, fungi, etc., and their insect vectors (Agrios, 2005; Roshan 
et al., 2019). As a consequence, researchers, and scientists are concerned to 
develop ingenious, cost-effective, and sustainable weed management system 
to tackle the weed related challenges in agriculture. 
12.4.1	 CROSSTALK BETWEEN CLIMATE CHANGE AND CROP￾WEED COMPETITION 
Global changes in the climatic factors such as increased CO2
 concentration, 
elevated temperature, drought, solar radiation pattern, etc., found to nega￾tively influence the agriculture productivity. Furthermore, these factors alter 
the competitiveness of weeds, leading to a reduction in the crop yields (Ziska 
et al., 2011). 
It is evident that agriculture based activities contribute (10–12%) for the 
emission of GHGs such as CO2
, nitrous oxide (NO2
), and methane (CH4
) 
(Smith et al., 2014). In context to plant species, elevated CO2
 (e[CO2
]) can have 
adverse consequences in determining the invasiveness of C3 weeds species 
over C4 crops (Ziska, 2004). The most probable reason for this change is 
different modes of CO2 enrichment by ribulose-1,5-biphosphate (RuBisCO) 
enzyme, and C3 plants have been reported to efficiently fix the higher 
concentrations of CO2
 (600–800 ppm) during photosynthesis. However, C4 
plants have a lesser tendency to tolerate an increased amount of atmospheric 
CO2
 because their innate machinery itself can accumulate 2000 ppm of CO2
, 
which is sufficient to saturate RuBisCO enzyme (Ziska et al., 2011; Korres 
et al., 2016). Additionally, e[CO2
] levels lead to enhancement of leaf area 
and biomass that are unequivocally correlated with the reproductive capacity Weed Management in Organic Cropping Systems 293 
of C3 weed species (Chandrasena, 2009). For instance, a C3 weed common 
cocklebur outcompetes C4 crop, sorghum in terms of biomass and leaf area 
under e[CO2
] concentrations (Ziska, 2001). Ziska (2003) has also reported 
that e[CO2
] concentrations enhanced 70% growth of a North American weed 
in comparison to native species. The effect of e[CO2
] on weed competitive￾ness is also strengthened by some reports in the Asian subcontinent, where 
a C3 weed species, Phalaris minor Retz. affect the growth of wheat crop 
(Ramesh et al., 2017). Contrarily, in a field of C3 crop and C4 weed, the 
former is being benefitted by the increased CO2
 rates (Ziska, 2013). 
Together with e[CO2
], atmospheric temperature is considered as an 
important attribute in determining competitiveness and distribution of weed 
species in a geographical area. Under temperature stress, both C3 and C4 
species experience variations in the photosynthetic stimulation and growth. 
Beyond 25°C, C3 species undergo increased photorespiration accompa￾nied with inhibition of CO2
 assimilation, whereas C4 species sustain low 
photorespiration rates in response to temperature change. This mechanism 
favors the growth of C4 species at different atmospheric temperatures in 
comparison to C3 species (Sage and Kubein, 2007). Moreover, C4 weeds 
tend to expand their geographical territories (range shift) because higher 
latitudes are convenient for plant growth at elevated temperatures (Clements 
and Ditommaso, 2011). In a maize field, germination of a C4 weed, Setaria 
viridis occurs in the latter stage, under warmer temperatures. Recently, due 
to climate change events and elevated temperature, the germination of this 
weed species is synchronized with maize, thus becoming as a competitor to 
maize (Peters and Gerowitt, 2014). 
Elevated CO2
 and temperature events are correlated with the increased 
aridity and global alteration in the rainfall pattern. As a consequence, 
the monsoon fed geographical area would dried up, leading to increased 
drought spells and favor growth of C4 over C3 weed species (Valerio et al., 
2011). Weed species, such as Striga hermonthica and Lantana sp. adapt to 
thrive under drought conditions (trait shift) by shortening their life cycle. 
On the other hand, weeds like Ramphicarpa fistulosa are benefitted by 
moisture abundance (Rodenburg et al., 2010; Taylor et al., 2012). In south 
Asia, direct-seeded rice (DSR) technology was implemented to achieve 
higher water productivity, but the major limitation of this approach was 
serious weed infestation and competition that resulted in 30–80% yield 
loss (Matloob et al., 2015). Karkanis et al. (2018) postulated that moisture 
fed weeds species could shift to northern Europe due to decreased rainfall 
content in the southern part, and under such circumstances; drought can 
increase weed derived crop losses throughout Europe.  
294 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
12.4.2	 EFFECTIVE STRATEGIES OF WEED MANAGEMENT UNDER 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
It is quite evident from our previous discussion that changing ECVs can 
potentially affect weed invasiveness and distribution of a geographical 
region. Hence, at a realistic level, systemic, and comprehensive research 
of weed biology and ecology accompanied with higher crop yield goals 
is a prerequisite for the development of sustainable weed management 
programs. 
There is a pressing need to identify geographical ranges vulnerable 
to weed invasion and expansion under changing climatic conditions. The 
development of high throughput bioclimatic prediction models integrated 
with understanding of weed biology and ecology would be helpful in making 
weed management decisions and precise application of control measures 
(Chauhan et al., 2017). These simulation models are based on combinatorial 
approaches such as niche-based species distribution, spatial distribution, 
geographic information system (GIS) and successfully utilized to study 
distribution of weed species, (Avena sterilis L. and Ambrosia artemisi￾ifolia L.) and assessment of crop/weed competition (Richter et al., 2013; 
Castellanos-Frías et al., 2014; Andrew and Storkey, 2017). 
Weed species retain their seeds in soil and serve as inoculums for next 
season weed emergence. These seeds can remain dormant and viable for 
longer periods, thus escaping the effect of changing climatic conditions 
and germinate on arrival of favorable climate. The most effective way to 
prevent the addition of weed seeds into soil is by implementation of harvest 
weed seed control methods (HWSC). As a spinoff of this concept, several 
weed control methods like chaff carts, narrow window burning, bale direct 
system and recently, a weed management device called ‘Harrington seed 
destructor’ is coupled with grain harvesters to destroy weed seeds (Walsh et 
al., 2012, 2017). Seeds of some weeds display greater extent of dormancy 
while remaining in the soil, causing hindrance in weed control practices. 
In such a case, an application of smoke derived stimulant, namely Karrikin 
(KAR1) is helpful in the synchronized germination of Avena fatua seeds 
(Kępczyński, 2018). 
The application of herbicides has been considered as most economical 
way for weed management in agriculture. However, continuous use of 
concentrated herbicide formulations on crops under elevated temperature, 
rendered the evolution of herbicide resistant weeds species (Heap, 2014). 
Taking into account of abovementioned limitations of chemical herbicides,  
Weed Management in Organic Cropping Systems 295 
the need of the hour is to implement the usage of natural phytotoxins as 
non-chemical herbicides for controlling the weed population in a sustainable 
manner (Dayan and Duke, 2014). 
Some crop cultivars possess complex traits which are responsible for 
suppression/allelopathy of weed growth, therefore, identification of such 
traits is a crucial step in organic plant breeding (OPB) program. Location 
and mapping of genes controlling high yield, early vigor, height, and alle￾lopathy in crop cultivars would be important in weed management. So far, 
several breeding studies have been conducted between high yielding and 
weed suppressive cultivars to develop superior and competitive cultivars 
in rice, wheat, and canola (Worthington et al., 2015; Dimaano et al., 2017; 
Mwendwa et al., 2018). 
In the 21st century, initiatives must be taken to educate farmers about the 
weed risk assessment amid climate change, and the association of farmers 
with weed scientists will encourage them to adopt the latest technology to 
control weeds. 
12.5 CONCLUSION 
Weeds can be considered a major problem because at the cost of crops they 
appear to fight for resources including light, water, and nutrients. The corner￾stone of an organic weed control strategy should consider the following basic 
strategy: crop stand, crop rotation, crop cover, variety selection, clean seed, 
soil health, soil structure, spring tillage, delayed planting, post-emergence 
tillage, hand weeding, mulches, organic herbicides. 
KEYWORDS 
• delayed planting 
• hand weeding 
• mulches
 
• organic herbicides
 
• post-emergence tillage 
• spring tillage 
• weed 296 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
REFERENCES 
Adeux, G., Munier-Jolain, N., Meunier, D., Farcy, P., Carlesi, S., Barberi, P., & Cordeau, 
S., (2019). Diversified grain-based cropping systems provide long-term weed control 
while limiting herbicide use and yield losses. Agronomy for Sustainable Development, 
39(4), 42. 
Alsaadawi, I. S., Sarbout, A. K., & Al-Shamma, L. M., (2012). Differential allelopathic 
potential of sunflower (Helianthus annuus L.) genotypes on weeds and wheat (Triticum 
aestivum L.) crop. Archives of Agronomy and Soil Science, 58(10), 1139–1148. 
Al-Tawaha, A. R. M., & Nidal, O., (2010). Use of sorghum and maize allelopathic properties 
to inhibit germination and growth of wild barley (Hordeum spontaneum). Notulae 
Botanicae Horti. Agrobotanici Cluj-Napoca, 38(3), 124–127. 
Andrew, I. K., & Storkey, J., (2017). Using simulation models to investigate the cumulative 
effects of sowing rate, sowing date and cultivar choice on weed competition. Crop 
Protection, 95, 109–15. 
Bojinski, S., Verstraete, M., Peterson, T. C., Richter, C., Simmons, A., & Zemp, M., (2014). 
The concept of essential climate variables in support of climate research, applications, 
and policy. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society, 95(9), 1431–43. 
Carr, P. M., Gramig, G. G., & Liebig, M. A., (2013). Impacts of organic zero tillage systems 
on crops, weeds, and soil quality. Sustainability, 5(7), 3172–3201. 
Castellanos-Frías, E., García De, L. D., Pujadas-Salva, A., Dorado, J., & Gonzalez-Andujar, 
J. L., (2014). Potential distribution of Avena sterilis L. in Europe under climate change. 
Annals of Applied Biology, 165(1), 53–61. 
Chandrasena, N., (2009). How will weed management change under climate change? Some 
perspectives. Journal of Crop and Weed, 5(2), 95–105. 
Chauhan, B. S., Matloob, A., Mahajan, G., Aslam, F., Florentine, S. K., & Jha, P., (2017). 
Emerging challenges and opportunities for education and research in weed science. 
Frontiers in Plant Science, 8, 1537. 
Clements, D. R., & Ditommaso, A., (2011). Climate change and weed adaptation: Can evolution 
of invasive plants lead to greater range expansion than forecasted? Weed Research, 51(3), 
227–240. 
Climate Change, (2014). Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability-Contribution of Working 
Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 
Environmental Migration Portal. https://environmentalmigration.iom.int/climate-change￾2014-impacts-adaptation-and-vulnerability-contribution-working-group-ii-fifth (accessed 
on 12 July 2021). 
Dayan, F. E., & Duke, S. O., (2014). Natural compounds as next-generation herbicides. Plant 
Physiology, 166(3), 1090–1105. 
Derksen, D. A., Anderson, R. L., Blackshaw, R. E., & Maxwell, B., (2002). Weed dynamics 
and management strategies for cropping systems in the northern great plains. Agronomy 
Journal, 94(2), 174–185. 
Dimaano, N. G. B., Ali, J., Cruz, P. C. S., Baltazar, A. M., Diaz, M. G. Q., Acero, B. L., & 
Li, Z., (2017). Performance of newly developed weed-competitive rice cultivars under 
lowland and upland weedy conditions. Weed Science, 65(6), 798–817. 
Fahey, J. W., Zalcmann, A. T., & Talalay, P., (2001). The chemical diversity and distribution of 
glucosinolates and isothiocyanates among plants. Phytochemistry, 56(1), 5–51. Weed Management in Organic Cropping Systems 297 
Gbèhounou, G., (2013). Guidance on Weed Issues and Assessment of Noxious Weeds in a 
Context of Harmonized Legislation for Production of Certified Seeds. Plant Production 
and Protection Division, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. 
Harlan, J. R., (1982). Relationships between weeds and crops. In: Biology and ecology of weeds 
(pp. 91–96). Springer, Dordrecht. 
Heap, I., (2014). Global perspective of herbicide-resistant weeds. Pest Management Science, 
70(9), 1306–1315. 
Jabran, K., Mahajan, G., Sardana, V., & Chauhan, B. S., (2015). Allelopathy for weed control 
in agricultural systems. Crop Protection, 72, 57–65. 
Jacobsen, S. E., Christiansen, J. L., & Rasmussen, J., (2010). Weed harrowing and inter-row 
hoeing in organic grown quinoa (Chenopodium quinoa Willd.). Outlook on Agriculture, 
39(3), 223–227. 
Karkanis, A., Ntatsi, G., Alemardan, A., Petropoulos, S., & Bilalis, D., (2018). Interference 
of weeds in vegetable crop cultivation, in the changing climate of Southern Europe with 
emphasis on drought and elevated temperatures: A review. The Journal of Agricultural 
Science, 156(10), 1175–1185. 
Kępczyński, J., (2018). Induction of agricultural weed seed germination by smoke and smoke￾derived karrikin (KAR 1), with a particular reference to Avena fatua L. Acta Physiologiae 
Plantarum, 40(5), 87. 
Korres, N. E., Norsworthy, J. K., Tehranchian, P., Gitsopoulos, T. K., Loka, D. A., Oosterhuis, 
D. M., Gealy, D. R., et al., (2016). Cultivars to face climate change effects on crops and 
weeds: A review. Agronomy for Sustainable Development, 36(1), 1–22. 
Lampkin, P., (2002). Organic Farming (p. 701). Old Pond Publishing, Ipswich, UK. 
Matloob, A., Khaliq, A., & Chauhan, B. S., (2015). Weeds of direct-seeded rice in Asia: 
Problems and opportunities. Advances in Agronomy, 130, 291–336. 
Melander, B., & Rasmussen, G., (2001). Effects of cultural methods and physical weed 
control on intrarow weed numbers, manual weeding and marketable yield in direct-sown 
leek and bulb onion. Weed Research, 41(6), 491–508. 
Melander, B., (1998). Interactions between soil cultivation in darkness, flaming and brush 
weeding when used for in-row weed control in vegetables. Biological Agriculture and 
Horticulture, 16(1), 1–14. 
Melander, B., Munier-Jolain, N., Charles, R., Wirth, J., Schwarz, J., Van, D. W. R., Bonin, L., 
et al., (2013). European perspectives on the adoption of nonchemical weed management 
in reduced-tillage systems for arable crops. Weed Technology, 27, 231–240. 
Monaco, T. J., Weller, S. C., & Ashton, F. M., (2002). Weed Science: Principles and Practices 
(p. 671). John Wiley and Sons Inc., New York, USA. 
Mutch, D. R., (2008). Flaming as a Method of Weed Control in Organic Farming Systems (pp. 
1–4). Michigan State University Extension Bulletin E-3038. 
Mwendwa, J. M., Brown, W. B., Wu, H., Weston, P. A., Weidenhamer, J. D., Quinn, J. C., & 
Weston, L., (2018). A. The weed suppressive ability of selected Australian grain crops; 
case studies from the Riverina region in New South Wales. Crop Protection, 103, 9–19. 
Pekrun, C., & Claupein, W., (2006). The implication of stubble tillage for weed population 
dynamics in organic farming. Weed Research, 46(5), 414–423. 
Peters, K., & Gerowitt, B., (2014). Important maize weeds profit in growth and reproduction 
from climate change conditions represented by higher temperatures and reduced humidity. 
Journal of Applied Botany and Food Quality, 87, 234–42. 298 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
Radosevich, S. R., Holt, J. S., & Ghersa, C. M., (2007). Ecology of Weeds and Invasive Plants: 
Relationship to Agriculture and Natural Resource Management (p. 471). John Wiley and 
Sons, New York. 
Ramesh, K., Matloob, A., Aslam, F., Florentine, S. K., & Chauhan, B. S., (2017). Weeds 
in a changing climate: Vulnerabilities, consequences, and implications for future weed 
management. Frontiers in Plant Science, 8, 1–12. 
Ray, D. K., West, P. C., Clark, M., Gerber, J. S., Prishchepov, A. V., & Chatterjee, S., (2019). 
Climate change has likely already affected global food production. PLoS One, 14(5), 
e0217148. 
Richter, R., Berger, U. E., Dullinger, S., Essl, F., Leitner, M., Smith, M., & Vogl, G., (2013). 
Spread of invasive ragweed: Climate change, management and how to reduce allergy 
costs. Journal of Applied Ecology, 50(6), 1422–1430. 
Roshan, P., Kulshreshtha, A., & Hallan, V., (2019). Global weed-infecting Gemini viruses. In: 
Gemini Viruses (103–121). Springer, Cham. 
Sage, R. F., & Kubien, D. S., (2007). The temperature response of C3 and C4 photosynthesis. 
Plant, Cell and Environment, 30(9), 1086–1106. 
Smith, P., Clark, H., Dong, H., Elsiddig, E. A., Haberl, H., Harper, R., House, J., et al. (2014). 
Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use. Cambridge University Press, pp. 811–922. 
Tabaglio, V., Marocco, A., & Schulz, M., (2013). Allelopathic cover crop of rye for integrated 
weed control in sustainable agroecosystems. Italian Journal of Agronomy, 8(5), 10. 
Tawaha, A. M., & Turk, M. A., (2001). Crop-weed competition studies in faba bean (Vicia 
faba L.) under rainfed conditions. Acta Agronomica Hungarica, 49(3), 299–303. 
Tawaha, A. M., & Turk, M. A., (2002). Response of Tetragonolobus palaestinus Boiss to 
several frequencies of hand weeding. Acta Agronomica Hungarica, 50(1), 91–93. 
Tawaha, A. M., & Turk, M. A., (2003). Allelopathic effects of black mustard (Brassica nigra) 
on germination and growth of wild barley (Hordeum spontaneum). Journal of Agronomy 
and Crop Science, 189(5), 298–303. 
Tawaha, A. R., Turk, M. A., & Maghaereh, G. A., (2001). Field pea response to several 
frequencies of hand weeding under Mediterranean environment. Crop Research, 22(2), 
161–163. 
Taylor, S., Kumar, L., Reid, N., & Kriticos, D. J., (2012). Climate change and the potential 
distribution of an invasive shrub, Lantana camara L. PLoS One, 7(4), e35565. 
Tominaga, T., & Yamasue, Y., (2004). Crop-associated weeds. In: Weed Biology and 
Management (pp. 47–63). Springer, Dordrecht. 
Turk, A. M., & Tawaha, A. M., (2001a). Wheat response to 2,4-D application at two growth 
stages under semi-arid conditions. Acta Agronomica Hungarica, 49(4), 387–391. 
Turk, A. M., & Tawaha, A. M., (2001b). Effect of time and frequency of weeding on growth, 
yield and economics of chickpea and lentil. Research on Crop, 2(2), 103–107. 
Turk, A. M., & Tawaha, A. M., (2002). Inhibitory effects of aqueous extract Black mustard on 
germination and growth of lentil. Pakistan Journal of Agronomy, 1, 28–30. 
Turk, A. M., & Tawaha, A. M., (2002a). Response of sorghum genotypes to weed management 
under Mediterranean conditions. Pakistan Journal of Agronomy, 1(1), 31–33. 
Turk, A. M., & Tawaha, A. M., (2002b). Awnless barley (Hordeum vulagre L.) response 
to hand weeding and 2,4-D application at two growth stages under Mediterranean 
environment. Weed Biology and Management, 2, 163–168. 
Turk, A. M., & Tawaha, A. M., (2002c). Crop-weed competition studies in garlic (Allium 
sativum L.) under irrigated condition. Crop Research, 23(2), 321–323. Weed Management in Organic Cropping Systems 299 
Turk, A. M., & Tawaha, A. M., (2002d). Lentil response to several frequency of hand weeding. 
Indian Journal of Agricultural Research, 36(2), 137–140. 
Turk, M. A., & Tawaha, A. M., (2003). The response of wild oats (Avena fatua L.) to sowing 
rate and herbicide application. African Journal of Range and Forage Science, 20(3), 
239–242. 
Turk, M. A., & Tawaha, A. R. M., (2002e). Inhibitory effects of aqueous extracts of black 
mustard on germination and growth of lentil. Pakistan Journal of Agronomy, 1(1), 28–30. 
Turk, M. A., & Tawaha, A., (2003). Allelopathic effect of black mustard (Brassica nigra L.) 
on germination and growth of wild oat (Avena fatua L.). Crop Protection, 22(4), 673–677. 
Turk, M. A., Shatnawi, M. K., & Tawaha, A. M., (2003). Inhibitory effects of aqueous extracts 
of black mustard on germination and growth of alfalfa. Weed Biology and Management, 
3(1), 37–40.‏ 
Valerio, M., Tomecek, M. B., Lovelli, S., & Ziska, L. H., (2011). Quantifying the effect of 
drought on carbon dioxide-induced changes in competition between a C3 crop (tomato) 
and a C4 weed (Amaranthus retroflexus). Weed Research, 51(6), 591–600. 
Varanasi, A., Prasad, P. V., & Jugulam, M., (2016). Impact of climate change factors on weeds 
and herbicide efficacy. In: Advances in Agronomy (Vol. 135, pp. 107–146). 
Walsh, M. J., Harrington, R. B., & Powles, S. B., (2012). Harrington seed destructor: A new 
nonchemical weed control tool for global grain crops. Crop Science, 52(3), 1343–47. 
Walsh, M., Ouzman, J., Newman, P., Powles, S., & Llewellyn, R., (2017). High levels of 
adoption indicate that harvest weed seed control is now an established weed control 
practice in Australian cropping. Weed Technology, 31(3), 341–47. 
Weston, L. A., Alsaadawi, I. S., & Baerson, S. R., (2013). Sorghum allelopathy-from 
ecosystem to molecule. Journal of Chemical Ecology, 39(2), 142–153. 
Worthington, M., Reberg-Horton, S. C., Brown-Guedira, G., Jordan, D., Weisz, R., & Murphy, 
J. P., (2015). Relative contributions of allelopathy and competitive traits to the weed 
suppressive ability of winter wheat lines against Italian ryegrass. Crop Science, 55(1), 57. 
Zimdahl, R. L., (2012). Fundamentals of Weed Science (p. 661). Academic Press. 
Ziska, L. H., & Dukes, J. S., (2011). Weed Biology and Climate Change (p. 235). Wiley. 
Ziska, L. H., (2001). Changes in competitive ability between a C4 crop and a C3 weed with 
elevated carbon dioxide. Weed Science, 49(5), 622–27. 
Ziska, L. H., (2003). Evaluation of the growth response of six invasive species to past, present 
and future atmospheric carbon dioxide. Journal of Experimental Botany, 54(381), 395–404. 
Ziska, L. H., (2004). Rising carbon dioxide and weed ecology. In: Weed biology and 
Management (pp. 159–176). Springer, Dordrecht. 
Ziska, L. H., Blumenthal, D. M., Runion, G. B., Hunt, E. R., & Diaz-Soltero, H., (2011). Invasive 
species and climate change: An agronomic perspective. Climatic Change, 105(1), 13–42. 
Ziska, L., (2013). Observed changes in soybean growth and seed yield from Abutilon 
theophrasti competition as a function of carbon dioxide concentration. Weed Research, 
53(2), 140–145. PART III
 
Organic Agriculture for Food Safety
  
 
 
CHAPTER 13
 
ORGANIC PRODUCTION 
TECHNOLOGY OF RICE 
SHAH KHALID,1
 AMANULLAH,1
 NADIA,1
 IMRANUDDIN,2 
MUJEEB UR RAHMAN,2
 ABDEL RAHMAN M. AL-TAWAHA,3 
DEVARAJAN THANGADURAI,4
 JEYABALAN SANGEETHA,5 
SAMIA KHANUM,6 MUNIR TURK,7 HIBA ALATRASH,8 
SAMEENA LONE,9
 KHURSHEED HUSSAIN,9
 PALANI SARANRAJ,10 
and ARUN KARNWAL11 
1
Department of Agronomy, The University of Agriculture, 
Peshawar, Pakistan 
2
Department of Horticulture, The University of Agriculture, 
Peshawar, Pakistan 
3
Department of Biological Sciences, Al-Hussein Bin Talal University, 
Maan, Jordan 
4
Department of Botany, Karnatak University, Dharwad–580003, 
Karnataka, India 
5
Department of Environmental Science, Central University of Kerala, 
Kasaragod–671316, Kerala, India 
6
Department of Botany, University of the Punjab, Lahore, Pakistan 
7
Department of Plant Production, Jordan University of Science and 
Technology, Irbid, Jordan 
8
General Commission for Scientific Agricultural Research, Syria 
9
Division of Vegetable Science, SKUAST-Kashmir, Shalimar, 

Jammu and Kashmir, India
 
10Department of Microbiology, Sacred Heart College (Autonomous), 

Tirupattur–635601, Tamil Nadu, India
 
11Department of Microbiology, School of Bioengineering and 

BioSciences, Lovely Professional University, Phagwara, Punjab, India
  
304 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
ABSTRACT 
Bio-based modifications such as compost, farms manure, slurry biogas, 
vermicompost, green manures (GMs), biofertilizer, crop residues and crop 
cover are a valuable nutrient source to boost the attributes of growing and 
yielding, yield, nutrient absorption, rice quality, and soil fertility. Organic 
farming improves soil organic carbon, phosphorus content available, 
and enzymatic/microbial population behavior of the soil to make organic 
farming sustainable. The organic system becomes sustainable in the long 
term by preserving the soil and improving its fertility by guaranteeing 
future generations production potential. The use of farmyard manure (FYM) 
will increase the soil’s microbial activity. This microbial soil behavior is 
dependent on the soil’s ability to release, store, and supply plant nutrients. 
Product consistency is also deteriorated as a result of chemical contaminants 
entering the plant body and the food chain. The emerging scenario requires 
the adoption of practices that preserve soil health, maintain a sustainable 
production system, and provide quality food to meet people’s nutritional 
needs. Organic agriculture is a method to improve the sustainability of 
the rice-white cultivation system without detrimental impacts on natural 
resources and the environment. 
13.1 INTRODUCTION 
The cultivation method for rice (Oryza sativa L.)-wheat (Triticum aestivum 
L.) covers some 28.8 million hectares, spread primarily over five Asian coun￾tries, namely India, Pakistan, Nepal, Bangladesh, and China (Prasad, 2005; 
Amanullah and Inamullah, 2016). The rice-wheat production mechanism 
accounts for around one-fourth of Southeast Asia’s total food grain produc￾tion. This means that the rice-wheat cultivation system contributes to meeting 
the food requirements of the country. The rice-wheat crop system, which 
is considered the cornerstone of food autosufficiency, faces a sustainability 
issue as a result of modern production methods using chemical fertilizers and 
pesticides indiscriminately (Amanullah and Inamullah, 2016; Amanullah et 
al., 2019a, c; Amanullah and Khalid, 2020). Many studies have concluded 
that low productivity mainly concerns dryland farming management practices 
(Tawaha and Turk, 2001; Turk and Tawaha, 2002b; Abebe et al., 2005a–d; 
Abera et al., 2005; Assefa et al., 2005; Lee et al., 2005a–d; Nikus et al., 2005a, 
b; Mesfine et al., 2005; Sulpanjani et al., 2005a–c; Tawaha et al., 2005a, 
b; Yang et al., 2005; Zheng et al., 2005; Assaf et al., 2006). The effects of  
 
Organic Production Technology of Rice 305 
modern rice-wheat manufacturing systems involving unequaled and harmful 
use of chemical fertilizers and pesticides are the decrease in productivity, 
depletion of soil organic carbon and mineral-nutrient contents (Shah Khalid, 
2017: Imranuddin et al., 2017; Amanullah et al., 2019d). The adverse effects 
of these chemicals on the soil structure, microflora, water quality, food, and 
fodder are clearly evident. Organic farming is one of the practices for making 
the rice-wheat cultivation method viable without adverse environmental and 
natural resources consequences (Hidayatullah et al., 2013; Hidaytullah, 2015; 
Khalid et al., 2018a). According to a global survey conducted by Ockologie 
and Landbau (SOUL), organic food was only grown for 5% of the world’s 
cultivated area in 2003. Austria’s organic farming sector was the highest 
percentage, followed by Switzerland, Italy, Finland, Denmark, Sweden, and 
the Czech Republic. In recent years, awareness of improved quality of food 
goods, health risks and environmental concerns both globally and nationally 
has increased. There is a strong demand on the international market for high 
quality products and organically grown products and can capitalize on its 
ability to be widely used in organic farming. Farmers need to be educated on 
the scientific methods of organic farming to eventually increase their profits. 
Bio-farming is also favored due to increased demand from consumers for 
natural, high-quality, ethical organic foods. Organically, it also produces 
strong yields. 
13.2 COMPONENTS OF ORGANIC FARMING 
13.2.1 NUTRIENT SOURCES 
Soil fertility is defined as the soil quality which provides the right amount 
of nutrients for the production and balance of specified plants or plants 
(Turk and Tawaha, 2001, 2002a, b; Tawaha and Turk, 2002; Turk et al., 
2003a–c). The objective of organic nutrient management is to maximize the 
use of on-farm capital and to minimize losses. Organic materials such as 
field manure, compost, vermicompost, biogas fog, green manures (GMs), 
crop residues, biofertilizers, and cover crops constitute a valuable source 
of nutrients to enhance qualities of growth and yield, yield, absorption of 
nutrients and grain and soil fertility. The values of these nutrient sources are 
examined for rice and wheat separately. Farmyard manure (FYM) is volumi￾nous organic manure arising from the decomposed dung and urine mixture 
and litter (bedding material). Average, well-rotted FYM contains 0.5–1.0% 
N, 0.15–2.0% P2
O5
 and 0.5–0.6% K20. The desired FYM C:N ratio should  
306 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
not be higher than 15 to 20 (Bhattacharyya et al., 1986; Mäder et al., 2002; 
Ghimire et al., 2017). The use of FYM is more important for sustainability 
because it has great potential not only to provide nutrients, but to improve 
the physical properties of soil. Each of these physical properties has a great 
practical impact on the maintenance of soils as a production medium and a 
major role in stopping environmental degradation. It is important to main￾tain them and improve them in the long term for the sustainability of the 
environment. 
Farmyard microbial manure includes large numbers of microbial popula￾tions. Microbial activity on the soil can be increased by using agricultural 
manure both to improve microbial activity and to enable microbials to 
multiply. In compliance with the biological request of soil, the application of 
agricultural manure contributes to the sustainable production of the soil. The 
soil has the capacity to release, store, and provide nutrients of plants for this 
microbial activity. 
Many studies show the improved microbial behavior by the use of farms 
manure are available in the literature. Application of FYM has shown that 
the increased number of bacteria, actinomycetes, and fungi is increased in 
organic carbon. Like many other organic dung, agricultural dung leaves 
some positive residual impacts on the next crop behind. The total nutrients 
which become labile in the beneficial residual effects of the following 
year are derived by: A) part of the total nutrient intake of labile type in 
the following years is obtained by: b) Improved physical properties aid in 
the enrichment of the soil and enhanced physical properties of the soil that 
eventually contribute to crop production in various ways. In experiments 
involving crop rotation, improved yield of the successive crop by FYM for 
preceding crop was recorded at Pusa in 1932. Many other jobs have recently 
identified beneficial FYM application residual effects. 
13.2.2 EFFECT OF FARMYARD MANURE (FYM) ON RICE 
Shanmugam and Veeraputhran (2000) revealed that application of FYM at 
12.5 t ha–1 significantly increased the growth and yield attributes and yield of 
rice. Bridgit and Potty (2006) found that increasing the FYM level increased 
the number of roots per plant and average root length. Maximum correlation 
was observed between root number per plant and grain yield, straw yield, 
and total biomass, followed by the difference in total dry weight between 
flowering and panicle initiation stages. Bhattacharya (2003) recorded the Organic Production Technology of Rice 307 
highest plant height at 45 and 90 days after transplanting with 9.0 t FYM 
ha–1. The application of 7.0 t FYM ha–1 resulted in the highest dry matter 
accumulation at 45 (327.1 and 319.8 g m–2) and 90 days after transplanting 
(648.4 and 651.1 g m–2) and the dry weight at tillering and flowering growth 
stages. The beneficial effects of organic manure on grain and straw yield 
have been reported by many workers (Badgley et al. 2007; Leifeld et al. 
2013; Lori et al. 2017; Amanullah et al., 2019a–d). Summarizing the work 
done in China, where FYM is widely used, FAO (1978) reported that appli￾cation of 30–40 tons FYM ha–1 increased the yield ranging from 24 to 89% 
as compared to control. It was shown by Meelu and Morris (1984) that 
applying 12 tons FYM ha–1 on the rice method leads to a 40 kg/ha saving on 
rice and 20 kg P2
O5
 and 30 kg K2
O ha–1 in the successor wheat. 10 t FYM 
ha–1 was significantly increased in N, P, and K absorption in the rice-wheat 
system by 4.0, 7.8, and 7.6% compared to controls (Singh et al., 2018). The 
impact on sustainability of rice (Oryza sativa)-wheat (Triticum aestivum) 
cropping system from the nutrient management studied by Hidayatullah et 
al. (2013) showed that the grain yield of rice-wheat system was increased 
by the FYM @ 10 t ha–1. FYM’s positive role in improving the physical, 
chemical, and biological characteristics of soil (Amanullah et al., 2019a, b; 
Amanullah and Khalid, 2020). Application of FYM significantly increased 
organic carbon available N and available P and K (Hobson, 2005). Appli￾cation of FYM and fertilizer-N increased alkaline permanganate oxidiz￾able N. FYM application has been documented to increase plant growth 
through the provision of plant nutrients including micronutrients and soil 
enhancement of physical, chemical, and biological properties. The rise was 
between 19.3% and 27.4% compared to NPK alone. They also saw FYM’s 
application as the highest in the WHC, i.e., 46.4%, followed by mushroom 
expended, rice straw compost, and coir pith. By improving the soil structure, 
FYM provides a better environment for root growth. Ibrahim et al. (2010) 
recorded significant increases in the length and volume of the rice root with 
the FYM application that would enable the plant to exploit more water 
under water stress conditions by improving root growth. Other advantages 
of FYM soil modifications are the faster rate of water penetration due to 
increased soil aggregation. Thus, water is available for rice plants for a 
longer period of time. Plants supplied with FYM would take a longer time 
to wilt in conditions of drought than plants not supplied with organic fertil￾izer. Prasad and Misra (2001) reported that application of FYM increased 
the available NPK of organic carbon in comparison to regulation. This may 
be because organic matter is decomposed and mineralized.  
 
308 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
13.2.3 GREEN MANURING 
Organic farming is based on soil health and the use of natural processes 
through soil cycling of nutrients. GMs fulfil, in addition to the addition of 
animal manures, the essential role of fertilization. The use of GM has been 
found to be very promising for improving crop yield and saving fertilizer. 
GM means that any GM plants are plowed under or soil when they are green, 
or soon after they have flowered. GMs are forages or legumes grown for 
their leafy substances necessary to preserve the soil. It has been found that 
about 18 species of grain legumes are essential to GM in various rice farms 
in Asia. In organic farming systems (OFSs) the following two types of GMs 
can be used: 
1.	 Green Manuring In Situ: GM plants in this method are cultivated 
and buried in the same GM area. Sesbania (Sesbania aculeata) is a 
common leguminous green-manure crop called dhaincha or sawri. 
The branches and leaf stalks are armed with thin, weak prickles, and 
grows to a height of several feet per year. The pinnate leaves have 40 
to 81 narrow leaflets, and 3 to 6 loose racemes have a light-yellow 
dotted flower. The pods are long and very tight. Sesbania is ideally 
suited to wetlands and flourishes at higher altitudes, suffers from 
significant drought and salinity in the soil, and is grown on very low 
lands. It is not useful for drilling and is therefore produced only as 
GM. Sesbania aculeata has a solid, deep system of rooting and this 
was described as an advantage if a subsoil is to be opened. 
2.	 Green Leaf Manuring: The green leaf manure refers to turning 
green leaves in the soil and tender green branches gathered from 
shrubs and trees cultivated on rivers, wastelands, and surrounding 
forest areas. Leucaena leucocephala is a thornless tree or shrub that 
can grow up to 7–20 m in altitude. Bipinnate leaves are 6–8 pairs 
with 11–23 pairs of leaflets 8–16 mm long. The inflorescence is a 
globular cream that produces a cluster of 13–18 mm, flat brown pods 
that contain 15–30 seeds. 
13.2.4 EFFECT OF GREEN MANURING ON RICE 
Manguiat et al. (1997) confirmed that immediate rice sowing after incorpo￾rating GM had no negative impact on upland rice growth and development. 
Chandra and Pareek (1998) noted that the introduction of different Sesbanian Organic Production Technology of Rice 309 
GM species increased the dry weight of the plants at different intervals from 
7.1 to 25.2%. All Sesbania species except 45 day-old S. rostrata produced 
significantly more plant dry matter than control at 51 DAT, however, different 
species did not differ significantly. Sesbania rostrata (60 day-old), however, 
recorded the highest plant dry matter at all growth stages. Total and effective 
tillers recorded at maturity showed the similar trend. Hemalatha et al. (2000) 
observed that the best plant height (97.61 cm), hill numbers of tillers (19.55), 
index of leaf sized (6.85 t), development of the dry matter (13848 kg/ha) 
and days to 50% flowering were registered in situ with the incorporation of 
dhaincha at 12.0 t ha–1 (101 days). 
Singh et al. (2000) have recorded a substantial increase in root length 
density over control of FYM and GM. Mukherjee and Singh (2001) revealed 
a significant effect of Sesbania green manuring on plant height at 50 and 70 
days after transplanting and at harvest. Summer green manuring of Sesbania 
before rice transplanting recorded significantly more number of tillers at 30 
and 50 days after transplanting over residue incorporated, residue burnt and 
residue removed treatments. Ram et al. (2011) revealed that incorporation of 
12.5 t ha–1 of Sesbania aculeate recorded the highest plant height (87.3 cm), 
number of tillers hill–1 (15.4) and LAI (7.9). Green manuring of Sesbania 
equivalents to 45 kg N/ha which gave 20% more yield than the control and the 
response was 8.8 kg grain per kg N. Rice cv. Gayatri, rice Cuttack (Sesbania 
aculeata) and dhaincha were either transplanted to plots of pure dhaincha 
following the accumulation of water in various arrangements (parallel lines 
and mixed broadcasting) in dry soil, or rice seedlings. With dhaincha GMs 
compared with control the yield of both direct-seeded and transplanted crops 
has increased (without green manuring). They commented that the increase 
in yields under GM was the result of higher panicle weight, likely due to 
the combined supply of N after organic matter was decomposed through 
the dhaincha. Grain yield obtained with Sesbania aculeata was equivalent 
to 90 kg ha–1 in non-scented rice. The results of IARI experiments showed 
that GM in Sesbania increased the grain yield of rice by 0.4 t ha during the 
summer months (May-June). In a field experiment for 4 years with irrigated 
rice-wheat rotations, Aulakh et al. (2000) conducted a sandy loam soil to test 
the effects of cowpea (Vigna unguiculata) or Sesbania (Sesbania aculeata) 
on the cultivation productivity of GM. The pre-transplant rice grain yields 
ranged from 5.18 to 5.81 t ha–1 of GM ha–1 from 20 and 40 t. 
There has been a rise of 3 Q ha–1 compared to beushening (beushening 
is crossing under lowland rice habitats in standing water when rice plants 
are planted). Green manuring of dhaincha (Sesbania aculeata) before  
310 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
transplanting rice gave higher the grain yield of rice than other treatments. 
Hemalatha et al. (2000) observed that in situ incorporation of dhaincha at 
12 t ha–1 increased the grain yield by 18% and straw yield by 16% over no 
organic manure, owing to increase in growth and yield-attributing characters 
of rice. Mehla et al. (2000) reported mean grain yield of 6.89, 6.74, 6.16, and 
5.43 t ha–1 with GM, FYM, ash, and control treatments, respectively. Ram et 
al. (2011) observed that Sesbania aculeata GM resulted in higher N, P, and 
K uptake (mg plot–1) by rice grain and straw as compared GM with Sebania 
speciosa, Crotalaria juncea, Azolla microphylla, cowpea, FYM, composted 
coir pith and paddy straw. Tiwari et al. (1980) observed that Sesbania green 
manure increased the N, P, and K contents in plants and their availability in 
soil. Saha et al. (2000) observed that green manuring registered significantly 
higher P uptake, which was 8.4 higher over fallow. Sesbania GM resulted in 
N and P uptake similar to 120 kg N + 13 kg P + 17 kg K ha–1 and 120 kg N 
+ 26 kg P + 34 kg K ha–1, respectively. Ram et al. (2011) studied the effect 
of Sesbania aculeata, S. speciosa, Crotalaria juncea, paddy straw, powdered 
FYM or composted raw coir pith, 28-day-old rice cv. IR 60 seedlings on 
nutrient uptake. The highest values for uptake of N (399.4 mg pot–1), P 
(49.82 mg pot–1), K (403.2 mg pot–1), Zn (1059.9 µg pot–1), Fe (18.28 mg 
pot–1), Mn (6.69 mg pot–1) and Cu (693.3 µg pot–1) in IR 60 were recorded 
with the addition of S. aculeata. 
13.2.5 GREEN MANURING + BIOFERTILIZERS 
Microbial inoculants or biofertilizers are essential components of organic 
agriculture that help to feed crops by the nutrients they need. The microbes 
help to fix nitrogen in the environment, solubilize, and mobilize phosphorus, 
transfer small items such as zinc, copper, etc., to the plant, generate plant 
growth that promotes hormones, vitamins, and amino acids and regulates 
pathogenic fungi in plants, thereby improving soil health and increasing 
crop production. Long-term use has been made of biofertilizers such as 
Rhizobium, Azotobacter, Azospirillum, and blue-green algae (BGA). These 
species fix and supply atmospheric nitrogen to plants. Therefore, it is called 
biofertilizers. 20–30 kg N/ha/season is contributed by bacterial biofertil￾izers. Inoculant rhizobium is used in leguminous plants. Azotobacter can 
be used in crops such as wheat, maize, mustard, cotton, potatoes, etc. For 
sorghum, millets, corn, sugarcane, and wheat inoculants are primarily 
recommended. The BGA of the genus Nostoc, Anabaena, Tolypothrix, and 
Aulosira fix the atmospheric nitrogen and serve as inoculants for low and Organic Production Technology of Rice 311 
high ground paddy cultivation. However, the inoculants are most successful 
for cultivation in lowland rice and contribute 20–30 kg N per hectare per 
season with better grain quality. Azolla adds nitrogen up to 60 Kg/ha/Saison 
to Azolla in combination with water fern and enriches soils with organic 
matter. The term biofertilization or microbial inoculants can be described as 
preparations contending strains of microorganisms that can increase micro￾biological processes such as fixation of nitrogen, phosphates solubilization 
or mineralization, excretion from plant growth promotion of soil, compost, 
or other environments for the purpose of cellulose or lignin biodegradation 
(Gaur, 2006). The biofixing mechanism for nitrogen can be divided into 3 
categories: (i) symbiotic system; (ii) Legume-Rhizobia symbiosis; and (iii) 
other symbiotic nitrogen fixation systems. An artificially prepared Rhizo￾bium cultivation was used until the seed was seeded. A specific Rhizobium 
culture is needed for a particular legume crop with high infection, nodula￾tion, fixation, and antibiotic resistance capacity (Bhattacharyya and Tandon, 
2002). Azotobacter is non-symbiotic free-living soil bacteria which fixes 
nitrogen in cereals, vegetables, and flowers. Application is usually achieved 
by seed/seedling or soil treatment. It also reports its foliar submission. Both 
Azotobacter fertilizers based on carriers and liquids are available. The 
Azotobacter species are known to average 10 mg N/g sugar on nitrogen 
free medium in pure culture. The most effective strains of Azotobacter will 
have to oxidize approximately 1000 kg of organic matter in order to repair 
30 kg N/ha. This does not sound practical for our very low active carbon 
soils. Furthermore, soil has a wide range of other bacteria, all competing 
for activated carbon. The blue-green algae (BGA) are frequently referred to 
as cyanobacteria or cyanophyte that are a phylum of bacteria which obtain 
energy from photosynthesis. The name “cyanobacteria” is taken from the 
color of the bacteria, cyan (blue); no use or production of cyanide is made 
by the bacteria. Cyanobacteria have been found to show fossil traces from 
around 3.8 billion years, which certainly prove that Blue-green algae are 
among the earliest forms of life on earth. Filamentous, photosynthetic 
aerobic N fastening species are blue-green algae. Over 100 BGA species are 
known to correct N. These can provide 25–30 kg N ha–1 as biofertilizer for 
humidity rice (paddy). They also separate hormones such as IAA, GA, and 
improve the structure of the soil by generating polysaccharides that help 
attach soil particles to better soil aggregation. For growth and N-fixation, 
BGA requires all plant nutrients. The optimum BGA temperature is about 
30–35°C and its growth decreases at low temperatures. The optimal pH is 
between 7.5 and 10.0 for BGA growth in cultivation media and is around  
312 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
6.5–7.0 (Kumar and Shivay, 2008). The cultivation method of rice (Oryza 
sativa L.)-wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) is spread out over 5 Asian coun￾tries, namely India, Pakistan, Nepal, Bangladesh, and China (approximately 
28.8 million hectares) (Prasad, 2005; Amanullah and Inamullah, 2016). A 
rice-wheat crop system accounts for approximately a quarter of South-East 
Asia’s total food grain output. This means the contribution of the rice-wheat 
cultivation method to the country’s food demands. However, the rice-white 
cultivation system is considered the cornerstone of food self-sufficiency, 
which faces a sustainability challenge because of the current processing 
methods using chemical fertilizers and pesticides indiscriminately 
(Amanullah and Inamullah, 2016; Amanullah et al., 2019a, c; Amanullah 
and Khalid, 2020). Many studies have concluded that low productivity 
mainly concerns dryland farming management practices (Tawaha and Turk, 
2001; Turk and Tawaha, 2002b; Abebe et al., 2005a–d; Abera et al., 2005; 
Assefa et al., 2005; Lee et al., 2005a–d; Nikus et al., 2005a, b; Mesfine 
et al., 2005; Sulpanjani et al., 2005a–c; Tawaha et al., 2005a, b; Yang et 
al., 2005; Zheng et al., 2005; Assaf et al., 2006). The consequences of the 
modern rice-wheat production system with unbalanced and harmful use 
of chemical fertilizers and pesticides include concerns such as declining 
factor productivity, deprivation of soil-based organic carbon and mineral 
nutrients (Imranuddin et al., 2017; Shah Khalid, 2017; Amanullah et al., 
2019), water extraction and salinization, increasing nitrate concentrations 
on wells, etc. The adverse effects of these chemicals on the soil structure, 
microflora, water quality, food, and forage are clearly evident (Hidayatullah 
et al., 2013; Hidaytullah, 2015; Khalid et al., 2018a). According to a global 
survey conducted by Germany’s Ockologie and Landbau (SOUL), only 5% 
of worldly cultivated food was developed in 2003. Austria’s organic farming 
sector was the highest percentage, followed by Switzerland, Italy, Finland, 
Denmark, Sweden, and the Czech Republic. In recent years, awareness of 
improved food safety, health risks, and environmental concerns both at the 
international and national level has increased. Bio-farming is also favored 
due to increased demand from consumers for natural, high-quality, and 
ethical organic foods. Organically, it also produces strong yields. 
13.2.6	 EFFECT OF GREEN MANURING, FYM, AND 
BIOFERTILIZERS ON RICE 
The application of FYM, Eichhornia, and Azolla compost yielded less grain 
and pain than 60 kg N ha–1 as urea. These suggests that organic materials may Organic Production Technology of Rice 313 
have a strong potential to be a source of alternative nutrients in a rice crop 
for the longer term (Flessa et al., 2002; Khan et al. 2004; Munda et al., 2018; 
Shrestha et al., 2018; Amanullah et al., 2019a, 2020; Rahman et al., 2019; 
Sharma et al., 2019). Dixit and Gupta (2000) have observed a growth in the 
economic yield by applying fertilizer manure alone or together at 10 t ha–1 
and BGA (Cyanobacteria) inoculation BGA averaged 0.24 t ha–1 (7.5%) in 
grain yield, while the combined use of farm manure and BGA showed an 
improvement of 0.60 t ha–1 (19.2%). Dixit and Gupta (2000) also pointed out 
that content and uptake of N, P, and K showed increasing trends as a result 
of the application of FYM, and BGA inoculation either alone or in combi￾nation. Shanmugam and Veeraputhran (2000) revealed that application of 
either GM (Sesbania aculeata at 6.25 t ha–1) or FYM at 12.5 t ha–1 combined 
with Azospirillum (2 kg ha–1) significantly increased the growth attributes 
of rice. The FYM + SGM + BGA application was stated to have resulted in 
more N and P uptake of rice than FYM by Van Quyen and Sharma (2003). 
Highest N intake was achieved with the combined application of FYM + 
SGM + BGA + PSB, which was substantially higher than both inorganic 
and biologic combinations. The FYM + SGM + BGA + PSB combination 
however substantially increased P uptake by grain, paw, and grain + straw 
over FYM, SGM, and BGA combinations, while GM from Sesbania resulted 
in a comparable uptake in N and P of 120 kg N + 13 kg P + 17 kg K ha–1 
and 120 kg N + 26 kg P +34 kg ha–1 respectively. Total rice N and P intakes 
were substantially higher than that found with FYM with sesbania GM. 
However, if FYM+SGM+BGA are added together they resulted in more N 
and P than FYM, SGM+FYM+BGA, in rice inoculation without significant 
impact on total N rice intake. In addition to all combines of inorganic and 
organic therapies, the FYM+SGM+BGA+PSB was added together to the 
N uptake. However, the combined grain, paw, and grain + straw increased 
considerably in P uptake over other FYM, SGM, and BGA combinations 
except FYM + SGM +FGA. Dixit and Gupta (2000) reported that higher 
number of tillers, number of total spikelets per panicle, test weight, grain, 
and straw yields, larger panicles and lesser unfilled spikelets in both years 
were recorded with application of Azolla along with 100% RDN. This was 
on par with the application of Azospirillum and BGA with 100% RDN. All 
the yield components, grain, and straw yields of rice due to inoculation of 
any one of the biofertilizers along with 80% RDN were statistically similar 
to that of 100% RDN alone without any biofertilizer inoculation, indicating 
a saving of 20% RDN (24 kg N/ha) due to application of any one of the three 
biofertilizers. The experiment was performed by Bhattacharya (2003), and  
314 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
the results demonstrated that the quality and compatibility of biofertilizers 
with inorganic fertilizers is gradually increasing. In the subsequent processes 
treated with the biologics, major differences in soil fertility status (avail￾able N, P, and K) and soil biota increased (the third season). Kumar et al. 
(2007) reported that approximately 50% of recommended dose of inorganic 
fertilizers could be saved by using 20 t ha–1 of FYM + 10 kg ha–1 of BGA 
[or cyanobacteria]. Supply of a portion of P and K along with secondary 
and micronutrients required by crops could help offset the negative nutrient 
balance and slow down nutrient depletion processes. Application of organic 
manures improved the physical, chemical, and biological properties of soil. 
Sharma and Namdeo (1999) reported that FYM + biofertilizers improved all 
the parameters of soil fertility over FYM alone as well over green manuring 
alone. Kumar et al. (2007) reported that the direct and residual application of 
GM increased the yield of hybrid rice by up to 1240 kg/ha (42.61%) during 
the 1st year and 1275 kg/ha (45.94%) during the 2nd year. The highest grain 
yield of hybrid rice (9300 and 8670 kg/ha during 1st and 2nd year, respectively) 
was recorded for 150% NPK + GM + biofertilizer. The increase in the yield 
of rice due to biofertilizer application ranged from 202 to 422 kg/ha during 
the 1st year, and from 290 to 388 kg/ha during the 2nd year. The greatest total 
removal of NPK (405.5 kg/ha and 394 kg/ha on the 1st and 2nd year in hybrid 
rice was registered for 150% NPK + GM + biofertilizer. The increase in 
nutrient use efficiency due to GM application was greater in the control and 
lower at higher rates of applied fertilizers for rice (0.7–43.9%, with a mean 
value of 17.4%, on the 1st year, and 10.68–44.36%, with a mean value of 
16.61%, on the 2nd year). The percent increase in nutrient use efficiency due 
to biofertilizer application on the 1st and 2nd year reached 6.5 and 8.16% in 
rice. 
13.3 CONCLUSION 
The common organic amendments used in rice are FYM, vermicompost, 
green manuring, and biofertilizers. The combination and combined use of 
these various organic changes will meet the biorice nutrient requirement. 
Organic farming improves soil organic carbon, phosphorus content available 
and soil microbial population and enzymes, making it sustainable for the 
production of organic crops. The organic system becomes sustainable for 
the long term by protecting soils and increasing their productivity, ensuring 
future generations’ productive potential. Organic Production Technology of Rice 315 
KEYWORDS
 
• biofertilizers 
• biogas slurry 
• compost 
• farmyard manure 
• green manures
 
• organic amendments
 
• vermicompost 
REFERENCES 
Abebe, G., Assefa, T., Harrun, H., Mesfine, T., & Al-Tawaha, A. M., (2005d). Participatory 
selection of drought-tolerant maize varieties using mother and baby methodology: A 
case study in the semi-arid zones of the central rift valley of Ethiopia. World Journal of 
Agricultural Sciences, 1(1), 22–27. 
Abebe, G., Hattar, B., & Al-Tawaha, A. M., (2005c). Nutrient availability as affected by 
manure application in cowpea [Vigna unguiculata (L.) Walp.] on calcareous soils. 
Journal of Agriculture and Social Science, 1(1), 1–6. 
Abebe, G., Sahile, G., & Al-Tawaha, A. M., (2005a). Evaluation of potential trap crops on 
Orobanche soil seed bank and tomato yield in the central rift valley of Ethiopia. World 
Journal of Agricultural Sciences, 1(2), 148–151. 
Abebe, G., Sahile, G., & Al-Tawaha, A. M., (2005b). Effect of soil solarization on Orobanche 
soil seed bank and tomato yield in the central rift valley of Ethiopia. World Journal of 
Agricultural Sciences, 1(2), 143–147. 
Abera, T., Feyisa, D., Yusuf, H., Nikus, O., & Al-Tawaha, A. M., (2005). Grain yield of maize 
as affected by biogas slurry and N-P fertilizer rate at Bako, Western Oromiya, Ethiopia. 
Bioscience Research, 2(1), 31–38. 
Amanullah, & Khalid, S., (2020). Agronomy-food security-climate change and the sustainable 
development goals. Agronomy-Climate Change and Food Security. Intech Open, London. 
Amanullah, I., & Inamullah, X., (2016). Dry matter partitioning and harvest index differ in rice 
genotypes with variable rates of phosphorus and zinc nutrition. Rice Sci., 23(2), 78–87. 
Amanullah, Iqbal, A., Khan, A., Khalid, S., Shah, A., Parmar, B., Khalid, S., & Muhammad, 
A., (2019a). Efficient management of phosphorus, organic sources, and beneficial 
microbes improve dry matter partitioning of maize. Commun. Soil Sci. Plant Anal., 
50(20), 2544–2569. 
Amanullah, Khalid, S., Imran, Khan, H. A., Arif, M., Al-Tawaha, A. R., Adnan, M., et al., 
(2019b). Organic matter management in cereals based system: Symbiosis for improving 
crop productivity and soil health. In: Lal, R., & Francaviglia, R., (eds.), Sustainable 
Agriculture Reviews 29: Sustainable Soil Management: Preventive and Ameliorative 
Strategies (pp. 67–92). Cham: Springer International Publishing.  
316 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
Amanullah, Khalid, S., Khalil, F., & Imranuddin, (2020). Influence of irrigation regimes on 
competition indexes of winter and summer intercropping system under semi-arid regions 
of Pakistan. Sci. Rep., 10(1), 8129. 
Amanullah, Khan, N., Khan, M. I., Khalid, S., Iqbal, A., & Al-Tawaha, A. R., (2019c). Wheat 
biomass and harvest index increases with integrated use of phosphorus, zinc, and beneficial 
microbes under semiarid climates. J. Microbiol. Biotech. Food Sci., 9 (2), 242–247. 
Amanullah, Khan, S. T., Iqbal, A., & Fahad, S., (2016). Growth and productivity response of 
hybrid rice to application of animal manures, plant residues, and phosphorus. Frontiers 
in Plant Science, 7, 1440. 
Assaf, T. A., Hameed, K. M., Turk, M. A., & Tawaha, A. M., (2006). Effect of soil amendment 
with olive mill by-products under soil solarization on growth and productivity of faba 
bean and their symbiosis with mycorrhizal fungi. World Journal of Agricultural Sciences, 
2(1), 21–28. 
Assefa, T., Abebe, G., Fininsa, C., Tesso, B., & Al-Tawaha, A. M., (2005). Participatory bean 
breeding with women and smallholder farmers in eastern Ethiopia. World Journal of 
Agricultural Sciences, 1(1), 28–35. 
Aulakh, M. S., Khera, T. S., Doran, J. W., Kuldip, S., & Bijay, S., (2000). Yields and nitrogen 
dynamics in a rice-wheat system using green manure and inorganic fertilizer. Soil Sci. 
Soc. Am J, 64(5), 1867–1876. 
Badgley, C., Moghtader, J., Quintero, E., Zakem, E., Chappell, M. J., Aviles-Vazquez, K., 
Samulon, A., & Perfecto, I., (2007). Organic agriculture and the global food supply. Rene. 
Agri. Food Sys., 22(2), 86–108. 
Bhattacharya, S., (2003). Effect of humic acid (earth) on the growth and yield of transplanted 
summer rice. Environ. Ecol., 21(3), 680–683. 
Bhattacharyya, P., Dey, B. K., Nath, S., & Banik, S., (1986). Organic manures in relation to 
rhizosphere effect iii. effect of organic manures on population of ammonifying bacteria 
and mineralization of nitrogen in rice and succeeding wheat rhizosphere soils. Zent. 
Mikro, 141(4), 267–277. 
Bridgit, T., & Potty, N., (2006). Effect of cultural management on root characteristics and 
productivity of rice in laterite soil. J. Trop. Agric, 40, 59–62. 
Dixit, K., & Gupta, B., (2000). Effect of farmyard manure, chemical and biofertilizers on 
yield and quality of rice (Oryza sativa L.) and soil properties. J. Indian Soc. Soil Sci., 
48(4), 773–780. 
Dwivedi, D., & Thakur, S., (2000). Effect of organics and inorganic fertility levels on 
productivity of rice (Oryza sativa) crop. Indian J. Agron., 45(3), 568–574. 
Flessa, H., Ruser, R., Dörsch, P., Kampb, T., Jimenez, M. A., Munchb, J. C., & Beese, F., 
(2002). Integrated evaluation of greenhouse gas emissions (CO2
, CH4
, N2
O) from two 
farming systems in southern Germany. Agri. Eco. Envi. Beh., 91(1–3), 175–189. 
Gaur, A. C., (2006). Handbook of Organic Farming and Biofertilizers. Ambica Book Agency. 
Ghimire, R., Norton, U., Bista, P., Obour, A. K., & Norton, J. B., (2017). Soil organic matter, 
greenhouse gases and net global warming potential of irrigated conventional, reduced￾tillage and organic cropping systems. Nutri. Cyc. Agroecology., 107(1), 49–62. 
Hidayatullah, A., Jan, A., & Shah, Z., (2013). Residual effect of organic nitrogen sources 
applied to rice on the subsequent wheat crop. Int. J. Agron. Plant Prod, 4, 620–631. 
Hidaytullah, A., (2015). Sources, ratios, and mixtures of organic and inorganic nitrogen 
influence plant height of hybrid rice (Oryza sativa L.) at various growth stages. EC Agric, 
2(3), 328–337. Organic Production Technology of Rice 317 
Hobson, P., (2005). Book review: Organic recycling and biofertilization in South Asia. 
Bioresour. Technol., 96(3), 393. 
Ibrahim, M., Arshad, M., & Tanveer, A., (2010). Variation in root growth and nutrient element 
concentration in wheat and rice: Effect of rate and type of organic materials. Soil Envi., 
29(1), 47–52. 
Imranuddin, Arif, M., Khalid, S., Nadia, Saddamullah, Idrees, M., & Amir, M., (2017). Effect 
of seed priming, nitrogen levels, and moisture regimes on yield and yield components of 
wheat. Pure App. Biol., 6(1), 369–377. 
Khalid, S., Afridi, M. Z., Munsif, F., Imranuddin, & Nadia. (2018a). Effect of Sulphur foliar 
application on yield and yield components of Brassica napus L. Int. J. Agric. Environ. 
Res, 2, 232–236. 
Khalid, S., Imranuddin, N., Nadeem, F., Saddamullah, A. M., & Ghani, F., (2017). Allelopathic 
effect of Parthenium liquid extract on mung bean germination ability and early growth. 
Inter. J. Agron. Agri. Res., 11(4), 31–36. 
Khalid, S., Munsif, F., Nadia, I., Nadeem, F., Ali, S., Ghani, F., & Idrees, M., (2018b). Influence 
of source limitation on physiological traits of wheat. Pure App. Biol., 7(1), 85–92. 
Khan, A. R., Chandra, D., Nanda, P., Singh, S. S., Ghorai, A. K., & Singh, S. R., (2004). 
Integrated nutrient management for sustainable rice production. Arch. Agron. Soil Sci., 
50(2), 161–165. 
Kumar, A., Tripathi, H., & Yadav, D., (2007). Correcting nutrient imbalances for sustainable 
crop production. Indian J. Fer., 2(11), 37. 
Kumar, D., & Shivay, Y., (2008). Definitional Glossary of Agricultural Terms (p. 324). IK 
International, New Delhi. 
Lee, K. D., Sulpanjani, Tawaha, A. M., & Min, Y. S., (2005a). Effect of phosphorus application 
on yield, mineral contents and active components of Chrysanthemum coronarium L. 
Bioscience Research, 2(3), 118–124. 
Lee, K. D., Tawaha, A. R. M., & Supanjani, (2005c). Antioxidant status, stomatal resistance and 
mineral composition of hot pepper under salinity and boron stress. Bioscience Research, 
2(3), 148–154. 
Lee, K. D., Turk, M. A., & Tawaha, A. M., (2005b). Nitrogen fixation in rice based farming 
system. Bioscience Research, 2(3), 130–138. 
Leifeld, J., Angers, D. A., Chenu, C., Fuhrer, J., Kätterer, T., & Powlson, D. S., (2013). 
Organic farming gives no climate change benefit through soil carbon sequestration. Proc. 
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 110 (11), E984. 
Lori, M., Symnaczik, S., Mäder, P., De Deyn, G., & Gattinger, A., (2017). Organic farming 
enhances soil microbial abundance and activity-A meta-analysis and meta-regression. 
PLoS One, 12(7). 
Mäder, P., Fliessbach, A., Dubois, D., Gunst, L., Fried, P., & Niggli, U., (2002). Soil fertility 
and biodiversity in organic farming. Sci. Cult, 296(5573), 1694–1697. 
Mesfine, T., Abebe, G., & Al-Tawaha, A. M., (2005). Effect of reduced tillage and crop 
residue ground cover on yield and water use efficiency of sorghum (Sorghum bicolor (L.) 
Moench) under semi-arid conditions of Ethiopia. World Journal of Agricultural Sciences, 
1(2), 152–160. 
Munda, S., Shivakumar, B. G., Rana, D. S., Gangaiah, B., Manjaiah, K. M., Dass, A., Layek, 
J., & Lakshman, K., (2018). Inorganic phosphorus along with biofertilizers improves 
profitability and sustainability in soybean (Glycine max)- potato (Solanum tuberosum) 
cropping system. J. Saudi Soc. Agri. Sci., 17(2), 107–113. 318 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
Nadeem, F., Khan, N. U., Imranuddin, Khalid, S., Azam, S., Saeed, B., Jah, T., et al., (2018). 
4. Genotype × environment interaction studies in F5 populations of upland cotton under 
agro-climatic condition of Peshawar. Pure App. Biol., 7(3), 973–991. 
Nikus, O., Abebe, G., Takele, A., Harrun, H., Chanyalew, S., Al Tawaha, A. M., & Mesfin, 
T., (2005b). Yield response of tef (Eragrostis tef (Zucc.) Trotter) to NP fertilization in 
the semi arid zones of the central rift valley in Ethiopia. European Journal of Scientific 
Research, 4(4), 49–60. 
Nikus, O., Nigussie, M., & Al Tawaha, A. M., (2005a). Agronomic performance of maize 
varieties under irrigation in Awash valley, Ethiopia. Bioscience Research, 2(1), 26–30. 
Prasad, R., & Misra, B. N., (2001). Effect of addition of organic residues, farmyard manure 
and fertilizer nitrogen on soil fertility in rice-wheat cropping system. Arch. Agron. Soil 
Sci., 46(5, 6), 455–463. 
Prasad, R., (2005). Rice-Wheat Cropping Systems (pp. 255–339). Elsevier, New Delhi, India. 
Rahman, F., Hossain, A., & Islam, M. R., (2019). Integrated effects of poultry manure and 
chemical fertilizer on yield, nutrient balance and economics of wetland rice culture. 
Bang. Rice J, 22(2), 71–77. 
Ram, M., Davari, M., & Sharma, S., (2011). Organic farming of rice (Oryza sativa L.)-wheat 
(Triticum aestivum L.) cropping system: A review. Inter. J. Agron. Plant Prod, 2(3), 
114–134. 
Shah, K., Afridi, M. Z., Imranuddin, Nadia, Nadeem, F., Aamir, M., & Saddamullah, (2017). 
Effect of sulfur foliar fertilization on reproductive growth and development of canola. 
Int. J. Agron. Agri. Res, 11(3), 61–67. 
Shanmugam, P., & Veeraputhran, R., (2000). Effect of organic manure, biofertilizers, inorganic 
nitrogen and zinc on growth and yield of rabi rice (Oryza sativa L.). Madras Agric. J. 87, 
90–93. 
Sharma, K., & Namdeo, K., (1999). Effect of biofertilizers and phosphorous on NPK contents, 
uptake and grain quality of soybean (Glycine max L. Merrill) and nutrient status of soil. 
Crop Res, 17(2), 164–169. 
Sharma, S., Padbhushan, R., & Kumar, U., (2019). Integrated nutrient management in rice￾wheat cropping system: An evidence on sustainability in the Indian subcontinent through 
meta-analysis. Agronomy, 9(2), 71. 
Shrestha, S., Bhatta, B., Shrestha, M., & Shrestha, P. K., (2018). Integrated assessment of the 
climate and land-use change impact on hydrology and water quality in the Songkhram 
River Basin, Thailand. Sci. Total Environ., 643, 1610–1622. 
Singh, S. K., Kumar, M., Singh, R. P., Bohra, J. S., Srivastava, J. P., Singh, S. P., & Singh, Y. 
V., (2018). Conjoint application of organic and inorganic sources of nutrients on yield, 
nutrient uptake and soil fertility under rice (Oryza sativa)-wheat (Triticum aestivum) 
system. J. Indian Soc. Soil Sci., 66(3), 287–294. 
Sulpanjani, A., Yang, M. S., Tawaha, A. R. M., & Lee, K. D., (2005a). Effect of magnesium 
application on yield, mineral contents and active components of Chrysanthemum 
coronarium L. under hydroponics conditions. Bioscience Research, 2(2), 73–79. 
Supanjani, Tawaha, A. M., Min, Y. M. S., & Lee, K. D., (2005b). Role of calcium in yield 
and medicinal quality of Chrysanthemum coronarium L. Journal of Agronomy, 4(3), 
188–192. 
Supanjani, Tawaha, A. M., Yang, M. S., & Lee, Y. D., (2005c). Calcium effects on yield, 
mineral uptake and terpene components of hydroponic Chrysanthemum coronarium L. 
Research Journal of Agriculture and Biological Science, 1(1), 146–151. Organic Production Technology of Rice 319 
Tawaha, A. M., & Turk, M. A., (2001). Effects of dates and rates of sowing on yield and yield 
components of Narbon vetch under semi-arid conditions. Acta Agronomica Hungarica, 
49(1), 103–105. 
Tawaha, A. M., & Turk, M. A., (2002). Lentil (Lens culinaris Medic.) productivity as 
influenced by rate and method of phosphate placement in a Mediterranean environment. 
Acta Agronomica Hungarica, 50(2), 197–201. 
Tawaha, A. M., Turk, M. A., Lee, K. D., Supanjani, Nikus, O., Al-Rifaee, M., & Sen, R., 
(2005a). Awnless barley response to crop management under Jordanian environment. 
Bioscience Research, 2(3), 125–129. 
Tawaha, A. R. M., Turk, M. A., & Lee, K. D., (2005b). Adaptation of chickpea to cultural 
practices in a Mediterranean type environment. Research Journal of Agriculture and 
Biological Science, 1(2), 152–157. 
Turk, A. M., & Tawaha, A. M., (2002a). Impact of seeding rate, seeding date, rate and method 
of phosphorus application in faba (Vicia faba L. Minor) in the absence of moisture stress. 
Biotechnology, Agronomy, Society and Environment, 6(3), 171–178. 
Turk, A. M., & Tawaha, A. M., (2002b). Response of winter wheat to applied n with or 
without ethrel spray under irrigation planted in semi-arid environments. Asian Journal of 
Plant Sciences, 1(4), 464–466. 
Turk, M. A., & Tawaha, A. M., (2001). Influence of rate and method of phosphorus placement 
to Garlic (Allium sativum L.) in a Mediterranean environment. Journal of Applied 
Horticulture, 3(2), 115–116. 
Turk, M. A., Hameed, K. M., Aqeel, A. M., & Tawaha, A. M., (2003c). Nutritional status of 
durum wheat grown in soil supplemented with olive mills by-products. Agrochimica, 
209–219. 
Turk, M. A., Tawaha, A. M., Samara, N., & Latifa, N., (2003b). The response of six row 
barley (Hordeum vulgare L.) to nitrogen fertilizer application and weed control methods 
in the absence of moisture stress. Pakistan Journal of Agronomy, 2(2), 101–108. 
Turk, M. A., Tawaha, A. M., Taifor, H., Al-Ghzawi, A., Musallam, I. W., Maghaireh, G. A., 
& Al-Omari, Y. I., (2003a). Two row barley response to plant density, date of seeding 
and rate and method of phosphorus application in the absence of moisture stress. Asian 
Journal of Plant Science, 2(2), 180–183. 
Van, Q. N., & Sharma, S., (2003). Relative effect of organic and conventional farming on 
growth, yield and grain quality of scented rice and soil fertility. Arch. Agron. Soil Sci., 
49(6), 623–629. 
Yang, M. S., Tawaha, A. M., & Lee, Y. D., (2005). Effects of ammonium concentration on the 
yield, mineral content and active terpene components of Chrysanthemum coronarium L. 
in a hydroponic system. Research Journal of Agriculture and Biological Science, 1(2), 
170–175. 
Zheng, W. J., Tawaha, A. M., & Lee, K. D., (2005). In situ hybridization analysis of mcMT1 
gene expression and physiological mechanisms of Cu-tolerant in Festuca rubra cv 
merlin. Bioscience Research, 1(1), 21–26. CHAPTER 14 
PROSPECTS OF ORGANIC 
AGRICULTURE IN FOOD QUALITY 
AND SAFETY 
AKBAR HOSSAIN,1
 DEBJYOTI MAJUMDER,2
 SHILPI DAS,3,4 
APURBO KUMAR CHAKI,4,5 MST. TANJINA ISLAM,6
 RAJAN BHATT,7 
and TOFAZZAL ISLAM8 
1
Bangladesh Wheat and Maize Research Institute, Dinajpur–5200, 
Bangladesh 
2
Uttar Banga Krishi Viswavidyalaya, Cooch Behar, West Bengal, India 
3
Bangladesh Institute of Nuclear Agriculture, Mymensingh–2202, 
Bangladesh 
4
School of Agriculture and Food Sciences, University of Queensland, 
QLD–4072, Australia 
5
On-Farm Research Division, Bangladesh Agricultural Research 
Institute (BARI), Gazipur, Dhaka, Bangladesh 
6
Department of Agronomy, Hajee Mohammad Danesh Science and 
Technology University, Dinajpur–5200, Bangladesh 
7
Regional Research Station-Kapurthala, Punjab Agricultural University, 
Ludhiana, Punjab–144601, India 
8
Institute of Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering (IBGE), 
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman Agricultural University, 
Gazipur–1706, Bangladesh 
ABSTRACT 
Innovative farming practices in the traditional agriculture have signifi￾cantly been progressed in the last 1,000 years. Most of these aboriginal  
322 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
agricultural methodologies were not finely honed. Concurrent improve￾ment of biochemistry and engineering, farming practices were also rapidly 
improved during the early 40 years of the 20th Century. After the industrial 
revolution, the application of farm machineries, irrigation, and synthetic 
fertilizers and pesticides in crop production have dramatically changed 
the traditional farming practices. Although these modern approaches 
significantly increased the yield of crops to feed the increasing population, 
the degradation of environmental resources, including soils, has become 
apparent. Increasing environmental pollution and residual effects of the 
used synthetic chemicals pose a serious threat to human life and biodi￾versity. Considering these burning issues, researchers explored alternative 
sustainable techniques or solutions to alleviate these deleterious effects of 
modern farming, while preserving the maximum productivity. Therefore, an 
organic farming system (OFS) concept was started in the 1940s for avoiding 
the deleterious effects of the application of synthetic fertilizers and pesti￾cides to the crop fields. The OFS was established as a substitution of the 
rapidly changing modern agricultural system in the early 20th century. In 
the OFS, agricultural inputs and practices are generated from the biological 
origins such as organic manure, compost, non-GM elite cultivars, crop 
rotation and companion planting. Instead of synthetic chemicals, pests are 
managed through integrated pest management (IPM) approach. The OFS 
aims to maintain agroecosystem by encouraging interior self-regulation for 
using synthetic agricultural inputs. The understanding of OFS revealed that 
the system is environment-friendly, and good for biodiversity and sustain￾ability. Therefore, the environment-friendly OFS approaches have become 
a subject for the improvement of sustainable agriculture by many countries 
and organizations. This chapter highlights the current concept, status, 
economic benefits, and challenges for sustainable OFS intensification. The 
generated knowledge of OFS is thought to be useful for the sustainable 
production of safe and nutritional food in the era of global climate change. 
14.1 INTRODUCTION 
After the industrial revolution, various inorganic methods were introduced 
in modern agriculture for resolving the increasing demand of food and 
nutrition for the increasing population of the world. At the same time, 
the invention of the gasoline engine leads to improve the numerous farm 
apparatuses. A concurrent improvement of biochemistry and engineering 
has impacted on introduction of various farm machineries and synthetic Organic Agriculture in Food Quality 323 
chemicals in agriculture. The application of machineries and synthetic 
chemicals ultimately replaced the use of animal powers and organic inputs in 
the agriculture. The primitive agriculture was the innovative type of farming 
which has been experienced for 1000 of years. All aboriginal agricultural 
systems are now measured to be “organic farming system (OFS)” though 
that period there were no recognized non-living approaches (McConnell et 
al., 2017). Since, farming was started to upgrade through the introduction 
of new farming procedures and machinery, while several serious short and 
longer-term side effects had appeared as a result of the excessive and imbal￾anced use of synthetic fertilizers and pesticides. Therefore, soon it was well￾understood that modern production systems were not environment-friendly 
and had severe adverse effects on human health and the environment. 
Considering these burning issues, researchers started to explore alternative 
sustainable techniques or solutions to alleviate these hazardous effects of 
modern farming to preserve the potential of maximum productivity of the 
farming system. 
The OFS concept was started in practice in the 1940s for avoiding the 
harmful effects of modern farming using artificial fertilizers and pesticides 
(Colorado State University, 2020). The OFS is well-defined by the use of 
plant nutrition of biological origin, including compost, manure, green 
manuring compost, and bone meal, etc., and simultaneously producing 
crops in farmland with a prioritization on procedures such as non-GMO 
elite varieties, crop rotation and companion planting. The system varies 
basically in soil fertility and productivity, diseases, and pests’ management, 
nutritional quality and yield stability as compared to conventional farming 
systems. Besides these, organic pests and diseases management, diversified 
cropping and raising of insect killers are inspired. The OFS focuses on the 
versatility and buffering limit in the ranch environment by animating inner 
self-guideline through useful agrobiodiversity in or more the dirt, rather than 
outer guideline through substance protectants. Natural norms are intended 
to permit the utilization of normally happening substances while precluding 
or carefully restricting manufactured substances (McEvoy, 2018). The OFS 
was established as a substitution of the modern agricultural system which 
initiated during the early in the 20th century in response to promptly altering 
agricultural activities (Coleman, 1995; Arsenault, 2014; USDA, 2016). In 
the OFS, agricultural inputs such as fertilizers and pesticides are gener￾ally obtained from the organic origins also must involve crop rotation and 
companion planting methods. The OFS aims to maintain agroecosystem by 
encouraging interior self-regulation for using synthetic agricultural inputs 
(Halberg, 2006; Strochlic and Sierra, 2007).  
324 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
It revealed that OFS is friendly to the environment, biodiversity, and 
sustainability of the resource utilization. Therefore, various countries and 
organizations have started to adopt, improve, and extend the use of OFS 
for promoting sustainable agriculture. This chapter reviews and updates our 
understanding of the current concept, status, economic benefits, and chal￾lenges for sustainable intensification of OFS. The knowledge of eco-friendly 
OFS is described in relation to its usefulness for the safe production of 
nutritional food in the era of climate change. 
14.2	 PRESENT STATUS OF ORGANIC FARMING ACROSS THE 
GLOBE 
Since 1990, the marketplace for an organic and additional foodstuff has full￾grown quickly, attaining $63 billion globally in 2012 (Helga et al., 2013) and 
is now experienced in ˃120 countries (Willer and Yussefi, 2007). This need 
for organic products has motivated a comparable intensification in naturally 
accomplished farmland that raised from 2001 to 2011 at a compounding 
proportion of 8.9% yearly (Paull, 2011a, b). As of 2018, about 71.5 Mha land 
globally were cultivated under OFS naturally, demonstrating about 1.5% of 
total farmland worldwide (FiBL, 2020) (Figures 14.1–14.3). According to the 
latest FiBL organic agriculture survey data from 186 countries (conducted 
at the end of 2018) revealed that the growth rate of organic agriculture was 
2.9% or 2 Mha compared to 2017. Presently, specialized OFS is occupied 
about 70 million ha land worldwide, where country Australia stands for 
54% of global authorized organic land with the country recorded ˃35 Mha 
verified OFS land (Paull, 2018, 2019). As a result of the huge area of organic 
farmlands are practiced in Australia, half of the global OFS lands are situated 
in Oceania (36.0 Mha) (Figures 14.1–14.3). Considering the country based 
on OFS lands, Australia has the first (about 35.7 Mha), secondly Argentina 
(3.6 Mha), and then China (3.1 Mha) in 2018 (Paull and Hennig, 2018). 
In the case of continents under OFS land, Australia is the 1st (about 35.7 
Mha), Europe is the 2nd (15.6 Mha), third in Latin America (8 Mha). Asia is 
in 4th position (4.1 Mha), and North America is the 5th position (about 1.4 
Mha) and Africa is the least (1.2 Mha) (Colom-Gorgues et al., 2009; Paull 
and Hennig, 2018). In the year 2018, the international market for organic 
food and products exceeded 97 billion euros (BES) for the first time, whereas 
the USA contributes 40.6 BEs, next place was occupied for Germany (10.9 
BEs) and France (9.1 BEs). In the meantime, the organic market in French 
was grownup more than 15%. Consumers in Denmark and Switzerland Organic Agriculture in Food Quality 325 
have already spent 312 Euros per capita in 2018 for organic food. Similarly, 
Denmark spent 15% on organic food of its total food market. Additionally, 
as an Asian country, India is the maximum number of organic food producers 
(1,149,000), then place was occupied for African countries Uganda (210000) 
and Ethiopia (204000). 
FIGURE 14.1 Development of organic agriculture in several countries globally from 1999 
to 2017.
 
Source: Research Institute of Organic Agriculture (FiBL, 2020).
 
FIGURE 14.2 Trends (from 1999 to 2017) of organic agricultural land worldwide. 
Source: Research Institute of Organic Agriculture (FiBL, 2020).  
 
326 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
FIGURE 14.3 Area (ha) under organic farming across the globe. 
Source: Research Institute of Organic Agriculture (FiBL, 2020). 
14.3	 CONCEPT, HISTORY, AND REGULATION OF ORGANIC 
AGRICULTURE 
14.3.1 CONCEPT OF ORGANIC FARMING 
The practice of term “organic” promoted by Howard and Rodale, who 
mentions more precisely to usage of organic agricultural status in soils, high￾lighted from the effort of soil researchers who stated the concept of ‘humus 
farming’ (Nayler, 2014). On the other hand, the term “organic” designates 
that a farm should be regarded as active organisms (Kirchmann and Berg￾strom, 2008; Paull, 2011a, b). The exact concept of OFS is discussed by the 
following quotations: 
•	 An organic farm is a farm whose arrangement is shaped in simulated 
of the construction of a natural structure that has the truthfulness, the 
individuality, and the benevolent requirement of a natural creature 
(IFOAM-Organics International, 2008). 
•	 OFS can be well-defined as a combined agricultural structure that 
struggles for the sustainability, the improvement of soil productiveness 
and organic assortment, while with infrequent exemptions, elimination 
artificial pesticides, fertilizers, phytohormones, and GM crop cultivars 
(Martin, 2009; Gold, 2020).  
Organic Agriculture in Food Quality 327 
•	 OFS is an assembly of a productive arrangement that withstands the 
healthiness of soils, agroecosystems, and anthropological activity. It 
trusts on environmental practices, biodiversity, and cycles adjusted 
to home-grown conditions, rather than the use of contributions with 
hostile effects. OFS associates custom, improvement, and discipline 
to profit the collective location and indorse reasonable associations 
and decent superiority of life for all involved (IFOAM-Organics 
International, 2008). 
•	 OFS is an unconventional cultivated system that initiated initial of the 
20th century in response to promptly altering agricultural practices. 
OFS approaches are globally synchronized and legitimately imposed 
by numerous countries, established in huge part on the ethics set 
by the IFOAM, which was established in 1972, an intercontinental 
umbrella organization for OFS (Paull, 2010). 
14.3.2 HISTORY OF ORGANIC FARMING 
The traditional agriculture was the innovative kind of farming that has been 
experienced for 1000 of years. Most of these traditional agricultural method￾ologies were underdeveloped and had unadorned adverse effects on human 
health and also on the surrounding environment. Since non-natural plant 
nourishments in agriculture were initially created at the time of mid-1900. 
Comparable progresses of inorganic pesticides were materialized in the 1940s, 
directed to the period being mentioned to as the ‘era of pesticide’ (Horne, 
2008). As a concurrent improvement of biochemistry and engineering farm￾ing’s during the initial 40-year of the 20-century, farms size and cropping 
were started bigger and specialized for using of efficient farm machinery 
and also for reducing the dependence on physical and animal employments 
in tillage, pesticides, and fertilizers applications. As an advancement of farm 
mechanization and excessive and imbalanced use of modern agricultural 
inputs including man-made agricultural stimulators, and the extreme events 
of climate change (Stinner, 2007), resulted several short and lengthier side 
effects on agroecological environment, leading to adverse effect on human 
health. Researchers also started to search techniques/solutions to alleviate 
these poisonous effects of modern farming, while preserving the maximum 
productivity. In the circumstances, farmers and policymakers in the 
emerging countries have adapted to contemporary biological approaches for 
commercial reasons (Paull, 2007). Therefore, an OFS concept was started 
in the 1940s for avoiding the poisonous effects that were emerged from the  
328 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
application of artificial fertilizers and pesticides. The OFS was established 
as a substitution of the agricultural system which initiated during the early in 
the 20th century in response to promptly altering agricultural activities. The 
historical trends of OFS have discussed in subsections. 
14.3.2.1 PRE-WORLD WAR-II 
Intentionally OFS started more or less concurrently in Europe and India. 
Historical evidence of the Pre-World War-II concept on OFS are discussed 
in the following several points: 
1.	 In the late 1800s and early 1900s, scientists of soil environmental 
science started to search for techniques for remedying these adverse 
effects of synthetic agricultural inputs in modern agriculture, through 
preserving the maximum agricultural productivity. 
2.	 OFS conception was established by Sir Albert Howard, F.H. King, 
Rudolf Steiner, and others in the early 19 Century, who presumed 
that the utilization of compost, organic manures, cover crops, crop 
rotation, and pest management through biological means ensued in a 
healthier farming system. 
3.	 An American agronomist namely ‘F. H. King’ published his findings on 
‘Farmers of 40 Centuries’ who also visited in China, Korea, and Japan 
during the year 1909 for lecturing on outdated agricultural system’s 
nourishment, plowing, and wide-ranging of farming practices (King, 
2004; Paull, 2011b). 
4.	 From 1905 to 1924, the father of current OFS the British botanist Sir 
Albert Howard and his wife a plant physiologist namely Gabrielle 
worked as agricultural consultants in Pusa-Bengal, India, and exposed 
the primitive Indian agricultural activities and suggested several meth￾odologies to respect them as loftier to their unadventurous agriculture 
(Conford, 2001; Heckman, 2007). As soon as Howard backed to UK 
in the initial of 1930s, he started to disseminate OFS in England and 
Europe (Lotter, 2003; Vogt, 2007; Kirchmann and Bergstrom, 2008). 
5.	 In the year 1924, the first comprehensive system of OFS namely 
‘Development of biodynamic agriculture’ was coined by Rudolf 
Steiner’s (a German Scientist), exposed by a series of lectures 
with Steiner at a farm in Koberwitz (Kobierzyce now in Poland) 
(Paull, 2011a, b). In the lecture they revealed that when crops are 
cultivated in despoiled soil leads to deteriorate the productivity and  
Organic Agriculture in Food Quality 329 
nutritional quality of crops and livestock as a consequence of exces￾sive and imbalanced utilization of inorganic stimulants. Although the 
summary of these lecture series was first appeared as a publication 
in November 1924, but it was first translated to English in the year 
1928 in ‘The Agriculture Course’ (Paull, 2011b). 
6.	 A soil microbiologist namely Masanobu Fukuoka (Japan) first 
opened the contemporary agricultural movement. In 1937, he left his 
job as a scientist and backed to his family’s farm in 1938, and dedi￾cated his next 60 years of life for developing a fundamental no-till 
organic agricultural technique for increasing crop productivity. Now 
these techniques are known as natural, natural farming, ‘do-nothing’ 
farming or Fukuoka farming. 
7.	 In July 1939, the term “OFS” was first coined by Walter James in his 
book ‘Look to the Land’ (Lord Northbourne), which was written in 
1939 and was published in 1940) (Paull, 2011b, c, 2014). In the text 
of the book, Walter James demarcated all-inclusive, environmentally 
stable methodology to farming, known as “the farm as organisms” 
(Paull, 2006); establishing based on Steiner’s farming moralities and 
approaches (Paull, 2011a, c, 2014). 
8.	 In 1939, Lady Eve Balfour had been working on farming systems 
development since 1920 for generating data to test these beliefs at 
Haughley Experiment, Suffolk-England (Gordon, 2017). Lady Eve 
Balfour assumed that human healthiness and upcoming life are 
depending on how the soil was used for producing their foodstuffs. 
She also assumed that sketchy farming could harvest more healthy 
food (Gordon, 2017). 
14.3.2.2 POST-WORLD WAR-II 
Technological progress at the time of 2nd World War was enhanced for the 
post-war novelty in all sides of food production by ensuing in huge improve￾ments in modernization and synthetic inputs. In particular, two chemicals 
were produced and used widely in agricultural production system. For 
example, ammonium nitrate was used as a cheap source of nitrogen for plant 
munitions. Besides the new pesticides, DDT was used widely for controlling 
disease-carrying insects: 
1.	 In 1944, an intercontinental movement named the ‘Green Revolu￾tion’ was hurled in Mexico with a private subsidy from the America. 330 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
The concept of ‘Green Revolution’ inspired the expansion of hybrid 
crop cultivars, synthetic stimulators such as inorganic fertilizers and 
pesticides, irrigated crops, and also introduction of mechanization 
for intensive agricultural through reducing manual labors; as a result, 
a single farmer started to big areas of land and fields raised larger. 
2.	 During the year 1950s, a topic of sustainable agriculture was started 
popularity in a scientific society, but researchers tend to spirit on 
evolving the new chemical methods as one of the principals of the 
ongoing ‘Green Revolution,’ for enhancing the agricultural produc￾tivity for a growing population. At that time, conversely, the hostile 
effects of “modern” agriculture sustained to spark an unimportant but 
increasing consciousness for OFS concept. For example, in the US, J. 
I. Rodale started to promote the word and approaches of OFS, mainly 
to clients by doing the advertising of organic horticulture initially. 
3.	 During 1962, Rachel Carson, a prominent ecologist, published the 
book ‘Silent Spring’ which recording the consequences of DDT and 
other insecticides on the surrounding environment (Paull, 2007). The 
US government in 1972 banned the usage of chemical DDT as per 
the suggestions of the book Silent Spring. 
4.	 During 1970, the meaning of “eco-agriculture” was first specified by 
Charles Walters, in the Acres Magazine, in where Charles Walters 
suggested not to use ‘synthetic stimulators’ in the cultivation rather 
than organic agriculture; since these molecules have short and long￾term side effects (ACRES-Magazine, 2020). 
5.	 During the 1970s, scientists and policy were worried about envi￾ronmental pollution as a consequence of intensive agricultural 
production systems and emphasized on OFS. One objective of the 
OFS effort was inspired for consuming locally produced food staffs 
through slogans like “Know Your Farmer, Know Your Food.” 
6.	 During 1972, the IFOAM was created in ‘Versailles’ (Paull, 2010), 
France for dissemination and discussion about the benefits of OFS. 
7.	 During 1975, the book ‘The One-Straw Revolution’ was published 
by Fukuoka. In the book, Fukuoka discussed the robust impression 
in various fields of the modern farming across the globe. He stated 
that limited scale grain production should be accentuated carefully 
to maintain the equilibrium of the local agroecosystem through 
minimizing anthropological interference. 
8.	 J. I. Rodale and his Rodale Press (now Rodale, Inc.) directed the 
technique to minimize the adverse effects of artificial agricultural  
Organic Agriculture in Food Quality 331 
inputs at the time period of 1970s and 1980s. He also highlighted the 
benefits of OFS. 
9.	 ‘Oregon Tilth’ started first for authorization of organic products and 
service in the USA during 1984 (Musick, 2008). 
10. In the 1980s, the government forced to producers and consumers for 
authorization ruling of organic products. In the USA, the Organic 
Foods Production ‘Act of 1990’ rule was first published in the 
Federal Register in the year 2000 (USDA, 2000). 
11. Since the early 1990s, due to increasing consumer request, OFS 
products in developed economies have been growing up about 20% 
annually. 
12. The damage of Soviet financial livelihood resulting the failure of the 
Soviet Union in 1991; regulated to emphasizing on native farming 
production and the progress of an exclusive state-supported urban 
OFS program called ‘Organopónicos.’ 
14.3.2.3 TWENTY-FIRST-CENTURY 
All the way of history, for meeting the food demand of raising population, 
modern agriculture always emphasize the artificial agricultural inputs, not 
on OFS. After agricultural modernization, biotechnology, and genetic engi￾neering approaches were introduced for the improvement of stress-tolerant 
crop cultivars (USEPA, 2020). Since, farming was started to upgrade 
through the introduction of new farming procedures and machinery, while 
several serious short and longer-term side effects were arisen due to the 
excessive and imbalanced use of synthetic stimulants including inorganic 
plant nutrients and pesticides. Considering these burning issues, researchers 
have started to search techniques or solutions to alleviate these poisonous 
effects of modern farming, while preserving the maximum productivity. 
Therefore, an OFS concept has been started for avoiding the deleterious 
effects that were emerged from the application of artificial fertilizers and 
pesticides. The OFS was established as a substitution of the agricultural 
system in response to promptly altering agricultural activities. Data in the 
year of 2018, revealed that approximately 71.5 Mha of land globally under 
OFS naturally (FiBL, 2020). According to the latest FiBL (2020) organic 
agriculture survey data from 186 countries (conducted at the end of 2018) 
revealed that the growth rate of organic agriculture was 2.0 Mha compared 
to 2017.  
 
 
 
332 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
14.3.3 REGULATION OF ORGANIC FARMING 
The products of OFS must be legally authorized by the governments of each 
country. Growers should be certified for their products and foods to be exclu￾sively “organic,” and there are exact organic criterions for foodstuffs. Organic 
authorization and fair-trade authorization are one of the eight successes of 
the millennium development goals (MDGs), that were time-honored in the 
Millennium Summit of the UN in the year 2000, since all UN member states 
were committed to assist for achieving the goal of MDGs by the year 2015 
(Setboonsarng, 2015). 
Considering the aspect, the body of ‘Codex Alimentarius of the FAO’ was 
established in November 1961. The Commission’s major aims are to keep 
the healthily life of consumers and ensure quality food in the international 
food market. The Codex Alimentarius body is recognized by the WTO as 
an international authority for resolving arguments, regarding food security 
and end-user health-safeguard (WTO, 2020). Since, most nations have 
their own agendas, roles, and regulation for ensuring the quality and safety 
of organic products (Figure 14.4). The certifiers of the EU or the United 
States can examine and verify the other countries’ growers and processors 
products when the country/organization want to export their product to these 
countries. In the EU, organic certification and examination are approved by 
authorized organic control bodies as per the standard levels of EU. In USA, 
OFS products has been certified and examined by the U.S. Department of 
Agriculture (USDA) for ensuring the National Organic Standards. In the 
USA, the Organic Foods Production ‘Act of 1990’ rule was first established 
and published in the Federal Register in the year 2000 (USDA, 2000). 
14.4	 TYPES, PRINCIPLES, COMPONENTS, AND BASIC METHODS 
OF ORGANIC AGRICULTURE 
14.4.1 TYPES OF ORGANIC FARMING SYSTEM (OFS) 
14.4.1.1 PURE ORGANIC FARMING SYSTEM 
This includes the use of organic inputs while completely avoids the use 
of any types of chemicals. Further to become pure OFS, around 4–5 years 
required to diminish the residual effects of already applied fertilizers. 
Many agencies are there to provide certificates for the OFS. Generally,  
 
Organic Agriculture in Food Quality 333 
organic produce is somewhat expensive as compared to the conventional 
produce but superior from nutritional values (Brandt and Mølgaard, 2001). 
However, inhabitants, particularly of developed nations demanding it even 
after paying higher for it after considering its health benefits. However, 
in underdeveloped nations, OFS is still requiring to jump many hurdles 
(Meena et al., 2013). 
FIGURE 14.4 Organic certification labels for different countries. 
14.4.1.2 INTEGRATED ORGANIC FARMING SYSTEM 
This permits the sustainable use of both organic and inorganic fertilizers 
to an extent at which it does not adversely affect our ecology. It is the kind 
of cultivation practices, where cultivating of crops is done solely utilizing 
natural resources (Meena et al., 2013). Legumes have a considerable scope 
under this farming (Drinkwater et al., 1998). Further, it could also involve 
the poultry, mushroom production, goat-rearing, and fishpond altogether for 
having regular incomes (Yadav, 2017). 
14.4.2 BASIC PRINCIPLES OF ORGANIC FARMING SYSTEM (OFS) 
There are several principles of OFS, which are discussed in the following 
sub-headings (Meena et al., 2013).  
 
 
334 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
14.4.2.1 PRINCIPLE OF HEALTH 
The OFS ultimately results in sustainable farming and reduces the carbon as well 
as water footprints. The OFS increases the product quality which further helps 
in attaining the overall sustainability. Good quality soils produce good quality 
products which further has a favorable effect on the consumers (Meena et al., 
2013). Being having almost nil residual effects of chemicals, organic produce 
always improves the health status of the consumers. Organically produced 
products help to bring overall sustainability by improving the soil health, human 
health, etc., (Drinkwater et al., 1998; Brandt and Mølgaard, 2001). 
14.4.2.2 PRINCIPLE OF ECOLOGY 
The OFS has sustainable effects on our ecosystems by one or other way as 
it reduces the generation of GHGs, reduces carbon footprints, and expands 
the soil fertility and productivity by improving organic matters in the soils. 
It also has favorable effects on the beneficial insects which otherwise killed 
by the strong pesticides, which further controls the harmful insects. Further 
approaches such as Trichoderma has a significant role in controlling the 
pest population. The objective is to have a favorable effect on the ecological 
balance. Organic supervision must be reformed as per local agro-ecological 
and social conditions (Drinkwater et al., 1998). The OFS uses natural organic 
manures hence reduces the carbon as well as water footprints and makes the 
whole agricultural system ecologically sustainable (Meena et al., 2013). 
14.4.2.3 PRINCIPLE OF FAIRNESS 
Fair relationship between common environment and life opportunities 
must be there under the OFS (Brandt and Mølgaard, 2001), which involved 
well-being of every whosoever involved, viz. farmers, workers, processors, 
distributors, traders and consumers (Meena et al., 2013). Aim of the OFS is 
to produce a better-quality product which is good for society, the ultimate 
users (Drinkwater et al., 1998). Sustainable agriculture is a must for the 
upcoming generations (Brandt and Mølgaard, 2001). Fairness required in 
the production, transportation, handling, and trade of the product with a 
minimum of food loss as well as to the food wastage.  
 
Organic Agriculture in Food Quality 335 
14.4.2.4 PRINCIPLE OF CARE
 
The OFS has a goal of improved health and wellness. Depending upon the 
demands both external as well as internal, organic produce produced under 
the principles of OFS, though it might be a bit costly as associated to the 
traditional systems. Precaution and responsibility of OFS must be critically 
followed for the optimum production (Meena et al., 2013). 
14.4.3 COMPONENTS OF ORGANIC FARMING 
Proper crop rotation, organic matter additions, nitrogen fixation, biogas, etc., 
are the main pillars for the OFS which must be followed while practicing the 
OFS. Among organic manures, farmyard manures (FYMs), vermicompost, 
green manuring, etc., are the key players for improving the soil health. OFS, 
in brief, involved the following pillars in subsections (Figure 14.5). 
FIGURE 14.5 Essential components of organic farming system.  
 
 
336 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
14.4.3.1 CROP ROTATION 
Under this method, different crops with different rhizosphere and different 
nutrient mining capabilities are grown in sequence so as to grow crops 
sustainably with the least possible pressure on the natural resources. 
Introduced legumes in the crop rotation will improve the soil health and 
livelihoods of the farmers by one or other way. Further, fertilizer demands 
also reduced which reduced loads on the farmers’ pockets. Hence proper 
crop rotation must be followed by adding legumes in the cereals. 
14.4.3.2 CROP RESIDUE 
Rice-wheat crop rotation followed on a significant portion of South Asia. 
Among their residues, management of the rice residues is really a challenging 
job as because of higher silica contents, and it is not used in the animal 
husbandry sector. Therefore, several methods viz., ZT sown wheat with a 
happy seeder, paralichar, phosphor-compost recommended in the region for 
the sustainable management of the rice residues. Under OFS, use of paralichar 
or phosphor-compost is highlighted. 
14.4.3.3 ORGANIC MANURE 
Use of organic manures viz., FYM, compost, vermicompost, etc., is recom￾mended in the OFS for sustainably cutting of the chemical fertilizers. Further, 
organic manure slowly releases the nutrients and improves the soil health 
as manures act as the feed for the microorganisms. The use of only organic 
manures certainly cut down the potential yields, and that is why organic 
produce is somewhat costlier than the conventional produce because of its 
lower yields. Beside these above components, the following aspects are 
important for an OFS: 
•	 Shifting of land from conventional use to organic use with almost no 
use of chemicals; 
•	 Ensure biodiversity and sustainability of the system by overall 
ecological maintenance; 
•	 Sustainable crop production with different approaches viz., crop rota￾tion, management of crop residues, compost, manures, and managing 
pests and diseases through biological means;  
Organic Agriculture in Food Quality 337 
•	 Control of insect-pest population through the biological control 
system; 
•	 Use of organic concept in livestock by the use of organically produced 
feed. 
14.4.4 ORGANIC FARMING METHODS 
As the accumulation of organic matter is a precedence for OFS, hence, 
chemical fertilizers are ignored. Generally, organic matter is applied in the 
soil in the form of the FYM, vermicompost, green manure (GM), compost, 
and so on. The USDA National Organic Standards instructed those organic 
manures must be incorporated in the soils within 3 to 4 months, based on soil 
and air temperature, moisture availability, etc. Well decomposed compost or 
FYM only be utilized in the soil to enhance the soil health that ultimately 
further adds organic matter into the soils, improves the physicochemical 
properties of the soils, and finally the potential yields and their quality 
standards. As nutrients in these organic manures are un-mineralized, hence 
the use of microbes is a must to make them available to the plants for 
meeting their requirements, hence their release is slow, and uses efficiency 
is relatively higher than that of the chemical fertilizers which easily released 
the nutrients quickly. For example, urea easily hydrolyzed by the urease 
enzyme to produce the CO2
 and ammonia gas in the atmosphere, which 
further causes the greenhouse gas (GHG) effect. 
Green manuring practiced under OFS to add the organic matter in soil 
and hence improves the product quality. Green manuring also helpful for 
loading the soil with different macro and micronutrients. Further, minimum 
tillage should be practiced as under the intensively tilled plots, hidden 
organic matter oxidized by the microorganisms and produces the CO2
 as 
GHGs enhances the C-footprints which is certainly not required. Further, 
under the OFS, to get ride-off from the different insects and pests, instead 
of using different insecticides and pesticides, organically produced liquid 
formulations containing neem leaves or neem oil or other organic products 
like Lassi preferred. Further, some bacteria like Bacillus thuringiensis, also 
used at some site-specific locations. However, under the OFS, some inor￾ganic pesticides such as sulfur (S) and copper (Cu) are also allowed, since 
they have no side effect on the food chain confirmed by several earlier find￾ings (NPR, 2011). Cu sources pesticides are recycled to fight against fungal 
and bacterial diseases in plants; since it is not very toxic to human health. 
Further, OFS much depends on the biological approaches to control insect  
 
 
338 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
pests. Further, breeding and biotechnological approaches must be applied to 
develop new plant cultivars which respond better to the OFS, could tolerate 
different stresses, and resistant to the attack of different insect-pest and 
diseases. The very basic methods of organic agriculture are discussed in the 
following sub-headings. 
14.4.4.1 CROP DIVERSITY 
Diversification already advocated minimizing the water footprints in the 
rice-based cropping systems (Bhatt et al., 2020a, b). Further, multi-cropping 
could also be practiced for resolving the ever-increasing demands of the 
burgeoning population. However, growing of a single crop for a number 
of consecutive years removes the nutrients from a particular soil depth for 
fulfilling further crop nutrient demands. Hence diversification is an impor￾tant method to be kept in the mind. 
14.4.4.2 SOIL MANAGEMENT 
Mostly under conventional crop establishment methods, soil health is 
declining day after day due to intensively practiced rice-wheat cropping rota￾tion with conventional faulty methods, which led to declined soil health and 
yields (Drinkwater et al., 1998; Bhatt et al., 2020a, b). However, under OFS 
mostly nutrient requirements fulfilled through the organic inputs viz., FYM, 
and vermicompost or even through the green manuring, etc., which further 
improves the soil organic matter (SOM) status which further has its favor￾able effects in the soil physic-chemical and biological properties (Dobbs and 
Smolik, 1996). Therefore, OFS depends on the natural way of farming and 
avoid the use of chemical fertilizers (Brandt and Mølgaard, 2001). 
14.4.4.3 WEED MANAGEMENT 
Plants that are not required where they are not required are known as “weeds” 
and they fight with the focal plants for water, nutrients, and sunlight, and 
ultimately affected the overall land productivity (Drinkwater et al., 1998). 
Under OFS generally, we used the practice of mulching and cutting instead 
of using heavy weedicides, which further pollutes the underground water 
and thus a threat to the ecosystem.  
 
 
 
Organic Agriculture in Food Quality 339 
14.4.4.4 INSECT-PEST CONTROL
 
Agricultural produce significantly affected by the attack of insect-pest and 
diseases, which needs to be controlled for overall sustainability (Drinkwater 
et al., 1998). However, instead of using the chemicals under OFS more 
stress given on the biological control or spray of natural chemicals like 
neem oil. Further, by doing so, we could also take care of the useful insects 
which otherwise affected by the chemicals of conventional farming. 
14.4.4.5 LIVESTOCK 
OFS methods also focused on the other sectors like dairy, piggery, etc., along 
with the agricultural sector to enhance the system sustainability. Further, this 
also led to regular incomes for the farmers. 
14.4.4.6 GENETIC MODIFICATION 
In general, OFS discourages the use of the engineered animals/plants for 
direct consumption by the humans as many complications are there regarding 
their residual effects on the human health (Dobbs and Smolik, 1996). More￾over, up to now in India, these are not advocated except Bt cotton, which is 
a non-food crop. 
14.5	 PROSPECTS OF ORGANIC AGRICULTURE FOR FOOD 
QUALITY AND SAFETY 
Agricultural activity was started 10,000 years ago without the utilization 
of synthetic stimulators. Synthetic fertilizers and pesticides were started 
to use in the mid-1900. Initially, these artificial inputs were very inexpen￾sive, influential, and transportation of bulk volume was easy. Comparable 
progresses were also happened for artificial pesticides in the 1940s, which 
leading to the period being mentioned to as the ‘Pesticide Era’(Horne, 2008). 
Although application of artificial agricultural inputs significantly improved 
the farming productivity (Hole et al., 2005), while excessive and imbalanced 
application of these chemical fertilizers and pesticides generated a serious 
short and longer-term side effects on soil and surrounding environment, and 
also human health (Stinner, 2007). The green revolution has also contributed 340 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
to several environmental problems (Singh, 2000) which have directly or 
indirectly influenced the human civilizations. In the present day the number 
of food-insecure people in India, Bangladesh. Pakistan, Nepal, and Sri 
Lanka are increasing not due to food availability but also due to food acces￾sibility. Considering the burning issue, researchers began to seek solutions 
to alleviate these hostile effects of chemicals, while preserving the maximum 
productivity. In the last part of the 1800’s and mid 1900’s, researchers 
started to look for approaches to cure these results while as yet keeping up 
higher productivity. Therefore, an OFS concept was started in the 1940s for 
avoiding the poisonous effects that were emerged from the application of 
artificial fertilizers and pesticides (Pugliese, 2001; Vogt, 2007). Under such 
circumstances, there is an urgent need to provide access to food. As per the 
report provided (IFAD, 2007), it has been observed that OFS can purposively 
solve the problems by providing local food security by generating diverse 
products with low input costs as compared to conventional agriculture. In 
the OFS, agricultural inputs generally must be from biological origin also 
must involve organic manure, compost, free from GMO, crop rotation and 
companion planting, etc. The OFS aims to maintain agroecosystem by 
encouraging interior self-regulation for using synthetic agricultural inputs. 
Undeniably, profits of organic crops/products have been established to be 
around 25% inferior to modern farming (Stolze and Lampkin, 2009), but 
OFS is environmentally friendly, could improve nutritional quality through 
incorporating diversified crop cultivars (Rigby and Cáceres, 2001). A study 
conducted over 22 years in Rodale Institute test farm (Pimentel et al., 2005; 
Steffanie et al., 2018). A 30th-anniversary report was published by Rodale in 
2012 (Rodale Institute, 2020). During the trial, he expressed that the harvest 
yields for corn and soybeans were at par in the animal based natural farming, 
vegetable-based cropping pattern and regular cultivating frameworks. 
It likewise found that fundamentally less fossil energy was exhausted for 
the production of corn in the Rodale Institute’s organic leguminous based 
cropping practices and natural vegetable cultivation frameworks than in the 
traditional agronomic framework. Similarly, there was little distinction in 
energy input consumption among the various treatments for the production 
of soybeans. In the natural cropping practices, inorganic fertilizers and 
chemical pesticides were avoided (McBride and Greene, 2013). 
Organic food production system is needed to spread globally as the 
currently practiced conventional agricultural production system poses a 
detrimental effect on the environment, causing soil, water, land degradation 
and also contributing to GHG emission leading to global warming. Organic 
cropping system not only increases food productivity in some areas but also  
 
Organic Agriculture in Food Quality 341 
helps in combating hunger where poverty exists providing both food security 
and health enrichment. Initiatives taken by some developing countries to 
slowly shift towards an organic package of practices through integrated 
nutrient management are praiseworthy. It is to be mentioned that the chal￾lenge in adapting organic cropping system is neither agronomical constraints 
nor economical boundaries but completely socio-political. Prospects and 
benefits of OFS are discussed in the following sub-sections. 
14.5.1	 IMPORTANCE OF ORGANIC FARMING ON FOOD 
SECURITY 
During the last few years, per capita world food production has increased by 
almost 25%, and world food commodity rates have drastically decreased by 
40% in actual terms. As per the study conducted by Pretty et al. (2001), during 
the early 1960s and mid-90’s the mean cereal productivity increased signifi￾cantly from 1.2 t ha–1 to 2.52 t ha–1 in emerging nations like India, Bangladesh, 
Nepal, Sri Lanka, Vietnam, and Malaysia. However, total cereal production 
has been increased dramatically from 420 to 1,176 million tons yearly. 
Gradual progression towards achieving food sufficiency by reducing 
hunger has been unfortunately slowed down in recent years. For the period 
of the late ‘1990s and early 20th Century, the total figure of hungry/starved 
people in the developing nations has been reduced by just 1%, from 824 
million to 815 million. However, in the sub-Saharan African (SSA) region, 
the scenarios are just the opposite, where there is a significant rise in hungry 
people since the 1990s by almost 20% (Von Braun, 2005). Thus, it is very 
much evident that humanity is far away from the reality in achieving the 
goal which has been set as per MDGs of reducing the number of hungry 
people around the globe by almost half. Yet paradoxically rather ironically 
during the same period, nearly about 1.2 billion people, particularly in first 
world nations, are over-eating, which increases obesity-related health issues 
(World Watch Institute, 2000). 
In 2007, the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) 
reported that chemical fertilizers were needed to avoid hunger, particularly 
in Africa where fertilizers are presently used 90% less than in Asia (FAO, 
2007). Likewise, NEPAD, an advancement association of African govern￾ments, reported that taking care of Africans and forestalling ailing health 
requires manures and upgraded seeds (Africa Fertilizer Summit, 2006). For 
example, in Malawi, the yield has been boosted up using seeds and fertil￾izers (FAO, 2007). FAO additionally calls for utilizing biotechnology, as it  
342 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
can help small and marginal producers (farmers) to improve their monetary 
returns and food security (FAO, 2013). According to a 2012 study in Science 
Digest, organic best management practices show an average yield of only 
13% less than the conventional cultivation system (McGill University, 
2012). On the planet’s less fortunate countries (under-developed nations) 
where a large portion of the world’s ravenous individuals live, and where 
individual farmers could not able to afford costly input materials, adoption 
of natural and organic input materials enhances yields almost by 93% overall 
and hence could be a significant piece of alternative way for achieving food 
security (World Watch Institute, 2006). Many researchers, policymakers, and 
experts opined that OFS would not only increase the world’s food demand 
but might be the only technique to eliminate malnourishment (World Watch 
Institute, 2006). 
This is well established fact that there is an increasing need for capital 
and chemical inputs that have deleterious consequences in the sustainability 
of agriculture. There have been many arguments in the adaptation of conser￾vation agriculture, recycling of nutrients, biodiversity, and synergistic effect 
between crops, animals including livestock and soils, etc., regeneration, and 
conservation of natural resources. However, these strategies should accord 
with policy, capacities, and interest with the small and medium farmers, who 
otherwise will not be enthusiastic enough in adapting so. 
14.5.2	 THE SYNERGISTIC WELFARES OF ORGANIC FARMING 
SYSTEM (OFS) 
Organic methods reduce the production cost of food crop (Marshall, 1991; 
Brown, 2008). During 2000, uncompensated costs for 1996 reached nearly 
2,343 million British pounds or £208 per ha. (£84.20/ac) (Pretty et al., 2000). 
An investigation of practices in the US distributed in 2005 presumed that crop￾land costs the economy roughly 5 to 16 billion dollars ($30–96/ha–$12–39/ 
ac), while livestock production costs 714 million dollars (Tegtmeier and 
Duffy, 2005). Assessing the welfares and also the constraints of OFS is rather 
very multifaceted. The effect of transforming to OFS will largely depend on 
the initial interest and capabilities of the growers and farming communities, 
their inherent skills, and the natural means obtainable to them. However, 
several major relevant potentials prospects have been worked out: 
•	 OFS can enhance agricultural output, particularly in regions where 
growers are prone or subject to the vulnerability of food shortages.  
Organic Agriculture in Food Quality 343 
•	 OFS can enhance income generation and/or revenues to the farm 
employment. This goal can be attained either through reaping the 
better yields, superior prices due to higher demand, lower costs (for 
inputs) or incorporations of these three parameters. 
•	 The divergence of the agricultural production system, which is 
intrinsic in OFS, decreases the risk of crop loss by any natural calami￾ties or anthropogenic sources due to various stress and synergistic 
financial and food security restraints. The system consensuses power￾fully with the risk diversion approaches which have been embraced 
by low income-generating farming families. 
•	 OFS foodstuffs are safe, diversified, and nutritional. 
•	 OFS bypasses the hidden risks related with the drastic and vigorous 
use of toxic chemicals. 
•	 OFS plays a vital role in sustaining natural resource conservation 
such as decreasing water demand and run-off, soil erosion, enhancing 
biodiversity, natural resource conservation. 
•	 OFS plays a dynamic role for creating awareness regarding the impor￾tance of sustainable food production and consumption amongst the 
farmers and consumers and also the importance of clean and safely 
produced in order to safeguard the environment. 
•	 OFS has significantly contributed to women upliftment in farming 
societies as compared to additional relegated groups, as well as 
ensuring innovative employment prospects for the poor landless. 
•	 OFS identifies the importance of outdated and aboriginal under￾standing and thus helps in incorporating this knowledge in its produc￾tion system, thus growing social capability and self-value. 
•	 OFS has proved to be sustainable in the long run. It increases the 
capabilities of a production system towards climate resilience such as 
drought, flooding, or other extreme events. 
•	 OFS has a perfect cut role to encounter a variety of world ecological 
policies and aims, comprising strategies to combat desertification, 
preserving resource biodiversity, and bypassing the unfriendly effects 
of global warming. 
14.5.3	 FOOD QUALITY IMPROVEMENT UNDER ORGANIC 
PRODUCTION SYSTEMS 
The quality of food products is judgmental and shows temporal and spatial 
variation. There are no specific criteria for classifying food superiority. 344 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
Hence, the definition of food quality is highly flexible. Initially, there 
were some fixed parameters for assessing food quality. Nowadays, a more 
holistic approach is undertaken for defining food quality. Kahl et al. (2010) 
analyzed the present condition/values of organic food quality as compared to 
the potential quality that has been claimed in the superior world. A rational 
gap between consumer demands regarding food quality of an individual to 
that which can be guaranteed by the government as per policies, regulatory 
law enforcement was also worked out. A study by Byerlee and Alex (2005) 
showed that diversification and optimization of farm productivity, reduc￾tion of inputs for farm operations, resulting towards the development of 
households,’ a market-orientated scheme for earning extra income; organic 
production systems which have eventually resulted in alleviating hunger and 
poverty. It is proven that improved income allows individual farmers to buy 
food to a greater extent which would otherwise lead to a hunger crisis. 
Incurred higher returns coming from the marketing of organic commodi￾ties often leads to seasonal or permanent diversification of cropping systems 
from principle staple crop production towards high value lucrative high￾value commodities such as exotic vegetables, fruits, etc., depending upon 
the farmers’ investment potentiality, agroecological conditions and local 
demands. Although in many instances, principle food systems will continue 
to dominate the market (for example, rice dominated 50% of Asia’s culti￾vated lands) and off-farm activities will generate extra revenue, however, 
on the other hand, organic diversification contributes to higher net earn￾ings from land and labor savings. However, the adapting diversified crop 
cultivation from conventional to organic practices requires strong will and 
capital for establishment. Assured land, water source, sound technological 
knowledge is some of the important prerequisites for investments in organic 
diversification and commercialization as compared to any other forms of 
agriculture. 
Rural Schools and homestead gardens provide chemical-free nutritional 
organic products that improve the health of rural children and households. 
These systems significantly contribute to food accessibility, the safety of 
children and improving the health and nutritional status of the families. In 
certain instances, poorly known less popular varieties have proved to be an 
important source of income generation opportunities through the marketing 
of processed specialty foods (e.g., Chenopodium quinoa) or certain medic￾inal plants like Aswagandha, Cinchona, etc., or aromatic (Cinnamon) or dye 
plants, which have high very high demand locally and in international export 
markets.  
 
Organic Agriculture in Food Quality 345 
14.5.4	 CONTRIBUTION OF ORGANIC AGRICULTURE TO 
TRANSITIONAL FOOD CRISIS 
Small and marginal farmers are often associated with pre- and post-production 
risks factors, and thus, they are very much vulnerable to losses. For them, 
sustainable food with assured income is more important than yield. Thus, 
organic production system shows less variation in harvests and divergence 
and hence, is one of the best-assured alternatives in cases of a sole crop 
disappointment, climatic adversities, or even socio-economic crisis. Under 
changing climatic scenarios with a rise in the number of risky weather events, 
snow balling the flexibility of agroecosystems to weather abnormalities has 
become an urgent need of present and future, especially in countries which are 
agriculturally highly dependent. A thorough correlation of energy effective￾ness in grain production, produced yield, and animal husbandry concluded 
that OFS had a better return for each unit of energy consumed over the huge 
dominating animals and crop-based cropping system (Dalgaard et al., 2001). 
Contradictory results on the profitability of OFS have also been reported 
(Dalgaard et al., 2001). It has commonly been tracked down that the work 
input per unit of yield was higher for organic means of agricultural practices 
over conventional agricultural framework system (Pimentel et al., 1983). 
14.5.5	 ORGANIC AGRICULTURE CONTRIBUTION TO HEALTHY 
DIETS 
About 58% of deaths in the world are caused of non-transmissible diseases 
like cardiac arrest, diabetes, kidney ailments due to malnutrition or imbal￾anced diets. In China alone, around 8.1% of the same households have both 
underweight and an overweight member. Recent food patterns, however, have 
immensely proved to be beneficial in combating malnutrition; specialized 
agricultural systems focusing on enhancing nutritional contents of some staple 
crops through biotechnological interventions have been a success in some 
countries. Low dietary contents and micronutrients viz. vitamins, iron, and 
iodine have affected more than half the population in developing nations like 
India, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Nepal, etc. This is indeed a key community 
health anxiety which has been spoken through providing external addition and 
biofortification in some important cereal crops like black rice, Golden rice, 
High nutritional enriched fruits, and vegetables but in small scale which have 
failed to target the majority of the population till date.  
 
346 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
Encouraging a miscellaneous indigenous food source may be available to 
poor families, which has established to be a low cost and effective solution 
to combat undernourishment. The feasibility of an OFS is highly dependable 
to a different agroecosystem both spatially as well as temporally. Crop 
diversification with the organic package of practice with even low economic 
value have high nutrient enrichment is beneficial for the household in 
improving the overall health. The reintroduction, assortment, and genetically 
enrichment of location specific reformed cultivars makes an irreplaceable 
involvement to “hidden hunger,” or nutritional micronutrient insufficiencies. 
Several consumers’ survey reports have clearly depicted that consumers 
of organic products have a healthier dietary status, particularly owing to 
selections of “minor” legumes that contribute to improved foods. 
While there may be some alterations in the quantities of nutrients and 
anti-nutrients when progressively produced food and unadventurously 
produced food products are compared, the variable idea of food creation 
and taking care of makes it hard to sum up outcomes, and there is lacking 
proof to make asserts that natural food is more secure or more grounded than 
ordinary food (Bourn and Prescott, 2002; Blair, 2012; Smith-Spangler et al., 
2012; Barański et al., 2014). 
14.5.6	 ORGANIC AGRICULTURE SYSTEM INCREASES THE 
PROFITABILITY 
In the USA, OFS has been revealed 2.7 to 3.8 times extra cost-effective 
to modern conventional farming (CT) (The Hindu, 2010; Gurung, 2011). 
Worldwide, according to Metadata analysis across five continents in the year 
2015, OFS was found 22 to 35% more income than CT (Hindu Business 
Line, 2010; Times of India, 2010). Another observation found that on an 
inclusive scale, 5–7% price premiums were needed to break even with CT 
(Lotter, 2003; Crowder and Reganold, 2015). Martin and Kim (2008) found 
that organic food is profitable, since organic products could be sold at a 
relatively higher rate as compared to organically produced food. 
14.5.7	 ORGANIC FARMING SYSTEM (OFS) INCREASES 
EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY OF LABORS 
Organic production system is labor-intensive than CT (FAO, 2020), indi￾cating that OFS provides more jobs per unit area than conventional systems  
 
Organic Agriculture in Food Quality 347 
(Green and Maynard, 2006). The 2011 United Nations Environment Program 
(UNEP) Green Economy Report suggests that an increase in investment in 
OFS is anticipated to lead to growth rate in labor employment about 60% 
compared with CT. The report also highlighted that investment in OFS could 
create 47 million additional jobs compared with CT over the next 40 years 
(UNEP, 2011), particularly for emerging nations. A large part of the develop￾ment in ladies work support in agribusiness and allied sectors are outside the 
male dominated field of CT. Predominant associates in OFS are 21% ladies, 
instead of 14% in conventional mode of farming sectors. 
14.5.8	 ORGANIC FARMING SYSTEM (OFS) CONSERVES SOIL 
PHYSIOLOGICAL AND CHEMICAL PROPERTIES 
The OFS can build up SOM better than CT system, which suggests long￾term yield benefits from OFS (USDA-ARS, 2007). Researchers claimed 
that naturally conserved soil has higher fertility and productivity (Johnston, 
1986) leads to higher water retention (Kirchmann et al., 2007). USDA’s 
Agricultural Research Service has observed that organic manure applica￾tions in tilled-OFS are better at constructing conserves soil physiological 
and chemical properties than no-till (Hepperly et al., 2008; Paulson, 2008). 
Scientists at Oxford University examined 71 peer-reviewed scientific 
papers and looked into contemplates and observed that natural items are 
once in a while are harmful rather detrimental for the climate (University of 
Oxford, 2004) and generally, natural items required less energy, yet more land 
(University of Oxford, 2004). Per unit of item, natural produce creates higher 
nitrogen filtering, nitrous oxide outflows, smelling salts emanations, eutro￾phication, and fermentation potential than customarily developed produce 
(Meleca, 2008; Tuomisto et al., 2012) and that OFS can diminish petroleum 
derivative discharges (UNEP, 2011; Rodale Institute, 2014). Several experts 
in the field of OFS techniques accept that the expanding land for cultivating 
natural/organically produced food might actually annihilate the rainforests 
and crash numerous environments (Goldberg, 2007; Leonard, 2007). 
14.5.9	 ORGANIC FARMING SYSTEM (OFS) IS A BIODIVERSITY￾FRIENDLY PRACTICE 
A wide scope of living beings profits by OFS, however, it is indistinct 
whether natural techniques give more prominent financial advantages 348 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
than traditional coordinated agro-ecological projects (Hole et al., 2005). 
OFS is regularly introduced as a greater biodiversity-accommodating 
practice, however, the over-simplification of the valuable impacts of OFS 
is bantered as the impacts show up frequently species-and setting reliant 
and flow research have featured the need to measure the overall impacts of 
neighborhood and scene scale the board on farmland biodiversity (Henckel, 
2015). The protection of characteristic assets and biodiversity is a center 
rule of natural creation. Three expansive administration rehearses (preclu￾sion/diminished utilization of synthetic pesticides and inorganic manures; 
thoughtful administration of non-trimmed environments; and safeguarding 
of blended cultivating) that are generally characteristic (yet not selective) 
to OFS are especially helpful for farmland natural life. Utilizing rehearses 
that draw in or present gainful creepy crawlies, give territory to birds and 
vertebrates, and give conditions that expansion soil biotic variety serve to 
supply crucial biological administrations to natural creation frameworks. 
Benefits to guaranteed natural tasks that carry out these kinds of creation 
rehearses include: (1) diminished reliance on external ripeness inputs; (2) 
decreased bug the executives costs; (3) more solid wellsprings of clean 
water; and (4) better fertilization (USDSA, 2018). Practically all non-crop, 
normally happening species saw in similar homestead land practice reads 
show an inclination for OFS both by plenitude and variety (Hole et al., 
2005; Gabriel et al., 2006). A normal of 30% more species possesses natural 
homesteads (Bengtsston et al., 2005). Birds, butterflies, soil microorgan￾isms, scarabs, worms, (Blakemore, 2000), arachnids, vegetation, and well 
evolved creatures are especially influenced. The absence of herbicides and 
pesticides improve biodiversity wellness and populace thickness (Gabriel 
et al., 2006). Many weed species draw in useful bugs that improve soil 
characteristics and rummage on weed bothers (van Elsen, 2000). Soil￾bound creatures frequently advantage in view of expanded microorganisms 
populaces because of regular compost like fertilizer, while encountering 
decreased admission of herbicides and pesticides (Hole et al., 2005). 
Expanded biodiversity, particularly from helpful soil microorganisms and 
mycorrhizae have been proposed as a clarification for the significant returns 
experienced by some natural plots, particularly considering the distinctions 
found in a 21-year examination of natural and control fields (Fließbach et 
al., 2006). Biodiversity from OFS gives cash-flow to people. Species found 
in natural homesteads upgrade maintainability by diminishing human info 
(e.g., manures, pesticides) (Perrings et al., 2006). The USDA’s agricultural 
marketing service (AMS) distributed a Federal Register notice on 15  
Organic Agriculture in Food Quality 349 
January 2016, reporting the national organic program (NOP) last direction 
on Natural Resources and Biodiversity Conservation for Certified Organic 
Operations. Given the expansive extent of regular assets which incorporates 
soil, water, wetland, forest, and untamed life, the direction gives instances of 
practices that help the hidden protection standards and exhibit consistence 
with USDA natural guidelines (USDSA, 2018). The last direction furnishes 
natural certifiers and homesteads with instances of creation rehearses that 
help preservation standards and consent to the USDA natural guidelines, 
which expect activities to keep up or improve common assets (USDA, 
2018). The last direction likewise explains the job of guaranteed tasks (to 
present an OSP to a certifier), certifiers (guarantee that the OSP depicts or 
records rehearses that clarify the administrator’s checking plan and prac￾tices to help regular assets and biodiversity protection), and assessors (on 
location investigation) in the execution and confirmation of these creation 
rehearses (USDSA, 2018). 
14.5.10 CAPACITY BUILDING IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES 
The OFS can donate to environmental sustainability, particularly in low 
incoming countries (Hine and Pretty, 2006). Organic principles of OFS 
employ of native assets (e.g., local seed varieties, manure, etc.). Local 
and international markets for organic foodstuffs express the excellent 
opportunities to improve the income of producers and exporters’ (Lockie, 
2006). For expansion and improvement of OFS, International Federation 
of OFS Movements accommodated more than 170 free handbooks and 
75 training prospects online in the year 2007 (Niggli et al., 2008). United 
Nations Environmental Program (UNEP) and the United Nations Confer￾ence on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) specified that OFS can be 
more encouraging to food safety in Africa than CT, and more sustain￾able in the long-term and intensive production systems (Howden, 2008; 
UNEP-UNCTAD, 2008). The estimation of OFS in the accomplishment 
of the MDGs, especially in destitution decrease endeavors even with 
environmental change, is appeared by its commitment to both pay and 
non-pay parts of the MDGs (World Bank, 2008; Markandya et al., 2015; 
Setboonsarng, 2015). A few overviews and studies have endeavored to 
inspect and analyze regular and natural frameworks of cultivating and 
have tracked down that natural strategies, while not without hurt, are less 
harmful than ordinary ones since they diminish levels of biodiversity not  
 
350 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
exactly customary frameworks do and utilize less energy and produce 
less waste when determined per unit region (Stolze et al., 2000; Hansen 
et al., 2001). 
14.6 CHALLENGES OF ORGANIC AGRICULTURAL SYSTEM 
Despite the fact that we need to recall that the world is still having a shortage 
of good quality cultivable agricultural lands. Cultivating as of now involves 
37% of the world’s territory zone and the majority of the great quality land is 
as of now trimmed. By the mid-20th century we need to have to increase farm 
outputs about 2-fold for feeding 9.7 billion people. The natural homesteads 
as of now lose about a portion of their yield potential since they will not 
utilize nitrogen compost and the more viable manufactured pesticides. They 
are as of now suing regular ranchers for “dust contamination” from biotech 
seeds. Presently they are beginning to lobby for “calamity installments” on 
landslides and weeds. It has been proposed that OFS may profit farmland 
biodiversity more in scenes that have lost a huge piece of its previous scene 
heterogeneity. 
In spite, it is a reality that the natural development faces a few obstacles 
as it extends globally. A new audit of OFS recorded a few difficulties 
confronting OFS (Halberg et al., 2005; Kristiansen et al., 2006; Smith et 
al., 2010) including biological equity, creature government assistance, 
reasonable exchange, store network improvement, profitability impediment 
and local transformation and worldwide harmonization for norms. The most 
important challenges for the sustainability of OFS under the growing food 
demand of increasing population as well as in the modern era of changing 
climate are discussed in subsections. 
14.6.1	 GENERAL CONSUMERS HAVE SEVERAL STANDARDS FOR 
QUALITY ASPECTS THAT ARE DIFFICULT FOR ORGANIC 
GROWERS TO MEET 
Lettuce with holes in it or apples with a bit of scab are always passed over 
by shoppers, although nutrition and flavor quality might be excellent. 
Consumers have been trained to seek out food with Barbie-doll features. 
Organic growers have higher rates of unmarketable blemished product which 
often limits sales revenue.  
 
 
 
Organic Agriculture in Food Quality 351 
14.6.2	 PROFITABILITY IS LOW BECAUSE FOOD PRICES ARE LOW 
AND THE LAND IS EXPENSIVE 
The vast majority of the farm producers we know have a normal day to day 
employment to help the agricultural production which they do tirelessly on 
evenings and throughout the week. Regardless of increment openness and 
several benefits which have been acquired as of late, actually most of them 
are yet not productive organizations. 
14.6.3	 ORGANIC FARMING ON COMMERCIAL LEVEL IS 
DIFFICULT 
Numerous organically harvested crops which are part of the monocropping 
system, unlike conventional crops however, utilize naturally enlisted pesti￾cides and composts. It is basic for natural cultivators to splash pesticides 
much more as often as possible as their customary partners to maintain 
control pest and disease infestations. Natural techniques are considerably 
more successful on a limited scale than on the commercial level. 
14.6.4	 THERE ARE MANY CONTRADICTORY CONCEPTS 
REGARDING ORGANIC FOOD PRODUCTS/CONSUMABLES 
Many consumers buy organic because it seems like the ethical choice. But 
how can big businesses (like Wal-Mart, General Mills, and Kellogg) grow 
organically, and be any better than the produce grown in your own town? 
Is organic really synonymous with pure? How do ethics of shopping for 
organics compare with shopping local or fair-trade? Perhaps we are ready for 
a new standard. How about farm-direct? 
14.6.5	 ORGANIC CERTIFICATION IS EXCLUSIVE 
Numerous small producers do not legitimize the incurred cost for obtaining 
organic certification. Some utilization strategies that are very appropriate for 
obtaining organic tags, yet does not fulfill the underlying criteria for organic 
tagging. On the off chance that you purchase directly from the producers 
shops or village markets, you can converse with the producers regarding the 
agronomic practices for producing the stuffs.  
352 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
14.7	 REGIONAL SUPPORT OF ORGANIC FARMING ACROSS THE 
GLOBE FOR PROVIDING SAFETY AND NUTRITIONAL FOOD 
The Chinese government, especially the local government, has been 
providing various supports for the development of OFS since the 1990s. 
OFS has been perceived by neighborhood governments for its potential in 
advancing economic provincial turn of events (Aijuan, 2015). It is normal 
for nearby governments to encourage land access of agribusinesses by 
arranging land renting with neighborhood ranchers. The public authority 
likewise sets up show natural nurseries, gives preparing to natural food 
organizations to pass affirmations, and sponsors natural certificate 
expenses, bug repellent lights, and natural manure, etc. The public authority 
has likewise been assuming a functioning part in showcasing natural items 
through getting sorted out natural food exhibitions and marking upholds 
(Scott et al., 2015). 
In India, in 2016, the northern territory of Sikkim accomplished its 
objective of changing over existing homestead grounds to 100% OFS 
(Hindu Business Line, 2010). Different provinces of India, including Kerala 
(Martin, 2016), Mizoram, Goa, Rajasthan, and Meghalaya, have likewise 
announced their expectations to move to completely natural development 
(Indian Express, 2014; Paull, 2017). The South Indian state Andhra Pradesh 
is likewise advancing OFS, particularly zero budget natural farming (ZBNF) 
which is a type of regenerative agribusiness (Naresh et al., 2018). The 
Dominican Republic has effectively changed over a lot of its banana yield 
to natural (Paull, 2017). The Dominican Republic represents 55% of the 
world’s confirmed natural bananas (Paull, 2017). 
In Thailand, the Institute for Sustainable Agricultural Communities 
(ISAC) was set up in 1991 to advance OFS (among other feasible horticul￾tural practices). The public objective by means of the National Plan for OFS 
is to achieve, by 2021, 1.3 million rai of naturally cultivated land. Another 
objective is for 40% of the produce from these farmlands to be burned 
through locally (City Life-Chiang Mai (Thailand), 2017). Much advance￾ment has been made (City Life-Chiang Mai (Thailand), 2017). For instance, 
numerous natural ranches have grown, developing produce going from 
mangos-teenager to stinky bean. A portion of the homesteads have likewise 
settled schooling communities to advance and share their OFS methods and 
information. For expanding the showcasing offices for OFS items, the public 
authority has been set up in excess of 18 natural business sectors (ISAC￾connected) in Chiang Mai Province of Thailand.  
Organic Agriculture in Food Quality 353 
14.8 CONCLUSIONS
 
To satisfy the growing demand of food for the increasing population in the 
world, modern agricultural practices such as inorganic synthetic chemicals 
and various farm machineries were introduced in crop production. However, 
these new farming inputs and machineries have been found to cause serious 
short and longer-term side effects to the environment, human health, and 
biodiversity. Furthermore, these practices also cause degradation of soil 
health and other natural resources and thus unsuitable for sustainable 
agriculture. To overcome these challenges, OFS has been introduced in 
the early 20th century as a suitable alternative to the modern agriculture for 
the sustainable production of safe food without affecting the environment 
and human health. In the OFS, agricultural inputs are generally obtained 
from of the organic origins and should involve diversified crops with crop 
rotation and companion planting for maintaining agroecosystem through 
encouraging interior self-regulation for using synthetic agricultural inputs. 
Discussion in this comprehensive review revealed that the OFS system 
is environment-friendly and good for human health and biodiversity. The 
information discussed in this review should be useful for the safe and 
sustainable production of crops using OFS in the era of changing climate. 
Although the OFS system works well in some developed countries as their 
population is declining day by day, advanced research is needed to improve 
the productivity OFS to ensure the food and nutritional security of the ever￾increasing population in the developing countries from the decreasing areas 
of cultivable land. 
KEYWORDS 
• environmentally friendly 
• food quality 
• food safety 
• integrated pest management 
• millennium development goals 
• national organic program
 
• organic agriculture
 354 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
REFERENCES 
ACRES-Magazine, (2020). What is Eco-Agriculture? Acres, USA. https://www.acresusa.com/ 
pages/what-is-eco-agriculture (accessed on 13 July 2021). 
Africa Fertilizer Summit, (2006). The New Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD), 
9–13 June 2006, Abuja, Nigeria. https://web.archive.org/web/20100304023531/http:// 
www.africafertilizersummit.org/ (accessed on 13 July 2021). 
Aijuan, C., (2015). China’s Path in Developing Organic Agriculture: Opportunities and 
Implications for Small-scale Farmers and Rural Development. PhD Thesis, University 
of Waterloo. 
Arsenault, C., (2014). Only 60 years of Farming Left if Soil Degradation Continues. Scientific 
American. https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/only-60-years-of-farming-left-if￾soil-degradation-continues/ (accessed on 13 July 2021). 
Barański, M., Srednicka-Tober, D., Volakakis, N., Seal, C., Sanderson, R., Stewart, G. B., 
Benbrook, C., et al., (2014). Higher antioxidant and lower cadmium concentrations and 
lower incidence of pesticide residues in organically grown crops: A systematic literature 
review and meta-analyses. The British Journal of Nutrition, 112(5), 794–811. doi: https:// 
doi.org/10.1017/S0007114514001366. 
Bengtsston, J., Ahnström, J., & Weibull, A., (2005). The effects of organic agriculture on 
biodiversity and abundance: A meta-analysis. Journal of Applied Ecology, 42(2), 
261–269. doi: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2664.2005.01005.x. 
Bhatt, R., Hossain, A., & Hasanuzzaman, M., (2020b). Adaptation strategies to mitigate the 
evapotranspiration for sustainable crop production: A perspective of rice-wheat cropping 
system. Agronomic Crops: Management Practices (Vol. 2, pp. 559–582). Springer Nature, 
Switzerland. doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-32-9783-8. 
Bhatt, R., Hossain, A., & Singh, P., (2020a). Scientific interventions to improve land and 
water productivity for climate smart agriculture in South-Asia. Agronomic Crops: 
Management Practices (Vol. 2, pp. 499–558). Springer-Nature, Switzerland. https://doi. 
org/10.1007/978-981-32-9783-8. 
Blair, R., (2012). Organic Production and Food Quality: A Down to Earth Analysis. Wiley￾Blackwell, Oxford, UK. 
Blakemore, R. J., (2000). Ecology of earthworms under the ‘Haughley Experiment’ of organic 
and conventional management regimes. Biological Agriculture and Horticulture, 18(2), 
141–159. doi: https://doi.org/10.1080/01448765.2000.9754876. 
Bourn, D., & Prescott, J., (2002). A comparison of the nutritional value, sensory qualities, and 
food safety of organically and conventionally produced foods. Critical Review in Food 
Science and Nutrition, 42(1), 1–34. doi: https://doi.org/10.1080/10408690290825439. 
Brandt, K., & Mølgaard, J. P., (2001). Organic agriculture: Does it enhance or reduce the nutritional 
value of plant foods? The Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture, 81, 924–931. 
Brown, K., (2008). New Zealand’s Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry Sector Performance 
Policy. MAF Policy, Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, Wellington, New Zealand. 
https://web.archive.org/web/20081015111550/http://www.maf.govt.nz/mafnet/rural-nz/ 
sustainable-resource-use/organic-production/organic-farming-in-nz/org10005.htm 
(accessed on 13 July 2021). 
Byerlee, D., & Alex, G., (2005). Organic Farming: A Contribution to Sustainable Poverty 
Alleviation in Developing Countries. German NGO Forum on Environment and Develop￾ment, Bonn, Misereor, Naturland, EED, NABU and WWF. Organic Agriculture in Food Quality 355 
City Life-Chiang Mai (Thailand). (2017). Understanding the complexities of organic farming 
in Thailand: Does organic farming exist in Thailand. https://www.chiangmaicitylife. 
com/clg/business/agriculture/understanding-the-complexities-of-organic-farming-in￾thailand/ (accessed on 13 July 2021). 
Coleman, E., (1995). The New Organic Grower: A Master’s Manual of Tools and Techniques 
for the Home and Market Gardener (2nd edn., pp. 65, 108). 
Colom-Gorgues, A., (2009). The challenges of organic production and marketing in Europe 
and Spain: Innovative marketing for the future with quality and safe food products. 
Journal of International Food and Agribusiness Marketing, 21, 166–190. doi: https://doi. 
org/10.1080/08974430802589675. 
Colorado State University, (2020). Some Pesticides Permitted in Organic Gardening. 
Colorado State University Cooperative Extension, Fort Collins, Colorado, USA. https:// 
denver.extension.colostate.edu/programs/horticulture/ (accessed on 13 July 2021). 
Conford, P., (2001). The Origins of the Organic Movement. Glasgow, Great Britain: Floris 
Books. 
Crowder, D. W., & Reganold, J. P., (2015). Financial competitiveness of organic agriculture 
on a global scale. Proc. Natl. Acad Sci. USA, 112(24), 7611–7616. 
Dalgaard, T., Halberg, N., & Porter, J. R., (2001). A model for fossil energy use in Danish 
agriculture used to compare organic and conventional farming. Agriculture, Ecosystems, 
Environment, 87(1), 51–65. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0167-8809(00)00297-8. 
Dobbs, T. L., & Smolik, J. D., (1996). Productivity and profitability of conventional and alter￾native farming systems: A long-term on-farm paired comparison. Journal of Sustainable 
Agriculture, 91(1), 63–79. 
Drinkwater, L. E., Wagoner, P., & Sarrantonio, M., (1998). Legume-based cropping systems 
have reduced carbon and nitrogen losses. Nature, 396, 262–265. 
FAO, (2007). Organic Agriculture Can Contribute to Fighting Hunger. Food and Agricultural 
Organization of United Nations, Rome, Italy. http://www.fao.org/newsroom/en/ 
news/2007/1000726/index.html (accessed on 13 July 2021). 
FAO, (2013). Overcoming Smallholder Challenges with Biotechnology. Food and Agricultural 
Organization of United Nations, Rome, Italy. http://www.fao.org/news/story/en/item/ 
202820/icode/ (accessed on 13 July 2021). 
FAO, (2020). Organic Agriculture. FAO-Working Group on Organic Agriculture. FAO, Rome, 
Italy. http://www.fao.org/organicag/oa-faq/oa-faq5/en/ (accessed on 13 July 2021). 
FiBL, (2020). Global Organic Area Continues to Grow-Over 71.5 Million Hectares of Farmland 
are Organic. FiBL and IFOAM. https://www.fibl.org/en/info-center/news/global-organic￾area-continues-to-grow-over-71-5-million-hectares-of-farmland-are-organic.html 
(accessed on 13 July 2021). 
Fließbach, A., Oberholzer, H., Gunst, L., & Mäder, P., (2006). Soil organic matter and 
biological soil quality indicators after 21 years of organic and conventional farming. 
Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment, 118(1–4), 273–284. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
agee. 2006.05.022. 
Gabriel, D., Roschewitz, I., Tscharntke, T., & Thies, C., (2006). Beta diversity at different 
spatial scales: Plant communities in organic and conventional agriculture. Ecological 
Applications, 16(5), 2011–21. 
Gold, M. V., (2020). What is Organic Production? National Agricultural Library, USDA. 
https://www.nal.usda.gov/afsic/organic-productionorganic-food-information-access￾tools (accessed on 13 July 2021). 356 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
Goldberg, B., (2007). The Hypocrisy of Organic Farmers. AgBioWorld. http://www.agbioworld. 
org/biotech-info/articles/biotech-art/hypocrisy.html (accessed on 13 July 2021). 
Gordon, I., (2017). Reproductive Technologies in Farm Animals (p. 10). CABI. 
Green, M., & Maynard, R., (2006). The employment benefits of organic farming. Aspects of 
Applied Biology, 79, 51–55. 
Gurung, B., (2011). Sikkim Races on Organic Route. Telegraph India. https://www.telegraphindia. 
com/states/west-bengal/sikkim-races-on-organic-route/cid/478489 (accessed on 13 July 2021). 
Halberg, N., (2006). Global Development of Organic Agriculture: Challenges and Prospects 
(p. 297). CAB International, Wallingford. 
Halberg, N., Alrøe, H. F., & Kristensen, E. S., (2005). Synthesis: Perspectives for organic 
agriculture in a global context. In: Halberg, N., Alrøe, H. F., Knudsen, M. T., & Kristensen, 
E. S., (eds.), Global Development of Organic Agriculture: Challenges and Promises (pp. 
344–368). CAB International, Wallingford. 
Hansen, B., Alrøe, H. J., & Kristensen, E. S., (2001). Approaches to assess the environmental 
impact of organic farming with particular regard to Denmark. Agriculture, Ecosystems 
and Environment, 83(1, 2), 11–26. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0167-8809(00)00257-7. 
Heckman, J., (2007). A History of Organic Farming: Transitions from Sir Albert Howard’s 
War in the Soil to the USDA National Organic Program. The Weston A. Price Foundation, 
Washington. https://www.westonaprice.org/health-topics/farm-ranch/a-history-of-organic￾farming-transitions-from-sir-albert-howards-war-in-the-soil-to-the-usda-national-organic￾program/ (accessed on 13 July 2021). 
Helga, W., Julia, L., & Robert, H., (2013). The World of Organic Agriculture: Statistics 
and Emerging Trends 2013. Research Institute of Organic Agriculture (FiBL) and the 
International Federation of Organic Agriculture Movements (IFOAM). 
Henckel, L., (2015). Organic fields sustain weed meta-community dynamics in farmland 
landscapes. Proceedings of the Royal Society B, 282(1808), 20150002. doi: https://doi. 
org/10.1098/rspb.2015.0002. 
Hepperly, P., Jeff, M., & Dave, W., (2008). Developments in Organic No-till Agriculture (pp. 
16–19). Acres USA: The Voice of Eco-Agriculture. 
Hindu Business Line, (2010). Sikkim ‘Livelihood Schools’ to Promote Organic Farming. https:// 
www.thehindubusinessline.com/todays-paper/tp-economy/Sikkim-lsquolivelihood￾schools-to-promote-organic-farming/article20031763.ece (accessed on 13 July 2021). 
Hine, R., & Pretty, J., (2006). Capacity Building Study 3: Organic Agriculture and Food Security 
in East Africa. United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) and 
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP). http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/ 
download?doi=10.1.1.535.1631&rep=rep1&type=pdf (accessed on 13 July 2021). 
Hole, D. G., Perkins, A. J., Wilson, J. D., Alexander, I. H., Grice, P. V., & Evans, A. D., (2005). 
Does organic farming benefit biodiversity? Biological Conservation, 122(1), 113–130. 
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biocon.2004.07.018. 
Horne, P. A., (2008). Integrated Pest Management for Crops and Pastures (p. 2). CSIRO 
Publishing. 
Howden, D., (2008). Organic Farming Could Feed Africa. The Independent. http:// 
www.panna.org/sites/default/files/imported/files/IndependentOrganicFarms 
CouldFeedAfrica20081022.pdf (accessed on 13 July 2021). 
IFAD (International Fund for Agricultural Development), (2007). Organic Agriculture and 
Poverty Reduction in Asia (2005). China and India Focus. Organic Agriculture in Food Quality 357 
IFOAM-Organics International, (2008). Concept of Organic Agriculture. https://www.ifoam. 
bio/why-organic/organic-landmarks/definition-organic (accessed on 13 July 2021). 
Indian Express, (2014). CM: Will Get Total Organic Farming State Tag by 2016. https://www. 
newindianexpress.com/cities/kochi/2014/nov/07/CM-Will-Get-Total-Organic-Farming￾State-Tag-by-2016-679699.html (accessed on 13 July 2021). 
Johnston, A. E., (1986). Soil organic-matter, effects on soils and crops. Soil Use Management, 
2(3), 97–105. doi: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1475-2743.1986.tb00690.x. 
Kahl, J., Busscher, N., & Ploeger, A., (2010). Questions on the validation of holistic methods 
of testing organic food quality. Biological Agriculture and Horticulture, 27, 81–94. 
King, F. H., (2004). Farmers of Forty Centuries: Organic Farming in China, Korea, and 
Japan. Courier Corporation. 
Kirchmann, H., & Bergstrom, L., (2008). Organic Crop Production-Ambitions and Limitations 
(pp. 1–2). Springer Science & Business Media. 
Kirchmann, H., Bergström, L., Kätterer, T., Mattsson, L., & Gesslein, S., (2007). Comparison 
of long-term organic and conventional crop-livestock systems on a previously nutrient￾depleted soil in Sweden. Agronomy Journal, 99(4), 960–972. doi: https://doi.org/10.2134/ 
agronj2006.0061. 
Kristiansen, P., Taji, A., & Reganold, J., (2006). Organic Agriculture: Opportunities and 
Challenges (pp. 421–441). Organic Agriculture: A Global Perspective. CSIRO Publishing, 
Australia. 
Leonard, A., (2007). Save the Rain Forest-Boycott Organic? How The World Works. https:// 
www.salon.com/2006/12/11/borlaug/ (accessed on 13 July 2021). 
Lockie, S., (2006). Going Organic: Mobilizing Networks for Environmentally Responsible 
Food Production (p. 239). Wallingford: CABI. 
Lotter, D., (2003). Organic agriculture. Journal of Sustainable Agriculture, 21(4), 59. doi: 
https://doi.org/10.1300/J064v21n04. 
Markandya, A., Setboonsarng, S., Qiao, Y. H., Songkranok, A. R., & Stefan, S., (2015). 
The costs of achieving the millennium development goals through adopting organic 
agriculture. In: Setboonsarng, S., & Markandya, A., (eds.), Organic Agriculture and Post￾2015 Development Goals: Building on the Comparative Advantage of Poor Farmers (pp. 
49–78). Manila: ADB. 
Marshall, G., (1991). Organic farming: Should government give it more technical support? 
Review of Marketing and Agricultural Economics, 59(3), 283–296. 
Martin, A., & Kim, S., (2008). Sticker Shock in the Organic Aisles. New York Times. 
https://www.nytimes.com/2008/04/18/business/18organic.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0 
(accessed on 13 July 2021). 
Martin, H., (2009). Introduction to Organic Farming. Ontario Ministry of Agriculture, Food 
and Rural Affairs. http://www.omafra.gov.on.ca/english/crops/facts/09-077.htm#define 
(accessed on 13 July 2021). 
Martin, K. A., (2016). State to Switch Fully to Organic Farming by 2016. https://www. 
thehindu.com/todays-paper/tp-national/tp-kerala/state-to-switch-fully-to-organic￾farming-by-2016-mohanan/article6517859.ece (accessed on 13 July 2021). 
McBride, W. D., & Greene, C. R., (2013). Organic data and research from the ARMS survey: 
Findings on competitiveness of the organic soybean sector. Crop Management, 12(1), 1–11. 
McConnell, D. J., Dharmapala, K. A. E., & Attanayake, S. R., (2017). The Forest Farms of 
Kandy: And other Gardens of Complete Design. Routledge. 358 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
McEvoy, M., (2018). Organic 101: Allowed and Prohibited Substances. USDA Blog. https:// 
www.usda.gov/media/blog/2012/01/25/organic-101-allowed-and-prohibited-substances 
(accessed on 13 July 2021). 
McGill University, (2012). Can Organic Food Feed the World? New Study Sheds Light on 
Debate Over Organic vs. Conventional Agriculture. Science Daily. www.sciencedaily. 
com/releases/2012/04/120425140114.htm (accessed on 13 July 2021). 
Meena, R. P., Meena, H. P., & Meena, R. S., (2013). Organic Farming: Concept and Components 
(Vol. 1, No. 4, pp. 1–14). Popular Kheti. 
Meleca, (2008). The Organic Answer to Climate Change. https://web.archive.org/web/2008 
1211111856/http://www.organicguide.com/community/education/the-organic-answer￾to-climate-change/ (accessed on 13 July 2021). 
Musick, M. (2021). WA Tilth Association History. Washington Tilth. Retrieved from: http:// 
www.tilthalliance.org/about/abriefhistoryoftilth (accessed on 13 July 2021). 
Naresh, R. K., Vivek, M. K., Kumar, S., Chowdhary, U., Kumar, Y., Mahajan, N. C., Malik, 
M., et al., (2018). Zero budget natural farming viable for small farmers to empower food 
and nutritional security and improve soil health: A review. Journal of Pharmacognosy 
and Phytochemistry, 7(2), 1104–1118. 
Nayler, J., (2014). Second Thoughts About Organic Agriculture. Soil and health library. https:// 
web.archive.org/web/20140801061226/http://www.soilandhealth.org/01aglibrary/ 
Second.Thoughts.pdf (accessed on 13 July 2021). 
Niggli, U., Slabe, A., Schmid, O., Halberg, N., & Schlüter, M., (2008). Vision for an Organic 
Food and Farming Research Agenda 2025: Organic Knowledge for the Future (p. 
48). IFOAM-EU and FiBL. https://orgprints.org/13439/1/niggli-etal-2008-technology￾platform-organics.pdf (accessed on 13 July 2021). 
NPR, (2011). Public Health: Organic Pesticides: Not an Oxymoron. NPR Health Newsletter. 
https://www.npr.org/sections/health-shots/2011/06/18/137249264/organic-pesticides￾not-an-oxymoron (accessed on 13 July 2021). 
Paull, J., & Hennig, B., (2018). Maps of organic agriculture in Australia. Journal of Organics, 
5(1), 29–39. 
Paull, J., (2006). The farm as organism: The foundational idea of organic agriculture 
elementals. Journal of Bio-Dynamics Tasmania, 83, 14–18. 
Paull, J., (2007). Rachel carson: A voice for organics-the first hundred years. Journal of 
Bio-Dynamics Tasmania, (86), 37–41. 
Paull, J., (2010). From France to the world: The international federation of organic agriculture 
movements (IFOAM). Journal of Social Research and Policy, 1(2), 93–102. 
Paull, J., (2011a). The Betteshanger summer school: Missing link between biodynamic 
agriculture and organic farming. Journal of Organic Systems, 6(2), 13–26. 
Paull, J., (2011b). Biodynamic agriculture: The journey from Koberwitz to the World, 
1924–1938. Journal of Organic Systems, 6(1), 27–41. 
Paull, J., (2013a). Breslau (Wrocław): In the footsteps of Rudolf Steiner. Journal of Bio￾Dynamics Tasmania, 110, 10–15. 
Paull, J., (2013b). Koberwitz (Kobierzyce): In the footsteps of Rudolf Steiner. Journal of 
Bio-Dynamics Tasmania, 109, 7–11. 
Paull, J., (2014). Lord Northbourne, the man who invented organic farming, a biography. 
Journal of Organic Systems, 9(1), 31–53. 
Paull, J., (2017). Four new strategies to grow the organic agriculture sector. AGROFOR￾International Journal, 2, 61–70. Organic Agriculture in Food Quality 359 
Paull, J., (2019). Organic Agriculture in Australia: Attaining the Global Majority (51%). 
Journal of Environment Protection and Sustainable Development, 5(2), 70–74. 
Paulson, T., (2008). The Lowdown on Topsoil: It’s Disappearing: Disappearing Dirt Rivals 
Global Warming as an Environmental Threat. https://www.seattlepi.com/national/article/ 
The-lowdown-on-topsoil-It-s-disappearing-1262214.php?source=mypi (accessed on 13 
July 2021). 
Perrings, C., Louise, J., Kamaljit, B. S., Lijbert, B., Brush, S., & Tom, G., (2006). Biodiversity 
in agricultural landscapes: Saving natural capital without losing interest. Conservation 
Biology, 20(2), 263–264. 
Pimentel, D., Berardi, G., & Fast, S., (1983). Energy efficiency of farming systems: Organic 
and conventional agriculture. Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment, 9(4), 359–372. 
Pimentel, D., Hepperly, P., Hanson, J., Douds, D., & Seidel, R., (2005). Environmental, 
energetic, and economic comparisons of organic and conventional farming systems. 
BioScience, 55(7), 573–582. 
Pretty, J. N., Morison, J. I. L., & Hine, R. E., (2003). Reducing food poverty by increasing 
agricultural sustainability in developing countries. Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environ￾ment, 95, 217–234. 
Pretty, J., Brett, C., Gee, D., Hine, R. E., Mason, C. F., Morison, J. I. L., Raven, H., Rayment, 
M. D., Van, D. B. G., et al., (2001). An assessment of the total external costs of UK 
agriculture. Agricultural Systems, 65(2), 113–136. doi:10.1016/S0308-521X(00)00031-7. 
Pugliese, P., (2001). Organic farming and sustainable rural development: A multifaceted and 
promising convergence. Sociologia Ruralis, 41(1), 112–130. 
Rigby, D., & Cáceres, D., (2001). Organic farming and the sustainability of agricultural 
systems. Agricultural Systems, 68(1), 21–40. 
Rodale Institute, (2014). Regenerative Organic Agriculture and Climate Change: A Down￾to-Earth Solution to Global Warming. https://rodaleinstitute.org/wp-content/uploads/ 
Regenerative-Organic-Agriculture-White-Paper.pdf (accessed on 13 July 2021). 
Rodale Institute, (2020). The Farming Systems Trial Rodale 30 Year Report. https:// 
rodaleinstitute.org/wp-content/uploads/fst-30-year-report.pdf (accessed on 13 July 2021). 
Scott, S., Si, Z., Schumilas, T., & Chen, A., (2018). Organic Food and Farming in China: 
Top-down and Bottom-up Ecological Initiatives. Routledge. 
Setboonsarng, S., (2015). Can ethical trade certification contribute to the attainment of 
the millennium development goals? A review of organic and fair-trade certification. 
In: Setboonsarng, S., & Markandya, A., (eds.), Organic Agriculture and Post-2015 
Development Goals: Building on the Comparative Advantage of Poor Farmers (pp. 
79–103). https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/publication/161042/organic-agriculture￾post-2015-development-goals.pdf (accessed on 13 July 2021). 
Singh, R. B., (2000). Environmental consequences of agricultural development: Case 
study from the green revolution state of Haryana, India. Agriculture, Ecosystem and 
Environment, 82, 97–103. 
Smith, H. G., Dänhardt, J., Lindström, Å., et al., (2010). Consequences of organic farming 
and landscape heterogeneity for species richness and abundance of farmland birds. 
Oecologia, 162, 1071–1079. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00442-010-1588-2. 
Smith-Spangler, C., Brandeau, M. L., Hunter, G. E., Bavinger, J. C., Pearson, M., Eschbach, 
P. J., Sundaram, V., et al., (2012). Are organic foods safer or healthier than conventional 
alternatives?: A systematic review. Annals of Internal Medicine, 157(5), 348–366. 
doi:10.7326/0003-4819-157-5-201209040-00007. 360 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
Steffanie, S., Zhenzhong, S., Theresa, S., & Aijuan, C., (2018). Organic Food and Farming 
in China: Top-down and Bottom-up Ecological Initiatives (1st edn., p. 236). Routledge. 
Stinner, D. H., (2007). The science of organic farming. In: Lockeretz, W., (ed.), Organic 
Farming: An International History (pp. 40–72). Oxford shire, UK: CAB International. 
Stolze, M., & Lampkin, N., (2009). Policy for organic farming: Rationale and concepts. Food 
Policy, 34(3), 237–244. 
Stolze, M., Piorr, A., Häring, A. M., & Dabbert, S., (2000). Environmental impacts of 
organic farming in Europe. Organic Farming in Europe: Economics and Policy (Vol. 6). 
Universität Hohenheim, Stuttgart-Hohenheim. 
Strochlic, R., & Sierra, L., (2007). Conventional, Mixed, and “Deregistered” Organic 
Farmers: Entry Barriers and Reasons for Exiting Organic Production in California (pp. 
1–43). California Institute for Rural Studies. http://ccwiki.pbworks.com/f/CAStudy￾Barriers-Organic-CIRS-2007.pdf (accessed on 13 July 2021). 
Tegtmeier, E. M., & Duffy, M., (2005). External costs of agricultural production in the United 
States. The Earthscan Reader in Sustainable Agriculture. https://www.organicvalley. 
coop/why-organic-valley/ (accessed on 13 July 2021). 
The Hindu, (2010). Sikkim to Become a Completely Organic State by 2015. https:// 
www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/agriculture/Sikkim-to-become-a-completely-organic￾state-by-2015/article15908694.ece (accessed on 13 July 2021). 
Tuomisto, H. L., Hodge, I. D., Riordan, P., & Macdonald, D. W., (2012). Does organic 
farming reduce environmental impacts?: A meta-analysis of European research. Journal 
of Environmental Management, 112, 309–320. 
UNEP, (2011). Towards a Green Economy: Pathways to Sustainable Development and 
Poverty Eradication. www.unep.org/greeneconomy (accessed on 13 July 2021). 
UNEP-UNCTAD, (2008). Organic Agriculture and Food Security in Africa. United Nations. 
https://unctad.org/en/docs/ditcted200715_en.pdf (accessed on 13 July 2021). 
University of Oxford, (2004). Organic Farms Not Necessarily Better for Environment. 
http://people.forestry.oregonstate.edu/steve-strauss/sites/people.forestry.oregonstate. 
edu.steve-strauss/files/Organic%20farms%20not%20necessarily%20better%20for%20 
environment%20-%20University%20of%20Oxford_2012.pdf (accessed on 13 July 2021). 
USDA, (2000). National Organic Program. Federal Register/Vol. 65, No. 246/Rules and regula￾tions. https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2000-12-21/pdf/00-32257.pdf (accessed on 
13 July 2021). 
USDA, (2016). USDA List of Allowed and Prohibited Substances in Organic Agriculture. 
USDA. https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?c=ecfr&SID=9874504b6f1025eb0e6b67cad 
f9d3b40&rgn=div6&view=text&node=7:3.1.1.9.32.7&idno=7 (accessed on 13 July 2021). 
USDA-ARS, (2007). Organic Farming Beats No-Till? Agricultural Research Magazine, 
USDA- Agricultural Research Service. https://www.ars.usda.gov/news-events/news/ 
research-news/2007/organic-farming-beats-no-till/ (accessed on 13 July 2021). 
USDSA, (2018). Guidance Natural Resources and Biodiversity Conservation (pp. 1–9). 
Agricultural Marketing Service. https://www.ams.usda.gov/sites/default/files/media/ 
NOP%205020%20Biodiversity%20Guidance%20Rev01%20%28Final%29.pdf 
(accessed on 13 July 2021). 
USEPA (United States Environmental Protection Agency), (2020). Organic Farming. https:// 
www.epa.gov/agriculture/organic-farming (accessed on 13 July 2021). Organic Agriculture in Food Quality 361 
Van, E. T., (2000). Species diversity as a task for organic agriculture in Europe. Agriculture, 
Ecosystems and Environment, 77(1, 2), 101–109. doi:10.1016/S0167-8809(99)00096-1. 
Vogt, G., (2007). Chapter 1: The origins of organic farming. In: Lockeretz, W., (ed.), Organic 
Farming: An International History (pp. 9–30). CABI Publishing, UK. 
Von, B. J., (2005). The World Food Situation: An Overview. Presentation to the CGIAR 
annual meeting, Marrakech (Morocco). 
Willer, H., & Yussefi, M., (2007). The current status of organic farming in the world-focus 
on developing countries. In: International Conference on Organic Agriculture and Food 
Security (pp. 12, 13). Rome, Italy. 
World Bank, (2008). Global Monitoring Report-2008: MDGs and the Environment: Agenda 
for Inclusive and Sustainable Development. Washington, DC: World Bank. 
World Watch Institute, (2000). State of the World 2000. Norton Publishing, New York. 
World Watch Institute, (2006). Can Organic Farming Feed Us All? (Vol. 19, No. 3) World 
Watch Magazine. https://web.archive.org/web/20140209135230/http://www.worldwatch. 
org/node/4060 (accessed on 13 July 2021). 
WTO (World Trade Organization), (2020). Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and 
Phytosanitary Measures. World Trade Organization. https://www.wto.org/english/docs_e/ 
legal_e/15sps_01_e.htm (accessed on 13 July 2021). 
Yadav, A. K., (2017). Organic Agriculture-Concept, Scenario, Principals and Practices. 
National Project on Organic farming, Department of Agriculture and Cooperation, 
Government of India.  
 
CHAPTER 15
 
ORGANIC FOODS IN SUB-SAHARAN 
AFRICA: HEALTH IMPACT, FARMERS’ 
EXPERIENCES, AND INTERNATIONAL 
TRADE 
OSEBHAHIEMEN ODION IKHIMIUKOR,1 
OLUWADAMILOLA MATHEW MAKINDE,2 
CHIBUZOR-ONYEMA IHUOMA EBERE,2
 TOBA SAMUEL ANJORIN,3 
and FAPOHUNDA STEPHEN OYEDELE2 
1
Environmental Microbiology and Biotechnology Laboratory, 
Department of Microbiology, University of Ibadan, Nigeria 
2
Department of Microbiology, School of Science and Technology, 
Babcock University, Ilishan-Remo, Nigeria 
3
Department of Crop Protection, Faculty of Agriculture, 
University of Abuja, Nigeria 
ABSTRACT 
The organic food industry is a rapidly growing sector in Africa, with strong 
links to economic and socio-cultural development. Organic food produc￾tion involves an ecosystem-friendly approach that harnesses biodiversity, 
the biogeochemical cycles as well as the soil’s biological activity in the 
production of fresh food void of chemical agricultural inputs. This chapter 
aims at discussing organic foods vis-à-vis its health and economic impact on 
consumers and producers within Africa with focus on creating awareness on 
practices and regulations guiding it. Agricultural practices in Africa relies 
heavily on chemical inputs to boost food production. Toxic concentrations of 
these chemicals cause an imbalance in the soil’s natural ecosystem and may  
364 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
eventually affect food quality to be unsuitable for international trade. Despite 
efforts that gave birth to the strategic plan (2015–2025) for the development 
of organic agriculture in Africa, the continent scores low (26%) of the total 
number of producers of organic food worldwide. It is therefore the intention 
of the authors to bring to the consciousness of the continent these statistics as 
well as provide ways by which these statistics can be improved to guarantee 
safety, food security and foreign exchange for Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA). 
15.1 INTRODUCTION 
The Sub-Saharan region of Africa (SSA) accommodates over 950 million 
people. The population in SSA is projected to increase by 22% by 2050 
(FAOSTAT, 2015). Adequate nourishment of the ever-increasing population in 
SSA is a challenge. Despite a reduction in the rate of undernourishment from 
33% between 1990 and 1992 to 23% between 2014 and 2016, this region is 
still rated as highly undernourished among developing countries (FAOSTAT, 
2015). Food insecurity in this region has been linked with peculiar challenges, 
one of which is low agricultural productivity. Close to 70% of the African 
population are involved with one form of agriculture or the other, as highlighted 
by AGRA (2017), and reports show that the major farming systems in this 
region are crop production and livestock management (AGRA, 2016). Current 
agricultural practices in SSA fail in achieving food sufficiency and security. 
From an agricultural perspective, there is a drastic need for changes in the food 
system. There is the need to produce more food at affordable prices, ensuring 
better livelihoods to farmers and the people while reducing the environmental 
cost of agriculture (Agama, 2015). 
Organic farming is described by the Directorate-General for Agriculture 
and Rural Development of the European Commission (2009) as a variant 
of agriculture that utilizes eco-friendly, traditional methods in the cultiva￾tion, control of pest, and animal husbandry without the use of chemical 
farm inputs. It is simply characterized by the exclusion of chemicals (i.e., 
fertilizers or pesticides) and total reliance on natural processes or products 
to ensure food production (IFOAM, 2010). This system of farming aimed at 
producing food with minimal harm to ecosystems, animals, or humans, is 
the most prominent of the alternatives and is often proposed as a solution for 
more sustainable agriculture (Agama, 2015). 
Organic farming draws its origins from concepts established over a 
century ago, borne out of a desire for efficient nutrient utilization on the 
farm (Lockeretz, 2007). In the 1940s, the term organic farming was coined Organic Foods in Sub-Saharan Africa 365 
to depict the farm as a biological system and not on the basis of the artificial 
inputs employed in food production today (Kuepper, 2010). This biological 
system comprises the minerals within the soil, its organic matter, soil micro￾flora as well as the soil’s flora and fauna and how they interact to create a 
stable system. In this biological system, resources internally generated as 
well as the biogeochemical cycle are of paramount importance (Letourneau 
and Bothwell, 2008). Biogeochemical cycling of resources in the soil’s 
ecosystem has been significantly influenced by climate change which conse￾quently affects organic farming. Evolving issues over the years, especially 
those of environmental concern such as climate change, have affected the 
way organic farming is perceived by placing a huge premium on enhancing 
the cultivation of crops using biological and eco-friendly inputs (USDA/ 
AMS, 2000). 
Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) is faced with numerous challenges of which 
poor policies on agriculture leads to malnutrition and loss of productivity 
(Makinde et al., 2017). These poor policy decisions have also taken its toll 
on organic farming in recent years. For instance, the amount of arable land 
devoted to the practice of organic farming, despite huge growth in research 
and awareness created concerning its benefits, can be greatly expanded 
(De Ponti et al., 2012; Reganold and Wacher, 2016). In relation to the total 
amount of land the world over devoted to organic farming (43.7 million 
hectares) as at 2014, Africa had the lowest amount (3%, 1.3 million hectares) 
despite its vast amount of suitable land for agriculture which is reported to 
be 1031 million hectares (FAO, 2003). Uganda leads the continent with a 
meager 240,000 hectares of arable land devoted to organic farming (Willer 
and Lernoud, 2016). 
In 2014, organic farming in SSA encouraged the cultivation of cash 
crops like coffee and olives (Willer and Lernoud, 2016). Each of these 
crops occupied 47% and 19% respectively of the total landmass available. 
The major cash crop cultivated on the continent was coffee covering about 
241,500 hectares (Willer and Lernoud, 2016). Organic crops cultivated by 
organic farming on the continent include: oilseeds, cotton, cocoa, tea, fruits, 
medicinal and aromatic plants, olives, sesame, cereals, oils, nuts, spices, and 
vegetables. About 123,000 and 68,000 hectares of land were devoted to the 
cultivation of oilseeds and cotton, respectively (Willer and Lernoud, 2016). 
The statistics of organic farming in SSA as it concerns food security and 
economic enhancement is quite poor. It is, therefore, the intention of the 
authors to bring the Sub-Saharan populace to the consciousness of the poor 
state of regional agriculture, its implications and possible ways for improve￾ment to guarantee safety, food security, and foreign exchange.  
366 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
In SSA, where the focus is on improved nutrition, food security and 
sustainable agriculture, organic farming in the form of organoponic systems 
(which is adaptable to urban areas) can be explored to ensure high yield 
and healthy food products. Organoponics is eco-friendly and improves the 
microbial diversity of the soil which in turn influences soil fertility posi￾tively through the use of organic control systems (Prain, 2006). This form of 
organic farming has been successful in Venezuela and Cuba with the active 
support of their various governments (Orsini et al., 2013) and possesses huge 
potential if adopted to provide food for the people of SSA. It is encouraged 
that government at all levels on the continent show strong political will to 
support the furtherance of organic farming in ensuring food security within 
the continent. 
15.2 AWARENESS PROFILE AND INTERNATIONAL TRADE 
Organic food production in SSA is largely practiced by small scale farmers 
who are of the low-income class (Kisaka-lwayo and Obi, 2014). Despite the 
growing popularity and inherent potentials of organic food production in 
SSA, there are concerns over its ability to sustain and ensure food security in 
the region (Issaka et al., 2016). 
Data on the production of organic foods in SSA is primarily collated 
by agencies of government as well as private sector organizations who are 
stakeholders in the business of organic farming. These efforts have improved 
the quality and availability of data in recent years within SSA. The data 
revealed that Uganda has the highest number of organic farms in Africa to 
the tune 187,893 farms, closely followed by Ethiopia and Tanzania with 
100,000 and 85,366 farms, respectively (Willer and Lernoud, 2016). 
Although Ivory Coast, Ghana, and Nigeria are the leading producers of 
cocoa beans in the world, only 36% of organic cocoa is produced in SSA, 
notably from DR Congo and the United Republic of Tanzania (FAOSTAT, 
2015). Nigeria, a leading producer of pulses and vegetables, is reported to 
have little or no data on its organic cultivation of these crops (Rahmann et 
al., 2015). 
The biggest African clients are in Europe, where it has its largest market. 
In 2009, Uganda was reported to earn as much as 36.87 million US Dollars 
from export as well as programs sponsored by international agencies. 
Organic foods generated reported a profit of €10 million through exports 
from Tanzania to the EU and the America (Kledal and Kwai, 2010).  
 
 
 
Organic Foods in Sub-Saharan Africa 367 
15.3 NUTRITIONAL AND HEALTH IMPACTS
 
15.3.1 HIGHER YIELD 
Organic food production places a huge premium on the quality and yield 
of food crops. According to De Ponti et al. (2012), crops whose growth is 
properly managed under the organic method produce higher yields than 
those produced by chemical-driven agriculture. With the use of chemical 
agricultural inputs, yield was 6–11% less than organic production. The soil 
ecosystem also contributes to getting the best in organic farming (Lockeretz 
et al., 1981; Lotter et al., 2003). The ability of organic soil to retain water 
over a long period of time confers on it this advantage (Niggli, 2014). 
15.3.2 REDUCED PESTICIDE RESIDUES 
Organic farming has been confirmed through scientific reports to have little 
or no pesticide residues in the crops (Baker et al., 2002; Pussemier et al., 
2006; Smith-Spangler et al., 2012; Barański et al., 2014). A scary dimension 
was introduced when Curl et al. (2003); and Lu et al. (2006), reported that 
children who consumed conventionally produced foods had significantly 
high concentrations of pesticide residues in their urine. 
15.3.3 ENHANCED NUTRIENT QUALITY 
In terms of nutrition, existing literature has proven organic foods to surpass 
conventionally produced foods (SAOS, 2000; Brandt and Mølgaard, 2001; 
Worthington, 2001). Despite little or no premium placed on nutrients obtained 
from organic foods, they are reported to possess higher concentrations of 
vitamin C, antioxidants, and omega-3 fats compared to conventionally 
produced foods (Brandt et al., 2011; Smith-Spangler et al., 2012). 
With increasing production, marketing, and consumption of conventional 
foods, the occurrence of pesticides, fertilizers, and other contaminants in 
foods generally has also increased, leading to the preference of organic foods 
by individuals in recent times (Hurtado-Barroso et al., 2017). A number of 
factors have been linked to the preference in organic foods, for example, their 
environmental friendliness and health benefits (Dettmann and Dimitri, 2009; 
Padilla et al., 2013). Similarly, some studies have linked the consumption of 368 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
organic foods to health and lifestyle indicators, more physical activity, and 
lower body-mass index (BMI) than those who seldom or do not consume 
organic foods (Dimitri, 2009; Eisinger-Watzl et al., 2015; Brantsaeter et 
al., 2017). Many studies have shown that there is no significant difference 
between organic foods and conventional foods in terms of its core nutrient 
levels of carbohydrates, vitamins, and minerals (Williams, 2002; Matallana 
González et al., 2010), however, studies have also shown low levels of 
nitrate in the former than the latter (Worthington, 2001; Matallana González 
et al., 2010). This is a desirable quality as nitrates have been shown to be 
associated with a high risk of gastrointestinal cancer and increased risks 
of methemoglobinemia in infants (Forman and Silverstein, 2012). Higher 
vitamin C concentration has been observed in organic leafy vegetables like 
spinach, lettuce, and chard (21 out of 36 studies) (Williams, 2002). Some 
other studies have postulated health benefits due to antioxidants effects 
from organic foods as a result of their higher total phenol content as when 
compared to conventional foods (Asami et al., 2003). 
Differences in nutritional content in food has been argued to be a result of 
many factors, including geographic location, soil quality, climate condition, 
maturity, and time of harvest and storage conditions as well. Considering 
all these factors, concluding on nutritional differences may not be definitive 
with a report by Dangour (2009) highlighting high levels of nitrogen from 
conventionally produced foods when compared to organic foods, which in 
turn revealed high levels of phosphorus. 
The health benefits of organic foods could also be viewed from its 
compositional studies. The composition of dairy products, for example, is 
dependent upon various factors like genetic variability and cattle breed. 
However, milk produced both organically and conventionally has shown 
to contain the same protein, vitamin, lipid, and trace elements. In terms of 
microbial load, there is no evidence to prove that organic milk possesses high 
levels of contamination by pathogenic bacteria compared to convention￾ally produced milk, however, conventionally produced milk could contain 
antibiotic-resistant bacteria due to the use of antibiotics in animal husbandry 
(Forman and Silverstein, 2012). Hormones like estradiol and progesterone 
were lower in concentration in conventionally produced milk than in organic 
foods. 
An animal-based study described by Huber (2010), showed higher growth 
rate on animals which fed on conventional foods as against those fed organic 
foods, however, immune responsiveness and recovery was observed to be 
higher among those on organic foods. A number of studies have been made Organic Foods in Sub-Saharan Africa 369 
to buttress the health impact of organic foods as compared to conventional 
foods and they include: 
•	 Reduction of allergies among children (5–13) through the consump￾tion of organic foods according to the cross-sectional PARSIFAL 
study by Alfvén et al. (2006) and confirmed by Stenius (2011). 
•	 Lowered risk of eczema at 2 years among babies who consumed 
organic daily products according to the KOALA study by Alim et al. 
(1999); and Kummeling (2008). 
•	 Lower risk of being overweight (28% in women and 27% decrease 
in men) or obese among organic food consumers according to the 
Nutrient-Sainte study (Mie and Wivstad, 2015). 
•	 A study in the United Kingdom reported by Bradbury et al. (2014), 
described that there was no association between preference for organic 
foods and all forms of cancer; however, 9% risk increase was reported 
for organic food preference and breast cancer. 
Health implications resulting from pesticide ingestion ranges from 
neurotoxicity to its effect in human infertility through endocrine system 
disruption (Laster and Rea, 1983). The latter has been subjected to studies 
that came up with evidences of hormone synthesis disruption in male mice 
by the herbicide glyphosate. It was also shown that exposure either by inges￾tion or occupationally to xeno-estrogen pesticides can affect the human male 
offspring’s reproductive system (North and Golding, 2000). Savona (1998) 
also reported that a reduction in the consumption of conventionally produced 
foods by women presenting with signs of hormonal instability aids them in 
regaining hormonal balance. 
It was established that exposure to a combination of pesticides causes 
an increased incidence of birth defects (Garry et al., 1996). The association 
between exposures to pesticides and the risk of cancer has also been consid￾ered. And it was shown that Canadian farmers with exposures to pesticides 
had higher incidences of cancer (Wiggle et al., 1990). Correlations between 
organic food consumption and sperm health was also established to show 
that men who were involved with organic farming and consumed organic 
foods had higher sperm concentrations than control groups (Abell, 1994; 
Chaudhary et al., 2015). 
There is a paucity of data on the health impact of consumption of organic 
foods as compared to conventionally produced foods in SSA, however, 
emphasis elsewhere has been on the occurrence of pesticides and their levels 
of occurrence in foods generally and this has raised some concerns on food  
 
 
370 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
safety (Betarbet et al., 2000; Trewavas, 2001). The health impact of organic 
foods is not conclusive, however, the negative health consequences of pesti￾cides either individually or in combination give organic foods an edge over 
conventional foods. 
15.4 MICROBE-ORGANIC FOOD RELATIONS 
Soil which is home to a wide variety of microbes, is notably the first require￾ment in organic farming. Soil health, is therefore of paramount essence as its 
unique features-one of which is compost, forms the foundation of organically 
grown food. Organic farming being an alternative to the use of synthetic 
pesticides and fertilizers for optimal crop yield and reduced environmental 
pollution, has shown huge success and growing awareness throughout the 
globe. One of the pivotal pillars in its success is the significant role played by 
the microbial population in the soil. Microorganisms play important roles in 
terms of pest and disease control as well as sustainable fertility management. 
Microbial biomass present in soil comprises of fungi, protozoa, algae, yeast, 
eubacteria, actinomycetes, and archaea. Their populations, however, vary 
due to factors such as soil texture and structure, pH, air/moisture content, 
temperature, and organic matter (Zarb et al., 2005). Their various contribu￾tions to organic farming are highlighted in subsections. 
15.4.1 SOIL ENRICHMENT 
Microorganisms enrich soil through various ways, including their posses￾sion of the enzyme urease, which helps in the degradation or hydrolysis of 
organic nitrogen (Zarb et al., 2005). In addition, microorganisms have the 
ability to melt and take up phosphate which is usually found in low concen￾trations in soils where conventional farming is practiced. Microbes known 
for phosphate uptake include vesicular-arbuscular mycorrhizas (VAM), 
Ecto-mycorrhizas, some fungi (Fusarium, Aspergillus, and Penicillium) and 
some bacteria (Bacillus and Pseudomonas) (Wang et al., 2019). 
15.4.2 SOIL STABILITY 
Microorganisms also play important roles in soil formation and stability 
by binding soil aggregates with hyphae and exudates secreted by them.  
 
 
Organic Foods in Sub-Saharan Africa 371 
This is exemplified in the stimulated attachment of Pasteuria penetrans (a 
parasite of plant-parasitic nematode) by a microbial population (including 
mycorrhizal and nematophagous fungi) to the nematodes thereby reducing 
nematode infection (Ozturk et al., 2017). 
15.4.3 ANTAGONISM AND ANTIBIOSIS 
Soil organisms also play antagonistic roles against other organisms. For 
example, over 100 species of fungi are known to trap and prey on nema￾todes (Zarb, 2005), while many other fungi are hyperparasitic to other 
fungi (Toppo and Naik, 2015). Microorganisms such as streptomycetes, 
filamentous bacteria, which are known soil saprophytes are also associated 
with antibiotic and extracellular hydrolytic enzymes. The microbial secre￾tions according to Samac et al. (2003) significantly contribute to a disease 
management system due to their ability to colonize plants and bring about a 
decrease in damage from a wide range of pathogens. 
The plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria (PGPR) has the ability to 
suppress plant pathogens through antibiosis, hormone production, and compe￾tition with other pathogens for basic resources. Some of these bacteria are 
also known to promote root and shoot growth, bring about nodule formation 
and mycorrhizal establishment (Nkebiwe et al., 2016; Thonar et al., 2017; 
Mpanga et al., 2018). 
15.4.4 DISEASE AND PEST CONTROL 
Microorganisms control plant pests and disease through a number of ways 
which are discussed in subsections. 
15.4.4.1 COMPETITION 
This is achieved when high compost or organic matter is introduced into 
soil, thereby causing a rise in carbon source availability leading to increased 
indigenous microbial activity. With a raise in native microbial biomass, 
competition for basic resources with pathogens is subsequently increased, 
ultimately leading to outright stamping out of pathogens within an organi￾cally treated farm field (Mohammadi, 2013).  
 
372 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
15.4.4.2 PROTECTION 
Studies have highlighted the use of microbes to protect seedlings against a 
damping off disease caused by a Pythium species (Carr, 2016). Disinfecting 
and subsequently inoculating seeds can help avoid or prevent seed-borne 
diseases such as Fusarium (Nebert et al., 2016). Specific organisms such as 
Trichoderma, Pseudomonas are known to protect seeds and seedlings from 
various diseases (Trabelsi and Mhamdi, 2013; Mpanga et al., 2018). 
In addition, some organisms have introduced certain structural changes 
in their roots, thereby creating physical barriers to pathogen entry. Some of 
these structural changes as reported by Eulenstein et al. (2016) occurs when 
associations between soil fungi and plant roots (as Arbuscular mycorrhiza) 
protects host plant from drought while enhancing nutrient uptake and plant 
growth even under water stress conditions (Tauschke et al., 2015; Lopez￾Raez, 2016). 
Microorganisms also have high tolerance for heavy metals (HMs), 
thereby conferring protection to the plants from the uptake of HMs by way 
of adsorption or various forms of fungal metabolism. Compost, as a major 
ingredient in organic farming, can serve as a means of inoculation of soil 
microbiota which in turn carry out unique activities for desired results. The 
use of compost extract can inhibit weed seed germination, thereby reducing 
weed competition (Mohammadi, 2013). Generally, organic farming system 
(OFS) maintains organic matter levels through practices such as mixed 
farming, rotations, recycling compost, farmyard and green manures (GMs). 
Proprietary cultures in the form of root dips, feed additives and sprays are 
also encouraged to help support the presence of soil microbiota, thereby 
leading to improved soil structure and stability. 
15.5 AFRICAN EXPERIENCE: AN UPDATE 
The producers of organic foods have various motivating factors for engaging 
in organic farming. Since the ultimate aim of food production is consumption, 
most farmers thrive in organic farming based on the preference of consumers 
for their products. Most consumers patronize organic farmers due to one or 
more of the following reasons (SSNC, 2014): 
• Food is produced with less or no agrochemicals; 
• Food production does not lead to residue contamination; 
• Organic farming leaves a cleaner environment with a richer wildlife; Organic Foods in Sub-Saharan Africa 373 
•	 It is a practice which is kind to animals; 
•	 Organic foods boost consumer health. 
Before products are labeled as organic, farmers need to meet up with 
specifications which are recognized either locally or internationally. Many 
organic farmers’ associations exist in various countries, and these countries 
ascertain help in proper marketing and distribution of organic products. 
Countries which hold organic products in high regard have local markets in 
strategic places for the sale and distribution of organic produce. 
While these efforts help in boosting organic farming, certain challenges 
exist among farmers who choose to engage in organic farming irrespective 
of the choice of products cultivated. Some of the challenges faced by organic 
farmers according to Saleki and Saleki (2012); and SSNC (2014) include: 
•	 High price differences between organic and conventional produce. 
Organic foods are notably more expensive in most countries, including 
those within Sub-Saharan Africa. This gives a high percentage of the 
consumers a choice in terms of purchasing power. 
•	 Lack of trust for some organic foods despite their labels. 
•	 Lack of substantive awareness about organic farming, organic foods 
and organic food markets. 
Despite the difficulties and challenges faced in organic farming, farmers 
are rather encouraged by the reason described above, thus ensuring its conti￾nuity by upcoming generations of farmers. 
With extreme poverty ravaging a vast majority of the citizenry in SSA, 
organic food production provides a sure way of ameliorating this problem as 
well as providing a wide range of benefits to farmers. Some of the benefits 
enjoyed range from additional source of income from sales of excess food, 
extra cost of employing chemically produced fertilizers and chemicals is 
saved, fixed prices when international trade is involved as well as additional 
value for processed products of organic origin exported and consumed from 
and within the continent respectively (Twarog, 2006; UNCTAD, 2006, 
2008). In terms of earnings from the export of products, organic farming 
has been reported to be a significant source of foreign exchange and net 
farm earnings compared to conventional farming. Other significant areas 
such as the income of organic farmers and their families are reported to 
witness significant increase to the tune of 87% with a resultant decrease in 
poverty amongst farmers and increased food supply within the continent 
(UNCTAD, 2008).  
374 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
Organic foods are produced via a systemic production process that 
combines both traditional and scientific knowhow to ensure food safety and 
availability. The level of awareness on organic foods has increased in the 
developing countries of the world, which includes Africa, due to the huge 
benefits it provides ranging from economic, environmental, and socio￾cultural (EU Commission, 2012). 
According to IFOAM (2012), Africa has an estimated 570,000 producers 
of organic food utilizing 3% (1 mio ha) of the world’s certified agricultural 
land. Uganda (0.23 mio ha), Tunisia (0.18 mio ha) and Ethiopia (0.14 mio 
ha) are also reported to be the countries with the most organic land on the 
continent. 
In economic terms, prices of organic food products within developing 
countries including those from Africa; do not command premium prices 
compared to those exported which command relatively high prices especially 
those renowned for exceptional quality barring the challenges associated with 
logistics such as transportation, ensuring quality is not compromised as well 
as proper certification for the organic food products (Codex Alimentarius 
Commission and FAO/WHO, 2007; EU Commission, 2012). 
15.5.1 ECONOMICS OF PRODUCTION AND AFFORDABILITY 
According to FAO (2003), the cost of organic food products is observed to 
be high when compared to food products from chemical laden agriculture 
due to the fact that demand for organic food products is quite high due to its 
immense benefits compared to its supply. Also, due to the high labor cost 
involved per unit of organic food produced, and the diversity of products 
making economics of scale unachievable, production cost of organic food 
tends to increase with this having a huge impact on the price of the final 
product (Post and Schahczenski, 2012). In addition, higher costs are incurred 
during postharvest handling of small amounts of organic food products due 
to the fact that they must be adequately separated from conventional food 
products when it comes to transportation and processing, thus contributing 
to the final cost which is borne by the consumer. In addition, inefficient 
marketing and distribution systems for organic products due to its relatively 
low volume also contribute to the high prices incurred by the consumers. 
Despite the increasing demand for organic agricultural products, the 
effective utilization of research findings from science and technology, which 
translates into an increase in production, should help reduce the cost of price 
of organic food products all through the production chain. This is realizable  
Organic Foods in Sub-Saharan Africa 375 
because the prices of organic food products are not only made up of the cost 
of production but also other factors unique to it and not considered when 
prices of chemical laden (conventional) food products are set. Factors such 
as curbing environmental pollution via commercial cultivation of organic 
foods ensure the effective maintenance of soil fertility (Peterson et al., 
2012). However, the higher prices placed on these products helps to make up 
for the low income made from crop rotation periods employed by chemical 
laden agriculture. Also, animal products are required to meet high standards, 
making the welfare of these animals of high priority and thus impacting on 
the price. In addition, farmers are saved from the health impact of improper 
handling of pesticides, thus averting spending on their health (Dalton, 
2008). Finally, employment within the farm is created, and producers gain 
maximum value for their products. 
15.6 REGULATIONS 
Organic food production is expected to be devoid of chemical inputs. However, 
farmers are allowed to apply only environmentally friendly chemical pesticides 
especially such as complexes of copper, sulfates, and chlorides, plant oils like 
neem, and the bacteria-Bacillus thuringiensis can also be used in biocontrol. 
Despite the safety concerns about some of the pesticides allowed in organic 
farming, the foods are expected to have no residues in them. Where they occur, 
incidence rates and levels are usually lower than when found in non-organic 
or conventional foods (Woese et al., 1997; Heaton, 2001; Williams, 2002). 
Washing and peeling fruit and vegetables are approved for precautionary 
purposes prior to eating (Buffin, 1997). For regulatory purposes, maximum 
residue level (MRLs) and acceptable daily intakes (ADIs) are set as Legal 
Limits for individual pesticides in food produces. Regulation of organic foods 
on the continent is subject to international regulations provided by the Codex 
Alimentarius Commission and FAO/WHO (2007). They are responsible for 
setting up guidelines for the production, processing, labeling, and marketing 
of organic food for producers as well as ensure that consumers are safe and 
not defrauded (EU Commission, 2012). 
Guidelines specifically made by Codex Alimentarius for organic foods 
carry no legal weight as international standards however they serve as 
recommendations. These recommendations are encouraged for use by devel￾oping countries, including organic food producing countries in SSA (Codex 
Alimentarius Commission and FAO/WHO, 2007). Producers are heavily 
regulated by the private sector. Guidelines for producers was propounded by  
376 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
IFOAM called the International Basic Standards for Organic Production and 
Processing, with the sole aim of regulating how organic food products are 
produced, processed, and handled. 
According to EU Commission (2012), about 73 countries of the world 
have already implemented guidelines and legislation on organic foods. Of this 
total number, SSA has 11 countries that have either drafted regulations or fully 
implemented such regulations. Egypt, Morocco, South Africa, Zambia, and 
Zimbabwe are in the process of drafting regulations on organic food production 
while Tunisia and the Eastern African countries of Burundi, Kenya, Rwanda, 
Tanzania, and Uganda have fully implemented regulations and legislations 
guiding the production, processing, and handling of organic foods. 
15.7 CONCLUSION 
With the proven advantages ascribed to organic farming in SSA, there is the 
need for better policies by governments that will encourage the allocation of 
more agricultural land for its practice. This is due to the fact that this region is 
far behind other sub-regions in land allocation. Awareness and enlightenment 
programs need to be enhanced in order to achieve desired results on food 
safety. Improved healthy living and economic advantage through local and 
international trade are directly associated with the consumption of organic 
food. As the sub-region is economically challenged, a conscious effort 
should be put in place to encourage the development of local and national 
organic food production and markets. It is factual that organic agriculture has 
a high potential to contribute immensely to food security, employment, and 
increased incomes generation to the Sub-Saharan populace. 
KEYWORDS 
• conventional farming 
• ecosystem 
• International trade
 
• organic farming
 
• pesticides 
• regulation 
• Sub-Saharan Africa Organic Foods in Sub-Saharan Africa 377 
REFERENCES
 
Abell, A., Ernst, E., & Bonde, J. P., (1498). High sperm density among members of organic 
farmers’ association. The Lancet, 1994, 343. 
Agama, J., (2015). Africa: Latest development in organic agriculture in Africa. In: Willer, H., 
& Lernoud, J., (eds.), The World of Organic Agriculture. Statistics and Emerging Trends. 
FiBL-IFOAM Report-Organics International, Bonn. 
AGRA, (2016). Africa Agriculture Status Report 2016: Progress Towards Agricultural 
Transformation. Nairobi, Kenya: Alliance for a Green Revolution for Africa (AGRA). 
AGRA, (2017). Africa Agriculture Status Report: The Business of Smallholder Agriculture in 
Sub-Saharan Africa (No. 5). Nairobi, Kenya: Alliance for a Green Revolution in Africa 
(AGRA). 
Alfvén, T., Braun-Fahrlander, C., Brunekreef, B., Von, M. E., Riedler, J., Scheynius, A., 
Van, H. M., et al., (2006). Allergic diseases and atopic sensitization in children related 
to farming and anthroposophic lifestyle-the PARSIFAL study. Allergy, 61(4), 414–421. 
Alim, J. S., Swartz, J., Lilja, G., Scheynius, A., & Pershagen, G., (1999). Atopy in children of 
families with an anthroposophic lifestyle. Lancet, 353(9163), 1485–1488. 
Asami, D. K., Hong, Y. J., Barrett, D. M., & Mitchell, A. E., (2003). Comparison of the total 
phenolic and ascorbic acid content of freeze-dried and air-dried marionberry, strawberry, 
and corn grown using conventional, organic, and sustainable agricultural practices. 
Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 51(5), 1237–1241. 
Baker, B. P., Benbrook, C. M., Groth, E. I. I. I., & Benbrook, K. L., (2002). Pesticide residues 
in conventional, integrated pest management (IPM)-grown and organic foods: insights 
from three US data sets. Food Additives and Contaminants, 19, 427–446. 
Barański, M., Srednicka-Tober, D., Volakakis, N., Seal, C., Sanderson, R., Stewart, G. B., 
Benbrook, C., et al., (2014). Higher antioxidant and lower cadmium concentrations and 
lower incidence of pesticide residues in organically grown crops: A systematic literature 
review and meta-analyses. British Journal of Nutrition, 112, 794–811. 
Betarbet, R., Shera, T. B., McKenzie, G., Garcia-Osuna, M., Panov, A. V., & Greenamyre, 
J. T., (2000). Chronic systemic pesticide exposure reproduces features of Parkinson’s 
disease. Nature Neuroscience, 3(12), 1301–1306. 
Bradbury, K. E., Balkwill, A., Spencer, E. A., Roddam, A. W., Reeves, G. K., Green, J., Key, 
T. J., Beral, V., Pirie, K., & Million Women Study Collaborators, (2014). Organic food 
consumption and the incidence of cancer in a large prospective study of women in the 
United Kingdom. British Journal of Cancer, 110(9), 2321–2326. 
Brandt, K., & Mølgaard, J. P., (2001). Organic agriculture: Does it enhance or reduce the 
nutritional value of plant foods? Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture, 81, 
924–931. 
Brantsæter, A. L., Ydersbond, T. A., Hoppin, J. A., Haugen, M., & Meltzer, H. M., (2017). 
Organic food in the diet: Exposure and health implications. Annual Review of Public 
Health, 38(1), 295–313. 
Carr, R., (2016). Deploying Microbes as a Seed Treatment for Protection Against Soil-Borne 
Plant Pathogen. Rodale Institute. 
Chaudhary, S. A., Manani, Y., Pithadiya, A., Masram, P., Joshi, K., & Rathia, S., (2015). 
Modern life-style: A threat for the fertility. International Journal of Herbal Medicine, 
3(5), 47–51. 378 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
Codex Alimentarius Commission and the FAO/WHO, (2007). Food standard program: 
Organically produced foods, Rome. 
Curl, C. L., Fenske, R. A., & Elgethun, K., (2003). Organophosphorus pesticide exposure of 
urban and suburban preschool children with organic and conventional diets. Environmental 
Health Perspectives, 111, 377–382. 
Dalton, T. J., Parsons, R., Kersbergen, R., Rogers, G., Kauppila, D., McCrory, L., Bragg, L. 
A., & Wang, Q., (2008). A Comparative Analysis of Organic Dairy Farms in Maine and 
Vermont: Farm Financial Information From 2004–2006. University of Maine, Maine 
Agricultural and Forest Experiment Station Bulletin 851, Orono, ME. 
Dangour, A. D., Dodhia, S. K., Hayter, A., Allen, E., Lock, K., & Uauy, R., (2009). Nutritional 
quality of organic foods: A systematic review. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 
90(3), 680–685. 
De Ponti, T., Rijk, B., & Van, I. M. K., (2012). The crop yield gap between organic and 
conventional agriculture. Agricultural Systems, 108, 1–9. 
Dettmann, R. L., & Dimitri, C., (2009). Who’s buying organic vegetables? Demographic 
characteristics of US consumers. Journal of Food Products Marketing, 16, 79–91. 
Directorate-General for Agriculture and Rural Development of the European Commission, 
(2009). What is Organic Farming? http://ec.europa.eu/agriculture/organic-farming/what￾organic_en (accessed on 13 July 2021). 
Eisinger-Watzl, M., Wittig, F., Heuer, T., & Hoffmann, I., (2015). Customers purchasing 
organic food-do they live healthier? Results of the German national nutrition survey II. 
European Journal of Nutrition and Food Safety, 5, 59–71. 
Eulenstein, F., Tauschke, M., Behrendt, A., & Monk, S., (2017). The application of mycorrhizal 
fungi and organic fertilizers in horticultural potting soils to improve water use efficiency 
of crops. Horticulture, 3, 8. 
FAOSTAT, (2015). The FAO Homepage. FAO, Rome. http://www.fao.org/faostat/en/#data/ 
QC (accessed on 13 July 2021). 
Forman, J., & Silverstein, J., (2012). Organic foods: Health and environmental advantages 
and disadvantages. Pediatrics, 130, 1406–1415. 
Garry, V. F., Schreinemachers, D., Harkers, M. E., & Griffith, J., (1996). Pesticide applicators, 
biocides and birth defects in rural Minnesota. Environmental Health Perspectives, 104, 
394–399. 
Heaton, S., (2001). Organic Farming, Food Quality and Human Health (p. 87). Soil Association 
Report, Bristol, UK. 
Huber, M., Van De, V. L. P., Parmentier, H., Savelkoul, H., Coulier, L., Wopereis, S., Verheij, 
E., et al., (2010). Effects of organically and conventionally produced feed on biomarkers 
of health in a chicken model. British Journal of Nutrition, 103(5), 663–676. 
Hughner, R. S., McDonagh, P., Prothero, A., Shultz, C. J., & Stanton, J., (2007). Who are 
organic food consumers? A compilation and review of why people purchase organic food. 
Journal of Consumer Behavior, 6, 94–110. 
Hurtado-Barroso, S., Tresserra-Rimbau, A., Vallverdu-Queralt, A., & Lamuela-Raventos, R. 
M., (2017). Organic food and the impact on human health. Critical Reviews in Food 
Science and Nutrition, 30, 1–11. 
IFOAM (International Federation of Organic Agriculture Movements), (2010). Organic 
Food and Farming: A System Approach to Meet the Sustainability Challenge (pp. 1–24). 
IFOAM EU-Group, Belgium. Organic Foods in Sub-Saharan Africa 379 
Issaka, Y. B., Antwi, M., & Tawia, G. A., (2016). Comparative analysis of productivity among 
organic and non-organic farms in the West Mamprusi District of Ghana. Agriculture, 
6(2). 
Kisaka-lwayo, M., & Obi, A., (2014). Analysis of Production and consumption of organic 
products in South Africa. In: Pilipavicius, V., (ed.), Organic Agriculture Towards 
Sustainability (pp. 25–50). Intech Open, London. 
Kledal, P. R., & Kwai, N., (2010). Organic food and farming in Tanzania. In: Helga, W., 
Youssefi-Menzler, M., & Sorensen, N., (eds.), The World of Organic Agriculture: Statistics 
and Emerging Trends 2008 (p. 111). FiBL and IFOAM. 
Kuepper, G., (2010). A Brief Overview of the History and Philosophy of Organic Agriculture. 
Kerr Center for Sustainable Agriculture. 
Kummeling, I., Thijs, C., Huber, M., Van De, V. L. P. L., Snijders, B. E. P., Penders, J., Stelma, 
F., et al., (2008). Consumption of organic foods and risk of atopic disease during the first 
2 years of life in the Netherlands. British Journal of Nutrition, 99(3), 598–605. 
Laster, J., & Rea, W., (1983). Chlorinated hydrocarbon pesticides in environmentally sensitive 
patients. Clinical Ecology, 2, 3–12. 
Letourneau, K. L., & Bothwell, S. G., (2008). Comparison of organic and conventional 
farms: Challenging ecologists to make biodiversity functional. Frontier in Ecology and 
Environment, 6(8), 430–438. 
Lockeretz, W., (2007). Organic Farming: An International History (pp. 1–282). Cromwell 
Press, Trowbridge, UK. 
Lockeretz, W., Shearer, G., & Kohl, D. H., (1981). Organic farming in the corn belt. Science, 
211, 540–547. 
Lopez-Raez, J. A., (2016). How drought and salinity affect arbuscular mycorrhizal symbiosis 
and strigolactone biosynthesis. Planta, 243, 1375–1385. 
Lotter, D., Seidel, R., & Liebhardt, W., (2003). The performance of organic and conventional 
cropping systems in an extreme climate year. American Journal of Alternative Agriculture, 
18, 146–154. 
Lu, C., Toepel, K., Irish, R., Fenske, R. A., Barr, D. B., & Bravo, R., (2006). Organic 
diets significantly lower children’s dietary exposure to organophosphorus pesticides. 
Environmental Health Perspectives, 114, 260–263. 
Makinde, O. M., Ikhimiukor, O. O., & Fapohunda, S. O., (2017). Bioprocess engineering 
and genetically modified foods: Tackling food insecurity in Africa. Brazilian Journal of 
Biological Sciences, 4(8), 233–246. 
Matallana, G. M. C., Martínez-Tomé, M. J., & Torija, I. M. E., (2010). Nitrate and nitrite 
content in organically cultivated vegetables. Food Additives and Contaminants: Part B, 
3(1), 19–29. 
Mie, A., & Wivstad, M., (2015). Organic Food-Food Quality and Potential Health Effects. 
A review of current knowledge, and a discussion of uncertainties. SLU, EPOK￾Center for Organic Food and Farming. http://www.slu.se/Documents/externwebben/ 
centrumbildningarprojekt/epok/Organic_food_quality_and_health_webb.pdf (accessed 
on 13 July 2021). 
Mohammadi, G. R., (2013). Alternative weed control methods: A review. Weed and Pest 
Control-Conventional and New Challenges. 
Mpanga, I. K., Dapaah, H. K., Geistlinger, J., Ludewig, U., & Neumann, G., (2018). Soil 
type-dependent interactions of P-solubilizing microorganisms with organic and inorganic 
fertilizers mediate plant growth promotion in tomato. Agronomy, 8(10), 213. 380 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
Nebert, L., Bohannan, B., Ocamb, C., Still, A., Kleeger, S., Bramlet, J., & Heisler, C., 
(2016). Managing Indigenous Seed-Inhabiting Microbes for Biological Control Against 
Fusarium Pathogen in Corn. University of Oregon, USA. 
Niggli, U., (2014). Sustainability of organic food production: Challenges and innovations. 
Proceedings of the Nutrition Society, 74(1), 83–88. 
Nkebiwe, P. M., Weinmann, M., & Müller, T., (2016). Improving fertilizer-depot exploitation 
and maize growth by inoculation with plant growth-promoting bacteria: From lab to 
field. Chem. Biol. Technol. Agric., 3, 15. 
North, K., & Golding, J., (2000). A maternal vegetarian diet in pregnancy is associated with 
hypospadias. BJU International, 85, 107–113. 
Orsini, F., Kahane, R., Nono-Womdim, R., & Gianquinto, G., (2013). Urban agriculture 
in the developing world: A review. Agronomy for Sustainable Development, 33, 
695–720. 
Ozturk, L., Avci, G. G., Behmand, T., & Elekcioglu, I. H., (2017). Pasteuria penetrans: A 
bacteria parasitizing plant-parasitic nematodes in vineyards and orchards of Thrace region. 
In: 6th Entomopathogens and Microbial Control Congress (pp. 14–16). Gaziosmanpaşa 
University, Tokat, Turkey. 
Padilla, B. C., Cordts, A., Schulze, B., & Spiller, A., (2013). Assessing determinants of 
organic food consumption using data from the German national nutrition survey II. Food 
Quality Preference, 28, 60–70. 
Peterson, H. H., Barkley, A., Chacon-Cascante, A., & Kastens, T. L., (2012). The motivation 
for organic grain farming in the United States: Profits, lifestyle, or the environment? 
Journal of Agricultural and Applied Economics, 44(2), 137–135. 
Ponisio, L. C., M’Gonigle, L. K., Mace, K. C., Palomino, J., De Valpine, P., & Kremen, C., 
(2015). Diversification practices reduce organic to conventional yield gap. Proceedings 
of the Royal Society B, (282), 1–7. 
Post, E., & Schahczenski, J., (2012). Understanding Organic Pricing and Costs of Production 
(pp. 1–12). National Sustainable Agriculture Information Service. National Center for 
Appropriate Technology, IP441. 
Prain, G., (2006). Integrated urban management of local agricultural development: The 
policy arena in Cuba. In: Veenhuizen, R. V., (ed.), Cities Farming for the Future: Urban 
Agriculture for sustainable cities (pp. 308–311). RUAF Foundation, IDRC and IIRR. 
Pussemier, L., Larondelle, Y., Van, P. C., & Huyghebaert, A., (2006). Chemical safety of 
conventionally and organically produced foodstuffs: A tentative comparison under 
Belgian conditions. Food Control, 17, 14–21. 
Rahmann, G., Olabiyi, T. I., & Olowe, V. I., (2015). Achieving social and economic 
development through ecological and organic agricultural alternatives. Scientific Track 
Proceedings of the 3rd African Organic Conference. Lagos, Nigeria. Food and Agricultural 
Organization of the United Nations and African Union Commission. 
Reganold, J. P., & Wachter, J. M., (2016). Organic agriculture in the twenty-first century. 
Nature Plants, 2, 1–8. 
Saleki, Z. S., & Saleki, S. M. S., (2012). The main factors influencing purchase behavior of 
organic products in Malaysia. Interdisciplinary Journal for Contemporary Research in 
Business, 4, 98–116. 
Samac, D. A., Willert, A. M., McBride, M. J., & Kinkel, L. L., (2003). Effects of antibiotics￾producing Streptomyces on nodulations and leaf spot in alfalfa. Appl. Soil. Ecol., 22, 
55–66. Organic Foods in Sub-Saharan Africa 381 
SAOS (Soil Association Organic Standard), (2000). Organic Farming, Food Quality and 
Human Health: A Review of the Evidence (pp. 1–88). Soil Association, Bristol. 
Savona, N., (1998). Female health problems and their nutritional solutions. Optimum Nutrition, 
11(3), 46–51. 
Smith-Spangler, C., Brandeau, M. L., Hunter, G. E., Bavinger, J. C., Pearson, M., Eschbach, 
P. J., Sundaram, V., et al., (2012). Are organic foods safer or healthier than conventional 
alternatives? Annals of Internal Medicine, 157, 348–366. 
SSNC (Swedish Society for Nature Conservation), (2014). Organic Food and Farming for All 
(pp. 1–30). SSNC, Stockholm. 
Stenius, F., Swartz, J., Lilja, G., Borres, M., Bottai, M., Pershagen, G., Scheynius, A., & Alm, 
J., (2011). Lifestyle factors and sensitization in children- the ALADDIN birth cohort. 
Allergy, 66(10), 1330–1338. 
Tauschke, M., Behrendt, A., Monk, J., Lentzsch, P., Eulenstein, F., & Monk, S., (2015). 
Improving the water use efficiency of crop plant by application of mycorrhizal fungi. 
In: Currie, L., & Burkitt, K. L., (eds.), Moving Farm Systems to Improved Nutrient 
Attenuation (pp. 1–8), Fertilizer and Lime Research Center, Massey University, New 
Zealand. 
Thonar, C., Lekfeldt, J. D. S., Cozzolino, V., Kundel, D., Kulhánek, M., Mosimann, C., 
Neumann, G., et al., (2017). Potential of three microbial bio-effectors to promote maize 
growth and nutrient acquisition from alternative phosphorous fertilizers in contrasting 
soils. Chem. Biol. Technol. Agric., 4, 7. 
Toppo, S. R., & Naik, U. C., (2015). Isolation and characterization of bacterial antagonist to 
plant pathogenic fungi (Fusarium spp.) from agro-based area of Bilaspur. International 
Journal of Research Studies in Biosciences, 6–14. 
Trabelsi, D., & Mhamdi, R., (2013). Microbial Inoculants and their impact on soil microbial 
communities: A review. Biomedical Research International, 2013(836240), 1–11. 
Trewavas, A., (2001). Urban myths of organic farming. Nature, 410, 409–410. 
Twarog, S., (2006). Organic agriculture: A trade and sustainable development opportunity 
for developing countries. In: United Nations conference on trade and development 
(UNCTD). Trade and Environment Review (pp. 141–224). UN, New York. 
UNCTAD (United Nations Conference on Trade and Development), (2008). Certified 
Organic Export Production. Implications for Economic Welfare and Gender Equality 
Among Smallholder Farmers in Tropical Africa (UNCTAD/DITC/TED/2007/7). 
UNCTAD (United Nations Conference on Trade and Development), (2006). Trade and 
Environment Review. UN, New York (UNCTAD/DITC/TED/2005/12). 
USDA/AMS. (2000). 7 CFR Part 205. National Organic Program; Final Rule. Federal Register, 
65(46), 80564. 
Wang, J., Fu, Z., Ren, Q., Zhu, L., Lin, J., Zhang, J., Cheng, X., et al., (2019). Effects of 
arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi on growth, photosynthesis and nutrient uptake of Zelkova 
Serrata (Thunb.) Makino seedlings under salt stress. Forests, 10(2), 1–16. 
Wiggle, D. T., Semenciw, R. M., Wilkins, K., Riedel, D., Ritter, L., Morrison, H., & Mao, 
Y., (1990). Mortality study of Canadian male farm operators: Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma 
mortality and agricultural practices in Saskatchewan. Journal of the National Cancer 
Institute, 82, 575–582. 
Willer, H., & Lernoud, J., (2016). The World of Organic Agriculture: Statistics and Emerging 
Trends. Frick: Research Institute of Organic Agriculture (FiBL) and IFOAM-Organics 
International, Switzerland. 382 Organic Farming for Sustainable Development 
Williams, C. M., (2002). Nutritional quality of organic food: shades of grey or shades of 
green? Proceedings of the Nutritional Society, 61(1), 19–24. 
Woese, K., Lange, D., Boess, C., & Werner, B. K., (1997). A comparison of organically and 
conventionally grown foods - results of a review of relevant literature. Journal of the 
Science of Food and Agriculture, 74(3), 281–293. 
Worthington, V., (2001). Nutritional quality of organic versus conventional fruits, vegetables, 
and grains. Journal of Alternative and Complementary Medicine, 7, 161–173. 
Zarb, J., Ghorbani, R., Koocheki, A., & Leifert, C., (2005). The importance of microorganisms 
in organic agriculture. Outlooks on Pest Management, 16(2), 52–55. INDEX
 
A 
Abelmoschus esculentus, 88, 92 
Allium 
cepa L., 25, 30, 31 
sativum L., 165, 166, 173, 177 
Alternaria, 15, 123, 174–176, 285, 288 
alternata, 15, 123, 124 
solani, 174 
Aphis 
glycines, 111, 112 
gossypii, 115 
Aspergillus, 81, 82, 84, 86, 88, 89, 92, 123, 
134, 155, 174, 175, 370 
flavus., 123 
fumigatus, 134, 155, 174 
neoniger, 82 
niger, 84, 85, 88, 92 
ochraceus, 175 
parasiticus, 174 
terreus, 123 
tubingensis, 81 
Abiotic 
biotic environmental stresses, 109 
stress, 23, 44, 60, 79, 108, 241–243, 246 
Abscisic acid (ABA), 37, 63, 243 
Absorption, 25, 26, 33, 35, 39, 84, 88, 113, 
245, 304, 305, 307 
Acceptable daily intakes (ADIs), 375 
Acer saccharum, 40 
Acetic, 58, 64, 65, 83, 85, 89, 94, 119, 188, 
191 
Acetylene reduction assay (ARA), 62, 68 
Acidification, 81, 188 
Acid-tolerant species, 54 
Acinetobacter, 80 
Acremonium, 197 
alternatum, 197 
Acrodontium crateriform, 197 
Actigard treatment, 189 
Actinobacteria, 40 
Actinomycetes, 186, 191, 197, 306, 370 
Active 
cells (AC), 110, 324, 352 
defense compounds, 165–167 
ingredient, 5, 6, 88, 125 
motility, 61 
taxonomic units (ATUs), 30 
Adaptation, 81, 283, 342 
Adenophora axilliflora, 156 
Adenosine triphosphate, 62 
Adsorption, 5, 61, 84, 98, 372 
Aerobic microorganism, 58 
Aeschynomene 
aspera, 57 
indica, 57 
African 
armyworm, 173 
bollworm, 173 
Agaricales, 40 
Aged garlic extract (AGE), 167, 168 
Aggregate 
interference, 270 
stability, 213 
Agribusinesses, 352 
Agricultural, 1, 4, 51, 78, 165, 183, 207, 
226, 239, 259, 277, 278, 301, 303, 321, 
325, 326, 329, 363, 364 
crops, 52, 54–56, 62, 63, 67, 68, 193 
fertilizers, 32 
manure, 306 
market, 11, 348 
pests, 79, 106, 108–110, 125, 126, 184, 
227 
management, 105, 109 
practices, 24, 27, 30, 89, 92, 112, 183, 
197, 198, 200, 220, 241, 327, 345, 353, 
364 
production, 78, 106, 107, 121, 126, 133, 
210, 213, 226, 279, 292, 329, 330, 340, 
343, 351 
productivity, 106, 213, 328, 330, 364 384 Index 
significance (endophytic microorgan￾isms), 107 
wastes, 34, 98, 188, 192 
Agrobacterium tumefaciens, 124 
Agrochemical, 108, 118, 126, 157, 178, 210, 
372 
Agroecological conditions, 344 
Agroecosystem, 119, 208, 226, 227, 230, 
265, 322, 323, 330, 340, 346, 353 
Agro-fertilizer, 25, 82 
Agro-industry, 210 
Agronomic 
benefits, 248
 
constraints, 341
 
practices, 56, 351
 
Ajoene, 173, 175 
Alamethicins, 7 
Alcaligenes, 80, 114 
piechaudii, 114 
Alfalfa plant, 95 
Alkaline phosphatases, 86 
Alkaloids pyrrolizidine, 111 
Allelochemicals, 284, 287 
Allelopathic, 283, 284, 287, 295 
compounds inhibition, 260 
Allicin, 166, 168, 173–175 
Alliin, 166, 168 
Allinase, 165, 166, 168 
Allylmethyl sulfide, 169 
Allymethyltrisulfide, 175 
Aloe vera, 58 
Aluminum, 78, 83, 87, 121, 122, 265 
phosphate (AlPO4), 78, 87 
Amalgamation, 34 
Amaranthus 
cruentus L., 86 
virdis, 286 
Ambrosia, 286 
artemisiifolia L., 294 
Ambuic acid, 117 
Amendments, 184–186, 197, 211, 220, 224, 
225, 240, 249 
Amino acids, 59, 310 
Ammonia, 59, 61, 185, 188, 337 
Ammonium, 55, 59, 91, 185, 187, 329 
Ampelomyces quisqualis, 197 
Anabaena, 53, 310 
Anabolism, 34 
Anaerobic 
conditions, 60, 191, 197, 198 
decomposition, 191 
digested 
dairy (ADD), 187
 
pig slurry (ADP), 187
 
slurry (ADS), 187
 
soil disinfestation (ASD), 198, 199 
rice bran, 199 
Anhydrofulvic acid, 156 
Animal 
husbandry, 336, 345, 364, 368 
manures, 184, 187, 308 
Annual species, 279 
Antagonism, 371 
activity, 12, 192
 
impacts, 89
 
mechanism, 37
 
properties, 9
 
Anthocyanins, 27 
Anthranilic acid, 65 
Anthraquinone 
chromanone, 134, 143 
derivatives, 145 
Anthropogenic activities, 24, 32 
Antiacetylcholinesterase activity, 150 
Anti-bacterial qualities, 177 
Antibiosis, 195, 371 
Antibiotic, 7, 9, 11, 108, 117, 140, 191, 195, 
198, 208, 229, 311, 368, 371 
Anticancer, 117 
Anticarsia gemmatalis, 116 
Antifungal, 117, 123, 124, 133–135, 139, 
142, 148, 174, 175, 177, 188, 191
 
activity, 197, 198
 
qualities, 112
 
Anti-inflammatory, 133, 134 
Antimicrobial, 111, 122, 124, 134, 136, 138, 
140, 141, 143, 148, 151, 157, 176, 189, 
190, 195 
activities, 136, 143, 176 
properties, 176, 189 
Antimycotic, 117 
Antioxidant, 33, 37, 96, 117, 168, 195, 210, 
367, 368 
defense reactions, 33 
Antiporters, 37 
Antique farming practice, 241, 246, 248 Index 385 
Antiviral, 117 
Aquaporins (AQPs), 243 
Aquatic microorganisms, 120 
Arachnids, 348 
Arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM), 23–38, 40, 
41, 43, 44, 53, 91, 113, 372 
colonization, 30, 43 
symbiotic plants, 27 
Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (AMF), 
23–27, 29, 31, 38–44 
community composition, 39 
fungal diversity, 41 
microbe interactions, 38 
Area under disease progress curve 
(AUDPC), 193 
Aromatic compounds, 59 
Arthrobacter, 80 
Artificial 
materials, 265, 270 
pesticides, 326, 339 
Ascorbic acid, 97, 166 
Asian citrus psyllid, 109 
Aspartate, 108 
Assessors, 349 
Associative symbionts, 57 
Assortment, 28, 35, 346 
Aswagandha, 344 
Atmospheric nitrogen, 51, 53, 55, 59–63, 
67, 310 
Aulosira, 310 
Avena sterilis L., 294 
Avicennia germinans L., 84 
Azaphilones, 134, 138, 139, 141, 146, 148, 
151 
Azolla microphylla, 310 
Azospirillum, 25, 51–68, 80, 242, 310, 313 
amazonense, 54, 55 
bioinoculant, 60, 63, 67 
brasilense, 54–57, 59–66 
halopraeferens, 54, 55 
inoculant, 67 
inoculated, 53, 61, 64, 67 
plants, 60 
inoculum, 62 
irakense, 55 
largimobile, 55 
lipoferum, 54–57, 59, 61–63, 65, 66 
microbe, 52 
plant interaction, 60 
root interaction, 61 
strains, 52, 55, 58 
Azotobacter, 11, 53, 89, 92, 310, 311 
B 
Bacillus, 4, 16, 53, 80, 84, 85, 87, 94, 112, 
115, 116, 125, 134, 135, 143, 157, 176, 
189, 193, 195, 198, 337, 370, 375 
aizawai S1576, 115 
amyloliquefaciens, 84, 112, 193 
atrophaeus, 84 
cereus, 116, 176, 195 
kurstaki S1168, 115 
licheniformis, 84 
megaterium, 84 
subtilis, 134, 135, 143, 157 
thuringiensis (Bt), 4, 5, 16, 53, 114–116, 
125, 337, 375, 339 
toxin, 4, 5 
aizawai, 115 
brasiliensis (Btb), 116 
colmeri (Btc), 116 
huazhongensis (Bth), 116 
kurstaki (Btk) , 115, 116 
morrisoni, 115 
roskildiensis (Btr), 116 
sooncheon (Bts), 116 
sooncheon, 116 
yunnanensis (Bty), 116 
Botrytis, 7, 15, 43, 123, 134, 175, 190 
cinerea (BC), 7, 15, 43, 123, 124, 134, 
135, 142, 190 
Beauveria bassiana, 4, 53, 109–112, 116 
Bacteria, 4, 26, 33, 38, 40, 52, 53, 57, 59, 
61, 63, 64, 67, 79–81, 83–87, 91, 92, 94, 
95, 97, 98, 110–113, 116–118, 124, 134, 
137, 140, 151, 186, 189, 195, 214, 292, 
306, 311, 337, 368, 370, 371, 375 
community, 40, 199 
infested soil, 189 
strain, 61, 78, 83, 84, 191 
wilt disease, 188, 189 
Bactericidal, 122, 153, 165, 170, 178 
activity, 178 
Bacteroides fragillis, 134, 140 
Bagasse, 10, 188, 189 
Bale direct system, 294 386 Index 
Banana, 110 
Barbie-doll features, 350 
BB Fafu-13, 109 
BB Fafu-16, 109 
Beating, 262 
Below-ground biomass, 286 
Beneficial microorganism, 8, 12, 13, 23, 24, 
28, 42, 44, 79, 80, 97, 98, 107, 108, 121, 
122, 125, 126, 186 
populations, 245 
Benzoquinone derivatives, 134 
Berardia subacaulis Vill, 39 
Betaines, 37 
Beushening, 309 
Biennial 
species, 280 
weeds, 281, 282 
Bio sequencing strains, 120 
Bioactive 
compounds, 195 
phytochemicals, 178 
Bioagents, 196 
Biochar, 34, 35, 96, 212, 240–249 
amendments, 240, 241, 248 
plant growth, 247 
application, 240–248 
inoculation, 34 
plant production, 246 
soil fertility, 245 
supplied nutrients, 247 
Biochemical 
characters, 58, 63 
composition, 60 
organic compounds, 33 
parameters, 52 
pesticides, 5 
reactive species, 113 
Bioconjugation, 124 
Bio-control, 32–35, 113, 114, 118, 183, 192, 
194–197, 200 
abilities, 34 
activity, 7 
agent, 9, 11, 12, 14, 32, 34, 53, 186, 190, 
191, 242, 287 
mediator, 113 
microbes, 34 
Biodegradability, 227, 311 
products, 178 
Biodiversity, 209, 225–228, 272, 322, 324, 
327, 336, 342, 343, 348–350, 353, 363 
Bio-farming, 305, 312 
Biofertilization, 311 
Biofertilizer, 9, 26–29, 31, 32, 38, 44, 52, 
53, 58, 66, 68, 80, 83, 84, 87–95, 98, 242, 
304, 305, 310–315 
Biofungicide, 133, 134, 157, 158 
Biogas slurry, 315 
Biogeochemical cycle, 363, 365 
Biological 
composition, 32 
control, 10, 11, 26, 27, 30, 31, 34–36, 41, 
86, 88, 91–96, 107–110, 115, 117, 118, 
120, 126, 191, 192, 198, 287, 337, 339 
agent, 10, 86, 108, 115, 191 
invasions alteration, 40 
nitrogen fixation, 52, 63 
parameters, 292 
products, 117 
properties, 117, 211, 245, 265, 307, 314, 
338 
Biomass, 9, 10, 24, 30, 35, 36, 83, 92–94, 
96, 110, 118, 120, 138, 191, 192, 208, 
213, 218, 220, 224, 225, 227, 229, 
241–243, 247, 248, 286, 292, 293, 306, 
370, 371 
production, 191, 192, 247 
Bio-mechanism, 33 
Bionano 
hybrid agroparticles, 124 
nano-particles, 114 
particles, 114 
Bio-organic fertilizer (BOF), 193 
Biopesticidal, 3–8, 11–16, 23, 105–107, 121 
technology, 106 
Bio-protector, 31 
Bio-regulatory organism, 37 
Bioremediation, 38, 80, 97 
Bio-sorption substrate, 34 
Bio-stabilization, 119 
Biotechnological 
approaches, 338 
interventions, 345 
tools, 124 
Biotic 
production, 97 
stress, 41, 44, 78, 79, 245 Index 387 
Biotrophs, 42 
BioYield, 189 
Bipolaris sorokiniana, 175 
Black 
garlic, 168 
mangroves, 84 
Blue 
green algae (BGA), 53, 310, 311, 313, 314 
umbrella cultivar, 112 
Blu-v2, 112, 113 
Body-mass index (BMI), 368 
Boerhavia diffusa, 56 
Bone phosphate, 93 
Bradyrhizobium sp., 53 
Brassica 
chinesis, 57 
rapa, 57 
Bromophenol blue (BPB), 85 
Brush weeder, 291 
Bulk density, 213, 217, 229, 241, 248, 270 
Burgeoning population, 338 
Burkholderia, 80, 87, 90 
anthina, 83, 90 
Butyric acid, 188, 191 
C 
Cadmium, 35, 36, 66 
Calcification soils, 89 
Calcium, 28, 39, 78, 83–85, 89, 90, 125, 
188, 189 
Candida albicans, 134, 136, 139, 155 
Cannibalistic, 117 
Capnodiales, 40 
Capsule suspension, 6 
Carbohydrates, 37, 282, 368 
Carbon, 29, 41, 59, 79, 84, 89, 91, 122, 
183, 184, 198, 210–212, 214, 224, 226, 
229, 240–242, 245, 248, 261, 269, 292, 
304–307, 311, 312, 314, 334, 371 
dioxide (CO2), 97, 113, 198, 278, 286, 
292, 293, 337 
assimilation, 293 
sequestration, 261 
soil amendments, 210 
Carbonate substances, 269 
Carcinogenicity, 106 
Carotenoids, 27 
Carrot, 43, 229, 281 
Castor oil, 170 
Caterpillars, 114–116, 166 
Catharanthus roseus, 58 
Cation exchange, 39, 247 
Cellulose, 6, 9, 11, 37, 311 
Cellulosimicrobium, 95 
Celosia argentea, 286 
Cereal, 30, 38, 52–55, 57, 67, 112, 311, 336, 
365 
productivity, 341 
Chaetomium, 133–136, 138–140, 151–158 
amygdalisporum, 133, 135 
atrobrunneum, 135 
aureum, 135 
brasiliense, 133, 135, 136 
coarctatum, 133, 136 
cochliodes, 133, 136–138 
cupreum, 133, 138 
elatum, 133, 139, 140 
funicola, 133, 140 
globosum, 133, 140–151 
gracile, 133, 151 
indicum, 151 
longirostre, 133 
lucknowense, 133 
mollicellum, 133, 152 
murorum, 133, 153 
nigricolor, 153 
olivaceum, 133, 153 
quadrangulatum, 133, 153 
retardatum, 133, 153 
seminudum, 133, 153 
siamense, 133, 153 
subspirale, 154 
thielavioideum, 154 
trilaterale, 133, 154, 155 
Chaetoatrosin A, 135 
Chaetoaurin, 135 
Chaetochalasin, 134, 135, 138 
Chaetocin, 135, 154 
Chaetocochins A-C (44–46), 137 
Chaetoglobosin, 135, 139, 141, 143, 144, 
146, 148, 154 
chaetoglobosin A, 140, 141, 143, 146, 148 
chaetoglobosin C, 144 
chaetoglobosin D, 135 
chaetoglobosin Fex, 135, 154 
chaetoglobosin V, 139 388 Index 
Chaetominine, 156
 
Chaetomugilin A, 146–148
 
Chaetomugilin D, 146, 148
 
Chaetoquadrin, 135, 153
 
Chaetoquadrin B, 135
 
Chaetoquadrin F, 153
 
Chaetoquadrin G, 135, 153
 
Chaetoquadrin H, 135
 
Chaetoviridin A, 138, 141, 142, 147, 148,
 
153
 
Chaetoviridin B-D, 141
 
Challenges of,
 
organic agricultural system, 350
 
contradictory concepts (organic food 
products), 351
 
general consumers (quality standards), 
350
 
organic certification, 351
 
organic farming (commercial level), 351
 
profitability low (food prices and land), 
351
 
Chelation-mediated modes, 97
 
Chemical
 
driven agriculture, 367
 
environments, 220
 
fertilizers, 4, 26, 29, 31, 52, 79, 241, 248, 
304, 305, 312, 336–339, 341
 
herbicides, 289, 294, 295
 
pesticides, 3, 4, 178, 227, 340, 375
 
properties, 28, 82, 220, 248, 347
 
Chemotaxis, 59, 61
 
Chenopodium
 
album, 286
 
quinoa, 344
 
Chetomin, 137, 140–142, 151, 153
 
Chickpea crop plants, 34
 
Chinese
 
brake fern, 35
 
cabbage, 193
 
Chitin, 7, 12, 37, 125, 135
 
Chitinase, 7, 9, 12, 31
 
enzyme, 7, 12
 
Chitosanase, 31
 
Chlamydospores, 9
 
Chlorophyll content, 29, 118
 
Cholangiocarcinoma cell lines, 134, 136, 139
 
Chorismic acid, 65
 
Chromatographic condition, 172
 
Chromium, 66
 
Chryseomonas luteola, 84
 
Chrysophanol, 143, 151, 153
 
Cinchona, 344
 
Citrus
 
limon, 109
 
orchards, 220
 
plants, 7
 
seedlings, 109
 
Cladosporium
 
oxysporum, 197
 
resinae, 134, 143
 
Claroideoglomus, 30
 
Claroideoglomus lamellosum, 30
 
Clerodentron viscosum, 56
 
Clerotinia sclerotiorum, 12
 
Climatic
 
conditions, 26, 67, 193, 228, 292, 294
 
management, 114
 
Clipping, 280
 
Clods, 262
 
Clostridium spp., 198
 
Clothianidin, 120
 
Cochliobolus lunatus, 134, 142
 
Cocoa, 365, 366
 
Coconut husk, 10
 
Codex alimentarius body, 332
 
Coffee, 26–29, 266, 365
 
beans, 266
 
Co-inoculation, 25
 
Coleus forskholii, 58
 
Colletotrichum, 9
 
capsici, 15, 195
 
gloesporioides, 12
 
Colloidal surfaces, 225
 
Colonization, 11, 30, 35, 36, 39, 40, 42–44, 
53, 60, 61, 64, 92, 109
 
potentials, 30
 
process, 61
 
Coloring agent, 5
 
Combat undernourishment, 346
 
Commensalism, 117
 
Commercial pesticides, 184
 
Commercialization, 344
 
Common
 
cocklebur, 280, 293
 
pokeweed, 281
 
Compartmentalization approaches, 37
 Index 389 
Competition, 194, 292, 371 
weed ability, 287 
Complex phosphates, 53 
Compost, 183, 190–197, 200, 210, 212, 220, 
224, 225, 261, 304, 305, 307, 311, 312, 
315, 322, 323, 328, 336, 337, 340, 348, 
350, 351, 370–372 
Concentric rings, 9 
Concept history regulation (organic 
agriculture), 326 
concept (organic farming), 326 
history (organic farming), 327–331 
regulation (organic farming), 332 
Conidiophores, 9 
Coniella diplodiella, 134, 149 
Conservation 
agriculture, 342 
tillage practices, 218 
Contaminants, 95, 304, 367 
Contemporary agro practices, 112 
Conventional 
agricultural framework system, 345 
farming (CF), 211, 214, 217, 218, 224, 
323, 339, 346, 347, 349, 370, 373, 376 
systems, 211, 214, 323 
farms, 213, 220, 225 
food, 367–370, 375 
products, 374 
intensive management, 24 
management practices, 220 
tillage practices, 218 
Copper, 37, 95, 122–124, 166, 310, 337, 375 
Cork compost (CC), 192, 193 
Correlation, 28, 29, 41, 83, 84, 89, 97, 345 
Corynebacterium diphtheriae, 134, 157 
Cotton, 62, 84, 115, 186, 191, 280, 310, 
339, 365 
Cottonseed oil, 170, 175 
Covalent bonding, 125 
Cover crops, 210, 224, 263, 279, 287, 289, 
290, 305, 328 
Crabgrass, 280, 287 
Crop, 39, 62, 199, 283, 287, 289, 290, 307, 
323, 327, 338, 340, 341, 344, 345 
diversity, 338 
nutrient demands, 338 
pesticide control, 263 
production, 25, 39, 98, 105, 107, 208, 
209, 240–242, 247, 248, 267, 279, 306, 
310, 322, 336, 344, 353, 364 
productivity, 32, 68, 82, 89, 122, 184, 
240, 246, 248, 292, 329 
protection, 106, 165, 166, 178 
residues, 218, 336 
rotation, 184, 210, 213, 218, 261, 265, 
278, 279, 283, 286, 295, 306, 322, 323, 
328, 335, 336, 340, 353, 375 
rotation, 336 
specialization, 209 
stand, 278, 279, 295 
system, 39, 199, 283, 287, 290, 307, 338, 
340, 341, 344, 345 
Crotalaria juncea, 310 
Cruciferceae, 56 
Crude garlic extract, 169 
Crushing, 262 
Cryptocandin, 117 
Cryptococcus neoformans, 135 
Cryptomeria japonica, 247 
Cucumis sativus, 8, 15, 57, 91 
Cucurbitaceae, 197 
Cultivars, 87, 112, 169, 287, 295, 322, 326, 
330, 331, 338, 340, 346 
Cultivation, 31, 56, 58, 91, 260, 261, 265, 
269, 271, 282, 289, 304, 305, 309, 311, 
312, 330, 333, 340, 342, 344, 364–366, 375 
Cultural 
activities, 82 
characters, 58 
medium, 64, 65 
Current biodiversity, 228 
Curvularia lunata, 134, 142 
Cyanobacteria, 26, 53, 311, 313, 314 
Cylindrocladium sp., 12 
Cymbopogon winterianus, 63 
Cynodon dactylon, 56 
Cyperus rotundus, 56 
Cyprus sp., 56 
Cysteine, 108, 142, 165 
Cytochalasines, 117 
Cytokinins, 63 
Cytoplasm, 35, 37, 245 
Cytotoxicity, 133–137, 139, 143–146, 149–152 390 Index 
D Drilling, 261, 289, 308 
Drought, 25, 34, 60, 79, 213, 240, 243, 244, 
246, 248, 249, 271, 278, 286, 292, 293, 
307, 308, 343, 372 
Drug-resistant microorganisms, 122 
Dry 
cycles, 269 
formulations, 5 
lime cake, 34 
matter production, 67 
olive residues (DOR), 189, 190 
Dryland farming management practices, 
304, 312 
Duration, 27, 199, 224, 262 
Dustable powder, 5 
E 
Enterobacter, 80, 84, 90, 110 
aerogenes, 84 
asburiae, 84 
cloacae, 110, 111 
Escherichia coli, 110, 134, 141, 157 
Enterobacter taylorae, 84 
Earthworm, 267 
Echinochloao ryzicola, 283 
Ecological 
distortions, 81 
stress, 112, 113 
Eco-physiological balance, 111 
Ecorestoration, 23, 25, 31, 44, 78, 98 
Ecosystem, 4, 27, 29–32, 37, 38, 40, 57, 62, 
88, 107, 112–114, 118–120, 123, 183, 
211, 212, 218, 227, 228, 338, 363, 365, 
367, 376 
habitation, 112 
reconstruction, 38 
services, 27, 29, 211, 218, 227 
potential, 27 
Effective phosphate solubilizing strains, 94 
Efficacy, 12, 26, 31, 34, 37, 41, 52, 68, 88, 
91, 95, 98, 126, 165, 166, 174, 177, 185, 
188–191, 197, 200 
Electric 
conductivities, 39, 58 
potential, 225 
Electrostatic 
forces, 124 
repulsion, 225 
Diaphorina citri, 109, 110 
Datura fastuosa, 186, 187 
Decomposition, 218, 224, 260, 266, 267, 
269, 289 
Deep taproots, 281 
Defense mechanisms, 42 
Degradation periods, 106 
Delayed planting, 278, 279, 295 
Dendrograms, 27 
Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), 79, 112, 125 
Depsidones, 134–136, 152 
Desertification, 343 
Dethio-tetra (methylthio) chetomin, 137, 141 
Deuteromycetes, 9 
Deuteromycotina, 9 
Dhaincha, 308–310 
Diallyl 
disulfide (DADS), 169 
sulfide (DAS), 169, 174, 321 
Dicalcium phosphate, 81 
Dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT), 
106, 329, 330 
Dichloromethane extract, 141 
Dicot-monocot crops, 290 
Dicotyledonous, 24 
Dietary status, 28, 346 
Digitaria decumbens, 54 
Dihydroxyxanthenone, 144 
Dimethyl trisulfide (DATS), 169 
Direct-seeded rice (DSR), 293 
Disease 
causing 
organisms, 29, 117 
pathogens, 165, 190, 195 
infestations, 351 
management, 177, 323 
system, 371 
suppression, 183, 186, 188, 192, 194, 
198, 199 
Disruption tolerant AMF taxa, 40 
Diversification, 289, 338, 344, 346 
Diversispora, 30 
Domesticated plants, 111 
Downy mildew, 166, 174, 175 
Drechslera 
oryzae, 134, 135 
tritici-repentis, 175 Index 391 
Emulsifier, 170 
Emulsion, 5, 6, 122, 170 
Encapsulations, 106, 107 
Encystations, 59 
Endangering, 117 
Endocrine system disruption, 369 
Endomycorrhizal, 27, 31 
fungus, 27, 31 
Endophytes, 27, 39, 61, 107, 109–111, 114, 
116–119, 123, 127 
bacteria, 110–113 
fungi, 109–112, 118, 119, 126 
metabolites, 111 
microbes, 111, 117, 118 
microorganism, 106–110, 118, 119, 121, 
125, 126 
organisms, 117, 118 
plant-bacteria, 110 
relationship, 112 
Endophyticentomopathogenic strain, 111 
Endopolygalacturonase, 11 
Endosphere, 97 
Endosymbiont, 57 
Enhanced 
mineral uptake, 68 
plant holobiomes (EPHs), 113 
Entomo-pathogenic 
endophytes, 112 
fungi, 111 
fungi, 109 
Entomophilous agricultural plants, 227 
Environment, 3, 4, 16, 32, 33, 35, 53, 55, 
58, 61, 78, 83, 85, 106, 113, 118, 119, 
126, 149, 189, 198, 208–210, 213, 225, 
226, 230, 265, 279, 283, 287, 304, 306, 
307, 310, 322–324, 327, 330, 334, 339, 
340, 343, 353, 372 
contaminants, 32 
degradation, 30, 306 
friendly, 32, 52, 81, 118, 121, 340, 353, 375 
quality, 213 
stress, 28, 31, 32, 34–36, 111 
stressors, 32, 34, 35 
temperature, 79 
Enzyme 
activities, 89, 211, 224, 243 
production, 34 
Epipolythiodioxopiperazines, 137, 151, 153 
Eradication, 280 
Ergosterol palmitate, 143 
Erosion, 79, 82, 208, 211–213, 218, 
260–262, 270 
Erwinia, 80 
Erysiphe pisi, 7 
Erythroglaucin, 145 
Essential climate variables (ECV), 291 
Ethanol, 63, 167, 173, 199 
Ethical organic foods, 305, 312 
Ethylene, 108, 198 
Eugenetin, 135 
Eugenitol, 135 
Euphorbia hirta, 56 
European Union (EU), 226, 332, 366, 374–376 
Eutrophication, 78, 82, 88, 347 
Evaporation prevention, 260, 263 
Excavation, 121 
Exopolysaccharide production, 58 
Extrication, 36 
Exudation, 39, 42, 287 
F 
Fusarium oxysporum, 9, 12, 14, 15, 43, 123, 
124, 190–192, 194, 197, 198 
f. sp. basilici, 191 
f. sp. lycopersici (FOL), 190, 193 
f. sp. melonis, 192 
Fabaceae families, 197 
Fabrication, 110 
Facultative 
endophytic diazotrophs, 57 
parasites, 196 
Fallow grassland soils, 224 
False seedbed, 289 
Familia Tuberculariaceae, 9 
Farm 
community, 183, 197, 342 
mechanization, 79, 327 
operations, 344 
plan, 262 
productivity, 344 
systems, 230, 329, 364 
Farmyard manure (FYM), 14, 89, 304–307, 
309, 310, 312–315, 335–338 
Feeding, 78, 109, 112, 174, 227, 350 
Fermentation, 13, 83, 84, 88, 92, 145, 146, 
168, 198, 347 392 Index 
Fertility enhancer, 38 
Fertilizers, 31, 32, 52, 63, 67, 82, 177, 
184, 189, 193, 208, 211, 225, 229, 241, 
242, 245, 248, 263, 269, 279, 311, 312, 
314, 322, 323, 326–328, 331, 332, 337, 
339–341, 364, 367, 370, 373 
Fetal diseases, 120 
Field 
capacity, 39 
margins, 290 
Filtered homogenate, 167 
Fishmeal, 184 
Fixation, 34, 37, 53, 60–62, 113, 311 
Flaming, 289, 291 
Flash chromatography, 171, 172 
Flavobacterium, 80 
Flavonoids, 174 
Flavo-viridae, 141 
Flooding, 209, 265, 343 
Flora 
biochemical compositions, 113 
immune system, 119 
Foliar 
pathogen, 43, 190, 245 
spraying, 109 
Food 
Agriculture Organization (FAO), 307, 
332, 341, 342, 346, 365, 374, 375 
autosufficiency, 304 
insecurity, 28, 32 
production, 372 
quality, 344, 353, 364 
residues, 106, 209 
safety, 32, 312, 349, 353, 374, 376 
security, 28, 29, 292, 332, 340–343, 
364–366, 376 
Formic, 83, 94 
Formulation procedure, 178 
Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy 
(FTIR), 172 
Functional 
complementarity, 41 
moieties, 124 
Fungal, 4, 7–9, 11, 12, 24–41, 53, 79, 
81–83, 86, 87, 92, 97, 111, 112, 116–119, 
134, 137, 174, 175, 186, 189–192, 195, 
197, 198, 214, 288, 292, 306, 370–372 
bacteria endophytic organisms, 117 
causative agents, 113 
hyphae growth, 124 
micro-biota, 111 
pathogens, 123, 191 
phytopathogens, 12, 13 
strains, 78, 109 
Fungicidal, 165, 170, 178 
activity, 178 
Fungicides, 122, 123, 177, 191, 197 
Funneliformis mosseae, 30 
Fusarium, 4, 12, 14, 15, 43, 123, 175, 176, 
187, 190–192, 194–198, 370, 372 
culmorum (FC), 190, 193 
solani, 187 
strains, 14 
G 
Glomus, 29–31, 35 
intraradices, 29, 31, 36 
macrocarpum, 35 
Gaeumannomyces graminis f. sp. tritici, 193 
Gammaproteobacteria, 31 
microbes, 31 
Garlic, 165–169, 171, 173, 175, 176 
bulb, 166 
cloves, 168, 169 
components, 170, 173 
efficacy optimization, 171 
homogenate, 167 
natural ingredients, 177 
oil, 169 
pesticidal products, 165 
powder, 168 
products, 165, 167, 169, 173, 176, 178 
Gasoline engine, 322 
Gelatin, 6, 125 
Gene expression, 36, 37, 113 
Genetic 
biodiversity, 261 
disorders, 120 
engineering, 5, 30, 98, 331 
expression, 36 
make-up, 261 
modification, 339 
phylogenetic sequence analysis, 112 
Genus azospirillum, 54 
Geographic information system (GIS), 294 
Gerlachia oryzae, 135 Index 393 
Germination, 62, 94, 175, 176, 185, 187, 
193–195, 240, 245, 265, 287, 293, 294
 
Giant cactus, 62
 
Gibberellins, 63–65, 68, 118
 
Ginger oil, 170
 
Ginkgo biloba, 146
 
Gliocladium, 195, 197
 
Global
 
population, 78
 
strategy plant conservation (GSPC), 227, 
230
 
warming, 113, 340, 343
 
episodes, 113
 
Globosumones, 134, 143, 156
 
Globosuxanthone A, 144
 
Globosuxanthone B, 144
 
Globosuxanthone C, 144
 
Gluconic, 83, 90, 94, 97
 
Glucose, 59, 91
 
Glutathione, 97
 
Glycine max, 57, 111, 112
 
Goosegrass, 280
 
Grain production, 304, 330, 345
 
Gramineae, 56
 
Granules, 5, 37, 55, 58, 59, 125
 
size, 5
 
Grape marc compost (GMC), 192, 193
 
Grassed
 
mulched plants, 266
 
plots, 266
 
waterways, 290
 
Green
 
bio-endophytic anti-disease agent, 118
 
leaf manuring, 308
 
manure (GMs), 210, 212, 224, 304, 305, 
308–310, 315, 337, 372
 
manuring, 308–310, 312, 314, 323, 335, 338
 
in situ, 308
 
revolution, 329, 330
 
Greeneyes roots, 27
 
Greengram, 92
 
Greenhouse
 
agro cultivation, 114
 
gas (GHGs), 113, 292, 334, 337, 340
 
Groundnut, 123, 176, 291
 
Growth
 
hormone production (azospirillum), 63
 
gibberellins, 65
 
indole acetic acid (IAA), 64
 
hormones, 52, 63, 117, 208, 229, 279
 
parameters, 29, 44, 58, 86, 110
 
Guaiacol peroxidase, 36
 
Guanidine derivatives, 111
 
H 
Halo zone, 94
 
Hand weeding, 262, 278, 279, 295
 
Harmful microorganisms, 7
 
Harrington seed destructor’, 294
 
Harrowing, 289, 290
 
Harvest weed seed control methods 
(HWSC), 294
 
Health
 
consciousness, 4
 
supervisory atmosphere, 126
 
Heat
 
dehydration, 169
 
killed cells (HKC), 110
 
Heavy metals (HMs), 32–34, 37, 88, 95, 96, 
119, 120, 127, 372
 
noxiousness, 119
 
Heinonen
 
method, 92
 
technique, 88
 
Helianthus annuus, 118
 
Helicoverpa zea, 114
 
Helotiales, 40
 
Hepatocellular carcinoma cells, 145
 
Heptelidic acid, 140
 
Herbal pesticides, 5
 
Herbicidal, 210, 265, 271, 279, 282, 283, 
286, 294, 348
 
systems, 272
 
Herbicide glyphosate, 120, 369
 
Heterodera cajanis, 176
 
Hexane, 171, 173, 174
 
High-pressure liquid chromatography 
(HPLC), 63, 65, 172
 
Holobiomes, 113
 
Holobiont, 38
 
Horticultural
 
crops, 291
 
ornamentals, 290
 
Host plant, 24, 33, 36, 41, 44, 62, 108, 110, 
372
 
Hostas, 112
 394 Index 
Human 
breast cancer, 133, 135, 139 
civilizations, 340 
food requirement, 209 
lung epithelial cells, 145 
microvascular endothelial cells (HMEC), 
145
 
neuroma, 134, 135
 
tumor cell lines, 133, 135
 
Humanity, 341 
Humic substances (HS), 187 
Humicola fuscoatra, 197 
Humidity, 168, 262, 265, 267, 270, 311 
Hydraulic conductivity, 217, 228 
Hydrophobic relationship, 125 
Hyper 
accumulative potentials, 35
 
parasitism, 7, 194, 196, 200, 371
 
causing mycelial lysis, 196
 
sensitive response, 108 
Hyphal cells, 9 
Hypocreales, 40 
agaricales, 40 
Hypoviruses, 196 
I 
Imbalanced diets, 345 
Immunoassays, 172 
Immunosuppressive substances, 117 
In vitro antifungal assay, 123 
Inceptisols, 31 
Incorporation combination, 263 
Indian agricultural activities, 328 
Indicator species evaluation, 40 
Indigenous microorganisms, 81 
Indol-3-yl-[13]cytochalasans, 134, 140 
Indole, 58, 63–65, 68, 89, 94, 109–111, 119, 
142 
3-acetic acid, 94, 127 
3-butyric acid (IBA), 63 
3-methanol, 63 
acetic acid (IAA), 58, 63–65, 68, 89–91, 
94, 95, 109, 110, 119, 311
 
production, 58, 65
 
Induced 
resistance, 43, 183, 196, 200 
systemic resistance (ISR), 7, 16, 43, 53, 
68, 194–196, 245, 249 
Industrial revolution, 322 
Ineffective pathogen proliferation, 183, 194 
Infected bacteria, 113 
Infertility, 28, 120, 369 
Inflammatory activity, 142 
Infrared spectroscopy, 172 
Inoculant 
manufacturers, 68 
rhizobium, 310 
Inoculation, 30, 60, 62, 63, 67, 68, 84–86, 89, 
90, 93, 109, 110, 112, 189, 248, 313, 372 
Inorganic 
fertilizers, 30, 31, 87, 93, 241, 248, 314, 
330, 333, 340
 
manures, 348
 
materials, 260
 
organic therapies, 313
 
phosphate-solubilizing, 85
 
bacteria, 85
 
strains, 85
 
Insect, 3–5, 7, 12, 15, 16, 106, 107, 109, 
111, 114, 126, 166, 174, 227, 228, 267, 
285, 288, 329, 334, 337, 339 
microbes associations, 114 
oviposition, 174 
pest 
control, 339
 
plantain lilies cultivars, 113
 
population, 337
 
Insecticidal, 116, 121, 125, 134, 155, 165, 
170, 173, 178 
activity, 125, 134, 155, 173, 178 
properties, 173 
Institute for Sustainable Agricultural 
Communities (ISAC), 352 
Integrated 
pest management (IPM), 4, 16, 107, 178, 
322, 353 
plant nutrition system (IPNS), 67 
Intensification, 226, 322, 324 
Intensive 
agricultural practices, 24 
farming practices, 226 
Intercontinental Umbrella Organization, 327 
Intercropping, 287 
Interfacial polymerization, 6 
Internal transcribed spacer (ITS), 54, 87 
International trade, 376 Index 395 
Inter-row
 
cultivators, 290
 
hoeing, 290
 
spacing, 290
 
Intra-cellular media, 37
 
Intra-radical vesicles, 37
 
Intra-row weeds, 290
 
Ionomes, 30
 
Ipomea sp., 56
 
batatas, 31
 
repens, 56
 
Iranian phosphate mine, 81
 
Iron, 10, 36, 37, 63, 66, 67, 83, 194, 345
 
chelating compounds, 66
 
Isaria fumosorosea, 109
 
Isobutyric, 85, 188, 191
 
acid, 188, 191
 
Isochromophilone II, 138, 139
 
Isocoumarin, 111
 
Isolation, 187
 
Isoquinolines, 151
 
Isotetrahydroauroglaucin, 145
 
Isovaleric, 85, 191
 
J 
Jasmonate acid, 43
 
Jasmonic acid, 108
 
Jesterone, 117
 
Johnson grass, 282, 287
 
K 
Karrikin, 294
 
Keto gluconic acids, 97
 
Key biological constraints, 292
 
Klebsiella pneumonia, 110
 
Kluyvera
 
ascorbata, 114
 
cryocrescens, 84
 
L 
Lycopersicon esculentum, 190
 
Lactuca sativa, 190
 
Lactic, 63, 85, 176
 
Lactobacillus delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus, 
176
 
Lagenaria siceraria, 88, 92
 
Laguncularia racemosa, 84
 
Lake sediments, 85
 
Land
 
allocation, 376
 
formation, 263
 
Landslides, 350
 
Lantana sp., 293
 
Larvicidal, 173, 174
 
Lateral roots, 64
 
Lawns, 291
 
Lead, 3, 41, 52, 60, 66, 78, 79, 96, 98, 108, 
120, 122–124, 194, 245, 262, 270, 292, 
344, 347, 372
 
Lecithin, 87
 
Leg-hemoglobin substances, 34
 
Legumes, 30, 38, 54, 210, 308, 333, 336, 346
 
Leguminosae, 55
 
Lemongrass oil, 170
 
Lepidium sativum, 190
 
Lepidopterous lymantria dispar, 116
 
Leptochloa fusca, 54
 
Lethal effect, 198
 
Lettuce, 350
 
Leucaena leucocephala, 308
 
Leucas aspera, 56
 
Light, 270, 285
 
weight materials, 270
 
Lignin, 108, 267, 311
 
Lipopolysaccharide, 153, 158
 
Liquid
 
formulations, 6
 
state fermentation, 10
 
swine manure (LSM), 187, 188
 
Livestock, 208–210, 230, 329, 337, 339, 
342, 364
 
Living microorganisms, 4
 
Locally-made garlic powder, 169
 
Loliterm B, 117
 
Lolium temulentum, 283
 
Long-term conservative practices, 213
 
Loranthus sp., 286
 
Low dietary contents, 345
 
Lslea, 37
 
Lsnced, 37
 
Lycopersici, 123, 191, 194
 
Lymantria dispar, 116
 
M 
Macerating biofumigant plant, 263
 
Machineries, 322, 323, 353
 
activity, 261
 396 Index 
Macroaggregates, 212, 218 
Macronutrients, 83, 88 
Macrophomina phaseolina, 187, 199 
Macropores, 214, 217 
Macroporosity, 272 
Macroporousness, 260, 262 
Magnaporthe 
grisea, 123 
oryzae, 140 
Magnesium, 10, 123 
Maize, 55, 56, 62, 66, 67, 87–89, 92, 125, 
134, 173, 174, 229, 241, 242, 246–248, 
271, 291, 293, 310, 321 
Malformations, 124 
Malnourishment, 342 
Malnutrition, 345, 365 
Manganese, 37, 66 
Mangroves, 84 
Man-made agricultural stimulators, 327 
Mannose, 59 
Manure, 89, 183, 184, 192, 200, 210, 
212–214, 218, 220, 224, 225, 229, 
304–308, 310, 313, 322, 323, 336, 340, 
347, 349, 352 
Marine mangrove plants, 56 
Market-orientated scheme, 344 
Marsilia quadrifolia, 56 
Mass 
production, 53, 83, 98, 108 
spectrometry (MS), 110, 172, 195 
Matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization￾time of flight (MALDI-TOF), 110 
Mattress material, 267 
Maximum 
correlation, 306 
proliferation, 186 
residue level (MRLs), 375 
Mechanical 
control, 288, 289 
cultivation, 262, 272 
soil structure alteration, 262 
weed control, 214 
Mechanism of, 
organic amendments, 184 
composts, 190 
liquid swine manure (LSM), 187 
plant seed-based cakes, 186 
s-h mixture, 188 
slurry, 187 
Medicinal aromatic plants, 365 
Melanin, 37 
Membrane stability index, 34 
Metabolic 
process, 79 
proliferation, 64 
Metabolites, 12, 97, 108, 109, 117, 125, 126, 
133, 134, 136, 139, 141, 143, 144, 146–148, 
151, 153, 154, 156, 157, 166, 195 
Metagenomic, 106, 107, 125, 126 
study, 125 
Metallothioneins, 33 
Metam-sodium, 30 
chemigation, 30 
Metarhizium, 53, 111, 112 
brunneum, 111, 112 
strain, 112 
Methane, 198, 292 
Methanol, 167, 171, 173, 174 
Methemoglobinemia, 368 
Methyl bromide, 106 
Micro-macro plant nutrients, 225 
Microaerophilic conditions, 51, 53, 58, 59 
Microaggregates, 212 
Microbes, 26, 32, 33, 40, 66, 88, 89, 91, 96, 
97, 107, 109, 111, 113, 114, 117, 118, 
125, 126, 186, 191, 192, 194–196, 243, 
248, 310, 337, 370, 372 
community 
composition, 243 
structure, 38 
diversity, 24, 125, 183, 366 
ecology, 184 
growth, 59 
inoculants, 53, 87, 310, 311 
inoculum, 26 
insecticides, 53 
pathogens, 42 
pesticide, 4 
industry., 126 
adaptation, 126 
population, 53, 56, 80, 85, 186, 245, 248, 
304, 306, 314, 370, 371 
relationship, 87 
Microbiota, 42, 372 
Microclimate changes, 272 
Microelements, 166 
Micromonosporaceae, 85 Index 397 
Micronutrients, 25, 27, 208, 209, 220, 224, 
225, 229, 230, 241, 307, 314, 337, 345 
Micro-propagated banana seedlings, 25 
Microsclerotia, 185, 188 
Millennium development goals (MDGs), 
332, 341, 349, 353 
Millets, 54, 286, 310 
Milling, 262 
Mineral 
nutrients, 110, 208, 229, 230, 286, 312 
solution (MMN), 110, 127 
Mineralization, 39, 80, 88, 97, 224, 311 
Mineralogy, 224 
Mitigation, 23, 35–37, 106, 112, 117, 119 
Mitogen-activated protein kinase, 42 
Modes of action, 24, 25, 41, 42, 44, 78, 85, 
97, 98, 106, 107, 126, 127 
Modulus of elasticity, 60 
Moisture retention, 211, 214 
Moldboard plow, 212, 218, 271, 289 
treatments, 212 
Mollicellin D, 135 
Mollicellins A, 152 
Mollicellins H-J, 135 
Molybdenum, 63 
Monoamine oxidase (MAO), 142, 153, 158 
Monoclonal antibodies (Mabs), 172 
Monocotyledonous, 24 
Monoculturing, 184 
Monospecific genus, 39 
Morphological 
changes, 64, 208, 229 
characterization, 112 
characters, 58 
Morphospecies, 27 
Mowing, 282, 290 
Mucor plumbeus, 123 
Mugil cephalus, 146 
Mulchery, 265 
Mulches, 260, 263, 265–269, 278, 279, 295 
Mulching, 260, 265, 266, 268–270, 272, 338 
Multicellular, 9 
Multi-cropping, 338 
Muscanthus, 57 
sinensis, 57 
Mushroom production, 333 
Mustard seed meal (MSM), 199 
Mutualistic, 117 
Mycelium, 36, 193, 197 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, 133, 134, 136, 
138, 143 
Mycoherbicides, 288 
Mycorrhizae, 348 
fungi, 38, 247 
mycelium, 35 
symbioses, 29 
transformed carrot roots, 43 
Mycorrhizosphere, 24, 38, 42 
Mycotoxins, 124, 134 
N 
Nanoagroparticles, 121–123 
Nanoaluminum, 121 
Nanobiopesticides, 121–123 
Nanotechnology, 106, 107, 121, 127 
Naphthalene acetic acid (NAA), 64 
Narrow window burning, 294 
National 
Botanical Research Institute Phosphate 
(NBRIP), 85, 86 
organic 
program (NOP), 262, 349, 353 
standards, 332, 337 
Native farming production, 331 
Natural 
ecosystems, 225, 226, 228 
homesteads, 348, 350 
mulches, 265, 267, 270 
pesticides formulation issues, 176 
products, 117, 134, 140, 157, 177 
Neighborhood ranchers, 352 
Nematicidal, 117, 165, 178 
activity, 178 
Nematodes, 4, 5, 16, 42, 185, 199, 371 
Neonicotinoids, 120 
Nesting, 227 
Net photosynthetic effectiveness, 34 
Neural disorders, 106 
Neurological effects, 120 
Nicotinic acid, 65 
Nitrate, 55, 59, 91, 185, 188, 189, 312, 329, 
368 
Nitrification, 39, 185 
Nitrite production, 61 
Nitrogen, 25, 26, 28, 30, 31, 35, 37–39, 
41, 52, 54, 56–64, 67, 68, 79, 80, 82, 84, 398 Index 
89–91, 107, 109–111, 184, 185, 211, 212, 
222, 224, 267–269, 286, 310, 311, 329, 
335, 347, 350, 368, 370 
fixation, 52, 54, 59–63, 68, 89, 107, 109, 
311, 335 
efficiency, 62, 64 
processes, 59 
phosphorous potassium (NPK), 31, 52, 
87, 286, 307, 314 
Nitrogenase, 59, 60, 62, 66, 68 
activity, 62 
enzyme, 68 
Nitrous 
acid, 185, 188 
oxide (NO2), 292, 347 
Nodulation, 37, 241, 248, 311 
Nodule-like tumors, 64 
Nodulisporium sp., 109 
Non-affected bacteria, 113 
Non-agrochemical production (NAP), 134 
Non-cereal crop plants, 54 
Non-endophyte, 110 
Non-fumigated fields, 30 
Non-graminaceous crops, 56, 57 
Non-inhabited AM plant, 35 
Non-inoculated seeds, 60 
Non-metric multidimensional scaling 
(NMDS), 28, 39 
Non-mycorrhizal (NM), 29 
plants, 31 
Non-point source pollution, 225 
Non-symbiotic nitrogen-fixing microorgan￾isms, 54 
Non-targeted microorganisms, 123 
Non-toxic 
mechanism, 5 
substrates, 10 
Norway maple, 40 
roots, 40 
Nostoc, 310 
No-till organic agricultural technique, 329 
No-tillage farming, 283 
Novel mechanism, 122 
Noxious alkaloids, 117 
Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), 172 
Nucleopolyhedrovirus, 125 
Nursery transplantation, 265 
Nutrient, 286 
availability, 34, 183, 184 
depletion, 211, 314 
immobilization, 260 
management, 29, 67, 305, 307, 341 
mobilization, 61, 241 
provision, 246, 248 
release stimulation, 263 
stabilization, 33, 90 
uptake, 23, 26, 52, 95, 225, 310, 372 
Nutritional 
health impacts, 367 
enhanced nutrient quality, 367 
higher yield, 367 
reduced pesticide residues, 367 
quality, 210, 323, 329, 340 
O 
Obligate endophytic diazotrophs, 57 
Ochrephilonol, 139 
Ocimum sanctum, 58 
Oil 
dispersion, 6 
seeds, 365 
soluble sulfides, 168 
Olives, 365 
Olpidium brassicae, 192 
O-methyl-sterigmatocystin, 135, 154 
Onion thrips, 173 
Oocydin, 117 
Oospores, 197 
Operational taxonomic units, 40 
Optimization, 86, 114, 118, 177, 344 
Orchards, 290 
Orcinol, 143 
Organic 
acid, 9, 30, 59, 83, 85, 88, 94, 97, 98, 198 
agriculture (OA), 23, 25, 43, 44, 79, 108, 
134, 157, 158, 210–212, 217, 226–228, 
261, 304, 310, 324, 325, 330, 331, 338, 
353, 364, 376 
approach, 228 
amendment, 185, 186, 188, 189, 191, 
197, 198, 212, 213, 218, 220, 224, 225, 
241, 248, 314, 315 
assortment, 326 
authorization, 332 
certification, 332, 351 
commodities, 344 Index 399 
crop protection, 165, 178 
cropping systems, 210, 265 
diversification, 344 
farming, 3, 52, 67, 207–214, 217, 218, 
220, 224, 225, 227–230, 259, 260, 
265, 272, 279, 304, 305, 308, 312, 314, 
322–324, 326, 332, 333, 335, 337, 341, 
342, 346, 347, 352, 364–367, 369, 370, 
372, 373, 375, 376 
standards, 260 
system (OFS), 208, 209, 211–214, 
217, 220, 225, 229, 260, 279, 308, 
322–343, 345–350, 352, 353, 372 
farmlands, 324 
fertilizer nutrients, 229 
food, 4, 210, 305, 324, 325, 344, 346, 
349, 363, 364, 366–370, 372–376 
producers, 325 
production, 340, 363, 366, 367, 375 
herbicides, 278, 295 
manures, 228, 229, 272, 314, 328, 
334–337 
materials, 198, 200, 213, 224, 229, 260, 
305, 312 
matter, 39, 82, 113, 183, 184, 186, 189, 
191, 194, 197, 199, 200, 209, 212–214, 
217, 218, 224, 229, 261, 269, 307, 309, 
311, 334, 335, 337, 365, 370–372 
methods, 342 
mulch, 210, 214, 259, 265, 266, 269–272 
mulching, 259 
plant breeding (OPB), 295 
production system, 344, 345 
products, 3, 209, 324, 331, 332, 337, 344, 
346, 373, 374 
reservoirs, 209 
supervision, 334 
tagging, 351 
unstable metabolites, 112 
Organophosphates, 106 
Organophosphorus pesticides (OPPs), 120, 127 
Organoponic, 366 
systems, 366 
Organo-sulfur compounds, 168, 169, 174, 178 
Orsellinic acid, 134, 143, 155 
Oryza sativa L., 53, 304, 312 
Oryzophagus oryzae, 116 
Osmotic stress, 60 
Ostrinia furnacalis, 116 
Ovicidal activities, 174 
Oxidative 
phosphorylation process, 62 
stress, 31, 37, 245 
Oxygen depletion, 198 
P 
Paenibacillus, 80, 84, 85 
macerans, 84 
Panicum maximum, 62 
Pantoea, 83, 89, 90, 94 
agglomerans, 83, 84, 87, 90 
Penicillium, 4, 86, 123, 174, 175, 370 
expansum, 123, 124 
Phytophthora, 15, 41, 43, 134, 153, 156, 
174, 175, 187, 191–195, 197, 288 
apsici, 197 
attack, 43 
capsici, 15, 187 
cinnamomi, 193 
fragariae, 193 
infestans, 109, 134, 156 
infestation, 175 
nicotianae, 191, 192 
parasitica, 31, 43, 191 
disease, 31 
Piriformospora indica, 109, 113 
Pseudocercospora fijiensis, 110 
Pseudomonas, 4, 31, 53, 64, 80, 84, 86, 87, 
89, 90, 93, 94, 114, 119, 120, 187–189, 
191, 194, 195, 370, 372 
aeruginosa, 86, 119, 120, 187 
strain, 120 
diminuta, 31 
fluorescens, 4, 53, 64, 191, 194 
maltophila, 114 
putida, 53, 84, 87, 189 
89B61, 189 
solanacearum, 188 
stutzeri, 84 
Paraglomus, 30 
Paralichar, 336 
Parasitization, 197 
Parchment paper, 169 
Parietin, 145 
Parkinson disorder, 120 
Parthenium hysterophorus, 286 400 Index 
Paspalum notatum, 62 
Pasteuria penetrans, 371 
Pastures, 227, 228, 280, 281, 290 
Pathogen, 7, 9, 32, 33, 41–43, 61, 106–108, 
113, 117, 118, 122–124, 126, 127, 133, 
157, 166, 175, 177, 184–186, 190–192, 
194–199, 245, 288, 292, 371 
bacteria nematodes, 176 
fungi, 11, 41, 123, 190, 310 
microorganisms, 41, 79, 108, 122 
population, 193 
related proteins, 108 
Peanut cake, 185, 186 
Pennisetum purpureum, 57 
Pentacyclic triterpenoid, 153 
Perennial, 281 
crops, 281, 282 
species, 281 
weeds, 266, 282, 283, 286, 289 
Perforated sheets, 265 
Peritrichous flagella, 58 
Perlite medium, 191 
Pesticides, 3, 4, 16, 24, 79, 106, 109, 111, 
120, 121, 125, 126, 165–169, 171–173, 
176–178, 208, 210, 304, 305, 312, 322, 
323, 327–331, 334, 337, 339, 340, 348, 
350, 351, 364, 367, 369, 370, 375, 376 
era, 339 
preparation, 169 
usage (garlic products), 173 
Pests, 3–5, 7, 12, 15, 16, 25, 105–109, 111, 
112, 114, 126, 165, 166, 173, 184, 261, 
263, 287, 322, 323, 336–338, 371 
Phaseolus vulgaris, 8, 15 
Phenolic, 43, 154, 174, 195 
Phenological phases, 27 
Phenylacetic acid, 63 
Phenylpropanoids, 108 
Pheophytin isotopomer, 111 
Phialides, 9 
Phoma medicaginis f. sp. pinodella, 193 
Phosphate, 26, 28, 30, 34–37, 53, 78, 81–91, 
93–98, 109, 110, 240, 269, 370 
solubilizers, 53, 86 
solubilizing 
bacteria (PSB), 53, 83–86, 89–91, 95, 
313 
capability, 84, 85 
content, 85 
efficiency, 93, 95 
fungi, 82 
microorganisms (PSMS) , 78, 81–83 
rhizospheric bacteria (PSRB), 91 
solvable microorganism, 89 
starvation, 98, 240, 242 
Phosphonium hydroxide (NaOH-P), 85 
Phosphor-compost, 336 
Phosphorus (P), 10, 25, 26, 28, 29, 31, 34, 
38, 39, 77–92, 94, 95, 97, 98, 107, 221, 
242, 266, 269, 304, 310, 314, 368 
hydrochloride, 85 
solubilization, 78, 84, 91, 94, 97, 98 
solubilizing microorganism, 78, 80, 81, 
87, 98 
Photorespiration, 293 
Photosynthesis, 29, 34, 37, 41, 79, 113, 118, 
245, 292, 311 
processes, 35 
reactions, 113 
Phyllanthus 
amarus, 58 
niruri, 56 
Phylloplane microbes, 118 
Phyllosphere, 53 
region, 56 
Phyllostachys edulis, 82 
Physical quality, 213 
Physicochemical properties, 183, 194, 195, 
337 
Physiological 
alteration, 37 
mechanism, 33 
properties, 61, 168 
Phytate, 83, 87 
Phytic acid, 80, 87 
Phytoalexins, 43, 108 
Phytochelatins, 33 
Phytochemical, 165, 171, 172 
Phyto-disease control, 118 
Phytohormone, 61, 64, 68, 108, 326 
production, 59, 61 
Phytopathogenic, 3, 12, 16, 53, 60, 66, 86, 
122, 134, 153, 156, 157, 183, 186, 188, 
190, 192, 195, 197, 198, 200 
fungi, 190 
microbes, 198 Index 401 
Phytoremediation, 26, 33, 38, 119 
Phyto-sphere, 118 
Phytotoxic, 120, 155, 189, 190, 247 
Piggery, 339 
Pigweeds, 280 
Pikovskaya (PVK), 82, 85, 87, 94 
Pistilla stratiotes, 56 
Plant 
boosters, 38 
counter-reaction, 42 
disease 
control, 134, 157, 158 
management, 12, 183 
eating animals, 109, 112 
growth promoting 
activities, 61 
bacteria (PGPB), 57, 108, 196 
microorganisms (PGPM), 87, 98 
phytohormones, 53 
rhizobacteria (PGPR), 52–55, 66, 68, 
80, 189, 196, 371 
substances, 63, 64 
host microbes, 26 
incorporated-protectants, 5 
inhibitors, 108 
metabolism, 11, 61 
nutrients, 23, 39, 67, 87, 110, 209, 213, 
229, 240, 242, 266, 304, 307, 311, 323, 
331 
parasitic nematode, 187, 199, 371 
pathogenic, 288 
microorganisms, 24 
production, 24, 31, 245, 248, 249 
related microbial communities, 40 
rhizosphere, 63, 68, 80 
sustenance, 27 
Plasmodiophora brassicae, 192, 193 
Plasmodium falciparum, 133, 134, 136, 138, 
152 
Plasticity, 262 
Pleosporales, 40 
P-limiting regions, 82 
Ploughing, 289 
Plowing, 211, 217, 218, 265, 289, 328 
Plummeting, 82 
Plutella xylostella, 114, 115, 134, 155 
Podosphaera xanthil, 8 
Pollinators, 227 
Poly β-hydroxybutyrate (PHB), 55, 58 
Polyamines, 37 
Polygalacturonase activity, 64 
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR), 27, 81, 
97, 199 
denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis 
(PCR-DGGE), 27 
Polysiphonia urceolata, 145 
Poly-ß-hydroxybutyrate granules, 68 
Pore-size distributions, 214 
Portulaca quadrifida, 286 
Post-emergence tillage, 278, 295 
Potassium, 28, 31, 39, 82, 90, 91, 188, 189, 
266, 286 
Potato, 10, 13, 16, 31, 82, 134, 156, 185, 
187, 195, 199, 220, 291 
cultivation, 220 
dextrose agar (PDA), 13, 16 
Potential bio-fertilizer, 29 
Poultry manure (PM), 89, 183–186, 224, 
242 
Pratylenchus penetrans, 199 
Pre-post-harvest preservations, 118 
Precipitation, 81, 167, 270, 292 
Preservation, 112, 125, 269, 272, 349 
Pressmud, 10 
Prevention, 79, 108, 118, 270, 280 
Priming, 42, 43, 224 
Prochaetoglobosin I, 143 
Prochaetoglobosin III, 139 
Proliferation, 65, 143, 200 
Prolines, 37 
Propane, 291 
Prophylactic measure, 175 
Propionibacterium acnes, 134, 141 
Propionic acid, 83, 188, 191 
Protection, 165, 372 
Proteobacteria, 40 
Proton efflux phenomenon, 67 
Protuberances, 34 
Pseudocercosporella herpotrichoides, 193 
Pseudoperonospora cubensis, 175 
Pungent-smelling malicious odor, 166 
Purification, 171, 172 
Purse lane, 280 
Pycniospores, 193 
Pyrenochaet 
aterrestris, 198 402 Index 
lycopersici, 194 
Pyricularia oryzae, 15, 134, 135, 142, 158 
Pyridoxine, 65 
Pythium, 4, 134, 142, 153, 190–195, 197, 
372 
aphanidermatum, 192 
arrhenomanes, 191 
infection, 190 
ultimum, 134, 142, 193, 194 
Q 
Quercus suber L., 192 
R 
Rhizoctonia, 7, 9, 43, 187, 190–194, 196, 197 
infection, 43 
solani, 7, 9, 14, 15, 187, 191–194, 196, 197 
Ralstonia solanacearum, 187, 189, 193, 199 
Ramifications, 26 
Ramphicarpa fistulosa, 293 
Rangeland, 290 
Reactive oxygen species (ROS), 113 
Rebounding, 262 
Relative 
humidity, 193 
length of stem with brown xylem 
(RLSBX), 193 
Reliable biotechnological tool, 23 
Remediation, 25, 37, 95, 96, 119 
Reproduction 
development, 245 
growth, 280 
method, 281 
Resident microbial populations, 184 
Residual 
management, 263 
toxicity, 106 
Resistance, 11, 25, 28, 31, 34, 38, 42, 60, 
61, 66, 82, 95, 105, 106, 108, 109, 113, 
118, 122, 125, 165, 172, 175, 177, 196, 
217, 245, 246, 271, 283, 311 
induction, 108 
Respiratory diseases, 120 
Rhapis cochinchinensis, 151 
Rhizobacteria, 53, 61, 80 
Rhizobiaceae, 113 
Rhizobium, 11, 26, 52, 80, 94, 310, 311 
Rhizomes, 282, 287 
Rhizopus stolonifer, 123, 134, 149 
Rhizosphere, 12, 13, 32, 33, 52–58, 60, 61, 
63, 66–68, 81, 82, 84, 85, 87, 91, 93, 97, 
120, 186, 193, 229, 243, 245, 336 
diazotrophs, 57 
microorganisms, 54, 66, 85 
PSBs, 91 
region, 12, 13, 52, 54–57, 60, 61 
soil, 55, 56, 58, 63, 68, 82, 84, 193 
wheat soils, 90 
Rhyzopertha dominica, 121 
Ribonucleotide diphosphate reductase, 66 
Ribosomal DNA (rDNA), 85, 87, 95, 112, 
120 
Ribulose-1,5-biphosphate (RuBisCO), 292 
Rice, 10, 27, 55–58, 62, 64, 67, 96, 115, 
116, 123, 134, 135, 137, 140, 142, 153, 
174, 175, 185, 186, 188, 189, 198, 199, 
242, 245, 246, 282, 283, 295, 304–314, 
336, 338, 344, 345 
wheat production mechanism, 304 
Ridging, 291 
Rishitin, 43 
Risk diversion approaches, 343 
Rock phosphate (RP), 81, 89, 93 
Role of, 
tillage organic farming, 261 
mulch (weeds controller), 265 
mulches effects, 263 
organic manures tillage, 262 
organic mulch (nutrients availability), 
267 
organic mulch (soil erosion), 270 
organic mulch (soil micro fauna), 266 
organic mulching (soil water), 271 
organic mulch-soil organic matter 
(SOM), 269 
soil physical properties, 269 
stubble mulches, 270 
tillage importance, 262 
Root 
borne diseases, 116 
colonization (trichoderma), 3, 11, 27, 30, 
39, 52, 60, 61 
action mechanism (t. harzianum), 12 
application (biopesticides), 14 
trichoderma (sustainable agriculture), 11 Index 403 
trichoderma applications (biological 
control), 13
 
trichoderma biopesticide features, 12
 
trichoderma biopesticide production, 13
 
trichoderma interaction (other microor￾ganisms), 11
 
development, 52, 64, 229
 
dry matter, 64, 84
 
exudates, 41, 59, 61, 63, 98, 196, 287
 
microbial communities, 40
 
proliferation, 64, 263
 
rot disease, 14, 118
 
system, 12, 24, 26, 28, 41, 82, 88, 95, 
109, 111, 113, 281, 286
 
vacuoles, 37
 
Rota evaporator, 171
 
Rotiorinols A–C, 139
 
Rubrorotiorin, 139
 
Russian knapweed, 282
 
S 
Spodoptera frugiperda, 112, 113, 115, 125
 
nucleopolyhedrovirus (SfNPV), 125
 
Sesbania
 
aculeata, 308–310, 313
 
rostrata, 309
 
Saccharomyces spp, 174
 
Saccharum officinarum, 14
 
Salicylic acid, 108
 
Salinization, 79, 312
 
S-allycysteine (SAC), 167
 
S-allylmercaptocysteine (SMAC), 167
 
Salmonella
 
choleraesuis, 134, 157
 
typhimurium, 134, 153, 176
 
Saponins, 174
 
Saprotrophic populations, 39
 
Sativum oil extract, 173
 
Scanning electron microscopy, 124
 
Sclerotinia minor (SM), 12, 190
 
Sclerotium
 
rolfsii, 12, 14, 118
 
sclerotiorum, 14
 
Sebania speciosa, 310
 
Secondary
 
branches, 9
 
metabolite, 9, 12, 108, 126, 133, 134, 
146, 153, 155, 157, 242
 
Seed
 
cakes, 183, 200
 
dressing, 5
 
germination, 62, 191, 280, 289, 372
 
morphology, 282
 
Sensitization, 42
 
Serine, 108, 142
 
Serratia, 80
 
Sesame oil, 170
 
Sesbania, 308–310, 313
 
Sesquiterpenes, 111
 
Setaria viridis, 293
 
S-H mixture, 183, 188, 189, 200
 
Shallow mechanical disturbance, 217
 
Shoot elongation, 91, 93
 
Siderophore, 66, 68, 89, 95, 108, 109
 
production, 52, 194
 
Sieving technique, 28
 
Sigatoka disease, 110
 
Signal
 
hormone, 118
 
transduction, 79
 
Silent spring, 330
 
Silver nanoparticles, 123, 124
 
Single super phosphorus (SSP), 89
 
Sitophilus oryzae, 121
 
Slope centrifugation, 28
 
Slurry, 13, 183, 187, 199, 200, 220, 225, 
304
 
Small
 
conventional agriculture habitats, 228
 
medium entrepreneurship, 126
 
Sochromophilonol, 139
 
Socio-economic crisis, 345
 
Sodium chloride, 60
 
Soil
 
aggregates, 211, 213, 214, 218, 370
 
aggregation, 307, 311
 
amendment, 188, 189, 245
 
bacteria, 81
 
biological
 
activity, 209, 211
 
stimulation, 263
 
borne plant diseases, 32
 
compaction, 211, 213, 217
 
conditioning, 263
 
conditions, 198, 228, 261, 271
 
decontamination, 96
 404 Index 
degradation, 26, 28, 79, 208, 209, 241, 248 
enrichment, 370 
enzymes, 88, 266 
erosion, 218, 262, 272, 343 
fertility, 24, 25, 29, 32, 53, 78, 86, 89, 
208, 209, 212, 226, 229, 240–242, 245, 
246, 248, 249, 266, 304, 305, 314, 323, 
334, 366, 375 
depletion, 78 
flooding, 197 
hydraulic properties, 214 
management, 338 
microbial activity, 190, 191 
microbiota, 186, 188, 194, 198, 240, 243, 
372 
microorganisms, 24, 39, 40, 199, 267, 348 
organic 
C (SOC), 224 
matter (SOM), 113, 208, 209, 211, 214, 
222, 224, 225, 227, 229, 260, 338, 
347 
pH, 28, 38, 79, 185, 188, 220, 225, 279, 347 
buffer, 38 
physical properties, 213, 214, 229, 266 
porosity, 214, 217, 241, 243, 246, 248 
pot assay, 26 
preparation practices, 282 
productiveness, 326 
profile management, 38 
quality, 26, 28, 88, 211, 213, 229, 241, 
242, 246, 248, 305, 368 
root endophytic symbiotic microorgan￾isms, 113 
salinity, 243, 245 
reclamation, 243 
salinization, 79 
saprophytes, 371 
sodification, 79 
solarization, 197–199 
stability, 370 
suppressiveness, 187, 199 
tests, 187 
sustainability, 208, 241, 248 
texture, 23, 28, 183, 214, 224, 370 
water retention, 214 
weed seed bank, 288 
Solanaceae, 56, 197 
Solanum lycopersicum, 8, 15 
Solarization, 199 
Solavetivone, 43 
Solid state fermentation (SSF), 10, 13, 16 
Solubilization, 53, 80, 81, 84–87, 90, 91, 
93–95, 97, 98, 107, 109, 311 
Sorbose, 59 
Sorghum, 55, 56, 62, 67, 271, 280, 293, 310 
bicolor, 60 
Sound technological knowledge, 344 
Soybean, 26, 63, 65, 87, 170, 185, 186, 241, 
244, 247, 248, 280, 340 
oil, 170 
Spartina pectinata, 57 
Species, 9, 24, 26–30, 38, 40, 41, 54, 55, 
57, 58, 81, 84–86, 89, 90, 92–94, 97, 
109, 113, 117, 133, 134, 151–153, 155, 
173–176, 189, 190, 198, 208, 224–228, 
278–282, 287, 292–294, 308–311, 348, 
371, 372 
Spectrophotometric quantification, 84 
Sphenophorus levis, 115 
Spinacia oleracea, 57 
Spirilli, 81 
Spirillum, 54, 55 
lipoferum, 54, 55 
Spring 
tillage, 278, 279, 295 
tooth harrow, 271 
Stakeholders, 366 
Stale seedbed 
method, 289 
technique, 289 
Staphylococcus aureus, 134, 135, 141, 157, 
176 
209P, 134, 141 
Starch, 5, 6, 10, 125 
Stationary perennials, 281 
Steochospermum marginatum, 187 
Sterigmatocystin, 135, 154 
Stolon, 282 
Streptococcus, 134, 157, 176 
aureus, 134 
pyogenes, 134, 157 
Streptomyces scabies, 185 
Stress 
alleviation, 107 
tolerant, 38, 56, 331 
Striga hermonthica, 293 Index 405 
Stromata, 9 
Structural 
stability, 224 
uniformity, 260, 262 
Stubble-mulch 
agriculture, 271 
farming method, 271 
Sub-Saharan African (SSA), 341, 364–366, 
369, 373, 375, 376 
Subtropical bamboo ecosystem, 83 
Succinate, 59 
Sugar, 59 
beet, 34, 282 
maple, 40 
Sulfur, 37, 165, 167, 169, 337 
Sunflower hulls, 266 
Sunlight, 169, 177, 289, 292, 338 
Supernatant, 64, 65 
Superoxide dismutase, 31 
Supplement, 167, 290 
Suppression, 176, 193, 199, 200, 265, 295 
Suspo-emulsion, 6 
Sustainable, 3, 4, 12, 16, 23–33, 35, 38, 
39, 43, 78–82, 84, 91, 98, 106, 108, 111, 
112, 114, 119, 121–123, 165, 178, 200, 
208–210, 213, 226–228, 292, 294, 295, 
304, 306, 307, 312, 314, 322–324, 326, 
330, 333, 334, 336, 339, 342, 343, 345, 
349, 350, 353, 364, 366, 370 
agriculture, 3, 12, 16, 24, 80, 98, 111, 
114, 122, 322, 324, 330, 353, 364, 366 
biotechnological tool, 121, 123 
management, 33, 119, 209, 336 
Sweeping cultivator, 271 
Swollenin protein, 11 
Symbiotic 
AM fungi, 31 
association, 26, 28 
relationship, 24 
Synthetic 
agricultural inputs, 322, 323, 328, 340, 353 
chemical, 105, 322, 323, 353 
pesticides, 4, 166 
pesticides, 24, 105–107, 120–122, 125, 
166, 178, 183, 184, 279, 348, 370 
Systemic 
acquired resistance (SAR), 194, 196, 245 
establishment, 109 
T 
Trichoderma, 3, 4, 7–16, 53, 86, 113, 188, 
192, 195, 196, 334, 372 
asperellum, 7, 9, 10 
aureoviride, 9 
biocontrol agents, 11 
biofungicides, 11 
biopesticide, 3, 7, 8, 12–14, 16 
brevicompactum, 12 
conidiophores, 9 
gamsii, 9 
hamatum, 9, 11, 14 
harzianum, 4, 7, 9–15, 86, 196 
koningii, 9 
lignorum, 7 
longibrachyatum, 9 
parareesei, 9 
piluliferum, 9 
polysporum, 9 
pseudokoningii, 9 
reessei, 9 
selective medium, 86 
spore production, 10 
spores, 7 
strains, 14 
virens, 9 
viride, 4, 9, 11–13, 15 
Triticum aestivum, 91, 119, 120, 190, 304, 
307, 312 
Talaromyces aurantiacus, 82 
Taxonomy, 52, 54 
Tea-oil plants, 89, 90 
Technological progress, 329 
Temperature, 86, 91, 121, 168, 169, 176, 
177, 188, 192, 193, 197, 198, 260, 263, 
265–267, 269, 271, 278, 291–294, 311, 
337, 370 
Tension tolerance, 27 
Termites, 173 
Terranchus urticae, 176 
Tetrahydroxanthenone, 144 
Tetra-S-methyl derivatives, 134 
Thermo-photo-degradation, 170 
Thermophilus, 176 
Thiamethoxam, 120 
Thin-layer chromatography (TLC), 172 
Thiol-disulfide, 176 
Three-point hitches, 290 
Tiliaceae, 56 406 Index 
Tillage, 24, 184, 209, 211, 212, 217, 218, 
220, 224, 259–263, 270–272, 279, 282, 
283, 288, 289, 327, 337 
intensities, 218 
practices, 262 
processes, 261 
tools, 262 
Tithonia diversifolia, 229 
Titratable acidity (TA), 84, 90 
Tolypothrix, 310 
Tomato 
plant, 31, 43, 83, 94, 123 
seedlings, 189, 191, 193 
Total organic carbon nitrogen, 224 
Toxic, 106, 114, 119–121, 151, 173, 177, 
188, 195 
chemicals, 16, 343 
compounds, 288 
concentrations, 363 
metabolites, 7 
metals, 25, 95 
Trace-nutrients, 25 
Traditional herbicidal systems, 261 
Trans-cinnamic acid-precursor, 108 
Transgenic crops, 79 
Translocation, 24, 95, 96 
Transpiration, 118, 285 
Transplanted, 188, 307, 309, 310 
crops, 309 
Transportation, 53, 121, 334, 339, 374 
Trash-mulch agriculture, 270 
Trechisporales, 40 
Tress disease, 118 
Tribasic calcium phosphate, 84 
Tricalcium phosphate (TCP), 81, 83–87, 93, 
94, 98 
Trichodion, 143 
Tricholin, 7 
Trichophyton mentagrophytes, 134, 135, 143 
Trophobiotic, 117 
Tryptophan, 63–65 
independent pathway, 64, 65 
Tumorpromoting agent, 142 
Turmeric, 291 
U 
Ultraviolet (UV), 125, 172 
United 
Nations 
Conference on Trade and Development 
(UNCTAD), 349, 373 
Environment Program (UNEP), 347, 349 
States of America (USA), 4, 7, 30, 324, 
331, 332, 346 
Department of Agriculture (USDA), 
213, 323, 331, 332, 337, 347–349, 365 
Upright position, 291 
Uprooting, 290 
V 
Valeric acid, 188 
Vanadomoybdate 
method, 92 
technique, 88 
Variety selection, 278, 279, 295 
Vascular tissues, 25, 26, 111, 186 
Vegetation 
coverage, 27, 39 
mimicry, 283 
organs, 281, 282 
parts, 27 
spores, 112 
Vermicompost, 304, 305, 314, 315, 335–338 
Vermiculate (V), 11, 84, 147, 192, 193 
derivadas, 192 
Vertebrates, 348 
Verticillium, 4, 12, 53, 184–186, 188, 191, 
197, 198 
chlamydosporium, 197 
dahliae, 12, 185, 188, 191, 197, 198 
Verticillium wilt, 184–186, 188, 191 
Vesicular-arbuscular mycorrhizas (VAM), 370 
Vicissitudes, 112 
Vigna 
radiata, 83, 92 
unguiculata, 309 
Village markets, 351 
Vinydithiins, 173 
Viridin, 7 
Vitamin, 65, 84, 367, 368 
Vitrification, 121 
Volatile 
fatty acid (VFA), 188, 191 
compounds, 188 
organic compounds, 195, 198 
W 
Wastes effluents, 119 
Water, 243, 285, 288 
hemp, 280 
infiltration, 214, 241, 243, 246, 248, 260, 
263 Index 407 
penetration, 263, 307 
retention, 211, 213, 214, 217, 241, 246, 
248, 347 
capacity, 211, 213, 214 
stable macro aggregation, 214 
wasters, 285 
Wedelia trilobata, 95 
Weed, 57, 210, 211, 217, 218, 220, 224, 
227, 260–263, 265, 266, 269, 271, 272, 
278–283, 285–295, 338, 348, 350, 372 
control, 210, 218, 224, 260, 262, 263, 265, 
278, 279, 283, 288, 290, 291, 294, 295 
measures, 262 
cultural methods (management strate￾gies), 283-291 
allelopathy, 287 
biological control, 287 
crop rotations, 286 
weed crop competition, 283 
weed on weed, 287 
harrowing, 289 
management, 277, 291, 294, 338
 
climate change strategies, 291
 
programs, 294
 
strategies, 278, 279
 
physical weed control methods (manage￾ment strategies), 288 
brush weeding, 291 
flaming, 291 
harrowing-seed bed preparation, 289 
inter-row cultivators, 290 
mowing, 290 
ploughing, 289 
ridging (potatoes-row crops), 291 
stubble cultivation, 288 
weed harrowing, 289 
population, 265, 287, 288, 295 
species, 57, 278, 279–281, 292–294, 348 
suppressive cultivars, 295 
Weedicides, 338 
Wetlands, 308 
Wettable powders, 6 
Wheat, 10, 55, 56, 58, 60, 62, 64, 65, 67, 
89–91, 119, 123, 175, 185, 186, 191, 193, 
195, 247, 266, 270, 272, 282, 283, 293, 
295, 304, 305, 307, 309, 310, 312, 336, 
338
 
straw, 185, 186, 191, 272
 
Whiteflies, 173 
Wild buckwheat, 280 
X 
Xanthobacter agilis, 84 
Xeno-estrogen pesticides, 369 
Y
Yamchaetoglobosin, 150 
Yeast extract glucose malt extract water 
(YMG), 156 
Z 
Zea mays, 35, 36, 60, 88 
Zero budget natural farming (ZBNF), 352 
Zinc, 37, 90, 121–123, 166, 310 
oxide (ZnO), 123, 124 
Zoospore germination, 187 
Zwittermycin A, 116, 195 
Zygosporium masonii, 195 
