This International Student Edition is for use outside of the U.S.
Organizational
10e
Emerging Knowledge.
 Global Reality.
Steven L. McShane Mary Ann Von Glinow
BehaviorOrganizational10e
Emerging Knowledge.
 Global Reality.
Steven L. McShane
Interconnected Knowledge
Mary Ann Von Glinow
Florida International University
BehaviorORGANIZATIONAL BEHAVIOR
Published by McGraw Hill LLC, 1325 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019. Copyright ©2024 by 
McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. No part of this publication 
may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, 
without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC, including, but not limited to, in any network or 
other electronic storage or transmission, or broadcast for distance learning.
Some ancillaries, including electronic and print components, may not be available to customers outside the 
United States.
This book is printed on acid-free paper.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 LWI 28 27 26 25 24 23
ISBN 978-1-266-10809-9
MHID 1-266-10809-2
Cover Image: Leigh Prather/Alamy Stock Photo
All credits appearing on page or at the end of the book are considered to be an extension of the copyright page.
The Internet addresses listed in the text were accurate at the time of publication. The inclusion of a website does 
not indicate an endorsement by the authors or McGraw Hill LLC, and McGraw Hill LLC does not guarantee the 
accuracy of the information presented at these sites.
mheducation.com/higherediii
about the Authors
Steven L. McShane
Steven L. McShane has held tenured positions as Professor at Simon Fraser Univer￾sity’s Faculty of Business Administration (Canada) and Winthrop Professor of 
Management at the University of Western Australia Graduate School of Manage￾ment and Business School. He has been Conjoint Professor at Newcastle Business 
School, University of Newcastle (Australia) and Adjunct Professor at Gustavson 
School of Business, University of Victoria (Canada). Most recently, he also taught 
organizational behavior in the IMBA program at the Antai College of Economics 
and Management at Shanghai Jiao Tong University in Shanghai, China. Steve is 
currently head of Interconnected Knowledge, which he founded two decades ago. 
Steve earned his PhD from Michigan State University, where he specialized in 
organizational behavior and labor relations. He also holds a Master’s of Industrial 
Relations from the University of Toronto and an undergraduate degree from 
Queen’s University in Canada. Steve is a past president of the Administrative Sci￾ences Association of Canada (the Canadian equivalent of the Academy of Manage￾ment) and served as Director of Graduate Programs in Simon Fraser University’s 
business faculty. He has conducted executive programs with Nokia, TÜV-SÜD, 
Wesfarmers Group, Main Roads WA, McGraw Hill, ALCOA World Alumina 
Australia, and many other organizations. Steve has also received awards for his 
teaching quality and innovation, and has high ratings from students in Perth, Shanghai, 
Singapore, Manila, and other cities where he has taught. 
Along with coauthoring Organizational Behavior, Tenth Edition, Steve is lead 
coauthor of M: Organizational Behavior, Fifth Edition (2022); Organisational Behav￾iour: Asia Pacific, Sixth Edition (2019) which has twice been awarded the best ter￾tiary textbook in Australia; and Canadian Organizational Behaviour, Eleventh 
Edition (2021), which is the leading organizational behavior book in Canada. He is 
also coauthor of editions or translations of his organizational behavior books in 
other countries. Steve has published several dozen articles and conference papers 
on workplace values, training transfer, organizational learning, exit–voice–loyalty, 
employee socialization, wrongful dismissal, media bias in business magazines, and 
other diverse topics.
Steve enjoys spending his leisure time hiking, swimming, body board surfing, 
canoeing, skiing, and traveling with his wife and their two daughters and partners.
Mary Ann Von Glinow
Dr. Von Glinow is a Knight Ridder Eminent Scholar Chair in International Manage￾ment at Florida International University and is senior editor for the Journal of Inter￾national Business Studies (JIBS). She served as 2010 to 2012 president of the 
Academy of International Business (AIB) and the 1994–1995 president of 
the Academy of Management (AOM). Previously on the Marshall School faculty of 
the University of Southern California, she has an MBA and a PhD in management 
science from Ohio State University, and is a Fellow of the Academy of Management, Mary Ann Von Glinow
Courtesy of Donna McClementiv About the Authors
the Academy of International Business, and the Pan-Pacific Business Association. 
She sits on 13 editorial review boards and numerous international panels and 
teaches in executive programs in Latin America, Asia, and the United States.
Dr. Von Glinow has authored over 100 journal articles and 13 books, most of 
which have been translated into Chinese, Hindi, and Spanish. Her book on organi￾zational learning capability won a Gold Book Award from the Ministry of Eco￾nomic Affairs in Taiwan in 2002. She is the 2005 recipient of the Academy of 
Management’s Distinguished Service Award, one of the highest honors bestowed by 
the Academy.
Mary Ann has consulted widely and is on the board of directors of several orga￾nizations, including the advisory board to Volvo-Geely in China. She is actively in￾volved in several animal welfare organizations and received the 1996 Humanitarian 
Award of the Year from Miami’s Adopt-a-Pet.v
dedication
Dedicated with love and devotion to Donna, and to our 
wonderful daughters, Bryton and Madison
—S.L.M.
Dedicated to Zack, Emma, Googun, Blue, Chloe, Jackson, and 
Boomer
—M.A.V.G.vi
1
INTRODUCTION
Chapter 1 Introduction to the Field of Organizational 
Behavior 2
2
INDIVIDUAL BEHAVIOR AND 
PROCESSES
Chapter 2 Individual Differences: Personality and 
Values 44
Chapter 3 Perceiving Ourselves and Others in 
Organizations 82
Chapter 4 Workplace Emotions, Attitudes, and 
Stress 122
Chapter 5 Foundations of Employee Motivation 164
Chapter 6 Applied Performance Practices 204
Chapter 7 Decision Making and Creativity 240
3
TEAM PROCESSES
Chapter 8 Team Dynamics 280
Chapter 9 Communicating in Teams and 
Organizations 324
Chapter 10 Power and Influence in the Workplace 360
Chapter 11 Conflict and Negotiation in the 
Workplace 392
Chapter 12 Leadership in Organizational Settings 434
4
ORGANIZATIONAL PROCESSES
Chapter 13 Designing Organizational Structures 466
Chapter 14 Organizational Culture 498
Chapter 15 Organizational Change 534
ADDITIONAL CASES
Case 1: Arctic Mining Consultants 568
Case 2: Bayou Life Assurance and Waltham 
Financial 569
Case 3: CentraClear Inc. 571
Case 4: Keeping Suzanne Chalmers 573
Case 5: The Regency Grand Hotel 574
Case 6: Tamarack Industries 575
Case 7: The Outstanding Faculty Award 576
Case 8: Conifer Corp. 577
Case 9: Verberg Kansen N.V. 578
Case 10: Vetements Ltée 582
Appendix A
Theory Building and Systematic Research Methods 584
Organization Index I-1
Name Index I--4
Glossary/Subject Index I-30
brief contentsvii
Preface xiv
1
INTRODUCTION 2
Chapter 1 Introduction to 
the Field of Organizational 
Behavior 2
Welcome to the Field of Organizational Behavior! 4
What Is Organizational Behavior? 4
Historical Foundations of Organizational Behavior 5
Why Organizational Behavior Is Important 6
Why OB Is Important for You 6
Why OB Is Important for Organizations 7
Connecting the Dots: An Integrative Model 
of Organizational Behavior 10
Anchors of Organizational Behavior Knowledge 12
The Systematic Research Anchor 12
The Practical Orientation Anchor 13
The Multidisciplinary Anchor 14
The Contingency Anchor 14
The Multiple Levels of Analysis Anchor 14
The Emerging Workplace Landscape 15
Diversity and the Inclusive Workplace 15
Work–Life Integration 17
Remote Work 20
MARS Model of Individual Behavior and Performance 22
Employee Motivation 23
Ability 24
Role Perceptions 25
Situational Factors 25
Types of Individual Behavior 26
Task Performance 26
Organizational Citizenship 27
Counterproductive Work Behaviors 28
Joining and Staying with the Organization 28
Maintaining Work Attendance 28
The Journey Begins 29
Chapter Summary 29
Key Terms 30
Critical Thinking Questions 31
Case Study: Promoting Safe behavior at Mother Parkers 31
contents
Team Exercise: Wye & Valve Plumbing: A Mars Diagnostic
Exercise 32
Class Exercise: World Café on The Emerging Workplace 33
Class Exercise: It All Makes Sense? 34
2
INDIVIDUAL 
BEHAVIOR AND 
PROCESSES 44
Chapter 2 Individual Differences: 
Personality and Values 44
Personality and the Five-Factor Model in Organizations 46
What Causes Personality: Nature versus Nurture 47
Five-Factor Model of Personality 48
Issues When Applying the Five-Factor Model 51
The Dark Triad Personality 52
Machiavellianism 52
Narcissism 52
Psychopathy 52
The Dark Triad in the Workplace 53
Jungian Personality Theory and the MBTI 54
Jungian Theory in the Workplace 55
Values in the Workplace 57
Types of Values 58
Values and Individual Behavior 59
Values Congruence 60
Ethical Values and Behavior 61
Four Ethical Principles 62
Moral Intensity, Moral Sensitivity, 
and Situational Influences 63
Supporting Ethical Behavior 64
Values across Cultures 65
Individualism and Collectivism 65
Power Distance 66
Uncertainty Avoidance 66
Achievement-Nurturing Orientation 67
Caveats about Cross-Cultural Knowledge 68
Cultural Diversity Within the United States 68
Isadora Getty Buyou/
Image Source
B Calkins/Shutterstockviii Contents
Emotional Intelligence 133
Emotional Intelligence Outcomes and Development 134
Job Satisfaction 135
Job Satisfaction and Work Behavior 136
Job Satisfaction and Performance 137
Job Satisfaction and Customer Satisfaction 138
Job Satisfaction and Business Ethics 139
Organizational Commitment 139
Consequences of Affective 
and Continuance Commitment 140
Building Organizational Commitment 140
Work-Related Stress and Its Management 141
General Adaptation Syndrome 142
Consequences of Distress 142
Stressors: The Causes of Stress 143
Individual Differences in Stress 145
Managing Work-Related Stress 145
Chapter Summary 147
Key Terms 148
Critical Thinking Questions 148
Case Study: Diana’s Disappointment: The Promotion 
Stumbling Block 149
Team Exercise: What Does That Face Tell You? 150
Team Exercise: Attitudes Toward Mel 
The Manager 151
Team Exercise: Ranking Jobs on Their 
Emotional Labor 152
Chapter 5 Foundations of Employee 
Motivation 164
Employee Motivation, Drives, and Needs 166
Employee Drives and Needs 166
Individual Differences in Needs 168
Drive-Based Motivation Theories 168
Four-Drive Theory 168
Maslow’s Needs Hierarchy Theory 170
Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivation 171
Learned Needs Theory 173
Expectancy Theory of Motivation 174
Expectancy Theory in Practice 175
Organizational Behavior Modification 
and Social Cognitive Theory 176
Organizational Behavior Modification 177
Social Cognitive Theory 179
Goal Setting and Feedback 180
Characteristics of Effective Feedback 181
Sources of Feedback 182
Evaluating Goal Setting and Feedback 183
Chapter Summary 69
Key Terms 70
Critical Thinking Questions 70
Case Study: Personality and Values at Bridgewater 
Associates 71
Class Exercise: Which Big Five Factors Fit Specific 
Occupations? 72
Class Exercise: Personal Values Exercise 73
Team Exercise: Ethics Dilemma Vignettes 73
Chapter 3 Perceiving Ourselves and Others 
in Organizations 82
Self-Concept: How We Perceive Ourselves 84
Self-Concept Complexity, Consistency, and Clarity 84
Self-Enhancement 87
Self-Verification 87
Self-Evaluation 88
The Social Self 89
Self-Concept and Organizational Behavior 91
Perceiving the World around Us 91
Perceptual Organization and Interpretation 92
Specific Perceptual Processes and Problems 94
Stereotyping in Organizations 94
Attribution Theory 97
Self-Fulfilling Prophecy 99
Other Perceptual Effects 101
Improving Perceptions 102
Awareness of Perceptual Biases 102
Improving Self-Awareness 103
Meaningful Interaction 105
Global Mindset: Developing Perceptions across Borders 106
Developing a Global Mindset 107
Chapter Summary 108
Key Terms 109
Critical Thinking Questions 109
Case Study: Bridging the Two Worlds 110
Team Exercise: Why Did They Do That? 111
Team Exercise: My User Manual 112
Chapter 4 Workplace Emotions, Attitudes, 
and Stress 122
Emotions in the Workplace 124
Types of Emotions 124
Emotions, Attitudes, and Behavior 125
Cognitive Dissonance 129
Emotions and Personality 129
Managing Emotions at Work 130
Emotional Display Norms across Cultures 130
Strategies for Displaying Expected Emotions 130Contents ix
Effectiveness of Self-Leadership 227
Personal and Situational Predictors 
of Self-Leadership 227
Chapter Summary 228
Key Terms 229
Critical Thinking Questions 229
Case Study: Yakkatech, Inc. 230
Team Exercise: Job Design Scenarios 230
Team Exercise: Is Student Work Enriched? 231
Chapter 7 Decision Making and 
Creativity 240
Rational Choice Decision Making 242
Rational Choice Decision Process 243
Problems with Rational Choice Decision Making 245
Identifying Problems and Opportunities 245
Problems with Problem Identification 245
Identifying Problems and Opportunities 
More Effectively 247
Searching for, Appraising, and Choosing Alternatives 247
Problems with Goals 247
Problems with Information Processing 248
Problems with Maximization 250
Appraising Opportunities 251
Emotions and Intuition in Decision Making 251
Emotions and Making Choices 251
Intuition and Making Choices 252
Making Choices More Effectively 253
Implementing and Evaluating Decisions 254
Implementing Decisions 254
Evaluating Decisions 254
Escalation of Commitment 254
Creativity 256
The Creative Process 257
Characteristics of Creative People 258
Organizational Conditions Supporting Creativity 259
Activities That Encourage Creativity 261
Employee Involvement in Decision Making 263
Benefits of Employee Involvement 264
Contingencies of Employee Involvement 265
Chapter Summary 266
Key Terms 267
Critical Thinking Questions 267
Case Study: Dogged by the Wrong Problem 268
Class Exercise: Employee Involvement Incidents 269
Class Exercise: Creativity Brainbusters 270
Organizational Justice 184
Distributive Justice and Equity Theory 184
Procedural and Interactional Justice 187
Chapter Summary 189
Key Terms 190
Critical Thinking Questions 190
Case Study: Motivated to Work in the Slow Lane 191
Case Study: Cincinnati Super Subs 191
Team Exercise: Motivation Dilemma Incidents 192
Team Exercise: Predicting Harry’s Work Effort 193
Class Exercise: Needs Priority Exercise 194
Chapter 6 Applied Performance 
Practices 204
The Meaning of Money in the Workplace 206
Financial Reward Practices 207
Membership- and Seniority-Based Rewards 207
Job Status–Based Rewards 208
Competency-Based Rewards 208
Performance-Based Rewards 210
Improving Reward Effectiveness 212
Link Rewards to Performance 213
Ensure That Rewards Are Relevant 213
Use Team Rewards for Interdependent Jobs 213
Ensure That Rewards Are Valued 213
Watch Out for Unintended Consequences 214
Job Design Practices 215
Job Design and Work Efficiency 215
Scientific Management 216
Problems with Job Specialization 217
Job Design and Work Motivation 218
Job Characteristics Model 218
Social and Information Processing 
Job Characteristics 220
Job Design Practices That Motivate 221
Frequent Job Rotation 221
Job Enlargement 222
Job Enrichment 222
Psychological Empowerment Practices 223
Supporting Psychological Empowerment 224
Self-Leadership Practices 224
Personal Goal Setting 225
Constructive Thought Strategies 225
Designing Natural Rewards 226
Self-Monitoring 227
Self-Reinforcement 2273
TEAM 
PROCESSES 280
Chapter 8 Team 
Dynamics 280
Teams and Informal Groups 282
Informal Groups 284
Benefits and Limitations of Teams 284
The Limitations of Teams 285
A Model of Team Effectiveness 287
Organizational and Team Environment 289
Team Design Elements 289
Task Characteristics 289
Team Size 290
Team Composition 291
Team Processes 294
Team Development 294
Team Norms 295
Team Roles 296
Team Cohesion 297
Team Trust 299
Team Mental Models 301
Improving Teams through Team Building 301
Self-Directed Teams 302
Success Factors for Self-Directed Teams 303
Remote Teams 303
Success Factors for Remote Teams 304
Team Decision Making 305
Constraints on Team Decision Making 305
Improving Decision Making and Creativity in Teams 306
Chapter Summary 308
Key Terms 310
Critical Thinking Questions 310
Case Study: The Operating Room Surgical Team 311
Case Study: The Shipping Industry Accounting Team 312
Team Exercise: Team Tower Power 312
Team Exercise: Survival on the Moon 313
Chapter 9 Communicating in Teams 
and Organizations 324
The Importance of Communication 326
A Model of Communication 328
Influences on Effective Encoding and Decoding 328
Communication Channels 330
Nonverbal Communication 330
Digital Verbal Communication 332
Social Media in the Workplace 334
Digital Nonverbal Communication 335
Choosing the Best Communication Channel 336
Synchronicity 336
Social Presence 337
Social Acceptance 337
Media Richness 338
Communication Channels and Persuasion 340
Communication Barriers (Noise) 340
Perceptions 340
Language 340
Jargon 341
Filtering 341
Information Overload 341
Cross-Cultural and Male-Female Communication 342
Nonverbal Differences across 
Cultures 343
Male-Female Differences in Communication 343
Improving Interpersonal Communication 344
Getting Your Message Across 344
Active Listening 344
Improving Communication Throughout the Hierarchy 345
Workspace Design 346
Digitally-Based Organizational Communication 346
Direct Communication with Top Management 346
Communicating through the Grapevine 347
Grapevine Characteristics 347
Grapevine Benefits and Limitations 348
Chapter Summary 348
Key Terms 349
Critical Thinking Questions 349
Case Study: Difficult Connections 350
Team Exercise: Cross-Cultural Communication Game 351
Team Exercise: Visual Instructions Exercise 352
Chapter 10 Power and Influence 
in the Workplace 360
The Meaning of Power 362
Sources of Power in Organizations 364
Legitimate Power 364
Reward Power 365
Coercive Power 365
Expert Power 365
Referent Power 366
Deference to Power 367
Contingencies and Consequences of Power 367
Contingencies of Power 367
Consequences of Power 369
RedPixel.PL/
Shutterstock
x ContentsThe Power of Social Networks 370
Social Capital and Sources 
of Power 370
Gaining Power through Social Networks 372
Influencing Others 374
Types of Influence Tactics 374
Consequences and Contingencies of 
Influence Tactics 378
Organizational Politics 379
Individual Differences in Organizational Politics 380
Minimizing Organizational Politics 380
Chapter Summary 381
Key Terms 382
Critical Thinking Questions 382
Case Study: Resonus Corporation 383
Team Exercise: Power, Influence, and Politics Mini-Cases 384
Team Exercise: Deciphering the Network 385
Team Exercise: Bingo Networking 386
Team Exercise: Managing Your Boss 386
Chapter 11 Conflict and Negotiation 
in the Workplace 392
The Meaning and Consequences of Conflict 394
Is Conflict Good or Bad? 394
The Emerging View: Task and Relationship Conflict 395
Task Conflict 395
Relationship Conflict 396
Minimizing Relationship Conflict During 
Task Conflict 397
Conflict Process Model 398
Structural Sources of Conflict in Organizations 399
Incompatible Goals 399
Differentiation 400
Interdependence 400
Scarce Resources 401
Ambiguous Rules 402
Communication Problems 402
Interpersonal Conflict-Handling Styles 402
Choosing the Best Conflict-Handling Style 404
Cultural and Male-Female Differences in 
Conflict-Handling Styles 406
Structural Approaches to Conflict Management 406
Emphasize Superordinate Goals 406
Reduce Differentiation 407
Improve Communication and Mutual 
Understanding 407
Reduce Interdependence 408
Increase Resources 409
Clarify Rules and Procedures 409
Third-Party Conflict Resolution 409
Choosing the Best Third-Party Intervention 
Strategy 410
Resolving Conflict through Negotiation 411
Distributive versus Integrative Approaches 
to Negotiation 411
Preparing to Negotiate 412
The Negotiation Process 414
The Negotiation Setting 416
Male-Female Differences in Negotiation 417
Chapter Summary 418
Key Terms 419
Critical Thinking Questions 419
Case Study: Maelstrom Communications 419
Case Study: Discord Investments 420
Class Exercise: Conflict Handling Incidents 421
Team Exercise: Kumquat Conflict Role Play 423
Chapter 12 Leadership in 
Organizational Settings 434
What Is Leadership? 436
Shared Leadership 436
Transformational Leadership Perspective 437
Develop and Communicate a Strategic Vision 437
Model the Vision 439
Encourage Experimentation 440
Build Commitment toward the Vision 440
Transformational and Charismatic Leadership 440
Evaluating the Transformational 
Leadership Perspective 441
Managerial Leadership Perspective 442
Interdependence of Managerial and 
Transformational Leadership 443
Task-Oriented and People-Oriented Leadership 443
Servant Leadership 444
Path–Goal and Leadership Substitute Theories 445
Path–Goal Leadership Theory 445
Leadership Substitutes Theory 448
Implicit Leadership Perspective 448
Prototypes of Effective Leaders 449
The Romance of Leadership 449
Personal Attributes Perspective of Leadership 450
Eight Important Leadership Attributes 450
Authentic Leadership 452
Leadership Attributes Perspective Limitations 
and Practical Implications 453
Cross-Cultural and Male-Female Issues 
in Leadership 454
Male-Female Leadership 455
Contents xiChapter Summary 455
Key Terms 456
Critical Thinking Questions 456
Case Study: IbexTel 456
Team Exercise: World Café on Leadership 457
Team Exercise: Leadership Diagnostic Analysis 458
4
ORGANIZATIONAL 
PROCESSES 466
Chapter 13 Designing 
Organizational 
Structures 466
Division of Labor and Coordination 469
Division of Labor 469
Coordination of Work Activities 469
Elements of Organizational Structure 472
Span of Control 472
Centralization and Decentralization 475
Formalization 476
Mechanistic versus Organic Structures 476
Forms of Departmentalization 477
Simple Structure 478
Functional Structure 478
Divisional Structure 479
Team-Based Structure 481
Matrix Structure 482
Network Structure 485
Contingencies of Organizational Design 486
External Environment 486
Organizational Size 488
Technology 489
Organizational Strategy 489
Chapter Summary 490
Key Terms 490
Critical Thinking Questions 491
Case Study: Sloan & Wu, Inc. 491
Team Exercise: Organizational Structure Scenarios 492
Team Exercise: The Club Ed Exercise 493
Chapter 14 Organizational Culture 498
Elements of Organizational Culture 500
Espoused versus Enacted Values 501
Content of Organizational Culture 502
Organizational Subcultures 503
Deciphering Organizational Culture 
through Artifacts 504
Organizational Stories and Legends 505
Organizational Language 505
Rituals and Ceremonies 505
Physical Structures and Symbols 506
Is Organizational Culture Important? 506
Meaning and Potential Benefits of a 
Strong Culture 507
Contingencies of Organizational Culture 
and Effectiveness 508
Organizational Culture and Business 
Ethics 510
Merging Organizational Cultures 512
Bicultural Audit 512
Strategies for Merging Different 
Organizational Cultures 512
Changing and Strengthening Organizational Culture 514
Model Desired Culture through 
the Actions of Founders 
and Leaders 514
Align Artifacts with the Desired Culture 515
Introduce Culturally Consistent Rewards 
and Recognition 515
Support Workforce Stability and Communication 516
Use Attraction, Selection, and Socialization 
for Culture Fit 516
Organizational Socialization 518
Learning and Adjustment Process 518
Psychological Contracts 519
Stages of Organizational Socialization 519
Improving the Socialization Process 521
Chapter Summary 523
Key Terms 523
Critical Thinking Questions 524
Case Study: CommsOne Bank 524
Team Exercise: Corporate Culture Dilemma Vignettes 525
Team Exercise: Organizational Culture GIF Memes 526
Team Exercise: Socialization Diagnostics Exercise 527
Chapter 15 Organizational Change 534
Lewin’s Force Field Analysis Model 536
Understanding Resistance to Change 538
Why Employees Resist Change 539
Unfreezing, Changing, and Refreezing 541
Creating an Urgency for Change 542
Reducing the Restraining Forces 543
Refreezing the Desired Conditions 546
xii Contents
Peter Kováč/Alamy Stock 
PhotoLeadership, Coalitions, and Pilot Projects 546
Transformational Leadership and Change 547
Coalitions, Social Networks, and Change 548
Pilot Projects and Diffusion of Change 548
Four Approaches to Organizational Change 549
Action Research Approach 550
Appreciative Inquiry Approach 551
Large Group Intervention Approach 554
Parallel Learning Structure Approach 555
Cross-Cultural and Ethical Issues 
in Organizational Change 556
Organizational Behavior: The Journey 
Continues 556
Chapter Summary 557
Key Terms 557
Critical Thinking Questions 558
Case Study: Delta Palm Mill 558
Team Exercise: Organizational Change Incidents 560
Team Exercise: Applying Lewin’s Force Field Analysis 561
ADDITIONAL CASES
Case 1: Arctic Mining Consultants 568
Case 2: Bayou Life Assurance and Waltham 
Financial 569
Case 3: CentraClear Inc. 571
Case 4: Keeping Suzanne Chalmers 573
Case 5: The Regency Grand Hotel 574
Case 6: Tamarack Industries 575
Case 7: The Outstanding Faculty Award 576
Case 8: Conifer Corp. 577
Case 9: Verberg Kansen N.V. 578
Case 10: Vetements Ltée 582
Appendix A
Theory Building and Systematic Research Methods 584
Organization Index I-1
Name Index I-4
Glossary/Subject Index I-30
Contents xiiiWelcome to the fascinating and highly relevant field of organizational behavior! Knowl￾edge is replacing infrastructure. Digital communication platforms and remote teams are 
transforming the way employees work together. Employees are guided more by values and 
self-leadership rather than command-and-control management. Companies seek out em￾ployees with emotional intelligence and effective problem-solving, analytical, communi￾cation, and teamwork skills, not just technical smarts.
Organizational Behavior, Tenth Edition, is written in the context of these emerging work￾place realities. This edition explains how design thinking and agile methodologies are im￾proving creativity and decision making in organizations; how self-concept is a significant 
determinant of individual behavior, team cohesion, and leadership; how employees increas￾ingly communicate and coordinate through emerging digital channels; how emotions influ￾ence employee motivation, attitudes, and decisions; and how global mindset has become 
an important employee attribute in this increasingly diverse and inclusive interconnected 
world. This book also adopts the view that organizational behavior is not just for managers; 
it is relevant and valuable to anyone who works in and around organizations.
Linking Theory with Reality
Every chapter of Organizational Behavior is filled with examples that make OB knowledge 
more meaningful and illuminate the relevance and excitement of this field. These stories 
about real people and organizations translate academic theories into useful knowledge 
and real-life applications.
For example, we describe how Gitlab, one of the world’s largest distributed companies 
(it has no physical offices), helps its remote workers fulfill their drive to bond through a 
variety of innovative virtual events and practices; how executives at Levi Strauss & Co. 
have applied several organizational change initiatives to transform the clothing company 
into an innovative digital leader in that industry; how cloud communications company 
RingCentral supports an inclusive workforce; how executives at Expedia, Netflix, and 
other companies have been questioned by investment analysts for engaging in self-serving 
bias to explain poor financial results; how local law enforcement agencies in Washington 
State, Ohio, and elsewhere are training officers to improve their emotional intelligence; 
and how digital business payments company Bill.com believes that a successful organiza￾tional culture depends on vibrant subcultures.
These and many other stories—which the authors of this book personally researched, 
selected, and wrote from diverse sources—appear in many forms. This edition is filled with 
photo captions, features, and in-text anecdotes about work life. Each chapter opens with a 
brief case vignette of events in a real organization related to one or more central topics in 
that chapter. Global Connections features “connect” OB concepts with events in real-world 
companies around the planet. Case studies in each chapter also link OB concepts to 
emerging workplace realities. Students will use their diagnostic skills to apply the OB 
theories and practices to analyze the causes and offer solutions to these cases. These an￾ecdotes and detailed descriptions discuss large and small organizations around the world 
and in a wide range of industries.
Global Focus
From its first edition, this book has been crafted with the recognition that globalization 
has had a profound influence on the workplace. We continue this global focus by discuss￾ing international and cross-cultural issues in many chapters. Furthermore, every chapter 
includes truly global examples, not just how American companies operate in other parts 
of the world.
preface
xivPreface xv
For example, this Tenth Edition describes how senior executives at German technology 
company Robert Bosch led an organization-wide change toward agile practices by applying 
those methodologies in their own executive boardroom; how Shiseido Company, the Tokyo￾based cosmetics company, became a more globalized business by adopting a product￾geographic matrix organizational structure; how the Norwegian Armed Forces developed 
and applied its version of the five factor personality model; how Nigerian software company 
Softcom motivates employees through job enrichment; how Tri-Mer Global Technologies, 
the global air pollution control systems company, created an obeya room to improve cross￾functional teamwork at its headquarters near Milan, Italy; how ENWIN Utilities in Windsor, 
Canada, relies on a parallel learning structure to introduce employee-led organizational 
change; how the witty “You People!” commercial produced by South African restaurant 
chain Nando’s pokes fun at our tendency to stereotype others; and how Singapore￾headquartered food and agri-business Olam International practices employee involvement 
through dozens of workshops in which employees identify more sustainable practices.
Contemporary Theory Foundation
Vivid real-world examples and practices are valuable only if they are connected to good 
theory. Organizational Behavior has developed a reputation for its solid foundation of con￾temporary and classic research and writing. This evidence-based knowledge is apparent 
from the number and quality of literature cited in each chapter, including dozens of articles, 
books, and other sources. This results in what we believe is the most up-to-date organiza￾tional behavior textbook available. These references also reveal that we reach out to market￾ing, information management, human resource management, and other disciplines for new 
ideas. This book is rigorously focused on information that is valuable to its readers, namely 
OB knowledge and practices. Consequently, with a few classic exceptions, we avoid writing 
a “who’s who” book; most scholars are named in the references, not in the main text.
One of the driving forces for writing Organizational Behavior has been to provide a 
more responsive conduit for emerging OB knowledge to reach students, practitioners, and 
fellow scholars. To its credit, Organizational Behavior is apparently the first major OB 
book to discuss the full self-concept model (not just core self-evaluation), the importance 
of emotions in several OB topics (perceptions, attitudes, motivation, decisions), social 
identity theory, design thinking, five strategies for regulating emotions, global mindset, 
four-drive theory, two main types of matrix organizational structures, specific elements of 
social networks, appreciative inquiry, affective events theory (but without the jargon), so￾matic marker hypothesis (also without the jargon), four criteria for selecting the preferred 
communication channel, Schwartz’s values model, learning orientation, predictors of 
moral sensitivity, social and information processing characteristics of job design, and sev￾eral other groundbreaking topics.
This edition continues this leadership by introducing the latest knowledge on the shifting 
trends in digital communication in organizations, including the increasing use of emojis and 
other forms of digital nonverbal communication (Chapter 9); specific types of unintended 
consequences of performance-based rewards (Chapter 6); the underlying meaning of “culture 
add” rather than “culture fit” in the attraction-selection-attrition process (Chapter 14); 
and specific ways to practice boundary management in work–life integration (Chapter 1).
Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion
Organizational Behavior, Tenth Edition, continues to emphasize theories and practices 
around diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI). A broad array of OB topics are connected 
to these objectives, so people of all backgrounds feel psychologically safe, engaged, valued, authentic, listened to, and respected. Here is a brief list of the main areas where DEI 
receives considerable attention in this book.
• The first chapter includes an entire section on workplace diversity and inclusion. 
It describes these concepts in detail, summarizes how they are practiced in organi￾zations, and identifies their benefits, challenges, and moral imperative.
• The self-concept model in Chapter 3 explains the authentic self, how self-concept 
awareness and acceptance allows people of all identities to be fully themselves 
while contributing to the organization, and how inclusion in informal workplace 
groups is an important part of everyone’s self-concept.
• Chapter 3 also explains the effect of perceptual processes on DEI objectives, in￾cluding the problems of stereotyping, systemic and intentional discrimination, and 
stereotype threat. The chapter also describes (with a detailed company example) 
how nonconscious bias training can improve self-awareness and minimize biased 
perceptions and prejudices.
• Chapter 5 presents a full discussion of equity as well as various forms of justice in 
organizational settings. It also distinguishes the equity concept from the concepts 
of equality and need. Beyond this chapter, equity and justice are also discussed 
in the context of several other OB topics, such as ethical values, organizational 
commitment, third-party conflict management, ethical organizational culture, 
and fairness in the process of organizational change.
• Chapter 10 explains how social networks can create a more inclusive workplace, with 
a detailed example of employee resource groups (support and information networks 
around gender, ethnicity, parenthood, and other specific commonalities). It also warns 
that some social networks potentially undermine workplace inclusion and equity.
• Chapter 14 discusses the potential advantages of diverse subcultures and intro￾duces the emerging debate about whether organizations should aim for “culture 
add” rather than “culture fit.” The question is whether the former inherently 
undermines diversity, equity, and inclusion, whereas the latter supports those 
objectives and recognizes the benefits of diverse subcultures.
• Several chapters in this book present information on gender, ethnic, generational, 
and cultural differences across many topics, such as communication, conflict 
handling, and leading others.
Organizational Behavior Knowledge 
for Everyone
Another distinctive feature of Organizational Behavior is that it is written for everyone in 
organizations, not just managers. The philosophy of this book is that everyone who works 
in and around organizations needs to understand and make use of organizational behav￾ior knowledge. People throughout the organization—systems engineers, production em￾ployees, accounting professionals—are taking on more responsibilities as companies 
remove layers of management and give the rest of us more autonomy and accountability 
for our work outcomes. This book helps everyone make sense of organizational behavior, 
and provides the conceptual tools to work more effectively in the workplace.
Active Learning and Critical Thinking Support
Teaching organizational behavior is an important part of our careers, so we understand 
how important it is to use a textbook that offers deep support for active learning and criti￾cal thinking. Business school accreditation associations also emphasize the importance of 
xvi PrefacePreface xvii
the learning experience, which further reinforces our attention on classroom activities 
whether that be face-to-face, hybrid, or online. This Tenth Edition includes more than two 
dozen case studies in various forms and levels of complexity, and a similar number of 
team and class exercises. These learning resources engage students to apply OB concepts 
so they can solve problems, make decisions, or resolve conflicts described in those cases 
and exercises. This book also has four dozen self-assessments, most of which have been 
empirically tested and validated.
Student critical thinking is further aided with a Debating Point in each chapter. This 
feature demonstrates that even the most obvious OB knowledge may be contested by con￾trary evidence and logical counterarguments. Debating Point encourages students to con￾tinuously seek out divergent viewpoints and evidence rather than unquestioningly accept 
the validity of existing theories and practices.
Organizational Behavior, Tenth Edition, is also a rich resource for remote and face-to￾face learning activities. Most of these cases and exercises are available only in this book, 
such as Deciphering the (Social) Network; The Cross-Cultural Communication Game, 
and the Personal Values Exercise.
Changes to the Tenth Edition
Organizational Behavior, Tenth Edition, continues to keep students and instructors up to 
date with new concepts, real-world examples, and useful learning resources. A unique 
strength of this book is that the authors personally researched and wrote all of the concep￾tual content, in-text examples, captioned photos, and features. They also wrote most of 
the new exercises and cases. In addition, the authors personally developed the instructors’ 
manual and PowerPoint slides. This high-level involvement provides better integration of 
the knowledge and ensures that the examples are truly relevant and useful additions to the 
learning experience. 
NEW LEARNING RESOURCES
The first thing you might notice about this edition is the significant number of new exer￾cises and cases. In fact, almost half of the end-of-chapter learning activities are new, more 
than in any previous edition. The Additional Cases section at the end of the book also has 
two new case studies. Here is the complete list of new exercises and cases in Organiza￾tional Behavior, Tenth Edition:
CH01: Team Exercise: Wye & Valve Plumbing: A MARS Diagnostic 
Exercise
CH02: Case Study: Personality and Values at Bridgewater Associates
CH02: Team Exercise: Ethics Dilemma Vignettes (one new vignette)
CH03: Team Exercise: Why Did They Do That?
CH03: Team Exercise: My User Manual
CH04: Team Exercise: What Does That Face Tell You?
CH04: Team Exercise: Attitudes Toward Mel the Manager
CH05: Case Study: Motivated to Work in the Slow Lane
CH05: Team Exercise: Motivation Dilemma Incidents
CH06: Team Exercise: Job Design Scenarios
CH08: Case Study: The Operating Room Surgical Team
CH09: Case Study: Difficult Connections
CH10: Team Exercise: Power, Influence, and Politics Mini-Cases
CH12: Case Study: IbexTel
CH12: Team Exercise: World Café on Leadership
CH13: Case Study: Sloan & Wu, Inc.
CH13: Team Exercise: Organizational Structure Scenarios
CH14: Case Study: CommsOne Bank
CH14: Team Exercise: Corporate Culture Dilemma Vignettes
CH14: Team Exercise: Organizational Culture GIF Memes
CH14: Team Exercise: Socialization Diagnostics Exercise
CH15: Case Study: Delta Palm Mill
CH15: Team Exercise: Organizational Change Incidents
CH15: Team Exercise: Applying Lewin’s Force Field Analysis
Additional Cases: Bayou Life Assurance and Waltham Financial
Additional Cases: CentraClear Inc.NEW CONCEPTUAL CONTENT AND REAL-WORLD EXAMPLES
Every chapter of Organizational Behavior, Tenth Edition, provides new information about 
OB concepts and practices, thanks to reviews by organizational behavior instructors, 
along with our regular practice of scanning the diverse literature for new ideas that have 
gained sufficient evidential support. These conceptual updates are most apparent in 
Chapter 1 (Introduction to the Field of Organizational Behavior), Chapter 6 (Applied 
Performance Practices), Chapter 8 (Team Dynamics), Chapter 9 (Communicating in 
Teams and Organizations), and Chapter 14 (Organizational Culture).
Organizational Behavior, Tenth Edition, replaces most examples with new real-world 
stories that satisfy our criteria of being relevant, recent, and interesting. Fourteen of 
the 15 chapter-opening case studies are new (the remaining one is substantially revised). The 
majority of captioned photos and Global Connections features are new or updated. We 
have also added dozens of new in-text examples to help readers understand OB concepts 
and their relevance in organizations.
Here are the main conceptual improvements and new real-world features in Organiza￾tional Behavior, Tenth Edition:
Chapter 1: Introduction to the Field of Organizational Behavior
• Significantly updated content on personal strategies to improve work–life integration 
and ways to practice boundary management across roles.
• Revised and updated discussion on why OB is important to you and to organizations.
• The systematic research anchor has updated analysis on why organizational 
leaders overlook evidence-based knowledge, as well as ways to minimize these 
problems.
• The section on individual behavior and performance (MARS model) now includes 
habits as one of three aspects of ability.
• New exhibit on the three types of individual performance.
• New exhibit on strategies to improve work–life integration.
• Significantly updated exhibit on the most important skills for new hires.
• Completely revised factoid on “Mind the MARS Gap.”
• New Global Connections feature on why and how cloud-based communication 
company RingCentral fosters inclusion rather than just workforce diversity.
• New Global Connections feature about remote working at Automattic, the 
distributed (fully remote) organization.
• New chapter-opening case study describes why three individuals became 
participants in the Great Resignation.
Chapter 2: Individual Differences: Personality and Values
• MBTI and Jungian theory in the workplace has been updated with more 
discussion about the strengths and weaknesses of this personality model.
• This edition includes more details about ways to support ethical values 
and practices.
• The Dark Triad discussion now has its own section of the chapter.
• The topics of personal values and ethical principles have been updated.
• New factoid on ethical challenges in the workplace.
• New Global Connections feature on the COVID-19 pandemic’s effect on 
personality changes.
• New Global Connections feature on “gapjil” problems in South Korea’s high 
power distance culture.
• New chapter-opening case study examines the use of personality testing to select 
job applicants, and concerns with that practice.
xviii PrefacePreface xix
Chapter 3: Perceiving Ourselves and Others in Organizations
• The attribution process topic provides further details about the concept as it was 
actually described in the original and subsequent scholarly literature.
• The topic of awareness of perceptual biases has been updated with more complete 
discussion.
• This edition introduces two limitations or adverse consequences when trying to 
improve self-awareness of perceptual biases.
• Self-concept characteristics, perceptual organization, problems with stereotyping, 
and attribution errors have some revised content.
• New factoid on positive self-evaluation in the workplace.
• New Global Connections feature on how executives use self-serving bias to explain 
away poor financial results.
• New Debating Point feature on whether empathy is always beneficial in the workplace.
• New chapter-opening case study describes how two executives changed career 
directions guided by their self-concepts.
Chapter 4: Workplace Emotions, Attitudes, and Stress
• This book pioneered the inclusion of emotions in several OB topics (perceptions, 
attitudes, motivation, decisions). This edition further refines and updates details 
about how people regulate their emotions.
• Other updates and rewriting are found within the topics of generating positive 
emotions at work, continuance commitment, and changing stress perceptions.
• New exhibit summarizing the five deep acting emotion regulation strategies.
• Completely revised factoid on workplace stress.
• Updated exhibit on job satisfaction in selected countries.
• New Global Connections feature on stress from dysfunctional conflict at the City 
of Edmonton.
• New Global Connections feature on improving police empathy and deescalation 
through emotional intelligence training.
• New opening case study about two companies that measure employee attitudes 
through timely pulse surveys.
Chapter 5: Foundations of Employee Motivation
• This edition updates information about evaluating OB Mod, including a brief 
introduction to “nudge” practices.
• The topics of goal setting, strengths-based coaching, and organizational justice 
have new introductions.
• Completely revised factoid on how well (or poorly) companies motivate employees 
through performance-to-outcome expectancies.
• New Global Connections feature on how distributed company Gitlab helps its 
1,500 remote workers fulfill their drive to bond through innovative online social 
interaction events and practices.
• Completely revised chapter-opening case study highlights three companies that 
replaced their traditional performance appraisal process with meaningful feedback 
and developmental reviews.
Chapter 6: Applied Performance Practices
• The job design section now delineates the four main ways that job specialization 
improves work efficiency, including how it minimizes the attention residue effect.
• The section on financial rewards updates writing about job evaluation and internal 
pay inequity. That section also has a large number of new in-text examples to 
illustrate several types of pay practices.• Two negative effects of job specialization on work quality are described more 
distinctly.
• The two social job characteristics (social interaction requirement and social 
feedback) are more distinctly presented.
• New Global Connections feature discusses (with specific examples) how financial 
rewards can lead to four specific types of unintended consequences.
• New chapter-opening case study describes how Expensify motivates employees 
with enriched jobs, an empowering work environment, equitable pay practices, and 
a culture that encourages self-leadership.
Chapter 7: Decision Making and Creativity
• This edition identifies multiple types of meta-decision making in the rational 
choice decision process.
• The topic of decision choice maximization now describes conditions in which 
decision paralysis is avoided or minimized when a large number of alternatives 
are presented.
• The topics of rational choice decision making, problems with information process￾ing, evaluating decision outcomes more effectively, and contingencies of employee 
involvement have been noticeably revised.
• Completely revised factoid on using intuition or data analysis in organizational 
decision making.
• Revised exhibit on employee involvement contingencies and outcomes.
• New Global Connections feature on how sparks of creativity help employees 
develop new products at Bluedrop Training and Simulation.
• New Debating Point feature on whether organizations should encourage “fail fast” 
for creativity.
• New chapter-opening case study explains why employees at global packaging firm 
Syntegon Technology apply different decision making processes depending on the 
type of issue and situation.
Chapter 8: Team Dynamics
• This edition has a significantly fuller description of team mental models and 
assigns it as a separate topic within team processes.
• The team development topic has been revised and updated, and is now presented 
as a meta-model of team processes.
• The topic of team norms has been significantly updated, including more 
explanation on why norms develop.
• The topic of brainstorming more fully explains why real-world success of this 
practice differs from laboratory research findings.
• Task interdependence, team building, remote teams, team roles, and electronic 
brainstorming have been rewritten and updated.
• Completely revised factoid on the importance of effective team behaviors in 
organizations.
• Revised exhibit on the team effectiveness model, which now identifies team roles 
and team mental models as two distinct team processes.
• New exhibit on types of team roles.
• New Global Connections feature on how Norwegian law firm Thommessen 
supports teamwork.
• New Global Connections feature on how Italian firm Tri-Mer Global Technologies 
supports team decisions by installing an obeya room.
xx Preface• New chapter-opening case study describes why Cisco Systems has shifted its 
attention to teams rather than just individual employees, and how the company 
supports a team-oriented workplace.
Chapter 9: Communicating in Teams and Organizations
• This book has been at the forefront of new research and practices on the rapid 
development of digital communication in the workplace. This edition continues 
that leadership with analysis of multiple digital channel trends over the past decade.
• The communication channels section has a new subtopic on digital nonverbal 
communication, which looks at workplace communication using emojis and 
animated GIFs.
• Several other updates and rewriting are found throughout the chapter, but particularly 
on the importance of communication, influences on effective encoding and decoding, 
the four factors in choosing the best communication channel, and communication 
through workspace design.
• Revised most statements in the factoid on how well organizations support internal 
communication.
• Significantly updated exhibit on the changing use of digital communication 
channels in the workplace.
• New Debating Point feature on whether emojis are beneficial or problematic in 
workplace communication.
• New chapter-opening case study explains how professional services firm 
RealFoundations has almost completely replaced email with an enterprise 
communication platform that supports its team-oriented and “work out 
loud” culture.
Chapter 10: Power and Influence in the Workplace
• This chapter more fully discusses the troubling issue of deference to power in 
organizations.
• The consequences of power topic receives more discussion and is moved earlier in 
the chapter.
• The organizational politics section now provides more clarity on its conceptual 
meaning, as well as discussion of dark triad personality as an individual predictor 
of organizational politics.
• The meaning of power, nonsubstitutability, and social network power through 
many ties have some revised content.
• New Global Connections feature about one professional’s use of extreme 
impression management (lying on his résumé) as an influence tactic.
• New chapter-opening case study in which several executives explain why and how 
employees should engage in upward influence (manage their boss).
Chapter 11: Conflict and Negotiation in the Workplace
• The section on task conflict and relationship conflict has further clarification on 
these approaches to conflict.
• The logical fallacy of argumentum ad hominem is described as a characteristics of 
relationship conflict.
• This edition revises and updates writing on several other topics, but notably on 
differentiation as a source of conflict, minimizing or reducing conflict through 
better communication and mutual understanding, gathering information in 
negotiations, and managing concessions in negotiations.
• Revised most statements in the factoid on the tendency of people to steer clear of 
(i.e., avoid) workplace conflict.
Preface xxi• New Global Connections feature on how a technology executive’s third-party conflict 
resolution strategy was to have two feuding managers permanently switch jobs.
• New Global Connections feature on the importance of knowing your BATNA 
when negotiating pay increases.
• New chapter-opening case study about the problems of having too much of a 
“nice” company culture that discourages task-oriented conflict.
Chapter 12: Leadership in Organizational Settings
• The most significant change in this chapter is that the discussion about transfor￾mational leadership and charisma has an updated conceptualization of charisma.
• This edition also has some revised content on path–goal theory contingencies, 
leadership substitutes, and a few leadership attributes (e.g., drive).
• Completely revised factoid on how employees perceive and rate their managers.
• New Global Connections feature on servant leadership at TDIndustries.
• New chapter-opening case study describes the leadership style and attributes of 
Canva cofounder Melanie Perkins.
Chapter 13: Designing Organizational Structures
• The topic of matrix organizational structures has been revised and updated, 
particularly regarding types of matrix structures in global companies.
• The topic of coordination through informal communication has updated writing 
on liaison roles.
• Significantly revised exhibit on the three types of divisional structure, each with a 
new real-world example.
• New exhibit in the section on contingencies of organizational structure summarizing 
the recommended structure for various contingency variables.
• New exhibit depicting a simplified adaptation of the matrix organizational structure 
at Shiseido Company.
• New Global Connections feature on how Samsung Electronics is becoming more 
nimble by flattening its organizational structure and reducing status differences 
across the hierarchy.
• New Global Connections feature on how German engineering and technology 
company Robert Bosch is replacing its hierarchical organizational structure with 
one built around teams.
• New Global Connections feature on the risk of too much centralization of authority 
during pandemics.
• New chapter-opening case study documents Twitter’s evolving organizational 
structure in recent years in attempts to improve innovation, collaboration among 
work units, and efficient decision making.
Chapter 14: Organizational Culture
• The attraction-selection-attrition topic describes and analyzes the recent debate 
about “culture fit” versus “culture add.”
• Some subtopics on changing and strengthening organizational culture have been 
revised, such as new writing on the role of communication and several new in-text 
examples throughout this section.
• The organizational culture concept has been revised to include norms as an ele￾ment of that concept.
• The organizational socialization section more clearly delineates the four inherent 
conflicts between employers and job applicants during preemployment 
socialization.
• New factoid highlighting the importance of organizational culture.
xxii Preface• Revised exhibit depicting the elements and artifacts of organizational culture.
• New Global Connections feature explaining why the founder of Bill.com 
appreciates the digital software company’s subcultures, not just its dominant 
organizational culture.
• New Global Connections feature on the debate about hiring for “culture add” 
rather than for “culture fit.”
• New Global Connections feature on the award-winning onboarding process 
developed at Singapore-based mobile network operator Circles.Life.
• New chapter-opening case study describes the strategies Workday, Inc. has applied 
to maintain a strong people-focused corporate culture.
Chapter 15: Organizational Change
• The section on understanding resistance to change has a new opening example 
and now describes specific variations of resistance due to negative valence of 
change.
• The topic of creating an urgency for change has been revised, along with new in￾text examples.
• The force field analysis model topic now notes that the unfreezing and refreezing 
metaphor was introduced after Kurt Lewin’s original model. 
• This edition also has some new writing within the topics of guiding coalitions and 
appreciative inquiry.
• New factoid on the challenges of resistance to organizational change.
• New Global Connections feature describing how the management board at 
Robert Bosch GmbH led the German company’s organizational change to agile 
methodologies by modeling agile practices in the boardroom.
• New chapter-opening case study examines organizational change practices that 
transformed Levi Strauss & Co. from a declining business to an innovative digital 
leader in the clothing industry.
Preface xxiiixxiv
Organizational behavior is an incredibly relevant and valuable field of study, which be￾comes apparent while developing a world-class book such as Organizational Behavior,
Tenth Edition. Throughout this project, we witnessed the power of teamwork, the excite￾ment of creative thinking, and the motivational force of the vision that we collectively 
held as our aspiration. The tight coordination and innovative synergy was evident through￾out this venture. This development process is even more amazing when you consider that 
most team members on this project are scattered throughout the United States and the 
lead coauthor (Steve) spends most of his time on the other side of the planet! And all of 
this effort occurred while we began to emerge from a global pandemic.
Portfolio director Mike Ablassmeir led the development of Organizational Behavior with 
unwavering enthusiasm and foresight. Lead product developer Kelly Pekelder orchestrated 
the overall launch and process to ensure that this edition met her high standards. Product 
developer Allison Marker, product developer Laura Spell (Editors, Inc.), and senior content 
project manager Sherry Kane led the daily process with superhuman skill and determination, 
which is particularly important given the magnitude of this revision, the pressing deadlines, 
the 24-hour time zones, and later-stage pandemic in which we operated. Content licensing 
specialist Sarah Flynn fulfilled the critical permissions and copyright activities with profes￾sional scrutiny. Our photo researcher, Nichole Nalenz, proficiently identified photos that 
depict the examples we wrote about. We also extend our thanks to Laurie Lawrie for superb 
copyediting and to Debbie Clare for her excellent marketing development work.
Paula Kepos smoothly guided development of the Test Bank to reflect the significantly 
updated content of this edition. Many thanks to those involved in updating our Connect 
content. This has been a truly wonderful journey!
Several dozen instructors around the world reviewed parts or all of Organizational Be￾havior, Tenth Edition, or related editions in other countries over the past few years. Their 
compliments were energizing, and their suggestions significantly improved the final prod￾uct. The following people from U.S. colleges and universities provided the most recent 
feedback for improvements specifically for this edition:
Steve is honored to work with Mary Ann Von Glinow as well as with his other coau￾thors, including Kevin Tasa (Schulich School of Business, York University) and Sandra 
Steen (University of Regina) on the Canadian edition, and Mara Olekalns (Melbourne 
Business School), Alex Newman (Deakin University), and Angela Martin (University of 
Tasmania) on the Asia-Pacific edition. He also thanks the coauthors of other adaptations 
Gary Adams
Marquette University
Lyndsey Fianko
Central Georgia Technical College
Carolina Gomez
Florida International University
Amanda Hinojosa
Howard University
Stephanie Merritt
University of Missouri, St. Louis
Gary J. Nierengarten
Saint Cloud State University
Lauren L. Rich
University of West Florida
John Striebich
Monroe Community College
Monica Yang
Adelphi University
John Wesley Yoest Jr.
The Catholic University of America
acknowledgmentsand translations. Most of all, Steve is forever indebted to his wife, Donna McClement, 
and to their wonderful daughters, Bryton and Madison. Their love and support give 
special meaning to Steve’s life.
Mary Ann would also like to acknowledge the many professionals at McGraw Hill who 
have worked to make the Tenth Edition a reality. In addition, she would like to thank the 
many, many students who have used and hopefully enjoyed this book, so a big shout-out 
to all students everywhere who have used and enjoyed previous editions of this book. She 
would also like to thank the faculty and staff at Florida International University. Most 
importantly, though, Mary Ann thanks coauthor Steve McShane for his tireless efforts. 
Mary Ann would like to thank her family starting with the immediate ones, Chloe, Jackson, 
Blue, and the Little Guy. She would also like to thank John, Rhoda, Lauren, Lindsay, and 
Christy. She also acknowledges the critical role that some special people play in her life: 
Janet and Peter, Bill and Lana, Alan and Danny, Letty and John, Caro and Jeff, Damian, 
Debra, Dalia, Mary T, Linda, George Gough, Roberto Lopez, and Leo Maldonado. 
Thanks to you all!
Acknowledgments xxvsupporting the learning process
xxvi
AN INTERNATIONAL AUTHOR TEAM FOR THE GLOBAL EMPLOYEE
Drawing on their extensive international teaching and research 
experience, the authors have produced a book that is highly regarded 
for its global focus. Steve McShane has taught organizational behavior 
in Australia, Singapore, Canada, China, and elsewhere. As director of 
the Center for International Business Education, Mary Ann Von Glinow 
regularly visits and conducts research in South America, China, and 
elsewhere around the world.
DEBATING POINTS
The Debating Point feature in each chapter helps students think 
critically and recognize that even seemingly obvious ideas have logical 
counterarguments. Debating Points also raise the bar by focusing on 
topics that are central to the world of work.
REAL-WORLD EXAMPLES BRING OB TO LIFE
Every chapter is filled with examples to make OB knowledge more 
meaningful and reflect the relevance and excitement of this field. 
Opening case studies set the stage; captioned photos depict OB 
concepts; and Global Connections features present more detailed 
examples of OB concepts in practice.
SELF-ASSESSMENTS
Self-assessments are an important and engaging part of the active 
learning process. This edition features self-assessments associated 
with content in every chapter, such as power-distance orientation, 
romance of leadership, preferred organizational structure, work 
centrality, sensing-intuitive type, and guanxi orientation. These self￾assessments are available online in Connect with self-scoring results 
and written feedback.
CASES AND EXERCISES
Cases and exercises at the end of each chapter provide a rich resource 
for remote and face-to-face learning activities. Most of these cases and 
exercises are available only in this book, and more than two dozen of 
them are new in this edition. Additional Cases at the end of the book 
provide students with an opportunity to explore how the concepts 
apply in real-world organizations.xxvii
INSTRUCTOR’S MANUAL
This is one of the few textbooks for which the authors write the Instructor’s Manual,
ensuring that this valuable teaching resource is consistent with the textbook’s content 
and supports instructor needs. Each chapter includes the learning objectives, glossary 
of key terms, a chapter synopsis, complete lecture outline that align with the PowerPoint 
slides, and suggested answers to the end-of-chapter critical thinking questions. Also 
included are teaching notes for the chapter case(s), team and class exercises, and self￾assessments. The Instructor’s Manual also provides complete teaching notes for the 
additional cases.
TEST BANK AND TEST BUILDER
Updated for this edition, the Test Bank includes more than 2,000 multiple-choice, true/
false, and essay questions. Each question identifies the relevant learning objective, 
Bloom’s taxonomy level, AACSB standard for assurance of learning, and difficulty level.
Available within Connect, Test Builder is a cloud-based tool that enables instructors 
to format tests that can be printed or administered within an LMS. Test Builder offers a 
modern, streamlined interface for easy content configuration that matches course 
needs, without requiring a download.
Test Builder allows you to:
• Access all test bank content from a particular title.
• Easily pinpoint the most relevant content through robust filtering options.
• Manipulate the order of questions or scramble questions and/or answers.
• Pin questions to a specific location within a test.
• Determine your preferred treatment of algorithmic questions.
• Choose the layout and spacing.
• Add instructions and configure default settings.
Test Builder provides a secure interface for better protection of content and allows for 
just-in-time updates to flow directly into assessments.
POWERPOINT PRESENTATION SLIDES
The PowerPoint slides have been prepared by the authors, allowing seamless integra￾tion between the slides and the Instructor’s Manual. Each chapter includes more than 
two dozen slides, featuring key points, photographs, and figures from the text, as well 
as teaching tips and notes for using the slides.
Organizational Behavior, Tenth Edition, includes a variety of supplemental materials to help 
instructors prepare and present the material in this textbook more effectively. The following 
items are available in Connect:
student and instructor support 
materialsxxviii
Connect Resources
SMARTBOOK 2.0
SmartBook 2.0 is an adaptive learning solution that provides personalized learning to 
individual student needs, continually adapts to pinpoint knowledge gaps and focuses 
learning on concepts requiring additional study. It fosters more productive learning, 
takes the guesswork out of what to study, and helps students better prepare for class. 
Our adaptive reading experience has been made more personal, accessible, produc￾tive, and mobile.
READANYWHERE APP
Read or study when it’s convenient for you with McGraw Hill’s free ReadAnywhere® app. 
Available for iOS or Android smartphones or tablets, ReadAnywhere gives users access 
to McGraw Hill tools including the eBook and SmartBook® 2.0 or Adaptive Learning 
Assignments in Connect. Take notes, highlight, and complete assignments offline—all of 
your work will sync when you open the app with Wi-Fi access. Log in with your McGraw Hill 
Connect username and password to start learning—anytime, anywhere!
INTERACTIVE EXERCISES
These activities help make the connection between theory and application.
ISEEIT! VIDEOS
These brief, contemporary, and engaging videos offer dynamic, student-centered intro￾ductions, illustrations, and animations that guide students through challenging concepts 
with assignable assessment questions.
SELF-ASSESSMENTS
These introspective, research-based surveys elicit feedback about oneself to promote 
student self-awareness and self-reflection.
CASE ANALYSES
A variety of cases, found in most chapters, provide an opportunity for students to delve 
further into the topical content and read about real-life products and companies. Ac￾companied by assignable, thought-provoking questions that check students’ ability to 
apply the course material to these scenarios, these case analyses help students foster 
their critical thinking abilities and develop their workplace-readiness skills.
VIDEO CASES
An assortment of short video cases challenge students to analyze concepts as they 
manifest in real-life products and companies. Accompanied by assignable, thought￾provoking questions that check the students’ ability to apply the course material to 
these video cases, they help to develop students’ critical thinking abilities and workplace￾readiness skills.MANAGER’S HOT SEAT
These videos allow students to assume the role of a manager as they immerse them￾selves in video-based scenarios in which managers in realistic situations deal with em￾ployees and complex issues. Through a series of assignable questions, students will 
use their critical thinking skills to apply, analyze, and evaluate these managerial chal￾lenges while learning from the manager’s mistakes.
APPLICATION-BASED ACTIVITIES
These highly interactive, automatically graded exercises provide students a safe 
space to practice using problem-solving skills to apply their knowledge to realistic 
scenarios. Each scenario addresses key concepts and skills that students must use 
to work through and solve course specific problems, resulting in improved critical 
thinking and relevant workplace skills. Students take on specific roles to complete an 
OB-related task within a real-world context. These tasks often involve multiple decision￾making paths that students can take as they work to complete the task. Students 
see the impact of their decisions immediately and feedback is provided all along 
the way.
DIVERSITY, EQUITY, INCLUSION
Reflecting the Diverse World Around Us McGraw Hill believes in unlocking the potential 
of every learner at every stage of life. To accomplish that, we are dedicated to creating 
products that reflect, and are accessible to, all the diverse, global customers we serve. 
Within McGraw Hill, we foster a culture of belonging, and we work with partners who 
share our commitment to equity, inclusion, and diversity in all forms. In McGraw Hill 
Higher Education, this includes, but is not limited to, the following:
• Refreshing and implementing inclusive content guidelines around topics including 
generalizations and stereotypes, gender, abilities/disabilities, race/ethnicity, sex￾ual orientation, diversity of names, and age.
• Enhancing best practices in assessment creation to eliminate cultural, cognitive, 
and affective bias.
• Maintaining and continually updating a robust photo library of diverse images that 
reflect our student populations.
• Including more diverse voices in the development and review of our content.
• Strengthening art guidelines to improve accessibility by ensuring meaningful text 
and images are distinguishable and perceivable by users with limited color vision 
and moderately low vision.
PROCTORIO
Remote Proctoring & Browser-Locking Capabilities and logos Remote proctoring and 
browser-locking capabilities, hosted by Proctorio within Connect, provide control of the 
assessment environment by enabling security options and verifying the identity of the 
student.
Seamlessly integrated within Connect, these services allow instructors to control 
the assessment experience by verifying identification, restricting browser activity, and 
monitoring student actions. 
Instant and detailed reporting gives instructors an at-a-glance view of potential aca￾demic integrity concerns, thereby avoiding personal bias and supporting evidence￾based claims.
xxixxxx
OLC-ALIGNED COURSE
Implementing High-Quality Instruction and Assessment through Preconfigured Course￾ware In consultation with the Online Learning Consortium (OLC) and our certified Fac￾ulty Consultants, McGraw Hill has created pre-configured courseware using OLC’s 
quality scorecard to align with best practices in online course delivery. This turnkey 
courseware contains a combination of formative assessments, summative assessments, 
homework, and application activities, and can easily be customized to meet an individ￾ual instructor’s needs and desired course outcomes. For more information, visit https://
www.mheducation.com/highered/olc.
Create
Your Book, Your Way
McGraw Hill’s Content Collections Powered by Create® is a self-service website that 
enables instructors to create custom course materials—print and eBooks—by drawing 
upon McGraw Hill’s comprehensive, cross-disciplinary content. Choose what you want 
from our high-quality textbooks, articles, and cases. Combine it with your own content 
quickly and easily, and tap into other rights-secured, third-party content such as read￾ings, cases, and articles. Content can be arranged in a way that makes the most sense 
for your course, and you can include the course name and information as well. Choose 
the best format for your course: color print, black-and-white print, or eBook. The eBook 
can be included in your Connect course and is available on the free ReadAnywhere® app 
for smartphone or tablet access as well. When you are finished customizing, you will 
receive a free digital copy to review in just minutes! Visit McGraw Hill Create®—
www.mcgrawhillcreate.com—today and begin building!65%
Less Time
Grading
Instructors
The Power of Connections
A complete course platform
Connect enables you to build deeper connections with your students through
cohesive digital content and tools, creating engaging learning experiences.
We are committed to providing you with the right resources and tools to
support all your students along their personal learning journeys.
Solutions for 
your challenges
A product isn’t a solution. Real 
solutions are affordable, reliable, 
and come with training and ongoing 
support when you need it and how you 
want it. Visit supportateverystep.com
for videos and resources both you 
and your students can use throughout 
the term.
Every learner is unique
In Connect, instructors can assign an adaptive reading 
experience with SmartBook® 2.0. Rooted in advanced 
learning science principles, SmartBook 2.0 delivers 
each student a personalized experience, focusing 
students on their learning gaps, ensuring that the time 
they spend studying is time well-spent.
mheducation.com/highered/connect/smartbook
Affordable solutions, 
added value
Make technology work for you with 
LMS integration for single sign-on access, 
mobile access to the digital textbook, 
and reports to quickly show you how 
each of your students is doing. And with 
our Inclusive Access program, you can 
provide all these tools at the lowest 
available market price to your students. 
Ask your McGraw Hill representative for 
more information.
Laptop: Getty Images; Woman/dog: George Doyle/Getty ImagesEffective tools for efficient studying
Connect is designed to help you be more productive with simple, flexible, intuitive tools that maximize 
your study time and meet your individual learning needs. Get learning that works for you with Connect.
Everything you need in one place 
Your Connect course has everything you need—whether reading your digital eBook 
or completing assignments for class—Connect makes it easy to get your work done.
“I really liked this 
app—it made it easy 
to study when you 
don’t have your text￾book in front of you.”
- Jordan Cunningham, 
 Eastern Washington University
Study anytime, anywhere
Download the free ReadAnywhere® app and 
access your online eBook, SmartBook® 2.0, 
or Adaptive Learning Assignments when it’s 
convenient, even if you’re offline. And since 
the app automatically syncs with your Connect 
account, all of your work is available every time 
you open it. Find out more at 
mheducation.com/readanywhere 
Students
Get Learning that Fits You
Learning for everyone 
McGraw Hill works directly with Accessibility 
Services Departments and faculty to meet the 
learning needs of all students. Please contact your 
Accessibility Services Office and ask them to email 
accessibility@mheducation.com, or visit 
mheducation.com/about/accessibility
for more information.
iPhone: Getty Images2
Introduction to the Field 
of Organizational Behavior
Marianne Taylin (we have changed actual names) and her coworkers at a 
professional association shifted to remote work when the pandemic spread 
throughout the world. More than a year later, as case numbers fell, the organization asked 
everyone to return to the office at least four days each week. Taylin soon realized that she could no 
longer tolerate her old daily commute—90 minutes each way between Baltimore, Maryland, and 
Alexandria, Virginia. “Why am I doing this?” Taylin asked herself. “It was affecting my health, and I 
couldn’t get my work done.” So Taylin quit, even before securing another job.
A long commute wasn’t a factor in David Martinez’s decision to change jobs. He lives just down the 
street from the once-popular small restaurant in Arkansas where he worked as the lead cook. The 
restaurant closed during the first year of the pandemic and two of the co-owners who actively 
managed the restaurant sold out to the two remaining owners. But things were different when the 
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
LO 1-1 Define organizational behavior and organizations.
LO 1-2 Explain why organizational behavior knowledge is important for you and for 
organizations.
LO 1-3 Describe the anchors on which organizational behavior knowledge is based.
LO 1-4 Summarize the workplace trends of diversity and the inclusive workplace, work–life 
integration, and remote work.
LO 1-5 Diagram the MARS model and describe the four factors that directly influence 
individual behavior and performance.
LO 1-6 Summarize the five types of individual behavior in organizations.
Learning Objectives
1
chapterThe Great Resignation during the COVID-19 pandemic connects with many organizational behavior topics, such as 
organizational culture, job satisfaction, leadership, task performance, organizational change, team dynamics, stress, and 
organizational commitment.
PART 1: INTRODUCTION
restaurant reopened. The restaurant now had takeout along with seated dining, the new owners were 
less involved in the kitchen, and staff couldn’t keep up. Martinez was overworked and stressed. 
“I mean, I was having, like, panic—I had to, like, go to the back sometimes and just, like, have a panic 
attack,” he says.
The pandemic also triggered Kelly Knowles’ resignation from her well-paid executive position after a 
decade working at an Australian bank. The endless Zoom calls and dealing with customer problems 
were exhausting, but Knowles also realized that the bank took her loyalty for granted. “I worked 60- to 
70-hour weeks for three months and I was not really rewarded or recognized for that at all,” she 
protested. “It honestly feels like I’m just coming out of this abusive relationship and I’ve been gaslighted 
and there is a better world and I can finally see it.”1
3
Isadora Getty Buyou/Image Source4 Part One Introduction
Welcome to the Field of Organizational Behavior!
It’s called the Great Resignation. During the second year of the pandemic, an unprece￾dented number of people either changed employers or quit before securing another job. A 
Microsoft survey estimated that 40 percent of the global workforce considered switching 
employers. In the United States, one-quarter of the workforce was employed at a different 
company less than two years after the pandemic began.2 The pandemic’s disruption 
forced some people to find new employment. But many left after realizing that their needs 
and expectations were misaligned with the current work situation. 
Whether the Great Resignation is a brief aberration or a longer trend, this phenome￾non connects with many of the organizational behavior topics discussed throughout this 
book. In every sector of the economy, organizations need to employ skilled and motivated 
people who can be creative, work in teams, and maintain a healthy lifestyle. They need 
leaders with foresight and vision, who support innovative work practices, and who make 
decisions that consider the interests of multiple stakeholders. In other words, the best 
companies succeed through the concepts and practices that we discuss in this organizational 
behavior book.
Our purpose is to help you understand what goes on in organizations. We examine the 
factors that make companies effective, improve employee well-being, and drive successful 
collaboration among coworkers. We look at organizations from numerous and diverse 
perspectives, from the deepest foundations of employee thoughts and behavior (personal￾ity, self-concept, attitudes, etc.) to the complex interplay between the organization’s struc￾ture and culture and its external environment. Along this journey, we emphasize why 
things happen and what you can do to predict and guide organizational events.
We begin this chapter by introducing you to the field of organizational behavior (OB) 
and its historical origins. This is followed by details about why OB is important for your 
career and why organizations depend on OB knowledge to survive and thrive. An integra￾tive model of organizational behavior is presented, which illustrates the interconnected￾ness of OB topics and serves as a road map to guide you through this book. We then 
describe the philosophical anchors that guide the development of organizational behavior 
knowledge. This is followed by an overview of three emerging features of the workplace 
environment: diversity and the inclusive workplace, work–life integration, and remote 
work. The latter part of this chapter introduces the MARS model, which outlines the four 
direct drivers of individual behavior and performance. The final section identifies the five 
main types of individual behavior.
WHAT IS ORGANIZATIONAL BEHAVIOR?
Organizational behavior (OB) is the study of what people think, feel, and do in and around 
organizations. It looks at employee behaviors, decisions, perceptions, and emotional re￾sponses. It examines how individuals and teams interact with one another. OB also ex￾tends to the study of how employees and organizations interact with their external 
environments, such as serving or collaborating with customers, suppliers, communities, 
and people working in other organizations. OB researchers systematically study these top￾ics at multiple levels of analysis, namely, the individual, team (including interpersonal), 
and organization.3
The definition of organizational behavior begs the 
question: What are organizations? Organizations are 
groups of people who work interdependently toward 
some purpose.4 Notice that they are not buildings or 
government-registered entities. In fact, many organizations 
exist with neither physical walls nor government docu￾mentation to confer their legal status.5
LO 1-1
organizational behavior (OB)
the study of what people think, 
feel, and do in and around 
organizations
organizations
groups of people who work 
interdependently toward some 
purposeChapter One Introduction to the Field of Organizational Behavior 5
One key feature of all organizations is that they are collective entities.6
 They consist of 
human beings—typically, but not necessarily, employees—who interact with one another in 
an organized way. This organized relationship requires communication, coordination, and 
collaboration to achieve organizational objectives. As such, all organizational members 
have degrees of interdependence; they accomplish goals by sharing materials, information, 
or expertise with coworkers.
A second key feature of organizations is that their members have a collective sense of 
purpose. This collective purpose isn’t always well defined or agreed on. Companies typi￾cally have vision and mission statements, but they are sometimes out of date or don’t de￾scribe what employees actually try to achieve. Still, some sense of collective purpose does 
exist, even if it is implicit or informally understood. Otherwise, an organization would be 
nothing more than an assemblage of people without direction or unifying force.
HISTORICAL FOUNDATIONS OF ORGANIZATIONAL BEHAVIOR
Organizational behavior emerged as a distinct field sometime around the early 1940s.7
During that decade, a few researchers began describing their research as organizational 
(rather than sociological or psychological). And by the late 1940s, Harvard University 
had changed the name of its MBA human relations course to “Organizational Behavior.”
Although the field of OB is recent, experts in other fields have been studying organiza￾tions for many centuries. The Greek philosopher Plato (400 bce) wrote about the essence 
of leadership, and the Chinese philosopher Confucius (500 bce) extolled the virtues of 
ethics and leadership. The economist Adam Smith (1770s) discussed the benefits of job 
specialization and division of labor. The German sociologist Max Weber (early 1900s) 
wrote about rational organizations, the work ethic, and charismatic leadership. The indus￾trial engineer Frederick Winslow Taylor proposed systematic ways to organize work pro￾cesses and motivate employees through goal setting and rewards.8
The political scientist Mary Parker Follett (1920s) offered new ways of thinking about 
constructive conflict, team dynamics, power, and leadership. Harvard professor Elton 
Mayo and his colleagues (1930s and 1940s) established the “human relations” school of 
management, which pioneered research on employee attitudes, formal team dynamics, 
informal groups, and supervisor leadership style. American executive and Harvard 
Steve Jobs orchestrated many of 
the greatest advances in our 
digital lifestyle and animation film 
over the past few decades. The 
cofounder of Apple and Pixar 
Animation Studios was renowned 
for his vision and persistence. Yet 
Jobs emphasized that great 
achievements also require the 
power of organizations. “A 
company is one of humanity’s 
most amazing inventions,” Jobs 
once explained. “It’s totally 
abstract. Sure, you have to build 
something with bricks and mortar 
to put the people in, but basically 
a company is this abstract 
construct we’ve invented, and it’s 
incredibly powerful.”a
ZUMA Press, Inc./Alamy Stock 
Photo6 Part One Introduction
associate Chester Barnard (1930s) wrote insightful views regarding organizational com￾munication, coordination, leadership and authority, organizations as open systems, and 
team dynamics.9
 This brief historical tour indicates that OB has been in existence for a 
long time; it just wasn’t organized into a unified discipline until around World War II.
Why Organizational Behavior Is Important
You are likely reading this book as part of a required course in organizational behavior. Apart 
from degree or diploma requirements, why should you learn the ideas and practices that we 
are discussing here? After all, who ever heard of a career path leading to a “vice president of 
OB” or a “chief OB officer”? Our answer to this question comes in two parts: why OB is im￾portant to you personally and why OB is important for organizations generally.
WHY OB IS IMPORTANT FOR YOU
Throughout our careers teaching undergraduate, graduate, and executive programs, we 
(the authors of this book) have found that students with work experience identify organiza￾tional behavior as one of the most valued courses. Why? Because organizational behavior 
knowledge and skills are critical to everyone’s career, and people become more aware of its 
value through work experience. Whether you are a sales professional, technical specialist, 
or senior executive, you need to make sound decisions, interact effectively with other people, 
understand social networks and power dynamics, and apply other OB concepts.10
The importance of organizational behavior is evident in numerous surveys that ask 
employers to identify the most important skills and knowledge they look for in new hires. 
Technical skills are important, of course, particularly for highly specialized jobs and pro￾fessions. But the skills and knowledge that employers tend to rank above anything else are 
the topics found in this and other organizational behavior books.
Exhibit 1.1 lists the five most important skills identified by employers in four recent 
large-scale surveys. One of the top-ranked skills is problem solving (along with critical 
thinking and analytic skills), which relates to several OB topics, particularly decision mak￾ing and perceptions. A second important skill for new hires is communication, which also 
appears on all four lists. Along with an entire chapter on communication, the topic is in￾terwoven with influence, conflict management, leadership, organizational change, and 
other topics. Teamwork (as well as interpersonal skills) is the third skill appearing on all 
four lists. This book includes an entire chapter on team dynamics; the topic also relates to 
managing conflict, influencing others, managing emotions, and other themes.
LO 1-2
NACE JOB OUTLOOK SURVEY 
(UNITED STATES)
QS GLOBAL SKILLS GAP 
REPORT (GLOBAL)
BUSINESS COUNCIL OF 
CANADA SKILLS SURVEY 
(ENTRY-LEVEL HIRES LIST)
HAYS SOFT SKILLS 
EMPLOYER SURVEY 
(AUSTRALIA AND NEW 
ZEALAND)
• Problem-solving skills
• Analytic/quantitative skills
• Ability to work in a team
• Communication skills (written)
• Initiative
• Problem solving
• Teamwork 
• Communication 
• Adaptability 
• Interpersonal skills
• Collaboration, teamwork, 
interpersonal skills
• Communication skills
• Problem-solving skills
• Resiliency
• Analytical capabilities
• Teamwork
• Problem solving 
• Communication 
• Adaptability 
• Critical thinking
EXHIBIT 1.1 Most Important Skills for New Hires
Sources: “The Global Skills Gap Report 2019” (London: QS Quacquarelli Symonds, September 2019); Morneau Shepell, “Investing in a Resilient Canadian 
Workforce: 2020 Business Council Skills Survey” (Ottawa: Business Council of Canada, August 2020); “The Unexpected Soft Skill Employers Need Today 
(Australia),” Press release, June 28, 2021, “The Unexpected Soft Skill Employers Need Today (New Zealand),” Press release, June 28, 2021; K. Gray, 
“Problem-Solving Skills Top Attributes Employers Seek on Resumes,” National Association of Colleges and Employers, November 21, 2021.Chapter One Introduction to the Field of Organizational Behavior 7
Other critical skills that employers look for in new hires are adaptability, initiative, and 
resiliency. Adaptability is discussed later in this chapter as one of the three types of indi￾vidual performance; it also connects with creativity, teamwork behavior, and organizational 
change. Initiative refers to self-motivation, which is discussed as an applied performance 
practice. Resiliency, the capacity to recover from setbacks, is discussed in the context of 
work-related stress. Overall, these and other employer surveys suggest that OB offers a core 
foundation of knowledge and skill development for your success in organizations.
Better Personal Theories to Predict and Influence Along with supporting 
valuable skill development, the field of organizational behavior helps you to adopt better 
personal theories so you can more effectively comprehend, predict, and influence organi￾zational events:
• Comprehend and predict workplace behavior and events. Everyone develops per￾sonal theories to understand and anticipate the surrounding environment.11 These 
personal models are sometimes accurate, often overgeneralized, and occasionally 
wrong. Even some ideas that appear to be “common sense” may be inaccurate or 
oversimplified.12 Through systematic research, the field of organizational behavior 
has developed theories that will help you to improve the accuracy of your personal 
theories. In doing so, you will also be better at predicting things, thereby minimiz￾ing unexpected and unexplained behavior and events in the workplace.
• Influence workplace behavior and events. Probably the greatest value of OB knowl￾edge is that it helps us to get things done by influencing others.13 By definition, 
organizations are people who work together to accomplish work-related goals; a 
toolkit of OB knowledge and skills is therefore vital to motivate ourselves and co￾workers, make better decisions, build effective teams, resolve workplace conflicts, 
and work successfully with coworkers in a host of other ways. No matter what ca￾reer path you choose, OB concepts play an enormously important role in helping 
you to work more effectively within organizations.
Organizational Behavior Is for Everyone You may have noticed that we 
haven’t mentioned “managers” in this discussion on why OB is important for you. Effec￾tive management (and leadership) does depend on OB concepts and practices, but this 
book pioneered the broader view that OB is valuable for everyone who works in and 
around organizations. Whether you are a software engineer, customer service representa￾tive, foreign exchange analyst, or chief executive officer, you need to understand and ap￾ply the many organizational behavior topics that are discussed in this book. In fact, OB 
knowledge is probably more valuable than ever before because employees increasingly 
need to be proactive, self-motivated, and able to work effectively with coworkers without 
management intervention. In the words of one forward-thinking OB writer almost a half 
century ago: Everyone is a manager.14
WHY OB IS IMPORTANT FOR ORGANIZATIONS
Along with benefiting you as an individual, the field of organizational behavior is vital to 
the organization’s survival and success.15 For instance, the best 100 companies to work 
for in America (i.e., companies with the highest levels of employee satisfaction) enjoy 
significantly higher financial performance than other businesses within the same indus￾try. Hospitals with higher levels of employee engagement have lower inpatient mortality 
rates; other types of firms with engaged staff tend to have higher sales and profitability. 
Studies also report a positive relationship between the quality of leadership and the com￾pany’s financial performance. Employee engagement, leadership, performance-based re￾wards, and other specific OB variables are also important “positive screens” for selecting 
companies with the highest and most consistent long-term investment returns.168 Part One Introduction
Almost all organizational behavior theories have the implicit or explicit objective of 
making organizations more effective.17 In fact, organizational effectiveness is consid￾ered the “ultimate dependent variable” in organizational behavior.18 Organizational 
performance, success, goodness, health, competitiveness, and excellence are alterna￾tive labels for organizational effectiveness. Organizations are effective when they have 
a good fit with their external environment (open systems view), effectively transform 
inputs to outputs through human capital, and satisfy the needs of key stakeholders.
Let’s look at these three elements to understand why OB knowledge is important 
for organizations.
Organizations as Open Systems The field of organizational behavior adopts 
the fundamental view that organizations are open systems.19 This means that organiza￾tions are dependent on the external environment for resources (inputs), consist of in￾ternal subsystems that transform inputs to outputs, and affect the environment through 
those outputs. Inputs include raw materials, job applicants, financial resources, infor￾mation, and equipment. They also include laws, cultural norms, and other expecta￾tions that place demands on how organizations should operate. Organizations 
transform inputs to outputs through internal subsystems. Furthermore, they depend 
on the external environment to receive outputs created throughout the transformation 
process. Some outputs (e.g., products and services) 
may be valued by the external environment; other out￾puts (e.g., employee layoffs, pollution) are undesirable 
by-products. Organizations also receive feedback from 
the external environment regarding the value of their 
outputs, the availability of future inputs, and the appro￾priateness of the transformation process.
This ongoing open systems process is illustrated in 
Exhibit 1.2. The external environment includes the physical 
and social setting in which the organization operates. 
The word open describes this permeable relationship 
Marketing/Sales
subsystem
Engineering
subsystem
Managerial
subsystem
Subsystem
• Raw materials
• Human resources
• Information
• Financial resources
• Equipment
• Products/services
• Stockholder dividends
• Community support
• Waste/pollution
External Environment External Environment
Feedback Feedback
Purchasing
subsystem
Subsystem
Subsystem
Subsystem
Subsystem
Technological
subsystem
Production
subsystem
Accounting
subsystem
Subsystem
Cultural
subsystem
Socialization
subsystem
Subsystem
Transforming inputs to outputs 
Organization
EXHIBIT 1.2 Organizations as Open Systems
organizational effectiveness
an ideal state in which an 
organization has a good fit with 
its external environment, 
effectively transforms inputs to 
outputs through human capital, 
and satisfies the needs of key 
stakeholders
open systems
the view that organizations 
are dependent on the external 
environment for resources 
(inputs), consist of internal 
subsystems that transform 
inputs to outputs, and affect 
the environment through those 
outputsChapter One Introduction to the Field of Organizational Behavior 9
between the organization and its environment, whereas closed systems operate without 
dependence on or interaction with an external environment.
The open systems view points to two ways that OB knowledge supports organizational 
effectiveness. First, it helps the organization to maintain a good “fit” with the external 
environment.20 A good fit exists when the organization’s inputs, processes, and outputs 
are aligned with the resources available in the external environment and with the needs 
and expectations of that environment. Several OB topics discuss the organization’s fit or 
alignment with the external environment. For example, we discuss how specific organiza￾tional structures, organizational cultures, and leadership behaviors are more appropriate 
for some environments than for others.
Second, OB theories identify ways for companies to develop and maintain optimal 
transformation processes. Organizations consist of numerous subsystems (departments, 
teams, technological processes, etc.) that transform the incoming resources into outputs 
(see Exhibit 1.2). OB theories offer guidance on this matter, such as how internal subsys￾tems coordinate with one another.21 For instance, we discuss the conditions for teams to 
perform effectively, how employees influence each other, and how successful companies 
improve coordination through a strong organizational culture.
Human Capital as the Organization’s Competitive Advantage The 
most important ingredient in the organization’s process of transforming inputs to outputs 
is its human capital. Human capital refers to the knowledge, skills, abilities, creativity, and 
other valued resources that employees bring to the organization. Human capital is a com￾petitive advantage because employees are essential for the organization’s survival and suc￾cess. Furthermore, their talents are difficult to find, copy, and replace with technology.22
Consequently, effective organizations introduce workplace practices that enhance human 
capital.23 These practices are identified and discussed throughout this book. For example, 
OB theories identify ways to strengthen employee motivation through enriched jobs, re￾wards, feedback, and fair work practices. Other topics discuss the value of employee in￾volvement, the features of effective self-directed work teams, and ways to minimize 
employee turnover.
By enhancing their human capital, organizations potentially become more effective in 
three ways.24 First, employees tend to have better job performance as they acquire more 
Rehiring former employees (called 
boomerangs) can help companies 
boost their human capital faster. 
One recent study of a Fortune 
500 health care organization 
reported that boomerangs 
performed better than other new 
hires, particularly in jobs requiring 
more relational demands (more 
sensitive interactions with others) 
and administrative coordination. 
Boomerangs are skilled, already 
know the company’s inner 
workings, experience less work 
adjustment, and some bring 
new customers with them. “Why 
wouldn’t you have them back?” 
asks Beccy Cameron, an executive 
at the Dublin, Ireland, offices of 
global accounting firm Crowe, 
where several boomerangs have 
been rehired. “It’s cost-effective 
as it cuts out the recruitment and 
on-boarding costs, and they return 
with a fresh perspective, more 
knowledge, and an enlarged 
business network.”b
bbernard/Shutterstock
human capital
the knowledge, skills, abilities, 
creative thinking, and other 
valued resources that 
employees bring to the 
organization10 Part One Introduction
skills and knowledge, which, in turn, improves the organization’s success. Second, compa￾nies with superior human capital are better at adapting to rapidly changing environments. 
This adaptability occurs because highly skilled employees tend to be better at performing 
diverse tasks in unfamiliar situations, particularly when they have freedom regarding ways 
to perform that work. A third reason is that developing human capital means the com￾pany is investing in and rewarding its workforce. Employees tend to reciprocate this in￾vestment by providing greater effort in their jobs and assistance to coworkers.
Organizations and Their Stakeholders As open systems, organizations are 
more effective when they understand, manage, and satisfy the needs and expectations of 
stakeholders in the external environment. Stakeholders include customers, suppliers, the 
local community and national society, interest groups, stockholders, governments, and 
many other entities that affect, or are affected by, the company’s objectives and actions.25
Fulfilling stakeholder needs and expectations isn’t easy. These varied groups have conflict￾ing interests and organizations lack sufficient resources to satisfy all of them in every way.
Several organizational behavior topics provide guidance for stakeholder relations.26 OB 
research has identified factors that influence the prioritization of stakeholders, including 
stakeholder power, how executives perceive the organization’s environment, the organiza￾tion’s culture, and the personal values of the corporate board and executive team.
One topic closely aligned with stakeholders is corporate social responsibility. Corporate 
social responsibility (CSR) consists of organizational activities intended to benefit society 
and the environment beyond the firm’s immediate financial interests or legal obliga￾tions.27 It is the view that companies have a contract with society, in which they must 
serve stakeholders beyond stockholders and customers. This is known as the triple-bottom￾line philosophy. Firms that adopt the triple bottom line aim to survive and be profit￾able in the marketplace (economic), but they also intend to maintain or improve 
conditions for society (social) as well as the physical environment. The emerging evidence 
is that companies with a positive CSR reputation tend to have better financial perfor￾mance, more loyal employees, and better relations with customers, job applicants, and 
other stakeholders.28
CONNECTING THE DOTS: AN INTEGRATIVE MODEL 
OF ORGANIZATIONAL BEHAVIOR
From this discussion of how organizational behavior benefits you as well as the organiza￾tion, you should be discovering that OB is a diverse and interconnected field of knowl￾edge. Exhibit 1.3 is an integrative road map for the field of organizational behavior that 
gives you a picture of the topics throughout this book. It is a meta-model of the various 
OB topics and concepts, each of which has its own explanatory models. For instance, you 
will learn about employee motivation theories and practices in Chapter 5 and leadership 
theories and skills in Chapter 12. Exhibit 1.3 gives you a bird’s-eye view of the book and 
its various topics, to see how they fit together.
As Exhibit 1.3 illustrates, individual inputs and processes influence individual 
outcomes, which in turn have a direct effect on the organization’s effectiveness. For 
example, how well organizations transform inputs to outputs and satisfy key stakeholders 
is dependent on how well employees perform their 
jobs and make logical and creative decisions. Individual 
inputs, processes, and outcomes are identified in the 
two left-side boxes of our integrative OB model and are 
the center of attention in Part 2 of this book. We will 
learn about personality and values—two of the most 
important individual characteristics—and later examine 
self-concept, perceptions, emotions, attitudes, motivation, 
and self-leadership.
stakeholders
individuals, groups, and other 
entities that affect, or are 
affected by, the organization’s 
objectives and actions
corporate social responsibility 
(CSR)
organizational activities 
intended to benefit society and 
the environment beyond the 
firm’s immediate financial 
interests or legal obligationsChapter One Introduction to the Field of Organizational Behavior 11
Part 3 of this book directs our attention to team and interpersonal inputs, processes, 
and outcomes. These topics are found in the two boxes on the right side of Exhibit 1.3. 
The chapter on team dynamics (Chapter 8) offers an integrative model for that specific 
topic, which shows how team inputs (e.g., team composition, size, and other team charac￾teristics) influence team processes (team development, cohesion, and others), which then 
affect team performance and other outcomes. Later chapters (Part 3) examine specific 
interpersonal and team processes listed in Exhibit 1.3, including communication, power 
and influence, conflict, and leadership.
Exhibit 1.3 illustrates that team processes and outcomes affect individual processes and 
outcomes. As an example, an individual’s personal well-being is partly affected by the mutual 
support received from team members and other coworkers. The opposite is also true; indi￾vidual processes affect team and interpersonal dynamics in organizations. For instance, we 
will learn that self-concept among individual team members influences the team’s cohesion.
The top area of Exhibit 1.3 highlights the macro-level influence of organizational in￾puts and processes on both teams and individuals. These organizational-level variables are 
mainly discussed in Part 4, including organizational structure, organizational culture, and 
organizational change. However, we will also refer to human resource practices, informa￾tion systems, and additional organizational-level variables throughout this book where 
they have a known effect on individual, interpersonal, and team dynamics.
EXHIBIT 1.3 
An Integrative Model of 
Organizational Behavior
Organizational Inputs and Processes 
• Organizational structure
• Organizational culture
• Organizational technology
• Organizational change
• Human resource practices
• Organizational strategy
Organizational Outcomes (Eectiveness)
• Open systems fit
• Eective input-output transformation
through human capital development
• Eective stakeholder engagement
• Corporate social responsibility
• Personality/values/abilities
• Self-concept/perceptions/mindset
• Emotions/attitudes
• Motivation
• Self-leadership
Individual
Inputs and Processes 
• Team tasks/size/composition
• Team development/trust/cohesion
• Communication
• Leadership (team/organization)
• Power/influence/politics
• Conflict/negotiation
Team/Interpersonal
Inputs and Processes
• Behavior/performance
• Organizational citizenship
• Well-being (low distress)
• Decisions/creativity
Individual
Outcomes
• Team performance
• Team decisions
• Collaboration/mutual support
• Social networks
Team/Interpersonal
Outcomes12 Part One Introduction
Anchors of Organizational Behavior Knowledge
Earlier, we pointed out that the field of organizational behavior helps you to refine your 
personal theories, which makes it easier to understand, predict, and influence organiza￾tional events. OB engages in an ongoing process of theory-building, which relies on a set 
of basic beliefs (see Exhibit 1.4). Here, we briefly discuss five conceptual anchors repre￾senting the principles on which OB knowledge is developed and refined.29
THE SYSTEMATIC RESEARCH ANCHOR
Probably the most important anchor of OB knowledge is that it should be based on sys￾tematic research, which typically involves forming research questions, systematically col￾lecting data, and testing hypotheses against those data.30 The appendix at the end of this 
book provides a brief overview of these research methods. Systematic research investiga￾tion is the basis for evidence-based management—making decisions and taking actions 
guided by research evidence.
It makes sense that management practice should be founded on the best available sys￾tematic knowledge, yet corporate leaders and other decision makers often embrace fads, 
untested consulting models, and their own pet beliefs without bothering to find out if they 
actually work!31 Why do organizational leaders and others overlook evidence-based knowledge? 
Here are several reasons:
1. Organizational decision makers are bombarded with ideas from consultant re￾ports, guru websites, and other sources that are popular, visually appealing, and 
accessible. In contrast, most OB research is found in relatively obscure journal 
articles that have restricted access and, consequently, low readership.32
2. Management fads often gain public attention because their sources are rewarded for 
being persuasive, not for having a strong evidence-based foundation. In contrast, 
OB researchers are usually rewarded for carefully testing the validity of their theories, 
not for convincing the public that their research findings are important.
3. Organizational decision makers sometimes ignore or dismiss evidence-based 
knowledge that contradicts their preconceived beliefs. This problem is caused 
by various perceptual errors and decision-making biases that we discuss in this 
book.33
evidence-based management
the practice of making 
decisions and taking actions 
based on research evidence
LO 1-3
Ensure that OB theories are useful in organizations Practical orientation
anchor
Systematic research
anchor
Study organizations using systematic research
methods
Import knowledge from other disciplines, not just
create its own knowledge
Multidisciplinary
anchor
Contingency
anchor
Recognize that the eectiveness of an action may
depend on the situation
Multiple levels of
analysis anchor
Understand OB events from three levels of 
analysis: individual, team, organization
EXHIBIT 1.4 
Anchors of Organizational 
Behavior KnowledgeChapter One Introduction to the Field of Organizational Behavior 13
4. Good OB research is necessarily generic rather than relevant to a specific situa￾tion or industry. Leaders therefore have the difficult task of figuring out which 
theories are relevant to their unique situation.
5. Leaders often exhibit herd mentality when choosing new organizational practices. 
They tend to embrace ideas that their peers at other companies are using even 
when those trendy practices lack evidence of their validity or relevance. Following 
the herd gives decision-makers more confidence in the fad and that their reputa￾tion is protected if the intervention falls short of expectations.34
How can leaders create a more evidence-based organization?35 One suggestion is to be 
skeptical of hype, such as when so-called experts say the idea is “new,” “revolutionary,” 
and “proven.” In reality, most management ideas are adaptations, evolutionary, and never 
proven (science can only disprove, but never prove; it can only find evidence to support a 
practice). Second, seek out the views of several expert sources, not lone charismatic stars 
and management gurus. Third, keep in mind that an example or story might illustrate an 
idea, but it does not validate that idea. An example is one data point, which could be the 
exception rather than the norm. Instead, rely on more systematic investigations with a 
larger sample, preferably with some quantitative data included. Finally, resist the tempta￾tion to engage in herd behavior. People with clearer and more confident self-concepts are 
less likely to follow the herd. Herd behavior is also minimized by involving other people 
with diverse backgrounds in the decision or project.
THE PRACTICAL ORIENTATION ANCHOR
Organizational behavior doesn’t just develop theories for the sake of being interesting. 
Most OB theories need to be useful in practice, whether for executive teams or for the rest 
debating point
IS THERE ENOUGH EVIDENCE TO SUPPORT EVIDENCE-BASED MANAGEMENT?
One of the five anchors of organizational behavior is that knowledge 
must be built on a solid foundation of research based on scientific 
methods. This evidence-based management approach urges corporate 
leaders to become more aware of evidence-based knowledge, and to 
use diagnostic tools (such as surveys and checklists) to apply those 
principles in the workplace.
It seems obvious that we should rely on good evidence rather than 
bad evidence (or no evidence at all) to make good decisions in the 
workplace. Yet, there is another side to this debate. The question isn’t 
whether good evidence is valuable; it is about the meaning of “good 
evidence.” One concern is that scholars might be advocating an inter￾pretation of good evidence that is far too narrow.c
 They typically limit 
evidence to empirical correlational research, whereas descriptive and 
qualitative information often provide additional evidence, and occa￾sionally the only feasible evidence. A half-century ago, sociologist Wil￾liam Bruce Cameron warned against this empiricist bias with this 
memorable chiasmus: “Not everything that can be counted counts, and 
not everything that counts can be counted.”d
Another concern is that managers don’t view organizational re￾search as particularly relevant to the issues they face.e
 Much university 
research is derived from cross-sectional surveys that depend on uncon￾taminated, quantifiable measures. But managers say they need re￾search that is closer to real-world variables and conditions. 
Unfortunately, less than one-fifth of leadership studies actually mea￾sure any form of behavior, and only about 2 percent of organizational 
studies are real-world experiments. The problem is that field studies 
take more time and are usually empirically messy, which may make 
them more difficult to get published.f
A third concern is that systematic elements of organizational re￾search studies (e.g., sample size, measurement reliability, advanced 
data analysis methods) can mask other potentially serious underlying 
faults. Cross-cultural studies, for instance, often use limited college stu￾dent samples to represent an entire culture. Lab studies with students 
assume they replicate workplace conditions, yet ignore important dif￾ferences with employee characteristics. These and many other faults 
may explain why replicated studies often produce different results from 
the original. And even if the published research is valid, the collective 
knowledge is still somewhat inaccurate because studies with nonsig￾nificant results are much less likely to get published (partly because 
authors don’t bother to submit papers with nonsignificant findings).g14 Part One Introduction
of us in everyday work activities. This is consistent with our statement earlier in this chap￾ter that almost all organizational behavior theories have the implicit or explicit objective 
of making organizations more effective. OB experts have had a number of debates on 
this matter, such as whether researchers need to more effectively frame the practical 
implications of their study results, whether researchers need to involve practitioners in the 
co-creation of OB knowledge, and whether publications need to loosen methodological 
standards to accommodate the messiness of real-world organizational events and issues.36
The true “impact” of an OB theory is how well it finds its way into organizational life 
and becomes a valuable asset for improving the organization’s effectiveness. For instance, 
the MARS model (introduced later in this chapter) is a useful framework for coaching 
employees, a diagnostic tool for determining how a work issue occurred, and a guide for 
implementing some forms of organizational change. Other chapters offer specific advice 
on how to improve customer service through employee attitudes, create more effective 
teams, determine the best communication channel for a specific situation, build a strong 
corporate culture, determine when to involve others in your decisions, handle conflict 
effectively, and so forth. After reading this book, you will have a toolkit of theories that 
are not only interesting, but are practical to use in organizations.
THE MULTIDISCIPLINARY ANCHOR
Another organizational behavior anchor is that the field should welcome theories and 
knowledge from other disciplines, not just from its own isolated research base. For in￾stance, psychological research has aided our understanding of individual and interper￾sonal behavior. Sociologists have contributed to our knowledge of team dynamics, 
organizational socialization, organizational power, and other aspects of the social system. 
OB knowledge has also benefited from knowledge in newer fields such as communica￾tions, marketing, and information systems.
This practice of borrowing theory from other disciplines is inevitable. Organizations have 
central roles in society, so they are studied in many social sciences.37 Furthermore, organiza￾tions consist of people who interact with one another, so there is an inherent intersection be￾tween OB and most disciplines that study human beings. However, by relying too much on 
theories developed in other fields, OB faces the risk of lagging rather than leading in knowl￾edge production. In contrast, OB-bred theories allow researchers to concentrate on the qual￾ity and usefulness of the theory, and be the first to understand and apply that knowledge.38
THE CONTINGENCY ANCHOR
OB research embraces the contingency anchor, namely, that the effect of one variable on 
another variable often depends on the characteristics of the situation or people involved. 
People and their work environments are complex, so a particular action may have different 
consequences under different conditions. An action rarely has the same success or other 
outcome in every situation.39
For example, later in this chapter we discuss how the success of remote work depends 
on specific characteristics of the employee, job, and organization. Contingencies are iden￾tified in many OB theories, such as the best leadership style, the best conflict-handling 
style, and the best organizational structure. Of course, it would be so much simpler if we 
could rely on “one best way” theories, in which a particular concept or practice has the 
same results in every situation. OB experts do try to keep theories as simple as possible, 
but the contingency anchor is always on their mind.40
THE MULTIPLE LEVELS OF ANALYSIS ANCHOR
Organizational behavior recognizes that what goes on in organizations can be placed into 
three levels of analysis: individual, team (including interpersonal), and organization. In 
fact, advanced empirical research carefully identifies the appropriate level of analysis for Chapter One Introduction to the Field of Organizational Behavior 15
each variable in the study and then measures at that level of analysis. For example, team 
norms and cohesion are measured as team variables, not as characteristics of individuals 
within each team.
Although OB research and writing pegs each variable within one of these levels of 
analysis, most variables are understood best by thinking of them from all three levels of 
analysis.41 Communication is located in this book as a team (interpersonal) process, for 
instance, but it also includes individual and organizational processes. Therefore, you 
should try to think about each OB topic at the individual, team, and organizational levels, 
not just at one of these levels.
The Emerging Workplace Landscape
Organizations are experiencing unprecedented change. Global competition, rapid and dis￾ruptive technological change, pandemic disease outbreaks, and many other factors have 
substantially altered business strategy and everyday workplace activities. The field of orga￾nizational behavior plays a vital role in guiding organizations through this continuous 
turbulence. In this section, we look at three emerging workplace developments: diversity/
inclusive workplace, work–life integration, and remote work.
DIVERSITY AND THE INCLUSIVE WORKPLACE
The workforce in most countries is more diverse than ever before, and organizations need 
to support this diversity by maintaining an inclusive workplace. Inclusive workplaces value 
diversity and allow people of all identities to be fully themselves while contributing to the 
organization.42 At the individual level, an inclusive workplace enables people of all back￾grounds to feel psychologically safe, engaged, valued, authentic, listened to, and respected. 
At a collective level, an inclusive workplace gives diverse groups voice through formal 
structures, such as diversity councils, and everyday processes, such as representation in 
teams and casual gatherings. An inclusive workplace also continually assesses recruit￾ment, rewards, social and information networks, and other organizational systems to en￾sure that they do not unfairly favor some groups over others.
Most people initially think about diversity in terms of surface-level diversity, that is, the 
observable demographic and other overt differences among members of a group, such as 
their race, ethnicity, gender, sex, age, and physical capabilities.43 Surface-level diversity in 
the United States and many other countries has increased substantially over the past few 
decades. Another form of diversity—called deep-level diversity—refers to differences in the 
psychological characteristics of employees, including personalities, beliefs, values, and 
attitudes.44 We can’t directly see deep-level diversity, but it is evident in a person’s words, 
decisions, and actions. Some deep-level diversity is associated with surface-level attributes. 
For example, studies report significant differences between men and women regarding 
their preference of conflict-handling styles, ethical principles, and approaches to commu￾nicating with others in various situations.45
The combination of surface-level and deep-level diversity is also evident in the 
multigenerational workforce, which is usually organized into cohorts: Silents (born earlier 
than 1946), Baby Boomers
(born from 1946 to 1964), 
Generation Xers (born from 
1965 to 1980), Millennials
(born from 1981 to 1996), 
and Generation Zs (born after 
1996).46 Research suggests 
that differences in needs, 
expectations, and attitudes 
LO 1-4
inclusive workplace
a workplace that values 
people of all identities and 
allows them to be fully 
themselves while contributing 
to the organization
surface-level diversity
the observable demographic 
or physiological differences in 
people, such as their race, 
ethnicity, gender, age, and 
physical disabilities
deep-level diversity
differences in the 
psychological characteristics 
of employees, including 
personalities, beliefs, values, 
and attitudes16 Part One Introduction
Beyond Diversity: Fostering Inclusion 
at RingCentralh
Many companies claim they support diversity by employing 
people with a wide range of ethnicities, races, sexual prefer￾ences, ages, and other characteristics. It’s a good start, but 
RingCentral believes that true diversity requires much more.
“The truth is, simply hiring people from different back￾grounds isn’t enough to really improve diversity in the 
workplace,” explains Jedd Ong, diversity program manager 
at the Silicon Valley leading provider of global enterprise 
cloud communications and collaboration. “For that to 
happen, companies need to focus on fostering inclusion—
finding ways for all employees to have their voices heard 
and grow more opportunities for diversity at all levels of the 
organization.”
RingCentral has nurtured an inclusive workplace by 
hiring people who are both collaborative and cosmopolitan. 
“Learning to work together is a life skill that is key to 
development from early on,” says Sangeeta Walsh, Senior 
Director of Platform Ecosystem and ISV Product Marketing. 
The company further supports this culture by encouraging 
volunteer activities to help diverse groups in the 
community.
RingCentral’s inclusive culture is also anchored in its 
Employee Resource Groups, representing employees 
who share a common purpose or background, particularly 
from traditionally underrepresented groups and their al￾lies. A few of these have definable titles, such as The 
Rainbow Room (LGBTQ), BE@R (Black Employees at Ring￾Central), HUGS (Help & Understanding Group Support), 
and EnviRingmentalists.
“Here at RingCentral, our mission is all about building 
better human connections—and that starts from within,” 
says Jennifer Caukin, RingCentral’s VP of Analyst Rela￾tions and Executive Co-Sponsor of the Pan-Asian Network. 
global connections 1.1
Ariel Skelley/Blend Images
“Our Pan-Asian Network has been a source of support and 
comfort, but it’s also about activating our experiences and 
points of view to make the world a better place.”
Diversity and inclusion isn’t just morally correct; it is a 
competitive advantage. For example, it helps RingCentral 
to understand and connect with its global clients. “We’re 
committed to developing an inclusive workforce, ensuring 
our employees are as diverse as the customers we serve,” 
the company states in its annual impact report. “We’re 
global, and diversity in our workforce gives us better visi￾bility as to address the global scale,” says Sangeeta Walsh.
An inclusive culture also amplifies the company’s cre￾ative potential. “We’re a company built on innovation,” says 
Evie Goldstein, Lead UX Writer/Content Strategist on Ring￾Central’s innovation team. “If you have people of different 
backgrounds and different experiences, they come to the 
table with new ideas. And if everyone loves new ideas—as 
they do here—then everyone’s suggestion gets heard.”
do exist across age groups, although not necessarily as much as some popular books and ar￾ticles claim. Also, much of this deep-level diversity is due more to the person’s stage in life 
and less to whether they were born into a specific cohort. For instance, one analysis of 
German data over 25 years found that generational groups held similar attitudes (importance 
of job success, importance of self-actualization, confidence in the future, worry about job 
security, etc.) when they were a particular age. In other words, Baby Boomers had similar 
beliefs and attitudes as Millennials do when they were that age.47
Workforce diversity and inclusion offer numerous advantages.48 Teams with high infor￾mational diversity—members have different knowledge and skills—tend to be more creative 
and make better decisions in complex situations compared to teams with less informa￾tional diversity. A workforce with surface- and deep-level diversity is also more representa￾tive of most communities, so companies are better able to recognize and address 
community needs. Overall, inclusive workplaces produce better decisions, employee atti￾tudes, team performance, and a host of other favorable outcomes for employees and the 
organization. However, these benefits are contingent on a variety of factors, such as leader￾ship, team structure, psychological safety perceptions, and employees’ personal values.49Chapter One Introduction to the Field of Organizational Behavior 17
Diversity also poses challenges in the workplace.50 Employees with diverse back￾grounds usually take longer to perform effectively together due to problems with commu￾nication, coordination, and cooperation (see Chapter 8). Some forms of diversity also 
increase the risk of dysfunctional conflict, which reduces information sharing and satis￾faction with coworkers (see Chapter 11). These issues often produce a curvilinear rela￾tionship between team diversity and performance. For example, one study reported that 
innovation performance in research teams increased with employees’ cross-national 
geographic diversity, but only up to a point; teams with very high geographic diversity had 
lower performance. Another study found that more diverse research teams produced 
patents with broader scope (the patent identified more variations and uses), but they were 
also slower than less diverse teams at completing the patent process.
Overall, diversity and inclusion can be significant competitive advantages for organiza￾tions, particularly when they manage the potential challenges. Also, companies that cre￾ate an inclusive workplace are, in essence, fulfilling the ethical standard of fairness in 
their decisions regarding employment selection, promotions, and reward allocation. Inclu￾sive workplace practices improve the quality of hiring and promotion, and increase em￾ployee satisfaction and loyalty. 
WORK–LIFE INTEGRATION
Before the digital age, most employees would finish work after eight or nine hours at the 
office or factory and could separate their personal time from their employment. Few 
people had complete separation of these roles, of course. Employees either brought paper￾work home or thought about workplace issues long after their official work day had 
ended. Even so, the past is a stark contrast to the situation today in which information 
technology tethers a large percentage of employees to work on a 24/7 schedule. Globaliza￾tion has contributed to this blending of work and nonwork because employees need to be 
“on-call” with coworkers, suppliers, and clients who now live in different time zones 
around the planet.
Little wonder that one feature employees value in a job is the ability to integrate work 
with nonwork activities.51 Work–life integration refers to the degree that people are effec￾tively engaged in their various work and nonwork roles and have a low degree of role 
Does team performance increase 
with team diversity? Usually, but 
the relationship is often 
curvilinear—performance 
increases with diversity to a 
point, then decreases at very high 
levels of that diversity. This 
curvilinearity has been observed 
in several recent studies. For 
instance, research teams in the 
Formula 1 race car industry 
performed better as their 
diversity (range of experience) 
increased to a point. However, 
performance was lower in 
highly diverse teams because 
they couldn’t communicate 
or coordinate as well as less 
diverse teams.i
Alessio De Marco/AP Images
work–life integration
the degree that people are 
effectively engaged in their 
various work and nonwork 
roles and have a low degree 
of role conflict across those 
life domains18 Part One Introduction
conflict across those life domains.52 This phrase has replaced work–life balance, which 
incorrectly implies that work and nonwork roles are completely separate and opposing 
partitions (like a balance of a scale). “There is no such thing as work–life balance,” says 
Lisa Sterling, chief people officer at SmartRecruiters. “You’ve got to get to a point at 
which work and life integrate, and you figure out organizationally and individually how to 
make those two things work together.”53
To understand work–life integration, consider that each of us has multiple roles and 
associated self-concepts, such as accountant, parent, friend, manager, and sports fan (see 
Chapter 3). Work–life integration occurs by satisfying the demands and experiencing the 
positive emotions of our various segments of life. These roles are inherently integrated 
because the resources generated and consumed by one role enhance or starve other 
roles.54 People with a fulfilling home life, for example, develop social support, positive 
moods, relaxation, and other resources that can enrich their work, as well as other roles. 
Similarly, the resources gained at work—such as new skills, income, and feelings of success—
contribute to home and other nonwork roles.
Unfortunately, many people don’t experience resource enrichment across roles. In￾stead, the heavy demands of one role deplete personal resources, which starve other roles. 
Employees who spend most waking hours performing or thinking about their job—whether 
at the workplace, at home, or on vacation—have insufficient time and energy remaining 
for other aspects of their lives. They experience what is widely known as work–life conflict. 
In short, a person’s work roles and nonwork roles are inherently integrated because the 
physical, cognitive, and emotional resources produced or consumed by one role poten￾tially enrich or undermine the success and enjoyment of other roles.
Practicing Work–Life Integration How do individuals and organizations maxi￾mize work–life integration?55 One strategy is to literally integrate two or more roles (see 
Exhibit 1.5). An increasingly popular trend is to conduct meetings during an exercise walk. 
Some companies encourage staff to bring their dogs to work, which is both comforting and 
requires an occasional break to walk the four-legged friend. On-site child care is a form of 
integration because it allows employees to switch from work to parent roles throughout the 
day. These integration arrangements are not always effective, but they illustrate that blend￾ing work and nonwork roles is more viable than we previously understood.
A second work–life integration strategy occurs through flexible work scheduling.56 For 
instance, you might remotely attend a meeting from home in the evening with coworkers 
who live in other time zones, then arrive at work late the next morning after doing a few 
EXHIBIT 1.5 Strategies to Improve Work–Life Integration
WORK-LIFE INTEGRATION STRATEGY DESCRIPTION EXAMPLE
Integrate multiple roles Find ways to perform work and nonwork 
activities simultaneously or proximally.
Have a meeting with a coworker while doing 
exercise that allows conversation (e.g., walking).
Flexible work scheduling Establish work (and nonwork) roles 
that allow work time to have variable 
time frames.
Seek jobs and companies that allow you to 
vary your start and finish times as well as work 
remotely on some days.
Align roles with personal attributes Choose work and nonwork roles that are 
sufficiently compatible with each other 
and with your personality and values.
Assess your personality and values, then 
choose work and life activities that are 
compatible with those personal attributes.
Boundary management Establish methods that prevent your 
work roles from encroaching on time and 
attention devoted to your nonwork roles.
1. Schedule time blocks
2. Create physical role spaces
3. Apply technological boundaries 
4. Communicate role boundary expectationsChapter One Introduction to the Field of Organizational Behavior 19
household chores. Organizations also have parental and other personal leave benefits to 
support higher demands at home in the short term. A third work–life integration strategy 
is to ensure that your various work and nonwork roles are sufficiently compatible with each 
other and with your personal characteristics. In other words, your job, family life, sports 
activities, and so forth should align with your personality and values and have some simi￾larity to each other. This relates to self-concept consistency, which we discuss in Chapter 3.
Although work is integrated with other life roles, a fourth strategy is to engage in some 
degree of “boundary management” across those roles.57 The literature has identified a few 
types of tactics to manage role boundaries, some of which are often applied in combination:58
1. Scheduling time blocks. A common boundary management tactic is actively block￾ing out time for work versus other life roles. For example, some people strictly end 
their work day at a specific hour. A few companies support this tactic by closing 
offices and shutting down work-related resources. Employees also set aside spe￾cific blocks of time each week to engage in family, leisure, fitness, and other non￾work events.
2. Creating physical role spaces. This involves assigning specific physical locations to 
specific roles. Some people perform work only at the office, and rarely bring work 
materials home. Employees who routinely work at home might have a dedicated 
“home office” and limit interruptions from family and other nonwork sources in 
that space. Physical locations are usually designed to facilitate the role (desk, 
equipment, etc.), but they also create a “mental fence” to separate that role from 
other roles.
3. Applying technological boundaries. Technologies often blur work and nonwork 
boundaries, but they can also manage those boundaries. The most basic tactic is 
shutting off work-related devices during nonwork hours. Digital calendars can dis￾tinguish work from nonwork events, so notifications for specific roles are activated 
only at specific times of day (e.g., work notifications are turned off during non￾work hours). Some governments have assisted technological boundary manage￾ment by passing legislation (France) or creating an employment code of practice 
(Ireland) giving employees the right to ignore company messages after regular 
work hours (called the “right to disconnect”).
Soon after switching to remote 
work during the pandemic, many 
employees discovered the need to 
actively separate work from other 
spheres of life. “We had to be 
intentional about setting 
boundaries; otherwise, they were 
non-existent,” warns Amrita Patel, 
a Senior Vice President at Wells 
Fargo Commercial Capital in 
Dallas. “I made a contract with 
myself that two days a week I 
would “shut off” at a certain time.” 
Patel admits that time-scheduled 
boundary management is difficult, 
but it works. “When I stuck to it, I 
found I had more clarity to tackle 
the challenges ahead.”j
Sergii Sobolevskyi/Shutterstock20 Part One Introduction
4. Communicating role boundary expectations. Some individuals advise others of 
their role-related boundaries and let them know when those expectations have 
been violated. This also includes activating automated phone and digital messages 
to signal that the individual is away for a set time. Several organizations support 
this form of boundary management by prohibiting work-related communication 
(except in extreme emergencies) after the regular work day. Portugal recently 
passed legislation that prohibits employers from contacting their staff outside 
regular work hours, with rare exceptions.
REMOTE WORK
One of the most dramatic workplace transformations during the COVID-19 pandemic has 
been a surge in remote work. Remote work is any arrangement whereby an individual per￾forms organizational tasks while located away from the employer’s physical premises. In 
most cases, remote employees are connected to coworkers, clients, and company data 
through various forms of information technology. Remote work exists in many forms. 
Consultants and tradespeople routinely perform work on the client’s premises. A small 
percentage of remote workers are nomadic; they do their work at cafés, libraries, and 
short-term rentals while traveling to different countries throughout the year. The most 
common form of remote work, however, is performing work from home (formerly known 
as telecommuting or teleworking).
Over the past two decades, only a small percentage of the American workforce worked 
remotely at least a few days each month. However, remote working skyrocketed when the 
COVID-19 pandemic forced businesses in the United States and elsewhere to apply social 
distancing and self-isolation practices. Estimates vary, but roughly two-thirds of American 
employees worked from home at least part of the time during the pandemic. This includes 
those in hybrid work arrangements--working from home part of the week and at the com￾pany’s premises at other times. During the second year of the pandemic, fewer employees 
were fully remote (worked from home all of the time), while on-site and hybrid work ar￾rangements increased. One major survey estimates that almost half of knowledge workers 
globally now work remotely at least part of the time.59
Some companies employed a completely remote workforce long before the COVID-19 
pandemic. Automattic, Buffer, Emsisoft, and Sonatype are a few organizations in which 
all employees are remote workers. These distributed organizations have learned how to re￾cruit, train, support, retain, and lead employees who rarely (if ever) meet in person. 
“When I started doing all-remote, it was a special thing,” says Christian Mairoll, who 
launched anti-malware software company Emsisoft almost two decades ago in Austria. 
Mairoll now has three dozen staff located around the world and runs the business from 
his sheep farm in New Zealand. “I’m proud to say that Emsisoft is living proof that 
all-remote is a viable, effective, and sustainable business model.”60
Remote Work Benefits and Risks In spite of its popularity among employees, 
remote work is a controversial issue in the workplace because it has both benefits and 
risks for organizations as well as remote workers (see Exhibit 1.6).61 One benefit is that 
remote work
any arrangement whereby 
an individual performs 
organizational tasks while 
located away from the 
employer’s physical premises, 
usually connected through 
various forms of information 
technology
POTENTIAL BENEFITS POTENTIAL RISKS
• Better employee work–life integration
• Attractive benefit for job applicants 
• Low employee turnover 
• Higher employee productivity 
• Lower unpaid time and travel costs 
• Reduced greenhouse gas emissions 
• Reduced corporate real estate and office costs
• More social isolation 
• Less informal communication with coworkers 
• Lower team cohesion 
• Weaker organizational culture 
• More stressful due to home space and roles
EXHIBIT 1.6
Potential Benefits and Risks 
of Remote WorkingChapter One Introduction to the Field of Organizational Behavior 21
Automattic: The Distributed 
(Fully Remote) Organizationk
Jerry Jones lives near Columbia, Missouri, where he was 
hired as a software engineer at Automattic. Jones and his 
team members work well together, even though they 
don’t work at the same physical location. In fact, his co￾workers live in other countries and continents. Automattic, 
which makes the blogging platform WordPress and other 
popular website-building products, is a completely distrib￾uted organization. All of its 1,800 employees are remote 
workers located across 94 countries.
Automattic’s entire hiring process, including inter￾views, is conducted through text-based interactions. The 
company reasons that its employees communicate mainly 
through chat and text messaging, so applicants need to 
demonstrate their ability to communicate well through 
these channels. “No one sees or hears you until after 
you’re hired,” says Jerry Jones. Employees are responsi￾ble for output, not for being at work at specific times. This 
creates accountability, but it also gives everyone consid￾erable flexibility for work–life integration. The company 
even has a no-limits vacation policy.
Automattic team leaders regularly convene video￾based meetings, partly to discuss complex issues but 
also so employees feel part of a team. To support team 
dynamics, organizational culture, and employee 
well-being, Automattic ensures that team members meet 
in person twice each year. One “meetup” is arranged for 
each team alone. For example, Jerry Jones and his team 
met for several days in Los Angeles two months after he 
was hired. The other event is the Grand Meetup, an 
annual week-long conference attended by all Automattic 
employees.
global connections 1.2
RossHelen/Shutterstock
remote workers usually experience better work–life integration because they have more 
time and somewhat more control to juggle work with family obligations. Work–life inte￾gration is more difficult, however, when employees lack sufficient workspace and privacy 
at home and have increased family responsibilities on days when they work from home.
Job applicants—particularly Millennials—rate remote work as an attractive job feature, 
and turnover is usually lower among employees who are able to work from home. Research 
also indicates that remote workers have higher productivity than other employees, likely 
because they experience less stress and tend to convert some of the former commuting 
time into work time. Working remotely also improves productivity by enabling employees 
to perform their jobs at times when natural disasters, such as the COVID-19 pandemic, 
prohibit access to the office.
Due to less commuting, remote work offers considerable financial benefits for employ￾ees, including less unpaid time traveling, vehicle use, fuel costs, and other commuting ex￾penses. One recent study of remote workers in Ontario, Canada, estimated savings 
between (CAD) $8,820 and $29,426 per year, depending on the number of days working 
from home each week. With less commuting, remote work also benefits society in the 
form of lower greenhouse gas emissions and less need for taxpayer-funded transportation 
infrastructure. Companies also benefit from lower real estate costs.62
Remote work also has several potential disadvantages or risks.63 People who regularly 
or mostly work from home report higher levels of social isolation, including weaker rela￾tionships with coworkers. They also receive less word-of-mouth information, which may 
have implications for promotional opportunities and workplace relations. Teams poten￾tially suffer from lower cohesion when their members work remotely most of the time. 
Organizations risk having a weaker culture when most employees work from home for a 
significant part of their workweek.22 Part One Introduction
Contingencies of Remote Work Success The success of remote work ar￾rangements depends on several characteristics of the employee, job, and organization.64
Employees who work effectively from home typically have less need for structure; instead, 
they have higher self-motivation, self-organization, and need for autonomy. They also tend 
to have a lower need for regular social interaction or are able to fulfill their social needs 
from sources outside the workplace. Given the importance of technology in remote work 
arrangements, employees who perform well under these conditions have good informa￾tion technology skills.
Some jobs and tasks are more suitable for remote work. Remote work jobs should re￾quire fairly low interdependence with other jobs, because coordination and communica￾tion are more challenging in remote than face-to-face work settings. Also, jobs are best 
suited for remote work if needed resources can be transported home or are available digi￾tally. A third job characteristic is that task performance is measurable.
At the organizational level, remote work tends to be more successful when em￾ployee rewards and promotions are determined by performance and other measurable 
contributions rather than by presence in the office (face time). Companies also help 
remote workers maintain sufficient cohesion with their team and psychological con￾nectedness with the organization. This occurs through regular supportive communica￾tion with the supervisor and teammates. In some instances, companies may need to 
limit the number of days that employees work from home, such as by having special 
meetings or events where all employees assemble at the workplace. Visual communica￾tion channels, such as video conferences with cameras turned on, also improve per￾sonal relatedness.
®
SELF-ASSESSMENT 1.1: Are You a Good Remote Worker?
MARS Model of Individual Behavior and Performance
For most of the past century, experts have tried to identify the direct predictors of individ￾ual behavior and performance.65 One of the earliest formulas was performance = person ×
situation, where person includes individual characteristics and situation represents external 
influences on the individual’s behavior. Another frequently mentioned formula is perfor￾mance = ability × motivation.66 Sometimes known as the “skill-and-will” model, this 
formula elaborates two specific characteristics within the person that influence individual 
performance. Some organizational studies use the ability–motivation–opportunity (AMO)
model, which refers to the three variables but with a limited interpretation of the situation. 
Along with ability, motivation, and situation, researchers have identified a fourth key direct 
predictor of individual behavior and performance: role perceptions (the individual’s ex￾pected role obligations).67
These four variables—motivation, ability, role perceptions, and situational factors—are 
represented in the MARS model of individual behavior and performance (see Exhibit 1.7). 
MARS is the acronym for these four concepts.
68 All four variables are essential influences 
on an individual’s voluntary behavior and performance; if any one of them is low in a given 
situation, the employee is less likely to engage in the behavior or will perform it poorly. 
For example, motivated salespeople with clear role perceptions and sufficient resources 
(situational factors) will not perform their jobs as well if they lack sales skills and related 
knowledge (ability).
LO 1-5
MARS model
a model depicting the four 
variables—motivation, ability, 
role perceptions, and 
situational factors—that 
directly influence an 
individual’s voluntary behavior 
and performanceChapter One Introduction to the Field of Organizational Behavior 23
Motivation, ability, and role perceptions are clustered together in the model because 
they are located within the person. Situational factors are external to the individual but 
still affect one’s behavior and performance.69 The four MARS variables are the direct 
predictors of employee performance, customer service, team behaviors (cooperation, co￾ordination, etc.), ethical behavior, and all other forms of voluntary behavior in the work￾place. Let’s look more closely at each of the four MARS factors.
EMPLOYEE MOTIVATION
Motivation represents the forces within a person that affect the direction, intensity, and 
persistence of effort for voluntary behavior.70 Direction refers to the path along which 
people steer their effort. In other words, motivation is goal-directed, not random. People 
have choices about what they are trying to achieve and at what level of quality, quantity, 
and so forth. They are motivated to arrive at work on time, finish a project a few hours 
early, or aim for many other targets.
The second element of motivation, called intensity, is the amount of effort allocated to 
the goal. Intensity is all about how much people push themselves to complete a task. Two 
employees might be motivated to finish their project within the next few hours (direc￾tion), but only one of them puts forth enough effort (intensity) to achieve this goal. The 
third element of motivation is persistence, which refers to the length of time that the indi￾vidual continues to exert effort toward an objective. Employees sustain their effort until 
they reach their goal or give up beforehand.
To help remember these three elements of motivation, consider the metaphor of 
driving a car in which the thrust of the motor is your effort. Direction refers to where 
you steer the car, intensity is how much you put your foot down on the accelerator, and 
persistence is for how long you drive toward your destination. Remember that motiva￾tion is a force that exists within individuals; it is not their actual behavior. Thus, direc￾tion, intensity, and persistence are cognitive (thoughts) and emotional conditions that 
directly cause us to move.
Personality
Individual
characteristics MARS model
Values
Self-concept
Perceptions
Emotions and
attitudes
Stress
Motivation
Ability Abilit Abilityy
Role
perceptions
Situational
factors
Behavior and
results
• Task performance
• Organizational
citizenship
• Counterproductive
work behaviors
• Joining/staying with
the organization
• Maintaining 
attendance
EXHIBIT 1.7 MARS Model of Individual Behavior and Results
motivation
the forces within a person that 
affect the direction, intensity, 
and persistence of effort for 
voluntary behavior24 Part One Introduction
40% of 20,000 employees surveyed worldwide 
strongly agree that their managers have clearly defined their 
roles and responsibilities.
83% of 181,754 Canadian federal
government employees strongly or somewhat 
agree that they have the materials and
equipment they need to do their job.
67%of 615,395 U.S. federal government 
employees say they are given a real opportunity
to improve their skills in the organization.
75% of 1,500 American employees
surveyed question whether their workplace has 
given them the sucient training necessary to
do their current job.
60% of 2.2 million employees
surveyed worldwide strongly agree that 
they know what is expected of them.
ederal
ewhat
nd
l government
opportunity
tion.
surveyed
given the
do their c
MIND THE MARS GAP ON ABILITY, ROLE PERCEPTIONS, AND SITUATIONAL FACTORSl
Andersen Ross/Blend Images LLC
ABILITY
Employee abilities have a well-known influence on behavior and task performance. Ability
includes the natural aptitudes, learned capabilities, and habits required to successfully 
complete a task.71
• Aptitudes are the natural (inborn) physical or cognitive talents that help employees 
learn specific tasks more quickly and perform them better. For example, finger 
dexterity is an aptitude by which individuals learn more quickly and potentially 
achieve higher performance at picking up and handling small objects with their fin￾gers. Employees with high finger dexterity are not necessarily better than others at 
first; rather, they usually learn the skill faster and potentially reach a higher level of 
performance.
• Learned capabilities include the skills and knowledge that people acquire through 
training, practice, and other forms of learning. Learned capabilities tend to wane 
over time if they are not regularly put to use.
• Habits are tendencies to engage in specific behaviors in response to contextual 
cues and enacted with little conscious awareness or reflection.72 Habits differ from 
other learned capabilities because they are triggered by situational cues with 
minimal or no consciously motivated thought. This automaticity develops over 
time as the behavior is repeated and rewarded in specific contexts. Between one-third 
and one-half of our daily behaviors are habitual. Organizations train employees to 
develop habits, particularly for situations requiring quick action without careful 
deliberation (e.g., emergencies, military responses).
An individual’s performance and well-being depend on how compatible their abilities 
are with job requirements. One matching strategy is to select applicants with the required 
abilities. For example, companies determine the suitability of job applicants through past 
work references, work samples, and various selection tests. A second strategy is to train 
employees who lack specific learned capabilities needed for the job.73 The third person–
job matching strategy is to redesign the job so that employees are given tasks only within 
their current abilities. For example, a complex task might be simplified—some aspects of 
the work are transferred to others—so new employees are assigned only tasks that they are 
currently able to perform. As newcomers become more competent at these tasks, other 
tasks are added back into the job.
ability
the natural aptitudes, learned 
capabilities, and habits 
required to successfully 
complete a taskChapter One Introduction to the Field of Organizational Behavior 25
ROLE PERCEPTIONS
Along with motivation and ability, employees require accurate role perceptions to perform 
their jobs well. Role perceptions refer to how clearly people understand what is expected 
of them in their organizational roles. These perceptions range from role clarity to role 
ambiguity. Role clarity exists when the individual: 
1. Understands the specific duties or consequences for which the employee is account￾able. You might think that every employee clearly understands what tasks and re￾sponsibilities are assigned to them. In reality, employees are sometimes evaluated on 
performance that was never mentioned as part of their job duties. This role ambigu￾ity may be increasing as firms move away from precisely defined job descriptions to 
broader work responsibilities.
2. Understands company expectations of task scheduling priority and performance 
criterion priority. Task scheduling priority refers to which jobs should be completed 
before performing other tasks. Performance criterion priority refers to the relative 
importance of performance dimensions, such as how many customers to serve in an 
hour (quantity) versus how well each customer should be served (quality).
3. Understands the preferred behaviors or procedures for accomplishing tasks. Role 
ambiguity exists when an employee is skilled at performing a task in multiple 
ways, but is unsure which way the company prefers.
Role perceptions are important because they represent how well employees know where 
to direct their effort.74 Employees with role clarity perform work more accurately and effi￾ciently, whereas those with role ambiguity waste considerable time and energy performing 
the wrong tasks or in the wrong way. Furthermore, role clarity is essential for coordination 
with coworkers and other stakeholders. This improves team performance and ensures that 
everyone performs their work safely. Finally, role clarity motivates employees because they 
have a higher belief that their effort will produce the expected outcomes. In other words, 
people are more confident when they know what is expected of them.
SITUATIONAL FACTORS
Individual behavior and performance also depend on the situation, which is any context 
beyond the employee’s immediate control.75 The situation has two main influences on 
individual behavior and performance.76 One influence is that the work context constrains 
or facilitates behavior and performance. Employees who are motivated and skilled and 
know their role obligations will nevertheless perform poorly if they lack time, budget, 
physical work facilities, and other resources. The second influence is that the work envi￾ronment provides cues to guide and motivate people. For example, companies install bar￾riers and warning signs in dangerous areas. These workplace features are situational 
factors that warn employees to avoid the nearby hazards.
role perceptions
the degree to which a person 
understands the job duties 
assigned to or expected of 
him or her
Through virtual reality training, Walmart employees are improving their role 
clarity for everyday situations. An employee slips on VR goggles and acts 
out the role in a Black Friday scenario while classmates view a projection 
of the same scene. The instructor clarifies employee role perceptions by 
asking the class to prioritize what should be done and to describe the 
preferred behaviors for each incident. For instance, the scene shows a 
toddler standing on a shopping cart seat, and Walmart has a preferred way 
to correct the child’s risky behavior (hint: don’t tell the child directly). 
“Black Friday is a busy, hectic day for everyone,” says a Walmart employee 
in St. Petersburg, Florida. “With the VR, an associate can feel how it can 
play out.”m
Julio Cortez/AP Images26 Part One Introduction
Types of Individual Behavior
The four elements of the MARS model—motivation, ability, role perceptions, and situa￾tional factors—affect all voluntary workplace behaviors and performance. Individual behav￾ior comes in many varieties, but most can be organized into the five categories described 
in this section: task performance, organizational citizenship, counterproductive work be￾haviors, joining and staying with the organization, and maintaining work attendance.
TASK PERFORMANCE
Task performance refers to the individual’s voluntary goal-directed behaviors that contribute 
to organizational objectives.77 Most jobs require incumbents to complete several tasks. For 
example, foreign exchange traders at Morgan Stanley must be able to identify and execute 
profitable trades, work cooperatively with clients and coworkers, assist in training new staff, 
and work on special telecommunications equipment without error. All tasks involve degrees 
of working with people, data, things, and ideas.78 Foreign 
exchange traders mainly work with data (e.g., performing 
technical analysis of trends), but also with people (e.g., 
sharing information with coworkers and clients), ideas (in￾terpreting charts and company reports), and things (infor￾mation technology equipment).
There are three types of task performance (see Exhibit 1.8).79
Proficient task performance refers to how well employees 
perform the work efficiently and accurately. It involves 
LO 1-6
Proficient task performance
Adaptive task performance
How well employees perform the
work eciently and accurately.
How well employees modify their
thoughts and behavior to align with
and support a new or changing work
process or work setting.
How well employees take the initiative
to anticipate and introduce new work
patterns that benefit the organization.
Proactive task performance
EXHIBIT 1.8
Three Types of Task Performance 
in the Workplace
(top): Ildar Galeev/Shutterstock; 
(middle): Fred Ho Yeow Hui/
Shutterstock; (bottom): malika.
1028/Shutterstock
task performance
the individual’s voluntary goal￾directed behaviors that 
contribute to organizational 
objectives; includes proficient, 
adaptive, and proactive task 
performance
proficient task performance
how well employees perform 
the work efficiently and 
accuratelyChapter One Introduction to the Field of Organizational Behavior 27
accomplishing the assigned work at or above the expected standards of quality, quantity, and 
other indicators of effectiveness. Adaptive task performance refers to how well employees 
modify their thoughts and behavior to align with and support a new or changing work 
process or work setting. In essence, adaptive task performance is about how well employees 
respond to change in the workplace and in their job duties. Proactive task performance refers 
to how well employees take the initiative to anticipate and introduce new work patterns that 
benefit the organization. Proactive performance is about anticipating change, and leading 
that change in oneself, coworkers, and the workplace to achieve what is perceived to be a 
better future for the organization.
ORGANIZATIONAL CITIZENSHIP
Employee behavior extends beyond performing specific tasks. It also includes organizational 
citizenship behaviors (OCBs), which are various forms of cooperation and helpfulness to 
others that support the organization’s social and psychological context.80 Some OCBs are 
directed toward individuals, such as assisting coworkers with their work problems, adjust￾ing your work schedules to accommodate coworkers, showing genuine courtesy toward 
coworkers, and sharing your work resources (supplies, technology, staff) with coworkers. 
Other OCBs represent cooperation and helpfulness toward the organization, such as sup￾porting the company’s public image, offering ideas beyond those required for your own 
job, attending events that support the organization, and keeping up with new develop￾ments in the organization. Some forms of organizational citizenship are discretionary 
behaviors (employees don’t have to perform them), whereas other OCBs are job require￾ments even if they aren’t explicitly stated in job descriptions.81
OCBs can have a signifi￾cant effect on individual, 
team, and organizational ef￾fectiveness.82 Employees 
who help others have 
higher task performance 
because they receive more 
reciprocated support from 
coworkers. OCBs also 
Organizational citizenship is 
embedded in EMPAUA’s core 
value of collaboration. “At 
EMPAUA, we are happy to share 
our knowledge and offer advice, 
so we can contribute to our 
colleagues‘ growth,” says the pan￾European technology consulting 
firm with 60 employees in 
Germany, the United Kingdom, 
Switzerland and Spain. “People 
can just approach other 
colleagues directly, but we also 
have several channels in our team 
chat where people can ask for 
help when they encounter 
problems in their projects.” 
Organizational citizenship goes 
beyond providing advice; it 
also includes helping out when 
someone is overloaded. “If 
someone has a lot on their plate 
and others have capacity, it is 
natural to offer to take some of 
the workload off their shoulders.”n
fizkes/Shutterstock
adaptive task performance
how well employees modify 
their thoughts and behavior to 
align with and support a new 
or changing work process or 
work setting
proactive task performance
how well employees take the 
initiative to anticipate and 
introduce new work patterns 
that benefit the organization
organizational citizenship 
behaviors (OCBs)
various forms of cooperation 
and helpfulness to others that 
support the organization’s social 
and psychological context28 Part One Introduction
increase team performance where members depend on one another. However, engaging in 
OCBs can also have negative consequences.83 OCBs take time and energy away from per￾forming tasks, so employees who give more attention to OCBs risk lower career success in 
companies that reward task performance. Also, employees who frequently perform OCBs 
tend to have higher work–family conflict because their attention to OCBs takes time away 
from nonwork obligations.
COUNTERPRODUCTIVE WORK BEHAVIORS
Organizational behavior is interested in all workplace behaviors, including dysfunctional 
activities collectively known as counterproductive work behaviors (CWBs). CWBs are vol￾untary behaviors that have the potential to directly or indirectly harm the organization or 
its stakeholders.84 This concept includes a wide array of intentional and unintentional 
behaviors, such as harassing coworkers, creating unnecessary conflict, deviating from pre￾ferred work methods (e.g., shortcuts that undermine work quality), being untruthful, 
stealing, sabotaging work, and wasting resources. CWBs are not minor concerns; research 
suggests that they can substantially undermine the organization’s effectiveness.
JOINING AND STAYING WITH THE ORGANIZATION
Companies suffer and potentially fail if they can’t hire and retain enough people with the 
right skills and knowledge to perform the work.85 This isn’t a hypothetical statement. 
During times of economic growth, companies have been unable to keep up with demand 
because they can’t hire enough qualified people. The impact of staff shortages is particu￾larly dramatic during crises, such as the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic. Some hospi￾tals have been so short-staffed during COVID-19 surges that governments in several 
countries have called in military medical teams and related personnel to assist.86
Even when companies are able to hire enough qualified staff, they need to ensure 
that these employees stay with the company.87 Earlier in this chapter, we explained that 
human capital is the organization’s main source of competitive advantage. The impor￾tance of human capital is particularly apparent when employees quit. Those who leave 
remove valuable knowledge, skills, and social networks, all of which take time for new 
staff to acquire. Other problems with employee turnover are discussed in later chap￾ters, such as its adverse effect on customer service, team development, and corporate 
culture strength. Employee turnover does offer some benefits, such as opening up 
positions so new employees with fresh ideas can be hired and removing people with 
counterproductive work behaviors. But overall, turnover usually has a negative effect 
on organizations.
MAINTAINING WORK ATTENDANCE
Along with attracting and retaining employees, organizations need everyone to show up 
for work at scheduled times, whether in-person or through remote work arrangements. 
Unscheduled absenteeism can lead to increased workloads or overtime among coworkers, 
lower performance by temporary staff filling the vacant positions, poorer coordination in 
the work process, poorer customer service, and potentially more workplace accidents.88
What are the main causes of absenteeism and lateness?89 Much absenteeism is due to 
situational factors, such as personal illness, family demands (e.g., sick children), and bad 
weather. Other absenteeism occurs because employees need to get away from workplace 
bullying, difficult customers, boring work, and other stressful conditions. Absenteeism is 
also higher in organizations with generous sick leave because it minimizes the financial 
loss of taking time away from work. Absenteeism also varies from one employee to the 
next due to personal values and personality. Finally, studies report that absenteeism is 
higher in teams with strong absence norms, meaning that team members tolerate and 
even expect coworkers to take time off.
counterproductive work 
behaviors (CWBs)
voluntary behaviors that have 
the potential to directly or 
indirectly harm the 
organizationChapter One Introduction to the Field of Organizational Behavior 29
Although most companies focus on minimizing absenteeism, another issue is presenteeism—
showing up for work when unwell, injured, preoccupied by personal problems, or faced 
with dangerous conditions getting to work.90 The current debate is whether presenteeism 
is, on balance, positive or negative for the individual and organization. The “positive” 
view is that working rather than being absent fulfills psychological needs, interaction with 
coworkers provides social support and distraction from one’s ailments, and illnesses 
or injuries are seldom so severe that the employee is unable to work. The “negative” view 
is that employees tend to be less productive, may reduce the productivity of interdepen￾dent coworkers, and may worsen their own health and increase health and safety risks 
for coworkers. 
Presenteeism is more common among employees with low job security (such as new 
and temporary staff), employees who lack sick leave pay or similar financial buffers, and 
those whose absence would immediately affect many people. Specific personality traits, 
which we discuss in Chapter 2, also motivate some people to show up for work when 
others would gladly recover at home.91
The Journey Begins
This chapter gives you some background about the field of organizational behavior, the 
emerging landscape of organizations, and why OB is important for you and for organiza￾tions. It also introduces the foundations of individual behavior and performance as well as 
the main types of individual behavior. But this is only the beginning of our journey. 
Throughout this book, we will challenge you to learn new ways of thinking about how 
people work in and around organizations. We begin this process in Chapter 2 through to 
Chapter 7 by looking at personality, values, and other individual differences that indi￾rectly predict individual thoughts, decisions, and behavior. Part 3 of this book moves to 
the team level of analysis. We examine a model of team effectiveness and specific features 
of high-performance teams. We also look at communication, power and influence, con￾flict, and leadership. Finally, Part 4 shifts our focus to the organizational level of analysis, 
where the topics of organizational structure, organizational culture, and organizational 
change are examined in detail.
LO 1-1 Define organizational behavior and organizations.
Organizational behavior is the study of what people think, feel, 
and do in and around organizations. It examines how individu￾als and teams in organizations relate to one another, and how 
organizations interact with their external environments. This 
field of knowledge emerged around the early 1940s, but organi￾zations have been studied by other disciplines for more than 
two thousand years. Organizations are groups of people who 
work interdependently toward some purpose. They consist of 
people who interact with one another in an organized way and 
have a collective sense of purpose.
LO 1-2 Explain why organizational behavior knowledge is 
important for you and for organizations.
Organizational behavior is important for you because it 
offers a core foundation of knowledge and skill development 
for your success in organizations. The skills and knowledge 
that employers look for in new hires, above anything else, are 
the topics found in organizational behavior, including 
problem solving, working effectively in teams, communica￾tion, and adaptability/initiative. More broadly, OB helps you 
adopt better personal theories to understand, predict, and 
influence organizational events. OB knowledge is for everyone, 
not just managers.
OB theories and practices are vital to the organization’s sur￾vival and success. In fact, most OB theories implicitly or ex￾plicitly try to improve organizational effectiveness—an ideal 
state in which an organization has a good fit with its external 
environment, effectively transforms inputs to outputs through 
human capital, and satisfies the needs of key stakeholders. Or￾ganizational behavior knowledge is highly relevant to the open 
systems view of organizations by identifying organizational 
characteristics that “fit” some external environments better 
than others. OB theories offer guidance on how to effectively 
transform inputs to outputs.
chapter summary30
OB is also important for organizations because it identifies 
ways for organizations to develop and leverage the potential of 
human capital—the knowledge, skills, abilities, creativity, and 
other valued resources that employees bring to the organiza￾tion. Several organizational behavior topics also give us a bet￾ter understanding of relations with stakeholders—individuals, 
groups, and other entities that affect, or are affected by, the 
organization’s objectives and actions. This latter focus in￾cludes the role of corporate social responsibility—organiza￾tional activities intended to benefit society and the 
environment beyond the firm’s immediate financial interests 
or legal obligations.
LO 1-3 Describe the anchors on which organizational 
behavior knowledge is based.
The systematic research anchor states that OB knowledge should 
be based on systematic research, consistent with evidence-based 
management. The practical orientation anchor states that OB 
theories need to be useful in practice, such as by helping organi￾zations become more effective. The multidisciplinary anchor 
states that the field should develop from knowledge in other dis￾ciplines (e.g., psychology, sociology, economics), not just from its 
own isolated research base. The contingency anchor states that 
OB theories generally need to consider that there will be different 
consequences in different situations. The multiple levels of analysis 
anchor states that OB topics may be viewed from the individual, 
team, and organization levels of analysis.
LO 1-4 Summarize the workplace trends of diversity and 
the inclusive workplace, work–life integration, and 
remote work.
An inclusive workplace values people of all identities and 
allows them to be fully themselves while contributing to the 
organization. It views diversity as a valued resource. An organi￾zation’s workforce has both surface-level diversity (observable 
demographic and other overt differences in people) and deep￾level diversity (differences in personalities, beliefs, values, and 
attitudes). Inclusive workplaces produce better decisions, 
employee attitudes, team performance, and a host of other 
favorable outcomes for employees and the organization. 
However, diversity also poses challenges, such as dysfunctional 
conflict and slower team development.
Work–life integration refers to the degree that people are 
effectively engaged in their various work and nonwork roles 
and have a low degree of role conflict across those life do￾mains. Various work and nonwork roles are inherently inte￾grated because the physical, cognitive, and emotional resources 
produced or consumed by one role potentially enrich or under￾mine the success and enjoyment of other roles. There are sev￾eral ways to maximize work–life integration, such as doing 
things that mix two roles, engage in flexible work scheduling, 
ensure that work and nonwork roles are aligned with your per￾sonal characteristics, and engage in some degree of “boundary 
management” across roles.
An increasing percentage of the workforce performs their 
job remotely some or all of the time rather than at the organi￾zation’s physical work site. Some organizations are completely 
remote—everyone works at home and cafés and the company 
has no physical head office. Working remotely potentially ben￾efits employees and employers, but there are also disadvan￾tages. The effectiveness of remote work depends on the 
employee, job, and organization.
LO 1-5 Diagram the MARS model and describe the four 
factors that directly influence individual behavior 
and performance.
Four variables—motivation, ability, role perceptions, and situa￾tional factors—which are represented by the acronym MARS, 
directly influence individual behavior and performance. Moti￾vation represents the forces within a person that affect the di￾rection, intensity, and persistence of voluntary behavior; ability 
includes natural aptitudes, learned capabilities, and habits 
required to successfully complete a task; role perceptions are 
the extent to which people understand the job duties (roles) 
assigned to them or expected of them; and situational factors 
include conditions beyond the employee’s immediate control 
that constrain, facilitate, or cue behavior and performance.
LO 1-6 Summarize the five types of individual behavior in 
organizations.
There are five main types of workplace behavior. Task perfor￾mance refers to goal-directed behaviors under the individual’s 
control that support organizational objectives. It includes pro￾ficiency, adaptivity, and proactivity. Organizational citizenship 
behaviors consist of various forms of cooperation and helpful￾ness to others that support the organization’s social and psy￾chological context. Counterproductive work behaviors are 
voluntary behaviors that have the potential to directly or indi￾rectly harm the organization. Joining and staying with the or￾ganization refers to agreeing to become an organizational 
member and remaining with the organization. Maintaining 
work attendance includes minimizing absenteeism when capa￾ble of working and avoiding scheduled work when not fit (i.e., 
low presenteeism).
ability, p. 24
adaptive task performance, p. 27
corporate social responsibility 
(CSR), p. 10
counterproductive work behaviors 
(CWBs), p. 28
deep-level diversity, p. 15
evidence-based management, p. 12
human capital, p. 9
inclusive workplace, p. 15
MARS model, p. 22
motivation, p. 23
open systems, p. 8
organizational behavior (OB), p. 4
organizational citizenship behaviors 
(OCBs), p. 27
organizational effectiveness, p. 8
organizations, p. 4
proactive task performance, p. 27
proficient task performance, p. 26
remote work p. 20
role perceptions, p. 25
stakeholders, p. 10
surface-level diversity, p. 15
task performance, p. 26
work–life integration, p. 17
key terms31
1. A friend suggests that organizational behavior courses 
are useful only to people who will enter management ca￾reers. Discuss the accuracy of your friend’s statement.
2. Problem solving, teamwork, communication, and 
adaptability/initiative are four of the top skills identified by 
employers as most important when hiring (see Exhibit 1.1). 
How have these skills been important (or unimportant) 
for you in jobs that you have held or as a student? Identify 
one other skill that you would place at or near the top of 
the list for working effectively in organizations.
3. Organizational behavior provides valuable knowledge to 
improve and maintain organizational effectiveness. Scan 
through the topics of this book to identify a few ways 
that OB knowledge is useful. Your answer should refer 
not only to the OB chapter theme, but also to open sys￾tems, human capital, and/or stakeholders.
4. After attending a seminar on human capital, a mining 
company executive argues that this view of organizations 
ignores the fact that mining companies could not rely on 
people alone to stay in business. They also need physical 
capital (such as digging and ore-processing equipment) 
and land (where the minerals are located). In fact, these 
two may be more important than what employees carry 
around in their heads. Discuss the mining executive’s 
comments in the context of human capital and organiza￾tional effectiveness.
5. Most companies actively hire and retain employees with 
diverse backgrounds, particular race, ethnicity, gender, 
disability, and sexual orientation. Based on this ongoing 
effort, many claim their organization is an inclusive 
workplace. Explain why the existence of a diverse work￾force differs from having an inclusive workplace.
6. What does evidence-based management mean? Describe 
situations you have heard about in which companies have 
practiced evidence-based management, as well as situa￾tions in which companies have relied on fads that lacked 
sufficient evidence of their worth.
7. Work–life integration is one of the most important issues 
that job applicants consider when choosing where to work. 
Think about the variety of specific benefits, working condi￾tions, or resources that employers offer to support work–life 
integration. Which of these is most valuable to you person￾ally at this stage in your life and career? Why? In what ways 
have you personally been able to minimize conflict between 
your work (including school) and nonwork roles?
8. Automattic and several other businesses (e.g., Emsisoft, 
Gitlab) are completely remote (distributed) companies. 
Everyone who works for these firms performs their jobs 
from home or cafés. In your opinion, will distributed 
companies become more common in the future? Why or 
why not? Would you prefer working in a remote company—
one that has no physical location, just (maybe) an 
occasional gathering of staff at a conference setting or 
resort? Or do you prefer working face-to-face most days 
with coworkers at a company worksite? Why?
9. A federal government department has high levels of 
absenteeism among the office staff. The head of office 
administration argues that employees are misusing 
the company’s sick leave benefits. However, some of 
the mostly female staff members have explained that fam￾ily responsibilities interfere with work. Using the MARS 
model, as well as your knowledge of absenteeism behav￾ior, discuss some of the possible reasons for absenteeism 
here and how it might be reduced.
critical thinking questions
CASE STUDY: PROMOTING SAFE BEHAVIOR AT MOTHER PARKERS
Most companies try to create a safe work environment, but 
few are as dedicated as Mother Parkers Tea & Coffee Inc. 
As North America’s largest private label coffee producer, 
Mother Parkers infuses safety knowledge, awareness, and 
engagement in every employee and contractor. “One of our 
priorities here has been to provide a safe workplace to our 
employees,” says Adrian Khan, Mother Parkers Senior 
Manager of Environmental, Health, Safety, and Security for 
North America. “They make a commitment to us to help 
produce great quality products; we make a commitment to 
them to provide them with a safe working environment.”
To begin with, Mother Parkers creates a physically safe 
work environment through well-designed barriers and cues 
at its award-winning automated production facilities in Fort 
Worth, Texas, and Ontario, Canada. The production floor 
includes physical barriers to separate people from moving 
equipment. Safe walking areas are brightly marked, includ￾ing specific spots where people must stop and look both 
ways before crossing forklift travel areas. At eye level next to 
doors are signs specifying what equipment (shoes, eyewear, 
etc.) must be worn before entering the next area. Updated 
lighting systems provide superior visibility and eye comfort.
Another way that Mother Parkers supports safe behavior is 
by investing in employee training. Staff learn safety procedures 
before they are allowed to enter the production floor. They also 
learn about new safety technology and practices from commu￾nity experts at special health and safety day events.
Employee involvement is an important part of safety im￾provement at Mother Parkers. Employees participate in 
safety issues so decisions are based on a full complement of 
knowledge from employees, not just from management and 
outside experts. “We wanted to empower the operators to 
recognize hazards in their work area, voice those concerns, 
and to be a part of the solutions,” says Khan, who recently 
won a national safety leadership award. “When it comes 
down to it, they are the experts running the machines who 
know exactly what the hazards are in the workplace.” For 
example, when the company decided to buy an ergonomic 
roll lifter (a machine that holds and transports heavy rolls 
of metal), employees on the ergonomics team tested many 
of the roll lifters on the market to determine which one was 
the best fit for their application.
Mother Parkers has held numerous “ergonomic blitzes,” 
whereby an external consultant and production staff conduct an intensive review of health and safety concerns 
in each specific work area. “We jump-started our program 
by having ergonomics blitz events so that the team could 
‘Find It’ (hazards), ‘Fix It’ (countermeasures), and ‘Check 
It’ (happy operators),” says Khan. “From there, the team 
would have a number of short-term solutions that could be 
implemented immediately, and also a list of longer-term im￾provements that could be planned for.”
A special cross-functional team developed from these 
“ergo blitzes,” whose members now serve as role models for 
safety behavior and as valuable sources of safety knowledge. 
“This creates a go-to group of operators on the floor that 
their peers feel comfortable with and can go to if they want 
to report an issue,” Khan observes.
Employee involvement also generates employee commit￾ment to safety. “There’s a high level of engagement here,” 
says a Mother Parkers production manager. “The operators 
have been developing most of the procedures for equipment 
operation, cleaning, quality checks, and troubleshooting. 
The operators take ownership of their positions.” Mike Bate, 
Mother Parkers vice president of human resources, notes 
that employees are more motivated to act safely because the 
company pays attention to their ideas. “Our health and 
safety committees are now engaged, they have plans, they 
have ideas, people’s voices get heard. And when they bring 
issues on the table, those issues get dealt with and they get 
addressed and they are part of the planning process.”
Another way that Mother Parkers promotes workplace 
safety is by continuously reminding everyone that safety is 
an important part of everyone’s job. This message occurs 
through ongoing safety training, employee involvement in 
ergonomic risk prevention, and the presence of numerous 
workplace safety cues. Reminding everyone about safety is 
even a daily event. “Safety is the core of everything we do 
here,” explains the production manager of Mother Parkers’ 
award-winning RealCup operations. “We begin our produc￾tion meetings and shift handovers by talking about safety.”
Safety-focused expectations also extend to contractors, 
all of whom complete a safety training program before their 
projects begin. “We set expectations and standards with 
contractors before they come on site on what it means to be 
on site at Mother Parkers from a health and safety perspec￾tive,” says Mike Bate. “Before they even get approved to 
come on site and work with us as a contractor [they have 
to] register themselves to say they have gone through this 
education. So by the time they arrive, [contractors] under￾stand the risks, they bring the proper protective equipment 
that may be required, or they understand what they need 
from us to make the workplace safe for them to work in.”
Discussion Questions
1. Apply the MARS model to explain how Mother Parkers 
improves safety in the workplace.
2. What other organizational behavior topics are generally 
apparent in this description of how Mother Parkers cre￾ates a safe workplace?
© 2019 Steven L. McShane
Sources: Based on information in: J. Smith, “Top Plant: Mother Parkers: 
Recipe for Growth,” Plant Engineering 68, no. 10 (2014): 26–31; “We Listen, 
We Lead,” Canadian HR Reporter, October 13, 2016; Canadian HR 
Reporter, “2016 COS Safety Leader of the Year,” YouTube, December 15 
2016; C. Lotz. Interview: 2016 Canadian Safety Leader of the Year. Mich￾igan: Humantech, Inc. 2016; A. Silliker. Meet the 2016 Safety Leader 
of the Year. Luxembourg: Thomson Reuters Corporation. 2017; A. Silliker, 
“Tea Time: Meet the 2016 Safety Leader of the Year,” Canadian Occupational 
Safety, December/January 2017, 28–30
TEAM EXERCISE: WYE & VALVE PLUMBING: A MARS DIAGNOSTIC EXERCISE
32
be assigned under one of the four MARS elements (e.g., a 
strategy to improve employee motivation would be stated 
under the “M” category).
Step 3: The class debriefing will discuss the strategies sys￾tematically for each MARS element. For example, the class 
will review the “M” strategies across teams and comment on 
similarities and difference among those recommendations.
WYE & VALVE PLUMBING INCIDENT
Wye & Valve Plumbing is a plumbing supplies retailer with 
three dozen stores in one region of the United States. The 
company mainly sells plumbing supplies (valves, fittings, 
pipes, etc.) to tradespeople as well as to do-it-yourself 
(DIY) customers trying to fix specific plumbing problems 
in their home. The stores are a moderate size with the 
most common supplies and tools located in aisles where 
customers can browse and select. However, items that are 
specialized (less often purchased) or are small yet expen￾sive are retrievable only by staff in an area behind the 
main customer desk.
PURPOSE This exercise is designed to help you practice 
using the MARS model to diagnose a specific issue relat￾ing to employee behavior and performance.
MATERIALS Teams should have a way to document their 
analysis for other teams to view. This might be flip chart 
paper for face-to-face classes or a dedicated virtual white 
board for each team in remote classes.
INSTRUCTIONS Step 1: Students are organized into 
teams (typically five to seven people per team). After reading 
the Wye & Valve Plumbing incident, the team will diagnose 
Wye & Valve’s customer service issues and discuss specific 
ways the retailer can improve customer service at the company. 
The discussion should explain whether and in what ways 
each MARS element can guide better customer service. All 
four elements of the MARS model should be considered.
Step 2: The team summarizes its recommendations on 
flip chart paper (in-person) or presentation slide or virtual 
white board (remote class). Each recommendation should the company also has sessions in which employees share 
core plumbing knowledge.
Wye & Valve Plumbing received survey feedback that 
many do-it-yourself customers and some tradespeople 
give Wye & Valve below average customer service ratings. 
One complaint is that employees assume customers know 
what parts and tools they need, and do not actively volun￾teer information or recommendations. A second com￾plaint is that many staff seem to be abrupt or terse when 
customers asked for supplies or seek specific information. 
They are particularly inhospitable when asked for special￾ized parts that only staff can retrieve. The retailer wants 
to develop a multipronged strategy to improve customer 
service in its stores.
© 2022 Steven L. McShane
Tradespeople understand most plumbing supplies and 
tools, but are sometimes unaware of new products as well 
as parts required for tasks they have seldom performed in 
the past. DIY customers have limited knowledge about fix￾ing specific plumbing problems other than their prelimi￾nary internet searches. Usually, the plumbing tasks 
attempted by DIY customers can be done safely with the 
correct parts, tools, and instructions, but some plumbing 
tasks are too risky for most DIY customers to attempt.
There are thousands of plumbing parts and tools, so it 
takes considerable time and experience to learn each 
item’s function and variations. Fortunately, many of Wye 
& Valve’s retail staff were once plumbers who moved late 
career into retail work or desired a change in working con￾ditions. Wye & Valve also provides regular training ses￾sions to update staff about new products and techniques; 
CLASS EXERCISE: WORLD CAFÉ ON THE EMERGING WORKPLACE
debrief the class on the key points they documented on 
the theme assigned to them.
Step 3: Teams will read the questions assigned to the 
theme of their initial table/topic (see below). They have a 
fixed time (usually between 10 and 15 minutes) to discuss 
their views and offer answers to those questions. The 
scribe will document ideas presented by the team.
Step 4: After the preset discussion time has ended, the 
instructor will advise the class to move to the next table 
(f2f) or topic (remote). For f2f classes, each team (except 
the scribe) moves to another table, that has a different 
theme. For example, students at a “remote work” table 
would together move to a table on either “work–life inte￾gration” or “inclusive workplace.” For remote classes, only 
the scribes move to another room identified by the instruc￾tor that has not discussed the scribe’s topic. Students will 
read the questions assigned to the theme of this second 
table/topic. The instructor again assigns a fixed time 
(10–15 minutes) for students to discuss their new theme.
Step 5: The scribe will add ideas identified by the sec￾ond group to existing notes presented earlier by the first 
team. The scribe should not tell the second group what the 
first group discussed about this theme. The scribe should 
remain quiet, except asking for clarification.
Step 6: One more transition occurs after the preset dis￾cussion time. For f2f classes, the instructor will advise 
each team to move to the next table. For remote classes, 
the instructor will advise each scribe to move to the next 
team room. In either situation, the scribe will interact with 
a team that has not yet discussed that topic (i.e., they will 
discuss the third topic described below). Scribes docu￾ment ideas from their third group without informing them 
of what the previous teams discussed on that theme.
Step 7: After the third round of discussion has ended, 
the entire class will gather and listen to the main ideas 
documented by the scribes. This is usually a few minutes 
per scribe. If two or more scribes have been responsible 
for the same theme, those scribes should present at the 
PURPOSE This exercise is designed to help you under￾stand organizational behavior issues that arise in the 
emerging workplace landscape, particularly regarding in￾clusive workplace, remote work, and work–life 
integration.
MATERIALS This exercise is possible as a face-to-face 
(f2f) class or a remote class. For f2f classes, the learning 
space should allow for one large table or other dedicated 
area for approximately every 10 students in the class. For 
remote classes, each team is assigned to a separate team 
room (i.e., six team rooms instead of six tables). One per￾son (the “scribe”) at each table/room will write notes on 
the ideas presented. These ideas can be rewritten later as a 
summary of the event.
INSTRUCTIONS Step 1: Students are organized into 
teams of approximately 10 people. For f2f classes, each 
team is initially assigned to a large table or dedicated space 
for the team. For remote classes, each team is permanently 
assigned to a virtual team room. The instructor will assign 
one of the three themes (see below) to each table. For ex￾ample, if the class has 60 students, there would be six 
tables/team rooms of 10 students. In this example, two 
tables/rooms would be assigned the theme of inclusive 
workplace, two tables/rooms would look at remote work, 
and two tables/rooms would look at work–life integration.
Step 2: For either f2f or remote classes, one person on 
each team volunteers to be the “scribe” for that table. The 
scribe makes notes on the main ideas presented by stu￾dents at that table/room. For f2f classes, the scribe remains 
at the same table for the entire exercise, whereas the rest 
of the team moves from one table to another table when 
the instructor advises. For remote sessions, only the 
scribes move from one team room to the next when the 
instructor advises. In remote sessions, each team remains 
in the same team room and receives a different scribe (and 
topic) when the instructor advises. All scribes will later 
3334
the pandemic. What problems do you think they 
experienced?
2. What personal characteristics enable some people to 
work remotely better (or worse) than other people? 
Why are those attributes important?
3. How can leaders (supervisors to executives) support 
and maintain the performance and well-being of 
remote workers? Provide specific examples from 
your experience as a remote worker, a supervisor 
of remote workers, or knowledge of others in those 
situations.
Table 3: Work–Life Integration
Work–life integration refers to the degree that people are 
effectively engaged in their various work and nonwork 
roles and have a low degree of role conflict across those 
life domains.
1. In what specific ways can employees apply each of 
the four strategies for improving work–life integra￾tion? What challenges do they face in trying to apply 
each of these strategies? Provide specific examples 
from your experience--or your knowledge of others--in 
applying work–life integration.
2. What personal characteristics enable some people to 
be more successful at maintaining work–life integra￾tion? Why are those attributes important?
3. In what specific ways can organizations and their lead￾ers help employees to improve or maintain work–life 
integration? Provide specific examples that you know 
about of corporate initiatives that try to improve em￾ployees’ work–life integration.
© 2022 Steven L. McShane.
same time or consecutively (e.g., if two scribes have the 
remote work theme, they should speak to the class to￾gether or one after the other).
WORLD CAFÉ DISCUSSION THEMES
Table 1: Inclusive Workplace
An inclusive workplace values people of all identities (i.e., 
surface- and deep-level diversity) and allows them to be 
fully themselves while contributing to the organization.
1. What challenges do organizations and their employees 
experience on their journey toward an inclusive work￾place? Provide specific examples.
2. How can leaders (supervisors to executives) nurture 
and maintain an inclusive workplace? Provide specific 
examples from your experience in an organization that 
emphasizes and leverages (or undermines) workplace 
inclusion.
3. What personal characteristics of leaders (supervisors 
to executives) make them better (or worse) equipped 
to support and lead people in an inclusive workplace? 
Why are those attributes important?
Table 2: Remote Workers
Remote workers are people who perform organizational 
tasks while located away from the employer’s physical 
premises. For this exercise, we focus specifically on remote 
working from home.
1. What are the challenges for the organization and for 
employees who work remotely in terms of their effec￾tiveness and well-being in this work arrangement? 
Provide specific examples. Several firms (Yahoo, IBM, 
etc.) had reduced the degree of remote work prior to 
CLASS EXERCISE: IT ALL MAKES SENSE?
4. True False Employees have more power with 
many close friends than with many 
acquaintances.
5. True False Companies are more successful when 
they have strong corporate cultures.
6. True False Employees perform better without 
stress.
7. True False The best way to change people and 
organizations is by pinpointing the 
source of their current problems.
8. True False Female leaders involve employees in 
decisions to a greater degree than do 
male leaders.
9. True False The best decisions are made without 
emotion.
10. True False If employees feel they are paid unfairly, 
nothing other than changing their pay 
will reduce their feelings of injustice.
PURPOSE This exercise is designed to help you compre￾hend how organizational behavior knowledge can help you 
understand life in organizations.
INSTRUCTIONS Read each of the statements below and 
determine whether each statement is true or false, in your 
opinion. The class will consider the answers to each ques￾tion and discuss the implications for studying organiza￾tional behavior.
This exercise may also be conducted as a team activity, 
whereby students answer these questions in teams rather 
than alone.
1. True False A happy worker is a productive worker.
2. True False A decision maker’s effectiveness in￾creases with the number of choices or 
alternatives available to them.
3. True False Organizations are more effective when 
they minimize conflict among 
employees.35
1. K. Morgan, “The Great Resignation: How Employers 
Drove Workers to Quit,” BBC Worklife, July 2, 2021; 
S. Sharples, “The Great Resignation: Millions of Aussies 
Predicted to Leave Jobs,” news.com.au, October 19, 2021; 
A. Fowers and E. Rosenberg, “The Geography of the 
Great Resignation: First-Time Data Shows Where 
Americans Are Quitting the Most,” Washington Post, 
October 22, 2021; H. Long and M. Penman, “Quitters, Part 1,” 
Post Reports (Washington Post) (blog), December 16, 
2021, https://www.washingtonpost.com/podcasts/post￾reports/quitters-part-1. 
2. “The Next Great Disruption Is Hybrid Work—Are We 
Ready?,” The Work Trend Index (Microsoft, March 22, 
2021); B. Nguyen, “Here’s Everything We Know about 
‘The Great Resignation,’ Who’s Quitting, and Why,” 
Business Insider, September 22, 2021; B. Casselman, “More 
Workers Quit than Ever as U.S. Job Openings Remain 
near a Record,” The New York Times, January 4, 2022.
3. M. Warner, “Organizational Behavior Revisited,” Human 
Relations 47 (1994): 1151–66; R. Westwood and S. Clegg, 
“The Discourse of Organization Studies: Dissensus, 
Politics, and Paradigms,” in Debating Organization: 
Point-Counterpoint in Organization Studies, ed. 
R. Westwood and S. Clegg (Malden, MA: Wiley￾Blackwell, 2003), 1–42. 
4. R.N. Stern and S.R. Barley, “Organizations as Social 
Systems: Organization Theory’s Neglected Mandate,” 
Administrative Science Quarterly 41 (1996): 146–62; D. 
Katz and R.L. Kahn, The Social Psychology of Organizations
(New York: Wiley, 1966), Chap. 2. 
5. L.E. Greiner, “A Recent History of Organizational 
Behavior,” in Organizational Behavior, ed. S. Kerr 
(Columbus, OH: Grid, 1979), 3–14; J. Micklethwait and 
A. Wooldridge, The Company: A Short History of a Revolu￾tionary Idea (New York: Random House, 2003). 
6. T. Lawson, “The Nature of the Firm and Peculiarities of 
the Corporation,” Cambridge Journal of Economics 39, 
no. 1 (2015): 1–32. 
7. “A Field Is Born,” Harvard Business Review 86, no. 7/8 
(2008): 164; P.R. Lawrence, “The Key Job Design Prob￾lem Is Still Taylorism,” Journal of Organizational Behavior
31, no. 2/3 (2010): 412–21; L.W. Porter and B. Schnei￾der, “What Was, What Is, and What May Be in OP/OB,” 
Annual Review of Organizational Psychology and Organiza￾tional Behavior 1, no. 1 (2014): 1–21. 
8. T. Takala, “Plato on Leadership,” Journal of Business 
Ethics 17(1998): 785–98; A.M. Blake and J.L. Moseley, 
“Frederick Winslow Taylor: One Hundred Years of 
Managerial Insight,” International Journal of Management 28, 
no. 4 (2011): 346–53; R.J. Bathurst and M.S. Chen, “A 
Smile and a Sigh: Leadership Insights from the East,” in 
Handbook of Philosophy of Management, ed. C. Neesham 
and S. Segal (Cham: Springer International Publishing, 
2018), 1–18; C. Adair-Toteff, “Max Weber and the 
Sociology of Charisma,” in Routledge International 
Handbook of Charisma, ed. J.P. Zúquete (Oxon, 
UK: Routledge, 2021), 7–17.
9. C.D. Wrege, “Solving Mayo’s Mystery: The First Complete 
Account of the Origin of the Hawthorne Studies—the 
Forgotten Contributions of C. E. Snow and H. Hibarger” 
(paper presented at the Academy of Management Pro￾ceedings, August 1976), 12–16; P. Graham, ed., Mary 
Parker Follett: Prophet of Management (Boston: Harvard 
Business School Press, 1995); J.H. Smith, “The Enduring 
Legacy of Elton Mayo,” Human Relations 51, no. 3 
(1998): 221–49; R. Busse and M. Warner, “The Legacy 
of the Hawthorne Experiments: A Critical Analysis of 
the Human Relations School of Thought,” History of 
Economic Ideas 25, no. 2 (2017): 91–114; G.M. Nelson, 
“Mary Parker Follett – Creativity and Democracy,” 
Human Service Organizations: Management, Leadership 
& Governance 41, no. 2 (2017): 178–85.
10. The extent to which OB influences career success 
depends on course pedagogy as well as the practical 
value of the OB concepts covered in the course. In fact, 
OB scholars have an ongoing debate about the practical 
relevance of OB research. See, for example: J.P. Walsh et al., 
“On the Relationship between Research and Practice: 
Debate and Reflections,” Journal of Management Inquiry
16, no. 2 (2007): 128–54; J.M. Bartunek and S.L. Rynes, 
“Academics and Practitioners Are Alike and Unlike: The 
Paradoxes of Academic–Practitioner Relationships,” 
Journal of Management 40, no. 5 (2014): 1181–201; 
K. Božič, A.A. Bachkirov, and M. Černe, “Towards Bet￾ter Understanding and Narrowing of the Science-Practice 
Gap: A Practitioner-Centered Approach to Management 
Knowledge Creation,” European Management Journal, 
September 10, 2021 (in press); D. Gioia, “On the Road 
to Hell: Why Academia Is Viewed as Irrelevant to Prac￾ticing Managers,” Academy of Management Discoveries 8, 
no. 2 (2022): 174–79.
11. G. Loewenstein, “The Psychology of Curiosity: A Review 
and Reinterpretation,” Psychological Bulletin 116, no. 1 
(1994): 75–98; C. Kidd and B.Y. Hayden, “The Psychol￾ogy and Neuroscience of Curiosity,” Neuron 88, no. 3 
(November 2015): 449–60; M. Livio, Why?: What Makes 
Us Curious (New York: Simon and Schuster, 2017).
12. R. L. Priem and J. Rosenstein, “Is Organization Theory 
Obvious to Practitioners? A Test of One Established 
Theory,” Organization Science 11, no. 5 (2000): 509–24.
13. R.S. Rubin and E.C. Dierdorff, “How Relevant Is the 
MBA? Assessing the Alignment of Required Curricula 
and Required Managerial Competencies,” Academy of 
Management Learning & Education 8, no. 2 (2009): 
208–24; Y. Baruch and O. Lavi-Steiner, “The Career 
Impact of Management Education from an Average-Ranked 
University: Human Capital Perspective,” Career 
Development International 20, no. 3 (2015): 218–37. 
14. M.S. Myers, Every Employee a Manager (New York: 
McGraw Hill, 1970). 
15. For example, see: M.C. Díaz-Fernández, M.R. González￾Rodríguez, and B. Simonetti, “Top Management Team’s 
Intellectual Capital and Firm Performance,” European 
Management Journal 33, no. 5 (2015): 322–31; S. Hauff, 
D. Alewell, and N.K. Hansen, “Further Exploring the 
Links between High-Performance Work Practices and 
Firm Performance: A Multiple-Mediation Model in the 
German Context,” German Journal of Human Resource 
Management 32, no. 1 (2018): 5–26; J. Harter et al., 
“Increased Business Value for Positive Job Attitudes during 
endnotes36
Economic Recessions: A Meta-Analysis and SEM Analysis,” 
Human Performance 33 (2020): 1–24; R.G. Badgett, L. 
Jonker, and S. Xirasagar, “Hospital Workforce Engage￾ment and Inpatient Mortality Rate: Findings from the 
English National Health Service Staff Surveys,” Journal 
of General Internal Medicine 35, no. 12 (2020): 3465–70.
16. A. Edmans, “The Link Between Job Satisfaction and 
Firm Value, With Implications for Corporate Social 
Responsibility,” Academy of Management Perspectives 26, no. 4 
(2012): 1–19; S. Abhayawansa and J. Guthrie, “Drivers 
and Semantic Properties of Intellectual Capital Information 
in Sell-Side Analysts’ Reports,” Journal of Accounting & 
Organizational Change 12, no. 4 (2016): 434–71; 
E. Symitsi, P. Stamolampros, and G. Daskalakis, “Employees’ 
Online Reviews and Equity Prices,” Economics Letters
162 (2018): 53–55; A. Krausert et al., “Investor Perspec￾tives: People Data and Reporting” (London: Chartered 
Institute of Personnel and Development, March 2019); 
G. Filbeck, X. Zhao, and M. Warnaka, “Glassdoor’s Best 
Places to Work Internationally: Are They Best for Share￾holders?,” International Journal of Finance & Economics
(in press) (December 15, 2020).
17. In 1961, Harvard business professor Fritz Roethlisberger 
proposed that the field of OB is concerned with human 
behavior “from the points of view of both (a) its determi￾nation . . . and (b) its improvement.” See P. B. Vaill, “F.J. 
Roethlisberger and the Elusive Phenomena of Organiza￾tional Behavior,” Journal of Management Education 31, 
no. 3 (2007): 321–38. The centrality of organizational 
effectiveness in OB research is also discussed in: B.S. 
Georgopoulos and A.S. Tannenbaum, “A Study of Orga￾nizational Effectiveness,” American Sociological Review
22 (1957): 534–40; S. A. Mohrman, C. B. Gibson, and 
A. M. Mohrman Jr., “Doing Research That Is Useful to 
Practice: A Model and Empirical Exploration,” Academy 
of Management Journal 44 (2001): 357–75; J. P. Walsh 
et al., “On the Relationship between Research and 
Practice,” Journal of Management Inquiry 16, no. 2 
(June 2007): 128–54; M. Beer, “Making a Difference: 
Developing Actionable Knowledge for Practice and 
Theory,” The Journal of Applied Behavioral Science 56, 
no. 4 (2020): 506–20.
18. R. H. Hall, “Effectiveness Theory and Organizational 
Effectiveness,” Journal of Applied Behavioral Science 16, 
no. 4 (1980): 536–45; K. Cameron, “Organizational 
Effectiveness: Its Demise and Re-Emergence through 
Positive Organizational Scholarship,” in Great Minds in 
Management, ed. K. G. Smith and M. A. Hitt (New York: 
Oxford University Press, 2005), 304–30.
19. Chester Barnard gives one of the earliest descriptions of 
organizations as systems interacting with external envi￾ronments and that are composed of subsystems. See C. 
Barnard, The Functions of the Executive (Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press, 1938), esp. Chap. 6. Also see 
F.E. Kast and J.E. Rosenzweig, “General Systems Theory: 
Applications for Organization and Management,” Acad￾emy of Management Journal 15, no. 4 (1972): 447–65; 
P.M. Senge, The Fifth Discipline: The Art and Practice of the 
Learning Organization (New York: Doubleday Currency, 
1990); G. Morgan, Images of Organization, 2nd ed. 
(Newbury Park: Sage, 1996); A. de Geus, The Living 
Company (Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 1997). 
20. D. Katz and R.L. Kahn, The Social Psychology of Organi￾zations (New York: Wiley, 1966), Chap. 2; J. McCann, 
“Organizational Effectiveness: Changing Concepts for 
Changing Environments,” Human Resource Planning 27, 
no. 1 (2004): 42–50; A.H. Van de Ven, M. Ganco, and 
C.R. Hinings, “Returning to the Frontier of Contingency 
Theory of Organizational and Institutional Designs,” 
Academy of Management Annals 7, no. 1 (2013): 391–438. 
21. K.E. Weick, The Social Psychology of Organizing (Read￾ing, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1979); J.L. Claggett and E. 
Karahanna, “Unpacking the Structure of Coordination 
Mechanisms and the Role of Relational Coordination in 
an Era of Digitally Mediated Work Processes,” Academy 
of Management Review 43, no. 4 (2018): 704–22; R.M. 
Burton and B. Obel, “The Science of Organizational 
Design: Fit between Structure and Coordination,” Journal 
of Organization Design 7, no. 5 (2018).
22. J. Barney, “Firm Resources and Sustained Competitive 
Advantage,” Journal of Management 17, no. 1 (1991): 
99–120. The scholarly literature has separated human capital 
from social capital (social networks) and psychological 
capital (personal cognitive and emotional resources such 
as hope and optimism). On closer inspection, however, 
social and psychological capital may be embedded in, or 
consequences of, human capital. Consequently, the three 
concepts may be integrated in some ways.
23. P. Tharenou, A.M. Saks, and C. Moore, “A Review and 
Critique of Research on Training and Organizational-Level 
Outcomes,” Human Resource Management Review 17, no. 3 
(2007): 251–73; D.Y. Jeong and M. Choi, “The Impact of 
High-Performance Work Systems on Firm Performance: 
The Moderating Effects of the Human Resource Function’s 
Influence,” Journal of Management & Organization 22, no. 
3 (2016): 328–48; F.S. Bentley, R.R. Kehoe, and H. Chung, 
“Investing for Keeps: Firms’ Prepandemic Investments in 
Human Capital Decreased Workforce Reductions Associ￾ated with COVID-19 Financial Pressures.,” Journal of Ap￾plied Psychology 106, no. 12 (2021): 1785–1804.
24. R.R. Kehoe and P.M. Wright, “The Impact of High￾Performance Human Resource Practices on Employees’ 
Attitudes and Behaviors,” Journal of Management 39, 
no. 2 (2013): 366–91; B. Fabi, R. Lacoursière, and L. 
Raymond, “Impact of High-Performance Work Systems 
on Job Satisfaction, Organizational Commitment, and 
Intention to Quit in Canadian Organizations,” Interna￾tional Journal of Manpower 36, no. 5 (2015): 772–90; J.G. 
Meijerink, S.E. Beijer, and A.C. Bos-Nehles, “A Meta￾Analysis of Mediating Mechanisms between Employee 
Reports of Human Resource Management and Employee 
Performance: Different Pathways for Descriptive and 
Evaluative Reports?,” The International Journal of Human 
Resource Management 32, no. 2 (2021): 394–442.
25. R.E. Freeman, J.S. Harrison, and A.C. Wicks, Managing 
for Stakeholders: Survival, Reputation, and Success (New 
Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2007); B.L. Parmar et al., 
“Stakeholder Theory: The State of the Art,” Academy of 
Management Annals 4, no. 1 (2010): 403–45; S. Sachs 
and E. Rühli, Stakeholders Matter: A New Paradigm for 
Strategy in Society (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press, 2011). Some writers criticize “organizational effec￾tiveness” for having only an internal focus (transformation 
process), whereas we take the broader open systems view 37
that effectiveness also includes serving external stakehold￾ers. See: A. Baughen, C. Oswick, and R. Oswick, “Rethink￾ing ‘Organizational Effectiveness’ as a Core Premise of 
Organization Development: Beyond Narrow Organiza￾tional Interests and Towards Wider Soulful Interventions,” 
Journal of Change Management 20, no. 4 (2020): 333–41. 
26. R. B. Adams, A. N. Licht, and L. Sagiv, “Shareholders and 
Stakeholders: How Do Directors Decide?,” Strategic Man￾agement Journal 32, no. 12 (2011): 1331–55; A. Santana, 
“Three Elements of Stakeholder Legitimacy,” Journal of 
Business Ethics 105, no. 2 (2012): 257–65; D. Crilly and 
P. Sloan, “Autonomy or Control? Organizational Architec￾ture and Corporate Attention to Stakeholders,” Organiza￾tion Science 25, no. 2 (2014): 339–55; M. Hall, Y. Millo, 
and E. Barman, “Who and What Really Counts? Stake￾holder Prioritization and Accounting for Social Value,” 
Journal of Management Studies 52, no. 7 (2015): 907–34; 
D. Weitzner and Y. Deutsch, “Understanding Motivation 
and Social Influence in Stakeholder Prioritization,” 
Organization Studies 36, no. 10 (2015): 1337–60.
27. H. Aguinis and A. Glavas, “What We Know and Don’t 
Know about Corporate Social Responsibility: A Review 
and Research Agenda,” Journal of Management 38, no. 4 
(2012): 932–68; T. Meynhardt and P. Gomez, “Building 
Blocks for Alternative Four-Dimensional Pyramids of 
Corporate Social Responsibilities,” Business & Society 58, 
no. 2 (2019): 404–38.
28. A.B. Carroll and K.M. Shabana, “The Business Case for 
Corporate Social Responsibility: A Review of Concepts, 
Research and Practice,” International Journal of Management 
Reviews 12, no. 1 (2010): 85–105; J. Kim and J. Kim, 
“Corporate Sustainability Management and Its Market 
Benefits,” Sustainability 10, no. 5 (May 2018): 1455; M. 
Ong et al., “When Corporate Social Responsibility Motivates 
Employee Citizenship Behavior: The Sensitizing Role of 
Task Significance,” Organizational Behavior and Human De￾cision Processes 144 (2018): 44–59; B. Lis, “Corporate Social 
Responsibility’s Influence on Organizational Attractiveness: 
An Investigation in the Context of Employer Choice,” Journal 
of General Management 43, no. 3 (2018): 106–14.
29. Most of these anchors are mentioned in J.D. Thompson, 
“On Building an Administrative Science,” Administrative 
Science Quarterly 1, no. 1 (1956): 102–11. 
30. This anchor has a colorful history dating back to critiques 
of business schools in the 1950s. Soon after, systematic 
research became a mantra for many respected scholars. 
See, for example, J.D. Thompson, “On Building an 
Administrative Science,” Administrative Science Quarterly 1, 
no. 1 (1956): 102–11. 
31. J. Pfeffer and R.I. Sutton, Hard Facts, Dangerous Half￾Truths, and Total Nonsense (Boston: Harvard Business 
School Press, 2006); D.M. Rousseau and S. McCarthy, 
“Educating Managers from an Evidence-Based Perspec￾tive,” Academy of Management Learning & Education 6, 
no. 1 (2007): 84–101; R.B. Briner and D.M. Rousseau, 
“Evidence-Based I–O Psychology: Not There Yet,” Indus￾trial and Organizational Psychology 4, no. 1 (2011): 3–22. 
32. J. Hamet and F. Maurer, “Is Management Research Visi￾ble Outside the Academic Community?,” M@n@gement
Vol. 20, no. 5 (2017): 492–516.
33. E. Barends and D.M. Rousseau, Evidence-Based Manage￾ment: How to Use Evidence to Make Better Organizational 
Decisions (London: Kogan Page Publishers, 2018), 
Chap. 4.
34. D.S. Scharfstein and J.C. Stein, “Herd Behavior and 
Investment,” The American Economic Review 80, no. 3 
(1990): 465–79; W. Zhang et al., “The Neural Basis of 
Herding Decisions in Enterprise Clustering: An Event￾Related Potential Study,” Frontiers in Neuroscience 13 (2019): 
1175; A. Vedadi, M. Warkentin, and A. Dennis, “Herd 
Behavior in Information Security Decision-Making,” 
Information & Management 58, no. 8 (2021): 103526.
35. J. Pfeffer and R.I. Sutton, Hard Facts, Dangerous Half￾Truths, and Total Nonsense (Boston: Harvard Business 
School Press, 2006); D.M. Rousseau, “The Realist Ratio￾nality of Evidence-Based Management,” Academy of Man￾agement Learning & Education 19, no. 3 (2020): 415–24.
36. J.M. Bartunek and J. McKenzie, eds., Academic-Practitioner 
Relationships: Developments, Complexities and Opportunities 
(New York: Routledge, 2017); J. Hamet and S. Michel, 
“Rigor, Relevance, and the Knowledge ‘Market,’” 
European Business Review 30, no. 2 (2018): 183–201; 
H. Aguinis et al., “A Pluralist Conceptualization of Schol￾arly Impact in Management Education: Students as 
Stakeholders,” Academy of Management Learning & 
Education 18, no. 1 (2019): 11–42; G. Sharma and P. (Tima) 
Bansal, “Cocreating Rigorous and Relevant Knowledge,” 
Academy of Management Journal 63, no. 2 (2020): 386–
410; Z. Simsek, N. Li, and J.L. Huang, “Turbocharging 
Practical Implications in Management Studies,” Journal 
of Management, August 28, 2021, 01492063211040562.
37. P.H. Kim, R.E. Ployhart, and C.B. Gibson, “Editors’ 
Comments: Is Organizational Behavior Overtheorized?,” 
Academy of Management Review 43, no. 4 (October 
2018): 541–45.
38. M. N. Zald, “More Fragmentation? Unfinished Business 
in Linking the Social Sciences and the Humanities,” 
Administrative Science Quarterly 41 (1996): 251–61; 
C. Oswick, P. Fleming, and G. Hanlon, “From Borrowing 
to Blending: Rethinking the Processes of Organizational 
Theory Building,” Academy of Management Review 36, 
no. 2 (2011): 318–37; B.M. Staw, “Stumbling Toward a 
Social Psychology of Organizations: An Autobiographi￾cal Look at the Direction of Organizational Research,” 
Annual Review of Organizational Psychology and Organiza￾tional Behavior 3 (2016): 1–19.
39. C.M. Christensen and M.E. Raynor, “Why Hard-Nosed 
Executives Should Care about Management Theory,” 
Harvard Business Review (2003): 66–74; C.E.J. Härtel and 
J.M. O’Connor, “Contextualizing Research: Putting Con￾text Back into Organizational Behavior Research,” Journal 
of Management & Organization 20, no. 4 (2014): 417–22. 
For excellent critique of the “one best way” approach in 
early management scholarship, see P.F. Drucker, “Man￾agement’s New Paradigms,” Forbes (1998): 152–77.
40. H.L. Tosi and J.W. Slocum Jr., “Contingency Theory: 
Some Suggested Directions,” Journal of Management 10 
(1984): 9–26. 
41. D.M. Rousseau and R.J. House, “Meso Organizational 
Behavior: Avoiding Three Fundamental Biases,” in 
Trends in Organizational Behavior, ed. C.L. Cooper and 
D.M. Rousseau (Chichester, UK: Wiley, 1994), 13–30. 
42. B.M. Ferdman, “Paradoxes of Inclusion: Understanding and 
Managing the Tensions of Diversity and Multiculturalism,” 38
The Journal of Applied Behavioral Science 53, no. 2 (2017): 
235–63; A.E. Randel et al., “Inclusive Leadership: Realizing 
Positive Outcomes through Belongingness and Being Valued 
for Uniqueness,” Human Resource Management Review 28, 
no. 2 (2018): 190–203; L.M. Shore, J.N. Cleveland, and 
D. Sanchez, “Inclusive Workplaces: A Review and Model,” 
Human Resource Management Review 28, no. 2 (2018): 
176–89; M.V. Norman and K.M. Johnson, “The Importance 
of Employee Inclusion: Lessons for HR Managers,” Strategic 
HR Review 21, no. 1 (2022): 20–24.
43. W.J. Casper, J.H. Wayne, and J.G. Manegold, “Who Will 
We Recruit? Targeting Deep- and Surface-Level Diversity 
with Human Resource Policy Advertising,” Human 
Resource Management 52, no. 3 (2013): 311–32; J. Wang 
et al., “Team Creativity/Innovation in Culturally Diverse 
Teams: A Meta-Analysis,” Journal of Organizational 
Behavior 40, no. 6 (2019): 693–708.
44. J. Qin, N. Muenjohn, and P. Chhetri, “A Review of Diver￾sity Conceptualizations: Variety, Trends, and a Frame￾work,” Human Resource Development Review 13, no. 2 
(2014): 133–57; M. del C. Triana et al., “The Relation￾ship Between Team Deep-Level Diversity and Team 
Performance: A Meta-Analysis of the Main Effect, 
Moderators, and Mediating Mechanisms,” Journal of 
Management Studies 58, no. 8 (2021): 2137–79.
45. M.H. Davis, S. Capobianco, and L.A. Kraus, “Gender 
Differences in Responding to Conflict in the Workplace: 
Evidence from a Large Sample of Working Adults,” Sex 
Roles 63, no. 7 (2010): 500–14; J.L. Locke, Duels and 
Duets: Why Men and Women Talk So Differently (New York: 
Cambridge University Press, 2011); R. Friesdorf, 
P. Conway, and B. Gawronski, “Gender Differences in 
Responses to Moral Dilemmas: A Process Dissociation 
Analysis,” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 41, 
no. 5 (2015): 696–713.
46. E. Bolland and C. Lopes, Generations and Work (New 
York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2014); P. Taylor, The Next 
America: Boomers, Millennials, and the Looming Generational 
Showdown (New York: PublicAffairs, 2014); J. Bristow, 
Baby Boomers and Generational Conflict (London: 
Palgrave Macmillan, 2015).
47. S. Lyons and L. Kuron, “Generational Differences in the 
Workplace: A Review of the Evidence and Directions for 
Future Research,” Journal of Organizational Behavior 35, 
no. S1 (2014): S139–57; K.L. Zabel et al., “Generational 
Differences in Work Ethic: Fact or Fiction?,” Journal of 
Business and Psychology 32, no. 3 (2017): 301–15; J.M. 
Cucina et al., “Generational Differences in Workplace 
Attitudes and Job Satisfaction: Lack of Sizable Differ￾ences across Cohorts,” Journal of Managerial Psychology
33, no. 3 (2018): 246–64; M. Schröder, “Der Generation￾enmythos (The Generation Myth),” Kölner Zeitschrift für 
Soziologie und Sozialpsychologie 70, no. 3 (2018): 469–94; 
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and 
Medicine, Are Generational Categories Meaningful 
Distinctions for Workforce Management? (National Academies 
Press, 2020).
48. C.-M. Lu et al., “Effect of Diversity on Human Resource 
Management and Organizational Performance,” Journal 
of Business Research 68, no. 4 (2015): 857–61; Y. Zhang 
and M.-Y. Huai, “Diverse Work Groups and Employee 
Performance: The Role of Communication Ties,” Small 
Group Research 47, no. 1 (2016): 28–57; J. Wang et al., 
“Team Creativity/Innovation in Culturally Diverse 
Teams: A Meta-Analysis,” Journal of Organizational Be￾havior 40, no. 6 (2019): 693–708; M. del C. Triana et al., 
“The Relationship Between Team Deep-Level Diversity 
and Team Performance: A Meta-Analysis of the Main 
Effect, Moderators, and Mediating Mechanisms,” Journal 
of Management Studies 58, no. 8 (2021): 2137–79.
49. Q. Roberson, O. Holmes, and J.L. Perry, “Transforming 
Research on Diversity and Firm Performance: A Dynamic 
Capabilities Perspective,” Academy of Management 
Annals 11 (2017): 189–216; Y.R.F. Guillaume et al., 
“Harnessing Demographic Differences in Organizations: 
What Moderates the Effects of Workplace Diversity?,” 
Journal of Organizational Behavior 38, no. 2 (2017): 
276–303; N. Luanglath, M. Ali, and K. Mohannak, “Top 
Management Team Gender Diversity and Productivity: 
The Role of Board Gender Diversity,” Equality, Diversity 
and Inclusion: An International Journal 38, no. 1 (2019): 
71–86.
50. T. Kochan et al., “The Effects of Diversity on Business 
Performance: Report of the Diversity Research Net￾work,” Human Resource Management 42 (2003): 3–21; 
S.T. Bell et al., “Getting Specific about Demographic Di￾versity Variable and Team Performance Relationships: A 
Meta-Analysis,” Journal of Management 37, no. 3 (2011): 
709–43; S.M.B. Thatcher and P.C. Patel, “Group Fault￾lines: A Review, Integration, and Guide to Future Re￾search,” Journal of Management 38, no. 4 (2012): 
969–1009; C. Ozgen et al., “Does Cultural Diversity of 
Migrant Employees Affect Innovation?,” International 
Migration Review 48 (2014): S377–S416; P. Choudhury 
and M.R. Haas, “Scope versus Speed: Team Diversity, 
Leader Experience, and Patenting Outcomes for Firms,” 
Strategic Management Journal 39, no. 4 (2018): 977–
1002; E. Seo, H. Kang, and J. Song, “Blending Talents 
for Innovation: Team Composition for Cross-Border 
R&D Collaboration within Multinational Corporations,” 
Journal of International Business Studies 51, no. 5 (2020): 
851–85.
51. J. Hyman, “New Research Reveals Employees Value 
Well-being over Climbing the Ladder,” Work Life by 
Atlassian (blog), July 19, 2021; Y. Bizouati-Kennedy, “42% 
of Gen Z Prioritize Work-Life Balance Over Other Job 
Perks, Survey Says” (GOBankingRates, September 15, 
2021); D. Klinghoffer, “Hybrid Tanked Work-Life Balance. 
Here’s How Microsoft Is Trying to Fix It.,” Harvard Business 
Review, December 8, 2021.
52. Jeffrey H. Greenhaus and Lieke L. ten Brummelhuis, 
“Models and Frameworks Underlying Work–Life Re￾search: Challenges and Opportunities,” in Handbook of 
Work-Life Integration Among Professionals: Challenges and 
Opportunities, ed. D.A. Major and R.J. Burke (Chelten￾ham, UK: Edward Elgar Publishing, 2013), 14–34; M.J. 
Sirgy and D.-J. Lee, “Work-Life Balance: An Integrative 
Review,” Applied Research in Quality of Life 13, no. 1 
(2018): 229–54.
53. Katie Clarey, “Work-Life Balance? There’s No Such 
Thing,” HR Dive, December 18, 2018.
54. L.L. ten Brummelhuis and A.B. Bakker, “A Resource Per￾spective on the Work–Home Interface: The Work–Home 
Resources Model,” American Psychologist 67, no. 7 39
(2012): 545–56; L.L. ten Brummelhuis and J.H. Green￾haus, “How Role Jugglers Maintain Relationships at 
Home and at Work: A Gender Comparison.,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology 103, no. 12 (2018): 1265–82; A. Li, A. 
Butler, and J. Bagger, “Depletion or Expansion? Under￾standing the Effects of Support Policy Use on Employee 
Work and Family Outcomes,” Human Resource Management 
Journal 28, no. 2 (2018): 216–34.
55. S.D. Friedman, Leading the Life You Want: Skills for Inte￾grating Work and Life (Boston: Harvard Business Press, 
2014); A.M. Foreman et al., “Dogs in the Workplace: A 
Review of the Benefits and Potential Challenges,” Inter￾national Journal of Environmental Research and Public 
Health 14, no. 5 (2017), 498; K. Goldin, “Why Meetings 
On The Move Should Be The New Normal (And How 
To Ensure They’re Productive),” Forbes, April 20, 2018; 
K. Fannin. “Why Work-Life Integration Is the New 
Work-Life Balance and How To . . .” Intelivate (blog), 
January 29, 2018. https://www.intelivate.com/team-strategy/
work-life-integration-work-life-balance; K. Lockwood. 
“Achieving Work-Life Integration In This New World Of 
Work.” Forbes, April 18, 2018. Although almost all firms 
have practices that support work–life integration, many 
employers implicitly limit the career progress of those 
who use some of these practices. See: S. Bourdeau, A. 
Ollier-Malaterre, and N. Houlfort, “Not All Work-Life 
Policies Are Created Equal: Career Consequences of 
Using Enabling Versus Enclosing Work-Life Policies,” 
Academy of Management Review 44, no. 1 (2019): 172–93.
56. E.E. Kossek and R.J. Thompson, “Workplace Flexibility: 
Integrating Employer and Employee Perspectives to 
Close the Research–Practice Implementation Gap,” in 
The Oxford Handbook of Work and Family, ed. T.D. Allen 
and L.T. Eby (New York: Oxford University Press, 2016), 
255–70; M. Beatson, “Megatrends: Flexible Working” 
(London: Chartered Institute of Personnel and Develop￾ment, January 15, 2019).
57. T.D. Allen, E. Cho, and L.L. Meier, “Work–Family 
Boundary Dynamics,” Annual Review of Organizational 
Psychology and Organizational Behavior 1, no. 1 (2014): 
99–121; N.P. Rothbard and A. Ollier-Malaterre, “Boundary 
Management,” in The Oxford Handbook of Work and 
Family, ed. T.D. Allen and L.T. Eby (New York: Oxford 
University Press, 2016), 109–24; T.D. Allen et al., 
“Boundary Management and Work-Nonwork Balance 
While Working from Home,” Applied Psychology 70, no. 1 
(2021): 60–84.
58. G.E. Kreiner, E.C. Hollensbe, and M.L. Sheep, “Balanc￾ing Borders and Bridges: Negotiating the Work-Home 
Interface via Boundary Work Tactics,” Academy of 
Management Journal 52, no. 4 (2009): 704–30; D.S. 
Carlson, M. Ferguson, and K.M. Kacmar, “Boundary 
Management Tactics: An Examination of the Alignment 
with Preferences in the Work and Family Domains,” 
Journal of Behavioral and Applied Management 16, no. 2 
(2016): 51–70; T. Karabinski et al., “Interventions for Im￾proving Psychological Detachment from Work: A Meta￾Analysis,” Journal of Occupational Health Psychology 26, 
no. 3 (2021): 224–42; “Code Of Practice For Employers 
And Employees On The Right To Disconnect” (Dublin: 
Government of Ireland. Workplace Relations Commis￾sion, March 2021); “Portugal Protects Employees with 
New Rules on Home Working,” AP NEWS, November 5, 
2021; E. Sherberg, “In Her Own Words: Amrita Patel 
Commits to Leading with Empathy,” BizWomen: The 
Business Journals, December 6, 2021.
59. “Gartner Forecasts 51% of Global Knowledge Workers 
Will Be Remote by the End of 2021,” Press Release 
(Stamford, Conn.: Gartner, June 22, 2021); S. McFeely, 
“2021 Remote Work Statistics: The State of Remote 
Work” (Omaha, Neb.: Quantum Workplace, September 
2021); Gallup Inc, “Remote Work Persisting and Trend￾ing Permanent,” October 13, 2021; “State of Remote 
Work 2021” (Boston: Owl Labs, December 2021).
60. J. Trigwell, “What I’ve Learned about Running an All￾Remote Company during 15-Years as the CEO of the 
World’s First All-Remote AV Company,” Emsisoft Secu￾rity Blog (blog), November 20, 2018; R. Chan, “How a 
Tech CEO Runs His 40-Employee Company from a 
Farm in New Zealand,” stuff.co.nz, January 21, 2019.
61. T.D. Allen, T.D. Golden, and K.M. Shockley, “How Ef￾fective Is Telecommuting? Assessing the Status of Our 
Scientific Findings,” Psychological Science in the Public 
Interest 16, no. 2 (2015): 40–68; M. Charalampous et al., 
“Systematically Reviewing Remote E-Workers’ Well￾Being at Work: A Multidimensional Approach,” European 
Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology 28, no. 1 
(2019): 51–73; T.A. Beauregard, K.A. Basile, and E. 
Canonico, “Telework: Outcomes and Facilitators for 
Employees,” in The Cambridge Handbook of Technology and 
Employee Behavior, ed. R.N. Landers, (Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press, 2019), 511–43; B. Wang 
et al., “Achieving Effective Remote Working During the 
COVID-19 Pandemic: A Work Design Perspective,” 
Applied Psychology 70, no. 1 (2021): 16–59.
62. E.E. Kossek and R.J. Thompson, “Workplace Flexibility: 
Integrating Employer and Employee Perspectives to 
Close the Research–Practice Implementation Gap,” in 
The Oxford Handbook of Work and Family, ed. T.D. Allen 
and L.T. Eby (New York: Oxford University Press, 2016), 
255–70; H. Hambly and J. (Donghoon) Lee, “The Rural 
Telecommuter Surplus in Southwestern Ontario, Canada,” 
Telecommunications Policy 43 (2019): 278–86. 
63. C.A. Bartel, A. Wrzesniewski, and B.M. Wiesenfeld, 
“Knowing Where You Stand: Physical Isolation, Per￾ceived Respect, and Organizational Identification among 
Virtual Employees,” Organization Science 23, no. 3 
(2011): 743–57; E.E. Kossek, R.J. Thompson, and B.A. 
Lautsch, “Balanced Workplace Flexibility: Avoiding the 
Traps,” California Management Review 57, no. 4 (2015): 
5–25; J. Delanoeije, M. Verbruggen, and L. Germeys, 
“Boundary Role Transitions: A Day-to-Day Approach to 
Explain the Effects of Home-Based Telework on Work-to￾Home Conflict and Home-to-Work Conflict,” Human 
Relations 72, no. 12 (2019): 1843–68; T.D. Golden and 
K.A. Eddleston, “Is There a Price Telecommuters Pay? 
Examining the Relationship between Telecommuting and 
Objective Career Success,” Journal of Vocational Behavior
116 (2020): 103348; Microsoft, “The Next Great Disrup￾tion Is Hybrid Work—Are We Ready?,” WTI Pulse Report, 
March 22, 2021.
64. T.A. O’Neill, L.A. Hambley, and G.S. Chatellier, “Cyber￾slacking, Engagement, and Personality in Distributed 
Work Environments,” Computers in Human Behavior 40 40
(2014): 152–60; N.W. Van Yperen, E.F. Rietzschel, and 
K.M.M. De Jonge, “Blended Working: For Whom It May 
(Not) Work,” PLoS ONE 9, no. 7 (2014): e102921; S.J. 
Perry, C. Rubino, and E.M. Hunter, “Stress in Remote 
Work: Two Studies Testing the Demand-Control-Person 
Model,” European Journal of Work and Organizational 
Psychology 27, no. 5 (2018): 577–93; T.A. Beauregard, 
K.A. Basile, and E. Canonico, “Telework: Outcomes and 
Facilitators for Employees,” in The Cambridge Handbook 
of Technology and Employee Behavior, ed. R.N. Landers, 
1st ed. (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 
2019), 511–43; A.M. Evans et al., “Extroversion and 
Conscientiousness Predict Deteriorating Job Outcomes 
During the COVID-19 Transition to Enforced Remote 
Work,” Social Psychological and Personality Science 13, 
no. 3 (2022): 781–91.
65. L.L. Thurstone, “Ability, Motivation, and Speed,” 
Psychometrika 2, no. 4 (1937): 249–54; N.R.F. Maier, 
Psychology in Industry, 2nd ed. (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 
1955); V.H. Vroom, Work and Motivation (New York: 
Wiley, 1964); J.P. Campbell et al., Managerial Behavior, 
Performance, and Effectiveness (New York: McGraw Hill, 
1970). 
66. R.S. Dalal, D.P. Bhave, and J. Fiset, “Within-Person Vari￾ability in Job Performance: A Theoretical Review and 
Research Agenda,” Journal of Management 40, no. 5 
(2014): 1396–436; S. Aryee et al., “Developing and Le￾veraging Human Capital Resource to Promote Service 
Quality: Testing a Theory of Performance,” Journal of 
Management 42, no. 2 (2016): 480–99.
67. E.E. Lawler III and L.W. Porter, “Antecedent Attitudes 
of Effective Managerial Performance,” Organizational 
Behavior and Human Performance 2 (1967): 122–42; O.-P. 
Kauppila, “So, What Am I Supposed to Do? A Multilevel 
Examination of Role Clarity,” Journal of Management 
Studies 51, no. 5 (2014): 737–63.
68. Only a few sources have included all four factors. These 
include J.P. Campbell and R.D. Pritchard, “Motivation 
Theory in Industrial and Organizational Psychology,” in 
Handbook of Industrial and Organizational Psychology, ed. 
M.D. Dunnette (Chicago: Rand McNally, 1976), 62–130; 
T.R. Mitchell, “Motivation: New Directions for Theory, 
Research, and Practice,” Academy of Management Review 7, 
no. 1 (1982): 80–88; G.A.J. Churchill et al., “The De￾terminants of Salesperson Performance: A Meta-Analysis,” 
Journal of Marketing Research 22, no. 2 (1985): 103–18; 
R.E. Plank and D.A. Reid, “The Mediating Role of Sales 
Behaviors: An Alternative Perspective of Sales Perfor￾mance and Effectiveness,” Journal of Personal Selling & 
Sales Management 14, no. 3 (1994): 43–56. The “MARS” 
acronym was coined by senior officers in the Singapore 
Armed Forces during a senior officer program taught 
by Steve McShane.
69. Technically, the model proposes that situation factors 
moderate the effects of the three within-person factors. 
For instance, the effect of employee motivation on be￾havior and performance depends on (is moderated by) 
the situation. 
70. G.P. Latham and C.C. Pinder, “Work Motivation The￾ory and Research at the Dawn of the Twenty-First Cen￾tury,” Annual Review of Psychology 56 (2005): 485–516; 
G.P. Latham, Work Motivation: History, Theory, 
Research, and Practice, Revised ed. (Thousand Oaks, 
CA: Sage, 2012), 7.
71. L. M. Spencer and S. M. Spencer, Competence at Work: 
Models for Superior Performance (New York: Wiley, 
1993); D. Bartram, “The Great Eight Competencies: A 
Criterion-Centric Approach to Validation,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology 90, no. 6 (2005): 1185–203; R. A. Roe, 
“Using Competences in Employee Development,” in 
Wiley Blackwell Handbook of the Psychology of Training, 
Development, and Performance Improvement, ed. K. 
Kraiger et al. (Chichester: Wiley, 2014), 303–35.
72. W. Wood, J.M. Quinn, and D.A. Kashy, “Habits in Every￾day Life: Thought, Emotion, and Action.,” Journal of Per￾sonality and Social Psychology 83, no. 6 (2002): 1281–97; 
W. Wood and D. Rünger, “Psychology of Habit,” Annual 
Review of Psychology 67 (2016): 289–314; D.L. Lorenzetti 
et al., “Strategies for Improving Physician Documenta￾tion in the Emergency Department: A Systematic Re￾view,” BMC Emergency Medicine 18, no. 1 (2018): 36; 
K. Miyahara, T.G. Ransom, and S. Gallagher, “What the 
Situation Affords: Habit and Heedful Interrelations in 
Skilled Performance,” in Habits: Pragmatist Approaches 
from Cognitive Science, Neuroscience, and Social Theory, 
ed. F. Caruana and I. Testa (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press, 2020), 120–36.
73. P. Tharenou, A.M. Saks, and C. Moore, “A Review and 
Critique of Research on Training and Organizational￾Level Outcomes,” Human Resource Management Review 17, 
no. 3 (2007): 251–73; Y. Kim and R.E. Ployhart, “The 
Effects of Staffing and Training on Firm Productivity 
and Profit Growth before, during, and after the Great 
Recession,” Journal of Applied Psychology 99, no. 3 (2014): 
361–89; M. Choi and H.J. Yoon, “Training Investment 
and Organizational Outcomes: A Moderated Mediation 
Model of Employee Outcomes and Strategic Orientation 
of the HR Function,” The International Journal of Human 
Resource Management 26, no. 20 (2015): 2632–51. 
74. E.C. Dierdorff, R.S. Rubin, and D.G. Bachrach, “Role 
Expectations as Antecedents of Citizenship and the 
Moderating Effects of Work Context,” Journal of Man￾agement 38, no. 2 (2012): 573–98; A. Newman, B. Allen, 
and Q. Miao, “I Can See Clearly Now: The Moderating 
Effects of Role Clarity on Subordinate Responses to 
Ethical Leadership,” Personnel Review 44, no. 4 (2015): 
611–28.
75. W.H. Cooper and M.J. Withey, “The Strong Situation 
Hypothesis,” Personality and Social Psychology Review 13, 
no. 1 (2009): 62–72; N.A. Bowling et al., “Situational 
Strength as a Moderator of the Relationship between Job 
Satisfaction and Job Performance: A Meta-Analytic 
Examination,” Journal of Business and Psychology 30, no. 1 
(2015): 89–104; T.A. Judge and C.P. Zapata, “The Person–
Situation Debate Revisited: Effect of Situation Strength 
and Trait Activation on the Validity of the Big Five Person￾ality Traits in Predicting Job Performance,” Academy 
of Management Journal 58, no. 4 (2015): 1149–79; J.F. 
Rauthmann and R.A. Sherman, “Situation Change: 
Stability and Change of Situation Variables between and 
within Persons,” Frontiers in Psychology 6 (2016).
76. L.H. Peters and E.J. O’Connor, “Situational Constraints 
and Work Outcomes: The Influences of a Frequently 
Overlooked Construct,” Academy of Management Review 5, 41
no. 3 (1980): 391–97; G. Johns, “Commentary: In 
Praise of Context,” Journal of Organizational Behavior 22 
(2001): 31–42; C.E.J. Härtel and J.M. O’Connor, “Con￾textualizing Research: Putting Context Back into Organi￾zational Behavior Research,” Journal of Management & 
Organization 20, no. 4 (2014): 417–22.
77. R.D. Hackett, “Understanding and Predicting Work Per￾formance in the Canadian Military,” Canadian Journal of 
Behavioural Science 34, no. 2 (2002): 131–40; J.P. Camp￾bell and B.M. Wiernik, “The Modeling and Assessment 
of Work Performance,” Annual Review of Organizational 
Psychology and Organizational Behavior 2, no. 1 (2015): 
47–74.
78. L. Tay, R. Su, and J. Rounds, “People-Things and Data￾Ideas: Bipolar Dimensions?,” Journal of Counseling 
Psychology 58, no. 3 (2011): 424–40. 
79. M.A. Griffin, A. Neal, and S.K. Parker, “A New Model 
of Work Role Performance: Positive Behavior in Uncer￾tain and Interdependent Contexts,” Academy of Manage￾ment Journal 50, no. 2 (2007): 327–47; S.K. Baard, T.A. 
Rench, and S.W.J. Kozlowski, “Performance Adaptation: 
A Theoretical Integration and Review,” Journal of Man￾agement 40, no. 1 (2014): 48–99; D.K. Jundt, M.K. 
Shoss, and J.L. Huang, “Individual Adaptive Perfor￾mance in Organizations: A Review,” Journal of Organiza￾tional Behavior 36, no. S1 (2015): S53–S71; J.A. Carpini, 
S.K. Parker, and M.A. Griffin, “A Look Back and a Leap 
Forward: A Review and Synthesis of the Individual Work 
Performance Literature,” Academy of Management Annals 11, 
no. 2 (2017): 825–85; S.K. Parker, Y. Wang, and J. Liao, 
“When Is Proactivity Wise? A Review of Factors That 
Influence the Individual Outcomes of Proactive Behavior,” 
Annual Review of Organizational Psychology and Organiza￾tional Behavior 6 (2019): 221–48; S. Park and S. Park, 
“Employee Adaptive Performance and Its Antecedents: 
Review and Synthesis,” Human Resource Development 
Review 18, no. 3 (2019): 294–324.
80. D.W. Organ, “Organizational Citizenship Behavior: It’s 
Construct Clean-up Time,” Human Performance 10 
(1997): 85–97; J.A. LePine, A. Erez, and D.E. Johnson, 
“The Nature and Dimensionality of Organizational Citi￾zenship Behavior: A Critical Review and Meta-Analysis,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 87 (2002): 52–65; N.P. Pod￾sakoff et al., “Consequences of Unit-Level Organizational 
Citizenship Behaviors: A Review and Recommendations 
for Future Research,” Journal of Organizational Behavior 35, 
no. S1 (2014): S87–S119.
81. E.W. Morrison, “Role Definitions and Organizational 
Citizenship Behavior: The Importance of the Employee’s 
Perspective,” Academy of Management Journal 37, no. 6 
(1994): 1543–67; N. Podsakoff et al., “Individual- and Or￾ganizational-Level Consequences of Organizational Citi￾zenship Behaviors: A Meta-Analysis,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology 94, no. 1 (2009): 122–41; E.C. Dierdorff, R.S. 
Rubin, and D.G. Bachrach, “Role Expectations as Ante￾cedents of Citizenship and the Moderating Effects of 
Work Context,” Journal of Management 38, no. 2 (2012): 
573–598.
82. M. Ozer, “A Moderated Mediation Model of the Rela￾tionship between Organizational Citizenship Behaviors 
and Job Performance,” Journal of Applied Psychology 96, 
no. 6 (2011): 1328–36; S.B. Mackenzie, N.P. Podsakoff, 
and P.M. Podsakoff, “Individual- and Organizational￾Level Consequences of Organizational Citizenship 
Behaviors,” in The Oxford Handbook of Organizational 
Citizenship Behavior, ed. P.M. Podsakoff, S.B. MacKenzie, 
and N.P. Podsakoff (New York: Oxford University 
Press, 2018); C.J.C. de Geus et al., “Organizational 
Citizenship Behavior in the Public Sector: A Systematic 
Literature Review and Future Research Agenda,” Public 
Administration Review 80, no. 2 (2020): 259–70.
83. M.C. Bolino, A.C. Klotz, and W.H. Turnley, “The 
Unintended Consequences of Organizational Citizenship 
Behaviors for Employees, Teams, and Organizations,” 
in The Oxford Handbook of Organizational Citizenship 
Behavior, ed. P.M. Podsakoff, S.B. Mackenzie, and N.P. 
Podsakoff (New York: Oxford University Press, 2018), 
185–202.
84. M. Rotundo and P. Sackett, “The Relative Importance of 
Task, Citizenship, and Counterproductive Performance 
to Global Ratings of Job Performance: A Policy-Capturing 
Approach,” Journal of Applied Psychology 87 (2002): 
66–80; N.A. Bowling and M.L. Gruys, “Overlooked 
Issues in the Conceptualization and Measurement of 
Counterproductive Work Behavior,” Human Resource 
Management Review 20, no. 1 (2010): 54–61; B. Marcus 
et al., “The Structure of Counterproductive Work Behav￾ior: A Review, a Structural Meta-Analysis, and a Primary 
Study,” Journal of Management 42, no. 1 (2016): 203–33; 
R.S. Dalal and N.C. Carpenter, “The Other Side of the 
Coin?: Similarities and Differences between Organiza￾tional Citizenship Behavior and Counterproductive Work 
Behavior,” in The Oxford Handbook of Organizational Citi￾zenship Behavior, ed. P.M. Podsakoff, S.B. MacKenzie, 
and N.P. Podsakoff (New York: Oxford University Press, 
2018), 69–90.
85. The relationship between employee turnover and firm 
performance is actually very low, but this is due to mod￾erators and is stronger for some forms of firm perfor￾mance. See: J.I. Hancock et al., “Meta-Analytic Review 
of Employee Turnover as a Predictor of Firm Perfor￾mance,” Journal of Management 39, no. 3 (2013): 
573–603.
86. K. Gooch, “Hospitals Receive Staffing Help amid Latest 
COVID-19 Wave: Snapshots from 6 States,” Becker Hos￾pital Review, September 9, 2021; J. Hannah, J. Carroll, 
and C. Maxouris, “‘Round after Round of COVID.’ 
Military Personnel Help a Michigan Hospital That’s 
Inundated with COVID Patients and Short on Staff,” 
CNN, December 18, 2021.
87. T.-Y. Park and J. Shaw, “Turnover Rates and Organiza￾tional Performance: A Meta-Analysis,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology 98, no. 2 (2013): 268–309; J.I. Hancock et al., 
“Meta-Analytic Review of Employee Turnover as a Pre￾dictor of Firm Performance,” Journal of Management 39, 
no. 3 (2013): 573–603; J.G. Messersmith et al., “Turnover 
at the Top: Executive Team Departures and Firm Perfor￾mance,” Organization Science 25, no. 3 (2014): 776–93; 
B.C. Holtom and T.C. Burch, “A Model of Turnover-Based 
Disruption in Customer Services,” Human Resource 
Management Review 26, no. 1 (2016): 25–36.
88. D.A. Harrison and J.J. Martocchio, “Time for Absenteeism: 
A 20-Year Review of Origins, Offshoots, and Outcomes,” 
Journal of Management 24, no. 3 (1998): 305–50; M.A. 42
Herrmann and J.E. Rockoff, “Worker Absence and Pro￾ductivity: Evidence from Teaching,” Journal of Labor Eco￾nomics 30, no. 4 (October 1, 2012): 749–82; V. Čikeš, H. 
Maškarin Ribarić, and K. Črnjar, “The Determinants and 
Outcomes of Absence Behavior: A Systematic Literature 
Review,” Social Sciences 7, no. 8 (August 2018): 120.
89. W. Beemsterboer et al., “A Literature Review on Sick 
Leave Determinants (1984–2004),” International Journal 
of Occupational Medicine and Environmental Health 22, 
no. 2 (2009): 169–79; C. M. Berry, A. M. Lelchook, and 
M. A. Clark, “A Meta-Analysis of the Interrelationships 
between Employee Lateness, Absenteeism, and Turnover: 
Implications for Models of Withdrawal Behavior,”Journal 
of Organizational Behavior 33, no. 5 (2012): 678–99; 
M. Miraglia and G. Johns, “The Social and Relational 
Dynamics of Absenteeism From Work: A Multilevel 
Review and Integration,” Academy of Management Annals
15, no. 1 (2021): 37–67.
90. G. Johns, “Presenteeism in the Workplace: A Review and 
Research Agenda,” Journal of Organizational Behavior 31, 
no. 4 (2010): 519–42; R. K. Skagen and A. M. Collins, 
“The Consequences of Sickness Presenteeism on Health 
and Wellbeing over Time: A Systematic Review,” Social 
Science & Medicine 161 (2016): 169–77; S.A. Ruhle et al., 
“‘To Work, or Not to Work, That Is the Question’ – Recent 
Trends and Avenues for Research on Presenteeism,” 
European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology 29, 
no. 3 (May 3, 2020): 344–63; M. Karanika-Murray and 
C. Biron, “The Health-Performance Framework of 
Presenteeism: Towards Understanding an Adaptive 
Behaviour,” Human Relations 73, no. 2 (2020): 242–61.
91. D. Baker-McClearn et al., “Absence Management and Pre￾senteeism: The Pressures on Employees to Attend Work 
and the Impact of Attendance on Performance,” Human 
Resource Management Journal 20, no. 3 (2010): 311–28; 
G. Johns, “Attendance Dynamics at Work: The Anteced￾ents and Correlates of Presenteeism, Absenteeism, and 
Productivity Loss,” Journal of Occupational Health 
Psychology 16, no. 4 (2011): 483–500; R. Pohling et al., 
“Work-Related Factors of Presenteeism: The Mediating 
Role of Mental and Physical Health,” Journal of Occupa￾tional Health Psychology 21, no. 2 (2016): 220–34.
a. B. Schlender and S. Jobs, “The Three Faces of Steve,” 
Fortune, November 9, 1998, 96–101. 
b. O. Keogh, “Boomerang Employees Can Work Out. Just 
Don’t Get Hit in the Face,” The Irish Times, May 10, 
2019; J. Keller et al., “In With the Old? Examining When 
Boomerang Employees Outperform New Hires,” Acad￾emy of Management Journal 64, no. 6 (2021): 1654–84; 
K. Dill, “More People Quit to Take a New Job From an 
Old Boss,” Wall Street Journal, December 15, 2021. One 
study found that boomerangs had higher turnover and no 
better performance than internal or external hires. How￾ever, all hires in that study entered the same management 
trainee positions, not positions in which boomerangs 
were experienced. See: J.D. Arnold et al., “Welcome 
Back? Job Performance and Turnover of Boomerang; 
Employees Compared to Internal and External Hires,” 
Journal of Management 47, no. 8 (2021): 2198–2225.
c. M.A. Cronin and R. Klimoski, “Broadening the View of 
What Constitutes ‘Evidence,’” Industrial and Organizational 
Psychology 4, no. 1 (2011): 57–61; P.E. Spector and L.L. 
Meier, “Methodologies for the Study of Organizational 
Behavior Processes: How to Find Your Keys in the Dark,” 
Journal of Organizational Behavior 35, no. 8 (2014): 
1109–19; K. Morrell and M. Learmonth, “Against 
Evidence-Based Management, for Management Learning,” 
Academy of Management Learning & Education 14, no. 4 
(2015): 520–33.
d. W.B. Cameron, Informal Sociology: A Casual Introduction 
to Sociological Thinking (Random House, 1963), 13; “Not 
Everything That Counts Can Be Counted – Quote Inves￾tigator,” May 26, 2010, https://quoteinvestigator.
com/2010/05/26/everything-counts-einstein/.
e. J.M. Bartunek and S.L. Rynes, “Academics and Practitioners 
Are Alike and Unlike: The Paradoxes of Academic–
Practitioner Relationships,” Journal of Management 40, 
no. 5 (2014): 1181–1201; S. Johnson and K. Orr, “What 
Is Business School Research For? Academic and Stake￾holder Perspectives, Politics and Relationality,” Studies in 
Higher Education 45, no. 3 (2020): 557–78.
f. J. Greenberg and E.C. Tomlinson, “Situated Experiments 
in Organizations: Transplanting the Lab to the Field,” 
Journal of Management 30, no. 5 (2004): 703–24; W. 
Zhang, A. Levenson, and C. Crossley, “Move Your Re￾search from the Ivy Tower to the Board Room: A Primer 
on Action Research for Academics, Consultants, and 
Business Executives,” Human Resource Management 54, 
no. 1 (2015): 151–74; G.C. Banks, H.M. Woznyj, and 
C.A. Mansfield, “Where Is ‘Behavior’ in Organizational 
Behavior? A Call for a Revolution in Leadership 
Research and Beyond,” The Leadership Quarterly, 
December 7, 2021, 101581.
g. A. Franco, N. Malhotra, and G. Simonovits, “Publica￾tion Bias in the Social Sciences: Unlocking the File 
Drawer,” Science 345, no. 6203 (2014): 1502–05; G.C. 
Banks, S. Kepes, and M.A. McDaniel, “Publication Bias: 
Understanding the Myths Concerning Threats to the 
Advancement of Science,” in More Statistical and 
Methodological Myths and Urban Legends, ed. C.E. Lance 
and R.J. Vandenberg (New York: Routledge, 2015), 
36–64. On the uneven replication of research, see: Open 
Science Collaboration, “Estimating the Reproducibility 
of Psychological Science,” Science 349, no. 6251 (2015): 
943, aac4716–1–aac16–8; C.J. Anderson et al., “Re￾sponse to Comment on ‘Estimating the Reproducibility 
of Psychological Science,’” Science 351, no. 6277 (2016): 
1037c. Even meta-analyses might not be the magic solu￾tion to research bias and variability. See: J. de Vrieze, 
“Meta-Analyses Were Supposed to End Scientific 
Debates. Often, They Only Cause More Controversy,” 
Science, September 18, 2018, https://doi.org/10.1126/
science.aav4617.
h. “RingCentral’s Diverse Culture: It All Starts with Collab￾oration,” Comparably, July 28, 2020; “2020 Impact 
Report” (Belmont, Calif.: RingCentral, March 12, 2021); 
J. Caukin, “AAPI Heritage Month: What We Learned 
about Inclusivity and Culture as a Company,” RingCentral
(blog), May 27, 2021; J. Ong, “It’s Time to Redefine 
Work with Equality, Inclusivity, and Understanding,” 
RingCentral (blog), June 21, 2021.
i. K. Hoisl, M. Gruber, and A. Conti, “R&D Team Diversity 
and Performance in Hypercompetitive Environments,” 
Strategic Management Journal 38, no. 7 (2017): 1455–77.43
	 j.	 E. Sherberg, “In Her Own Words: Amrita Patel Commits
to Leading with Empathy,” BizWomen: The Business 
Journals, December 6, 2021.
	 k.	 G. Leibowitz, “This CEO Runs a Billion-Dollar Com￾pany With No Offices or Email,” Inc, March 16, 2016;
M.K. Saltzman, “Best Practices for Distributed Teams:
Automattic Shares All,” True Ventures (blog), March 13,
2020,https://trueventures.com/blog/automattic-distributed￾team; J. Jones, “Getting Hired at Automattic,” Jerry 
Jones Blog (blog), April 16, 2020, https://jerryjones.
dev/2020/04/16/getting-hired-at-automattic/. Information
about Automattic’s workforce is available on its website.
See: https://automattic.com/about/
	 l.	 Gallup Inc., State of the American Workplace (Washing￾ton, DC: Gallup, February 23, 2017; “The TINYpulse
2019 Employee Engagement Report: The End of Em￾ployee Loyalty” (Seattle: TINYpulse, February 2019);
C. Headley, “This Is What 75% of Employees Say Their
Workplace Doesn’t Provide for Them,” Ladders, May 28,
2019; “2020 Public Service Employee Survey: Results for
the Public Service” (Ottawa: Government of Canada,
Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat, 2021); Office of
Personnel Management, “2020 Federal Employee View￾point Survey” (Washington, DC: United States Govern￾ment, April 2021).
	m.	 L. Mirabella, “Walmart Employees Get Real Look at
Retail World; Virtual Reality Technology Prepares Su￾pervisors for Situations That Might Arise,” Baltimore 
Sun, December 3, 2017; H. Shively, “Area Stores Train￾ing Employees Using Virtual Reality,” TCA Regional 
News, November 12, 2018; S. DiNatale, “What’s It Like
to Train for Walmart’s Black Friday? Local Stores Use
Virtual Reality Goggles,” Tampa Bay Times, November 13,
2018.
	 n.	 “Collaboration: A Deep-Dive into One of Our Core
Values,” EMPAUA Blog (blog), July 9, 2019.
Design Credit: Blue globe icon: Merfin/Shutterstock44
Individual Differences: 
Personality and Values
Piedmont Family YMCA carefully reviewed job applicants for the position 
of finance director prior to a major audit. Along with assessing applicants’ technical skills, 
the Charlottesville, Virginia, organization included a personality assessment to determine who had the 
best soft skills needed to navigate the challenges ahead.
“We had to hire for skill, but the personality test allowed us to hire someone with just the right amount 
of enthusiasm and collaboration to balance out their analytical parts,” says an executive who led the 
hiring process.
Personality is an important individual characteristic, which explains why many companies try to 
estimate the personality traits of job applicants and employees. One survey estimated that 32 percent 
of companies were using personality and behavioral assessments when filling executive-level roles. 
Personality assessments can offer fairly good predictions of employee behavior and performance if they 
are carefully developed, customized to specific jobs, and have been carefully validated.
The problem is that organizations often use off-the-shelf personality tests. Some of these not only fail 
to predict job performance; they unfairly discriminate against some applicant groups. Best Buy, CVS, and 
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
LO 2-1 Define personality and discuss how the Big Five personality factors relate to 
workplace behavior and performance.
LO 2-2 Describe the dark triad personality and identify its effects on behavior in organizations.
LO 2-3 Summarize psychological types in the Myers Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI) and discuss 
the usefulness of this model in organizations.
LO 2-4 Summarize Schwartz’s model of individual values and discuss the conditions where 
values influence behavior.
LO 2-5 Describe four ethical principles and discuss three factors that influence ethical behavior.
LO 2-6 Describe five values commonly studied across cultures.
Learning Objectives
2
chapterPersonality is an important individual characteristic, which explains why many companies try to estimate the personality traits of 
job applicants and employees.
PART 2: INDIVIDUAL BEHAVIOR AND PROCESSES
other companies stopped using their personality assessments after U.S. government investigations 
found those tests adversely impacted applicants based on race, national origin, or disability.
The most popular personality tests aren’t designed for employment selection or promotion decisions 
at all. “My firm, the Myers-Briggs Company, has long held the position that the Myers-Briggs Type 
Indicator instrument shouldn’t be used in hiring, but rather for team-building, conflict management, 
leadership development and other non-selective purposes,” advises Sherie Haynie, Director of U.S. 
Professional Services at the Myers-Briggs Company.
Another concern is that some applicants fake their personality test responses to match perceptions 
of the ideal employee for that job. “I once answered honestly and failed one for a job I really wanted,” 
an employee recently wrote on a popular discussion forum. The personality test was completed online 
and applicants couldn’t apply again within six months. “So I created a new email address and took 
it again, lying this time. I passed and got the job, and had a new ‘work’ email.” Some personality test 
companies claim they can identify fake results, but recent studies have found that personality test 
faking is complex and therefore difficult to identify.1
45
B Calkins/Shutterstock46 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
Personality is a word that people use every day to describe their own or 
someone else’s character and behavior. Part 2 of this book focuses on 
individual behavior and personal characteristics in the context of organizations. 
This chapter specifically discusses the two core individual differences: 
personality and values.
The chapter begins by describing the meaning and origins of current 
personality theory. We then look at the five-factor personality model and 
identify how each dimension of this highly regarded model relates to job 
performance and other forms of workplace behavior. Four caveats when 
applying the five-factor model are then presented. Next, two other personality 
models are introduced: the dark triad (Machiavellianism, narcissism, and 
psychopathy) and the Jungian personality theory applied by the Myers-Briggs 
Type Indicator (MBTI).
Our attention then turns to personal values. We describe Schwartz’s values 
circumplex model, explain how personal values influence workplace decisions 
and behavior, and introduce the concept of values congruence. Next, we 
examine ethical values and the mechanisms through which they influence a 
person’s decisions and behavior. The final section of this chapter describes 
the best known cross-cultural values and explains their relevance to 
organizational behavior.
Personality and the Five-Factor Model in Organizations
On any given day in almost every workplace, employees will invariably mention either 
their own or someone else’s personality. Personality refers to the relatively enduring pattern 
of thoughts, emotions, and behaviors that characterize a person, along with the psycho￾logical processes behind those characteristics.2
 In essence, it is the bundle of characteris￾tics that make us similar to or different from other people. We estimate an individual’s 
personality by what they say and do, and we infer the person’s internal states—including 
thoughts and emotions—from these observable behaviors.
This definition attempts to cover the broad meaning of personality. However, defining 
personality is a challenge—one personality theorist bluntly calls it impossible—because there 
are several perspectives or approaches to personality, each of which has a somewhat differ￾ent view or emphasis on how personality should be defined. For example, needs and mo￾tives, which we discuss in Chapter 5, are often discussed as components of personality.
People engage in a wide range of behaviors in their daily lives, yet close inspection of 
those actions reveals discernible patterns called personality traits.3
 Traits are broad concepts 
that allow us to label and understand individual differences. For example, some of your 
friends are probably quite talkative whereas others tend to be quieter. Some people like to 
take risks whereas others are risk-averse. Each trait implies that there is something within 
the person, rather than environmental influences alone, that predicts this behavioral ten￾dency. In fact, studies report that an individual’s personality traits measured in childhood 
predict many behaviors and outcomes in adulthood, including educational attainment, em￾ployment success, marital relationships, illegal activities, and health-risk behaviors.4
LO 2-1
personality
the relatively enduring pattern 
of thoughts, emotions, and 
behaviors that characterize a 
person, along with the 
psychological processes 
behind those characteristicsChapter Two Individual Differences: Personality and Values 47
Although people have behavioral tendencies, they do not act the same way in all situa￾tions. Such consistency would be considered abnormal because it indicates a person’s in￾sensitivity to social norms, reward systems, and other external conditions.5
 People vary 
their behavior to suit the situation, even if the behavior is at odds with their personality. 
For example, talkative people remain relatively quiet in a library where “no talking” rules 
are explicit and strictly enforced. But even there, personality differences are apparent be￾cause talkative people tend to do more talking in libraries relative to how much other 
people talk in that setting.
WHAT CAUSES PERSONALITY: NATURE VERSUS NURTURE
Personality is shaped by both nature and nurture, although the relative importance of 
each continues to be debated and studied.6 Nature refers to our genetic or hereditary 
origins—the genes that we inherit from our parents. Studies of identical twins reveal that 
heredity has a very large effect on personality; up to 50 percent of variation in behavior 
and 30 percent of temperament preferences can be attributed to a person’s genetic 
characteristics. In other words, genetic code not only determines our eye color, skin tone, 
and physical shape; it also significantly affects our attitudes, decisions, and behavior.
Personality is also shaped by nurture—our socialization, life experiences, and other 
forms of interaction with the environment. Personality develops and changes mainly from 
childhood to young adulthood, typically stabilizing by around age 30. However, some per￾sonality changes continue to occur later in life. For instance, a few traits (openness to expe￾rience, social vitality) increase through to young adulthood, then decline in later years, 
whereas other traits (agreeableness, conscientiousness) tend to increase through to late 
life. Our personality is also influenced somewhat by the job we work in over a long time 
period. Even migrating to another culture can change our personality to some extent.7
The main explanation of why personality becomes more stable by adulthood is that we 
form a clearer and more rigid self-concept. This increasing clarity of “who we are” 
Did the COVID-19 Pandemic Alter 
Some Personalities?a
Remote work, lockdowns, social distancing, hand wash￾ing, health risks. The COVID-19 pandemic has been a sig￾nificant life event that required most of us to alter our 
lifestyles. These changes may have also altered the per￾sonalities of some people, although perhaps only 
temporarily.
One study with daily measures of the Big Five and 
other personality traits in a large American sample re￾ported that extraversion increased significantly throughout 
the entire first year of the pandemic. The researchers sug￾gest that this increase may be evidence that lockdowns, 
remote work, and social distancing made people more 
aware that they value social interaction. Neuroticism 
also increased slightly in the first year. More important, 
however, was that daily neuroticism scores fluctuated in 
the same direction as daily national (U.S.) COVID-19 cases.
Another large U.S. study also found that weekly per￾sonality scores during the first four months of the pan￾demic fluctuated much more than during the months 
before the pandemic began. It also reported that people 
had slightly elevated altruism (helping others) and in￾creased their orientation toward objective analysis during 
those early pandemic months. However, none of the Big 
Five factors changed noticeably overall during the short 
period of the pandemic covered by the study.
A third study reported minimal personality changes, 
but that investigation covered only the first six weeks of 
the pandemic.
global connections 2.1
Prostock-studio/Alamy Stock Photo48 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
anchors our behavior with the help of our executive function. This is the part of the brain 
that monitors and regulates goal-directed behavior to keep it consistent with our current 
or ideal self-concept. Our self-view becomes clearer and more stable with age, which in￾creases the stability and consistency of our personality and behavior.8
 We discuss the ele￾ments and influences of self-concept in Chapter 3. The main point here is that personality 
is not completely determined by heredity; life experiences, particularly early in life, also 
shape each individual’s personality traits.
FIVE-FACTOR MODEL OF PERSONALITY
Sociable, anxious, curious, dependable, suspicious, talkative, adventurous, and hundreds of 
other personality traits have been described over the years, so experts have tried to organize 
them into smaller clusters. The most researched and respected clustering of personality 
traits is the five-factor model, also known as the Big Five.9
 Several decades ago, personality 
experts identified more than 17,000 words that describe an individual’s personality. These 
words were distilled down to five broad personality factors, each with a cluster of specific 
traits. Similar results were found in studies of different languages, suggesting that the five￾factor model is fairly robust across cultures. These Big Five factors, represented by the 
handy acronym CANOE (or OCEAN), are outlined in Exhibit 2.1 and described as follows:
• Conscientiousness. Characterizes people who are organized, dependable, goal￾focused, thorough, disciplined, methodical, and industrious. People with low 
conscientiousness tend to be careless, disorganized, and less thorough.
• Agreeableness. Describes people who are trusting, helpful, good-natured, consider￾ate, tolerant, selfless, generous, and flexible. People with low agreeableness tend to 
be uncooperative and intolerant of others’ needs as well as more suspicious and 
self-focused.
• Neuroticism. Refers to people who tend to be anxious, insecure, self-conscious, 
depressed, and temperamental. In contrast, people with low neuroticism (high 
emotional stability) are poised, secure, and calm.
• Openness to experience. Characterizes people who are imaginative, creative, uncon￾ventional, curious, nonconforming, autonomous, and aesthetically perceptive. Those 
with low scores on this factor tend to be more resistant to change, less open to new 
ideas, and more conventional and fixed in their ways.
• Extraversion. Describes people who are outgoing, talkative, energetic, sociable, 
and assertive. The opposite is introversion, which applies to those who are quiet, 
cautious, and less interactive with others. Extraverts 
get their energy from people and things around them, 
whereas introverts get their energy more from personal 
reflection on concepts and ideas. Introverts do not nec￾essarily lack social skills. Instead, they are more inclined 
to direct their interests to ideas than to social events. 
Introverts feel more comfortable being alone than do 
extraverts.
agreeableness
a personality dimension 
describing people who are 
trusting, helpful, good-natured, 
considerate, tolerant, selfless, 
generous, and flexible
neuroticism
a personality dimension 
describing people who tend to 
be anxious, insecure, self￾conscious, depressed, and 
temperamental
openness to experience
a personality dimension 
describing people who are 
imaginative, creative, 
unconventional, curious, 
nonconforming, autonomous, 
and aesthetically perceptive
extraversion
a personality dimension 
describing people who are 
outgoing, talkative, sociable, 
and assertive
five-factor (Big Five) model
the five broad dimensions 
representing most personality 
traits: conscientiousness, 
emotional stability, openness to 
experience, agreeableness, 
and extraversion; also known 
as the “Big Five”
conscientiousness
a personality dimension 
describing people who are 
organized, dependable, goal￾focused, thorough, disciplined, 
methodical, and industriousChapter Two Individual Differences: Personality and Values 49
Personality
factor
People with higher scores on this factor
tend to be more:
Conscientiousness Organized, dependable, goal-focused, thorough, 
disciplined, methodical, industrious
Trusting, helpful, good-natured, considerate, tolerant, 
selfless, generous, flexible
Anxious, insecure, self-conscious, depressed, 
temperamental
Imaginative, creative, unconventional, curious, 
nonconforming, autonomous, perceptive
Outgoing, talkative, energetic, sociable, assertive
Agreeableness
Neuroticism
Openness to
experience
Extraversion
EXHIBIT 2.1
Five-Factor Model of Personality
®
SELF-ASSESSMENT 2.1: What Is Your Big Five Personality?
®
SELF-ASSESSMENT 2.2: Are You Introverted Or Extraverted?
Five-Factor Model and Work Performance Personality mainly affects behav￾ior and performance through motivation, specifically by influencing employees’ direction 
and intensity of effort (i.e., what goals they choose to reach and how much effort they 
apply to reach those goals). Consequently, all of the Big Five factors predict one or more 
types of employee behavior and performance to some extent.
Exhibit 2.2 highlights which Big Five personality factors best predict the three types of 
task performance as well as organizational citizenship and counterproductive work behav￾iors (see Chapter 1).10 Conscientiousness stands out as the best overall personality predic￾tor of proficient task performance for most jobs. The specific conscientiousness traits of 
industriousness (achievement, self-discipline, purposefulness) and dutifulness are the best 
predictors of proficient task performance. Conscientious employees set higher personal 
goals for themselves and are more persistent. They also engage in more organizational 
citizenship and in less counterproductive work behavior. Conscientiousness is a weak 
predictor of adaptive (responding to change) and proactive performance (taking initiative 
toward new work patterns). In fact, two specific conscientiousness traits—orderliness and 
dependability—tend to suppress adaptivity.
Extraversion is the second best overall personality predictor of proficient task perfor￾mance, but is a much weaker predictor than is conscientiousness. Among the specific 
traits within the extraversion factor, assertiveness and positive emotionality are the stron￾gest predictors of proficient task performance. Assertiveness is also a strong predictor of 
adaptive and proactive performance. Assertive employees tend to have a “take charge” 50 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
approach to situations, which is consistent with adapting to change and proactively initiat￾ing change. Extraversion is associated with influencing others and being comfortable in 
social settings, which (along with being assertive) explains why effective leaders and sales￾people tend to be somewhat more extraverted than the general population.
Agreeableness is positively associated with most forms of organizational citizenship 
and negatively associated with counterproductive work behaviors.11 The reason is that 
employees with high agreeableness are more cooperative, sensitive, flexible, and sup￾portive. Agreeableness does not predict proficient or proactive task performance very 
well, mainly because it is associated with lower motivation to set goals and achieve re￾sults. However, employees with higher (but not too high) agreeableness tend to im￾prove team performance through better knowledge sharing and motivation to help the 
team. Agreeableness also has a positive effect on friendliness behavior in customer 
service jobs.12
Openness to experience is a weak predictor of proficient task performance, but it is 
one of the best personality predictors of adaptive and proactive performance. The main 
reason is that employees with higher openness scores have more curiosity, imagination, 
and tolerance of change.13 These traits also explain why openness to change is associated 
with successful performance in creative work.
Emotional stability (low neuroticism) is one of the best personality predictors of adap￾tive performance.14 The central explanation is that employees with higher emotional sta￾bility cope better with the ambiguity and uncertainty of change. In contrast, those with 
higher neuroticism view change as a threat, so they tend to avoid change and experience 
Type of
Performance
Proficient task
performance
Organizational
citizenship
Counterproductive
work behaviors
• Conscientiousness
• Extraversion
• Conscientiousness
• Agreeableness
• Conscientiousness*
• Agreeableness*
*Negative relationship.
• Emotional stability
• Extraversion (assertiveness)
• Openness to experience
• Extraversion (assertiveness)
• Openness to experience
Adaptive task
performance
Proactive task
performance
Relevant
Personality
Factors
Relevant
Personality
Factors
Type of
Performance
EXHIBIT 2.2 Big Five Personality and Work Performance
(top-left): Ildar Galeev/Shutterstock; (top-center): Fred Ho Yeow Hui/Shutterstock; (top-right): malika.1028/Shutterstock; (bottom-left): Aha-Soft/Shutterstock; 
(bottom-right): Sign N Symbol Production/ShutterstockChapter Two Individual Differences: Personality and Values 51
ISSUES WHEN APPLYING THE FIVE-FACTOR MODEL
The five-factor model of personality is widely accepted among scholars and has a deep 
research foundation to support its structure and usefulness at predicting workplace behav￾ior. However, we need to alert you to several issues to better understand and apply this 
theory to the workplace.
• Higher isn’t always better. A common assumption is that the “perfect employee” 
has the highest scores on all of the Big Five personality factors (where emotional 
stability is high and neuroticism is low). Part of the problem may be that the labels 
and structure of the Big Five factors have a strong linear bias (high is good, low is 
bad).15 But several studies have reported that the best employees don’t have the 
highest scores on some personality factors. In other words, the relationship be￾tween personality and performance is often nonlinear. Employees with moderate 
extraversion perform better in sales jobs than those with high or low extraver￾sion.16 Students with the best peer-rated contributions to teamwork have relatively 
high extraversion, but moderately high conscientiousness, and only around the 
mid-point on agreeableness.
• Specific traits may be better predictors than the Big Five factors. We pay so much 
attention to the Big Five factors that it’s easy to forget that each factor clusters 
several specific personality traits. For instance, conscientiousness clusters spe￾cific traits such as organized, dependable, goal-focused, thorough, disciplined, 
methodical, and industrious. Specific traits are sometimes better than the 
broader factor at predicting behavior and performance. Earlier we pointed out 
that the specific extraversion traits of assertiveness and positive emotionality 
predict proficient task performance better than the other extraversion traits or 
the overall extraversion factor.17
• Personality isn’t static. There is an unfortunate tendency to think “that’s the way 
this person is” as if an adult’s personality is frozen for a lifetime. Labelling people 
(“You’re an introvert”) reinforces this fallacy that personality is static. Personality 
does stabilize around age 30, but that doesn’t mean it is static. As we noted at the 
beginning of this topic, some Big Five factors tend to increase or decrease as we 
age. Some personality factors also change when our environment significantly 
changes over a long time, such as when moving to a different culture or working 
in a job for many years.
• The five-factor model doesn’t cover all personality. Many of us—including some 
researchers—make the mistake of assuming that the five-factor model measures all 
of our personality.18 The five-factor model does capture a large portion of the 
domain we call personality, but not all of it. As mentioned at the outset of this topic, 
personality is difficult to define because there are several perspectives of this topic. 
The Big Five reflects only some of those perspectives. This is apparent in the next 
two sections of this chapter, which introduce two other models of personality that 
only partially overlap with the Big Five factors.
®
SELF-ASSESSMENT 2.3: Can You Identify Personality Traits From Blogging 
Words?
more stress when faced with workplace adjustments. These characteristics would suggest 
that emotional stability also predicts proactive performance, but the limited research has 
reported mixed results.52 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
The Dark Triad Personality
Several decades ago when personality experts distilled thousands of dictionary words down 
to the five-factor model, they deliberately excluded words with positive or negative valence, 
such as humbleness (positive) or sinister (negative). They initially even excluded words such 
as agreeable and ambitious that were later added to the Big Five analysis. The process of 
reducing words into categories also chopped off weaker clusters that coincidentally had 
positive or negative orientations. Yet, some of these excluded traits (such as impulsive) ap￾peared in earlier personality models and were widely known in clinical work.19
Personality experts have since re-examined personality traits with positive and negative 
valences. Out of these studies has emerged a cluster of three socially undesirable personal￾ity traits—Machiavellianism, narcissism, and psychopathy—called the dark triad.20 Although 
these traits are distinct, they have a common “dark core” consisting of either low humility/
honesty or a tendency to malevolently undermine others to maximize one’s own gains.21
MACHIAVELLIANISM
Machiavellianism is named after Niccolò Machiavelli, the 16th-century Italian philosopher 
who wrote The Prince, a famous treatise about political behavior. People with high Machiavel￾lianism (high-Machs) demonstrate a strong motivation to get what they want at the expense of 
others. They believe that deceit is a natural and acceptable way to achieve their goals; indeed, 
they take pleasure in misleading, outwitting, and otherwise controlling others. High-Machs 
routinely use lies, manipulation, exploitation, and other undesirable influence tactics (see 
Chapter 10). They have a cynical disregard for moral principles, believe that getting more 
than one deserves is acceptable, and seldom empathize with or trust coworkers.22
NARCISSISM
Narcissism is named after Narcissus, the young male hunter in Greek mythology who was 
so obsessed with his beauty that he could not stop admiring the reflection of himself in a 
pool of water (he died of thirst because he didn’t want to stop looking at himself). This 
trait is evident in people who have an obsessive belief in their superiority and entitlement. 
Along with their grandiose, inflated self-view, narcissists have an excessive need for atten￾tion, so they aggressively engage in self-promotion, exhibitionism, and other attention￾seeking behaviors. Although known to be initially charming, narcissists are intensely 
envious of others, which is eventually apparent in their arrogance, schadenfreude (deriving 
pleasure from another person’s misfortune), callous disregard for others’ feelings (i.e., 
low empathy), and exploitation of others for personal aggrandizement.23
PSYCHOPATHY
Psychopathy is often considered the most sinister of the triad. It refers to social predators 
who ruthlessly dominate and manipulate others, yet without empathy or any feelings of 
LO 2-2
dark triad
a cluster of three socially 
undesirable (dark) personality 
traits: Machiavellianism, 
narcissism, and psychopathy
Machiavellianism
a personality trait of people 
who demonstrate a strong 
motivation to achieve their own 
goals at the expense of others, 
who believe that deceit is a 
natural and acceptable way to 
achieve their goals, who take 
pleasure in outwitting and 
misleading others using crude 
influence tactics, and who have 
a cynical disregard for morality
narcissism
a personality trait of people 
with a grandiose, obsessive 
belief in their superiority and 
entitlement, a propensity to 
aggressively engage in 
attention-seeking behaviors, 
an intense envy of others, and 
tendency to exhibit arrogance, 
callousness, and exploitation 
of others for personal 
aggrandizement
psychopathy
a personality trait of people 
who ruthlessly dominate and 
manipulate others without 
empathy or any feelings of 
remorse or anxiety, use 
superficial charm, yet are 
social predators who engage 
in antisocial, impulsive, and 
often fraudulent thrill-seeking 
behaviorChapter Two Individual Differences: Personality and Values 53
remorse or anxiety. They are selfish self-promoters who use superficial charm (called the 
“mask” of psychopathy), yet engage in antisocial, impulsive, and often fraudulent thrill￾seeking behavior. These people callously do as they please and take what they want.24
THE DARK TRIAD IN THE WORKPLACE
Machiavellianism, narcissism, and psychopathy may seem like they belong in textbooks 
on criminology or medieval politics, not organizational behavior. Yet these traits are gain￾ing attention because they are prevalent throughout the workplace. As one personality 
researcher warned in his keynote address to a national police association: “Not all 
psychopaths are in prison. Some are in the board room.”25
These three traits produce numerous dysfunctional outcomes in organizational set￾tings.26 Dishonesty is a core characteristic of the dark triad, so people with these traits are 
more likely to lie and deceive others at work. Similarly, they malevolently undermine others 
to maximize their own gains. This is the essence of organizational politics (see Chapter 10), 
which is about using influence tactics for personal gain at the expense of others and the 
interests of the entire organization. Political tactics produce a host of dysfunctional 
outcomes, ranging from employee stress and dissatisfaction to unproductive use of orga￾nizational resources.
Is Your CEO Narcissistic? 
Count the Tweetsb
Elon Musk has never been shy about saying what he 
thinks. The CEO of Tesla, SpaceX, and the Boring Com￾pany, tweeted an average of 250 messages per month 
over the past three years. To put this in perspective, less 
than 20 percent of Fortune 500 CEOs have a Twitter ac￾count at all and only 13 percent could be called “active” 
on their account.
Public relations experts suggest that Musk’s tweet ma￾nia and his flair for crafting casual messages makes him a 
good communicator. But a recent meta-analysis reported 
that individuals who produce a high number of tweets and 
Facebook updates are significantly more likely to have a 
grandiose narcissism personality.
Grandiose narcissism refers to people who are interper￾sonally dominant, self-absorbed, overconfident, and have an 
inflated sense of superiority and entitlement. As part of the 
dark triad, narcissists also tend to be more disagreeable and 
antagonistic toward others compared to the average per￾son. Twitter tweets and Facebook updates fit nicely with 
grandiose narcissism because these people prefer emotion￾ally shallow social relationships and rely on mass communi￾cation to fulfill their need for attention and self-promotion.
Elon Musk’s tweet output doesn’t necessarily mean that 
he is narcissistic, although more than a dozen leading news￾papers, magazines, and business school blogs have made 
that assertion. Also, the aggressive and antagonistic content 
of Musk’s tweets are consistent with grandiose narcissism.
Tesla’s legal tussles (arising from Musk’s tweets) with 
the Securities and Exchange Commission and other 
global connections 2.2
Steve Nesius/Reuters/Alamy Stock Photo
government agencies are also consistent with studies on 
narcissistic executives. One recent study concluded that 
“narcissistic CEOs subject their organizations to undue 
legal risk because they are overconfident about their abil￾ity to win and less sensitive to the costs to their organiza￾tions of such litigation.”
But Elon Musk might have the last word on this matter: 
“If I am a narcissist (which might be true), at least I am a 
useful one,” he has tweeted.
organizational politics
the use of influence tactics for 
personal gain at the perceived 
expense of others and the 
organization54 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
Counterproductive work behaviors, such as taking company property from work without 
permission or deliberately working slowly to get overtime, are predicted by the dark triad to 
some extent, but they are more closely associated with specific Big Five factors (low agree￾ableness and conscientiousness) that were identified earlier in Exhibit 2.2. Instead, dark 
triad traits are more strongly associated with serious White-collar crimes. For instance, one 
study reported that a dark triad measure from video analysis was highly effective at identi￾fying chief executive officers who were implicated in unethical misconduct and fraud.27
The dark triad is also associated with bullying and other forms of workplace aggres￾sion.28 In particular, employees in organizations with psychopathic managers observe sig￾nificantly more incidents of bullying than employees in other organizations. People with 
dark triad personality traits tend to make decisions that produce poorer absolute and 
risk-adjusted investment returns. In particular, those with high psychopathy take excessive 
risks, due to their overconfidence and disregard for consequences.29
The dark triad has a complex relationship with other forms of task performance and 
career success. People with these traits are dysfunctional team members in the long term 
because, by definition, they don’t trust coworkers and focus on their own goals at the ex￾pense of team goals.30 At the same time, dark triad employees are known to help others in 
the short run when it serves their self-interest.
People who possess dark triad personality traits aren’t always worse off. These traits are 
associated with manipulative political skill, which some supervisors rate favorably in em￾ployee performance. Being manipulative occasionally helps employees move into more cen￾tral (and therefore powerful) positions in informal employee networks. Narcissistic CEOs tend to 
have higher direct pay as well as a higher gap in pay from other members of the executive 
team.31 Finally, studies point to one component of psychopathy called “fearless dominance” 
as a predictor of career success. Indeed, this subtrait is found in a few of the more successful 
U.S. presidents. However, several experts doubt that fearless dominance should be separated 
from other aspects of psychopathy, which are negatively associated with career success. 
Some even argue that fearless dominance doesn’t belong in the dark triad at all.32
®
SELF-ASSESSMENT 2.4: How Machiavellian Are You?
Jungian Personality Theory and the MBTI
The five-factor model of personality has the most research support, but it is not the 
most popular personality test in practice. That distinction goes to Carl Jung’s theory of 
psychological types, which is measured through the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI)
(see Exhibit 2.3).
Nearly a century ago, Swiss psychiatrist Carl Jung suggested that personality is mainly 
represented by the individual’s preferences regarding perceiving and judging informa￾tion.33 Jung explained that the perceiving function—how 
people prefer to gather information—occurs through two 
competing orientations: sensing (S) and intuition (N).
Sensing involves perceiving information directly through 
the five senses; it relies on an organized structure to ac￾quire factual and preferably quantitative details. In con￾trast, intuition relies more on insight and subjective 
experience to see relationships among variables. Sensing 
types focus on the here and now, whereas intuitive types 
focus more on future possibilities.
LO 2-3
counterproductive work 
behaviors (CWBs)
voluntary behaviors that have 
the potential to directly or 
indirectly harm the organization
Myers-Briggs Type Indicator 
(MBTI)
an instrument designed to 
measure the elements of 
Jungian personality theory, 
particularly preferences 
regarding perceiving and 
judging informationChapter Two Individual Differences: Personality and Values 55
Jung also proposed that the judging function—how people prefer making decisions based 
on what they have perceived—consists of two competing processes: thinking (T) and feeling 
(F). People with a thinking orientation rely on rational cause–effect logic and systematic 
data collection to make decisions. Those with a strong feeling orientation, on the other 
hand, rely on their emotional responses to the options presented, as well as to how those 
choices affect others. Jung noted that in addition to the four core processes of sensing, intu￾ition, thinking, and feeling, people differ in their level of extraversion–introversion, which 
was introduced earlier as one of the Big Five personality traits.
The MBTI extends Jung’s list of personality traits described above by also measur￾ing Jung’s broader categories of perceiving and judging, which represent a person’s at￾titude toward the external world. People with a perceiving orientation are open, 
curious, and flexible. They prefer to keep their options open and to adapt spontane￾ously to events as they unfold. Judging types prefer order and structure and want to 
resolve problems quickly.
JUNGIAN THEORY IN THE WORKPLACE
Is Carl Jung’s theory of psychological types useful in organizations? Given the popularity 
of the MBTI, many business leaders think so. However, popularity is not a proxy for valid￾ity. In fact, Jungian theory and the MBTI fail to pass several important quality 
standards.34
The theory was developed from Carl Jung’s observation and interpretation of patients 
and was never systematically tested. The MBTI was also created with little or no empirical 
validation. Consequently, the MBTI is not recommended for hiring or promotion deci￾sions. Studies suggest that it also has questionable value in predicting leadership effective￾ness and in predicting how well a team develops.35
Due to its subjective development, Jungian theory and the MBTI rely on a limited 
number of broadly-defined “types,” some of which are ambiguous (e.g., intuitive type) and 
• Talkative
• Externally focused
• Assertive
Getting
energy
Perceiving
information
Making
decisions
Orienting to the
external world
Extraversion (E)
• Concrete
• Realistic
• Practical
Sensing (S)
• Logical
• Objective
• Impersonal
Thinking (T)
• Organized
• Schedule-oriented
• Closure-focused
Judging (J)
• Quiet
• Internally focused
• Abstract
Introversion (I)
• Imaginative
• Future-focused
• Abstract
Intuitive (N)
• Empathetic
• Caring
• Emotion-focused
Feeling (F)
• Spontaneous
• Adaptable
• Opportunity-focused
Perceiving (P)
EXHIBIT 2.3
Jungian and Myers-Briggs Type 
Indicator Types
Sources: Adapted from an exhibit 
found at http://www.16-personality￾types.com. Based on data from CPP, 
Inc., Sunnyvale, CA 94086 from 
Introduction to Type and Careers
by Allen L. Hammer.56 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
might not even be mutually exclusive of each other. Also, some opposing pairs are not 
necessarily opposites. A related issue is that Jungian theory and the MBTI make a num￾ber of assumptions contrary to research evidence, such as that an individual’s type is 
completely caused by nature (nurture has no effect).
Another concern is that Jungian theory and the MBTI dichotomize people to distinct 
groups (e.g., thinking versus feeling types). In reality, people score across the continuum 
with many located near the middle (between types). This explains why test-takers are 
likely to have different results at different times. The MBTI also suffers from measure￾ment flaws. It uses forced choice binary (either-or) scale items. This created interpreta￾tion problems when combining results. The binary scoring also suppresses the 
instrument’s reliability, although the reliability of some MBTI dimensions is acceptable in 
some studies.
In spite of these major limitations, the MBTI remains popular and has some character￾istics in its favor. It is even used by artificial intelligence engineers to develop robot inter￾action behavior with human beings (although the five-factor model is more widely used 
for that purpose).36 Jungian theory is modeled around perceiving and deciding, which are 
logical extensions of how people interact with their environment, whereas these processes 
are less explicit in the five-factor model. In fact, one of the most popular Big Five person￾ality factors, extraversion-introversion, was first introduced by Jung decades earlier 
(although Jung referred to these as attitudes).
Another positive feature of Jungian theory (and the MBTI) is that it recognizes both 
the strengths and limitations of each type in different situations. In contrast, the five-factor 
model views people with higher scores as better than those with lower scores on each 
dimension. This may be a restrictive view of personality and makes the Big Five model 
more difficult to apply for coaching and personal development.37
Jung’s theory of psychological 
types has been immensely 
popular over several decades for 
developing military leaders and 
squads. However, two behavioral 
scientists at the U.S. Army War 
College recommend that the U.S. 
Army consider switching to the 
five-factor model of personality. 
“With a formidable research 
foundation behind it, the Big 
Five offers potentially significant 
benefits for leader development 
in the Army,” advise Col. Stephen 
Gerras and Lt. Col. Leonard Wong. 
Other military organizations have 
already adopted the five-factor 
model. For example, the Norwegian 
Armed Forces measures the Big 
Five with its recently developed 
Norwegian Military Personality 
Inventory (NMPI).c
Oleg Zabielin/Stocktrek Images/
Alamy Stock Photo
®
SELF-ASSESSMENT 2.5: Are You A Sensing Or Intuitive Type?Chapter Two Individual Differences: Personality and Values 57
Values in the Workplace
Liam (not his real name) felt uncomfortable working in his previous project team at a 
consumer goods company. His coworkers were friendly and knowledgeable, but their 
views about customers and getting ahead in the company were irritating. Most of the 
other team members discussed new products as money makers without much thought to 
whether they actually satisfied customer needs. Conversations about getting ahead in the 
company focused on networking rather than achieving objectives. At one point, Liam felt 
so uncomfortable with the views of other team members that he began looking for a job 
at another company. Fortunately, he was transferred to a new project where most col￾leagues held values that were similar to his own.
Most of us have experienced situations similar to what Liam went through, where 
the values expressed by others clash with our own personal values. Values are stable, 
evaluative beliefs that guide our preferences for outcomes or courses of action in a vari￾ety of situations.38 Values are normative or prescriptive—they tell us what we “ought” to 
do. They are perceptions about what is good or bad and, consequently, influence our 
motivation, decisions, and actions in various situations. Some values also serve as a 
moral compass because they help us to evaluate what is right or wrong in line with uni￾versal virtues and societal norms. Values also provide justification for past decisions 
and behavior. 
People arrange values into a hierarchy of preferences, called a values system. Some 
individuals value new challenges more than they value conformity. Others value personal 
success more than the wellbeing of others. Each person’s unique values system is devel￾oped and reinforced through socialization from parents, religious institutions, friends, 
personal experiences, and the society in which that person lives. As such, a person’s hi￾erarchy of values is stable and long-lasting. For example, one study found that values 
systems of a sample of adolescents were remarkably similar 20 years later when they 
were adults.39
LO 2-4
values
relatively stable, evaluative 
beliefs that guide a person’s 
preferences for outcomes or 
courses of action in a variety 
of situations
debating point
SHOULD COMPANIES USE PERSONALITY TESTS TO SELECT JOB APPLICANTS?
Personality theory has made significant strides over the past two de￾cades, particularly in demonstrating that specific traits are associated 
with specific workplace behaviors and outcomes. Various studies have 
reported that specific Big Five dimensions predict overall job perfor￾mance, organizational citizenship, leadership, counterproductive work 
behaviors, training performance, team performance, and a host of 
other important outcomes. These findings cast a strong vote in favor of 
personality testing in the workplace.
A few prominent personality experts urge caution, however.d
 They 
point out that although traits are associated with workplace behavior to 
some extent, there are better predictors of work performance, such as 
work samples and past performance. Furthermore, selection proce￾dures typically assume that more of a personality trait is better, whereas 
an increasing number of studies indicate that the best candidates might 
be closer to the middle than the extremes of the range. For instance, job 
performance apparently increases with conscientiousness, yet 
employees with high conscientiousness might be so thorough that they 
become perfectionists, which can stifle rather than enhance job 
performance.e
 A third concern is that, depending on how the selection 
decision applies the test results, personality instruments may unfairly 
discriminate against specific groups of people.f
A fourth worry is that most personality tests are self-reported 
scales, so applicants might try to fake their answers.g
 Worse, the test 
scores might not represent the individual’s personality or anything 
else meaningful because test takers often don’t know what personal￾ity traits the company is looking for. Studies show that candidates 
who try to fake “good” personality scores change the selection re￾sults. Supporters of personality testing offer the counterargument 
that few job applicants try to fake their scores. One major study re￾cently found that most personality dimensions are estimated better 
by observers than by self-ratings, but few companies rely on ratings 
from other people.h58 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
Values exist only within individuals—we call them personal values. However, groups of 
people might hold the same or similar values, so we tend to ascribe these shared values to 
the team, department, organization, profession, or entire society. The values shared by 
people throughout an organization (organizational values) receive fuller discussion in 
Chapter 14 because they are a central component of corporate culture. The values shared 
across a society (cultural values) receive attention in the last section of this chapter.
Values and personality traits are related to each other, but the two concepts differ in a 
few ways.40 The most noticeable distinction is that values are normative or prescriptive—
they tell us what we ought to do—whereas personality traits are descriptive—they tell us 
what we naturally tend to do. A second distinction is that personality traits have minimal 
conflict with each other—you can have high agreeableness and high introversion, for 
example—whereas some values are opposed to other values. This opposing effect means 
that someone who values excitement and challenge would have difficulty also valuing 
stability and moderation. Third, although personality and values are both partly determined 
by heredity, values are influenced more by socialization whereas heredity has a stronger 
influence on an individual’s personality traits.
TYPES OF VALUES
Values come in many forms, and experts on this topic have conducted considerable re￾search on organizing them into clusters. By far, the most widely accepted model of per￾sonal values is Schwartz’s values circumplex, developed and tested by social psychologist 
Shalom Schwartz and his colleagues.41 This model clusters 57 values into 10 broad catego￾ries that are organized into the circular model (circumplex) shown in Exhibit 2.4. The 
10 categories include universalism, benevolence, tradition, conformity, security, power, 
achievement, hedonism, stimulation, and self-direction. Each category is a cluster of more 
specific values (not shown in the exhibit). For example, conformity includes the specific 
values of politeness, honoring parents, self-discipline, and obedience.
The 10 broad values categories are further grouped into four quadrants. One quadrant, 
called openness to change, refers to the extent to which a person is motivated to pursue in￾novative ways. It includes the values categories of self-direction (creativity, independent 
thought), stimulation (excitement and challenge), and hedonism (pursuit of pleasure, enjoy￾ment, gratification of desires). The opposing quadrant is conservation, which is the extent to 
which a person is motivated to preserve the status quo. The conservation quadrant includes 
the values categories of conformity (adherence to social norms and expectations), security 
(safety and stability), and tradition (moderation and preservation of the status quo).
Julie Averill’s decision to accept a 
position at Lululemon was partly 
motivated by the opportunity to 
guide the athletic apparel firm’s 
digital transformation. But the 
veteran information technology 
executive also considered the fit 
between her personal values and 
Lululemon’s culture. “I choose to 
work with companies that have 
values that align with my own, and 
who care about important things 
in the world,” says Averill, who is 
located in Seattle with Lululemon’s 
technology team. “I get inspired 
every day by people who live their 
lives to their values and find their 
passion along the way.i
Sorbis/ShutterstockChapter Two Individual Differences: Personality and Values 59
The third quadrant in Schwartz’s circumplex model, called self-enhancement, refers to how 
much a person is motivated by self-interest. This quadrant includes the values categories of 
achievement (pursuit of personal success), power (dominance over others), and hedonism 
(a values category shared with openness to change). The opposite of self-enhancement is 
self-transcendence, which refers to motivation to promote the welfare of others and nature. 
Self-transcendence includes the values categories of benevolence (concern for others in one’s 
life) and universalism (concern for the welfare of all people and nature).
Self￾transcendence
Self￾enhancement
Universalism
Tradition
Benevolence
Conformity
Security
Power
Achievement
Hedonism
Stimulation
Self-direction
Conservation
Openness
to change
Sources: S.H. Schwartz, “Universals in the Content and Structure of Values: Theoretical Advances and Empirical Tests in 20 Countries,” Advances in Experimental 
Social Psychology 25 (1992): 1–65; S.H. Schwartz and K. Boehnke, “Evaluating the Structure of Human Values with Confirmatory Factor Analysis,” Journal of 
Research in Personality 38, no. 3 (2004): 230–55.
EXHIBIT 2.4 Schwartz’s Values Circumplex
®
SELF-ASSESSMENT 2.6: What Are Your Dominant Values?
VALUES AND INDIVIDUAL BEHAVIOR
Personal values influence decisions and behavior in three ways.42
• Values influence the attractiveness of choices. Our decisions are guided by personal 
values because those values generate positive or negative feelings (valences) toward 
the available choices. We experience more positive feelings toward choices that are 
aligned with our values and negative feelings toward alternatives that are contrary 60 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
to our values. If stimulation is at the top of your values hierarchy, for instance, 
then jobs that offer new experiences will appeal to you more than jobs that have 
predictable and stable tasks.
• Values frame our perceptions of reality. We are constantly bombarded with stimuli 
from our surroundings. Personal values influence whether we notice something as 
well as how we interpret it (see Chapter 3). Our decisions and actions are affected 
by how we perceive those situations.
• Values help regulate the consistency of behavior. People are motivated to act consis￾tently with their personal values and other aspects of their self-concept. If achieve￾ment is a key feature of your self-view and public image, then you are motivated to 
act in ways that are consistent with that value. The more clearly a behavior is 
aligned with a specific value that identifies us, the more motivated we are to 
engage in that behavior.
Personal values motivate behavior to some extent, but this connection isn’t as strong as 
we might like to believe.43 One reason for this “disconnect” between personal values and 
individual behavior is the situation. Personal values motivate us to engage in specific be￾havior, but the MARS model points out that the situation can prevent us from engaging in 
values-consistent behavior. For example, individuals with strong self-transcendent values 
are motivated to engage in recycling and other environmentally friendly behaviors, but 
lack of recycling facilities prevents or severely limits this behavior. A second reason why 
an individual’s behavior deviates from their personal values is due to strong countermotiva￾tional forces. For instance, employees caught in illegal business dealings sometimes claim 
that pressure from management forced them to achieve their performance at any cost.
A third reason why our personal values are sometimes inconsistent with our decisions 
and behavior is that we don’t actively think about our values much of the time.44 Values 
are abstract concepts, so their relevance is not obvious in many situations. Furthermore, 
many daily decisions and actions occur routinely or habitually, so we don’t actively evalu￾ate their consistency with our values. We do consciously consider our values in some situ￾ations, of course, such as realizing how much we value security when deciding whether to 
perform a risky task. However, many daily events do not trigger values awareness, so we 
act without their guidance. We literally need to be reminded of our values so they can 
guide our decisions and actions.
The effect of values awareness on behavior was apparent in a study in which students 
were given a math test and received a payment for each correct answer.45 One group 
couldn’t lie about their results because they submitted their results to the experimenter for 
scoring. A second group could get away with lying because they scored the test themselves 
and told the experimenter their test score. A third group was similar to the second (they 
scored their own test), but that test included the following statement, and students were 
required to sign their name to that statement: “I understand that this short survey falls 
under (the university’s) honor system.” The researchers estimated that some students 
cheated when they scored their own test without the “honor system” statement, whereas 
no one given the “honor system” form lied about the results. The university didn’t actually 
have an honor system, but the message made students pay attention to their honesty. In 
short, people are more likely to apply their values (honesty, in this case) when they are 
explicitly reminded of those values and see their relevance to the situation.
VALUES CONGRUENCE
Values tell us what is right or wrong and what we ought to do. This evaluative characteris￾tic affects how comfortable we are with specific organizations and individuals. The key 
concept here is values congruence, which refers to how similar a person’s values hierarchy 
is to the values hierarchy of another entity, such as the employee’s team or organization. 
When personal values are congruent with the organization’s values, employees tend to Chapter Two Individual Differences: Personality and Values 61
have higher job satisfaction, loyalty, and organizational citizenship. They also have lower 
stress and are less likely to quit. Furthermore, employees are more likely to make deci￾sions that are compatible with organizational expectations when their personal values are 
congruent with the organization’s shared values.46
Are organizations the most successful when every employee’s personal values align with 
the company’s values? Not at all! While a large degree of values congruence is necessary 
for the reasons just stated, organizations also benefit from some level of incongruence. 
Employees with diverse values offer different perspectives, which potentially lead to better 
decision making. Also, too much congruence can create a “corporate cult” that potentially 
undermines creativity, organizational flexibility, and business ethics (see Chapter 14).
Ethical Values and Behavior
When 195 business leaders across 15 countries were asked to identify the most important 
leader competencies, “high ethics and moral standards” was the top-rated item from the 
list of 74 items. Similarly, when 1,000 CEOs and other top-level executives around 
the world were asked to list the most important attributes of effective leaders, integrity—
the leader’s ethical standards—was the most frequently mentioned.47
These surveys highlight the importance of ethical principles and behavior in the work￾place. Ethics refers to moral principles (human good) or societal norms that determine 
whether actions are right or wrong and outcomes are good or bad.48 As you can see from 
this definition, ethics and values overlap in that they are both normative or prescriptive be￾liefs (determining what is good or bad). However, values are personal preferences whereas 
ethics have a foundation in societal norms or universal principles of “human good.” For 
example, some people value work that provides stimulation (excitement and challenge), but 
this is a personal preference, not a societal norm. In contrast, most people value freedom of 
speech, which is both a personal value and a societal norm (i.e., an ethical principle).
LO 2-5
ethics
moral principles (human good) 
or societal norms that 
determine whether actions are 
right or wrong and outcomes 
are good or bad
“Your Values Are More Important Than 
Your CV” at IKEAj
When IKEA recently advertised a job opening for a tax 
specialist in Shanghai, China, the job qualifications in￾cluded handling tax compliance and tax audits, preparing 
transfer pricing documentation, and related capabilities. 
But the job description also emphasized something that 
isn’t found in most job ads: “The IKEA values really reflect 
my own values.”
IKEA describes itself as a values-driven company, so 
job applicants need to reflect on whether their personal 
values are congruent with the global retailer’s organiza￾tional values. “Your values are more important than your 
CV,” says IKEA’s national talent manager in Australia.
“We recruit by values,” explains Anna Carin Månsson, 
IKEA’s People and Society Leader in the Netherlands. 
“We like to understand personal values of a candidate 
and how these come out in typical behavior in everyday 
life.”
Månsson’s team pays attention to whether job appli￾cants have really considered values congruence. “When 
global connections 2.3
Iroz Gaizka/AFP/Getty Images
recruiting for IKEA, it is attractive to recognize that the ap￾plicant has read up about the company and managed to 
describe the connection—i.e., what are the values they 
have as a person which makes them the perfect fit for 
working with the organization.”62 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
FOUR ETHICAL PRINCIPLES
Most ethical issues are associated with four ethical principles: utilitarianism, individual 
rights, distributive justice, and the ethic of care.49 Your personal values might sway you 
more toward one principle than the others, but all four should be actively considered to 
put important ethical issues to the test.
• Utilitarianism. This principle says the only moral obligation is to seek the greatest 
good for the greatest number of people. It advocates choosing the option that pro￾duces the highest satisfaction to those affected. One problem is that utilitarianism 
requires a cost–benefit analysis, yet many outcomes aren’t measurable. Another 
problem is that utilitarianism focuses only on outcomes, whereas the means of 
achieving those outcomes may be considered unethical by other principles.
• Individual rights. This principle says that everyone has the same set of natural 
rights, such as freedom of speech, freedom of movement, right to physical security, 
and right to fair trial. The individual rights principle includes human rights that 
are considered a moral norm of society. One problem with this principle is that 
some individual rights may conflict with the rights of other people. The sharehold￾ers’ right to be informed about corporate activities may ultimately conflict with an 
executive’s right to privacy, for example.
• Distributive justice. This principle says that appropriate decision criteria rules should 
be applied to calculate how various benefits and burdens are distributed. These dis￾tribution criteria might be based on equality (everyone 
gets the same benefits and burdens), equity (they vary 
with one’s contribution), or need (more benefits for those 
who most need them). The main problem with the distrib￾utive justice principle is that it is difficult to agree on the 
value of benefits and burdens and on the contribution or 
need of the people affected. We discuss distributive justice 
further in Chapter 5.
19% of more than 18,000
employees surveyed worldwide say
they observed corruption in their
organization within the previous
12 months (ranging from 14% in
Europe to 27% in Africa/Middle East).
60% of Americans in
a large Gallup survey believe there is
widespread corruption within American
businesses.
46% of 9,000
American employees who
received ethics training
from their organization
agree that they are able
to apply that training in
their day-to-day work.
57% of 2,000 UK adults
believe that British businesses
behave very or fairly ethically.
24% of 759
Singaporean employees
say they have felt pressured
to compromise ethical standards.
ETHICAL CHALLENGES IN THE WORKPLACEk
pathdoc/Shutterstock
utilitarianism
an ethical principle stating that 
the only moral obligation is to 
seek the greatest good for the 
greatest number of people
distributive justice
an ethical principle stating that 
appropriate decision criteria 
should be applied to calculate 
how various benefits and 
burdens are distributedChapter Two Individual Differences: Personality and Values 63
• Ethic of Care. This principle states that everyone has a moral obligation to help oth￾ers within their relational sphere to grow and self-actualize.50 Thus, caring for oth￾ers is a fundamental characteristic of humanity and an ethical virtue. Ethic of care 
includes being attentive to others’ needs, using one’s abilities to give care to others, 
and being responsive to (having empathy for) the person receiving care. This princi￾ple is found in writing about how organizations should serve stakeholders and how 
leaders should serve employees (see servant leadership in Chapter 12).51
MORAL INTENSITY, MORAL SENSITIVITY, 
AND SITUATIONAL INFLUENCES
Along with the four ethical principles, three other factors influence ethical conduct in the 
workplace: the moral intensity of the issue, the individual’s moral sensitivity, and situa￾tional factors.52
Moral Intensity Moral intensity is the degree to which an issue demands the appli￾cation of ethical principles. Decisions with high moral intensity have strong ethical impli￾cations that usually affect many people, so the decision maker needs to carefully apply 
ethical principles to make the best choice. The moral intensity of a situation increases 
(a) with the severity (good or bad) of the decision’s consequences, (b) with the probability 
that the decision will have good or bad consequences, (c) with the number of people who 
will experience the decision’s good or bad consequences, and (d) with the level of agree￾ment by others that the decision has good or bad consequences.53
Moral Sensitivity Moral sensitivity (also called ethical sensitivity) is a characteristic 
of the person, namely their ability to detect a moral dilemma and estimate its relative im￾portance.54 People with high moral sensitivity can more quickly and accurately estimate 
the moral intensity of the issue. This is a necessary prerequisite for moral behavior be￾cause such behavior requires awareness of the need to apply ethical principles. However, 
people with higher moral sensitivity are not always more ethical. Moral sensitivity is a role 
perception and possibly an ability, yet as the MARS model states, moral behavior also 
depends on motivation and situational factors.
Employees develop and maintain higher moral sensitivity under the following 
conditions:55
• Expertise or knowledge of prescriptive norms and rules. Occupational training and 
other learning increases awareness of illegal or otherwise unethical activities. For 
example, accountants are more morally sensitive regarding specific accounting 
procedures than are people who have not been trained in this profession.
• Previous experience with specific moral dilemmas. Past incidents often generate internal 
cues that trigger awareness of future ethical dilemmas with similar characteristics.
• Ability to empathize with those affected by the decision. Moral sensitivity tends to be 
higher among people who more easily understand and are sensitive to the feelings, 
thoughts, and situations of others (called empathy, which we discuss in Chapter 3).
• A strong self-view of being a morally sensitive person.56 Employees who strongly 
define themselves by their moral character (called their moral identity) put more 
energy into maintaining 
ethical conduct, which in￾cludes being more alert to 
the moral intensity of each 
decision and situation.
• A high degree of 
situational mindfulness.57
Mindfulness refers to a 
ethic of care
an ethical principle stating that 
everyone has a moral 
obligation to help others 
within their relational sphere 
to grow and self-actualize
moral intensity
the degree to which an issue 
demands the application of 
ethical principles
moral sensitivity
a person’s ability to recognize 
the presence of an ethical 
issue and determine its 
relative importance64 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
person’s receptive and impartial attention to and awareness of the present situa￾tion as well as to one’s own thoughts and emotions in that moment. Mindfulness 
increases moral sensitivity because it involves actively monitoring the environment 
as well as being sensitive to our responses to that environment.
Situational Factors Along with moral intensity and moral sensitivity, ethical con￾duct is influenced by the situation in which the conduct occurs.58 Some employees say 
they regularly experience pressure from top management that motivates them to lie to 
customers, breach regulations, or otherwise act unethically. Situational factors do not 
justify unethical conduct. Rather, we need to be aware of these factors so organizations 
can reduce their influence.
SUPPORTING ETHICAL BEHAVIOR
Many organizations try to improve ethical conduct through various structural initiatives.59
The most common is a code of ethical conduct—a statement about desired practices, rules 
of conduct, and philosophy about the organization’s relationship to its stakeholders and the 
environment. Ethics codes are supposed to motivate and guide employee behavior, signal 
the importance of ethical conduct, and build the firm’s trustworthiness to stakeholders. 
There is some evidence that ethics codes improve the company’s ethical image and increase 
employees’ ethics awareness and intentions. But ethics codes alone have limited effect on 
ethical behavior; they work only in combination with other structural ethics initiatives.60
Another strategy to improve ethical conduct is to train and regularly test employees on 
their knowledge of proper ethical conduct. Many large firms have annual quizzes to assess 
employee awareness of company rules and practices concerning important ethical issues 
such as giving gifts and receiving sensitive information about competitors or governments. 
In some firms, employees participate in elaborate games that present increasingly chal￾lenging and complex moral dilemmas.
A third strategy to improve ethical conduct is an ethics hotline and website in which 
employees can anonymously report suspicious behavior. These hotlines are typically oper￾ated by an independent organization, and employees maintain their anonymity or confi￾dentiality from their employer. A few very large businesses also employ ombudspersons 
who proactively investigate possible wrongdoing.61
Like most large organizations, 
Lockheed Martin has a code of 
ethical conduct. But the 
aerospace company has found 
that ethics codes support ethical 
behavior only if employees 
understand and feel confident in 
identifying and acting on 
potentially unethical conduct. 
“Voicing our Values” is a set of 
techniques developed at 
Lockheed Martin to guide every 
staff member through real world 
ethical dilemmas. The steps 
include: ask questions, obtain 
data, talk to others, reframe the 
issue, and report violations. 
Lockheed Martin employees 
practice these techniques through 
several engaging and relevant 
case studies.l
PJF Military Collection/Alamy 
Stock PhotoChapter Two Individual Differences: Personality and Values 65
Compliance-focused initiatives represent a fourth structural ethics category. These in￾clude rewarding ethical conduct, punishing unethical conduct, and evaluating ethical at￾titudes and behavior in performance appraisals. The effectiveness of these activities is 
mixed.62 As we discuss in Chapter 5 and Chapter 6, rewards and punishments can moti￾vate desirable behavior under specific circumstances, but they just as often have unin￾tended negative consequences.
Codes, training, hotlines, ombudspersons, rewards, and other initiatives improve ethi￾cal conduct to some extent, but the most powerful foundation is a set of shared values that 
reinforces ethical conduct. As we describe in Chapter 14 (organizational culture), an ethi￾cal culture is supported by the conduct and vigilance of corporate leaders. By acting with 
the highest moral standards, leaders not only gain support and trust from followers; they 
role model the ethical standards that employees are more likely to follow.63
Values across Cultures
Values differ not only among individuals and across organizations. They also vary across 
societies. In this final section of the chapter, we introduce five values that have been stud￾ied across cultures: individualism, collectivism, power distance, uncertainty avoidance, 
and achievement-nurturing orientation. Exhibit 2.5 summarizes these values and lists 
countries that have high, medium, or low emphasis on these values.
INDIVIDUALISM AND COLLECTIVISM
Individualism is the extent to which we value independence and personal uniqueness. 
Highly individualist people value personal freedom, self-sufficiency, control over their own 
lives, and appreciation of the unique qualities that distinguish them from others. Americans, 
Chileans, Canadians, and South Africans generally exhibit high individualism, whereas 
LO 2-6
VALUE SAMPLE COUNTRIES REPRESENTATIVE BELIEFS/BEHAVIORS IN “HIGH” CULTURES
Individualism High: United States, Chile, Canada, South Africa
Medium: Japan, Denmark 
Low: Taiwan, Venezuela
Defines self more by one’s uniqueness; personal goals have priority; 
decisions have low consideration of effect on others; relationships are 
viewed as more instrumental and fluid.
Collectivism High: Israel, Taiwan 
Medium: India, Denmark 
Low: United States, Germany, Japan
Defines self more by one’s in-group membership; goals of self-sacrifice 
and harmony have priority; behavior regulated by in-group norms; 
in-group memberships are viewed as stable with a strong differentiation 
with out-groups.
Power distance High: India, Malaysia
Medium: United States, Japan
Low: Denmark, Israel
Reluctant to disagree with or contradict the boss; managers are 
expected and preferred decision makers; perception of dependence 
on (versus interdependence with) the boss.
Uncertainty 
avoidance
High: Belgium, Greece 
Medium: United States, Norway 
Low: Denmark, Singapore
Prefer predictable situations; value stable employment, strict laws, 
and low conflict; dislike deviations from normal behavior.
Achievement 
orientation
High: Austria, Japan 
Medium: United States, Brazil 
Low: Sweden, Netherlands
Focus on outcomes (versus relationships); decisions based on 
contribution (equity versus equality); low empathy or showing 
emotions (versus strong empathy and caring).
Sources: Individualism and collectivism descriptions and results are from the meta-analysis reported in D. Oyserman, H.M. Coon, and M. Kemmelmeier, 
“Rethinking Individualism and Collectivism: Evaluation of Theoretical Assumptions and Meta-Analyses,” Psychological Bulletin, 128 (2002): 3–72. The 
other information is from G. Hofstede, Culture’s Consequences, 2nd ed. (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 2001).
EXHIBIT 2.5 Five Cross-Cultural Values
individualism
a cross-cultural value 
describing the degree to 
which people in a culture 
emphasize independence and 
personal uniqueness66 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
Taiwan and Venezuela are countries with low individualism.64 Collectivism is the extent to 
which we value our duty to groups to which we belong and to group harmony. Highly col￾lectivist people define themselves by their group memberships, emphasize their personal 
connection to others in their in-groups, and value the goals and well-being of people within 
those groups.65 Low collectivism countries include the United States, Japan, and Germany, 
whereas Israel and Taiwan have relatively high collectivism.
A common mistake is the assumption that individualism and collectivism are opposites. 
In reality, the two concepts are typically uncorrelated.66 For example, cultures that highly 
value duty to one’s group do not necessarily give a low priority to personal freedom and 
uniqueness. Generally, people across all cultures define themselves by both their uniqueness 
and their relationship to others. It is an inherent characteristic of everyone’s self-concept, 
which we discuss in the next chapter. Some cultures clearly emphasize either personal unique￾ness or group obligations, but both have a place in a person’s values and self-concept.
Also note that people in Japan have relatively low collectivism. This is contrary to 
some cross-cultural books that mistakenly claim that Japan is one of the most collectivist 
countries on the planet! There are several explanations for the historical misinterpreta￾tion, ranging from problems defining and measuring collectivism to erroneous reporting 
of early cross-cultural research. Whatever the reasons, studies consistently report that 
people in Japan tend to have relatively low collectivism and moderate individualism (as 
indicated in Exhibit 2.5).67
®
SELF-ASSESSMENT 2.8: What Is Your Level of Power Distance?
®
SELF-ASSESSMENT 2.7: How Much Do You Value Individualism and 
Collectivism?
POWER DISTANCE
People in high power distance cultures value unequal power.68 Those in positions of greater 
power expect obedience to authority; those in less powerful positions are comfortable re￾ceiving commands from their superiors without consultation or debate. People with high 
power distance also prefer to resolve differences through formal procedures rather than di￾rect informal discussion. In contrast, people with low power distance expect relatively equal 
power sharing. They view the relationship with their boss as one of interdependence, not 
dependence; that is, they believe their boss is also dependent on them, so they expect power 
sharing and consultation before decisions affecting them are made. People in India and 
Malaysia tend to have high power distance, whereas people in Denmark and Israel generally 
have low power distance. Americans collectively have medium-low power distance.
UNCERTAINTY 
AVOIDANCE
Uncertainty avoidance is 
the degree to which people 
tolerate ambiguity (low un￾certainty avoidance) or feel 
threatened by ambiguity and 
uncertainty (high uncertainty 
avoidance). Employees with 
collectivism
a cross-cultural value 
describing the degree to which 
people in a culture emphasize 
duty to groups to which they 
belong and to group harmony
power distance
a cross-cultural value describing 
the degree to which people in a 
culture accept unequal 
distribution of power in a society
uncertainty avoidance
a cross-cultural value 
describing the degree to which 
people in a culture tolerate 
ambiguity (low uncertainty 
avoidance) or feel threatened 
by ambiguity and uncertainty 
(high uncertainty avoidance)Chapter Two Individual Differences: Personality and Values 67
high uncertainty avoidance value structured situations in which rules of conduct and decision 
making are clearly documented. They usually prefer direct rather than indirect or ambiguous 
communications. Uncertainty avoidance tends to be high in Belgium and Greece and very high 
in Japan. It is generally low in Denmark and Singapore. Americans collectively have medium￾low uncertainty avoidance.
ACHIEVEMENT-NURTURING ORIENTATION
Achievement-nurturing orientation reflects a competitive versus cooperative view of rela￾tions with other people.69 People with a high achievement orientation value assertiveness, 
competitiveness, and materialism. They appreciate people who are tough, and they favor 
the acquisition of money and material goods. In contrast, people in nurturing-oriented 
cultures emphasize relationships and the well-being of others. They focus on human inter￾action and caring rather than competition and personal success. People in Sweden, 
Gapjil Problems in South Korea’s High 
Power Distance Culture
Koreans live in a high power distance culture, which val￾ues formalized hierarchy, authoritarian leadership, and 
deference to authority. In traditional Korean firms employ￾ees show deference by using specific honorific titles for 
people at each management level, by avoiding direct 
communication with any manager other than their boss, 
and by allowing bosses to present the employee’s work 
as if it was the manager’s own accomplishment.
“When we had a meeting, I found the one who actually 
worked on the project did not make a presentation. It was 
always the boss or the boss of the boss,” recalls Dimitris 
Psillakis, who spent five years as CEO of Mercedes-Benz 
Korea and is now head of Mercedes-Benz Marketing and 
Sales North America.
Many Koreans claim that high power distance is the 
foundation of the country’s economic success. But 
several business leaders and many younger generation 
employees believe the authoritarian culture has done 
more damage than good. Over the past dozen years, SK 
Telecom, Kakao, and other organizations have removed 
honorific titles for managers and encouraged more 
upward communication. Samsung set up special creative 
labs with somewhat egalitarian norms, isolated from 
the technology’s firm’s high power distance culture.
These changes seem to have improved creativity and 
efficiency, but they have not come easily. KT Corp., Korea’s 
second-largest telecom company, returned to a traditional 
hierarchy after managers complained that the lack of titles 
made them feel inferior when meeting business partners 
and clients.
Korea’s high power distance culture is now under fire 
for another reason: gapjil. This Korean portmanteau is the 
label for people in positions of power who abuse and 
shame those with less power in the relationship. To some 
global connections 2.4
maroke/Shutterstock
degree, high power distance entitles managers to engage 
in gapjil behavior. But recent studies indicate that this cul￾ture also causes subordinates to tolerate and even ex￾pect that abuse. This acceptance may be changing, 
however. Recent surveys have reported that between 84 
and 90 percent of working age Koreans believe gapjil is a 
serious problem in their society.
“The CEOs tend to think they’re more talented than 
others, having no guilt towards ridiculing or verbally abus￾ing under-performing employees and even cutting their 
salary or kicking them out,” says a spokesperson at a hot￾line that provides help for those on the receiving end of 
gapjil incidents. The South Korean government has also 
recognized the problem. Labor laws were recently passed 
that prohibit extreme gapjil behavior by managers and 
others. The government also launched a TV campaign 
ridiculing abusive bosses and customers; the commer￾cials show the abusers as angry roosters, complete with 
clucking sounds and rooster combs on their heads.m
achievement-nurturing 
orientation
a cross-cultural value 
describing the degree to 
which people in a culture 
emphasize competitive versus 
cooperative relations with 
other people68 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
Norway, and the Netherlands have a very low achievement orientation (i.e., they have a 
high nurturing orientation). In contrast, very high achievement orientation scores have 
been reported in Japan and Austria. The United States is located a little above the middle 
of the range on achievement-nurturing orientation.
CAVEATS ABOUT CROSS-CULTURAL KNOWLEDGE
Cross-cultural organizational research has gained considerable attention over the past two 
decades, likely due to increased globalization and cultural diversity within organizations. 
Our knowledge of cross-cultural dynamics has blossomed, and many of these findings will 
be discussed throughout this book, such as leadership, conflict, and influence. However, 
we also need to raise a few warning flags about cross-cultural knowledge. One problem is 
that too many studies have relied on small, convenient samples (such as students attending 
one university) to represent an entire culture.70 The result is that many cross-cultural stud￾ies draw conclusions that might not generalize to the cultures they intended to represent.
A second caveat is that cross-cultural research and writing continues to rely on a major 
study conducted almost four decades ago of 116,000 IBM employees across dozens of 
countries. That study helped ignite subsequent cross-cultural research, but its findings are 
becoming out-of-date as values in some cultures have shifted over the years.71
A third concern is that cross-cultural studies often assume that each country has one 
culture.72 In reality, the United States and many other countries have become culturally 
diverse. As more countries embrace globalization and multiculturalism, it becomes even 
less appropriate to assume that an entire country has one unified culture.
CULTURAL DIVERSITY WITHIN THE UNITED STATES
The United States is widely recognized for its cultural diversity. But even Americans may 
be surprised to know the degree of deep-level diversity across this country.73 One form of 
deep-level diversity is cultural values across ethnic groups. A major review of past studies 
reported that, on average, African Americans have significantly higher individualism than 
European and Hispanic Americans, whereas Asian Americans have the lowest individual￾ism among these demographic groups.74
Americans also differ from each other across regions.75 Some research identifies signifi￾cant cultural differences between the northern and southern states. Other research has found 
variations in collectivism across the country. Collectivism is highest across the southern 
states, California, and Hawaii and lowest in the Mountain, Northwest, and Great Plains 
states. Other studies report that regions vary in personality profiles. The New England, Middle 
Atlantic, and Pacific regions have high openness to experience, whereas people living in the 
Great Plains and midwestern and southeastern states have the lowest scores. Neuroticism 
scores are highest in the Northeast and Southeast and lowest in the Midwest and West.76 One 
study found that Americans have fairly accurate stereotypes of these regional differences.
Why do Americans vary in their values and personalities across regions?77 One expla￾nation is that regional institutions—such as local governments, educational systems, and 
dominant religious groups—have a greater influence than national institutions on social￾ization practices and resulting personal values. For instance, research suggests that the 
number of rules and social controls (called cultural tightness) within each state explains 
differences in personality and values across the country.78
Some experts suggest that a person’s values are influenced by the physical environ￾ment (flat versus mountainous), climatic conditions (temperate versus tropical), and so￾cioeconomic conditions (low income versus relatively wealthy). For instance, research 
has found that residents of mountainous U.S. states are, on average, more introverted 
than residents who live near the ocean. However, the physical environment probably has 
a limited effect on individual traits and values. Instead, evidence suggests that people 
migrate to places that are more compatible with their values and self-views.7969
LO 2-1 Define personality and discuss how the Big Five per￾sonality factors relate to workplace behavior and 
performance.
Personality refers to the relatively enduring pattern of thoughts, 
emotions, and behaviors that characterize a person, along with 
the psychological processes behind those characteristics. 
Personality is formed through heredity (nature) as well as so￾cialization (nurture).
The Big Five personality factors include conscientiousness, 
agreeableness, neuroticism, openness to experience, and extra￾version. Conscientiousness and extraversion are the best over￾all predictors of job performance in most job groups. 
Extraversion and openness to experience are the best predic￾tors of adaptive and proactive performance. Emotional stabil￾ity (low neuroticism) is also associated with better adaptivity. 
Conscientiousness and agreeableness are the two best person￾ality predictors of organizational citizenship and (negatively) 
counterproductive work behaviors.
Four issues to consider about the Big Five personality fac￾tors is that (a) people with higher personality levels aren’t nec￾essarily the best performers, (b) specific personality traits are 
sometimes better predictors of behavior than are the broader 
Big Five factors, (c) personality changes to some extent over a 
person’s lifetime, and (d) the five-factor model doesn’t cover 
all of an individual’s personality.
LO 2-2 Describe the dark triad personality and identify its 
effects on behavior in organizations.
The dark triad is a cluster of three socially undesirable personal￾ity traits: Machiavellianism, narcissism, and psychopathy. They 
have a common core of low humility/honesty or a tendency to 
malevolently undermine others to maximize one’s own gains. 
Machiavellianism refers to people who demonstrate a strong 
motivation to achieve their own goals at the expense of others, 
who believe that deceit is a natural and acceptable way to 
achieve their goals, who take pleasure in outwitting and mis￾leading others using crude influence tactics, and who have a 
cynical disregard for morality. Narcissism is a personality trait 
of people with a grandiose, obsessive belief in their superiority 
and entitlement, a propensity to aggressively engage in atten￾tion-seeking behaviors, an intensive envy of others, and ten￾dency to exhibit arrogance, callousness, and exploitation of 
others for personal aggrandizement. Psychopathy refers to peo￾ple who ruthlessly dominate and manipulate others without 
empathy or any feelings of remorse or anxiety, use superficial 
charm, yet are social predators who engage in antisocial, impul￾sive, and often fraudulent thrill-seeking behavior. People with 
the dark triad personality engage in more organizational poli￾tics, White-collar crime, workplace aggression, and (to some 
degree) counterproductive work behaviors and poor team be￾havior. They also make riskier decisions, resulting in poorer in￾vestment returns. However, the dark triad personality is also 
associated with manipulative political skill that can lead to 
higher performance reviews, more central positions in em￾ployee networks, and better pay.
LO 2-3 Summarize psychological types in the Myers Briggs 
Type Indicator (MBTI) and discuss the usefulness 
of this model in organizations.
Based on Jungian personality theory, the Myers-Briggs Type 
Indicator (MBTI) identifies competing orientations for getting 
energy (extraversion versus introversion), perceiving informa￾tion (sensing versus intuiting), processing information and 
making decisions (thinking versus feeling), and orienting to 
the external world (judging versus perceiving). The MBTI and 
underlying Jungian theory are popular, possibly because the 
various types are logical extensions of how people interact with 
their environment (perceiving and deciding). The theory also 
recognizes both the strengths and limitations of each type in 
different situations. However, Jungian theory and the MBTI 
were created with little or no empirical validation, resulting in 
broadly-defined and possibly ambiguous categories, some of 
which seem to overlap and some pairs don’t seem to be opposites. 
The MBTI also has several measurement flaws.
LO 2-4 Summarize Schwartz’s model of individual values 
and discuss the conditions where values influence 
behavior.
Values are stable, evaluative beliefs that guide our preferences 
for outcomes or courses of action in a variety of situations. 
Compared to personality traits, values are evaluative (rather 
than descriptive), more likely to conflict, and formed more 
from socialization than heredity. Schwartz’s model organizes 
57 values into a circumplex of 10 dimensions along two bipolar 
dimensions: openness to change to conservation, and self￾enhancement to self-transcendence. Values influence behavior 
in three ways: (1) shaping the attractiveness of choices, 
(2) framing perceptions of reality, and (3) aligning behavior with 
self-concept and self-presentation. However, the effect of values 
on behavior also depends on whether the situation supports or 
prevents that behavior and on how actively we think about them 
and understand their relevance to the situation. Values congru￾ence refers to how similar a person’s values hierarchy is to the 
values hierarchy of another source (organization, team, etc.).
LO 2-5 Describe four ethical principles and discuss three 
factors that influence ethical behavior.
Ethics refers to moral principles (human good) or societal 
norms that determine whether actions are right or wrong and 
outcomes are good or bad. Four ethical principles are utilitari￾anism (greatest good for the greatest number), individual 
rights (upholding natural rights), distributive justice (appro￾priate decision criteria rules should be applied to distribute ben￾efits and burdens), and ethic of care (the moral obligation to 
help others). Ethical behavior is influenced by the degree to 
which an issue demands the application of ethical principles 
(moral intensity), the individual’s ability to recognize the pres￾ence and relative importance of an ethical issue (moral sensi￾tivity), and situational forces. Ethical conduct at work is 
supported by codes of ethical conduct, mechanisms for com￾municating ethical violations, the organization’s culture, and 
the leader’s behavior.
LO 2-6 Describe five values commonly studied across 
cultures.
Five values often studied across cultures are individualism 
(valuing independence and personal uniqueness); collectivism 
(valuing duty to in-groups and group harmony); power dis￾tance (valuing unequal distribution of power); uncertainty 
avoidance (tolerating or feeling threatened by ambiguity and 
uncertainty); and achievement-nurturing orientation (valuing 
competition versus cooperation).
chapter summary70
achievement-nurturing 
orientation, p. 67
agreeableness, p. 48
collectivism, p. 66
conscientiousness, p. 48
counterproductive work behaviors 
(CWBs), p. 54
dark triad, p. 52
distributive justice p. 62
ethic of care p. 63
ethics p. 61
extraversion, p. 48
five-factor (Big Five) model, p. 48
individualism, p. 65
Machiavellianism, p. 52
moral intensity, p. 63
moral sensitivity, p. 63
Myers-Briggs Type Indicator 
(MBTI), p. 54
narcissism, p. 52
neuroticism, p. 48
openness to experience, p. 48
organizational politics, p. 53
personality, p. 46
power distance, p. 66
psychopathy, p. 52
uncertainty avoidance, p. 66
utilitarianism p. 62
values, p. 57
key terms
1. Studies report that heredity has a strong influence on an 
individual’s personality. What are the implications of this 
influence in organizational settings?
2. All candidates applying for a management trainee position 
are given a personality test that measures the five dimen￾sions in the five-factor model. Which personality traits 
would you consider most important for this type of job? 
Explain your answer.
3. As head of product development for mobile telephones, 
you are about to hire someone to assist in the human in￾terface features of product design. The nature of this 
work calls for a creative, “break out of the box” thinker 
who works well in a team setting. Five short-listed appli￾cants have completed a valid measure of the Big Five 
personality factors. If these applicants all have similar 
intelligence and work experience, which Big Five per￾sonality factors would best predict job performance 
(you may select one or more factors). Which Big Five 
factor would be least relevant? Justify your answer.
4. The dark triad is understandably a personality cluster of 
great concern in organizations. Yet, even though it con￾sists of three socially undesirable personality traits, there 
is evidence that senior executives are more likely than 
the rest of us to possess some of these traits. Why would 
this occur? Does this mean that the dark triad isn’t so 
bad after all?
5. Big Box Corp. wants it employees to behave more consis￾tently with the digital technology retailer’s core value of 
mutual support (being helpful and cooperative with co￾workers). Big Box executives believe that most employees 
strongly support this value, but they do not enact the 
value in as many situations as is possible. Explain why 
Big Box employees do not act consistently with this 
value, even if it dominates their personal values. Also, 
suggest what steps Big Box can take to help employees 
enact the mutual support value more often. 
6. The CEO and two other executives at an automotive 
parts manufacturer were recently fired after being 
charged with fixing prices on several key automotive 
parts sold to the auto industry. Executives at competing 
manufacturers face the same charges for also participat￾ing in this collusion. Profit margins have come under 
intense pressure in the industry, which could cause one 
or more auto parts firms (possibly this company) to 
go bankrupt. When the wrongdoing was discovered, 
most employees involved in product pricing (but not 
implicated in price fixing) were surprised. The execu￾tives were highly respected in their fields of expertise, 
so many staff members interpreted the unusual pricing 
decisions as a new strategy, not an illegal activity. 
Apply your knowledge of personal and ethical values 
and behavior to explain why the unethical activity may 
have occurred.
7. HyperTXT Inc, which provides information technol￾ogy services to retail and business customers, wants 
its employees to act ethically in all of their business 
activities. Recent incidents suggest that employees en￾gage in unethical conduct due to low moral sensitiv￾ity. Some wrongdoing occurred because HyperTXT 
employees (including executives) didn’t realize that 
their actions crossed the line on ethical conduct, such 
as being contrary to laws or industry rules of practice. 
In other situations, acceptable practices on the sur￾face were deemed unethical (although not illegal) 
because they had serious negative consequences for 
others (clients, suppliers, etc.). Staff in those situa￾tions did not actively think through the consequences 
of their decisions. As a consultant, identify ways to 
help HyperTXT employees improve their ethical 
conduct and decision making by increasing their 
moral sensitivity.
8. People in a particular South American country have high 
power distance and high collectivism. What does this 
mean, and what are the implications of this information 
when you (a senior executive) visit employees working 
for your company in that country?
critical thinking questions71
CASE STUDY: PERSONALITY AND VALUES AT 
BRIDGEWATER ASSOCIATES
Getting hired at Bridgewater Associates—the world’s largest 
hedge fund—is not a cake-walk. Job applicants first watch 
online videos depicting the culture and daily office life at 
the Westport, Connecticut, investment firm. Next, they 
spend a few hours completing the Myers-Briggs Type Indi￾cator and three other online assessments of their personal￾ity and values.
Applicants who pass the online selection process engage 
in a structured interview over the phone with consultants, 
who further assess the individual’s character. Even after ac￾cepting Bridgewater’s job offer, new recruits take a final 
two-hour personality and personal values assessment devel￾oped by the company.
Bridgewater Associates founder Ray Dalio says assess￾ing an individual’s personality and values helps the hedge 
fund company assign people to jobs that fit their personal 
attributes. “I needed a systematic approach to capturing 
and recording our differences so that we could actively 
take them into consideration when putting people into dif￾ferent roles at Bridgewater,” he wrote in his book on the 
subject. The information is also used to understand why 
conflicts occur, why problems arise, and presumably to 
minimize those issues. Dalio suggests that values top the 
list of importance. “In picking people for long-term rela￾tionships, values are most important, abilities come next, 
and skills are the least important.” Personality and values 
assessments are clumped together in the hiring process, so 
personality is likely also a top priority.
Each employee’s personality, values, and other attri￾butes are displayed on digital Baseball Cards. Every em￾ployee can view all other Baseball Cards through 
Bridgewater’s digital app. Each attribute has a score based 
on the personality and values test results. “I found that we 
needed to have these [Baseball Cards] and refer to them 
regularly because without them, people tended to interact 
with each other without any regard to who was good or 
bad at what,” says Dalio. “By recording these qualities in 
people’s Baseball Cards, others who’d never worked with 
them before could know what to expect from them.”
Each employee’s Baseball Card scores are initially calcu￾lated from personality and values assessments during the 
hiring process. However, these scores change over time 
based on ongoing instant evaluations by coworkers. As part 
of Bridgewater’s culture of “radical transparency,” cowork￾ers regularly evaluate each other after meetings and presen￾tations using a special company app called Dot Collector. 
The app has a 10-point scale and more than 100 attributes 
(leadership, organized, attentive, customer-focused, etc.) 
These scores are immediately added to the rated employee’s 
Baseball Card.
Dalio explains that this instant feedback gives everyone a 
more accurate estimate of their character and capabilities. 
Since the feedback is ongoing and comes from many peo￾ple, Dalio argues the outcome is more objective rather than 
the person’s own subjective self-evaluation. “We do it be￾cause it elevates ourselves above our own opinions, so that 
we start to see things through everybody’s eyes, and we see 
things collectively.”
Approximately one-third of Bridgewater employees 
leave within two years after being hired. Dalio suggests 
that this turnover confirms the effectiveness of the com￾pany’s measurement of employee personality and values, 
the ongoing feedback from peers, and the transparency 
of everyone’s attributes. “Over time, a body of evidence 
builds up, showing which people can be relied on and 
which cannot,” says Dalio. “Track records matter, and at 
Bridgewater tools such as Baseball Cards and the 
Dot Collector make everyone’s track records available 
for scrutiny.”
Discussion Questions
1. To what extent and in what ways would Bridgewater 
Associates benefit from measuring the personalities 
and values of job applicants, and from displaying 
these attributes to all staff in employee Baseball 
Cards?
2. What problems and limitations might generally occur 
from Bridgewater’s (or any other firm’s) reliance on 
personality and values assessments to make decisions 
about hiring, assigning job duties, and placement into 
teams? What specific personality and values assessment 
practices at Bridgewater might create problems or be 
less effective than the company believes?
3. Bridgewater believes that peer feedback improves the 
initial estimates of employee attributes. Do you think 
this is true? Why or why not? 
Sources: K. Roose, “Ray Dalio Is Building a Baseball Card Collection,” 
New York Magazine, June 14, 2012; R. Feloni, “Here’s Why the World’s 
Largest Hedge Fund Makes Applicants Take 5 Personality Tests before 
Sitting through Hours of Intensive Interviews,” Business Insider, August 
16, 2016; R. Feloni, “These Are the Personality Tests You Take to Get a 
Job at the World’s Largest Hedge Fund,” Business Insider, August 27, 
2016; R. Dalio, Principles: Life and Work (New York: Simon and Schus￾ter, 2017); A. Akhtar, “What It’s like to Work at the Most Successful 
Hedge Fund in the World, Where 30% of New Employees Don’t Make 
It,” Business Insider, April 17, 2019.
© 2022 Steven L. McShane72
CLASS EXERCISE: WHICH BIG FIVE FACTORS FIT SPECIFIC OCCUPATIONS?
five-factor model of personality and their relationship to 
job performance generally. Be prepared to explain your 
decisions and select a spokesperson if the instructor asks spe￾cific teams to present their answer. During the debriefing, 
your instructor will show you answers based on scholarly 
results. (Note: The instructor might create a friendly com￾petition to see which team has the most answers correct.)
Personality and Occupational Preferences Questions
1. You have been asked to select job applicants for a 
nine-month over-winter assignment working in an 
Antarctic research station with a dozen other people. 
Assuming that all candidates have equal skills, experi￾ence, and health, identify which level of each person￾ality factor would be best for people working in these 
remote, confined, and isolated conditions.
positively associated with preferences for each 
occupation.
PURPOSE This exercise is designed to help you think 
about and understand how the Big Five personality factors 
are associated with the motivational and situational re￾quirements of specific occupations.
INSTRUCTIONS (LARGE CLASS) Below are two sets of 
questions relating to the Big Five personality factors and vari￾ous occupations. Answer each of these questions, relying on 
your knowledge of the five-factor model of personality and 
their relationship to job performance generally. Later, your 
instructor will show you answers based on scholarly results.
INSTRUCTIONS (SMALL CLASS) Below are two sets of 
questions relating to the Big Five personality factors and 
various occupations. Working in small teams, answer each 
of these questions, relying on your team’s knowledge of the 
2. Listed below are several occupations. Please check 
one or two personality factors that you believe are 
PERSONALITY FACTOR LOW BELOW AVERAGE AVERAGE ABOVE AVERAGE HIGH
Conscientiousness
Agreeableness
Neuroticism
Openness to experience
Extraversion
OCCUPATION EXTRAVERSION CONSCIENTIOUSNESS AGREEABLENESS NEUROTICISM
OPENNESS TO 
EXPERIENCE
Budget analyst
Corporate executive
Engineer
Journalist
Life insurance agent
Nurse
Physician
Production supervisor
Public relations director
Research analyst
Schoolteacher
Sculptor
© Steven L. McShaneCLASS EXERCISE: PERSONAL VALUES EXERCISE
TEAM EXERCISE: ETHICS DILEMMA VIGNETTES
2. From the remaining 41 values on the sheet provided 
by your instructor, pick THREE (3) of these that rep￾resent the LEAST important values to you personally. 
Print each of the three values on three sticky notes of 
the second color provided by your instructor (i.e., 
print one value on each note).
3. The instructor will advise you what to do with the six 
sticky notes on which you wrote your most and least 
important values.
4. The class will engage in a debriefing, using the informa￾tion created in the third step of this activity.
© Steven L. McShane
PURPOSE This exercise is designed to help you understand 
Schwartz’s values model and relate its elements to your per￾sonal values and the values held by others in your class.
INSTRUCTIONS Your instructor will distribute a sheet 
with 44 words and phrases representing different personal 
values. Read these words and phrases carefully, then follow 
these steps:
1. Pick THREE (3) of these words/phrases that represent 
the MOST important values to you personally. Print 
each of the three values on the three yellow-colored 
sticky notes provided by your instructor (i.e., print one 
value on each note).
recognition that alerts the company if someone other than 
the employee is in the work area. The call center company 
explains that home monitoring merely replicates the sys￾tem that has existed for some time in its offices. It also 
suggests that the webcams will also be valuable for training 
and team building activities, and for watching employee 
wellbeing due to isolation and lack of social support found 
in an office environment. The monitoring systems are in￾stalled only where they are accepted or requested by cli￾ents and do not violate existing laws. The company 
publicly states that workers in most countries can “opt in” 
to the monitoring system, but internal memos indicate 
that it is mandatory as a condition of employment.
Case Two A 16-year-old hired as an office administrator 
at a small import services company started posting her 
thoughts about the job on her Facebook site. After her first 
day, she wrote: “first day at work. omg!! So dull!!” Two days 
later, she complained “all i do is shred holepunch n scan 
paper!!! omg!” Two weeks later she added “im so totally 
bord!!!” These comments were intermixed with the other 
usual banter about her life. Her Facebook site did not men￾tion the name of the company where she worked. Three 
weeks after being hired, the employee was called into the 
owner’s office, where he fired her for the comments on 
Facebook, then had her escorted from the building. The 
owner argues that these comments put the company in a 
bad light, and her “display of disrespect and dissatisfaction 
undermined the relationship and made it untenable.”
Case Three A large multinational grocery chain that em￾phasizes healthy lifestyles is recognized as one of the na￾tion’s “greenest” companies and is perennially rated as 
one of the best places to work. Full-time and longer-service 
part-time staff receive health insurance coverage. Most 
employees receive a 20 percent discount on company 
PURPOSE This exercise is designed to make you aware 
of the ethical dilemmas people face in various business 
situations, as well as the competing principles and values 
that operate in these situations.
INSTRUCTIONS (SMALL CLASS) The instructor will 
form teams of four or five students. Team members will read 
each of the following cases and discuss the extent to which 
the company’s action in each case was ethical. Teams should 
be prepared to justify their evaluation using ethics principles 
and the perceived moral intensity of each incident.
INSTRUCTIONS (LARGE CLASS) Working alone, read 
each of the following cases and determine the extent to 
which the company’s action in each case was ethical. The 
instructor will use a show of hands to determine the ex￾tent to which students believe the case represents an ethi￾cal dilemma (high or low moral intensity) and the extent 
to which the main people or company in each incident 
acted ethically.
Case One A global provider of customer assistance, tele￾marketing, and technical support services for well-known 
corporations and government organizations has shifted 
most employees from offices to remote work in their own 
homes. To ensure that employees maintain a professional 
work setting and do not steal confidential customer infor￾mation (such as credit card details), the firm has devel￾oped a monitoring system with webcams and sophisticated 
artificial intelligence software that randomly scans the em￾ployee and work area. The company has strict rules for 
home-based work, similar to rules in the office, such as no 
eating during work times and no objects nearby that create 
a security risk (e.g., mobile phones, paper). Employees 
must have a home work area that separates them from 
family members; the monitoring system includes facial 
7374
Case Four Computer printer manufacturers usually 
sell printers at a low margin over cost and generate 
much more income from subsequent sales of the high￾margin ink cartridges required for each printer. One 
global printer manufacturer now designs its printers so 
that they work only with ink cartridges made in the 
same region. Ink cartridges purchased in the United 
States will not work with the same printer model sold in 
Europe, for example. This “region coding” of ink car￾tridges does not improve performance. Rather, it pre￾vents consumers and gray marketers from buying the 
product at a lower price in another region. The company 
says this policy allows it to maintain stable prices within 
a region rather than continually changing prices due to 
currency fluctuations.
© 2022 Steven L. McShane 
products. Employees who participate in the company’s vol￾untary “Healthy Discount Incentive Program” receive up 
to another 10 percent discount on their purchases (i.e., up 
to a total 30 percent discount). These additional discounts 
are calculated from employees’ blood pressure, total cho￾lesterol (or LDL) levels, Body Mass Index (BMI), and 
nicotine-free lifestyle. For example, the full additional 10 
percent discount is awarded to those who do not use nico￾tine products, have 110/70 or lower blood pressure, have 
cholesterol levels under 150, and have a BMI of less than 
24. Employees do not receive the additional discount if 
they use nicotine products, or have any one of the follow￾ing: blood pressure above 140/90, cholesterol of 195 or 
higher, or BMI of 30 or higher. In his letter to employees 
when announcing the plan, the CEO explained that these 
incentives “encourage our Team Members to be healthier 
and to lower our health care costs.”
1. C. Kiefer and N. Benit, “What Is Applicant Faking Be￾havior? A Review on the Current State of Theory and 
Modeling Techniques,” Journal of European Psychology 
Students 7, no. 1 (2016): 9–19; U.S. Equal Employment 
Opportunity Commission, “Best Buy and EEOC Reach 
Agreement to Resolve Discrimination Charge,” JD Su￾pra, June 7, 2018; U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity 
Commission, “CVS Caremark Corporation and EEOC 
Reach Agreement to Resolve Discrimination Charge,” 
JD Supra, June 7, 2018; N. Roulin and F. Krings, “Faking 
to Fit In: Applicants’ Response Strategies to Match Orga￾nizational Culture,” Journal of Applied Psychology 105, 
no. 2 (2020): 130–45; K. Rockwood, “Assessing Person￾alities,” HR Today, February 29, 2020; “Does Anyone 
Else Really Hate Having to Fill out ‘Personality Tests’ 
on Job Applications?,” Reddit Post, February 10, 2021; 
S. Haynie, “Should Personality Assessments Be Used 
In Hiring?,” Forbes, June 3, 2021.
2. The definition presented here is based on: D.C. Funder, 
The Personality Puzzle (New York: W W Norton & Com￾pany, 2016); C.S. Carver and M.F. Scheier, Perspectives 
on Personality, 8th ed. (Hoboken, N.J.: Pearson Educa￾tion, 2017). Both of these books recognize that the per￾sonality concept has varied perspectives and approaches. 
Several recent articles also recognize and attempt to ad￾dress this conceptual diversity, such as: D. Cervone and 
B.R. Little, “Personality Architecture and Dynamics: The 
New Agenda and What’s New about It,” Personality and 
Individual Differences, 136 (2019): 12–23; E. Jayawick￾reme, C.E. Zachry, and W. Fleeson, “Whole Trait The￾ory: An Integrative Approach to Examining Personality 
Structure and Process,” Personality and Individual Differ￾ences, 136 (2019): 2–11.
3. J. Anglim and P. O’Connor, “Measurement and Research 
Using the Big Five, HEXACO, and Narrow Traits: A 
Primer for Researchers and Practitioners,” Australian 
Journal of Psychology 71, no. 1 (2019): 16–25.
4. B. W. Roberts and A. Caspi, “Personality Development 
and the Person-Situation Debate: It’s Déjà Vu All over 
Again,” Psychological Inquiry 12, no. 2 (2001): 104–109; 
N. A. Turiano et al., “Personality and Substance Use in 
Midlife: Conscientiousness as a Moderator and the Effects 
of Trait Change,”Journal of Research in Personality 46, 
no. 3 (2012): 295–305; C. R. Gale et al., “Neuroticism 
and Extraversion in Youth Predict Mental Wellbeing and 
Life Satisfaction 40 Years Later,” Journal of Research in 
Personality 47, no. 6 (2013): 687–97; M. Pluess and M. 
Bartley, “Childhood Conscientiousness Predicts the So￾cial Gradient of Smoking in Adulthood: A Life Course 
Analysis,” Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health
69, no. 4 (2015): 330–38; M. Blatný et al., “Personality 
Predictors of Successful Development: Toddler Tempera￾ment and Adolescent Personality Traits Predict Well￾Being and Career Stability in Middle Adulthood,” 
PLoS ONE 10, no. 4 (2015): e0126032.
5. W. Mischel, “Toward an Integrative Science of the 
Person,” Annual Review of Psychology 55 (2004): 1–22; 
T.A. Judge and C.P. Zapata, “The Person–Situation Debate 
Revisited,” Academy of Management Journal 58, no. 4 
(2015): 1149–79; R.P. Tett, M.J. Toich, and S.B. Ozkum, 
“Trait Activation Theory: A Review of the Literature and 
Applications to Five Lines of Personality Dynamics Re￾search,” Annual Review of Organizational Psychology and 
Organizational Behavior 8 (2021): 199–233.
6. T. Vukasović and D. Bratko, “Heritability of Personality: 
A Meta-Analysis of Behavior Genetic Studies.,” Psycho￾logical Bulletin 141 (2015): 769–85; W. Bleidorn, “What 
Accounts for Personality Maturation in Early Adult￾hood?,” Current Directions in Psychological Science 24 
(2015): 245–52; T.J.C. Polderman et al., “Meta-Analysis 
of the Heritability of Human Traits Based on Fifty Years 
of Twin Studies,” Nature Genetics 47 (2015): 702–709; 
L. Penke and M. Jokela, “The Evolutionary Genetics of 
Personality Revisited,” Current Opinion in Psychology 7 
endnotes75
(2016): 104–109; M.-T. Lo et al., “Genome-Wide Analyses 
for Personality Traits Identify Six Genomic Loci and 
Show Correlations with Psychiatric Disorders,” Nature 
Genetics 49 (2017): 152–56.
7. M. Liu and J.L. Huang, “Cross-Cultural Adjustment to 
the United States: The Role of Contextualized Extra￾version Change,” Frontiers in Psychology 6 (2015); S. 
Tasselli, M. Kilduff, and B. Landis, “Personality Change: 
Implications for Organizational Behavior,” Academy of 
Management Annals 12, no. 2 (2018): 467–93; W. 
Bleidorn, C.J. Hopwood, and R.E. Lucas, “Life Events 
and Personality Trait Change,” Journal of Personality 86, 
no. 1 (2018): 83–96; P.T. Costa, R.R. McCrae, and C.E. 
Löckenhoff, “Personality Across the Life Span,” Annual 
Review of Psychology 70, no. 1 (2019): 423–48; R.I. 
Damian et al., “Sixteen Going on Sixty-Six: A Longitudinal 
Study of Personality Stability and Change across 
50 Years,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
117, no. 3 (2019): 674–95; C. Kandler et al., “How 
Genetic and Environmental Variance in Personality Traits 
Shift across the Life Span: Evidence from a Cross-National 
Twin Study,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
121, no. 5 (2021): 1079–94.
8. R.F. Baumeister, B.J. Schmeichel, and K.D. Vohs, 
“Self-Regulation and the Executive Function: The Self 
as Controlling Agent,” in Social Psychology: Handbook of 
Basic Principles, ed. A.W. Kruglanski and E.T. Higgins 
(New York: Guilford, 2007), 516–39; K. Murdock, K. 
Oddi, and D. Bridgett, “Cognitive Correlates of Personality: 
Links between Executive Functioning and the Big Five 
Personality Traits,” Journal of Individual Differences 34, 
no. 2 (2013): 97–104; P. Baggetta and P.A. Alexander, 
“Conceptualization and Operationalization of Executive 
Function,” Mind, Brain, and Education 10, no. 1 (2016): 
10–33.
9. J.M. Digman, “Personality Structure: Emergence of the 
Five-Factor Model,” Annual Review of Psychology 41 
(1990): 417–40; O.P. John and S. Srivastava, “The Big 
Five Trait Taxonomy: History, Measurement, and 
Theoretical Perspectives,” in Handbook of Personality: 
Theory and Research, ed. L.A. Pervin and O.P. John 
(New York: Guilford Press, 1999), 102–38; R.R. McCrae, 
J.F. Gaines, and M.A. Wellington, “The Five-Factor 
Model in Fact and Fiction,” in Handbook of Psychology, 
ed. I.B. Weiner (2012), 65–91.
10. M.R. Barrick and M.K. Mount, “Yes, Personality 
Matters: Moving on to More Important Matters,” Human 
Performance 18, no. 4 (2005): 359–72; P.R. Sackett and 
P.T. Walmsley, “Which Personality Attributes Are Most 
Important in the Workplace?,” Perspectives on Psychological 
Science 9, no. 5 (2014): 538–51; L.M. Penney, E. David, 
and L.A. Witt, “A Review of Personality and Performance: 
Identifying Boundaries, Contingencies, and Future Re￾search Directions,” Human Resource Management Review
21, no. 4 (2011): 297–310; T. Judge et al., “Hierarchical 
Representations of the Five-Factor Model of Personality 
in Predicting Job Performance: Integrating Three Orga￾nizing Frameworks with Two Theoretical Perspectives,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 98, no. 6 (2013): 875–925; 
J. Huang et al., “Personality and Adaptive Performance 
at Work: A Meta-Analytic Investigation,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology 99, no. 1 (2014): 162–79; Y. He, M.B. 
Donnellan, and A.M. Mendoza, “Five-Factor Personality 
Domains and Job Performance: A Second Order Meta￾Analysis,” Journal of Research in Personality 82 (2019): 
103848; M.P. Wilmot et al., “Extraversion Advantages 
at Work: A Quantitative Review and Synthesis of the 
Meta-Analytic Evidence.,” Journal of Applied Psychology
104, no. 12 (2019): 1447–70.
11. R.D.S. Chiaburu et al., “The Five-Factor Model of Per￾sonality Traits and Organizational Citizenship Behaviors: 
A Meta-Analysis,” Journal of Applied Psychology 96, no. 6 
(2011): 1140–66; D.S. Chiaburu, I.-S. Oh, and S.V. 
Marinova, “Five-Factor Model of Personality Traits and 
Organizational Citizenship Behavior: Current Research 
and Future Directions,” in The Oxford Handbook of 
Organizational Citizenship Behavior, ed. P.M. Podsakoff, 
S.B. Mackenzie, and N.P. Podsakoff (New York: Oxford 
University Press, 2018), 203–20.
12. R.F. Hurley, “Customer Service Behavior in Retail Set￾tings: A Study of the Effect of Service Provider Personal￾ity,” Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 26, no. 2 
(1998): 115–27; M.A.G. Peeters et al., “Personality and 
Team Performance: A Meta-Analysis,” European Journal 
of Personality 20, no. 5 (2006): 377–96; J.L. Huang and 
A.M. Ryan, “Beyond Personality Traits: A Study of Per￾sonality States and Situational Contingencies in Cus￾tomer Service Jobs,” Personnel Psychology 64, no. 2 
(2011): 451–88; B.H. Bradley et al., “Team Players and 
Collective Performance: How Agreeableness Affects 
Team Performance Over Time,” Small Group Research 44, 
no. 6 (2013): 680–711.
13. A. Neal et al., “Predicting the Form and Direction of 
Work Role Performance from the Big 5 Model of 
Personality Traits,” Journal of Organizational Behavior 33, 
no. 2 (2012): 175–92.
14. J. L. Huang et al., “Personality and Adaptive Performance 
at Work,” Journal of Applied Psychology 99, no. 1 (2014): 
162–79.
15. J.B. Lloyd, “Unsubstantiated Beliefs and Values Flaw the 
Five-Factor Model of Personality,” Journal of Beliefs & 
Values 36, no. 2 (2015): 156–64. 
16. H. Le et al., “Too Much of a Good Thing: Curvilinear 
Relationships between Personality Traits and Job Perfor￾mance,” Journal of Applied Psychology 96, no. 1 (2011): 
113–33; A.M. Grant, “Rethinking the Extraverted Sales 
Ideal: The Ambivert Advantage,” Psychological Science 24, 
no. 6 (2013): 1024–30; G. Blickle et al., “Extraversion 
and Job Performance: How Context Relevance and 
Bandwidth Specificity Create a Non-Linear, Positive, and 
Asymptotic Relationship,” Journal of Vocational Behavior
87 (2015): 80–88; P.L. Curşeu et al., “Personality Char￾acteristics That Are Valued in Teams: Not Always ‘More 
Is Better’?,” International Journal of Psychology, 2019.
17. Y. He, M.B. Donnellan, and A.M. Mendoza, “Five-Factor 
Personality Domains and Job Performance: A Second 
Order Meta-Analysis,” Journal of Research in Personality
82 (2019): 103848; P.L.L. Nguyen, M. Syed, and M. 
McGue, “Behavior Genetics Research on Personality: 
Moving beyond Traits to Examine Characteristic Adapta￾tions,” Social and Personality Psychology Compass 15, 
no. 8 (2021): e12628; A.B. Speer et al., “Measurement 
Specificity with Modern Methods: Using Dimensions, 
Facets, and Items from Personality Assessments to 
Predict Performance,” Journal of Applied Psychology, 
2021, (in press).76
18. J. Anglim and P. O’Connor, “Measurement and Research 
Using the Big Five, HEXACO, and Narrow Traits: A 
Primer for Researchers and Practitioners,” Australian 
Journal of Psychology 71, no. 1 (2019): 16–25.
19. N.G. Waller and J.D. Zavala, “Evaluating the Big Five,” 
Psychological Inquiry 4, no. 2 (1993): 131–34; S.V. Pau￾nonen and D.N. Jackson, “What Is Beyond the Big Five? 
Plenty!,” Journal of Personality 68, no. 5 (2000): 821–35; 
L.J. Simms, “The Big Seven Model of Personality and Its 
Relevance to Personality Pathology,” Journal of Personal￾ity 75, no. 1 (February 2007): 65–94.
20. D.L. Paulhus and K.M. Williams, “The Dark Triad of 
Personality: Narcissism, Machiavellianism, and Psychop￾athy,” Journal of Research in Personality 36, no. 6 (2002): 
556–63; J.M. LeBreton, L.K. Shiverdecker, and E.M. 
Grimaldi, “The Dark Triad and Workplace Behavior,” 
Annual Review of Organizational Psychology and Organiza￾tional Behavior 5, no. 1 (2018): 387–414; S.M. Spain, 
“The Dark Side of Personality,” in Leadership, Work, and 
the Dark Side of Personality, ed. S.M. Spain (Academic 
Press, 2019), 41–93; R. Rogoza and J. Cieciuch, “Dark 
Triad Traits and Their Structure: An Empirical Ap￾proach,” Current Psychology: A Journal for Diverse Perspec￾tives on Diverse Psychological Issues 39, no. 4 (2020): 
1287–1302. A fourth trait—sadism—has recently been sug￾gested, but it is early days to add this as a dark tetrad to 
our discussion.
21. D.N. Jones and D.L. Paulhus, “Differentiating the Dark 
Triad Within the Interpersonal Circumplex,” in Hand￾book of Interpersonal Psychology, ed. L.M. Horowitz and 
S. Strack (Hoboken, NJ, USA: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 
2012), 249–67, Chap. 15; A. Book et al., “Unpacking 
More ‘Evil’: What Is at the Core of the Dark Tetrad?,” 
Personality and Individual Differences 90 (2016): 269–72; 
M. Moshagen, B.E. Hilbig, and I. Zettler, “The Dark 
Core of Personality,” Psychological Review 125, no. 5 
(2018): 656–88; G. Hodson et al., “Is the Dark Triad 
Common Factor Distinct from Low Honesty-Humility?,” 
Journal of Research in Personality 73 (2018): 123–29.
22. R. Christie and F. Geis, Studies in Machiavellianism 
(New York: Academic Press, 1970); S. R. Kessler et al., 
“Re-Examining Machiavelli: A Three-Dimensional Model 
of Machiavellianism in the Workplace,” Journal of Ap￾plied Social Psychology 40, no. 8 (2010): 1868–96; E. 
O’Boyle et al., “A Meta-Analysis of the Dark Triad and 
Work Behavior: A Social Exchange Perspective,” Journal 
of Applied Psychology 97, no. 3 (2012): 557–79.
23. Z. Krizan and O. Johar, “Envy Divides the Two Faces of 
Narcissism,” Journal of Personality 80, no. 5 (2012): 
1415–51.
24. C.J. Patrick, “Psychopathy as Masked Pathology,” 
in Handbook of Psychopathy, 2nd ed. (New York: The 
Guilford Press, 2018), 3–21.
25. Cited in: S.F. Smith and S.O. Lilienfeld, “Psychopathy in 
the Workplace: The Knowns and Unknowns,” Aggression 
and Violent Behavior 18, no. 2 (2013).
26. S.F. Smith and S.O. Lilienfeld, “Psychopathy in the 
Workplace: The Knowns and Unknowns,” Aggression and 
Violent Behavior 18, no. 2 (2013): 204–18; A. Cohen, 
“Are They among Us? A Conceptual Framework of the 
Relationship between the Dark Triad Personality and 
Counterproductive Work Behaviors (CWBs),” Human 
Resource Management Review 26, no. 1 (2016): 69–85; A. 
Harrison, J. Summers, and B. Mennecke, “The Effects of 
the Dark Triad on Unethical Behavior,” Journal of Business 
Ethics 153, no. 1 (2018): 53–77.
27. H.L. DeShong, D.M. Grant, and S.N. Mullins-Sweatt, 
“Comparing Models of Counterproductive Workplace 
Behaviors: The Five-Factor Model and the Dark Triad,” 
Personality and Individual Differences 74 (2015): 55–60; 
J.R. Van Scotter and K. De Déa Roglio, “CEO Bright 
and Dark Personality: Effects on Ethical Misconduct,” 
Journal of Business Ethics 164, no. 3 (2020): 451–75.
28. C.R. Boddy, “Corporate Psychopaths, Bullying and Un￾fair Supervision in the Workplace,” Journal of Business 
Ethics 100, no. 3 (2011): 367–79; S.F. Smith and S.O. 
Lilienfeld, “Psychopathy in the Workplace: The Knowns 
and Unknowns,” Aggression and Violent Behavior 18, 
no. 2 (2013): 204–18.
29. D.N. Jones, “Risk in the Face of Retribution: Psycho￾pathic Individuals Persist in Financial Misbehavior 
among the Dark Triad,” Personality and Individual Differ￾ences, The Dark Triad of Personality, 67 (2014): 109–13; 
L. ten Brinke, A. Kish, and D. Keltner, “Hedge Fund 
Managers With Psychopathic Tendencies Make for 
Worse Investors,” Personality and Social Psychology 
Bulletin 44, no. 2 (2018): 214–23.
30. M.A. Baysinger, K.T. Scherer, and J.M. LeBreton, “Explor￾ing the Disruptive Effects of Psychopathy and Aggression 
on Group Processes and Group Effectiveness.,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology 99, no. 1 (2014): 48–65, A.G. Nassif, 
“Heterogeneity and Centrality of ‘Dark Personality’ within 
Teams, Shared Leadership, and Team Performance: A 
Conceptual Moderated-Mediation Model,” Human Re￾source Management Review 29, no. 4 (2019): 100675.
31. C.A. O’Reilly et al., “Narcissistic CEOs and Executive 
Compensation,” The Leadership Quarterly 25, no. 2 
(2014): 218–31; K.J. Templer, “Dark Personality, Job 
Performance Ratings, and the Role of Political Skill: An 
Indication of Why Toxic People May Get Ahead at Work,” 
Personality and Individual Differences 124 (2018): 209–14; 
W. Hart, K. Richardson, and G.K. Tortoriello, “Meet 
Your Public Relations Team: People with Dark Traits 
May Help You Manage Your Image,” Personality and 
Individual Differences 134 (2018): 164–73; D.K. Marcus, 
J. Preszler, and V. Zeigler-Hill, “A Network of Dark 
Personality Traits: What Lies at the Heart of Darkness?,” 
Journal of Research in Personality 73 (2018): 56–62.
32. E.A. Witt et al., “Assessment of Fearless Dominance and 
Impulsive Antisociality via Normal Personality Measures: 
Convergent Validity, Criterion Validity, and Developmen￾tal Change,” Journal of Personality Assessment 91, no. 3 
(May 2009): 265–76; S.O. Lilienfeld et al., “Fearless 
Dominance and the U.S. Presidency: Implications of 
Psychopathic Personality Traits for Successful and 
Unsuccessful Political Leadership.,” Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology 103, no. 3 (2012): 489–505; J.L. 
Maples et al., “An Examination of the Correlates of 
Fearless Dominance and Self-Centered Impulsivity 
among High-Frequency Gamblers,” Journal of Personality 
Disorders; New York 28, no. 3 (2014): 379–93; H. Eisenbarth, 
C.M. Hart, and C. Sedikides, “Do Psychopathic Traits 
Predict Professional Success?,” Journal of Economic 
Psychology 64 (2018): 130–39.77
33. C.G. Jung, Psychological Types, trans. H.G. Baynes 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1971); I.B. 
Myers, The Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (Palo Alto, CA: 
Consulting Psychologists Press, 1987). 
34. D.A. Johnson and D.R. Saunders, “Confirmatory Factor 
Analysis of the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator-Expanded 
Analysis Report,” Educational and Psychological Measure￾ment 50, no. 3 (1990): 561–71; R.M. Capraro and M.M. 
Capraro, “Myers-Briggs Type Indicator Score Reliability 
across Studies: A Meta-Analytic Reliability Generaliza￾tion Study,” Educational and Psychological Measurement
62 (2002): 590–602; D. Pittenger, “Cautionary 
Comments Regarding the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator.,” 
Consulting Psychology Journal: Practice and Research 57 
(2005): 210–21; K. Randall, M. Isaacson, and C. Ciro, 
“Validity and Reliability of the Myers-Briggs Personality 
Type Indicator: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis,” 
Journal of Best Practices in Health Professions Diversity 10, 
no. 1 (2017): 1–27; R. Stein and A.B. Swan, “Evaluating 
the Validity of Myers-Briggs Type Indicator Theory: A 
Teaching Tool and Window into Intuitive Psychology,” 
Social and Personality Psychology Compass 13, no. 2 
(2019): e12434.
35. J. Michael, “Using the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator as a 
Tool for Leadership Development? Apply with Caution,” 
Journal of Leadership & Organizational Studies 10 (2003): 
68–81; B.S. Kuipers et al., “The Influence of Myers￾Briggs Type Indicator Profiles on Team Development 
Processes,” Small Group Research 40, no. 4 (2009): 
436–64; F.W. Brown and M.D. Reilly, “The Myers-Briggs 
Type Indicator and Transformational Leadership,” Journal 
of Management Development 28, no. 10 (2009): 916–32; 
A. Luse et al., “Personality and Cognitive Style as Predic￾tors of Preference for Working in Virtual Teams,” 
Computers in Human Behavior 29, no. 4 (2013): 1825–32. 
One recent review offers counterarguments to many of 
the MBTI problems presented here. See: P. Moyle and J. 
Hackston, “Personality Assessment for Employee Develop￾ment: Ivory Tower or Real World?,” Journal of Personality 
Assessment 100, no. 5 (2018): 507–17.
36. R.B. Kennedy and D.A. Kennedy, “Using the Myers￾Briggs Type Indicator in Career Counseling,” Journal of 
Employment Counseling 41, no. 1 (2004): 38–44; S.J. 
Armstrong, E. Cools, and E. Sadler-Smith, “Role of 
Cognitive Styles in Business and Management: Reviewing 
40 Years of Research,” International Journal of Manage￾ment Reviews 14, no. 3 (2012): 238–62; T. Santamaria 
and D. Nathan-Roberts, “Personality Measurement and 
Design in Human-Robot Interaction: A Systematic and 
Critical Review,” Proceedings of the Human Factors and 
Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting 61, no. 1 (2017): 
853–57.
37. J.B. Lloyd, “Unsubstantiated Beliefs and Values Flaw the 
Five-Factor Model of Personality,” Journal of Beliefs & 
Values 36, no. 2 (2015): 156–64. 
38. B.M. Meglino and E.C. Ravlin, “Individual Values in 
Organizations: Concepts, Controversies, and Research,” 
Journal of Management 24, no. 3 (1998): 351–89; B.R. 
Agle and C.B. Caldwell, “Understanding Research on 
Values in Business,” Business and Society 38, no. 3 
(1999): 326–87; S. Hitlin and J.A. Pilavin, “Values: Reviving 
a Dormant Concept,” Annual Review of Sociology 30 
(2004): 359–93; L. Sagiv et al., “Personal Values in 
Human Life,” Nature Human Behaviour 1, no. 9 (2017): 
630–39; S. Arieli, L. Sagiv, and S. Roccas, “Values at 
Work: The Impact of Personal Values in Organisations,” 
Applied Psychology 69, no. 2 (2020): 230–75.
39. D. Lubinski, D.B. Schmidt, and C.P. Benbow, “A 20-Year 
Stability Analysis of the Study of Values for Intellectually 
Gifted Individuals from Adolescence to Adulthood,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 81 (1996): 443–51. A more 
recent example of values stability is reported in: R. 
Sundberg, “Value Stability and Change in an ISAF 
Contingent,” Journal of Personality 84, no. 1 (2016): 91–101.
40. L. Parks and R.P. Guay, “Personality, Values, and Motiva￾tion,” Personality and Individual Differences 47, no. 7 
(2009): 675–84; L. Parks-Leduc, G. Feldman, and A. 
Bardi, “Personality Traits and Personal Values: A Meta￾Analysis,” Personality and Social Psychology Review 19, 
no. 1 (2015): 3–29.
41. S.H. Schwartz, “Universals in the Content and Structure 
of Values: Theoretical Advances and Empirical Tests in 
20 Countries,” Advances in Experimental Social Psychol￾ogy 25 (1992): 1–65; S.H. Schwartz and K. Boehnke, 
“Evaluating the Structure of Human Values with Confir￾matory Factor Analysis,” Journal of Research in Personal￾ity 38, no. 3 (2004): 230–55; I. Borg, A. Bardi, and S.H. 
Schwartz, “Does the Value Circle Exist Within Persons 
or Only Across Persons?,” Journal of Personality 85, no. 2 
(2017): 151–62. Schwartz’s model is currently being revised, 
but the new model is similar in overall design and still 
requires refinement. One recent study found that 
Schwartz’s new model is the strongest predictor among 
various values models. See S.H. Schwartz et al., “Refining 
the Theory of Basic Individual Values,” Journal of Person￾ality and Social Psychology 103, no. 4 (2012): 
663–88; P.H.P. Hanel, L.F. Litzellachner, and G.R. Maio, 
“An Empirical Comparison of Human Value Models,” 
Frontiers in Psychology 9 (September 25, 2018), 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2018.01643
42. N.T. Feather, “Values, Valences, and Choice: The Influ￾ence of Values on the Perceived Attractiveness and 
Choice of Alternatives,” Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology 68, no. 6 (1995): 1135–51; L. Sagiv, N. Sverdlik, 
and N. Schwarz, “To Compete or to Cooperate? Values’ 
Impact on Perception and Action in Social Dilemma 
Games,” European Journal of Social Psychology 41, no. 1 
(2011): 64–77; S.H. Schwartz and T. Butenko, “Values 
and Behavior: Validating the Refined Value Theory in 
Russia,” European Journal of Social Psychology 44, no. 7 
(2014): 799–813.
43. G.R. Maio et al., “Addressing Discrepancies between 
Values and Behavior: The Motivating Effect of Reasons,” 
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 37, no. 2 
(2001): 104–17; A. Bardi and S.H. Schwartz, “Values 
and Behavior: Strength and Structure of Relations,” 
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 29, no. 10 
(2003): 1207–20; L. Sagiv, N. Sverdlik, and N. Schwarz, 
“To Compete or to Cooperate? Values’ Impact on 
Perception and Action in Social Dilemma Games,” 
European Journal of Social Psychology 41, no. 1 (2011): 
64–77; K.M. Sheldon and L.S. Krieger, “Walking the 
Talk: Value Importance, Value Enactment, and 
Well-Being,” Motivation and Emotion 38 (2014): 609–19.78
44. E. Dreezens et al., “The Missing Link: On Strengthening the 
Relationship between Values and Attitudes,” Basic and 
Applied Social Psychology 30, no. 2 (2008): 142–52; S. Arieli, 
A.M. Grant, and L. Sagiv, “Convincing Yourself to Care 
About Others: An Intervention for Enhancing Benevolence 
Values,” Journal of Personality 82, no. 1 (2014): 15–24.
45. N. Mazar, O. Amir, and D. Ariely, “The Dishonesty of 
Honest People: A Theory of Self-Concept Maintenance,” 
Journal of Marketing Research 45 (2008): 633–44. 
46. M.L. Verquer, T.A. Beehr, and S.H. Wagner, “A Meta￾Analysis of Relations between Person–Organization Fit 
and Work Attitudes,” Journal of Vocational Behavior 63 
(2003): 473–89; J.W. Westerman and L.A. Cyr, “An Inte￾grative Analysis of Person–Organization Fit Theories,” 
International Journal of Selection and Assessment 12, 
no. 3 (2004): 252–61; J.R. Edwards and D.M. Cable, 
“The Value of Value Congruence,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology 94, no. 3 (2009): 654–77. We use the phrase 
“values congruence” (plural, NOT the singular “value 
congruence”) because values operate as a set, not 
individually. Also, “value” is easily confused with the 
economic concept of worth of something relative to price.
47. The Conference Board, CEO Challenge 2014 (New York: 
The Conference Board, January 2014); S. Giles, “The 
Most Important Leadership Competencies, According to 
Leaders around the World,” Harvard Business Review 
Digital Articles(March 2016): 2–6.
48. This definition and discussion carefully integrates the on￾going debate about ethics as virtues( human good) versus 
norms and expectations of society (or specific entities 
such as a profession). See: D. Melé, Business Ethics in 
Action: Managing Human Excellence in Organizations, 
2nd ed. (London: Macmillan Education, 2019), Chap. 2.
49. P.L. Schumann, “A Moral Principles Framework for 
Human Resource Management Ethics,” Human Resource 
Management Review 11(2001): 93–111; J.A. Boss, 
Analyzing Moral Issues, 6th ed. (New York: McGraw Hill, 
2013), Chap. 1; A. Gustafson, “In Defense of a Utilitar￾ian Business Ethic,” Business and Society Review 118, 
no. 3 (2013): 325–60. 
50. J.C. Tronto, Moral Boundaries: A Political Argument for an 
Ethic of Care (Psychology Press, 1993), Chap. 5; T.F. 
Hawk, “An Ethic of Care: A Relational Ethic for the Re￾lational Characteristics of Organizations,” in Applying 
Care Ethics to Business, ed. M. Hamington and M. 
Sander-Staudt (Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, 2011), 
3–34; P.M. Linsley, “Application of an Ethic of Care to 
Business,” in Handbook of Virtue Ethics in Business and 
Management, ed. A.J.G. Sison, G.R. Beabout, and I. 
Ferrero, International Handbooks in Business Ethics 
(Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, 2017), 307–19.
51. D. Engster, “Care Ethics and Stakeholder Theory,” in 
Applying Care Ethics to Business, ed. M. Hamington and 
M. Sander-Staudt (Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, 
2011), 93–110; J. Nicholson and E. Kurucz, “Relational 
Leadership for Sustainability: Building an Ethical Frame￾work from the Moral Theory of ‘Ethics of Care,’” Journal 
of Business Ethics, 2017; G.J. Lemoine, C.A. Hartnell, 
and H. Leroy, “Taking Stock of Moral Approaches to 
Leadership: An Integrative Review of Ethical, Authentic, 
and Servant Leadership,” Academy of Management 
Annals 13, no. 1 (2018): 148–87.
52. For analysis of these predictors of ethical conduct, see 
J.J. Kish-Gephart, D.A. Harrison, and L.K. Treviño, 
“Bad Apples, Bad Cases, and Bad Barrels: Meta-Analytic 
Evidence about Sources of Unethical Decisions at 
Work,” Journal of Applied Psychology 95, no. 1 (2010): 
1–32. 
53. T.M. Jones, “Ethical Decision Making by Individuals in 
Organizations: An Issue-Contingent Model,” Academy 
of Management Review 16 (1991): 366–95; T. Barnett, 
“Dimensions of Moral Intensity and Ethical Decision 
Making: An Empirical Study,” Journal of Applied Social 
Psychology 31, no. 5 (2001): 1038–57; T.T. Moores, H.J. 
Smith, and M. Limayem, “Putting the Pieces Back 
Together: Moral Intensity and Its Impact on the 
Four-Component Model of Morality,” Business and 
Society Review 123, no. 2 (2018): 243–68.
54. K. Weaver, J. Morse, and C. Mitcham, “Ethical Sensitiv￾ity in Professional Practice: Concept Analysis,” Journal 
of Advanced Nursing 62, no. 5 (2008): 607–18; L.J.T. 
Pedersen, “See No Evil: Moral Sensitivity in the Formu￾lation of Business Problems,” Business Ethics: A European 
Review 18, no. 4 (2009): 335–48; M.I. Kraaijeveld, J. 
(Hans) Schilderman, and E. van Leeuwen, “Moral 
Sensitivity Revisited,” Nursing Ethics 28, no. 2 (2021): 
179–89; D. Schmocker et al., “Moral Sensitivity in 
Business: A Revised Measure,” Current Psychology, 
September 23, 2021.
55. D. You, Y. Maeda, and M.J. Bebeau, “Gender Differ￾ences in Moral Sensitivity: A Meta-Analysis,” Ethics & 
Behavior 21, no. 4 (2011): 263–82; A.H. Chan and H. 
Cheung, “Cultural Dimensions, Ethical Sensitivity, and 
Corporate Governance,” Journal of Business Ethics 110, 
no. 1 (2012): 45–59; J.R. Sparks, “A Social Cognitive Ex￾planation of Situational and Individual Effects on Moral 
Sensitivity,” Journal of Applied Social Psychology 45, no. 1 
(2015): 45–54; S.J. Reynolds and J.A. Miller, “The Rec￾ognition of Moral Issues: Moral Awareness, Moral Sensi￾tivity and Moral Attentiveness,” Current Opinion in 
Psychology 6 (2015): 114–17.
56. J. Boegershausen, K. Aquino, and A. Reed II, “Moral 
Identity,” Current Opinion in Psychology 6 (2015): 162–66.
57. N. Ruedy and M. Schweitzer, “In the Moment: The Effect 
of Mindfulness on Ethical Decision Making,” Journal of 
Business Ethics 95, no. 1 (2010): 73–87. 
58. M.H. Bazerman and F. Gino, “Behavioral Ethics: Toward 
a Deeper Understanding of Moral Judgment and Dishon￾esty,” Annual Review of Law and Social Science 8, no. 1 
(2012): 85–104; M. Knoll et al., “Examining the Moral 
Grey Zone: The Role of Moral Disengagement, Authen￾ticity, and Situational Strength in Predicting Unethical 
Managerial Behavior,” Journal of Applied Social Psychol￾ogy 46, no. 1 (2016): 65–78.
59. M. Kaptein, “Ethics Programs and Ethical Culture: A 
Next Step in Unraveling Their Multi-Faceted Relation￾ship,” Journal of Business Ethics 89, no. 2 (2009): 261–81; 
G. Svensson et al., “Ethical Structures and Processes of 
Corporations Operating in Australia, Canada, and Swe￾den: A Longitudinal and Cross-Cultural Study,” Journal 
of Business Ethics 86, no. 4 (2009): 485–506; M. Kirsten, 
R. Wordsworth, and M. du-Plessis, “More Does Not 
Always Mean Better : Do More Comprehensive Ethics 
Management Programmes Result in Better Outcomes?,” 79
African Journal of Business and Economic Research 12, 
no. 2/3 (2017): 149–76; M. Constantinescu and M. Kaptein, 
“Ethics Management and Ethical Management: Mapping 
Criteria and Interventions to Support Responsible Man￾agement Practice,” in Research Handbook of Responsible 
Management, ed. O. Laasch et al. (Cheltenham, UK: 
Edward Elgar Publishing, 2020), 115–74.
60. P. Ruiz et al., “Level of Coherence Among Ethics 
Program Components and Its Impact on Ethical Intent,” 
Journal of Business Ethics 128, no. 4 (2015): 725–42; M. 
Babri, B. Davidson, and S. Helin, “An Updated Inquiry 
into the Study of Corporate Codes of Ethics: 2005–2016,” 
Journal of Business Ethics 168, no. 1 (2021): 71–108; 
P. Kotzian et al., “Effective, but Not All the Time: Experi￾mental Evidence on the Effectiveness of a Code of 
Ethics’ Design,” Business and Society Review 126, no. 2 
(2021): 107–34
61. G. Svensson et al., “Ethical Structures and Processes of 
Corporations Operating in Australia, Canada, and Swe￾den: A Longitudinal and Cross-Cultural Study,” Journal 
of Business Ethics 86, no. 4 (2009): 485–506.
62. S. Román and J.-L. Munuera-Alemán, “Determinants 
and Consequences of Ethical Behaviour: An Empirical 
Study of Salespeople,” European Journal of Marketing 39 
(2005): 473–95; P. Ruiz et al., “Level of Coherence 
Among Ethics Program Components and Its Impact on 
Ethical Intent,” Journal of Business Ethics 128, no. 4 
(2015): 725–42; A. Nygaard et al., “Leading by Example: 
Values-Based Strategy to Instill Ethical Conduct,” Journal 
of Business Ethics 145, no. 1 (2017): 133–39.
63. S.L. Grover, T. Nadisic, and D.L. Patient, “Bringing 
Together Different Perspectives on Ethical Leadership,” 
Journal of Change Management 12, no. 4 (2012): 377–81; 
M. Kuenzi, D.M. Mayer, and R.L. Greenbaum, “Creating 
an Ethical Organizational Environment: The Relation￾ship between Ethical Leadership, Ethical Organizational 
Climate, and Unethical Behavior,” Personnel Psychology
73, no. 1 (2020): 43–71; H. Al Halbusi et al., “How 
Upper/Middle Managers’ Ethical Leadership Activates 
Employee Ethical Behavior? The Role of Organizational 
Justice Perceptions Among Employees,” Frontiers in 
Psychology 12 (March 16, 2021): 652471.
64. Individualism and collectivism information is from the 
meta-analysis by Oyserman et al., not the earlier findings 
by Hofstede. See D. Oyserman, H.M. Coon, and M. 
Kemmelmeier, “Rethinking Individualism and Collectiv￾ism: Evaluation of Theoretical Assumptions and Meta￾Analyses,” Psychological Bulletin 128 (2002): 3–72. 
Consistent with Oyserman et al., a recent study found 
high rather than low individualism among Chileans. See 
A. Kolstad and S. Horpestad, “Self-Construal in Chile 
and Norway,” Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology 40, 
no. 2 (2009): 275–81. 
65. F.S. Niles, “Individualism–Collectivism Revisited,” 
Cross-Cultural Research 32 (1998): 315–41; C.P. Earley 
and C.B. Gibson, “Taking Stock in Our Progress on 
Individualism–Collectivism: 100 Years of Solidarity 
and Community,” Journal of Management 24 (1998): 
265–304; C.L. Jackson et al., “Psychological Collectiv￾ism: A Measurement Validation and Linkage to Group 
Member Performance,” Journal of Applied Psychology 91, 
no. 4 (2006): 884–99. 
66. D. Oyserman, H.M. Coon, and M. Kemmelmeier, 
“Rethinking Individualism and Collectivism: Evaluation of 
Theoretical Assumptions and Meta-Analyses,” Psychological 
Bulletin 128 (2002): 3–72; H. Vargas and M. Kemmelmeier, 
“Ethnicity and Contemporary American Culture: A Meta￾Analytic Investigation of Horizontal–Vertical Individualism–
Collectivism,” Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology 44, no. 
2 (2013): 195–222; Y. Kashima, P.G. Bain, and A. Perfors, 
“The Psychology of Cultural Dynamics: What Is It, What 
Do We Know, and What Is Yet to Be Known?,” Annual 
Review of Psychology 70, no. 1 (2019): 499–529. 
67. M. Voronov and J.A. Singer, “The Myth of Individual￾ism–Collectivism: A Critical Review,” Journal of Social 
Psychology 142 (2002): 461–80; Y. Takano and S. Sogon, 
“Are Japanese More Collectivistic Than Americans?,” 
Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology 39, no. 3 (2008): 
237–50; D. Dalsky, “Individuality in Japan and the 
United States: A Cross-Cultural Priming Experiment,” 
International Journal of Intercultural Relations 34, no. 5 
(2010): 429–35. Japan scored 46 on individualism 
in Hofstede’s original study, placing it a little below the 
middle of the range and around the 60th percentile 
among the countries studied. Recent studies suggest 
that Japan has become even more individualistic in 
recent years. See Y. Ogihara et al., “Are Common Names 
Becoming Less Common? The Rise in Uniqueness 
and Individualism in Japan,” Frontiers in Psychology 6 
(2015): 1490.
68. G. Hofstede, Culture’s Consequences: Comparing Values, 
Behaviors, Institutions, and Organizations across Nations, 
2nd ed. (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 2001). 
69. G. Hofstede, Culture’s Consequences: Comparing Values, 
Behaviors, Institutions, and Organizations across Nations,
2nd ed. (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 2001). Hofstede 
used the terms masculinity and femininity for achievement
and nurturing orientation, respectively. We (along with 
other writers) have adopted the latter two terms to mini￾mize the sexist perspective of these concepts. Also, read￾ers need to be aware that achievement orientation is 
assumed to be opposite of nurturing orientation, but this 
opposing relationship might be questioned. 
70. V. Taras, J. Rowney, and P. Steel, “Half a Century of 
Measuring Culture: Review of Approaches, Challenges, 
and Limitations Based on the Analysis of 121 Instru￾ments for Quantifying Culture,” Journal of International 
Management 15, no. 4 (2009): 357–73. 
71. N. Jacob, “Cross-Cultural Investigations: Emerging Con￾cepts,” Journal of Organizational Change Management 18, 
no. 5 (2005): 514–28; V. Taras, B.L. Kirkman, and P. 
Steel, “Examining the Impact of Culture’s Consequences: 
A Three-Decade, Multilevel, Meta-Analytic Review 
of Hofstede’s Cultural Value Dimensions,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology 95, no. 3 (2010): 405–39. 
72. R.L. Tung and A. Verbeke, “Beyond Hofstede and 
GLOBE: Improving the Quality of Cross-Cultural Re￾search,” Journal of International Business Studies 41, no. 8 
(2010): 1259–74. 
73. M. Adams, Fire and Ice: The United States, Canada, and 
the Myth of Converging Values (Toronto: Penguin Canada, 
2004); C. Woodard, American Nations: A History of the 
Eleven Rival Regional Cultures of North America (New 
York: Viking, 2011).80
74. D. Oyserman, H.M. Coon, and M. Kemmelmeier, 
“Rethinking Individualism and Collectivism: Evaluation 
of Theoretical Assumptions and Meta-Analyses,” Psycho￾logical Bulletin 128 (2002): 3–72. However, a recent 
meta-analysis found only minor differences across ethnic 
groups. See J.H. Vargas and M. Kemmelmeier, “Ethnicity 
and Contemporary American Culture: A Meta-Analytic 
Investigation of Horizontal–Vertical Individualism–
Collectivism,” Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology 44, 
no. 2 (2013): 195–222.
75. J.A. Vandello and D. Cohen, “Patterns of Individualism 
and Collectivism across the United States,” Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology 77, no. 2 (1999): 279–
92; B. MacNab, R. Worthley, and S. Jenner, “Regional 
Cultural Differences and Ethical Perspectives within the 
United States: Avoiding Pseudo-Emic Ethics Research,” 
Business and Society Review 115, no. 1 (2010): 27–55; 
J. Lun, B. Mesquita, and B. Smith, “Self- and Other￾Presentational Styles in the Southern and Northern United 
States: An Analysis of Personal Ads,” European Journal 
of Social Psychology 41, no. 4 (2011): 435–45; P.J. 
Rentfrow et al., “Divided We Stand: Three Psychological 
Regions of the United States and Their Political, Economic, 
Social, and Health Correlates,” Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology 105, no. 6 (2013): 996–1012.
76. V.C. Plaut, H. Rose Markus, and M.E. Lachman, “Place 
Matters: Consensual Features and Regional Variation in 
American Well-Being and Self,” Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology 83, no. 1 (2002): 160–84; P.J. 
Rentfrow, “Statewide Differences in Personality: Toward 
a Psychological Geography of the United States,” American 
Psychologist 65, no. 6 (2010): 548–58; K.H. Rogers and 
D. Wood, “Accuracy of United States Regional Personality 
Stereotypes,” Journal of Research in Personality 44, no. 6 
(2010): 704–13; J. Lieske, “The Changing Regional Sub￾cultures of the American States and the Utility of a New 
Cultural Measure,” Political Research Quarterly 63, no. 3 
(2010): 538–52.
77. P.J. Rentfrow, “Statewide Differences in Personality: To￾ward a Psychological Geography of the United States,” 
American Psychologist 65, no. 6 (2010): 548–58; J. Lieske, 
“The Changing Regional Subcultures of the American 
States and the Utility of a New Cultural Measure,” Politi￾cal Research Quarterly 63, no. 3 (2010): 538–52.
78. J.R. Harrington and M.J. Gelfand, “Tightness–Looseness 
across the 50 United States,” Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences 111, no. 22 (2014): 7990–95.
79. M. Motyl et al., “How Ideological Migration Geographi￾cally Segregates Groups,” Journal of Experimental Social 
Psychology 51 (2014): 1–14; S. Oishi, T. Talhelm, and 
M. Lee, “Personality and Geography: Introverts Prefer 
Mountains,” Journal of Research in Personality 58 (2015): 
55–68.
a. B. Ferrell, “Is COVID-19 Changing How People Score on 
Personality Assessments?,” Hogan Assessments (blog), 
May 21, 2020; A.R. Sutin et al., “Change in Five-Factor 
Model Personality Traits during the Acute Phase of the 
Coronavirus Pandemic,” PLOS ONE 15, no. 8 (2020): 
e0237056, D.M. Condon and S.J. Weston, “Personality 
States of the Union,” Collabra: Psychology 7, no. 1 (De￾cember 2021): 30140; L. Smith and S. Jarvis, “COVID-19: 
Can Lockdowns Change Our Personalities?,” Patient, 
December 22, 2021.
b. M.J. Coren and Y. Zhou, “We’ve Tracked All of Musk’s 
Tweets since 2015. It’s Never Been like This,” Quartz, 
June 1, 2018; D. Lovric and T. Chamorro-Premuzic, 
“Why Great Success Can Bring Out the Worst Parts of 
Our Personalities,” Harvard Business Review (Online), 
August 9, 2018; S. Singh, S.D. Farley, and J.J. Donahue, 
“Grandiosity on Display: Social Media Behaviors and 
Dimensions of Narcissism,” Personality and Individual 
Differences 134 (2018): 308–13; J.L. McCain and W.K. 
Campbell, “Narcissism and Social Media Use: A Meta￾Analytic Review,” Psychology of Popular Media Culture 7, 
no. 3 (2018): 308–27; C.A. O’Reilly, B. Doerr, and J.A. 
Chatman, “‘See You in Court’: How CEO Narcissism In￾creases Firms’ Vulnerability to Lawsuits,” The Leadership 
Quarterly 29, no. 3 (2018): 365–78; P. Marx, “Elon Musk’s 
Twitter Meltdowns Are Just the Beginning,” NBC News, 
October 24, 2018; S. Ben-Hur, “Will Elon Musk’s 
Narcissism Be His Downfall?,” Research & Knowledge, 
IMD Business School (blog), October 2018; A. Ohnsman, 
“Elon Musk’s Tesla Tweet Puts CEO Role At Risk Again,” 
Forbes, February 25, 2019; M.J. Coren, “Elon Musk May 
Not Be the Narcissist Tesla Needs Right Now,” Quartz, 
March 4, 2019; A. Lee, “CEOs and Twitter: How a New 
and More Diverse Generation of CEOs Are Leading and 
Communicating Through Challenging Times” (New York: 
Teneo, May 27, 2021).
c. S.J. Gerras and L. Wong, “Moving Beyond the MBTI: 
The Big Five and Leader Development,” Military Review, 
April 2016, 54–57; T.H. Skoglund et al., “Big Five Person￾ality Profiles in the Norwegian Special Operations 
Forces,” Frontiers in Psychology 11 (2020): 747.
d. K. Murphy and J.L. Dzieweczynski, “Why Don’t Mea￾sures of Broad Dimensions of Personality Perform Better 
as Predictors of Job Performance?,” Human Performance
18, no. 4 (2005): 343–57; F.P. Morgeson et al., “Recon￾sidering the Use of Personality Tests in Personnel Selec￾tion Contexts,” Personnel Psychology 60, no. 3 (2007): 
683–729; N. Schmitt, “Personality and Cognitive Ability 
as Predictors of Effective Performance at Work,” Annual 
Review of Organizational Psychology and Organizational 
Behavior 1, no. 1 (2014): 45–65.
e. J. Stoeber, K. Otto, and C. Dalbert, “Perfectionism and 
the Big Five: Conscientiousness Predicts Longitudinal In￾creases in Self-Oriented Perfectionism,” Personality and 
Individual Differences 47, no. 4 (2009): 363–68; C.J. 
Boyce, A.M. Wood, and G.D.A. Brown, “The Dark Side 
of Conscientiousness: Conscientious People Experience 
Greater Drops in Life Satisfaction Following Unemploy￾ment,” Journal of Research in Personality 44, no. 4 (2010): 
535–39.
f. S.D. Risavy and P.A. Hausdorf, “Personality Testing in 
Personnel Selection: Adverse Impact and Differential 
Hiring Rates,” International Journal of Selection and 
Assessment 19, no. 1 (2011): 18–30.
g. N.S. Hartman and W.L. Grubb, “Deliberate Faking on 
Personality and Emotional Intelligence Measures,” Psy￾chological Reports 108, no. 1 (2011): 120–38; J.J. Dono￾van, S.A. Dwight, and D. Schneider, “The Impact of 
Applicant Faking on Selection Measures, Hiring Deci￾sions, and Employee Performance,” Journal of Business 
and Psychology 29, no. 3 (2014): 479–93.
h. B.S. Connelly and D.S. Ones, “An Other Perspective on 
Personality: Meta-Analytic Integration of Observers’ 81
Accuracy and Predictive Validity,” Psychological Bulletin
136, no. 6 (2010): 1092–122; J.J. Jackson et al., “Your 
Friends Know How Long You Will Live: A 75-Year Study 
of Peer-Rated Personality Traits,” Psychological Science 26, 
no. 3 (2015): 335–40.
i. “Reign FC Legend: Julie Averill,” Medium, May 12, 2017; 
S.A. Schwartz, “Lululemon CTO Aligns Personal Values 
with the Company’s Mission through Tech,” CIO Dive, 
December 5, 2018; R. Torres, “CTO of the Year: Julie 
Averill, Lululemon,” CIO Dive, December 12, 2019.
j. “‘We Believe That Your Values Are More Important than 
Your CV,’” Human Resources Director Australia, April 11, 
2018; V. Sawhney, “What I Look for in Candidates: An 
Interview with Anna-Carin Månsson,” HBR Ascend
(blog), August 2018; C. Lamba, “Understanding the HR 
Policies of IKEA,” India Retailing, December 17, 2018. 
The job advertisement for a Tax Specialist in Shanghai, 
China was retrieved from IKEA’s global jobs website on 
January 6, 2022.
k. G. Khoury and S. Crabtree, “Are Businesses Worldwide 
Suffering From a Trust Crisis?” Gallup Workplace, Febru￾ary 6, 2019; “A Quarter of Singaporean Employees Felt 
Pressured to Compromise Ethical Standards, Reveals In￾stitute of Business Ethics’ Survey,” news release (London: 
Institute of Business Ethics, September 23, 2019); “2019 
Global Business Ethics Survey—Workplace Misconduct 
and Reporting: A Global Look” (Vienna, VA: Ethics & 
Compliance Initiative, November 27, 2019); “Attitudes 
of the British Public to Business Ethics: 2019” (London: 
Institute of Business Ethics, January 2020).
l. “2021 Ethics Awareness Training: Voicing Our Values” 
(Betheda, MD: Lougheed Martin, May 2021).
m. E. Ramstad, “Pulling Rank Gets Harder At One Korean 
Company,” Wall Street Journal, August 20, 2007; I.-S. 
Nam, “Staff Hierarchies Make a Comeback At KT 
Corp,” Wall Street Journal, June 23, 2014; R. Premack, 
“Why Korean Companies Are Forcing Their Workers to 
Go by English Names,” Washington Post, May 12, 2017; 
J. Shin, “Bosses Have Names Too: Breaking through 
Korea’s Hierarchical Work Culture,” The Korea Herald, 
September 4, 2018; G. Tellenne, C. Simon, and J. McCurry, 
“Power Abuse in South Korea: Government to Tackle 
Workplace ‘gapjil’ Culture,” Focus (France 24, April 8, 
2019); Yonhap, “Over 80% of Public Perceive ‘gapjil’ 
Problem as Serious: Survey,” The Korea Herald, January 
13, 2021; H.-R. Kwon, “Gapjil Is a Problem at Start-Ups 
Too as Pressure Mounts,” Korea JoongAng Daily, June 7, 
2021; C. Moon and Á. Sánchez-Rodríguez, “Cultural 
Influences on Normative Reactions to Incivility: 
Comparing Individuals from South Korea and Spain,” 
International Journal of Conflict Management 32, no. 2 
(2021): 292–314.
Design Credit: Blue globe icon: Merfin/Shutterstockchapter
82
chapter 
Nicolas Gerlier had spent a decade successfully climbing the corporate 
ladder of a major French cosmetics company, eventually becoming global 
head of perfumes for a luxury client. But after his first child was born, Gerlier realized 
that his work was misaligned with his ideals and self-concept as an environmentally ethical person.
“[I] witnessed the polluting nature of the cosmetic industry, where an estimated one billion lipstick 
cases are thrown away every year,” Gerlier explains. He also felt that his job no longer had purpose.
 “It wasn’t just a question of sustainability, although that was certainly an obvious issue to me then. 
It was about meaning and values; it felt like what I was doing was completely devoid of it.”
To shift his career path closer to his authentic self, Gerlier left his executive job and founded La 
Bouche Rouge. The French maison de maquillage (makeup house) has innovated sustainable development, 
production, and packaging of lipsticks, mascara, liners, and eyeshadow products. All formulas and 
packaging are free from petrochemical derivatives, silicones, and microplastics. “We really want to be 
a sustainable brand in the way we produce as well as in our product,” Gerlier proudly states.
3 Perceiving Ourselves and 
Others in Organizations
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
LO 3-1 Describe the self-concept characteristics and processes, and explain how each affects 
an individual’s behavior and well-being.
LO 3-2 Outline the perceptual process and discuss the effects of categorical thinking and 
mental models in that process.
LO 3-3 Discuss how stereotyping, attribution, self-fulfilling prophecy, halo, false consensus, 
primacy, and recency effects influence the perceptual process.
LO 3-4 Discuss three ways to improve perceptions, with specific application to organizational 
situations.
LO 3-5 Outline the main features of a global mindset and justify its usefulness to employees 
and organizations.
Learning ObjectivesNicolas Gerlier and Claude Silver changed their career directions so their work would be more compatible and consistent with 
their self-concepts.
Claude Silver found herself in a similar situation while working as head strategist for global brands 
at an advertising firm in London. The job was exciting but it didn’t align with her ideal self of helping 
others. “I got a feeling, that voice in my head was loud, which was saying to me, ‘You really only want 
to work with people.’” At first, Silver suppressed that voice, but then moved to Vayner Media, a creative 
agency in New York that involved working more directly with staff and clients.
But that career move wasn’t enough. The voice in Silver’s head returned even more loudly, saying: 
“You really don’t care about advertising, you only care about these people.” She briefly quit that job, 
but Vayner Media founder Gary Vaynerchuk called a few months later with an offer: “You’re coming 
back. You’re going to be chief heart officer.” The newly-created position was consistent with Silver’s 
self-concept. But she asked what her success in that position would look like. Vaynerchuk replied: 
“You’ll touch every single human being and infuse the agency with empathy.”1
Nicolas Gerlier and Claude Silver changed their career directions so their work would be more 
compatible and consistent with their self-concepts. Self-concept is essentially about how we perceive 
83
Elnur/Shutterstock
PART 2: INDIVIDUAL BEHAVIOR AND PROCESSES84 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
ourselves, and is the first topic in this chapter. Specifically, we look at the three 
characteristics and the four processes (four selves) in the self-concept model.
Next, we turn our attention to perceiving the world around us, beginning with 
how we select, organize, and interpret information. We then discuss several 
specific perceptual processes such as stereotyping, attribution, and self-fulfilling 
prophecy. This is followed by a discussion of potentially effective ways to improve 
perceptions. The final section of this chapter reviews the main elements of global 
mindset, a largely perceptual process valued in this increasingly globalized world.
Self-Concept: How We Perceive Ourselves
Self-concept refers to an individual’s self-beliefs and self-evaluations.2
 It is the “Who am I?” 
and “How do I feel about myself?” that people ask themselves and that guide their deci￾sions and actions. Whether contemplating a career as an advertising executive or any other 
occupation, we compare our images of that job with our current (perceived self) and de￾sired (ideal self) images of ourselves. We also evaluate our current and desired abilities to 
determine whether there is a good fit with that type of work. Our self-concept is defined at 
three levels: individual, relational, and collective. Specifically, we view ourselves in terms of 
our personal traits (individual self); connections to friends and coworkers (relational self); 
and membership in teams, organizations, social groups, and other entities (collective self).3
SELF-CONCEPT COMPLEXITY, CONSISTENCY, AND CLARITY
An individual’s self-concept can be described by three characteristics: complexity, consis￾tency, and clarity (see Exhibit 3.1). Complexity refers to the number of distinct and impor￾tant roles or identities that people perceive about themselves.4 Everyone has multiple 
self-views because they see themselves in different roles at various times (student, friend, 
daughter, sports fan, etc.). People are generally motivated to increase their complexity 
(called self-expansion) as they seek out new opportunities and social connections. Your 
self-concept becomes more complex, for example, as you move from being an accountant 
to a manager because you have acquired additional roles.
LO 3-1
self-concept
an individual’s self-beliefs and 
self-evaluations
EXHIBIT 3.1 
Self-Concept Characteristics 
and Processes
Self￾verification
Self￾evaluation
Social
self
Self￾enhancement
Self-Concept
• Complexity
• Consistency
• ClarityChapter Three Perceiving Ourselves and Others in Organizations 85
Self-concept complexity is defined by more than just the number of identities that a 
person has; it is also defined by the separation of those identities. An individual with sev￾eral identities might still have low self-concept complexity when those identities are highly 
interconnected, such as when they are all work related (manager, engineer, family income 
earner). Complexity is higher when the multiple identities have a low correlation with one 
another, such as when you have a successful career but also carve out sufficient time and 
focus to be a dedicated parent, a helpful neighbor, and a talented mountain biker.
Although everyone has multiple selves, only some of those identities dominate their 
attention at one time.5
 A particular self-view (parent, manager, etc.) is usually domain￾specific; it is more likely to be activated in some settings than in others. People shift their 
self-concept more easily when the activated self-view is important and compatible with 
the situation. For instance, as employees travel from home to work, they can usually shift 
their self-view from being a parent to being an executive because each role is important 
and fits into the home and work contexts, respectively. In contrast, some individuals strug￾gle to focus on their occupational self-concept when working from home (remote work).
Consistency, the second self-concept characteristic, is the degree to which a person’s 
identities are (a) compatible with each other and (b) compatible with the individual’s per￾sonal characteristics (personality, values, etc.). Regarding the first type, low consistency 
occurs when some self-views conflict with other self-views because they require opposing or 
significantly different personal characteristics, such as when a safety-conscious engineer also 
self-identifies as a risk-oriented surfer. Regarding the second type, low consistency occurs 
when an individual’s main identities are incompatible with actual personal attributes (example: 
you have moderately low openness-to-experience personality and values yet try to identify 
yourself as a creative person). High consistency can extend to synergistic relationships across 
roles, not just compatibility across those roles. For instance, your passion as an amateur 
marathon runner might give you better knowledge and role modeling as a physician.6
Clarity, the third characteristic of self-concept, refers to the degree to which a person’s 
self-concept is clear, confidently defined, and stable.7
 People with high self-concept clar￾ity are confident about “who I am,” can describe their identities to others, and provide the 
same description of themselves across time. Self-concept clarity increases with age be￾cause personality and values become relatively stable by adulthood and people develop 
better self-awareness through life experiences. Self-concept is also clearer when a person’s 
multiple selves have higher consistency. This makes sense because low consistency 
Most employees don’t reveal their 
authentic selves when they get 
hired. Instead, they try be what 
they think the company expects, 
which can be stressful and stilted. 
Fortunately, surveys report that 
new hires enact more of their 
natural selves a few months 
after being hired, although about 
20 percent take nine months and 
another 20 percent say they are 
never themselves on the job. 
Bringing our whole selves to work 
is nuanced in practice, however, 
because everyone also needs to 
accommodate others. “No 
organization will fit us perfectly, 
so there is always some 
dissonance to manage,” explains 
executive coach Evan Roth. He 
urges employees to speak out 
when their values or ethics are 
being compromised. “The rest of 
the dissonance can be managed 
by learning to flex to the 
situation.”a
Life_imageS/Shutterstock86 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
produces ambiguity about a person’s underlying characteristics. For example, someone 
whose self-view includes both cautious engineer and risk-oriented snowboarder would 
have difficulty defining themselves clearly or with much confidence.8
Effects of Self-Concept Characteristics on Well-Being and Behavior
Psychological well-being tends to be higher among people with fairly distinct multiple 
selves (complexity) that are well established (clarity) and require similar personal attri￾butes that are compatible with the individual’s character (consistency).9 Self-concept 
complexity protects our self-esteem when some roles are threatened or damaged. A com￾plex self is like a ship with several compartments that can be sealed off from one another. 
If one compartment of the ship is damaged, the other compartments remain intact so the 
ship remains afloat. A complex self offers the same benefits. If one identity is damaged by 
events—job loss, for example—the person’s mental health remains afloat because the other 
selves remain intact. In contrast, people with low complexity, including those whose mul￾tiple selves are interconnected, suffer severe loss when they experience failure because 
these events affect a large part of themselves.
People also tend to have better well-being when their multiple selves are in harmony with 
one another and with their personality and values (high consistency).10 This is evident in 
the opening case study for this chapter. Nicolas Gerlier and Claude Silver described the 
tension they experienced between what they did (their work) and their personal values and 
preferences. Notice that a lack of consistency became evident only as the clarity of their 
self-concept increased over time and through life events (such as having children).
Self-concept complexity helps people adapt, but too much variation causes internal 
tension and conflict. Well-being also tends to increase with self-concept clarity. People 
who are unsure of their self-views are more easily influenced by others, experience more 
stress when making decisions, and feel more threatened by social forces that undermine 
their self-confidence and self-esteem.11
Self-concept complexity, consistency, and clarity have both positive and negative influ￾ences on individual behavior and performance.12 Employees with complex identities tend 
to have more adaptive decision making and performance. This likely occurs because mul￾tiple selves generate more diverse experiences and role patterns, so these employees can 
more easily alter their thinking and behavior to suit new tasks and work environments. A 
second benefit is that self-concept complexity often produces more diverse social net￾works, which gives employees access to more resources and social support to perform 
their jobs.
Against these benefits is the problem that highly complex self-concepts require more 
effort to maintain and juggle, which can be stressful and less efficient. Low complexity 
self-concepts, on the other hand, require less effort and resources to develop. For exam￾ple, people who define themselves mainly by their work (low complexity) often have bet￾ter performance due to their longer work hours, more investment in skill development, 
and more concentration on work. They also have lower absenteeism and turnover.
Self-concept clarity tends to improve performance and is considered vital for leader￾ship roles.13 Clarity also provides a more discernible career path, which enables people to 
direct their effort more efficiently toward career objectives. Another benefit is that people 
with high self-concept clarity feel less threatened by interpersonal conflict, which in￾creases their ability to resolve conflicts through constructive problem-solving behaviors. 
However, those with very high clarity may have role inflexibility, with the result that they 
cannot adapt to changing job duties or environmental conditions.
®
SELF-ASSESSMENT 3.1: How Much Does Work Define Your Self-Concept?Chapter Three Perceiving Ourselves and Others in Organizations 87
Along with the three self-concept characteristics, Exhibit 3.1 illustrates four processes 
that shape self-concept and motivate a person’s decisions and behavior. Let’s look at each 
of these four “selves”: self-enhancement, self-verification, self-evaluation, and social self 
(social identity).
SELF-ENHANCEMENT
A century ago, educational philosopher John Dewey said that “the deepest urge in human 
nature is the desire to be important.”14 Dewey recognized that people are inherently moti￾vated to perceive themselves (and to be perceived by others) as competent, attractive, lucky, 
ethical, and important.15 This phenomenon, called self-enhancement, occurs when individu￾als rate themselves above average, believe that they have a better-than-average probability of 
success, and attribute their successes to personal motivation or ability while blaming the 
situation for their mistakes. People don’t believe they are above average in all circumstances, 
only for things that are important to them and are relatively common rather than rare.16
Self-enhancement has both positive and negative consequences in organizational 
settings.17 On the positive side, individuals tend to experience better mental and physical 
health when they amplify their self-concept. Overconfidence also generates a “can-do” 
attitude (which we discuss later) that motivates persistence in difficult or risky tasks. On 
the negative side, self-enhancement causes people to overestimate future returns in invest￾ment decisions and engage in unsafe behavior such as dangerous driving. It also accounts 
for executives repeating poor decisions (because they ignore negative feedback), launch￾ing misguided corporate diversification strategies, and acquiring excessive corporate debt. 
Generally, though, successful companies strive to help employees feel valued, which gen￾erates some degree of self-enhancement.
SELF-VERIFICATION
Individuals try to confirm and maintain their existing self-concept.18 This process, called 
self-verification, stabilizes an individual’s self-view, which in turn provides an important 
anchor that guides the individual’s thoughts and actions. People actively communicate 
their self-concept so coworkers understand it and provide verifying feedback when ob￾served. For example, you might let coworkers know that you are a very organized person; 
later, they compliment you on occasions where you have indeed been very organized. One 
study reported that when a person’s identity as a leader is questioned by others, the leader 
applies self-verification strategies, such as making their role performance more visible 
(e.g., working longer hours), adopting a less threatening style of that self-view, and di￾rectly confronting those who doubt or disagree with their identity as a leader.19
Unlike self-enhancement, self-verification includes seeking feedback that is not neces￾sarily flattering (e.g., “I’m a numbers person, not a people person”). Experts continue to 
debate whether and under what conditions people prefer information that supports self￾enhancement or self-verification.20 Do we prefer compliments rather than accurate cri￾tique about weaknesses that we readily acknowledge? The answer is likely complex; we 
enjoy compliments, but less so if they are significantly contrary to our self-view.
Self-verification is associated with several OB topics.21
First, it affects the perceptual process that we describe 
later in this chapter. Specifically, employees are more 
likely to remember information that is consistent with 
their self-concept and nonconsciously screen out infor￾mation (particularly negative information) that seems in￾consistent with it. Second, people with high self-concept 
clarity will consciously dismiss feedback that contradicts 
their self-concept. Third, employees prefer interacting 
with others who affirm their self-views, which affects how 
well they get along with their boss and team members.22
self-enhancement
a person’s inherent motivation 
to have a positive self-concept 
(and to have others perceive 
him or her favorably), such as 
being competent, attractive, 
lucky, ethical, and important
self-verification
a person’s inherent motivation 
to confirm and maintain his or 
her existing self-concept88 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
SELF-EVALUATION
Almost everyone strives to have a positive self-concept, but some people have a more posi￾tive evaluation of themselves than do others. This self-evaluation is mostly defined by 
three elements: self-esteem, self-efficacy, and locus of control.23
Self-Esteem Self-esteem—the extent to which people like, respect, and are satisfied 
with themselves—represents a comprehensive self-evaluation. People have degrees of 
self-esteem for each of their various roles, such as being a good student, a good driver, 
and a good parent. From these multiple self-appraisals, people form an overall evalua￾tion of themselves, known as their global self-esteem. Those with high self-esteem are 
less influenced by others, tend to persist in spite of failure, and have a higher propensity 
to think logically.24
Self-Efficacy Self-efficacy refers to a person’s belief about successfully completing a 
task.25 Those with high self-efficacy have a “can-do” attitude. They believe they possess 
the energy (motivation), ability, clear expectations (role perceptions), and resources 
(situational factors) to perform the task. In other words, self-efficacy is an individual’s 
perception regarding the MARS model in a specific situation. Self-efficacy is often task 
specific, but it can also be more generalized. People have a general self-efficacy when 
they believe they can be successful across a variety of situations.26 Those with higher 
general self-efficacy have a more positive overall self-evaluation.
93% of 1,000 executives surveyed
say they felt a material dip in their self-confidence
and self-esteem within the past six months due to
something that happened at work.
79% of women
(compared to 62% of men) among
2,499 UK employees surveyed say
they regularly lack confidence when it
comes to their careers and speaking
up at work.
51% of 666
employees surveyed say that
workplace training gives them
more self-confidence.
45% of managers
in a large survey say they don’t
feel confident in their ability to
develop the skills employees
need today.
33%of more
than 25,000 employees globally
say their employer makes them
feel undervalued (26% feel
highly valued).
NOT ENOUGH POSITIVE SELF-EVALUATION IN THE WORKPLACEb
Ljupco Smokovski/Shutterstock
®
SELF-ASSESSMENT 3.2: How Much General Self-Efficacy Do You Have?
self-efficacy
a person’s belief that he or she 
has the ability, motivation, 
correct role perceptions, and 
favorable situation to complete 
a task successfullyChapter Three Perceiving Ourselves and Others in Organizations 89
Locus of Control Locus of control is defined as a person’s general beliefs about the 
amount of control they have over personal life events.27 Individuals with an internal locus 
of control believe that life events are caused mainly by their personal characteristics (i.e., 
motivation and abilities). Those with an external locus of control believe events are due 
mainly to fate, luck, or conditions in the external environment. Locus of control is a gen￾eralized belief, but this belief varies to some extent with the situation. People with an ex￾ternal locus of control generally believe that life’s outcomes are beyond their control, but 
they also believe they have control over the results of tasks they perform often. An indi￾vidual’s general locus of control would be most apparent in new situations, where their 
ability to control events is uncertain.
People with an internal locus of control have a more positive self-evaluation. They also 
tend to perform better in most employment situations, are more successful in their ca￾reers, earn more money, and are better suited for leadership positions. Internals are also 
more satisfied with their jobs, cope better in stressful situations, and are more motivated 
by performance-based reward systems.28
®
SELF-ASSESSMENT 3.3: What Is Your Locus of Control?
THE SOCIAL SELF
We began this topic by stating that an individual’s self-concept exists at three levels: indi￾vidual, relational, and collective. These three levels recognize two opposing human mo￾tives that influence how people view themselves.29
• Motivation to be distinctive and different from other people. The individual self, called 
personal identity or internal self-concept, fulfills the need for distinctiveness because 
it involves defining ourselves by our personality, values, abilities, qualifications, 
achievements and other personal attributes. Everyone has a unique combination of 
personal characteristics, and we embrace this uniqueness to some degree. For in￾stance, an unusual skill or accomplishment that distinguishes you from coworkers 
is part of your personal identity.
• Motivation for inclusion and assimilation with other people. The relational and collec￾tive self-concepts fulfill the fundamental need for affiliation because they involve 
both interaction and interdependence with others.30 Human beings are social ani￾mals; we have an inherent drive to be associated with others and to be recognized 
as part of social communities. This drive to belong motivates all individuals to de￾fine themselves to some degree by their interpersonal and collective relationships, 
a definition known as their social identity or external self-concept.
Social identity is the central theme of social identity theory, which says that people 
define themselves by the groups to which they belong or have an emotional attachment.31
For instance, someone might have a social identity as an American citizen, a University 
of Oregon alumnus, and an employee at Boston Consulting Group (see Exhibit 3.2).
Social identity is a complex combination of many 
memberships arranged in a hierarchy of importance. One 
factor that determines importance is how easily you are 
identified as a member of the reference group, such as by 
your gender, age, and ethnicity. A second factor is your 
minority status in a group. It is difficult to ignore your 
biological sex in a class where most other students are 
the opposite sex, for example. In that context, biological 
locus of control
a person’s general belief about 
the amount of control he or she 
has over personal life events
social identity theory
a theory stating that people 
define themselves by the 
groups to which they belong or 
have an emotional attachment90 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
sex tends to become a stronger defining feature of your social identity than it is in social 
settings where there are many people of the same sex.
The group’s status is another important social identity factor because association with 
the group makes us feel better about ourselves (i.e., self-enhancement). Medical doctors 
usually define themselves by their profession because of its high status. Some people de￾scribe themselves by where they work (“I work at Google”) because their employer has a 
good reputation. Others never mention where they work because their employer is noted 
for poor relations with employees or has a poor reputation in the community.32
Everyone tries to balance personal and social identities to some degree, but the prior￾ity for uniqueness (personal identities) versus relatedness (social identities) differs from 
one person to the next. People whose self-concepts are heavily defined by social rather 
EXHIBIT 3.2 
Social Identity Theory Example
Boston Consulting
Group employee
American
citizen/resident
Social Identity Contrasting Groups
Employees at
other firms
Citizens/residents
of other countries
Graduates of
other schools
University of
Oregon graduate
An Individual's
Social Identity
Starbucks Nurtures Employees’ Social 
Identity in Chinac
Starbucks Coffee Company has become a success story 
in China by making the American coffee-house chain an 
integral part of employees’ social identity. It does this in 
several ways. First, employees (who are called “partners”) 
easily connect with Starbucks’ core values of perfor￾mance, innovation, respect, and belonging.
Second, Starbucks has positioned itself as a premium 
brand, which further elevates employee pride. The com￾pany offers competitive pay, comprehensive health insur￾ance, an employee ownership plan, a housing allowance for 
full-time staff, and ongoing training and career development.
Starbucks staff also proudly identify with their em￾ployer because of its well-known emphasis on families—
an important value in Chinese culture. The company holds 
an annual “Partner Family Forum,” where employees and 
their parents learn about Starbucks and its future in China. 
The chain also  introduced special critical illness insurance 
for employees’ elderly parents. 
“Starbucks takes great care of me and my fellow part￾ners, and even our families,” says Suvi Zhong,  store man￾ager of Starbucks Select Xi’an Maike Center. “Having 
worked at the Shanghai Reserve Roastery, before moving 
back to my hometown, Starbucks has always been a 
home to me no matter where I am.”
global connections 3.1
humphery/ShutterstockChapter Three Perceiving Ourselves and Others in Organizations 91
than personal identities are more motivated to abide by team norms and more easily influ￾enced by peer pressure. Those who place more emphasis on personal identities, on the 
other hand, speak out more frequently against the majority and are less motivated to fol￾low the team’s wishes. Furthermore, expressing disagreement with others is a sign of dis￾tinctiveness and can help employees form a clearer self-concept, particularly when that 
disagreement is based on differences in personal values.33
SELF-CONCEPT AND ORGANIZATIONAL BEHAVIOR
Self-concept has become a hot topic in the social sciences and is starting to bloom in or￾ganizational behavior research.34 This section briefly noted that self-concept influences 
human perceptions, decision making, motivation, stress, team dynamics, leadership devel￾opment, and several other OB topics. Consequently, we will refer to self-concept later in 
this chapter and in many other topics throughout this book.
Perceiving the World around Us
We spend considerable time perceiving ourselves, but most of our perceptual energy is 
directed toward the outer world. Whether as a chemical engineer, forensic accountant, or 
senior executive, we need to make sense of our surroundings and to manage the condi￾tions that challenge the accuracy of those perceptions. Perception is the process of receiv￾ing information about and making sense of the world around us. It includes determining 
which information to notice, as well as how to categorize and interpret it within the 
framework of our existing knowledge.
This perceptual process generally follows the steps shown in Exhibit 3.3. Perception 
begins when environmental stimuli are received through our senses. We are continually 
bombarded by external stimuli. Most are screened out; the rest are organized and inter￾preted. The process of attending to some information re￾ceived by our senses and ignoring other information is 
called selective attention. Selective attention is influenced 
by characteristics of the person or object being perceived, 
particularly size, intensity, motion, repetition, and novelty. 
For example, a small, flashing red light on a nurses’ work￾station console is immediately noticed because it is bright 
(intensity), flashing (motion), a rare event (novelty), and 
LO 3-2
Perceptual organization
and interpretation
Environmental Stimuli
Feeling Hearing Seeing
Selective attention and emotional marker response
Attitudes
and behavior
Smelling Tasting
EXHIBIT 3.3 
Model of the Perceptual Process
perception
the process of receiving 
information about and making 
sense of the world around us
selective attention
the process of attending to 
some information received by 
our senses and ignoring other 
information92 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
has symbolic meaning that a patient’s vital signs are failing. Notice that selective attention 
is also influenced by the context in which the target is perceived. For instance, selective 
attention is triggered by things or people who might be out of context, such as someone 
with a foreign accent in a setting where most people have a local accent.
Characteristics of the perceiver also influence selective attention, usually without the 
perceiver’s awareness.35 When information is received through the senses, our brain quickly 
and nonconsciously assesses whether it is relevant or irrelevant to us and then attaches 
emotional markers (worry, happiness, boredom) to the retained information.36 Emotional 
markers help us store information in memory; those emotions are later reproduced when 
recalling the perceived information. The selective attention process is far from perfect, 
however. The Greek philosopher Plato acknowledged this imperfection long ago when he 
wrote that we see reality only as shadows reflecting against the rough wall of a cave.37
One selective attention bias is the effect of our assumptions and expectations about future 
events. You are more likely to notice a particular coworker’s email among the daily avalanche 
of messages when you are expecting to receive that email (even more so if it is important). 
Unfortunately, expectations and assumptions also cause us to screen out potentially impor￾tant information. In one study, students were asked to watch a 30-second video clip in which 
several people passed around two basketballs. Students in one group were instructed simply 
to watch the video clip. Most of them readily noticed a person dressed in a gorilla suit walk￾ing among the players for nine seconds and stopping to thump their chest. Students in a sec￾ond group were asked to count the number of times one of the two basketballs was passed 
around. Only half of the people in this latter group noticed the intruding gorilla.38
Another selective attention problem, called confirmation bias, is the nonconscious ten￾dency for people to screen out information that is contrary to their decisions, beliefs, values, 
and assumptions, while more readily accepting information that confirms those elements.39
When making an important decision, such as investing in a costly project, we tend to pay atten￾tion to information that supports that decision, ignore information that questions the wisdom 
of the decision, and more easily recall the supportive than the opposing information. Confir￾mation bias is a well-known perceptual problem when police detectives and other forensic ex￾perts have “tunnel vision,” that is, they form theories too early in the investigation.40
PERCEPTUAL ORGANIZATION AND INTERPRETATION
We pay attention to a tiny fraction of the stimuli received by the senses. Even so, the hu￾man brain applies various perceptual grouping strategies to further reduce the huge vol￾ume and complexity of selected information. Perceptual grouping occurs mostly without 
our awareness, yet it is the foundation for making sense of things and fulfilling our need 
for cognitive closure.
The dominant form of perceptual grouping is categorical thinking—the mostly noncon￾scious process of organizing people and objects into preconceived categories that are stored 
in our long-term memory.41 Similarity is a widely used categorization principle in social set￾tings; we group people together based on their observable 
similarity, such as gender, age, race, or clothing style. Prox￾imity is another organizing principle.42 When entering a 
room with many people, you quickly discern clusters rather 
than a random distribution of bodies, particularly when in￾dividuals seem to be interacting with each other. Quite of￾ten, we soon realize that organizing people in that room by 
their proximity is far from precise.
®
SELF-ASSESSMENT 3.4: How Much Perceptual Structure Do You Need?
confirmation bias
the processing of screening out 
information that is contrary to 
our values and assumptions, 
and to more readily accept 
confirming information
categorical thinking
organizing people and objects 
into preconceived categories 
that are stored in our long-term 
memoryChapter Three Perceiving Ourselves and Others in Organizations 93
Another form of perceptual grouping involves filling in missing information about 
people or places. Everyone wants to make sense of what goes on around them, so they 
rely on past images and experiences to make sense of similar situations. For instance, 
people assume what happened at a meeting that they didn’t attend (e.g., who was there, 
where it was held). A related process is one in which people tend to see patterns that, in 
fact, are random events. For example, people incorrectly believe that a sports player or 
gambler with a string of wins is more likely to win next time as well.43
The perceptual process includes interpreting incoming information, not just organiz￾ing it. Making sense of the world around us can happen as quickly as selecting and organizing 
because the emotional markers tagged to incoming stimuli are essentially quick judgments 
about whether that information is good or bad for us. How much time does it take to make 
these quick judgments? Studies estimate that we make reliable (but not always accurate) 
judgments about another individual’s trustworthiness after viewing a facial image for as 
little as 50 milliseconds (1/20th of a second). In fact, our opinion regarding whether we 
like or trust a stranger is about the same whether we see the person’s face for a minute or a 
fraction of a second.44 Collectively, these studies reveal that selective attention, perceptual 
organization, and interpretation operate very quickly and to a large extent without our 
awareness.
Confirmation Bias Leads 
to Wrongful Convictiond
“It is a capital mistake to theorize before you have all the 
evidence,” warned the mythical detective Sherlock Holmes 
in A Study in Scarlet. “It biases the judgment.” Law￾enforcement agencies try to follow this advice, but confir￾mation bias contributes to many flawed investigations.
One of the most notorious examples of confirmation 
bias occurred in the wrongful conviction of Michael 
Morton in his wife’s murder. Morton spent 25 years in a 
Texas jail before his conviction was overturned. The actual 
murderer was subsequently identified and convicted.
By focusing on the theory that Morton murdered his 
wife, police and the District Attorney’s Office ignored evi￾dence from neighbors who saw an unknown driver park his 
van in a vacant wooded lot behind Morton’s property and 
walk through underbrush toward Morton’s home on the 
morning the murder was discovered. Investigators also dis￾missed the relevance of a bandana found 100 yards from 
the home. Two decades later, the bandana provided vital 
DNA evidence linking the real murderer to Morton’s wife.
The deceased’s purse was missing, which the district 
attorney argued in court was Morton’s attempt to direct 
blame onto a fictional burglar. Yet police apparently failed 
to investigate a report that the credit card from the miss￾ing purse was fraudulently used two days after the mur￾der. The police also ignored a conversation Morton’s 
three-year-old son had with his grandmother two weeks 
after the murder in which the child correctly recalled de￾tails of the murder scene, described a man in the house, 
and said his father was not home at the time. (Morton was 
at work that day, whereas the prosecutor tried to prove 
Morton killed his wife before going to work.)
The district attorney and his successor fought against 
attempts to re-examine evidence with newer DNA tests 
and tried to block release of the original investigation’s 
notes and reports. The presiding judge had requested all 
documentary evidence of the case, but decades later of￾ficials discovered that the District Attorney’s Office violated 
that request by excluding evidence that conflicted with 
their case (i.e., exonerating evidence).
The district attorney (who later became a district judge) 
was found guilty of contempt of court and agreed to sur￾render his law license as a result of his actions in the Mor￾ton case. His successor lost the district attorney election 
when new evidence supporting Morton’s innocence came 
to light. The state of Texas has since passed the Michael 
Morton Act, which requires Texas prosecutors to disclose 
to the defendant and other parties the entire contents of 
the prosecutor’s files, such as police reports, DNA evi￾dence, and surveillance footage.
global connections 3.2
tillsonburg/E+/Getty Images94 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
Mental Models To engage in almost any activity and achieve goals, we need road 
maps of the environments in which we live. These road maps, called mental models, are 
knowledge structures that we develop to describe, explain, and predict the world around 
us.45 They consist of visual or relational images in our mind, such as what the classroom 
looks like or what happens when we submit an assignment late. Mental models partly 
rely on the process of perceptual grouping to make sense of things; they fill in the miss￾ing pieces, including the causal connection among events. For example, you have a 
mental model about attending a class lecture or seminar, including assumptions or ex￾pectations about where the instructor and students arrange themselves in the room, 
how they ask and answer questions, and so forth. In other words, we create a mental 
image of a class in progress.
Mental models are important for sense making, yet they also make it difficult to see the 
world in different ways. For example, accounting professionals tend to see corporate prob￾lems from an accounting perspective, whereas marketing professionals see the same prob￾lems from a marketing perspective. Mental models also block our recognition of new 
opportunities.
How do we change mental models? That’s a tough challenge. After all, we developed 
these knowledge structures from several years of experience and reinforcement. The 
most important way to minimize the perceptual problems with mental models is to be 
aware of and frequently question them. We need to ask ourselves about the assumptions 
we make. Working with people from diverse backgrounds is another way to break out of 
existing mental models. Colleagues from different cultures and areas of expertise tend 
to have different mental models, so working with them makes our own assumptions 
more obvious.
Specific Perceptual Processes and Problems
Within the general perceptual process are specific subprocesses and associated perceptual 
errors. In this section of the chapter, we examine several of these perceptual processes 
and biases as well as their implications for organizational behavior, beginning with the 
most widely known one: stereotyping.
STEREOTYPING IN ORGANIZATIONS
Stereotyping is the perceptual process in which we assign characteristics to an identifiable 
group and then automatically transfer those features to anyone we believe is a member of 
that group.46 The assigned characteristics tend to be difficult to observe, such as personal￾ity traits and abilities, but they can also include physical characteristics and a host of 
other qualities. If we learn that someone is a professor, for example, we implicitly assume 
the person is probably also intelligent and absent-minded.
Stereotypes are formed to some extent from personal experience, but they are mainly 
provided to us through media images (e.g., movie characters) and other cultural proto￾types. Consequently, stereotypes are shared beliefs across an entire society and some￾times across several cultures, rather than beliefs that differ from one person to the next. 
Most stereotypes have a few kernels of truth; they are more likely to characterize people 
within the group than the rest of us.47 Still, stereotypes 
embellish or distort the kernels of truth and include 
other features that are false.
Why Stereotyping Occurs People engage in ste￾reotyping because, as a form of categorical thinking, it is 
usually a nonconscious “energy-saving” process that sim￾plifies our understanding of the world. It is easier to 
LO 3-3
mental models
visual and relational images 
that we develop to describe, 
explain, and predict the world 
around us
stereotyping
the process of assigning traits 
to people based on their 
membership in a social 
categoryChapter Three Perceiving Ourselves and Others in Organizations 95
remember features of a stereotype than the constellation of characteristics unique to each 
person we meet. A second reason is that we have an innate need to understand and antici￾pate how others will behave. We don’t have much information when first meeting some￾one, so we rely on stereotypes to fill in the missing pieces. The higher the perceiver’s need 
for cognitive closure, the higher their reliance on stereotypes.48
A third explanation for stereotyping is that it is motivated by the observer’s need for 
social identity and self-enhancement. Earlier in this chapter we explained that people de￾fine themselves by the groups to which they belong or have an emotional attachment. 
They also are motivated to maintain a positive self-concept. This combination of social 
identity and self-enhancement leads to the process of categorization, homogenization, 
and differentiation, all of which are the foundations of stereotyping:49
• Categorization. Social identity is a comparative process, and the comparison begins by 
categorizing people into distinct groups. By viewing someone (including yourself) as a 
Texan, for example, you remove that person’s individuality and, instead, see them as a 
prototypical representative of the group called Texans. This categorization then allows 
you to distinguish Texans from people who live in, say, California or Maine.
• Homogenization. To simplify the comparison process, we tend to think that people 
within each group are very similar to one another. For instance, we surmise that 
Texans collectively have similar attitudes and characteristics, whereas Californians 
collectively have their own set of characteristics. Of course, every individual is 
unique, but we often lose sight of this fact when thinking about our social identity 
and how we compare to people in other social groups.
You People!: Exposing Stereotyping 
in South Africae
South African restaurant chain Nando’s launched a witty 
advertisement that pokes fun at our tendency to stereo￾type people who are different from us. The “You People” 
video has several brief scenes in which viewers easily 
misperceive the actors’ role in the scene (upscale cus￾tomer versus employee) or the meaning of their actions 
(running for exercise versus running away from police). It 
also shows that those who stereotype “you people” fail to 
recognize similar behavior in themselves.
“‘You people’ is a phrase often used by South Africans 
when describing people who are different to them,” says 
Doug Place, Nando’s chief marketing officer in Johannes￾burg. “It’s a phrase that goes hand in hand with an uncon￾scious bias.”
Place explains that Nando’s created the ad to encour￾age discussion about stereotyping and to promote 
greater harmony in society. “If you’re watching our ad and 
say ‘I’ve done that’ (hopefully with a guilty smile), then 
we’ve been successful at starting a crucial conversation—
hopefully one that starts with ‘us people’.”
global connections 3.3
Aaron Amat/Shutterstock96 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
•	 Differentiation. Along with categorizing and homogenizing people, we tend to assign
more favorable characteristics to people in our groups than to people in other
groups.50 This differentiation is motivated by self-enhancement because being in a
“better” group produces higher self-esteem. Differentiation is often subtle, but
when out-group members threaten our self-concept, we are particularly motivated
(often without our awareness) to assign negative stereotypes to them.
Problems with Stereotyping Everyone engages in stereotyping, yet it is highly
inaccurate. Most features of a stereotype are distorted and embellished to such an ex￾tent that they describe very few people in the group. Even though a stereotype often
has kernels of truth, that information doesn’t describe everyone—often less than the
majority—of members in the category. As a result, stereotyping leads to perceptual bi￾ases. For instance, the traditional accountant stereotype (boring, cautious, calculat￾ing) perhaps describes a few accountants, but it is certainly not characteristic of all, or
even most, people in this profession. Nevertheless, when someone is categorized as an
accountant, the nonobservable stereotypical features of accountants are transferred to
that individual, even though we have no evidence that the individual actually has those
characteristics.
A second problem with stereotypes is that they generate stereotype threat. This is a
condition whereby members of an identifiable group are so concerned about the negative
stereotype assigned to their group that they end up displaying the stereotype trait they are
trying to avoid.51 Stereotype threat occurs because people anxiously try to avoid confirm￾ing the undesirable traits and try to push the negative image from their mind. These two
cognitive activities divert energy and attention, which makes it more difficult to perform
the task well. The negative stereotype also can weaken self-efficacy; it is difficult to be
confident in your ability when your group’s stereotype suggests otherwise.
For example, females perform worse on math and science tests when sensitized to the
generally false but widely held belief that they perform worse than males in these subjects.
Females also tend to have lower scores when they are a small percentage of the group
being tested. Females achieve much higher scores when the associated stereotype is not
apparent, such as when taking the test with many females in the class. Almost anyone can
be affected by stereotype threat, but studies have particularly observed it for females,
some minority groups, and older people.
A third problem with stereotyping is that it lays the foundation for unfair discrimina￾tion. Most of this perceptual bias occurs as unintentional (systemic) discrimination,
whereby decision makers rely on stereotypes to establish notions of the “ideal” person in
specific roles. People who don’t fit the ideal tend to receive a less favorable evaluation
than those who are compatible with the occupational stereotype.
Unintentional systemic discrimination is particularly evident in employment and sal￾ary decisions. Consider the following example: Science faculty from several research in￾tensive universities were given the fictitious application materials of either a male or
female undergraduate student who was applying for a science laboratory manager job.
The applications were identical other than the name and gender of the applicant, yet the
male applicant received significantly higher ratings than the female applicant on compe￾tence and hireability. The male applicant also received a 15-percent-higher recommended
salary than did the female applicant. Female faculty exhibited as much gender bias as the
male faculty.52
Another negative consequence of stereotyping is intentional discrimination or prejudice,
in which people hold unfounded negative attitudes toward people belonging to a particular
stereotyped group.53 Systemic discrimination is implicit, automatic, and unintentional,
whereas intentional discrimination deliberately puts the target person at an unfair disad￾vantage. For instance, some French firms have used the code BBR as a signal that they
want recruiters to hire someone who is Caucasian. “Some people asked for what in French
is called a BBR; it’s a code to say a ‘Bleu-Blanc-Rouge’—the colors of our national flag,”
stereotype threat
an individual’s concern 
about confirming a negative 
stereotype about his or her 
groupChapter Three Perceiving Ourselves and Others in Organizations 97
explains one French recruiter. “It was to tell the recruitment agency I am a racist company 
but I do not want it to appear as such so I use an external supplier to bypass the law.”54
If stereotyping is such a problem, shouldn’t we try to avoid this process altogether? 
Unfortunately, it’s not that simple. Most experts agree that categorical thinking (including 
stereotyping) is an automatic and nonconscious process. Specialized training programs 
can minimize stereotype activation to some extent, but for the most part the process is 
hardwired in our brain cells.55 Also remember that stereotyping helps us in several valu￾able (although fallible) ways described earlier: minimizing mental effort, filling in missing 
information, and supporting our social identity.
Stereotype activation is automatic and nonconscious, but the good news is that we can 
minimize stereotype application—the extent to which we rely on that information. In other 
words, we automatically categorize people and assign stereotypic traits to them, but we can 
consciously minimize our reliance on that stereotypic information.56 Later in this chapter, 
we identify ways to minimize stereotype application and other perceptual biases.
ATTRIBUTION THEORY
An important perceptual process in organizational settings is how people form beliefs 
about the causes of behavior or events. This attribution process forms beliefs about 
whether an observed behavior or event is caused mainly by the person (internal factors) 
or by one or more elements in the person’s environment (external factors).57 Internal fac￾tors include the individual’s characteristics (ability, personality, motivation, etc.) whereas 
external factors include anything in the external environment, such as the tools being 
used, presence or help from coworkers or manager, the physical setting, and luck. If some￾one doesn’t show up for an important meeting, for instance, we infer either internal attri￾butions (the coworker is forgetful, lazy, etc.) or external attributions (traffic, a family 
emergency, etc.) to make sense of the person’s absence.
Two attribution rules—distinctiveness and consensus—influence whether we believe an 
individual’s actions are caused mainly by internal or external factors. A third attribution 
rule (consistency) influences our confidence in that attribution belief.58 We’ll use the 
example of an employee who makes poor-quality products on a specific machine (the 
external entity).
• Distinctiveness: This rule refers to whether the individual’s response is similar 
(low distinctiveness) or different (high distinctiveness) in the presence of different 
attribution process
the perceptual process of 
forming beliefs about whether 
an observed behavior or event 
is caused largely by internal or 
external factors
Numerous employee complaints 
and two prominent lawsuits 
suggest that Pinterest’s “nice” 
public image masked a culture 
that tolerated gender and racial 
discrimination. Rhode Island’s 
pension system led a shareholder 
lawsuit (since settled) claiming 
that Pinterest’s CEO “repeatedly 
placed himself before the 
Company, surrounding himself 
with yes-men and marginalizing 
women who dared to challenge 
Pinterest’s white, male leadership 
clique.” Françoise Brougher, 
Pinterest’s first chief operating 
officer, won a lawsuit against 
Pinterest for being intentionally 
left out of meetings, receiving 
gendered performance feedback, 
and being given lower pay 
(vesting rights) than male peers. 
“I want to change and dismantle 
the system of gender bias at this 
company and to rid it of the 
stereotype that holds men and 
women to a different standard,” 
says Brougher.f
Prostock-studio/Shutterstock98 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
entities (e.g., different tools, customers, physical setting, etc.). In our example, 
high distinctiveness occurs if the employee makes poor quality products on this 
machine but makes good-quality products on other machines. Low distinctiveness 
occurs if the employee makes poor quality products on all of the machines.
• Consensus: This rule refers to whether other people have the same response (high 
consensus) or a different response (low consensus) from the individual in the pres￾ence of the entity. In our example, high consensus occurs if other employees also 
make poor-quality products on this machine, whereas low consensus occurs if 
other employees make good-quality products on this machine.
• Consistency: The consistency rule refers to whether the individual’s response is 
the same over time in the presence of the entity, and in whatever way the entity is 
presented. In our example, high consistency occurs if the employee always makes 
poor-quality products on this machine over time and in various situations (such as 
whether the manager is watching, or whether the machine is moved to another 
location). Low consistency occurs if the quality of the employee’s work on this 
machine (and on other machines) varies from poor to good over time and in dif￾ferent situations.
Exhibit 3.4 illustrates how the three attribution rules influence our perception of an 
internal or external attribution. Distinctiveness and consensus determine whether the at￾tribution should be internal or external. Applying our example, we would form an internal 
attribution about the employee’s performance on this machine (i.e., something wrong 
with the employee’s ability or motivation) if the individual makes poor quality products 
on all of the machines (low distinctiveness) and other employees make good-quality prod￾ucts on this machine (low consensus). We would form an external attribution (something 
Yes
(high consistency)
Yes
(high consistency)
Consistency
Did this person act
this way in this
situation in the past?
Yes
(low distinctiveness)
No
(high distinctiveness)
Distinctiveness
Does this person act
this way in other
situations?
No
(low consensus)
Yes
(high consensus)
Consensus
Do other people
act this way
in this situation?
Behavior is attributed
to situational factors
External Attribution
Behavior is attributed
to personal factors
EXHIBIT 3.4 Internal Attribution
Attribution Theory Rules
Note: Internal and external attribution 
are determined by either high or 
low distinctiveness and consensus; 
consistency always needs to be high 
for sufficient confidence in either 
attribution.Chapter Three Perceiving Ourselves and Others in Organizations 99
wrong with the machine) if the employee makes good-quality products on other machines 
(high distinctiveness) and all employees make poor-quality products on this machine 
(high consensus).
The third attribution rule, consistency, determines our confidence in our internal or 
external attribution. In fact, the original theory didn’t explicitly mention low consistency 
at all. This is why Exhibit 3.4 shows that consistency needs to be high for both internal 
and external attributions. If consistency is low, we would lack confidence about whether 
to attribute the product’s poor quality to the employee, to the machine, or to some other 
environmental factor that hasn’t been identified.
The attribution process is important because understanding cause–effect relationships 
enables us to work more effectively with others and to assign praise or blame to them.59
Suppose a coworker didn’t complete their task on a team project on time. You would evalu￾ate this situation differently if you believed the coworker was lazy or lacked sufficient skill 
(an internal attribution) than if you believed the poor performance was due to lack of time 
or resources available to the coworker (an external attribution). We also react differently to 
attributions of our own behavior and performance. Students who make internal attribu￾tions about their poor grades, for instance, have lower self-efficacy and are more likely to 
drop out of their programs than if they make external attributions about those grades.60
Attribution Errors The attribution process is susceptible to errors. One such error is 
self-serving bias—the tendency to attribute our failures to external causes more than inter￾nal causes, while successes are due more to internal than external factors.61 Simply put, we 
take credit for our successes and blame others or the situation for our mistakes. Individual 
athletes and sports teams regularly attribute their successes to personal factors and their 
failures to situational conditions. In financial reports, executives tend to overweight their 
personal qualities as reasons for the company’s success and to emphasize external factors 
(competitors, weather, government regulations, etc.) as reasons why the company’s perfor￾mance fell below expectations.62 Self-serving bias is partly a deliberate influence tactic 
(impression management, see Chapter 10) to reframe how others view the situation, and 
partly the individual’s perceptual distortion of the situation caused by self-enhancement 
(i.e., they actually believe problems weren’t caused by their personal attributes).
Another attribution error, fundamental attribution error (also called correspondence 
bias), is the tendency to overemphasize internal causes of another person’s behavior and 
to discount or ignore external causes of their behavior.63 We are more likely to attribute a 
coworker’s late arrival for work to lack of motivation rather than to situational constraints 
(such as traffic congestion). This occurs because observers can’t easily see the external 
factors that constrain another person’s behavior. Also, people like to think that human 
beings (not the situation) are the prime sources of their behavior. Although fundamental 
attribution error does occur, recent reviews suggest it may be less common than previ￾ously thought. It can often be minimized by giving those making attributions more infor￾mation about the situation and warning them about this attribution error.64
SELF-FULFILLING PROPHECY
Self-fulfilling prophecy occurs when our expectations about another person cause that 
person to act in a way that is consistent with those expectations. In other words, our 
perceptions can influence 
reality. Exhibit 3.5 illus￾trates the four steps in the 
self-fulfilling prophecy 
process using the example 
of a supervisor and a sub￾ordinate.65 The process be￾gins when the supervisor 
forms expectations about 
self-serving bias
the tendency to attribute our 
favorable outcomes to internal 
factors and our failures to 
external factors
fundamental attribution error
the tendency to see the 
person rather than the 
situation as the main cause of 
that person’s behavior
self-fulfilling prophecy
the perceptual process in which 
our expectations about another 
person cause that person to act 
more consistently with those 
expectations100 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
Explaining Poor Financial Results with 
Creative Self-Serving Biasesg
When companies experience poor sales and profits, ex￾ecutives scramble for explanations, preferably ones that 
cast the blame on others rather than themselves. This 
self-serving bias sometimes borders on the ridiculous.
Expedia’s sales and profits dropped precipitously early 
in the pandemic, and analysts readily accepted that the 
main cause was the resulting travel restrictions. But Expe￾dia executives also claimed that changes to Google’s 
search engine optimization (SEO) forced them to lose 
market share and increase spending. Analysts were skep￾tical because Expedia’s marketing expenses hadn’t 
changed and room nights had actually improved. 
Deutsche Bank analysts suggested that the real problem 
was operational inefficiencies within management’s con￾trol. “We believe that the old management team may have 
used ‘SEO headwinds’ as an excuse for broader opera￾tional issues,” they wrote.
A few years ago, Netflix subscriber growth fell short of 
projections, a problem that Netflix executives attributed to 
something beyond their control—customers were switch￾ing to chip-based credit and debit cards and forgot to up￾date their accounts. Investment experts didn’t buy that 
argument. “It’s just the dumbest thing I’ve heard,” quipped 
one investment analyst.
Some external attributions get sillier. Macy’s blamed 
one quarterly earnings shortfall on lipstick. Specifically, 
the company claimed that female shoppers preferred 
“going to the off-price retailers because she doesn’t have 
to put lipstick on.” Macy’s executives didn’t mention that 
perhaps they weren’t price competitive against these dis￾count (off-price) retailers.
Even the NFL can’t escape the blame for slumping re￾tail sales. Executives at Lids Sports Group pointed to a 
slump in the football league’s reputation as “the single 
biggest factor” weighing on one quarter’s declining sales 
at the athletic headwear retailer. Analysts tried without 
success to get a logical explanation from the company 
about how one sports league had such an outsized effect. 
“Retailers look for excuses,” says one industry observer. 
“This is just another opportunity for companies that 
missed earnings to blame it on something.”
global connections 3.4
Aaron Amat/Alamy Stock Photo
4. Employee's behavior
becomes more consistent
with the supervisor's
initial expectations
2. Supervisor's
expectations aect
his/her behavior toward
the employee
vior 2
1. Supervisor forms
expectations about
the employee
3. Supervisor's behavior
aects the employee's
ability and motivation 
(self-confidence)
EXHIBIT 3.5 
The Self-Fulfilling Prophecy Cycle
the employee’s future behavior and performance. These expectations are sometimes inac￾curate, because first impressions are usually formed from limited information. Next, the 
supervisor’s expectations influence their behavior toward employees. In particular, high￾expectancy employees (those expected to do well) receive more emotional support 
through nonverbal cues (e.g., more smiling and eye contact from the boss), more frequent Chapter Three Perceiving Ourselves and Others in Organizations 101
and valuable feedback and reinforcement, more challenging goals, better training, and 
more opportunities to demonstrate good performance.66
The third step in self-fulfilling prophecy includes two effects of the supervisor’s be￾havior on the employee. One effect is that a high-expectancy employee learns more 
skills and knowledge than does a low-expectancy employee because of better training 
and more practice opportunities. The other effect is that the high-expectancy employee 
becomes more self-confident, which results in stronger motivation and willingness 
to set challenging goals.67 In the final step, high-expectancy employees are more 
motivated and skilled, resulting in better performance, while the opposite is true of low￾expectancy employees.
Self-fulfilling prophecy has been observed in many contexts. In one study, four Israeli 
Defense Force combat command course instructors were told that one-third of the incom￾ing trainees had high command potential, one-third had normal potential, and the rest 
had unknown potential. The trainees had been randomly placed into these categories by 
the researchers, but the instructors were led to believe that the information they received 
was accurate. Consistent with self-fulfilling prophecy, high-expectancy soldiers performed 
significantly better by the end of the course than did trainees in the other groups. They 
also had more favorable attitudes toward the course and the instructor’s leadership effec￾tiveness. An analysis of dozens of leader intervention studies over the years found that 
self-fulfilling prophecy is one of the most powerful leadership effects on follower behavior 
and performance.68
Contingencies of Self-Fulfilling Prophecy The self-fulfilling prophecy effect 
is stronger in some situations than in others. It has a stronger effect at the beginning of a 
relationship, such as when employees are first hired. It is also stronger when several peo￾ple (rather than just one person) hold the same expectations of the individual. In other 
words, we might be able to ignore one person’s doubts about our potential but not the 
collective doubts of several people. The self-fulfilling prophecy effect is also stronger 
among people with a history of low achievement. These people tend to have lower self￾esteem, so they are more easily influenced by others’ opinions of them.69
The main lesson from the self-fulfilling prophecy literature is that leaders need to de￾velop and maintain a positive, yet realistic, expectation toward all employees. Communi￾cating realistic hope and optimism is so important that it has been identified as one of the 
critical success factors for physicians and surgeons. Training programs that make leaders 
aware of the power of positive expectations seem to have minimal effect, however. In￾stead, generating positive expectations and hope depends on a corporate culture of sup￾port and learning. Hiring supervisors who are inherently optimistic toward their staff is 
another way of increasing the incidence of positive self-fulfilling prophecies.70
OTHER PERCEPTUAL EFFECTS
Self-fulfilling prophecy, attribution, and stereotyping are among the most common per￾ceptual processes and biases in organizational settings, but there are many others. Four 
additional biases that have received attention in organizational settings are briefly de￾scribed below.
Halo Effect The halo effect occurs when our general impression of a person, usually 
based on one prominent characteristic, distorts our perception of other characteristics of 
that person.71 If a supervisor who values punctuality notices that an employee is some￾times late for work, the supervisor might form a negative general opinion of the employee 
and evaluate that person’s other performance dimensions unfavorably as well. The halo 
effect is most likely to occur when important information about the perceived target is 
missing or we are not sufficiently motivated to search for it. Instead, we use our general 
impression of the person to fill in the missing information.
halo effect
a perceptual error whereby 
our general impression of a 
person, usually based on one 
prominent characteristic, 
colors our perception of other 
characteristics of that person102 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
False-Consensus Effect The false-consensus effect (also called similar-to-me 
effect) occurs when people overestimate the extent to which others have similar beliefs or 
behaviors to our own.72 Employees who are thinking of quitting their jobs overestimate 
the percentage of coworkers who are also thinking about quitting, for example. The false￾consensus effect occurs partly because we are comforted by the belief that others are simi￾lar to us, particularly regarding less acceptable or divisive behavior. A second explanation 
is that we interact more with people who have similar views. This frequent interaction 
with like-minded people causes us to overestimate how common those views are throughout 
the company or society.
Confirmation bias is a third explanation for the false-consensus effect. We are more 
likely to notice and remember people whose views are similar to our own and ignore or 
forget about incidents in which individuals express views that oppose our own. A fourth 
explanation is that our social identity process homogenizes people within groups, so we 
tend to think that everyone in that group has similar opinions and behavior, including the 
false-consensus attitude or behavior.
Recency Effect The recency effect occurs when the most recent information domi￾nates our perceptions.73 This perceptual bias is most common when people (especially 
those with limited experience) make a decision involving complex information. For in￾stance, auditors need to digest large volumes of information in their judgments about fi￾nancial documents. They are susceptible to recency effect because the most recent 
information received prior to rendering their judgment may receive more weight than in￾formation received at the beginning of the audit. Similarly, when supervisors evaluate the 
performance of employees over the previous year, the most recent performance informa￾tion dominates the evaluation because it is the most easily recalled.
Primacy Effect The primacy effect is our tendency to rely on the first information 
we receive about people to quickly form an opinion of them.74 This perceptual bias is 
captured in the well-known statement: First impressions are lasting impressions. We rap￾idly organize and interpret new information to fulfill our inherent need to make sense of 
the situation and, in particular, to trust others. The problem is that first impressions—
particularly negative first impressions—are difficult to change. After categorizing some￾one, we tend to select subsequent information that supports our first impression and 
screen out information that opposes that impression.
Improving Perceptions
We can’t bypass the perceptual process, but we should try to minimize perceptual biases 
and distortions. Three potentially effective ways to improve perceptions include aware￾ness of perceptual biases, self-awareness, and meaningful interaction.
AWARENESS OF PERCEPTUAL BIASES
One of the most obvious and widely practiced ways to reduce perceptual biases is by 
knowing that they exist.75 For example, traditional diversity training programs try to 
minimize discrimination by 
making people aware of 
systemic discrimination as 
well as prejudices that oc￾cur through stereotyping. 
Performance management 
training attempts to in￾crease manager awareness 
of halo and primacy effect 
LO 3-4
false-consensus effect
a perceptual error in which 
we overestimate the extent 
to which others have beliefs 
and characteristics similar to 
our own
recency effect
a perceptual error in which 
the most recent information 
dominates our perception 
of others
primacy effect
a perceptual error in which 
we quickly form an opinion 
of people based on the first 
information we receive 
about themChapter Three Perceiving Ourselves and Others in Organizations 103
when evaluating employee performance. Awareness training was an early attempt to mini￾mize dysfunctional self-fulfilling prophecy in the workplace. Many companies introduce 
cultural awareness training prior to acquiring or merging with another business located in 
another country. Cultural awareness training is also provided to employees in helping in￾dustries who work closely with clients from a different culture.
Awareness of perceptual biases can reduce these errors to some extent by making peo￾ple more mindful of their thoughts and actions, but the effect is often limited.76 There is 
minimal support for awareness training to reduce self-fulfilling prophecy, halo, or primacy 
effects. Diversity awareness training can improve cultural sensitivity when the trainees 
are motivated to learn and the program mainly describes the other culture (rather than 
judge the attendees’ culture). However, the good intentions of these programs can evapo￾rate quickly in organizations that lack an inclusive culture. Worse, teaching people to re￾ject incorrect stereotypes has the unintended effect of reinforcing rather than reducing 
reliance on those stereotypes. For instance, students in one study showed more bias 
against elderly people after watching a video encouraging them to be less biased against 
older people! Another problem is that diversity training is ineffective for people with 
deeply held prejudices against those groups.
IMPROVING SELF-AWARENESS
More successful than perceptual bias awareness are interventions that improve self￾awareness.77 This approach makes us more mindful of our beliefs, values, and attitudes 
and, from that insight, we become more aware of biases in our own decisions and behavior. 
Self-awareness tends to reduce perceptual biases by making people more open-minded 
and nonjudgmental toward others. Self-awareness is also the first step to take in becoming 
an authentic leader (see Chapter 12). Essentially, leaders need to understand their own 
values, strengths, and biases as a foundation for building a vision and leading others to￾ward that vision.78
But how do we become more self-aware? One approach is to complete formal tests that 
indicate any implicit biases we might have toward others. One such instrument is the Im￾plicit Association Test (IAT), which attempts to detect subtle racial, age, gender, disabil￾ity, and other forms of bias by associating positive and negative words with specific groups 
of people.79 Although the reliability and accuracy of the IAT is still being debated by 
Manulife Financial (which owns 
John Hancock Financial) strives to 
be an inclusive workplace in which 
everyone can bring their authentic 
and whole self to work. To achieve 
this, the company’s entire global 
senior executive group and more 
than 26,000 of its managers and 
employees have completed a 
nonconscious bias training 
program. The program gives each 
participant confidential feedback 
on their personal biases (through 
the IAT or similar test) and 
provides guidance on how 
to manage those perceptions 
and attitudes. “There needs to 
be a focus on inclusion, and 
unconscious bias training is one 
way that we’re working to shift 
our culture,” explains Manulife’s 
Global Head of Diversity & 
Inclusion.h
Robert Kneschke/Shutterstock104 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
scholars, the test does seem to provide some evidence of specific biases. For example, one 
recent study reported that most of the 176,935 people completing the IAT test had a 
strong science-is-male stereotype, even in subdisciplines where females represent a large 
percentage of the profession. Most people completing that test associate science with 
males. Many people are much more cautious about their stereotypes and prejudices after 
discovering that their test results show a personal bias against older people or individuals 
from different ethnic backgrounds.80
Another way to reduce perceptual biases through increased self-awareness is by apply￾ing the Johari Window.81 Developed by psychologists Joseph Luft and Harry Ingram 
(hence the name “Johari”), this model of self-awareness and mutual understanding di￾vides information about you into four “windows”—open, blind, hidden, and unknown—
based on whether your own values, beliefs, and experiences are known to you and to 
others (see Exhibit 3.6). The open area includes information about you that is known both 
to you and to others. The blind area refers to information that is known to others but not 
to you. For example, your colleagues might notice that you are self-conscious and awk￾ward when meeting the company’s chief executive officer, but you are unaware of this fact. 
Information known to you but unknown to others is found in the hidden area. Finally, the 
unknown area includes your values, beliefs, and experiences that are buried so deeply that 
neither you nor others are aware of them.
The main objective of the Johari Window is to increase the size of the open area so that 
both you and your colleagues are aware of your perceptual limitations. This objective is partly 
accomplished by reducing the hidden area through disclosure—informing others of your be￾liefs, feelings, and experiences that may influence the work relationship. The open area also 
increases through feedback from others about your behavior. Feedback reduces your blind 
area because, according to recent studies, people near you are good sources of information 
about many (but not all) of your traits and behaviors.82 Finally, the combination of disclosure 
and feedback occasionally produces revelations about you in the unknown area.
The Johari Window and Implicit Association Test improve self-awareness, which poten￾tially minimizes biases by being more open-minded and nonjudgmental. However, two 
problems may limit these benefits. First, implicit biases are similar to stereotypes—they 
are automatically activated and, consequently, difficult to prevent. However, as with ste￾reotypes, even though implicit biases are still activated, we can potentially minimize the 
application of those biases in our decisions and behavior.
The second problem is that perceptual bias self-awareness can cause people to become 
more sensitized and self-conscious. In one study, a group of White (Caucasian) partici￾pants completed an IAT that examined their implicit bias against Indigenous Canadians, 
Open
area
Hidden
area
Unknown
area
Blind
area
Known to
others
Feedback from others
Known to
self
Unknown to
self
Unknown to
others
Disclosure to others
EXHIBIT 3.6 
Johari Window Model of 
Self-Awareness and Mutual 
Understanding
Source: Based on J. Luft. 1969. 
Of Human Interaction. Palo Alto, 
CA: National Press Books.
Johari Window
a model of mutual 
understanding that 
encourages disclosure and 
feedback to increase our own 
open area and reduce the 
blind, hidden, and unknown 
areasChapter Three Perceiving Ourselves and Others in Organizations 105
whereas a second group of White participants did not take the IAT. All White participants 
were then paired with Indigenous peers, and for 15 minutes they discussed career goals, 
academic experiences, or other assigned topics. Everyone then confidentially completed 
an evaluation of their discussion partner. The study found that the White participants 
who completed the IAT were more cautious and demonstrated less positive regard toward 
their Indigenous discussion partners than were the White participants who did not com￾plete the IAT. In other words, increased self-awareness of implicit bias can lead to less fa￾vorable interaction with the targets of that bias.83
MEANINGFUL INTERACTION
The Johari Window relies on direct conversations about ourselves and others, whereas 
meaningful interaction is a more indirect, yet potentially powerful, approach to improving 
self-awareness and mutual understanding.84 Meaningful interaction is any activity in 
which people engage in valued (meaningful, not trivial) activities. The activities might be 
work related, such as when senior executives work alongside frontline staff. Or the activi￾ties might occur outside the workplace, such as when sales staff from several countries 
participate in outdoor challenges.
Meaningful interaction is founded on the contact hypothesis, which states that, under cer￾tain conditions, people who interact with one another will be less perceptually biased because 
they have a more personal understanding of the other person and their group. Simply spend￾ing time with members of other groups can improve this understanding to some extent. How￾ever, meaningful interaction is strongest when people work closely and frequently with one 
another on a shared goal that requires mutual cooperation and reliance. Furthermore, every￾one should have equal status in that context, should be engaged in a meaningful task, and 
should have positive experiences with one another in those interactions.85
Meaningful interaction reduces dependence on stereotypes because it diminishes psy￾chological distance, improves our knowledge about individuals, and helps us to observe 
their unique attributes in action.86 Meaningful interaction also potentially improves empa￾thy toward others. Empathy refers to the ability to understand another person’s situation 
or viewpoint (perspective taking), be sensitive to their thoughts and feelings, and experi￾ence their emotions.87 People empathize when they visualize themselves in the other per￾son’s place as if they are the other person. This perceptual experience is cognitive, 
emotional, and experiential. In other words, empathy occurs when we understand the 
other person’s situation, feel their emotions in that context, and to some degree react to 
those thoughts and feelings as the other person does.
Empathizing reduces attribution errors by improving our sensitivity to the external 
causes of another person’s performance and behavior. A supervisor who imagines what 
it’s like to be a single mother, for example, would become more sensitive to the external 
causes of lateness and other events among such employees. However, trying to empathize 
with others without spending time with them might actually increase rather than reduce 
stereotyping and other perceptual biases.88
contact hypothesis
a theory stating that the more 
we interact with someone, the 
less prejudiced or perceptually 
biased we will be against that 
person
®
SELF-ASSESSMENT 3.6: How Strong Is Your Emotional Empathy?
®
SELF-ASSESSMENT 3.5: How Strong Is Your Perspective Taking 
(Cognitive Empathy)?106 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
Global Mindset: Developing Perceptions across Borders
Shiseido is changing the way it views itself as a global organization. “It’s no longer 
about Japan and the rest of the world,” explains Shiseido executive Roselin Lee. The 
Japanese personal care company has acquired Western brands and decentralized deci￾sions to regional headquarters beyond Japan. Most of all, Shiseido is training employ￾ees so they are ready for this globalized future. “The structure of the program ties back 
closely to the attributes and behaviors that we want our future-ready leaders to have—
agile, inclusive, digitally savvy, innovative, and most importantly, have a global mindset,” 
says Lee.89
Global mindset refers to an individual’s ability to perceive, know about, and process 
information across cultures. It includes the following four specific elements.90
• Adopting a global perspective. A global mindset in￾creases as the individual acquires more of a global 
than a local/parochial frame of reference about 
their business and its environment. This frame of 
reference includes accumulating knowledge and 
appreciation of many cultures without judging 
the competence of others by their national or 
ethnic origins.
LO 3-5
empathy
the ability to understand 
another person’s situation or 
viewpoint (perspective taking), 
be sensitive to their thoughts 
and feelings, and experience 
their emotions
global mindset
an individual’s ability to 
perceive, appreciate, and 
empathize with people from 
other cultures, and to process 
complex cross-cultural 
information
debating point
IS EMPATHY ALWAYS BENEFICIAL IN THE WORKPLACE?I
Empathy is considered an essential human process in the workplace. 
The ability to understand another person’s situation or viewpoint (per￾spective taking), be sensitive to their thoughts and feelings, and expe￾rience their emotions enables employees to provide social support and 
quality care, minimize perceptual biases, and manage others’ emotions 
(part of emotional intelligence). Empathy increases moral sensitivity, 
which improves ethical decision making. By perceiving others’ situation 
and experiencing how they feel, organizational leaders are more alert 
to subtle signals of problems before they become obvious. Design con￾sultants value empathy with current and prospective users to develop 
better products, part of the design thinking process.
Yet, considerable debate has emerged about whether empathy—
particularly intense emotional empathy—has more negative than posi￾tive consequences. The greatest criticism is that empathy produces 
partiality, which leads to less ethical and effective decisions. Individu￾als empathize with other individuals, rather than with groups or societ￾ies. The observer therefore pays more attention and gives more weight 
to the plight of the person being empathized than to others who are 
also affected by the situation. Some experts suggest that empathy 
even has a polarizing effect by anchoring the empathizer to one side of 
a conflict and blinding them to the logic of competing positions. This 
also means that the observer fails to apply all ethical principles, partic￾ularly the greatest good for the greatest number (utilitarianism). 
Another concern is that empathizing is cognitively and emotionally 
intensive and potentially exhausting. Consequently, empathizing can 
overwhelm the decision process, which motivates the empathizer to be 
more decisive. This, in turn, short-circuits information gathering and 
increases reliance on questionable heuristics. A systematic, impartial 
analysis of the situation is abandoned.
Similarly, although empathy can increase a person’s sensitivity to 
problems, it can also trigger a knee jerk response to false alarms. As 
such, empathizers risk acting on the target person’s emotional state 
rather than on a broader and more accurate array of indicators.
Design experts increasingly value empathy, but some warn that em￾pathizing too much or for too long with end users may shut out more 
objective design development processes. The designer gets so caught 
up in how the user feels about current product experiences and beliefs 
that more radical future design options are never systematically 
searched, developed, or prototyped.
Finally, the emotional weight of empathy can lead to compassion 
fatigue, particularly in medical and other helping professions where 
clients have life-threatening problems. People become emotionally 
drained by ongoing deep empathy with patients and their families. This 
has the perverse effect of undermining the empathizer’s capacity to 
perform duties and maintain positive support for those receiving the 
empathy.Chapter Three Perceiving Ourselves and Others in Organizations 107
• Empathizing and acting effectively across cultures. A global mindset includes under￾standing the perceptions and emotions of coworkers from other cultures in various 
situations. Furthermore, this empathy translates into effective use of words and be￾haviors that are compatible with the local culture.
• Processing complex information about novel environments. People who work across 
cultures are frequently placed in new situations that require quick understanding 
and decision making. This calls for a capacity to cognitively receive and analyze 
large volumes of information in these new and diverse situations.
• Developing new multilevel mental models. A global mindset involves the capacity to 
quickly develop useful mental models of situations, particularly at both a local and 
global level of analysis. Ultimately, those with a strong global mindset apply multi￾ple levels of understanding to workplace issues in multicultural settings.
A global mindset offers tremendous value to organizations as well as to the employee’s 
career opportunities.91 Employees form better relationships across cultures by understand￾ing and showing respect to distant colleagues and partners. They can sift through huge 
volumes of ambiguous and novel information transmitted in multinational relationships. 
They have a capacity to form networks and to exchange resources more rapidly across 
borders. They also develop greater sensitivity and respond more quickly to emerging 
global opportunities.
DEVELOPING A GLOBAL MINDSET
Developing a global mindset involves improving one’s perceptions, so the practices de￾scribed earlier on awareness of perceptual biases, self-awareness, and meaningful interaction 
are relevant. As with most perceptual capabilities, a global mindset begins with awareness of 
the concept, followed by self-awareness of one’s current level of development. By under￾standing their own beliefs, values, and attitudes, employees become more open-minded and 
nonjudgmental when receiving and processing complex information for decision making. 
EY Cultivates a Global Mindset 
Through International Secondmentsj
Cathy Ng usually works in EY’s (formerly Ernst & Young’s) 
offices in Hong Kong, but she jumped at the offer of a 
temporary transfer to London. “My secondment to EY 
London has allowed me to develop a global mindset by 
working with individuals from different backgrounds and 
cultures. It is interesting to know that there are different 
ways of looking at the same thing and therefore bringing 
different insights and ways of improving our work.”
Jessica Lönnqvist, an EY transactions diligence man￾ager from Helsinki, also benefited from her temporary 
transfer to EY’s offices in Milan, Italy. “My three-month 
secondment in Milan with EY was an invaluable experi￾ence. It exposed me to new, bigger clients and stretched 
my technical knowledge,” says Lönnqvist. She particu￾larly noted how working with people from around the 
world improves a person’s perceptions and abilities. 
“The global mindset of EY people is really inspiring. The 
open, international, and collaborative environment is so 
valuable.”
Along with developing a global mindset in its employ￾ees, EY actively looks for this competency in job appli￾cants. “We need candidates who can work effectively in 
teams, analyze, innovate and think with a global mindset, 
regardless of their domain expertise or background,” says 
Larry Nash, EY’s recruiting leader in the United States.
global connections 3.5
Willy Barton/Shutterstock108 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
In addition, companies develop a global mindset by giving employees opportunities to 
compare their own mental models with those of coworkers or partners from other regions 
of the world. For example, employees might participate in online forums about how well 
the product’s design or marketing strategy is received in their own country versus a more 
distant and culturally different country. When companies engage in regular discussions 
about global competitors, suppliers, and other stakeholders, they eventually move the 
employee’s sphere of awareness more toward that global level.
A global mindset develops through better knowledge of people and cultures. Some of 
that knowledge is acquired through formal programs, such as cultural awareness training, 
but deeper absorption results from immersion in those cultures.92 Employees need to ex￾perience meaningful interaction with colleagues from other cultures in those settings. The 
deeper the individual’s immersion in the local environment (such as following local prac￾tices, eating local food, and using the local language), the greater the potential to under￾stand the perspectives and attitudes of colleagues in those cultures.
LO 3-1 Describe the self-concept characteristics and pro￾cesses, and explain how each affects an individual’s 
behavior and well-being.
Self-concept includes an individual’s self-beliefs and self￾evaluations. It has three structural characteristics—complexity, 
consistency, and clarity—all of which influence employee 
well-being, behavior, and performance. People are inherently 
motivated to promote and protect their self-concept (self￾enhancement) and to verify and maintain their existing self-concept 
(self-verification). Self-evaluation consists of self-esteem, self￾efficacy, and locus of control. Self-concept also consists of 
both personal identity and social identity. Social identity theory 
explains how people define themselves by the groups to which 
they belong or have an emotional attachment.
LO 3-2 Outline the perceptual process and discuss the ef￾fects of categorical thinking and mental models in 
that process.
Perception involves selecting, organizing, and interpreting in￾formation to make sense of the world around us. Perceptual 
organization applies categorical thinking—the mostly noncon￾scious process of organizing people and objects into precon￾ceived categories that are stored in our long-term memory. 
Mental models—knowledge structures that we develop to de￾scribe, explain, and predict the world around us—also help us 
make sense of incoming stimuli.
LO 3-3 Discuss how stereotyping, attribution, self-fulfilling 
prophecy, halo, false consensus, primacy, and re￾cency effects influence the perceptual process.
Stereotyping occurs when people assign traits to others based 
on their membership in a social category. This assignment 
economizes mental effort, fills in missing information, and en￾hances our self-concept, but it also lays the foundation for ste￾reotype threat as well as systemic and intentional 
discrimination. The attribution process involves forming be￾liefs about whether an observed behavior or event is caused 
mainly by the person (internal factors) or the environment 
(external factors). Two attribution rules—distinctiveness and 
consensus—influence whether we believe an individual’s 
actions are caused mainly by internal or external factors, while 
the consistency rule influences our confidence in that attribution 
belief. Self-serving bias and fundamental attribution error are 
two attribution errors. A self-fulfilling prophecy occurs when 
our expectations about another person cause that person to act 
in a way that is consistent with those expectations. This effect 
is stronger when employees first join the work unit, when sev￾eral people hold these expectations, and when the employee 
has a history of low achievement. Four other perceptual errors 
commonly noted in organizations are the halo effect, false￾consensus effect, recency effect, and primacy effect.
LO 3-4 Discuss three ways to improve perceptions, with spe￾cific application to organizational situations.
One way to minimize perceptual biases is to become more 
aware of their existence. Awareness of these biases makes peo￾ple more mindful of their thoughts and actions, but this train￾ing sometimes reinforces rather than reduces reliance on 
stereotypes and tends to be ineffective for people with deeply 
held prejudices. A second strategy is to become more aware of 
biases in our own decisions and behavior. Self-awareness in￾creases through formal tests such as the Implicit Association 
Test (IAT) and by applying the Johari Window, which is a pro￾cess in which others provide feedback to you about your behav￾ior, and you offer disclosure to them about yourself. The third 
strategy is meaningful interaction, which applies the contact 
hypothesis that people who interact will be less prejudiced or 
perceptually biased toward one another. Meaningful interac￾tion is strongest when people work closely and frequently with 
relatively equal status on a shared meaningful task that re￾quires cooperation and reliance on one another. Meaningful 
interaction helps improve empathy, which is a person’s under￾standing and sensitivity to the feelings, thoughts, and situa￾tions of others.
LO 3-5 Outline the main features of a global mindset and jus￾tify its usefulness to employees and organizations.
A global mindset refers to an individual’s ability to perceive, 
know about, and process information across cultures. This in￾cludes (1) an awareness of, openness to, and respect for other 
chapter summary109
views and practices in the world; (2) the capacity to empathize 
and act effectively across cultures; (3) an ability to process 
complex information about novel environments; and (4) the 
ability to comprehend and reconcile intercultural matters with 
multiple levels of thinking. A global mindset enables people to 
develop better cross-cultural relationships, to digest huge 
volumes of cross-cultural information, and to identify and re￾spond more quickly to emerging global opportunities. Employ￾ees develop a global mindset through self-awareness, 
opportunities to compare their own mental models with peo￾ple from other cultures, formal cross-cultural training, and im￾mersion in other cultures.
attribution process, p. 97
categorical thinking, p. 92
confirmation bias, p. 92
contact hypothesis, p. 105
empathy, p. 106
false-consensus effect, p. 102
fundamental attribution error, p. 99
global mindset, p. 106
halo effect, p. 101
Johari Window, p. 104
locus of control, p. 89
mental models, p. 94
perception, p. 91
primacy effect, p. 102
recency effect, p. 102
selective attention, p. 91
self-concept, p. 84
self-efficacy, p. 88
self-enhancement, p. 87
self-fulfilling prophecy, p. 99
self-serving bias, p. 99
self-verification, p. 87
social identity theory, p. 89
stereotype threat, p. 96
stereotyping, p. 94
key terms
1. You are the manager of a district that has just hired 
several recent university and college graduates. Most of 
these people are starting their first full-time job, though 
most of them have held part-time and summer positions 
in the past. They have general knowledge of their particu￾lar skill area (accounting, engineering, marketing, etc.) 
but know relatively little about specific business practices 
and developments. Explain how you would nurture the 
self-concepts in these new hires to strengthen their per￾formance and maintain their psychological well-being. 
Also explain how you might reconcile the tendency for 
self-enhancement while preventing the new employees 
from forming a negative self-evaluation.
2. Do you define yourself in terms of the university you 
attend? Why or why not? What are the implications of 
your answer for your university or college?
3. A high-performance company has launched a “total 
focus” initiative that requires all employees to give com￾plete attention and dedication to the company’s growth 
and success. In an email to all staff members, the CEO 
wrote: “We live in a competitive world, and only those 
businesses whose employees give their total focus to the 
business will survive. As such, we are offering a generous 
severance to employees leaving because they can’t devote 
110 percent to this firm.” The company announced that 
it would invest heavily in employee training and career 
development, but employees who held second jobs or 
were engaged in time-consuming hobbies would be asked 
to leave. Discuss the company’s “total focus” initiative 
and its consequences from the perspective of employee 
self-concept complexity, consistency and clarity.
4. Several years ago, senior executives at energy company 
CanOil wanted to acquire an exploration company 
(HBOG) that was owned by another energy company, 
AmOil. Rather than face a hostile takeover and 
unfavorable tax implications, CanOil’s two top executives 
met with the CEO of AmOil to discuss a friendly ex￾change of stock to carry out the transaction. AmOil’s 
chief executive was previously unaware of CanOil’s plans, 
and as the meeting began, the AmOil executive warned 
that he was there merely to listen. The CanOil executives 
were confident that AmOil wanted to sell HBOG be￾cause energy legislation at the time made HBOG a poor 
investment for AmOil. AmOil’s CEO remained silent for 
most of the meeting, which CanOil executives interpreted 
as an implied agreement to proceed to buy AmOil stock 
on the market. But when CanOil launched the stock pur￾chase a month later, AmOil’s CEO was both surprised 
and outraged. He thought he had given the CanOil execu￾tives the cold shoulder, remaining silent to show his 
disinterest in the deal. The misunderstanding nearly 
bankrupted CanOil because AmOil reacted by protecting 
its stock. What perceptual problem(s) likely occurred 
that led to this misunderstanding?
5. Before joining an organization or beginning education 
at a new school, we form mental models of what the 
work setting and activities will be like. How did your pre￾employment or pre-enrollment mental models differ from 
the actual situation? Why did your mental models differ 
from reality, and what effect did those differences have 
on your adjustment to the new work or school?
6. During a diversity management session, a manager 
suggests that stereotypes are a necessary part of working 
with others. “I have to make assumptions about what’s 
in the other person’s head, and stereotypes help me do 
that,” she explains. “It’s better to rely on stereotypes than 
to enter a working relationship with someone from 
another culture without any idea of what they believe in!” 
Discuss the merits of and problems with the manager’s 
statement.
critical thinking questions110
7. Describe how a manager or coach could use the process 
of self-fulfilling prophecy to enhance an individual’s 
performance.
8. Self-awareness is increasingly recognized as an important 
ingredient for effective leadership. Suppose that you are 
responsible for creating a leadership development pro￾gram in a government organization. What activities or 
processes would you introduce to help participants in 
this program constructively develop a better self-aware￾ness of their personality, values, and personal biases?
9. Almost everyone in a college or university business pro￾gram has developed some degree of a global mindset. 
What events or activities in your life have helped nurture 
the global mindset you have developed so far? What ac￾tions can you take now, while still attending school, to 
further develop your global mindset?
CASE STUDY: BRIDGING THE TWO WORLDS
By William Todorovic, Purdue University, Fort Wayne
I had been hired by Aluminum Elements Corp. (AEC), and 
it was my first day of work. I was 26 years old, and I was 
now the manager of AEC’s customer service group, which 
looked after customers, logistics, and some of the raw mate￾rial purchasing. My superior, George, was the vice presi￾dent of the company. AEC manufactured most of its 
products from aluminum, a majority of which were destined 
for the construction industry.
As I walked around the shop floor, the employees ap￾peared to be concentrating on their jobs, barely noticing me. 
Management held daily meetings, in which various produc￾tion issues were discussed. No one from the shop floor was 
invited to the meeting, unless there was a specific problem. 
Later I also learned that management had separate wash￾rooms, separate lunchrooms, as well as other perks that floor 
employees did not have. Most of the floor employees felt that 
management, although polite on the surface, did not really 
feel they had anything to learn from the floor employees.
John, who worked on the aluminum slitter, a crucial op￾eration required before any other operations could com￾mence, had a number of unpleasant encounters with 
George. As a result, George usually sent written memos to 
the floor in order to avoid a direct confrontation with John. 
Because the directions in the memos were complex, these 
memos were often more than two pages in length.
One morning, as I was walking around, I noticed that 
John was very upset. Feeling that perhaps there was some￾thing I could do, I approached John and asked him if I 
could help. He indicated that everything was just fine. 
From the looks of the situation, and John’s body language, 
I felt that he was willing to talk, but John knew that this 
was not the way things were done at AEC. Tony, who 
worked at the machine next to John’s, then cursed and 
said that the office guys only cared about schedules, not 
about the people down on the floor. I just looked at him, 
and then said that I only began working here last week, 
and thought that I could address some of their issues. 
Tony gave me a strange look, shook his head, and went 
back to his machine. I could hear him still swearing as I 
left. Later I realized that most of the office staff were also 
offended by Tony’s language.
On the way back to my office, Lesley, a recently hired 
engineer from Russia, approached me and pointed out 
that the employees were not accustomed to management 
talking to them. Management only issued orders and made 
demands. As we discussed the different perceptions be￾tween office and floor staff, we were interrupted by a very 
loud lunch bell, which startled me. I was happy to join 
Lesley for lunch, but she asked me why I was not eating in 
the office lunch room. I replied that if I was going to un￾derstand how AEC worked, I had to get to know all the 
people better. In addition, I realized that this was not how 
things were done, and wondered about the nature of this 
apparent division between the management and the floor. 
In the lunchroom, the other workers were amazed to see 
me there, commenting that I was just new and had not 
learned the ropes yet.
After lunch, when I asked George, my supervisor, about 
his recent confrontation with John, George was surprised 
that John got upset, and exclaimed, “I just wanted John to 
know that he did a great job, and as a result, we will be able 
to ship on time one large order to the West Coast. In fact, I 
thought I was complimenting him.”
Earlier, Lesley had indicated that certain behaviour was 
expected from management, and therefore from me. I rea￾soned that I do not think that this behaviour works, and be￾sides it is not what I believe or how I care to behave. For the 
next couple of months, I simply walked around the floor and 
took every opportunity to talk to the shop floor employees. 
Often, when the employees related specific information about 
their workplaces, I felt that it went over my head. Frequently, I 
had to write down the information and revisit it later. I made 
a point of listening to them, identifying where they were com￾ing from, and trying to understand them. I needed to keep my 
mind open to new ideas. Because the shop employees ex￾pected me to make requests and demands, I made a point of 
not doing any of that. Soon enough, the employees became 
friendly, and started to accept me as one of their own, or at 
least as a different type of a management person.
During my third month of work, the employees showed 
me how to improve the scheduling of jobs, especially those 
on the aluminum slitter. In fact, the greatest contribution 
was made by John who demonstrated better ways to com￾bine the most common slitting sizes, and reduce waste by 
retaining some of the “common-sized” material for new or￾ders. Seeing the opportunity, I programmed a spreadsheet 
to calculate and track inventory. This, in addition to better 
planning and forecasting, allowed us to reduce our new or￾der turnarounds from four to five weeks to in by 10 a.m. out 
by 5 p.m. on the same day.111
By the time I was employed for four months, I realized 
that members from other departments came to me and 
asked me to relay messages to the shop employees. When I 
asked why they were delegating this task to me, they stated 
that I spoke the same language as the shop employees. In￾creasingly, I became the messenger for the office to floor 
shop communication.
One morning, George called me into his office and compli￾mented me on the levels of customer service and the improve￾ments that have been achieved. As we talked, I mentioned 
that we could not have done it without John’s help. “He really 
knows his stuff, and he is good,” I said. I suggested that we 
consider him for some type of a promotion. Also, I hoped that 
this would be a positive gesture that would improve the com￾munication between the office and shop floor.
George turned and pulled a flyer out of his desk; “Here 
is a management skills seminar. Do you think we should 
send John to it?”
“That is a great idea,” I exclaimed, “Perhaps it would be 
good if he were to receive the news from you directly, 
George.” George agreed, and after discussing some other 
issues, we parted company.
That afternoon, John came into my office, upset and 
ready to quit. “After all my effort and work, you guys are 
sending me for training seminars. So, am I not good enough 
for you?”
Discussion Questions
1. What symptoms in this case suggest that something has 
gone wrong?
2. Explain the causes of these symptoms using your knowl￾edge of self-concept and perceptions concepts and theories. 
Analyze the case facts separately for each theory and 
refer to the symptom(s) that the theory explains from 
the facts.
3. What would you recommend to the manager and com￾pany overall to improve the situation (reduce or remove 
the symptoms) in the future. Provide recommendations 
for both immediate and longer-term actions.
TEAM EXERCISE: WHY DID THEY DO THAT?
111
company has one office in every state that helps clients 
complete the insurance application documents. The state 
office then digitally transfers those documents to the 
company’s risk assessment department, which has two 
dozen assessors, all of whom work in one centralized loca￾tion. One risk assessor, Jess, typically requires one hour to 
estimate a potential client’s risk level. Jess rarely completes 
an assessment in less than 45 minutes and a few applica￾tions require 90 minutes or more. However, when Jess 
receives client applications from the company’s office in 
State X, the assessment sometimes takes up to two hours. 
Jess’s coworkers also require up to two hours to complete a 
risk assessment for client applications submitted by State X. 
Other employees typically require the same range of time as 
Jess to complete risk assessments from other states. 
Recently, the director of risk assessment encouraged staff 
to speed up the assessment process without increasing errors. 
However, this request had little effect on how quickly Jess or 
the others completed their assessment of clients in State X 
or in other states.
Select one of these answers regarding this mini-case, 
and use the attribution rules along with facts in this case 
to justify your answer:
A. Something about Jess probably caused Jess to com￾plete risk assessments more slowly for State X client 
application files.
B. Something about State X client application files proba￾bly caused Jess to complete those risk assessments 
more slowly.
C. Something or someone at Jess’s workplace or in Jess’s 
life probably caused Jess to complete risk assessments 
of State X client application files more slowly.
PURPOSE This exercise is designed to help you under￾stand the attribution process and to apply the three attri￾bution rules to justify your conclusions about causation in 
each mini-case.
MATERIALS None, but it is useful for teams to have 
presentation resources (flip chart paper) or technologies 
(presentation slides) to show their analysis to the class.
INSTRUCTIONS (SMALL OR LARGE CLASS)
Step 1: The instructor will organize students into teams 
with membership size that allows meaningful team discussion 
and decision making. This exercise can also be completed indi￾vidually. It can also be conducted in remote or hybrid classes.
Step 2: Team members will read each case below and 
select one of the four answer options, relating to whether 
the focal behavior (response) should be attributed to the 
person (internal attribution), to the identified situational 
entity (resource, person, work setting, etc.), to an un￾known situational entity, or to a combination of these. The 
team will also indicate its level of confidence in their be￾liefs about the attributional cause of the person’s response. 
The team justifies its conclusion by commenting on each 
of the three attribution rules and referring to specific facts 
in the mini-case that relate to those rules. The team should 
document its justification regarding the three rules to 
show the class during debriefing.
Step 3: The class will debrief the exercise by sharing 
their results and discussing how the three rules guided 
those results.
CASE 1: COMPLETING RISK ASSESSMENTS AT AN 
INSURANCE FIRM A national property and life insurance C. Something about this meeting probably caused Kim to 
arrive late for this particular meeting.
D. Some combination of A, B, and C above probably 
caused Kim to arrive late for this particular meeting. 
(You need to specify which two of A, B, and C apply, 
or whether all three apply.)
CASE 3: POSITIVE INTERPERSONAL STYLE IN AN 
ELECTRONICS STORE A large electronics store has two 
dozen sales staff answering customers’ questions and help￾ing them to select products. Today, as on other days, Zoe 
displayed a positive, energetic, and talkative interpersonal 
style to most customers. Zoe is popular for this style along 
with her good product knowledge. All other sales staff are 
also very knowledgeable. Most also have a positive manner 
towards customers because the company carefully hires 
sales staff who can regularly display that style. Customer X, 
who visits the store a few times each month on various 
days and is known for buying products most of the time, 
approached Zoe today for assistance. Zoe was subdued and 
in a barely discernible way seemed reluctant to serve that 
person. Zoe displayed a clearly positive interpersonal style 
to all other customers she helped today. Three other em￾ployees also spoke with Customer X today (although more 
briefly), all of whom displayed their usual positive ap￾proach toward Customer X. Zoe exhibited a similar sub￾dued demeanor to Customer X in past interactions. Some 
staff weren’t particularly positive toward a few other cus￾tomers today, but that variability also occurs on other days.
Select one of these answers regarding this mini-case, 
and use the attribution rules along with facts in this case 
to justify your answer:
A. Something about Zoe probably caused Zoe to behave 
differently toward Customer X today.
B. Something about Customer X probably caused Zoe to 
behave differently toward Customer X today.
C. Something about the store or situation outside the 
store probably caused Zoe to behave differently toward 
Customer X today.
D. Some combination of A, B, and C above probably 
caused Zoe to behave differently toward Customer X 
today. (You need to specify which two of A, B, and C 
apply, or whether all three apply.)
© 2022 Steven L. McShane
D. Some combination of A, B, and C above probably 
caused Jess to more slowly complete risk assessments 
of State X client application files. (You need to spec￾ify which two of A, B, and C apply, or whether all 
three apply.)
CASE 2: SHOWING UP LATE FOR A CITY GOVERN￾MENT MANAGEMENT MEETING Ten municipal depart￾ment managers whose offices are located throughout a large 
city have monthly meetings to review budgets and policies. 
These gatherings are held in late afternoon at City Hall. To￾day’s meeting is scheduled to begin now, but two managers 
have just rushed in and one manager is still absent.
“Typical of Kim, always late,” complained one man￾ager, Sandy. “You’ve been late for these meetings, too,” 
another manager, Yui, reminded Sandy. Sandy shot back: 
“I was late only a couple of times this year, not as often as 
Kim. And when I’m late it’s because I’m very busy!” A 
third manager, Ben, chimed in: “Calm down you two, 
we’re all busy. In fact, these meetings should be quarterly, 
not monthly, so we can get our jobs done.” Two other man￾agers who haven’t spoken nodded in agreement.
“Quarterly meetings would be better for me. My of￾fice is across town, further than most of you,” agreed 
Regina, one of two managers who arrived just when the 
meeting was scheduled to start. Another manager, Jack￾son, countered: “I’m probably the furthest away, and 
traffic is terrible at this time, just as parents pick up kids 
from school.”
“Isn’t Kim’s office in the same building as yours, 
Jackson?” Ben asked. “Sure, but Kim’s job requires daily 
travel around the city,” Jackson replied. “Kim could be 
working today near city hall or closer to our outer suburb 
office. Anyway, I arrived here five minutes before the 
meeting was supposed to start.” At that moment, Kim flew 
into the room (as Kim often does), and apologized for 
being late. The city’s administrative leader then began 
the meeting, ten minutes later than scheduled.
Select one of these answers regarding this mini-case, 
and use the attribution rules along with facts in this case 
to justify your answer:
A. Something about Kim probably caused Kim to arrive 
late for this particular meeting.
B. Something about Kim’s work situation probably 
caused Kim to arrive late for this particular meeting.
TEAM EXERCISE: MY USER MANUAL
112
PURPOSE This exercise is designed to help you and 
other members of your team strengthen cooperation and 
coordination through improved perceptions and mutual 
understanding.
MATERIALS Students should complete the “My User 
Manual” template before class. This exercise also assumes 
that students have been organized into ongoing teams (i.e., 
not teams created only for this activity). These teams work 
together for class assignments or other class events at other 
times. The instructor might remove categories or include 
additional categories in the “My User Manual,” in which 
case the revised template will be distributed separately by 
the instructor.113
My User Manual: Your Name _____________________________________
CATEGORY INFORMATION ABOUT YOU
What energizes me at work
What work times/hours and working conditions are best for me
What communication channels and styles I prefer 
How I like to receive feedback, and what types of feedback I find most helpful 
What I like to receive from my team and the workplace to help me be my best 
My strengths (what I think I’m good at) 
My growth areas (what I’m trying to improve) 
What people tend to misunderstand about me 
Other interesting things about me 
This activity is based on information in: A. Bryant, “Want to Know Me? Just Read My User Manual,” New York Times, March 30, 2013; “How to 
Create a Personal User Manual for Work,” Atlassian Team Playbook (blog), 2019; L. Thomas, “A Personal User Manual for Work (Everything You 
Need to Know),” Friday Blog (blog) 2020; T. Connor, “Communicating to Yourself and Others—Your Personal User Manual and Other Great Tools,” 
10x Curiosity (blog), May 2, 2021.
1. “Life as I Know It: Nicholas Gerlier,” Eco-Age (blog), 
December 20, 2018; L. Tramuta, “The Beauty Industry’s 
Plastic Problem,” Fortune, December 23, 2021; L. 
Schmidt, Redefining HR: Transforming People Teams to 
Drive Business Performance (Kogan Page Publishers, 
2021), pp. 23–24.
2. J. Schaubroeck, Y.J. Kim, and A.C. Peng, “The Self￾Concept in Organizational Psychology: Clarifying and 
Differentiating the Constructs,” in International Review 
of Industrial and Organizational Psychology (New York: 
Wiley, 2012): 1–38; J.J. Skowronski and C. Sedikides, 
“Evolution of Self,” in Encyclopedia of Evolutionary 
Psychological Science, ed. T.K. Shackelford and V.A. 
Weekes-Shackelford (Cham: Springer International 
Publishing, 2018), 1–10.
3. V.L. Vignoles, S.J. Schwartz, and K. Luyckx, “Introduc￾tion: Toward an Integrative View of Identity,” in Handbook 
of Identity Theory and Research, ed. J.S. Schwartz, K. 
Luyckx, and L.V. Vignoles (New York: Springer New 
York, 2011), 1–27; L. Gaertner et al., “A Motivational 
Hierarchy within: Primacy of the Individual Self, 
Relational Self, or Collective Self?” Journal of 
Experimental Social Psychology 48, no. 5 (2012): 997–1013.
4. E.J. Koch and J.A. Shepperd, “Is Self-Complexity Linked 
to Better Coping? A Review of the Literature,” Journal of 
Personality 72, no. 4 (2004): 727–60; A.R. McConnell, 
“The Multiple Self-Aspects Framework: Self-Concept 
Representation and Its Implications,” Personality and 
Social Psychology Review 15, no. 1 (2011): 3–27; L.F. 
Emery, C. Walsh, and E.B. Slotter, “Knowing Who You 
Are and Adding to It: Reduced Self-Concept Clarity 
Predicts Reduced Self-Expansion,” Social Psychological 
and Personality Science 6, no. 3 (2015): 259–66.
5. C.M. Brown et al., “Between Two Selves: Comparing 
Global and Local Predictors of Speed of Switching between 
Self-Aspects,” Self and Identity 15, no. 1 (2016): 72–89.
endnotes
Step 2: Each student should complete the “My User 
Manual” template BEFORE class. The information 
should be documented in a way that can be easily shared 
with other members of the individual’s team, such as posted 
to a private online team space or written in a presentation 
slide.
Step 3: Each team member shares their user manual 
with other members of the team and answers any ques￾tions about what the individual has described about 
themselves.
INSTRUCTIONS
Step 1: When assigning this activity (prior to the class 
when this activity occurs), the instructor should clearly 
emphasize the following.
• The purpose of the activity is to improve perceptions 
and mutual understanding among team members.
• Students are NOT pressured to share anything about 
themselves that they are uncomfortable sharing.
• The content of each template is shared only with other 
members of the team (i.e., this activity does not ask stu￾dents to share their user manual with the entire class).114
Friends and Influence People, 1st ed. (New York: Simon 
& Schuster, 1936), Chapter 2, 37–38.
15. C.L. Guenther and M.D. Alicke, “Deconstructing the 
Better-Than-Average Effect,” Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology 99, no. 5 (2010): 755–70; S. Loughnan 
et al., “Universal Biases in Self-Perception: Better and 
More Human Than Average,” British Journal of Social 
Psychology 49 (2010): 627–36; D.L. Ferris and C. 
Sedikides, “Self-Enhancement in Organizations,” in The 
Self at Work: Fundamental Theory and Research, ed. D.L. 
Ferris, R.E. Johnson, and C. Sedikides, 2018, 91–118. 
16. D. Dunning, C. Heath, and J.M. Suls, “Flawed Self￾Assessment: Implications for Health, Education, and the 
Workplace,” Psychological Science in the Public Interest 5, 
no. 3 (2004): 69–106; D.A. Moore, “Not So above 
Average after All: When People Believe They Are Worse 
Than Average and Its Implications for Theories of Bias in 
Social Comparison,” Organizational Behavior and Human 
Decision Processes 102, no. 1 (2007): 42–58. 
17. D. Gosselin et al., “Comparative Optimism among 
Drivers: An Intergenerational Portrait,” Accident Analysis 
& Prevention 42, no. 2 (2010): 734–40; P.M. Picone, G. 
Battista Dagnino, and A. Minà, “The Origin of Failure: A 
Multidisciplinary Appraisal of the Hubris Hypothesis 
and Proposed Research Agenda,” Academy of Manage￾ment Perspectives 28, no. 4 (2014): 447–68; G. Chen, C. 
Crossland, and S. Luo, “Making the Same Mistake All 
over Again: CEO Overconfidence and Corporate 
Resistance to Corrective Feedback,” Strategic Manage￾ment Journal 36, no. 10 (2015): 1513–35; M. Dufner et al., 
“Self-Enhancement and Psychological Adjustment: A 
Meta-Analytic Review,” Personality and Social Psychology 
Review 23, no. 1 (2019): 48–72.
18. D.M. Cable and V.S. Kay, “Striving for Self-Verification 
during Organizational Entry,” Academy of Management 
Journal 55, no. 2 (2012): 360–80; S. Talaifar and W.B. 
Swann, “Self-Verification Theory,” in Encyclopedia of 
Personality and Individual Differences, ed. V. Zeigler-Hill 
and T.K. Shackelford (Cham: Springer International 
Publishing, 2020).
19. A. Meister, A. Sinclair, and K.A. Jehn, “Identities 
under Scrutiny: How Women Leaders Navigate Feeling 
Misidentified at Work,” The Leadership Quarterly 28, 
no. 5 (2017): 672–90.
20. T. Kwang and W.B. Swann, “Do People Embrace Praise 
Even When They Feel Unworthy? A Review of Critical 
Tests of Self-Enhancement versus Self-Verification,” 
Personality and Social Psychology Review 14, no. 3 (2010): 
263–80.; G. S. Preuss and M. D. Alicke, “My Worst 
Faults and Misdeeds: Self-Criticism and Self-Enhancement 
Can Co-Exist,” Self and Identity 16, no. 6 (2017): 645–63; 
A. Ashokkumar and W.B. Swann, “The Saboteur within: 
Self-Verification Strivings Can Make Praise Toxic,” in 
Psychological Perspectives on Praise, ed. E. Brummelman 
(Routledge, 2020), 11–18.
21. M.R. Leary, “Motivational and Emotional Aspects 
of the Self,” Annual Review of Psychology 58, no. 1 
(2007): 317–44; A. Meister, K.A. Jehn, and S.M.B. 
Thatcher, “Feeling Misidentified: The Consequences 
of Internal Identity Asymmetries for Individuals at 
Work,” Academy of Management Review 39, no. 4 
(2014): 488–512.
6. C.D. Bataille and H.C. Vough, “More Than the Sum 
of My Parts: An Intrapersonal Network Approach to 
Identity Work in Response to Identity Opportunities 
and Threats,” Academy of Management Review 47, no. 1 
(2022): 93–115.
7. J.D. Campbell et al., “Self-Concept Clarity: Measure￾ment, Personality Correlates, and Cultural Boundaries,” 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 70, no. 1 
(1996): 141–56. 
8. J. Lodi-Smith and B.W. Roberts, “Getting to Know Me: 
Social Role Experiences and Age Differences in Self￾Concept Clarity During Adulthood,” Journal of Personal￾ity 78, no. 5 (2010): 1383–410; H. Adam et al., “The 
Shortest Path to Oneself Leads around the World: Living 
Abroad Increases Self-Concept Clarity,” Organizational 
Behavior and Human Decision Processes 145 (2018): 16–29.
9. E.J. Koch and J.A. Shepperd, “Is Self-Complexity Linked 
to Better Coping? A Review of the Literature,” Journal of 
Personality 72, no. 4 (2004): 727–60; A.T. Church et al., 
“Relating Self-Concept Consistency to Hedonic and 
Eudaimonic Well-Being in Eight Cultures,” Journal of 
Cross-Cultural Psychology 45, no. 5 (2014): 695–712; A.W. 
Hanley and E.L. Garland, “Clarity of Mind: Structural 
Equation Modeling of Associations between Disposi￾tional Mindfulness, Self-Concept Clarity and Psychologi￾cal Well-Being,” Personality and Individual Differences
106 (2017): 334–39; M. Parise et al., “Self-Concept 
Clarity and Psychological Adjustment in Adolescence: 
The Mediating Role of Emotion Regulation,” Personality 
and Individual Differences 138 (2019): 363–65.
10. A.T. Brook, J. Garcia, and M.A. Fleming, “The Effects 
of Multiple Identities on Psychological Well-Being,” 
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 34, no. 12 
(2008): 1588–600; A.T. Church et al., “Relating Self￾Concept Consistency to Hedonic and Eudaimonic 
Well-Being in Eight Cultures,” Journal of Cross-Cultural 
Psychology 45, no. 5 (2014): 695–712.
11. J.D. Campbell, “Self-Esteem and Clarity of the Self￾Concept,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 59, 
no. 3 (1990): 538–49.
12. S. Hannah et al., “The Psychological and Neurological 
Bases of Leader Self-Complexity and Effects on Adaptive 
Decision-Making,” Journal of Applied Psychology 98, no. 3 
(2013): 393–411; S.J. Creary, B.B. Caza, and L.M. 
Roberts, “Out of the Box? How Managing a Subordinate’s 
Multiple Identities Affects the Quality of a Manager￾Subordinate Relationship,” Academy of Management 
Review 40, no. 4 (2015): 538–62.
13. C. Peus et al., “Authentic Leadership: An Empirical 
Test of Its Antecedents, Consequences, and Mediating 
Mechanisms,” Journal of Business Ethics 107, no. 3 
(2012): 331–48; F.O. Walumbwa, M.A. Maidique, and 
C. Atamanik, “Decision-Making in a Crisis: What Every 
Leader Needs to Know,” Organizational Dynamics 43, 
no. 4 (2014): 284–93; B. Mittal, “Self-Concept Clarity: 
Exploring Its Role in Consumer Behavior,” Journal of 
Economic Psychology 46 (2015): 98–110.
14. This quotation has been cited since the 1930s, yet we 
were unable to find it in any of Dewey’s writing. The 
earliest known reference to this quotation is Dale 
Carnegie’s famous self-help book, where the statement 
is attributed to Dewey. See D. Carnegie, How to Win 115
2010), 63–113; M. Ormiston, “Explaining the Link be￾tween Objective and Perceived Differences in Groups: 
The Role of the Belonging and Distinctiveness Motives,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 101, no. 2 (2016): 222–36.
30. We describe relational self-concept as a form of social 
identity because such connections are inherently social 
and the dyads are typically members of a collective en￾tity. For example, an employee has a relationship identity 
with his/her boss, but this is connected to a social iden￾tity with the team or department. However, recent discus￾sion suggests that relational self-concept may also be part 
of personal identity or a separate form of self-concept. 
See B.E. Ashforth, B.S. Schinoff, and K.M. Rogers, ““I 
Identify with Her,” “I Identify with Him”: Unpacking the 
Dynamics of Personal Identification in Organizations,” 
Academy of Management Review 41, no. 1 (2016): 28–60.
31. C. Sedikides and A.P. Gregg, “Portraits of the Self,” in 
The Sage Handbook of Social Psychology, ed. M.A. Hogg 
and J. Cooper (London: Sage, 2003), 110–38; S.A. 
Haslam and N. Ellemers, “Identity Processes in Organi￾zations,” in Handbook of Identity Theory and Research, 
ed. J.S. Schwartz, K. Luyckx, and L.V. Vignoles (New 
York: Springer New York, 2011), 715–44; M.A. Hogg and 
M.J. Rinella, “Social Identities and Shared Realities,” 
Current Opinion in Psychology, 23 (2018): 6–10.
32. M.R. Edwards, “Organizational Identification: A Con￾ceptual and Operational Review,” International Journal of 
Management Reviews 7, no. 4 (2005): 207–30; E.S. Lee, 
T.Y. Park, and B. Koo, “Identifying Organizational 
Identification as a Basis for Attitudes and Behaviors: 
A Meta-Analytic Review,” Psychological Bulletin 141, 
no. 5 (2015): 1049–80.
33. M.B. Brewer, “The Social Self: On Being the Same and 
Different at the Same Time,” Personality and Social 
Psychology Bulletin 17, no. 5 (1991): 475–82; R. Imhoff 
and H.-P. Erb, “What Motivates Nonconformity? Unique￾ness Seeking Blocks Majority Influence,” Personality and 
Social Psychology Bulletin 35, no. 3 (2009): 309–20; K.R. 
Morrison and S.C. Wheeler, “Nonconformity Defines 
the Self: The Role of Minority Opinion Status in Self￾Concept Clarity,” Personality and Social Psychology Bulle￾tin 36, no. 3 (2010): 297–308; M.G. Mayhew, J. Gardner, 
and N.M. Ashkanasy, “Measuring Individuals’ Need for 
Identification: Scale Development and Validation,” 
Personality and Individual Differences 49, no. 5 (2010): 
356–61. 
34. See, for example: L. Ramarajan, “Past, Present and Future 
Research on Multiple Identities: Toward an Intrapersonal 
Network Approach,” The Academy of Management Annals
8, no. 1 (2014): 589–659; D.L. Ferris, R.E. Johnson, and C. 
Sedikides, eds., The Self at Work: Fundamental Theory 
and Research (New York: Routledge/Taylor & Francis 
Group, 2018).
35. E.I. Knudsen, “Fundamental Components of Attention,” 
Annual Review of Neuroscience 30, no. 1 (2007): 57–78. 
For an evolutionary psychology perspective of selective 
attention and organization, see L. Cosmides and J. 
Tooby, “Evolutionary Psychology: New Perspectives on 
Cognition and Motivation,” Annual Review of Psychology 64, 
no. 1 (2013): 201–29. 
36. A. Bechara and A.R. Damasio, “The Somatic Marker 
Hypothesis: A Neural Theory of Economic Decision,” 
22. T.-Y. Kim, X. Lin, and S.-P. Kim, “Person–Organization 
Fit and Friendship From Coworkers: Effects on Feeling 
Self-Verified and Employee Outcomes,” Group & Organi￾zation Management 44, no. 4 (2019): 777–806; J. Lee 
Cunningham et al., “Seeing Oneself as a Valued Contribu￾tor: Social Worth Affirmation Improves Team Informa￾tion Sharing,” Academy of Management Journal 64, no. 6 
(2021): 1816–41.
23. We have described three components of core self￾evaluation. The remaining component is the personality 
trait emotional stability, which was described in Chapter 2. 
However, personality is a behavior tendency, whereas 
core self-evaluation includes only “evaluation focused” 
variables. There is also recent concern about whether 
locus of control is part of self-evaluation. See R.E. Johnson, 
C.C. Rosen, and P.E. Levy, “Getting to the Core of Core 
Self-Evaluation: A Review and Recommendations,” 
Journal of Organizational Behavior 29 (2008): 391–413; 
C.-H. Chang et al., “Core Self-Evaluations: A Review and 
Evaluation of the Literature,” Journal of Management 38, 
no. 1 (2012): 81–128; R.E. Johnson et al., “Getting to the 
Core of Locus of Control: Is It an Evaluation of the Self 
or the Environment?,” Journal of Applied Psychology 100, 
no. 5 (2015): 1568–78.
24. W.B. Swann Jr., C. Chang-Schneider, and K.L. McClarty, 
“Do People’s Self-Views Matter?: Self-Concept and Self￾Esteem in Everyday Life,” American Psychologist 62, no. 2 
(2007): 84–94; J.L. Pierce, D.G. Gardner, and C. Crow￾ley, “Organization-Based Self-Esteem and Well-Being: 
Empirical Examination of a Spillover Effect,” European 
Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology 25, no. 2 
(2016): 181–99.
25. A. Bandura, Self-Efficacy: The Exercise of Control
(New York: W. H. Freeman, 1997); J.B. Vancouver and 
J.D. Purl, “A Computational Model of Self-Efficacy’s 
Various Effects on Performance: Moving the Debate 
Forward.,” Journal of Applied Psychology 102, no. 4 
(2017): 599–616.
26. G. Chen, S.M. Gully, and D. Eden, “Validation of a New 
General Self-Efficacy Scale,” Organizational Research 
Methods 4, no. 1 (2001): 62–83. 
27. J.B. Rotter, “Generalized Expectancies for Internal ver￾sus External Control of Reinforcement,” Psychological 
Monographs 80, no. 1 (1966): 1–28; D.A. Cobb-Clark, 
“Locus of Control and the Labor Market,” IZA Journal of 
Labor Economics 4, no. 1 (2015): 1–19; B.M. Galvin et al., 
“Changing the Focus of Locus (of Control): A Targeted 
Review of the Locus of Control Literature and Agenda 
for Future Research,” Journal of Organizational Behavior
39, no. 7 (2018): 820–33.
28. T.W.H. Ng, K.L. Sorensen, and L.T. Eby, “Locus of Con￾trol at Work: A Meta-Analysis,” Journal of Organizational 
Behavior 27 (2006): 1057–87; Q. Wang, N.A. Bowling, 
and K.J. Eschleman, “A Meta-Analytic Examination of 
Work and General Locus of Control,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology 95, no. 4 (2010): 761–68. 
29. G.J. Leonardelli, C.L. Pickett, and M.B. Brewer, “Opti￾mal Distinctiveness Theory: A Framework for Social 
Identity, Social Cognition, and Intergroup Relations,” in 
Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, ed. M.P. 
Zanna and J.M. Olson (San Diego, CA: Academic Press, 116
43. S. Avugos et al., “The ’Hot Hand’ Reconsidered: A Meta￾Analytic Approach,” Psychology of Sport and Exercise 14, 
no. 1 (2013): 21–27. For a discussion of cognitive closure 
and perception, see A. Roets et al., “The Motivated 
Gatekeeper of Our Minds: New Directions in Need for 
Closure Theory and Research,” in Advances in Experimen￾tal Social Psychology, ed. M.O. James and P.Z. Mark 
(San Diego, CA: Academic Press, 2015), 221–83.
44. J. Willis and A. Todorov, “First Impressions: Making Up 
Your Mind after a 100-Ms Exposure to a Face,” Psycho￾logical Science 17, no. 7 (2006): 592–98; D. Kahneman, 
Thinking Fast and Slow (New York: Farrar, Strauss and 
Giroux, 2011); A. Todorov, Face Value: The Irresistible 
Influence of First Impressions (Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press, 2017).
45. T.J. Chermack, “Mental Models in Decision Making and 
Implications for Human Resource Development,” Ad￾vances in Developing Human Resources 5, no. 4 (2003): 
408–22; P.N. Johnson-Laird, “Mental Models and 
Deductive Reasoning,” in Reasoning: Studies of Human 
Inference and Its Foundations, ed. J.E. Adler and L.J. 
Rips (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
2008); C. Furlough and D. Gillan, “Mental Models: 
Structural Differences and the Role of Experience,” 
Journal of Cognitive Engineering and Decision Making 12, 
no. 4 (2018): 269–87.
46. G.W. Allport, The Nature of Prejudice (Reading, MA: 
Addison-Wesley, 1954); J.C. Brigham, “Ethnic Stereo￾types,” Psychological Bulletin 76, no. 1 (1971): 15–38; 
D.J. Schneider, The Psychology of Stereotyping (New 
York: Guilford, 2004); S. Kanahara, “A Review of the 
Definitions of Stereotype and a Proposal for a Progres￾sional Model,” Individual Differences Research 4, no. 5 
(2006): 306–21. 
47. L. Jussim, J.T. Crawford, and R.S. Rubinstein, “Stereo￾type (in)Accuracy in Perceptions of Groups and Individ￾uals,” Current Directions in Psychological Science 24, no. 6 
(2015): 490–97.
48. C.N. Macrae, A.B. Milne, and G.V. Bodenhausen, 
“Stereotypes as Energy-Saving Devices: A Peek inside 
the Cognitive Toolbox,” Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology 66 (1994): 37–47; J.W. Sherman et al., 
“Stereotype Efficiency Reconsidered: Encoding Flexibil￾ity under Cognitive Load,” Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology 75 (1998): 589–606; A.-K. Newheiser 
and J.F. Dovidio, “Individual Differences and Intergroup 
Bias: Divergent Dynamics Associated with Prejudice and 
Stereotyping,” Personality and Individual Differences 53, 
no. 1 (2012): 70–74; C.K. Soderberg et al., “The Effects 
of Psychological Distance on Abstraction: Two Meta￾Analyses,” Psychological Bulletin 141, no. 3 (2015): 
525–48.
49. J.C. Turner and S.A. Haslam, “Social Identity, Organiza￾tions, and Leadership,” in Groups at Work: Theory and 
Research, ed. M.E. Turner (Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum, 
2001), 25–65; J. Jetten, R. Spears, and T. Postmes, 
“Intergroup Distinctiveness and Differentiation: A Meta￾Analytic Integration,” Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology 86, no. 6 (2004): 862–79; M.A. Hogg et al., 
“The Social Identity Perspective: Intergroup Relations, 
Self-Conception, and Small Groups,” Small Group 
Research 35, no. 3 (2004): 246–76; K. Hugenberg and 
Games and Economic Behavior 52, no. 2 (2005): 336–72; 
T.S. Saunders and M.J. Buehner, “The Gut Chooses 
Faster Than the Mind: A Latency Advantage of Affective 
over Cognitive Decisions,” Quarterly Journal of Experi￾mental Psychology 66, no. 2 (2012): 381–88; R. Smith 
and R. D. Lane, “The Neural Basis of One’s Own 
Conscious and Unconscious Emotional States,” Neurosci￾ence & Biobehavioral Reviews 57 (2015): 1–29. 
37. Plato, The Republic, trans. D. Lee (Harmondsworth, UK: 
Penguin, 1955). On the various effects of emotions on 
memory, see: I. Xenakis, A. Arnellos, and J. Darzentas, 
“The Functional Role of Emotions in Aesthetic Judg￾ment,” New Ideas in Psychology 30, no. 2 (2012): 212–26; 
S. Sheldon and J. Donahue, “More than a Feeling: 
Emotional Cues Impact the Access and Experience of 
Autobiographical Memories,” Memory & Cognition 45, no. 5 
(2017): 731–44; H.J. Bowen, S.M. Kark, and E.A. Kens￾inger, “NEVER Forget: Negative Emotional Valence 
Enhances Recapitulation,” Psychonomic Bulletin & Review
25, no. 3 (2018): 870–91.
38. D.J. Simons and C.F. Chabris, “Gorillas in Our Midst: 
Sustained Inattentional Blindness for Dynamic Events,” 
Perception 28 (1999): 1059–74. 
39. R.S. Nickerson, “Confirmation Bias: A Ubiquitous Phe￾nomenon in Many Guises,” Review of General Psychology 2, 
no. 2 (1998): 175–220; A. Gilbey and S. Hill, “Confirma￾tion Bias in General Aviation Lost Procedures,” Applied 
Cognitive Psychology 26, no. 5 (2012): 785–95; A.M. 
Scherer, P.D. Windschitl, and A.R. Smith, “Hope to Be 
Right: Biased Information Seeking Following Arbitrary 
and Informed Predictions,” Journal of Experimental 
Social Psychology 49, no. 1 (2013): 106–12. 
40. C. Wastell et al., “Identifying Hypothesis Confirmation 
Behaviors in a Simulated Murder Investigation: Implica￾tions for Practice,” Journal of Investigative Psychology and 
Offender Profiling 9, no. 2 (2012): 184–98; D.K. Rossmo, 
“Case Rethinking: A Protocol for Reviewing Criminal 
Investigations,” Police Practice and Research 17, no. 3 
(2016): 212–28.
41. C.N. Macrae and G.V. Bodenhausen, “Social Cognition: 
Thinking Categorically about Others,” Annual Review of 
Psychology 51 (2000): 93–120; K.A. Quinn and H.E.S. 
Rosenthal, “Categorizing Others and the Self: How 
Social Memory Structures Guide Social Perception and 
Behavior,” Learning and Motivation 43, no. 4 (2012): 
247–58; L.T. Phillips, M. Weisbuch, and N. Ambady, 
“People Perception: Social Vision of Groups and Conse￾quences for Organizing and Interacting,” Research in Or￾ganizational Behavior 34 (2014): 101–27; B.D. Langhe 
and P. Fernbach, “The Dangers of Categorical Thinking: 
We’re Hardwired to Sort Information into Buckets—and 
That Can Hamper Our Ability to Make Good Decisions,” 
Harvard Business Review 97, no. 5 (2019): 80–92.
42. J.L. Brooks, “Traditional and New Principles of Percep￾tual Grouping,” in The Oxford Handbook of Perceptual 
Organization, ed. J. Wagemans (Oxford University Press, 
2015), 57–87; L. Papeo and E. Abassi, “Seeing Social 
Events: The Visual Specialization for Dyadic Human–
Human Interactions,” Journal of Experimental Psychology: 
Human Perception and Performance 45, no. 7 (2019): 
877–88. Proximity is mostly studied in visual perception 
(Gestalt), but recent studies are discovering the social 
dynamics of proximity categorization.117
Stereotype Activation and Application,” Journal of Exper￾imental Social Psychology 73 (2017): 97–110; I.R. 
Johnson, B.M. Kopp, and R.E. Petty, “Just Say No! 
(And Mean It): Meaningful Negation as a Tool to Modify 
Automatic Racial Attitudes,” Group Processes & Intergroup 
Relations 21, no. 1 (2018): 88–110; G.B. Humiston and 
E.J. Wamsley, “Unlearning Implicit Social Biases during 
Sleep: A Failure to Replicate,” PLOS ONE 14, no. 1 
(2019): e0211416.
56. A.M. Rivers et al., “On the Roles of Stereotype Activa￾tion and Application in Diminishing Implicit Bias,” 
Personality & Social Psychology Bulletin 46, no. 3 (2020): 
349–64
57. H.H. Kelley, Attribution in Social Interaction (Morristown, 
NJ: General Learning Press, 1971); B.F. Malle, “Attribu￾tion Theories: How People Make Sense of Behavior,” in 
Theories of Social Psychology, ed. D. Chadee (Chichester, 
UK: Blackwell, 2011), 72–95. This “internal–external” 
or “person–situation” perspective of the attribution 
process differs somewhat from the original “intentional–
unintentional” perspective, which says that we try to 
understand the deliberate or accidental/involuntary 
reasons why people engage in behaviors, as well as the 
reasons for behavior. Some writers suggest the original 
perspective is more useful. See B.F. Malle, “Time to 
Give Up the Dogmas of Attribution: An Alternative 
Theory of Behavior Explanation,” in Advances in Experi￾mental Social Psychology, vol. 44, ed. K.M. Olson and 
M.P. Zanna (San Diego: Elsevier Academic, 2011), 
297–352.
58. Some psychology and OB books state that high consis￾tency predicts internal attribution and low consistency 
predicts external attribution. These sources describe low 
consistency as a one-off deviation from the past. In con￾trast, the original attribution writing and subsequent re￾search defines consistency as the degree that responses 
vary across time and settings (i.e., reliability). In fact, 
Kelley’s original writing only discusses high consistency. 
Kelley and Michela state: “The basic point is that a per￾son trusts his reactions to a stimulus (i.e. attributes them 
to objective properties of the stimulus) when they are 
consistent (over time and modality) and distinctive from 
those to other stimuli.” Van Overwalle states: “High con￾sensus information resulted in stimulus dispositions and 
low distinctiveness information lead to person disposi￾tions; and, as predicted, consistency information often 
increased these ratings.” DiVitto and McArthur state: 
“causal attributions to the target of a response are facili￾tated by high consensus, high distinctiveness, or high 
consistency, whereas low consensus, low distinctiveness, 
or high consistency information facilitate causal attribu￾tions to the agent.” See: L.A. Mcarthur, “The How and 
What of Why: Some Determinants and Consequences 
of Causal Attribution,” Journal of Personality & Social 
Psychology 22 (1970): 171–93; B. Divitto and L.Z. 
McArthur, “Developmental Differences in the Use of 
Distinctiveness, Consensus and Consistency Information 
for Making Causal Attributions,” Developmental Psychol￾ogy 14, no. 5 (1978): 474–82; H.H. Kelley and J.L. 
Michela, “Attribution Theory and Research,” Annual 
Review of Psychology 31 (1980): 457–501; F. van 
Overwalle, “Dispositional Attributions Require the Joint 
Application of the Methods of Difference and Agreement,” 
D.F. Sacco, “Social Categorization and Stereotyping: How 
Social Categorization Biases Person Perception and Face 
Memory,” Social and Personality Psychology Compass 2, 
no. 2 (2008): 1052–72. 
50. N. Halevy, G. Bornstein, and L. Sagiv, “‘In-Group Love’ 
and ‘Out-Group Hate’ as Motives for Individual Partici￾pation in Intergroup Conflict: A New Game Paradigm,” 
Psychological Science 19, no. 4 (2008): 405–11; T. Yamag￾ishi and N. Mifune, “Social Exchange and Solidarity: In￾Group Love or Out-Group Hate?,” Evolution and Human 
Behavior 30, no. 4 (2009): 229–37; N. Halevy, O. Weisel, 
and G. Bornstein, “‘In-Group Love’ and ‘Out-Group 
Hate’ in Repeated Interaction between Groups,” Journal 
of Behavioral Decision Making 25, no. 2 (2012): 188–95; 
M. Parker and R. Janoff-Bulman, “Lessons from Morality￾Based Social Identity: The Power of Outgroup ‘Hate,’ 
Not Just Ingroup ‘Love,’” Social Justice Research 26, no. 1 
(2013): 81–96. 
51. T. Schmader and W.M. Hall, “Stereotype Threat in 
School and at Work: Putting Science into Practice,” Policy 
Insights from the Behavioral and Brain Sciences 1, no. 1 
(2014): 30–37; C.R. Pennington et al., “Twenty Years of 
Stereotype Threat Research: A Review of Psychological 
Mediators,” PLoS ONE 11, no. 1 (2016): e0146487.
52. C.A. Moss-Racusin et al., “Science Faculty’s Subtle Gen￾der Biases Favor Male Students,” Proceedings of the Na￾tional Academy of Sciences 109, no. 41 (2012): 16474–79. 
Several studies conducted earlier and subsequently have 
similarly reported unintentional bias in job and research 
grant applications. For example, see: H.O. Witteman et al., 
“Are Gender Gaps Due to Evaluations of the Applicant 
or the Science? A Natural Experiment at a National 
Funding Agency,” The Lancet 393, no. 10171 (February 9, 
2019): 531–40; A.A. Eaton et al., “How Gender and 
Race Stereotypes Impact the Advancement of Scholars 
in STEM: Professors’ Biased Evaluations of Physics and 
Biology Post-Doctoral Candidates,” Sex Roles 82, no. 3–4 
(2020): 127–41.
53. S.T. Fiske, “Stereotyping, Prejudice, and Discrimination,” 
in Handbook of Social Psychology, ed. D.T. Gilbert, S.T. 
Fiske, and G. Lindzey (New York: McGraw Hill, 1998): 
357–411; C. Stangor, “The Study of Stereotyping, Preju￾dice, and Discrimination within Social Psychology: A 
Quick History of Theory and Research,” in Handbook of 
Prejudice, Stereotyping, and Discrimination, ed. Todd D. 
Nelson (New York: Psychology Press, 2016), 1–22.
54. E. Zschirnt and D. Ruedin, “Ethnic Discrimination in 
Hiring Decisions: A Meta-Analysis of Correspondence Tests 
1990–2015,” Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies 42, 
no. 7 (2016): 1115–34; S. Hennekam et al., “Recruitment 
Discrimination: How Organizations Use Social Power to 
Circumvent Laws and Regulations,” The International 
Journal of Human Resource Management (2019): 1–29.
55. J.A. Bargh and T.L. Chartrand, “The Unbearable 
Automaticity of Being,” American Psychologist 54, no. 7 
(1999): 462–79; B. Gawronski et al., “When ‘Just Say 
No’ Is Not Enough: Affirmation versus Negation Train￾ing and the Reduction of Automatic Stereotype Activa￾tion,” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 44 
(2008): 370–77; M.D. Burns, M.J. Monteith, and L.R. 
Parker, “Training Away Bias: The Differential Effects of 
Counterstereotype Training and Self-Regulation on 118
in Correspondence Bias: Measurement, Consequences, 
and Correction of Biased Interpersonal Attributions,” 
Management Science 64, no. 4 (2017): 1879–1910.
65. Similar models are presented in D. Eden, “Self-Fulfilling 
Prophecy as a Management Tool: Harnessing Pygma￾lion,” Academy of Management Review 9 (1984): 64–73; 
R.H.G. Field and D.A. Van Seters, “Management by 
Expectations (MBE): The Power of Positive Prophecy,” 
Journal of General Management 14 (1988): 19–33; D.O. 
Trouilloud et al., “The Influence of Teacher Expectations 
on Student Achievement in Physical Education Classes: 
Pygmalion Revisited,” European Journal of Social Psychol￾ogy 32 (2002): 591–607. 
66. P. Whiteley, T. Sy, and S.K. Johnson, “Leaders’ Concep￾tions of Followers: Implications for Naturally Occurring 
Pygmalion Effects,” Leadership Quarterly 23, no. 5 
(2012): 822–34; J. Weaver, J. F. Moses, and M. Snyder, 
“Self-Fulfilling Prophecies in Ability Settings,” Journal 
of Social Psychology 156, no. 2 (2016): 179–89.
67. D. Eden, “Interpersonal Expectations in Organizations,” 
in Interpersonal Expectations: Theory, Research, and 
Applications (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1993), 154–78. 
68. D. Eden, “Pygmalion Goes to Boot Camp: Expectancy, 
Leadership, and Trainee Performance,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology 67 (1982): 194–99; C.M. Rubie￾Davies, “Teacher Expectations and Student Self￾Perceptions: Exploring Relationships,” Psychology in the 
Schools 43, no. 5 (2006): 537–52; B.J. Avolio et al., 
“A Meta-Analytic Review of Leadership Impact Research: 
Experimental and Quasi-Experimental Studies,” 
The Leadership Quarterly 20, no. 5 (2009): 764–84; 
P. Whiteley, T. Sy, and S.K. Johnson, “Leaders’ Concep￾tions of Followers: Implications for Naturally Occurring 
Pygmalion Effects,” Leadership Quarterly 23, no. 5 
(2012): 822–34. 
69. S. Madon, L. Jussim, and J. Eccles, “In Search of the 
Powerful Self-Fulfilling Prophecy,” Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology 72, no. 4 (1997): 791–809; A.E. 
Smith, L. Jussim, and J. Eccles, “Do Self-Fulfilling 
Prophecies Accumulate, Dissipate, or Remain Stable 
over Time?,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 77, 
no. 3 (1999): 548–65; S. Madon et al., “Self-Fulfilling 
Prophecies: The Synergistic Accumulative Effect 
of Parents’ Beliefs on Children’s Drinking Behavior,” 
Psychological Science 15, no. 12 (2005): 837–45. 
70. J. Hoffman, “Doctors’ Delicate Balance in Keeping 
Hope Alive,” New York Times, 24 December 2005, A1, 
A14; K. Blakely et al., “Optimistic Honesty: Understand￾ing Surgeon and Patient Perspectives on Hopeful Com￾munication in Pancreatic Cancer Care,” HPB 19, no. 7 
(2017): 611–19. For reviews of positive organizational 
behavior and associated concepts of positive psychology 
and psychological capital, see: A. Newman et al., “Psy￾chological Capital: A Review and Synthesis,” Journal of 
Organizational Behavior 35, no. S1 (2014): S120–S38; 
D. S. Dunn, ed. Positive Psychology: Established and 
Emerging Issues, (New York: Routledge, 2018).
71. W.H. Cooper, “Ubiquitous Halo,” Psychological Bulletin 90 
(1981): 218–44; J.W. Keeley et al., “Investigating Halo 
and Ceiling Effects in Student Evaluations of Instruc￾tion,” Educational and Psychological Measurement 73, 
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 23, no. 9 
(1997): 974–80.
59. However, attribution alone does not explain how people 
determine causation and assign blame. See S.A. Sloman 
and D. Lagnado, “Causality in Thought,” Annual Review 
of Psychology 66, no. 1 (2015): 223–47; M.D. Alicke 
et al., “Causal Conceptions in Social Explanation and 
Moral Evaluation: A Historical Tour,” Perspectives on 
Psychological Science 10, no. 6 (2015): 790–812; J.E. 
Mroz and J.A. Allen, “To Excuse or Not to Excuse: 
Effect of Explanation Type and Provision on Reactions 
to a Workplace Behavioral Transgression,” Journal of 
Business and Psychology 35, no. 2 (2020): 187–201; P. 
Catellani et al., “How Expert Witnesses’ Counterfactuals 
Influence Causal and Responsibility Attributions of 
Mock Jurors and Expert Judges,” Applied Cognitive 
Psychology 35, no. 1 (2021): 3–17.
60. B. Weiner, “Intrapersonal and Interpersonal Theo￾ries of Motivation from an Attributional Perspective,” 
Educational Psychology Review 12 (2000): 1–14; N. Bacon 
and P. Blyton, “Worker Responses to Teamworking: 
Exploring Employee Attributions of Managerial Mo￾tives,” International Journal of Human Resource Manage￾ment 16, no. 2 (2005): 238–55; K. Hamann, M.A.E. 
Pilotti, and B.M. Wilson, “Students’ Self-Efficacy, Causal 
Attribution Habits and Test Grades,” Education Sciences
10, no. 9 (2020): 231.
61. D.T. Miller and M. Ross, “Self-Serving Biases in the 
Attribution of Causality: Fact or Fiction?,” Psychological 
Bulletin 82, no. 2 (1975): 213–25; J. Shepperd, W. 
Malone, and K. Sweeny, “Exploring Causes of the Self￾Serving Bias,” Social and Personality Psychology Compass 2, 
no. 2 (2008): 895–908; M.S. Allen et al., “Systematic 
Review and Meta-Analysis of Self-Serving Attribution 
Biases in the Competitive Context of Organized Sport,” 
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 46, no. 7 
(2020): 1027–43.
62. E.W.K. Tsang, “Self-Serving Attributions in Corporate 
Annual Reports: A Replicated Study,” Journal of Manage￾ment Studies 39, no. 1 (2002): 51–65; N.J. Roese and 
J.M. Olson, “Better, Stronger, Faster: Self-Serving Judg￾ment, Affect Regulation, and the Optimal Vigilance 
Hypothesis,” Perspectives on Psychological Science 2, no. 2 
(2007): 124–41; A. Melis and S. Aresu, “Analyst Follow￾ing, Country’s Financial Development, and the Selective 
Use of Graphical Information in Corporate Annual Re￾ports,” International Journal of Business Communication, 
February 28, 2019, 232948841982988; D. Lehmberg and 
C. Tangpong, “Do Top Management Performance Attri￾bution Patterns Matter to Subsequent Organizational 
Outcomes? A Two-Country Study of Attribution in 
Economic Crisis,” Journal of Management & Organiza￾tion 26, no. 5 (2020): 736–55.
63. D.T. Gilbert and P.S. Malone, “The Correspondence 
Bias,” Psychological Bulletin 117, no. 1 (1995): 21–38. 
64. B.F. Malle, “The Actor–Observer Asymmetry in Attribu￾tion: A (Surprising) Meta-Analysis,” Psychological Bulletin
132, no. 6 (2006): 895–919; C.W. Bauman and L.J. 
Skitka, “Making Attributions for Behaviors: The Preva￾lence of Correspondence Bias in the General Population,” 
Basic and Applied Social Psychology 32, no. 3 (2010): 
269–77; I. Scopelliti et al., “Individual Differences 119
77. T.W. Costello and S.S. Zalkind, Psychology in Administra￾tion: A Research Orientation (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Prentice Hall, 1963), 45–46; J.M. Kouzes and B.Z. 
Posner, The Leadership Challenge, 4th ed. (San Francisco: 
Jossey-Bass, 2007), Chap. 3. 
78. W.L. Gardner et al., “‘Can You See the Real Me?’ A Self￾Based Model of Authentic Leader and Follower Develop￾ment,” Leadership Quarterly 16 (2005): 343–72; C. Peus 
et al., “Authentic Leadership: An Empirical Test of Its 
Antecedents, Consequences, and Mediating Mechanisms,” 
Journal of Business Ethics 107, no. 3 (2012): 331–48.
79. A.G. Greenwald et al., “Understanding and Using the 
Implicit Association Test: III. Meta-Analysis of Predictive 
Validity,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 97, 
no. 1 (2009): 17–41; M.C. Wilson and K. Scior, “Atti￾tudes Towards Individuals with Disabilities as Measured 
by the Implicit Association Test: A Literature Review,” 
Research in Developmental Disabilities 35, no. 2 (2014): 
294–321; B.A. Nosek et al., “Understanding and Using 
the Brief Implicit Association Test: Recommended Scor￾ing Procedures,” PLoS ONE 9, no. 12 (2014): e110938; 
B. Schiller et al., “Clocking the Social Mind by Identifying 
Mental Processes in the IAT with Electrical Neuroimag￾ing,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 113, 
no. 10 (2016): 2786–91.
80. J.T. Jost et al., “The Existence of Implicit Bias Is Beyond 
Reasonable Doubt: A Refutation of Ideological and 
Methodological Objections and Executive Summary of 
Ten Studies That No Manager Should Ignore,” Research 
in Organizational Behavior 29 (2009): 39–69. The 
science-as-male implicit stereotype is discussed in F.L. 
Smyth and B.A. Nosek, “On the Gender–Science Stereo￾types Held by Scientists: Explicit Accord with Gender￾Ratios, Implicit Accord with Scientific Identity,” 
Frontiers in Psychology 6 (April 27, 2015), https://doi.
org/10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00415.
81. J. Luft, Of Human Interaction (Palo Alto, CA: National 
Press, 1969). For a variation of this model, see J. Hall, 
“Communication Revisited,” California Management 
Review 15 (1973): 56–67. For recent discussion of the 
Johari blind spot, see A.-M.B. Gallrein et al., “You Spy 
with Your Little Eye: People Are ‘Blind’ to Some of the 
Ways in Which They Are Consensually Seen by Others,” 
Journal of Research in Personality 47, no. 5 (2013): 464–71; 
A.-M.B. Gallrein et al., “I Still Cannot See It—a Replication 
of Blind Spots in Self-Perception,” Journal of Research in 
Personality 60 (2016): 1–7.
82. S. Vazire and M.R. Mehl, “Knowing Me, Knowing You: 
The Accuracy and Unique Predictive Validity of Self￾Ratings and Other-Ratings of Daily Behavior,” Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology 95, no. 5 (2008): 1202–16; 
D. Leising, A.-M.B. Gallrein, and M. Dufner, “Judging 
the Behavior of People We Know: Objective Assessment, 
Confirmation of Preexisting Views, or Both?,” Personality 
and Social Psychology Bulletin 40, no. 2 (2014): 153–63. 
However, there is some evidence that too much self-disclosure 
has unintended negative consequences for individuals in 
team settings. see: K.R. Gibson, D. Harari, and J.C. Marr, 
“When Sharing Hurts: How and Why Self-Disclosing 
Weakness Undermines the Task-Oriented Relationships 
of Higher Status Disclosers,” Organizational Behavior and 
Human Decision Processes 144 (2018): 25–43.
no. 3 (2013): 440–57; M.K. Maske, M. Sohn, and B. 
Hirsch, “How Managerial Accountability Mitigates a 
Halo Effect in Managers’ Ex-Post Bonus Adjustments,” 
Management Accounting Research 51 (2021): 100738.
72. B. Mullen et al., “The False Consensus Effect: A Meta￾Analysis of 115 Hypothesis Tests,” Journal of Experimen￾tal Social Psychology 21, no. 3 (1985): 262–83; F.J. Flynn 
and S.S. Wiltermuth, “Who’s with Me? False Consensus, 
Brokerage, and Ethical Decision Making in Organiza￾tions,” Academy of Management Journal 53, no. 5 (2010): 
1074–89; B. Roth and A. Voskort, “Stereotypes and False 
Consensus: How Financial Professionals Predict Risk 
Preferences,” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organiza￾tion 107, Part B (2014): 553–65.
73. D.D. Steiner and J.S. Rain, “Immediate and Delayed 
Primacy and Recency Effects in Performance Evalua￾tion,” Journal of Applied Psychology 74 (1989): 136–42; 
A. Guiral Contreras, J.A. Gonzalo Angulo, and W. Rodgers, 
“Information Content and Recency Effect of the Audit 
Report in Loan Rating Decisions,” Accounting & Finance
47, no. 2 (2007): 285–304; P. Henne et al., “Counterfac￾tual Thinking and Recency Effects in Causal Judgment,” 
Cognition 212 (July 2021): 104708.
74. E.A. Lind, L. Kray, and L. Thompson, “Primacy Effects 
in Justice Judgments: Testing Predictions from Fairness 
Heuristic Theory,” Organizational Behavior and Human 
Decision Processes 85 (2001): 189–210; T. Mann and M. 
Ferguson, “Can We Undo Our First Impressions? The 
Role of Reinterpretation in Reversing Implicit Evalua￾tions,” Journal of Personality & Social Psychology 108, no. 6 
(2015): 823–49; B.C. Holtz, “From First Impression to 
Fairness Perception: Investigating the Impact of Initial 
Trustworthiness Beliefs,” Personnel Psychology 68, no. 3 
(2015): 499–546; T.C. Mann and M.J. Ferguson, “Revers￾ing Implicit First Impressions through Reinterpretation 
after a Two-Day Delay,” Journal of Experimental Social 
Psychology 68 (2017): 122–27.
75. K. Bezrukova, K.A. Jehn, and C.S. Spell, “Reviewing 
Diversity Training: Where We Have Been and Where 
We Should Go,” Academy of Management Learning & 
Education 11, no. 2 (2012): 207–27; S.M. Shepherd, 
“Cultural Awareness Workshops: Limitations and 
Practical Consequences,” BMC Medical Education 19, 
no. 1 (2019): 14; E.M. Krockow, “The Halo Effect: 
What It Is and How to Beat It,” Psychology Today, 
October 8, 2021.
76. D. Eden et al., “Implanting Pygmalion Leadership 
Style through Workshop Training,” The Leadership 
Quarterly 11, no. 2 (June 2000): 171–210; B. Gawronski 
et al., “When ‘Just Say No’ Is Not Enough: Affirmation 
versus Negation Training and the Reduction of Auto￾matic Stereotype Activation,” Journal of Experimental 
Social Psychology 44 (2008): 370–77; M. M. Duguid and 
M. C. Thomas-Hunt, “Condoning Stereotyping? How 
Awareness of Stereotyping Prevalence Impacts Expres￾sion of Stereotypes,” Journal of Applied Psychology 100, 
no. 2 (2015): 343–59; F. Dobbin and A. Kalev, “Why 
Diversity Programs Fail,” Harvard Business Review 94, 
no. 7/8 (2016): 52–60; L.M. Leslie, “Diversity Initiative 
Effectiveness: A Typological Theory of Unintended Con￾sequences,” Academy of Management Review 44, no. 3 
(2019): 538–63.120
most of the recent writing on this subject. See, for exam￾ple, S.J. Black, W.H. Mobley, and E. Weldon, “The Mind￾set of Global Leaders: Inquisitiveness and Duality,” in 
Advances in Global Leadership (Greenwich, CT: JAI, 
2006), 181–200; O. Levy et al., “What We Talk about 
When We Talk about ‘Global Mindset’: Managerial Cog￾nition in Multinational Corporations,” Journal of Interna￾tional Business Studies 38, no. 2 (2007): 231–58; S. 
Beechler and D. Baltzley, “Creating a Global Mindset,” 
Chief Learning Officer 7, no. 6 (2008): 40–45; M. Javidan 
and D. Bowen, “The ‘Global Mindset’ of Managers: 
What It Is, Why It Matters, and How to Develop It,” 
Organizational Dynamics 42, no. 2 (2013): 145–55. 
91. A.K. Gupta and V. Govindarajan, “Cultivating a Global 
Mindset,” Academy of Management Executive 16, no. 1 
(2002): 116–26. 
92. T. Maak, N.M. Pless, and M. Borecká, “Developing 
Responsible Global Leaders, ” Advances in Global Leader￾ship 8 (2014): 339–64; P. Caligiuri and C. Thoroughgood, 
“Developing Responsible Global Leaders through 
Corporate-Sponsored International Volunteerism Programs,” 
Organizational Dynamics 44, no. 2 (2015): 138–45.
a. V. Buote, “Most Employees Feel Authentic at Work, but 
It Can Take a While,” Harvard Business Review, May 11, 
2016; J. Austin, “Why We Don’t Bring Our Whole Selves 
to Work,” Work Life by Atlassian (blog), January 8, 2020; 
“The Importance of Authenticity in the Workplace” 
(Boston: Simmons University, Institute for Inclusive 
Leadership, July 2021); Forbes Expert Panel, “Work￾place Culture Doesn’t Align With Your Authentic Self? 
14 Tips,” Forbes, August 16, 2021.
b. S. Mautz, “A New Deloitte Study of 10,455 Millennials 
Shows They Need Help Improving These 4 Skills,” Inc., 
May 21, 2018; J. Gitlin, “Why Employees Crave More 
Training and How Employers Aren’t Delivering It,” 
SurveyMonkey, Curiosity at Work (blog), August 30, 
2018, https://www.surveymonkey.com/curiosity/why￾employees-crave-more-training-and-how-employers￾arent-delivering-it/; “Getting to Equal,” news release 
(Glasgow: My Confidence Matters, 2019), https://www.
myconfidencematters.com/research-2019; “The TINYpulse 
2019 Employee Engagement Report: The End of 
Employee Loyalty” (Seattle: TINYpulse, February 2019); 
“Gartner Says 45% of Managers Lack Confidence To 
Help Employees Develop the Skills They Need Today,” news 
release (London: Gartner, September 18, 2019).
c. M. Zakkour, “Why Starbucks Succeeded in China: A 
Lesson for All Retailers,” Forbes, August 24, 2017; Star￾bucks, “Starbucks Redefines Partner Benefits in China,” 
news release (Beijing, China, April 11, 2017); O. Farry, 
“Harnessing the Power,” South China Morning Post (Hong 
Kong), November 17, 2017, 1; “Brewing a Culture of Family: 
Starbucks Named One of China’s Best Employers,” 
Starbucks Stories Asia (blog), November 15, 2019.
d. The Sherlock Holmes quotation is from A. Conan 
Doyle, “A Study in Scarlet,” in The Complete Sherlock 
Holmes (New York: Fine Creative Media, 2003), 3–96. 
Sherlock Holmes offers similar advice in “A Scandal in 
Bohemia,” page 189. P. Colloff, “The Innocent Man, Part 
One,” Texas Monthly, November 2012; P. Colloff, “The 
Innocent Man, Part Two,” Texas Monthly, December 
2012; C. Lindell, “Anderson Gets 10 Days, Surrenders 
83. J.D. Vorauer, “Completing the Implicit Association Test 
Reduces Positive Intergroup Interaction Behavior,” 
Psychological Science 23, no. 10 (2012): 1168–75.
84. T.F. Pettigrew and L.R. Tropp, “A Meta-Analytic Test of 
Intergroup Contact Theory,” Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology 90, no. 5 (2006): 751–83; Y. Amichai￾Hamburger, B.S. Hasler, and T. Shani-Sherman, “Struc￾tured and Unstructured Intergroup Contact in the Digital 
Age,” Computers in Human Behavior 52 (2015): 515–22; 
S.C. Wright, A. Mazziotta, and L.R. Tropp, “Contact and 
Intergroup Conflict: New Ideas for the Road Ahead,” 
Journal of Peace Psychology 23, no. 3 (2017): 317–27; J.F. 
Dovidio et al., “Reducing Intergroup Bias through Inter￾group Contact: Twenty Years of Progress and Future 
Directions,” Group Processes & Intergroup Relations 20, 
no. 5 (2017): 606–20.
85. The contact hypothesis was first introduced in G.W. 
Allport, The Nature of Prejudice (Reading, MA: Addison￾Wesley, 1954), Chap. 16. For recent discussion on how 
to implement intergroup contact, see: S. Paolini et al., 
“Intergroup Contact Research in the 21st Century: 
Lessons Learned and Forward Progress If We Remain 
Open,” Journal of Social Issues 77, no. 1 (2021): 11–37; 
J. Harwood, “Modes of Intergroup Contact: If and How 
to Interact with the Outgroup,” Journal of Social Issues 77, 
no. 1 (2021): 154–70; M.S. Choi and S.E. Jarrott, 
“Application of Intergroup Contact Theory to Managing 
Age-Diverse Teams,” Journal of Intergenerational 
Relationships 19, no. 3 (2021): 377–91.
86. C.K. Soderberg et al., “The Effects of Psychological Dis￾tance on Abstraction: Two Meta-Analyses,” Psychological 
Bulletin 141, no. 3 (2015): 525–48; J. Boin et al., “The 
Generalization of Intergroup Contact Effects: Emerging 
Research, Policy Relevance, and Future Directions,” 
Journal of Social Issues 77, no. 1 (2021): 105–31.
87. The meaning of empathy is a never-ending debate. Our 
definition tries to capture the most widely accepted view, 
but carefully avoids two dimensions found in a couple of 
definitions. First, our definition doesn’t explicitly refer to 
emotional contagion, which is automatic whereas empa￾thy is a conscious ability. Second, we avoid “empathetic 
concern,” which is empirically a distinct concept and im￾plies a distancing from the target person. J. Zaki, “Empa￾thy: A Motivated Account,” Psychological Bulletin 140, 
no. 6 (2014): 1608–47; B.M.P. Cuff et al., “Empathy: A 
Review of the Concept,” Emotion Review 8, no. 2 (2016): 
144–53; J.A. Hall, R. Schwartz, and F. Duong, “How Do 
Laypeople Define Empathy?,” The Journal of Social 
Psychology 161, no. 1 (2021): 5–24.
88. M. Tarrant, R. Calitri, and D. Weston, “Social Identifica￾tion Structures the Effects of Perspective Taking,” Psycho￾logical Science 23, no. 9 (2012): 973–78; J.L. Skorinko 
and S.A. Sinclair, “Perspective Taking Can Increase 
Stereotyping: The Role of Apparent Stereotype Confir￾mation,” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 49, 
no. 1 (2013): 10–18. 
89. J. Ang, “Q&A: Roselin Lee, Vice President, HR, Shiseido 
Asia Pacific and Shiseido Travel Retail,” Human Resources, 
September 2, 2019; “Shiseido Develops Regional Learning 
Center to Help Leaders Grow,” SmartBrief, September 3, 
2019.
90. There is no consensus on the meaning of global mindset. 
The elements identified in this book are common among 121
“2018 Sustainability Report” (Toronto: Manulife Financial 
Corporation, June 4, 2019).
i. S. Côté, P.K. Piff, and R. Willer, “For Whom Do the 
Ends Justify the Means? Social Class and Utilitarian 
Moral Judgment,” Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology 104, no. 3 (2013): 490–503; T. Mattelmäki, 
K. Vaajakallio, and I. Koskinen, “What Happened to 
Empathic Design?,” Design Issues 30, no. 1 (2014): 67–77; 
J. Decety and J.M. Cowell, “Friends or Foes: Is Empathy 
Necessary for Moral Behavior?,” Perspectives on Psycho￾logical Science 9, no. 4 (2014): 525–37; M. Churcher, 
“Can Empathy Be a Moral Resource? A Smithean Reply 
to Jesse Prinz,” Dialogue 55, no. 3 (2016): 429–47; 
N.H. Longmire and D.A. Harrison, “Seeing Their Side 
versus Feeling Their Pain: Differential Consequences of 
Perspective-Taking and Empathy at Work,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology 103, no. 8 (2018): 894–915; A.B.B. 
Hamilton and F. Breithaupt, The Dark Sides of Empathy
(Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2019); C.D. Cameron 
et al., “Empathy Is Hard Work: People Choose to Avoid 
Empathy Because of Its Cognitive Costs.,” Journal of 
Experimental Psychology: General 148, no. 6 (2019): 
962–76; A. König et al., “A Blessing and a Curse: How 
CEOs’ Trait Empathy Affects Their Management of 
Organizational Crises,” Academy of Management Review
45, no. 1 (2020): 130–53.
j. “The EY Global Mindset: Cathy Ng,” EY-Financial 
Services, FSCareers:Top Stories, accessed March 9, 2019, 
https://www.fscareers.ey.com/top-stories/apac_cathy-ng/; 
J. Lönnqvist, “EY - Jessica Lönnqvist,” EY Global-Careers￾Inspiring Women, My Journey (blog), 2018, https://
www.ey.com/gl/en/careers/ey-jessica-lonnqvist; 
S. McCabe, “EY Eyes over 15,000 New Hires in 2019,” 
Accounting Today, October 10, 2018; C. Ng. “How has 
working in EY help to expand your understanding of 
the different cultures globally?” 2019.
Law License,” Austin American-Statesman, 9 November 
2013, A1; D. K. Rossmo, “Case Rethinking: A Protocol 
for Reviewing Criminal Investigations,” Police Practice 
and Research 17, no. 3 (2016): 212–28; B. Wirskye, 
“Opinion: Texas Paves the Way for NY to Make Criminal 
Justice More Fair,” City Limits (New York), February 18, 2019.
e. J. Richardson, “Nando’s Takes on Stereotypes with Their 
Hilarious New Ad: #YouPeople [Video],” The South 
African, November 26, 2018; J. Tennant, “#NewCampaign: 
All You People, This Ad’s for You,” Advertising News, 
November 26, 2018.
f. N. Tiku, “Black Women Say Pinterest Created a Den of 
Discrimination—despite Its Image as the Nicest Company 
in Tech,” Washington Post, July 4, 2020; K. Swisher, “Hitting 
the Glass Ceiling, Suddenly, at Pinterest,” The New York 
Times, August 14, 2020; Z. Schiffer, “Pinterest Shareholders 
Sue over ‘Toxic’ Work Culture,” The Verge, December 1, 
2020; J. Miller, “Pinterest Isn’t So Pretty Behind the 
Scenes,” Slate, December 15, 2020; J. Min, “Pinterest and 
the Subtle Poison of Sexism and Racism in Silicon Valley,” 
Time, March 22, 2021; P. Anderson, “Pinterest to Undergo 
Corporate Diversity Reform to Settle Suit Led by RI General 
Treasurer,” The Providence Journal, November 27, 2021.
g. J. Booton, “Macy’s CFO Blames Millennials, Netflix and 
Lipstick Haters on Shifting Retail Landscape,” Market￾Watch, March 24, 2015; S. McGee, “What’s to Blame for 
Poor Earnings? Probably Not the Weather or the Pope,” 
The Guardian, October 18, 2015; J. Briggs, “Papa John’s 
Started a Dumb Trend of Retailers Blaming the NFL for 
Weak Sales,” The Indianapolis Star, December 8, 2017; 
J. Engle, “Expedia’s Problems Run Deeper,” GuruFocus, 
December 17, 2019.
h. S. Tatla, “A Great Start to 2019 - Manulife Named to 
Bloomberg’s 2019 Gender-Equality Index,” LinkedIn, Pulse
(blog), January 16, 2019, https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/great￾start-2019-manulife-named-bloombergs-index-sandeep-tatla; 
Design Credit: Blue globe icon: Merfin/Shutterstock122
Workplace Emotions, 
Attitudes, and Stress
Circles.Life doesn’t wait a year or even six months to measure employee 
attitudes. “At Circles.Life, we launched an initiative called monthly pulse check (quick rating of 1 to 5) 
that helps us evaluate how our employees feel,” says cofounder Rameez Ansar. The Singapore-based 
digital telco, which operates across several countries, provides quarterly feedback to employees about 
the pulse survey results and the company’s actions to address employee concerns.
Circles.Life and many other companies are replacing or supplementing their annual attitude survey 
with more timely pulse checks, in which employees respond to a handful of easily answered questions 
online several times each year. St Ermin’s Hotel in London switched from annual surveys to biweekly 
pulse checks so the Marriott Autograph Collection hotel has more timely feedback about employees’ 
general work attitudes as well as their views on specific issues.
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
LO 4-1 Explain how emotions and cognition (conscious reasoning) influence attitudes 
and behavior.
LO 4-2 Describe emotional labor and discuss strategies for displaying expected emotions 
at work.
LO 4-3 Define emotional intelligence and discuss its importance in the workplace.
LO 4-4 Explain how job satisfaction and dissatisfaction affect work behavior, including job 
performance and customer service.
LO 4-5 Summarize the three types of organizational commitment, and discuss strategies to 
increase affective commitment.
LO 4-6 Define stress and stressors, and explain why people differ in their response to the 
same stressor.
LO 4-7 Identify five ways to manage workplace stress.
Learning Objectives
4
chapterEmployee emotions and attitudes are so important at Hootsuite and other organizations that they rely on pulse surveys to 
regularly check in on employee beliefs and feelings.
PART 2: INDIVIDUAL BEHAVIOR AND PROCESSES
Pulse checks are also valued at Hootsuite because they fit the company’s culture. “We’re a social first 
company. We have a live out loud culture,” explains Tara Ataya, chief people and diversity officer at the 
Vancouver-based social media diagnostics technology firm. “Part of that is conducting regular pulse 
surveys to understand where our employees are and to meet them there.”
Ataya points out that frequent pulse surveys also keep the company informed and responsive to 
rapid changes in employee opinions and the workplace. “We know that what works today may not work 
tomorrow. As such, we need to make sure that we have an open dialogue with employees so that we 
can adapt, and test, and flex as needed.”1
Organizations increasingly rely on pulse checks and other indicators because emotions and attitudes 
influence employee performance, well-being, and customer service. This chapter begins by describing 
emotions and explaining how they influence attitudes and behavior. Next, we consider the dynamics of 
emotional labor, followed by the popular concept of emotional intelligence. The specific work attitudes 
of job satisfaction and organizational commitment are then discussed, including their association with 
various employee behaviors and work performance. The final section looks at work-related stress, 
including the stress experience, four prominent stressors, individual differences in stress, and ways 
to combat excessive stress.
123
Matt Jacques/Alamy Stock Photo124 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
Emotions in the Workplace
Emotions influence almost everything we do in the workplace. This is a strong statement, 
and one that would have rarely been expressed by organizational behavior experts a few 
decades ago. Most OB theories still assume that a person’s thoughts and actions are gov￾erned primarily or exclusively by logical thinking (called cognition).2
 Yet groundbreaking 
neuroscience discoveries have revealed that our perceptions, attitudes, decisions, and be￾havior are influenced as much and possibly more by emotions.3
 In fact, emotions often 
occur before cognitive processes and, consequently, influence the latter. By ignoring emo￾tionality, many theories have overlooked a large piece of the puzzle about human behavior 
in the workplace.
Emotions are physiological, behavioral, and psychological episodes experienced 
toward an object, person, or event that create a state of readiness.4 These “episodes” are 
very brief events, some lasting less than a second. However, we usually experience 
emotions over several minutes or longer because they occur in waves as we continue 
to think about the source of the emotion. Emotions are directed toward someone or 
something. For example, we experience joy, fear, anger, and other emotional episodes 
toward tasks, customers, or a phone app we are using. This differs from moods, which 
tend to be longer-term background emotional states that are no longer associated with 
specific events or people.
Emotions are experiences. They represent changes in our physiological state (e.g., blood 
pressure, heart rate), psychological state (e.g., thought process), and behavior (e.g., facial 
expression).5
 Most emotional experiences are subtle; they occur without our awareness. 
This is an important point because the topic of emotions often conjures up images of peo￾ple “getting emotional.” In reality, most emotions are fleeting, usually nonconscious events 
that influence our conscious thinking and behavior.6
 Finally, emotions put us in a state of 
readiness. When we get worried, for example, our heart rate and blood pressure increase to 
make our body better prepared to engage in fight or flight. Strong emotions trigger our 
conscious awareness of a threat or opportunity in the external envi￾ronment. The “state of readiness” generated by emotions is the en￾gine of our motivation, which we discuss more fully in Chapter 5.7
TYPES OF EMOTIONS
People experience many emotions and various combinations of 
emotions, but all of them have two common features, illustrated in 
Exhibit 4.1.8
 One feature is that emotions vary in their level of acti￾vation. Emotions put us in a “state of readiness” and, as men￾tioned, are the primary source of a person’s motivation. Some 
emotional experiences, such as when we are suddenly surprised, 
are strong enough to consciously motivate us to act without careful 
thought. Most emotional experiences are more subtle, but even 
they activate enough to make us more aware of our environment.
A second feature is that all emotions evaluate the situation as 
positive or negative, good or bad, helpful or harmful, and so forth. 
In other words, all emotions have an associated valence (called 
core affect) signaling that the perceived object or event should be 
approached or avoided. Negative emotions tend to generate stron￾ger levels of activation than do positive emotions.9
 Fear and anger, 
for instance, are more intense experiences than are joy and delight, 
so they have a stronger influence on our actions. This valence 
asymmetry likely occurs because negative emotions protect us 
from harm and are therefore more critical for our survival.
LO 4-1
If employees are experiencing the wrong emotions or moods, it 
may be time to change the lighting. Almost a century ago, MIT and 
Harvard researchers dismissed the effects of lighting on human 
thoughts and behavior, whereas numerous recent studies report 
that lighting intensity and warmth can influence emotions and 
moods. Bright white lighting tends to increase employee alertness 
and vitality, resulting in faster reaction times on tasks. Moderate 
intensity warm lighting seems to improve interpersonal relations, 
whereas low intensity cool lighting reduces socially oriented 
emotions and motivation. The combination of light intensity and 
warmth also influences how much employees regulate their 
emotions in that setting.a
Oleksandr Delyk/Shutterstock
emotions
physiological, behavioral, and 
psychological episodes 
experienced toward an object, 
person, or event that create a 
state of readinessChapter Four Workplace Emotions, Attitudes, and Stress 125
EMOTIONS, ATTITUDES, AND BEHAVIOR
To understand how emotions influence our thoughts and behavior in the workplace, we 
first need to know about attitudes. Attitudes represent the cluster of beliefs, assessed feelings, 
and behavioral intentions toward a person, object, or event (called an attitude object).10
Attitudes are judgments, whereas emotions are experiences. In other words, attitudes 
involve evaluations of an attitude object, whereas emotions operate as events that we 
experience, usually without our awareness. Attitudes might occasionally be nonconscious, 
but more often we are aware of and actively think about those evaluations. Another 
distinction is that we experience most emotions very briefly, whereas our attitude toward 
someone or something is more stable over time.11
Until recently, experts believed that attitudes could be understood just by the three 
cognitive components illustrated on the left side of Exhibit 4.2: beliefs, feelings, and be￾havioral intentions. Now evidence suggests that a parallel emotional process is also at 
work, shown on the right side of the exhibit.12 Using attitude toward mergers as an exam￾ple, let’s look more closely at this model, beginning with the traditional cognitive perspec￾tive of attitudes.
• Beliefs. These are your established perceptions about the attitude object—what you 
believe to be true.13 For example, you might believe that mergers reduce job secu￾rity for employees in the combined firms, or that mergers increase the company’s 
competitiveness in this era of globalization. These beliefs are perceived facts that 
you acquire from experience and other forms of learning. Each of these beliefs 
also has a valence; that is, you have a positive or negative feeling about each belief 
(e.g., less job security is bad).
• Feelings. This element represents your conscious positive or negative evaluations of 
the attitude object. Some people think mergers are good; others think they are bad. 
Your positive or negative opinion of mergers represents your assessed feelings. 
attitudes
the cluster of beliefs, assessed 
feelings, and behavioral 
intentions toward a person, 
object, or event (called an 
attitude object)
Aroused
Astonished
Stimulated
Quiet
Tranquil
Still
Negative
Low
High
Positive
High-activation
negative emotions
High-activation
positive emotions
Low-activation
negative emotions
Evaluation
Activation
Low-activation
positive emotions
Unhappy
Sad
Gloomy
Happy
Cheerful
Delighted
Bored
Tired
Drowsy
Relaxed
Content
Calm
Distressed
Fearful
Jittery
Enthusiastic
Elated
Excited
EXHIBIT 4.1
Circumplex Model of Emotions
Sources: Adapted from J.A. Russell, 
“Core Affect and the Psychological 
Construction of Emotion,” Psychological 
Review 110, no. 1 (2003): 145–72; 
M. Yik, J.A. Russell, and J.H. Steiger, 
“A 12-Point Circumplex Structure 
of Core Affect,” Emotion 11, no. 4 
(2011): 705–31.126 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
EXHIBIT 4.2
Model of Emotions, Attitudes, 
and Behavior
Behavior
Attitude
Emotion
episodes
Perceived environment
Emotional process
Behavioral
intentions
Feelings
Beliefs
Cognitive process
According to the traditional cognitive perspective of attitudes (left side of the 
model), feelings are calculated from your beliefs about mergers and the associated 
feelings about those beliefs. Consider the example of your attitude toward mergers. 
If you believe that mergers typically have negative consequences such as layoffs 
and organizational politics, then you will form negative feelings toward mergers in 
general or about a specific planned merger in your organization.
• Behavioral intentions. This third element represents your planned effort to engage 
in a particular behavior regarding the attitude object.14 Upon hearing that the com￾pany will merge with another organization, you might become motivated to look 
for a job elsewhere or possibly to complain to management about the merger deci￾sion. Your feelings toward mergers influence your behavioral intentions, and which 
actions you choose depends on your past experience, personality, and social 
norms of appropriate behavior.
Attitude–Behavior Contingencies The cognitive model of attitudes (beliefs–
feelings–intentions) gives the impression that we can predict behavior from each element 
of the individual’s attitude. This is potentially true, but contingencies at each stage in the 
model usually weaken that predictability.15 Let’s begin with the beliefs–feelings link. Peo￾ple with the same beliefs might form quite different feelings toward the attitude object 
because they have different valences for those beliefs. Two employees who work for the 
same boss share the belief that their boss makes them work hard. Yet one employee dis￾likes the boss because that person has a negative valence toward hard work, whereas the 
other employee likes the boss because they have a positive valence toward hard work.
The effect of feelings on behavioral intentions also depends on contingencies, particu￾larly an individual’s personality, values, self-concept, experiences, and other personal 
characteristics. For instance, two employees might equally dislike their boss, but one em￾ployee intends to complain to the union or upper management whereas the other em￾ployee intends to find a job elsewhere. Complaining (voice) and quitting are two of the 
four responses to job dissatisfaction, which we discuss later in this chapter.Chapter Four Workplace Emotions, Attitudes, and Stress 127
Finally, the model indicates that behavioral intentions are the best predictors of a per￾son’s behavior. However, the strength of this link also depends on situational factors as 
well as the person’s ability and role perceptions (see the MARS model in Chapter 1). For 
example, two people might intend to quit because they dislike their boss, but only one 
does so because the other employee can’t find another job.
How Emotions Influence Attitudes and Behavior To some extent, the cog￾nitive model describes how employees form and change their attitudes, but emotions also 
have a central role in this process.16 The right side of Exhibit 4.2 illustrates this process, 
which (like the cognitive process) also begins with perceptions of the world around us. 
Our brain tags incoming sensory information with emotional markers based on a quick 
and imprecise evaluation of whether that information supports or threatens our innate 
drives. These markers are not calculated feelings; they are automatic and nonconscious 
emotional responses based on very thin slices of sensory information.17 The experienced 
emotions then influence our feelings about the attitude object.
Consider once again your attitude toward mergers, specifically a situation in which 
your employer intends to merge with a competitor. You might experience worry, nervous￾ness, or relief upon learning that your company intends to be merged with another firm. 
The fuzzy dots on the right side of Exhibit 4.2 illustrate the numerous emotional epi￾sodes you experience upon hearing the merger announcement, subsequently thinking 
about the merger, discussing the merger with coworkers, and so forth. These emotions 
are transmitted to your brain’s cognitive centers, where they are somewhat logically ana￾lyzed along with other information about the attitude object.18 So, while you are con￾sciously evaluating whether the announced merger is good or bad, your brain is also 
generating emotions with positive or negative valences, and those emotional signals sway 
your conscious evaluation. In fact, we often deliberately “listen in” on our emotions to 
help us consciously decide whether to support or oppose something (see Chapter 7 on 
emotions in decision making).19
The influence of both cognitive reasoning and emotions on attitudes is most apparent 
when they disagree with each other. People occasionally experience this mental tug-of￾war, sensing that something isn’t right even though they can’t think of any logical reason 
to be concerned. This internal conflict or mixed feelings indicates that the person’s logi￾cal analysis of the situation (left side of Exhibit 4.2) generates feelings that differ from the 
emotional response (right side of Exhibit 4.2).20 Should we pay attention to our emotions 
or to our logical analysis? This question is not easy to answer, but some studies indicate 
that logical analysis should play a central role in most decisions. Although executives are 
known to make quick decisions based on their gut feelings (emotional response), their 
best decisions tend to occur after logically working through the alternatives.21 Therefore, 
we should pay attention to both the cognitive and emotional sides of the attitude model, 
and hope they agree with each other most of the time!
Generating Positive Emotions at Work Companies have introduced numer￾ous perks and practices to generate positive emotional experiences.22 For instance, em￾ployees at Zoom Video Communications are among the happiest in America, according 
to several annual reviews of America’s best workplaces. The San Jose-based company 
provides free meals, fully stocked kitchens, choice of workspace, games rooms, wellness 
rooms, volunteering events, and many other perks. Zoom even has an entire team—called 
the happiness crew—at each location dedicated to maintaining a positive and engaging 
workplace. “If you get an offer to work at Zoom, take it,” advises a Zoom employee in 
Atlanta, Georgia. “Zoom takes employee happiness seriously and people genuinely love 
the company.”23
The COVID-19 pandemic has forced companies to limit access to these office-based 
benefits, but innovative firms have found new ways to create positive emotional experi￾ences for employees in remote work arrangements. Google has several “reset days” each 128 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
year, giving employees uninterrupted leisure time. And even while working from home, 
employees at Parthenon Management Group in Nashville, Tenn., continue to have fun 
with ugly sweater contests, team-centered conversations on specific topics, motivational 
emails, and virtual painting classes.24
Some critics argue that the organization’s main focus should be to create positive emo￾tions through the job itself, and through natural everyday occurrences such as polite cus￾tomers and supportive coworkers. Still, most people perform work that produces some 
negative emotions, and research has found that humor and fun at work—whether natural 
or contrived—can potentially counteract the negative experiences.25 Overall, emotions 
shape employee attitudes and, as we will discuss later, those attitudes influence various 
forms of work-related behavior.
One last comment about Exhibit 4.2: Notice the arrow from the emotional episodes to 
behavior. It indicates that emotions directly influence a person’s behavior without con￾scious thought. This occurs when we jump suddenly if someone sneaks up on us. It also 
occurs in everyday situations because even low-intensity emotions automatically change 
our facial expressions. These actions are not carefully thought out. They are automatic 
emotional responses that are learned or hardwired by heredity for particular situations.26
COVID-19 pushed employees into 
remote work, far removed from 
office perks and fun activities. But 
companies have discovered new 
ways to maintain staff happiness. 
Vertex Pharmaceuticals in Boston 
offers virtual baby-sitting, tutoring, 
and online craft classes so its 
employees have some respite from 
home schooling and entertaining 
kids. European fintech company 
Revolut allows its 2,000 employees 
to work from anywhere in the 
world for two months each year. 
And Ogilvy continues to have fun￾filled meetings, even though they 
are now remote. “We’ve 
overhauled our all-agency internal 
meetings to put fun and silly￾business back centre-stage,” 
explains Leigh Bignell, managing 
partner at the marketing services 
firm’s Australian business. “Shared 
laughter goes a long way in 
making everyone feel connected.”b
Panther Media GmbH/
Alamy Stock Photo
debating point
IS HAVING FUN AT WORK REALLY A GOOD IDEA?C
“Fun at work” has become such a hot business fad that companies 
without a “fun” committee are considered insensitive task masters. 
Having fun at work can improve employee attitudes in many situations, 
but are special fun events really necessary or beneficial?
Some critics vote “No”! They argue that contrived fun events at work 
can backfire. Employees might even be offended by the silliness of activi￾ties created by management or a few staff. Some types of fun aren’t fun 
at all to specific groups of people. For example, there is evidence that the 
meaning and value of fun at work varies across generations; what works 
for Millennials could backfire for Baby Boomers, and vice versa.
Other employees resent having fun forced on them. One expert 
warns: “Once the idea of fun is formally institutionalized from above, it 
can lead to employees becoming resentful. They feel patronized and 
condescended, and it breeds anger and frustration.”Chapter Four Workplace Emotions, Attitudes, and Stress 129
COGNITIVE DISSONANCE
Imagine that you have just signed a contract for new digital whiteboards to be installed 
throughout the company’s meeting rooms. The deal was expensive but, after consulting 
with several staff, you decided that the technology would be valuable in this digital age. 
Yet, you felt ambivalence and a twinge of regret soon after signing the contract. This 
emotional experience is cognitive dissonance, which occurs when people perceive that 
their beliefs, feelings, and behavior are incongruent with each other.27 The inconsis￾tency among these three attitude components generates emotions (such as feeling am￾bivalent and regret) that motivate the person to create more consistency by changing 
one or more of them.
Why did you experience cognitive dissonance after purchasing the digital white￾boards?28 Perhaps you remembered that some staff wanted flexibility, whereas the white￾boards require special markers and computer software. Or maybe you feel an increasing 
awareness that the high cost of digital whiteboards versus traditional whiteboards is 
inconsistent with your personal values and your company’s culture of thriftiness. Generally, 
dissonance occurs because your attitude (it’s good to be cost conscious) is incongruous 
with your behavior (buying expensive whiteboards). Most people like to think of themselves—
and be viewed by others—as rational and logical. Cognitive dissonance occurs when our 
behavior and beliefs conflict, which is not so rational.
How do we reduce cognitive dissonance?29 Reversing the behavior might work, but 
most behaviors can’t be undone. It would be too expensive to remove the digital 
whiteboards after they have been installed. In any event, dissonance would still exist 
because you and your coworkers already know that you made this purchase and did 
so willingly.
More often, people reduce cognitive dissonance by changing their beliefs and feelings. 
One dissonance-reducing strategy is to amplify or discover additional positive features of 
their selected alternative (e.g., the digital whiteboards can change handwriting into typed 
text). A second strategy is to amplify or discover additional problems or weaknesses with 
the alternatives that weren’t chosen (e.g., traditional boards are ineffective as projection 
screens). 
A third strategy is more indirect; rather than try to overlook the high price of the digi￾tal whiteboards, you reduce dissonance by emphasizing how your other decisions have 
been frugal. This framing compensates for your expensive whiteboard fling and thereby 
maintains your self-concept and public image as a thrifty decision maker. Each of these 
mental acrobatics maintains some degree of consistency between the person’s behavior 
(buying expensive whiteboards) and attitudes (being thrifty).
EMOTIONS AND PERSONALITY
Throughout this section, we have implied that emotional experiences are triggered by 
workplace experiences. This is mostly true, but emotions are also partly determined, am￾plified, or suppressed by an individual’s personality.30 People with higher emotional sta￾bility and extraverted personalities (see Chapter 2) tend to experience more positive 
emotions. Those with higher neuroticism (lower emotional stability) and introverted per￾sonalities tend to experience more negative emotions. Although these personality traits 
have some effect, studies have found that the actual situation in which people work has a 
noticeably stronger influence on their attitudes and behavior.31
cognitive dissonance
an emotional experience 
caused by a perception that 
our beliefs, feelings, and 
behavior are incongruent with 
one another
®
SELF-ASSESSMENT 4.1: What Is Your Emotional Personality?130 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
Managing Emotions at Work
Employees are expected to manage their emotions in the workplace. They must conceal 
their frustration when serving an irritating customer, display compassion to an ill patient, 
and hide their boredom in a long meeting with other executives. These are all forms of 
emotional labor—the effort, planning, and control needed to express organizationally de￾sired emotions during interpersonal transactions.32
Almost everyone is required to abide by display rules. These norms or explicit rules 
require employees to display behaviors representing specific emotions and to hide ob￾servable evidence of other emotions. Emotional labor demands are higher in jobs re￾quiring a variety of emotions (e.g., anger as well as joy) and more intense emotions 
(e.g., showing delight rather than smiling weakly), as well as in jobs where interaction 
with clients is frequent and longer. Emotional labor also increases when employees 
must precisely rather than casually abide by the display rules.33 This work requirement 
is most common in service industries, where employees have frequent face-to-face inter￾action with clients.
Employees sometimes need to show emotions that are quite different from—sometimes 
opposite to—the emotions they actually experience at that moment. For instance, they 
must display patience and positive feelings toward a customer who they actually dislike. 
This incongruence requires considerable mental effort and can be very stressful. 
Emotional labor may also require employees to act contrary to their self-concept, which 
can lead to psychological separation from self as well as job dissatisfaction. These problems 
are greater when people need to frequently display emotions that oppose their genuine 
emotions. Some strategies to display desired emotions can also result in lower job perfor￾mance, including failing to display the desired emotions.34
EMOTIONAL DISPLAY NORMS ACROSS CULTURES
Norms about displaying or hiding our true emotions vary considerably across cultures.35
One large global study reports that norms in several countries in Asia and Africa strongly 
discourage emotional expression. People in those cultures are expected to be subdued, 
have relatively monotonic voice intonation, and avoid physical movement and touching 
that display emotions. In contrast, several Latin and Middle Eastern cultures allow or 
encourage more vivid display of emotions and expect people to act more consistently with 
their true emotions. In these cultures, people are expected to reveal their true thoughts 
and feelings, be dramatic in their conversational tones, and be animated in their use of 
nonverbal behaviors. For example, 81 percent of Ethiopians and 74 percent of Japanese 
agreed that it is considered unprofessional to express emotions overtly in their culture, 
whereas 43 percent of Americans, 33 percent of Italians, and only 19 percent of Span￾iards, Cubans, and Egyptians agreed with this statement.36
When required to suppress their true emotions at work, employees from cultures that 
tolerate or encourage emotional expression experience more stress and lower life satisfac￾tion compared to coworkers from cultures that discourage emotional expression. The re￾verse is also true. Employees in cultures that discourage emotional expression experience 
stress because they continually work at controlling manifestations of their true feelings. In 
China, a culture that suppresses emotion expression, one company even tried to reduce 
employee stress by holding a “no-face” day, in which employees wore masks so they didn’t 
need to worry about the emotions their faces displayed!37
STRATEGIES FOR DISPLAYING EXPECTED EMOTIONS
Emotional labor is ultimately about displaying expected emotions through facial expressions 
and other forms of behavior. There are two general approaches to performing emotional 
labor: (1) pretending to have the expected emotions by consciously trying to display 
emotional labor
the effort, planning, and 
control needed to express 
organizationally desired 
emotions during interpersonal 
transactions
LO 4-2Chapter Four Workplace Emotions, Attitudes, and Stress 131
behaviors depicting those emotions and (2) actively changing our perceptions and situa￾tion so we naturally produce the expected emotions and associated behaviors.
The first approach—consciously pretending to display the expected emotions—is known 
as surface acting. We do surface acting when trying to show interest in a client’s lengthy 
explanation even though we are actually weary from hearing it. We act out the verbal and 
nonverbal behaviors that symbolize the expected emotions, even though our actual emo￾tions are quite different.38
Surface acting is usually a poor strategy for emotional labor because it requires consid￾erable mental effort that is often stressful and alienating.39 Surface acting also tends to 
display insincere emotions. A genuine emotion automatically activates a complex set of 
facial muscles and body positions, all of which are difficult to replicate when pretending 
to have this emotion. Also, while trying to display desired emotions through surface act￾ing, our true emotions reveal themselves as subtle gestures, usually without our awareness. 
The result of surface acting is that observers often recognize the fake emotions, which 
undermines the social exchange.40
Regulating Emotions Through Deep Acting The second approach to dis￾playing the expected emotions—called deep acting—is to actively change our perceptions 
and situation so they naturally produce the expected emotions and associated behaviors. 
Deep acting involves actually producing the emotions that are expected in a particular 
situation, whereas surface acting does not attempt to experience the expected emotion.41
Smiling in Russia: More Emotional 
Labor than in Americad
When Russia prepared to host the 21st World Cup, it not 
only built several soccer stadiums. It also taught train con￾ductors and other customer-facing employees how to 
smile at foreigners. “Russian people usually don’t smile,” 
explains a trainer involved in the smile program. “That’s 
why when other people come to Russia, they think 
Russians are not friendly.”
Even in customer service roles, Russians have a reputa￾tion of being more forthright and dour than Americans. 
However, the low prospect of a smile from Russian 
employees doesn’t mean that they are unhappy or dislike 
you. Russians just have a different interpretation of smiling 
than do people in the United States and most other West￾ern societies. Consequently, Russians likely experience 
more emotional labor when forced to smile at customers.
One study found that people in Russia and several 
other cultures (Japan, Korea, Iran, France, etc.) tend to 
view strangers who smile often as less intelligent. This is 
reflected in the well-known Russian proverb: “Smiling for 
no reason is a sign of stupidity.” In contrast, frequent smil￾ing is interpreted as a sign of higher intelligence in sev￾eral other cultures, particularly Germany, Switzerland, 
Malaysia, China, and Austria.
According to the recent cross-cultural study on smiling, 
societies with high levels of corruption view people (par￾ticularly men) who smile fairly often as less honest than 
nonsmiling strangers. Russia has a high corruption score, 
so Russians have less trust in people who smile.
Russian film director Yulia Melamed recently experi￾enced this when she was stopped by a police officer in 
Moscow and asked to show her identification. After doing 
so, she asked why the officer stopped her. “Because you 
were smiling,” he replied. Melamed explains that in Russia 
“it is strange for a person to walk on the street and smile. 
It looked alien and suspicious.”
global connections 4.1
Sorbis/Shutterstock132 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
By experiencing the expected emotions, we naturally display behaviors that signal those 
emotions to others. 
The five main strategies for regulating our emotions are summarized in Exhibit 4.3.42
Changing the situation involves moving out of or into work settings that affect our emo￾tions, such as avoiding a place or person that we expect would create undesirable emo￾tions. Modifying the situation occurs when we remain in the same physical location, but 
adapt that environment so it alters our emotional state. This might involve changing a task 
or the topic of conversation in a given setting. The third strategy, suppressing or amplify￾ing emotions, involves consciously trying to block out dysfunctional emotions or to in￾crease the intensity of expected emotions.43 An example of suppressing emotions is trying 
to stop thinking about events that bother us or, at least, psychologically distance ourselves 
from those events. 
The fourth emotion regulation strategy also blocks unwanted emotions, but we do this 
specifically by redirecting our focus of attention. This occurs when we actively do things 
to take our mind off a past or future event and the undesirable emotions that thought 
creates. Finally, reframing the situation is a cognitive reevaluation of a particular event 
that generates more appropriate emotions. Flight attendants apply reframing when they 
define an incident with an unruly passenger as a test of their customer service skill. 
These interactions are accomplishments rather than dreaded chores.44
All five emotion regulation strategies generate deep acting, but reframing the situation 
and shifting attention tend to be the most common. Changing and modifying the situa￾tion can be applied when employees work alone, but seldom in social settings, such as 
when attending a client meeting or interacting with an upset passenger. Suppressing or 
amplifying emotions produces deep acting, but these cognitive activities can be difficult 
for most of us. But no matter which strategy is applied to manage emotions, emotion 
regulation requires emotional intelligence, which we discuss next.
EXHIBIT 4.3 Regulating Emotions Through Deep Acting
EMOTION REGULATION STRATEGY DESCRIPTION EXAMPLE
Change the situation Move out of or into work settings 
that produce or avoid specific 
emotions.
• Temporarily leave a work area that makes 
us feel lethargic. 
• Keep away from a particular client who is 
deeply irritating.
Modify the situation Modify the current setting to create 
or avoid specific emotions.
• Switch from a task that is aggravating to one 
that is more enjoyable. 
• Shift a conversation away from an awkward 
or sensitive topic (e.g., politics) to a less 
emotionally laden topic.
Suppress or amplify emotions Consciously block out thoughts that 
produce dysfunctional emotions or 
more actively think about things that 
produce expected emotions.
• Maintain an impersonal relationship with 
patients (avoid becoming emotionally 
attached to their plight).
Shift attention Change the focus of one’s attention. • Switch to an engaging and enjoyable work 
activity that takes your mind off something 
that caused negative emotions earlier that day.
Reframe the situation Cognitively reevaluate a particular 
event so it generates desired 
emotions.
• Rather than viewing a client presentation 
as a failure, reframe the event as a 
learning moment that had a low probability 
of success.Chapter Four Workplace Emotions, Attitudes, and Stress 133
Emotional Intelligence
Indian Railways, the largest employer in India, is experiencing rapid change, which re￾quires managers with high emotional intelligence to effectively lead that change. “The 
change champion has to be emotionally intelligent,” advises a senior trainer at the com￾pany’s management development center. Thousands of managers have attended work￾shops to help them understand emotional intelligence and its relevance to their leadership 
roles every day. They completed a well-known emotional intelligence test, then received 
feedback and coaching to help the managers improve weaker aspects of their emotional 
intelligence capabilities.45
Indian Railways and many other organizations have embraced the idea that emotional 
intelligence (EI) is a valuable set of abilities for people in many types of jobs. Emotional 
intelligence refers to the ability to recognize and regulate our own emotions as well as the 
emotions of other people. This definition refers to the four main dimensions shown in 
Exhibit 4.4.46
• Awareness of our own emotions. This is the ability to perceive and understand the 
meaning of our own emotions. People with higher emotional intelligence have 
better awareness of their emotions and are better able to make sense of them. They 
can eavesdrop on their emotional responses to specific situations and use this 
awareness as conscious information.47
• Management of our own emotions. Everyone manages their own emotions to some 
extent. We suppress disruptive impulses and try not to feel angry or frustrated when 
events go against us. We try to feel joy and happiness to￾ward others on such occasions. We re-energize ourselves 
to break out of mid-day lethargy. More generally, manage￾ment of our own emotions involves deep acting and the 
associated emotion regulation practices described earlier.
• Awareness of others’ emotions. This is the ability to per￾ceive and understand the emotions of other people.48
It relates to empathy—the ability to understand another 
person’s situation or viewpoint (perspective taking), 
LO 4-3
Awareness of 
own emotions
Management of 
own emotions
Awareness of 
others’ emotions
Yourself
Recognition
of emotions
Abilities
Regulation
of emotions
Others
Management of 
others’ emotions
EXHIBIT 4.4 Dimensions of Emotional Intelligence
Variations of these dimensions are found in: D. Goleman, R. Boyatzis, and A. McKee, Primal Leadership 
(Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 2002), Chap. 3; Peter J. Jordan and Sandra A. Lawrence, “Emotional 
Intelligence in Teams: Development and Initial Validation of the Short Version of the Workgroup Emotional Intelli￾gence Profile (WEIP-S),” Journal of Management & Organization 15 (2009): 452–69; K.A. Pekaar et al., “Dynamic 
Self- and Other-Focused Emotional Intelligence: A Theoretical Framework and Research Agenda,” Journal of 
Research in Personality 86 (2020): 103958.
emotional intelligence (EI)
the ability to recognize and 
regulate our own emotions 
as well as the emotions of 
other people
empathy
the ability to understand 
another person’s situation or 
viewpoint (perspective taking), 
be sensitive to their thoughts 
and feelings, and experience 
their emotions134 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
be sensitive to their thoughts and feelings, and experience their emotions (see 
Chapter 3). Awareness of others’ emotions also includes being organizationally 
aware, such as sensing office politics and the existence of informal social networks.
• Management of others’ emotions. This dimension of EI refers to managing other 
people’s emotions. It includes consoling people who feel sad, emotionally inspir￾ing team members to complete a class project on time, getting strangers to feel 
comfortable working with you, and dissipating coworker stress and other dysfunc￾tional emotions that they experience.
The four dimensions of emotional intelligence form a foundational hierarchy.49 Awareness 
of your own emotions is the lowest foundation in that hierarchy because you need awareness 
to engage in the higher levels of emotional intelligence. You can’t manage your own emotions 
if you don’t know what they are. Managing other people’s emotions is the highest level of EI 
because this ability requires awareness of your own and others’ emotions. To diffuse an angry 
conflict between two employees, for example, you need to understand the emotions they are 
experiencing and manage your emotions (and display of emotions). 
®
SELF-ASSESSMENT 4.2: How Well Do You Recognize and Regulate Emotions?
EMOTIONAL INTELLIGENCE OUTCOMES AND DEVELOPMENT
Most jobs involve social interaction with coworkers or external stakeholders, so employ￾ees need emotional intelligence to work effectively.50 Studies suggest that people with high 
EI are more effective team members, perform better in jobs requiring emotional labor, 
make better decisions involving other people, and maintain a more positive mindset for 
creative work. EI is also associated with effective leadership because leaders engage in 
emotional labor (e.g., showing patience to employees even when they might feel frus￾trated) and actively regulate the emotions of others (e.g., helping coworkers feel optimism 
after they have lost an important contract). However, emotional intelligence does not improve 
some forms of performance, such as tasks that require minimal social interaction.51
Given the potential value of emotional intelligence, it’s not surprising that organiza￾tions try to measure this ability in job applicants.52 The New South Wales government in 
Australia requires applicants for ambulance, fire, and rescue jobs to complete an emo￾tional intelligence test. In one part, candidates identify the emotions depicted in a series 
of facial expressions. In a second part, they read several everyday situations and predict 
the emotions people will experience as a result of those situations.
More commonly, organizations train current employees to improve their emotional 
intelligence abilities.53 As described earlier, Indian Railways tested and then coached a 
large number of managers to improve their self-awareness, empathy, and management of 
emotions. Several police departments have also introduced emotional intelligence train￾ing, particularly to help law enforcement officers to deescalate conflict situations and to 
be more sensitive to their own emotions as they approach others (and thereby avoid esca￾lating the conflict). Along with formal training programs, emotional intelligence increases 
with age; it is part of the process called maturity.
So far, this chapter has introduced the model of emotions and attitudes, as well as 
emotional intelligence, as the means by which we manage emotions in the workplace. The 
next two sections look at two specific attitudes: job satisfaction and organizational commit￾ment. These two attitudes are so important in our understanding of workplace behavior 
that some experts suggest the two combined should be called “overall job attitude.”54Chapter Four Workplace Emotions, Attitudes, and Stress 135
Job Satisfaction
Probably the most studied attitude in organizational behavior is job satisfaction, a per￾son’s evaluation of their job and work context.55 It is an appraisal of the perceived job 
characteristics, work environment, and emotional experiences at work. Satisfied employ￾ees have a favorable evaluation of their jobs, based on their observations and emotional 
experiences. Job satisfaction is best viewed as a collection of attitudes about different as￾pects of the job and work context. You might like your coworkers but be less satisfied with 
the tasks you are assigned, for instance.
How satisfied are employees at work? The answer depends on the person, the work￾place, and the country. Global surveys, such as the one shown in Exhibit 4.5, indicate that 
job satisfaction tends to be highest in India, Mexico, Turkey, and the United States. The 
lowest levels of overall job satisfaction have recently been recorded in Japan, Hong Kong, 
and Singapore.
Can we conclude from these surveys that most employees in India, Mexico, Turkey, 
and the United States are happy at work? Possibly, but their overall job satisfaction prob￾ably isn’t as high as these statistics suggest. One problem is that surveys often use a single 
direct question, such as “How satisfied are you with your job?” Many dissatisfied employ￾ees are reluctant to reveal their feelings in a direct question because this is tantamount to 
admitting that they made a poor job choice and are not enjoying a large segment of their 
life. The inflated results are evident by the fact that employees tend to report less 
job satisfaction
a person’s evaluation of their 
job and work context
Police Empathy and Deescalation 
Through Emotional Intelligence 
Traininge
After completing Washington State’s Basic Law Enforce￾ment Academy, police officers receive further training in 
their local agencies. One session not only teaches them 
how to properly use pepper spray; they also discover how 
it feels to be sprayed. The experience helps new recruits to 
improve their emotional intelligence with greater empathy 
toward those on the receiving end of the defensive tactic.
“Because I got sprayed, I understand what the other 
person is going through,” says Lt. Dean Hallett, who pep￾per sprayed new police officers in Quincy, Washington, 
and then led them through additional challenges while 
the spray continued to sting. “I can empathize with them, I 
can understand what they’re feeling and why they’re feel￾ing it, so I can help them.”
Emotional intelligence training is becoming an impor￾tant component of officer development in law enforcement 
agencies across the United States. Several police depart￾ments in Massachusetts have a multiday program that in￾cludes EI testing, experiential exercises, and learning about 
the neuroscience of emotion and empathy. “It is very valu￾able training, from deescalation to simple community 
engagement,” says Wellesley Police Chief Jack Pilecki.
Police officers in Ohio participate in the RITE program, 
which includes recognizing and regulating emotions. “We 
want officers to recognize what their emotions are before 
they get out of their car and engage with the public,” says 
Linda Webb, who co-created the program. “If I get out of a 
patrol car and I’m mad or I’m angry, that engagement with 
a public member is not going to be good.” The emotional 
intelligence principles that Webb now teaches saved her 
from life-threatening incidents during her 35-year career 
as a law enforcement officer and detective in Florida.
global connections 4.2
Mikael Karlsson/Alamy Stock Photo
LO 4-4136 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
satisfaction when asked about specific aspects of their work. For instance, 72 percent of 
United States federal government employees say that they are satisfied overall with their 
job, yet only 58 percent of them are satisfied with their involvement in decisions that af￾fect their work. Furthermore, a large portion of the workforce in many countries intends 
to change employers within the next year.56
A second problem is that cultural values make it difficult to compare job satisfaction 
across countries. People in Japan tend to subdue their emotions in public, and there is evi￾dence that they also avoid extreme survey ratings such as “very satisfied.” A third problem 
is that job satisfaction changes with economic conditions. Employees with the highest job 
satisfaction in current surveys tend to be in countries where the economies are moving 
along quite well.57
JOB SATISFACTION AND WORK BEHAVIOR
Does job satisfaction influence workplace behavior? In general, yes! Job satisfaction affects 
many of the individual behaviors introduced in Chapter 1 (task performance, organiza￾tional citizenship, quitting, absenteeism, etc.).58 However, a more precise answer is that the 
effect of job satisfaction and dissatisfaction on individual behavior depends on the person 
and the situation. A useful template for organizing and understanding the consequences of 
job dissatisfaction is the exit–voice–loyalty–neglect (EVLN) model. As the name suggests, 
the EVLN model identifies four ways that employees respond to dissatisfaction:59
• Exit. Exit includes leaving the organization, transferring to another work unit, or at 
least trying to get away from the dissatisfying situation. The traditional theory is that 
job dissatisfaction builds over time and eventually becomes strong enough that the 
employee is motivated to search for better work opportunities elsewhere. This is likely 
true to some extent, but it is more likely that specific “shock events” quickly energize 
employees to think about and engage in exit behavior. For example, the emotional re￾action you experience to an unfair management decision or a conflict episode with a 
exit–voice–loyalty–neglect 
(EVLN) model
the four ways, as indicated in 
the name, that employees 
respond to job dissatisfaction
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
Japan Hong
Kong
Singapore Sweden Italy United
Kingdom
China United
States
49%
61%
66%
69%
74% 74%
78%
Turkey Mexico India
80%
85%
89%
42%
Survey data were collected for Randstad Holdings nv, with a minimum of 400 employees in each country. This exhibit shows results from selected countries 
across the full range of 34 countries studied.
EXHIBIT 4.5 Job Satisfaction in Selected CountriesfChapter Four Workplace Emotions, Attitudes, and Stress 137
coworker motivates you to look at job ads and speak to friends about job opportuni￾ties where they work. This begins the process of visualizing yourself working at 
another company and psychologically withdrawing from your current employer.60
• Voice. Voice is any attempt to change, rather than escape from, the dissatisfying 
situation. Voice can be a constructive response, such as recommending ways for 
management to improve the situation, or it can be more confrontational, such as 
filing formal grievances or forming a coalition to oppose a decision.61 In the ex￾treme, some employees might engage in counterproductive behaviors to get atten￾tion and force changes in the organization.
• Loyalty. In the original version of this model, loyalty was only briefly mentioned as 
an outcome of dissatisfaction. Instead, the original model stated that loyalty pre￾dicted whether people chose exit or voice (i.e., high loyalty resulted in voice; low 
loyalty produced exit).62 More recent writers describe loyalty as an outcome, but 
in various and somewhat unclear ways. Generally, they suggest that “loyalists” are 
employees who respond to dissatisfaction by patiently waiting—some say they “suf￾fer in silence”—for the problem to work itself out or be resolved by others.63
• Neglect. Neglect includes reducing work effort, paying less attention to quality, and 
increasing absenteeism and lateness. It is generally considered a passive activity 
that has negative consequences for the organization.
Which of these EVLN alternatives employees use depends on the person and the situa￾tion.64 Voice is preferred by employees with higher extraversion and conscientiousness, 
likely because these personality factors relate to a person’s assertiveness, dutifulness, and 
outgoing nature. Past experience also influences which EVLN action is applied. Dissatis￾fied employees are more likely to apply exit or neglect if they were unsuccessful with voice 
in the past. Loyalty, as it was intended in the original exit–voice–loyalty model, is another 
important factor. Specifically, employees are more likely to quit when they have low loyalty 
to the company, and they are more likely to engage in voice when they have high loyalty.
An employee’s response to dissatisfaction also depends on the situation. Employees 
are less likely to use the exit option when there are few alternative job prospects, for ex￾ample. Dissatisfied employees are more likely to use voice than the other options when 
they are aware that other employees are dependent on them and when organizational 
leaders encourage employees to discuss their concerns.65
JOB SATISFACTION AND PERFORMANCE
Does job satisfaction predict job performance? In other words, is a happy worker a pro￾ductive worker? This is one of the oldest debates in workplace attitudes, and one that has 
flip-flopped over the years.66 In recent years, studies have fairly consistently concluded 
that the “happy worker” hypothesis is true, but only to some extent. In other words, there 
is a moderately positive relationship between job satisfaction and performance.
67
One reason why job satisfaction affects employee performance only “to some extent” 
is that general attitudes (such as job satisfaction) don’t predict specific behaviors very 
well. As the EVLN model explained, reduced performance (a form of neglect) is only one 
of four possible responses to dissatisfaction. A second reason is that some employees have 
little control over their performance because their work effort is paced by technology or 
interdependence with coworkers in the production process. An assembly-line worker, for 
instance, installs a fixed number of windshields each hour with about the same quality of 
installation whether that individual has high or low job satisfaction.
A third consideration is that job performance might cause job satisfaction, rather than 
vice versa.68 Higher performers tend to have higher satisfaction because they receive more 
rewards and recognition than do low-performing employees. The connection between job 
satisfaction and performance isn’t stronger because many organizations do not reward 
good performance very well.138 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
JOB SATISFACTION AND CUSTOMER SATISFACTION
The Co-operators has one of the highest satisfaction ratings among automobile and home 
insurance customers in most regions of Canada. The company achieves such consistently 
favorable customer opinions because it also cares for the happiness and well-being of its 
employees. In fact, over the past 20 years the firm has been named annually as one of 
Canada’s Best Employers. “We believe an engaged team leads to happy employees, and 
happy employees lead to happy customers,” says Co-operators CEO Rob Wesseling.69
Research supports the philosophy that Co-operators CEO Rob Wesseling described. In 
fact, evidence suggests that job satisfaction has a stronger effect on customer service than 
on overall performance. The effect of job satisfaction on customer service and company 
profits is detailed in the service profit chain model, diagrammed in Exhibit 4.6. This model 
shows that job satisfaction has a positive effect on customer service, which eventually 
benefits shareholder financial returns.70
The service profit chain model process begins with workplace practices that increase 
or decrease job satisfaction. Job satisfaction then influences whether employees stay 
(employee retention) as well as their motivation and behavior on the job. Retention, 
motivation, and behavior affect service quality, which influences the customer’s satisfaction, 
perceived value of the service, and tendency to recommend the service to others (referrals). 
These customer activities influence the company’s profitability and growth. The service 
profit chain model has strong research support. However, the benefits of job satisfaction 
take time to flow through to the organization’s bottom line.
Within the service profit chain model are two key explanations why satisfied employees tend 
to generate happier and more loyal customers.71 One explanation is that job satisfaction tends 
to put employees in a more positive mood, and people in a good mood more naturally and 
frequently display friendliness and positive emotions. When employees have good feelings, 
their display of positive emotions “rubs off” on most (but not all) customers, so customers feel 
happier and consequently form a positive evaluation of the service experience (i.e., higher 
service quality). The effect is also mutual—happy customers make employees happier—which 
can lead to a virtuous cycle of positive emotions in the service experience.
service profit chain model
a theory explaining how 
employee’s job satisfaction 
influences company 
profitability indirectly through 
service quality, customer 
loyalty, and related factors
Hilton Hotels and Resorts 
recognizes that great customer 
service results from positive 
employee attitudes. The global 
pandemic seriously challenged 
the entire hospitality industry, yet 
Hilton continued its employee￾centric approach through open 
communication with staff and 
actively working with retail firms 
to arrange short-term jobs when 
some hotels temporarily closed. 
The result? Hilton remains one of 
the best big companies to work 
for in America and is rated third 
among the top 25 workplaces 
in the world. “Our mission is to 
be the most hospitable company 
in the world, and you can’t do that 
without great people, and you 
can’t get great people without 
being a great workplace,” says 
Matt Schuyler, Hilton’s chief 
brand officer.g
Alex Segre/Alamy Stock PhotoChapter Four Workplace Emotions, Attitudes, and Stress 139
The second explanation is that satisfied employees are less likely to quit their jobs, so 
they have more work experience (i.e., better knowledge and skills) to serve clients. Lower 
turnover also enables customers to have the same employees serve them on different oc￾casions, so there is more consistent service. Some evidence indicates that customers build 
their loyalty to specific employees, not to the organization, so keeping employee turnover 
low tends to build customer loyalty.
JOB SATISFACTION AND BUSINESS ETHICS
Along with its significant effect on employee behavior, job satisfaction is an ethical issue 
that influences the organization’s reputation in the community. People spend a large por￾tion of their time working in organizations, and many societies now expect companies to 
provide work environments that are safe and enjoyable. Indeed, employees in several 
countries closely monitor ratings of the best companies to work for, an indication that 
employee satisfaction is a virtue worth considerable goodwill to employers. The impor￾tance of this reputation is apparent when an organization has low job satisfaction. The 
company typically tries to hide this fact, and when morale problems become public, cor￾porate leaders are usually quick to take steps to improve the situation.
Organizational Commitment
Organizational commitment—specifically, affective organizational commitment—represents 
the other half (with job satisfaction) of what some experts call “overall job attitude.” 
Affective commitment is the employee’s emotional attachment to, involvement in, and 
identification with an organization. It is a psychological bond whereby one chooses to be 
dedicated to and responsible for the organization. Fur￾thermore, affective commitment is intrinsically motivated 
because it originates from the employee’s self-concept 
and values alignment rather than from external forces.72
Affective commitment differs from continuance 
commitment, which is a calculative attachment to the or￾ganization. Employees develop continuance commitment 
when leaving the organization would incur significant fi￾nancial or social costs (e.g., “I hate this place but can’t 
Organizational
practices
Employee
satisfaction
and
commitment
Employee
motivation
and behavior
Employee
retention
Customer
satisfaction/
perceived
value
Service
quality
Customer
loyalty and
referrals
Company
profitability
and growth
Sources: This model is based on J.I. Heskett, W.E. Sasser, and L.A. Schlesinger, The Service Profit Chain (New York: Free Press, 1997); A.J. Rucci, S.P. Kirn, 
and R.T. Quinn, “The Employee-Customer-Profit Chain at Sears,” Harvard Business Review 76 (1998): 83–97; S.P. Brown and S.K. Lam, “A Meta-Analysis of 
Relationships Linking Employee Satisfaction to Customer Responses,” Journal of Retailing 84, no. 3 (2008): 243–55.
EXHIBIT 4.6 Service Profit Chain Model
LO 4-5
affective organizational 
commitment
an individual’s emotional 
attachment to, involvement in, 
and identification with an 
organization
continuance commitment
an individual’s calculative 
attachment to an organization140 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
afford to quit!”)73 This happens when quitting forfeits a large deferred financial bonus or 
risks weakening social bonds with friends at work. Continuance commitment also occurs 
when employees have limited employment opportunities elsewhere (e.g., “I dislike work￾ing here but there are no other jobs available”). In each situation, continuance commit￾ment is motivation to remain with and participate in the organization due to external 
forces, whereas the motivation of affective commitment originates internally from the 
person’s identity, bond, and psychological attachment to the organization.
Affective and continuance commitment have a third sibling, called normative commit￾ment, which refers to a felt obligation or moral duty to the organization.74 Felt obligation 
applies the norm of reciprocity—a natural human motivation to support, contribute, and 
otherwise “pay back” the organization because it has invested in and supported the em￾ployee (see Chapter 10). The sense of moral duty is the motivation to remain with and 
contribute to the organization because it is the right thing to do as a member of the orga￾nization. Normative commitment receives less attention because it overlaps somewhat 
with affective commitment and its meaning is somewhat ambiguous.
norm of reciprocity
a felt obligation and social 
expectation of helping or 
otherwise giving something of 
value to someone who has 
already helped or given 
something of value to you
®
SELF-ASSESSMENT 4.3: How Committed Are You to Your School?
CONSEQUENCES OF AFFECTIVE AND 
CONTINUANCE COMMITMENT
Affective commitment can be a significant competitive advantage.75 Employees with a 
strong psychological bond to the organization are less likely to quit their jobs and be ab￾sent from work. They also have higher work motivation and organizational citizenship, as 
well as somewhat higher job performance. Affective commitment also improves customer 
satisfaction because long-tenure employees have better knowledge of work practices and 
because clients like to do business with the same employees. One concern is that employ￾ees with very high affective commitment tend to have high conformity, which results in 
lower creativity. Another problem is that employees with very high commitment are more 
motivated to engage in illegal activity in defense of the organization. However, most com￾panies suffer from too little rather than too much affective commitment.
In contrast to the benefits of affective commitment, employees with high levels of con￾tinuance commitment tend to have lower performance and are less likely to engage in or￾ganizational citizenship behaviors. Furthermore, unionized employees with high 
continuance commitment are more likely to use formal grievances, whereas employees 
with high affective commitment engage in more cooperative problem solving when 
employee–employer relations sour.76 In general, employers should not rely primarily on 
continuance commitment to retain staff. Instead, they should focus on winning employees’ 
hearts through affective commitment.
BUILDING ORGANIZATIONAL COMMITMENT
There are almost as many ways to build and maintain affective commitment as there are 
topics in this book, but the most frequently mentioned strategies are:
• Justice and support. Affective commitment is higher in organizations that support or￾ganizational justice, which we discuss in the next chapter. Similarly, organizations 
that support employee well-being tend to cultivate higher levels of loyalty in return.77
• Shared values. The definition of affective commitment refers to a person’s identifi￾cation with the organization, and that identification is highest when employees be￾lieve their values are congruent with the organization’s dominant values. Employees Chapter Four Workplace Emotions, Attitudes, and Stress 141
also experience more positive emotions when their personal values are aligned 
with corporate values and actions, which increases their motivation to stay with 
the organization.78
• Trust. Trust refers to positive expectations one person has toward another person 
in situations involving risk.79 Trust means putting faith in the other person or 
group. It is also a reciprocal activity: To receive trust, you must demonstrate trust. 
Employees identify with and feel obliged to work for an organization only when 
they trust its leaders. This explains why layoffs are one of the greatest blows to 
affective commitment; by reducing job security, companies reduce the trust 
employees have in their employer and the employment relationship.80
• Organizational comprehension. Organizational comprehension refers to how well 
employees understand the organization, including its strategic direction, social 
dynamics, and physical layout.81 This awareness is a necessary prerequisite to af￾fective commitment because it is difficult to identify with or feel loyal to some￾thing that you don’t know very well. Furthermore, lack of information produces 
uncertainty, and the resulting stress can distance employees from that source of 
uncertainty (i.e., the organization). The practical implication here is to ensure 
that employees develop a reasonably clear and complete mental model of the or￾ganization. This occurs by giving staff information and opportunities to keep up 
to date about organizational events, interact with coworkers, discover what goes 
on in different parts of the organization, and learn about the organization’s his￾tory and future plans.82
• Employee involvement. Employee involvement increases affective commitment by 
strengthening the employee’s psychological ownership and social identity with the 
organization.83 Employees feel part of the organization when they participate in de￾cisions that guide the organization’s future (see Chapter 7). Employee involvement 
also builds loyalty because it demonstrates the company’s trust in its employees.
Organizational commitment and job satisfaction represent two of the most often stud￾ied and discussed attitudes in the workplace. Each is linked to emotional episodes and 
cognitive judgments about the workplace and relationship with the company. Emotions 
also play an important role in another concept that is on everyone’s mind these days: 
stress. The final section of this chapter provides an overview of work-related stress and 
how it can be managed.
Work-Related Stress and Its Management
When asked if they often feel stressed, most employees these days say “Yes!” Not only 
do most people understand the concept; they claim to have plenty of personal experi￾ence with it. Stress is most often described as an adaptive response to a situation that is 
perceived as challenging or threatening to the person’s well-being.84 It is a physiological 
and psychological condition that prepares us to adapt to hostile or noxious environmen￾tal conditions. Our heart rate increases, muscles tighten, breathing speeds up, and per￾spiration increases. Our body also moves more blood to the brain, releases adrenaline 
and other hormones, fuels the system by releasing more glucose and fatty acids, acti￾vates systems that sharpen our senses, and conserves 
resources by suppressing our immune system. One 
school of thought suggests that stress is a negative evalu￾ation of the external environment. However, critics of 
this “cognitive appraisal” perspective point out that 
stress is more accurately described as an emotional ex￾perience, which may occur before or after a conscious 
evaluation of the situation.85
LO 4-6
trust
positive expectations one person 
has toward another person in 
situations involving risk
stress
an adaptive response to a 
situation that is perceived as 
challenging or threatening to 
the person’s well-being142 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
Whether stress is a complex emotion or a cognitive evaluation of the environment, it 
has become a pervasive experience in the daily lives of most people. Stress is typically 
described as a negative experience. This is known as distress—the degree of physiological, 
psychological, and behavioral deviation from healthy functioning. However, a lower level 
or different form of stress—called eustress—is a necessary part of life because it activates 
and motivates people to achieve goals, change their environments, and succeed in life’s 
challenges.86 Our focus is on the causes and management of distress, because it has become 
a chronic problem in many societies.
®
SELF-ASSESSMENT 4.4: How Stressed Are You?
GENERAL ADAPTATION SYNDROME
The word stress was first used more than 500 years ago to describe the human response to 
harsh environmental conditions. However, it wasn’t until the 1930s that researcher Hans 
Selye (often described as the “father” of stress research) first documented the stress expe￾rience, called the general adaptation syndrome. Selye determined that people have a fairly 
consistent and automatic physiological response to stressful situations, which helps them 
cope with environmental demands.87
The general adaptation syndrome consists of the three stages shown in Exhibit 4.7. The 
alarm reaction stage occurs when a threat or challenge activates the physiological stress 
responses that we described a few paragraphs ago. The individual’s energy level and cop￾ing effectiveness decrease in response to the initial shock. The second stage, resistance,
activates various biochemical, psychological, and behavioral mechanisms that give the 
individual more energy and engage coping mechanisms to overcome or remove the source of 
stress. People have a limited resistance capacity, and if the source of stress persists, 
the individual will eventually move into the third stage, exhaustion. Most of us are able 
to remove the source of stress or remove ourselves from that source before becoming too 
exhausted. However, people who frequently reach exhaustion have increased risk of 
long-term physiological and psychological damage.88
CONSEQUENCES OF DISTRESS
Stress takes its toll on the human body.89 Many people experience tension headaches, muscle 
pain, and related problems mainly due to muscle contractions from the stress response. High 
stress levels also contribute to cardiovascular disease, including heart attacks and strokes, 
and may be associated with some forms of cancer. One major review estimated that more than 
100,000 deaths annually and as much as 8 percent of health care costs in the United States 
general adaptation syndrome
a model of the stress 
experience, consisting of three 
stages: alarm reaction, 
resistance, and exhaustion
Stage 1
Alarm reaction
Stage 2
Resistance
Stage 3
Exhaustion
Time
Ability to cope
High
Normal
state
Low
EXHIBIT 4.7
General Adaptation Syndrome
Source: Adapted from H. Selye, The 
Stress of Life (New York: McGraw Hill, 
1956).Chapter Four Workplace Emotions, Attitudes, and Stress 143
are due to the consequences of work-related stress. Stress also produces various psycho￾logical consequences such as job dissatisfaction, moodiness, depression, and lower organi￾zational commitment. Furthermore, various behavioral outcomes have been linked to high 
or persistent stress, including lower job performance, poor decision making, and increased 
workplace accidents and aggressive behavior. Most people react to stress through “fight or 
flight,” so, as a form of flight, increased absenteeism is another outcome of stress.90
A particular stress consequence, called job burnout, occurs when people experience 
emotional exhaustion, cynicism, and reduced feelings of personal accomplishment.91
Emotional exhaustion, the first stage, is characterized by a lack of energy, tiredness, and a 
feeling that one’s emotional resources are depleted. This is followed by cynicism (also 
called depersonalization), which is an indifferent attitude toward work, emotional detach￾ment from clients, a cynical view of the organization, and a tendency to strictly follow 
rules and regulations rather than adapt to the needs of others. The final stage of burnout, 
called reduced personal accomplishment, entails feelings of diminished confidence in one’s 
ability to perform the job well. In such situations, employees develop a sense of learned 
helplessness as they no longer believe that their efforts make a difference.
STRESSORS: THE CAUSES OF STRESS
Before identifying ways to manage work-related stress, we must first understand its causes, 
known as stressors. Stressors include any environmental conditions that place a physical 
or emotional demand on a person.92 There are numerous stressors in the workplace and 
in life generally. Four of the most common work-related stressors are organizational con￾straints, interpersonal conflict, work overload, and low task control.93
Organizational Constraints Stress research has identified organizational con￾straints as one of the most pervasive causes of workplace stress.94 This stressor includes lack 
of equipment, supplies, budget funding, coworker support, information, and other resources 
necessary to complete the required work. Most employees experience stress because these 
constraints interfere with task performance, which indirectly threatens their rewards, status, 
and job security. Organizational constraints refer to situational factors, which is one of the 
four direct predictors of individual behavior and performance (see the MARS model in 
Chapter 1). It is the only direct influence on individual performance that is beyond the 
employee’s immediate control. This lack of control is a powerful stressor because it threatens 
the individual’s fundamental drive to influence their external environment.
stressors
any environmental conditions 
that place a physical or 
emotional demand on the 
person
12% of 13,200 
adults representative of the
population in 22 countries say 
their work-related stress is 24% unmanageable. of more than
100,000 Canadian adults (18–64
years) surveyed say that most 
days in their life are quite a bit
or extremely stressful.
65% of 1,951 
American professionals 
surveyed say that their 
level of stress at work 
today is higher than it
was 5 years ago.
35% of 
151,000 adults 
interviewed across 142 
countries say they had 
experienced significant 
stress the previous day.
40% of 
National Health Service 
employees in the UK 
report feeling unwell as 
a result of work-related 
stress over the 
previous year.
STRESSED OUT, BURNT OUTh
(photo) donskarpo/Getty Images144 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
Interpersonal Conflict As we will learn in Chapter 11, dysfunctional conflict can 
easily flair up and, left unchecked, escalate to a level that produces considerable stress. In 
organizational settings, most interpersonal conflict is caused by structural sources such as 
ambiguous rules, lack of resources, and conflicting goals between employees or depart￾ments. However, conflict becomes even more stressful when the parties attack each oth￾er’s personal attributes (intelligence, experience, etc.) rather than focus on the logic and 
factual foundation of the arguments presented. Also, one form of interpersonal conflict 
that has become an increasing concern is workplace harassment, including workplace bul￾lying, sexual harassment, and other forms of incivility and mistreatment by coworkers, 
managers, or customers.95
Work Overload “We just keep rushing along in a confused state of never having time 
to do the things that seem to be pressing upon us.” Sound familiar? Most of us probably had 
this thought from time to time. But this comment wasn’t written in the past year or even in 
the past decade. It came from an article called “Let’s Slow Down!” in a financial institu￾tion’s newsletter to clients in 1949!96 The fact is, people have been struggling with work 
overload for more than a half century. Employees are expected (or believe they are expected) 
to complete more work with more effort than they can provide within the allotted time.97
Work overload is evident when employees consume more of their personal time to get 
the job done. Technology and globalization also contribute to work overload because they 
tether employees to work for more hours of the day. People increasingly work with cowork￾ers in distant time zones, and their communication habits of being constantly “on” make it 
difficult to separate work from personal life. Some employees amplify their work overload 
by adopting an “ideal worker norm” in which they expect themselves and others to work 
longer hours. For many, toiling away far beyond the normal workweek is a badge of honor, 
a symbol of their superhuman capacity to perform above others. For example, 39 percent 
of Millennial employees in one recent large-scale survey admitted that they work long 
hours and have a 24/7 schedule so they look like a “work martyr” to their boss.98
Edmonton Staff Suffer Stress from 
Dysfunctional Conflicti
A few years ago, almost one-quarter of employees at the 
City of Edmonton, Canada, said they were harassed at 
work within the previous year. That percentage has since 
dropped below 10 percent, but undue stress from dys￾functional workplace conflict persists, according to both 
the city and labor union management.
Staff in the City of Edmonton’s accounts payable office 
did speak up after experiencing several years of stress 
due to conflict with their manager. The department’s eight 
employees had tried in vain to warn about serious flaws in 
Edmonton’s new invoice payment system. But rather than 
investigate, the manager blamed the employees for the 
problem, accusing them of lacking the experience and 
credentials to judge the new system. 
An external audit eventually confirmed the employees’ 
worries: the new payment system had systemic errors. 
The accounts payable office employees filed a harass￾ment complaint against their manager, who was eventu￾ally fired. Throughout the ordeal, these staff members had 
suffered severe stress. 
global connections 4.3
fizkes/Shutterstock
“There are eight members that are very hurt,” said the 
lead accounts payable office coordinator in a presenta￾tion to Edmonton City council. “There are people who are 
seriously sick because of being harassed. They can’t 
function.”Chapter Four Workplace Emotions, Attitudes, and Stress 145
Low Task Control Workplace stress is higher when employees lack control over 
how and when they perform their tasks as well as lack control over the pace of work activ￾ity. Work is potentially more stressful when it is paced by a machine, it involves monitor￾ing equipment, or the work schedule is controlled by someone else. Low task control is a 
stressor because employees face high workloads without the ability to adjust the pace of 
the load to their own energy, attention span, and other resources. Furthermore, the de￾gree to which low task control is a stressor increases with the burden of responsibility the 
employee must carry.99 Assembly-line workers have low task control, but they experience 
fairly low stress if their level of responsibility is also low. In contrast, sports coaches are 
under immense pressure to win games (high responsibility), yet they have little control 
over what happens on the playing field (low task control).
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN STRESS
Two employees exposed to the same stressor often experience different levels of stress. 
One reason is differences in their physical health. Regular exercise and a healthy lifestyle 
produce a larger store of energy to cope with stress. A second reason is that people use 
different strategies to cope with the stressor.100 Some try to remove the stressor or to mini￾mize its presence. Others seek out support from coworkers and friends or try to reframe 
the stressor in a more positive light. Some coping strategies work better for specific 
stressors and some are better across all stressors.101 Those who apply a less effective coping 
mechanism in a particular situation experience more stress in response to that situation.
Personality is the third reason people experience different levels of stress when faced 
with the same stressor.102 Individuals with low neuroticism (high emotional stability) usu￾ally experience lower stress levels because, by definition, they are less prone to anxiety, 
depression, and other negative emotions. Extraverts also tend to experience lower stress 
than do introverts, likely because extraversion includes a degree of positive thinking and 
extraverts interact with others, which helps buffer the effect of stressors. Those with a 
positive self-concept—high self-esteem, self-efficacy, and internal locus of control (see 
Chapter 3)—feel more confident and in control when faced with a stressor. In other words, 
they tend to have a stronger sense of optimism.103 Stress also tends to be higher among 
those who suffer from workaholism. Workaholics have an uncontrollable work motivation, 
constantly think about work, and have low work enjoyment.104
®
SELF-ASSESSMENT 4.5: Are You a Workaholic?
MANAGING WORK-RELATED STRESS
Many people deny the existence of their stress until it has more serious outcomes. This 
avoidance strategy creates a vicious cycle because the failure to cope with stress becomes 
another stressor on top of the one that created the stress in the first place. To prevent this 
vicious cycle, employers and employees need to apply one or more of the stress management 
strategies described next: remove the stressor, withdraw from the stressor, change stress 
perceptions, control stress consequences, and receive social support.105
Remove the Stressor There are many ways to remove the stressor, but some of the 
more common actions involve assigning employees to jobs that match their skills and 
preferences, reducing excessive workplace noise, having a complaint system that takes 
corrective action against harassment, and giving employees more control over the work 
process. Another important way that companies can remove stressors is through work–life 
integration initiatives (see Chapter 1). For example, personal leave benefits, such as 
LO 4-7
work–life integration
the degree that people are 
effectively engaged in their 
various work and nonwork 
roles and have a low degree 
of role conflict across those 
life domains146 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
maternity and paternity leave, temporarily offer employees paid nonwork time to manage 
special circumstances. Remote work potentially improves work–life integration by reduc￾ing or eliminating commuting time and increasing flexibility to perform nonwork obliga￾tions (such as picking up the kids from school).106
Withdraw from the Stressor Removing the stressor may be the ideal solution, 
but it isn’t always feasible. An alternative strategy is to permanently or temporarily re￾move employees from the stressor. Permanent withdrawal occurs when employees are 
transferred to jobs that are more compatible with their abilities and values. Temporarily 
withdrawing from stressors is the most frequent way that employees manage stress. Vaca￾tions and holidays are important opportunities for employees to recover from stress and 
reenergize for future challenges. A small number of companies offer paid or unpaid sab￾baticals.107 Many firms also provide innovative ways for employees to withdraw from 
stressful work throughout the day such as game rooms, ice cream cart breaks, nap rooms, 
and cafeterias that include live piano recitals.
Change Stress Perceptions How much stress employees experience depends on 
how they perceive the stressor.108 Consequently, another way to manage stress is by coach￾ing employees to improve their self-concept, personal goal setting, and self-reinforcement 
practices. Job challenges are perceived as less threatening when employees develop these 
self-views and self-management activities. In addition, research suggests that some (but 
not all) forms of humor can improve optimism and create positive emotions by taking 
some psychological weight off a stressful situation.109
Control Stress Consequences Keeping physically fit and maintaining a healthy 
lifestyle are effective stress management strategies because they control stress conse￾quences. Good physical fitness reduces the adverse physiological consequences of stress 
by helping employees moderate their breathing and heart rate, muscle tension, and stom￾ach acidity. The key variable here is physical fitness, not exercise. Exercise leads to 
Japanese employees are 
chronically overworked and sleep 
deprived. Using fitness trackers, 
one study found that people in 
Japan sleep only 6 hours and 
35 minutes each day, on average, 
which is the lowest among 
28 countries studied. Crazy Inc. 
hopes to reduce the Japanese 
penchant for overwork by 
motivating people to sleep longer. 
The Tokyo-based upscale 
wedding organizer awards points 
to employees who sleep at least 
six hours every night for at least 
five days each week. Employee 
sleep patterns are tracked by an 
app developed by a mattress 
manufacturer. The points, which 
are exchanged for food in the 
company cafeteria, can add up to 
more than $500 per year.j
DAJ/Getty ImagesChapter Four Workplace Emotions, Attitudes, and Stress 147
physical fitness, but research suggests that exercise does not reduce stress symptoms 
among people who are not yet physically fit.110 Various forms of meditation reduce anxi￾ety and other symptoms of stress, but their effect on blood pressure and other physiologi￾cal symptoms is minimal.111 Some firms educate employees about the benefits of better 
nutrition and fitness, regular sleep, and other good health habits. Finally, many large 
companies offer employee assistance programs (EAPs)—counseling services that help 
employees resolve marital, financial, or work-related troubles.
Receive Social Support Social support occurs when coworkers, supervisors, fam￾ily members, friends, and others provide emotional and/or informational support to buf￾fer an individual’s stress experience. Social support potentially improves the person’s 
optimism and self-confidence because support makes people feel valued and worthy. 
Social support also provides information to help the person interpret, comprehend, and 
possibly remove the stressor. For instance, to reduce a new employee’s stress, coworkers 
could describe ways to handle difficult customers. Seeking social support is called a “tend 
and befriend” response to stress, and research suggests that women often follow this route 
rather than the “fight-or-flight” response mentioned earlier.112
®
SELF-ASSESSMENT 4.6: How Do You Cope with Stressful Situations?
LO 4-1 Explain how emotions and cognition (conscious rea￾soning) influence attitudes and behavior.
Emotions are physiological, behavioral, and psychological epi￾sodes experienced toward an object, person, or event that cre￾ate a state of readiness. Emotions differ from attitudes, which 
represent a cluster of beliefs, feelings, and behavioral inten￾tions toward a person, object, or event. Beliefs are a person’s 
established perceptions about the attitude object. Feelings are 
positive or negative evaluations of the attitude object. Behav￾ioral intentions represent planned effort to engage in a particu￾lar behavior toward the target.
Attitudes have traditionally been described as a purely ratio￾nal process in which beliefs predict feelings, which predict be￾havioral intentions, which predict behavior. Each link in that 
model has contingencies that reduce predictability. We now 
know that emotions also have an influence on behavior that 
is equal to or greater than that of cognition. This dual process 
is apparent when we internally experience a conflict between 
what logically seems good or bad and what we emotionally feel 
is good or bad in a situation. Emotions also affect behavior di￾rectly. Behavior sometimes influences our subsequent attitudes 
through cognitive dissonance, which is an emotional experi￾ence caused by a perception that our beliefs, feelings, and be￾havior are incongruent with one another.
LO 4-2 Describe emotional labor and discuss strategies 
for displaying expected emotions at work.
Emotional labor consists of the effort, planning, and control 
needed to express organizationally desired emotions during 
interpersonal transactions. It is more common in jobs requiring 
a variety of emotions and more intense emotions, as well as in 
jobs in which interactions with clients are frequent and long in 
duration. Employees experience stress, job dissatisfaction, psy￾chological separation from self, and low job performance when 
they are required to display emotions that differ markedly from 
the emotions they actually experience at that time. The extent 
to which employees are expected to hide their true emotions 
varies considerably across cultures.
Employees sometimes fulfill their emotional labor obliga￾tions through surface acting—they consciously display behav￾iors that represent the expected emotions even though their 
actual emotions are different. A second strategy is deep acting, 
whereby employees actively change their true emotions so they 
are similar to the required emotions. The five ways to regulate 
emotions are to: (a) change the situation, (b) modify the situa￾tion, (c) suppress or amplify emotions, (d) shift attention, and 
(e) reframe the situation.
LO 4-3 Define emotional intelligence and discuss its 
importance in the workplace.
Emotional intelligence is the ability to recognize and regulate 
our own emotions as well as the emotions of other people. This 
concept includes four components arranged in a hierarchy: 
awareness of one’s own emotions, management of one’s own 
emotions, awareness of others’ emotions, and management of 
others’ emotions. Most jobs involve social interaction with co￾workers or external stakeholders, so employees need emotional 
intelligence to work effectively. Some firms try to measure 
emotional intelligence in job applicants. More often, compa￾nies train current employees to improve their emotional intel￾ligence abilities. Emotional intelligence also increases with age.
chapter summary148
LO 4-4 Explain how job satisfaction and dissatisfaction 
affect work behavior, including job performance and 
customer service.
Job satisfaction represents a person’s evaluation of their job 
and work context. People generally respond to job dissatisfac￾tion in four ways: (a) quitting or otherwise getting away from 
the dissatisfying situation (exit), (b) attempting to change the 
dissatisfying situation (voice), (c) patiently waiting for the 
problem to sort itself out (loyalty), and (d) reducing work ef￾fort and performance (neglect). There is a moderately positive 
relationship between job satisfaction and performance, with 
three specific reasons why the relationship isn’t stronger. Job 
satisfaction has a stronger effect on customer service, which is 
explained by the service profit chain model. Job satisfaction 
predicts customer satisfaction because (a) the positive emo￾tions of satisfied employees transfers to customers, and 
(b) satisfied employees are less likely to quit their jobs, so they 
have more work experience and more consistent service. Job 
satisfaction is also an ethical issue that influences the organiza￾tion’s reputation in the community
LO 4-5 Summarize the three types of organizational com￾mitment, and discuss strategies to increase affective 
commitment.
Affective organizational commitment is the employee’s emo￾tional attachment to, identification with, and involvement in a 
particular organization. Employees with high affective commit￾ment have higher work motivation, organizational citizenship, 
customer service, and somewhat higher job performance. Con￾tinuance commitment is a calculative attachment to the organi￾zation. This form of commitment exists when quitting incurs 
significant financial or social costs or when there is limited al￾ternative employment. High continuance commitment leads to 
lower performance, fewer organizational citizenship behaviors, 
and more use of formal grievances to resolve conflicts. 
Normative commitment—a felt obligation or moral duty to the 
organization—is a third form of organizational commitment. 
Companies increase employees’ affective commitment through 
organizational justice and support, shared values, trust, organi￾zational comprehension, and employee involvement.
LO 4-6 Define stress and stressors, and explain why people 
differ in their response to the same stressor.
Stress is an adaptive response to a situation that is perceived as 
challenging or threatening to a person’s well-being. The stress 
experience, called the general adaptation syndrome, involves 
moving through three stages: alarm, resistance, and exhaustion. 
High stress (distress) is a source of numerous physiological and 
psychological health problems. Stress also leads to various be￾havioral outcomes such as increased absenteeism, workplace 
accidents, and aggressive behavior as well as lower job perfor￾mance and poorer decision making. Stressors are the causes of 
stress and include any environmental conditions that place a 
physical or emotional demand on a person. Four of the most 
common workplace stressors are organizational constraints, in￾terpersonal conflict, work overload, and low task control.
LO 4-7 Identify five ways to manage workplace stress.
Many interventions are available to manage work-related stress, 
including removing the stressor, withdrawing from the stressor, 
changing stress perceptions, controlling stress consequences, 
and receiving social support.
affective organizational 
commitment, p. 139
attitudes, p. 125
cognitive dissonance, p. 129
continuance commitment, p. 139
emotional intelligence (EI), p. 133
emotional labor, p. 130
emotions, p. 124
empathy, p. 133
exit–voice–loyalty–neglect (EVLN) 
model, p. 136
general adaptation syndrome, p. 142
job satisfaction, p. 135
norm of reciprocity, p. 140
service profit chain model, p. 138
stress, p. 141
stressors, p. 143
trust, p. 141
work–life integration, p. 145
key terms
1. SuperTelco is shutting down its customer service center 
and moving all of its staff into remote work (work from 
home). These employees will be required to have a sepa￾rate area of their home for work and special cameras and 
other equipment will be installed to maintain work com￾pliance (e.g., no eating on the job) and minimize theft 
(e.g., employees stealing credit card information). Some 
of the 200 employees are enthusiastic about the shift to 
remote work whereas others are dreading it. Some em￾ployees opposed to the change have already quit and a 
few have complained to management. Using just the cog￾nitive part of the attitude model (beliefs, feelings, behav￾ioral intentions), explain how this move to remote work 
leads to different feelings, behavioral intentions, and 
behaviors among staff.
2. A software development company has formed a “fun” 
committee to help its 100 employees experience more 
positive emotions in the workplace. Its first event was a 
space hopper race (employees ride a bouncy ball along 
a wide hallway to a finish line) which occurred through￾out one morning. The event rotated through four groups 
of employees, each participating for one hour. Most 
employees enjoyed the experience, which was evident 
from friendly chatter and laughter that afternoon. 
However, a few people hated the experience and a 
couple even said they might move to another company. 
Apply the entire attitude model (cognitive and emotional 
components) to explain how this so-called fun activity 
might influence employee attitudes and behavior toward 
this organization.
critical thinking questions149
3. Studies report that college instructors are frequently re￾quired to engage in emotional labor. Identify the situa￾tions in which emotional labor is required for this job. In 
your opinion, is emotional labor more troublesome for 
college instructors or for people working at emergency 
service call centers?
4. Recall situations where you had to regulate your emo￾tions. For example, think of times when you wanted to 
feel more serious than you would otherwise, or experi￾ence more happiness for someone at a time when events 
caused your emotions to be less positive. Which of 
the five emotion regulation strategies did you apply? 
Why were those strategies chosen? How difficult was it 
to actually change your emotions?
5. Recognizing and regulating emotions in ourselves and 
others is an important capability in the workplace. Look￾ing at each of the four components of this concept, what 
special training and daily informal activities can help 
us to increase our emotional intelligence?
6. Recall or imagine yourself in a customer-facing job, such 
as restaurant waiter or retail salesperson. Use the service￾profit chain model to explain how being happy working 
in this job and for this company affects the satisfaction 
that your customers experience.
7. Two college graduates recently joined the same major 
newspaper as journalists. Both work long hours and have 
tight deadlines for completing their stories. They are un￾der constant pressure to scout out new leads and be the 
first to report new controversies. One journalist is in￾creasingly fatigued and despondent and has taken sev￾eral days of sick leave. The other is getting the work 
done and seems to enjoy the challenges. Use your knowl￾edge of stress to explain why these two journalists are re￾acting differently to their jobs.
8. Recall or imagine yourself in the job of a financial ad￾visor, who gives advice to clients for investing in stocks 
and other asset classes. Clients are sometimes angry or 
frantic when investments fall and they often expect to 
move their investment around more quickly than is pos￾sible. They have your personal phone number and 
some call you outside the usual work day. For each of 
the five types of stress management practices discussed 
in this chapter, identify ways to manage your stress in 
this profession.
CASE STUDY: DIANA’S DISAPPOINTMENT: THE 
PROMOTION STUMBLING BLOCK
By Rosemary Maellaro, University of Dallas
Diana Gillen had an uneasy feeling of apprehension as she 
arrived at the Cobb Street Grille corporate offices. Today 
she was meeting with her supervisor, Julie Spencer, and re￾gional director, Tom Miner, to learn the outcome of her 
promotion interview for the district manager position. 
Diana had been employed by this casual dining restaurant 
chain for 12 years and had worked her way up from server 
to general manager. Based on her track record, she was the 
obvious choice for the promotion; and her friends assured 
her that the interview process was merely a formality. Diana 
was still anxious, though, and feared that the news might 
not be positive. She knew she was more than qualified for 
the job, but that didn’t guarantee anything these days.
Nine months ago, when Diana interviewed for the last 
district manager opening, she thought her selection for the 
job was inevitable. She was shocked when that didn’t hap￾pen. Diana was so upset about not getting promoted then 
that she initially decided not to apply for the current open￾ing. She eventually changed her mind—after all, the com￾pany had just named her Restaurant Manager of the Year 
and entrusted her with managing its flagship location. 
Diana thought her chances had to be really good this time.
A multiunit management position was a desirable move 
up for any general manager and was a goal to which Diana 
had aspired since she began working in the industry. When 
she had not been promoted the last time, Julie, her supervi￾sor, explained that her people skills needed to improve. But 
Diana knew that explanation had little to do with why she 
hadn’t gotten the job—the real reason was corporate politics. 
She heard that the person they hired was some superstar 
from the outside—a district manager from another restaurant 
company who supposedly had strong multiunit management 
experience and a proven track record of developing restau￾rant managers. Despite what she was told, she was convinced 
that Tom, her regional manager, had been unduly pressured 
to hire this person, who had been referred by the CEO.
The decision to hire the outsider may have impressed the 
CEO, but it enraged Diana. With her successful track re￾cord as a store manager for the Cobb Street Grille, she was 
much more capable, in her opinion, of overseeing multiple 
units than someone who was new to the operation. Besides, 
district managers had always been promoted internally 
among the store managers and she was unofficially desig￾nated as the next one to move up to a district position. Tom 
had hired the outside candidate as a political maneuver to 
put himself in a good light with management, even though 
it meant overlooking a loyal employee like her in the pro￾cess. Diana had no patience with people who made busi￾ness decisions for the wrong reasons. She worked very hard 
to avoid politics—and it especially irritated her when the 
political actions of others negatively impacted on her.
Diana was ready to be a district manager nine months 
ago, and thought she was even more qualified today—
provided the decision was based on performance. She ran a 
tight ship, managing her restaurant completely by the book. 
She meticulously adhered to policies and procedures and rig￾orously controlled expenses. Her sales were growing, in spite 
of new competition in the market, and she received relatively 
few customer complaints. The only number that was a little 
out of line was the higher turnover among her staff.	 Diana was not too concerned about the increasing num￾ber of terminations, however; there was a perfectly logical
explanation for this. It was because she had high standards—
for herself and her employees. Any employee who delivered
less than 110 percent at all times would be better off finding
a job somewhere else. Diana didn’t think she should bend
the rules for anyone, for whatever reason. A few months
ago, for example, she had to fire three otherwise good em￾ployees who decided to try a new customer service tactic—
a so-called innovation they dreamed up—rather than
complying with the established process. As the general
manager, it was her responsibility to make sure that the res￾taurant was managed strictly in accordance with the opera￾tions manual and she could not allow deviations. This
by-the-book approach to managing had served her well for
many years. It got her promoted in the past and she was not
about to jinx that now. Losing a few employees now and
then—particularly those who had difficulty following the
rules—was simply the cost of doing business.
	 During a recent store visit, Julie suggested that Diana
might try creating a friendlier work environment because
she seemed aloof and interacted with employees somewhat
mechanically. Julie even told her that she overheard employ￾ees refer to Diana as the “Ice Maiden” behind her back.
Diana was surprised that Julie brought this up because her
boss rarely criticized her. They had an unspoken agreement:
since Diana was so technically competent and always met
her financial targets, Julie didn’t need to give her much in￾put. Diana was happy to be left alone to run her restaurant
without needless advice.
	 At any rate, Diana rarely paid attention to what employ￾ees said about her. She wasn’t about to let something as
childish as a silly name cause her to modify a successful
management strategy. What’s more, even though she had
recently lost more than the average number of employees
due to “personality differences” or “miscommunications”
over her directives, her superiors did not seem to mind
when she consistently delivered strong bottom line results
every month.
	 As she waited in the conference room for the others,
Diana worried that she was not going to get this promotion.
Julie had sounded different in the voicemail message she left
to inform her about this meeting, but Diana couldn’t put her
finger on exactly what it was. She would be very angry if she
was passed over again and wondered what excuse they would
have this time. Then her mind wandered to how her employ￾ees would respond to her if she did not get the promotion.
They all knew how much she wanted the job and she cringed
at how embarrassed she would be if she didn’t get it. Her
eyes began to mist over at the sheer thought of having to face
them if she was not promoted today.
	 Julie and Tom entered the room then and the meeting
was under way. They told Diana, as kindly as they could,
that she would not be promoted at this time; one of her col￾leagues would become the new district manager. She was
incredulous. The individual who got promoted had been
with the company only three years—and Diana had trained
her! She tried to comprehend how this happened, but it did
not make sense. Before any further explanation could be
offered, she burst into tears and left the room. As she tried
in vain to regain her composure, Diana was overcome with
crushing disappointment.
Discussion Questions
1.	 Apply your knowledge of the four emotional intelli￾gence dimensions to discuss the likely reasons why
Diana wasn’t offered a promotion.
2.	 What skills does Diana need to develop to be promotable
in the future? What can the company do to support her
developmental efforts?
TEAM EXERCISE: WHAT DOES THAT FACE TELL YOU?
	 Step 2: The instructor will show students a series of
faces on a projection screen or monitor (not on paper). For
each face, students are given time to select the emotion
word that best represents the emotion on that face. How￾ever, where possible, the instructor shows the face for a
very short time (e.g., 0.5 seconds), typically with a warning
when the face will be shown. This is repeated for each face
shown and students have selected one emotion for each
item (face) on the scoring sheet. Students will NOT change
their answers after all of the faces have been shown.
	 Step 3: (Optional, and typically for face-to-face classes
under 60 students) Students are placed into larger groups
(10-15 people in each group). A scribe in each group has a
blank copy of the scoring sheet. With a show of hands, the
group sees which emotions were chosen for each face. The
scribe counts the number of group members who selected
each answer for each face. The instructor may collect the
group sheets for grouped results to show future classes.
PURPOSE To help students estimate and understand
their awareness of others’ emotions through facial expres￾sions, as a dimension of emotional intelligence.
MATERIALS Students just require a pen/pencil. The in￾structor will display and distribute all materials for this
exercise.
INSTRUCTIONS (SMALL OR LARGE CLASS, 
FACE-TO-FACE OR REMOTE) Step 1: The instructor
will distribute a scoring sheet that each student will use to
select their answers. The sheet has a set of emotions words
for each item. Students do NOT write their name on the
scoring sheet unless advised by the instructor. Usually
only the student sees their results, although their results
may be shared with others in a large group (Step 3 below)
and the instructor may ask for the sheets to give grouped
feedback to future classes.
150Step 6: For each face, the instructor will show the an￾swer that is most likely correct. If the instructor has 
results from previous classes, that information will also 
be shown for each face. As each face and “correct” an￾swer is shown, students will score their own result. A 
value of “1” is given to a correct answer and “0” to an 
incorrect answer.
Step 7: The instructor will debrief the class and lead 
discussion about this faces exercise and how to improve 
awareness of others’ emotions.
© Steven L. McShane.
Step 4: (Optional) The instructor hands out a sheet 
showing all of the faces that students had briefly viewed 
and scored. Students will briefly look at these faces and 
determine if they would change any of their original an￾swers. Students must not change the original answers, but 
can mark up the scoring sheet with additional notes.
Step 5: (Optional) If the faces in this exercise came 
from a video, the instructor will show that video at this 
time. As students see the faces in the video, they deter￾mine if they would change any of their original answers. 
Students can note this on the scoring sheet but must not 
change their original answers.
TEAM EXERCISE: ATTITUDES TOWARD MEL THE MANAGER
INTERVIEW WITH EMPLOYEE “A” What do I think of 
Mel? Uh, well, I need to be diplomatic here. Okay, sure, 
Mel is really knowledgeable. Seems to know everything 
on the planet about financial products, at least the prod￾ucts that this company offers to its clients. I suppose I 
should appreciate that, but Mel uses that expertise as a 
badge of superiority. I actually hate to ask Mel for infor￾mation because I get this put-down sort of response. It 
makes it really tough working here because I need to 
know some of the finer details of these products yet I get 
pushed further down every time I ask. Not a good feel￾ing, you know?
What else about Mel? Let’s see. Oh yeah, Mel isn’t into 
helicopter managing. Sure, Mel will check up on you, 
make sure you’re doing your job right. But Mel’s not peer￾ing over your shoulder every hour. That’s good, although 
our previous manager checked up on us more often, which 
didn’t bother me as much as it bothered some coworkers 
here. At the same time, when Mel does show up, there’s 
this awkward attempt to be funny. Like, I mean, really 
dumb jokes or irritating puns. Maybe it’s me, but Mel’s 
sort of humor is truly cringeworthy. Someone should warn 
Mel about that.
(In response to interviewer question about whether the 
employee would recommend this place to work to a 
friend). No, can’t say I would. At least, not this depart￾ment with Mel on board. In fact, I’m not sure how much 
longer I can put up working with Mel.
INTERVIEW WITH EMPLOYEE “B” Glad you asked 
about Mel! Mel became head of this unit six months 
ago, and I can tell you—what a difference! The person 
Mel replaced was a true micromanager. Always checking 
up on you. Always asking precise questions and giving 
advice over the tiniest things. Not Mel. I appreciate my 
manager giving me some space. And when Mel does 
drop by, it’s always to cheer you up, saying something 
funny. That humor really helps after a tough time with a 
client or just to get my energy moving again. Mel has 
this way with words that can really bring a smile to any￾one. At least, I think so.
PURPOSE To help students to understand the model of 
emotions, attitudes, and behavior by applying that model 
to a specific situation.
MATERIALS Teams should be able to display their analy￾sis to others in the class, such as flip chart paper (for face￾to-face classes) or a team digital space or presentation 
slides for remote teams. 
INSTRUCTIONS (SMALL OR LARGE CLASS, FACE￾TO-FACE OR REMOTE) Step 1: Students will be placed 
in teams (typically 5-7 people). This exercise is possible 
in large classes when assigned individually rather than in 
teams.
Step 2: Each team (or individual student in large 
classes) reads the mini-case below. Using the model of 
emotions, attitudes, and behavior, diagnose and compare 
the attitudes and behavior of the two employees inter￾viewed toward their manager Mel. The analysis should sys￾tematically identify the stated beliefs, feelings, behavioral 
intentions, and behavior of these two employees toward 
Mel. The analysis needs to consider contingencies at each 
step in the model, including the valences of key features 
about Mel.
Step 3: The class will debrief this mini-case. Teams will 
be asked to show their analysis of the attitudes of each 
employee. Team diagnoses will be compared to determine 
different approaches or applications of the emotions, atti￾tudes, and behavior model.
BACKGROUND A small financial services company 
with four offices in one state sells well-known branded fi￾nancial products sold across the industry (investment 
funds, bonds, annuities, etc.) The firm also offers clients a 
small number of its own investment funds, model portfo￾lios, and term deposits. The financial services department 
in the company’s main branch employs 30 staff (financial 
advisors). Mel, the manager of that department, was hired 
from a competitor six months ago. An outside interviewer 
met confidentially with two employees to discuss their 
views about the manager.
151152
friend). What a coincidence that you asked! Just last 
week, I met up at a café with one of my old school 
friends. I happened to mention where I work. My friend’s 
brother, who is in the finance business, is interested in 
changing jobs. I immediately suggested that my friend’s 
brother should consider applying here. Not just to this 
company, but to this department. Can’t go wrong with 
Mel running the shop.
© 2022 Steven L. McShane.
Another thing that stands out: Mel knows the compa￾ny’s business more than anyone else. Really! I’ve had some 
tough questions from clients and Mel answered them for 
me immediately, without even have to look anything up. 
And when I checked, Mel was correct! Like a walking en￾cyclopedia of financial products and related tax issues. It 
makes me feel good because I go back to the client fairly 
quickly with an answer or explanation that helps them out. 
That also makes me look good to the client!
(In response to interviewer question about whether 
the employee would recommend this place to work to a 
TEAM EXERCISE: RANKING JOBS ON THEIR EMOTIONAL LABOR
Step 2: The instructor will form teams of four or five 
members, and each team will rank order the items on the 
basis of consensus (not simply averaging the individual 
rankings). These results are placed in column 2.
Step 3: The instructor will provide expert ranking 
information. This information should be written in 
column 3. Then, students calculate the differences in 
columns 4 and 5.
Step 4: The class will compare the results and discuss 
the features of jobs with high emotional labor.
PURPOSE This exercise is designed to help you under￾stand the jobs in which people tend to experience higher 
or lower degrees of emotional labor.
INSTRUCTIONS Step 1: Individually rank order the extent 
that the jobs listed below require emotional labor. In other 
words, assign a “1” to the job you believe requires the most 
effort, planning, and control to express organizationally de￾sired emotions during interpersonal transactions. Assign a 
“10” to the job you believe requires the least amount of 
emotional labor. Mark your rankings in column 1.
Occupational Emotional Labor Scoring Sheet
OCCUPATION
(1)
INDIVIDUAL 
RANKING
(2) 
TEAM
RANKING
(3) 
EXPERT 
RANKING
(4) 
ABSOLUTE 
DIFFERENCE 
OF 1 AND 3
(5) 
ABSOLUTE 
DIFFERENCE
OF 2 AND 3
Bartender
Cashier
Dental hygienist
Insurance adjuster
Lawyer
Librarian
Postal clerk
Registered nurse
Social worker
Television announcer
TOTAL
Your score Team score
(The lower the score, the better.)153
1. R. Ansar, “Creating a Culture beyond Ping Pong Tables 
and Sleeping Pods,” E27, November 16, 2019; R. Mullen, 
“The Best Places to Work in Hospitality 2021,” The 
Caterer, June 4, 2021; E. Douglas, “Hootsuite’s Chief 
People and Diversity Officer: ‘The Link between Mental 
Agility and Culture,’” Human Resources Director, 
September 14, 2021.
2. Emotions are also cognitive processes. However, we use 
the narrow definition of cognition as a well-used label 
referring only to reasoning processes. Also, this and 
other chapters emphasize that emotional and cognitive 
processes are intertwined. For recent discussion of this 
in neuroscience, see: L. Pessoa, “Understanding Emotion 
with Brain Networks,” Current Opinion in Behavioral 
Sciences, 19 (2018): 19–25.
3. For discussion of emotions in marketing, economics, 
and sociology, see: W. Kalkhoff, S.R. Thye, and J. 
Pollock, “Developments in Neurosociology,” Sociology 
Compass 10, no. 3 (2016): 242–58; H. Lin and O. 
Vartanian, “A Neuroeconomic Framework for Creative 
Cognition,” Perspectives on Psychological Science 13, 
no. 6 (2018): 655–77; W.M. Lim, “Demystifying Neuro￾marketing,” Journal of Business Research 91 (2018): 
205–20; A. Konovalov and I. Krajbich, “Over a Decade 
of Neuroeconomics: What Have We Learned?,” 
Organizational Research Methods 22, no. 1 (2019): 
148–73. One recent review suggests that organizational 
behavior will benefit from the neuroscience of emo￾tion, but there are several methodological issues to 
address. See: A.I. Jack et al., “Pitfalls in Organizational 
Neuroscience: A Critical Review and Suggestions for 
Future Research,” Organizational Research Methods 22, 
no. 1 (2019): 421–58.
4. Although definitions of emotion vary, the definition 
stated here seems to be the most widely accepted. See, 
for example, N.H. Frijda, “Varieties of Affect: Emotions 
and Episodes, Moods, and Sentiments,” in The Nature 
of Emotion: Fundamental Questions, ed. P. Ekman and 
R.J. Davidson (New York: Oxford University Press, 
1994), 59–67; G. Van Kleef, H. van den Berg, and M. 
Heerdink, “The Persuasive Power of Emotions: Effects 
of Emotional Expressions on Attitude Formation and 
Change,” Journal of Applied Psychology 100, no. 4 
(2015): 1124–42; A. Scarantino, “The Philosophy of 
Emotions and Its Impact on Affective Science,” in 
Handbook of Emotions, ed. L.F. Barrett, M. Lewis, and 
J.M. Haviland-Jones, 4th ed. (New York: Guilford 
Press, 2016), 3–47; R. Smith and R.D. Lane, “Uncon￾scious Emotion: A Cognitive Neuroscientific Perspec￾tive,” Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews 69 (2016): 
216–38; M. Résibois et al., “The Relation between 
Rumination and Temporal Features of Emotion Inten￾sity,” Cognition and Emotion 32, no. 2 (2018): 259–74; 
L.F. Barrett and A.B. Satpute, “Historical Pitfalls and 
New Directions in the Neuroscience of Emotion,” 
Neuroscience Letters, 693 (2019): 9–18.
5. R. Reisenzein, M. Studtmann, and G. Horstmann, 
“Coherence between Emotion and Facial Expression: 
Evidence from Laboratory Experiments,” Emotion Review 5, 
no. 1 (2013): 16–23; M.D. Lieberman, “Boo! The 
Consciousness Problem in Emotion,” Cognition and 
Emotion 33, no. 1 (2019): 24–30.
6. R.B. Zajonc, “Emotions,” in Handbook of Social 
Psychology, ed. D.T. Gilbert, S.T. Fiske, and L. Gardner 
(New York: Oxford University Press, 1998), 591–634; 
P. Winkielman, “Bob Zajonc and the Unconscious 
Emotion,” Emotion Review 2, no. 4 (2010): 353–62; K.R. 
Scherer and A. Moors, “The Emotion Process: Event 
Appraisal and Component Differentiation,” Annual Re￾view of Psychology 70 (2019): 719–45. Scherer and Moors 
also describe neurological processes of coherence to 
explain how and when individuals become conscious of 
their emotions.
7. A. R. Damasio, The Feeling of What Happens: Body and 
Emotion in the Making of Consciousness(New York: 
Harcourt Brace, 1999), 286; B.Q. Ford and J.J. Gross, 
“Emotion Regulation: Why Beliefs Matter,” Canadian 
Psychology/Psychologie Canadienne 59, no. 1 (2018): 
1–14; K.C. Berridge, “Evolving Concepts of Emotion and 
Motivation,” Frontiers in Psychology 9 (Sept. 7, 2018), 
01647.
8. R.J. Larson, E. Diener, and R.E. Lucas, “Emotion: 
Models, Measures, and Differences,” in Emotions in the 
Workplace, ed. R.G. Lord, R.J. Klimoski, and R. Kanfer 
(San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2002), 64–113; L.F. 
Barrett et al., “The Experience of Emotion,” Annual 
Review of Psychology 58, no. 1 (2007): 373–403; M. Yik, 
J.A. Russell, and J.H. Steiger, “A 12-Point Circumplex 
Structure of Core Affect,” Emotion 11, no. 4 (2011): 
705–31. 
9. R. F. Baumeister, E. Bratslavsky, and C. Finkenauer, 
“Bad Is Stronger Than Good,” Review of General 
Psychology 5, no. 4 (2001): 323–70; A. Vaish, T. Gross￾mann, and A. Woodward, “Not All Emotions Are Cre￾ated Equal: The Negativity Bias in Social–Emotional 
Development,” Psychological Bulletin 134, no. 3 (2008): 
383–403; R. H. Fazio et al., “Positive versus Negative 
Valence: Asymmetries in Attitude Formation and Gen￾eralization as Fundamental Individual Differences,” in 
Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, vol. 51, ed. 
J. M. Olson and M. P. Zanna (Waltham, MA: Academic 
Press, 2015), 97–146; K. Bebbington et al., “The Sky Is 
Falling: Evidence of a Negativity Bias in the Social 
Transmission of Information,” Evolution and Human 
Behavior 38, no. 1 (2017): 92–101.
10. A.P. Brief, Attitudes in and around Organizations 
(Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 1998); A.H. Eagly and 
S. Chaiken, “The Advantages of an Inclusive Definition of 
Attitude,” Social Cognition 25, no. 5 (2007): 582–602; 
G. Bohner and N. Dickel, “Attitudes and Attitude Change,” 
Annual Review of Psychology 62, no. 1 (2011): 391–417. 
The definition of attitudes is still being debated. This 
book adopts the three-component model (beliefs, feel￾ings, behavioral intentions), whereas some writers 
describe attitude as only the “feelings” component; 
however, they invariably include beliefs and intentions in 
their discussion of attitude. For definitions and various 
models of attitude, see I. Ajzen, “Nature and Operation 
endnotes154
of Attitudes,” Annual Review of Psychology 52 (2001): 
27–58; D. Albarracín et al., “Attitudes: Introduction and 
Scope,” in The Handbook of Attitudes, ed. D. Albarracín, 
B.T. Johnson, and M.P. Zanna (Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum, 
2005), 3–20; W.A. Cunningham and P.D. Zelazo, 
“Attitudes and Evaluations: A Social Cognitive Neurosci￾ence Perspective,” TRENDS in Cognitive Sciences 11, no. 3 
(2007): 97–104; R.S. Dalal, “Job Attitudes: Cognition 
and Affect,” in Handbook of Psychology, 2nd ed. (New 
York: Wiley, 2012).
11. Neuroscience has a slightly more complicated distinc￾tion in that conscious awareness is “feeling a feeling” 
whereas “feeling” is a nonconscious sensing of the body 
state created by emotion, which itself is a nonconscious 
neural reaction to a stimulus. However, this distinction 
is not significant for scholars focused on human behav￾ior rather than brain activity, and the labels collide with 
popular understanding of “feeling.” See A.R. Damasio, 
The Feeling of What Happens: Body and Emotion in the 
Making of Consciousness (New York: Harcourt Brace, 
1999); F. Hansen, “Distinguishing between Feelings 
and Emotions in Understanding Communication 
Effects,” Journal of Business Research 58, no. 10 (2005): 
1426–36; T. Bosse, C.M. Jonker, and J. Treur, 
“Formalisation of Damasio’s Theory of Emotion, 
Feeling and Core Consciousness,” Consciousness and 
Cognition 17, no. 1 (2008): 94–113. 
12. W.A. Cunningham and P.D. Zelazo, “Attitudes and 
Evaluations: A Social Cognitive Neuroscience Perspec￾tive,” TRENDS in Cognitive Sciences 11, no. 3 (2007): 
97–104; M.D. Lieberman, “Social Cognitive Neuro￾science: A Review of Core Processes,” Annual Review 
of Psychology 58, no. 1 (2007): 259–89; M. Fenton￾O’Creevy et al., “Thinking, Feeling and Deciding: The 
Influence of Emotions on the Decision Making and 
Performance of Traders,” Journal of Organizational Be￾havior 32 (2011): 1044–61. The dual emotion–cognition 
processes are likely the same as the implicit–explicit at￾titude processes reported by several scholars, as well as 
tacit knowledge structures. See W.J. Becker and R. 
Cropanzano, “Organizational Neuroscience: The Prom￾ise and Prospects of an Emerging Discipline,” Journal 
of Organizational Behavior 31, no. 7 (2010): 1055–59; 
D. Kahneman, Thinking Fast and Slow (New York: 
Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2011).
13. M.H. Connors and P.W. Halligan, “A Cognitive Account 
of Belief: A Tentative Road Map,” Frontiers in Psychology 5 
(2015), 1588; D. Albarracin and S. Shavitt, “Attitudes 
and Attitude Change,” Annual Review of Psychology 69 
(2018): 299–327. An emerging view is that beliefs (and 
possibly feelings) are networked so activation of one be￾lief toward an entity activates other beliefs toward that en￾tity, and the valence of those beliefs become more closely 
aligned. See: J. Dalege et al., “Toward a Formalized Ac￾count of Attitudes: The Causal Attitude Network (CAN) 
Model,” Psychological Review 123, no. 1 (2016): 2–22.
14. P. Sheeran and T.L. Webb, “The Intention–Behavior 
Gap,” Social and Personality Psychology Compass 10, 
no. 9 (2016): 503–18.
15. A.W. Kruglanski et al., “The Rocky Road from Attitudes 
to Behaviors: Charting the Goal Systemic Course of 
Actions.,” Psychological Review 122, no. 4 (2015): 598–
620; P. Sheeran and T.L. Webb, “The Intention–Behavior 
Gap,” Social and Personality Psychology Compass 10, no. 9 
(2016): 503–18.
16. H.M. Weiss and R. Cropanzano, “Affective Events 
Theory: A Theoretical Discussion of the Structure, 
Causes and Consequences of Affective Experiences at 
Work,” Research in Organizational Behavior 18 (1996): 
1–74; A. Bechara et al., “Deciding Advantageously before 
Knowing the Advantageous Strategy,” Science 275, no. 
5304 (1997): 1293–95; B. Russell and J. Eisenberg, “The 
Role of Cognition and Attitude in Driving Behavior: 
Elaborating on Affective Events Theory,” in Experiencing 
and Managing Emotions in the Workplace, ed. N.M. 
Ashkanasy, C.E.J. Hartel, and W.J. Zerbe (Bingley, UK: 
Emerald Group, 2012), 203–24.
17. J.A. Bargh and M.J. Ferguson, “Beyond Behaviorism: On 
the Automaticity of Higher Mental Processes,” Psycholog￾ical Bulletin 126, no. 6 (2000): 925–45; P. Winkielman 
and K.C. Berridge, “Unconscious Emotion,” Current Di￾rections in Psychological Science 13, no. 3 (2004): 120–23; 
A. Moors, “Automaticity: Componential, Causal, and 
Mechanistic Explanations,” Annual Review of Psychology
67, no. 1 (2016): 263–87.
18. A.R. Damasio, Descartes’ Error: Emotion, Reason, and 
the Human Brain (New York: Putnam Sons, 1994); P. 
Ekman, “Basic Emotions,” in Handbook of Cognition 
and Emotion, ed. T. Dalgleish and M. Power (San Fran￾cisco: Jossey-Bass, 1999), 45–60; A. R. Damasio, The 
Feeling of What Happens: Body and Emotion in the 
Making of Consciousness (New York: Harcourt Brace 
and Company, 1999); J.E. LeDoux, “Emotion Circuits 
in the Brain,” Annual Review of Neuroscience 23 (2000): 
155–84; R. Smith and R.D. Lane, “The Neural Basis of 
One’s Own Conscious and Unconscious Emotional 
States,” Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews 57 
(2015): 1–29.
19. M.T. Pham, “The Logic of Feeling,” Journal of Consumer 
Psychology 14, no. 4 (2004): 360–69; N. Schwarz, 
“Feelings-as-Information Theory,” in Handbook of Theo￾ries of Social Psychology, ed. P. Van Lange, A. Kruglanski, 
and E.T. Higgins (London: Sage, 2012), 289–308.
20. We have described likely the most common form of emo￾tion–attitude conflict and ambivalence, but other forms 
exist. See: G. Loewenstein, T. O’Donoghue, and S. Bhatia, 
“Modeling the Interplay between Affect and Deliberation,” 
Decision 2, no. 2 (2015): 55–81; A.I. Snyder and Z.L. 
Tormala, “Valence Asymmetries in Attitude Ambiva￾lence,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 112, 
no. 4 (2017): 555–76; I.K. Schneider and N. Schwarz, 
“Mixed Feelings: The Case of Ambivalence,” Current 
Opinion in Behavioral Sciences, Mixed Emotions, 15 
(2017): 39–45; N.B. Rothman and S. Melwani, “Feeling 
Mixed, Ambivalent, and in Flux: The Social Functions of 
Emotional Complexity for Leaders,” Academy of Manage￾ment Review 42, no. 2 (2017): 259–82.
21. P.C. Nutt, Why Decisions Fail (San Francisco: Berrett￾Koehler, 2002); S. Finkelstein, Why Smart Executives Fail
(New York: Viking, 2003).
22. C.A. Petelczyc et al., “Play at Work: An Integrative 
Review and Agenda for Future Research,” Journal of 155
Management 44, no. 1 (2018): 161–90; J.W. Michel, M.J. 
Tews, and D.G. Allen, “Fun in the Workplace: A Review 
and Expanded Theoretical Perspective,” Human Resource 
Management Review 29, no. 1 (2019): 98–110; S.Y. Kim 
and D. Lee, “Work–Life Program Participation and Em￾ployee Work Attitudes: A Quasi-Experimental Analysis 
Using Matching Methods,” Review of Public Personnel 
Administration 40, no. 3 (2020): 468–90.
23. B. Nordlo, “Why Zoom Video Communications Built a 
Team Dedicated to Happiness,” Built In Colorado (blog), 
July 27, 2018; “Zoom: A Best Place to Work in 2021!,” 
Zoom Blog (blog), January 22, 2021. The quotation was 
retrieved from an employee comment submitted to Glass￾door on June 24, 2019.
24. S. Pichai, “A Hybrid Approach to Work,” Google (blog), 
May 5, 2021; “Community Outreach & Employee En￾gagement ‘FUN’ Committee,” Parthenon Management 
Group (blog), July 30, 2021.
25. J. Mesmer-Magnus, D.J. Glew, and C. Viswesvaran, “A 
Meta-Analysis of Positive Humor in the Workplace,” 
Journal of Managerial Psychology 27, no. 2 (2012): 
155–90; C. Robert and S.P. da Motta Veiga, “Conversa￾tional Humor and Job Satisfaction at Work: Exploring 
the Role of Humor Production, Appreciation, and Positive 
Affect,” HUMOR 30, no. 4 (2017): 417–438; C. Robert, 
ed., The Psychology of Humor at Work: A Psychological 
Perspective (London: Routledge, 2017).
26. R.W. Levenson et al., “Emotion,” in Handbook of 
Psychophysiology, ed. G.G. Berntson, J.T. Cacioppo, and 
L.G. Tassinary, 4th ed., Cambridge Handbooks in 
Psychology (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
2016), 444–64; T.T.A. Höfling et al., “Read My Face: 
Automatic Facial Coding Versus Psychophysiological 
Indicators of Emotional Valence and Arousal,” 
Frontiers in Psychology 11 (2020), 01388.
27. L. Festinger, A Theory of Cognitive Dissonance (Evanston, 
IL: Row, Peterson, 1957); J. Cooper, Cognitive Disso￾nance: Fifty Years of a Classic Theory (London: Sage, 
2007); J. Hagège et al., “Suggestion of Self-(in)Coher￾ence Modulates Cognitive Dissonance,” PLOS ONE 13, 
no. 8 (August 30, 2018): e0202204.
28. This example focuses on cognitive dissonance due to 
counter-attitudinal behaviors. Two lesser known causes 
are free choice and effort/behavior commitment. See: 
A.S. Hinojosa et al., “A Review of Cognitive Dissonance 
Theory in Management Research: Opportunities for Fur￾ther Development,” Journal of Management 43, no. 1 
(January 2017): 170–99.
29. G.R. Salancik, “Commitment and the Control of Orga￾nizational Behavior and Belief,” in New Directions in 
Organizational Behavior, ed. B.M. Staw and G.R. 
Salancik (Chicago: St. Clair, 1977), 1–54; J.M. Jarcho, 
E.T. Berkman, and M.D. Lieberman, “The Neural 
Basis of Rationalization: Cognitive Dissonance Reduc￾tion during Decision-Making,” Social Cognitive and 
Affective Neuroscience 6, no. 4 (2011): 460–67; M.H. 
Connors and P.W. Halligan, “A Cognitive Account of 
Belief: A Tentative Road Map,” Frontiers in Psychology 5 
(2015) 1588; A. McGrath, “Dealing with Disso￾nance: A Review of Cognitive Dissonance Reduction,” 
Social and Personality Psychology Compass 11, no. 12 
(2017): e12362.
30. T.W.H. Ng and K.L. Sorensen, “Dispositional Affectivity 
and Work-Related Outcomes: A Meta-Analysis,” Journal 
of Applied Social Psychology 39, no. 6 (2009): 1255–87; 
S. Nelis et al., “Trait Affectivity and Response Styles to 
Positive Affect: Negative Affectivity Relates to Dampening 
and Positive Affectivity Relates to Enhancing,” Personality 
and Individual Differences 96 (2016): 148–54
31. J. Schaubroeck, D.C. Ganster, and B. Kemmerer, “Does 
Trait Affect Promote Job Attitude Stability?,” Journal of 
Organizational Behavior 17 (1996): 191–96; C. Dormann 
and D. Zapf, “Job Satisfaction: A Meta-Analysis of Sta￾bilities,” Journal of Organizational Behavior 22 (2001): 
483–504; A.C. Keller and N.K. Semmer, “Changes in 
Situational and Dispositional Factors as Predictors of 
Job Satisfaction,” Journal of Vocational Behavior 83, no. 1 
(2013): 88–98.
32. H. Wang, N.C. Hall, and J.L. Taxer, “Antecedents and 
Consequences of Teachers’ Emotional Labor: A System￾atic Review and Meta-Analytic Investigation,” Educational 
Psychology Review 31, no. 3 (2019): 663–98; A.A. Grandey 
and G.M. Sayre, “Emotional Labor: Regulating Emotions 
for a Wage,” Current Directions in Psychological Science 28, 
no. 2 (2019): 131–37.
33. J. A. Morris and D. C. Feldman, “The Dimensions, 
Antecedents, and Consequences of Emotional Labor,”
Academy of Management Review 21 (1996): 986–1010; 
J. Li, B.F. Canziani, and C. Barbieri, “Emotional Labor 
in Hospitality: Positive Affective Displays in Service 
Encounters,” Tourism and Hospitality Research 18, no. 2 
(2018): 242–53.
34. A.A. Grandey and R.C. Melloy, “The State of the Heart: 
Emotional Labor as Emotion Regulation Reviewed and 
Revised,” Journal of Occupational Health Psychology 22, 
no. 3 (2017): 407–22; H. Wang, N.C. Hall, and J.L. 
Taxer, “Antecedents and Consequences of Teachers’ 
Emotional Labor: A Systematic Review and 
Meta-Analytic Investigation,” Educational Psychology 
Review 31 (2019): 663–98.
35. D. Matsumoto, S.H. Yoo, and J. Fontaine, “Mapping 
Expressive Differences around the World,” Journal of 
Cross-Cultural Psychology 39, no. 1 (2008): 55–74; B.Q. 
Ford and I.B. Mauss, “Culture and Emotion Regula￾tion,” Current Opinion in Psychology 3 (2015): 1–5; 
B. Mesquita, M. Boiger, and J. De Leersnyder, “Doing 
Emotions: The Role of Culture in Everyday Emotions,” 
European Review of Social Psychology 28, no. 1 (2017): 
95–133; D. Matsumoto and H.C. Hwang, “Culture and 
Emotion: Integrating Biological Universality with 
Cultural Specificity,” in The Handbook of Culture and 
Psychology, 2nd ed. (New York: Oxford University 
Press, 2019), 361–98.
36. F. Trompenaars and C. Hampden-Turner, Riding the 
Waves of Culture, 2nd ed. (New York: McGraw Hill, 
1998), Chap. 6. This major survey is two decades old, but 
recent studies report similar emotional display rules in 
the cultures reported by Trompenaars and Hampden￾Turner. For example, see: Ю. Менджерицкая, М. 
Ханзен, and Х. Хорц, “Правила выражения эмоций 
преподавателями российских и немецких 156
университетов (The Rules Of Emotional Display 
In Lecturers Of Russian And German Universities),” 
Российский психологический журнал (Russian 
Psychological Journal) 12, no. 4 (2015): 54–77; H.C. 
Hwang et al., “Self-Reported Expression and Experience 
of Triumph across Four Countries,” Motivation and 
Emotion 40, no. 5 (2016): 731–39.
37. K. Gander, “Workers in China Wear Masks for a Day so 
They Don’t Have to Deal with Social Stress,” The Inde￾pendent, July 16, 2015. Recent studies on cross-cultural 
emotion display rules and well-being are reported in: S. 
Huwaë and J. Schaafsma, “Cross-Cultural Differences in 
Emotion Suppression in Everyday Interactions,” Interna￾tional Journal of Psychology 53, no. 3 (2018): 176–83; Y. 
Nam, Y.-H. Kim, and K.K.-P. Tam, “Effects of Emotion 
Suppression on Life Satisfaction in Americans and 
Chinese,” Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology 49, no. 1 
(2018): 149–60.
38. D.P. Bhave and T.M. Glomb, “The Role of Occupational 
Emotional Labor Requirements on the Surface Acting–
Job Satisfaction Relationship,” Journal of Management
42, no. 3 (2016): 722–41; T. Huyghebaert et al., “Investi￾gating the Longitudinal Effects of Surface Acting on 
Managers’ Functioning through Psychological Needs,” 
Journal of Occupational Health Psychology 23, no. 2 
(April 2018): 207–22;D. Zapf et al., “Emotion Work: A 
Work Psychology Perspective,” Annual Review of Organi￾zational Psychology and Organizational Behavior 8 
(2021): 139–72.
39. A.A. Grandey and R.C. Melloy, “The State of the Heart: 
Emotional Labor as Emotion Regulation Reviewed and 
Revised,” Journal of Occupational Health Psychology 22, 
no. 3 (2017): 407–22. However, both surface and deep 
acting are effortful activities, so both produce emotional 
exhaustion. Also, faking negative emotions may be less 
stressful than faking positive emotions. See: F. Cheung, 
V.M.C. Lun, and M.W.-L. Cheung, “Emotional Labor 
and Occupational Well-Being: Latent Profile Transition 
Analysis Approach,” Frontiers in Psychology 9 (2018) 
1084; A.C. Lennard, B.A. Scott, and R.E. Johnson, 
“Turning Frowns (and Smiles) Upside down: A Multi￾level Examination of Surface Acting Positive and Nega￾tive Emotions on Well-Being.,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology 104 (2019): 1164–80.
40. S. Côté, I. Hideg, and G.A. van Kleef, “The Conse￾quences of Faking Anger in Negotiations,”Journal of 
Experimental Social Psychology 49, no. 3 (2013): 453–63; 
Y. Zhan, M. Wang, and J. Shi, “Interpersonal Process 
of Emotional Labor: The Role of Negative and Positive 
Customer Treatment,”Personnel Psychology 69, no. 3 
(2016): 525–57; K. Picard, M. Cossette, and D. Morin, 
“Service with a Smile: A Source of Emotional 
Exhaustion or Performance Incentive in Call-Centre 
Employees,” Canadian Journal of Administrative 
Sciences 35, no. 2 (2018): 214–27.
41. J.D. Kammeyer-Mueller et al., “A Meta-Analytic Struc￾tural Model of Dispositional Affectivity and Emotional 
Labor,” Personnel Psychology 66, no. 1 (2013): 47–90; 
R.H. Humphrey, B.E. Ashforth, and J.M. Diefendorff, 
“The Bright Side of Emotional Labor,” Journal of Organi￾zational Behavior 36, no. 6 (2015): 749–69. Deep acting 
is considered an adaptation of method acting used by 
professional actors. 
42. J.J. Gross, “Emotion Regulation: Current Status and 
Future Prospects,” Psychological Inquiry 26, no. 1 
(2015): 1–26; J.M. Diefendorff et al., “Emotion Regula￾tion in the Context of Customer Mistreatment and Felt 
Affect: An Event-Based Profile Approach.,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology 104 (2019): 965–83; J. Yih et al., 
“Better Together: A Unified Perspective on Appraisal 
and Emotion Regulation,” Cognition and Emotion 33, 
no. 1 (2019): 41–47.
43. Y. Kivity and J.D. Huppert, “Emotion Regulation in 
Social Anxiety: A Systematic Investigation and 
Meta-Analysis Using Self-Report, Subjective, and Event￾Related Potentials Measures,” Cognition and Emotion 33 
(2019): 213–30.
44. R. Brockman et al., “Emotion Regulation Strategies in 
Daily Life: Mindfulness, Cognitive Reappraisal and Emo￾tion Suppression,” Cognitive Behaviour Therapy 46, no. 2 
(2017): 91–113.
45. “Railways Plans to Improve Senior Leaders’ EQ,” Mint 
(India), November 16, 2018; “To Improve Service, 
Railways to Give Emotional Intelligence Training to Its 
Officers,” India Today, December 17, 2018; S.N. Sharma, 
“Can Emotional Intelligence Training for Staff Make 
Indian Railways Safer? [Railways],” The Economic Times 
(India), December 23, 2018. 
46. This definition and model is an ability-based rather 
than trait-based perspective. Several models and 
measures of emotional intelligence have adopted a 
similar four-quadrant model. See D. Goleman, R. 
Boyatzis, and A. McKee, Primal Leadership (Boston: 
Harvard Business School Press, 2002), Chap. 3; P.J. 
Jordan and S.A. Lawrence, “Emotional Intelligence 
in Teams: Development and Initial Validation of the 
Short Version of the Workgroup Emotional Intelli￾gence Profile (WEIP-S),” Journal of Management & 
Organization 15 (2009): 452–69; D.L. Joseph and D.A. 
Newman, “Emotional Intelligence: An Integrative 
Meta-Analysis and Cascading Model,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology 95, no. 1 (2010): 54–78; X. Wei, Y. 
Liu, and N. Allen, “Measuring Team Emotional Intelli￾gence: A Multimethod Comparison,” Group Dynamics: 
Theory, Research, & Practice 20, no. 1 (2016): 34–50; 
K.A. Pekaar et al., “Dynamic Self- and Other-Focused 
Emotional Intelligence: A Theoretical Framework and 
Research Agenda,” Journal of Research in Personality 86 
(2020): 103958.
47. H.A. Elfenbein and N. Ambady, “Predicting Workplace 
Outcomes from the Ability to Eavesdrop on Feelings,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 87, no. 5 (2002): 
963–71; T. Quarto et al., “Association between Ability 
Emotional Intelligence and Left Insula during Social 
Judgment of Facial Emotions,” PLoS ONE 11, no. 2 
(2016): e0148621.
48. For neurological evidence that people with higher EI 
have higher sensitivity to others’ emotions, see W.D.S. 
Killgore et al., “Emotional Intelligence Correlates with 
Functional Responses to Dynamic Changes in Facial 
Trustworthiness,” Social Neuroscience 8, no. 4 (2013): 
334–46.157
49. The hierarchical nature of the four EI dimensions is 
discussed by Goleman, but it is more explicit in the 
Salovey and Mayer model. See D.R. Caruso and P. 
Salovey, The Emotionally Intelligent Manager (San 
Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2004). Aspects of this hierarchy 
are also incorporated in recent studies. For example, 
see: K.A. Pekaar et al., “Managing Own and Others’ 
Emotions: A Weekly Diary Study on the Enactment of 
Emotional Intelligence,” Journal of Vocational Behavior
109 (2018): 137–51.
50. S. Côté, “Emotional Intelligence in Organizations,” 
Annual Review of Organizational Psychology and Organiza￾tional Behavior 1 (2014): 459–88; M. Parke, M.-G. 
Seo, and E. Sherf, “Regulating and Facilitating: The 
Role of Emotional Intelligence in Maintaining and Using 
Positive Affect for Creativity,” Journal of Applied Psychol￾ogy 100, no. 3 (2015): 917–34; D. Delpechitre and L. 
Beeler, “Faking It: Salesperson Emotional Intelligence’s 
Influence on Emotional Labor Strategies and Customer 
Outcomes,” Journal of Business & Industrial Marketing 33, 
no. 1 (2017): 53–71; C. Miao, R.H. Humphrey, and 
S. Qian, “Emotional Intelligence and Authentic Leader￾ship: A Meta-Analysis,” Leadership & Organization 
Development Journal 39, no. 5 (2018): 679–90.
51. D. Joseph et al., “Why Does Self-Reported Emotional 
Intelligence Predict Job Performance? A Meta-Analytic 
Investigation of Mixed EI,” Journal of Applied Psychology
100, no. 2 (2015): 298–342; P. Checa and P. Fernández￾Berrocal, “Cognitive Control and Emotional Intelli￾gence: Effect of the Emotional Content of the Task. 
Brief Reports,” Frontiers in Psychology 10 (2019), 0195.
52. K. Schlegel and M. Mortillaro, “The Geneva Emotional 
Competence Test (GECo): An Ability Measure of Work￾place Emotional Intelligence,” Journal of Applied Psychol￾ogy 104, no. 4 (2019): 559–80; “Fire & Rescue NSW 
Tests Preparation 2021,” Psychometric Test Practice 
Guide, 2021; “Preparation for NSW Ambulance Tests - 
Emotional Intelligence and Cognitive Tests,” Psychometric 
Test Practice Guide, 2021.
53. D. Blanch-Hartigan, S.A. Andrzejewski, and K.M. Hill, 
“The Effectiveness of Training to Improve Person 
Perception Accuracy: A Meta-Analysis,” Basic and 
Applied Social Psychology 34, no. 6 (2012): 483–98; 
S. Hodzic et al., “How Efficient Are Emotional Intelli￾gence Trainings: A Meta-Analysis,” Emotion Review 10, 
no. 2 (2018): 138–48; I. Kotsou et al., “Improving Emo￾tional Intelligence: A Systematic Review of Existing 
Work and Future Challenges,” Emotion Review 11, no. 2 
(2019): 151–65.
54. D.A. Harrison, D.A. Newman, and P.L. Roth, “How 
Important Are Job Attitudes? Meta-Analytic Compari￾sons of Integrative Behavioral Outcomes and Time 
Sequences,” Academy of Management Journal 49, no. 2 
(2006): 305–25. Another study concluded that job 
satisfaction and organizational commitment are so highly 
correlated that they represent the same construct. See 
H. Le et al., “The Problem of Empirical Redundancy of 
Constructs in Organizational Research: An Empirical 
Investigation,” Organizational Behavior and Human 
Decision Processes 112, no. 2 (2010): 112–25. They are also 
considered the two central work-related variables in the 
broader concept of happiness at work. See C.D. Fisher, 
“Happiness at Work,” International Journal of Manage￾ment Reviews 12, no. 4 (2010): 384–412. 
55. E.A. Locke, “The Nature and Causes of Job Satisfac￾tion,” in Handbook of Industrial and Organizational 
Psychology, ed. M. Dunnette (Chicago: Rand McNally, 
1976), 1297–350; H.M. Weiss, “Deconstructing Job 
Satisfaction: Separating Evaluations, Beliefs and Affective 
Experiences,” Human Resource Management Review, 
no. 12 (2002): 173–94. Some definitions still include 
emotion as an element of job satisfaction, whereas the 
definition presented in this book views emotion as a cause 
of job satisfaction. Also, this definition views job satisfac￾tion as a “collection of attitudes,” not several “facets” 
of job satisfaction. 
56. Office of Personnel Management, “2020 Federal Em￾ployee Viewpoint Survey” (Washington, DC: United 
States Government, April 2021); For the high intention 
to leave the current employer, see: “The Next Great Dis￾ruption Is Hybrid Work—Are We Ready?,” The Work 
Trend Index (Microsoft, March 22, 2021).
57. The problems with measuring attitudes and values 
across cultures are discussed in A.K. Uskul et al., 
“How Successful You Have Been in Life Depends on 
the Response Scale Used: The Role of Cultural Mind￾sets in Pragmatic Inferences Drawn from Question For￾mat,” Social Cognition 31, no. 2 (2013): 222–36; H. 
Baumgartner and B. Weijters, “Methodological Issues 
in Cross-Cultural Research,” in Cross Cultural Issues in 
Consumer Science and Consumer Psychology: Current 
Perspectives and Future Directions, ed. H. van Herk and 
C.J. Torelli (Cham: Springer International Publishing, 
2017), 169–90.
58. For a review of the various job satisfaction outcome theo￾ries, see R.S. Dalal, “Job Attitudes: Cognition and Af￾fect,” in Handbook of Psychology, Second Edition, ed. I.B. 
Weiner (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 2013), 341–66.
59. D. Farrell, “Exit, Voice, Loyalty, and Neglect as Re￾sponses to Job Dissatisfaction: A Multidimensional Scal￾ing Study,” Academy of Management Journal 26, no. 4 
(1983): 596–607; M.J. Withey and W.H. Cooper, “Pre￾dicting Exit, Voice, Loyalty, and Neglect,” Administrative 
Science Quarterly, no. 34 (1989): 521–39; A.B. Whitford 
and S.-Y. Lee, “Exit, Voice, and Loyalty with Multiple 
Exit Options: Evidence from the US Federal Work￾force,” Journal of Public Administration Research and 
Theory 25, no. 2 (2015): 373–98. For a critique and 
explanation of historical errors in the EVLN model, see 
S.L. McShane, “Reconstructing the Meaning and Di￾mensionality of Voice in the Exit-Voice-Loyalty-Neglect 
Model,” paper presented at the Voice and Loyalty Sym￾posium, Annual Conference of the Administrative Sci￾ences Association of Canada, Organizational Behaviour 
Division, Halifax, 2008.
60. K. Morrell, J. Loan-Clarke, and A. Wilkinson, “The Role 
of Shocks in Employee Turnover,” British Journal of Man￾agement 15 (2004): 335–49; M. Zhang, D.D. Fried, and 
R.W. Griffeth, “A Review of Job Embeddedness: Concep￾tual, Measurement Issues, and Directions for Future Re￾search,” Human Resource Management Review 22, no. 3 
(2012): 220–31; P.W. Hom et al., “One Hundred Years of 158
Employee Turnover Theory and Research,” Journal of Ap￾plied Psychology 102, no. 3 (2017): 530–45; A.L. Ruben￾stein et al., “Surveying the Forest: A Meta-Analysis, 
Moderator Investigation, and Future-Oriented Discussion 
of the Antecedents of Voluntary Employee Turnover,” 
Personnel Psychology 71, no. 1 (2018): 23–65.
61. E.W. Morrison, “Employee Voice and Silence,” Annual 
Review of Organizational Psychology and Organizational 
Behavior 1, no. 1 (2014): 173–97; M.R. Bashshur and 
B. Oc, “When Voice Matters: A Multilevel Review of the 
Impact of Voice in Organizations,” Journal of Manage￾ment 41, no. 5 (2015): 1530–54; P.K. Mowbray, A. 
Wilkinson, and H.H.M. Tse, “An Integrative Review of 
Employee Voice: Identifying a Common Conceptualiza￾tion and Research Agenda,” International Journal of 
Management Reviews 17, no. 3 (2015): 382–400.
62. A.O. Hirschman, Exit, Voice, and Loyalty: Responses to 
Decline in Firms, Organizations, and States (Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 1970); P. John, “Finding 
Exits and Voices: Albert Hirschman’s Contribution to 
the Study of Public Services,” International Public Man￾agement Journal 20, no. 3 (2017): 512–29.
63. J.D. Hibbard, N. Kumar, and L.W. Stern, “Examining 
the Impact of Destructive Acts in Marketing Channel 
Relationships,” Journal of Marketing Research 38 (2001): 
45–61; J. Zhou and J.M. George, “When Job Dissatisfac￾tion Leads to Creativity: Encouraging the Expression of 
Voice,” Academy of Management Journal 44 (2001): 
682–96. 
64. M.J. Withey and I.R. Gellatly, “Situational and Disposi￾tional Determinants of Exit, Voice, Loyalty and Neglect,” 
Proceedings of the Administrative Sciences Association of 
Canada, Organizational Behaviour Division, 1998; R.D. 
Zimmerman et al., “Who Withdraws? Psychological Indi￾vidual Differences and Employee Withdrawal Behaviors,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 101, no. 4 (2016): 498–519; 
É. Lapointe and C. Vandenberghe, “Examination of the 
Relationships between Servant Leadership, Organizational 
Commitment, and Voice and Antisocial Behaviors,” 
Journal of Business Ethics 148, no. 1 (2018): 99–115; 
M. Zare and C. Flinchbaugh, “Voice, Creativity, and Big 
Five Personality Traits: A Meta-Analysis,” Human 
Performance 32, no. 1 (2019): 30–51.
65. V. Venkataramani and S. Tangirala, “When and Why Do 
Central Employees Speak Up? An Examination of Medi￾ating and Moderating Variables,” Journal of Applied Psy￾chology 95, no. 3 (2010): 582–91; M. Weiss et al., “We 
Can Do It! Inclusive Leader Language Promotes Voice 
Behavior in Multi-Professional Teams,” The Leadership 
Quarterly 29, no. 3 (2018): 389–402; I. Hussain et al., 
“The Voice Bystander Effect: How Information Redun￾dancy Inhibits Employee Voice,” Academy of Manage￾ment Journal 62, (2019): 828–49.
66. D. P. Schwab and L. L. Cummings, “Theories of Perfor￾mance and Satisfaction: A Review,” Industrial Relations 9 
(1970), pp. 408–30.
67. D.J. Schleicher, J.D. Watt, and G.J. Greguras, “Reexam￾ining the Job Satisfaction-Performance Relationship: The 
Complexity of Attitudes,” Journal of Applied Psychology 89, 
no. 1 (2004): 165–77; D. A. Harrison, D. A. Newman, 
and P. L. Roth, “How Important Are Job Attitudes? 
Meta-Analytic Comparisons of Integrative Behavioral 
Outcomes and Time Sequences,” Academy of Manage￾ment Journal 49, no. 2 (2006): 305–25; N.A. Bowling et al., 
“Situational Strength as a Moderator of the Relationship 
Between Job Satisfaction and Job Performance: A Meta￾Analytic Examination,” Journal of Business and Psychology
30, no. 1 (2015): 89–104; T.A. Judge et al., “Job Attitudes, 
Job Satisfaction, and Job Affect: A Century of Continu￾ity and of Change,” Journal of Applied Psychology 102, 
no. 3 (2017): 356–74; P. Warr and K. Nielsen, “Wellbeing 
and Work Performance,” In E. Diener, S. Oishi, and 
L. Tay (Eds.), Handbook of Well-Being (Salt Lake City, 
UT: DEF Publishers, 2018); J. Peiró et al., “The Happy￾Productive Worker Model and Beyond: Patterns of 
Wellbeing and Performance at Work,” International 
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 16, 
no. 3 (2019): 479.
68. However, panel studies suggest that satisfaction has a 
stronger effect on performance than the other way 
around. For a summary, see C. D. Fisher, “Happiness at 
Work,” International Journal of Management Reviews 12, 
no. 4 (2010): 384–412.
69. M. Nguyen, “Why People Still Matter to Canada’s Best 
Employers,” Canadian Business, November 8, 2018; 
“2019 Canada Auto Insurance Satisfaction Study,” News 
Release (Toronto: J.D. Power Canada, February 14, 
2019); “2019 Canada Home Insurance Satisfaction 
Study,” News Release (Toronto: J.D. Power Canada, 
March 28, 2019); “The Co-Operators Recognized as a 
Kincentric Best Employer 2021,” Press Release (Guelph, 
Ont.: The Co-operators, September 21, 2021).
70. J.I. Heskett, W.E. Sasser, and L.A. Schlesinger, The Ser￾vice Profit Chain (New York: Free Press, 1997); Y. Hong 
et al., “Missing Link in the Service Profit Chain: A Meta￾Analytic Review of the Antecedents, Consequences, and 
Moderators of Service Climate,” Journal of Applied Psy￾chology 98, no. 2 (2013): 237–67; D. Solnet, R. Ford, and 
C. Moyle, “What Matters Most in the Service-Profit 
Chain? An Empirical Test in a Restaurant Company,” 
International Journal of Contemporary Hospitality Manage￾ment 30, no. 1 (2018): 260–85; J. Hogreve, A. Iseke, and 
K. Derfuss, “The Service-Profit Chain: Reflections, 
Revisions, and Reimaginations,” Journal of Service 
Research 25, no. 3 (2022): 460–77.
71. Z. Wang et al., “Effects of Employees’ Positive Affective 
Displays on Customer Loyalty Intentions: An Emotions￾as-Social-Information Perspective,” Academy of Manage￾ment Journal 60, no. 1 (2017): 109–29; H. Weijun et al., 
“Study of E-Smile Service Influence on Customers’ Satis￾faction in Social Business Context,” The Journal of Super￾computing 76, no. 5 (2020): 3673–88; J.H. Son, J.H. Kim, 
and G.J. Kim, “Does Employee Satisfaction Influence 
Customer Satisfaction? Assessing Coffee Shops through 
the Service Profit Chain Model,” International Journal of 
Hospitality Management 94 (2021): 102866.
72. R.T. Mowday, L.W. Porter, and R.M. Steers, Employee 
Organization Linkages: The Psychology of Commitment, 
Absenteeism, and Turnover (New York: Academic Press, 
1982); J.P. Meyer, “Organizational Commitment,” Inter￾national Review of Industrial and Organizational Psychol￾ogy 12 (1997): 175–228. Some writers argue that 159
organizational commitment should be defined as a unified 
concept around a person’s “bond” to the organization, 
whereas other types of commitment should be distinct, 
rather than other forms of the concept. H.J. Klein and 
H.M. Park, “Commitment as a Unidimensional Con￾struct,” in Handbook of Employee Commitment, ed. J.P. 
Meyer (Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar, 2016), 15–27.
73. M. Taing et al., “The Multidimensional Nature of Contin￾uance Commitment: Commitment Owing to Economic 
Exchanges versus Lack of Employment Alternatives,” 
Journal of Business and Psychology 26, no. 3 (2011): 269–
84; N.J. Allen, “Commitment as a Multidimensional 
Construct,” in Handbook of Employee Commitment, ed. 
J.P. Meyer (Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar, 2016), 
28–42.
74. J.P. Meyer and N.M. Parfyonova, “Normative Commit￾ment in the Workplace: A Theoretical Analysis and Re￾Conceptualization,” Human Resource Management 
Review 20, no. 4 (2010): 283–94; S. Jaros, “A Critique of 
Normative Commitment in Management Research,” 
Management Research Review 40, no. 5 (2017): 517–37.
75. J.P. Meyer et al., “Affective, Continuance, and Normative 
Commitment to the Organization: A Meta-Analysis of 
Antecedents, Correlates, and Consequences,” Journal of 
Vocational Behavior 61 (2002): 20–52; M. Riketta, “Atti￾tudinal Organizational Commitment and Job Perfor￾mance: A Meta-Analysis,” Journal of Organizational 
Behavior 23 (2002): 257–66; C. Devece, D. Palacios￾Marqués, and M. Pilar Alguacil, “Organizational Commit￾ment and Its Effects on Organizational Citizenship 
Behavior in a High-Unemployment Environment,” Journal 
of Business Research, Designing Implementable Innovative 
Realities, 69, no. 5 (2016): 1857–61; J.C. Wombacher and 
J. Felfe, “Dual Commitment in the Organization: Effects 
of the Interplay of Team and Organizational Commitment 
on Employee Citizenship Behavior, Efficacy Beliefs, and 
Turnover Intentions,” Journal of Vocational Behavior 102 
(2017): 1–14; D. Charbonneau and V.M. Wood, “Ante￾cedents and Outcomes of Unit Cohesion and Affective 
Commitment to the Army,” Military Psychology 30, no. 1 
(2018): 43–53; Q. Wang, Q. (D.) Weng, and Y. Jiang, 
“When Does Affective Organizational Commitment 
Lead to Job Performance?: Integration of Resource 
Perspective,” Journal of Career Development 47, no. 4 
(2020): 380–93.
76. J.P. Meyer et al., “Organizational Commitment and Job 
Performance: It’s the Nature of the Commitment That 
Counts,” Journal of Applied Psychology 74 (1989): 152–
56; A.A. Luchak and I.R. Gellatly, “What Kind of Com￾mitment Does a Final-Earnings Pension Plan Elicit?,” 
Relations Industrielles 56 (2001): 394–417; Z.X. Chen 
and A.M. Francesco, “The Relationship between the 
Three Components of Commitment and Employee Per￾formance in China,” Journal of Vocational Behavior 62, 
no. 3 (2003): 490–510; H. Gill et al., “Affective and Con￾tinuance Commitment and Their Relations with Deviant 
Workplace Behaviors in Korea,” Asia Pacific Journal of 
Management 28, no. 3 (2011): 595–607. The negative 
effect on performance might depend on the type of 
continuance commitment. See M. Taing et al., “The 
Multidimensional Nature of Continuance Commitment: 
Commitment Owing to Economic Exchanges versus 
Lack of Employment Alternatives,” Journal of Business 
and Psychology 26, no. 3 (2011): 269–84.
77. J.E. Finegan, “The Impact of Person and Organizational 
Values on Organizational Commitment,” Journal of Occu￾pational and Organizational Psychology 73 (2000): 149–
69; F. Stinglhamber et al., “Perceived Organizational 
Support,” in Handbook of Employee Commitment, ed. J.P. 
Meyer, Edward Elgar, Cheltenham, UK vols. (Edward 
Elgar Publishing, 2016), 333–45; D.R. Bobocel and F. Mu, 
“Organizational Justice and Employee Commitment: A 
Review of Contemporary Research,” in Handbook of 
Employee Commitment, ed. J.P. Meyer (Cheltenham, UK: 
Edward Elgar, 2016), 346–60; J.N. Kurtessis et al., 
“Perceived Organizational Support: A Meta-Analytic 
Evaluation of Organizational Support Theory,” Journal 
of Management 43, no. 6 (2017): 1854–84.
78. A.L. Kristof-Brown, R.D. Zimmerman, and E.C. John￾son, “Consequences of Individuals’ Fit at Work: A Meta￾Analysis of Person-Job, Person-Organization, 
Person-Group, and Person-Supervisor Fit,” Personnel Psy￾chology 58 (2005): 281–342; M.E. Bergman et al., “An 
Event-Based Perspective on the Development of Commit￾ment,” Human Resource Management Review 23 (2013): 
148–60; O.A.U. Byza et al., “When Leaders and Follow￾ers Match: The Impact of Objective Value Congruence, 
Value Extremity, and Empowerment on Employee Com￾mitment and Job Satisfaction,” Journal of Business Ethics
158 (2019): 1097–1112.
79. D.M. Rousseau et al., “Not So Different after All: A 
Cross-Discipline View of Trust,” Academy of Management 
Review 23 (1998): 393–404; D. Balliet and P.A.M. Van 
Lange, “Trust, Conflict, and Cooperation: A Meta-Analy￾sis,” Psychological Bulletin 139, no. 5 (2013): 1090–1112; 
P.C. Bauer, “Clearing the Jungle: Conceptualising Trust 
and Trustworthiness,” in Trust Matters: Cross-Disciplinary 
Essays, ed. R.B. de Freitas and S.L. Iacono (Oxford UK: 
Hart Publishing, 2021), 17–34.
80. D.K. Datta et al., “Causes and Effects of Employee 
Downsizing: A Review and Synthesis,” Journal of Manage￾ment 36, no. 1 (2010): 281–348; R. van Dick, F. Drzensky, 
and M. Heinz, “Goodbye or Identify: Detrimental Effects of 
Downsizing on Identification and Survivor Performance,” 
Frontiers in Psychology 7 (2016), 0771.
81. Similar concepts on information acquisition are found in 
socialization, mergers, and organizational change re￾search. See, for example, P. Bordia et al., “Uncertainty 
during Organizational Change: Types, Consequences, 
and Management Strategies,” Journal of Business and Psy￾chology 18, no. 4 (2004): 507–32; H.D. Cooper-Thomas 
and N. Anderson, “Organizational Socialization: A Field 
Study into Socialization Success and Rate,” International 
Journal of Selection and Assessment 13, no. 2 (2005): 
116–28; T.N. Bauer, “Newcomer Adjustment during Or￾ganizational Socialization: A Meta-Analytic Review of 
Antecedents, Outcomes, and Methods,” Journal of Ap￾plied Psychology 92, no. 3 (2007): 707–21; R. Bommaraju 
et al., “The Impact of Mergers and Acquisitions on the 
Sales Force,” Journal of Marketing Research 55, no. 2 
(2018): 254–64.160
82. T.S. Heffner and J.R. Rentsch, “Organizational Commit￾ment and Social Interaction: A Multiple Constituencies 
Approach,” Journal of Vocational Behavior 59 (2001): 
471–90. 
83. M. Mayhew et al., “A Study of the Antecedents and Con￾sequences of Psychological Ownership in Organizational 
Settings,” The Journal of Social Psychology 147, no. 5 
(2007): 477–500; T.-S. Han, H.-H. Chiang, and A. 
Chang, “Employee Participation in Decision Making, 
Psychological Ownership and Knowledge Sharing: Medi￾ating Role of Organizational Commitment in Taiwanese 
High-Tech Organizations,” The International Journal of 
Human Resource Management 21, no. 12 (2010): 2218–33; 
G. Thompson, R. Buch, and B. Kuvaas, “Political Skill, 
Participation in Decision-Making and Organizational 
Commitment,” Personnel Review 46, no. 4 (2017): 
740–49; D. Gallie et al., “The Implications of Direct 
Participation for Organisational Commitment, Job 
Satisfaction and Affective Psychological Well-Being: A 
Longitudinal Analysis,” Industrial Relations Journal 48, 
no. 2 (2017): 174–91.
84. J.C. Quick et al., Preventive Stress Management in 
Organizations (Washington, DC: American Psychologi￾cal Association, 1997), 3–4; A.L. Dougall and A. Baum, 
“Stress, Coping, and Immune Function,” in Handbook 
of Psychology, ed. M. Gallagher and R.J. Nelson 
(Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2003), 
441–55. For the various definitions and perspectives 
of stress, see T.A. Day, “Defining Stress as a Prelude to 
Mapping Its Neurocircuitry: No Help from Allostasis,” 
Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology and Biological 
Psychiatry 29 (2005): 1195–200; D.C. Ganster and C.C. 
Rosen, “Work Stress and Employee Health: A Multidis￾ciplinary Review,” Journal of Management 39 (2013): 
1085–122.
85. The cognitive appraisal view is described in R.S. Lazarus, 
Stress and Emotion: A New Synthesis (New York: Springer 
Publishing, 2006). In contrast, recent neuroscience stud￾ies and reviews indicate a dissociation between a person’s 
subjective feeling of stress and their autonomic physio￾logical responses (i.e., release of stress hormones into the 
blood stream). In other words, people respond physiolog￾ically to stressful situations even when they do not con￾sciously feel stressed. See J. Campbell and U. Ehlert, 
“Acute Psychosocial Stress: Does the Emotional Stress 
Response Correspond with Physiological Responses?” 
Psychoneuroendocrinology 37 (2012): 1111–34; N. Ali et al., 
“Suppressing the Endocrine and Autonomic Stress 
Systems Does Not Impact the Emotional Stress Experi￾ence after Psychosocial Stress,” Psychoneuroendocrinology
78 (2017): 125–30.
86. M.G. González-Morales and P. Neves, “When Stressors 
Make You Work: Mechanisms Linking Challenge Stress￾ors to Performance,” Work & Stress 29, no. 3 (2015): 
213–29; M.B. Hargrove, W.S. Becker, and D.F. Hargrove, 
“The HRD Eustress Model: Generating Positive Stress 
with Challenging Work,” Human Resource Development 
Review 14, no. 3 (2015): 279–98.
87. H. Selye, Stress without Distress (Philadelphia: J.B. 
Lippincott, 1974); S.L. Buckner et al., “The General 
Adaptation Syndrome: Potential Misapplications to 
Resistance Exercise,” Journal of Science and Medicine 
in Sport 20 (2017): 1015–17; A.J. Cunanan et al., “The 
General Adaptation Syndrome: A Foundation for 
the Concept of Periodization,” Sports Medicine 48 
(2018): 787–97.
88. K. Hasselberg et al., “Self-Reported Stressors among 
Patients with Exhaustion Disorder: An Exploratory 
Study of Patient Records,” BMC Psychiatry 14 (2014): 
1–10; I.H. Jonsdottir et al., “Working Memory and 
Attention Are Still Impaired after Three Years in 
Patients with Stress-Related Exhaustion,” Scandinavian 
Journal of Psychology 58 (2017): 504–9; I. Savic, A. 
Perski, and W. Osika, “MRI Shows That Exhaustion 
Syndrome Due to Chronic Occupational Stress Is Asso￾ciated with Partially Reversible Cerebral Changes,” 
Cerebral Cortex 28 (2018): 894–906.
89. D.C. Ganster and C.C. Rosen, “Work Stress and Em￾ployee Health: A Multidisciplinary Review,” Journal of 
Management 39 (2013): 1085–122; J. Goh, J. Pfeffer, and 
S.A. Zenios, “The Relationship between Workplace 
Stressors and Mortality and Health Costs in the United 
States,” Management Science 62 (2016): 608–28; C. 
Johansen et al., “Stress and Cancer,” in The Handbook 
of Stress and Health, ed. C.L. Cooper and J.C. Quick 
(John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2017), 125–34.
90. M. Lauzier, S. Melancon, and K. Cote, “The Effect of 
Stress Seen on Absenteeism and Presenteeism Behavior: 
The Mediating Role of Health,” Canadian Journal of Be￾havioural Science 49 (2017): 221–30; B. Schmidt et al., 
“A Comparison of Job Stress Models: Associations with 
Employee Well-Being, Absenteeism, Presenteeism, and 
Resulting Costs,” Journal of Occupational and Environ￾mental Medicine 61 (2019): 535–44.
91. G.M. Alarcon, “A Meta-Analysis of Burnout with Job 
Demands, Resources, and Attitudes,” Journal of Voca￾tional Behavior 79, no. 2 (2011): 549–62; C. Maslach and 
M.P. Leiter, “Understanding Burnout,” in The Handbook 
of Stress and Health, ed. C.L. Cooper and J.C. Quick 
(John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2017), 36–56.
92. C.L. Cooper and J. Marshall, “Occupational Sources of 
Stress: A Review of the Literature Relating to Coronary 
Heart Disease and Mental Ill Health,” in From Stress to 
Wellbeing Volume 1: The Theory and Research on Occupa￾tional Stress and Wellbeing, ed. C.L. Cooper (London: 
Palgrave Macmillan UK, 2013), 3–23. 
93. C.C. Rosen et al., “Occupational Stressors and Job Per￾formance: An Updated Review and Recommendations,” 
in New Developments in Theoretical and Conceptual Ap￾proaches to Job Stress, Research in Occupational Stress and 
Well-Being (Emerald Group Publishing Limited, 2010), 
1–60; A.E. Nixon et al., “Can Work Make You Sick? A 
Meta-Analysis of the Relationships between Job Stress￾ors and Physical Symptoms,” Work & Stress 25, no. 1 
(2011): 1–22.
94. S. Pindek and P.E. Spector, “Organizational Constraints: 
A Meta-Analysis of a Major Stressor,” Work & Stress 30, 
no. 1 (2016): 7–25.
95. P. McDonald, “Workplace Sexual Harassment 30 Years 
On: A Review of the Literature,” International Journal of 
Management Reviews 14, no. 1 (2012): 1–17; B. Verkuil, 
S. Atasayi, and M.L. Molendijk, “Workplace Bullying 161
and Mental Health: A Meta-Analysis on Cross-Sectional 
and Longitudinal Data,” PLOS ONE 10, no. 8 (2015): 
e0135225; J.D. Mackey et al., “Abusive Supervision: A 
Meta-Analysis and Empirical Review,” Journal of Man￾agement 43, no. 6 (2017): 1940–65.
96. “Let’s Slow Down!,” The Royal Bank of Canada Monthly 
Letter, September 1949. 
97. N.A. Bowling et al., “A Meta-Analytic Examination of 
the Potential Correlates and Consequences of Work￾load,” Work & Stress 29, no. 2 (2015): 95–113.
98. R. Drago, D. Black, and M. Wooden, The Persistence of 
Long Work Hours, Melbourne Institute Working Paper 
Series, Melbourne Institute of Applied Economic and 
Social Research, University of Melbourne, August 2005; 
L. Golden, “A Brief History of Long Work Time and the 
Contemporary Sources of Overwork,” Journal of Business 
Ethics 84, no. S2 (2009): 217–27; M. Tarafdar, E. B. 
Pullins, and T. S. Ragu-Nathan, “Technostress: Negative 
Effect on Performance and Possible Mitigations,” 
Information Systems Journal 25, no. 2 (2015): 103–32; 
E. Reid, “Embracing, Passing, Revealing, and the Ideal 
Worker Image: How People Navigate Expected and Expe￾rienced Professional Identities,” Organization Science 26, 
no. 4 (2015): 997–1017; Project: Time Off, The Work 
Martyr’s Cautionary Tale: How the Millennial Experience 
Will Define America’s Vacation Culture (Washington, DC: 
Project: Time Off, August 17, 2016).
99. R. Karasek and T. Theorell, Healthy Work: Stress, Produc￾tivity, and the Reconstruction of Working Life (New York: 
Basic Books, 1990); M. Lavigne-Robichaud et al., “Job 
Strain and the Prevalence of Uncontrolled Hypertension 
among White-Collar Workers,” Hypertension Research 42 
(2019): 1616–23.
100. M.K. Holton, A.E. Barry, and J.D. Chaney, “Employee 
Stress Management: An Examination of Adaptive and 
Maladaptive Coping Strategies on Employee Health,” 
Work 53, no. 2 (2016): 299–305.
101. S. Folkman and J.T. Moskowitz, “Coping: Pitfalls and 
Promise,” Annual Review of Psychology 55 (2004): 
745–74; C.A. Thompson et al., “On the Importance of 
Coping: A Model and New Directions for Research on 
Work and Family,” Research in Occupational Stress and 
Well-Being 6 (2007): 73–113; K. Stanisławski, “The 
Coping Circumplex Model: An Integrative Model of the 
Structure of Coping With Stress,” Frontiers in Psychology
10 (2019), 0694.
102. P. Steel, J. Schmidt, and J. Shultz, “Refining the Rela￾tionship between Personality and Subjective Well-Being,” 
Psychological Bulletin 134, no. 1 (2008): 138–61; G. Alarcon, 
K.J. Eschleman, and N.A. Bowling, “Relationships 
between Personality Variables and Burnout: A Meta￾Analysis,” Work & Stress 23, no. 3 (2009): 244–63; T.R. 
Schneider et al., “The Influence of Neuroticism, Extra￾version and Openness on Stress Responses,” Stress 
and Health: Journal of the International Society for the 
Investigation of Stress 28, no. 2 (2012): 102–10; Y. Xin 
et al., “The Relationship between Personality and the 
Response to Acute Psychological Stress,” Scientific Reports 7, 
no. 1 (2017): 16906.
103. E.M. Kleiman et al., “Optimism and Well-Being: A Pro￾spective Multi-Method and Multi-Dimensional 
Examination of Optimism as a Resilience Factor Following 
the Occurrence of Stressful Life Events,” Cognition and 
Emotion 31, no. 2 (2017): 269–83; D. Saleh, N. Camart, 
and L. Romo, “Predictors of Stress in College Students,” 
Frontiers in Psychology 8 (January 25, 2017): 19; F. Sab￾ouripour et al., “Mediating Role of Self-Efficacy in the 
Relationship Between Optimism, Psychological 
Well-Being, and Resilience Among Iranian Students,” 
Frontiers in Psychology 12 (April 15, 2021), 675645.
104. M. A. Clark et al., “All Work and No Play? A Meta￾Analytic Examination of the Correlates and Outcomes of 
Workaholism,” Journal of Management 42, no. 7 (2016): 
1836–73; C. S. Andreassen et al., “The Relationships be￾tween Workaholism and Symptoms of Psychiatric Disor￾ders: A Large-Scale Cross-Sectional Study,” PLoS ONE 11, 
no. 5 (2016): e0152978.
105. This list is based on various reviews, but stress manage￾ment interventions have been organized in several ways. 
See, for example, J.H. Ruotsalainen et al., “Preventing 
Occupational Stress in Healthcare Workers,” Cochrane 
Database of Systematic Reviews, no. 4 (2015); L.E. Tetrick 
and C.J. Winslow, “Workplace Stress Management Inter￾ventions and Health Promotion,” Annual Review of Orga￾nizational Psychology and Organizational Behavior 2 
(2015): 583–603; M. Savic et al., “How Do Nurses Cope 
with Shift Work? A Qualitative Analysis of Open-Ended 
Responses from a Survey of Nurses,” International Jour￾nal of Environmental Research and Public Health 16, no. 
20 (October 2019): 3821.
106. E.E. Kossek and R.J. Thompson, “Workplace Flexibility: 
Integrating Employer and Employee Perspectives to 
Close the Research–Practice Implementation Gap,” in 
The Oxford Handbook of Work and Family, ed. T.D. Allen 
and L.T. Eby (New York: Oxford University Press, 2016), 
255–70; M.J. Sirgy and D.-J. Lee, “Work-Life Balance: 
An Integrative Review,” Applied Research in Quality of 
Life 13 (2018): 229–54; M. Charalampous et al., “System￾atically Reviewing Remote E-Workers’ Well-Being at 
Work: A Multidimensional Approach,” European Journal 
of Work and Organizational Psychology 28, no. 1 (2019): 
51–73; T.A. Beauregard, K.A. Basile, and E. Canonico, 
“Telework: Outcomes and Facilitators for Employees,” in 
The Cambridge Handbook of Technology and Employee 
Behavior, ed. R.N. Landers, (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press, 2019), 511–43.
107. O.B. Davidson et al., “Sabbatical Leave: Who Gains 
and How Much?,” Journal of Applied Psychology 95, no. 5 
(2010): 953–64; J. de Bloom, S.A.E. Geurts, and M.A.J. 
Kompier, “Vacation (after-) Effects on Employee Health 
and Well-Being, and the Role of Vacation Activities, 
Experiences and Sleep,” Journal of Happiness Studies 14, 
no. 2 (2013): 613–33; J. Wendsche and A. Lohmann￾Haislah, “A Meta-Analysis on Antecedents and Outcomes 
of Detachment from Work,” Frontiers in Psychology 7 
(2017), 2072; B. Hruska et al., “Vacation Frequency Is 
Associated with Metabolic Syndrome and Symptoms,” 
Psychology & Health 35, no. 1 (2020): 1–15.
108. M. Tuckey et al., “Hindrances Are Not Threats: 
Advancing the Multidimensionality of Work Stress,” 
Journal of Occupational Health Psychology 20, no. 2 
(2015): 131–47.162
109. M.H. Abel, “Humor, Stress, and Coping Strategies,” 
Humor: International Journal of Humor Research 15 
(2002): 365–81; K. Ebner et al., “Coaching as Stress￾Management Intervention: The Mediating Role of 
Self-Efficacy in a Framework of Self-Management and 
Coping.,” International Journal of Stress Management 25 
(2018): 209–33.
110. O. Kettunen et al., “Greater Levels of Cardiorespiratory 
and Muscular Fitness Are Associated with Low Stress 
and High Mental Resources in Normal but Not Over￾weight Men,” BMC Public Health 16, no. 1 (2016): 788; 
M. Gerber et al., “Fitness Moderates the Relationship 
between Stress and Cardiovascular Risk Factors,” 
Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise 48, no. 11 (2016): 
2075–81. 
111. H.O. Dickinson et al., “Relaxation Therapies for the 
Management of Primary Hypertension in Adults,” Co￾chrane Database of Systematic Reviews, no. 1 (2008); O.L. 
Siu, “Stress Management Techniques in the Workplace,” 
in Routledge Companion to Wellbeing at Work, ed. C.L. 
Cooper and M.P. Leiter (Routledge: 2017), 284–97.
112. C. Viswesvaran, J. I. Sanchez, and J. Fisher, “The Role of 
Social Support in the Process of Work Stress: A Meta￾Analysis,” Journal of Vocational Behavior 54, no. 2 
(1999): 314–34; S. E. Taylor et al., “Biobehavioral Re￾sponses to Stress in Females: Tend-and-Befriend, Not 
Fight-or-Flight,”Psychological Review 107, no. 3 (2000): 
411–29; B. A. Scott et al., “A Daily Investigation of the 
Role of Manager Empathy on Employee Well-Being,” 
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes
113, no. 2 (2010): 127–40; S. Y. Shin and S. G. Lee, 
“Effects of Hospital Workers? Friendship Networks 
on Job Stress,” PLoS ONE 11, no. 2 (2016): e0149428.
a. K.C.H.J. Smolders and Y.A.W. de Kort, “Bright Light 
and Mental Fatigue: Effects on Alertness, Vitality, 
Performance and Physiological Arousal,” Journal of 
Environmental Psychology, Light, Lighting, and Human 
Behaviour, 39 (2014): 77–91; M.G. Figueiro et al., “The 
Impact of Daytime Light Exposures on Sleep and Mood 
in Office Workers,” Sleep Health 3, no. 3 (2017): 
204–15; X. (I.) Huang, P. Dong, and A.A. Labroo, 
“Feeling Disconnected from Others: The Effects of 
Ambient Darkness on Hedonic Choice,” International 
Journal of Research in Marketing 35, no. 1 (2018): 144–53; 
L. Veenstra and S.L. Koole, “Disarming Darkness: Effects 
of Ambient Lighting on Approach Motivation and State 
Anger among People with Varying Trait Anger,” Journal 
of Environmental Psychology 60 (2018): 34–40; S.Y. 
Kang, N. Youn, and H.C. Yoon, “The Self-Regulatory 
Power of Environmental Lighting: The Effect of Illumi￾nance and Correlated Color Temperature,” Journal of 
Environmental Psychology 62 (2019): 30–41.
b. M. Taylor, “Companies Are Finally Getting Rid of Dumb 
Work Perks,” Wired UK, August 6, 2021; C. Pash and M. 
Obeid, “The Benefits Flowing to Agency Staff to Fight 
Lockdown Fatigue,” AdNews (Australia), September 15, 
2021; K. Baskin, “How Companies Are Helping Parents 
and Caregivers with ‘Work-Life Integration’,” Boston 
Globe, December 1, 2021.
c. M. McLaughlin, “Bosses Blind to Horrors of ‘Fun 
Days,’” Scotland on Sunday, January 3, 2010, 10; D.L. 
Collinson, “Managing Humour,” Journal of Management 
Studies 39, no. 3 (2002): 269–88; K. Owler, R. Morrison, 
and B. Plester, “Does Fun Work? The Complexity of 
Promoting Fun at Work,” Journal of Management and 
Organization 16, no. 3 (2010): 338–52; B. Plester, 
H. Cooper-Thomas, and J. Winquist, “The Fun Paradox,” 
Employee Relations 37, no. 3 (2015): 380–98.
d. K. Krys et al., “Be Careful Where You Smile: Culture 
Shapes Judgments of Intelligence and Honesty of Smil￾ing Individuals,” Journal of Nonverbal Behavior 40, no. 2 
(2016): 101–16; S. Rosenberg, “Why Russians Are Being 
Taught to Smile,” BBC News (London: BBC, June 9, 
2018); C. Baker, “What a Russian Smile Means,” Nautilus, 
June 21, 2018.
e. E. Richter, “Police from around Ohio Train in Middle￾town on Handling Emotions, Racial Intelligence,” 
Journal-News (Butler County, Ohio), July 22, 2020; C.H. 
Featherstone, “Compassion, Empathy and Pepper Spray: 
Quincy Police Officers Learn de-Escalation Techniques,” 
Columbia Basin Herald (Wash.), February 11, 2021; 
“Lunenburg, Sudbury and Wellesley Police Take Part in 
Empathy Training Program,” Massachusetts Municipal 
Association (MMA) (blog), August 9, 2021; M. Kuhlman, 
“Ohio State Legislators Eye Emotional-Intelligence 
Training for Police,” Cleveland Scene, September 15, 
2021; O. Magny and N. Todak, “Emotional Intelligence 
in Policing: A State-of-the-Art Review,” Policing: An 
International Journal 44, no. 6 (2021): 957–69.
f. “Randstad Workmonitor Q4 2019” (Amsterdam: 
Randstad Holding nv, December 2019). Survey data 
were collected from 34 countries with a minimum of 
400 interviews per country of adults working 24 hours or 
more per week as employees. Respondents were asked, 
“How satisfied are you in general about working with 
your current employer?” This exhibit shows results from 
selected countries across the full range of results.
g. O. Staley, “Hilton Hotels’ Newest Upgrades Are Strictly 
for Staff,” Quartz at Work, April 2, 2018; “Hilton Named 
#1 Best Big Company to Work For, #3 Best Company to 
Work For in the U.S.,” Press Release (Hilton Hotels & 
Resorts, April 12, 2021); “Hilton Ranked #3 Workplace 
in the World,” Press Release (Hilton Hotels & Resorts, 
October 19, 2021).
h. Statistics Canada, “Perceived Life Stress, by Age Group,” 
Health Characteristics, Annual Estimates (Ottawa: Sta￾tistics Canada, June 26, 2018); “Worried Workers: Korn 
Ferry Survey Finds Professionals Are More Stressed Out 
at Work Today Than 5 Years Ago,” News Release (Los 
Angeles: Korn Ferry, November 8, 2018); “2019 CIGNA 
360 Well-Being Survey: Well and Beyond” (Bloomfield, 
CT: CIGNA, March 26, 2019); “2019 Global Emotions 
Report” (Washington, DC: Gallup, April 18, 2019); 
“NHS Staff Survey 2019: National Results Briefing” 
(London: National Health Service, February 2020).
i. E. Stolte, “‘Very Hurt’: Years of Harassment Finally Led 
to Managerial Change,” Edmonton Journal, July 5, 2018; 
“2018 Employee Engagement & Diversity Survey 
Results” (City of Edmonton, January 15, 2019); E. Stolte, 
“Audit into City Payment System Illustrates How Work￾place Culture Can Hit Bottom Line,” Edmonton Journal, 
January 25, 2019; D. Cook, “‘This Is Clearly Problematic’: 163
Most City of Edmonton Employees Not Speaking up 
about Discrimination or Inappropriate Behaviour, Work￾place Survey Highlights,” Edmonton Journal, October 22, 
2020; W. Snowdon, “Harassment down in City 
Workplaces but Staff Complain of Unprofessional 
Behaviour, Micromanagement,” CBC News, 
October 22, 2020.
j. M. Katanuma, “The Company That Pays Its Employees 
to Get a Full Night’s Sleep,” Bloomberg, October 21, 
2018; L. Lewis, “Japan Wakes up to Sleep Shortage Prob￾lems,” Financial Times, November 20, 2018; J. McCurry, 
“Snoozing on the Job: Japanese Firms Tackle Epidemic 
of Sleeplessness,” The Guardian, January 8, 2019.
Design Credit: Blue globe icon: Merfin/Shutterstock164
Foundations of Employee 
Motivation
Henkel AG & Co. now supplements its annual performance review with 
more open, informal, and timely feedback. The German chemical and consumer goods 
company launched a digital feedback tool that enables employees to request feedback from anyone, 
at any time, on any aspect of their performance. This digital feedback process is particularly valuable 
because instantaneous feedback from colleagues in the hallway has diminished with the move to 
remote and hybrid work. 
“I think it’s great that the feedback tool allows me to decide who and what to ask,” says Viktoria Ritter, 
Henkel’s Manager of Global Leadership in Berlin. “I can gather targeted feedback from selected people 
on areas in which I want to develop.”
Henkel still has a formal performance review, whereas other companies have completely abandoned 
performance ratings. “We realized that investing significant time in backward-looking performance 
appraisals—and figuring out the Holy Grail of forced rankings—simply does not yield the best outcomes 
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
LO 5-1 Define motivation, and explain how drives and emotions influence employee motivation.
LO 5-2 Explain through four-drive theory the process of human motivation, and summarize 
Maslow’s needs hierarchy, intrinsic and extrinsic motivation, and learned needs theory.
LO 5-3 Outline the expectancy theory model, and prescribe how to improve employee 
motivation through the elements of this model.
LO 5-4 Describe organizational behavior modification (OB Mod) and social cognitive theory, 
and explain their relevance to employee motivation.
LO 5-5 Discuss the characteristics of effective goal setting and feedback.
LO 5-6 Explain how equity theory, procedural justice, and interactional justice influence 
employee motivation.
Learning Objectives
5
chapterMany companies are improving employee motivation by transforming their old performance appraisal systems into coaching 
and developmental conversations, with more responsive goal setting and feedback.
PART 2: INDIVIDUAL BEHAVIOR AND PROCESSES
for our company or our people,” observes Nicholas Greschner, Global HR Business Partner for the Legal 
group at consulting firm Accenture. “Millennials and Gen Z-ers don’t want hierarchy, formal feedback 
processes, and appraisals. They demand real-time, in-person feedback, forward-looking conversations 
and support to grow their careers.”
Goldman Sachs’ performance review process includes goal setting and subsequent evaluation, but it 
now places more emphasis on coaching employees throughout the year. “Managers who frequently 
practice the coaching behaviors are more likely to have reports that are top performers,” explains 
David Landman, Goldman Sachs’ global head of talent assessment. The New York-based investment 
firm also makes extensive use of 360-degree feedback, so employees receive valuable comments 
from a variety of sources. “360 is a great way to capture a broad perspective well beyond the manager’s 
view,” says Landman.1
Executives at Henkel, Accenture, Goldman Sachs, and many other organizations are realizing that 
their traditional performance appraisal systems don’t motivate employees as well as they had assumed. 
Some traditional performance reviews even have the opposite effect; they disengage employees and 
motivate behavior that undermines the organization’s success. This isn’t news to organizational 
behavior scholars, who have warned over the past few decades about the limitations and adverse 
effects of rating, ranking, and other traditional performance management practices.2 The challenge now 
is to introduce practices that actually motivate and develop employees to their potential.
165
marvent/Shutterstock166 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
We begin this chapter by defining motivation and explaining how drives 
and emotions are the prime movers of an individual’s motivation. Four-drive 
theory is then presented to explain how drives and emotions produce 
goal-directed needs and motivational effort. Three other needs-based 
theories are also briefly introduced. Next, expectancy theory is described, 
including the practical implications of this important cognitive decision 
model of employee motivation. Organizational behavior modification and 
social cognitive theory are then introduced and linked to expectancy theory. 
The latter sections of this chapter look at the key components of goal 
setting and feedback, and three types of organizational justice: distributive, 
procedural, and interactional.
Employee Motivation, Drives, and Needs
Employee motivation should be on anyone’s short list of the most important topics in 
organizational behavior. Why? Because motivation is one of the four elements of the 
MARS model, meaning that it is critical to understanding human behavior and perfor￾mance (see Chapter 1). Even when people are able to perform the work (A), understand 
their role responsibilities (R), and work in a setting that supports their work objectives 
(S), they won’t get the job done without sufficient motivation (M) to achieve those tasks.
Motivation is defined as the forces within a person that affect the direction, intensity, 
and persistence of effort for voluntary behavior.3 Direction refers to what people are fo￾cused on achieving; in other words, the goal or outcome toward which they steer their ef￾fort. Intensity is the amount of physical, cognitive, and emotional energy expended at a 
given moment to achieve a task or other objective. Persistence, the third element of motiva￾tion, refers to how long people sustain their effort as they move toward their goal. In 
short, motivated employees exert varying levels of effort (intensity), for varying lengths of 
time (persistence), toward various goals (direction).
When discussing employee motivation, some business leaders use the phrase employee 
engagement. Employee engagement is an individual’s emotional and cognitive (logical) 
motivation, particularly a focused, intense, persistent, and purposive effort toward work￾related goals.4
 It is associated with self-efficacy—the belief that you have the ability, role 
clarity, and resources to get the job done (see Chapter 3). Many definitions of employee 
engagement also refer to a high level of absorption in the work—the experience of focusing 
intensely on the task, with limited awareness of events beyond that work.
EMPLOYEE DRIVES AND NEEDS
To build a more motivated and engaged workforce, we first need to understand where mo￾tivation begins, that is, the motivational “forces” or “prime movers” of employee behavior.5
Our starting point is drives (also called primary needs), 
which we define as hardwired characteristics of the brain 
that attempt to keep us in balance by correcting deficien￾cies. Neuroscience (brain) research has highlighted the 
central role of emotions in this process. Specifically, 
drives produce emotions that energize us to act on our 
environment.6 There is no agreed-upon list of human 
drives, but research has consistently identified several, 
LO 5-1
motivation
the forces within a person that 
affect the direction, intensity, 
and persistence of effort for 
voluntary behavior
drives
hardwired characteristics of the 
brain that correct deficiencies or 
maintain an internal equilibrium 
by producing emotions to 
energize individualsChapter Five Foundations of Employee Motivation 167
such as the drive to have social interaction, to develop our competence, to comprehend our 
surroundings, and to defend ourselves against physiological and psychological harm.7
Drives are innate and universal, which means that everyone has them and they exist 
from birth. Drives are the starting point of motivation because they generate emotions 
that, as we learned in Chapter 4, put people in a state of readiness to act on their envi￾ronment. Cognition (logical thinking) also plays an important role in motivation, but 
emotions are the real sources of energy in human behavior.8
 In fact, both words (emotion
and motivation) originate from the same Latin word, movere, which means “to move.”
Exhibit 5.1 illustrates how drives and emotions translate into felt needs and behavior. 
Drives, and the emotions produced by these drives, generate human needs. We define 
needs as goal-directed forces or energy that people experience. They are the motivational 
forces of emotions channeled toward specific goals and associated behaviors to correct 
deficiencies or imbalances. For example, you sense a need to interact with people after 
being alone for a while, or to do something challenging after performing tedious activities. 
needs
goal-directed forces that 
people experience
Gitlab Supports Social Interaction 
Among Remote Workersa
The workplace isn’t just for working. It is also a setting 
where employees partly fulfill their drive to bond. But sat￾isfying that primary need isn’t easy when everyone works 
remotely. One recent survey reported that by far the 
biggest challenge with working from home is the lack of 
social interaction and associated feeling of being discon￾nected from colleagues.
Gitlab, one of the world’s largest distributed companies 
(it has no business offices), has established several infor￾mal communication practices to improve social interaction 
among its 1,500 remote employees. “When working re￾mote, it is important to formalize informal communication,” 
advises Gitlab cofounder Sid Sijbrandij. “Explicitly plan 
time to create, build, and maintain social connections and 
trust.”
During onboarding, Gitlab’s new hires have at least five 
virtual “coffee chats” with their coworkers. Staff are also 
encouraged to arrange a few of these two-person get-to￾know-you video calls each week with coworkers, particu￾larly those who infrequently work together. Gitlab even 
has a “donut be strangers” app that randomly pairs em￾ployees for brief social chats and provides useful ques￾tions to spark conversation between these strangers.
Gitlab team leaders further support bonding through 
regular “Social Calls,” which are team video gatherings for 
about an hour on a nonwork topic. As an example, one 
team discussed their favorite TV shows and then voted 
on the best program. Some employees arrange virtual 
tours, showing their coworkers where they work and live, 
in realtime or through video clips that they narrate. Gitlab 
staff also post virtual postcards so others learn about the 
country or city where they live.
Gitlab encourages informal social bonding even during 
formal meetings. For example, team members arrive 
(virtually) with unusual video background settings and 
spend the first few minutes discussing them. And when 
pets or children unexpectedly show up during a work 
meeting, Gitlab encourages employees to enjoy that visit 
if the children and pets are willing.
global connections 5.1
Andrey_Popov/Shutterstock
Self-concept, social norms,
and past experience
Drives
 and emotions Needs Decisions and
behavior
EXHIBIT 5.1
Drives, Needs, and Behavior168 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
As one leading neuroscientist explains: “drives express themselves directly in background 
emotions and we eventually become aware of their existence by means of background feelings.”9
In other words, needs are the emotions we eventually become consciously aware of.
Consider the following example: You arrive at work to discover a stranger sitting at 
your desk. This situation produces emotions (worry, curiosity) that motivate you to act. 
These emotions are generated from drives, such as the drive to defend and drive to com￾prehend. When strong enough, these emotions motivate you to do something about this 
situation, such as finding out who that person is and possibly seeking reassurance from 
coworkers that your job is still safe. In this case, you have a need to understand what is 
going on (comprehend), to feel secure, and possibly to correct a sense of personal viola￾tion (defend). Notice that your emotional reactions to seeing the stranger sitting at your 
desk represent the forces that move you, and that your logical thinking plays an active role 
in channeling those emotions toward specific goals and associated actions.
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN NEEDS
Everyone has the same drives; they are hardwired in us through evolution. However, peo￾ple develop different intensities of needs in a particular situation. Exhibit 5.1 explains why 
this difference occurs. The left side of the model shows that the individual’s self-concept 
(as well as personality and values), social norms, and past experience amplify or suppress 
emotions, thereby resulting in stronger or weaker needs.10 For example, people who de￾fine themselves as very sociable typically experience a stronger need for social interaction 
if they have been alone for a while, whereas people who view themselves as less sociable 
would experience a less intense need to be with others over that time. These individual 
differences can be “learned” to some extent through socialization and reinforcement. We 
will discuss learned needs in the next section of this chapter.
Individual differences—including self-concept, social norms, and past experience—regulate 
the motivation process in a second way. They influence what goals and behaviors are moti￾vated by the felt emotions, as the right side of Exhibit 5.1 illustrates. Consider the earlier ex￾ample of the stranger sitting at your desk. You probably wouldn’t walk up to the person and 
demand that they leave; such blunt behavior is contrary to social norms in most cultures. 
Employees who view themselves as forthright might approach the stranger directly, whereas 
those who have a different personality and self-view are more likely to first gather information 
from coworkers before approaching the intruder. In short, your drives (to comprehend, 
to defend, to bond, etc.) and resulting emotions energize you to act, and your self-concept, 
social norms, and past experience direct that energy toward goal-directed behavior.
Exhibit 5.1 provides a useful template for understanding how drives and emotions are the 
prime sources of employee motivation and how individual characteristics (self-concept, experience, 
values) influence goal-directed behavior. We will refer to elements of this drive theory of mo￾tivation when we discuss four-drive theory, expectancy theory, equity theory, and other con￾cepts in this chapter. The next section describes specific drive-based theories of motivation.
Drive-Based Motivation Theories
FOUR-DRIVE THEORY
The process through which drives, emotions, and needs influence motivation is most ef￾fectively explained by four-drive theory. This theory states that emotions are the source of 
human motivation and that these emotions are generated through four drives identified 
from earlier psychological, sociological, and anthropological research:11
• Drive to acquire. This is the drive to seek, take, control, and retain objects and 
personal experiences. It produces various needs, including achievement, competence, 
status, and self-esteem.12 The drive to acquire also motivates competition.
• Drive to bond. This drive produces the need for belonging and affiliation.13 It ex￾plains why our self-concept is partly defined by associations with social groups 
LO 5-2
four-drive theory
a motivation theory based on 
the innate drives to acquire, 
bond, comprehend, and 
defend that incorporates both 
emotions and rationalityChapter Five Foundations of Employee Motivation 169
(see social identity theory in Chapter 3). The drive to bond motivates people to 
cooperate and, consequently, is a fundamental ingredient in the success of organi￾zations and the development of societies.
• Drive to comprehend. We are inherently curious and need to make sense of our en￾vironment and ourselves.14 When observing something that is inconsistent with or 
beyond our current knowledge, we experience a tension that motivates us to close 
that information gap. The drive to comprehend motivates curiosity as well as the 
broader need to reach our knowledge potential.
• Drive to defend. This is the drive to protect ourselves physically, psychologically, 
and socially. Probably the first drive to develop in human beings, it creates a fight￾or-flight response when we are confronted with threats to our physical safety, our 
possessions, our self-concept, our values, and the well-being of others.15
All drives are hardwired in our brains and exist in all human beings. They are also in￾dependent of one another; there is no hierarchy of drives. Four-drive theory also claims 
that no fundamental drives are excluded from the model. Another key feature is that three 
of the four drives are proactive—we regularly try to fulfill them. Therefore, need “fulfill￾ment” is brief and ongoing. Only the drive to defend is reactive—it is triggered by threat.
How Drives Influence Motivation and Behavior Recall from Chapter 3 that 
the stimuli received through our senses are quickly and nonconsciously tagged with emo￾tional markers.16 Four-drive theory proposes that the four drives determine which emo￾tions are tagged to incoming stimuli. Most of the time, we aren’t aware of our emotional 
experiences because they are subtle and fleeting. However, emotions do become con￾scious experiences when they are sufficiently strong or when they significantly conflict 
with one another.
Four-drive theory also recognizes that our social norms, personal values, and past 
experience—which the theory calls our “mental skill set”—guide our motivational energy 
and reduce the felt need (see Exhibit 5.2). In other words, our mental skill set chooses 
courses of action that are acceptable to society, consistent with our own moral compass, 
and have a high probability of achieving the goal of fulfilling those felt needs.17 This is 
the process that we described in the previous section of this chapter: drives produce 
emotions, various personal characteristics (self-concept, social norms, experience) 
convert these emotions into goal-directed needs, and those characteristics also guide 
those needs toward decisions and behavior.
Practical Implications of Four-Drive Theory Four-drive theory recommends 
that jobs and workplaces should provide a balanced opportunity to fulfill the four drives.18
There are really two recommendations here. The first is that the best workplaces help 
Drive to
acquire
Social
norms
Mental skill set
channels emotional
forces created by drives
Goal-directed
choice and eort
Personal
values
Past
experience
Drive to
bond
Drive to
comprehend
Drive to
defend
EXHIBIT 5.2
Four-Drive Theory of Motivation
Source: Based on information in P.R. 
Lawrence and N. Nohria, Driven: How 
Human Nature Shapes Our Choices
(San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2002).170 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
employees fulfill all four drives. Employees continually 
seek fulfillment of their innate drives, so successful com￾panies provide sufficient rewards, learning opportuni￾ties, social interaction, and so forth for all employees.
The second recommendation is that fulfillment of the 
four drives must be kept in balance; that is, organizations 
shouldn’t give employees too much or too little opportu￾nity to fulfill each drive. The reason for this advice is that 
the four drives counterbalance each other. The drive to 
bond, which motivates mutual support and cohesion, 
counterbalances the drive to acquire, which motivates 
competitiveness. An organization that fuels the drive to 
acquire without encouraging the drive to bond may even￾tually suffer from organizational politics, dysfunctional 
conflict, and insufficient collaboration.19 The drive to 
comprehend, which motivates investigation of the un￾known, counterbalances the drive to defend, which moti￾vates avoidance of the unknown. Change and novelty in 
the workplace will feed the drive to comprehend, but too 
much of it will trigger the drive to defend to such an extent 
that employees become territorial and resistant to change.
Four-drive theory is based on a deep foundation of 
neuroscientific, psychological, sociological, and anthro￾pological research. The theory explains why needs vary 
from one person to the next and recognizes that motiva￾tion is influenced by human thought and social influ￾ences (not just instinct).20 Even so, the theory is more 
recent than other motivation models and is far from 
complete. Most experts would argue that one or two 
other drives should be included. Furthermore, social norms, personal values, and past 
experience probably don’t represent the full set of individual characteristics that translate 
emotions into goal-directed effort. For example, personality and self-concept probably 
also moderate the effect of drives and needs on decisions and behavior.
MASLOW’S NEEDS HIERARCHY THEORY
Mention needs and drives to most people and they will probably refer to Maslow’s needs 
hierarchy theory, which was developed by psychologist Abraham Maslow in the 1940s.21
Maslow condensed and organized the dozens of previously studied drives (which he called 
primary needs) into five basic categories, organized in a hierarchy from lowest to highest 
(see Exhibit 5.3):22 physiological (need for food, air, water, shelter, etc.), safety (need for 
security and stability), belongingness/love (need for interaction with and affection from 
others), esteem (need for self-esteem and social esteem/status), and self-actualization (need 
for self-fulfillment, realization of one’s potential). Along with these five categories, Maslow 
identified the need to know and the need for aesthetic beauty as two innate drives that do 
not fit within the hierarchy.23
Maslow proposed that we are motivated simultaneously by several needs, but the stron￾gest motivation comes from the lowest unsatisfied need. When satisfied, the next higher 
need in the hierarchy becomes the strongest motivator and remains so even if never satis￾fied. The exception to this need fulfillment process is self-actualization. Human beings 
have an ongoing need for self-actualization; it is never really fulfilled. Thus, while the bot￾tom four groups are deficiency needs because they become activated when unfulfilled, 
self-actualization is known as a growth need because it continues to develop even when 
temporarily satiated.
Maslow’s needs hierarchy 
theory
a motivation theory of needs 
arranged in a hierarchy, 
whereby people are motivated 
to fulfill a higher need as a 
lower one becomes gratified
Petroliam Nasional Bhd (Petronas) is rated as the best company to work for in 
Malaysia, partly because it actively tries to balance employees’ fulfillment of 
their four drives. The energy giant challenges employees to step out of their 
comfort zone by acquiring new skills, but this is counteracted with work–life 
integration and supportive management. Some employees say promotions and 
performance standards are competitive, but this is balanced with Petronas’ 
strong culture of teamwork. “Good place for work–life balance,” says a Petronas 
application developer, pointing out that the company also “… greatly 
challenge[s] your skill to the limit.” A Petronas manager in Kuala Lumpur advises 
that employees get “… lots of new projects, which require moving out of your 
comfort zone,” but adds that the company also fosters “good camaraderie with 
colleagues.” Another Petronas technical employee observes: “The staff here are 
team players. They are welcoming and helpful.”b
Marco Bertorello/AFP/Getty ImagesChapter Five Foundations of Employee Motivation 171
Maslow’s needs hierarchy theory may be well known, but it was rejected long ago by 
motivation experts.24 The main flaw is that not everyone has the same needs hierarchy. 
Some people place social status at the top of their personal hierarchy whereas others view 
personal development and growth above social relations or status. This variation occurs 
because employee needs are strongly influenced by self-concept, personal values, and 
personality.25 People have different hierarchies of values, so they also have parallel differ￾ences in their needs hierarchies. If your most important values lean toward power and 
achievement, for example, status needs will likely be at the top of your needs hierarchy. 
Furthermore, a person’s values hierarchy can change over time, so their needs hierarchy 
also changes over time.26
Needs hierarchy theory failed, but Maslow improved our understanding of motivation 
in a few ways.27 First, he emphasized that needs should be studied together (holistically) 
because human behavior is typically initiated by more than one need at the same time 
(previously, needs were studied separately from one another).28 Second, he recognized 
that motivation can be shaped by human thoughts (such as personal values), whereas 
earlier motivation experts focused mainly on how instincts motivated behavior.29 Third, 
Maslow adopted a positive view of motivation, whereas previous motivation theories 
focused on need deficiencies such as hunger. Maslow’s positive perspective is revealed in 
his emphasis on growth needs and self-actualization, suggesting that people are naturally 
motivated to reach their potential.30
Self￾actualization
Esteem
Belongingness
Safety
Physiological
Self￾ualization
Need to know
Need for beauty
EXHIBIT 5.3
Maslow’s Needs Hierarchy
Source: Based on information in 
A.H. Maslow, “A Theory of Human 
Motivation,” Psychological Review 50 
(1943): 370–96.
®
SELF-ASSESSMENT 5.1: How Strong Are Your Growth Needs?
INTRINSIC AND EXTRINSIC MOTIVATION
By extolling the importance of self-actualization, Maslow launched an entirely new way of 
thinking about human motivation. People experience self-actualization by applying their 
skills and knowledge, observing how their talents achieve meaningful results, and experi￾encing personal growth through learning. 172 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
These are the conditions for intrinsic motivation, which is motivation that occurs when 
people are fulfilling their needs for competence and autonomy by engaging in the activity 
itself, rather than from an externally controlled outcome of that activity.31 Intrinsically 
motivated employees apply their talents toward a meaningful task and experience prog￾ress or success in that task.32 They feel competent when applying their skills and observ￾ing positive, meaningful outcomes from that effort. They feel autonomous when their 
motivation is self-initiated rather than controlled from an external source.
Intrinsic motivation contrasts with extrinsic motivation, which is motivation that occurs 
when people want to engage in an activity for instrumental reasons, that is, to receive 
something that is beyond their personal control. This involves directing one’s effort toward 
a reward controlled by others that indirectly fulfills a need. Extrinsic motivators exist 
throughout organizations, such as pay incentives, recognition awards, and frequent remind￾ers from the boss about work deadlines. Extrinsic motivation also occurs indirectly, such as 
when we are motivated to complete our part of a team project partly due to our concerns 
about how team members will react if we submit it late or with inferior quality.
Does Extrinsic Motivation Undermine Intrinsic Motivation? There are 
two contrasting hypotheses about how extrinsic and intrinsic motivation work together.33
One hypothesis is that someone performing an intrinsically motivating job becomes even 
more motivated by also receiving an extrinsic source of motivation for that work. The extrinsic 
motivator energizes the employee more than the intrinsic motivator alone. The opposing 
hypothesis states that introducing extrinsic sources of motivation will reduce the amount of 
intrinsic motivation. For example, employees who were energized from the work itself will 
experience less of that intrinsic motivation when they receive extrinsic rewards such as a 
performance bonus. The explanation is that introducing extrinsic motivators diminishes the 
employee’s feeling of autonomy, which is a key source of intrinsic motivation.
Which hypothesis is correct? So far, the research evi￾dence is mixed. Extrinsic motivators may reduce existing 
intrinsic motivation to some extent and under some condi￾tions, but the effect is often minimal. Extrinsic rewards do 
not undermine intrinsic motivation when they are unex￾pected (e.g., a surprise bonus), when they have low value 
relative to the intrinsic motivator, and when they are 
not contingent on specific behavior (such as receiving a 
fixed salary). Even so, when employees are intrinsically 
Hubspot employees say they feel 
intrinsically motivated through 
autonomy and personal growth. 
“I feel like I’m valued. I have a lot 
of autonomy in how and when 
and where I work,” applauds an 
employee at the Cambridge, 
Mass., sales and marketing 
software firm. “Everything I read 
about how wonderful a place 
HubSpot is to work turned out to 
be the real deal,” says a Hubspot 
product operations manager. 
“Teams are given a lot of 
autonomy, so there is always 
room to learn and grow.”c
4 PM production/Shutterstock
intrinsic motivation
occurs when people fulfill their 
needs for competence and 
autonomy by engaging in the 
activity itself, rather than from 
an externally controlled 
outcome of that activity
extrinsic motivation
occurs when people are 
motivated to engage in an 
activity for instrumental 
reasons, that is, to receive 
something that is beyond their 
personal controlChapter Five Foundations of Employee Motivation 173
motivated, employers should be careful about the potential unintended effect of undermining 
that motivation with performance bonuses and other sources of extrinsic motivation.34
LEARNED NEEDS THEORY
In the previous section of this chapter, we explained that needs are shaped, amplified, or 
suppressed through self-concept, social norms, and past experience. Maslow noted this 
when he observed that individual differences influence the strength of higher-order needs, 
such as the need to belong. Psychologist David McClelland further investigated the idea 
that needs can be strengthened or weakened through reinforcement, learning, and social 
conditions. He examined three “learned” needs: achievement, affiliation, and power.35
• People with a high need for achievement (nAch) choose moderately challenging 
tasks, desire unambiguous feedback and recognition for their success, and prefer 
working alone rather than in teams. Except as a source of feedback, money is a 
weak motivator for people with high nAch, whereas it can be a strong motivator for 
those with low nAch.36 Successful entrepreneurs tend to have high nAch, possibly 
because they establish challenging goals for themselves and thrive on competition.37
• People with a high need for affiliation (nAff) seek approval from others, want to 
conform to others’ wishes and expectations, and avoid conflict and confrontation. 
High-nAff employees generally work well in jobs responsible for cultivating long￾term relations. However, with a strong need for approval, high nAff employees 
tend to be less effective at allocating scarce resources and making other decisions 
that potentially generate conflict. This suggests that leaders shouldn’t have high 
nAff, but research suggests they should have moderate nAff to be supportive of 
employee needs.38
• People with a high need for power (nPow) want to exercise control over others, are 
highly involved in team decisions, rely on persuasion, and are concerned about 
maintaining their leadership position. There are two types of nPow.39 The need for 
personalized power occurs when individuals enjoy their power for its own sake, use 
it to advance personal interests, and wear their power as a status symbol. The need 
for socialized power exists when individuals desire power as a means to help others. 
Effective leaders have a high need for socialized rather than personalized power. 
They demonstrate altruism and social responsibility and are concerned about the 
consequences of their own actions on others.
McClelland developed training programs to test the idea that these needs can be learned 
(amplified or suppressed) through reinforcement, learning, and social conditions. One pro￾gram increased achievement motivation by having participants write achievement-oriented 
stories, practice achievement-oriented behaviors in business games, and meet frequently 
with other trainees to main￾tain their newfound achieve￾ment motivation.40 These 
training programs changed 
how people viewed them￾selves (their self-concept), 
which amplified their need 
for achievement, affiliation, 
or power.
need for achievement (nAch)
a learned need in which 
people want to accomplish 
reasonably challenging goals 
and desire unambiguous 
feedback and recognition for 
their success
need for affiliation (nAff)
a learned need in which 
people seek approval from 
others, conform to their wishes 
and expectations, and avoid 
conflict and confrontation
need for power (nPow)
a learned need in which 
people want to control their 
environment, including people 
and material resources, to 
benefit either themselves 
(personalized power) or others 
(socialized power)
®
SELF-ASSESSMENT 5.2: How Strong Are Your Learned Needs?174 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
Expectancy Theory of Motivation
The theories described so far mainly explain what motivates us—the prime movers of em￾ployee motivation—but they don’t tell us what we are motivated to do. Four-drive theory 
recognizes that social norms, personal values, and past experience direct our effort, but it 
doesn’t offer any detail about what goals we choose or where our effort is directed under 
various circumstances.
Expectancy theory offers more precision by predicting the goal-directed behavior where 
employees are most likely to aim their effort. The theory states that work effort is directed 
toward behaviors that people believe will produce the most favorable outcomes. It assumes 
that people are rational decision makers who choose a target that will best fulfill their 
needs. This choice is based on the probability that specific events will occur and the positive 
or negative valences (expected satisfaction) resulting from those events.41 As Exhibit 5.4 
illustrates, an individual’s effort level depends on three factors: effort-to-performance 
(E-to-P) expectancy, performance-to-outcome (P-to-O) expectancy, and outcome valences. 
Employee motivation is influenced by all three components of the expectancy theory 
model.42 If any component weakens, motivation weakens.
• E-to-P expectancy. This is the individual’s perception that their effort will result in a 
specific level of performance. In some situations, employees may believe that they 
can unquestionably accomplish the task (a probability of 1.0). In other situations, 
they expect that even their highest level of effort will not result in the desired 
performance level (a probability of 0.0). In most cases, the E-to-P expectancy falls 
somewhere between these two extremes.
• P-to-O expectancy. This is the perceived probability that a specific behavior or per￾formance level will lead to a specific outcome. In extreme cases, employees may 
believe that accomplishing a particular task (performance) will definitely result in 
a particular outcome (a probability of 1.0), or they may believe that successful 
performance will have no effect on this outcome occurring (a probability of 0.0). 
More often, the P-to-O expectancy falls somewhere between these two extremes.
• Outcome valences. A valence is the anticipated satisfaction or dissatisfaction that 
an individual feels toward an outcome.43 It ranges from negative to positive. (The 
expectancy theory
a motivation theory based on 
the idea that work effort is 
directed toward behaviors that 
people believe will lead to 
desired outcomes
LO 5-3
EXHIBIT 5.4
Expectancy Theory of Motivation
Outcome 3
Eort Performance
+/–
Outcome 2 +/–
Outcome 1 +/–
Probability that a 
specific eort level 
will result in a specific
performance level
E-to-P expectancy
Probability that a 
specific performance
level will result in 
specific outcomes
P-to-O expectancy
Anticipated 
satisfaction
from the outcome
ValenceChapter Five Foundations of Employee Motivation 175
actual range doesn’t matter; it may be from −1 to +1 or from −100 to +100.) Out￾comes have a positive valence when they are consistent with our values and satisfy 
our needs; they have a negative valence when they oppose our values and inhibit 
need fulfillment.
EXPECTANCY THEORY IN PRACTICE
One of the appealing characteristics of expectancy theory is that it provides clear guide￾lines for increasing employee motivation, at least extrinsic motivation.44 Several practical 
applications of expectancy theory are listed in Exhibit 5.5 and described below.
Increasing E-to-P Expectancies E-to-P expectancies are influenced by the indi￾vidual’s belief that they can successfully complete the task. In other words, people with 
higher E-to-P expectancies have higher self-efficacy (see Chapter 3). Some companies in￾crease this can-do attitude by assuring employees that they have the required abilities and 
resources as well as clear role perceptions to reach the desired levels of performance. An 
important part of this process involves matching employee abilities to job requirements 
and clearly communicating the tasks required for the job. Similarly, E-to-P expectancies 
are learned, so behavior modeling and supportive feedback typically strengthen the indi￾vidual’s belief that they are able to perform the task.
Increasing P-to-O Expectancies The most obvious ways to improve P-to-O ex￾pectancies are to measure employee performance accurately and distribute more valued 
rewards to those with higher job performance. P-to-O expectancies are perceptions, 
so employees also need to believe that higher performance will result in higher rewards. 
Furthermore, they need to know how that connection occurs, so leaders should use exam￾ples, anecdotes, and public ceremonies to illustrate when behavior has been rewarded.
Increasing Outcome Valences One size does not fit all when motivating and 
rewarding people. The valence of a reward varies from one person to the next because 
each person has different need priorities. One solution is to individualize rewards by 
EXPECTANCY THEORY COMPONENT OBJECTIVE APPLICATIONS
E → P expectancies To increase the employee’s belief 
that they are capable of 
performing the job successfully
• Select people with the required skills and knowledge.
• Provide required training and clarify job requirements.
• Provide sufficient time and resources.
• Assign simpler or fewer tasks until employees can master 
them.
• Provide examples of similar employees who have 
successfully performed the task.
• Provide coaching to employees who lack self-confidence.
P → O expectancies To increase the employee’s belief 
that their good performance will 
result in specific valued outcomes
• Measure job performance accurately.
• Clearly explain the outcomes that will result from 
successful performance.
• Describe how the employee’s rewards were based on 
past performance.
• Provide examples of other employees whose good 
performance has resulted in higher rewards.
Outcome valences To increase the employee’s expected 
satisfaction with outcomes resulting 
from desired performance
• Distribute rewards that employees value.
• Individualize rewards.
• Minimize the presence of countervalent outcomes.
EXHIBIT 5.5 Practical Applications of Expectancy Theory176 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
allowing employees to choose the rewards of greatest value to them. When this isn’t 
possible, companies should find a reward that everyone values to some degree. Finally, we 
need to watch out for countervalent outcomes. If a company offers individual perfor￾mance bonuses, for example, it should beware of team norms that discourage employees 
from working above a minimum standard. These norms and associated peer pressure are 
countervalent outcomes to the bonus.
Overall, expectancy theory is a useful model that explains how people rationally fig￾ure out the best direction, intensity, and persistence of effort. It has been tested in a 
variety of situations and predicts employee motivation in different cultures.45 Expec￾tancy theory does have limitations, however.46 First, it assumes that people are perfectly 
rational decision makers; in reality, human decision making deviates from perfect ratio￾nality (see Chapter 7). A second concern is that the theory mainly explains extrinsic 
motivation, whereas applying the model’s features to intrinsic motivation is more diffi￾cult (although not impossible). Third, expectancy theory ignores emotions as a source 
of motivation. The valence element of expectancy theory captures some of this emo￾tional process, but only peripherally.47 Fourth, E-to-P and P-to-O expectancies are criti￾cal components of expectancy theory, yet the theory doesn’t explain how employees 
develop these expectancies. Two theories that do explain how expectancies are devel￾oped are organizational behavior modification and social cognitive theory, which we 
describe next.
Organizational Behavior Modification and 
Social Cognitive Theory
Expectancy theory states that motivation is determined by employee beliefs about expected 
performance and outcomes. But how do employees learn these expectancy beliefs? For 
example, how do they form the impression that one level of task performance is more likely 
than another performance level to produce a pay increase, promotion, or other outcomes? 
Two theories—organizational behavior modification (OB Mod) and social cognitive 
theory—complement expectancy theory by explaining how people learn what to expect 
from their actions, which is how people develop the expectancies that affect motivation.
51% of 624,800 U.S. 
federal government employees
believe that dierences in
performance are recognized in
a meaningful way in their
work unit.
69% of 1,025 US employees
say that they have a good understanding
of how people are compensated at all
levels of their company.
45% of 31,000
employees globally believe 
there is a clear link between
their performance and
their pay.
43% of 2,800 US 
senior managers say their 
company is very eective at 
recognizing employees for
good performance.
27% of 600 Canadian senior
managers say their company is
very eective at recognizing
employees for good performance.
PERFORMANCE-TO-OUTCOME EXPECTANCY: MOTIVATION’S WEAK LINKd
(photo): alxpin/iStock/Getty Images
LO 5-4Chapter Five Foundations of Employee Motivation 177
ORGANIZATIONAL BEHAVIOR MODIFICATION
For most of the first half of the 1900s, the dominant paradigm about managing individual 
behavior was behaviorism, which argues that a good theory should rely exclusively on be￾havior and the environment and ignore nonobservable cognitions and emotions.48 Al￾though behaviorists don’t deny the existence of human thoughts and attitudes, behaviorist 
scholars dismissed them as nonobservable and, therefore, irrelevant to scientific study. A 
variation of this paradigm, called organizational behavior modification (OB Mod), eventu￾ally entered organizational studies of motivation and learning.49
A-B-Cs of OB Mod The core elements of OB Mod are depicted in the A-B-C model 
shown in Exhibit 5.6. Essentially, OB Mod attempts to change behavior (B) by managing its 
antecedents (A) and consequences (C).50 Consequences are events following a particular be￾havior that influence its future occurrence. Consequences include receiving words of thanks 
from coworkers after assisting them, receiving preferred work schedules after being with the 
company longer than the average employee, and finding useful information on your mobile 
phone after checking for new messages. Consequences also include no outcome at all, such 
as when no one says anything to you about how well you have been serving customers.
Antecedents are events preceding the behavior, informing employees that a particular 
action will produce specific consequences. An antecedent could be a sound from your 
mobile phone signaling that a text message has arrived. Or it could be your supervisor’s 
request to complete a specific task by tomorrow. Notice that antecedents do not cause 
behavior. The sound from your phone doesn’t cause you to open the text message. Rather, 
the sound (antecedent) is a cue signaling that if you look at your phone messages (behav￾ior), you will find a new message with potentially useful information (consequence).
Contingencies and Schedules of Reinforcement OB Mod identifies four 
types of consequences, called the contingencies of reinforcement.
51 Positive reinforcement oc￾curs when the introduction of a consequence increases or maintains the frequency or future 
probability of a specific behavior. Receiving praise from coworkers is an example of positive 
reinforcement because the praise usually maintains or increases your likelihood of helping 
them in the future. Punishment occurs when a consequence decreases the frequency or fu￾ture probability of a specific behavior occurring. Most of us would consider being demoted 
or criticized by our coworkers as forms of punishment. A third type of consequence is ex￾tinction. The extinction consequence occurs when the target behavior decreases because no 
consequence follows it. For instance, research suggests that performance tends to decline 
when managers stop congratulating employees for their good work.52
Example
Antecedents
What happens before
the behavior
Behavior
What the person
says or does
Consequences
What happens after
the behavior
Your phone makes a
distinctive sound
You check your phone
for a new message
You learn useful 
information from the new
message on your phone
Sources: Adapted from T.K. Connellan, How to Improve Human Performance (New York: Harper & Row, 1978), 50; F. Luthans 
and R. Kreitner, Organizational Behavior Modification and Beyond (Glenview, IL: Scott, Foresman, 1985), 85–88.
EXHIBIT 5.6 A-B-Cs of Organizational Behavior Modification
organizational behavior 
modification (OB Mod)
a theory that explains 
employee behavior in terms of 
the antecedent conditions and 
consequences of that behavior178 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
The fourth consequence in OB Mod, called negative reinforcement, is often confused 
with punishment. It’s actually the opposite—the removal of punishment, or some other 
disagreeable condition. Negative reinforcement occurs when the removal or avoidance of 
a consequence increases or maintains the frequency or future probability of a specific 
behavior. For example, managers apply negative reinforcement when they stop criticizing 
employees whose substandard performance has improved.
Which of these four consequences works best? In most situations, positive reinforce￾ment should follow desired behaviors (although not necessarily after every occurrence), 
and extinction (do nothing) should follow undesirable behaviors. Positive reinforcement 
is preferred because focusing on the positive rather than negative aspects of life tends to 
improve organizational success and individual well-being.53 In contrast, punishment and 
negative reinforcement generate negative emotions and attitudes toward the punisher 
(e.g., supervisor) and organization who initiated and later removed the punishment. How￾ever, punishment (dismissal, demotion, boss’s anger, etc.) may be necessary for extreme 
behaviors, such as deliberately hurting a coworker or stealing inventory. Indeed, research 
suggests that, under some conditions, punishment maintains a sense of fairness among 
those affected by or aware of the employee’s indiscretion.54
Along with the four consequences, OB Mod considers the frequency and timing of these 
reinforcers (called the schedules of reinforcement).55 The most effective reinforcement sched￾ule for learning new tasks is continuous reinforcement—providing positive reinforcement after 
every occurrence of the desired behavior. The most effective reinforcement schedule for 
skilled and experienced employees is the variable ratio schedule---providing positive reinforce￾ment after a varying number of times. Salespeople experience variable ratio reinforcement 
because they make a successful sale (the reinforcer) after a varying number of client calls. 
The variable ratio schedule makes behavior highly resistant to extinction because the rein￾forcer is never expected at a particular time or after a fixed number of accomplishments.
Evaluating OB Mod Everyone uses organizational 
behavior modification principles in one form or another 
to motivate people. We thank coworkers for a job well 
done, are silent when displeased, and sometimes try to 
punish those who go against our wishes. OB Mod also 
occurs in various formal programs to reduce absenteeism, 
improve task performance, encourage safe work behav￾iors, and promote a healthier lifestyle. 
OB Mod principles are also embedded in “gamification” 
and some “nudge” interventions.56 Gamification involves 
reinforcing behavior through digital games in which em￾ployees earn points and “badges” and compete for top posi￾tions on leaderboards. Nudges represent a broader range of 
interventions that gently guide an individual to select one 
choice rather than others. Some nudges use gamification, 
others use feedback reinforcement, and still others rely on 
antecedent cues to signal behavior preferences. For exam￾ple, a nudge might make some choices more difficult to use 
(e.g., few wastebaskets nearby), might introduce behavior 
preference cues (e.g., footmarks direct people toward stairs 
rather than the elevator), or might generate reinforcement 
through ongoing feedback. By applying OB Mod principles, 
gamification and nudge tactics potentially influence learn￾ing, decisions, and desired behaviors. However, they also 
risk producing negative outcomes when the interventions 
seem manipulative, constrain free choice, or are tied to 
large financial rewards.57
To reduce traffic congestion in downtown Sydney, Australia, a research group 
introduced gamification, nudges, and other OB Mod interventions to encourage 
employees in eight organizations (with 1,000 commuting employees) to practice 
flexible work hours. The most successful of these was a competition held over 
nine weeks in which work units received points when their employees arrived 
and departed outside the traditional 9am to 5pm schedule or worked from 
home or part-time. Team scores were regularly updated on a leader board and a 
prize was awarded to the winning work unit. Two months after the competition 
was over, off-peak arrivals and departures were still 7.1 percent higher than 
before the intervention.e
Bim/Getty ImagesChapter Five Foundations of Employee Motivation 179
In spite of its widespread use, organizational behavior modification has a number of limi￾tations. One drawback is “reward inflation,” in which the reinforcer is eventually considered 
an entitlement. For this reason, most OB Mod programs must run infrequently and for a 
short duration. Another concern is that the variable ratio schedule of reinforcement tends 
to create a lottery-style reward system, which might be viewed as too erratic for formal re￾wards and is unpopular to people who dislike gambling. Probably the most significant prob￾lem is OB Mod’s radical view that behavior is learned only through personal interaction 
with the environment.58 This view is no longer accepted; instead, experts recognize that 
people also learn and are motivated by observing others and inferring possible conse￾quences of their actions. This learning process is explained by social cognitive theory.
SOCIAL COGNITIVE THEORY
Social cognitive theory states that much learning occurs by observing and modeling others 
as well as by anticipating the consequences of our behavior.59 There are several pieces to 
social cognitive theory, but the three most relevant to employee motivation are learning 
behavior consequences, behavior modeling, and self-regulation.
Learning Behavior Consequences People learn the consequences of behavior 
by observing or hearing about what happened to others, not just by directly experiencing 
the consequences.60 Hearing that a coworker was fired for being rude to a client increases 
your belief that rude behavior will result in being fired. In the language of expectancy 
theory, learning behavior consequences changes a person’s perceived P-to-O expectancy. 
Furthermore, people logically anticipate consequences in related situations. For instance, 
the story about the fired employee might also strengthen your P-to-O expectancy that be￾ing rude toward coworkers and suppliers (not just clients) will get you fired.
Behavior Modeling Along with observing others, people learn by imitating and 
practicing their behaviors.61 Modeling the behavior of others gives learners direct sensory 
experience, which helps them to acquire knowledge and skills, such as the subtle person–
machine interaction while driving a vehicle. Behavior modeling also increases the em￾ployee’s self-efficacy (see Chapter 3) after observing others and performing the task 
successfully themselves. Self-efficacy particularly improves when observers are similar to 
the model in age, experience, sex, and related features.
Self-Regulation An important feature of social cognitive theory is that human be￾ings set goals and engage in other forms of intentional, purposive action.62 They establish 
their own short- and long-term objectives, choose their own standards of achievement, 
work out a plan of action, consider backup alternatives, and have the forethought to antici￾pate the consequences of their goal-directed behavior. Furthermore, people self-regulate by 
engaging in self-reinforcement; they reward and punish themselves for exceeding or falling 
short of their self-set goals. For example, you might have a goal of completing the rest of 
this chapter, after which you reward yourself by having a snack. Raiding the refrigerator is 
a form of self-induced positive reinforcement for completing this reading assignment.
OB Mod and social cognitive theory explain how peo￾ple learn probabilities of successful performance (E-to-P 
expectancies) as well as probabilities of various outcomes 
from that performance (P-to-O expectancies). As such, 
these theories explain motivation through their relation￾ship with expectancy theory of motivation, described ear￾lier. Elements of these theories also help us understand 
other motivation processes. For instance, self-regulation is 
the cornerstone of motivation through goal setting and 
feedback, which we discuss next.
social cognitive theory
a theory that explains how 
learning and motivation occur 
by observing and modeling 
others as well as by anticipating 
the consequences of our 
behavior
self-reinforcement
reinforcement that occurs when 
an employee has control over a 
reinforcer but doesn’t “take” it 
until completing a self-set goal180 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
Goal Setting and Feedback
Key performance indicators, task objectives, stretch targets, job duties. No matter what 
they are called, goals figure prominently in everyone’s job. A goal is a cognitive represen￾tation of a desired end state that a person is committed to attain.63 Goals motivate people 
by clarifying role perceptions and, consequently, the direction of effort. Goals also am￾plify the intensity and persistence of effort because they make it easier to judge how much 
energy is required to reach them. However, the motivational potential of goals depends on 
how well they are stated.64 Rather than just trying to “do your best,” effective goals have 
several characteristics identified in the popular acronym SMARTER.65 Specifically, goals 
are more effective when they are specific, measurable, achievable, relevant, time-framed, 
exciting, and reviewed.
• Specific. Goals lead to better performance when they are specific. Specific 
goals state what needs to be accomplished, how it should be accomplished, and 
where, when, and with whom it should be accomplished. Specific goals clarify 
performance expectations, so employees can direct their effort more efficiently 
and reliably.
• Measurable. Goals need to be measurable because motivation occurs when people 
have some indication of their progress and achievement of those goals. This mea￾surement ideally includes how much (quantity), how well (quality), and at what 
cost the goal was achieved. However, some types of employee performance are dif￾ficult to measure, and they risk being neglected in companies preoccupied with 
quantifiable outcomes.66
• Achievable. One of the trickiest aspects of goal setting is developing goals that are 
sufficiently but not overly challenging.67 Easy goals motivate employees to perform 
well below their potential. Yet, goals that are too challenging may also lead to sub￾standard effort if employees believe there is a low probability of accomplishing 
them (i.e., low E-to-P expectancy). Studies also report that very difficult goals in￾crease the probability that employees will engage in unethical behavior to achieve 
them.68
• Relevant. Goals need to be relevant to the job and within the employee’s control. 
For example, a goal to reduce waste materials won’t motivate employees who have 
negligible control over waste in the production process.
• Time-framed. Goals need a due date. They should specify when the objective should 
be completed or when it will be assessed for comparison against a standard.
• Exciting. Goals tend to be more effective when employees are committed to them, 
not just compliant. Challenging goals tend to be more exciting for most (but not 
all) employees because growth need fulfillment is stronger when difficult goals 
are achieved. Goal commitment also increases when employees are involved in 
goal setting.69
• Reviewed. The motivational value of goals depends on employees receiving feed￾back about reaching those goals.70 Effective feedback requires measurement, which 
we discussed earlier in this list, but it also includes reflecting on or discussing with 
others your goal progress and accomplishment. Reviewing goal progress and ac￾complishment helps employees to redirect their effort. It is also a potential source 
of recognition that fulfills growth needs.
goal
a cognitive representation of a 
desired end state that a 
person is committed to attain
LO 5-5
®
SELF-ASSESSMENT 5.3: What Is Your Goal Orientation?Chapter Five Foundations of Employee Motivation 181
CHARACTERISTICS OF EFFECTIVE FEEDBACK
The opening case study for this chapter described why Henkel, Accenture, Goldman 
Sachs, and many other organizations have replaced or supplemented their traditional per￾formance review process with real-time, coaching-oriented feedback. This dramatic shift 
has occurred mainly because traditional performance reviews do not satisfy several fea￾tures of effective feedback. Feedback—information that lets us know whether we have 
achieved the goal or are properly directing our effort toward it—is a critical partner in goal 
setting. Feedback contributes to motivation and performance by clarifying role percep￾tions, improving employee skills and knowledge, and strengthening self-efficacy.71
Effective feedback has many of the same characteristics as effective goal setting (see 
Exhibit 5.7).72 It should be specific; the information should refer to identifiable behaviors 
and, when possible, measurable outcomes (e.g., sales increased by 5 percent last month). 
Feedback should also be relevant, meaning that it should relate to behaviors and outcomes 
within the individual’s or team’s control. Effective feedback is also timely; that is, the in￾formation is available soon after the behavior or results occur—not six months later in a 
performance review meeting. Timely feedback gives employees a clearer association be￾tween their actions and the consequences.
EXHIBIT 5.7 Characteristics of Effective Feedback
FEEDBACK 
CHARACTERISTIC DESCRIPTION EXAMPLE
Specific Information refers to identifiable 
behaviors and (when possible) 
measurable outcomes
“Inventory shrinkage (theft, damage) 
fell to 1% of inventory over the previous 
three months.”
Relevant Information should relate to 
behaviors and outcomes within the 
individual’s or team’s control
“You have submitted the monthly 
budget reports without error and on 
time every month over the past year, 
one of the few district managers to do 
so” (where district managers have few 
situational barriers to submitting the 
reports accurately or on schedule).
Timely Information should be available 
soon after the behavior or results 
occur
“Two of our customers noted this week 
that you were unable to answer their 
questions about how the new widget 
model differs from the previous model.”
Credible Information source should: 
• have complete and accurate 
information
• recall information reliably
• be unbiased in communicating 
and applying the feedback
• describe the feedback in a 
supportive and empathetic 
manner
Supervisor has good knowledge of 
the employee’s job duties, regularly 
observes them performing the work, 
and offers constructive feedback with 
optimism and sensitivity on how the 
employee can perform specific tasks 
better.
Sufficiently frequent Information is provided: 
• more often for those learning 
new tasks 
• according to the job cycle’s 
frequency
Supervisor meets twice monthly 
with every experienced production 
employee and at least twice weekly 
with every new employee to discuss 
their individual safety behavior and 
output (where task cycle times are 
usually less than one hour).182 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
A fourth characteristic of effective feedback is that it is credible. A feedback source is cred￾ible when employees believe that person has complete and accurate information about the 
employee’s performance, is reliable at recalling that information, is unbiased in communicat￾ing and applying the feedback to decisions (such as performance ratings), and describes the 
feedback in a supportive and empathetic manner. These conditions explain why perfor￾mance feedback is typically less credible during traditional performance appraisals than dur￾ing real-time coaching-style feedback.73 Supervisors have difficulty completely and reliably 
recalling performance information over such a long time. In addition, traditional perfor￾mance reviews force supervisors into two roles—coach and judge. The latter can undermine 
the supervisor’s perceived neutrality as well as supportiveness during the feedback session.
One other important characteristic of effective feedback is that it should be sufficiently 
frequent. How frequent is “sufficiently”? The answer depends on at least two things. One 
consideration is the employee’s knowledge and experience with the task. Employees working 
on new tasks should receive more frequent feedback because they require more behavior 
guidance and reinforcement. Experienced employees can receive less frequent feedback when 
performing familiar tasks.74 The second factor is how long it takes to complete the task (i.e., 
its cycle time). Less frequent feedback usually occurs in jobs with a long cycle time (e.g., ex￾ecutives and scientists) because indicators of goal progress and accomplishment in these jobs 
are less frequent than in jobs with a short cycle time (e.g., grocery store cashiers).
Feedback through Strengths-Based Coaching Strengths-based coaching
(also known as appreciative coaching) is a positive approach to coaching and feedback that 
focuses on building and leveraging the employee’s strengths rather than trying to correct 
their weaknesses.75 In strengths-based coaching, employees describe areas of work where 
they excel or demonstrate potential. The coach guides this discussion by asking exploratory 
questions that help employees discover ways to build on these strengths. Situational barri￾ers, as well as strategies to overcome those barriers, are identified to further support the 
employee’s potential.
Strengths-based coaching might not be best in all situations, but it is associated with 
higher employee engagement, satisfaction, self-efficacy, and relations with management.76
One reason is that people are more receptive to information about their strengths than they 
are to information about their flaws. In fact, for more than three decades scholars have 
warned that traditional problem-focused feedback leads to employee defensiveness and po￾tentially lower self-efficacy, which can result in reduced (rather than increased) employee 
performance.77 Strengths-based coaching also makes sense because personality becomes 
quite stable in the early stages of employees’ careers, which limits their flexibility regarding 
interests, preferences, and abilities.78 Consequently, people become less motivated and less 
able to improve themselves in areas where they previously lacked interest or skill.
SOURCES OF FEEDBACK
Feedback can originate from nonsocial or social sources. Nonsocial sources provide feed￾back without someone communicating that information. Corporate intranets allow many 
executives to receive feedback instantaneously on their computer or other digital device, 
usually in the form of graphic output on an executive dashboard.
Goldman Sachs and many other firms set up multisource (360-degree) feedback that, as 
the name implies, is information about an employee’s performance collected from a full 
circle of people, including subordinates, peers, supervisors, and customers. Multisource 
feedback tends to provide more complete and accurate information than feedback from a 
supervisor alone. It is particularly useful when the supervisor is unable to observe the 
employee’s behavior or performance in every situation. Lower-level employees also feel a 
greater sense of fairness when they are able to provide upward feedback about their boss’s 
performance.79 However, multisource feedback can be expensive and time-consuming. It 
may also be biased by coworkers avoiding interpersonal conflict. Multisource feedback 
strengths-based coaching
an approach to coaching and 
feedback that focuses on 
building and leveraging the 
employee’s strengths rather 
than trying to correct their 
weaknessesChapter Five Foundations of Employee Motivation 183
also tends to be ambiguous because several observers have different perspectives of the 
employee’s behavior.
The preferred feedback source depends on the purpose of the information. Feedback 
from nonsocial sources, such as digital images or feedback directly from the job, is better 
when employees need to learn about goal progress and accomplishment. This is because 
information from nonsocial sources is considered more accurate than information from 
social sources. Negative feedback from nonsocial sources is also less damaging to self￾esteem. In contrast, social sources tend to delay or exclude negative information as well as 
distort the bad news in a positive way.80 Employees should receive some positive feedback 
from social sources. It feels better to have coworkers say that you are performing the job 
well than to discover this from data on an impersonal computer screen.
EVALUATING GOAL SETTING AND FEEDBACK
Goal setting (in partnership with feedback) is generally a highly effective practice for em￾ployee motivation and performance.81 Putting goal setting into practice can be challenging, 
however.82 It tends to focus employees on a narrow subset of measurable performance indi￾cators while ignoring aspects of job performance that are difficult to measure. This problem 
is captured in the saying: “What gets measured, gets done.” Another concern is that very 
difficult goals may motivate some people to engage in unethical behavior to achieve those 
goals. Difficult goals are also stressful, which can undermine overall job performance.
Yet another problem is that goal setting tends to interfere with the learning process in 
new, complex jobs. Therefore, setting performance goals may be effective for employees 
who are already experienced in a job but should be avoided for those who are in the middle 
of an intensive learning process. A final issue is that when goal achievement is tied to 
financial rewards, many employees are motivated to set easy goals (while making the boss 
think they are difficult) so that they have a higher probability of receiving the bonus or 
pay increase. As a former Ford Motor Company CEO once quipped: “At Ford, we hire 
very smart people. They quickly learn how to make relatively easy goals look difficult!”83
Strengths-Based Coaching at Strykerf
Stryker is rated as one of the world’s best workplaces, 
thanks in part to its deeply embedded practice of 
strengths-based coaching. The Michigan-headquartered 
medical devices company encourages employees to dis￾cover their strengths through a commercial assessment, 
then to let others know about their top five strengths. 
“Stryker has an amazing culture, built by amazing peo￾ple,” says a Stryker inventory manager. “I get to use my 
unique combination of strengths to solve problems and 
deliver results for our customers. I am my authentic self at 
work and am grateful to be able to work at a place that 
celebrates my achievements.”
“We work with people to understand how to use their 
strengths in a positive way, and encourage them to own 
their career using those strengths,” explains a Stryker hu￾man resources director. Ryan McCarthy, Stryker Medical 
APAC managing director, explains further: “What strengths 
has allowed me to do as a leader is to truly treat people 
as individuals and find the best in each person.” McCarthy 
says his role as a leader is “… to ensure the individual has 
the opportunity to use those strengths every day in an 
engaging environment.”
global connections 5.2
Thomas Busk/Cultura/Getty Images184 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
Organizational Justice
Treating employees fairly is both ethical and good for employee motivation, loyalty, and 
well-being. Yet feelings of injustice are regular occurrences in the workplace. Two recent 
surveys report that almost half (43 percent and 46 percent) of American workers believe 
they are underpaid, about half think their pay is about right, and only 5 percent say they 
are overpaid. Two recent surveys of pay fairness among Canadian and Australian office 
workers reported very similar results.84 These findings refer to fair pay, but there are many 
other types of perceived workplace injustices, such as who gets promoted, how employees 
are treated by management, and whether resource allocation decisions are transparent 
and unbiased.
How can we improve workplace justice? Our answer begins by explaining that there are 
several types of organizational justice, each of which has some degree of unique influence 
on whether people believe the situation is fair or unfair.85 We will discuss the three most 
common varieties (there are others): distributive, procedural, and interactional justice. 
All three types of justice refer to the perception that appropriate formal or informal rules 
have been applied to the situation. People have a sense of fairness when they believe those 
rules are being followed.86
• Distributive justice refers to the perception that appropriate decision criteria 
(rules) have been applied to calculate how various benefits and burdens are dis￾tributed. These criteria—such as effort, need, or membership—determine how 
much each person should receive, such as higher pay, more tedious tasks, better 
workspace, and so forth.
• Procedural justice is the perception that appropriate procedural rules have been 
applied throughout the decision process. Procedural justice tends to be higher, for 
example, when the decision maker demonstrates neutrality (no favoritism), allows 
everyone involved to have their say, and allows an appeal of the decision.
• Interactional justice is the perception that appropriate rules have been applied in 
the way employees are treated throughout the decision process. For example, we 
believe there is interactional justice when the decision maker is polite toward the 
potential beneficiaries and is honest and candid in providing information about 
the decision.
DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE AND EQUITY THEORY
At its most basic level, employment in any organization is an exchange relationship; we 
provide our time, skills, and behavior in exchange for pay, fulfilling work, skill development 
opportunities, and so forth. What is considered “fair” in this exchange relationship de￾pends on what criteria we use to determine distributive justice in various situations.87 An 
equality principle operates when we believe that everyone in the group should receive the 
same outcomes, such as when everyone gets subsidized meals in the company cafeteria. 
The need principle is applied when we believe that those with the greatest need should re￾ceive more outcomes than others with less need. This occurs, for instance, when employees 
get paid time off to recover from illness. The equity principle infers that people should be 
paid in proportion to their 
contribution. The equity 
principle relates to the most 
common set of distributive 
justice rules in organiza￾tional settings, so let’s look 
at equity-based distributive 
justice in more detail.
LO 5-6
distributive justice
an ethical principle stating that 
appropriate decision criteria 
should be applied to calculate 
how various benefits and 
burdens are distributed
procedural justice
the perception that 
appropriate procedural rules 
were applied throughout the 
decision process
interactional justice
the perception that 
appropriate rules were applied 
in the way the people involved 
were treated throughout the 
decision processChapter Five Foundations of Employee Motivation 185
Feelings of equity are explained by equity theory, which says that employees determine 
whether a decision is equitable by comparing their own outcome/input ratio to the out￾come/input ratio of another person or group.88 As Exhibit 5.8 illustrates, the outcome/
input ratio is the value of the outcomes you receive divided by the value of the inputs you 
provide in the exchange relationship. Inputs include things such as skill, effort, reputation, 
performance, experience, and hours worked. Outcomes are what employees receive from 
the organization such as pay, promotions, recognition, interesting jobs, and opportunities 
to improve one’s skills and knowledge.
A central feature of equity theory is that individuals determine fairness in terms of a 
comparison other.
89 The comparison other might be another person or group of people in 
other jobs (e.g., comparing your pay with the CEO’s pay) or another organization. Some 
research suggests that employees frequently collect information on several referents to 
form a “generalized” comparison other.90 For the most part, however, the comparison 
other varies from one person and situation to the next and is not easily identifiable.
The comparison of our own outcome/input ratio with the ratio of someone else results 
in perceptions of equity, underreward inequity, or overreward inequity. In the equity con￾dition, people believe that their outcome/input ratio is similar to the ratio of the compari￾son other. In the underreward inequity situation, people believe their outcome/input ratio 
is lower than the comparison other’s ratio. In the overreward inequity condition, people 
believe their outcome/input ratio is higher than the comparison other’s ratio.
Inequity and Employee Motivation How do perceptions of equity or inequity 
affect employee motivation? The answer is illustrated in Exhibit 5.9. When people believe 
they are under- or overrewarded, they experience negative emotions (called inequity tension).91
As we have pointed out throughout this chapter, emotions are the engines of motivation. 
debating point
DOES EQUITY MOTIVATE MORE THAN EQUALITY?g
It seems obvious that employees with higher performance, skills, or 
other contributions to the organization should receive more generous 
pay and other rewards. Increasing the pay differential (wage disper￾sion) between high and low contributors should boost employee moti￾vation to achieve a higher standard of performance. It should also 
increase company performance by motivating the top performers to 
stay and the bottom performers to leave. A large wage dispersion is 
also consistent with justice and fairness. Differentiating rewards based 
on employee performance, skills, and other forms of contribution is 
consistent with the principle of meritocracy. It is also consistent with the 
ethical principle of justice, which states that those who contribute more 
should receive more in return (Chapter 2). Furthermore, performance￾based pay is one of the pillars of human capital (see Chapter 1).
But workplaces that have large wage dispersions might not be re￾ceiving the performance dividends they expect. Several (but not all) 
studies have found that sports teams with relatively small pay differ￾ences among team members perform better than sport teams with 
relatively high pay differences. Teams that pay huge salaries or bo￾nuses to stars do not score more points or win more games. Also, 
turnover among players and managers tends to increase with the size 
of the wage dispersion. One study extended these observations to all 
industries. Companies that have a higher dispersion of wage in￾creases (larger increases to higher-paid staff) perform worse than 
companies with an equal dispersion of wage increases. Another study 
reported that information technology companies with larger salary dif￾ferences among top management teams had worse shareholder re￾turns and market-to-book value compared to IT companies with less 
pay inequality.
Why would larger pay ranges undermine rather than enhance em￾ployee and organizational performance? One reason is that pay differ￾ences produce status differences, which can undermine cooperation 
among employees. A second reason is that large pay differences might 
increase (rather than decrease) feelings of injustice. Most people think 
they are above average, so large pay differences clearly place many 
employees below their self-evaluations. Also, employees tend to un￾derestimate the contribution of higher-paid coworkers and assume 
those higher-paid coworkers also receive other rewards (such as pref￾erential treatment). In short, lower-paid employees often believe 
higher-paid employees are overpaid, which reduces the lower-paid 
workers’ motivation and performance.
equity theory
a theory explaining how 
people develop perceptions of 
fairness in the distribution and 
exchange of resources186 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
In the case of inequity, people are motivated to reduce the emotional tension. They tend 
to have a strong emotional response when the situation seems to be unfair, and this emo￾tion nags at them until they take steps to correct the perceived inequity.
There are several ways to try to reduce the inequity tension.92 Let’s consider each of 
these in the context of underreward inequity. One action is to reduce our inputs so the 
outcome/input ratio is similar to the higher-paid coworker. Some employees do this by 
working more slowly, offering fewer suggestions, and engaging in less organizational citi￾zenship behavior. A second action is to increase our outcomes. Some people who think 
they are underpaid ask for a pay raise. Others make unauthorized use of company re￾sources. A third behavioral response is to increase the comparison other’s inputs. We 
might subtly ask the better-paid coworker to do a larger share of the work, for instance. A 
fourth action is to reduce the comparison other’s outcomes. This might occur by ensuring 
that the coworker gets less desirable jobs or working conditions. Another action, although 
uncommon, is to ask the company to reduce the coworker’s pay so it is the same as yours.
A fifth action involves changing our beliefs about the situation rather than changing our 
behavior. For example, we might believe that the coworker really is providing more inputs 
(e.g., working longer hours) for that higher pay. Alternatively, we might change our perceived 
Your own outcome/input ratio
Own inputs
• Skill
• Eort
• Performance
• Reputation
• Hours
• Experience
Own outcomes
• Pay/benefits
• Recognition
• Learning
• Promotions
• Workspace
• Interesting job
Comparison other’s outcome/input ratio
Compare own ratio
with other’s ratio
Perceptions of equity
or inequity
Other’s inputs
• Skill
• Eort
• Performance
• Reputation
• Hours
• Experience
Other’s outcomes
• Pay/benefits
• Recognition
• Learning
• Promotions
• Workspace
• Interesting job
EXHIBIT 5.8 Equity Theory Model
EXHIBIT 5.9 Motivational Effects of Inequity Perceptions
Perceived
inequity
Inequity tension
(negative emotions)
Motivation to
reduce tension
Actions that reduce
inequity tension
• Change our inputs
• Change our outcomes
• Change other’s inputs
• Change other’s outcomes
• Change our perceptions
• Change comparison other
• Leave the fieldChapter Five Foundations of Employee Motivation 187
valence of some outcomes. Rather than viewing a cowork￾er’s work-related travel as a desirable perk, we instead per￾ceive most of that travel as an undesirable nuisance. A 
sixth action to reduce the inequity tension is to change the 
comparison other. Instead of comparing ourselves with the 
higher-paid coworker, we might increasingly compare our￾selves with a friend or neighbor who works in a similar job. 
Finally, if the inequity tension is strong and can’t be re￾duced through other actions, we might leave the field. This 
occurs by moving to another department, joining another 
company, or keeping away from the work site where the 
overpaid coworker is located.
People who feel overreward inequity would reverse 
these actions. Some overrewarded employees reduce 
their feelings of inequity by working harder; others en￾courage the underrewarded coworker to work at a more 
leisurely pace. A common reaction, however, is that the 
overrewarded employee changes their perceptions to jus￾tify the more favorable outcomes, such as believing the 
assigned work is more difficult or their skills are more 
valuable than the lower-paid coworker’s skills. As Pierre 
Burton, the late journalist and popular history author, 
once said, “I was underpaid for the first half of my life. 
I don’t mind being overpaid for the second half.”93
Evaluating Equity Theory Equity theory is quite successful at understanding (usu￾ally in hindsight) why people feel unfairly rewarded.94 However, it is more difficult to use as 
a practical tool for preventing inequity in the future. The main problem is that people vary 
in their choice of comparison other and which inputs or outcomes are most valuable. The 
best solution here is for leaders to know their employees well enough to minimize the risk 
of inequity feelings. Open communication is also crucial, enabling employees to let deci￾sion makers know when they believe decisions are unfair. A second problem is that equity 
theory accounts for only some of our feelings of fairness in the workplace. Procedural and 
interactional justice can be just as important as distributive justice.
Melissa Leverrier earns a fixed hourly rate along with overtime pay as a Canada 
Post urban mail carrier in Chilliwack, British Columbia. Sandee Saamanen does 
similar work as a Canada Post rural suburban mail carrier (RSMC) in nearby 
Agassiz. But Saamanen does not receive overtime pay and her paycheck is 
determined by how many parcels she delivers, distance traveled, and other 
performance criteria. An arbitrator concluded that this dual compensation 
system creates pay inequity. RSMCs receive significantly lower earnings than 
their urban counterparts for performing essentially the same work. “She 
[Sandee Saamanen] has a different uniform than I, but honestly we’re all doing 
the same thing,” Leverrier complains. Canada Post is now adjusting the RSMC 
pay rates. “It’s just another small step towards equality,” says Leverrier.h
Pascal Huot/Shutterstock
®
SELF-ASSESSMENT 5.4: How Sensitive Are You to Inequities?
PROCEDURAL AND INTERACTIONAL JUSTICE
Procedural justice is the perception that appropriate rules are applied in the procedures 
used throughout the course of deciding how to distribute workplace benefits and burdens. 
Interactional justice is the perception that appropriate rules are applied in the way the 
people involved are treated throughout that decision process.95 Exhibit 5.10 lists the main 
rules that people consider when determining procedural and interactional justice.
There are several ways to maintain procedural justice.96 Decision makers must be per￾ceived as unbiased, without self-interest in the results, and not blinded by narrow doc￾trines. Their allocation decisions need to be based on as much relevant and accurate 
information as possible. Those decisions also need to take into account the positions and 
circumstances of the diverse groups affected by the outcomes. Another factor to consider 
in procedural justice is whether the decision criteria and decision procedures are compat￾ible with ethical principles. For example, gathering accurate information might not be fair 188 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
if it involves closely monitoring employees or violating their individual privacy. The deci￾sion criteria used to allocate benefits as well as the procedural justice rules need to be 
applied consistently to everyone (equality) and over time (stability).
Another important condition for procedural justice is that employees are given “voice” 
in the process—they have the opportunity to present their evidence and opinions to decision 
makers. Voice improves the quality of information applied to the decision. It also provides 
a value-expressive function; employees tend to feel better after having an opportunity to 
speak their mind. Lastly, employees should have a right to appeal the decision (so it is 
reviewed and possibly overturned) if they believe there were errors in how resources were 
distributed or flaws in the procedures leading to that decision.
Interactional justice also depends on a set of rules that people believe are being applied 
to the situation.97 Two of these rules—treating people with politeness and with respect—support 
the feeling of fairness in the interpersonal relationship. Abusive supervision is a clear 
example of violation of these interactional justice rules because employees are treated 
rudely and their self-worth is attacked.98 To generate a sense of fairness regarding the infor￾mation provided, employees should receive thorough and well-justified explanations about 
the decision, as well as honest, candid, and timely information about the decision. For 
instance, people are more likely to feel that a decision is unfair if decision makers refuse 
to explain how the decision was made, or if they seem evasive in their explanation.
Consequences of Procedural and Interactional Injustice Employees who 
believe procedural or interactional justice rules have been violated experience negative 
emotions, such as anger, frustration, insult, resentment, and shame.99 How employees direct 
the energy from these emotions depends on their personal characteristics and experiences. 
Generally, research has found that procedural or interactional injustice often results in less 
work effort (and performance), fewer organizational citizenship behaviors, less cooperation 
with coworkers, increased involvement in union activities, and increased turnover.
Victims of procedural and interactional injustice sometimes retaliate to restore their 
self-esteem, reinstate their status and power in the relationship, and educate the perpetra￾tor of the injustice.100 A related outcome is increased aggression toward the decision 
maker (e.g., supervisor) and sometimes toward coworkers who are seemingly treated 
more favorably. Procedural or interactional justice can also lead to more extreme dysfunc￾tional behaviors, such as theft, sabotage, and violence.
Sources: Based on information in: G.S. Leventhal, “What Should Be Done with Equity Theory? New Approaches to the Study of Fairness in Social Rela￾tionships,” in Social Exchange, ed. K.J. Gergen, M.S. Greenberg, and R.H. Willis (Boston, MA: Springer US, 1980), 27–55; J.A. Colquitt and J.B. Rodell, 
“Measuring Justice and Fairness,” in The Oxford Handbook of Justice in the Workplace, ed. R.S. Cropanzano and M.L. Ambrose (New York: Oxford Univer￾sity Press, 2015), 187–202.
EXHIBIT 5.10 Procedural and Interactional Justice Rules
PROCEDURAL JUSTICE RULES: INTERACTIONAL JUSTICE RULES:
• Decision makers are not biased by self-interest or restrictive 
doctrines.
• Allocation decisions are based on a full complement of 
accurate information.
• Decision makers consider the interests of all groups affected 
by the outcomes.
• Decisions and procedures are compatible with ethical principles. 
• Decision criteria and procedures are applied consistently across 
persons and over time. 
• Employees have the opportunity to present their evidence 
and opinions to decision makers (voice). 
• Questionable decisions and procedures can be appealed 
and overturned.
• Employees are treated in a polite manner. 
• Employees are treated with respect. 
• Employees receive thorough and well-justified explanations 
about the decision. 
• Employees receive honest, candid, and timely information 
about the decision.189
LO 5-1 Define motivation, and explain how drives and emo￾tions influence employee motivation.
Motivation is defined as the forces within a person that affect 
the direction, intensity, and persistence of effort for voluntary 
behavior. Drives (also called primary needs) are hardwired 
characteristics of the brain that attempt to keep us in balance 
by correcting deficiencies. Drives do this by generating emo￾tions, which put us in a state of readiness to act. Needs are the 
motivational forces of emotions channeled toward specific 
goals and associated behaviors. Individual differences—including 
self-concept, social norms, and past experience—influence 
which goals and behaviors are chosen to direct the motivated 
effort. Individual differences also affect the intensity of experi￾enced emotions.
LO 5-2 Explain through four-drive theory the process of hu￾man motivation, and summarize Maslow’s needs 
hierarchy, intrinsic and extrinsic motivation, and 
learned needs theory.
Four-drive theory states that emotions are the source of human 
motivation and that these emotions are generated through four 
drives: to acquire, bond, comprehend, and defend. These 
drives produce emotions, which become conscious needs. The 
employee’s personal characteristics and experiences (mental 
skill set) direct emotional energy to goals perceived to have a 
high probability of achieving the goal of fulfilling those felt 
needs. Four-drive theory’s two recommendations are that orga￾nizations should help employees fulfill all four drives and that 
fulfillment of the four drives must be kept in balance.
Maslow’s needs hierarchy groups needs into a hierarchy of 
five levels and states that the lowest needs are initially most im￾portant but higher needs become more important as the lower 
ones are satisfied. Although popular, needs hierarchy theory 
lacks research support, mainly because it wrongly assumes that 
everyone has the same hierarchy. The emerging evidence 
suggests that needs hierarchies vary from one person to the 
next, according to their personal values. However, Maslow 
transformed how we think about human motivation by em￾phasizing that theory needs to be holistic, humanistic, and 
positive-oriented.
Intrinsic motivation refers to motivation controlled by the 
individual and experienced from the activity itself, whereas ex￾trinsic motivation occurs when people are motivated to receive 
something that is beyond their personal control for instrumen￾tal reasons. Intrinsic motivation is anchored in the innate 
drives for competence and autonomy. Some research suggests 
that extrinsic motivators may reduce existing intrinsic motiva￾tion to some extent and under some conditions, but the effect 
is often minimal. McClelland’s learned needs theory argues 
that needs can be strengthened through learning. The three 
needs studied in this respect have been need for achievement, 
need for power, and need for affiliation.
LO 5-3 Outline the expectancy theory model, and prescribe 
how to improve employee motivation through the ele￾ments of this model.
Expectancy theory states that work effort is determined by the 
perception that effort will result in a particular level of perfor￾mance (E-to-P expectancy), the perception that a specific be￾havior or performance level will lead to specific outcomes 
(P-to-O expectancy), and the valences that the person feels for 
those outcomes. The E-to-P expectancy increases by improving 
the employee’s ability and confidence to perform the job. The 
P-to-O expectancy increases by measuring performance accu￾rately, distributing higher rewards to better performers, and 
showing employees that rewards are performance-based. Out￾come valences increase by finding out what employees want 
and using these resources as rewards.
LO 5-4 Describe organizational behavior modification (OB 
Mod) and social cognitive theory, and explain their 
relevance to employee motivation.
Organizational behavior modification takes the behaviorist 
view that the environment teaches people to alter their behav￾ior so that they maximize positive consequences and minimize 
adverse consequences. Antecedents are environmental stimuli 
that provoke (not necessarily cause) behavior. Consequences 
are events following behavior that influence its future occur￾rence. Consequences include positive reinforcement, punish￾ment, negative reinforcement, and extinction. The schedules of 
reinforcement also influence behavior.
Social cognitive theory states that much learning and moti￾vation occurs by observing and modeling others, as well as by 
anticipating the consequences of our behavior. It suggests that 
people typically infer (rather than only directly experience) 
cause-and-effect relationships, anticipate the consequences of 
their actions, develop self-efficacy in performing behavior, ex￾ercise personal control over their behavior, and reflect on their 
direct experiences. The theory emphasizes self-regulation of 
individual behavior, including self-reinforcement, which is the 
tendency of people to reward and punish themselves as a con￾sequence of their actions.
LO 5-5 Discuss the characteristics of effective goal setting 
and feedback.
Goal setting is the process of motivating employees and clari￾fying their role perceptions by establishing performance objec￾tives. Goals are more effective when they are SMARTER 
(specific, measurable, achievable, relevant, time-framed, excit￾ing, and reviewed). Effective feedback is specific, relevant, 
timely, credible, and sufficiently frequent. Strengths-based 
coaching maximizes employees’ potential by focusing on their 
strengths rather than weaknesses. Strengths-based coaching 
tends to be effective because people are more receptive to in￾formation about their strengths rather than flaws, and because 
a person’s motivation and ability becomes more stable over 
time. Employees usually prefer nonsocial feedback sources to 
learn about their progress toward goal accomplishment.
LO 5-6 Explain how equity theory, procedural justice, and 
interactional justice influence employee motivation.
Organizational justice exists in several forms, the main three of 
which are distributive, procedural, and interactional. Distribu￾tive justice refers to the perception that appropriate decision cri￾teria (rules) have been applied to calculate how various benefits 
and burdens are distributed. These rules relate to equality, need, 
or equity. Equity theory has four elements: outcome/input ratio, 
comparison other, equity evaluation, and consequences of ineq￾uity. The theory also explains what people are motivated to do 
when they feel inequitably treated.
chapter summary190
Procedural justice is the perception that appropriate proce￾dural rules have been applied throughout the decision pro￾cess. These rules include that the decision maker is unbiased, 
considers the full complement of accurate information, con￾siders the interests of all groups affected, applies ethical prin￾ciples, applies decision criteria and procedural rules 
consistently, allows employees to present their views, and al￾lows appeal of decisions. Interactional justice is the percep￾tion that appropriate rules have been applied in the way 
employees are treated throughout the decision process. These 
rules include that employees are treated with respect and po￾liteness, that employees receive explanations that are thor￾ough and logical, and receive honest and timely information 
about the decision. Lack of procedural and interactional jus￾tice results in negative emotions (ranging from anger to 
shame) as well as a variety of behaviors that harm the organi￾zation (such as lower performance and higher incidence of 
turnover, aggression, and theft).
distributive justice, p. 184
drives, p. 166
equity theory, p. 185
expectancy theory, p. 174
extrinsic motivation, p. 172
four-drive theory, p. 168
goal, p. 180
interactional justice, p. 184
intrinsic motivation, p. 172
Maslow’s needs hierarchy 
theory, p. 170
motivation, p. 166
need for achievement (nAch), p. 173
need for affiliation (nAff), p. 173
need for power (nPow), p. 173
needs, p. 167
organizational behavior modification 
(OB Mod), p. 177
procedural justice, p. 184
self-reinforcement, p. 179
social cognitive theory, p. 179
strengths-based coaching, p. 182
key terms
1. Four-drive theory recommends that companies must 
keep fulfillment of the four drives in balance. What is 
this “balance” and why is it important? Give an example 
(real or hypothetical) of how a company maintains 
balanced drive fulfillment. Also describe a company 
that does not provide this balance, including the conse￾quences of this imbalance on employees’ attitudes 
and behavior.
2. Learned needs theory states that needs can be strength￾ened or weakened. How might a company strengthen the 
achievement needs of its management team?
3. Everyone who works as an electronic game developer has 
extrinsic sources of motivation, and most also experience 
some degree of intrinsic motivation. Considering the 
dynamics of extrinsic and intrinsic motivation, what should 
companies in this industry do to ensure that their game 
developers are highly motivated at work?
4. Use all three components of expectancy theory to ex￾plain why some employees are motivated to show up for 
work during a snowstorm whereas others don’t make any 
effort to leave their homes.
5. The opening case study for this chapter describes 
how many companies have replaced or supplemented 
traditional annual performance appraisals with frequent, 
constructive, and future-focused development reviews. 
Apply expectancy theory to explain why the more 
frequent feedback and more strengths-based future 
focus of the new performance review process might 
motivate employees more than the traditional judgment￾oriented, problem-focused, annual performance 
appraisal process.
6. Describe a situation in which you used organizational 
behavior modification to increase or decrease someone’s 
motivation regarding a specific behavior. What specifi￾cally did you do? What was the result?
7. Using your knowledge of the characteristics of effective 
goals, establish two meaningful goals related to your 
performance in this class.
8. Most people think they are “worth more” than they are 
paid. Furthermore, most employees seem to feel that 
they exhibit better leadership skills and interpersonal 
skills than others. Please comment on this human 
tendency.
9. You are an external consultant hired by a large organi￾zation to investigate possible causes of employee per￾ceptions of procedural and interactional injustice 
regarding various management decisions (promotions, 
vacation rostering, assigned tasks, office location, and 
so forth). Many employees have complained that man￾agement is unfair in how it makes these decisions. Even 
those who say they get a fair deal in these decisions 
agree that the process is suspicious and therefore 
subject to doubt by those who receive less than they 
expected. In a few instances, employees have also com￾plained about the information (or lack of information) 
they receive about how the decision was justified, as 
well as how they have been treated when trying to 
discuss the decision with management. As an external 
consultant, identify specific activities and issues you 
would investigate to pinpoint the ways in which man￾agement can improve employee perceptions of proce￾dural and interactional justice.
critical thinking questions191
CASE STUDY: MOTIVATED TO WORK IN THE SLOW LANE
CASE STUDY: CINCINNATI SUPER SUBS
The main thing that Quinn McGee learned after working 
several summers at the city’s Parks and Recreation Depart￾ment was how to get the job done at a very leisurely pace. 
Soon after he was hired for the first summer, McGee heard 
a coworker jokingly refer to the department as “Parks and 
Relaxation.” It was an accurate title. A few days later, while 
performing his job at a pace normal to most human beings, 
McGee was scolded by a “lifer” (a permanent city worker 
with life-time employment) for going too fast. He was told 
in no uncertain terms to slow down.
Quinn McGee learned that this was useful advice. The 
department assigned goals for how long each task should 
take to complete, but there were no rewards for crew mem￾bers to finish work sooner than the goals specified. On the 
contrary, if the crew completed a task faster than expected, 
the supervisor seldom had anything else for the team to do 
that day. This visibly frustrated the supervisor because it 
didn’t look good if employees were sitting around. Finishing 
work quickly also left employees with the painful duty of 
trying to look busy for the rest of the day. 
At first, looking busy was difficult for McGee. “During 
the first summer, I couldn’t look busy even if my life de￾pended on it,” he recalls. In his performance evaluation at 
the end of the first summer season, McGee’s supervisor 
complained that he was standing around too much. So, to 
avoid warnings from lifers and poor evaluations from his 
boss, over the next few summers McGee tried his best to 
adopt a more leisurely pace of work.
Another deterrent to working efficiently was that McGee 
and other seasonal employees would be laid off each 
summer after their assigned projects were completed or the 
Cincinnati Super Subs is one of the larger Super Subs out￾lets, a chain of 300 takeout sub sandwich restaurants in Indi￾ana, Ohio, and Michigan. This outlet has a restaurant 
manager, an assistant manager, and several part-time team 
leaders. The restaurant manager rarely has time to serve cus￾tomers, and frontline work by managers is discouraged by 
the head office. The assistant manager serves customers for 
a couple of hours during the busy lunchtime but otherwise 
assists the restaurant manager with purchasing, accounts, 
hiring, and other operations. Most team leaders are college 
students and serve customers alongside other employees, 
particularly from late afternoon to night closing. Most em￾ployees are also students who work part-time; a few are in 
high school. All regular staff earn minimum pay rates.
Cincinnati Super Subs has experienced below-average 
profitability over the past 18 months, which has reduced 
the monthly bonus paid to the restaurant manager and as￾sistant manager. This bonus is calculated by percentage of 
“wastage” (unsold, damaged, or unaccounted for food and 
drinks) relative to sales; the lower the percentage of 
department’s budget for summer help was spent. The em￾ployees didn’t want to get laid off early, and the department 
managers didn’t want a budget surplus because city hall 
might cut the extra money from next year’s budget. So ev￾eryone was quite happy to see McGee and others working 
slowly and taking longer for lunch and coffee breaks until 
the budget was depleted.
Quinn McGee eventually mastered the skill of working 
slowly without appearing to be sloth-like. But now that he 
no longer works summers in the city’s Parks and Recreation 
department, he has trouble getting motivated for jobs that 
require real work effort. “I became a role model on how to 
look like a reasonably productive employee while actually 
working at a snail’s pace,” McGee admits. “Who should I 
blame for this sorry state?”
Discussion Questions
1. Apply expectancy theory of motivation to explain why 
Quinn McGee and coworkers were motivated to work 
at a slow pace rather than at a “normal pace for most 
humans.”
2. To what extent do goal setting and equity theories of 
motivation explain the motivation problems in this case?
3. Assume you are a consultant with this information. What 
recommendations would you provide the city’s executives 
to improve employee motivation in the Parks and 
Recreation Department?
© 2022 Steven L. McShane. Based on information described by “Quinn 
McGee” in a newspaper article. The name Quinn McGee was created for 
this case; it is not the person’s real name.
wastage, the higher the bonus. Wastage occurs when em￾ployees drop or spill food, cut up more toppings than are 
sold, burn heated subs, prepare an order incorrectly, and 
eat or give away food without permission. When employees 
make mistakes, the expense is supposed to come out of 
their paycheck. Unauthorized eating and giving away food 
are grounds for immediate dismissal. However, team leaders 
are reluctant to report any accidental or deliberate wastage, 
even when confronted by the restaurant manager about the 
store’s high wastage over the previous week and month. 
One team leader who reported several accidental wastage 
incidents eventually quit after being snubbed by coworkers 
who attended the same college classes.
Cincinnati Super Subs gives employees a food allowance 
if they work continuously for at least four and one-half 
hours. Staff complain that the allowance is meager and that 
they are often ineligible for the food allowance because 
many shifts are only three or four hours. Employees who 
work these shorter shifts sometimes help themselves to 
food and drinks when the managers aren’t around, claiming that their hard work justifies the free meal. Some also claim 
the food is a low company expense and makes up for their 
small paycheck, relative to what many of their friends earn 
elsewhere. Several (but not most) employees give some of 
their friends generous helpings as well as occasional free 
soft drinks and chips. Employees say handing out free food 
to friends makes them more popular with their peers.
Five months ago, the Cincinnati restaurant’s wastage 
(mainly deliberate wastage) had risen to the point where 
the two managers no longer received a bonus. The restau￾rant manager reacted by giving the food allowance only to 
those who work for six or more hours in a single shift. This 
action excluded even more staff from receiving the food al￾lowance, but it did not discourage employees from eating or 
giving away food. However, almost 20 percent of the experi￾enced college staff left for other jobs over the following two 
months. Many of those who stayed discouraged friends 
from considering jobs at Super Subs. Morale declined, 
which dampened the fun atmosphere that had been experi￾enced to some extent in past times. Relations between em￾ployees and managers soured further.
With relatively low unemployment, the restaurant man￾ager found it difficult to hire replacements, particularly 
people with previous work experience of any kind. Tempo￾rary staff shortages required the two managers to spend 
more time working in food preparation and training the 
new staff. Their increased presence in the restaurant 
significantly reduced deliberate wastage, but accidental 
wastage increased somewhat as the greater number of inex￾perienced staff made more mistakes.
After three months, Cincinnati Super Subs’ manager 
and assistant manager were confident that the situation had 
improved, so they spent less time training staff and serving 
customers. Indeed, they received a moderate bonus after 
the third month in the store. However, wastage increased 
again soon after the managers withdrew from daily opera￾tions. The experienced employees started eating more food, 
and the new staff soon joined this practice. Exasperated, 
the restaurant manager took bolder steps. He completely 
removed the food allowance and threatened to fire any em￾ployee caught consuming or giving away food.
Wastage dropped somewhat over the next month but is 
now creeping upward again.
Discussion Questions
1. What symptoms in this case suggest that something has 
gone wrong?
2. Apply relevant motivation theories to explain the main 
causes of these symptoms?
3. What actions should Cincinnati Super Subs’ managers 
take to correct these problems?
© 2011 Steven L. McShane. Inspired by an earlier case written by J.E. 
Dittrich and R.A. Zawacki.
TEAM EXERCISE: MOTIVATION DILEMMA INCIDENTS
192
some degree for performance. However, some employees 
evaluated as good performers are perceived by coworkers 
as no better than average. Aware of this subjectivity and 
employee skepticism, a few supervisors try to give every￾one similar performance ratings. “Our oldest employees 
tend to get the highest pay, even though they sometimes 
have lower output,” one senior manager acknowledges. 
“Someone processing 400 orders per day might earn less 
than an older employee who completes 250 orders per 
day.” Younger employees believe they should be paid 
more, which partly explains their complaints to manage￾ment and their higher turnover. The older employees say 
the pay system works well because they have shown their 
loyalty to the company and have valuable knowledge about 
how the business works.
INCIDENT 2: MÅLBANKEN Målbanken, which operates 
in one European country, relies on its 80 local branches to 
sell credit cards, mortgages, term deposits, and many other 
financial products. To avoid the confusion and complexity 
of having sales goals for all products at the same time, 
branch employees are assigned sales goals for six products 
each quarter (e.g., sell 100 term deposits for the quarter). 
Goals for six different products are assigned the next quar￾ter, and so forth. Every branch employee has the same 
goals. Employees earn bonuses for achieving each prod￾uct’s goal (sales target). Although most employees agree 
PURPOSE This exercise is designed to help you apply 
motivation theories to understand and resolve motivation￾related issues in real situations.
INSTRUCTIONS (SMALL OR LARGE CLASS) This ex￾ercise may be completed either individually or in teams. It 
is suitable for in-class and remote learning settings. It may 
be appropriate in moderately large classes. When the indi￾viduals (or teams) have completed the exercise, the results 
will be discussed and compared with others in the class.
Read each motivation dilemma incident. Identify one 
motivation theory that best relates to that incident, and 
apply that theory to diagnose the problem(s) described. 
Next, use the same motivation theory to provide recom￾mendations on how to resolve some or all of the problems 
and thereby improve employee motivation. Finally, where 
feasible, identify a second motivation theory that might 
help to understand some aspects of the incident.
INCIDENT 1: GOFER DISTRIBUTION Gofer Distribu￾tion Inc. is a small fulfillment business that provides ware￾housing and mail packaging services of small products for 
several local businesses in a mid-sized city. Pay rates for 
the company’s 200 operations employees are determined 
mainly by seniority, so employees with the longest service 
tend to be the highest paid. The company has a perfor￾mance appraisal system that is supposed to adjust pay to that sales level during the next quarter when there is no 
goal or reward for sales of that product. Many employees 
also comment that they try to satisfy customer needs with 
services for which measurable goals do not exist and are 
not possible (e.g., providing financial advice, explaining 
how to use the bank’s phone app). Similarly, there are 
many bank branch tasks that need to be completed but are 
never included as goals (e.g., ordering supplies, communi￾cating with other branches, sorting mail and redirecting 
branch email). Consequently, employees are frustrated that 
coworkers are not assisting with those essential tasks.
© 2022 Steven L. McShane
that goals can be motivating, they also have concerns. One 
complaint is that it is almost impossible to achieve goals for 
some products in some branches because of the type of 
customers (e.g., small business loan goal in a residential 
suburb). More generally, some branches have wealthier and 
a larger number of customers per employee, making it eas￾ier to achieve any goal than in other branches. Another 
problem is that employees tend to specialize (e.g., one 
branch employee is usually best with small business loans), 
yet the bank’s goal system discourages anyone from refer￾ring a customer to the skilled coworker for that product. 
Employees are also frustrated when they fail to achieve a 
particular sales goal during one quarter, then easily exceed 
TEAM EXERCISE: PREDICTING HARRY’S WORK EFFORT
By Robert J. Oppenheimer, Concordia University
193
Harry: I certainly would not want my buddies to 
make fun of me. We’re pretty friendly, and 
this is really important to me.
Interviewer: Anything else?
Harry: No, not really. That seems to be it.
Interviewer: How satisfied do you think you would be 
with each of these?
Harry: What do you mean? 
Interviewer: Well, assume that something that you 
would really like has a value of +1.0 and 
something you would really not like, that is, 
you would want to avoid, has a value of 
−1.0, and something you are indifferent 
about has a value of 0.
Harry: Okay. Getting a raise would have a value of 
0.5; a promotion is more important, so I’d 
say 0.7; and having my buddies make fun of 
me, 0.9.
Interviewer: But, I thought you didn’t want your buddies 
to make fun of you.
Harry: I don’t.
Interviewer: But you gave it a value of 0.9.
Harry: Oh, I guess it should be −0.9.
Interviewer: OK, I just want to be sure I understand 
what you’re saying. Harry, what do you 
think the chances are of these things 
happening?
Harry: That depends.
Interviewer: On what?
Harry: On whether my performance is high or just 
acceptable.
Interviewer: What if it is high?
Harry: I figure I stand about a 50–50 chance of 
getting a raise and/or a promotion, but I 
also think that there is a 90 percent chance 
that my buddies will make fun of me.
PURPOSE This exercise is designed to help you under￾stand expectancy theory and how its elements affect a per￾son’s level of effort toward job performance.
INSTRUCTIONS This exercise may be completed either 
individually or in small teams of four or five people. 
When the individuals (or teams) have completed the ex￾ercise, the results will be discussed and compared with 
others in the class.
Read the following interview case. Then, calculate whether 
Harry will engage in high or “just acceptable” performance 
effort under the conditions described. Valence scores range 
from −1.0 to +1.0. All expectancies are probabilities ranging 
from 0 (no chance) to 1.0 (definitely will occur). The effort 
level scores are calculated by multiplying each valence by the 
appropriate P-to-O expectancy, summing these results, then 
multiplying the sum by the E-to-P expectancy.
INTERVIEW WITH HARRY
Interviewer: Hi, Harry. I have been asked to talk to you 
about your job. Do you mind if I ask you a 
few questions?
Harry: No, not at all.
Interviewer: Thanks, Harry. What are the things that 
you would anticipate getting satisfaction 
from as a result of your job?
Harry: What do you mean?
Interviewer: Well, what is important to you with regard 
to your job here?
Harry: I guess most important is job security. As a 
matter of fact, I can’t think of anything that 
is more important to me. I think getting a 
raise would be nice, and a promotion would 
be even better.
Interviewer: Anything else that you think would be nice 
to get, or for that matter, that you would 
want to avoid?Interviewer: Well, which would you do: put out a low 
level or a high level of effort?
Harry: With all the questions you asked me, you 
should be able to tell me.
Interviewer: You may be right!
Harry: Yeah? That’s nice. Hey, if you don’t have 
any other questions, I’d like to join the guys 
for coffee.
Interviewer: Okay, thanks for your time.
Harry: You’re welcome.
Discussion Question
1. Use the expectancy theory model to predict Harry’s 
motivation to achieve high or “just acceptable” perfor￾mance in his job. Identify and discuss the factors that 
influence this motivation.
Used with permission of the author, Robert J. Oppenheimer, Concordia 
University.
Interviewer: What about job security?
Harry: I am certain my job is secure here, whether 
my performance is high or just acceptable. I 
can’t remember the last guy who was doing 
his job and got fired. But if my performance 
is just acceptable, my chances of a raise or 
promotion are about 10 percent. However, 
then the guys will not make fun of me. That 
I am certain about.
Interviewer: What is the likelihood of your performance 
level being high?
Harry: That depends. If I work very hard and put 
out a high degree of effort, I’d say that my 
chance of my performance being high 
is about 90 percent. But if I put out a low 
level of effort—you know, if I just take it 
easy—then I figure that the chances of 
my doing an acceptable job is about 
80 percent.
CLASS EXERCISE: NEEDS PRIORITY EXERCISE
within the class to identify possible explanations for any 
variation of results across students.
Step 3: The instructor will provide results of a recent large￾scale survey of Millennial postsecondary students (i.e., 
born in 1980 or after). When these results are presented, 
discuss the reasons for any noticeable differences between 
the survey and class rankings. Relate the differences to 
your understanding of the emerging view of employee 
needs and drives in work settings.
INSTRUCTIONS (LARGE CLASS)
Step 1 and Step 2: Same as the small class instructions.
Step 3: The instructor will ask students, by a show of hands 
(or use of classroom technology), to identify their top￾ranked attributes.
Step 4: Same as the small class instructions.
PURPOSE This class exercise is designed to help you un￾derstand employee needs in the workplace.
INSTRUCTIONS (SMALL CLASS)
Step 1: The table below lists in alphabetical order 16 char￾acteristics of the job or work environment. Working alone, 
use the far-left column to rank-order the importance of 
these characteristics to you personally. Write in “1” beside 
the most important characteristic, “2” for the second most 
important, and so on, through to “16” for the least impor￾tant characteristic on this list.
Step 2: Students are assigned to teams, where they com￾pare each other’s rank-order results. Note reasons for the 
largest variations in rankings and be prepared to discuss 
these reasons with the entire class. Students should pay 
close attention to different needs, self-concepts, and vari￾ous forms of diversity (ethnicity, profession, age, etc.) 
Personal Ranking of Work-Related Attributes
ATTRIBUTES OF WORK (LISTED ALPHABETICALLY) YOUR RANKING (1 = MOST IMPORTANT)
Challenging work
Commitment to social responsibility
Good health and benefits plan
Good initial salary level
Good people to report to
Good people to work with
Good training opportunities/developing new skills
194195
ATTRIBUTES OF WORK (LISTED ALPHABETICALLY) YOUR RANKING (1 = MOST IMPORTANT)
Good variety of work
Job security
Opportunities for advancement in position
Opportunities to have a personal impact
Opportunities to have a social impact
Opportunity to travel
Organization is a leader in its field
Strong commitment to employee diversity
Work–life integration
1. V. Galt, “Time to Retire the Employee Ranking Sys￾tem?,” The Globe and Mail (Toronto), March 11, 2017; 
D. Landman and J. Zide, “Rethinking Your Approach to 
Performance Management,” Goldman Sachs Remote 
Roundtables (blog), November 13, 2020; “Human 
Capital for Human Impact: Goldman Sachs 2020 People 
Strategy Report” (New York: Goldman Sachs, April 
2021); “How to Create a Successful Open Feedback 
Culture,” Spotlight Magazine (Henkel), October 5, 2021.
2. H.H. Meyer, E. Kay, and J. John R. P. French, “Split 
Roles in Performance Appraisal,” Harvard Business 
Review 43 (January 1965): 123–29; G.P. Latham et al., 
“New Developments in Performance Management,” 
Organizational Dynamics 34, no. 1 (2005): 77–87; D.J. 
Schleicher et al., “Evaluating the Effectiveness of Perfor￾mance Management: A 30-Year Integrative Conceptual 
Review.,” Journal of Applied Psychology 104, no. 7 
(2019): 851–87; E.D. Pulakos, R. Mueller-Hanson, and 
S. Arad, “The Evolution of Performance Management: 
Searching for Value,” Annual Review of Organizational 
Psychology and Organizational Behavior 6, (2019): 
249–71; K.R. Murphy, “Performance Evaluation Will 
Not Die, but It Should,” Human Resource Management 
Journal 30, no. 1 (2020): 13–31.
3. C.C. Pinder, Work Motivation in Organizational Behavior
(Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1998); A.M. 
Schmidt, J.W. Beck, and J.Z. Gillespie, “Motivation: 
Industrial and Organizational Psychology,” in Handbook 
of Psychology, Second Edition, ed. N. Schmidt and 
S. Highouse, vol. 12 (John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2012), 
311–40.
4. W.H. Macey and B. Schneider, “The Meaning of Em￾ployee Engagement,” Industrial and Organizational 
Psychology 1 (2008): 3–30; A.M. Saks and J.A. Gruman, 
“What Do We Really Know about Employee Engage￾ment?,” Human Resource Development Quarterly 25, no. 2 
(2014): 155–82; J.L. Whittington et al., Enhancing 
Employee Engagement: An Evidence-Based Approach
(New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2017), Chap. 1.
5. The confusing array of definitions about drives and 
needs has been the subject of criticism for a half 
century. See, for example, R.S. Peters, “Motives and 
Motivation,”Philosophy 31 (1956): 117–30; H. Cantril, 
“Sentio, Ergo Sum: ‘Motivation’ Reconsidered,” Journal 
of Psychology 65, no. 1 (1967): 91–107; G.R. Salancik 
and J. Pfeffer, “An Examination of Need-Satisfaction 
Models of Job Attitudes,” Administrative Science 
Quarterly 22, no. 3 (1977): 427–456. For a recent effort 
to condense 162 human “motives” into a small set, 
see: J.R. Talevich et al., “Toward a Comprehensive 
Taxonomy of Human Motives,” PLOS ONE 12, no. 2 
(2017): e0172279.
6. D.W. Pfaff, Drive: Neurobiological and Molecular 
Mechanisms of Sexual Motivation (Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press, 1999); A. Blasi, “Emotions and Moral Moti￾vation,” Journal for the Theory of Social Behaviour 29, 
no. 1 (1999): 1–19; K.C. Berridge, “Motivation Con￾cepts in Behavioral Neuroscience,” Physiology & Behavior 81, 
no. 2 (2004): 179–209; D. Scheffer and H. Heckhausen, 
“Trait Theories of Motivation,” in Motivation and 
Action, ed. J. Heckhausen and H. Heckhausen (Cham: 
Springer International Publishing, 2018), 67–112. We 
distinguish drives from emotions, but future research 
may find that the two concepts are not so different as is 
stated here. Woodworth is credited with either coining 
or popularizing the term drives in the context of human 
motivation. His classic book is certainly the first source 
to discuss the concept in detail. See R.S. Woodworth, 
Dynamic Psychology (New York: Columbia University 
Press, 1918).
7. P.R. Lawrence and N. Nohria, Driven: How Human 
Nature Shapes Our Choices (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 
2002); N. Nohria, B. Groysberg, and L.-E. Lee, “Em￾ployee Motivation: A Powerful New Model,” Harvard 
endnotes196
14. G. Loewenstein, “The Psychology of Curiosity: A Review 
and Reinterpretation,” Psychological Bulletin 116, no. 1 
(1994): 75–98; J. Litman, “Curiosity and the Pleasures of 
Learning: Wanting and Liking New Information,” 
Cognition and Emotion 19, no. 6 (2005): 793–814; 
C. Kidd and B.Y. Hayden, “The Psychology and Neuro￾science of Curiosity,” Neuron 88, no. 3 (2015): 449–60.
15. N. Nohria, B. Groysberg, and L.-E. Lee, “Employee 
Motivation: A Powerful New Model,” Harvard Business 
Review, August 2008, 78–84; F. Beyer et al., “Hit or Run: 
Exploring Aggressive and Avoidant Reactions to 
Interpersonal Provocation Using a Novel Fight-or-Escape 
Paradigm (FOE),” Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience 11 
(2017), 0190.
16. A.R. Damasio, Descartes’ Error: Emotion, Reason, and the 
Human Brain (New York: Putnam’s Sons, 1994); J.E. 
LeDoux, “Emotion Circuits in the Brain,” Annual Review 
of Neuroscience 23 (2000): 155–184; M. Reimann and A. 
Bechara, “The Somatic Marker Framework as a Neuro￾logical Theory of Decision-Making: Review, Conceptual 
Comparisons, and Future Neuroeconomics Research,” 
Journal of Economic Psychology 31, no. 5 (2010): 767–776; 
P. Winkielman, K. Berridge, and S. Sher, “Emotion, 
Consciousness, and Social Behavior,” in The Oxford 
Handbook of Social Neuroscience, ed. J. Decety and J.T. 
Cacioppo (Oxford University Press, 2011), 195–211; 
T. Poppa and A. Bechara, “The Somatic Marker Hypothesis: 
Revisiting the Role of the ‘Body-Loop’ in Decision￾Making,” Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences 19 
(2018): 61–66.
17. P.R. Lawrence and N. Nohria, Driven: How Human 
Nature Shapes Our Choices (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 
2002), 145–47; R.F. Baumeister, E.J. Masicampo, and 
K.D. Vohs, “Do Conscious Thoughts Cause Behavior?,” 
Annual Review of Psychology 62, no. 1 (2011): 331–61.
18. P.R. Lawrence and N. Nohria, Driven: How Human 
Nature Shapes Our Choices (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 
2002), Chap. 11.
19. For recent discussion on the benefits and risks of work 
practices that encourage employee competition, see: A. 
Sapegina and A. Weibel, “The Good, the Not So Bad, 
and the Ugly of Competitive Human Resource Practices: 
A Multidisciplinary Conceptual Framework,” Group & 
Organization Management 42, no. 5 (2017): 707–47.
20. An increasing number of scholarly publications have 
incorporated four-drive theory in their writing in recent 
years. For recent examples, see: R.C. Wood et al., 
“Evolutionary Neuroscience and Motivation in Organiza￾tions,” in Organizational Neuroscience, eds D.A. Waldman 
and P.A. Balthazard, Monographs in Leadership and 
Management (Emerald Group Publishing Limited, 2015), 
143–67; C. Abraham et al., “Explaining the Unexpected 
and Continued Use of an Information System with the 
Help of Evolved Evolutionary Mechanisms,” Journal of 
the Association for Information Science and Technology 67, 
no. 1 (2016): 212–31; M.T. Lee and R.L. Raschke, 
“Understanding Employee Motivation and Organizational 
Performance: Arguments for a Set-Theoretic Approach,” 
Journal of Innovation & Knowledge 1, no. 3 (2016): 
162–69; B. Torgler, “Can Tax Compliance Research 
Profit from Biology?,” Review of Behavioral Economics 3, 
Business Review (2008): 78–84; P. Lawrence and M. Pirson, 
“Economistic and Humanistic Narratives of Leadership 
in the Age of Globality: Toward a Renewed Darwinian 
Theory of Leadership,” Journal of Business Ethics 128, 
no. 2 (2015): 383–394.
8. S.G. Barsade and D.E. Gibson, “Why Does Affect Mat￾ter in Organizations?,” Academy of Management Perspec￾tives 21, no. 2 (2007): 36–59; K.C. Berridge, “Evolving 
Concepts of Emotion and Motivation,” Frontiers in Psy￾chology 9 (2018) 1647; E. Harmon-Jones, “On Motiva￾tional Influences, Moving beyond Valence, and 
Integrating Dimensional and Discrete Views of Emo￾tion,” Cognition and Emotion 33, no. 1 (2019): 101–8.
9. A.R. Damasio, The Feeling of What Happens: Body and 
Emotion in the Making of Consciousness (New York: 
Harcourt Brace, 1999), 286.
10. S. Hitlin, “Values as the Core of Personal Identity: 
Drawing Links between Two Theories of Self,” Social 
Psychology Quarterly 66, no. 2 (2003): 118–137; 
B. Monin, D.A. Pizarro, and J.S. Beer, “Deciding 
Versus Reacting: Conceptions of Moral Judgment and the 
Reason–Affect Debate,” Review of General Psychology 11, 
no. 2 (2007): 99–111;S.H. Schwartz et al., “Refining 
the Theory of Basic Individual Values,” Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology 103, no. 4 (2012): 
663–88; M. Driver, “Motivation and Identity: A 
Psychoanalytic Perspective on the Turn to Identity 
in Motivation Research,” Human Relations 70, no. 5 
(2017): 617–37.
11. P.R. Lawrence and N. Nohria, Driven: How Human 
Nature Shapes Our Choices (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 
2002); N. Nohria, B. Groysberg, and L.-E. Lee, 
“Employee Motivation: A Powerful New Model,” 
Harvard Business Review (2008): 78–84; P. Lawrence and 
M. Pirson, “Economistic and Humanistic Narratives of 
Leadership in the Age of Globality: Toward a Renewed 
Darwinian Theory of Leadership,” Journal of Business 
Ethics 128, no. 2 (2015): 383–394.
12. The drive to acquire is likely associated with research 
on getting ahead, desire for competence, the selfish 
gene, and desire for social distinction. See R.H. Frank, 
Choosing the Right Pond: Human Behavior and the Quest 
for Status (New York: Oxford University Press, 1985); 
L. Gaertner et al., “The ‘I,’ the ‘We,’ and the ‘When’: A 
Meta-Analysis of Motivational Primacy in Self-Definition,”
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 83, no. 3 
(2002): 574–91; J. Hogan and B. Holland, “Using Theory 
to Evaluate Personality and Job-Performance Relations: 
A Socioanalytic Perspective,” Journal of Applied Psy￾chology 88, no. 1 (2003): 100–12; R. Dawkins, The 
Selfish Gene, 30th Anniversary Ed. (Oxford, UK: 
Oxford University Press, 2006); M.R. Leary, “Motiva￾tional and Emotional Aspects of the Self,” Annual Re￾view of Psychology 58, no. 1 (2007): 317–44; F. Martela 
and T.J.J. Riekki, “Autonomy, Competence, Related￾ness, and Beneficence: A Multicultural Comparison of 
the Four Pathways to Meaningful Work,” Frontiers in 
Psychology 9 (2018), 1157.
13. R.E. Baumeister and M.R. Leary, “The Need to Belong: 
Desire for Interpersonal Attachments as a Fundamental 
Human Motivation,” Psychological Bulletin 117 (1995): 
497–529.197
26. B. Verplanken and R.W. Holland, “Motivated Decision 
Making: Effects of Activation and Self-Centrality of 
Values on Choices and Behavior,” Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology 82, no. 3 (2002): 434–47; J. Jin 
and J. Rounds, “Stability and Change in Work Values: A 
Meta-Analysis of Longitudinal Studies,” Journal of Voca￾tional Behavior 80, no. 2 (2012): 326–39; C.M. Lechner 
et al., “The Development of Work Values During the 
Transition to Adulthood: A Two-Country Study,” Journal 
of Vocational Behavior 99(2017): 52–65.
27. K. Dye, A.J. Mills, and T.G. Weatherbee, “Maslow: Man 
Interrupted—Reading Management Theory in Context,” 
Management Decision 43, no. 10 (2005): 1375–95.
28. A.H. Maslow, “A Preface to Motivation Theory,” 
Psychosomatic Medicine 5 (1943): 85–92.
29. S. Kesebir, J. Graham, and S. Oishi, “A Theory of Human 
Needs Should Be Human-Centered, Not Animal-Centered,” 
Perspectives on Psychological Science 5, no. 3 (2010): 
315–19.
30. C. Peterson and N. Park, “What Happened to Self-Actu￾alization?,” Perspectives on Psychological Science 5, no. 3 
(2010): 320–22; J.A. Krems, D.T. Kenrick, and R. Neel, 
“Individual Perceptions of Self-Actualization: What 
Functional Motives Are Linked to Fulfilling One’s Full 
Potential?,” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 43, 
no. 9 (2017): 1337–52.
31. M. Gagné and E.L. Deci, “Self-Determination Theory 
and Work Motivation,” Journal of Organizational Behav￾ior 26, no. 4 (2005): 331–62; C.P. Cerasoli, J.M. Nicklin, 
and M.T. Ford, “Intrinsic Motivation and Extrinsic In￾centives Jointly Predict Performance: A 40-Year Meta￾Analysis,” Psychological Bulletin 140, no. 4 (2014): 
980–1008.
32. M. Gagné and D. Bhave, “Autonomy in the Workplace: 
An Essential Ingredient to Employee Engagement and 
Well-Being in Every Culture,” in Human Autonomy in 
Cross-Cultural Context, ed. V.I. Chirkov, R.M. Ryan and 
K.M. Sheldon, Cross-Cultural Advancements in Positive 
Psychology (Dordrecht, Netherlands: Springer Nether￾lands, 2011), 163–87; E.L. Deci and M.R. Ryan, “The 
Importance of Universal Psychological Needs for Under￾standing Motivation in the Workplace,” in The Oxford 
Handbook of Work Engagement, Motivation, and 
Self-Determination Theory, ed. M. Gagne (New York: 
Oxford University Press, 2014), 13–32. For neuroscience 
research on intrinsic motivation (particularly need for 
competence), see: W. Lee and J. Reeve, “Identifying 
the Neural Substrates of Intrinsic Motivation During 
Task Performance,” Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral 
Neuroscience 17, no. 5 (2017): 939–53; S.I. Di Domenico 
and R.M. Ryan, “The Emerging Neuroscience of Intrinsic 
Motivation: A New Frontier in Self-Determination 
Research,” Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 11 (2017), 0145.
33. C.P. Cerasoli, J.M. Nicklin, and M.T. Ford, “Intrinsic 
Motivation and Extrinsic Incentives Jointly Predict Per￾formance: A 40-Year Meta-analysis,” Psychological Bulle￾tin 140, no. 4 (2014): 980–1008; Y. Garbers and U. 
Konradt, “The Effect of Financial Incentives on Perfor￾mance: A Quantitative Review of Individual and Team￾Based Financial Incentives,” Journal of Occupational and 
Organizational Psychology 87, no. 1 (2014): 102–37.
no. 1 (2016): 113–44; M.T. Lee, R.L. Raschke, and R.S. 
Louis, “Exploiting Organizational Culture: Configurations 
for Value through Knowledge Worker’s Motivation,” 
Journal of Business Research 69, no. 11 (2016): 5442–47; 
D. Scheffer and H. Heckhausen, “Trait Theories of 
Motivation,” in Motivation and Action, ed. J. Heckhausen 
and H. Heckhausen (Cham: Springer International 
Publishing, 2018), 67–112.
21. A. H. Maslow, “A Theory of Human Motivation,” Psycho￾logical Review 50 (1943): 370–96; A. H. Maslow, Motivation 
and Personality (New York Harper & Row, 1954).
22. Maslow did not diagram his theory as a pyramid. He 
does not even mention pyramids in his writing on human 
motivation. Instead, Maslow mostly repeats the term hier￾archy in describing how human needs (drives) are orga￾nized relative to each other. The earliest description of 
human needs as a pyramid is likely from Chapter 2 (“The 
Pyramid of Man’s Needs”) of a 1960 book on conflict by 
F. Alexander Magoun, a professor of human relations at 
MIT. Magoun’s chapter discusses Maslow’s needs hierar￾chy theory. A recent review also points to a step model of 
Maslow’s model in Keith Davis’s human relations book, 
and of a pyramid model in a 1960 article by Charles 
McDermid. See: F.A. Magoun, Cooperation and Conflict 
in Industry (New York: Harper, 1960), 20–31; T. Bridgman, 
S. Cummings, and J. Ballard, “Who Built Maslow’s Pyra￾mid? A History of the Creation of Management Studies’ 
Most Famous Symbol and Its Implications for Management 
Education,” Academy of Management Learning & Educa￾tion 18 (2019): 81–98.
23. A.H. Maslow, Motivation and Personality (New York 
Harper & Row, 1954), 2, 97–98.
24. D.T. Hall and K.E. Nougaim, “An Examination of 
Maslow’s Need Hierarchy in an Organizational Setting,” 
Organizational Behavior and Human Performance 3, no. 1 
(1968): 12; M.A. Wahba and L.G. Bridwell, “Maslow 
Reconsidered: A Review of Research on the Need 
Hierarchy Theory,” Organizational Behavior and Human 
Performance 15 (1976): 212–40; E.L. Betz, “Two Tests of 
Maslow’s Theory of Need Fulfillment,” Journal of Voca￾tional Behavior 24, no. 2 (1984): 204–20; P.A. Corning, 
“Biological Adaptation in Human Societies: A ‘Basic 
Needs’ Approach,” Journal of Bioeconomics 2, no. 1 
(2000): 41–86. For a proposed revision of the model, see 
D.T. Kenrick et al., “Renovating the Pyramid of Needs: 
Contemporary Extensions Built upon Ancient Founda￾tions,” Perspectives on Psychological Science 5, no. 3 
(2010): 292–314.
25. L. Parks and R.P. Guay, “Personality, Values, and Motiva￾tion,” Personality and Individual Differences 47, no. 7 
(2009): 675–84; R. Fischer and D. Boer, “Motivational 
Basis of Personality Traits: A Meta-Analysis of Value￾Personality Correlations,” Journal of Personality 83, no. 5 
(2015): 491–510; L. Parks-Leduc, G. Feldman, and A. 
Bardi, “Personality Traits and Personal Values: A Meta￾Analysis,” Personality and Social Psychology Review 19, 
no. 1 (2015): 3–29. Maslow did acknowledge that the 
needs hierarchy has a different ordering for some people, 
but he described these as relatively rare exceptions. See: 
A.H. Maslow, “A Theory of Human Motivation,” Psycho￾logical Review 50 (1943): 386–88.198
theory model. The difference is that instrumentality is a 
correlation whereas P-to-O expectancy is a probability. 
See J.P. Campbell et al., Managerial Behavior, Perfor￾mance, and Effectiveness (New York: McGraw Hill, 1970); 
E.E. Lawler III, Motivation in Work Organizations
(Monterey, CA: Brooks-Cole, 1973); D.A. Nadler and 
E.E. Lawler, “Motivation: A Diagnostic Approach,” in 
Perspectives on Behavior in Organizations, ed. J.R. Hackman, 
E.E. Lawler III, and L.W. Porter (New York: McGraw Hill, 
1983), 67–78.
43. The earliest economic theorists argued that valence is the 
the positive or negative emotion that the decision maker 
anticipates from an outcome. See: Steven L. McShane, 
“Organisational Decision-Making,” in Contemporary 
Issues in Management and Organisational Behaviour, ed. 
P. Murray, D. Poole, and G. Jones (Sydney: Cengage 
Learning Australia, 2006), 136–65. The connection between 
valence and emotion is supported by recent neuroscience 
studies. See: J. Bartol and S. Linquist, “How Do Somatic 
Markers Feature in Decision Making?,” Emotion Review 7 
(2014): 81–89; J.S. Lerner et al., “Emotion and Decision 
Making,” Annual Review of Psychology 66 (2015): 
799–823; K.M. Tye, “Neural Circuit Motifs in Valence 
Processing,” Neuron 100, no. 2 (2018): 436–52.
44. D.A. Nadler and E.E. Lawler, “Motivation: A Diagnostic 
Approach,” in Perspectives on Behavior in Organizations, 
ed. J.R. Hackman, E.E. Lawler III, and L.W. Porter 
(New York: McGraw Hill, 1983), 70–73.
45. For recent applications of expectancy in diverse settings, 
see R.L. Purvis, T.J. Zagenczyk, and G.E. McCray, 
“What’s in It for Me? Using Expectancy Theory and 
Climate to Explain Stakeholder Participation, Its Direc￾tion and Intensity,” International Journal of Project 
Management 33, no. 1 (2015): 3–14; E. Shweiki et al., 
“Applying Expectancy Theory to Residency Training: 
Proposing Opportunities to Understand Resident 
Motivation and Enhance Residency Training,” Advances 
in Medical Education and Practice 6 (2015): 339–46; K.N. 
Bauer et al., “Re-Examination of Motivation in Learning 
Contexts: Meta-Analytically Investigating the Role Type 
of Motivation Plays in the Prediction of Key Training 
Outcomes,” Journal of Business and Psychology 31, no. 1 
(2016): 33–50; R. Meymandpour and P. Pawar, “Study 
of Expectancy Motivation in IT Developers,” Telecom 
Business Review 11, no. 1 (2018): 6–11.
46. R. Kanfer, M. Frese, and R.E. Johnson, “Motivation 
Related to Work: A Century of Progress.,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology 102, no. 3 (2017): 338–55.
47. This limitation was acknowledged by Victor Vroom, who 
had introduced expectancy theory in his 1964 book. See 
G.P. Latham, Work Motivation: History, Theory, Research, 
and Practice (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 2007), 47–48.
48. J.B. Watson, Behavior: An Introduction to Comparative 
Psychology (New York: Henry Holt, 1914).
49. B.F. Skinner, About Behaviorism (New York: Knopf, 1974); 
J. Komaki, T. Coombs, and S. Schepman, “Motivational 
Implications of Reinforcement Theory,” in Motivation 
and Leadership at Work, ed. R.M. Steers, L.W. Porter, 
and G.A. Bigley (New York: McGraw Hill, 1996), 34–52; 
R.G. Miltenberger, Behavior Modification: Principles and 
Procedures (Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole, 1997).
34. J. Schroeder and A. Fishbach, “How to Motivate 
Yourself and Others? Intended and Unintended Conse￾quences,” Research in Organizational Behavior 35 (2015): 
123–41.
35. D.C. McClelland, The Achieving Society (New York: 
Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1961); D. McClelland and 
D. Burnham, “Power is the Great Motivator,” Harvard 
Business Review 54, no. 2 (1976): 100–110; M.G. Köllner 
and O.C. Schultheiss, “Meta-Analytic Evidence of Low 
Convergence between Implicit and Explicit Measures of 
the Needs for Achievement, Affiliation, and Power,” 
Frontiers in Psychology 5 (2014), 0826.
36. D.C. McClelland, The Achieving Society (New York: Van 
Nostrand Reinhold, 1961).
37. M. Frese and M.M. Gielnik, “The Psychology of Entre￾preneurship,” Annual Review of Organizational Psychology 
and Organizational Behavior 1, no. 1 (2014): 413–38.
38. S. Leroy et al., “Synchrony Preference: Why Some People 
Go with the Flow and Some Don’t,” Personnel Psychology
68, no. 4 (2015): 759–809; M.H. Do and A. Minbashian, 
“A Meta-Analytic Examination of the Effects of the 
Agentic and Affiliative Aspects of Extraversion on Lead￾ership Outcomes,” The Leadership Quarterly 25, no. 5 
(2014): 1040–53; B. Steinmann et al., “Implicit Motives 
and Leadership Performance Revisited: What Consti￾tutes the Leadership Motive Pattern?,” Motivation and 
Emotion 39, no. 2 (2015): 167–74; B. Steinmann, S.K. 
Ötting, and G.W. Maier, “Need for Affiliation as a 
Motivational Add-On for Leadership Behaviors and Man￾agerial Success,” Frontiers in Psychology 7 (2016), 1972. 
39. J.C. Magee and C.A. Langner, “How Personalized and 
Socialized Power Motivation Facilitate Antisocial and 
Prosocial Decision-Making,” Journal of Research in 
Personality 42, no. 6 (2008): 1547–59; D. Rus, D. van 
Knippenberg, and B. Wisse, “Leader Self-Definition and 
Leader Self-Serving Behavior,” Leadership Quarterly 21, 
no. 3 (2010): 509–29; C. Case and J. Maner, “Divide and 
Conquer: When and Why Leaders Undermine the Cohe￾sive Fabric of Their Group,” Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology 107, no. 6 (2014): 1033–50.
40. D. Miron and D.C. McClelland, “The Impact of Achieve￾ment Motivation Training on Small Business,” California 
Management Review 21 (1979): 13–28.
41. Expectancies and valences have a long history in motiva￾tion and decision making, dating back to the earliest writing 
on the economics of utilitarianism. See, for example: 
W.S. Jevons, The Theory of Political Economy (London: 
MacMillan, 1871), Chaps. 2 and 3. For recent discussion 
in organizational behavior, see: S. Sun, J.B. Vancouver, 
and J.M. Weinhardt, “Goal Choices and Planning: Dis￾tinct Expectancy and Value Effects in Two Goal Pro￾cesses,” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision 
Processes 125, no. 2 (2014): 220–33.
42. Expectancy theory of motivation in work settings origi￾nated in V.H. Vroom, Work and Motivation (New York: 
Wiley, 1964). The version of expectancy theory pre￾sented here was developed by Edward Lawler. Lawler’s 
model provides a clearer presentation of the model’s 
three components. P-to-O expectancy is similar to 
“instrumentality” in Vroom’s original expectancy 199
Development 22, no. 2 (2018): 162–69; J. Beshears and 
H. Kosowsky, “Nudging: Progress to Date and Future 
Directions,” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision 
Processes, 161 (2020): 3–19; S. Mertens et al., “The 
Effectiveness of Nudging: A Meta-Analysis of Choice 
Architecture Interventions across Behavioral Domains,” 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 119, 
no. 1 (2022).
58. J.A. Bargh and M.J. Ferguson, “Beyond Behaviorism: 
On the Automaticity of Higher Mental Processes,” 
Psychological Bulletin 126, no. 6 (2000): 925–45. Some 
writers argue that behaviorists long ago accepted the rele￾vance of cognitive processes in behavior modification. 
See I. Kirsch et al., “The Role of Cognition in Classical 
and Operant Conditioning,” Journal of Clinical Psychology
60, no. 4 (2004): 369–92.
59. A. Bandura, Social Foundations of Thought and Action: A 
Social Cognitive Theory (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice 
Hall, 1986); A. Bandura, “Social Cognitive Theory of 
Self-Regulation,” Organizational Behavior and Human 
Decision Processes 50, no. 2 (1991): 248–87; A. Bandura, 
“Social Cognitive Theory: An Agentic Perspective,” 
Annual Review of Psychology 52, no. 1 (2001): 1–26.
60. M.E. Schnake, “Vicarious Punishment in a Work Setting,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 71 (1986): 343–45; L. K. 
Trevino, “The Social Effects of Punishment in Organiza￾tions: A Justice Perspective,” Academy of Management 
Review 17 (1992): 647–76; J. Malouff et al., “Effects of 
Vicarious Punishment: A Meta-Analysis,” Journal of 
General Psychology 136, no. 3 (2009): 271–86.
61. A. Pescuric and W.C. Byham, “The New Look of 
Behavior Modeling,” Training & Development 50 (1996): 
24–30; P.J. Taylor, D.F. Russ-Eft, and D.W.L. Chan, 
“A Meta-Analytic Review of Behavior Modeling Training,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 90, no. 4 (2005): 692–709; 
C.G. Myers and D.S. DeRue, “Agency in Vicarious 
Learning at Work,” in Autonomous Learning in the Work￾place, ed. J.E. Ellingson and R.A. Noe, (New York: 
Routledge, 2017), 15–37.
62. A. Bandura, “Self-Reinforcement: Theoretical and 
Methodological Considerations,” Behaviorism 4 (1976): 
135–55; J.B. Vancouver and D.V. Day, “Industrial and 
Organisation Research on Self-Regulation: From Con￾structs to Applications,” Applied Psychology: An Interna￾tional Journal 54, no. 2 (2005): 155–85; A. Neal, T. 
Ballard, and J.B. Vancouver, “Dynamic Self-Regulation 
and Multiple-Goal Pursuit,” Annual Review of Organiza￾tional Psychology and Organizational Behavior 4 (2017): 
401–23.
63. M. Milyavskaya and K.M. Werner, “Goal Pursuit: 
Current State of Affairs and Directions for Future 
Research,” Canadian Psychology 59, no. 2 (2018): 163–75.
64. E.A. Locke and G.P. Latham, A Theory of Goal Setting 
and Task Performance (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice 
Hall, 1990); G. Latham, G. Seijts, and J. Slocum, “The 
Goal Setting and Goal Orientation Labyrinth: Effective 
Ways for Increasing Employee Performance,” Organiza￾tional Dynamics 45, no. 4 (2016): 271–77.
65. The SMARTER goal-setting model is an extension of the 
earlier SMART model. SMARTER apparently originated 
50. T.K. Connellan, How to Improve Human Performance
(New York: Harper & Row, 1978), 48–57; F. Luthans 
and R. Kreitner, Organizational Behavior Modification and 
Beyond (Glenview, IL: Scott, Foresman, 1985), 85–88.
51. B.F. Skinner, Science and Human Behavior (New York: 
Free Press, 1965); R.G. Miltenberger, Behavior Modification: 
Principles and Procedures (Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole, 
1997), Chap. 4–6.
52. T.R. Hinkin and C.A. Schriesheim, “‘If You Don’t Hear 
from Me You Know You Are Doing Fine,’” Cornell Hotel 
& Restaurant Administration Quarterly 45, no. 4 (2004): 
362–72; T.R. Hinkin and C.A. Schriesheim, “An Exami￾nation of ‘Nonleadership’: From Laissez-Faire Leadership 
to Leader Reward Omission and Punishment Omission.,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 93, no. 6 (2008): 1234–48.
53. K. Cameron et al., “Effects of Positive Practices on 
Organizational Effectiveness,” The Journal of Applied 
Behavioral Science 47, no. 3 (2011): 266–308; F. Luthans 
and C.M. Youssef-Morgan, “Psychological Capital: An 
Evidence-Based Positive Approach,” Annual Review of 
Organizational Psychology and Organizational Behavior 4, 
(2017): 339–66; A.B. Bakker and M. van Woerkom, 
“Strengths Use in Organizations: A Positive Approach 
of Occupational Health.,” Canadian Psychology 59, no. 1 
(2018): 38–46.
54. L.K. Trevino, “The Social Effects of Punishment in 
Organizations: A Justice Perspective,” Academy of 
Management Review 17 (1992): 647–76; L. Wang and J.K. 
Murnighan, “The Dynamics of Punishment and Trust,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 102, no. 10 (2017): 1385–
1402; L. Wang et al., “Does Anger Expression Help or 
Harm Leader Effectiveness? The Role of Competence￾Based versus Integrity-Based Violations and Abusive 
Supervision,” Academy of Management Journal 61, no. 3 
(2018): 1050–72.
55. G.P. Latham and V.L. Huber, “Schedules of Reinforce￾ment: Lessons from the Past and Issues for the Future,” 
Journal of Organizational Behavior Management 13 
(1992): 125–49; B.A. Williams, “Challenges to Timing￾Based Theories of Operant Behavior,” Behavioural 
Processes 62 (2003): 115–23.
56. R.H. Thaler and C.R. Sunstein, Nudge: Improving Decisions 
about Health, Wealth, and Happiness (New Haven, Conn.: 
Yale University Press, 2008); A. Tawse, V.M. Patrick, and 
D. Vera, “Crossing the Chasm: Leadership Nudges to 
Help Transition from Strategy Formulation to Strategy 
Implementation,” Business Horizons 62, no. 2 (2019): 
249–57; O. Nwafor et al., “Effectiveness of Nudges as a 
Tool to Promote Adherence to Guidelines in Healthcare 
and Their Organizational Implications: A Systematic 
Review,” Social Science & Medicine 286 (2021): 114321.
57. M.T. Cardador, G.B. Northcraft, and J. Whicker, “A 
Theory of Work Gamification: Something Old, Something 
New, Something Borrowed, Something Cool?,” Human 
Resource Management Review 27 (2017): 353–65; R.N. 
Landers et al., “Gamification Science, Its History and 
Future: Definitions and a Research Agenda,” Simulation 
& Gaming 49, no. 3 (2018): 315–37; M.B. Armstrong and 
R.N. Landers, “Gamification of Employee Training and 
Development,” International Journal of Training and 200
73. H.H. Meyer, E. Kay and J.R.P. French Jr, “Split Roles in 
Performance Appraisal,” Harvard Business Review 43, 
no. 1 (1965): 123–29; A.S. DeNisi and K.R. Murphy, 
“Performance Appraisal and Performance Management: 
100 Years of Progress?,” Journal of Applied Psychology
102, no. 3 (2017): 421–33; K.R. Murphy, “Performance 
Evaluation Will Not Die, but It Should,” Human 
Resource Management Journal 30, no. 1 (2020): 13–31.
74. C.F. Lam et al., “The Impact of Feedback Frequency on 
Learning and Task Performance: Challenging the ‘More 
Is Better’ Assumption,” Organizational Behavior and 
Human Decision Processes 116, no. 2 (2011): 217–28. 
For a recent example of the benefits of more frequent 
feedback, see: D.P. Kelley and N. Gravina, “Every Min￾ute Counts: Using Process Improvement and Performance 
Feedback to Improve Patient Flow in an Emergency 
Department,” Journal of Organizational Behavior 
Management 38, no. 2/3 (2018): 234–43.
75. M. Buckingham, Go Put Your Strengths to Work (New 
York: Free Press, 2007); H. Aguinis, R.K. Gottfredson, 
and H. Joo, “Delivering Effective Performance Feedback: 
The Strengths-Based Approach,” Business Horizons 55, 
no. 2 (2012): 105–11; A.B. Bakker and M. van Woerkom, 
“Strengths Use in Organizations: A Positive Approach 
of Occupational Health,” Canadian Psychology 59, 
no. 1 (2018): 38–46; H.F. Grammer et al., “Positive 
Performance Reviews Using Strengths-Based Goal Setting,” 
in Positive Organizational Psychology Interventions: Design 
and Evaluation (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell, 2021), 
65–106.
76. A.N. Kluger and D. Nir, “The Feedforward Interview,” 
Human Resource Management Review 20, no. 3 (2010): 
235–46; J.V. Wingerden and J.V. der Stoep, “The Motiva￾tional Potential of Meaningful Work: Relationships with 
Strengths Use, Work Engagement, and Performance,” 
PLOS ONE 13, no. 6 (2018): e0197599; M. van Woerkom 
and B. Kroon, “The Effect of Strengths-Based Performance 
Appraisal on Perceived Supervisor Support and the 
Motivation to Improve Performance,” Frontiers in 
Psychology 11 (2020), 1883.
77. H.H. Meyer, “A Solution to the Performance Appraisal 
Feedback Enigma,” Academy of Management Executive 5, 
no. 1 (1991): 68–76.
78. A. Terracciano, P.T. Costa and R.R. McCrae, “Personal￾ity Plasticity after Age 30,” Personality and Social Psychol￾ogy Bulletin 32, no. 8 (2006): 999–1009; R. Mıttus et al., 
“Within-Trait Heterogeneity in Age Group Differences in 
Personality Domains and Facets: Implications for the De￾velopment and Coherence of Personality Traits,” PLoS 
ONE 10, no. 3 (2015): e0119667; L. H. Schultz et al., 
“Vocational Interests across 20 Years of Adulthood: 
Stability, Change, and the Role of Work Experiences,” 
Journal of Research in Personality 71 (2017): 46–56.
79. J.W. Smither, M. London, and R.R. Reilly, “Does Perfor￾mance Improve Following Multisource Feedback? A The￾oretical Model, Meta-Analysis, and Review of Empirical 
Findings,” Personnel Psychology 58, no. 1 (2005): 33–66; 
L.E. Atwater, J.F. Brett, and A.C. Charles, “Multisource 
Feedback: Lessons Learned and Implications for Prac￾tice,” Human Resource Management 46, no. 2 (2007): 
285–307; M.C. Campion, E.D. Campion, and M.A. 
Campion, “Improvements in Performance Management 
from British sports psychology writing around the mid￾1990s, such as: P. Butler, Performance Profiling (Leeds, 
UK: The National Coaching Foundation, 1996), 36. 
There are several variations of the SMARTER goal￾setting model; “achievable” is sometimes “acceptable,” 
“reviewed” is sometimes “recorded,” and “exciting” is 
sometimes “ethical.” For a summary of variations of 
meanings within the SMARTER acronym, see: G. 
Brown, C. Leonard, and M. Arthur-Kelly, “Writing 
SMARTER Goals for Professional Learning and Improv￾ing Classroom Practices,” Reflective Practice 17, no. 5 
(2016): 621–35.
66. The value and limitations of measurement are discussed 
in J.M. Henshaw, Does Measurement Measure Up? How 
Numbers Reveal and Conceal the Truth (Baltimore, MD: 
Johns Hopkins Press, 2006).
67. A.C. Crossley, C. Cooper, and T. Wernsing, “Making 
Things Happen through Challenging Goals: Leader 
Proactivity, Trust, and Business-Unit Performance,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 98, no. 3 (2013): 540–49; 
A. Kruglanski et al., “The Rocky Road from Attitudes to 
Behaviors: Charting the Goal Systemic Course of Ac￾tions,” Psychological Review 122, no. 4 (2015): 598–620; 
K.M. Roose and W.L. Williams, “An Evaluation of the 
Effects of Very Difficult Goals,” Journal of Organiza￾tional Behavior Management 38, no. 1 (2018): 18–48.
68. Z. Zhang and M. Jia, “How Can Companies Decrease 
the Disruptive Effects of Stretch Goals? The Moderating 
Role of Interpersonal—and Informational—Justice 
Climates,” Human Relations 66, no. 7 (2013): 993–1020; 
L.D. Ordóñez and D.T. Welsh, “Immoral Goals: How 
Goal Setting May Lead to Unethical Behavior,” Current 
Opinion in Psychology 6 (2015): 93–96.
69. E.A. Locke and G.P. Latham, A Theory of Goal Setting 
and Task Performance (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice 
Hall, 1990), chaps. 6 and 7; H. Klein, J.T. Cooper and 
C.A. Monahan, “Goal Commitment,” in New Develop￾ments in Goal Setting and Task Performance, ed. E.A. 
Locke and G.P. Latham (London: Taylor and Francis, 
2012), 65–89.
70. G.P. Latham and C.C. Pinder, “Work Motivation Theory 
and Research at the Dawn of the Twenty-First Century,” 
Annual Review of Psychology 56 (2005): 485–516; S. J. 
Ashford and K.E.M. Stobbelier, “Feedback, Goal Setting, 
and Task Performance Revisited,” in New Developments in 
Goal Setting and Task Performance, ed. E.A. Locke and 
G.P. Latham (New York: Routledge, 2013), 51–64.
71. G.P. Latham, Work Motivation: History, Theory, Research, 
and Practice (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 2007), 198–203; 
A. Baker et al., “Feedback and Organizations: Feedback 
Is Good, Feedback-Friendly Culture Is Better,” Canadian 
Psychology 54, no. 4 (2013): 260–68.
72. F. Anseel et al., “How Are We Doing after 30 Years? A 
Meta-Analytic Review of the Antecedents and Outcomes 
of Feedback-Seeking Behavior,” Journal of Management 41, 
no. 1 (2015): 318–48; M. London, The Power of Feedback: 
Giving, Seeking, and Using Feedback for Performance 
Improvement (New York: Routledge, 2015); B. Kuvaas, 
R. Buch and A. Dysvik, “Constructive Supervisor 
Feedback Is Not Sufficient: Immediacy and Frequency 
Is Essential,” Human Resource Management 56, no. 3 
(2017): 519–31.201
Resources Management 33 (2015): 279–350; J.A. Colquitt 
and J.B. Rodell, “Measuring Justice and Fairness,” in The 
Oxford Handbook of Justice in the Workplace, ed. R.S. 
Cropanzano and M.L. Ambrose (New York: Oxford 
University Press, 2015), 187–202.
87. M. Deutsch, “Equity, Equality, and Need: What Deter￾mines Which Value Will Be Used as the Basis of Distrib￾utive Justice?,” Journal of Social Issues 31, no. 3 (1975): 
137–49; D.A. Morand and K.K. Merriman, “Equality 
Theory as a Counterbalance to Equity Theory in Human 
Resource Management,” Journal of Business Ethics 111, 
no. 1 (2012): 133–44; T. Reeskens and W. van Oorschot, 
“Equity, Equality, or Need? A Study of Popular Prefer￾ences for Welfare Redistribution Principles across 
24 European Countries,” Journal of European Public 
Policy 20, no. 8 (2013): 1174–95.
88. J.S. Adams, “Toward an Understanding of Inequity,” 
Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology 67 (1963): 
422–36; P.H. Siegel, M. Schraeder, and R. Morrison, 
“A Taxonomy of Equity Factors,” Journal of Applied So￾cial Psychology 38, no. 1 (2008): 61–75; R. Cropanzana, 
D.E. Bowen, and S.W. Gilliland, “The Management of 
Organizational Justice,” Academy of Management 
Perspectives 21, no. 4 (2007): 34–48; D.E. Rupp et al., 
“A Critical Analysis of the Conceptualization and Mea￾surement of Organizational Justice: Is It Time for Reas￾sessment?,” Academy of Management Annals 11, no. 2 
(2017): 919–59.
89. C.T. Kulik and M.L. Ambrose, “Personal and Situational 
Determinants of Referent Choice,” Academy of Manage￾ment Review 17 (1992): 212–37; J. Shin and Y.W. Sohn, 
“Effects of Employees’ Social Comparison Behaviors on 
Distributive Justice Perception and Job Satisfaction,” 
Social Behavior and Personality 43, no. 7 (2015): 1071–83; 
C.M. Sterling and G. Labianca, “Costly Comparisons: 
Managing Envy in the Workplace,” Organizational 
Dynamics 44, no. 4 (2015): 296–305.
90. T.P. Summers and A.S. DeNisi, “In Search of Adams’ 
Other: Reexamination of Referents Used in the Evalua￾tion of Pay,” Human Relations 43 (1990): 497–511.
91. The emotive dynamics of feelings of inequity are studied 
in A.W. Cappelen et al., “Equity Theory and Fair In￾equality: A Neuroeconomic Study,” Proceedings of the Na￾tional Academy of Sciences 111, no. 43 (2014): 15368–72.
92. Y. Cohen-Charash and P.E. Spector, “The Role of Jus￾tice in Organizations: A Meta-Analysis,” Organizational 
Behavior and Human Decision Processes 86 (2001): 
278–321; B. Walker and R.T. Hamilton, “Employee–
Employer Grievances: A Review,” International Journal 
of Management Reviews 13, no. 1 (2011): 40–58; R. 
Cropanzana and C. Moliner, “Hazards of Justice: Ego￾centric Bias, Moral Judgments, and Revenge-Seeking,” 
in Deviant and Criminal Behavior in the Workplace, ed. 
S.M. Elias (New York: New York University Press, 
2013), 155–77; B.C. Holtz and C.M. Harold, “Interper￾sonal Justice and Deviance: The Moderating Effects of 
Interpersonal Justice Values and Justice Orientation,” 
Journal of Management 39, no. 2 (2013): 339–65; C.L. 
Wilkin and C.E. Connelly, “Green with Envy and 
Nerves of Steel: Moderated Mediation between Distribu￾tive Justice and Theft,” Personality and Individual 
Differences 72 (2015): 160–64.
through the Use of 360 Feedback,” Industrial and Organi￾zational Psychology 8, no. 1 (2015): 85–93.
80. S.J. Ashford and G.B. Northcraft, “Conveying More 
(or Less) Than We Realize: The Role of Impression Man￾agement in Feedback Seeking,” Organizational Behavior 
and Human Decision Processes 53 (1992): 310–34; J.R. 
Williams et al., “Increasing Feedback Seeking in Public 
Contexts: It Takes Two (or More) to Tango,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology 84 (1999): 969–76.
81. J.B. Miner, “The Rated Importance, Scientific Validity, 
and Practical Usefulness of Organizational Behavior 
Theories: A Quantitative Review,” Academy of Manage￾ment Learning and Education 2, no. 3 (2003): 250–68; 
S. Asmus et al., “The Impact of Goal-Setting on Worker 
Performance - Empirical Evidence from a Real-Effort 
Production Experiment,” Procedia CIRP, 12th Global 
Conference on Sustainable Manufacturing – Emerging 
Potentials, 26 (January 2015): 127–32.
82. P.M. Wright, “Goal Setting and Monetary Incentives: 
Motivational Tools That Can Work Too Well,” Compensa￾tion and Benefits Review 26 (1994): 41–49; S. Kerr and 
D. LePelley, “Stretch Goals: Risks, Possibilities, and Best 
Practices,” in New Developments in Goal Setting and Task 
Performance, ed. E.A. Locke and G.P. Latham (London: 
Taylor and Francis, 2012), 21–32; L.D. Ordóñez and 
D.T. Welsh, “Immoral Goals: How Goal Setting May 
Lead to Unethical Behavior,” Current Opinion in 
Psychology 6 (2015): 93–96.
83. G.P. Latham, Work Motivation: History, Theory, Research, 
and Practice (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 2007), 188.
84. J. Norman, “Four in 10 U.S. Workers Think They Are 
Underpaid,” Gallup.Com, August 28, 2018; “Money 
Matters: Survey Finds Canadian Workers Are Scrutiniz￾ing Salaries; “Are You Underpaid? Survey Released With 
Robert Half 2019 Salary Guides Finds 46 Percent Of 
Workers Feel Shortchanged,” News Release (Menlo 
Park, Calif.: Robert Half, August 28, 2018); “Feelings 
Split on Pay Satisfaction,” News Release (Toronto: 
Robert Half, August 28, 2019); “More than Four in Ten 
Australian Workers Feel Underpaid and Prioritise 
Securing a Pay Rise in 2020” (Sydney, Australia: Robert 
Half, January 23, 2020).
85. The most widely studied types in organizational behav￾ior are distributive, procedural, and interactional 
justice, the latter of which includes two subsets (infor￾mational and interpersonal). However, other writers 
have identified completely different typologies, such 
as legalistic, retributive, and restorative justice. See, for 
example: G.D. Paul and L.L. Putnam, “Emergent 
Paradigms of Organizational Justice,” in Transforming 
Conflict through Communication in Personal, Family, and 
Working Relationships, ed. P.M. Kellett and T. Matyók, 
Peace and Conflict Studies (Lanham: Lexington Books, 
2016), 271–92. For a detailed discussion and critique of 
the development of the justice domain, see: D.E. Rupp 
et al., “A Critical Analysis of the Conceptualization and 
Measurement of Organizational Justice: Is It Time for 
Reassessment?,” Academy of Management Annals 11, 
no. 2 (2017): 919–59.
86. R. Cropanzano, J.F. Kirk, and M. Fortin, “How Do We 
Know When We Are Treated Fairly? Justice Rules and 
Fairness Judgments,” Research in Personnel and Human 202
a. S. Sijbrandij, “When Working Remote . . .,” Tweet, 
@sytses (blog), April 17, 2020, https://twitter.com/sytses/
status/1250946875143815168; A. Ashenden, “Employees 
Cite Lack of Social Interaction as Biggest Remote Work 
Challenge,” Reworked.Co (blog) (Simpler Media Group, 
Inc., January 27, 2021); P. Thibodeau, “GitLab’s Head 
of Remote Work Talks Successes and Strategy,” 
SearchHRSoftware (blog), November 8, 2021; “Informal 
Communication in an All-Remote Environment,” 
in GitLab All Remote Handbook (GitLab), accessed 
January 27, 2022.
b. C.C. Anderson and Y. Ong, “Top Companies 2021: The 
15 Best Workplaces to Grow Your Career in Malaysia,” 
LinkedIn News Asia, April 28, 2021. Employee quotations 
are comments on Malaysia’s most popular job advertis￾ing site, jobstreet.com.my between December 2016 and 
January 2018.
c. Joel Anderson, “20 Companies With the Happiest Em￾ployees,” Yahoo! Finance, September 17, 2021. Second 
employee quotation is from Glassdoor in 2021.
d. “Global Workforce Study” (London: Willis Towers 
Watson, 2017); “2019 Glassdoor Data on the Gender Pay 
Gap and Salary Transparency” (San Francisco: Glass￾door, March 2019); “Survey: 43 Percent Of Companies 
Are Getting Employee Recognition Right,” Press Release 
(Menlo Park, Calif.: OfficeTeam, April 16, 2019); 
“Survey: Only 27 Per Cent of Companies in Canada Are 
Acing Employee Recognition” (Toronto: OfficeTeam, 
April 16, 2019); Office of Personnel Management, “2020 
Federal Employee Viewpoint Survey” (Washington, 
DC: United States Government, April 2021).
e. C. Wiryakusuma et al., “How We Nudged Employees to 
Embrace Flexible Work,” Harvard Business Review, 
November 3, 2017; C. Hava, “How Nudge Theory Guides 
Employees in the Right Direction,” HRM Magazine 
(Australia), May 2021.
f. Gallup Strengths Center, “Gallup Called to Coach 
with Ryan McCarthy–Australia Singapore Edition,” Pod￾cast in Called to Coach, (YouTube, October 5 2016); C. 
Scobie, “Fighting the Good Fight, for the People,” Acuity, 
Feb/March 2017; C. Donaldson, “5 Keys to Strengths￾Based Talent Success at Australia’s Best Place to Work,” 
Inside HR, January 29, 2018. The inventory manager 
quote is from Glassdoor, June 24, 2019.
g. Some studies report a curvilinear effect of wage disper￾sion on motivation or performance. The relationship may 
also depend on club (organization) size or variable ver￾sus fixed pay dispersion. The effect may also be sup￾pressed by player pay caps. See: C. Grund and N. 
Westergaard-Nielsen, “The Dispersion of Employees’ 
Wage Increases and Firm Performance,” Industrial & 
Labor Relations Review 61, no. 4 (2008): 485–501; 
H. Katayama and H. Nuch, “A Game-Level Analysis of 
Salary Dispersion and Team Performance in the National 
Basketball Association,” Applied Economics 43, no. 10 
(2011): 1193–207; P.E. Downes and D. Choi, “Employee 
Reactions to Pay Dispersion: A Typology of Existing 
Research,” Human Resource Management Review 24, 
no. 1 (2014): 53–66; S.A. Conroy et al., “A Multilevel 
Approach to the Effects of Pay Variation,” Research in 
Personnel and Human Resources Management 32 (2014): 
93. Canadian Press, “Pierre Berton, Canadian Cultural Icon, 
Enjoyed Long and Colourful Career,” Times Colonist 
(Victoria, BC), November 30, 2004.
94. J. Fizel, A.C. Krautman, and L. Hadley, “Equity and 
Arbitration in Major League Baseball,” Managerial and 
Decision Economics 23, no. 7 (2002): 427–35; M. Ezzamel 
and R. Watson, “Pay Comparability across and within 
UK Boards: An Empirical Analysis of the Cash Pay 
Awards to CEOs and Other Board Members,” Journal 
of Management Studies 39, no. 2 (2002): 207–32.
95. D.R. Bobocel and L. Gosse, “Procedural Justice: A 
Historical Review and Critical Analysis,” in Oxford 
Handbook of Justice in the Workplace, ed. R.S. Cropanzano 
and M.L. Ambrose (New York: Oxford University Press, 
2015), 51–88; Robert J. Bies, “Interactional Justice: 
Looking Backward, Looking Forward,” in The Oxford 
Handbook of Justice in the Workplace, ed. R. Cropanzano 
and M.L. Ambrose, Oxford Library of Psychology (New 
York: Oxford University Press, 2015), 89–107.
96. J. Greenberg and E.A. Lind, “The Pursuit of Organiza￾tional Justice: From Conceptualization to Implication to 
Application,” in Industrial and Organizational Psychology: 
Linking Theory with Practice ed. C.L. Cooper and E.A. 
Locke (London: Blackwell, 2000), 72–108 ; C.B. 
Goldberg, M.A. Clark, and A.B. Henley, “Speaking Up: 
A Conceptual Model of Voice Responses Following the 
Unfair Treatment of Others in Non-Union Settings,” 
Human Resource Management 50, no. 1 (2011): 75–94; 
M.R. Bashshur, “When Voice Matters: A Multilevel 
Review of the Impact of Voice in Organizations,” Journal 
of Management 41, no. 5 (2015): 1530–54.
97. Robert J. Bies, “Interactional Justice: Looking Backward, 
Looking Forward,” in The Oxford Handbook of Justice in 
the Workplace, ed. R. Cropanzano and M.L. Ambrose, 
Oxford Library of Psychology (New York: Oxford Univer￾sity Press, 2015), 89–107; R. Cropanzano, J.F. Kirk, and 
M. Fortin, “How Do We Know When We Are Treated 
Fairly? Justice Rules and Fairness Judgments,” Research 
in Personnel and Human Resources Management 33 
(2015): 279–350.
98. J.S. Michel, K. Newness, and K. Duniewicz, “How 
Abusive Supervision Affects Workplace Deviance: A 
Moderated-Mediation Examination of Aggressiveness 
and Work-Related Negative Affect,” Journal of Business 
and Psychology 31, no. 1 (2016): 1–22; J.K. Oh and C.I.C. 
Farh, “An Emotional Process Theory of How Subordinates 
Appraise, Experience, and Respond to Abusive Supervi￾sion Over Time,” Academy of Management Review 42, 
no. 2 (2017): 207–32.
99. D.T. Miller, “Disrespect and the Experience of Injustice,” 
Annual Review of Psychology 52 (2001): 527–53; R. 
Vermunt and H. Steensma, “Procedural Justice,” in 
Handbook of Social Justice Theory and Research, ed. 
C. Sabbagh and M. Schmitt (New York, NY: Springer 
New York, 2016), 219–36; K.A. DeCelles and K. Aquino, 
“Dark Knights: When and Why an Employee Becomes a 
Workplace Vigilante,” Academy of Management Review 45, 
no. 3 (2020): 528–48.
100. M.L. Ambrose, M.A. Seabright, and M. Schminke, 
“Sabotage in the Workplace: The Role of Organizational 
Injustice,” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision 
Processes 89, no. 1 (2002): 947–65.203
September 21, 2018.; N. Grossman, “Agassiz Postal 
Workers Join Canada Post Strike, Push for Equality 
to Urban Carriers,” The Agassiz - Harrison Observer, 
October 29, 2018; “Retroactive Payments, Collection of 
Premiums to Appear on Your October 17 Pay Statement” 
(Canada Post letter to RSMC employees, October 2019). 
But even with the arbitration ruling, some forms of pay 
inequity seem to continue between the two Canada Post 
groups. see: K. Yarr, “COVID-19 Pandemic Highlights 
Different Pay for Urban, Rural Mail Deliveries,” CBC 
News, May 15, 2020.
1–64; B.L. Connelly et al., “Minding the Gap: Anteced￾ents and Consequences of Top Management-To-Worker 
Pay Dispersion,” Journal of Management 42, no. 4 
(2016): 862–85; H.L. Chan et al., “CEO-Employee Pay 
Gap and Firm R&D Efficiency,” Review of Accounting 
and Finance 19, no. 2 (2020): 271–87; T. Gasparetto and 
A. Barajas, “Wage Dispersion and Team Performance: 
The Moderation Role of Club Size,” Journal of Sports 
Economics 23, no. 5 (2022): 548–66.
h. T. Pedwell, “Arbitrator Awards Rural Canada Post Carriers 
up to 25% Raise in Pay Equity Decision,” Benefits Canada, 
Design Credit: Blue globe icon: Merfin/Shutterstock204
Applied Performance 
Practices
When Adele Kennedy was hired as a “people operations generalist” at 
Expensify, she joined an organization that is proud to be different from the 
typical high-tech firm. To begin with, the expense management software company has no job 
titles and minimal supervision (only three levels of hierarchy). Instead, its 150 employees have generalist 
positions and are expected to figure out for themselves how to contribute to the company and their own 
personal growth.
“The autonomy you have to work on the things you care about is huge,” says Kennedy. “It’s a lot of 
personal responsibility because I structure my own day. I pick up the things that I want to work on, 
whether it’s this interview, or it’s writing a design doc, or it’s getting into coding.”
Another Expensify employee explains further: “Being a ‘generalist’ is highly valued, meaning it’s 
actually encouraged for you to step outside the role you were hired for initially. I’ve worked so 
many places where stepping out of the narrow box of your designated role is strictly discouraged. 
Not so here.”
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
LO 6-1 Discuss the meaning of money and identify several individual-, team-, and 
organizational-level performance-based rewards.
LO 6-2 Describe five ways to improve reward effectiveness.
LO 6-3 List the advantages and disadvantages of job specialization.
LO 6-4 Diagram the job characteristics model and describe three ways to improve employee 
motivation through job design.
LO 6-5 Define psychological empowerment and identify strategies that support empowerment.
LO 6-6 Describe the five elements of self-leadership and identify specific personal and work 
environment influences on self-leadership.
Learning Objectives
6
chapterExpensify employees require considerable self-leadership because they have maximum autonomy to craft their work 
assignments with negligible supervision or performance measures.
PART 2: INDIVIDUAL BEHAVIOR AND PROCESSES
With so much autonomy and minimal supervision, Expensify seeks out employees who excel in 
self-leadership. “Everything is self directed,” advises an Expensify employee in Melbourne, Australia. 
“Not a place for people who depend on hierarchy and being told what to do by a boss.”
Expensify’s pay practices also stand out. Jobs are so idiosyncratic and dynamic that the company 
eschews structured goals, key performance indicators, and associated financial rewards. “We don’t use 
numbers to measure performance,” declares Expensify founder and CEO David Barrett. “I trust that my 
employees work hard and pay close attention to what’s working and what’s not.”
Everyone is paid “as if they live in San Francisco” even though Expensify is now headquartered in 
Portland, Oregon, and staff work from anywhere. This means that employees enjoy above average pay 
rates that don’t rise or fall when they move geographically. Another unique pay practice is that no one 
can negotiate their pay rate. Instead, Expensify completes a lengthy paired comparison process twice 
each year. Every person’s performance and broader contribution to the company is ranked against 
every other employee. All Expensify employees can participate in this salary calculation.1
Expensify has become an incredibly successful technology firm because its employees are motivated 
by enriched jobs, an empowering work environment, potentially equitable pay practices, and a culture 
that encourages self-leadership. All four topics are discussed in this chapter.
205
nd3000/Shutterstock206 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
The chapter begins by examining the meaning of money. This is followed 
by an overview of financial reward practices, including the different types of 
rewards and how to implement them effectively. Next, we look at the 
conceptual foundations of job design, followed by specific job design 
strategies for motivating employees. We then consider the elements of 
empowerment, as well as conditions that support empowerment. The final 
part of the chapter explains how employees manage their own performance 
through self-leadership.
The Meaning of Money in the Workplace
Rewarding people with money is one of the oldest applied performance practices, and is 
certainly the most widespread. At the most basic level, money and other financial rewards 
represent a form of exchange; employees provide their labor, skill, and knowledge in re￾turn for money and benefits from the organization. From this perspective, money and re￾lated rewards align employee goals with organizational goals. This concept of economic 
exchange can be found across cultures. The word for pay in Malaysian and Slovak means 
“to replace a loss”; in Hebrew and Swedish it means “making equal.”2
However, money is much more than an object of compensation for an employee’s con￾tribution to organizational objectives. Money relates to our needs, our emotions, and our 
self-concept. It is a symbol of achievement and status, a motivator, a source of enhanced 
or reduced anxiety, and an influence on our propensity to make ethical or risky decisions. 
It also generates a variety of emotions, some of which are negative (anxiety, depression, 
anger, helplessness, etc.).3
 Furthermore, money influences human thoughts and behavior 
nonconsciously to some extent.4
 According to one source, “Money is probably the most 
emotionally meaningful object in contemporary life.”5
The meaning of money varies considerably from one person to the next. Some people 
value it as an instrument for acquiring other things of value; others value money for its 
own sake. A widely studied model of money attitudes suggests that people have a strong 
“money ethic” or “monetary intelligence” when they believe that money is not evil; that it 
is a symbol of achievement, respect, and power; and that it should be budgeted carefully. 
These attitudes toward money influence an individual’s ethical conduct, organizational 
citizenship, and many other behaviors and attitudes.6
LO 6-1
®
SELF-ASSESSMENT 6.1: What Is Your Attitude toward Money?
Do males and females have different perceptions and attitudes toward money? Appar￾ently so, according to several studies.7
 In almost all societies, males attach more impor￾tance or value to money than do females. Males are more likely than females to view 
money as a symbol of power and status as well as the means to autonomy. Females are 
more likely to view money in terms of things for which it can be exchanged and particu￾larly as a symbol of generosity and caring by using money to buy things for others.
The meaning of money also varies across cultures.8
 People in China, Japan, and other 
countries with high power distance (acceptance of unequal distribution of power in a 
society—see Chapter 2) tend to have a high respect and priority for money, whereas people 
in countries with a strong egalitarian culture (such as Denmark, Austria, and Israel) are 
discouraged from openly talking about money or displaying their personal wealth. One Chapter Six Applied Performance Practices 207
study suggests that Swiss culture values saving money, whereas Italian culture places more 
value on spending it.
The motivational effect of money is much greater than was previously believed, and 
this effect is due more to its symbolic value than to what it can buy.9
 Philosopher John 
Stuart Mill made this observation almost 150 years ago when he wrote: “The love of 
money is not only one of the strongest moving forces of human life, but money is, in many 
cases, desired in and for itself.”10 People who earn higher pay tend to have higher job 
performance because the higher paycheck enhances their self-concept evaluation. Others 
have noted that the symbolic value of money depends on how it is distributed in the orga￾nization and how many people receive that financial reward.
Overall, current organizational behavior knowledge indicates that money is much more 
than a means of exchange between employer and employee. It fulfills a variety of needs, 
influences emotions, and shapes or represents a person’s self-concept. These findings are 
important to remember when the employer is distributing financial rewards in the work￾place. Over the next few pages, we look at various reward practices and how to improve 
the implementation of performance-based rewards.
Financial Reward Practices
Financial rewards come in many forms, which can be organized into the four specific ob￾jectives identified in Exhibit 6.1: membership and seniority, job status, competencies, and 
performance.
MEMBERSHIP- AND SENIORITY-BASED REWARDS
Membership-based and seniority-based rewards (sometimes called “pay for pulse”) repre￾sent the largest part of most paychecks. Some employee benefits are provided equally to 
EXHIBIT 6.1 Reward Objectives, Advantages, and Disadvantages
REWARD OBJECTIVE SAMPLE REWARDS ADVANTAGES DISADVANTAGES
Membership/
seniority
• Fixed pay
• Most employee 
benefits 
• Paid time off
• May attract applicants 
• Minimizes stress of insecurity 
• Reduces turnover
• Doesn’t directly motivate performance 
• May discourage poor performers from leaving 
• “Golden handcuffs” may undermine performance
Job status • Promotion-based 
pay increase 
• Status-based 
benefits
• Tries to maintain fairness 
across jobs
• Tries to minimize job-based 
pay discrimination 
• Motivates employees to 
compete for promotions
• Encourages hierarchy, which may increase costs 
and reduce responsiveness
• Reinforces status differences 
• Motivates job competition and exaggerated 
job worth
Competencies • Pay increase based 
on competency 
• Skill-based pay
• Improves workforce flexibility 
• Tends to improve quality 
• Is consistent with employability
• Relies on subjective measurement of 
competencies 
• Skill-based pay plans are expensive
Task performance • Commissions
• Merit pay 
• Gainsharing
• Profit-sharing 
• Stock options
• Motivates task performance 
• Attracts performance-oriented 
applicants 
• Organizational rewards create 
an ownership culture 
• Pay variability may avoid 
layoffs during downturns
• May weaken intrinsic motivation 
• May distance reward giver from receiver 
• May discourage creativity 
• Tends to address symptoms, not underlying 
causes of behavior208 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
everyone, such as free or subsidized meals at work. Other rewards increase with seniority. 
Employees with 10 or more years of service at the Paul Scherrer Institute near Zurich, 
Switzerland, receive an annual loyalty bonus equal to half a month’s salary; those with 20 
or more years of service at the research organization receive a bonus equal to a full 
month’s salary. Companies have also ramped up various types of loyalty or retention bo￾nuses in response to skill shortages and high turnover. Shaker Cuisine and Mixologie 
hands out CAD $1,000 loyalty bonuses every six months to chefs at its dozen restaurants 
in Quebec, Canada.11
These membership- and seniority-based rewards potentially reduce turnover and at￾tract job applicants (particularly those who desire predictable income). However, they 
do not directly motivate job performance; on the contrary, they discourage poor 
performers from seeking work better suited to their abilities. Instead, good performers 
are more easily lured to better-paying jobs. Some of these rewards are also “golden 
handcuffs”—they discourage employees from quitting because of deferred bonuses or 
generous benefits that are not available elsewhere. For instance, bankers at Credit Suisse 
receive a large annual performance bonus, but they must return some or most of that 
reward if they leave within three years. The problem is that golden handcuffs potentially 
weaken job performance because they generate continuance rather than affective commit￾ment (see Chapter 4).12
JOB STATUS–BASED REWARDS
Almost every organization rewards employees to some extent on the basis of the status or 
worth of the jobs they occupy. In many parts of the world, companies measure job worth 
through job evaluation. Most job evaluation methods try to quantify the value of the job 
by giving higher points to jobs that require more skill and effort, have more responsibility, 
and have more difficult working conditions.13 The higher the estimated worth of a job, the 
higher the minimum and maximum pay range received by people in that job. Employees 
with more valued jobs sometimes also receive larger offices, company-paid vehicles, and 
other perks.
Job evaluation is a critical practice for estimating the internal pay equity or comparable 
worth of jobs. This calculation is ethically important because it identifies unfair pay dis￾crimination, such as when people in a female-dominated job group are paid significantly 
less than people in a male-dominated job of similar value. Many firms rely on external 
market rates (what other companies pay for specific job groups), but then face lawsuits 
because market rates discriminate unfairly against female jobs than male jobs, as deter￾mined by systematic analysis of job worth. However, critics suggest that estimating job 
worth is subjective, and the embedded bias may actually institutionalize inequities.14
Through job evaluation and other methods, job status–based rewards try to improve 
feelings of fairness by distributing more pay to people in higher-valued jobs. These re￾wards also motivate employees to compete for promotions. However, at a time when com￾panies are trying to be cost-efficient and agile, job status–based rewards potentially do the 
opposite by encouraging a bureaucratic hierarchy. For example, Expensify (in the opening 
case study) avoids job status rewards because of its flat structure and job worth varies 
considerably with each employee’s choice of projects and skill development. Job status 
rewards also reinforce a status mentality, whereas Millennial employees expect a more 
egalitarian workplace. Furthermore, status-based pay potentially motivates employees to 
compete with one another for higher-status jobs and to exaggerate their job duties and 
hoard resources as ways to increase the worth of their current job.15
COMPETENCY-BASED REWARDS
Many companies have shifted reward priorities from job status to skills, knowledge, and 
other competencies that lead to superior performance. The two main reward practices in 
this category are competency-based pay structures and skill-based pay structures.
job evaluation
systematically rating the worth 
of jobs within an organization 
by measuring the required 
skill, effort, responsibility, and 
working conditionsChapter Six Applied Performance Practices 209
Competency-based pay structures identify clusters of skills, knowledge, and experience 
specific to each broad job group as well as clusters relevant across all job groups. Em￾ployees progress through the pay range within their job group as they demonstrate 
higher levels of those competencies.16 For example, the pay system at one mid-sized 
power company lists accountability, technical competency, and a few other skills rele￾vant to everyone in the organization. Each of the company’s four broad organizational 
levels also has a specific set of competencies. For instance, technical acumen and 
team skills are two skill sets that influence pay among employees in the technical/
professional job group.17
Skill-based pay structures are more measurable competency-based reward systems in 
which employees receive higher pay based on how quickly or accurately they perform 
specific tasks and operate equipment.18 High Liner Foods, one of North America’s largest 
frozen seafood companies, assigns pay rates to employees at its Portsmouth, New Hamp￾shire, plant based on the number and difficulty of skills they have mastered. “We’re set￾ting our sites up for a skill-based pay system, so as employees learn and demonstrate 
certain skills, they move into a different pay bracket,” explains a High Liner executive.
Competency-based rewards motivate employees to learn new skills.19 This tends to sup￾port a more flexible workforce, increase employee creativity, and allow employees to be 
more adaptive to embracing new practices in a dynamic environment. Product or service 
quality also tends to improve because employees with multiple skills are more likely to 
understand the work process and know how to improve it. However, competency-based 
pay plans have not always worked out as well as promised by their advocates. They are 
often over-designed, making it difficult to communicate these plans to employees. Compe￾tency definitions tend to be abstract, which raises questions about fairness when employ￾ers are relying on these definitions to award pay increases. Skill-based pay systems 
measure specific skills, so they are usually more objective. However, they are expensive 
because employees spend more time learning new tasks.20
Skill-Based Pay at Wonderful 
Companya
Wonderful Company is the parent company of the world’s 
largest flower delivery service (Teleflora), the world’s larg￾est grower of tree nuts, the largest citrus grower in North 
America, and other diversified businesses. These opera￾tions require employees who are motivated and rewarded 
for developing valuable skills, so Wonderful Co. has intro￾duced a skill-based reward system for production staff.
Employees are assigned to skill blocks, such as Opera￾tor 5 and Mechanical 1. These pay groups have clearly 
defined skills as well as pathways to higher skill blocks. 
As an example, an employee in the Mechanical 1 block 
needs to know how to operate the correction tensioning 
tool, calculate chain deflection for each system, demon￾strate the correct use of an Accu-Glide conveyor service, 
and so forth.
Higher pay rates are earned as the employee demon￾strates mastery of skills in the next skill block. If someone in 
a general operator job wants to enter the refrigeration 
technician skill group, they would begin by learning the 
specific skills in the Mechanical 1 skill block. The employee 
would receive a higher pay rate after measurable demon￾stration of those skills.
The employee would next learn skills associated with 
Mechanical 2 skill block and receive a higher pay rate 
when these are mastered. Electrical 1 and other skill 
blocks are also part of the refrigeration technician skill 
group, which the employee could also learn over time.
global connections 6.1
David Hancock/Alamy Stock Photo210 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
PERFORMANCE-BASED REWARDS
Performance-based rewards have existed for more than 4,000 years, since shepherds and 
other workers during the Third Dynasty of Ur (located in modern-day Iraq) had strict 
performance standards and received harsh penalties if their output (number of sheep de￾livered) fell short of those standards. Hundreds of years later, the most productive weav￾ers in ancient Babylon received higher payment (in food) than coworkers with lower 
productivity.21 Today, performance-based rewards exist in many forms across most cul￾tures. Here is an overview of some of the most popular individual, team, and organiza￾tional performance-based rewards.
Individual Rewards Individual incentives exist in a wide variety across a range of 
industries and occupations. Housekeeping staff in many hotels are paid a piece rate—a 
specific amount earned for each room cleaned.22 Real estate agents and other salespeople 
typically earn commissions, in which the amount of pay earned depends on sales volume. 
Executives receive annual performance bonuses determined by revenue or other metrics 
within the region or division they lead. Several unique individual incentives have be intro￾duced during the COVID-19 pandemic. Many firms gave bonuses to employees who got 
fully vaccinated. American Airlines paid flight attendants a higher hourly rate throughout 
the Christmas holiday season if they didn’t have any absenteeism.23
Team Rewards Organizations have shifted their focus from individuals to teams, 
and accompanying this transition has been the introduction of more team-based rewards. 
Employees at Nucor Corp. earn bonuses that can exceed half their total pay, determined 
GLOBAL VARIATIONS IN INDIVIDUAL PERFORMANCE-BASED PAYb
Scores represent the average number of individual pay-for-performance (I-PFP) practices used by each company sur￾veyed within the specified country. The I-PFP practices include using performance-based rewards, using performance 
appraisals to make pay decisions, and so forth. The study surveyed 4,207 companies (minimum 100 employees) in 
27 countries. This exhibit displays a sample across the range of the countries studied.
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
3.40
3.71
4.58
4.86
5.30
5.84
5.96
6.25
6.94
7.34
7.67
7.83
Russia
Japan
Philippines
Switzerland
USA
Germany
Taiwan
France
Finland
Sweden
Denmark
UKChapter Six Applied Performance Practices 211
by how much steel is produced by the team. This team-based bonus system also includes 
penalties. If employees catch a bad batch of steel before it leaves the mini-mill, they lose 
their bonus for that shipment. But if a bad batch makes its way to the customer, the team 
loses three times its usual bonus.24
Another form of team-based performance reward, called a gainsharing plan, calculates 
bonuses from the department’s or business unit’s cost savings and productivity improve￾ment. Gainsharing plans tend to improve team dynamics, knowledge sharing, and pay 
satisfaction. They also create a reasonably strong link between effort and performance, 
because much of the cost reduction and labor efficiency is within the team’s control.25
Gainsharing plans in manufacturing plants motivate employees to minimize wastage 
and time loss in the production process. Some hospitals have cautiously introduced a form 
of gainsharing, whereby physicians and medical staff in a medical unit (cardiology, ortho￾pedics, etc.) are collectively rewarded for cost reductions in surgery and patient care costs. 
Parisian restaurant Bouillon Chartier has a reward system that includes gainsharing factors 
(kitchen productivity, control of food cost ratio) along with other performance metrics 
(seating turnover, sale of higher-value meals, customer satisfaction). Over the past decade, 
this plan has paid an average of 4.3 percent above each employee’s annual salary.26
Organizational Rewards Many performance-based rewards are distributed to a 
group of employees (typically executives) or to the entire workforce based on the compa￾ny’s success. The most common organizational rewards are the companywide perfor￾mance bonus, employee stock ownership plan, stock options, and profit-sharing plan.
Companywide performance bonus. This type of reward distributes bonuses to some or 
all employees for achieving preset organizational goals or companywide productivity im￾provements. Hilcorp Energy Company pays annual bonuses to all employees calculated 
by the company’s production rate, midstream income, reserves, and operating costs. The 
company’s latest bonus paid $75,000 to each employee along with another $25,000 to be 
donated to a charity of the employee’s choice. “The annual bonus payout is up to 60 per￾cent of salary and is the same number for every employee—no team component, no indi￾vidual component—one number for the entire organization,” explains Greg Lalicker, CEO 
of the Texas-based oil and gas firm.27
Employee stock ownership plan (ESOP). This organizational reward encourages employ￾ees to buy company stock, usually at a discounted price. The financial incentive occurs in 
the form of dividends and market appreciation of the stock. Grocery retail chain Publix 
Super Markets, which has the largest ESOP in America, distributes a portion of company 
profits to employees in the form of company stock. “Working for an employee-owned com￾pany gives me a strong sense of ownership so that when I walk into work every day, I want 
to do my very best,” says Matthew Honeycutt, manager of a Publix store in Virginia.28
Stock options. These rewards give employees the right to purchase company stock at a 
predetermined price up to a fixed expiration date. Here’s how stock options work: An 
employer might offer employees the right to purchase 100 shares at $50 each at any time 
between two and six years from now. If the stock price is, say, $60 two years later, em￾ployees could earn $10 per share from these options, or they could wait up to six years 
for the stock price to rise further. If the stock price never rises above $50 during that 
time, employees are “out of the money,” and they would let the options expire. The inten￾tion of stock options is to 
motivate employees to 
make the company more 
profitable, thereby raising 
the company’s stock price 
and enabling them to reap 
the value above the prede￾termined price of the 
stock options.
gainsharing plan
a team-based reward that 
calculates bonuses from the 
work unit’s cost savings and 
productivity improvement
employee stock ownership 
plan (ESOP)
a reward system that 
encourages employees to buy 
company stock
stock options
a reward system that gives 
employees the right to 
purchase company stock at a 
future date at a predetermined 
price212 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
Profit-sharing plan. A profit-sharing plan distributes a predetermined percentage of the 
company’s profits to some or all employees. For example, Shepherd and Wedderburn 
(one of Scotland’s largest law firms), pays a discretionary profit-sharing bonus which was 
about five percent of each employee’s salary in the most recent financial year. Taiwanese 
multinational ASUS also pays a discretionary bonus based on annual earnings, the most 
recent of which equated to more than two months of salary. Rather than distributing cash 
bonuses, many US firms assign the profit-share funds either into the company pension 
plan or employee stock ownership plan.29
Evaluating Organizational-Level Rewards
How effective are organizational-level rewards? Research 
indicates that ESOPs and stock options tend to create an 
ownership culture in which employees feel aligned with 
the organization’s success.30 They may also increase firm 
performance under some circumstances, but the effects 
are modest.31 Profit-sharing and organization-wide pro￾ductivity bonuses are also associated with improved pro￾ductivity, but their effectiveness depends on industry, 
bonus complexity, and other factors.32 Profit-sharing has 
the advantage of automatically adjusting employee com￾pensation with the firm’s prosperity, thereby reducing 
the need for layoffs or negotiated pay reductions during 
recessions.
One reason why organizational rewards don’t improve 
motivation or performance very much is that employees 
perceive a weak connection between their individual ef￾fort and the determinants of those rewards (e.g., corpo￾rate profits or stock price). Even in small firms, the 
company’s stock price or profitability are influenced by 
economic conditions, competition, and other factors be￾yond the employee’s immediate control. This low indi￾vidual performance-to-outcome expectancy suppresses 
the incentive’s motivational effect. However, a few stud￾ies have found that ESOPs and other organizational re￾wards have a more robust influence on motivation and 
firm performance when employees are also involved in organizational decisions.33 We 
discuss employee involvement in the next chapter (Chapter 7).
Improving Reward Effectiveness
Performance-based rewards have come under attack over the years for discouraging 
creativity, distancing management from employees, distracting employees from the 
meaningfulness of the work itself, and being quick fixes that ignore the true causes of 
poor performance. Studies have even reported that the heightened stress created by 
very large rewards can reduce, rather than increase, performance.34 Although these 
issues have kernels of truth under specific circumstances, they do not necessarily 
mean that we should abandon performance-based pay. On the contrary, top-performing 
companies are more likely to have performance-based rewards, which is consistent 
with evidence that these rewards are an important factor in human capital develop￾ment (see Chapter 1).35 Reward systems do motivate most employees, but only under 
the right conditions. Here are some of the more important strategies for improving 
reward effectiveness.
profit-sharing plan
a reward system that pays 
bonuses to employees on the 
basis of the previous year’s 
level of corporate profits
Just before the COVID-19 pandemic arrived, Delta Air Lines distributed profit￾sharing bonuses equal to roughly two months pay to every employee. No bonus 
was paid in the first year of the pandemic due to the airline’s historic financial 
loss. However, a $1,250 bonus was distributed the following year when Delta 
eked out a small profit. “For years, I would get beaten up by Wall Street,” said 
Delta CEO Ed Bastian after the large pre-pandemic profit-sharing payout. “They 
thought the profits were theirs, and ‘why are you giving the profits away to the 
employees?’ Wall Street has actually come full circle, and they realize that Delta 
is the most awarded airline in the world because of its employees.”c
Heorshe/Alamy Stock Photo
LO 6-2Chapter Six Applied Performance Practices 213
LINK REWARDS TO PERFORMANCE
Organizational behavior modification theory and expectancy theory (Chapter 5) both 
recommend that employees with better performance should be rewarded more than those 
with poorer performance. Unfortunately, this simple principle seems to be unusually dif￾ficult to apply. Few employees see a relationship between job performance and the 
amount of pay they and their coworkers receive. One survey reported that only 20 percent 
of large and mid-size US and Canadian employers agreed that individual merit pay was 
driving higher levels of individual performance.36
How can companies improve the pay–performance linkage? Inconsistencies and bias can 
be minimized through gainsharing, ESOPs, and other plans that use objective performance 
measures. Where subjective measures of performance are necessary, companies should rely 
on multiple sources of information. Companies also need to apply rewards soon after the 
performance occurs, and in a large-enough dose (such as a bonus rather than a pay 
increase), so employees experience positive emotions when they receive the reward.37
ENSURE THAT REWARDS ARE RELEVANT
Companies need to align rewards with performance within the employee’s control. The 
more employees see a “line of sight” between their daily actions and the reward, the more 
they are motivated to improve performance. “We call it return on controllable assets,” 
explains Michael Kneeland, board chair and former CEO of United Rentals. Bonuses at 
the world’s largest equipment rental company are determined by how profitably United 
managers take care of assets within their control. Higher-level managers earn bonuses 
based more on overall fleet performance, whereas branch managers are rewarded more 
for parts and inventory efficiencies at their local operations. “These are things within 
their control that they are assessed on,” says Kneeland.38 Reward systems also need to 
correct for situational factors. Salespeople in one region may have higher sales because 
the economy is stronger there than elsewhere, so sales bonuses need to be adjusted for 
such economic factors.
USE TEAM REWARDS FOR INTERDEPENDENT JOBS
Team rewards are better than individual rewards when employees work in highly interde￾pendent jobs because it is difficult to measure individual performance in these situations. 
Nucor Corp. relies on team-based bonuses for this reason; producing steel is a team effort, 
so employees earn bonuses based on team performance. Team rewards also encourage 
cooperation, which is more important when work is highly interdependent. Employees 
also favor team-based work when rewards are determined by team performance. One con￾cern, however, is that employees (particularly the most productive employees) in the 
United States and many other low-collectivism cultures prefer rewards based on their in￾dividual performance rather than team performance.39
ENSURE THAT REWARDS ARE VALUED
Rewards are most effective when they are valued, yet companies sometimes miscalculate 
the reward’s valence for some or all employees. For instance, one company had a time￾sensitive project that could have resulted in a hefty (six-figure) government fine for noncompli￾ance if completed late. A few employees outside that area of responsibility dropped their 
current work to help others finish the project. To thank them, the employer gave a company￾branded coffee cup, which had a chalkboard surface that one could write on and wash off. 
“For months I would write a different phrase or word on the cup that meant ‘cheap gift’ in 
a foreign language,” admits one employee. “I know several people used to use google trans￾late to find out what I’d written every day.” The company provided a more meaningful re￾ward (free lunch and a gift card) next time a team of employees saved the day.40214 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
The solution, of course, is to ask employees what they value. Campbell Soup did this 
several years ago at one of its distribution centers. Executives thought the employees 
would ask for more money in a special team reward program. Instead, distribution staff 
said the most valued reward was a leather jacket with the Campbell Soup logo on the 
back. The leather jackets cost much less, yet were worth much more than the financial 
bonus the company had intended to distribute.41
WATCH OUT FOR UNINTENDED CONSEQUENCES
Performance-based rewards sometimes have unexpected—and undesirable—effects on 
employee motivation and behavior.42 One problem is that rewards can motivate 
When Rewards Go Wrongd
Organizational rewards can produce the desired behav￾ior, but they are also well known for producing unex￾pected dysfunctional outcomes. Here are four types of 
unintended consequences, with examples.
Gaming the system. Rewards often motivate employ￾ees to game the system. They do things that get the re￾ward, rather than engage in the behavior intended by the 
reward. For instance, highly favorable customer reviews 
are important for car sales staff because they affect the 
person’s pay and future employment. Car dealerships also 
value high customer ratings because manufacturers re￾ward dealerships based on those ratings. Unfortunately, 
this leads to dysfunctional behavior. Sales staff have cre￾ated awkward moments when they beg customers for per￾fect reviews. Dealerships have secretly incentivized 
customers with free gas, detailing, and other car services in 
exchange for perfect scores. These actions produce excel￾lent customer reviews, but not excellent customer service.
Manipulating information. Rewards sometimes moti￾vate people to hide, misrepresent, or falsify information as￾sociated with the reward. A study found that one Norwegian 
hospital was incredibly successful in treating patients with 
multiple traumas. But that hospital also treated far more 
trauma cases than expected for the size of its catchment 
area. Further investigation revealed that the hospital was 
“upcoding” minor injuries as much more serious multiple 
traumas. Miscoding the patient’s condition not only pro￾duced higher success rates (minor injuries have better reha￾bilitation prospects); the hospital also received more 
revenue from trauma cases than from minor injury cases.
Doing only what gets measured. A classic problem 
with rewards is that employees direct more effort to the 
measured behavior than to unmeasured behavior. For 
example, at one time almost all public transit bus drivers 
in Santiago, Chile, were paid by the number of fare-paying 
passengers. This motivated the drivers to be efficient 
and ensure that passengers paid their fare. But it also 
motivated them to compromise safety and passenger 
service, which weren’t measured. Drivers aggressively 
sped away before passengers were safely on board, 
raced to the next passenger waiting area, and left bus 
doors open to save time. Some drivers skipped stops 
with only one or two people waiting. They also drove by 
stops with schoolchildren, who paid only one-third of the 
regular fare.
Altering the employment relationship. Rewards are 
known to replace a relational (i.e., flexible, trust-based) 
employment relationship with a transactional relationship 
whereby employees expect to be compensated for every￾thing. For example, many universities reward faculty for 
publication output, teaching time, and committee chair 
roles. One faculty administrator took this much further 
with a detailed system that assigned points for different 
types of publications, types of courses taught (level, class 
size), types of committees, and so forth. Several staff com￾plained that the reward system should also assign points 
for other activities, such as representing the faculty in 
community events and attending faculty meetings. Some 
privately said they would otherwise stop volunteering 
their time to the department. However, the points-based 
reward system was abandoned a year later when the fac￾ulty administrator moved to another university.
global connections 6.2
Andrey_Popov/ShutterstockChapter Six Applied Performance Practices 215
employees to “game” the system, that is, to do things that directly influence the size of 
the reward, rather than behaviors intended by the reward. For example, the UK govern￾ment wanted emergency room patients to be assessed (triaged) within five minutes of 
arrival. To fulfill this target, some hospitals employed “hello nurses” who merely greeted 
incoming patients within five minutes but didn’t actually triage them. A second unin￾tended consequence is that rewards motivate people to manipulate the information that 
affects the reward. Some hospital managers have unethically upcoded or miscoded pa￾tients, which produced higher revenue and better outcome statistics. Third, rewards 
motivate people to select work that achieves the reward more easily or results in a larger 
reward (known as cherry picking or cream skimming). This occurs when a retail worker 
tags customers browsing near the higher priced products, or when a welfare worker 
chooses less difficult cases.
A fourth unintended consequence is that rewards tend to focus employees on mea￾sured outcomes and away from unmeasured outcomes. For instance, companies dis￾cover that their reward system increases production output (quantity) but decreases 
product quality. Fifth, rewards sometimes shift employees from a relational to a trans￾actional employment relationship. When a variety of incentives are introduced, em￾ployees become less willing to engage in activities that are not rewarded, such as 
organizational citizenship behaviors. Finally, rewards may reduce costs in expected 
ways (e.g., more efficient production), but these benefits are offset by much higher 
hidden costs. Employees might experience more stress, which results in higher absen￾teeism and emotion regulation problems (e.g., getting angry with clients). Or employ￾ees might achieve higher productivity by increasing costs or damage to expensive 
production equipment.
Job Design Practices
How do you build a better job? This question has challenged organizational behavior ex￾perts, psychologists, engineers, and economists for a few centuries. Some jobs have very 
few tasks and usually require very little skill. Other jobs are immensely complex and re￾quire years of experience and learning to master them. From one extreme to the other, 
jobs have different effects on work efficiency and employee motivation. The ideal, at least 
from the organization’s perspective, is to find the right combination so that work is per￾formed efficiently but employees are engaged and satisfied.43 Job design—the process of 
assigning tasks to a job, including the interdependency of those tasks with other jobs—
tries to balance these potentially competing effects of efficiency and motivation. To un￾derstand this issue more fully, let’s begin by describing early job design efforts aimed at 
increasing work efficiency through job specialization.
JOB DESIGN AND WORK EFFICIENCY
By any measure, supermarket cashiers have highly repetitive work. One consulting firm 
estimated that cashiers should be able to scan each item in an average of 4.6 seconds. 
Cashiers at five British supermarket chains took between 1.75 and 3.25 seconds to scan 
each item from a standardized list of 20 products. Along with scanning, cashiers pro￾cess the payment, move the divider stick, and (in some stores) bag the checked 
groceries.44
Supermarket cashiers perform jobs with a high degree of job specialization. Job spe￾cialization occurs when the work required to serve a customer—or provide any other 
product or service—is subdivided into separate jobs assigned to different people. For 
instance, supermarkets have separate jobs for checking out customers, stocking shelves, 
preparing fresh foods, and so forth. Except in the smallest family grocery stores, one 
job specialization
the result of a division of labor, 
in which work is subdivided 
into separate jobs assigned to 
different people
LO 6-3216 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
person would not perform all of these tasks as part of one job. Each resulting job in￾cludes a narrow subset of tasks, usually completed in a short cycle time. Cycle time is 
the time required to complete the task before starting over with another item or client. 
Supermarket cashiers have a cycle time of about four seconds to scan each item before 
they repeat the activity with the next item. They also have a cycle time for serving 
each customer, which works out to somewhere between 20 and 40 times per hour in 
busy stores.
Why would companies divide work into such tiny bits? The simple answer is that job 
specialization potentially improves work efficiency. It does so in four ways:
• Fewer skills and less knowledge to learn. Employees can master specialized 
jobs more quickly because there are fewer physical and mental skills and 
knowledge to learn and therefore less time required to become proficient in 
the job.
• More frequent practice. More specialized jobs typically have shorter cycle times. 
Shorter task cycles give employees more frequent practice with the task, so jobs 
are mastered more quickly.
• Less attention residue from changing tasks. Employees experience “attention 
residue” after they change from one type of task to another. Their cognitive 
attention lingers on the previous type of work, which slows down performance 
on the new task. Specialized jobs have fewer and less varied tasks, so there 
is less changeover and, consequently, less attention residue and productivity 
loss.45
• Better person-job matching. Job specialization tends to increase work efficiency by 
enabling employers to more precisely match employees with specific aptitudes, 
skills, knowledge, interests, and other characteristics to the jobs for which these 
talents are best suited.46
The benefits of job specialization were noted more than 2,300 years ago by the 
Chinese philosopher Mencius and the Greek philosopher Plato. Scottish economist 
Adam Smith wrote 250 years ago about the advantages of job specialization. Smith de￾scribed a small factory where 10 pin makers collectively produced as many as 48,000 pins 
per day because they performed specialized tasks. One person straightened the metal, 
another cut it, another sharpened one end of the cut piece, yet another added a white tip 
to the other end, and so forth. By comparison, Smith suggested that if each of these 
10 people produced complete pins individually, they would collectively manufacture no 
more than 20 pins per day.47
SCIENTIFIC MANAGEMENT
One of the strongest advocates of job specialization was Frederick Winslow Taylor, an 
American industrial engineer who introduced the principles of scientific management in 
the early 1900s.48 Scientific management consists of a toolkit of activities. Some of these 
interventions—employee selection, training, goal setting, and work incentives—are com￾mon today but were rare until Taylor popularized them. However, scientific management 
is mainly associated with high levels of job specialization and standardization of tasks to 
achieve maximum efficiency.
Taylor recommended that the most effective companies should have detailed proce￾dures and work practices developed by engineers, enforced by supervisors, and executed 
by employees. Even supervisory tasks should be divided among different people (opera￾tions, inspection, discipline). Although the accuracy of Taylor’s evidence is suspect, scien￾tific management practices do improve work efficiency in many situations. These 
productivity gains are partly due to training, goal setting, and work incentives, but job 
specialization quickly became popular in its own right.
scientific management
the practice of systematically 
partitioning work into its 
smallest elements and 
standardizing tasks to achieve 
maximum efficiencyChapter Six Applied Performance Practices 217
PROBLEMS WITH JOB SPECIALIZATION
Frederick Winslow Taylor and his contemporaries focused on how job specialization re￾duces labor “waste” by improving the mechanical efficiency of work (i.e., skills matching, 
faster learning, less switchover time). Yet they didn’t seem to notice how this extreme job 
specialization adversely affects employee attitudes and motivation. Some jobs—such as 
scanning grocery items—are so specialized and repetitive that they become tedious, so￾cially isolating, and cognitively dysfunctional. Specialized jobs with very short cycle times 
often produce higher employee turnover and absenteeism. Companies sometimes have to 
pay higher wages to attract job applicants to this dissatisfying, narrowly defined work.49
Job specialization affects output quality, but in two opposing ways. On the positive 
side, employees in specialized jobs tend to produce higher quality output because, as we 
mentioned earlier, they master their work faster compared to people in jobs with a wide 
variety of tasks. This higher proficiency explains why specialist lawyers tend to provide 
better quality service than do generalist lawyers.50
However, job specialization also has two negative effects on work quality. First, many 
specialized jobs (such as supermarket cashiers) are so tedious that they reduce work at￾tentiveness and motivation, both of which undermine the quality of output. Second, by 
performing a tiny piece of the overall product or service, employees in specialized jobs 
have difficulty striving for better quality or even noticing flaws with the work unit’s over￾all output.
The Arsenal of Venice introduced job specialization in the sixteenth 
century—200 years before economist Adam Smith famously praised 
this form of job design. Founded in CE 1104, the state-owned 
shipbuilder in Italy eventually employed up to 4,000 people in 
specialized jobs (carpenters, iron workers, warehouse supervisors, etc.) 
to build ships and accessories (e.g., ropes). In 1570, the Arsenal had 
become so efficient through specialization that it built 100 ships in 
two months. The organization even had an assembly line along the 
waterway where workers apportioned food, ammunition, and other 
supplies from specially designed warehouses to the newly built vessels 
as they travelled past.e
Leemage/Universal Images Group/Getty Images218 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
Job Design and Work Motivation
Frederick Winslow Taylor may have overlooked the motivational effect of job characteris￾tics, but it is now the central focus of many job design initiatives.
JOB CHARACTERISTICS MODEL
The motivational potential of the job itself is depicted in the job characteristics model,
shown in Exhibit 6.2. The model identifies five core job characteristics that produce three 
psychological states. Employees who experience higher levels of these psychological 
states tend to have higher levels of intrinsic motivation, work performance (quality and 
efficiency), and job satisfaction with the work itself.51
Core Job Characteristics The five job character￾istics are skill variety, task identity, task significance, au￾tonomy, and job feedback.
•  Skill variety. Skill variety refers to the use of differ￾ent skills and talents to perform tasks within a job. 
For example, sales clerks who normally only serve 
customers might be assigned the additional duties of 
stocking inventory and changing storefront displays.
LO 6-4
Intrinsic
motivation
Satisfaction with
the work itself
Work performance
(quality and eciency)
Core job
characteristics
Critical
psychological
states
Personal and
work outcomes
Felt meaningfulness
of the work
Felt responsibility
for work outcomes
Knowledge 
of work results 
Autonomy
Skill variety
Task identity
Task significance
Job feedback
Individual dierence
moderators
job characteristics model
a job design model that relates 
the motivational properties of 
jobs to specific personal and 
organizational consequences 
of those properties
skill variety
the extent to which employees 
must use different skills and 
talents to perform tasks within 
their jobs
EXHIBIT 6.2 The Job Characteristics Model
Sources: J.R. Hackman and E.E. Lawler, “Employee Reactions to Job Characteristics,” Journal of Applied Psychology 55, no. 3 (1971): 259–86; J.R. Hackman 
and G.R. Oldham, “The Job Diagnostic Survey: An Instrument for the Diagnosis of Jobs and the Evaluation of Job Redesign Projects” (New Haven, Conn.: Dept. 
of Administrative Sciences, Yale University, May 1974); J.R. Hackman and G.R. Oldham, “Motivation through the Design of Work: Test of a Theory,” Organizational 
Behavior and Human Performance 16, no. 2 (1976): 250–79; J. R. Hackman and G. Oldham, Work Redesign (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1980).Chapter Six Applied Performance Practices 219
• Task identity. Task identity is the degree to which a job requires completion of a 
whole or identifiable piece of work, such as assembling an entire broadband modem 
rather than just soldering in the circuitry.
• Task significance. Task significance is the degree to which the job affects the orga￾nization and/or larger society. This job characteristic is most strongly felt when 
employees regularly and directly see how their work affects customers or others in 
society. As an example, when chefs in one study were able to directly observe the 
customers who ordered food (and vice versa), they felt more appreciated and, 
consequently, exerted more effort and felt more satisfied with their job. “When 
[the customers] can see us [make their food], they appreciate it, and I appreciate 
that. It makes me want to improve,” says a cook who participated in the study.52
• Autonomy. As we learned in Chapter 5, autonomy is a key contributor to intrinsic 
motivation. In jobs with high levels of autonomy, employees make their own deci￾sions rather than rely on detailed instructions from supervisors or procedure man￾uals. These jobs provide freedom, independence, and discretion in scheduling the 
work and determining the procedures to be used to complete the work.53
• Job feedback. Job feedback is the degree to which employees can tell how well they 
are doing from direct sensory information from the job itself. Airline pilots can tell 
how well they land their aircraft, and road crews can see how well they have pre￾pared the roadbed and laid the asphalt.
Critical Psychological States The five core job 
characteristics affect employee motivation, performance, 
and satisfaction through three critical psychological 
states, shown in Exhibit 6.2. Skill variety, task identity, 
and task significance directly contribute to the job’s felt 
meaningfulness of the work—the belief that one’s work is 
worthwhile or important. Autonomy directly contributes 
Thriving on Enriched Jobs at 
Softcom Nigeriaf
Softcom Ltd. is a shining star in Nigeria’s emerging technol￾ogy industry. This success is partly due to the software com￾pany’s capacity to motivate its 150 employees through 
highly enriched jobs. Softcom staff are energized by the high 
task significance of their work, such as a Patient Adherence 
Program for pharmaceutical company GSK, a digital wallet 
payment and financial services product (Eyowo), and a 
nationwide program with digital foundations (called N-Power) 
to reintroduce 500,000 Nigerians to the labor market.
“The sheer scale, size and audacity of what we’re do￾ing here is one of the motivating factors for me to come to 
work,” enthuses the leader of one of Softcom’s engineer￾ing development teams. “At Softcom, there is always a 
sense of purpose,” adds another Softcom employee. “We 
are all committed to the goal of solving some of Africa’s 
biggest challenges, and that in itself is what connects ev￾erything and everyone.”
Along with meaningful work, Softcom employees say 
they are motivated by the high degree of autonomy in 
their jobs. “I’ve realized that maybe just the freedom is 
what comforts people. Nobody is ringing the bell for 
opening time and closing time,” says a software engineer. 
“There’s just that expectation for you to take ownership of 
your time and ideas. That level of expectation will drive 
you to find the most productive ways to work.”
global connections 6.3
Mavo/Shutterstock
task identity
the degree to which a job 
requires completion of a whole 
or an identifiable piece of work
task significance
the degree to which a job 
has a substantial impact on the 
organization and/or larger 
society220 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
to felt responsibility for work outcomes—a sense of being personally accountable for the 
consequences of work activities. The third critical psychological state is knowledge of work 
results—an awareness of the work outcomes based on information from the job itself.
Individual Differences Job design doesn’t increase work motivation, perfor￾mance, or satisfaction for everyone in every situation. Employees must have the required 
skills and knowledge to master the more challenging work. Otherwise, job design tends to 
increase stress and reduce job performance. The original model also states that employees 
will be motivated only when they have a high growth need strength (the need for personal 
growth and development—similar to self-actualization).54 However, research findings have 
been mixed, suggesting that employees might be motivated by the job no matter how they 
score on growth needs.55
SOCIAL AND INFORMATION PROCESSING 
JOB CHARACTERISTICS
The job characteristics model overlooks two other types of job features: social character￾istics and information processing demands.56 Two social job characteristics are:
• Social interaction requirements. This is the extent to which the job requires employ￾ees to interact with coworkers, clients, suppliers, and other stakeholders. Jobs with 
high social interaction requirements tend to be more motivating because employ￾ees need greater use of emotion regulation skills (see Chapter 4). Social interac￾tion also increases the complexity of the work due to the person’s interdependence 
with these other people (see task interdependence in Chapter 8).
• Social feedback. A second social characteristic of the job is feedback from other 
people. Jobs that include social feedback may be just as motivating as jobs that 
provide feedback from the task itself. Feedback from others may be communicated 
explicitly through conversation or more implicitly through subtle nonverbal cues.
The other category of job characteristics missing from the job characteristics model is infor￾mation processing demands of the job.57 The two main information processing demands are:
• Task variability. This information processing demand refers to how predictable the 
job duties are from one day to the next. Task variability increases employee motiva￾tion because employees in these jobs have nonroutine work patterns; they perform 
different types of tasks from one day to the next, and don’t know which tasks are 
required until that time. Jobs with low task variability, on the other hand, are less 
motivating because the work is repetitive; employees perform similar tasks using 
similar skills in the same way every day.
• Task analyzability. This information processing demand refers to how much the job 
can be performed using known procedures and rules. Jobs with high task analyzabil￾ity have low information processing demand because job incumbents rely on estab￾lished guidelines for most decisions and actions. Consequently, employees are less 
motivated when performing jobs with high task analyzability. 
Jobs with low task analyzability, on the other hand, have 
higher motivational potential because employees need to 
rely on their creativity and judgment to determine the best 
courses of action for most tasks. The novel or complex 
work activities in low task analyzability jobs make it 
difficult to create fixed procedures and rules.
Task variability and task analyzability will be discussed 
again in Chapter 8 in the context of task structures for 
teams and in Chapter 13 when we look at contingencies 
for designing organizational structures.
task variability
the degree to which job 
duties are nonroutine and 
unpredictable; employees 
perform diverse tasks from one 
day to the next because they 
are faced with unfamiliar and 
unexpected issues
task analyzability
the degree to which job 
duties allow the application of 
established procedures and 
rules to guide decisions and 
behavior (high analyzability); 
employee creativity and 
judgment are necessary to 
perform jobs with low task 
analyzabilityChapter Six Applied Performance Practices 221
Job Design Practices That Motivate
Three main strategies can increase the motivational potential of jobs: frequent job rota￾tion, job enlargement, and job enrichment.
FREQUENT JOB ROTATION
Frequent job rotation involves moving employees through two or more jobs each day. For 
example, many grocery stores reduce the tedium of checkout work by moving cashiers to 
other jobs during the work shift. This rotation differs from career development transfers, 
which involves rotating employees once or twice each year through different jobs. One 
benefit of frequent job rotation is that it potentially reduces the risk of repetitive strain 
and heavy lifting injuries. A second benefit is that employees learn how to perform mul￾tiple jobs. Third, employees who perform multiple jobs within a production or service 
process develop a clearer picture of that process and ways to improve quality. The fourth 
potential benefit of frequent job rotation is that employees use a wider variety of skills 
throughout the workday—their daily work has more skill variety—which potentially 
improves their motivation and satisfaction.
debating point
JOB ROTATION HAS COSTS, NOT JUST BENEFITS
Frequent job rotation—in which employees switch jobs with coworkers 
one or more times each day—is considered a valuable practice in many 
production and service job groups. It minimizes health risks from re￾petitive strain and heavy lifting by relieving employees of that strain for 
part of the day or, at least, allows them to use different muscle groups 
in the rotated jobs. Employees in the rotation cycle see a larger part of 
the production process, so they can more easily identify quality prob￾lems and their solutions. Job rotation also increases workforce flexibil￾ity by training employees in multiple jobs. This multiskilling makes it 
easier for the company to fill jobs during vacations and other absences. 
Finally, job rotation increases skill variety throughout the workday, 
which supports at least one motivational component of job design.
These job rotation benefits are widely recognized and applauded, 
but less attention seems to be given to the potential problems and limi￾tations of this practice. One concern is that employee task performance 
may be lower when performing two or more jobs each day, even when 
each job has a narrow range of tasks.g
 This performance deficit occurs 
because employees who perform several jobs have less time to prac￾tice and perfect their performance within each job. A related concern is 
that job rotation produces higher training costs because employees 
need to learn the procedures for each job in the rotation cluster. Task 
performance also suffers because the various jobs likely require some￾what different aptitudes, such as finger dexterity or emotional intelli￾gence. Consequently, job rotation does not assign employees as 
precisely to tasks that fit their natural aptitudes.
Frequent job rotation also likely undermines task performance due 
to the problem of attention residue.h
 Attention residue occurs when we 
continue to think about a previous task after switching over to another 
task. An employee who worked on inventory at the beginning of a shift 
might continue to think about inventory decisions and problems after 
rotating into a cashier position. Consequently, the employee is less 
mindful of their checkout duties and is more susceptible to errors in 
that role. The more frequent the job rotation, the more risk that atten￾tion residue will undermine performance in the current position.
Job rotation also overlooks the idea that people are more moti￾vated to perform some tasks than other tasks.i
 Some enjoy physical 
work whereas others prefer work that involves social interaction, for 
example. In fact, people often define themselves by specific jobs, such 
as being a customer-focused person rather than a number-cruncher. 
Job rotation might undermine employee motivation because employ￾ees are required to perform tasks they don’t like and are misaligned 
with their self-concept.
A fourth concern is that job rotation might make it more difficult to 
identify individual performance or accountability for job site mainte￾nance. If several employees switch jobs every two hours, then each job 
will have three or more job incumbents within one work shift. Nine or 
more employees would have been in that position over 24 hours in a 
continuous production system. Unless work output is tagged or time 
stamped, it becomes difficult to know which of these employees made 
mistakes, didn’t sufficiently prepare the work area for others, and so 
forth. Aware of their performance anonymity, some employees in job 
rotation clusters will engage in social loafing—they exert less effort and 
produce lower quality or quantity output because their work output is 
less identifiable.j222 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
JOB ENLARGEMENT
Job enlargement involves increasing the number and variety of related tasks assigned to a 
job held by an employee. This might involve combining two or more complete jobs into 
one or just adding more tasks requiring different skills to an existing job.58 Either way, 
skill variety increases because the additional tasks require distinct skills from the original 
job with fewer tasks. Video journalist is an example of an enlarged job. As Exhibit 6.3 il￾lustrates, a traditional news team consists of a camera operator, a sound and lighting 
specialist, and the journalist who writes and presents or narrates the story. One video 
journalist performs all of these tasks.
Job enlargement offers the same benefits as job rotation because adding more and 
varied tasks gives employees more skill variety and reduces the risk of repetitive strain in￾juries. Early research concluded that job enlargement often produced higher employee 
motivation, job satisfaction, and work efficiency.59 However, simply giving employees 
more tasks falls significantly short of the motivational potential of jobs as defined by the 
job characteristics model. Instead, a job’s full motivational potential occurs when skill 
variety is combined with more autonomy and job knowledge.60 In other words, employees 
are motivated when they perform a variety of tasks and have the freedom and knowledge 
to structure their work to achieve the highest satisfaction and performance. These job 
characteristics are at the heart of job enrichment.
JOB ENRICHMENT
Job enrichment occurs when employees are given more responsibility for scheduling, co￾ordinating, and planning their own work.61 Job enrichment relates to all aspects of the job 
characteristics model, but it is particularly about autonomy and its psychological outcome 
of felt responsibility for work outcomes. Job enrichment 
is in full bloom at Expensify, which was described in the 
opening case study for this chapter. Employees at the ex￾pense management software company have an incredibly 
high level of autonomy to choose work activities, as well 
as to plan and schedule those activities. “It’s a lot of per￾sonal responsibility because I structure my own day,” says 
Expensify employee Adele Kennedy.62
EXHIBIT 6.3 Job Enlargement of Video Journalists
• Operates camera
• Operates sound
• Reports story
Traditional
news team
Video
journalist
Employee 2
Operates sound
Employee 3
Reports story
Employee 1
Operates camera
job enlargement
the practice of increasing the 
number and variety of related 
tasks assigned to a job
job enrichment
the practice of giving 
employees more responsibility 
for scheduling, coordinating, 
and planning their own workChapter Six Applied Performance Practices 223
Job enrichment potentially increases job satisfaction 
and work motivation, and reduces absenteeism and turn￾over. Productivity is also higher when task identity and 
job feedback are improved. Product and service quality 
tend to improve because job enrichment increases the 
jobholder’s felt responsibility and sense of ownership 
over the product or service.63
One way to increase job enrichment is by combining 
highly interdependent tasks into one job. This natural 
grouping approach occurs in the video journalist job be￾cause it naturally groups tasks together to complete an 
entire product (i.e., a news story). By forming natural 
work units, jobholders have stronger feelings of responsi￾bility for an identifiable body of work. They feel a sense 
of ownership and, therefore, tend to deliver higher qual￾ity work output. Forming natural work units increases 
task identity and task significance because employees 
produce a complete product or service and can more 
readily see how their work affects others.
A second job enrichment strategy, called establishing 
client relationships, involves putting employees in direct 
contact with their clients rather than using another job 
group or the supervisor as the liaison between the em￾ployee and the customer. Establishing client relation￾ships increases task significance because employees 
more easily see how their work affects those clients. By 
being directly responsible for specific clients, employees 
also have more information and can make better deci￾sions affecting those clients.64
Psychological Empowerment Practices
Psychological empowerment is a well-known outcome of job enrichment, although it is 
also influenced by other work conditions as well as employee characteristics. Psychological 
empowerment refers to a perceptual and emotional state in which people experience 
more self-determination, meaning, competence, and impact regarding their role in the 
organization.65
• Self-determination. Employees feel that they have freedom, independence, and dis￾cretion over their work activities.
• Meaning. Employees care about their work and believe that what they do is 
important.
• Competence. Employees are confident about their ability to perform the work well 
and have a capacity to grow with new challenges.
• Impact. Employees view themselves as active participants in the organization; that 
is, they believe their decisions and actions have an influence on the company’s 
success.
Telus Communications increased job enrichment among its service technicians 
by establishing direct client relationships. Previously, clients communicated only 
with customer service staff at the Canadian telecommunications company; 
service technicians performed the technical tasks with minimal customer 
interaction or responsibilities. Now, service technicians are responsible for both 
technical and customer service activities for their respective assignments. Telus 
job ads for technicians clearly emphasize these multiple roles: “You will be 
responsible for installing, maintaining and supporting [Telus products] while 
driving future growth for TELUS by providing exemplary customer service and 
education to our customers face to face on both new and existing products in 
the customer’s home.” As one Telus technician commented: “It’s great for me 
personally, because I have a lot more ownership of the customer relationship.”k
JSMimages/Alamy Stock Photo
LO 6-5
psychological empowerment
a perceptual and emotional 
state in which people 
experience more self￾determination, meaning, 
competence, and impact 
regarding their role in the 
organization
®
SELF-ASSESSMENT 6.2: Are You Empowered as a Student?224 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
SUPPORTING PSYCHOLOGICAL EMPOWERMENT
When leaders say they are “empowering” the workforce, they actually mean that they are 
changing the work environment to support psychological empowerment.66 A wide variety 
of workplace conditions—often called structural empowerment practices—potentially en￾hance or support psychological empowerment.67
Job characteristics clearly influence the degree to which people feel empowered.68 Em￾ployees are much more likely to experience self-determination when working in jobs with 
a high degree of autonomy and minimal bureaucratic control. They experience more 
meaningfulness when working in jobs with high levels of task identity and task signifi￾cance. Employees experience more self-confidence when working in jobs that allow them 
to receive feedback about their performance and accomplishments.
Several organizational and work-context factors also influence empowerment.69 People 
experience more empowerment in organizations that provide easily accessible informa￾tion and other resources, that provide formal training, and that encourage employees to 
learn through informal experimentation. Empowerment also requires corporate leaders to 
trust employees and be willing to take the risks that empowerment creates.
Along with job and workplace conditions, psychological empowerment depends on per￾sonal characteristics. In particular, employees must possess the skills and knowledge neces￾sary to perform the work and to handle the additional decision-making requirements.
Psychological empowerment can substantially improve motivation and performance. 
For instance, restaurant servers with higher empowerment provide better customer ser￾vice and engage in more organizational citizenship behaviors (specifically, helping 
other busy servers with their workload).70 However, organizational and cultural circum￾stances can limit the extent to which the conditions for empowerment produce feelings 
of empowerment. A few studies have observed, for example, that increased autonomy 
and discretion do not result in higher feelings of empowerment in high power distance 
cultures because this self-determination conflicts with the norms of high power dis￾tance (respecting the boss’s power). Whether employees feel empowered when struc￾tural conditions for empowerment are present also depends on how much they trust the 
company’s leaders.71
Self-Leadership Practices
Boston Scientific introduced its Connected Work Strategy (CWS) a few years ago to offer 
employees remote and hybrid work options. The medical devices company acknowledges 
that working from home is better suited to employees with the self-direction and self￾motivation needed to perform a task without close supervision. “The success of the CWS 
adoption will hinge on the company’s trust and mature ‘self-leadership,’” explains Kim 
Na-young, Human Resources Director at Boston Scientific Korea. “The company must 
trust employees to fulfill their responsibilities and achieve their business goals, whether or 
not they can be seen, whether they are at home or in the office. On the other hand, em￾ployees will have to fulfill their duties with ‘self-leadership’ no matter where they work.”72
Boston Scientific, Expensify, and many other firms value employees who are self-starters, 
self-motivated, and proactive. These are people who engage in self-leadership. They 
establish the self-direction and self-motivation needed to perform a task without their 
managers generating that motivation or initiative.73 Self-leadership includes a toolkit of 
behavioral activities borrowed from social cognitive theory and goal setting (see Chapter 5). 
It also includes constructive thought processes that have been extensively studied in 
sports psychology.
Self-leadership consists of several activities, particularly the five identified in Exhibit 6.4. 
These elements generally follow one another in a sequence: personal goal setting, construc￾tive thought strategies, designing natural rewards, self-monitoring, and self-reinforcement.74
LO 6-6
self-leadership
specific cognitive and 
behavioral strategies to 
achieve personal goals and 
standards through self￾direction and self-motivationChapter Six Applied Performance Practices 225
Personal
goal
setting
Constructive
thought
strategies
Designing
natural
rewards
Self￾monitoring
Self￾reinforcement
EXHIBIT 6.4 Elements of Self-Leadership
PERSONAL GOAL SETTING
Self-leadership refers to leading oneself toward objectives, so the process necessarily be￾gins by setting goals. These goals are self-determined, rather than assigned by or jointly 
decided with a supervisor. Research suggests that employees are more motivated and per￾form better when they set their own goals, particularly in combination with other self￾leadership practices. These goals also tend to be more challenging and therefore more 
effective when set some time (rather than immediately) before the task.75 Personal goal 
setting also requires a high degree of self-awareness, because people need to understand 
their current behavior and performance before establishing meaningful goals for personal 
development.
CONSTRUCTIVE THOUGHT STRATEGIES
Before beginning a task and while performing it, employees engage in two constructive 
(positive) thought strategies about that work and its accomplishment: positive self-talk 
and mental imagery.76
Positive Self-Talk Do you ever talk to yourself? Most of us do, according to studies 
of college students.77 Self-talk refers to any situation in which we talk to ourselves about 
our own thoughts or actions. The problem is that most self-talk is negative; we criticize 
much more than encourage or congratulate ourselves. Negative self-talk undermines our 
confidence and potential to perform a particular task. In contrast, positive self-talk creates 
a “can-do” belief and thereby increases motivation by raising our self-efficacy and reducing 
anxiety about challenging tasks.78 We often hear that professional athletes “psyche” them￾selves up before an important event. They tell themselves that they can achieve their goal 
and that they have practiced enough to reach that goal. They are motivating themselves 
through positive self-talk.
Mental Imagery You’ve probably heard the phrase “I’ll cross that bridge when I 
come to it!” Self-leadership takes the opposite view. It suggests that we need to mentally 
visualize specific future behaviors as well as the successful outcomes of those behaviors. 
In our mind’s eye, we practice a task, successfully perform that task, and receive the re￾wards of that successful performance. This process is known as mental imagery.79
From our description, you can see that mental imagery has two components. One com￾ponent involves mentally practicing the task, anticipating obstacles to goal accomplish￾ment, and working out solutions to those hypothetical obstacles. By mentally walking 
through the activities required to accomplish the task, we begin to see problems that may 
occur. We can then imagine what responses would be best for each contingency.80
The other part of mental imagery involves visualizing 
successful completion of the task. You might imagine the 
experience of completing the task and the positive results 
that follow, such as being promoted, receiving a presti￾gious award, or taking time off work. Visualizing success￾ful performance and its rewards activates energizing 
emotions, which increases the individual’s goal 
self-talk
the process of talking to 
ourselves about our own 
thoughts or actions
mental imagery
the process of mentally 
practicing a task and visualizing 
its successful completion226 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
Overcoming Negative Self-Talkl
Sarah Coll is a successful orthopedic surgeon in a country 
(Australia) where only 4 percent of people in this field are 
female. She is adept at brushing off the occasional sexist 
comment about females in this profession. But more diffi￾cult to ignore is her own negative self-talk. “When it’s your 
internal monologue, that’s much more challenging,” she 
says. “It’s so quiet, and so subversive.”
Everyone—including world-class athletes, high￾performance executives, and successful surgeons—has a 
natural tendency to engage in negative self-talk more 
than constructive self-talk. It is one of the great challenges 
people need to tackle along their journey toward 
self-leadership.
Coll applies two strategies to minimize negative self￾talk. The first is to face the inner voice of self-doubt head￾on. “I’ve made myself accept that that negative self-talk is 
there, and I’ve gone to lengths to notice it, which is ex￾tremely unpleasant,” she admits. “I think that’s always the 
first step to stopping it is to stare it in the eye.”
Coll’s second strategy is to engage in constructive 
mental imagery. She thinks about her objective for each 
surgical procedure, and visualizes performing a techni￾cally perfect operation that her entire theatre team en￾joys. Coll also consciously praises herself about her 
success. “Ten years [into my career] I can tell myself I’m 
offering the patient a world class procedure,” she says. 
“I’m offering the patient the best they could get in the 
world.”
global connections 6.4
Alloy/Dreet Production/Getty Images
commitment and motivation to complete the task effectively.81 This is the strategy that 
Tony Wang applies to motivate himself. “Since I am in sales, I think about the reward I get 
for closing new business—the commission check—and the things it will allow me to do that 
I really enjoy,” explains the sales employee in Washington, DC. “Or I think about the feel￾ing I get when I am successful at something and how it makes me feel good, and use that 
to get me going.”82
DESIGNING NATURAL REWARDS
Self-leadership recognizes that employees actively “craft” their jobs. To varying degrees, 
people often have enough discretion in their work to make changes that match their 
needs and preferences, which makes them more satisfying and motivating.83 Employees 
develop natural rewards within their job by expanding tasks that they inherently enjoy, 
offloading to others tasks they do not enjoy or that exceed their reasonable workload, 
and changing how tasks are accomplished in ways that make them more developmental and 
interesting. Employees also produce natural rewards by cognitively reframing the activity, 
such as by being more vigilant regarding the importance of the work for clients or by 
viewing difficult tasks in a more positive light as interesting challenges (see Chapter 4 on 
regulating emotions).Chapter Six Applied Performance Practices 227
SELF-MONITORING
Self-monitoring is the process of keeping track at regular intervals of one’s progress to￾ward a goal by using naturally occurring feedback. Self-monitoring significantly improves 
employee performance.84 However, some types of self-monitoring are better than others. 
Some people can receive feedback from the job itself, such as members of a lawn mainte￾nance crew who can see how they are improving the appearance of their client’s property. 
But many of us are unable to observe our work output so quickly or easily. Instead, feed￾back mechanisms need to be designed. Salespeople might arrange to receive monthly re￾ports on sales levels in their territory. Production staff might have gauges or computer 
feedback systems installed so they can see how many errors are made on the production 
line. Research suggests that people who have control over the timing of performance feed￾back perform their tasks better than do those with feedback assigned by others.85
SELF-REINFORCEMENT
Self-leadership includes self-reinforcement, which is part of social cognitive theory de￾scribed in Chapter 5. Self-reinforcement occurs whenever an employee has control over a 
reinforcer but doesn’t “take” the reinforcer until completing a self-set goal. A common 
example is taking a break after reaching a predetermined stage of your work. The work 
break is a self-induced form of positive reinforcement. Self-reinforcement also occurs 
when you decide to do a more enjoyable task after completing work that you dislike. For 
example, after slogging through a difficult report, you might decide to spend time doing a 
more pleasant task, such as catching up on industry news by scanning websites. One of 
the challenges with self-reinforcement is the temptation to take the reward before you 
should. Recent writing has explored situational and emotional strategies to manage these 
temptations so self-reinforcement remains true to one’s original intentions.86
®
SELF-ASSESSMENT 6.3: How Well Do You Practice Self-Leadership?
EFFECTIVENESS OF SELF-LEADERSHIP
Self-leadership is shaping up to be a valuable applied performance practice in organiza￾tional settings. A respectable body of research shows consistent support for most ele￾ments of this model.87 Furthermore, self-leadership strategies seem to work just as well 
across cultures.88 Austrian army soldiers who completed a self-leadership training course 
performed better on physical tests (such as time completing an obstacle course) and 
educational tests on subjects they were studying at the time, compared to soldiers who 
didn’t receive self-leadership training. Employees in a mining operation wore safety equipment 
more frequently after engaging in self-set goals and self-monitoring activities.
By applying mental imagery, supervisors and process engineers in a pulp-and-paper 
mill more effectively transferred what they learned in an interpersonal communication 
skills class back to the job. Studies also indicate that constructive thought processes im￾prove individual performance in various sports activities. Indeed, almost all Olympic ath￾letes rely on mental rehearsal and positive self-talk to achieve their performance goals.89
PERSONAL AND SITUATIONAL PREDICTORS 
OF SELF-LEADERSHIP
Some research suggests that self-leadership behaviors are more frequently found in people 
with higher levels of conscientiousness, openness to experience, and extroversion. People 
with a positive self-concept evaluation (i.e., self-esteem, self-efficacy, and internal locus of 
control) are also more likely to apply self-leadership strategies.90228 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
The work environment influences the extent to which employees engage in self￾leadership. Specifically, employees require some degree of autonomy to engage in most 
aspects of self-leadership. They also feel more confident with self-leadership when their 
boss is empowering rather than controlling, uses motivating language, and demonstrates 
trust in employees. Employees are also more likely to engage in self-monitoring in compa￾nies that emphasize continuous measurement of performance.91 Overall, self-leadership 
promises to be an important concept and practice for improving employee motivation and 
performance.
®
SELF-ASSESSMENT 6.4: Do You Have a Proactive Personality?
LO 6-1 Discuss the meaning of money and identify sev￾eral individual-, team-, and organizational-level 
performance-based rewards.
Money (and other financial rewards) is a fundamental part of 
the employment relationship, but it also relates to our needs, 
our emotions, and our self-concept. It is viewed as a symbol of 
status and prestige, as a source of security, as a source of evil, 
or as a source of anxiety or feelings of inadequacy.
Organizations reward employees for their membership and 
seniority, job status, competencies, and performance. Member￾ship-based rewards may attract job applicants and seniority￾based rewards reduce turnover, but these reward objectives 
tend to discourage turnover among those with the lowest per￾formance. Rewards based on job status try to maintain internal 
equity and motivate employees to compete for promotions. 
However, they tend to encourage a bureaucratic hierarchy, sup￾port status differences, and motivate employees to compete 
and hoard resources. Competency-based rewards are becoming 
increasingly popular because they encourage skill develop￾ment. However, they tend to be subjectively measured and can 
result in higher costs as employees spend more time learning 
new skills.
Awards and bonuses, commissions, and other individual 
performance-based rewards have existed for centuries and are 
widely used today. Many companies are shifting to team-based 
rewards such as team bonuses and gainsharing plans, and to 
organizational rewards such as employee stock ownership 
plans (ESOPs), stock options, and profit sharing. Although 
ESOPs and stock options create an ownership culture, employ￾ees often perceive a weak connection between individual per￾formance and the organizational reward.
LO 6-2 Describe five ways to improve reward effectiveness.
Financial rewards have a number of limitations, but reward ef￾fectiveness can be improved in several ways. Organizational 
leaders should ensure that rewards are linked to work perfor￾mance, rewards are aligned with performance within the em￾ployee’s control, team rewards are used where jobs are 
interdependent, rewards are valued by employees, and rewards 
have no unintended consequences. Unintended reward 
consequences include gaming the system, manipulating reward￾related information, cherry-picking tasks, ignoring nonmea￾sured tasks, shifting to a transactional employment relationship, 
and creating unexpected hidden costs.
LO 6-3 List the advantages and disadvantages of job 
specialization.
Job design is the process of assigning tasks to a job, including 
the interdependency of those tasks with other jobs. Job special￾ization subdivides work into separate jobs for different people. 
This increases work efficiency by requiring fewer skills and less 
knowledge to learn (jobs are mastered more quickly), enabling 
more frequent practice (shorter cycle time), having less atten￾tion residue from changing tasks, and enabling easier person–
job matching. However, job specialization may reduce work 
motivation, create mental health problems (tedious, socially 
isolating, and cognitively dysfunctional work), and increase 
costs through discontentment, absenteeism, and turnover. Job 
specialization can improve output quality because jobs are mas￾tered more quickly. But job specialization can also reduce work 
quality because of decreasing attentiveness and motivation, and 
because of lower awareness of the overall product or service.
LO 6-4 Diagram the job characteristics model and describe 
three ways to improve employee motivation through 
job design.
The job characteristics model is a template for job redesign 
that specifies core job dimensions, psychological states, and 
individual differences. The five core job dimensions are skill 
variety, task identity, task significance, autonomy, and job 
feedback. Two other sets of job characteristics are social char￾acteristics (social interaction requirements and social feed￾back) and the information processing demands of task 
variability (predictability of work activities) and task analyz￾ability (degree of work procedure clarity). Contemporary job 
design strategies try to motivate employees through job rota￾tion, job enlargement, and job enrichment. Organizations in￾troduce job rotation to reduce the incidence of repetitive 
strain injuries, increase employee multiskilling, improve 
quality through knowledge of the overall work process, and 
chapter summary229
improve motivation and satisfaction. Job enlargement involves 
increasing the number of tasks within the job. Two ways to 
enrich jobs are clustering tasks into natural groups and estab￾lishing client relationships.
LO 6-5 Define psychological empowerment and identify 
strategies that support empowerment.
Psychological empowerment is a perceptual and emotional 
state in which people experience more self-determination, 
meaning, competence, and impact regarding their role in the 
organization. Individual characteristics seem to have a minor 
influence on empowerment. Job design is a major influence, 
particularly autonomy, task identity, task significance, and job 
feedback. Empowerment is also supported at the organiza￾tional level through a culture that encourages informal learning 
and discovery, sufficient information and resources, and cor￾porate leaders who trust employees.
LO 6-6 Describe the five elements of self-leadership and 
identify specific personal and work environment in￾fluences on self-leadership.
Self-leadership refers to specific cognitive and behavioral strate￾gies to achieve personal goals and standards through self￾direction and self-motivation. These strategies include personal 
goal setting, constructive thought patterns, designing natural 
rewards, self-monitoring, and self-reinforcement. Constructive 
thought patterns include self-talk and mental imagery. Self-talk 
occurs in any situation in which a person talks to himself or 
herself about his or her own thoughts or actions. Mental imag￾ery involves mentally practicing a task and imagining success￾fully performing it beforehand. People with higher levels of 
conscientiousness, openness, extroversion, and a positive self￾concept engage in more self-leadership. Self-leadership also oc￾curs more readily in workplaces that support empowerment 
and have high trust between employees and management.
employee stock ownership plan 
(ESOP), p. 211
gainsharing plan, p. 211
job characteristics model, p. 218
job enlargement, p. 222
job enrichment, p. 222
job evaluation, p. 208
job specialization, p. 215
mental imagery, p. 225
profit-sharing plan, p. 212
psychological empowerment, p. 223
scientific management, p. 216
self-leadership, p. 224
self-talk, p. 225
skill variety, p. 218
stock options, p. 211
task analyzability, p. 220
task identity, p. 219
task significance, p. 219
task variability p. 220
key terms
1. As a consultant, you have been asked to recommend ei￾ther a gainsharing plan or a profit-sharing plan for em￾ployees who work in the four regional distribution and 
warehousing facilities of a large retail organization. 
Which reward system would you recommend? Explain 
your answer.
2. Expensify, which was described in the opening case study 
to this chapter, has an unusual process for determining 
pay rates. Twice yearly, employees do a paired compari￾son of employees. Each person’s skill and contribution is 
documented and that information is ranked against the 
skill and contribution of every other employee. Most em￾ployees participate in this process even though it takes 
many hours to complete. Expensify’s pay rate calculation 
practice relates to which of the four financial reward 
practices discussed in this chapter? What are the poten￾tial advantages of this process? What problems might oc￾cur by using this method to determine individual pay? 
3. Waco Tire Corporation redesigned its production facilities 
around a team-based system. However, the company presi￾dent believes that employees will not be motivated unless 
they receive incentives based on their individual perfor￾mance. Give three reasons why Waco Tire should introduce 
team-based rather than individual rewards in this setting.
4. A national retail chain selling electronics and kitchen 
appliances wants to motivate its employees to increase 
sales, reduce product returns (customer changed mind 
within 14 days), and reduce waste (less product packag￾ing damage). Sales staff have different areas of knowl￾edge (kitchen appliances, home wifi technology, home 
cleaning technology, etc.). Discuss each of the five strate￾gies to improve reward effectiveness in the context of a 
performance-based reward system for this organization 
and each of its stores. 
5. Most of us have watched pizzas being made while wait￾ing in a pizzeria. What level of job specialization do you 
usually notice in these operations? Why does this high or 
low level of specialization exist? If some pizzerias have 
different levels of specialization than others, identify the 
contingencies that might explain these differences.
6. Social characteristics are often overlooked in job design. 
Identify two jobs that have high social interaction re￾quirements and/or high social feedback. Next, identify 
two jobs that have low levels of these two job characteris￾tics. To what extent do these two job characteristics im￾prove employee motivation? Explain why.
7. Describe a time when you practiced self-leadership to 
perform a task successfully. With reference to each step 
in the self-leadership process, describe what you did to 
achieve this success.
8. The city manager of a large city government wants to 
reduce supervisory costs by encouraging employees to 
motivate and manage themselves much of the time. The 
manager has heard of self-leadership, and believes that it 
may be a key strategy to reduce the number of supervi￾sors in the organization. Discuss the extent to which self￾leadership practices among employees would support the 
city manager’s objectives. Also, summarize the content 
of a training module that would improve any one of the 
self-leadership practices.
critical thinking questionsCASE STUDY: YAKKATECH, INC. 
YakkaTech, Inc. is an information technology services firm 
employing 1,500 people throughout Washington and Oregon. 
YakkaTech has a consulting division, which mainly installs 
and upgrades enterprise software systems and related hard￾ware on the client’s site. YakkaTech also has a customer 
service division that consists of four customer contact centers 
serving clients within specific regions of these two states.
Each customer service center consists of a half-dozen de￾partments representing functional specializations (computer 
systems, intranet infrastructure, storage systems, enterprise 
software systems, customer billing, etc.). These centers typi￾cally have more than two dozen employees in each depart￾ment. When a client submits a problem to the center using 
the online form, the message or call is directed to the depart￾ment where the issue best applies. The query is given a 
“ticket” number and assigned to the next available employee 
in that department. Individual employees are solely respon￾sible for the tickets assigned to them. The employee investi￾gates and corrects the issue, and the ticket is “closed” when 
the client agrees that the problem has been resolved.
If the client experiences the same problem again, even a 
few days later, a new ticket is issued and sent to whichever 
employee is available to receive the ticket. A client’s prob￾lems are almost always handled by different employees each 
time, even when the issue is sent to the same department. 
Furthermore, when a customer center department is heav￾ily backlogged, clients are redirected to the same depart￾ment at another regional center, where the problem can be 
addressed more quickly.
At one time, YakkaTech operated more than a dozen small 
customer contact centers throughout the region, because cli￾ent problems had to be diagnosed and resolved on-site. Today, 
employees can investigate most software and hardware system 
faults from the center through remote monitoring systems, 
rather than personally visit the client. Consequently, eight 
years ago, YakkaTech amalgamated its customer service op￾erations into four large regional centers. Customer service 
staff work entirely within the center. When a client visit is re￾quired, the ticket is transferred to an individual or team in the 
consulting business, who then visits the client.
YakkaTech’s customer service business has nearly dou￾bled over the past five years, but with this growth has 
come increasing customer complaints regarding poor 
quality service. Many say that employees seem indifferent 
to the client’s problems. Others have commented on the 
slow response to their problems where the issue requires 
the involvement of more than one department. Several 
clients have also complained that they are continually 
educating YakkaTech’s customer service employees about 
the details of their unique IT systems infrastructure.
Another concern is that about 18 months ago, Yakka￾Tech’s voluntary employee quit rates in the contact centers 
had risen above the industry average. This shift increased 
labor costs due to the cost of recruiting new technical staff 
and the lower productivity of new employees. According to 
results of an employee survey two years ago (as well as in￾formal comments since then), many employees felt that 
their work is monotonous. Some also said that they felt dis￾connected from the consequences of their work. A few also 
complained about ongoing conflicts with people in other 
departments and the stress of serving dissatisfied clients.
In response, YakkaTech’s executive team decided to 
raise pay rates for its customer service staff to become 
among the highest in the industry around the Pacific 
Northwest. The assumption was that the high pay rates 
would improve morale and reduce turnover, thereby reduc￾ing hiring costs and improving productivity. In addition, 
YakkaTech introduced a vested profit-sharing plan, in 
which employees received the profit-sharing bonus only if 
they remained with the company for two years after the 
bonus was awarded. Employees who quit or were fired for 
just cause before the vesting period forfeited the bonus.
Employee turnover rates dropped dramatically, leading 
the executive team to conclude that customer service qual￾ity and productivity would improve. Instead, customer com￾plaints and productivity remain below expectations and, in 
some cases, have worsened. Experienced employees con￾tinue to complain about the work. There have been a few 
disturbing incidents in which employees have been careless 
in solving client problems or did not bother to forward tick￾ets that should have been assigned to another department. 
Employee referrals (where staff recommend friends to join 
the company) have become rare events, whereas at one time 
they represented a significant source of qualified job appli￾cants. Furthermore, a few executives have recently over￾heard employees say that they would like to work elsewhere 
but can’t afford to leave YakkaTech.
Discussion Questions
1. What symptom(s) in this case suggest(s) that some￾thing has gone wrong?
2. What are the main causes of the symptom(s)?
3. What actions should YakkaTech executives take to cor￾rect the problem(s)?
© 2009 Steven L. McShane
TEAM EXERCISE: JOB DESIGN SCENARIOS
INSTRUCTIONS (SMALL OR LARGE CLASS) This ex￾ercise may be completed either individually or in teams. It 
is suitable for in-class and remote learning settings. It may 
PURPOSE This exercise is designed to help you learn 
how to apply job design concepts and practices to real￾world situations.
230TEAM EXERCISE: IS STUDENT WORK ENRICHED?
INSTRUCTORS TEACHING OB AND OTHER 
COURSES As students, you have an excellent view of 
many (but not all) of the tasks performed by instructors 
teaching organizational behavior and other courses in this 
school, faculty, or college. To simplify the scenario, as￾sume that instructors are full-time and are mostly involved 
only with teaching and a small percentage of administra￾tion (i.e., no research, consulting, executive programs, or 
community work for the college).
Task 1: Diagnose the job of a college instructor in 
terms of the two social job characteristics (social interac￾tion requirements and social feedback) and two informa￾tion processing job characteristics (task variability and 
task analyzability). Explain whether and to what extent 
each of these four job characteristics affect job enrich￾ment and the incumbent’s (instructor’s) motivation.
Task 2: As a Taylorist consultant, you have been 
hired to redesign jobs that involve teaching organiza￾tional behavior and other courses (finance, marketing, 
etc.). Specifically, this school or faculty wants to intro￾duce a very high degree of job specialization of teach￾ing staff in the expectation that these interventions will 
significantly improve work efficiency and work quality. 
You may assume that people in these jobs are mostly 
involved in teaching with a small percentage of adminis￾tration (i.e., no research, consulting, executive pro￾grams, or community work for the college). Detail how 
you would divide teaching positions into more special￾ized jobs. Refer to the benefits of job specialization to 
justify this job redesign. Also explain what negative out￾comes might result if this job specialization interven￾tion occurred.
© 2022 Steven L. McShane
be appropriate in moderately large classes. When the indi￾viduals (or teams) have completed the exercise, the results 
will be discussed and compared with others in the class.
Read each job design scenario and complete the re￾quested tasks, which refer to specific aspects of job design.
STATE CONSTRUCTION INSPECTORS The Office of 
Construction Compliance in a state government employs 
several dozen construction compliance inspectors who are 
located in four district offices across the state. People in 
these jobs ensure that construction contractors are in com￾pliance with statutory laws. They conduct targeted and 
random on-site inspections and investigate alleged viola￾tions of construction standards and laws. These employees 
inspect all aspects of the construction work, ensure that all 
tradespeople on site have the required licensing and certi￾fication. Construction compliance inspectors in this state 
currently receive assignments from their supervisor and 
file their reports with the supervisor when the inspection 
is completed. These inspectors were construction workers 
earlier in their careers. They spend some time visiting con￾struction sites, but also considerable time completing doc￾umentation and calling individuals (developers, state 
engineering departments, etc.) from their offices.
Task: The Office of Construction Compliance wants 
construction compliance inspectors to experience more 
job enrichment by performing several tasks currently 
completed by their supervisor. These include receiving 
all work orders, scheduling inspections, and dealing di￾rectly with contractor complaints and inquiries. (Con￾tractors often dispute the state department’s inspection 
reports.) What advice would you give the Office of Con￾struction Compliance regarding this job enrichment 
intervention?
3. Members of each team compare their individual re￾sults. The group should identify differences of opinion 
for each core job characteristic. They should also note 
which core job characteristics have the lowest scores 
and recommend how these scores could be increased.
4. The entire class will then meet to discuss the results 
of the exercise. The instructor may ask some teams to 
present their comparisons and recommendations for a 
particular core job characteristic.
INSTRUCTIONS (LARGE CLASS)
1. Working alone, each student completes both sets of 
measures in this exercise. Then, using the guidelines 
below, each student individually calculates the score 
for the five core job characteristics, as well as the over￾all motivating-potential score for the job.
PURPOSE This exercise is designed to help you learn 
how to measure the motivational potential of jobs and 
evaluate the extent that jobs should be further enriched.
INSTRUCTIONS (SMALL CLASS) Being a student is 
like a job in several ways. You have tasks to perform, and 
someone (such as your instructor) oversees your work. Al￾though few people want to be students most of their lives 
(the pay rate is too low!), it may be interesting to deter￾mine how enriched your job is as a student.
1. Students are placed into teams (preferably four or five 
people).
2. Working alone, each student completes both sets of 
measures in this exercise. Then, using the following 
guidelines, they individually calculate the score for 
the five core job characteristics as well as the overall 
motivating-potential score for the job.
231technology. Later, the instructor will provide feedback 
to the class showing the collective results (i.e., distri￾bution of results across the range of scores).
3. Where possible, the instructor might ask students with 
very high or very low results to discuss their views with 
the class.
2. Using a show of hands or classroom technology, stu￾dents indicate their results for each core job character￾istic. For example, the instructor will ask those whose 
result is within a range of scores, so several students 
raise their hands within each band of scores. Alterna￾tively, students can complete this activity prior to class 
and submit their results through online classroom 
Job Diagnostic Survey
CIRCLE THE NUMBER ON THE RIGHT THAT BEST 
DESCRIBES STUDENT WORK VERY LITTLE MODERATELY VERY MUCH
1. To what extent does student work permit you to de￾cide on your own how to go about doing the work?
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
2. To what extent does student work involve doing a 
whole or identifiable piece of work, rather than a small 
portion of the overall work process?
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
3. To what extent does student work require you to do many 
different things, using a variety of your skills and talents?
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
4. To what extent are the results of your work as a stu￾dent likely to significantly affect the lives and well-being 
of other people (e.g., within your school, your family, 
society)?
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
5. To what extent does working on student activities 
provide information about your performance?
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
CIRCLE THE NUMBER ON THE RIGHT THAT BEST 
DESCRIBES STUDENT WORK VERY INACCURATE UNCERTAIN VERY ACCURATE
6. Being a student requires me to use a number of com￾plex and high-level skills.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
7. Student work is arranged so that I do not have the 
chance to do an entire piece of work from beginning 
to end.
7 6 5 4 3 2 1
8. Doing the work required of students provides many 
chances for me to figure out how well I am doing.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
9. The work students must do is quite simple and 
repetitive.
7 6 5 4 3 2 1
10. The work of a student is the type where a lot of other 
people can be affected by how well the work gets 
done.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
11. Student work denies me any chance to use my per￾sonal initiative or judgment in carrying out the work.
7 6 5 4 3 2 1
12. Student work provides me the chance to completely 
finish the pieces of work I begin.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
13. Doing student work by itself provides very few clues 
about whether I am performing well.
7 6 5 4 3 2 1
14. As a student, I have considerable opportunity for 
independence and freedom in how I do the work.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
15. The work I perform as a student is not very significant 
or important in the broader scheme of things.
7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Source: Adapted from the Job Diagnostic Survey, developed by J.R. Hackman and G.R. Oldham. The authors have released any copyright ownership of 
this scale [see J.R. Hackman and G. Oldham, Work Redesign (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1980), 275]. 
232233
Autonomy Question 1 + 11 + 14 ___________________ 3
 =
Job feedback Question 5 + 8 + 13 __________________ 3
 =
Calculating Motivating-Potential Score (MPS): Use the 
following formula and the earlier results to calculate the 
motivating-potential score. Notice that skill variety, task 
identity, and task significance are averaged before being 
multiplied by the score for autonomy and job feedback.
(
SV + TI + TS ____________ 3
 ) × Autonomy × Job Feedback
( + + ____________________ 3
 ) × × = 
Calculating the Motivating-Potential Score
Scoring Core Job Characteristics: Use the following set of 
calculations to estimate the motivating-potential score for 
the job of being a student. Use your answers from the Job 
Diagnostic Survey that you completed earlier.
Skill variety (SV) Question 3 + 6 + 9 _________________ 3
 =
Task identity (TI) Question 2 + 7 + 12 __________________ 3
 =
Task significance (TS) Question 4 + 10 + 15 ___________________ 3
 =
1. D. Barrett, “How We Build a High Performance Team at 
Expensify,” Medium: Be Like A Startup, May 13, 2016; A. 
Heim, “How Expensify Got to $100M in Revenue by Hir￾ing ‘Stem Cells’ and Not ‘Cogs in a Wheel,’” TechCrunch, 
May 18, 2021; R. DuRose, “How to Get a Job at Expen￾sify, the Software Company That Just Went Public and 
Made 40% of Employees on-Paper Millionaires,” Business 
Insider, December 9, 2021; A. Picchi, “At This Tech Com￾pany, Workers Vote on Each Other’s Pay Raises,” CBS 
News, December 14, 2021. Quotations from two employees 
are from recent employee reviews of Expensify on Glass￾door, accessed in February 2022.
2. M.C. Bloom and G.T. Milkovich, “Issues in Managerial 
Compensation Research,” in Trends in Organizational Be￾havior, ed. C.L. Cooper and D.M. Rousseau (Chicester, 
UK: Wiley, 1996), 23–47. For an excellent review of the 
history of money, see N. Ferguson, The Ascent of Money: A 
Financial History of the World (New York: Penguin, 2008).
3. A. Furnham, The New Psychology of Money (East Sussex, 
UK: Routledge, 2014), Chap. 5.
4. S. Jia et al., “Attitude toward Money Modulates Outcome 
Processing: An ERP Study,” Social Neuroscience 8, no. 1 
(2012): 43–51; R.L. Capa and R. Custers, “Conscious 
and Unconscious Influences of Money: Two Sides of the 
Same Coin?,” in The Psychological Science of Money, ed. 
E. Bijleveld and H. Aarts (New York: Springer, 2014), 
73–91; C.R. Leana and J. Meuris, “Living to Work and 
Working to Live: Income as a Driver of Organizational 
Behavior,” Academy of Management Annals 9, no. 1 
(2015): 55–95.
5. D.W. Krueger, “Money, Success, and Success Phobia,” in 
The Last Taboo: Money as Symbol and Reality in Psycho￾therapy and Psychoanalysis, ed. D.W. Krueger (New York: 
Brunner/Mazel, 1986), 3–16.
6. P.F. Wernimont and S. Fitzpatrick, “The Meaning of 
Money,” Journal of Applied Psychology 56, no. 3 (1972): 
218–26; T.R. Mitchell and A.E. Mickel, “The Meaning of 
Money: An Individual-Difference Perspective,” Academy 
of Management Review (1999): 568–78; S.E.G. Lea and P. 
Webley, “Money as Tool, Money as Drug: The Biological 
Psychology of a Strong Incentive,” Behavioral and Brain 
Sciences 29 (2006): 161–209; S.E.G. Lea and P. Webley, 
“Money: Metaphors and Motives,” in The Psychological 
Science of Money, ed. E. Bijleveld and H. Aarts (New 
York: Springer, 2014), 21–35; T. Tang and Y.-J. Chen, 
“Intelligence vs. Wisdom: The Love of Money, Machia￾vellianism, and Unethical Behavior across College Major 
and Gender,” Journal of Business Ethics 82, no. 1 (2008): 
1–26; M. Kouchaki et al., “Seeing Green: Mere Exposure 
to Money Triggers a Business Decision Frame and Un￾ethical Outcomes,” Organizational Behavior and Human 
Decision Processes 121, no. 1 (2013): 53–61; J. Chen, 
T.L.-P. Tang, and N. Tang, “Temptation, Monetary Intelli￾gence (Love of Money), and Environmental Context on 
Unethical Intentions and Cheating,” Journal of Business 
Ethics 123, no. 2 (2014): 197–219.
7. R. Lynn, The Secret of the Miracle Economy (London: 
SAE, 1991); G. Ridinger and M. McBride, “Money Af￾fects Theory of Mind Differently by Gender,” PLoS ONE 10, 
no. 12 (2015): e0143973; A. Furnham, S. Stumm, and 
M. Fenton-O’Creevy, “Sex Differences in Money Pathology 
in the General Population,” Social Indicators Research
123, no. 3 (2015): 701–11.
8. A. Furnham, B.D. Kirkcaldy, and R. Lynn, “National 
Attitudes to Competitiveness, Money, and Work among 
Young People: First, Second, and Third World Differ￾ences,” Human Relations 47 (1994): 119–32; K.O. Doyle, 
“Introduction: Ethnicity and Money,” American Behav￾ioral Scientist 45, no. 2 (2001): 181–90; G. Dell’Orto and 
K.O. Doyle, “Poveri Ma Belli: Meanings of Money in It￾aly and in Switzerland,” American Behavioral Scientist 45, 
no. 2 (2001): 257–71; V.K.G. Lim, “Money Matters: An 
Empirical Investigation of Money, Face and Confucian 
Work Ethic,” Personality and Individual Differences 35 
(2003): 953–70; T.L.-P. Tang, A. Furnham, and G.M.-T. 
Davis, “A Cross-Cultural Comparison of the Money 
Ethic, the Protestant Work Ethic, and Job Satisfaction: 
Taiwan, the USA, and the UK,” International Journal of 
Organization Theory and Behavior 6, no. 2 (2003): 175–94; 
R. Tung and C. Baumann, “Comparing the Attitudes 
toward Money, Material Possessions and Savings of 
Overseas Chinese vis-à-vis Chinese in China: Conver￾gence, Divergence or Cross-Vergence, vis-à-vis ‘One Size 
Fits All’ Human Resource Management Policies and 
Practices,” International Journal of Human Resource 
Management 20, no. 11 (2009): 2382–401.
endnotes234
17. L. Brown, B. George, and C. Mehaffey-Kultgen, “The 
Development of a Competency Model and Its Implemen￾tation in a Power Utility Cooperative: An Action Research 
Study,” Industrial and Commercial Training 50, no. 3 
(2018): 123–35.
18. A. Mitra, N. Gupta, and J.D. Shaw, “A Comparative Exami￾nation of Traditional and Skill-Based Pay Plans,” Journal of 
Managerial Psychology 26, no. 4 (2011): 278–96. High Liner 
Foods’ skill-based pay information is described in M. Mayer, 
“Maintaining a Seafood Savviness Like No Other,” Refriger￾ated & Frozen Foods 23, no. 12 (2013): 30, 34, 36, 38.
19. E.C. Dierdorff and E.A. Surface, “If You Pay for Skills, 
Will They Learn? Skill Change and Maintenance under a 
Skill-Based Pay System,” Journal of Management 34, no. 4 
(2008): 721–43; M. Díaz-Fernández, A. López-Cabrales, 
and R. Valle-Cabrera, “In Search of Demanded Compe￾tencies: Designing Superior Compensation Systems,” The 
International Journal of Human Resource Management 24, 
no. 3 (2013): 643–66.
20. P.K. Zingheim and J.R. Schuster, “Competencies and Re￾wards: Substance or Just Style?,” Compensation Benefits 
Review 35, no. 5 (2003): 1–15.
21. E.B. Peach and D.A. Wren, “Pay for Performance from 
Antiquity to the 1950s,” Journal of Organizational Behav￾ior Management 12(1992): 5–26; R.M. Adams, “Shep￾herds at Umma in the Third Dynasty of Ur: Interlocutors 
with a World Beyond the Scribal Field of Ordered 
Vision,” Journal of the Economic and Social History of the 
Orient 49, no. 2 (2006): 133–69; P. Kriwaczek, Babylon: 
Mesopotamia, and the Birth of Civilization (London: 
Atlantic Books, 2010), pg.142.
22. S. Oxenbridge and M.L. Moensted, “The Relationship 
between Payment Systems, Work Intensification and 
Health and Safety Outcomes: A Study of Hotel Room 
Attendants,” Policy and Practice in Health and Safety 9, no. 2 
(2011): 7–26; P. Reeburgh, “How Much Money Should 
a Housekeeper Be Paid per Room at a Motel?,” Quora, 
October 29, 2018.
23. “Arizona State University Survey of Employers Shows 
Companies Doubling Down on COVID-19 Testing and 
Support Vaccinations to Achieve a Post-Pandemic Work￾place,” Press Release (Phoenix: The Rockefeller Founda￾tion, April 29, 2021); K. Yamanouchi, “Delta Posts 4Q 
Loss, but Airline Employees to Get Bonus Checks,” 
Atlanta Journal-Constitution, January 13, 2022; Several 
types of individual incentives and associated laws can be 
found in: “Piece-Rate Compensation—Labor Code 226.2 
(AB 1513)” (California Department of Industrial Rela￾tions, August 2021).
24. N. Byrnes and M. Arndt, “The Art of Motivation,” Business￾Week, May 1, 2006, 56; M. Bolch, “Rewarding the Team,” 
HR Magazine, February 2007, 91–93; J. McGregor, “Nucor’s 
CEO Is Stepping Aside, but Its Culture Likely Won’t,” The 
Washington Post, November 20, 2012. For discussion and re￾view on the shift from individual to team and organization 
rewards, see: D. Brown, “‘We Are All in This Together’. Col￾lective Bonuses and Incentives in the United Kingdom and 
Europe: The Real Performance-Related Pay?,” Compensation 
& Benefits Review 52, no. 4 (2020): 175–92.
25. L.R. Gomez-Mejia, T.M. Welbourne, and R.M. Wiseman, 
“The Role of Risk Sharing and Risk Taking under Gain￾sharing,” Academy of Management Review 25 (2000): 
492–507; R.W.D. Zondo, “The Impact of Gainsharing in 
9. A.E. Mickel and L.A. Barron, “Getting ‘More Bang for the 
Buck’: Symbolic Value of Monetary Rewards in Organiza￾tions,” Journal of Management Inquiry 17, no. 4 (2008): 
329–38; C.P. Cerasoli, J.M. Nicklin, and M.T. Ford, “In￾trinsic Motivation and Extrinsic Incentives Jointly Predict 
Performance: A 40-Year Meta-Analysis,” Psychological 
Bulletin 140, no. 4 (2014): 980–1008; J.D. Shaw and N. 
Gupta, “Let the Evidence Speak Again! Financial Incen￾tives Are More Effective Than We Thought,” Human 
Resource Management Journal 25, no. 3 (2015): 281–93.
10. J.S. Mill, Utilitarianism, 7th ed. (London: Longmans, 
Green, and Co., 1879; repr., Project Gutenberg EBook), 
Chap. 4.
11. J.-M.G. Gagnon, “Des «primes de Fidélité» de 1000$ à 
2000$,” Le Journal de Québec, June 8, 2019; “Conditions 
of Employment,” Working at PSI (Villigen, Switzerland: 
Paul Scherrer Institut, 2016), www.psi.ch/pa/employment￾conditions (accessed February 2, 2022).
12. For these and other arguments against loyalty/retention 
bonuses, see A. Greenberg, “Why Bonuses Don’t Work 
to Improve Employee Retention,” ContractRecruiter
(blog), November 26, 2021. The Credit Suisse example is 
described in P. Clarke, “Credit Suisse Memo to Bankers: 
Your Bonus Will Be in Cash. But If You Leave, Pay Us 
Back,” Financial News, January 28, 2022.
13. K. Gilbert, “Promises and Practices: Job Evaluation and 
Equal Pay Forty Years On!,” Industrial Relations Journal 43, 
no. 2 (2012): 137–51; M. Armstrong and D. Brown, “Job 
Evaluation Versus Market Pricing: Competing or Combin￾ing Methods of Pay Determination?,” Compensation & Bene￾fits Review 49, no. 3 (2017): 153–60; M. Armstrong, 
Armstrong’s Job Evaluation Handbook: A Guide to Achieving 
Fairness and Transparency in Pay and Reward (London: 
Kogan Page Publishers, 2018). One recent book justifiably 
critiqued pay determination, but focused almost completely 
on “power” as the cause of pay differences across jobs, 
whereas the more justifiable factors discussed here were 
overlooked. See: J. Rosenfeld, You’re Paid What You’re 
Worth: And Other Myths of the Modern Economy, 1st edition 
(Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press, 2021).
14. J. Rubery, “Joan Acker and Doing Comparable Worth,” 
Gender, Work & Organization 26, no. 12 (2019): 1786–93; 
S. Pochic and V.-A. Chappe, “Battles through and about 
Statistics in French Pay Equity Bargaining: The Politics of 
Quantification at Workplace Level,” Gender, Work & Organi￾zation 26, no. 5 (2019): 650–67. Several pay discrimination 
cases are heard each year in several countries. For 
example, see: “Google LLC, US Department of Labor 
Settlement Resolves Alleged Pay, Hiring Discrimination at 
California, Washington State Locations,” News Release (San 
Francisco: U.S. Department of Labor, February 1, 2021).
15. R. McNabb and K. Whitfield, “Job Evaluation and High 
Performance Work Practices: Compatible or Conflictual?,” 
Journal of Management Studies 38 (2001): 293–312; P.K. 
Sandberg, “Intertwining Gender Inequalities and Gender￾Neutral Legitimacy in Job Evaluation and Performance￾Related Pay,” Gender, Work & Organization 24, no. 2 (2017): 
156–70.
16. P.K. Zingheim and J.R. Schuster, “Competencies and Rewards: 
Substance or Just Style?,”Compensation Benefits Review 35, 
no. 5 (2003): 40–44; K. Kim et al., “Rewarding Self-Initiated 
Expatriates: A Skills-Based Approach,” Thunderbird Interna￾tional Business Review 60, no. 1 (2018): 89–104.235
Investments,” Employee Relations 37, no. 3 (2015): 296–313. 
Contrary to most other research, one study in Finland re￾ported that group-level incentives have a stronger effect 
than individual incentives on organizational productivity. 
See: T. Kato and A. Kauhanen, “Performance Pay and En￾terprise Productivity: The Details Matter,” Journal of Par￾ticipation and Employee Ownership 1, no. 1 (2018): 61–73.
34. W.C. Hammer, “How to Ruin Motivation with Pay,” 
Compensation Review 7, no. 3 (1975): 17–27; A. Kohn, 
Punished by Rewards (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1993); 
M. Beer and M.D. Cannon, “Promise and Peril of Imple￾menting Pay-for-Performance,” Human Resource Manage￾ment 43, no. 1 (2004): 3–48; D. Ariely et al., “Large 
Stakes and Big Mistakes,” Review of Economic Studies 76, 
no. 2 (2009): 451–69; C.B. Cadsby, F. Song, and F. 
Tapon, “The Impact of Risk-Aversion and Stress on the 
Incentive Effect of Performance-Pay,” in Experiments in 
Organizational Economics, vol. 19 (Emerald Group 
Publishing Limited, 2016), 189–227.
35. J.D. Shaw and N. Gupta, “Let the Evidence Speak 
Again! Financial Incentives Are More Effective Than We 
Thought,” Human Resource Management Journal 25, no. 3 
(2015): 281–93; S.Y. Sung, J.N. Choi, and S.-C. Kang, 
“Incentive Pay and Firm Performance: Moderating Roles 
of Procedural Justice Climate and Environmental Turbu￾lence,” Human Resource Management 56, no. 2 (2017): 
287–305; A.J. Nyberg et al., “Collective Pay for Perfor￾mance: A Cross-Disciplinary Review and Meta-Analysis,” 
Journal of Management 44, no. 6 (2018): 2433–72.
36. J. Paterson, “20% of Employers Link Pay to Performance,” 
Benefits Canada, February 5, 2016. For discussion about 
the challenges of linking pay with individual performance, 
see: J. Rosenfeld, You’re Paid What You’re Worth: And Other 
Myths of the Modern Economy (Cambridge, Massachusetts: 
Harvard University Press, 2021), Chap. 4.
37. B. Gerhart and M. Fang, “Pay for (Individual) Perfor￾mance: Issues, Claims, Evidence and the Role of Sorting 
Effects,” Human Resource Management Review 24, no. 1 
(2014): 41–52; J. Han, K. Bartol, and S. Kim, “Tightening 
up the Performance-Pay Linkage: Roles of Contingent Re￾ward Leadership and Profit-Sharing in the Cross-Level In￾fluence of Individual Pay-for-Performance,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology 100, no. 2 (2015): 417–30; S.Y. Sung, 
J.N. Choi, and S.-C. Kang, “Incentive Pay and Firm Per￾formance: Moderating Roles of Procedural Justice Cli￾mate and Environmental Turbulence,” Human Resource 
Management 56, no. 2 (2017): 287–305.
38. “United Rentals Inc at Evercore ISI Industrial Conference—
Final,” Fair Disclosure Wire (Linthicum, MD), March 3, 2015.
39. J.S. DeMatteo, L.T. Eby, and E. Sundstrom, “Team￾Based Rewards: Current Empirical Evidence and Direc￾tions for Future Research,” Research in Organizational 
Behavior 20 (1998): 141–83; A.J. Nyberg et al., “Collec￾tive Pay for Performance: A Cross-Disciplinary Review 
and Meta-Analysis,” Journal of Management 44, no. 6 
(2018): 2433–72.
40. A. Green, “When Attempts to Recognize Employees Go 
Horribly Wrong: Stuffed Bears, Birthday Snubs, and 
More,” Ask a Manager (blog), April 5, 2018.
41. “Dream Teams,” Human Resources Professional (1994): 
17–19.
42. S. Kerr, “On the Folly of Rewarding A, While Hoping for 
B,” Academy of Management Journal 18 (1975): 769–83; 
the Automotive Parts Manufacturing Industry of South 
Africa,” South African Journal of Economic and Manage￾ment Sciences 21, no. 1 (2018): 8; A.M. Benson and 
S. Sajjadiani, “Are Bonus Pools Driven by Their Incentive 
Effects? Evidence from Fluctuations in Gainsharing 
Incentives,” ILR Review 71, no. 3 (2018): 567–99.
26. S. Hopkins, J. Surpin, and A. Stanowski, “Lessons Learned 
from Implementation of Gainsharing,” Healthcare Financial 
Management 69, no. 3 (2015): 78–83; A.A. Anoushiravani 
and R.M. Nunley, “Gainsharing Strategies, Physician 
Champions, Getting Physician Buy In,” The Journal of 
Arthroplasty 32, no. 6 (2017): 1723–27; P. Wallerich, “An 
Example of Successful Gain-Sharing Plan in a Most Popular 
Parisian Restaurant,” LinkedIn, April 5, 2017.
27. P. Lambert, “Digging Deep for Organizational Innova￾tion,” McKinsey Quarterly, April 2018.
28. D. Weinstein, “In Business for Ourselves,” Richmond 
Magazine, February 12, 2019.
29. G. Cameron, “Surge in Profits Pays off with Law Firm 
Shepherd and Wedderburn Staff Bonus,” The Times 
(London), August 23, 2021; H. Mujtaba, “ASUS Awards 
Its Employees With Huge Year-End Bonuses, All Thanks 
To Huge Profits From Crypto Mining In The GPU Seg￾ment,” Wccftech, January 22, 2022.
30. J. Chelius and R.S. Smith, “Profit Sharing and Employment 
Stability,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 43 (1990): 
256s–73s; S.H. Wagner, C.P. Parkers, and N.D. Christian￾sen, “Employees That Think and Act Like Owners: Effects 
of Ownership Beliefs and Behaviors on Organizational Ef￾fectiveness,” Personnel Psychology 56, no. 4 (2003): 847–71; 
G. Ledford, M. Lucy, and P. Leblanc, “The Effects of Stock 
Ownership on Employee Attitudes and Behavior: Evidence 
from the Rewards at Work Studies,” Perspectives (Sibson),
January 2004; P. Walsh, M. Peck, and I. Zugasti, “Why the 
U.S. Needs More Worker-Owned Companies,” Harvard 
Business Review, August 8, 2018.
31. R. Meng et al., “Do ESOPs Enhance Firm Performance? 
Evidence from China’s Reform Experiment,” Journal of 
Banking & Finance 35, no. 6 (2011): 1541–51; H. Fang, 
J.R. Nofsinger, and J. Quan, “The Effects of Employee 
Stock Option Plans on Operating Performance in Chinese 
Firms,” Journal of Banking & Finance 54 (2015): 141–59; 
N.-C. Liu, M.-Y. Chen, and M.-L. Wang, “The Effects of 
Non-Expensed Employee Stock Bonus on Firm Perfor￾mance: Evidence from Taiwanese High-Tech Firms,” British 
Journal of Industrial Relations 54, no. 1 (2016): 30–54; 
D. Kruse, “Does Employee Ownership Improve Perfor￾mance?,” IZA World of Labor, December 2016: 311.
32. T. Kato, J. Ho Lee, and J.-S. Ryu, “The Productivity 
Effects of Profit Sharing, Employee Ownership, Stock 
Option and Team Incentive Plans: Evidence from Korean 
Panel Data,” in Advances in the Economic Analysis of Par￾ticipatory & Labor-Managed Firms, vol. 11, (Emerald, 
2010), 111–35; C. Lucifora and F. Origo, “Performance￾Related Pay and Firm Productivity: Evidence from a 
Reform in the Structure of Collective Bargaining,” ILR 
Review 68, no. 3 (2015): 606–32.
33. A. Pendleton and A. Robinson, “Employee Share Owner￾ship and Human Capital Development: Complementarity 
in Theory and Practice,” Economic and Industrial Democ￾racy 32, no. 3 (2011): 439–57; G. Loris, “Why Do Firms 
Adopt Employee Share Ownership? Bundling ESO and 
Direct Involvement for Developing Human Capital 236
Psychology, and the ‘Human Factor,’” Journal of the His￾tory of the Behavioral Sciences 50, no. 2 (2014): 148–65.
49. W.F. Dowling, “Job Redesign on the Assembly Line: 
Farewell to Blue-Collar Blues?” Organizational Dynamics
(1973): 51–67; J.A. Häusser et al., “Experimental 
Evidence for the Effects of Task Repetitiveness on Mental 
Strain and Objective Work Performance,” Journal of 
Organizational Behavior 35 (2014): 705–21; E.A.J. van 
Hooft and M.L.M. van Hooff, “The State of Boredom: 
Frustrating or Depressing?” Motivation and Emotion 42 
(2018): 931–46; W. Han et al., “Assessing the Brain ‘on 
the Line’: An Ecologically-Valid Assessment of the Im￾pact of Repetitive Assembly Line Work on Hemody￾namic Response and Fine Motor Control Using FNIRS,” 
Brain and Cognition 136 (2019): 103613.
50. R. Moorhead, “Lawyer Specialization—Managing the Pro￾fessional Paradox,” Law & Policy 32, no. 2 (2010): 226–59.
51. J.R. Hackman and E.E. Lawler, “Employee Reactions to 
Job Characteristics,” Journal of Applied Psychology 55, no. 3 
(1971): 259–86; J.R. Hackman and G.R. Oldham, “The 
Job Diagnostic Survey: An Instrument for the Diagnosis 
of Jobs and the Evaluation of Job Redesign Projects” 
(New Haven, Conn.: Dept. of Administrative Sciences, 
Yale University, May 1974); J.R. Hackman and G.R. 
Oldham, “Motivation through the Design of Work: Test of 
a Theory,” Organizational Behavior and Human Performance 16, 
no. 2 (1976): 250–79; J. R. Hackman and G. Oldham, 
Work Redesign (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1980).
52. R.W. Buell, T. Kim, and C.-J. Tsay, “Creating Reciprocal 
Value Through Operational Transparency,” Management 
Science 63 (2017): 1673–95; R.W. Buell, “Operational 
Transparency,” Harvard Business Review 97 (March–
April 2019): 102–13.
53. M. Gagné and D. Bhave, “Autonomy in the Workplace: 
An Essential Ingredient to Employee Engagement and 
Well-Being in Every Culture,” in Human Autonomy in 
Cross-Cultural Context, ed. V.I. Chirkov, R.M. Ryan, and 
K.M. Sheldon, Cross-Cultural Advancements in Positive 
Psychology (Springer: Netherlands, 2011), 163–87.
54. Maslow introduced or popularized the notion of “growth” 
to human motivation, and his writing suggests that it is 
the same as self-actualization. However, a few others sug￾gest that “growth need strength” in the Hackman/Oldham 
model is a permanent (trait) characteristic. see: A.H. 
Maslow, Motivation and Personality (New York: Harper & 
Row, 1954); J.B. Miner, Organizational Behavior: Inte￾grated Theory Development and the Role of the Uncon￾scious, vol. 6 (Armonk, N.Y.: M.E. Sharpe, 2011), 32-33.
55. J.E. Champoux, “A Multivariate Test of the Job Charac￾teristics Theory of Work Motivation,” Journal of Organi￾zational Behavior 12, no. 5 (1991): 431–46; R.B. Tiegs, 
L.E. Tetrick, and Y. Fried, “Growth Need Strength and 
Context Satisfactions as Moderators of the Relations of 
the Job Characteristics Model,” Journal of Management 18, 
no. 3 (1992): 575–93.
56. G.R. Oldham and J.R. Hackman, “Not What It Was and 
Not What It Will Be: The Future of Job Design Re￾search,” Journal of Organizational Behavior 31, no. 2–3 
(2010): 463–79; A.M. Grant, Y. Fried, and T. Juillerat, 
“Work Matters: Job Design in Classic and Contemporary 
Perspectives,” in APA Handbook of Industrial and Organi￾zational Psychology, ed. S. Zedeck (Washington DC: 
American Psychological Association, 2011), 417–53.
R. Mannion and J. Braithwaite, “Unintended Conse￾quences of Performance Measurement in Healthcare: 20 
Salutary Lessons from the English National Health Ser￾vice,” Internal Medicine Journal 42, no. 5 (2012): 569–74; 
A. Sapegina and A. Weibel, “The Good, the Not So Bad, 
and the Ugly of Competitive Human Resource Practices: 
A Multidisciplinary Conceptual Framework,” Group & Or￾ganization Management 42, no. 5 (2017): 707–47; M. 
Franco-Santos and D. Otley, “Reviewing and Theorizing 
the Unintended Consequences of Performance Manage￾ment Systems,” International Journal of Management 
Reviews 20, no. 3 (2018): 696–730; J. Taylor, “Public 
Officials’ Gaming of Performance Measures and Targets: 
The Nexus between Motivation and Opportunity,” Public 
Performance & Management Review 44, no. 2 (2021): 
272–93.
43. M.A. Campion et al., “Work Redesign: Eight Obstacles 
and Opportunities,” Human Resource Management 44, 
no. 4 (2005): 367–90; S.-J. Cullinane et al., “Job Design 
under Lean Manufacturing and Its Impact on Employee 
Outcomes,” Organizational Psychology Review 3, no. 1 
(2013): 41–61.
44. A. Shinnar et al., “Survey of Ergonomic Features of Su￾permarket Cash Registers,” International Journal of Indus￾trial Ergonomics 34, no. 6 (2004): 535–41; V. O’Connell, 
“Stores Count Seconds to Trim Labor Costs,” The Wall 
Street Journal, November 13, 2008; A. Kihlstedt and G.M. 
Hägg, “Checkout Cashier Work and Counter Design—
Video Movement Analysis, Musculoskeletal Disorders 
and Customer Interaction,” International Journal of Indus￾trial Ergonomics 41, no. 3 (2011): 201–07; “One Checkout 
Item Every Three Seconds,” Mail Online (London), July 8, 
2012. Average scanning times vary considerably with 
the scanning technology, product standardization, and 
ergonomic design of the cashier station.
45. S. Leroy, “Why Is It So Hard to Do My Work? The Chal￾lenge of Attention Residue When Switching between 
Work Tasks,” Organizational Behavior and Human Deci￾sion Processes 109, no. 2 (2009): 168–81; S. Leroy and 
T.M. Glomb, “Tasks Interrupted: How Anticipating Time 
Pressure on Resumption of an Interrupted Task Causes 
Attention Residue and Low Performance on Interrupting 
Tasks and How a ‘Ready-to-Resume’ Plan Mitigates the 
Effects,” Organization Science 29, no. 3 (2018): 380–97.
46. H. Fayol, General and Industrial Management, trans. C. 
Storrs (London: Pitman, 1949); E.E. Lawler III, Motiva￾tion in Work Organizations (Monterey, CA: Brooks/Cole, 
1973), Chap. 7; M.A. Campion, “Ability Requirement 
Implications of Job Design: An Interdisciplinary 
Perspective,” Personnel Psychology 42 (1989): 1–24.
47. A. Smith, An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the 
Wealth of Nations, 1st ed., 2 vols. (London: W. Strahan 
and T. Cadell, 1776), pp . 6–7. Although Smith’s general 
premise is true in most cases, the estimates he provided 
were speculated, not empirically tested. He even sug￾gested that the 10 pin makers couldn’t complete one pin 
per day, but he also stipulated that is “without any of 
them having been educated to this peculiar business.”
48. F.W. Taylor, The Principles of Scientific Management
(New York: Harper & Row, 1911); R. Kanigel, The One 
Best Way: Frederick Winslow Taylor and the Enigma of Ef￾ficiency (New York: Viking, 1997); M. Derksen, “Turning 
Men into Machines? Scientific Management, Industrial 237
Common Is Workplace Transformation and Who Adopts 
It?,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 47 (1994): 
173–88; R. Saavedra and S. K. Kwun, “Affective States in 
Job Characteristics Theory,” Journal of Organizational 
Behavior 21 (2000): 131–46.
64. J.R. Hackman and G. Oldham, Work Redesign (Reading, 
MA: Addison-Wesley, 1980), 137–38.
65. This definition is based mostly on G.M. Spreitzer and R.E. 
Quinn, A Company of Leaders: Five Disciplines for Unleash￾ing the Power in Your Workforce (San Francisco: Jossey￾Bass, 2001). However, most elements of this definition 
appear in other discussions of empowerment. See, for ex￾ample, R. Forrester, “Empowerment: Rejuvenating a Po￾tent Idea,” Academy of Management Executive 14 (2000): 
67–80; W.A. Randolph, “Re-Thinking Empowerment: 
Why Is It so Hard to Achieve?,” Organizational Dynamics
29 (2000): 94–107; S.T. Menon, “Employee Empower￾ment: An Integrative Psychological Approach,” Applied 
Psychology: An International Review 50 (2001): 153–80.
66. Psychological and structural empowerment have separate 
origins but studies have shown that the structural condi￾tions predict psychological empowerment. Our approach 
is to define empowerment as a psychological state and to 
view “structural empowerment” as various antecedents of 
empowerment. see: M.T. Maynard, L.L. Gilson, and J.E. 
Mathieu, “Empowerment—Fad or Fab? A Multilevel Re￾view of the Past Two Decades of Research,” Journal of 
Management 38, no. 4 (2012): 1231–81; S.E. Abel and 
M.W. Hand, “Exploring, Defining, and Illustrating a 
Concept: Structural and Psychological Empowerment in 
the Workplace,” Nursing Forum 53, no. 4 (2018): 579–84.
67. Y. Melhem, “The Antecedents of Customer-Contact Em￾ployees’ Empowerment,” Employee Relations 26, no. 1/2 
(2004): 72–93; M.T. Maynard, L.L. Gilson, and J.E. 
Mathieu, “Empowerment—Fad or Fab? A Multilevel Review 
of the Past Two Decades of Research,” Journal of 
Management 38, no. 4 (2012): 1231–81.
68. X. Zhang and K.M. Bartol, “Linking Empowering Leader￾ship and Employee Creativity: The Influence of Psycholog￾ical Empowerment, Intrinsic Motivation, and Creative 
Process Engagement,” Academy of Management Journal
53, no. 1 (2010): 107–28; S. Pentareddy and L. Suganthi, 
“Building Affective Commitment through Job Characteris￾tics, Leadership and Empowerment,” Journal of Manage￾ment & Organization 21, no. 03 (2015): 307–20.
69. P.N. Sharma and B.L. Kirkman, “Leveraging Leaders: A 
Literature Review and Future Lines of Inquiry for Empow￾ering Leadership Research,” Group & Organization Man￾agement 40, no. 2 (2015): 193–237; V. Christian, A.B. 
Stephan, and B. Heike, “How to Empower Employees: Us￾ing Training to Enhance Work Units’ Collective Empower￾ment,” International Journal of Manpower 36, no. 3 (2015): 
354–73; D.M. Sumpter, C.B. Gibson, and C. Porath, “Act 
Expediently, with Autonomy: Vicarious Learning, Empow￾ered Behaviors, and Performance,” Journal of Business and 
Psychology 32, no. 2 (2017): 131–45; M. Leyer, A. Richter, 
and M. Steinhüser, “‘Power to the Workers’: Empowering 
Shop Floor Workers with Worker-Centric Digital De￾signs,” International Journal of Operations & Production 
Management 39, no. 1 (2018): 24–42.
70. G. Gazzoli, M. Hancer, and Y. Park, “The Role and Effect 
of Job Satisfaction and Empowerment on Customers’ Per￾ception of Service Quality: A Study in the Restaurant 
57. C. Perrow, “A Framework for the Comparative Analysis 
of Organizations,” American Sociological Review 32, no. 2 
(1967): 194–208; R.L. Daft and N.B. Macintosh, “A Ten￾tative Exploration into the Amount and Equivocality of 
Information Processing in Organizational Work Units,” 
Administrative Science Quarterly 26, no. 2 (1981): 207–24. 
This job characteristics category is part of “job complex￾ity,” the latter of which has too many dimensions and in￾terpretations. See P. Liu and Z. Li, “Task Complexity: A 
Review and Conceptualization Framework,” International 
Journal of Industrial Ergonomics 42, no. 6 (2012): 553–68.
58. Job enlargement, as defined here, refers to “horizontal job 
enlargement/loading” which involves increasing the num￾ber and variety of related tasks assigned to an employee. 
This differs from “vertical job enlargement/loading” which 
assigns not only more tasks but also more autonomy and 
responsibility to the employee performing those tasks. The 
latter is now considered a form of job enrichment. For 
early research on job enlargement, see: C. Argyris, Person￾ality and Organization: The Conflict between System and the 
Individual (New York: Harper, 1957), 177–81; K.H. Chung 
and M.F. Ross, “Differences in Motivational Properties be￾tween Job Enlargement and Job Enrichment,” Academy of 
Management Review 2, no. 1 (1977): 113–22.
59. M.D. Kilbridge, “Reduced Costs Through Job Enlarge￾ment: A Case,” The Journal of Business 33, no. 4 (1960): 
357–62; L.E. Davis, “The Design of Jobs,” Industrial Rela￾tions 6, no. 1 (1966): 21–45; W.E. Reif and P.P. Schoder￾bek, “Job Enlargement: Antidote to Apathy,” Human 
Resource Management 5, no. 1 (1966): 16-23. Recent job 
enlargement studies are mainly between-person correla￾tional analyses, whereas early research more richly stud￾ied temporal attitude and behavioral changes from job 
enlargement interventions. Some recent studies that inves￾tigate job enlargement include: J.A. Häusser et al., “Ex￾perimental Evidence for the Effects of Task Repetitiveness 
on Mental Strain and Objective Work Performance,” Jour￾nal of Organizational Behavior 35, no. 5 (2014): 705–21; 
F. Fraccaroli et al., “Who Benefits from More Tasks? Older 
versus Younger Workers,” Journal of Managerial Psychol￾ogy 29, no. 5 (2014): 508–23; D. Berdicchia, G. Masino, 
and F. Nicolli, “Job Enlargement, Job Crafting and the 
Moderating Role of Self-Competence,” Journal of 
Managerial Psychology 31, no. 2 (2016): 318–30.
60. M.A. Campion and C.L. McClelland, “Follow-Up and 
Extension of the Interdisciplinary Costs and Benefits of 
Enlarged Jobs,” Journal of Applied Psychology 78 (1993): 
339–51; N.G. Dodd and D.C. Ganster, “The Interactive 
Effects of Variety, Autonomy, and Feedback on Attitudes 
and Performance,” Journal of Organizational Behavior 17 
(1996): 329–47.
61. J.R. Hackman et al., “A New Strategy for Job Enrich￾ment,” California Management Review 17, no. 4 (1975): 
57–71; R.W. Griffin, Task Design: An Integrative Approach
(Glenview, IL: Scott Foresman, 1982).
62. R. DuRose, “How to Get a Job at Expensify, the Software 
Company That Just Went Public and Made 40% of Em￾ployees on-Paper Millionaires,” Business Insider, Decem￾ber 9, 2021.
63. P.E. Spector and S.M. Jex, “Relations of Job Characteris￾tics from Multiple Data Sources with Employee Affect, 
Absence, Turnover Intentions, and Health,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology 76 (1991): 46–53; P. Osterman, “How 238
Psychology of Sport and Exercise 10 (2009): 186–92; S.G. 
Rogelberg et al., “The Executive Mind: Leader Self-Talk, 
Effectiveness and Strain,” Journal of Managerial Psychol￾ogy 28, no. 1–2 (2013): 183–201.
79. Mental imagery has recently become an important instru￾ment in therapies to correct maladaptive behavior. See: J. 
Pearson et al., “Mental Imagery: Functional Mechanisms 
and Clinical Applications,” Trends in Cognitive Sciences 19, 
no. 10 (2015): 590–602; S.E. Blackwell, “Mental Imagery: 
From Basic Research to Clinical Practice.,” Journal of 
Psychotherapy Integration 29, no. 3 (2019): 235–47.
80. J.E. Driscoll, C. Copper, and A. Moran, “Does Mental 
Practice Enhance Performance?,” Journal of Applied Psy￾chology 79 (1994): 481–92; C.P. Neck, G.L. Stewart, and 
C.C. Manz, “Thought Self-Leadership as a Framework for 
Enhancing the Performance of Performance Appraisers,” 
Journal of Applied Behavioral Science 31 (1995): 278–302. 
Some research separates mental imagery from mental prac￾tice, whereas most studies combine both into one concept.
81. C. O’Donnell et al., “The Role of Mental Imagery in 
Mood Amplification: An Investigation across Subclinical 
Features of Bipolar Disorders,” Cortex 105 (2018): 104–17; 
F. Renner et al., “Mental Imagery as a ‘Motivational 
Amplifier’ to Promote Activities,” Behaviour Research 
and Therapy 114 (2019): 51–59.
82. A. Joyce, “Office Perks: Re-Energize to Get through the 
Blahs,” The Washington Post, August 28, 2005, F05.
83. A. Wrzesniewski and J.E. Dutton, “Crafting a Job: Revi￾sioning Employees as Active Crafters of Their Work,” 
Academy of Management Review 26(2001): 179–201; H.J. 
Gordon et al., “Individual Job Redesign: Job Crafting In￾terventions in Healthcare,” Journal of Vocational Behavior
104 (2018): 98–114; A. Lazazzara, M. Tims, and D. de 
Gennaro, “The Process of Reinventing a Job: A Meta–
Synthesis of Qualitative Job Crafting Research,” Journal 
of Vocational Behavior, 116 (2020): 103267.
84. B. Harkin et al., “Does Monitoring Goal Progress Promote 
Goal Attainment? A Meta-Analysis of the Experimental 
Evidence,” Psychological Bulletin 142, no. 2 (2016): 198–229.
85. M.I. Bopp, S.J. Glynn, and R.A. Henning, “Self-Manage￾ment of Performance Feedback during Computer-Based 
Work by Individuals and Two-Person Work Teams,” paper 
presented at the APA-NIOSH conference, March 1999.
86. M. Inzlicht, B.D. Bartholow, and J.B. Hirsh, “Emotional 
Foundations of Cognitive Control,” Trends in Cognitive 
Sciences 19, no. 3 (2015): 126–32; A.L. Duckworth, T.S. 
Gendler, and J.J. Gross, “Situational Strategies for Self￾Control,” Perspectives on Psychological Science 11, no. 1 
(2016): 35–55.
87. L. Morin and G. Latham, “The Effect of Mental Practice 
and Goal Setting as a Transfer of Training Intervention 
on Supervisors’ Self-Efficacy and Communication Skills: 
An Exploratory Study,” Applied Psychology: An Interna￾tional Review 49 (2000): 566–78; J.S. Hickman and E.S. 
Geller, “A Safety Self-Management Intervention for Min￾ing Operations,” Journal of Safety Research 34 (2003): 
299–308; N.G. Panagopoulos and J. Ogilvie, “Can Sales￾people Lead Themselves? Thought Self-Leadership Strat￾egies and Their Influence on Sales Performance,” 
Industrial Marketing Management 47 (2015): 190–203; 
G. Lucke and M. Furtner, “Soldiers Lead Themselves to 
More Success: A Self-Leadership Intervention Study,” 
Military Psychology 27, no. 5 (2015): 311–24.
Industry,” Journal of Hospitality & Tourism Research 34, 
no. 1 (2010): 56–77; K. BeomCheol, L. Erwin, and M. 
Simon, “Consequences of Empowerment among Restau￾rant Servers: Helping Behaviors and Average Check Size,” 
Management Decision 51, no. 4 (2013): 781–94.
71. W. Ke and P. Zhang, “Effects of Empowerment on Per￾formance in Open-Source Software Projects,” IEEE 
Transactions on Engineering Management 58, no. 2 
(2011): 334–46; H. Fock et al., “Moderation Effects of 
Power Distance on the Relationship between Types of 
Empowerment and Employee Satisfaction,” Journal of 
Cross-Cultural Psychology 44, no. 2 (2013): 281–98; M.M. 
Tuuli et al., “Individual-Level Antecedents of Psychological 
Empowerment,” Journal of Management in Engineering 31, 
no. 2 (2015): 04014036.
72. G. Park, “Boston Scientific workers get to pick working￾from-home days,” Korea Biomedical Review, May 29, 2021.
73. C.C. Manz, “Self-Leadership: Toward an Expanded The￾ory of Self-Influence Processes in Organizations,” Acad￾emy of Management Review 11 (1986): 585–600; G.L. 
Stewart, S.H. Courtright, and C.C. Manz, “Self-Leader￾ship: A Multilevel Review,” Journal of Management 37, 
no. 1 (2011): 185–222; C.C. Manz, “Taking the Self￾Leadership High Road: Smooth Surface or Potholes 
Ahead?,” Academy of Management Perspectives 29, no. 1 
(2015): 132–51; C.P. Neck, C.C. Manz, and J.D. Houghton, 
Self-Leadership: The Definitive Guide to Personal Excellence
(Thousand Oaks, Calif.: SAGE Publications, 2019).
74. C.C. Manz, “Self-Leadership: Toward an Expanded The￾ory of Self-Influence Processes in Organizations,” Acad￾emy of Management Review 11 (1986): 585–600; C.C. 
Manz and C. Neck, Mastering Self-Leadership, 3rd ed. 
(Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2004); C.P. Neck 
and J.D. Houghton, “Two Decades of Self-Leadership 
Theory and Research,” Journal of Managerial Psychology 21, 
no. 4 (2006): 270–95.
75. D. Welsh, M. Baer, and H. Sessions, “Hot Pursuit: The 
Affective Consequences of Organization-Set versus Self￾Set Goals for Emotional Exhaustion and Citizenship Be￾havior,” Journal of Applied Psychology 105, no. 2 (2020): 
166–85; G. Alessandri et al., “Self-Set Goals Improve Aca￾demic Performance through Nonlinear Effects on Daily 
Study Performance,” Learning and Individual Differences
77 (2020): 101784; J. Kaiser, A.K. Koch, and J. Nafziger, 
“Self-Set Goals Are Effective Self-Regulation Tools—Despite 
Goal Revision,” SSRN Scholarly Paper (Rochester, NY: 
Social Science Research Network, January 25, 2021).
76. C.P. Neck and C.C. Manz, “Thought Self-Leadership: 
The Impact of Mental Strategies Training on Employee 
Cognition, Behavior, and Affect,” Journal of Organiza￾tional Behavior 17 (1996): 445–67.
77. R.M. Duncan and J.A. Cheyne, “Incidence and Functions 
of Self-Reported Private Speech in Young Adults: A Self￾Verbalization Questionnaire,” Canadian Journal of Behav￾ioral Science 31 (1999): 133–36; A. Morin, C. Duhnych, 
and F. Racy, “Self-Reported Inner Speech Use in University 
Students,” Applied Cognitive Psychology 32, no. 3 (2018): 
376–82; P.K. Oleś et al., “Types of Inner Dialogues and 
Functions of Self-Talk: Comparisons and Implications,” 
Frontiers in Psychology 11 (2020): 0227.
78. A. Hatzigeorgiadis et al., “Mechanisms Underlying the 
Self-Talk–Performance Relationship: The Effects of 
Motivational Self-Talk on Self-Confidence and Anxiety,” 239
International Journal of Management Reviews 20, no. 3 
(2018): 696–730; M. Jones, “Why Car Salespeople Beg 
for Top Customer Survey Scores,” Edmunds (blog), 
June 4, 2019; K. Woolley and M.A. Sharif, “What 
Happens When Companies Pay Customers to Write 
Reviews?,” Harvard Business Review, June 25, 2021.
e. R.C. Davis, “Arsenal and Arsenalotti: Workplace and 
Community in Seventeenth-Century Venice,” in The 
Workplace before the Factory, ed. T.M. Safley and L.N. 
Rosenband (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1993), 
180–203; R. Crowley, “Arsenal of Venice: World’s First 
Weapons Factory,” Military History, March 2011, 62–70.
f. “Toluyemi Nathaniel Talks about Being a Woman in the 
Tech Space with Softcom,” BellaNaija (blog), July 2, 
2018; Y. Ogunlami, “Nigerian Engineers in Hijabs,” Pulse 
Nigeria, August 3, 2018; “75 Softcomers Were Broken 
into 7 Hackathon Teams,” Twitter (Lagos, Nigeria: Soft￾com, January 24, 2019), https://twitter.com/SoftcomNG/
status/1088474546041208832; D.I. Adeleke, “I Visited a 
Young Nigerian Tech Company Generating Millions in 
Revenue and This Is What I Learned,” Pulse Nigeria, 
January 29, 2019. Some information and quotations are 
also from Softcom’s website: https://softcom.ng/. 
g. S.G.H. Meyerding, “Job Characteristics and Job Satisfac￾tion: A Test of Warr’s Vitamin Model in German Horti￾culture.,” The Psychologist-Manager Journal 18, no. 2 
(2015): 86–107; R. Su, C. Murdock, and J. Rounds, 
“Person-Environment Fit.,” in APA Handbook of Career 
Intervention, Volume 1: Foundations., ed. P.J. Hartung, 
M.L. Savickas, and W.B. Walsh (Washington: American 
Psychological Association, 2015), 81–98.
h. S. Leroy and T.M. Glomb, “Tasks Interrupted: How 
Anticipating Time Pressure on Resumption of an 
Interrupted Task Causes Attention Residue and Low 
Performance on Interrupting Tasks and How a ‘Ready￾to-Resume’ Plan Mitigates the Effects,” Organization 
Science 29, no. 3 (2018): 380–97.
i. E.H. Schein and J. Van Maanen, “Career Anchors and Job/
Role Planning: Tools for Career and Talent Management,” 
Organizational Dynamics 45, no. 3 (2016): 165–73; M. 
Abessolo, J. Rossier, and A. Hirschi, “Basic Values, Career 
Orientations, and Career Anchors: Empirical Investigation 
of Relationships,” Frontiers in Psychology 8 (2017), 1556.
j. B. Latane, K. Williams, and S. Harkins, “Many Hands 
Make Light the Work: The Causes and Consequences of 
Social Loafing,” Journal of Personality 37, no. 6 (1979): 
822–32; R.B. Lount and S.L. Wilk, “Working Harder or 
Hardly Working? Posting Performance Eliminates Social 
Loafing and Promotes Social Laboring in Workgroups,” 
Management Science 60, no. 5 (2014): 1098–1106; F. 
Chen, L. Zhang, and J. Latimer, “How Much Has My 
Co-Worker Contributed? The Impact of Anonymity and 
Feedback on Social Loafing in Asynchronous Virtual 
Collaboration,” International Journal of Information Man￾agement 34, no. 5 (2014): 652–59.
K. “Putting Customers First Is Critical to Success: Telus,” 
National Post, February 4, 2013. The job description is 
for Digital Home Technician-Edmonton on Telus’ job 
vacancies website on Feb 4, 2022.
l. Based on information in: M. Dulaney, “Impostor 
Syndrome can be Your Loudest Critic—Here’s How to 
Silence It,” ABC News (Australia), February 27, 2019.
88. J. Ho and P.L. Nesbit, “Self-Leadership in a Chinese 
Context: Work Outcomes and the Moderating Role of 
Job Autonomy,” Group & Organization Management 39, 
no. 4 (2014): 389–415; J.D. Houghton, A. Carnes, and 
C.N. Ellison, “A Cross-Cultural Examination of Self￾Leadership: Testing for Measurement Invariance across 
Four Cultures,” Journal of Leadership & Organizational 
Studies 21, no. 4 (2014): 414–30.
89. J. Bauman, “The Gold Medal Mind,” Psychology Today
33 (2000): 62–69; R.A. Hamilton, D. Scott, and M.P. 
MacDougall, “Assessing the Effectiveness of Self-Talk In￾terventions on Endurance Performance,” Journal of Ap￾plied Sport Psychology 19, no. 2 (2007): 226–39. J.L. Van 
Raalte, A. Vincent, and B.W. Brewer, “Self-Talk: Review 
and Sport-Specific Model,” Psychology of Sport and 
Exercise 22 (2016): 139–48
90. R.W. Renn, D.G. Allen, and T.M. Huning, “Empirical 
Examination of the Individual-Level Personality-Based 
Theory of Self-Management Failure,” Journal of Organi￾zational Behavior 32, no. 1 (2011): 25–43; M.B. Harari 
et al., “Self-Leadership: A Meta-Analysis of over Two 
Decades of Research,” Journal of Occupational and 
Organizational Psychology 94, no. 4 (2021): 890–923.
91. J. Ho and P.L. Nesbit, “Self-Leadership in a Chinese Context: 
Work Outcomes and the Moderating Role of Job Autonomy,” 
Group & Organization Management 39 (2014): 389–415; 
G.L. Stewart, S.H. Courtright, and C.C. Manz, “Self￾Leadership: A Paradoxical Core of Organizational Behavior,” 
Annual Review of Organizational Psychology and Organiza￾tional Behavior 6 (2019): 47–67; J. Mayfield, M. Mayfield, 
and C.P. Neck, “Speaking to the Self: How Motivating 
Language Links With Self-Leadership,” International 
Journal of Business Communication 58, no. 1 (2021): 31–54.
a. Based on information in: G. Simonoff and B. Kazar, 
“Build and Benefit from a Skill-Based Pay System,” Plant 
Services, August 16, 2018.
b. Based on data reported in: P. Gooderham et al., “A Multi￾level Analysis of the Use of Individual Pay-for-Performance 
Systems,” Journal of Management 44, no. 4 (2018): 
1479–1504. Data were collected in 2009–2010. These 
results are remarkably similar to a 2013 global survey 
sponsored by Kelly Services.
c. J. McGregor, “Delta Workers to Receive Profit-Sharing 
Payouts Worth 2 Months’ Pay,” Washington Post, January 21, 
2020; K. Yamanouchi, “Delta Posts 4Q Loss, but Airline 
Employees to Get Bonus Checks,” Atlanta Journal￾Constitution, January 13, 2022.
d. F.F. Reichheld, The Loyalty Effect (Boston: Harvard 
Business School Press, 1996), p. 236; I. Tiznado et al., 
“Incentive Schemes for Bus Drivers: The Case of the 
Public Transit System in Santiago, Chile,” Research in 
Transportation Economics 48 (2014): 77–83; R.M. Johnson, 
D.H. Reiley, and J.C. Muñoz, “‘The War for the Fare’: 
How Driver Compensation Affects Bus System Perfor￾mance,” Economic Inquiry 53, no. 3 (2015): 1401–19; 
S. Neby et al., “Bending the Rules to Play the Game: 
Accountability, DRG and Waiting List Scandals in 
Norway and Germany,” European Policy Analysis 1, no. 
1 (2015): 127–48; M. Franco-Santos and D. Otley, 
“Reviewing and Theorizing the Unintended Conse￾quences of Performance Management Systems,” 
Design Credit: Blue globe icon: Merfin/Shutterstock240
Decision Making and 
Creativity
To make the best decisions, employees need to use the best decision 
process for that particular situation. In other words, they need to decide how to decide. 
Product and software development companies use various decision processes, such as lean practices, 
agile teams, and, most recently, design thinking. Syntegon Technology, one of the world’s leading 
processing and packaging developers, applies all three approaches in different decision settings.
Packaging firms have relied heavily on lean practices for decisions about improving production 
efficiency, quality, and cost reduction. For example, Syntegon applies lean practices when 
installing capsule filling machines at Pfizer’s manufacturing plants, which demand extreme production 
optimization. Lean decisions are based on systematic data collection, testing, analysis, and feedback to 
discover the best ways to improve the current work situation.
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
LO 7-1 Describe the elements of rational choice decision making.
LO 7-2 Explain why decision makers deviate from rational choice decision making when 
identifying problems and opportunities.
LO 7-3 Explain why people differ from rational choice decision making when searching for, 
appraising, and choosing alternatives.
LO 7-4 Discuss how emotions and intuition relate to decision making.
LO 7-5 Explain how decision makers bias the evaluation of decision outcomes, and identify 
ways to minimize those decision evaluation problems.
LO 7-6 Outline the creative process, and identify employee characteristics, workplace 
conditions, and specific activities that support creativity.
LO 7-7 Summarize the benefits of employee involvement and discuss five contingencies that 
affect the optimal level of employee involvement.
Learning Objectives
7
chapterSyntagon, the German developer of processing and packaging equipment, relies on a variety of decision-making approaches to 
match different types of problems or opportunities.
PART 2: INDIVIDUAL BEHAVIOR AND PROCESSES
In contrast to efficiency-oriented lean decisions, packaging firms now face highly complex and novel 
decisions around sustainable packaging materials and processes. For example, Syntagon works with 
Mars Wrigley and other food manufacturers to develop paper-based packaging that maintains safety 
standards and production reliability. These situations call for design thinking. Cross-functional, 
autonomous teams first engage in problem finding by understanding and empathizing with the user 
experience. They use questioning, creativity, exploration, and learning by doing to develop new 
products or services. They also cycle through multiple iterations of prototypes with customer feedback 
in each cycle to refine their work.
Agile practices, the third decision making approach, fit best where decisions relate to somewhat 
dynamic or unstable situations, such as improving the quality of a section of software code or correcting 
unusual faults on a client’s production line. Agile decisions rely on a team that targets specific issues 
requiring improvement, fixes those issues within a time frame, then moves on to another issue that 
requires attention.”1
Effective decision making—from problem finding to developing creative solutions—is critical to 
Syntegon’s success. All organizations depend on employees to foresee and correctly identify 
problems or opportunities, to consider the full range of alternatives, to pick the best alternative based 
on several relevant factors, and to execute and evaluate those decisions effectively and objectively. 
241
Monty Rakusen/Cultura/Image Source242 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
Decision making is not only a critical management skill; it is also a core 
activity for all staff members directly in their jobs and through employee 
involvement.
This chapter examines each of these themes. It begins by describing the 
rational choice view of decision making. Next, the human limitations of 
rational choice—we call it imperfect rationality—are discussed in the context 
of how human beings actually make decisions. We also examine the 
emerging view that decisions consist of a complex interaction of logic and 
emotion. The latter part of this chapter focuses on two topics that intertwine 
with decision making: creativity and employee involvement.
Rational Choice Decision Making
Decision making is the process of making choices among alternatives with the intention of 
moving toward some desired state of affairs.2
 How can we make effective decisions in or￾ganizations? This chapter answers this question by describing different ways of thinking 
about decision making and by examining several issues at each stage of the decision￾making process. We begin this journey by discussing the earliest perspective—rational 
choice decision making—which is the process of using pure logic and all available informa￾tion about all alternatives to choose the alternative with the highest value. Choices with 
the highest value might have the highest expected profitability, customer satisfaction, em￾ployee well-being, or some combination of these outcomes.
For most of written history, Western societies have elevated pure rationality as an ideal 
state of decision making.3
 The rational choice view was established 2,500 years ago when 
Plato and his contemporaries in ancient Greece raised logical debate and reasoning to a 
fine art. About 400 years ago, Descartes and other European philosophers argued that 
the ability to make logical decisions is one of the most important accomplishments of hu￾man beings. In the 1700s, Scottish philosophers refined the notion that the best choice is 
the one that offers the greatest expected satisfaction. As we shall discover, these views of 
rational choice decision making are flawed, but this approach provides a useful foundation 
to understand this topic.
Rational choice decisions often involve complex calculations of data using a formula 
that points to the best choice. Basically, this formula determines the best alternative by 
considering the probability that various outcomes will occur from the choices along with 
the expected satisfaction (valences) from each of those outcomes.4
 We have already de￾scribed similar calculations of probability and valences in organizational behavior theo￾ries presented earlier in this book, notably the attitude model in Chapter 4 and expectancy 
theory of motivation in Chapter 5.
The example shown in Exhibit 7.1 will help to explain how the rational choice calculation 
works.5
 Suppose that you need to choose a new supplier of a specific raw material used in 
the company’s products. From experience, you estimate 
that the preferred supplier should provide a high-quality 
product (+9) with low prices (+6) and on-time delivery 
(+4).6
 The numbers, which are on a plus or minus 10-point 
scale in this example, indicate the valence of each out￾come, that is, its expected satisfaction or importance. You 
discover that supplier A has excellent on-time delivery 
(about 90 percent probability of meeting the company’s 
expectations), an 80 percent likelihood of offering low 
LO 7-1 
decision making
the conscious process of 
making choices among 
alternatives with the intention 
of moving toward some desired 
state of affairs
rational choice decision making
the process of using pure logic 
and all available information 
about all alternatives to choose 
the alternative with the highest 
valueChapter Seven Decision Making and Creativity 243
0.7
0.9
0.8
Low prices
On-time delivery
Product quality
Probability
(“expectancy”) the
outcome will occur
with that supplier
Important outcomes
(selection criteria)
Outcome valences
(importance)
+9
+4
+6
0.9
0.6
0.4
Supplier B
Low prices
On-time delivery
Product quality +9
+4
+6
Supplier A
prices, and a 70 percent probability of reliably providing a product with exceptional quality. 
Supplier B has a 90 percent chance of providing very high product quality but a lower likeli￾hood of on-time delivery (60 percent) and of offering the low prices (40 percent).
Which of these two suppliers should be selected? A rational choice decision maker 
would choose Supplier A because that company would produce the highest expected sat￾isfaction. This composite valence is calculated by multiplying the valence of each out￾come by the probability of that outcome occurring, then adding those results across all 
three outcomes. The supplier with the higher score is the better choice, given available 
information. This is a highly simplified illustration because a truly rational choice deci￾sion would examine all potential suppliers and all possible outcomes. The key point from 
this example is that all rational decisions rely primarily on two pieces of information: 
(a) the probability that each outcome will occur from the chosen alternative and (b) the 
valence or expected satisfaction of each outcome.
RATIONAL CHOICE DECISION PROCESS
Calculating the best alternative is at the heart of rational choice decision making, but it 
goes hand-in-hand with the systematic decision process illustrated in Exhibit 7.2.7
 The 
first step is to identify the problem or recognize an opportunity. A problem is a deviation 
between the current and the desired situation—the gap between “what is” and “what ought 
to be.” This deviation is a symptom of more fundamental causes that need to be corrected. 
The “ought to be” refers to goals or performance expectations, which later help to evaluate 
the success of the selected choice.8
 For instance, if a customer contact center’s goal is to 
answer incoming client calls within 30 seconds, the problem is the gap between that goal 
and the actual time the contact center takes to answer most client calls. An opportunity
EXHIBIT 7.1
Rational Choice Decision-Making 
Example244 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
is a deviation between current expectations and a potentially better situation that was not 
previously expected. In other words, an opportunity exists when decision makers discover 
that some choices may produce better results than current goals or expectations.
The second step involves choosing the best decision process. This is really a meta￾decision—deciding how to decide—because it refers to choosing among the different ap￾proaches and processes to make the decision.9
 The opening case study to this chapter 
described three types of decision processes that manufacturers and software developers 
tend to use for different situations. One meta-decision is whether to solve the problem 
alone or involve others in the process. We’ll examine the con￾tingencies of employee involvement in decision making in the 
last section of this chapter. Another factor in choosing the best 
decision process is how much time is available to make the de￾cision. A third factor is the degree of decision uncertainty, that 
is, how easily you can estimate outcome probabilities for each 
alternative. A fourth contingency is whether the problem is rou￾tine or novel. Routine problems apply programmed decisions
because earlier encounters with that problem would have identi￾fied ready-made alternatives and possibly the optimal solution. 
In contrast, new or unique problems require nonprogrammed 
decisions because the decision maker must work through all 
steps in the decision model.
The third step in the rational choice decision process is to 
identify and/or develop a list of possible choices. This usually 
begins by searching for ready-made solutions, such as practices 
that have worked well on similar problems. If none of the exist￾ing solutions is acceptable, then decision makers need to design 
a custom-made solution or modify an existing one.
The fourth step is to select the best choice by applying the 
rational choice calculation we described in Exhibit 7.1. 
To choose the alternative with the greatest expected satisfac￾tion, the decision maker must have information about all pos￾sible alternatives and their outcomes. That condition is 
usually impossible, but the rational choice view of decision 
making assumes it can be accomplished without any effort 
or challenges.
1. Identify
problem or
opportunity
2. Choose
the best
decision
process
3. Discover
or develop
possible
choices
4. Select the
choice with the
highest value
5. Implement
the selected
choice
6. Evaluate
the selected
choice
2. C
the
dec
pro
3. Di
or de
pos
cho
ent
ed
te
ed
Rational
Choice
Decision￾Making
Process
EXHIBIT 7.2
Rational Choice Decision Process
Too often, decision makers unwisely skip the first step in the rational 
choice decision process. Rather than discover and define the problem, 
they passively accept whatever problem is handed to them by clients or 
managers. “Engineers are trained to be good problem-solvers, but too 
often they wait for people to tell them about the problem that needs 
to be solved,” suggests Liam Hayes, Global Chief People officer at 
multinational engineering firm Aurecon. “If engineering is going to 
solve the problems of tomorrow, there’s a desperate need to practice 
problem finding today.” A UX designer at Boeing advises that problem 
finding requires conversations with the right stakeholders. “[Sometimes] 
we have the wrong stakeholders in the room and have the wrong 
problem to find and miss the mark.”a
Prostock-studio/ShutterstockChapter Seven Decision Making and Creativity 245
The fifth step in the rational choice decision-making process is to implement the se￾lected alternative. The rational choice view has little to say about this step because it 
assumes that implementation occurs with ease. The final step is to evaluate whether the 
gap has narrowed between “what is” and “what ought to be.” Ideally, this information 
should come from systematic benchmarks so that relevant feedback is objective and 
easily observed.
PROBLEMS WITH RATIONAL CHOICE DECISION MAKING
The rational choice view of decision making seems so logical, yet there are several reasons 
why it is impossible to apply in reality.10 Therefore, we need to understand why people 
have imperfect rationality. Over the next several pages we reexamine each step in the ra￾tional choice decision-making process, but with more detail about what really happens 
through the lens of “imperfect rationality.”
Identifying Problems and Opportunities
Physicists Albert Einstein and Leopold Infeld once wrote: “The formulation of a problem 
is far more often essential than its solution, which may be merely a matter of mathemati￾cal or experimental skill.”11 In other words, problem identification is not just the first step 
in decision making; it is arguably the most important step. But problems and opportuni￾ties are not clearly labeled objects that appear on our desks. Instead, they are conclusions 
that we form from ambiguous and conflicting information.12
PROBLEMS WITH PROBLEM IDENTIFICATION
Only by forming an accurate understanding of the problem can we move toward a mean￾ingful solution. Unfortunately, the problem identification stage is, itself, filled with prob￾lems. Here are five of the most widely recognized concerns.
Solution-Focused Problems One problem-identification error occurs when deci￾sion makers jump to a solution before understanding the problem.13 This is evident when 
the problem is described as a veiled solution, such as: “The problem is that we need more 
control over our suppliers.” This isn’t a problem statement; it is a solution rephrased as a 
problem with little or no diagnosis. The solution-focused mindset occurred when the ex￾ecutive who launched Apple’s retail stores was subsequently hired as CEO of JCPenney. 
The executive quickly identified the ailing American retailer’s main problem in a way that 
was actually a veiled solution: It needed to be more like Apple. JCPenney’s popular cou￾pons and store sales were abandoned because Apple rarely discounted its products. 
JCPenney stores were redesigned to look more like Apple stores. The former Apple execu￾tive curtly explained that he didn’t test these changes because “We didn’t test at Apple.” 
Less than two years later, JCPenney’s sales had plummeted by one-third and the former 
Apple executive was out the door.14
Why do decision makers fall into the solution-focused problem trap? One reason is 
that they have been reinforced by past successes with that solution. When new prob￾lems arise, the solution that worked in the past is quickly embraced before proper 
problem diagnosis can occur. Abraham Maslow (who created Maslow’s needs hierar￾chy model) once warned, “I suppose it is tempting, if the only tool you have is a ham￾mer, to treat everything as if it were a nail.”15 A second reason for the solution-focused 
problem identification error is that decision makers are comforted by closure to prob￾lems, so they nonconsciously embed a solution in their problem definition. Unfortu￾nately, this solution-focused situation fails to fully diagnose the underlying causes that 
need to be addressed.
LO 7-2246 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
mental models
visual and relational images 
that we develop to describe, 
explain, and predict the world 
around us
Decisive Leadership Executives tend to be valued for their decisiveness, including 
how quickly they determine that the situation is a problem, opportunity, or nothing worth 
their attention.16 Consequently, many leaders announce problems or opportunities before 
having a chance to logically assess the situation. The result is often a misguided effort to 
solve an ill-defined problem or resources wasted on a poorly identified opportunity.
Stakeholder Framing Employees, suppliers, customers, and other stakeholders 
provide (or hide) information in ways that makes the decision maker see the situation as 
a problem, opportunity, or steady sailing.17 Employees point to external factors rather 
than their own imperfections as the cause of production delays. Suppliers market their 
new products as unique opportunities and competitor products as risky choices. Many 
other stakeholders also frame the situation in ways that benefit them. Decision makers fall 
prey to these constructed realities because they have a need to simplify the daily bombard￾ment of complex and often ambiguous information.
Perceptual Defense Under some conditions, decision makers either fail to recog￾nize or quickly forget information that signals the existence of a serious problem. The 
tendency to engage in perceptual defense (or its variation, called repressive coping) is a 
coping mechanism. It is more likely to occur in decision makers with higher trait anxiety 
(high neuroticism) and when they have limited options to solve the problem.18
Mental Models Decision makers are victims of their own problem framing due to 
existing mental models. Mental models are knowledge structures that we develop to de￾scribe, explain, and predict the world around us.19 These visual or relational images of the 
external world fill in information that we don’t immediately see, which satisfies our need 
Mental Model Myopia Almost Rejected 
Seinfeldb
Seinfeld was one of the most successful situational com￾edies (sitcoms) in history, yet it was soundly rejected by 
executives at Fox network and almost had the same fate 
at NBC, which aired the pilot episode.
The show’s near-miss with success occurred because 
it was a new form of television comedy, one that was pro￾foundly different from the deeply reinforced mental mod￾els that network executives relied on to identify future 
program gems. Popular sitcoms wove humor into a story 
line that often addressed current ethical or social issues, 
whereas Seinfeld was a show about nothing—just humor￾ous dialogue in “moments” of everyday life (such as going 
to a laundromat or waiting too long for dinner at a restau￾rant). In the minds of network executives, lead characters 
in successful sitcoms had emotional attachments or con￾flicts and displayed occasional heroism. Seinfeld’s charac￾ters lived separate lives, had minimal emotional 
relationships, and were hardly heroic.
NBC executive Rick Ludwin is widely credited with sav￾ing Seinfeld from the dustbin. In his early days, Ludwin 
had done stand-up comedy and read Saturday Night Live
scripts, so he recognized the potential of Seinfeld’s 
unique humor. Also, Ludwin was responsible for late-night 
programming, not sitcoms, so he didn’t rely on the out￾dated mental models that blinkered sitcom executives re￾garding what a successful program should look like. 
Seinfeld scriptwriters Larry David and Jerry Seinfeld also 
lacked experience in the sitcom industry, which enabled 
them to produce scripts that forged new territory.
“Larry and Jerry had never written a sitcom, and my 
department had never developed one,” says Rick Ludwin. 
“We were a good match, because we didn’t know what 
rules weren’t supposed to be broken.”
global connections 7.1
Stle Rock/West-Shapiro/Album/Alamy Stock PhotoChapter Seven Decision Making and Creativity 247
to understand and navigate the surrounding environment (see Chapter 3). Many mental 
images are also images of ideal conditions—they represent models of how things should 
be. Unfortunately, these mental models can blind us from recognizing unique problems or 
opportunities because people tend to dislike anything that deviates from the ideal type. If 
an idea doesn’t fit the existing mental model of how things should work, then it is quickly 
dismissed as unworkable or undesirable.
IDENTIFYING PROBLEMS AND OPPORTUNITIES 
MORE EFFECTIVELY
Recognizing problems and opportunities will always be a challenge, but one way to im￾prove the process is by becoming aware of the five problem identification biases just de￾scribed. For example, by recognizing that mental models restrict a person’s perspective of 
the world, decision makers are more motivated to consider other perspectives of reality. 
Along with increasing their awareness of problem identification flaws, leaders require 
considerable willpower to resist the temptation of looking decisive when a more thought￾ful examination of the situation should occur.
A third way to improve problem identification is to create a norm of “divine discon￾tent.” Decision makers with this mindset are never satisfied with current conditions no 
matter how successful that situation may be, so they more actively search for problems 
and opportunities.20 Fourth, problem identification errors can be minimized by discuss￾ing the situation with other people, particularly those with different experiences and back￾grounds. It is much easier to discover blind spots in problem identification when listening 
to how others perceive the situation.
Searching for, Appraising, and Choosing Alternatives
The rational choice view of decision making assumes that decision makers rely on logic to 
assess and choose alternatives. It also assumes that they have well-articulated and agreed￾upon organizational goals, that they efficiently and simultaneously process facts about all 
alternatives and the consequences of those alternatives, and that they choose the alterna￾tive with the most favorable outcomes.
Nobel Prize–winning organizational scholar Herbert Simon questioned these assump￾tions a half century ago. He argued that people engage in bounded rationality because they 
process limited and imperfect information, and they rarely try to select the best choice.21
Bounded rationality is the most widely known theory questioning the rational choice 
view, but it is not alone. Other imperfect rationality theories identify imperfections in how 
people form preferences, how they short-circuit the decision-making process, and how 
their choices are distorted by faulty heuristics and other perceptual biases.22 Overall, as 
Exhibit 7.3 illustrates, organizational behavior theories identify several ways that human 
decision making differs from rational choice assumptions. Let’s look at these differences 
in terms of goals, information processing, and maximization.
PROBLEMS WITH GOALS
Goals are a critical component of all decisions because they establish “what ought to be” 
and, therefore, provide a standard against which each alternative is appraised. The rational 
choice view assumes that organizational goals are clear and agreed on, yet in reality they are 
often ambiguous or in conflict with each other.23 Ambiguous goals make it difficult to know 
if a particular choice has greater value to the organization. For example, “satisfy customer 
needs” may refer to providing efficient service, a variety of services, more personalized ser￾vice, and other possibilities. Conflicting goals also create havoc with rational decision mak￾ing. When goals conflict, decision makers need to determine which goal gets priority. 
Unfortunately, they rarely have a guidebook to advise which goals take precedence.
LO 7-3
bounded rationality
the view that people are 
bounded in their decision￾making capabilities, including 
access to limited information, 
limited information processing, 
and tendency toward satisficing 
rather than maximizing when 
making choices248 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
PROBLEMS WITH INFORMATION PROCESSING
The rational choice approach assumes that decision makers assess all alternatives and all 
of their features and outcomes simultaneously using unbiased estimates of valences and 
outcome probabilities. In reality, people sequentially (not all at the same time) appraise 
only a few alternatives and only a handful of characteristics.24 For example, there are hun￾dreds of mobile/cell phone models on the market and dozens of features to consider in 
each model, yet phone purchasers typically pay attention to a small subset of products 
and a handful of characteristics or expected outcomes of those products.
Furthermore, purchasers rarely line up their limited range of alternatives at the same 
time to select the best phone. Instead, they typically assess alternatives sequentially using 
an implicit favorite. An implicit favorite is a preferred alternative that becomes the bench￾mark against which other choices are compared. The preferred alternative is called “im￾plicit” because decision makers don’t explicitly decide this initial preference and often 
aren’t even aware of their favoritism.25
Why do decision makers follow a sequential appraisal process using an implicit fa￾vorite? One reason is the difficulty of having all alternatives available at the same 
time.26 It is impossible to collect information about every type of phone on the same 
day, for example, so the most favorable phone found early in your search becomes the 
implicit favorite when considering phones that you investigate later. Second, human 
beings have a natural preference for comparing two choices rather than systematically 
assessing many alternatives simultaneously.27 An implicit favorite assists this process 
by serving as an anchor comparator for appraising the other choices. Third, people are 
cognitive misers. They minimize mental effort by quickly forming a preferred 
Goals are clear, compatible, and
agreed upon.
Rational choice
assumptions
Observations from
organizational behavior
Decision makers can calculate all
alternatives and their outcomes.
Decision makers evaluate all
alternatives simultaneously.
Decision makers use absolute
standards to evaluate alternatives.
Decision makers use factual
information to choose alternatives.
Decision makers choose the
alternative with the highest payo.
Goals are ambiguous, are in conflict,
and lack full support.
Decision makers have limited
information-processing abilities.
Decision makers evaluate
alternatives sequentially.
Decision makers evaluate alternatives
against an implicit favorite.
Decision makers process
perceptually distorted information.
Decision makers choose the 
alternative that is good enough 
(satisficing).
EXHIBIT 7.3 Rational Choice Assumptions versus Organizational Behavior Findings about Choosing Alternatives
implicit favorite
a preferred alternative that the 
decision maker uses repeatedly 
as a comparison with other 
choicesChapter Seven Decision Making and Creativity 249
alternative (their implicit favorite) and then looking mainly for evidence that supports 
the preferred choice. In other words, they engage in confirmation bias, which we dis￾cussed in Chapter 3.28
The fourth reason why we compare alternatives sequentially against an implicit favorite 
is the human need for cognitive consistency and coherence. People want to think and act 
logically, so they try to align their emotional preference (implicit favorite) with the logical 
choice. This occurs through sequential analysis of alternatives by subtly changing valences 
and probabilities. Specifically, decision makers nonconsciously ignore or underweight 
positive features of the alternatives relative to the implicit favorite, and change the impor￾tance of factors to support the favorite. Suppose that the camera on another phone brand 
gets more positive reviews than the camera on the phone you prefer (your implicit favorite). 
Chances are, you nonconsciously make camera quality less important (lower valence) and 
discount the accuracy of the reviews about camera quality (which increases the probability 
that the camera on your preferred phone is equally good). Consequently, your implicit 
favorite remains the rational best choice.29
Biased Decision Heuristics The cornerstone of rational choice decision making 
is to calculate the alternative with the highest expected satisfaction. However, psychologists 
Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman discovered that human beings have built-in decision 
heuristics that automatically distort those calculations. Three of the most widely studied 
heuristic biases are anchoring and adjustment, availability, and representativeness:30
• Anchoring and adjustment heuristic. This heuristic states that we are influenced by 
an initial anchor point and do not sufficiently move away from that point as new 
information is provided.31 The anchor point might be an initial offer price, initial 
opinion of someone, or initial estimated probability that something will occur. 
This bias is associated with the problem we described a few paragraphs ago, 
namely that human beings tend to compare alternatives rather than assess them 
purely against objective criteria. Therefore, if someone requests a high initial price 
for a car we want to buy, we naturally compare—and thereby anchor—our alternative 
offer against that high initial price.
• Availability heuristic. The availability heuristic is the tendency to estimate the 
probability of something occurring by how easily we can recall that event. Unfortu￾nately, how easily we recall something is due to several factors, not just how often 
it occurs (probability).32 For instance, we overestimate the probability or fre￾quency of recent events as well as emotional events (such as earthquakes and 
shark attacks) because they are easily remembered.
• Representativeness heuristic. Representativeness heuristic states that we pay more 
attention to whether something resembles (is representative of) something else 
and less attention to more objective statistics about its probability.33 In other 
words, our decisions tend to rely more on stereotypes (see Chapter 3) than on 
objective statistical probabilities. Suppose that 80 percent of the students in a 
confirmation bias
the process of screening out 
information that is contrary to 
our values and assumptions, 
and to more readily accept 
confirming information
anchoring and adjustment 
heuristic
a natural tendency for people 
to be influenced by an initial 
anchor point such that they do 
not sufficiently move away 
from that point as new 
information is provided
availability heuristic
a natural tendency to assign 
higher probabilities to objects 
or events that are easier to 
recall from memory, even 
though ease of recall is also 
affected by nonprobability 
factors (e.g., emotional 
response, recent events)
representativeness heuristic
a natural tendency to evaluate 
probabilities of events or 
objects by the degree to 
which they resemble (are 
representative of) other events 
or objects rather than on 
objective probability 
information250 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
sociology course are sociology majors, but the remaining 20 percent are computer 
science students taking the course as an interdepartmental elective. Statistically, 
there is only a 20 percent chance that any classmate is from computer science, yet 
we tend to believe a student is from computer science if they look and act like a 
stereotype of a computer science student.
PROBLEMS WITH MAXIMIZATION
One of the main assumptions of rational choice decision making is that people are both 
motivated and able to identify and select the best alternative (maximization). Yet rather 
than aiming for maximization, decision makers engage in satisficing—they choose the first 
alternative that exceeds an acceptable standard for their needs and preferences.34 In short, 
they choose an alternative that is “good enough.”
Satisficing is usually necessary because choosing the absolutely best choice (maximization) 
requires complete and perfect information. This is impossible in reality because informa￾tion is imperfect, costly, or can’t be found at all when the decision is made. Even if deci￾sion makers could receive complete and perfect information, they wouldn’t have the time 
or cognitive capacity to digest and analyze the mammoth amount of complex data. For 
example, it is difficult to choose the best possible mobile/cell phone because of the large 
number of choices, the many features to consider for each choice, the numerous conse￾quences of each choice (time to first breakdown, system update limits, etc.), and the am￾biguous information about those features and outcomes. Given this overwhelming 
complexity, maximization leads to a spiral of endless trade-offs among the various choices, 
which can actually result in worse decisions and less satisfied decision makers.35
Studies report that people like to have choices, but deciding from among dozens of al￾ternatives and many outcomes for each alternative is cognitively and emotionally drain￾ing. Consequently, decision makers satisfice as a way to minimize cognitive effort.36 They 
also reduce cognitive effort by discarding a large selection of 
alternatives using easily identifiable factors (color, size, etc.) 
and by appraising them using only a handful of possible out￾comes (selection criteria).
People who face a large number of alternatives often opt for 
a decision strategy that is even less cognitively challenging than 
satisficing: they don’t make any decision at all! And those who 
do choose one of the many options tend to be less satisfied with 
their decision than those who choose from a few alternatives. 
In one study, for example, grocery store customers saw one of 
two jam-tasting booths. Thirty percent of consumers who vis￾ited the booth displaying six types of jam purchased one of 
those products. In contrast, only 3 percent of customers who 
saw the booth displaying 24 types of jam made a purchase. 
Other studies revealed similar results in decisions about choco￾lates, pens, vacation packages, mobile phones, and pension 
plan investment options.37
Individuals don’t always experience decision paralysis when 
faced with a large number of alternatives.38 Some people 
choose more easily because they are familiar or have expertise 
with the products and are reasonably clear about what they are 
looking for (criteria clarity). It is also easier to select among 
many alternatives that have a wide range on key criteria (very 
good to very bad features, taste, appearance, etc.), and when 
they or their characteristics are systematically organized (rather 
than presented randomly). For example, a financial advisor 
could easily chose a preferred investment fund from hundreds 
satisficing
selecting an alternative that is 
satisfactory or “good enough,” 
rather than the alternative with 
the highest value 
(maximization)
People avoid making choices in decisions that have too many alternatives. 
This is evident when new employees are asked to register for their 
pension plan and choose one type of investment. More employees delay 
or avoid pension plan registration when they face dozens of investment 
options, even though signing up would give them tax benefits, company 
contributions to that plan, and long-term financial security. Studies have 
found that employees are significantly more likely to register for the 
company pension plan when they are given only two or three initial 
investment options, such as a growth fund, balanced fund, and capital 
stable investment. After they have signed up, employees are presented 
with further investment choices for their pension plan.c
William Potter/ShutterstockChapter Seven Decision Making and Creativity 251
of funds, particularly when they know which fund characteristics are most important, 
when the funds listed vary widely (performance, volatility, etc.), and when information 
about the different funds is well organized.
APPRAISING OPPORTUNITIES
Opportunities are just as important as problems, but the process of acting on an opportu￾nity differs from the process of solving a problem. Decision makers seldom assess several 
alternatives when they find an opportunity; after all, the opportunity is the solution, so 
why look for others. An opportunity is usually experienced as an exciting and rare revela￾tion, so decision makers tend to have an emotional attachment to the opportunity. Unfor￾tunately, this emotional preference motivates decision makers to apply the opportunity 
and short-circuit any detailed assessment of its likely benefits. Furthermore, studies indi￾cate that decision makers tend to personalize an opportunity (i.e., it belongs to them) 
rather than remain impartial appraisers of the opportunity. This ownership mindset 
makes impersonal analysis of the opportunity even more difficult.39
Emotions and Intuition in Decision Making
EMOTIONS AND MAKING CHOICES
The previous sections of this chapter explained why people are far from perfect at rational 
decision making. However, Herbert Simon and other scholars who studied imperfect ra￾tionality neglected to mention another problem: the rational choice perspective com￾pletely ignores the effect of emotions in human decision making. Just as both the rational 
and emotional brain centers alert us to problems, they also influence our choice of alter￾natives.40 Emotions affect the appraisal of alternatives in three ways.
Emotions Form Early Preferences The emotional marker process described in 
previous chapters (Chapters 3, 4, and 5) shapes our preference for alternatives before we 
consciously assess them. Our brain very quickly attaches specific emotions to information 
about each alternative, and our preferred alternative is strongly influenced by those initial 
emotional markers.41 Of course, logical analysis also influences which alternative we 
choose, but it requires strong logical evidence to change our initial preferences (initial 
emotional markers). Yet even logical analysis depends on emotions to sway our decision. 
Specifically, neuroscientific evidence says that information produced from logical analy￾sis is tagged with emotional markers, and it is those emotional markers, not logical analy￾sis, that motivate us to choose or avoid a particular alternative. In other words, emotions, 
not rational logic, energize us to make the preferred choice. In fact, people with damaged 
emotional brain centers have difficulty making choices.
Emotions Change the Decision Appraisal Process Moods and specific 
emotions influence the process of appraising alternatives.42 For instance, we pay more 
attention to details when in a negative mood, possibly because a negative mood signals 
that there is something wrong that requires careful scrutiny. When in a positive mood, 
on the other hand, we pay less attention to details and rely on a more programmed deci￾sion routine. This phenomenon explains why executive teams are often less vigilant 
about competitors and other environmental threats after they have experienced success￾ful events.43 Research also suggests that when angry, decision makers rely on stereotypes 
and other shortcuts to speed up the choice process. Anger also makes them more opti￾mistic about the success of risky alternatives, whereas the emotion of fear tends to make 
them less optimistic. Overall, emotions shape how we assess information, not just which 
choice we select.
LO 7-4252 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
Emotions Serve as Information When Making Choices The third way 
that emotions influence the appraisal of alternatives is through a process called “emo￾tions as information.” This refers to the idea that we listen in on our emotions for guid￾ance when making choices.44 The emotions-as-information effect is similar to having a 
temporary improvement in emotional intelligence. Most emotional experiences remain 
below the level of conscious awareness, but people actively try to be more sensitive to 
these subtle emotions when making a decision.
When buying a new car, for example, you not only logically assess each vehicle’s fea￾tures; you also try to gauge your emotions when visualizing what it would be like to own 
each of the cars on your list of choices. Even when you have information about each vehi￾cle (purchase price, fuel efficiency, maintenance costs, resale value, etc.), you are swayed 
by your emotional reaction and actively try to sense those emotional responses when think￾ing about the decision. Everyone pays attention to their emotions to some degree when 
choosing alternatives. This phenomenon ties directly into our next topic, intuition.
INTUITION AND MAKING CHOICES
Do you get a gut feeling when something isn’t quite right? Or perhaps a different emo￾tional experience occurs when you sense an opportunity? These emotional events poten￾tially (but not necessarily) indicate your intuition—the ability to know when a problem or 
opportunity exists and to select the best course of action without conscious reasoning.45
Some people pay more attention to their gut feelings whereas others are more comfort￾able with decisions based on logic and data analysis. However, intuition and logical analy￾sis are not opposites and never completely replace each other. Emotions are always 
present in human decision making.46
intuition
the ability to know when a 
problem or opportunity exists 
and to select the best course 
of action without conscious 
reasoning
®
SELF-ASSESSMENT 7.1: What is Your Preferred Decision-Making Style?
Intuition is both an emotional experience and a rapid nonconscious analytic process. 
The gut feelings we experience are emotional signals that have enough intensity to make 
us consciously aware of them. These signals warn us of impending danger or motivate us 
to take advantage of an opportunity. Some intuition also directs us to preferred choices 
relative to other alternatives in that situation.
All gut feelings are emotional signals, but not all emotional signals are intuition. Emo￾tional signals are valid intuition when they rely on mental models that reasonably and accu￾rately depict the situation where we sense the problem or opportunity. Intuition involves 
rapidly comparing our observations with these “templates of the mind.” Positive or negative 
emotions are produced, depending on how well that situation fits our mental model.47 For 
example, when chess masters quickly scan a chessboard, they experience emotional signals 
that the chess configuration poses an opportunity or threat. These emotional signals moti￾vate closer observation to logically confirm the situation and to act on it. Thus, intuition sig￾nals that a problem or opportunity exists before conscious rational analysis has occurred.
However, not all emotional signals are intuition because they are not always based on 
well-grounded mental models. Instead, we sometimes compare the current situation to 
more remote templates, which may or may not be relevant. A new employee might feel 
confident about relations with a supplier, whereas an experienced employee senses poten￾tial problems. The difference is that the new employee relies on poorly developed or more 
remote templates from other experiences that might not fit this situation. Thus, the extent 
to which our gut feelings in a situation represent intuition depends on our level of experi￾ence in that situation. The key message here is that some emotional signals are not intu￾ition, so gut feelings alone shouldn’t guide our decisions.Chapter Seven Decision Making and Creativity 253
So far, we have described intuition as an emotional experience (gut feeling) and a pro￾cess in which we compare the current situation with well-established templates of the 
mind. Intuition also relies on action scripts that speed up our response to pattern matches 
or mismatches.48 Action scripts are programmed decisions; they shorten the decision￾making process by jumping from problem identification to selection of a solution. Action 
scripts are also generic, so we need to consciously adapt them to the specific situation.
MAKING CHOICES MORE EFFECTIVELY
It is very difficult to get around the human limitations of making choices, but a few strate￾gies help minimize these concerns. One important discovery is that decisions tend to have 
a higher failure rate when leaders are decisive rather than contemplative about the avail￾able options. Of course, decisions can also be ineffective when leaders procrastinate in 
decision making, but research indicates that a lack of logical appraisal of alternatives is a 
greater concern. This recommendation does not suggest that we ignore intuition; rather, 
it suggests that we use it in combination with careful analysis of relevant information. By 
systematically assessing alternatives against relevant factors, decision makers minimize 
the implicit favorite and satisficing problems that occur when they rely on general, subjec￾tive judgments. For instance, one recent study of patient flow decisions in hospitals found 
that the best choices occurred through systematic discovery and appraisal of alternative 
interventions. Yet most hospital leaders and committees did the opposite; they selected a 
myriad of pet projects and a patchwork of multiple alternatives without assessing or com￾paring their likely effectiveness.49
A second recommendation is to revisit important problems and opportunities at an￾other time so information is reviewed when decision makers are in different moods and 
78% of 250 senior
business leaders in Canada
agree or somewhat agree
that a business leader must
go with their gut and intuition
when an important decision 
needs to be made quickly.
67% of 1,300 CEOs of companies in the 11 largest
economies say that within the past three years they have
overlooked data-based insights and models because they
contradicted their intuition.
46% of 3,750 U.S.
and European knowledge workers
believe that business decisions are
made based on data.
63% of 1,048 U.S.
senior managers do not believe
their companies are analytics-driven.
39% of 2,106 senior
executives surveyed globally
say their decision making is
highly data driven (8% say it is
rarely data-driven).
INTUITION VERSUS DATA ANALYSIS: CRUNCH YOUR HUNCHd
(photo): Jonathan Evans/Photographer’s Choice RF/Getty Images254 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
have allowed time for their initial emotions to subside. For example, if you sense that your 
team is feeling too confident when making an important decision, you might decide to 
have the committee revisit the decision a few days later when its members are thinking 
more critically.
Another strategy is scenario planning, which is a disciplined method for imagining pos￾sible futures.50 It typically involves thinking about what would happen if a significant en￾vironmental condition changed and what the organization should do to anticipate and 
react to such an event. Scenario planning is a useful vehicle for choosing the best solu￾tions under possible scenarios long before they occur, because alternative courses of ac￾tion are assessed without the pressure and emotions that occur during real emergencies.
Implementing and Evaluating Decisions
IMPLEMENTING DECISIONS
Implementing decisions is often skipped over in most writing about decision making. Yet 
leading business writers emphasize that execution—translating decisions into action—is 
one of the most important and challenging tasks in the decision-making process.51 Imple￾menting decisions is mainly about organizational change, which we discuss in Chapter 15, 
but also relates to motivation (Chapter 5), influence processes (Chapter 10), leadership 
(Chapter 12), and several other topics throughout this book.
EVALUATING DECISIONS
Contrary to the rational choice view, decision makers aren’t completely honest with them￾selves when evaluating the effectiveness of their decisions. Earlier in this chapter, we ex￾plained that decision makers engage in confirmation bias to support their implicit favorite 
and to maintain consistency in their preference and decision. This bias continues long after 
the decision has been made; during the evaluation stage it is also known as postdecisional 
justification.
52 Decision makers ignore or underemphasize negative outcomes of the choice 
they made and overemphasize new information about its positive features. Postdecisional 
justification gives people an excessively optimistic evaluation of their decisions, but only 
until they receive very clear and undeniable information to the contrary.
ESCALATION OF COMMITMENT
Another reason why decision makers don’t evaluate their decisions very well is due to 
escalation of commitment—the tendency to repeat an apparently bad decision or allocate 
more resources to a failing course of action.53 Why are decision makers led deeper and 
deeper into failing projects? Several explanations have been identified and discussed over 
the years, but the four main influences are self-justification effect, self-enhancement 
effect, prospect theory effect, and sunk costs effect.
Self-Justification Effect People try to convey a positive public image of them￾selves. In decision making, this self-justification typically involves appearing to be rational 
and competent. Decision makers are therefore motivated to demonstrate that their 
choices will be successful, which includes continuing to 
support a decision even when it is not having the desired 
outcomes. In contrast, pulling the plug symbolizes the 
project’s failure and the decision maker’s incompetence. 
This self-justification effect is particularly evident when 
decision makers are personally identified with the proj￾ect, have staked their reputations to some extent on the 
project’s success, and have low self-esteem.54
LO 7-5
scenario planning
a systematic process of thinking 
about alternative futures and 
what the organization should do 
to anticipate and react to those 
environments
escalation of commitment
the tendency to repeat an 
apparently bad decision or 
allocate more resources to a 
failing course of actionChapter Seven Decision Making and Creativity 255
Self-Enhancement Effect People have a natural tendency to feel good about 
themselves—to feel luckier, more competent, and more successful than average—regarding 
things that are important to them (see Chapter 3).55 This self-enhancement supports a 
positive self-concept, but it also increases the risk of escalation of commitment. When 
presented with evidence that a project is in trouble, self-enhancement biases our interpre￾tation of the information as a temporary aberration from an otherwise positive trend line. 
And when we eventually realize that the project isn’t going as well as planned, we con￾tinue to invest in the project because our self-enhancement overestimates our probability 
of rescuing the project. Self-justification and self-enhancement often occur together, but 
they are different mechanisms. Self-justification is a deliberate attempt to maintain a fa￾vorable public image, whereas self-enhancement nonconsciously distorts our perceptions 
so problems are recognized later and our probabilities of success are biased so we con￾tinue to invest in the losing project.56
Prospect Theory Effect Prospect theory effect is the tendency to experience stronger 
negative emotions when losing something of value than positive emotions when gaining 
something of equal value. This is also known as loss aversion because we have a stronger mo￾tivation to avoid losses than to risk receiving equally valuable gains. The stronger negative 
valence of a potential loss motivates escalation of commitment because stopping a project is 
a certain loss, which evokes more negative emotions to most people than the uncertainty of 
success associated with continuing to fund the project. Given the choice, decision makers 
choose escalation of commitment, which is the less painful option at the time.57
Sunk Costs Effect People inherently feel motivated 
to invest more resources in projects that have high sunk 
costs—the value of resources already invested in the deci￾sion.58 This contrasts with the rational choice view, which 
states that investing resources should be determined by ex￾pected future gains and risk of the new investment, not the 
size of earlier resources invested in the project. A variation 
of sunk costs is time investment. Time is a resource, so the 
more time decision makers have devoted to a project, the 
In 2008, two South Carolina power 
companies announced that they 
would build nuclear electric￾generating units, operational by 
2016 at a total cost of $9.8 billion. 
Instead, the project, now known as 
the Nukegate scandal, became a 
classic escalation of commitment. 
It would have cost $25 billion and 
the nuclear power units wouldn’t 
be operational until 2024, with 
customers footing most of that 
cost. In 2015, an independent audit 
identified serious flaws, cost 
overruns, and delays, but the state 
regulator granted a budget 
increase because the utilities 
allegedly removed the report’s 
conclusion that delays would 
forfeit federal tax credits. The 
prime contractor (Westinghouse) 
filed for bankruptcy in 2017; the 
utilities pulled the plug on the 
project a few months later. 
Executives at one of the utilities 
pleaded guilty to concealing 
information from regulators and 
stockholders about project costs 
and delays that contractors had 
warned them about.e
John Bazemore/AP Images
self-enhancement
a person’s inherent motivation 
to have a positive self-concept 
(and to have others perceive 
him or her favorably), such as 
being competent, attractive, 
lucky, ethical, and important
prospect theory effect
an innate tendency to feel 
stronger negative emotions from 
losing a particular amount than 
positive emotions from gaining 
an equal amount256 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
more motivated they are to continue investing in that project. Finally, sunk costs can take 
the form of closing costs, that is, the financial or nonfinancial penalties associated with 
shutting down a project. As with other forms of sunk costs, the higher the closing costs, the 
more motivated decision makers are to engage in escalation of commitment.
Escalation of commitment is usually framed as poor decision making, but adding more 
resources to a failing project may be beneficial under some circumstances.59 Indeed, many 
breakthroughs have occurred because of the decision maker’s persistence and optimism. 
Continuing with a losing project may be prudent when the cost overruns are small relative 
to the project cost, the benefits of success are high, and the rewards of a successful project 
are received quickly. Some experts also suggest that throwing more money into a failing 
project is sometimes a logical attempt to further understand an ambiguous situation. By 
adding more resources, the decision maker gains new information about the project’s de￾velopment, which provides more feedback about the project’s future success. This strategy 
is particularly common where the project has high closing costs.
Evaluating Decision Outcomes More Effectively There are several ways to 
minimize escalation of commitment and postdecisional justification.60
• Separate decision maker from decision evaluator. Decision evaluation biases are of￾ten minimized when those who made the original decision are replaced by those 
who later evaluate and act on that evaluation. This strategy works best when the 
decision evaluators have limited alliance with those who made the decision. It min￾imizes the self-justification effect because the person responsible for evaluating the 
decision is not connected to the original decision.
• Create a stop-loss. Publicly establishing a preset level at which the decision is aban￾doned or reevaluated forces the decision maker to halt further investment if its 
value falls or cost overruns increase beyond a set level. The problem with this solu￾tion is that conditions are often so complex that it is difficult to identify an appro￾priate point to abandon a project.
• Seek factual and social feedback. At some point, even the strongest escalation and 
confirmation bias effects deflate when the decision maker is faced with systematic 
and clear feedback about the project’s failings. In addition, the decision maker can 
benefit from ongoing feedback from several (preferably impartial) people. Feed￾back from others might result in earlier awareness of problems. By relying on ad￾vice from several people, the decision maker might also have less psychological 
attachment to any recommendation to cancel the project.
• Change the decision maker’s mindset. Some research suggests that decision makers 
are less likely to engage in escalation of commitment if they change their mindset 
regarding the situation. In one study, a 15-minute meditation recording reduced 
escalation of commitment by refocusing the decision maker’s attention away from 
the negative emotions of the project’s past financial losses. A second study found 
that decision makers were more likely to terminate failing projects when they 
focused on growing the business rather than on maintaining past obligations or 
preventing losses in past decisions.
Creativity
The entire decision-making process depends on creativity—the development of original 
ideas that make a socially recognized contribution.61 Creativity enables us to imagine op￾portunities, such as discovering new products or services, or recognizing problems that 
are not easily apparent from traditional perspectives. It helps us to develop and choose 
alternatives by visualizing the future in different ways and figuring out how each choice 
might be useful or a liability in those scenarios.
LO 7-6
creativity
the development of original 
ideas that make a socially 
recognized contributionChapter Seven Decision Making and Creativity 257
Preparation
• Understand the problem
 or opportunity
• Investigate information
that seems relevant
to the issue
Incubation Verification
• Period of reflective
thought
• Nonconscious or
low-level awareness,
not direct attention 
to the issue
• Active divergent
thinking process
• Detailed logical
and experimental
evaluation of the
illuminated idea
• Further creative 
thinking
• Sudden awareness of
a novel, although
vague and incomplete,
idea entering one’s
consciousness
• May include an 
initial period of 
“fringe” awareness 
V
e
ss,
n
• Detai
and e
evalu
illumi
• Furth
• Sudden awareness of
a novel, although
vague and incomplete,
idea entering one’s
Illumination
THE CREATIVE PROCESS
How does creativity occur? That question has puzzled experts for centuries and has fasci￾nated scientists who saw how creative thinking led to their own important discoveries. 
Notably, more than a century ago, German physicist Hermann von Helmholtz gave a 
public talk in which he described the process that led to his innovations (energy physics, 
instruments for examining eyes, and many others). A few decades later, London School of 
Economics cofounder Graham Wallas built on Helmholtz’s ideas to construct the four￾stage model shown in Exhibit 7.4.62 To this day, Wallas’s model is considered the most 
elegant representation of the creative process.
The first stage is preparation—the process of investigating the problem or opportunity. 
Preparation involves developing a clear understanding of what you are trying to achieve 
through a novel solution and then actively studying information seemingly related to the 
topic. It is a process of developing knowledge and possibly skills about the topic. The 
second stage, called incubation, is the period of reflective thought. We put the problem 
aside, but our mind is still working on it in the background.63 The important condition 
here is to maintain a low-level awareness by frequently revisiting the problem.
Incubation assists divergent thinking—reframing the problem in a unique way and gen￾erating different approaches to the issue. Divergent thinking breaks us away from existing 
mental models so that we can apply concepts or processes from completely different areas 
of life. This contrasts with convergent thinking, which involves calculating the convention￾ally accepted “right answer” to a logical problem.
Source: Based on G. Wallas, The Art of Thought (London: Jonathan Cape, 1926), Chap. 4.
EXHIBIT 7.4 The Creative Process Model
®
SELF-ASSESSMENT 7.2: How Well Do You Engage in Divergent Thinking?
The invention of Velcro illustrates how divergent thinking occurs.64 In the 1940s, Swiss 
engineer Georges de Mestral had just returned home from a walk with his dog through 
the countryside when he noticed that his clothing and the dog’s fur were covered in burrs. 
While struggling to remove the barbed seeds, de Mestral engaged in divergent thinking by 
recognizing that the adhesion used by burrs could be used to attach other things together. 
It took another dozen years of hard work, but de Mestral eventually perfected the hook￾and-loop fastener, which he trademarked as Velcro.
divergent thinking
reframing a problem in a 
unique way and generating 
different approaches to the 
issue258 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
Creative Sparks at Bluedrop 
Training & Simulationf
Bluedrop Training & Simulation Inc. relies on expertise, 
industry partnerships, and plenty of creativity to develop 
state-of-the-art simulation-based training systems. For ex￾ample, the company, which works with Boeing, Lockheed 
Martin, Cougar Helicopters, and other firms, recently de￾veloped the first fully immersive virtual training system for 
load hoisting operations, such as in helicopter search￾and-rescue missions. 
The creative sparks for these simulation systems occur 
regularly and in unusual places. Tushar Sehgal, the man￾ager of Bluedrop’s simulation center, describes one such 
incident. Sehgal and a coworker were shopping at Home 
Depot when they saw a black pipe coupling product. 
They soon realized that it could become the hand track￾ing mechanism they needed for Bluedrop’s prototype for 
one of their virtual-reality helicopter crew trainer projects. 
“It was one of those ‘aha’ moments,” says Sehgal. “We 
put that around our wrists as a joke and then realized, 
wait, this is going to work.” The employees bought two of 
them, drilled holes, attached markers, and found out that 
the item worked nicely. “There [are] many stories like that 
inspiration coming from random parts and random shop￾ping trips,” Sehgal observes.
global connections 7.2
Sfio Cracho/Shutterstock
Illumination (also called insight), the third stage of creativity, refers to the experience of 
suddenly becoming aware of a unique idea.65 Wallas and others suggest that this stage be￾gins with a “fringe” awareness before the idea fully enters our consciousness. Illumination 
is often visually depicted as a lightbulb, but a better image would be a flash of light or per￾haps a briefly flickering candle—these bits of inspiration are fleeting and can be quickly 
lost if not documented. For this reason, many creative people keep a journal or notebook 
nearby so they can jot down their ideas before they disappear. Also, flickering ideas don’t 
keep a particular schedule; they might come to you at any time of day or night.
Illumination presents ideas that are usually vague, roughly drawn, and untested. There￾fore, the essential final stage of creativity is verification, whereby we flesh out the illuminated 
ideas and subject them to systematic and detailed experimentation and evaluation. This 
stage often calls for further creativity as the ideas evolve into finished products or services. 
Thus, although verification is labeled the final stage of creativity, it is really the beginning of 
a long process of creative decision making toward development of an innovation.
CHARACTERISTICS OF CREATIVE PEOPLE
Everyone is creative, but some people have a higher potential for creativity. Four of the 
main characteristics that give individuals more creative potential are intelligence, persis￾tence, knowledge and experience, and a cluster of personality traits and values represent￾ing independent imagination (see Exhibit 7.5).
• Cognitive and practical intelligence. People with higher creative potential have 
above-average intelligence to synthesize information, analyze ideas, and apply their 
ideas.66 They recognize the significance of small bits of information and are able 
to connect them in ways that few others can imagine. They also have practical 
intelligence—the capacity to assess the potential usefulness of their ideas.
• Persistence. Creative people have persistence, which is based on a high need for 
achievement, a strong motivation from the task itself, and a moderate or higher self￾esteem. Persistence is vital because people need this motivation to continue working Chapter Seven Decision Making and Creativity 259
Independent Imagination
Characteristics of
Creative People
• High openness to experience
• Moderately low need for
aliation
• Strong self-direction value
• Strong stimulation value
Knowledge and
Experience
• Prerequisite knowledge and 
experience 
• Not locked into a fixed 
knowledge mindset
Cognitive and Practical 
Intelligence
Persistence
• High need for achievement
• Strong task motivation
• Moderately high self-esteem
and optimism
• Ability to synthesize, analyze,
and apply ideas
• Ability to evaluate potential
 usefulness of ideas
EXHIBIT 7.5
Characteristics of Creative People
®
SELF-ASSESSMENT 7.3: Do You Have a Creative Personality?
ORGANIZATIONAL CONDITIONS SUPPORTING CREATIVITY
Intelligence, persistence, expertise, and independent imagination represent a person’s cre￾ative potential, but the extent to which these characteristics produce more creative output 
depends on how well the work environment supports the creative process.71 Several job 
and workplace characteristics have been identified in the literature, and different combina￾tions of situations can equally support creativity; there isn’t one best work environment.
on and investing in a project in spite of failures and advice from others to quit. In 
fact, human beings have a general tendency to dismiss or criticize new ideas, so 
creative people need persistence to withstand these negative social forces.67
• Knowledge and experience. Creative people require a foundation of knowledge and 
experience to discover or acquire new knowledge.68 However, this expertise is a 
double-edged sword. As individuals acquire specific knowledge and experience, 
their mental models about that topic tend to become more rigid. They are less 
adaptable to new information or rules about that knowledge domain. Some writers 
suggest that expertise also increases “mindless behavior” because expertise reduces 
the tendency to question why things happen.69 To overcome the limitations of ex￾pertise, some corporate leaders like to hire people from other industries and 
specializations.
• Independent imagination. Creative people possess a cluster of personality traits and 
values that support an independent imagination: high openness to experience, 
moderately low need for affiliation, and strong values around self-direction and 
stimulation.70 Openness to experience is a Big Five personality dimension repre￾senting the extent to which a person is imaginative, curious, sensitive, open￾minded, and original (see Chapter 2). Creative people have a moderately low need 
for affiliation so they are less embarrassed when making mistakes. Self-direction 
includes the values of creativity and independent thought; stimulation includes the 
values of excitement and challenge. Together, these values form openness to 
change—representing the motivation to pursue innovative ways (see Chapter 2).260 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
One of the most important conditions for creativity is a learning orientation.72 A learn￾ing orientation is a set of collective beliefs and norms that encourage employees to question 
past practices, learn new ideas, experiment putting ideas into practice, and view mistakes 
as part of the learning process. Job enrichment is a second contributor to creativity. More 
creative employees believe their work benefits the organization and/or larger society 
(i.e., task significance) and that they have the freedom to pursue novel ideas without 
bureaucratic delays (i.e., autonomy).73 Creativity is about changing things, and change is 
possible only when employees have autonomy and the authority to experiment.
Along with a learning orientation and enriched jobs, creativity blossoms through open 
communication and sufficient resources. Creative organizations also provide a comfort￾able degree of job security, which explains why creativity suffers during times of downsiz￾ing and corporate restructuring.74 Some companies also support creativity by designing 
nontraditional workspaces, such as unique building design or unconventional office ar￾eas.75 Google is one example. The Internet innovator has funky offices in several coun￾tries that include hammocks, slides, brightly painted walls, and privacy spaces that look 
like gondolas and bee hives.
To some degree, creativity also improves with support from leaders and coworkers.76
Generally, creativity thrives when leaders have an appealing vision of the future and en￾courage employees to experiment with new ways to achieve that vision (see transforma￾tional leadership in Chapter 12). Coworker support can improve creativity in some 
situations; however, a few studies suggest that competition among coworkers invigorates 
creativity in other situations. Similarly, it isn’t clear how much pressure should be exerted 
on employees to produce creative ideas. Extreme time pressures are well-known creativity 
inhibitors, but lack of pressure doesn’t seem to produce the highest creativity, either.
learning orientation
a set of beliefs and norms in 
which people are encouraged 
to question past practices, 
learn new ideas, experiment 
putting ideas into practice, and 
view mistakes as part of the 
learning process
debating point
SHOULD ORGANIZATIONS ENCOURAGE ‘FAIL FAST’ FOR CREATIVITY?g
“Fail fast, fail forward” and its cousin “fail fast, fail often” have become 
popular phrases for creativity, learning, and innovation in organiza￾tions. The central idea is that creativity involves trying out new ideas, 
and this exploration inevitably produces mistakes and sometimes out￾right failures. “It’s OK to try, and if it doesn’t work, learn from it, adjust 
and keep failing forward,” advises Jen-Hsun Huang, NVidia cofounder 
and CEO. “Mistakes and failures are kind of the negative space around 
success, right? And if we could take enough shots at it, we’re going to 
figure out what success is going to look like.”
A related justification for “fail fast” is that punishing mistakes and 
failures motivates employees to play it safe, which results in less cre￾ativity and innovation. In contrast, creativity thrives in organizations 
that view mistakes as part of the learning and development process.
But is failure a desirable or even necessary focus for creativity? 
While agreeing that organizations should not punish reasonable mis￾takes, a number of experts suggest that “failing fast” gives employees 
license to rush into projects alone and without sufficient forethought. 
“Instead of calmly and intelligently iterating, employees race to com￾plete something (failing) while racing to the next objective as quickly as 
possible (failing, but quicker),” warns consultant and former SAP and 
Telus executive Dan Pontefract.
Creativity and innovation may be more successful and less costly 
when conducted by empowered cross-functional teams that apply 
the systematic hypothesize-test-learn cycle. Cross-functional teams 
have the advantages of greater knowledge and more diverse view￾points than individuals experimenting on their own. Teams check 
each member’s assumptions and ask better questions about where 
to focus their effort. 
And rather than randomly trying out ideas, research suggests 
that creativity is more successful and less costly when it follows the 
hypothesize-test-learn cycle. Hypotheses are testable proposed ex￾planations for a phenomenon. They represent the springboards for 
new knowledge, but only if based on verified existing knowledge and 
justifiable assumptions. Hypotheses are continuously developed and 
tested, and learning occurs from the results of those tests. This process 
takes small steps with ongoing feedback, so incorrect hypotheses are 
discovered quickly and at a relatively low cost.
“Rather than throwing initiatives at the proverbial wall to see what 
sticks, the best companies seek to evolve and progress through testing 
and learning,” advises Patrick Gray, VP Global Digital Services, Digital 
Consulting at AECOM. “It may seem like a semantic difference, but test￾ing and learning is significantly different than failing fast.”Chapter Seven Decision Making and Creativity 261
ACTIVITIES THAT ENCOURAGE CREATIVITY
We have described two cornerstones of creativity in organizations: employing people with 
strong creative potential and providing a work environment that supports creativity. The 
third cornerstone is activities that help employees think more creatively. Four types of 
creativity-building activities are: redefine the problem, associative play, cross-pollination, 
and design thinking.
Redefine the Problem Redefining the problem is a potentially powerful way to 
unleash creative thinking. One approach is to revisit projects that have been set aside. 
After a period of neglect, these projects might be seen in new ways.77 You can also see the 
problem from different perspectives by asking coworkers unfamiliar with the issue to ex￾plore the problem. You state the objectives and give some facts and then let the other 
person ask questions to further understand the situation. By verbalizing the problem, lis￾tening to questions, and hearing what others think, you are more likely to view the prob￾lem in a new light.78
Associative Play Associative play literally involves playing games or being chal￾lenged in unusual ways.79 One form of associative play is to engage in playful activities, 
such as playing croquet using grapefruits as the balls, or completing a treasure hunt in 
which the clues are ambiguous rhymes. Creative thinking emerges naturally from these 
playful activities and then carries over to work-related problem solving. A second varia￾tion is challenging participants to create something new with a specific purpose (e.g., 
cleaning cutlery) using existing unrelated products (e.g., blow dryer and electric tooth￾brush). These activities exercise the mind to break out of traditional mental models about 
existing products and services.
A third variation of associative play, called morphological analysis, involves systemati￾cally investigating all combinations of characteristics of a product, service, or event, and 
then looking at the feasibility of each combination.80 This exercise encourages people to 
carefully examine combinations that initially seem nonsensical. For instance, employees 
at a dairy company might look at all combinations of yogurt-based products by consider￾ing the contents (fruit, a low amount of fat, etc.), occasion (breakfast, dessert, etc.), target 
group (children, older adults, etc.), size, and packaging. A novel, yet commercially suc￾cessful, innovation may emerge from the resulting list.
Cross-Pollination Cross-pollination occurs when people from different areas of the 
organization exchange ideas or when new people are brought into an existing team.81 This 
may occur by arranging formal social gatherings, encouraging happenstance interactions 
with people from other work areas or, as a few firms do, asking employees to move their 
desks every few months to another location with employees who are only acquaintances.
A classic example of encouraging creativity through cross-pollination occurs at the 
London (and possibly other) offices of creative agency Mother. “Everyone sits together 
around the same table, and every six weeks, on ‘Move Monday,’ we all change places,” 
explains Mother’s crerative director. The creative agency produces a new seating plan 
where employees are redistributed, most of them around a mammoth concrete slab that 
accommodates more than 100 people. “There’s no rules in terms of seniority or discipline, 
and it means that everybody gets to know each other and ideas can be cross-pollinated.”82
Cross-pollination highlights the fact that creativity rarely occurs alone. Some creative 
people may be individualistic, but most creative ideas are generated through teams and 
informal social interaction.
Design Thinking The opening case study for this chapter stated that Syntagon, the 
German developer of processing and packaging equipment, uses design thinking principles 
and practices for highly complex and novel problems and opportunities. Design thinking is 
a human-centered, solution-focused creative process that applies both intuition and 
design thinking
a human-centered, solution￾focused creative process that 
applies both intuition and 
analytical thinking to clarify 
problems and generate 
innovative solutions262 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
analytical thinking to clarify problems and generate innovative solutions. Contrary to its 
label, design thinking isn’t just for people in design jobs. Rather, it is a tangible scaffolding 
that guides all employees through the decision-making process using creative thinking, logi￾cal analysis, empathy, and intuition.
There are several models and guidelines for design thinking, but one of the most re￾spected frameworks identifies the four rules outlined in Exhibit 7.6 and summarized 
below:
• The Human Rule. Design thinking is a team activity. It depends on collaboration and 
co-creation among several people with diverse knowledge and experiences so the 
issue and its possible solutions are viewed from several angles. Design thinking is 
also human-centered because designers need to empathize with clients and end users 
and involve them in the design process.83 Client involvement facilitates redefinition 
of the original problem statement (such as the client’s briefing) and more dynamic 
discovery and refinement of potential solutions. As ideas and prototypes develop, 
clients and end users can provide real-time feedback on the product experience.
• The Ambiguity Rule. Creativity and experimentation are possible only when there 
is ambiguity in the problem and its potential solutions.84 Therefore, design thinkers 
preserve ambiguity rather than seek clarity too quickly. They do not assume the 
client’s original problem statement is accurate. Instead, the stated problem is 
questioned and refined with the client. Design thinkers also avoid the natural 
temptation to solve the problem too quickly with one solution. Instead, they 
continually question possible solutions even after one seems likely. They also 
develop more than one solution to the problem.
• The Re-Design Rule. No creative solution is completely original, because the needs 
being served have existed since the beginning of humanity. Therefore, design thinkers
review past solutions to understand how those inventions tried to satisfy human 
needs. They find out how those solutions tried to work as well as understand their 
flaws and limitations. Foresight tools (environmental scanning, context mapping, 
etc.) are then used to visualize emerging trends and changes to the future context.
EXHIBIT 7.6 Four Rules of Design Thinking
Source: Based on information in C. Meinel and L. Leifer, “Introduction—Design Thinking Is Mainly about 
Building Innovators,” in Design Thinking Research: Building Innovators, ed. H. Plattner, C. Meinel, and L. Leifer 
(Cham, Switzerland: Springer International, 2015), 1–11.
DESIGN THINKING RULE DESCRIPTION
Human rule • Involve several people so the issue and possible solutions are viewed 
from several angles.
• Include clients and end users to enable an iterative process of 
problem identification and solution development.
Ambiguity rule • Preserve ambiguity rather than seek clarity too quickly. 
• Question and refine the stated problem. 
• Develop more than one solution to the problem.
Re-Design rule • Review past solutions to understand how those inventions tried to 
satisfy human needs. 
• Use foresight tools to imagine better solutions for the future.
Tangible rule • Build several low-cost prototypes to test ideas. 
• Don’t analyze alternatives at a purely conceptual level. 
• Tolerate failure; embrace a learning orientation.Chapter Seven Decision Making and Creativity 263
• The Tangible Rule. Design thinking spends less time planning and more time do￾ing. Designers build several low-cost prototypes of their ideas rather than analyze 
those ideas at a purely conceptual level.85 Prototypes represent a rich form of 
communication that does not exist in conceptual planning. One design thinking 
mantra is “fail fast, fail often,” meaning that prototypes are made quickly and 
frequently along the journey to the final result. This statement also recognizes that 
design thinking tolerates failure and embraces a learning orientation.
Employee Involvement in Decision Making
Employee involvement refers to activities in which employees participate in and influence 
decisions about their jobs, work units, or organization.86 Involvement is more than just giving 
workers a voice in decisions; it exists when they actually influence decisions to some degree. 
There are several levels of employee involvement.87 A low level of involvement occurs where 
employees are individually asked for specific information but the problem is not described to 
them. Somewhat higher involvement occurs where the problem is described and employees 
are asked individually or collectively for information relating to that problem.
Moving further up the involvement scale, the problem is described to employees, who 
are collectively given responsibility for developing recommendations. However, the decision 
maker is not bound to accept those recommendations. At the highest level of involve￾ment, the entire decision-making process is handed over to employees. They identify the 
problem, discover alternative solutions, choose the best alternative, and implement that 
choice. The original decision maker serves only as a facilitator to guide the team’s decision 
process and keep everyone on track.
LO 7-7
Everyone Has a Creative Role at Estée 
Lauderh
Creativity is key to Estée Lauder’s success as the global 
leader in the prestige beauty industry. “To be clear, cre￾ativity is at the center of our innovation models,” empha￾sizes Fabrizio Freda, CEO of the New York–based 
cosmetics and skin care firm. “So while we listen to the 
consumer and study trends, the majority of our effort is 
directed at inventing things that don’t exist.”
The foundation of Estée Lauder’s creative success is 
the belief that everyone in the organization can and 
should be creative. “Creativity is about solving problems, 
and who doesn’t solve problems on a daily basis? There￾fore, everybody by virtue of their innate problem solving 
skills, is creative,” says Mark Polson, until recently Estée 
Lauder’s creativity executive and now a faculty member at 
the Fashion Institute. “Whatever domain that you’re 
in—be it supply chain, be it sales, be it finance, even 
procurement—you have the ability to be creative in that role.”
Along with encouraging every employee to be cre￾ative, Estée Lauder supports creativity by nurturing a 
learning orientation culture. Mark Polson explains that he 
and other Estée Lauder leaders “do that by creating an 
environment that doesn’t punish failure, but looks to learn 
from the lessons of failure.”
Estée Lauder also supports creativity through training 
programs and creative activities. For instance, the com￾pany’s innovation lab in Queens, N.Y., hosts design think￾ing sessions with product developers, engineers, 
customer-facing employees, and other groups. “We bring 
them together, put the problem on the table, break them 
into teams and just let them come up with ideas and put 
prototypes together. Then we evaluate them, and iterate 
and do more prototypes,” Polson explains.
global connections 7.3
TEA/123RF264 Part Two Individual Behavior and Processes
Employee
involvement
Outcomes of employee
involvement
• Better problem identification
• More/better choices generated 
• More likely to select the best
alternative
• Stronger commitment to the
decision
Higher job enrichment,
motivation, aective
commitment, and job
satisfaction
Contingencies of employee
involvement
• Decision structure 
• Source of decision knowledge
• Decision commitment 
• Employee-firm goal congruence
• Risk of conflict among employees
•
BENEFITS OF EMPLOYEE INVOLVEMENT
Employee involvement offers enormous benefits to organizations and employees alike, 
particularly when the level and type of participation is aligned with the situation.88 In fact, 
it may be difficult for any company to function effectively or retain employees without 
some degree of employee participation in decisions outside their daily work activities. 
Exhibit 7.7 identifies five main outcomes of employee involvement.
To begin with, employee involvement improves the identification of problems and op￾portunities. Employees are, in many respects, the sensors of the organization’s environ￾ment. They are usually the first to know when the organization is misaligned with 
customer or community expectations, or with the supply of input resources. Employee 
involvement provides a conduit for organizational leaders to be alerted to such prob￾lems.89 Second, employee involvement can potentially improve the number and quality of 
solutions generated. In a well-managed meeting, team members create synergy by pooling 
their knowledge to form new alternatives. In other words, several people working together 
can potentially generate better solutions than the same people working alone.
A third benefit of employee involvement is that, under specific conditions, it improves 
the appraisal of alternatives. Numerous studies on participative decision making, task 
conflict, and team dynamics have found that involvement brings out more diverse per￾spectives, tests ideas, and provides more valuable knowledge, all of which improve the 
probability of selecting the best alternative.90 This is consistent with a mathematical theo￾rem introduced in 1785 by the Marquis de Condorcet, which states that the alternative 
selected by the team’s majority is more likely to be correct than is the alternative selected 
by any team member individually.91
A fourth benefit of employee involvement is that it tends to strengthen employee com￾mitment to the decision. Rather than viewing themselves as agents of someone else’s deci￾sion, those who contribute to the idea or solution feel personally responsible for its 
success. This explains why involvement is usually valuable in organizational change; em￾ployees who participate in the change initiative are more likely to support and implement, 
rather than resist, the change.92
EXHIBIT 7.7 Model of Employee Involvement in Decision MakingChapter Seven Decision Making and Creativity 265
Olam International’s 38,000 employees attended 1,000 workshops 
in several dozen countries, where they made suggestions for the 
company’s repositioned corporate strategy. Led by 500 trained staff, 
these “Olam Re-imagineering” events produced 1,200 ideas to 
identify more sustainable practices and new “purpose” brands for 
the Singapore-headquartered food and agri-business. Olam is now 
exploring several ideas from the re-imagineering sessions, such as 
commercializing rice biomass straw for packaging and other uses. 
“Being part of the Re-imagineers program was one of the most 
exciting things I have ever done at Olam,” says Burcu Turkay, global 
sustainability manager at Olam Edible Nuts in Istanbul, Turkey. 
“Organizing the workshops in Turkey gave me the opportunity to 
interact with employees across departments, from factories to offices.”i
Chaay_Tee/Shutterstock
Finally, employee involvement potentially increases skill 
variety, feelings of autonomy, and task identity, all of which 
increase job enrichment, employee motivation, and job 
satisfaction. Similarly, involvement is associated with 
higher levels of affective commitment to the organization, 
not just to the decision.93
CONTINGENCIES OF EMPLOYEE 
INVOLVEMENT
If employee involvement is so wonderful, why don’t leaders 
leave all decisions to employees? The answer is that there 
is an optimal level of employee involvement, and that ideal 
level depends on the situation. The employee involvement 
model shown earlier in Exhibit 7.7 lists five contingencies 
in the decision process: decision structure, source of deci￾sion knowledge, decision commitment, risk of conflict 
among employees, and employee-firm goal congruence.94
• Decision structure. At the beginning of this chapter, 
we learned that some decisions are programmed 
whereas others are nonprogrammed. Programmed 
decisions are less likely to need employee involve￾ment because the solutions are already worked out 
from past incidents. In other words, the benefits of 
employee involvement increase with the novelty and 
complexity of the problem or opportunity.
• Source of decision knowledge. Subordinates should be 
involved in some level of decision making when the 
 leader lacks sufficient knowledge and subordinates have additional information to 
improve decision quality. In many cases, employees are closer to customers and 
production activities, so they often know where the company can save money, im￾prove product or service quality, and realize opportunities. This is particularly true 
for complex decisions where employees are more likely to possess relevant 
information.
• Decision commitment. Participation tends to improve employee commitment to the 
decision. If employees are unlikely to accept a decision made without their involve￾ment, some level of involvement is usually necessary.
• Risk of conflict among employees. The degree of involvement depends on whether 
employees will agree with one another on the preferred solution. If conflict is 
likely to occur, low or moderate involvement is advisable because employees are 
unlikely to reach a mutual decision.
• Employee-firm goal congruence. A higher level of involvement is possible when 
employee goals and norms are congruent with the organization’s goals. When 
employee preferences and choices are likely to conflict with the organization’s 
success and survival, a low level of involvement is necessary.
Employee involvement is an important component of the decision-making process. To 
make the best decisions, we need to involve people who have valuable information and 
who will be more motivated to implement the decision. Employee involvement is a forma￾tive stage of team dynamics, so it carries many of the benefits and challenges of working 
in teams. The next chapter provides a closer look at team dynamics, including processes 
for making decisions in teams.266
LO 7-1 Describe the elements of rational choice decision 
making.
Decision making is a conscious process of making choices 
among one or more alternatives with the intention of moving 
toward some desired state of affairs. Rational choice decision 
making identifies the best choice by calculating the expected va￾lence of numerous outcomes and the probability of those out￾comes. It also follows the logical process of identifying problems 
and opportunities, choosing the best decision style, developing 
alternative solutions, choosing the best solution, implementing 
the selected alternative, and evaluating decision outcomes.
LO 7-2 Explain why decision makers deviate from rational 
choice decision making when identifying problems 
and opportunities.
One problem with problem identification is that decision mak￾ers tend to jump to a solution before understanding the prob￾lem, mainly because have been reinforced by past successes 
with that solution and they are comforted by closure to prob￾lems. Second, some executives are rewarded for making deci￾sions decisively before understanding the problem. A third 
problem is stakeholder framing, which occurs when others use 
selective information to make the decision maker see the situa￾tion as a problem or not. Fourth, decision makers occasionally 
experience perceptual defense; they either fail to recognize or 
quickly forget information that signals the existence of a seri￾ous problem. Finally, decision makers’ own mental models 
frame the situation in ways that distorts or hides the problem 
or opportunity. Problem identification problems can be mini￾mized by being aware of problem identification biases, resist￾ing the temptation to look decisive, create a norm of divine 
discontent, and discussing the situation with colleagues.
LO 7-3 Explain why people differ from rational choice deci￾sion making when searching for, appraising, and 
choosing alternatives.
Goals are a critical component of rational choice decision 
making, but appraising and choosing alternatives in reality are 
often challenging because organizational goals are ambiguous 
or in conflict. Information processing of decision alternatives 
also deviates from the rational choice view. Due to limited in￾formation processing capacity, individuals appraise only a few 
alternatives and only a handful of characteristics. They also 
follow a sequential appraisal process using an implicit favorite—
a preferred alternative used repeatedly as a comparison with 
other choices. This occurs because it is difficult to have all 
alternatives available at the same time, human beings have a 
natural preference for comparing two choices, the implicit 
favorite enables decision makers to minimize cognitive effort, 
and this comparative and implicit favorite process helps deci￾sion makers to maintain cognitive consistency and coherence 
(their emotional preferences match the logical choice). 
Decision makers also have decision heuristic biases that af￾fect choice selection. Anchoring and adjustment heuristic 
states that we are influenced by an initial anchor point and do 
not sufficiently move away from that point as new information 
is provided. Availability heuristic is the tendency to estimate 
the probability of something occurring by how easily we can 
recall that event. Representativeness heuristic states that we 
pay more attention to whether something resembles (is 
representative of) something else and less attention to more 
objective statistics about its probability.
Decision makers tend to choose the first alternative that 
exceeds an acceptable standard for their needs and preferences 
(satisficing) rather than the alternative with the highest ex￾pected value (maximization). Satisficing occurs because it is 
impossible to receive complete and perfect information re￾quired for maximization, decision makers do not have suffi￾cient time or information processing capacity, and they want 
to minimize cognitive effort. When too many choices are pre￾sented, people are motivated to avoid making any decision, al￾though this decision paralysis depends on characteristics of 
the decision maker and the choices.
LO 7-4 Discuss how emotions and intuition relate to deci￾sion making.
Emotions shape our preferences for alternatives and the pro￾cess we follow to assess alternatives. We also listen in on our 
emotions for guidance when making decisions. This latter ac￾tivity relates to intuition—the ability to know when a problem 
or opportunity exists and to select the best course of action 
without conscious reasoning. Intuition is both an emotional 
experience and a rapid, nonconscious, analytic process that 
involves pattern matching and action scripts.
LO 7-5 Explain how decision makers bias the evaluation of 
decision outcomes, and identify ways to minimize 
those decision evaluation problems.
Postdecisional justification and escalation of commitment 
make it difficult to accurately evaluate decision outcomes. 
Postdecisional justification is the decision maker’s tendency to 
support their implicit favorite and to maintain consistency in 
their preference and decision. Escalation is the tendency to repeat 
an apparently bad decision or allocate more resources to a fail￾ing course of action. It is mainly caused by the self-justification 
effect, self-enhancement effect, the prospect theory effect, and 
sunk costs effect. These decision evaluation biases are minimized 
by separating decision makers from decision evaluators, estab￾lishing a stop-loss point to abandon the project, seeking out 
factual information as well as feedback from others, and by 
changing the mindset regarding the situation.
LO 7-6 Outline the creative process, and identify employee 
characteristics, workplace conditions, and specific 
activities that support creativity.
Creativity is the development of original ideas that make a so￾cially recognized contribution. The four creativity stages are prep￾aration, incubation, illumination, and verification. Incubation 
assists divergent thinking, which involves reframing the problem 
in a unique way and generating different approaches to the issue.
Four of the main features of creative people are intelligence, 
persistence, expertise, and independent imagination. Creativity 
is also strengthened for everyone when the work environment 
supports a learning orientation, the job has task significance 
and autonomy, the organization provides a reasonable level of 
job security, and project leaders provide appropriate goals, time 
pressure, and resources. Four types of activities that encourage 
creativity are redefining the problem, associative play, cross￾pollination, and design thinking. Design thinking is a human￾centered, solution-focused creative process that applies both 
intuition and analytical thinking to clarify problems and 
chapter summary267
generate innovative solutions. Four rules guide this process: hu￾man rule, ambiguity rule, re-design rule, and tangible rule.
LO 7-7 Summarize the benefits of employee involvement 
and discuss five contingencies that affect the optimal 
level of employee involvement.
Employee involvement refers to the degree that employees in￾fluence how their work is organized and carried out. The level 
of participation may range from an employee providing spe￾cific information to management without knowing the prob￾lem or issue, to complete involvement in all phases of the 
decision process. Employee involvement may lead to higher 
decision quality and commitment, but several contingencies 
need to be considered, including the decision structure, source 
of decision knowledge, decision commitment, risk of conflict 
among employees, and employee-firm goal congruence.
anchoring and adjustment 
heuristic, p. 249
availability heuristic, p. 249
bounded rationality, p. 247
confirmation bias, p. 249
creativity, p. 256
decision making, p. 242
design thinking, p. 261
divergent thinking, p. 257
escalation of commitment, p. 254
implicit favorite, p. 248
intuition, p. 251
learning orientation, p. 260
mental models, p. 246
prospect theory effect, p. 255
rational choice decision making p. 242
representativeness heuristic, p. 249
satisficing, p. 250
scenario planning, p. 254
self-enhancement, p. 255
key terms
1. A management consultant is hired by a manufacturing 
firm to determine the best site for its next production fa￾cility. The consultant has had several meetings with the 
company’s senior executives regarding the factors to 
consider when making the recommendation. Discuss 
the decision-making problems that might prevent the 
consultant from choosing the best site location.
2. You have been asked to personally recommend a new 
travel agency to handle all airline, accommodation, and 
related travel needs for your organization of 500 staff. 
One of your colleagues, who is responsible for the com￾pany’s economic planning, suggests that the best travel 
agent could be selected mathematically by inputting the 
relevant factors for each agency and the weight (impor￾tance) of each factor. What decision-making approach is 
your colleague recommending? Is this recommendation a 
good idea in this situation? Why or why not?
3. Intuition is both an emotional experience and a noncon￾scious analytic process. One problem, however, is that 
not all emotions signaling that there is a problem or 
opportunity represent intuition. Explain how we would 
know if our “gut feelings” are intuition or not, and if not 
intuition, suggest what might be causing them.
4. A developer received financial backing for a new busi￾ness financial center along a derelict section of the wa￾terfront, a few miles from the current downtown area of 
a large European city. The idea was to build several 
high-rise structures, attract large businesses to those 
sites, and have the city extend transportation systems 
out to the new center. Over the next decade, the devel￾oper believed that others would build in the area, 
thereby attracting the regional or national offices of 
many financial institutions. Interest from potential busi￾ness tenants was much lower than initially predicted 
and the city did not build transportation systems as 
quickly as expected. Still, the builder proceeded with 
the original plans. Only after financial support was cur￾tailed did the developer reconsider the project. Using 
your knowledge of escalation of commitment, discuss 
three possible reasons why the developer was motivated 
to continue with the project.
5. Ancient Book Company has a problem with new book 
projects. Even when others are aware that a book is far 
behind schedule and may engender little public interest, 
sponsoring editors are reluctant to terminate contracts 
with authors whom they have signed. The result is that 
editors invest more time with these projects than on 
more fruitful projects. As a form of escalation of commit￾ment, describe two methods that Ancient Book Company 
can use to minimize this problem.
6. A recent graduate is offered a job by an employer she 
admires even before she can start her job search. The 
student thinks it is an opportunity and grabs it. Explain 
the recent graduate’s decision in terms of the role of 
emotions in decision making.
7. Think of a time when you experienced the creative pro￾cess. Maybe you woke up with a brilliant (but usually 
sketchy and incomplete) idea, or you solved a baffling 
problem while doing something else. Describe this inci￾dent to your class and explain how the experience 
followed the creative process.
8. Two characteristics of creative people are that they have 
relevant experience and are persistent in their quest. 
Does this mean that people with the most experience 
and the highest need for achievement are the most 
creative? Explain your answer.
9. Employee involvement applies just as well to the 
classroom as to the office or factory floor. Explain how 
student involvement in classroom decisions typically 
made by the instructor alone might improve decision 
quality. What potential problems may occur in this 
process?
critical thinking questions268
CASE STUDY: DOGGED BY THE WRONG PROBLEM 
More than 3 million dogs enter animal shelters each year in 
the United States, and almost one-third of these have been 
surrendered by their owners. Until recently, animal shelter 
employees assumed that the owners didn’t want their pets 
anymore, so they focused their resources on ways to get the 
surrendered dogs re-adopted with new owners.
Now, animal shelters recognize that they were focused 
on the wrong problem to some extent. Most owners of sur￾rendered dogs love their pets but believe they are unable to 
keep them due to financial or family difficulties. “Owner 
surrenders are not a people problem,” explains Lori Weise, 
founder of Downtown Dog Rescue in Los Angeles. “By and 
large, they are a poverty problem. These families love their 
dogs as much as we do, but they are also exceptionally 
poor.” Even when owners surrender their dog due to the 
pet’s behavior, animal shelter staff have learned that the 
problem is often the owners’ lack of basic training to im￾prove their pet’s behavior.
These discoveries have been a wake-up call for animal 
shelters. Along with finding new homes for surrendered 
dogs, shelters now also focus on strategies that enable own￾ers to keep their pets. Downtown Dog Rescue in Los Angeles 
is a pioneer in applying diverse solutions to minimize the 
number of dogs surrendered each year to animal shelters. 
Through donations, the organization provides free dog vac￾cinations, spay/neutering, medical assistance, pet licenses, 
and other forms of support to help low income people keep 
their pets rather than surrender them to shelters.
Until recently, Animal Care Centers (ACC) of New 
York City also focused solely on getting surrendered dogs to 
new owners. The municipal agency receives more than 
30,000 pets annually at its shelters in five New York City 
boroughs. Front desk staff members were aware of common 
themes why owners were surrendering their pets: they 
couldn’t afford veterinary care; they had fallen on hard 
times and weren’t allowed to keep dogs at their new tempo￾rary accommodation; the dog had behavior problems that 
the owner didn’t know how to correct.
Unfortunately, ACC staff receiving the surrendered dogs 
have many other duties (returning pets to owners, tracing 
license tags, etc.). All they could do in most instances was 
ask the owners the required questions to complete the pa￾perwork. “They were overwhelmed and didn’t have time to 
sit down with clients and have those really in-depth conver￾sations to see if there was anything we could do to help 
them keep their pet,” recalls ACC admissions supervisor 
Aleah Simpson. It was also an awkward situation because 
the owners answered the questions and surrendered their 
pet in ACC’s crowded front lobby where many dog-loving 
clients were listening.
Inspired by the work of Downtown Dog Rescue in Los 
Angeles, ACC now takes a dramatically different approach 
to dog surrenders. Instead of answering a few questions 
asked by busy front desk staff, owners who intend to surren￾der their dogs are now greeted by trained ACC admission 
counselors with impeccable people skills. In a private office, 
these counselors listen to the owner’s story about why they 
want or need to surrender their dog. These counselors are 
trained by licensed social workers to maintain a nonjudg￾mental attitude toward the owners and to handle difficult 
situations. “Once that person (the pet owner) doesn’t feel 
like they’re going to be judged in that moment, they might 
open up and tell you the real situation,” says Simpson.
Based on the information from these conversations, 
ACC counselors direct some owners to support groups that 
can provide assistance, such as financial support or tempo￾rary lodging for the dog. In other situations, the owners are 
invited to attend brief training programs where they receive 
instruction on how to improve the pet’s behavior. The con￾versations also help counselors determine which pets are 
better off with new owners. As new situations arise, ACC 
staff have found increasingly innovative and customized so￾lutions to enable owners to keep their pet. “Even two years 
ago, I would think there wouldn’t be options for so many of 
these pet owners and their animals,” says Jenny Coffey of 
the Mayor’s Alliance for NYC’s Animals.
ACC predicted that over the first 18 months of the pro￾gram, 150 owners would keep their pets as a result of the 
counseling program. Instead, this initiative has reduced the 
intake by more than 90 pets per month. Through New York 
Community Trust funding, ACC introduced free veterinary 
and humane care to pets of owners in low income areas of 
New York City. Pet surrenders have dropped by 50 percent, 
on average, in the areas that received this funding.
“It’s almost as if a few years back a massive light bulb 
went off in the animal welfare community,” says Matthew 
Bershadker, CEO of the American Society for the Preven￾tion of Cruelty to Animals (ASPCA), about the industry’s 
reframed mandate. “We stopped thinking about how to get 
animals out of shelters and we started thinking about how 
to keep animals from coming into shelters.”
Discussion Questions
1. What stage of decision making is mainly discussed in 
this case about dog surrenders? To what extent and 
in what ways did the change in that stage of decision 
making affect later stages of decision making about 
dog surrenders?
2. How has creativity played a role in the events described 
in this case study?
Sources: J. Falconer, “Unnecessary Surrenders? Fuhgettaboutit!,” Animal 
Sheltering Magazine, The Humane Society of the United States, March/April, 
2016; T. Wedell-Wedellsborg, “Are You Solving the Right Problems?,” 
Harvard Business Review, January/February 2017; A. Torgan, “Keeping 
People and Their Pets Together,” CNN, December 18, 2018; L. Lombardi, 
“Poverty Forces People to Surrender Their Pets. It Doesn’t Have to Be This 
Way.,” Talk Poverty, February 4, 2019; “The New York Community Trust 
Grants $4.8 Million to Invest in a Fairer, More Equitable New York,” News 
release (New York City: The New York Community Trust, April 8, 2019).
© 2020 Steven L. McShaneCLASS EXERCISE: EMPLOYEE INVOLVEMENT INCIDENTS
269
staff in the water agency (including most of your employees) 
is concerned that the productivity dividend initiative will 
reduce employment numbers over time and increase em￾ployee workloads. Although the TD group is a separate de￾partment within the city’s water agency, it affects most 
other work units in the agency. It is possible, for example, 
that ideas that reduce costs in the TD group might increase 
costs elsewhere. The TD group employees may be unaware 
of or care little about these repercussions, because there is 
limited interaction with or social bonding by employees 
across the departments.
SCENARIO 2: THE SUGAR-SUBSTITUTE RESEARCH 
DECISION
You are the head of research and development (R&D) for 
a major beer company. While working on a new beer prod￾uct, one of the scientists in your unit seems to have tenta￾tively identified a new chemical compound that has few 
calories but tastes closer to sugar than current sugar sub￾stitutes. The company has no foreseeable need for this 
product, but it could be patented and licensed to manufac￾turers in the food industry.
The sugar-substitute discovery is in its preliminary 
stages and would require considerable time and resources 
before it would be commercially viable. This means that it 
would necessarily take some resources away from other 
projects in the lab. The sugar-substitute project is beyond 
your technical expertise, but some of the R&D lab re￾searchers are familiar with that field of chemistry. As with 
most forms of research, it is difficult to determine the 
amount of research required to further identify and per￾fect the sugar substitute. You do not know how much de￾mand is expected for this product. Your department has a 
decision process for funding projects that are behind 
schedule. However, there are no rules or precedents about 
funding projects that would be licensed but not used by 
the organization.
The company’s R&D budget is limited, and other scien￾tists in your work group have recently complained that 
they require more resources and financial support to get 
their projects completed. Some of these R&D projects 
hold promise for future beer sales. You believe that most 
researchers in the R&D unit are committed to ensuring 
that the company’s interests are achieved.
SCENARIO 3: COAST GUARD CUTTER DECISION
You are the captain of a 200-foot Coast Guard cutter, with 
a crew of 16, including officers. Your mission is general 
at-sea search and rescue. At 2:00 a.m. today, while en 
route to your home port after a routine 28-day patrol, you 
received word from the nearest Coast Guard station that a 
small plane had crashed 60 miles offshore. You obtained 
all the available information concerning the location of 
the crash, informed your crew of the mission, and set a 
new course at maximum speed for the scene to commence 
a search for survivors and wreckage.
PURPOSE This exercise is designed to help you under￾stand the contingencies of employee involvement.
INSTRUCTIONS (SMALL OR LARGE CLASS)
Four scenarios are presented in this exercise. Assume you 
are the manager or person in charge. For each scenario, 
identify the preferred level of employee involvement from 
one of the five levels described below. For each scenario, 
identify and justify what factors led you to choose this 
level of employee involvement rather than the others. Also, 
be prepared to discuss what problems might occur with 
less or more involvement in this case (where possible).
1. Decide alone. Use your personal knowledge and insight 
to complete the entire decision process without confer￾ring with anyone else.
2. Receive information from individuals. Ask specific indi￾viduals for information. They do not make recommen￾dations and might not even know what the problem 
is about.
3. Consult with individuals. Describe the problem to 
selected individuals and seek both their information 
and recommendations. The final decision is made by 
you, and you may or may not take the advice from 
others into account.
4. Consult with the team. You bring together a team of 
people (all department staff or a representation of 
them if the department is large), who are told about 
the problem and provide their ideas and recommenda￾tions. You make the final decision, which may or may 
not reflect the team’s information.
5. Facilitate the team’s decision. The entire decision-making 
process is handed over to a team or committee of subor￾dinates. You serve only as a facilitator to guide the de￾cision process and keep everyone on track. The team 
identifies the problem, discovers alternative solutions, 
chooses the best alternative, and implements their choice.
SCENARIO 1: THE PRODUCTIVITY DIVIDEND 
DECISION
As head of the transmission/distribution group (TD 
group) in the city’s water agency (a government corpora￾tion), you have been asked to reduce costs over the next 
year by a minimum of 3 percent without undermining ser￾vice. Your department employs about 300 people, who are 
responsible for constructing and maintaining water lines 
throughout the city. Although you have an engineering 
background, the work is complex and involves several pro￾fessions and trades. Even the TD group’s first-line supervi￾sors (one or two levels below you in the hierarchy) are not 
fully knowledgeable of all aspects of the business.
You believe that most employees support or at least accept 
the city’s recent mandate to reduce costs (called the “pro￾ductivity dividend initiative”). The city leaders have stated 
that this initiative will not result in any layoffs this year. How￾ever, the labor union representing most nonmanagement You have now been searching for 20 hours. Your search 
operation has been increasingly impaired by rough seas, 
and there is evidence of a severe storm building. The atmo￾spherics associated with the deteriorating weather have 
made communications with the Coast Guard station im￾possible. A decision must be made shortly about whether 
to abandon the search and place your vessel on a course 
that would ride out the storm (thereby protecting the ves￾sel and your crew, but relegating any possible survivors to 
almost certain death from exposure) or to continue a po￾tentially futile search and the risks it would entail.
Before losing communications, you received an update 
weather advisory concerning the severity and duration of 
the storm. Although your crew members are extremely con￾scientious about their responsibility, you believe that they 
would be divided on the decision of leaving or staying.
SCENARIO 4: THE SOCIAL MEDIA POLICY 
DECISION
The industry initiatives agency is a group of 120 profes￾sionals responsible for marketing your state as a good 
place for companies to operate their business or open 
new operations. Although you report to the head of the 
state’s employment and commerce department, your 
agency is semi-autonomous in its policies and practices 
from the parent department. One of your highest priori￾ties is to recruit and retain young, well-educated, high￾potential employees for this growing agency. During a recent 
recruiting drive at universities and polytechnics, some po￾tential applicants candidly stated that the state govern￾ment seems out of touch with the younger generation, 
particularly their use of technology. A few observed that 
your agency’s website doesn’t provide much recruitment 
information, and they couldn’t find the department’s 
Facebook or Twitter sites.
These comments led you to think about having a so￾cial media policy in the industry initiatives agency, par￾ticularly whether or to what degree the agency should 
allow or possibly even encourage its staff to have work￾related Facebook sites, personal blogs, and Twitter sites, 
and to participate in those sites during work hours. You 
personally know very little about emerging social media, 
though many of your direct reports (functional managers 
and team leaders) have varying degrees of knowledge 
about them. A few even have their own personal Face￾book sites, and one manager has her own travel blog. 
Some direct reports are strongly opposed to social media 
in the workplace, whereas others are likely very support￾ive. However, you believe that all of their views are in the 
agency’s best interests.
This social media policy decision would be within your 
mandate; unlike most governments, neither this state gov￾ernment nor the employment and commerce department 
has such a policy or restrictions on any policy that is 
designed by your agency. However, a few specific govern￾ment departments prohibit Facebook and texting activity 
during work and, due to concerns about breaches of confi￾dentiality and employer reputation, do not allow employ￾ees to mention work-related matters in any social media. 
Your decision is to develop a policy specifying whether 
and, if so, to what degree agency staff should be allowed 
or encouraged to engage in social network site activity 
during work hours.
Sources: The Productivity Dividend Decision and The Social Media 
Policy Decision: © 2013 Steven L. McShane. The Sugar-Substitute 
Research Decision: © 2002 Steven L. McShane. The Coast Guard 
Cutter Decision case is adapted from V.H. Vroom and A.G. Jago, 
The New Leadership: Managing Participation in Organizations
(Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1988), © 1987 V.H. Vroom 
and A.G. Jago. Used with permission of the authors.
CLASS EXERCISE: CREATIVITY BRAINBUSTERS
puzzles and what may have prevented you from solving 
them more quickly.
1. Double-circle problem. Draw two circles, one inside the 
other, with a single line and with neither circle touch￾ing the other (as shown below). In other words, you 
must draw both of these circles without lifting your 
pen (or other writing instrument).
PURPOSE This exercise is designed to help students un￾derstand the dynamics of creativity and team problem 
solving.
INSTRUCTIONS (LARGE OR SMALL CLASS)
The instructor describes the problem, and students are 
asked to figure out the solution working alone. When 
enough time has passed, the instructor may then ask spe￾cific students who think they have the solution to de￾scribe (or show using projection technology) their 
answer. The instructor will review the solutions and dis￾cuss the implications of this exercise. In particular, be 
prepared to discuss what you needed to solve these 
270271
	 1.	 J. Schneider, Understanding Design Thinking, Lean, and 
Agile (Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly Media, 2017); “Pfizer
Manufacturing GmbH,” Syntegon Success Story (blog),
April 15, 2018; “The Right Method For Solving The
Problem On Hand,” Bosch Packaging Technology,
accessed January 13, 2020; C. Kidd and J. Johnson,
“Design Thinking, Lean Startup, and Agile: What’s The
Difference?,” BMC Blogs (blog), July 23, 2020; Syntegon,
Mars Wrigley and Syntegon Develop Paper-Based
Packaging for Balisto® Chocolate Bar, YouTube
(Syntegon, 2021). Syntegon recently became a separate
company; it was previously Bosch Packaging Technology.
	 2.	 F.A. Shull Jr., A.L. Delbecq, and L.L. Cummings,
Organizational Decision Making (New York: McGraw Hill,
1970), 31.
	 3.	 Harvard Business School, Decision Making: 5 Steps to 
Better Results (Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business School
Press 2006), Chap. 1; D. Baltzly, “Stoicism” (Stanford 
Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 2008), http://plato.stanford.
edu/entries/stoicism/ (accessed March 30, 2008);
I. Pownall, Effective Management Decision Making
(Holstebro, DK: Ventus Publishing, 2012), Chap. 1;
C.P. Webel, The Politics of Rationality: Reason through 
Occidental History (New York: Routledge, 2014),
Chaps. 1 and 3.
	 4.	 J.G. March and H.A. Simon, Organizations (New York:
Wiley, 1958); K. Manktelow, Thinking and Reasoning: An 
Introduction to the Psychology of Reason, Judgment and 
Decision Making (Hoboken, NJ: Taylor & Francis, 2012),
Chap. 8. Recent neuroscience theory and research sug￾gest that the calculation of probabilities and valences for
each alternative is an iterative process of repeatedly sam￾pling memory and available information (because, in re￾ality, information isn’t perfect) until the decision maker
is sufficiently confident in the estimated composite va￾lence of each choice. See: J.W. Kable and P.W. Glimcher,
“The Neurobiology of Decision: Consensus and Contro￾versy,” Neuron 63, no. 6 (September 24, 2009): 733–45;
S.B.M. Yoo and B.Y. Hayden, “Economic Choice as an
Untangling of Options into Actions,” Neuron 99, no. 3
(2018): 434–47; R.G. O’Connell et al., “Bridging Neural
and Computational Viewpoints on Perceptual
Decision-Making,” Trends in Neurosciences 41, no. 11
(2018): 838–52.
	 5.	 This example differs from the game theory model in
classic economic theory. In classic economic theory, the
“outcomes” are alternatives, so the probabilities must
add up to 1.0. For example, if there is a 30 percent proba￾bility that your company will choose supplier A, then
there is necessarily a 70 percent chance that the com￾pany will choose supplier B (if those are the only
choices). The current example, which is much more rele￾vant to business decisions, differs because it calculates
each alternative’s composite valence from a set of criteria
(outcomes) associated with all alternatives. These proba￾bilities do not add up to 1.0 because they refer to entities
that are not perfectly correlated (e.g., both suppliers
might have a high probability of offering low prices).
	 6.	 These criteria are commonly used in supplier selection
modeling. See, for example, H. Karimi and A. Rezaeinia,
“Supplier Selection Using Revised Multi-Segment Goal
Programming Model,” International Journal of Advanced 
Manufacturing Technology 70, no. 5/8 (2014): 1227–34.
	 7.	 This model is adapted from several sources, including
H.A. Simon, The New Science of Management Decision
(New York: Harper & Row, 1960); H. Mintzberg,
D. Raisinghani, and A. Théorét, “The Structure of
‘Unstructured’ Decision Processes,” Administrative 
Science Quarterly 21 (1976): 246–75; W.C. Wedley and
R.H.G. Field, “A Predecision Support System,” Academy 
of Management Review 9 (1984): 696–703.
	 8.	 P.F. Drucker, The Practice of Management (New York:
Harper & Brothers, 1954), 353–57; B.M. Bass, Organiza￾tional Decision Making (Homewood, IL: Irwin, 1983),
Chap. 3; H.E. Posen et al., “Renewing Research on
endnotes
2.	 Nine-dot problem. Below are nine dots. Without lifting
your pencil, draw no more than four straight lines that
pass through all nine dots.
3.	 Nine-dot problem revisited. Referring to the nine-dot
exhibit above, describe how, without lifting your pencil,
you could pass a pencil line through all dots with three
or fewer straight lines.
4.	 Word search. In the following line of letters, cross out
five letters so that the remaining letters, without alter￾ing their sequence, spell a familiar English word.
CFRIVEELATETITEVRSE
5.	 Burning ropes. You have two pieces of rope of unequal
lengths and a box of matches. In spite of their differ￾ent lengths, each piece of rope takes one hour to burn;
however, parts of each rope burn at unequal speeds.
For example, the first half of one piece might burn in
10 minutes. Use these materials to accurately deter￾mine when 45 minutes has elapsed.272
Fail (New York: Viking, 2003); G. Bhardwaj et al., 
“Alleviating the Plunging-In Bias, Elevating Strategic 
Problem-Solving,” Academy of Management Learning & 
Education 17, no. 3 (2018): 279–301. Some research 
suggests that decisive decision making is most common 
among those in first-level and mid-management positions. 
See: K. Brousseau et al., “The Seasoned Executive’s 
Decision-Making Style,” Harvard Business Review 84 
(Feb 2006): 110–21, 165.
17. P.C. Nutt, “Framing Strategic Decisions,” Organization 
Science 9, no. 2 (1998): 195–216; S. Kaplan, “Framing 
Contests: Strategy Making Under Uncertainty,” Organiza￾tion Science 19, no. 5 (2008): 729–52; J.P. Cornelissen 
and M.D. Werner, “Putting Framing in Perspective: 
A Review of Framing and Frame Analysis across the 
Management and Organizational Literature,” Academy 
of Management Annals 8, no. 1 (2014): 181–235.
18. M. Hock and H.W. Krohne, “Coping with Threat and 
Memory for Ambiguous Information: Testing the 
Repressive Discontinuity Hypothesis,” Emotion 4, no. 1 
(2004): 65–86; J. Brandtstadter, A. Voss, and K. 
Rothermund, “Perception of Danger Signals: The Role 
of Control,” Experimental Psychology 51, no. 1 (2004): 
24–32. 
19. M.S. Gary and R.E. Wood, “Mental Models, Decision 
Rules, and Performance Heterogeneity,” Strategic Man￾agement Journal 32, no. 6 (2011): 569–94.
20. Various sources suggest that the phrase “divine discon￾tent” may have originated with unspecified writing by 
either of the poets John Milton (1608–1674) or Alexander 
Pope (1688–1744). Alternatively, it may have been inspired 
later based on John Stuart Mill’s famous quotation in 
Utilitarianism (1863): “It is better to be a human being 
dissatisfied than a pig satisfied; better to be Socrates 
dissatisfied than a fool satisfied.” Divine discontent 
became a particularly popular phrase during a couple 
of decades from the 1890s. It appeared in various books 
(e.g., Robert Bury, The Symposium of Plato, 1909, xlii) 
as well as in articles in a wide array of magazines and 
newspapers, including The Athenaeum Journal (1896), 
Punch Magazine (1894), Edinburgh Review (1900), and 
frequently in The Independent (New York). The phrase 
is commonly used in reference to the valuable effect of 
education on the mind (for example, see: J.L. Spalding, 
Education and the Higher Life, 1900, 167; M. Mead, Male 
and Female, 1949, 160). 
21. H.A. Simon, Administrative Behavior, 2nd ed. (New York: 
Free Press, 1957); H.A. Simon, “Rational Decision 
Making in Business Organizations,” American Economic 
Review 69, no. 4 (1979): 493–513; M. Cristofaro, 
“Herbert Simon’s Bounded Rationality: Its Historical 
Evolution in Management and Cross-Fertilizing Contri￾bution,” Journal of Management History 23, no. 2 (2017): 
170–90; R. Viale, “Why Bounded Rationality?,” in 
Routledge Handbook of Bounded Rationality, ed. R. Viale 
(London: Routledge, 2021), 1–53.
22. Here are a few of the dozens of studies and reviews that 
identify and discuss imperfect rationality in decision 
making: E. Witte, N. Joost, and A.L. Thimm, “Field 
Research on Complex Decision-Making Processes—The 
Phase Theorem,” International Studies of Management & 
Problemistic Search—A Review and Research Agenda,” 
Academy of Management Annals 12, no. 1 (2017): 
208–51.
9. J.G. March and H.A. Simon, Organizations (New York: 
John Wiley & Sons, 1958), Chap. 7; L.R. Beach and 
T.R. Mitchell, “A Contingency Model for the Selection 
of Decision Strategies,” Academy of Management Review 3 
(1978): 439–49; I.L. Janis, Crucial Decisions (New York: 
Free Press, 1989), 35–37; W. Zhongtuo, “Meta-Decision 
Making: Concepts and Paradigm,” Systematic Practice 
and Action Research 13, no. 1 (2000): 111–15; 
Y.-L. Boureau, P. Sokol-Hessner, and N.D. Daw, “Deciding 
How To Decide: Self-Control and Meta-Decision 
Making,” Trends in Cognitive Sciences 19, no. 11 (2015): 
700–710; F. Lieder and T.L. Griffiths, “Strategy Selection 
as Rational Metareasoning,” Psychological Review 124, 
no. 6 (2017): 762–94.
10. J. de Jonge, Rethinking Rational Choice Theory: A 
Companion on Rational and Moral Action (Basingstoke, 
UK: Palgrave Macmillan, 2011). 
11. A. Einstein and L. Infeld, The Evolution of Physics
(Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1938), 
pg. 92. This statement is likely the true origin of what 
other writers claim Einstein said: when asked how he 
would save the world in one hour, Einstein replied that 
he would spend the first 55 minutes defining the prob￾lem and the last 5 minutes solving it. The importance of 
problem finding above other steps is also discussed in: 
H. Mintzberg, D. Raisinghani, and A. Théorêt, “The 
Structure of ‘Unstructured’ Decision Processes,” Admin￾istrative Science Quarterly 21, no. 2 (1976): 246–75; H.E. 
Posen et al., “Renewing Research on Problemistic 
Search—A Review and Research Agenda,” Academy of 
Management Annals 12, no. 1 (2018): 208–51.
12. M.A. Roberto, Know What You Don’t Know: How Great 
Leaders Prevent Problems before They Happen (Saddle River, 
NJ: Wharton School Publishing, 2009); M. Meckler and 
K. Boal, “Decision Errors, Organizational Iatrogenesis, 
and Errors of the Seventh Kind,” Academy of Management 
Perspectives 34, no. 2 (2020): 266–84.
13. N.P. Repenning, D. Kieffer, and T. Astor, “The Most 
Underrated Skill in Management,” MIT Sloan Management 
Review 58, no. 3 (2017): 39–48; G. Bhardwaj et al., 
“Alleviating the Plunging-In Bias, Elevating Strategic 
Problem-Solving,” Academy of Management Learning & 
Education 17 (2018): 279–301.
14. E. Glazer, J.S. Lublin, and D. Mattioli, “Penney Backfires 
on Ackman,” The Wall Street Journal, April 10, 2013; S. 
Snyder, “What J.C. Penney’s Ron Johnson Must Do 
Now,” CNN Money, 2013; D. Mattiolo, “For Penney’s 
Heralded Boss, the Shine Is Off the Apple,” The Wall 
Street Journal, February 25, 2013, A1; N. Tichy, Succession: 
Mastering the Make-or-Break Process of Leadership Transi￾tion (New York: Portfolio/Penguin, 2014), Chap. 7; 
M. Schlossberg, “JCPenney’s CEO Used a High School 
Dating Analogy to Describe the Worst Time in the 
Company’s History,” Business Insider, October 28, 2015.
15. A.H. Maslow, The Psychology of Science: A Reconnaissance
(New York: Harper & Row, 1966), pp. 15-16.
16. P.C. Nutt, Why Decisions Fail (San Francisco: Berrett￾Koehler, 2002); S. Finkelstein, Why Smart Executives 273
Cognitions,” Journal of Personality & Social Psychology
109, no. 3 (2015): 369–94; M.L. DeKay, “Predecisional 
Information Distortion and the Self-Fulfilling Prophecy 
of Early Preferences in Choice,” Current Directions in 
Psychological Science 24, no. 5 (2015): 405–11.
30. T. Gilovich, D. Griffin, and D. Kahneman, Heuristics and 
Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive Judgment (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2002); D. Kahneman, 
“Maps of Bounded Rationality: Psychology for Behavioral 
Economics,” American Economic Review 93, no. 5 (2003): 
1449–75; J.S. Blumenthal-Barby and H. Krieger, “Cogni￾tive Biases and Heuristics in Medical Decision Making: A 
Critical Review Using a Systematic Search Strategy,” Med￾ical Decision Making 35, no. 4 (2015): 539–57; M. Richie 
and S.A. Josephson, “Quantifying Heuristic Bias: Anchor￾ing, Availability, and Representativeness,” Teaching and 
Learning in Medicine 30, no. 1 (2018): 67–75.
31. A. Tversky and D. Kahneman, “Judgment under 
Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases,” Science 185, no. 4157 
(1974): 1124–31; I. Ritov, “Anchoring in Simulated 
Competitive Market Negotiation,” Organizational Behavior 
and Human Decision Processes 67, no. 1 (1996): 16; 
J.D. Jasper and S.D. Christman, “A Neuropsychological 
Dimension for Anchoring Effects,” Journal of Behavioral 
Decision Making 18 (2005): 343–69; M.H. Jung, H. 
Perfecto, and L.D. Nelson, “Anchoring in Payment: 
Evaluating a Judgmental Heuristic in Field Experimental 
Settings,” Journal of Marketing Research 53, no. 3 (2016): 
354–68.
32. A. Tversky and D. Kahneman, “Availability: A Heuristic 
for Judging Frequency and Probability,” Cognitive 
Psychology 5 (1973): 207–32; A. Kudryavtsev, 
“The Availability Heuristic and Reversals Following 
Large Stock Price Changes,” Journal of Behavioral 
Finance 19, no. 2 (2018): 159–76.
33. D. Kahneman and A. Tversky, “Subjective Probability: 
A Judgment of Representativeness,” Cognitive Psychology
3, no. 3 (1972): 430–54; D. Kahneman, Thinking Fast 
and Slow (New York: Farrar, Strauss, Giroux, 2011), 
Chap. 14; S.S. Kulkarni et al., “Defining the Represen￾tativeness Heuristic in Trauma Triage: A Retrospective 
Observational Cohort Study,” PLOS ONE 14, no. 2 
(February 8, 2019): e0212201.
34. H.A. Simon, “Rational Choice and the Structure of 
Environments,” Psychological Review 63 (1956): 129–38; 
B. Schwartz, “On The Meaning And Measurement Of 
Maximization,” Judgment and Decision Making 11, no. 2 
(2016): 126–46.
35. K. Jain, J.N. Bearden, and A. Filipowicz, “Do Maximizers 
Predict Better Than Satisficers?,” Journal of Behavioral 
Decision Making 26, no. 1 (2013): 41–50; W. Mao, 
“When One Desires Too Much of a Good Thing: The 
Compromise Effect under Maximizing Tendencies,” Journal 
of Consumer Psychology 26, no. 1 (2016): 66–80.
36. S. Botti and S.S. Iyengar, “The Dark Side of Choice: 
When Choice Impairs Social Welfare,” Journal of Public 
Policy and Marketing 25, no. 1 (2006): 24–38; K.D. Vohs 
et al., “Making Choices Impairs Subsequent Self-Control: 
A Limited-Resource Account of Decision Making, 
Self-Regulation, and Active Initiative,” Journal of Person￾ality and Social Psychology 94, no. 5 (2008): 883–98. 
Organization 2, no. 2 (1972): 156–82; H. Mintzberg, D. 
Raisinghani, and A. Théorêt, “The Structure of ‘Unstruc￾tured’ Decision Processes,” Administrative Science 
Quarterly 21, no. 2 (1976): 246–75; T. Gilovich, D. Griffin, 
and D. Kahneman, Heuristics and Biases: The Psychology 
of Intuitive Judgment (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 2002); S. Finkelstein, Why Smart Executives Fail: 
And What You Can Learn from Their Mistakes (New York: 
Penguin, 2004); P. Adinolfi, “A Journey around Decision￾Making: Searching for the ‘Big Picture’ across Disciplines,” 
European Management Journal 39, no. 1 (2021): 9–21.
23. M.D. Cohen, J.G. March, and J.P. Olsen, “A Garbage 
Can Model of Organizational Choice,” Administrative 
Science Quarterly 17, no. 1 (1972): 1–25; R.A. Ferrer, E. 
Orehek, and L.S. Padgett, “Goal Conflict When Making 
Decisions for Others,” Journal of Experimental Social 
Psychology 78 (2018): 93–103.
24. H.A. Simon, Administrative Behavior, 2nd ed. (New York: 
Free Press, 1957), xxv, 80–84. 
25. Current researchers refer to implicit favorite as “predeci￾sion information distortion” and the “coherence effect,” 
but these theories are essentially implicit favorite bias. 
P.O. Soelberg, “Unprogrammed Decision Making,” 
Industrial Management Review 8 (1967): 19–29; K.H. 
Ehrhart and J.C. Ziegert, “Why Are Individuals Attracted 
to Organizations?,” Journal of Management 31, no. 6 
(2005): 901–19; J.E. Russo, “The Predecisional Distortion 
of Information,” in Neuroeconomics, Judgment, and Decision 
Making, ed. E.A. Wilhelms and V.F. Reyna, Frontiers of 
Cognitive Psychology (New York: Psychology Press, 2015), 
91–110.
26. S. Sacchi and M. Burigo, “Strategies in the Information 
Search Process: Interaction among Task Structure, 
Knowledge, and Source,” Journal of General Psychology
135, no. 3 (2008): 252–70.
27. Milton Rokeach famously stated, “Life is ipsative, 
because decisions in everyday life are inherently and 
phenomenologically ipsative decisions.” Ipsative is a 
process of comparing (usually two) things side-by-side. 
M. Rokeach, “Inducing Changes and Stability in Belief 
Systems and Personality Structures,” Journal of Social 
Issues 41, no. 1 (1985): 153–71.
28. R.S. Nickerson, “Confirmation Bias: A Ubiquitous Phe￾nomenon in Many Guises,” Review of General Psychology
2, no. 2 (1998): 175–220; O. Svenson, I. Salo, and T. 
Lindholm, “Post-Decision Consolidation and Distortion 
of Facts,”Judgment and Decision Making 4, no. 5 (2009): 
397–407; A.M. Scherer, P.D. Windschitl, and A.R. 
Smith, “Hope to Be Right: Biased Information Seeking 
Following Arbitrary and Informed Predictions,” Journal 
of Experimental Social Psychology 49, no. 1 (2013): 
106–12.
29. A.L. Brownstein, “Biased Predecision Processing,” Psy￾chological Bulletin 129, no. 4 (2003): 545–68; M. Nurek, 
O. Kostopoulou, and Y. Hagmayer, “Predecisional 
Information Distortion in Physicians’ Diagnostic Judg￾ments: Strengthening a Leading Hypothesis or Weaken￾ing Its Competitor?,” Judgment and Decision Making 9, 
no. 6 (2014): 572–85; D. Simon, D. Stenstrom, and S. 
Read, “The Coherence Effect: Blending Cold and Hot 274
Processing Perspective,” Organizational Behavior and 
Human Decision Processes 86 (2001): 3–34; J.P. Forgas 
and A.S. Koch, “Mood Effects on Cognition,” in Hand￾book of Cognition and Emotion, ed. M.D. Robinson, E.R. 
Watkins, and E. Harmon-Jones (New York: Guilford, 
2013), 231–51; J.M. George and E. Dane, “Affect, 
Emotion, and Decision Making,” Organizational Behavior 
and Human Decision Processes 136 (2016): 47–55; A. 
Prinz, V. Bergmann, and J. Wittwer, “Happy but 
Overconfident: Positive Affect Leads to Inaccurate 
Metacomprehension,” Cognition and Emotion 33, no. 3 
(2019): 606–15; K.M. Hengen and G.W. Alpers, 
“Stress Makes the Difference: Social Stress and Social 
Anxiety in Decision-Making Under Uncertainty,” 
Frontiers in Psychology 12 (February 22, 2021): 578293.
43. D. Miller, The Icarus Paradox (New York: HarperBusi￾ness, 1990); D. Miller, “What Happens after Success: 
The Perils of Excellence,” Journal of Management Studies
31, no. 3 (1994): 325–68; A.C. Amason and A.C. 
Mooney, “The Icarus Paradox Revisited: How Strong 
Performance Sows the Seeds of Dysfunction in Future 
Strategic Decision-Making,” Strategic Organization 6, 
no. 4 (2008): 407–34; S. M.M, “How Icarus Paradox 
Doomed Kingfisher Airlines,” Vision 24, no. 1 (2020): 
118–24.
44. M.T. Pham, “The Logic of Feeling,” Journal of Consumer 
Psychology 14 (2004): 360–69; N. Schwarz, “Feelings-as￾Information Theory,” in Handbook of Theories of Social 
Psychology, ed. P. Van Lange, A. Kruglanski, and E.T. 
Higgins (London: Sage, 2012), 289–308; A.I. Tiba, 
“Feelings-As-Embodied Information: Studying the Role 
of Feelings As Images in Emotional Disorders,” Frontiers 
in Psychology 9 (2018), 0186.
45. O. Behling and N.L. Eckel, “Making Sense out of Intuition,” 
Academy of Management Executive 5 (1991): 46–54; 
R.M. Hogarth, “Intuition: A Challenge for Psychological 
Research on Decision Making,” Psychological Inquiry 21, 
no. 4 (2010): 338–53; S. Epstein, “Demystifying Intu￾ition: What It Is, What It Does, and How It Does It,” 
Psychological Inquiry 21, no. 4 (2010): 295–312; G.P. 
Hodgkinson and E. Sadler-Smith, “The Dynamics of 
Intuition and Analysis in Managerial and Organizational 
Decision Making,” Academy of Management Perspectives 32, 
no. 4 (2018): 473–92.
46. L. Sjöberg, “Intuitive vs. Analytical Decision Making: 
Which Is Preferred?,” Scandinavian Journal of Manage￾ment 19 (2003): 17–29; K. Hamilton, S.-I. Shih, and S. 
Mohammed, “The Development and Validation of the 
Rational and Intuitive Decision Styles Scale,” Journal of 
Personality Assessment 98, no. 5 (2016): 523–35; Y. Wang 
et al., “Meta-Analytic Investigations of the Relation 
Between Intuition and Analysis,” Journal of Behavioral 
Decision Making 30, no. 1 (2017): 15–25.
47. W.G. Chase and H.A. Simon, “Perception in Chess,” 
Cognitive Psychology 4, no. 1 (1973): 55–81; G. Klein, 
Intuition at Work (New York: Currency/Doubleday, 
2003); E. Dane, K.W. Rockmann, and M.G. Pratt, 
“When Should I Trust My Gut? Linking Domain 
Expertise to Intuitive Decision-Making Effectiveness,” 
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes
119, no. 2 (2012): 187–94; A. Linhares and D.M. Chada, 
37. S. Iyengar, The Art of Choosing (New York: Hachette, 
2010), 177–95; A. Chernev, U. Böckenholt, and J. 
Goodman, “Choice Overload: A Conceptual Review and 
Meta-Analysis,” Journal of Consumer Psychology 25, no. 2 
(2015): 333–58, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcps.2014.08.002.
38. R. Greifeneder, B. Scheibehenne, and N. Kleber, 
“Less May Be More When Choosing Is Difficult: Choice 
Complexity and Too Much Choice,” Acta Psychologica
133, no. 1 (2010): 45–50; A. Chernev, U. Böckenholt, 
and J. Goodman, “Choice Overload: A Conceptual 
Review and Meta-Analysis,” Journal of Consumer 
Psychology 25, no. 2 (2015): 333–58; N.T. Thai and U. 
Yuksel, “Too Many Destinations to Visit: Tourists’ 
Dilemma?,” Annals of Tourism Research 62 (January 2017): 
38–53; A. Mayol and C. Staropoli, “Giving Consumers 
Too Many Choices: A False Good Idea? A Lab Experi￾ment on Water and Electricity Tariffs,” European Journal 
of Law and Economics 51, no. 2 (2021): 383–410; R. 
Misuraca et al., “How Much Choice Is ‘Good Enough’?: 
Moderators of Information and Choice Overload,” in 
Routledge Handbook of Bounded Rationality, ed. R. Viale 
(London: Routledge, 2021), 637–49.
39. P.C. Nutt, “Search During Decision Making,” European 
Journal of Operational Research 160 (2005): 851–76; 
M.S. Wood, A. McKelvie, and J.M. Haynie, “Making It 
Personal: Opportunity Individuation and the Shaping 
of Opportunity Beliefs,” Journal of Business Venturing 29 
(2014): 252–72; Y. Chandra, “A Time-Based Process 
Model of International Entrepreneurial Opportunity 
Evaluation,” Journal of International Business Studies
48 (2017): 423–51.
40. P. Winkielman et al., “Affective Influence on Judgments 
and Decisions: Moving Towards Core Mechanisms,” 
Review of General Psychology 11, no. 2 (2007): 179–92; 
J.S. Lerner et al., “Emotion and Decision Making,” 
Annual Review of Psychology 66, no. 1 (2015): 799–823; 
G. Loewenstein, T. O’Donoghue, and S. Bhatia, “Modeling 
the Interplay between Affect and Deliberation,” Decision
2, no. 2 (2015): 55–81; T. Poppa and A. Bechara, “The 
Somatic Marker Hypothesis: Revisiting the Role of 
the ‘Body-Loop’ in Decision-Making,” Current Opinion 
in Behavioral Sciences, 19 (2018): 61–66; C.A. Trujillo, 
“The Complementary Role of Affect-Based and Cogni￾tive Heuristics to Make Decisions under Conditions of 
Ambivalence and Complexity,” PLOS ONE 13, no. 11 
(2018): e0206724.
41. A. Bechara and A.R. Damasio, “The Somatic Marker 
Hypothesis: A Neural Theory of Economic Decision,” 
Games and Economic Behavior 52, no. 2 (2005): 336–72; 
T.S. Saunders and M.J. Buehner, “The Gut Chooses 
Faster Than the Mind: A Latency Advantage of Affective 
over Cognitive Decisions,” Quarterly Journal of Experi￾mental Psychology 66, no. 2 (2013): 381–88; A. Moors, 
“Automaticity: Componential, Causal, and Mechanistic 
Explanations,” Annual Review of Psychology 67, no. 1 
(2016): 263–87; T. Poppa and A. Bechara, “The Somatic 
Marker Hypothesis: Revisiting the Role of the ‘Body￾Loop’ in Decision-Making,” Current Opinion in Behav￾ioral Sciences 19 (2018): 61–66.
42. J.P. Forgas and J.M. George, “Affective Influences on 
Judgments and Behavior in Organizations: An Information 275
54. B.M. Staw, “Knee-Deep in the Big Muddy: A Study of 
Escalating Commitment to a Chosen Course of Action,” 
Organizational Behavior and Human Performance 16 
(1976): 27–44; D. Steinkühler, M.D. Mahlendorf, and 
M. Brettel, “How Self-Justification Indirectly Drives 
Escalation of Commitment—a Motivational Perspective,” 
Schmalenbach Business Review: ZFBF 66 (2014): 
191–222; E.A. Lofquist and R. Lines, “Keeping Promises: 
A Process Study of Escalating Commitment Leading to 
Organizational Change Collapse,” The Journal of Applied 
Behavioral Science 53 (2017): 417–45.
55. S. Loughnan et al., “Universal Biases in Self-Perception: 
Better and More Human Than Average,” British Journal 
of Social Psychology 49 (2010): 627–36; D.L. Ferris and 
C. Sedikides, “Self-Enhancement in Organizations,” in 
The Self at Work: Fundamental Theory and Research, ed. 
D.L. Ferris, R.E. Johnson, and C. Sedikides (New York: 
Routledge, 2018), 91–118.
56. M. Keil, G. Depledge, and A. Rai, “Escalation: The Role 
of Problem Recognition and Cognitive Bias,” Decision 
Sciences 38 (2007): 391–421; R. Ronay et al., “Pride 
before the Fall: (Over)Confidence Predicts Escalation of 
Public Commitment,” Journal of Experimental Social 
Psychology 69 (2017): 13–22.
57. G. Whyte, “Escalating Commitment in Individual and 
Group Decision Making: A Prospect Theory Approach,” 
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 54 
(1993): 430–55; D. Kahneman and J. Renshon, 
“Hawkish Biases,” in American Foreign Policy and the 
Politics of Fear: Threat Inflation since 9/11, ed. T. Thrall 
and J. Cramer (New York: Routledge, 2009), 79–96. 
58. D. J. Sleesman et al., “Cleaning up the Big Muddy: A 
Meta-Analytic Review of the Determinants of Escalation 
of Commitment,” Academy of Management Journal 55, 
no. 3 (2012): 541–62; B.M. Sweis et al., “Sensitivity to 
‘Sunk Costs’ in Mice, Rats, and Humans,” Science 361, 
no. 6398 (July 13, 2018): 178–81.
59. J.D. Bragger et al., “When Success Breeds Failure: History, 
Hysteresis, and Delayed Exit Decisions,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology 88, no. 1 (2003): 6–14; H. Drummond, “Escalation 
of Commitment: When to Stay the Course?,” The Academy 
of Management Perspectives 28, no. 4 (2014): 430–46.
60. I. Simonson and B.M. Staw, “De-Escalation Strategies: A 
Comparison of Techniques for Reducing Commitment to 
Losing Courses of Action,” Journal of Applied Psychology
77 (1992): 419–26; M. Keil and D. Robey, “Turning 
around Troubled Software Projects: An Exploratory 
Study of the Deescalation of Commitment to Failing 
Courses of Action,” Journal of Management Information 
Systems 15 (1999): 63–87; D.C. Molden and C.M. Hui, 
“Promoting De-Escalation of Commitment: A Regulatory￾Focus Perspective on Sunk Costs,” Psychological Science
22 (2011): 8–12; A.C. Hafenbrack, Z. Kinias, and S.G. 
Barsade, “Debiasing the Mind Through Meditation: 
Mindfulness and the Sunk-Cost Bias,” Psychological 
Science 25 (2014): 369–76; K.R. Sarangee et al., 
“De-Escalation Mechanisms in High-Technology Product 
Innovation,” Journal of Product Innovation Management 31 
(2014): 1023–38; D.V. Chulkov and J.M. Barron, “Turnover 
in Top Management and De-Escalation of Commitment,” 
Applied Economics 51 (2019): 2534–51.
“What Is the Nature of the Mind’s Pattern-Recognition 
Process?,” New Ideas in Psychology 31, no. 2 (2013): 
108–21.
48. G. Klein, Intuition at Work (New York: Currency/
Doubleday, 2003), 12–13, 16–17; G. Kefalidou, D. 
Golightly, and S. Sharples, “Identifying Rail Asset Main￾tenance Processes: A Human-Centric and Sensemaking 
Approach,” Cognition, Technology & Work 20, no. 1 
(2018): 73–92.
49. P.C. Nutt, “Search During Decision Making,” European 
Journal of Operational Research 160 (3) (2005): 851–876; 
P.C. Nutt, “Investigating the Success of Decision Making 
Processes,” Journal of Management Studies 45, no. 2 
(2008): 425–55; S.A. Kreindler, “Planning without Ac￾tion and Action without Planning? Examining a Regional 
Health System’s Efforts to Improve Patient Flow, 1998–
2013,” The International Journal of Health Planning and 
Management 33, no. 1 (2018): e333–43.
50. T.J. Chermack, Scenario Planning in Organizations
(San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler, 2011); G. Bowman, 
“The Practice of Scenario Planning: An Analysis of 
Inter- and Intra-Organizational Strategizing,” British 
Journal of Management 27, no. 1 (2016): 77–96; J.J. 
Oliver and E. Parrett, “Managing Uncertainty: Harnessing 
the Power of Scenario Planning,” Strategic Direction 33, 
no. 1 (2016): 5–6; T. Lehr et al., “Scenario-Based Strate￾gizing: Advancing the Applicability in Strategists’ 
Teams,” Technological Forecasting and Social Change 124 
(Nov. 2017): 214–24; R. Vecchiato, “Scenario Planning, 
Cognition, and Strategic Investment Decisions in a 
Turbulent Environment,” Long Range Planning 52, no. 5 
(2019): 101865.
51. J. Pfeffer and R.I. Sutton, “Knowing ‘What’ to Do Is 
Not Enough: Turning Knowledge into Action,” California 
Management Review 42, no. 1 (1999): 83–108; R. 
Charan, C. Burke, and L. Bossidy, Execution: The 
Discipline of Getting Things Done (New York: Crown Busi￾ness, 2002); S.A. Kreindler, “What If Implementation Is 
Not the Problem? Exploring the Missing Links between 
Knowledge and Action,” The International Journal of 
Health Planning and Management 31, no. 2 (2016): 
208–26.
52. C.A. O’Reilly and D.F. Caldwell, “The Commitment 
and Job Tenure of New Employees: Some Evidence of 
Postdecisional Justification,” Administrative Science Quar￾terly 26 (1981): 597–616; S.W.S. Lee and N. Schwarz, 
“Washing Away Postdecisional Dissonance,” Science 328, 
no. 5979 (May 7, 2010): 709–709; J. De Fine Licht et al., 
“When Does Transparency Generate Legitimacy? Experi￾menting on a Context-Bound Relationship: When Does 
Transparency Generate Legitimacy?,” Governance 27 
(2014): 111–34.
53. B.M. Staw and J. Ross, “Behavior in Escalation Situa￾tions: Antecedents, Prototypes, and Solutions,” Research 
in Organizational Behavior 9 (1987): 39–78; D.J. Slees￾man et al., “Cleaning up the Big Muddy: A Meta-Analytic 
Review of the Determinants of Escalation of Commitment,” 
Academy of Management Journal 55 (2012): 541–62; D.J. 
Sleesman et al., “Putting Escalation of Commitment in 
Context: A Multilevel Review and Analysis,” Academy of 
Management Annals 12 (2018): 178–207.276
Sternberg (New York: Cambridge University Press, 
1999), 273–96; C.E. Shalley, J. Zhou, and G.R. Oldham, 
“The Effects of Personal and Contextual Characteristics 
on Creativity: Where Should We Go from Here?,” 
Journal of Management 30, no. 6 (2004): 933–58; S.J. 
Dollinger, K.K. Urban, and T.A. James, “Creativity and 
Openness to Experience: Validation of Two Creative 
Product Measures,” Creativity Research Journal 16, no. 1 
(2004): 35–47; T.S. Schweizer, “The Psychology of Novelty￾Seeking, Creativity and Innovation: Neurocognitive 
Aspects within a Work-Psychological Perspective,” 
Creativity and Innovation Management 15, no. 2 (2006): 
164–72; S. Acar and M.A. Runco, “Creative Abilities: 
Divergent Thinking,” in Handbook of Organizational 
Creativity, ed. M. Mumford (Waltham, MA: Academic 
Press, 2012), 115–39. 
71. C.E. Shalley, J. Zhou, and G.R. Oldham, “The Effects 
of Personal and Contextual Characteristics on Creativity: 
Where Should We Go from Here?,” Journal of Manage￾ment 30, no. 6 (2004): 933–58; N. Anderson, K. 
Potočnik, and J. Zhou, “Innovation and Creativity in 
Organizations: A State-of-the-Science Review, 
Prospective Commentary, and Guiding Framework,” 
Journal of Management 40, no. 5 (2014): 1297–1333; 
D. van Knippenberg and G. Hirst, “A Motivational Lens 
Model of Person × Situation Interactions in Employee 
Creativity,” Journal of Applied Psychology 105, no. 10 
(2020): 1129–44.
72. Learning orientation has multiple meanings. Rather 
than the “learning goal orientation” definition, we are 
referring to the marketing-based definition which is asso￾ciated with organizational learning. See, for example: 
W.E. Baker and J.M. Sinkula, “The Synergistic Effect of 
Market Orientation and Learning Orientation on Orga￾nizational Performance,” Journal of the Academy of 
Marketing Science 27, no. 4 (1999): 411–27; O. Pesämaa 
et al., “How a Learning Orientation Affects Drivers of 
Innovativeness and Performance in Service Delivery,” 
Journal of Engineering and Technology Management 30, 
no. 2 (2013): 169–87; J.C. Real, J.L. Roldán, and A. 
Leal, “From Entrepreneurial Orientation and Learning 
Orientation to Business Performance: Analysing the 
Mediating Role of Organizational Learning and the Mod￾erating Effects of Organizational Size,” British Journal 
of Management 25, no. 2 (2014): 186–208.
73. A. Cummings and G.R. Oldham, “Enhancing Creativity: 
Managing Work Contexts for the High Potential 
Employee,” California Management Review, no. 40 (1997): 
22–38; F. Coelho and M. Augusto, “Job Characteristics 
and the Creativity of Frontline Service Employees,” 
Journal of Service Research 13, no. 4 (2010): 426–38; G. 
Hirst et al., “How Does Bureaucracy Impact Individual 
Creativity? A Cross-Level Investigation of Team Contex￾tual Influences on Goal Orientation–Creativity Relation￾ships,” Academy of Management Journal 54, no. 3 (June 
2011): 624–41; W. Zhang et al., “Exploring the Effects 
of Job Autonomy on Engagement and Creativity: The 
Moderating Role of Performance Pressure and Learning 
Goal Orientation,” Journal of Business and Psychology 32, 
no. 3 (2017): 235–51.
61. M.I. Stein, “Creativity and Culture,” Journal of Psychology
36 (1953): 311–22; M.A. Runco and G.J. Jaeger, “The 
Standard Definition of Creativity,” Creativity Research 
Journal 24, no. 1 (2012): 92–96. 
62. G. Wallas, The Art of Thought (London: Jonathan Cape, 
1926). For recent applications of Wallas’s classic model, 
see T. Kristensen, “The Physical Context of Creativity,” 
Creativity and Innovation Management 13, no. 2 (2004): 
89–96; U.E. Haner, “Spaces for Creativity and Innova￾tion in Two Established Organizations,” Creativity and 
Innovation Management 14, no. 3 (2005): 288–98. 
63. R.S. Nickerson, “Enhancing Creativity,” in Handbook of 
Creativity, ed. R.J. Sternberg (New York: Cambridge 
University Press, 1999), 392–430. There are varied sub￾processes within incubation and illumination, such as 
serendipitous insights, disciplined imagination, and 
hunches. See: M.A. Mithani and I. Kocoglu, “Idea 
Generation in Abductive Thinking: Not One but Three 
Approaches,” Academy of Management Review, October 20, 
2021.
64. E. Oakes, Notable Scientists: A to Z of STS Scientists
(New York: Facts on File, 2002), 207–09. 
65. R.J. Sternberg and J.E. Davidson, The Nature of Insight 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1995); W. Shen et al., 
“Feeling the Insight: Uncovering Somatic Markers of the 
‘Aha’ Experience,” Applied Psychophysiology and Biofeed￾back, September 19, 2017, https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10484-017-9381-1.
66. R.J. Sternberg and L.A. O’Hara, “Creativity and Intelli￾gence,” in Handbook of Creativity, ed. R.J. Sternberg 
(New York: Cambridge University Press, 1999), 251–72; 
S. Taggar, “Individual Creativity and Group Ability to 
Utilize Individual Creative Resources: A Multilevel 
Model,” Academy of Management Journal 45 (2002): 
315–30; R.J. Sternberg, “Successful Intelligence: A 
Model for Testing Intelligence beyond IQ Tests,” 
European Journal of Education and Psychology 8, no. 2 
(2015): 76–84, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejeps.2015.09.004.
67. G.J. Feist, “The Influence of Personality on Artistic and 
Scientific Creativity,” in Handbook of Creativity, ed. R.J. 
Sternberg (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1999), 
273–96; T. Åsterbro, S.A. Jeffrey, and G.K. Adomdza, 
“Inventor Perseverance after Being Told to Quit: The 
Role of Cognitive Biases,” Journal of Behavioral Decision 
Making 20 (2007): 253–72; J.S. Mueller, S. Melwani, and 
J.A. Goncalo, “The Bias against Creativity: Why People 
Desire but Reject Creative Ideas,” Psychological Science
23, no. 1 (2012): 13–17. 
68. R.W. Weisberg, “Creativity and Knowledge: A Challenge 
to Theories,” in Handbook of Creativity, ed. R.J. Sternberg 
(New York: Cambridge University Press, 1999), 
226–50. 
69. R.I. Sutton, Weird Ideas That Work (New York: Free 
Press, 2002), 53–54, 121; E. Dane, “Reconsidering the 
Trade-Off between Expertise and Flexibility: A Cognitive 
Entrenchment Perspective,” Academy of Management 
Review 35, no. 4 (2010): 579–603.
70. G.J. Feist, “The Influence of Personality on Artistic and 
Scientific Creativity,” in Handbook of Creativity, ed. R.J. 277
84. R. Glen et al., “Teaching Design Thinking in Business 
Schools,” The International Journal of Management 
Education 13, no. 2 (2015): 182–92; L. Carlgren, I. 
Rauth, and M. Elmquist, “Framing Design Thinking: 
The Concept in Idea and Enactment,” Creativity and 
Innovation Management 25, no. 1 (2016): 38–57; K.D. 
Elsbach and I. Stigliani, “Design Thinking and Organiza￾tional Culture: A Review and Framework for Future Re￾search,” Journal of Management 44, no. 6 (2018): 2274–2306.
85. J. Kolko, “Design Thinking Comes of Age,” Harvard 
Business Review 93, no. 9 (2015): 66–71; C. Vetterli et al., 
“How Deutsche Bank’s IT Division Used Design 
Thinking to Achieve Customer Proximity,” MIS Quarterly 
Executive 15, no. 1 (2016): 37–53; D. Henriksen, C. 
Richardson, and R. Mehta, “Design Thinking: A Creative 
Approach to Educational Problems of Practice,” 
Thinking Skills and Creativity 26 (2017): 140–53.
86. M. Fenton-O’Creevy, “Employee Involvement and the 
Middle Manager: Saboteur or Scapegoat?,” Human 
Resource Management Journal, no. 11 (2001): 24–40. 
Also see V.H. Vroom and A.G. Jago, The New Leadership: 
Managing Participation in Organizations (Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1988). 
87. V.H. Vroom and A.G. Jago, The New Leadership: Managing 
Participation in Organizations (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Prentice Hill, 1988). Involvement level is a core dimen￾sion, but involvement also varies in terms of its directness, 
stage of involvement (selection of intervention content 
versus intervention implementation method), range of 
topics, and choice of intervention objectives. See: A. 
Wilkinson et al., “Conceptualizing Employee Participa￾tion in Organizations,” in The Oxford Handbook of 
Participation in Organizations, ed. A. Wilkinson et al., vol. 
1 (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2010), Chap. 1 ; 
J.S. Abildgaard et al., “Forms of Participation: The 
Development and Application of a Conceptual Model 
of Participation in Work Environment Interventions,” 
Economic and Industrial Democracy 41, no. 3 (2020): 
746–69.
88. The benefits of employee involvement have been 
discussed for more than a half century, such as: C. 
Argyris, Personality and Organization (New York: Harper 
& Row, 1957); D. McGregor, The Human Side of Enter￾prise (New York: McGraw Hill, 1960); R. Likert, New 
Patterns of Management (New York: McGraw Hill, 1961). 
Recent studies have observed that the benefits of involve￾ment depend on the form of involvement and employee 
characteristics. For example, see: K. Hutter, B.A. Nketia, 
and J. Füller, “Falling Short with Participation—Different 
Effects of Ideation, Commenting, and Evaluating Behav￾ior on Open Strategizing,” Long Range Planning, Open 
Strategy: Transparency and Inclusion in Strategy Pro￾cesses, 50, no. 3 (2017): 355–70; Y. Zhou, X. Fan, and 
J. Son, “How and When Matter: Exploring the Interaction 
Effects of High-performance Work Systems, Employee 
Participation, and Human Capital on Organizational 
Innovation,” Human Resource Management 58, no. 3 
(2019): 253–68.
89. A.G. Robinson and D.M. Schroeder, Ideas Are Free (San 
Francisco: Berrett-Koehler, 2004). 
74. T.M. Amabile, “Changes in the Work Environment for 
Creativity During Downsizing,” Academy of Management 
Journal 42 (1999): 630–40. 
75. J. Moultrie et al., “Innovation Spaces: Towards a Frame￾work for Understanding the Role of the Physical Environ￾ment in Innovation,” Creativity & Innovation Management 16, 
no. 1 (2007): 53–65. 
76. C.E. Shalley, J. Zhou, and G.R. Oldham, “The Effects 
of Personal and Contextual Characteristics on Creativity: 
Where Should We Go from Here?,” Journal of Manage￾ment 30, no. 6 (2004): 933–58; S. Powell, “The Manage￾ment and Consumption of Organisational Creativity,” 
Journal of Consumer Marketing 25, no. 3 (2008): 158–66; 
D.J. Hughes et al., “Leadership, Creativity, and Innovation: 
A Critical Review and Practical Recommendations,” 
The Leadership Quarterly 29, no. 5 (2018): 549–69.
77. A. Hiam, “Obstacles to Creativity—and How You Can 
Remove Them,” Futurist 32 (1998): 30–34. 
78. M.A. West, Developing Creativity in Organizations (Leices￾ter, UK: BPS Books, 1997), 33–35. 
79. S. Brown, Play: How It Shapes the Brain, Opens the Imagi￾nation, and Invigorates the Soul (New York: Avery, 2009); 
C. Mainemelis and D.D. Dionysiou, “Play, Flow, and 
Timelessness,” in The Oxford Handbook of Creativity,
Innovation, and Entrepreneurship, ed. C. Shalley, M. Hitt, 
and J. Zhou (New York: Oxford University Press, 2015), 
121–40; C.A. Petelczyc et al., “Play at Work: An Integra￾tive Review and Agenda for Future Research,” Journal 
of Management 44, no. 1 (2018): 161–90.
80. T. Ritchey, Wicked Problems—Social Messes: Decision 
Support Modelling with Morphological Analysis, Risk, 
Governance and Society (Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 2011); 
S. Seidenstricker and C. Linder, “A Morphological 
Analysis-Based Creativity Approach to Identify and Develop 
Ideas for BMI: A Case Study of a High-Tech Manufacturing 
Company,” International Journal of Entrepreneurship and 
Innovation Management 18, no. 5–6 (2014): 409–24.
81. A. Hargadon and R.I. Sutton, “Building an Innovation 
Factory,” Harvard Business Review 78 (2000): 157–66; 
T. Kelley, The Art of Innovation (New York: Currency 
Doubleday, 2001), 158–62; P.F. Skilton and K.J. Dooley, 
“The Effects of Repeat Collaboration on Creative Abra￾sion,” Academy of Management Review 35, no. 1 (2010): 
118–34. 
82. M. Burton, “Open Plan, Open Mind,” Director (2005): 
68–72; S. Pathak, “On the Inside at Mother New York, 
Where Rotating Desks Are the Norm,” Digiday, November 
6, 2015; I. Davies, “Iconic Ads, Communal Working and 
Fierce Independence: We Meet the Team at Mother 
London,” Lecture In Progress, March 13, 2018, https://
lectureinprogress.com/journal/mother-london.
83. E. Köppen and C. Meinel, “Empathy Via Design 
Thinking: Creation of Sense and Knowledge,” in Design 
Thinking Research: Building Innovators, ed. H. Plattner, 
C. Meinel, and L. Leifer (Cham, Switzerland: Springer 
International, 2015), 15–28; K.D. Elsbach and I. Stigliani, 
“Design Thinking and Organizational Culture: A 
Review and Framework for Future Research,” Journal of 
Management 44, no. 6 (2018): 2274–2306.278
7 March 2018); N. J. Nigro, Seinfeld FAQ: Everything Left 
to Know About the Show About Nothing (Milwaukee: 
Applause Theatre and Cinema Books, 2015); A. Grant, 
Originals: How Non-Conformists Change the World
(New York: Viking, 2016), 44–46.
c. S. Iyengar, The Art of Choosing (New York: Hachette, 
2010), 194–200; J. Beshears et al., “Simplification and 
Saving,” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 95 
(2013): 130–45.
d. “Intuition in the Age of Big Data,” Smith School of 
Business, Queen’s University, Smith Business Insight
(blog), June 21, 2016; “PwC’s Global Data and Analytics 
Survey” (London: PwC, July 2016); “Growing Pains: 2018 
Global CEO Outlook” (Zurich: KPMG International, 
May 2018); T. Smith et al., “Analytics and AI-Driven 
Enterprises Thrive in the Age of With the Culture 
Catalyst” (London: Deloitte, July 24, 2019); “The State 
of Work 2020” (Lehi, Utah: Workfront, October 2019).
e. “SCE&G & Santee Cooper Announce Contract to Build 
Two New Nuclear Units,” News Release, May 27, 2008; 
T. Moore, “Santee Cooper, SCE&G Pull Plug on 
Roughly $25 Billion Nuclear Plants in South Carolina,” 
Post and Courier, July 31, 2017; R. Gold, “Scana 
Abandons Nuclear-Site Plans,” The Wall Street Journal, 
August 1, 2017; A.G. Wilks and S. Fretwell, “Long-Secret 
Report Could Save SCE&G’s Customers Billions,” The 
State, September 5, 2017; A. Lacy, “Endless Trials: South 
Carolina Spent $9 Billion to Dig a Hole in the Ground 
and Then Fill It Back In,” The Intercept, February 6, 
2019; “Former SCANA CEO Pleads Guilty To Conspir￾acy to Commit Mail and Wire Fraud” (Columbia, S.C.: 
U.S. Department of Justice, District of South Carolina, 
February 24, 2021).
f. T. Ayres, “Helicopter Simulator Accompanies CH-148 
Cyclones,” Halifax Chronicle-Herald, February 24, 2018, 
B1; “Bluedrop Amongst Firsts for Technology Leader￾ship Accelerated Ocean Solutions Project With Its State￾of-the-Art Hoist Mission Training System,” Press Release 
(St. John’s, Nfld: BPLI Holdings, November 13, 2020); 
“Lockheed Martin Recognizes Outstanding Performance 
of Bluedrop Training & Simulation Inc.,” Press Release 
(Halifax, NS: Bluedrop Training and Simulation, 
October 6, 2021).
g. A. Bryant, “I’m Prepared for Adversity. I Waited Tables.,” 
The New York Times, June 5, 2010; P. Gray, “Why ‘Fail 
Fast’ Is a Terrible Business Philosophy for Most Compa￾nies,” TechRepublic, January 9, 2018; D. Pontefract, “The 
Foolishness Of Fail Fast, Fail Often,” Forbes, September 
15, 2018; J.W. Ross and N.O. Fonstad, “Learn from 
Hypotheses, Not Failures,” MIT CISR Research Briefing, 
no. XIX–5 (May 16, 2019); J. Wingard, “Don’t Fail 
Fast—Fail Smart,” Forbes, February 21, 2020; T. Eisenmann, 
The Fail-Safe Startup: Your Roadmap for Entrepreneurial 
Success (Penguin, 2021), Chap. 4.
h. J. Anixter, “Mark Polson, Creativity and Estee Lauder—
The IX Interview,” Innovation Excellence (blog), February 
16, 2015; “Estée Lauder Companies: A Home for Cre￾ative Talent,” The Business of Fashion, February 2, 2017; 
L.R. Rublin, “Shaking Up the Prestige Beauty Business,” 
90. M.R. Bashshur, “When Voice Matters: A Multilevel 
Review of the Impact of Voice in Organizations,” Journal 
of Management 41 (2015): 1530–54; F.A. Guzman and A. 
Espejo, “Introducing Changes at Work: How Voice Be￾havior Relates to Management Innovation,” Journal of 
Organizational Behavior 40, no. 1 (2019): 73–90; Y. 
Zhou, X. Fan, and J. Son, “How and When Matter: 
Exploring the Interaction Effects of High-performance 
Work Systems, Employee Participation, and Human 
Capital on Organizational Innovation,” Human Resource 
Management 58, no. 3 (2019): 253–68; M. del C. Triana 
et al., “The Relationship Between Team Deep-Level 
Diversity and Team Performance: A Meta-Analysis of 
the Main Effect, Moderators, and Mediating Mecha￾nisms,” Journal of Management Studies 58, no. 8 (2021): 
2137–79. 
91. D. Berend and J. Paroush, “When Is Condorcet’s Jury 
Theorem Valid?,” Social Choice and Welfare 15, no. 4 
(1998): 481–88. 
92. K.T. Dirks, L.L. Cummings, and J.L. Pierce, 
“Psychological Ownership in Organizations: Conditions 
under Which Individuals Promote and Resist Change,” 
Research in Organizational Change and Development, no. 9 
(1996): 1–23; R. Markey, J. McIvor, and C.F. Wright, 
“Employee Participation and Carbon Emissions Reduc￾tion in Australian Workplaces,” The International Journal 
of Human Resource Management 27, no. 2 (2016): 
173–91; F.A. Guzman and A. Espejo, “Introducing 
Changes at Work: How Voice Behavior Relates to Man￾agement Innovation,” Journal of Organizational Behavior
40, no. 1 (2019): 73–90.
93. Y. Zhu et al., “Employee Participation and the Influence 
on Job Satisfaction of the ‘New Generation’ of Chinese 
Employees,” The International Journal of Human Re￾source Management 26, no. 19 (2015): 2395–2411; M. 
Valverde-Moreno, M. Torres-Jimenez, and A.M. Lucia￾Casademunt, “Participative Decision-Making amongst 
Employees in a Cross-Cultural Employment Setting: 
Evidence from 31 European Countries,” European Journal 
of Training and Development 45, no. 1 (2020): 14–35.
94. V.H. Vroom and A.G. Jago, The New Leadership: 
Managing Participation in Organizations (Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1988); N. Lührs et al., “How 
Participatory Should Environmental Governance Be? 
Testing the Applicability of the Vroom-Yetton-Jago 
Model in Public Environmental Decision-Making,” 
Environmental Management 61, no. 2 (2018): 249–62.
a. L. Hayes, “You’re Too Creative To Be An Engineer—And 
Other Myths . . .,” Huffington Post, October 5, 2016; 
Design Sprint Academy, The ROI of Problem Framing, 
YouTube (San Francisco: Design Sprint Academy, 2020), 
n815OJE4trc.
b. P. Rosenthal, “NBC Executive Stands Apart by Taking 
Stands,” Chicago Tribune, August 21, 2005; L. Mellor, 
“Seinfeld’s Journey from Flop to Acclaimed Hit,” Den of 
Geek (London, 7 November 2014), http://www.denof￾geek.com (accessed 6 March 2018); S. Austerlitz, 
“How ‘Seinfeld’ Revolutionized the Sitcom,” IndieWire
(28 February 2014), http://www.indiewire.com (accessed 279
Healthy Ecosystems,” Olam International News (blog), 
June 11, 2020; “Olam Urges International Brands to 
Adopt New Rice Eco-Label to Allow Consumers to Sup￾port Farmers and Promote Sustainable Rice Production,” 
Press Release (Singapore: Olam International, 
September 18, 2020).
Barron’s, June 1, 2018; S. Castellanos, “Estée Lauder 
Revamps IT, Merging Beauty Business With Innovation,” 
The Wall Street Journal, March 20, 2019.
i. “Sharpening Focus, Accelerating Sustainable Growth: 
Strategy Report, Annual Report 2019” (Singapore: Olam 
International Limited, March 2020); “Nuts about Sus￾tainability: Meet Olam’s Experts Helping to Reimagine 
Design Credit: Blue globe icon: Merfin/Shutterstock280
chapter
8 Team Dynamics
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
LO 8-1 Define teams and informal groups, and explain why employees join informal groups.
LO 8-2 Discuss the benefits and limitations of teams.
LO 8-3 Outline the team effectiveness model and discuss how task characteristics, team 
size, and team composition influence team effectiveness.
LO 8-4 Discuss how the six team processes—team development, norms, roles, cohesion, 
trust, and mental models—influence team effectiveness.
LO 8-5 Identify the features of self-directed teams (SDTs), and discuss ways to support the 
success of SDTs.
LO 8-6 Contrast remote teams with traditional teams in organizations, and discuss ways to 
support the success of remote teams.
LO 8-7 Identify four constraints on team decision making and describe four structures that 
support idea generation in teams.
A few years ago, leaders at Cisco Systems realized that most work gets 
done in teams. “We believe the best teams are really the nucleus of where the work is, where 
people feel safe, where they feel engaged and where people are experiencing the work,” states 
James Comer, a Cisco Asia Pacific human resources executive. Consequently, the San Jose, Calif., 
high technology developer and manufacturer has reconfigured its systems and practices to support 
teamwork and team success.
One of Cisco’s first steps was to figure out how many teams exist in the company and where they are 
located. This is a challenge, because many teams are cross-functional and exist for only a few weeks or 
months. Cisco’s organizational chart “is actually incomplete because a lot of the work done is on project or 
cross-functional teams, or teams that cut across the boundaries in the org chart,” explains Ashley Goodall, 
Learning Objectives281
PART 3: TEAM PROCESSES
Cisco’s senior vice-president who helped lead the firm’s team-oriented strategy. The company has more 
than 15,000 teams, which is 40 percent higher than initially assumed.
Next, Cisco executives learned that members of its most successful teams spend more time in roles 
that leverage their strengths and preferences rather than their weaknesses. In response, the company 
introduced a confidential strengths-based team role self-reflection analysis so employees in all teams 
can understand and align their role preferences. Cisco also introduced innovative ways for employees 
to develop different skills and to temporarily join different teams on diverse projects. Furthermore, the 
company is launching new ways to develop team leaders so they can improve team dynamics, 
particularly since most have teams with varying degrees of remoteness.
Cisco developed a team-oriented internal collaboration communication system (similar to Slack and 
Microsoft Teams), so employees could interact more effectively. It conducted social network analysis to 
better understand how its teams are formed. The firm also hosts a “Teams Week” that encourages team 
development and employee learning on numerous topics and from several external speakers.
Teams are central to where work gets done at Cisco Systems, so the technology company has introduced several systems and 
practices to support team dynamics and team success.
RedPixel.PL/Shutterstock282 Part Three Team Processes
Today, Cisco is rated as one of the best places to work in the United States 
and in a dozen other countries, and has become a more formidable competitor 
in the marketplace. “We’re going to continue to focus on teams because we 
believe that’s how we win,” advises Francine Katsoudas, Cisco executive 
vice-president of people, policy, and purpose. “We will take all of the analytics 
and learnings of the past four years and really push into the understanding of 
teams even more.”1
Cisco Systems has shifted its attention to teams because employees 
engage in more teamwork and collaboration today than at any other time in 
recent history. One study found that knowledge workers are involved in almost 
twice as many teams compared to five years earlier. By comparison, three 
decades ago only 20 percent of managers said they worked in teams at all!2
The importance of teamwork extends to scientific research. A study of almost 
20 million research publications reported that the percentage of journal 
articles written by teams rather than individuals has increased substantially 
over the past five decades. Team-based articles also had a much higher 
number of subsequent citations, suggesting that journal articles written by 
teams are superior to articles written by individuals.3
Why are teams becoming so important, and how can organizations 
strengthen their potential for organizational effectiveness? We find the 
answers to these and other questions in this chapter on team dynamics. This 
chapter begins by defining teams, examining the reasons why organizations 
rely on teams, and explaining why people join informal groups in organizational 
settings. A large segment of this chapter examines a model of team effectiveness, 
which includes team and organizational environment, team design, and 
team processes. We then turn our attention to two specific types of teams: 
self-directed teams and remote teams. The final section of this chapter 
looks at the challenges and strategies for making better decisions in teams.
LO 8-1
Teams and Informal Groups
Teams are groups of two or more people who interact with and influence each other, are 
mutually accountable for achieving common goals associated with organizational objec￾tives, and perceive themselves as a social entity within an organization.4
 This definition 
has a few important components worth repeating. First, all teams exist to fulfill some 
purpose, such as developing cybersecurity software, repairing electric power lines, design￾ing a new educational program, or making an important executive decision. 
Second, team members are held together by their interdependence and need for col￾laboration to achieve common goals. All teams require some form of communication so 
its members can coordinate, share information, and develop a common mindset regarding 
teams
groups of two or more people 
who interact with and influence 
each other, are mutually 
accountable for achieving 
common goals associated with 
organizational objectives, and 
perceive themselves as a social 
entity within an organizationChapter Eight Team Dynamics 283
purpose and objectives. Third, team members influence each other, although some mem￾bers may be more influential than others regarding the team’s goals and activities. Finally, 
a team exists when its members perceive themselves to be a team. They feel connected to 
one another through a common interest or purpose.
There are many types of teams in organizations, and each type can be distinguished 
by three characteristics: team permanence, skill diversity, and authority dispersion 
(see Exhibit 8.1).5 Team permanence refers to how long that type of team usually exists. 
Accounting, marketing, and other departments are usually long-lasting structures, so these 
teams have high permanence. In contrast, task forces and project teams usually have low 
permanence because most are formed temporarily to solve a problem, realize an opportu￾nity, or design a product or service.
A second distinguishing characteristic is the team’s skill diversity. A team has high skill 
diversity when its members possess different skills and knowledge, whereas low diversity 
exists when team members have similar abilities and, therefore, are interchangeable. Most 
functional departments have low skill diversity because they organize employees around 
their common skill sets (e.g., people with accounting expertise are located in the account￾ing department). In contrast, self-directed teams, which we discuss later in this chapter, 
are responsible for producing an entire product or service, which usually requires mem￾bers with dissimilar skills and knowledge to perform the diverse tasks in that work. Cross￾training increases interchangeability of team members to some extent, but moderately 
high skill diversity is still likely where the team’s work is complex.
Authority dispersion, the third distinguishing characteristic of teams, refers to the degree 
that decision-making responsibility is distributed throughout the team (high dispersion) 
or is vested in one or a few members of the team (low dispersion). Departmental teams 
tend to have low authority dispersion because much of the power is concentrated in a 
formal manager. Self-directed teams usually have high authority dispersion because the 
entire team makes key decisions and hierarchical authority is limited.
EXHIBIT 8.1 Team Permanence, Skill Diversity, and Authority Dispersion for Selected Team Types
SELECTED TYPES 
OF TEAMS DESCRIPTION TYPICAL CHARACTERISTICS
Departmental teams Teams that consist of employees who have 
similar or complementary skills and are lo￾cated in the same unit of a functional struc￾ture; usually minimal task interdependence 
because each person works with clients or 
with employees in other departments.
Team permanence: High—departments continue indefinitely.
Skill diversity: Low to medium—departments are often organized 
around common skills (e.g., accounting staff located in the 
accounting department).
Authority dispersion: Low—departmental power is usually 
concentrated in the departmental manager.
Self-directed teams Teams whose members are organized 
around work processes that complete an 
entire piece of work requiring several inter￾dependent tasks and have substantial au￾tonomy over the execution of those tasks 
(i.e., they usually control inputs, flow, and 
outputs with little or no supervision).
Team permanence: High—teams are usually assigned indefinitely 
to a specific cluster of production or service activities.
Skill diversity: Medium to high—members typically perform 
different tasks requiring diverse skill sets, but cross-training 
can somewhat reduce skill diversity.
Authority dispersion: High—team members share power, usually 
with limited hierarchical authority.
Task force (project) 
teams
Cross-functional teams whose members are 
usually drawn from several disciplines to 
solve a specific problem, realize an oppor￾tunity, or design a product or service.
Team permanence: Low—teams typically disband on completion 
of a specific project or decision.
Skill diversity: Medium to high—members are typically drawn 
from several functional specializations associated with the 
complexity of the task or decision.
Authority dispersion: Medium—teams often have someone with 
formal authority (project leader), but members also have moderate 
power due to their expertise and functional representation.284 Part Three Team Processes
INFORMAL GROUPS
This chapter mainly focuses on formal teams, but employees also belong to informal 
groups. All teams are groups, but many groups do not satisfy our definition of teams. 
Groups include people assembled together, whether or not they have any interdependence 
or organizational objective. The friends you meet for lunch are an informal group, but they 
wouldn’t be called a team because they have little or no interdependence (each person 
could just as easily eat lunch alone) and no organizationally mandated purpose. Instead, 
an informal group exists primarily for the benefit of its members. Although the terms are 
used interchangeably, teams has largely replaced groups in the language of business when 
referring to employees who work together to complete organizational tasks.6
Why do informal groups exist? One reason is that human beings are social animals. 
Our drive to bond is hardwired through evolutionary development, creating a need to be￾long to informal groups.7
 This is evident by the fact that people invest considerable time 
and effort forming and maintaining social relationships without any special circumstances 
or ulterior motives. A second reason why people join informal groups is provided by so￾cial identity theory, which states that individuals partly define themselves by their group 
affiliations (see Chapter 3). Thus, we join groups—particularly those that are viewed favor￾ably by others and have values similar to our own—because they shape and reinforce our 
self-concept.8
A third reason why informal groups exist is that they accomplish personal objectives 
that cannot be achieved by individuals working alone. For example, employees will some￾times congregate to support or oppose organizational changes because this collective ef￾fort has more power than individuals who try to bring about change alone. These informal 
groups, called coalitions, are discussed in Chapter 10. A fourth explanation for informal 
groups is that we are comforted by the mere presence of other people and are therefore 
motivated to be near them in stressful situations. When in danger, people congregate near 
each other even though doing so serves no protective purpose. Similarly, employees tend 
to mingle more often after hearing rumors that the company might be acquired by a com￾petitor. As Chapter 4 explained, this social support minimizes stress by providing emo￾tional and/or informational resources to buffer the stress experience.9
Informal Groups and Organizational Outcomes Informal groups are not 
created to serve corporate objectives, yet they have a profound influence on the organiza￾tion and its employees. Informal groups potentially minimize employee stress because, as 
mentioned, group members provide emotional and informational social support. This stress￾reducing capability of informal groups improves employee well-being, which potentially 
increases organizational effectiveness. Informal groups are also the backbone of social 
networks, which are important sources of trust building, information sharing, power, influ￾ence, and employee well-being in the workplace.10 Chapter 10 explains how social networks 
are a source of influence in organizational settings. Employees with strong informal net￾works tend to have more power and influence because they receive better information and 
preferential treatment from others and their talent is more visible to key decision makers.
Benefits and Limitations of Teams
Daimler AG is relying more on teamwork to keep pace with rapidly changing consumer 
preferences and technological innovations. The German automobile giant is shifting up to 
20 percent of its employees from traditional departments into a more dynamic structure 
of temporary swarm teams. “Swarms work autonomously, are self-organized, set goals and 
roles, have complete end-to-end responsibility, and include a diverse range of people 
across functions and skill sets,” explains Sabine Scheunert, vice president Digital and IT 
Marketing/Sales of Daimler’s Mercedes-Benz Cars unit. Some swarms have a dozen team 
members on short-term assignments; others are large-scale projects (such as Daimler’s 
social networks
social structures of individuals 
or social units that are 
connected to one another 
through one or more forms of 
interdependence
LO 8-2Chapter Eight Team Dynamics 285
next-generation procurement process) that bring together up to 80 experts from across 
the organization.11
Why are teams so important at Daimler, Cisco, and so many other companies? The 
answer to this question has a long history.12 Early research on British coal mining in the 
1940s, the Japanese economic miracle of the 1970s, and a huge number of investigations 
since then have revealed that under the right conditions, teams make better decisions, de￾velop better products and services, and increase motivation more than employees working 
alone.13 Similarly, team members can quickly share information and coordinate tasks, 
whereas these processes are slower and more prone to errors in traditional departments 
led by supervisors. Teams typically provide superior customer service because they offer 
clients a greater breadth of knowledge and expertise than do lone “stars.”
Teams are also potentially more productive because, in many situations, their members 
exert more effort than when working alone.14 There are three motivating forces at work. 
First, employees have a drive to bond, which motivates them to fulfill their team’s goals. 
This felt obligation is particularly strong when the employee’s social identity is connected 
to the team. Second, members have high accountability to fellow team members, who 
monitor performance more closely than a traditional supervisor. This accountability is 
particularly strong when the team’s performance is limited by the worst performer, such 
as on an assembly line. Third, each team member creates a moving performance standard 
for the others. When a few employees complete tasks faster, other team members recognize 
that they could (and should) work faster. This benchmark effect also motivates because 
employees are often apprehensive that their performance will be compared to others’ 
performance.
THE LIMITATIONS OF TEAMS
Teams are potentially very productive, but they are not always as effective as individuals 
working alone.15 The main problem is that teams have additional costs called process 
losses—resources (including time and energy) expended on team development and main￾tenance rather than on performing the task.16 Team members need time and effort to 
process losses
resources (including time and 
energy) expended toward team 
development and maintenance 
rather than the task
Thommessen Creates the Law Firm of 
the Future through Teamworka
Advokatfirmaet Thommessen AS is one of the oldest 
(since 1856), largest, and top-rated commercial law firms 
in Norway. It is also one of the industry’s leading advo￾cates for teamwork. “Teamwork and new forms of collab￾oration have helped us establish an innovation culture,” 
says the company, which has 300 employees, including 
240 lawyers, at its offices in Oslo, Bergen, and London.
“An advantage of working at Thommessen is that we 
work in teams,” explains partner Ylva B. Gjesdahl Petersen. 
“Well-composed teams whose members complement 
each other enable everyone to have a life outside their 
professional commitments, also during hectic periods.”
Thommessen’s team-oriented culture is evident in its 
new Oslo offices, which have an “activity-based land￾scape specifically designed to encourage teamwork.” The 
building has dozens of project rooms where legal teams 
can meet face-to-face or in hybrid arrangements. The 
company’s digital project management tools also support 
efficient team-based work and have reduced emails by 
40 percent. “These premises are specifically designed to en￾courage teamwork, knowledge transfer and innovation—
which we believe are key to creating the law firm of the 
future,” says Managing Partner Sverre Tyrhaug.
global connections 8.1
Jack Frog/Shutterstock286 Part Three Team Processes
develop mutual understanding of their goals, determine the best strategy for accomplish￾ing those goals, negotiate their specific roles, agree on informal rules of conduct, and re￾solve their disagreements. An employee working alone on a project does not have these 
internal misunderstandings, divergent viewpoints, disagreements, or coordination prob￾lems (at least, not nearly as much as with other people). Teams may be necessary when 
the work is so complex that it requires knowledge and skills from several people. But when 
the work can be performed by one person, process losses can make a team less effective 
than an individual working alone.
Process losses tend to increase with the team’s diversity and size.17 A diverse team has 
a range of beliefs and values, which can slow development toward a high-performance 
unit. Conflicts about the team’s purpose, roles, and coordination routines are more likely 
to flare up and take longer to resolve. Larger teams have higher process losses because 
understanding, agreeing with, and synchronizing work with many people is more difficult 
than with a few people. Larger teams also require more time for each member to be mean￾ingfully involved in the team’s decisions.
Process losses are also amplified, at least temporarily, when adding new members to an 
existing team. The new team members consume time and effort figuring out how to work 
well with coworkers. Performance also suffers among current team members because 
their attention is partially diverted from task performance to accommodating and inte￾grating newcomers. The software industry even has a name for the problems of adding 
people to a team: Brooks’s law says that adding more people to a late software project only 
makes it later! Although process losses are well known, research has found that managers 
consistently underestimate these costs when adding more people to an existing team.18
Social Loafing The process losses just described mainly refer to coordination chal￾lenges, but teams also suffer from motivational process losses. The best-known motiva￾tional process loss is social loafing, which occurs when people exert less effort (and 
usually perform at a lower level) in teams than when working alone.19
Social loafing is more pervasive under several conditions.20 It is more likely to occur 
when individual performance is hidden or difficult to distinguish from the performance of 
other team members. Individual performance is less visible in larger rather than smaller 
teams. It is also hidden when the team produces a single output (e.g., solving a client’s 
problem) rather than separate outputs for each team member (e.g., each member reviews 
several accounting reports per day). Second, social loafing is more common when the 
work is boring or the team’s overall task has low task significance (see Chapter 6). Third, 
social loafing is more prevalent among team members with low conscientiousness and 
low agreeableness personality traits as well as low collectivist values.
Fourth, social loafing is more widespread when employees aren’t motivated to help the 
team achieve its goals. This situation occurs when individual members have low social 
identity with the team. Motivation is also lower when employees believe other team mem￾bers aren’t pulling their weight. In other words, social loafers provide only as much effort 
as they believe others will provide, which is their way of maintaining fairness in work al￾location. Employees also exert less effort when they believe they have little control over 
the team’s success. This perception is more likely to occur when the team is large (their 
contribution has minimal effect on the team’s performance) and when the team is depen￾dent on other members who have known performance problems.
By understanding the causes of social loafing, we can identify ways to minimize this 
problem.21 Some of the strategies listed below reduce social loafing by making each mem￾ber’s performance more visible. Other strategies increase each member’s motivation to 
perform their job and mindfully minimize social loafing within the group.
• Form smaller teams—Splitting the team into several smaller groups reduces social 
loafing because each person’s performance becomes more noticeable and impor￾tant for team performance. A smaller group also potentially increases individual 
commitment to and identity with the team.
social loafing
the problem that occurs when 
people exert less effort (and 
usually perform at a lower 
level) when working in teams 
than when working aloneChapter Eight Team Dynamics 287
• Measure individual performance—Social loafing is minimized when each member’s 
contribution is measured. This is possible when each member can perform parallel 
tasks, such as serving different customers. But measuring individual performance 
is difficult to implement when the team produces a single output, such as solving 
one client’s problem.
• Specialize tasks—It is easier to measure individual performance when each team 
member performs a different work activity. For example, rather than pooling their 
effort for all incoming customer inquiries, each customer service representative 
might be assigned a particular type of client.
• Increase job enrichment—Social loafing is minimized when each team member’s 
job is highly motivating, such as when the work has high task significance or is 
sufficiently varied and challenging rather than boring.
• Increase mindfulness of team obligations—Social loafing can be minimized by alert￾ing team members to this problem and asking them to declare their commitment 
to the team’s performance objectives. This relates to the discussion in Chapter 2 
on increasing employee awareness of values and ethics.
• Select motivated, team-oriented employees—Employees are less susceptible to social 
loafing when they identify with the team, have moderate or higher conscientious￾ness and agreeableness personality traits, and have a fairly high collectivist value 
orientation. Social loafing is also minimized by selecting team members who are 
self-motivated, because these people perform their tasks well even when their 
personal work output is difficult to measure.
Overall, teams can be very powerful forces for competitive advantage, or they can be much 
more trouble than they are worth. To understand when teams are better than individuals 
working alone, we need to more closely examine the conditions that make teams effective or 
ineffective. The next few sections of this chapter discuss the model of team effectiveness.
®
SELF-ASSESSMENT 8.1: Are You a Team Player?
A Model of Team Effectiveness
Why are some teams effective while others fail? To answer this question, we first need to 
clarify the meaning of team effectiveness. A team is effective when it benefits the organi￾zation and its members, and survives long enough to accomplish its mandate.22 First, 
teams exist to serve some organizational purpose, so effectiveness is partly measured by 
the achievement of that objective. Second, a team’s effectiveness relies on the satisfaction 
and well-being of its members. People join groups to fulfill their personal needs, so effec￾tiveness is partly measured by this need fulfillment. Third, team effectiveness includes the 
ability and motivation of team members to remain together long enough to accomplish 
the assigned goals. Even temporary teams have been known to fall apart literally (people 
refuse to join or stay with the team) or cognitively (members become emotionally disen￾gaged from the team).
Researchers have developed several models over the years to identify the features, con￾ditions, and processes that make some teams more effective than others.23 Exhibit 8.2 in￾tegrates the main components of these team effectiveness models. This exhibit is a 
meta-model because each component (team development, team cohesion, etc.) includes 
its own set of theories to explain how that component operates. Over the next few sections, 
we discuss elements of this model in some detail.
LO 8-3288 Part Three Team Processes
• Accomplish tasks
• Satisfy member needs
• Maintain team survival
Team Eectiveness
• Team development
• Team norms
• Team roles
• Team cohesion
• Team trust
• Team mental models
• Rewards
• Communication
• Organizational structure
• Organizational leadership
• Physical space
• Task characteristics
• Team size
• Team composition
Organizational and
Team Environment
Team Design
Team Processes
EXHIBIT 8.2 Team Effectiveness Model
Obeyas Support Team Decisions and 
Performanceb
Many years ago, Toyota Motor Company discovered that 
it could speed up new car design by forming a cross￾functional team and having its members meet regularly in 
an “obeya”—Japanese for “large room.” Obeyas have 
since been introduced in many organizations, including 
recently at ING Bank, Nike Europe, PSA Group (Peugeot 
Citroën), and Siemens.
A typical obeya has walls plastered with graphs and 
notes so team members can visualize progress and docu￾ment key issues on a project. At the executive level, an 
obeya serves as an operations center with key perfor￾mance metrics and strategic initiatives visualized on the 
walls. Many obeyas are now digital, so documentation 
and charts are presented on monitors around the room. 
This visual setting improves team communication, prob￾lem-solving, and performance on complex problems 
through face-to-face interaction.
“We are always looking for the best solutions to opti￾mize teamwork and that’s why we decided to adopt the 
Obeya concept,” says management at Tri-Mer Global 
Technologies, which recently designed an obeya at its 
headquarters near Milan, Italy. The global air pollution 
control systems company periodically holds brief 
stand-up meetings in the obeya, during which team mem￾bers check progress on work, find solutions to work flow 
bottlenecks, and determine tasks to be completed by the 
next meeting.
Tri-Mer lists many advantages to the obeya concept. 
“Teams learn to evaluate the voice of customers, see prob￾lems as soon as they arise, resolve problems quickly and 
efficiently in order to protect customers, create and use 
standards that improve quality and remove variability in 
their process, and collaborate with the whole organization.”
global connections 8.2
Sam Edwards/OJO Images/Getty ImagesChapter Eight Team Dynamics 289
The organizational and team environment refers to the context surrounding the team, 
such as its physical work space and organizational leadership. Team design refers to vari￾ables that, for the most part, are assigned to the team when it is created and altered 
throughout its existence. The number of people assigned to the team (team size) and the 
personal attributes these members bring to the team (team composition) are elements of 
team design, for example. Team processes are the cognitive and emotional dynamics of 
the team that continually change with its development. These processes center around the 
team’s development and the associated variables of team norms, roles, cohesion, trust, 
and shared/complementary mental models.24
ORGANIZATIONAL AND TEAM ENVIRONMENT
The organizational and team environment represents all conditions beyond the team’s 
boundaries that influence its effectiveness. The environment is typically viewed as a re￾source pool that either supports or inhibits the team’s ability to function and achieve its 
objectives.25 Teams thrive where the physical workspace encourages collaborative interac￾tion, information systems support team coordination, organizational leaders instill a cul￾ture of teamwork, and the reward system reinforces collaboration rather than competition 
among team members. Team effectiveness also benefits from an organizational structure 
that clusters work activities within the team and creates fairly distinct boundaries between 
the team and other work units.26
Team Design Elements
Even when it operates in a team-friendly environment, the team’s effectiveness will fall 
short of its potential if the task characteristics, team size, and team composition are 
poorly designed.
TASK CHARACTERISTICS
Teams are more effective than individuals in specific types of tasks.27 They are better for 
work that is too complex for any individual to perform, such as launching the business in a 
new market, developing a computer operating system, or constructing a bridge. Complex 
work requires skills and knowledge beyond one person’s abilities. Teams are particularly 
well suited for complex work that can be divided into more specialized roles, and where the 
people in those specialized roles are able to coordinate frequently with one another.
Task complexity demands teamwork, but teams work better when the work is well 
structured and predictable rather than ambiguous and unpredictable. Team members on 
an automobile assembly line have well-structured and predictable tasks. They perform 
the same set of tasks each day (low task variability—see Chapter 6) and the work is pre￾dictable enough for well-established procedures (high task analyzability). The main ben￾efit of well-structured tasks is that it is easier to coordinate the work among several 
people.
In contrast, ambiguous and unpredictable tasks are more difficult to coordinate among 
team members, which leads to higher process losses and errors. Fortunately, teams can 
still perform these less-structured and less predictable tasks reasonably well when mem￾bers are experienced in well-defined broader roles. During surgery, for example, medical 
team members know generally what to expect of one another even when unique problems 
arise.28
Task Interdependence Another task-related influence on team effectiveness is 
task interdependence—the extent to which team members must share materials, informa￾tion, or expertise to perform their jobs.29 Apart from complete independence, there are 
task interdependence
the extent to which team 
members must share materials, 
information, or expertise in 
order to perform their jobs290 Part Three Team Processes
Shared
resource
Pooled
interdependence Employee Employee Employee
Sequential
interdependence Employee Employee Employee
Reciprocal
interdependence Employee
Employee
Employee
Employee
EXHIBIT 8.3
Levels of Task Interdependence
three levels of task interdependence, as illustrated in Exhibit 8.3.30 The lowest level, called 
pooled interdependence, occurs when an employee or work unit shares machinery, techni￾cal support, financial support, or other common (pooled) resources, but otherwise oper￾ates independently from other employees or work units. A higher level of interdependence 
occurs when the output of one person or work unit becomes the direct input for another 
person or unit. This sequential interdependence typically occurs on an assembly line be￾cause each team member’s output is forwarded to the next person on the line for further 
assembly of the product or service.
Reciprocal interdependence, in which work output is exchanged back and forth among 
individuals or work units, produces the highest degree of interdependence. People who 
design a new product or service would typically have reciprocal interdependence because 
their design decisions affect others involved in the design process. Any decision made by 
the design engineers would influence the work of the manufacturing engineer and pur￾chasing specialist, and vice versa.
As a rule, the higher the level of task interdependence, the greater the need to organize 
people into teams rather than have them work alone.31 A team structure is much more im￾portant for employees with reciprocal interdependence than for those with only pooled 
interdependence. Higher task interdependence usually requires more intense coordination, 
and team structures enable better interpersonal communication than when employees 
work independently from each other or in different departments. High task interdepen￾dence also motivates most people to be part of the team and to coordinate with each other.
However, this rule has one important condition: employees with high interdependence 
should be formed into teams only when they have the same task goals, such as serving the 
same clients or collectively assembling the same product. In contrast, a team structure may 
lead to dysfunctional conflict when each member has unique goals (such as serving differ￾ent clients) even though these employees are dependent on each other to achieve those 
distinct goals. Under these circumstances, the company should try to reduce the level of 
interdependence or rely on supervision as a buffer or mediator among employees.
TEAM SIZE
What is the ideal size for a team? Online retailer Amazon relies on the “two-pizza team” 
rule, namely that a team should be small enough to be fed comfortably with two large piz￾zas. This works out to between five and seven employees. At the other extreme, a few Chapter Eight Team Dynamics 291
experts suggest that tasks are becoming so complex that many teams need to have more 
than 100 members.32 Unfortunately, the former piece of advice (two-pizza teams) is too 
simplistic, and the latter seems to have lost sight of the meaning and dynamics of real teams.
Teams should be large enough to provide the necessary abilities and viewpoints re￾quired for the assigned work, yet small enough to maintain efficient coordination and 
meaningful involvement of each member.33 The ideal team size varies with the type 
of team, the tasks it is expected to perform, and the available forms of coordination 
(see Chapter 13). Small teams (say, six members) operate effectively because they have 
less process loss. Members of smaller teams also tend to feel more engaged because they 
have more influence on the group’s norms and goals and feel more responsible for the 
team’s successes and failures. Also, members of smaller teams get to know one another 
better, which improves mutual trust as well as perceived support, help, and assistance 
from those team members.34
Should companies have 100-person teams if the task is highly complex? The answer is 
that a group this large probably isn’t a team, even if management calls it one. A team ex￾ists when its members interact and influence one another, are mutually accountable for 
achieving common goals associated with organizational objectives, and perceive them￾selves as a social entity within an organization. It is very difficult for everyone in a 100-person 
work unit to influence one another and perceive themselves as members of the same 
team. Instead, such complex projects usually consist of several teams that all coordinate 
more formally together as a large work unit.
TEAM COMPOSITION
Team effectiveness depends on the qualities of the people who are members of those 
teams.35 To begin with, a team’s performance depends on how well its members engage in 
taskwork—that is, perform task-related behaviors toward the achievement of the team’s 
objectives. Taskwork requires team members who are highly motivated, possess the re￾quired abilities, and have clear role perceptions about how and when to perform the as￾signed work (see MARS model in Chapter 1).
85% of 4,213 senior
(graduating) students at
American universities and
colleges say they are very
or extremely proficient in
teamwork/collaboration.
51% of 1,021
hiring managers say
that being team-oriented
is a top soft skill they
assess in job applicants.
81% of 25,000
employees in 1,000 companies
globally believe they have the
right people on their team.
27% of 25,000 employees
in 1,000 companies globally rate the
organization’s team-building eorts
as very good (35% rate them as poor).
77% of 201 American
employers rate recent
college graduates as
very or extremely proficient
in teamwork/collaboration.
RATING TEAMWORK BEHAVIORS IN JOB APPLICANTS AND COWORKERSc
(photo): solarseven/Shutterstock292 Part Three Team Processes
 Coordinating
• Align work with
 others
• Keep team on
 track
 Communicating
•Share information
 freely, eciently,
 respectfully
•Listen actively
 Comforting
•Show empathy
•Provide 
 emotional 
 comfort
•Build confidence
 in others
 Conflict
 Handling
•Diagnose conflict
 sources
•Use best conflict-
 handling style
 Cooperating
• Share resources
• Accommodate
 others
Eective
Team Member
Behaviors
EXHIBIT 8.4
Five Cs of Effective Teamwork 
Behaviors
Sources: Based on information in 
V. Rousseau, C. Aubé, and A. Savoie, 
“Teamwork Behaviors: A Review and 
an Integration of Frameworks,” Small 
Group Research 37, no. 5 (2006), 
540–70; M.L. Loughry, M.W. Ohland, 
and D.D. Moore, “Development of a 
Theory-Based Assessment of Team 
Member Effectiveness,” Educational 
and Psychological Measurement 67, 
no. 3 (2007), 505–24; E. Salas et al., 
“Understanding and Improving Team￾work in Organizations: A Scientifically 
Based Practical Guide,” Human 
Resource Management 54, no. 4 
(2015): 599–622.
But effective teams demand more than just individuals who perform their own jobs well. 
They also need members who are motivated, able, and have clear role perceptions about en￾gaging in teamwork behaviors.36 Teamwork behaviors maintain the team’s existence and func￾tioning. In other words, the best performing teams have members who are effective at 
performing their tasks and effective at supporting and maintaining the team’s development.
The most frequently mentioned teamwork behaviors are depicted in the “Five Cs” 
model illustrated in Exhibit 8.4. Coordinating, communicating, cooperating are mainly 
(but not entirely) about supporting team members on their task, whereas comforting and 
conflict resolving primarily maintain healthy psychological and interpersonal relation￾ships in the team.37
• Cooperating. Effective team members are willing and able to work together rather 
than alone. This includes sharing resources and being sufficiently adaptive or 
flexible to accommodate the needs and preferences of other team members, such 
as rescheduling use of machinery so that another team member with a tighter 
deadline can use it.
• Coordinating. Effective team members actively manage the team’s work so it is per￾formed efficiently and harmoniously. This includes keeping the team on track and 
helping to integrate the work performed by different members. To effectively coor￾dinate, team members must know the other team members’ work to some extent, 
not just their own.
• Communicating. Effective team members transmit information freely (rather than 
hoarding), efficiently (using the best channel and language), and respectfully 
(minimizing arousal of negative emotions).38 They also listen actively to coworkers.
• Comforting. Effective team members help coworkers maintain a positive and 
healthy psychological state. They show empathy, provide emotional comfort, and 
build coworker feelings of confidence and self-worth.
• Conflict handling. Conflict is inevitable in social settings, so effective team mem￾bers have the skills and motivation to resolve disagreements within the group. 
This involves using appropriate conflict-handling styles as well as diagnostic skills 
to identify and resolve the structural sources of conflict.Chapter Eight Team Dynamics 293
Team Diversity Diversity, another aspect of team composition, has both advan￾tages and challenges for team effectiveness.39 One advantage of diverse teams is that peo￾ple from dissimilar backgrounds tend to see a problem or opportunity from different 
angles. Team members have varied personal mental models, so diverse teams are more 
likely to identify viable solutions to difficult problems. A second advantage is that di￾verse team members have a broader pool of technical abilities to serve clients or design 
new products.
Third, diverse teams often provide better representation of the team’s constituents, 
such as other departments or clients from similarly diverse backgrounds. This representa￾tion not only brings different viewpoints to the decision; it also gives stakeholders confi￾dence that they have a voice in the team’s decision process. As we learned in Chapter 5, 
voice is an important ingredient in procedural justice, so stakeholders are more likely to 
believe the team’s decision is fair when the team mirrors the surface or deep-level diversity 
of its constituents.
Team diversity also presents a number of challenges. Employees with diverse back￾grounds take longer to become a high-performing team. This occurs partly because people 
with varied worldviews take longer to reach agreement on team goals, operational proce￾dures, team roles, and informal norms. The team development process is also slower be￾cause it takes longer to build trust with coworkers whose personal characteristics, 
experiences, and beliefs are different from one another.
A related challenge is that diverse teams are susceptible to “faultlines”—hypothetical 
dividing lines that may split a team into subgroups along gender, ethnic, professional, or 
other dimensions.40 These faultlines undermine team effectiveness by reducing the moti￾vation to communicate and coordinate with teammates on the other side of the hypotheti￾cal divisions. In contrast, members of homogeneous teams experience higher satisfaction, 
less conflict, and better interpersonal relations. As a result, homogeneous teams tend to 
be more effective on tasks requiring a high degree of cooperation and coordination, such 
as emergency response teams.
Diverse Teams Improve Investment 
Research and Adviced
Investment firms increasingly recognize that diverse 
teams are better than individuals working alone. One re￾cent study found that 70 percent of investment analyst 
research reports are now completed by teams rather than 
individuals. More important, reports prepared by teams 
had significantly more accurate earnings forecasts than 
did reports written by individual analysts. Furthermore, 
earnings forecast accuracy increased with the team’s 
diversity (educational background, sex, and level of 
experience).
Investment advisory firms also depend increasingly on 
teams because no individual has sufficient expertise to 
provide complex investment services. RBC Capital Mar￾kets chief executive Derek Neldner gives this example: “If 
you are going to offer serious coverage to a health care 
client, you need an analyst who can talk authoritatively on 
medical devices, an expert on pharmaceuticals, one on 
biotech, and so on.”
The shift from individual stars to high-performing 
teams is evident at Merrill Lynch Wealth Management. 
A decade ago, most of the company’s 15,000 financial 
advisors worked alone with their clients. Today, 77 percent 
of Merrill Lynch’s advisors work in teams. “It’s exceedingly 
rare that a single individual could deliver everything a cli￾ent needs today,” says Merrill Lynch Wealth Management 
president Andy Sieg. “When you look at what clients 
need—comprehensive advice across their financial lives—
it very quickly becomes obvious that the only way to 
deliver that is through a team.”
global connections 8.3
Gorodenkoff/Shutterstock294 Part Three Team Processes
Team Processes
Team processes comprise the third set of elements in the team effectiveness model. These 
include team development, norms, roles, cohesion, trust, and team mental models. Team 
processes are the cognitive and emotional dynamics of the team that continually change 
and improve. In other words, this section looks at the continuously evolving collective 
knowledge, beliefs, expectations, and feelings of the team as well as how those team dy￾namics influence team effectiveness.41
TEAM DEVELOPMENT
Team development is at the heart of team processes because the other processes—shaping 
norms, roles, cohesion, trust, and mental models—are embedded in team development. 
Team members resolve several issues and pass through several stages of development be￾fore emerging as an optimally effective work unit. They need to get to know and trust one 
another, understand and agree on their respective roles, discover appropriate and inap￾propriate behaviors (norms), develop mutual understanding of the team’s objectives and 
their coordination in that process (team mental models), and develop a strong bond with 
the team and its members (cohesion).
Numerous team development models have been proposed over the past half century.42
The model shown in Exhibit 8.5 is the most popular and captures the complexity of the 
team development processes better than most.43 The diagram shows teams moving 
LO 8-4
Adjourning
• Task oriented, committed
• Ecient coordination
• High cooperation and trust
• Conflicts resolved quickly
Performing
• Establish roles
• Agree on team objectives
• Form team mental models
• Develop cohesion
Norming
• Interpersonal conflict
• Compete for team roles
• Influence goals and means
• Establish norms
Storming
• Discover expectations
• Evaluate value of membership
• Defer to existing authority
• Test boundaries of behavior
Forming
EXHIBIT 8.5 Stages of Team DevelopmentChapter Eight Team Dynamics 295
systematically from one stage to the next, while the dashed lines illustrate that teams 
might—and often do—fall back to an earlier stage of development as new members join or 
other conditions disrupt the team’s maturity.
Forming, the first stage of team development, is a period of testing and orientation in 
which members learn about one another and evaluate the benefits and costs of continued 
membership. People tend to be polite, will defer to authority, and try to find out what is 
expected of them and how they will fit into the team. The storming stage is marked by in￾terpersonal conflict as members become more proactive and compete for various team 
roles. Members also try to establish norms of appropriate behavior and performance 
standards.
During the norming stage, the team develops its first real sense of cohesion as roles are 
established and a consensus forms around group objectives and shared and complemen￾tary mental models. By the performing stage, team members have learned to efficiently 
coordinate and resolve conflicts. In high-performance teams, members are highly coop￾erative, have a high level of trust in one another, identify with the team, and have func￾tional shared mental models of group objectives and work processes. Finally, the 
adjourning stage occurs when the team is about to disband. Team members shift their 
attention away from task orientation to a relationship focus.
This model depicts team development fairly well because it identifies and incorporates 
all of the other team processes. It recognizes that team members become cohesive, de￾velop norms to guide behavior, assign roles, form team mental models, and develop trust 
in one another. However, the model is not a perfect representation of team development.44
It does not show that some teams remain in a particular stage longer than others and does 
not explain why teams sometimes regress back to earlier stages of development. Perhaps 
most important, this model does not explain the intricacies of how norms, cohesion, men￾tal models, and other team dynamics evolve (sometimes rapidly, sometimes slowly) over 
time. Fortunately, these team processes are explained by separate theories. The remainder 
of this section describes each of these, beginning with team norms.
TEAM NORMS
Norms are the informal rules and shared expectations that groups establish to regulate the 
behavior of their members. They apply only to behavior, not to private thoughts or feel￾ings. Furthermore, norms exist only for behaviors that are important to the team.45 The 
team development model in Exhibit 8.5 suggests that team norms develop during the 
storming stage, likely because conflict often occurs when members try to reach agree￾ment on what behavior is expected or forbidden. However, it is more accurate to say that 
norms begin as soon as the team forms and that some norms continue to change over the 
team’s lifespan.
Teams develop norms for a few reasons. First, most norms develop when members as￾sociate these behaviors with the team’s performance or the well-being of its members. The 
perceived value of norms motivates members to enact them as well as influence others to 
do the same.46 Some norms originate from a critical incident; for instance, a norm of 
wearing safety glasses emerges after a team member is seriously hurt from not wearing 
them. Other norms are brought into the team due to experiences that some members have 
had in previous teams.47
Second, team norms develop because they improve predictability and conflict-avoidance 
in coworker relations. Newcomers, for instance, try to fit in with the group by actively 
discovering and behaving consistently with the team’s norms. Third, teams develop 
norms to routinize behavior with minimal cognitive effort, which improves social order 
and coordination among team members. This explains why norms often develop regarding 
seemingly minor issues, such as where people sit in meetings.
An important feature of team norms is that they are enforced.48 Coworkers display 
their displeasure if we are absent from work too often or don’t have our part of a project 
norms
the informal rules and shared 
expectations that groups 
establish to regulate the 
behavior of their members296 Part Three Team Processes
completed on time. Norms are also directly reinforced through praise from high-status 
members and easier access to valued resources. These forms of peer pressure and rein￾forcement can occur even when team members work remotely from one another. But 
team members often conform to prevailing norms without direct reinforcement or punish￾ment because they identify with the group and want to align their behavior with the team’s 
expectations. The more closely the person’s social identity is connected to the group, the 
more the individual is motivated to obey the team’s norms.49
Developing and Changing Team Norms One of the best ways to establish 
desired norms in new teams is to select team members whose values and past behavior are 
compatible with those norms. Teams are also more likely to establish norms that the 
leader clearly states and justifies when the team is formed. As an example, if organiza￾tional leaders want their teams to have strong safety norms, they should clearly state the 
importance of safety during the team’s first few meetings.
For existing teams, research indicates that leaders have the capacity to remove dys￾functional norms by cautioning team members against these behaviors. They can also 
introduce desired norms through ongoing coaching of team members.50 Another sug￾gestion that works sometimes (but not always) is to introduce team-based rewards that 
reinforce desired norms and counteract dysfunctional norms. Finally, if dysfunctional 
norms are deeply ingrained and the previous solutions don’t work, it may be necessary 
to disband the group and form a new team whose members have more appropriate 
norms.
TEAM ROLES
Cisco Systems, which was described in the opening case study to this chapter, discovered 
that the most successful teams had members who felt their roles were compatible with 
their self-concept and personal strengths. To nurture this, the technology company en￾courages employees to complete a confidential online self-reflection tool that identifies 
which two or three of nine informal roles (Advisor, Connector, Creator, etc.) are best 
suited to their personality and preferences. A role is a set of behaviors that people are ex￾pected to perform because they hold specific formal or informal positions in a team and 
organization.51 Roles are similar to norms in the sense that they both establish and rein￾force expected patterns of behavior. However, most norms apply to all team members 
whereas a role typically applies to one or a few specific team members.
Forming and reinforcing team roles is an inherent part of the team development pro￾cess. Some roles are formally assigned to individuals when the team is created (as part of 
team design in the team effectiveness model). For example, most teams have a leader, 
and that person is expected to help clarify task responsibilities, ensure that everyone 
has an opportunity to present their views in meetings, and so forth. However, many roles 
are adopted informally as the team develops. Informal roles are shared, but many are 
eventually associated with specific team members through subtle positioning and 
negotiation. In many cases, employees are attracted to roles that suit their personality 
and values. In other cases, team members encourage specific coworkers to take on se￾lected roles.
Several experts have tried to categorize the wide variety of team roles.52 One recent 
model, shown in Exhibit 8.6, integrates categories from several previous studies into six 
roles: organizer, doer, challenger, innovator, team builder, and connector. More broadly, 
most team roles focus on either task performance (taskwork) or team maintenance (team￾work). Taskwork roles might include coordinating the team, providing constructive cri￾tique of the team’s plans, and motivating team members when effort is lagging. Teamwork 
roles might include providing emotional support when the team is frustrated, maintaining 
harmony among team members, and creating opportunities for social interaction among 
team members.
role
a set of behaviors that people 
are expected to repeatedly 
perform because they hold 
formal or informal positions in 
a team and organizationChapter Eight Team Dynamics 297
TEAM COHESION
Another team process is team cohesion, which refers to the degree of attraction people 
feel toward the team and their motivation to remain members. A team has high cohesion 
when its members are attracted to the team, take ownership of the team’s success, make 
the team part of their self-concept, are committed to the team’s goals or tasks, and feel a 
collective sense of team pride.53 Thus, team cohesion is an emotional experience, not just 
a calculation of whether to stay or leave the team.
Influences on Team Cohesion Six of the most important influences on team 
cohesion are described below. Some of these conditions strengthen the individual’s iden￾tity with the team; others strengthen the individual’s belief that team membership will 
fulfill personal needs.
• Member similarity. A well-established research finding is that we are attracted more 
to coworkers who are similar to us.54 This similarity-attraction effect occurs because 
we assume that people are more trustworthy and more likely to accept us if they look 
and act like us. We also believe that these similar others will create fewer conflicts and 
violations of our expectations. Thus, teams have higher cohesion or become cohesive 
more quickly when members are similar to one another. In contrast, high cohesion 
is more difficult and takes longer in teams with diverse members. This difficulty varies 
with the form of diversity, however. Teams consisting of people from different job 
groups seem to get together just as well as teams of people from the same job.55
• Team size. Smaller teams tend to have more cohesion than larger teams. One 
reason is that it is easier for a few people to agree on goals and coordinate work 
activities. Another reason is that members have more influence in smaller teams, 
so they feel a greater sense of involvement and ownership in the team. However, 
small teams have less cohesion when they lack enough qualified members to 
perform the required tasks.
EXHIBIT 8.6
Examples of Team Roles
Source: Based on information in J.E. 
Mathieu et al., “Team Role Experience 
and Orientation: A Measure and 
Tests of Construct Validity,” Group 
& Organization Management 40 
(February 2015): 6–34.
ROLE DESCRIPTION
Organizer Structures what the team is doing. Keeps track of the team’s progress and 
achievements relative to goals and timelines.
Doer Accepts tasks, reliably completes work, and meets deadlines to ensure the team’s 
success. 
Challenger Pushes the team to explore all aspects of a situation and to consider alternative 
assumptions, explanations, and solutions. Comfortable debating, critiquing, and 
asking “why” current practices exist.
Innovator Regularly generates new and creative ideas, strategies, and approaches for how 
the team can handle various situations and challenges.
Team builder Establishes norms, supports decisions, and maintains a positive ambience within 
the team. Calms members when they are stressed, and motivates them when they 
are discouraged.
Connector Boundary spanner who helps bridge and connect the team with stakeholders 
outside of the team. Ensures good working relationships between the team and 
people outside the team
®
SELF-ASSESSMENT 8.2: What Team Roles Do You Prefer?
team cohesion
the degree of attraction 
people feel toward the team 
and their motivation to remain 
members298 Part Three Team Processes
• Member interaction. Teams tend to have more cohesion when their members inter￾act with one another fairly regularly. More frequent interaction occurs when team 
members perform highly interdependent tasks and work in the same physical area, 
or at least communicate remotely through channels with high social presence.
• Somewhat difficult entry. Teams tend to have more cohesion when entry to the team 
is restricted. The more elite the team, the more prestige it confers on its members, 
and the more they tend to value their membership in the unit. At the same time, 
research suggests that severe initiations can weaken team cohesion because of the 
adverse effects of humiliation, even for those who successfully endure the initiation.56
• Team success. Team cohesion increases with the team’s level of success because 
people are attracted to groups that fulfill their needs and goals.57 Furthermore, in￾dividuals are more likely to identify with successful teams than with teams that of￾ten fail to achieve their goals.
• External competition and challenges. Teams tend to have more cohesion when they 
face external competition or a challenging objective that is important. Employees 
value their membership on the team because of its ability to overcome the threat 
or competition and as a form of social support. However, cohesion can dissipate 
when external challenges overwhelm the team and threaten its success or viability.58
Consequences of Team Cohesion Teams with higher cohesion tend to per￾form better than those with lower cohesion.59 In fact, the team’s existence depends on 
some level of cohesion because it motivates team members to remain and to achieve the 
team’s objectives. Employees in highly cohesive teams spend more time together, share 
information more frequently, and are more satisfied with one another. They provide better 
social support in stressful situations and work to minimize dysfunctional conflict.60 When 
conflict does arise, members of highly cohesive teams tend to resolve their differences 
swiftly and effectively.
Communal Meals Build Team 
Cohesione
When Patrick Mathieu became a firefighter at the Fire 
Rescue Department in Waterloo, Ontario, Canada, he 
soon learned that communal meals support the team’s co￾hesion and trust. “In the fire service, we pride ourselves 
on teamwork and unity,” says Mathieu (second from right 
in this photo). “Eating and cooking is part of our firefighter 
culture and I have seen the immense team-building ben￾efits that result from a platoon cooking together.”
A recent study supports Mathieu’s observations. It 
found that fire stations in the United States where the 
team usually ate together performed better than stations 
where firefighters ate alone. The higher performance was 
attributed to better cooperation, trust, and other out￾comes of high cohesion.
Mathieu has become a popular chef at his fire station 
in Waterloo and has become nationally recognized for his 
firehouse recipes. Mathieu notes that the favorite dishes 
involve the entire crew in its preparation. “With everyone 
in the kitchen, we talk, laugh, joke and create something 
special together,” he says. “It brings us in for bonding, just 
like a family dinner.” But Mathieu warns that there is one 
risk of cooking great meals in a fire station. “You make the 
call for everyone to come to dinner. Boom—the alarm 
goes off. Yep, the meal sits and waits until we come back.”
global connections 8.4
©Waterloo firefighter and The FireHouse Chef Cookbook author Patrick 
Mathieu, @stationhousecco, stationhouseChapter Eight Team Dynamics 299
Team norms
support
company
goals
Low Team
cohesion
High
Team norms
conflict with
company
goals
Moderately
high task
performance
Moderately
low task
performance
High task
performance
Low task
performance
EXHIBIT 8.7
Effect of Team Cohesion on Task 
Performance
The relationship between team cohesion and team performance depends on two condi￾tions, however. First, team cohesion has less effect on team performance when the team 
has low task interdependence.61 High cohesion motivates employees to coordinate and 
cooperate with other team members. But cooperation and coordination are less critical 
when the team members don’t depend on each other to perform their jobs (low task inter￾dependence), so the motivational effect of high cohesion is less relevant under those 
conditions.
Second, the effect of cohesion on team performance depends on whether the team’s 
norms are aligned or conflict with organizational objectives.62 As Exhibit 8.7 illustrates, 
teams with high cohesion perform better when their norms support the company’s goals, 
whereas higher cohesion can potentially reduce team performance when norms are coun￾terproductive. This effect occurs because cohesion motivates employees to perform at a 
level more consistent with team norms. If a team’s norm tolerates or encourages absentee￾ism, employees will be more motivated to take unjustified sick leave. If the team’s norm 
discourages absenteeism, employees are less motivated to take sick leave.
One last comment about team cohesion and performance: Earlier in this section we 
stated that team success (performance) increases cohesion, whereas we are now saying 
that team cohesion causes team performance. Both statements are correct. Teams with 
higher cohesion perform better, and teams with better performance become more cohe￾sive. Which direction is stronger? A major review of previous studies reports that in estab￾lished teams (i.e., typical of teams in most organizations), cohesion affects team 
performance much more than team performance affects cohesion. Only lab experiments 
that studied short-lived student teams found that both directions were equal. Student 
teams typically begin with fairly low cohesion.63
TEAM TRUST
Any relationship—including the relationship among team members—depends on some de￾gree of trust.64 Trust refers to positive expectations one person has toward another person 
in situations involving risk (see Chapter 4). Trust is ultimately perceptual; we trust others 
on the basis of our beliefs about their ability, integrity, and benevolence. Trust is also an 
emotional event; we experience positive feelings toward those we trust.65
Trust is built on three foundations in a hierarchy from lowest to highest: calculus, 
knowledge, and identification (see Exhibit 8.8).66 Calculus-based trust represents a logical 
calculation that other team members will act appropriately because they face sanctions if 
their actions violate reasonable expectations.67 It offers the lowest potential trust and is 
trust
positive expectations 
one person has toward 
another person in situations 
involving risk300 Part Three Team Processes
easily broken by a violation of expectations. Some scholars suggest that calculus-based 
trust is not interpersonal trust at all. Instead, it might be trust in the system rather than in 
the other person. In any event, calculus-based trust alone cannot sustain a team’s relation￾ship because it relies on deterrence.
Knowledge-based trust is based on the predictability of another team member’s behav￾ior. This predictability refers only to “positive expectations”—as the definition of trust 
states—because you would not trust someone who tends to engage in harmful or dysfunc￾tional behavior. Knowledge-based trust includes our confidence in the other person’s 
abilities, such as the confidence that exists when we trust a physician. It also includes 
perceptions of the other person’s reliability and consistency in performing good deeds or 
enacting their values.68 Knowledge-based trust offers a higher potential level of trust than 
calculus-based trust and it is more stable because it develops over time.
Identification-based trust is based on mutual understanding and an emotional bond 
among team members. It occurs when team members think, feel, and act like one another. 
High-performance teams exhibit this level of trust because they share the same values and 
mental models. Identification-based trust is potentially the strongest and most robust of 
all three types of trust.69 The individual’s self-concept is based partly on membership in 
the team whose members hold similar values, so any transgressions by other team mem￾bers are quickly forgiven. People are more reluctant to acknowledge a violation of this 
high-level trust because it strikes at the heart of their self-concept.
Identification￾based trust
High
Type of Trust Description
Low
Potential
level of
trust
Knowledge￾based trust
• Based on predictability and competence
• Fairly robust
• Based on common mental models and values
• Increases with person’s social identity 
 with team
Calculus￾based trust
• Based on deterrence
• Fragile and limited potential because
 dependent on punishment
EXHIBIT 8.8
Three Foundations of Trust in 
Teams
®
SELF-ASSESSMENT 8.3: How Trusting Are You?
Dynamics of Team Trust Employees typically join a team with a moderate or high 
level—not a low level—of trust in their new coworkers.70 The main explanation why people 
have high trust (called swift trust) at the outset is that they usually believe fellow team 
members are reasonably competent (knowledge-based trust) and they tend to develop 
some degree of social identity with the team (identification-based trust). Even when work￾ing with strangers, most employees display some level of trust, if only because it supports 
their self-view of being a good person. However, trust is fragile in new relationships be￾cause it is based on assumptions rather than well-established experience.71 Studies report 
that trust tends to decrease rather than increase over time. This is unfortunate because 
employees become less forgiving and less cooperative toward others as their level of trust 
decreases, which damages both teamwork and taskwork.Chapter Eight Team Dynamics 301
TEAM MENTAL MODELS
Mental models are visual and relational images in our mind that we develop to describe, 
explain, and predict the world around us (see Chapter 3). Team mental models are cogni￾tive images that team members form about the team’s tasks, relationship dynamics, and 
knowledge repository.72 Team members have both shared and complementary mental 
models. As a team matures, its members form shared mental models, meaning that they 
develop similar images and expectations about the team’s objectives, shared values, behav￾ior norms, and work style, as well as a general picture of how each member participates in 
the work process.
Complementary mental models are cognitive images held by specific (rather than all) 
team members but that are compatible with the mental models held by other team mem￾bers. Each team member has a unique mental picture of how the team operates because 
they have a unique background and are located in different parts of the work process than 
other team members. For example, an engineering team member would view customers 
somewhat differently from how the marketing person on that team views customers. In 
successful teams, each member’s mental model operates in harmony with the unique 
mental models of other team members.
Shared and complementary mental models enable team members to establish effective 
coordinating routines.73 In high-performing teams, each member develops habitual work 
practices that coordinate almost automatically with the behaviors and expectations of 
other members. This alignment of mental images and predictions also supports the per￾ception that the group is a functioning social entity with meaningful purpose and perfor￾mance capabilities.
Team mental models also guide employees to where knowledge is located within the 
team.74 Members of cross-functional teams, for instance, have diverse knowledge and skills 
(production, legal, marketing, technology, etc.) that are collectively applied to achieve the 
team’s objectives. To make better decisions or serve clients well, team members often need 
to consult with coworkers who possesses specific skills and knowledge. This awareness of 
the team’s diverse knowledge repository is therefore a vital part of team mental models.
IMPROVING TEAMS THROUGH TEAM BUILDING
Teams require time to become cohesive, form productive norms, assign roles, build trust, 
and form effective mental models. Team building consists of activities that attempt to 
speed up or improve these team development processes.75
As we have emphasized throughout this section, team development consists of several 
diverse team processes. Therefore, not surprisingly, there are several types of team build￾ing to serve different processes. Some team-building interventions are task-focused. They 
clarify the team’s performance goals, increase the team’s motivation to accomplish these 
goals, and establish a mechanism for systematic feedback on the team’s goal performance. 
A second type of team building focuses on improving the team’s problem-solving skills.
A third team building category clarifies and reconstructs each member’s perception of 
their role as well as the role expectations that member has of other team members. Role 
definition team building also helps the team to develop shared and complementary men￾tal models, such as how to interact with clients, maintain machinery, and engage in meet￾ings.76 A fourth—and likely the most popular—type of team building is aimed at helping 
team members to improve interpersonal relations, such as building trust in each other and 
becoming a more cohesive team.77 Popular interventions such as wilderness team activi￾ties, paintball wars, and obstacle-course challenges are intended to support these team 
processes.
Do team building interventions support team development and associated processes? 
The answer is that all four types of team building are potentially effective, but some inter￾ventions work better than others and in some situations more than others.78 Goal setting 
tends to be the most successful type of team building, although role clarification and 
mental models
visual and relational images 
that we develop to describe, 
explain, and predict the world 
around us302 Part Three Team Processes
adventure programs (to improve interpersonal relations) are also effective to some extent. 
Interventions are also more successful when they focus on one rather than multiple team￾building objectives.
However, many team-building interventions fall short of their potential.79 One problem 
is that these activities are often applied as a general solution without adequately diagnos￾ing the specific issues that need to be addressed to improve team effectiveness. Team 
building also tends to be applied as a one-shot jump start for a newly-formed team, 
whereas it should be an ongoing process throughout the team’s existence.80 Finally, we 
must remember that team building occurs on the job, not just on an obstacle course or in 
a national park. Organizations should encourage team members to reflect on their work 
experiences and to experiment with just-in-time learning for team development.
Self-Directed Teams
Buurtzorg Nederland employs almost 15,000 professionals (mostly registered nurses) in 
more than 1,000 self-directed teams across the Netherlands and other countries. “Self￾managing teams have professional freedom with responsibility,” says Buurtzorg’s website. 
Each self-directed team consists of up to 12 nurses responsible for between 50 and 
60 home-care patients, most of whom are elderly, disabled, or terminally ill. Each team 
has autonomy to organize the work, make decisions, and build its own caseload of new 
clients. Performance is measured at the team level, including patient satisfaction, work 
efficiency, and cost savings. Independent studies report that Buurtzorg’s self-directed 
teams are significantly more cost-efficient than traditional (mostly non-team) services by 
competitors. Employees also enjoy the team structure.81
Buurtzorg Nederland is a global model of an organization designed around self￾directed teams. Self-directed teams (SDTs) are cross-functional groups organized around 
work processes that complete an entire piece of work requiring several interdependent 
tasks and have substantial autonomy over the execution of 
those tasks.82 This definition captures two distinct features of 
SDTs. First, these teams complete an entire piece of work re￾quiring several interdependent tasks. Employees within a team 
are clustered together with minimal interdependence or interac￾tion with people outside the team. The result is a close-knit 
group of employees who depend on one another to accomplish 
the team’s work objectives. The second distinctive feature of 
SDTs is that they have substantial autonomy over the execution 
of their tasks. In particular, these teams plan, organize, and 
control work activities with little or no direct involvement of a 
higher-status supervisor.
Self-directed teams are found in several industries, ranging 
from aircraft engine manufacturing to home-care nursing ser￾vices. Most of the top-rated manufacturing firms in North 
America apparently rely on SDTs.83 Indeed, self-directed teams 
have become such an established way to organize employees 
that many companies don’t realize they have them. The popu￾larity of SDTs is consistent with research indicating that they 
potentially increase both productivity and job satisfaction.84
For instance, one study found that car dealership service shops 
with SDTs were significantly more profitable than shops where 
employees worked without a team structure. In another study, 
both short- and long-term measures of customer satisfaction in￾creased after street cleaners in a German city were organized 
into SDTs.
LO 8-5
self-directed teams (SDTs)
cross-functional work groups 
that are organized around work 
processes, complete an entire 
piece of work requiring several 
interdependent tasks, and have 
substantial autonomy over the 
execution of those tasks
GE’s (General Electric’s) aviation plant in Bromont, Quebec, Canada, 
manufactures parts for the world’s most sophisticated aircraft engines 
for Boeing, Airbus, and other aerospace firms. It is also a world leader 
in automation and robotics. But you won’t find any managers on the 
plant floor. For the past three decades, the Bromont plant has relied on 
self-directed teams to get the work done. Production planning, 
manufacturing process improvements, vacation schedules, and other 
managerial decisions are determined by the teams themselves. “We 
say we need x output, and then [production teams] are left to decide, 
how do they get all that done?” explains a GE Bromont human 
resources leader. “That’s how a full teaming system works.”f
Aviation Images Ltd/Alamy Stock PhotoChapter Eight Team Dynamics 303
SUCCESS FACTORS FOR SELF-DIRECTED TEAMS
The success of self-directed teams depends on several factors.85 SDTs should be responsible 
for an entire work process, such as making an entire product or providing a service. This 
structure keeps each team sufficiently independent from other teams, yet it demands a 
relatively high degree of interdependence among employees within the team.86 SDTs should 
also have sufficient autonomy to organize and coordinate their work. Autonomy allows them 
to respond more quickly and effectively to client and stakeholder demands. It also increases 
intrinsic motivation among team members. Finally, SDTs are more successful when the work 
site and technology support coordination and communication among team members. 
Too often, management calls a group of employees a “team,” yet the work layout, assembly￾line structure, and other technologies isolate the employees from one another.
Remote Teams
Chapter 1 described how remote work—performing work from home or other nonbusiness 
sites—has become a common arrangement in most organizations, particularly since the 
COVID-19 pandemic. Most employees work in teams for some or all of their tasks, so the 
increasing popularity of remote work has produced more remote teams.
Remote teams (also known as distributed or virtual teams) are teams whose mem￾bers operate across space, time, and organizational boundaries and are linked through 
information technologies to achieve organizational tasks.87 Remote teams differ from 
traditional teams in two ways: (1) one or more members work remotely at least some 
of the time rather than always being colocated (working in the same physical area as 
coworkers), and (2) due to their lack of colocation, members of remote teams depend 
on information technologies in addition to or instead of 
face-to-face interaction to communicate and coordinate their 
work effort.
Teams vary in their degree of remoteness. Team remoteness 
increases with the geographic dispersion of team members, per￾centage of members who work apart (aren’t colocated), and 
percentage of time that members work apart.88 For example, a 
team has minimal remoteness when most of its members work 
in the same physical location most days and only one or two 
work from home occasionally. High remoteness exists when 
team members are spread around the world and few members 
have met the others in person.
The social distancing and self-isolation requirements dur￾ing the COVID-19 pandemic made remote teams more com￾monplace. However, these teams were gaining popularity in 
organizations many years earlier. One reason is that an in￾creasing percentage of employees perform knowledge work 
(rather than physical production work), which enables them 
to do their job from almost anywhere. Second, information 
technologies have made it easier than ever to communicate 
and coordinate remotely with other knowledge workers.89 A 
third reason is the increasing recognition that the organiza￾tion’s competitive advantage is its human capital—the knowl￾edge, skills, abilities, creativity, and other valued resources 
that employees bring to the organization. Leveraging the po￾tential of human capital typically occurs through teams, many 
of which have degrees of remoteness because staff members 
are distributed across several cities and countries.
LO 8-6
remote teams
teams whose members 
operate across space, time, 
and organizational boundaries 
and are linked through 
information technologies to 
achieve organizational tasks
Automattic is a completely remote (distributed) organization. The open￾source software developer has no physical head office and all of its 
1,800 employees work in remote teams from their home locations in 
94 countries. These teams have extreme remoteness, yet they work 
effectively partly by gathering face-to-face at least twice each year. Every 
remote team meets for several days somewhere “from Boulder to Buenos 
Aires . . . to brainstorm team-level strategy and bond.” The entire company 
also congregates for an annual week-long gathering called Grand Meetup. 
Automattic encourages networking throughout the Grand Meetup by 
assigning employees to eat with different coworkers at each meal. 
A statistical analysis revealed that after attending a recent Grand Meetup 
new hires formed strong network ties and current employees expanded 
their connections with coworkers in other networks around the company.j
Ramiro Agustin Vargas Tabares/ZUMA Press, Inc./Alamy Stock Photo304 Part Three Team Processes
SUCCESS FACTORS FOR REMOTE TEAMS
Remote teams face all the challenges of traditional teams, compounded by problems aris￾ing from time and distance. These challenges increase with the team’s remoteness, par￾ticularly when it exists for only a short time.90 Fortunately, OB research has identified the 
following strategies to minimize most remote team problems.91 First, remote team mem￾bers need to apply the effective team behaviors (the five Cs) described earlier in this 
chapter. They also require good communication technology skills, strong self-leadership 
skills to motivate and guide their behavior without peers or bosses nearby, and better 
emotional intelligence to decipher the feelings of other team members from text messages 
and other limited communication media.
Second, remote teams should have a toolkit of communication channels (messaging, 
online whiteboards, videoconferencing, etc.) as well as the freedom to choose the chan￾nels that work best for them.92 This recommendation may seem obvious, but unfortu￾nately senior management tends to impose technology on remote teams and expects team 
members to use the same communication technology throughout their work. In contrast, 
research suggests that communication channels gain and lose importance over time, de￾pending on the task and level of trust.
Third, remote teams need plenty of structure. In one review, many of the principles for 
successful remote teams related mostly to creating these structures, such as clear opera￾tional objectives, documented work processes, and agreed-on roles and responsibilities.93
The final recommendation is that remote team members should meet face-to-face fairly 
early in the team development process. This idea may seem contradictory to the entire 
notion of remote teams, but so far, no technology has replaced face-to-face interaction for 
high-level bonding and mutual understanding.94
debating point
ARE REMOTE TEAMS MORE TROUBLE THAN THEY’RE WORTH?
Remote teams were rare before the Internet. Today, they are almost as 
commonplace as face-to-face teams. To some extent, remote teams 
have even become “cool.” But whether they are stylish or common￾place, remote teams seem to be increasingly necessary for an organi￾zation’s competitive advantage. In spite of the importance of remote 
teams, there are a few arguments against them.g
 Critics don’t deny the 
potential value of creating these teams. Rather, they have calculated 
that the negative outcomes outweigh the benefits. Just before the 
pandemic, a few organizations even curtailed the extent that employees 
were allowed to work remotely because of possible problems with 
their physical absence from the workplace.
One persistent problem is that remote teams lack the richness of 
face-to-face communication. We’ll provide more detail about this 
important matter in Chapter 9, but no information technology to date 
offers the same degree of social presence or information richness as 
communication among people located in the same room.
Another problem is that trust among remote team members is ei￾ther lower or more fragile compared with colocated team members.h
 In 
fact, experts offer one main recommendation to increase trust among 
remote team members—have them spend time together as colocated 
teams.
A third drawback with remote teams is that the farther away people are 
located, the more they differ in experiences, beliefs, culture, and expecta￾tions. These differences can be advantageous for some decisions, of course, 
but they can also be a curse for team development and performance.
Here’s one more reason why companies should think twice before 
relying on remote teams: People seem to have less influence or control 
over distant coworkers than over colocated coworkers. A team mem￾ber who stops by your cubicle to ask how your part of the report is 
coming along has much more effect than an impersonal—or even a 
flaming—text message from afar.
Perhaps that is why surveys reveal less satisfaction with remote 
team members than colocated team members.i
 Remote employees be￾lieve other team members are less willing to support them and more 
likely to say bad things behind their back compared to colocated co￾workers. Remote workers also receive two to three times as many com￾plaints as colocated colleagues about working ineffectively (falling 
behind on projects, missing deadlines, etc.).Chapter Eight Team Dynamics 305
Team Decision Making
Self-directed teams, remote teams, and practically all other groups are expected to make 
decisions. Under specific conditions, teams are more effective than individuals at identify￾ing problems, choosing alternatives, and evaluating their decisions. To leverage these ben￾efits, however, we first need to understand the constraints on effective team decision 
making. Then, we look at specific team structures that try to overcome these constraints.
CONSTRAINTS ON TEAM DECISION MAKING
Anyone who has spent enough time in the workplace can recite several ways in which 
teams stumble in decision making. The four most common problems are time constraints, 
evaluation apprehension, pressure to conform, and overconfidence.
Time Constraints Committees keep minutes and waste hours. This age-old saying 
reflects the fact that teams take longer than individuals to make decisions.95 Teams con￾sume time organizing, coordinating, and maintaining relationships (i.e., process losses). 
Team members require time to build rapport, agree on rules and norms of behavior in the 
decision process, and understand one another’s ideas.
Another time-related constraint in most team structures is that only one person can 
speak at a time.96 This problem, known as production blocking, undermines idea generation 
in a few ways. First, team members need to listen in on the conversation to find an oppor￾tune time to speak up, but this monitoring makes it difficult for them to concentrate on their 
own ideas. Second, ideas are fleeting, so the longer participants wait to speak up, the more 
likely their flickering ideas will die out. Third, team members might remember their fleeting 
thoughts by concentrating on them, but this causes them to pay less attention to the conver￾sation. By ignoring what others are saying, team members miss other potentially good ideas.
Evaluation Apprehension People are often reluctant to mention ideas that seem 
silly because they believe (often correctly) that others in the decision-making group are si￾lently evaluating them.97 This evaluation apprehension is based on the individual’s desire to 
create a favorable public image and need to protect self-esteem. It is most common in meet￾ings attended by people with different levels of status or expertise or when members for￾mally evaluate one another’s performance throughout the year (as in 360-degree 
feedback). Creative ideas often sound bizarre or illogical when first presented, so evaluation 
apprehension tends to discourage employees from mentioning them in front of coworkers.
Pressure to Conform Team cohesion motivates employees to conform to the 
team’s norms. This control keeps the group organized around common goals, but it may 
also cause team members to suppress their dissenting opinions, particularly when a strong 
team norm is related to the issue. When someone does state a point of view that violates 
the majority opinion, other members might punish the violator or try to persuade them 
that the opinion is incorrect. Conformity can also be subtle. To some extent, we depend 
on the opinions that others hold to validate our own views. If coworkers don’t agree with 
us, we begin to question our own opinions even without overt peer pressure.
Overconfidence (Inflated Team Efficacy) To some degree, teams are more success￾ful when their members have collective confidence in how well they work together and the likely 
success of their team effort.98
This team efficacy is similar 
to individual self-efficacy, 
which we discussed in Chap￾ter 3. High-efficacy teams set 
more challenging goals and 
are more motivated to 
achieve them, both of which 
increase team performance.
LO 8-7
production blocking
a time constraint in team 
decision making due to the 
procedural requirement that 
only one person may speak at 
a time
evaluation apprehension
occurs when individuals are 
reluctant to mention ideas that 
seem silly because they believe 
(often correctly) that others in 
the decision-making group are 
silently evaluating them
team efficacy
the collective belief among 
team members in the team’s 
capability to successfully 
complete a task306 Part Three Team Processes
Unfortunately, there is a curvilinear relationship between team efficacy and the quality 
of team decisions (as well as other forms of team performance). In other words, teams 
make worse decisions when they are overconfident as well as underconfident.99 Overcon￾fident teams are less vigilant when making decisions, partly because they have more posi￾tive than negative emotions and moods during these events (see Chapter 7). They also 
engage in less constructive debate and are less likely to seek out or accept information 
located outside the team, both of which undermine the quality of team decisions.
Why do teams become overconfident? The main reason is a team-level variation of self￾enhancement (see Chapter 3); team members have a natural tendency to believe the 
team’s capabilities and situation are above average. Overconfidence is more common in 
highly cohesive teams because self-enhancement occurs for things that are important, and 
the team is important to people in cohesive teams. Overconfidence is also stronger when 
the team has external threats or competition because these adversaries generate “us ver￾sus them” differentiation. Team efficacy is further inflated by the mutually reinforcing 
beliefs of the team. We develop a clearer and higher opinion of the team when other team 
members echo that opinion.
IMPROVING DECISION MAKING AND CREATIVITY IN TEAMS
Team decision making is fraught with problems, but there are several ways to minimize 
these pitfalls. Checks and balances need to be in place to prevent the leader or other indi￾viduals from dominating the discussion. The team should also be large enough to possess 
the collective knowledge to resolve the problem yet small enough to avoid consuming too 
much time or restrict individual input. Team members should be confident in their deci￾sion making but also be wary about being overconfident. This calls for team norms that 
encourage critical thinking as well as team membership with sufficient diversity.
Another important ingredient for effective team decision making is an environment in 
which team members have psychological safety.100 Psychological safety is a shared belief 
that engaging in interpersonal risk-taking will not have adverse consequences. This belief 
exists when employees are confident that they can constructively disagree with the major￾ity, present weird ideas, or experiment with novel behaviors without fear that coworkers 
will belittle them or that the company will limit their career progress. Psychological safety 
requires team norms that encourage employees to respect and value one another, demon￾strate interest in one another, be open-minded about and tolerant with coworkers’ opin￾ions, and show positive intentions toward one another. Showing positive intentions 
involves displaying positive emotions and nonthreatening behavior when discussing differ￾ent points of view.
These recommendations improve most types of team-level decisions. OB studies have 
also identified four team structures that encourage creativity in a team setting: brain￾storming, brainwriting, electronic brainstorming, and nominal group technique.
Brainstorming Brainstorming is a team event in 
which participants try to think up many ideas for the ulti￾mate objective of generating the most creative ideas.101
The process was introduced by advertising executive Alex 
Osborn in 1939 and has four simple rules to maximize 
the creativity of ideas presented. These rules are sup￾posed to encourage divergent thinking while minimizing 
evaluation apprehension and other team dynamics 
problems.
psychological safety
a shared belief that it is safe 
to engage in interpersonal 
risk-taking; specifically, that 
presenting unusual ideas, 
constructively disagreeing with 
the majority, and experimenting 
with new work behaviors will 
not result in coworkers posing 
a threat to their self-concept, 
status, or career
brainstorming
a freewheeling, face-to-face 
meeting where team members 
aren’t allowed to criticize but 
are encouraged to speak freely, 
generate as many ideas as 
possible, and build on the ideas 
of others
Rule 1: Judicial judgment is ruled out—No criticism or 
evaluation of any ideas until the next session.
Rule 2: “Wildness” is welcome—The crazier the idea, 
the better.Chapter Eight Team Dynamics 307
Rule 3: Quantity is wanted—The goal is to produce highly creative ideas, and this is 
more likely to occur by generating a large number of ideas.
Rule 4: Combination and improvement are welcome—Think up better ideas by piggybacking 
on others’ ideas and by uniquely joining two previous ideas into a new original idea.
Brainstorming fell out of favor after numerous lab studies reported that it doesn’t pro￾duce as many ideas as individuals working alone. Production blocking, evaluation appre￾hension, and social loafing were identified as the main culprits.102 These findings are 
perplexing because some of the most successful creative agencies and product design 
firms rely on brainstorming to help them discover brilliant ideas.103
Why does brainstorming usually work well in the leading creative organizations but not 
in lab studies? One reason, which Alex Osborn warned about, is that effective brainstorm￾ing requires a skilled facilitator who ensures the rules are followed, encourages everyone 
to speak up, manages dominant participants, keeps the group focused on the topic, and 
maintains an efficient flow of ideas. Lab studies rely on students who have never done 
brainstorming and whose facilitator is randomly picked from the group.
Second, brainstorming asks participants to provide crazy ideas, which requires confi￾dent employees in a collaborative learning orientation culture that prioritizes psychologi￾cal safety. Lab studies don’t operate in that setting. They involve students who barely 
know one another, tend to be careful about how they are perceived by peers, and probably 
have limited confidence in their skills for this task. Finally, brainstorming sessions try to 
generate many ideas (Rule 3), but that is only the means to the goal of producing the 
most original and creative ideas. The most creative ideas are rough diamonds that need to 
go through prototyping and refinement before they have obvious business value. Lab stud￾ies merely count the number of ideas or, at best, measure “quality” as ideas that immedi￾ately have obvious business value.104
Brainstorming likely improves 
team creativity under the conditions 
we described, but it does have limita￾tions. One problem, called fixation
or conformity effect, occurs when 
hearing another person’s ideas tends 
to restrict the variety of ideas that 
we subsequently think about. In 
other words, the first few sugges￾tions in a brainstorming session 
might restrict the range of ideas sub￾sequently presented in that session. 
However, fixation effect occurs only 
in some circumstances that can be 
avoided, and creative teams use tech￾niques to minimize this effect.105
A second limitation is that no mat￾ter who is involved, brainstorming 
suffers from production blocking. 
Participants forget their own great 
thoughts when listening to others’ 
ideas, or they hold on to their own 
ideas by being less mindful of what 
others are suggesting. To overcome 
production blocking, some experts 
recommend brainwriting instead of, 
or in sequential combination with, 
brainstorming.106
IDEO has a huge toolkit of practices to help its teams generate original ideas, but brainstorming is 
particularly embedded in its culture. “For us [at IDEO], brainstorming is a really great tool that we know 
how to use,” says Brendan Boyle, partner at the Palo Alto, Calif., global design and consulting firm. Boyle 
warns that brainstorming requires experience and the right people to work effectively. “It [brainstorming] 
gets a bad rap because people who just read the rules and try it once don’t actually know how to do it.” 
Boyle particularly notices that novices quickly identify a few novel ideas and then stop before further 
divergent thinking can develop. In contrast, experienced brainstormers keep the creative tap open longer, 
coming up with “all sorts of crazy ideas because that’s where you’re going to find a good idea.”k
fizkes/Shutterstock308 Part Three Team Processes
Brainwriting Brainwriting is a variation of brainstorming that removes conversation 
during idea generation.107 There are many forms of brainwriting, but they all have the 
common feature that individuals write down their ideas rather than verbally describe 
them to others. In one version, participants write their ideas on cards and place them in 
the center of the table. At any time, participants can pick up one or more cards in the 
center to spark their thinking or further build (piggyback) on those ideas. In another 
variation, each person writes one idea on a card, then everyone passes their card to the 
next person. The receiving person writes a new idea on a second card, both cards are sent 
to the next person, and the process is repeated. Research on brainwriting is very limited, 
but it may produce more and better-quality ideas than brainstorming due to the lack of 
production blocking and initially less fixation effect.
Electronic Brainstorming Electronic brainstorming is similar to brainwriting but 
is likely more efficient because it uses digital networks rather than handwritten cards to 
document and share ideas. Participants enter their ideas using special digital software. 
The system anonymously stores everyone’s ideas, which are viewed randomly by other 
participants to generate more ideas or build on the documented suggestions. The soft￾ware usually has a process for voting electronically on the ideas that have been gener￾ated. Along with being an efficient process, electronic brainstorming minimizes 
production blocking, evaluation apprehension, and fixation effect.108 However, creativity 
might be dampened by the lack of social interaction during idea generation. Also, elec￾tronic brainstorming is rarely used because it is often considered too structured and 
technology-bound.
Nominal Group Technique Another variation of brainwriting, nominal group 
technique, adds a verbal element to the process.109 The problem is described, team members 
silently and independently write down as many solutions as they can, then they describe 
their solutions to the other team members, usually in a round-robin format. As with brain￾storming, there is no criticism or debate, just clarification. Finally, participants silently and 
independently rank-order or vote on each proposed solution. Nominal group technique has 
been used in real-world decisions, such as identifying ways to improve tourism in various 
countries. This method 
tends to generate more and 
better-quality ideas than 
occur in traditional inter￾acting and possibly brain￾storming groups. However, 
production blocking and 
evaluation apprehension 
still occur to some extent. 
Training improves this struc￾tured approach to team de￾cision making.110
brainwriting
a variation of brainstorming 
whereby participants write 
(rather than speak about) and 
share their ideas
electronic brainstorming
a form of brainstorming that 
relies on networked digital 
devices for submitting and 
sharing creative ideas
nominal group technique
a variation of brainwriting 
consisting of three stages in 
which participants (1) silently 
and independently document 
their ideas, (2) collectively 
describe these ideas to the 
other team members without 
critique, and then (3) silently 
and independently evaluate 
the ideas presented
LO 8-1 Define teams and informal groups, and explain why 
employees join informal groups. 
Teams are groups of two or more people who interact and influ￾ence one another, are mutually accountable for achieving com￾mon goals associated with organizational objectives, and perceive 
themselves as a social entity within an organization. There are 
many types of teams in organizations, which can be distinguished 
by three characteristics: team permanence, skill diversity, and au￾thority dispersion. All teams are groups, but many groups do not 
satisfy our definition of teams. In contrast to a team, an informal 
group is any gathering of people who have little or no interdepen￾dence and no organizationally mandated purpose.
chapter summary309
People join informal groups for four reasons: (1) They have 
an innate drive to bond, (2) individuals have an inherent need 
to define themselves to some extent by their group affiliations, 
(3) some personal goals are accomplished better in groups, 
and (4) individuals are comforted in stressful situations by the 
mere presence of other people.
LO 8-2 Discuss the benefits and limitations of teams. 
Under the right conditions, teams make better decisions, de￾velop better products and services, and create a more moti￾vated workforce than do employees working alone. Teams also 
coordinate more easily than do people working in separate de￾partments. In many situations, employees are more motivated 
when working in teams than alone. This occurs because the 
drive to bond motivates team members to fulfill team goals, 
employees are monitored by and feel accountable to team 
members, and each team member creates a moving perfor￾mance standard for the others.
Two limitations of teams are process losses and social loaf￾ing. Process losses are resources expended toward team devel￾opment and maintenance rather than directly toward task 
performance. These costs increase with the team’s diversity, 
with its size, and with the addition of new members. Social 
loafing occurs when people exert less effort (and usually per￾form at a lower level) in teams than when working alone. It is 
more likely to occur under several conditions: (1) Individual 
performance is hidden or difficult to distinguish from the per￾formance of other team members; (2) the work is boring or 
has low task significance; (3) the individual team member has 
low conscientiousness, low agreeableness, and low collectiv￾ism; and (4) the individual team member has low motivation 
to help the team achieve its goals, which occurs when the em￾ployee doesn’t identify with the team, doesn’t believe others 
are pulling their weight, and doesn’t believe his or her effort 
will affect the team’s success. Social loafing can be minimized 
by forming smaller teams, measuring individual performance, 
specializing tasks, increasing job enrichment, increasing mind￾fulness of team obligations, and selecting motivated, team￾oriented employees.
LO 8-3 Outline the team effectiveness model and discuss 
how task characteristics, team size, and team com￾position influence team effectiveness.
Team effectiveness includes the team’s ability to achieve its 
objectives, fulfill the needs of its members, and maintain its 
survival. The team effectiveness model includes several 
elements grouped into three main categories: (a) organiza￾tional and team environment, (b) team design, and (c) team 
processes.
Team design includes three elements: task characteristics, 
team size, and team composition. Teams tend to be better 
suited for situations in which the work is complex yet tasks 
are well structured and have high task interdependence. 
Teams should have enough members to perform the work 
yet be small enough for efficient coordination and meaning￾ful involvement. Effective teams are composed of people 
who are motivated and able to perform tasks (taskwork) but 
who are also motivated and able to engage in teamwork—
behaviors that support the team’s existence and functioning. 
These include cooperating, coordinating, communicating, 
comforting, and conflict handling (i.e., the Five Cs). Team 
member diversity has advantages and disadvantages for team 
performance.
LO 8-4 Discuss how the six team processes—team develop￾ment, norms, roles, cohesion, trust, and mental 
models—influence team effectiveness.
Six team processes are team development, norms, roles, cohe￾sion, trust, and team mental models. Team development incor￾porates the other five processes. Teams develop through the 
stages of forming, storming, norming, performing, and eventually 
adjourning. Team building consists of activities that attempt to 
speed up or improve these team development processes.
As teams evolve, they develop norms to regulate and guide 
member behavior. Norms exist because employees believe 
these behaviors improve team performance or well-being; be￾cause they want predictability and conflict-avoidance in their 
relations with other team members; and because norms routin￾ize behavior, which improves social order and coordination 
with minimal cognitive effort.
Team members are assigned or acquire roles—a set of behav￾iors they are expected to perform. Some roles are assigned in 
team design; others are informally acquired as a team process. 
There are numerous team roles, but all generally focus directly 
either on task performance (taskwork) or on team mainte￾nance (teamwork).
Team cohesion is the degree of attraction people feel to￾ward the team and their motivation to remain members. Co￾hesion increases with member similarity, smaller team size, 
higher degree of interaction, somewhat difficult entry, team 
success, and external challenges. Cohesion increases team 
performance when the team has high interdependence and 
its norms are congruent with organizational goals. Trust 
refers to positive expectations one person has toward an￾other person in situations involving risk. People trust others 
on the basis of three foundations: calculus, knowledge, and 
identification.
Team mental models are cognitive images that team mem￾bers form about the team’s tasks, relationship dynamics, and 
knowledge repository. High-performing teams form shared 
mental models about their collective objectives, values, norms, 
work style, and interaction in the work process. Complemen￾tary mental models are unique to each team member but are 
compatible with the mental models held by other team mem￾bers. Team mental models establish effective coordinating rou￾tines and generate perceptions of the team’s purpose and 
performance. They also help team members quickly know 
where knowledge is located within the team.
LO 8-5 Identify the features of self-directed teams (SDTs), 
and discuss ways to support the success of SDTs.
Self-directed teams (SDTs) complete an entire piece of work 
requiring several interdependent tasks, and they have substan￾tial autonomy over the execution of their tasks. SDTs should 
be responsible for an entire work process and should have suf￾ficient autonomy to organize and coordinate their work. Team 
members should have a relatively high degree of interdepen￾dence with each other but are sufficiently independent from 
other teams. SDTs are also more successful when the work site 
and technology support coordination and communication 
among team members.
LO 8-6 Contrast remote teams with traditional teams in or￾ganizations, and discuss ways to support the success 
of remote teams.
Remote teams are teams whose members operate across space, 
time, and organizational boundaries and are linked through 310
information technologies to achieve organizational tasks. Re￾mote teams differ from traditional (colocated) teams in two 
ways: (1) one or more members work remotely at least some of 
the time, and (2) remote team members depend on informa￾tion technologies in addition to or instead of face-to-face inter￾action to communicate and coordinate their work effort.
Remote teams are more effective when their members apply 
effective teamwork behaviors (the five Cs) and have good com￾munication technology skills, strong self-leadership skills, and 
higher emotional intelligence. They should have a variety of 
communication channels and the ability to choose which and 
when to use them. Remote teams require plenty of task struc￾ture. Remote team members should also meet face-to-face 
fairly early in the team development process.
LO 8-7 Identify four constraints on team decision making 
and describe four structures that support idea gen￾eration in teams.
Team decisions are impeded by time constraints, evaluation ap￾prehension, conformity to peer pressure, and overconfidence. 
These concerns can be minimized through a shared belief that 
engaging in interpersonal risk-taking will not have adverse con￾sequences (psychological safety), checks and balances that pre￾vent anyone from dominating discussion, a team size that is as 
small as practicable, and wariness about the team’s overconfi￾dence. Four structures potentially improve creative decision 
making (specifically, idea generation) in team settings: brain￾storming, brainwriting, electronic brainstorming, and nominal 
group technique.
brainstorming, p. 306
brainwriting, p. 308
electronic brainstorming, p. 308
evaluation apprehension, p. 305
mental models p. 301
nominal group technique, p. 308
norms, p. 295
process losses, p. 285
production blocking, p. 305
psychological safety, p. 306
remote teams, p. 303
role, p. 296
self-directed teams (SDTs), p. 302
social loafing, p. 286
social networks, p. 284
task interdependence, p. 289
team cohesion, p. 297
team efficacy, p. 305
teams, p. 282
trust, p. 299
key terms
1. There are many types of teams in organizations. This 
chapter identified three types of teams—departmental 
teams, self-directed teams, and task force/project 
teams—and distinguished them in terms of three team 
characteristics: team permanence, skill diversity, and 
authority dispersion. Identify two other types of 
teams and describe them in terms of these three 
team characteristics.
2. Although teams have limitations, they can also be very 
effective. Identify three reasons why a team of six stu￾dents potentially produces a better report for a major 
course assignment than the average quality of their re￾ports completed individually. Detail the motivational 
benefits as one reason why teams are potentially better.
3. You have just been transferred from the Kansas office 
to the Denver office of your company, a national sales 
organization of electrical products for developers and 
contractors. In Kansas, team members regularly called 
customers after a sale to ask whether the products ar￾rived on time and whether they are satisfied. But when 
you moved to the Denver office, no one seemed to 
make these follow-up calls. A recently hired coworker 
explained that other coworkers discouraged her from 
making those calls. Later, another coworker suggested 
that your follow-up calls were making everyone else 
look lazy. Give three possible reasons why the norms 
in Denver might be different from those in the Kansas 
office, even though the customers, products, sales com￾missions, and other characteristics of the workplace are 
almost identical.
4. Consider the six team roles summarized in Exhibit 8.6. 
Which two of these best describes your role tendency 
or role preference in a typical team at school or work. 
What factors do you think influence a person’s role 
preferences?
5. You have been given the task of forming an eight-member 
team of software engineers to secretly develop an im￾portant new component (feature) for the company’s 
main software, which is used widely by financial advi￾sors and their clients. Suppose that high team cohesion 
is critical for this team, whose members will be working 
on the team for up to six months. The company’s soft￾ware engineers are located in several cities in North 
America, as well as three locations in Europe and Asia. 
What actions would you take to create a software team 
that would quickly become highly cohesive, while still 
maintaining the company’s standards of an inclusive 
workplace?
6. Describe your personal experience—or a situation in a 
movie—of a team that had well-developed shared and 
complementary team mental models. What evidence 
can you provide that this team had well-developed 
mental models?
7. You are responsible for convening a major event in 
which senior officials from several state governments 
will try to come to an agreement on environmental is￾sues. It is well known that some officials take positions 
to make themselves appear superior, whereas others are 
highly motivated to solve the environmental problems 
that cross adjacent states. What team decision-making 
critical thinking questions311
CASE STUDY: THE OPERATING ROOM SURGICAL TEAM
The surgical team in a hospital operating room consists of 
several skilled professionals, each from different special￾ties. The number and variety of people involved depends 
on the type of surgery. The following describes the roles 
and responsibilities of surgical team members in a “typi￾cal” surgical operation. Some titles and duties vary across 
jurisdictions. This information refers only to “intraopera￾tive” tasks (during the operation); most roles also have nu￾merous duties both before and after the operation.
The surgeon leads the operation and is the main person 
conducting the physical surgical intervention. The surgeon 
is directly assisted by a resident physician, intern, or non￾physician surgical assistant who provides a second pair of 
hands and eyes for the surgeon. This assistant performs suc￾tioning, sponging, suturing, retractor holding, and related 
hands-on duties. The individual also monitors the patient’s 
vital signs and other indicators of patient health.
The third role within the “sterile field” (inside the sterile 
drape area of the operating room) is a scrub nurse (also 
called surgical or instrument nurse), although this role is 
alternatively called or filled by a surgical technologist. Dur￾ing the operation, the scrub nurse (or surgical tech) ar￾ranges all of the surgical equipment and supplies, carefully 
hands them directly to the surgeon and surgeon’s assistant, 
and removes used items from the operative field. This per￾son also assembles some of the equipment, which others on 
the surgical team might not know how to do. The scrub 
nurse also maintains a count of the surgical items. This role 
sometimes also acts as the surgeon’s third set of hands, for 
example by holding an incision open with a retractor where 
the surgeon and assistant are working.
Both the scrub nurse and surgical assistant need to 
fully understand the surgical procedure so their behaviors 
are synchronized with the surgeon’s activities. For exam￾ple, the scrub nurse needs to know what instruments are 
required for each step of the operation so they are handed 
to the surgeon without unnecessary communication or 
delay. 
The anesthesiologist and usually an assistant (e.g., nurse 
anesthetist) are responsible for closely monitoring the pa￾tient’s vital life functions, such as breathing, heart rate and 
rhythm, blood pressure, body temperature, and body fluid 
balance. They apply anesthetics to block local sensation or 
render the patient unconscious during surgery, and admin￾ister other medications to stabilize other vital functions. 
The anesthesiologist works in the operating theater but is 
usually located outside the sterile field of the operation 
(i.e., not in direct or close contact with the patient or the 
surgeon’s instruments during the operation).
The circulating nurse also works in the operating theater 
but away from the sterile field. This person has overall re￾sponsibility for the operating room, particularly monitoring 
for any events that might compromise sterility during the 
operation. This person documents all procedures, actions, 
and events during the operation. The circulating nurse also 
interacts with the scrub nurse by opening supply packages 
(without touching their contents) and providing additional 
resources (e.g., more sponges), as needed.
Surgical operations are completed under time pressure 
to reduce the risk of disease, effects of medications, and 
other complications from the surgery. Surgical team mem￾bers talk to each other, mostly involving operational re￾quests or observations, but most operations have 
considerable silence to minimize distraction and risk of air￾borne contamination. Some surgeons in specialized clinics 
have a dedicated team, but most hospital surgical teams 
have different members for each operation.
Discussion Questions
1. From the information presented in this case, diagnose 
the task complexity, task variability, task analyzability, 
and task interdependence of a typical operating room 
surgical team. Do these task characteristics vary 
among the members of this team? To what extent are 
these task characteristics best suited to teams than to 
individuals working independently of each other?
2. Explain whether and to what extent team mental models 
(shared and complementary) are important for effective 
performance of an operating room surgical team?
3. What team norms might exist in a surgical team, even 
though most teams have different members for each 
surgical operation?
Sources: B. Tørring et al., “Communication and Relationship Dynamics 
in Surgical Teams in the Operating Room: An Ethnographic Study,” 
BMC Health Services Research 19, no. 1 (July 29, 2019): 528; K. Poulsen, 
“What Do Scrub Nurses Do in the Operating Room?,” ToughNickel, 
September 4, 2020; N. Ramadanov, Teamwork in a Surgical Department, 
Teamwork in Healthcare (IntechOpen, 2020); B. Flavin, “Scrub Nurse 
vs. Surgical Tech: Decoding the Differences in the OR and Beyond,” 
Rasmussen University Health Sciences (blog), September 27, 2021; 
“Surgical Team,” Johns Hopkins Medicine, 2022.
© 2022 Steven L. McShane
problems are likely to be apparent in this government 
forum, and what actions can you take to minimize these 
problems?
8. The chief marketing officer of Sawgrass Widgets 
wants marketing and sales staff to identify new uses 
for its products. Which of the four team structures 
for creative decision making would you recommend? 
Describe and justify this process to Sawgrass’ chief 
marketing officer.TEAM EXERCISE: TEAM TOWER POWER
312
similar) amounts and types of pieces. The instructor will 
need a measuring tape and stopwatch. Students may use 
writing materials during the design stage (see instruc￾tions). The instructor will distribute a “Team Objectives 
Sheet” and “Tower Specifications Effectiveness Sheet” to 
all teams.
PURPOSE This exercise is designed to help you under￾stand team roles, team development, and other issues in 
the development and maintenance of effective teams.
MATERIALS The instructor will provide enough Lego 
pieces or similar materials for each team to complete the 
assigned task. All teams should have identical (or very 
 CASE STUDY: THE SHIPPING INDUSTRY ACCOUNTING TEAM
For the past five years, I have been working at McKay, 
Sanderson, and Smith Associates, a mid-sized accounting 
firm in Boston that specializes in commercial accounting 
and audits. My particular specialty is accounting practices 
for shipping companies, ranging from small fishing fleets to 
a couple of the big firms with ships along the East Coast.
About 18 months ago, McKay, Sanderson, and Smith 
Associates became part of a large merger involving two 
other accounting firms. These firms have offices in Miami, 
Seattle, Baton Rouge, and Los Angeles. Although the other 
two accounting firms were much larger than McKay, all 
three firms agreed to avoid centralizing the business around 
one office in Los Angeles. Instead, the new firm—called 
Goldberg, Choo, and McKay Associates—would rely on 
teams across the country to “leverage the synergies of our 
collective knowledge” (an often-cited statement from the 
managing partner soon after the merger).
The merger affected me a year ago when my boss (a senior 
partner and vice president of the merged firm) announced 
that I would be working more closely with three people 
from the other two firms to become the firm’s new shipping 
industry accounting team. The other “team members” were 
Elias in Miami, Susan in Seattle, and Brad in Los Angeles. 
I had met Elias briefly at a meeting in New York City during 
the merger, but have never met Susan or Brad, although 
knew that they were shipping accounting professionals at 
the other firms.
Initially, the shipping “team” activities involved emailing 
each other about new contracts and prospective clients. Later, 
we were asked to submit joint monthly reports on accounting 
statements and issues. Normally, I submitted my own monthly 
reports which summarize activities involving my own clients. 
Coordinating the monthly report with three other people 
took much more time, particularly since different accounting 
documentation procedures across the three firms were still 
being resolved. It took numerous emails and a few telephone 
calls to work out a reasonable monthly report style.
During this aggravating process, it became apparent—to 
me, at least—that this “teams” business was costing me more 
time than it was worth. Moreover, Brad in Los Angeles 
didn’t have a clue as to how to communicate with the rest of 
us. He rarely replied to emails. Instead, he often used the 
telephone voice mail system, which resulted in numerous ir￾ritating episodes of telephone tag. Brad arrives at work at 
9:30 a.m. in Los Angeles (and is often late!), which is early 
afternoon in Boston. I typically have a flexible work sched￾ule from 7:30 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. so I can chauffeur my kids 
after school to sports and music lessons. So Brad and I have 
a window of less than three hours to share information.
The biggest nuisance with the shipping specialist ac￾counting team started two weeks ago when the firm asked 
the four of us to develop a new strategy for attracting more 
shipping firm clients. This new strategic plan is a messy 
business. Somehow, we have to share our thoughts on vari￾ous approaches, agree on a new plan, and write a unified 
submission to the managing partner. Already, the project is 
taking most of my time just writing and responding to 
emails, and talking in conference calls (which none of us 
did much before the team formed).
 Susan and Brad have already had two or three “misun￾derstandings” via email about their different perspectives 
on delicate matters in the strategic plan. The worst of these 
disagreements required a conference call with all of us to 
resolve. Except for the most basic matters, it seems that we 
can’t understand each other, let alone agree on key issues. 
I have come to the conclusion that I would never want Brad 
to work in my Boston office (thank goodness, he’s on the 
other side of the country). While Elias and I seem to agree 
on most points, the overall team can’t form a common vi￾sion or strategy. I don’t know how Elias, Susan, or Brad 
feel, but I would be quite happy to work somewhere that did 
not require any of these long-distance team headaches.
Discussion Questions
1. What type of team was formed here? Was it necessary, 
in your opinion?
2. Use the team effectiveness model and related information 
in this chapter to identify the strengths and weaknesses 
of this team’s environment, design, and processes.
3. Assuming that these four people must continue to 
work as a team, recommend ways to improve the 
team’s effectiveness.
© 2004 Steven L. McShanethe construction phase. The time allowed for construction 
will be closely monitored, and the instructor will occasion￾ally call out the time elapsed (particularly if there is no 
clock in the room).
Each team will advise the instructor as soon as it has 
completed its tower. The team will write down the time 
elapsed, as determined by the instructor. The team also 
may be asked to assist the instructor by counting the num￾ber of blocks used and measuring the height of the tower. 
This information gets added to the Team Objectives Sheet. 
Then, the team calculates its profit.
After presenting the results, the class will discuss the 
team dynamics elements that contribute to team effective￾ness. Team members will discuss their strategy, division of 
labor (team roles), expertise within the team, and other 
elements of team dynamics.
Source: Several published and online sources describe variations of this 
exercise, but there is no known origin to this activity.
INSTRUCTIONS The instructor will divide the class into 
teams. Depending on class size and space availability, 
teams may have between four and seven members, but all 
should be approximately equal in size.
Each team has 20 minutes to design a tower that uses 
only the materials provided, is freestanding, and pro￾vides an optimal return on investment. Team members 
may wish to draw their tower on paper or a flip-chart to 
facilitate the tower’s design. Teams are free to practice 
building their tower during this stage. Preferably, each 
team will have a secluded space so that the design 
can be created privately. During this stage, each team 
will complete the Team Objectives Sheet distributed 
by the instructor. This sheet requires the Tower Specifi￾cations Effectiveness Sheet, also distributed by the 
instructor.
Each team will show the instructor that it has com￾pleted its Team Objectives Sheet. Then, with all teams in 
the same room, the instructor will announce the start of 
TEAM EXERCISE: SURVIVAL ON THE MOON
your survival depends on reaching the outpost, finding a 
way to protect yourself until someone can reach you, or 
meeting a rescue party somewhere between your landing 
site and the outpost.
You know the Moon has basically no atmosphere or 
magnetosphere to protect you from space radiation. The 
environment is unlike any found on Earth. The regolith, or 
lunar soil, is a mixture of materials that includes sharp, 
glassy particles. The gravity field on the Moon is only one￾sixth as strong as Earth’s. More than 80 percent of the 
Moon is made up of heavily cratered highlands. Tempera￾tures vary widely on the Moon. It can be as cold as −193°C 
(−315°F) at night at its poles and as hot as 111°C (232°F) 
during the day at its equator.
INSTRUCTIONS Survival will depend on your mode of 
transportation and ability to navigate. Your basic needs for 
food, shelter, water, and air must be considered. Your chal￾lenge is to choose items that will help you survive.
Part I: Individual Decision The scoring sheet below lists 
15 items in alphabetical order that are available to you. 
In the “Your Ranking” column, rank these items from 1 to 
15 according to your own beliefs and knowledge about 
their importance to you and your team (other members of 
the crew). Place the number 1 beside the most important 
item and continue ranking the items to number 15, the 
least important. Be prepared to explain why you gave each 
item the rank it received and how you plan to use the item 
to help you survive.
PURPOSE This exercise is designed to help you under￾stand the importance and dynamics of team decision 
making.
MATERIALS All materials are provided below. They in￾clude the “Survival on the Moon Scenario” and the “Sur￾vival on the Moon Scoring Sheet” for ranking items 
individually and as a team.
SURVIVAL ON THE MOON SCENARIO The year is 
2025. You and your crew are traveling toward the Moon in 
the Orion spacecraft. Orion is a gumdrop-shaped space￾craft designed to carry people from Earth to the Moon. 
Orion is similar in shape, but larger than the capsules used 
during the Apollo program. Attached, or docked, to Orion
is the Lunar Surface Access Module (LSAM), which you 
alone will use to land on the Moon (other crew members 
remain onboard the Orion).
As your spacecraft enters lunar orbit, you spot the lunar 
outpost. This outpost has grown, having been built piece 
by piece during past missions. You are excited to see the 
outpost. It is located on a crater rim near the lunar south 
pole, in near-constant sunlight. This location is not far 
from supplies of water ice that can be found in the cold, 
permanently shadowed part of the crater.
After transferring into the LSAM and separating from 
Orion, you prepare to descend to the lunar surface. Sud￾denly, you notice that there is a problem with the thrust￾ers. You land safely, but off course, about 80 kilometers 
(50 miles) from the lunar outpost. Looking across the 
charcoal-gray, dusty surface of the Moon, you realize that 
313314
ITEMS (ALPHABETICAL ORDER)
YOUR 
RANKING
TEAM 
RANKING
EXPERT 
RANKING
YOUR 
SCORE
TEAM 
SCORE
First aid kit: a basic kit with pain medication and medicine for infection _______ _______ _______ _______ _______
Food: dehydrated concentrate to which water is added _______ _______ _______ _______ _______
Life raft: a self-inflatable flotation device _______ _______ _______ _______ _______
Magnetic compass: a tool that uses a magnetic field to determine 
direction
_______ _______ _______ _______ _______
Map: document showing the Moon’s surface/terrain _______ _______ _______ _______ _______
Matches (box of): wooden sticks with sulfur-treated heads _______ _______ _______ _______ _______
Oxygen: two 45.5-kilogram (100-pound) tanks _______ _______ _______ _______ _______
Parachute: a large piece of silk cloth _______ _______ _______ _______ _______
Portable lights: with solar-powered rechargeable batteries _______ _______ _______ _______ _______
Radio receiver-transmitter: a solar-powered communication instrument _______ _______ _______ _______ _______
Rope: 15 meters (approx. 50 feet) of nylon rope _______ _______ _______ _______ _______
Signal mirror: a handheld mirror _______ _______ _______ _______ _______
Space blanket: a thin sheet of plastic material that is coated with a 
metallic reflecting layer
_______ _______ _______ _______ _______
Space suit repair kit: kit with materials to repair tiny holes in fabric _______ _______ _______ _______ _______
Water: one 38-liter (10-gallon) container _______ _______ _______ _______ _______
TOTAL SCORE: (sum scores within the column) _______ _______
Survival on the Moon Scoring Sheet
Discussion Questions
1.	 Did most team members have higher (worse) or lower
(better) total scores than the total “team score”?
Why did this difference occur?
2.	 In what situations, if any, would someone’s total per￾sonal score be very similar to the total team score?
Did this occur for anyone on your team? Why?
3.	 When the team was ranking items, which items had
the most difference of opinion regarding the item’s
importance? Why did this disagreement occur, and
how was it resolved by the team?
4.	 While the team was determining the collective ranking
of items, did specific team members take on specific
roles, such as leading the discussion, encouraging
opinions from quieter members, managing conflict,
and so forth? If so, why do you think these people
took on these roles?
5.	 Was your team composed mostly of people you have
worked with previously in teams? If so, do you think
the discussion was more effective or less effective
than when making decisions with people who are
new to you? Why?
Source: National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
Part II: Team Decision After everyone working alone
has ranked these 15 items, the instructor will organize
students into approximately equal-sized teams. Team
members should try to reach a consensus on the rank
order of each of these 15 items. Place the number 1 be￾side the most important item and continue ranking the
items to number 15, the least important. Record this
ranking of items in the “Team Ranking” column. Your
survival depends on the team’s ability to agree on the
importance of these items, as well as logical explanation
of their value and how to use them.
Part III: Total Scores After the items have been ranked
by teams, your instructor will report how the 15 items
were ranked by NASA scientists (experts). Write these
rankings under the “Expert Ranking” column. Next, calcu￾late the absolute difference (remove the negative sign) be￾tween your ranking and the expert’s ranking for each of
the 15 items and record these scores in the “Your Score”
column. Sum these 15 absolute differences to determine
your personal total score. Determine your team’s score
in the same manner using the “Team Score” column.
Write these scores and summary statistics into the spaces
at the bottom of the scoring sheet for those two columns.315
1. H. Carroll, “How Cisco Is Rewriting the Rules on Perfor￾mance Management,” APQC Blog (blog), April 6, 2016; 
Great Place to Work, In Conversation: Executive Leadership 
Team at Cisco, YouTube, March 12, 2019; M. Ahmed, “At 
Cisco, People Come First: Ashley Goodall, SVP, Methods 
& Intelligence,” People Matters, August 10, 2020; J. Boynton, 
“Helping Our People Learn and Lead,” Cisco Blogs (blog), 
May 4, 2020; R. Hougaard, “The Superpowers Of Cisco: 
How The World’s Best Workplace Takes Care Of Its 
Employees,” Forbes, February 15, 2021; J. Bell, “Cisco’s 
Head of HR on the Culture behind Australia’s #1 Place 
to Work,” Human Resources Director (Australia), March 
30, 2021; “A Look at Teams for Teams Week,” The Cisco 
News Network - APJC (blog), May 14, 2021; “World’s Best 
Workplaces 2021,” Great Place to Work®, October 2021.
2. “Trends: Are Many Meetings a Waste of Time? Study Says 
So,” news release (MeetingsNet, November 1, 1998); 
R. Cross, R. Rebele, and A. Grant, “Collaborative Over￾load,” Harvard Business Review, Jan-Feb 2016, 74–79; 
L. Wright and N. McCullough, “New Survey Explores 
the Changing Landscape of Teamwork,” Microsoft 365 
Blog (blog), April 19, 2018.
3. S. Wuchty, B.F. Jones, and B. Uzzi, “The Increasing 
Dominance of Teams in Production of Knowledge,” Science
316 (2007): 1036–39. For a detailed analysis of teamwork 
in scientific research, see N.J. Cooke and M.L. Hilton, 
Enhancing the Effectiveness of Team Science, Committee on 
the Science of Team Science; Board on Behavioral, Cogni￾tive, and Sensory Sciences; Division of Behavioral and 
Social Sciences and Education; National Research Council 
(Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2015).
4. M.E. Shaw, Group Dynamics, 3rd ed. (New York: 
McGraw Hill, 1981), 8; E. Sundstrom, “The Challenges 
of Supporting Work Team Effectiveness,” in Supporting 
Work Team Effectiveness ed. E. Sundstrom and Associates 
(San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass, 1999), 6–9; L.E. 
Benishek and E.H. Lazzara, “Teams in a New Era: Some 
Considerations and Implications,” Frontiers in Psychology
10 (2019): 01006. Even though a distinct social entity, a 
team’s boundaries (who is and who is not a member) may 
be fuzzier than previously assumed. See M. Mortensen 
and M.R. Haas, “Perspective—Rethinking Teams: From 
Bounded Membership to Dynamic Participation,” 
Organization Science 29 (2018): 341–55.
5. J.R. Hollenbeck, B. Beersma, and M.E. Schouten, “Beyond 
Team Types and Taxonomies: A Dimensional Scaling 
Conceptualization for Team Description,” Academy of 
Management Review 37, no. 1 (2012): 82–106. This article 
uses the term skill differentiation, whereas we use skill diver￾sity, which is a more common label to describe variations 
among team members; skill differences represent a form of 
deep-level diversity. The original article also uses the label 
authority differentiation, whereas we believe that authority 
dispersion is more consistent with power variations, such 
as in decentralization of organizational structures.
6. R.A. Guzzo and M.W. Dickson, “Teams in Organizations: 
Recent Research on Performance and Effectiveness,” 
Annual Review of Psychology 47 (1996): 307–38; L.R. 
Offerman and R.K. Spiros, “The Science and Practice 
of Team Development: Improving the Link,” Academy of 
Management Journal 44 (2001): 376–92.
7. J.R. Spoor and J.R. Kelly, “The Evolutionary Signifi￾cance of Affect in Groups: Communication and Group 
Bonding,” Group Processes & Intergroup Relations 7, no. 4 
(2004): 398–412; W.S. Jansen et al., “Inclusion: Concep￾tualization and Measurement,” European Journal of Social 
Psychology 44, no. 4 (2014): 370–85.
8. M.A. Hogg et al., “The Social Identity Perspective: Inter￾group Relations, Self-Conception, and Small Groups,” 
Small Group Research 35, no. 3 (2004): 246–76; S.A. 
Haslam and N. Ellemers, “Identity Processes in Organi￾zations,” in Handbook of Identity Theory and Research, 
ed. J.S. Schwartz, K. Luyckx, and L.V. Vignoles (New 
York: Springer New York, 2011), 715–44; R. Spears, 
“Group Identities: The Social Identity Perspective,” 
in Handbook of Identity Theory and Research, ed. S.J. 
Schwartz, K. Luyckx, and V.L. Vignoles (New York: 
Springer New York, 2011), 201–24; S.K. Kang and G.V. 
Bodenhausen, “Multiple Identities in Social Perception 
and Interaction: Challenges and Opportunities,” Annual 
Review of Psychology 66, no. 1 (2015): 547–74.
9. S. Cohen, “The Pittsburgh Common Cold Studies: 
Psychosocial Predictors of Susceptibility to Respiratory 
Infectious Illness,” International Journal of Behavioral 
Medicine 12, no. 3 (2005): 123–31; S.Y. Shin and S.G. 
Lee, “Effects of Hospital Workers? Friendship Networks 
on Job Stress,” PLoS ONE 11, no. 2 (2016): e0149428.
10. R. Cross and R.J. Thomas, Driving Results through Social 
Networks: How Top Organizations Leverage Networks for 
Performance and Growth (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2009); 
R. McDermott and D. Archibald, “Harnessing Your Staff’s 
Informal Networks,” Harvard Business Review 88, no. 3 
(2010): 82–89; J.R. Methot, E.H. Rosado-Solomon, and 
D.G. Allen, “The Network Architecture of Human Capital: 
A Relational Identity Perspective,” Academy of Management 
Review 43 (2018): 723–48.
11. J. Brecht, “How to Make Swarms Work.,” LinkedIn, March 7, 
2018; “Ready to Be Different,” Diversity Report (Stuttgart: 
Daimler AG, May 24, 2018); R. Deiser, “Part 5: Agility 
in Practice: The Swarm Organization at Daimler,” The 
Digital Transformation People (blog), May 7, 2019; Capgemini 
Research Institute, “Daimler: Accelerating Digital Innova￾tion by Transforming Culture, Collaboration, and Talent: 
An Interview with Sabine Scheunert, Daimler AG,” Digital 
Leadership (Paris: Capgemini, February 8, 2019).
12. M. Moldaschl and W. Weber, “The ‘Three Waves’ of 
Industrial Group Work: Historical Reflections on Current 
Research on Group Work,” Human Relations 51 (1998): 
347–88. Several popular books in the 1980s encouraged 
teamwork, based on the Japanese economic miracle. These 
books include W. Ouchi, Theory Z: How American Man￾agement Can Meet the Japanese Challenge (Reading, MA: 
Addison-Wesley, 1981); R.T. Pascale and A.G. Athos, Art of 
Japanese Management (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1982).
13. C.R. Emery and L.D. Fredenhall, “The Effect of Teams 
on Firm Profitability and Customer Satisfaction,” Jour￾nal of Service Research 4 (2002): 217–29; J.R. Hackman, 
Collaborative Intelligence: Using Teams to Solve Hard Prob￾lems (San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler Publishers, 2011); 
E. Salas, D.L. Reyes, and S.H. McDaniel, “The Science 
of Teamwork: Progress, Reflections, and the Road 
Ahead.,” American Psychologist 73 (2018): 593–600.
endnotes316
Effect of Agreeableness and Conscientiousness,” Academy 
of Management Learning & Education 13, no. 1 (2014): 
62–81; B. Meyer, C.C. Schermuly, and S. Kauffeld, “That’s 
Not My Place: The Interacting Effects of Faultlines, Sub￾group Size, and Social Competence on Social Loafing 
Behaviour in Work Groups,” European Journal of Work 
and Organizational Psychology 25, no. 1 (2016): 31–49.
21. C. Lam, “The Role of Communication and Cohesion in 
Reducing Social Loafing in Group Projects,” Business 
and Professional Communication Quarterly 78, no. 4 (2015): 
454–75; V. Peñarroja, V. Orengo, and A. Zornoza, 
“Reducing Perceived Social Loafing in Virtual Teams: 
The Effect of Team Feedback with Guided Reflexivity,” 
Journal of Applied Social Psychology 47, no. 8 (2017): 
424–35; I. Fronza and X. Wang, “Towards an Approach 
to Prevent Social Loafing in Software Development 
Teams,” in 11th ACM/IEEE International Symposium 
on Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement
(New York: IEEE, 2017), 241–46; A.A. Curcio and M.A. 
Lynch, “Addressing Social Loafing on Faculty Commit￾tees,” Journal of Legal Education 67 (2017): 242–62.
22. E. Sundstrom, K.P. De Meuse, and D. Futrell, “Work 
Teams: Applications and Effectiveness,” American Psy￾chologist, Organizational Psychology, 45, no. 2 (1990): 
120–33; J.R. Hackman et al., “Team Effectiveness in 
Theory and in Practice,” in Industrial and Organizational 
Psychology: Linking Theory with Practice, ed. C.L. Cooper 
and E.A. Locke (Oxford, UK: Blackwell, 2000), 109–29. 
Recent literature has focused mainly on the first two 
functions, but team survival is also an important out￾come. See J.E. Mathieu et al., “Embracing Complexity: 
Reviewing the Past Decade of Team Effectiveness 
Research,” Annual Review of Organizational Psychology 
and Organizational Behavior 6 (2019): 17–46.
23. P.S. Goodman, E.C. Ravlin, and L. Argote, “Current 
Thinking About Groups: Setting the Stage for New 
Ideas,” in Designing Effective Work Groups, ed. P.S. 
Goodman and Associates (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 
1986); M.A. Marks, J.E. Mathieu, and S.J. Zaccaro, 
“A Temporally Based Framework and Taxonomy of Team 
Processes,” Academy of Management Review 26, no. 3 
(2001): 356–76; E. Salas, D.L. Reyes, and S.H. McDaniel, 
“The Science of Teamwork: Progress, Reflections, and 
the Road Ahead.,” American Psychologist 73, no. 4 (2018): 
593–600; J.E. Mathieu et al., “Embracing Complexity: 
Reviewing the Past Decade of Team Effectiveness Research,” 
Annual Review of Organizational Psychology and Organiza￾tional Behavior 6, no. 1 (2019): 17–46.
24. McGrath recommended that team models and studies 
should focus on team processes rather than the snapshot 
“series of states” that emerge from those processes. He 
explained that the processes generating team states are 
logically more important for understanding team dynam￾ics. Unfortunately, recent writers on teams have ne￾glected that advice. See J.E. McGrath, “Studying Groups 
at Work: Ten Critical Needs for Theory and Practice,” in 
Designing Effective Work Groups, ed. P.S. Goodman and 
and Associates (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1986), 362–92. 
Several writers describe “team processes” as team 
activities in the transformation of input resources to 
outputs. However, this defines the team’s involvement 
in the production process, whereas earlier scholars 
clearly stated that “team processes” refer to the team’s 
14. R.E. Baumeister and M.R. Leary, “The Need to Belong: 
Desire for Interpersonal Attachments as a Fundamental 
Human Motivation,” Psychological Bulletin 117 (1995): 
497–529; J.M. Feinberg and J.R. Aiello, “Social Facilitation: 
A Test of Competing Theories,” Journal of Applied Social 
Psychology 36, no. 5 (2006): 1087–109; A.M. Grant, “Rela￾tional Job Design and the Motivation to Make a Prosocial 
Difference,” Academy of Management Review 32, no. 2 
(2007): 393–417; N.L. Kerr and D.H. Seok, “ ‘. . . with a 
Little Help from My Friends’: Friendship, Effort Norms, 
and Group Motivation Gain,” Journal of Managerial Psychol￾ogy 26, no. 3 (2011): 205–18; D. Herbst and A. Mas, “Peer 
Effects on Worker Output in the Laboratory Generalize 
to the Field,” Science 350, no. 6260 (2015): 545–49.
15. E.A. Locke et al., “The Importance of the Individual in 
an Age of Groupism,” in Groups at Work: Theory and 
Research, ed. M.E. Turner (Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum, 2001), 
501–28; N.J. Allen and T.D. Hecht, “The ‘Romance of 
Teams’: Toward an Understanding of Its Psychological 
Underpinnings and Implications,” Journal of Occupa￾tional and Organizational Psychology 77 (2004): 439–61; 
A. Almaatouq et al., “Task Complexity Moderates Group 
Synergy,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
118, no. 36 (2021): e2101062118.
16. I.D. Steiner, Group Process and Productivity (New York: 
Academic Press, 1972); S. Coyle, K. Conboy, and T. Acton, 
“Group Process Losses in Agile Software Development 
Decision Making,” International Journal of Intelligent Information 
Technologies 9, no. 2 (2013): 38–53; K. Srikanth, S. Harvey, 
and R. Peterson, “A Dynamic Perspective on Diverse Teams: 
Moving from the Dual-Process Model to a Dynamic 
Coordination-Based Model of Diverse Team Performance,” 
Academy of Management Annals 10 (2016): 453–93.
17. M.W. McCarter and R.M. Sheremeta, “You Can’t Put Old 
Wine in New Bottles: The Effect of Newcomers on Coor￾dination in Groups,” PLoS ONE 8, no. 1 (2013): e55058. 
18. F.P. Brooks, ed. The Mythical Man- Month: Essays on 
Software Engineering, Second ed. (Reading, MA: Addison￾Wesley, 1995); B.R. Staats, K.L. Milkman, and C.R. Fox, 
“The Team Scaling Fallacy: Underestimating the Declining 
Efficiency of Larger Teams,” Organizational Behavior and 
Human Decision Processes 118, no. 2 (2012): 132–42; 
T. van Balen and M. Tarakci, “Never Change a Winning 
Team?,” SSRN Scholarly Paper (Rochester, NY: Social 
Science Research Network, May 4, 2017).
19. S.J. Karau and K.D. Williams, “Social Loafing: A Meta￾Analytic Review and Theoretical Integration,” Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology 65 (1993): 681–706; 
R.C. Liden et al., “Social Loafing: A Field Investigation,” 
Journal of Management 30 (2004): 285–304. 
20. B. Latane, K. Williams, and S. Harkins, “Many Hands 
Make Light the Work: The Causes and Consequences of 
Social Loafing,” Journal of Personality & Social Psychology 37, 
no. 6 (1979): 822–32; U.-C. Klehe and N. Anderson, 
“The Moderating Influence of Personality and Culture 
on Social Loafing in Typical versus Maximum Perfor￾mance Situations,” International Journal of Selection and 
Assessment 15, no. 2 (2007): 250–62; R.B. Lount and 
S.L. Wilk, “Working Harder or Hardly Working? Posting 
Performance Eliminates Social Loafing and Promotes 
Social Laboring in Workgroups,” Management Science 60, 
no. 5 (2014): 1098–106; M.C. Schippers, “Social Loafing 
Tendencies and Team Performance: The Compensating 317
Psychology 17, no. 1/2 (2002): 50–67; J. Lyubovnikova 
et al., “24-Karat or Fool’s Gold? Consequences of Real 
Team and Co-Acting Group Membership in Healthcare 
Organizations,” European Journal of Work and Organiza￾tional Psychology 24, no. 6 (2015): 929–50; S.H. Cour￾tright et al., “Structural Interdependence in Teams: An 
Integrative Framework and Meta-Analysis,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology 100, no. 6 (2015): 1825–46.
30. J.D. Thompson, Organization in Action (New York: 
McGraw Hill, 1967), 54–55. A slight variation of this 
model is also applied to understand interdependence 
in multi-team systems. See: R. Rico et al., “Structural 
Influences upon Coordination and Performance in 
Multiteam Systems,” Human Resource Management 
Review 28, no. 4 (2018): 332–46.
31. J.D. Thompson, Organization in Action (New York: 
McGraw Hill, 1967), 55–59.
32. L. Gratton and T.J. Erickson, “Ways to Build Collabora￾tive Teams,” Harvard Business Review (2007): 100–09; 
B. Stone, The Everything Store: Jeff Bezos and the Age of 
Amazon (New York: Random House, 2013), 203–05. 
33. J.R. Hackman, Leading Teams: Setting the Stage for Great 
Performances (Boston: Harvard Business Review Press, 
2002), 116–22; C. Aube, V. Rousseau, and S. Tremblay, 
“Team Size and Quality of Group Experience: The More 
the Merrier?,” Group Dynamics: Theory Research and 
Practice 15, no. 4 (2011): 357–75; J.S. Mueller, “Why 
Individuals in Larger Teams Perform Worse,” Organiza￾tional Behavior and Human Decision Processes 117, no. 1 
(2012): 111–24; Y.-N. Lee, J.P. Walsh, and J. Wang, 
“Creativity in Scientific Teams: Unpacking Novelty and 
Impact,” Research Policy 44, no. 3 (2015): 684–97.
34. J.S. Mueller, “Why Individuals in Larger Teams Perform 
Worse,” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision 
Processes 117, no. 1 (2012): 111–24. 
35. J.E. Mathieu et al., “A Review and Integration of Team 
Composition Models: Moving toward a Dynamic and 
Temporal Framework,” Journal of Management 40, no. 1 
(2014): 130–60; N.J. Allen and T. O’Neill, “Team Com￾position and Performance: Considering the Project-Team 
Challenge,” in The Psychology and Management of Project 
Teams: An Interdisciplinary Perspective, ed. B. Hobbs, 
E.K. Kelloway, and F. Chiocchio (New York: Oxford 
University Press, 2015), 301–28.
36. Taskwork and teamwork have varied definitions in the 
literature (e.g., behaviors versus competencies; individ￾ual- versus team-level phenomena). Our definition, which 
refers to individual-level behaviors focused on task perfor￾mance versus team maintenance, is similar to the concep￾tualizations by Eduardo Salas and his colleagues, as well 
as to Lewin’s seminal ideas about locomotion versus 
maintenance in groups. See, for example, J.E. Driskell, 
E. Salas, and T. Driskell, “Foundations of Teamwork and 
Collaboration,” American Psychologist 73, no. 4 (2018): 
334–48; E. Salas et al., “Can Teamwork Promote Safety 
in Organizations?” Annual Review of Organizational Psy￾chology and Organizational Behavior 7 (2020): 283–313.
37. F.P. Morgeson, M.H. Reider, and M.A. Campion, 
“Selecting Individuals in Team Settings: The Importance 
of Social Skills, Personality Characteristics, and Teamwork 
Knowledge,” Personnel Psychology 58, no. 3 (2005): 
583–611; V. Rousseau, C. Aubé, and A. Savoie, “Teamwork 
Behaviors: A Review and an Integration of Frameworks,” 
continuously evolving characteristics (norms, cohesion, etc.). 
Indeed, much recent writing unwittingly applies both def￾initions. See M.A. Marks, J.E. Mathieu, and S.J. Zaccaro, 
“A Temporally Based Framework and Taxonomy of Team 
Processes,” The Academy of Management Review 26, no. 3 
(2001): 356–76; S.W.J. Kozlowski and B.S. Bell, “Work 
Groups and Teams in Organizations,” in Handbook of 
Psychology: Industrial and Organizational Psychology, ed. 
N.W. Schmitt, S. Highhouse, and I.B. Weiner, 2nd ed., 
vol. 12 (Hoboken, NJ,: John Wiley & Sons Inc, 2013), 
412–69; L.E. Benishek and E.H. Lazzara, “Teams in 
a New Era: Some Considerations and Implications,” 
Frontiers in Psychology 10 (2019), 01006.
25. M. Kouchaki et al., “The Treatment of the Relationship 
between Groups and Their Environments: A Review 
and Critical Examination of Common Assumptions in 
Research,” Group & Organization Management 37, no. 2 
(2012): 171–203; T. Driskell, E. Salas, and J.E. Driskell, 
“Teams in Extreme Environments: Alterations in Team 
Development and Teamwork,” Human Resource Manage￾ment Review, 28, no. 4 (2018): 434–49.
26. E. Sundstrom, “The Challenges of Supporting Work 
Team Effectiveness,” in Supporting Work Team Effective￾ness ed. E. Sundstrom and Associates (San Francisco, 
CA: Jossey-Bass, 1999), 6–9; G.L. Stewart, “A Meta￾Analytic Review of Relationships between Team Design 
Features and Team Performance,” Journal of Management
32, no. 1 (2006): 29–54; H. Huettermann, S. Doering, and 
S. Boerner, “Leadership and Team Identification: Explor￾ing the Followers’ Perspective,” Leadership Quarterly 25, 
no. 3 (2014): 413–32; J.E. Mathieu, L. D’Innocenzo, and 
M.R. Kukenberge, “Contextual Issues in Project Perfor￾mance: A Multilevel Perspective,” in The Psychology and 
Management of Project Teams: An Interdisciplinary Per￾spective, ed. B. Hobbs, E.K. Kelloway, and F. Chiocchio 
(New York: Oxford University Press, 2015), 101–36; 
F. Schölmerich, C.C. Schermuly, and J. Deller, “How 
Leaders’ Diversity Beliefs Alter the Impact of Faultlines 
on Team Functioning,” Small Group Research 47, no. 2 
(2016): 177–206; S.A. Conroy and N. Gupta, “Team 
Pay-for-Performance: The Devil Is in the Details,” Group 
& Organization Management 41, no. 1 (2016): 32–65.
27. J.E. Mathieu et al., “Embracing Complexity: Reviewing 
the Past Decade of Team Effectiveness Research,” Annual 
Review of Organizational Psychology and Organizational 
Behavior 6, no. 1 (2019): 17–46; A. Almaatouq et al., 
“Task Complexity Moderates Group Synergy,” Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences 118, no. 36 (2021): 
e2101062118.
28. M.A. Campion, E.M. Papper, and G.J. Medsker, “Rela￾tions between Work Team Characteristics and Effective￾ness: A Replication and Extension,” Personnel Psychology 49 
(1996): 429–52; N. Sivasubramaniam, S.J. Liebowitz, 
and C.L. Lackman, “Determinants of New Product 
Development Team Performance: A Meta-Analytic Review,” 
Journal of Product Innovation Management 29, no. 5 
(2012): 803–20; M.A. Valentine and A.C. Edmondson, 
“Team Scaffolds: How Mesolevel Structures Enable Role￾Based Coordination in Temporary Groups,” Organization 
Science 26, no. 2 (2015): 405–22.
29. G. Van der Vegt and E. Van de Vliert, “Intragroup Inter￾dependence and Effectiveness: Review and Proposed Di￾rections for Theory and Practice,” Journal of Managerial 318
A.P. Hare, “Theories of Group Development and Catego￾ries for Interaction Analysis,” Small Group Behavior 4, 
no. 3 (1973): 259–304; A.P. Beck, “A Study of Group Phase 
Development and Emergent Leadership,” Group 5, no. 4 
(1981): 48–54; C.J.G. Gersick, “Time and Transition in 
Work Teams: Toward a New Model of Group Development,” 
Academy of Management Journal 31, no. 1 (1988): 9–41.
43. B.W. Tuckman, “Developmental Sequence in Small 
Groups.,” Psychological Bulletin 63, no. 6 (1965): 384–99; 
B.W. Tuckman and M.A.C. Jensen, “Stages of Small￾Group Development Revisited,” Group and Organization 
Studies 2 (1977): 419–42; B.W. Tuckman, “Developmen￾tal Sequence in Small Groups,” Group Facilitation (2001): 
66–81; D.A. Bonebright, “40 Years of Storming: A His￾torical Review of Tuckman’s Model of Small Group De￾velopment,” Human Resource Development International 13, 
no. 1 (2010): 111–20.
44. G.R. Bushe and G.H. Coetzer, “Group Development and 
Team Effectiveness: Using Cognitive Representations to 
Measure Group Development and Predict Task Perfor￾mance and Group Viability,” Journal of Applied Behavioral 
Science 43, no. 2 (2007): 184–212; D.A. Bonebright, 
“40 Years of Storming: A Historical Review of Tuckman’s 
Model of Small Group Development,” Human Resource 
Development International 13, no. 1 (2010): 111–20.
45. D.C. Feldman, “The Development and Enforcement of 
Group Norms,” Academy of Management Review 9 (1984): 
47–53; E. Fehr and U. Fischbacher, “Social Norms and 
Human Cooperation,” Trends in Cognitive Sciences 8, no. 4 
(2004): 185–90; B.A. De Jong, K.M. Bijlsma-Frankema, 
and L.B. Cardinal, “Stronger Than the Sum of Its Parts? 
The Performance Implications of Peer Control Combina￾tions in Teams,” Organization Science 25 (2014): 1703–21.
46. J.M. Nolan, “Social Norms and Their Enforcement,” in 
The Oxford Handbook of Social Influence, ed. S.G. Harkins, 
K.D. Williams, and J. Burger (New York: Oxford University 
Press, 2015), 147–64; A. Diekmann and W. Przepiorka, 
“ ‘Take One for the Team!’ Individual Heterogeneity and 
the Emergence of Latent Norms in a Volunteer’s Dilemma,” 
Social Forces 94 (2016): 1309–33.
47. K.D. Opp, “How Do Norms Emerge? An Outline of a 
Theory,” Mind & Society 2, no. 1 (2001): 101–28. 
48. J.M. Nolan, “Social Norms and Their Enforcement,” in The 
Oxford Handbook of Social Influence, ed. S.G. Harkins, K.D. 
Williams, and J. Burger (New York: Oxford University Press, 
2015); B. Manata, “The Structural Effects of Team Density 
and Normative Standards on Team Member Performance,” 
Human Communication Research 45 (2019): 309–33.
49. N. Ellemers and F. Rink, “Identity in Work Groups: The 
Beneficial and Detrimental Consequences of Multiple 
Identities and Group Norms for Collaboration and 
Group Performance,” Advances in Group Processes 22 
(2005): 1–41. For research on norm development and 
reinforcement in virtual teams, see K. Moser and C. Axtell, 
“The Role of Norms in Virtual Work: A Review and 
Agenda for Future Research,” Journal of Personnel 
Psychology 12, no. 1 (2013): 1–6.
50. S. Taggar and R. Ellis, “The Role of Leaders in Shaping 
Formal Team Norms,” Leadership Quarterly 18, no. 2 (2007): 
105–20; B.A. De Jong, K.M. Bijlsma-Frankema, and L.B. 
Cardinal, “Stronger Than the Sum of Its Parts? The Per￾formance Implications of Peer Control Combinations in 
Teams,” Organization Science 25, no. 6 (2014): 1703–21; 
Small Group Research 37, no. 5 (2006): 540–70; M.L. 
Loughry, M.W. Ohland, and D.D. Moore, “Development 
of a Theory-Based Assessment of Team Member Effec￾tiveness,” Educational and Psychological Measurement 67, 
no. 3 (2007): 505–24; E. Salas et al., “Understanding and 
Improving Teamwork in Organizations: A Scientifically 
Based Practical Guide,” Human Resource Management 54, 
no. 4 (2015): 599–622.
38. S. McComb et al., “The Five Ws of Team Communica￾tion,” Industrial Management 54, no. 5 (2012): 10–13. 
39. D. van Knippenberg, C.K.W. De Dreu, and A.C. Homan, 
“Work Group Diversity and Group Performance: An 
Integrative Model and Research Agenda,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology 89, no. 6 (2004): 1008–22; E. Mannix 
and M.A. Neale, “What Differences Make a Difference?: 
The Promise and Reality of Diverse Teams in Organiza￾tions,” Psychological Science in the Public Interest 6, no. 2 
(2005): 31–55; L.M. Shore et al., “Inclusion and Diver￾sity in Work Groups: A Review and Model for Future 
Research,” Journal of Management 37, no. 4 (2011): 
1262–89; S.K. Horwitz, “Functional Diversity in Project 
Teams: Working across Boundaries,” in The Psychology 
and Management of Project Teams: An Interdisciplinary 
Perspective, ed. B. Hobbs, E.K. Kelloway, and F. Chiocchio 
(New York: Oxford University Press, 2015), 329–63.
40. D.C. Lau and J.K. Murnighan, “Interactions within 
Groups and Subgroups: The Effects of Demographic 
Faultlines,” Academy of Management Journal 48, no. 4 
(2005): 645–59; S.M.B. Thatcher and P.C. Patel, “Group 
Faultlines: A Review, Integration, and Guide to Future 
Research,” Journal of Management 38, no. 4 (2012): 
969–1009; M. Shemla et al., “A Review of Perceived Diver￾sity in Teams: Does How Members Perceive Their Team’s 
Composition Affect Team Processes and Outcomes?,” 
Journal of Organizational Behavior 37 (2016): S89-S106.
41. This book applies the widely held definition of team pro￾cesses, which includes concepts that depict causal changes 
within teams, such as team development, norms, cohesion, 
and trust. In other words, it refers to team dynamics. How￾ever, some team models refer to team processes as a team’s 
actions that contribute to the organization’s transformation 
of inputs to outputs (see open systems in Chapter 1). We 
view these behaviors as team outcomes, not processes, at 
the team level of analysis. Most team effectiveness models 
adopt our meaning of team processes (along with emergent 
states). For example, see: J.S. Christian et al., “Team Adap￾tation in Context: An Integrated Conceptual Model and 
Meta-Analytic Review,” Organizational Behavior and Human 
Decision Processes 140 (2017): 62–89; M.L. Shuffler et al., 
“Developing, Sustaining, and Maximizing Team Effec￾tiveness: An Integrative, Dynamic Perspective of Team 
Development Interventions,” Academy of Management 
Annals 12, no. 2 (2018): 688–724; H. Roh et al., “Opening 
the Black Box: A Meta-Analytic Examination of the Effects 
of Top Management Team Diversity on Emergent Team 
Processes and Multilevel Contextual Influence,” Group & 
Organization Management 44, no. 1 (2019): 112–64.
42. Some of the better-known team development models over 
the years have been: W.G. Bennis and H.A. Shepard, “A 
Theory of Group Development,” Human Relations 9, no. 
4 (1956): 415–37; S.R. Kaplan and M. Roman, “Phases of 
Development in an Adult Therapy Group,” International 
Journal of Group Psychotherapy 13, no. 1 (1963): 10–26; 319
Team Cohesiveness and Performance,” Journal of Applied 
Social Psychology 38, no. 10 (2008): 2574–93; R. Wageman 
et al., Senior Leadership Teams (Boston: Harvard Business 
School Press, 2008): 69–70.
58. M. Rempel and R.J. Fisher, “Perceived Threat, Cohesion, 
and Group Problem Solving in Intergroup Conflict,” 
International Journal of Conflict Management 8 (1997): 
216–34; M.E. Turner and T. Horvitz, “The Dilemma of 
Threat: Group Effectiveness and Ineffectiveness under 
Adversity,” in Groups at Work: Theory and Research ed. 
M.E. Turner (Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum, 2001), 445–70. 
59. A.V. Carron et al., “Cohesion and Performance in 
Sport: A Meta-Analysis,” Journal of Sport and Exercise 
Psychology 24 (2002): 168–88; D.J. Beal et al., 
“Cohesion and Performance in Groups: A Meta-Analytic 
Clarification of Construct Relations,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology 88, no. 6 (2003): 989–1004; L.A. DeChurch 
and J.R. Mesmer-Magnus, “The Cognitive Underpin￾nings of Effective Teamwork: A Meta-Analysis,” Journal 
of Applied Psychology 95, no. 1 (2010): 32–53; S.M. 
Gully, D.J. Devine, and D.J. Whitney, “A Meta-Analysis 
of Cohesion and Performance: Effects of Level of Analy￾sis and Task Interdependence,” Small Group Research 43, 
no. 6 (2012): 702–25.
60. W. Piper et al., “Cohesion as a Basic Bond in Groups,” 
Human Relations 36 (1983): 93–108; S.Y. Shin and S.G. 
Lee, “Effects of Hospital Workers? Friendship Networks 
on Job Stress,” PLoS ONE 11, no. 2 (2016): e0149428.
61. S.M. Gully, D.J. Devine, and D.J. Whitney, “A Meta￾Analysis of Cohesion and Performance: Effects of Level 
of Analysis and Task Interdependence,” Small Group 
Research 43, no. 6 (2012): 702–25. 
62. K.L. Gammage, A.V. Carron, and P.A. Estabrooks, “Team 
Cohesion and Individual Productivity: The Influence of the 
Norm for Productivity and the Identifiability of Individual 
Effort,” Small Group Research 32 (2001): 3–18. Concerns 
about existing research on cohesion–performance are dis￾cussed in M. Casey-Campbell and M.L. Martens, “Sticking 
It All Together: A Critical Assessment of the Group 
Cohesion–Performance Literature,” International Journal 
of Management Reviews 11, no. 2 (2009): 223–46. 
63. J. Mathieu et al., “Modeling Reciprocal Team Cohesion￾Performance Relationships, as Impacted by Shared Lead￾ership and Members’ Competence,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology 100, no. 3 (2015): 713–34.
64. D.M. Rousseau et al., “Not So Different after All: A Cross￾Discipline View of Trust,” Academy of Management 
Review 23 (1998): 393–404; R. Searle, A. Weibel, and 
D.N. Den Hartog, “Employee Trust in Organizational 
Contexts,” in International Review of Industrial and 
Organizational Psychology 26 (2011): 143–91; I. Yang, 
“What Makes an Effective Team? The Role of Trust 
(Dis)Confirmation in Team Development,” European 
Management Journal 32, no. 6 (2014): 858–69.
65. D.J. McAllister, “Affect- and Cognition-Based Trust as 
Foundations for Interpersonal Cooperation in Organiza￾tions,” Academy of Management Journal 38, no. 1 (1995): 
24–59; M. Williams, “In Whom We Trust: Group Mem￾bership as an Affective Context for Trust Development,” 
Academy of Management Review 26, no. 3 (2001): 377–96; 
M. Pirson and D. Malhotra, “Foundations of Organiza￾tional Trust: What Matters to Different Stakeholders?,” 
Organization Science 22, no. 4 (2011): 1087–104.
A. Lieberman, K.E. Duke, and O. Amir, “How Incentive 
Framing Can Harness the Power of Social Norms,” 
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 151 
(2019): 118–31.
51. A.P. Hare, “Types of Roles in Small Groups: A Bit of 
History and a Current Perspective,” Small Group Research
25 (1994): 443–48; A. Aritzeta, S. Swailes, and B. Senior, 
“Belbin’s Team Role Model: Development, Validity and 
Applications for Team Building,” Journal of Management 
Studies 44, no. 1 (2007): 96–118. 
52. A.P. Hare, “Types of Roles in Small Groups: A Bit of 
History and a Current Perspective,” Small Group Research
25 (1994): 443–48; A. Aritzeta, S. Swailes, and B. Senior, 
“Belbin’s Team Role Model: Development, Validity and 
Applications for Team Building,” Journal of Management 
Studies 44, no. 1 (2007): 96–118; J.E. Mathieu et al., 
“Team Role Experience and Orientation: A Measure and 
Tests of Construct Validity,” Group & Organization Man￾agement 40 (2015): 6–34; N. Lehmann-Willenbrock, S.J. 
Beck, and S. Kauffeld, “Emergent Team Roles in Organi￾zational Meetings: Identifying Communication Patterns 
Via Cluster Analysis,” Communication Studies 67 (2016): 
37–57; T. Driskell et al., “Team Roles: A Review and Inte￾gration,” Small Group Research 48 (2017): 482–511.
53. D.J. Beal et al., “Cohesion and Performance in Groups: 
A Meta-Analytic Clarification of Construct Relations,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 88, no. 6 (2003): 989–1004. 
However, the definition of social cohesion is still being 
debated, such as its level of analysis. see: S. Drescher, 
G. Burlingame, and A. Fuhriman, “Cohesion: An Odyssey 
in Empirical Understanding,” Small Group Research 43, 
no. 6 (2012): 662–89; X. Fonseca, S. Lukosch, and 
F. Brazier, “Social Cohesion Revisited: A New Definition 
and How to Characterize It,” Innovation: The European 
Journal of Social Science Research 32, no. 2 (2019): 231–53.
54. R.M. Montoya, R.S. Horton, and J. Kirchner, “Is Actual 
Similarity Necessary for Attraction? A Meta-Analysis 
of Actual and Perceived Similarity,” Journal of Social 
and Personal Relationships 25, no. 6 (2008): 889–922; 
M.T. Rivera, S.B. Soderstrom, and B. Uzzi, “Dynamics 
of Dyads in Social Networks: Assortative, Relational, and 
Proximity Mechanisms,” Annual Review of Sociology 36 
(2010): 91–115. 
55. K.A. Jehn, G.B. Northcraft, and M.A. Neale, “Why Dif￾ferences Make a Difference: A Field Study of Diversity, 
Conflict, and Performance in Workgroups,” Administra￾tive Science Quarterly 44, no. 4 (1999): 741–63. For 
evidence that diversity/similarity does not always influence 
cohesion, see S.S. Webber and L.M. Donahue, “Impact 
of Highly and Less Job-Related Diversity on Work Group 
Cohesion and Performance: A Meta-Analysis,” Journal 
of Management 27, no. 2 (2001): 141–62.
56. E. Aronson and J. Mills, “The Effects of Severity of Initi￾ation on Liking for a Group,” Journal of Abnormal and 
Social Psychology 59 (1959): 177–81; J.E. Hautaluoma 
and R.S. Enge, “Early Socialization into a Work Group: 
Severity of Initiations Revisited,” Journal of Social Behav￾ior & Personality 6 (1991): 725–48. 
57. B. Mullen and C. Copper, “The Relation between 
Group Cohesiveness and Performance: An Integration,” 
Psychological Bulletin 115 (1994): 210–27; C.J. Fullagar 
and D.O. Egleston, “Norming and Performing: Using 
Microworlds to Understand the Relationship between 320
Memory and Group Performance,” Organization Science
29 (2018): 191–206.
75. C.A. Beatty and B.A. Barker, Building Smart Teams: 
Roadmap to High Performance (Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Sage, 2004); W.G. Dyer, J.H. Dyer, and W.G. Dyer, Team 
Building: Proven Strategies for Improving Team Perfor￾mance, 5th ed. (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2013); M.R. 
Beauchamp, D. McEwan, and K.J. Waldhauser, “Team 
Building: Conceptual, Methodological, and Applied 
Considerations,” Current Opinion in Psychology, 16 (2017): 
114–17; C.N. Lacerenza et al., “Team Development Inter￾ventions: Evidence-Based Approaches for Improving 
Teamwork,” American Psychologist 73 (2018): 517–31.
76. J. Langan-Fox and J. Anglim, “Mental Models, Team 
Mental Models, and Performance: Process, Development, 
and Future Directions,”Human Factors and Ergonomics 
in Manufacturing 14 (2004): 331–52; J.E. Mathieu et al., 
“Scaling the Quality of Teammates’ Mental Models: 
Equifinality and Normative Comparisons,” Journal of 
Organizational Behavior 26 (2005): 37–56.
77. D.R. Seibold and R.A. Meyers, “Interventions in Groups: 
Methods for Facilitating Team Development,” in Research 
Methods for Studying Groups and Teams: A Guide to Ap￾proaches, Tools, and Technologies, ed. A. Hollingshead 
and M.S. Poole (New York: Routledge, 2012), 418–41; 
A. Hämmelmann and R. van Dick, “Building the Team: 
Effect on the Individual—an Evaluation of Team Building 
Interventions (Entwickeln Im Team—Effekte FüR Den 
Einzelnen: Eine Evaluation Von Teamentwicklungsmaß￾nahmen),” Gruppendynamik und Organisationsberatung
44, no. 2 (2013): 221–38.
78. L.J. Martin, A.V. Carron, and S.M. Burke, “Team Building 
Interventions in Sport: A Meta-Analysis,” Sport & Exer￾cise Psychology Journal 5, no. 2 (2009): 3–18; C. Klein et al., 
“Does Team Building Work?,” Small Group Research 40, 
no. 2 (2009): 181–222; I. Nadler, P.M. Sanderson, and 
H.G. Liley, “The Accuracy of Clinical Assessments as a 
Measure for Teamwork Effectiveness,” Simulation in 
Healthcare 6, no. 5 (2011): 260–68; Y.J. Yi, “Effects of 
Team-Building on Communication and Teamwork among 
Nursing Students,” International Nursing Review 63, no. 1 
(2016): 33–40; C.N. Lacerenza et al., “Team Development 
Interventions: Evidence-Based Approaches for Improving 
Teamwork.,” American Psychologist 73 (2018): 517–31.
79. R.W. Woodman and J.J. Sherwood, “The Role of Team 
Development in Organizational Effectiveness: A Critical 
Review,” Psychological Bulletin 88 (1980): 166–86; C.J. 
Miller et al., “A Systematic Review of Team-Building Inter￾ventions in Non-Acute Healthcare Settings,” BMC Health 
Services Research 18, no. 1 (2018): 146.
80. G.E. Huszczo, “Training for Team Building,” Training 
and Development Journal 44 (1990): 37–43; P. McGraw, 
“Back from the Mountain: Outdoor Management Devel￾opment Programs and How to Ensure the Transfer of 
Skills to the Workplace,” Asia Pacific Journal of Human 
Resources 31 (1993): 52–61. 
81. K. Monsen and J. deBlok, “Buurtzorg Nederland,” Ameri￾can Journal of Nursing 113, no. 8 (2013): 55–59; B. Gray, 
D.O. Sarnak, and J. Burgers, Home Care by Self-Governing 
Nursing Teams: The Netherlands’ Buurtzorg Model, 
The Commonwealth Fund (New York: May 29, 2015); 
K. Oxtoby, “Can the Buurtzorg Model of Nursing Trans￾form the NHS?,” Independent Nurse, April 16, 2021; 
66. R.J. Lewicki, E.C. Tomlinson, and N. Gillespie, “Models 
of Interpersonal Trust Development: Theoretical Ap￾proaches, Empirical Evidence, and Future Directions,” 
Journal of Management 32, no. 6 (2006): 991–1022. 
67. R.J. Lewicki, E.C. Tomlinson, and N. Gillespie, “Models 
of Interpersonal Trust Development: Theoretical Ap￾proaches, Empirical Evidence, and Future Directions,” 
Journal of Management 32, no. 6 (2006): 991–1022; 
N. Zhao et al., “The Impact of Traditionality/Modernity 
on Identification- and Calculus-Based Trust,” International 
Journal of Psychology 54, no. 2 (2019): 237–46.
68. E.M. Whitener et al., “Managers as Initiators of Trust: 
An Exchange Relationship Framework for Understanding 
Managerial Trustworthy Behavior,” Academy of Manage￾ment Review 23 (1998): 513–30; T. Simons et al., “How 
Leader Alignment of Words and Deeds Affects Follow￾ers: A Meta-Analysis of Behavioral Integrity Research,” 
Journal of Business Ethics 132, no. 4 (2015): 831–44.
69. H. Akrout and M.F. Diallo, “Fundamental Transforma￾tions of Trust and Its Drivers: A Multi-Stage Approach of 
Business-to-Business Relationships,” Industrial Marketing 
Management 66 (2017): 159–71; A.C. Costa, C.A. 
Fulmer, and N.R. Anderson, “Trust in Work Teams: 
An Integrative Review, Multilevel Model, and Future 
Directions,” Journal of Organizational Behavior 39, no. 2 
(2018): 169–84.
70. L.P. Robert, A.R. Dennis, and Y.T.C. Hung, “Individual 
Swift Trust and Knowledge-Based Trust in Face-to-Face and 
Virtual Team Members,” Journal of Management Informa￾tion Systems 26, no. 2 (2009): 241–79; C.B. Crisp and S.L. 
Jarvenpaa, “Swift Trust in Global Virtual Teams: Trusting 
Beliefs and Normative Actions,” Journal of Personnel Psy￾chology 12, no. 1 (2013): 45–56; O. Schilke and L. Huang, 
“Worthy of Swift Trust? How Brief Interpersonal Contact 
Affects Trust Accuracy,” Journal of Applied Psychology 103 
(2018): 1181–97.
71. K.T. Dirks and D.L. Ferrin, “The Role of Trust in Organi￾zations,” Organization Science 12, no. 4 (2004): 450–67; 
I. Yang, “What Makes an Effective Team? The Role of 
Trust (Dis)Confirmation in Team Development,” Euro￾pean Management Journal 32, no. 6 (2014): 858–69.
72. L.A. DeChurch and J.R. Mesmer-Magnus, “The Cogni￾tive Underpinnings of Effective Teamwork: A Meta￾Analysis,” Journal of Applied Psychology 95 (2010): 32–53; 
C. Aubé, V. Rousseau, and S. Tremblay, “Perceived Shared 
Understanding in Teams: The Motivational Effect of 
Being ‘on the Same Page,’” British Journal of Psychology
106 (2015): 468–86; J.M. Schmidtke and A. Cummings, 
“The Effects of Virtualness on Teamwork Behavioral 
Components: The Role of Shared Mental Models,” 
Human Resource Management Review 27 (2017): 660–77.
73. R. Rico, M. Sánchez-Manzanares, and C. Gibson, “Team 
Implicit Coordination Processes: A Team Knowledge￾Based Approach,” Academy of Management Review 33, 
no. 1 (2008): 163–84; J.C. Gorman, “Team Coordination 
and Dynamics: Two Central Issues,” Current Directions in 
Psychological Science 23, no. 5 (2014): 355–60; J. Schmutz 
et al., “Effective Coordination in Medical Emergency 
Teams: The Moderating Role of Task Type,” European 
Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology 24, no. 5 
(2015): 761–76.
74. L. Argote, B.L. Aven, and J. Kush, “The Effects of 
Communication Networks and Turnover on Transactive 321
Journal 20, no. 3 (2010): 267–95; M.K. Foster et al., 
“Rethinking Virtuality and Its Impact on Teams,” 
Small Group Research 46, no. 3 (2015): 267–99; J.M. 
Schaubroeck and A. Yu, “When Does Virtuality Help or 
Hinder Teams? Core Team Characteristics as Contingency 
Factors,” Human Resource Management Review 27, no. 4 
(2017): 635–47.
89. L.L. Gilson et al., “Virtual Teams Research: 10 Years, 10 
Themes, and 10 Opportunities,” Journal of Management 41, 
no. 5 (2015): 1313–37.
90. J.L. Cordery and C. Soo, “Overcoming Impediments to 
Virtual Team Effectiveness,” Human Factors and Ergo￾nomics in Manufacturing & Service Industries 18, no. 5 
(2008): 487–500; A. Ortiz de Guinea, J. Webster, and 
D.S. Staples, “A Meta-Analysis of the Consequences of 
Virtualness on Team Functioning,” Information & Man￾agement 49, no. 6 (2012): 301–08; T.A. O’Neill, L.A. 
Hambley, and G.S. Chatellier, “Cyberslacking, Engage￾ment, and Personality in Distributed Work Environments,” 
Computers in Human Behavior 40 (2014): 152–60.
91. L.L. Martins and M.C. Schilpzand, “Global Virtual Teams: 
Key Developments, Research Gaps, and Future Directions,” 
Research in Personnel and Human Resources Management
30 (2011): 1–72; S. Krumm et al., “What Does It Take to 
Be a Virtual Team Player? The Knowledge, Skills, Abilities, 
and Other Characteristics Required in Virtual Teams,” 
Human Performance 29, no. 2 (2016): 123–42; J.L. Gibbs, 
A. Sivunen, and M. Boyraz, “Investigating the Impacts of 
Team Type and Design on Virtual Team Processes,” 
Human Resource Management Review 27 (2017): 590–603.
92. S.L. Marlow, C.N. Lacerenza, and E. Salas, “Communi￾cation in Virtual Teams: A Conceptual Framework and 
Research Agenda,” Human Resource Management Review
27 (2017): 575–89; L. Handke et al., “Teams, Time, and 
Technology: Variations of Media Use Over Project 
Phases,” Small Group Research 50 (2019): 266–305.
93. G.G. Harwood, “Design Principles for Successful Virtual 
Teams,” in The Handbook of High-Performance Virtual 
Teams: A Toolkit for Collaborating across Boundaries, ed. 
J. Nemiro and M.M. Beyerlein (San Francisco: Jossey￾Bass, 2008), 59–84. Also see H. Duckworth, “How TRW 
Automotive Helps Global Virtual Teams Perform at the 
Top of Their Game,” Global Business and Organizational 
Excellence 28, no. 1 (2008): 6–16; L. Dubé and D. Robey, 
“Surviving the Paradoxes of Virtual Teamwork,” Information 
Systems Journal 19, no. 1 (2009): 3–30. 
94. L. Dubé and D. Robey, “Surviving the Paradoxes of Virtual 
Teamwork,” Information Systems Journal 19, no. 1 (2009): 
3–30.
95. V.H. Vroom and A.G. Jago, The New Leadership
(Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1988), 28–29. 
96. M. Diehl and W. Stroebe, “Productivity Loss in Idea￾Generating Groups: Tracking Down the Blocking 
Effects,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 61 
(1991): 392–403; B.A. Nijstad, W. Stroebe, and H.F.M. 
Lodewijkx, “Production Blocking and Idea Generation: 
Does Blocking Interfere with Cognitive Processes?,” 
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 39, no. 6 (2003): 
531–48; D.D. Henningsen and M.L.M. Henningsen, 
“Generating Ideas About the Uses of Brainstorming: 
Reconsidering the Losses and Gains of Brainstorming 
Groups Relative to Nominal Groups,” Southern Commu￾nication Journal 78, no. 1 ( 2013): 42–55.
E. Battaglia, “A Thousand Small Self-Managed Units 
around Trust, Respect, and Autonomy—with Buurtzorg,” 
Medium: Stories of Platform Design, March 17, 2021; 
D. Bagnall, “Coffee First, Then Care,” Inside Story, Octo￾ber 7, 2021; A. Hegedüs, A. Schürch, and I. Bischofberger, 
“Implementing Buurtzorg-Derived Models in the Home 
Care Setting: A Scoping Review,” International Journal of 
Nursing Studies Advances 4 (January 2022): 100061.
82. S.A. Mohrman, S.G. Cohen, and A.M. Mohrman Jr., 
Designing Team-Based Organizations: New Forms for 
Knowledge Work (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1995), 
39–40; D.E. Yeatts and C. Hyten, High-Performing 
Self-Managed Work Teams: A Comparison of Theory and 
Practice (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 1998); E.E. Lawler, 
Organizing for High Performance (San Francisco: Jossey￾Bass, 2001); R.J. Torraco, “Work Design Theory: A Re￾view and Critique with Implications for Human Resource 
Development,” Human Resource Development Quarterly 16, 
no. 1 (2005): 85–109. 
83. P. Panchak, “Production Workers Can Be Your Competi￾tive Edge,” Industry Week, October 2004, 11; S.K. Muth￾usamy, J.V. Wheeler, and B.L. Simmons, “Self-Managing 
Work Teams: Enhancing Organizational Innovativeness,” 
Organization Development Journal 23, no. 3 (2005): 53–66.
84. A. Krause and H. Dunckel, “Work Design and Customer 
Satisfaction: Effects of the Implementation of Semi￾Autonomous Group Work on Customer Satisfaction Con￾sidering Employee Satisfaction and Group Performance 
(translated abstract),” Zeitschrift für Arbeits-und Organisa￾tionspsychologie 47, no. 4 (2003): 182–93; G.L. Stewart, 
S.H. Courtright, and M.R. Barrick, “Peer-Based Control 
in Self-Managing Teams: Linking Rational and Norma￾tive Influence with Individual and Group Performance,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 97, no. 2 (2012): 435–47; 
E.E.M. Maurits et al., “Home-Care Nursing Staff in Self￾Directed Teams Are More Satisfied with Their Job and 
Feel They Have More Autonomy over Patient Care: 
A Nationwide Survey,” Journal of Advanced Nursing 73, 
no. 10 (2017): 2430–40.
85. J.L. Cordery et al., “The Impact of Autonomy and Task 
Uncertainty on Team Performance: A Longitudinal Field 
Study,” Journal of Organizational Behavior 31 (2010): 
240–58; N.C. Magpili and P. Pazos, “Self-Managing Team 
Performance: A Systematic Review of Multilevel Input 
Factors,” Small Group Research 49, no. 1 (2018): 3–33; 
M. Renkema, T. Bondarouk, and A. Bos-Nehles, “Trans￾formation to Self-Managing Teams: Lessons Learned: 
A Look at Current Trends and Data,” Strategic HR 
Review 17, no. 2 (2018): 81–84.
86. E. Ulich and W.G. Weber, “Dimensions, Criteria, and 
Evaluation of Work Group Autonomy,” in Handbook of 
Work Group Psychology, ed. M.A. West (Chichester, UK: 
Wiley, 1996), 247–82. 
87. J. Lipnack and J. Stamps, Virtual Teams: People Working 
across Boundaries with Technology (New York: Wiley, 
2001); J.H. Dulebohn and J.E. Hoch, “Virtual Teams in 
Organizations,” Human Resource Management Review 27 
(2017): 569–74. Some suggest that remote teams differ 
slightly from distributed teams, where the latter have no 
physical base location. However, we group them together 
because they overlap in terms of OB concepts and practices.
88. L. Schweitzer and L. Duxbury, “Conceptualizing and 
Measuring the Virtuality of Teams,” Information Systems 322
103. R.I. Sutton and A. Hargadon, “Brainstorming Groups 
in Context: Effectiveness in a Product Design Firm,” 
Administrative Science Quarterly 41(1996): 685–718; 
T. Kelley, The Art of Innovation (New York: Currency 
Doubleday, 2001); T. Kelley, The Ten Faces of Innovation
(New York: Doubleday, 2005); A.B. Hargadon and B.A. 
Bechky, “When Collections of Creatives Become Cre￾ative Collectives: A Field Study of Problem Solving at 
Work,” Organization Science 17, no. 4 (2006): 484–500; 
K. Sawyer, Group Genius: The Creative Power of Collabora￾tion (New York: Basic Books, 2007). Lab-based research￾ers now recognize that brainstorming can be quite 
effective when specific conditions are put in place. See: 
P.B. Paulus and J.B. Kenworthy, “Effective Brainstorm￾ing,” in The Oxford Handbook of Group Creativity and 
Innovation, ed. P.B. Paulus and B.A. Nijstad (New York: 
Oxford University Press, 2019), 287–306.
104. K. Girotra, C. Terwiesch, and K.T. Ulrich, “Idea Genera￾tion and the Quality of the Best Idea,” Management 
Science 56, no. 4 (April 2010): 591–605; N.W. Kohn, P.B. 
Paulus, and Y.H. Choi, “Building on the Ideas of Others: 
An Examination of the Idea Combination Process,” Jour￾nal of Experimental Social Psychology 47(2011): 554–61. 
Recent studies provide evidence that brainstorming is 
effective in conditions closer to real-world organizations. 
See: J.M. Levine et al., “Group Brainstorming: When 
Regulatory Nonfit Enhances Performance,” Group Pro￾cesses & Intergroup Relations 19, no. 2 (2016): 257–71; 
Levine, K.B. Heuett, and K.M. Reno, “Re-Operationaliz￾ing Established Groups in Brainstorming: Validating 
Osborn’s Claims,” The Journal of Creative Behavior 51, 
no. 3 (2017): 252–62. Also, recent evidence suggests 
that the most creative ideas are found in earlier rather 
than later ideas presented in brainstorming groups. See: 
B.R. Johnson and C.J. D’Lauro, “After Brainstorming, 
Groups Select an Early Generated Idea as Their Best 
Idea,” Small Group Research 49, no. 2 (2018): 177–94.
105. N.W. Kohn and S.M. Smith, “Collaborative Fixation: 
Effects of Others’ Ideas on Brainstorming,” Applied Cog￾nitive Psychology 25, no. 3 (2011): 359–71; L. Alipour 
et al., “A Review of Design Fixation: Research Directions 
and Key Factors,” International Journal of Design Creativity 
and Innovation 6, no. 1–2 (2018): 22–35; N. Crilly and 
R. Moroşanu Firth, “Creativity and Fixation in the Real 
World: Three Case Studies of Invention, Design and 
Innovation,” Design Studies 64 (2019): 169–212.
106. P.B. Paulus et al., “Asynchronous Brainstorming in an 
Industrial Setting: Exploratory Studies,” Human Factors 57, 
no. 6 (2015): 1076–94; A. Markman, “Conventional 
Brainstorming Doesn’t Work. Try This Method Instead,” 
Fast Company, October 5, 2021.
107. P.A. Heslin, “Better Than Brainstorming? Potential 
Contextual Boundary Conditions to Brainwriting for Idea 
Generation in Organizations,” Journal of Occupational 
and Organizational Psychology 82, no. 1 (2009): 129–45; 
J.S. Linsey and B. Becker, “Effectiveness of Brainwriting 
Techniques: Comparing Nominal Groups to Real 
Teams,” in Design Creativity 2010, ed. T. Taura and 
Y. Nagai (London: Springer London, 2011), 165–71; 
N. Michinov, “Is Electronic Brainstorming or Brainwriting 
the Best Way to Improve Creative Performance in Groups? 
An Overlooked Comparison of Two Idea-Generation 
Techniques,” Journal of Applied Social Psychology 42 
97. B.E. Irmer, P. Bordia, and D. Abusah, “Evaluation Ap￾prehension and Perceived Benefits in Interpersonal and 
Database Knowledge Sharing,” Academy of Management 
Proceedings (2002): B1–B6; L. McGrath, “When Pairing 
Reduces Scaring: The Effect Of Dyadic Ideation On 
Evaluation Apprehension,” International Journal of 
Innovation Management 19, no. 04 (2015): 1550039.
98. A.D. Stajkovic, D. Lee, and A.J. Nyberg, “Collective 
Efficacy, Group Potency, and Group Performance: Meta￾Analyses of Their Relationships, and Test of a Mediation 
Model,” Journal of Applied Psychology 94, no. 3 (2009): 
814–28; J. Schepers et al., “Fields of Gold: Perceived 
Efficacy in Virtual Teams of Field Service Employees,” 
Journal of Service Research 14, no. 3 (2011): 372–89. 
OB experts describe team efficacy as efficacy toward a 
specific task, whereas team potency is the team’s general 
efficacy. 
99. D. Miller, The Icarus Paradox: How Exceptional 
Companies Bring about Their Own Downfall (New York: 
HarperBusiness, 1990); G. Whyte, “Recasting Janis’s 
Groupthink Model: The Key Role of Collective Efficacy 
in Decision Fiascoes,” Organizational Behavior and 
Human Decision Processes 73, no. 2–3 (1998): 185–209; 
K. Tasa and G. Whyte, “Collective Efficacy and Vigilant 
Problem Solving in Group Decision Making: A Non-Linear 
Model,” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision 
Processes 96, no. 2 (2005): 119–29; T.L. Rapp et al., “The 
Role of Team Goal Monitoring in the Curvilinear Rela￾tionship between Team Efficacy and Team Performance,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 99 (2014): 976–87; W.-W. 
Park, M.S. Kim, and S.M. Gully, “Effect of Cohesion on 
the Curvilinear Relationship Between Team Efficacy and 
Performance,” Small Group Research 48 (2017): 455–81.
100. A.C. Edmondson and Z. Lei, “Psychological Safety: 
The History, Renaissance, and Future of an Interpersonal 
Construct,” Annual Review of Organizational Psychology 
and Organizational Behavior 1 (2014): 23–43; A. New￾man, R. Donohue, and N. Eva, “Psychological Safety: 
A Systematic Review of the Literature,” Human Resource 
Management Review 27 (2017): 521–35.
101. The term brainstorm dates back to a New York murder 
trial in February 1907, during which an alienist (psychia￾trist) gave expert testimony that the accused had a “brain 
storm,” which he described as a form of temporary insan￾ity. But by the mid-1920s, a brainstorm was associated 
with creative thinking. For example, Popular Science
magazine’s lead article in April 1926 described innovative 
camera operators, one of whom received a film award 
for a brainstorm of filming while strapped to a windmill. 
Advertising executive Alex Osborn (the O in BBDO, 
the largest creative agency owned by Omnicom) first 
described the brainstorming process in the little-known 
1942 booklet How to Think Up (p. 29). Osborn gave a 
fuller description of the brainstorming process in his 
popular 1948 (Your Creative Power) and 1953 (Applied 
Imagination) books. See A.F. Osborn, How to Think Up
(New York: McGraw Hill, 1942), Chap. 4; A.F. Osborn, 
Your Creative Power (New York: Scribner’s Sons, 1948); 
A.F. Osborn, Applied Imagination (New York: Scribner’s 
Sons, 1953).
102. B. Mullen, C. Johnson, and E. Salas, “Productivity Loss 
in Brainstorming Groups: A Meta-Analytic Integration,” 
Basic and Applied Psychology 12(1991): 2–23.323
	 d.	 S. Garmhausen, “Why Teams Dominate at the Top
Financial Advisors,” Barron’s, April 19, 2019; A. Willis,
“Why RBC Is Becoming the New England Patriots of
Bay Street,” Globe & Mail, April 24, 2019; “Canada’s
Best Investment Bank 2019: RBC Capital Markets,”
Euromoney, July 10, 2019; B. Fang and O.-K. Hope,
“Analyst Teams,” Review of Accounting Studies 26, no. 2
(2021): 425–67.
	 e.	 K.M. Kniffin et al., “Eating Together at the Firehouse:
How Workplace Commensality Relates to the Perfor￾mance of Firefighters,” Human Performance 28, no. 4
(2015): 281–306; J. Hicks, “Ready to Handle the Heat:
Waterloo Firefighter a Culinary Contender on Chopped
Canada,” Waterloo Regional Record (Kitchener, Ontario,
Canada), January 29, 2015, A1; P. Mathieu, “Recipe
Rescue: Bond over Meal Prep,” Canadian Firefighter,
April 11, 2016; “How Food Helps Both Firefighters and
Families Bond,” CBC News, December 21, 2017.
	 f.	 N. Van Praet, “GE to Modernize Its Aircraft Engine
Parts Plant in Quebec,” Globe & Mail, February 9, 2017;
S. Kessler, “GE Has a Version of Self-Management
That Is Much like Zappos’ Holacracy–and It Works,”
Quartz, June 6, 2017; C. Thatcher, “Smart Factory:
GE Aviation,” Skies Magazine (blog), August 2, 2017.
	 g.	 G.R. Berry, “Enhancing Effectiveness on Virtual Teams:
Understanding Why Traditional Team Skills Are Insuffi￾cient,” The Journal of Business Communication 48, no. 2
(2011): 186–206; J.H. Dulebohn and J.E. Hoch, “Virtual
Teams in Organizations,” Human Resource Management 
Review 27, no. 4 (2017): 569–74; S. Mak and S.W.J.
Kozlowski, “Virtual Teams: Conceptualization, Integra￾tive Review, and Research Recommendations,” in The 
Cambridge Handbook of Technology and Employee 
Behavior, ed. R.N. Landers, Cambridge Handbooks in
Psychology (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
2019), 441–79.
	 h.	 J.V. Hacker et al., “Trust in Virtual Teams: A Multidisci￾plinary Review and Integration,” Australasian Journal of 
Information Systems 23 (2019) https://doi.org/10.3127/
ajis.v23i0.1757.
	 i.	 Long-Distance Loathing (Summary and Data), (Provo,
Utah: VitalSmarts, March 2009); “Virtual Reality: Re￾mote Employees Experience More Workplace Politics
Than Onsite Teammates,” News Release (Provo, Utah:
VitalSmarts, November 2, 2017).
	 j.	 O. Staley, “The Creator of WordPress Shares His Secret
to Running a Remote Workplace,” Quartz at Work, May
29, 2018; M. Hollingsworth, “Cesar Abeid, Happiness
Team Lead at Automattic,” podcast, The Remote Show
(blog), April 24, 2019; M.K. Saltzman, “Best Practices
for Distributed Teams: Automattic Shares All,” True 
Ventures (blog), March 13, 2020. Information about
Automattic’s workforce is available on its website.
See: https://automattic.com/about/
	 k.	 V. Siriwardane, “How to Run a Brainstorming Session,”
Inc., November 30, 2010; Stanford eCorner, Brendan 
Boyle: How to Brainstorm Better, YouTube, Stanford
Speaker Series: Entrepreneurial Thought Leaders, 2017;
B. Boyle and M. Lee, “5 Activities to Stretch Your
Imagination,” LinkedIn Pulse (blog), January 22, 2021.
(2012): E222–E243; M. Litcanu et al., “Brain-Writing
vs. Brainstorming Case Study For Power Engineering
Education,” Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 191
(2015): 387–90.
	108.	R.B. Gallupe, L.M. Bastianutti, and W.H. Cooper, “Un￾blocking Brainstorms,” Journal of Applied Psychology 76
(1991): 137–42; W.H. Cooper et al., “Some Liberating
Effects of Anonymous Electronic Brainstorming,” Small 
Group Research 29, no. 2 (1998): 147–78; J. Baruah and
P.B. Paulus, “The Role of Time and Category Relatedness
in Electronic Brainstorming,” Small Group Research 47,
no. 3 (2016): 333–42; H. Al-Samarraie and S. Hurmuzan,
“A Review of Brainstorming Techniques in Higher Edu￾cation,” Thinking Skills and Creativity 27 (2018): 78–91.
	109.	A.L. Delbecq, A.H. Van de Ven, and D.H. Gustafson,
Group Techniques for Program Planning: A Guide to Nomi￾nal Group and Delphi Processes (Middleton, WI: Green
Briar Press, 1986).
	110.	S. Frankel, “NGT + MDS: An Adaptation of the Nomi￾nal Group Technique for Ill-Structured Problems,” Jour￾nal of Applied Behavioral Science 23 (1987): 543–51; H.
Barki and A. Pinsonneault, “Small Group Brainstorming
and Idea Quality: Is Electronic Brainstorming the Most
Effective Approach?,” Small Group Research 32, no. 2
(2001): 158–205; P. P. Lago et al., “Structuring Group
Decision Making in a Web-Based Environment by Using
the Nominal Group Technique,” Computers & Industrial 
Engineering 52, no. 2 (2007): 277–95; D.M. Spencer,
“Facilitating Public Participation in Tourism Planning on
American Indian Reservations: A Case Study Involving
the Nominal Group Technique,” Tourism Management
31, no. 5 (2011): 684–90.
	 a.	 “A Sneak Preview of Thommessen’s New Oslo Premises,”
Thommessen Corporate News (blog), June 10, 2021; “Digital
Services,” Advokatfirmaet Thommessen AS, 2022;
“Working at Thommessen,” Advokatfirmaet Thommessen
AS, accessed February 14, 2022, https://www.thommessen
.no/en/career/working-at-thommessen.
	 b.	 F. Mathijssen, “The Story of Nike’s Obeya,” Planet Lean,
December 11, 2014; F. Parisot, “PSA Généralise Les
Réunions Virtuelles (PSA Generalizes Virtual Meetings),”
L’usine Nouvelle, January 15, 2015; S. Arlt, “Schöne, neue
Arbeitswelt (Beautiful, New Working Environment),”
Deutschlandfunk Kultur, November 7, 2017; T. Hein,
“Der agile Way of Working im Baufinanzierungsvertrieb
(The agile way of working in mortgage lending sales),”
Der Bank Blog (blog), March 8, 2021; T. Wiegel, Leading 
with Obeya: Using a Big Room to Lead Successful Strategies
(Amsterdam, NL: Management Impact Publishing,
2021); “How to Improve Communication within the
Team: The Obeya Room,” News Release (Gorgonzola,
Italy: Tri-Mer Global Technologies, May 25, 2021).
	 c.	 “Are College Graduates ‘Career Ready’?,” News Release
(Bethlehem, PA: National Association of Colleges and
Employers, February 19, 2018); “The 2019 Employee
Engagement Report” (Seattle: TINYpulse, February 21,
2019); “Forty Percent of Employers Plan to Hire Full￾Time Workers This Year, Forty-Seven Percent Recruiting
Part-Time Workers,” News Release (Chicago: Career
Builder, March 5, 2019).
Design Credit: Blue globe icon: Merfin/Shutterstock324
Communicating in Teams 
and Organizations
Several years ago, Chris Shaida received about 500 emails per day, most 
of them from RealFoundations (RF) employees. Today, the CEO and cofounder of the 
Dallas-based professional services firm for the real estate industry has only about 25 daily emails, all of 
them from outside sources. “I do not get email messages from anybody else inside RealFoundations,” 
Shaida proclaims.
RF’s 400 employees have replaced internal email with messages posted on team channels within the 
company’s enterprise communication platform. Team channels are fully visible to all members of that 
team and are organized around conversations or topics. Employees typically belong to more than one 
team, and some channels are open to the entire organization. “You will see a ton of replies and likes on 
posts, and you’ll see very rapid response,” Shaida points out. Documents and work-in-progress are also 
digitally accessible to others.
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
LO 9-1 Explain why communication is important in organizations, and discuss four influences 
on effective communication encoding and decoding.
LO 9-2 Compare and contrast the advantages and disadvantages of digital written communication 
channels, other verbal communication channels, and nonverbal communication.
LO 9-3 Discuss the relevance of synchronicity, social presence, social acceptance, and media 
richness when choosing the preferred communication channel.
LO 9-4 Discuss various barriers (noise) to effective communication, including cross-cultural 
and male–female differences in communication.
LO 9-5 Explain how to get your message across more effectively, and summarize the 
elements of active listening.
LO 9-6 Summarize effective communication strategies in organizational hierarchies, and 
review the role and relevance of the organizational grapevine.
Learning Objectives
9
chapterRealFoundations employees rely on team-oriented communication on the company’s digital collaboration platform, particularly 
using team channels and team videos rather than private chat, calls, and emails between two people.
PART 3: TEAM PROCESSES
Email is being pushed aside as organizations adopt Microsoft Teams, Slack, and other platforms that 
integrate a variety of emerging digital communication channels and products. The transition to these 
platforms began a decade ago but rapidly accelerated to accommodate remote and hybrid work during 
the COVID-19 pandemic.
RF was one of the earliest adopters of these platforms because of its “work out loud” culture—doing 
and placing work where coworkers can view and participate in it. As Facebook and other social media 
channels gained popularity, RF executives saw opportunities for better internal communication. They 
asked: “Can we somehow use that inside our business?”
RF’s team-oriented communication is still unusual in many other organizations. A recent survey of several 
dozen organizations using the Microsoft Teams platform reported that only 26 percent of the 100,000 
teams studied had any team-level communication, such as using team channels and team meetings. Most 
communication occurred through private chat (direct messages) or audio/video calls between two people. 
“I think we’re the reverse of that. Most of our messaging occurs in channels,” says Shaida.
Along with being an early adopter of digital communication platforms, RF actively hires, monitors, 
and coaches people to engage in team rather than private communication. “We have made the 
measurement of participation . . . a very integral part of how we talk to people about shaping a career 
325
Daniel Constante/Alamy Stock Photo326 Part Three Team Processes
inside our firm,” Shaida explains. “It’s for people who are very collaborative, 
who pay attention to each other, and never email each other, never text 
message each other outside of team.” These team-oriented communication 
practices are now well entrenched. “I don’t think you’d find a single 
person at RealFoundations who would go back to living their work life on 
email on a regular basis,” Shaida suggests.1
We are currently experiencing the most significant and disruptive 
transformation of organizational communication in our lifetimes. Team 
channels, task flow and planners, video meetings, private chat, document 
repositories, and other methods barely existed a decade ago. Digital 
communication offers significant potential for information sharing and social 
bonding. Equally important, employees use these emerging communication 
channels in their private lives and expect to have them available at work.
Communication refers to the process by which information is transmitted 
and understood between two or more people. We emphasize the word 
“understood” because communication is effective when the receiver 
accurately deciphers the sender’s message. This chapter begins by discussing 
the importance of effective communication, outlining the communication 
process model, and discussing factors that improve communication 
encoding and decoding. Next, we identify types of communication channels, 
including digital communication and social media, followed by factors to 
consider when choosing the most appropriate communication channel. 
The chapter then identifies several barriers to effective communication and 
discusses ways to improve interpersonal communication. The latter part of 
the chapter looks at communication in organizational hierarchies and 
offers insight about the pervasive organizational grapevine.
The Importance of Communication
Effective communication is vital to all organizations, so much so that no company could 
exist without it. The reason? Recall from Chapter 1 that organizations are defined as 
groups of people who work interdependently toward some purpose. People work interde￾pendently only when they can communicate with one another. Organizations rely on a 
variety of coordinating mechanisms (which we discuss in Chapter 13), but frequent, 
timely, and accurate communication remains the primary means through which employ￾ees and work units effectively synchronize their work.2
 Chester Barnard, a telecommuni￾cations CEO and pioneer in organizational behavior theory, made this observation back 
in 1938: “An organization comes into being when there are persons able to communicate 
with each other.”3
Along with its importance for coordinating work, communication is vital for effective 
decision making. Imagine the challenge of making a decision without any information 
LO 9-1
communication
the process by which 
information is transmitted and 
understood between two or 
more peopleChapter Nine Communicating in Teams and Organizations 327
about the decision context, the alternatives available, the likely outcomes of those op￾tions, or the extent to which the decision is achieving its objectives. Communication 
brings this information from the external environment into the organization and distrib￾utes it so employees can solve problems and discover opportunities. For example, airline 
cockpit crews make much better decisions—and thereby cause far fewer accidents—when 
the captain encourages the other pilots to openly share information.4
A third function of communication is to change behavior.5
 When conveying informa￾tion to others, we are often trying to alter their beliefs, feelings, and ultimately their behav￾ior. This influence process might be passive, such as merely describing the situation more 
clearly and fully, or it might be a deliberate attempt to change someone’s thoughts and 
actions. We discuss the topic of persuasion later in this chapter.
A fourth function of communication is to support employee well-being.6
 Communica￾tion minimizes stress by conveying knowledge that enables employees to manage their 
work setting more effectively. For instance, research shows that new employees adjust 
much better to the organization when coworkers communicate subtle nuggets of wisdom, 
such as how to complete work procedures correctly, find useful resources, handle difficult 
customers, and avoid office politics.7
 Communication also minimizes stress emotionally; 
talking with others can be a soothing balm during difficult times. Indeed, people are less 
susceptible to colds, cardiovascular disease, and other physical and mental illnesses when 
they have regular social interaction.8
 In essence, people have an inherent drive to bond, to 
validate their self-worth, and to maintain their social identity. Communication is the 
means through which these drives and needs are fulfilled.
(photo): Rawpixel.com/Shutterstock
68% of 1,038 American Millennial
and Gen Z adults say that communication
skills is an important attribute of a good
manager (top rated attribute among eight).
60% of 1,001 U.S. employees
say they WOULD NOT confidently advise
keeping their CEO because of the poor
communication they’ve experienced.
60% of 624,800 U.S. federal
government employees say managers in
their work unit promote (encourage)
communication among dierent work
units (e.g., about project, goals, needed
resources).
40% of 820 corporate
communications managers (majority
from Europe) rate the communication
skills of their firm’s senior leaders as
good or excellent (60% rate them as
adequate or poor).
13% of employees in a very
large global Gallup poll strongly
agree that the leadership of their
organization communicates eectively
with the rest of the organization.
HOW WELL DO ORGANIZATIONS SUPPORT INTERNAL COMMUNICATION?a328 Part Three Team Processes
A Model of Communication
The model presented in Exhibit 9.1 provides a useful “conduit” metaphor for thinking about 
the communication process.9
 According to this model, communication flows through one 
or more channels (also called media) between the sender and receiver. The sender forms a 
message and encodes it into words, gestures, voice intonations, and other symbols or signs. 
Next, the encoded message is transmitted to the intended receiver through voice, text, non￾verbal cues, or other channels. The receiver senses and decodes the incoming message into 
something meaningful. Ideally, the decoded meaning is what the sender had intended.
In most situations, the sender looks for evidence that the other person has received 
and understood the transmitted message. This feedback may involve the receiver repeat￾ing the message back to the sender or demonstrating awareness of the message indirectly 
through the receiver’s subsequent actions. Notice that feedback repeats the communica￾tion process. Intended feedback is encoded, transmitted, received, and decoded from the 
receiver to the sender of the original message.
This model recognizes that communication is not a free-flowing conduit. Rather, the 
transmission of meaning from one person to another is hampered by noise—the psycho￾logical, social, and structural barriers that distort and obscure the sender’s intended mes￾sage. If any part of the communication process is distorted or broken, the sender and 
receiver will not have a common understanding of the message.
INFLUENCES ON EFFECTIVE ENCODING AND DECODING
According to the communication process model, effective communication depends on 
the sender’s and receiver’s ability, motivation, role clarity, and situational support (i.e., 
MARS model, see Chapter 1) to efficiently and accurately encode and decode informa￾tion. Four main factors influence the effectiveness of this encoding–decoding process.10
Similar Codebooks The sender and receiver encode and decode more effectively 
when they have similar “codebooks,” which are dictionaries of symbols, language, ges￾tures, idioms, and other tools used to convey information. With similar codebooks, the 
communication participants assign the same or similar meaning to the transmitted sym￾bols and signs. Communication efficiency also improves because there is less need for 
redundancy (repeating the message in different ways) and less need for confirmation 
feedback (“So, you are saying that . . .?”).
Sender
Transmit
message
Transmit
feedback
Receive
encoded
message
Encode
feedback
Decode
message
Form
feedback
Decode
feedback
Receive
encoded
feedback
Receiver
Noise
Form
message
Encode
message
EXHIBIT 9.1
The Communication 
Process ModelChapter Nine Communicating in Teams and Organizations 329
Sender’s Encoding Experience The encoding–decoding process improves with 
the sender’s experience transmitting a message. The more frequently the sender transmits 
a specific message, particularly to a similar audience, the more the sender learns which 
words, symbols, voice intonations, and other features transmit the message more clearly 
and persuasively to others.
Communication Channel Motivation and Ability The encoding–decoding 
process is better when the sender and receiver are skilled and motivated to use the se￾lected communication channel(s).11 Some people are better at face-to-face conversations, 
whereas others are more skilled at writing and receiving detailed reports. Even when the 
sender and receiver are able to communicate using a particular channel, they might mis￾understand each other when one or both of them dislike using that channel and, conse￾quently, lack the effort to communicate effectively.
Shared Mental Models of the Communication Context The encoding–
decoding process is more successful when the sender and receiver have shared mental 
models of the communication context.12 Mental models are internal representations of 
the external world that allow us to visualize elements of a setting and relationships among 
those elements (see Chapter 3). A sender and receiver with shared mental models of the 
communication context have similar images and expectations regarding the location, time 
frame, cause-effect relationships, and so forth. These shared mental models potentially 
increase the accuracy of the message content and reduce the need for communication 
about that context. For example, it is easier for two people to discuss events that occur in 
a national electricity market control center if both of them have detailed mental models 
of that control center. Notice that a shared mental model of the communication context 
differs from a shared codebook. Codebooks are symbols used to convey message content, 
whereas mental models are knowledge structures of the communication topic setting.
Encoding-Decoding Divergences 
Across Generationsb
The contemporary workplace is multigenerational. This 
new reality may be creating problems in the encoding–
decoding communication process because each genera￾tion has increasingly divergent communication channel 
preferences, abilities, and even codebooks.
In a survey of 14,371 employees across seven coun￾tries, 55 percent of Generation Z workers (those born after 
1996) said they are happiest using online chat and instant 
messaging. In contrast, only 15 percent of Baby Boomers 
(born 1946 to 1964), 23 percent of Gen Xers (born 1965 
to 1980), and 38 percent of Millennials (born 1981 to 
1996) are happiest using chat or instant messaging. The 
overwhelming majority of Baby Boomers (85 percent) pre￾fer face-to-face meetings, whereas only half the percentage 
Gen Z workers (45 percent) are happiest with in-person 
meetings. These results are consistent with separate evi￾dence that more than one-third of Baby Boomers never 
use instant messaging and almost half of them never use 
social media to communicate with colleagues or clients.
Problems with cross-generational differences in 
encoding–decoding preferences and abilities are already 
apparent. In a survey across 33 countries (400 or more 
respondents per country), 80 percent of employees said 
that the most important difference with working in a multi￾generational workplace is communication styles. Further￾more, 31 percent of respondents said they find it difficult 
to communicate with coworkers who are not from their 
generation or in their age group.
global connections 9.1
Antoniodiaz/Shutterstock330 Part Three Team Processes
Communication Channels
A central feature of the communication model is the channel through which information is 
transmitted. There are two main types of channels: verbal and nonverbal. Verbal communication
uses words, so it includes both spoken (oral) and written channels.
Spoken communication, particularly face-to-face interaction, tends to be better than 
written methods for transmitting emotions and persuading the receiver. This is because 
conversations are usually accompanied by a nonverbal channel as well as a paralanguage 
dimension, such as voice intonations, loudness, and silence. Also, most face-to-face spo￾ken communication has the advantage of transmitting immediate feedback from the re￾ceiver, so the sender can adjust the message accordingly.
Written communication is more appropriate for recording, presenting, and retrieving 
technical details. Employees tend to have a higher comprehension of content when they 
receive it in writing rather than in a spoken conversation. Traditionally, written communi￾cation has been much slower than spoken communication at transmitting messages, al￾though text chats and other digital channels have significantly improved written 
communication efficiency.
NONVERBAL COMMUNICATION
Nonverbal communication is any type of communication that does not use words, such as im￾ages, diagrams and hand gestures. It also includes facial gestures, voice intonation, physical 
distance, and even silence.13 Nonverbal communication is helpful where noise or physical 
distance prevents effective verbal exchanges and the need for immediate feedback precludes 
written communication. But even in quiet face-to-face meetings, nonverbal communication is 
immensely important for most information exchanges. In fact, in 
traditional face-to-face conversations, most information is commu￾nicated nonverbally. Rather like a parallel conversation, nonverbal 
cues transmit information that amplifies the verbal message, adds 
emotional meaning to the message, and influences the relation￾ship between the parties. For example, nonverbal communication 
reinforces the person’s interest in the verbal conversation and sig￾nals relative status in the relationship.14 Unfortunately, we often 
transmit messages nonverbally without being aware of this conver￾sation. For example, Exhibit 9.2 identifies 10 behaviors among 
job applicants that transmit negative nonverbal messages about 
their character.
Nonverbal communication differs from verbal (i.e., written 
and spoken) communication in a couple of ways. First, it is less 
rule-bound than verbal communication. We receive consider￾able formal training on how to understand and transmit spoken 
words, but very little on how to understand and use the nonver￾bal signals that accompany those words. Consequently, most 
nonverbal signals are ambiguous and susceptible to misinterpre￾tation. Not all nonverbal cues are ambiguous, however. Some 
facial expressions (such as smiling) are hardwired and univer￾sal, thereby providing a somewhat more reliable means of com￾municating across cultures.
The other difference between verbal and nonverbal commu￾nication is that the former is typically conscious, whereas most 
nonverbal communication is automatic and nonconscious. We 
normally plan the words we say or write, but we rarely plan ev￾ery blink, smile, or other gesture during a conversation. Indeed, 
LO 9-2
Do you feel worn out after a video meeting? Nonverbal communication 
is the main reason. At in-person meetings, most participants are further 
away from you, many are in the periphery or beyond your area of vision, 
and they spend relatively little time looking at the speaker. Video 
sessions are more cognitively intense because everyone is up close, 
within the viewing area, and seems to be staring much of the time at 
everyone else. With few peripheral cues (e.g., body pose), video 
participants also require more effort to interpret available facial and 
verbal cues. Furthermore, people are constantly “on stage” during video 
sessions, so they expend more energy consciously managing their own 
nonverbal cues (nodding, smiling, etc.). Constantly seeing one’s own 
face is also draining because it motivates more intense self-presentation 
activity.d
Girts Ragelis/ShutterstockChapter Nine Communicating in Teams and Organizations 331
as we just mentioned, some of these facial expressions communicate the same meaning 
across cultures because they are hardwired, nonconscious responses to human emotions.15
For example, pleasant emotions cause the brain center to widen the mouth, whereas nega￾tive emotions produce constricted facial expressions (squinting eyes, pursed lips, etc.).
Emotional Contagion One of the most fascinating aspects of nonverbal communi￾cation is emotional contagion, which is the automatic process of “catching” or sharing 
another person’s emotions by mimicking that person’s facial expressions and other non￾verbal behavior. Technically, human beings have brain receptors that cause them to mirror 
what they observe. In other words, to some degree our brain causes us to act as though we 
are the person we are watching.16
Consider what happens when you see a coworker accidentally bang their head against a 
filing cabinet. Chances are, you wince and put your hand on your own head as if you had 
hit the cabinet. Similarly, while listening to someone describe a positive event, you tend to 
smile and exhibit other emotional displays of happiness. While some of our nonverbal 
communication is planned, emotional contagion represents nonconscious behavior—we 
automatically mimic and synchronize our nonverbal behaviors with other people.17
Emotional contagion influences communication and social relationships in three 
ways.18 First, mimicry provides continuous feedback, communicating that we understand 
and empathize with the sender. To consider the significance of this, imagine employees 
Handshake is too strong
0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70%
8%
Using too many hand gestures 13%
Handshake is weak 22%
Playing with their hair
or touching their face 26%
Crossing their arms
over their chest 31%
Fidgeting too much in their chair
Bad posture 31%
32%
Playing with something
on the table 36%
Failing to smile 38%
Failing to make eye contact 68%
EXHIBIT 9.2 Top 10 Body Language Mistakes in Job Interviewsc
Note: Percentage of more than 1,014 U.S. human resource and hiring managers surveyed who identified each of these nonverbal behaviors as the biggest 
body language mistakes made by job candidates during hiring interviews.
emotional contagion
the nonconscious process of 
“catching” or sharing another 
person’s emotions by 
mimicking that person’s facial 
expressions and other 
nonverbal behavior332 Part Three Team Processes
remaining expressionless after watching a coworker bang their head! The lack of parallel 
behavior conveys a lack of understanding or caring. A second function is that we experi￾ence stronger emotional meaning when we mimic the nonverbal behaviors that represent 
the emotional experience someone is describing to us. If a coworker is angry with a client, 
our tendency to frown and show anger while listening helps us to experience that emotion 
more fully.
The third function of emotional contagion is to fulfill the drive to bond that we men￾tioned earlier in this chapter and was introduced in Chapter 5. Emotional contagion 
generates that communal experience because those participating in the communication 
event witness others sharing the same emotions that they feel. This strengthens relations 
among team members as well as between leaders and followers by providing evidence of 
their similarity.
DIGITAL VERBAL COMMUNICATION
In the early 1960s, with funding from the U.S. Department of Defense, university re￾searchers began discussing how to collaborate better by connecting their computers 
through a network. Their vision of connected computers became a reality in 1969 as the 
Advanced Research Projects Agency Network (ARPANET). ARPANET initially had only 
a dozen or so connections and was very expensive and slow by today’s standards, but 
nevertheless it marked the birth of the Internet. Two years later, using that network, a 
computer engineer sent the first electronic mail (email) message between different com￾puters on a network. By 1973, most communication on ARPANET was through email. 
ARPANET was mostly restricted to U.S. Department of Defense-funded research centers, 
so in 1979 two graduate students at Duke University developed a public network system, 
called Usenet. Usenet allowed people to post messages in “newsgroups” dedicated to spe￾cific topics. Newsgroups could be viewed by anyone on the network, making it the first 
public digital social network.19
We have come a long way since the early days of ARPANET and Usenet. Team chan￾nels, collaborative whiteboards, video meetings, workflows, private chat, document 
repositories, and other digital communication channels barely existed in the workplace a 
dozen years ago, whereas many organizations now embed them in enterprise communica￾tion platforms. Email has dominated the corporate landscape, but is rapidly waning for 
internal discussions. Generation Z employees—those born after 1996—have always pre￾ferred digital text messaging rather than email in the workplace.20
Exhibit 9.3 shows estimated digital organizational communication usage among knowl￾edge workers in the United States in recent years.21 A decade ago, email represented al￾most 75 percent of work-related digital communication, whereas text messages in channel 
messages and private chats were uncommon. Today, text messaging and emails have ap￾proximately equal usage in the workplace. This transition accelerated as the COVID-19 
pandemic triggered a massive shift to digital communication platforms that rely on mes￾saging (team channels and private chat) rather than email. For example, Microsoft Teams 
users skyrocketed from 20 million in 2019 to 145 million in 2021. In many organizations 
today, email is used mostly for external correspondence.
Video chats and meetings now represent a larger percentage of time in workplace digital 
communication than a decade ago. This channel’s usage increased slowly a few years ago, 
but soared during the pandemic as a replacement for face-to-face meetings. (Zoom meeting 
minutes increased 3000% and business customers increased tenfold between January 
2019 and July 2021.) Meanwhile, voice-only communication was on a downward trend 
earlier in the past decade and remains low today. Other digital communication methods 
(calendars, whiteboards, project management tools) have increased only slightly, possibly 
because they are not time intensive.
As you can see, the COVID-19 pandemic has significantly shifted digital communica￾tion patterns in organizations. However, two other factors also influenced these changes Chapter Nine Communicating in Teams and Organizations 333
for a few years before the pandemic. One of these is generational differences in commu￾nication preferences. Younger employees grew up in the era of mobile (cell) phones, so 
text messaging and other emerging digital text-based communication channels are al￾ready embedded in their lives. The other reason is that Slack, Microsoft Teams, and 
other enterprise-grade collaboration platforms became available throughout the past de￾cade. In fact, many of these collaborative communication products didn’t exist in 2014! 
These products mainly rely on chat and messaging, not email, as the core communica￾tion channels.
Benefits of Digital Written Communication Almost all workplaces rely 
heavily on digital text-based communication in one form or another. Channel mes￾sages, chats, and emails are the first choices for coordinating work and transmitting 
well-defined information. They have become more popular than face-to-face meetings 
(in-person or remote), voice conversations, and other media. Digital messages can be 
written, edited, appended, and transmitted quickly to many people. Most messages can 
be sent and received at different times (they are asynchronous), so coordination is less 
important for message transmission. Furthermore, enterprise communication plat￾forms and email apps include search engines, which makes these channels convenient 
filing cabinets.22
Communication patterns changed significantly when email entered the workplace, and 
these changes will likely continue as other digital written channels become more popular. 
Specifically, digital written communication reduces face-to-face interactions and tradi￾tional phone calls but increases communication with people further up the hierarchy.23
Digital channels also reduce social and organizational status differences between sender 
and receiver, mainly because they provide fewer cues of these differences than is evident 
in face-to-face interaction. However, status differences still exist to some extent, such as 
when managers reply less quickly and with shorter messages.24
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
Email
Other
Chat/Messaging
Video
meetings
Voice
EXHIBIT 9.3 Use of Digital Communication Channelse
Percentage of total time in digital communication at work spent actively using each communication channel. 2014–2019 data are from monitored usage 
among 12,000 knowledge workers for January of each year. The data for 2020 and 2021 extrapolate from the earlier data, guided by macro-level statistics 
on user counts and corporate adoptions of Microsoft Teams, Slack, and Zoom, as well as global email activity.334 Part Three Team Processes
Problems with Digital Written Communication Team channel messages, 
private chat, emails, and other digital written channels dominate organizational commu￾nication, but they have several limitations. Here are the top four complaints:
• Faulty communication of emotions. People consistently and significantly overesti￾mate the degree to which they understand the emotional meaning of digital mes￾sages. The problem is that we rely on facial expressions and other nonverbal cues 
to interpret the emotional meaning of words, whereas digital text-based communi￾cation lacks this parallel channel. Expressive language (“Wonderful to hear from 
you!”) and emojis provide some substitution for the lack of nonverbal channels, 
but they also have limitations and flaws.25
• Less politeness and respectfulness. Digital text messages are often less diplomatic 
than written letters and visual interactions. This flaming occurs because digital 
media are more impersonal (less social presence) than most other communication 
channels, which reduces the sender’s empathy and sensitivity when crafting the 
message. A second reason is that digital messages can be written and transmitted 
before the sender’s emotions subside. Receivers are also partly to blame because, 
on average, they infer a less respectful interpretation of the digital message than 
was intended by the sender.26
• Inefficient for ambiguous, complex, and novel situations. Digital text messages are in￾credibly efficient for well-defined situations, such as giving basic instructions for a 
routine activity or arranging a video meeting. But in ambiguous, complex, and 
novel situations, digital written communication lacks the ability to transmit large 
volumes of information with rapid feedback. In other words, when the issue gets 
messy, stop texting or emailing and start talking, preferably face-to-face.
• Contributes to information overload. Digital messages contribute to information 
overload.27 More than 300 billion business and consumer emails are sent and re￾ceived every day. As for text messages, 100 billion are sent through WhatsApp ev￾ery day; Slack reports that its users post 300,000 messages every second in team 
channels and private chats.28 The shear volume of messages in team channels is 
frequently mentioned as one of the drawbacks with enterprise communication 
platforms that rely on team channels.
SOCIAL MEDIA IN THE WORKPLACE
Not long ago, most organizational communication pushed messages one-way from the 
content creator (sender) to the audience. For instance, memos, corporate intranet web 
pages, policy guidelines, paper-based company magazines, and video clips transmitted 
from the CEO provide little or no opportunity for recipients to respond, append, revise, 
or make any other collaborative contribution to the original message. Even email tends to 
be a one-way exchange, such as when the CEO emails corporate news to employees.
Today, workplace communication has shifted towards social media. Social media refers 
to digital communication channels that enable people to collaborate in the creation and 
exchange of user-generated content. User-generated content exists when audience mem￾bers (users) are partly or completely responsible for the creation or amendment of the 
content.29 Social media are “social” because user-generated content creation is a recipro￾cally interactive social process.
Most social media activity within organizations initially occurred through Facebook, 
Twitter, and other public platforms, often without the company’s formal approval. These 
platforms still occur the workplace, but they are being replaced by the enterprise commu￾nication platforms that we described in the opening case study and throughout this sec￾tion (e.g., Microsoft Teams, Slack, Cisco Webex Teams). These systems rely heavily on 
structured channels for team messages and private text messaging. They also include 
shared file space, collaborative document editing, media sharing, team video calls, and 
shared task scheduling. Almost all are social media.
social media
digital communication 
channels that enable people 
to collaborate in the creation 
and exchange of user￾generated contentChapter Nine Communicating in Teams and Organizations 335
Social media offer a number of advantages. They improve decision making by being a forum 
where many participants can provide information and feedback. These channels improve 
commitment by involving many people in the discussion.30 A large-scale study of Twitter 
tweets reported that this form of communication aided employees in transmitting knowledge, 
maintaining collegiality among coworkers, and strengthening their professional network. 
DIGITAL NONVERBAL COMMUNICATION
Digital text messages alone do not replace face-to-face communication, partly because they 
lack a nonverbal channel. Consequently, there has been a dramatic rise in the use of vari￾ous forms of digital nonverbal communication, particularly emoticons, emojis, and GIFs, 
to supplement the written content.31 Emoticons are keyboard symbols or letters combined 
to look like a face or object. More common today are emojis—small images depicting faces, 
animals, or objects, which are intended to have conceptual and emotional meaning.
GIFs are short video clips, often depicting a person’s (or animal’s) emotional response, 
such as cheering, showing frustration, or working quickly. These are typically visually 
debating point
SHOULD WE USE EMOJIS IN DIGITAL WORKPLACE COMMUNICATION?
Unlike face-to-face conversations, digital text messages don’t have a 
natural parallel nonverbal communication channel. To correct for this de￾ficiency, senders often insert emojis with their text messages and emails. 
These small images depict faces, animals, or objects, which have con￾ceptual and emotional meaning to supplement the text message.
Emojis have become popular in personal messages and are in￾creasingly found in some types of business communication. According 
to recent surveys, the majority of employees believe that emojis im￾prove workplace communication. Almost half (46 percent) of emoji us￾ers say that they are even comfortable using emojis when texting with 
their boss.f
The main benefit of emojis is that they usually transmit rich emo￾tional meaning which tends to be too subtle or ambiguous in text-only 
messages. They also symbolize ideas or objects, thereby strengthening 
or clarifying the meaning of the written text. Third, emojis potentially 
improve interpersonal relations.
But before populating your messages with emojis, be warned that 
they may create more communication chaos than benefits. One prob￾lem is that not everyone approves of emoji-laden messages in some or 
all work settings.g
 Several studies report that the usage and accep￾tance of emojis is lower in older age groups, for example. One experi￾mental study found that working-age recipients in general viewed 
senders as less professional, less motivated, and less committed when 
a couple of smiley emojis were included in their text message to ar￾range a team meeting than when the message was text-only. Including 
smiley emojis did not create a negative perception of the sender when 
the message was about a social event after work.
The appropriate use of emojis at work also depends on the relative 
position of the sender and receiver.h
 Emojis are considered less useful 
and less appropriate when sent to people in socially distant rather than 
close relationships, even more so when the message has a negative 
tone. Hierarchical position or power distance is another factor. One 
study found that female recipients viewed leaders (male or female) 
who include emojis in their emails as less effective and no more likable 
than leaders who don’t use emojis. However, male recipients did per￾ceive emoji-user leaders as more likable and more effective.
Even when both parties approve of emojis in the workplace, there 
is a good chance that they have different codebooks to interpret those 
images. For example, you might send a red face image to indicate your 
embarrassment about an incident, whereas the recipient might think 
that emoji indicates your anger towards them or others. The ambiguity 
of emojis is evident in a recent study of 1,000 Americans, who were 
asked to interpret ten of the most popular emojis. Only two emojis 
(tears of joy, loudly crying) were correctly interpreted by more than 
75 percent of respondents. With more than 3,600 registered emojis 
and multitudes more on some message apps and platforms, little 
wonder that experts advise using only the best known images.
Most emoji users (89 percent in one recent large survey) believe 
that these nonverbal icons are ideal for communicating across lan￾guages and cultures. In reality, misinterpretations are even more likely 
when using emojis across cultures.i
 A waving hand, for example, means 
a friendly goodbye or hello in many countries. But in China, this symbol 
means that we aren’t friends anymore, either in a teasing or serious 
tone. Animal emojis are also a minefield of subtle meaning. If someone 
sends you a flattering message with an emoji of a side-glancing dog 
(doge), that image indicates that the message is actually sarcasm or 
spite, not a compliment. Even the famous happy face emoji can be mis￾understood. Older employees view the classic smiley as a symbol of 
happiness. To many younger recipients, the symbol is patronizing, 
wishing the recipient ill fortune.336 Part Three Team Processes
engaging by being humorous and having sudden action. They are usually a symbolic repre￾sentation of how the sender would act if they were in-person with the message recipient.32
Emojis have several functions that improve digital written communication.33 First, they 
transmit rich emotional meaning which is either too subtle or ambiguous in text-only mes￾sages. Research indicates that emoji faces generate similar emotional responses as in-person 
faces. Most emojis have a positive valence, so they tend to generate more positive than 
negative emotions in the interpersonal exchange. In one recent large global survey, more 
than half of emoji users said they were more comfortable expressing emotions through 
emojis than in phone and in-person conversations.
A second benefit of emojis is that they symbolize ideas or objects, thereby strengthen￾ing or clarifying the meaning of the written text. Research indicates that viewers interpret 
the meaning of emojis more quickly than they interpret the text message. Some messages 
are sent only with emojis, conveying both a message and an emotion. A third function of 
emojis is to improve interpersonal relations. In many settings, recipients tend to feel a 
closer social presence when the message includes positive emojis. These images also sym￾bolize personal characteristics of the sender, such as being thoughtful, humorous, or cool.
Choosing the Best Communication Channel
Employees have more communication channels to choose from than ever before, ranging 
from physical and digital forms of face-to-face interaction to a multitude of ways to trans￾mit written messages. Which communication channel is most appropriate in a particular 
situation? There are many factors to consider, but the four most important are summa￾rized in Exhibit 9.4 and described in this section.
SYNCHRONICITY
Communication channels vary in their synchronicity, that is, the extent to which they re￾quire or allow both sender and receiver to be actively involved in the conversation at the 
same time.34 Face-to-face conversations are almost always synchronous, whereas most 
digital text communication can occur with each party participating at different times 
(asynchronous). Team channel messages can be asynchronous, but some text-based chat 
interactions are so responsive that they become synchronous conversations. Synchronous 
LO 9-3
CHANNEL CHOICE FACTOR DESCRIPTION DEPENDS ON . . . 
Synchronicity The channel requires or allows the sender and 
receiver to communicate with each other at 
the same time (synchronous) or at different 
times (asynchronous)
• Time urgency (immediacy)
• Complexity of the topic
• Cost of both parties communicating at the same time
• Whether receiver should have time to reflect before 
responding
Social presence The channel creates psychological closeness 
to others, awareness of their humanness, and 
appreciation of the interpersonal relationship
• Need to empathize with others
• Need to influence others
Social acceptance The channel is approved and supported by 
others (receiver, team, organization, or 
society)
• Organizational, team, and cultural norms
• Each party’s preferences and skills with the channel
• Symbolic meaning of the channel
Media richness The channel has high data-carrying capacity—
the volume and variety of information that can 
be transmitted during a specific time
• Situation is nonroutine
• Situation is ambiguous
EXHIBIT 9.4 Factors in Choosing the Best Communication Channel
synchronicity
the extent to which the 
channel requires or allows 
both sender and receiver to 
be actively involved in the 
conversation at the same time 
(synchronous) or at different 
times (asynchronous)Chapter Nine Communicating in Teams and Organizations 337
communication is preferred when the information is required quickly (high immediacy) 
or where the issue is complex and therefore requires the parties to address several related 
decisions. Asynchronous communication is better when the issue is simple, the issue has 
low time urgency, getting both parties together at the same time is costly, and/or the re￾ceiver would benefit from time to reflect on the message before responding.
SOCIAL PRESENCE
Social presence refers to how much the communication channel creates psychological 
closeness to others, awareness that there is another human being (or several others) in the 
conversation, and appreciation of the interpersonal relationship.35 Face-to-face interac￾tions almost always have the highest social presence, whereas low social presence would 
typically occur when uploading a document where anyone in the organization can retrieve 
it. Social presence is usually stronger in synchronous communication because the receiv￾er’s immediate responses to our messages increase the sense of connectedness with that 
person. Although social presence is affected mostly by specific channel characteristics, 
message content also plays a role. For example, social presence is higher when the send￾er’s message style is casual rather than formal and when the message describes personal 
information about the sender.
A communication channel is valued for its social presence effect when the purpose of 
the dialogue is to understand and empathize with the other person or group. People are 
also more willing to listen and help others when there is a degree of interpersonal rela￾tionship or feeling of human connectedness. Therefore, channels with high social pres￾ence are better when the sender wants to influence the receiver.36
SOCIAL ACCEPTANCE
Social acceptance refers to how well the communication channel is approved and sup￾ported by coworkers, teams, the organization, and society.37 One social acceptance factor 
is the norms held by others involved in the communication 
event. Norms explain why face-to-face meetings are daily 
events among staff in some firms, whereas text messages are 
the media of choice in other organizations (such as at Real￾Foundations, discussed in the opening case study). National 
culture also influences preferences for specific communica￾tion channels.38 For instance, emojis populate more business 
emails and text messages in China than in the United States, 
likely because people in China prefer conveying emotions indi￾rectly rather than directly (in words) and because they value 
the complex, ambiguous, and cute symbolism of emojis.39
A second social acceptance factor is the sender’s and re￾ceiver’s preferences for specific communication channels.40
You may have noticed that some coworkers ignore (or rarely 
check) voice mail, yet they quickly respond to text messages. 
These preferences are due to the individual’s personality, val￾ues, experience, and previous success with some channels 
more than others.
A third social acceptance factor is the symbolic meaning of 
a channel.41 Many years ago, communications scholar Marshall 
McLuhan wrote: “The medium is the message.” This famous 
statement itself has multiple meanings, including the notion 
that an emerging communication channel (medium) shapes 
society. However, the statement also highlights the fact that the 
selected channel communicates a message beyond the content 
sent through that channel. Some communication channels are 
social presence
the extent to which a 
communication channel 
creates psychological 
closeness to others, awareness 
of their humanness, and 
appreciation of the 
interpersonal relationship
To: Mary Chang
From: ABC Corp.
LAYOFF
NOTICE
The symbolic meaning of a communication channel can be as important as 
the content of the message transmitted through that medium. The channel’s 
symbolic meaning is perhaps most apparent in stories about managers who 
use text messages and other impersonal channels to inform employees that 
they have been fired or laid off. In a recent case involving dismissal by text 
message, Australia’s Fair Work Commission warned employers that digital 
written communication channels are “unnecessarily callous” and therefore 
(with rare exceptions) should not be used. The Commission explained that 
“termination of employment is a matter of such significance that basic 
human dignity requires that dismissal be conveyed personally.”j
perfectlab/Shutterstock338 Part Three Team Processes
Rich
medium
Communication
channel
richness
Communication environment
Lean
medium
Routine/
clear
Nonroutine/
ambiguous
Overloaded zone
(medium provides too much
data-carrying capacity)
Oversimplified zone
(medium provides too little
data-carrying capacity)
m
n
Communication environment
m
Routine/
clear
Nonroutine/
ambiguous
Overloaded zone
(medium provides too much
data-carrying capacity)
Oversimplified zone
(medium provides too little
Financial data-carrying capacity)
statements
Newsletters
E-mail
Weblogs
Telephone
Instant
messaging
Video
conference
Face-to-face
viewed as impersonal whereas others are more personal; some are considered professional 
whereas others are casual; some are seen as “cool” whereas others are old-fashioned. For 
instance, phone calls and other synchronous communication channels convey a greater 
sense of urgency than do text messages and other asynchronous channels.
MEDIA RICHNESS
Media richness refers to the channel’s data-carrying capacity—the volume and variety of 
information that can be transmitted during a specific time.42 Exhibit 9.5 illustrates vari￾ous communication channels arranged in a hierarchy of richness, with face-to-face interac￾tion at the top and lean data-only reports at the bottom. A communication channel has 
high richness when it is able to convey multiple cues (such as both verbal and nonverbal 
information), allows timely feedback from receiver to sender, allows the sender to custom￾ize the message to the receiver, and makes use of complex symbols (such as words and 
phrases with multiple meanings).
Face-to-face communication has very high media richness because it allows us to com￾municate both verbally and nonverbally at the same time, to get feedback almost immedi￾ately from the receiver, to quickly adjust our message and style, and to use complex 
language such as metaphors and idioms (e.g., “spilling the beans”). For example, many 
hospital teams have brief stand-up daily huddles during which participants share informa￾tion and expectations about the day’s work.43 Rich media tend to be synchronous and 
have high social presence, but not always.
According to media richness theory, rich media are better than lean media when the 
communication situation is nonroutine and ambiguous, such as figuring out the cause of 
media richness
a communication channel’s 
data-carrying capacity—that 
is, the volume and variety 
of information that can be 
transmitted during a 
specific time
EXHIBIT 9.5 Media Richness Hierarchy
Sources: Based on R.H. Lengel and R.L. Daft, “The Selection of Communication Media as an Executive Skill,” Academy of Management Executive 2, no. 3 
(August 1988): 226; R.L. Daft and R.H. Lengel, “Information Richness: A New Approach to Managerial Behavior and Organization Design,” Research in 
Organizational Behavior 6 (1984): 199.Chapter Nine Communicating in Teams and Organizations 339
a production problem that hasn’t occurred previously.44 Under 
these conditions, the sender and receiver need to transmit a 
large volume of information with immediate feedback so they 
can understand the situation and agree on the best solution 
and form of coordination. If a unique and ambiguous issue is 
handled through text messages or another lean channel, then 
issues take longer to resolve and misunderstandings are more 
likely to occur. Lean media work well in routine situations, 
such as informing a coworker that you will be away from the 
office this afternoon, because the sender and receiver have 
shared mental models to understand and act on the situation. 
Using a rich medium—such as holding a special meeting—when 
the situation is routine and clear would be a waste of time.
Exceptions to the Media Richness Theory Re￾search generally supports media richness theory for traditional 
channels (face-to-face, written memos, etc.). However, the 
model doesn’t fit reality nearly as well when digital communi￾cation channels are studied.45 Three factors seem to explain 
why digital channels may have more media richness than me￾dia richness theory predicts:
1. Ability to multicommunicate. It is usually difficult (as 
well as rude) to communicate face-to-face with someone 
while simultaneously transmitting messages to another 
person using another medium. Most digital communica￾tion channels, on the other hand, require less social eti￾quette and attention, so employees can easily engage in 
two or more communication events at the same time.
In other words, they can multicommunicate.46 For example, people routinely scan 
web pages while talking to someone on the phone. Employees tap out text mes￾sages to a client while listening to a discussion at a large meeting. Research consis￾tently finds that people multitask less efficiently than they assume,47 but the 
volume of information transmitted simultaneously through two digital communi￾cation channels is sometimes greater than through one high media richness 
channel.
2. Communication proficiency. Earlier in this chapter we explained that communica￾tion effectiveness is partially determined by the sender’s ability and motivation to 
use the communication channel. People with higher proficiency can “push” more 
information through the channel, thereby increasing the channel’s information 
flow. Experienced smartphone users, for instance, can whip through messages in 
a flash, whereas new users struggle to type notes and organize incoming messages. 
In contrast, the ability to communicate through casual conversation and other nat￾ural channels is less varied, because most of us develop good levels of proficiency 
throughout life and possibly through hardwired evolutionary development.48
3. Social presence effects. Channels with high media richness, such as face-to-face 
conversations, tend to have more social presence. This improves empathy, but it 
also sensitizes both parties to their relative status and self-presentation, which can 
distort or divert attention away from the message.49 During a personal meeting 
with the company’s CEO, for example, you might concentrate more on your image 
to the CEO than on what the CEO is saying to you. In other words, the benefits of 
channels with high media richness may be offset by more social presence distrac￾tions, whereas lean media have much less social presence to distract or distort the 
transmitted information.
Into the AM, which creates and sells graphic design casual clothing, 
competes in the fast-paced online retail apparel industry. 
Communicating a large volume of information with immediate feedback 
among employees is vital, so the California company holds brief 
stand-up huddles every day. “During these huddles, we cover what’s 
coming up in the next 24 hours and figure out a game plan,” explains 
CEO Brian Lim. “The major benefit of these huddles is to keep everyone 
on the team aligned . . . This keeps everyone on the same page and 
reduces the chances of any problems coming up.” Huddles are brief 
(usually under 15 minutes) and focused, but they also identify issues to 
discuss at another time. “[We] schedule bigger meetings to handle any 
issues that are more complex or require more time,” says Lim.k
Juice Flair/Shutterstock340 Part Three Team Processes
COMMUNICATION CHANNELS AND PERSUASION
Some communication channels are more effective than others for persuasion, that is, us￾ing facts, logical arguments, and emotional appeals to change another person’s beliefs and 
attitudes, usually for the purpose of changing behavior. Studies support the long-held view 
that spoken communication, particularly face-to-face interaction, is more persuasive than 
emails, websites, and other forms of written communication. There are three main rea￾sons for this persuasive effect.50 First, spoken communication is typically accompanied by 
nonverbal communication. People are persuaded more when they receive both emotional 
and logical messages, and the combination of spoken with nonverbal communication 
provides this dual punch. A lengthy pause, raised voice tone, and (in face-to-face interac￾tion) animated hand gestures can amplify the emotional tone of the message, thereby 
signaling the vitality of the issue.
A second reason why conversations are more persuasive is that spoken communication 
offers the sender high-quality, immediate feedback about whether the receiver under￾stands and accepts the message (i.e., is being persuaded). This feedback allows the sender 
to adjust the content and emotional tone of the message more quickly than with written 
communication. A third reason is that people are persuaded more under conditions of 
high social presence than low social presence. Listeners have higher motivation to pay 
attention and consider the sender’s ideas in face-to-face conversations (high social pres￾ence). In contrast, persuasive communication through a website, text message, and other 
low social presence channels is less effective due to the higher degree of anonymity and 
psychological distance from the persuader.
Although spoken communication tends to be more persuasive, written communication 
can also persuade others to some extent. Written messages have the advantage of present￾ing more technical detail than can occur through conversation. This factual information is 
valuable when the issue is important to the receiver. Also, people experience a moderate 
degree of social presence in written communication with friends and coworkers, so written 
messages can be persuasive when sent and received with close associates. Furthermore, 
emojis and animated gifs provide some degree of parallel nonverbal communication, which 
increases persuasiveness by amplifying the emotional dimension of the written message.
Communication Barriers (Noise)
In spite of the best intentions of sender and receiver to communicate, several barriers 
(called “noise” earlier in Exhibit 9.1) inhibit the effective exchange of information. As 
American executive and communications expert Joseph W. Coffman said 70 years ago, 
“The greatest barrier to communication is the illusion that it has been achieved.”51
PERCEPTIONS
One barrier is that both sender and receiver have imperfect perceptual processes. As 
receivers, we don’t listen as well as senders assume, and our needs and expectations influ￾ence what signals get noticed and ignored (see Chapter 3). We aren’t any better as senders, 
either. Some studies suggest that we have difficulty stepping out of our own perspectives 
and stepping into the perspectives of others, so we overestimate how well other people 
understand the message we are communicating.52
LANGUAGE
Language can be a huge source of communication noise because sender and receiver sel￾dom have the same codebook. They might struggle to communicate in a language that 
neither of them has mastered, or they come from cultures that assign different meanings 
to specific words and phrases. The English language (among others) also has built-in 
persuasion
the use of facts, logical 
arguments, and emotional 
appeals to change another 
person’s beliefs and attitudes, 
usually for the purpose of 
changing the person’s behavior
LO 9-4Chapter Nine Communicating in Teams and Organizations 341
ambiguities that cause misunderstandings. Consider the phrase “Can you close the door?” 
You might assume the sender is asking whether shutting the door is permitted. However, 
the question might be asking whether you are physically able to shut the door or whether 
the door is designed such that it can be shut. In fact, this question might not be a question 
at all; the person could be politely telling you to shut the door.53
The ambiguity of language isn’t always dysfunctional noise, however.54 At times, lead￾ers purposively use obscure language to reflect the ambiguity of the topic or to avoid un￾wanted emotional responses produced from more specific words. They might use 
metaphors to represent an abstract vision of the company’s future, or use obtuse phrases 
such as “rightsizing” and “restructuring” to obscure the underlying message that people 
will be fired or laid off. Studies report that effective communicators also use more ab￾stract words and symbols when addressing diverse or socially distant audiences, because 
abstraction increases the likelihood that the message is understood across a broader range 
of listeners.
JARGON
Jargon—specialized words and phrases for specific occupations 
or groups—potentially improves communication efficiency. 
However, it is a source of communication noise when transmit￾ted to people who do not possess the jargon codebook. This 
problem was apparent in one recent study, which reported that 
physicians used more than two dozen jargon terms, on average, 
during consultations with parents of children with sleep 
disorders.55
FILTERING
Another source of noise in the communication process is the 
tendency to filter messages. Filtering may involve deleting or 
delaying negative information or using less harsh words so the 
message sounds more favorable.56 Filtering is less likely to oc￾cur when corporate leaders create a “culture of candor.” This 
culture develops when leaders themselves communicate truth￾fully, seek out diverse sources for information, and protect and 
reward those who speak openly and truthfully.57
INFORMATION OVERLOAD
Start with a daily avalanche of email, then add in text messages, PDF file downloads, cell/
mobile phone calls, web pages, hard copy documents, some Twitter tweets, blogs, wikis, 
and other sources of incoming information. Altogether, you have created a perfect recipe 
for information overload.58 As Exhibit 9.6 illustrates, information overload occurs when￾ever the job’s information load exceeds the individual’s capacity to get through it. Employ￾ees have an information-processing capacity—the amount of information that they are able 
to process in a fixed unit of time. At the same time, jobs have a varying information load—
the amount of information to be processed per unit of time. Information overload creates 
noise in the communication process because information gets overlooked or misinter￾preted when people can’t analyze it fast enough. The result is poorer-quality decisions as 
well as higher stress.59
Information overload problems can be minimized by increasing our information-processing 
capacity, reducing the job’s information load, or through a combination of both. Employees 
can temporarily increase their information-processing capacity by reading faster, scanning 
through documents more efficiently, managing their time use (less wasted time), removing 
Jerry King Cartoons
information overload
a condition in which the volume 
of information received 
exceeds the person’s capacity 
to process it342 Part Three Team Processes
distractions that slow information-processing speed, and working longer hours. However, 
working beyond one’s natural capacity is not sustainable for the long term.
Information load can be reduced by buffering, omitting, and summarizing. Buffering 
involves having incoming communication filtered, usually by an assistant. Omitting 
occurs when we decide to overlook messages, such as using software rules to redirect 
emails to folders that we rarely look at. Summarizing involves digesting a condensed 
version of the complete communication, such as reading an executive summary rather 
than the full report.
Cross-Cultural and Male-Female Communication
Globalization and increasing cultural diversity have created more cross-cultural communi￾cation issues in the workplace.60 As mentioned in the previous section, language differ￾ences can be a significant source of noise in the communication process. Words are easily 
misunderstood in verbal communication when those involved have a limited vocabulary 
(such as when two executives need to communicate in a language that neither of them 
uses regularly). Even when both are fluent, the sender’s accent might distort the usual 
sound of some words.
Voice intonation is another cross-cultural communication barrier. How loudly, deeply, 
and quickly people speak varies across cultures, and these voice intonations send second￾ary messages that have different meaning in each society. Words also have somewhat dif￾ferent meaning across cultures. For example, KPMG staff from the United Kingdom 
sometimes referred to another person’s suggestions as “interesting.” They had to clarify to 
their German colleagues that “interesting” might not be complimenting the idea.61
Another cross-cultural dimension of communication is how people interpret conversa￾tional gaps (silence) and overlaps. Silence is revered in Japan because it symbolizes re￾spect, indicates that the listener is thoughtfully contemplating what has just been said, and 
is a way of avoiding overt conflict.62 Consequently, the informal communication practice 
in Japan and a few other countries is to let the other person finish speaking and sometimes 
Employee’s
information
processing
capacity
Episodes of
information
overload
Information
load
Time
information
processing
capacity
Time
EXHIBIT 9.6
Dynamics of Information 
OverloadChapter Nine Communicating in Teams and Organizations 343
wait a few seconds before saying anything. In contrast, most 
people in the United States and similar cultures avoid silence 
and interpret those incidents as a sign of disagreement. Conver￾sational overlaps are considered rude in Japan, whereas people 
in Brazil and France are more likely to interpret interruptions 
and overlaps as evidence of the person’s interest and involve￾ment in the conversation. Meetings in countries that expect 
overlapping conversations can seem like a chaotic cacophony to 
those from other cultures.
NONVERBAL DIFFERENCES 
ACROSS CULTURES
Nonverbal communication represents another potential area 
for misunderstanding across cultures. Many nonconscious or 
involuntary nonverbal cues (such as smiling) have the same 
meaning around the world, but deliberate gestures often have 
different interpretations. For example, most of us shake our 
head from side to side to say “No,” but a variation of head shak￾ing means “I understand” to many people in India. Filipinos 
raise their eyebrows to give an affirmative answer, yet Arabs in￾terpret this expression (along with clicking one’s tongue) as a 
negative response. Most Americans are taught to maintain eye 
contact with the speaker to show interest and respect, whereas 
some Indigenous Americans learn at an early age to show re￾spect by looking down when an older or more senior person is 
talking to them.63
Indigenous Canadians communicate with silence much more than do 
most other people in that country, which can create misunderstanding 
in business and other relationships. “I really feel that there needs to 
be more acceptance and more teaching around the act of silence,” 
suggests Roberta Price, an Elder of the Coast Salish peoples in British 
Columbia. In particular, she advises medical professionals to “just sit 
in silence and listen very, very carefully . . . when there is huge 
disconnect between the professional and the patient.” A pioneering 
study reported how non-Indigenous physicians learned to better 
understand and practice silence when consulting with Indigenous 
patients. One physician explains that he sits low to avoid “looming” 
over the patient and does “not say anything for a long time.” Another 
physician learned about “developing the patience, accepting the 
pregnant pauses, and the loss, the lack of eye contact.”l
Cavan Images/Alamy Stock Photo
MALE-FEMALE DIFFERENCES IN COMMUNICATION
Males and females have similar communication practices, but there are subtle distinctions 
that can occasionally lead to misunderstanding and conflict (see Exhibit 9.7).64 One dis￾tinction is that males are more likely than females to view conversations as negotiations of 
relative status and power. They assert their power by directly giving advice to others (e.g., 
“You should do the following”) and using combative language. There is also evidence that 
males dominate the talk time in conversations with females, as well as interrupt more and 
adjust their speaking style less than do females.
Males engage in more “report talk,” in which the primary function of the conversation 
is impersonal and efficient information exchange. Females also do report talk, particu￾larly when conversing with males. However, females engage in more “rapport talk”—verbal 
and nonverbal communication that builds relationships by showing egalitarian, empa￾thetic support, and engagement with the other person.65 They also subdue their power in 
the relationship through more deferential communication, including modifiers (“It might 
be a good idea . . .”), disclaimers (“I’m not certain, but . . .”), and tag questions (“This 
works, doesn’t it?”).
Females also make more use of indirect requests (“Do you think you should . . .”), apolo￾gize more often, and seek advice from others more quickly than do males. Men also use 
these speech patterns to some extent, but women use them more frequently as well as 
across communication channels (conversations, text messages, etc.). Research also reports 
that females are more sensitive than males to nonverbal cues in face-to-face meetings. To￾gether, these conditions can create communication conflicts. Females who describe prob￾lems get frustrated that males offer advice rather than rapport; males become frustrated 
because they can’t understand why females don’t appreciate their advice.344 Part Three Team Processes
Improving Interpersonal Communication
Effective interpersonal communication depends on the sender’s ability to get the message 
across and the receiver’s performance as an active listener. In this section, we outline 
these two essential features of effective interpersonal communication.
GETTING YOUR MESSAGE ACROSS
This chapter began with the statement that effective communication occurs when the other 
person receives and understands the message. This is more difficult to accomplish than 
most people believe. To get your message across to the other person, you first need to empa￾thize with the receiver, such as being sensitive to words that may be ambiguous or trigger the 
wrong emotional response. Second, you should repeat the message, such as by rephrasing 
the key points a couple of times. Third, your message competes with other messages and 
noise, so find a time when the receiver is less likely to be distracted by these other matters. 
Finally, focus on the problem, not the person, if you have negative information to convey. 
People stop listening when the information attacks their self-concept. Also, suggest things 
the listener can do to improve, rather than implying that the listener has the problem.
ACTIVE LISTENING
Listening is at least as important as talking. As the Greek philosopher Epictetus wrote 
almost two millennia ago: “Nature gave us one tongue, but two ears, so we may listen 
twice as much as we speak.”66 But listening is more than just hearing the other person 
making sounds; it is a process of actively sensing the sender’s signals, evaluating them ac￾curately, and responding appropriately.
These three components of listening—sensing, evaluating, and responding—reflect the 
listener’s side of the communication model described at the beginning of this chapter. 
Listeners receive the sender’s signals, decode them as intended, and provide appropriate 
and timely feedback to the sender. Active listeners constantly cycle through sensing, eval￾uating, and responding during the conversation and engage in various activities to im￾prove these processes (see Exhibit 9.8).67
LO 9-5
WHEN MALES COMMUNICATE WHEN FEMALES COMMUNICATE
• Report talk—give advice, 
assert power
• Give advice directly 
• Dominant conversation style 
• Apologize less often 
• Less sensitive to nonverbal 
cues
• Rapport talk—relationship 
building 
• Give advice indirectly 
• Flexible conversation style 
• Apologize more often 
• More sensitive to nonverbal 
cues
(Photos): Brittany Herbert/McGraw Hill
EXHIBIT 9.7 Male–Female Differences in CommunicationChapter Nine Communicating in Teams and Organizations 345
• Sensing. Sensing is the process of receiving signals from the sender and paying at￾tention to them. Active listeners improve sensing in three ways. First, they post￾pone evaluation by not forming an opinion until the speaker has finished. Second, 
they avoid interrupting the speaker’s conversation. Third, they remain motivated to 
listen to the speaker.
• Evaluating. This component of listening includes understanding the message mean￾ing, evaluating the message, and remembering the message. To improve their evalu￾ation of the conversation, active listeners empathize with the speaker—they try to 
understand and be sensitive to the speaker’s feelings, thoughts, and situation. Eval￾uation also improves by organizing the speaker’s ideas during the communication 
episode.
• Responding. This third component of listening involves providing feedback to the 
sender, which motivates and directs the speaker’s communication. Active listeners 
accomplish this by maintaining sufficient eye contact and sending back channel 
signals (e.g., “I see”), both of which show interest. They also respond by clarifying 
the message—rephrasing the speaker’s ideas at appropriate breaks (“So you’re 
saying that . . . ?”).
• Postpone evaluation
• Avoid interruptions
• Maintain interest
Active
listening
Sensing
• Empathize
• Organize information
Evaluating
• Show interest
• Clarify the message
Responding
EXHIBIT 9.8
Active Listening Process 
and Strategies
®
SELF-ASSESSMENT 9.1: Are You an Active Listener?
Improving Communication Throughout the Hierarchy
So far, we have looked at micro-level issues in the communication process, namely, send￾ing and receiving information between two employees or among members of a small 
team. But in this era where knowledge is competitive advantage, corporate leaders also 
need to maintain an open flow of communication up, down, and across the entire orga￾nization. In this section, we discuss three organization-wide communication strategies: 
workspace design, digitally-based organizational communication, and direct communica￾tion with top management.
LO 9-6346 Part Three Team Processes
WORKSPACE DESIGN
The location and design of hallways, offices, cubicles, and communal areas (cafeterias, 
elevators) all influence to whom we speak as well as the frequency of that communica￾tion.68 Many organizations have shifted from cubicles to open spaces in the hope that the 
increased line-of-sight to coworkers will improve information sharing. However, two factors 
may reverse this trend. First, the COVID-19 pandemic demanded more social distancing 
to protect employees’ health. Some companies fulfilled this requirement by transferring 
employees from shared work areas to their own private cubicles. Second, open-space 
arrangements potentially undermine employee productivity due to noise, distractions, and 
loss of privacy.69
Another workspace strategy is to enable employees to collaborate in team spaces. 
These aren’t necessarily open-office plans. Some cloister team members into an area sepa￾rate from other teams. Others have more semi-private individual spaces. However, the 
work area consists of small breakout spaces, happenstance cubbyholes along hallways, 
and larger conference rooms where teams can frequently congregate. “We’re moving even 
more to a team-based space approach where we’re giving the employees a variety of spaces 
to use,” says Michael Ford, Microsoft’s vice president of global real estate and security.70
DIGITALLY-BASED ORGANIZATIONAL COMMUNICATION
For decades, employees received official company news through hard copy newsletters 
and magazines. Some firms still use these communication devices, but the traditional 
company magazine has almost completely been replaced by intranet web pages or PDF 
format files.
Even so, employees are increasingly skeptical of information that has been screened 
and packaged exclusively by management. Companies are adapting to this skepticism by 
introducing social media channels through the emerging enterprise communication plat￾forms described earlier in this chapter. Along with enabling task-focused message threads, 
these systems allow users to generate blogs, shared notices, and other news-oriented sites, 
most of which also allow feedback comments from readers within the organization. In 
many instances, company magazines have been replaced by real-time text messages di￾rectly from employees where the events occur.71
DIRECT COMMUNICATION WITH TOP MANAGEMENT
Effective organizational communication includes regular interaction directly between se￾nior executives and employees further down the hierarchy. One form of direct communi￾cation is through town-hall meetings, where executives brief a large gathering of staff on 
the company’s current strategy and results. Although the communication is mostly from 
executives to employees, town-hall meetings are more personal and credible than video or 
written channels. Also, these events usually provide some opportunity for employees to 
ask questions. Another strategy is for senior executives to hold roundtable forums with a 
small representation of employees, mainly to hear their opinions on various issues.
A less formal approach to direct communication is management by wandering around 
(MBWA). Coined by people at Hewlett-Packard four decades ago, this is essentially the 
practice in which senior executives get out of their offices and casually chat with em￾ployees on a daily or regular basis.72 Bob Courteau actively practices MBWA by casually 
meeting employees and trawling social media. “Management by wandering around was 
a big new idea as part of the Hewlett Packard way . . . and I have practiced it heavily in 
my career,” says Courteau, who initially worked at Hewlett Packard and for the past 
several years has been CEO of Altus Group, a large commercial real estate services and 
software company.73
Filtering is less prevalent when executives engage in regular casual conversations di￾rectly with employees. Direct conversations also help executives acquire a deeper meaning 
management by wandering 
around (MBWA)
a communication practice in 
which executives get out of 
their offices and learn from 
others in the organization 
through face-to-face dialogueChapter Nine Communicating in Teams and Organizations 347
and quicker understanding of internal organizational problems. A third benefit of direct 
communication is that employees might have more empathy for decisions made further 
up the corporate hierarchy.
Communicating through the Grapevine
Organizational leaders may try their best to quickly communicate breaking news to em￾ployees through emails, text messages, and other direct formal channels, but employees 
still rely to some extent on the corporate grapevine. The grapevine is an unstructured and 
informal network founded on social relationships rather than organizational charts or job 
descriptions. What do employees think about the grapevine? Surveys have found that al￾most all employees use the grapevine, but very few of them prefer this source of informa￾tion. In one survey, only one-third of employees believe grapevine information is credible. 
In other words, employees turn to the grapevine when they have few other options.74
GRAPEVINE CHARACTERISTICS
Research conducted several decades ago reported that the grapevine transmits informa￾tion very rapidly in all directions throughout the organization. The typical pattern is a 
cluster chain, whereby a few people actively transmit information to many others. The 
grapevine works through informal social networks, so it is more active where employees 
have similar backgrounds and are able to communicate easily. Many rumors seem to have 
at least a kernel of truth, possibly because they are transmitted through media-rich com￾munication channels (e.g., face-to-face) and employees are motivated to communicate ef￾fectively. Nevertheless, the grapevine distorts information by deleting fine details and 
exaggerating key points of the story.75
Some of these characteristics might still be true, but the grapevine almost certainly has 
changed as text messaging, email, and social media practices have replaced the traditional 
water cooler as sources of gossip. For example, several Facebook sites are unofficially 
themed around specific companies, allowing employees and customers to vent their com￾plaints about the organization. Along with altering the speed and network of corporate 
grapevines, the Internet has expanded these networks around the globe, not just around 
the next cubicle.76
Advice to CEOs: Listen—Act—Repeatm
John Legere has straightforward advice for all leaders. 
“The most powerful formula for success is three simple 
steps: 1. Shut up and listen to your customers and em￾ployees. 2. Do what they tell you. 3. Repeat.” 
Legere, who recently stepped down as CEO of T-Mobile 
US, practices what he preaches. His town hall meetings 
with employees are famous. He tweets incessantly with 
customers and staff alike. And he interacts personally—
not just remotely—with the people on the front lines. 
“At T-Mobile, we’ve cut through the layers—and 
hierarchy—to listen to employees directly every single 
day,” he says. “I’ve personally flown over a million miles 
to visit our call centers and retail stores—because it’s 
so important to cut out all the layers and hear directly 
from employees.”
global connections 9.2
Andrew Weber/AP/Shutterstock
grapevine
an unstructured and informal 
communication network 
founded on social relationships 
rather than organizational 
charts or job descriptions348 Part Three Team Processes
GRAPEVINE BENEFITS AND LIMITATIONS
Should the grapevine be encouraged, tolerated, or quashed? The difficulty in answering 
this question is that the grapevine has both benefits and limitations.77 One benefit, as was 
mentioned earlier, is that employees rely on the grapevine when information is not avail￾able through formal channels. It is also the main conduit through which organizational 
stories and other symbols of the organization’s culture are communicated. A third benefit 
of the grapevine is that this social interaction relieves anxiety. This explains why rumor 
mills are most active during times of uncertainty.78 Finally, the grapevine is associated 
with the drive to bond. Being a recipient of gossip is a sign of inclusion, according to evo￾lutionary psychologists. Trying to quash the grapevine is, in some respects, an attempt to 
undermine the natural human drive for social interaction.79
While the grapevine offers these benefits, it is not a preferred communication medium. 
Grapevine information is sometimes so distorted that it escalates rather than reduces em￾ployee anxiety. Furthermore, employees develop more negative attitudes toward the organi￾zation when management is slower than the grapevine in communicating information. 
What should corporate leaders do with the grapevine? They should listen to the grapevine 
as a signal of employee anxiety, then correct the cause of this anxiety. They also need to 
advise employees when the grapevine transmits blatant errors and fabrications. Most 
important, the company needs to view the grapevine as a competitor and meet this challenge 
by directly informing employees of news before it spreads throughout the grapevine.
LO 9-1 Explain why communication is important in organi￾zations, and discuss four influences on effective 
communication encoding and decoding.
Communication refers to the process by which information is 
transmitted and understood between two or more people. 
Communication is important for coordinating work, making 
decisions, changing others’ behavior, and supporting employee 
well-being. The communication process involves forming, en￾coding, and transmitting the intended message to a receiver, 
who then decodes the message and provides feedback to the 
sender. Effective communication occurs when the sender’s 
thoughts are transmitted to and understood by the intended 
receiver. The effectiveness of this process depends on whether 
the sender and receiver have similar codebooks, the sender’s 
proficiency at encoding that message to the audience, the send￾er’s and receiver’s motivation and ability to transmit messages 
through that particular communication channel, and their 
common mental models of the communication context.
LO 9-2 Compare and contrast the advantages and disadvan￾tages of digital written communication channels, 
other verbal communication channels, and nonver￾bal communication.
The two main types of communication channels are verbal and 
nonverbal. Verbal communication uses words, so it includes 
both spoken (oral) and written channels. Spoken communica￾tion tends to be better for transmitting emotions and persuad￾ing the receiver. Written communication is more appropriate 
for recording, presenting, and retrieving technical details. Non￾verbal communication is any type of communication that does 
not use words, such as images, diagrams, and hand gestures. It 
also includes facial gestures, voice intonation, physical dis￾tance, and even silence. Unlike verbal communication, nonver￾bal communication is less rule-bound and is mostly automatic 
and nonconscious. Some nonverbal communication is auto￾matic through a process called emotional contagion.
Digital communication in organizations has changed rap￾idly. Email once dominated, but has decreased to the point 
where it is almost equal to channel text messages and private 
text chats among knowledge workers. Video chats and meet￾ings have increased whereas voice-only communication has 
decreased. The COVID-19 pandemic quickly increased use of 
text messages and video chat. However, this trend began sev￾eral years earlier due to the arrival of enterprise communica￾tion platforms and a new generation of employees with 
emerging communication preferences.
The main advantages of digital written communication is 
that it can be written, edited, and transmitted quickly to many 
people. Most of these channels reduce social and organiza￾tional status differences, are asynchronous and, with search 
functions, are somewhat efficient filing cabinets. However, 
digital written communication is relatively poor at communi￾cating emotions, tends to reduce politeness and respect, and 
contributes to information overload. It is also inefficient at 
communicating in ambiguous, complex, and novel situations.
Emerging digital communication channels are forms of so￾cial media. They enable people to collaborate in the creation 
and exchange of user-generated content. Social media facilitate 
reciprocally interactive content, such that senders and receiv￾ers become “users” in a community of shared content.
Digital nonverbal communication, particularly emojis and 
animated GIFs, is increasing in organizations. The main bene￾fit of emojis is that they usually transmit rich emotional 
chapter summary349
meaning which tends to be too subtle or ambiguous in text￾only messages. They also symbolize ideas or objects, thereby 
strengthening or clarifying the meaning of the written text. 
Third, emojis potentially improve interpersonal relations.
LO 9-3 Discuss the relevance of synchronicity, social pres￾ence, social acceptance, and media richness when 
choosing the preferred communication channel.
The most appropriate communication medium depends on 
several factors. Synchronicity refers to the channel’s capacity 
for the sender and receiver to communicate at the same time 
(synchronous) or at different times (asynchronous). Synchro￾nous channels are better when the issue is urgent or the topic 
is complex. Asynchronous channels are better when it is costly 
for both parties to communicate at the same time or when the 
receiver should have time to reflect before responding. A chan￾nel has high social presence when it creates psychological 
closeness to the other party and awareness of their humanness. 
This is valuable when the parties need to empathize or influ￾ence each other. Social acceptance refers to how well the com￾munication medium is approved and supported by others. This 
acceptance depends on organizational or societal norms, each 
party’s preferences and skills with the channel, and the sym￾bolic meaning of a channel. Media richness refers to a chan￾nel’s data-carrying capacity. Nonroutine and ambiguous 
situations require rich media. However, technology-based lean 
media may be possible where users can multicommunicate, 
have high proficiency with that technology, and don’t have so￾cial presence distractions.
LO 9-4 Discuss various barriers (noise) to effective commu￾nication, including cross-cultural and male-female 
differences in communication.
Several barriers create noise in the communication process. 
People misinterpret messages because of misaligned codebooks 
due to different languages, jargon, and the use of ambiguous 
phrases. Filtering messages and information overload are two 
other communication barriers. Cross-cultural settings also pose 
problems with differences in the meaning of nonverbal cues, si￾lence, and conversational overlaps. There are also some com￾munication differences between males and females, such as the 
tendency for males to exert status and engage in report talk in 
conversations, whereas females use more rapport talk and are 
more sensitive to nonverbal cues.
LO 9-5 Explain how to get your message across more effec￾tively, and summarize the elements of active listening.
To get a message across, the sender must learn to empathize 
with the receiver, repeat the message, choose an appropriate 
time for the conversation, and be descriptive rather than eval￾uative. Listening includes sensing, evaluating, and responding. 
Active listeners support these processes by postponing evalua￾tion, avoiding interruptions, maintaining interest, empathiz￾ing, organizing information, showing interest, and clarifying 
the message.
LO 9-6 Summarize effective communication strategies in 
organizational hierarchies, and review the role and 
relevance of the organizational grapevine.
Some companies try to encourage communication across the 
organization through workspace design as well as through digi￾tal communication channels. Some executives also meet di￾rectly with employees by engaging in management by wandering 
around (MBWA) and by holding town-hall meetings.
In any organization, employees rely on the grapevine, par￾ticularly during times of uncertainty. The grapevine is an un￾structured and informal network founded on social relationships 
rather than organizational charts or job descriptions. Although 
early research identified several unique features of the grape￾vine, some of these features may be changing as the Internet 
plays an increasing role in grapevine communication.
communication, p. 326
emotional contagion, p. 331
grapevine, p. 347
information overload, p. 341
management by wandering 
around (MBWA), p. 346
media richness, p. 338
persuasion, p. 340
social media, p. 334
social presence, p. 337
synchronicity, p. 336
key terms
1. You have been hired as a consultant to improve commu￾nication between engineering and marketing staff in a 
large high-technology company. Use the communication 
model and the four ways to improve that process to de￾vise strategies to improve communication effectiveness 
among employees between these two work units.
2. A consumer goods company holds quarterly meetings 
involving its three dozen sales managers. These managers 
are located in several cities and countries, so more than 
half of them “participate” in the meeting as remote 
attendees. The one-day meeting has an opening and 
closing talk by CEO and vice president of sales, but most 
of the day consists of open discussion as well as one 
small-group session on strategic and operations sales 
issues. Which digital communication channel(s) would 
likely work best for involving the remote participants in 
these sessions? You may assume that more than one 
digital channel can be used throughout the day and, for 
some channels, more than one channel may be used at 
the same time. Your answer should refer to the four fac￾tors to consider when choosing the best communication 
channel (synchronicity, social presence, social accep￾tance, and media richness).
3. Digital communication has changed dramatically over 
the past decade. Emails are being replaced by team chan￾nels and private chat messaging. Video chats and team 
critical thinking questions350
meetings have become standard practice. To what extent 
have these changes in digital communication occurred 
where you are taking this course in organizational behav￾ior? Is email still widely used? Why or why not? What 
further changes in digital communication can you recom￾mend to improve your course and college experience?
4. Some (or many) senders include emojis or animated 
GIFs as a nonverbal channel to supplement their text 
messages or emails. In what work situations, if any, are 
emojis and GIFs most appropriate and helpful to com￾municate messages? Under what conditions should these 
nonverbal digital elements definitely NOT be used? If 
you use either emojis or animated GIFs in text messages 
or emails, what rules or principles would you recom￾mend to someone who hasn’t yet used these?
5. You are about to form a project team to design new mar￾keting strategies for one of the company’s global prod￾ucts. The team consists of eight marketing, technology, 
and sales coworkers located in the United States, Brazil, 
Singapore, and France. All speak English sufficiently, but 
some are understandably hesitant and slower than those 
whose first language is English. During the first two 
weeks, the team will resolve ambiguous details about the 
project’s main features, deadlines, and distribution of 
team tasks. What preferred communication channels 
(more than one can be used) should this team use to 
decide these initial team phase issues? Justify your 
choice of each channel in terms of synchronicity, social 
presence, social acceptance, and media richness.
6. Under what conditions, if any, do you think it is appro￾priate to use a text message to notify an employee that 
he or she has been laid off or fired? Why are text mes￾sages and other digital written communication channels 
usually considered inappropriate for conveying this 
information?
7. Explain why females and males are sometimes frustrated 
with each other’s communication behaviors.
8. In your opinion, has the introduction of digital written 
communication (team channel text messages, email, 
private chat, etc.) increased or decreased the amount 
of information flowing through the corporate grapevine? 
Explain your answer.
CASE STUDY: DIFFICULT CONNECTIONS
Sophia Reddy is an accountant in her late 20s who works in 
the downtown Chicago office of Alicamber LLC, a well￾known accounting firm with two dozen offices in the Mid￾west and Southeast states. A few days ago, a partner in the 
Chicago office asked her to participate next month in a spe￾cial project located in Alicamber’s Nashville office. The 
project includes accounting valuation analysis of an insur￾ance firm, and Sophia’s specialized knowledge of auditing 
insurance firms is apparently important for the project 
team’s skill set. She will spend two weeks in Nashville work￾ing on-site with that team. For two weeks before her visit, as 
the project gets under way, she will work remotely from Chi￾cago with Thomas Kerbakker, the project leader, and his 
team members in Nashville.
Sophia initially looked forward to her involvement in the 
Nashville project. The brief secondment applies her special￾ized knowledge, she will meet and learn from colleagues in 
another city, and working in Nashville will be an interesting 
change from Chicago. Two days after being advised of the 
assignment by the partner in the Chicago office, Sophia 
had not received any text message from Thomas, so she 
took the initiative to message him first.
Hi Thomas. Sophia Reddy here. I am excited to join 
your project. Gr8 to meet the Nashville team and learn 
from each other. Pls text team member list and schedule. 
Any b/g info you can send this wk would be helpful . Best, 
Sophia Reddy.
Sophia expected Thomas to reply the same day, prefer￾ably within an hour or two after her message was sent. 
Coworkers in her Chicago office typically texted back 
within that time frame. But no reply was received by the 
end of that day. When Sophia checked the next morning, 
Thomas still hadn’t replied. So, she sent the text message 
a second time. Thomas still had not texted back to her 
by the end of that day.
Thomas’s silence was beginning to irritate and worry 
Sophia. Either her specialized knowledge for the project 
wasn’t valued, or the project had been delayed, which would 
throw off her schedule working on other projects with Chi￾cago clients.
On the third morning, with no communication from 
Thomas, Sophia checked in with the Chicago partner who 
had assigned her to the Nashville project. To her surprise, 
the partner explained that although Thomas has a com￾pany-provided mobile phone (whose number Sophia had 
used for the messages she sent), he is one of those near￾retirement employees who apparently doesn’t do text mes￾sages. Staff in the Nashville office are aware of this, so they 
typically speak to him in person or over the phone. The 
partner acknowledged that sorting out schedules is impor￾tant, but also mentioned that the project wouldn’t begin for 
another month.
Armed with this information, Sophia returned to her of￾fice to finally make contact with Thomas. She picked up her 
phone, looked at it for a moment, then slowly set it down 
again. Sophia visualized an awkward conversation. She had 
never met Thomas, he is obviously much older than her, and 
his reluctance or inability to send text messages was a sure 
sign that the two have considerably divergent ways of think￾ing. In fact, Sophia wondered whether the entire Nashville 
office does things differently than her colleagues in Chicago. 
Sophia calls clients when required, but even these conversa￾tions are getting rarer in favor of text messages, emails, and on-site visits. As with many people her age, Sophia uses her 
phone to do almost everything, except make phone calls!
As a compromise, Sophia decided to send Thomas an 
email. It was a variation of her earlier text message, but with 
much more formality as well as a subject line, greeting, salu￾tation, and company signature lines. Sophia even changed 
“Thomas” to “Mr. Kerbakker” in the greeting. She surmised 
that Thomas would prefer this status-laden introduction, 
given his age and phobia with text messages. Sophia felt 
odd writing so formal an email to a coworker or project 
leader, but Thomas Kerbakker seemed to be the type who 
would expect this approach.
A few hours later, Sophia received an email reply from 
Thomas. It consisted of terse comments to each sentence 
that she had written in her earlier email:
| Hello Mr. Kerbakker:
| I am excited to join the [insurance company] project team 
| in Nashville. 
good
| It will be an excellent opportunity to meet the Nashville
| group and learn from each other. 
yes it will
| Please send me details of the team members and your 
| proposed project scheduling. Any background information 
| you can send this week would be helpful.
noted
Thomas
Sophia felt bewildered and dejected as she stared at Thom￾as’s reply. Was he angry with her for some unknown rea￾son? He seemed too busy to welcome her and certainly 
didn’t seem to care whether she was involved in the proj￾ect. “He didn’t even take the trouble to capitalize his 
words!” Sophia quipped under her breath. Also, Thomas’s 
reply didn’t give her confidence that the information she 
needed would be forthcoming very soon. Sophia increas￾ingly regretted being assigned to this project. “This Nash￾ville assignment isn’t going to be as enjoyable as I thought,” 
Sophia mumbled to herself.
Discussion Questions
1. Identify one or more symptoms that something has 
gone wrong here.
2. Analyze the causes of these symptom(s) using one or 
more communication concepts from this chapter.
3. What do you recommend that Sophia do at this time 
regarding her interaction with Thomas and the Nashville 
team? Assume that Sophia cannot back out of her 
assignment to the Nashville project.
4. What should Alicamber LLC do to minimize these 
problems in the long run?
© 2020 Steven L. McShane
TEAM EXERCISE: CROSS-CULTURAL COMMUNICATION GAME
Step 3: The exercise begins with a member of Team A pick￾ing up one card from the top of the pile and asking the 
question on that card to the members of Team B. The infor￾mation given to Team B includes the question and all alter￾natives listed on the card. Team B has 30 seconds after the 
question and alternatives have been read to give an answer. 
Team B earns one point if the correct answer is given. If 
Team B’s answer is incorrect, however, Team A earns that 
point. Correct answers to each question are indicated on 
the card and, of course, should not be revealed until the 
question is correctly answered or time is up. Whether or 
not Team B answers correctly, it picks up the next card on 
the pile and reads it to members of Team A. In other words, 
cards are read alternatively to each team. This procedure is 
repeated until all of the cards have been read or time has 
expired. The team receiving the most points wins.
Important note: The textbook provides very little informa￾tion pertaining to the questions in this exercise. Rather, 
you must rely on past learning, logic, and luck to win.
© 2001 Steven L. McShane 
PURPOSE This exercise is designed to develop and test 
your knowledge of cross-cultural differences in communi￾cation and etiquette.
MATERIALS The instructor will provide one set of ques￾tion/answer cards to each pair of teams.
INSTRUCTIONS
Step 1: The class is divided into an even number of 
teams. Ideally, each team would have three students. 
(Two- or four-student teams are possible if matched with 
an equal-sized team.) Each team is then paired with an￾other team and the paired teams (Team “A” and Team 
“B”) are assigned a private space, away from other 
matched teams.
Step 2: The instructor will hand each pair of teams a stack 
of cards with the multiple choice questions face down. 
These cards have questions and answers about cross￾cultural differences in communication and etiquette. No 
books or other aids are allowed.
351352
1. RealFoundations, A Foundation Built for Collaboration, 
YouTube, 2020; RealFoundations; Managing an Enter￾prise with the Modern Digital Workplace, YouTube, 2020; 
RealFoundations, How to Thrive in a Digital Workplace, 
YouTube, 2020; SWOOP Analytics, Real Foundations 
CEO Chris Shaida Reveals His 7 Behaviors for Success 
on Microsoft Teams, YouTube, 2021; L.L. Lee and S. 
Dawson, “Microsoft Teams Benchmarking Report 2021” 
(Sydney: SWOOP Analytics, June 2021).
2. A.H. Van de Ven, A.L. Delbecq, and R. Koenig Jr., 
“Determinants of Coordination Modes within Organiza￾tions,” American Sociological Review 41, no. 2 (1976): 
322–38; R. Foy et al., “Meta-Analysis: Effect of Interac￾tive Communication between Collaborating Primary 
Care Physicians and Specialists,” Annals of Internal 
Medicine 152, no. 4 (2010): 247–58; R. Rico et al., 
“Structural Influences upon Coordination and Perfor￾mance in Multiteam Systems,” Human Resource Manage￾ment Review 28, no. 4 (2018): 332–46; J.L. Claggett and 
E. Karahanna, “Unpacking the Structure of Coordination 
Mechanisms and the Role of Relational Coordination in 
an Era of Digitally Mediated Work Processes,” Academy 
of Management Review 43, no. 4 (2018): 704–22.
3. C. Barnard, The Functions of the Executive (Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 1938), 82. Barnard’s en￾tire statement also refers to the other features of organi￾zations that we describe in Chapter 1, namely that 
(a) people are willing to contribute their effort to the 
organization and (b) they have a common purpose.
4. J. O’Toole and W. Bennis, “What’s Needed Next: A 
Culture of Candor,” Harvard Business Review 87, no. 6 
(2009): 54–61. 
5. W.J.L. Elving, “The Role of Communication in Organisa￾tional Change,” Corporate Communications 10, no. 2 
(2005): 129–38; S. Muthusamy, “Power of Positive 
Words: Communication, Cognition, and Organizational 
Transformation,” Journal of Organizational Change Man￾agement 32, no. 1 (2019): 103–22; C. Schulz-Knappe, 
T. Koch, and J. Beckert, “The Importance of Communicat￾ing Change: Identifying Predictors for Support and 
Resistance toward Organizational Change Processes,” 
Corporate Communications: An International Journal 24, 
no. 4 (2019): 670–85.
6. R.E. Baumeister and M.R. Leary, “The Need to 
Belong: Desire for Interpersonal Attachments as a 
Fundamental Human Motivation,” Psychological 
Bulletin 117 (1995): 497–529; K.H. Greenaway et al., 
“Social Identities Promote Well-Being Because They 
Satisfy Global Psychological Needs,” European Journal 
of Social Psychology 46 (2016): 294–307; N. Steverink 
et al., “The Associations of Different Social Needs with 
Psychological Strengths and Subjective Well-Being: An 
Empirical Investigation Based on Social Production 
Function Theory,” Journal of Happiness Studies 21 
(2020): 799–824.
7. A.M. Saks, K.L. Uggerslev, and N.E. Fassina, “Socializa￾tion Tactics and Newcomer Adjustment: A Meta-Analytic 
Review and Test of a Model,” Journal of Vocational Behav￾ior 70, no. 3 (2007): 413–46; M. Wang et al., “Context, 
Socialization, and Newcomer Learning,” Organizational 
Psychology Review 5, no. 1 (2015): 3–25; A.M. Saks and 
J.A. Gruman, “How Do You Socialize Newcomers dur￾ing a Pandemic?,” Industrial and Organizational Psychol￾ogy 14, no. 1–2 (2021): 217–20.
endnotes
TEAM EXERCISE: VISUAL INSTRUCTIONS EXERCISE
Step 2: The instructor will ask each team to draw instruc￾tions on how to perform a well-known activity. These in￾structions are intended for people who have never heard 
about that activity. The instructions use pictures only—
without any words. Teams will have a fixed time frame to 
prepare these visual instructions. Each team will display 
its instructions on the flip chart sheet provided. These 
sheets will be posted around the class so all students can 
see every team’s instructions for that task.
Step 3: With all visual instructions posted, the class will 
debrief on the exercise, guided by a set of questions posed 
by the instructor.
This exercise was inspired by a similar activity developed by Dave Gray, 
XPLANE Corp.
PURPOSE This exercise is designed to help you under￾stand the importance of media richness, choosing com￾munication channels, and related issues on effective 
communication.
MATERIALS Each team will receive one sheet of flip 
chart paper as well as one nonpermanent (e.g., white 
board) marker. The instructor should have some means of 
posting each team’s final flip chart sheet, such as with 
tape or removable adhesive tac.
INSTRUCTIONS
Step 1: The class will form teams (usually five or six stu￾dents per team). (Note: Alternatively, your instructor 
might ask students to complete this activity individually 
rather than in teams.)353
“Emotional Contagion in Organizational Life,” Research 
in Organizational Behavior 38 (2018): 137–51.
17. M. Sonnby-Borgstrom, P. Jonsson, and O. Svensson, 
“Emotional Empathy as Related to Mimicry Reactions 
at Different Levels of Information Processing,” Journal 
of Nonverbal Behavior 27 (2003): 3–23; V. Vijayalakshmi 
and S. Bhattacharyya, “Emotional Contagion and Its 
Relevance to Individual Behavior and Organizational 
Processes: A Position Paper,” Journal of Business and 
Psychology 27 (2012): 363–74. However, emotional 
contagion is not universally automatic. It may depend 
on social relations between the parties. See: M. Wróbel 
and K.K. Imbir, “Broadening the Perspective on 
Emotional Contagion and Emotional Mimicry: The 
Correction Hypothesis,” Perspectives on Psychological 
Science 14 (2019): 437–51.
18. T.L. Chartrand and J.L. Lakin, “The Antecedents and 
Consequences of Human Behavioral Mimicry,” Annual 
Review of Psychology 64 (2013): 285–308; E. Prochazkova 
and M.E. Kret, “Connecting Minds and Sharing 
Emotions through Mimicry: A Neurocognitive Model 
of Emotional Contagion,” Neuroscience & Biobehavioral 
Reviews 80 (2017): 99–114.
19. M. Hauben and R. Hauben, “Netizens: On the History 
and Impact of Usenet and the Internet,” First Monday 3, 
no. 8 (1998); J. Abbate, Inventing the Internet (Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press, 1999); B.M. Leiner et al., Brief History 
of the Internet (Reston, VA: Internet. Society, October 15, 
2012).
20. “Communication Barriers in the Modern Workplace” 
(London: The Economist Intelligence Unit, March 
2018); L. Wright and N. McCullough, “New Survey 
Explores the Changing Landscape of Teamwork,” 
Microsoft 365 Blog (blog), April 19, 2018; “Email Market, 
2021–2025, Executive Summary” (London: Radicati 
Group, April 2021).
21. Although this exhibit likely reflects actual changes, there 
are no known large scale data on digital communication 
usage in the workplace. In this exhibit, 2014 to 2019 data 
are from 12,000 RescueTime app users. Data points are 
January of each year. On average, users actively focused 
on their screens for 5.5 hours each work day. The data 
shown here represent the 18 percent (about one hour) of 
total active screen time spent communicating. The data 
for 2020 and 2021 extrapolate from the earlier data, 
guided by macro-level statistics on user counts and cor￾porate adoptions of Microsoft Teams, Slack, and Zoom, 
as well as global email activity. Small surveys (e.g. com￾munication activities surveyed by project.co) support 
these extrapolations.
22. N.B. Ducheneaut and L.A. Watts, “In Search of 
Coherence: A Review of E-Mail Research,” Human￾Computer Interaction 20, no. 1–2 (2005): 11–48; R.S. 
Mano and G.S. Mesch, “E-Mail Characteristics, Work 
Performance and Distress,” Computers in Human 
Behavior 26, no. 1 (2010): 61–69. 
23. W. Lucas, “Effects of E-mail on the Organization,” 
European Management Journal 16, no. 1 (1998): 18–30; 
G. de La Rupelle, C. Guthrie, and M. Kalika, “La Relation 
8. S. Cohen, “The Pittsburgh Common Cold Studies: 
Psychosocial Predictors of Susceptibility to Respiratory 
Infectious Illness,” International Journal of Behavioral 
Medicine 12, no. 3 (2005): 123–31; B. A. Scott et al., 
“A Daily Investigation of the Role of Manager Empathy 
on Employee Well-Being,” Organizational Behavior and 
Human Decision Processes 113, no. 2 (2010): 127–40; S. 
Y. Shin and S. G. Lee, “Effects of Hospital Workers’ 
Friendship Networks on Job Stress,” PLoS ONE 11, no. 2 
(2016): e0149428.
9. C.E. Shannon and W. Weaver, The Mathematical Theory 
of Communication (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 
1949); R.M. Krauss and S.R. Fussell, “Social Psychologi￾cal Models of Interpersonal Communication,” in Social 
Psychology: Handbook of Basic Principles, ed. E.T. Higgins 
and A. Kruglanski (New York: Guilford Press, 1996), 
655–701. 
10. J.R. Carlson and R.W. Zmud, “Channel Expansion The￾ory and the Experiential Nature of Media Richness Per￾ceptions,” Academy of Management Journal 42 (1999): 
153–70; S.C. D’Urso and S.A. Rains, “Examining the 
Scope of Channel Expansion: A Test of Channel Expan￾sion Theory With New and Traditional Communication 
Media,” Management Communication Quarterly 21, no. 4 
(2008): 486–507; R.S. Burt and S. Wang, “Bridge Super￾vision: Correlates of a Boss on the Far Side of a Struc￾tural Hole,” Academy of Management Journal, 
October 25, 2021, in press.
11. Y. van den Boer et al., “Towards a Model of Source and 
Channel Choices in Business-to-Government Service 
Interactions: A Structural Equation Modeling Approach,” 
Government Information Quarterly 34 (2017): 434–56; R. 
McColl and M. Michelotti, “Sorry, Could You Repeat 
the Question? Exploring Video-Interview Recruitment 
Practice in HRM,” Human Resource Management Journal
29 (2019): 637–56.
12. A.A. Niler et al., “Conditioning Team Cognition: 
A Meta-Analysis,” Organizational Psychology Review 11, 
no. 2 (2021): 144–74; R. Müller and C.H. Antoni, 
“Effects of ICT Shared Mental Models on Team Pro￾cesses and Outcomes,” Small Group Research 53, no. 2 
(2022): 307–35.
13. S. Bonaccio et al., “Nonverbal Behavior and Communica￾tion in the Workplace: A Review and an Agenda for 
Research,” Journal of Management 42 (2016): 1044–74.
14. L.Z. Tiedens and A.R. Fragale, “Power Moves: Comple￾mentarity in Dominant and Submissive Nonverbal 
Behavior,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 84, 
no. 3 (2003): 558–68. 
15. P. Ekman and E. Rosenberg, What the Face Reveals: Basic 
and Applied Studies of Spontaneous Expression Using the 
Facial Action Coding System (Oxford, UK: Oxford 
University Press, 1997); P. Winkielman and K.C. 
Berridge, “Unconscious Emotion,” Current Directions 
in Psychological Science 13, no. 3 (2004): 120–23. 
16. W.J. Becker and R. Cropanzano, “Organizational 
Neuroscience: The Promise and Prospects of an Emerging 
Discipline,” Journal of Organizational Behavior 31 (2010): 
1055–59; S.G. Barsade, C.G.V. Coutifaris, and J. Pillemer, 354
is based on two of the more widely cited sources: A.M. 
Kaplan and M. Haenlein, “Users of the World, Unite! 
The Challenges and Opportunities of Social Media,” 
Business Horizons 53 ( 2010): 59–68; C.T. Carr and 
R.A. Hayes, “Social Media: Defining, Developing, and 
Divining,” Atlantic Journal of Communication 23 
(2015): 46–65. 
30. “The Coworker Network,” Kellogg Insight, June 3, 2013; 
W. van Zoonen, T.G.L.A. van der Meer, and J.W.M. 
Verhoeven, “Employees Work-Related Social-Media 
Use: His Master’s Voice,” Public Relations Review 40, 
no. 5 (2014): 850–52; G. Martin, E. Parry, and P. 
Flowers, “Do Social Media Enhance Constructive 
Employee Voice All of the Time or Just Some of the 
Time?,” Human Resource Management Journal 25, no. 4 
(2015): 541–62; W. van Zoonen, J.W.M. Verhoeven, 
and R. Vliegenthart, “How Employees Use Twitter to 
Talk about Work: A Typology of Work-Related Tweets,” 
Computers in Human Behavior 55, Part A (2016): 
329–39.
31. N. Aldunate and R. González-Ibáñez, “An Integrated 
Review of Emoticons in Computer-Mediated Communi￾cation,” Frontiers in Psychology 7 (2017), 02061; Q. Bai 
et al., “A Systematic Review of Emoji: Current Research 
and Future Perspectives,” Frontiers in Psychology 10 
(2019), 02221.
32. J. Tolins and P. Samermit, “GIFs as Embodied 
Enactments in Text-Mediated Conversation,” Research 
on Language and Social Interaction 49, no. 2 (2016): 
75–91; J. “Aaron” Jiang, C. Fiesler, and J.R. Brubaker, 
“‘The Perfect One’: Understanding Communication 
Practices and Challenges with Animated GIFs,” Proceed￾ings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 2, 
no. CSCW (November 2018): 80: 1–20; A. Wagener, 
“The Postdigital Emergence of Memes and GIFs: 
Meaning, Discourse, and Hypernarrative Creativity,” 
Postdigital Science and Education 3, no. 3 (2021): 
831–50.
33. Y. Tang and K. Hew, “Emoticon, Emoji, and Sticker Use 
in Computer-Mediated Communications: Understanding 
Its Communicative Function, Impact, User Behavior, 
and Motive,” in New Media for Educational Change, ed. 
L. Deng, W.W.K. Ma, and C.W.R. Fong (Singapore: 
Springer Nature, 2018), 191–201; Q. Bai et al., “A 
Systematic Review of Emoji: Current Research and 
Future Perspectives,” Frontiers in Psychology 10 (2019), 
02221; C. Gantiva et al., “Cortical Processing of Human 
and Emoji Faces: An ERP Analysis,” Behaviour & Infor￾mation Technology 39, no. 8 (2020): 935–43; B. Fischer 
and C. Herbert, “Emoji as Affective Symbols: Affective 
Judgments of Emoji, Emoticons, and Human Faces Vary￾ing in Emotional Content,” Frontiers in Psychology 12 
(April 20, 2021): 645173.
34. A.R. Dennis, R.M. Fuller, and J.S. Valacich, “Media, 
Tasks, and Communication Processes: A Theory of Media 
Synchronicity,” MIS Quarterly 32 (2008): 575–600; S. Taipale, 
“Synchronicity Matters: Defining the Characteristics of 
Digital Generations,” Information, Communication & 
Society 19 (2016): 80–94; I. Geiger and C. Laubert, 
“Situational Strategic versus Personal Influences on 
Entre L’intensité Perçue D’utilisation De La Messagerie 
Électronique Et La Qualité De La Relation Hiérar￾chique,” Relations Industrielles 70, no. 1 (2015): 157–85; 
C.M. Brotheridge, D.J. Neufeld, and B. Dyck, “Commu￾nicating Virtually in a Global Organization,” Journal of 
Managerial Psychology 30, no. 8 (2015): 909–24.
24. N. Panteli, “Richness, Power Cues and Email Text,” 
Information & Management 40, no. 2 (2002): 75–86; 
C.T. Carr and C. Stefaniak, “Sent from My iPhone: 
The Medium and Message as Cues of Sender Profession￾alism in Mobile Telephony,” Journal of Applied Communi￾cation Research 40, no. 4 (2012): 403–24; D.C. DeAndrea, 
“Advancing Warranting Theory,” Communication Theory 24, 
no. 2 (2014): 186–204; C.M. Brotheridge, D.J. Neufeld, 
and B. Dyck, “Communicating Virtually in a Global 
Organization,” Journal of Managerial Psychology 30, 
no. 8 (2015): 909–24.
25. K. Byron, “Carrying Too Heavy a Load? The 
Communication and Miscommunication of Emotion 
by Email,” Academy of Management Review 33 (2008): 
309–27; M.A. Riordan and L.A. Trichtinger, “Overconfi￾dence at the Keyboard: Confidence and Accuracy in 
Interpreting Affect in E-Mail Exchanges,” Human Com￾munication Research 43 (2017): 1–24; K. Lohmann, S.S. 
Pyka, and C. Zanger, “The Effects of Smileys on Receiv￾ers’ Emotions,” Journal of Consumer Marketing 34 
(2017): 489–95; C. Laubert and J. Parlamis, “Are You 
Angry (Happy, Sad) or Aren’t You? Emotion Detection 
Difficulty in Email Negotiation,” Group Decision and 
Negotiation 28 (2019): 377–413.
26. H. Lee, “Behavioral Strategies for Dealing with Flaming 
in an Online Forum,” The Sociological Quarterly 46 
(2005): 385–403; A.K. Turnage, “Email Flaming Behav￾iors and Organizational Conflict,” Journal of Computer￾Mediated Communication 13 (2007): 43–59; K. Byron, 
“Carrying Too Heavy a Load? The Communication and 
Miscommunication of Emotion by Email,” Academy of 
Management Review 33 (2008): 309–27.
27. N. Sobotta and M. Hummel, “A Capacity Perspective 
on E-Mail Overload: How E-Mail Use Contributes to 
Information Overload” (paper presented at the 2015 
48th Hawaii International Conference on System 
Sciences, January 5–8, 2015), 692–701; S. Drössler et al., 
“Informationsüberflutung durch digitale Medien am 
Arbeitsplatz (Information overload by digital media at 
the workplace. Systematic review of qualitative studies),” 
Zentralblatt für Arbeitsmedizin, Arbeitsschutz und 
Ergonomie (Central Journal for Occupational 
Medicine, Occupational Safety and Ergonomics) 68 
(2018): 77–88.
28. The estimated daily email messages is reported in: 
“Email Market, 2021-2025, Executive Summary” 
(London: Radicati Group, April 2021). For information 
about the volume of mobile and platform messaging, see: 
D. Kent, “The State Of Workplace Messaging 2022: 
Microsoft Teams, Webex, & More,” November 2, 2021; B. 
Dean, “WhatsApp 2022 User Statistics: How Many People 
Use WhatsApp?,” Backlinko (blog), January 5, 2022.
29. Social media definitions in the literature tend to be 
obtuse, varied, and in many cases, elusive. Our definition 355
medium is the message is found in: M. McLuhan, Under￾standing Media: The Extensions of Man (New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 1964).
42. R.L. Daft and R.H. Lengel, “Information Richness: A 
New Approach to Managerial Behavior and Organization 
Design,” Research in Organizational Behavior 6 (1984): 
191–233; R.H. Lengel and R.L. Daft, “The Selection of 
Communication Media as an Executive Skill,” Academy 
of Management Executive 2 (1988): 225–32. 
43. H. Rodriguez et al., “Huddle Up!: The Adoption and Use 
of Structured Team Communication for VA Medical 
Home Implementation,” Health Care Management Review
40, no. 4 (2015): 286–99; R.W. Quinn and J.S. Bunder￾son, “Could We Huddle on This Project? Participant 
Learning in Newsroom Conversations,” Journal of 
Management 42, no. 2 (2016): 386–418; M. Harrison, 
“How a U.S. Health Care System Uses 15-Minute 
Huddles to Keep 23 Hospitals Aligned,” Harvard Business 
Review, November 29, 2018.
44. R.E. Rice, “Task Analyzability, Use of New Media, and 
Effectiveness: A Multi-Site Exploration of Media 
Richness,” Organization Science 3 (1992): 475–500; V.W. 
Kupritz and E. Cowell, “Productive Management 
Communication: Online and Face-to-Face,” Journal of 
Business Communication 48 (2011): 54–82.
45. R.F. Otondo et al., “The Complexity of Richness: Media, 
Message, and Communication Outcomes,” Information & 
Management 45, no. 1 (2008): 21–30. 
46. N.L. Reinsch Jr., J.W. Turner, and C.H. Tinsley, “Multi￾communicating: A Practice Whose Time Has Come?,” 
Academy of Management Review 33, no. 2 (2008): 
391–403; A.F. Cameron and J. Webster, “Multicommuni￾cating: Juggling Multiple Conversations in the Workplace,” 
Information Systems Research 24, no. 2 (2013): 352–71; 
N.L. Reinsch and J.W. Turner, “Multicommunicator 
Aspirational Stress, Suggestions for Teaching and Research, 
and Other Insights After 10 Years of Multicommunica￾tion Research,” Journal of Business and Technical 
Communication 33, no. 2 (2019): 141–71.
47. S. Xu, Z. Wang, and P. David, “Media Multitasking 
and Well-Being of University Students,” Computers in 
Human Behavior 55, Part A (2016): 242–50; A.-F. Cam￾eron et al., “Multicommunicating in Meetings: Effects 
of Locus, Topic Relatedness, and Meeting Medium,” 
Management Communication Quarterly 32, no. 3 
(2018): 303–36.
48. J.R. Carlson and R.W. Zmud, “Channel Expansion 
Theory and the Experiential Nature of Media Richness 
Perceptions,” Academy of Management Journal 42 
(1999): 153–70; N. Kock, “Media Naturalness Theory: 
Human Evolution and Behaviour towards Electronic 
Communication Technologies,” in Applied Evolutionary 
Psychology, ed. S.C. Roberts (Oxford, UK: Oxford 
University Press, 2012), 381–98; I. Blau, O. Weiser, and 
Y. Eshet-Alkalai, “How Do Medium Naturalness and 
Personality Traits Shape Academic Achievement and 
Perceived Learning? An Experimental Study of Face-to￾Face and Synchronous E-Learning,” Research in Learn￾ing Technology 25 (2017), 1974.
Negotiation Medium Choice: Media Synchronicity Theory 
and Affect for Communication Channel,” International 
Journal of Conflict Management 29 (2018): 398–423.
35. R.E. Rice, “Media Appropriateness: Using Social 
Presence Theory to Compare Traditional and New 
Organizational Media,” Human Communication Research 19, 
no. 4 (1993): 451–84; D. Gooch and L. Watts, “The 
Impact of Social Presence on Feelings of Closeness in 
Personal Relationships,” Interacting with Computers 27, 
no. 6 (2015): 661–74; C.S. Oh, J.N. Bailenson, and 
G. Welch, “A Systematic Review of Social Presence: 
Definition, Antecedents, and Implications,” Frontiers in 
Robotics and AI (October 15, 2018), 00114.
36. N. Walter, K. Ortbach, and B. Niehaves, “Designing 
Electronic Feedback—Analyzing the Effects of Social 
Presence on Perceived Feedback Usefulness,” International 
Journal of Human-Computer Studies 76 (2015): 1–11; S.C. 
Srivastava and S. Chandra, “Social Presence in Virtual 
World Collaboration: An Uncertainty Reduction 
Perspective Using a Mixed Methods Approach,” MIS 
Quarterly 42, no. 3 (2018): 779–803.
37. J. Fulk, “Social Construction of Communication 
Technology,” Academy of Management Journal 36 (1993): 
921–50; J.W. Turner et al., “Exploring the Dominant 
Media: How Does Media Use Reflect Organizational 
Norms and Affect Performance?” Journal of Business 
Communication 43 (2006): 220–50; J.B. Bayer, S.W. 
Campbell, and R. Ling, “Connection Cues: Activating 
the Norms and Habits of Social Connectedness,” 
Communication Theory 26 (2016): 128–49.
38. Z. Lee and Y. Lee, “Emailing the Boss: Cultural 
Implications of Media Choice,” IEEE Transactions on 
Professional Communication 52, no. 1 (2009): 61–74; 
D. Holtbrügge, A. Weldon, and H. Rogers, “Cultural 
Determinants of Email Communication Styles,” 
International Journal of Cross Cultural Management 13, 
no. 1 (2013): 89–110. 
39. “Emojis Gain Hearts, Business in Shy Chinese,” Xinhua 
News Agency, August 18, 2016; J. D’Onfro, “13 Rules 
Regarding Proper Email Etiquette from Around the 
World,” Mental Floss, February 20, 2017; Z. Zhang, 
“WeChat’s Exclusive Emojis Express Emotions Western 
Apps Cannot,” Quartz, July 19, 2018; O. Surcouf, 
“Korean Apps Conquer Asia with Cute Emojis,” Asia 
Times, March 16, 2019.
40. R.C. King, “Media Appropriateness: Effects of Experi￾ence on Communication Media Choice,” Decision 
Sciences 28 (1997): 877–910; A. Oeldorf-Hirsch and K.L. 
Nowak, “There Is Something I Need to Tell You: Balanc￾ing Appropriateness and Efficiency in Modality Choice 
for Interpersonal Disclosures,” Communication Studies
69 (2018): 125–44.
41. K.K. Stephens, A.K. Barrett, and M.J. Mahometa, “Orga￾nizational Communication in Emergencies: Using Multi￾ple Channels and Sources to Combat Noise and Capture 
Attention,” Human Communication Research 39 
(2013): 230–51; J. Eden and A.E. Veksler, “Relational 
Maintenance in the Digital Age: Implicit Rules and 
Multiple Modalities,” Communication Quarterly 64 
(2016): 119–44. Marshall McLuhan’s treatise on the 356
Task-Relevant Expectations,” Psychonomic Bulletin & 
Review 26 (2019): 1426–32.
53. R.M. Krauss, “The Psychology of Verbal Communica￾tion,” in International Encyclopedia of the Social and Be￾havioral Sciences, ed. N. Smelser and P. Baltes (London: 
Elsevier, 2002), 16161–65. 
54. A.M. Carton, C. Murphy, and J.R. Clark, “A (Blurry) Vi￾sion of the Future: How Leader Rhetoric about Ultimate 
Goals Influences Performance,” Academy of Management 
Journal 57 (2014): 1544–70; P.D. Joshi et al., “Communi￾cating with Distant Others: The Functional Use of Ab￾straction,” Social Psychological and Personality Science 7 
(2016): 37–44. Ambiguous language by politicians also 
increases with the diversity of constituents. See: C. 
Chapp et al., “Going Vague: Ambiguity and Avoidance 
in Online Political Messaging,” Social Science Computer 
Review 37 (2019): 591–610.
55. A.R. Links et al., “Surgeon Use of Medical Jargon with 
Parents in the Outpatient Setting,” Patient Education and 
Counseling 102 (2019): 1111–18.
56. C.E. Connelly et al., “Knowledge Hiding in Organiza￾tions,” Journal of Organizational Behavior 33 (2012): 
64–88.
57. J. O’Toole and W. Bennis, “What’s Needed Next: A 
Culture of Candor,” Harvard Business Review 87, no. 6 
(2009): 54–61.
58. T.W. Jackson and P. Farzaneh, “Theory-Based Model of 
Factors Affecting Information Overload,” International 
Journal of Information Management 32, no. 6 (2012): 
523–32; S. Drössler et al., “Informationsüberflutung 
durch digitale Medien am Arbeitsplatz (Information 
overload by digital media at the workplace. Systematic 
review of qualitative studies),” Zentralblatt für 
Arbeitsmedizin, Arbeitsschutz und Ergonomie (Central 
Journal for Occupational Medicine, Occupational Safety 
and Ergonomics) 68, no. 2 (2018): 77–88.
59. A. Edmunds and A. Morris, “The Problem of Informa￾tion Overload in Business Organisations: A Review of the 
Literature,” International Journal of Information Manage￾ment 20 (2000): 17–28; C.-Y. Li, “Why Do Online 
Consumers Experience Information Overload? An Exten￾sion of Communication Theory,” Journal of Information 
Science 43, no. 6 (2017): 835–51.
60. A.-W. Harzing, K. Köster, and U. Magner, “Babel in 
Business: The Language Barrier and Its Solutions in the 
HQ-Subsidiary Relationship,” Journal of World Business
46 (2011): 279–87; N. Aichhorn and J. Puck, “Bridging 
the Language Gap in Multinational Companies: Lan￾guage Strategies and the Notion of Company-Speak,” 
Journal of World Business 52 (2017): 386–403; 
D.E. Welch and L.S. Welch, “Developing Multilingual 
Capacity: A Challenge for the Multinational Enterprise,” 
Journal of Management 44 (2018): 854–69.
61. T. Craig, “Different Strokes,” Personnel Today, November 
25, 2008, 190. 
62. D. C. Barnlund, Communication Styles of Japanese and 
Americans: Images and Realities (Belmont, CA: 
Wadsworth, 1988); H. Yamada, American and Japanese 
Business Discourse: A Comparison of Interaction Styles
49. L.P. Robert and A.R. Dennis, “Paradox of Richness: A 
Cognitive Model of Media Choice,” IEEE Transactions on 
Professional Communication 48 (2005): 10–21; C. 
Belletier et al., “Choking under Monitoring Pressure: 
Being Watched by the Experimenter Reduces Executive 
Attention,” Psychonomic Bulletin & Review 22 (2015): 
1410–16; C. Belletier, A. Normand, and P. Huguet, 
“Social-Facilitation-and-Impairment Effects: From 
Motivation to Cognition and the Social Brain,” 
Current Directions in Psychological Science 28 (2019): 
260–65.
50. E.V. Wilson, “Perceived Effectiveness of Interpersonal 
Persuasion Strategies in Computer-Mediated Communi￾cation,” Computers in Human Behavior 19, no. 5 (2003): 
537–52; K. Sassenberg, M. Boos, and S. Rabung, 
“Attitude Change in Face-to-Face and Computer￾Mediated Communication: Private Self-Awareness 
as Mediator and Moderator,” European Journal of 
Social Psychology 35 (2005): 361–74; P. Di Blasio and 
L. Milani, “Computer-Mediated Communication and 
Persuasion: Peripheral vs. Central Route to Opinion 
Shift,” Computers in Human Behavior 24, no. 3 (2008): 
798–815. 
51. Most sources incorrectly attribute this famous quotation 
(usually with “accomplished” rather than “achieved”) to 
the Irish playwright and social critic George Bernard 
Shaw. To the best of our knowledge, it was first uttered in 
the late 1950s by Joe Coffman, president of Tecnifax 
Corporation (which made visual education technology). 
Coffman held patents for specialized slide transparencies 
and related apparatus on overhead projectors. Given the 
company’s products, Coffman was also an enthusiast of 
visual and interpersonal communication. Twice each year 
at its head office in Holyoke, Massachusetts, Tecnifax 
held international seminars on communication practices. 
This quotation was originally published in a 1960 article 
summarizing a public health conference, during which 
one of the speakers credited Coffman as the originator of 
this quotation. There is one more twist to the origins of 
this quotation. Coffman may have adapted it from the 
following passage in William H. Whyte’s 1950 Fortune
magazine article on communication, which became one 
of Fortune’s most-read articles: “The great enemy of com￾munication, we find, is the illusion of it.” See W. H. 
Whyte, “Is Anybody Listening,” Fortune, September 
1950, 77–83, 167–78; “Web of Mutual Anticipations: 
Conference Report,” Public Health Reports 75, no. 10 
(1960): 927–32; D. M. Davis, A Biased Biography: 
Mine (Lincoln, NE: iUniverse, 2004); “The Biggest Prob￾lem in Communication Is the Illusion That It Has Taken 
Place,” Quote Investigator, August 31, 2014, http://quote￾investigator.com/2014/08/31/illusion/.
52. J.W. Bang and D. Rahnev, “Stimulus Expectation Alters 
Decision Criterion but Not Sensory Signal in Perceptual 
Decision Making,” Scientific Reports 7, no. 1 (December 
6, 2017): 1–12; M.M. Roghanizad and V.K. Bohns, “Ask 
in Person: You’re Less Persuasive than You Think over 
Email,” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 69 
(March 2017): 223–26; A. Tapal, Y. Yeshurun, and 
B. Eitam, “Relevance-Based Processing: Little Role for 357
68. T.J. Allen, “Architecture and Communication among 
Product Development Engineers,” California Manage￾ment Review 49, no. 2 (2007): 23–41; M.C. Davis, D.J. 
Leach, and C.W. Clegg, “The Physical Environment of 
the Office: Contemporary and Emerging Issues,” in Inter￾national Review of Industrial and Organizational Psychol￾ogy 2011 (Wiley, 2011), 193–237; J. Kim and R. de Dear, 
“Workspace Satisfaction: The Privacy-Communication 
Trade-Off in Open-Plan Offices,” Journal of Environmental 
Psychology 36 (2013): 18–26.
69. A. Seddigh et al., “The Association between Office 
Design and Performance on Demanding Cognitive 
Tasks,” Journal of Environmental Psychology 42 (2015): 
172–81; M. Yadav et al., “The Irrelevant Speech Effect in 
Multi-Talker Environments: Applications to Open-Plan 
Offices,” The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America
143, no. 3 (2018): 1725; K. Chan, “Cubicle Comeback? 
Pandemic Will Reshape Office Life for Good,” Chicago 
Tribune, May 12, 2020.
70. G. Evans and D. Johnson, “Stress and Open-Office 
Noise,” Journal of Applied Psychology 85 (2000): 779–83; 
A. Seddigh et al., “The Association between Office 
Design and Performance on Demanding Cognitive 
Tasks,” Journal of Environmental Psychology 42 (2015): 
172–81; M. Yadav et al., “The Irrelevant Speech Effect 
in Multi-Talker Environments: Applications to Open-Plan 
Offices,” The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America
143, no. 3 (2018): 1725; “How to Reimagine Work 
Spaces for the Hybrid Era,” Microsoft Worklab (blog), 
June 21, 2021.
71. C.J. Turco, “A New Era of Corporate Conversation,” 
MIT Sloan Management Review 58, no. 1 (Fall 2016): 
11–12.
72. The original term is “management by wandering around,” 
but this has been replaced with “walking around” 
over the years. See W. Ouchi, Theory Z (New York: 
Avon Books, 1981), 176–77; T. Peters and R. Waterman, 
In Search of Excellence (New York: Harper and Row, 
1982), 122. 
73. S.-L. Tan, “Altus Group’s Bob Courteau Manages 
by Wandering Around,” Australian Financial Review, 
March 7, 2019.
74. R. Rousos, “Trust in Leaders Lacking at Utility,” The 
Ledger (Lakeland, FL), July 29, 2003, B1; B. Whitworth 
and B. Riccomini, “Management Communication: 
Unlocking Higher Employee Performance,” Communica￾tion World, March/April 2005, 18–21. 
75. K. Davis, “Management Communication and the 
Grapevine,” Harvard Business Review 31 (1953): 
43–49; W.L. Davis and J.R. O’Connor, “Serial 
Transmission of Information: A Study of the Grapevine,” 
Journal of Applied Communication Research 5 (1977): 
61–72. 
76. G. Dalziel, Rumor and Communication in Asia in the 
Internet Age (New York: Routledge, 2013); K.L. Robinson 
and P.D. Thelen, “What Makes the Grapevine So Effective? 
An Employee Perspective on Employee-Organization 
Communication and Peer-to-Peer Communication,” 
Public Relations Journal 12, no. 2 (2018).
(Norwood, NJ: Ablex, 1992), chap. 2; T. Hasegawa and 
W. B. Gudykunst, “Silence in Japan and the United 
States,” Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology 29, no. 5 
(1998): 668–84; M. Fujio, “Silence during Intercultural 
Communication: A Case Study,” Corporate Communica￾tions 9, no. 4 (2004): 331–39.
63. H. Blagg, “A Just Measure of Shame?,” British Journal 
of Criminology 37 (1997): 481–501; R. E. Axtell, Gestures: 
The Do’s and Taboos of Body Language around the 
World, rev. ed. (New York: Wiley, 1998); A. McCarthy 
et al., “Cultural Display Rules Drive Eye Gaze During 
Thinking,” Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology 37 
(2006): 717–22; H. Akechi et al., “Attention to Eye 
Contact in the West and East: Autonomic Responses and 
Evaluative Ratings,” PLOS ONE 8, no. 3 (March 13, 
2013): e59312; H. Yamada, O.R. Kelm, and D.A. Victor, 
The 7 Keys to Communicating in Japan: An Intercultural 
Approach (Georgetown University Press, 2017), 
pp. 163–65.
64. D. Tannen, You Just Don’t Understand: Men and Women 
in Conversation (New York: Ballantine Books, 1990); 
J.L. Locke, Duels and Duets: Why Men and Women Talk 
So Differently (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press, 2011); M.R. Atai and F. Chahkandi, “Democracy 
in Computer-Mediated Communication: Gender, Com￾municative Style, and Amount of Participation in Profes￾sional Listservs,” Computers in Human Behavior 28, no. 3 
(2012): 881–88; A.B. Hancock and B.A. Rubin, “Influence 
of Communication Partner’s Gender on Language,” 
Journal of Language and Social Psychology 34, no. 1 
(2015): 46–64.
65. A. Mulac et al., “‘Uh-Huh. What’s That All About?’ Dif￾fering Interpretations of Conversational Backchannels 
and Questions as Sources of Miscommunication across 
Gender Boundaries,” Communication Research 25 
(1998): 641–68; C. Leaper and R.D. Robnett, “Women 
Are More Likely Than Men to Use Tentative Language, 
Aren’t They? A Meta-Analysis Testing for Gender Differ￾ences and Moderators,” Psychology of Women Quarterly 35, 
no. 1 (2011): 129–42; L. Jefferson et al., “Effect of 
Physicians’ Gender on Communication and Consulta￾tion Length: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis,” 
Journal of Health Services Research & Policy 18, no. 4 
(2013): 242–48.
66. This quotation is varied slightly from the original 
translations by: E. Carter, All the Works of Epictetus, 
Which Are Now Extant, 3rd ed., vol. 2 (London: J. and 
F. Rivington, 1768), 333; T.W. Higginson, The Works of 
Epictetus (Boston: Little, Brown, and Company, 1866), 
428.
67. L.B. Comer and T. Drollinger, “Active Empathetic Lis￾tening and Selling Success: A Conceptual Framework,” 
Journal of Personal Selling & Sales Management 19 
(1999): 15–29; T. Drollinger, L.B. Comer, and P.T. War￾rington, “Development and Validation of the Active Em￾pathetic Listening Scale,” Psychology and Marketing 23, 
no. 2 (2006): 161–80; P. JungKun et al., “The Role of 
Listening in E-Contact Center Customer Relationship 
Management,” Journal of Services Marketing 29, no. 1 
(2015): 49–58.358
of Applied Psychology 106, no. 8 (2021): 1137–55; J. Boland, 
“Got Zoom Fatigue? Out-of-Sync Brainwaves Could Be 
Another Reason Videoconferencing Is Such a Drag,” The 
Conversation, December 11, 2021.
e. 2014–2019 data are from 12,000 RescueTime app users, 
calculated from information in R. Molla, “The Productiv￾ity Pit: How Slack Is Ruining Work,” Vox, May 1, 2019. 
These data represent the 18 percent (about one hour) of 
total active screen time spent engaging in communication 
activity. The data for 2020 and 2021 extrapolate from the 
earlier data, guided by macro-level statistics on user 
counts and corporate adoptions of Microsoft Teams, 
Slack, and Zoom, as well as global email activity. Small￾scale surveys by project.co are consistent with the esti￾mates shown here in digital workplace communication 
during these two years. See: “Email Market, 2021–2025, 
Executive Summary” (London: Radicati Group, April 
2021); D. Curry, “Microsoft Teams Revenue and Usage 
Statistics (2022),” Business of Apps, January 11, 2022; 
D. Curry, “Slack Revenue and Usage Statistics (2022),” 
Business of Apps, January 11, 2022; B. Dean, “Zoom User 
Stats: How Many People Use Zoom in 2022?,” Backlinko
(blog), January 6, 2022; M. Iqbal, “Zoom Revenue and 
Usage Statistics (2022),” Business of Apps, January 11, 
2022; “Communication Statistics 2022” (Southport, UK: 
Project.co, February 2022).
f. “Adobe Global Emoji Trend Report 2021 Key Findings” 
(San Jose, Calif.: Adobe, June 2021); “Are Emojis the 
New Email Etiquette?,” Crossword Solver (blog), October 
2021.
g. E. Glikson, A. Cheshin, and G.A. van Kleef, “The 
Dark Side of a Smiley: Effects of Smiling Emoticons 
on Virtual First Impressions,” Social Psychological and 
Personality Science 9, no. 5 (2018): 614–25; M. Prada 
et al., “Motives, Frequency and Attitudes toward Emoji 
and Emoticon Use,” Telematics and Informatics 35, no. 7 
(2018): 1925–34; S.C. Herring and A.R. Dainas, 
“Gender and Age Influences on Interpretation of 
Emoji Functions,” ACM Transactions on Social 
Computing 3, no. 2 (2020): 1–26.
h. M.A. Riordan and E. Glikson, “On the Hazards of the 
Technology Age: How Using Emojis Affects Perceptions 
of Leaders,” International Journal of Business Communi￾cation, November 24, 2020, in press; B.P. Cavalheiro et al., 
“Evaluating the Adequacy of Emoji Use in Positive and 
Negative Messages from Close and Distant Senders,” 
Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking, 25, 
no. 3 (2022): 194–99.
i. Down To Earth Chinese, These Emojis In China DON’T 
Mean This! DO NOT Use Them Incorrectly!, YouTube, 
Learn Chinese, 2021; V. Zhou, “China’s Beloved Doge 
Emojis Don’t Mean What They Seem,” Vice, April 21, 
2021; “Don’t Put on a Happy Face! Are You Using the 
Smiley Emoji All Wrong?,” The Guardian, August 11, 
2021.
j. Kurt Wallace v AFS Security 24/7 Pty Ltd, No. 4292 (Fair 
Work Commission [Australia], June 28, 2019).
k. Based on information in: E. Dopson, “How to Host Pro￾ductive Team Huddles for Retail Stores,” Shopify (blog), 
September 2, 2021.
77. S.R. Clegg and A. van Iterson, “Dishing the Dirt: Gossip￾ing in Organizations,” Culture and Organization 15, 
no. 3/4 (2009): 275–89; C. Mills, “Experiencing Gossip: 
The Foundations for a Theory of Embedded Organiza￾tional Gossip,” Group & Organization Management 35, 
no. 2 (2010): 213–40; T.J. Grosser et al., “Hearing 
It through the Grapevine: Positive and Negative Work￾place Gossip,” Organizational Dynamics 41, no. 1 (2012): 
52–61.
78. R.L. Rosnow, “Inside Rumor: A Personal Journey,” 
American Psychologist 46 (1991): 484–96; P. Bordia 
et al., “Management Are Aliens! Rumors and Stress 
during Organizational Change,” Group & Organization 
Management 31 (2006): 601–21; K. Smet et al., “The 
Explanatory Role of Rumours in the Reciprocal 
Relationship between Organizational Change 
Communication and Job Insecurity: A Within-Person 
Approach,” European Journal of Work and Organiza￾tional Psychology 25 (2016): 631–44.
79. N. Nicholson, “Evolutionary Psychology: Toward a 
New View of Human Nature and Organizational Society,” 
Human Relations 50 (1997): 1053–78; E.K. Foster, 
“Research on Gossip: Taxonomy, Methods, and Future 
Directions,” Review of General Psychology 8, no. 2 (2004): 
78–99; B. Beersma and G.A. Van Kleef, “Why People 
Gossip: An Empirical Analysis of Social Motives, 
Antecedents, and Consequences,” Journal of Applied 
Social Psychology 42, no. 11 (2012): 2640–70. 
a. “State of the Sector 2019: The Definitive Global Survey 
of the Internal Communication Profession” (London: 
Gatehouse, February 2019); “Dynamic Signal Study 
Finds U.S. Workforce Stressed and Ready to Quit, Com￾pounding Concerns from Tight Labor Market and Possi￾ble Economic Downturn,” news release (San Bruno, 
CA: Dynamic Signal, March 20, 2019); “Millennials 
Are Managers Now,” Zapier (blog), March 10, 2020; 
S.M. O’Keefe and J. Buono, “Crisis Communication: 
How Great Leaders Stop Rumors before They Start,” 
Gallup Workplace, April 3, 2020; Office of Personnel 
Management, “2020 Federal Employee Viewpoint 
Survey” (Washington, DC: United States Government, 
April 2021).
b. “Communication Barriers in the Modern Workplace” 
(London: The Economist Intelligence Unit, March 
2018); L. Wright and N. McCullough, “New Survey Ex￾plores the Changing Landscape of Teamwork,” Microsoft 
365 Blog (blog), April 19, 2018; “Randstad Workmonitor 
Q2 2018” (Amsterdam: Randstad Holding nv, June 12, 
2018).
c. “The Most Unusual Interview Mistakes and Biggest Body 
Language Mishaps, According to Annual CareerBuilder 
Survey,” News Release (Chicago: CareerBuilder, 
February 22, 2018).
d. J. Lee, “A Neuropsychological Exploration of Zoom 
Fatigue,” Psychiatric Times, November 18, 2020; J.N. 
Bailenson, “Nonverbal Overload: A Theoretical Argu￾ment for the Causes of Zoom Fatigue,” Technology, Mind, 
and Behavior 2, no. 1 (2021), 00030; K.M. Shockley 
et al., “The Fatiguing Effects of Camera Use in Virtual 
Meetings: A Within-Person Field Experiment,” Journal 359
from the Inside Out!,” September 26, 2017, https://
www.t-mobile.com/news/un-carrier-is-from-the-inside-out; 
M. Davis, “T-Mobile CEO John Legere Met Employees 
at Sprint Campus Weeks after Negative Report,” Kansas 
City Star, October 5, 2018; S. Walker, “T-Mobile’s CEO 
and the Tribal Approach to Management,” Wall Street 
Journal, September 7, 2019.
l. L. Kelly and J.B. Brown, “Listening to Native Patients: 
Changes in Physicians’ Understanding and Behaviour,” 
Canadian Family Physician 48 (October 2002): 1645–52; 
W. Rowland, Elder Roberta: Welcoming Silence, Video, 
Living My Culture (Canadian Virtual Hospice, 2016).
m. J. Legere, “T-Mobile’s CEO on Winning Market Share 
by Trash-Talking Rivals,” Harvard Business Review, 
January-February 2017; J. Legere, “Un-Carrier Is 
Design Credit: Blue globe icon: Merfin/Shutterstock360
Power and Influence 
in the Workplace
Managing your boss sounds manipulative and a career risk, but it is 
actually a valuable process of gaining power and using influence for the 
benefit of the organization. Executives say it is a key factor in everyone’s career success. 
Managing up begins with understanding and adapting to your boss’s preferences and style. “When 
done well, managing up means knowing how they like to work and delivering on it,” explains Loren 
Margolis, CEO of Training & Leadership Success in New York City. “Get to know their communication 
preferences and adjust yours for greater understanding. Know when to keep them in the loop and when 
to work independently.”
Tomas Kucera agrees. “It is about understanding the needs of the other person and helping them to 
achieve their goals.” The head of business operations at Tricentis, a software testing company in Vienna, 
Austria, also points out that the process is mutual, not one-sided. “Managing up is about setting 
boundaries and rules on how you and your manager work together.”
Communicating effectively with people above you in the hierarchy is an important skill in upward 
influence. “Rather than only expecting managers (“from the top”) to communicate their intent, we should 
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
LO 10-1 Describe the dependence model of power and the five sources of power 
in organizations.
LO 10-2 Discuss the four contingencies of power.
LO 10-3 Explain how people and work units gain power through social networks.
LO 10-4 Describe eight types of influence tactics, three consequences of influencing others, 
and three contingencies to consider when choosing an influence tactic.
LO 10-5 Identify the organizational conditions and personal characteristics associated with 
organizational politics, as well as ways to minimize organizational politics.
Learning Objectives
10
chapterManaging your boss sounds manipulative and a career risk, but it is actually a valuable process of gaining power and using 
influence for the benefit of the organization.
PART 3: TEAM PROCESSES
also “manage up” by communicating our intent to our managers and colleagues,” suggests Andrea 
Darabos, a lean agile coach at Lean Advantage in London, UK.
Mike Krupit, founder of Philadelphia-based executive coaching firm Trajectify, suggests that managing 
up involves influencing your boss in a way that doesn’t look like negotiation. “You’re trying to influence an 
action or a decision,” explains Krupit, who has led eight startup businesses. “You have to know who you’re 
negotiating with, assess what drives them, and understand how to speak to them on their own terms.”
Managing your boss also means helping your boss succeed in their job. This occurs by being a 
problem solver, not a problem pyromaniac. Problem pyromaniacs turn everything into problems for the 
boss to fix, whereas problem solvers offer the boss solutions when problems arise. “Here’s a pro tip 
from me as a former dean and provost who has worked with many department chairs: For every 
problem you share with your dean, bring a couple of potential solutions as well,” recommends 
Dartmouth College professor Carolyn Dever. “From the dean’s perspective, this will be most welcome.”1
The fine art and science of upward influence (managing your boss) captures many of the themes in 
this chapter. It considers the individual’s sources and contingencies of power, and how that power is 
applied to actually engage in upward influence. Everyone uses power and influence in organizations, 
whether they realize it or not.
361
insta_photos/Shutterstock362 Part Three Team Processes
This chapter unfolds as follows: First, we define power and present a 
basic model depicting the dynamics of power in organizational settings. 
The chapter then discusses the five bases of power. Next, we look at the 
contingencies necessary to translate those sources into meaningful power. 
Our attention then turns to social networks and how they provide power to 
members through social capital. The latter part of this chapter examines 
the various types of influence in organizational settings as well as the 
contingencies of effective influence strategies. The final section looks at 
situations in which influence becomes organizational politics, and identifies 
ways of minimizing political behavior.
The Meaning of Power
Power is the capacity of a person, team, or organization to influence others.2
 There are a 
few important features of this definition. First, power is not the act of changing someone’s 
attitudes or behavior; it is only the potential to do so. People frequently have power they 
do not use; they might not even know they have power. Second, power is based on the 
target’s perception that the power holder controls (i.e., possesses, has access to, or regu￾lates) a valuable resource that can help the target achieve their goals.3
 An employee might 
have valuable expertise, yet this power base doesn’t translate into actual power because 
others in the organization don’t know about or understand the value of this expertise.
However, power is not your own perception or feeling of power; it exists only when oth￾ers believe you have power. For example, some unscrupulous individuals generate power 
by convincing others that they control something of value, even though they don’t actually 
control that resource. Some people are also perceived as powerful simply because their 
behavior suggests they are not swayed by authority or concerned about abiding by social 
norms.4
Third, power involves asymmetric (unequal) dependence of one party on another 
party.5
 This dependent relationship is illustrated in Exhibit 10.1. The line from Person B 
to the goal shows that Person B believes Person A controls a resource that can help or 
hinder Person B in achieving that goal. Person A—the dominant power holder in this 
illustration—might have power over Person B by controlling a desired job assignment, 
power
the capacity of a person, team, 
or organization to influence 
others
LO 10-1
Person B’s
goal
Countervailing
power
Person A is perceived 
as controlling resources
that help or hinder
Person B’s goal
achievement
Power
Person A
(power holder)
Person B
EXHIBIT 10.1
Dependence Model of PowerChapter Ten Power and Influence in the Workplace 363
useful information, rewards, or even the privilege of being associated with Person A! For 
example, if you believe a coworker has expertise (the resource) that would substantially 
help you write a better report (your goal), then that coworker has some power over you 
because you value that expertise to achieve your goal. Whatever the resource is, Person B 
believes they are dependent on Person A (the power holder) to provide the resource so 
Person B can reach their goal.
Although dependence is a key element of power relationships, we use the phrase asym￾metric dependence because the less powerful party still has some power—called countervailing 
power—over the more powerful party. In Exhibit 10.1, Person A dominates the power relation￾ship, but Person B has enough countervailing power to keep Person A in the exchange rela￾tionship and ensure that person uses their dominant power judiciously.
One other key feature of all power relationships is that they depend on some minimum 
level of trust. Trust indicates a level of expectation that the more powerful party will de￾liver the resource. For instance, you trust your employer to give you a paycheck at the end 
of each pay period. Even those in extremely dependent situations will usually walk away 
from the relationship if they lack a minimum level of trust in the more powerful party.
Let’s look at this power dependence model in the employee–manager relationship. You 
depend on your boss to support your continued employment, satisfactory work arrange￾ments, and other things you value. At the same time, the manager depends on you to 
complete required tasks, to work effectively with others, and to engage in other behaviors 
that the manager values. Managers (and the companies they represent) typically have 
more power, whereas employees have weaker countervailing power. But that power imbal￾ance may have changed, at least temporarily, as many employees gained power during the 
recent “great resignation.” The extent that your source of power (such as expertise) actu￾ally generates power depends on several factors, such as the manager’s awareness of your 
source of power and how many other employees have that source of power. The employee–
manager relationship also depends on sufficient trust in each other.
The dependence model of power reveals only the core features of power dynamics between 
people and work units in organizations. We also need to learn about the specific sources of 
power and contingencies that support or inhibit those power bases. As Exhibit 10.2 illustrates, 
power is derived from five sources: legitimate, reward, coercive, expert, and referent. 
countervailing power
the capacity of a person, team, 
or organization to keep a more 
powerful person or group in 
the exchange relationship
others
Nonsubstitutability
Centrality
Visibility
Discretion
Referent
Expert
Legitimate
Reward
Coercive
EXHIBIT 10.2 
Sources and Contingencies 
of Power364 Part Three Team Processes
The model also identifies four contingencies of power: the employee’s or department’s non￾substitutability, centrality, discretion, and visibility. Over the next two sections of this chapter, 
we will discuss each of these sources and contingencies of power in organizations.
Sources of Power in Organizations
There are five main sources of power in human interactions.6
 Three of these—legitimate, 
reward, and coercive—originate mostly (but not completely) from the power holder’s for￾mal position or informal role. In other words, the person is granted these sources of 
power formally by the organization or informally by coworkers. Two other sources of 
power—expert and referent—originate mainly from the power holder’s own characteristics; 
in other words, people carry these power bases around with them. However, even personal 
sources of power are not completely within the person because they depend on how oth￾ers perceive them.
LEGITIMATE POWER
Legitimate power is an agreement among organizational members that people in specific 
roles can request a set of behaviors from others. This perceived right or obligation origi￾nates from formal job descriptions as well as informal rules of conduct. It is likely the most 
important source of power in organizational settings, particularly between employees and 
managers.7
 For example, managers have a legitimate right to tell employees what tasks to 
perform, whom to work with, what company resources they can use, and so forth. Employ￾ees follow the boss’s requests because they have agreed to perform a range of requests from 
people in positions of higher authority. Employee motivation to comply with these requests 
occurs separately from the manager’s ability to reward or punish employees.
Legitimate power has restrictions; it gives the power holder the right to ask others to per￾form only a limited domain of behaviors, known as the “zone of indifference.”8
 Although 
most employees accept the boss’s right to deny them access to Facebook during company 
time, some might draw the line when the boss asks them to work several hours beyond the 
regular workday. They either overtly refuse to follow orders or they engage in evasive tactics.
Several factors influence the size of the zone of indifference and, consequently, the 
magnitude of legitimate power. Highly trusted power holders have a larger zone of indif￾ference. Employees are more willing to abide by the requests of trusted leaders even when 
those requests are unusual or on the periphery of expected job du￾ties. Some people are more obedient to authority due to their val￾ues and personality traits. Specifically, those who value conformity 
and tradition as well as have high power distance (i.e., they accept 
an unequal distribution of power) tend to give their bosses a larger 
legitimate power
an agreement among 
organizational members that 
people in specific roles can 
request a set of behaviors 
from others
Legitimate power gives managers the right to ask employees to perform a range of 
tasks, but employees sometimes believe the request is unreasonable (outside the 
“zone of indifference”). Consider the recent incident in which the Bristol regional 
manager of a cleaning company asked a supervisor who reported to her to transfer 
cleaning equipment from a client (school) to the manager’s house. The supervisor 
refused. The pandemic had just begun, the manager and another person at her home 
had COVID-19 symptoms, and the United Kingdom had entered its first mandatory 
lockdown. The manager fired the supervisor, allegedly saying: “I am your manager 
and you should not question me, and if I tell you to do something, you should do it.” 
A UK employment tribunal disagreed. It concluded that the fired supervisor was 
within his rights to refuse the task; he was awarded one year’s pay.a
Elnur/ShutterstockChapter Ten Power and Influence in the Workplace 365
zone of indifference. The organization’s culture represents another influence on the will￾ingness of employees to follow orders.9
Managers are not the only people with legitimate power in organizations. Employees 
also have legitimate power over their bosses and coworkers through legal and administra￾tive rights as well as informal norms.10 An organization might give employees the right to 
request information or training that is required for their job. Laws give employees the 
right to refuse to work in unsafe conditions. More subtle forms of legitimate power also 
exist.11 Human beings have a norm of reciprocity—a feeling of obligation to help someone 
who has helped them. If a coworker previously assisted you with a challenging task, that 
coworker has power because you feel an obligation to help the coworker on something of 
similar value in the future. The norm of reciprocity is a form of legitimate power because 
it is an informal rule of conduct that we are expected to follow.
Legitimate Power through Information Control A particularly potent form 
of legitimate power occurs where people have the right to control information that others 
receive.12 These information gatekeepers have power in two ways. First, information is a 
resource, so those who need information are dependent on the gatekeeper to provide that 
resource. For example, the map department of a mining company has considerable power 
when other departments are dependent on the map department to deliver maps required 
for exploration projects.
Second, information gatekeepers gain power by selectively distributing information 
such that those receiving the information perceive the situation in a specific way.13 As we 
learned in the previous chapter on communication, information is often filtered as it 
flows up the hierarchy, which enables those transmitting the information to frame the 
situation in a more positive light. This framing allows the information gatekeeper to steer 
the decision maker toward one choice rather than another.
REWARD POWER
Reward power is derived from the person’s ability to control the allocation of rewards 
valued by others and to remove negative sanctions (i.e., negative reinforcement). Man￾agers have formal authority that gives them power over the distribution of organiza￾tional rewards such as pay, promotions, time off, vacation schedules, and work 
assignments. Employees have reward power over coworkers through organizational citi￾zenship behaviors, such as lending work resources or coaching others. They also have 
reward power over their bosses through feedback they provide to the company about the 
boss’s leadership.
COERCIVE POWER
Coercive power is the ability to apply punishment. Managers usually have considerable 
coercive power, ranging from showing disapproval to firing employees. Employees also 
have coercive power, such as when coworkers use peer pressure to change another em￾ployee’s behavior. In fact, one study found that hospital employees were more likely to 
follow prescribed hygienic activity (wash their hands) when faced with peer pressure than 
when the hospital rewarded this behavior with a large financial incentive.14
EXPERT POWER
Legitimate, reward, and coercive power originate mostly from an organizational position 
or role.15 Expert power, on the other hand, originates from within the power holder. It is 
an individual’s or work unit’s capacity to influence others by possessing knowledge or 
skills valued by others. An important form of expert power is the perceived ability to man￾age uncertainties in the business environment. Organizations are more effective when 
they operate in predictable environments, so they value people who can minimize 
norm of reciprocity
a felt obligation and social 
expectation of helping or 
otherwise giving something of 
value to someone who has 
already helped or given 
something of value to you366 Part Three Team Processes
turbulence in consumer trends, societal changes, unstable supply lines, and so forth. Ex￾pertise can help companies cope with uncertainty through prevention, forecasting, and 
absorption. These three coping strategies are arranged in a hierarchy of importance, with 
prevention being the most powerful:16
• Prevention—The most effective strategy is to prevent environmental changes from 
occurring. For example, financial experts acquire power by preventing the organi￾zation from experiencing a cash shortage or defaulting on loans.
• Forecasting—The second best strategy is to predict environmental changes or varia￾tions. In this respect, some people gain power as trend spotters. They have the un￾canny ability to predict the rise and fall of fads and other consumer preferences so 
companies can adapt before the emerging environmental conditions occur.
• Absorption—People and work units also gain power by absorbing or neutralizing the 
impact of environmental shifts when they happen. An example is the ability of 
maintenance crews to come to the rescue when machines break down.
REFERENT POWER
People have referent power when others identify with them, like them, or otherwise re￾spect them. As with expert power, referent power originates within the power holder. It is 
mostly a function of the person’s character and interpersonal skills. Referent power is 
The Power of a Trend Hunterb
People who can forecast the future are worth their weight 
in gold because they help companies cope with environ￾mental uncertainties. By understanding and even manag￾ing the future, corporate leaders know whether to ramp 
up production or take corrective action before fads fall 
out of favor.
Jeremy Gutsche is one of the world’s leading trend 
spotters, but he doesn’t like to use that word. “Quite sim￾ply, the word ‘trends’ is too broad,” he says, explaining 
that it can mean anything from next year’s fashionable 
color to macro-level buying behavior. “I like to hunt for 
what I call clusters of inspiration,” he offers. “Clustering 
is the art of identifying insights that are meaningful to 
your customer. To create clusters, you’ll need to collect 
your observations from trend hunting and filter through 
the noise.”
Gutsche’s foray into searching for clusters of inspira￾tion came from his entrepreneurial father. “He used to get 
me to read hundreds of magazines a month, searching for 
business ideas and brainstorming what projects we could 
prototype during the weekend.” A professor in an MBA 
program also introduced Gutsche to the business of 
“hunting for cool.”
Soon after, Gutsche developed a new “trend hunter” 
website “as a place for people to share business ideas.” 
The successful website has millions of visitors and 
200,000 idea hunters. Gutsche leads a team that dis￾sects this cornucopia of information to identify future 
trends, including the decline of the luxury market and the 
rise of “credit crunch couture.” He also hosts Future 
Festivals in several countries, writes best-selling books 
on the topic, and advises organizations on future clusters 
of inspiration.
global connections 10.1
Marcel Bieri/Shutterstock
referent power
the capacity to influence 
others on the basis of an 
identification with and respect 
for the power holderChapter Ten Power and Influence in the Workplace 367
associated with charisma. Experts have difficulty agreeing on the meaning of charisma. 
Some describe it as a special “gift” or trait within the charismatic person, while others say 
it is mainly in the eyes of the beholder. Charisma may be best described as a set of self￾presentation characteristics and nonverbal communication behaviors (i.e., signaling) that 
generate interpersonal attraction and referent power over others as well as deference to 
the charismatic person.17
DEFERENCE TO POWER
One of the most troubling observations about power in organizations is the human tendency 
to follow the guidance of people who are charismatic (i.e., have referent power) or claim to 
have legitimate or expert power. Deferential followers minimally evaluate the appropriate￾ness of the requested behavior. They don’t even investigate whether the power holder has 
legitimate authority to make the request or actually possesses the expertise they claim.18
Consider this recent example: Before the instructor of an undergraduate course arrived 
for class, two casually dressed people (a 29-year-old Black male and a 50-year-old Cauca￾sian female) entered and set their belongings down at the front of the classroom. Without 
introduction, one of them said to the students: “I need you to put your cell phones in this 
box.” One of them then walked around the classroom with a box to collect the students’ 
phones. If any student questioned this task, they were authoritatively told, “It is important 
for you to follow instructions and put your phone in the box.” The two also said (when 
asked) that they did not know where the instructor was at that time. Most students cher￾ish their cell/mobile phones, yet an average of 85 percent of students across five small 
classes surrendered their phones to these strangers without receiving any explanation or 
assurance! Fortunately, these two people were confederates of the instructor and all 
phones were returned after the confederates had collected and counted them.19
This example was an experimental event in a classroom, but deference to power some￾times has tragic consequences. Not long ago, the Canadian justice system discovered that 
one of its “star” expert witnesses—a forensic child pathology expert—had provided inac￾curate cause of death evaluations in at least 20 cases. A dozen of those cases resulted in 
wrongful or highly questionable criminal convictions. The pathologist’s reputation as a 
renowned authority was the main reason why his often-weak evidence was accepted with￾out question. “Experts in a courtroom—we give great deference to experts,” admits a 
Canadian defense lawyer familiar with the situation.20
Contingencies and Consequences of Power
CONTINGENCIES OF POWER
Suppose that you have valuable expertise that can give the organization significant com￾petitive advantage over rivals. Does this expertise mean that you are powerful? Not neces￾sarily. As was illustrated earlier in Exhibit 10.2, sources of power generate power only 
under some conditions. Four important contingencies of power are nonsubstitutability, 
centrality, visibility, and discretion.21
Nonsubstitutability Individuals and work units have more power when the re￾source they offer is nonsubstitutable.22 If you have expertise that is valuable to the organi￾zation and that no other employee can provide, you would be more powerful than if 
several people in your company possess this valued knowledge. Conversely, power de￾creases as the number of alternative sources of the resource increases. Substitutability re￾fers not only to other sources that offer the resource; it also refers to substitutions of the 
resource itself. You might be the only person with specialized knowledge about a topic, 
but that knowledge becomes substitutable if technology or documented procedures pro￾vide similar guidance. 
charisma
a set of self-presentation 
characteristics and nonverbal 
communication behaviors 
(i.e. signaling) that generate 
interpersonal attraction and 
referent power over others as 
well as deference to the 
charismatic person
LO 10-2368 Part Three Team Processes
Controlling access to the resource is one strategy to increase 
nonsubstitutability. Several professions leverage their expert 
power by restricting access to the profession and often to the 
educational programs that train people into that profession. 
Employees are also less substitutable when they operate special 
equipment that they personally have modified or possess other 
knowledge that remains undocumented.
A second strategy is differentiating the resource from the al￾ternatives. Consulting firms sometimes use this tactic. They take 
skills and knowledge that many competitors can also provide 
and wrap them into a package (with the latest buzz words, of 
course) so that it looks like a service that no one else can offer.
Nonsubstitutability through differentiation is also recom￾mended when developing our personal brand. Our public image 
and reputation should be authentic (who we really are and what 
we can deliver) and valuable to employers. But it also needs to 
be unique, which leverages the power of nonsubstitutability. “Be 
unique about something. Be a specialist in something. Be known 
for something. Drive something,” advises Barry Salzberg, the 
former global CEO of Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited who 
now teaches at Columbia Business School. “That’s very, very 
important for success in leadership because there are so many 
highly talented people. What’s different about you—that’s your 
personal brand.”23
Centrality Centrality refers to the power holder’s importance 
based on the degree and nature of interdependence with others.24
Centrality increases with the number of people dependent on you 
as well as how quickly and severely they are affected by that de￾pendence. Think about your own centrality for a moment: If you 
decided not to show up for work or school tomorrow, how many 
people would have difficulty performing their jobs because of your absence? How soon after 
they arrive at work would these coworkers have to adjust their tasks and work schedule as a 
result of your absence? If you have high centrality, many people in the organization would 
be adversely affected by your absence, and they would be affected quickly.
Visibility Power does not flow to unknown people in the organization. Instead, em￾ployees gain power when their talents remain in the forefront of the minds of their boss, 
coworkers, and others. In other words, power increases with visibility. This visibility can 
occur, for example, by taking on people-oriented jobs and projects that require frequent 
interaction with senior executives. Employees also gain visibility by being, quite literally, 
visible. Some people strategically locate themselves in more visible work areas, such as 
those closest to the boss or where other employees frequently pass by.
People often use public symbols as subtle (and not-so-subtle) cues to make their power 
sources known to others. Some display their educational diplomas and awards on office 
walls to remind visitors of their expertise. Medical professionals wear white coats with 
stethoscopes around their necks, which symbolize their legitimate and expert power in 
hospital settings. Other people play the game of “face time”—spending more time at work 
and showing that they are working productively.
Discretion Another important contingency of power in organizations is the free￾dom to exercise judgment. This discretion involves making decisions without referring 
to a specific rule or receiving permission from someone else.25 Employees have more 
power due to increased discretion when they are given more autonomy over their work 
One of the top drivers of career success is your personal brand—what 
makes you unique and valuable. “Nurturing and enhancing your 
professional ‘brand’ should be up there with performance as top 
priorities in your career journey,” says public relations executive 
Curtis Sparrer. The power of your personal brand increases with its 
nonsubstitutability—how much it differentiates you from others. 
Furthermore, personal brand power increases with visibility. “In order 
for your great performance to be appreciated, it needs to be visible,” 
says Jeffrey Pfeffer, a leading expert on power in organizations. Rita 
Mitjans adds that you need to actively manage your public image. 
“Make sure that you are able to articulate and present the brand that 
you want others to see,” advises the chief diversity and corporate 
social responsibility officer at payroll and tax services firm ADP.c
Artem Furman/Shutterstock
centrality
a contingency of power 
pertaining to the degree and 
nature of interdependence 
between the power holder 
and othersChapter Ten Power and Influence in the Workplace 369
(see Chapter 5). In contrast, an employee’s discretion to apply their legitimate, reward, 
and coercive power is often curtailed by rules and higher authorities.26
CONSEQUENCES OF POWER
How does power affect the power holder? The answer depends to some extent on the type 
of power.27 When people feel empowered (high self-determination, meaning, competence, 
and impact), they believe they have power over themselves and freedom from being influ￾enced by others (power independence). Empowerment tends to increase motivation, job 
satisfaction, organizational commitment, and job performance. However, this feeling of 
being in control and free from others’ authority also increases automatic rather than 
debating point
HOW MUCH POWER DO CEOS REALLY POSSESS?
It seems reasonable to assume that chief executive officers wield enor￾mous power. They have legitimate power by virtue of their position at 
the top of the organizational hierarchy. They also have tremendous 
reward and coercive power because they allocate budgets and other 
resources. Refusing to go along with the CEO’s wishes can be an 
unfortunate career decision. Some CEOs also gain referent power be￾cause their lofty position creates an aura of reverence. Even in this era 
of equality and low power distance, most employees further down the 
organization are in awe when the top executive visits.
CEO power is equally apparent through various contingencies. Top 
executives are almost always visible; some amplify that visibility when 
they become synonymous with the company’s brand.d
 CEOs also have 
high centrality. Few strategic decisions are put into motion unless the 
top dog supports the idea. CEOs are supposed to have replacements￾in-waiting (to make them substitutable), yet more than a few don’t take 
enough time to mentor an heir-apparent. Some CEOs create an image 
of being too unique to be replaceable.
It would seem evident that CEOs have considerable power—except 
that many CEOs and a few experts disagree with that view.e
 New CEOs 
quickly discover that they no longer have expertise over a specific area of the 
company or subject matter. Instead, they oversee the entire organization—
a domain so broad that CEOs necessarily become jacks-of-all-trades 
and masters-of-none. Consequently, the CEO depends on the expertise of 
others to get things done. CEOs don’t even have much knowledge about 
what goes on in the organization. Reliable sources of information become 
more guarded when communicating to the top dog; employees further 
down the hierarchy carefully filter information so the CEO hears more of 
the good and less of the bad news.
The biggest Achilles’ heel for CEOs’ power is that their discretion is 
much more restricted than most people realize. To begin with, CEOs 
are rarely at the top of the power pyramid. Instead, they report to the 
company board, which can reject their proposals and fire them for act￾ing contrary to the board’s wishes. The board’s power over the CEO is 
particularly strong when the company has one or two dominant 
shareholders. But CEOs have been fired by the board even when the 
CEO is the company’s founder! At one time, some CEOs had more 
power by serving as the board’s chair and personally selecting board 
members. Today, corporate governance rules and laws in most coun￾tries have curtailed this practice, resulting in more power for the board 
and less power for the CEO.f
The CEO’s discretion is also held in check by the power of various 
groups within the organization. One such group is the CEO’s own ex￾ecutive team. These executives constantly monitor their boss, because 
their careers and reputation are affected by the boss’s actions, and 
some of them are eager to fill the top job themselves.g
 Similarly, the 
actions of hospital CEOs are restricted to some extent by the interests 
and preferences of physicians associated with the hospital.
One cross-cultural study found that the CEO’s discretion is limited 
in countries where laws offer greater rights to many stakeholders 
(not just shareholders) and give employees more protection from 
dismissal. The study also reported that the CEO’s discretion is limited 
in cultures with high uncertainty avoidance, because these social 
values require executives to take measured rather than bold steps 
toward change.h
You might think that CEOs have one remaining form of discretion: 
They can still overrule their vice presidents. Technically they can, but 
some experts point out that doing so has nasty repercussions. It trig￾gers resentment and sends morale into a tailspin.i
 Worse, this action 
motivates vice presidents to seek out the CEO’s involvement much ear￾lier, which overwhelms the CEO’s schedule and leaves less time for 
other priorities. A related observation is that CEOs are the official voice 
of the organization, so they have much less discretion about what they 
can say in public or even in private conversations.
Finally, although it seems safe to claim that CEOs have high centrality, 
a few executives see their situation differently. “I am the least impor￾tant person in this building,” claims the CEO of a regional hospital in 
Illinois. “This place would run without me for weeks, but the most 
important groups here are the people taking care of the patients.”j370 Part Three Team Processes
mindful thinking. In particular, people who feel powerful are more likely to rely on stereo￾types, have difficulty empathizing, and generally have less accurate perceptions compared 
with people who have less power.28
The other type of power is one in which an individual has power over others, such as the 
legitimate, reward, and coercive power that managers have over employees in the work￾place (power interdependence). In many situations, this type of power produces a sense 
of duty or responsibility for the people over whom the power holder has authority. Conse￾quently, people who have power over others tend to be more mindful of their actions and 
engage in less stereotyping.
Power over oneself (independent power) and power over others (interdependent power) 
are not necessarily distinct from each other. As people are promoted into higher manage￾ment positions they tend to have more of both. Therefore, the issue is more about how the 
power holder views their power. For people in positions of power (e.g., executives), the 
distinction is how their personal characteristics frame their role and application of power. 
Some relish their empowerment, which can result in the dysfunctional effects of personal 
power (see Chapter 5). Others feel increasingly responsible for stakeholders as they get 
promoted (social power), so their power tends to improve organizational outcomes.29
The Power of Social Networks
“It’s not what you know, but who you know that counts!” This often-heard statement re￾flects the idea that employees get ahead not just by developing their knowledge and skills, 
but by locating themselves within social networks—social structures of individuals or so￾cial units (e.g., departments, organizations) that are connected to one another through 
one or more forms of interdependence.30 Some networks are held together due to com￾mon interests, such as when employees who exercise over their lunch hours spend more 
time together. Other networks form around common status, expertise, kinship, or physical 
proximity. For instance, employees are more likely to form networks with coworkers who 
have common educational backgrounds and occupational interests.31
Social networks exist everywhere because people have a drive to bond. Cultural norms 
also seem to influence active network involvement. Social networking may be more of a 
central life activity in Asian cultures that emphasize guanxi, a Chinese term referring to an 
individual’s network of social connections. Guanxi is an expressive activity because inter￾acting with family and friends reinforces one’s self-concept. It is also an instrumental activ￾ity for receiving favors and opportunities from others. Guanxi is sometimes so pervasive, 
however, that several experts warn it can undermine the organization’s effectiveness.32
LO 10-3
®
SELF-ASSESSMENT 10.1: Do you have a guanxi orientation?
SOCIAL CAPITAL AND SOURCES 
OF POWER
Social networks generate power through social capital—the 
knowledge, opportunities, and other resources available to 
members of a social network as well as the mutual sup￾port, trust, reciprocity, and coordination that facilitate 
sharing of those resources.33 Compared to non-members, 
members within a social network are more motivated and 
able to communicate, distribute, or otherwise provide re￾sources within their power to others in that community.
social networks
social structures of individuals 
or social units that are 
connected to one another 
through one or more forms of 
interdependence
social capital
the knowledge, opportunities, 
and other resources available 
to members of a social network, 
along with the mutual support, 
trust, reciprocity, and 
coordination that facilitate 
sharing of those resourcesChapter Ten Power and Influence in the Workplace 371
Social networks potentially enhance and maintain the power of its members through 
three resources: information, visibility, and referent power. Probably the best-known re￾source is information from other network members, which improves the individual’s ex￾pert power.34 The goodwill of social capital opens communication pipelines among those 
within the network. Network members receive valuable knowledge more easily and more 
quickly from fellow network members than do people outside that network.35 With better 
information access and timeliness, members have more power because their expertise is a 
scarce resource; it is not widely available to people outside the network.
Increased visibility is a second social network resource that enhances a person’s power. 
When asked to recommend someone who has a particular expertise, other network mem￾bers more readily think of you than of people outside the network. A third resource from 
social networks is increased referent power. People tend to gain referent power through 
networking because members of the network identify with or at least have greater trust in 
one another. Referent power is also apparent by the fact that reciprocity increases among 
network members as they become more embedded in the network.36
Social networks are often viewed as free spirits, yet they can be orchestrated to some 
extent through organizational structures and other practices.37 Whether or not you try to 
manage social networks, you need to be aware of them. Indeed, employees gain power 
through their awareness of social networks throughout the organization and who is at￾tached to those networks.38
Employee Resource Group for Females 
Blossoms into a Meaningful Networkk
Most large organizations encourage employees to form 
employee resource groups—support and information net￾works around specific commonalities such as gender, dis￾ability, ethnicity, parenthood, and so forth. Management 
consultant Maya Townsend was hired by a biopharmaceu￾tical company to assess how well one of its new em￾ployee resource groups—the Women’s Success Network 
(WSN)—was working.
Townsend conducted an organizational network analy￾sis one year after the group was formed and again after 
two years. The network analysis specifically asked who 
each employee knows in the network and how much 
meaningful interaction she had sharing expertise, mentor￾ing, creative discussions, or ad hoc decisions.
Soon after its formation, the WSN had developed ob￾jectives, fundraising, and several activities such as lunch 
and learn sessions. But networking takes time. The Year 1 
network map indicated that few meaningful connections 
had developed among the biopharmaceutical firm’s 343 
WSN members. Only a small percentage of these employ￾ees were actively involved in the network. Most of these 
connections were with only one or two other people. Sev￾eral clusters of people were completely disconnected 
from other clusters.
By the end of Year 2, networking in the biopharmaceu￾tical company’s WSN group had blossomed. The group 
had grown to 634 members. More significantly, these 
members were much more actively connected to one 
another, either by providing and receiving mentoring or 
by sharing expertise. For instance, expertise connections 
jumped from an average of 2.7 per person in Year 1 to 
4.2 per person in Year 2. The analysis also revealed that 
although the founders and active participants in Year 1 
were still involved, newer members were in the center of 
most network clusters.
Overall, Maya Townsend’s organizational network anal￾ysis provided compelling evidence that the Women’s Suc￾cess Network was, indeed, becoming a success. Members 
were supporting one another, learning from one another, 
and opening doors to career advancement. Although a 
causal link is difficult to verify, the percentage of females at 
the biopharmaceutical firm’s director level and above has 
increased significantly since the WSN was formed.
global connections 10.2
UfaBizPhoto/Shutterstock372 Part Three Team Processes
GAINING POWER THROUGH SOCIAL NETWORKS
How do individuals (and teams and organizations) gain social capital from social net￾works? To answer this question, we need to consider the number, depth, variety, and cen￾trality of connections that people have in their networks.
Strong Ties, Weak Ties, Many Ties The volume of information, opportunities, 
and other social capital that we receive from networks depends on strong ties, weak ties, 
and many ties. Strong ties are close-knit relationships, which are evident from how often 
we interact with specific people, how much we share resources with them, how much we 
experience psychological closeness to them, and whether we have multiple- or single￾purpose relationships with them (e.g., friend, coworker, sports partner). Strong ties 
are valuable because they offer resources more quickly and usually more plentifully than 
are available from weak ties (i.e., acquaintances). Strong ties also offer greater social 
support and greater cooperation for favors and assistance.39
Some minimal connection strength is necessary to remain in any social network, but 
strong connections aren’t necessarily the most valuable ties. Instead, having weak ties 
(i.e., being merely acquaintances) with people from diverse networks can be equally or 
more valuable than having only strong ties (i.e., having close friendships) with people 
in similar networks.40 Why is this so? Strong ties—our close-knit circle of friends—tend 
to be similar to us and to one another. Consequently, they provide much of the same 
information and other resources that we already have or that other strong ties provide.41
Weak ties, on the other hand, are acquaintances who are different from us and therefore 
more likely to offer unique opportunities, connections, and other resources not avail￾able from our strong ties. Weak ties exist when we serve as a “bridge” across several 
unrelated networks.
The value of weak ties is most apparent in job hunting and career development.42 Peo￾ple with diverse networks tend to be more successful job seekers because they have a 
wider net to catch new job opportunities. In contrast, people who belong to similar over￾lapping networks tend to receive fewer leads, many of which they already knew about. As 
careers require more movement across many organizations and industries, you need to 
establish connections with people across a diverse range of industries, professions, and 
other spheres of life.
Finally, our power and social capital increase with many ties—the number of people 
connected to you in a social network. The more people you know, the more network re￾sources are available to you. Generally, as your social network grows, you have less time 
and energy to maintain strong ties. However, some people have an amazing capacity to 
support relatively active and frequent connections to many people. Emerging social media 
(Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn, etc.) have further amplified this capacity to maintain nu￾merous connections at a fairly strong level.43
Social Network Centrality Earlier in this chapter, we explained that centrality is 
an important contingency of power. This contingency also applies to social networks.44
The more central a person (or team or organization) is located in the network, the more 
social capital and therefore more power they acquire. Centrality is your importance in 
that network.
Three factors determine your centrality in a social network. One factor is “between￾ness,” which literally refers to how much you are located between others in the network. 
In Exhibit 10.3, Person A has high betweenness centrality because that individual is a 
gatekeeper who controls the flow of information to and from many other people in the 
network. Person H has less betweenness, whereas Person F and several other network 
members in the diagram have no betweenness. The more betweenness you have, the 
more you control the distribution of information and other resources to people on either 
side of you.Chapter Ten Power and Influence in the Workplace 373
A second factor in centrality is the number or percentage of connections you have to 
others in the network (called degree centrality). The network resources (information, fa￾vors, etc.) available to you increases with the number of people connected to you. The 
number of connections also increases centrality because you are more visible to other 
members of the network. Although being a member of a network gives you access to re￾sources in that network, having a direct connection to more people within the network 
makes that resource sharing more fluid.
A third factor in centrality is the “closeness” of the relationship with others in the net￾work. High closeness refers to strong ties. It is depicted by shorter, more direct, and effi￾cient paths or connections with others in the network. For example, Person A has fairly 
high closeness centrality because that member has direct paths to most of the network. 
Also, many of these paths are short, which implies efficient and high quality communica￾tion links. Your centrality increases with your closeness to other network members be￾cause they are affected more quickly and significantly by you.
One last observation is that Exhibit 10.3 illustrates two clusters of people in the net￾work. The gap between these two clusters is called a structural hole.45 Notice that Person A 
provides the main bridge across this structural hole (connecting to H and K in the other 
cluster). This bridging role gives Person A additional power in the network. By bridging 
this gap, Person A becomes a broker—someone who connects two independent networks 
and controls information flow between them. Research shows that the more brokering re￾lationships you have, the more likely you are to get early promotions and higher pay.
The Dark Side of Social Networks Social networks occur naturally in all organi￾zations, yet they can create a formidable barrier to those who are not actively connected to 
them.46 Females are often excluded from social networks in male-dominated jobs and 
industries because people tend to network with others with similar characteristics and 
backgrounds. These gendered networks can be a liability for females because they limit re￾ferrals, knowledge, and other forms of career-enhancing resources that networks provide.
“From my experience, women and men tend to mainly network with their own gen￾ders,” says Sharon Ritchey, executive committee member on the U.S. Golf Association 
and board member at QBE North America. She warns that gendered networks can be a 
liability for females because most senior management positions are still held by men. 
Consequently, men “are more likely to hear about jobs at the senior levels—and then pass 
these tips along to their mostly male networks. This obviously works against women, be￾cause men tend to hear earlier and more often about upper-level job leads.”47
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
Person A has high
betweenness, closeness, and
degree (number) centrality
Person F has low
betweenness, closeness, and
degree (number) centrality
EXHIBIT 10.3
Centrality in Social Networks
structural hole
a gap between two or more 
social networks that lack 
network ties374 Part Three Team Processes
Several years ago, executives at Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu discovered that inaccessibil￾ity to powerful social networks partly explained why many junior female employees left 
the global accounting and consulting firm before reaching partnership level. The organi￾zation now relies on mentoring, formal women’s network groups, and measurement of 
career progress to ensure that female staff members have the same career development 
opportunities as their male colleagues.48
Influencing Others
So far, this chapter has focused on the sources and contingencies of power as well as power 
derived from social networks. But power is only the capacity to influence others. It repre￾sents the potential to change someone’s attitudes and behavior. Influence, on the other 
hand, is power in motion. It applies one or more sources and contingencies of power in an 
attempt to alter another person’s beliefs, feelings, and behavior.49 Consequently, the re￾mainder of this chapter looks at how people use power to influence others.
Influence tactics are woven throughout the social fabric of all organizations. Influ￾ence is an essential process through which people coordinate their effort and act in 
concert to achieve organizational objectives. It is central to the definition of leadership. 
It operates down, across, and up the corporate hierarchy. Executives ensure that subordi￾nates complete required tasks. Employees influence coworkers to help them with their 
job assignments.
LO 10-4
influence
any behavior that attempts to 
alter someone’s attitudes or 
behavior
®
SELF-ASSESSMENT 10.2: What Is Your Approach to Influencing Coworkers?
TYPES OF INFLUENCE TACTICS
Organizational behavior researchers have devoted considerable attention to the various 
types of influence tactics found in organizational settings. They do not agree on a defini￾tive list, but the most commonly discussed influence tactics are identified in Exhibit 10.4 
and described in this section of the chapter.50 The first five are known as “hard” influence 
tactics because the influencer applies extrinsic conditions, such as obligations and re￾wards, to control the other party’s behavior. To varying degrees, hard tactics generate be￾havior change through position power (legitimate, reward, and coercive). The latter three 
tactics—persuasion, impression management, and exchange—are called “soft” tactics be￾cause the person being influenced has more autonomy and control over the influence 
process. Soft tactics rely more on personal sources of power (referent, expert) and appeal 
to the target person’s attitudes and needs.51
Silent Authority The silent application of authority occurs when someone complies 
with a request because of the requester’s legitimate power as well as the role expectations 
of the person receiving the request.52 Essentially, this is deference to authority in action, 
which we discussed earlier in this chapter. It occurs when you comply with your boss’s 
request to complete a particular task. If the task is within your job scope and your boss 
has the right to make this request, then this influence strategy operates without negotia￾tion, threats, persuasion, or other tactics. Experts suggest that every organization requires 
this influence strategy to operate. Silent authority is the most common form of influence 
in high power distance cultures.53
Assertiveness Assertiveness might be called “vocal authority” because it involves ac￾tively applying legitimate and coercive power to influence others. This includes persistently Chapter Ten Power and Influence in the Workplace 375
reminding the target of their obligations, frequently checking the target’s work, confronting 
the target, and using threats of sanctions to force compliance. Workplace bullying is an ex￾treme form of assertiveness because it involves explicit threats of punishment.
Information Control Earlier in this chapter we explained that people gain power 
when they have legitimate power or social network centrality to control how much and 
what type of information others receive. This power translates into influence when the 
power holder’s selective distribution of information reframes how others perceive the situ￾ation and consequently alters their attitudes and/or behavior. For example, research has 
found that CEOs influence their board of directors by selectively feeding and withholding 
information.54
Coalition Formation When someone acting alone lacks sufficient power to influ￾ence others, they might be able to do so by forming a coalition of people who support the 
proposed change.55 A coalition is influential in three ways. First, it pools the power and 
resources of many people, so the coalition potentially has more influence than its mem￾bers have if they operated alone. Second, the coalition’s mere existence can influence 
others by symbolizing the legitimacy of the issue. In other words, a coalition creates a 
sense that the issue deserves attention because it has broad support. Third, a coalition 
increases the confidence and motivation of its members through social identity theory 
(Chapter 3). This motivation occurs because a coalition 
consists of like-minded people, so its members identify 
with the group and feel more confident in supporting the 
coalition’s mandate.56
Upward Appeal Upward appeal is a type of influ￾ence whereby someone with higher authority or expertise 
is relied on in reality or symbolically to support the influ￾encer’s position. It occurs when an employee says, “The 
EXHIBIT 10.4 Types of Influence Tactics in Organizations
INFLUENCE TACTIC DESCRIPTION
Silent authority Influencing behavior through legitimate power without explicitly referring to that 
power base.
Assertiveness Actively applying legitimate and coercive power by applying pressure or threats.
Information control Explicitly manipulating someone else’s access to information for the purpose of 
changing their attitudes and/or behavior.
Coalition formation Forming a group that attempts to influence others by pooling the resources and 
power of its members.
Upward appeal Relying symbolically or in reality on people with higher authority or expertise to 
support our position.
Persuasion Using logical arguments, factual evidence, and emotional appeals to convince 
people of the value of a request.
Impression 
management
Actively shaping, through self-presentation and other means, the perceptions 
and attitudes that others have of us. Includes ingratiation, which refers to the 
influencer’s attempt to be more liked by the targeted person or group.
Exchange Promising benefits or resources in exchange for the target person’s compliance.
coalition
a group that attempts to 
influence people outside the 
group by pooling the resources 
and power of its members
upward appeal
a type of influence in which 
someone with higher authority 
or expertise is called on in 
reality or symbolically to 
support the influencer’s position376 Part Three Team Processes
EXHIBIT 10.5 Elements of Persuasion
PERSUASION ELEMENT CHARACTERISTICS OF EFFECTIVE PERSUASION
Persuader characteristics • Expertise 
• Credibility 
• No apparent profit motive 
• Appears somewhat neutral (acknowledges strengths of alternative 
choices)
Message content • Multiple viewpoints (not exclusively supporting the preferred option) 
• Limited to a few strong arguments (not many arguments) 
• Repeat arguments, but not excessively 
• Use emotional appeals in combination with logical arguments 
• Offer specific solutions to overcome the stated problems 
• Inoculation effect—audience warned of counterarguments that 
opponents will present
Communication channel • Channels with high media-richness and social presence are usually 
more persuasive
Audience characteristics Persuasion is less effective when the audience: 
• has higher self-esteem 
• has higher intelligence 
• has a self-concept tied to an opposing position
boss likely agrees with me on this matter; let’s find out!” Upward appeal also occurs when 
relying on the authority of the firm’s policies or values. By reminding others that your 
request is consistent with the organization’s overarching goals, you are implying support 
from senior executives without formally involving them.
Persuasion The influence tactics described so far are called “hard” influence tactics 
because the influencer attempts to change the other party’s behavior through position 
power (legitimate, reward, and coercive). The three remaining categories—persuasion, im￾pression management, and exchange—are “soft” influence strategies because the person 
being influenced has more autonomy and control over the influence process. The first of 
these, persuasion, involves the use of facts, logical arguments, and emotional appeals to 
change another person’s beliefs and attitudes, usually for the purpose of changing their 
behavior. This is the most widely used and accepted influence strategy in organizations. It 
is a quality of effective leaders and, in many societies, a noble skill. 
The effectiveness of persuasion as an influence tactic depends on characteristics of the 
persuader, message content, communication channel, and the audience being persuaded 
(see Exhibit 10.5).57 People are more persuasive when they are perceived to have expertise 
and credibility. Persuaders have more credibility when they do not seem to profit from the 
persuasion attempt, they acknowledge limitations with their position, and they note minor 
positive features of the alternative choices.
Several characteristics of message content increase a person’s ability to persuade 
others, particularly when the issue is important to the audience.58 The speaker’s mes￾sage is more persuasive when it acknowledges several points of view. This increases the 
speaker’s credibility and avoids having the audience feel boxed in by the persuasion at￾tempt. The message should also be limited to a few strong arguments, which are re￾peated a few times, but not too frequently. The message should use emotional appeals 
(such as graphically showing the unfortunate consequences of a bad decision), but only 
in combination with logical arguments and specific recommendations to overcome the 
threat. Finally, message content is more persuasive when the audience is warned about 
persuasion
the use of facts, logical 
arguments, and emotional 
appeals to change another 
person’s beliefs and attitudes, 
usually for the purpose of 
changing the person’s behaviorChapter Ten Power and Influence in the Workplace 377
opposing arguments. This inoculation effect causes listeners to generate counterargu￾ments to the anticipated persuasion attempts, which makes the opponent’s subsequent 
persuasion attempts less effective.59
Two other considerations when persuading people are the communication channel and 
characteristics of the audience. Generally, persuasion works best through communication 
channels with high social presence and media-richness, such as in face-to-face conversa￾tions (see Chapter 9). The human presence in face-to-face communication increases the 
persuader’s credibility, and the richness of this channel provides faster feedback that the 
influence strategy is working. With respect to audience characteristics, it is more difficult 
to persuade people who have high self-esteem and intelligence, as well as a self-concept 
that is strongly tied to the opposing viewpoint.60
Impression Management The softest of the soft influence tactics is impression 
management—actively shaping the perceptions and attitudes that others have of us.61
Impression management mostly occurs through self-presentation. Employees routinely 
engage in pleasant impression management behaviors to 
satisfy social norms, such as the way they dress and how 
they behave toward colleagues and customers. People 
sometimes craft their public image to depict their impor￾tance and expertise, which affects their influence under 
some circumstances. For this reason, impression manage￾ment plays a significant role in an individual’s personal 
brand—forming and displaying an accurate impression of 
that person’s own distinctive, competitive advantage.62
Taking Impression Management to the 
Extremel
Barry Urban has—or had—an impressive résumé. It stated 
that he received a bachelor of arts degree from the Univer￾sity of Leeds, UK, a certificate of higher education and po￾licing from the University of Portsmouth, and a diploma in 
Local Government from a third institution. He also claimed 
to have been on the security team for war crimes investiga￾tors in Bosnia while serving in the British Army. He wore a 
medal, which apparently was an official award from the 
British government for his overseas policing service.
The problem with Barry Urban’s résumé is that it was 
an elaborate misrepresentation. There was no record of 
him attending either university (his documents were ap￾parently forged), and he did not complete all coursework 
for the diploma. He was in the British army but was not 
assigned to any war crimes investigation unit. He bought 
the military medal online.
Urban’s mastery of impression management certainly 
worked effectively, for a while. It opened the door to a 
police career in the United Kingdom and later in Australia. 
Urban even became an elected politician in an Australian 
state legislative assembly. But when his fabrications un￾raveled, so did his career. Urban quit the state legislature 
before being expelled, and he served a jail sentence for 
lying to a parliamentary committee.
Urban’s tendency to embellish the facts was not news 
to some people in his past. “We all accepted his personal￾ity as a yarn spinner, his exaggerated tales; you name a 
subject, he had done it or seen it,” recalls a former co￾worker in the local UK police unit. The colleague was also 
surprised that Urban lied to such an extent because he 
performed well as a police officer and was respected. “He 
was very good at what he did; he had no need to do all 
this and there was no monetary gain to be made.”
global connections 10.3
Jirapong Manustrong/Shutterstock
inoculation effect
a persuasive communication 
strategy of warning listeners 
that others will try to influence 
them in the future and that they 
should be wary of the 
opponent’s arguments
impression management
actively shaping through self￾presentation and other means 
the perceptions and attitudes 
that others have of us378 Part Three Team Processes
However, impression management also motivates some people to exaggerate and embel￾lish their credentials, experience, and accomplishments. This is evident in some extreme 
forms of résumé fraud.
One subcategory of impression management is ingratiation, which is any attempt to 
increase liking by, or perceived similarity to, some targeted person.63 Ingratiation includes 
flattering your boss, demonstrating similar views as your boss (e.g., agreeing with the 
boss’s suggestions), and asking your boss for advice. Ingratiation is one of the more effec￾tive influence tactics at boosting a person’s career success. However, people who engage 
in high levels of ingratiation are less (not more) influential and less likely to get promoted 
because too much ingratiation is viewed as insincere and self-serving.64
Exchange Exchange activities involve the promise of benefits or resources in ex￾change for the target person’s compliance with your request. Negotiation is an integral 
part of exchange influence activities. For instance, you might negotiate with your boss for 
a day off in return for working a less desirable shift at a future date. Exchange also in￾cludes applying the norm of reciprocity that we described earlier, such as reminding the 
target of past benefits or favors with the expectation that the target will now make up for 
that debt. The norm of reciprocity also influences others in social networks. Active net￾workers build up “exchange credits” by helping colleagues in the short term for reciprocal 
benefits in the long term.
CONSEQUENCES AND CONTINGENCIES OF 
INFLUENCE TACTICS
Faced with a variety of influence strategies, you are probably asking: Which ones are best? 
To answer this question, we first need to describe the three ways that people respond to 
influence: resistance, compliance, or commitment (see Exhibit 10.6).65 Resistance occurs 
when people or work units oppose the behavior desired by the influencer. At the extreme, 
Soft
influence
tactics
Hard
influence
tactics
Persuasion
Impression management
(including ingratiation)
Exchange
Silent authority
Upward appeal
Coalition formation
Information control
Assertiveness
Commitment
Compliance
Resistance
EXHIBIT 10.6
Consequences of Hard and Soft 
Influence TacticsChapter Ten Power and Influence in the Workplace 379
they refuse to engage in the behavior. However, there are degrees of resistance, such as 
when people do what the power holder has requested yet maintain their opposition by 
performing the tasks poorly or by vocally complaining while performing the imposed work.
Compliance occurs when people are extrinsically motivated to implement the influ￾encer’s request (see Chapter 5). They perform the requested task for purely instrumental 
reasons. Compliance usually involves engaging in the behavior with no more effort than is 
required. Furthermore, compliance usually stops—employees no longer perform the re￾quested behavior—when the extrinsic source of motivation is removed. The strongest out￾come of influence is commitment. This occurs when people identify with the influencer’s 
request and are highly motivated to implement it even when extrinsic sources of motiva￾tion are not present..
People usually react more favorably to soft tactics than to hard tactics. Soft influence 
tactics rely on personal sources of power (expert and referent power), which tend to build 
commitment to the influencer’s request. In contrast, hard tactics rely on position power 
(legitimate, reward, and coercive), so they tend to produce compliance or, worse, resis￾tance. Hard tactics also tend to undermine trust, which can hurt future relationships.
The most appropriate influence strategy depends on a few contingencies.66 One obvi￾ous factor is the influencer’s strongest sources of power. Those with expertise tend to have 
more influence using persuasion, whereas those with a strong legitimate power base may 
be more successful applying silent authority. A second contingency is whether the person 
being influenced is higher, lower, or at the same level in the organization. As an example, 
employees may face adverse career consequences by being too assertive with their boss. 
Meanwhile, supervisors who engage in ingratiation and some other forms of impression 
management tend to lose the respect of their staff.
Finally, the most appropriate influence tactic depends on personal, organizational, 
and cultural values.67 People with a strong power orientation might feel more comfortable 
using assertiveness, whereas those who value conformity would make greater use of up￾ward appeals. At an organizational level, firms with a competitive culture encourage coali￾tion formation and, perversely, more use of information control; companies with a more 
collegial culture likely encourage more influence through persuasion. The preferred influ￾ence tactics also vary across societal cultures. Research indicates that ingratiation is much 
more common among managers in the United States than in Hong Kong. One explana￾tion is that this tactic is incompatible with the more distant roles that managers and em￾ployees expect in high power distance cultures.
Organizational Politics
Organizational politics goes hand-in-hand with the topics of organizational power and in￾fluence. Unfortunately, the meaning of organizational politics is quite muddled. The most 
widely held view among scholars, which this book adopts, is that organizational politics is 
the use of influence tactics for personal gain at the perceived expense of others and the 
organization.68 This definition recognizes that all political behaviors apply one or more 
influence tactics. However, influence activities are organizational politics only when the 
perpetrator is apparently motivated by self-interest and the action is likely to have an ad￾verse effect on others and the organization. Organizational politics is necessarily a percep￾tual interpretation of events because it is very difficult to know the political actor’s 
self-interest motives or awareness of how their actions affect others.
Some popular press writers (as well as a few scholars) claim that organizational 
politics can be beneficial.69 These “positive politics” sources suggest that “politics is 
an essential skill in managers who wish to get things done” and that it is “an indispens￾able component of organizational life.” The problem with the positive politics view is 
that it labels almost all influence activities as political tactics. For example, they de￾fine organizational politics as “power in action, using a range of techniques and 
LO 10-5
organizational politics
the use of influence tactics for 
personal gain at the perceived 
expense of others and the 
organization380 Part Three Team Processes
tactics.” Yet, as we stated earlier in the chap￾ter, influence is defined as power in action. 
Organizational politics and influence are 
not the same concept.
Meanwhile, numerous studies have docu￾mented the adverse consequences of organi￾zational politics.70 Employees who observe or 
experience organizational politics from others 
have lower levels of job satisfaction, organiza￾tional commitment, organizational citizen￾ship, and task performance, as well as higher 
levels of work-related stress and motivation to 
leave the organization. And because political 
tactics serve individuals rather than organiza￾tions, they potentially divert resources away 
from the organization’s effective functioning 
and may threaten its survival.
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN ORGANIZATIONAL POLITICS
Some people are more likely than others to engage in organizational politics.71 Employees 
with a strong need for personalized power seek power for its own sake and try to acquire 
more power. This contrasts with people with a strong need for socialized power; they seek 
power as an instrument to accomplish organizationally beneficial objectives.
Individuals with dark triad personality characteristics are also more likely to engage in 
organizational politics (see Chapter 2).72 These people routinely engage in deceit and 
malevolently undermine others to maximize their own gains. They believe that using lies, 
manipulation, exploitation, and other undesirable influence tactics are acceptable ways to 
achieve their personal goals (Machiavellianism). They arrogantly exploit coworkers for 
personal aggrandizement and take pleasure in others’ misfortune (narcissism). They are 
also selfish self-promoters who manipulate others and engage in antisocial, impulsive, and 
often fraudulent thrill-seeking behavior without feelings of remorse (psychopathy).
MINIMIZING ORGANIZATIONAL POLITICS
Organizational behavior experts have identified several conditions that encourage organi￾zational politics. Out of these findings we can identify corresponding strategies to mini￾mize the use of political tactics.73
• Provide sufficient resources. Organizational politics is triggered by scarce resources 
in the workplace. When budgets are slashed, people rely on political tactics to safe￾guard their resources and maintain the status quo. Although it is not easy to main￾tain or add resources, sometimes this action is less costly than the consequences 
of organizational politics.
• Clarify resource allocation rules. Political tactics are fueled by ambiguous or com￾plex rules, or the absence of formal rules, because those tactics help people get what 
they want when decisions lack structural guidelines. Consequently, organizational 
politics is suppressed when resource allocation decisions are clear and simplified.
• Apply effective organizational change practices. Organizational change tends to bring 
out more organizational politics, mainly because change creates ambiguity and 
threatens the employee’s power and other valued resources. Consequently, leaders 
need to apply the organizational change strategies that we describe in Chapter 15, 
particularly through communication, learning, and involvement. Research has 
found that employees who are kept informed of what is going on in the organization 
dark triad
a cluster of three socially 
undesirable (dark) personality 
traits: Machiavellianism, 
narcissism, and psychopathy
of 1,000 professional adults identify
workplace politics as one of their major
career struggles (fourth highest on the
list of 10 struggles).
25%
58%
49%
37%
34%
of 763 American employees say they have left jobs, or are
considering leaving, because of oce politics.
of 2,000 job seekers in South Africa say they occasionally had
to deal with oce politics and clashes. 
of 1,815 British employees identify work-related
oce politics as the number one cause of
work-related stress.
of 2,181 (mostly American) remote workers
identify oce politics and distractions as a
major concern about returning to the oce
(third highest concern after COVID-19
infection and less work flexibility).
HOW OFFICE POLITICS AFFECTS EMPLOYEESm
(photo): SchulteProductions/Getty ImagesChapter Ten Power and Influence in the Workplace 381
and who are involved in organizational decisions are less likely to engage in organi￾zational politics.
• Purge political behavior norms and role models. Political behavior is more common 
in work units and organizations where it is tolerated and reinforced. Some compa￾nies seem to nurture self-serving behavior through reward systems and the role 
modeling of organizational leaders. To minimize political norms, the organization 
needs to diagnose and alter systems and role modeling that support self-serving be￾havior. They should support organizational values that oppose political tactics, 
such as altruism and focusing on the customer. One of the most important strate￾gies is for leaders to become role models of organizational citizenship rather than 
symbols of successful organizational politicians.
®
SELF-ASSESSMENT 10.3: How Politically Charged is Your School?
LO 10-1 Describe the dependence model of power and the 
five sources of power in organizations.
Power is the capacity to influence others. It exists when one 
party perceives that they are dependent on the other for some￾thing of value. However, the dependent person must also have 
countervailing power—some power over the dominant party—to 
maintain the relationship, and the parties must have some level 
of trust.
There are five power bases. Legitimate power is an agree￾ment among organizational members that people in certain 
roles can request certain behaviors of others. This power has 
restrictions, represented by the target person’s zone of indif￾ference. It also includes the norm of reciprocity (a feeling of 
obligation to help someone who has helped you), as well as 
control over the flow of information to others. Reward 
power is derived from the ability to control the allocation of 
rewards valued by others and to remove negative sanctions. 
Coercive power is the ability to apply punishment. Expert 
power is the capacity to influence others by possessing 
knowledge or skills that they value. An important form of 
expert power is the (perceived) ability to manage uncertain￾ties in the business environment. People have referent power 
when others identify with them, like them, or otherwise re￾spect them.
LO 10-2 Discuss the four contingencies of power.
Four contingencies determine whether these power bases 
translate into real power. Individuals and work units are more 
powerful when they are nonsubstitutable. Employees, work 
units, and organizations reduce substitutability by controlling 
tasks, knowledge, and labor, by differentiating themselves from 
competitors, and by developing a personal brand—a unique 
combination of knowledge, skills, and experience that are valu￾able to current or prospective employers.
A second contingency is centrality. People have more power 
when they have high centrality, which means that many people 
are quickly affected by their actions. The third contingency, 
visibility, refers to the idea that power increases to the extent 
that a person’s or work unit’s competencies are known to oth￾ers. Discretion, the fourth contingency of power, refers to the 
freedom to exercise judgment. Power increases when people 
have the freedom to use their power.
LO 10-3 Explain how people and work units gain power 
through social networks.
Social networks are social structures of individuals or social 
units (e.g., departments, organizations) that connect to one 
another through one or more forms of interdependence. 
People receive power in social networks through social capi￾tal, which is the goodwill and resulting resources shared 
among members in a social network. Three main resources 
from social networks are information, visibility, and referent 
power.
Employees gain social capital through their relationship in 
the social network. Social capital tends to increase with the 
number of network ties. Strong ties (close-knit relationships) 
can also increase social capital because these connections of￾fer more resources more quickly. However, having weak ties 
with people from diverse networks can be more valuable than 
having strong ties with people in similar networks. Weak ties 
provide more resources that we do not already possess. An￾other influence on social capital is the person’s centrality in 
the network. Network centrality is determined in several ways, 
including the extent to which you are located between others in 
the network (betweenness), how many direct ties you have (de￾gree), and the closeness of these ties. People also gain power 
by bridging structural holes—linking two or more clusters of 
people in a network.
chapter summary382
LO 10-4 Describe eight types of influence tactics, three conse￾quences of influencing others, and three contingen￾cies to consider when choosing an influence tactic.
Influence refers to any behavior that attempts to alter some￾one’s attitudes or behavior. The most widely studied influence 
tactics are silent authority, assertiveness, information control, 
coalition formation, upward appeal, impression management, 
persuasion, and exchange. “Soft” influence tactics such as 
friendly persuasion and subtle ingratiation are more acceptable 
than “hard” tactics such as upward appeal and assertiveness. 
However, the most appropriate influence tactic also depends 
on the influencer’s power base; whether the person being influ￾enced is higher, lower, or at the same level in the organization; 
and personal, organizational, and cultural values regarding in￾fluence behavior.
LO 10-5 Identify the organizational conditions and personal 
characteristics associated with organizational politics, 
as well as ways to minimize organizational politics.
Organizational politics refer to the use of influence tactics for 
personal gain at the perceived expense of others and the orga￾nization. It is more common when ambiguous decisions allo￾cate scarce resources and when the organization tolerates or 
rewards political behavior. Individuals with a high need for 
personal power and dark triad personality have a higher pro￾pensity to use political tactics. Organizational politics can be 
minimized by providing sufficient resources, establishing clear 
resource allocation rules, applying effective organizational 
change strategies (communication, learning, involvement), and 
purging political behavior norms and people who are role mod￾els for political behavior.
centrality, p. 368
charisma, p. 367
coalition, p. 375
countervailing power, p. 363
dark triad p. 380
impression management, p. 377
influence, p. 374
inoculation effect, p. 377
legitimate power, p. 364
norm of reciprocity, p. 365
organizational politics, p. 379
persuasion, p. 376
power, p. 362
referent power, p. 366
social capital, p. 370
social networks, p. 370
structural hole, p. 373
upward appeal, p. 375
key terms
1. What role does countervailing power play in the power 
relationship? Give an example of one of your own en￾counters with countervailing power at school or work.
2. Until recently, a mining company’s data resided in the 
department that was responsible for that information. 
Property data were on the computers in land administra￾tion, hydrocarbon data were in the well administration 
group, maps were found in the map department, and so 
on. The executive team concluded that this arrangement 
was dysfunctional, so the CEO announced that all infor￾mation would become widely accessible on a central 
server system. If someone needs a color map, for exam￾ple, they can retrieve it from the central server without 
going through the map department. Rather than wel￾come the change, employees in several departments com￾plained, offering several arguments why other groups 
should not have direct access to their data files. Some 
departments tried to opt out of the centralized server 
system. Using the model of sources and contingencies 
of power, explain why some groups opposed the central 
server model of data access.
3. You have just been hired as a brand manager of tooth￾paste for a large consumer products company. Your 
job mainly involves encouraging the advertising and 
production groups to promote and manufacture your 
product more effectively. These departments aren’t 
under your direct authority, though company proce￾dures indicate that they must complete certain tasks 
requested by brand managers. Describe the sources of 
power you can use to ensure that the production and 
advertising departments will help you make and sell 
toothpaste more effectively.
4. Your personal brand is an important form of power for 
career success. In what ways can you and other students 
strengthen their personal brand? What sources and con￾tingencies of power are relevant in building a personal 
brand?
5. You have been asked to form and lead a task force of stu￾dents to recommend improvements to an important col￾lege process (such as course registration, parking and 
public transportation, or grade appeals). The committee 
consists of one student from each of eight disciplines at 
the college. These people have diverse backgrounds and 
experiences (since their education programs are in differ￾ent departments or faculties). You are selected to lead 
because you are in your final year and have succeeded 
in other student leadership roles. Among the eight influ￾ence tactics described in this chapter, which two or three 
would you apply the most to steer the committee, such as 
keeping discussion on track, minimizing dominant mem￾bers, pushing agreement on various issues, and so forth? 
Which influence tactics are unlikely to ever be used by 
you in this committee role?
6. Consider a situation in which there is only one female 
member on a team of six people, and she is generally ex￾cluded from informal gatherings of the team. What kind 
of influence tactics can she use to address this situation?
7. In the mid-1990s, the CEO of Apple Computer invited 
the late Steve Jobs (who was not associated with the 
company at the time) to serve as a special adviser and 
raise morale among Apple employees and customers. 
While doing so, Jobs spent more time advising the CEO 
on how to cut costs, redraw the organizational chart, and 
hire new people. Before long, most of the top people at 
critical thinking questions383
Apple were Jobs’s colleagues, who began to systematically 
evaluate and weed out teams of Apple employees. While 
publicly supporting Apple’s CEO, Jobs privately criticized 
him and, in a show of nonconfidence, sold the 1.5 million 
shares of Apple stock he had received. This action caught 
the attention of Apple’s board of directors, who soon after 
decided to replace the CEO with Steve Jobs. The CEO 
claimed Jobs was a conniving back-stabber who used 
political tactics to get his way. Others suggest that Apple 
would be out of business today if he hadn’t taken over 
the company. In your opinion, were Steve Jobs’s actions 
examples of organizational politics? Justify your answer.
8. A coworker suggests that the company where you both work 
would be much more effective if there were no organiza￾tional politics. What would you say to this person in reply?
CASE STUDY: RESONUS CORPORATION
Frank Choy is normally a quiet person, but his patience has 
already been worn thin by interdepartmental battles. Choy 
joined Resonus Corporation, a hearing aid designer and man￾ufacturer, eight months ago as director of engineering. Pro￾duction of the latest product has been delayed by two months, 
and Choy’s engineering services department (ESD)—which 
prepares final manufacturing specifications—is taking the heat 
as the main culprit for these delays. Similar delays have been 
occurring at Resonus for the past few years. The previous en￾gineering director was fired after 18 months; the director be￾fore him quit after about the same amount of time.
Bill Hunt, CEO of Resonus for the past 15 years, re￾sponded to these problems by urging everyone to remain 
civil. “I’m sure we can resolve these differences if we just 
learn to get along better,” he said whenever a dispute broke 
out. Hunt disliked firing anyone, but he felt the previous engi￾neering director was too confrontational. “I spent too much 
time smoothing out arguments when he was here,” Hunt 
thought to himself soon after Choy was hired. “Frank, on the 
other hand, seems to fit into our culture of collegiality.”
Hunt was groomed by the company’s founder and took 
great pride in preserving the organization’s family spirit. He 
also discouraged bureaucracy, believing that Resonus oper￾ated best through informal relationships among its manag￾ers. Most Resonus executives were similarly informal, 
except Jacqui Blanc, the production director, who insisted 
on strict guidelines. Hunt tolerated Blanc’s formal style, be￾cause soon after joining Resonus five years ago, she discov￾ered and cleaned up fraudulent activity involving two 
production managers and a few suppliers.
The organizational chart shows that Frank Choy oversees 
two departments: ESD and research. In reality, “Doc” Ka￾landry, the research director, informally reports directly to 
the CEO (Hunt) and has never considered the director of 
engineering as his boss. Hunt actively supports this informal 
reporting relationship because of Doc’s special status in the 
organization. “Doc Kalandry is a living genius,” Hunt told 
Choy soon after he joined the firm. “With Doc at the helm of 
research, this company will continue to lead the field in in￾novation.” Hunt’s first job at Resonus was in the research 
group, and Choy suspected that Hunt still favored that group.
Everyone at Resonus seems to love Doc’s successful 
products, his quirky style, and his over-the-top enthusiasm, 
but some of Choy’s ESD staff are also privately concerned. 
Says one engineer: “Doc is like a happy puppy when he gets 
a new product idea. He delights in the discovery but also 
won’t let go of it. He also gets Hunt too enthusiastic. But 
Doc’s too optimistic; we’ve had hundreds of production 
change orders already this year. If I were in Frank’s shoes, 
I’d put my foot down on all this new development.”
Soon after joining Resonus, Choy realized that ESD em￾ployees get most of the blame and little of the credit for 
their work. When production staff find a design fault, they 
directly contact the research design engineer who devel￾oped the technology, rather than the ESD group who pre￾pare the specifications. Research engineers willingly work 
with production, because they don’t want to let go of their 
project. “The designers seem to feel they’re losing some￾thing when one of us in ESD tries to help,” Choy explains.
Meanwhile, production supervisors regularly critique 
ESD staff, whereas they tend to accept explanations from the 
higher-status research department engineers. “Production 
routinely complains about every little specification error, 
many of which are due to design changes made by the 
research group,” says one frustrated ESD technician. 
“Many of us have more than 15 years’ experience in this 
work. We shouldn’t have to prove our ability all the time, 
but we spend as much time defending ourselves as we do 
getting the job done.”
Choy’s latest troubles occurred when Doc excitedly told 
CEO Hunt about new nano-processor technology that he 
wanted to install in the forthcoming high-end hearing aid 
product. As with most of Doc’s previous last-minute revi￾sions, Hunt endorsed this change and asked Choy and 
Blanc (the production director) to show their commitment, 
even though production was scheduled to begin in less than 
three weeks. Choy wanted to protest, knowing that his de￾partment would have to tackle unexpected incompatibility 
design errors. Instead, he quietly agreed to Hunt’s request 
to avoid acting like his predecessor and facing similar con￾sequences (getting fired). Blanc curtly stated that her group 
was ready if Choy’s ESD unit could get accurate production 
specifications ready on time and if the sales director would 
stop making wild delivery promises to customers.
When Doc’s revised design specs arrived more than a 
week later, Choy’s group discovered numerous incompatibili￾ties that had to be corrected. Even though several ESD staff 
were assigned to 12-hour days on the revisions, the final pro￾duction specifications weren’t ready until a couple of days 
after the deadline. Production returned these specs two days 
later, noting a few elements that required revision because 
they were too costly or difficult to manufacture in their current form. By that time, the production director had to 
give priority to other jobs and moved the new hearing aid 
product further down the queue. This meant that manufac￾turing of the new product was delayed by at least two months. 
The sales director was furious and implied that Frank Choy’s 
incompetence was to blame for this catastrophe.
Discussion Questions
1. What sources and contingencies of power existed 
among the executives and departments at Resonus?
2. What influence tactics were evident in this case study? 
Would you define any of these influence activities as 
organizational politics? Why or why not?
3. Suppose you are a consultant invited to propose a 
solution to the product delay problems facing this orga￾nization. What would you recommend, particularly 
regarding power dynamics among the executives and 
departments?
© 2011 Steven L. McShane, based on a case by John A. Seeger.
TEAM EXERCISE: POWER, INFLUENCE, AND POLITICS MINI-CASES
384
to city council that Daniel Moulin was a good candidate 
for the job. Almost as soon as Moulin was appointed gen￾eral manager, he tried to convince city councilors that 
South City’s administration required a major overhaul. 
Boyce (Moulin’s boss) disagreed, saying that the organi￾zation just needed some “fine-tuning” to get it running 
well. What Boyce didn’t know was that part of Moulin’s 
proposed restructuring plan was to combine the chief ex￾ecutive position with the general manager job that Moulin 
had just accepted.
Soon after Moulin’s appointment, Boyce took sick 
leave to recover from a back operation, assigning another 
executive as acting CEO. Almost as soon as Boyce left, 
Moulin produced a report to city councilors blaming 
Boyce’s leadership style and philosophy for the current 
problems, explaining that a new leader was needed for the 
proposed restructuring.
Without authorization from South City council, Moulin 
visited Boyce at his home during the sick leave to offer 
Boyce the option of significantly reduced pay or quitting 
with a severance payment. Boyce negotiated a large sever￾ance, an agreement that bypassed city procedures. Three 
other city executives also left due to the proposed restruc￾turing that Moulin orchestrated.
The city then searched for a permanent CEO to replace 
Boyce. Moulin was a frontrunner even though he lacked the 
experience and skills for the position. Soon after, Moulin 
sent a memo to councilors explaining why he was the best 
person for the job. Six months after he was appointed gen￾eral manager, Moulin moved into the chief executive’s job.
Mini-Case 2: The New Enterprise 
Communication System
Katrin Szema was frustrated that senior executives com￾municate company news to employees mainly through 
emails, internal bulletins, and other one-way channels. The 
marketing manager at the large food products company 
wanted the company to introduce an enterprise communi￾cation platform such as Microsoft Teams or Slack so any 
department or region could post its own news as it hap￾pens. At least in the short term, she wanted executive news 
to be provided in a social media style whereby employees 
PURPOSE This exercise is designed to help students un￾derstand and diagnose situations involving forms and de￾grees of power, influence, and organizational politics.
MATERIALS Teams should have a method of summariz￾ing their analysis for other teams to view. This might be 
flip chart paper for face-to-face classes or a dedicated vir￾tual white board or presentation slide for each team in re￾mote classes.
INSTRUCTIONS (SMALL OR LARGE CLASSES) This 
exercise may be completed either individually or in teams. It 
is suitable for in-class and remote learning settings. It may 
be appropriate in moderately large classes. When the indi￾viduals (or teams) have completed the exercise, the results 
will be discussed and compared with others in the class.
Step 1: Students are organized into teams (typically five to 
seven people per team). Students read each mini-case be￾low. The instructor might assign any or all of these mini￾cases for discussion. 
Step 2: The team will analyze each mini-case by answering 
the following questions: 
1. What sources of power is the main person in this mini￾case using? What contingencies of power supported or 
limited that person’s power potential? (More than one 
source and contingency of power may be relevant.)
2. What was this person trying to achieve, and what influ￾ence tactics did this person use to get others to align 
their attitudes and behavior toward that objective. 
(More than one influence tactic might be relevant.)
3. Did this person engage in organizational politics? 
What makes you say they did or did not use political 
tactics?
4. If you were senior executive and were advised of this 
person’s actions, what steps would you take to encour￾age or discourage this type of change behavior in future?
Mini-Case 1: Getting Promoted in City Government
Sam Boyce, chief executive of South City (a municipality 
of 200,000 residents, part of a large metropolitan city), 
created a general manager’s position and recommended tight control. Horn was increasingly concerned about the 
trading losses that Dampf was allowing his team of cur￾rency traders to carry forward (called smoothing). The 
bank recently banned the practice because it hid losses 
with future gains. Horn was so concerned about the loss 
risks that, without telling Dampf, she told Dampf’s boss 
that the smoothing practice was occurring. Dampf obvi￾ously found out that Horn had blabbed.
After a few days of silence, Dampf pulled Horn aside 
and launched into a tirade. “I was ready to . . . strangle 
someone the other day,” Dampf said pointedly to Horn. “I 
demand loyalty! If you expect to be with this team much 
longer, you don’t tell anyone—and I mean anyone—what’s 
happening here.” Horn was shaken by the exchange, even 
though Dampf was well known for threatening traders to 
abide by his orders and expectations. Last month, Dampf 
warned a junior trader not to cross him, saying that an￾other employee who had done so was now making bread 
for a living. He recently ridiculed a currency trader in the 
bank’s Singapore office, calling her a “stench kid” for reg￾ularly making a stink about Dampf’s currency trading 
methods.
Dampf’s boss and a few other senior bank managers 
obviously knew about Dampf’s controlling behavior and 
trading methods, but they wouldn’t take any corrective ac￾tion. Dampf and his senior traders were considered “un￾touchable” geniuses who were given free rein at the bank. 
They had generated huge profits from currency trading 
over the previous few years, which made the bank’s execu￾tive team look successful to the board and shareholders.
Several months after Horn had spoken to Dampf’s 
boss, Dampf was still smoothing losses. And those losses 
seem to be getting more extreme. He and a few senior trad￾ers were also making dozens of outsized bets on currency 
fluctuations that exceeded the banks trading limits. “They 
are so powerful here that they have become a law unto 
themselves,” thought Mila Horn. Horn had a difficult de￾cision ahead: She either had to show more loyalty to 
Dampf or leave the currency trading group.
© 2022 Steven L. McShane
could post feedback or add further updates to the execu￾tive posts and news reports.
Unfortunately, the vice president of marketing (Szema’s 
boss) was not keen on a social media-style communication 
system in the company. He was reluctant to advance her 
suggestions to top management because of concerns that 
some executives would feel threatened by having uncon￾trolled employee comments, even if available only within 
the company. In any event, Szema’s boss was too busy with 
other projects to support the idea.
But Szema wasn’t about to give up. She approached a 
coworker in information technology (IT) who was keen on 
having an integrated communication system for the com￾pany. Another friend in human resources (HR) was also 
excited by the prospect of such a communication platform, 
saying that it was exactly what human resources needed to 
launch frequent pulse surveys, get employee feedback on 
new initiatives, and generally improve employee engage￾ment. The company was also about to make a decision on 
its outdated central server intranet system, which was get￾ting expensive and lacked features that the company 
needed. So, Szema and her two colleagues from IT and 
HR approached the executive who led the task force on 
that project, suggesting that a new enterprise system 
should have an integrated communication platform.
By this time, Szema’s initiative was getting noticed by 
others. The company’s food research division knew that 
other firms had introduced an enterprise communication 
platform and found that it improved teamwork. The CEO’s 
office received word about this (apparently from the vice 
president of research) and a few weeks later the CEO 
spoke during the company’s Team Work Day about 
the benefits of a team-oriented collaboration system for 
the company.
Mini-Case 3: King of the Coin
Mila Horn knew why Max Dampf was giving her the cold 
shoulder. Dampf was Horn’s boss, the head of the foreign 
currency options group at a large European bank. He was 
also known for running the currency trading desk with 
TEAM EXERCISE: DECIPHERING THE NETWORK
1. What aspects of this diagram suggest that the network 
is not operating as effectively as possible?
2. Which people in this network seem to be most power￾ful? Least powerful? What information or features of 
the diagram led you to this conclusion?
3. If you were responsible for this group of people, how 
would you change this situation to improve their 
effectiveness?
After teams have diagnosed each social network map, the 
class will debrief by hearing each team’s assessments and 
recommendations.
PURPOSE This exercise is designed to help students in￾terpret social network maps and their implications for or￾ganizational effectiveness.
MATERIALS The instructor will distribute several social 
network diagrams to each student.
INSTRUCTIONS (SMALLER CLASSES) The instructor 
will organize students into teams (typically four to seven 
people, depending on class size). Teams will examine each 
social network diagram to answer the following questions:
385386
is apparent, and whether the individual’s connections are 
mainly strong or weak ties. The instructor might also ask 
which quadrant on the map indicates the most concern 
and then allow individual students to provide their 
explanations.
© 2013 Steven L. McShane
INSTRUCTIONS (LARGER CLASSES) This activity is 
also possible in large classes by projecting each social 
network diagram on a screen and giving students a min￾ute or two to examine the diagram. The instructor can 
then ask specific questions to the class, such as pointing 
to a specific individual in the network and asking whether 
he or she has high or low power, what level of centrality 
TEAM EXERCISE: BINGO NETWORKING
TEAM EXERCISE: MANAGING YOUR BOSS
column, and/or diagonal. Unlike classic Bingo, however, 
the activity does not end when you complete a sequence of 
boxes. Instead, it ends after a fixed period of time. After 
completing a row, column, and/or diagonal, students will 
continue to complete more boxes.
Everyone is a winner in this activity because it is a so￾cial event where you get to know others better. However, 
the instructor might ask how many participants have com￾pleted one or more entire rows, columns, and diagonals.
INSTRUCTIONS: BINGO RULES
1. Formally introduce yourself to each person you meet 
(e.g., say your name, shake hands).
2. You cannot volunteer information about yourself; 
only answer questions asked regarding a specific box 
on the Bingo card (i.e., you cannot ask: “Which of 
these boxes apply to you?”).
3. When someone satisfies one of the boxes, that person 
should initial the box.
4. You cannot initial any boxes on your own card.
5. The goal is to get initials along one or more entire 
rows, columns, or diagonals.
Source: Bingo networking is based on a widely discussed activity with no 
known original source.
practices that might change the attitudes and behavior of 
their bosses. During this team discussion, students should 
determine which influence tactics are most and least appro￾priate for managing their bosses. Teams should also con￾sider relevant concepts from other chapters, such as 
perceptions (Chapter 3), emotions and attitudes (Chapter 4), 
motivation (Chapter 5), and (if already covered in the 
course) conflict (Chapter 11).
The class will regroup, and each team will present spe￾cific recommendations for influencing people in higher 
positions.
PURPOSE This exercise is designed to improve student 
networking by practicing how to meet and quickly acquire 
information from other people.
MATERIALS The instructor will distribute one Bingo 
card with rules to each student. Students need to supply 
their own pen or pencil to initial the other students’ Bingo 
cards. This activity requires sufficient space for social 
interaction.
INSTRUCTIONS This exercise can involve any number 
of students, depending on the space available.
Each student completes boxes in the Bingo card by 
finding another student in the class who has done the ac￾tivity stated in that box. That other person initials the box. 
For example, if a box says that the person has ridden a 
horse within the past five years, only a student who satis￾fies that condition can initial the box.
Students need to follow the specific rules of the activ￾ity. In particular, participants cannot volunteer informa￾tion about themselves and can only ask and answer 
specific questions related to a specific box on the Bingo 
card.
This activity has similarities to classic Bingo in that 
your objective is to fill in boxes along an entire row, 
PURPOSE This exercise is designed to help students 
apply influence tactics to real situations, in this case 
influencing people above them in the hierarchy.
MATERIALS None.
INSTRUCTIONS (FOR SMALLER CLASSES ONLY)
The instructor will organize students into teams (typically 
four to seven people, depending on class size). Teams will 
identify specific strategies to influence people above them 
in the organizational hierarchy. Teams should consider each 
of the various influence tactics to determine specific 387
1. T. Kucera, “How to Manage Your Manager,” LinkedIn 
Pulse, March 5, 2017; A. Darabos, “Managing ‘Up’: How 
to Manage Your Manager,” Management 3.0 (blog), 
March 11, 2021; K. Taylor, “The Fine Art of Managing 
Up,” Work Life by Atlassian, May 19, 2021; C. Dever, 
“Managing Up,” The Chronicle of Higher Education, 
November 9, 2021; Forbes Coaches Council, “Council 
Post: 14 Ways ‘Managing Up’ Can Impact A Professional’s 
Career,” Forbes, December 17, 2021.
2. J.R. French and B. Raven, “The Bases of Social Power,” 
in Studies in Social Power, ed. D. Cartwright (Ann Arbor: 
University of Michigan Press, 1959), 150–67; A.D. 
Galinsky et al., “Power and Perspectives Not Taken,” 
Psychological Science 17, no. 12 (2006): 1068–74. Also 
see H. Mintzberg, Power in and around Organizations 
(Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1983), Chap. 1; 
J. Pfeffer, Managing with Power: Politics and Influence in 
Organizations (Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 
1992), 17, 30; A. Guinote and T.K. Vescio, “Introduction: 
Power in Social Psychology,” in The Social Psychology 
of Power, ed. A. Guinote and T.K. Vescio (New York: 
Guilford Press, 2010), 1–18.
3. R.A. Dahl, “The Concept of Power,” Behavioral Science 2 
(1957): 201–18; R.M. Emerson, “Power-Dependence 
Relations,” American Sociological Review 27 (1962): 
31–41; A.M. Pettigrew, The Politics of Organizational 
Decision-Making (London: Tavistock, 1973).
4. G.A. van Kleef et al., “The Social Dynamics of Breaking 
the Rules: Antecedents and Consequences of Norm￾Violating Behavior,” Current Opinion in Psychology 6 
(2015): 25–31.
5. J. Pfeffer and G.R. Salancik, The External Control of Or￾ganizations (New York: Harper & Row, 1978), 52–54; 
K. Cowan, A.K. Paswan, and E. Van Steenburg, “When 
Inter-Firm Relationship Benefits Mitigate Power Asymme￾try,” Industrial Marketing Management 48 (2015): 140–48.
6. J.R. French and B. Raven, “The Bases of Social Power,” 
in Studies in Social Power, ed. D. Cartwright (Ann 
Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1959), 150–67; 
P.M. Podsakoff and C. Schreisheim, “Field Studies of 
French and Raven’s Bases of Power: Critique, Analysis, 
and Suggestions for Future Research,” Psychological 
Bulletin 97 (1985): 387–411; P.P. Carson and K.D. Carson, 
“Social Power Bases: A Meta-Analytic Examination of 
Interrelationships and Outcomes,” Journal of Applied 
Social Psychology 23 (1993): 1150–69. Most alternative 
models of power bases parallel French and Raven’s list. 
See P. Heinemann, Power Bases and Informational Influ￾ence Strategies: A Behavioral Study on the Use of Manage￾ment Accounting Information (Wiesbaden, Germany: 
Deutscher Universitäts-Verlag, 2008). Raven subsequently 
proposed information power as a sixth source of power. 
We present information power as forms of legitimate and 
expert power rather than as a distinct sixth power base.
7. Legitimate power and expert power are also consistently 
the strongest source of power that coaches have over 
players in sports. See P. Rylander, “Coaches’ Bases of 
Power: Developing Some Initial Knowledge of Athletes’ 
Compliance with Coaches in Team Sports,” Journal of 
Applied Sport Psychology 27, no. 1 (2015): 110–21.
8. C. Barnard, The Function of the Executive (Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 1938), 167–70; B.J. 
Tepper, “What Do Managers Do When Subordinates 
Just Say, ‘No’?: An Analysis of Incidents Involving 
Refusal to Perform Downward Requests,” in Power 
and Influence in Organizations, ed. L.L. Neider and C.A. 
Schreisheim (Charlotte, NC: IAP/Information Age 
Publishing, 2006), 1–20.
9. A.I. Shahin and P.L. Wright, “Leadership in the Context 
of Culture: An Egyptian Perspective,” Leadership & 
Organization Development Journal 25, no. 5/6 (2004): 
499–511; Y.J. Huo et al., “Leadership and the Management 
of Conflicts in Diverse Groups: Why Acknowledging versus 
Neglecting Subgroup Identity Matters,” European Journal 
of Social Psychology 35, no. 2 (2005): 237–54.
10. B.H. Raven, “Kurt Lewin Address: Influence, Power, 
Religion, and the Mechanisms of Social Control,” 
Journal of Social Issues 55 (1999): 161–86.
11. A.W. Gouldner, “The Norm of Reciprocity: A Preliminary 
Statement,” American Sociological Review 25 (1960): 161–78; 
M. Koslowsky and J. Schwarzwald, “Power Tactics 
Preference in Organizations: Individual and Situational 
Factors,” in Power and Interdependence in Organizations, 
ed. D. Tjosvold and B. Wisse (New York: Cambridge 
University Press, 2009), 244–61.
12. G. Yukl and C.M. Falbe, “Importance of Different Power 
Sources in Downward and Lateral Relations,” Journal 
of Applied Psychology 76 (1991): 416–23; B.H. Raven, 
“Kurt Lewin Address: Influence, Power, Religion, and the 
Mechanisms of Social Control,” Journal of Social Issues 55 
(1999): 161–86.
13. A.M. Pettigrew, “Information Control as a Power Resource,” 
Sociology 6, no. 2 (1972): 187–204; P.L. Dawes, D.Y. 
Lee, and G.R. Dowling, “Information Control and Influ￾ence in Emergent Buying Centers,” Journal of Marketing 62, 
no. 3 (1998): 55–68; J. Webster et al., “Beyond 
Knowledge Sharing: Withholding Knowledge at Work,” 
Research in Personnel and Human Resources Management
27 (2008): 1–37; C.E. Connelly et al., “Knowledge 
Hiding in Organizations,” Journal of Organizational 
Behavior 33, no. 1 (2012): 64–88.
14. S.L. Robinson, J. O’Reilly, and W. Wang, “Invisible at 
Work: An Integrated Model of Workplace Ostracism,” 
Journal of Management 39, no. 1 (2013): 203–31; S. 
Gallani, “Incentives Don’t Help People Change, but Peer 
Pressure Does,” Harvard Business Review, March 23, 2017.
15. J.M. Peiro and J.L. Melia, “Formal and Informal Inter￾personal Power in Organisations: Testing a Bifactorial 
Model of Power in Role-Sets,” Applied Psychology 52, 
no. 1 (2003): 14–35.
16. C.R. Hinings et al., “Structural Conditions of Intraorga￾nizational Power,” Administrative Science Quarterly 19 
(1974): 22–44. Also see C.S. Saunders, “The Strategic 
Contingency Theory of Power: Multiple Perspectives,” 
Journal of Management Studies 27 (1990): 1–21.
17. W.H. Friedland, “For a Sociological Concept of Charisma,” 
Social Forces 43, no. 1 (1964): 18–26; K. Miyahara, 
“Charisma: From Weber to Contemporary Sociology,” 
Sociological Inquiry 53, no. 4 (1983): 368–88; J.D. 
Kudisch and M.L. Poteet, “Expert Power, Referent Power, 
endnotes388
Pay Strategy Using Agency, Transaction Cost and 
Resource Dependence Theories*,” Journal of Management 
Studies 40, no. 7 (2003): 1651–8; I. Roper and P. Higgins, 
“Hidden in Plain Sight? The Human Resource Manage￾ment Practitioner’s Role in Dealing with Workplace 
Conflict as a Source of Organisational–Professional 
Power,” Human Resource Management Journal 30, no. 4 
(2020): 508–24.
23. A. Bryant, “The Right Job? It’s Much Like the Right 
Spouse,” The New York Times, May 22, 2011, 2.
24. J.D. Hackman, “Power and Centrality in the Allocation 
of Resources in Colleges and Universities,” Administrative 
Science Quarterly 30 (1985): 61–77; S.P. Borgatti and 
D.J. Brass, “Centrality: Concepts and Measures,” in 
Social Networks at Work, ed. D.J. Brass and S.P. Borgatti 
(New York: Routledge, 2020), Chapter 2.
25. A. Caza, “Typology of the Eight Domains of Discretion 
in Organizations,” Journal of Management Studies 49, 
no. 1 (2012): 144–77.
26. B.E. Ashforth, “The Experience of Powerlessness in 
Organizations,” Organizational Behavior and Human 
Decision Processes 43 (1989): 207–42; D.B. Wangrow, D.J. 
Schepker, and V.L. Barker, “Managerial Discretion: An 
Empirical Review and Focus on Future Research Directions,”
Journal of Management 41, no. 1 (2015): 99–135.
27. J. Lammers, J.I. Stoker, and D.A. Stapel, “Differentiating 
Social and Personal Power: Opposite Effects on Stereo￾typing, but Parallel Effects on Behavioral Approach 
Tendencies,” Psychological Science 20, no. 12 (2009): 
1543–49; S. Leach, M. Weick, and J. Lammers, “Does 
Influence Beget Autonomy? Clarifying the Relationship 
between Social and Personal Power,” Journal of Theoretical 
Social Psychology 1, no. 1 (2017): 5–14; P. Ziemianski, 
“Identifying and Mitigating the Negative Effects of Power 
in Organizations,” Journal of Applied Social Science 16, 
no. 1 (2022): 140–59.
28. J. Lammers et al., “Power and Morality,” Current Opinion 
in Psychology 6 (2015): 15–19.
29. A.D. Galinsky et al., “Acceleration with Steering: The 
Synergistic Benefits of Combining Power and Perspective￾Taking,” Social Psychological and Personality Science 5, 
no. 6 (2014): 627–35; A. Cislak et al., “Power Corrupts, 
but Control Does Not: What Stands Behind the Effects 
of Holding High Positions,” Personality and Social Psy￾chology Bulletin 44, no. 6 (2018): 944–57; K. Fousiani 
and B. Wisse, “Effects of Leaders’ Power Construal on 
Leader-Member Exchange: The Moderating Role of 
Competitive Climate at Work,” Journal of Leadership & 
Organizational Studies, 29, no. 3 (2022): 306–24.
30. S. Wasserman and K. Faust, Social Network Analysis: 
Methods and Applications, Structural Analysis in the 
Social Sciences (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press, 1994), Chap. 1; D.J. Brass et al., “Taking Stock 
of Networks and Organizations: A Multilevel Perspective,” 
Academy of Management Journal 47, no. 6 (2004): 795–817.
31. M. Grossetti, “Where Do Social Relations Come From?: 
A Study of Personal Networks in the Toulouse Area of 
France,” Social Networks 27, no. 4 (2005): 289–300.
32. R.J. Taormina and J.H. Gao, “A Research Model for 
Guanxi Behavior: Antecedents, Measures, and Outcomes 
of Chinese Social Networking,” Social Science Research 39, 
no. 6 (2010): 1195–212; J. Barbalet, “Guanxi, Tie Strength, 
and Charisma: Toward the Resolution of a Theoretical 
Debate,” Journal of Business & Psychology 10 (1995): 
177–95; K.O. Tskhay, R. Zhu, and N.O. Rule, “Percep￾tions of Charisma from Thin Slices of Behavior Predict 
Leadership Prototypicality Judgments,” Leadership Quar￾terly, 28 (2017): 555–62. One recent review analyzes 
various definitions and concludes that charisma “is 
values-based, symbolic, and emotion-laden leader signal￾ing.” Although a useful development, even this definition 
may miss the mark somewhat because all interactions 
generate emotions, and people can be charismatic by 
their mere presence (signaling) without conversation and 
therefore perhaps without values-based interaction. See: 
J. Antonakis et al., “Charisma: An Ill-Defined and Ill￾Measured Gift,” Annual Review of Organizational Psychology 
and Organizational Behavior 3 (2016): 293–319.
18. R.B. Cialdini and N.J. Goldstein, “Social Influence: 
Compliance and Conformity,” Annual Review of Psychology
55 (2004): 591–621; T. Wray, C. Yu, and C. Philbey, 
“Akrasia and Obedience in Medicine,” in Ethics and 
Professionalism in Healthcare: Transition and Challenges, 
ed. S. Salloch et al. (London: Routledge, 2016), 151–61. 
Several writers point out methodological limitations in 
the evidence on this topic. However, they focus on one 
flawed study (Milgram) and neglect the intricacies of 
expert, legitimate, and referent power. For example, see: 
J.M. Burger et al., “Obedience,” in The Oxford Handbook 
of Social Influence (New York: Oxford University Press, 
2017), 129–45; S.A. Haslam and S.D. Reicher, “50 Years 
of ‘Obedience to Authority’: From Blind Conformity to 
Engaged Followership,” Annual Review of Law and Social 
Science 13, no. 1 (2017): 59–78; M. Meyer, “Putting the 
Onus on Authority: A Review of Obedient Behavior and 
Why We Should Move On,” New Ideas in Psychology 60 
(January 1, 2021): 100831.
19. S.D. Farley, D.H. Carson, and T.J. Pope, “‘I Would Never 
Fall for That’: The Use of an Illegitimate Authority to 
Teach Social Psychological Principles,” Teaching of 
Psychology 46, no. 2 (2019): 146–52.
20. C. Perkel, “It’s Not CSI,” Canadian Press, November 10, 
2007; “Dr. Charles Smith: The Man behind the Public 
Inquiry,” CBC News (Toronto), August 10, 2010. Evidence￾based management writers also warn against blindly fol￾lowing the advice of management gurus. See J. Pfeffer 
and R.I. Sutton, Hard Facts, Dangerous Half-Truths, and 
Total Nonsense (Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 
2006), 45–46. The broader problem of judicial deference 
to medical experts is discussed in: C. Foster, “The Dangers 
Of Deferring To Doctors,” Oxford University-Practical 
Ethics (blog), July 30, 2018, http://blog.practicalethics.
ox.ac.uk/2018/07/the-dangers-of-deferring-to-doctors/.
21. D.J. Hickson et al., “A Strategic Contingencies’ Theory 
of Intraorganizational Power,” Administrative Science 
Quarterly 16 (1971): 216–27; C.R. Hinings et al., 
“Structural Conditions of Intraorganizational Power,” 
Administrative Science Quarterly 19 (1974): 22–44; 
J. Pfeffer and G.R. Salancik, The External Control of 
Organizations (New York: Harper & Row, 1978).
22. R.M. Emerson, “Power-Dependence Relations,” American 
Sociological Review 27 (1962): 31–41. Emerson uses the 
term “availability.” For recent applications of nonsubsti￾tutability to specific departments and individuals, see: 
M. Tremblay, J. Côté, and D.B. Balkin, “Explaining Sales 389
Communication Practices,” Computers in Human Behavior
72 (2017): 259–68.
44. S.P. Borgatti and D.J. Brass, “Centrality: Concepts and 
Measures,” in Social Networks at Work, ed. D.J. Brass and 
S.P. Borgatti (New York: Routledge, 2020), Chapter 2.
45. R.S. Burt, Structural Holes: The Social Structure of Compe￾tition (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1992); 
D.J. Brass and D.M. Krackhardt, “Power, Politics, and 
Social Networks in Organizations,” in Politics in Organi￾zations: Theory and Research Considerations, ed. G.R. 
Ferris and D.C. Treadway (New York: Routledge, 2012), 
355–75.
46. B.R. Ragins and E. Sundstrom, “Gender and Power in 
Organizations: A Longitudinal Perspective,” Psychological 
Bulletin 105 (1989): 51–88; S. McDonald et al., “Frontiers 
of Sociological Research on Networks, Work, and Inequality,” 
in Networks, Work and Inequality, ed. S. McDonald, Research 
in the Sociology of Work (Emerald Group Publishing 
Limited, 2013), 1–41.
47. S. Ritchey, “The Biggest Mistake Women Make When 
Networking,” Fortune, February 1, 2016.
48. D.M. McCracken, “Winning the Talent War for Women: 
Sometimes It Takes a Revolution,” Harvard Business 
Review (2000): 159–67.
49. S. Lee et al., “How Do I Get My Way? A Meta-Analytic 
Review of Research on Influence Tactics,” The Leadership 
Quarterly 28 (2017): 210–28.
50. D. Kipnis, S.M. Schmidt, and I. Wilkinson, “Intraorgani￾zational Influence Tactics: Explorations in Getting One’s 
Way,” Journal of Applied Psychology 65 (1980): 440–52; 
G. Yukl, “Power and the Interpersonal Influence of Leaders,” 
in Power and Interdependence in Organizations, ed. D. 
Tjosvold and B. Wisse (New York: Cambridge University 
Press, 2009), 207–23. A recent review includes these 
influence tactics but divides some of them into narrower 
subcategories. See S. Lee et al., “How Do I Get My Way? 
A Meta-Analytic Review of Research on Influence Tactics,” 
The Leadership Quarterly 28 (2017): 210–28.
51. B. van Knippenberg, R. van Eijbergen, and H. Wilke, “The 
Use of Hard and Soft Influence Tactics in Cooperative 
Task Groups,” Group Processes & Intergroup Relations 2 
(1999): 231–44.
52. R.B. Cialdini and N.J. Goldstein, “Social Influence: 
Compliance and Conformity,” Annual Review of Psychol￾ogy 55, (2004): 591–621; A. Bourgoin, N. Bencherki, 
and S. Faraj, “‘And Who Are You?’: A Performative 
Perspective on Authority in Organizations,” Academy 
of Management Journal 63, no. 4 (2020): 1134–65.
53. The most widely applied model or power excludes silent 
authority. Its closest category is “legitimating tactics,” 
which is an active attempt to demonstrate one’s right to 
the request based on rules or contracts. See G. Yukl, C.F. 
Seifert, and C. Chavez, “Validation of the Extended In￾fluence Behavior Questionnaire,” The Leadership Quarterly
19 (2008): 609–21. Several studies identify the importance 
of silent authority in high power distance cultures. For 
example, see Y. Zhai, “Values of Deference to Authority 
in Japan and China,” International Journal of Compara￾tive Sociology 58, no. 2 (April 2017): 120–39.
54. S. Maitlis, “Taking It from the Top: How CEOs Influence 
(and Fail to Influence) Their Boards,” Organization Stud￾ies 25, no. 8 (2004): 1275–311. This type of influence is a 
and Network Attributes,” American Behavioral Scientist
59, no. 8 (2015): 1038–50; X.-A. Zhang, N. Li, and 
T.B. Harris, “Putting Non-Work Ties to Work: The Case 
of Guanxi in Supervisor–Subordinate Relationships,” 
Leadership Quarterly 26, no. 1 (2015): 37–54. For 
problems with guanxi, see W.R. Vanhonacker, “When 
Good Guanxi Turns Bad,” Harvard Business Review 82, 
no. 4 (2004): 18–19; F. Yang, “Guanxi Human Resource 
Management Practices as a Double-Edged Sword: The 
Moderating Role of Political Skill,” Asia Pacific Journal 
of Human Resources 52, no. 4 (2014): 496–510.
33. A. Portes, “Social Capital: Its Origins and Applications 
in Modern Society,” Annual Review of Sociology 24 
(1998): 1–24; P.S. Adler and S.W. Kwon, “Social Capital: 
Prospects for a New Concept,” Academy of Management 
Review 27, no. 1 (2002): 17–40; R. Lee, “Social Capital 
and Business and Management: Setting a Research 
Agenda,” International Journal of Management Reviews 11, 
no. 3 (2009): 247–73.
34. R.F. Chisholm, Developing Network Organizations: Learning 
from Practice and Theory (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley 
Longman, 1998); W.S. Chow and L.S. Chan, “Social Net￾work, Social Trust and Shared Goals in Organizational 
Knowledge Sharing,” Information & Management 45, no. 7 
(2008): 458–65.
35. R.S. Burt, Structural Holes: The Social Structure of Compe￾tition (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1992).
36. M.T. Rivera, S.B. Soderstrom, and B. Uzzi, “Dynamics of 
Dyads in Social Networks: Assortative, Relational, and 
Proximity Mechanisms,” Annual Review of Sociology 36 
(2010): 91–115.
37. R. Cross and R.J. Thomas, Driving Results through Social 
Networks: How Top Organizations Leverage Networks for 
Performance and Growth (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 
2009); R. McDermott and D. Archibald, “Harnessing 
Your Staff’s Informal Networks,” Harvard Business 
Review 88, no. 3 (2010): 82–89.
38. M. Kilduff and D. Krackhardt, Interpersonal Networks 
in Organizations: Cognition, Personality, Dynamics, and 
Culture (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2008).
39. D.J. Brass et al., “Taking Stock of Networks and Organi￾zations: A Multilevel Perspective,” Academy of Manage￾ment Journal 47, no. 6 (2004): 795–817; D. Melamed 
and B. Simpson, “Strong Ties Promote the Evolution of 
Cooperation in Dynamic Networks,” Social Networks 45 
(2016): 32–44.
40. M.S. Granovetter, “The Strength of Weak Ties,” American 
Journal of Sociology 78 (1973): 1360–80; B. Erickson, 
“Social Networks,” in The Blackwell Companion to 
Sociology, ed. J.R. Blau (Malden, MA: Blackwell, 2004), 
314–26.
41. B. Uzzi and S. Dunlap, “How to Build Your Network,” 
Harvard Business Review 83, no. 12 (2005): 53–60.
42. S.C. de Janasz and M.L. Forret, “Learning the Art of 
Networking: A Critical Skill for Enhancing Social Capital 
and Career Success,” Journal of Management Education 32, 
no. 5 (2008): 629–50; Y. Zenou, “A Dynamic Model of 
Weak and Strong Ties in the Labor Market,” Journal 
of Labor Economics 33, no. 4 (2015): 891–932.
43. C.C. Su and N.K. Chan, “Predicting Social Capital on 
Facebook: The Implications of Use Intensity, Perceived 
Content Desirability, and Facebook-Enabled 390
61. M. Bolino, D. Long, and W. Turnley, “Impression Man￾agement in Organizations: Critical Questions, Answers, 
and Areas for Future Research,” Annual Review of Organi￾zational Psychology and Organizational Behavior 3, no. 1 
(2016): 377–406.
62. T. Peters, “The Brand Called You,” Fast Company, August 
1997; C. Johnson, Platform: The Art and Science of Personal 
Branding (New York: Penguin Random House, 2019); 
L.A. King, Just Do You: Authenticity, Leadership, and Your 
Personal Brand (Toronto: Ingenium Books, 2019).
63. D. Strutton and L.E. Pelton, “Effects of Ingratiation on Lat￾eral Relationship Quality within Sales Team Settings,” Journal 
of Business Research 43 (1998): 1–12; R. Vonk, “Self-Serving 
Interpretations of Flattery: Why Ingratiation Works,” Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology 82 (2002): 515–26.
64. D. Strutton, L.E. Pelton, and J.F. Tanner, “Shall We Gather 
in the Garden: The Effect of Ingratiatory Behaviors on 
Buyer Trust in Salespeople,” Industrial Marketing Manage￾ment 25 (1996): 151–62; J. O’Neil, “An Investigation of the 
Sources of Influence of Corporate Public Relations Practi￾tioners,” Public Relations Review 29 (2003): 159–69.
65. C.M. Falbe and G. Yukl, “Consequences for Managers 
of Using Single Influence Tactics and Combinations of 
Tactics,” Academy of Management Journal 35 (1992): 
638–52.
66. G. Yukl and J. Tracey, “Consequences of Influence 
Tactics Used with Subordinates, Peers, and the Boss,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 77, no. 4 (1992): 525–35; 
B. Oc and M.R. Bashshur, “Followership, Leadership 
and Social Influence,” Leadership Quarterly 24, no. 6 
(2013): 919–34; M.B. Wadsworth and A.L. Blanchard, 
“Influence Tactics in Virtual Teams,” Computers in 
Human Behavior 44 (2015): 386–93.
67. P.P. Fu et al., “The Impact of Societal Cultural Values 
and Individual Social Beliefs on the Perceived Effective￾ness of Managerial Influence Strategies: A Meso 
Approach,” Journal of International Business Studies 35, 
no. 4 (2004): 284–305; A.N. Smith et al., “Gendered 
Influence: A Gender Role Perspective on the Use and 
Effectiveness of Influence Tactics,” Journal of Management
39, no. 5 (2013): 1156–83; C.C. Lewis and J. Ryan, “Age 
and Influence Tactics: A Life-Stage Development Theory 
Perspective,” The International Journal of Human Resource 
Management 25, no. 15 (2014): 2146–58.
68. This definition is founded on a cluster of definitions with 
similar core elements, including self-interest, damage to 
individuals and the organization, and perceived motiva￾tion of the political actor. See H. Mintzberg, Power In 
and Around Organizations (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Pren￾tice Hall, 1983); A. Drory and T. Romm, “The Definition 
of Organizational Politics: A Review,” Human Relations 43, 
no. 11 (1990): 1133–54; K. Michele Kacmar and G.R. 
Ferris, “Politics at Work: Sharpening the Focus of 
Political Behavior in Organizations,” Business Horizons 36, 
no. 4 (1993): 70–74; C.-H. Chang, C.C. Rosen, and 
P.E. Levy, “The Relationship between Perceptions of Or￾ganizational Politics and Employee Attitudes, Strain, and 
Behavior: A Meta-Analytic Examination,” Academy of 
Management Journal 52 (2009): 779–801; A. Bedi and A. 
Schat, “Perceptions of Organizational Politics: A Meta￾Analysis of Its Attitudinal, Health, and Behavioural 
Consequences,” Canadian Psychology 54 (2013): 246–59.
form of manipulation. See P. Fleming and A. Spicer, 
“Power in Management and Organization Science,” The 
Academy of Management Annals 8, no. 1 (2014): 237–98.
55. J.K. Murnighan, “Organizational Coalition Formation: 
Process, Consequences and Dominant Coalitions,” 
BEBR faculty working paper, 1985; W.B. Stevenson, J.L. 
Pearce, and L.W. Porter, “The Concept of ‘Coalition’ in 
Organization Theory and Research,” Academy of Manage￾ment Review 10, no. 2 (1985): 256–68; F. Liu, O. 
Dedehayir, and B. Katzy, “Coalition Formation during 
Technology Adoption,” Behaviour & Information 
Technology 34 (2015): 1186–99.
56. A.T. Cobb, “Toward the Study of Organizational 
Coalitions: Participant Concerns and Activities in a 
Simulated Organizational Setting,” Human Relations 44 
(1991): 1057–79; E.A. Mannix, “Organizations as Re￾source Dilemmas: The Effects of Power Balance on 
Coalition Formation in Small Groups,” Organizational 
Behavior and Human Decision Processes 55 (1993): 1–22; 
K. Rangus and M. Černe, “The Impact of Leadership 
Influence Tactics and Employee Openness toward Others 
on Innovation Performance: Leadership Influence 
Tactics and Employee Openness,” R&D Management 49, 
no. 2 (2019): 168–79.
57. A.P. Brief, Attitudes in and around Organizations (Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage, 1998), 69–84; D.J. O’Keefe, Persuasion: 
Theory and Research (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 2002); 
R.H. Gass and J.S. Seiter, Persuasion: Social Influence 
and Compliance Gaining, 5th ed. (New York: Routledge, 
2014).
58. These and other features of message content in persua￾sion are detailed in R. Petty and J. Cacioppo, Attitudes 
and Persuasion: Classic and Contemporary Approaches
(Dubuque, IA: W.C. Brown, 1981); D.J. O’Keefe, Persua￾sion: Theory and Research (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 
2002), Chap. 9; G. Van Kleef, H. van den Berg, and 
M. Heerdink, “The Persuasive Power of Emotions: Effects 
of Emotional Expressions on Attitude Formation and 
Change,” Journal of Applied Psychology 100 (2015): 
1124–42; E. Falk and C. Scholz, “Persuasion, Influence, 
and Value: Perspectives from Communication and Social 
Neuroscience,” Annual Review of Psychology 69 (2018): 
329–56; D. Albarracin and S. Shavitt, “Attitudes and 
Attitude Change,” Annual Review of Psychology 69 (2018): 
299–327.
59. J.A. Banas and S.A. Rains, “A Meta-Analysis of Research 
on Inoculation Theory,” Communication Monographs 77, 
no. 3 (2010): 281–311; B. Ivanov et al., “Beyond Simple 
Inoculation: Examining the Persuasive Value of Inocula￾tion for Audiences with Initially Neutral or Opposing 
Attitudes,” Western Journal of Communication 81, no. 1 
(2017): 105–26.
60. Y. Lim and R.J. Lee-Won, “When Retweets Persuade: 
The Persuasive Effects of Dialogic Retweeting and the 
Role of Social Presence in Organizations’ Twitter-Based 
Communication,” Telematics and Informatics 34, no. 5 
(2017): 422–33; P. Briñol and R.E. Petty, “The Impact 
of Individual Differences on Attitudes and Attitude 
Change,” in The Oxford Handbook of Personality and 
Social Psychology, ed. D. Albarracín and B. Johnson, 
2nd ed., vol. 1 (New York: Oxford University Press, 
2019), 520–56.391
Forbes, January 7, 2019; L. Blanco, “How To Become 
Visible Through Personal Branding in the Social Age,” 
Black Enterprise, March 7, 2019.
d. M. Fetscherin, “The 4Ps of CEO Branding,” in CEO 
Branding: Theory and Practice, ed. M. Fetscherin (New 
York: Routledge, 2015), 1–17; E. Blankespoor and E. 
deHaan, “Strategic Disclosure and CEO Media Visibility,” 
Journal of Financial Reporting 5, no. 1 (2020): 25–50.
e. M.E. Porter, J.W. Lorsch, and N. Nohria, “Seven Surprises 
for New CEOs,” Harvard Business Review 82, no. 10 
(2004): 62–72; C. Dewar, M. Hirt, and S. Keller, “The 
Mindsets and Practices of Excellent CEOs,” McKinsey 
& Company, October 25, 2019.
f. M.A. Bliss, “Does CEO Duality Constrain Board Inde￾pendence? Some Evidence from Audit Pricing,” Account￾ing & Finance 51, no. 2 (2011): 361–80; K.B. Lewellyn 
and S. Fainshmidt, “Effectiveness of CEO Power Bundles 
and Discretion Context: Unpacking the ‘Fuzziness’ of the 
CEO Duality Puzzle,” Organization Studies 38, no. 11 
(2017): 1603–24; J.R. Graham, H. Kim, and M. Leary, 
“CEO-Board Dynamics,” Journal of Financial Economics
137, no. 3 (2020): 612–36.
g. J.G. Combs et al., “The Moderating Effect of CEO Power 
on the Board Composition–Firm Performance Relation￾ship,” Journal of Management Studies 44, no. 8 (2007): 
1299–323; J.W. Ridge, F. Aime, and M.A. White, “When 
Much More of a Difference Makes a Difference: Social 
Comparison and Tournaments in the CEO’s Top Team,” 
Strategic Management Journal 36, no. 4 (April 2015): 
618–36; D. Georgakakis et al., “Four Decades of CEO–TMT 
Interface Research: A Review Inspired by Role Theory,” 
The Leadership Quarterly 33 (2022): 101354.
h. C. Crossland and D.C. Hambrick, “Differences in Mana￾gerial Discretion across Countries: How Nation-Level 
Institutions Affect the Degree to Which CEOs Matter,” 
Strategic Management Journal 32, no. 8 (2011): 797–819.
i. M.E. Porter, J.W. Lorsch, and N. Nohria, “Seven Surprises 
for New CEOs,” Harvard Business Review 82, no. 10 
(2004): 62–72.
j. D. Pressey, “Area Hospitals Chief Extends Personal Touch,” 
News-Gazette (Champaign-Urbana, IL), April 18, 2011.
k. M. Townsend, “What You Can Learn from Your Em￾ployee Networks,” Strategy+business, January 22, 2019.
l. “WA MP Barry Urban Admits He Did Not Complete 
Diploma; Apologises ‘Unreservedly,’” ABC News (Australia), 
November 30, 2017; “Resume Fraud: More Common Than 
You Think,” Health Street (blog), September 2, 2020; S. 
Brookes, “Ex-Police Colleague Says Disgraced MP Barry 
Urban Had a Reputation for Tall Tales,” The Sydney Morning 
Herald, November 23, 2021; “Embellishing the Truth in a 
CV Is Common. But Here’s Where You Can Cross the 
Line into Fraud,” ABC News (Australia), February 17, 2022.
m. “Your Best Employees Are Leaving. But Is It Personal or 
Practical?,” News Release (Atlanta: Randstad USA, 
August 28, 2018); Z. Mejia, “These Are the Top 10 Work￾place Struggles Employees Face in 2018,” CNBC, September 
19, 2018; “South African Workplace Habits—The Truth 
Revealed!,” CareerJunction Blog (blog), April 23, 2019; 
“The 2020 UK Workplace Stress Survey” (London, UK: 
Perkbox, 2021); R. Pelta, “FlexJobs Survey Finds Remote 
Work Remains in Demand,” FlexJobs (blog), April 19, 2021.
69. D. Buchanan and R. Badham, Power, Politics, and Organi￾zational Change: Winning the Turf Game (SAGE, 2008), 
pg. 11; E.M. Landells and S.L. Albrecht, “Positive Poli￾tics, Negative Politics, and Engagement: Psychological 
Safety, Meaningfulness, and Availability as ‘Black Box’ 
Explanatory Mechanisms,” in Research in Occupational 
Stress and Well-Being, ed. C.C. Rosen and P.L. Perrewé, 
vol. 15 (Emerald Publishing Limited, 2017), 33–49; E.M. 
Landells and S.L. Albrecht, “The Positives and Negatives 
of Organizational Politics: A Qualitative Study,” Journal 
of Business and Psychology 32, no. 1 (2017): 41–58; 
N. Postma, “You Can’t Sit Out Office Politics,” Harvard 
Business Review, July 14, 2021.
70. Surveys of employees consistently identify organizational 
politics as self-serving behavior that is dysfunctional for 
employee well-being and performance. See, for example, 
“Sloppy Worker Wake-Up Call: Sweating the Small Stuff 
Matters,” news release (Menlo Park, CA: Accountemps, 
January 10, 2017); “Indian Millennials Lack Critical 
Skills: HBR Ascend Survey,” Hindustan Times, July 18, 
2017; Z. Mejia, “These Are the Top 10 Workplace Strug￾gles Employees Face in 2018,” CNBC, September 19, 
2018; “New DDI Research: 57 Percent of Employees Quit 
Because of Their Boss,” news release (Pittsburgh: Devel￾opment Dimensions International, December 9, 2019).
71. L.W. Porter, R.W. Allen, and H.L. Angle, “The Politics 
of Upward Influence in Organizations,” Research in Orga￾nizational Behavior 3 (1981): 120–22; R.J. House, “Power 
and Personality in Complex Organizations,” Research in 
Organizational Behavior 10 (1988): 305–57.
72. E. O’Boyle et al., “A Meta-Analysis of the Dark Triad and 
Work Behavior: A Social Exchange Perspective,” Journal 
of Applied Psychology 97, no. 3 (2012): 557–79; A. Harrison, 
J. Summers, and B. Mennecke, “The Effects of the Dark 
Triad on Unethical Behavior,” Journal of Business Ethics 153, 
no. 1 (2018): 53–77; M. Moshagen, B.E. Hilbig, and I. 
Zettler, “The Dark Core of Personality,” Psychological 
Review 125, no. 5 (2018): 656–88; S.M. Spain, “The Dark 
Side of Personality,” in Leadership, Work, and the Dark Side of 
Personality, ed. S.M. Spain (Academic Press, 2019), 41–93.
73. C. Hardy, Strategies for Retrenchment and Turnaround: 
The Politics of Survival (Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 1990), 
Chap. 14; G.R. Ferris et al., “Perceptions of Organiza￾tional Politics: Prediction, Stress-Related Implications, 
and Outcomes,” Human Relations 49 (1996): 233–63; 
M.C. Andrews and K.M. Kacmar, “Discriminating 
among Organizational Politics, Justice, and Support,” 
Journal of Organizational Behavior 22 (2001): 347–66.
a. Mr M Ham v ESL BBSW Ltd, No. 1601260/2020 (UK 
Employment Tribunals April 22, 2021).
b. R. Spence, “Seven ‘Patterns of Opportunity’ as Seen in 
the Crystal Ball of Change,” Financial Post (Toronto), 
October 18, 2017; A. Gopinath, “Trend Hunter Helps 
You Identify the Next Big Thing,” The Edge (Malaysia), 
July 2, 2018; “Interview with Jeremy Gutsche,” Media 
Planet-Careers and Education (blog), September 2018, 
http://www.careersandeducation.ca/inspiration/
interview-with-jeremy-gutsche.
c. J. Pfeffer, Power: Why Some People Have It—and Others Don’t
(New York: Harper Collins, 2010), 26–27; C. Sparrer, 
“Establish Your Personal Brand For Workplace Success,” 
Design Credit: Blue globe icon: Merfin/Shutterstock392
Conflict and Negotiation 
in the Workplace
To lure talent, build a positive corporate reputation, and avoid harassment 
lawsuits, many organizational leaders have created a culture that is 
supportive, friendly, and overall “nice.” These values and practices are important, but a 
culture of too much niceness actually suffers from conflict avoidance.
“If all teams are in agreement, you might find yourself in an echo chamber where improvements and 
new ideas aren’t discussed,” suggests Misty Larkins, president of growth marketing agency Relevance 
in Columbia, Missouri. “A small amount of conflict is normal and expected in business. Not everyone is 
going to agree on everything, and it’s actually healthy for teams to have differing options.”
Tamara Littleton agrees. “You can’t be too nice,” warns the founder and CEO of social media agency 
The Social Element, which has 300 employees across several countries. “You have to allow for people 
to challenge you.” 
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
LO 11-1 Define conflict and debate its positive and negative consequences in the workplace.
LO 11-2 Distinguish task conflict from relationship conflict and describe three strategies to 
minimize relationship conflict during task conflict episodes.
LO 11-3 Diagram the conflict process model and describe six structural sources of conflict 
in organizations.
LO 11-4 Outline the five conflict-handling styles and discuss the circumstances in which each 
would be most appropriate.
LO 11-5 Apply the six structural approaches to conflict management and describe the three 
types of third-party dispute resolution.
LO 11-6 Discuss activities in the negotiation preparation, process, and setting that improve 
negotiation effectiveness.
Learning Objectives
11
chapterCompanies that create a culture of extreme niceness are actually discouraging employees from engaging in constructive 
debate, which is needed for better decisions and creative ideas.
PART 3: TEAM PROCESSES
Littleton experienced the conflict avoidance problem several years ago when she exuberantly 
recommended expanding the company’s London, UK, business overseas through a few acquisitions. 
That expansion was abandoned within the year for various reasons. Publicly, the firm’s executive team 
had supported the expansion, but some later confided that they privately anticipated serious problems 
with it. “I created a cordial culture where everyone agreed to a bad decision,” Littleton acknowledges.1
When the topic of workplace conflict is mentioned, most people visualize incidents of dysfunctional 
arguments and entrenched infighting. This conflict undermines the organization’s effectiveness, but so 
does the opposite. A culture of extreme niceness discourages employees from engaging in 
constructive debate, which is needed for better decisions and creative ideas. As we will learn in this 
chapter, some forms of conflict are dysfunctional, whereas other forms are valuable to organizations. 
The challenge is to enable beneficial conflict and suppress dysfunctional conflict.
We begin this chapter by defining conflict and discussing the age-old question: Is conflict good or 
bad? Next, we look at the conflict process and examine in detail the main factors that cause or amplify 
conflict. The five styles of handling conflict are then described, including its contingencies as well as 
gender and cross-cultural differences in conflict handling. This is followed by discussion of the most 
important structural approaches to conflict resolution. Next, we look at the role of managers and others 
in third-party conflict resolution. The final section of this chapter reviews key factors to consider when 
negotiating conflict resolution.
393
Flamingo Images/Shutterstock394 Part Three Team Processes
The Meaning and Consequences of Conflict
Conflict is a fact of life in organizations. Companies are continuously adapting to their 
external environment, yet there is no clear road map on what changes are best. Every day, 
employees disagree on which work objectives should receive priority, which norms they 
should abide by, and how even minor tasks should be performed. These conflict episodes 
occur because of clashing work goals, divergent personal values and experiences, and a 
variety of other reasons that we discuss in this chapter.
Conflict is a process in which one party perceives that its interests are being opposed 
or negatively affected by another party.2
 It occurs when one party obstructs another’s 
goals in some way, or when one party perceives that the other person or group is likely to 
do so. Conflict is ultimately based on perceptions; it exists whenever one party believes
that another might obstruct its efforts, regardless of whether the other party actually has 
those intentions.
This definition—and the focus of this chapter—is on conflict with others, such as between 
people on the same team or department, between work units or business divisions, or 
between the organization and external stakeholders. However, conflict also occurs within each 
of us (called intrapersonal conflict). In earlier chapters, we discussed various intrapersonal 
conflicts, such as when our behavior conflicts with our beliefs and values (see Chapter 4 on 
cognitive dissonance) and when we need to reconcile conflicting goals in decision making, 
such as providing customer service versus working efficiently (Chapter 7).
IS CONFLICT GOOD OR BAD?
One of the oldest debates in organizational behavior is whether con￾flict is good or bad—or, more recently, what forms of conflict are 
good or bad.3
 The dominant view over most of this time has been 
that conflict is dysfunctional.4
 This perspective argues that organiza￾tions work best through harmonious relations, whereas even moder￾ately low levels of conflict tatter the fabric of workplace interactions 
and divert energy from productive activities. 
The “conflict-is-bad” perspective is now considered too simplistic, 
yet workplace conflict can indeed have negative consequences under 
some circumstances (see Exhibit 11.1).5
 Conflict potentially threat￾ens personal needs and self-concept, which reduces job satisfaction 
and increases stress and turnover. It undermines job performance by 
consuming otherwise productive time, distracting employees from 
their work, and sapping their personal energy.6
Conflict also potentially undermines information sharing because 
employees are less motivated to ask for, pay attention to, and trans￾mit information with discordant coworkers.7
 Disagreements can also 
fuel organizational politics and thereby waste resources, such as 
when employees try to undermine the credibility of their opponents. 
Conflict among team members may hurt team cohesion and perfor￾mance. Even when conflict occurs between work units or regions 
(such as when competing for budget funding), the interdepartmental 
conflict may lead to conflict and power struggles among employees 
within each group.8
Benefits of Conflict In the 1920s, when most organizational 
scholars viewed conflict as inherently dysfunctional, educational phi￾losopher and psychologist John Dewey praised its benefits: “Conflict 
is the gadfly of thought. It stirs us to observation and memory. It insti￾gates to invention. It shocks us out of sheep-like passivity, and sets us 
LO 11-1
Conflict can have costly consequences, even from the most 
trivial disagreements. One such incident occurred as an easyJet 
flight was taxiing out to the runway at London’s Gatwick Airport, 
then returned to the gate. The problem was neither mechanical 
nor an external threat. Instead, two cabin crew members had an 
irreconcilable disagreement about how to properly unpack and 
store the water bottles. The cabin manager urged the 
employees to try to get along, but the conflict continued to such 
a degree that the captain decided to offload and replace the 
two squabbling crew members. “This is quite incredible,” 
exclaimed a passenger who observed the incident. “We’ve all 
worked with people we don’t get on with, right? But this tiff 
means a one hour flight is delayed!” The easyJet flight arrived 
90 minutes late at its destination in Belfast, Northern Ireland.a
Images/Alamy Stock Photo
conflict
the process in which one party 
perceives that its interests are 
being opposed or negatively 
affected by another partyChapter Eleven Conflict and Negotiation in the Workplace 395
at noting and contriving.” Three years later, political scientist and management theorist Mary 
Parker Follett similarly remarked that the “friction” of conflict should be put to use rather than 
treated as an unwanted consequence of differences.9
 But it wasn’t until the 1970s that conflict 
management experts began to embrace the notion that some level of conflict can be benefi￾cial.10 They formed an “optimal conflict” perspective, which states that organizations are most 
effective when employees experience neither too much nor too little conflict.
The opening case study to this chapter highlighted the idea that conflict avoidance can 
undermine an organization’s success. In other words, some level and some forms of con￾flict are beneficial. One benefit of conflict is that it potentially improves decision making. 
As Dewey stated, conflict energizes people to debate issues and evaluate alternatives 
more thoroughly. When employees disagree constructively, they probe and test one an￾other’s way of thinking to better understand the underlying issues that need to be ad￾dressed. They evaluate the logic of the opposing positions and reexamine each party’s 
basic assumptions about the problem and its possible solution. Conflict also motivates 
creative thinking to discover novel solutions to the disagreement.11
A second benefit is that moderate levels of conflict maintain vigilance with the exter￾nal environment. Through disagreement, employees engage in active thinking, and this 
often involves ongoing questioning about how the organization can be more closely 
aligned with its customers, suppliers, and other stakeholders.12 A third benefit occurs 
when team members experience conflict with external sources, such as competition with 
or threats from other teams or organizations. People tend to be more motivated to work 
together when faced with an external threat, which strengthens cohesion within the team 
(see Chapter 8). However, as mentioned a few paragraphs ago, this interdepartmental 
conflict sometimes also undermines relations within the department.
The Emerging View: Task and Relationship Conflict
The “optimal conflict” perspective remains popular and seems to be true in some 
respects—too much of any conflict is probably dysfunctional.13 However, the school of 
thought most widely accepted today is that there are two dominant types of conflict: task 
conflict and relationship conflict. These represent two distinct ways that people approach 
and interact with one another during disagreements.14
TASK CONFLICT
Task conflict (also called constructive conflict) occurs when people focus their discussion 
around the issue (i.e., the “task”) while showing respect for people involved in that dis￾agreement. This type of conflict keeps the spotlight on the merits of the ideas presented. 
With task conflict, participants examine behavior, ideas, and recommendations in terms 
of their factual accuracy, logic, and reasonable inferences. The discussion avoids any at￾tention to attributes or attitudes of the people involved. Although there is likely an upper 
limit to the intensity of any disagreement, research indicates that task conflict tends to 
produce the beneficial outcomes described earlier.15
NEGATIVE CONSEQUENCES POSITIVE CONSEQUENCES
• Lower performance
• Higher stress, dissatisfaction, and turnover
• Less information sharing and coordination 
• Increased organizational politics 
• Wasted resources 
• Weakened team cohesion (when conflict exists 
among team members)
• Better decision making 
— Tests logic of arguments
— Questions assumptions
— Generates creative thinking
• More responsive to changing environment
• Stronger team cohesion (when conflict exists 
between the team and outside opponents)
EXHIBIT 11.1
Consequences of Workplace 
Conflict
LO 11-2
task conflict
a type of conflict in which 
people focus their discussion 
around the issue (i.e., the task) 
in which different viewpoints 
occur while showing respect 
for people involved in that 
disagreement396 Part Three Team Processes
We often hear about workplace conflicts caused by “personality clashes.” The problem 
is that personalities aren’t direct causes of conflict. In fact, we don’t directly see personal￾ity. Instead, the individual’s behavior triggers the disagreement, and their personality is 
inferred from that behavior. Therefore, we can view a disagreement as a personality clash 
or as disagreement over appropriate behavior. The latter is task conflict.
Suppose an employee describes a disagreement with a coworker in terms of the latter’s 
reckless personality, which is inferred from their risky statements and behaviors. A task￾oriented view of this conflict is possible by focusing on what the allegedly reckless employee 
does (the logic, ethics, and consequences of those actions) and on the logic and factual 
foundation of that person’s suggestions, not on alleged personal attributes. The point here is 
that almost all workplace conflicts can be framed as task conflicts, even when some partici￾pants try to pin the problem on flaws on the other party’s personal characteristics.
RELATIONSHIP CONFLICT
In contrast to task conflict, relationship conflict occurs when the discussion focuses on 
the qualities of the people in the dispute rather than on the qualities of the ideas pre￾sented.16 The most direct form of relationship conflict is to attack the competence, wis￾dom, trustworthiness, personality, and other qualities of the opponent, rather than to 
present logical and factual concerns with the opponent’s ideas or arguments (task con￾flict). This approach infers that an idea should be dismissed because those who propose 
or support that idea lack credentials or other qualities. In most situations, this “argumen￾tum ad hominem” (argument about the person) isn’t just character assassination. It is a 
well-known logical fallacy because the characteristics of the person being criticized are 
not direct evidence (or any evidence) that their idea lacks merit.17
A second form of relationship conflict occurs when someone relies on their status or 
expertise to support or defend an idea (“My recommendation is best because I have the 
most experience!”). This is an indirect way of attacking others because it implies the infe￾riority of those who present opposing arguments or recommendations. Once again, it fo￾cuses on the relative qualities of the people involved, not the qualities of the ideas 
presented. A third form of relationship conflict occurs when someone uses assertive influ￾ence to demonstrate the superiority of their position in the disagreement. This aggression 
inherently demeans others in the conversation.18 For example, a manager who bangs a fist 
on the desk while presenting an argument is demonstrating that they have more power 
than the opponents.
relationship conflict
a type of conflict in which 
people focus their discussion 
on qualities of the people in 
the dispute, rather than on the 
qualities of the ideas 
presented regarding a task￾related issue
Team decision making at 
Amazon.com is not a casual 
social gathering. “It is respectful 
contention and eventually we 
reach a decision based on the 
data, but meetings are hotly 
debated,” says a vice president 
about the meetings he attends at 
the online retailer. In fact, one of 
Amazon’s principles states that 
leaders should “respectfully 
challenge decisions when they 
disagree, even when doing so is 
uncomfortable or exhausting.” 
Another Amazon executive 
explains that “it would certainly be 
much easier and socially cohesive 
to just compromise and not 
debate, but that may lead to the 
wrong decision.” Some observers 
and employees say that Amazon 
fuels relationship conflict, not just 
task conflict. Others counter that 
relationship conflict is discouraged, 
pointing out that “respectfully
challenge” means focusing on the 
problem, not the person. “We 
debate politely and respectfully, 
and you are given constructive 
feedback to course-correct if you 
are rude or disrespectful,” says a 
middle management engineer.b
Fizkes/ShutterstockChapter Eleven Conflict and Negotiation in the Workplace 397
Whether directly attacking the other party’s personal attributes or doing so indirectly 
through status or assertiveness, relationship conflict is dysfunctional because it threatens 
the opponent’s self-esteem (see Chapter 3). It usually triggers defense mechanisms and a 
competitive orientation between the opponents. It also reduces mutual trust by emphasiz￾ing interpersonal differences, thereby weakening any bond that might otherwise exist be￾tween the parties.19 Relationship conflict escalates more easily than task conflict because 
the adversaries become less motivated to communicate and share information, making it 
more difficult for them to discover common ground and ultimately resolve the conflict. 
Instead, they rely increasingly on distorted perceptions and stereotypes, which tend to 
reinforce their perceptions of threat.
MINIMIZING RELATIONSHIP CONFLICT DURING TASK CONFLICT
Our discussion so far leads to the logical recommendation to encourage task conflict and 
minimize relationship conflict. This sounds good in theory, but separating these two types 
of conflict isn’t easy in practice. Research indicates that people experience some degree 
of relationship conflict whenever they engage in constructive debate.20 No matter how 
diplomatically others question our ideas and actions, they potentially threaten our self￾esteem and our public image, which usually triggers our drive to defend. The stronger the 
level of debate and the more the issue is tied to our self-view, the more likely that task 
conflict will evolve into (or mix with) relationship conflict. Fortunately, three conditions 
potentially minimize the level of relationship conflict during task conflict episodes.21
• Emotional intelligence. Relationship conflict is less likely to occur, or is less likely 
to escalate, when team members have high levels of emotional intelligence, as well 
as the related attributes of emotional stability and trait self-control.22 Employees 
with higher emotional intelligence are better able to understand and regulate their 
own emotions during debate, which reduces the risk of escalating perceptions of 
interpersonal hostility. They are also more likely to view a coworker’s emotional 
reaction as valuable information about that person’s needs and expectations, rather 
than as a personal attack.
• Team development. Team development plays a critical role in suppressing relation￾ship conflict during task conflict.23 One reason is that as teams develop, their 
members become better at understanding and anticipating one another, which re￾duces the risk that a coworker’s words or actions will be misinterpreted as a con￾flict trigger. Newly formed teams (which have less mutual understanding) have 
more difficulty separating task and relationship conflict, whereas experienced 
teams (such as senior executive teams) tend to demonstrate a higher capacity to 
suppress relationship conflict during discussions. A second reason is that team de￾velopment produces higher team cohesion, in which employees feel a strong social 
identity with the group. Members of cohesive teams are motivated to minimize 
relationship conflict because these episodes threaten the team’s stability and the 
member’s future with that group.
• Norms supporting psychological safety. Task conflict is less likely to mutate into 
chronic relationship conflict when the team or broader organization adopts norms 
that support psychological safety.24 Psychological safety refers to a shared belief 
that it is safe to engage in interpersonal risk-taking (see Chapter 8). In other 
words, employees are confident that presenting unusual ideas, constructively 
disagreeing with the majority, or experimenting with new work behaviors will not 
cause coworkers to threaten their self-concept, status, or career. Psychological 
safety flourishes when team and organizational norms encourage employees to re￾spect and value one another, demonstrate interest in one another, be open-minded 
about and tolerant with coworkers’ opinions, and show positive intentions toward 
one another. Showing positive intentions involves displaying positive emotions and 
nonthreatening behavior when discussing different points of view.
psychological safety
a shared belief that it is safe to 
engage in interpersonal risk￾taking; specifically, that 
presenting unusual ideas, 
constructively disagreeing 
with the majority, and 
experimenting with new work 
behaviors will not result in 
coworkers posing a threat to 
their self-concept, status, or 
career398 Part Three Team Processes
Conflict Process Model
Now that we have outlined the history and current perspectives of conflict and its out￾comes, let’s look at the model of the conflict process, shown in Exhibit 11.2.25 This model 
begins with the sources of conflict, which we will describe in the next section. The sources 
of conflict lead one or both parties to perceive that conflict exists. They become aware 
that one party’s statements and actions interfere with or otherwise threaten their own 
goals or beliefs. These perceptions produce and interact with emotions experienced about 
the conflict.
Conflict perceptions usually produce negative emotions, including stress, anxiety, fear, 
frustration, and/or anger.26 However, some people experience positive emotions through 
cognitive reappraisal of the conflict, such as by perceiving the situation as a positive chal￾lenge, an opportunity to learn about other viewpoints, and a relief that nagging concerns 
about a possible conflict are out in the open and can now be addressed.
Manifest conflict represents each party’s decisions and behaviors toward the other. 
These conflict episodes may range from subtle nonverbal communication to warlike aggres￾sion. Manifest conflict incidents are influenced by how the other party perceives and re￾acts emotionally to them.27 Conflict is also behaviorally revealed by the style each side 
prefers using to resolve the conflict. Some people tend to avoid the conflict whereas others 
try to defeat those with opposing views. We discuss different conflict handling styles later 
in this chapter.
debating point
CAN PEOPLE AVOID RELATIONSHIP CONFLICT DURING DISAGREEMENTS?
One of the core ideas in conflict theory is that people can disagree with 
each other regarding an issue (task conflict) without experiencing neg￾ative emotions toward each other (relationship conflict). The most 
popular book on negotiation makes this point by stating that the par￾ties need to “separate the people from the problem.”c
 It advises that 
the participants need to view themselves as “working side by side, 
attacking the problem, not each other.”
Scholars do recognize that separating task from relationship con￾flict isn’t easy, but they claim it is possible.d
 People with well-developed 
emotional intelligence can control negative emotional reactions (anger, 
frustration, hurt, etc.) and can reframe the conflict as a constructive 
event rather than as a personal attack. Research also suggests that 
relationship conflict is less likely to occur when the parties understand 
each other’s views, such as in high-performing teams. Psychological 
safety norms have also been identified as a way to avoid relationship 
conflict while engaging in task conflict.
The ability to avoid relationship conflict during task conflict sounds 
promising in theory yet, in practice, it may be a bridge too far. Instead, 
some degree of relationship conflict may be inevitable. One of the most 
basic problems is that employees immediately and automatically expe￾rience negative emotions when they become aware that coworkers or 
supervisors disagree with their ideas or behavior.e
 Negative emotions 
aren’t just attributed to information in the opposing message; they are 
also attributed to the source of that message. This occurs because we 
naturally try to make sense of disruptive conditions, and this includes 
forming adverse interpretations about why a coworker has disagreed 
with our proposal or behavior. Consequently, relationship conflict 
seems to form as soon as we become aware that our ideas or actions 
are being challenged.
Relationship conflict may also be unavoidable because it disrupts 
the current or expected pattern of behavior, which produces negative 
emotions toward those who caused that disruption. People have a 
natural desire to maintain the status quo.f
 Even those who propose 
change want to see their ideas flow predictably through to the future 
without opposition. This effect occurs because people want to believe 
they control their situation, whereas disagreement reduces perceived 
control and predictability in the work environment.
Relationship conflict may also be inevitable in any disagreement 
because all communication has both a relational and substantive 
function.g
 This means that when people interact with each other, they 
not only transmit and receive information (substantive), but also reinforce 
or strain the fabric of their relationship. Communication is important for 
one’s relatedness needs, so a message that challenges another view￾point (substantive) also seems to challenge the relationship.
LO 11-3Chapter Eleven Conflict and Negotiation in the Workplace 399
Exhibit 11.2 shows arrows looping back from manifest conflict to conflict perceptions 
and emotions. These arrows illustrate that the conflict process is really a series of epi￾sodes that potentially cycle into conflict escalation.28 It doesn’t take much to start this 
conflict cycle—just an inappropriate comment, a misunderstanding, or an action that 
lacks diplomacy. These behaviors cause the other party to perceive that conflict exists. 
Even if the first party did not intend to demonstrate conflict, the second party’s response 
may create that perception. Conflict escalation is particularly challenging because any 
task conflict focus that existed crumbles and relationship conflict takes over. Further￾more, the parties become less motivated to communicate with each other. With less com￾munication, the parties increasingly rely on stereotypes of the opposing group, which 
amplify differences and feed relationship conflict.
Structural Sources of Conflict in Organizations
The conflict model starts with the sources of conflict, so we need to understand these 
sources to effectively diagnose conflict episodes and subsequently resolve the disagree￾ment or occasionally to generate conflict where it is lacking. The six main conditions that 
cause conflict in organizational settings are incompatible goals, differentiation, interde￾pendence, scarce resources, ambiguous rules, and communication problems.
INCOMPATIBLE GOALS
Organizations divide work among departments and teams, who divide it further among 
individuals. Each division of work has associated goals, so employees and departments 
have different—and often conflicting—work objectives. Goal incompatibility occurs when 
the goals of one person or department seem to interfere with another person’s or depart￾ment’s goals.29 For example, the production department strives for cost-efficiency by 
scheduling long production runs whereas the sales team emphasizes customer service by 
delivering the client’s product as quickly as possible. If the company runs out of a particu￾lar product, the production team would prefer to have clients wait until the next produc￾tion run. This infuriates sales representatives who would rather change production quickly 
to satisfy consumer demand.
EXHIBIT 11.2 Model of the Conflict Process
Positive
• Better decisions
• Responsive firm
• Team cohesion
Negative
• Lower performance
• More stress/turnover
• Less coordination
• More politics
• Less team cohesion
Conflict perceptions
and emotions
• Conflict-handling style
• Decisions
• Overt behaviors
• Incompatible goals
• Dierentiation
• Interdependence
• Scarce resources
• Ambiguous rules
• Poor communication
Conflict
outcomes
Sources of
conflict
Manifest
conflict400 Part Three Team Processes
DIFFERENTIATION
Another source of conflict is differentiation—differences among people and work units 
regarding their beliefs, values, experiences, and preferences. Differentiation is distinct 
from goal incompatibility; two people or departments may agree on a common goal (serv￾ing customers better) but have different beliefs about how to best achieve that goal (such 
as by introducing new technology versus employee customer service training). Employees 
form different beliefs, expectations, and worldviews due to their childhood socialization, 
gender, ethnicity, occupation, personal values, and personality.30 Also, conflict is a per￾ception, so before differences are actually apparent, employees form conflict beliefs from 
stereotypes and false expectations about coworkers from different backgrounds. 
Conflict due to differentiation occurs when two companies merge.31 People in each former 
company have unique experiences and beliefs about the “right way” to do things, which 
produce clashes when they jointly need to make decisions. A variation of this differentiation 
occurs when the organization hires a cluster of people from another company whose back￾grounds and experiences differ from the long-term staff. Employees within the organization 
also have conflicting beliefs and preferences due to regional and national culture diversity.32
For example, a remote team of employees from different countries might experience friction 
regarding the expected amount of debate, authority of the team leader, and so forth. 
Another source of differentiation exists due to generational diversity.33 Employees 
across broad age groups tend to have different needs, expectations, and behaviors for two 
reasons. First, each generation develops a somewhat unique perspective because they ex￾perience unique technological advances (e.g., smartphones versus Sputnik), economic 
conditions, and other “social forces” throughout their life. Second, people have somewhat 
different needs and priorities at each stage of their career and life. In particular, employ￾ees have a greater need for skills development during early career, a greater need for job 
security while raising a family, and a greater need for financial security in retirement to￾ward the end of their career.
INTERDEPENDENCE
All workplace conflict is caused to some extent by interdependence. Conflict isn’t possi￾ble between two people or work units that have no mutual involvement or shared re￾sources (i.e., they are independent entities) because they would not have occasion to 
Considerable differentiation￾based conflict was reported at 
Under Armour (UA) after the 
sports apparel company hired 
several executives from Nike and 
Adidas. These new hires and UA’s 
long-service executives embraced 
different strategies, resulting in 
clashes about which products to 
develop and how many to 
produce. The conflict was 
compounded by the CEO’s 
apparent bias favoring the 
insiders’ views. “[The CEO] was so 
loyal to the guys who were there 
before that when the Nike guys 
came in, suddenly, they were 
insiders and we [Nike executives] 
were outsiders,” complained a 
former Nike executive who left UA 
after two years. “Why recruit 
talented, proven people and then 
not listen to them?”h
Dean Drobot/ShutterstockChapter Eleven Conflict and Negotiation in the Workplace 401
Open Office, Hidden Conflicti
The social distancing requirements of the COVID-19 pan￾demic may have temporarily halted the decade-long 
movement of employees from cubicles and private offices 
into open-plan and nonterritorial workspaces. These com￾munal arrangements were considered high-risk settings 
for spreading disease. But even before COVID-19, con￾cern was growing that open-plan offices were fueling 
workplace conflict, most of which occurs as subtle irrita￾tion and resentment among coworkers.
Shared work space arrangements create higher inter￾dependence among employees regarding the noise, visual 
movement, territorial privacy, and information privacy of 
that space. For example, 79 percent of 60,000 Canadian 
federal government scientists and associated profession￾als recently surveyed said they had difficulty focusing and 
concentrating on their work and 62 percent believed their 
productivity and efficiency got worse after moving to open 
offices. This situation produces interpersonal conflict.
“Our open office has absolutely crippled my productiv￾ity,” concludes a marketing professional in Idaho after 
three years in an open-office arrangement. “I can’t hear 
myself think, I’m starting to feel bitter toward my cowork￾ers, and my anxiety has shot through the roof.” Employees 
at another company reported increased conflict when the 
company squeezed more desks into the open space. 
“When we sat closer together, suddenly minor things be￾came major irritants,” observes one occupant. “That was 
before the disagreements over blinds open or closed, 
windows opened or closed.”
Conflict seems to be even more intense in nonterritorial 
offices (where no one has an assigned desk) because they 
create ongoing competition over prized locations, such as 
desks in quieter areas, close to windows, and near strong 
Wi-Fi. “Each morning in my office is like a grown-up game 
of musical chairs, with six or so people competing for the 
last remaining hot desk,” complains a British accountant. 
“Lost productivity spent hunting for somewhere to sit is 
the least of our concerns. Barely concealed resentment 
comes to the fore on regular occasions.”
global connections 11.1
Monkey Business Images/Shutterstock
interfere with one another. Task interdependence exists when employees must share 
resources or coordinate work activities to perform their jobs (see Chapter 8). Conflict is 
inherently about relationships because people and work units are affected by others only 
when they have some degree of interdependence.
The probability and intensity of conflict increase with the level of interdependence.34
Conflict is usually lowest when working with others in a pooled interdependence relation￾ship, such as when sharing a common resource. The potential for conflict is higher in se￾quential interdependence work relationships, such as an assembly line. The highest risk and 
intensity of conflict tends to occur in reciprocal interdependence situations because employ￾ees in these situations quickly and significantly affect each other (i.e., high centrality).
SCARCE RESOURCES
Resource scarcity generates conflict because each person or department requiring the 
same resource necessarily interferes with others who also need that resource to fulfill 
their goals.35 Budget deliberations within organizations produce conflict because there 
isn’t enough cash flow or debt facility to satisfy the funding aspirations of each work 
unit. Conflict is particularly common in competitive cultures where several people vie 
for budgets, promotions, and other scarce resources. Until recently, Uber’s culture was 
so competitive that the company suffered from continuous internal battles and politics. 
“It seemed like every manager was fighting their peers and attempting to undermine 
their direct supervisor so that they could have their direct supervisor’s job,” complained 
a former Uber engineer.36402 Part Three Team Processes
AMBIGUOUS RULES
Conflict breeds in work settings where rules are ambiguous, inconsistently enforced, or 
completely missing. This occurs because uncertainty increases the risk that one party will 
interfere with the other party’s goals. Ambiguity also encourages political tactics and, in 
some cases, employees enter a free-for-all battle to win decisions in their favor. This explains 
why conflict is more common during mergers and acquisitions. Employees from both com￾panies have conflicting practices and values, and few rules have developed to minimize the 
maneuvering for power and resources.37 When clear rules exist, on the other hand, employ￾ees know what to expect from one another and usually agree to abide by those rules.
COMMUNICATION PROBLEMS
Conflict often becomes dysfunctional when employees lack the ability or motivation to 
state their disagreement in a diplomatic, nonconfrontational manner. It is difficult to craft 
a message that communicates dissent with neither too little nor too much assertiveness.38
Influenced by their own strong feelings about an issue, employees tend to use emotion￾laden language and aggressive nonverbal behavior when transmitting their concerns. The 
stronger the emotive language and other signals, the stronger the perception by receivers 
that the conflict not only exists, but is a high risk threat. Receivers often reciprocate with 
a similar response, which further escalates the conflict. Aggressive and emotive commu￾nication fuels relationship conflict, which makes it more difficult for the discussants to 
maintain a task conflict focus.
Poorly crafted communication is a source of conflict, but a lack of communication 
often amplifies that conflict. Occasionally, lack of communication exists because employ￾ees don’t have the opportunity to discuss their differences. More often, the quarrel makes 
the relationship so uncomfortable that the parties actively avoid each other. Unfortu￾nately, less communication can further escalate the conflict because each side increas￾ingly relies on distorted images and stereotypes of the other party. Perceptions are further 
distorted because people in conflict situations tend to perceive more differentiation with 
those who are unlike themselves (see Chapter 3). This differentiation creates a more posi￾tive and reassuring self-concept and a more negative image of the opponent.39
Interpersonal Conflict-Handling Styles
The six sources of conflict described in the previous section lead to conflict perceptions 
and emotions which, in turn, motivate people to respond in some way to the conflict. 
Mary Parker Follett (who argued that conflict can be beneficial) observed almost a cen￾tury ago that people use a variety of interpersonal conflict-handling styles to address 
conflict situations. Follett’s original list was expanded and refined over the years into the 
five-category model shown in Exhibit 11.3. This model recognizes that how people re￾spond behaviorally to a conflict situation depends on the relative importance they place 
on maximizing outcomes for themselves and for the other party.40
• Problem solving. Problem solving tries to find a solution that is beneficial for both 
parties. This is known as the win–win orientation because people using this style 
believe the resources at stake are expandable rather than fixed if the parties work
together to find a creative solution. Information shar￾ing is an important feature of this style because both 
parties collaborate to identify common ground and 
potential solutions that satisfy everyone involved.
• Forcing. Forcing tries to win the conflict at the other’s 
expense. People who use this style typically have a 
win–lose orientation—they believe the parties are
LO 11-4
win–win orientation
the belief that conflicting 
parties will find a mutually 
beneficial solution to their 
disagreement
win–lose orientation
the belief that conflicting parties 
are drawing from a fixed pie, so 
the more one party receives, the 
less the other party will receiveChapter Eleven Conflict and Negotiation in the Workplace 403
drawing from a fixed pie, so the more one party receives, the less the other party 
will receive. Consequently, this style relies on “hard” influence tactics (see Chap￾ter 10) to get one’s own way. However, forcing is not necessarily aggressiveness or 
bullying. It also includes more moderate degrees of assertiveness, such as speaking 
up and showing conviction for your idea or request.41
• Avoiding. Avoiding tries to smooth over or evade conflict situations altogether. A 
common avoidance strategy is to steer clear of the coworkers associated with the 
conflict. Another action is to minimize discussion of the sensitive topic when in￾teracting with the other person. Although it is situated in the “low–low” sector of 
the model, avoidance does not necessarily mean that people always have a low 
concern for both one’s own and the other party’s interests. Instead, they might be 
very concerned about one or both party’s interests but conclude that avoidance is 
the best strategy, at least for the short term.42
• Yielding. Yielding involves giving in completely to the other side’s wishes, or at 
least cooperating with little or no attention to your own interests. This style in￾volves making unilateral concessions and unconditional promises, as well as offer￾ing help with no expectation of reciprocal help.
• Compromising. Compromising involves actively seeking a middle ground between 
the interests of the two parties. This occurs by calculating losses from concessions 
with equally valued gains, or at least trying to achieve similar levels of how much 
value each party sacrifices to reach agreement.
Forcing Problem solving
Avoiding
Compromising
Yielding
High
High
Low
Assertiveness
(motivation to
satisfy one’s
own interests)
Low
Cooperativeness
(motivation to satisfy
other party’s interests)
EXHIBIT 11.3
Interpersonal Conflict-Handling 
Styles
Source: C.K.W. de Dreu, A. Evers, 
B. Beersma, E.S. Kluwer, and 
A. Nauta, “A Theory-Based Measure 
of Conflict Management Strategies in 
the Workplace,” Journal of Organiza￾tional Behavior 22 (2001): 645–68. 
Reprinted with permission of John 
Wiley & Sons, Inc.
®
SELF-ASSESSMENT 11.1: What Is Your Preferred Conflict-Handling Style?404 Part Three Team Processes
CHOOSING THE BEST CONFLICT-HANDLING STYLE
Chances are that you gravitate toward one or two conflict-handling styles that match your 
personality, personal and cultural values, and past experience.43 You might typically use 
avoiding or yielding because disagreement makes you feel uncomfortable and is contrary 
to your self-view as someone who likes to get along with everyone. Or perhaps you prefer 
the forcing and compromising strategies because they reflect your strong need for achieve￾ment and to control the situation. However, the best style depends on the situation, so you 
need to understand and develop the capacity to use each style in the appropriate 
circumstances.44
Exhibit 11.4 summarizes the main contingencies and problems associated with using 
each conflict-handling style. Problem solving is the preferred conflict-handling style 
whenever possible. Why? Because this approach offers the best chance for the conflicting 
parties to reach a solution that is closest to their needs and goals. Through dialogue and 
clever thinking, the parties discover a win–win solution. In addition, the problem-solving 
style tends to improve long-term relationships, reduce stress, and minimize emotional de￾fensiveness and other indications of relationship conflict.45
The problem-solving style is not the best conflict-handling style in all situations, how￾ever. If the conflict is simple and perfectly opposing (each party wants more of a single 
fixed pie), then this approach will waste time and increase frustration. It also takes more 
time and requires a fairly high degree of trust because there is a risk that the other party 
will take advantage of the information you have openly shared. The problem-solving style 
can be stressful and difficult when people experience strong feelings of conflict, likely 
because these negative emotions undermine trust in the other party.46
The forcing style is usually inappropriate because a high level of assertiveness tends to 
generate relationship conflict more quickly or intensely than occurs with other 
CONFLICT￾HANDLING STYLE PREFERRED STYLE WHEN … PROBLEMS WITH THIS STYLE
Problem solving • Interests are not perfectly opposing (i.e., not pure
win–lose) 
• Parties have trust, openness, and time to share information 
• Issues are complex
• Sharing information that the other party might 
use to its advantage
Forcing • Dispute requires a quick solution
• Your position objectively has a much stronger logical or 
moral foundation
• Other party would take advantage of more cooperative 
strategies
• Highest risk of relationship conflict
• May damage long-term relations, reducing future 
problem solving
Avoiding • Conflict has become too emotionally charged
• Parties want to maintain harmony in relationship
• Cost of trying to resolve the conflict outweighs the 
benefits
• Doesn’t usually resolve the conflict
• May increase uncertainty and frustration
Yielding • Issue is much less important to you than to the other party
• The value and logic of your position isn’t as clear
• Parties want to maintain harmony in relationship
• Other party has substantially more power
• Increases other party’s expectations in future 
conflict episodes
Compromising • Single issue conflict with opposing interests
• Parties lack time or trust for problem solving
• Parties want to maintain harmony in relationship
• Parties have equal power
• Suboptimal solution where mutual gains 
are possible
EXHIBIT 11.4 Conflict-Handling Style Contingencies and ProblemsChapter Eleven Conflict and Negotiation in the Workplace 405
conflict-handling styles. This adverse effect of forcing is conveyed in the old adage: “The 
more arguments you win, the fewer friends you will have.”47 Even so, a moderate degree of 
assertiveness may be appropriate where the dispute requires a quick solution or your ideas 
have a significantly and objectively stronger logical or moral foundation. This conflict￾handling style may also be preferred when the other party would take advantage of a more 
cooperative conflict-handling style.
Avoiding is often ineffective as a conflict-handling style because it produces uncer￾tainty and frustration rather than resolution of the conflict.48 However, avoiding may be 
the best short-term strategy when the conflict has become emotionally charged or is so 
intractable that resolution would be excessively costly in terms of time, effort, and other 
resources. Avoidance is also one of the preferred cooperative styles in cultures where 
openly resolving the conflict is a lower priority than maintaining superficial harmony in 
the relationship (superficial because the disagreement still exists under the surface).
The yielding style may be appropriate when the other party has substantially more 
power, the issue is not as important to you as to the other party, and you aren’t confident 
that your position has superior logical or ethical justification.49 On the other hand, yield￾ing behaviors may give the other side unrealistically high expectations, thereby motivating 
them to seek more from you in the future. In the long run, yielding may produce more 
conflict, not less. 
The compromising style may be best where the conflict is simple and perfectly oppos￾ing (each party wants more of a single fixed pie). Even if the conflict is sufficiently com￾plex for potential mutual gains, compromising may be necessary when the parties lack 
time, trust, and openness to apply the problem-solving style. The compromising style is 
also popular where the parties prioritize harmony in their relationship over personal gains 
in the dispute.50 Compromise also tends to occur where both parties have approximately 
equal power, which prevents one party from gaining advantage over the other. However, 
many conflicts have the potential for mutual gains, whereas the compromise style settles 
for a suboptimal solution. Research also suggests that employees experience negative emo￾tions (depression, frustration, etc.) under some conditions after they settle for a compro￾mise agreement.
STEERING CLEAR OF WORKPLACE CONFLICTJ
(photo): Alhovik/Shutterstock
37% of 616 American managers surveyed say
they are uncomfortable giving direct performance
feedback/criticism to their employees to which they
might respond badly.
36% of 500 American
employees surveyed say the 2020
U.S. presidential election topic has
led them to avoid talking to or
working with a coworker because
of his or her political views.
35% of 701 UK employees
who experienced serious conflict
over the past year say the most
common negative behavior
resulting from that conflict was
the refusal to work together or
cooperate with each other.
10% of 1,027 employed workers
say they most often dealt with coworker
conflict by avoiding that coworker
completely.406 Part Three Team Processes
CULTURAL AND MALE-FEMALE DIFFERENCES IN 
CONFLICT-HANDLING STYLES
The preferred conflict handling style varies from one culture to another.51 For example, 
people from high collectivist cultures—where people are expected to support and show 
allegiance to the group—are motivated to maintain harmonious relations and, conse￾quently, are more likely than those from less collectivist cultures to manage disagreements 
through avoidance or problem solving. However, collectivism motivates harmony within
the group, not necessarily with people outside the group.52 Generally, cultural values and 
norms represent an important contingency when choosing the preferred conflict-handling 
approach in that culture.
Males and females rely on different conflict-handling styles to some degree.53 The 
clearest difference is that males are more likely than females to use the forcing style, 
whether as managers or nonmanagement employees. Also, females (whether as managers 
or employees) are more likely than male counterparts to use the avoiding style. Females 
are also slightly more likely than males to use problem solving, compromising, and yield￾ing. Overall, except for the male preference for forcing, differences in conflict-handling 
styles are relatively small, but they have a logical foundation. Compared to males, females 
pay more attention to the relationship between the parties, so their preferred style tries to 
protect the relationship. This is apparent in less forcing, more avoiding, and slightly more 
use of compromising and yielding.
Structural Approaches to Conflict Management
Conflict-handling styles describe how we approach the other party in a conflict situation. 
But conflict management also involves altering the underlying structural causes of potential 
conflict. The main structural approaches parallel the sources of conflict discussed earlier. 
Six structural approaches to minimize dysfunctional conflict are: emphasize superordi￾nate goals, reduce differentiation, improve communication and understanding, reduce 
task interdependence, increase resources, and clarify rules and procedures.
EMPHASIZE SUPERORDINATE GOALS
One of the oldest recommendations for resolving conflict is to increase the parties’ com￾mitment to superordinate goals and decrease the importance of the conflicting subordi￾nate goals.54 Superordinate goals are goals that the conflicting employees or departments 
value and whose attainment requires the joint resources and effort of those parties.55
These goals are called superordinate because they are higher-order aspirations such as 
the organization’s strategic objectives rather than work unit operational goals or indi￾vidual key performance objectives. Research indicates that the most effective executive 
teams frame their decisions as superordinate goals that rise above each executive’s de￾partmental or divisional goals. Similarly, effective leaders reduce dysfunctional organiza￾tional conflict through an inspirational vision that unifies employees and makes them 
less preoccupied with their subordinate goal differences.56
Suppose that marketing staff want a new product released quickly, whereas engi￾neers want more time to test and add new features. Leaders can potentially reduce this 
interdepartmental conflict by reminding both groups of the company’s mission to 
serve customers or by pointing out that competitors currently threaten sales of the 
company’s existing products. By increasing commitment to companywide goals (cus￾tomer focus, competitiveness), engineering and marketing employees pay less atten￾tion to their competing departmental-level goals, which reduces their perceived 
conflict with each other.57
superordinate goals
goals that the conflicting 
parties value and whose 
attainment requires the joint 
resources and effort of those 
parties
LO 11-5Chapter Eleven Conflict and Negotiation in the Workplace 407
REDUCE DIFFERENTIATION
Earlier in this chapter we explained that one of the main sources of workplace conflict is 
differentiation—differences among people regarding their training, values, beliefs, and ex￾periences. Therefore, reducing differentiation is a logical approach to reducing dysfunc￾tional conflict. As employees develop and recognize more similarities than differences 
with coworkers in other departments, they increase their trust in them and are more will￾ing to coordinate activities and resolve their disputes through constructive discussion.58
Organizations can reduce differentiation among individuals or work units in several 
ways.59 One strategy is for employees to have meaningful interaction with people in other 
groups, such as through participation in multidisciplinary projects.60 A second strategy is to 
rotate staff to different departments or regions throughout their career. These work-related 
interactions create common experiences among coworkers across the organization and con￾sequently increase employee identification with the organization rather than just with a spe￾cific department, occupation, or regional division. A third strategy is for leaders to build and 
maintain a strong organizational culture. In strong cultures, employees have shared values 
and assumptions as well as a stronger sense of community in a company (see Chapter 14). 
Consequently, they identify more with the overall organization than with subunits.
IMPROVE COMMUNICATION AND MUTUAL UNDERSTANDING
A third way to reduce dysfunctional conflict is to give the conflicting parties more oppor￾tunities to communicate and understand each other.61 These activities don’t necessarily 
reduce differentiation (employees still have divergent beliefs and experiences), but the 
Improving Mutual Understanding 
through Lunch Roulettesk
WeWork, the shared workspace company, expanded into 
Israel and within two years its Tel-Aviv technology group 
employed more than 100 people. As the numbers grew, 
newcomers increasingly had trouble blending in, informal 
subgroups were springing up, and some team members 
had never spoken to one another. The situation could 
eventually lead to dysfunctional squabbles among em￾ployees and their cliques.
“For those that were part of the early team and expe￾rienced the close, family-like, relationships of a small 
group, something started to feel ‘off’,” recalls one soft￾ware engineer. He and a few other early hires began ca￾sually thinking of ways to minimize dysfunctional conflict 
by improving connectedness among staff in their large 
Tel-Aviv technology group. When someone described 
“lunch roulette,” the group sprang into action.
Lunch roulettes at WeWork’s Tel-Aviv technology group 
are held every second week. Any employee in that work 
unit can participate (on average, about half of them do). 
Those who sign up are organized randomly—like a roulette 
wheel—into lunch groups of three people. To encourage 
conversation within each trio, the technology group devel￾oped an app in which attendees register for the event and 
(optionally) briefly state their hobbies and a “talk to me 
about” category. The app organizes participants a couple 
of hours before the event and creates a private digital 
space so each luncheon trio can coordinate where to eat 
and what to order. After several of these events, a survey 
reported a 66 percent increase in how close employees in 
the Tel-Aviv technology unit felt to one another.
“Lunch is a great time to talk and get to know one an￾other,” says the software engineer who spearheaded this 
initiative. “Although our team is already medium-sized and 
in hyper-growth, the lunch roulette helps keeping that 
‘small team’ feeling. Not only does this affect our team’s 
happiness, it also improves our collaboration and ap￾proachability, and therefore, our efficiency.”
global connections 11.2
wavebreakmedia/Shutterstock408 Part Three Team Processes
interaction and discussion may create better awareness of and respect for one another’s 
situation and point of view. 
This conflict-management strategy can be applied by simply changing physical or re￾porting arrangements so employees across departments have more occasions to interact 
with one another. When Telenor, the Norwegian telecommunications company, replaced 
departmental coffee machines with a few large coffee stations, employees who didn’t 
know one another started mingling together around these common areas. Balentine, the 
employee-owned financial services firm in Atlanta and Raleigh, is one of many organiza￾tions that holds regular “lunch and learn” sessions. At Balentine, staff learn new knowl￾edge from coworkers (financial planning practices, new software, etc.), but the sessions 
also improve collaboration and rapport across work units.62
Some companies improve mutual understanding through a variation of the Johari 
window model (see Chapter 3). In seminars with a trained facilitator, individuals 
disclose to coworkers information about themselves and their self-perceptions as well 
as feedback to others about how they are perceived.63 Where conflicts have escalated, 
some embattled groups have participated in a deeper version of this process, called 
intergroup mirroring.64 Led by an external consultant, the conflicting groups sepa￾rately document their perceptions of (1) how the group perceives itself, (2) how it 
perceives the other group, and (3) how the group believes it is perceived by the other 
group. The “mirroring” stage follows, whereby each group discusses its three sets of 
perceptions with the other group. The two sides use this shared information to review 
their relationship problems and establish joint goals and action plans to improve their 
relationship.
Although communication and mutual understanding can reduce dysfunctional con￾flict, there are two important warnings. First, these interventions should be applied only 
for groups or individuals with moderate or low differentiation. If the parties have over￾whelming differences, they tend to focus on information during the interaction that rein￾forces that view.65 Consequently, dialogue could escalate rather than reduce relationship 
conflict. The second warning is that people in some cultures are less comfortable with the 
practice of resolving differences through direct and open dialogue.66 This approach threat￾ens harmony and risks loss of face, whereas people in collectivist and high power distance 
cultures, for example, prefer avoidance, yielding, and compromising to minimize the risk 
of any manifest conflict.
REDUCE INTERDEPENDENCE
Conflict occurs where people are dependent on one another, so another way to reduce 
dysfunctional conflict is to minimize the level of interdependence among the parties. 
Three ways to reduce interdependence among employees and work units are to create buf￾fers, use integrators, and combine jobs.
• Create buffers. A buffer is any mechanism that loosens the coupling between two or 
more people or work units. This decoupling reduces the potential for conflict be￾cause the buffer reduces the effect of one party on the other. Building up in-process 
inventory between assembly line workers is a buffer, for example, because each em￾ployee is less dependent in the short term on the previous person along that line.67
• Use integrators. Integrators are employees who coordinate the activities of multiple 
work units toward the completion of a shared task or project.68 Brand managers, 
for instance, are responsible for coordinating the efforts of the research, produc￾tion, advertising, and marketing departments regarding a specific product line. In￾tegrators typically reduce the amount of direct interaction required among these 
diverse work units. Integrators rarely have direct authority over the departments 
they integrate, so they must rely on referent power and persuasion to manage con￾flict and accomplish the work.Chapter Eleven Conflict and Negotiation in the Workplace 409
• Combine jobs. Combining jobs is both a form of job enrichment and a way to re￾duce task interdependence. Consider a toaster assembly system where one person 
inserts the heating element, another adds the sides, and so on. By combining these 
tasks so that each person assembles an entire toaster, the employees now have a 
pooled rather than sequential form of task interdependence and the likelihood of 
dysfunctional conflict is reduced.
INCREASE RESOURCES
Resource scarcity is a source of conflict, so increasing the amount of resources available 
would have the opposite effect.69 This might not be a feasible strategy for minimizing 
dysfunctional conflict due to the costs involved. However, these costs need to be com￾pared against the costs of dysfunctional conflict due to the resource scarcity.
CLARIFY RULES AND PROCEDURES
Conflicts that arise from ambiguous rules can be minimized by establishing clear rules 
and procedures. If two scientific teams are fighting over the use of an expensive piece of 
laboratory equipment, a schedule might be established that allocates the equipment exclu￾sively to each team at certain times or days.
Third-Party Conflict Resolution
Most of this chapter has focused on people directly involved in a conflict, yet many work￾place disputes are resolved with the assistance of a manager, coworker, or other person 
outside the dispute. Third-party conflict resolution is any attempt by a relatively neutral person 
to help the parties resolve their differences.70 There are three main third-party dispute resolu￾tion activities: arbitration, inquisition, and mediation. These interventions can be classified 
by their level of control over the process and control over the decision (see Exhibit 11.5).71
• Arbitration—Arbitrators have high control over the final decision, but low control over 
the process. This is the “adversarial” model used in North American legal proceed￾ings, in which the judge has decision control and the lawyers representing the oppo￾nents have process control. In organizations, managers engage in this strategy by 
following previously agreed-upon rules of due process, listening to arguments from the 
disputing employees, and making a binding decision. Arbitration is applied as the 
third-party conflict resolution
any attempt by a relatively 
neutral person to help 
conflicting parties resolve their 
differences
Level of
process
control
Low
Low
Level of decision control
High
High
Mediation
Arbitration
Inquisition
EXHIBIT 11.5
Types of Third-Party Intervention410 Part Three Team Processes
final stage of grievances by unionized employees in many countries, but it is also ap￾plied to nonunion conflicts in organizations with formal conflict resolution processes.
• Mediation—Mediators have high control over the intervention process, but low con￾trol over the decision. Their main function is to help the disputing parties progress 
toward conflict resolution by coaching their interaction and providing a supportive 
context. The conflicting parties alone make the final decision about how to resolve 
their differences.72
• Inquisition—The inquisition approach gives the third-party high control over both 
the process and decision. Like arbitrators, inquisitors have high decision control 
because they determine how to resolve the conflict. Like mediators, inquisitors 
also have high process control because they choose which information to examine 
and how to examine it, and they generally decide how the conflict resolution pro￾cess will be handled. Many judicial systems in Europe apply forms of inquisitional 
justice. Meanwhile, some North American experts recommend the inquisitional 
rather than the adversarial approach for some legal conflicts.73
CHOOSING THE BEST THIRD-PARTY INTERVENTION STRATEGY
Team leaders, executives, and coworkers regularly intervene in workplace disputes. Some￾times they mediate; at other times they serve as arbitrators. Occasionally, they begin with 
one approach then switch to another. However, research suggests that managers usually 
adopt an inquisitional approach whereby they dominate the intervention process as well 
Freaky Friday Third-Party Conflict 
Resolutionl
Ben Horowitz had to intervene in a major ongoing battle 
between the customer support and sales engineering di￾visions of the software technology organization he co￾founded. The sales engineers complained that customer 
support lacked urgency, refused to fix product flaws, and 
undermined sales and customer satisfaction. The cus￾tomer support staff were frustrated that the sales engi￾neers didn’t provide enough detail when submitting 
software problems, ignored suggested solutions, and 
were problem pyromaniacs who viewed every issue as a 
top priority.
In third-party conflict resolution, managers often de￾fault to the inquisition approach. They control the process 
by deciding what questions to ask, and then act as arbi￾trators by imposing a solution to end the conflict. In con￾trast, Ben Horowitz wanted the customer support and 
sales engineering division leaders to resolve their differ￾ences on their own. However, he also recognized that the 
two combative division leaders needed an intervention to 
help them along their journey to agreement.
Coincidentally, Horowitz watched the comedy film 
Freaky Friday, in which a feuding mother and daughter 
mysteriously switch bodies one morning and throughout 
the day develop a better understanding and acceptance 
of each other’s perspective of reality. There was an earlier 
version of the film, so Horowitz viewed it as well. These 
films gave him the inspiration he needed. 
“The very next day I informed the head of Sales Engi￾neering and the head of Customer Support that they would 
be switching jobs,” Horowitz says. He told the shocked ex￾ecutives that, unlike the temporary body switch in the 
Freaky Friday movies, their job switch was permanent.
Horowitz’s third-party conflict approach and Freaky 
Friday intervention worked. “After just one week walking 
in the other’s moccasins, both executives quickly diag￾nosed the core issues causing the conflict,” says Horowitz 
“They then swiftly acted to implement a simple set of pro￾cesses that cleared up the combat and got the teams 
working harmoniously.”
global connections 11.3
pathdoc/ShutterstockChapter Eleven Conflict and Negotiation in the Workplace 411
as make a binding decision.74 They prefer the inquisition approach because it gives them 
control over the situation and tends to resolve disputes efficiently. This approach is also 
consistent with the traditional decision-oriented nature of managerial jobs.
Unfortunately, inquisition is usually the least effective third-party conflict resolution 
method in organizational settings.75 One problem is that leaders who take an inquisitional 
role tend to collect limited information about the problem, so their imposed decision may 
produce an ineffective solution to the conflict. Another issue is that employees often view 
inquisitional procedures and outcomes as unfair because they have little control over this 
approach. In particular, the inquisitional approach potentially violates several practices 
required to support procedural justice (see Chapter 5).
Which third-party intervention is most appropriate in organizations? The answer partly 
depends on the situation, such as the type of dispute, the relationship between the man￾ager and employees, and cultural values such as power distance.76 Also, any third-party 
approach has more favorable results when it applies the procedural and interactional jus￾tice rules described in Chapter 5.77 Generally, for everyday disagreements between two 
employees, the mediation approach is usually best because this gives workers more re￾sponsibility for resolving their own disputes. The third-party representative merely estab￾lishes an appropriate context for conflict resolution. Although not as efficient as other 
strategies, mediation potentially offers the highest level of employee satisfaction with the 
conflict process and outcomes.78 When employees cannot resolve their differences 
through mediation, arbitration seems to work best because the predetermined rules of evi￾dence and other processes create a higher sense of procedural justice.79 Arbitration is also 
preferred where the organization’s goals should take priority over individual goals.
Resolving Conflict through Negotiation
Think back through yesterday’s events. Maybe you had to reach consensus with other 
students about what tasks to complete for a team project. Chances are that you shared 
transportation with someone, so you had to agree on the timing of the ride. Then perhaps 
there was the question of who made dinner. Each of these daily events created potential 
conflict and, most likely, they were resolved through negotiation.
Negotiation occurs when interdependent parties with divergent beliefs or goals attempt 
to reach agreement on issues that mutually affect them. In other words, people negotiate 
when they need to work together (mutual dependence), need to reach a consensus on 
decisions that affect them, and initially don’t have identical preferences regarding those 
decisions.80 This definition highlights the fact that negotiation skills are vital in organiza￾tions and everyday life because they help us achieve our goals, reduce conflict, and build 
collaborative relationships. In this section, we identify many of the strategies and condi￾tions that effective negotiators consider in organizations and other settings.
DISTRIBUTIVE VERSUS INTEGRATIVE 
APPROACHES TO NEGOTIATION
Earlier in this chapter, we noted that some conflict-handling styles adopt a win–lose 
orientation—the view that one party necessarily loses when the other party gains. In 
negotiations, this is called the distributive approach because the negotiator believes those 
involved in the conflict must distribute portions from a fixed pie. The opposing view is a 
win–win orientation, known as the integrative or mutual gains approach to negotiations. 
This approach exists when negotiators believe the resources at stake are expandable rather 
than fixed if the parties work creatively together to find a solution.
When do negotiators adopt a distributive or integrative approach to negotiations? The 
actual situation is a key factor. Distributive negotiation is most common when the parties 
have only one item to resolve, such as product price or starting salary. Integrative negotiation 
negotiation
the process in which 
interdependent parties with 
divergent beliefs or goals 
attempt to reach agreement 
on issues that mutually affect 
them
LO 11-6412 Part Three Team Processes
is more common when multiple issues are open for discussion. Multiple issues provide 
greater opportunity for mutual gains because each issue or element in the negotiation has 
different value to each party. 
Consider the example of a buyer who wants to pay a low price for several dozen manu￾factured items from a seller, doesn’t need the entire order at once, but does need the pay￾ment schedule spread over time due to limited cash flow. The seller would like the buyer 
to pay a high price, but also values steady production to minimize overtime and layoffs. 
Through negotiation, the parties learn that spreading out the delivery schedule benefits 
both of them, and that the buyer would agree to a higher price if payments could be 
spread out with the delivery schedule.
Negotiators usually begin with a cautiously integrative approach to negotiations, but 
they switch to a distributive approach when they realize that their interests are perfectly 
opposing. Another factor is the individual’s personality and past experience. Some people 
have a natural tendency to be competitive and think more distributively, whereas others 
more frequently believe that conflicts can be resolved with a mutual gains solution.
PREPARING TO NEGOTIATE
Preparation is essential for successful negotiations.81 You can’t resolve disagreements un￾less you know what you want, why you want it, and what power you have to get it. You also 
need to anticipate the other party for each of these factors.
Develop Goals and Understand Needs Successful negotiators develop goals
about what they want to achieve from the exchange. Equally important, they reflect on 
what needs they are trying to fulfill from those goals. The distinction between goals and 
needs is important because specific needs can be satisfied by different goals. For example, 
an employee might negotiate for a promotion (a goal), but what the employee really wants 
is more status and interesting work (underlying needs). Effective negotiators try to under￾stand their own needs and avoid becoming locked into fixed goals. Focusing on needs 
enables negotiators to actively consider different proposals and opportunities, some of 
which could fulfill their needs better than their original negotiation goals. Preparation 
also includes anticipating the other party’s goals and their underlying needs, based on 
available information before negotiation sessions begin.
Negotiators engage in a form of goal setting that identifies the three key positions 
shown in the bargaining zone model (see Exhibit 11.6).82 The initial offer point—each par￾ty’s opening offer to the other side—requires careful consideration because it can influ￾ence the negotiation outcome. If the initial offer is set higher than the other party 
expected, it can anchor the negotiation at a higher point along the range by reframing the 
other party’s perception of what is considered a “high” or “low” settlement (see anchor￾ing and adjustment heuristic in Chapter 7).83 In other words, a high initial offer point can 
potentially keep the outcome closer to your target point; it may even cause the other side 
to lower its resistance point.
Suppose that a prospective employer thinks you would ask no more than $60,000 for 
an annual salary, but your initial request is for $72,000. This request may change the em￾ployer’s perception of a high salary to the extent that, after some negotiation activity, the 
company is comfortable with the final agreement of $65,000. The challenge is to avoid an 
initial offer that is set so high that the other party breaks off negotiations or damages trust 
that cannot be rebuilt.
The target point is your realistic goal or expectation for a final agreement. This position 
must consider alternative strategies to achieve those objectives as well as test underlying 
assumptions about the situation.84 Negotiators who set high, specific target points usually 
obtain better outcomes than those with low or vague target points. In this respect, a target 
point needs to possess the same characteristics as effective goal setting (see Chapter 5). Chapter Eleven Conflict and Negotiation in the Workplace 413
Unfortunately, perceptual distortions cause inexperienced negotiators to form overly opti￾mistic expectations, which can only be averted through careful reflection of the facts.85
Know Your BATNA and Power The resistance point in the bargaining zone 
model is the point beyond which you will make no further concessions and, instead, 
walk away from the negotiations. How do you determine the resistance point? The an￾swer requires thoughtful comparison of how your goals and needs might be achieved 
through some other means. This comparison is called the best alternative to a negotiated 
agreement (BATNA).86 BATNA estimates your power in the negotiation because it rep￾resents the estimated cost to you of walking away from the relationship. If people out￾side the current negotiation are willing to negotiate with you and provide a reasonable 
agreement, then you have a high BATNA because it would cost you very little to walk 
away from the current negotiation.
Having more than one BATNA to a negotiation increases your power. A common 
problem, however, is that people tend to overestimate their BATNA.87 They wrongly be￾lieve there are plenty of other ways to achieve their objective rather than through this 
specific negotiation. Wise advice here is to actively investigate multiple alternatives, not 
just assume they exist. For instance, if you are searching for a new job, make specific in￾quiries at a few organizations. This may give you a more realistic idea of your BATNA, in 
particular, how much your talents are in demand and what employers are willing to offer 
for those talents.
Your power in the negotiation depends on the sources and contingencies of power 
discussed in Chapter 10. For example, you have more power to negotiate a better starting 
salary and job conditions if you have valued skills and experience that few other people 
possess (high expertise with low substitutability), the employer knows that you possess 
these talents (high visibility), and the company will experience costs or lost opportunities 
fairly quickly if this position is not filled soon (high centrality). Not surprisingly, BATNA 
tends to be higher for those with favorable sources and contingencies of power, because 
they would be in demand in the marketplace.
best alternative to a negotiated 
settlement (BATNA)
the best outcome you might 
achieve through some other 
course of action if you 
abandon the current 
negotiation
Your
initial
point
Your
target
point
Your
resistance
point
Opponent’s
resistance
point
Area of
potential
agreement
Opponent’s
target
point
Opponent’s
initial
oer
point
EXHIBIT 11.6 Bargaining Zone Model of Negotiations414 Part Three Team Processes
THE NEGOTIATION PROCESS
The negotiation process is a complex human interaction that draws on many topics in this 
book, including perceptions, attitudes, motivation, decision making, and communication. 
The most important specific negotiation practices are to gather information, manage con￾cessions, manage time, and build the relationship.
Gather Information Information is the cornerstone of effective negotiations.88 It 
helps you to discover the other party’s needs hidden behind their stated offers and nego￾tiation goals. Some types of information reveal the other party’s resistance point. Infor￾mation can also potentially transform distributive negotiations into integrative 
negotiations by discovering multiple dimensions that weren’t previously considered. For 
example, a simple negotiation over salary may reveal that the employee would prefer more 
performance-based pay and less fixed salary. Thus, mutual gains may be possible because 
there is now more than one variable to negotiate. Information is even more important in 
integrative negotiations, because the parties require knowledge of each other’s needs to 
discover solutions that maximize benefits for both sides.
Information sharing is essential in all negotiations, but it also comes with risks. The 
information you offer gives the other party more power to leverage a better deal if the op￾portunity occurs.89 Skilled negotiators address this dilemma by adopting a cautious problem￾solving style at the outset. They begin by sharing information slowly and determining 
whether the other side will reciprocate. In this way, they try to establish trust with the 
other party.
Know Your BATNA in Pay Increase 
Negotiationsm
Christie Lindor thought she was offered decent pay for an 
entry-level job at a management consulting firm early in 
her career. Then she discovered that a male coworker in a 
similar position with less experience was paid 25 percent 
more. Lindor, who is Black, spoke to her boss and, after 
several months, negotiated an increase that was closer to 
the coworker’s rate.
One of the most important tasks when trying to negoti￾ate a pay increase is to develop fact-based, detailed 
knowledge about your BATNA. This starts with careful 
analysis of your value in the market. “Never walk into a 
salary negotiation meeting before you’ve fully understood 
the market rate for your position,” advises Lindor, who is 
founder and CEO of a Boston consulting firm specializing 
in inclusive workplace practices. 
Knowing your BATNA includes researching salary in￾formation on career websites, looking carefully at salary 
offers in the company’s own job postings, and getting 
salary information from peers who are currently search￾ing or recently searched for similar jobs elsewhere. And 
although the conversations may be awkward, Lindor 
recommends asking coworkers about their pay. “If you 
have trusted relationships with White men or women 
allies in a similar role, confidentially ask them about 
their salary at certain intervals such as starting pay, 
bonus, promotion pay, etc.”
BATNA also includes assessing your value to the orga￾nization, such as the uniqueness of your skills and your 
recent contributions. Armed with these details, employ￾ees should confidently request a meeting with the man￾ager to discuss a salary increase. There are many features 
of a good meeting, but two of them are to give a specific 
salary proposal and place that proposal in the upper 
range of the market for your position. 
“I’ve always been able to walk into salary adjustment 
or promotion conversations knowing the value that I bring 
to the table,” says Lindor. “If you’re a high performer, 
armed with data and evidence about your work, it’s diffi￾cult for the employer to say no.”
global connections 11.4
AJR_photo/ShutterstockChapter Eleven Conflict and Negotiation in the Workplace 415
Skilled negotiators heed the advice of the late management guru Stephen Covey: “Seek 
first to understand, then to be understood.”90 They spend most of the negotiation time 
listening closely to the other party and asking for details. In contrast, inexperienced nego￾tiators mainly talk to the other side about their arguments and justifications. Skilled nego￾tiators draw out more details by presenting open-ended questions, followed by probe 
questions (“Oh, why is that?”). Nonverbal communication is also observed as an associ￾ated source of information during this dialogue. 
Skilled negotiators also test how well they understand the other side’s facts and posi￾tion by summarizing the information presented and by asking for clarification on specific 
points. Furthermore, they gather information by communicating their inner thoughts and 
feelings about what the other party has said. This practice does not present arguments or 
proposals. Instead, by reflecting on their own feelings, negotiators encourage the other 
party to provide further information that will help dissolve concerns (“What you just said 
makes me hopeful, but I’m still uncertain about how it would work specifically in our 
organization.”)91
Manage Concessions A concession is one party’s revision of a negotiating posi￾tion so it comes closer to the other party’s current position. Successful negotiators actu￾ally make fewer concessions and each concession is smaller than those of average 
negotiators, particularly in distributive negotiations where both parties know the bargain￾ing zone.92 Even so, the process of making concessions is important to all parties.93
Concessions are a form of communication because they signal to the other party the 
relative importance of each issue being negotiated. One way to estimate the relative im￾portance of the issues to each party is to make multi-issue offers rather than discuss one 
issue at a time.94 You might offer a client a specific price, delivery date, and guarantee 
period, for example. The other party’s counteroffer signals which of the multiple items are 
more and which are less important to them. Your subsequent concessions similarly signal 
how important each issue is to your group.
Concessions also symbolize each party’s motivation to bargain in good faith. In fact, an 
important feature of negotiations is that each party reciprocates when the other side makes 
a concession.95 Ultimately, concessions are necessary for the parties to move toward the 
Effective negotiators gather 
information about the opponent’s 
underlying needs and 
expectations. They do this by 
listening more than talking, but 
also by encouraging the other 
party to reveal more information. 
“It’s not just listening, but it’s 
understanding how to get them to 
talk more,” says former FBI 
hostage negotiator, Chris Voss. 
One effective strategy used by the 
FBI is mirroring—repeating back 
as a question the last few words 
of what the other person said. If 
the opponent says, “I need to 
receive your shipment within the 
next month,” you would mirror by 
asking “Within the next month?” 
This usually motivates the other 
person to explain further. “By 
repeating back what people say, 
you trigger this mirroring instinct 
and your counterpart will 
inevitably elaborate on what was 
just said and sustain the process 
of connecting,” Voss explains.n
Fizkes/Shutterstock416 Part Three Team Processes
area of agreement. Concessions need to be clearly labeled as such and should be accompa￾nied by an expectation that the other party will reciprocate. They should also be offered in 
installments because people experience more positive emotions from a few smaller conces￾sions than from one large concession.96 Generally, the best strategy is to be moderately 
tough and give just enough concessions to communicate sincerity and motivation to 
resolve the conflict.
Manage Time Negotiators tend to make more concessions as the deadline gets 
closer.97 This can be a liability if you are under time pressure, or it can be an advantage if 
the other party alone is under time pressure. Negotiators with more power in the relation￾ship sometimes apply time pressure through an “exploding offer” whereby they give the 
opponent a very short time to accept their offer.98 These time-limited offers are frequently 
found in consumer sales (“on sale today only!”) and in some job offers. They produce 
time pressure, which can motivate the other party to accept the offer and forfeit the op￾portunity to explore their BATNA. Another time factor is that the more time someone 
has invested in the negotiation, the more committed they become to ensuring an agree￾ment is reached. This commitment increases the tendency to make unwarranted conces￾sions so that the negotiations do not fail.
Build the Relationship Building and maintaining trust is important in all negotia￾tions.99 In purely distributive negotiation situations, trust keeps the parties focused on the 
issue rather than personalities, motivates them to return to the bargaining table when ne￾gotiations stall, and encourages the parties to engage in future negotiations. Trust is also 
critical in integrative negotiations because it motivates the parties to share information 
and actively search for mutual gains.
Effective negotiators build trust by discovering common backgrounds and interests 
with the other party, such as places they have lived and favorite sports teams. In addition, 
trust tends to be higher when team members closely match the backgrounds of the other 
party. First impressions are also important. People form beliefs and emotions in a fraction 
of a second, so negotiators need to be sensitive to their nonverbal cues, appearance, and 
initial statements. Another way to build trust is by keeping promises in the negotiation 
and identifying shared goals and values with the other party. Trustworthiness also in￾creases by developing a shared understanding of the negotiation process, including its 
norms and expectations about speed and timing.100
Finally, relationship building demands emotional intelligence.101 This includes manag￾ing the emotions each person displays to the other party, particularly avoiding an image of 
superiority, aggressiveness, or insensitivity. Emotional intelligence also involves managing 
the other party’s emotions. Well-placed flattery, humor, and other methods keep everyone 
in a good mood and diffuse dysfunctional tension.102
THE NEGOTIATION SETTING
The effectiveness of negotiating depends to some extent on the environment in which the 
negotiations occur. Three key situational factors are location, physical setting, and 
audience.
Location It is easier to negotiate on your own turf because you are familiar with the 
negotiating environment and are able to maintain comfortable routines.103 Also, there is 
no need to cope with travel-related stress or depend on others for resources during the 
negotiation. Of course, you can’t walk out of negotiations as easily when the event occurs 
on your own turf, but this is usually a minor issue. Considering the strategic benefits of 
home turf, many negotiators agree to neutral territory. Phone calls, videoconferences, 
email, and other forms of information technology potentially avoid territorial issues, but Chapter Eleven Conflict and Negotiation in the Workplace 417
skilled negotiators usually prefer the media richness and social presence of face-to-face 
meetings. Frank Lowy, cofounder of retail property giant Westfield Group, says that tele￾phones are “too cold” for negotiating. “From a voice I don’t get all the cues I need. I go by 
touch and feel and I need to see the other person.”104
Physical Setting The physical distance between the parties and formality of the 
setting can influence their orientation toward each other and the disputed issues. So can 
the seating arrangements. People who sit face-to-face are more likely to develop a win–
lose orientation toward the conflict situation. In contrast, some negotiation groups delib￾erately intersperse participants around the table to convey a win–win orientation. Others 
arrange the seating so that both parties face a whiteboard, reflecting the notion that both 
parties face the same problem or issue.
Audience Characteristics Most negotiators have audiences—anyone with a 
vested interest in the negotiation outcomes, such as executives, other team members, or 
the general public. Negotiators tend to act differently when their audience observes the 
negotiation or has detailed information about the process, compared to situations in 
which the audience sees only the end results.105 When the audience has direct surveillance 
over the proceedings, negotiators tend to be more competitive, less willing to make con￾cessions, and more likely to engage in assertive tactics against the other party. This “hard￾line” behavior shows the audience that the negotiator is working for their interests. With 
their audience watching, negotiators also have higher motivation to save face.
MALE-FEMALE DIFFERENCES IN NEGOTIATION
When negotiating, females tend to have poorer economic outcomes than do males.106 On 
average, females are less keen to negotiate and less mindful of situations where negotia￾tion can or should occur. When they do negotiate, females often set lower personal target 
points and are more likely to accept offers just above their resistance points. Males typi￾cally set high target points and push to get a deal as close to their target point as possible. 
Females are also less likely than males to use alternatives to improve their outcomes. One 
explanation for these differences is that, compared to males, females give higher priority 
to interpersonal relations in the exchange. This is consistent with evidence about male￾female differences in conflict-handling styles, discussed earlier in this chapter. Giving 
more concessions and even avoiding the negotiation process altogether (accepting the 
salary offered when hired) are ways that females try to maintain good relations.
Male-female differences in negotiation aren’t just caused by how females view negotia￾tions. Females are also treated worse than males by the opposing negotiators.107 They are 
also more likely to be deceived by the other party and to receive less generous offers for 
the same job or product. For instance, one study reported that when a used car dealer was 
asked about the price of one of the used cars, the dealer quoted a lower price to males 
than to females—for the same car. 
Females who use effective negotiation techniques—such as making fewer and smaller 
concessions—are viewed less favorably by the opposing negotiator than when males use 
these tactics. This reaction likely occurs because some effective negotiation activities vio￾late female stereotypes, so women are viewed as more aggressive than men doing exactly 
the same thing. The result is that the other negotiator becomes less trustful and engages 
in harder tactics.
Fortunately, women perform as well as men in negotiations when they receive training 
and gain experience. Women also negotiate well when the situation signals that negotia￾tion is expected, such as when a job opening states that the salary is negotiable. Another 
factor that improves negotiation outcomes for women is how well they know the expected 
bargaining range. For example, women negotiate a better starting salary when they re￾search the salary range for that position.418
LO 11-1 Define conflict and debate its positive and negative 
consequences in the workplace.
Conflict is the process in which one party perceives that its 
interests are being opposed or negatively affected by another 
party. The earliest view of conflict was that it was dysfunc￾tional for organizations. Even today, we recognize that con￾flict sometimes or to some degree consumes productive time, 
increases stress and job dissatisfaction, discourages coordina￾tion and resource sharing, undermines customer service, fuels 
organizational politics, and undermines team cohesion. But 
conflict can also be beneficial. It is known to motivate more 
active thinking about problems and possible solutions, en￾courage more active monitoring of the organization in its envi￾ronment, and improve team cohesion (where the conflict 
source is external).
LO 11-2 Distinguish task conflict from relationship conflict 
and describe three strategies to minimize relation￾ship conflict during task conflict episodes.
Task conflict occurs when people focus their discussion around 
the issue while showing respect for people with other points of 
view. Relationship conflict exists when people focus their dis￾cussion on qualities of the people in the dispute. Relationship 
conflict occurs when people attack each other’s credibility, as￾sert their superior status, and display aggression toward the 
other party. It is difficult to separate task from relationship con￾flict. However, three strategies or conditions that minimize rela￾tionship conflict during constructive debate are (1) emotional 
intelligence of the participants, (2) team development, and (3) 
norms that support psychological safety (a shared belief that it 
is safe to engage in interpersonal risk-taking).
LO 11-3 Diagram the conflict process model and describe six 
structural sources of conflict in organizations.
The conflict process model begins with the six structural 
sources of conflict: incompatible goals, differentiation (differ￾ent values and beliefs), interdependence, scarce resources, am￾biguous rules, and communication problems. These sources 
lead one or more parties to perceive a conflict and to experi￾ence conflict emotions. This produces manifest conflict, such 
as behaviors toward the other side. The conflict process often 
escalates through a series of episodes.
LO 11-4 Outline the five conflict-handling styles and discuss 
the circumstances in which each would be most 
appropriate.
There are five known conflict-handling styles: problem solving, 
forcing, avoiding, yielding, and compromising. People who use 
problem solving have a win–win orientation. Others, particu￾larly forcing, assume a win–lose orientation. In general, people 
gravitate toward one or two preferred conflict handling styles 
that match their personality, personal and cultural values, and 
past experience.
The best style depends on the situation. Problem solving is 
best when interests are not perfectly opposing, the parties trust 
each other, and the issues are complex. Forcing works best 
when the dispute requires quick action, your position is logi￾cally and morally stronger, and the other party would take ad￾vantage of a cooperative style. Avoiding is preferred when the 
conflict has become emotional, there is strong incentive to 
maintain harmony, or the cost of resolution outweighs the ben￾efits. Yielding works well when the issue is less important to 
you, the value or logic of your position is less clear, the parties 
want to maintain harmony, and the other party has substan￾tially more power. Compromising is preferred when there is a 
single issue (not complex) with opposing interests, the parties 
are under time pressure, they want to maintain harmony, and 
they have equal power.
LO 11-5 Apply the six structural approaches to conflict man￾agement and describe the three types of third-party 
dispute resolution.
Conflict can be managed through six structural strategies. One 
of these is to increase the parties’ commitment to superordi￾nate goals—goals that the conflicting employees or depart￾ments value and whose attainment requires the joint resources 
and effort of those parties. Another method is to reduce dif￾ferentiation between the conflicting parties, such as by tempo￾rarily assigning employees to other work units, rotating 
employees across the organization throughout their career, and 
by building a strong organizational culture. A third method is 
to improve communication and mutual understanding. This 
can occur by designing workspaces such that diverse groups 
coincidentally mingle, engaging in seminars that apply Johari 
Window principles across groups, and through intergroup mir￾roring interventions. Fourth, conflict can be minimized by re￾ducing interdependence, such as by creating buffers, using 
integrators, or combining jobs. The final two structural ap￾proaches to conflict management involve increasing resources 
and clarifying rules and procedures.
Third-party conflict resolution is any attempt by a relatively 
neutral person to help the parties resolve their differences. The 
three main forms of third-party dispute resolution are media￾tion, arbitration, and inquisition. Managers tend to use an in￾quisition approach, though mediation and arbitration often are 
more appropriate, depending on the situation.
LO 11-6 Discuss activities in the negotiation preparation, 
process, and setting that improve negotiation 
effectiveness.
Negotiation occurs whenever two or more conflicting parties 
attempt to resolve their divergent goals by redefining the terms 
of their interdependence. Distributive negotiation is most com￾mon when the parties have only one item to resolve, such as 
product price or starting salary. Integrative negotiation is more 
common when multiple issues are open for discussion. Effec￾tive negotiators engage in several preparation activities. These 
include determining their initial, target, and resistance posi￾tions; understanding their needs behind these goals; and know￾ing their alternatives to the negotiation (BATNA).
During the negotiation process, effective negotiators devote 
more attention to gathering than giving information. They try 
to determine the other party’s underlying needs rather than 
just their stated positions. They make fewer and smaller con￾cessions, but use concessions strategically to discover the other 
party’s priorities and to maintain trust. They try to avoid time 
traps (negotiating under deadlines set by the other side), and 
they engage in practices to maintain a positive relationship 
with the other party. Characteristics of the setting—including 
location, physical setting, and audience characteristics—are 
also important in successful negotiations.
chapter summary419
best alternative to a negotiated agreement 
(BATNA), p. 413
conflict, p. 394
negotiation, p. 411
psychological safety, p. 397
relationship conflict, p. 396
superordinate goals, p. 406
task conflict, p. 395
third-party conflict resolution, p. 409
win–lose orientation, p. 402
win–win orientation, p. 402
key terms
1. Distinguish task conflict from relationship conflict, and 
explain how to maintain some degree of task conflict 
while minimizing relationship conflict.
2. The chief executive officer of Creative Toys, Inc. read 
about cooperation in Japanese companies and vowed to 
bring this same philosophy to the company. The goal is 
to avoid all conflict, so that employees would work coop￾eratively and be happier at Creative Toys. Discuss the 
merits and limitations of the CEO’s policy.
3. Conflict among managers emerged soon after a French 
company acquired a Swedish firm. The Swedes perceived 
the French management as hierarchical and arrogant, 
whereas the French thought the Swedes were naive, cau￾tious, and lacking an achievement orientation. Identify 
the source(s) of conflict that best explain(s) this conflict, 
and describe ways to reduce dysfunctional conflict in 
this situation.
4. You are a special assistant to the commander-in-chief of a 
peacekeeping mission to a war-torn part of the world. 
The unit consists of a few thousand peacekeeping troops 
from the United States, France, India, and four other 
countries. The troops will work together for approxi￾mately one year. What strategies would you recommend 
to improve mutual understanding and minimize conflict 
among these troops?
5. The chief operating officer (COO) has noticed that pro￾duction employees in the company’s Mexican manufac￾turing operations are unhappy with some of the 
production engineering decisions made by engineers in 
the company’s headquarters in Chicago. At the same 
time, the engineers complain that production employees 
aren’t applying their engineering specifications correctly 
and don’t understand why those specifications were put 
in place. The COO believes that the best way to resolve 
this conflict is to have a frank and open discussion be￾tween some of the engineers and employees representing 
the Mexican production crew. This open dialogue approach 
worked well recently among managers in the company’s 
Chicago headquarters, so it should work equally well be￾tween the engineers and production staff. Based on your 
knowledge of communication and mutual understanding 
as a way to resolve conflict, discuss the COO’s proposal.
6. Describe the inquisitional approach to resolve disputes 
between employees or work units. Discuss its appropri￾ateness in organizational settings, including the suitability 
of its use with a multigenerational workforce.
7. Jane has just been appointed as purchasing manager of 
Tacoma Technologies, Inc. The previous purchasing man￾ager, who recently retired, was known for his “winner￾take-all” approach to suppliers. He continually fought for 
more discounts and was skeptical about any special deals 
that suppliers would propose. A few suppliers refused to 
do business with Tacoma Technologies, but senior man￾agement was confident that the former purchasing 
manager’s approach minimized the company’s costs. Jane 
wants to try a more collaborative approach to working 
with suppliers. Will her approach work? How should she 
adopt a more collaborative approach in future negotiations 
with suppliers?
8. You are a new program manager with responsibility for sig￾nificant funding and external relations, and because of 
downsizing issues in your area, you have lost two valuable 
employees (actually 1.5, because the second person is on 
half time now; she used to be your manager and was the 
person under whom you trained). You have been in the 
new job approximately two weeks; however, you have been 
in the unit for more than a year and have seen how systems 
are managed, from your manager’s perspective. You now 
have her job. Out of the blue, a senior person (not in your 
area) comes to you and says he is taking most of your space 
(when the company had to let the 1.5 people go). He 
doesn’t ask your permission, nor does he seem the least bit 
concerned with what your response is. What do you do?
9. Laura is about to renegotiate her job role with her new 
manager. She has heard through the grapevine that he is 
a tough negotiator, highly competitive, and unwilling to 
take others’ needs into consideration. She has also heard 
that even if he gives concessions in the negotiation, he 
often fails to keep his word. If you were Laura, how would 
you prepare for this negotiation?
critical thinking questions
CASE STUDY: MAELSTROM COMMUNICATIONS
By Daniel Robey, Georgia State University, in collaboration with Todd Anthony
Sales manager Roger Todd was fuming. Thanks to, as he 
put it, “those nearsighted addleheads in service,” he had 
nearly lost one of his top accounts. When told of Todd’s 
complaint, senior serviceperson Ned Rosen retorted, “That 
figures. Anytime Mr. Todd senses even the remotest possi￾bility of a sale, he immediately promises the customer the 
world on a golden platter. We can’t possibly provide the ser￾vice they request under the time constraints they give us 
and do an acceptable job.”
Feelings of this sort were common in the departments 
both Roger and Ned worked for in Maelstrom Communica￾tions. Sales and service, the two dominant functions in the 420
company, never saw eye to eye on anything, it seemed. The 
problems dated well back in the history of the company, 
even before Roger or Ned were hired some years ago.
Maelstrom Communications is a franchised distribution￾ship belonging to a nationwide network of companies that 
sell voice, mobile, data, and cloud telecommunications 
products to small and medium-sized businesses. Maelstrom 
competes directly with the largest national telecommunica￾tions firms in the hardware market. Equipment installation 
and maintenance service are an integral part of the total 
package Maelstrom offers.
Modern telecommunications systems hardware is highly 
sophisticated and few, if any, system users have the techno￾logical know-how to do their own equipment servicing. An 
excellent service record is crucial to the success of any com￾pany in the field. After the direct sale of a Maelstrom sys￾tem, the sales force maintains contacts with customers. 
There is nothing the salespeople dislike so much as hearing 
that a customer hasn’t received the type of service promised 
at the time of sale. On the other hand, service technicians 
complain of being hounded by the salespeople whenever a 
preferred customer needs even the simplest fiber optic ca￾ble reconnected. As Ned Rosen put it, “I can’t remember 
the last time a service request came through that wasn’t an 
emergency from a preferred customer.”
Maelstrom’s owner and president, Al Whitfield, has a 
strong sales background and views sales as the bread-and￾butter department of the company. He is in on all major 
decisions and has final say on any matter brought to his at￾tention. He spends most of his time working with sales and 
marketing personnel, and rarely concerns himself with the 
day-to-day activities of the service department unless a 
major problem of some sort crops up.
Next in line in Maelstrom’s corporate hierarchy is the 
vice-president in charge of production, Lawrence Henderson. 
Henderson is responsible for the acquisition and distribution 
of all job-related equipment and materials and for the 
scheduling of all service department activities. His sympa￾thies lie primarily with the service department.
Each week Whitfield, Henderson, and all members of 
the sales force hold a meeting in Maelstrom’s conference 
room. The sales personnel present their needs to Hender￾son so that equipment can be ordered and jobs scheduled. 
Service requests reported to salespeople from customers 
are also relayed to Henderson at this point. Once orders for 
service have been placed with production, sales personnel 
receive no feedback on the disposition of them (unless a 
customer complains to them directly) other than at these 
weekly meetings. It is common for a salesperson to think all 
is well with their accounts when, in fact, they are receiving 
delayed service or none at all. When an irate customer 
phones the sales representative to complain, it sets in mo￾tion the machinery that leads to disputes such as the one 
between Roger Todd and Ned Rosen.
It has become an increasingly common occurrence at 
Maelstrom for sales personnel to go to Henderson to com￾plain when their requests are not met by the service depart￾ment. Henderson has exhibited an increasing tendency to 
side with the service department and to tell the salespeople 
that existing service department priorities must be adhered 
to and that any sales requests will have to wait for resched￾uling. At this point, a salesperson’s only recourse is to go 
to Whitfield, who invariably agrees with the salesperson 
and instructs Henderson to take appropriate action. All of 
this is time-consuming and only serves to produce friction 
between the president and the vice president in charge of 
production.
Discussion Questions
1. What situational conditions have created the conflict 
in this case?
2. What actions should the organization take to manage 
the conflict more effectively?
 CASE STUDY: DISCORD INVESTMENTS
Discord Investments didn’t expect so much conflict when 
the regional brokerage firm brought in a global informa￾tion technology (IT) consulting firm to implement a new 
client/server network. Discord had no plans to outsource 
its information systems activities, yet the investment 
firm’s own IT employees were worried that they would be 
replaced or transferred to the consulting firm after the 
hardware installation was completed. This risk made 
them somewhat reluctant to provide details about Dis￾cord’s operations that the consultants needed to do their 
jobs effectively.
“Why should we tell them what we know and end up los￾ing our jobs or, at best, getting outsourced to some un￾known outfit,” Discord’s IT employees privately warned 
each other. The consultants sensed this reluctance, but the 
Discord employees kept their concerns to themselves.
Scheduling was another source of disagreement between 
Discord’s IT staff and the external consultants. Each week, 
the consultants flew in from other cities to Discord’s of￾fices, typically working 12-hour days, Monday through 
Thursday, then flew back to their home cities on Friday. 
Discord’s employees lived close to the company’s offices 
and worked Monday to Friday with regular hours, usually 9 
to 5 with one or two hours of flexibility around those times. 
The consultants raised concerns that the project would be 
delayed by Discord’s IT staff if they did not adjust to the 
consultants’ schedule during the two or three months that 
the consultants were on-site. The employees complained because the consultants’ schedule would mean significant 
disruption to their usual nonwork life, such as attending 
evening school events, spending time with family, or partici￾pating in sports and other social activities during the week.
Finally, the most serious disagreement broke out re￾garding who should lead the project—the Discord IT man￾agers or the external consultants? Discord’s top executives 
tried to quell the dispute by giving the leadership role to 
the consultants, but this decision simply added to the ten￾sion. The problem was that Discord’s IT people would be 
responsible for the system long after the external 
consultants were gone, so they felt somewhat trapped by 
the consultants’ power.
Discussion Questions
1. Identify and explain the main source(s) of conflict in 
this case.
2. What actions should the organization take immediately 
and for future consulting interventions to manage the 
conflict more effectively?
© 2020 Steven L. McShane
CLASS EXERCISE: CONFLICT HANDLING INCIDENTS
421
and they receive patients who have been pre-booked by 
the clinic administrative staff. The company owns more 
than one brand and model of ultrasound equipment 
(GE, Toshiba, Siemens, Philips, etc.), so some rooms 
have different equipment. Each ultrasound machine has 
similar functions, but staff tend to have more experience 
and preferences for one model than for others. Also, 
some machines are easier to use for some purposes (e.g., 
scanning, video imaging) or have more modern controls 
or displays.
On this particular day, you are assigned to a clinic 
where you have worked only a few times in the past. As 
you enter your assigned consulting room, you see another 
sonographer already preparing the equipment for the day’s 
use. The sonographer explains that she decided to use this 
room because she doesn’t like the ultrasound equipment 
in the room assigned to her. She claims that the clinic 
rarely assigns her to that other consulting room. She says 
that you can take the consulting room she was assigned. 
At that point, she turns away to continue her equipment 
preparation. You are able to work on the equipment in the 
other consulting room, although it is not your favorite ma￾chine, either. Also, you notice from your appointment 
sheet that one patient today requires a special type of scan 
that is much more difficult to complete using the equip￾ment in the other room than in the room to which you 
were assigned. You barely know the other sonographer. 
She seemed somewhat presumptuous in casually taking 
your assigned room, but wasn’t aggressive or threatening 
in her statements. She works frequently at this clinic 
whereas you are seldom assigned to this clinic. You believe 
that the clinic management is indifferent regarding who is 
assigned to each consulting room.
Action Alternatives for Incident #1
Please indicate your first (1) and second (2) choices from 
among the following alternatives by writing the appropri￾ate number in the space provided.
PURPOSE This exercise is designed to help you under￾stand the factors to consider when choosing the preferred 
conflict-handling styles in organizational settings.
INSTRUCTIONS
Step 1: Participants will read each of the three incidents 
presented below and select the most appropriate response 
from among the five alternatives for each incident.
Step 2 (Optional): The instructor may ask each student to 
complete the Conflict Handling Style Scale (available in 
Connect if assigned by the instructor) or a similar instru￾ment. This instrument will provide an estimate of your pre￾ferred conflict-handling style.
Step 3: As a class, students identify their top two responses 
from the five provided. They discuss the situational factors 
they took into account in making those selections.
Step 4 (Optional): Students will compare their responses 
to the three incidents with their results from the conflict￾handling self-assessment. Discussion will focus on the extent 
to which each person’s preferred conflict-handling style 
influenced their alternatives in this activity, and the impli￾cations of this style preference for managing conflict in 
organizations.
INCIDENT #1
Setting
You work as a sonographer for a company that owns a 
dozen imaging diagnostics clinics in a major city. A so￾nographer is a medical professional who uses ultrasound 
medical equipment to create images for medical diagnos￾tics. You are assigned to several clinics, staying at each 
clinic for a few days or a week. You typically rotate 
across four clinics closest to your home, but occasion￾ally are assigned to one of the company’s other seven 
clinics in the city. Each day, the clinic assigns each of its 
half-dozen sonographers to a specific consulting room ACTION ALTERNATIVE RANKING (1ST & 2ND)
1. You tell the other sonographer that she must return to her assigned room or trade rooms with another sonogra￾pher. If she refuses, you state that you will ask the clinic manager to enforce the room assignment.
_____________
2. You politely tell the other sonographer that as a favor to her, you will let her use the consulting room that you 
were assigned (and she has taken).
_____________
3. Given that there is a half hour before the clinic opens, you ask the sonographer to spend a few minutes dis￾cussing her needs and preferences to determine if there is some solution on the consulting room or ultrasound 
equipment that will benefit both of you.
_____________
4. You tell the sonographer that she can have the consulting room you were assigned for most of the day, but must 
swap rooms with you when you have appointments that are much better served by the equipment in this room.
_____________
5. Without saying anything, you walk away from the consulting room you were assigned and work in the room as￾signed to the other sonographer. Later, you make some excuse (such as long driving distance) to the company’s 
central administration to explain why they should not assign you to this clinic in future.
_____________
INCIDENT #2
Setting
You are district manager responsible for eight salespeople 
in one region of a national manufacturer and wholesaler of 
building supplies products. You and fourteen other district 
sales managers report directly to the company’s national 
sales director, who is located at headquarters in another 
city. You were promoted to this job almost two years ago 
and have become increasingly frustrated with the national 
sales director’s ambiguity regarding several key sales man￾agement decisions. The director tells district managers 
that they are empowered to make decisions regarding com￾mon sales issues, such as bulk-buying deals, addressing 
customer complaints, and allocating the sales staff train￾ing budget. Yet, without warning, the director tends to step 
in and reverse some of your decisions (and apparently de￾cisions of other district managers). These interventions do 
not appear to be consistent with any underlying rationale 
or policy, and the director’s explanations for these actions 
are equally obtuse.
You have learned from others as well as some personal 
observations that the national sales director sometimes be￾comes testy when someone disagrees with his views. The 
director generally treats his district sales managers fairly 
over the long term, but he can be briefly vindictive if a di￾rect report questions his wisdom. So far, you have only 
asked the sales director politely to explain why he reversed 
a few of the decisions. However, this is becoming an im￾portant issue to you because the director’s actions are 
making it difficult to make decisions. Also, some direct 
reports feel less confident about whether your decisions 
will remain long enough so they can plan their work. You 
are known for performing your job well, but the sales di￾rector does not view your performance any better than 
most other district sales managers.
Action Alternatives for Incident #2
Please indicate your first (1) and second (2) choices from 
among the following alternatives by writing the appropri￾ate number in the space provided.
ACTION ALTERNATIVE RANKING (1ST & 2ND)
1. You decide not to raise this matter with the national sales director because the disagreement is not worth the risk 
to your career. Instead, you frequently remind your sales staff that your decisions might be reversed by the director.
_____________
2. You arrange a meeting with the director and insist that your should have clear decision control over specific 
district sales decisions. If the director wants to reverse any decision, you explain that he should first speak to 
you and reach mutual agreement before the decision is reversed.
_____________
3. You speak to the director about his tendency to reverse decisions. You suggest that he can reverse decisions 
on specific matters where a change in decision is less disruptive (such as training budget allocation) but will not 
interfere with other types of district sales manager decisions (such as addressing customer complaints).
_____________
4. You meet with the director to discuss the issue of having decisions reversed. You ask the director to think of 
ways that would allow you to make decisions without the director feeling the need to reverse some of them.
_____________
5. You try to minimize the risk of having your decisions reversed by delaying making decisions that you think are 
at higher risk of being reversed by the director, even though you eventually need to act on these matters.
_____________
422ACTION ALTERNATIVE RANKING (1ST & 2ND)
1. Tell Ben Estobar that you understand his difficult work deadlines, and try to prepare the report by estimating 
what his data might have been, such as by extrapolating last quarter’s numbers.
_____________
2. Meet with Ben Estobar and other managers to discover a longer term solution that would almost completely 
avoid the risk that one or more managers fail to submit the operational data on time.
_____________
3. Give Ben Estobar an ultimatum that he must submit the required information by tomorrow afternoon. If he fails 
to do so, you will ask the chief operating officer (to whom you and Ben Estobar’s manager reports) to compel 
you to provide the operational data this week.
_____________
4. Choose a middle ground in which you ask Ben Estobar to send you the most vital information (about half of 
what is required) and you will use your judgment to fill in the missing information.
_____________
5. Ask the senior executive team if they would be willing to have your quarterly report postponed for a week or 
two, if possible.
_____________
© 2020 Steven L. McShane. This exercise was inspired by a similar activity in: G.A. Callanan and D.F. Perri, “Teaching Conflict Management Using 
a Scenario-Based Approach,” Journal of Education for Business 81 (January/February 2006): 131–39.
INCIDENT #3
Setting
You are the manager responsible for operational analysis at 
a national company that processes citrus fruit into juices, 
concentrates, oils and essences, pulp cells, and dried fruit. 
The company has several processing plants and specific 
measurement metrics are applied to determine their effi￾ciency and effectiveness. The company’s executive team in￾creasingly relies on your quarterly report and other analyses 
you provide to make important decisions regarding future 
investments, product changes, budgets, and so forth. In fact, 
your ability to provide timely, high quality operational per￾formance information has raised your reputation and influ￾ence in the organization. Your quarterly reports depend on 
each production facility to supply you with the raw data 
identified in a well-developed online reporting system.
As per the established schedule, senior management 
expects to receive your next quarterly report later this 
week. However, Ben Estobar, the manager of grapefruit 
production at the Florida facility, has not yet submitted key 
information for you to complete your report. Ben did not 
reply to your email reminders, so you give him a call. Dur￾ing that conversation, Ben says he is too busy to get the re￾quired information within the next couple of days. He 
explains that his delay for another week or two is due to the 
busy season for grapefruit processing, even though the data 
have never been submitted late in the past. You remind Ben 
that his information is critical to completion of your report, 
which is vital to senior executive decisions and the compa￾ny’s long-term success. You have a higher position and more 
seniority in the company than Ben Estobar. Ben is friendly 
and rarely aggressive in any way, but he has been known to 
twist facts to make his position look more favorable.
Action Alternatives for Incident #3
Please indicate your first (1) and second (2) choices from 
among the following alternatives by writing the appropri￾ate number in the space provided.
TEAM EXERCISE: KUMQUAT CONFLICT ROLE PLAY
the team to be an independent observer of that team and 
the negotiation (e.g., 10 observers if there are 10 teams). 
One-half of the teams will take the role of Dr. Rexa and 
the other half will be Dr. Chan.
Step 2: The instructor will describe the activity and read 
out the statement by Cathal, representative of the farmer’s 
cooperative that grows the world’s only Caismirt Kum￾quats. The instructor will also state the time frames for 
preparing the negotiation and the actual negotiation.
Step 3: With teams formed and the instructions read, the 
instructor will distribute the roles. Members within each 
team are given a short time (usually 10 minutes), but the 
instructor may choose another time limit) to learn their 
roles and decide their negotiating strategy.
PURPOSE This exercise is designed to help you under￾stand the dynamics of interpersonal and intergroup con￾flict, as well as the effectiveness of negotiation strategies in 
specific conditions.
MATERIALS The instructor will distribute roles for Dr. 
Rexa, Dr. Chan, and a few observers. Ideally, each negotia￾tion should occur in a private area, away from the other 
negotiations.
INSTRUCTIONS
Step 1: The instructor will divide the class into an even 
number of small teams (usually four or five students per 
team, but larger teams are possible to accommodate larger 
classes). One student will remove himself or herself from 
423424
Step 4: After reading their roles and discussing strategy, 
each Dr. Chan team is matched with a Dr. Rexa team and 
begin negotiations. Observers will receive observation 
forms from the instructor, and will watch the paired teams 
during pre-negotiations and subsequent negotiations.
Step 5: At the end of the exercise, the class will debrief 
on the negotiations. Observers, negotiators, and the in￾structor will discuss their observations and experiences 
and the implications for conflict management and 
negotiation.
© 2017 Steven L. McShane. This exercise is inspired by a similar exer￾cise in D.T. Hall, D.D. Bowen, R.J. Lewicki, and F.S. Hall, Experiences 
in Management and Organizational Behavior (Chicago: St. Clair Press, 
1975). It is also inspired by an incident involving two sisters described 
in R. Fisher and W. Ury, Getting to Yes: Negotiating Agreement without 
Giving In (New York: Penguin, 1981).
1. M. Larkins, “Cross-Functional or Dysfunctional? Resolv￾ing Team Conflicts,” Fast Company, October 29, 2021; 
J. Howell, “CEO Secrets: ‘Company Culture Shouldn’t 
Be Too Nice,’” BBC News, November 2, 2021; P. Crush, 
“Are Workplaces Becoming ‘Too Nice’?,” Management 
Today, November 12, 2021.
2. J.A. Wall and R.R. Callister, “Conflict and Its Manage￾ment,” Journal of Management 21 (1995): 515–58; M.A. 
Rahim, Managing Conflict in Organizations, 4th ed. 
(New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction, 2011), 15–17; D. 
Tjosvold, A.S.H. Wong, and N.Y.F. Chen, “Construc￾tively Managing Conflicts in Organizations,” Annual 
Review of Organizational Psychology and Organizational 
Behavior 1, no. 1 (2014): 545–68.
3. J.A. Litterer, “Conflict in Organization: A Re￾Examination,” Academy of Management Journal 9, no. 3 
(September 1966): 178–86; M.A. Rahim, Managing 
Conflict in Organizations, 4th ed. (New Brunswick, NJ: 
Transaction, 2011), Chap. 1.
4. For example, see L. Urwick, The Elements of Administra￾tion, 2nd ed. (London: Pitman, 1947); H.L. Sheppard 
and S. Chase, “The Social and Historical Philosophy of 
Elton Mayo [with Comment],” The Antioch Review 10, 
no. 3 (1950): 396–406; C. Argyris, “The Individual and 
Organization: Some Problems of Mutual Adjustment,” 
Administrative Science Quarterly 2, no. 1 (1957): 1–24; 
K.E. Boulding, “Organization and Conflict,” Conflict 
Resolution 1, no. 2 (1957): 122–34; R.R. Blake, H.A. 
Shepard, and J.S. Mouton, Managing Intergroup Conflict 
in Industry (Houston: Gulf, 1964).
5. C.K.W. De Dreu and L.R. Weingart, “A Contingency 
Theory of Task Conflict and Performance in Groups and 
Organizational Teams,” in International Handbook of 
Organizational Teamwork and Cooperative Working, ed. 
M.A. West, D. Tjosvold, and K.G. Smith (Chichester, 
UK: Wiley, 2003), 151–66; S. Rispens, “Benefits and 
Detrimental Effects of Conflict,” in Handbook of Conflict 
Management Research, ed. O.B. Ayoko, N.M. Ashkanasy, 
and K.A. Jehn (Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar, 2014), 
19–32; D. De Clercq and I. Belausteguigoitia, “Overcom￾ing the Dark Side of Task Conflict: Buffering Roles of 
Transformational Leadership, Tenacity, and Passion for 
Work,” European Management Journal 35, no. 1 (2017): 
78–90.
6. F.R.C. de Wit, L.L. Greer, and K.A. Jehn, “The Paradox 
of Intragroup Conflict: A Meta-Analysis,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology 97, no. 2 (2012): 360–90; L.L. 
Meier et al., “Relationship and Task Conflict at Work: 
Interactive Short-Term Effects on Angry Mood and 
Somatic Complaints,” Journal of Occupational Health 
Psychology 18, no. 2 (2013): 144–56; N.L. Jimmieson, 
M.K. Tucker, and J.L. Campbell, “Task Conflict 
Leads to Relationship Conflict When Employees Are 
Low in Trait Self-Control: Implications for Employee 
Strain,” Personality and Individual Differences 113 (2017): 
209–18.
7. J. Meng, J. Fulk, and Y.C. Yuan, “The Roles and Inter￾play of Intragroup Conflict and Team Emotion Manage￾ment on Information Seeking Behaviors in Team 
Contexts,” Communication Research 42, no. 5 (2015): 
675–700; M.-H. Tsai and C. Bendersky, “The Pursuit 
of Information Sharing: Expressing Task Conflicts as 
Debates vs. Disagreements Increases Perceived Receptiv￾ity to Dissenting Opinions in Groups,” Organization 
Science 27, no. 1 (2015): 141–56.
8. L.L. Greer, L. van Bunderen, and S. Yu, “The Dysfunc￾tions of Power in Teams: A Review and Emergent Con￾flict Perspective,” Research in Organizational Behavior 37 
(2017): 103–24; L. van Bunderen, L.L. Greer, and D. van 
Knippenberg, “When Interteam Conflict Spirals into 
Intrateam Power Struggles: The Pivotal Role of Team 
Power Structures,” Academy of Management Journal 61, 
no. 3 (2018): 1100–30.
9. J. Dewey, Human Nature and Conduct: An Introduction to 
Social Psychology (New York: Holt, 1922), 300; M.P. 
Follett, “Constructive Conflict,” in Dynamic Administration: 
The Collected Papers of Mary Parker Follett, ed. H.C. 
Metcalf and L. Urwick (Bath, UK: Management 
Publications Trust, 1941), 30–49. 
10. Although the 1970s marked a point when the benefits of 
conflict became widely acknowledged, a few earlier writ￾ers had also expressed this view. See L.A. Coser, The 
Functions of Social Conflict (New York: Free Press, 1956); 
J.A. Litterer, “Conflict in Organization: A Re-Examination,” 
Academy of Management Journal 9 (1966): 178–86; 
H. Assael, “Constructive Role of Interorganizational 
Conflict,” Administrative Science Quarterly 14, no. 4 
(1969): 573–82.
endnotes425
11. P.J. Carnevale, “Creativity in the Outcomes of Conflict,” 
in The Handbook of Conflict Resolution: Theory and 
Practice, ed. M. Deutsch, P.T. Coleman, and E.C. 
Marcus (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2006), 414–35; T.A. 
O’Neill, N.J. Allen, and S.E. Hastings, “Examining the 
‘Pros’ and ‘Cons’ of Team Conflict: A Team-Level Meta￾Analysis of Task, Relationship, and Process Conflict,” 
Human Performance 26 (2013): 236–60; X.-Y. Xie, W.-L. 
Wang, and K. Luan, “It Is Not What We Have, but How 
We Use It: Re-exploring the Relationship between Task 
Conflict and Team Innovation from the Resource-Based 
View,” Group Processes & Intergroup Relations 17 (2014): 
240–51, P. Petrou, A.B. Bakker, and K. Bezemer, “Cre￾ativity under Task Conflict: The Role of Proactively In￾creasing Job Resources,” Journal of Occupational and 
Organizational Psychology 92 (2019): 305–29.
12. K.M. Eisenhardt, J.L. Kahwajy, and L.J. Bourgeois III, 
“Conflict and Strategic Choice: How Top Management 
Teams Disagree,” California Management Review 39 
(1997): 42–62; T. Greitemeyer et al., “Information Sam￾pling and Group Decision Making: The Effects of an 
Advocacy Decision Procedure and Task Experience,” 
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied 12, no. 1 
(2006): 31–42; U. Klocke, “How to Improve Decision 
Making in Small Groups: Effects of Dissent and Train￾ing Interventions,” Small Group Research 38, no. 3 
(2007): 437–68.
13. C.K.W. De Dreu, “When Too Little or Too Much Hurts: 
Evidence for a Curvilinear Relationship Between Task 
Conflict and Innovation in Teams,” Journal of Manage￾ment 32, no. 1 (2006): 83–107; J.L. Farh, C. Lee, and 
C.I.C. Farh, “Task Conflict and Team Creativity: A 
Question of How Much and When,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology 95, no. 6 (2010): 1173–80; G. Todorova, J.B. 
Bear, and L.R. Weingart, “Can Conflict Be Energizing? 
A Study of Task Conflict, Positive Emotions, and Job 
Satisfaction,” Journal of Applied Psychology 99, no. 3 
(2014): 451–67; L.R. Weingart et al., “The Directness 
and Oppositional Intensity of Conflict Expression,” 
Academy of Management Review 40, no. 2 (2015): 
235–62.
14. This book adopts the long-held perspective (Fisher & 
Ury, Tjosvold, etc.) that all conflict can be framed 
as either (or degrees of) task and relationship conflict. 
For example employees who refer to a conflict as a “per￾sonality clash” have attributed the conflict to problems 
with the other party’s personal characteristics 
(relationship conflict). Yet others frame the same situa￾tion as task conflict by attributing the disagreement to 
different beliefs and feelings about the issue that need to 
be understood and analyzed logically. This “framing” 
perspective contrasts with the view by some writers that 
task and relationship (along with process and status) 
conflict are somehow fundamental sources of conflict. 
This “content” perspective defines the type of conflict 
by the topic or content of the conflict. One problem is 
that content-based typologies can expand into an almost 
infinite list of topics. Furthermore, the content-based 
view inappropriately assumes that task conflict and 
relationship conflict cannot co-exist or be perceived in 
the same conflict episode. It is how conflicts are 
framed—not whether the alleged topic is the task, pro￾cess, status, or relationship—that affects the key out￾comes in conflict episodes. For literature on types of 
conflict, see: A.C. Amason, “Distinguishing the Effects 
of Functional and Dysfunctional Conflict on Strategic 
Decision Making: Resolving a Paradox for Top Manage￾ment Teams,” Academy of Management Journal 39, no. 1 
(1996): 123–48; R. Fisher and W. Ury, Getting to Yes: Ne￾gotiating an Agreement without Giving In (Random House, 
2012); K.A. Jehn, “Types of Conflict: The History and 
Future of Conflict Definitions and Typologies,” in Hand￾book of Conflict Management Research, ed. O.B. Ayoko, 
N.M. Ashkanasy, and K.A. Jehn (Cheltenham, UK: 
Edward Elgar, 2014), 3–18; D. Tjosvold, A.S.H. Wong, and 
N.Y.F. Chen, “Constructively Managing Conflicts in 
Organizations,” Annual Review of Organizational Psychology 
and Organizational Behavior 1 (2014): 545–68; T.A. 
O’Neill et al., “The Structure and Function of Team 
Conflict State Profiles,” Journal of Management 44, no. 2 
(2018): 811–36. One recent review recognizes this dis￾tinction between conflict type and how conflict is viewed 
(focus) or how it is expressed. See: L.R. Weingart et al., 
“The Directness and Oppositional Intensity of Conflict 
Expression,” Academy of Management Review 40, no. 2 
(2015): 235–62.
15. F.R.C. de Wit, L.L. Greer, and K.A. Jehn, “The Paradox 
of Intragroup Conflict: A Meta-Analysis,” Journal of Ap￾plied Psychology 97, no. 2 (2012): 360–90. Earlier meta￾analyses reported either nonsignificant or somewhat 
negative correlations between task conflict and team 
outcomes. However, the recent meta-analysis and other 
writers point to several methodological problems with 
conflict research that explain the mixed findings. For a 
review, see M.L. Loughry and A.C. Amason, “Why 
Won’t Task Conflict Cooperate? Deciphering Stubborn 
Results,” International Journal of Conflict Management
25, no. 4 (2014): 333–58.
16. One of the clearest recent descriptions of relationship 
versus task conflict is found in L.R. Weingart et al., 
“The Directness and Oppositional Intensity of Conflict 
Expression,” Academy of Management Review 40, no. 2 
(2015): 235–62.
17. D. Walton, Ad Hominem Arguments (Tuscaloosa: Univer￾sity of Alabama Press, 1998), Chaps 1-2. The ad homi￾nem fallacy is a major concern in academic critiques. 
See, for example: R.M. Barnes et al., “The Effect of Ad 
Hominem Attacks on the Evaluation of Claims Pro￾moted by Scientists,” PLOS ONE 13, no. 1 (2018): 
e0192025.
18. J.M. Leon-Perez et al., “The Relationship between Inter￾personal Conflict and Workplace Bullying,” Journal of 
Managerial Psychology 30 (2015): 250–63; K.A. Graham 
et al., “Too Many Cooks in the Kitchen: The Effects of 
Dominance Incompatibility on Relationship Conflict 
and Subsequent Abusive Supervision,” Leadership Quar￾terly 30 (2019): 351–64.426
“Constructively Managing Conflicts in Organizations,” 
Annual Review of Organizational Psychology and Organiza￾tional Behavior 1 (2014): 545–68; A. Newman, R. Donohue, 
and N. Eva, “Psychological Safety: A Systematic Review of 
the Literature,” Human Resource Management Review 27, 
no. 3 (2017): 521–35.
25. L. Pondy, “Organizational Conflict: Concepts and 
Models,” Administrative Science Quarterly 2 (1967): 
296–320; K.W. Thomas, “Conflict and Negotiation Pro￾cesses in Organizations,” in Handbook of Industrial and 
Organizational Psychology, ed. M.D. Dunnette and L.M. 
Hough (Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press, 
1992), 651–718. 
26. E. Halperin, “Emotion, Emotion Regulation, and Con￾flict Resolution,” Emotion Review 6, no. 1 (2014): 68–76; 
G. Todorova, J.B. Bear, and L.R. Weingart, “Can Con￾flict Be Energizing? A Study of Task Conflict, Positive 
Emotions, and Job Satisfaction.,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology 99, no. 3 (2014): 451–67; S. Čehajić-Clancy 
et al., “Social-Psychological Interventions for Intergroup 
Reconciliation: An Emotion Regulation Perspective,” 
Psychological Inquiry 27, no. 2 (2016): 73–88; M. Caldara 
et al., “A Study of the Triggers of Conflict and Emotional 
Reactions,” Games 8, no. 2 (2017): 21, https://doi.org/
10.3390/g8020021; G.A. van Kleef and S. Côté, 
“Emotional Dynamics in Conflict and Negotiation: Indi￾vidual, Dyadic, and Group Processes,” Annual Review of 
Organizational Psychology and Organizational Behavior 5 
(2018): 437–64.
27. E. Halperin, “Emotion, Emotion Regulation, and Con￾flict Resolution,” Emotion Review 6, no. 1 (2014): 68–76; 
D. Motro, T. Kugler, and T. Connolly, “Back to the Ba￾sics: How Feelings of Anger Affect Cooperation,” Inter￾national Journal of Conflict Management 27, no. 4 (2016): 
523–46; J. Folger, M.S. Poole, and R.K. Stutman, Work￾ing through Conflict: Strategies for Relationships, Groups, 
and Organizations, 7th ed. (Oxon, UK: Routledge, 2016), 
Chap. 2.
28. G.E. Martin and T.J. Bergman, “The Dynamics of Behav￾ioral Response to Conflict in the Workplace,” Journal of 
Occupational & Organizational Psychology 69 (1996): 
377–87; K.A. Kennedy and E. Pronin, “When Disagree￾ment Gets Ugly: Perceptions of Bias and the Escalation 
of Conflict,” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin
34, no. 6 (2008): 833–48; L.F. Smyth, “Escalation and 
Mindfulness,” Negotiation Journal 28, no. 1 (2012): 
45–72.
29. R.E. Walton and J.M. Dutton, “The Management of 
Conflict: A Model and Review,” Administrative Science 
Quarterly 14 (1969): 73–84; S.M. Schmidt and T.A. 
Kochan, “Conflict: Toward Conceptual Clarity,” 
Administrative Science Quarterly 17, no. 3 (1972): 359–70. 
30. K.A. Jehn, C. Chadwick, and S.M.B. Thatcher, “To 
Agree or Not to Agree: The Effects of Value Congru￾ence, Individual Demographic Dissimilarity, and Con￾flict on Workgroup Outcomes,” International Journal of 
Conflict Management 8 (1997): 287–305; A.N. Garman, 
D.C. Leach, and N. Spector, “Worldviews in Collision: 
19. R.S. Lau and A.T. Cobb, “Understanding the Connec￾tions between Relationship Conflict and Performance: 
The Intervening Roles of Trust and Exchange,” Journal 
of Organizational Behavior 31, no. 6 (2010): 898–917. 
20. C.K.W. De Dreu and L.R. Weingart, “Task versus Rela￾tionship Conflict, Team Performance, and Team Mem￾ber Satisfaction: A Meta-Analysis,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology 88 (2003): 587–604; A.C. Mooney, P.J. 
Holahan, and A.C. Amason, “Don’t Take It Personally: 
Exploring Cognitive Conflict as a Mediator of Affective 
Conflict,” Journal of Management Studies 44, no. 5 
(2007): 733–58; K. Choi and B. Cho, “Competing 
Hypotheses Analyses of the Associations between Group 
Task Conflict and Group Relationship Conflict,” Journal 
of Organizational Behavior 32, no. 8 (2011): 1106–26. 
21. J.X. Yang and K.W. Mossholder, “Decoupling Task 
and Relationship Conflict: The Role of Intergroup 
Emotional Processing,” Journal of Organizational 
Behavior 25 (2004): 589–605; B.H. Bradley et al., “Ready 
to Rumble: How Team Personality Composition and 
Task Conflict Interact to Improve Performance,” Journal 
of Applied Psychology 98, no. 2 (2013): 385–92; B.H. 
Bradley et al., “Reaping the Benefits of Task Conflict 
in Teams: The Critical Role of Team Psychological Safety 
Climate,” Journal of Applied Psychology 97, no. 1 (2012): 
151–58. 
22. P.L. Curseu, S. Boros, and L.A.G. Oerlemans, “Task and 
Relationship Conflict in Short-Term and Long-Term 
Groups: The Critical Role of Emotion Regulation,” Inter￾national Journal of Conflict Management 23, no. 1 (2012): 
97–107; A. Schlaerth, N. Ensari, and J. Christian, “A 
Meta-Analytical Review of the Relationship between 
Emotional Intelligence and Leaders’ Constructive 
Conflict Management,” Group Processes & Intergroup 
Relations 16, no. 1 (2013): 126–36; N.L. Jimmieson, 
M.K. Tucker, and J.L. Campbell, “Task Conflict Leads 
to Relationship Conflict When Employees Are Low in 
Trait Self-Control: Implications for Employee Strain,” 
Personality and Individual Differences 113 (July 2017): 
209–18; H.R. Flores, X. Jiang, and C.C. Manz, 
“Intra-Team Conflict: The Moderating Effect of Emo￾tional Self-Leadership,” International Journal of Conflict 
Management 29, no. 3 (2018): 424–44.
23. F.R.C. de Wit, L.L. Greer, and K.A. Jehn, “The Paradox 
of Intragroup Conflict: A Meta-Analysis,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology 97, no. 2 (2012): 360–90; S.E. Hum￾phrey et al., “Team Conflict Dynamics: Implications of a 
Dyadic View of Conflict for Team Performance,” Organi￾zational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 142 
(2017): 58–70; T.A. O’Neill and M.J.W. McLarnon, “Op￾timizing Team Conflict Dynamics for High Performance 
Teamwork,” Human Resource Management Review 28, no. 
4 (2018): 378–94.
24. A.C. Edmondson and Z. Lei, “Psychological Safety: The 
History, Renaissance, and Future of an Interpersonal 
Construct,” Annual Review of Organizational Psychology 
and Organizational Behavior 1, no. 1 (2014): 23–43; D. 
Tjosvold, A.S.H. Wong, and N.Y.F. Chen, 427
Review 40 (2015): 235–62; D. Ames, A. Lee, and A. 
Wazlawek, “Interpersonal Assertiveness: Inside the 
Balancing Act,” Social and Personality Psychology Com￾pass 11 (2017): e12317; C. Samba, D. Van Knippenberg, 
and C.C. Miller, “The Impact of Strategic Dissent on 
Organizational Outcomes: A Meta-Analytic Integration,” 
Strategic Management Journal 39 (2018): 379–402.
39. M. Hewstone, M. Rubin, and H. Willis, “Intergroup 
Bias,” Annual Review of Psychology 53 (2002): 575–604; 
T. Yamagishi and N. Mifune, “Social Exchange and 
Solidarity: In-Group Love or Out-Group Hate?,” Evolution 
and Human Behavior 30 (2009): 229–37; N. Halevy, O. 
Weisel, and G. Bornstein, “‘In-Group Love’ and 
‘Out-Group Hate’ in Repeated Interaction between 
Groups,” Journal of Behavioral Decision Making 25 
(2012): 188–95; O. Weisel and R. Böhm, “‘Ingroup Love’ 
and ‘Outgroup Hate’ in Intergroup Conflict between 
Natural Groups,” Journal of Experimental Social 
Psychology 60 (2015): 110–20.
40. M.P. Follett, “Constructive Conflict,” in Dynamic Admin￾istration: The Collected Papers of Mary Parker Follett, ed. 
H.C. Metcalf and L. Urwick, (Bath, UK: Management 
Publications Trust, 1941), 30–49; R.R. Blake, H.A. 
Shepard, and J.S. Mouton, Managing Intergroup Conflict 
in Industry (Houston: Gulf Publishing, 1964); T. Ruble 
and K. Thomas, “Support for a Two-Dimensional Model 
of Conflict Behavior,” Organizational Behavior and 
Human Performance 16 (1976): 143–55; C.K.W. De Dreu 
et al., “A Theory-Based Measure of Conflict Management 
Strategies in the Workplace,” Journal of Organizational 
Behavior 22 (2001): 645–68; D. Tjosvold, A.S.H. Wong, 
and N.Y.F. Chen, “Constructively Managing Conflicts 
in Organizations,” Annual Review of Organizational 
Psychology and Organizational Behavior 1 (2014): 545–68; 
K.E. Johnson and J.A. Hall, “Validity of Self-Reported 
Conflict Handling Preferences and the Role of Self￾Enhancement,” International Journal of Conflict Manage￾ment 29 (2018): 543–63.
41. D. Ames, A. Lee, and A. Wazlawek, “Interpersonal 
Assertiveness: Inside the Balancing Act,” Social and 
Personality Psychology Compass 11, no. 6 (2017): e12317.
42. Q. Wang, E.L. Fink, and D.A. Cai, “The Effect of Con￾flict Goals on Avoidance Strategies: What Does Not 
Communicating Communicate?,” Human Communica￾tion Research 38, no. 2 (2012): 222–52. 
43. Several studies have identified personal characteristics 
that predict a person’s preferred conflict style. For 
example, see P.J. Moberg, “Linking Conflict Strategy 
to the Five-Factor Model: Theoretical and Empirical 
Foundations,” International Journal of Conflict Manage￾ment 12 (2001): 47–68; J.E. Barbuto Jr., K.A. Phipps, 
and Y. Xu, “Testing Relationships between Personality, 
Conflict Styles and Effectiveness,” International Journal 
of Conflict Management 21 (2010): 434–47; M. Gunkel, 
C. Schlaegel, and V. Taras, “Cultural Values, Emotional 
Intelligence, and Conflict Handling Styles: A Global 
Study,” Journal of World Business 51 (2016): 568–85; 
L. Parmer, “Relationships between Philosophical Values 
Conflict and Collaboration across Professional Lines,” 
Journal of Organizational Behavior 27 (2006): 829–49; 
L.L. Greer et al., “Why and When Hierarchy Impacts 
Team Effectiveness: A Meta-Analytic Integration,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 103 (2018): 591–613; X.P. 
Zhang et al., “One World, Two Realities: Perception 
Differences between Software Developers and Testers,” 
Journal of Computer Information Systems 58 (2018): 
385–94.
31. J. Joseph, “Managing Change after the Merger: The 
Value of Pre-Merger Ingroup Identities,” Journal of 
Organizational Change Management 27, no. 3 (2014): 
430–48; H.E. Yildiz, “‘Us vs. Them’ or ‘Us over Them’? 
On the Roles of Similarity and Status in M&As,” 
International Business Review 25, no. 1, Part A (2016): 
51–65; R.M. Sarala, E. Vaara, and P. Junni, “Beyond 
Merger Syndrome and Cultural Differences: New 
Avenues for Research on the ‘Human Side’ of Global 
Mergers and Acquisitions (M&As),” Journal of World 
Business 54, no. 4 (2019): 307–21.
32. J. Brett, “Intercultural Challenges in Managing 
Workplace Conflict—A Call for Research,” Cross Cultural 
& Strategic Management 25, no. 1 (2018): 32–52.
33. D.R. Hillman, “Understanding Multigenerational Work￾Value Conflict Resolution,” Journal of Workplace 
Behavioral Health 29, no. 3 (2014): 240–57; S. Lyons and 
L. Kuron, “Generational Differences in the Workplace: 
A Review of the Evidence and Directions for Future 
Research,” Journal of Organizational Behavior 35, no. S1 
(2014): S139–57; M.J. Urick et al., “Understanding and 
Managing Intergenerational Conflict: An Examination 
of Influences and Strategies,” Work, Aging and Retirement 3, 
no. 2 (2017): 166–85.
34. P.C. Earley and G.B. Northcraft, “Goal Setting, Resource 
Interdependence, and Conflict Management,” in Manag￾ing Conflict: An Interdisciplinary Approach, ed. M.A. 
Rahim (New York: Praeger, 1989), 161–70; K. Jehn, “A 
Multimethod Examination of the Benefits and Detri￾ments of Intragroup Conflict,” Administrative Science 
Quarterly 40 (1995): 245–82; P.T. Coleman et al., “Navi￾gating Conflict and Power at Work: The Effects of Power 
and Interdependence Asymmetries on Conflict in Orga￾nizations,” Journal of Applied Social Psychology 43, no. 10 
(2013): 1963–83.
35. J.G. March and H.A. Simon, Organizations (New York: 
John Wiley & Sons, 1958), 126.
36. M. Isaac, “Inside Uber’s Aggressive, Unrestrained Work￾place Culture,” New York Times, February 22, 2017.
37. A. Risberg, “Employee Experiences of Acquisition Pro￾cesses,” Journal of World Business 36 (2001): 58–84; G. 
Karamustafa and S.C. Schneider, “Buffering and Bridg￾ing: How Leaders Can Make a Difference during the 
Post-Merger Integration Process,” in Research Handbook 
of Global Leadership, ed. L. Zander (Cheltenham, UK: 
Edward Elgar Publishing, 2020), 288–306.
38. L.R. Weingart et al., “The Directness and Oppositional 
Intensity of Conflict Expression,” Academy of Management 428
49. A. Ergeneli, S.M. Camgoz, and P.B. Karapinar, “The Re￾lationship between Self-Efficacy and Conflict-Handling 
Styles in Terms of Relative Authority Positions of the 
Two Parties,” Social Behavior & Personality: An International 
Journal 38, no. 1 (2010): 13–28. 
50. K. Leung et al., “Harmony and Conflict: A Cross-Cultural 
Investigation in China and Australia,” Journal of Cross￾Cultural Psychology 42 (2011): 795–816; W.-F. Lin et al., 
“We Can Make It Better: ‘We’ Moderates the Relation￾ship Between a Compromising Style in Interpersonal 
Conflict and Well-Being,” Journal of Happiness Studies 17 
(2016): 41–57.
51. C.H. Tinsley, “How Negotiators Get to Yes: Predicting 
the Constellation of Strategies Used across Cultures to 
Negotiate Conflict,” Journal of Applied Psychology 86 
(2001): 583–93; M. Gunkel, C. Schlaegel, and V. Taras, 
“Cultural Values, Emotional Intelligence, and Conflict 
Handling Styles: A Global Study,” Journal of World 
Business 51 (2016): 568–85.
52. F.P. Brew and D.R. Cairns, “Styles of Managing 
Interpersonal Workplace Conflict in Relation to Status 
and Face Concern: A Study with Anglos and Chinese,” 
International Journal of Conflict Management 15 (2004): 
27–57; A. C-Y. Peng and D. Tjosvold, “Social Face 
Concerns and Conflict Avoidance of Chinese Employees 
with Their Western or Chinese Managers,” Human 
Relations 64 (2011): 1031–50; X. Li, V. Worm, and P. Xie, 
“Towards an Integrative Framework of Conflict-Handling 
Behaviour: Integrating Western and Chinese Perspectives,” 
Asia Pacific Business Review 24 (2018): 22–36; J. Brett, 
“Intercultural Challenges in Managing Workplace 
Conflict—A Call for Research,” Cross Cultural & Strategic 
Management 25 (2018): 32–52.
53. J.L. Holt and C.J. DeVore, “Culture, Gender, Organiza￾tional Role, and Styles of Conflict Resolution: A Meta￾Analysis,” International Journal of Intercultural Relations
29, no. 2 (2005): 165–96; M. Davis, S. Capobianco, and 
L. Kraus, “Gender Differences in Responding to Conflict 
in the Workplace: Evidence from a Large Sample of 
Working Adults,” Sex Roles 63, no. 7 (2010): 500–14; 
B.M. Gayle, R.W. Preiss, and M. Allen, “Where Are 
We Now? A Meta-Analytic Review of Sex Difference 
Expectations for Conflict Management Strategy Selection,” 
in Managing Interpersonal Conflict: Advances through 
Meta-Analysis, ed. N.A. Burrell, et al. (New York: 
Routledge, 2014), 226–47.
54. K. Lewin, Resolving Social Conflicts (New York: Harper, 
1948). 
55. M. Sherif, “Superordinate Goals in the Reduction of 
Intergroup Conflict,” American Journal of Sociology 63, 
no. 4 (1958): 349–56; J.D. Hunger and L.W. Stern, “An 
Assessment of the Functionality of the Superordinate 
Goal in Reducing Conflict,” Academy of Management 
Journal 19, no. 4 (1976): 591–605.
56. K.M. Eisenhardt, J.L. Kahwajy, and L.J. Bourgeois III, 
“How Management Teams Can Have a Good Fight,”
Harvard Business Review (July/August 1997): 77–85; O. 
Doucet, J. Poitras, and D. Chenevert, “The Impacts of 
and Conflict Management Styles,” International Journal 
of Conflict Management 29 (2017): 236–52.
44. D.W. Johnson et al., “Effects of Cooperative, Competitive, 
and Individualistic Goal Structures on Achievement: 
A Meta-Analysis,” Psychological Bulletin 89 (1981): 
47–62; G.A. Callanan, C.D. Benzing, and D.F. Perri, 
“Choice of Conflict-Handling Strategy: A Matter of 
Context,” Journal of Psychology 140 (2006): 269–88; 
T.J. Hargrave and A.H. Van de Ven, “Integrating 
Dialectical and Paradox Perspectives on Managing 
Contradictions in Organizations,” Organization Studies
38 (2017): 319–39.
45. X.M. Song, J. Xile, and B. Dyer, “Antecedents and Con￾sequences of Marketing Managers’ Conflict-Handling 
Behaviors,” Journal of Marketing 64 (2000): 50–66; L.A. 
DeChurch, K.L. Hamilton, and C. Haas, “Effects of 
Conflict Management Strategies on Perceptions of 
Intragroup Conflict,” Group Dynamics 11, no. 1 (2007): 
66–78; D.G. Oore, M.P. Leiter, and D.E. LeBlanc, 
“Individual and Organizational Factors Promoting 
Successful Responses to Workplace Conflict,” Canadian 
Psychology 56, no. 3 (2015): 301–10.
46. G.A. Chung-Yan and C. Moeller, “The Psychosocial 
Costs of Conflict Management Styles,” International 
Journal of Conflict Management 21, no. 4 (2010): 382–99. 
47. Several variations of this quotation have appeared over 
the past century. The field of marketing has an even 
older version of this quotation—Win an argument and 
lose a sale (or customer). Marketing textbooks and trade 
publications cited it in the 1890s. The “friends” version 
of this quotation has occasionally been attributed to 
Edward Wood, 1st Earl of Halifax, but we could not ver￾ify this. In any event, the earliest marketing/sales version 
appeared before Lord Halifax was an adult. Dale Carnegie 
definitely popularized the idea behind the notion that 
winning arguments loses friends. The entire first chapter 
of Part 3 in his best-selling book How to Win Friends and 
Influence People (1936) is devoted to this topic: “You 
Can’t Win an Argument.” The version of the quotation 
cited here is published in E. Knowles, Little Oxford 
Dictionary of Proverbs (Oxford, UK: Oxford University 
Press, 2009), 21.
48. J.B. Bear, L.R. Weingart, and G. Todorova, “Gender and 
the Emotional Experience of Relationship Conflict: The 
Differential Effectiveness of Avoidant Conflict Manage￾ment,” Negotiation and Conflict Management Research 7, 
no. 4 (2014): 213–31; A. Chunyan Peng and D. Tjosvold, 
“Social Face Concerns and Conflict Avoidance of 
Chinese Employees with Their Western or Chinese 
Managers,” Human Relations 64, no. 8 (2011): 1031–50; 
I. Yang, “Perceived Conflict Avoidance by Managers and 
Its Consequences on Subordinates’ Attitudes,” Business 
Ethics: A European Review 24, no. 3 (2015): 282–96; Z.-X. 
Zhang and X. Wei, “Superficial Harmony and Conflict 
Avoidance Resulting from Negative Anticipation in the 
Workplace,” Management and Organization Review 13, 
no. 4 (2017): 795–820.429
Rejoinders, and a Challenge,” The Journal of Applied 
Behavioral Science 45, no. 1 (2009): 141–58; L. Shamoa-Nir, 
“The Window Becomes a Mirror: The Use of the Johari 
Window Model to Evaluate Stereotypes in Intergroup 
Dialogue in Israel,” Israel Affairs 23, no. 4 (2017): 727–46.
64. R.R. Blake and J.S. Mouton, “Reactions to Intergroup 
Competition under Win-Lose Conditions,” Management 
Science 7, no. 4 (1961): 420–35; R.R. Blake and 
J.S. Mouton, Solving Costly Organizational Conflicts, 
(San Francisco: Jossey-Bass Publishers, 1984), Chapter 6; 
M.L. Marks, “Merger Management HR’s Way,” 
HRMagazine 36, no. 5 (1991): 60; G. Gemmill and 
M. Elmes, “Mirror, Mask, and Shadow: Psychodynamic 
Aspects of Intergroup Relations,” Journal of Management 
Inquiry 2, no. 1 (1993): 43–51.
65. A.-K. Newheiser and J.F. Dovidio, “Individual Differences 
and Intergroup Bias: Divergent Dynamics Associated 
with Prejudice and Stereotyping,” Personality and Individ￾ual Differences 53, no. 1 (2012): 70–74; L. Cosmides and 
J. Tooby, “Evolutionary Psychology: New Perspectives on 
Cognition and Motivation,” Annual Review of Psychology
64 (2013): 201–29.
66. M.A. Von Glinow, D.L. Shapiro, and J.M. Brett, “Can 
We Talk, and Should We? Managing Emotional Conflict 
in Multicultural Teams,” Academy of Management Review
29, no. 4 (2004): 578–92; X. Li, V. Worm, and P. Xie, 
“Towards an Integrative Framework of Conflict-Handling 
Behaviour: Integrating Western and Chinese Perspec￾tives,” Asia Pacific Business Review 24, no. 1 (2018): 
22–36.
67. J.R. Galbraith, Organization Design (Addison-Wesley 
Pub. Co., 1977), 132.
68. P.R. Lawrence and J.W. Lorsch, “New Management 
Job: The Integrator,” Harvard Business Review, December 
1967, 142–51; J.R. Galbraith, Organization Design
(Addison-Wesley Pub. Co., 1977), 152–58; R. Cappetta 
and P. Cillo, “Managing Integrators Where Integration 
Matters: Insights from Symbolic Industries,” The Interna￾tional Journal of Human Resource Management 19, no. 12 
(2008): 2235–51.
69. J.G. March and H.A. Simon, Organizations (New York: 
John Wiley & Sons, 1958), 126.
70. A.R. Elangovan, “The Manager as the Third Party: De￾ciding How to Intervene in Employee Disputes,” in Nego￾tiation: Readings, Exercises, and Cases, ed. R.J. Lewicki, 
J.A. Litterer, and D. Saunders (New York: McGraw Hill, 
1999), 458–69; D.E. Conlon et al., “Third Party Inter￾ventions across Cultures: No ‘One Best Choice,’” in 
Research in Personnel and Human Resources Management
(Greenwich, CT: JAI, 2007), 309–49. A broader varia￾tion of third-party conflict resolution is peacemaking. 
See: X. Zhang et al., “Peacemaking at the Workplace: 
A Systematic Review,” Negotiation and Conflict Manage￾ment Research 11, no. 3 (2018): 204–24.
71. J.W. Thibaut and L. Walker, Procedural Justice: A Psycho￾logical Analysis (Hillsdale, N.J.: L. Erlbaum Associates, 
1975); B.H. Sheppard, “Managers as Inquisitors: Lessons 
Leadership on Workplace Conflicts,” International Jour￾nal of Conflict Management 20, no. 4 (2009): 340–54; 
J. DiBenigno, “Anchored Personalization in Managing 
Goal Conflict between Professional Groups: The Case of 
U.S. Army Mental Health Care,” Administrative Science 
Quarterly 63, no. 3 (2018): 526–69.
57. R.S. Lau and A.T. Cobb, “Understanding the Connec￾tions between Relationship Conflict and Performance: 
The Intervening Roles of Trust and Exchange,” Journal 
of Organizational Behavior 31 (2010): 898–917; D.E. Rast, 
M.A. Hogg, and D. van Knippenberg, “Intergroup 
Leadership across Distinct Subgroups and Identities,” 
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 44 (2018): 
1090–103.
58. M.-G. Seo and N.S. Hill, “Understanding the Human 
Side of Merger and Acquisition: An Integrative Frame￾work,” The Journal of Applied Behavioral Science 41 
(2005): 422–43; H.E. Yildiz, “‘Us vs. Them’ or ‘Us over 
Them’? On the Roles of Similarity and Status in M&As,” 
International Business Review 25, Part A (2016): 51–65; 
F. Du and K. Xu, “The Path to Independence: Board 
Cohesion, Cognitive Conflict, and Information Sharing,” 
Journal of Management Accounting Research 30 (2018): 
31–54.
59. J. Sanchez-Burks, C.-Y. Cheng, and F. Lee, “Taking 
Advantage of Differences: Increasing Team Innovation 
through Identity Integration,” in Diversity and Groups, 
vol. 11, Research on Managing Groups and Teams 11 
(Bingley, UK: Emerald Group Publishing Limited, 2008), 
55–73; A.M. Carton and B.A. Tewfik, “Perspective—A 
New Look at Conflict Management in Work Groups,” 
Organization Science 27 (2016): 1125–41; H. Rubinstein, 
“The Importance of Multiple Perspectives,” in Applying 
Behavioural Science to the Private Sector: Decoding What 
People Say and What They Do, ed. H. Rubinstein 
(Cham, Switzerland: Palgrave Pivot, 2018), 89–106; 
T. Wei and J. Clegg, “Effect of Organizational Identity 
Change on Integration Approaches in Acquisitions: 
Role of Organizational Dominance,” British Journal of 
Management 29 (2018): 337–55.
60. J. DiBenigno, “Anchored Personalization in Managing 
Goal Conflict between Professional Groups: The Case of 
U.S. Army Mental Health Care,” Administrative Science 
Quarterly 63, no. 3 (2018): 526–69.
61. J.F. Dovidio et al., “Reducing Intergroup Bias through 
Intergroup Contact: Twenty Years of Progress and Future 
Directions,” Group Processes & Intergroup Relations
20 (2017): 606–20; R. Böhm, H. Rusch, and J. Baron, 
“The Psychology of Intergroup Conflict: A Review of 
Theories and Measures,” Journal of Economic Behavior 
& Organization, 178 (2020): 947–62.
62. B. Waber, J. Magnolfi, and G. Lindsay, “Workspaces 
That Move People,” Harvard Business Review 92 (October 
2014); S. Baker, “Communication a Key Thread for 
Winners,” Pensions & Investments 45, no. 25 (December 11, 
2017): 0022.
63. J. Luft, Of Human Interaction (Palo Alto, CA: National 
Press, 1969); E.H. Schein, “Reactions, Reflections, 430
1–13; L.B. Bingham, “Employment Dispute Resolution: 
The Case for Mediation,” Conflict Resolution Quarterly
22, no. 1/2 (2004): 145–74; M. Hyde et al., “Workplace 
Conflict Resolution and the Health of Employees 
in the Swedish and Finnish Units of an Industrial 
Company,” Social Science & Medicine 63, no. 8 (2006): 
2218–27. 
79. W.H. Ross and D.E. Conlon, “Hybrid Forms of Third￾Party Dispute Resolution: Theoretical Implications of 
Combining Mediation and Arbitration,” Academy of 
Management Review 25, no. 2 (2000): 416–27; W.H. 
Ross, C. Brantmeier, and T. Ciriacks, “The Impact of 
Hybrid Dispute-Resolution Procedures on Constituent 
Fairness Judgments,” Journal of Applied Social Psychology
32, no. 6 (2002): 1151–88. 
80. L.L. Thompson, J. Wang, and B.C. Gunia, “Negotiation,” 
Annual Review of Psychology 61 (2010): 491–515; B. 
O’Neill, “International Negotiation: Some Conceptual 
Developments,” Annual Review of Political Science 21 
(2018): 515–33.
81. Several models of negotiations have been developed. 
Preparation (also called planning) is a key part of these 
models in organizational settings. See, for example: 
D. Jang, H.A. Elfenbein, and W.P. Bottom, “More than 
a Phase: Form and Features of a General Theory of 
Negotiation,” Academy of Management Annals 12, no. 1 
(2018): 318–56.
82. R. Stagner and H. Rosen, Psychology of Union–Management 
Relations (Belmont, CA: Wadsworth, 1965), 95–96, 108–10; 
R.E. Walton and R.B. McKersie, A Behavioral Theory of 
Labor Negotiations: An Analysis of a Social Interaction System 
(New York: McGraw Hill, 1965), 41–46; L. Thompson, 
The Mind and Heart of the Negotiator (Upper Saddle 
River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1998), Chap. 2. 
83. A. Tversky and D. Kahneman, “Judgment under 
Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases,” Science 185, no. 
4157 (1974): 1124–31; J.D. Jasper and S.D. Christman, 
“A Neuropsychological Dimension for Anchoring 
Effects,” Journal of Behavioral Decision Making 18 (2005): 
343–69. 
84. S. Doctoroff, “Reengineering Negotiations,” Sloan 
Management Review 39 (1998): 63–71; D.C. Zetik and 
A.F. Stuhlmacher, “Goal Setting and Negotiation Perfor￾mance: A Meta-Analysis,” Group Processes & Intergroup 
Relations 5 (2002): 35–52. 
85. A. Caputo, “A Literature Review of Cognitive Biases in 
Negotiation Processes,” International Journal of Conflict 
Management 24 (2013): 374–98; A.B.V. Zant and L.J. 
Kray, “Negotiation and Conflict Resolution: A Behav￾ioral Decision Research Perspective,” in The Wiley Black￾well Handbook of Judgment and Decision Making, ed. G. 
Keren and G. Wu (Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons, 
Ltd, 2015), 828–48; M. Schaerer, D.D. Loschelder, and 
R.I. Swaab, “Bargaining Zone Distortion in Negotiations: 
The Elusive Power of Multiple Alternatives,” Organiza￾tional Behavior and Human Decision Processes 137 (2016): 
156–71.
from the Law,” in Bargaining inside Organizations, ed. 
M.H. Bazerman and R.J. Lewicki (Beverly Hills, CA: 
Sage, 1983).
72. J.A. Wall and T.C. Dunne, “Mediation Research: A 
Current Review,” Negotiation Journal 28, no. 2 (2012): 
217–44; K. Bollen and M. Euwema, “Workplace Media￾tion: An Underdeveloped Research Area,” Negotiation 
Journal 29, no. 3 (2013): 329–53. Some researchers 
suggest that there are several forms of mediation, not all 
of which have high process and low decision control. 
See: D.L. Shapiro and E.N. Sherf, “The Role of Conflict 
in Managing Justice,” in The Oxford Handbook of Justice 
in the Workplace, ed. R. Cropanzano and M.L. Ambrose 
(New York: Oxford University Press, 2015), 443–60.
73. M. Asimow, “Inquisitorial Adjudication and Mass 
Justice in American Administrative Law,” in The Nature 
of Inquisitorial Processes in Administrative Regimes: Global 
Perspectives, ed. L. Jacobs and S. Baglay (Ashgate, 2013), 
93–112; D.J. Bussel, “A Third Way: Examiners as 
Inquisitors,” American Bankruptcy Law Journal 90 
(2016): 59–127.
74. B.H. Sheppard, “Managers as Inquisitors: Lessons from 
the Law,” in Bargaining inside Organizations, ed. M.H. 
Bazerman and R.J. Lewicki (Beverly Hills, CA: Sage, 
1983). Even in cultures that support managerial mediation, 
managers slip easily into inquisition and arbitration 
approaches where conflict has escalated. See M.K. Kozan, 
C. Ergin, and K. Varoglu, “Bases of Power and Conflict 
Intervention Strategy: A Study on Turkish Managers,” 
International Journal of Conflict Management 25, no. 1 
(2014): 38–60.
75. R. Karambayya and J.M. Brett, “Managers Handling 
Disputes: Third Party Roles and Perceptions of Fairness,” 
Academy of Management Journal 32 (1989): 687–704; 
B.M. Goldman et al., “The Role of Third Parties/Media￾tion in Managing Conflict in Organizations,” in The 
Psychology of Conflict and Conflict Management in Organi￾zations, ed. C.K.W. De Dreu and M.J. Gelfand (New 
York: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 2008).
76. A.R. Elangovan, “Managerial Intervention in Organiza￾tional Disputes: Testing a Prescriptive Model of Strategy 
Selection,” International Journal of Conflict Management
4 (1998): 301–35; P.S. Nugent, “Managing Conflict: 
Third-Party Interventions for Managers,” Academy of 
Management Executive 16, no. 1 (2002): 139–54. 
77. K. Bollen, H. Ittner, and M.C. Euwema, “Mediating 
Hierarchical Labor Conflicts: Procedural Justice Makes 
a Difference—For Subordinates,” Group Decision and 
Negotiation 21, no. 5 (2012): 621–36; R. Nesbit, T. Nabatchi, 
and L.B. Bingham, “Employees, Supervisors, and 
Workplace Mediation: Experiences of Justice and Settle￾ment,” Review of Public Personnel Administration 32, no. 3 
(2012): 260–87. 
78. J.P. Meyer, J.M. Gemmell, and P.G. Irving, “Evaluating 
the Management of Interpersonal Conflict in Organiza￾tions: A Factor-Analytic Study of Outcome Criteria,” 
Canadian Journal of Administrative Sciences 14 (1997): 431
Outcomes,” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 39, 
no. 2 (2003): 101–17. 
95. C. Thuderoz, “Why Do We Respond to a Concession 
with Another Concession? Reciprocity and Compro￾mise,” Negotiation Journal 33, no. 1 (2017): 71–83.
96. D. Malhotra, “The Fine Art of Making Concessions,” 
Negotiation (2006): 3–5. 
97. A.F. Stuhlmacher, T.L. Gillespie, and M.V. Champagne, 
“The Impact of Time Pressure in Negotiation: A Meta￾Analysis,” International Journal of Conflict Management 9 
(1998): 97–116; C.K.W. De Dreu, “Time Pressure and 
Closing of the Mind in Negotiation,” Organizational Be￾havior and Human Decision Processes 91 (2003): 280–95; 
P.J. Carnevale, “Strategic Time in Negotiation,” Current 
Opinion in Psychology, 26 (2019): 106–12.
98. As with other forms of time pressure, the exploding offer 
effects on negotiation outcomes are complex. Those who 
apply these offers can be worse off in the negotiation un￾der some circumstances. See N. Lau et al., “Exploding 
Offers Can Blow up in More Than One Way,” Decision 
Analysis 11, no. 3 (2014): 171–88; W. Güth and M.G. 
Kocher, “More Than Thirty Years of Ultimatum Bargain￾ing Experiments: Motives, Variations, and a Survey of 
the Recent Literature,” Journal of Economic Behavior & 
Organization 108 (2014): 396–409.
99. M. Olekalns and P.L. Smith, “Moments in Time: Meta￾cognition, Trust, and Outcomes in Dyadic Negotiations,” 
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 31, no. 12 
(2005): 1696–707. 
100. D.W. Choi, “Shared Metacognition in Integrative Negoti￾ation,” International Journal of Conflict Management 21, 
no. 3 (2010): 309–33. 
101. J.M. Brett et al., “Sticks and Stones: Language, Face, and 
Online Dispute Resolution,” Academy of Management 
Journal 50, no. 1 (2007): 85–99; D. Pietroni et al., 
“Emotions as Strategic Information: Effects of Other’s 
Emotional Expressions on Fixed-Pie Perception, Demands, 
and Integrative Behavior in Negotiation,” Journal of 
Experimental Social Psychology 44, no. 6 (2008): 1444–54; 
D. Druckman and M. Olekalns, “Emotions in Negotia￾tion,” Group Decision and Negotiation 17, no. 1 (2008): 1–11; 
M.J. Boland and W.H. Ross, “Emotional Intelligence and 
Dispute Mediation in Escalating and De-Escalating Situa￾tions,” Journal of Applied Social Psychology 40, no. 12 
(2010): 3059–105. 
102. P.J. Carnevale and A.M. Isen, “The Influence of Positive 
Affect and Visual Access on the Discovery of Integrative 
Solutions in Bilateral Negotiation,” Organizational Behav￾ior and Human Decision Processes 37 (1986): 1–13; L. 
Thompson, The Mind and Heart of the Negotiator (Upper 
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1998), Chap. 2.
103. J.W. Salacuse and J.Z. Rubin, “Your Place or Mine? Site 
Location and Negotiation,” Negotiation Journal 6 (1990): 
5–10; G. Brown and M. Baer, “Location in Negotiation: 
Is There a Home Field Advantage?” Organizational Be￾havior and Human Decision Processes 114, no. 2 (2011): 
190–200.
86. L.L. Thompson, J. Wang, and B.C. Gunia, “Negotiation,” 
Annual Review of Psychology 61 (2010): 491–515. Some 
negotiation experts warn that BATNA is often misunder￾stood and that “no deal option” may be a better way of 
viewing such situations. see: J.K. Sebenius, “BATNAs in 
Negotiation: Common Errors and Three Kinds of ‘No,’” 
Negotiation Journal 33, no. 2 (2017): 89–99.
87. R.L. Pinkley et al., “The Power of Phantom Alternatives 
in Negotiation: How What Could Be Haunts What Is,” 
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes
151 (2019): 34–48.
88. L.L. Thompson, “Information Exchange in Negotiation,” 
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 27 (1991): 
161–79; R. Fells, Effective Negotiation: From Research to 
Results, 2nd ed. (Melbourne: Cambridge University 
Press, 2012), Chap. 6.
89. N. Rackham and J. Carlisle, “The Effective Negotiator—
Part I: The Behaviour of Successful Negotiators,” Journal 
of European Industrial Training 2, no. 6 (1978): 6–11; 
J.M. Brett, “Managing Organizational Conflict,” 
Professional Psychology: Research and Practice 15 (1984): 
664–78; R. Fells et al., “Unraveling Business Negotiations 
Using Practitioner Data,” Negotiation and Conflict 
Management Research 8, no. 2 (2015): 119–36.
90. S.R. Covey, The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People (New 
York: Free Press, 1989), pp . 235–260. Covey’s state￾ment was likely inspired by a prayer attributed to Saint 
Francis of Assisi, who lived around 1200. Its translation 
in part says: “Grant that I may not so much seek...To be 
understood as to understand.” This prayer has been 
published in English for more than two centuries. For 
example, see: Episcopal Church, The Book of Common 
Prayer: And Administration of the Sacraments and Other 
Rites and Ceremonies of the Church ... Together with the 
Psalter; Or, Psalms of David (Church Publishing, Inc., 
1803), pg. 833.
91. N. Rackham and J. Carlisle, “The Effective Negotiator—
Part I: The Behaviour of Successful Negotiators,” Journal 
of European Industrial Training 2, no. 6 (1978): 6–11.
92. A.R. Herrman and M. Allen, “Hardline Versus Softline 
Bargaining Strategies: A Meta-Analytic Review,” in 
Managing Interpersonal Conflict: Advances through Meta￾Analysis, ed. N.A. Burrell, et al. (New York: Routledge, 
2014), 213–25; J. Hüffmeier et al., “Being Tough or Being 
Nice? A Meta-Analysis on the Impact of Hard- and 
Softline Strategies in Distributive Negotiations,” Journal 
of Management 40, no. 3 (2014): 866–92.
93. S. Kwon and L.R. Weingart, “Unilateral Concessions 
from the Other Party: Concession Behavior, Attributions, 
and Negotiation Judgments,” Journal of Applied Psychology
89, no. 2 (2004): 263–78; R. Fells, Effective Negotiation
(Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2012), 
Chap. 8. 
94. R.J. Lewicki et al., Negotiation, 4th ed. (New York: 
McGraw Hill/Irwin, 2003), 95; M. Olekalns and P.L. 
Smith, “Testing the Relationships among Negotiators’ 
Motivational Orientations, Strategy Choices, and 432
e. M.D. Seery et al., “Alone against the Group: A Unani￾mously Disagreeing Group Leads to Conformity, but 
Cardiovascular Threat Depends on One’s Goals,” 
Psychophysiology 53, no. 8 (2016): 1263–71; A. Hagemeister 
and J. Volmer, “Do Social Conflicts at Work Affect 
Employees’ Job Satisfaction?: The Moderating Role of 
Emotion Regulation,” International Journal of Conflict 
Management 29, no. 2 (2017): 213–35.
f. W. Samuelson and R. Zeckhauser, “Status Quo Bias in 
Decision Making,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 1, no. 
1 (1988): 7–59; D. Proudfoot and A.C. Kay, “System Jus￾tification in Organizational Contexts: How a Motivated 
Preference for the Status Quo Can Affect Organizational 
Attitudes and Behaviors,” Research in Organizational Be￾havior 34 (2014): 173–87; D. De Clercq and I. Belauste￾guigoitia, “Overcoming the Dark Side of Task Conflict: 
Buffering Roles of Transformational Leadership, 
Tenacity, and Passion for Work,” European Management 
Journal 35, no. 1 (2017): 78–90.
g. A.C. Mooney, P.J. Holahan, and A.C. Amason, “Don’t 
Take It Personally: Exploring Cognitive Conflict as a 
Mediator of Affective Conflict,” Journal of Management 
Studies 44, no. 5 (2007): 733–58; S.J. Beck and J. 
Keyton, “Perceiving Strategic Meeting Interaction,” 
Small Group Research 40, no. 2 (2009): 223–46; L.R. 
Weingart et al., “The Directness and Oppositional Inten￾sity of Conflict Expression,” Academy of Management 
Review 40, no. 2 (2015): 235–62.
h. J. Creswell and K. Draper, “How Under Armour Lost Its 
Edge,” New York Times, January 26, 2020.
i. P. Tomlin, “Hot Desk, Cold Shoulder,” The Guardian, 
November 7, 2005; C.B. Danielsson et al., “The Relation 
between Office Type and Workplace Conflict: A Gender 
and Noise Perspective,” Journal of Environmental Psy￾chology 42 (2015): 161–71; L. Greene, “How Open Of￾fices Are Killing Us,” PsyPost, August 20, 2016; R.L. 
Morrison and K.A. Macky, “The Demands and Re￾sources Arising from Shared Office Spaces,” Applied Er￾gonomics 60 (2017): 103–15; R. Reid, “Let’s Face It, Hot 
Desking Is the Absolute Worst,” Metro UK, January 8, 
2018; M. Yadav et al., “The Irrelevant Speech Effect in 
Multi-Talker Environments: Applications to Open-Plan 
Offices,” The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America
143, no. 3 (2018): 1725; A. Green, “Can We Make 
Hot-Desking Work in Our Office?,” Ask A Manager, 
October 18, 2018; “Fact Sheet: Productivity in Open 
Workplaces,” The Professional Institute of the Public 
Service of Canada, May 29, 2019.
j. “New Interact Report: Many Leaders Shrink from 
Straight Talk with Employees” (Charlotte, NC: Interact, 
February 2016); “Co-Worker Conflicts,” Nulab (blog), 
October 1, 2019; R. Suff, “Managing Conflict in the 
Modern Workplace” (London: Chartered Institute of 
Personnel and Development [CIPD], January 2020); 
“Gartner Survey Shows 47% of Employees Report Being 
Distracted at Work by the U.S. Presidential Election,” 
news release (Arlington, VA: Gartner, February 18, 
2020).
104. J. Margo, “The Persuaders,” Boss Magazine, December 
29, 2000, 38. For a full discussion of the advantages and 
disadvantages of face-to-face and alternative negotiation 
situations, see M.H. Bazerman et al., “Negotiation,” 
Annual Review of Psychology 51 (2000): 279–314. 
105. R. Lewicki, B. Barry, and D. Saunders, Negotiation, 
8th ed. (New York: McGraw Hill Education, 2020), 
Chap. 11.
106. J.A. Kennedy and L.J. Kray, “A Pawn in Someone Else’s 
Game?: The Cognitive, Motivational, and Paradigmatic 
Barriers to Women’s Excelling in Negotiation,” Research 
in Organizational Behavior 35 (2015): 3–28; J. Mazei et al., 
“A Meta-Analysis on Gender Differences in Negotiation 
Outcomes and Their Moderators,” Psychological Bulletin 141, 
no. 1 (2015): 85–104.
107. I. Ayres and P. Siegelman, “Race and Gender Discrimi￾nation in Bargaining for a New Car,” American Economic 
Review 83, no 3 (1995): 304–21; L.J. Kray, J.A. Kennedy, 
and A.B. Van Zant, “Not Competent Enough to Know 
the Difference? Gender Stereotypes about Women’s 
Ease of Being Misled Predict Negotiator Deception,” 
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 125, 
no. 2 (2014): 61–72.
a. J. Shammas, “EasyJet Flight from Gatwick Delayed after 
‘Unbelievable Fight between Staff,’” The Mirror (UK), 
August 24, 2016; E. Kerr, “Passengers ‘Aghast’ at EasyJet 
Crew Spat,” BBC News, August 25, 2016; R. Flood, 
“EasyJet Flight Delayed by Fighting Crew in Bizarre Row 
‘over Bottled Water,’” Sunday Express (UK), August 25, 
2016; S. Francis, “EasyJet Flight ‘Delayed for an Hour 
after Crew Members Fight over Water Bottles,’” Daily 
Mail (UK), August 25, 2016.
b. G. Anders, “Inside Amazon’s Idea Machine: How Bezos 
Decodes Customers,” Forbes, April 23, 2012; J. Kantor 
and D. Streitfeld, “Amazon’s Bruising, Thrilling Workplace,” 
The New York Times, August 16, 2015; N. Ciubotariu, “An 
Amazonian’s Response to ‘Inside Amazon: Wrestling Big 
Ideas in a Bruising Workplace,’” LinkedIn Pulse, LinkedIn, 
August 16, 2015, www.linkedin.com/pulse/amazonians￾response-inside-amazon-wrestling-big-ideas-nick-ciubotariu; 
L. Hook, “Person of the Year: Amazon Web Services’ 
Andy Jassy,” FT.Com (London), March 17, 2016.
c. R. Fisher and W. Ury, Getting to Yes: Negotiating an Agree￾ment without Giving In (Random House, 2012). Although 
few believe task and relationship conflict can be com￾pletely separated (Fisher and Ury included), several 
scholars have developed activities that emphasize the 
possibility of this separation. For example, see: L. Boyd, 
M. Gupta, and F. Kuzmits, “The Evaporating Cloud: A 
Tool for Resolving Workplace Conflict,” International 
Journal of Conflict Management 22, no. 4 (2011): 394–412; 
C.A. Blair and D.E. Desplaces, “Conflict Management 
through the Negotiations Canvas, Getting Participants 
to Understand,” Conflict Resolution Quarterly 36, no. 1 
(2018): 39–51.
d. For a summary of these views, see: T.A. O’Neill et al., 
“The Structure and Function of Team Conflict State Pro￾files,” Journal of Management 44, no. 2 (2018): 811–36.433
CNBC-Make It, August 3, 2021; C.S. Grant, “Black 
Women’s Equal Pay Day 2021: How To Negotiate Your 
Salary Like a Boss,” Black Entertainment Television, 
August 3, 2021.
n. C. Voss and T. Raz, Never Split the Difference: Negotiating 
as If Your Life Depended on It (Random House, 2016), 
Chap.2; C. Clifford, “Ex FBI Negotiator Chris Voss: 
How to Get What You Want,” CNBC, October 16, 2017.
k. Based on information in: B. Sitbon, “Meet, Eat, Scale, 
Repeat,” WeWork Technology (blog), May 29, 2018.
l. B. Horowitz, “The Freaky Friday Management Tech￾nique,” Business Insider, January 20, 2012.
m. C. Lindor, “Black Women Aren’t Paid Fairly—And It Starts 
as Early as Age 16,” Harvard Business Review, August 2, 
2021; C. Lindor, “A Black CEO Shares How She Negotiated 
a $12,000 Raise in Her 20s: ‘It Was Incredibly Exhausting,’” 
Design Credit: Blue globe icon: Merfin/Shutterstock434
chapter
12
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
LO 12-1 Define leadership and shared leadership.
LO 12-2 Describe the four elements of transformational leadership and explain why they are 
important for organizational change.
LO 12-3 Compare managerial leadership with transformational leadership, and describe the 
features of task-oriented, people-oriented, and servant leadership.
LO 12-4 Discuss the elements of path–goal theory and leadership substitutes theory.
LO 12-5 Describe the two components of the implicit leadership perspective.
LO 12-6 Identify eight personal attributes associated with effective leaders and describe 
authentic leadership.
LO 12-7 Discuss cultural and male–female similarities and differences in leadership.
Over the past decade, Melanie Perkins launched and built Canva into one 
of the fastest growing software platform companies in history. The 30-something 
Australian entrepreneur did so with a combination of vision, persistence, and optimism about future 
opportunities. “‘Empowering the world to design’ has been a core part of our vision from our early days,” 
Perkins enthuses. “We want Canva to be the place you can go to by default, and so our focus is on 
creating a simple and intuitive design tool.”
Fifteen years ago, Perkins realized that traditional design software was unnecessarily complex for 
most people who want to create visually appealing web pages, reports, presentations, and other 
designs. She and her partner initially developed a website that simplifies yearbook design, and saw 
its success as a first step to a site for most types of design work.
But Perkins had to overcome innumerable challenges along the way. Dozens of venture capital firms 
rejected her funding requests until one saw Canva’s potential. “Sheer determination has been key to 
Learning Objectives
Leadership in 
Organizational Settings435
PART 3: TEAM PROCESSES
Canva’s success in every way,” says Perkins. “I think I’ve always put a lot of pressure on myself. And 
I think that sort of internal locus of control has been pretty strong.”
Perkins also learned to lead a rapidly growing organization. “In the start, it was astronomical trying 
to figure out all the things about starting a company,” she recalls. “Now we’ve got 600 [currently 2,000] 
people, so there are astronomical challenges trying to make sure that those [employees] are all moving 
towards the one vision, and that the company is structured and set up for success in order to take 
advantage of the huge opportunity ahead of us.”
Ultimately, Perkins sees her role as an optimistic, persevering visionary who motivates employees 
to embrace and realize that vision. “As a leader, I feel my job is to set the vision and the goals for the 
company, and then to work with everyone to empower them to dream big and crazy,” says Perkins. 
“I want to set them up to do the best work of their lives and to achieve those crazy, big goals.”1
The launch and growth of Canva is an example of how Melanie Perkins and other leaders make 
a difference in an organization’s survival and success. This opening case study also highlights how 
leadership includes developing and communicating the company’s vision, empowering employees to 
experiment, and having leadership attributes such as drive and self-concept as a leader. Leadership is 
one of the most researched and discussed topics in the field of organizational behavior. This topic 
Melanie Perkins has led Canva with a combination of vision, persistence, and optimism about the company’s growth 
and success.
Pedro Fiuza/ZUMA Wire/Alamy Stock Photo436 Part Three Team Processes
What Is Leadership?
Several years ago, dozens of leadership experts from around the world reached a consen￾sus that leadership is about influencing, motivating, and enabling others to contribute to￾ward the effectiveness and success of the organizations of which they are members.3
 This 
definition has two key components. First, leaders motivate others through persuasion and 
other influence tactics. They use their communication skills, rewards, and other resources 
to energize the collective toward the achievement of challenging objectives. Second, lead￾ers are enablers. They allocate resources, alter work relationships, minimize external dis￾ruptions, and establish other work environment changes that make it easier for employees 
to achieve organizational objectives.
SHARED LEADERSHIP
At EllisDon Corporation, leaders aren’t just people in management jobs. The award￾winning construction services giant believes that leadership extends to every employee 
in the organization. “Everyone is a leader, everyone is accountable to each other, and 
everyone is involved in the success of the company as a whole,” says EllisDon CEO Geoff 
Smith. “It’s a leadership philosophy throughout our company.” EllisDon supports shared 
leadership by setting objectives and then giving employees a high degree of autonomy to 
achieve them. “Get good people, give them the authority, give them the support, and then 
get out of their way so you create leaders around you,” Smith advises.4
EllisDon CEO Geoff Smith recognizes that leadership is not a formal position in the 
hierarchy; it is actually a set of roles that anyone can and should perform. Companies are 
far more effective when everyone assumes leadership responsibilities in various ways and 
at various times. This emerging view is called shared leadership.5
 Shared leadership is 
based on the idea that the formal leader cannot—and should not—try to perform all leader￾ship tasks. Instead, employees lead one another as the occasion arises.
Shared leadership exists when an employee persuades coworkers to try out a new work 
activity or introduce new technology.6
 It exists when employees help one another through 
social support or organizational citizenship behaviors. 
Shared leadership also exists when employees keep one 
another focused on the task and deadlines. As the late 
Sergio Marchionne, former CEO of Fiat Chrysler and 
Ferrari, proclaimed several years ago: “We’ve abandoned 
the Great Man model of leadership that long character￾ized Fiat and have created a culture where everyone is 
expected to lead.”7
LO 12-1
receives so much attention because we are captivated by the ability of some 
individuals to influence and motivate beyond expectations a large collective 
of people. 
This chapter explores leadership from four perspectives: transformational, 
managerial, implicit, and personal attributes.2 Although some of these 
perspectives are currently more popular than others, each helps us to more fully 
understand the complex issue of leadership. The final section of this chapter 
looks at cross-cultural and sex differences in organizational leadership. But first, 
we learn about the meaning of leadership as well as shared leadership.
leadership
influencing, motivating, and 
enabling others to contribute 
toward the effectiveness and 
success of the organizations of 
which they are members
shared leadership
the view that leadership is a 
role, not a position assigned to 
one person; consequently, 
people within the team and 
organization lead each otherChapter Twelve Leadership in Organizational Settings 437
Shared leadership typically supplements formal leadership; 
that is, employees lead along with the formal manager, rather 
than replace the manager. However, W. L. Gore & Associates, 
Valve Corporation, Morning Star Company, and a few other 
unique companies rely almost completely on shared leadership 
because they don’t have any formal managers on the organiza￾tional chart.8
Shared leadership flourishes in organizations where the 
formal leaders are willing to delegate power and encourage 
employees to take the initiative and risks without fear of fail￾ure (i.e., a learning orientation culture). Shared leadership 
also calls for a collaborative rather than internally competi￾tive culture because employees take on shared leadership 
roles only when their coworkers support them in these roles. 
Furthermore, shared leadership lacks formal authority, so it 
operates best when employees learn to influence others 
through their enthusiasm, logical analysis, and involvement 
of coworkers in their idea or vision.
Transformational Leadership Perspective
Most leadership concepts and practices can be organized into four perspectives: transfor￾mational, managerial, implicit, and personal attributes. By far the most popular of these 
perspectives today—and arguably the most important in the domain of leadership—is 
transformational leadership. Transformational leadership views leaders as change agents. 
They move the organization or work unit in a new direction that will provide better 
opportunities and alignment with the external environment.
There are several models of transformational leadership, but four elements are com￾mon throughout most of them and represent the core concepts of this leadership perspec￾tive (see Exhibit 12.1).9 Transformational leaders create, communicate, and model a 
shared vision for the team or organization. They encourage experimentation so employees 
discover a better path to the future. Through these and other activities, transformational 
leaders also build commitment in followers to strive for that vision.
DEVELOP AND COMMUNICATE A STRATEGIC VISION
The heart of transformational leadership is a strategic vision.10 A vision is a positive repre￾sentation of a future state that energizes and unifies employees.11 The opening case study 
to this chapter described how Melanie Perkins has led Canva’s success through a vision of 
“empowering the world to design.” This future ideal inspires employees at the design plat￾form company to improve the product and dream up new and better ways to serve custom￾ers in this market. Canva’s strategic vision was created by its founder, but some strategic 
visions are formed by employees or other stakeholders and then adopted and championed 
by the formal leader. 
An effective strategic vision has several identifiable features.12 It describes an aspira￾tional future with a higher purpose. This purpose is associated with personal values that 
directly or indirectly fulfill the needs of multiple stakeholders. A values-based vision is 
particularly meaningful and appealing to employees, which motivates them to strive for 
that ideal.
A strategic vision also engages employees because it is a distant goal that is both chal￾lenging and abstract. A vision of the future is challenging because it requires substantial 
change, such as new work practices and belief systems. It is necessarily abstract for two 
LO 12-2
Airbus SE employs more than 130,000 people from 130 nationalities. The 
European aerospace company has thousands of managers and executives, 
yet has adopted the view that every employee should assume a leadership 
role no matter what position they hold. In fact, the company’s Airbus 
Leadership University in Toulouse, France, ultimately serves all employees 
because “Airbus firmly believes that everyone is a leader!”a
Christian Charisius/Alamy Stock Photo
transformational leadership
a leadership perspective that 
explains how leaders change 
teams or organizations by 
creating, communicating, and 
modeling a vision for the 
organization or work unit and 
inspiring employees to strive 
for that vision 438 Part Three Team Processes
reasons. One reason is that the vision hasn’t yet been experienced (at least, not in this 
company or industry), so it isn’t possible to detail exactly what the vision looks like. The 
other reason is that an abstract description enables the vision to remain stable over time, 
yet is sufficiently flexible to accommodate operational adjustments in a shifting external 
environment. As such, a vision describes a broad noble cause related to fulfilling the 
needs of one or more stakeholder groups.
Another feature of an effective vision is that it is unifying. It is a superordinate objec￾tive that bonds employees together and aligns their personal values with the organiza￾tion’s values. In fact, a successful vision is a shared vision because employees collectively 
define themselves by this aspirational image of the future as part of their identification 
with the organization.
Communicate the Vision The effectiveness of a strategic vision depends on how 
leaders convey it to followers and other stakeholders.13 Transformational leaders generate 
meaning and motivation in followers by relying on symbols, metaphors, stories, and other 
vehicles that transcend plain language.14 Metaphors and related communication tools 
“frame” the vision, meaning that they guide or construct the listener’s mental model of 
the situation.
For example, when David Ossip became CEO of Ceridian, which was a payroll soft￾ware company at the time, he broadened the firm’s product offering to human capital 
management software and relentlessly communicated an inspirational vision for its fu￾ture. “Our worldwide focus became something more than just paying people correctly,” 
Ossip explains. “At Ceridian, our brand promise is ‘Makes Work Life Better’—we believe 
that our solutions and our people make work life better for employees everywhere, in any 
role within their organization.” Ossip travelled to Ceridian offices worldwide to discuss 
and demonstrate his personal commitment to the company’s new vision and values. 
“Essentially it came down to a lot of communication, a lot of town halls, and a lot of 
interaction with everyone inside Ceridian, and that’s what I did.”15
Borrowing images from other experiences creates a richer understanding of the abstract 
vision that generates desired emotions and motivates people to pursue the vision. For in￾stance, when MacDonald’s executive George Cohen was faced the daunting challenge 
of opening the first McDonald’s restaurants in Russia (USSR at the time), he frequently 
reminded his team members that they were establishing “hamburger diplomacy.”16
Encourage
experimentation
Model the
vision
Develop/
communicate a
strategic vision
Build
commitment
to the vision
Elements of
Transformational
Leadership
EXHIBIT 12.1
Elements of Transformational 
LeadershipChapter Twelve Leadership in Organizational Settings 439
Strategic Visions of a Serial 
Transformational Leaderb
By any measure, Keith Krach is a transformational leader. 
The serial entrepreneur cofounded or led several technol￾ogy firms, including digital procurement services com￾pany Ariba (now owned by SAP) and most recently 
electronic signature company DocuSign. For each busi￾ness, Krach developed and communicated an inspira￾tional vision of a future that did not previously exist.
At Ariba, Krach described a vision “to lead the elec￾tronic trade revolution, to build a great, sustaining organi￾zation into the next century.” At DocuSign, he inspired 
employees with a noble mission to “change the way busi￾ness is done,” and ultimately “simplify and improve peo￾ple’s lives.” Krach explains that a strategic vision is critical 
to an organization’s success because for employees to 
“spring out of the bed in the morning, they need to know 
that they’re making a difference.”
“A single vision is one more than most people will 
ever produce,” says Mitch Daniels, President of Purdue 
University and former Governor of Indiana. “Keith Krach is 
working on the most recent of a long string of them. And 
unlike so many visionaries, he never fails to make his new 
conceptions real, and powerfully successful.”
Rick Smith, CEO of Equifax, echoes Daniels’ comments 
about Krach as a transformational leader. “Keith is a 
passionate leader known to attract top talent, build high 
performance teams, and inspire a shared vision focused 
around customer success.”
global connections 12.1
Adriano Machado/Reuters/Alamy Stock Photo
Transformational leaders also convey the vision using verbal and nonverbal commu￾nication practices that show humility, sincerity, and a level of passion that reflects their 
personal belief in the vision and their optimism that employees can succeed. They 
strengthen team-orientation and employee self-efficacy by referring to the team’s 
strengths and potential. By focusing on shared experiences and the central role of 
employees in achieving the vision, transformational leaders suppress leader–follower 
differences, deflect attention from themselves, and avoid any image of superiority over 
the team.17
MODEL THE VISION
Transformational leaders not only talk about a vision; they enact it. They “walk the talk” 
by stepping outside the executive suite and doing things that symbolize the vision.18 Lead￾ers model the vision through significant events such as visiting customers, moving their 
offices closer to (or further from) employees, and holding ceremonies to symbolize sig￾nificant change. However, they also enact the vision by ensuring that the more routine 
daily activities—meeting agendas, dress codes, executive schedules—are consistent with the 
vision and its underlying values.
Modeling the vision is important because it legitimizes and demonstrates what the 
vision looks like in practice. It also builds employee trust in the leader. The greater the 
consistency between the leader’s words and actions, the more employees will believe in 
and be willing to follow the leader. “Great leaders walk the talk. They lead by example,” 
observes Mike Perlis, vice-chairman of Forbes Media. “There isn’t anything they ask peo￾ple to do they’re not willing to do themselves.” Ceridian CEO David Ossip also 440 Part Three Team Processes
recognizes the importance of modeling the vision. “When employees are able to see their 
leadership live by the values that guide them, it helps to establish a sense of organizational 
trust and credibility.”19 Surveys report that “leading by example” is one of the most impor￾tant attributes of effective leaders and of a company’s culture.20
ENCOURAGE EXPERIMENTATION
Transformational leadership is about change, and central to any change is discovering 
new behaviors and practices that are better aligned with the desired vision. Transfor￾mational leaders support this journey by encouraging employees to question current prac￾tices and to experiment with new ways that are potentially more consistent with the 
vision’s future state.21 In other words, transformational leaders support a learning 
orientation (see Chapter 7). They encourage employees to continuously question the way 
things are currently done, actively experiment with new ideas and practices, and view 
reasonable mistakes as a natural part of the learning process.22
BUILD COMMITMENT TOWARD THE VISION
Transforming a vision into reality requires employee commitment, and transformational 
leaders build this commitment in several ways.23 Their words, symbols, and stories build 
a contagious enthusiasm that energizes people to adopt the vision as their own. Leaders 
demonstrate a “can-do” attitude by enacting and behaving consistently with their vision. 
This persistence and consistency reflect an image of honesty, trust, and integrity. By en￾couraging experimentation, leaders involve employees in the change process so it is a 
collective activity. Leaders also build commitment through rewards, recognition, and cel￾ebrations as they pass milestones along the road to the desired vision.
®
SELF-ASSESSMENT 12.1: What Are Your Transformational Leadership Tendencies?
TRANSFORMATIONAL AND CHARISMATIC LEADERSHIP
Some experts describe charisma as an essential ingredient of transformational leader￾ship.24 However, the emerging view, which this book adopts, is that charismatic leadership 
is distinct from transformational leadership. Several studies and reviews indicate that cha￾risma is not necessarily part of transformational leadership; in fact, some of its effects on 
employees may be opposite to the effects of transformational leadership.25
Charisma refers to a set of self-presentation characteristics and nonverbal communica￾tion behaviors (i.e., signaling) that generate interpersonal attraction and referent power 
over others as well as follower deference to the charismatic person (see Chapter 10).26 In 
contrast, transformational leadership is a set of behaviors that engage followers toward a 
better future. Charismatic leadership motivates followers directly through the leader’s ref￾erent power, whereas transformational leadership motivates followers through behaviors 
that persuade and earn trust. For instance, communicating an inspiring vision is a trans￾formational leadership behavior that motivates followers to strive for that vision. This 
motivational effect exists separate from the leader’s charismatic appeal.
Being charismatic is not inherently good or bad, but several research studies have con￾cluded that charismatic leadership can have negative consequences.27 One concern is that 
charismatic leadership tends to produce dependency because, by definition, followers 
want to be associated with people who have charisma. Transformational leadership has 
the opposite effect; it builds follower empowerment, which tends to reduce dependence 
on the leader.
learning orientation
a set of beliefs and norms in 
which people are encouraged 
to question past practices, 
learn new ideas, experiment 
putting ideas into practice, and 
view mistakes as part of the 
learning processChapter Twelve Leadership in Organizational Settings 441
Another concern is that leaders who possess the gift of charisma may become intoxi￾cated by this power, which leads to a greater focus on self-interest than on the common 
good. “Charisma becomes the undoing of leaders,” Peter Drucker warned many years ago. 
“It makes them inflexible, convinced of their own infallibility, unable to change.”28 The late 
management guru witnessed the destructive effects of charismatic political leaders in 
Europe a century ago and foresaw that this personal or relational characteristic would create 
similar problems for organizations. The main point here is that transformational leaders are 
not necessarily charismatic, and charismatic leaders are not necessarily transformational.
EVALUATING THE TRANSFORMATIONAL 
LEADERSHIP PERSPECTIVE
Transformational leaders do make a difference.29 Subordinates are more satisfied and 
have higher affective organizational commitment under transformational leaders. They 
also perform their jobs better, engage in more organizational citizenship behaviors, and 
make better or more creative decisions. One study of bank branches reported that organi￾zational commitment and financial performance increased when the branch manager 
completed a transformational leadership training program.30
Did Charismatic Leadership Cause 
Steinhoff’s Downfall?c
Board members of Steinhoff International Holdings anx￾iously waited for CEO Markus Jooste to arrive from Eu￾rope with documents supporting the company’s unaudited 
and overdue financial reports. Instead, after hours of de￾lay, Jooste sent a text message saying that he was quit￾ting, seeking legal counsel, and wouldn’t attend the board 
meeting at all. The South African–based company’s stock 
value plummeted by 90 percent with news of its account￾ing “irregularities.” A recent forensic accounting report 
confirmed the worst: a small group of Steinhoff execu￾tives, “led by a senior management executive,” had en￾gaged in extensive accounting fraud involving more than 
(USD) $7 billion over the previous decade.
Steinhoff’s collapse has been attributed to several fac￾tors, including overpriced acquisitions, a dual reporting 
structure, and a board that failed to provide sufficient 
oversight of management. Another frequently mentioned 
explanation, however, is that Markus Jooste was a charis￾matic leader who mesmerized Steinhoff’s board, execu￾tives, and many external stakeholders. Jooste has been 
portrayed as a “superhuman businessman,” a “ruthlessly 
ambitious” retail star with “extraordinary dealmaking tal￾ent” and “unshakeable confidence.” These characteristics 
were reinforced through his “bold” acquisitions, including 
Poundland (United Kingdom), Mattress Firm (United 
States), Freedom (Australia), and Conforama (France).
Jooste cultivated a small cadre of “fiercely loyal insid￾ers who enjoyed social and financial privileges through 
their close association with Jooste.” He was called the 
“don” of the “Stellenbosch mafia,” referring to his ten￾dency to hire executives educated at his alma mater, 
Stellenbosch University. One South African professor stated 
that Jooste’s “leadership style fostered an institutional 
culture of uncritical subservience and self-censorship” 
and that “only those subordinates who obsequiously 
defer to him benefit from his extensive patronage.”
Jooste’s apparent charisma was even blamed for the 
board’s poor oversight of management. Steinhoff’s chair￾man, who has since resigned, claimed that the accounting 
fraud “came like a bolt out of the blue.” Yet German au￾thorities had been investigating Steinhoff’s accounting 
practices for almost two years and an investment firm 
(Portsea) had written a scathing report about self-dealing 
and potentially illegal financial transfers at the company. 
A well-known investment analyst summed up the 
Steinhoff saga with this warning: “You cannot in this day 
and age have a board full of stooges that rubber-stamp 
what a charismatic CEO wants to get away with.”
global connections 12.2
Roger Bosch/AFP/Getty Images442 Part Three Team Processes
Transformational leadership is currently the most popular leadership perspective, but it 
faces a number of challenges.31 One problem is that some models engage in circular logic. 
They define and measure transformational leadership by its effects on employees (e.g., in￾spire employees), then (not surprisingly) report that this leadership is effective because it 
inspires employees. Instead, transformational leadership needs to be defined purely as a set 
of behaviors that people use to lead others through the change process. A second concern is 
that some transformational leadership theories combine leader behaviors with the personal 
characteristics of leaders. For instance, transformational leaders are described as visionary, 
imaginative, sensitive, and thoughtful, yet these personal characteristics are actually predic￾tors of how easily the individual can engage in transformational leadership behaviors.32
A third concern is that transformational leadership is usually described as a universal 
concept, that is, it should be applied in all situations. Only a few studies have investigated 
whether this form of leadership is more valuable in some situations than others.33 For in￾stance, transformational leadership is probably more appropriate when organizations 
need to adapt to a rapidly changing external environment than when the environment is 
stable. Preliminary evidence suggests that the transformational leadership perspective is 
relevant across cultures. However, there may be specific elements of transformational 
leadership, such as the way visions are communicated and modeled, that are more appro￾priate in North America than in other cultures.
Managerial Leadership Perspective
Leaders don’t spend all (or even most) of their time transforming the organization or 
work unit. They also engage in managerial leadership (also called functional leadership)—
daily activities that support and guide the performance and well-being of individual em￾ployees and the work unit toward current objectives and practices. Leadership experts and 
most people in management positions generally recognize that leading (transformational 
leadership) differs from managing (managerial leadership).34 Although the distinction 
between these two perspectives continues to be debated, each cluster has a reasonably 
clear set of activities and strong research foundation.
One distinction between these two perspectives is that managerial leadership assumes 
the organization’s or department’s objectives are stable and aligned with the external 
environment.35 It focuses on continuously developing or maintaining the effectiveness of 
employees and work units toward those established objectives and practices. In contrast, 
transformational leadership assumes the organization is misaligned with its environment 
and therefore needs to change its direction. This distinction is captured in the often-cited 
statement: “Managers are people who do things right and leaders are people who do the 
right thing.”36 Managers “do things right” by enabling employees to perform established 
LO 12-3
managerial leadership
a leadership perspective 
stating that effective leaders 
help employees improve their 
performance and well-being 
toward current objectives and 
practices (also called 
functional leadership)
Successful executives need to use both transformational and managerial leadership 
behaviors at appropriate times, advises Leagh Turner. “On one hand, part of being a 
leader is cultivating growth which entails convening people under a common 
purpose and allowing ideas to flourish,” says Turner, who was recently appointed 
co-CEO of Ceridian and was previously global chief operating officer of SAP. “On the 
other hand, it’s about knowing when to jump in and steer the ship which entails 
helping the team take their ideas and shape them into something meaningful and 
executable.” The challenge, Turner warns, is to know how much and when to apply 
transformational and managerial leadership. “The balance of knowing when to ‘fly 
high’ and ensure the overall health of the business, and when to ‘dive deep’ and 
run right alongside the teams, is a careful balancing act that is imperative to master 
for the sustainable health of both the business and the team.”d
Fizkes/ShutterstockChapter Twelve Leadership in Organizational Settings 443
goals more effectively. Leaders “do the right thing” by changing the organization or work 
unit so its objectives are aligned more closely with the external environment.
A second distinction is that managerial leadership is more micro-focused and concrete, 
because it relates to the specific performance and well-being objectives of individual em￾ployees and the immediate work unit. Transformational leadership is more macro-focused 
and abstract. It is directed toward an imprecise strategic vision for an entire organization, 
department, or team.
INTERDEPENDENCE OF MANAGERIAL AND 
TRANSFORMATIONAL LEADERSHIP
Although transformational and managerial leadership are discussed as two leadership 
perspectives, they are more appropriately viewed as interdependent perspectives.37 In other 
words, transformational leadership and managerial leadership depend on each other. 
Transformational leadership identifies, communicates, and builds commitment to a better 
future for the organization or work unit. But these transformational leadership behaviors 
are not enough for organizational success. That success also requires managerial leader￾ship to translate the abstract vision into more specific operational behaviors and prac￾tices, and to continuously improve employee performance and well-being in the pursuit of 
that future ideal. Managerial leadership also depends on transformational leadership to 
set the right direction. Otherwise, managers might produce operational excellence toward 
goals that are misaligned with the organization’s long-term survival.
Senior executives typically engage in more transformational leadership than do middle 
managers, supervisors, and others further down the hierarchy. This greater emphasis on 
transformational leadership at higher levels likely occurs because senior leaders are more 
responsible for the organization’s alignment with its environment and because they have 
more discretion to enable macro-level change. However, managerial and transformational 
leadership are not embodied in different people or positions in the organization. Every 
manager needs to apply both transformational and managerial leadership behaviors to 
varying degrees. Through shared leadership, even front-line employees apply managerial 
leadership (e.g., helping coworkers through a difficult project) and transformational leader￾ship (e.g., championing a change toward more customer-friendly norms in the work unit).
TASK-ORIENTED AND PEOPLE-ORIENTED LEADERSHIP
Managerial leadership research began in the 1940s when several universities launched in￾tensive investigations to answer the question “What behaviors make leaders effective?” 
They studied first-line supervisors by asking subordinates to rate their bosses on many 
behaviors. These independent research teams essentially identified the same two clusters 
of leadership behavior from literally thousands of items (Exhibit 12.2).38
Leaders are people-oriented
when they . . .
• Show interest in others as
 people.
• Listen to employees.
• Make the workplace more
 pleasant.
• Show appreciation to employees
 for their performance contribution.
• Are considerate of employee 
 needs.
Leaders are task-oriented
when they . . .
• Assign work and clarify 
 responsibilities. 
• Set goals and deadlines.
• Evaluate and provide feedback
 on work quality.
• Establish well-defined best
 work procedures.
• Plan future work activities. 
EXHIBIT 12.2
Task- and People-Oriented 
Leadership Styles444 Part Three Team Processes
One cluster, called task-oriented leadership, includes behaviors that define and structure 
work roles. This leadership style includes assigning employees to specific tasks, setting 
goals and deadlines, clarifying work duties and procedures, defining work procedures, and 
planning work activities. The other cluster represents people-oriented leadership. This lead￾ership style includes listening to employees for their opinions and ideas, creating a pleas￾ant physical work setting, showing interest in staff, complimenting and recognizing 
employees for their effort, and showing consideration of employee needs.
These early managerial leadership studies tried to find out whether effective manag￾ers are more task-oriented or more people-oriented. This proved to be a difficult ques￾tion to answer because each style has its advantages and disadvantages. In fact, 
numerous studies now indicate that effective leaders rely on both styles, but in different 
circumstances.39 When leaders use people-oriented leadership behaviors, their employ￾ees tend to have more positive attitudes as well as lower absenteeism, grievances, stress, 
and turnover. When leaders use task-oriented leadership behaviors, their employees 
tend to have higher job performance. Not surprisingly, employees generally prefer 
bosses who use more people-oriented behaviors, and they form negative attitudes to￾ward bosses who are mostly task-oriented. However, task-oriented leadership is also ap￾preciated to some degree. For example, college students value task-oriented instructors 
because those instructors provide clear expectations, well-prepared course outlines, and 
constructive feedback.40
®
SELF-ASSESSMENT 12.2: What Is Your Preferred Managerial Leadership Style?
SERVANT LEADERSHIP
Servant leadership is an extension or variation of people-oriented leadership because it 
defines leadership as serving others. In particular, servant leaders selflessly assist others 
in their need fulfillment, personal development, and growth.41 Servant leaders ask “How 
can I help you?” rather than expecting employees to serve them. They are typically 
described as selfless, egalitarian, humble, nurturing, empathetic, and ethical coaches. The 
main objective of servant leadership is to help followers and other stakeholders fulfill 
their needs and potential, particularly “to become healthier, wiser, freer, more auto￾nomous, more likely themselves to become servants.”42 This description captures three 
key features of servant leadership:43
• Natural desire or “calling” to serve others. Servant leaders have a deep commitment 
to help others in their personal growth for that purpose alone. This commitment is 
not merely an instrument to achieve company objectives. It is a selfless desire to 
support others that goes beyond the leader’s role obligation.
• Humble, egalitarian, accepting relationship with followers. Servant leaders do not 
view leadership as a position of power. Rather, they serve without drawing atten￾tion to themselves, without evoking superior status, and without being judgmental 
about others or defensive of criticisms received.
• Ethical decisions and behavior. Servant leaders display sensitivity to and enactment 
of moral values. They are not swayed by deviant social pressures or expectations. 
Servant leaders maintain moral integrity by relying on personal values to anchor 
their decisions and behavior. In this respect, servant leadership relies heavily on 
authentic leadership, which we discuss later in this chapter.
Servant leadership was introduced several decades ago and has since had a steady fol￾lowing, particularly among practitioners and religious leaders.44 The notion that leaders 
servant leadership
the view that leaders serve 
followers, rather than vice versa; 
leaders help employees fulfill 
their needs and are coaches, 
stewards, and facilitators of 
employee developmentChapter Twelve Leadership in Organizational Settings 445
should be servants has considerable currency and for many centuries has been embedded 
in the principles of major religions. Scholarly research indicates that servant leaders im￾prove employee wellbeing, feelings of empowerment, and job performance. However, the 
concept still faces conceptual hurdles. Although servant leadership writers generally agree 
on the three features we described here, many have included other characteristics that 
might confound the concept with its predictors and outcomes.
Path–Goal and Leadership Substitute Theories
PATH–GOAL LEADERSHIP THEORY
The earliest managerial leadership studies not only identified the task-oriented and 
people-oriented leadership styles; they also concluded that the best leadership style 
depends on the situation.45 In other words, the most appropriate leadership style is con￾tingent on the characteristics of the employee, work setting, leader-follower relationship, 
and other factors. This “it depends” view is more consistent with the contingency anchor 
of organizational behavior discussed in Chapter 1.
Path–goal leadership theory is the dominant model that applies this contingency ap￾proach to managerial leadership. This theory states that effective leaders choose one or 
more leadership styles to influence employee expectations (their preferred path) regard￾ing achievement of desired results (their work-related goals), as well as their perceived 
satisfaction with those results (outcome valences). Leaders clarify the link between 
employee behaviors and outcomes, influence the valence of those outcomes, provide a 
work environment to facilitate goal accomplishment, and so forth.46 Notice from this 
description that path–goal theory builds on the expectancy theory of motivation 
(Chapter 5) and its underlying formula of rational decision making (Chapter 7).47
LO 12-4
path–goal leadership theory
a leadership theory stating 
that effective leaders choose 
the most appropriate 
leadership style(s), depending 
on the employee and situation, 
to influence employee 
expectations about desired 
results and their positive 
outcomes
Servant Leadership at TDIndustriese
Dallas-based TDIndustries is one of America’s largest me￾chanical contractors and facility service companies. It is 
also one of the earliest companies (since the 1970s) to 
embrace servant leadership. “The leadership here lives 
and breathes servant leadership daily so you are sur￾rounded by examples of it that you can emulate,” says 
Nikki Morgan, TDIndustries executive vice-president for 
Houston. “I can’t imagine any other way to lead people.”
TDIndustries CEO Harold MacDowell, who was recently 
named one of the world’s most admired CEOs, describes 
servant leadership. “In the servant leadership model, lead￾ers are first a servant of those they lead. They are a 
teacher, a source of information and knowledge, and a 
role model.” MacDowell says that servant leadership in￾cludes “providing for [employees], eliminating roadblocks, 
helping them grow. When you do that, the organization 
grows and the leader’s job is just much easier.” MacDowell 
says that TD Industries puts frontline employees at the top 
of the company because they perform the most important 
work. “We also use an upside down org chart to really help 
us remember that . . . the most important people inside TD 
really are front line skilled tradespeople.”
“At TD, we are employee-owned and truly live by our 
mission statement to help our Partners [employees] grow 
their careers,” adds Nikki Morgan. “Servant Leadership is 
the epitome of empowerment leadership. The goal is to 
bring out the best in people and help them achieve 
greatness.”
global connections 12.3
Source: TDIndustries446 Part Three Team Processes
Path–Goal Leadership Styles Exhibit 12.3 presents the path–goal theory of 
leadership. It highlights four leadership styles and several contingency factors leading to 
three indicators of leader effectiveness. The four leadership styles are:48
• Directive. Directive leadership is the same as task-oriented leadership, described 
earlier. This leadership style consists of behaviors that provide cognitive structure 
for subordinates. It includes clarifying performance goals, the means to reach 
those goals, and the standards against which performance will be judged. Directive 
leadership also includes judicious use of rewards, constructive feedback, and 
disciplinary actions.
• Supportive. Supportive leadership is the same as people-oriented leadership, de￾scribed earlier. This style consists of behaviors that provide psychological support 
for subordinates. The leader is friendly and approachable; makes the work more 
pleasant; treats employees with equal respect; and shows concern for the status, 
needs, and well-being of employees.
• Participative. Participative leadership consists of behaviors that encourage and 
facilitate employee involvement in decisions beyond their normal work activities. 
This is the same as employee involvement, discussed in Chapter 7. The leader
consults with staff, asks for their suggestions, carefully reflects on employee 
views before making a decision, and at times empowers employees to make 
the decision.
• Achievement-oriented. This leadership style consists of behaviors that encourage 
employees to reach their peak performance. The leader sets challenging goals, ex￾pects employees to perform at their highest level, continuously seeks improvement 
in employee performance, and shows a high degree of confidence that employees 
will assume responsibility and accomplish challenging goals. Achievement￾oriented leadership applies goal-setting theory as well as positive expectations in 
self-fulfilling prophecy.
Path–Goal Theory Contingencies As a contingency theory, path–goal theory 
states that each of the four leadership styles will be more effective in some situations 
than in others. The theory also contends that managers are able to apply the most ap￾propriate leadership style (or styles) for each situation. Depending on the circumstances, 
this skill may involve using two or more leadership styles at the same time. The model 
specifies two sets of situational variables: (1) employee characteristics and (2) character￾istics of the employee’s work environment. Several employee and workplace 
Employee 
contingencies
• Skills/experience
• Locus of control
Environmental
contingencies
• Task structure
• Team dynamics
Leader behaviors
• Directive
• Supportive
• Participative
• Achievement-oriented
Leader eectiveness
• Employee motivation
• Employee satisfaction
• Leader acceptance
Leader behaviors
• Directive
• Supportive
• Participative
• Achievement-oriented
Leader eectiveness
• Employee motivation
• Employee satisfaction
• Leader acceptance
Employee 
contingencies
• Skills/experience
• Locus of control
Environmental
contingencies
• Task structure
• Team dynamics
Leader behaviors
• Directive
• Supportive
• Participative
• Achievement-oriented
Leader eectiveness
• Employee motivation
• Employee satisfaction
• Leader acceptance
EXHIBIT 12.3
Path–Goal Leadership TheoryChapter Twelve Leadership in Organizational Settings 447
contingencies have been studied, but the following four have re￾ceived the most attention:49
• Skill and experience. A combination of directive and 
supportive leadership is best for employees who are (or 
perceive themselves to be) inexperienced and unskilled.50
Directive leadership involves providing information 
about how to accomplish the task, whereas supportive 
leadership offers support to cope with the uncertainties 
of unfamiliar work situations. This leadership style is 
detrimental when employees are skilled and experienced 
because it introduces too much supervisory control 
(i.e., micromanaging).
• Locus of control. People with an internal locus of control believe that they have con￾trol over their work environment (see Chapter 3). Consequently, these employees 
prefer participative and achievement-oriented leadership styles and may become 
frustrated with a directive style. In contrast, people with an external locus of control 
believe that their performance is due more to luck and fate, so they tend to be more 
satisfied with directive and supportive leadership.
• Task structure. When tasks are nonroutine (complex, unique, ambiguous), leaders 
should adopt the directive style for inexperienced employees and the participative 
style for experienced employees.51 Directive leadership provides guidance and 
learning for inexperienced employees working in these work situations. The direc￾tive style is redundant and potentially irritating for experienced employees in non￾routine task situations because they have as much knowledge as their supervisor. 
Instead, participative leadership is preferred for experienced employees because 
they require more autonomy (fewer rules) to navigate through complex and un￾usual job assignments. Employees performing routine and simple tasks may re￾quire supportive leadership to help them cope with the tedious nature of the work 
and lack of control over the pace of work. Directive leadership is ineffective for 
employees performing routine tasks because the manager’s guidance serves no 
purpose and may be viewed as unnecessarily close control. 
• Team dynamics. Cohesive teams with performance-oriented norms act as a substi￾tute for most leader interventions. High team cohesion substitutes for supportive 
leadership, whereas performance-oriented team norms substitute for directive and 
possibly achievement-oriented leadership. Thus, when team cohesion is low, lead￾ers should use the supportive style. Leaders should apply a directive style to coun￾teract team norms that oppose the performance objectives assigned to the team. 
For example, the team leader may need to exert authority if team members have 
developed a norm to “take it easy” rather than get a project completed on time.
Evaluating Path–Goal Theory Path–goal theory has received more research 
support than other managerial leadership models. In fact, path–goal theory and similar 
managerial leadership variables predict effective leadership as much as or more than 
transformational leadership variables.52 This stronger effect is likely because managers 
typically spend more of their time engaging in managerial rather than transformational 
leadership.53
Support for the path–goal model is far from ideal, however. Not all contingencies have 
sufficient research support and a few haven’t been investigated at all.54 Another concern 
is that path–goal theory assumes effective leaders can change managerial styles to fit the 
situation. In reality, it takes considerable effort to do so because leaders typically prefer 
one style that is most consistent with their personality and values. Some experts even sug￾gest that leadership styles are hardwired.55 In spite of these limitations, path–goal theory 
remains a relatively robust theory of managerial leadership.
When asked to describe their favorite 
boss, employees refer to leadership 
styles and situations that fit path–
goal theory. A junior employee at a 
pharmaceutical company in London, 
United Kingdom, praises his boss’s 
supportive style. “She has this 
magical ability to lead with empathy, 
compassion and transparency.” An 
experienced community education 
services worker in Minnesota 
appreciates participative leadership. 
“Is he perfect? No. But he listens 
to others’ opinions and always 
considers them.” A financial services 
professional in Illinois says his 
manager is someone “you would walk 
on coals for” because of his balance 
of achievement and supportive 
leadership. “He pushed you but 
always had your best interest at heart 
and wanted you to succeed.” And a 
school teacher in Michigan is happy 
that his current boss doesn’t apply 
too much directive leadership, but 
instead “trusts that I am a veteran 
professional and does not 
micromanage.”f
mentatdgt/Shutterstock448 Part Three Team Processes
LEADERSHIP SUBSTITUTES THEORY
Path–goal leadership theory recommends changing leadership styles depending on the 
situation, whereas leadership substitutes theory suggests that the situation either limits the 
leader’s ability to influence subordinates or renders a particular leadership style unneces￾sary.56 The literature identifies several conditions that possibly substitute for task-oriented 
or people-oriented leadership (see Exhibit 12.4).
Consistent with path–goal theory, task-oriented leadership is likely less valuable for 
employees as they gain skill and experience in the job. This leadership style also may be 
redundant or have less value when performance-based rewards motivate employees, when 
the work is intrinsically motivating, and when employees use self-leadership practices (see 
Chapter 6).57 Teams also substitute for task-oriented leadership under some conditions 
and to some degree.58 Task-oriented leadership is substituted by team members who infor￾mally train less-experienced employees, and by team members who encourage (or pres￾sure) coworkers to perform their tasks.
People-oriented leadership may be less valuable when the work itself is enjoyable and 
when the employee applies effective coping strategies to minimize stress. This leadership 
style is also substituted by coworkers who use humor to create psychological safety.59
Skilled and experienced employees also have higher self-efficacy, which results in less stress￾ful work and therefore less need for people-oriented leadership interaction from the boss.
The leadership substitutes model has intuitive appeal, but the evidence so far is mixed. 
Some studies show that a few substitutes do replace the need for task- or people-oriented 
leadership, but others do not. The difficulties of statistically testing for leadership substitutes 
may account for some problems. However, a few writers contend that the weak support for 
substitutes indicates that formal leadership plays a critical role regardless of the situation.60
Overall, we can conclude that leadership substitutes might reduce the need for managerial 
leadership behaviors, but they do not completely replace managers in these situations.
Implicit Leadership Perspective
Research on transformational and managerial leadership has found that leaders do “make 
a difference”; that is, leaders significantly influence the performance of their departments 
and organizations. However, a third leadership perspective, called implicit leadership 
theory, explains that followers’ perceptions also play a role in a leader’s effectiveness. The 
implicit leadership perspective has two components: leader prototypes and the romance 
of leadership.61
LO 12-5
Based on ideas in S. Kerr and J.M. Jermier, “Substitutes for Leadership: Their Meaning and Measurement,” Orga￾nizational Behavior and Human Performance 22 (December 1978): 375–403; P.M. Podsakoff and S.B. MacKenzie, 
“Kerr and Jermier’s Substitutes for Leadership Model: Background, Empirical Assessment, and Suggestions for 
Future Research,” Leadership Quarterly 8 (1997): 117–32.
MANAGERIAL LEADERSHIP STYLE POTENTIAL SUBSTITUTES FOR THAT STYLE
Task-oriented • Performance-based rewards 
• Employee is skilled and experienced 
• Guidance from coworkers 
• Team norms reinforce task objectives 
• Intrinsically motivating work 
• Employee applies self-leadership
People-oriented • Supportive coworkers 
• Employee is skilled and experienced 
• Enjoyable work 
• Employee uses effective stress coping strategies
EXHIBIT 12.4
Potential Leadership Substitutes
leadership substitutes theory
a theory identifying conditions 
that either limit a leader’s ability 
to influence subordinates or 
make a particular leadership 
style unnecessaryChapter Twelve Leadership in Organizational Settings 449
PROTOTYPES OF EFFECTIVE LEADERS
One aspect of implicit leadership theory states that everyone has leadership prototypes—
preconceived beliefs about the features and behaviors of effective leaders.62 These proto￾types develop through socialization within the family and society. Specific prototype 
features (e.g., sensitivity) vary somewhat across cultures as well as demographic groups 
(e.g., female versus male, older versus younger). Prototypes shape the follower’s expecta￾tions and acceptance of others as leaders, and this in turn affects their willingness to re￾main as a follower. Leadership prototypes not only support a person’s role as leader; they 
also influence follower perceptions of the leader’s effectiveness. In other words, a leader 
is often perceived as more effective when they look like and act consistently with observ￾ers’ prototype of a leader.63
This prototype comparison process occurs because people want to trust their leader 
before they are willing to serve as followers. However, the leader’s actual effectiveness usu￾ally isn’t known for several months or possibly years, so comparing the leader against a 
prototype is a quick (although faulty) way of estimating the leader’s future success.
THE ROMANCE OF LEADERSHIP
Along with relying on implicit prototypes of effective leaders, followers tend to inflate the 
perceived influence of leaders on the organization’s success. This “romance of leader￾ship” effect occurs for two reasons.64 First, leadership is a useful way for us to simplify life 
events. It is easier to explain organizational successes and failures in terms of the leader’s 
ability than by analyzing a complex array of other forces. 
The second reason why people inflate their perception of the leader’s influence over 
the environment is that people in the United States and many other cultures want to believe 
that life events are generated more from people than from uncontrollable natural forces.65
This illusion of control is satisfied by believing that events result from the rational actions 
of leaders. In other words, employees feel better believing that leaders make a difference, 
so they actively look for evidence that this is so.
implicit leadership theory
a theory stating that people 
evaluate a leader’s 
effectiveness in terms of 
how well that person fits 
preconceived beliefs about 
the features and behaviors of 
effective leaders (leadership 
prototypes) and that people 
tend to inflate the influence 
of leaders on organizational 
events
61% of 2,000 employees
in the UK say they have an
annoying boss.
83% of 3,000 full-time
American workers say they
could do their own job
without their managers.
57% of 1,257 American workers say managers in
 their workplace could benefit from training on how to
 be a better people manager.
78% of 624,800 U.S federal government
 employees say their immediate supervisor is
 doing a good job (increased annually
 from 70% five years earlier).
67% of 624,800 U.S federal government
 employees say the manager immediately
 above their immediate supervisor is doing
 a good job (increased annually from 58%
 five years earlier).
70% of 3,000 full-time American
workers say they somewhat or strongly
enjoy working for their manager.
THE LEADERSHIP REPORT CARDg
(photo): james weston/Shutterstock
®
SELF-ASSESSMENT 12.3: Do Leaders Make a Difference?450 Part Three Team Processes
Fundamental attribution error (see Chapter 3) also explains why followers believe that 
leaders make a difference. Leaders are often given credit for the company’s success be￾cause employees do not readily see the external forces that also influence these events. 
Leaders reinforce this belief by taking credit for organizational successes.66 “The people 
at Semco don’t look and act like me,” explains Ricardo Semler, well-known author, 
speaker, CEO of Semco Partners, and founder of the Lumiar Schools in Brazil. “They are 
not yes-men by any means. . . . [Yet] they credit me with successes that are not my own, 
and they don’t debit me my mistakes.”67
The implicit leadership perspective highlights the fact that leadership is influenced by 
followers’ perceptions, not only the actual behaviors and formal roles of people calling 
themselves leaders. Potential leaders must be sensitive to this fact and be aware of fol￾lower expectations. Individuals who do not naturally fit leadership prototypes need to 
provide more direct evidence of their effectiveness as leaders.
Personal Attributes Perspective of Leadership
Since the beginning of recorded civilization, people have been interested in the personal 
characteristics that distinguish great leaders from the rest of us.68 One prominent review 
in the late 1940s concluded that no valid list of leadership traits could be distilled from 
previous research. This conclusion was premature; a decade later, an update of that review 
concluded that a few traits are associated with effective leaders.69 Unfortunately, the 
initial review caused many scholars to give up their search for the personal characteristics 
of effective leaders.
EIGHT IMPORTANT LEADERSHIP ATTRIBUTES
Leadership experts have since returned to the notion that effective leaders possess spe￾cific personal attributes. Many leadership studies conducted long ago were apparently 
plagued by methodological problems, lack of theoretical foundation, and inconsistent 
definitions of leadership. Recent studies have mostly corrected these problems, with 
the result that several attributes are now consistently identified with effective leadership 
or leader emergence. Eight important attributes of effective leaders (not in any particu￾lar order) are personality, self-concept, leadership motivation, drive, integrity, knowl￾edge of the business, cognitive and practical intelligence, and emotional intelligence 
(see Exhibit 12.5).70
Personality Most of the Big Five personality factors (see Chapter 2) are associated 
with effective leadership.71 However, the strongest predictors are high levels of extraver￾sion (outgoing, talkative, sociable, and assertive) and conscientiousness (careful, depend￾able, and self-disciplined). With high extraversion, effective leaders are comfortable 
having an influential role in social settings. With higher conscientiousness, effective lead￾ers set higher goals for themselves (and others), are organized, and have a strong sense of 
duty to fulfill work obligations.
Self-Concept Successful leaders have a complex, internally consistent, and clear 
self-concept as both a transformational and managerial leader (see Chapter 3).72 This 
“leader identity” also includes a positive self-evaluation, which consists of high self￾esteem, high self-efficacy, and an internal locus of control. Many people in leadership 
positions default to daily managerial leadership and define themselves as managers. 
Effective leaders, on the other hand, view themselves as both transformational and 
managerial, and are confident with both of these self-views.73
Leadership Motivation Effective leaders are motivated to lead others. They have 
a strong need for socialized power, meaning that they want power to lead others in 
LO 12-6Chapter Twelve Leadership in Organizational Settings 451
accomplishing organizational objectives and similar good deeds. This contrasts with a 
need for personalized power, which is the desire to have power for personal gain or for the 
thrill one might experience from wielding power over others (see Chapter 5).74 Leader￾ship motivation is also necessary because, even in organizations where managers support 
one another, they are in contests for positions further up the hierarchy. Effective leaders 
thrive rather than wither in the face of this competition.75
Drive Successful leaders have a moderately high drive, which is variously described as 
energy, need for achievement, initiative, tenacity, and ambition.76 Drive is also associated 
with high conscientiousness, extraversion, and positive self-evaluation. The drive attri￾bute is evident in Canva CEO Melanie Perkins, who was described at the beginning of 
this chapter. This drive represents the inner motivation that leaders possess to pursue 
their goals and encourage others to move forward with theirs. Drive inspires inquisitive￾ness, an action orientation, and measured boldness to take the organization or team into 
uncharted waters.
Integrity Integrity involves having strong moral principles, which supports the ten￾dency to be truthful and to be consistent in words and deeds. In fact, surveys consistently 
report that employees identify integrity and honesty as one of the most important charac￾teristics of effective leaders. Ethical leaders engage in behaviors that model ethical conduct 
while also signaling that followers are expected to act with integrity. Notice that integrity is 
ultimately based on the leader’s values, which provide an anchor for consistency.77
Knowledge of the Business Effective leaders understand the business environment 
in which they operate, including subtle indications of emerging trends. Knowledge of the 
business also includes a solid understanding of how their organization works effectively.
Cognitive and Practical Intelligence Leaders have above-average cognitive 
ability to process enormous amounts of information. Leaders aren’t necessarily geniuses; 
EXHIBIT 12.5 Personal Attributes of Effective Leaders
LEADERSHIP ATTRIBUTE DESCRIPTION
Personality Effective leaders have higher levels of extraversion (outgoing, talkative, sociable, and assertive) and 
conscientiousness (careful, dependable, and self-disciplined).
Self-concept Effective leaders have strong self-beliefs and a positive self-evaluation about their own leadership skills 
and ability to achieve objectives.
Leadership motivation Effective leaders have a need for socialized power (not personalized power) to accomplish team or 
organizational goals.
Drive Effective leaders have an inner motivation to pursue goals.
Integrity Effective leaders have strong moral principles, which are demonstrated through truthfulness and 
consistency of words with deeds.
Knowledge of the business Effective leaders have tacit and explicit knowledge about the company’s environment, enabling them to 
make more intuitive decisions.
Cognitive and practical 
intelligence
Effective leaders have above-average cognitive ability to process information (cognitive intelligence) and 
ability to solve real-world problems by adapting to, shaping, or selecting appropriate environments 
(practical intelligence).
Emotional intelligence Effective leaders have the ability to recognize and regulate their own emotions and the emotions of others.452 Part Three Team Processes
rather, they have a superior ability to analyze a variety of complex alternatives and oppor￾tunities. Furthermore, leaders have practical intelligence. This means that they can think 
through the relevance and application of ideas in real-world settings. Practical intelligence 
is particularly evident where problems are poorly defined, information is missing, and 
more than one solution may be plausible.78
Emotional Intelligence Effective leaders have a high level of emotional intelli￾gence. They are able to recognize and regulate emotions in themselves and in other peo￾ple (see Chapter 4).79 For example, effective leaders can sense how well their conversations 
are influencing employees and other stakeholders. Also, leaders can recognize and change 
their own emotional state to suit the situation, such as feeling optimistic and determined 
in spite of recent business setbacks.
AUTHENTIC LEADERSHIP
A few paragraphs ago, we said that successful leaders have a complex, internally consis￾tent, and clear self-concept as a leader, and that they have a strong positive self-evaluation. 
These characteristics lay the foundation for authentic leadership, which refers to how well 
leaders are aware of, feel comfortable with, and act consistently with their values, person￾ality, and self-concept.80 Authenticity is mainly about knowing yourself and being yourself 
(see Exhibit 12.6). Leaders learn more about their personality, values, thoughts, and hab￾its by reflecting on various situations and personal experiences. They also improve this 
self-awareness by receiving feedback from trusted people inside and outside the organiza￾tion. Both self-reflection and receptivity to feedback require high levels of emotional 
intelligence.
Transformational Leader Carolyn 
McCall Identifies Important Leadership 
Attributesh
As one of the United Kingdom’s most admired business 
executives, Carolyn McCall has had plenty of opportunity 
to observe the personal characteristics of great leaders. 
The CEO of ITV (the United Kingdom’s largest commercial 
television company) and former CEO of easyJet and 
Guardian Media Group identifies drive as an important 
leadership attribute because the job is filled with hurdles 
and distractions. “You have to keep your energy and be 
resilient, and remember the long-term vision,” she advises.
Integrity is another essential attribute of successful 
leaders. “A reputation takes years to build and you can 
lose it in two seconds,” warns McCall, who recently re￾ceived the British honor of Damehood (the female equiva￾lent of knighthood). “I would rather tell people the truth, 
even if it’s really hard, than avoid the problem.”
A third leadership attribute that McCall emphasizes is 
understanding and managing emotions. “Emotional intel￾ligence is important for leadership,” she says. “For me, it’s 
about being able to relate to other people and to show 
you want to nurture that relationship.”
A fourth ingredient in successful leaders is self￾concept, particularly the authentic leadership attributes of 
knowing yourself and being yourself in leadership roles. 
“You need to be comfortable with yourself to be confi￾dent,” she says, warning that “if you change yourself to 
adapt to that, it’s even harder.” However, McCall distin￾guishes pretending to be someone else from adapting 
your leadership style to the situation. “Of course in differ￾ent situations you have to have different behaviors. You 
sometimes have to be a lot more assertive in meetings, 
but that’s a change of tone, not character.”
global connections 12.4
Anthony Harvey/Getty Images
authentic leadership
the view that effective leaders 
need to be aware of, feel 
comfortable with, and act 
consistently with their values, 
personality, and self-conceptChapter Twelve Leadership in Organizational Settings 453
As people learn more about themselves, they gain a greater understanding of their in￾ner purpose which, in turn, generates a long-term passion for achieving something worth￾while for the organization or society. Some leadership experts suggest that this inner 
purpose emerges from a life story, typically initiated by a transformative event or experi￾ence earlier in life.81
Authentic leadership is more than self-awareness; it also involves behaving in ways that 
are consistent with that self-concept rather than pretending to be someone else. It is dif￾ficult enough to lead others, but to do so while pretending to be someone else is nearly 
impossible. To be themselves, great leaders regulate their decisions and behavior in sev￾eral ways. First, they develop their own style and, where appropriate, move into positions 
where that style is most effective. Although effective leaders adapt their behavior to the 
situation to some extent, they invariably understand and rely on decision methods and 
interpersonal styles that feel most comfortable to them.
Second, effective leaders continually think about and consistently apply their stable 
hierarchy of personal values to those decisions and behaviors. Leaders face many 
pressures and temptations, such as achieving short-term stock price targets at the cost 
of long-term profitability. Experts note that authentic leaders demonstrate self-discipline 
by remaining anchored to their values. Third, leaders maintain consistency around their 
self-concept by having a strong, positive core self-evaluation. They have high self-esteem 
and self-efficacy as well as an internal locus of control (Chapter 3).
LEADERSHIP ATTRIBUTES PERSPECTIVE LIMITATIONS 
AND PRACTICAL IMPLICATIONS
Personality, experience, self-concept, and other personal characteristics potentially con￾tribute to a leader’s effectiveness. Still, the leadership attributes perspective has a few limi￾tations.82 First, it assumes that all effective leaders have the same personal characteristics 
that are equally important in all situations. This is probably a false assumption; leadership 
is far too complex to have a universal list of traits that apply to every condition. Some at￾tributes might not be important all the time. Second, alternative combinations of attri￾butes may be equally successful; two people with different sets of personal characteristics 
might be equally good leaders. Third, the personal attributes perspective views leadership 
as something within a person, yet experts emphasize that leadership is relational. People 
are effective leaders because of their favorable relationships with followers, not just 
because they possess specific personal characteristics.83
Also remember from our discussion earlier in this chapter that, in the short term, 
followers tend to define others as effective or ineffective leaders based on their personal 
characteristics rather than whether the leader actually makes a difference to the organi￾zation’s success. People who exhibit self-confidence, extraversion, and other traits are 
called leaders because they fit the widely held prototype of an effective leader. Alterna￾tively, if someone is successful, observers might assign several nonobservable personal 
characteristics to them, such as intelligence, confidence, and drive. In short, the link 
between personal characteristics and effective leadership is muddied by several 
perceptual distortions.
Know yourself
• Engage in self-reflection
• Receive feedback from
 trusted sources
• Understand your life 
 story
Be yourself
• Develop your own style
• Apply your values
• Maintain a positive core
 self-evaluation
EXHIBIT 12.6
Authentic Leadership454 Part Three Team Processes
One important final point: The personal attributes perspective of leadership does not 
necessarily imply that leadership is a talent acquired at birth. On the contrary, attributes 
indicate only leadership potential, not leadership performance. People with these charac￾teristics become effective leaders only after they have developed and mastered the neces￾sary leadership behaviors through experience. However, even those with fewer leadership 
attributes may become very effective leaders by more fully developing their potential.
Cross-Cultural and Male-Female Issues in Leadership
Culture shapes the leader’s values and norms, which influence their decisions and ac￾tions. Furthermore, leaders experience various forms of influence from peers, followers, 
and others so their behavior is consistent with cultural norms about leadership in that 
society. Followers are also influenced by cultural norms and values, which shape their 
expectations of an ideal leader. An executive who acts inconsistently with cultural expec￾tations is less likely to be perceived as an effective leader. Thus, differences in leadership 
practices across cultures are partly explained by implicit leadership theory, which was 
described earlier in this chapter.
A major global research project over the past two decades has found that some features 
of leadership are universal and some differ across cultures.84 One leadership category, 
called charismatic visionary, is a universally recognized concept and middle managers 
LO 12-7
debating point
SHOULD LEADERS REALLY BE AUTHENTIC ALL THE TIME?
According to popular business books and several scholarly articles, au￾thentic leadership is one of the core attributes of effective leaders. Au￾thentic leaders know themselves and act in accordance with that 
self-concept. They live their personal values and find a leadership style 
that best matches their personality. Furthermore, authentic leaders 
have a sense of purpose, often developed through a crisis or similar 
“crucible” event in their lives.
It makes sense that leaders should be authentic. After all, as singer 
Liza Minnelli has often said: “I would rather be a first-rate version of 
myself than a second-rate version of anybody else.”i
 In other words, 
leaders are better at acting out their natural beliefs and tendencies 
than by acting like someone else. Furthermore, authenticity results in 
consistency, which is a foundation of trust. So, by being authentic, 
leaders are more likely to be trusted by followers.j
But should leaders always be themselves and act consistently with 
their beliefs and personality? Not necessarily, according to a few ex￾perts. The concept of authentic leadership seems to be at odds with 
well-established research that people are evaluated as more effective 
leaders when they have a high rather than low self-monitoring 
personality.k
High “self-monitors” quickly understand their social environment 
and easily adapt their behavior to that environment. In other words, 
high self-monitors change their behavior to suit what others expect 
from them. In contrast, low self-monitors behave consistently with their 
personality and self-concept. They do not change their beliefs, style, or 
behaviors across social contexts. On the contrary, they feel much more 
content with high congruence between who they are and what they do, 
even when their natural style does not fit the situation.
Employees prefer an adaptive (i.e., high self-monitoring) leader be￾cause they have preconceived prototypes of how leaders should act 
(implicit leadership theory, which we discussed earlier in this chapter).l
Authentic leaders are more likely to violate those prototypical expecta￾tions and, consequently, be viewed as less leaderlike. The message 
from this is that leadership is a role that its incumbents are required to 
perform rather than to completely “act naturally.” Ironically, while ap￾plauding the virtues of authentic leadership, the late leadership expert 
Warren Bennis acknowledged that “leadership is a performance art.” 
His point was that leaders are best when they act naturally in that role, 
but the reality of any performance is that people can never fully be 
themselves.m
Furthermore, while being yourself is authentic, it may convey the 
image of being inflexible and insensitive.n
 This problem was apparent to 
a management professor and consultant when working with a client. 
The executive’s staff followed a work process that was comfortable 
to the executive but not to many of her employees. When asked to 
consider adopting a process that was easier for her staff, the executive 
replied: “Look. This is just how I work.” The executive was authentic, but 
the inflexibility undermined employee performance and morale.oChapter Twelve Leadership in Organizational Settings 455
around the world believe it is characteristic of effective leaders. Charismatic visionary 
represents a cluster of concepts including visionary, inspirational, performance orienta￾tion, integrity, and decisiveness.85 In contrast, participative leadership is perceived as 
characteristic of effective leadership in low power distance cultures but less so in high 
power distance cultures.86 In summary, some features of leadership are universal and 
some differ across cultures.
MALE-FEMALE LEADERSHIP
Studies in work settings have generally found that male and female leaders do not differ in 
their levels of task-oriented or people-oriented leadership. The main explanation is that 
real-world jobs require similar behavior from male and female job incumbents.87 However, 
female leaders do adopt a participative style more readily than their male counterparts. 
One possible reason is that, compared to boys, girls are often raised to be more egalitarian 
and less status-oriented, which is consistent with being participative. There is also some 
evidence that, compared to males, females have somewhat better interpersonal skills, and 
this translates into their relatively greater use of the participative leadership style. A third 
explanation is that employees are motivated by their own stereotypes to expect female 
leaders to be more participative. Thus, female leaders comply with follower expectations 
to some extent.
Several studies report that females are rated higher than males on the emerging leader￾ship qualities of coaching, teamwork, and empowering employees.88 Yet studies also find 
that females are evaluated negatively when they try to apply the full range of leadership 
styles, particularly more directive and autocratic approaches. Thus, ironically, females 
may be well suited to contemporary leadership roles, yet they often continue to face limi￾tations of leadership through the stereotypes and prototypes of leaders that are held by 
followers.89 Overall, both male and female leaders must be sensitive to the fact that follow￾ers have expectations about how leaders should act, and leaders who deviate from those 
expectations likely receive less favorable evaluations.
LO 12-1 Define leadership and shared leadership.
Leadership is defined as the ability to influence, motivate, and 
enable others to contribute to the effectiveness and success of 
the organizations of which they are members. Leaders use in￾fluence to motivate followers and arrange the work environ￾ment so they do the job more effectively. Shared leadership 
views leadership as a role rather than a formal position, so em￾ployees throughout the organization act informally as leaders 
as the occasion arises. These situations include serving as 
champions for specific ideas or changes, as well as filling lead￾ership roles where it is needed.
LO 12-2 Describe the four elements of transformational lead￾ership and explain why they are important for orga￾nizational change.
Transformational leadership begins with a strategic vision, 
which is a positive representation of a future state that ener￾gizes and unifies employees. A vision is values-based, a distant 
goal, abstract, and meaningful to employees. Transformational 
leaders effectively communicate the vision by framing it 
around values, showing sincerity and passion toward the vi￾sion, and using symbols, metaphors, and other vehicles that 
create richer meaning for the vision. Transformational leaders 
model the vision (walk the talk) and encourage employees to 
experiment with new behaviors and practices that are poten￾tially more consistent with the visionary future state. They also 
build employee commitment to the vision through the preced￾ing activities, as well as by celebrating milestones to the vision. 
Transformational leaders are not necessarily charismatic, and 
charismatic leaders do not necessarily apply transformational 
leadership behaviors.
LO 12-3 Compare managerial leadership with transforma￾tional leadership, and describe the features of task￾oriented, people-oriented, and servant leadership.
Managerial leadership includes the daily activities that support 
and guide the performance and well-being of individual em￾ployees and the work unit to achieve current objectives and 
practices. Transformational and managerial leadership are 
dependent on each other, but they differ in their assumptions 
of stability versus change and their micro versus macro focus.
Task-oriented behaviors include assigning employees to spe￾cific tasks, clarifying their work duties and procedures, ensur￾ing they follow company rules, and pushing them to reach their 
performance capacity. People-oriented behaviors include show￾ing mutual trust and respect for subordinates, demonstrating a 
genuine concern for their needs, and having a desire to look 
out for their welfare.
chapter summary456
authentic leadership, p. 452
implicit leadership theory, p. 449
leadership, p. 436
leadership substitutes theory, p. 448
learning orientation, p. 440
managerial leadership, p. 442
path–goal leadership theory, p. 445
servant leadership, p. 436
shared leadership, p. 444
transformational leadership, p. 437
key terms
1. Why should organizational leaders encourage and 
support shared leadership?
2. Is it possible to be a transformational leader and have 
poor communication skills? Why or why not?
3. Transformational leadership is the most popular 
perspective of leadership. However, it is far from perfect. 
Discuss the limitations of transformational leadership.
4. This chapter distinguished charismatic leadership from 
transformational leadership. Yet charisma is identified 
by most employees and managers as a characteristic of 
effective leaders. Why is charisma commonly related to 
leadership? In your opinion, are the best leaders charis￾matic? Why or why not?
5. Consider your favorite teacher. What people-oriented and 
task-oriented leadership behaviors did that person use 
effectively? In general, do you think students prefer an 
instructor who is more people-oriented or task-oriented? 
Explain your preference.
6. Your employees are skilled and experienced customer 
service representatives who perform nonroutine tasks, such 
as solving unique customer problems. Use path–goal the￾ory to identify the most appropriate leadership style(s) you 
should use in this situation. Be sure to fully explain your 
answer, and discuss why other styles are inappropriate.
7. Discuss the accuracy of the following statement: “Con￾tingency theories don’t work because they assume that 
leaders can adjust their style to the situation. In reality, 
people have a preferred leadership style that they can’t 
easily change.”
8. Find two job advertisements for management or execu￾tive positions. What leadership personal attributes are 
mentioned in these ads? If you were on the selection 
panel, what methods would you use to identify these 
personal attributes in job applicants?
9. How do you think emotional, cognitive, and practical 
intelligence influence authentic leadership?
critical thinking questions
Servant leadership defines leadership as serving others to 
support their need fulfillment and personal development and 
growth. Servant leaders have a natural desire or “calling” to 
serve others. They maintain a relationship with others that is 
humble, egalitarian, and accepting. Servant leaders also anchor 
their decisions and actions in ethical principles and practices.
LO 12-4 Discuss the elements of path–goal theory and 
leadership substitutes theory.
The path–goal theory of leadership takes the view that effec￾tive managerial leadership involves diagnosing the situation 
and using the most appropriate style for it. The core model 
identifies four leadership styles—directive, supportive, partici￾pative, and achievement-oriented—and several contingencies 
related to the characteristics of the employee and of the situa￾tion. Leadership substitutes theory identifies contingencies 
that either limit the leader’s ability to influence subordinates 
or make a particular leadership style unnecessary.
LO 12-5 Describe the two components of the implicit leader￾ship perspective.
According to the implicit leadership perspective, people have 
leadership prototypes, which they use to evaluate the leader’s 
effectiveness. Furthermore, people form a romance of leader￾ship; they want to believe that leaders make a difference, so 
they engage in fundamental attribution error and other percep￾tual distortions to support this belief in the leader’s impact.
LO 12-6 Identify eight personal attributes associated with 
effective leaders and describe authentic leadership.
The personal attributes perspective identifies the characteris￾tics of effective leaders. Recent writing suggests that leaders 
have specific personality characteristics, positive self-concept, 
leadership motivation, drive, integrity, knowledge of the busi￾ness, cognitive and practical intelligence, and emotional intel￾ligence. Authentic leadership refers to how well leaders are 
aware of, feel comfortable with, and act consistently with their 
self-concept. This concept consists mainly of two parts: self￾awareness and engaging in behavior that is consistent with 
one’s self-concept.
LO 12-7 Discuss cultural and male–female similarities and 
differences in leadership.
Cultural values influence the leader’s personal values, which in 
turn influence their leadership practices. Women generally do 
not differ from men in the degree of people-oriented or task￾oriented leadership. However, female leaders more often adopt 
a participative style. Research also suggests that people evalu￾ate female leaders on the basis of gender stereotypes, which 
may result in higher or lower ratings.
CASE STUDY: IBEXTEL
As a former government-owned telecommunications monop￾oly, IbexTel enjoyed several decades of minimal competition 
in this mid-size European country. Even today as a publicly 
traded enterprise, the company’s control over most of the 
country’s core network keeps its profit margins above 40 per￾cent. Competitors continue to rely on IbexTel’s wholesale TEAM EXERCISE: WORLD CAFÉ ON LEADERSHIP
6 team rooms instead of 6 tables). One person (the “scribe”) 
at each table/room will write notes on the ideas presented. 
These ideas can be rewritten later as a summary of the event.
INSTRUCTIONS Step 1: Students are organized into teams 
of approximately 10 people. For f2f classes, each team is ini￾tially assigned to a large table or dedicated space for the 
team. For remote classes, each team is permanently assigned 
to a virtual team room. The instructor will assign one of the 
three themes (see below) to each table. For example, if the 
PURPOSE This exercise is designed to help you under￾stand different leadership themes and specific behaviors 
and attributes of effective leaders associated with that 
theme.
MATERIALS This exercise is possible as a face-to-face (f2f) 
class or a remote class. For f2f classes, the learning space 
should allow for one large table or other dedicated area for 
approximately every 10 students in the class. For remote 
classes, each team is assigned to a separate team room (i.e. 
business, which generates substantially more profit than simi￾lar wholesale services in many other countries. However, 
competitors are gaining on IbexTel’s dominance in the latest 
iteration of mobile telecommunications, and are beginning to 
invest in emerging technologies such as device interconnec￾tivity, cyber security, and artificial intelligence systems. Based 
on these threats, IbexTel’s board of directors decided to hire 
an outsider as the new chief executive.
Although several qualified candidates expressed an inter￾est in IbexTel’s top job, the board selected Jason Turner, 
who had been CEO for six years of a publicly traded American 
telecommunications company, followed by a brief stint as 
CEO of a smaller mobile telecommunications company in 
the United Kingdom until it was acquired by a larger firm. 
IbexTel’s board couldn’t believe its good fortune; Turner 
brought extensive industry knowledge and global experience, 
a high-octane energy level, self-confidence, decisiveness, 
and congenial yet strongly persuasive interpersonal style. 
He also had a unique “presence,” which captured others’ 
attention and their quick respect for his leadership.
The board was also impressed with Turner’s strategy to bol￾ster IbexTel’s profit margins. This included heavy investment 
in the latest satellite and next generation wireless technology 
before competitors could gain a foothold, cutting costs through 
layoffs and reduction of peripheral services, and putting pres￾sure on government to deregulate its legacy and emerging busi￾nesses. When Turner described his strategy to the board, one 
board member commented that this was the same strategy 
Turner used in his previous two CEO postings. Turner 
dismissed the comment, saying that each situation is unique.
Turner lived up to his reputation as a decisive executive. 
Almost immediately after taking the CEO job at IbexTel, 
he hired two executives who had reported to him at the 
American company where he was a senior executive a few 
years earlier. Together over the next two years they cut the 
workforce by 10 percent, became one of the first organiza￾tions to roll out next generation wireless broadband tech￾nology, and invested in a company with early stage satellite 
communication systems. Costs increased due to downsizing 
expenses and the various investments. IbexTel’s wireless 
broadband subscriber list grew quickly because, in spite of 
its very high prices, the technology faced limited competi￾tion and IbexTel pushed customers onto the new network 
by reducing capacity on the older technology.
IbexTel’s customer satisfaction ratings fell, however. The 
wireless technology was one of the first large-scale imple￾mentations with that manufacturing provider, so the com￾pany experienced numerous system outages due to network 
software and integration problems. Industry experts criti￾cized IbexTel for choosing its wireless technology from that 
manufacturer without sufficiently considering other technol￾ogy competitors whose products were preferred in other 
countries. A national consumer research group also reported 
that IbexTel offered the country’s worst value for mobile 
telecommunication plans. Employee morale also declined 
due to layoffs and the sudden decline in the company’s pub￾lic image. Turner’s aggressive campaign against government 
regulation also had unintended consequences. Rather than 
achieving less regulation, Turner’s relentless criticism of gov￾ernment regulation made IbexTel look even more arrogant 
in the eyes of both customers and government leaders.
IbexTel’s board was troubled by the company’s lackluster 
share price, which had declined 20 percent since Turner 
was hired. Some board members also worried that the com￾pany had bet on the wrong wireless and satellite technolo￾gies and that market share for these services would stall far 
below the number necessary to achieve the profits stated in 
Turner’s strategic plan. This concern came closer to reality 
when a foreign-owned telecommunications competitor won 
a large government contract to improve mobile and Internet 
services in areas of the country that were not adequately 
served. Turner was confident that IbexTel would be awarded 
the contract because of its market dominance, even though 
the company’s proposal was higher than that of other 
bidders. When the government announced its decision, 
IbexTel’s board fired Turner along with two executives he 
had hired from the United States. Now, the board had to 
figure out what went wrong and how to avoid this problem 
in the future.
Discussion Questions
1. Use specific leadership concepts to explain what went 
wrong at IbexTel.
2. Identify specific ways that IbexTel’s board of directors 
can reduce the risk of repeating these leadership 
problems.
© 2022 Steven L. McShane.
457next team room. In either situation, the scribe will interact 
with a team that has not yet discussed that topic (i.e., they 
will discuss the third topic described below). Scribes docu￾ment ideas from their third group without informing them 
of what the previous teams discussed on that theme.
Step 7: After the third round of discussion has ended, 
the entire class will gather and listen to the main ideas 
documented by the scribes. This is usually a few minutes 
per scribe. If two or more scribes have been responsible 
for the same theme, those scribes should present at 
the same time or consecutively (e.g., if two scribes have 
the managerial leadership theme, for example, they should 
speak to the class together or one after the other).
WORLD CAFÉ DISCUSSION THEMES
Table 1: Transformational leadership
1. Provide specific examples of leaders who “transformed” 
the work unit or organization to a better future. What 
did they do regarding employees and other stakeholders 
to achieve this change?
2. What personal characteristics of leaders assist their 
transformational leadership?
3. In what situations, if any, would transformational 
leadership be dysfunctional?
Table 2: Managerial leadership
1. Provide specific examples of leaders who have been 
effective at improving the performance and wellbeing 
of employees in the work unit or organization. What 
did they do to make the group or firm more effective?
2. What personal characteristics of leaders assist their 
managerial leadership?
3. In what situations, if any, would managerial leadership 
be dysfunctional?
Table 3: Charismatic leadership
1. What does a charismatic leader do that makes them 
charismatic?
2. To what extent and under what conditions would 
charismatic leaders be effective leaders?
3. Under what conditions or in what ways, if any, is 
charisma dysfunctional in leaders?
© 2022 Steven L. McShane.
class has 60 students, there would be six tables/team rooms 
of 10 students. In this example, two tables/rooms would be 
assigned the theme of charismatic leadership, two tables/
rooms would look at managerial leadership, and two tables/
rooms would look at transformational leadership.
Step 2: For either f2f or remote classes, one person on 
each team volunteers to be the “scribe” for that table. The 
scribe makes notes on the main ideas presented by 
students at that table/room. For f2f classes, the scribe 
remains at the same table for the entire exercise, whereas 
the rest of the team moves from one table to another table 
when the instructor advises. For remote sessions, only 
the scribes move from one team room to the next when 
the instructor advises. In remote sessions, each team 
remains in the same team room and receives a different 
scribe (and topic) when the instructor advises. All scribes 
will later debrief the class on the key points they docu￾mented on the theme assigned to them.
Step 3: Teams will read the questions assigned to the 
theme of their initial table/topic (see below). They have a 
fixed time (usually between 10 and 15 minutes) to discuss 
their views and offer answers to those questions. The 
scribe will document ideas presented by the team.
Step 4: After the preset discussion time has ended, the 
instructor will advise the class to move to the next table 
(f2f) or topic (remote). For f2f classes, each team (except 
the scribe) moves to another table, that has a different 
theme. For example, students at a “charismatic leader￾ship” table would together move to a table on either “man￾agerial leadership” or “transformational leadership.” For 
remote classes, only the scribes move to another table, 
specifically to a table identified by the instructor that has 
not discussed the scribe’s topic. Students will read the 
questions assigned to the theme of this second table/topic. 
The instructor again assigns a fixed time (10–15 minutes) 
for students to discuss their new theme.
Step 5: The scribe will add ideas identified by the sec￾ond group to existing notes presented earlier by the first 
team. The scribe should not tell the second group what the 
first group discussed about this theme. The scribe should 
remain quiet, except asking for clarification.
Step 6: One more transition occurs after the preset 
discussion time. For f2f classes, the instructor will 
advise each team to move to the next table. For remote 
classes, the instructor will advise each scribe to move to the 
TEAM EXERCISE: LEADERSHIP DIAGNOSTIC ANALYSIS
students might describe how their supervisor in a summer 
job pushed them to reach higher performance goals than 
they would have done otherwise. Each incident should state 
the actual behaviors that the leader used, not just general 
statements (e.g., “My boss sat down with me and we agreed 
on specific targets and deadlines, then he said several times 
over the next few weeks that I was capable of reaching those 
goals.”). Each incident requires only two or three sentences.
PURPOSE To help students learn about the different 
path–goal leadership styles and when to apply each style.
INSTRUCTIONS Step 1: Students individually write down 
two incidents in which someone has been an effective man￾ager or leader over them. The leader and situation might be 
from work, a sports team, a student work group, or any other 
setting where leadership might emerge. For example, 
458459
clearly and, where possible, connect them to the con￾tingencies described in path–goal theory. (Note: The 
team might identify path–goal leadership contingen￾cies that are not described in the book. These, too, 
should be noted and discussed.)
Step 3: After the teams have diagnosed the incidents, 
each team will describe to the entire class the most inter￾esting incidents, as well as its diagnosis of that incident. 
Other teams will critique the diagnosis. Any leadership 
contingencies not mentioned in the textbook should also 
be presented and discussed.
Step 2: After everyone has written their two incidents, 
the instructor will form small groups (typically between 
four or five students). Each team will answer the following 
questions for each incident presented in that team:
1. Which path–goal theory leadership style(s)—directive, 
supportive, participative, or achievement-oriented—did 
the leader apply in this incident?
2. Ask the person who wrote the incident about the con￾ditions that made this leadership style (or these styles, 
if more than one was used) appropriate in this situa￾tion. The team should list these contingency factors 
1. K. Caprino, “Canva Cofounder And CEO Melanie Perkins 
Leads Her Unicorn To New Heights,” Forbes, April 5, 
2019; R. Devine, “Canva Founder Melanie Perkins Turned 
Idea into Billion-Dollar Business,” The CEO Magazine, 
April 29, 2020; H.L. Miller, “Melanie Perkins and the Rise 
of the $40B Unicorn, Canva,” Leaders, December 6, 2021; 
M. Wilson, “The Rise of Canva, the $40 Billion Design 
Juggernaut,” Fast Company, March 8, 2022.
2. Many of these perspectives are summarized in R.N. 
Kanungo, “Leadership in Organizations: Looking Ahead 
to the 21st Century,” Canadian Psychology 39 (1998): 
71–82; R.G. Lord et al., “Implicit Leadership Theories, 
Implicit Followership Theories, and Dynamic Processing 
of Leadership Information,” Annual Review of Organiza￾tional Psychology and Organizational Behavior 7 (2020): 
49–74; G. Yukl and W.L. Gardner III, Leadership in 
Organizations, 8th ed. (Pearson Higher Ed, 2020); U.Y. 
Eseryel, K. Crowston, and R. Heckman, “Functional and 
Visionary Leadership in Self-Managing Virtual Teams,” 
Group & Organization Management 46, no. 2 (2021): 
424–60. Although we have organized this topic into four 
leadership perspectives, one recent review recommends 
organizing this subject around specific types of leader 
behavior (such as modeling, directing, and acting 
symbolically). See: A.M. Carton, “The Science of 
Leadership: A Theoretical Model and Research Agenda,” 
Annual Review of Organizational Psychology and Organiza￾tional Behavior 9 (2022): 61–93.
3. R. House, M. Javidan, and P. Dorfman, “Project GLOBE: 
An Introduction,” Applied Psychology: An International Re￾view 50 (2001): 489–505; R. House et al., “Understanding 
Cultures and Implicit Leadership Theories across the 
Globe: An Introduction to Project GLOBE,” Journal of 
World Business 37 (2002): 3–10.
4. C. McMorrow, Entrepreneurs Turn Us On: 20 Years of 
Recognizing Bright Ideas, EY Entrepreneur of the year—
Ontario 2013, Ernst & Young (October 2013); D. Ovsey, 
“‘Get Out of the Way,’” National Post, February 18, 2014.
5. J.A. Raelin, “We the Leaders: In Order to Form a Leaderful 
Organization,” Journal of Leadership & Organizational 
Studies 12, no. 2 (2005): 18–30; C.L. Pearce, J.A. Conger, 
and E.A. Locke, “Shared Leadership Theory,” Leadership 
Quarterly 19, no. 5 (2008): 622–28; E. Engel Small and 
J.R. Rentsch, “Shared Leadership in Teams: A Matter of 
Distribution,” Journal of Personnel Psychology 9, no. 4 
(2010): 203–11.
6. C.A. Beatty, “Implementing Advanced Manufacturing 
Technologies: Rules of the Road,” Sloan Management 
Review (1992): 49–60; J.M. Howell, “The Right Stuff: 
Identifying and Developing Effective Champions of 
Innovation,” Academy of Management Executive 19, no. 2 
(2005): 108–19; J.M. Howell and C.M. Shea, “Effects of 
Champion Behavior, Team Potency, and External Commu￾nication Activities on Predicting Team Performance,” Group 
& Organization Management 31, no. 2 (2006): 180–211.
7. S. Marchionne, “Fiat’s Extreme Makeover,” Harvard 
Business Review (2008): 45–48.
8. J.A. Raelin, Creating Leaderful Organizations: How to 
Bring Out Leadership in Everyone (San Francisco: 
Berrett-Koehler, 2003).
9. Most or all of these elements are included in: W. Bennis 
and B. Nanus, Leaders: The Strategies for Taking Charge
(New York: Harper & Row, 1985); N.M. Tichy and M.A. 
Devanna, The Transformational Leader (New York: Wiley, 
1986); B.M. Bass and R.E. Riggio, Transformational 
Leadership, 2nd ed. (Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates, 2006); J.M. Kouzes and B.Z. Posner, The 
Leadership Challenge: How to Make Extraordinary Things 
Happen in Organizations (Hoboken, N.J.: John Wiley & 
Sons, 2017). Most transformational leadership elements 
might also apply to managerial leadership, but with the 
latter focusing on improving current operational objectives 
rather than discovering new strategic directions. This is 
consistent with the recent recommendation to focus more 
on specific leader activities (modeling, directing, acting 
symbolically) rather than broad leadership typologies. 
See: A.M. Carton, “The Science of Leadership: A 
Theoretical Model and Research Agenda,” Annual 
Review of Organizational Psychology and Organizational 
Behavior 9, no. 1 (2022): 61–93.
10. Strategic collective vision has been identified as a key 
factor in leadership since Chester Barnard’s seminal 
book in organizational behavior. See C. Barnard, The 
Functions of the Executive (Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, 1938), 86–89.
11. W. Bennis and B. Nanus, Leaders: The Strategies for 
Taking Charge (New York: Harper & Row, 1985), 27–33, 
89; R.E. Quinn, Building the Bridge as You Walk on It: A 
endnotes460
no. 4 (2015): 30–31; S. Kolesnikov-Jessop, “You’re the 
Conductor: Listen to the Music You Can Create with 
the Group,” The New York Times, April 11, 2016.
20. For a discussion of trust in leadership, see C.S. Burke 
et al., “Trust in Leadership: A Multi-Level Review and 
Integration,” Leadership Quarterly 18, no. 6 (2007): 
606–32. The surveys on leading by example are reported 
in J.C. Maxwell, “People Do What People See,” 
BusinessWeek, 19 November 2007, 32; “Who’s the Boss 
of Workplace Culture?,” News release (Chelmsford, MA: 
Kronos, 9 March 2016). One recent study found that lead￾ing by doing has a positive correlation with employee pro￾ductivity and service quality. See: L. Eldor, “Leading by 
Doing: Does Leading by Example Impact Productivity and 
Service Quality?,” Academy of Management Journal 64, no. 2 
(2021): 458–81.
21. B.M. Bass and R.E. Riggio, Transformational Leadership, 
2nd ed. (Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum, 2006), 7; J.M. Kouzes 
and B.Z. Posner, The Leadership Challenge: How to Make 
Extraordinary Things Happen in Organizations (Hoboken, 
N.J.: John Wiley & Sons, 2017), Chaps. 7 and 8.
22. W.E. Baker and J.M. Sinkula, “The Synergistic Effect 
of Market Orientation and Learning Orientation on 
Organizational Performance,” Academy of Marketing 
Science Journal 27, no. 4 (1999): 411–27; Z. Emden, A. 
Yaprak, and S.T. Cavusgil, “Learning from Experience 
in International Alliances: Antecedents and Firm Perfor￾mance Implications,” Journal of Business Research 58, 
no. 7 (2005): 883–92.
23. J.M. Kouzes and B.Z. Posner, The Leadership Challenge: 
How to Make Extraordinary Things Happen in Organizations
(Hoboken, N.J.: John Wiley & Sons, 2017).
24. R.J. House, “A 1976 Theory of Charismatic Leadership,” 
in Leadership: The Cutting Edge, ed. J.G. Hunt and L.L. 
Larson (Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 
1977), 189–207; J.A. Conger, “Charismatic Leadership,” 
in The Sage Handbook of Leadership, ed. A. Bryman et al. 
(London: Sage, 2011), 86–102.
25. J.E. Barbuto Jr., “Taking the Charisma out of Transfor￾mational Leadership,” Journal of Social Behavior & 
Personality 12 (1997): 689–97; Y.A. Nur, “Charisma 
and Managerial Leadership: The Gift That Never Was,” 
Business Horizons 41 (1998): 19–26; M.D. Mumford 
and J.R. Van Doorn, “The Leadership of Pragmatism: 
Reconsidering Franklin in the Age of Charisma,” 
Leadership Quarterly 12, no. 3 (2001): 279–309; A. 
Fanelli, “Bringing Out Charisma: CEO Charisma and 
External Stakeholders,” Academy of Management Review
31, no. 4 (2006): 1049–61; M.J. Platow et al., “A Special 
Gift We Bestow on You for Being Representative of Us: 
Considering Leader Charisma from a Self-Categorization 
Perspective,” British Journal of Social Psychology 45, no. 2 
(2006): 303–20.
26. W.H. Friedland, “For a Sociological Concept of Charisma,” 
Social Forces 43 (1964): 18–26; K. Miyahara, “Charisma: 
From Weber to Contemporary Sociology,” Sociological 
Inquiry 53 (1983): 368–88; J. Antonakis et al., “Charisma: 
An Ill-Defined and Ill-Measured Gift,” Annual Review of 
Organizational Psychology and Organizational Behavior 3 
(2016): 293–319; K.O. Tskhay, R. Zhu, and N.O. Rule, 
“Perceptions of Charisma from Thin Slices of Behavior 
Predict Leadership Prototypicality Judgments,” Leadership 
Quarterly, 28 (2017): 555–62.
Guide for Leading Change (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 
2004), Chap. 11; R. Gill, Theory and Practice of Leadership
(London: Sage, 2011), Chap. 4; D. O’Connell, K. Hickerson, 
and A. Pillutla, “Organizational Visioning: An Integrative 
Review,” Group & Organization Management 36, no. 1 
(2011): 103–25.
12. J.M. Strange and M.D. Mumford, “The Origins of Vision: 
Effects of Reflection, Models, and Analysis,” Leadership 
Quarterly 16, no. 1 (2005): 121–48; S. Kantabutra, 
“Toward a Behavioral Theory of Vision in Organizational 
Settings,” Leadership & Organization Development Journal
30, no. 4 (2009): 319–37; S.A. Kirkpatrick, “Lead 
through Vision and Values,” in Handbook of Principles 
of Organizational Behavior, ed. E.A. Locke (Chichester, 
UK: Wiley, 2010), 367–87; R. Ashkenas and B. Manville, 
“You Don’t Have to Be CEO to Be a Visionary Leader,” 
Harvard Business Review, April 4, 2019.
13. J.A. Conger and R.N. Kanungo, Charismatic Leadership 
in Organizations (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 1998), 
173–83; M. Venus, D. Stam, and D. van Knippenberg, 
“Leader Emotion as a Catalyst of Effective Leader 
Communication of Visions, Value-Laden Messages, and 
Goals,” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision 
Processes 122, no. 1 (2013): 53–68; J. Mayfield, M. 
Mayfield, and W.C. Sharbrough, “Strategic Vision and 
Values in Top Leaders’ Communications: Motivating 
Language at a Higher Level,” International Journal of 
Business Communication 52, no. 1 (2015): 97–121.
14. D.A. Waldman, P.A. Balthazard, and S.J. Peterson, 
“Leadership and Neuroscience: Can We Revolutionize 
the Way That Inspirational Leaders Are Identified and 
Developed?,” Academy of Management Perspectives 25, 
no. 1 (2011): 60–74; S. Denning, The Leader’s Guide to 
Storytelling: Mastering the Art and Discipline of Business 
Narrative, rev. ed. (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2011); J.C. 
Sarros et al., “Leaders and Their Use of Motivating Lan￾guage,” Leadership & Organization Development Journal 35, 
no. 3 (2014): 226–40; A.M. Carton, C. Murphy, and J.R. 
Clark, “A (Blurry) Vision of the Future: How Leader 
Rhetoric About Ultimate Goals Influences Performance,” 
Academy of Management Journal 57, no. 6 (2014): 1544–70.
15. D. Ossip, “Create a Culture of Engagement for 
Successful Customer Outcomes,” The CEO Forum 2015, 
30–31; R. Reiss, “ Interview with David Ossip,” The 
CEO Forum, 11 October 2015, 73–76; L. Efron, “How 
Transformational Leadership Saved This Company: 
Ceridian’s Story,” Forbes, 6 July 2016.
16. P.C. Newman, “Cohon’s Hamburger Diplomacy,” Maclean’s, 
May 30, 1988; L. Black, “Hamburger Diplomacy,” Report 
on Business Magazine, August 1988, 30–36.
17. J.E. Baur et al., “More Than One Way to Articulate 
a Vision: A Configurations Approach to Leader 
Charismatic Rhetoric and Influence,” Leadership 
Quarterly 27, no. 1 (2016): 156–71.
18. D.E. Berlew, “Leadership and Organizational Excitement,” 
California Management Review 17, no. 2 (1974): 21–30; 
W. Bennis and B. Nanus, Leaders: The Strategies for 
Taking Charge (New York: Harper & Row, 1985), 43–55; 
T. Simons, “Behavioral Integrity: The Perceived Alignment 
between Managers’ Words and Deeds as a Research 
Focus,” Organization Science 13, no. 1 (2002): 18–35.
19. D. Ossip, “Create a Culture of Engagement for 
Successful Customer Outcomes,” The CEO Forum V, 461
no. 4 (2005): 361–75; D.V. Simonet and R.P. Tett, “Five 
Perspectives on the Leadership–Management Relationship: 
A Competency-Based Evaluation and Integration,” Journal 
of Leadership & Organizational Studies 20, no. 2 (2013): 
199–213; H. Mintzberg, Simply Managing: What Managers 
Do—and Can Do Better (San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler 
Publishers, 2013); M. Bresnen et al., “Leadership Talk: From 
Managerialism to Leaderism in Health Care after the Crash,”
Leadership 11, no. 4 (November 1, 2015): 451–70; U.Y. 
Eseryel, K. Crowston, and R. Heckman, “Functional and 
Visionary Leadership in Self-Managing Virtual Teams,” 
Group & Organization Management 46, no. 2 (2021): 424–60.
35. R.J. House and R.N. Aditya, “The Social Scientific Study 
of Leadership: Quo Vadis?,” Journal of Management 23, 
no. 3 (1997): 409–73.
36. W. Bennis and B. Nanus, Leaders: The Strategies for 
Taking Charge (New York: Harper & Row, 1985), 20. 
Peter Drucker is also widely cited as the source of this 
quotation. The closest passage we could find, however, 
is in the first two pages of The Effective Executive (1966) 
where Drucker states that effective executives “get the 
right things done.” On the next page, he states that 
manual workers need only efficiency, “that is, the ability 
to do things right rather than the ability to get the right 
things done.” See P.F. Drucker, The Effective Executive
(New York: Harper Business, 1966), 1–2.
37. G. Yukl and R. Lepsinger, “Why Integrating the Leading 
and Managing Roles Is Essential for Organizational 
Effectiveness,” Organizational Dynamics 34, no. 4 (2005): 
361–75; U.Y. Eseryel, K. Crowston, and R. Heckman, 
“Functional and Visionary Leadership in Self-Managing 
Virtual Teams,” Group & Organization Management 46, 
no. 2 (2021): 424–60.
38. E.A. Fleishman, “The Description of Supervisory Behav￾ior,” Journal of Applied Psychology 37, no. 1 (1953): 1–6. 
For discussion on methodological problems with the devel￾opment of these people- versus task-oriented leadership 
constructs, see C.A. Schriesheim, R.J. House, and S. Kerr, 
“Leader Initiating Structure: A Reconciliation of Discrep￾ant Research Results and Some Empirical Tests,” Organiza￾tional Behavior and Human Performance 15, no. 2 (1976): 
297–321; L. Tracy, “Consideration and Initiating Structure: 
Are They Basic Dimensions of Leader Behavior?,” Social 
Behavior and Personality 15, no. 1 (1987): 21–33.
39. A.K. Korman, “Consideration, Initiating Structure, and 
Organizational Criteria—a Review,” Personnel Psychology 19 
(1966): 349–62; E.A. Fleishman, “Twenty Years of 
Consideration and Structure,” in Current Developments 
in the Study of Leadership, ed. E.A. Fleishman and J.C. 
Hunt (Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 
1973), 1–40; T.A. Judge, R.F. Piccolo, and R. Ilies, “The 
Forgotten Ones?: The Validity of Consideration and 
Initiating Structure in Leadership Research,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology 89, no. 1 (2004): 36–51; D.S. DeRue 
et al., “Trait and Behavioral Theories of Leadership: 
An Integration and Meta-Analytic Test of Their Relative 
Validity,” Personnel Psychology 64, no. 1 (2011): 7–52; 
G.A. Yukl, Leadership in Organizations, 8th ed. (Upper 
Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education, 2013), 62–75.
40. V.V. Baba, “Serendipity in Leadership: Initiating 
Structure and Consideration in the Classroom,” Human 
Relations 42 (1989): 509–25; D. Erdel and M. Takkaç, 
“Teacher Leadership inside the Classroom: Implications 
27. B. Shamir et al., “Correlates of Charismatic Leader 
Behavior in Military Units: Subordinates’ Attitudes, Unit 
Characteristics, and Superiors’ Appraisals of Leader 
Performance,” Academy of Management Journal 41, no. 4 
(1998): 387–409; R. Khurana, Searching for a Corporate 
Savior: The Irrational Quest for Charismatic CEOs
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2002); R.E. 
de Vries, R.D. Pathak, and A.R. Paquin, “The Paradox 
of Power Sharing: Participative Charismatic Leaders Have 
Subordinates with More Instead of Less Need for Leader￾ship,” European Journal of Work and Organizational 
Psychology 20, no. 6 (2010): 779–804; J. Vergauwe et al., 
“The Double-Edged Sword of Leader Charisma: Under￾standing the Curvilinear Relationship between Charismatic 
Personality and Leader Effectiveness,” Journal of Personal￾ity and Social Psychology 114, no. 1 (2018): 110–30.
28. J. Lipman-Blumen, “A Pox on Charisma: Why Connective 
Leadership and Character Count,” in The Drucker 
Difference: What the World’s Greatest Management Thinker 
Means to Today’s Business Leaders, ed. C.L. Pearce, J.A. 
Maciariello, and H. Yamawaki (New York: McGraw Hill, 
2010), 149–74.
29. A. Mackey, “The Effect of CEOs on Firm Performance,” 
Strategic Management Journal 29, no. 12 (2008): 1357–67. 
However, one study reported that transformational lead￾ership is less effective than authoritarian (command￾control with punishment) leadership in resource scarcity 
environments. See X. Huang et al., “When Authoritarian 
Leaders Outperform Transformational Leaders: Firm 
Performance in a Harsh Economic Environment,” Acad￾emy of Management Discoveries 1, no. 2 (2015): 180–200.
30. J. Barling, T. Weber, and E.K. Kelloway, “Effects of 
Transformational Leadership Training on Attitudinal 
and Financial Outcomes: A Field Experiment,” Journal 
of Applied Psychology 81 (1996): 827–32.
31. A. Bryman, “Leadership in Organizations,” in Handbook 
of Organization Studies, ed. S.R. Clegg, C. Hardy, and 
W.R. Nord (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 1996), 276–92; 
D. van Knippenberg and S.B. Sitkin, “A Critical Assess￾ment of Charismatic—Transformational Leadership 
Research: Back to the Drawing Board?,” Academy of 
Management Annals 7, no. 1 (2013): 1–60.
32. G. Yukl and J.W. Michel, “A Critical Assessment of 
Research on Effective Leadership Behavior,” in Advances 
in Authentic and Ethical Leadership, ed. L.L. Neider and 
C.A. Schriesheim (Charlotte, NC: Information Age, 
2014), 209–30.
33. B.S. Pawar and K.K. Eastman, “The Nature and Implica￾tions of Contextual Influences on Transformational 
Leadership: A Conceptual Examination,” Academy of 
Management Review 22 (1997): 80–109; C.P. Egri and 
S. Herman, “Leadership in the North American Environ￾mental Sector: Values, Leadership Styles, and Contexts 
of Environmental Leaders and Their Organizations,” 
Academy of Management Journal 43, no. 4 (2000): 571–604.
34. A. Zaleznik, “Managers and Leaders: Are They Differ￾ent?,” Harvard Business Review 55, no. 3 (1977): 67–78; 
J.P. Kotter, A Force for Change: How Leadership Differs 
from Management (New York: Free Press, 1990); E.A. 
Locke, The Essence of Leadership (New York: Lexington 
Books, 1991); G. Yukl and R. Lepsinger, “Why Integrat￾ing the Leading and Managing Roles Is Essential for Or￾ganizational Effectiveness,” Organizational Dynamics 34, 462
of Leadership & Organizational Studies 11, no. 4 (2005): 
65–83.
51. R.T. Keller, “A Test of the Path–Goal Theory of Leadership 
with Need for Clarity as a Moderator in Research and 
Development Organizations,” Journal of Applied Psychology 
74 (1989): 208–12; M.A.M.G. Hoogeboom and C.P.M. 
Wilderom, “Advancing the Transformational–Transactional 
Model of Effective Leadership: Integrating Two Classic 
Leadership Models with a Video-Based Method,” Journal 
of Leadership Studies 13, no. 2 (2019): 23–46.
52. R.P. Vecchio, J.E. Justin, and C.L. Pearce, “The Utility 
of Transactional and Transformational Leadership for 
Predicting Performance and Satisfaction within a 
Path–Goal Theory Framework,” Journal of Occupational 
and Organizational Psychology 81 (2008): 71–82. One 
recent study also found that leadership effectiveness is 
predicted better by transformational leadership variables 
together with path-goal variables than by transformational 
with transactional leadership variables. This is consistent 
with critiques of the “transactional leadership” construct 
and measurement. See: M.A.M.G. Hoogeboom and 
C.P.M. Wilderom, “Advancing the Transformational–
Transactional Model of Effective Leadership: Integrating 
Two Classic Leadership Models with a Video-Based 
Method,” Journal of Leadership Studies 13, no. 2 (2019): 
23–46.
53. B. Carroll and L. Levy, “Defaulting to Management: 
Leadership Defined by What It Is Not,” Organization 15, 
no. 1 (2008): 75–96; L. Crevani and N. Endrissat, 
“Mapping the Leadership-as-Practice Terrain: Comparative 
Elements,” in Leadership-as-Practice, ed. J.A. Raelin 
(New York: Routledge, 2016), 21–49; M. Korica, D. 
Nicolini, and B. Johnson, “In Search of ‘Managerial 
Work’: Past, Present and Future of an Analytical Category,” 
International Journal of Management Reviews 19, no. 2 
(2017): 151–74.
54. C.A. Schriesheim and L.L. Neider, “Path–Goal Leader￾ship Theory: The Long and Winding Road,” Leadership 
Quarterly 7 (1996): 317–21.
55. N. Nicholson, Executive Instinct (New York: Crown, 
2000). The earliest contingency theory of leadership in 
the 1960s introduced the notion that managers have pre￾ferred styles and limited flexibility to use other styles. 
That theory had various flaws (so is not described here) 
but deserves recognition for proposing that it is better to 
move managers to situations that fit their leadership style 
than to expect managers to fluidly change style with the 
situation. See F.E. Fiedler, “Engineer the Job to Fit the 
Manager,” Harvard Business Review 43, no. 5 (1965): 
115–22; F.E. Fiedler, A Theory of Leadership Effectiveness 
(New York: McGraw Hill, 1967); F.E. Fiedler and M. M. 
Chemers, Leadership and Effective Management (Glen￾view, IL: Scott, Foresman, 1974).
56. S. Kerr and J.M. Jermier, “Substitutes for Leadership: Their 
Meaning and Measurement,” Organizational Behavior and 
Human Performance 22 (December 1978): 375–403.
57. C.A. Schriesheim, “Substitutes-for-Leadership Theory: 
Development and Basic Concepts,” Leadership Quarterly
8 (1997): 103–08; R.T. Keller, “Transformational Leader￾ship, Initiating Structure, and Substitutes for Leadership: 
A Longitudinal Study of Research and Development 
Project Team Performance,” Journal of Applied Psychol￾ogy 91, no. 1 (2006): 202–10.
for Effective Language Teaching,” International Journal 
of Curriculum and Instruction 12 (2020): 467–500.
41. S.J. Peterson, B.M. Galvin, and D. Lange, “CEO Servant 
Leadership: Exploring Executive Characteristics and 
Firm Performance,” Personnel Psychology 65, no. 3 
(2012): 565–96.
42. R.K. Greenleaf, Servant Leadership: A Journey into the 
Nature of Legitimate Power & Greatness (Mahwah, NJ: 
Paulist Press, 1977; repr., 2002), 27.
43. S. Sendjaya, J.C. Sarros, and J.C. Santora, “Defining and 
Measuring Servant Leadership Behaviour in Organiza￾tions,” Journal of Management Studies 45, no. 2 (2008): 
402–24; R.C. Liden et al., “Servant Leadership: Develop￾ment of a Multidimensional Measure and Multi-Level 
Assessment,” Leadership Quarterly 19, no. 2 (2008): 161–77; 
D. van Dierendonck, “Servant Leadership: A Review and 
Synthesis,” Journal of Management 37, no. 4 (2011): 
1228–61; R. VanMeter et al., “In Search of Clarity on Ser￾vant Leadership: Domain Specification and Reconceptual￾ization,” AMS Review 6, no. 1 (2016): 59–78.
44. R. VanMeter et al., “In Search of Clarity on Servant 
Leadership: Domain Specification and Reconceptualiza￾tion,” AMS Review 6, no. 1 (2016): 59–78; K.E. Mcquade, 
C. Harrison, and H. Tarbert, “Systematically Reviewing 
Servant Leadership,” European Business Review 33, no. 3 
(2020): 465–90; Y. Zhang et al., “A Meta-Analytic 
Review of the Consequences of Servant Leadership: 
The Moderating Roles of Cultural Factors,” Asia 
Pacific Journal of Management 38, no. 1 (2021): 371–400.
45. S. Kerr et al., “Towards a Contingency Theory of Leader￾ship Based Upon the Consideration and Initiating Struc￾ture Literature,” Organizational Behavior and Human 
Performance 12 (1974): 62–82; L.L. Larson, J.G. Hunt, 
and R.N. Osborn, “The Great Hi-Hi Leader Behavior 
Myth: A Lesson from Occam’s Razor,” Academy of 
Management Journal 19 (1976): 628–41; V.H. Vroom and 
A.G. Jago, “The Role of the Situation in Leadership,” 
American Psychologist 62, no. 1 (2007): 17–24.
46. R.J. House, “A Path Goal Theory of Leader Effectiveness,” 
Administrative Science Quarterly 16, no. 3 (1971): 321–39; 
M.G. Evans, “Extensions of a Path–Goal Theory of Moti￾vation,” Journal of Applied Psychology 59 (1974): 172–78; 
R.J. House and T.R. Mitchell, “Path–Goal Theory of Lead￾ership,” Journal of Contemporary Business (1974): 81–97; 
M.G. Evans, “Path Goal Theory of Leadership,” in Leader￾ship, ed. L.L. Neider and C.A. Schriesheim (Greenwich, 
CT: Information Age, 2002), 115–38.
47. For a thorough study of how expectancy theory of 
motivation relates to leadership, see R.G. Isaac, W.J. 
Zerbe, and D.C. Pitt, “Leadership and Motivation: The 
Effective Application of Expectancy Theory,” Journal 
of Managerial Issues 13 (2001): 212–26.
48. R.J. House, “Path–Goal Theory of Leadership: Lessons, 
Legacy, and a Reformulated Theory,” The Leadership 
Quarterly 7, no. 3 (1996): 323–52.
49. J. Indvik, “Path–Goal Theory of Leadership: A Meta￾Analysis,” Academy of Management Proceedings (1986): 
189–92; J.C. Wofford and L.Z. Liska, “Path–Goal 
Theories of Leadership: A Meta-Analysis,” Journal of 
Management 19 (1993): 857–76.
50. J.D. Houghton and S.K. Yoho, “Toward a Contingency 
Model of Leadership and Psychological Empowerment: 
When Should Self-Leadership Be Encouraged?,” Journal 463
65. J. Pfeffer, “The Ambiguity of Leadership,” Academy of 
Management Review 2 (1977): 102–12.
66. R. Weber et al., “The Illusion of Leadership: Misattribu￾tion of Cause in Coordination Games,” Organization 
Science 12, no. 5 (2001): 582–98; N. Ensari and S.E. 
Murphy, “Cross-Cultural Variations in Leadership 
Perceptions and Attribution of Charisma to the Leader,” 
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 92 
(2003): 52–66; M.L.A. Hayward, V.P. Rindova, and T.G. 
Pollock, “Believing One’s Own Press: The Causes and 
Consequences of CEO Celebrity,” Strategic Management 
Journal 25, no. 7 (2004): 637–53; G.T. Fairhurst and D. 
Grant, “The Social Construction of Leadership: A Sail￾ing Guide,” Management Communication Quarterly 24, 
no. 2 (2010): 171–210.
67. L.M. Fisher, “Ricardo Semler Won’t Take Control,” 
strategy+business, no. 41 (2005): 1–11.
68. L.L. Koppes et al., eds., “Leadership: A Critical 
Historical Analysis of the Influence of Leader Traits,” 
in Historical Perspectives in Industrial and Organizational 
Psychology. (New York: Routledge, 2021), 227–48.
69. R.M. Stogdill, Handbook of Leadership (New York: Free 
Press, 1974), Chap. 5.
70. This list is based on S.A. Kirkpatrick and E.A. Locke, 
“Leadership: Do Traits Matter?,” Academy of Manage￾ment Executive 5 (1991): 48–60; G.A. Yukl, Leadership in 
Organizations, 8th ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson 
Education, 2013), Chap. 6; S.J. Zaccaro et al., “Leader 
Individual Differences, Situational Parameters, and Lead￾ership Outcomes: A Comprehensive Review and Integra￾tion,” The Leadership Quarterly 29, no. 1 (2018): 2–43.
71. T.A. Judge et al., “Personality and Leadership: A Qualita￾tive and Quantitative Review,” Journal Of Applied Psychol￾ogy 87, no. 4 (2002): 765–80; D.S. Derue et al., “Trait and 
Behavioral Theories of Leadership: An Integration and 
Meta-Analytic Test of Their Relative Validity,” Personnel 
Psychology 64, no. 1 (2011): 7–52; A. Deinert et al., “Trans￾formational Leadership Sub-Dimensions and Their Link to 
Leaders’ Personality and Performance,” Leadership Quar￾terly 26, no. 6 (2015): 1095–120. Recent evidence suggests 
that being a formal leader changes the individual’s person￾ality (e.g., conscientiousness increases). See: W.-D. Li et al., 
“Can Becoming a Leader Change Your Personality? An 
Investigation with Two Longitudinal Studies from a Role￾Based Perspective.,” The Journal of Applied Psychology 106, 
no. 6 (2020): 882–901.
72. H. Ibarra et al., “Leadership and Identity: An Examination 
of Three Theories and New Research Directions,” in The 
Oxford Handbook of Leadership and Organizations, ed. D.V. 
Day (New York: Oxford University Press, 2014), 285–301; 
L. Guillén, M. Mayo, and K. Korotov, “Is Leadership a 
Part of Me? A Leader Identity Approach to Understand￾ing the Motivation to Lead,” Leadership Quarterly 26, 
no. 5 (2015): 802–20; D. Miscenko, H. Guenter, and D.V. 
Day, “Am I a Leader? Examining Leader Identity Develop￾ment over Time,” The Leadership Quarterly 28, no. 5 
(2017): 605–20; E. Lanka, A. Topakas, and M. Patterson, 
“Becoming a Leader: Catalysts and Barriers to Leader 
Identity Construction,” European Journal of Work and 
Organizational Psychology 29, no. 3 (2020): 377–90.
73. B. Carroll and L. Levy, “Defaulting to Management: 
Leadership Defined by What It Is Not,” Organization 15, 
no. 1 (2008): 75–96.
58. B. Künzle et al., “Substitutes for Leadership in Anaesthesia 
Teams and Their Impact on Leadership Effectiveness,” Euro￾pean Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology 19, no. 5 
(2010): 505–31; B.A. De Jong, K.M. Bijlsma-Frankema, and 
L.B. Cardinal, “Stronger Than the Sum of Its Parts? The 
Performance Implications of Peer Control Combinations 
in Teams,” Organization Science 25, no. 6 (2014): 1703–21.
59. W. Potipiroon and M.T. Ford, “Does Leader Humor In￾fluence Employee Voice? The Mediating Role of Psycho￾logical Safety and the Moderating Role of Team Humor,” 
Journal of Leadership & Organizational Studies 28, no. 4 
(2021): 415–28.
60. P.M. Podsakoff and S.B. MacKenzie, “Kerr and Jermier’s 
Substitutes for Leadership Model: Background, Empiri￾cal Assessment, and Suggestions for Future Research,” 
Leadership Quarterly 8 (1997): 117–32; S.D. Dionne et al., 
“Neutralizing Substitutes for Leadership Theory: 
Leadership Effects and Common-Source Bias,” Journal 
of Applied Psychology 87, no. 3 (2002): 454–64; J.R. Villa 
et al., “Problems with Detecting Moderators in Leader￾ship Research Using Moderated Multiple Regression,” 
Leadership Quarterly 14, no. 1 (2003): 3–23; S.D. Dionne 
et al., “Substitutes for Leadership, or Not,” Leadership 
Quarterly 16, no. 1 (2005): 169–93.
61. J.R. Meindl, “On Leadership: An Alternative to the Con￾ventional Wisdom,” Research in Organizational Behavior 
12 (1990): 159–203; L.R. Offermann, J.K. Kennedy, and 
P.W. Wirtz, “Implicit Leadership Theories: Content, 
Structure, and Generalizability,” Leadership Quarterly 5, 
no. 1 (1994): 43–58; P. Jacquart and J. Antonakis, 
“When Does Charisma Matter for Top-Level Leaders? 
Effect of Attributional Ambiguity,” Academy of Manage￾ment Journal 58, no. 4 (2015): 1051–74; R.G. Lord et al., 
“Implicit Leadership Theories, Implicit Followership 
Theories, and Dynamic Processing of Leadership Infor￾mation,” Annual Review of Organizational Psychology and 
Organizational Behavior 7 (2020): 49–74.
62. F.C. Brodbeck et al., “Cultural Variation of Leadership 
Prototypes across 22 European Countries,” Journal of 
Occupational and Organizational Psychology 73, no. 1 
(2000): 1–29; O. Epitropaki et al., “Implicit Leadership 
and Followership Theories ‘in the Wild’: Taking Stock of 
Information-Processing Approaches to Leadership and 
Followership in Organizational Settings,” The Leadership 
Quarterly 24, no. 6 (2013): 858–81; G.M. Tavares et al., 
“Opening the Implicit Leadership Theories’ Black Box: 
An Experimental Approach with Conjoint Analysis,” 
Frontiers in Psychology 9 (2018): 0100.
63. S.F. Cronshaw and R.G. Lord, “Effects of Categoriza￾tion, Attribution, and Encoding Processes on Leadership 
Perceptions,” Journal of Applied Psychology 72 (1987): 
97–106; J.L. Nye and D.R. Forsyth, “The Effects of 
Prototype-Based Biases on Leadership Appraisals: A 
Test of Leadership Categorization Theory,” Small Group 
Research 22 (1991): 360–79.
64. R. Meindl, “On Leadership: An Alternative to the Conven￾tional Wisdom,” Research in Organizational Behavior 12 
(1990): 163; B. Schyns, J.R. Meindl, and M.A. Croon, 
“The Romance of Leadership Scale: Cross-Cultural Test￾ing and Refinement,” Leadership 3, no. 1 (2007): 29–46; 
J. Felfe and L.E. Petersen, “Romance of Leadership and 
Management Decision Making,” European Journal of Work 
and Organizational Psychology 16, no. 1 (2007): 1–24.464
Studies 83 (2018): 34–64; W.L. Gardner et al., “Authentic 
Leadership Theory: The Case For and Against,” The 
Leadership Quarterly 32, no. 6 (2021): 101495.
81. W.G. Bennis and R.J. Thomas, “Crucibles of Leader￾ship,” Harvard Business Review 80, no. 9 (2002): 39–45; 
R.J. Thomas, Crucibles of Leadership: How to Learn from 
Experience to Become a Great Leader (Boston: Harvard 
Business Press, 2008).
82. R. Jacobs, “Using Human Resource Functions to En￾hance Emotional Intelligence,” in The Emotionally Intelli￾gent Workplace, ed. C. Cherniss and D. Goleman (San 
Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2001), 161–63; J.A. Conger and 
D.A. Ready, “Rethinking Leadership Competencies,” 
Leader to Leader (2004): 41–47.
83. R.G. Lord and D.J. Brown, Leadership Processes and 
Self-Identity: A Follower-Centered Approach to Leadership 
(Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum, 2004); R. Bolden and J. Gosling, 
“Leadership Competencies: Time to Change the Tune?,” 
Leadership 2, no. 2 (2006): 147–63.
84. Six of the Project GLOBE clusters are described in a 
special issue of the Journal of World Business 37 (2000). 
For an overview of Project GLOBE, see R. House, 
M. Javidan, and P. Dorfman, “Project GLOBE: An 
Introduction,” Applied Psychology: An International Review
50 (2001): 489–505; R. House et al., “Understanding 
Cultures and Implicit Leadership Theories across the 
Globe: An Introduction to Project GLOBE,” Journal of 
World Business 37 (2002): 3–10.
85. J.C. Jesuino, “Latin Europe Cluster: From South to 
North,” Journal of World Business 37 (2002): 88. 
Another GLOBE study, of Iranian managers, also 
reported that “charismatic visionary” stands out as a 
primary leadership dimension. See A. Dastmalchian, 
M. Javidan, and K. Alam, “Effective Leadership and 
Culture in Iran: An Empirical Study,” Applied Psychology: 
An International Review 50 (2001): 532–58.
86. D.N. Den Hartog et al., “Culture Specific and Cross￾Cultural Generalizable Implicit Leadership Theories: Are 
Attributes of Charismatic/Transformational Leadership 
Universally Endorsed?,” Leadership Quarterly 10 (1999): 
219–56; F.C. Brodbeck et al., “Cultural Variation of 
Leadership Prototypes across 22 European Countries,” 
Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology 73 
(2000): 1–29; E. Szabo et al., “The Europe Cluster: 
Where Employees Have a Voice,” Journal of World 
Business 37 (2002): 55–68. The Mexican study is 
reported in C.E. Nicholls, H.W. Lane, and M.B. Brechu, 
“Taking Self-Managed Teams to Mexico,” Academy of 
Management Executive 13 (1999): 15–25.
87. G.N. Powell, “One More Time: Do Female and Male 
Managers Differ?,” Academy of Management Executive 4 
(1990): 68–75; M.L. van Engen and T.M. Willemsen, 
“Sex and Leadership Styles: A Meta-Analysis of Research 
Published in the 1990s,” Psychological Reports 94, no. 1 
(2004): 3–18.
88. A.H. Eagly, M.C. Johannesen-Schmidt, and M.L. van En￾gen, “Transformational, Transactional, and Laissez-Faire 
Leadership Styles: A Meta-Analysis Comparing Women 
and Men,” Psychological Bulletin 129 (2003): 569–91; 
S. Paustian-Underdahl, L. Walker, and D. Woehr, “Gender 
and Perceptions of Leadership Effectiveness: A Meta￾Analysis of Contextual Moderators,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology 99, no. 6 (2014): 1129–45.
74. L. Guillén, M. Mayo, and K. Korotov, “Is Leadership a 
Part of Me? A Leader Identity Approach to Understand￾ing the Motivation to Lead,” The Leadership Quarterly 26, 
no. 5 (2015): 802–20; K.L. Badura et al., “Motivation to 
Lead: A Meta-Analysis and Distal-Proximal Model of 
Motivation and Leadership.,” Journal of Applied Psychology
105, no. 4 (2020): 331–54.
75. J.B. Miner, “Twenty Years of Research on Role Motivation 
Theory of Managerial Effectiveness,” Personnel Psychology
31 (1978): 739–60; C.J. Vinkenburg et al., “Arena: A 
Critical Conceptual Framework of Top Management 
Selection,” Group & Organization Management 39, no. 1 
(2014): 33–68; B.L. Connelly et al., “Tournament Theory: 
Thirty Years of Contests and Competitions,” Journal of 
Management 40, no. 1 (2014): 16–47; Y. Baruch and Y. 
Vardi, “A Fresh Look at the Dark Side of Contemporary 
Careers: Toward a Realistic Discourse,” British Journal of 
Management 27, no. 2 (2016): 355–72.
76. S.A. Kirkpatrick and E.A. Locke, “Leadership: Do Traits 
Matter?,” Academy of Management Executive 5 (1991): 
48–60; S.J. Zaccaro et al., “Leader Individual Differ￾ences, Situational Parameters, and Leadership Out￾comes: A Comprehensive Review and Integration,” The 
Leadership Quarterly 29, no. 1 (2018): 2–43.
77. S. Giles, “The Most Important Leadership Competencies, 
According to Leaders around the World,” Harvard Business 
Review, March 15, 2016; C. Moore et al., “Leaders Matter 
Morally: The Role of Ethical Leadership in Shaping Em￾ployee Moral Cognition and Misconduct.,” Journal of Ap￾plied Psychology 104, no. 1 (2019): 123–45; A.C. Peng and 
D. Kim, “A Meta-Analytic Test of the Differential Pathways 
Linking Ethical Leadership to Normative Conduct,” Journal 
of Organizational Behavior 41, no. 4 (May 1, 2020): 348–68; 
G.C. Banks et al., “Ethical Leadership: Mapping the Terrain 
for Concept Cleanup and a Future Research Agenda,” The 
Leadership Quarterly 32, no. 2 (2021): 101471.
78. J. Hedlund et al., “Identifying and Assessing Tacit Knowl￾edge: Understanding the Practical Intelligence of Mili￾tary Leaders,” Leadership Quarterly 14, no. 2 (2003): 
117–40; A. Baczyńska and G.C. Thornton III, “Relation￾ships of Analytical, Practical, and Emotional Intelligence 
with Behavioral Dimensions of Performance of Top Man￾agers,” International Journal of Selection and Assessment 25, 
no. 2 (2017): 171–82.
79. D. Goleman, R. Boyatzis, and A. McKee, Primal Leaders
(Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 2002); C. Miao, 
R.H. Humphrey, and S. Qian, “Emotional Intelligence and 
Authentic Leadership: A Meta-Analysis,” Leadership & Or￾ganization Development Journal 39, no. 5 (2018): 679–90; 
C.B. Koh and E. O’Higgins, “Relationships between Emo￾tional Intelligence, Perceived and Actual Leadership Effec￾tiveness in the Military Context,” Military Psychology 30, 
no. 1 (2018): 27–42; S. Mysirlaki and F. Paraskeva, “Emo￾tional Intelligence and Transformational Leadership in 
Virtual Teams: Lessons from MMOGs,” Leadership & Or￾ganization Development Journal 41, no. 4 (2020): 551–66.
80. B. George, Authentic Leadership (San Francisco: Jossey￾Bass, 2004); W.L. Gardner et al., “Authentic Leadership: 
A Review of the Literature and Research Agenda,” The 
Leadership Quarterly 22 (2011): 1120–45; B. Alilyyani, 
C.A. Wong, and G. Cummings, “Antecedents, Mediators, 
and Outcomes of Authentic Leadership in Healthcare: 
A Systematic Review,” International Journal of Nursing 465
2018; M. Schwantes, “Harold MacDowell: Servant￾Leadership Is Love in Action,” Leadership from the 
Core, Podcast, August 2019; “Morgan Leading through 
Service,” TD Spirit, September 2020.
f. S. Sahadi, “We Asked CNN Business Readers What 
Makes a Great Boss. Here’s What You Said,” CNN 
Business, March 27, 2019.
g. “Bad Bosses: Glassdoor Survey Reveals Worst Manager 
Habits,” Glassdoor UK (blog), May 14, 2020; “Survey: 
84 Percent of U.S. Workers Blame Bad Managers for 
Creating Unnecessary Stress,” Press Release (Alexandria, 
VA: SHRM, December 8, 2020); Office of Personnel 
Management, “2020 Federal Employee Viewpoint Survey” 
(Washington, DC: United States Government, April 
2021); S. Korolevich, “Horrible Bosses: A Survey of the 
American Workforce,” GoodHire (blog), January 11, 2022.
h. “Three Leadership Secrets from easyJet Boss Carolyn 
McCall,” O2 BusinessBlog, O2, September 19, 2014; 
C. Zillman, “easyJet CEO: ‘I’m Not a Turnaround 
Expert,’” Fortune, June 15, 2015; L. Roderick, “easyJet 
CEO Carolyn McCall Explains How Marketers Can 
Soar,” Marketing Week, March 9, 2016; K. Magee, 
“‘Women Don’t Need to Defeminise, They Need to Be 
Themselves,’ easyJet CEO McCall Says,” Advertising 
Week, April 19, 2016; D. Medland, “EasyJet CEO Dame 
Carolyn McCall on Transformative Leadership,” Insights 
(Chartered Management Institute), April 26, 2017; G. 
Spanier, “ITV’s Carolyn McCall: ‘We Have Got to Evolve 
Quickly,’” Campaign, February 18, 2019.
i. Liza Minnelli makes this statement to explain why she 
doesn’t perform the songs made famous by her mother, 
Judy Garland. The earliest versions of this quotation are 
found in New Woman magazine (volume 8, 1978) and 
Vincente Minnelli’s 1975 autobiography. The version cited 
here is from E. Santosuosso, “Minnelli Brings a Real-Life 
Concert to Town,” Boston Globe, September 24, 1992, 61.
j. B.J. Avolio et al., “Unlocking the Mask: A Look at the 
Process by Which Authentic Leaders Impact Follower 
Attitudes and Behaviors,” Leadership Quarterly 15 
(2004): 801–23.
k. D.V. Day et al., “Self-Monitoring Personality at Work: 
A Meta-Analytic Investigation of Construct Validity,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 87, no. 2 (2002): 390–401; 
I.O. Tueretgen, P. Unsal, and I. Erdem, “The Effects of 
Sex, Gender Role, and Personality Traits on Leader 
Emergence—Does Culture Make a Difference?,” Small 
Group Research 39, no. 5 (2008): 588–615; D.U. 
Bryant et al., “The Interaction of Self-Monitoring and 
Organizational Position on Perceived Effort,” Journal 
of Managerial Psychology 26, no. 2 (2011): 138–54.
l. A.G. Bedeian and D.V. Day, “Can Chameleons Lead?,” 
The Leadership Quarterly 15, no. 5 (2004): 687–718.
m. W. Bennis, “We Need Leaders,” Executive Excellence 27, 
no. 12 (2010): 4. Also see D. Nyberg and S. Sveningsson, 
“Paradoxes of Authentic Leadership: Leader Identity 
Struggles,” Leadership 10, no. 4 (2014): 437–55.
n. A.G. Bedeian and D.V. Day, “Can Chameleons Lead?,” 
The Leadership Quarterly 15, no. 5 (2004): 687–718.
o. D. Gruenfeld and L. Zander, “Authentic Leadership Can Be 
Bad Leadership,” Harvard Business Review Blog, Harvard 
Business School, February 3, 2011, http://blogs.hbr.org.
89. A.H. Eagly, S.J. Karau, and M.G. Makhijani, “Gender 
and the Effectiveness of Leaders: A Meta-Analysis,” 
Psychological Bulletin 117 (1995): 125–45; M.E. Heilman 
et al., “Penalties for Success: Reactions to Women 
Who Succeed at Male Gender-Typed Tasks,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology 89, no. 3 (2004): 416–27; A.H. Eagly, 
“Achieving Relational Authenticity in Leadership: Does 
Gender Matter?,” Leadership Quarterly 16, no. 3 (2005): 
459–74; A.J. Anderson et al., “The Effectiveness of 
Three Strategies to Reduce the Influence of Bias in 
Evaluations of Female Leaders,” Journal of Applied 
Social Psychology 45, no. 9 (2015): 522–39.
a. “Airbus Careers - Benefits - Leadership University,” August 9, 
2021, https://www.airbus.com/en/careers/benefits.
b. “DocuSign Chairman & CEO Keith Krach Honored as 
‘Most Admired CEO,’” Press Release (San Francisco: 
DocuSign, November 12, 2015); D. Ciamprone, 
“DocuSign’s Keith Krach Talks Transformational 
Leadership,” Profile Magazine, June 27, 2018; P.G. 
Stoltz, “The True GRIT of a Serial Transformational 
Leader,” Psychology Today, December 1, 2018; J.R. 
Miles, “Bold Spotlight: Krach, Transformational Leader,” 
LinkedIn, January 30, 2019, https://www.linkedin.com/
pulse/bold-leader-spotlight-keith-krach-transformational￾keith-krach; H.R. Morgan, “Entrepreneur Keith Krach 
Reveals His Secret Sauce For Creating Billion Dollar 
Companies,” Forbes, February 25, 2019.
c. S. Harris, “Is Jooste SA’s Top Dealmaker?,” Finweek, 
August 25, 2016, 32–34; “The Seagull’s Name Was 
Markus Jooste: Steinhoff And The ‘Stellenbosch Mafia,’” 
HuffPost UK, December 12, 2017; R. Henderson, 
“Steinhoff Sells off Its Luxury Gulfstream Jet to Raise 
Funds,” Sunday Times (South Africa), January 21, 2018; 
S. Theobald, “Jooste’s Obsession with Maintaining 
Steinhoff Illusion Drove Him to Cross the Line,” 
Business Day (South Africa), March 5, 2018; J. Shapiro, 
“The ‘Murky’ Local Origins of Steinhoff’s Secret Em￾pire,” Australian Financial Review, June 15, 2018; “Inside 
the Steinhoff Saga, One of the Biggest Cases of 
Corporate Fraud in South African Business History,” 
(Case study written by “Several University of Stellenbosch 
Business School academics”) CNBC Africa, June 28, 2018; 
J.-B. Styan, “The Steinhoff Story That Markus Jooste 
Left Untold,” Finweek, September 27, 2018, 34–35; 
M. Soko, “Book on Steinhoff’s Demise Shows Danger of 
‘Big Men’ Business Leaders,” The Conversation, November 13, 
2018; J. Rossouw and J. Styan, “Steinhoff Collapse: A 
Failure of Corporate Governance,” International Review 
of Applied Economics 33, no. 1 (2019): 163–70; PwC, 
“Overview of Forensic Investigation” (South Africa: 
Steinhoff International Holdings, March 15, 2019); 
K. Magubane, “Tribunal Confirms FSCA Insider Trading 
Finding against Former Steinhoff CEO Markus Jooste,” 
Fin 24, December 15, 2021.
d. L. Turner, “Five Tips for Exceptional Leadership,” SAP 
Community (blog), November 24, 2014.
e. TDAdmin, “Harold MacDowell Named #7 CEO in the 
World in Inc. Magazine Feature,” News Release (Dallas: 
TD Industries, April 7, 2017); 2018 Most Admired CEO: 
Harold MacDowell, TDIndustries (Video) (Dallas Business 
Journal, 2018); J. Yoo, “How TDIndustries Puts Its 
People First,” Chase Bank, Bold Leaders (blog), March 1, 
Design Credit: Blue globe icon: Merfin/Shutterstock466
chapter
13
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
LO 13-1 Describe three types of coordination in organizational structures.
LO 13-2 Discuss the role and effects of span of control, centralization, and formalization, 
and relate these elements to organic and mechanistic organizational structures.
LO 13-3 Identify and evaluate six types of departmentalization.
LO 13-4 Explain how the external environment, organizational size, technology, and strategy 
are relevant when designing an organizational structure.
Twitter’s organizational structure grew into a mishmash of business units 
during its first decade as the social media company acquired businesses 
and served more diverse users. Some divisions were based on products, such as 
Periscope live video. Others were focused on clients, such as global media. Still others were functional 
departments, such as counsel (legal). Jack Dorsey, Twitter’s co-founder and CEO at the time, was 
concerned that this jumbled structure was too complex and inefficient. Some divisions were so 
interdependent with others that they required exceptional coordination to work effectively.
Dorsey’s solution was to simplify the business with a purely functional structure. “A pure end-to-end 
functional organization (organized by discipline) will drive clearer decision-making, enable us to foster 
stronger culture, be more agile in making engineering trade-offs, and most importantly, sets us up for 
more creativity and invention, which is the phase we must now enter to continue to be relevant and 
important to the world,” Dorsey wrote to all staff. That new structure included ten groups: finance, 
customers, design and research, technology, counsel, people and marketing, product, revenue product, 
engineering, and assists.
Learning Objectives
Designing Organizational 
Structures467
PART 4: ORGANIZATIONAL PROCESSES
Jack Dorsey recently stepped down as Twitter CEO. One week later, the new CEO, Parag Agrawal, 
replaced the functional structure with a divisional structure around three product groups. The Bluebird 
division is responsible for Twitter’s consumer products. The Goldbird division is responsible for Twitter’s 
revenue products. The Core Tech division is responsible for technology that builds, powers, and 
protects Bluebird and Goldbird. The new structure also includes five functional support departments: 
finance, legal, people, customer service, and marketing. Two executives responsible for the former 
engineering and design functional units left the company.
Agrawal quickly introduced the new organizational structure so employees would become more 
focused on the company’s products, and that specific executives would be accountable for innovation 
and growth of those product areas. “We’re moving to a General Manager model and having one 
person lead work that supports one of our key company objectives,” the company explains. Agrawal 
Twitter replaced its purely functional structure with a product-based divisional structure to generate better innovation, growth, 
and efficient cross-functional collaboration.
Peter Kováč/Alamy Stock Photo468 Part Four Organizational Processes
acknowledged that the previous structure resulted in “slow decision making 
because of so much coordination that needed to happen” across functional 
units. In contrast, he believes the product-based structure will enable better 
cross-functional collaboration with “clear decision-making, increased 
accountability, and faster execution.”1
Twitter has introduced a product-based divisional organizational structure 
to foster more innovation, cross-functional collaboration, and efficient decision 
making. Organizational structure refers to the division of labor as well as the 
patterns of coordination, communication, workflow, and formal power that 
direct organizational activities. It formally determines what activities receive 
the most attention as well as financial, power, and information resources. 
For example, Twitter’s new structure dramatically shifts power and resources 
from functional group executives (engineering, technology, etc.) to product 
group executives. It also focuses employees around the development and 
success of its products rather than around their own specialized knowledge. 
Furthermore, Twitter’s product structure makes it easier for employees 
with diverse expertise to coordinate with one another through informal 
communication because they are grouped together, not in separate silos.
The topic of organizational structure typically conjures up images of an 
organizational chart. Organizational structure includes these reporting 
relationships, but it also includes other features that relate to work standards 
and rules, team dynamics, power relationships, information flow, and job 
design. The organization’s structure is an important instrument in an 
executive’s toolkit for organizational change because it establishes new 
communication patterns and aligns employee behavior with the corporate 
vision. Indeed, one global survey of 7,000 business and human resources 
leaders in 130 countries reported that organizational design was their firm’s 
most important trend or priority to improve human capital (leadership and 
corporate culture were second and third most important, respectively).2
This chapter begins by introducing the two fundamental processes in 
organizational structure: division of labor and coordination. Next, we 
examine three of the four main elements of organizational structure: span 
of control, centralization, and formalization. A separate section is devoted 
to the fourth element, departmentalization, including its various forms. 
The latter part of this chapter examines the contingencies of organizational 
design, including external environment, organizational size, technology, 
and strategy.
organizational structure
the division of labor as well as 
the patterns of coordination, 
communication, workflow, 
and formal power that direct 
organizational activitiesChapter Thirteen Designing Organizational Structures 469
Division of Labor and Coordination
All organizational structures include two fundamental requirements: the division of labor 
into distinct tasks and the coordination of that labor so employees are able to accomplish 
common goals.3
 Organizations are groups of people who work interdependently toward some 
purpose (see Chapter 1). To effectively accomplish this common purpose, most organiza￾tional activities are divided into manageable chunks, particularly when there are many differ￾ent tasks required to complete the work. Organizations also introduce various coordinating 
mechanisms to ensure that everyone is working in concert toward the same objectives.
DIVISION OF LABOR
Division of labor refers to the subdivision of work into separate jobs assigned to different 
people. Subdivided work leads to job specialization because each job now includes a sub￾set of the tasks and skills necessary to complete the product or service. Twitter divides its 
employees into hundreds of specific jobs to more effectively design and market its social 
media products. As companies get larger, this horizontal division of labor is almost always 
accompanied by vertical division of labor. Some people are assigned the task of supervis￾ing employees, others are responsible for managing those supervisors, and so forth.
Why do companies divide the work into several jobs? As we described in Chapter 6, 
job specialization increases work efficiency.4
 Job incumbents can master their tasks more 
quickly when work cycles are shorter. Less time is wasted changing from one task to an￾other. Training costs are lower because employees require fewer physical and mental skills 
to accomplish the assigned work. Finally, job specialization makes it easier to match peo￾ple with specific aptitudes and other abilities to the jobs for which they are best suited. It 
is almost impossible for one person working alone to develop and market sophisticated 
software that has numerous features and maintains protection against hostile online at￾tacks. Instead, Twitter requires thousands of people with diverse knowledge and skills to 
accomplish this work.
COORDINATION OF WORK ACTIVITIES
When people divide work among themselves, they require coordinating mechanisms to 
ensure that everyone works in concert. In fact, the extent to which work can be effectively 
divided among several people and work units depends on how well the divided work can 
be coordinated. When an organization divides work beyond its capacity to coordinate that 
work, individual effort is wasted due to misalignment, duplication, and mistiming of tasks. 
Coordination also tends to become more expensive and difficult as the division of labor 
increases. Therefore, companies specialize jobs only to the point where it isn’t too costly 
or challenging to coordinate the people in those jobs.5
Every organization—from the two-person corner convenience store to the largest 
corporate entity—uses one or more of the following coordinating mechanisms:6
 informal 
communication, formal hierarchy, and standardization (see Exhibit 13.1). These forms 
of coordination align the work of staff within the same department as well as across 
work units. Coordinating mechanisms are also critical when several organizations work 
together, such as in joint ventures and industry-level initiatives.7
Coordination through Informal Communication All organizations rely on 
informal communication as a coordinating mechanism. This process includes sharing 
information on mutual tasks as well as forming shared and complementary mental 
models so employees can more effectively synchronize their work activities.8
 Informal 
communication is vital in nonroutine and ambiguous situations because employees need 
to exchange a large volume of information through face-to-face communication and other 
media-rich channels. Twitter’s new structure groups people with diverse skills together 
LO 13-1470 Part Four Organizational Processes
because they require informal communication to discover and develop new software and 
tackle unusual problems, all of which are nonroutine and ambiguous.
Coordination through informal communication is easiest in small firms, but informa￾tion technologies have further enabled this coordinating mechanism at Twitter and in 
other large organizations.9 Some companies that employ thousands of people also sup￾port informal communication by limiting the size of each work site. Magna International 
follows this principle by keeping many of its plants—including its recently opened paint 
shop in Hoče, Slovenia—to less than 200 employees. The global auto-parts manufacturer 
has found that employees have difficulty remembering one another’s names in plants that 
are any larger, a situation that makes informal communication more difficult as a coordi￾nating mechanism.10
Some large firms encourage informal communication through integrator roles. These 
people coordinate a work process by encouraging employees in each work unit to directly 
share information and coordinate work activities with each other. Brand managers for lux￾ury perfumes are often integrator roles because they ensure that the work of fragrance de￾velopers, bottle designers, advertising creatives, production, and other groups are aligned 
with the brand’s image and meaning.11 Another informal communication coordination 
strategy is to have liaison roles. These employees transmit information between two 
work units that seldom communicate or coordinate directly with each other. However, liaison 
roles are likely less common today because digital communication and decentralized decision 
making have made it easier and more acceptable for the leaders and staff of work units to 
informally communicate directly with their counterparts in other work units.
Another mechanism for supporting coordination through informal communication in 
large organizations is to temporarily organize employees from several departments into 
cross-functional teams. This cross-disciplinary team-based coordination, called concurrent 
engineering, was pioneered by Toyota four decades ago and is now widespread throughout 
several industries. Technology companies, for example, rely on “agile” teams to enable in￾formal communication in product development. In concurrent engineering, people across 
several functional specializations—production engineering, manufacturing, marketing, pur￾chasing, etc.—work together and provide immediate feedback to each other as the product 
is designed and developed. In contrast, traditional product development passes work from 
one functional department to the next department in a sequential process. Automakers 
calls this the “over the wall” effect; technology firms call it the “waterfall effect.” Both 
phrases symbolize the notion that traditional product development suffers from inefficient 
coordination due to the lack of informal two-way communication and feedback.12
EXHIBIT 13.1 Coordinating Mechanisms in Organizations
FORM OF COORDINATION DESCRIPTION SUBTYPES/STRATEGIES
Informal communication Sharing information on mutual tasks; forming common 
mental models to synchronize work activities
• Direct communication 
• Liaison roles 
• Integrator roles 
• Temporary teams
Formal hierarchy Assigning legitimate power to individuals, who then use 
this power to direct work processes and allocate resources
• Direct supervision 
• Formal communication channels
Standardization Creating routine patterns of behavior or output • Standardized skills 
• Standardized processes 
• Standardized output
Sources: Based on information in J. Galbraith, Designing Complex Organizations (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1973), 8–19; H. Mintzberg, The Structuring 
of Organizations (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1979), Chap. 1; D.A. Nadler and M.L. Tushman, Competing by Design: The Power of Organizational 
Architecture (New York: Oxford University Press, 1997), Chap. 6.Chapter Thirteen Designing Organizational Structures 471
Coordination through Formal Hierarchy Informal communication is the most 
flexible form of coordination, but it can become chaotic as the number of employees 
increases. Consequently, as organizations grow, they rely increasingly on a second coordinat￾ing mechanism: formal hierarchy.13 Hierarchy assigns legitimate power to individuals, who 
then use this power to direct work processes and allocate resources. In other words, work 
is coordinated through direct supervision—the chain of command. For instance, Walmart 
stores have managers and assistant managers who are responsible for ensuring that 
employees are properly trained, perform their respective tasks, and coordinate effectively 
with other staff.
A century ago, management scholars applauded formal hierarchy as the best coordinating 
mechanism for large organizations. They argued that organizations are most effective when 
managers exercise their authority and employees receive orders from only one supervisor. 
The chain of command—in which information flows across work units only through supervi￾sors and managers—was viewed as the backbone of organizational strength.
Although still important, formal hierarchy is much less popular today. One problem, 
which Twitter is trying to minimize with its new structure, is that hierarchical organiza￾tions are not as agile for coordination in complex and novel situations. Formal communi￾cation through the chain of command is rarely as fast or accurate as informal direct 
communication among employees. Another concern with formal hierarchy is that managers 
are able to closely supervise only a limited number of employees. As the business grows, 
the number of supervisors and layers of management must increase, resulting in a costly 
bureaucracy. A third problem is that today’s workforce demands more autonomy over 
work and more involvement in company decisions. Coordination through formal hierarchy 
tends to limit employee autonomy and involvement, which increases employee complaints 
of being “micromanaged.”
ESA Coordinates Satellite Design 
through Concurrent Engineeringa
More than 2,000 people work at the European Space 
Agency (ESA), yet the organization relies extensively on 
informal communication to coordinate the design of satel￾lites and their missions. The government agency forms 
cross-disciplinary teams that meet in a specially con￾structed Concurrent Design Facility (CDF) in the Nether￾lands. This concurrent engineering arrangement is 
effective because it enables representatives from a dozen 
interdependent departments to fluidly coordinate through 
face-to-face interaction.
ESA explains that the CDF and its processes “allow 
teams of experts from different engineering disciplines to 
work in close coordination in the same place, at the same 
time, to develop complex designs very quickly—typically, in 
a matter of a few weeks compared to the duration of stan￾dard pre-Phase A design period, which is several months.”
CDF technical author Andrew Pickering describes the 
inefficiency of the traditional sequential design process. 
“Traditional mission design is an ‘over-the-fence’ type pro￾cess, where one domain team—mission analysis for 
instance—starts work based on the initial mission require￾ments, then throws it over the fence to the next subsystem 
team, such as propulsion, passing it in turn to the next.”
A typical ESA design team consists of two or three 
dozen people representing numerous disciplines, includ￾ing propulsion, structures and mechanisms, flight dynam￾ics, electrical systems, thermal control, as well as 
specialists in technical risk, organization, and cost engi￾neering. The team meets in the CDF for four intense 
hours twice each week.
“It can be quite draining, but exciting at the same time, 
because there are always challenges arising,” says CDF 
Systems Leader Ilaria Roma. “As a team leader, it’s like 
leading an orchestra, to sustain good communication, guide 
the process, and keep it moving toward finding solutions.”
global connections 13.1
Dean Mouhtaropoulos/Getty Images472 Part Four Organizational Processes
Coordination through 
Standardization Stan￾dardization, the third type of 
coordination, involves creating 
routine patterns of behavior 
or output. This coordinating 
mechanism takes three distinct 
forms:
• Standardized processes.
Quality and consistency 
of a product or service 
can often be improved 
by standardizing work 
activities through job 
descriptions and proce￾dures.14 Flowcharts 
represent coordination 
through standardized 
processes. This coordi￾nating mechanism 
works best when the
task is routine (such as mass production) or simple (such as stocking shelves), but 
it is less effective in nonroutine and complex work such as product design, which 
occurs among employees in some of Twitter’s product development groups.
• Standardized outputs. This form of standardization involves ensuring that individu￾als and work units have clearly defined goals and output measures (e.g., customer 
satisfaction, production efficiency). For instance, to coordinate the work of sales￾people, companies assign sales targets rather than specific behaviors.
• Standardized skills. When work activities are too complex to standardize through 
processes or goals, companies often coordinate work effort through standardized 
skills. Twitter and other technology firms carefully hire people for their education, 
training, and past experience so they can perform tasks without continuous super￾vision, precise job descriptions, or exacting work process guidelines. Training is 
also a form of standardization through skills. Companies provide extensive 
in-house training so they learn precise role behaviors such as customer service 
interactions, or they learn general guidelines for more complex situations.
Division of labor and coordination of work represent the two fundamental ingredients 
of all organizations. But how work is divided, which coordinating mechanisms are empha￾sized, who makes decisions, and other issues are related to the four elements of organiza￾tional structure that we discuss over the next two sections of this chapter.
Elements of Organizational Structure
Every organizational structure consists of four elements. This section discusses three 
of them: span of control, centralization, and formalization. The fourth element—
departmentalization—is presented in the next section.
SPAN OF CONTROL
Span of control (also called span of management) refers to the number of people directly 
reporting to the next level above in the hierarchy. A narrow span of control exists when 
very few people report directly to a manager, whereas a wide span exists when a manager 
LO 13-2
span of control
the number of people directly 
reporting to the next level 
above in the hierarchy
 of 889 Koreans
say that they have experienced a
militaristic (authoritarian, patriarchic,
oppressive management)
culture at school and work.
71%
 of 2,800 American
oce workers say their current
supervisor is a micromanager.
23%
 of 2,000
American workers identify
micromanaging as their
boss’s worst trait (top of list,
followed by unavailable and
incompetence). 
23% of 2,000
American employees
 of 1,525 working 31% 39%
Canadians say they have
experienced an overbearing
micromanager, someone
who is constantly hovering
and asking for status updates.
say that being a micromanager
is the worst quality in a boss
(most frequent choice, followed
by being “overly critical”).
COORDINATION THROUGH MICROMANAGEMENTb
(photo): Steve Hamblin/CorbisChapter Thirteen Designing Organizational Structures 473
has many direct reports.15 A century ago, French engineer and management scholar Henri 
Fayol strongly recommended a relatively narrow span of control, typically no more than 
20 employees per supervisor and six supervisors per manager. Fayol championed formal 
hierarchy as the primary coordinating mechanism, so he believed that supervisors should 
closely monitor and coach employees. His views were similar to those of Napoleon, who 
declared that senior military leaders should have no more than five officers directly 
reporting to them. These prescriptions were based on the belief that managers simply 
could not monitor and control any more subordinates closely enough.16
Today, we know better. The best-performing manufacturing plants have an average of 
38 production employees per supervisor (see Exhibit 13.2).17 What’s the secret here? Did 
Fayol, Napoleon, and others miscalculate the optimal span of control? The answer is 
that those who lauded hierarchical control believed that employees should perform the 
physical tasks, whereas supervisors and other management personnel should make the 
decisions and monitor employees to ensure they performed their tasks.
In contrast, the best-performing manufacturing operations today rely on self-directed 
teams, so direct supervision (formal hierarchy) is supplemented with other coordinating 
mechanisms. Self-directed teams coordinate mainly through informal communication and 
various forms of standardization (i.e., training and processes), so formal hierarchy has a 
secondary role in work coordination. More generally, managers can often accommodate 
a wider span of control because staff members are self-managing and coordinate mainly 
through standardized skills. For instance, nurse managers often have between 25 and 
50 direct reports because nurses are professionally trained and have specific protocols 
to guide most of their work activity.18
Note: Data represent the average number of direct reports per manager. “Max.” is the maximum spans of control 
recommended by Napoleon Bonaparte and Henri Fayol. “Min.” is the minimum span of control applied to teams by Google 
and recommended by Tom Peters. “Est.” is the estimated average span of control across all major U.S. companies, accord￾ing to consulting firm Deloitte. “Goal” refers to the span of control targets that the U.S. Postal Service and State of Iowa 
are trying to achieve. (USPS currently exceeds its goal.) The State of Texas number is the span of control mandated by law. 
The Best U.S. Plants number is the average span of control in American manufacturing facilities identified by Industry Week
magazine as the most effective. “Actual” refers to the spans of control reported in the cities of Phoenix, Portland, and 
Toronto; the public service of the U.S. State of Iowa; Bowling Green State University; the Toronto Transit Commission; the 
Oregon State Police; and FedEx Corporation in the years indicated. The City of Toronto number excludes firefighters and 
parks, which have unusually high spans of control. When these units are included, Toronto’s span of control is 16.29.
EXHIBIT 13.2 Recommended, Actual, Estimated, and Enforced Spans of Controlc
Fayol (Max. Mgt.: 1916)
Portland (Actual: 2013)
Google (Min.: 2014)
Phoenix (Actual: 2011)
Toronto (Actual: 2012)
U.S. Companies (Est.: 2014)
Iowa State (Actual: 2011)
Texas State (Law: 2003)
Toronto Transit (Actual: 2015)
Iowa State (Goal: 2012)
Fayol (Max. nonmgt.: 1916)
U.S. Postal Service (Goal nonmgt.: 2013)
FedEx (Actual: 2008)
Tom Peters (Min.: 1988)
Best U.S. Plants (Survey: 2000)
6
6
7
Bowling Green State U (Actual: 2015)
Napoleon (Max.: 1815)
4.3
5
8.1
8.8
9.7
10
11
11.7
Oregon State Police (Actual: 2021) 11
15
20
25
25
25
38
0 10 20 30 40474 Part Four Organizational Processes
A second factor influencing the best span of control is whether employees perform 
routine tasks. A wider span of control is possible when employees perform routine jobs, 
because they require less direction or advice from supervisors. A narrow span of control 
is necessary when employees perform novel or complex tasks, because these employees 
tend to require more supervisory decisions and coaching. This principle is illustrated in 
a survey of property and casualty insurers. The average span of control in commercial￾policy processing departments is around 15 employees per supervisor, whereas the span 
of control is 6.1 in claims service and 5.5 in commercial underwriting. Staff members in 
the latter two departments perform more technical work, so they have more novel and 
complex tasks, which requires more supervisor involvement. Commercial-policy processing, 
on the other hand, is like production work. Tasks are routine and have few exceptions, so 
managers have less coordinating to do with each employee.19
A third influence on span of control is the degree of interdependence among employ￾ees within the department or team.20 Generally, a narrow span of control is necessary for 
highly interdependent jobs because employees tend to experience more conflict with one 
another, which requires more of a manager’s time to resolve. Also, employees are less 
clear on their personal work performance in highly interdependent tasks, so supervisors 
spend more time providing coaching and feedback.
Tall versus Flat Structures Span of control is interconnected with organizational 
size (number of employees) and the number of layers in the organizational hierarchy. 
Consider two companies with the same number of employees. If Company A has a wider 
span of control (more direct reports per manager) than Company B, then Company A 
necessarily has fewer layers of management (i.e., a flatter structure). The reason for this 
relationship is that a company with a wider span of control has more employees per 
supervisor, more supervisors for each middle manager, and so forth. This larger number 
of direct reports can occur only by removing layers of management.
The interconnection of span of control, organizational size (number of employees), 
and number of management layers has important implications. As organizations grow 
and employ more people, they must widen the span of control, build a taller hierarchy, or 
both. Most companies end up building taller structures because they rely on direct super￾vision to some extent as a coordinating mechanism and there are limits to how many 
people each manager can coordinate.
Unfortunately, building a taller hierarchy (more layers of management) creates prob￾lems. One concern is that executives in tall structures usually receive lower-quality and 
less timely information. People tend to filter, distort, and simplify information before it is 
passed to higher levels in the hierarchy because they are motivated to frame the informa￾tion in a positive light or to summarize it more efficiently. In contrast, information tends 
to have less manipulation in flat hierarchies, and is often received much more quickly 
than in tall hierarchies. “Any new idea condemned to struggle upward through multiple 
levels of rigidly hierarchical, risk-averse management is an idea that won’t see day￾light . . . until it’s too late,” warned Sergio Marchionne, the late CEO of Fiat Chrysler 
Automobiles and Ferrari.21
A second problem is that taller structures have higher overhead costs. With more man￾agers per employee, tall hierarchies necessarily have more people administering the com￾pany, thereby reducing the percentage of staff who are actually making the product or 
providing the service. A third issue with tall hierarchies is that employees usually feel less 
empowered and engaged in their work. Hierarchies are power structures, so more levels of 
hierarchy tend to draw power away from people at the bottom of that hierarchy. Indeed, 
the size of the hierarchy itself tends to focus power around managers rather than 
employees.22
These problems with tall hierarchies have prompted companies to reduce management 
layers. For example, Thomson Reuters slashed its hierarchy to a maximum of six layers. 
The media conglomerate previously had up to 12 layers between the top executive and Chapter Thirteen Designing Organizational Structures 475
front-line staff. British personal care products company PZ Cussons also recently flat￾tened its structure by removing regional management layers and decentralizing authority 
down to individual country teams. Another example is Conagra Foods. CEO Sean Con￾nolly says the packaged food company now has “fewer layers, broader spans of control 
and the workforce, we believe, is right-sized for speed, empowerment, agility, all the things 
we need to do.”23
Although flattening the hierarchy has benefits, this necessarily widens the span of 
control, which can have negative consequences.24 With a wider span of control, managers 
have less time to effectively coach employees, resolve conflicts, and make operational de￾cisions within the work unit. Fewer layers also reduce the company’s ability to develop 
managerial skills because there are fewer positions and steps to develop management 
talent. Promotions are also riskier because they involve a larger jump in responsibility 
in flatter, compared to taller, hierarchies. Finally, managers translate corporate strategy 
into coherent daily operations, but there is less time to perform this vital task when 
supervising more employees.
CENTRALIZATION AND DECENTRALIZATION
Centralization means that formal decision-making authority is held by a small group of 
people, typically those at the top of the organizational hierarchy. Most organizations 
Samsung Becomes More Nimble by 
Flattening its Structured
Samsung Electronics Co., South Korea’s largest business 
conglomerate, is flattening its organizational structure to 
become more innovative and nimble. This transformation 
will be challenging because the electronics giant’s exist￾ing structure has been almost the opposite of what most 
nimble firms look like.
As with most large South Korean organizations, 
Samsung has had a tall, rigid hierarchy with power 
centralized at the top of the organization. This structure 
included seven well-defined status titles below the ex￾ecutive level, ranging from an entry-level employee 
through to division manager. Everyone addressed one 
another by their rank in the hierarchy rather than by their 
personal name.
A few years ago, Samsung cut those seven non￾executive career levels to just four levels. The company 
also discouraged managers from requiring “fancy reports” 
from their subordinates and from attending endless 
manager-dominated meetings. Employees were told to 
stop addressing one another by their rank. Instead, every￾one uses the suffix “nim,” which is a highly respectful 
variation of Mr./Ms.
Now, Samsung is further flattening its organizational 
structure. Its non-executive hierarchy is being collapsed 
to just two layers with no job titles. Everyone will use the 
honorific “pro” as in professional, although they can con￾tinue to use “nim” instead. Employees will no longer be 
able to look up coworker ID numbers and other evidence 
of their seniority and status. 
The company hopes this egalitarian setting will 
encourage more collaboration and coordination through 
informal communication. “We won’t have to worry about 
what title to refer other employees during business meet￾ings with the change, and we will be able to freely ex￾change opinions on equal footing,” says one Samsung 
employee.
Samsung is also reducing the number of executive 
levels. Division head level has been eliminated and two 
vice-president levels (senior VP and executive VP) will be 
merged into one “vice-president” level. The company is 
also removing the minimum years required to be em￾ployed at each organizational level. “We are removing 
qualifications for climbing up the (corporate) ladder and 
reducing the number of steps to get there, too,” says a 
Samsung Electronics official.
global connections 13.2
imtmphoto/Shutterstock
centralization
the degree to which formal 
decision authority is held by 
a small group of people, 
typically those at the top of 
the organizational hierarchy476 Part Four Organizational Processes
begin with centralized structures, because the founder makes most of the decisions and 
tries to direct the business toward their vision. As organizations grow, however, they diver￾sify and their environments become more complex. Senior executives aren’t able to pro￾cess all the decisions that significantly influence the business. Consequently, larger 
organizations typically decentralize; that is, they disperse decision authority and power 
throughout the organization.
The optimal level of centralization or decentralization depends on several contingen￾cies that we will examine later in this chapter. However, different degrees of decentraliza￾tion can occur simultaneously in different parts of an organization. For instance, 7-Eleven 
centralizes decisions about information technology and supplier purchasing to improve 
buying power, increase cost-efficiencies, and minimize complexity across the organiza￾tion. Yet it decentralizes local inventory decisions to store managers because they have 
the best information about their customers and can respond quickly to local market 
needs. “We could never predict a busload of football players on a Friday night, but the 
store manager can,” explains a 7-Eleven executive.25
FORMALIZATION
Formalization is the degree to which organizations standardize 
behavior through rules, procedures, formal training, and related 
mechanisms.26 In other words, companies become more formal￾ized as they increasingly rely on various forms of standardiza￾tion to coordinate work.
Older companies tend to become more formalized because 
work activities become routinized, making them easier to docu￾ment into standardized practices. Larger companies also tend to 
have more formalization because direct supervision and infor￾mal communication among employees do not operate as easily 
when large numbers of people are involved. External influences, 
such as government safety legislation and strict accounting 
rules, also encourage formalization.
Formalization may increase efficiency and compliance, but 
it can also create problems.27 Rules and procedures reduce or￾ganizational flexibility, so employees follow prescribed behav￾iors even when the situation clearly calls for a customized 
response. Some work rules become so convoluted that organi￾zational efficiency would decline if they were actually followed 
as prescribed. Another problem is that high levels of formaliza￾tion tend to undermine creativity. Formalization is also a 
source of job dissatisfaction and work stress. Finally, rules and 
procedures have been known to take on a life of their own in 
some organizations. They become the focus of attention rather 
than the organization’s ultimate objectives of producing a prod￾uct or service and serving its dominant stakeholders.
MECHANISTIC VERSUS ORGANIC 
STRUCTURES
We discussed span of control, centralization, and formal￾ization together because they cluster around two broader 
organizational forms: mechanistic and organic structures 
(see Exhibit 13.3).28 A mechanistic structure is character￾ized by a narrow span of control and high degree of for￾malization and centralization. Mechanistic structures 
Fulfillment by Amazon is well-known—and sometimes infamously 
identified—for its very high formalization. The warehouse operations 
for Amazon’s third-party sellers relies on standardization of work 
processes as a coordinating mechanism. Computer algorithms 
determine how many products employees should pick, move, pack, 
and store per hour. As soon as one product is picked, the employee’s 
scanner displays the next item with a count down of the time allowed 
to find and scan that item. Employees are told to walk at “Amazon 
pace,” which is somewhere between walking and jogging. Bathroom 
breaks are timed.e
Terry Harris/Shutterstock
formalization
the degree to which 
organizations standardize 
behavior through rules, 
procedures, formal training, 
and related mechanisms
mechanistic structure
an organizational structure with 
a narrow span of control and a 
high degree of formalization 
and centralizationChapter Thirteen Designing Organizational Structures 477
have many rules and procedures, limited decision making at lower levels, tall hierarchies 
of people in specialized roles, and vertical rather than horizontal communication flows. 
Tasks are rigidly defined and are altered only when sanctioned by higher authorities.
Companies with an organic structure have the opposite characteristics. They operate 
with a wide span of control, decentralized decision making, and little formalization. Tasks 
are fluid, adjusting to new situations and organizational needs. In extremely organic orga￾nizations, decision making is decentralized down to teams and individuals, and employees 
have enough autonomy to adapt their job duties to fit the situation.
As a general rule, mechanistic structures operate better in stable environments because 
they rely on efficiency and routine behaviors. Organic structures work better in rapidly 
changing (i.e., dynamic) environments because they are more flexible and responsive to 
the changes. Organic structures are also more compatible with contemporary workplaces 
because they emphasize an empowered workforce rather than hierarchy and status. How￾ever, the effectiveness of organic structures depends on how well employees have devel￾oped their roles and expertise.29 Without these conditions, employees are unable to 
coordinate effectively with one another, resulting in errors and gross inefficiencies.
High
Formalization
Centralized
Narrow Wide
Organic
structure
Mechanistic
structure
Span of control
Decision-making
authority
Low
Decentralized
EXHIBIT 13.3
Contrasting Mechanistic and 
Organic Organizational 
Structures
®
SELF-ASSESSMENT 13.1: Which Organizational Structure Do You Prefer?
Forms of Departmentalization
Span of control, centralization, and formalization are important elements of organiza￾tional structure, but most people think about organizational charts when the discussion of 
organizational structure arises. The organizational chart represents the fourth element in 
the structuring of organizations, called departmentalization. Departmentalization speci￾fies how employees and their activities are grouped together. It is a fundamental strategy 
for coordinating organizational activities because it influences organizational behavior in 
the following ways:30
• Departmentalization establishes the chain of command—the system of common 
supervision among positions and units within the organization. It frames the member￾ship of formal work teams and typically determines which positions and units 
must share resources. Thus, departmentalization establishes interdependencies 
among employees and subunits.
• Departmentalization focuses people around common mental models or ways of 
thinking, such as serving clients, developing products, or supporting a particular 
skill set. This focus is typically anchored around the common budgets and mea￾sures of performance assigned to employees within each departmental unit.
LO 13-3
organic structure
an organizational structure 
with a wide span of control, 
low formalization, and 
decentralized decision making478 Part Four Organizational Processes
• Departmentalization encourages specific people and work units to coordinate 
through informal communication. With common supervision and resources, 
members within each configuration typically work near one another, so they can 
use frequent and informal interaction to get the work done.
There are almost as many organizational charts as there are businesses, but the six 
most common pure types of departmentalization are simple, functional, divisional, team￾based, matrix, and network.
SIMPLE STRUCTURE
Most companies begin with a simple structure.31 They employ only a few people and typi￾cally offer only one distinct product or service. There is minimal hierarchy—usually just 
employees reporting to the owners. Employees perform broadly defined roles because 
there are insufficient economies of scale to assign them to specialized jobs. The simple 
structure is highly flexible and minimizes the walls that form between employees in other 
structures. However, the simple structure usually depends on the owner’s direct super￾vision to coordinate work activities, so it is very difficult to operate as the company grows 
and becomes more complex.
FUNCTIONAL STRUCTURE
As organizations grow, they typically shift from a simple structure to a functional 
structure. Even after they adopt more complex organizational structures that we discuss 
later, they usually have functional departments at some level of the hierarchy. A functional 
structure organizes employees around specific knowledge or other resources (see 
Exhibit 13.4). Employees with marketing expertise are grouped into a marketing unit, en￾gineers are found in product development, those with finance skills are located in finance, 
and so forth. Organizations with functional structures are typically centralized to coordi￾nate their activities effectively.
Evaluating the Functional Structure The functional structure creates special￾ized pools of talent that typically serve everyone in the organization. Pooling talent into 
one group improves economies of scale compared to dispersing functional specialists over 
different parts of the organization. The functional structure also increases employee iden￾tity with the specialization or profession. Direct supervision is easier in a functional struc￾ture because managers oversee people with common issues and expertise.32
The functional structure also has limitations.33 Grouping employees around their 
skills tends to focus attention on those skills and related professional needs rather than 
on the company’s products, services, or client needs. Unless people are transferred from 
one function to the next, they might not develop a broader understanding of the busi￾ness. Compared with other structures, the functional structure usually produces more 
dysfunctional conflict and poorer coordination in serving clients or developing products. 
These problems occur because employees need to work with coworkers in other 
Chief executive
Manufacturing Design Administration Marketing
EXHIBIT 13.4
A Functional Organizational 
Structure
functional structure
an organizational structure 
in which employees are 
organized around specific 
knowledge or other resourcesChapter Thirteen Designing Organizational Structures 479
departments to complete organizational tasks, yet they have 
different subgoals and mental models about how to perform 
the work effectively. Together, these problems require substan￾tial formal controls and coordination when people are orga￾nized around functions.
DIVISIONAL STRUCTURE
As the opening case study to this chapter described, a few years 
ago Twitter adopted a pure functional structure in the hope that 
this would simplify the business. That design didn’t work very 
well. Employees and executives focused on their own specializa￾tions rather than products or clients; innovation suffered be￾cause functional departments created silos that stymied 
cross-functional teams. To refocus the organization around 
product performance and growth, Twitter’s new CEO immedi￾ately adopted a product-based divisional structure.
The divisional structure groups employees around geographic 
areas, outputs (products or services), or clients. Exhibit 13.5 il￾lustrates these three variations of divisional structure.34 The geo￾graphic divisional structure organizes employees around distinct 
regions of the country or world. Exhibit 13.5(a) illustrates a sim￾plified version of the geographic divisional structure adopted by 
Kone, the Helsinki-based global elevator and escalator com￾pany. The product/service divisional structure organizes employ￾ees around distinct outputs. Exhibit 13.5(b) illustrates the four 
product divisions at Medtronic, the medical devices company. The client divisional struc￾ture organizes employees around specific customer groups. Exhibit 13.5(c) illustrates the 
client-focused divisional structure at Thomson-Reuters, the digital information services 
company.35
Which form of divisional structure should large organizations adopt? The answer de￾pends mainly on the primary source of environmental diversity or uncertainty.36 Suppose 
an organization has one type of product sold to people across the country. If customers 
have different needs across regions, or if state governments impose different regulations 
on the product, then a geographic structure would be best so the company can be more 
vigilant about this diversity. But if the company sells several types of products across the 
country and customer preferences and government regulations are similar everywhere, 
then a product structure would likely work best.
Kone, the global elevator and escalator company, is organized mainly around geo￾graphic regions, likely because regulations and sales channels vary much more by region 
than by product. Medtronic has numerous country managers to anticipate and respond to 
unique conditions and decisions in each region. However, the medical devices firm places 
product groups (cardiac/vascular, diabetes, etc.) at the top of its organizational structure, 
likely because product development, manufacturing, and marketing activities vary much 
more across product divisions than across regions.
Many companies are moving away from structures that organize people around geo￾graphic clusters.37 One reason is that clients can purchase products online and communi￾cate with businesses from almost anywhere in the world, so local representation is 
becoming less important. Reduced geographic variation is another reason for the shift 
away from geographic structures; freer trade has reduced government intervention, and 
consumer preferences for many products and services are becoming more similar 
(converging) around the world. The third reason is that large companies increasingly have 
global business customers who demand one global point of purchase, not one in every 
country or region.
Airbnb had a functional structure in its early years (engineering, 
design, finance, etc.). With rapid growth, the online lodging 
marketplace company switched to a divisional structure and eventually 
ballooned to almost a dozen divisions (core host, luxe, business, 
transportation, etc.). But when the COVID-19 pandemic shut down 
80 percent of its business, Airbnb went back to basics. “The radical 
thing is we went back to a functional organization,” explains CEO 
Brian Chesky. Large companies tend to be sluggish with a functional 
structure, but Chesky says the opposite occurred. “When Airbnb 
became a functional org, suddenly the entire company was on one 
roadmap. We all had the same exact priorities. There were fewer 
meetings. Decision-making was faster. Quality was better.”f
askarim/Shutterstock
divisional structure
an organizational structure 
in which employees are 
organized around geographic 
areas, outputs (products or 
services), or clients480 Part Four Organizational Processes
Legal
professions Corporates Tax
professionals
Global print
(general public)
Reuters news
(media firms)
Cardiac &
vascular group
Diabetes
group
Minimally invasive
therapies group
Restorative
therapies group
(a) Geographic Divisional Structure
(b) Product Divisional Structure
(c) Client Divisional Structure
South Europe,
Middle East, &
Africa
Americas Greater
China Asia-Pacific Central &
North Europe
Chief executive
ocer
Chief executive
ocer
Chief executive
ocer
EXHIBIT 13.5 Three Types of Divisional Structure
Note: Diagram (a) shows a global geographic divisional structure similar to that of Kone Corporation; diagram (b) depicts 
the four product divisions of Medtronic; diagram (c) shows the five client divisions of Thomson Reuters. None of these 
firms has a pure divisional structure. At all three companies the top executive team also includes the heads of some 
functional units (e.g., finance).
Evaluating the Divisional Structure The divisional organizational structure is 
a building-block structure. As the company develops new products, services, or clients, it 
can sprout new divisions relatively easily. The divisional structure is also outcome-focused. 
It directs employee attention to customers and products, rather than to their own 
specialized knowledge.38
These advantages are offset by a number of limitations. First, the divisional structure 
tends to duplicate resources, such as production equipment and engineering or informa￾tion technology expertise. Also, unless the division is quite large, resources are not used 
as efficiently as they are in functional structures where resources are pooled across the 
entire organization. The divisional structure also creates silos of knowledge. Expertise is 
spread across several autonomous business units, which reduces the ability and perhaps 
motivation of the people in one division to share their knowledge with counterparts in 
other divisions. In contrast, a functional structure groups experts together, thereby 
supporting knowledge sharing.
Finally, the preferred divisional structure depends on the company’s primary source of 
environmental diversity or uncertainty. This principle seems to be applied easily enough 
at Kone and Thomson Reuters, but many global organizations experience diversity and 
uncertainty in terms of geography, product, and clients. Consequently, some organiza￾tions revise their structures back and forth or create complex structures that attempt to 
give all three dimensions equal status. This muddling generates further complications, Chapter Thirteen Designing Organizational Structures 481
because organizational structure decisions shift power and status among executives. If the 
company switches from a geographic to a product structure, people who lead the geo￾graphic fiefdoms suddenly get demoted under the product chiefs. In short, leaders of 
global organizations struggle to find the best divisional structure, often resulting in the 
departure of some executives and frustration among those who remain.
TEAM-BASED STRUCTURE
A team-based structure is built around self-directed teams that complete an entire piece of 
work, such as developing core code for a feature in Twitter or assembling an aircraft en￾gine. This type of structure is usually organic. There is a wide span of control because 
teams operate with minimal supervision. Some team-based structures have no formal 
leaders within each team, just someone selected by other team members to help coordi￾nate the work and liaise with top management.
Team structures are highly decentralized because almost all day-to-day decisions are 
made by team members rather than someone further up the organizational hierarchy. 
Many team-based structures also have low formalization because teams are given relatively 
few rules about how to organize their work. Instead, executives assign quality and quantity 
output targets, and often productivity improvement goals, to each team. Teams are then 
encouraged to use available resources and their own initiative to achieve those objectives.
Team-based structures are usually found within the manufacturing or service opera￾tions of larger divisional structures. Several GE aircraft engine plants are organized as 
team-based structures, but these plants operate within GE’s larger divisional structure. 
Bosch Powers Ahead with a Team￾Based Organizational Structure.g
Robert Bosch GmbH has been replacing its hierarchical 
organizational structure with one that is built around 
teams. “In terms of achieving a flatter organization, for a lot 
of projects we now work in a ‘podular’ structure,” explains 
Frederic Boumaza, a senior vice-president at the German 
engineering and technology company. “So, not in a kind of 
pyramid organization, but by creating teams, or pods, with 
people from multiple departments with different expertise 
who can work together on projects much faster.”
Bosch’s power tools division, for example, replaced a 
seven-layer hierarchy with cross-functional self-directed 
teams, each with less than a dozen employees. The home 
and gardens business unit alone has 54 teams. Most 
teams are responsible for designing or manufacturing 
specific products (hedging products, cleaning technology, 
etc.). However, some teams are assigned support roles, 
such as engineering services and brand management. 
Along with their autonomy to improve the production 
process, Bosch teams are responsible for providing peer 
feedback and compensation. The annual performance re￾view conducted by managers has been replaced with on￾going individual development dialogues in which 
employees discuss their contribution toward team goals. 
Employees initially rejected the idea of determining each 
other’s pay rates, but this is also occurring in some teams.
Frederic Boumaza points out that the team-based 
structure enables Bosch to respond more quickly and 
effectively to changes and customized client requests. 
“As these teams are mostly independent of any hierarchi￾cal constraints, they can connect and act in a much more 
agile way and really focus on the results.” How￾ever, Boumaza also warns that leaders need to be more 
flexible and future-oriented. In addition, leaders “need to 
work in an agile way, not to be limited by traditional levels 
of hierarchy, but to accept that, to be fast enough, you 
have to create expert teams and give them the right levels 
of autonomy to succeed.”
global connections 13.3
dpa picture alliance/Alamy Stock Photo
team-based structure
an organizational structure 
built around self-directed 
teams that complete an entire 
piece of work482 Part Four Organizational Processes
A small number of firms apply the team-based structure from top to bottom, including W. L. 
Gore & Associates, Semco SA, Morning Star Company, and Valve Corporation, where 
almost all associates work in teams.
Evaluating the Team-Based Structure The team-based structure has gained 
popularity because it is usually flexible and responsive in turbulent environments.39
It tends to reduce costs because teams have less reliance on formal hierarchy (direct super￾vision). A cross-functional team structure improves communication and cooperation 
across traditional boundaries. With greater autonomy, this structure also allows quicker 
and more informed decision making.40 For this reason, some hospitals have shifted from 
functional departments to cross-functional teams. Teams composed of nurses, radiolo￾gists, anesthetists, a pharmacology representative, possibly social workers, a rehabilitation 
therapist, and other specialists communicate and coordinate more efficiently, thereby 
reducing delays and errors.41
The team-based structure also has several limitations. It can be costly to maintain due 
to the need for ongoing interpersonal skills training. Teamwork potentially takes more 
time to coordinate than formal hierarchy during the early stages of team development. 
Employees may experience more stress due to increased ambiguity in their roles. Team 
leaders also experience more stress due to increased conflict, loss of functional power, 
and unclear career progression ladders. In addition, team structures suffer from duplica￾tion of resources and potential competition (and lack of resource sharing) across teams.42
MATRIX STRUCTURE
Until a few years ago, Shiseido Company, Limited was heavily dependent on sales in 
Japan. Most executives at the Tokyo-based cosmetics company were in charge of special￾ized functions (finance, supply chain, marketing, cosmetics research, etc.). One executive 
led the company’s non-Japanese operations. When Masahiko Uotani became Shiseido’s 
first externally-hired CEO, the former Coca-Cola executive recognized that Shiseido 
needed to boost the company’s global footprint and, at the same time, assign more prior￾ity to the company’s brands (product groups). To achieve this, he adopted a matrix orga￾nizational structure that gave equal power to Shiseido’s six global regions and four broad 
product (brand) groups. Over the next five years, Shiseido’s global business soared and 
the company’s share price more than tripled.43
Shiseido has a matrix structure, which mainly overlays two structures (in this case, 
a geographic and a product divisional structure) to leverage the benefits of both.44
Exhibit 13.6 illustrates a matrix structure similar to how Shiseido is organized. The hori￾zontal bars represent the product groups; the vertical bars represent the regions. The 
“Travel Retail” group represents the global duty-free business. In a pure matrix structure, 
the executive at the intersection of these bars reports to both the head of the global prod￾uct group and to the head of that region.
A common mistake is to assume that everyone in a matrix organizational structure has 
two bosses. In a pure matrix structure of this type, usually only executives at the region￾product intersection report to both the regional CEO and to the global brand leader. 
Employees below the regional head of a product group would have only one boss. But 
many matrixes structures aren’t “pure” because one leader is often given more authority 
than the other. Shiseido’s regional CEOs likely have more authority because the compa￾ny’s revenue and profits are reported by region, not by product. For example, Shiseido’s 
Americas Fragrance Business Director likely reports to Shiseido Americas CEO whereas 
the company’s global head of fragrances probably has only advisory authority over the 
Americas Fragrance Business Director.
If a global company has a matrix structure, it most likely would have a geographic￾product structure. But some global firms have a matrix structure that intersects products 
(brands) with functions. H&M Group (H&M Hennes & Mauritz AB) has a product￾function matrix structure that intersects its store brands (H&M, H&M Home, Monki, & 
matrix structure
an organizational structure 
that overlays two structures 
(such as a geographic 
divisional and a product 
structure) in order to leverage 
the benefits of bothChapter Thirteen Designing Organizational Structures 483
Other Stories, Weekday, COS, ARKET, Afound) with several functional groups (finance, 
sustainability, human resources, etc.). This means that the executive responsible for a 
particular functional group at the Swedish fashion retailer also has responsibility for that 
function within each store brand. For instance, COS’s head of sustainability likely reports 
to both the COS managing director and to H&M Group’s head of sustainability.45
A considerably different form of matrix structure, which can be applied to small or 
large companies, overlays a functional structure with projects.46 BioWare adopted this 
project–functional matrix structure soon after the electronic games company was born a 
few decades ago and returned to this matrix structure in recent years. Most employees in 
a project-functional matrix structure have two managers. One manager leads the specific 
project to which employees are assigned, such as a specific game, client project, or soft￾ware app. The other manager is head of the employee’s functional specialization, such as 
engineering, programming, audio, quality assurance, and design.47 Employees are assigned 
permanently to their functional unit but physically work with the temporary project team. 
When the project nears completion, the functional boss reassigns employees in their 
functional specialization to another project.
Evaluating the Matrix Structure
The project–functional matrix structure usually makes very good use of resources and 
expertise, making it well-suited for project-based organizations with fluctuating workloads. 
When properly managed, this form of departmentalization improves communication ef￾ficiency, project flexibility, and innovation, compared to purely functional or divisional 
designs. It focuses employees on serving clients or creating products, yet keeps people 
organized around their specialization. The result is that knowledge sharing improves and 
people are more efficiently assigned to work where they are most needed.
Matrix structures for global organizations are also a logical choice when, as in the case 
of Shiseido Company, two different dimensions (regions and products) are equally impor￾tant. Structures determine executive power and what should receive priority; the matrix 
structure works best when the business environment is complex and two different 
Regions
Product Groups
Skincare
Cosmetics
Makeup
Fragrance
Americas Travel
Retail Japan China EMEA Asia
Pacific
EXHIBIT 13.6 Matrix Organizational Structure Similar to Shiseido
Note: This diagram is a simplified adaptation of Shiseido’s most recent matrix structure intersecting geographic regions with products 
(brands). This diagram shows a pure matrix structure, in which both product leaders and regional leaders have equal power. However, 
Shiseido’s revenue is reported by region, so a regional brand director likely reports to the regional CEO and the global brand executive 
has only advisory authority over the regional brand director. Also, some products (e.g. cosmetics) are not sold in some regions, so there is 
no executive for that product in that region. Also not shown is that Shiseido has some degree of matrix structure of headquarters 
functional departments with regions. 484 Part Four Organizational Processes
dimensions deserve equal attention and integration. Executives who have worked in a 
global matrix also say they have more freedom, likely because their two bosses are more 
advisory and less oriented toward command-and-control leadership.48
The many advantages of the matrix structure are offset by well-known problems.49 One 
concern is that it increases conflict among managers who equally share power. Employees 
working at the matrix level have two bosses and, consequently, two sets of priorities that 
aren’t always aligned with each other. Project leaders might squabble with functional lead￾ers regarding the assignment of specific employees to projects as well as regarding the 
employee’s technical competence. However, successful companies manage this conflict by 
developing and promoting leaders who can work effectively in matrix structures. “Of 
course there’s potential for friction,” says an executive at IBM India. “In fact, one of the 
prerequisites to attaining a leadership position at IBM is the ability to function in a matrix 
structure.”50
debating point
DO ORGANIZATIONS REALLY NEED TO ADOPT A MATRIX STRUCTURE?h
The matrix organizational structure is gaining in popularity 
among leaders of large organizations. Multinational firms 
typically adopt a product–geographic matrix because it po￾tentially balances the importance of the company’s core 
products/services with its geographic diversity. Matrix struc￾tures are also gaining popularity in smaller firms, typically as 
project–functional structures, as leaders try to make their 
workforce more “agile.”
“An agile, matrixed structure can help companies be more 
nimble, as this approach emphasizes interdisciplinary func￾tionality and enables workers to move from team to team as 
project needs demand,” enthuses consulting firm Gallup. The 
company claims that matrixed employees are more motivated 
and focused on the organization’s unified mission and vision.
In spite of these potential benefits, matrix organizational 
structures have a long history of problems that are avoided 
or minimized through other forms of departmentalization. 
ABB Group, Proctor & Gamble, Philips, Siemens, and other 
companies that at one time had boasted their matrix struc￾ture have since shifted to divisional or functional structures. 
McLaren Racing is another example. The well-known For￾mula 1 race car organization recently discarded its matrix 
structure because it undermined decision efficiency and 
overall coordination. “The current [matrix] structure does not 
allow certain people to make decisions quickly enough and 
act as entrepreneurially as I would like,” argues McLaren 
Racing CEO Zak Brown.
The most commonly cited concern is that matrix struc￾tures rely on co-management at one or many levels of the 
organization. The risk is that when employees report to two 
managers, some degree of responsibility and accountability 
falls through the cracks. For example, Britain’s HM Revenue 
& Customs (HMRC) lost two computer discs containing con￾fidential details of 25 million child welfare claimants. A re￾view concluded that “[HMRC] is not suited to the so-called 
‘constructive friction’ matrix type organization [that was] in 
place at the time of the data loss.”
A second perennial problem with matrix structures is that 
they produce unnecessary conflict and organizational poli￾tics. Ambiguity is one of the main structural causes of con￾flict. Matrix structures necessarily produce more ambiguity 
because joint managers and their employees need to nego￾tiate priorities with each other, whereas single line authority 
assigns the decision to one person. Also, no matter how col￾laborative the culture, managers have a degree of territorial￾ity and inherent competitive tournament mentality that 
makes it difficult to maintain continuous bipartisanship. In 
other words, there are limits to how much managers are will￾ing to resolve conflicts through problem solving, yielding, 
and other supportive actions.
Finally, matrix structures assume that the two 
dimensions—whether product and geography or project 
and function—are absolutely equally important. This is 
rarely true; one group almost always takes priority over 
other groups at the top of the hierarchy. Yet CEOs take the 
expedient route of a matrix structure rather than decide 
through a divisionalized structure that one set of execu￾tives (such as product leaders) will be subordinate to 
another set of executives (such as regional leaders). One 
CEO candidly described the matrix structure as a “cop-out 
style of management.”
Many matrix-structured organizations would experience 
fewer problems with a different structure that provides 
clearer lines of accountability. For instance, an organization 
might have a global footprint, but it should be organized 
around its diverse product groups if they represent the core 
focus and competitive advantage. Geographic diversity is 
still embedded somewhere beneath the top level of the 
structure, such as under the heads of global sales or manu￾facturing. Another option is to apply “dotted-line” reporting 
relationships that clearly identify the executive who leads 
and the executive with lesser power in the relationship, often 
with specific statements about each leader’s specific areas 
of supervisory responsibility.Chapter Thirteen Designing Organizational Structures 485
Ambiguous accountability is another challenge with matrix structures. In a functional 
or divisional structure, one manager is responsible for everything, even the most unex￾pected issues. But in a matrix structure, the unusual problems don’t get resolved because 
neither manager takes ownership of them.51 Due to this ambiguous accountability, matrix 
structures have been blamed for corporate ethical misconduct, such as embezzlement at 
Hana Financial Group in Korea and massive bribery at Siemens AG in Germany. The late 
technology executive Mark Hurd once warned of this problem: “The more accountable 
I can make you, the easier it is for you to show you’re a great performer,” said Hurd. 
“The more I use a matrix, the easier I make it to blame someone else.”52 The combination 
of dysfunctional conflict and ambiguous accountability in matrix structures also explains 
why some employees experience more stress and why some managers are less satisfied 
with their work arrangements.
NETWORK STRUCTURE
BMW AG and Daimler AG aren’t eager to let you know this, but some of the vehicles 
manufactured by them with Germanic precision are not constructed by their employees 
or in Germany. BMW’s newest Z4 sports coupe and Daimler’s Mercedes G class luxury 
SUVs are made in Austria by Magna Steyr, a division of Magna Corporation. For these 
vehicles, at least, BMW and Daimler Benz are hub organizations that own and market 
their respective brands, whereas Magna Steyr and other suppliers are spokes around the 
hub that provide production, engineering, and other services that get the auto firms’ 
luxury products to customers.53
BMW, Daimler, and many other organizations are moving toward a network structure
as they design and build a product or serve a client through an alliance of several organi￾zations.54 As Exhibit 13.7 illustrates, this collaborative structure typically consists of sev￾eral satellite organizations bee-hived around a hub or core firm. The core firm orchestrates 
the network process and provides one or two other core competencies, such as marketing 
or product development. In our example, BMW or Mercedes is the hub that provides 
design and marketing, whereas other firms perform many other functions. The core firm 
EXHIBIT 13.7
A Network Organizational 
Structure Marketing
partner
(USA)
CORE FIRM
Assembly
partner
(Mexico)
Call center
partner
(India)
Accounting
partner
(USA)
Product
development
partner
(France)
Package
design
partner
(UK)
network structure
an alliance of several 
organizations for the purpose 
of creating a product or 
serving a client486 Part Four Organizational Processes
might be the main contact with customers, but most of the product or service delivery 
and support activities are farmed out to satellite organizations located anywhere in the 
world. Digital networks with partners and other technologies ensure that information 
flows easily and openly between the core firm and its array of satellites.55
One of the main forces pushing toward a network structure is the recognition that an 
organization has only a few core competencies. A core competency is a knowledge base that 
resides throughout the organization and provides a strategic advantage. As companies dis￾cover their core competency, they outsource noncritical tasks to other organizations that 
have a core competency at performing those tasks. For instance, BMW decided long ago 
that facilities management is not one of its core competencies, so it outsourced this func￾tion in its British operations to a company that specializes in facilities management.56
Companies are also more likely to form network structures when technology is chang￾ing quickly and production processes are complex or varied.57 Many firms cannot keep up 
with the hyperfast changes in information technology, so they have outsourced their en￾tire information system departments to IBM, HP Enterprise Business, and other firms 
that specialize in information system services. Similarly, many high-technology firms 
form networks with electronic equipment manufacturers that have expertise in diverse 
production processes.
Evaluating the Network Structure Organizational behavior theorists have long 
argued that executives should think of their companies metaphorically as plasma-like organ￾isms rather than rigid machines.58 Network structures come close to the organism metaphor 
because they offer the flexibility to realign their structure with changing environmental re￾quirements. If customers demand a new product or service, the core firm forms new alli￾ances with other firms offering the appropriate resources. For example, when Magna Steyr’s 
clients need a different type of manufacturing, they aren’t saddled with nonessential facili￾ties and resources. Network structures also offer efficiencies because the core firm becomes 
globally competitive as it shops worldwide for subcontractors with the best people and the 
best technology at the best price. Indeed, the pressures of global competition have made 
network structures more vital, and information technology has made them possible.59
A potential disadvantage of network structures is that they expose the core firm to mar￾ket forces. Other companies may bid up the price for subcontractors, whereas the short￾term cost would be lower if the company hired its own employees to perform the same 
function. A related problem is that there are increased costs of negotiating prices with ex￾ternal providers compared to internal costs with the company’s own employees.60 A third 
concern is that information technology makes worldwide communication much easier, but 
it has not yet replaced the degree of control organizations have when manufacturing, market￾ing, and other functions are in-house. The core firm can use arm’s-length incentives and 
contract provisions to maintain the subcontractor’s quality, but these actions are relatively 
crude compared with maintaining the quality of work performed by in-house employees.
Contingencies of Organizational Design
Most organizational behavior theories and concepts have contingencies: Ideas that 
work well in one situation might not work as well in another situation (see Chapter 1). 
This contingency approach is certainly relevant when choosing the most appropriate 
organizational structure.61 In this section, we identify four contingencies of organizational 
design: external environment, size, technology, and strategy (see Exhibit 13.8).
EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT
The best structure for an organization depends on its external environment. The external 
environment includes anything outside the organization, including most stakeholders 
(e.g., clients, suppliers, government), resources (e.g., raw materials, human resources, 
LO 13-4Chapter Thirteen Designing Organizational Structures 487
information, finances), and competitors. Four characteristics of external environments in￾fluence the type of organizational structure best suited to a particular situation: dynamism, 
complexity, diversity, and hostility.62
Dynamic versus Stable Environments Dynamic environments have a high 
rate of change, leading to unfamiliar situations and a lack of identifiable patterns. Organic 
structures operate well in dynamic environments. Employees are experienced and coordi￾nate well in teams, which enables the organization to adapt more quickly to changes.63
For instance, the U.S. Army learned from difficult confrontations against guerrilla insur￾gents that the battlefield has become too dynamic and complex for its rigid mechanistic 
structure. It has since evolved into a more organic structure consisting of teams with in￾creased autonomy to accomplish their missions. “We had to tear down familiar organiza￾tional structures and rebuild them along completely different lines, swapping our sturdy 
architecture for organic fluidity, because it was the only way to confront a rising tide of 
complex threats,” says Stanley McChrystal, the U.S. Army general who led America’s 
Joint Special Operations Command and NATO forces in Afghanistan.64
In contrast, stable environments are characterized by regular cycles of activity and 
steady changes in supply and demand for inputs and outputs. Events are more predict￾able, enabling the firm to apply rules and procedures. Mechanistic structures are more 
efficient when the environment is predictable, so they tend to be more profitable than 
organic structures under these conditions.
Complex versus Simple Environments Complex environments have many el￾ements, whereas simple environments have few things to monitor. As an example, a major 
university library operates in a more complex environment than a small-town public li￾brary. The university library’s clients require several types of services, such as book bor￾rowing, online full-text databases, research centers, and course reserve collections. A 
small-town public library has fewer of these demands placed on it. The more complex the 
environment, the more decentralized the organization should become. Decentralization is 
a logical choice for complex environments because decisions are pushed down to people 
and subunits who have the necessary information to make informed choices.
EXHIBIT 13.8 Choosing the Best Organizational Structure
CONTINGENCY VARIABLE RECOMMENDATION
External environment: 
Dynamic versus stable 
Organic structures are better in dynamic environments; mechanistic structures are usually more effective 
for stable environments. 
External environment: 
Complex versus simple
Organizations should be more decentralized as environments become more complex.
External environment: 
Diverse versus integrated.
A divisional structure aligned with the highest form of diversity tends to work well in diverse environments.
External environment: 
Hostile versus munificent
Organic structures are more suitable for hostile environments; mechanistic structures are usually more 
effective in munificent environments.
Organizational size As companies grow, they should make greater use of standardization for coordination and should become 
more decentralized.
Technology: Task variability 
and task analyzability
Organic structures are better where tasks have high variability and low analyzability; mechanistic structures 
are better where production involves low variability and high analyzability tasks.
Organizational strategy Organic structures are better when the company’s strategy is to compete through innovation, a more 
mechanistic structure is preferred when the organization chooses a low-cost strategy.488 Part Four Organizational Processes
Diverse versus Integrated Environments Organizations located in diverse 
environments have a greater variety of products or services, clients, and regions. In con￾trast, an integrated environment has only one type of client and product and serves only 
one geographic area. The more diversified the environment, the more the firm needs to 
use a divisional structure aligned with that diversity. If it sells a single product globally 
and its design, marketing, or delivery need to be adapted to specific regions, then a geo￾graphic divisional structure would align best with that regional diversity. Diverse environ￾ments also call for decentralization. By pushing decision making further down the 
hierarchy, the company can adapt better and more quickly to diverse clients, government 
requirements, and other circumstances related to that diversity.
Hostile versus Munificent Environments Firms located in a hostile environ￾ment face resource scarcity and more competition in the marketplace. Hostile environ￾ments are typically dynamic ones because they reduce the predictability of access to 
resources and demand for outputs. Organic structures tend to be best in hostile environ￾ments. However, when the environment is extremely unfavorable—such as during the 
COVID-19 pandemic or when there is a severe shortage of raw production materials—
organizations tend to temporarily centralize so that decisions can be made more quickly 
and executives feel more comfortable being in control.65 Ironically, centralization may 
result in lower-quality decisions during organizational crises because top management has 
less information, particularly when the environment is complex.66
ORGANIZATIONAL SIZE
The organizational structures of larger firms differ from those of smaller ones, for good 
reason.67 As the number of employees increases, job specialization increases due to a 
greater division of labor. The greater division of labor requires more elaborate coordinat￾ing mechanisms. Thus, larger firms make greater use of standardization (particularly 
work processes and outcomes) to coordinate work activities. These coordinating 
The Risk of Centralizing Authority 
during Pandemicsi
Organizational leaders often make the mistake of tempo￾rarily centralizing authority during pandemics, such as 
during the COVID-19 crisis. Unfortunately, centralization 
when the external environment becomes hostile can pro￾duce worse decisions because headquarters executives 
have less information than managers on the front lines.
“The temptation in a time of crisis is for leaders to put 
themselves at the center of all activity,” warns Manley 
Hopkinson, a leadership consultant and McKinsey advisor 
who served as an officer in the British Royal Navy during 
the first Gulf War. “It is vital that a leader resist centralizing 
control.” 
Hugo Bague, who was a senior Rio Tinto executive 
during the Ebola crisis, agrees. “Local teams are often the 
best positioned to judge the situation on the ground—and 
their decisions should not be second-guessed.” During 
the Ebola crisis, for instance, Rio Tinto executives in 
Guinea, West Africa, were asked to recommend whether 
the expatriates should leave, a decision that would have 
undermined the mining firm’s credibility in that country. 
They determined that the expats should stay, but their 
families should be sent home.
Although Rio Tinto’s Guinea executives made the 
decision, senior executives at headquarters monitored 
the decision process. “We said clearly, whether you stay 
in Guinea or not is your call,” says Bague. “But we want to 
have a discussion with you to ensure that you’ve looked 
at it at every angle.”
global connections 13.4
Luis Alvarez/Getty ImagesChapter Thirteen Designing Organizational Structures 489
mechanisms create an administrative hierarchy and greater formalization. At one time, 
growing organizations reduced their reliance on informal communication as a coordinat￾ing mechanism. However, emerging digital technologies have enabled large firms to coor￾dinate work more through informal communication than was previously possible.68
Larger organizations also tend to be more decentralized than are smaller organiza￾tions. Executives have neither sufficient time nor expertise to process all the decisions 
that significantly influence the business as it grows. Therefore, decision-making authority 
is pushed down to lower levels, where employees are able to make decisions on issues 
within their narrower range of responsibility.
TECHNOLOGY
Technology is another factor to consider when designing the best organizational structure 
for the situation.69 Technology refers to the mechanisms or processes an organization re￾lies on to make its products or services. In other words, technology isn’t just the equip￾ment used to make something; it also includes how the production process is physically 
arranged and how the production work is divided among employees.
The two main technological contingencies are task variability and task analyzability, both 
of which we described as job characteristics in Chapter 6. Task variability refers to how pre￾dictable the job duties are from one day to the next. In jobs with high variability, employees 
perform several types of tasks, but they don’t know which of those tasks are required from one 
day to the next. Low variability occurs when the work is highly routine and predictable. Task 
analyzability refers to how much the job can be performed using known procedures and rules. 
In jobs with high task analyzability, employees have well-defined guidelines to direct them 
through the work process. In jobs with low task analyzability, employees tackle unique situa￾tions with few (if any) guidelines to help them determine the best course of action.
An organic structure should be introduced where employees perform tasks with high vari￾ability and low analyzability, such as in a research setting. The reason is that employees face 
unique situations with little opportunity for repetition. In contrast, a mechanistic organizational 
structure is preferred where production work has low task variability and high task analyzability, 
such as an assembly line. Assembly work is routine, highly predictable, and has well-established 
procedures—an ideal situation for a mechanistic structure to operate efficiently.
organizational strategy
the way the organization 
positions itself in its 
environment in relation to 
its stakeholders, given the 
organization’s resources, 
capabilities, and mission
®
SELF-ASSESSMENT 13.2: Does Your Job Require An Organic Or Mechanistic 
Structure?
ORGANIZATIONAL STRATEGY
Organizational strategy refers to the way the organization positions itself in its environ￾ment in relation to its stakeholders, given the organization’s resources, capabilities, and 
mission.70 In other words, strategy represents the decisions and actions applied to achieve 
the organization’s goals. Although size, technology, and environment influence the opti￾mal organizational structure, these contingencies do not necessarily determine structure. 
Instead, corporate leaders formulate and implement strategies that shape both the charac￾teristics of these contingencies as well as the organization’s resulting structure.
This concept is summed up with the simple phrase “structure follows strategy.”71 Orga￾nizational leaders decide how large to grow and which technologies to use. They take 
steps to define and manipulate their environments, rather than let the organization’s fate 
be entirely determined by external influences (see the open systems view in Chapter 1). 
Furthermore, organizational structures don’t evolve as a natural response to environmen￾tal conditions; they are the outcomes of conscious human decisions. Thus, organizational 
strategy influences both the contingencies of structure and the structure itself.490 Part Four Organizational Processes
If a company’s strategy is to compete through innovation, a more organic structure 
would be preferred because it is easier for employees to share knowledge and be creative. If 
a company chooses a low-cost strategy, a mechanistic structure is preferred because it maxi￾mizes production and service efficiency.72 Overall, it is now apparent that organizational 
structure is influenced by size, technology, and environment, but the organization’s strat￾egy may reshape these elements and loosen their connection to organizational structure.
LO 13-1 Describe three types of coordination in organiza￾tional structures.
Organizational structure is the division of labor as well as the 
patterns of coordination, communication, workflow, and for￾mal power that direct organizational activities. All organiza￾tional structures divide labor into distinct tasks and coordinate 
that labor to accomplish common goals. The primary means of 
coordination are informal communication, formal hierarchy, 
and standardization.
LO 13-2 Discuss the role and effects of span of control, central￾ization, and formalization, and relate these elements 
to organic and mechanistic organizational structures.
The four basic elements of organizational structure are span of 
control, centralization, formalization, and departmentalization. 
The optimal span of control—the number of people directly re￾porting to the next level in the hierarchy—depends on what co￾ordinating mechanisms are present other than formal hierarchy, 
whether employees perform routine tasks, and how much inter￾dependence there is among employees within the department.
Centralization occurs when formal decision authority is 
held by a small group of people, typically senior executives. 
Many companies decentralize as they become larger and more 
complex, but some sections of the company may remain cen￾tralized while other sections decentralize. Formalization is the 
degree to which organizations standardize behavior through 
rules, procedures, formal training, and related mechanisms. 
Companies become more formalized as they get older and 
larger. Formalization tends to reduce organizational flexibility, 
organizational learning, creativity, and job satisfaction.
Span of control, centralization, and formalization cluster 
into mechanistic and organic structures. Mechanistic struc￾tures are characterized by a narrow span of control and a high 
degree of formalization and centralization. Companies with an 
organic structure have the opposite characteristics.
LO 13-3 Identify and evaluate six types of departmentalization.
Departmentalization specifies how employees and their activi￾ties are grouped together. It establishes the chain of command, 
focuses people around common mental models, and encour￾ages coordination through informal communication among 
people and subunits. A simple structure employs few people, 
has minimal hierarchy, and typically offers one distinct prod￾uct or service. A functional structure organizes employees 
around specific knowledge or other resources. This structure 
fosters greater specialization and improves direct supervision, 
but it weakens the focus on serving clients or developing 
products.
A divisional structure groups employees around geographic 
areas, clients, or outputs. This structure accommodates growth 
and focuses employee attention on products or customers 
rather than tasks. However, this structure also duplicates re￾sources and creates silos of knowledge. Team-based structures 
are very flat, with low formalization, and organize self-directed 
teams around work processes rather than functional specialties. 
The matrix structure combines two structures to leverage the 
benefits of both types. However, this approach requires more 
coordination than functional or pure divisional structures, may 
dilute accountability, and increases conflict. A network struc￾ture is an alliance of several organizations for the purpose of 
creating a product or serving a client.
LO 13-4 Explain how the external environment, organiza￾tional size, technology, and strategy are relevant 
when designing an organizational structure.
The best organizational structure depends on whether the envi￾ronment is dynamic or stable, complex or simple, diverse or 
integrated, and hostile or munificent. Another contingency is 
the organization’s size. Larger organizations need to become 
more decentralized and more formalized. The work unit’s 
technology—including variability of work and analyzability of 
problems—influences whether it should adopt an organic or 
mechanistic structure. These contingencies influence but do 
not necessarily determine structure. Instead, corporate leaders 
formulate and implement strategies that shape both the charac￾teristics of these contingencies and the organization’s resulting 
structure.
chapter summary
centralization, p. 475
divisional structure, p. 479
formalization, p. 476
functional structure, p. 478
matrix structure, p. 482
mechanistic structure, p. 476
network structure, p. 485
organic structure, p. 477
organizational strategy, p. 468
organizational structure, p. 489
span of control, p. 472
team-based structure, p. 481
key terms491
1. Twitter, Inc.’s organizational structure was described 
at the beginning of this chapter. What coordinating 
mechanism is likely most common in this organization? 
Describe the extent and form in which the other two 
types of coordination might be apparent at Twitter.
2. Think about the business school or other organizational 
unit whose classes you are currently attending. What is 
the dominant coordinating mechanism used to guide 
or control the instructor? Why is this coordinating 
mechanism used the most here?
3. Administrative theorists concluded many decades ago 
that the most effective organizations have a narrow span 
of control. Yet today’s top-performing manufacturing 
firms have a wide span of control. Why is this possible? 
Under what circumstances, if any, should manufacturing 
firms have a narrow span of control?
4. Leaders of large organizations struggle to identify the best 
level and types of centralization and decentralization. 
What should companies consider when determining the 
degree of decentralization?
5. Mechanistic and organic structures are two organizational 
forms. How do the three types of coordination mechanisms 
operate through these forms?
6. While preparing for a final examination in organizational 
behavior, you and a student in another class review the 
important information regarding organizational structure 
and design. During the conversation, the other student 
suggests that just about everything you need to know 
about organizational structure can be based on knowing 
the different types of departmentalization. In other 
words, all of the key features of organizational structure, 
including a structure’s fundamental requirements and 
elements are found in descriptions of the several forms 
of departmentalization. Based on your knowledge of 
organizational structure, discuss the accuracy of this 
statement.
7. From an employee perspective, what are the advantages 
and disadvantages of working in a matrix structure?
8. Suppose you have been hired as a consultant to diagnose 
the environmental characteristics of your college or 
university. Referring to the four external environment 
contingency dimensions described in the final section 
of this chapter, is the school’s existing structure 
appropriate for its external environment?
critical thinking questions
CASE STUDY: SLOAN & WU, INC.
Sloan & Wu, Inc., wants to get closer to its customers. Over 
the past six years, the large chain of department stores had 
acquired three major regional department store businesses 
that enjoyed loyal customers and solid profits. But sales vol￾umes slipped as each of these organizations was converted 
to the Sloan & Wu brand with standardized store designs, 
merchandising, and marketing. The merchandising and mar￾keting was centralized to such an extent that the company’s 
expensive pre-Christmas advertising campaign for winter 
coats also appeared in Florida and southern California 
where few of those coats are sold. Another gaffe occurred 
when the company distributed a large stock of swimsuits in 
February to stores located in the northern states.
As sales and profits continue to decline, Sloan & Wu is 
reversing itself with a new organizational structure that 
gives more autonomy to local districts and stores to person￾alize merchandise and marketing for customers in that area. 
This change is part of its “Sloan, Wu, and You” initiative. 
The strategy’s objective is for customers to feel a more per￾sonal connection to the Sloan & Wu outlets in their area by 
ensuring that those stores provide merchandise assort￾ments, size ranges, marketing programs, and shopping expe￾riences that are more closely aligned to local needs.
“Better earnings come from better creative thinking and 
engagement with our customers in every store,” states Sloan 
& Wu CEO Nadia Dhillon. “This is achieved by reallocating 
our resources, placing more emphasis and talent at the local 
market level, and empowering our local store and district 
leaders. We will drive sales growth by understanding what the 
locals want and then acting quickly to deliver on those expec￾tations. We also believe this will speed up decision making 
and simplify the process of working with our vendors.”
Sloan & Wu’s previous organizational structure (after 
the recent acquisitions) had 30 districts spread across five 
regions of the United States. The new structure consists of 
45 districts in three regions (East, South, and West). Dis￾trict managers and their small staff of store merchandisers 
and planners will be responsible for an average of 10 stores 
rather than 15 stores in the previous structure. With fewer 
direct reports, district managers will be able to work more 
closely and effectively with each store. District managers 
report to regional directors, but the five regions are being 
consolidated into three regions.
The new structure will add 250 people in district offices. 
But it will also result in about 2,000 layoffs, mostly in re￾gional offices where many of the company’s merchandising 
and operations decision making previously occurred. The 
company is also removing one management level—assistant 
regional managers—from the company.
The district store merchandisers will liaise with Sloan & 
Wu central buying teams to understand and act on the mer￾chandise needs of local customers. The district planners will 
provide market-specific intelligence to the company’s plan￾ning office. Sloan & Wu is introducing radio frequency iden￾tification technology that precisely tracks each merchandise 
item, so customers are assured that products listed online for a particular store are actually in stock at that store. The sales 
database will also more accurately document which items, 
brands, garment sizes, and colors are preferred by customers 
who shop at those specific locations. Furthermore, district 
offices will receive resources to participate in local events.
Will the “Sloan, Wu, and You” initiative be effective? 
One retail analyst sees the benefits, but also warns that it is 
a costly experiment. “This degree of localization can inflate 
costs, whereas the previous standardization missed the mark 
in different customer needs across the country,” she explains. 
Another analyst thinks fewer stores per district manager is 
“just adding another layer of close supervision” to store 
managers and employees. “It seems that centralized control 
is just being replaced with district manager control over the 
store managers and their staff.”
But Sloan & Wu CEO Nadia Dhillon doesn’t see the 
changes in that light. “I’m really excited about this devolved 
structure,” she says. “Giving our district managers fewer 
stores enables them to discover what local customers are 
buying and what they would purchase if we had the product 
available. Ultimately, that’s how we grow sales and keep 
ahead of our competitors.”
Discussion Questions
1. Describe the proposed changes at Sloan & Wu in terms 
of the four elements of organizational structure.
2. What contingencies suggest that Sloan & Wu’s new 
organizational structure is appropriate or inappropriate?
3. What problems do you think Sloan & Wu might 
experience with the new organizational structure? 
Explain why these problems might occur.
© 2022 Steven L. McShane
TEAM EXERCISE: ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE SCENARIOS
Africa), North America, South America, and Asia-Pacific. 
Each region is led by a vice-president, who is effectively the 
CEO of a semi-autonomous regional company. Marketing, 
sales, manufacturing, research and development (R&D), 
and most administrative functions report to this regional 
CEO and have only indirect liaison with the global heads of 
these functions. Most of the company’s products have simi￾lar brands across all regions, although marketing activities 
(channels, advertising style, etc.) vary considerably between 
regions. In the EMEA, marketing variations occur within 
the region. The global head of marketing is concerned that 
localization is causing some brand confusion. For example, a 
premium-priced laundry detergent in Europe and the United 
States has been marketed by the South American division as 
a mid-priced youth-oriented value product, which may even￾tually undermine the premium image elsewhere.
Each region has its own R&D center, with the result 
that each region has some new products or variations 
of the main brands not available in other regions. The 
global R&D chief reports that almost all R&D work in 
each region is relevant to the entire organization. How￾ever, the R&D centers do not share information very well 
and, in any event, there is subtle evidence that regional 
heads often dismiss products developed in other regions. 
Most manufacturing occurs within the region, which 
provides some responsiveness to varying demand and pro￾tects against global transportation disruptions. However, 
local manufacturing has higher costs due to small batches 
for some products, and more varied quality due to uneven 
expertise and raw materials in some regions. SuperBrands’ 
CEO wants to improve efficiency and quality by having 
each low-end product manufactured in one or two global 
manufacturing facilities.
Scenario 2: MetSat
MetSat is an engineering contract company that began three 
decades ago in the basement of two engineering entrepre￾neurs. The company now employs several hundred 
PURPOSE This exercise is designed to help students to 
understand and diagnose the best organizational structure 
in specific situations.
MATERIALS Teams should have a method of summarizing 
their analysis for other teams to view. This might be flip chart 
paper for face-to-face classes or a dedicated virtual white 
board or presentation slide for each team in remote classes.
INSTRUCTIONS (SMALL OR LARGE CLASSES) This 
exercise may be completed either individually or in teams. It 
is suitable for in-class and remote learning settings. It may 
be appropriate in moderately large classes. When the indi￾viduals (or teams) have completed the exercise, the results 
will be discussed and compared with others in the class.
Step 1: Students are organized into teams (typically five to 
seven people per team). Students read each scenario below. 
The instructor might assign any or all of these scenarios for 
discussion.
Step 2: The team will analyze each scenario by completing 
the following:
1. Identify the preferred form of departmentalization for 
the organization, given the information provided, and 
draw a simplified organizational chart that depicts the 
preferred structure. Justify your decision to apply this 
form of departmentalization.
2. Assess the current structure of this organizational with 
reference to any one of the other three organizational 
structure elements (span of control, centralization, 
formalization). Should the organization change that 
element of structure? If so, explain why.
3. What problems—conflict, power dynamics, morale, etc.—
might result from the changes your team recommends?
Scenario 1: SuperBrands
SuperBrands, a consumer products company, is organized 
into four regional divisions: EMEA (Europe, Middle East, 
492Scenario 3: UusiHealth
UusiHealth is a growing mid-size pharmaceutical com￾pany that began two decades ago in Scandinavia as a 
manufacturer and marketer of nonprescription (over-the￾counter and grocery) consumer medicine. These products, 
which today represent about 60 percent of UusiHealth’s 
revenue and net profit, are marketed through four regional 
hubs (Europe, Asia, Americas, and MiddleEast/Africa) to 
wholesalers and retailers in several dozen countries. The 
products are essential identical across regions with only 
minor marketing variations. The company’s manufactur￾ing operations for its nonprescription products are located 
in Germany, China, Brazil, and Canada.
A dozen years ago, UusiHealth expanded into the fields of 
human vaccines and animal medicine. These have each 
grown to almost 20 percent of the company’s business and 
will continue to grow faster than the nonprescription busi￾ness. Human vaccines, animal medicine, and nonprescrip￾tion products have significantly different end users, marketing 
practices, and regulatory requirements from one another. 
Regulations for nonprescription products are similar across 
regions. For human vaccines and animal medicine products, 
however, some countries have unique requirements (packag￾ing, dosages, etc.). All of UusiHealth’s human vaccines and 
animal medicine products are manufactured at a dedicated 
facility in Germany. UusiHealth currently has a functional 
organizational structure that groups employees by specializa￾tion: manufacturing, sales, marketing, research, administra￾tion, etc. However, numerous problems (poor information 
sharing, inefficiencies, conflict, etc) have led UusiHealth’s 
executives to the conclusion that the company’s functional 
structure is inappropriate for its current and future business. 
© 2022 Steven L. McShane
highly-trained technical experts, most in engineering. The 
business provides product and software development engi￾neering for companies that manufacture aviation and space 
technologies, meteorological systems, and geological infor￾mation systems. MetSat has eight engineering departments 
(electrical, mechanical, software, systems, etc.) as well as 
departments for procurement, business development, mar￾keting, and various support groups (finance, human re￾sources, etc.)
Most MetSat contracts have a time frame of between 
six months and two years. These contracts, many of which are 
signed with major aerospace firms or government agencies, 
require the involvement of up to four dozen employees 
from several engineering departments. When a new con￾tract is awarded, a project manager is assigned, who sub￾mits descriptions of the personnel required and, where 
appropriate, the names of specific employees and when 
they will be needed for the project. The contract work typi￾cally begins in the design engineering department. When 
their work takes some form, it is made available to other 
engineering departments and the procurement unit so they 
can begin their work on the project. Everyone works within 
their own department, but employees from two or three 
departments will occasionally meet when ambiguities or 
conflicts arise. Unfortunately, projects have become more 
complex, which has resulted in numerous meetings with 
specific engineers across departments to resolve problems. 
Initial design work is sometimes completely scrapped when 
another department identifies fundamental flaws, such as 
aerothermal risks or design materials that exceed the proj￾ect’s budget. The design engineering employees also over￾look ideas that people in other departments later mention. 
The company’s executive team thinks that its functional 
structure is no longer suited to this type of work.
TEAM EXERCISE: THE CLUB ED EXERCISE
that is most appropriate for this situation. Students will 
describe the type of structure drawn and explain why it is the 
best option. The structure should be drawn on one sheet of 
flip chart paper for others to see during later class discussion. 
The instructor will set a fixed time (e.g., 15 minutes) to com￾plete this task before the next scenario is presented.
Scenario #1 Determined to never suffer another cold 
winter, you secured venture capital funding for a new 
resort business called Club Ed on a small Caribbean 
island. The resort is under construction and is scheduled 
to open in less than one year. The resort will employ 
approximately 75 staff (most employed full-time). Draw 
an organizational chart that best suits the organization 
when it opens, and justify your decision.
Step 3: At the end of the time allowed, the instructor will 
present scenario #2 and each team will be asked to draw 
another organizational chart to suit that situation. Again, 
students will describe the type of structure drawn and ex￾plain why it is the best type of structure for that situation.
PURPOSE This exercise is designed to help you under￾stand the issues to consider when designing organizations 
at various stages of growth.
MATERIALS Each student team should have several flip 
chart sheets or other means to draw and show the class 
several organizational charts.
INSTRUCTIONS Teams receive up to four scenarios, one 
at a time in chronological sequence. For each scenario, 
teams are given a fixed time (e.g., 15 minutes) to draw an 
organizational chart that best suits the firm in that sce￾nario. The first scenario is presented below. The exercise 
and debriefing require approximately 90 minutes, although 
fewer scenarios can reduce the time somewhat.
Step 1: Students are placed in teams (typically four or 
five people).
Step 2: After reading scenario #1 (presented below), each 
team will design an organizational chart (departmentalization) 
493494
presentation, teams will be asked to describe the type of 
structure drawn and explain why it is the best choice for 
that situation.
Instructions and scenarios written by Steven L. McShane, based on an 
earlier exercise by C. Harvey and K. Morouney, Journal of Management 
Education 22 (June 1998), 425–29.
Step 4: At the end of the time allowed, the instructor will 
present scenario #3, and each team will be asked to draw 
another organizational chart to suit that situation.
Step 5: Depending on the time available, the instructor 
might present a fourth scenario. The class will gather to 
present their designs for each scenario. During each 
1. J. Dorsey, “The Next Decade,” Twitter tweet memo, 
June 28, 2018; A. Silberling, “New Twitter CEO Parag 
Agrawal Begins Restructuring as Two Execs Step Down,” 
TechCrunch, December 4, 2021; W. Oremus and E. 
Dwoskin, “Twitter’s New CEO Announces Major 
Reorganization of the Social Networking Company,” 
Washington Post, December 5, 2021; A. Heath, “New 
Twitter CEO Wants the Company to Move Faster,” 
The Verge, December 7, 2021.
2. S. Ranson, R. Hinings, and R. Greenwood, “The Structuring 
of Organizational Structure,” Administrative Science Quarterly 
25 (1980): 1–14; J. E. Johanson, “Intraorganizational 
Influence,” Management Communication Quarterly 13 
(2000): 393–435; K. Walsh, “Interpreting the Impact 
of Culture on Structure,” Journal of Applied Behavioral 
Science 40, no. 3 (2004): 302–22. The recent survey is 
reported in J. Bersin et al., “The New Organization: 
Different by Design,” in Global Human Capital Trends 2016 
(Westlake, TX: Deloitte University Press, 2016), 1–14.
3. H. Mintzberg, The Structuring of Organizations 
(Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1979), 2–3.
4. E.E. Lawler III, Motivation in Work Organizations 
(Monterey, CA: Brooks/Cole, 1973); M.A. Campion, 
“Ability Requirement Implications of Job Design: An 
Interdisciplinary Perspective,” Personnel Psychology 42 
(1989): 1–24.
5. G.S. Becker and K.M. Murphy, “The Division of Labor, 
Coordination Costs, and Knowledge,” Quarterly Journal 
of Economics 107, no. 4 (1992): 1137–60; L. Borghans 
and B. Weel, “The Division of Labour, Worker Organisa￾tion, and Technological Change,” The Economic Journal
116, no. 509 (2006): F45–F72.
6. H. Mintzberg, The Structuring of Organizations 
(Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1979), Chap. 1; 
D.A. Nadler and M.L. Tushman, Competing by Design: The 
Power of Organizational Architecture (New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1997), Chap. 6; J.R. Galbraith, Designing 
Organizations: An Executive Guide to Strategy, Structure, 
and Process (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2002), Chap. 4.
7. J. Stephenson Jr., “Making Humanitarian Relief 
Networks More Effective: Operational Coordination, 
Trust and Sense Making,” Disasters 29, no. 4 (2005): 337.
8. A. Willem, M. Buelens, and H. Scarbrough, “The Role 
of Inter-Unit Coordination Mechanisms in Knowledge 
Sharing: A Case Study of a British MNC,” Journal of 
Information Science 32, no. 6 (2006): 539–61; R.R. 
Gulati, “Silo Busting,” Harvard Business Review 85, 
no. 5 (2007): 98–108.
9. L. Borghans and B. Weel, “The Division of Labour, 
Worker Organisation, and Technological Change,” The 
Economic Journal 116, no. 509 (2006): F45–F72.
10. T. Van Alphen, “Magna in Overdrive,” Toronto Star, 
July 24, 2006; “Production at Magna Paint Shop Finally 
under Way,” News release (Hoče, Slovenia: Magna Steyr, 
March 19, 2019).
11. J.R. Galbraith, Designing Organizations: An Executive 
Guide to Strategy, Structure, and Process (San Francisco, 
CA: Jossey-Bass, 2002), 66–72; D. Aaker, Spanning Silos: 
The New CMO Imperative (Cambridge, MA: Harvard Busi￾ness Press, 2008), 95–96; A. Pike, Brands and Branding 
Geographies (Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar, 2011), 133.
12. S.M. Sapuan, M.R. Osman, and Y. Nukman, “State of 
the Art of the Concurrent Engineering Technique in the 
Automotive Industry,” Journal of Engineering Design 17, 
no. 2 (2006): 143–57; D.M. Anderson, Design for Manu￾facturing: How to Use Concurrent Engineering to Rapidly 
Develop Low-Cost, High-Quality Products for Lean Manage￾ment (Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press/Taylor & Francis, 
2014), Chap. 2.
13. A.H. Van De Ven, A.L. Delbecq, and R.J. Koenig Jr., 
“Determinants of Coordination Modes within Organiza￾tions,” American Sociological Review 41, no. 2 (1976): 
322–38.
14. Y.M. Hsieh and A.T. Hsieh, “Enhancement of Service 
Quality with Job Standardisation,” Service Industries 
Journal 21 (2001): 147–66.
15. B. Davison, “Management Span of Control: How Wide 
Is Too Wide?,” Journal of Business Strategy 24, no. 4 
(2003): 22–29; N.A. Theobald and S. Nicholson-Crotty, 
“The Many Faces of Span of Control: Organizational 
Structure across Multiple Goals,” Administration Society 36, 
no. 6 (2005): 648–60; R.M. Meyer, “Span of Management: 
Concept Analysis,” Journal of Advanced Nursing 63, no. 1 
(2008): 104–12.
16. D.D. Van Fleet and A.G. Bedeian, “A History of the 
Span of Management,” Academy of Management Review 2 
(1977): 356–72; H. Fayol, General and Industrial Manage￾ment, trans. C. Storrs (London: Pitman, 1949); D.A. 
Wren, A.G. Bedeian, and J.D. Breeze, “The Foundations 
of Henri Fayol’s Administrative Theory,” Management 
Decision 40, no. 9 (2002): 906–18.
17. D. Drickhamer, “Lessons from the Leading Edge,” 
IndustryWeek, February 21, 2000, 23–26.
18. For examples of nurse manager span of control, see: D. 
Jones et al., “Nurse Manager Scope and Span of Control: 
An Objective Business and Measurement Model” 
(AONE 45th Annual Conference, Denver, 2013); R.O. 
Sherman, “Span of Control in Nurse Leader Roles,” 
Emerging Nurse Leader (blog), June 27, 2013, https://
www.emergingrnleader.com/span-of-control-in-nurse￾leader-roles/; J.M. Kendall, “Nurse Manager Span of 
Control and the Impact on Employee Engagement,” 
endnotes495
30. H. Mintzberg, The Structuring of Organizations (Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1979), 106.
31. H. Mintzberg, The Structuring of Organizations (Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1979), Chap. 17; N. Worren, 
Organization Design: Simplifying Complex Systems, 2nd ed. 
(Abingdon-on-Thames, UK: Routledge, 2018), Chap. 3; 
R.M. Burton, B. Obel, and D.D. Håkonsson, Organizational 
Design: A Step-by-Step Approach (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press, 2020), 67–69.
32. J.R. Galbraith, Designing Organizations: An Executive 
Guide to Strategy, Structure, and Process (San Francisco: 
Jossey-Bass, 2002), 23–25; N. Worren, Organization De￾sign: Simplifying Complex Systems, 2nd ed. (Abingdon-on￾Thames, UK: Routledge, 2018), Chap. 3; R.M. Burton, 
B. Obel, and D.D. Håkonsson, Organizational Design: A 
Step-by-Step Approach (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press, 2020).), 69–74.
33. E.E. Lawler III, Rewarding Excellence: Pay Strategies for the 
New Economy (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2000), 31–34.
34. The evolutionary development of the divisional structure 
is described in J.R. Galbraith, “The Evolution of Enter￾prise Organization Designs,” Journal of Organization 
Design 1, no. 2 (2012): 1–13.
35. These structures were identified from corporate websites 
and annual reports. The organizations typically rely on a 
mixture of structures (typically functional units along 
with the divisional units shown here), so the charts shown 
have been adapted and simplified for learning purposes.
36. M. Goold and A. Campbell, “Do You Have a Well-Designed 
Organization?,” Harvard Business Review 80 (2002): 117–24. 
Others have added factors such as economies of scale and 
what resources need to be controlled the most. See G. 
Kesler and A. Kates, Leading Organization Design: How to 
Make Organization Design Decisions to Drive the Results 
You Want (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2011), Chap. 3.
37. J.R. Galbraith, “Structuring Global Organizations,” in 
Tomorrow’s Organization, ed. S.A. Mohrman et al. (San 
Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1998), 103–29; C. Homburg, J.P. 
Workman Jr., and O. Jensen, “Fundamental Changes 
in Marketing Organization: The Movement toward a 
Customer-Focused Organizational Structure,” Academy of 
Marketing Science Journal 28 (2000): 459–78; T.H. Daven￾port, J.G. Harris, and A.K. Kohli, “How Do They Know 
Their Customers So Well?,” Sloan Management Review 42 
(2001): 63–73; J.R. Galbraith, “Organizing to Deliver 
Solutions,” Organizational Dynamics 31 (2002): 194–207.
38. R.M. Burton, B. Obel, and G. DeSanctis, Organizational 
Design: A Step-by-Step Approach, 2nd ed. (Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge University Press, 2011), 65–68.
39. J.R. Galbraith, E.E. Lawler III, and Associates, Organizing 
for the Future: The New Logic for Managing Complex 
Organizations (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1993); R. Bettis 
and M. Hitt, “The New Competitive Landscape,” Strategic 
Management Journal 16 (1995): 7–19.
40. P.C. Ensign, “Interdependence, Coordination, and 
Structure in Complex Organizations: Implications for 
Organization Design,” Mid-Atlantic Journal of Business
34 (1998): 5–22.
41. M.M. Fanning, “A Circular Organization Chart Promotes a 
Hospital-Wide Focus on Teams,” Hospital & Health Services 
Administration 42 (1997): 243–54; B. Cougot et al., “Impact 
at Two Years of an Intervention on Empowerment among 
Medical Care Teams: Study Protocol of a Randomised 
DNP Projects (University of Kentucky, 2018), https://
uknowledge.uky.edu/dnp_etds/185.
19. J. Greenwald, “Ward Compares the Best with the Rest,” 
Business Insurance, August 26, 2002, 16. One recent article 
also emphasized that claims managers require a narrow 
span of control. See M.T. Murdock, “Getting Claim Costs 
under Control: Improve Your Loss Ratio Using These 
Proven Fundamentals,” Claims Journal, March 1, 2016.
20. J.H. Gittell, “Supervisory Span, Relational Coordination 
and Flight Departure Performance: A Reassessment of 
Postbureaucracy Theory,” Organization Science 12, no. 4 
(2001): 468–83.
21. S. Marchionne, “Navigating the New Automotive Epoch,” 
Vital Speeches of the Day (2010): 134–37.
22. T.D. Wall, J.L. Cordery, and C.W. Clegg, “Empowerment, 
Performance, and Operational Uncertainty: A Theoretical 
Integration,” Applied Psychology: An International Review 51 
(2002): 146–69.
23. Conagra Foods, “Conagra Brands Investor Day,” news 
release (Chicago: CQ FD Disclosure, October 18, 2016); 
J. Tashea, “With Significant Changes, Thomson Reuters 
Wants to Be Closer to Its Customers,” ABA Journal, May 
15, 2019; “Building Brands for Life Today and for Future 
Generations,” Annual Report 2021 (Manchester, UK: 
PZ Cussons, October 2021).
24. Q.N. Huy, “In Praise of Middle Managers,” Harvard 
Business Review 79 (2001): 72–79; C.R. Littler, R. Wiesner, 
and R. Dunford, “The Dynamics of Delayering: Changing 
Management Structures in Three Countries,” Journal of 
Management Studies 40, no. 2 (2003): 225–56; H.J. Leavitt, 
Top Down: Why Hierarchies Are Here to Stay and How to 
Manage Them More Effectively (Cambridge: Harvard 
Business School Press, 2005); L. McCann, J. Morris, 
and J. Hassard, “Normalized Intensity: The New Labour 
Process of Middle Management,” Journal of Management 
Studies 45, no. 2 (2008): 343–71; “Why Middle Managers 
May Be the Most Important People in Your Company,” 
Knowledge @ Wharton, May 25, 2011.
25. The variations of decentralization within a company are 
discussed in G. Masada, “To Centralize or Decentralize?,” 
Optimize, May 2005, 58–61. The 7-Eleven example is 
described in J.G. Kelley, “Slurpees and Sausages: 7-Eleven 
Holds School,” Richmond (VA) Times-Dispatch, March 12, 
2004, C1; S. Marling, “The 24-Hour Supply Chain,” 
InformationWeek, January 26, 2004, 43.
26. H. Mintzberg, The Structuring of Organizations (Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1979), Chap. 5.
27. W. Dessein and T. Santos, “Adaptive Organizations,” 
Journal of Political Economy 114, no. 5 (2006): 956–95; 
A.A.M. Nasurdin et al., “Organizational Structure and 
Organizational Climate as Potential Predictors of Job 
Stress: Evidence from Malaysia,” International Journal of 
Commerce and Management 16, no. 2 (2006): 116–29; 
C.J. Chen and J.W. Huang, “How Organizational 
Climate and Structure Affect Knowledge Management—
The Social Interaction Perspective,” International Journal 
of Information Management 27, no. 2 (2007): 104–18.
28. T. Burns and G. Stalker, The Management of Innovation 
(London: Tavistock, 1961).
29. W.D. Sine, H. Mitsuhashi, and D.A. Kirsch, “Revisiting 
Burns and Stalker: Formal Structure and New Venture 
Performance in Emerging Economic Sectors,” Academy 
of Management Journal 49, no. 1 (2006): 121–32.496
50. D. Ganguly, “Matrix Evolutions,” Economic Times 
(Mumbai, India), February 18, 2012.
51. D.A. Nadler and M.L. Tushman, Competing by Design: The 
Power of Organizational Architecture (New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1997), Chap. 6; M. Goold and A. Camp￾bell, “Structured Networks: Towards the Well-Designed 
Matrix,” Long Range Planning 36, no. 5 (2003): 427–39.
52. D. Ciampa and M. Watkins, “Rx for New CEOs,” Chief 
Executive, January 2008. The matrix structure problems 
at Hana Financial and Siemens are discussed in: J.-Y. 
Lee, “Matrix Structure No Easy Fit for Local Financial 
Groups,” Korea JoongAng Daily, February 3, 2012; G. 
Dietz and N. Gillespie, “Rebuilding Trust: How Siemens 
Atoned for Its Sins,” The Guardian, March 26, 2012.
53. M. Beecham, “Magna Steyr President on Launching Prod￾ucts Smarter and Quicker—Q&A,” Just-Auto Global News, 
March 16, 2016; M. Panait, “Magna Steyr Celebrates 
300,000th Mercedes-Benz G-Class Produced Since 1978,” 
AutoEvolution, July 19, 2017; A. Padeanu, “2019 BMW 
Z4 Production Starts In Austria,” Motor1, November 8, 
2018; A. Karr, “First 2020 Toyota Supra Rolls Off Magna 
Steyr Assembly Lines,” Motor1, March 25, 2019.
54. R.F. Miles and C.C. Snow, “The New Network Firm: 
A Spherical Structure Built on a Human Investment 
Philosophy,” Organizational Dynamics 23, no. 4 (1995): 
5–18; C. Baldwin and K. Clark, “Managing in an Age of 
Modularity,” Harvard Business Review 75 (1997): 84–93.
55. J. Hagel III and M. Singer, “Unbundling the Corpora￾tion,” Harvard Business Review 77 (1999): 133–41; 
R. Hacki and J. Lighton, “The Future of the Networked 
Company,” McKinsey Quarterly 3 (2001): 26–39.
56. J. Dwyer, “Mind How You Go,” Facilities Management, 
May 2008, 22–25.
57. M.A. Schilling and H.K. Steensma, “The Use of Modular 
Organizational Forms: An Industry-Level Analysis,” 
Academy of Management Journal 44 (2001): 1149–68.
58. G. Morgan, Images of Organization, Second ed. 
(Newbury Park: Sage, 1996); G. Morgan, Imagin-I-Zation: 
New Mindsets for Seeing, Organizing and Managing 
(Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 1997).
59. H. Chesbrough and D.J. Teece, “When Is Virtual 
Virtuous? Organizing for Innovation,” Harvard Business 
Review 74, no. 1 (1996): 65–73; P.M.J. Christie and R. 
Levary, “Virtual Corporations: Recipe for Success,” 
Industrial Management 40 (1998): 7–11.
60. The lower transaction costs of employee relationships 
versus market exchange relationships was explained 
almost a century ago in: R.H. Coase, “The Nature of 
the Firm,” Economica 4, no. 16 (1937): 386–405.
61. L. Donaldson, The Contingency Theory of Organizations 
(Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 2001); J. Birkinshaw, R. 
Nobel, and J. Ridderstråle, “Knowledge as a Contingency 
Variable: Do the Characteristics of Knowledge Predict 
Organizational Structure?,” Organization Science 13, no. 3 
(2002): 274–89.
62. P.R. Lawrence and J.W. Lorsch, Organization and 
Environment (Homewood, IL: Irwin, 1967); H. Mintzberg, 
The Structuring of Organizations (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Prentice Hall, 1979), Chap. 15.
63. T. Burns and G. Stalker, The Management of Innovation 
(London: Tavistock, 1961); P.R. Lawrence and J.W. Lorsch, 
Organization and Environment (Homewood, IL: Irwin, 1967).
Controlled Trial in a Large French University Hospital,” 
BMC Health Services Research 19, no. 1 (2019): 1–13; N. 
Wellman et al., “Beyond the Pyramid: Alternative Formal 
Hierarchical Structures and Team Performance,” Academy 
of Management Journal 63 (2020): 997–1027.
42. R. Cross, “Looking before You Leap: Assessing the Jump 
to Teams in Knowledge-Based Work,” Business Horizons 43, 
no. 5 (2000): 29–36; M. Fenton-O’Creevy, “Employee 
Involvement and the Middle Manager: Saboteur or 
Scapegoat?,” Human Resource Management Journal 11 
(2001): 24–40; C. Douglas and W.L. Gardner, “Transition 
to Self-Directed Work Teams: Implications of Transition 
Time and Self-Monitoring for Managers’ Use of Influence 
Tactics,” Journal of Organizational Behavior 25 (2004): 
47–65; G. Garda, K. Lindstrom, and M. Dallnera, “Towards 
a Learning Organization: The Introduction of a Client￾Centered Team-Based Organization in Administrative 
Surveying Work,” Applied Ergonomics 34 (2003): 97–105.
43. K. Rozario, “China Closes In On Japan At Beauty Giant 
Shiseido,” Forbes, May 14, 2021; “Consolidated Settle￾ment of Accounts for the Fiscal Year Ended December 
31, 2021” (Tokyo: Shiseido Company, February 9, 2022). 
Shiseido may be moving towards a regional structure by 
giving more power to regions than to brands. See: “WIN 
2023 and Beyond: Global Business Transformation” 
(Tokyo: Shiseido Company, February 2021).
44. S. M. Davis and P. R. Lawrence, Matrix (Reading, 
MA: Addison-Wesley, 1977); J. R. Galbraith, Designing 
Matrix Organizations That Actually Work (San Francisco: 
Jossey-Bass, 2009); G. Kesler and A. Kates, Leading 
Organization Design: How to Make Organization Design 
Decisions to Drive the Results You Want (San Francisco: 
Jossey-Bass, 2011), Chap. 7.
45. “Corporate Governance Report 2020” (Stockholm: 
H&M Hennes & Mauritz AB, April 2021). Information 
was also retrieved from LinkedIn accounts of key H&M 
executives and brands staff.
46. R.C. Ford and W.A. Randolph, “Cross-Functional Struc￾tures: A Review and Integration of Matrix Organization 
and Project Management,” Journal of Management 18 
(1992): 267–94.
47. R. Muzyka and G. Zeschuk, “Managing Multiple Projects,” 
Game Developer, March 2003, 34–42; J. Schreier, “BioWare 
Boss Addresses Studio Issues, Vows To ‘Continue Working 
To Solve Them,’” Kotaku, April 4, 2019.
48. J.X.J. Qiu and L. Donaldson, “Stopford and Wells Were 
Right! MNC Matrix Structures Do Fit a ‘High-High’ 
Strategy,” Management International Review (MIR) 52, no. 5 
(2012): 671–89; D. Ganguly and M. Mitra, “Survive the 
Matrix,” Economic Times (Mumbai, India), March 29, 2013.
49. G. Calabrese, “Communication and Co-operation in 
Product Development: A Case Study of a European Car 
Producer,” R&D Management 27 (1997): 239–52; T. Sy 
and L.S. D’Annunzio, “Challenges and Strategies of 
Matrix Organizations: Top-Level and Mid-Level Managers’ 
Perspectives,” Human Resource Planning 28, no. 1 (2005): 
39–48; J. Wolf and W.G. Egelhoff, “An Empirical 
Evaluation of Conflict in MNC Matrix Structure Firms,” 
International Business Review 22, no. 3 (2013): 591–601; 
R. Sutton and B. Wigert, “Too Many Teams, Too Many 
Bosses: Overcoming Matrix Madness,” Gallup Workplace, 
October 19, 2021.497
(Toronto: October 31, 2012); United States Postal Service, 
Supervisor Workhours and Span of Control: Management 
Advisory (Washington, DC: United States Postal Service, 
April 4, 2013); N. Fish and S. Novick, FY 2013–14 Budget 
Subcommittee #1 Final Report, City of Portland, Oregon 
(Portland, Oregon: April 8, 2013); E. Schmidt and J. 
Rosenberg, How Google Works (New York: Grand Central, 
2014), 42–44; S. Stoll, Accenture Update: Progress Report 
through August 31, 2015, Bowling Green University (Bowling 
Green, OH: September 18, 2015); WMC Consultants, 
Toronto Transit Commission Organizational Review Report, 
Toronto Transit Commission (Toronto: July 2015); The 
New Organization: Different by Design, Global Human 
Capital Trends 2016 (New York: Deloitte University Press, 
2016); “State of Oregon: Employee Resources and State 
Workforce—Span of Control,” accessed March 13, 2022.
d. J.-S. Song, “Samsung’s Organizational Culture to Change 
Like Google,” The Kyunghyang Shinmun, June 28, 2016; 
M.-H. Lee, “Samsung to Demolish Rigid, Top-down 
Corporate Culture,” Korea Times, February 11, 2017; 
E.-K. Choi and T.-H. Lee, “Samsung Electronics May 
Make Its Org Chart Very Flat,” Korea JoongAng Daily, 
November 17, 2021; S.-B. Lee and H.-S. Song, “Samsung 
to Adopt Flatter Hierarchy to Lure Young Talent,” The 
Korea Economic Daily, November 29, 2021.
e. J. Bloodworth, “I Worked in an Amazon Warehouse,” The 
Guardian, September 17, 2018; M. Burin, “When You Click 
‘Buy Now’, This Is What Happens inside Amazon Australia’s 
Warehouse,” ABC News (Australia), February 27, 2019; M. 
Zahn and S. Paget, “‘Colony of Hell’: 911 Calls From Inside 
Amazon Warehouses,” The Daily Beast, March 11, 2019.
f. N. Patel, “Why the Future of Work Is the Future of 
Travel, with Airbnb CEO Brian Chesky,” The Verge, 
November 16, 2021.
g. P. Tate, “Pioneering an Industrial Revolution at Bosch,” 
Manufacturing Leadership Journal, June 2, 2018; T. Jakob 
and M.-O. Griesshaber, “How Big Companies Can 
Survive in the Digital Age: New Models for Culture, 
Leadership, and Collaboration” (Presentation, Singapore, 
September 28, 2018); P. Wainewright, “How Bosch 
Broke Free from Silos to Reorganize as Agile Teams,” 
Diginomica, February 7, 2019.
h. T.J. Peters, “Beyond the Matrix Organization,” Business 
Horizons 22, no. 5 (October 1979): 15–27; V. Houlder, “The 
Merger That Exposed a Taxing Problem for Managers,” 
Financial Times, 11 July 2008, 12; K. Poynter, Review of 
Information Security at HM Revenue and Customs, (London: 
HM Treasury, Government of the United Kingdom, June 
2008); “The Multiple Boss Dilemma: Is It Possible to Please 
More Than One?,” Knowledge@Wharton, September 2, 
2016; B. Johnson and Geal, “The Challenges of Matrix 
Management,” Training Journal, October 28, 2016; O. 
Keogh, “Balancing Bosses in the Matrix Can Be a Daunting 
Challenge,” The Irish Times, June 15, 2018; M. Gretton, Z. 
Haidinger and E. Straw, “Zak Brown: Was Mit ‘Matrix￾Management’ Verkehrt Ist (Zak Brown: What’s wrong with 
“matrix management”),” Motorsport-Total.Com, July 15, 2018; 
V. Ratanjee and N. Dvorak, “Mastering Matrix Management 
in the Age of Agility,” Gallup Workplace, September 18, 2018.
i. Based on information in G. Tolub, “Applying Past Lead￾ership Lessons to the Coronavirus Pandemic,” McKinsey 
& Company, March 2020.
64. G.S. McChrystal et al., Team of Teams: New Rules of 
Engagement for a Complex World (New York: Penguin, 
2015); R. Feloni, “Retired 4-Star Gen. Stanley 
McChrystal Explains How the Realisation the US Was 
Losing the Iraq War in 2004 Led to the Transformation 
of Special Operations,” Business Insider, January 4, 2019.
65. B.M. Staw, L.E. Sandelands, and J.E. Dutton, “Threat 
Rigidity Effects in Organizational Behavior: A Multilevel 
Analysis,” Administrative Science Quarterly 26, no. 4 (1981): 
501–24; Z. Bakonyi and B. Muraközy, “Centralization of 
Strategic Decisions during the Great Recession,” Manage￾rial and Decision Economics 40, no. 4 (2019): 394–413.
66. P. Aghion et al., “Turbulence, Firm Decentralization, and 
Growth in Bad Times,” American Economic Journal: 
Applied Economics 13, no. 1 (2021): 133–69.
67. D.S. Pugh and C.R. Hinings, Organizational Structure: Ex￾tensions and Replications (Farnborough, UK: Lexington 
Books, 1976); H. Mintzberg, The Structuring of Organizations 
(Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1979), Chap. 13.
68. J.R. Galbraith, Designing Matrix Organizations That Actu￾ally Work (San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass, 2009), 52–55; 
G. Hertel, S. Geister, and U. Konradt, “Managing Virtual 
Teams: A Review of Current Empirical Research,” 
Human Resource Management Review 15 (2005): 69–95.
69. C. Perrow, “A Framework for the Comparative Analysis 
of Organizations,” American Sociological Review 32 (1967): 
194–208; D. Gerwin, “The Comparative Analysis of Struc￾ture and Technology: A Critical Appraisal,” Academy of 
Management Review 4, no. 1 (1979): 41–51; C.C. Miller 
et al., “Understanding Technology-Structure Relationships: 
Theory Development and Meta-Analytic Theory Testing,” 
Academy of Management Journal 34, no. 2 (1991): 370–99.
70. R.H. Kilmann, Beyond the Quick Fix (San Francisco: 
Jossey-Bass, 1984), 38.
71. A.D. Chandler, Strategy and Structure (Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press, 1962).
72. D. Miller, “Configurations of Strategy and Structure,” 
Strategic Management Journal 7 (1986): 233–49.
a. M. Bandecchi et al., “The ESA/ESTEC Concurrent Design 
Facility,” in Proceedings of the 2nd European Systems Engi￾neering Conference (European Systems Engineering Confer￾ence (EuSEC 2000), Munich, 2000), 329–36; “20 Years of 
ESA’s Concurrent Design Facility: An Oral History,” News 
release (Paris: European Space Agency, April 1, 2019); 
“Concurrent Design Facility,” European Space Agency, 
Concurrent Design Facility, February 22, 2022.
b. “The Beast in the Corner Office: A Living Nightmare for 
Many Canadians,” News Release (Toronto: Monster 
Canada, October 28, 2015); T.K. Ock, “Top-down Corpo￾rate Culture Continues to Take Its Toll,” Korea Herald, July 
19, 2016; “Study: The Worst Traits in a Boss,” Comparably 
(blog), March 28, 2018; “Survey Reveals Cities Where 
Workers Are Most (And Least) Happy With Bosses,” 
News Release (Menlo Park, Calif.: Robert Half, October 11, 
2018); K. Morris, “Here Are The States Where People 
Dislike Their Boss The Most- And Why,” Zippia-Advice 
(blog), July 16, 2020.
c. Iowa State Legislative Services Agency, Span of Control, 
Fiscal Note, Iowa State (Des Moines: Iowa Legislature, 
March 10, 2011); Western Management Consultants, 
Service Efficiency Study Program Management Span of 
Control Review Report to the City Manager, City of Toronto 
Design Credit: Blue globe icon: Merfin/Shutterstock498
When Aneel Bhusri and Dave Duffield founded Workday Inc. less than two 
decades ago, they actively shaped an organizational culture that values 
and supports collegiality, collaboration, and psychological safety among 
employees and stakeholders. “We believe deeply that if employees feel respected, valued, 
and that what they do matters and they can make an impact, then they will do great things for our 
customers,” says Ashley Goldsmith, chief people officer at the cloud-based financial management and 
human capital management software firm. “So, with this ethos as a backdrop, ensuring we have a strong 
culture and sticking to our values has been really important.”
Workday’s founders personally interviewed and hired the first 500 employees to ensure that their 
beliefs and behaviors were aligned with the desired culture. The company continues to seek out job 
applicants who enact the company’s values. “It’s part of the fabric of how we hire people,” states Greg 
Pryor, senior vice president, people and performance evangelist. “We look for people who are already 
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
LO 14-1 Describe the elements of organizational culture and discuss the importance of 
organizational subcultures.
LO 14-2 Describe four categories of artifacts through which corporate culture is deciphered.
LO 14-3 Discuss the importance of organizational culture and the conditions under which 
organizational culture strength improves organizational performance.
LO 14-4 Compare and contrast four strategies for merging organizational cultures.
LO 14-5 Describe five strategies for changing and strengthening an organization’s culture, 
including the application of attraction–selection–attrition theory.
LO 14-6 Describe the organizational socialization process and identify strategies to improve 
that process.
Learning Objectives
14
chapter
Organizational CultureWorkday Inc.’s founders actively developed and continue to guide a strong people-first organizational culture, resulting in a 
highly effective and happy global workforce.
PART 4: ORGANIZATIONAL PROCESSES
oriented toward being empathetic and seem like they would be able to put themselves in service to 
colleagues and customers.”
Workday’s culture also attracts job applicants, which further reinforces that culture. “Workday’s core 
values stood out and there seemed to be no shortage of news that reflected Workday’s people-first 
mentality and doing the right thing,” says Caroline Bisiaux, who now works in the company’s Paris office. 
“This was validated throughout my interview process by the way that the sales team shared stories of 
collaboration, support, and how Workday takes care of employees.”
Maintaining a strong organizational culture isn’t easy, however. A few years ago when the company 
had grown quickly, Workday executives noticed from internal surveys and social media comments that 
the company’s culture had weakened and shifted away from the founders’ ideals. “We were seeing all 
these little signals that the culture, values, and experience were just not what they used to be,” recalls 
Ashley Goldsmith.
To realign and restrengthen Workday’s culture, the company held a large summit to discuss the 
company’s values and beliefs. “We brought every single one of our people leaders from around the 
world together for two days to meet with Workday’s cofounders and our senior leadership team, to 
learn why we need to nurture our culture and how to create positive experiences for employees,” says 
Goldsmith. That get-together reinvigorated Workday’s employee-focused culture and is now held 
annually with every people manager who was hired or promoted over the previous year.
499
Luis Alvarez/Getty Images500 Part Four Organizational Processes
Today, with more than 15,000 employees across dozens of countries, 
Workday continues to maintain a strong people-first culture and is recognized 
as one of the best places to work across several countries (the United States, 
Europe, Canada, Ireland, and the United Kingdom). “Culture matters,” declares 
Workday president and chief financial officer Robynne Sisco. “A strong 
company culture goes hand in hand with engaged, productive employees, 
lower attrition, and a greater likelihood of reaching your strategic goals.”1
Workday Inc. has a strong organizational culture and applies several 
strategies we will describe in this chapter to maintain and sustain that culture 
throughout its substantial growth over the past two decades. Organizational 
culture consists of the values, norms, and assumptions that are shared among 
organizational members.2 It defines what is important and unimportant in the 
company and, consequently, directs everyone in the organization toward the 
“right way” of doing things. You might think of organizational culture as the 
company’s DNA—invisible to the naked eye, yet a powerful template that 
shapes what happens in the workplace.
This chapter begins by identifying the elements of organizational culture and 
then describing how culture is deciphered through artifacts. Next, we examine 
the relationship between organizational culture and organizational effectiveness, 
including the effects of cultural strength, environmental fit, and adaptability. Our 
attention then turns to strategies for merging organizational cultures. The latter 
part of this chapter examines ways to change and strengthen organizational 
culture, and looks more closely at the related topic of organizational socialization.
Elements of Organizational Culture
Organizational culture consists of shared values, norms, and assumptions. Exhibit 14.1 
illustrates how these elements relate to each other and are associated with artifacts, which 
are discussed in the next section of this chapter. Values are stable, evaluative beliefs that 
guide our preferences for outcomes or courses of action in a variety of situations (see 
Chapter 2).3
 They are conscious perceptions about what is good or bad, right or wrong. In 
the context of organizational culture, values are discussed as shared values, which are val￾ues that people within the organization or work unit have in common and place near the 
top of their hierarchy of values.4
Organizational culture norms are informal rules and shared expectations of employee 
behavior (see Chapter 8). These norms are the cultural values translated into more spe￾cific behavioral guidelines.5 For example, Workday values collegiality, so it likely has 
many associated norms, such as the expectation that employees are polite and respectful 
to one another. A company with a strong performance culture might have norms that en￾courage working long hours and being persistent in achieving goals.
Organizational culture also consists of shared assumptions—a deeper element that some 
experts believe is the essence of corporate culture.6
 Shared assumptions are nonconscious, 
LO 14-1
organizational culture
the values, norms, and 
assumptions shared among 
organizational membersChapter Fourteen Organizational Culture 501
Artifacts of
organizational culture
Organizational culture
Physical
structures
Language
Rituals and
ceremonies
Stories
and legends
• Nonconscious, taken-
 for-granted beliefs.
• Ideal prototypes of
 behavior.
Shared assumptions 
• Stable, conscious,
 prescriptive beliefs.
• Guide decision/behavior
 preferences.
• Informal rules, shared
 expectations of behavior.
Shared values and norms
taken-for-granted perceptions or ideal prototypes of behavior that are considered the cor￾rect way to think and act toward problems and opportunities. Shared assumptions are so 
deeply ingrained that you probably wouldn’t discover them by surveying employees. Only 
by observing people, analyzing their decisions, and debriefing them on their actions would 
these assumptions rise to the surface.
ESPOUSED VERSUS ENACTED VALUES
Most corporate websites have “Careers” web pages for job candidates, and many of these 
sites proudly list the company’s core values. Nature’s Path Foods lists five core values. 
“We use the acronym PATHS,” explains Ratana Stephens, cofounder and CEO of 
North America’s largest certified organic breakfast and snack food company. “‘P’ for 
performance-driven, ‘A’ for always improving, ‘T’ for team-focused, ‘H’ for honorable, and 
‘S’ for sustainable. We try to find people who have these kinds of values.”7
Do these values really represent the cultural content at Nature’s Path Foods? They 
probably do in this organization, because its culture is well known and deeply entrenched 
EXHIBIT 14.1 Organizational Culture Assumptions, Norms, Values, and Artifacts502 Part Four Organizational Processes
through various artifacts. However, most company websites 
tend to describe espoused values—the values that corporate 
leaders hope will eventually become the organization’s culture, 
or possibly just the values they want the public to believe guide 
the organization’s decisions and actions.8
 Espoused values are 
usually socially desirable, so they present a positive public im￾age. Even if top management acts consistently with the es￾poused values, lower-level employees might not do so. 
Employees bring diverse personal values to the organization, 
some of which might conflict with the organization’s espoused 
values. A few firms even describe espoused values that are 
completely different from their actual culture.9
An organization’s culture is defined by its enacted values,
not its espoused values. Values are enacted when they actually 
guide and influence decisions and behavior. They are values 
put into practice. Enacted values are apparent when watching 
executives and other employees in action, including where they 
focus their attention and resources, how they behave toward 
stakeholders, what decisions they make, and what outcomes 
occur from those decisions and behavior.
CONTENT OF ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURE
Organizations differ considerably in their cultural content—the 
relative ordering of the culture’s dominant values as well as its 
norms and assumptions.10 As the opening case study to this 
chapter described, Workday has a collaborative, employee￾centered culture. “We believe deeply that if employees feel 
respected, valued and that what they do matters and they can 
make an impact, then they will do great things for our customers,” says chief people offi￾cer Ashley Goldsmith. In contrast, Netflix’s culture seems to prioritize individual perfor￾mance and undertones of internal competitiveness. For instance, the online streaming 
media provider reminds employees that “We’re a team, not a family,” that “Netflix leaders 
hire, develop, and cut smartly,” and that “adequate performance gets a generous sever￾ance package.”11
How many corporate cultures are there? Several models and measures classify organi￾zational culture into a handful of easy-to-remember categories. One of these, shown in 
Exhibit 14.2, identifies seven corporate cultures. Another popular model identifies four 
organizational cultures organized in a two-by-two table representing internal versus 
For many years, Takata Corporation proudly broadcast its organizational 
culture, known as the Takata Way: open communication, commitment, 
and fact-based problem-solving. Yet these espoused values were 
apparently opposite to the enacted values at the Japanese airbag and 
seatbelt manufacturer. The company was found guilty of concealing 
evidence that its airbags had catastrophic safety flaws which killed two 
dozen people and injured hundreds of others. Investigations found that 
Takata’s senior management stifled open communication and 
discouraged employees from applying fact-based analysis of its 
products. An independent panel of experts concluded that “many of the 
Panel’s recommendations require cultural change.” Instead, Takata 
entered bankruptcy protection and was sold to a competitor.a
KAZUHIRO NOGI/Getty Images
ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURE DIMENSION CHARACTERISTICS OF THE DIMENSION
Innovation Experimenting, opportunity seeking, risk taking, few 
rules, low cautiousness
Stability Predictability, security, rule-oriented
Respect for people Fairness, tolerance
Outcome orientation Action-oriented, high expectations, results-oriented
Attention to detail Precise, analytic
Team orientation Collaboration, people-oriented
Aggressiveness Competitive, low emphasis on social responsibility
EXHIBIT 14.2
Organizational Culture Profile 
Dimensions and Characteristics
Source: Based on information in C.A. 
O’Reilly III, J. Chatman, and D.F. 
Caldwell, “People and Organizational 
Culture: A Profile Comparison 
Approach to Assessing Person–
Organization Fit,” Academy of 
Management Journal 34, no. 3 (1991): 
487–518.Chapter Fourteen Organizational Culture 503
external focus and flexibility versus control. Other models organize cultures around a 
circle with 8 or 12 categories. These circumplex models suggest that some cultures are 
opposite to others, such as an avoidance culture versus a self-actualization culture, or a 
power culture versus a collegial culture.12
Organizational culture models and surveys are popular with corporate leaders faced 
with the messy business of diagnosing their company’s culture and identifying what kind 
of culture they want to develop. Unfortunately, the models oversimplify the diversity of 
cultural values within organizations. There are dozens of individual values, and many 
more combinations of values, so the number of organizational cultures that these models 
describe probably falls considerably short of the full set.
The diversity of corporate cultures is evident in a study of espoused values at the top 
500 American companies.13 The study distilled these values down to nine categories. Integ￾rity appeared most often, followed by teamwork, innovation, respect, quality, safety, com￾munity, communication, and hard work. But each of these categories encapsulates a large 
number of specific values. The “respect” category, for instance, includes the specific values 
of diversity, inclusion, development, empowerment, and dignity. As you can see, there are 
dozens of espoused values, so there would be an equally long list of enacted values.
Another concern is that organizational culture models and measures typically ignore the 
shared assumptions aspect of culture. This oversight likely occurs because measuring shared 
assumptions is even more difficult than measuring shared values and norms. A third con￾cern is that many organizational culture models and measures incorrectly assume that orga￾nizations have a fairly clear, unified culture that is easily decipherable.14 In reality, an 
organization’s culture is typically blurry and fragmented. Every employee has a somewhat 
distinct hierarchy of values, so an organization’s culture necessarily has noticeable variability. 
Also, organizations consist of clusters of employees across the organization, and these 
employees prioritize different values than the company’s culture. Thus, many of the popular 
organizational culture models and measures oversimplify the variety of organizational cul￾tures and falsely presume that organizations can easily be identified within these categories.
®
SELF-ASSESSMENT 14.1: Which Corporate Culture Do You Prefer?
ORGANIZATIONAL SUBCULTURES
When discussing organizational culture, we are really referring to the dominant culture,
that is, the values, norms, and assumptions shared most consistently and widely by the 
organization’s members. The dominant culture is usually supported by senior manage￾ment, but not always. Cultural values, norms, and assumptions can also persist in spite of 
senior management’s desire for another culture.
Organizations are also composed of subcultures located throughout their various divi￾sions, geographic regions, occupational units, and demographic groups.15 Some subcul￾tures enhance the dominant culture by enacting parallel values, norms, and assumptions. 
Others differ from but do not conflict with the dominant culture. Still others are called 
countercultures because they embrace values, norms, and assumptions that directly op￾pose the organization’s dominant culture. It is also possible that some organizations (in￾cluding some universities, according to one study) consist of subcultures with no 
decipherable dominant culture at all.16
Subcultures, particularly countercultures, may cause conflict and dissension among 
employees, but they also serve two important functions.17 First, they maintain the organi￾zation’s standards of performance and ethical behavior. Employees who hold countercul￾tural values are an important source of surveillance and critical review of the dominant 
order. They encourage constructive conflict and more creative thinking about how the 504 Part Four Organizational Processes
organization should interact with its environment. Subcultures potentially support ethical 
conduct by preventing employees from blindly following one set of values. Subculture 
members continually question the “obvious” decisions and actions of the majority, 
thereby making everyone more mindful of the consequences of their actions.
Subcultures serve a second valuable function: they are spawning grounds for emerging 
values that keep the firm aligned with the evolving needs and expectations of customers, 
suppliers, communities, and other stakeholders. Companies eventually need to revise their 
existing dominant values with ones that are more appropriate for the changing environ￾ment. Those emerging cultural values, norms, and assumptions usually exist in subcultures 
long before they are ideal for the organization. If subcultures are suppressed, the organiza￾tion may take longer to discover, develop, and adopt the emerging desired culture.
Deciphering Organizational Culture through Artifacts
Shared values, norms, and assumptions are not easily measured through surveys and 
might not be accurately reflected in the organization’s values statements. Instead, as 
Exhibit 14.1 illustrated earlier, an organization’s culture needs to be deciphered through a 
detailed investigation of artifacts. Artifacts are the observable symbols and signs of an 
organization’s culture, such as the way visitors are greeted, the organization’s physical 
layout, and how employees are rewarded.18 A few experts suggest that artifacts are the es￾sence of organizational culture, whereas most others (including the authors of this book) 
view artifacts as symbols or indicators of culture. In other words, culture is cognitive—values, 
norms, and assumptions reside inside people’s heads—whereas artifacts are observable 
manifestations of that culture. Either way, artifacts are important because they represent 
and reinforce an organization’s culture.
LO 14-2
In Praise of Organizational 
Subculturesb
René Lacerte actively created Bill.com’s organizational 
culture when he founded the cloud-based digital busi￾ness payments company. “The culture of the company 
was defined and set before we hired our first employee,” 
says Lacerte. “‘Humble, Passionate, Dedicated, Authentic 
and Fun’ describes what we at Bill.com all value today 
and what we’ll still value tomorrow.” 
Bill.com has a strong corporate culture, but Lacerte 
points out that the San Jose-based company also has sub￾cultures. “As a company grows and scales, it will inevitably 
develop subcultures. For example, your sales team may 
have a different working style than your product team.” 
LaCerte views subcultures as potentially good for the 
company. “Different leaders might view these subcultures 
as a threat or somehow diluting the overall culture,” says 
Lacerte “I don’t view them that way at all. In fact, I em￾brace these subcultures and encourage guiding them so 
they can individually grow and help the larger team thrive 
by virtue of their differences.” 
Lacerte says that strong cultures are self-monitoring; 
they recognize when a subculture is misaligned with 
the company’s core values and with its stakeholder 
relationships. But most subcultures are beneficial be￾cause they provide a unique interpretation and applica￾tion of the dominant values. Lacerte offers this example: 
“We have a team with a stronger bias toward urgency 
than others. While urgency is not one of our values, the 
principle of speed is how that team expresses their 
passion for moving quickly and dedication to the customer. 
It’s their special ingredient.”
global connections 14.1
VioletaStoimenova/Getty Images
artifacts
the observable symbols and 
signs of an organization’s 
cultureChapter Fourteen Organizational Culture 505
Artifacts provide valuable evidence about a company’s culture.19 An organization’s am￾biguous and fragmented culture is best understood by observing workplace behavior, lis￾tening to everyday conversations among staff and with customers, studying written 
documents and text messages, viewing physical structures and settings, and interviewing 
staff about corporate stories. In other words, to truly understand an organization’s cul￾ture, we need to sample information from a variety of organizational artifacts. In this 
section, we review four broad categories of artifacts: organizational stories and legends, 
language, rituals and ceremonies, and physical structures and symbols.
ORGANIZATIONAL STORIES AND LEGENDS
Stories and legends about the company’s founders and past events permeate 
strong organizational cultures. Some tales recount heroic deeds, whereas oth￾ers ridicule incidents that deviated from the firm’s core values. Organizational 
stories and legends add human realism to corporate expectations, individual 
performance standards, and the criteria for getting fired. They also produce 
emotions, which tend to improve listeners’ memory of the lesson within the 
story.20 Stories have the greatest effect on communicating corporate culture 
when they describe real people, are assumed to be true, are known by employ￾ees throughout the organization, and convey clear messages about the way 
things should (or should not) be done.21
ORGANIZATIONAL LANGUAGE
The language of the workplace speaks volumes about the company’s culture. 
How employees talk to one another, describe customers, express anger, and 
greet stakeholders are all verbal symbols of shared values, norms, and assump￾tions. “What we say—and how we say it—can deeply affect a company’s cul￾ture,” advise Tom Kelley (partner) and David Kelley (founder) of design firm 
IDEO.22 An organization’s culture particularly stands out when employees 
habitually use customized phrases and labels. For instance, DaVita Health￾Care Partners is called the “village” because that word captures the sense of 
community much more accurately than the “company.” Employees at the Denver￾based provider of kidney care and dialysis services are “teammates” which 
more accurately reflects the relationship that DaVita staff members have with 
one another.23
Language also captures less complimentary cultural values. Not long ago at 
Goldman Sachs, employees infamously spoke about “elephant trades,” which 
apparently were large investment transactions with huge profit potential. The 
investment firm’s salespeople were allegedly rewarded for going “elephant 
hunting” (seeking out these large trades from clients). Some staff also referred 
to “muppets,” a label for unsophisticated clients. Under new leadership, Gold￾man Sachs is apparently changing its culture, but the derogatory language it 
generated is still used in the investment industry.24
RITUALS AND CEREMONIES
Rituals are the programmed routines of daily organizational life that dramatize an organi￾zation’s culture.25 They include how visitors are greeted, how often senior executives visit 
subordinates, how people communicate with one another, how much time employees take 
for lunch, and so on. Cultural rituals are repetitive, predictable events that have symbolic 
meaning of underlying cultural values, norms, and assumptions. For instance, BMW’s 
fast-paced culture is quite literally apparent in the way employees walk around the 
German automaker’s offices. “When you move through the corridors and hallways of other 
companies’ buildings, people kind of crawl, they walk slowly,” observes a BMW executive. 
rituals
the programmed routines of 
daily organizational life that 
dramatize the organization’s 
culture
Employees at Galvanize (now Diligent) often utter 
the phrase “put the moose on the table,” which 
means talking openly about a known problem or 
issue that everyone has avoided (i.e., the elephant 
in the room). “It’s a symbolic invitation to have the 
awkward—but necessary—conversation,” says 
Laurie Schultz, who was CEO of the security 
software company over the past decade and is now 
a board director or chair of several companies. “We 
say it all the time. It’s a huge, huge, huge part of our 
culture.” As a reminder, Galvanize has stuffed toy 
moose and moose drawings throughout its offices. 
Schultz adds: “One thing I’ve learned is the power 
of symbols, values, and language when reinforcing 
a risk-taking culture.”c
yvdavyd/Getty Images506 Part Four Organizational Processes
“But BMW people tend to move faster.”26 Ceremonies are more formal artifacts than ritu￾als. Ceremonies are planned activities conducted specifically for the benefit of an audi￾ence. This would include publicly rewarding (or punishing) employees or celebrating the 
launch of a new product or newly won contract.
PHYSICAL STRUCTURES AND SYMBOLS
Winston Churchill once said: “We shape our buildings; thereafter, they shape us.”27 The 
former British prime minister was reminding us that an organization’s culture affects 
building decisions, but the resulting structure’s size, shape, location, and age subsequently 
reinforce or alter that culture. Physical structures might support a company’s emphasis on 
teamwork, environmental friendliness, hierarchy, or any other set of values.28
Even if the building doesn’t make much of a statement, there is a treasure-trove of 
physical artifacts inside. Desks, chairs, office space, and wall hangings (or lack of them) 
are just a few of the workplace features that might convey cultural meaning.29 Each physi￾cal artifact alone might not say much, but put enough of them together and an image 
emerges of how they symbolize the organization’s culture. 
For example, one prominent workspace design and manufacturing company identified 
the workspace features typically found at companies with different organizational cul￾tures. Exhibit 14.3 summarizes the physical space design of collaborative and creative 
cultures compared to cultures that emphasize efficiency (control) and competition. Col￾laborative and creative cultures value more teamwork and flexibility, so space design is 
informal and enables spontaneous group discussion. Controlling and competitive cultures 
tend to have more structural office arrangements and provide more space for individual 
work than teamwork.
Is Organizational Culture Important?
Does organizational culture improve organizational effectiveness? Marty Parker thinks so. 
“As leaders, we need to put culture at the center of how we do things,” says the founder 
and CEO of consulting and executive search firm Waterstone Human Capital. Tony Guzzi 
agrees. “I am a firm believer that my job is to define the culture we want, model the 
LO 14-3
ceremonies
planned displays of 
organizational culture, 
conducted specifically for the 
benefit of an audience
COLLABORATIVE AND CREATIVE CULTURES CONTROLLING AND COMPETITIVE CULTURES
• More team space
• Informal space
• Low/medium enclosure
• Flexible environment
• Organic layout
• More individual space
• More formal than informal space
• High/medium enclosure
• More fixed environment
• More structured, symmetrical layout
EXHIBIT 14.3
Workspace Design and 
Organizational Culture
Photos: (left) PeopleImages/Getty 
Images; (right) Westend61 Premium/
Shutterstock
Source: Based on information in How 
to Create a Successful Organizational 
Culture: Build It—Literally (Holland, 
MI: Haworth Inc., June 2015).Chapter Fourteen Organizational Culture 507
culture we want, and nourish the culture we 
want,” says the CEO of EMCOR Group, a 
Fortune 500 company that provides construc￾tion, industrial and energy infrastructure, 
and facilities services. “In the end, the big￾gest thing you [as CEO] can try to shape is 
the culture in the organization.”30
Marty Parker, Tony Guzzi, Workday found￾ers Aneel Bhusri and Dave Duffield, and 
many other leaders believe that an organiza￾tion’s success partly depends on its culture. 
Several popular-press management books 
similarly assert that the most successful com￾panies have strong cultures. In fact, one popu￾lar management book, Built to Last, suggests 
that successful companies are “cult-like” (al￾though not actually cults, the authors are care￾ful to point out).31 Does OB research support 
this view that companies are more effective 
when they have a strong culture? Yes, poten￾tially, but the evidence indicates that the rela￾tionship depends on a few conditions.32
MEANING AND POTENTIAL 
BENEFITS OF A STRONG 
CULTURE
Before discussing the contingencies of an ef￾fective organizational culture, let’s examine 
the meaning of a “strong” organizational cul￾ture and its potential benefits. Culture 
strength refers to how widely and deeply em￾ployees understand and embrace the organi￾zation’s dominant values, norms, and 
assumptions. In a strong organizational cul￾ture, the company’s core values are “shared” 
by most employees across all subunits. Values are “shared” when employees hold a similar 
understanding of them and internalize them as part of their personal set of values.
In a strong culture, the company’s values, norms, and assumptions are also institution￾alized through well-established artifacts, which further entrench the culture. In addition, 
strong cultures tend to be long-lasting; some can be traced back to personal attributes and 
behaviors of the company’s founder. In contrast, companies have weak cultures when the 
dominant values are held mainly by a few people at the top of the organization; employees 
lack awareness or agreement on the meaning of those values; the values, norms, and as￾sumptions are unstable over time or highly varied across the organization; and the culture 
is difficult to interpret from artifacts.
Under the right conditions, companies are more effective when they have strong cultures 
because of the three important functions listed in Exhibit 14.4 and described as follows:
1. Control system. Organizational culture is a deeply embedded form of social control 
that influences employee decisions and behavior.33 Culture is pervasive and oper￾ates almost invisibly. Think of it as an automatic pilot, nonconsciously directing 
employees so their behavior is consistent with organizational expectations. For 
this reason, organizational culture is often described as a compass that points 
everyone in the same direction.
93% of employee reviews on Glassdoor discuss some element of the
company’s culture.
of more than 7,000 business leaders across 130 countries identify
organizational culture as one of the most important business issues
(3rd most important, after organization design and leadership).
86%
of 1,204 employees across 50 countries say their company’s
success and growth over the next five years depends on changing
the organization’s culture.
80%
% of 5,113 working adults in the U.S., UK, France, and Germany say that
company culture is more important than salary when it comes to
being satisfied at work.
56
% of 548 human resources practitioners agree that leaders uphold the 50 stated values of their organization.
% of 25,000 employees surveyed worldwide rate their organization’s 30 culture as “poor” (29% rate it as “very good”).
HOW IMPORTANT IS CORPORATE CULTURE?d
ozgur_oral/Shutterstock508 Part Four Organizational Processes
• Control system
• Social glue
• Sense making
• Organizational
 performance
• Employee well-being
Functions of
strong cultures Organizational outcomes
Benefits of culture strength
depend upon . . .
• Whether culture content fits the
 environment
• Moderate, not cultlike, strength
• An adaptive culture
2. Social glue. Organizational culture is the social glue that bonds people together 
and makes them feel part of the organizational experience.34 Employees are moti￾vated to internalize the organization’s dominant culture because it fulfills their 
need for social identity. This social glue attracts new staff and retains top performers. 
It also becomes the common thread that holds employees together in global 
organizations. “Culture is the X-factor,” says Noah Rabinowitz, vice president of 
learning and development at vaccine developer Moderna. “It’s the invisible glue 
that holds an organization together and ultimately makes the difference between 
whether an organization is able to succeed in the market or not.”35
3. Sense making. Organizational culture helps employees to make sense of what 
goes on and why things happen in the company.36 Corporate culture also makes it 
easier to understand what is expected of them. As a result, employees in compa￾nies with stronger organizational cultures have clearer role perceptions and less 
role-related stress.
CONTINGENCIES OF ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURE 
AND EFFECTIVENESS
Studies have found only a moderately positive relationship between culture strength and 
organizational effectiveness. The reason for this weak connection is that strong cultures 
improve organizational effectiveness only under specific conditions (see Exhibit 14.4). 
The three main contingencies are (1) whether the culture content is aligned with its external 
environment; (2) whether the culture is moderately strong, not a cult; and (3) whether the 
culture incorporates an adaptive culture.
Culture Content Is Aligned with the External Environment The benefits 
of a strong culture depend on whether its content—the relative ordering of the culture’s 
dominant values as well as its norms and assumptions—is aligned with the external envi￾ronment. If the culture is congruent with the environment, then employees are more mo￾tivated and have clearer role perceptions to practice behaviors that improve the 
organization’s interaction with its environment. But when the culture is misaligned with 
the environment, a strong culture encourages decisions and behaviors that can undermine 
the organization’s connection with its stakeholders.
EXHIBIT 14.4 Potential Benefits and Contingencies of Culture StrengthChapter Fourteen Organizational Culture 509
Consider Microsoft, which has had a strong culture for many years. Until recently, the 
technology giant’s dominant values were noticeably dysfunctional, meaning that they un￾dermined rather than enhanced the organization’s capacity to innovate, adapt, and col￾laborate internally and externally. “Innovation was being replaced by bureaucracy. 
Teamwork was being replaced by internal politics. We were falling behind,” recalls current 
CEO Satya Nadella. Indeed, some observers predicted that if Microsoft’s existing culture 
continued, the company would be “fading toward irrelevance.” Nadella successfully trans￾formed Microsoft’s culture by instilling a new set of dominant values around a growth 
mindset of innovation, information sharing (collaboration), and customer focus—values 
that are much more aligned with what the technology firm needs to thrive.37
Culture Strength Is Not the Level of a Cult A second contingency is the 
degree of culture strength. Various experts suggest that companies with very strong 
cultures—known as corporate “cults”—may be less effective than companies with moderately 
strong cultures.38 One reason why corporate cults may undermine organizational effec￾tiveness is that they lock people into mental models, which can blind them to new oppor￾tunities and unique problems. The effect of these very strong cultures is that people 
overlook or incorrectly define subtle misalignments between the organization’s activities 
and the changing environment.
The other reason why very strong cultures may be dysfunctional is that they suppress 
dissenting subcultures. The challenge for organizational leaders is to maintain not only 
a strong culture but one that allows subcultural diversity. Subcultures encourage task￾oriented conflict, which improves creative thinking and offers some level of ethical vigilance 
over the dominant culture. In the long run, a subculture’s nascent values could become 
important dominant values as the environment changes. Corporate cults suppress subcul￾tures, thereby undermining these benefits.
Culture Is an Adaptive Culture A third condition influencing the effect of cul￾ture strength on organizational effectiveness is whether the culture content includes an 
adaptive culture.39 An adaptive culture embraces change, creativity, open-mindedness, 
growth, and learning. Organizational leaders across many industries increasingly view an 
adaptive culture as an important ingredient for the organization’s long-term success. “At 
the end of the day, you have to create a culture that not only accepts change but seeks out 
how to change,” says former GM CEO Dan Akerson. “It’s critically important that we 
inculcate that into our culture.”40
What does an adaptive culture look like? It is one in which employees recognize 
that the organization’s survival and success depends on their ability to discover emerg￾ing changes in the external environment and to adapt their own behavior to those 
changes. Thus, employees in adaptive cultures adopt an open systems view and take 
responsibility for the organization’s performance and alignment with the external 
environment.
In an adaptive culture, receptivity to change extends to internal processes and roles. 
Employees believe that satisfying stakeholders requires continuous improvement of inter￾nal work processes. They also recognize the importance of remaining flexible in their 
own work roles. The phrase “That’s not my job” is found 
in nonadaptive cultures. Finally, an adaptive culture has 
a strong learning orientation because being receptive to 
change necessarily means that the company also sup￾ports action-oriented discovery. With a learning orienta￾tion, employees welcome new learning opportunities, 
actively experiment with new ideas and practices, view 
reasonable mistakes as a natural part of the learning pro￾cess, and continuously question past practices (see 
Chapter 7).41
adaptive culture
an organizational culture in 
which employees are receptive 
to change, including the 
ongoing alignment of the 
organization to its environment 
and continuous improvement of 
internal processes
learning orientation
a set of beliefs and norms in 
which people are encouraged 
to question past practices, 
learn new ideas, experiment 
putting ideas into practice, and 
view mistakes as part of the 
learning process510 Part Four Organizational Processes
debating point
IS CORPORATE CULTURE AN OVERUSED PHRASE?
Corporate culture is probably one of the most frequently uttered 
phrases in organizations these days. That’s quite an accomplishment 
for two words that were rarely paired together prior to 1982.e
 Execu￾tives say they have crafted the company’s culture to attract top talent 
and better serve clients. Job applicants have made organizational 
culture one of the top factors in their decision whether to join the 
company. Journalists routinely blame corporate culture for business 
failures, deviant activities, and quirky employee conduct.
This chapter offers plenty of evidence to defend the argument that 
organizational culture explains employee decisions and behavior. A 
strong culture is a control system that directs employee decisions and 
behavior. It is, after all, the “way we do things around here.” The underly￾ing assumptions of a company’s culture further guide employee behavior 
without conscious awareness. A strong culture also serves as the com￾pany’s “social glue,” which strengthens cohesion among employees. In 
other words, employees in strong cultures have similar beliefs and values 
which, in turn, increases their motivation to follow the corporate herd.
Organizational culture can be a useful concept to explain work￾place activities, but some OB experts suggest that the phrase is over￾used. To begin with, corporate culture is usually presented as a singular 
thing within the company—one company with one culture. This pre￾sumption of a homogeneous culture—in which every employee under￾stands and embraces the same few dominant values—just doesn’t 
exist. Every organization has a fragmented culture to varying degrees. 
Furthermore, many employees engage in façades of conformity. They 
pretend to live the company’s values but don’t actually do so because 
they don’t believe in them.f
 Fragmentation and façades suggest that 
culture is not an integrated force field that manipulates people like 
mindless robots. Instead, employees ultimately make decisions based 
on a variety of influences, not only the organization’s values, norms, 
and assumptions.
Another argument why corporate culture is an overused explana￾tion of workplace events is that values don’t drive behavior as often as 
many people believe. Instead, employees turn to their values to guide 
behavior only when they are reminded of their values or when the 
situation produces fairly obvious conflicting or questionable decisions.g
Most of the time, frontline staff perform their jobs without much 
thought to their values. Their decisions are usually technical rather 
than values-based matters. As such, corporate culture has a fairly 
peripheral role in daily routine work activities.
A third problem is that organizational culture is a blunt instrument 
for explaining workplace behavior and for recommending how to 
change those behaviors. “Fix the culture” is almost meaningless be￾cause the problems prompting this advice could be due to any number 
of artifacts. Furthermore, some problems attributed to a poor corporate 
culture may be due to more mundane and precise dysfunctions—
unintended consequences of poorly designed rewards, ineffective 
leadership, misaligned corporate strategy, biased information systems, 
and a host of other conditions.
Rather than blame the company’s culture, we should pay more at￾tention to specific systems, structures, behaviors, and attitudes that 
explain what went wrong. Furthermore, as one paper recently noted, 
organizational culture is often the outcome of these specific artifacts, 
not the cause of the problems those artifacts create.h
ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURE AND BUSINESS ETHICS
An organization’s culture influences the ethical conduct of its employees. This makes 
sense because good behavior is driven by ethical values, and ethical values become embed￾ded in an organization’s dominant culture. Workday, which was described in the opening 
case study to this chapter, has a strong culture that specifically includes “integrity” as one 
of its dominant values. “At Workday, integrity is one of our core values, which we define 
as standing by what we say, being accountable, staying true to our commitments, treating 
everyone equitably, and being open and honest in how we communicate to our employees 
and customers,” says Christine Fedrow, Workday’s chief integrity and compliance officer. 
Workday is recognized as one of the world’s most ethical companies, based on its culture, 
environmental and social practices, governance, diversity, and other initiatives. Most 
Workday employees (94 percent in recent surveys) agree that the company’s management 
is honest and ethical in its business practices.42
The opposite is equally true. For example, the board of Commonwealth Bank of Australia 
(CBA) eventually admitted that a dysfunctional corporate culture contributed to serious 
financial violations that ultimately triggered a national commission on conduct among all of 
Australia’s financial institutions. Government authorities found that CBA financial advisors Chapter Fourteen Organizational Culture 511
provided fraudulent or unprofessional advice to clients. Later, CBA traders were charged 
with “unconscionable conduct and market manipulation” that deliberately manipulated in￾terest rates. And more recently, CBA allegedly failed to adequately monitor, intervene, and 
report to government authorities evidence of substantial money laundering. “We’ve ac￾knowledged there are aspects of our culture where we could improve,” said CBA board chair 
Catherine Livingstone after the most recent series of ethical violations were made public.43
Some leaders try to improve ethical conduct by changing and strengthening the organi￾zation’s culture around more socially desirable values. For instance, after Barclays Bank 
PLC was found guilty of rigging interest rates a decade ago, the British bank’s most senior 
executives were forced out. The incoming CEO focused on establishing a clear set of ethi￾cal values (respect, integrity, service, excellence, stewardship). He then advised all 
140,000 Barclays employees that these values should guide their behavior so Barclays 
could become a more ethical organization.
“There might be some who don’t feel they can fully buy in to an approach which so 
squarely links performance to the upholding of our values,” warned Barclays’ CEO. “My 
message to those people is simple: Barclays is not the place for you. The rules have 
Uber Shifts Gears Toward a More 
Ethical Culturei
To guide employee behavior as Uber rapidly expanded 
during its early years, cofounder and former CEO Travis 
Kalanick and another executive penned a list of 14 values 
representing Uber’s “philosophy of work.” They were 
Uber’s actual or aspirational culture. 
Dressed in a white lab coat, Kalanick introduced the 
list at a secretive Las Vegas convention with almost all 
Uber employees in attendance. He explained each value 
in detail with several slides and a video, then asked spe￾cific Uber executives to tell a story that exemplified each 
value. “When you go through that growth, you have to ce￾ment your culture values and talk about them all of the 
time,” said Kalanick. 
Kalanick’s rationale for articulating the list of 14 values 
was to maintain Uber’s aggressive entrepreneurial spirit. 
Yet many observers say that several of these values and 
corresponding leadership role modeling produced a 
“toxic culture” and a “cultural implosion” that led to law￾suits, employee turnover and dismissals, and government 
investigations. Uber has faced allegations of sexual 
harassment, bullying, privacy violations, corporate espio￾nage, anti-competitive activities, and theft of proprietary 
technology. 
Three years after his dramatic corporate culture pre￾sentation, Kalanick was replaced as Uber’s CEO by out￾sider Dara Khosrowshahi. One of Khosrowshahi’s top 
priorities was to change the company’s culture to one that 
instilled more ethical conduct and productive behavior. 
“The culture and approach that got Uber where it is today 
is not what will get us to the next level,” said Khosrowshahi 
soon after stepping into the CEO role. “Our values define 
who we are and how we work, but I had heard from many 
employees that some of them simply didn’t represent the 
kind of company we want to be.”
Uber’s original list was developed by two Uber execu￾tives alone, whereas Khosrowshahi invited all employees 
to participate in crafting the new cultural “norms.” More 
than 1,200 staff members worldwide submitted ideas and 
almost two dozen employee focus group sessions were 
held. Employees voted on the resulting list of values, 
which were then distilled down to eight core themes.
Only a few of the original values remained, such as 
“big bold bets” and “be an owner.” Other values were 
jettisoned because they reinforced some of the unethical 
activities that got Uber in trouble. Khosrowshahi specifi￾cally commented that “toe-stepping” was intended to 
encourage employees at all levels to share their ideas, 
“but too often it was used as an excuse for being [a jerk].” 
Equally important, the new values include the explicit 
ethical mandate to “do the right thing” whereas nothing 
similar existed in the original list.
global connections 14.2
Tasos Katopodis/Getty Images512 Part Four Organizational Processes
changed. You won’t feel comfortable at Barclays and, to be frank, we won’t feel comfort￾able with you as colleagues.”44 The point here is that organizational culture and ethics go 
hand-in-hand. To create a more ethical company, leaders need to work on the enacted 
culture that steers employee behavior.
Merging Organizational Cultures
Mergers and acquisitions often fail financially when the merging organizations have incom￾patible cultures.45 Unless the acquired firm is left to operate independently, companies with 
clashing cultures tend to undermine employee performance and customer service. This 
problem is reflected in recent surveys: 20 percent of 1,000 corporate and private equity ex￾ecutives say that M&A deals underperform because the parties did not achieve cultural 
alignment; 30 percent of 1,438 M&A professionals in 54 countries identify organizational 
culture issues as the reason why M&A transactions failed to ever meet financial targets.46
Consider one such acquisition by Johnson & Johnson (J&J).47 The venerable medical 
devices and consumer products firm has acquired numerous companies over the years, 
and most of these deals carefully diagnosed the cultural compatibilities of the two firms. 
But Aileen Stockburger recalls one acquisition that didn’t. “We did extremely cursory as￾sessments of the existing organizational cultures,” admits the former J&J vice president of 
mergers and acquisitions. “Based on these assessments, we thought the cultures were very 
similar. Only later did we learn just how different the cultures were, particularly in terms 
of decision-making style.”
J&J values debate and constructive discussion in the decision process, whereas the 
acquired firm valued top-down authority. During the integration, executives at the ac￾quired firm felt increasingly uncomfortable and unhappy because their decisions were 
questioned by others. Most of the acquired firm executives eventually quit and J&J lost 
considerable value in their business acquisition.
BICULTURAL AUDIT
Organizational leaders can minimize cultural collisions and fulfill their duty of due dili￾gence in corporate mergers by conducting a bicultural audit.48 A bicultural audit diagno￾ses cultural relations between the companies and determines the extent to which cultural 
clashes will likely occur. The process begins by identifying cultural differences between 
the merging companies. This might occur by surveying employees or through an extended 
series of meetings where executives and staff of both firms discuss how they think through 
important decisions in their business. From the survey data or meetings, the parties deter￾mine which differences between the two firms will result in conflict and which cultural 
values provide common ground on which to build a cultural foundation in the merged 
organization. The final stage involves identifying strategies and preparing action plans to 
bridge the two organizations’ cultures.
STRATEGIES FOR MERGING DIFFERENT 
ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURES
In some cases, the bicultural audit results in a decision to end merger talks because the 
two cultures are too different to merge effectively. However, even with substantially differ￾ent cultures, two companies may form a workable union if they apply the appropriate 
merger strategy. The four main strategies for merging different corporate cultures are as￾similation, deculturation, integration, and separation (see Exhibit 14.5).49
Assimilation Assimilation occurs when employees at the acquired company will￾ingly embrace the cultural values of the acquiring organization. Typically, this strategy 
works best when the acquired company has a weak or dysfunctional culture, whereas the 
LO 14-4
bicultural audit
a process of diagnosing 
cultural relations between 
companies and determining 
the extent to which cultural 
clashes will likely occurChapter Fourteen Organizational Culture 513
acquiring company’s culture is strong and aligned with the external environment. The 
cultural assimilation strategy seldom produces cultural clashes because the acquiring 
firm’s culture is highly respected and the acquired firm’s culture is fairly easily altered.
Deculturation Assimilation is rare. Employees usually resist organizational change, 
particularly when they are asked to abide by significantly different corporate values and 
norms. Under these conditions, some acquiring companies apply a deculturation strategy 
by imposing their culture and business practices on the acquired organization. The acquir￾ing firm strips away reward systems and other artifacts that support the old culture. Peo￾ple who cannot adopt the acquiring company’s culture often lose their jobs. Deculturation 
may be necessary when the acquired firm’s culture doesn’t work, even when employees in 
the acquired company aren’t convinced of this. However, this strategy is difficult to apply 
effectively because the acquired firm’s employees resist the cultural intrusions from the 
buying firm, thereby delaying or undermining the merger process.
Integration A third strategy is to combine the cultures of the two firms into one new 
composite culture that preserves the best features of the previous ones. Integration is slow 
and potentially risky because there are many forces preserving the existing cultures. Still, 
this strategy should be considered when the companies have relatively weak cultures or 
when their cultures include several overlapping values. Integration works best when the 
cultures of both merging companies could be improved, which motivates employees to 
adopt the best cultural elements of the separate entities. This strategy also symbolizes that 
employees from both firms have meaningful values for the combined organization. “Find 
one thing in the organization that was good and use it as a cornerstone for a new culture,” 
advises a respected executive who led several mergers and acquisitions. “People don’t 
want to work for an organization for years and then be told it’s rubbish.”50
Separation A separation strategy occurs when the merging companies agree to re￾main distinct entities with minimal exchange of culture or organizational practices. This 
strategy is most appropriate when the two organizations are in unrelated businesses, be￾cause the most appropriate cultural values tend to differ by industry. Separation is also 
the preferred approach for the corporate cultures of diversified conglomerates. The cul￾tural separation strategy is rare, however. Executives in acquiring firms usually have diffi￾culty keeping their hands off the acquired firm. According to one estimate, only 15 percent 
of mergers leave the acquired company as a stand-alone unit.51
MERGER STRATEGY DESCRIPTION WORKS BEST WHEN  . . .
Assimilation Acquired company embraces acquiring 
firm’s culture.
Acquired firm has a weak culture and acquiring firm’s culture 
is strong and successful.
Deculturation Acquiring firm imposes its culture on unwilling 
acquired firm.
Rarely works—may be necessary only when acquired firm’s 
culture is dysfunctional but its employees aren’t yet aware of 
the problems.
Integration Merging companies combine the two or more 
cultures into a new composite culture.
Existing cultures at both firms are relatively weak or have 
overlapping values and can be improved. 
Separation Merging companies remain distinct entities with 
minimal exchange of culture or organizational 
practices.
Firms operate successfully in different businesses requiring 
different cultures.
Sources: Based on ideas in A.R. Malekzadeh and A. Nahavandi, “Making Mergers Work by Managing Cultures,” Journal of Business Strategy 11 (May/June 1990): 
55–57; K.W. Smith, “A Brand-New Culture for the Merged Firm,” Mergers and Acquisitions 35 (June 2000): 45–50.
EXHIBIT 14.5 Strategies for Merging Different Organizational Cultures514 Part Four Organizational Processes
Changing and Strengthening Organizational Culture
Is it possible to change an organization’s culture? Yes, but doing so isn’t easy, the change 
rarely occurs quickly, and often the culture ends up changing (or replacing) corporate lead￾ers. A few experts argue that an organization’s culture “cannot be managed,” so attempting 
to change the company’s values, norms, and assumptions is a waste of time.52 This may be 
an extreme view, but experts generally agree that changing an organization’s culture is a 
monumental challenge. At the same time, the external environment changes over time, so 
organizations eventually need to shift some aspects of their culture to maintain alignment 
with the emerging environment. “A lot of people still think about culture as if it’s static,” 
observes Tara Ryan, an executive at Monzo, a fintech start-up in London. “But if you try to 
maintain your culture, at all costs, and you don’t allow people to come and drive your cul￾ture forward, then you’re not maximizing the potential of your business.”53
This section looks at five strategies that have had some success at altering and strength￾ening corporate cultures. These strategies, illustrated in Exhibit 14.6, are not exhaustive, 
but each seems to work well in most circumstances.
MODEL DESIRED CULTURE THROUGH THE ACTIONS 
OF FOUNDERS AND LEADERS
Whether deliberately or haphazardly, the company’s founder usually forms an organiza￾tion’s culture.54 The founder’s personality, values, habits, and critical events all play a role 
in establishing the firm’s core values, norms, and assumptions. The founder is often an 
inspiring visionary who provides a compelling role model for others to follow. In later 
years, organizational culture is reinforced through stories and legends about the founder 
that symbolize the core values. “All companies, especially entrepreneurial companies, 
take the shape of the owner,” says Bruce Poon Tip, founder and “captain” of adventure 
travel company G Adventures. For example, he says “we have a culture of winning and a 
culture of excellence that is driven by me.”55
Although founders usually establish an organization’s culture, subsequent leaders need to 
actively guide, reinforce, and sometimes alter that culture.56 This is evident at Uber 
LO 14-5
Model desired
culture through 
the actions of
founders and
leaders
Use attraction,
selection, and
socialization for
culture “fit”
Support
workforce
stability and
communication
Introduce
culturally consistent
rewards/recognition
Align artifacts
with the 
desired culture
Changing and
Strengthening
Organizational
Culture
EXHIBIT 14.6
Strategies for Changing and 
Strengthening Organizational 
CultureChapter Fourteen Organizational Culture 515
Technologies, the ride-hailing and mobility as 
a service company. Until recently, Uber’s cul￾ture was strongly influenced by its cofounder 
Travis Kalanick and possibly a few others who 
led Uber during its early years. When Dara 
Khosrowshahi took over the top leadership 
role, one of his main objectives was to change 
the dysfunctional elements of Uber’s culture, 
which observers say he is accomplishing.57
The process of leading cultural change is 
associated with both transformational lead￾ership and authentic leadership (see Chap￾ter 12). In each of those models, leaders 
base their words and actions on personal 
values, and those values potentially become 
a reflection of the organization’s values. For 
instance, one study found that the preferred 
conflict-handling style of leaders influences 
the work unit’s or organization’s cultural ex￾pectations on how employees address con￾flict situations. Another study reported that 
work units or companies with strong servant 
leadership were more likely to have a culture 
that valued providing service to others.58
ALIGN ARTIFACTS WITH THE DESIRED CULTURE
Artifacts represent more than just the visible indicators of a company’s culture. They are 
also anchors that keep the culture in place or shift the culture to a new set of values, 
norms, and assumptions.59 Workplace layout, reporting structures, office rituals, and infor￾mation systems are some of the various organizational systems and structures. And as we 
discuss in the next chapter, systems and structures are powerful mechanisms for organiza￾tional change because they stabilize and reinforce the desired state of affairs. Corporate 
cultures can also be strengthened through the artifacts of stories and behaviors. Accord￾ing to Max De Pree, founder of furniture manufacturer Herman Miller Inc., every organi￾zation needs “tribal storytellers” to keep the organization’s history and culture alive.60
Leaders play a role by creating memorable events that symbolize the cultural values they 
want to develop or maintain.
INTRODUCE CULTURALLY CONSISTENT REWARDS 
AND RECOGNITION
Reward systems and informal recognition practices are artifacts, but they deserve separate 
discussion because of their powerful effect on strengthening or reshaping an organiza￾tion’s culture.61 Uber created a new reward system to help replace its “toxic” culture with 
one that is more compatible with societal expectations. The transportation network com￾pany previously had an internally competitive (rank-and-yank) merit system and allegedly 
biased performance review process tied to its original list of dysfunctional values. Uber’s 
new reward system asks employees to document specific performance goals as well as one 
“citizenship goal” (e.g., helping coworkers, volunteering outside the company). This re￾ward system encourages cooperation, community involvement, and individual develop￾ment without competing against coworkers. “We’re shifting the culture very significantly 
through this process,” says the Uber human resources executive who championed the new 
reward system.62
Microsoft Corporation’s transformation shows that changing an organization’s culture is both 
possible and necessary. For many years, the technology firm suffered from a culture of 
acrimonious internal competition, office politics, and aloofness to innovation with external 
partners. Experts believed the company was in a slow death spiral. After Satya Nadella became 
CEO a few years ago, he significantly shifted Microsoft’s culture to one that values team-oriented 
cooperation, continuous learning, and far-reaching innovation. The company’s recent success 
has been breathtaking. “I believe that culture is not static,” says Nadella, adding that guiding the 
company’s culture is a critical part of his job as a leader. “There is something only a CEO uniquely 
can do, which is set that tone, which can then capture the soul of the collective. And it’s culture.”j
Bryan Thomas/Getty Images516 Part Four Organizational Processes
SUPPORT WORKFORCE STABILITY AND COMMUNICATION
An organization’s culture is embedded in the minds of its employees. Organizational sto￾ries are rarely written down; rituals and ceremonies do not usually exist in procedure 
manuals; organizational language and metaphors are not found in corporate dictionaries. 
Thus, a strong culture depends on a stable workforce. Workforce stability is important 
because it takes time for employees to fully understand the organization’s culture and how 
to enact it in their daily work lives. The organization’s culture can literally disintegrate 
during periods of high turnover and precipitous downsizing because the corporate mem￾ory leaves with the departing employees. 
A strong organizational culture also depends on communication of that culture. One 
practice is for the executive team through to front line staff to have ongoing discussions 
about the company’s values and norms, and how they are manifested in decisions and 
behavior. Redstone Federal Credit Union ensures that these conversations occur at the lo￾cal level through the assistance of two “cultural ambassadors” at each branch and division 
of the Huntsville, Alabama financial institution. The ambassadors discuss the company’s 
values with staff as part of their regular huddles.63 A second way is to communicate cor￾porate culture through casual conversations, so organizations with strong cultures create 
opportunities for employees to regularly interact with one another. These activities de￾velop shared language, stories, and other artifacts.
USE ATTRACTION, SELECTION, AND SOCIALIZATION 
FOR CULTURE FIT
A powerful way to strengthen and possibly change an organization’s culture is by recruit￾ing, selecting, and retaining applicants whose values are congruent with the organiza￾tion’s culture. This process is explained by attraction–selection–attrition (ASA) theory.64
ASA theory states that organizations have a natural tendency to attract, select, and retain 
people with values and personality characteristics that are consistent with the organiza￾tion’s character. These activities increase the strength of the organization’s culture, but 
they also produce a more homogeneous organization in other ways.
• Attraction. Job applicants engage in self-selection by avoiding prospective employers 
whose values seem incompatible with their own values.65 Some applicants actively 
search for firms with compatible values; others decide where to apply or what of￾fers to accept without being aware of this values assessment. They look for subtle 
artifacts during interviews and through public information that communicate the 
company’s culture. Some organizations encourage this self-selection by actively 
describing their cultures. For example, one recent survey reported that 77 percent 
of 5,113 working adults surveyed in the United States, the United Kingdom, France, 
and Germany say they consider a company’s culture before applying there.66
• Selection. How well the person “fits in” with the company’s culture is often a factor 
in deciding which job applicants to hire. For instance, 90 percent of 6,700 American 
and Canadian hiring managers recently surveyed say a job candidate’s fit with the 
company’s culture is equal to or more important than their skills and experience.67
IKEA is a values-driven organization, so it determines how well applicants’ personal 
values are compatible with the global retailer’s corporate values as well as how well 
those applicants are aware of IKEA’s values. “Be clear of your personal values and 
connect those with your company values,” advises an IKEA human resource manager.68
• Attrition. People seek companies that are reasonably congruent with their personal 
values. They also leave workplaces that are too stressful because the culture 
clashes with their social identity and produces internal role conflict. Even if em￾ployees aren’t forced out, many quit when they experience sufficiently high values 
incongruence.69 Some companies encourage the attrition process by paying new 
hires to “fire the company.” Trainual, G Adventures, Zappos, Riot Games, and a 
attraction–selection–attrition 
(ASA) theory
a theory stating that 
organizations have a natural 
tendency to attract, select, and 
retain people with values and 
personality characteristics 
consistent with the 
organization’s character, 
resulting in a more 
homogeneous organization 
and a stronger cultureChapter Fourteen Organizational Culture 517
few other firms have at various times paid newcomers to quit within the first few 
weeks of employment if the newcomers conclude that they don’t have a good fit 
with the company and its culture.
To varying degrees, organizations actively manage the ASA process for “culture fit.” 
They deliberately advertise their culture (espoused values, if not their enacted values) to 
attract like-minded applicants. They use various selection criteria to choose applicants 
whose values are closely aligned with the company’s culture. And some companies weed 
out current employees whose behavior seems incompatible with the firm’s core values.
However, an increasing number of executives express discomfort with the notion of 
“culture fit,” preferring instead to use the phrase “culture add.” What is unusual is that 
companies that prefer to use the phrase “culture add” still say they attract and hire appli￾cants whose personal values are similar to—rather than opposed to—the company’s values. 
Person-culture fit is well-defined in seminal research as “congruency between an individu￾al’s values and those of an organization.” In other words, advocates for “culture add” are, 
in fact, still hiring for “culture fit.”
So, why do these leaders prefer the phrase “culture add”? One reason is that they 
equate “culture fit” with selecting applicants who look and act similar to current employ￾ees. However, the “mirror” approach to employment selection is a poor test of values 
congruence (hiring for culture fit) because it screens out people with different back￾grounds, even though their personal values are compatible with the company’s culture. 
This eventually creates a demographically homogeneous organization, which reveals 
Hiring for Culture Fit or for 
Culture Add?k
A strong culture potentially supports the company’s 
success, and culture strength depends to some extent 
on attracting and selecting people who agree with 
the company’s values. Yet, organizational leaders are 
increasingly uncomfortable with the idea that they hire 
for “culture fit.” 
“To keep our culture inclusive, innovative, and thriving, 
we don’t hire for culture fit,” declares Melonie D. Parker, 
chief diversity officer at Google. “We hire through the lens 
of ‘culture add.’ We’re asking ourselves ‘What perspec￾tives or experiences are missing from our teams?’ In other 
words, what can a candidate add to the organization?” 
Tammy Perkins, chief people officer at PMI Worldwide, 
agrees. “When you hire for culture add versus culture fit, 
you assert that what binds your team is their quality and 
values. Team members don’t match each other; they 
complement each other.” She further explains: “We get to 
shape our culture and pursue the enhancements it needs 
by finding candidates who contribute what it’s missing.”
Lyndsey Hannigan also prefers to “reframe the idea of 
culture fit as culture add.” The vice president of people at 
Clio, which develops cloud-based software for law firms, 
observes: “You absolutely need people who align around 
your mission and values. But you also need to look for 
unique and different ways candidates’ competencies can 
add to your culture, and bring new ways to handle 
problems.”
Notice that these advocates of “culture add” aren’t ac￾tually rejecting the practice of hiring for “culture fit.” In 
their own words, they attract and select applicants who 
align with the company’s values, who add to the organiza￾tion, and who can help shape the culture. Instead, these 
executives are raising two real concerns about associated 
topics. First, they oppose hiring for culture fit using dis￾criminatory recruitment and selection methods, specifi￾cally the “mirror” approach of hiring people who look and 
act similar to current employees. Second, they don’t want 
to create the problems that result from a very strong cul￾ture, including lack of debate, creativity, and adaptability. 
In other words, these leaders want to avoid creating a 
corporate cult that smothers its subcultures.
global connections 14.3
Lev Dolgachov/Alamy Stock Photo518 Part Four Organizational Processes
conscious or systemic adverse impact discrimination in the hiring process. Hiring for 
culture fit requires a careful, valid assessment of an applicant’s personal values. In fact, 
given the challenge of assessing personal values in job applicants, companies might focus 
their attention on screening out applicants with significantly incompatible values rather 
than try to select applicants with the most compatible values.
The second concern with “culture fit” identified by these executives is that hiring peo￾ple with identical values stifles constructive debate, creativity, and adaptability. “If you 
keep hiring just mirrors of yourself because it’s a good cultural fit, that doesn’t help you 
advance and push boundaries and think outside the box,” observes Szen Chew, director, 
global talent acquisition at Ciena in Singapore.70 These executives are understandably 
concerned that the ASA process will eventually lead to such a strong culture that it be￾comes a corporate cult. As we discussed earlier, corporate cults suffocate subcultures, 
which undermines organizational effectiveness. Most subcultures bring diverse perspec￾tives and encourage constructive conflict with the dominant culture, which produces 
more ethical and creative decisions.
Organizational Socialization
Organizational socialization is the process by which individuals learn the values, expected 
behaviors, and social knowledge necessary to assume their roles in the organization.71 It 
is a valuable set of practices to help companies change and strengthen their organiza￾tional culture. Equally important, it helps newcomers adjust to co-workers, work proce￾dures, and other corporate realities. Research indicates that when evidence-based 
organizational socialization practices are applied, new hires tend to perform better, have 
higher job satisfaction, and remain longer with the organization.72
Some writers claim that organizational socialization can change employee values to 
become more aligned with the company’s culture. However, personal values are fairly 
stable beyond early adulthood and therefore are not so easily altered by short-term training 
and related socialization events. Instead, effective organizational socialization offers new￾comers a clearer understanding about the company’s values which, in turn, gives them 
guidelines to more accurately engage in values-consistent behaviors on the job.73 Better 
awareness of the company’s culture also motivates new hires to reject the job offer or 
more quickly leave if their personal values are incompatible with the organization’s values, 
norms, and assumptions.
LEARNING AND ADJUSTMENT PROCESS
Organizational socialization is a process of both learning and adjustment. It is a learning 
process because newcomers try to make sense of the company’s physical workplace, so￾cial dynamics, and strategic and cultural environment. They learn about the organiza￾tion’s performance expectations, power dynamics, corporate culture, company history, 
and jargon. They also need to form successful and satisfying relationships with other 
people from whom they can learn the ropes.74 In other words, effective socialization sup￾ports newcomers’ organizational comprehension. It accelerates development of an accurate 
cognitive map of the physical, social, strategic, and cultural dynamics of the organization. 
Ideally, this learning should be distributed over time to minimize information overload.
Organizational socialization is also an adjustment process because individuals need to 
adapt to their new work environment. They adopt new team norms, practice new behav￾iors, and develop new work roles that alter their self-concept.75 The adjustment process is 
fairly rapid for many people, usually occurring within a few months. However, newcomers 
with diverse work experience seem to adjust better than those with limited previous expe￾rience, possibly because they have a larger toolkit of knowledge and skills to make the 
adjustment possible.76
LO 14-6
organizational socialization
the process by which 
individuals learn the values, 
expected behaviors, and 
social knowledge necessary 
to assume their roles in the 
organizationChapter Fourteen Organizational Culture 519
PSYCHOLOGICAL CONTRACTS
The psychological contract refers to the individual’s be￾liefs about the terms and conditions of a reciprocal ex￾change agreement between that person and another 
party (the employer in most work situations). The psy￾chological contract is a perception formed during recruit￾ment and throughout the organizational socialization 
process about what the employee is entitled to receive 
and is obliged to offer the employer in return.77
Job applicants form perceptions of what the company 
will offer them by way of career and learning opportunities, 
job resources, pay and benefits, quality of management, job 
security, and so forth. They also form perceptions about 
what the company expects from them, such as hours of 
work, continuous skill development, and demonstrated 
loyalty. The psychological contract continues to develop 
and evolve after job applicants become employees, but 
they are also continuously assessing the employer’s ful￾fillment of that exchange relationship.
Types of Psychological Contracts Psychologi￾cal contracts cross the spectrum from transactional to 
relational.78 Transactional contracts are primarily short￾term economic exchanges. Responsibilities are well de￾fined around a fairly narrow set of obligations that do 
not change over the life of the contract. People hired in 
temporary positions and as consultants tend to have 
more transactional contracts. To some extent, new 
employees also form transactional contracts until they 
develop a sense of continuity with the organization.79
Relational contracts, on the other hand, are rather like marriages; they are long-term 
attachments that encompass a broad array of subjective mutual obligations. Employees 
with a relational psychological contract are more willing to contribute their time and ef￾fort without expecting the organization to pay back this debt in the short term. Relational 
contracts are also dynamic, meaning that the parties anticipate that the contract will 
change over time and that mutual obligations are not necessarily balanced in the short 
run. Not surprisingly, organizational citizenship behaviors are more likely to prevail under 
relational than transactional psychological contracts. Permanent employees are more 
likely to believe they have a relational contract.
STAGES OF ORGANIZATIONAL SOCIALIZATION
Organizational socialization is a continuous process, beginning before you submit a job 
application and continuing throughout your career within the company. However, it is 
most intense when you move across organizational boundaries, such as when first joining 
a company or getting transferred to an international assignment. These transitions can be 
viewed as a process with three stages. Our focus here is on the socialization of new em￾ployees, so the three stages are called preemployment socialization, encounter, and role 
management (see Exhibit 14.7). These stages parallel the individual’s transition from out￾sider to newcomer and then to insider.80
Stage 1: Preemployment Socialization Think back to the months and weeks 
before you began working in a new job (or attending a new school). You actively searched 
for information about the company, formed expectations about working there, and felt 
Steve Wu assumed that his new job as an investment analyst would involve long 
hours working on prestigious fast-paced deals. The recent UCLA graduate 
experienced the long hours, but much of the work was drudgery. The reality 
shock and psychological contract violation motivated Wu to quit for a mobile￾gaming start-up just one month before his first year, forfeiting a five-figure bonus. 
Chris Martinez also expected long hours at the private equity firm that hired him, 
but admits the work involved “repetitive, simple work” on spreadsheets, little of 
which was ever seen by corporate clients. “It’s almost expected that an analyst, 
especially in their first year, is just going to be miserable,” says Martinez, who has 
since quit. Wu and Martinez aren’t alone feeling that their psychological contracts 
had been violated. One study found that new hires at a dozen investment banks 
stayed an average of only 17 months, down from 26 months a decade earlier and 
30 months two decades ago.l
Tetra Images/Getty Images
psychological contract
the individual’s beliefs about 
the terms and conditions of a 
reciprocal exchange 
agreement between that 
person and another party 
(typically an employer)520 Part Four Organizational Processes
some anticipation about fitting into that setting. The preemployment socialization stage 
encompasses all the learning and adjustment that occurs before the first day of work. In 
fact, a large part of the socialization adjustment process occurs during this stage.81
The main challenge with preemployment socialization is that outsiders rely on indirect 
information about what it is like to work in the organization. This information is often 
distorted by inherent conflicts during the mating dance between employer and applicant. 
Here are the four main conflicts (not in any particular order) that result in distorted infor￾mation exchange during preemployment socialization:82
• Conflict 1: The employer’s motivation to attract many high-quality job applicants 
conflicts with the applicant’s need to receive complete and accurate information 
for choosing the best job offer. Many firms describe only positive aspects of the 
job and company, causing applicants to accept job offers based on misleading 
expectations about working at that organization.
• Conflict 2: The job applicant’s motivation to attract job offers conflicts with the 
employer’s need to receive complete and accurate information for choosing the 
best job applicants. Applicants engage in impression management when seeking 
employment, motivating them to hide negative information, act out of character, 
and occasionally embellish information about their past accomplishments. Due to 
this distorted information, the employer chooses applicants who are less qualified 
or have a poorer cultural fit with the organization.
• Conflict 3: Employers are motivated to attract many high-quality job applicants, 
which conflicts with their need to receive complete and accurate information for 
choosing the best job applicants. Employers are sometimes reluctant to ask some 
types of questions to applicants or they avoid using potentially valuable selection 
methods because those information-gathering activities might scare off the best 
job candidates. Without the additional information about applicants, the employer 
forms inaccurate expectations about applicants and hires people who might not be 
sufficiently qualified or compatible with the organization’s culture.
• Conflict 4: Job applicants are motivated to attract job offers, which conflicts with 
their need to receive complete and accurate information for choosing the best job 
offer. Applicants avoid asking important questions about the company because 
they want to convey a favorable image to their prospective employer. For instance, 
applicants usually don’t like to ask about starting salaries and promotion opportu￾nities because it makes them seem greedy or narrowly focused on the transactional 
aspects of employment. Yet, unless the employer provides this information, appli￾cants might fill in the missing details with false assumptions that produce inaccu￾rate job expectations.
EXHIBIT 14.7 Stages of Organizational Socialization
Preemployment
Socialization
(Outsider)
• Learn about the
 organization and
 job
• Form employment
 relationship
 expectations
Encounter
(Newcomer)
• Test expectations
 against perceived
 realities
Role
Management
(Insider)
• Strengthen work
 relationships
• Practice new
 role behaviors
• Resolve
 work–nonwork
 conflicts
Socialization
Outcomes
• Higher motivation
• Higher loyalty
• Higher satisfaction
• Lower stress
• Lower turnoverChapter Fourteen Organizational Culture 521
Stage 2: Encounter The first day on the job typically marks the beginning of the 
encounter stage of organizational socialization. This is the stage in which newcomers test 
how well their preemployment expectations fit reality. Many companies fail that test, 
resulting in reality shock—the stress that results when employees perceive discrepancies 
between their preemployment expectations and on-the-job reality.83 Reality shock doesn’t 
necessarily occur on the first day; it might develop over several weeks or even months as 
newcomers form a better understanding of their new work environment.
Reality shock is common in many organizations.84 Newcomers sometimes face unmet 
expectations whereby the employer doesn’t deliver on its promises, such as failing to provide 
challenging projects or the resources to get the work done. However, new hires also experi￾ence reality shock due to unrealistic expectations, which are distorted work expectations 
formed from perceptual biases and imperfect preemployment information. Whether due to 
unmet or unrealistic expectations, reality shock impedes the learning and adjustment pro￾cess because the newcomer’s energy is directed toward managing the resulting stress.85
Stage 3: Role Management Role management, the third stage of organizational 
socialization, really begins during preemployment socialization, but it is most active as 
employees make the transition from newcomers to insiders. They strengthen relationships 
with coworkers and supervisors, practice new role behaviors, and adopt attitudes and values 
consistent with their new positions and the organization. Role management also involves 
resolving the conflicts between work and nonwork activities, including resolving discrepan￾cies between their personal values and those emphasized by the organizational culture.
IMPROVING THE SOCIALIZATION PROCESS
Companies have a tendency to exaggerate positive features of the job and neglect to men￾tion the undesirable elements. Their motivation is to attract as many job applicants as 
possible, which they assume will improve the selection choices. Unfortunately, this fly￾paper approach often ends badly. Those hired soon discover that the actual workplace is not 
as favorable as the employer’s marketing hype (i.e., unmet expectations), resulting in real￾ity shock and a broken psychological contract. In contrast, a realistic job preview (RJP)
offers a balance of positive and negative information about the job and work context.86
This balanced description of the company and work helps job applicants decide for 
themselves whether their skills, needs, and values are compatible with the job and 
organization.
For example, job applicants get a realistic job preview at Semify (formerly called Hub￾Shout) by hearing about both the good and the not-so-good aspects of working at the 
search engine marketing firm in Rochester, NY. This balanced view of the company 
comes from a team—affectionately called the “doom squad”—among the 30 Semify em￾ployees. “We insist that no supervisors or managers be there. We insist they be honest,” 
says Semify CEO Adam Stetzer. Job applicants apparently appreciate the candid informa￾tion from the doom squad’s realistic job preview. Stetzer points out that the company also 
benefits. “We’re getting better candidates, better fits.”87
RJPs scare away some applicants, but they also tend to reduce turnover and increase 
job performance.88 This occurs because RJPs help applicants develop more accurate pre￾employment expectations, which, in turn, minimize real￾ity shock. RJPs represent a type of vaccination by 
preparing employees for the more challenging and trou￾blesome aspects of the work context. There is also some 
evidence that RJPs increase affective organizational com￾mitment. One explanation is that companies providing 
candid information are easier to trust. Another explana￾tion is that RJPs show respect for the psychological con￾tract and concern for employee welfare.89
reality shock
the stress that results when 
employees perceive 
discrepancies between their 
preemployment expectations 
and on-the-job reality
realistic job preview (RJP)
a method of improving 
organizational socialization in 
which job applicants are given 
a balance of positive and 
negative information about the 
job and work context522 Part Four Organizational Processes
Socialization Agents If you ask new employees what provided the greatest assis￾tance adjusting to their jobs, they will probably credit helpful coworkers, bosses, or maybe 
even friends who work elsewhere in the organization. The fact is, socialization agents play 
a central role in the socialization process.90 Supervisors tend to provide technical infor￾mation, performance feedback, and information about job duties. They also improve the 
socialization process by giving newcomers reasonably challenging first assignments, buff￾ering them from excessive demands, helping them form social ties with coworkers, and 
generating positive emotions around their new work experience.91
Coworkers are important socialization agents because they are easily accessible, can 
answer questions when problems arise, and serve as role models for appropriate behavior. 
New employees tend to receive this information and support when coworkers welcome 
them into the work team. Coworkers also aid the socialization process by being flexible and 
tolerant in their interactions with new hires. Companies help newcomers strengthen social 
bonds through immediate involvement with a welcoming team of current employees. It also 
occurs through various social interaction events, particularly where current staff members 
help newcomers get acquainted with people elsewhere in the organization. 
Many firms have developed a buddy system that encourages current employees to as￾sist new hires in the socialization process. “Our buddy system, which partners a new 
joiner with a long standing member of the team, is designed to build strong, supportive 
relationships between colleagues,” says Emma Stewart, head of human resources at VG, a 
fiduciary and administrative services company on the island of Jersey. Stewart notes that 
buddy activities not only “provide access to someone who is familiar with our culture, at￾titude, and expectations of VG, but it also gives our existing team members the opportu￾nity to develop their own soft and mentoring skills.”92
Effective Socialization through 
Personalized Onboarding 
at Circles.Lifem
Circles.Life has developed an award-winning onboarding 
process that gets its new hires up to speed and comfort￾ably connected with their coworkers. The company previ￾ously relied on automated onboarding software, but it 
was too impersonal and dehumanizing. So, even while 
rapidly expanding across several countries, the Singapore￾based mobile virtual network operator created a more 
customized and personalized process.
“We acknowledged that there is no one-size-fits-all 
when it comes to onboarding, therefore we wanted to 
keep it different and personalized for each new hire,” says 
Jack Ang, Circles.Life head of people experience.
A week before their first day, new employees at Circles.
Life receive a personalized welcome email that includes 
links to information about the company. They are also asked 
to say more about themselves. Recruits receive additional 
pre-onboarding reminders as the first day approaches. 
On day one, new hires are welcomed by Circles.Life’s 
people and culture team in person or online and receive a 
Circles welcome kit (called a “swag”) symbolizing that the 
individual really has been hired and is valued.
“The onboarding journey does not end on day one,” 
Ang continues. “To ensure that new hires are fully 
integrated into the Circles.Life culture, we introduced 
bite-sized modules around rewards, that help with their 
long-term engagement.” This learning process is spread 
over the first 90 days of employment.
Ang says more personalized onboarding has improved 
employee socialization. “As a direct impact of utilizing a 
more personalized approach, we were able to signifi￾cantly reduce the amount of time spent on set up on day 
one, resulting in a higher level of engagement amongst 
new Circles.Lifers.”
global connections 14.4
Chaay_Tee/Shutterstock523
LO 14-1 Describe the elements of organizational culture 
and discuss the importance of organizational 
subcultures.
Organizational culture consists of the values, norms, and as￾sumptions shared within an organization. Values are stable, 
evaluative beliefs that guide our preferences for outcomes or 
courses of action in a variety of situations. Organizational cul￾ture norms are informal rules and shared expectations of em￾ployee behavior. Shared assumptions are nonconscious, 
taken-for-granted perceptions or beliefs that have worked so 
well in the past that they are considered the correct way to 
think and act toward problems and opportunities.
Organizations differ in their cultural content, that is, the rela￾tive ordering of values. There are several classifications of orga￾nizational culture, but they tend to oversimplify the wide variety 
of cultures and completely ignore the underlying assumptions of 
culture. Organizations have subcultures as well as the dominant 
culture. Subcultures maintain the organization’s standards of 
performance and ethical behavior. They are also the source 
of emerging values that replace misaligned core values.
LO 14-2 Describe four categories of artifacts through which 
corporate culture is deciphered.
Artifacts are the observable symbols and signs of an organiza￾tion’s culture. Four broad categories of artifacts include organi￾zational stories and legends, rituals and ceremonies, language, 
and physical structures and symbols. Understanding an organi￾zation’s culture requires the assessment of many artifacts be￾cause they are subtle and often ambiguous.
LO 14-3 Discuss the importance of organizational culture 
and the conditions under which organizational cul￾ture strength improves organizational performance.
Organizational culture has three main functions: as a form of 
social control, as the “social glue” that bonds people together, 
and as a way to help employees make sense of the workplace. 
Companies with strong cultures generally perform better than 
those with weak cultures, but only when the cultural content is 
appropriate for the organization’s environment. Also, the cul￾ture should not be so strong that it drives out dissenting values, 
which may form emerging values for the future. Organizations 
should have adaptive cultures in which employees support 
ongoing change in the organization and their own roles.
LO 14-4 Compare and contrast five strategies for merging 
organizational cultures.
Organizational culture clashes are common in mergers and ac￾quisitions. This problem can be minimized by performing a 
bicultural audit to diagnose the compatibility of the organiza￾tional cultures. The four main strategies for merging different 
corporate cultures are assimilation, deculturation, integration, 
and separation.
LO 14-5 Describe five strategies for changing and strength￾ening an organization’s culture, including the appli￾cation of attraction–selection–attrition theory.
An organization’s culture begins with its founders and leaders, 
because they use personal values to transform the organiza￾tion. The founder’s activities are later retold as organizational 
stories. Companies also introduce artifacts as mechanisms to 
maintain or change the culture. A related strategy is to intro￾duce rewards and recognition practices that are consistent 
with the desired cultural values. A fourth method to change 
and strengthen an organization’s culture is to support work￾force stability and communication. Stability is necessary 
because culture exists in employees. Communication activities 
improve sharing of the culture. Finally, companies strengthen 
and change their culture by attracting and selecting applicants 
with personal values that are compatible with the company’s 
culture, by encouraging those with misaligned values to leave 
the company, and by engaging in organizational socialization—
the process by which individuals learn the values, expected 
behaviors, and social knowledge necessary to assume their 
roles in the organization.
LO 14-6 Describe the organizational socialization process 
and identify strategies to improve that process.
Organizational socialization is the process by which individu￾als learn the values, expected behaviors, and social knowledge 
necessary to assume their roles in the organization. It is a pro￾cess of both learning and adjustment. During this process, job 
applicants and newcomers develop and test their psychological 
contract—personal beliefs about the terms and conditions of a 
reciprocal exchange agreement between that person and an￾other party (the employer).
Employees typically pass through three socialization 
stages: preemployment, encounter, and role management. To 
manage the socialization process, organizations should intro￾duce realistic job previews (RJPs) and recognize the value of 
socialization agents in the process. These RJPs give job ap￾plicants a realistic balance of positive and negative informa￾tion about the job and work context. Socialization agents 
provide information and social support during the socializa￾tion process.
chapter summary
adaptive culture, p. 509
artifacts, p. 504
attraction–selection–attrition (ASA) 
theory, p. 516
bicultural audit, p. 512
ceremonies, p. 506
learning orientation, p. 509
organizational culture, p. 500
organizational socialization, p. 518
psychological contract, p. 519
realistic job preview (RJP), p. 521
reality shock, p. 521
rituals, p. 505
key terms524
1. Superb Consultants has submitted a proposal to analyze 
your organization’s culture. The proposal states that Su￾perb has developed a revolutionary new survey to tap the 
company’s true culture. The survey takes just 10 minutes 
to complete, and the consultants say results can be based 
on a small sample of employees. Discuss the merits and 
limitations of this proposal.
2. All members of the executive team at Claybuild, a national 
manufacturer of bricks and related building materials, 
strongly believe that quality control and efficiency are the 
two cornerstones of the company’s future success. Every 
Claybuild executive meeting begins by discussing ways to 
improve product quality and operate more efficiently 
in the manufacturing process, distribution system, and 
administrative processes. The company’s website proudly 
describes its dedication to quality and efficiency. The 
CEO has given speeches to several retail client events on 
Claybuild’s quality–efficiency culture. However, an indus￾try expert suggests that quality and efficiency represent 
Claybuild’s espoused culture, but not so much its enacted 
culture. What does the industry expert mean by this, and 
what evidence might suggest that the industry expert’s 
opinion is correct?
3. The CEO of a manufacturing firm wants everyone to 
support the organization’s dominant culture of lean effi￾ciency and hard work. The CEO has introduced a new 
reward system to reinforce this culture and personally 
interviews all professional and managerial applicants to 
ensure that they bring similar values to the organization. 
Some employees who criticized these values had their ca￾reers sidelined until they left. Two midlevel managers were 
fired for supporting contrary values, such as work–life in￾tegration. Based on your knowledge of organizational sub￾cultures, what potential problems is the CEO creating?
4. “Organizations are more likely to succeed when they 
have an adaptive culture.” What can an organization do 
to foster an adaptive culture?
5. Senior officers of a city government have assigned you 
the project of identifying ways to reinforce a new culture 
of teamwork and collaboration. The senior executives 
clearly support these values, but they want everyone in 
the organization to embrace them. Identify four types of 
activities that would strengthen these cultural values.
6. Suppose you are considering joining one of three ac￾counting firms as your first full-time job in this career. 
One firm is located only within one large city but has a 
large portion of the small-business tax and audit busi￾ness in that city. The second is a national firm with 
offices across the country, including the city where you 
intend to work. The third is one of the top three global 
accounting and professional services firms, and has 
offices in the city where you intend to work. Only the 
global firm has a detailed “careers” web page that de￾scribes the job expectations, culture, and career develop￾ment opportunities. The other two firms have minimal 
information on their websites. All three firms have a 
standard interview process, including a brief tour of the 
local offices. All the firms will have booths at a career 
fair event that you will attend. As a job applicant, what 
methods and information would you seek out and apply 
to assess how well the organizational cultures at each of 
these three accounting firms are compatible with your 
personal values?
7. After three months on the job, you feel that the company 
has violated the psychological contract. The job is not as 
exciting as you originally expected, and your current boss 
is no better than the supervisor in your previous job. The 
people who interviewed you are concerned about your 
feelings, but say that they didn’t misrepresent either the 
job or the fact that some supervisors are not as good as 
others here. Explain how your perceived psychological 
contract may have been distorted during preemployment 
socialization. 
8. Socialization is most intense when people pass through 
organizational boundaries. One example is your entry 
into the college or university that you are now attending. 
What learning and adjustment occurred as you moved 
from outsider to newcomer to insider as a student here?
critical thinking questions
CASE STUDY: COMMSONE BANK
CommsOne Bank is one of Asia’s largest financial institu￾tions and is recognized as a leader in business banking. 
However, it has had difficulty gaining market share in the 
personal banking business (accounts, credit cards, invest￾ment funds) where several other companies dominate the 
market. To improve its position in the personal banking 
market, CommsOne decided to acquire TaurusBank, a 
much smaller financial institution that had aggressively de￾veloped investment funds, online banking, and digital trans￾action initiatives in the region.
Taurus was owned by a European conglomerate that 
wanted to exit the financial sector, so the company was qui￾etly put up for sale. The opportunity to acquire Taurus 
seemed like a perfect fit to CommsOne executives, who saw 
the purchase as an opportunity to finally gain a competitive 
position in the personal investment market. In particular, 
the acquisition would give CommsOne valuable talent in 
digital banking and investment fund businesses.
Negotiations between CommsOne and TaurusBank oc￾curred secretly, aside from communication with govern￾ment regulatory agencies. The acquisition took several 
months because CommsOne’s executive team spent con￾siderable time pouring over Taurus’s financial status to en￾sure the purchase was truly accretive. When CommsOne 
finally decided in favor of the acquisition, employees of 
both companies were notified only a few minutes before 
the merger was announced publicly. During the public 
statement, CommsOne’s CEO boldly proclaimed that 
TaurusBank would become a “seamless extension of 
CommsOne.” He explained that, like CommsOne, Taurus 
employees would learn the value of detailed analysis and 
cautious decision making.	 The comments by CommsOne’s CEO shocked many em￾ployees at Taurus, which was an aggressive and entrepre￾neurial competitor in online banking, digital transactions,
and personal investments. Taurus was well known for its
edgy marketing, innovative products, and tendency to in￾volve employees to generate creative ideas. The company
didn’t hesitate to hire people from other industries who
would bring different ideas to the investment and digital
banking business. CommsOne, on the other hand, almost
completely promoted its executives from within the ranks.
Every one of the senior executive team had started at
CommsOne. The company also emphasized decision making
at the top to maintain better control and consistency.
	 Frustration was apparent within a few months after the
merger. Several Taurus executives quit after repeated failure
of CommsOne’s executive team to decide quickly on critical
digital banking plans. For example, at the time of the acqui￾sition, Taurus was in the process of forming affinity alli￾ances with several companies regarding digital banking
initiatives. Yet, six months later, CommsOne’s executive
team still had not decided whether to proceed with these
partnerships.
	 The biggest concerns occurred in the investment fund
business where 20 of TaurusBank’s 60 fund managers were
lured away by competitors within the first year. Some left
for better opportunities. Six fund managers left with the
Taurus executive in charge of the investment fund business,
who joined a company that specializes in investment funds.
Several employees left Taurus after CommsOne executives
insisted that all new investment funds must be approved by
CommsOne’s executive group. Previously, Taurus had given
the investment fund division enough freedom to launch new
products without approval of the entire executive team.
	 Two years later, CommsOne’s CEO admitted that the
acquisition of TaurusBank did not gain the opportunities
that they had originally hoped. CommsOne had only
slightly more business in investment funds and digital bank￾ing than the two companies had before the merger. A
greater worry was that many talented people in those two
areas had left the firm, which was stifling future growth.
Overall, the merged company had not kept pace with other
innovative financial institutions in the market.
Discussion Questions
	 1.	 Based on your understanding of mergers and organiza￾tional culture, discuss the problems that occurred in
this case.
	 2.	 What strategies would you recommend to CommsOne’s
executives to avoid these corporate culture clashes in
future mergers and acquisitions?
© 2002, 2022 Steven L. McShane.
TEAM EXERCISE: CORPORATE CULTURE DILEMMA VIGNETTES
525
jobs. Some of these values emphasize ethical conduct with
clients, regulators, and other employees. The executive
team documented these shared values one year ago and
have regularly communicated them to employees. The ex￾ecutive team has actively tried to role model those values
so employees will embrace them. However, the executive
team now believes that staff (employees and management
below the executive level) have not significantly changed
their values toward those set out by the executive team last
year. For example, they recently discovered inappropriate
accounting practices among a group of managers as well as
instances of poor customer service by employees at head
office and in some regions. The executive team has heard
that strong cultures guide employee behavior as well as im￾prove company effectiveness. Yet the executive team can’t
seem to replicate these benefits at Goebroak Investments.
Assignment: Diagnose and evaluate this situation at
Goebroak based on organizational culture concepts. De￾scribe three different types of activities that may help this
organization to more effectively align employee behavior
with the company’s espoused values.
Weldug Corp.
The CEO of Weldug Corp., a midsize mining firm, wants
to change the organization’s culture toward one that em￾phasizes lean efficiency and safety. Weldug has become
somewhat more efficient over the past few years. Even so,
PURPOSE This exercise is designed to help you apply or￾ganizational culture knowledge by diagnosing and evaluat￾ing situations in which business leaders try to change or
strengthen the organization’s culture.
MATERIALS Teams should have a method of summariz￾ing their analysis for other teams to view. This might be
flip chart paper for face-to-face classes or a dedicated vir￾tual white board or presentation slide for each team in re￾mote classes.
INSTRUCTIONS (SMALL OR LARGE CLASS) This ex￾ercise may be completed either individually or in teams. It
is suitable for in-class and remote learning settings. It may
be appropriate in moderately large classes. When the teams
(or individuals) have completed the exercise, the results
will be discussed and compared with others in the class.
	 Team members begin by reading the two vignettes.
They then use organizational culture knowledge to answer
the assigned questions for each vignette. The class will de￾brief the exercise by having teams share their analysis of
each vignette.
Goebroak Investments
Given recent ethical problems in the banking and invest￾ment industry, the senior executive team at Goebroak In￾vestments, a multinational investment firm, has developed
a set of six values that employees should live by in their526
bureaucracy has crept into the business in subtle ways due 
to middle management practices. Safety has been an ongo￾ing concern, particularly because front-line miners seem to 
take pride in their risky work and partly because managers 
are keen to maintain their productivity bonus. Weldug 
hired a consulting firm to change employee values so they 
are more closely aligned with the CEO’s desired culture. 
The consultant recommended using its own 50-item sur￾vey, which identifies the organization’s culture from 
among six different culture types measured by the instru￾ment. This survey would be repeated every six months to 
monitor cultural change. The consultant also proposed a 
communication program that would give employees a 
clearer understanding of and commitment to these values. 
The communication initiative includes distributing an 
“our values” brochure to employees, giving them little cul￾ture statement cards they keep on their person, and having 
the CEO send emails emphasizing the importance of hav￾ing a strong culture. The consultant advised that the com￾munication program and ongoing survey feedback will 
change employee values and move Weldug’s culture signifi￾cantly closer to the CEO’s cultural expectations.
Assignment: Use organizational culture concepts to di￾agnose and evaluate the consultant’s activities and claims. 
In addition, briefly describe one activity not mentioned by 
the consultants that might change the organization’s cul￾ture as much as or more than the actions recommended by 
the consultant.
© 2022 Steven L. McShane.
TEAM EXERCISE: ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURE GIF MEMES
company names to the instructor before the day of the 
class. If in doubt, when the list is distributed, the instruc￾tor might ask for a show of hands to confirm that many or 
most students are aware of each company and have a per￾ception of its culture. At least one or two students on each 
team should be aware of each organization.
Step 3: Each team will reach consensus on a written phrase 
that best labels the dominant culture of each organization 
listed (e.g., company X has a strong competitive culture). 
Although corporate cultures have multiple values, the 
team will identify only the most prominent cultural value.
Step 4: Team members will search animated GIF sites and 
select items that they believe best depict the dominant cul￾tural value for each organization. The team will reach con￾sensus in selecting one (1) animated GIF for each 
organization listed that matches the agreed culture of that 
organization. Animated GIFs must be brief (less than 
15 seconds), without sound and, of course, be appropriate 
to display to the class. GIFs may include text captions, but 
all GIFs should be mainly animations of people, animals, 
places, or objects (not mainly words).
Step 5: The class will reconvene and teams will show their 
GIF for each company. Ideally, all teams will show their 
GIFs for the first company, then all teams show their GIFs 
for the second company, and so forth. This format de￾pends on the technology available to display the GIFs to 
the entire class.
Step 6: After all GIF memes for a specific company have 
been shown—and preferably before GIFs for the other orga￾nizations are shown—the class will compare the different 
GIF memes for that company’s culture and will discuss 
how they are useful metaphors or analogies for conveying 
that culture.
© 2022 Steven L. McShane.
PURPOSE This exercise is designed to help you under￾stand, assess, and interpret organizational culture using 
animated GIFs as humorous metaphor or analogy memes.
MATERIALS This exercise requires the following 
resources:
1. Student access to one or more free animated GIF 
websites.
2. A virtual space, digital presentation slides, or other 
place where teams can display several animated GIFs.
3. A list of companies (created by the instructor or class) 
that are known to most students.
INSTRUCTIONS (SMALL TO MEDIUM CLASS, FACE￾TO-FACE OR REMOTE) This exercise is best suited for 
teams in small to medium-sized classes. It can be conducted 
effectively with in-person classes or with remote classes. 
Organizational cultures tend to be abstract, so they are 
best described through metaphors, analogies, and other 
abstract symbols and signs. These communications often 
take the form of memes, which are ideas, behaviors, styles, 
or usages that spread from person to person within a cul￾ture. Animated GIFs are popular memes in contemporary 
society. They are typically humorous and mostly nonverbal 
forms of communication that depict meaning as meta￾phors and analogies. In this exercise, teams will select an 
animated GIF that best depicts the culture of each well￾known organization on a list.
Step 1: Students are organized into teams (typically five to 
seven people). 
Step 2: A list of organizations will be created (before class) 
and distributed. These organizations must be known to 
many or most students, who also have a perception of the 
corporate cultures of those organizations. The list might 
be created by the instructor, or students might suggest 527
TEAM EXERCISE: SOCIALIZATION DIAGNOSTICS EXERCISE
socialization process. Some experiences will reflect effec￾tive management of the socialization process. Other expe￾riences will indicate what companies have done 
ineffectively, so the team must identify practices that avoid 
or minimize those problems.
The class will debrief by having a round robin process 
in which each team describes one (1) socialization prac￾tice and briefly summarizes the student’s experience re￾garding that practice. The next team then presents one 
practice with its example. This process is repeated until 
the most significant anecdotes and their implications 
have been presented. The class will discuss common ele￾ments among experiences presented (e.g., realistic job 
previews, problems adjusting to new values, violations of 
the psychological contract) and practices companies 
should follow to make the socialization process more 
effective.
© 2022 Steven L. McShane
PURPOSE This exercise is designed to help you under￾stand the socialization strategies that organizations should 
use for new employees, and to learn about the impedi￾ments to forming an accurate psychological contract.
INSTRUCTIONS The instructor will form small teams 
(four or five students). Each student will describe one par￾ticularly memorable positive or negative experience that 
they had when entering an organization. Students without 
employment experience can describe their entry into a 
school, volunteer group, or other organization. Alternatively, 
they can describe an experience of someone they know 
(e.g., friend, another family member, etc.) For example, 
the student might describe how they were greeted during 
the first day of work, how the company kept them informed 
before the first day of work, how the company did (or 
didn’t) tell the person about negative aspects of the work 
or job context.
Based on these experiences, the team will develop a list 
of practices that companies should use to improve the 
1. T. Harbert, “Workday Is a Great Place to Work, and It 
Wants to Stay That Way,” Computerworld, June 18, 2018: 
E. Hakikat, “How Workday Maintains Employee Experi￾ence through Business Growth,” Inside HR, December 9, 
2019; R. Cross, A. Edmondson, and W. Murphy, “A Noble 
Purpose Alone Won’t Transform Your Company,” MIT 
Sloan Management Review, Winter 2020, 1–7; C. Bisiaux, 
“What It’s Like to Join Workday’s Sales Team,” LinkedIn
(blog), October 18, 2021; R. Sisco, “Now’s the Time 
for CFOs to Lead on Culture, Not Just Numbers,” 
Fortune, October 29, 2021; J. Purcell, “Workday’s Inten￾tional Culture Achieves Business Returns,” Forbes, 
December 7, 2021.
2. A. Williams, P. Dobson, and M. Walters, Changing Culture: 
New Organizational Approaches (London: Institute of 
Personnel Management, 1989); E.H. Schein, “What Is 
Culture?,” in Reframing Organizational Culture, ed. P.J. 
Frost et al. (Newbury Park, CA: Sage, 1991), 243–53. 
One of the earliest research papers discussing “organiza￾tional culture” explicitly defines the concept in terms of 
values, attitudes, and norms, which differs from “observable” 
variables (i.e. artifacts). See: N. Margulies, “Organizational 
Culture and Psychological Growth,” The Journal of 
Applied Behavioral Science 5 (1969): 491–508.
3. B.M. Meglino and E.C. Ravlin, “Individual Values in 
Organizations: Concepts, Controversies, and Research,” 
Journal of Management 24, no. 3 (1998): 351–89; S. Hitlin 
and J.A. Pilavin, “Values: Reviving a Dormant Concept,” 
Annual Review of Sociology 30 (2004): 359–93; L. Sagiv 
et al., “Personal Values in Human Life,” Nature Human 
Behaviour 1, no. 9 (2017): 630–39; S. Arieli, L. Sagiv, 
and S. Roccas, “Values at Work: The Impact of Personal 
Values in Organisations,” Applied Psychology 69, no. 2 
(2020): 230–75.
4. N.M. Ashkanasy, “The Case for Culture,” in Debating 
Organization, ed. R. Westwood and S. Clegg (Malden, 
MA: Blackwell, 2003), 300–10.
5. S.J. Hogan and L.V. Coote, “Organizational Culture, In￾novation, and Performance: A Test of Schein’s Model,” 
Journal of Business Research 67, no. 8 (2014): 1609–21.
6. E.H. Schein, Organizational Culture and Leadership, 5th ed. 
(Hoboken, N.J.: John Wiley & Sons, 2017), Chaps 1–2. 
The notion that shared assumptions are the heart of 
organizational culture is more strongly stated in the 
3rd edition (2004) of Schein’s book.
7. B. Bouw, “Ratana Stephens: ‘People Are My Strength 
and My Weakness,’” Globe & Mail, November 7, 2016; 
“Careers,” Nature’s Path website, accessed March 2022.
8. B. Kabanoff and J. Daly, “Espoused Values in 
Organisations,” Australian Journal of Management 27, 
Special issue (2002): 89–104; H. Bourne and M. Jenkins, 
“Organizational Values: A Dynamic Perspective,” 
Organization Studies 34, no. 4 (2013): 495–514. Bourne 
and Jenkins note that organizational values may also be 
attributed and aspirational.
9. K. Jonsen et al., “Evaluating Espoused Values: Does 
Articulating Values Pay Off?,” European Management 
Journal 33, no. 5 (2015): 332–40; L.W. Lee, D. Hannah, 
and I.P. McCarthy, “Do Your Employees Think Your 
Slogan Is ‘Fake News?’ A Framework for Understanding 
the Impact of Fake Company Slogans on Employees,” 
Journal of Product & Brand Management 29, no. 2 (2019): 
199–208.
endnotes528
18. J.S. Ott, The Organizational Culture Perspective (Pacific 
Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole, 1989), Chap. 2; J.S. Pederson 
and J.S. Sorensen, Organizational Cultures in Theory and 
Practice (Aldershot, UK: Gower, 1989), 27–29; M.O. 
Jones, Studying Organizational Symbolism: What, How, 
Why? (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 1996).
19. A. Furnham and B. Gunter, “Corporate Culture: Defini￾tion, Diagnosis, and Change,” International Review of 
Industrial and Organizational Psychology 8 (1993): 233–61; 
E.H. Schein, “Organizational Culture,” American Psychol￾ogist (1990): 109–19; M.G. Pratt and A. Rafaeli, “Arti￾facts and Organizations: Understanding Our ‘Object-Ive’ 
Reality,” in Artifacts and Organizations, ed. A. Rafaeli and 
M.G. Pratt (Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 
2006), 279–88.
20. T.E. Deal and A.A. Kennedy, Corporate Cultures (Read￾ing, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1982), Chap. 5; C.J. Boudens, 
“The Story of Work: A Narrative Analysis of Workplace 
Emotion,” Organization Studies 26, no. 9 (2005): 
1285–306; S. Denning, The Leader’s Guide to Storytelling
(San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2005).
21. J.C. Meyer, “Tell Me a Story: Eliciting Organizational 
Values from Narratives,” Communication Quarterly 43 
(1995): 210–24; W. Swap et al., “Using Mentoring and 
Storytelling to Transfer Knowledge in the Workplace,” 
Journal of Management Information Systems 18 (2001): 
95–114; A.L. Wilkins, “Organizational Stories as 
Symbols Which Control the Organization,” in Organiza￾tional Symbolism, ed. L.R. Pondy et al. (Greenwich, CT: 
JAI Press, 1984), 81–92; R. Zemke, “Storytelling: Back to 
a Basic,” Training 27, no. 3 (1990): 44–50.
22. T. Kelley and D. Kelley, Creative Confidence: Unleashing 
the Creative Potential within Us All (New York: Random 
House, 2013), 198.
23. J. Mossman, “Employee-Friendly Workplace Culture a Key 
to Company Success,” Denver Post, April 21, 2013; Darden 
MBA, “‘Community First, Company Second’: Javier 
Rodriguez, DaVita Kidney Care” (YouTube, November 18, 
2015); Stanford Graduate School of Business, “DaVita 
CEO Kent Thiry on Building a Signature Company 
Culture” (YouTube, November 23, 2015); D. Hoerman, 
“Inside DaVita’s Corporate Culture: ‘A Community First 
And A Company Second,’” Chief Executive, August 10, 2018.
24. G. Smith, Why I Left Goldman Sachs: A Wall Street Story
(New York: Grand Central Publishing, 2012); B. Tuttle, 
“16 Amazing Facts about the Muppets That’ll Make You 
Laugh, Cry & Sing Along,” Money, September 22, 2015; 
L. Burton, “David Solomon Getting Goldman Sachs on Track 
to a Softer Culture,” Telegraph, November 9, 2019. The 
word “muppet” is frequently mentioned in the investment 
industry to describe naive or gullible clients. See, for example, 
V. Guida, “Wells Fargo CEO Steps Down amid Rebukes 
from Regulators, Congress,” Politico, March 28, 2019.
25. A.C.T. Smith and B. Stewart, “Organizational Rituals: 
Features, Functions and Mechanisms,” International 
Journal of Management Reviews 13 (2011): 113–33.
26. “The Ultimate Chairman,” Business Times Singapore, 
September 3, 2005.
27. Churchill apparently made this statement on October 28, 
1943, in the British House of Commons, when London, 
damaged by bombings in World War II, was about to be 
rebuilt.
10. C. Ostroff, A.J. Kinicki, and R.S. Muhammad, “Organi￾zational Culture and Climate,” in Handbook of Psychology 
(2nd ed.), ed. I.B. Weiner (New York: Wiley, 2012), 643–76.
11. R. Hastings and P. McCord, Netflix Culture: Freedom and 
Responsibility (Los Gatos, CA: Netflix, August 2009); 
S. Ramachandran and J. Flint, “At Netflix, Radical Trans￾parency and Blunt Firings Unsettle the Ranks,” Wall 
Street Journal, October 25, 2018; B. Murphy Jr., “You 
Don’t Just Get Fired at Netflix,” Inc, October 27, 2018; 
E. Hakikat, “How Workday Maintains Employee Experi￾ence through Business Growth,” Inside HR, December 9, 
2019; R. Hastings and E. Meyer, No Rules Rules: Netflix 
and the Culture of Reinvention (New York: Penguin 
Random House, 2020).
12. For reviews of organizational culture survey instruments, 
see D.E. Leidner and T. Kayworth, “A Review of Culture 
in Information Systems Research: Toward a Theory of 
Information Technology Culture Conflict,” MIS 
Quarterly 30, no. 2 (2006): 357–99; S. Scott-Findlay and 
C.A. Estabrooks, “Mapping the Organizational Culture 
Research in Nursing: A Literature Review,” Journal of 
Advanced Nursing 56, no. 5 (2006): 498–513; B. Powell 
et al., “Measures of Organizational Culture, Organizational 
Climate, and Implementation Climate in Behavioral 
Health: A Systematic Review,” Implementation Research 
and Practice 2 (2021): 1–29; K.S. Hsiung et al., “Measures 
of Organizational Culture and Climate in Primary Care: 
A Systematic Review,” Journal of General Internal 
Medicine 36, no. 2 (2021): 487–99.
13. L. Guiso, P. Sapienza, and L. Zingales, “The Value of 
Corporate Culture,” Journal of Financial Economics 117, 
no. 1 (2015): 60–76.
14. J. Martin, P.J. Frost, and O.A. O’Neill, “Organizational 
Culture: Beyond Struggles for Intellectual Dominance,” 
in Handbook of Organization Studies, ed. S. Clegg et al. 
(London: Sage, 2006), 725–53; N.E. Fenton and S. Inglis, 
“A Critical Perspective on Organizational Values,” 
Nonprofit Management and Leadership 17, no. 3 (2007): 
335–47; K. Haukelid, “Theories of (Safety) Culture 
Revisited—an Anthropological Approach,” Safety 
Science 46, no. 3 (2008): 413–26.
15. G. Hofstede, “Identifying Organizational Subcultures: An 
Empirical Approach,” Journal of Management Studies 35, 
no. 1 (1990): 1–12; J. Martin and C. Siehl, “Organiza￾tional Culture and Counterculture: An Uneasy Symbiosis,” 
Organizational Dynamics (1983): 52–64; E. Carlström 
and L.-E. Olsson, “The Association between Subcultures 
and Resistance to Change—in a Swedish Hospital Clinic,” 
Journal of Health Organization and Management 28, no. 4 
(2014): 458–76.
16. H. Silver, “Does a University Have a Culture?,” Studies in 
Higher Education 28, no. 2 (2003): 157–69.
17. A. Sinclair, “Approaches to Organizational Culture and 
Ethics,” Journal of Business Ethics 12 (1993): 63–73; 
T.E. Deal and A.A. Kennedy, The New Corporate Cultures 
(Cambridge, MA: Perseus Books, 1999), Chap. 10; A. 
Boisnier and J. Chatman, “The Role of Subcultures in 
Agile Organizations,” in Leading and Managing People 
in Dynamic Organizations, ed. R. Petersen and E. Mannix 
(Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum, 2003), 87–112; C. Morrill, 
M.N. Zald, and H. Rao, “Covert Political Conflict in 
Organizations: Challenges from Below,” Annual Review 
of Sociology 29, no. 1 (2003): 391–415.529
36. M.R. Louis, “Surprise and Sensemaking: What Newcom￾ers Experience in Entering Unfamiliar Organizational 
Settings,” Administrative Science Quarterly 25 (1980): 
226–51; J.W. Barnes et al., “The Role of Culture Strength 
in Shaping Sales Force Outcomes,” Journal of Personal 
Selling & Sales Management 26, no. 3 (2006): 255–70; 
M.W. Kramer, “Sensemaking,” in The International Ency￾clopedia of Organizational Communication, ed. C.R. Scott 
and L.K. Lewis (John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2017); W.S. 
Sherman and K.J. Roberto, “Are You Talkin’ to Me?: The 
Role of Culture in Crisis Management Sensemaking,” 
Management Decision 58, no. 10 (2020): 2195–2211.
37. H. McCracken, “Satya Nadella Rewrites Microsoft’s 
Code,” Fast Company, September 18, 2017; H. Ibarra, 
A. Rattan, and A. Johnston, “Microsoft: Instilling a 
Growth Mindset,” London Business School Review 29, 
no. 3 (October 2018): 50–53.
38. C.A. O’Reilly III and J.A. Chatman, “Culture as Social 
Control: Corporations, Cults, and Commitment,” 
Research in Organizational Behavior 18 (1996): 157–200; 
B. Spector and H. Lane, “Exploring the Distinctions be￾tween a High Performance Culture and a Cult,” Strategy 
& Leadership 35, no. 3 (2007): 18–24. Organizational 
cults are closely related to high organizational identifica￾tion, which have several known dysfunctional outcomes 
for companies and individuals. See: S. Conroy et al., 
“Where There Is Light, There Is Dark: A Review of the 
Detrimental Outcomes of High Organizational Identifi￾cation,” Journal of Organizational Behavior 38, no. 2 
(2017): 184–203.
39. J.P. Kotter and J.L. Heskett, Corporate Culture and Perfor￾mance (New York: Free Press, 1992), Chap. 4; B.M. Bass 
and R.E. Riggio, Transformational Leadership, 2nd ed. 
(New York: Routledge, 2006), Chap. 7; L.M. Kotrba et al., 
“Do Consistent Corporate Cultures Have Better Business 
Performance? Exploring the Interaction Effects,” Human 
Relations 65, no. 2 (2012): 241–62; D.P. Costanza et al., 
“The Effect of Adaptive Organizational Culture on 
Long-Term Survival,” Journal of Business and Psychology 31 
(2016): 361–81.
40. T. Krisher and D.A. Durbin, “General Motors CEO 
Akerson Leads Comeback from Bankruptcy by Ruffling 
Company’s Bureaucracy,” Associated Press Newswires, 
December 17, 2011.
41. W.E. Baker and J.M. Sinkula, “The Synergistic Effect of 
Market Orientation and Learning Orientation on Organi￾zational Performance,” Journal of the Academy of Market￾ing Science 27, no. 4 (1999): 411–27; J.C. Real, J.L. 
Roldán, and A. Leal, “From Entrepreneurial Orientation 
and Learning Orientation to Business Performance: 
Analysing the Mediating Role of Organizational Learn￾ing and the Moderating Effects of Organizational Size,” 
British Journal of Management 25, no. 2 (2014): 186–208. 
42. Great Place to Work, “Working at Workday,” Great Place 
to Work®, 2020; “Harnessing the Power of Integrity at 
Workday,” Workday Blog (blog), March 15, 2022.
43. A. Ferguson and C. Vedelago, “Targets, Bonuses, Trips—
Inside the CBA Boiler Room,” Sydney Morning Herald, 
June 22, 2013; P. Williams, “How Criminal Gangs Ran Rings 
around Commonwealth Bank Culture,” The Australian, 
September 14, 2017; J. Smyth, “Commonwealth Bank 
Accused of ‘Unconscionable Conduct’ as Watchdog 
28. G. Turner and J. Myerson, New Workspace New Culture: 
Office Design as a Catalyst for Change (Aldershot, UK: 
Gower, 1998); J.C. McElroy and P.C. Morrow, “Em￾ployee Reactions to Office Redesign: A Naturally Occur￾ring Quasi-Field Experiment in a Multi-Generational 
Setting,” Human Relations 63, no. 5 (2010): 609–36; T.J. 
Kallio, K.-M. Kallio, and A.J. Blomberg, “Physical Space, 
Culture and Organisational Creativity—A Longitudinal 
Study,” Facilities 33, no. 5/6 (2015): 389–411; S. Zerella, 
K. von Treuer, and S.L. Albrecht, “The Influence of Of￾fice Layout Features on Employee Perception of Organi￾zational Culture,” Journal of Environmental Psychology 54 
(2017): 1–10.
29. K.D. Elsbach and B.A. Bechky, “It’s More Than a Desk: 
Working Smarter through Leveraged Office Design,” 
California Management Review 49, no. 2 (2007): 80–101.
30. G. Forsythe, K. Kuhla, and D. Rice, “The CEO’s Role in 
Shaping an Organization’s Culture,” Chief Executive, 
February 6, 2018; M. Parker, “Why Leaders Need to Make 
Corporate Culture the Centre of Corporate Strategy,” 
CEOWORLD Magazine, June 19, 2021.
31. J.C. Collins and J.I. Porras, Built to Last: Successful Hab￾its of Visionary Companies (New York: Harper Business, 
1994); T.E. Deal and A.A. Kennedy, The New Corporate 
Cultures (Cambridge, MA: Perseus Books, 1999); R. 
Barrett, The Values-Driven Organization, 2nd ed. (New 
York: Routledge, 2017); J.M. Kouzes and B.Z. Posner, 
The Leadership Challenge, Sixth ed. (Hoboken, N.J.: 
John Wiley & Sons, 2017), Chap. 3.
32. C. Siehl and J. Martin, “Organizational Culture: A Key to 
Financial Performance?,” in Organizational Climate and 
Culture, ed. B. Schneider (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1990), 
241–81; G.G. Gordon and N. Di-Tomaso, “Predicting 
Corporate Performance from Organizational Culture,” 
Journal of Management Studies 29 (1992): 783–98; J.P. 
Kotter and J.L. Heskett, Corporate Culture and Performance
(New York: Free Press, 1992); C.P.M. Wilderom, U. 
Glunk, and R. Maslowski, “Organizational Culture as a 
Predictor of Organizational Performance,” in Handbook 
of Organizational Culture and Climate, ed. N.M. Ashkanasy, 
C.P.M. Wilderom, and M.F. Peterson (Thousand Oaks, 
CA: Sage, 2000), 193–210; A. Carmeli and A. Tishler, 
“The Relationships between Intangible Organizational 
Elements and Organizational Performance,” Strategic 
Management Journal 25 (2004): 1257–78; S. Teerikangas 
and P. Very, “The Culture–Performance Relationship in 
M&A: From Yes/No to How,” British Journal of Manage￾ment 17, no. S1 (2006): S31–S48.
33. Y. Wiener, “Forms of Value Systems: A Focus on Organi￾zational Effectiveness and Cultural Change and Mainte￾nance,” Academy of Management Review 13, no. 4 (1988): 
534–45; J.A. Chatman and S.E. Cha, “Leading by Lever￾aging Culture,” California Management Review 45 (2003): 
20–34; M. Alvesson, Understanding Organizational 
Culture, 2nd ed. (London: Sage, 2013).
34. B. Ashforth and F. Mael, “Social Identity Theory and the 
Organization,” Academy of Management Review 14 
(1989): 20–39; M. Alvesson, Understanding Organiza￾tional Culture, 2nd ed. (London: Sage, 2013).
35. “Korn Ferry Global Study: Driving Culture Change Key 
Leadership Priority,” Press Release (Los Angeles: Korn 
Ferry, February 4, 2016).530
54. E.H. Schein, “The Role of the Founder in Creating Orga￾nizational Culture,” Organizational Dynamics 12, no. 1 
(1983): 13–28; A.S. Tsui et al., “Unpacking the Relation￾ship between CEO Leadership Behavior and Organiza￾tional Culture,” Leadership Quarterly 17 (2006): 113–37; 
Y. Berson, S. Oreg, and T. Dvir, “CEO Values, Organiza￾tional Culture and Firm Outcomes,” Journal of Organiza￾tional Behavior 29, no. 5 (2008): 615–33; B. Schneider, 
M.G. Ehrhart, and W.H. Macey, “Organizational Climate 
and Culture,” Annual Review of Psychology 64, no. 1 
(2013): 361–88.
55. J. Pachner, “The Gospel According to Bruce,” Profit, 7 
October 2011; “ A Travel Guru’s Guide to Good Leader￾ship,” National Post (Toronto), 17 June 2013, FP6.
56. Y. Berson, S. Oreg, and T. Dvir, “CEO Values, Organiza￾tional Culture and Firm Outcomes,” Journal of Organiza￾tional Behavior 29, no. 5 (2008): 615–33; A.S. Klein, 
J. Wallis, and R.A. Cooke, “The Impact of Leadership Styles 
on Organizational Culture and Firm Effectiveness: An 
Empirical Study,” Journal of Management & Organization
19 (2013): 241–54; D.V. Day, M.A. Griffin, and K.R. 
Louw, “The Climate and Culture of Leadership in Organi￾zations,” in The Oxford Handbook of Organizational 
Climate and Culture, ed. B. Schneider and K.M. Barbera 
(New York: Oxford University Press, 2014), 101–17.
57. S. Nicholls, “The Uber Story,” Four Corners (Sydney: 
ABC Australia, March 13, 2019); D. Lee, “What next for 
Uber? Inside the Fight for Its Future,” Financial Times, 
October 28, 2020; M. Matousek, “Inside Uber CEO 
Dara Khosrowshahi’s 4-Year Quest to Root out the Toxic 
Culture That Nearly Sank the World’s Most Valuable 
Startup,” Business Insider, April 19, 2021.
58. M.J. Gelfand et al., “Conflict Cultures in Organizations: 
How Leaders Shape Conflict Cultures and Their Organi￾zational-Level Consequences,” Journal of Applied Psychol￾ogy 97, no. 6 (2012): 1131–47; R.C. Liden et al., “Servant 
Leadership and Serving Culture: Influence on Individual 
and Unit Performance,” Academy of Management Journal 57, 
no. 5 (2014): 1434–52.
59. J.C. McElroy and P.C. Morrow, “Employee Reactions to 
Office Redesign: A Naturally Occurring Quasi-Field Ex￾periment in a Multi-Generational Setting,” Human Rela￾tions 63 (2010): 609–36; S.J. Hogan and L.V. Coote, 
“Organizational Culture, Innovation, and Performance: 
A Test of Schein’s Model,” Journal of Business Research 67 
(2014): 1609–21; S. Zerella, K. von Treuer, and S.L. 
Albrecht, “The Influence of Office Layout Features on 
Employee Perception of Organizational Culture,” Journal 
of Environmental Psychology 54 (2017): 1–10.
60. M. De Pree, Leadership Is an Art (East Lansing: Michigan 
State University Press, 1987).
61. J. Kerr and J.W. Slocum Jr., “Managing Corporate Cul￾ture through Reward Systems,” Academy of Management 
Executive 1 (1987): 99–107; J.M. Higgins et al., “Using 
Cultural Artifacts to Change and Perpetuate Strategy,” 
Journal of Change Management 6, no. 4 (2006): 397–415; 
H. Hofstetter and I. Harpaz, “Declared versus Actual 
Organizational Culture as Indicated by an Organization’s 
Performance Appraisal,” International Journal of Human 
Resource Management 26, no. 4 (2015): 445–66.
62. A. Griswold, “Uber Is Designed so That for One Employee 
to Get Ahead, Another Must Fail,” Quartz, February 27, 
Takes Rate-Rigging Case to Court,” Financial Times, 
January 30, 2018; S. Letts, “Banks Inquiry: APRA to Focus 
on CBA Culture and Pay in Studying Its ‘Fall from Grace’,” 
ABC News (Australia), February 1, 2018; J. Smyth, “Have 
Australia’s Scandal-Hit Banks Changed Their Culture?” 
Financial Times (London), February 11, 2020.
44. “Antony Jenkins to Staff: Adopt New Values or Leave 
Barclays,” The Telegraph (London), 17 January 2013. This 
paragraph also cites the original email to Barclays em￾ployees distributed in January 2013.
45. M.L. Marks, “Adding Cultural Fit to Your Diligence 
Checklist,” Mergers & Acquisitions 34, no. 3 (1999): 
14–20; E. H. Schein, The Corporate Culture Survival 
Guide (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1999), Chap. 8; S. 
Teerikangas and P. Very, “The Culture-Performance Rela￾tionship in M&A: From Yes/No to How,” British Journal 
of Management 17, no. S1 (2006): S31–S48; G.K. Stahl 
and A. Voigt, “Do Cultural Differences Matter in Mergers 
and Acquisitions? A Tentative Model and Examination,” 
Organization Science 19, no. 1 (2008): 160–76.
46. “Mercer Survey Reveals Culture Issues Derail M&A 
Transactions at an Alarming Rate,” News Release 
(New York: Mercer, September 24, 2018); “The State 
of the Deal: M&A Trends 2019” (New York: Deloitte, 
December 2018).
47. J. Chao et al., “The Role of Leadership in Merger Inte￾gration,” McKinsey Quarterly, July 2018; O. Engert et al., 
“Organizational Culture in Mergers: Addressing the 
Unseen Forces,” McKinsey & Company: Organization 
Practice, March 2019.
48. S. Gopalan, J. Dittrich, and R. Nelson, “Analysis of Orga￾nizational Culture: A Critical Step in Mergers and Acqui￾sitions,” Journal of Business Strategies 11, no. 2 (1994): 
124–40; C.A. Schorg, C.A. Raiborn, and M.F. Massoud, 
“Using a ‘Cultural Audit’ to Pick M&A Winners,” Jour￾nal of Corporate Accounting & Finance (2004): 47–55. 
These audits (known as cultural audits) also diagnose the 
need for and risks of organizational culture change 
within one organization. See: M.R. Testa and L.J. Sipe, 
“The Organizational Culture Audit: Countering Cultural 
Ambiguity in the Service Context,” Open Journal of Lead￾ership 2, no. 2 (2013): 36–44; M. Mitra, M. Brankin, and 
P. Brankin, “Cultural Audits as Tools for Enabling Pro￾cesses of Change in the NHS,” British Journal of Health￾care Management 23, no. 10 (2017): 492–97.
49. A.R. Malekazedeh and A. Nahavandi, “Making Mergers 
Work by Managing Cultures,” Journal of Business Strategy
(1990): 55–57; K.W. Smith, “A Brand-New Culture for 
the Merged Firm,” Mergers and Acquisitions 35 (2000): 
45–50.
50. A. Hyland, “Howzat? Wesfarmers and Boral Chairman 
Bob Every on Career and Overcoming Adversity,” 
Australian Financial Review, July 6, 2015.
51. Hewitt Associates, “Mergers and Acquisitions May Be 
Driven by Business Strategy—but Often Stumble over 
People and Culture Issues” (Lincolnshire, IL: PR 
Newswire, 1998).
52. J. Martin, “Can Organizational Culture Be Managed?,” 
in Organizational Culture, ed. P.J. Frost et al. (Beverly 
Hills, CA: Sage, 1985), 95–98.
53. S. Epstein, “What Does Being a ‘Cultural Fit’ Actually 
Mean?,” BBC Worklife, October 21, 2021.531
Journal of Management 32, no. 2 (2006): 237–56; A.M. 
Saks, K.L. Uggerslev, and N.E. Fassina, “Socialization 
Tactics and Newcomer Adjustment: A Meta-Analytic Re￾view and Test of a Model,” Journal of Vocational Behavior
70, no. 3 (2007): 413–46.
73. S.L. McShane, G. O’Neill, and T. Travaglione, “Managing 
Employee Values in Values-Driven Organizations: Contra￾diction, Façade, and Illusions” (paper presented at the 
21st Annual ANZAM Conference, Sydney, Australia, 
December 2007); S.L. McShane, G. O’Neill, and T. 
Travaglione, “Rethinking the Values-Driven Organization 
Process: From Values Engineering to Behavioral Domain 
Training” (paper presented at the Academy of Management 
2008 Annual Meeting, Anaheim, CA, 2008).
74. G.T. Chao et al., “Organizational Socialization: Its Con￾tent and Consequences,” Journal of Applied Psychology 79 
(1994): 450–63; H.D. Cooper-Thomas and N. Anderson, 
“Organizational Socialization: A Field Study into Social￾ization Success and Rate,” International Journal of Selection 
and Assessment 13, no. 2 (2005): 116–28.
75. N. Nicholson, “A Theory of Work Role Transitions,” 
Administrative Science Quarterly 29 (1984): 172–91; A. 
Elfering et al., “First Years in Job: A Three-Wave Analysis 
of Work Experiences,” Journal of Vocational Behavior 70, 
no. 1 (2007): 97–115; B.E. Ashforth, D.M. Sluss, and 
A.M. Saks, “Socialization Tactics, Proactive Behavior, 
and Newcomer Learning: Integrating Socialization 
Models,” Journal of Vocational Behavior 70, no. 3 (2007): 
447–62; T.N. Bauer, “Newcomer Adjustment during 
Organizational Socialization: A Meta-Analytic Review of 
Antecedents, Outcomes, and Methods,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology 92, no. 3 (2007): 707–21.
76. J.M. Beyer and D.R. Hannah, “Building on the Past: 
Enacting Established Personal Identities in a New Work 
Setting,” Organization Science 13 (2002): 636–52; H.D.C. 
Thomas and N. Anderson, “Newcomer Adjustment: The 
Relationship between Organizational Socialization Tactics, 
Information Acquisition and Attitudes,” Journal of Occu￾pational and Organizational Psychology 75 (2002): 423–37.
77. S.L. Robinson and E. Wolfe Morrison, “The Development 
of Psychological Contract Breach and Violation: A Longi￾tudinal Study,” Journal of Organizational Behavior 21, no. 5 
(2000): 525–46; K.J. McInnis, J.P. Meyer, and S. Feld￾man, “Psychological Contracts and Their Implications for 
Commitment: A Feature-Based Approach,” Journal of 
Vocational Behavior 74, no. 2 (2009): 165–80; C.-M. Alcover 
et al., “Understanding the Changing Nature of Psychologi￾cal Contracts in 21st Century Organizations: A Multiple￾Foci Exchange Relationships Approach and Proposed 
Framework,” Organizational Psychology Review 7, no. 1 
(2017): 4–35.
78. S.L. Robinson and D.M. Rousseau, “Violating the Psy￾chological Contract: Not the Exception but the Norm,” 
Journal of Organizational Behavior 15 (1994): 245–59; 
E.W. Morrison and S.L. Robinson, “When Employees 
Feel Betrayed: A Model of How Psychological Contract 
Violation Develops,” Academy of Management Review
22(1997): 226–56; S.D. Montes and P.G. Irving, “Disen￾tangling the Effects of Promised and Delivered Induce￾ments: Relational and Transactional Contract Elements 
and the Mediating Role of Trust,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology 93, no. 6 (2008): 1367–81.
2017; M.R. Dickey, “Inside Uber’s New Approach to Em￾ployee Performance Reviews,” TechCrunch, August 1, 2017.
63. P. Strozniak, “How Workplace Culture Drives Perfor￾mance,” Credit Union Times, February 22, 2022.
64. B. Schneider, “The People Make the Place,” Personnel 
Psychology 40, no. 3 (1987): 437–53; B. Schneider et al., 
“Personality and Organizations: A Test of the Homogene￾ity of Personality Hypothesis,” Journal of Applied Psychol￾ogy 83, no. 3 (1998): 462–70; T.R. Giberson, C.J. Resick, 
and M.W. Dickson, “Embedding Leader Characteristics: 
An Examination of Homogeneity of Personality and 
Values in Organizations,” Journal of Applied Psychology 90, 
no. 5 (2005): 1002–10.
65. T.A. Judge and D.M. Cable, “Applicant Personality, Orga￾nizational Culture, and Organization Attraction,” Personnel 
Psychology 50, no. 2 (1997): 359–94; D.S. Chapman et al., 
“Applicant Attraction to Organizations and Job Choice: 
A Meta-Analytic Review of the Correlates of Recruiting 
Outcomes,” Journal of Applied Psychology 90, no. 5 (2005): 
928–44; A.L. Kristof-Brown, R.D. Zimmerman, and E.C. 
Johnson, “Consequences of Individuals’ Fit at Work: A 
Meta-Analysis of Person–Job, Person–Organization, Person–
Group, and Person–Supervisor Fit,” Personnel Psychology 58, 
no. 2 (2005): 281–342; C. Hu, H.C. Su, and C.I.B. Chen, 
“The Effect of Person–Organization Fit Feedback via 
Recruitment Web Sites on Applicant Attraction,” Comput￾ers in Human Behavior 23, no. 5 (2007): 2509–23.
66. “More Than One-Third Of Workers Would Pass On Per￾fect Job If Corporate Culture Was Not A Fit, Survey 
Finds ,” News Release (Menlo Park, Calif.: Robert Half, 
November 27, 2018); Percentages were very close across 
countries (between 75% and 79%). 
67. A. Kristof-Brown, “Perceived Applicant Fit: Distinguish￾ing between Recruiters’ Perceptions of Person–Job and 
Person–Organization Fit,” Personnel Psychology 53, no. 3 
(2000): 643–71; A.E.M. Van Vianen, “Person–Organization 
Fit: The Match between Newcomers’ and Recruiters’ 
Preferences for Organizational Cultures,” Personnel Psy￾chology 53 (2000): 113–49. The recent survey is reported 
in: “Mission & Culture Survey 2019” (Mill Valley, Calif.: 
Glassdoor, July 9, 2019). The US and Canadian hiring 
managers had almost identical results (90% and 91%).
68. E. Keating, “‘Leadership Is Not Genetics’: How Ikea 
Australia’s National Talent Manager D’neale Prosser 
Puts Authentic Leadership into Practice,” SmartCompany, 
March 8, 2018; “‘We Believe That Your Values Are More 
Important than Your CV,’” Human Resources Director 
Australia, April 11, 2018.
69. D.M. Cable and J.R. Edwards, “Complementary and 
Supplementary Fit: A Theoretical and Empirical Integra￾tion,” Journal of Applied Psychology 89, no. 5 (2004): 
822–34; R. Ranosa, “Should You Pay Your Employees to 
Quit?,” Human Resources Director, December 17, 2020; 
S. Vozza, “This CEO Pays New Employees $5,000 to Quit,” 
Fast Company, January 5, 2022.
70. N. Syed, “Is Hiring for Culture Fit a Bad Idea?,” Human 
Resources Director Asia, July 29, 2021.
71. J. Van Maanen, “Breaking In: Socialization to Work,” in 
Handbook of Work, Organization, and Society, ed. R. Dubin 
(Chicago: Rand McNally, 1976), 67–130.
72. D.G. Allen, “Do Organizational Socialization Tactics 
Influence Newcomer Embeddedness and Turnover?,” 532
Acquisition,” Personnel Psychology 45 (1992): 849–74; 
H.D. Cooper-Thomas and N. Anderson, “Organizational 
Socialization: A Field Study into Socialization Success 
and Rate,” International Journal of Selection and Assess￾ment 13, no. 2 (2005): 116–28; S. Nifadkar and T. Bauer, 
“Breach of Belongingness: Newcomer Relationship Con￾flict, Information, and Task-Related Outcomes during Or￾ganizational Socialization,” Journal of Applied Psychology
101, no. 1 (2016): 1–13.
91. S. Nifadkar, A.S. Tsui, and B.E. Ashforth, “The Way You 
Make Me Feel and Behave: Supervisor-Triggered New￾comer Affect and Approach-Avoidance Behavior,” Acad￾emy of Management Journal 55, no. 5 (2012): 1146–68.
92. E. Stewart, “Your Company Is Only as Great as the 
Team You Employ and Develop,” Jersey Evening Post, 
February 17, 2022.
a. S. Berfield et al., “Sixty Million Car Bombs: Inside 
Takata’s Air Bag Crisis,” Bloomberg, June 2, 2016; Inde￾pendent Takata Corporation Quality Assurance Panel, 
Ensuring Quality across the Board (Chicago: February 2016); 
“Lax Corporate Culture Set up Takata’s Fall,” Nikkei 
Asian Review, July 3, 2017; H. Tabuchi and N.E. Boudette, 
“U.S. Charges Takata Officers in Airbag Case,” The New 
York Times, January 14, 2017, A1; “Our Aspirations,” 
About Takata (Tokyo: Takata Corporation, 2018), 
accessed March 27,2018; T. Krisher, T. Krisher, “Takata 
Recalls 10 Million More Airbags from 14 Automakers 
Including Subaru, Ford, GM and Toyota,” USA Today, 
January 8, 2020.
b. R. Lacerte, “Why Embracing Subcultures Inside Your 
Company Is Critical to Scaling Your Business,” Fast 
Company, January 7, 2022; R. Lacerte, “Creating a 
Culture (& Why That’s So Important from the Start),” 
Bill.Com (blog), accessed March 22, 2022.
c. F. Stone, “The Conversation: ACL Services Boss Laurie 
Schultz Knows Fraud When She Sees It,” BC Business, 
February 7, 2017; “5 Questions on Culture with Laurie 
Schultz, CEO, Galvanize,” Business in Vancouver, 
January 2020, pp. 30–31.
d. J. Bersin et al., “The New Organization: Different by 
Design,” in Global Human Capital Trends 2016 (West￾lake, TX: Deloitte University Press, 2016), 1–14; 
“Where Organizational Culture Is Headed,” Strategy &
(blog), 2018; “The TINYpulse 2019 Employee Engage￾ment Report: The End of Employee Loyalty” (Seattle: 
TINYpulse, February 2019); D. Sull, C. Sull, and 
A. Chamberlain, “Measuring Culture in Leading Com￾panies,” MIT Sloan Management Review, June 24, 2019; 
“Mission & Culture Survey 2019” (Mill Valley, CA: 
Glassdoor, July 9, 2019); “New Survey Reveals Toxic 
Cultures and Negative Behaviors Are Prevalent in the 
Workplace,” News Release (Washington DC: EVERFI, 
November 20, 2019).
e. The terms organizational culture and corporate culture
were popularized in 1982 in T.E. Deal and A.A. Kennedy, 
Corporate Cultures (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1982); 
T.J. Peters and R.H. Waternam, In Search of Excellence: 
Lessons from America’s Best-Run Companies (New York: 
Warner, 1982). However, this phrase did appear more 
than a decade earlier in N. Margulies, “Organizational 
Culture and Psychological Growth,” The Journal of 
Applied Behavioral Science 5, no. 4 (1969): 491–508; 
79. S. Persson and D. Wasieleski, “The Seasons of the Psy￾chological Contract: Overcoming the Silent Transforma￾tions of the Employer–Employee Relationship,” Human 
Resource Management Review 25, no. 4 (2015): 368–83.
80. L.W. Porter, E.E. Lawler III, and J.R. Hackman, Behavior 
in Organizations (New York: McGraw Hill, 1975), 163–67; 
J. Van Maanen, “Breaking In: Socialization to Work,” in 
Handbook of Work, Organization, and Society, ed. R. Dubin 
(Chicago: Rand McNally, 1976), 67–130; D.C. Feldman, 
“The Multiple Socialization of Organization Members,” 
Academy of Management Review 6 (1981): 309–18.
81. B.E. Ashforth and A.M. Saks, “Socialization Tactics: 
Longitudinal Effects on Newcomer Adjustment,” Acad￾emy of Management Journal 39 (1996): 149–78; J.D. 
Kammeyer-Mueller and C.R. Wanberg, “Unwrapping the 
Organizational Entry Process: Disentangling Multiple 
Antecedents and Their Pathways to Adjustment,” Journal 
of Applied Psychology 88, no. 5 (2003): 779–94.
82. L.W. Porter, E.E. Lawler III, and J.R. Hackman, Behavior 
in Organizations (New York: McGraw Hill, 1975), Chap. 5.
83. M.R. Louis, “Surprise and Sensemaking: What Newcomers 
Experience in Entering Unfamiliar Organizational Settings,” 
Administrative Science Quarterly 25 (1980): 226–51.
84. M. Kodama, “Functions of Career Resilience Against 
Reality Shock, Focusing on Full-Time Employees During 
Their First Year of Work,” Japanese Psychological Re￾search 59, no. 4 (2017): 255–65; C. Schott, T. Steen, and 
D.D. Van Kleef, “Reality Shock and Public Service Moti￾vation: A Longitudinal, Qualitative Study Among Dutch 
Veterinary Inspectors,” International Journal of Public 
Administration 42, no. 6 (2019): 468–81; T. Voss and M. 
Kunter, “‘Reality Shock’ of Beginning Teachers? Changes 
in Teacher Candidates’ Emotional Exhaustion and 
Constructivist-Oriented Beliefs,” Journal of Teacher 
Education 71, no. 3 (2020): 292–306.
85. D.L. Nelson, “Organizational Socialization: A Stress 
Perspective,” Journal of Occupational Behavior 8 (1987): 
311–24; C.-M. Alcover et al., “Understanding the Chang￾ing Nature of Psychological Contracts in 21st Century 
Organizations: A Multiple-Foci Exchange Relationships 
Approach and Proposed Framework,” Organizational 
Psychology Review 7, no. 1 (2017): 4–35.
86. J.P. Wanous, Organizational Entry (Reading, MA: 
Addison-Wesley, 1992); J. E. Baur et al., “A Historical 
Approach to Realistic Job Previews: An Exploration into 
Their Origins, Evolution, and Recommendations for the 
Future,” Journal of Management History 20, no. 2 (2014): 
200–223.
87. J. Rosenberg, “Companies Transform Cultures as They 
Compete for Staffers,” AP News, December 19, 2018.
88. J.M. Phillips, “Effects of Realistic Job Previews on 
Multiple Organizational Outcomes: A Meta-Analysis,” 
Academy of Management Journal 41 (1998): 673–90.
89. D.R. Earnest, D.G. Allen, and R.S. Landis, “Mechanisms 
Linking Realistic Job Previews with Turnover: A Meta￾Analytic Path Analysis,” Personnel Psychology 64, no. 4 
(2011): 865–97; S.A. Shibly, “Mapping the Holistic Impact 
of Realistic Job Preview―Pre-Recruitment Phase, Post￾Recruitment Phase and Marketing Spillover Effect,” Journal 
of Organizational Psychology 19, no. 1 (2019): 70–78.
90. C. Ostroff and S.W.J. Koslowski, “Organizational Social￾ization as a Learning Process: The Role of Information 533
Times (London), October 24, 2018; S. Nicholls, “The 
Uber Story,” transcript, Four Corners (Sydney: ABC 
Australia, March 13, 2019); M. Belcher, K. Edmond, and 
K. Yapchai, “Lessons on Culture and Leadership from 
Uber’s Ethics and Compliance Struggles,” ACC Docket, 
December 17, 2020; M. Matousek, “Inside Uber CEO 
Dara Khosrowshahi’s 4-Year Quest to Root out the Toxic 
Culture That Nearly Sank the World’s Most Valuable 
Startup,” Business Insider, April 19, 2021.
j. “Satya Nadella Emails the Troops, Reveals New Mission 
Statement OnMSFT.Com,” OnMSFT.Com (blog), June 26, 
2015; M. Weinberger, “Satya Nadella: ‘Customer Love’ 
Is a Better Sign of Success than Revenue or Profit,” 
Business Insider, October 7, 2015; H. McCracken, “Trans￾forming Culture at Microsoft: Satya Nadella Sets a New 
Tone,” InTheBlack, June 1, 2018.
k. C.A. O’Reilly III, J. Chatman, and D.F. Caldwell, 
“People and Organizational Culture: A Profile Compari￾son Approach to Assessing Person--Organization Fit,” 
Academy of Management Journal 34 (1991): 487–516; D. 
Deveau, “Clio’s Culture Shifts Into High Gear,” Financial 
Post (Toronto), February 27, 2020; T. Perkins, “Still Hiring 
for ‘Culture Fit’? It’s Time to Think Again,” HR Executive, 
September 7, 2021; S. Epstein, “What Does Being a 
‘Cultural Fit’ Actually Mean?,” BBC Worklife, October 21, 
2021; M. Ahmed, “ICYMI: ‘Culture Fit’ Can Sometimes Be 
Used to Mask Bias in Hiring,” People Matters, March 19, 
2022.
l. K. Tausche, “Wall Street Fights to Keep Young, Restless 
Analysts,” CNBC, February 19, 2014; D. Huang and L. 
Gellman, “Millennial Employees Confound Wall Street,”
Wall Street Journal, April 9, 2016, A1; S. Wu, “Why 
Happiness Is Overrated,” Medium, October 5, 2018.
m. “Winning Secrets: How Circles.Life’s 90-Day Onboarding 
Is One Way to Give Power Back to the Employees,” 
Human Resources Online, July 13, 2021.
S. Silverzweig and R.F. Allen, “Changing the Corporate 
Culture,” Sloan Management Review 17, no. 3 (1976): 33–49.
f. P.F. Hewlin, T.L. Dumas, and M.F. Burnett, “To Thine 
Own Self Be True? Facades of Conformity, Values Incon￾gruence, and the Moderating Impact of Leader Integ￾rity,” Academy of Management Journal 60 (2017): 178–99; 
S.E. Cha et al., “Being Your True Self at Work: Integrating 
the Fragmented Research on Authenticity in Organiza￾tions,” Academy of Management Annals 13 (2019): 633–71; 
N. Roulin and F. Krings, “Faking to Fit In: Applicants’ 
Response Strategies to Match Organizational Culture,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 105, no. 2 (2020): 130–45.
g. G.R. Maio and J.M. Olson, “Values as Truisms: Evidence 
and Implications,” Journal of Personality and Social Psy￾chology 74, no. 2 (1998): 294–311; S. Arieli, A.M. Grant, 
and L. Sagiv, “Convincing Yourself to Care about Others: 
An Intervention for Enhancing Benevolence Values,” 
Journal of Personality 82, no. 1 (2014): 15–24; K.M. 
Sheldon and L.S. Krieger, “Walking the Talk: Value 
Importance, Value Enactment, and Well-Being,” 
Motivation and Emotion 38 (2014): 609–19.
h. J.W. Lorsch and E. McTague, “Culture Is Not the Cul￾prit,” Harvard Business Review 94, no. 4 (2016): 96–105.
i. R. Parry, “Uber Hosts Top Secret Sin City Extravaganza 
for 4,800 Employees,” Mail Online, October 1, 2015; D. 
Brown, “3 Valuable Lessons From Uber Founder Travis 
Kalanick’s TED Talk,” Inc., February 16, 2016; A. Griswold, 
“Uber Is Designed so That for One Employee to Get 
Ahead, Another Must Fail,” Quartz, February 27, 2017; 
S. Levin, “Uber’s Scandals, Blunders and PR Disasters: 
The Full List,” Guardian, June 18, 2017; B. Edelman, 
“Uber Can’t Be Fixed—It’s Time for Regulators to 
Shut It Down,” Harvard Business Review, June 21, 2017; 
D. Khosrowshahi, “Uber’s New Cultural Norms,” Linkedin 
Blog (blog), November 7, 2017; S. Bond, “Uber Chief 
Admits Culture Needs Further Improvement,” Financial 
Design Credit: Blue globe icon: Merfin/Shutterstock534
When Chip Bergh became CEO at Levi Strauss & Co. a decade ago, he 
joined a company with declining revenue, high debt, and limited 
innovation. Worse, the former P&G executive discovered a profound lack of urgency for change. 
“How many of you think this company is performing well?” Bergh asked employees at a town hall 
meeting. He was shocked when 80 percent of them raised their hand. As CEO, Bergh had to “get 
people to embrace the brutal facts and then lay out the course for change,” one that had a stronger 
focus on customers and innovation.
Levi Strauss’s top leadership team also lacked the motivation or capacity to reinvigorate the company. 
“I was astonished by how many of my team members I needed to replace,” Bergh recalls. Two years 
after his arrival, only two of the original 11 direct reports were still at the company. Levi Strauss 
employees experienced many changes, which eventually turned the company into a growing, 
innovative, customer-focused business.
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
LO 15-1 Describe the elements of Lewin’s force field analysis model.
LO 15-2 Discuss the reasons why people resist organizational change and how change 
agents should view this resistance.
LO 15-3 Outline six strategies for minimizing resistance to change, and debate ways to 
effectively create an urgency to change.
LO 15-4 Discuss how leadership, coalitions, social networks, and pilot projects assist 
organizational change.
LO 15-5 Describe and compare action research, appreciative inquiry, large group interventions, 
and parallel learning structures as formal approaches to organizational change.
LO 15-6 Discuss two cross-cultural and three ethical issues in organizational change.
Learning Objectives
15
chapter
Organizational ChangeLevi Strauss relies on communication, learning, involvement, pilot projects, and other organizational change strategies to 
transform itself from a declining business to an innovative digital leader in the clothing industry.
PART 4: ORGANIZATIONAL PROCESSES
Now, Levi Strauss is embarking on a bolder journey: a massive company-wide “digital first” 
transformation. Many jobs and work processes are being overhauled by using technology to create 
products, artificial intelligence to streamline logistics, robotics to reduce costs, and digital communication 
systems to improve collaboration across the organization. “Digital transformations are more than turning 
on new solutions or digitizing platforms and workstreams,” advises Hermit Singh, Levi Strauss’s chief 
financial officer. “They’re about transforming your workforce to think in an agile and digital-first mindset.” 
Levi Strauss has tried to minimize employee anxiety and resistance to change by communicating the 
vision and offering training programs for current employees. The company also launched an innovative 
machine learning bootcamp, in which a group of nontechnical employees from across the organization 
learn to write code, apply agile methods, and implement machine learning tools. Bootcamp graduates 
then use those digital skills in their job and work unit. 
“I started developing algorithms and programs that automated work, allowed us to be more creative, 
and unlocked growth for the design department,” says Ron Pritipaul, a Levi Strauss design coordinator 
with a history degree who completed the bootcamp program. “I also did some neural network work that 
takes art and makes Trucker jackets.”
Bootcamp graduates have also become a guiding coalition to champion the “digital first” transformation. 
For instance, they actively welcome the technically-focused new hires who may have otherwise had a
535
Rawpixel.com/Shutterstock536 Part Four Organizational Processes
cooler reception from non-technical current employees. “Before we started the 
bootcamp, [tech hires] would face some internal resistance. But because they 
have internal people who speak their language, we actually have a new cycle of 
integration,” observes Katia Walsh, Levi Strauss’s chief strategy and AI officer.
Levi Strauss’s digital transformation has also minimized employee 
resistance through pilot projects. For instance, the company initially taught 
agile methodologies (scrums, sprints, user stories, etc.) to teams that were 
keen to try out this approach. As these initial groups become successful, the 
agile paradigm has been diffused to other teams across the company. “Our 
people are the key drivers of our digital transformation and the best ones to 
build the future of our company,” says Hermit Singh.1
Through effective organizational change practices, Levi Strauss has been 
transformed from a declining business to an innovative digital leader in the 
clothing industry. CEO Chip Bergh created an urgency for change, conveyed 
appealing visions for change (customers, innovation, and now digital), and actively 
communicated the need for those changes. Levi Strauss’s change initiatives have 
taken several years and required difficult adjustments. Indeed, most organizational 
change is messy, requiring considerable leadership effort and vigilance.
As we will describe throughout this chapter, the challenge of change is not 
so much in deciding which way to go; the challenge is in the execution of this 
strategy. When leaders discover the need for change and identify some ideas 
about the preferred route to a better future, the change process involves 
navigating around the numerous obstacles and gaining organization-wide 
support for that change.
This chapter unfolds as follows. We begin by introducing Lewin’s model of 
change and its component parts. This discussion includes sources of resistance 
to change, strategies to minimize this resistance, and ways to stabilize desired 
behaviors. Next, the chapter examines four approaches to organizational 
change—action research, appreciative inquiry, large group interventions, and 
parallel learning structures. The last section of this chapter considers both 
cross-cultural and ethical issues in organizational change.
Lewin’s Force Field Analysis Model
Change is the norm, not the exception, in successful organizations. One of the fundamen￾tal messages throughout this book is that organizations operate as open systems. As such, 
they need to continually evolve internally to keep pace with ongoing changes in their 
external environment, such as consumer needs, global competition, technological advances, 
community expectations, government (de)regulation, and environmental standards. 
LO 15-1Chapter Fifteen Organizational Change 537
In other words, successful organizations monitor their environments and take appropriate 
steps to maintain a compatible fit with emerging external conditions. Rather than resist 
change, employees in successful companies embrace these ongoing changes as an integral 
part of organizational life.
It is easy to see environmental forces pushing companies to change the way they oper￾ate. What is more difficult to see is the complex interplay of these forces on individuals, 
teams, and work units. Social psychologist Kurt Lewin developed a model to describe this 
process using the metaphor of a force field (see Exhibit 15.1).2
 Although it was developed 
more than a half century ago, contemporary reviews of this subject affirm that Lewin’s 
force field analysis model remains one of the most widely respected macro-level ways of 
viewing the change process.3
One side of the force field model represents the driving forces that push organizations 
toward a new state of affairs. These might include new competitors or technologies, evolv￾ing client expectations, or a host of other environmental changes. Corporate leaders also 
produce driving forces even when external forces for change aren’t apparent. For instance, 
leaders of successful companies urge employees to strive for higher standards or better 
practices. David Ogilvy, one of the world’s most successful advertising executives, stated 
this view decades ago when describing the culture of his agency: “We have a habit of 
divine discontent with our performance. It is an antidote to smugness.”4
The other side of Lewin’s model represents the restraining forces that maintain the sta￾tus quo. These restraining forces are commonly called “resistance to change” because 
they appear to block the change process. Stability occurs when the driving and restraining 
forces are roughly in equilibrium—that is, they are of approximately equal strength in op￾posite directions.
Kurt Lewin described how systems (whether individuals or organizations) have transitions 
between periods of stability and instability, but he never labelled those transition processes, 
possibly because he generally viewed stability as a brief condition.5
 However, later adaptations 
of Lewin’s force field model refer to these transitions as unfreezing and refreezing. Specifi￾cally, the change process begins by unfreezing the current situation, moving to a desired condi￾tion, and then refreezing the 
system so it stabilizes in the 
desired state. 
Unfreezing involves produc￾ing disequilibrium between the 
driving and restraining forces. 
As we will describe later, this 
may occur by increasing the 
Desired
conditions
Current
conditions
Restraining
forces
Driving
Restraining forces
forces
Driving
forces
Restraining
forces
Driving
forces
Before change After change
EXHIBIT 15.1
Lewin’s Force Field Analysis 
Model
force field analysis
Kurt Lewin’s model of 
systemwide change that helps 
change agents diagnose the 
forces that drive and restrain 
proposed organizational change
unfreezing
the first part of the change 
process, in which the change 
agent produces disequilibrium 
between the driving and 
restraining forces
refreezing
the latter part of the change 
process, in which systems and 
structures are introduced that 
reinforce and maintain the 
desired behaviors538 Part Four Organizational Processes
driving forces, reducing the restraining forces, or doing a combination of both. Refreezing 
occurs when the organization’s systems and structures are aligned with the desired behav￾iors. They must support and reinforce the new role patterns and prevent the organization 
from slipping back into the old way of doing things. Over the next two sections of this 
chapter, we use Lewin’s model as well as other change management theories to under￾stand why change is blocked and how the process can evolve more smoothly.
Understanding Resistance to Change
As CEO of Rotork Controls, Kevin Hostetler championed a transformation program that 
would make the British manufacturer of valve actuators and gearboxes for flow control 
systems more customer-focused and responsive to emerging technological changes. Early 
in the change process, Hostetler spoke with many of the global company’s 3,200 employ￾ees. “I spent much more time on the concrete of factory floors than on the carpet of the 
boardroom, convincing the organization of the need for change,” he recalls. Rotork’s lead￾ership team also diagnosed the company’s readiness for change. “We found that we had a 
senior team with considerable experience in driving change and, two organization levels 
below, we had a huge body of emerging leaders who longed for organizational improve￾ment,” Hostetler reports. But the diagnosis also identified several clusters of staff who 
resisted the change process. “We had this thick, stuck middle that had been at Rotork for 
a long time and saw no need to change.”6
Kevin Hostetler and his leadership team at Rotork Controls found clusters of resistance 
to change in their multiyear transformation process. Change resistance takes many forms, 
ranging from overt work stoppages to subtle attempts to continue the old ways.7
 A study 
of bank employees reported that covert resistance is much more common than overt resis￾tance. Some employees in that study avoided the desired changes by moving into different 
jobs. Others continued to perform tasks the old way as long as management didn’t notice. 
LO 15-2
40%of 1,737 American HR professionals
identify employee resistance to change as the most
common barrier to achieving success in the
workplace (2nd highest barrier).
25%of 10,000 employees say they don’t like
to leave their comfort zone when change is occurring
(16% of top level executives say this).
34%of more than 2,000 employees in the
US and UK say they feel anxiety over new or
changing work processes.
54% of 274 American HR leaders say
their employees are suering from change fatigue.
46%of 1,000 non-management employees
are willing to challenge the status quo (compared
with 89% of chief executives).
THE CHALLENGES OF RESISTANCE TO CHANGEa
Jacob Wackerhausen/Getty ImagesChapter Fifteen Organizational Change 539
Even when employees complied with the planned changes, they showed resistance by 
performing the new task while letting customers know that they disapproved of these 
changes forced on them!8
Most change agents are understandably frustrated by passive or active resistance to 
their planned change, but resistance is a common and natural human response. As econo￾mist John Kenneth Galbraith once quipped: “Faced with the choice between changing 
one’s mind and proving that there is no need to do so, almost everyone gets busy on the 
proof.”9
 Even when people support change, they typically assume that it is others—not 
themselves—who need to do the changing.
Resistance is a form of conflict, but change agents unfortunately sometimes interpret 
that disagreement as relationship conflict (see Chapter 11). They describe the people op￾posing change as unreasonable, dysfunctional, and irrational reactionaries to a desirable 
initiative. By perceiving the situation as relationship conflict, change agents attack the 
competence of those who resist the change, which further escalates the conflict and gen￾erates even stronger resistance to change.
A more productive approach is to view resistance to change as task conflict. From this 
perspective, resistance is a signal either that the change agent has not sufficiently pre￾pared employees for change or that the change initiative should be altered or improved.10
Employees might not feel a sufficiently strong urgency to change, or they might believe 
the change strategy is ill-conceived. Even if they recognize the need for change and agree 
with the strategy, employees might resist because they lack confidence to change or be￾lieve the change will make them worse off than the current situation. Resistance takes 
many forms, and change agents need to decipher those different types of resistance to 
understand their underlying causes.11
Resistance is also a form of voice, so giving employees an opportunity to discuss their 
concerns potentially improves procedural justice (see Chapter 5) as well as the quality of 
decision making about the change (see Chapter 7). By redirecting initial forms of resistance 
into constructive conversations, change agents are more likely to generate feelings of fairness 
among employees. Furthermore, resistance is motivated behavior that engages employees to 
think more carefully about the change strategy and process. Change agents can harness that 
motivational force to ultimately strengthen commitment to the change initiative.
®
SELF-ASSESSMENT 15.1: Are You Ready For Change?
WHY EMPLOYEES RESIST CHANGE
Change management experts have developed a long list of reasons why people resist 
change.12 Some people inherently oppose change because of their personality and val￾ues.13 Aside from these dispositional factors, employees typically oppose organizational 
change because they lack sufficient motivation, ability, role clarity, or situational support 
to change their attitudes, decisions, and behavior.14 In other words, an employee’s readi￾ness for change depends on all four elements of the MARS model. These MARS elements 
are the foundations of the six most commonly cited reasons why people resist change: 
(1) negative valence of change, (2) fear of the unknown, (3) not-invented-here syndrome, 
(4) breaking routines, (5) incongruent team dynamics, and (6) incongruent organiza￾tional systems and structures.
Negative Valence of Change Employees resist change when they believe the 
post-change situation will have more negative than positive outcomes.15 In other words, 
they apply (although imperfectly) the rational choice decision-making model (Chapter 7) 540 Part Four Organizational Processes
to estimate whether the change will make them and possibly the organization better or 
worse off (i.e., net positive or negative valence). For instance, they consider the cognitive 
effort of learning new skills, the probability of having more interesting work, the threat of 
losing job status or work relationships, the opportunity for better career advancement, 
and the risk of losing their job. In fact, all forms of resistance to change that we describe 
in this section relate to negative valence of change in some way.
An employee’s cost–benefit analysis mainly considers how the change will affect them 
personally. However, resistance due to negative valence also takes into account the effects 
of change on the team, organization, or society.16 Thus, resistance to change often occurs 
when employees doubt the planned changes will be worth the risks. They might believe 
the company is already performing well and that the planned changes will be less effective 
than the current practices. Or they might view the future practices as confusing and dis￾ruptive variations of what employees are currently doing in their jobs.
Fear of the Unknown Organizational change usually has a degree of uncertainty, 
and employees tend to assume the worst when they are unsure whether the change will 
have good or bad outcomes. Uncertainty is also associated with lack of personal control, 
which is another source of negative emotions. Consequently, the uncertainty inherent in 
most organizational change is less desirable than the relative certainty of the status quo. 
This “status quo bias” adds more negative valence to the cost–benefit calculation we de￾scribed above.17
Fear of the unknown was a significant form of resistance to change when General 
Motors (GM) brought the information technology (IT) function in-house. The IT function 
had been outsourced for many years, and many GM line managers feared that GM’s new 
IT group would provide worse service than the external contractors had provided. “This 
supplier is doing a great job for me, so don’t mess it up,” some managers warned. Line 
managers’ fear of the unknown and perceived negative outcomes about the IT changes led 
to “some really frank discussions,” acknowledged Randy Mott, the executive who led 
GM’s insourcing initiative.18
Not-Invented-Here Syndrome Employees sometimes oppose or even discreetly 
undermine organizational change initiatives that are introduced by people outside their 
group. This “not-invented-here” syndrome is most apparent among employees who are 
usually responsible for the knowledge or initiative.19 For example, information technology 
UTIL Industries S.p.A. is a global 
leader in the production of high￾quality vehicle brake components. But 
CEO Fernando Bertoni sees an urgent 
need for the 900-employee Italian 
company to evolve more quickly as 
the automotive industry rapidly 
transitions to electric vehicle 
manufacturing. “In the context we are 
living and working in today, we either 
change fast or there is no future,” 
Bertoni warns. “Repositioning UTIL 
will allow us to go from being a strong 
component manufacturer to a lean 
and fast technology solutions 
provider.” But change doesn’t come 
easily, particularly in a successful 
organization such as UTIL. “The single 
biggest challenge we have faced is 
the internal resistance to change,” 
says Bertoni. “The mentalities that 
say, ‘We are really good at what we 
do already’ or ‘we have always done 
it this way’ are the more common 
manifestations of that resistance.”b
gilaxia/Getty ImagesChapter Fifteen Organizational Change 541
staff are more likely to resist implementing new ideas championed by marketing or 
finance employees. If the IT staff support the change, they are implicitly acknowledging 
another group’s superiority within IT’s own area of expertise. To protect their self-worth, 
some employees deliberately inflate problems with changes they did not initiate, just to 
“prove” that those ideas were not superior to their own. As one consultant warned: 
“Unless they’re scared enough to listen, they’ll never forgive you for being right and for 
knowing something they don’t.”20
Breaking Routines People are creatures of habit. They typically resist initiatives that 
require them to break those automated routines and to learn new role patterns. And un￾less the new patterns of behavior are strongly supported and reinforced, employees tend 
to revert to their past routines and habits. “When you are leading for growth, you know 
you are going to disrupt comfortable routines and ask for new behavior, new priorities, 
new skills,” says Ray Davis, who transformed Oregon-based Umpqua Bank into one of 
America’s most innovative financial institutions. “Even when we want to change, and do 
change, we tend to relax and the rubber band snaps us back into our comfort zones.”21
Incongruent Team Dynamics Teams develop and enforce conformity to a set of 
norms that guide behavior (see Chapter 8). However, conformity to existing team norms 
may discourage employees from accepting organizational change. For instance, organiza￾tional initiatives to improve customer service may be thwarted by team norms that dis￾courage the extra effort expected to serve customers at this higher standard. Even when 
employees have positive attitudes about the change, they behaviorally resist the initiative 
when team norms and associated peer pressure oppose the change.22
Incongruent Organizational Systems Rewards, information systems, patterns 
of authority, career paths, selection criteria, and other systems and structures are both 
friends and foes of organizational change.23 When properly aligned, they reinforce desired 
behaviors. When misaligned, they pull people back into their old attitudes and behavior. 
Even enthusiastic employees lose momentum after failing to overcome the structural 
confines of the past.
Unfreezing, Changing, and Refreezing
Effective change occurs by unfreezing the current situation, moving to a desired condi￾tion, and then refreezing the system so it remains in its desired state. Unfreezing occurs 
when the driving forces are stronger than the restraining forces. This happens by making 
the driving forces stronger, weakening or removing the restraining forces, or doing both.
The first option is to increase the driving forces, which motivates employees to change 
through fear or threats (real or contrived). This strategy rarely works, however, because 
the action of increasing the driving forces alone is usually met with an equal and opposing 
increase in the restraining forces. A useful metaphor is pushing against the coils of a 
mattress. The harder corporate leaders push for change, the stronger the restraining forces 
push back. This antagonism threatens the change effort by producing dysfunctional 
tension and conflict within the organization.
The second option is to weaken or remove the restraining forces. The problem with 
this change strategy is that it provides no motivation for change. To some extent, weakening 
the restraining forces is like clearing a pathway for change. An unobstructed road makes 
it easier to travel to the destination, but does not motivate anyone to go there. The preferred 
option, therefore, is to both increase the driving forces and reduce or remove the restrain￾ing forces. Increasing the driving forces creates an urgency for change, while reducing the 
restraining forces lessens motivation to oppose the change and removes obstacles such as 
lack of ability and situational constraints.
LO 15-3542 Part Four Organizational Processes
CREATING AN URGENCY FOR CHANGE
Organizational change is more likely to succeed when employ￾ees develop a sufficiently strong urgency for change.24 In rare 
situations, such as the COVID-19 pandemic, the forces for 
change are widely known and worrisome to most employees. 
As such, they are motivated (or compliant) to dive into new 
practices, such as working from home, temporarily reducing 
pay rates, learning new digital communication technology, al￾tering work schedules, wearing protective clothing, and engag￾ing in unusual forms of interaction with coworkers and clients 
that minimize transmission of disease.
Most of the time, leaders buffer employees from the external 
environment to such an extent that the prevailing driving forces 
are hardly felt by anyone below the top executive level. The re￾sult is that employees don’t understand why they need to change 
and leaders are surprised when their change initiatives do not 
have much effect. Consequently, the change process begins by 
making the external forces for change known to employees and 
explaining their seriousness for the organization’s future. These 
are the main driving forces in Lewin’s model. They push people 
out of their comfort zone, energizing them to face the risks that 
change creates. Creating this urgency for change was the first 
priority for Chip Bergh when he became CEO at Levi Strauss, 
as the opening case study to this chapter reported. He increased 
employee awareness of the financial and marketplace problems 
the clothing company was experiencing, and explained why or￾ganizational changes were necessary.
Some companies fuel the urgency for change by putting employees and managers in 
direct contact with customers. Dissatisfied customers and other stakeholders represent a 
compelling driving force for change because the organization’s survival typically depends 
on having customers who are satisfied with the product or service. Personal interaction 
with customers also provides a human element that further energizes employees to change 
current behavior patterns.25
Creating an Urgency for Change without External Forces Exposing em￾ployees to external forces can strengthen the urgency for change, but leaders often need to 
begin the change process before problems come knocking at the company’s door. The 
challenge is greatest when companies are performing well in their markets. In successful 
organizations, decision makers tend to be less vigilant about external threats and more 
resistant to change. “To create a culture that embraces change, rigidity and complacency 
have no room at the table,” warns Josh Schoeller, CEO of healthcare at LexisNexis Risk 
Solutions. “Just because something seems to be working, it doesn’t mean you should 
settle into a false sense of security that a particular model, product, or solution will 
always remain relevant.”26
Creating an urgency for change when the organization is the market leader requires 
plenty of persuasive influence that helps employees visualize future competitive threats 
and environmental shifts. Experts warn, however, that employees may see this strategy as 
manipulative, which produces cynicism about change and undermines trust in the change 
agent.27 Fortunately, the urgency for change doesn’t need to originate from problems or 
threats to the company; this motivation can also develop through the leader’s vision of a 
more appealing future. A future vision of a better organization makes the current situation 
inherently less appealing. When the vision connects to employee values and needs, it can 
be a motivating force for change even when external problems are insignificant.
Not long ago, Slack didn’t have any serious competitors. This worried 
Stewart Butterfield, the entrepreneur who cofounded the enterprise 
communication platform. “We don’t have any effective competitors,” 
he observed a year before Microsoft Teams and other platforms were 
launched. “It’s handy in one way, but it’s also very motivating to have a 
real competitor.” To generate an urgency for change and minimize 
complacency, Butterfield persuasively warned Slack employees of the 
limited time they had remaining to build an unbeatable product. “It’s 
up to me to instill the message that we have a year, maybe 18 months, 
before we really have to lock horns with anyone,” said Butterfield.c
Jason Henry/The New York Times/ReduxChapter Fifteen Organizational Change 543
REDUCING THE RESTRAINING FORCES
Earlier, we used the mattress metaphor to explain that increasing the driving forces alone 
will not bring about change because employees often push back harder to offset the op￾posing forces. To minimize this push-back, change agents need to address each of the 
sources of resistance. Six of the main strategies for minimizing resistance to change are 
outlined in Exhibit 15.2. Communication, learning, employee involvement, and stress 
management should be the first priorities for change management.28 However, negotia￾tion and coercion may be necessary for some people who will clearly lose something from 
the change and in cases where the speed of change is critical.
Communication Communication is the highest priority and first strategy required 
for any organizational change. According to one survey, communication (together with 
involvement) is considered the top strategy for engaging employees in the change process.29
“The most practical piece of advice I can offer others is to recognize the critical 
®
SELF-ASSESSMENT 15.2: Are You Tolerant Of Change?
STRATEGY EXAMPLE WHEN APPLIED PROBLEMS
Communication Customer complaint letters 
are shown to employees.
When employees don’t feel an 
urgency for change, don’t know how 
the change will affect them, or resist 
change due to a fear of the unknown.
Time-consuming and potentially 
costly.
Learning Employees learn how to work 
in teams as company adopts 
a team-based structure.
When employees need to break old 
routines and adopt new role 
patterns.
Time-consuming, potentially costly, 
and some employees might not be 
able to learn the new skills.
Employee 
involvement
Company forms a task force 
to recommend new customer 
service practices.
When the change effort needs more 
employee commitment, some 
employees need to protect their self￾worth, and/or employee ideas would 
improve decisions about the change 
strategy.
Very time-consuming. Might 
lead to conflict and poor decisions 
if employees’ interests are 
incompatible with organizational 
needs.
Stress 
management
Employees attend sessions to 
discuss their worries about 
the change.
When communication, training, and 
involvement do not sufficiently ease 
employee worries.
Time-consuming and potentially 
expensive. Some methods may not 
reduce stress for all employees.
Negotiation Employees agree to replace 
strict job categories with mul￾tiskilled job clusters in return 
for increased job security.
When employees will clearly lose 
something of value from the change 
and would not otherwise support the 
new conditions. Also necessary when 
the company must change quickly.
May be expensive, particularly if 
other employees want to negotiate 
their support. Also tends to 
produce compliance but not 
commitment to the change.
Coercion Company president tells 
managers to “get on board” 
the change or leave.
When other strategies are ineffective 
and the company needs to change 
quickly.
Can lead to subtler forms of 
resistance, as well as long-term 
antagonism with the change 
agent.
Sources: Adapted from J.P. Kotter and L.A. Schlesinger, “Choosing Strategies for Change,” Harvard Business Review 57 (1979): 106–14; P.R. Lawrence, 
“How to Deal with Resistance to Change,” Harvard Business Review (May/June 1954): 49–57.
EXHIBIT 15.2 Strategies for Minimizing Resistance to Change544 Part Four Organizational Processes
importance of open communication in times of change,” advises Chris Catliff, CEO of 
BlueShore Financial. “Be consistent, repetitive, and authentic. Tell them [employees and 
others] why you are changing and what you hope to gain from the change.” Catliff led a 
dramatic (180 degree) transformation of a generic credit union in North Vancouver, Canada 
(formerly called North Shore Credit Union) into a much more competitive organization 
with financial “spa” branches and financial advisory services. BlueShore’s assets under 
administration have increased tenfold over the past decade.30
Communication improves the change process in two ways.31 First, communication is 
necessary to generate the urgency for change that we described a few paragraphs ago. Lead￾ers motivate employees to support the change by candidly telling them about the external 
threats and opportunities that make change so important. Second, communication minimizes 
resistance to change by illuminating the future and thereby reducing fear of the unknown. 
The more leaders communicate details about the vision as well as milestones already 
achieved, the more easily employees can understand their own roles in that future.
Learning The opening case study to this chapter described how Levi Strauss mini￾mized some resistance to change by retraining current employees for its “digital first” 
future. This initiative also made it easier for technical hires to be accepted into the organi￾zation. Learning is an important process in most organizational change initiatives 
because employees need new knowledge and skills to fit the organization’s evolving 
requirements. Learning not only helps employees perform better following the change; it 
also increases their readiness for change by generating more optimism about working suc￾cessfully in the new situation (called change self-efficacy). And when employees develop 
stronger change self-efficacy, they develop a stronger acceptance of and commitment to 
the change.32
Supporting Change through 
Communication at EEd
EE (“Everything Everywhere”), the United Kingdom’s larg￾est mobile network, has come a long way over the past 
decade. It was born out of the merger of French-owned 
Orange and German-owned T-Mobile, who sold EE to BT, 
the United Kingdom’s largest Internet service provider.
Communication has been a key ingredient to successful 
change throughout EE’s turbulent transformation. “During 
change, employee engagement needs to link heavily 
to internal communications,” advises Linda Kennedy￾McCarthy, who was EE’s Chief Change Officer during and 
after the merger. “We used every tool we could to keep 
our messages consistent and ever-present. We even put 
up posters in all our toilet cubicles! And we monitored 
closely whether the roadshow messages were being 
cascaded effectively.”
One important purpose of communicating during 
EE’s transformation was to build an urgency for change. 
“Senior management may jump up and down about burn￾ing platforms, but below the surface everyone could be 
sitting comfortably,” warns Kennedy-McCarthy. “If the front 
line doesn’t understand your message or—even worse—
never hears it, you’ll never be able to deliver real, mean￾ingful change.”
EE also relied on ongoing communication to maintain 
momentum and reduce employee fear of the unknown. 
“You have to help people see that the change is real and 
that it applies to them,” says Kennedy-McCarthy. “And it’s 
your responsibility to make sure they understand how the 
change will benefit them or how not changing will cost 
them.”
global connections 15.1
Barry Batchelor/PA Images/Alamy Stock PhotoChapter Fifteen Organizational Change 545
Employee Involvement Some level of employee involvement is almost always es￾sential in the change process. Change agents who dictate the change initiative experience 
resistance because employees today feel disempowered and rebel against command-and￾control leadership. Problems can occur even when employees are involved late in the deci￾sion process due to their lack of psychological ownership of the change. A low level of 
involvement may be necessary when the change must occur quickly or employee interests 
significantly conflict with the organization’s needs, but involvement is generally essential.
The potential benefits of employee involvement, which were discussed in Chapter 7, 
are relevant to organizational change. Rather than being disinterested agents of some￾one else’s decisions, involved employees tend to feel more personal responsibility for 
successful implementation of the change.33 This sense of ownership also minimizes the 
not-invented-here syndrome and fear of the unknown. Furthermore, the work environ￾ment is so complex that determining the best direction of the change effort requires 
ideas and knowledge of many employees. Employee involvement is such an important 
component of organizational change that special initiatives have been developed to al￾low participation in large groups. These large-scale change interventions are described 
later in the chapter.
Stress Management Organizational change is a stressful experience for many 
people because it threatens self-esteem and creates uncertainty about their future.34 Com￾munication, learning, and employee involvement tend to significantly reduce these stress￾ors.35 However, research indicates that companies also need to introduce stress 
management practices to help employees cope with changes.36 In particular, stress man￾agement minimizes resistance by removing some of the negative valence and fear of the 
unknown about the change process. Stress also saps energy, so minimizing stress poten￾tially increases employee motivation to support the change process.
Negotiation As long as people resist change, organizational change strategies will 
require a variety of influence tactics (see Chapter 10). Negotiation is a form of influence 
that involves the promise of benefits or resources in exchange for the target person’s com￾pliance with the influencer’s request. This strategy potentially gains support from those 
who would otherwise lose out from the change. However, this support usually produces 
no more than compliance with the change effort. Negotiation rarely produces commit￾ment to change, so it might not be effective in the long term.
Coercion If all else fails, leaders rely on coercion as part of the change process. Coercion 
includes a range of assertive influence behaviors, such as persistently reminding people of 
their obligations, frequently monitoring behavior to ensure compliance, confronting 
people who do not change, and using threats of punishment (including dismissal) to force 
compliance. Applying assertive influence on those who will not support the change is 
the least desirable way to bring about organizational transformation. It is also a risky 
strategy because, similar to the effects of punishment, coercion potentially reduces trust 
in corporate leaders and may motivate employees to engage in organizational politics to 
protect their own job security.
However, various forms of coercion are sometimes necessary when speed is essential 
and other tactics are ineffective. It may even be necessary to remove executives who are 
unwilling or unable to change their existing mental models of the ideal organization. This 
is a radical form of “unlearning” the organization’s past routines that have become dys￾functional.37 This occurred at Levi Strauss. When Chip Bergh became CEO, he expected 
that two or three of the 11 top executives might not have the ability or motivation to lead 
the clothing company’s transformation to a more customer-focused and innovation￾oriented company. Instead, as the opening case study to this chapter noted, all but two 
Levi Strauss executives were replaced less than two years after Burgh’s arrival.546 Part Four Organizational Processes
REFREEZING THE DESIRED CONDITIONS
Unfreezing and changing behavior won’t produce lasting change. People are creatures of 
habit, so they easily slip back into familiar patterns. Furthermore, existing systems and 
structures motivate people to return to their old ways. Therefore, leaders need to refreeze 
the new behaviors by realigning organizational systems and team dynamics with the de￾sired changes.38 Various physical structures and situational conditions need to be realigned. 
If the change requires more teamwork, then the workplace needs to support team dynam￾ics. Organizational rewards are also powerful systems that refreeze behaviors. If the 
change process is supposed to encourage efficiency, then rewards should be realigned to 
motivate and reinforce efficient behavior.
Information systems play a complementary role in the change process, particularly as 
conduits for feedback.39 Many companies have discovered significantly better cross￾departmental collaboration when enterprise communication platforms such as Slack and 
Microsoft Teams are introduced with appropriate training and nudging. Feedback systems 
are also powerful instruments for refreezing change. The organization maintains a stronger 
customer focus, for example, when people receive ongoing digital feedback regarding 
customer attitudes and behaviors toward the firm’s products and services. The adage 
“What gets measured, gets done” applies here. Employees concentrate on the new priori￾ties when they receive a continuous flow of feedback about how well they are achieving 
those goals.
Leadership, Coalitions, and Pilot Projects
Kurt Lewin’s force field analysis model is a useful macro-level template to explain the dy￾namics of organizational change. But it overlooks four other ingredients in effective 
change processes: leadership, coalitions, social networks, and pilot projects.
LO 15-4
Zenefits Urges Employees to Change 
or “Make Space” for Otherse
Zenefits provides cloud-based employee benefits soft￾ware and earns revenue as a broker of health insurance 
sold through that software. However, the start-up firm de￾veloped a campus frat-house reputation and gave only 
casual attention to rules and regulations. It was this disre￾gard for regulations that sailed Zenefits into turbulent wa￾ters and forced the departure of the company’s founder.
On his first day as Zenefits’ new (temporary) CEO, vet￾eran Internet leader David Sacks created an urgency for 
change by emphasizing that in the insurance business 
“compliance is like oxygen. Without it, we die.” He also re￾lied on more coercive change leadership strategies to en￾sure that future employees support the company’s 
transformation. Several dozen employees were fired or laid 
off due to possible compliance violations. A voluntary sep￾aration package was offered to any employee who didn’t 
want to give their full support to the company’s future.
“The next few months are going to be an exciting time 
at Zenefits and we want everyone participating in that,” 
Sacks wrote in an email to staff four months after becom￾ing CEO. “But if you can’t get excited about that, then 
frankly we need you to make space for someone who will. 
Because Zenefits is at a point where will matters as much 
as skill, and we need everyone committed and contribut￾ing to the push ahead.”
global connections 15.2
Hero Images/Getty ImagesChapter Fifteen Organizational Change 547
TRANSFORMATIONAL LEADERSHIP AND CHANGE
The opening case study to this chapter described how Chip Bergh navigated Levi Strauss 
away from a declining business with high debt towards an innovative, customer-focused 
organization, and more recently into a company that embraces digitalization. Bergh and 
his executive team are transformational leaders who have guided these change initiatives 
(see Chapter 12). They developed a vision of the organization’s desired future state, com￾municated that vision in ways that were meaningful to others, acted in ways that were 
consistent with that vision, and encouraged employees to experiment with ways to align 
work activities more closely with the vision.40
Leading change begins with a strategic vision.41 A leader’s vision provides a sense of 
direction and establishes the critical success factors against which the real changes are 
evaluated. Furthermore, a vision provides an emotional foundation for the change 
because it links the individual’s values and self-concept to the desired change.42 A strategic 
vision also minimizes employee fear of the unknown and provides a better understanding 
of what behaviors employees must learn for the desired future.
Bosch Executives Lead Change 
by Examplef
Faced with rapid technological change and an increas￾ingly connected world, Robert Bosch GmbH boldly 
adopted an agile approach of working. “For a technology 
company like Bosch, agility is crucial; it allows us to adjust 
to the increasing speed of change around us . . . and to 
remain in the position as an innovation leader,” said CEO 
Volkmar Denner soon after the agile transformation 
process began.
The Bosch executive team (management board) 
formed a steering committee, which prepared the change 
process by producing a detailed plan, complete with 
goals, target dates, and status update schedules. It then 
assigned Bosch project leader and agile expert Felix 
Hieronymi the monumental task of introducing agile 
methodology across the German engineering and techno￾logy company.
In spite of considerable effort to introduce agile prac￾tices, the change program stalled. The company’s divisional 
leaders lacked commitment to yet another transformation 
dictated by top management. Many were also skeptical 
because the executive team’s centralized, long-range blue￾print for change was the antithesis of the decentralized, 
dynamic agile practices that employees were expected to 
adopt. Some staff also felt that Bosch was successful, so 
their current work practices didn’t need to change. “If you 
are used to a prior process where you’re successful for 
years, it’s really hard to accept a new approach, even if it’s 
much more beneficial,” Hieronymi acknowledges.
Bosch’s leaders realized that the change process 
would only succeed if they led by example. The entire 
executive group had to apply agile methodologies 
themselves. “The members of the management board 
divided themselves into small agile teams and tested vari￾ous approaches—some with a ‘product owner’ and an 
‘agile master’—to tackle tough problems or work on fun￾damental topics,” Felix Hieronymi recounts.
Bosch’s management board identified and prioritized a 
backlog of executive tasks, which the cross-functional ag￾ile teams of 5–6 executives tackled as sprints. These 
executive teams moved out of the boardroom where they 
had mainly listened to presentations, and moved into 
spaces with whiteboards where they actively conducted 
stand-up discussions about their current sprints. Bosch’s 
top management collectively shifted from a mindset of 
fixed long-term objectives and budget cycles to more 
continuous planning and funding decisions.
As Bosch’s top executives began to role model agile 
practices, division leaders invited agile experts and their 
own employees to guide these changes in their divisional 
businesses. Felix Hieronymi points out that Bosch conducts 
“leadership programs, training workshops, and town hall 
meetings where we encourage leaders to be a role 
model. We not only talk about what should be changed in 
the organization, but how leaders can start that change 
by themselves.”
global connections 15.3
HRAUN/Getty Images548 Part Four Organizational Processes
COALITIONS, SOCIAL NETWORKS, AND CHANGE
One of the great truths of organizational change is that change agents cannot lead the 
initiative alone. They need the assistance of several people with a similar degree of com￾mitment to the transformation.43 Indeed, this group—often called a guiding coalition—may 
be the most important factor in the success of organizational change initiatives.
Membership in the guiding coalition extends beyond the executive team. Ideally, it in￾cludes a diagonal swath of employees representing different functions and most levels of 
the organization. Members of the guiding coalition should also be influencers—highly re￾spected by peers in their area of the organization. A guiding coalition can be created in 
many ways. It is sometimes formed from a special task force that initially investigates the 
opportunities for change. In other situations, the coalition consists of employees who re￾ceive special training in the new work practices, and then become trainers in their own 
work units.
For instance, the opening case study described how Levi Strauss trained digital tech￾niques to nontechnical employees across the organization so they could apply machine 
learning and agile methods to their jobs and work units. These bootcamp graduates be￾came a guiding coalition because they embodied the digital transformation the company 
was trying to create. They role modeled digital initiatives and supported newly hired techni￾cal staff in their socialization. 
Social Networks and Viral Change The change process can be strengthened 
through social networks, which are structures of people connected to one another through 
one or more forms of interdependence (see Chapter 10). They have an important role in 
communication and influence, both of which are key ingredients for organizational 
change. To some extent, coalition members support the change process by feeding into 
these networks. But social networks contribute to organizational change whether or not 
the change agent has a formal coalition.44
Social networks are not easily controlled, yet some change agents have tapped into 
them to build a groundswell of support for a change initiative. Viral change is a variation 
of word-of-mouth and viral marketing, whereby information is seeded to a few people and 
then spread to others through friendship connections.45 Within organizations, social net￾works represent the channels through which news and opinions about change initiatives 
are transmitted. Participants in that network have relatively high trust, so their informa￾tion and opinions are more persuasive than from more formal channels. Social networks 
also provide opportunities for behavior modeling—employees observe one another’s be￾havior and often adopt that behavior themselves. As key people in the network change 
their behavior, that behavior is copied by others in the network.
PILOT PROJECTS AND DIFFUSION OF CHANGE
The opening case study to this chapter described how Levi Strauss introduced agile meth￾odologies in self-directed teams. Agile can be a complex change process, so the clothing 
company began with a pilot project that selected and trained teams eager to adopt agile 
practices. As these teams successfully adopted the new methods, Levi Strauss diffused the 
planned change to other teams that may have been less receptive to agile methodologies.
Many companies begin with a pilot project, which involves applying change to one 
work unit or section of the organization. A pilot project is more flexible and less risky 
than a companywide initiative. This cautious approach tests initial employee support for 
the change as well as the specific methods used to introduce the change (e.g., training, 
involvement).46 Pilot projects also make it easier to select organizational groups that are 
most ready for change, thus increasing the change initiative’s likelihood of success.
How does change get diffused from the pilot project to other parts of the organiza￾tion? The answer is guided by the MARS model of individual behavior and performance Chapter Fifteen Organizational Change 549
(see Chapter 1). Several MARS strategies are outlined in Exhibit 15.3. First, employees 
are more likely to adopt the practices of a pilot project when they are motivated to do 
so.47 This occurs when the pilot project is successful and people in the pilot project re￾ceive recognition and rewards for changing their previous work practices. Diffusion also 
occurs more successfully when managers support and reinforce the desired behaviors. 
More generally, change agents need to minimize the sources of resistance to change that 
we discussed earlier in this chapter.
Second, employees must have the ability—the required skills, knowledge, and habits—to 
adopt the practices introduced in the pilot project. According to innovation diffusion 
studies, people adopt ideas more readily when they have an opportunity to interact with 
and learn from others who have already applied the new practices.48
Third, pilot projects get diffused when employees have clear role perceptions; that is, 
when they understand how the practices in a pilot project apply to them even though they 
are in a completely different functional area. For instance, accounting department em￾ployees won’t easily recognize how they can adopt quality improvement practices devel￾oped by employees in the production department. The challenge here is for change agents 
to provide guidance that is not narrowly defined around the pilot project setting because 
it might not seem relevant to other areas of the organization. At the same time, the pilot 
project intervention should not be described too broadly or abstractly to other employees 
because this makes the information and role model too vague. Finally, employees require 
supportive situational factors, including the resources and time necessary to adopt the 
practices demonstrated in the pilot project.
Four Approaches to Organizational Change
So far, this chapter has examined the dynamics of change that occur every day in organi￾zations. However, organizational leaders and consultants also apply various structured 
approaches to organizational change. This section introduces four of the leading ap￾proaches: action research, appreciative inquiry, large group interventions, and parallel 
learning structures.
LO 15-5
Motivation
• Widely communicate and celebrate the pilot project’s success.
• Reward and recognize pilot project employees as well as those who work at transferring that change 
to other parts of the organization.
• Ensure that managers support and reinforce the desired behaviors related to the pilot project’s 
success.
• Identify and address potential sources of resistance to change.
Ability
• Give employees the opportunity to interact with and learn from pilot project team members.
• Reassign or temporarily transfer some pilot project employees to other work units, where they can 
coach and serve as role models.
• Give employees technical training to implement practices identified in the pilot project.
Role Perceptions
• Communicate and teach employees how the pilot project practices are relevant for their own 
functional areas.
• Ensure that the pilot project is described in a way that is neither too specific nor too general.
Situational Factors
• Give staff sufficient time and resources to learn and implement the pilot project practices in their 
work units.
EXHIBIT 15.3
Strategies for Diffusing Change 
from a Pilot Project550 Part Four Organizational Processes
Diagnose need
for change
Introduce
intervention
Evaluate and
stabilize change
Form
client–
consultant
relationship
Disengage
consultant’s
services
• Gather data
• Analyze data
• Decide objectives
• Implement 
the desired 
 incremental or 
 rapid change
• Determine 
the change
 eectiveness
• Refreeze new
 conditions
ACTION RESEARCH APPROACH
Along with introducing the force field model, Kurt Lewin recommended an action 
research approach to the change process. The philosophy of action research is that meaning￾ful change is a combination of action orientation (changing attitudes and behavior) and re￾search orientation (testing theory).49 The change process needs to be action-oriented because 
the ultimate goal is to improve workplace behaviors and practices. An action orientation in￾volves diagnosing current problems and applying interventions that correct those problems. 
At the same time, the change process is a research study because change agents apply a 
conceptual framework (such as team dynamics or organizational culture) to a real situation. 
As with any good research, the change process involves collecting data to diagnose problems 
more effectively and to systematically evaluate how well the theory works in practice.50
Within this dual framework of action and research, the action research approach adopts 
an open systems view. It recognizes that organizations have many interdependent parts, so 
change agents need to anticipate both the intended and the unintended consequences of 
their interventions. Action research is also a highly participative process because change 
requires both the knowledge and the commitment of members within that open system. 
Indeed, employees are essentially co-researchers as well as participants in the intervention. 
Overall, action research is a data-based, problem-oriented process that diagnoses the need 
for change, introduces the intervention, and then evaluates and stabilizes the desired 
changes. The main phases of action research are illustrated in Exhibit 15.4:51
1. Form client–consultant relationship. Action research usually assumes that the change 
agent originates outside the system (such as a consultant), so the process begins by 
forming the client–consultant relationship. Consultants need to determine the client’s 
readiness for change, including whether people are motivated to participate in the pro￾cess, are open to meaningful change, and possess the abilities to complete the process.
2. Diagnose the need for change. Action research is a problem-oriented activity that 
carefully diagnoses the situation to identify the most appropriate change strategy. 
Organizational diagnosis systematically gathers and analyzes data about an ongo￾ing system, including interviews and surveys of employees and other stakeholders. 
This diagnosis also involves employees so they help to identify and support the ap￾propriate change method, the schedule for the actions involved, and the expected 
standards of successful change.
3. Introduce intervention. This stage in the action research model applies one or more 
actions to correct the problem. It may include any of the prescriptions mentioned 
in this book, such as building more effective teams, managing conflict, building a 
better organizational structure, or changing the corporate culture. An important 
issue is how quickly the changes should occur.52 Some experts recommend incremental 
change, in which the organization fine-tunes the system and takes small steps to￾ward a desired state. Others claim that rapid change is often required, in which the 
system is overhauled decisively and quickly.
action research
a problem-focused change 
process that combines action 
orientation (changing attitudes 
and behavior) and research 
orientation (testing theory 
through data collection and 
analysis)
EXHIBIT 15.4 The Action Research ProcessChapter Fifteen Organizational Change 551
4. Evaluate and stabilize change. Action research recommends evaluating the effective￾ness of the intervention against the standards established in the diagnostic stage. 
Unfortunately, even when these standards are clearly stated, the intervention’s 
effectiveness might not be apparent for several years or might be difficult to sepa￾rate from other factors. If the activity has the desired effect, the change agent and 
participants need to stabilize the new conditions. This refers to the refreezing pro￾cess that was described earlier in this chapter. Rewards, information systems, 
team norms, and other conditions are redesigned so they support the new values 
and behaviors.
The action research approach has dominated organizational change thinking since 
it was introduced in the 1940s. However, some experts are concerned that the problem￾oriented nature of action research—in which something is wrong that must be fixed—
focuses on the negative dynamics of the group or system rather than its positive opportu￾nities and potential. This concern with action research has led to the development of a 
more positive approach to organizational change, called appreciative inquiry.53
APPRECIATIVE INQUIRY APPROACH
Appreciative inquiry tries to break out of the problem￾solving mindset of traditional change management prac￾tices by reframing relationships around the positive and 
the possible. It searches for organizational (or team) 
strengths and capabilities and then applies that knowl￾edge for further success and well-being. Appreciative in￾quiry is therefore deeply grounded in the philosophy 
of positive organizational behavior, which suggests that 
debating point
WHAT’S THE BEST SPEED FOR ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE?
One of the great debates among organizational change experts is how 
quickly the change should occur. One view is that slow, incremental 
change is better because it gives employees more time to adjust to the 
new realities, to keep up with what needs to be learned, and to man￾age their stress in this process. Incremental change is also preferred 
because it gives leaders more time to change course if the current 
direction isn’t working as hoped.
In spite of the apparent virtues of incremental change, some ex￾perts argue that rapid change is usually a much better choice. They do 
not claim that change needs to be radical or evenly rapid all of the 
time. Rather, they suggest that most change initiatives need to be, on 
average, much quicker than incremental. One argument is that companies 
operate in such a fast-paced environment that any speed less than 
“rapid” is risky; an incremental change initiative risks putting organiza￾tions further behind their competitors to the point that any change 
seems futile.
A second argument is that rapid change creates a collective sense 
of momentum, whereas inertia eventually catches up with incremental 
change.g
 In other words, employees feel the sense of progress when 
change occurs quickly. This forward movement generates its own energy 
that helps motivate employees toward the future objectives. Incremental 
change, by comparison, is sluggish and lethargic. A related argument is 
that any organizational change requires plenty of energy, particularly 
from the leaders who must continually communicate, role model, coach, 
and otherwise support and influence employees toward the new state of 
affairs.h
 This energy is finite, and it is more likely to run out when the 
change is spread over a long rather than a short period of time.
Third, incremental change doesn’t necessarily give employees 
more time to adjust; instead, it typically gives them more time to dig in 
their heels! Rapid change, on the other hand, happens at such speed 
that employees don’t have the opportunity to find ways to hold back, 
retrench, or even think about strategies to oppose the change effort. 
Finally, although proponents of incremental change point to its benefits 
for minimizing stress, there is reason to believe that it often has the 
opposite effect. Changing slowly can feel like a slow train wreck—the 
more you see it coming, the more painful it feels. Quicker change, par￾ticularly when there are support systems to help employees through 
the process, may be less painful than incremental change.
appreciative inquiry
an organizational change 
strategy that directs the group’s 
attention away from its own 
problems and focuses 
participants on the group’s 
potential and positive elements
positive organizational behavior
a perspective of organizational 
behavior that focuses on building 
positive qualities and traits within 
individuals or institutions as 
opposed to focusing on what is 
wrong with them552 Part Four Organizational Processes
focusing on an individual’s positive attributes and behaviors rather than on what is 
wrong with the person will improve personal well-being and performance. In other words, 
this approach emphasizes building on strengths rather than trying to directly correct 
problems.54
Appreciative inquiry improves open dialogue by redirecting the group’s attention away 
from its own concerns. This is especially useful when participants are aware of their prob￾lems or already suffer from negativity in their relationships. The positive orientation of 
appreciative inquiry enables groups to overcome these negative tensions and build a more 
hopeful perspective of their future by focusing on what is possible.55 This positive ap￾proach to change also suggests that change agents should adopt an optimistic view of 
possibilities, such as seeing a glass half full rather than half empty. Therefore, appreciative 
inquiry actively frames reality in a way that provides constructive value for future 
development.
Appreciative inquiry’s positive focus is illustrated by the intervention conducted at 
Heidelberg USA. The American arm of the world’s largest printing press manufacturer 
(Heidelberger Druckmaschinen AG) had experienced morale-busting product setbacks as 
well as downsizing due to an economic recession. To rebuild employee morale and moti￾vation, Heidelberg held a two-day appreciative inquiry summit involving one-third of its 
staff. Organized into cross-departmental teams, participants envisioned what Heidelberg 
would ideally look like in the future. From these sessions emerged a new vision and 
greater autonomy for employees to serve customers. “Appreciative inquiry can energize an 
organization even in tough times because it begins the conversation with possibilities in￾stead of problems,” says a senior executive at Heidelberg USA.56
Appreciative Inquiry Principles Appreciative inquiry embraces five key princi￾ples (see Exhibit 15.5).57 One of these is the positive principle, which we have just de￾scribed. A second principle, called the constructionist principle, recognizes that the 
questions we ask and the language we use construct different realities. How questions are 
stated determines the information we receive, which in turn affects which change inter￾vention we choose. A third principle, called the simultaneity principle, states that inquiry 
and change are simultaneous, not sequential. We begin the change process the moment 
we ask questions, because the questions themselves influence those who hear and answer 
those questions. Consequently, change agents need to be mindful of effects that the 
inquiry has on the direction of the change process.
APPRECIATIVE INQUIRY PRINCIPLE DESCRIPTION
Positive principle Focusing on positive events and potential produces more positive, effective, and enduring 
change.
Constructionist principle How we perceive and understand the change process depends on the questions we ask and 
language we use throughout that process.
Simultaneity principle Inquiry and change are simultaneous, not sequential.
Poetic principle Organizations are open books, so we have choices in how they may be perceived, framed, 
and described.
Anticipatory principle People are motivated and guided by the vision they see and believe in for the future.
Sources: Based on D.L. Cooperrider and D.K. Whitney, Appreciative Inquiry: A Positive Revolution in Change (San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler, 2005), Chap. 7; 
D.K. Whitney and A. Trosten-Bloom, The Power of Appreciative Inquiry: A Practical Guide to Positive Change, 2nd ed. (San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler, 2010), 
Chap. 3.
EXHIBIT 15.5 Five Principles of Appreciative InquiryChapter Fifteen Organizational Change 553
1. Discovery
Identifying the
best of
“what is.”
2. Dreaming
Envisioning
“what
might be.”
3. Designing
Engaging in
dialogue about
“what should be.”
4. Delivering
Developing
objectives about
“what will be.”
A fourth appreciative inquiry principle, called the poetic principle, states that organiza￾tions are open books, so we have choices in how they may be perceived, framed, and de￾scribed. The poetic principle encourages change agents to actively frame reality in a way 
that provides constructive value for future development. The fifth principle, called the
anticipatory principle, recognizes that people are motivated and guided by an abstract vi￾sion of the future that is aligned with their personal values. We noted the importance of 
visions in our discussion of transformational leadership (Chapter 12) and in the previous 
section of this chapter.
The Four-D Model of Appreciative Inquiry Appreciative inquiry follows the 
“Four-D” process shown in Exhibit 15.6. The model’s name refers to its four stages, which 
begins with discovery—identifying the positive elements of the observed events or organiza￾tion.58 This might involve documenting positive customer experiences elsewhere in the 
organization. Or it might include directly observing a successful organization elsewhere to 
discover its fundamental strengths. As participants discuss their findings, they shift into 
the dreaming stage by envisioning what might be possible in an ideal organization. By 
pointing out a hypothetical ideal organization or situation, participants feel safer revealing 
their hopes and aspirations than they would if they were discussing their own organiza￾tion or predicament.
As participants make their private thoughts public to the group, the process shifts into 
the third stage, called designing. In the designing stage, participants listen with selfless 
receptivity to each other’s models and assumptions and eventually form a collective model 
for thinking within the team. Essentially, they create a common image of “what should 
be.” As this model takes shape, group members shift the focus back to their own situation. 
In the final stage of appreciative inquiry, called delivering (also known as destiny), partici￾pants establish specific objectives and direction for their own organization on the basis of 
their model of “what will be.”
Appreciative inquiry was introduced nearly four decades ago, but it gained popularity 
only within the past decade or two. The City of Cleveland recently held the Cleveland 
Rising Summit, an appreciative inquiry event in which 600 participants developed numer￾ous ideas to improve the region and clarify aspirations for the next decade. Several dozen 
health professionals at a hospital in Vancouver, Canada, were involved in appreciative in￾quiry sessions to discover how to improve medical practice for dementia patients. Appre￾ciative inquiry has also been successfully applied across a range of other organizations, 
including Heidelberg USA, British Broadcasting Corporation, the State of Massachusetts, 
and Hunter Douglas.59
EXHIBIT 15.6 The Four-D Model of Appreciative Inquiry
Sources: Based on F.J. Barrett and D.L. Cooperrider, “Generative Metaphor Intervention: A New Approach for Working with Systems Divided by Conflict and 
Caught in Defensive Perception,” Journal of Applied Behavioral Science 26 (1990): 229; J.M. Stavros, L.N. Godwin, and D.L. Cooperrider, “Appreciative Inquiry,” 
in Practicing Organization Development: Leading Transformation and Change, ed. W.J. Rothwell, J.M. Stavros, and R.L. Sullivan, 4th ed. (John Wiley & Sons, 
2016), 96–116.554 Part Four Organizational Processes
Appreciative inquiry has much to offer, but it is not always the best strategy for 
change and, indeed, has not always been successful. This approach depends on partici￾pants’ ability to let go of the problem-oriented approach, including the “blame game” of 
determining who may have been responsible for past failures. It also requires leaders 
who are willing to accept appreciative inquiry’s less structured process. Another concern 
is that research has not yet examined the contingencies of this approach.60 In other 
words, we don’t yet know under what conditions appreciative inquiry is useful for orga￾nizational change and under what conditions it is less effective. Overall, appreciative in￾quiry can be an effective approach to organizational change, but we are still discovering 
its potential and limitations.
LARGE GROUP INTERVENTION APPROACH
Appreciative inquiry can occur in small teams, but it is often designed to involve a large 
number of people, such as the hundreds of employees who participated in the recent 
Cleveland Rising Summit. As such, appreciative inquiry is often identified as one of sev￾eral large group organizational change interventions. Large group interventions adopt a 
“whole systems” perspective of the change process.61 This means that they view organiza￾tions as open systems (see Chapter 1) and assume that change will be more successful 
when many employees and other stakeholders participate.62 Large group interventions are 
high-involvement events because participants discuss their experiences, expectations, and 
ideas with others, typically in small groups within the large collective setting.
Similar to appreciative inquiry, large group interventions adopt a future-oriented posi￾tive focus rather than a past-oriented problem focus. Future search conferences, for in￾stance, are large group interventions typically held over a few days in which participants 
identify emerging trends and develop strategies for the organization to realize potential 
under those future conditions. In addition to developing strategy, large group interven￾tions generate a collective vision or sense making about the organization and its future. 
This “meaning-making” process is important for the organization’s evolving identity and 
how participants relate to that identity.
Future search meetings and similar large group change events potentially minimize 
resistance to change and assist the quality of the change process, but they also have 
Lewis County General Hospital 
has adopted appreciative inquiry 
principles and practices for its 
long-term strategy development 
process. “I wanted to focus on 
what we can do, not on what we 
can’t,” says Gerald R. Cayer, CEO 
of the Lewis County Health 
System, which owns the medical 
center in upstate New York. 
Instead of focusing on problems, 
Lewis County General Hospital 
began with “Discovery and 
Aspirations” discussion sessions, 
which reviewed the best practices 
of rural hospitals around the 
country. This was followed by the 
“designing” phase of strategy 
development. The hospital’s 
appreciative inquiry process 
involved numerous stakeholders, 
including hospital administration, 
employees, labor unions, service 
providers, the hospital foundation, 
and community members. “The 
point is to bring forward great 
minds, encourage dialogue, and 
to think about what can make the 
most sense for the community and 
for the hospital,” Cayer explains.i
Monkey Business Images/
ShutterstockChapter Fifteen Organizational Change 555
limitations.63 One problem is that involving so many people invariably limits the oppor￾tunity to contribute and increases the risk that a few people will dominate the process. 
Another concern is that these events focus on finding common ground, and this may 
prevent the participants from discovering substantive differences that interfere with fu￾ture progress. A third issue is that these events generate high expectations about an 
ideal future state that are difficult to satisfy in practice. Employees become even more 
cynical and resistant to change if they do not see meaningful decisions and actions re￾sulting from these meetings.
PARALLEL LEARNING STRUCTURE APPROACH
Parallel learning structures are highly participative arrangements composed of people 
from most levels of the organization who follow the action research model to produce 
meaningful organizational change. They are social structures developed alongside the for￾mal hierarchy with the purpose of increasing the organization’s learning.64 Ideally, partici￾pants in parallel learning structures are sufficiently free from the constraints of the larger 
organization that they can effectively solve organizational issues.
Royal Dutch/Shell relied on a parallel learning structure to introduce a more customer￾focused organization.65 Rather than try to change the entire organization at once, execu￾tives held weeklong “retail boot camps” with teams from six countries, consisting of 
front-line people (such as gas station managers, truck drivers, and marketing profession￾als). Participants learned about competitive trends in their regions and were taught power￾ful marketing tools to identify new opportunities. The teams then returned home to study 
their markets and develop proposals for improvement. Four months later, boot camp 
teams returned for a second workshop, at which each proposal was critiqued by Royal 
Dutch Shell executives. Each team had 60 days to put its ideas into action; then the teams 
returned for a third workshop to analyze what worked and what didn’t. This parallel learn￾ing process did much more than introduce new marketing ideas. It created enthusiasm in 
participants that spread contagiously to their coworkers, including managers above them, 
when they returned to their home countries.
parallel learning structure
a highly participative social 
structure developed alongside 
the formal hierarchy and 
composed of people across 
organizational levels who 
apply the action research 
model to produce meaningful 
organizational change
ENWIN Utilities Ltd. relies on a 
parallel learning structure to 
introduce employee-led 
organizational change. While still 
performing their regular jobs, 
15 employees (called Catalysts) 
at the hydro and water services 
company in Windsor, Ontario, 
Canada, receive design thinking 
and related training, then work in 
teams to develop strategies for 
improving work processes. 
“We trained the Catalysts in 
customer-centric design thinking 
and innovative solutions,” explains 
ENWIN executive Barry Leavitt. 
“Then it was their job to go out 
into the company and assess 
opportunities for change.” Catalyst 
teams present their diagnostics 
and solutions to ENWIN’s executive 
team; several ideas are selected 
for testing and implementation. 
ENWIN has two Catalyst intakes 
annually.j
FrameStockFootages/Shutterstock556 Part Four Organizational Processes
Cross-Cultural and Ethical Issues 
in Organizational Change
Throughout this chapter, we have emphasized that change is inevitable and often continu￾ous because organizations need to remain aligned with the dynamic external environ￾ment. Yet, we also need to be aware of cross-cultural and ethical issues with any change 
process. Many organizational change practices are built around Western cultural assump￾tions and values, which may differ from and sometimes conflict with assumptions and 
values in other cultures.66 One possible cross-cultural limitation is that Western organiza￾tional change models, such as Lewin’s force field analysis, often assume change has a be￾ginning and an ending in a logical linear sequence (that is, a straight line from point A to 
point B). Yet in some cultures change is viewed more as a cyclical phenomenon, such as 
the earth’s revolution around the sun or a pendulum swinging back and forth. Other 
cultures have more of an interconnected view of change, whereby one change leads to 
another (often unplanned) change, which leads to another change, and so forth until the 
change objective is ultimately achieved in a more circuitous way.
Another cross-cultural issue with some organizational change interventions is the as￾sumption that effective organizational change is necessarily punctuated by tension and overt 
conflict. Indeed, some change interventions encourage such conflict. But this direct con￾frontation view is incompatible with cultures that emphasize harmony and equilibrium (see 
Chapter 11). These cross-cultural differences suggest that a more contingency-oriented per￾spective is required for organizational change to work effectively in this era of globalization.
Organizational change practices also need to consider ethical issues.67 One ethical con￾cern is the risk of violating individual privacy rights. The action research model is built on the 
idea of collecting information from organizational members, yet this asks employees to pro￾vide personal information and reveal emotions they would not normally divulge.68 A second 
ethical concern is that some change activities potentially increase management’s power by 
inducing compliance and conformity in organizational members. For instance, action re￾search is a systemwide activity that requires employee participation rather than allowing 
individuals to get involved voluntarily. A third risk is that some organizational 
change interventions undermine the individual’s self-esteem. The unfreezing 
process requires that participants disconfirm their existing beliefs, sometimes 
including their own competence at certain tasks or interpersonal relations.
Organizational change is usually more difficult than it initially seems. 
Yet the dilemma is that most organizations operate in hyperfast environ￾ments that demand continuous and rapid adaptation. Organizations sur￾vive and gain competitive advantage by mastering the complex dynamics 
of moving people through the continuous process of change as quickly as 
the external environment is changing.
Organizational Behavior: 
The Journey Continues
More than a century ago, industrialist Andrew Carnegie said: “Take away 
my people, but leave my factories, and soon grass will grow on the factory 
floors. Take away my factories, but leave my people, and soon we will have 
a new and better factory.”69 Carnegie’s statement reflects the message 
woven throughout this book: Organizations are not buildings or machinery; 
rather, they are the people in those buildings who operate that machinery, 
and enable the organization to serve its purpose. Organizations are human 
entities—full of life, sometimes fragile, and always exciting.
LO 15-6
Andrew Carnegie
Bettmann/Getty Images557
LO 15-1 Describe the elements of Lewin’s force field analysis 
model.
Lewin’s force field analysis model states that all systems have 
driving and restraining forces. Change occurs through the pro￾cess of unfreezing, changing, and refreezing. Unfreezing pro￾duces disequilibrium between the driving and restraining forces. 
Refreezing realigns the organization’s systems and structures 
with the desired behaviors.
LO 15-2 Discuss the reasons why people resist organiza￾tional change and how change agents should view 
this resistance.
Restraining forces are manifested as employee resistance to 
change. The main reasons people resist change are the negative 
valence of change, fear of the unknown, not-invented-here syn￾drome, breaking routines, incongruent team dynamics, and in￾congruent organizational systems. Resistance to change should 
be viewed as a resource, not an inherent obstacle to change. 
Change agents need to view resistance as task conflict rather 
than relationship conflict. Resistance is a signal that the 
change agent has not sufficiently strengthened employee readi￾ness for change. It is also a form of voice, so discussion poten￾tially improves procedural justice.
LO 15-3 Outline six strategies for minimizing resistance to 
change, and debate ways to effectively create an ur￾gency to change.
Organizational change requires employees to have an urgency 
for change. This typically occurs by informing them about driv￾ing forces in the external environment. Urgency to change also 
develops by putting employees in direct contact with custom￾ers. Leaders often need to create an urgency to change before 
the external pressures are felt, and this can occur through a vi￾sion of a more appealing future.
Resistance to change may be minimized by keeping employ￾ees informed about what to expect from the change effort 
(communicating); teaching employees valuable skills for the 
desired future (learning); involving them in the change process; 
helping employees cope with the stress of change; negotiating 
trade-offs with those who will clearly lose from the change effort; 
and using coercion (sparingly and as a last resort).
LO 15-4 Discuss how leadership, coalitions, social networks, 
and pilot projects assist organizational change.
Every successful change requires transformational leaders with 
a clear, well-articulated vision of the desired future state. They 
also need the assistance of several people (a guiding coalition) 
who are located throughout the organization. In addition, 
change occurs more informally through social networks. Viral 
change operates through social networks using influencers.
Many organizational change initiatives begin with a pilot 
project. The success of the pilot project is then diffused to 
other parts of the organization. This occurs by motivating em￾ployees to adopt the pilot project’s methods, training people to 
know how to adopt these practices, helping clarify how the pi￾lot can be applied to different areas, and providing time and 
resources to support this diffusion.
LO 15-5 Describe and compare action research, appreciative 
inquiry, large group interventions, and parallel 
learning structures as formal approaches to organi￾zational change.
Action research is a highly participative, open systems ap￾proach to change management that combines an action orien￾tation (changing attitudes and behavior) with research 
orientation (testing theory). It is a data-based, problem￾oriented process that diagnoses the need for change, intro￾duces the intervention, and then evaluates and stabilizes the 
desired changes.
Appreciative inquiry embraces the positive organizational 
behavior principle by focusing participants on the positive and 
possible. This approach to change also applies the construc￾tionist, simultaneity, poetic, and anticipatory principles. The 
four stages of appreciative inquiry include discovery, dreaming, 
designing, and delivering.
Large group interventions are highly participative events 
that view organizations as open systems (i.e., involve as many 
employees and other stakeholders as possible) and adopt a fu￾ture and positive focus of change. Parallel learning structures 
rely on social structures developed alongside the formal hierar￾chy with the purpose of increasing the organization’s learning. 
They are highly participative arrangements, composed of peo￾ple from most levels of the organization who follow the action 
research model to produce meaningful organizational change.
LO 15-6 Discuss two cross-cultural and three ethical issues 
in organizational change.
One significant concern is that organizational change theories 
developed with a Western cultural orientation potentially con￾flict with cultural values in some other countries. Also, organiza￾tional change practices can raise one or more ethical concerns, 
including increasing management’s power over employees, 
threatening individual privacy rights, and undermining individ￾ual self-esteem.
chapter summary
action research, p. 550
appreciative inquiry, p. 551
force field analysis, p. 537
parallel learning structure, p. 555
positive organizational behavior, p. 551
refreezing, p. 537
unfreezing, p. 537
key terms558
1. Chances are that the school you are attending is currently 
undergoing some sort of change to adapt more closely to 
its environment. Discuss the external forces that are driving 
the change. What internal drivers for change also exist?
2. Use Lewin’s force field analysis to describe the dynamics 
of organizational change at Levi Strauss. The case study 
at the beginning of this chapter provides some informa￾tion, but think about other forces for and against change 
beyond the information provided.
3. Employee resistance is a symptom, not a problem, in the 
change process. What are some of the real problems that 
may underlie employee resistance?
4. Senior management of a large multinational corporation is 
planning to restructure the organization. Currently, the or￾ganization is decentralized around geographic areas so that 
the executive responsible for each area has considerable 
autonomy over manufacturing and sales. The new structure 
will transfer power to the executives responsible for differ￾ent product groups; the executives responsible for each 
geographic area will no longer be responsible for manufac￾turing in their area but will retain control over sales activi￾ties. Describe two types of resistance senior management 
might encounter from this organizational change.
5. The director of the state government’s department of 
human services (DOHS) wants to make the agency more 
environmentally friendly by reducing waste in the work￾place. Employees will be expected to significantly reduce 
printing (paper usage), nonrecyclables, food waste, and 
other items that end up in the department’s office trash 
each day. Unfortunately, a survey indicates that although 
DOHS employees support environmental objectives, 
many do not know how to reduce waste and some are not 
keen to change their current (wasteful) behaviors and 
habits. You are responsible for this initiative in one of 
DOHS’s largest buildings, where 700 employees work for 
some or most days. Describe specific actions you would 
take to effectively bring about meaningful behavioral 
change toward this environmental goal among employees 
in this building? 
6. Web Circuits is a Malaysian-based custom manufacturer 
for high-technology companies. Senior management 
wants to introduce lean management practices to reduce 
production costs and remain competitive. A consultant 
has recommended that the company start with a pilot 
project in one department and, when successful, diffuse 
these practices to other areas of the organization. Discuss 
the advantages of this recommendation, and identify three 
ways (other than the pilot project’s success) to make 
diffusion of the change effort more successful.
7. What is the role of formal and informal networks in 
organizations interested in undergoing change?
8. Suppose that you are vice president of branch services 
at the Bank of East Lansing. You notice that several 
branches have consistently low customer service ratings, 
even though there are no apparent differences in resources 
or staff characteristics. Describe an appreciative inquiry 
process in one of these branches that might help over￾come this problem.
critical thinking questions
 CASE STUDY: DELTA PALM MILL
By Arif Hassan and Thivagar Velayutham*
Delta Plantations Sdn. Bhd. is an oil palm plantation lo￾cated in Malaysia. It consists of an oil palm estate and one 
palm oil mill. It is a wholly owned subsidiary of a British 
multinational company and was founded with the purpose 
of supplying crude palm oil for its parent company’s deter￾gent manufacturing business. Since its formation, most of 
the managers have been recruited from the United King￾dom, with many British ex-soldiers and police officers em￾ployed there.
Mr. Chua Wen Zhuo first joined Delta mill at the age of 
15 as a laborer, and rose through the ranks to his current 
position as the senior production supervisor in Delta’s palm 
oil mill. Two junior supervisors report to Mr. Chua, who 
reports to the mill manager. The mill operates on a three￾shift cycle of 25 operators each and each supervisor (in￾cluding Mr. Chua) is in charge of one shift. Mr. Chua is 
responsible for the smooth daily palm oil processing opera￾tions. He coordinates the activities of all three shifts with 
the two junior supervisors, prepares the daily production 
reports, deals with short-term human resource planning is￾sues and minor discipline issues, and sets and evaluates 
short-term performance targets for all three shifts. In addi￾tion, he acts as the “gatekeeper,” which means that any mill 
personnel who wish to see the mill manager must first see 
Mr. Chua, who tries to solve the problem first, which may 
be anything from house repairs to a request for an advance 
on wages. Only in rare cases when Mr. Chua cannot resolve 
the issue is the matter brought to the mill manager.
Mr. Chua ran a tight ship, and never let anyone forget it. 
His superb technical competency helped him keep the mill 
in top shape. He was accustomed to receiving the highest 
appraisal ratings from the mill manager, who appreciated 
his firm, methodical, and almost militarily efficient way of 
running the mill. The palm oil industry in Malaysia faced 
many challenges in recent years. World oil prices plunged 
and, with it, palm oil prices hit a 15-year low. This cut profit 
margins of all palm oil producers and caused Delta mill to 
post losses.
Mr. Rex Lawson, the 54-year-old mill manager and for￾mer British Royal Engineer, didn’t know how to improve 
performance. “We are doing nothing wrong, and have met 
all our efficiency targets. It’s this market that is killing us!” 
he exasperatedly explained during the annual year-end visit 
of the directors from London. With insufficient improve￾ment, the board gave Mr. Lawson his marching orders.
The new mill manager was very different from all his pre￾decessors. Mr. Ian MacKenzie, a 32-year-old who hailed 
from Aberdeen, Scotland, was not a career plantation 559
engineer and had never managed an agricultural product￾processing mill before. He was actually an electronics engi￾neer with an Ivy League MBA on the fast track to a top 
management position. His previous appointment was as fac￾tory manager of a detergent factory in Egypt where he 
streamlined and modernized operations, which resulted in 
significantly better financial performance. The executives in 
London had high hopes that Mr. MacKenzie would be able 
to do the same with Delta mill and return it to profitability. 
Mr. MacKenzie’s first action was to analyze operations 
at Alpha mill and look for ways to reduce production costs 
and increase profits. He arrived at the following 
conclusions:
• Current performance standards allowed too much ma￾chine breakdown and changeover time. Better standards 
were achievable with the latest technology.
• Wastage could be reduced and yield significantly im￾proved by installing machinery with new technology.
• Personnel numbers were too high—they could be re￾duced with technology and multitasking and unleashing 
the full potential of workers.
• Personnel were just “cruising along”—they were not 
fully committed to achieving better performance.
• Hygiene needs were not being met.
• The old colonial and hierarchical company culture was 
not conducive to performance improvement.
• Information was not shared across the mill. Operators 
only knew about their own little area in the mill and 
almost nothing about the company as a whole.
Mr. MacKenzie proposed to remedy the situation with 
the following initiatives:
• Empower operators by reorganizing the shifts into 
self-directed production teams where the supervisors 
would now play the role of “facilitators,” and thereby 
gain commitment.
• Install new technology and automation.
• Adopt more stringent performance measures.
Mr. MacKenzie implemented and executed these initia￾tives by first organizing an excursion to a local picnic spot 
for the entire factory. After the icebreakers, games, and 
lunch, he held a briefing session on the beach, where he 
explained the situation Delta mill was in and the need to 
make changes. He then unveiled his plan for the first time. 
The response was enthusiastic, although some operators 
privately confessed to not understanding some of the termi￾nology Mr. MacKenzie used. At the end of the excursion, 
when there was some time allocated for feedback, Mr. Chua 
expressed his full support for Mr. MacKenzie’s plan. “We in 
Delta mill have full confidence in you, our new leader, and 
we assure you of our 110% support to make your plan a suc￾cess!” he said at the end of his speech.
The plan was put into motion when the new machinery 
had been installed and each shift had been reorganized into 
self-directed work teams. Whenever the team faced a 
problem during processing and tried to find a solution us￾ing the techniques that had been taught, Mr. Chua would 
step in after some time, issue instructions and take over the 
process. “This is a simple problem, no need to waste time 
over it. Just do it . . .” His instructions were always followed 
and the immediate problem was always solved. However, 
the production team reverted to the old ways of working, 
and none of the expected benefits of teaming were realized. 
Given the new tighter performance standards and reduced 
manpower, the team consistently underperformed. Team 
meetings were one-way affairs where Mr. Chua would tell 
everyone else what had gone wrong.
Mr. Chua’s response to this was to push himself harder. 
He was always the first to arrive and the last to leave. He 
would spend a lot of time troubleshooting process prob￾lems. He pushed his operators even harder, but he felt that 
he had less of a “handle” on his operators now that they 
had direct access to the mill manager and most of their 
minor needs were seen to by him. Sometimes Mr. Chua 
became annoyed with his operators’ mistakes and would 
resort to shouting and cursing, which had the immediate 
but short-term effect of having employees do what he 
wanted. This was in contrast to the mere glare that would 
have sufficed previously.
The continued poor performance of Delta mill affected 
Mr. Chua’s mid-year appraisal rating, which fell down from 
“excellent” to merely “adequate.” During the appraisal in￾terview, an annoyed Mr. MacKenzie bluntly told Mr. Chua 
that he needed to understand clearly what the initiatives 
were all about, and that he had to let the team take some 
responsibility, make mistakes and learn from them. “With 
your knowledge of this mill, you should be able to provide 
them with all the technical input they need,” he said. 
Mr. MacKenzie also added. “It might help if you treated our 
people with a little more respect. We aren’t living in the 
1950s any more you know.” Mr. Chua was thunderstruck by 
the appraisal but did not raise any objections on the spot. 
He silently deferred to Mr. MacKenzie’s judgment and 
promised to do better. He also reiterated his utmost support 
for Mr. MacKenzie and his plan.
After the mid-year appraisal, there was a noticeable 
change in Mr. Chua’s demeanor. He became very quiet and 
began to take a less active role in the daily running of the 
mill. He was superficially polite to the operators and an￾swered most requests for help with, “Get the team together 
and discuss it amongst yourselves. Show the boss that you 
can solve it for yourselves.” At first, the teams were at a loss 
and mill performance suffered badly, but within two weeks 
the team had found its feet and performance began to im￾prove. One of Mr. Chua’s junior supervisors, Mr. Varma, 
was able to coordinate between production teams to ensure 
that the performance gains were maintained. The effect on 
Mr. Chua was devastating. He became withdrawn and be￾gan to drink more than usual. His presence at team meet￾ings became a mere formality and he contributed next to 
nothing, taking a back seat to other team members. He 
spoke very little to mill personnel and became a mere 
shadow of his former self.Mr. MacKenzie was very aware of the changes taking 
place on the mill floor. He decided that it was time to have 
Mr. Chua removed from his position. He began to plan 
for a reshuffle of Delta mill’s organization chart where 
Mr. Chua would be promoted to the new position of mill 
executive, a staff position with a small pay raise. His re￾sponsibility would be to advise the mill manager on techni￾cal, quality, and efficiency problems faced by the mill. He 
would be assigned to carry out minor improvement proj￾ects and performance audits from time to time. Mr. Varma 
would be promoted to supervisor and report directly to 
the mill manager. Mr. Chua would no longer have any line 
authority over the production team. This reorganization 
was quickly approved by head office and Mr. MacKenzie 
proceeded to lay the groundwork for the announcements 
and the necessary paperwork. Little did he foresee what 
was to follow.
Mr. Chua was in the head office one morning when the 
personnel executive’s clerk congratulated him on his immi￾nent promotion. A surprised Mr. Chua enquired further 
and learned of the plans that Mr. MacKenzie had in store 
for him. It was the final straw. He rushed back to Delta mill 
just as Mr. MacKenzie was about to conduct his noon mill 
inspection. The confrontation was very loud, acrimonious, 
and public. It ended with Mr. Chua being terminated for 
insubordination and gross misconduct.
After Mr. Chua had left, Mr. MacKenzie felt that the 
obstacle to better commitment and morale was gone and 
that performance would improve greatly. He was very 
wrong. Team performance began to deteriorate and no 
amount of pep talks could improve it. He began to wonder 
what had gone wrong.
Discussion Questions
1. What are the main symptoms indicating that there are 
problems with Mr. MacKenzie’s change initiative?
2. What are the main causes of these symptoms?
3. Has Mr. MacKenzie managed the change process 
adequately? Why or why not? 
4. Do you think the departure of Mr. Chua will benefit the 
company in the long run?
5. What actions should the company take to improve the 
changes needed at Delta mill?
*Slightly revised by Steven L. McShane.
TEAM EXERCISE: ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE INCIDENTS
Incident 1: ManuSales Corp.
ManuSales Corp., a manufacturers’ sales agency in south￾western United States, lost a manufacturing client that it had 
served for many years. The company still had positive cash 
flow, but as a precaution the executive team decided to re￾duce expenses for the year by cutting back some trade show 
participation as well as advertising budget. Soon after, two 
valuable sales employees accepted jobs with a competitor 
sales agency and rumors circulated among the remaining 
dozen salespeople that some of them would be laid off. These 
rumors weren’t true at all, but they had a negative effect on 
morale and possibly on sales of the firm’s other products.
Six months later, ManuSales signed up another manu￾facturer as a client with a line of similar products. Sales of 
the new client’s line picked up nicely once ManuSales’ em￾ployees started selling those products. End customers (en￾gineering firms) were also pleased with the manufacturer’s 
products. However, ManuSales almost lost the new manu￾facturing client after the first year. With the previous cli￾ent, ManuSales staff had done all sales work, including 
writing up the basic engineering quotes. Only complex 
quotes were handled directly by the manufacturer’s em￾ployees. But the new manufacturing client insisted that 
ManuSales would only generate sales interest from the 
end user (engineering firms) and report the names of in￾terested customers to the manufacturer. The manufacturer 
would prepare all customer quotes. 
ManuSales salespeople knew the manufacturer wanted 
their own staff to do all quotes, but they opposed giving up 
PURPOSE This exercise is designed to help you apply or￾ganizational change concepts by diagnosing and evaluat￾ing situations in which organizational change is occurring 
unsuccessfully.
MATERIALS Teams should have a method of summariz￾ing their analysis for other teams to view. This might be 
flip chart paper for face-to-face classes or a dedicated vir￾tual white board or presentation slide for each team in re￾mote classes.
INSTRUCTIONS (SMALL OR LARGE CLASS) This ex￾ercise works well in teams so all students actively discuss 
change strategies. However, it can also be completed indi￾vidually. It is suitable for in-class and remote learning set￾tings. It may also be feasible in moderately large classes. 
When the teams (or individuals) have completed the exer￾cise, the results will be discussed and compared with oth￾ers in the class.
Step 1: Read the incidents assigned by the instructor.
Step 2: For each incident, identify specific instances of re￾sistance to change, including how that resistance relates to 
specific restraining forces in the force field model.
Step 3: Identify specific actions that the change agent 
should use to minimize the resistance to change identified 
in the previous step.
Step 4: The class will debrief the exercise by having teams 
share their analysis of each incident.
560this part of their work. Handing over the names of inter￾ested customers felt like handing over the actual business 
to the manufacturer. Furthermore, ManuSales employees 
didn’t understand why the manufacturer wanted or needed 
to write all of the quotes. ManuSales staff were experienced 
in writing basic engineering quotes (which represented 
most business) and viewed quote preparations as a critical 
part of their service to the end customers. ManuSales staff 
did reluctantly inform the manufacturer of business leads 
(interested customers) who had not previously bought 
products through ManuSales. But the salespeople contin￾ued to write quotes for customers who had done business 
with ManuSales for many years. The manufacturer threat￾ened to find another manufacturer’s sales agency unless all 
sales leads were sent to them to prepare quotations.
Incident 2: The Consultant’s Report
A regional director of a large discount variety retail chain 
had been facing two constant problems for some time. The 
first problem was the haphazard way in which products 
were stacked and stored after delivery to local stores. The 
second problem was the incorrect placement of merchan￾dise in those stores. The regional director decided to em￾ploy an outside consultant to analyze the systems in place 
in these retail outlets. After a thorough analysis which in￾cluded filming employee procedures and timing rest 
pauses and social interaction, the consultant delivered a 
200-page report that contained a number of recommended 
“action items.”
The regional director called a meeting of the store man￾agers, where copies of the report were distributed and man￾agers were asked for their support in implementing the new 
procedures. The director was surprised when the store 
managers responded by disagreeing with almost every rec￾ommendation in the report. From their perspective, the 
recommended changes would make matters worse rather 
than better. The director tried to explain some of the most 
obvious conclusions and recommendations documented in 
the report, but the store managers had rebuttals for almost 
all of them, such as claiming that the consultant’s observa￾tions were not representative of actual events.
Incident 3: Electropnya Company
Electropnya Company is the leading electronics retailer in 
a mid-sized European country. In addition to owning or 
franchising several hundred physical stores, it is the coun￾try’s largest online electronics store for mobile phones, 
computers, and other home and small business digital 
equipment. The main competitor, which is the leading on￾line electronics retailer in four other European countries, 
has one-third less online sales in this country than does 
Electropnya. A global online company has the third larg￾est online market share, which is increasing.
Electropnya’s vice president of operations (VPOp) is 
concerned that employees and managers responsible for 
the online business are not doing enough to improve and 
innovate. For example, some reviews suggest that the com￾pany’s online store lacks minor features available on com￾petitor sites, such as comparing products, and that stock 
availability is sometimes inaccurate. The VPOp is aware 
that many of the company’s developers continue to use 
older code and are not taking advantage of recent web 
platform developments that make that code obsolete. 
There are also concerns that online sales have much 
slower completion (from order to delivery) compared to 
competitors. Furthermore, the VPOp has noted rising op￾erational costs, although apparently only slightly above 
competitors’ costs for online sales.
The VPOp has urged managers responsible for the on￾line business to improve the customer online buying expe￾rience and to correct operational efficiency issues. 
However, the managers and their employees say that cus￾tomers are generally happy with the online buying experi￾ence, that some of the requested features probably aren’t 
really important, and that problems occur mainly when 
buyers don’t understand some aspects of the website. They 
point to the company’s leading online market share as evi￾dence that their work has been successful. In one meeting 
where employees acknowledged that the online customer 
experience could be better, the discussion degenerated 
into finger pointing to other groups, such as the company’s 
marketing and logistics departments.
© 2022 Steven L. McShane.
TEAM EXERCISE: APPLYING LEWIN’S FORCE FIELD ANALYSIS
INSTRUCTIONS This exercise works well in teams to 
enable all students to actively discuss change strategies. 
However, it can also be completed individually. The exercise 
is suitable for in-class and remote learning settings. It may 
be feasible in moderately large classes. When the teams (or 
individuals) have completed the exercise, the results will be 
discussed and compared with others in the class.
This exercise involves diagnosing the situation de￾scribed below, identifying the forces for and against 
change, and recommending strategies to minimize resis￾tance to change.
PURPOSE This exercise is designed to help you to diag￾nose an organizational change situation using force field 
analysis, and to identify strategies to facilitate organiza￾tional change.
MATERIALS Teams should have a method of summariz￾ing their analysis for other teams to view. This might 
be flip chart paper for face-to-face classes or a dedicated 
virtual white board or presentation slide for each team in 
remote classes.
561562
Step 1: Students will form teams of (typically four to six 
people) and everyone will read the situation below.
Step 2: Each team will identify the forces that seem to sup￾port the change. Team members should consider all possi￾ble sources of support, not just those explicitly stated in 
the description.
Step 3: Each team will identify potential restraining forces 
against the proposed changes. Specifically, refer to types 
of resistance to change that may affect the willingness or 
ability of professors/instructors to support the proposed 
changes.
Step 4: For each type of resistance to change by professors/
instructors, identify one or more strategies that would most 
effectively minimize that resistance. Those strategies 
should refer to specific concepts described in this chapter.
Step 5: The class will discuss each team’s results.
Situation
A college with 20,000 students (mostly undergraduate) has 
tried to maintain small class sizes of less than 30 students 
for all courses that were taught face-to-face for three hours 
each week. However, due to increasing costs and the shift 
to hybrid learning (some learning occurs online), the col￾lege administration has decided to increase introductory 
courses to a maximum of 120 students and other under￾graduate courses to a maximum of 50 students. Previously, 
courses were taught entirely by the professor or instructor. 
This will continue with the 50-student advanced classes, 
but with two hours of direct contact teaching. The third 
hour each week will occur as online learning modules. The 
proposed 120-student introductory courses will also have 
two hours of direct face-to-face instruction with a third 
hour represented by online learning modules. However, the 
professor or instructor will teach only one hour and the 
other hour each week will be a “tutorial” with labs and 
learning activities led by teaching assistants. The teaching 
assistants also participate in assignment grading. Surveys 
of other colleges suggest that the larger classes and revised 
teaching arrangements will be accepted by most students. 
The Faculty Association has not yet had time to state its 
position on the proposed changes.
© 2022 Steven L. McShane.
1. C. Bergh, “How Levi’s Became Cool Again,” Harvard 
Business Review, July-August (2018): 33–39; E. Rosenbaum, 
“Levi Strauss CEO Chip Bergh on Taking Big Risks with 
an Iconic Jeans Brand,” CNBC, November 19, 2019; 
“Levi’s Grows Value Stream Mindset with Agile Pilot 
Projects,” Digital Ai Catalyst (blog), June 14, 2021; 
H. Singh, “Why Everything That Can Be Automated, 
Should Be Automated: Levi Strauss CFO,” CNBC, 
October 7, 2021; M. McDowell, “Lessons from Levi’s 
Data Science Bootcamp,” Vogue Business, November 8, 
2021; H. Singh, “Inside Levi’s Digital Transformation,” 
Harvard Business Review, February 18, 2022; J.P. 
Titlow, “How Levi’s Uses AI to Accelerate Its Design 
Process and Digital Transformation,” VentureBeat, 
February 28, 2022.
2. K. Lewin, Field Theory in Social Science (New York: 
Harper & Row, 1951).
3. D. Coghlan and T. Brannick, “Kurt Lewin: The ‘Practical 
Theorist’ for the 21st Century,” Irish Journal of Manage￾ment 24, no. 2 (2003): 31–37; B. Burnes, “Kurt Lewin 
and the Planned Approach to Change: A Re-appraisal,” 
Journal of Management Studies 41, no. 6 (2004): 
977–1002; S. Cummings, T. Bridgman, and K.G. Brown, 
“Unfreezing Change as Three Steps: Rethinking Kurt 
Lewin’s Legacy for Change Management,” Human 
Relations 69, no. 1 (2016): 33–60.
4. M. Young, Ogilvy on Advertising in the Digital Age
(London: Goodman Books, 2017), 267. For details 
about the likely origins of “divine discontent,” see the 
annotation/reference toward the end of the “Identifying 
Problems and Opportunities” section in Chapter 7 
(Decision Making and Creativity) of this book.
5. For example, Lewin frequently discusses stable and un￾stable states in the context of driving and restraining 
forces in: K. Lewin, A Dynamic Theory Of Personality
(New York: McGraw Hill, 1935), especially Chap. 3.
6. A. Koivuniemi, “An Interview with Rotork’s CEO, Kevin 
Hostetler,” McKinsey & Company: Inside the Strategy Room, 
December 13, 2021.
7. Some experts suggest that resistance to change should 
be restated in a more positive way by its opposite: readi￾ness for change. See M. Choi and W.E.A. Ruona, 
“Individual Readiness for Organizational Change and 
Its Implications for Human Resource and Organization 
Development,” Human Resource Development Review 10, 
no. 1 (2011): 46–73.
8. S. Chreim, “Postscript to Change: Survivors’ Retrospective 
Views of Organizational Changes,” Personnel Review 35, 
no. 3 (2006): 315–35.
9. J.K. Galbraith, Economics, Peace, and Laughter (Boston: 
Houghton Mifflin, 1971), 50.
10. E.B. Dent and S.G. Goldberg, “Challenging ‘Resistance 
to Change,’” Journal of Applied Behavioral Science 35 
(1999): 25–41; F.E. Klonek, N. Lehmann-Willenbrock, 
and S. Kauffeld, “Dynamics of Resistance to Change: 
A Sequential Analysis of Change Agents in Action,” 
Journal of Change Management 14, no. 3 (2014): 334–60.
endnotes563
Systematic Resistance to Change,” Management Research 
Review 40, no. 2 (2017): 122–41; K.K. Katsaros and A.N. 
Tsirikas, “Perceived Change Uncertainty and Behavioral 
Change Support: The Role of Positive Change Orienta￾tion,” Journal of Organizational Change Management 35, 
no. 3 (2021): 511–26.
18. A. Bongard, “GM CIO Mott Is Confident IT 
Transformation Making Progress,” automotiveIT 
International, June 4, 2014; R. Preston, “General Motors’ 
IT Transformation: Building Downturn-Resistant Profit￾ability,” Forbes, April 14, 2016; P. High, “After Five Years 
Of Transformation, GM CIO Randy Mott Has The 
Company Primed For Innovation,” Forbes, June 18, 2018.
19. D. Grosse Kathoefer and J. Leker, “Knowledge Transfer 
in Academia: An Exploratory Study on the Not-Invented￾Here Syndrome,” Journal of Technology Transfer 37, no. 5 
(2012): 658–75; A.L.A. Burcharth, M.P. Knudsen, and 
H.A. Søndergaard, “Neither Invented nor Shared Here: 
The Impact and Management of Attitudes for the Adop￾tion of Open Innovation Practices,” Technovation 34, no. 3 
(2014): 149–61.
20. V. Newman, “The Psychology of Managing for Innovation,” 
KM Review 9, no. 6 (2007): 10–15.
21. R. Davis, Leading for Growth: How Umpqua Bank Got 
Cool and Created a Culture of Greatness (San Francisco: 
Jossey-Bass, 2007), 40.
22. R. Borges and C.A. Quintas, “Understanding the 
Individual’s Reactions to the Organizational Change: 
A Multidimensional Approach,” Journal of Organizational 
Change Management 33, no. 5 (2020): 667–81.
23. J. Stouten, D.M. Rousseau, and D. De Cremer, “Successful 
Organizational Change: Integrating the Management 
Practice and Scholarly Literatures,” Academy of Manage￾ment Annals 12, no. 2 (2018): 752–88.
24. J.P. Kotter, A Sense of Urgency (Boston: Harvard 
Business School Press, 2008); S.H. Appelbaum et al., 
“Back to the Future: Revisiting Kotter’s 1996 Change 
Model,” Journal of Management Development 31, no. 8 
(2012): 764–82; I. Heim and N. Sardar-Drenda, “Assess￾ment of Employees’ Attitudes toward Ongoing Organiza￾tional Transformations,” Journal of Organizational 
Change Management 34, no. 2 (2020): 327–49.
25. L.D. Goodstein and H.R. Butz, “Customer Value: The 
Linchpin of Organizational Change,” Organizational 
Dynamics 27 (1998): 21–35.
26. J. Schoeller, “Leading Through Change,” Forbes, 
March 17, 2021.
27. T.F. Cawsey and G. Deszca, Toolkit for Organizational 
Change (Los Angeles: Sage, 2007), 104.
28. J.P. Kotter and L.A. Schlesinger, “Choosing Strategies 
for Change,” Harvard Business Review (1979): 106–14.
29. M. Meaney and C. Pung, “Creating Organizational 
Transformations: McKinsey Global Survey Results,” 
McKinsey Quarterly, July 2008, 1–7; A.E. Rafferty, N.L. 
Jimmieson, and A.A. Armenakis, “Change Readiness: A 
Multilevel Review,” Journal of Management 39, no. 1 
(2013): 110–35.
11. B.J. Tepper et al., “Subordinates’ Resistance and Manag￾ers’ Evaluations of Subordinates’ Performance,” Journal 
of Management 32, no. 2 (2006): 185–209; J.D. Ford, 
L.W. Ford, and A. D’Amelio, “Resistance to Change: The 
Rest of the Story,” Academy of Management Review 33, 
no. 2 (2008): 362–77.
12. D.A. Nadler, “The Effective Management of Organiza￾tional Change,” in Handbook of Organizational Behavior, 
ed. J.W. Lorsch (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 
1987), 358–69; R. Maurer, Beyond the Wall of Resistance: 
Unconventional Strategies to Build Support for Change 
(Austin, TX: Bard Books, 1996); P. Strebel, “Why Do 
Employees Resist Change?,” Harvard Business Review
(1996): 86–92; D.A. Nadler, Champions of Change 
(San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1998).
13. S. Oreg et al., “Dispositional Resistance to Change: 
Measurement Equivalence and the Link to Personal Values 
across 17 Nations,” Journal of Applied Psychology 93, no. 4 
(2008): 935–44.
14. R.R. Sharma, Change Management: Concepts and 
Applications (New Delhi: Tata McGraw Hill, 2007), 
Chap. 4; I. Cinite, L.E. Duxbury, and C. Higgins, 
“Measurement of Perceived Organizational Readiness for 
Change in the Public Sector,” British Journal of Manage￾ment 20, no. 2 (2009): 265–77; A.A. Armenakis and 
S.G. Harris, “Reflections: Our Journey in Organizational 
Change Research and Practice,” Journal of Change 
Management 9, no. 2 (2009): 127–42; S. Jaros, 
“Commitment to Organizational Change: A Critical 
Review,” Journal of Change Management 10, no. 1 
(2010): 79–108.
15. A.M. García-Cabrera and F. García-Barba Hernández, 
“Differentiating the Three Components of Resistance to 
Change: The Moderating Effect of Organization-Based 
Self-Esteem on the Employee Involvement-Resistance 
Relation,” Human Resource Development Quarterly 25, 
no. 4 (2014): 441–69; S. Faupel and S. Süß, “The Effect 
of Transformational Leadership on Employees During 
Organizational Change – An Empirical Analysis,” 
Journal of Change Management 19, no. 3 (2019): 145–66; 
M.N. Islam, F. Furuoka, and A. Idris, “Employee 
Engagement and Organizational Change Initiatives: Does 
Transformational Leadership, Valence, and Trust 
Make a Difference?,” Global Business and Organizational 
Excellence 40, no. 3 (2021): 50–62.
16. R. de la Sablonnière et al., “Profound Organizational 
Change, Psychological Distress and Burnout Symptoms: 
The Mediator Role of Collective Relative Deprivation,” 
Group Processes & Intergroup Relations 15, no. 6 (2012): 
776–90.
17. W. Samuelson and R. Zeckhauser, “Status Quo Bias in 
Decision Making,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 1, no. 1 
(1988): 7–59; K. Lee and K. Joshi, “Examining the 
Use of Status Quo Bias Perspective in IS Research: Need 
for Re-Conceptualizing and Incorporating Biases,” Infor￾mation Systems Journal 27, no. 6 (2017): 733–52; B.H. 
Martin, “Unsticking the Status Quo: Strategic Framing 
Effects on Managerial Mindset, Status Quo Bias and 564
Making Change Initiatives Stick,” MIT Sloan Management 
Review 46, no. 4 (2005): 53–60; R.K. Smollan and R.L. 
Morrison, “Office Design and Organizational Change: 
The Influence of Communication and Organizational 
Culture,” Journal of Organizational Change Management 32, 
no. 4 (2019): 426–40; G.S. Day and G. Shea, “Changing 
the Work of Innovation: A Systems Approach,” California 
Management Review 63, no. 1 (2020): 41–60.
39. L.D. Goodstein and H.R. Butz, “Customer Value: The 
Linchpin of Organizational Change,” Organizational 
Dynamics 27 (1998): 21–35; R.H. Miles, “Leading 
Corporate Transformation: Are You up to the Task?,” in 
The Leader’s Change Handbook, ed. J.A. Conger, G.M. 
Spreitzer, and E.E. Lawler III (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 
1999), 221–67.
40. S. J. Stouten, D.M. Rousseau, and D. De Cremer, 
“Successful Organizational Change: Integrating the Man￾agement Practice and Scholarly Literatures,” Academy of 
Management Annals 12, no. 2 (2018): 752–88; Oreg and 
Y. Berson, “Leaders’ Impact on Organizational Change: 
Bridging Theoretical and Methodological Chasms,” 
Academy of Management Annals 13, no. 1 (2019): 
272–307; M.N. Islam, F. Furuoka, and A. Idris, 
“Mapping the Relationship between Transformational 
Leadership, Trust in Leadership and Employee Champi￾oning Behavior during Organizational Change,” Asia 
Pacific Management Review 26, no. 2 (2021): 95–102; 
G.B. Onyeneke and T. Abe, “The Effect of Change Lead￾ership on Employee Attitudinal Support for Planned 
Organizational Change,” Journal of Organizational 
Change Management 34, no. 2 (2021): 403–15.
41. M.S. Cole, S.G. Harris, and J.B. Bernerth, “Exploring 
the Implications of Vision, Appropriateness, and Execu￾tion of Organizational Change,” Leadership & Organiza￾tion Development Journal 27, no. 5 (2006): 352–67; 
S. Kirkpatrick, “Leading through Vision and Values,” 
in Handbook of Principles of Organizational Behavior: 
Indispensable Knowledge for Evidence-Based Management, 
ed. E. Locke (Hoboken: Wiley, 2010), 367–87; V. Lundy 
and P.P. Morin, “Project Leadership Influences Resistance 
to Change: The Case of the Canadian Public Service,” 
Project Management Journal 44, no. 4 (2013): 45–64.
42. J.P. Kotter and D.S. Cohen, The Heart of Change
(Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 2002), 61–82; 
D.S. Cohen and J.P. Kotter, The Heart of Change Field 
Guide (Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 2005).
43. J.P. Kotter, “Leading Change: Why Transformation 
Efforts Fail,” Harvard Business Review (1995): 59–67.
44. J. Stouten, D.M. Rousseau, and D. De Cremer, 
“Successful Organizational Change: Integrating the 
Management Practice and Scholarly Literatures,” 
Academy of Management Annals 12, no. 2 (2018): 
752–88.
45. A. De Bruyn and G.L. Lilien, “A Multi-Stage Model 
of Word-of-Mouth Influence through Viral Marketing,” 
International Journal of Research in Marketing 25, no. 3 
(2008): 151–63; J.Y.C. Ho and M. Dempsey, “Viral 
30. C. Catliff, “Strategies for Developing Your Inner Intra￾preneur,” Globe & Mail, November 8, 2019; Jostle, 
“Culture Hero Series: Chris Catliff, BlueShore Financial,” 
The Jostle Blog (blog), accessed April 3, 2020. 
31. J.P. Kotter and D.S. Cohen, The Heart of Change 
(Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 2002), 83–98; 
W.J.L. Elving, “The Role of Communication in 
Organisational Change,” Corporate Communications: 
An International Journal 10, no. 2 (2005): 129–38; J. 
Allen et al., “Uncertainty during Organizational Change: 
Managing Perceptions through Communication,” Journal 
of Change Management 7, no. 2 (2007): 187–210; 
M. van den Heuvel et al., “Adapting to Change: The 
Value of Change Information and Meaning-Making,” 
Journal of Vocational Behavior 83, no. 1 (2013): 11–21.
32. D.T. Holt and J.M. Vardaman, “Toward a Comprehensive 
Understanding of Readiness for Change: The Case for an 
Expanded Conceptualization,” Journal of Change 
Management 13, no. 1 (2013): 9–18; S. Bayraktar 
and A. Jiménez, “Self-Efficacy as a Resource: A Moder￾ated Mediation Model of Transformational Leadership, 
Extent of Change and Reactions to Change,” Journal 
of Organizational Change Management 33, no. 2 (2020): 
301–17.
33. J.L. Pierce, T. Kostova, and K.T. Dirks, “Toward a 
Theory of Psychological Ownership in Organizations,” 
Academy of Management Review 26, no. 2 (April 2001): 
298–310; L.K. Lewis and T.L. Russ, “Soliciting and 
Using Input during Organizational Change Initiatives: 
What Are Practitioners Doing,” Management Communi￾cation Quarterly 26, no. 2 (2012): 267–94; J.M. Berg and 
A. Yu, “Getting the Picture Too Late: Handoffs and the 
Effectiveness of Idea Implementation in Creative Work,” 
Academy of Management Journal 64, no. 4 (2021): 
1191–1212.
34. S.G. Bamberger et al., “Impact of Organisational Change 
on Mental Health: A Systematic Review,” Occupational 
and Environmental Medicine 69, no. 8 (2012): 592–98.
35. N.T. Tan, “Maximising Human Resource Potential in the 
Midst of Organisational Change,” Singapore Management 
Review 27, no. 2 (2005): 25–35; A.E. Rafferty and S.L.D. 
Restubog, “The Impact of Change Process and Context 
on Change Reactions and Turnover during a Merger,” 
Journal of Management 36, no. 5 (2010): 1309–38.
36. M. McHugh, “The Stress Factor: Another Item for the 
Change Management Agenda?,” Journal of Organiza￾tional Change Management 10 (1997): 345–62; D. 
Buchanan, T. Claydon, and M. Doyle, “Organisation 
Development and Change: The Legacy of the Nineties,” 
Human Resource Management Journal 9 (1999): 20–37.
37. J.P. Hausknecht and J.A. Holwerda, “When Does Em￾ployee Turnover Matter? Dynamic Member Configura￾tions, Productive Capacity, and Collective Performance,” 
Organization Science 24, no. 1 (2013): 210–25.
38. D.S. Cohen and J.P. Kotter, The Heart of Change Field 
Guide (Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 2005), 
161–77; M.A. Roberto and L.C. Levesque, “The Art of 565
et al., “Positive Psychology Progress: Empirical Validation 
of Interventions,” American Psychologist 60, no. 5 (2005): 
410–21. On the origins of appreciative inquiry, see: G.R. 
Bushe, “Foundations of Appreciative Inquiry: History, 
Criticism and Potential,” AI Practitioner 14, no. 1 
(February 2012): 8–20.
55. D.K. Whitney and D.L. Cooperrider, “The Appreciative 
Inquiry Summit: Overview and Applications,” Employ￾ment Relations Today 25 (1998): 17–28; J.M. Watkins 
and B.J. Mohr, Appreciative Inquiry: Change at the Speed 
of Imagination (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2001).
56. D. Meinert, “Positive Momentum,” HR Magazine 58, no. 6 
(2013): 68–74.
57. D.L. Cooperrider and D.K. Whitney, Appreciative 
Inquiry: A Positive Revolution in Change (San Francisco: 
Berrett-Koehler, 2005); J.M. Stavros, L.N. Godwin, and 
D.L. Cooperrider, “Appreciative Inquiry,” in Practicing 
Organization Development: Leading Transformation and 
Change, ed. W.J. Rothwell, J.M. Stavros, and R.L. 
Sullivan, 4th ed. (John Wiley & Sons, 2016), 96–116.
58. F.J. Barrett and D.L. Cooperrider, “Generative Metaphor 
Intervention: A New Approach for Working with Systems 
Divided by Conflict and Caught in Defensive Perception,” 
Journal of Applied Behavioral Science 26 (1990): 219–39; 
J.M. Stavros, L.N. Godwin, and D.L. Cooperrider, 
“Appreciative Inquiry,” in Practicing Organization Devel￾opment: Leading Transformation and Change, ed. 
W.J. Rothwell, J.M. Stavros, and R.L. Sullivan, 4th ed. 
(John Wiley & Sons, 2016), 96–116.
59. S. Berrisford, “Using Appreciative Inquiry to Drive 
Change at the BBC,” Strategic Communication Manage￾ment 9 (2005):22–25; G.R. Bushe, “A Comparative Case 
Study of Appreciative Inquiries in One Organization: 
Implications for Practice,” Review of Research and Social 
Intervention 29 (2010): 7–24; “2013-2015 Massachusetts 
Joint Statewide Three-Year Electric & Gas Energy 
Efficiency Plan” (State of Massachusetts, July 2, 2012); 
T. Wall, J. Russell, and N. Moore, “Positive Emotion in 
Workplace Impact: The Case of a Work-Based Learning 
Project Utilising Appreciative Inquiry,” Journal of 
Work-Applied Management 9, no. 2 (2017): 129–46; 
L. Hung et al., “Appreciative Inquiry: Bridging Research 
and Practice in a Hospital Setting,” International Journal 
of Qualitative Methods 17, no. 1 (2018): 1–17; A. Scerri, 
A. Innes, and C. Scerri, “Using Appreciative Inquiry to 
Implement Person-Centred Dementia Care in Hospital 
Wards,” Dementia 18, no. 1 (2019): 190–209; P. Krouse 
and M. Kilpatrick, “Cleveland Rising Aspires to 
Greatness, Needs a Way Forward,” Cleveland.Com, 
October 31, 2019.
60. T. F. Yaeger, P. F. Sorensen, and U. Bengtsson, “Assess￾ment of the State of Appreciative Inquiry: Past, Present, 
and Future,” Research in Organizational Change and 
Development 15 (2004): 297–319; G. R. Bushe and A. F. 
Kassam, “When Is Appreciative Inquiry Transfor￾mational? A Meta-Case Analysis,” Journal of Applied 
Behavioral Science 41, no. 2 (2005): 161–81.
Marketing: Motivations to Forward Online Content,” 
Journal of Business Research 63, no. 9/10 (2010): 
1000–06; M. Williams and F. Buttle, “The Eight Pillars 
of WOM Management: Lessons from a Multiple Case 
Study,” Australasian Marketing Journal 19, no. 2 (2011): 
85–92.
46. M. Beer, R.A. Eisenstat, and B. Spector, The Critical Path 
to Corporate Renewal (Boston: Harvard Business School 
Press, 1990).
47. M. Beer, R.A. Eisenstat, and B. Spector, The Critical Path 
to Corporate Renewal (Boston: Harvard Business School 
Press, 1990), Chap. 5; R.E. Walton, “Successful Strategies 
for Diffusing Work Innovations,” Journal of Contemporary 
Business (1977): 1–22; R.E. Walton, Innovating to 
Compete: Lessons for Diffusing and Managing Change in 
the Workplace (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1987).
48. E.M. Rogers, Diffusion of Innovations, 4th ed. (New York: 
Free Press, 1995).
49. H. Bradbury et al., “Action Research at Work: Creating 
the Future Following the Path from Lewin,” in The SAGE 
Handbook of Action Research: Participative Inquiry and 
Practice, ed. P. Reason and H. Bradbury, 2nd ed. 
(London: SAGE, 2008), 77–92; A.B. (Rami) Shani and 
D. Coghlan, “Action Research in Business and Manage￾ment: A Reflective Review,” Action Research 19, no. 3 
(2021): 518–41.
50. V.J. Marsick and M.A. Gephart, “Action Research: Build￾ing the Capacity for Learning and Change,” Human Re￾source Planning 26 (2003): 14–18.
51. L. Dickens and K. Watkins, “Action Research: Rethink￾ing Lewin,” Management Learning 30 (1999): 127–40; 
J. Heron and P. Reason, “The Practice of Co-operative 
Inquiry: Research ‘with’ Rather Than ‘on’ People,” in 
Handbook of Action Research, ed. P. Reason and H. 
Bradbury (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 2001), 179–88.
52. D.A. Nadler, “Organizational Frame Bending: Types of 
Change in the Complex Organization,” in Corporate 
Transformation: Revitalizing Organizations for a 
Competitive World, ed. R.H. Kilmann, T.J. Covin, and 
Associates (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1988), 66–83; 
K.E. Weick and R.E. Quinn, “Organizational Change 
and Development,” Annual Review of Psychology 50 
(1999): 361–86.
53. T.M. Egan and C.M. Lancaster, “Comparing Appreciative 
Inquiry to Action Research: OD Practitioner Perspectives,” 
Organization Development Journal 23, no. 2 (2005): 
29–49.
54. N. Turner, J. Barling, and A. Zacharatos, “Positive 
Psychology at Work,” in Handbook of Positive Psychology, 
ed. C.R. Snyder and S. Lopez (Oxford, UK: Oxford 
University Press, 2002), 715–30; K. Cameron, J.E. 
Dutton, and R.E. Quinn, eds., Positive Organizational 
Scholarship: Foundation of a New Discipline (San Francisco: 
Berrett-Koehler, 2003); S.L. Gable and J. Haidt, “What 
(and Why) Is Positive Psychology?,” Review of General 
Psychology 9, no. 2 (2005): 103–10; M.E.P. Seligman 566
68. G.A. Walter, “Organization Development and Individual 
Rights,” Journal of Applied Behavioral Science 20 (1984): 
423–39.
69. The source of this often-cited quotation was not found. 
It does not appear, even in other variations, in the books 
that Andrew Carnegie wrote (such as Gospel of Wealth,
1900; Empire of Business, 1902; and Autobiography, 1920). 
However, Carnegie may have stated these words (or 
similar ones) elsewhere. He gave many speeches and 
wrote numerous articles, parts of which have been 
reported by other authors.
a. “Addison Group Survey Finds Nearly Half of Staff Level 
Employees Don’t Feel Confident Their Industry,” News 
release (Chicago: Addison Group, June 5, 2017); B. 
Sanzenbacher, “Why 42% of Workers Are Fed Up and 
Ready to Bolt,” Wrike Blog (blog), February 15, 2018; 
“How Operational Inefficiencies Result In Employee 
Burnout (UK Survey),” Wrike Blog (blog), February 22, 
2018; M. Murphy, “Resistance To Change In Organiza￾tions Comes From These 5 Factors (New Data),” Leader￾ship IQ (blog), October 15, 2019; “Gartner Survey 
Reveals HR Leaders’ Number One Priority in 2022 Will 
Be Building Critical Skills and Competencies,” Press 
Release (Stamford, CT: Gartner, October 20, 2021); 
“SHRM Presents State of the Workplace Study,” Press 
Release (Alexandria, VA: SHRM, February 16, 2022).
b. M. Kääpä, “Automotive Adaptation,” EME Outlook 
Magazine, January 2021; J. Goldberg, “Speed of Change: 
Fernando Bertoni,” The CEO Magazine, December 3, 2021.
c. A. Weckler, “You Don’t Have Mail: How Slack Rein￾vented Chat,” Irish Independent, January 26, 2017, 6.
d. O. Blackwell, “How Employee Engagement Helped 
To Create EE And Turn It Into The Number One ‘Best 
Big Company To Work For’,” Engage for Success (blog), 
May 20, 2018.
e. W. Alden, “Startup Zenefits under Scrutiny for Flouting 
Insurance Laws,” BuzzFeed, November 25, 2015; C. 
Suddath and E. Newcomer, “The HR Startup Has an HR 
Problem,” Bloomberg Businessweek, May 9–15, 2016, 62; 
D. Sacks, “The New Zenefits—Becoming the Compliance 
Company,” Zenefits Blog, Zenefits, 2016; K. Kokalitcheva, 
“Zenefits’ Investigation Leaves Some Questions 
Unanswered,” Fortune, May 9, 2016; A. Hesseldahl, 
“Zenefits Is Firing 106 People and Offering Buyouts to 
More as It Restructures,” recode, June 14, 2016.
f. Bosch Global, Bosch Annual Report 2016: Dr. Volkmar 
Denner about Agility, YouTube (Gerlingen, Germany, 
2017); “Achieving Greater Agility: The Essential Influ￾ence of the C-Suite” (Newtown Square, PA: Project 
Management Institute, October 2017); D. Rigby, J. 
Sutherland, and A. Noble, “Agile at Scale,” Harvard 
Business Review, May-June 2018; A. Howard, “Scrum@
Scale at Bosch: Embracing Agility,” Scrum@Scale Case 
Study (blog), September 2, 2020.
g. D. Miller and P.H. Friesen, “Momentum and Revolution 
in Organizational Adaptation,” Academy of Management 
Journal 23, no. 4 (1980): 591–614; D. Miller and M.-J. 
61. J.M. Bartunek, J. Balogun, and B. Do, “Considering 
Planned Change Anew: Stretching Large Group Interven￾tions Strategically, Emotionally, and Meaningfully,” 
Academy of Management Annals 5, no. 1 (2011): 1–52.
62. M. Weisbord and S. Janoff, Future Search: An Action 
Guide to Finding Common Ground in Organizations and 
Communities (San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler, 2000); 
R.M. Lent, M.T. McCormick, and D.S. Pearce, “Combin￾ing Future Search and Open Space to Address Special 
Situations,” Journal of Applied Behavioral Science 41, 
no. 1 (2005): 61–69; S. Janoff and M. Weisbord, “Future 
Search as ‘Real-Time’ Action Research,” Futures 38, 
no. 6 (2006): 716–22.
63. For a critique of future search conferences and similar 
whole system events, see A. Oels, “Investigating the 
Emotional Roller-Coaster Ride: A Case Study-Based As￾sessment of the Future Search Conference Design,” Sys￾tems Research and Behavioral Science 19 (2002): 347–55; 
M.F.D. Polanyi, “Communicative Action in Practice: 
Future Search and the Pursuit of an Open, Critical and 
Non-Coercive Large-Group Process,” Systems Research 
and Behavioral Science 19 (2002): 357–66; A. De Grassi, 
“Envisioning Futures of African Agriculture: Representa￾tion, Power, and Socially Constituted Time,” Progress in 
Development Studies 7, no. 2 (2007): 79–98.
64. G.R. Bushe and A.B. Shani, Parallel Learning Structures 
(Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1991); E.M. Van Aken, 
D.J. Monetta, and D.S. Sink, “Affinity Groups: The 
Missing Link in Employee Involvement,” Organization 
Dynamics 22 (1994): 38–54.
65. D.J. Knight, “Strategy in Practice: Making It Happen,” 
Strategy & Leadership 26 (1998): 29–33; R.T. Pascale, 
“Grassroots Leadership—Royal Dutch/Shell,” Fast Com￾pany, no. 14 (1998): 110–20; R.T. Pascale, “Leading from 
a Different Place,” in The Leader’s Change Handbook, ed. 
J.A. Conger, G.M. Spreitzer, and E.E. Lawler III 
(San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1999), 301–20; R. Pascale, 
M. Millemann, and L. Gioja, Surfing on the Edge of Chaos 
(London: Texere, 2000).
66. T.C. Head and P.F. Sorenson, “Cultural Values and 
Organizational Development: A Seven-Country Study,” 
Leadership and Organization Development Journal 14 
(1993): 3–7; R.J. Marshak, “Lewin Meets Confucius: 
A Review of the OD Model of Change,” Journal of 
Applied Behavioral Science 29 (1993): 395–415; C.M. 
Lau, “A Culture-Based Perspective of Organization 
Development Implementation,” Research in Organizational 
Change and Development 9 (1996): 49–79; C.M. Lau 
and H.Y. Ngo, “Organization Development and Firm 
Performance: A Comparison of Multinational and Local 
Firms,” Journal of International Business Studies 32, no. 1 
(2001): 95–114.
67. M. McKendall, “The Tyranny of Change: Organizational 
Development Revisited,” Journal of Business Ethics 12 
(1993): 93–104; C.M.D. Deaner, “A Model of Organiza￾tion Development Ethics,” Public Administration 
Quarterly 17 (1994): 435–46.567
j. T. Campbell, “WEtech Alliance Launches Program to 
Encourage Innovation by Employees,” The Windsor Star 
(Ont.), February 28, 2019; “ENnovation—ENWIN 
and WEtech Alliance Nurture Innovation,” Perspective, 
March 23, 2019; D. Hall, “Chance Meeting Becomes 
Catalyst for ENNovation,” WEtech Alliance (blog), 
November 17, 2020.
Chen, “Sources and Consequences of Competitive Inertia: 
A Study of the U.S. Airline Industry,” Administrative 
Science Quarterly 39, no. 1 (1994): 1–23.
h. J. Isern and C. Pung, “Driving Radical Change,” 
McKinsey Quarterly, no. 4 (2007): 24–35.
i. J. Abbass, “Lewis County Hospital Takes a Positive 
Approach to Planning,” Watertown Daily Times, 
February 25, 2019.
Design Credit: Blue globe icon: Merfin/Shutterstock568
Case 1 Arctic Mining Consultants
Case 2 Bayou Life Assurance and Waltham 
Financial
Case 3 CentraClear Inc.
Case 4 Keeping Suzanne Chalmers
Case 5 The Regency Grand Hotel
Case 6 Tamarack Industries
Case 7 The Outstanding Faculty Award
Case 8 Conifer Corp.
Case 9 Verberg Kansen N.V.
Case 10 Vêtements Ltée
CASE 1: ARCTIC MINING CONSULTANTS
By Steven L. McShane, Interconnected Knowledge; and Tim Neale
Tom Parker enjoyed working outdoors. At various times in 
the past, he worked as a ranch hand, high steel rigger, head￾stone installer, prospector, and geological field technician. 
Now 43, Parker is a geological field technician and field 
coordinator with Arctic Mining Consultants. He has spe￾cialized knowledge and experience in all nontechnical as￾pects of mineral exploration, including claim staking, line 
cutting and grid installation, soil sampling, prospecting, and 
trenching. He is responsible for hiring, training, and super￾vising field assistants for all of Arctic Mining Consultants’ 
programs. Field assistants are paid a fairly low daily wage 
(no matter how long they work, which may be up to 12 hours 
or more) and are provided meals and accommodation. 
Many of the programs are operated by a project manager 
who reports to Parker.
Parker sometimes acts as a project manager, as he did on 
a job that involved staking 15 claims near Eagle Lake, 
Alaska. He selected John Talbot, Greg Boyce, and Brian 
Millar, all of whom had previously worked with Parker, as 
the field assistants. To stake a claim, the project team marks 
a line with flagging tape and blazes along the perimeter of 
the claim, cutting a claim post every 500 yards (called a 
length). The 15 claims would require almost 60 miles of line 
in total. Parker had budgeted seven days (plus mobilization 
and demobilization) to complete the job. This meant that 
each of the four stakers (Parker, Talbot, Boyce, and Millar) 
would have to complete a little over seven “lengths” each 
day. The following is a chronology of the project.
DAY 1
The Arctic Mining Consultants crew assembled in the 
morning and drove to Eagle Lake, from there they were 
flown by helicopter to the claim site. On arrival, they set 
up tents at the edge of the area to be staked, and agreed on 
a schedule for cooking duties. After supper, they pulled 
out the maps and discussed the job—how long it would 
take, the order in which the areas were to be staked, possible 
helicopter landing spots, and areas that might be more 
difficult to stake.
Parker pointed out that with only a week to complete the 
job, everyone would have to average seven and a half lengths 
per day. “I know that is a lot,” he said, “but you’ve all staked 
claims before and I’m confident that each of you is capable 
of it. And it’s only for a week. If we get the job done in time, 
there’s a $300 bonus for each man.” Two hours later, Parker 
and his crew members had developed what seemed to be a 
workable plan.
DAY 2
Millar completed six lengths, Boyce six lengths, Talbot 
eight, and Parker eight. Parker was not pleased with Millar’s 
or Boyce’s production. However, he didn’t make an issue of 
it, thinking that they would develop their “rhythm” quickly.
DAY 3
Millar completed five and a half lengths, Boyce four, and 
Talbot seven. Parker, who was nearly twice as old as the 
other three, completed eight lengths. He also had enough 
time remaining to walk over and check the quality of stakes 
that Millar and Boyce had completed, then walk back to his 
own area for helicopter pickup back to the tent site.
That night Parker exploded with anger. “I thought I told 
you that I wanted seven and a half lengths a day!” he 
shouted at Boyce and Millar. Boyce said that he was slowed 
down by unusually thick underbrush in his assigned area. 
Millar said that he had done his best and would try to pick 
up the pace. Parker did not mention that he had inspected 
their work. He explained that as far as he was concerned, 
the field assistants were supposed to finish their assigned 
area for the day, no matter what.
additional CASESAdditional Cases 569
DAY 7
Millar was again the first out and last in. That night, he col￾lapsed in an exhausted heap at the table, too tired to eat. 
After a few moments, he announced in an abject tone, “Six 
lengths. I worked like a dog all day and I only got a lousy six 
lengths!” Boyce completed five lengths, Talbot seven, and 
Parker seven and a quarter.
Parker was furious. “That means we have to do a total of 
34 lengths tomorrow if we are to finish this job on time!” 
With his eyes directed at Millar, he added: “Why is it that you 
never finish the job? Don’t you realize that you are part of a 
team, and that you are letting the rest of the team down? I’ve 
been checking your lines and you’re doing too much blazing 
and wasting too much time making picture-perfect claim 
posts! If you worked smarter, you’d get a lot more done!”
DAY 8
Parker cooked breakfast in the dark. The helicopter drop￾offs began as soon as morning light appeared on the hori￾zon. Parker instructed each assistant to complete eight 
lengths and, if they finished early, to help the others. Parker 
said that he would finish the other 10 lengths. Helicopter 
pickups were arranged for one hour before dark.
By noon, after working as hard as he could, Millar had 
only completed three lengths. “Why bother,” he thought to 
himself, “I’ll never be able to do another five lengths before 
the helicopter comes, and I’ll catch the same amount of abuse 
from Parker for doing six lengths as for seven and a half.” So 
he sat down and had lunch and a rest. “Boyce won’t finish his 
eight lengths either, so even if I did finish mine, I still wouldn’t 
get the bonus. At least I’ll get one more day’s pay this way.”
That night, Parker was livid when Millar reported that 
he had completed five and a half lengths. Parker had done 
ten and a quarter lengths, and Talbot had completed eight. 
Boyce proudly announced that he finished seven and a half 
lengths, but sheepishly added that Talbot had helped him 
with some of it. All that remained were the two and a 
half lengths that Millar had not completed.
The job was finished the next morning and the crew 
demobilized. Millar has never worked for Arctic Mining 
Consultants again, despite being offered work several times 
by Parker. Boyce sometimes does staking for Arctic, and 
Talbot works full time with the company.
This case is based on actual events, but names and some characteristics 
have been changed to maintain anonymity.
Talbot, who was sharing a tent with Parker, talked to him 
later. “I think that you’re being a bit hard on them, you 
know. I know that it has been more by luck than anything 
else that I’ve been able to do my quota. Yesterday I only had 
five lengths done after the first seven hours and there was 
only an hour before I was supposed to be picked up. Then 
I hit a patch of really open bush, and was able to do three 
lengths in 70 minutes. Why don’t I take Millar’s area 
tomorrow and he can have mine? Maybe that will help.”
“Conditions are the same in all of the areas,” replied Parker, 
rejecting Talbot’s suggestion. “Millar just has to try harder.”
DAY 4
Millar did seven lengths and Boyce completed six and a 
half. When they reported their production that evening, 
Parker grunted uncommunicatively. Parker and Talbot did 
eight lengths each.
DAY 5
Millar completed six lengths, Boyce six, Talbot seven and a 
half, and Parker eight. Once again Parker blew up, but he con￾centrated his diatribe on Millar. “Why don’t you do what you 
say you are going to do? You know that you have to do seven 
and a half lengths a day. We went over that when we first got 
here, so why don’t you do it? If you aren’t willing to do the job 
then you never should have taken it in the first place!”
Millar replied by saying that he was doing his best, that 
he hadn’t even stopped for lunch, and that he didn’t know 
how he could possibly do any better. Parker launched into 
him again: “You have got to work harder! If you put enough 
effort into it, you will get the area done!”
Later Millar commented to Boyce, “I hate getting dumped 
on all the time! I’d quit if it didn’t mean that I’d have to walk 
50 miles to the highway. And besides, I need the bonus 
money. Why doesn’t he pick on you? You don’t get any more 
done than me; in fact, you usually get less. Maybe if you did a 
bit more he wouldn’t be so bothered about me.”
“I only work as hard as I have to,” Boyce replied.
DAY 6
Millar raced through breakfast, was the first one to be 
dropped off by the helicopter, and arranged to be the last 
one picked up. That evening the production figures were 
Millar eight and a quarter lengths, Boyce seven, and Talbot 
and Parker eight each. Parker remained silent when the 
field assistants reported their performance for the day.
CASE 2: BAYOU LIFE ASSURANCE AND WALTHAM FINANCIAL
Waltham Financial is a large life insurance and financial 
services company with headquarters in Boston and busi￾ness operations in 15 countries. Although performing well 
internationally, Waltham has been losing market share 
within the United States. In response, senior management 
decided to divide the organization so the international and 
U.S. divisions are distinct businesses. The international 
business would remain in Boston, whereas Waltham 570 Additional Cases
hindsight, one Waltham manager confided that the process 
was more difficult than they had anticipated. ”Yeah, we 
definitely trivialized the whole thing,” she admitted. “We 
underestimated how much work, decision making, and 
commitment was required for just about everything—from 
operational systems to human resources practices. We were 
blindsided by the new problems we faced and by the different 
worldviews of these companies.”
When a consulting firm was brought in to evaluate 
Bayou Life Assurance‘s management team, Waltham’s 
management team began to realize how much of a chasm 
divided the two firms. Waltham was aggressive, entrepre￾neurial, consultative, and sales-oriented. Bayou was more 
bureaucratic, formal, patriarchal, and focused on financial 
controls. “Waltham was definitely the industry leader in 
marketing and sales; that’s where management focuses its 
attention and resources,” recalls a former Bayou executive. 
“In contrast, our firm put more weight on operational effi￾ciencies; it was a much more cost effective business than 
Waltham.” He added that Bayou was also “top-down driven, 
much less entrepreneurial or into employee empowerment 
than Waltham.”
No one was prepared for the consequences of integrat￾ing the two highly dissimilar organizations. Within six 
months, 65 of Bayou‘s 510 long-service staff (lifers) had re￾signed, were fired, or had taken early retirement. Only two 
executives among Bayou’s senior management team sur￾vived the merger; the others were let go (laid off) or given 
early retirement because of their “poor fit” with Waltham’s 
approach to doing business. Waltham handled these depar￾tures fairly, but resentment and bitterness against the invad￾ing company ran high among Bayou employees and in the 
Jackson community for some time afterwards.
The Bayou employees who remained with the merged firm 
experienced considerable anxiety as they struggled to learn 
what their new employer (Waltham) expected of them and to 
adjust their behavior accordingly. They started using 
Waltham’s language that reflected more entrepreneurial and 
sales-oriented thinking. They tried to be more participative in 
meetings rather than wait for the convening manager to tell 
them the right answer. Most Bayou employees actually looked 
forward to some of these changes, but were apprehensive 
about fitting in and being comfortable with empowerment.
One Bayou survivor describes the two opposing thoughts 
about this situation: “We didn’t see Waltham’s takeover as a 
threat; it was actually a real opportunity. But most of us 
were insecure about having this power without control or 
restraint. We now had much more freedom, but we were 
also uneasy with that freedom.”
Bayou employees also faced tacit, yet obvious signs of 
arrogance by Waltham employees. “The Waltham people ar￾rived with this air of superiority,” a Bayou manager recalls 
with some disgust. “It was partly their attitude toward the 
South, but mostly their condescending opinion of the 
Bayou assurance company and its staff.” Another Bayou 
intended to acquire another insurance firm with a well￾established American base and merge Waltham’s American 
operations with the acquired company.
Bayou Life Assurance of Jackson, Mississippi, was put 
up for sale by its principal shareholder and seemed an ideal 
fit for Waltham, at least from a business perspective. It was 
an efficiently run, medium-sized, U.S.-only operation with a 
healthy group life and pension investment business, and its 
major shareholder was willing to sell. By purchasing Bayou 
and moving Waltham‘s domestic operations from Boston to 
Jackson, Waltham would achieve the objective of separating 
its American and international businesses and give its 
American operations an opportunity to be more competi￾tive. Recalls Waltham’s chief actuary: “When Bayou Life 
Assurance came up as a possibility for us, I immediately 
saw this as a gift. It was a ready-made solution.”
ANNOUNCING THE ACQUISITION
The announcement that Waltham had purchased Bayou 
Life Assurance and would move its U.S. division to Jackson, 
Mississippi, sent shock waves throughout the company‘s 
luxurious headquarters on Purchase Street in Boston. 
Employees had become accustomed to Waltham’s recent 
building renovations, complete with new fitness center, 
beautiful gardens, and view of a park-like greenway in the 
heart of Boston. The stress increased when Waltham’s CEO 
bluntly announced that U.S. operations staff must move to 
Jackson or would be made redundant! The company later 
backtracked by saying it would try to accommodate those 
who could not move. Instead, it offered a number of incen￾tives to actively woo its Boston employees to the future 
domestic operations headquarters in Mississippi.
Bayou Life Assurance staff members were equally 
anxious, but for somewhat different reasons. They had 
known for the past six months that Bayou was up for sale, 
but no other details of prospective buyers were provided. 
Consequently, unreliable rumors ran through the company 
with disturbing regularity. One false story was that a con￾struction group from Chicago had purchased the company 
and intended to use it as a money-laundering front for the 
Mafia! News that Waltham had purchased the company 
finally reached Bayou’s employees through the local news 
media, not through an email or other form of announcement 
from the company. Morale was low and the uncertainties 
that lay ahead fueled more rumors.
THE AMALGAMATION
The acquisition and integration process began when 
10 assertive, go-getter Waltham managers from Boston ar￾rived in Jackson. They set up their own offices in a cluster 
away from the Bayou staff and immediately began assessing 
the situation. Bayou people and functions were closely eval￾uated to identify areas of duplication and, ultimately, down￾sizing. The Waltham managers also set up task forces to 
deal with the logistics of the move. With the benefit of Additional Cases 571
time, employees from two very different organizations 
struggled for almost two years to adjust to each other and 
operate as a single company.
TAKING ACTION
Realizing that the process of integrating Bayou with 
Waltham’s U.S. operations was in trouble, Waltham manag￾ers began to introduce more varied ways to communicate 
with staff in Jackson, including social media posts, casual 
office walk arounds, and text messages. They also intro￾duced ways for staff from the two companies to become 
better acquainted. For example, Waltham’s employees were 
given bus tours of Jackson, often with Bayou employees 
pointing out the best places for dining and recreation. With 
one-third of Waltham’s employees yet to move to Jackson, 
an onboarding process was created to help the Boston 
employees integrate more quickly into the merged company 
and settle into Jackson more easily. Belatedly, Waltham 
executives even introduced focus groups and counseling to 
help both Bayou and Waltham staff to cope with the stress 
that the merger had created.
Perhaps the single most effective action to integrate the 
two organizations occurred three years later when every 
employee in Jackson moved into one building that had been 
tastefully refurbished. Unlike the cramped quarters that most 
staff had endured since the merger, the new structure has 
bright and comfortable offices looking onto landscaped gar￾dens and parkland. This more closely represents Waltham’s 
tradition of quality and concern for employees. “Moving to 
the new Jackson headquarters has already consolidated our 
people and reinforced our values,” proclaims a senior man￾ager. “It is now so much easier to communicate meaning￾fully, to function as a team, and to lead by walking around.”
© 2022 Steven L. McShane.
employee summed up the problem this way: “We felt like 
second-hand goods. It’s as if they were saying ‘We bought 
your company, so we must be better.’”
OTHER PROBLEMS DEVELOP
As Waltham’s American business units moved to Jackson, 
another problem emerged. Bayou Life Assurance operated 
out of two buildings a few miles from each other, and the 
large influx of people from Boston meant that two more 
office locations had to be leased across the city. This geo￾graphic dispersion of employees made coordination and 
merger integration more difficult. Worse still, conditions in 
the four separate offices around Jackson were cramped and 
uncomfortable. Some employees were even assigned to 
office space in a basement that was intended for storage. 
Waltham staff openly wondered why they had agreed to 
transfer from their plush offices in Boston.
One of the most serious and costly crises during Waltham’s 
acquisition of Bayou was the backlog of work activity in the 
annuities business unit. Six of the seven key people at 
Waltham refused to move and the numerous Bayou annuities 
operations staff left the company within a few months after 
the Waltham management team arrived. Waltham convinced 
a few top annuities people from Waltham’s international busi￾ness in Boston to fly to Jackson every week for several months 
to lead the business until new people could be hired. Even so, 
for several months annuity applications had a four-week back￾log and some types of annuity payments fell behind schedule 
before the problems were corrected.
These and other difficulties placed incredible pressure 
on the work force. Most employees had to work long over￾time hours in cramped conditions to clear the backlog of 
work. New staff were hired to fill the gaps, resulting in 
many unfamiliar faces and lower productivity. At the same 
CASE 3: CENTRACLEAR INC.
CentraClear Inc., an American manufacturer of centralized 
and stand-alone industrial air filtration systems, was facing 
severe cash flow problems due to increasing demand for its 
products and rapid expansion of production facilities. Sven 
Andersen, CentraClear‘s founder and majority stockholder, 
flew to Germany to meet with management of Nanoklar 
GmbH to discuss the German company’s willingness to 
become majority stockholder of CentraClear in exchange 
for an infusion of much-needed cash. A deal was struck 
whereby Nanoklar would become majority stockholder 
while Andersen would remain as CentraClear‘s CEO. One 
of Nanoklar’s senior executives would become the chairper￾son of CentraClear’s board of directors, and Nanoklar 
would appoint two other board members.
This relationship worked well until Nanoklar was 
acquired by a large European conglomerate a couple of 
years later and the new owner wanted more precise finan￾cial information and controls placed on its holdings, includ￾ing CentraClear. Andersen resented this imposition and 
refused to provide the necessary information. Over the next 
18 months, relations between Nanoklar and CentraClear 
deteriorated to the point where Andersen refused to let 
Nanoklar representatives into the CentraClear manufactur￾ing facilities. He also instituted legal proceedings to regain 
control of the company.
According to the stockholders agreement between 
Nanoklar and CentraClear, any party who possesses more 
than two-thirds of a company‘s stock may force the minor￾ity holders to sell their holdings. Andersen owned 29 per￾cent of CentraClear’s stock, whereas Nanoklar owned 
56 percent. The remaining 15 percent of CentraClear stock 
was held by Leon Kaminski, CentraClear‘s head of 572 Additional Cases
was told last week when I became CEO. The decision 
surprised me . . . I don’t think I would have hired you.”
CONFRONTATION WITH JULES DUBOIS
Logan began work at CentraClear two months later and, 
within a few weeks, noticed that the CEO and two other 
CentraClear executives were not giving him the support he 
needed to accomplish his work. For example, Kaminski would 
call several salespeople almost daily, yet rarely speak with 
Logan unless he (Logan) approached the CEO first. The 
director of sales acted cautiously toward Logan. But it was Jules 
Dubois, the director of finance, who seemed to resent Logan’s 
presence the most. Dubois had been promoted from the posi￾tion of controller the previous month and now held the highest 
rank at CentraClear below Logan. After Andersen was dis￾missed, CentraClear’s board of directors had placed Dubois 
in charge of day-to-day operations until Logan took over.
Logan depended on Dubois for information because he 
had more knowledge than anyone else about many aspects 
of the business. However, Dubois excluded details on many 
occasions and would completely refuse to educate Logan 
on some matters. Dubois was also quick to criticize many 
of Logan’s decisions and made indirect statements to 
Logan about his inappropriateness as a COO. He also 
mentioned how he and other CentraClear managers didn’t 
want the German company (Nanoklar) to interfere with 
their company.
Logan would later learn about other things Dubois had 
said and done to undermine his position. For example, 
Dubois actively spoke to other managers as well as to office 
staff about the problems with Logan, and encouraged them 
to tell the CEO about any concerns with Logan that they 
observed. Logan overhead Dubois telling another manager 
that Logan’s emails were a “complete joke” and that “Logan 
didn‘t know what he was talking about.” On one occasion, 
Dubois let Logan send out incorrect information about the 
organization‘s structure even though Dubois knew that it was 
incorrect “just to prove what an idiot Nanoklar had hired.”
Just six weeks after joining CentraClear, Logan con￾fronted Dubois with his concerns. Dubois was quite candid, 
saying that everyone felt that Logan was a “plant” by 
Nanoklar and was trying to turn CentraClear into a branch 
office of the German company. He said that some employ￾ees would quit if Logan did not leave because they wanted 
CentraClear to maintain its independence from Nanoklar. 
In a later meeting with Logan and Kaminski, Dubois 
repeated these points and added that Logan’s management 
style was not appropriate for CentraClear. Logan responded 
that he had not received any support from CentraClear 
since the day he had arrived, even though Nanoklar had 
sent explicit directions to Kaminski and other CentraClear 
managers that he (Logan) was to have complete support in 
managing the company’s daily operations. Kaminski passively 
told the two men that they should work together and that, 
of course, Logan was the more senior person.
operations in the Western region. Kaminski was a long-time 
manager at CentraClear and remained on the sidelines 
throughout most of the legal battle between Nanoklar and 
Andersen. However, Kaminski finally agreed to sell his 
stock holdings to Nanoklar, thereby legally forcing Andersen 
to give up his stock. When Andersen’s bid for control failed, 
Nanoklar purchased all remaining stock and CentraClear‘s 
board of directors (now dominated by Nanoklar) dismissed 
Andersen as CEO a month later. The board immediately 
appointed Kaminski as CentraClear’s new CEO.
SEARCHING FOR A NEW CHIEF OPERATING OFFICER
Several months before Andersen’s departure, CentraClear‘s 
board of directors received instructions from Nanoklar to 
hire an executive search firm to identify possible outside 
candidates for the position of chief operating officer (COO) 
at CentraClear. The successful candidate would be hired 
after the conflict with Andersen had ended (presumably 
with Andersen’s departure). The COO would report to the 
CEO (the person eventually replacing Andersen) and 
would be responsible for day-to-day management of the 
company. Nanoklar‘s management correctly believed that 
most of CentraClear’s current managers were loyal to 
Andersen and, by hiring an outsider, the German firm would 
gain more inside control over its American subsidiary.
The executive search firm received dozens of applica￾tions for the COO position. Three of these candidates were 
interviewed by CentraClear‘s chairperson and another 
Nanoklar representative on CentraClear‘s board. One can￾didate, Mitch Logan, was vice-president of sales at an indus￾trial packaging firm in Ohio and, at 52 years old, was 
looking for one more career challenge before retirement. 
The Nanoklar representatives explained the current situa￾tion and said that they were offering stable employment 
after the problem with Andersen was resolved so the COO 
could help fix other issues at CentraClear. When Logan ex￾pressed his concern about rivalry with internal candidates, 
the Nanoklar manager on CentraClear’s board stated: “We 
have a finance guy, but he is not our choice. The sales direc￾tor is capable, but he’s located in Los Angeles and doesn’t 
want to move to Chicago (CentraClear’s headquarters).”
One week after Andersen‘s dismissal and the appointment 
of Kaminski as CEO, CentraClear’s chairman invited Logan 
to a meeting at a posh Chicago hotel attended by the board 
chair, another Nanoklar manager on CentraClear‘s board of 
directors, and Kaminski. The board’s chairperson explained 
the recent events at CentraClear and formally invited Logan 
to accept the position of COO. After discussing salary and 
details about job duties, Logan asked the others whether he 
had their support as well as the support of CentraClear’s 
employees. The two board members from Nanoklar immedi￾ately replied “Yes,” whereas Kaminski remained silent. When 
the board chairperson left the room to get a bottle of wine to 
toast the new COO, Logan asked Kaminski how long he had 
known about the decision to hire him. Kaminski replied, “I Additional Cases 573
interim report on the special project. The board agreed to 
give Logan another month to complete his work on that 
proposal. However, the board called Logan back to the 
boardroom in the afternoon and Kaminski bluntly asked 
Logan why he didn’t turn in his resignation. Logan replied: 
“Why should I resign? I joined this company six months 
ago as a challenge and to help CentraClear improve its 
operational performance. I have not been allowed to do my 
job. My decision to accept the COO position here was 
based on support from Nanoklar and on a great product.” 
The next day, Kaminski came to Logan’s office with a letter 
of dismissal signed by the chairperson of CentraClear’s 
board of directors.
© 2022 Steven L. McShane.
DECISION BY CENTRACLEAR’S BOARD OF DIRECTORS
As a member of CentraClear‘s board of directors, Kaminski 
ensured that Logan’s actions were framed in an unfavorable 
light to the board. He encouraged the board to invite 
Dubois to report his version of events involving Logan. 
Based on this testimony, the board decided to remove 
Logan from the COO job and give him a special project 
instead. Dubois was immediately named acting COO. The 
board chair and other Nanoklar representatives on 
CentraClear’s board were disappointed that events did not 
unfold as they had hoped. However, they agreed to remove 
Logan rather than face the mass exodus of CentraClear 
managers that Kaminski and Dubois had warned about.
Six months after being hired, Logan attended a morning 
meeting of CentraClear‘s board of directors to present his 
CASE 4: KEEPING SUZANNE CHALMERS
Thomas Chan ended the phone call and sighed. The vice 
president of software engineering at Advanced Photonics 
Inc. (API) had just spoken to Suzanne Chalmers, who called 
to arrange a meeting with Chan later that day. She didn’t say 
what the meeting was about, but Chan almost instinctively 
knew that Suzanne was going to quit after working at API 
for the past four years. Chalmers is a software engineer in 
Internet Protocol (IP), the software that directs fiber-optic 
light through API’s routers. It is very specialized work, and 
Suzanne is one of API’s top talents in that area.
Thomas Chan had been through this before. A valued 
employee would arrange a private meeting. The meeting 
would begin with a few pleasantries, then the employee an￾nounces that they want to quit. Some employees say they are 
leaving because of the long hours and stressful deadlines. 
They say they need to decompress, get to know the kids again, 
or whatever. But that’s not usually the real reason. Almost 
every organization in this industry is scrambling to keep up 
with technological advances and the competition. Employees 
would just leave one stressful job for another one.
Also, many of the people who leave API join a start-up 
company a few months later. These start-up firms can be 
pressure cookers where everyone works 16 hours each day 
and has to perform a variety of tasks. For example, engi￾neers in these small firms might have to meet customers or 
work on venture capital proposals rather than focus on spe￾cialized tasks related to their knowledge. API now has over 
6,000 employees, so it is easier to assign people to work that 
matches their technical competencies.
No, the problem isn’t the stress or long hours, Chan 
thought. The problem is money—too much money. Most of 
the people who leave are millionaires. Suzanne Chalmers is 
one of them. Thanks to generous stock options that have sky￾rocketed on the stock markets, many employees at API have 
more money than they can use. Most are under 40 years old, 
so it’s too early for them to retire. But their financial indepen￾dence gives them less reason to remain with API.
THE MEETING
The meeting with Suzanne Chalmers took place a few hours 
after the phone call. It began like the others, with the initial 
pleasantries and brief discussion about progress on the 
latest fiber-optic router project. Then, Suzanne made her 
well-rehearsed statement: “Thomas, I’ve really enjoyed 
working here, but I’m going to leave Advanced Photonics.” 
Suzanne took a breath, then looked at Chan. When he 
didn’t reply after a few seconds, she continued: “I need to 
take time off. You know, get away to recharge my batteries. 
The project’s nearly done and the team can complete it 
without me. Well, anyway, I’m thinking of leaving.”
Chan spoke in a calm voice. He suggested that Suzanne 
should take an unpaid leave for two or maybe three months, 
complete with paid benefits, then return refreshed. Suzanne 
politely rejected that offer, saying that she needs to get away 
from work for a while. Thomas then asked Suzanne whether 
she was unhappy with her work environment—whether she 
was getting the latest digital technology to do her work 
and whether there were problems with coworkers. The 
workplace was fine, Susanne replied. The job was getting a 
bit routine, but she had a comfortable workplace with 
excellent coworkers.
Chan then apologized for the cramped workspace, due 
mainly to the rapid increase in the number of people hired 
over the past year. He suggested that if Suzanne took a 
couple of months off, API would give her special treatment 
with a larger work space with a better view of the park 
behind the campus-like building when she returned. She 
politely thanked Chan for that offer, but it wasn’t what she 
needed. Besides, it wouldn’t be fair to have a large work 
space when other team members work in smaller quarters.574 Additional Cases
would recommend that she receive a significant raise—maybe 
25 percent more—and more stock options. Chan added that 
Chalmers was one of API’s most valuable employees and 
that the company would suffer if she left the firm.
The meeting ended with Chalmers promising to con￾sider Chan’s offer of higher pay and more stock options. 
Two days later, Chan received her resignation in writing. 
Five months later, Chan learned that after a few months 
traveling with her husband, Chalmers joined a start-up 
software firm in the area.
© 2003 Steven L. McShane.
Chan was running out of tactics, so he tried his last hope: 
money. He asked whether Suzanne had higher offers. 
Suzanne replied that she regularly received calls from other 
companies, and some of them offered more money. Most 
were start-up firms that offered a lower salary but higher 
potential gains in stock options. Chan knew from market sur￾veys that Suzanne was already paid well in the industry. He 
also knew that API couldn’t compete on stock option poten￾tial. Employees working in start-up firms sometimes saw the 
value of their stocks increase by five or ten times their initial 
value, whereas shares at API and other large firms increased 
more slowly. However, Chan promised Suzanne that he 
CASE 5: THE REGENCY GRAND HOTEL
By Elizabeth Ho, Gucci Group, under the supervision of Steven L. McShane, 
Interconnected Knowledge
The Regency Grand Hotel is a five-star hotel in Bangkok, 
Thailand. The hotel was established 15 years ago by a 
local consortium of investors and has been operated by a 
Thai general manager throughout this time. The hotel is 
one of Bangkok’s most prestigious hotels and its 700 em￾ployees enjoyed the prestige associated with the hotel. 
The hotel provides good welfare benefits, above market 
rate salary, and job security. In addition, a good year-end 
bonus amounting to four months’ salary was rewarded to 
employees regardless of the hotel’s overall performance 
during the year.
Recently, the Regency was sold to a large American 
hotel chain that was very keen to expand its operations into 
Thailand. When the acquisition was announced, the 
General Manager decided to take early retirement when the 
hotel changed ownership. The American hotel chain kept 
all of the Regency employees, although a few were trans￾ferred to other positions. John Becker, an American with 
10 years of management experience with the hotel chain, 
was appointed as the new General Manager of Regency 
Palace Hotel. Becker was selected as the new General 
Manager because of his previous successes in integrating 
newly acquired hotels in the United States. In most of the 
previous acquisitions, Becker took over operations with 
poor profitability and low morale.
Becker is a strong believer in empowerment. He expects 
employees to go beyond guidelines/standards to consider 
guest needs on a case-to-case basis. That is, employees must 
be guest-oriented at all times so as to provide excellent cus￾tomer service. From his U.S. experience, Becker has found 
that empowerment increases employee motivation, perfor￾mance, and job satisfaction, all of which contribute to the 
hotel’s profitability and customer service ratings. Soon 
after becoming General Manager in Regency Palace, Becker 
introduced the practice of empowerment so as to replicate 
the successes he had achieved back home.
The Regency Grand hotel has been very profitable since 
it opened 15 years ago. The employees have always worked 
according to management’s instructions. Their responsibil￾ity was to ensure that the instructions from their managers 
were carried out diligently and conscientiously. Innovation 
and creativity were discouraged under the previous manage￾ment. Indeed, employees were punished for their mistakes 
and discouraged from trying out ideas that had not been 
approved by management. As a result, employees were 
afraid to be innovative and to take risks.
Becker met with Regency’s managers and department 
heads to explain that empowerment would be introduced in 
the hotel. He told them that employees must be empowered 
with decision-making authority so that they can use their 
initiative, creativity, and judgment to satisfy guest needs or 
handle problems effectively and efficiently. However, he 
stressed that the more complex issues and decisions were to 
be referred to superiors, who were to coach and assist 
rather than provide direct orders. Furthermore, Becker 
stressed that mistakes were allowed but there was no justifi￾cation for making the same mistake more than twice. He 
advised his managers and department heads not to discuss 
with him minor issues/problems and not to consult minor 
decisions with him. Nevertheless, he told them that they are 
to discuss important/major issues and decisions with him. 
He concluded the meeting by asking for feedback. Several 
managers and department heads told him that they liked 
the idea and would support it, while others simply nodded 
their heads. Becker was pleased with the response, and was 
eager to have his plan implemented.
In the past, the Regency had emphasized administrative 
control, resulting in many bureaucratic procedures 
throughout the organization. For example, the front coun￾ter employees needed to seek approval from their manager 
before they could upgrade guests to another category of 
room. The front counter manager would then have to write Additional Cases 575
Becker thought that the practice of empowerment 
would benefit the overall performance of the hotel. How￾ever, contrary to his expectation, the business and overall 
performance of the hotel began to deteriorate. There had 
been an increasing number of guest complaints. In the 
past, the hotel had minimal guest complaints. Now a sig￾nificant number of formal written complaints were turned 
in every month. Many other guests voiced their dissatis￾faction verbally to hotel employees. The number of mis￾takes made by employees had been on the increase. 
Becker was very upset when he realized that two of the 
local newspapers and an overseas newspaper had pub￾lished negative feedback on the hotel in terms of service 
standards. He was most distressed when an international 
travel magazine had voted the hotel as “one of Asia’s 
nightmare hotels.”
The stress levels of the employees were continuously 
mounting since the introduction of the practice of empow￾erment. Absenteeism due to illness was increasing at an 
alarming rate. In addition, the employee turnover rate had 
reached an all-time high. The good working relationships 
that were established under the old management had been 
severely strained. The employees were no longer united and 
supportive of each other. They were quick to point fingers 
or backstab one another when mistakes were made and 
when problems occurred.
Note: This case is based on true events, but the industry and names have 
been changed.
and submit a report to the General Manager justifying the 
upgrade. Soon after his meeting with managers, Becker 
reduced the number of bureaucratic rules at the Regency 
and allocated more decision-making authority to front-line 
employees. This action upset those who previously had 
decision-making power over these issues. As a result, several 
of these employees left the hotel.
Becker also began spending a large portion of his time 
observing and interacting with the employees at the front 
desk, lobby, restaurants, and various departments. This direct 
interaction with Becker helped many employees to under￾stand what he wanted and expected of them. However, the 
employees had much difficulty trying to distinguish between 
a major and minor issue/decision. More often than not, 
supervisors would reverse employee decisions by stating that 
they were major issues requiring management approval. 
Employees who displayed initiative and made good decisions 
in satisfying the needs of the guests rarely received any positive 
feedback from their supervisors. Eventually, most of these 
employees lost confidence in making decisions, and reverted 
to relying on their superiors for decision making.
Not long after the implementation of the practice of 
empowerment, Becker realized that his subordinates were 
consulting him more frequently than before. Most of them 
came to him with minor issues and consulted with him on 
minor decisions. He had to spend most of his time attending 
to his subordinates. Soon Becker began to feel highly frus￾trated and exhausted, and very often would tell his secretary 
that “unless the hotel is on fire, don’t let anyone disturb me.”
CASE 6: TAMARACK INDUSTRIES
By David J. Cherrington, Brigham Young University
Tamarack Industries manufactures motorboats primarily 
used for water skiing. Students are hired during summer 
months to fill in for permanent employees on vacation. In 
past years, students worked alongside permanent employ￾ees, but a few staff complained that the students were inex￾perienced, slow, and arrogant. In general, permanent staff 
disliked the students’ behavior, such as listening to music 
with earphones while working. This summer, the company 
reorganized all permanent employees into three production 
teams (they usually have four teams, but 25 percent are on 
vacation at any given time) and assigned the 16 summer 
students to their own team on the fourth production line.
The supervisor, Dan Jensen, decided to try a different 
strategy this summer and have all the college students 
work on the new line. He asked Mark Allen to supervise 
the new crew because Mark claimed that he knew every￾thing about boats and could perform every job “with my 
eyes closed.” Mark was happy to accept the new job and 
participated in selecting the student hires. Mark’s crew 
was called “the Geek Team” because all the college 
students were savvy with computers, unlike most of the 
permanent employees.
Mark spent many hours training his student team to get 
the line running at full production. The college students 
learned quickly, and by the end of June their production rate 
was up to standard, with an error rate that was only slightly 
above normal. To simplify the learning process, Dan Jensen 
assigned the Geek Team long production runs that generally 
consisted of 30 to 40 identical units. Thus, the training period 
was shortened and errors were reduced. Shorter production 
runs were assigned to the experienced teams.
By the middle of July, a substantial rivalry had been 
created between the Geek Team and the older workers. At 
first, the rivalry was good-natured. But after a few weeks, the 
older workers became resentful of the remarks made by the 
college students. The Geek Team often met its production 
schedules, with time to spare at the end of the day for goofing 
around. It wasn’t uncommon for someone from the Geek 
Team to go to another line pretending to look for materials 
just to make demeaning comments. The experienced workers 576 Additional Cases
break by one of the experienced crews. By skillful decep￾tion, they were able to substitute an assembly from the 
other experienced line for theirs. By the end of the lunch 
period, the Geek Team was laughing wildly because of 
their deception, while one experienced crew was very 
angry with the other one.
Dan Jensen decided that the situation had to be changed 
and announced that the job assignments between the differ￾ent crews would be shuffled. The employees were told that 
when they appeared for work the next morning, the names 
of the workers assigned to each crew would be posted on 
the bulletin board. The announcement was not greeted with 
much enthusiasm, and Mark Allen decided to talk Dan out 
of his idea. Mark suspected that many of the college students 
would quit if their team was broken up.
resented having to perform all the shorter production runs 
and began to retaliate with sabotage. They would sneak over 
during breaks and hide tools, dent materials, install some￾thing crooked, and in other small ways do something that 
would slow production for the Geek Team.
Dan felt good about his decision to form a separate crew 
of college students, but when he heard reports of sabotage 
and rivalry, he became very concerned. Because of com￾plaints from the experienced workers, Dan equalized the 
production so that all of the crews had similar production 
runs. The rivalry, however, did not stop. The Geek Team 
continued to finish early and flaunt their performance in 
front of the other crews.
One day, the Geek Team suspected that one of their 
assemblies was going to be sabotaged during the lunch 
CASE 7: THE OUTSTANDING FACULTY AWARD
By David J. Cherrington, Brigham Young University; revised by Steven L. McShane, 
Interconnected Knowledge
I recently served on the Outstanding Faculty Award com￾mittee for the College of Business. This award is our col￾lege’s highest honor for a faculty member, which is bestowed 
at a special reception ceremony. At the first meeting, our 
committee discussed the nomination process and decided 
to follow our traditional practice of inviting nominations 
from both the faculty and students. During the next month, 
we received six completed files with supporting documenta￾tion. Three of the nominations came from department 
chairs, two from faculty who recommended their colleagues, 
and one from a group of 16 graduate students.
At the second meeting, we agreed that we didn’t know 
the six applicants well enough to make a decision that day, 
so we decided that we would read the applications on our 
own and rank them. There was no discussion about ranking 
criteria; I think we assumed that we shared a common 
definition of the word “outstanding.”
During the third meeting, it quickly became apparent 
that each committee member had a different interpretation 
of what constitutes an “outstanding” faculty member. The 
discussion was polite, but we debated the extent to which 
this was an award for teaching, or research, or service to the 
college, or scholarly textbook writing, or consulting, or ser￾vice to society, or some other factor. After three hours, we 
agreed on five criteria that we would apply to independently 
rate each candidate using a five-point scale.
When we reconvened the next day, our discussion was 
much more focused as we tried to achieve a consensus regard￾ing how we judged each candidate on each criterion. After a 
lengthy discussion, we finally completed the task and averaged 
the ratings. The top three scores had an average rating (out of 
a maximum of 25) of 21, 19.5, and 18.75. I assumed the person 
with the highest total would receive the award. Instead, my 
colleagues began debating over the relevance of the five crite￾ria that we had agreed on the previous day. Some committee 
members felt, in hindsight, that the criteria were incorrectly 
weighted or that other criteria should be considered.
Although they did not actually say this, I sensed that at 
least two colleagues on the committee wanted the criteria 
or weights changed because their preferred candidate didn’t 
get the highest score using the existing formula. When we 
changed the weights in various ways, a different candidate 
among the top three received the top score. The remaining 
three candidates received lower ratings every time. Dr. H 
always received the lowest score, usually around 12 on the 
25-point range.
After almost two hours of discussion, the Associate 
Dean turned to one committee member and said, “Dolan, 
I sure would like to see Dr. H in your department receive 
this honor. He retires next year and this would be a great 
honor for him and no one has received this honor in your 
department recently.”
Dolan agreed, “Yes, this is Dr. H’s last year with us and 
it would be a great way for him to go out. I’m sure he would 
feel very honored by this award.”
I sat there stunned at the suggestion, while Dolan retold 
how Dr. H had been active in public service, his only real 
strength on our criteria. I was even more stunned when 
another committee member, who I think was keen to finish 
the meeting, said, “Well, I so move,” and Dolan seconded it.
The Associate Dean, who was conducting the meeting, 
said, “Well, if the rest of you think this is a good idea, all in 
favor say aye.” A few members said “Aye,” and, without call￾ing for nays, the Associate Dean quickly proceeded to 
explain what we needed to do to advertise the winner and 
arrange the ceremony.Additional Cases 577
decision, and I was embarrassed to be a member of the 
committee. A few weeks later, we were appropriately punished 
when Dr. H gave a 45-minute acceptance speech that 
started poorly and only got worse.
During my conversations with other committee members 
over the next two weeks, I learned that everyone—including 
the two who said “Aye”—were as shocked as I was at our 
committee’s decision. I thought we made a terrible 
CASE 8: CONIFER CORP.
By Steven L. McShane, Interconnected Knowledge; and David Lebeter
Conifer Corp. is a sawmill operation in Oregon that is 
owned by a major forest products company but operates in￾dependently of the parent company. It was built 30 years 
ago and completely updated with new machinery five years 
ago. Conifer receives raw logs from the area for cutting and 
planning into building-grade lumber, mostly 2-by-4 and 
2-by-6 pieces of standard lengths. Higher-grade logs leave 
Conifer’s sawmill department in finished form and are sent 
directly to the packaging department. The remaining 
40 percent of sawmill output are cuts from lower-grade logs, 
requiring further work by the planning department.
Conifer has one general manager, 16 supervisors and sup￾port staff, and 180 unionized employees. The unionized 
employees are paid an hourly rate specified in the collective 
agreement, whereas management and support staff are paid a 
monthly salary. The mill is divided into six operating depart￾ments: boom, sawmill, planer, packaging, shipping, and 
maintenance. The sawmill, boom, and packaging depart￾ments operate a morning shift starting at 6:00 a.m. and an 
afternoon shift starting at 2:00 p.m. Employees in these depart￾ments rotate shifts every two weeks. The planer and shipping 
departments operate only morning shifts. Maintenance 
employees work the night shift (starting at 10:00 p.m.).
Each department, except for packaging, has a supervisor 
on every work shift. The planer supervisor is responsible for 
the packaging department on the morning shift, and the 
sawmill supervisor is responsible for the packaging depart￾ment on the afternoon shift. However, the packaging opera￾tion is housed in a separate building from the other 
departments, so supervisors seldom visit the packaging 
department. This is particularly true for the afternoon shift, 
because the sawmill supervisor is the furthest distance from 
the packaging building.
PACKAGING QUALITY
Ninety percent of Conifer’s product is sold nationally and 
internationally through Westboard, Inc., a large marketing 
agency. Westboard represents all forest products mills 
owned by Conifer’s parent company as well as several other 
clients in the region. The market for building-grade lumber 
is very price competitive, because there are numerous mills 
selling a relatively undifferentiated product. However, some 
differentiation does occur in product packaging and presen￾tation. Buyers will look closely at the packaging when 
deciding whether to buy from Conifer or another mill.
To encourage its clients to package their products better, 
Westboard sponsors a monthly package quality award. The 
marketing agency samples and rates its clients’ packages daily, 
and the sawmill with the highest score at the end of the month 
is awarded a framed certificate of excellence. Package quality 
is a combination of how the lumber is piled (e.g., defects 
turned in), where the bands and dunnage are placed, how 
neatly the stencil and seal are applied, the stencil’s accuracy, 
and how neatly and tightly the plastic wrap is attached.
Conifer won Westboard’s packaging quality award several 
times over the past five years, and received high ratings in 
the months that it didn’t win. However, the mill’s ratings 
have started to decline over the past year or two, and several 
clients have complained about the appearance of the 
finished product. A few large customers switched to com￾petitors’ lumber, saying that the decision was based on the 
substandard appearance of Conifer’s packaging when it 
arrived in their lumber yard.
BOTTLENECK IN PACKAGING
The planning and sawmilling departments have significantly 
increased productivity over the past couple of years. The saw￾mill operation recently set a new productivity record on a sin￾gle day. The planer operation has increased productivity to 
the point where last year it reduced operations to just one 
(rather than two) shifts per day. These productivity improve￾ments are due to better operator training, fewer machine 
breakdowns, and better selection of raw logs. (Sawmill cuts 
from high-quality logs usually do not require planning work.)
Productivity levels in the boom, shipping, and mainte￾nance departments have remained constant. However, the 
packaging department has recorded decreasing productivity 
over the past couple of years, with the result that a large 
backlog of finished product is typically stockpiled outside 
the packaging building. The morning shift of the packaging 
department is unable to keep up with the combined produc￾tion of the sawmill and planer departments, so the unpack￾aged output is left for the afternoon shift. Unfortunately, 
the afternoon shift packages even less product than the 
morning shift, so the backlog continues to build. The back￾log adds to Conifer’s inventory costs and increases the risk 
of damaged stock.
Conifer has added Saturday overtime shifts as well as 
extra hours before and after the regular shifts for the pack￾aging department employees to process this backlog. Last 578 Additional Cases
by 10 minutes and coffee breaks by 5 minutes. They also 
typically leave work a few minutes before the end of their 
shift. This abuse has worsened recently, particularly on 
the afternoon shift. Employees who are temporarily as￾signed to the packaging department also seem to partici￾pate in this time loss pattern after a few days. Although 
they are punctual and productive in other departments, 
these temporary employees soon adopt the packaging 
crew’s informal schedule when assigned to that 
department.
month, the packaging department employed 10 percent of 
the workforce but accounted for 85 percent of the overtime. 
This is frustrating to Conifer’s management, because time 
and motion studies recently confirmed that the packaging 
department is capable of processing all of the daily sawmill 
and planer production without overtime. With employees 
earning one and a half or two times their regular pay on 
overtime, Conifer’s cost competitiveness suffers.
Employees and supervisors at Conifer are aware that 
people in the packaging department tend to extend lunch 
CASE 9: VERBERG KANSEN N.V.
By Steven L. McShane, Interconnected Knowledge, based on an earlier case 
by Steven Palesy and David A. Nadler
Verberg Kansen N.V. (Verkan) is one of the leading European 
food manufacturers. Headquartered in Amsterdam, the 
Netherlands, the company manufactures or imports a full 
range of grocery foods, such as cereals, dairy products, baby 
foods, and canned foods. Verkan’s products are widely re￾spected for their quality, although the product lines are not 
considered as innovative as from other large competitors and 
small start-up boutique-style food manufacturers in the region. 
The company owns production operations within Europe but 
also imports a small percentage of its products from outside 
Europe. It has a well-developed distribution network and 
warehousing facilities, providing direct delivery of products 
from the warehouses to food retailers, restaurants, institutions, 
and other client groups across Europe.
Verkan’s baby foods division is a relatively small part of 
the overall business but, until recently, has provided steady 
revenue growth with good profit margins. Its baby foods 
brand is well-known to consumers, and is premium-priced 
with an overall market share across Europe of approximately 
25 percent in a fragmented market of almost a dozen brands. 
Within the past decade, Verkan expanded sales of several 
food products, including its full range of baby foods, into 
Asia. Asian sales of Verkan’s baby foods enjoy approximately 
15 percent growth per year, compared to 3 or 4 percent 
growth in recent years for its baby foods in Europe.
The baby foods division was formed more than two de￾cades ago and grew rapidly as it introduced a broad range of 
foods for the infant market, including strained vegetables, 
fruits, meats, and combined variations of these foods. Baby 
food sales growth ranged from 10 and 20 percent per year 
during the first decade, then growth slowed about 10 years 
ago. During those early years, the number of different types 
of infant food products increased tremendously to keep up 
with increasing demand for a greater number of foods and a 
greater variety of products. The product line includes foods 
that are pureed or strained (for babies about 5 months and 
older) as well as partially strained or chopped (for infants 
about 10 months and older).
The European market for baby foods has changed con￾siderably in recent years. The growth rate in sales for this 
market has slowed considerably, which is partly due to 
decreasing birth rates throughout many European coun￾tries. The industry also faces increasing scrutiny from 
consumers and government regulators regarding product 
content and food additives, such as food dyes and preser￾vatives. Some online influencers even urge parents to 
make their own baby food rather than buy products from 
food manufacturers. Competition in the baby food indus￾try has also increased, particularly from start-up bou￾tique brands with premium pricing as well as from 
grocery store private label brands competing on the basis 
of price. Verkan faces similar competition and consumer 
challenges in several product groups beyond its baby 
foods division.
Verkan’s senior executive team has been highly concerned 
about these threats to the company’s infant products and, 
ultimately, the company’s financial health. Baby food sales 
growth barely reached 3 percent in the most recent year, 
which has resulted in less efficient production and unused 
warehouse capacity. Verkan’s executives have made it a pri￾ority to seek out new revenue streams, including innovative 
alternative markets for the company’s products as well as 
the development of new products.
VERBERG KANSEN’S ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE
Verkan is organized into six divisions, each of which is led 
by a vice president who reports to the chief executive officer 
(Exhibit 1). Four divisions represent product groups, spe￾cifically dairy, cereals, baby, and canned foods. These food 
groups have somewhat or very distinct customers and mar￾keting practices. A fifth division is responsible for interna￾tional (mostly Asian) marketing and sales. The sixth 
division oversees the company’s European production 
operations and warehouse facilities. Also reporting to the 
CEO are the heads of product research, legal, government 
relations, and administration.Additional Cases 579
key goals against which regional manager’s performance is 
measured. The annual sales plan is developed through a 
multistage process.
In the first stage, the technical market planning team 
within a food group projects sales for the coming year for that 
division. Concurrently, regional managers develop sales pro￾jections for that food group in their area. These sales man￾ager estimates are typically extrapolations of the previous 
year’s sales figures, adjusting for any expected market 
changes. The regional managers’ projections are submitted to 
the divisional vice president and market planning team.
Invariably, the market planning team’s projections are 
higher than the regional manager projections. So, in the 
second stage, the product group’s regional managers negotiate 
with that food group’s market planning team to resolve 
those differences and agree on a sales plan. Along with stat￾ing projected sales volume for the division and each region, 
the sales plan identifies the division’s promotion and adver￾tising budgets, other expenditures, and expected profits.
Next, Verkan’s vice president for each product group 
communicates formal sales targets to each regional man￾ager. These targets are then cascaded down to the district 
managers and their sales teams. This information includes 
both each district’s formal sales targets and expense budget 
for the next financial year.
Each district manager receives a relatively low base 
salary and a large yearly bonus calculated by his or her 
sales team’s performance against the sales plan. The dis￾trict manager also receives a pool of bonus money, the 
amount of which varies with the district’s success com￾pared to the sales plan. The district manager distributes 
Each product group is primarily a marketing and sales 
organization, so most direct reports to the vice president 
are sales managers for each of the four European regions. 
The vice president’s office is responsible for overall market 
planning, sales promotion, advertising, and sales within 
that food group, as well as liaison with the company’s cen￾tralized product research center.
Exhibit 1 also shows the baby foods group structure 
beneath the top reporting level. Europe is divided into four 
regions, so each food group has four regional sales manag￾ers. Regions are further divided into several districts. Each 
district may represent part of a country, or one very large 
metropolitan area. A food group district manager leads the 
Verkan sales teams in one district. The food group’s sales 
team is responsible for selling Verkan products to retailers, 
negotiating shelf space with those customers, addressing 
delivery issues, and managing promotions developed by the 
food group’s market planning and promotion team.
District managers report to the regional sales manager 
responsible for that group in a specific area of Europe. The 
regional sales manager position has been an entry position 
for graduates of well-regarded MBA programs, who subse￾quently are promoted to high-level positions within the com￾pany. Verkan’s current CEO, the vice presidents of three out 
of the four food groups, and a few marketing specialists, began 
their careers at Verkan as regional sales managers.
VERBERG KANSEN’S YEARLY SALES PLAN
Verkan’s regional managers focus much of their attention 
on the yearly sales plan, which includes projections of sales, 
expenses, and profit. The yearly sales plan consists of the 
Vice President
Dairy foods
Vice President
Research
Vice President
Government
relations
General
counsel (legal)
Vice President
Cereal foods
Vice President
Canned foods
CEO
Vice President
International
Vice President
Production
Vice President
Baby foods
Vice President
Vice President
Administration
Market planning
and promotions
Regional
Manager 1
Regional
Manager 2
District
Manager 2
District
Manager 4
District
Manager 3
(Angelo Ricci)
Regional
Manager 4
Regional
Manager 3
(Anke Jansen)
EXHIBIT 1 Partial Organizational Structure of Verberg Kansen (Verkan) N.V.580 Additional Cases
	 “Verkan’s baby foods is a very mature product line. The vice
president of baby foods recognizes that as well as our critical
need to diversify. In other words, we need to reduce our depen￾dence on a steadily increasing population as the main source
of growth. The product development people have some exciting
ideas in the works, but it will be a few years of refinement and
testing before these products are on the market. Until then, it is
up to us in the field to generate new ideas that will boost sales
of our existing product line.
	 “I’m sure there must be better ways to market our product—
new practices we can apply or clients that we can serve to boost
sales volume and profits for our region and the entire division.
It’s a known truth that the best ideas come from the field—from
our district salespeople. But as I’ve said, there has been no
more than a trickle of suggestions from them. They literally
expect the products to continue to sell themselves without any
special initiative from frontline sales staff. The districts just
think their job is to assist with promotions developed at divi￾sion headquarters, maintain good relations with our larger
customers, and keep the shelves stocked. That’s all they have
done for years and, in their minds, that’s all they need to do for
years to come.”
At this juncture of the interview, Anke brought out some 
sales plan data for the current year in her region, including 
the sales volumes of the districts and individual salespeo￾ple. With a touch of emotion, Anke pointed to data from 
sales staff in the district covering Northern Italy:
	 “Look here at Angelo Ricci (pronounced Rik-Chee) and his
team in [the northern Italy district]. This illustrates the difficul￾ties I am facing. Our regional and divisional sales growth in baby
foods continues to slow down—sales increased by only 3 percent
last year across the division! Sales actually contracted from last
year in some districts. Yet Angelo’s group consistently delivers
sales volumes that are 10 percent above the sales plan.
	 “Of course, I’ve been down to their district office numerous
times and spent time talking with Angelo, but he can’t seem to
explain why they are doing so well. And I can’t figure out how
they do it, either. Surely they are doing something that would
benefit everyone selling Verkan baby foods. Yet whenever I ask
Angelo, I get vague answers. He’ll often reply: ‘Well, my sales￾people work very hard to get those sales’ or ‘Teamwork! Just
plain teamwork is why we succeed.’ I’m sure there is a reason—
maybe a few reasons—beyond these explanations, but I can’t
seem to get Angelo to open up.”
THE RESEARCHER VISITS NORTHERN ITALY
The situation in the northern Italy district sparked the 
researcher’s curiosity, so he arranged a six-week visit with 
district manager Angelo Ricci and his team. The researcher 
was given a letter of introduction from the vice president of 
the baby foods division. The letter asked the sales teams to 
assist the researcher, who was collecting data for a research 
study that potentially might help the company. The letter 
emphasized that any information collected by the researcher 
would be confidential.
these funds to individual salespeople. Sales staff also 
receive a relatively low base salary, so the yearly bonus is 
their major source of income.
ANKE JANSEN, SOUTHERN EUROPEAN REGIONAL 
MANAGER, BABY FOODS
Anke Jansen is the regional sales manager responsible for baby 
foods in Southern Europe. Anke completed an MBA program 
from one of Europe’s top universities, majoring in market￾ing and graduating near the top of her class. Anke’s first job 
following graduation was as an assistant product manager at a 
large consumer products company. Over her four years 
employed at that firm, she demonstrated her ability to manage 
current products and assist the launch of new offerings.
Seeing no opportunities for quick advancement at the 
consumer products firm, last year Anke accepted the posi￾tion of regional sales manager at Verkan’s baby food group. 
Her starting salary at Verkan was higher, and she would 
receive a potentially large bonus based on the baby food 
group’s performance and the entire company’s profits. 
Verkan also offered good career progress opportunities. She 
learn that many of Verkan’s senior executives had started in 
the regional manager position.
Currently beginning her second year at Verkan, Anke 
remains eager to perform her job well, particularly working 
with her eight district managers. She encourages them to 
identify new markets and other innovations to improve sales 
of the company’s various baby food products.
A RESEARCHER STUDIES VERBERG KANSEN
A researcher from a major European business school was 
recently given permission by Verkan to study the company’s 
operations and management practices. After developing an 
initial understanding of the company, the researcher decided 
to more closely study the European sales groups and issues 
that were being experienced there. One of his earliest inter￾views was with Anke Jansen, the baby foods regional sales 
manager for southern Europe, who he visited in her 
Amsterdam office. After introductions, Anke described the 
variety of baby food products that Verkan offered the 
market and how they related to sales in her southern Europe 
region. After this preliminary discussion, Anke revealed her 
thoughts and concerns:
	 “I was hired by Verberg Kansen a little more than a year
ago. There has been some growth during that time, but it has
been uneven. To some extent, I believe that we are starting to
get back on track toward our sales plan. But it has been a
much more challenging journey than I ever thought. Our ap￾proach to selling baby food is too traditional, too old school.
We need more innovative selling methods and ideas for new
markets. Unfortunately, the frontline sales staff—even the dis￾trict managers—don’t seem to be fully on board. Everyone is
content to continue their current sales routines just to meet the
sales goals. Very few of them have mentioned any new ideas to
increase market share and profitability.Additional Cases 581
	 “I’ll tell you, too, that we can be a bit hard on a coworker
who doesn’t go along with how we do things around here.
One of the young guys, Pietro, joined the team a few years
back. My, oh my! He was so fired up about the job! He was
going to sell baby food to half the mothers in Italy, person￾ally! It took some, er, gentle coaxing to let Pietro realize that
selling at ­Verkan means that you, uh [hesitates] . . . have to
pace yourself and not waste your effort for this firm. Because of
his over-eagerness when he got hired, Pietro experienced a few,
er, setbacks that slowed him down. Some of his sales orders got
lost, a couple of shipments were misdirected, things like that.
Yeah, some of the guys were making his life a little bit difficult
by creating these mix-ups. But when he finally realized what we
were expecting from each other, everyone treated Pietro great
and showed him how to work better rather than harder.”
The researcher then asked Raffaele about his views on 
Verkan as a place to work. The salesperson’s reply was blunt:
	 “It doesn’t take much brainpower to see that the company is
out to screw us [district sales staff]. Up in Netherlands, they are
concerned about one thing—the numbers, meeting the plan, no
matter what. But it’s a no-win situation. Let’s say you work hard
and meet the plan, and then increase sales so you can earn
some decent money. What happens? Head office just raises the
sales target next year based on how hard you worked this year!
Then, next year, you have to work even harder just to meet the
minimum sales quota and make the same money, or more likely
less money. It just doesn’t pay to bust your ass for this company.
	 “Also, Verkan’s people in Amsterdam love paperwork and
digital reports. They expect us to file sales reports, call reports,
all kinds of reports. If you got online and filled out all of the
information that they want, you’d have no time left to do any
selling, meeting clients, looking for new accounts, or anything
else that a salesperson needs to do to keep ahead of the game.”
The researcher soon discovered that Raffaele’s views on 
the company were similar to those held by other Verkan 
baby food salespeople in Northern Italy. For example, this 
is what Francesco Orbel said to the researcher as they were 
driving around Milan meeting clients:
During the first week or more, it was evident to the re￾searcher that Angelo Ricci and his district salespeople were 
suspicious of his visit. But the researcher spent numerous 
days traveling along the northern Italian roads with each of 
the sales staff, visiting a variety of grocery stores and other 
clients. Slowly, as the researcher gained their trust, the sales 
staff revealed more of their true feelings about their jobs 
and the company. (See Exhibit 2 for a listing of Angelo 
Ricci’s Northern Italy sales team members.)
Davide Pascutti, the unofficial assistant district man￾ager, gave a heartfelt explanation about why he enjoyed his 
work as a district salesperson:
	 “It’s the freedom! Really, I’m my own boss in this job most
of the time. I couldn’t imagine being in an office day in–day
out with some supervisor breathing down my neck and check￾ing through all of my work. In sales, you get to drive through
the wonderful countryside, colorful city streets, and generally
be out in the real world. I’m doing what I like most—talking to
people, being out and about, and making the sale.”
Raffaele Anzil has worked at Verkan for 30 years, more 
than anyone else in Angelo Ricci’s sales team. Along with 
discussing his job, he particularly described the unique 
qualities of the sales group in this district:
	 “You couldn’t ask for a greater bunch of people to work
with. Over the years, I’ve been with a few different teams, and
these guys are the best. I’ve worked with Davide and Angelo for
almost 15 years, so I know them well. We are true friends—
I wouldn’t trade this group for anything. That goes for Angelo,
too. He may be the district manager, but Angelo is really one of
us. He lets us do our jobs without micromanaging because he
knows that we are good at sales. We just continue to do our
work as we know best, and that’s just fine with Angelo.
	 “What makes these guys special is that they help you out
when you need it. I was sick last year, which meant that
I couldn’t keep up with store checks and other fieldwork for a
while. They [the other district salespeople] all took turns cover￾ing my territory. We made our plan plus 10 percent, yet didn’t
report my illness to the company.
NAME POSITION AGE
YEARS WITH 
VERKAN EDUCATION
Angelo Ricci District sales manager 52 24 Upper secondary school
Davide Pascutti Salesperson (assistant manager) 50 24 Upper secondary school
Raffaele Anzil Salesperson 56 30 Upper secondary school
Francesco Orbel Salesperson 49 18 One year university
Alessandro Volpe Salesperson 35 12 Two years university
Mattia Costa Salesperson 28 4 Laurea (undergrad degree)
Pietro Bianci Salesperson 30 3 Laurea (undergrad degree)
EXHIBIT 2 Northern Italy District Sales Team582 Additional Cases
They like our stuff, but they buy it mainly because they have
all kinds of teeth problems so they can’t chew food very well.
	 “So, now we have grown a very lucrative trade with a num￾ber of the seniors’ homes. But to keep it quiet from Amsterdam,
we’ve arranged to sell our products to these seniors residences
through supermarkets located nearby where there is a large
elderly population. It’s a great new market. More to the point:
it takes the pressure off us to make plan. In fact, since our
discovery, we haven’t had to push very hard to keep making
plan plus about 10 percent increase in district sales volume.
	 “We’ve been very careful—and so far quite successful—at
keeping Amsterdam from finding out. It would be ‘game
over’ if they knew. They would up our plan, which leaves us no
time to sell, to develop new customers, to develop new accounts,
to do anything necessary these days to keep our pay at a
decent level. This elderly market is our ‘cushion.’ It adds
enough of an annual sales volume increase that we can focus
our time on staying on top of our territory. I’m telling you this
now because the seniors market is on our agenda this after￾noon. Everyone here believes you are OK, so I’m trusting you
to keep this to yourself. That letter you showed me when you
first showed up said you’d keep everything confidential, right?
I hope I’m not making a mistake telling you this.”
A week after the Brescia meeting, the researcher bid 
farewell to Angelo Ricci and his sales team and returned to 
his university in [another European country]. But on his 
way back, he arranged a final visit with Anke Jansen in 
Amsterdam. It was immediately evident that Anke was even 
more stressed about baby food sales in her region.
	 “The regional managers met the other day with the VP (vice
president of the baby foods division). Verkan is putting even more
pressure on all of us to lift sales. Somehow, I get the sense that
my job is on the line. Maybe it’s because a couple of my districts
are lagging behind most others, but every region has districts that
can’t make the plan. Even if I’m not fired, the market planning
team has made it clear that they will demand a larger sales in￾crease in next year’s plan. My future with ­Verkan doesn’t look
good unless I can find some way to ­improve this situation.
	 “What’s worse is that I’m getting pressure from both sides.
My district managers push back that they are working harder
than ever. They claim they have squeezed out all the new sales
they can. Even Angelo Ricci objected that he will fall short of
the plan if next year’s sales targets are increased. Yet his district
always seems to pull a rabbit out of their hat and ­increase sales
by an extra 10 percent. I’d love to be a fly on their wall to know
what they’re really doing there [in the Northern Italy district].”
© 2019 Steven L. McShane
	 “Have you heard about Verkan’s suggestion plan? What a
joke! We’re supposed to come up with some brilliant ideas
about how to increase baby food sales for the company. So, you
think up an idea that makes our division a million dollars in
profit across the continent. What do they generously give you
in return? €3,000, that’s all. That’s the top figure, €3,000 for
your idea. What a joke . . . no, what an insult!
	 “Keep this in mind: we’re basically in this for the money.
Don’t get any fancy ideas that this is a comfortable or glamor￾ous job. It’s not! You’re out on the road all of the time, staying
in mid-standard hotels, and constantly fighting the competi￾tion. But these hassles are worth it because I can earn more
money than doing any other job available to someone like me.
I can live better than most ‘professionals’ with all their Laurea
[completed university degrees].
	 “That’s what’s so great about Angelo, too. He understands
that this is all about making good money. He makes sure that
we not only make our plan, but that we get a healthy bonus
every year, without fail. And frankly, he is very good at keeping
the people in Amsterdam from taking those bonuses away
from us. He’s not management; he’s one of us.
	 “You can see Angelo’s commitment to us when the entire dis￾trict sales team meets. Once every two or three months we all get
together, usually in Brescia, Bergamo, or sometimes Verona—
someplace small enough that we can get good accommodation
at a decent price. We spend a day going over our sales figures,
promotions expenses, and things we noticed about selling. We
spend the entire day working on these things in this hotel meet￾ing room. Then everyone goes out and has a fun night on the
town, usually drinking. Angelo is one of us. More than a few
nights I’ve had to help carry him back to the hotel.”
Almost one month after arriving in Northern Italy, the 
researcher was invited to attend the team’s next meeting, in 
Brescia. Angelo Ricci drew the researcher aside during the 
luncheon break and said the following:
	 “Listen, before we start the afternoon part of the meeting,
I need to talk to you about something. The guys trust you
enough to let you in on this. You have probably noticed that we
have been fairly successful with our sales targets and bonuses.
You’re right, we have been, and for a good reason.
	 “About three years ago, Francesco made a great discovery.
While checking shelf space in one of the stores, he noticed that
it wasn’t just moms and dads buying our baby food products
for their babies. Many customers were elderly people! Well, the
others here starting looking more closely in their areas and
found the same thing. In fact, a lot of old folks are buying
Verkan baby foods for themselves, particularly the chopped
and partially strained varieties. We talked with some of them.
CASE 10: VETEMENTS LTÉE
Vêtements Ltée is a chain of men’s retail clothing stores 
located throughout the province of Quebec, Canada. Two 
years ago, the company introduced new incentive systems 
for both store managers and sales employees. Store managers 
receive a salary with annual merit increases based on store 
sales above targeted goals, store appearance, store inventory Additional Cases 583
several occasions, stores have faced stock shortages because 
merchandise was not stocked or reorder forms were not 
completed in a timely manner. Potential sales have suffered 
from empty shelves when plenty of merchandise was avail￾able in the back storeroom or at the warehouse. The com￾pany’s new automatic inventory system could reduce some 
of these problems, but employees must still stock shelves 
and assist in other aspects of inventory management.
Store managers have tried to correct the inventory prob￾lem by assigning employees to inventory duty, but this has 
created resentment among the employees selected. Other 
managers have threatened sales staff with dismissals if they 
do not do their share of inventory management. This strat￾egy has been somewhat effective when the manager is in the 
store, but staff members sneak back onto the floor when 
the manager is away. It has also hurt staff morale, particularly 
relations with the store manager.
To reduce the tendency of sales staff to hoard customers 
at the store entrance, some managers have assigned employ￾ees to specific areas of the store. This has also created some 
resentment among employees stationed in areas with less 
traffic or lower-priced merchandise. Some staff have openly 
complained of lower paychecks because they have been 
placed in a slow area of the store or have been given more 
than their share of inventory duties.
© 1995 Steven L. McShane.
management, customer complaints, and several other 
performance measures. Some of this information (e.g., 
store appearance) is gathered during visits by senior 
management, whereas other information is based on 
company records (e.g., sales volume).
Sales employees are paid a fixed salary plus a commis￾sion based on the percentage of sales credited to that em￾ployee over the pay period. The commission represents 
about 30 percent of a typical paycheck and is intended to 
encourage employees to actively serve customers and to 
increase sales volume. Returned merchandise is deducted 
from commissions, so sales employees are discouraged 
from selling products that customers do not really want.
Soon after the new incentive systems were introduced, 
senior management began to receive complaints from store 
managers regarding the performance of their sales staff. 
They observed that sales employees tended to stand near 
the store entrance waiting to “tag” customers as their own. 
Occasionally, sales staff would argue over “ownership” of 
the customer. Managers were concerned that this aggressive 
behavior intimidated some customers. It also tended to 
leave some parts of the store unattended by staff.
Many managers were also concerned about inventory 
duties. Previously, sales staff would share responsibility for 
restocking inventory and completing inventory reorder 
forms. Under the new compensation system, however, few 
employees were willing to do these essential tasks. On 584
Theory Building and Systematic 
Research Methods
THEORY BUILDING
People need to make sense of their world, so they form the￾ories about the way the world operates. A theory is a gen￾eral set of propositions that describes interrelationships 
among several concepts. We form theories for the purpose 
of predicting and explaining the world around us.1 What 
does a good theory look like? First, it should be stated as 
clearly and simply as possible so that the concepts can be 
measured and there is no ambiguity regarding the theory’s 
propositions. Second, the elements of the theory must be 
logically consistent with each other, because we cannot test 
anything that doesn’t make sense. Third, a good theory pro￾vides value to society; it helps people understand their 
world better than they would without the theory.2
Theory building is a continuous process that typically 
includes the inductive and deductive stages shown in Ex￾hibit A.1.3 The inductive stage draws on personal experi￾ence to form a preliminary theory, whereas the deductive 
stage uses the scientific method to test the theory.
The inductive stage of theory building involves observing 
the world around us, identifying a pattern of relationships, 
and then forming a theory from these personal observa￾tions. For example, you might casually notice that new em￾ployees want their supervisor to give direction, whereas this 
leadership style irritates long-service employees. From 
these observations, you form a theory about the effective￾ness of directive leadership. (See Chapter 12 for a discus￾sion of this leadership style.)
POSITIVISM VERSUS INTERPRETIVISM
Research requires an interpretation of reality, and research￾ers tend to perceive reality in one of two ways. A common 
view, called positivism, is that reality exists independent of 
people. It is “out there” to be discovered and tested. Positiv￾ism is the foundation for most quantitative research (statis￾tical analysis). It assumes that we can measure variables 
and those variables have fixed relationships with other vari￾ables. For example, the positivist perspective says that we 
could study whether a supportive style of leadership re￾duces stress. If we find evidence that it does, then someone 
else studying leadership and stress would “discover” the 
same relationship.
	 Interpretivism takes a different view of reality. It suggests 
that reality comes from shared meaning among people in a 
particular environment. For example, supportive leadership 
is a personal interpretation of reality, not something that 
can be measured across time and people. Interpretivists rely 
mainly on qualitative data, such as observation and nondi￾rective interviews. They particularly listen to the language 
people use to understand the common meaning that people 
assign to various events or phenomena. For example, they 
might argue that you need to experience and observe sup￾portive leadership to effectively study it. Moreover, you 
can’t really predict relationships because the specific situa￾tion shapes reality.4
Most OB scholars identify themselves somewhere be￾tween the extreme views of positivism and interpretivism. 
appendix A
EXHIBIT A.1 Theory Building and Theory Testing
Inductive
Deductive
Personal
observation
Forming
hypotheses
Defining and
measuring
constructs
Preliminary
theory
Testing
hypothesesAppendix A 585
of directive leadership must be able to identify not only 
people who give directions but also those who maintain per￾formance standards and ensure that procedures are 
followed.
Testing Hypotheses The third step in the deductive 
process is to collect data for the empirical measures of 
the variables. Following our directive leadership example, 
we might conduct a formal survey in which new employees 
indicate the behavior of their supervisors and their attitudes 
toward their supervisors. Alternatively, we might design an 
experiment in which people work with someone who ap￾plies either a directive or a nondirective leadership style. 
When the data have been collected, we can use various pro￾cedures to statistically test our hypotheses.
A major concern in theory building is that some re￾searchers might inadvertently find support for their theory 
simply because they use the same information used to form 
the theory during the inductive stage. Consequently, the de￾ductive stage must collect new data that are completely in￾dependent of the data used during the inductive stage. For 
instance, you might decide to test your theory of directive 
leadership by studying employees in another organization. 
Moreover, the inductive process may have relied mainly on 
personal observation, whereas the deductive process might 
use survey questionnaires. By studying different samples 
and using different measurement tools, we minimize the 
risk of conducting circular research.
USING THE SCIENTIFIC METHOD
Earlier, we said that the deductive stage of theory building 
follows the scientific method. The scientific method is a sys￾tematic, controlled, empirical, and critical investigation of 
hypothetical propositions about the presumed relationships 
among natural phenomena.6
 There are several elements to 
this definition, so let’s look at each one. First, scientific re￾search is systematic and controlled because researchers want 
to rule out all but one explanation for a set of interrelated 
events. To rule out alternative explanations, we need to con￾trol them in some way, such as by keeping them constant or 
removing them entirely from the environment.
Second, we say that scientific research is empirical be￾cause researchers need to use objective reality—or as close 
as we can get to it—to test a theory. They measure observ￾able elements of the environment, such as what a person 
says or does, rather than relying on their own subjective 
opinion to draw conclusions. Moreover, scientific research 
analyzes these data using acceptable principles of mathe￾matics and logic.
Third, scientific research involves critical investigation.
This means that the study’s hypotheses, data, methods, and 
results are openly described so that other experts in the 
field can properly evaluate the research. It also means that 
scholars are encouraged to critique and build on previous 
research. The scientific method encourages the refinement 
Many believe that inductive research should begin with an 
interpretivist angle. We should consider a new topic with an 
open mind and search for shared meaning among people in 
the situation being studied. In other words, researchers 
should let the participants define reality rather than let the 
researcher’s preconceived notions shape that reality. This 
process involves gathering qualitative information and let￾ting this information shape their theory.5
 After the theory 
emerges, researchers shift to the positivist perspective by 
quantitatively testing relationships in that theory.
THEORY TESTING: THE DEDUCTIVE 
PROCESS
Once a theory has been formed, we shift into the deductive 
stage of theory building. This process includes forming hy￾potheses, defining and measuring constructs, and testing 
hypotheses (see Exhibit A.1). Hypotheses make empirically 
testable declarations that certain variables and their corre￾sponding measures are related in a specific way proposed 
by the theory. For instance, to find support for directive 
leadership theory, we need to form and then test a specific 
hypothesis from that theory. One such hypothesis might be: 
“New employees are more satisfied with supervisors who 
exhibit a directive rather than nondirective leadership 
style.” Hypotheses are indispensable tools of scientific re￾search because they provide the vital link between the the￾ory and empirical verification.
Defining and Measuring Constructs Hypothe￾ses are testable only if we can define and then form measur￾able indicators of the concepts stated in those hypotheses. 
Consider the hypothesis in the previous paragraph about 
new employees and directive leadership. To test this hypoth￾esis, we first need to define the concepts such as “new em￾ployees,” “directive leadership,” and “supervisor.” These are 
known as constructs because they are abstract ideas con￾structed by the researcher that can be linked to observable 
information. Organizational behavior researchers devel￾oped the construct called directive leadership to help them 
understand the different effects that leaders have on follow￾ers. We can’t directly see, taste, or smell directive leader￾ship; instead, we rely on indirect indicators of its existence, 
such as observing someone giving directions, maintaining 
clear performance standards, and ensuring that procedures 
and practices are followed.
As you can see, defining constructs well is very impor￾tant, because these definitions become the foundation for 
finding or developing acceptable measures of those con￾structs. We can’t measure directive leadership if we have 
only a vague idea about what this concept means. The bet￾ter the construct is defined, the better our chances of find￾ing or developing a good measure of that construct. 
However, even with a good definition, constructs can be dif￾ficult to measure, because the empirical representation 
must capture several elements in the definition. A measure 586 Appendix A
have higher loyalty than employees located elsewhere, the 
biased sampling would cause the results to underestimate 
the true level of loyalty among employees in the company. If 
you repeat the process again next year but somehow over￾weight employees from the head office, the results might 
wrongly suggest that employees have increased their organi￾zational commitment over the past year. In reality, the only 
change may be the direction of sampling bias.
How do we minimize sampling bias? The answer is to 
randomly select the sample. A randomly drawn sample 
gives each member of the population an equal probability 
of being chosen, so there is less likelihood that a subgroup 
within that population will dominate the study’s results.
The same principle applies to the random assignment of 
participants to groups in experimental designs. If we want 
to test the effects of a team development training program, 
we need to randomly place some employees in the training 
group and randomly place others in a group that does not 
receive training. Without this random selection, each group 
might have different types of employees, so we wouldn’t 
know whether the training explains the differences between 
the two groups. Moreover, if employees respond differently 
to the training program, we couldn’t be sure that the train￾ing program results are representative of the larger popula￾tion. Of course, random sampling does not necessarily 
produce a perfectly representative sample, but we do know 
that it is the best approach to ensure unbiased selection.
The other factor that influences representativeness is 
sample size. Whenever we select a portion of the popula￾tion, there will be some error in our estimate of the popula￾tion values. The larger the sample, the less error will occur 
in our estimate. Let’s suppose that you want to find out how 
employees in a 500-person firm feel about smoking in the 
workplace. If you asked 400 of those employees, the infor￾mation would provide a very good estimate of how the en￾tire workforce in that organization feels. If you survey only 
100 employees, the estimate might deviate more from the 
true population. If you ask only 10 people, the estimate 
could be quite different from what all 500 employees feel.
Notice that sample size goes hand in hand with random 
selection. You must have a sufficiently large sample size for 
the principle of randomization to work effectively. In our ex￾ample of attitudes toward smoking, we would do a poor job 
of random selection if our sample consisted of only 10 em￾ployees from the 500-person organization. The reason is that 
these 10 people probably wouldn’t capture the diversity of 
employees throughout the organization. In fact, the more di￾verse the population, the larger the sample size should be to 
provide adequate representation through random selection.
CAUSATION IN ORGANIZATIONAL 
RESEARCH
Theories present notions about relationships among con￾structs. Often, these propositions suggest a causal relation￾ship, namely, that one variable has an effect on another 
and eventually the replacement of a particular theory with 
one that better suits our understanding of the world.
GROUNDED THEORY: AN ALTERNATIVE 
APPROACH
The scientific method dominates the quantitative approach 
to systematic research, but another approach, called 
grounded theory, dominates research using qualitative meth￾ods.7 Grounded theory is a process of developing knowl￾edge through the constant interplay of data collection, 
analysis, and theory development. It relies mainly on quali￾tative methods to form categories and variables, analyze re￾lationships among these concepts, and form a model based 
on the observations and analysis. Grounded theory com￾bines the inductive stages of theory development by cycling 
back and forth between data collection and analysis to con￾verge on a robust explanatory model. This ongoing recipro￾cal process results in theory that is grounded in the data 
(hence the name grounded theory).
Like the scientific method, grounded theory is a system￾atic and rigorous process of data collection and analysis. It 
requires specific steps and documentation and adopts a 
positivist view by assuming that the results are generalizable 
to other settings. However, grounded theory also takes an 
interpretivist view by building categories and variables from 
the perceived realities of the subjects rather than from an 
assumed universal truth.8
 It also recognizes that personal 
biases are not easily removed from the research process.
SELECTED ISSUES IN ORGANIZATIONAL 
BEHAVIOR RESEARCH
There are many issues to consider in theory building, par￾ticularly when we use the deductive process to test hypoth￾eses. Some of the more important issues are sampling, 
causation, and ethical practices in organizational research.
SAMPLING IN ORGANIZATIONAL 
RESEARCH
To find out why things happen in organizations, we typically 
gather information from a few sources and then draw conclu￾sions about the larger population. If we survey several em￾ployees and determine that older employees are more loyal to 
their company, then we would like to generalize this state￾ment to all older employees in our population, not just those 
whom we surveyed. Scientific inquiry generally requires that 
researchers engage in representative sampling—that is, sam￾pling a population in such a way that we can extrapolate the 
results of the sample to the larger population.
One factor that influences representativeness is whether 
the sample is selected in an unbiased way from the larger 
population. Let’s suppose that you want to study organiza￾tional commitment among employees in your organization. 
A casual procedure might result in sampling too few 
employees from the head office and too many located 
elsewhere in the country. If head office employees actually Appendix A 587
know that storks don’t bring babies, so something else must 
cause the association between these two variables. The real 
explanation is that both storks and birthrates have a higher 
incidence in rural areas.
In other studies, the third variable effect is less appar￾ent. Many years ago, before polio vaccines were available, 
a study in the United States reported a surprisingly strong 
association between consumption of a certain soft drink 
and the incidence of polio. Was polio caused by drinking 
this soda, or did people with polio have an unusual crav￾ing for this beverage? Neither. Both polio and consump￾tion of the soft drink were caused by a third variable: 
climate. There was a higher incidence of polio in the sum￾mer months and in warmer climates, and people drink 
more liquids in these climates.10 As you can see from this 
example, researchers have a difficult time supporting 
causal inferences because third-variable effects are some￾times difficult to detect.
ETHICS IN ORGANIZATIONAL RESEARCH
Organizational behavior researchers need to abide by the 
ethical standards of the society in which the research is con￾ducted. One of the most important ethical considerations is 
the individual respondent’s freedom to participate in the 
study. For example, it is inappropriate to force employees to 
fill out a questionnaire or attend an experimental interven￾tion for research purposes only. Moreover, researchers have 
an obligation to tell potential subjects about any possible 
risks inherent in the study so that participants can make an 
informed choice about whether to be involved.
Finally, researchers must be careful to protect the pri￾vacy of those who participate in the study. This usually 
includes letting people know when they are being studied 
as well as guaranteeing that their individual information 
will remain confidential (unless publication of identities 
is otherwise granted). Researchers maintain anonymity 
through careful security of data. The research results usu￾ally aggregate data in numbers large enough that they do 
not reveal the opinions or characteristics of any specific 
individual. For example, we would report the average ab￾senteeism of employees in a department rather than state 
the absence rates of each person. When researchers are 
sharing data with other researchers, it is usually neces￾sary to code each case so that individual identities are not 
known.
RESEARCH DESIGN STRATEGIES
So far, we have described how to build a theory, including 
the specific elements of empirically testing the theory 
within the standards of scientific inquiry. But what are 
the different ways to design a research study so that we 
get the data necessary to achieve our research objectives? 
There are many strategies, but they mainly fall under 
three headings: laboratory experiments, field surveys, and 
observational research.
variable. When discussing causation, we refer to variables 
as being independent or dependent. Independent variables
are the presumed causes of dependent variables, which are the 
presumed effects. In our earlier example of directive leader￾ship, the main independent variable (there might be others) 
would be the supervisor’s directive or nondirective leader￾ship style because we presume that it causes the dependent 
variable (satisfaction with supervision).
In laboratory experiments (described later) the indepen￾dent variable is always manipulated by the experimenter. In 
our research on directive leadership, we might have subjects 
(new employees) work with supervisors who exhibit direc￾tive or nondirective leadership behaviors. If subjects are 
more satisfied under the directive leaders, we would be able 
to infer an association between the independent and depen￾dent variables.
Researchers must satisfy three conditions to provide 
sufficient evidence of causality between two variables.9
The first condition of causality is that the variables are 
empirically associated with each other. An association ex￾ists whenever one measure of a variable changes system￾atically with a measure of another variable. This condition 
of causality is the easiest to satisfy, because there are sev￾eral well-known statistical measures of association. A re￾search study might find, for instance, that heterogeneous 
groups (in which members come from diverse back￾grounds) produce more creative solutions to problems. 
This might be apparent because the measure of creativity 
(such as number of creative solutions produced within a 
fixed time) is higher for teams that have a high score on 
the measure of group heterogeneity. They are statistically 
associated or correlated.
The second condition of causality is that the indepen￾dent variable precedes the dependent variable in time. 
Sometimes, this condition is satisfied through simple 
logic. In our group heterogeneity example, it doesn’t 
make sense to say that the number of creative solutions 
caused the group’s heterogeneity, because the group’s het￾erogeneity existed before the group produced the creative 
solutions. In other situations, however, the temporal rela￾tionship among variables is less clear. One example is the 
ongoing debate about job satisfaction and organizational 
commitment. Do companies develop more loyal employ￾ees by increasing their job satisfaction, or do changes in 
organizational loyalty cause changes in job satisfaction? 
Simple logic does not answer these questions; instead, re￾searchers must use sophisticated longitudinal studies to 
build up evidence of a temporal relationship between the 
two variables.
The third requirement for evidence of a causal relation￾ship is that the statistical association between two variables 
cannot be explained by a third variable. There are many as￾sociations that we quickly dismiss as causally related. For 
example, there is a statistical association between the num￾ber of storks in an area and the birthrate in that area. We 588 Appendix A
argument is that laboratory experiment subjects are less 
involved than their counterparts in an actual work situa￾tion. This is sometimes true, though many lab studies have 
highly motivated participants. Another criticism is that 
the extraneous variables controlled in the lab setting might 
produce a different effect of the independent variable on 
the dependent variables. This might also be true, but re￾member that the experimental design controls variables in 
accordance with the theory and its hypotheses. Conse￾quently, this concern is really a critique of the theory, not 
the lab study.
Finally, there is the well-known problem that partici￾pants are aware they are being studied, which causes them 
to act differently than they normally would. Some partici￾pants try to figure out how the researcher wants them to 
behave and then deliberately try to act that way. Other 
participants try to upset the experiment by doing just the 
opposite of what they believe the researcher expects. Still 
others might act unnaturally simply because they know 
they are being observed. Fortunately, experimenters are 
well aware of these potential problems and are usually 
(though not always) successful at disguising the study’s 
true intent.
FIELD SURVEYS
Field surveys collect and analyze information in a natural 
environment—an office, a factory, or some other existing 
location. The researcher takes a snapshot of reality and 
tries to determine whether elements of that situation (in￾cluding the attitudes and behaviors of people in that situa￾tion) are associated as hypothesized. Everyone does some 
sort of field research. You might think that people from 
some states are better drivers than others, so you “test” 
your theory by looking at the way people with out-of-state 
license plates drive. Although your methods of data collec￾tion might not satisfy scientific standards, this is a form of 
field research because it takes information from a naturally 
occurring situation.
One advantage of field surveys is that the variables often 
have a more powerful effect than they would in a laboratory 
experiment. Consider the effect of peer pressure on the be￾havior of members within the team. In a natural environ￾ment, team members would form very strong cohesive 
bonds over time, whereas a researcher would have difficulty 
replicating this level of cohesiveness and corresponding 
peer pressure in a lab setting.
Another advantage of field surveys is that the researcher 
can study many variables simultaneously, thereby permitting 
a fuller test of more complex theories. Ironically, this is also 
a disadvantage of field surveys, because it is difficult for the 
researcher to contain his or her scientific inquiry. There is a 
tendency to shift from deductive hypothesis testing to more 
inductive exploratory browsing through the data. If these 
two activities become mixed together, the researcher can 
lose sight of the strict covenants of scientific inquiry.
LABORATORY EXPERIMENTS
A laboratory experiment is any research study in which in￾dependent variables and variables outside the researcher’s 
main focus of inquiry can be controlled to some extent. 
Laboratory experiments are usually located outside the ev￾eryday work environment, such as in a classroom, simula￾tion lab, or any other artificial setting in which the 
researcher can manipulate the environment. Organiza￾tional behavior researchers sometimes conduct experi￾ments in the workplace (called field experiments) in which 
the independent variable is manipulated. However, re￾searchers have less control over the effects of extraneous 
factors in field experiments than they have in laboratory 
situations.
Advantages of Laboratory Experiments There 
are many advantages of laboratory experiments. By defini￾tion, this research method offers a high degree of control 
over extraneous variables that would otherwise confound 
the relationships being studied. Suppose we wanted to test 
the effects of directive leadership on the satisfaction of 
new employees. One concern might be that employees are 
influenced by how much leadership is provided, not just 
the type of leadership style. An experimental design would 
allow us to control how often the supervisor exhibited this 
style so that this extraneous variable does not confound 
the results.
A second advantage of lab studies is that the indepen￾dent and dependent variables can be developed more pre￾cisely than is possible in a field setting. For example, the 
researcher can ensure that supervisors in a lab study apply 
specific directive or nondirective behaviors, whereas real￾life supervisors would use a more complex mixture of lead￾ership behaviors. By using more precise measures, we are 
more certain that we are measuring the intended construct. 
Thus, if new employees are more satisfied with supervisors 
in the directive leadership condition, we are more confident 
that the independent variable was directive leadership 
rather than some other leadership style.
A third benefit of laboratory experiments is that the in￾dependent variable can be distributed more evenly among 
participants. In our directive leadership study, we can en￾sure that approximately half of the subjects have a directive 
supervisor, whereas the other half have a nondirective su￾pervisor. In natural settings, we might have trouble finding 
people who have worked with a nondirective leader and, 
consequently, we couldn’t determine the effects of this 
condition.
Disadvantages of Laboratory Experiments
With these powerful advantages, you might wonder why 
laboratory experiments are the least appreciated form of 
organizational behavior research.11 One obvious limitation 
of this research method is that it lacks realism, and thus 
the results might be different in the real world. One Appendix A 589
brainstorming. (Sutton and Hargadon’s study is cited in 
Chapter 7 on team decision making.)
Participant observation takes the observation method 
one step further by having the observer take part in the or￾ganization’s activities. This experience gives the researcher 
a fuller understanding of the activities compared with just 
watching others participate in those activities.
Despite its intuitive appeal, observational research has a 
number of weaknesses. The main problem is that the ob￾server is subject to the perceptual screening and organizing 
biases that we discuss in Chapter 3 of this textbook. There 
is a tendency to overlook the routine aspects of organiza￾tional life, even though they may prove to be the most im￾portant data for research purposes. Instead, observers tend 
to focus on unusual information, such as activities that devi￾ate from what the observer expects. Because observational 
research usually records only what the observer notices, 
valuable information is often lost.
Another concern with the observation method is that 
the researcher’s presence and involvement may influence 
the people whom he or she is studying. This can be a prob￾lem in short-term observations, but in the long term people 
tend to return to their usual behavior patterns. With ongo￾ing observations, such as Sutton and Hargadon’s study of 
brainstorming sessions at IDEO, employees eventually for￾get that they are being studied.
Finally, observation is usually a qualitative process, so it 
is more difficult to empirically test hypotheses with the 
data. Instead, observational research provides rich informa￾tion for the inductive stages of theory building. It helps us 
form ideas about the way things work in organizations. We 
begin to see relationships that lay the foundation for new 
perspectives and theory. We must not confuse this inductive 
process of theory building with the deductive process of 
theory testing.
The main weakness with field surveys is that it is very 
difficult to satisfy the conditions for causal conclusions. 
One reason is that the data are usually collected at one 
point in time, so the researcher must rely on logic to decide 
whether the independent variable really preceded the de￾pendent variable. Contrast this with the lab study in which 
the researcher can usually be confident that the indepen￾dent variable was applied before the dependent variable oc￾curred. Increasingly, organizational behavior studies use 
longitudinal research to provide a better indicator of tempo￾ral relations among variables, but it is still not as precise as 
the lab setting. Another reason causal analysis is difficult in 
field surveys is that extraneous variables are not controlled 
as they are in lab studies. Without this control, there is a 
higher chance that a third variable might explain the rela￾tionship between the hypothesized independent and depen￾dent variables.
OBSERVATIONAL RESEARCH
In their study of brainstorming and creativity, Robert Sutton 
and Andrew Hargadon observed 24 brainstorming sessions 
at IDEO, a product design firm in Palo Alto, California. 
They also attended a dozen “Monday morning meetings,” 
conducted 60 semi-structured interviews with IDEO execu￾tives and designers, held hundreds of informal discussions 
with these people, and read through several dozen magazine 
articles about the company.12
Sutton and Hargadon’s use of observational research 
and other qualitative methods was quite appropriate for 
their research objective, which was to reexamine the effec￾tiveness of brainstorming beyond the number of ideas gen￾erated. Observational research generates a wealth of 
descriptive accounts about the drama of human existence 
in organizations. It is a useful vehicle for learning about the 
complex dynamics of people and their activities, such as 
constructs, p. 585
field survey, p. 588
grounded theory, p. 586
hypotheses, p. 585
interpretivism, p. 584
laboratory experiment, p. 588
positivism, p. 584
representative sampling, p. 586
scientific method, p. 585
theory, p. 584
key terms
1. F.N. Kerlinger, Foundations of Behavioral Research (New 
York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1964), 11.
2. J.B. Miner, Theories of Organizational Behavior (Hinsdale, 
IL: Dryden, 1980), 7–9.
3. J.B. Miner, Theories of Organizational Behavior
(Hinsdale, IL: Dryden, 1980), 6–7.
4. J. Mason, Qualitative Researching (London: Sage, 1996).
5. A. Strauss and J. Corbin (eds.), Grounded Theory in Practice
(London: Sage Publications, 1997); B.G. Glaser and 
A. Strauss, The Discovery of Grounded Theory: Strategies 
for Qualitative Research (Chicago, IL: Aldine Publishing 
Co, 1967).
endnotes590 Appendix A
9. P. Lazarsfeld, Survey Design and Analysis (New York: 
Free Press, 1955).
10. This example is cited by D.W. Organ and T.S. Bateman, 
Organizational Behavior, 4th ed. (Homewood, IL: Irwin, 
1991), 42.
11. This example is cited by D.W. Organ and T.S. Bateman, 
Organizational Behavior, 4th ed. (Homewood, IL: Irwin, 
1991), 45.
12. R. I. Sutton and A. Hargadon, “Brainstorming Groups in 
Context: Effectiveness in a Product Design Firm,” 
Administrative Science Quarterly 41 (1996): 685–718.
6. F.N. Kerlinger, Foundations of Behavioral Research (New 
York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1964), 13.
7. A. Strauss and J. Corbin (eds.), Grounded Theory in Practice
(London: Sage Publications, 1997); B.G. Glaser and 
A. Strauss, The Discovery of Grounded Theory: Strategies 
for Qualitative Research (Chicago, IL: Aldine Publishing 
Co, 1967).
8. W.A. Hall and P. Callery, “Enhancing the Rigor of 
Grounded Theory: Incorporating Reflexivity and 
Relationality,” Qualitative Health Research 11 
(March 2001): 257–72.I-1
A
ABB Group, 484
Accenture, 165, 181
Adidas, 400
Advanced Research Projects Agency Network 
(ARPANET), 332
Afghanistan, 487
Africa, 68, 130, 219, 480
Airbnb, 479
Altus Group, 346
Amazon, 290, 396
Amazon Prime, 28
American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty 
to Animals (ASPCA), 268
America’s Joint Special Operations Command, 487
Animal Care Centers (ACC), 268
Apple, 5, 245, 382, 383
Ariba (SAP), 439
Arsenal of Venice, 217
Asia, 130, 310, 493, 524
Australia
Freedom, 441
meaning of money, 204, 206, 228
workplace conflict and, 144, 393, 394, 400, 
401, 407
Austria, 68, 131, 206, 360, 485
Auto industry
BMW AG, 485
Daimler AG, 485
Ford Motor Company, 183
General Motors, 540
Magna International, 470
Takata Corporation, 502
Toyota Motor Company, 288
Automattic, 20, 21, 303
B
Balentine, 408
Baltimore, 2
Banks
Barclays Bank PLC, 511–512
Commonwealth Bank of Australia (CBA), 511
Hana Financial Group, 485
North Shore Credit Union, 544
Wells Fargo, 9
Barclays Bank PLC, 511–512
Belgium, 65, 67
Best Buy, 44
BioWare, 483
Bluedrop Training & Simulation Inc., 258
BMW AG, 485
Boeing, 244, 258, 302
Boring Company, 53
Boston, MA, 188
Boston Consulting Group, 89, 90
Brazil, 65, 343, 350, 450, 493
cultural values, 65
Semco SA, 482
Bridgewater Associates, 71
British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC), 553
Buffer, 20
Business Council of Canada, 6
Buurtzorg Nederland, 302
C
California, 68, 95, 339, 491, 589
Campbell Soup, 214
Canada
BioWare, 483
Business Council of Canada, 6
EllisDon Corporation, 436
Fire Rescue Department, 298
G Adventures, 514, 516
High Liner Foods, 209
individualism, 65, 66, 68, 69
Magna International, 470
Telus, 223
Carson, California, 387
Ceridian, 438, 439, 442
Chile, 65, 214
China, 61, 493
cross-cultural values, 46
emotional expression in, 130
employee engagement in, 166
job satisfaction in, 136
meaning of money, 206
Cincinnati Super Subs, 191
Cisco Systems, 280, 281, 282, 285, 296
Club Ed, 493
Cobb Street Grille, 149
Coca-Cola India, 162
Columbia Business School, 368
Commonwealth Bank of Australia (CBA), 510
CommsOne Bank, 524–525
Conagra Foods, 475
Concurrent Design Facility (CDF), 471
Conforama, 441
Conifer Corp, 577
Cougar Helicopters, 258
Crazy Inc, 146
D
Daimler, 285
DaVita HealthCare Partners, Inc., 505
Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu, 368, 374
Delta Air Lines, 212
Denmark
collectivism, 65
individualism, 65
meaning of money, 206–208, 228
power sharing, 66
uncertainty avoidance, 65, 66, 67
Discord Investments, 420–421
DocuSign, 439
Downtown Dog Rescue, 268
Duke University, 332
E
easyJet, 394, 452
E-commerce companies
Amazon, 290, 396, 476
Zappos, 516
Egypt, 559
Electronic game industry
BioWare, 483
Valve Corporation, 437, 482
Electronics
Apple, 5, 245, 382, 383
Best Buy, 44
Microsoft, 346, 509, 515
Philips, 421, 484
Samsung Electronics, 475
7-Eleven, 476
EllisDon Corporation, 436
EMCOR Group, 507
Emsisoft, 20
Engineering firms
Netflix, 100, 121, 502
Pixar Animation Studios, 5
ENWIN Utilities Ltd., 555
Equifax, 439
Estée Lauder, 263
Europe
emotional expression in, 130
European Space Agency (ESA), 471
Everything Everywhere (EE), 544
Expensify, 204–205, 208, 222, 224
F
Facebook, 53, 73, 270, 325, 334, 347, 
364, 372
Federal Bureau of Investigation 
(FBI), 415
FedEx Corporation, 473
Fiat Chrysler, 436, 474
Financial service companies
Balentine, 408
Bridgewater Associates, 71
Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu, 368, 374
Equifax, 439
Goldman Sachs, 505
Hana Financial Group, 485
ING Bank, 288
KPMG, 342
Merrill Lynch Wealth Management, 293
Morgan Stanley, 26
Westfield Group, 417
Fire Rescue Department (Waterloo, Ontario, 
Canada), 298
Food processors and manufacturers
Campbell Soup, 214
High Liner Foods, 209
Morning Star Company, 437, 482
Wonderful Company, 209
Food service
Cincinnati Super Subs, 191–192
Cobb Street Grille, 149
7-Eleven, 476
McDonald’s, 438
Mother Parkers Tea & Coffee Inc., 31
Poundland, 441
Forbes Media, 439
Ford Motor Company, 183
FOX network, 246
organization indexI-2 Organization Index
France, 210, 343, 350
Conforama, 441
job satisfaction in, 136
Freedom (Australia), 441
G
G Adventures, 514, 516
Gatwick Airport, 394
General Motors, 540
Germany
BMW AG, 485
Bosch GmbH, 481, 547
collectivism, 65, 66, 69, 70, 309, 406
emotional expression in, 130
Heidelberg USA, 552, 553
Siemens AG, 485
Glassdoor, 507
Goldman Sachs, 165, 182, 505
Google, 127
Government and government services
Business Council of Canada, 6
HM Revenue & Customers, 484
NASA, 314
NATO, 487
United States Air Force (USAF), 133
U.S. Army, 487
U.S. Department of Defense, 332
U.S. federal government, 24, 176, 327
U.S. Postal Service, 473
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission 
(SEC), 53
Government and government services 
America’s Joint Special Operations 
Command, 487
Grand Meetup, 303
Greece, 65, 67, 242
GSK, 219
Guardian Media Group, 452
H
Hana Financial Group, 485
Harvard University, 5
Heidelberger Druckmaschinen AG, 552
Heidelberg USA, 552–553
Henkel, 164, 165, 181
Herman Miller Inc., 515
Hewlett-Packard, 346
High Liner Foods, 209
Hilcorp Energy Company, 211
Hilton Hotels and Resorts, 138
H&M, 482, 483
HM Revenue & Customers 
(HMRC), 484
Hong Kong, 135, 136, 379
job satisfaction in, 136
McDonald’s, 438
HP Enterprise Business, 486
HubShout, 521
I
IBM, 34, 68, 484, 486
IBM India, 484
IDEO, 589
India, 65, 343, 419, 484
collectivism, 65, 66, 68, 69
employee engagement in, 166
IBM, 484
IKEA, 61
job satisfaction in, 136
nonverbal communications in, 330
power sharing, 66
ING Bank, 288
Iowa State, 473, 497
Iran, 131
Iraq, 210
Ireland, 394
Israel, 65–66, 206, 407
Italy, 136, 217, 288, 323, 581
ITV, 452
J
Japan
achievement-nurturing orientation, 
67, 68, 69
cultural values, 65, 67
emotional expression in, 130
employee engagement in, 166, 182
individualism, 65–66
job satisfaction in, 136
meaning of money, 206
workplace stress in, 143
JCPenney, 245
Johnson & Johnson (J&J), 512
K
Kakao, 67
Kone, 479, 480
Korea, 67, 131, 159, 224, 475, 485
KPMG, 342
KT Corp., 67
Kuala Lumpur, 170
L
Levi Strauss & Co., 534–536, 542, 545, 548
Lewis County General Hospital, 554
LinkedIn, 372
Lockheed Martin, 258
Lumiar Schools, 450
M
Maelstrom Communications, 419–420
Magna Corporation, 485
Magna International, 470
Malaysia
cultural values, 58
emotional expression in, 130
power sharing, 66
Manulife Financial, 103
Mars, Inc., 241
Massachusetts, 135, 356, 553
Mattress Firm, 441
McDonald’s Corp., 438
McLaren Racing, 484
Mercedes-Benz, 67
Merrill Lynch Wealth Management, 293
Mexico, 135, 136, 485
Microsoft, 281, 325, 332, 333, 334, 346, 384, 
509, 515
Middle East
emotional expression in, 130
IKEA, 61
Morgan Stanley, 26
Morning Star Company, 437, 482
Mother Parkers Tea & Coffee Inc., 31
N
NASA, 314
National Association of Colleges and Employers 
(United States), 6
NATO, 487
Netflix, 100, 502
Netherlands, 61, 65, 68, 302, 471
New Zealand, 20
Nigeria, 219
Nike, 288, 400
North America
emotional expression in, 130
nonverbal communications in, 348, 
367, 398
North Shore Credit Union, 544
North Vancouver, Canada, 544
Norway, 65, 68, 285
Nucor Inc., 210, 213
NVidia, 260
P
Petroliam Nasional Bhd (Petronas), 170
Philippines, 210
Philips, 421, 484
Pinterest, 97
Pixar Animation Studios, 5
Portland, Oregon, 205
Portsea, 441
Poundland, 441
Procter & Gamble, 484
Purdue University, 108, 449
R
RBC Capital Markets, 293
RealFoundations, 324, 325, 326, 337
Reddit, 74
Resonus Corporation, 383
Robert Bosch, 481
Royal Dutch/Shell, 555
Russia, 110, 131, 210
S
Samsung, 67
Samsung Electronics, 475
SAP, 260, 439, 442
Scotland, 212, 558
Semco Partners, 450
Semco SA, 482
Shiseido, 106, 482, 483
Siemens AG, 485
Singapore, 67, 122, 135, 265, 385, 
518, 522
SK Telecom, 67
Slack, 281, 325, 333, 334, 384, 542, 546Organization Index I-3
Softcom Ltd., 219
Sonatype, 20
South Africa, 65, 95
South America, 492
South Korea, 67, 475
SpaceX, 53
Spain, 27
Steinhoff International Holdings, 441
Stellenbosch University, 441
Stryker, 183
Sweden, 67, 136, 210
Switzerland, 131, 208, 262
T
Taiwan, 65, 66
Takata Corporation, 502
TDIndustries, 445
Telenor, 408
Telus Communications, 223
Tesla, 53
Texas State, 473
Third Dynasty of Ur, 210
Thommessen, 285
T-Mobile, 347, 544
Toronto Transit, 473
Toshiba, 421
Toyota Motor Company, 288
Twitter, 53, 270, 334, 335, 341, 372, 466, 467, 
468, 479, 481
U
Uber, 401, 511, 514, 515
United Kingdom, 27, 342, 364, 377, 441, 447, 
452, 457
job satisfaction, 135
and organizational change, 536
Poundland, 441
workplace conflict and, 407
United Rentals, 213
United States
achievement-nurturing orientation, 65, 66–68
collectivism, 66
emotional expression in, 130
employee engagement in, 166
Hilton Hotels and Resorts, 138
individualism, 65, 66, 68, 69, 70
job satisfaction in, 136, 587
Mattress Firm, 441
merging companies, 512, 513
and multiculturalism, 67
open-plan offices, 401
organizational change and, 454
“romance of leadership,”, 449
workplace conflict and, 144, 393, 394, 400, 
401, 407
U.S. Army, 56, 487
U.S. Department of Defense, 332
U.S. federal government, 24, 176, 327
U.S. Golf Association, 373
U.S. Postal Service, 473
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission 
(SEC), 53
Usenet, 332
UTIL Industries spa, 540
V
Valve Corporation, 437, 482
Vayner Media, 83
Venezuela, 65–66
Vertex Pharmaceuticals, 128
W
W. L. Gore & Associates, 437, 482
Wells Fargo, 19
Westboard, Inc., 577
Westfield Group, 417
Westinghouse, 255
WeWork, 407
Women’s Success Network (WSN), 371
Wonderful Company, 209
Y
Yahoo, 34
Z
Zappos, 516
Zoom Video Communications, 127I-4
A
Aaker, D., 494n11
Aarts, H., 233n4, 233n6
Abassi, E., 116n42
Abbass, J., 567n69i
Abbate, J., 353n19
Abe, T., 564n40
Abel, M.H., 162n109
Abel, S.E., 237n66
Abessolo, M., 239n91i
Abhayawansa, S., 36n16
Abildgaard, J.S., 277n87
Abraham, C., 196n20
Abusah, D., 322n97
Acar, S., 276n70
Acker, Joan, 234n14
Acton, T., 316n16
Adam, H., 114n8
Adams, J.S., 201n88
Adams, M., 79n73
Adams, R. B., 37n26
Adams, R.M., 234n21
Adeleke, D.I., 239n91f
Adinolfi, P., 273n22
Aditya, R.N., 461n35
Adler, J.E., 116n45
Adler, P.S., 389n33
Adomdza, G.K., 276n67
A.E. Nixon, 160n93
Aghion, P., 497n66
Agle, B.R., 77n38
Agrawal, Parag, 494n1
Aguinis, H., 37n27, 37n36, 200n75
A.H. Eagly, 465n89
Ahmed, M., 315n1
Aichhorn, N., 356n60
Aiello, J.R., 316n14
Aime, F., 391n73g
Ajzen, I., 153n10
Akechi, H., 357n63
Akrout, H., 320n69
Alam, K., 464n85
Alarcon, G.M., 160n91, 161n102
Albarracin, D., 154n10, 154n13, 390n58, 390n60
Albrecht, S.L., 391n69, 529n28, 530n59
Alcover, C.-M., 531n77, 532n85
Alden, W., 566n69e
Aldunate, N., 354n31
Alessandri, G., 238n75
Alewell, D., 35n15
Alexander, P.A., 75n8
Alexander Magoun, F., 197n22
Al Halbusi, H., 79n63
Ali, M., 38n49
Ali, N., 160n85
Alicke, M.D., 114n15, 118n59
Alilyyani, B, 464n80
Alipour, L., 322n105
Allen, B., 40n74
Allen, D.G., 155n22, 239n90, 315n10, 
531n72, 532n89
Allen, J.A., 118n59, 564n31
Allen, M.S., 118n61, 431n92
Allen, N.J., 156n46, 159n73, 316n15, 
317n35, 425n11
Allen, R.F., 529n41, 532–533n92e
Allen, R.W., 391n71
Allen, T.D., 39n56, 39n57, 39n61, 39n62, 
161n106
Allen, T.J., 357n68
Allport, G.W., 116n46, 120n85
Almaatouq, A., 316n15, 317n27
Alpers, G.W., 274n42
Al-Samarraie, H., 323n108
Alvesson, M., 529n33, 529n34
Amabile, T.M., 277n74
Amason, A.C., 274n43, 425n14, 425n15, 
426n20, 432n107g
Ambady, N., 116n41, 156n47
Ambrose, M.L., 201n86, 201n89, 202n95, 
202n97, 202n100, 430n72
Ames, D., 427n38, 427n41
Amichai-Hamburger, Y., 120n84
Amir, O., 78n45, 319n50
Anders, G., 432n107b
Anderson, A.J., 465n89
Anderson, C.C., 202n100b
Anderson, C.J., 42n91g
Anderson, D.M., 494n12
Anderson, Joel, 202n100c
Anderson, N.R., 159n81, 276n71, 316n20, 
320n69, 531n74, 531n76, 532n90
Anderson, P., 121n92f
Andreassen, C. S., 161n104
Andrews, M.C., 391n73
Andrzejewski, S.A., 157n53
Ang, J., 120n89
Angle, H.L., 391n71
Anglim, J., 74n3, 76n18, 320n76
Angulo, Gonzalo, 119n73
Anixter, J., 278n94h
Anoushiravani, A.A., 235n26
Ansar, R., 153n1
Anseel, F., 200n72
Antonakis, J., 388n17, 460n26, 463n61
Antoni, C.H., 353n12
Appelbaum, S.H., 563n24
Aquino, K., 78n56, 202n99
A.R. Paquin, 461n27
Arad, S., 195n2
Archibald, D., 315n10, 389n37
Aresu, S., 118n62
Argote, L., 316n23, 320n74
Argyris, C., 237n58, 277n88, 424n4
Arieli, S., 77n38, 78n44, 527n3, 533n92g
Ariely, D., 78n45, 235n34
Aritzeta, A., 319n51, 319n52
Arlt, S., 323n110b
Armenakis, A.A., 563n14, 563n29
Armstrong, M.B., 199n57, 234n13
Armstrong, S.J., 77n36
Arndt, M., 234n24
Arnellos, A., 116n37
Arnold, J.D., 42n91b
Aronson, E., 319n56
Arthur-Kelly, M., 200n65
Ashenden, A., 202n100a
Ashford, S.J., 200n70, 201n80
Ashforth, B.E., 115n30, 156n41, 388n26, 
529n34, 531n74, 532n81, 532n91
Ashkanasy, N.M., 115n33, 154n16, 424n5, 
425n14, 527n4, 529n32
Ashkenas, R., 460n12
Ashokkumar, A., 114n20
Asimow, M., 430n73
Asmus, S., 201n81
Assael, H., 424n10
Åsterbro, T., 276n67
Astor, T., 272n13
Atai, M.R., 357n64
Atamanik, C., 114n13
Atasayi, S., 160n95
Athos, A.G., 315n12
Atwater, L.E., 200n79
Aubé, C., 317n33, 317n37, 320n72
Augusto, M., 276n73
Austin, J., 120n92a
Aven, B.L., 320n74
Avolio, B.J., 118n68, 465n89j
Avugos, S., 116n43
Axtell, C., 318n49
Axtell, R. E., 357n63
Ayoko, O.B., 424n5, 425n14
Ayres, I., 432n107
Ayres, T., 278n94f
B
Baba, V.V., 461n40
Babri, M., 79n60
Bachkirov, A.A., 35n10
Bachrach, D.G., 40n74, 41n81
Bacon, N., 118n60
Baczyñska, A., 464n78
Badgett, R.G., 36n15
Badham, R., 391n69
Badura, K.L., 464n74
Baer, M., 238n75, 431n103
Bagger, J., 39n54
Baggetta, P., 75n8
Baglay, S., 430n73
Bagnall, D., 321n81
Bai, Q., 354n33
Bailenson, J.N., 355n35
Bain, P.G., 79n66
Baker, A., 200n71
Baker, C., 162n112d
Baker, S., 429n62
Baker, W.E., 276n72, 529n41
Baker-McClearn, D., 42n91
Bakker, A.B., 38n54, 199n53, 200n75, 425n11
Bakonyi, Z., 497n65
Baldwin, C., 496n54
Balkin, D.B., 388n22
Ballard, J., 197n22
Ballard, T., 199n62
Balliet, D., 159n79
name indexName Index I-5
Balogun, J., 566n61
Baltes, P., 356n53
Balthazard, P.A., 196n20, 460n14
Baltzley, D., 120n90
Baltzly, D., 271n3
Bamberger, S.G., 564n34
Banas, J.A., 390n59
Bandecchi, M., 497n72a
Bandura, A., 115n25, 199n59
Bang, J.W., 356n52
Banks, G.C., 42n91f, 42n91g, 464n77
Bansal, P., 37n36
Barajas, A., 203n100g
Barbalet, J., 388n32
Barbera, K.M., 530n56
Barbieri, C., 155n33
Barbuto, J.E., Jr., 427n43, 460n25
Bardi, A., 77n40, 77n41, 77n43, 197n25
Barends, E., 37n33
Bargh, J.A., 117n55, 154n17, 199n58
Barker, B.A., 320n75
Barker, V.L., 388n26
Barki , H., 323n110
Barley, S.R., 35n4
Barling, J., 461n30, 565n54
Barman, E., 37n26
Barnard, C., 352n3, 387n8, 459n10
Barnard, Chester, 36n19
Barnes, J.W., 529n36
Barnes, R.M., 425n17
Barnett, T., 78n53
Barney, J., 36n22
Barnlund, D. C., 356n62
Baron, J., 429n61
Barrett, A.K., 355n41
Barrett, D., 233n1
Barrett, F.J., 565n58
Barrett, L.F., 153n4, 153n8
Barrett, R., 529n31
Barrick, M.R., 75n10, 321n84
Barron, J.M., 275n60
Barron, L.A., 234n9
Barry, A.E., 161n100
Barry, B., 432n105
Barsade, S.G., 196n8, 275n60, 353n16
Bartel, C.A., 39n63
Bartholow, B.D., 238n86
Bartley, M., 74n4
Bartol, J., 198n43
Bartol, K., 235n37
Bartol, K.M., 237n68
Bartram, D., 40n71
Bartunek, J.M., 35n10, 37n36, 42n91e, 566n61
Baruah, J., 323n108
Baruch, Y., 35n13, 464n75
Bashshur, M.R., 158n61, 202n96, 278n90, 
390n66
Basile, K.A., 39n61, 40n64, 161n106
Baskin, K., 162n112b
Bass, B.M., 271n8, 459n9, 460n21, 529n39
Bastianutti, L.M., 323n108
Bataille, C.D., 114n6
Bateman, T.S., 590n10, 590n11
Bathurst, R.J., 35n8
Battaglia, E., 321n81
Battista Dagnino, G., 114n17
Bauer, K.N., 198n45
Bauer, P.C., 159n79
Bauer, T., 532n90
Bauer, T.N., 159n81, 531n74
Baughen, A., 37n25
Bauman, C.W., 118n64
Bauman, J., 239n89
Baumann, C., 233n8
Baumeister, R. F., 153n9
Baumeister, R.E., 196n13, 316n14, 352n6
Baumeister, R.F., 75n8, 196n17
Baumgartner, H., 157n57
Baur, J.E., 460n17
Baur,J. E., 532n86
Bayer, J.B., 355n37
Baynes, H.G., 77n33
Bayraktar, S., 564n32
Baysinger, M.A., 76n30
Bazerman, M.H., 78n58, 429–430n71, 430n74, 
432n104
Beabout, G.R., 78n50
Beach, L.R., 272n9
Beal, D.J., 319n53, 319n59
Bear, J.B., 425n13, 426n26, 428n48
Bearden, J.N., 273n35
Beatson, M., 39n56
Beatty, C.A., 320n75, 459n6
Beauchamp, M.R., 320n75
Beauregard, T.A., 39n61, 40n64, 161n106
Bebbington, K., 153n9
Bebeau, M.J., 78n55
Bechara, A., 115n36, 154n16, 196n16, 274n40, 
274n41
Bechky, B.A., 322n103, 529n29
Beck, A.P., 318n42
Beck, J.W., 195n3
Beck, S.J., 319n52, 432n107g
Becker, B., 322n107
Becker, G.S., 494n5
Becker, W.J., 154n12, 353n16
Becker, W.S., 160n86
Beckert, J., 352n5
Bedeian, A.G., 465n89l, 465n89n, 494n16
Bedi, A., 390n68
Beecham, M., 496n53
Beechler, S., 120n90
Beehr, T.A., 78n46
Beeler, L., 157n50
Beemsterboer, W., 42n89
Beer, J.S., 196n10
Beer, M., 36n17, 235n34, 565n46, 565n47
Beersma, B., 315n5, 358n79
Behling, O., 274n45
Beijer, S.E., 36n24
Belausteguigoitia, I., 424n5, 432n107f
Belcher, M., 533n92i
Bell, B.S., 317n24
Belletier, C., 356n49
Bell J., 315n1
Benbow, C.P., 77n39
Bencherki, N., 389n52
Bendersky, C., 424n7
Bengtsson, U., 565n60
Ben-Hur, S., 80n79b
Benishek, L.E., 315n4, 317n24
Benit, N., 74n1
Bennis, W.G., 318n42, 352n4, 356n57, 459n9, 
459n11, 460n18, 461n36, 464n81, 465n89m
Benson, A.M., 234n25
Bentley, F.S., 36n23
Benzing, C.D., 428n44
BeomCheol, K., 238n70
Berdicchia, D., 237n59
Berend, D., 278n91
Berfield, S., 532n92a
Berg, J.M., 564n33
Bergh, C., 562n1
Bergman, M.E., 159n78
Bergman, T.J., 426n28
Bergmann, V., 274n42
Berkman, E.T., 155n29
Berlew, D.E., 460n18
Bernerth, J.B., 564n41
Berntson, G.G., 155n26
Berridge, K.C., 153n7, 154n17, 195n6, 196n8, 
196n16, 353n15
Berrisford, S., 565n59
Berry, C. M., 42n89
Berry, G.R., 323n110g
Bersin, J., 494n2, 532n92d
Berson, Y., 530n54, 530n56, 564n40
Berton, Pierre, 202n93
Beshears, J., 199n57, 278n94c
Bettis, R., 495n39
Betz, E.L., 197n24
Beyer, F., 196n15
Beyer, J.M., 531n76
Beyerlein, M.M., 321n93
Bezemer, K., 425n11
Bezrukova, K., 119n75
Bhardwaj, G., 272n13, 272n16
Bhatia, S., 154n20, 274n40
Bhattacharyya, S., 353n17
Bhave, D.P., 40n66, 156n38, 197n32, 236n53
Bies, Robert J., 202n95, 202n97
Bigley, G.A., 198n49
Bijleveld, E., 233n4, 233n6
Bijlsma-Frankema, K.M., 318n45, 318n50, 
463n58
Bingham, L.B., 430n77, 430n78
Birkinshaw, J., 496n61
Biron, C., 42n90
Bischofberger, I., 321n81
Black, D., 161n98
Black, L., 460n16
Black, S.J., 120n90
Blackwell, O., 566n69d
Blackwell, S.E., 238n79
Blagg, H., 357n63
Blair, C.A., 432n107c
Blake, A.M., 35n8
Blake, R.R., 424n4, 427n40, 429n64
Blakely, K., 118n70
Blanchard, A.L., 390n66
Blanch-Hartigan, D., 157n53
Blanco, L., 391n73c
Blankespoor, E., 391n73d
Blasi, A., 195n6
Blau, I., 355n48I-6 Name Index
Blau, J.R., 389n40
Bleidorn, W., 74n6, 75n7
Blickle, G., 75n16
Bliss, M.A., 391n73f
Blomberg, A.J., 529n28
Bloodworth, J., 497n72e
Bloom, M.C., 233n2
Blumenthal-Barby, J.S., 273n30
Blyton, P., 118n60
Boal, K., 272n12
Bobocel, D.R., 159n77, 202n95
Böckenholt, U., 274n37, 274n38
Boddy, C.R., 76n28
Bodenhausen, G.V., 116n41, 116n48, 315n8
Boegershausen, J., 78n56
Boehnke, K., 77n41
Boer, D., 197n25
Boerner, S., 317n26
Böhm, R., 427n39, 429n61
Bohner, G., 153n10
Bohns, V.K., 356n52
Božiè, K., 35n10
Boiger, M., 155n35
Boin, J., 120n86
Boisnier, A., 528n17
Boland, J., 358n79d
Boland, M.J., 431n101
Bolch, M., 234n24
Bolino, M., 390n61
Bolino, M.C., 41n83
Bolland, E., 38n46
Bollen, K., 430n72, 430n77
Bommaraju, R., 159n81
Bonaccio, S., 353n13
Bond, S., 533n92i
Bondarouk, T., 321n85
Bonebright, D.A., 318n43, 318n44
Bongard, A., 563n18
Book, A., 76n21
Boos, M., 356n50
Booton, J., 121n92g
Bopp, M.I., 238n85
Bordia, P., 159n81, 322n97, 358n78
Borecká, M., 120n92
Borg, I., 77n41
Borgatti, S.P., 388n24, 389n44
Borges, R., 563n22
Borghans, L., 494n5, 494n9
Bornstein, G., 117n50, 427n39
Boros, S., 426n22
Bos-Nehles, A., 321n85
Bos-Nehles, A.C., 36n24
Bosse, T., 154n11
Bossidy, L., 275n51
Botti, S., 273n36
Bottom, W.P., 430n81
Boudens, C.J., 528n20
Boudette, N.E., 532n92a
Boulding, K.E., 424n4
Bourdeau, S., 39n55
Boureau, Y.-L., 272n9
Bourgeois, L.J., III, 425n12, 428n56
Bourgoin, A., 389n52
Bourne, H., 527n8
Bouw, B., 527n7
Bowen, D., 120n90
Bowen, D.E., 201n88
Bowen, H.J., 116n37
Bowling, N.A., 40n75, 41n84, 115n28, 158n67, 
161n97, 161n102
Bowman, G., 275n50
Boyatzis, R., 156n46, 464n79
Boyce, C.J., 80n79e
Boyd, L., 432n107c
Boyle, B., 323n110k
Boynton, J., 315n1
Boyraz, M., 321n91
Bradbury, H., 565n49, 565n51
Bradley, B.H., 75n12, 426n21
Bragger, J.D., 275n59
Braithwaite, J., 236n42
Brandtstadter, J., 272n18
Brankin, M., 530n48
Brankin, P., 530n48
Brannick, T., 562n3
Brantmeier, C., 430n79
Brass, D.J., 388n24, 388n30, 389n39, 
389n44, 389n45
Bratko, D., 74n6
Bratslavsky, E., 153n9
Brazier, F., 319n53
Brecht, J., 315n11
Brechu, M.B., 464n86
Breeze, J.D., 494n16
Breithaupt, F., 121n92i
Bresnen, M., 461n34
Brett, J., 427n32, 428n52
Brett, J.F., 200n79
Brett, J.M., 429n66, 430n75, 
431n89, 431n101
Brettel, M., 275n54
Brew, F.P., 428n52
Brewer, B.W., 239n89
Brewer, M.B., 115n29, 115n33
Bridgett, D., 75n8
Bridgman, T., 197n22, 562n3
Bridwell, L.G., 197n24
Brief, A.P., 153n10, 390n57
Briggs, J., 121n92g
Brigham, J.C., 116n46
Briner, R.B., 37n31
Briñol, P., 390n60
Bristow, J., 38n46
Brockman, R., 156n44
Brodbeck, F.C., 463n62, 464n86
Brook, A.T., 114n10
Brookes, S., 391n73i
Brooks, F.P., 316n18
Brooks, J.L., 116n42
Brotheridge, C.M., 354n23, 354n24
Brousseau, K., 272n16
Brown, C.M., 113n5
Brown, D., 234n13, 234n24, 533n92i
Brown, D.J., 464n83
Brown, F.W., 77n35
Brown, G., 200n65, 431n103
Brown, G.D.A., 80n79e
Brown, J.B., 359n79l
Brown, K.G., 562n3
Brown, L., 234n17
Brown, S., 277n79
Brown, W.C., 390n58
Brownstein, A.L., 273n29
Brubaker, J.R., 354n32
Brummelman, E., 114n20
Bryant, A., 278n94g, 388n23
Bryant, D.U., 465n89k
Bryman, A., 460n24, 461n30
Buch, R., 160n83, 200n72
Buchanan, D., 391n69, 564n36
Buckingham, M., 200n75
Buckner, S.L., 160n87
Buehner, M.J., 116n36, 274n41
Buelens, M., 494n8
Buell, R.W., 236n52
Bunderson, J.S., 355n43
Buono, J., 358n79a
Buote, V., 120n92a
Burch, T.C., 41n87
Burcharth, A.L.A., 563n19
Burger, J., 318n46, 318n48
Burger,J.M., 388n18
Burgers, J., 320n81
Burigo, M., 273n26
Burin, M., 497n72e
Burke, C., 275n51
Burke, C.S., 460n20, 460n22
Burke, R.J., 38n52
Burke, S.M., 320n78
Burlingame, G., 319n53
Burnes, B., 562n3
Burnett, M.F., 533n92f
Burnham, D., 198n35
Burns, M.D., 117n55
Burns, T., 495n28, 496n63
Burrell, N.A., 428n53, 431n92
Burt, R.S., 353n10, 389n35, 389n45
Burton, L., 528n24
Burton, M., 277n82
Burton, R.M., 36n21, 495n31, 
495n32, 495n38
Bury, Robert, 272n20
Bushe, G. R., 565n60
Bushe, G.R., 318n44, 565n54, 
565n59, 566n64
Busse, R., 35n9
Bussel, D.J., 430n73
Butenko, T., 77n42
Butler, A., 39n54
Butler, P., 200n65
Buttle, F., 565n45
Butz, H.R., 563n25, 564n39
Byham, W.C., 199n61
Byrnes, N., 234n24
Byron, K., 354n25, 354n26
Byza, O.A.U., 159n78
C
C. Kiefer, 74n1
C.A. Bartel, 39n63
Cable, D.M., 78n46, 114n18, 
531n65, 531n69
Cacioppo, J., 390n58
Cacioppo, J.T., 155n26, 196n16Name Index I-7
Cadell, T., 236n47
Cadsby, C.B., 235n34
Cai, D.A., 427n42
Cairns, D.R., 428n52
Calabrese, G., 496n49
Caldara, M., 426n26
Caldwell, C.B., 77n38
Caldwell, D.F., 275n52, 533n92k
Caligiuri, P., 120n92
Calitri, R., 120n88
Callanan, G.A., 428n44
Callery, P., 590n8
Callister, R.R., 424n2
Camart, N., 161n103
Cameron, A.-F., 355n47
Cameron, A.F., 355n46
Cameron, C.D., 121n92i
Cameron, G., 235n29
Cameron, K., 36n18, 199n53, 565n54
Cameron, W.B., 42n91d
Camgoz, S.M., 428n49
Campbell, A., 495n36
Campbell, J., 160n85
Campbell, J.D., 114n7, 114n11
Campbell, J.L., 424n6, 426n22
Campbell, J.P., 40n65, 40n68, 41n77, 198n42
Campbell, S.W., 355n37
Campbell, T., 566–567n69j
Campbell, W.K., 80n79b
Campion, E.D., 200n79
Campion, M.A., 200n79, 236n43, 236n46, 
237n60, 317n28, 317n37, 494n4
Campion, M.C., 200n79
Cannon, M.D., 235n34
Canonico, E., 39n61, 40n64, 161n106
Cantril, H., 195n5
Canziani, B.F., 155n33
Capa, R.L., 233n4
Capobianco, S., 38n45, 428n53
Cappelen, A.W., 201n90
Cappetta, R., 429n68
Capraro, M.M., 77n34
Capraro, R.M., 77n34
Caprino, K., 459n1
Caputo, A., 430n85
Cardador, M.T., 199n57
Cardinal, L.B., 318n45, 318n50, 463n58
Carlgren, L., 277n84
Carlisle, J., 431n89, 431n91
Carlson, D.S., 39n58
Carlson, J.R., 353n10, 355n48
Carlström, E., 528n15
Carmeli, A., 529n32
Carnegie, D., 114n14
Carnes, A., 239n88
Carnevale, P.J., 425n11, 431n97, 431n102
Carpenter, N.C., 41n84
Carpini, J.A., 41n79
Carr, C.T., 354n24, 354n29
Carroll, A.B., 37n28
Carroll, B., 462n53, 463n73
Carroll, H., 315n1
Carroll, J., 41n86
Carron, A.V., 319n59, 319n62, 320n78
Carson, D.H., 388n19
Carson, K.D., 387n6
Carson, P.P., 387n6
Carter, E., 357n66
Carton, A.M., 356n54, 429n59, 459n2, 
459n9, 460n14
Cartwright, D., 387n2, 387n6
Caruana, F., 40n72
Caruso, D.R., 157n49
Carver, C.S., 74n2
Case, C., 198n39
Casey-Campbell, M., 319n62
Casper, W.J., 38n43
Caspi, A., 74n4
Casselman, B., 35n2
Castellanos, S., 279n94h
Catellani, P., 118n59
Catliff, C., 564n30
Caukin, J., 42n91h
Cavalheiro, B.P., 358n79h
Cawsey, T.F., 563n27
Caza, A., 388n25
Caza, B.B., 114n12
Cerasoli, C.P., 197n31, 197n33, 234n9
Cerne, M., 35n10
Cervone, D., 74n2
Cha, S.E., 529n33, 533n92f
Chabris, C.F., 116n38
Chada, D.M., 274n47
Chadee, D., 117n57
Chadwick, C., 426n30
Chahkandi, F., 357n64
Chaiken, S., 153n10
Chamberlain, A., 532n92d
Chamorro-Premuzic, T., 80n79b
Champagne, M.V., 431n97
Champoux, J.E., 236n55
Chan, A.H., 78n55
Chan, D.W.L., 199n61
Chan, H.L., 203n100g
Chan, K., 357n69
Chan, L.S., 389n34
Chan, N.K., 389n43
Chandler, A.D., 497n71
Chandra, S., 355n36
Chandra, Y., 274n39
Chaney, J.D., 161n100
Chang, A., 160n83
Chang, C.-H., 115n23, 390n68
Chang-Schneider, C., 115n24
Chao, G.T., 531n74
Chao, J., 530n47
Chapman, D.S., 531n65
Chapp, C., 356n54
Chappe, V.-A., 234n14
Charalampous, M., 39n61, 161n106
Charan, R., 275n51
Charbonneau, D., 159n75
Charles, A.C., 200n79
Chartrand, T.L., 117n55, 353n18
Chase, S., 424n4
Chase, W.G., 274n47
Chatellier, G.S., 39n64, 321n90
Chatman, J., 528n17, 533n92k
Chatman, J.A., 80n79b, 529n33, 529n38
Chavez, C., 389n53
Checa, P., 157n51
Chelius, J., 235n30
Chemers, M. M., 462n55
Chen, C.I.B., 531n65
Chen, C.J., 495n27
Chen, F., 239n91j
Chen, G., 114n17, 115n26
Chen, J., 233n6
Chen, M.-J., 566–567n69g
Chen, M.-Y., 235n31
Chen, M.S., 35n8
Chen, N.Y.F., 424n2, 425n14, 427n40
Chen, Y.-J., 233n6
Chen, Z.X., 159n76
Chenevert, D., 428n56
Cheng, C.-Y., 429n59
Chermack, T.J., 116n45, 275n50
Chernev, A., 274n37, 274n38
Cherniss, C., 464n82
Chesbrough, H., 496n59
Cheshin, A., 358n79g
Cheung, F., 156n39
Cheung, H., 78n55
Cheung, M.W.-L., 156n39
Cheyne, J.A., 238n77
Chhetri, P., 38n44
Chiaburu, D.S., 75n11
Chiaburu, R.D.S., 75n11
Chiang, H.-H., 160n83
Chiocchio, F., 317n26, 317n35, 318n39
Chirkov, V.I., 197n32, 236n53
Chisholm, R.F., 389n34
Cho, B., 426n20
Cho, E., 39n57
Choi, D., 202n100g
Choi, D.W., 431n100
Choi, E.-K., 497n72d
Choi, J.N., 235n35, 235n37
Choi, K., 426n20
Choi, M., 36n23, 40n73
Choi, M.S., 120n85
Choi, See M., 562n7
Choi, Y.H., 322n104
Choudhury, P., 38n50
Chow,W.S., 389n34
Chreim, S., 562n8
Christensen, C.M., 37n39
Christian, J., 426n22
Christian, J.S., 318n41
Christian, V., 237n69
Christiansen, N.D., 235n30
Christie, P.M.J., 496n59
Christie, R., 76n22
Christman, S.D., 273n31, 430n83
Chulkov, D.V., 275n60
Chung, H., 36n23
Chung, K.H., 237n58
Chung-Yan, G.A., 428n46
Chunyan Peng, A., 428n48
Church, A.T., 114n10
Churcher, M., 121n92i
Churchill, G.A.J., 40n68
Cialdini, R.B., 388n18, 389n52
Ciamprone, D., 465n89b
Cieciuch, J., 76n20I-8 Name Index
Cikeš, V., 42n88
Cillo, P., 429n68
Cinite, I., 563n14
Ciriacks, T., 430n79
Ciro, C., 77n34
Cislak, A., 388n29
Ciubotariu, N., 432n107b
Claggett, J.L., 36n21, 352n2
Clarey, Katie, 38n53
Clark, J.R., 356n54, 460n14
Clark, K., 496n54
Clark, M. A., 42n89, 161n104
Clark, M.A., 202n96
Clarke, P., 234n12
Claydon, T., 564n36
Clegg, C.W., 357n68, 495n22
Clegg, J., 429n59
Clegg, S., 35n3, 527n4, 528n14
Clegg, S.R., 358n77, 461n31
Cleveland, J.N., 38n42
Clifford, C., 433n107n
Coase, R.H., 496n60
Cobb, A.T., 390n56, 426n19, 429n57
Cobb-Clark, D.A., 115n27
Coelho, F., 276n73
Coetzer, G.H., 318n44
Coghlan, D., 562n3, 565n49
Cohen, A., 76n26
Cohen, D., 80n75
Cohen, D.S., 564n31, 564n38, 564n42
Cohen, M.D., 273n23
Cohen, S., 315n9, 353n8
Cohen, S.G., 321n82
Cohen-Charash, Y., 201n92
Cole, M.S., 564n41
Coleman, P.T., 425n11, 427n34
Collins, A. M., 42n90
Collins, J.C., 529n31
Collinson, D.L., 162n112c
Colloff, P., 120n92d
Colquitt, J.A., 201n86
Combs, J.G., 391n73g
Comer, L.B., 357n67
Conan Doyle, A., 120n92d
Conboy, K., 316n16
Condon, M., 80n79a
Conger, J.A., 459n5, 460n13, 460n24, 
464n82, 564n39, 566n65
Conlon, D.E., 429n70, 430n79
Connellan, T.K., 199n50
Connelly, B.L., 203n100g, 464n75
Connelly, B.S., 80n79h
Connelly, C.E., 201n92, 356n56, 387n13
Connolly, T., 426n27
Connors, M.H., 154n13, 155n29
Conroy, S., 529n38
Conroy, S.A., 202n100g, 317n26
Constantinescu, M., 79n59
Conti, A., 42n91i
Conway, P., 38n45
Cook, D., 162n112i
Cooke, N.J., 315n3
Cooke, R.A., 530n56
Cools, E., 77n36
Coombs, T., 198n49
Coon, H.M., 79n64, 79n66, 80n74
Cooper, C., 200n67
Cooper, C.L., 37n41, 160n89, 160n91, 160n92, 
162n111, 202n96, 233n2, 316n22
Cooper, J., 115n31, 155n27
Cooper, J.T., 200n69
Cooper, W.H., 40n75, 118n71, 157n59, 323n108
Cooperrider, D.L., 565n55, 565n57, 565n58
Cooper-Thomas, H., 162n112c
Cooper-Thomas, H.D., 159n81, 531n74
Cooper-Thomas ,H.D., 532n90
Coote, L.V., 527n5, 530n59
Copper, C., 238n80, 319n57
Corbin, J., 589n5, 590n7
Cordery, J.L., 321n85, 321n90, 495n22
Coren, M.J., 80n79b
Cornelissen, J.P., 272n17
Corning, P.A., 197n24
Coser, L.A., 424n10
Cosmides, L., 115n35, 429n65
Cossette, M., 156n40
Costa, A.C., 320n69
Costa, P.T., 75n7, 200n78
Costello, T.W., 119n77
Côté, J., 388n22
Cote, K., 160n90
Côté, S., 121n92i, 156n40, 157n50, 426n26
Courtright, S.H., 238n73, 239n91, 317n29, 
321n84
Coutifaris, C.G.V., 353n16
Covey, S.R., 431n90
Covin, T.J., 565n52
Cowan, K., 387n5
Cowell, E., 355n44
Cowell, J.M., 121n92i
Coyle, S., 316n16
Crabtree, S., 81n79k
Craig, T., 356n61
Cramer, J., 275n57
Crawford, J.T., 116n47
Creary, S.J., 114n12
Creswell, J., 432n107h
Crevani, L., 462n53
Crilly, D., 37n26
Crilly, N., 322n105
Crisp, C.B., 320n70
Cristofaro, M., 272n21
Crnjar, K., 42n88
Cronin, M.A., 42n91c
Cronshaw, S.F., 463n63
Croon, M.A., 463n64
Cropanzana, R., 201n88, 201n92
Cropanzano, R., 154n12, 154n16, 201n86, 
202n95, 202n97, 353n16, 430n72
Cropanzano, R.S., 202n95
Cross, R., 315n2, 315n10, 389n37, 496n42, 
527n1
Crossland, C., 114n17, 391n73h
Crossley, A.C., 200n67
Crossley, C., 42n91f
Crowley, C., 115n24
Crowley, R., 239n91e
Crowston, K., 459n2, 461n34, 461n37
Cucina, J.M., 38n47
Cuff, B.M.P., 120n87
Cullinane, S.-J., 236n43
Cummings, A., 276n73, 320n72
Cummings, G., 464n80
Cummings, L. L., 158n66
Cummings, L.L., 271n2, 278n92
Cummings, S., 197n22, 562n3
Cunanan, A.J., 160n87
Cunningham, W.A., 154n10, 154n12
Curcio, A.A., 316n21
Curºeu, P.L., 75n16
Curry, D., 358n79e
Curseu, P.L., 426n22
Custers, R., 233n4
Cyr, L.A., 78n46
D
Daft, R.L., 237n57, 355n42
Dahl, R.A., 387n3
Dainas, A.R., 358n79g
Dalal, R.S., 40n66, 41n84, 154n10, 157n58
Dalbert, C., 80n79e
Dalege, J., 154n13
Dalgleish, T., 154n18
Dallnera, M., 496n42
Dalsky, D., 79n67
Daly, J., 527n8
Dalziel, G., 357n76
Damasio, A. R., 153n7, 154n18
Damasio, A.R., 115n36, 154n11, 154n18, 196n9, 
196n16, 274n41
D’Amelio, A., 563n11
Damian, R.I., 75n7
da Motta Veiga, S.P., 155n25
Dane, E., 274n42, 274n47, 276n69
Danielsson, C.B., 432n107i
D’Annunzio, L.S., 496n49
Darzentas, J., 116n37
Daskalakis, G., 36n16
Dastmalchian, A., 464n85
Datta, D.K., 159n80
Davenport, T.H., 495n37
David, E., 75n10
David, P., 355n47
Davidson, B., 79n60
Davidson, J.E., 276n65
Davidson, O.B., 161n107
Davidson, R.J., 153n4
Davies, I., 277n82
Davis, D. M., 356n51
Davis, G.M.-T., 233n8
Davis, K., 357n75
Davis, L.E., 237n59
Davis, M., 359m79l, 428n53
Davis, M.C., 357n68
Davis, M.H., 38n45
Davis, R., 563n21
Davis, R.C., 239n91e
Davis, S. M., 496n44
Davis, W.L., 357n75
Davison, B., 494n15
Davis’s, Keith, 197n22
Daw, N.D., 272n9
Dawes, P.L., 387n13
Dawkins, R., 196n12Name Index I-9
Dawson, S., 352n1
Day, D.V., 199n62, 463n72, 465n89k, 465n89l, 
465n89n, 530n56
Day, G.S., 564n38
Deal, .E., 529n31
Deal, T.E., 528n17, 532n92e
Deal,T.E., 528n20
Dean, B., 354n28, 358n79e
DeAndrea, D.C., 354n24
Deaner, C.M.D., 566n67
deBlok, J., 320n81
de Bloom, J., 161n107
De Bruyn, A., 564n45
DeCelles, K.A., 202n99
Decety, J., 121n92i, 196n16
DeChurch, L.A., 319n59, 320n72, 428n45
Deci, E.L., 197n31, 197n32
De Clercq, D., 424n5, 432n107f
De Cremer, D., 563n23, 564n40, 564n44
de Dear, R., 357n68
De Déa Roglio, K., 76n27
De Dreu, C.K.W., 318n39, 424n5, 425n13, 
426n20, 427n40, 430n75, 431n97
De Fine Licht, J., 275n52
de Freitas, R.B., 159n79
de Gennaro, D., 238n83
de Geus, C.J.C., 41n82
deHaan, E., 391n73d
Deinert, A., 463n71
Deiser, R., 315n11
de Janasz, S.C., 389n42
De Jong, B.A., 318n45, 318n50, 463n58
de Jonge, J., 272n10
De Jonge, K.M.M., 40n64
DeKay, M.L., 273n29
de Kort, Y.A.W., 162n112a
del , M., 38n44
del, M., 278n90
Delanoeije, J., 39n63
de La Rupelle, G., 353n23
de la Sablonnière, R., 563n16
Delbecq, A.L., 271n2, 352n2, 494n13
Delbecq, L., 323n109
del C. Triana, M., 38n44, 38n48
De Leersnyder, J., 155n35
Deller, J., 317n26
Dell’Orto, G., 233n8
Delpechitre, D., 157n50
DeMatteo, J.S., 235n39
De Meuse, K.P., 316n22
Dempsey, M., 564n45
Deng, L., 354n33
Den Hartog, D.N., 319n64, 464n86
DeNisi, A.S., 200n73, 201n90
Denning, S., 460n14, 528n20
Dennis, A., 37n34
Dennis, A.R., 320n70, 354n34, 356n49
Dent, E.B., 562n10
Depledge, G., 275n56
De Pree, M., 530n60
Derfuss, K., 158n70
Derksen, M., 236n48
der Stoep, J.V., 200n76
DeRue, D.S., 199n61, 461n39
Derue, D.S., 463n71
DeSanctis, G., 495n38
DeShong, H.L., 76n27
Desplaces, D.E., 432n107c
Dessein, W., 495n27
Deszca, G., 563n27
Deutsch, M., 201n87, 425n11
Deutsch, Y., 37n26
Devanna, M.A., 459n9
Deveau, D., 533n92k
Devece, C., 159n75
Dever, C., 387n1
Devine, D.J., 319n59, 319n61
Devine, R., 459n1
DeVore, C.J., 428n53
de Vries, R.E., 461n27
de Vrieze, J., 42n91g
Dewar, C., 391n73e
Dewey, J., 424n9
de Wit, F.R.C., 424n6, 425n15, 426n23
Diallo, M.F., 320n69
Díaz-Fernández, M., 234n19
Díaz-Fernández, M.C., 35n15
DiBenigno, J., 428–429n56, 429n60
Di Blasio, P., 356n50
Dickel, N., 153n10
Dickens, L., 565n51
Dickey, M.R., 531n62
Dickinson, H.O., 162n111
Dickson, M.W., 315n6, 531n64
Diefendorff, J.M., 156n41, 156n42
Diehl, M., 321n96
Diekmann, A., 318n46
Diener, E., 153n8, 158n67
Dierdorff, E.C., 35n13, 40n74, 41n81, 234n19
Dietz, G., 496n52
Digman, J.M., 75n9
Dill, K., 42n91b
DiNatale, S., 43n91m
D’Innocenzo, L., 317n26
Dionne, S.D., 463n60
Dionysiou, D.D., 277n79
Dirks, K.T., 278n92, 320n71, 564n33
Di-Tomaso, N., 529n32
Dittrich, J., 530n48
Divitto, B., 117n58
D’Lauro, C.J., 322n104
Do, B., 566n61
Do, M.H., 198n38
Dobbin, F., 119n76
Dobson, P., 527n2
Doctoroff, S., 430n84
Dodd, N.G., 237n60
Doering, S., 317n26
Doerr, B., 80n79b
Dollinger, S.J., 276n70
Domenico, Di, 197n32
Donahue, J., 116n37
Donahue, J.J., 80n79b
Donahue, L.M., 319n55
Donaldson, C., 202n100f
Donaldson, L., 496n48, 496n61
D’Onfro, J., 355n39
Dong, P., 162n112a
Donnellan, M.B., 75n10, 75n17
Donohue, R., 322n100, 426n24
Donovan, J.J., 80n79g
Dooley, K.J., 277n81
Dopson, E., 358n79k
Dorfman, P., 459n3, 464n83
Dormann, C., 155n31
Dorsey, J., 494n1
Doucet, O., 428n56
Dougall, A.L., 160n84
Douglas, C., 496n42
Douglas, E., 153n1
Dovidio, J.F., 116n48, 120n84, 429n61, 429n65
Dowling, G.R., 387n13
Dowling, W.F., 236n49
Downes, P.E., 202n100g
Doyle, K.O., 233n8
Doyle, V., 564n36
Drago, R., 161n98
Draper, K., 432n107h
Dreezens, E., 78n44
Drescher, S., 319n53
Drickhamer, D., 494n17
Driscoll, J.E., 238n80
Driskell, J.E., 317n25, 317n36
Driskell, T., 317n25, 317n36, 319n52
Driver, M., 196n10
Drollinger, T., 357n67
Drory, A., 390n68
Drössler, S., 354n27, 356n58
Drucker, P.F., 37n39, 271n8, 461n36
Druckman, D., 431n101
Drummond, H., 275n59
Drzensky, F., 159n80
Du, F., 429n58
Dubé, L., 321n93, 321n94
Dubin, R., 532n80
Ducheneaut, N.B., 353n22
Duckworth, A.L., 238n86
Duckworth, H., 321n93
Dufner, M., 114n17, 119n82
Duguid, M. M., 119n76
Duhnych, C., 238n77
Duke, K.E., 319n50
Dulaney, M., 239n91j
Dulebohn, J.H., 321n87, 323n110g
Dumas, T.L., 533n92f
Duncan, R.M., 238n77
Dunckel, H., 321n84
Dunford, R., 495n24
Duniewicz, K., 202n98
Dunlap, S., 389n41
Dunn, D. S., 118n70
Dunne, T.C., 430n72
Dunnette, M., 157n55
Dunnette, M.D., 40n68, 426n25
Dunning, D., 114n16
Duong, F., 120n87
du-Plessis, M., 78n59
Durbin, D.A., 529n40
DuRose, R., 233n1, 237n62
D’Urso, S.C., 353n10
Dutton, J.E., 238n83, 497n65, 565n54
Dutton, J.M., 426n29
Duxbury, L., 321n88
Duxbury, L.E., 563n14
Dvir, T., 530n56I-10 Name Index
Dvir,T., 530n54
Dvorak, N., 497n72h
Dwight, S.A., 80n79g
Dwoskin, E., 494n1
Dwyer, J., 496n56
Dyck, B., 354n23, 354n24
Dye, K., 197n27
Dyer, B., 428n45
Dyer, J.H., 320n75
Dyer, W.G., 320n75
Dysvik, A., 200n72
Dzieweczynski, J.L., 80n79d
E
E. Wolfe Morrison, 531n77
Eagly, A.H., 153n10, 464n88, 465n89
Earley, P.C., 427n34
Earnest, D.R., 532n89
Eastman, K.K., 461n33
Eaton, A.A., 117n52
Ebner, K., 162n109
Eby, L.T., 39n56, 39n62, 115n28, 161n106, 
235n39
Eccles, J., 118n69
Eckel, N.L., 274n45
Eddleston, K.A., 39n63
Edelman, B., 533n92i
Eden, D., 115n26, 118n65, 118n67, 118n68, 
119n76
Eden, J., 355n41
Edmans, A., 36n16
Edmond, K., 533n92i
Edmondson, A., 527n1
Edmondson, A.C., 317n28, 322n100, 426n24
Edmunds, A., 356n59
Edwards, J.R., 78n46, 531n69
Edwards, M.R., 115n32
Èehajiæ-Clancy, S., 426n26
Èerne, M., 390n56
Efron, L., 460n15
Egan, T.M., 565n53
Egelhoff, W.G., 496n49
Egleston, D.O., 319n57
Egri, C.P., 461n33
Ehlert, U., 160n85
Ehrhart, K.H., 273n25
Ehrhart, M.G., 530n54
Einstein, A., 272n11
Eisenbarth, H., 76n32
Eisenberg, J., 154n16
Eisenhardt, K.M., 425n12, 428n56
Eisenmann, T., 278n94g
Eisenstat, R.A., 565n46, 565n47
Eitam, B., 356n52
Ekman, P., 153n4, 154n18, 353n15
Elangovan, A.R., 429n70, 430n76
Eldor, L., 460n22
Elfenbein, H.A., 156n47, 430n81
Elfering, A., 531n74
Elgar, Edward, 159n77
Elias, S.M., 201n92
Ellemers, N., 115n31, 315n8, 318n49
Ellingson, J.E., 199n61
Ellis, R., 318n50
Ellison, C.N., 239n88
Elmes, M., 429n64
Elmquist, M., 277n84
Elsbach, K.D., 277n83, 277n84, 529n29
Elving, W.J.L., 352n5, 564n31
Emerson, R.M., 387n3, 388n22
Emery, C.R., 315n13
Emery, L.F., 113n4
Endrissat, N., 462n53
Enge, R.S., 319n56
Engel, E., 459n5
Engert, O., 530n47
Engle, J., 121n92g
Engster, D., 78n51
Ensari, N., 426n22, 463n66
Ensign, P.C., 495n40
Epitropaki, O., 463n62
Epstein, S., 274n45, 530n53, 533n92k
Erb, H.-P., 115n33
Erdel, D., 461n40
Erdem, I., 465n89k
Erez, A., 41n80
Ergeneli, A., 428n49
Ergin, C., 430n74
Erickson, 389n40
Erickson, B., 389n40
Erickson, T.J., 317n32
Erwin, L., 238n70
Eschleman, K.J., 115n28, 161n102
Eseryel, U.Y., 459n2, 461n34, 461n37
Eshet-Alkalai, Y., 355n48
Espejo, A., 278n90, 278n92
Estabrooks, C.A., 528n12
Estabrooks, P.A., 319n62
Euwema, M., 430n72
Euwema, M.C., 430n77
Eva, N., 322n100, 426n24
Evans, A.M., 40n64
Evans, G., 357n70
Evans, M.G., 462n46
Ezzamel, M., 202n94
F
Fabi, B., 36n24
Fainshmidt, S., 391n73f
Fairhurst, G.T., 463n66
Falbe, C.M., 387n12, 390n65
Falk, E., 390n58
Fan, X., 277n88, 278n90
Fanelli, A., 460n25
Fang, B., 323n110d
Fang, H., 235n31
Fang, M., 235n37
Fannin, K., 39n55
Fanning, M.M., 495n41
Faraj, S., 389n52
Farh, C.I.C., 202n98, 425n13
Farh, J.L., 425n13
Farley, S.D., 80n79b, 388n19
Farrell, D., 157n59
Farry, O., 120n92c
Farzaneh, P., 356n58
Fassina, N.E., 352n7, 531n72
Faupel, S., 563n15
Faust, K., 388n30
Fayol, H., 236n46, 494n16
Fazio, R. H., 153n9
Feather, N.T., 77n42
Featherstone, C.H., 162n112e
Fehr, E., 318n45
Feinberg, J.M., 316n14
Feist, G.J., 276n67, 276n70
Feldman, D. C., 155n33
Feldman, D.C., 318n45, 532n80
Feldman, G., 77n40, 197n25
Feldman, S., 531n77
Felfe, J., 159n75, 463n64
Fells, R., 431n88, 431n89, 431n93
Feloni, R., 497n64
Fenton, N.E., 528n14
Fenton-O’Creevy, M., 154n12, 233n7, 277n86, 
496n42
Ferdman, B.M., 37n42
Ferguson, A., 530n43
Ferguson, M., 39n58, 119n74
Ferguson, M.J., 119n74, 154n17, 199n58
Ferguson, N., 233n2
Fernández-Berrocal, P., 157n51
Fernbach, P., 116n41
Ferrell, B., 80n79a
Ferrer, R.A., 273n23
Ferrero, I., 78n50
Ferrin, D.L., 320n71
Ferris, D.L., 114n15, 115n34, 275n55
Ferris, G.R., 389n45, 390n68, 391n73
Ferry, Korn, 162n112g
Festinger, L., 155n27
Fetscherin, M., 391n73d
Fiedler, F.E., 462n55
Field, R.H.G., 118n65, 271n7
Fiesler, C., 354n32
Figueiro, M.G., 162n112a
Filbeck, G., 36n16
Filipowicz, A., 273n35
Finegan, J.E., 159n77
Fink, E.L., 427n42
Finkelstein, S., 154n21, 272n16, 273n22
Finkenauer, C., 153n9
Fischbacher, U., 318n45
Fischer, B., 354n33
Fischer, R., 197n25
Fiset, J., 40n66
Fish, N., 497n72c
Fishbach, A., 198n34
Fisher, C. D., 158n68
Fisher, J., 162n112
Fisher, L.M., 463n67
Fisher, R., 425n14, 432n107c
Fisher, R.J., 319n58
Fiske, S.T., 117n53, 153n6
Fitzpatrick, S., 233n6
Fizel, J., 202n94
Fleeson, W., 74n2
Fleishman, E.A., 461n38, 461n39
Fleming, M.A., 114n10
Fleming, P., 37n38, 389–390n54
Flinchbaugh, C., 158n64
Flint, J., 528n11
Flood, R., 432n107aName Index I-11
Flores, H.R., 426n22
Flowers, P., 354n30
Flynn, F.J., 119n72
Fock, H., 238n71
Folger, J., 426n27
Folkman, S., 161n101
Follett, M.P., 424n9, 427n40
Fonseca, X., 319n53
Fonstad, N.O., 278n94g
Fontaine, J., 155n35
Ford, B.Q., 153n7, 155n35
Ford, L.W., 563n11
Ford, M.T., 197n31, 197n33, 234n9, 463n59
Ford, R., 158n70
Ford, R.C., 496n46
Foreman, A.M., 39n55
Foresman, Scott, 237n61
Forgas, J.P., 274n42
Forrester, R., 237n65
Forret, M.L., 389n42
Forsyth, D.R., 463n63
Forsythe, G., 529n30
Fortin, M., 201n86, 202n97
Foster, C., 388n20
Foster, E.K., 358n79
Foster, M.K., 321n88
Fousiani, K., 388n29
Fowers, A., 35n1
Fox, C.R., 316n18
Foy, R., 352n2
Fraccaroli, F., 237n59
Fragale, A.R., 353n14
Francesco, A.M., 159n76
Francis, S., 432n107a
Franco, A., 42n91g
Franco-Santos, M., 236n42, 239n91d
Frank, R.H., 196n12
Frankel, S., 323n110
Fredenhall, L.D., 315n13
Freeman, R.E., 36n25
Freeman, W. H., 115n25
French, J.R., 387n6
French, J.R.P., Jr., 200n73
French, R. P., 195n2
French J.R., 387n2
Frese, M., 198n37, 198n46
Fretwell, S., 278n94e
Fried, D.D., 157n60
Fried, Y., 236n55, 236n56
Friedland, W.H., 387n17, 460n26
Friedman, S.D., 39n55
Friesdorf, R., 38n45
Friesen, P.H., 566n69g
Frijda, N.H., 153n4
Fronza, I., 316n21
Frost, P.J., 527n2, 528n14, 530n52
Fu, 390n66
Fu, P.P., 390n67
Fuhriman, A., 319n53
Fujio, M., 357n62
Fulk, J., 355n37, 424n7
Fullagar, C.J., 319n57
Füller, J., 277n88
Fuller, R.M., 354n34
Fulmer, C.A., 320n69
Funder, D.C., 74n2
Furlough, C., 116n45
Furnham, A., 233n3, 233n7, 233n8, 528n19
Furtner, M., 238n87
Furuoka, F., 563n15, 564n40
Fussell, S.R., 353n9
Futrell, D., 316n22
G
Gable, S.L., 565n54
Gaertner, L., 113n3, 196n12
Gagne, M., 197n32
Gagné, M., 197n31, 197n32, 236n53
Gagnon, J.-M.G., 234n11
Gaines, J.F., 75n9
Galbraith, J. R., 496n44
Galbraith, J.K., 562n9
Galbraith, J.R., 429n67, 429n68, 494n6, 494n11, 
495n32, 495n34, 495n37, 495n38, 495n39, 
497n68
Gale, C. R., 74n4
Galinsky, A.D., 387n2, 388n29
Gallagher, M., 160n84
Gallagher, S., 40n72
Gallie, D., 160n83
Gallrein, A.-M.B., 119n81, 119n82
Gallupe, R.B., 323n108
Galt,V., 195n1
Galvin, B.M., 115n27, 462n41
Gammage, K.L., 319n62
Ganco, M., 36n20
Gander, K., 156n37
Ganguly, D., 495n50, 496n48
Ganster, D.C., 155n31, 160n84, 160n89, 237n60
Gantiva, C., 354n33
Gao, J.H., 388n32
Garbers, Y., 197n33
Garcia, J., 114n10
García-Barba Hernández, F., 563n15
García-Cabrera, A.M., 563n15
Garda, G., 496n42
Gardner, D.G., 115n24
Gardner, J., 115n33
Gardner, L., 153n6
Gardner, W.L., 119n78, 464n80, 496n42
Gardner, W.L., III, 459n2
Garland, E.L., 114n9
Garman, A.N., 426n30
Garmhausen, S., 323n110d
Gary, M.S., 272n19
Gasparetto, T., 203n100g
Gass, R.H., 390n57
Gawronsk, B., 117n55
Gawronski, B., 38n45, 119n76
Gayle, B.M., 428n53
Gazzoli, G., 237n70
Geiger, I., 354n34
Geis, F., 76n22
Geister, S., 497n68
Gelfand, M.J., 80n78, 430n75, 530n58
Gellatly, I.R., 158n64, 159n76
Geller, E.S., 238n87
Gellman, L., 533n92i
Gemmell, J.M., 430n78
Gemmill, G., 429n64
Gendler, T.S., 238n86
Georgakakis, D., 391n73g
George, B., 234n17, 464n80
George, J.M., 158n63, 274n42
Georgopoulos, B.S., 36n17
Gephart, M.A., 565n50
Gerber, M., 162n110
Gerhart, B., 235n37
Germeys, L., 39n63
Gerras, S.J., 80n79c
Gersick, C.J.G., 318n42
Gerwin, D., 497n69
Geurts, S.A.E., 161n107
Gibbs, J.L., 321n91
Giberson, T.R., 531n64
Gibson, C., 320n73
Gibson, C.B., 37n37, 79n65, 237n69
Gibson, D.E., 196n8
Gibson, K.R., 119n82
Gielnik, M.M., 198n37
Gilbert, D.T., 117n53, 118n63, 153n6
Gilbert, K., 234n13
Gilbey, A., 116n39
Giles, S., 464n77
Gill, H., 159n76
Gill, R., 459n11
Gillan, D., 116n45
Gillespie, J.Z., 195n3
Gillespie, N., 320n66, 320n67, 496n52
Gillespie, T.L., 431n97
Gilliland, S.W., 201n88
Gilovich, T., 273n22, 273n30
Gilson, L.L., 237n67, 321n89
Gino, F., 78n58
Gioja, L., 566n65
Girotra, K., 322n104
Gitlin, J., 120n92b
Gittell, J.H., 495n20
Glaser, B.G., 589n5, 590n7
Glavas, A., 37n27
Glazer, E., 272n14
Glen, R., 277n84
Glew, D.J., 155n25
Glikson, E., 358n79g, 358n79h
Glimcher, P.W., 271n4
Glomb, T.M., 156n38, 236n45, 239n91h
Glunk, U., 529n32
Glynn, S.J., 238n85
Godwin, L.N., 565n57, 565n58
Goh, J., 160n89
Gold, R., 278n94e
Goldberg, C.B., 202n96
Goldberg, S.G., 562n10
Golden, L., 161n98
Golden, T.D., 39n61
Goldin, K., 39n55
Goldman, B.M., 430n75
Goldstein, N.J., 388n18, 389n52
Goleman, D., 156n46, 464n79, 464n82
Golightly, D., 275n48
Gomez, P., 37n27
Gomez-Mejia, L.R., 234n25
Goncalo, J.A., 276n67
González-Ibáñez, R., 354n31I-12 Name Index
González-Morales, M.G., 160n86
González-Rodríguez, M.R., 35n15
Gonzalo Angulo, J.A., 119n73
Gooch, D., 355n35
Gooch, K., 41n86
Gooderham, P., 239n91b
Goodman, J., 274n37, 274n38
Goodman, P.S., 316n23, 316n24
Goodstein, L.D., 563n25, 564n39
Goold, M., 495n36
Gopalan, S., 530n48
Gopinath, A., 391n73b
Gordon, G.G., 529n32
Gordon, H.J., 238n83
Gorman, J.C., 320n73
Gosling, J., 464n83
Gosse, L., 202n95
Gosselin, D., 114n17
Gottfredson, R.K., 200n75
Gouldner, A.W., 387n11
Govindarajan, V., 120n91
G.P. Latham, 40n70
Graham, J., 197n29
Graham, J.R., 391n73f
Graham, K.A., 425n18
Graham, P., 35n9
Grammer, H.F., 200n75
Grandey, A.A., 155n32, 155n34, 156n39
Granovetter, M.S., 389n40
Grant, A., 278n94b, 315n2
Grant, A.M., 75n16, 78n44, 236n56, 316n14, 
533n92g
Grant, C.S., 433n107m
Grant, D., 463n66
Grant, D.M., 76n27
Gratton, L., 317n32
Gravina, N., 200n74
Gray, B., 320n81
Gray, P., 278n94g
Green, A., 235n40, 432n107i
Greenaway, K.H., 352n6
Greenbaum, R.L., 79n63
Greenberg, A., 234n12
Greenberg, J., 42n91f, 202n96
Greene, L., 432n107i
Greenhaus, Jeffrey H., 38n52
Greenhaus, J.H., 39n54
Greenleaf, R.K., 462n42
Greenwald, A.G., 119n79
Greenwald, J., 495n19
Greenwood, R., 494n2
Greer, L.L., 424n6, 424n8, 425n15, 426n23, 
427n30
Gregg, A.P., 115n31
Greguras, G.J., 158n67
Greifeneder, R., 274n38
Greiner, L.E., 35n5
Greitemeyer, T., 425n12
Gretton, M., 497n72h
Griesshaber, M.-O., 497n72g
Griffeth, R.W., 157n60
Griffin, D., 273n22, 273n30
Griffin, M.A., 41n79, 530n56
Griffin, R.W., 237n61
Griffiths, T.L., 272n9
Grimaldi, E.M., 76n20
Griswold, A., 531n62, 533n92i
Gross, J.J., 153n7, 156n42, 238n86
Grosse Kathoefer, D., 563n19
Grosser, T.J., 358n77
Grossetti, M., 388n31
Grossman, N., 203n100h
Grossmann, T., 153n9
Grover, S.L., 79n63
Groysberg, B., 195n7, 196n11, 196n15
Grubb, W.L., 80n79g
Gruber, M., 42n91i
Gruenfeld, D., 465n89o
Gruman, J.A., 195n4, 352n7
Grund, C., 202n100g
Gruys, M.L., 41n84
Guay, R.P., 77n40, 197n25
Gudykunst, W. B., 357n62
Guenter, H., 463n72
Guenther, C.L., 114n15
Guida, V., 528n24
Guillaume, Y.R.F., 38n49
Guillén, L., 463n72, 464n74
Guinote, A., 387n2
Guiso, L., 528n13
Gully, S.M., 115n26, 319n59, 319n61, 322n99
Gunia, B.C., 430n80, 431n86
Gunkel, M., 427n43, 428n51
Gunter, B., 528n19
Gupta, A.K., 120n91
Gupta, M., 432n107c
Gupta, N., 234n9, 234n18, 235n35, 317n26
Gustafson, A., 78n49
Gustafson, D.H., 323n109
Guthrie, C., 353n23
Guthrie, J., 36n16
Güth,W., 431n98
Guzman, F.A., 278n90, 278n92
Guzzo, R.A., 315n6
H
Haas, C., 428n45
Haas, M.R., 38n50, 315n4
Hacker, J.V., 323n110h
Hackett, R.D., 41n77
Hacki, R., 496n55
Hackman, J.D., 388n24
Hackman, J.R., 198n44, 236n51, 236n56, 
237n61, 237n64, 315n13, 316n22, 317n33, 
532n80, 532n82
Hackston, J., 77n35
Hadley, L., 202n94
Haenlein, M., 354n29
Hafenbrack, A.C., 275n60
Hagège, J., 155n27
Hagel III, J., 496n55
Hagemeister, A., 432n107e
Hägg, G.M., 236n44
Hagmayer, Y., 273n29
Haidinger, Z., 497n72h
Haidt, J., 565n54
Hakikat, E., 527n1, 528n11
Håkonsson, D.D., 495n31, 495n32
Halevy, N., 117n50, 427n39
Half, Robert, 201n84, 497n72b
Hall, D., 567n69j
Hall, D.T., 197n24
Hall, J., 119n81
Hall, J.A., 120n87, 427n40
Hall, N.C., 155n32, 155n34
Hall, R. H., 36n18
Hall, W.A., 590n8
Hall, W.M., 117n51
Halligan, P.W., 154n13, 155n29
Halperin, E., 426n26, 426n27
Hamann, K., 118n60
Hambley, L.A., 39n64, 321n90
Hambly, H., 39n62
Hambrick, D.C., 391n73h
Hamet, J., 37n32, 37n36
Hamilton, A.B.B., 121n92i
Hamilton, K., 274n46
Hamilton, K.L., 428n45
Hamilton, R.A., 239n89
Hamilton, R.T., 201n92
Hamington, M., 78n50
Hämmelmann, A., 320n77
Hammer, W.C., 235n34
Hampden-Turner, C., 155n36
Han, J., 235n37
Han, T.-S., 160n83
Han, W., 236n49
Hancer, M., 237n70
Hancock, A.B., 357n64
Hancock, J.I., 41n85, 41n87
Hand, M.W., 237n66
Handke, L., 321n92
Hanel, P.H.P., 77n41
Haner, U.E., 276n62
Hanley, A.W., 114n9
Hanlon, G., 37n38
Hannah, D., 527n9
Hannah, D.R., 531n76
Hannah, J., 41n86
Hannah, S., 114n12
Hansen, F., 154n11
Hansen, N.K., 35n15
(Hans) Schilderman, J., 78n54
Harari, D., 119n82
Harariet, M.B., 239n90
Harbert, T., 527n1
Hardy, C., 391n73, 461n31
Hare, A.P., 318n42, 319n51, 319n52
Hargadon, A., 277n81, 322n103, 590n12
Hargadon, A.B., 322n103
Hargrave, T.J., 428n44
Hargrove, D.F., 160n86
Hargrove, M.B., 160n86
Harkin, B., 238n84
Harkins, S., 239n91j, 316n20
Harkins, S.G., 318n46, 318n48
Harmon-Jones, E., 196n8, 274n42
Harold, C.M., 201n92
Harpaz, I., 530n61
Harrington, J.R., 80n78
Harris, J.G., 495n37
Harris, S., 465n89c
Harris, S.G., 563n14, 564n41
Harris, T.B., 389n32Name Index I-13
Harrison, A., 41n88, 76n26, 391n72
Harrison, C., 462n44
Harrison, D. A., 158n67
Harrison, D.A., 78n52, 121n92i, 157n54
Harrison, J.S., 36n25
Harrison, M., 355n43
Hart, C.M., 76n32
Hart, W., 76n31
Hartel, C.E.J., 154n16
Härtel, C.E.J., 37n39, 41n76
Harter, J., 35n15
Hartman, N.S., 80n79g
Hartnell, C.A., 78n51
Hartung, P.J., 239n91g
Harvey, S., 316n16
Harwood, G.G., 321n93
Harwood, J., 120n85
Harzing, A.-W., 356n60
Hasegawa, T., 357n62
Haslam, S.A., 115n31, 116n49, 315n8, 388n18
Hasler, B.S., 120n84
Hassard, J., 495n24
Hasselberg, K., 160n88
Hastings, R., 528n11
Hastings, S.E., 425n11
Hatzigeorgiadis, A., 238n78
Hauben, M., 353n19
Hauben, R., 353n19
Hauff, S., 35n15
Haukelid, K., 528n14
Hausdorf, P.A., 80n79f
Hausknecht, J.P., 564n37
Häusser, J.A., 236n49, 237n59
Hautaluoma, J.E., 319n56
Hava, C., 202n100e
Haviland-Jones, J.M., 153n4
Hawk, T.F., 78n50
Hayden, B.Y., 35n11, 196n14, 271n4
Hayes, L., 278n94a
Hayes, R.A., 354n29
Haynie, J.M., 274n39
Haynie, S., 74n1
Hayward, M.L.A., 463n66
H.C. Metcalf, 424n9
He, Y., 75n10, 75n17
Headley, C., 43n91l
Heath, A., 494n1
Heath, C., 114n16
Hecht, T.D., 316n15
Heckhausen, H., 195n6, 197n20
Heckhausen, J., 195n6
Heckman, R., 459n2, 461n34, 461n37
Hedlund, J., 464n78
Heerdink, M., 153n4, 390n58
Heffner, T.S., 160n82
Hegedus, A., 321n81
Heike, B., 237n69
Heilman, M.E., 465n89
Heim, A., 233n1
Heim, I., 563n24
Hein, T., 323n110b
Heinemann, P., 387n6
Heinz, M., 159n80
Helin, S., 79n60
Henderson, R., 465n89c
Hengen, K.M., 274n42
Henley, A.B., 202n96
Henne, P., 119n73
Henning, R.A., 238n85
Henningsen, D.D., 321n96
Henningsen, M.L.M., 321n96
Henriksen, D., 277n85
Henshaw, J.M., 200n66
Herbert, C., 354n33
Herbst, D., 316n14
Herman, S., 461n33
Heron, J., 565n51
Herring, S.C., 358n79g
Herrman, A.R., 431n92
Herrmann, M.A., 42n88
Hertel, G., 497n68
Heskett, J.I., 158n70
Heskett, J.L., 529n32, 529n39
Heslin, P.A., 322n107
Hesseldahl, A., 566n69e
Heuett, K.B., 322n104
Hew, K., 354n33
Hewlin, P.F., 533n92f
Hewstone, M., 427n39
Hiam, A., 277n77
Hibarger, H., 35n9
Hibbard, J.D., 158n63
Hickerson, K., 459n11
Hickman, J.S., 238n87
Hicks, J., 323n110e
Hickson, D.J., 388n21
Hideg, I., 156n40
Higgins, C., 563n14
Higgins, E.T., 75n8, 154n19, 274n44, 353n9
Higgins, J.M., 530n61
Higgins, P., 388n22
Higginson, T.W., 357n66
High, P., 563n18
Highhouse, S., 317n24
Highouse, S., 195n3
Hilbig, B.E., 76n21, 391n72
Hill, K.M., 157n53
Hill, N.S., 429n58
Hill, S., 116n39
Hillman, D.R., 427n33
Hilton, M.L., 315n3
Hinings, C.R., 36n20, 387n16, 388n21, 497n67
Hinings, R., 494n2
Hinkin, T.R., 199n52
Hinojosa, A.S., 155n28
Hirsch, B., 119n71
Hirschi, A., 239n91i
Hirschman, A.O., 158n62
Hirsh, J.B., 238n86
Hirst, G., 276n71, 276n73
Hirt, M., 391n73e
Hitlin, S., 77n38, 196n10, 527n3
Hitt, M., 277n79, 495n39
Hitt, M. A., 36n18
Ho, J., 239n88, 239n91
Ho, J.Y.C., 564n45
Hobbs, B., 317n26, 317n35, 318n39
Hoboken, N.J, 74n2
Hoch, J.E., 321n87, 323n110g
Hock, M., 272n18
Hodgkinson, G.P., 274n45
Hodson, G., 76n21
Hodzic, S., 157n53
Hoerman, D., 528n23
Hoffman, J., 118n70
Höfling, T.T.A., 155n26
Hofstede, G., 79n68, 79n69, 528n15
Hofstetter, H., 530n61
Hogan, J., 196n12
Hogan, S.J., 527n5, 530n59
Hogarth, R.M., 274n45
Hogg, M.A., 115n31, 116n49, 315n8, 429n57
Hogreve, J., 158n70
Hoisl, K., 42n91i
Holahan, P.J., 426n20, 432n107g
Ho Lee, J., 235n32
Holland, B., 196n12
Holland, R.W., 197n26
Hollenbeck, J.R., 315n5
Hollensbe, E.C., 39n58
Hollingshead, A., 320n77
Hollingsworth, M., 323n110j
Holmes, O., 38n49
Holt, D.T., 564n32
Holt, J.L., 428n53
Holtbrügge, D., 355n38
Holtom, B.C., 41n87
Holton, M.K., 161n100
Holtz, B.C., 119n74, 201n92
Holwerda, J.A., 564n37
Hom, P.W., 157n60
Homan, A.C., 318n39
Homburg, C., 495n37
Hong, Y., 158n70
Hoogeboom, M.A.M.G., 462n51, 462n52
Hook, L., 432n107b
Hope, O.-K., 323n110d
Hopkins, S., 235n26
Hopwood, C.J., 75n7
Horowitz, B., 433n107l
Horowitz, L.M., 76n21
Horpestad, S., 79n64
Horstmann, G., 153n5
Horton, R.S., 319n54
Horvitz, T., 319n58
Horwitz, S.K., 318n39
Hougaard, R., 315n1
Hough, L.M., 426n25
Houghton, J.D., 238n73, 238n74, 239n88, 
462n50
Houlder, V., 497n72h
Houlfort, N., 39n55
House, R., 459n3, 464n84
House, R.J., 37n41, 391n71, 460n24, 461n35, 
461n38, 462n46, 462n48
Howard, A., 566n69f
Howell, J., 424n1
Howell, J.M., 459n6
Hruska, B., 161n107
Hsieh, A.T., 494n14
Hsieh ,Y.M., 494n14
Hsiung, K.S., 528n12
Hu, C., 531n65
Huai, M.-Y., 38n48
Huang, D., 533n92iI-14 Name Index
Huang, J., 75n10
Huang, J. L., 75n14
Huang, J.L., 37n36, 41n79, 75n7, 75n12
Huang, J.W., 495n27
Huang, L., 320n70
Huang, X., 461n29
Huang, X. (I.), 162n112a
Huber, V.L., 199n55
Huettermann, H., 317n26
Hüffmeier, J., 431n92
Hugenberg, K., 116n49
Hughes, D.J., 277n76
Huguet, P., 356n49
Hui, C.M., 275n60
Humiston, G.B., 117n55
Hummel, M., 354n27
Humphrey, R.H., 156n41, 157n50, 464n79
Humphrey, S.E., 426n23
Hung, L., 565n59
Hung, Y.T.C., 320n70
Hunger, J.D., 428n55
Huning, T.M., 239n90
Hunt, J.C., 461n39
Hunt, J.G., 460n24, 462n45
Hunter, E.M., 40n64
Huo, Y.J., 387n9
Huppert, J.D., 156n43
Hurley, R.F., 75n12
Hurmuzan, S., 323n108
Hussain, I., 158n65
Huszczo, G.E., 320n80
Hutter, K., 277n88
Huwaë, S., 156n37
Huy, Q.N., 495n24
Huyghebaert, T., 156n38
Hwang, H.C., 155n35, 156n36
Hyde, M., 430n78
Hyland, A., 530n50
Hyman, J., 38n51
Hyten, C., 321n82
I
Iacono, S.L., 159n79
Ibarra, H., 463n72, 529n37
Idris, A., 563n15, 564n40
Ilies, R., 461n39
Imbir, K.K., 353n17
Imhoff, R., 115n33
Indvik, J., 462n49
Infeld, L., 272n11
Inglis, S., 528n14
Innes, A., 565n59
Inzlicht, M., 238n86
Iqbal, M., 358n79e
Irmer, B.E., 322n97
Irving, P.G., 430n78, 532n78
Isaac, M., 427n36
Isaac, R.G., 462n47
Isaacson, M., 77n34
Iseke, A., 158n70
Isen, A.M., 431n102
Isern, J., 567n69h
Islam, M.N., 563n15, 564n40
Ittner, H., 430n77
Ivanov, B., 390n59
Iyengar, S., 274n37, 278n94c
Iyengar, S.S., 273n36
J
Jack, A.I., 153n3
Jackson, C.L., 79n65
Jackson, D.N., 76n19
Jackson, J.J., 81n79h
Jackson, T.W., 356n58
Jacob, N., 79n71
Jacobs, L., 430n73
Jacobs, R., 464n82
Jacquart, P., 463n61
Jaeger, G.J., 276n61
Jago, A.G., 277n86, 277n87, 278n94, 321n95, 
462n45
Jain, K., 273n35
Jakob, T., 497n72g
James, M.O., 116n43
James, T.A., 276n70
Jang, D., 430n81
Janis, I.L., 272n9
Janoff, S., 566n62
Janoff-Bulman, R., 117n50
Jansen, W.S., 315n7
Jarcho, J.M., 155n29
Jaros, S., 159n74, 563n14
Jarrott, S.E., 120n85
Jarvenpaa, S.L., 320n70
Jarvis, S., 80n79a
Jasper, J.D., 273n31, 430n83
Jassy, Andy, 432n107b
Javidan, M., 120n90, 459n3, 464n84, 464n85
Jayawickreme, E., 74n2
Jefferson, L., 357n65
Jeffrey, S.A., 276n67
Jehn, K., 427n34
Jehn, K.A., 114n19, 114n21, 119n75, 319n55, 
424n5, 424n6, 425n14, 425n15, 426n23, 
426n30
Jenkins, M., 527n8
Jenner, S., 80n75
Jensen, M.A.C., 318n43
Jensen, O., 495n37
Jeong, D.Y., 36n23
Jermier, J.M., 462n56
Jesuino, J.C., 464n85
Jetten, J., 116n49
Jevons, W.S., 198n41
Jex, S.M., 237n63
Jia, M., 200n68
Jia, S., 233n4
Jiang, X., 426n22
Jiang, Y., 159n75
Jiménez, A., 564n32
Jimmieson, N.L., 424n6, 426n22, 563n29
Jin, J., 197n26
Jobs, S., 42n91a
Johannesen-Schmidt, M.C., 464n88
Johansen, C., 160n89
Johanson, J. E., 494n2
Johar, O., 76n23
John, J., 195n2
John, O.P., 75n9
John, P., 158n62
Johns, G., 41n76, 42n89, 42n90, 42n91
Johnson, B., 390n60, 462n53, 497n72h
Johnson, B.R., 322n104
Johnson, B.T., 154n10
Johnson, C., 322n102, 390n62
Johnson, D., 357n70
Johnson, D.A., 77n34
Johnson, D.E., 41n80
Johnson, D.W., 428n44
Johnson, E.C., 159n78, 531n65
Johnson, I.R., 117n55
Johnson, J., 271n1
Johnson, K.E., 427n40
Johnson, K.M., 38n42
Johnson, R.E., 114n15, 115n23, 115n34, 156n39, 
198n46, 275n55
Johnson, R.M., 239n91d
Johnson, S., 42n91e
Johnson, S.K., 118n66, 118n68
Johnson-Laird, P.N., 116n45
Johnston, A., 529n37
Jokela, M., 74n6
Jones, B.F., 315n3
Jones, D., 494n18
Jones, D.N., 76n21, 76n29
Jones, G., 198n43
Jones, J., 43n91k
Jones, M., 239n91d
Jones, M.O., 528n18
Jones, T.M., 78n53
Jonker, C.M., 154n11
Jonker, L., 36n15
Jonsdottir, I.H., 160n88
Jonsen, K., 527n9
Jonsson, P., 353n17
Joo, H., 200n75
Joost, N., 272n22
Jordan, P.J., 156n46
Joseph, D., 157n51
Joseph, D.L., 156n46
Joseph, J., 427n31
Josephson, S.A., 273n30
Joshi, K., 563n17
Joshi, P.D., 356n54
Jost, J.T., 119n80
Joyce, A., 238n82
Judge, T., 75n10
Judge, T.A., 40n75, 74n5, 158n67, 461n39, 
463n71, 531n65
Juillerat, T., 236n56
Jundt, D.K., 41n79
Jung, C.G., 77n33
Jung, M.H., 273n31
JungKun, P., 357n67
Junni, P., 427n31
Jussim, L., 116n47, 118n69
Justin, J.E., 462n52
K
Kääpä, M., 566n69b
Kabanoff, B., 527n8
Kable, J.W., 271n4Name Index I-15
Kacmar, K.M., 39n58, 391n73
Kahn, R.L., 35n4, 36n20
Kahneman, D., 116n44, 154n12, 273n22, 
273n30, 273n31, 273n32, 275n57, 430n83
Kahwajy, J.L., 425n12, 428n56
Kaiser, J., 238n75
Kalev, A., 119n76
Kalika, M., 353n23
Kalkhoff, W., 153n3
Kallio, K.-M., 529n28
Kallio, T.J., 529n28
Kammeyer-Mueller, J.D., 532n81
Kammeyer-Mueller J.D., 156n41
Kanahara, S., 116n46
Kandler, C., 75n7
Kanfer, R., 153n8, 198n46
Kang, H., 38n50
Kang, S.-C., 235n35, 235n37
Kang, S.K., 315n8
Kang, S.Y., 162n112a
Kanigel, R., 236n48
Kantabutra, S., 460n12
Kantor, J., 432n107b
Kanungo, R.N., 459n2, 460n13
Kaplan, A.M., 354n29
Kaplan, S., 272n17
Kaplan, S.R., 318n42
Kaptein, M., 78n59, 79n59
Karabinski, T., 39n58
Karahanna, E., 36n21, 352n2
Karambayya, R., 430n75
Karamustafa, G., 427n37
Karanika-Murray, M., 42n90
Karapinar, P.B., 428n49
Karasek, R., 161n99
Karau, S.J., 316n19, 465n89
Karimi, H., 271n6
Kark, S.M., 116n37
Karr, A., 496n53
Kashima, Y., 79n66
Kashy, D.A., 40n72
Kassam, A. F., 565n60
Kast, F.E., 36n19
Katanuma, M., 163n112j
Katayama, H., 202n100g
Kates, A., 495n36, 496n44
Kato, T., 235n32, 235n33
Katsaros, K.K., 563n17
Katz, D., 35n4, 36n20
Katzy, B., 390n55
Kauffeld, S., 316n20, 319n52, 562n10
Kauhanen, A., 235n33
Kauppila, O.-P., 40n67
Kay, A.C., 432n107f
Kay, E., 195n2, 200n73
Kay, V.S., 114n18
Kayworth, T., 528n12
Kazar, B., 239n91a
Ke, W., 238n71
Keating, E., 531n68
Keeley, J.W., 118n71
Kefalidou, G., 275n48
Kehoe, R.R., 36n23, 36n24
Keil, M., 275n56, 275n60
Keller, A.C., 155n31
Keller, J., 42n91b
Keller, R.T., 462n51, 462n57
Keller, S., 391n73e
Kellett, P.M., 201n85
Kelley, D., 528n22
Kelley, D.P., 200n74
Kelley, H.H., 117n57, 117n58
Kelley, J.G., 495n25
Kelley, T., 277n81, 322n103, 528n22
Kelloway, E.K., 317n26, 317n35, 318n39, 461n30
Kelly, J.R., 315n7
Kelly, L., 359n79l
Kelm, O.R., 357n63
Keltner.D., 76n29
Kemmelmeier, M., 79n64, 79n66, 80n74
Kemmerer, B., 155n31
Kendall, J.M., 494n18
Kennedy, A.A., 528n17, 528n20, 529n31, 
532n92e
Kennedy, D.A., 77n36
Kennedy, J.A., 432n106, 432n107
Kennedy, J.K., 463n61
Kennedy, K.A., 426n28
Kennedy, R.B., 77n36
Kenrick, D.T., 197n24, 197n30
Kensinger, E.A., 116n37
Kent, D., 354n28
Kenworthy, J.B., 322n103
Keogh, O., 42n91b, 497n72h
Kepes, S., 42n91g
Keren, G., 430n85
Kerlinger, F.N., 589n1, 590n6
Kerr, E., 432n107a
Kerr, J., 530n61
Kerr, N.L., 316n14
Kerr, S., 201n82, 235n42, 461n38, 462n45, 
462n56
Kesebir, S., 197n29
Kesler, G., 495n36, 496n44
Kessler, S., 323n110f
Kessler, S. R., 76n22
Kettunen, O., 162n110
Keyton, J., 432n107g
Khosrowshahi, D., 533n92i
Khoury, G., 81n79k
Khurana, R., 461n27
Kidd, C., 35n11, 196n14, 271n1
Kiefer, C., 74n1
Kieffer, D., 272n13
Kihlstedt, A., 236n44
Kilbridge, M.D., 237n59
Kilduff, M., 75n7, 389n38
Killgore, W.D.S., 156n48
Kilmann, R.H., 497n70, 565n52
Kilpatrick, M., 565n59
Kim, D., 464n77
Kim, G.J., 158n71
Kim, H., 391n73f
Kim, J., 37n28, 357n68
Kim, J.H., 158n71
Kim, K., 234n16
Kim, M.S., 322n99
Kim, P.H., 37n37
Kim, S., 235n37
Kim, S.-P., 115n22
Kim, S.Y., 155n22
Kim, T., 236n52
Kim, T.-Y., 115n22
Kim, Y., 40n73
Kim, Y.-H., 156n37
Kim, Y.J., 113n2
King, L.A., 390n62
King, R.C., 355n40
Kinias, Z., 275n60
Kinicki, A.J., 528n10
Kipnis, D., 389n50
Kirchner, J., 319n54
Kirk, J.F., 201n86, 202n97
Kirkcaldy, B.D., 233n8
Kirkman, B.L., 79n71, 237n69
Kirkpatrick, S., 564n41
Kirkpatrick, S.A., 460n12, 463n70, 464n76
Kirsch, D.A., 495n29
Kirsch, I., 199n58
Kirsten, M., 78n59
Kish, A., 76n29
Kish-Gephart, J.J., 78n52
Kivity, Y., 156n43
Kleber, N., 274n38
Klehe, U.-C., 316n20
Kleiman, E.M., 161n103
Klein, A.S., 530n56
Klein , C., 320n78
Klein, G., 274n47, 275n48
Klein, H., 200n69
Klein, H.J., 159n72
Klimoski, R., 42n91c
Klimoski, R.J., 153n8
Klinghoffer, D., 38n51
Klocke, U., 425n12
Klonek, F.E., 562n10
Klotz, A.C., 41n83
Kluger, A.N., 200n76
Kniffin, K.M., 323n110e
Knight, D.J., 566n65
Knoll, M., 78n58
Knowles, E., 428n47
Knudsen, E.I., 115n35
Knudsen, M.P., 563n19
Koch, A.K., 238n75
Koch, A.S., 274n42
Koch, E.J., 113n4, 114n9
Koch, T., 352n5
Kochan, T., 38n50
Kochan, T.A., 426n29
Kocher, M.G., 431n98
Kock, N., 355n48
Kocoglu, I., 276n63
Kodama, M., 532n84
Koenig, R., Jr., 352n2
Koenig, R.J. Jr., 494n13
Koh, C.B., 464n79
Kohli, A.K., 495n37
Kohn, A., 235n34
Kohn, N.W., 322n104, 322n105
Koivuniemi, A., 562n6
Kokalitcheva, K., 566n69e
Kolesnikov-Jessop, S., 460n19
Kolko, J., 277n85
Köllner, M.G., 198n35I-16 Name Index
Langan-Fox, J., 320n76
Lange, D., 462n41
Langhe, B.D., 116n41
Langner, C.A., 198n39
Lanka, E., 463n72
Lapointe, É., 158n64
Larkins, M., 424n1
Larson, L.L., 460n24, 462n45
Larson, R.J., 153n8
Latane, B., 239n91j, 316n20
Latham, G., 199n64, 238n87
Latham, G.P., 40n70, 195n2, 198n47, 199n55, 
199n64, 200n69, 200n70, 200n71, 201n82, 
201n83
Latimer, J., 239n91j
Lau, C.M., 566n66
Lau, D.C., 318n40
Lau, N., 431n98
Lau, R.S., 426n19, 429n57
Laubert, C., 354n25, 354n34
Lautsch, B.A., 39n63
Lauzier, M., 160n90
Lavigne-Robichaud, M., 161n99
Lavi-Steiner, O., 35n13
Lawler, Edward, 198n42
Lawler, E.E., 198n42, 198n44, 236n51, 321n82
Lawler, E.E. III, 532n80
Lawler, E.E., III, 494n4, 532n82, 564n39, 
566n65
Lawler III, E.E., 40n67, 198n42, 198n44, 
236n46, 495n33, 495n39
Lawrence, P., 196n7, 196n11
Lawrence, P. R., 496n44
Lawrence, P.R., 35n7, 195n7, 196n11, 196n17, 
196n18, 429n68, 496n62, 496n63
Lawrence, S.A., 156n46
Lawson, T., 35n6
Lazarsfeld, P., 590n9
Lazarus, R.S., 160n85
Lazazzara, A., 238n83
Lazzara, E.H., 315n4, 317n24
Le, H., 75n16, 157n54
Lea, S.E.G., 233n6
Leach, D.C., 426n30
Leach, D.J., 357n68
Leach, S., 388n27
Leal, A., 276n72, 529n41
Leana, C.R., 233n4
Leaper, C., 357n65
Learmonth, M., 42n91c
Leary, M., 391n73f
Leary, M.R., 114n21, 196n12, 196n13, 316n14, 
352n6
Leavitt, H.J., 495n24
LeBlanc, D.E., 428n45
Leblanc, P., 235n30
LeBreton, J.M., 76n20, 76n30
Lechner, C.M., 197n26
Ledford, G., 235n30
LeDoux, J.E., 154n18, 196n16
Lee, A., 80n79b, 427n38, 427n41
Lee, C., 425n13
Lee, D., 116n37, 155n22, 322n98, 530n57
Lee, D.-J., 38n52, 161n106
Lee, D.Y., 387n13
Krouse, P., 565n59
Krueger, D.W., 233n5
Kruglanski, A., 154n19, 200n67, 274n44, 353n9
Kruglanski, A.W., 75n8, 154n15
Krumm, S., 321n91
Kruse, D., 235n31
Krys, K., 162n112d
Kucera, T., 387n1
Kudisch, J.D., 387n17
Kudryavtsev, A., 273n32
Kuenzi, M., 79n63
Kugler, T., 426n27
Kuhla, K., 529n30
Kuhlman, M., 162n112e
Kuipers, B.S., 77n35
Kukenberge, M.R., 317n26
Kulik, C.T., 201n89
Kulkarni, S.S., 273n33
Kumar, N., 158n63
Kunter, M., 532n84
Künzle, B., 463n58
Kupritz, V.W., 355n44
Kuron, L., 38n47, 427n33
Kurtessis, J.N., 159n77
Kurucz, E., 78n51
Kush, J., 320n74
Kuvaas, B., 160n83, 200n72
Kuzmits, F., 432n107c
Kwang, T., 114n20
Kwon, H.-R., 81n79m
Kwon, S., 431n93
Kwon, S.W., 389n33
Kwun, S. K., 237n63
L
Laasch, O., 79n59
Labianca, G., 201n89
Labroo, A.A., 162n112a
Lacerenza, C.N., 320n75, 320n78, 321n92
Lacerte, R., 532n92b
Lachman, M.E., 80n76
Lackman, C.L., 317n28
Lacoursière, R., 36n24
Lacy, A., 278n94e
Lagnado, D., 118n59
Lago, P. P., 323n110
Lakin, J.L., 353n18
Lam, C., 316n21
Lam, C.F., 200n74
Lamba, C., 81n79j
Lambert, P., 235n27
Lammers, J., 388n27, 388n28
Lancaster, C.M., 565n53
Lance, C.E., 42n91g
Landells, E.M., 391n69
Landers, R.N., 39n61, 40n64, 161n106, 199n57, 
323n110g
Landis, B., 75n7
Landis, R.S., 532n89
Landman, D., 195n1
Lane, H.W., 464n86
Lane, R. D., 116n36
Lane, R.D., 153n4, 154n18
Lane, V, 529n38
Kolstad, A., 79n64
Komaki, J., 198n49
Kompier, M.A.J., 161n107
König, A., 121n92i
Konovalov, A., 153n3
Konradt, U., 197n33, 497n68
Koo, B., 115n32
Koole, S.L., 162n112a
Kopp, B.M., 117n55
Köppen, E., 277n83
Koppes, L.L., 463n68
Korica, M., 462n53
Korman, A.K., 461n39
Korolevich, S., 465n89f
Korotov, K., 463n72, 464n74
Koskinen, I., 121n92i
Koslowski, S.W.J., 532n90
Koslowsky, M., 387n11
Kosowsky, H., 199n57
Kossek, E.E., 39n56, 39n62, 39n63, 161n106
Köster, K., 356n60
Kostopoulou, O., 273n29
Kostova, T., 564n33
Kotrba, L.M., 529n39
Kotsou, I., 157n53
Kotter, J.P., 461n34, 529n32, 529n39, 563n24, 
563n28, 564n31, 564n38, 564n43
Kotter,J.P., 564n42
Kotzian, P., 79n60
Kouchak, M., 317n25
Kouchaki, M., 233n6
Kouzes, J.M., 459n9, 460n21, 460n23, 529n31
Kozan, M.K., 430n74
Kozlowski, S.W.J., 41n79, 317n24, 323n110g
Kraaijeveld, M.I., 78n54
Krackhardt, D., 389n38
Krackhardt, D.M., 389n45
Kraiger, K., 40n71
Krajbich, I., 153n3
Kramer, M.W., 529n36
Kraus, L., 428n53
Kraus, L.A., 38n45
Krause, A., 321n84
Krausert, A., 36n16
Krauss, R.M., 353n9, 356n53
Krautman, A.C., 202n94
Kray, L., 119n74
Kray, L.J., 430n85, 432n106, 432n107
Kreindler, S.A., 275n49, 275n51
Kreiner, G.E., 39n58
Kreitner, R., 199n50
Krems, J.A., 197n30
Kret, M.E., 353n18
Krieger, H., 273n30
Krieger, L.S., 77n43, 533n92g
Krings, F., 74n1, 533n92f
Krisher, T., 529n40, 532n92a
Kristensen, T., 276n62
Kristof-Brown, A., 531n67
Kristof-Brown, A.L., 159n78, 531n65
Kriwaczek, P., 234n21
Krizan, Z., 76n23
Krockow, E.M., 119n75
Krohne, H.W., 272n18
Kroon, B., 200n76Name Index I-17
Lee, E.S., 115n32
Lee, F., 429n59
Lee, H., 354n26
Lee, J., 39n62, 358n79d
Lee, J.-Y., 496n52
Lee, K., 563n17
Lee, L.-E., 195n7, 196n11, 196n15
Lee, L.L., 352n1
Lee, L.W., 527n9
Lee, M., 80n79, 323n110k
Lee, M.-H., 497n72d
Lee, M.T., 196n20, 197n20
Lee, R., 389n33
Lee, Roselin, 120n89
Lee, S., 389n49, 389n50
Lee, S.-B., 497n72d
Lee, S. G., 162n112, 353n8
Lee, S.-Y., 157n59
Lee, S.G., 315n9, 319n60
Lee, S.W.S., 275n52
Lee, T.-H., 497n72d
Lee, W., 197n32
Lee, Y., 355n38
Lee, Y.-N., 317n33
Lee, Z., 355n38
Lee Cunningham, J., 115n22
Lee-Won, R.J., 390n60
Legere, J., 359m79l
Lehmann-Willenbrock, N., 319n52, 562n10
Lehmberg, D., 118n62
Lehr, T., 275n50
Lei, Z., 322n100, 426n24
Leibowitz, G., 43n91k
Leidner, D.E., 528n12
Leifer, L., 277n83
Leiner, B.M., 353n19
Leising, D., 119n82
Leiter, M.P., 160n91, 162n111, 428n45
Leker, J., 563n19
Lelchook, A. M., 42n89
Lemoine, G.J., 78n51
Lengel, R.H., 355n42
Lennard, A.C., 156n39
Lent, R.M., 566n62
Leonard, C., 200n65
Leonardelli, G.J., 115n29
Leon-Perez, J.M., 425n18
LePelley, D., 201n82
LePine, J.A., 41n80
Lepsinger, R., 461n34, 461n37
Lerner, J.S., 198n43, 274n40
Leroy, H., 78n51
Leroy, S., 198n38, 236n45, 239n91h
Leslie, L.M., 119n76
Letts, S., 530n43
Leung, K., 428n50
Levary, R., 496n59
Levenson, A., 42n91f
Levenson, R.W., 155n26
Levesque, L.C., 564n38
Levin, S., 533n92i
Levine, J.M., 322n104
Levy, L., 462n53, 463n73
Levy, O., 120n90
Levy, P.E., 115n23, 390n68
Lewellyn, K.B., 391n73f
Lewicki, R., 432n105
Lewicki, R.J., 320n66, 320n67, 429–430n71, 
429n70, 431n94
Lewin, K., 428n54, 562n2
Lewis, C.C., 390n67
Lewis, L., 163n112j
Lewis, L.K., 529n36, 564n33
Lewis, M., 153n4
Leyer, M., 237n69
Li, A., 39n54
Li, C.-Y., 356n59
Li, J., 155n33
Li, N., 37n36, 389n32
Li, W.-D., 463n71
Li, X., 428n52, 429n66
Liao, J., 41n79
Licht, A. N., 37n26
Liden, R.C., 316n19, 462n43, 530n58
Lieberman, A., 319n50
Lieberman, M.D., 153n5, 154n12, 155n29
Liebowitz, S.J., 317n28
Lieder, F., 272n9
Lieske, J., 80n77
Lighton, J., 496n55
Likert, R., 277n88
Liley, H.G., 320n78
Lilien, G.L., 564n45
Lilienfeld, S.O., 76n25, 76n26, 76n28
Lim, V.K.G., 233n8
Lim, W.M., 153n3
Lim, Y., 390n60
Limayem, M., 78n53
Lin, H., 153n3
Lin, W.-F., 428n50
Lin, X., 115n22
Lind, E.A., 119n74, 202n96
Lindell, C., 120n92d
Linder, C., 277n80
Lindholm, T., 273n28
Lindor, C., 433n107m
Lindsay, G., 429n62
Lindstrom, K., 496n42
Lindzey, G., 117n53
Lines, R., 275n54
Ling, R., 355n37
Linhares, A., 274n47
Links, A.R., 356n55
Linquist, S., 198n43
Linsey, J.S., 322n107
Linsley, P.M., 78n50
Lipman-Blumen, J., 461n28
Lipnack, J., 321n87
Lippincott, J.B., 160n87
Liska, L.Z., 462n49
Litcanu, M., 323n107
Litman, J., 196n14
Litterer, J.A., 424n3, 424n10, 429n70
Little, B.R., 74n2
Littler, C.R., 495n24
Litzellachner, L.F., 77n41
Liu, F., 390n55
Liu, M., 75n7
Liu, N.-C., 235n31
Liu, P., 237n57
Liu, Y., 156n46
Livio, M., 35n11
Lloyd, J.B., 75n15, 77n37
Lo, M.-T., 75n6
Loan-Clarke, J., 157n60
Locke, E., 564n41
Locke, E.A., 157n55, 199n64, 200n69, 200n70, 
201n82, 202n96, 316n15, 316n22, 459n5, 
460n12, 461n34, 463n70, 464n76
Locke, J.L., 38n45, 357n64
Löckenhoff, C.E., 75n7
Lockwood, K., 39n55
Lodewijkx, H.F.M., 321n96
Lodi-Smith, J., 114n8
Loewenstein, G., 35n11, 154n20, 196n14, 
274n40
Lofquist, E.A., 275n54
Lohmann, K., 354n25
Lohmann-Haislah, A., 161n107
London, M., 200n72, 200n79
Long, D., 390n61
Long, H., 35n1
Longmire, N.H., 121n92i
Lönnqvist, J., 121n92j
Lopes, C., 38n46
Lopez, S., 565n54
López-Cabrales, A., 234n19
Lord, R.G., 153n8, 459n2, 463n61, 463n63, 
464n83
Loris, G., 235n33
Lorsch, J.W., 391n73e, 391n73i, 429n68, 
496n62, 496n63, 533n92h, 563n12
Loschelder, D.D., 430n85
Loughnan, S., 275n55
Loughry, M.L., 318n37, 425n15
Louis, M.R., 529n36, 532n83
Louis, R.S., 197n20
Lount, R.B., 239n91j, 316n20
Louw, K.R., 530n56
Lovric, D., 80n79b
Lu, C.-M., 38n48
Luan, K., 425n11
Luanglath, N., 38n49
Lubinski, D., 77n39
Lublin, J.S., 272n14
Lucas, R.E., 75n7, 153n8
Lucas, W., 353n23
Luchak, A.A., 159n76
Lucia-Casademunt, A.M., 278n93
Lucifora, C., 235n32
Lucke, G., 238n87
Lucy, M., 235n30
Luft, J., 119n81, 429n63
Lührs, N., 278n94
Lukosch, S., 319n53
Lun, J., 80n75
Lun, V.M.C., 156n39
Lundy, V., 564n41
Luo, S., 114n17
Luse, A., 77n35
Luthans, F., 199n50, 199n53
Luyckx, K., 113n3, 115n31, 315n8
Lynch, M.A., 316n21
Lynn, R., 233n7, 233n8
Lyons, S., 38n47I-18 Name Index
Lyons ,S., 427n33
Lyubovnikova, J., 317n29
M
Ma, W.W.K., 354n33
Maak, T., 120n92
MacDougall, M.P., 239n89
Macey, W.H., 195n4, 530n54
Maciariello, J.A., 461n28
Macintosh, N.B., 237n57
MacKenzie, S.B., 41n84, 463n60
Mackenzie, S.B., 41n82, 41n83, 75n11
Mackey, A., 461n29
Mackey, J.D., 161n95
Macky, K.A., 432n107i
MacNab, B., 80n75
Macrae, C.N., 116n41, 116n48
Madon, S., 118n69
Maeda, Y., 78n55
Mael, F., 529n34
Magee, J.C., 198n39
Magee, K., 465n89h
Magner, U., 356n60
Magnolfi, J., 429n62
Magny, O., 162n112e
Magoun, F.A., 197n22
Magpili, N.C., 321n85
Magubane, K., 465n89c
Mahlendorf, M.D., 275n54
Mahometa, M.J., 355n41
Maidique, M.A., 114n13
Maier, G.W., 198n38
Maier, N.R.F., 40n65
Mainemelis, C., 277n79
Maio, G.R., 77n41, 77n43, 533n92g
Maitlis, S., 389n54
Major, D.A., 38n52
Mak, S., 323n110g
Makhijani, M.G., 465n89
Malekazedeh, A.R., 530n48
Malhotra, D., 319n65, 431n96
Malhotra, N., 42n91g
Malle, B.F., 117n57, 118n64
Malone, P.S., 118n63
Malone, W., 118n61
Malouff, J., 199n60
Manata, B., 318n48
Manegold, J.G., 38n43
Maner, J., 198n39
Manktelow, K., 271n4
Mann, T., 119n74
Mannion, R., 236n42
Mannix, E., 318n39, 528n17
Mannix, E.A., 390n56
Mano, R.S., 353n22
Mansfield, C.A., 42n91f
Manville, B., 460n12
Manz, C.C., 238n73, 238n74, 238n76, 238n80, 
239n91, 426n22
Mao, W., 273n35
March, J.G., 271n4, 272n9, 273n23, 427n35, 
429n69
Marchionne, S., 459n7, 495n21
Marcus, B., 41n84
Marcus, D.K., 76n31
Marcus, E.C., 425n11
Margo, J., 432n104
Margulies, N., 527n2, 529n41, 532–533n92e
Marinova, S.V., 75n11
Mark, P.Z., 116n43
Markey, R., 278n92
Markman, A., 322n106
Marks, M.A., 316n23, 317n24
Marks, M.L., 429n64, 530n45
Marling, S., 495n25
Marlow, S.L., 321n92
Marr, J.C., 119n82
Marshak, R.J., 566n66
Marshall, J., 160n92
Marsick, V.J., 565n50
Martela, F., 196n12
Martens, M.L., 319n62
Martin, G., 354n30
Martin, G.E., 426n28
Martin, J., 528n14, 528n15, 529n32, 530n52
Martin, L.J., 320n78
Martins, L.L., 321n91
Martocchio, J.J., 41n88
Marx, P., 80n79b
Mas, A., 316n14
Masada, G., 495n25
Masicampo, E.J., 196n17
Masino, G., 237n59
Maškarin Ribaric, H., 42n88
Maske, M.K., 119n71
Maslach, C., 160n91
Maslow, A. H., 197n21
Maslow, A.H., 197n23, 197n25, 197n28, 236n54, 
272n15
Maslowski, R., 529n32
Mason, J., 589n4
Massoud, M.F., 530n48
Mathieu, J., 319n63
Mathieu, J.E., 237n66, 237n67, 316n22, 316n23, 
317n24, 317n26, 317n27, 317n35, 319n52, 
320n76
Mathieu, P., 323n110e
Mathijssen, F., 323n110b
Matousek, M., 530n57, 533n92i
Matsumoto, D., 155n35
Mattelmäki, T., 121n92i
Mattioli, D., 272n14
Mattiolo, D., 272n14
Matyók, T., 201n85
Maurer, F., 37n32
Maurer, R., 563n12
Maurits, E.E.M., 321n84
Mauss, I.B., 155n35
Mautz, S., 120n92b
Maxouris, C., 41n86
Maxwell, J.C., 460n20
Mayer, D.M., 79n63
Mayer, M., 234n18
Mayfield, J., 239n91, 460n13
Mayfield, M., 239n91
Mayhew, M., 160n83
Mayhew, M.G., 115n33
Maynard, M.T., 237n66, 237n67
Mayo, M., 463n72, 464n74
Mayol, A., 274n38
Mazar, N., 78n45
Mazei, J., 432n106
Mazziotta, A., 120n84
McAllister, D.J., 319n65
Mcarthur, L.A., 117n58
McArthur, L.Z., 117n58
McBride, M., 233n7
McCabe, S., 121n92j
McCain, J.L., 80n79b
McCann, J., 36n20
McCann, L., 495n24
McCarter, M.W., 316n17
McCarthy, A., 357n63
McCarthy, I.P., 527n9
McCarthy, Ryan, 202n100f
McCarthy, S., 37n31
McChrystal, G.S., 497n64
McClarty, K.L., 115n24
McClelland, C.L., 237n60
McClelland, D., 198n35
McClelland, D.C., 198n35, 198n36, 198n40
McColl, R., 353n11
McComb, S., 318n38
McConnell, A.R., 113n4
McCord, P., 528n11
McCormick, M.T., 566n62
McCracken, D.M., 389n48
McCracken, H., 529n37, 533n92j
McCrae, R.R., 75n7, 75n9, 200n78
McCray, G.E., 198n45
McCullough, N., 315n2, 353n20, 358n79b
McCurry, J., 81n79m, 163n112j
McDaniel, M.A., 42n91g
McDaniel, S.H., 315n13, 316n23
McDermid, Charles, 197n22
McDermott, R., 315n10, 389n37
McDonald, P., 160n95
McDonald, S., 389n46
McDowell, M., 562n1
McElroy, J.C., 529n28, 530n59
McEwan, D., 320n75
McFeely, S., 39n58
McGee, S., 121n92g
McGrath, A., 155n29
McGrath, J.E., 316n24
McGrath, L., 322n97
McGraw, P., 320n80
McGregor, D., 277n88
McGregor, J., 234n24, 239n91c
McGue, M., 75n17
McHugh, M., 564n36
McInnis, K.J., 531n77
McIvor, J., 278n92
McKee, A., 156n46, 464n79
McKelvie, A., 274n39
McKendall, M., 566n67
McKenzie, J., 37n36
McKersie, R.B., 430n82
McLarnon, M.J.W., 426n23
McLaughlin, M., 162n112c
McMorrow, C., 459n4
McNabb, R., 234n15
Mcquade, K.E., 462n44
McShane, S.L., 157n59, 531n73Name Index I-19
McShane, Steven L., 198n43
McTague, E., 533n92h
Mead, M., 272n20
Meaney, M., 563n29
Meckler, M., 272n12
Medland, D., 465n89h
Medsker, G.J., 317n28
Meglino, B.M., 77n38, 527n3
Mehaffey-Kultgen, C., 234n17
Mehl, M.R., 119n82
Mehta, R., 277n85
Meier, L.L., 39n57, 42n91c, 424n6
Meijerink, J.G., 36n24
Meindl, J.R., 463n61, 463n64
Meindl, R., 463n64
Meinel, C., 277n83
Meinert, D., 565n56
Meister, A., 114n19, 114n21
Mejia, Z., 391n70, 391n73m
Melamed, D., 389n39
Melancon, S., 160n90
Melé, D., 78n48
Melhem, Y., 237n67
Melia, J.L., 387n15
Melis, A., 118n62
Mellor, L., 278n94b
Melloy, R.C., 155n34, 156n39
Melwani, S., 154n20, 276n67
Mendoza, A.M., 75n10, 75n17
Meng, J., 424n7
Meng, R., 235n31
Mennecke, B., 76n26, 391n72
Menon, S.T., 237n65
Merriman, K.K., 201n87
Mertens S., 199n57
Mesch, G.S., 353n22
Mesmer-Magnus, J., 155n25
Mesmer-Magnus, J.R., 319n59, 320n72
Mesquita, B., 80n75, 155n35
Messersmith, J.G., 41n87
Metcalf, H.C., 427n40
Methot, J.R., 315n10
Meuris, J., 233n4
Meyer, B., 316n20
Meyer, E., 528n11
Meyer, H.H., 195n2, 200n73, 200n77
Meyer, J.C., 528n21
Meyer, J.P., 158n72, 159n72, 159n73, 159n74, 
159n75, 159n76, 159n77, 430n78, 531n77
Meyer, M., 388n18
Meyer, R.M., 494n15
Meyerding, S.G.H., 239n91g
Meyers, R.A., 320n77
Meymandpour, R., 198n45
Meynhardt, T., 37n27
Miao, C., 157n50, 464n79
Miao, Q., 40n74
Michael, J., 77n35
Michel, J.S., 202n98
Michel, J.W., 155n22, 461n32
Michel, S., 37n36
Michela, J.L., 117n58
Michele Kacmar, K., 390n68
Michelotti, M., 353n11
Michinov, N., 322n107
Mickel, A.E., 233n6, 234n9
Micklethwait, J., 35n5
Mifflin, Houghton, 40n65
Mifune, N., 117n50, 427n39
Milani, L., 356n50
Miles, J.R., 465n89b
Miles, R.F., 496n54
Miles, R.H., 564n39
Milkman, K.L., 316n18
Milkovich, G.T., 233n2
Mill, J.S., 234n10
Millemann, M., 566n65
Miller, C.C., 427n38, 497n69
Miller, C.J., 320n79
Miller, D., 274n43, 322n99, 497n72, 566n69g
Miller, D.T., 118n61, 202n99
Miller, H.L., 459n1
Miller, J., 121n92f
Miller, J.A., 78n55
Mills, A.J., 197n27
Mills, C., 358n77
Mills, J., 319n56
Milne, A.B., 116n48
Miltenberger, R.G., 198n49, 199n51
Milton, John, 272n20
Milyavskaya, M., 199n63
Min, J., 121n92f
MinÃ , A., 114n17
Minbashian, A., 198n38
Miner, J.B., 201n81, 236n54, 464n75, 589n2, 
589n3
Mintzberg, H., 271n7, 272n11, 273n22, 387n2, 
390n68, 461n34, 494n3, 494n6, 495n26, 
495n30, 495n31, 496n62, 497n67
Mirabella, L., 43n91m
Miraglia, M., 42n89
Miron, D., 198n40
Miscenko, D., 463n72
Mischel, W., 74n5
Misuraca, R., 274n38
Mitcham, C., 78n54
Mitchell, T.R., 40n68, 233n6, 272n9, 462n46
Mithani, M.A., 276n63
Mitra, A., 234n18
Mitra, M., 496n48, 530n48
Mitsuhashi, H., 495n29
Mittal, B., 114n13
Miyahara, K., 40n72, 387n17, 460n26
Moberg, P.J., 427n43
Mobley, W.H., 120n90
Moeller, C., 428n46
Moensted, M.L., 234n22
Mohammed, S., 274n46
Mohannak, K., 38n49
Mohr, B.J., 565n55
Mohrman, A. M., Jr., 36n17
Mohrman, A.M., Jr., 321n82
Mohrman, S. A., 36n17
Mohrman, S.A., 321n82, 495n37
Moldaschl, M., 315n12
Molden, D.C., 275n60
Molendijk, M.L., 160n95
Moliner, C., 201n92
Molla, R., 358n79e
Monahan, C.A., 200n69
Monetta, D.J., 566n64
Monin, B., 196n10
Monsen, K., 320n81
Monteith, M.J., 117n55
Montoya, R.M., 319n54
Moon, C., 81n79m
Mooney, A.C., 274n43, 432n107g
Moore, C., 36n23, 40n73, 464n77
Moore, D.A., 114n16
Moore, D.D., 318n37
Moore, N., 565n59
Moore, T., 278n94e
Moores, T.T., 78n53
Moorhead, R., 236n50
Moors, A., 153n6, 154n17, 274n41
Moran, A., 238n80
Morand, D.A., 201n87
Morgan, G., 36n19, 496n58
Morgan, H.R., 465n89b
Morgan, K., 35n1
Morgeson, F.P., 80n79d, 317n37
Morin, A., 238n77
Morin, D., 156n40
Morin, L., 238n87
Morin, P.P., 564n41
Morosanu Firth, R., 322n105
Morrell, K., 42n91c, 157n60
Morrill, C., 528n17
Morris, A., 356n59
Morris, J., 495n24
Morris, J. A., 155n33
Morris, K., 497n72b
Morrison, E.W., 41n81, 158n61, 531n78
Morrison, K.R., 115n33
Morrison, R., 162n112c, 201n88
Morrison, R.L., 432n107i, 564n38
Morrow, P.C., 529n28, 530n59
Morse, J., 78n54
Mortensen, M., 315n4
Mortillaro, M., 157n52
Moseley, J.L., 35n8
Moser, K., 318n49
Moses, J. F., 118n66
Moshagen, M., 76n21, 391n72
Moskowitz, J.T., 161n101
Mossholder, K.W., 426n21
Mossman, J., 528n23
Moss-Racusin, C.A., 117n52
Motro, D., 426n27
Motyl, M., 80n79
Moultrie, J., 277n75
Mount, M.K., 75n10
Mouton, J.S., 424n4, 427n40, 429n64
Mowbray, P.K., 158n61
Mowday, R.T., 158n72
Moyle, C., 158n70
Moyle, P., 77n35
Mroz , J.E., 118n59
Mu, F., 159n77
Mueller, J.S., 276n67, 317n33, 317n34
Mueller-Hanson, R., 195n2
Muenjohn, N., 38n44
Muhammad, R.S., 528n10
Mujtaba, H., 235n29
Mulac, A., 357n65I-20 Name Index
Mullen, B., 119n72, 319n57, 322n102
Mullen, R., 153n1
Müller, R., 353n12
Mullins-Sweatt, S.N., 76n27
Mumford, M., 276n70
Mumford, M.D., 460n12, 460n25
Muñoz, J.C., 239n91d
Munuera-Alemán, J.-L., 79n62
Muraközy, B., 497n65
Murdock, C., 239n91g
Murdock, K., 75n8
Murdock, M.T., 495n19
Murnighan, J.K., 199n54, 318n40, 390n55
Murphy, C., 356n54, 460n14
Murphy, K., 80n79d
Murphy, K.M., 494n5
Murphy, K.R., 195n2, 200n73
Murphy, M., 566n69a
Murphy, S.E., 463n66
Murphy, W., 527n1
Murphy Jr., B., 528n11
Murray, P., 198n43
Muthusamy, S., 352n5
Muthusamy, S.K., 321n83
Muzyka, R., 496n47
Myers, C.G., 199n61
Myers, I.B., 77n33
Myers, M.S., 35n14
Myerson, J., 529n28
Mysirlaki, S., 464n79
Mýttus, R., 200n78
N
Nadisic, T., 79n63
Nadler, D.A., 198n42, 198n44, 494n6, 496n51, 
563n12, 565n52
Nadler, I., 320n78
Nafziger, J., 238n75
Nagai, Y., 322n107
Nahavandi, A., 530n49
Nam, Y., 156n37
Nanus, B., 459n9, 459n11, 460n18, 461n36
Nasurdin, A.A.M., 495n27
Nathan-Roberts, D., 77n36
NC, Charlotte, 432n107j
Neal, A., 41n79, 75n13, 199n62
Neale, M.A., 318n39, 319n55
Neby, S., 239n91d
Neck, C., 238n74
Neck, C.P., 238n73, 238n76, 238n80, 239n91
Neel, R., 197n30
Neesham, C., 35n8
Neider, L.L., 387n8, 461n32, 462n46, 462n54
Nelis, S., 155n30
Nelson, D.L., 532n85
Nelson, G.M., 35n9
Nelson, L.D., 273n31
Nelson, R., 530n48
Nelson, R.J., 160n84
Nelson, Todd D., 117n53
Nemiro, J., 321n93
Nesbit, P.L., 239n88, 239n91
Nesbit, R., 430n77
Neufeld, D.J., 354n23, 354n24
Neves, P., 160n86
Newcomer, E., 566n69e
Newheiser, A.-K., 116n48, 429n65
Newman, A., 40n74, 426n24
Newman, D. A., 158n67
Newman, D.A., 156n46, 157n54
Newman, P.C., 460n16
Newman, V., 563n20
Newness, K., 202n98
Ng, T.W.H., 115n28, 155n30
Ngo, H.Y., 566n66
Nguyen, B., 35n2
Nguyen, M., 158n69
Nguyen, P.L.L., 75n17
Nicholls, C.E., 464n86
Nicholls, S., 530n57, 533n92i
Nicholson, N., 358n79, 462n55
Nicholson-Crotty, S., 494n15
Nickerson, R.S., 116n39, 273n28, 276n63
Nicklin, J.M., 197n31, 197n33, 234n9
Nicoli, D., 462n53
Nicolli, F., 237n59
Niehaves, B., 355n36
Nielsen, K., 158n67
Nifadkar, S., 532n90, 532n91
Nijstad, B.A., 321n96, 322n103
Niler, A.A., 353n12
Niles, F.S., 79n65
Nir, D., 200n76
N.J. Hoboken, 460n21
Nketia, B.A., 277n88
Nobel, R., 496n61
Noble, A., 566n69f
Noe, R.A., 199n61
Nofsinger, J.R., 235n31
Nohria, N., 195n7, 196n11, 196n15, 196n17, 
196n18, 391n73e, 391n73i
Nolan, J.M., 318n46, 318n48
Nord, W.R., 461n31
Nordlo, B., 155n23
Norman, J., 201n84
Norman, M.V., 38n42
Normand, A., 356n49
Northcraft, G.B., 199n57, 201n80, 319n55, 
427n34
Nosek, B.A., 119n79, 119n80
Nougaim, K.E., 197n24
Novick, S., 497n72c
Nowak, K.L., 355n40
Nuch, H., 202n100g
Nugent, P.S., 430n76
Nukman, Y., 494n12
Nunley, R.M., 235n26
Nur, Y.A., 460n25
Nutt, P.C., 154n21, 272n16, 272n17, 274n39, 
275n49
Nwafor, O., 199n56
Nyberg, A.J., 235n35, 235n39, 322n98
Nye, J.L., 463n63
Nygaard, A., 79n62
O
Oakes, E., 276n64
Obeid, M., 162n112b
Obel, B., 36n21, 495n31, 495n32, 495n38
O’Boyle, E., 76n22, 391n72
Oc, B., 158n61, 390n66
O’Connell, D., 459n11
O’Connell, R.G., 271n4
O’Connell, V., 236n44
O’Connor, E.J., 40n76
O’Connor, J.M., 37n39, 41n76
O’Connor, J.R., 357n75
O’Connor, P., 74n3, 76n18
Oddi, K., 75n8
O’Donnell, C., 238n81
O’Donoghue, T., 154n20, 274n40
Oeldorf-Hirsch, A., 355n40
Oels, A., 566n63
Oerlemans, L.A.G., 426n22
Offerman, L.R., 315n6
Offermann, L.R., 463n61
Ogihara, Y., 79n67
Ogilvie, J., 238n87
Ogunlami, Y., 239n91f
Oh, C.S., 355n35
Oh, I.-S., 75n11
Oh, J.K., 202n98
O’Hara, L.A., 276n66
O’Higgins, E., 464n79
Ohland, M.W., 318n37
Ohnsman, A., 80n79b
Oishi, S., 80n79, 158n67, 197n29
O’Keefe, D.J., 390n57, 390n58
O’Keefe, S.M., 358n79a
Oldham, G., 237n64
Oldham, G.R., 236n51, 236n56, 276n70, 276n71, 
276n73, 277n76
Ole, P.K., 238n77
Olekalns, M., 431n94, 431n99, 431n101
Oliver, J.J., 275n50
Ollier-Malaterre, A., 39n55, 39n57
Olsen, J.P., 273n23
Olson, J. M., 153n9
Olson, J.M., 115n29, 118n62, 533n92g
Olson, K.M., 117n57
Olsson, L.-E., 528n15
O’Neil, J., 390n64
O’Neill, B., 430n80
O’Neill, G., 531n73
O’Neill, O.A., 528n14
O’Neill, T., 317n35
O’Neill, T.A., 39n64, 321n90, 425n11, 425n14, 
426n23, 432n107d
Ones, D.S., 80n79h
Ong, J., 42n91h
Ong, Y., 202n100b
Oore, D.G., 428n45
Opp, K.D., 318n47
Ordóñez, L.D., 200n68, 201n82
Oreg, S., 530n54, 530n56
Orehek, E., 273n23
O’Reilly, C.A., 76n31, 80n79b, 275n52
O’Reilly, C.A., III, 529n38, 533n92k
O’Reilly, J., 387n14
Oremus, W., 494n1
Orengo, V., 316n21
Organ, D.W., 41n80, 590n10, 590n11
Origo, F., 235n32Name Index I-21
Ormiston, M., 115n29
Orr, K., 42n91e
Ortbach, K., 355n36
Ortiz de Guinea, A., 321n90
Osborn, A.F., 322n101
Osborn, R.N., 462n45
Osika, W., 160n88
Osman, M.R., 494n12
Ossip, D., 460n15, 460n19
Osterman, P., 237n63
Ostroff, C., 528n10, 532n90
Oswick, C., 37n25, 37n38
Oswick, R., 37n25
Otley, D., 236n42, 239n91d
Otondo, R.F., 355n45
O’Toole, J., 352n4, 356n57
Ott, J.S., 528n18
Ötting, S.K., 198n38
Otto, K., 80n79e
Ouchi, W., 357n72
Ovsey, D., 459n4
Owler, K., 162n112c
Oxenbridge, S., 234n22
Oxtoby, K., 320n81
Oyserman, D., 79n64, 79n66, 80n74
Ozer, M., 41n82
Ozkum, S.B., 74n5
P
Pachner, J., 530n55
Padeanu, A., 496n53
Padgett, L.S., 273n23
Paget, S., 497n72e
Palacios- Marqués, D., 159n75
Panagopoulos, N.G., 238n87
Panait, M., 496n53
Panchak, P., 321n83
Panteli, N., 354n24
Paolini, S., 120n85
Papeo, L., 116n42
Papper, E.M., 317n28
Paquin, A.R., 461n27
Paraskeva, F., 464n79
Parfyonova, N.M., 159n74
Parisot, F., 323n110b
Park, G., 238n72
Park, H.M., 159n72
Park, Menlo, 497n72b
Park, N., 197n30
Park, T.-Y., 41n87
Park, T.Y., 115n32
Park, W.-W., 322n99
Park, Y., 237n70
Parke, M., 157n50
Parker, L.R., 117n55
Parker, M., 117n50, 529n30
Parker, S.K., 41n79
Parkers, C.P., 235n30
Parks, L., 77n40, 197n25
Parks-Leduc, L., 77n40, 197n25
Parlamis, J., 354n25
Parmar, B.L., 36n25
Parmer, L., 427n43
Paroush, J., 278n91
Parrett, E., 275n50
Parry, E., 354n30
Parry, R., 533n92i
Pascale, R., 566n65
Pascale, R.T., 315n12, 566n65
Pash, C., 162n112b
Paswan, A.K., 387n5
Patel, A., 39n58
Patel, N., 497n72f
Patel, P.C., 38n50, 318n40
Paterson, J., 235n36
Pathak, R.D., 461n27
Pathak, S., 277n82
Patient, D.L., 79n63
Patrick, C.J., 76n24
Patrick, V.M., 199n56
Patterson, M., 463n72
Paul, G.D., 201n85
Paulhus, D.L., 76n20, 76n21
Paulus, P.B., 322n103, 322n104, 322n106, 
323n108
Paunonen, S.V., 76n19
Paustian-Underdahl, S., 464n88
Pawar, B.S., 461n33
Pawar, P., 198n45
Pazos, P., 321n85
Peach, E.B., 234n21
Pearce, C.L., 459n5, 461n28, 462n52
Pearce, D.S., 566n62
Pearce, J.L., 390n55
Pearson, J., 238n79
Peck, M., 235n30
Pedersen, L.J.T., 78n54
Pederson J.S., 528n18
Pedwell, T., 203n100h
Peeters, M.A.G., 75n12
Peiró, J., 158n67
Peiro, J.M., 387n15
Pekaar, K.A., 156n46, 157n49
Pelta, R., 391n73m
Pelton, L.E., 390n63, 390n64
Peñarroja, V., 316n21
Pendleton, A., 235n33
Peng, A. C-Y., 428n52
Peng, A.C., 113n2, 464n77
Penke, L., 74n6
Penman, M., 35n1
Penney, L.M., 75n10
Penney’s Ron Johnson, J.C., 272n14
Pennington, C.R., 117n51
Pentareddy, S., 237n68
Perfecto, H., 273n31
Perfors, A., 79n66
Perkel, C., 388n20
Perkins, T., 533n92k
Perrewé, P.L., 391n69
Perrow, C., 237n57, 497n69
Perry, J.L., 38n49
Perry, S.J., 40n64
Perski, A., 160n88
Persson, S., 532n79
Pervin, L.A., 75n9
Pesämaa, O., 276n72
Pescuric, A., 199n61
Pessoa, L., 153n2
Petelczyc, C.A., 154n22, 276n79
Peters, L.H., 40n76
Peters, R.S., 195n5
Peters, T., 357n72, 390n62
Peters, T.J., 497n72h, 532–533n92e
Petersen, L.E., 463n64
Petersen, R., 528n17
Peterson, C., 197n30
Peterson, M.F., 529n32
Peterson, R., 316n16
Peterson, S.J., 460n14, 462n41
Petrou, P., 425n11
Pettigrew, A.M., 387n3, 387n13
Pettigrew, T.F., 120n84
Petty, R., 390n58
Petty, R.E., 117n55, 390n60
Peus, C., 114n13, 119n78
Pfaff, D.W., 195n6
Pfeffer, J., 37n31, 37n35, 160n89, 195n5, 275n51, 
387n2, 387n5, 388n20, 388n21, 391n73c, 
463n65
Pham, M.T., 154n19, 274n44
Philbey, C., 388n18
Phillips, J.M., 532n88
Phillips, L.T., 116n41
Phipps, K.A., 427n43
Picard, K., 156n40
Picchi, A., 233n1
Piccolo, R.F., 461n39
Pichai, S., 155n24
Pickett, C.L., 115n29
Picone, P.M., 114n17
Pierce, J.L., 115n24, 278n92, 564n33
Pietroni, D., 431n101
Piff, P.K., 121n92i
Pike, A., 494n11
Pilar Alguacil, M., 159n75
Pilavin, J.A., 77n38, 527n3
Pillemer, J., 353n16
Pillutla, A., 460n11
Pilotti, M.A.E., 118n60
Pindek, S., 160n94
Pinder, C.C., 40n70, 195n3, 200n70
Pinkley, R.L., 431n87
Pinsonneault, A., 323n110
Piper, W., 319n60
Pirson, M., 196n7, 196n11, 319n65
Pitt, D.C., 462n47
Pittenger, D., 77n34
Pizarro, D.A., 196n10
Plank, R.E., 40n68
Platow, M.J., 460n25
Plattner, H., 277n83
Plaut, V.C., 80n76
Pless, N.M., 120n92
Plester, B., 162n112c
Ployhart, R.E., 37n37, 40n73
Pluess, M., 74n4
Pochic, S., 234n14
Podsakoff, N., 41n81
Podsakoff, N.P., 41n80, 41n82, 75n11
Podsakoff, P.M., 41n82, 41n83, 41n84, 75n11, 
387n6, 463n60
Pohling, R., 42n91
Poitras, J., 428n56I-22 Name Index
Polanyi, M.F.D., 566n63
Polderman, T.J.C., 74n6
Pollock, J., 153n3
Pollock, T.G., 463n66
Polson, Mark, 278n94h
Pondy, L., 426n25
Pondy, L.R., 528n21
Pontefract, D., 278n94g
Poole, D., 198n43
Poole, M.S., 426n27
Pope, Alexander, 272n20
Pope, T.J., 388n19
Poppa, T., 196n16, 274n40, 274n41
Porath, C., 237n69
Porras, J.I., 529n31
Porter, L.W., 35n7, 40n67, 158n72, 198n42, 
198n44, 198n49, 390n55, 391n71, 532n80, 
532n82
Porter, M.E., 391n73e, 391n73i
Portes, A., 389n33
Posen, H.E., 271n8, 272n11
Posner, B.Z., 119n77, 459n9, 460n21, 460n23, 
529n31
Postma, N., 391n69
Postmes, T., 116n49
Poteet, M.L., 387n17
Potipiroon, W., 463n59
Potoènik, K., 276n71
Powell, B., 528n12
Powell, G.N., 464n87
Powell, S., 277n76
Power, M., 154n18
Pownall, I., 271n3
Poynter, K., 497n72h
Prada, M., 358n79g
Pratt, M.G., 274n47, 528n19
Preiss, R.W., 428n53
Premack, R., 81n79m
Pressey, D., 391n73j
Preston, R., 563n18
Preszler, J., 76n31
Priem, R. L., 35n12
Prinz, A., 274n42
Pritchard, R.D., 40n68
Prochazkova, E., 353n18
Pronin, E., 426n28
Proudfoot, D., 432n107f
Przepiorka, W., 318n46
Puck, J., 356n60
Pugh, D.S., 497n67
Pulakos, E.D., 195n2
Pullins, E. B., 161n98
Pung, C., 563n29, 567n69h
Purcell, J., 527n1
Purl, J.D., 115n25
Purvis, R.L., 198n45
Putnam, L.L., 201n85
Pyka, S.S., 354n25
Q
Qian, S., 157n50, 464n79
Qin, J., 38n44
Qiu, J.X.J., 496n48
Quan, J., 235n31
Quarto, T., 156n47
Quick, J.C., 160n84, 160n89, 160n91
Quinn, J.M., 40n72
Quinn, K.A., 116n41
Quinn, R.E., 237n65, 459n11, 565n52, 565n54
Quinn, R.W., 355n43
Quintas, C.A., 563n22
R
Rabung, S., 356n50
Rackham, N., 431n89, 431n91
Racy, F., 238n77
Raelin, J.A., 459n5, 459n8, 462n53
Rafaeli, A., 528n19
Rafferty, A.E., 563n29, 564n35
Ragins, B.R., 389n46
Ragu-Nathan, T. S., 161n98
Rahim, M.A., 424n2, 424n3, 427n34
Rahnev, D., 356n52
Rai, A., 275n56
Raiborn, C.A., 530n48
Rain, J.S., 119n73
Rains, S.A., 353n10, 390n59
Raisinghani, D., 271n7, 272n11, 273n22
Ramachandran, S., 528n11
Ramarajan, L., 115n34
Ramstad, E., 81n79m
Randall, K., 77n34
Randel, A.E., 38n42
Randolph, W.A., 237n65, 496n46
Rangus, K., 390n56
Ranosa, R., 531n69
Ransom, T.G., 40n72
Ranson, S., 494n2
Rao, H., 528n17
Rapp, T.L., 322n99
Raschke, R.L., 196n20, 197n20
Rast, D.E., 429n57
Ratanjee, V., 497n72h
Rattan, A., 529n37
Rauth, I., 277n84
Rauthmann, J.F., 40n75
Raven, B., 387n2, 387n6
Raven, B.H., 387n10, 387n12
Ravlin, E.C., 77n38, 316n23, 527n3
Raymond, L., 36n24
Raynor, M.E., 37n39
Raz, T., 433n107n
R.C. Wood, 196n20
Read, S., 273n29
Ready, D.A., 464n82
Real, J.C., 276n72, 529n41
Reason, P., 565n49, 565n51
Rebele, R., 315n2
Reeburgh, P., 234n22
Reed II, A., 78n56
Reeskens, T., 201n87
Reeve, J., 197n32
Reicher, S.D., 388n18
Reichheld, F.F., 239n91c
Reid, D.A., 40n68
Reid, E., 161n98
Reid, R., 432n107i
Reider, M.H., 317n37
Reif, W.E., 237n59
Reiley, D.H., 239n91d
Reilly, M.D., 77n35
Reilly, R.R., 200n79
Reimann, M., 196n16
Reinsch, N.L., 355n46
Reinsch, N.L., Jr., 355n46
Reisenzein, R., 153n5
Reiss, R., 460n15
Rempel, M., 319n58
Rench, T.A., 41n79
Renkema, M., 321n85
Renn, R.W., 239n90
Renner, F., 238n81
Reno, K.M., 322n104
Renshon, J., 275n57
Rentfrow, P.J., 80n75, 80n76, 80n77
Rentsch, J.R., 160n82, 459n5
Repenning, N.P., 272n13
Résibois, M., 153n4
Resick, C.J., 531n64
Restubog, S.L.D., 564n35
Reyes, D.L., 315n13, 316n23
Reyna, V.F., 273n25
Reynolds, S.J., 78n55
Rezaeinia, A., 271n6
Riccomini, B., 357n74
Rice, D., 529n30
Rice, R.E., 355n35, 355n44
Richardson, C., 277n85
Richardson, J., 121n92e
Richardson, K., 76n31
Richie, M., 273n30
Richter, A., 237n69
Richter, E., 162n112e
Rico, R., 317n30, 320n73, 352n2
Ridderstråle, J., 496n61
Ridge, J.W., 391n73g
Ridinger, G., 233n7
Riekki, T.J.J., 196n12
Rietzschel, E.F., 40n64
Rigby, D., 566n69f
Riggio, R.E., 459n9, 460n21, 529n39
Riketta, M., 159n75
Rindova, V.P., 463n66
Rinella, M.J., 115n31
Rink, F., 318n49
Riordan, M.A., 354n25, 358n79h
Rips, L.J., 116n45
Risavy, S.D., 80n79f
Risberg, A., 427n37
Rispens, S., 424n5
Ritchey, S., 389n47
Ritchey, T., 277n80
Ritov, I., 273n31
Rivera, M.T., 319n54, 389n36
Rivers, A.M., 117n56
R.J. Lewicki, 430n74
Roberson, Q., 38n49
Robert, C., 155n25
Robert, L.P., 320n70, 356n49
Roberto, K.J., 529n36
Roberto, M.A., 272n12, 564n38
Roberts, B. W., 74n4
Roberts, B.W., 114n8Name Index I-23
Roberts, L.M., 114n12
Roberts, S.C., 355n48
Robey. D., 275n60
Robey, D., 321n93, 321n94
Robinson, A., 235n33
Robinson, A.G., 277n89
Robinson, K.L., 357n76
Robinson, M.D., 274n42
Robinson, S.L., 387n14, 531n77, 531n78
Robnett, R.D., 357n65
Roccas, S., 77n38, 527n3
Rockmann, K.W., 274n47
Rockoff, J.E., 42n88
Rockwood, K., 74n1
Rodell, J.B., 201n86
Roderick, L., 465n89h
Rodriguez, H., 355n43
Roe, R. A., 40n71
Roese, N.J., 118n62
Roethlisberger, F.J., 36n17
Roethlisberger, Fritz, 36n17
Roets, A., 116n43
Rogelberg, S.G., 238n78
Rogers, E.M., 565n48
Rogers, H., 355n38
Rogers, K.H., 80n76
Rogers, K.M., 115n30
Roghanizad, M.M., 356n52
Rogoza, R., 76n20
Roh, H., 318n41
Rokeach, M., 273n27
Roldán, J.L., 276n72, 529n41
Roman, M., 318n42
Román, S., 79n62
Romm, T., 390n68
Romo, L., 161n103
Ronay, R., 275n56
Roose, K.M., 200n67
Roper, I., 388n22
Rosado-Solomon, E.H., 315n10
Rose Markus, H., 80n76
Rosen, C.C., 115n23, 160n84, 160n89, 160n93, 
390n68, 391n69
Rosen, H., 430n82
Rosenband, L.N., 239n91e
Rosenbaum, E., 562n1
Rosenberg, E., 35n1, 353n15
Rosenberg, J., 497n72c, 532n87
Rosenfeld, J., 234n13, 235n36
Rosenstein, J., 35n12
Rosenthal, P., 278n94b
Rosenzweig, J.E., 36n19
Rosnow, R.L., 358n78
Ross, J., 275n53
Ross, J.W., 278n94g
Ross, M., 118n61
Ross, M.F., 237n58
Ross, W.H., 430n79, 431n101
Rossier, J., 239n91i
Rossmo, D. K., 121n92d
Rossmo, D.K., 116n40
Rossouw, J., 465n89c
Roth, B., 119n72
Roth, P. L., 158n67
Roth, P.L., 157n54
Rothbard, N.P., 39n57
Rothermund, K., 272n18
Rothman, N.B., 154n20
Rothwell, W.J., 565n57, 565n58
Rotter, J.B., 115n27
Rotundo, M., 41n84
Roulin, N., 74n1, 533n92f
Rounds, J., 41n78, 197n26, 239n91g
Rousos, R., 357n74
Rousseau, D.M., 37n31, 37n33, 37n35, 37n41, 
159n79, 233n2, 319n64, 531n78, 563n23, 
564n40, 564n44
Rousseau, V., 317n33, 317n37, 320n72
Rowland, W., 359n79l
Rowney, J., 79n70
Rozario, K., 496n43
Rubenstein, A.L., 158n60
Rubery, J., 234n14
Rubie- Davies, C.M., 118n68
Rubin, B.A., 357n64
Rubin, J.Z., 431n103
Rubin, M., 427n39
Rubin, R.S., 35n13, 40n74, 41n81
Rubino, C., 40n64
Rubinstein, H., 429n59
Rubinstein, R.S., 116n47
Ruble, T., 427n40
Rublin, L.R., 278n94h
Ruedin, D., 117n54
Ruedy, N., 78n57
Ruhle, S.A., 42n90
Rühli, E., 36n25
Ruiz, P., 79n60, 79n62
Rule, N.O., 388n17, 460n26
Runco, M.A., 276n61, 276n70
Rünger, D., 40n72
Ruona, W.E.A., 562n7
Rupp, D.E., 201n85, 201n88
Rus, D., 198n39
Rusch, H., 429n61
Russ, T.L., 564n33
Russ-Eft, D.F., 199n61
Russell, B., 154n16
Russell, J., 565n59
Russell, J.A., 153n8
Russo, J.E., 273n25
Ryan, A.M., 75n12
Ryan, J., 390n67
Ryan, M.R., 197n32
Ryan, R.M., 197n32, 236n53
Rylander, P., 387n7
Rynes, S.L., 35n10, 42n91e
Ryu, J.-S., 235n32
S
S. Oreg, 563n13
Saavedra, R., 237n63
Sabbagh, C., 202n99
Sabouripour, F., 161n103
Sacchi, S., 273n26
Sacco, D.F., 117n49
Sackett, P., 41n84
Sackett, P.R., 75n10
Sacks, D., 566n69e
Sadler-Smith, E., 77n36, 274n45
Safley, T.M., 239n91e
Sagiv, L., 37n26, 77n38, 77n42, 77n43, 78n44, 
117n50, 527n3, 533n92g
Sahadi, S., 465n89f
Sajjadiani, S., 234n25
Saks, A.M., 36n23, 40n73, 195n4, 352n7, 
531n72, 531n74
Saks,A.M., 532n81
Salacuse, J.W., 431n103
Salancik, G.R., 155n29, 195n5, 
387n5, 388n21
Salas, E., 315n13, 316n23, 317n25, 317n36, 
318n37, 321n92, 322n102
Saleh, D., 161n103
Salloch, S., 388n18
Salo, I., 273n28
Salovey, P., 157n49
Saltzman, M.K., 43n91k, 323n110j
Samba, C., 427n38
Samermit, P., 354n32
Samuelson, W., 432n107f, 563n17
Sanchez, D., 38n42
Sanchez, J. I., 162n112
Sanchez-Burks, J., 429n59
Sánchez-Manzanares, M., 320n73
Sánchez-Rodríguez, Á., 81n79m
Sandberg, P.K., 234n15
Sandelands, L.E., 497n65
Sanderson, P.M., 320n78
Sander-Staudt, M., 78n50, 78n51
Santamaria, T., 77n36
Santana, A., 37n26
Santora, J.C., 462n43
Santos, T., 495n27
Sanzenbacher, B., 566n69a
Sapegina, A., 196n19, 236n42
Sapienza, P., 528n13
Sapuan, S.M., 494n12
Sarala, R.M., 427n31
Sarangee, K.R., 275n60
Sardar-Drenda, N., 563n24
Sarnak, D.O., 320n81
Sarros, J.C., 460n14, 462n43
Sassenberg, K., 356n50
Sasser, W.E., 158n70
Satpute, A.B., 153n4
Saunders, C.S., 387n16
Saunders, D., 429n70, 432n105
Saunders, D.R., 77n34
Saunders, T.S., 116n36, 274n41
Savic, I., 160n88
Savic, M., 161n105
Savickas, M.L., 239n91g
Savoie, A., 317n37
Sawhney, V., 81n79j
Sawyer, K., 322n103
Sayre, G.M., 155n32
Scarantino, A., 153n4
Scarbrough, H., 494n8
Scerri, A., 565n59
Scerri, C., 565n59
Schaafsma, J., 156n37
Schaerer, M., 430n85
Scharfstein, D.S., 37n34I-24 Name Index
Schat, A., 390n68
Schaubroeck, J., 113n2, 155n31
Schaubroeck, J.M., 321n88
Scheffer, D., 195n6, 197n20
Scheibehenne, B., 274n38
Scheier, M.F., 74n2
Schein, E. H., 530n45
Schein, E.H., 239n91i, 429n63, 527n2, 
527n6, 528n19, 530n54
Schepers, J., 322n98
Schepker, D.J., 388n26
Schepman, S., 198n49
Scherer, A.M., 116n39, 273n28
Scherer, K.R., 153n6
Scherer, K.T., 76n30
Schermuly, C.C., 316n20, 317n26
Schiffer, Z., 121n92f
Schilke, O., 320n70
Schiller, B., 119n79
Schilling, M.A., 496n57
Schilpzand, M.C., 321n91
Schinoff, B.S., 115n30
Schippers, M.C., 316n20
Schlaegel, C., 427n43, 428n51
Schlaerth, A., 426n22
Schlegel, K., 157n52
Schleicher, D.J., 158n67, 195n2
Schlender, B., 42n91a
Schlesinger, L.A., 158n70, 563n28
Schlossberg, M., 272n14
Schmader, T., 117n51
Schmeichel, B.J., 75n8
Schmidt, A.M., 195n3
Schmidt, B., 160n90
Schmidt, D.B., 77n39
Schmidt, E., 497n72c
Schmidt, J., 161n102
Schmidt, N., 195n3
Schmidt, S.M., 389n50, 426n29
Schmidtke, J.M., 320n72
Schminke, M., 202n100
Schmitt, M., 202n99
Schmitt, N., 80n79d
Schmitt, N.W., 317n24
Schmocker, D., 78n54
Schmutz, J., 320n73
Schnake, M.E., 199n60
Schneider, B., 35n7, 195n4, 529n32, 
530n54, 530n56, 531n64
Schneider, D., 80n79g
Schneider, D.J., 116n46
Schneider, I.K., 154n20
Schneider, J., 271n1
Schneider, S.C., 427n37
Schneider, T.R., 161n102
Schoderbek, P.P., 237n59
Schoeller, J., 563n26
Schölmerich, F., 317n26
Scholz, C., 390n58
Schorg, C.A., 530n48
Schott, C., 532n84
Schouten, M.E., 315n5
Schraeder, M., 201n88
Schreier, J., 496n47
Schreisheim, C., 387n6
Schreisheim, C.A., 387n8
Schriesheim, C.A., 199n52, 461n32, 461n38, 
462n46, 462n54, 462n57
Schröder, M., 38n47
Schroeder, D.M., 277n89
Schroeder, J., 198n34
Schultheiss, O.C., 198n35
Schultz, L. H., 200n78
Schulz-Knappe, C., 352n5
Schumann, P.L., 78n49
Schurch, A., 321n81
Schuster, J.R., 234n16, 234n20
Schwab, D. P., 158n66
Schwantes, M., 465n89e
Schwartz, B., 273n34
Schwartz, J.S., 113n3, 115n31, 315n8
Schwartz, R., 120n87
Schwartz, S.A., 81n79i
Schwartz, S.H., 77n41, 77n42, 77n43, 196n10
Schwartz, S.J., 113n3, 315n8
Schwarz, N., 77n42, 77n43, 154n19, 154n20, 
274n44, 275n52
Schwarzwald, J., 387n11
Schweitzer, L., 321n88
Schweitzer, M., 78n57
Schweizer, T.S., 276n70
Schyns, B., 463n64
Scior, K., 119n79
Scobie, C., 202n100f
Scopelliti, I., 118n64
Scott, B. A., 162n112, 353n8
Scott, B.A., 156n39
Scott, C.R., 529n36
Scott, D., 239n89
Scott-Findlay, S., 528n12
Seabright, M.A., 202n100
Searle, R., 319n64
Sebenius, J.K., 431n86
Seddigh, A., 357n69, 357n70
Sedikides, C., 76n32, 113n2, 114n15, 
115n31, 115n34, 275n55
Seery, M.D., 432n107e
Segal, S., 35n8
Seibold, D.R., 320n77
Seidenstricker, S., 277n80
Seifert, C.F., 389n53
Seijts, G., 199n64
Seiter, J.S., 390n57
Seligman, M.E.P., 565n54
Selye, H., 160n87
Semmer, N.K., 155n31
Sendjaya, S., 462n43
Senge, P.M., 36n19
Senior, B., 319n51, 319n52
Seo, E., 38n50
Seo, M.-G., 157n50, 429n58
Seok, D.H., 316n14
Sessions, H., 238n75
Shabana, K.M., 37n28
Shackelford, T.K., 113n2, 114n18
Shahin, A.I., 387n9
Shalley, C., 277n79
Shalley, C.E., 276n70, 276n71, 277n76
Shamir, B., 461n27
Shammas, J., 432n107a
Shamoa-Nir, L., 429n63
Shani, A.B., 566n64
Shani/Rami, A.B., 565n49
Shani-Sherman, T., 120n84
Shannon, C.E., 353n9
Shapiro, D.L., 429n66, 430n72
Shapiro, J., 465n89c
Sharbrough, W.C., 460n13
Sharif, M.A., 239n91d
Sharma, G., 37n36
Sharma, P.N., 237n69
Sharma, R.R., 563n14
Sharma, S.N., 156n45
Sharples, S., 35n1, 275n48
Shavitt, S., 154n13, 390n58
Shaw, J., 41n87
Shaw, J.D., 234n9, 235n35
Shaw, M.E., 315n4
Shea, C.M., 459n6
Shea, G., 564n38
Sheep, M.L., 39n58
Sheeran, P., 154n14, 154n15
Sheldon, K.M., 77n43, 197n32, 236n53, 
533n92g
Sheldon, S., 116n37
Shemla, M., 318n40
Shen, W., 276n65
Shepard, H.A., 318n42, 424n4, 427n40
Shepherd, S.M., 119n75
Sheppard, B.H., 429n71, 430n74
Sheppard, H.L., 424n4
Shepperd, J., 118n61
Shepperd, J.A., 113n4, 114n9
Sher, S., 196n16
Sherberg, E., 39n58, 43n91j
Sheremeta, R.M., 316n17
Sherf, E., 157n50
Sherf, E.N., 430n72
Sherif, M., 428n55
Sherman, J.W., 116n48
Sherman, R.A., 40n75
Sherman, R.O., 494n18
Sherman, W.S., 529n36
Sherwood, J.J., 320n79
Shi, J., 156n40
Shibly, S.A., 532n89
Shih, S.-I., 274n46
Shin, J., 81n79m, 201n89
Shin, S.Y., 162n112, 353n8
Shin, S.Y., 315n9, 319n60
Shinnar, A., 236n44
Shively, H., 43n91m
Shiverdecker, L.K., 76n20
Shockley, K.M., 39n61, 358n79d
Shore, L.M., 38n42, 318n39
Shoss, M.K., 41n79
Shuffler, M.L., 318n41
Shull, F.A., Jr., 271n2
Shultz, J., 161n102
Shweiki, E., 198n45
Siegel, P.H., 201n88
Siegelman, P., 432n107
Siehl, C., 528n15
Sijbrandij, S., 202n100a
Silberling, A., 494n1Name Index I-25
Silver, H., 528n16
Silverzweig, S., 529n41, 532–533n92e
Simmons, B.L., 321n83
Simms, L.J., 76n19
Simon, C., 81n79m
Simon, D., 273n29
Simon, H.A., 271n4, 271n7, 272n9, 
272n21, 273n24, 273n34, 274n47, 
427n35, 429n69
Simon, M., 238n70
Simonet, D.V., 461n34
Simonetti, B., 35n15
Simonoff, G., 239n91a
Simonovits, G., 42n91g
Simons, D.J., 116n38
Simons, T., 320n68, 460n18
Simonson, I., 275n60
Simpson, B., 389n39
Sinclair, A., 114n19, 528n17
Sinclair, S.A., 120n88
Sine, W.D., 495n29
Singer, J.A., 79n67
Singer, M., 496n55
Singh, H., 562n1
Singh, S., 80n79b
Sink, D.S., 566n64
Sinkula, J.M., 276n72, 529n41
Sipe, L.J., 530n48
Sirgy, M.J., 38n52, 161n106
Siriwardane, V., 323n110k
Sisco, R., 527n1
Sison, A.J.G., 78n50
Sitbon, B., 433n107k
Sitkin, S.B., 461n31
Siu, O.L., 162n111
Sivasubramaniam, N., 317n28
Sivunen, A., 321n91
Sjöberg, L., 274n46
Skagen, R. K., 42n90
Skilton, P.F., 277n81
Skinner, B.F., 198n49, 199n51
Skitka, L.J., 118n64
Skoglund, T.H., 80n79c
Skorinko, J.L., 120n88
Skowronski, J.J., 113n2
Sleesman, D. J., 275n58
Sleesman, D.J., 275n53
Sloan, P., 37n26
Slocum, J., 199n64
Slocum, J.W., Jr., 37n40
Slocum Jr., J.W., 530n61
Sloman, S.A., 118n59
Slotter, E.B., 113n4
Sluss, D.M., 531n74
Smelser, N., 356n53
Smet, K., 358n78
Smith, A., 236n47
Smith, A.C.T., 528n25
Smith, A.E., 118n69
Smith, A.N., 390n67
Smith, A.R., 116n39, 273n28
Smith, B., 80n75
Smith, G., 528n24
Smith, H.J., 78n53
Smith, J.H., 35n9
Smith, K. G., 36n18
Smith, K.G., 424n5
Smith, K.W., 530n49
Smith, L., 80n79a
Smith, P.L., 431n94, 431n99
Smith, R., 116n36, 153n4, 154n18
Smith, R.S., 235n30
Smith, S.F., 76n25, 76n26, 76n28
Smith, S.M., 322n105
Smith, T., 278n94d
Smither, J.W., 200n79
Smolders, K.C.H.J., 162n112a
Smollan, R.K., 564n38
Smyth, F.L., 119n80
Smyth, J., 530n43
Smyth, L.F., 426n28
Snow, C. E., 35n9
Snow, C.C., 496n54
Snowdon, W., 163n112i
Snyder, A.I., 154n20
Snyder, C.R., 565n54
Snyder, M., 118n66
Snyder, S., 272n14
Sobotta, N., 354n27
Soderberg, C.K., 116n48, 120n86
Soderstrom, S.B., 319n54, 389n36
Soelberg, P.O., 273n25
Sogon, S., 79n67
Sohn, M., 119n71
Sohn, Y.W., 201n89
Soko, M., 465n89c
Sokol-Hessner, P., 272n9
Solnet, D., 158n70
Son, J., 277n88, 278n90
Son, J.H., 158n71
Søndergaard, H.A., 563n19
Song, F., 235n34
Song, H.-S., 497n72d
Song, J., 38n50
Song, J.-S., 497n72d
Song, X.M., 428n45
Sonnby-Borgstrom, M., 353n17
Soo, C., 321n90
Sorensen, J.S., 528n18
Sorensen, K.L., 115n28, 155n30
Sorensen, P. F., 565n60
Sorenson, P.F., 566n66
Spain, S.M., 76n20, 391n72
Spalding, J.L., 272n20
Sparks, J.R., 78n55
Sparrer, C., 391n73c
Spears, R., 116n49, 315n8
Spector, B., 565n46, 565n47
Spector, N., 426n30
Spector, P.E., 42n91c, 160n94, 
201n92, 237n63
Spector, V, 529n38
Speer, A.B., 75n17
Spell, C.S., 119n75
Spence, R., 391n73b
Spencer, D.M., 323n110
Spencer, L. M., 40n71
Spencer, S. M., 40n71
Spicer, A., 389–390n54
Spiros, R.K., 315n6
Spoor, J.R., 315n7
Spreitzer, G.M., 237n65, 564n39, 566n65
Srikanth, K., 316n16
Srivastava, S., 75n9
Srivastava, S.C., 355n36
Staats, B.R., 316n18
Stagner, R., 430n82
Stahl, G.K., 530n45
Stajkovic, A.D., 322n98
Staley, O., 162n112g, 323n110j
Stalker, G., 495n28, 496n63
Stam, D., 460n13
Stamolampros, P., 36n16
Stamps, J., 321n87
Stangor, C., 117n53
Stanislawski, K., 161n101
Stanowski, A., 235n26
Stapel, D.A., 388n27
Staples, D.S., 321n90
Staropoli, C., 274n38
Stavros, J.M., 565n57, 565n58
Staw, B.M., 37n38, 155n29, 275n53, 
275n54, 275n60, 497n65
Steel, P., 79n70, 79n71, 161n102
Steen, T., 532n84
Steensma, H., 202n99
Steensma, H.K., 496n57
Steers, R.M., 158n72, 198n49
Stefaniak, C., 354n24
Steiger, J.H., 153n8
Stein, J.C., 37n34
Stein, M.I., 276n61
Stein, R., 77n34
Steiner, D.D., 119n73
Steiner, I.D., 316n16
Steinhüser, M., 237n69
Steinkühler, D., 275n54
Steinmann, B., 198n38
Stenstrom, D., 273n29
Stephan, A.B., 237n69
Stephens, K.K., 355n41
Stephenson, J., Jr., 494n7
Sterling, C.M., 201n89
Stern, L.W., 158n63, 428n55
Stern, R.N., 35n4
Sternberg, R.J., 276n63, 276n65, 276n66, 
276n67, 276n68, 276n70
Stevenson, W.B., 390n55
Steverink, N., 352n6
Stewart, B., 528n25
Stewart, E., 532n92
Stewart, G.L., 238n73, 238n80, 239n91, 
317n26, 321n84
Stigliani, I., 277n83, 277n84
Stinglhamber, F., 159n77
Stobbelier, K.E.M., 200n70
Stoeber, J., 80n79e
Stogdill, R.M., 463n69
Stoker, J.I., 388n27
Stolte, E., 162n112i
Stoltz, P.G., 465n89b
Stone, B., 317n32
Stone, F., 532n92c
Storrs, C., 236n46, 494n16
Stouten, J., 563n23, 564n44I-26 Name Index
Tews, M.J., 155n22
Thai, N.T., 274n38
Thaler, R.H., 199n56
Tharenou, P., 36n23, 40n73
Thatcher, C., 323n110f
Thatcher, S.M.B., 38n50, 114n21, 318n40, 
426n30
Thelen, P.D., 357n76
Theobald, N.A., 494n15
Theobald, S., 465n89c
Theorell, T., 161n99
Théorét, A., 271n7
Théorêt, A., 272n11, 273n22
Thibaut, J.W., 429n71
Thibodeau, P., 202n100a
Thimm, A.L., 272n22
Thomas, H.D.C., 531n76
Thomas, K., 427n40
Thomas, K.W., 426n25
Thomas, R.J., 315n10, 389n37, 464n81
Thomas-Hunt, M. C., 119n76
Thompson, C.A., 161n101
Thompson, D., 37n30
Thompson, G., 160n83
Thompson, J.D., 317n30, 317n31
Thompson, L., 119n74
Thompson, L.L., 430n80, 430n82, 431n86, 
431n88, 431n102
Thompson, R.J., 39n56, 39n62, 
39n63, 161n106
Thornton, G.C., III, 464n78
Thoroughgood, C., 120n92
Thrall, T., 275n57
Thuderoz, C., 431n95
Thurstone, L.L., 40n65
Thye, S.R., 153n3
Tiba, A.I., 274n44
Tichy, N., 272n14
Tichy, N.M., 459n9
Tiedens, L.Z., 353n14
Tiegs, R.B., 236n55
Tiku, N., 121n92f
Tims, M., 238n83
Tinsley, C.H., 355n46, 428n51
Tishler, A., 529n32
Titlow, J.P., 562n1
Tiznado, I., 239n91d
Tjosvold, D., 387n11, 389n50, 424n2, 
424n5, 425n14, 426n24, 427n40, 
428n48, 428n52
Todak, N., 162n112e
Todorov, A., 116n44
Todorova, G., 425n13, 426n26, 428n48
Toich, M.J., 74n5
Tolins, J., 354n32
Tolub, G., 497n72i
Tomlin, P., 432n107i
Tomlinson, E.C., 42n91f, 320n66, 320n67
Tooby, J., 115n35, 429n65
Topakas, A., 463n72
Torelli, C.J., 157n57
Torgler, B., 196n20
Tormala, Z.L., 154n20
Torraco, R.J., 321n82
Torres, R., 81n79i
T
Tabuchi, H., 532n92a
Taggar, S., 276n66, 318n50
Taing, M., 159n73, 159n76
Takala, T., 35n8
Takano, Y., 79n67
Takkaç, M., 461n40
Talaifar, S., 114n18
Talevich, J.R., 195n5
Talhelm, T., 80n79
Tam, K.K.-P., 156n37
Tan, N.T., 564n35
Tan, S.-L., 357n73
Tang, N., 233n6
Tang, T., 233n6
Tang, T.L.-P., 233n6, 233n8
Tang, Y., 354n33
Tangirala, S., 158n65
Tangpong, C., 118n62
Tannen, D., 357n64
Tannenbaum, A.S., 36n17
Tanner, J.F., 390n64
Taormina, R.J., 388n32
Tapal, A., 356n52
Tapon, F., 235n34
Tarafdar, M., 161n98
Tarakci, M., 316n18
Taras, V., 79n70, 79n71, 427n43, 428n51
Tarbert, H., 462n44
Tarrant, M., 120n88
Tasa, K., 322n99
Tashea, J., 495n23
Tasselli, S., 75n7
Tassinary, L.G., 155n26
Tate, P., 497n72g
Tatla, S., 121n92h
Taura , T., 322n107
Tausche, K., 533n92i
Tavares, G.M., 463n62
Tawse, A., 199n56
Taxer, J.L., 155n32, 155n34
Tay, L., 158n67
Tay,L., 41n78
Taylor, F.W., 236n48
Taylor, J., 236n42
Taylor, K., 387n1
Taylor, M., 162n112b
Taylor, P., 38n46
Taylor, P.J., 199n61
Taylor, S. E., 162n112
Teece, D.J., 496n59
Teerikangas, S., 529n32, 530n45
Tellenne, G., 81n79m
Ten Brinke, L., 76n29
Ten Brummelhuis, L.L., 38n54, 39n54
Tennant, J., 121n92e
Tepper, B.J., 387n8, 563n11
Terracciano, A., 200n78
Terwiesch, C., 322n104
Testa, I., 40n72
Testa, M.R., 530n48
Tetrick, L.E., 161n105, 236n55
Tett, R.P., 74n5, 461n34
Tewfik, B.A., 429n59
Stouten, S. J., 564n40
Strack, S., 76n21
Strahan, W., 236n47
Strange, J.M., 460n12
Strauss, A., 589n5, 590n7
Straw, E., 497n72h
Strebel, P., 563n12
Streitfeld, D., 432n107b
Stroebe, W., 321n96
Strozniak, P., 531n63
Strutton, D., 390n63, 390n64
Studtmann, M., 153n5
Stuhlmacher, A.F., 430n84, 431n97
Stumm, S., 233n7
Stutman, R.K., 426n27
Styan, J., 465n89c
Styan, J.-B., 465n89c
Su, C.C., 389n43
Su, H.C., 531n65
Su, R., 41n78, 239n91g
Suddath, C., 566n69e
Suff, R., 432n107j
Suganthi, L., 237n68
Sull, C., 532n92d
Sull, D., 532n92d
Sullivan, R.L., 565n57, 565n58
Suls, J.M., 114n16
Summers, J., 76n26, 391n72
Summers, T.P., 201n90
Sumpter, D.M., 237n69
Sun, S., 198n41
Sundberg, R., 77n39
Sundstrom, E., 235n39, 315n4, 316n22, 
317n26, 389n46
Sung, S.Y., 235n35, 235n37
Sunstein, C.R., 199n56
Surcouf, O., 355n39
Surface, E.A., 234n19
Surpin, J., 235n26
Süß, S., 563n15
Sutherland, J., 566n69f
Sutin, A.R., 80n79a
Sutton, R., 496n49
Sutton, R. I., 590n12
Sutton, R.I., 37n31, 37n35, 275n51, 276n69, 
277n81, 322n103, 388n20
Sveningsson, S., 465n89m
Svenson, O., 273n28
Svensson, G., 78n59, 79n61
Svensson, O., 353n17
Sverdlik, N., 77n42, 77n43
Swaab, R.I., 430n85
Swailes, S., 319n51, 319n52
Swan, A.B., 77n34
Swann, W.B., 114n18, 114n20
Swann ,W.B. Jr., 115n24
Swap, W., 528n21
Sweeny, K., 118n61
Sweis, B.M., 275n58
Swisher, K., 121n92f
Sy, T., 118n66, 118n68, 496n49
Syed, M., 75n17
Syed, N., 531n70
Symitsi, E., 36n16
Szabo, E., 464n86Name Index I-27
Vardi, Y., 464n75
Vargas, H., 79n66
Vargas, J.H., 80n74
Varoglu, K., 430n74
Vartanian, O., 153n3
Vazire, S., 119n82
Vecchiato, R., 275n50
Vecchio, R.P., 462n52
Vedadi, A., 37n34
Vedelago, C., 530n43
Veenstra, L., 162n112a
Veksler, A.E., 355n41
Venkataramani, V., 158n65
Venus, M., 460n13
Vera, D., 199n56
Verbeke, A., 79n72
Verbruggen, M., 39n63
Vergauwe, J., 461n27
Verhoeven, J.W.M., 354n30
Verkuil, B., 160n95
Vermunt, R., 202n99
Verplanken, B., 197n26
Verquer, M.L., 78n46
Very, P., 529n32, 530n45
Vescio, T.K., 387n2
Vetterli, C., 277n85
Viale, R., 272n21
Victor, D.A., 357n63
Vignoles, L.V., 113n3, 115n31, 315n8
Vignoles, V.L., 113n3, 315n8
Vijayalakshmi, V., 353n17
Villa, J.R., 463n60
Vincent, A., 239n89
Vinkenburg, C.J., 464n75
Viswesvaran, C., 155n25, 162n112
Vliegenthart, R., 354n30
Vohs, K.D., 75n8, 196n17, 273n36
Voigt, A., 530n45
Volmer, J., 432n107e
Von Glinow, M.A., 429n66
Vonk, R., 390n63
von Treuer, K., 529n28, 530n59
Vorauer, J.D., 120n83
Voronov, M., 79n67
Voskort, A., 119n72
Voss, A., 272n18
Voss, C., 433n107n
Voss, T., 532n84
Vough, H.C., 114n6
Vozza, S., 531n69
Vroom, V.H., 40n65, 198n42, 277n86, 277n87, 
278n94, 321n95, 462n45
Vukasovic, T., 74n6
W
Waber, B., 429n62
Wadsworth, M.B., 390n66
Wageman, R., 319n57
Wagemans, J., 116n42
Wagener, A., 354n32
Wagner, S.H., 78n46, 235n30
Wahba, M.A., 197n24
Wainewright, P., 497n72g
Waldhauser, K.J., 320n75
V
Vaajakallio, K., 121n92i
Vaara, E., 427n31
Vaill, P. B., 36n17
Vaish, A., 153n9
Valacich, J.S., 354n34
Valentine, M.A., 317n28
Valle-Cabrera, R., 234n19
Valverde-Moreno, M., 278n93
Van, A.H., 428n44
van, F., 117n58
Van Aken, E.M., 566n64
Van Alphen, T, 494n10
Van Alphen, T., 494n10
van Balen, T., 316n18
van Bunderen, L., 424n8
Vancouver, J.B., 115n25, 198n41, 199n62
Vandello, J.A., 80n75
van den Berg, H., 153n4, 390n58
Vandenberg, R.J., 42n91g
Vandenberghe, C., 158n64
van den Boer, Y., 353n11
van den Heuvel, M., 564n31
van der Meer, T.G.L.A., 354n30
Van der Vegt, G., 317n29
Van De Ven, A.H., 494n13
Van de Ven, A.H., 36n20, 323n109, 352n2
Van de Vliert, E., 317n29
van Dick, R., 159n80, 320n77
van Dierendonck, D., 462n43
Van Doorn, J.R., 460n25
van Engen, M.L., 464n87, 464n88
Van Fleet, D.D., 494n16
van Herk, H., 157n57
Vanhonacker, W.R., 389n32
van Hooff, M.L.M., 236n49
van Iterson, A., 358n77
Van Kleef, D.D., 532n84
Van Kleef, G., 153n4, 390n58
Van Kleef, G.A., 358n79
van Kleef, G.A., 156n40, 358n79g, 387n4, 
426n26
van Knippenberg, B., 389n51
Van Knippenberg, D., 427n38
van Knippenberg, D., 198n39, 276n71, 318n39, 
424n8, 429n57, 460n13, 461n31
Van Lange, P., 154n19, 274n44
Van Lange, P.A.M., 159n79
van Leeuwen, E., 78n54
Van Maanen, J., 239n91i, 531n71, 532n80
VanMeter, R., 462n43
van Oorschot, W., 201n87
Van Praet, N., 323n110f
Van Raalte, J.L., 239n89
Van Scotter, J.R., 76n27
Van Seters, D.A., 118n65
Van Steenburg, E., 387n5
Van Vianen, A.E.M., 531n67
van Woerkom, M., 200n75, 200n76
van Woerkom,, M., 199n53
Van Yperen, N.W., 40n64
Van Zant, A.B., 432n107
van Zoonen, W., 354n30
Vardaman, J.M., 564n32
Torres-Jimenez, M., 278n93
Tortoriello, G.K., 76n31
Tosi, H.L., 37n40
Townsend, M., 391n73k
Tracey, J., 390n66
Tracy, L., 461n38
Tramuta, L., 113n1
Travaglione, T., 531n73
Treadway, D.C, 389n45
Tremblay, M., 388n22
Tremblay, S., 317n33, 320n72
Treur, J., 154n11
Trevino, L. K., 199n60
Trevino, L.K., 199n54
Treviño, L.K., 78n52
Triana, C., 278n90
Trichtinger, L.A., 354n25
Trigwell, J., 39n60
Trompenaars, F., 155n36
TrontoTronto, J.C., 78n50
Tropp, L.R., 120n84
Trouilloud, D.O., 118n65
Trujillo, C.A., 274n40
Tsai, M.-H., 424n7
Tsang, E.W.K., 118n62
Tsay, C.-J., 236n52
Tse, H.H.M., 158n61
Tsirikas, A.N., 563n17
Tskhay, K.O., 388n17, 460n26
Tsui, A.S., 530n54, 532n91
Tucker, M.K., 424n6, 426n22
Tuckey, M., 161n108
Tuckman, B.W., 318n43
Tueretgen, I.O., 465n89k
Tung, R., 233n8
Tung, R.L., 79n72
Turco, C.J., 357n71
Turiano, N. A., 74n4
Turnage, A.K., 354n26
Turner, G., 529n28
Turner, J.C., 116n49
Turner, J.W., 355n37, 355n46
Turner, L., 465n89d
Turner, M.E., 116n49, 316n15, 319n58
Turner, N., 565n54
Turnley, W., 390n61
Turnley, W.H., 41n83
Tushman, M.L., 494n6, 496n51
Tuttle, B., 528n24
Tuuli, M.M., 238n71
Tversky, A., 273n31, 273n32, 430n83
Tye, K.M., 198n43
U
Uggerslev, K.L., 352n7, 531n72
Ulich, E., 321n86
Ulrich, K.T., 322n104
Unsal, P., 465n89k
Urban, K.K., 276n70
Urick, M.J., 427n33
Urwick, L., 424n4, 424n9, 427n40
Ury, W., 425n14, 432n107c
Uskul, A.K., 157n57
Uzzi, B., 315n3, 319n54, 389n36, 389n41I-28 Name Index
Waldman, D.A., 196n20, 460n14
Walker, B., 201n92
Walker, L., 429n71, 464n88
Walker, S., 359m79l
Wall, J.A., 424n2, 430n72
Wall, T., 565n59
Wall, T.D., 495n22
Wallas, G., 276n62
Waller, N.G., 76n19
Wallerich, P., 235n26
Wallis, J., 530n56
Walmsley, P.T., 75n10
Walsh, C., 113n4
Walsh, J.P., 35n10, 317n33
Walsh, K., 494n2
Walsh, P., 235n30
Walsh, W.B., 239n91g
Walter, G.A., 566n68
Walter, N., 355n36
Walters, M., 527n2
Waltham, MA, 153n9
Walton, D., 425n17
Walton, R.E., 426n29, 430n82, 565n47
Walumbwa, F.O., 114n13
Wamsley, E.J., 117n55
Wanberg, C.R., 532n81
Wang, B., 39n61
Wang, H., 155n32, 155n34
Wang, J., 38n48, 317n33, 430n80, 431n86
Wang, L., 199n54
Wang, M., 156n40, 352n7
Wang, M.-L., 235n31
Wang, Q., 115n28, 159n75, 427n42
Wang, S., 353n10
Wang, W., 387n14
Wang, W.-L., 425n11
Wang, X., 316n21
Wang, Y., 41n79, 274n46
Wang, Z., 158n71, 355n47
Wangrow, D.B., 388n26
Wanous, J.P., 532n86
Warkentin, M., 37n34
Warnaka, M., 36n16
Warner, M., 35n3, 35n9
Warr, P., 158n67
Warrington, P.T., 357n67
Wasieleski, D., 532n79
Wasserman, S., 388n30
Wastell, C., 116n40
Waterman, R., 357n72
Waternam, R.H., 532–533n92e
Watkins, E.R., 274n42
Watkins, J.M., 565n55
Watkins, K., 565n51
Watkins, M., 496n52
Watson, J.B., 198n48
Watson, R., 202n94
Watt, J.D., 158n67
Watts, L., 355n35
Watts, L.A., 353n22
Wayne, J.H., 38n43
Wazlawek, A., 427n38, 427n41
Weatherbee, T.G., 197n27
Weaver, J., 118n66
Weaver, K., 78n54
Weaver, W., 353n9
Webb, T.L., 154n14, 154n15
Webber, S.S., 319n55
Weber, R., 463n66
Weber, T., 461n30
Weber, W., 315n12
Weber, W.G., 321n86
Webley, P., 233n6
Webster, J., 321n90, 355n46, 387n13
Weckler, A., 566n69c
Wedley, W.C., 271n7
Weekes-Shackelford, V.A., 113n2
Weel, B., 494n5, 494n9
Wei, T., 429n59
Wei, X., 156n46, 428n48
Weibel, A., 196n19, 236n42, 319n64
Weick, K.E., 36n21, 565n52
Weick, M., 388n27
Weijters, B., 157n57
Weijun, H., 158n71
Weinberger, M., 533n92j
Weiner, B., 118n60
Weiner, I.B., 75n9, 157n58, 317n24, 528n10
Weingart, L.R., 424n5, 425n13, 425n14, 425n16, 
426n20, 426n26, 427n38, 428n48, 431n93, 
432n107g
Weinhardt, J.M., 198n41
Weinstein, D., 235n28
Weisberg, R.W., 276n68
Weisbord, M., 566n62
Weisbuch, M., 116n41
Weisel, O., 117n50, 427n39
Weiser, O., 355n48
Weiss, H.M., 154n16, 157n55
Weiss, M., 158n65
Weitzner, D., 37n26
Welbourne, T.M., 234n25
Welch, D.E., 356n60
Welch, G., 355n35
Welch, L.S., 356n60
Weldon, A., 355n38
Weldon, E., 120n90
Wellington, M.A., 75n9
Wellman, N., 496n41
Welsh, D., 238n75
Welsh, D.T., 200n68, 201n82
Wendsche, J., 161n107
Weng, Q. (D.), 159n75
Werne, K.M., 199n63
Werner, M.D., 272n17
Wernimont, P.F., 233n5
Wernsing, T., 200n67
West, M.A., 277n78, 321n86, 424n5
Westergaard-Nielsen, N., 202n100g
Westerman, J.W., 78n46
Weston, D., 120n88
Weston, S.J., 80n79a
Westwood, R., 35n3, 527n4
Wheeler, J.V., 321n83
Wheeler, S.C., 115n33
Whicker, J., 199n57
White, M.A., 391n73g
Whiteley, P., 118n65, 118n68
Whitener, E.M., 320n68
Whitfield, K., 234n15
Whitford, A.B., 157n59
Whitney, D.J., 319n59, 319n61
Whitney, D.K., 565n55, 565n57
Whittington, J.L., 195n4
Whitworth, B., 357n74
Whyte, G., 275n57, 322n99
Whyte, W. H., 356n51
Wicks, A.C., 36n25
Wiegel, T., 323n110b
Wiener, Y., 529n33
Wiernik, B.M., 41n77
Wiesenfeld, B.M., 39n63
Wiesner, R., 495n24
Wigert, B., 496n49
Wilderom, C.P.M., 462n51, 462n52, 529n32
Wilhelms, E.A., 273n25
Wilk, S.L., 239n91j, 316n20
Wilke, H., 389n51
Wilkin, C.L., 201n92
Wilkins, A.L., 528n21
Wilkinson, A., 157n60, 158n61, 277n87
Wilkinson, I., 389n50
Wilks, A.G., 278n94e
Willem, A., 494n8
Willemsen, T.M., 464n87
Willer, R., 121n92i
Williams, A., 527n2
Williams, B.A., 199n55
Williams, J.R., 201n80
Williams, K., 239n91j, 316n20
Williams, K.D., 316n19, 318n46, 318n48
Williams, K.M., 76n20
Williams, M., 319n65, 565n45
Williams, P., 530n43
Williams, W.L., 200n67
Willis, A., 323n110d
Willis, H., 427n39
Willis, J., 116n44
Wilmot, M.P., 75n10
Wilson, B.M., 118n60
Wilson, E.V., 356n50
Wilson, M.C., 119n79
Wiltermuth, S.S., 119n72
Windschitl, P.D., 116n39, 273n28
Wingard, J., 278n94g
Wingerden, J.V., 200n76
Winkielman, P., 153n6, 154n17, 196n16, 274n40, 
353n15
Winquist, J., 162n112c
Winslow, C.J., 161n105
Wirtz, P.W., 463n61
Wiryakusuma, C., 202n100e
Wiseman, R.M., 234n25
Wisse, B., 198n39, 387n11, 388n29, 389n50
Withey, M.J., 40n75, 157n59, 158n64
Witt, E.A., 76n32
Witt, L.A., 75n10
Witte, E., 272n22
Witteman, H.O., 117n52
Wittwer, J., 274n42
Woehr, D., 464n88
Wofford, J.C., 462n49
Wolf, J., 496n49
Wombacher, J.C., 159n75
Wong, A.S.H., 424n2, 425n14, 426n24, 427n40Name Index I-29
Wong, C.A., 464n80
Wong, L., 80n79c
Wood, A.M., 80n79e
Wood, D., 80n76
Wood, M.S., 274n39
Wood, R.E., 272n19
Wood, V.M., 159n75
Wood, W., 40n72
Woodard, C., 79n73
Wooden, M., 161n98
Woodman, R.W., 320n79
Woodward, A., 153n9
Woodworth, R.S., 195n6
Wooldridge, A., 35n5
Woolley, K., 239n91d
Wordsworth, R., 78n59
Workman, J.P,. Jr., 495n37
Worm, V., 428n52, 429n66
Worren, N., 495n32
Worthley, R., 80n75
Woznyj, H.M., 42n91f
Wray, T., 388n18
Wrege, C.D., 35n9
Wren, D.A., 234n21, 494n16
Wright, C.F., 278n92
Wright, L., 315n2, 353n20, 358n79b
Wright, P.L., 387n9
Wright, P.M., 36n24, 201n82
Wright, S.C., 120n84
Wrzesniewski, A., 39n63, 238n83
Wu, G., 430n85
Wu, S., 533n92i
Wuchty, S., 315n3
X
Xenakis, I., 116n37
Xie, P., 428n52, 429n66
Xie, X.-Y, 425n11
Xile, J., 428n45
Xin, Y., 161n102
Xirasagar, S., 36n15
Xu, K., 429n58
Xu, S., 355n47
Xu, Y., 427n43
Y
Yadav, M., 357n69, 357n70, 432n107i
Yaeger, T. F., 565n60
Yamada, H., 356n62, 357n63
Yamagishi, T., 117n50, 427n39
Yamanouchi, K., 234n23, 239n91c
Yamawaki, H., 461n28
Yang, F., 389n32
Yang, I., 319n64, 320n71, 428n48
Yang,J.X, 426n21
Yapchai, K., 533n92i
Yarr, K., 203n100h
Yeatts, D.E., 321n82
Yeshurun,Y., 356n52
Yi, Y.J., 320n78
Yih, J., 156n42
Yik, M., 153n8
Yildiz, H.E., 427n31, 429n58
Yoho, S.K., 462n50
Yoo, J., 465n89e
Yoo, S.B.M., 271n4
Yoo, S.H., 155n35
Yoon, H.C., 162n112a
Yoon, H.J., 40n73
You, D., 78n55
Youn, N., 162n112a
Young, M., 562n4
Youssef-Morgan, C.M., 199n53
Yu, A., 321n88, 564n33
Yu, C., 388n18
Yu, S., 424n8
Yuan, Y.C., 424n7
Yukl, G., 387n12, 389n50, 389n53, 390n65, 
390n66, 459n2, 461n32, 461n34, 461n37
Yukl, G.A., 461n39, 463n70
Yuksel, U., 274n38
Z
Zabel, K.L., 38n47
Zaccaro, S.J., 316n23, 317n24, 
463n70, 464n76
Zacharatos, A., 565n54
Zachry, C.E., 74n2
Zagenczyk, T.J., 198n45
Zahn, M., 497n72e
Zajonc, R.B., 153n6
Zaki, J., 120n87
Zakkour, M., 120n92c
Zald, M. N., 37n38
Zald, M.N., 528n17
Zaleznik, A., 461n34
Zalkind, S.S., 119n77
Zander, L., 427n37, 465n89o
Zanger, C., 354n25
Zanna, M. P., 153n9
Zanna, M.P., 115n29, 117n57, 154n10
Zant, A.B.V., 430n85
Zapata, C.P., 40n75, 74n5
Zapf, D., 155n31, 156n38
Zare, M., 158n64
Zavala, J.D., 76n19
Zeckhauser, R., 432n107f, 563n17
Zedeck, S., 236n56
Zeigler-Hill, V., 76n31, 114n18
Zelazo, P.D., 154n10, 154n12
Zemke, R., 528n21
Zenios, S.A., 160n89
Zenou, Y., 389n42
Zerbe, W.J., 154n16, 462n47
Zerella, S., 529n28, 530n59
Zeschuk, G., 496n47
Zettler, I., 76n21, 391n72
Zhai, Y., 389n53
Zhan, Y., 156n40
Zhang, L., 239n91j
Zhang, M., 157n60
Zhang, P., 238n71
Zhang, W., 37n34, 42n91f, 276n73
Zhang, X., 237n68, 429n70
Zhang, X.-A., 388–389n32
Zhang, X.P., 427n30
Zhang, Y., 38n48, 462n44
Zhang, Z., 200n68, 355n39
Zhang ,Z.-X., 428n48
Zhao, N., 320n67
Zhao, X., 36n16
Zhongtuo, W., 272n9
Zhou, J., 158n63, 276n70, 276n71, 277n76, 
277n79
Zhou, V., 358n79i
Zhou, Y., 80n79b, 278n90
Zhou,Y., 277n88
Zhu, R., 388n17, 460n26
Zhu, Y., 278n93
Zide, J., 195n1
Ziegert, J.C., 273n25
Ziemianski, P., 388n27
Zillman, C., 465n89h
Zimmerman, R.D., 158n64, 159n78, 531n65
Zingales, L., 528n13
Zingheim, P.K., 234n16, 234n20
Zmud, R.W., 353n10, 355n48
Zondo, R.W.D., 234n25
Zornoza, A., 316n21
Zschirnt, E., 117n54
Zugasti, I., 235n30
Zúquete, J.P., 35n8I-30
A
Ability-motivation-opportunity (AMO) 
model, 22
Ability The natural aptitudes and learned 
capabilities required to successfully complete 
a task, 24–25
Absenteeism, 28, 86
Absorption, 366
Accounting subsystem, 8
Achievable goal, 180
Achievement, 58–59, 173
Achievement-nurturing orientation Cross￾cultural value describing the degree to which 
people in a culture emphasize competitive 
versus cooperative relations with other people,
65, 67–68
Achievement-oriented leadership, 
446, 447
Acquire, drive to, 169
Acquisitions, 512–513
Action research A problem-focused change 
process that combines action orientation (changing 
attitudes and behavior) and research orientation 
(testing theory through data collection and 
analysis), 550–551
Action scripts, 253
Active listening, 344–345
Adaptive culture An organizational culture in 
which employees are receptive to change, including 
the ongoing alignment of the organization to its 
environment and continuous improvement of 
internal processes, 509
Adaptive task performance, 27, 50
Affective organizational commitment An 
individual’s emotional attachment to, involvement 
in, and identification with an organization,
139–140
Affiliation, 173
Agreeableness A personality dimension 
describing people who are trusting, helpful, 
good-natured, considerate, tolerant, selfless, 
generous, and flexible, 48–49, 54
Alarm reaction, 142
Altruism, 173
Ambiguity rule, in design thinking, 262
AMO. see Ability–motivation–opportunity 
(AMO)
Anchoring and adjustment heuristic A 
natural tendency for people to be influenced 
by an initial anchor point such that they do not 
sufficiently move away from that point as new 
information is provided, 249
Antecedents, 177
Anticipatory principle, 553
Application, 553
Appreciative coaching, 182. see also
Strengths-based coaching
Appreciative inquiry An organizational change 
strategy that directs the group’s attention away 
from its own problems and focuses participants 
on the group’s potential and positive elements,
551–554
Aptitude, 24
Arbitration, 409–410, 411
changing, with desired culture, 514–515
deciphering organizational culture 
through, 504–506
Artifacts The observable symbols and signs of an 
organization’s culture, 501, 504–505
Assertiveness (vocal authority), 374–375, 
403. see also Extraversion
Assimilation, of organizational cultures, 
512–513
Associative play, 261
Asymmetric (unequal) dependence, 
362–363
Asynchronous communication channel, 
336–338
Attendance, maintaining work, 26, 28–29
Attention-seeking behavior, 52
Attitude-behavior contingency, 126–127
Attitude object, 125
Attitudes The cluster of beliefs, assessed 
feelings, and behavioral intentions toward a 
person, object, or event (called an attitude 
object), 10, 125–127
Attraction-selection-attrition (ASA) theory 
A theory stating that organizations have a natural 
tendency to attract, select, and retain people with 
values and personality characteristics consistent 
with the organization’s character, resulting in a 
more homogeneous organization and a stronger 
culture, 514, 516–518
Attribution error, 99
Attribution process The perceptual process of 
deciding whether an observed behavior or event is 
caused largely by internal or external factors,
97–99
Authentic leadership The view that effective 
leaders need to be aware of, feel comfortable with, 
and act consistently with their values, personality, 
and self-concept, 452–453, 514–515
Authority dispersion, 283
Autonomy, 219
Availability heuristic A natural tendency to 
assign higher probabilities to objects or events that 
are easier to recall from memory, even though ease 
of recall is also affected by nonprobability factors 
(e.g., emotional response, recent events), 249
Avoiding, in conflict-handling styles, 403, 
405, 408
Awareness, 124
B
Baby Boomers, 15, 16, 329
Barriers (noise), communication, 340–342
Behavior, 126. see also Organizational 
behavior knowledge; Organizational 
behavior modification (OB Mod)
employee motivation and, 139
how emotions influence, 127
Behavioral change, 327
Behavioral intention, 125, 126
Behavior modeling, 179
Behavior modification, organizational, 
177–179
Belief, 125
Belongingness/love need, 170
Benevolence, 59
Best alternative to a negotiated settlement 
(BATNA) The best outcome you might achieve 
through some other course of action if you abandon 
the current negotiation, 413
Betweenness, in social networks, 
372–373
Bicultural audit A process of diagnosing cultural 
relations between companies and determining the 
extent to which cultural clashes will likely 
occur, 512
Big Five. see Five-factor (Big Five) model
Blind area, of Johari Window, 104
Body language, 331. see also Nonverbal 
communication
Bond, drive to, 168–170
and informal groups, 284
and emotional contagion, 332
Boundary management, 19
Bounded rationality The view that people are 
bounded in their decision-making capabilities, 
including access to limited information, limited 
information processing, and tendency toward 
satisficing rather than maximizing when making 
choices, 247
Brainstorming A freewheeling, face-to-face 
meeting where team members aren’t allowed to 
criticize but are encouraged to speak freely, 
generate as many ideas as possible, and build 
on the ideas of others, 306–307
Brainwriting A variation of brainstorming 
whereby participants write (rather than speak 
about) and share their ideas, 308
Brooks’s law The principle that adding more 
people to a late software project only makes it 
later, 286
glossary/subject indexGlossary/Subject Index I-31
Buffer, 408
Buffering. see Filtering
Built to Last, 507
Bullying, in workplace, 144, 375
Business ethics. see Ethics
Business knowledge, of leadership, 451
C
Calculus-based trust, 299–300
CANOE, 48
Categorical thinking Organizing people and 
objects into preconceived categories that are stored 
in our long-term memory, 92
Causation, in organizational research, 
586–587
in negotiation, 414
in social networks, 372–373
Centrality A contingency of power pertaining to 
the degree and nature of interdependence between 
the power holder and others, 363, 367, 368
Centralization The degree to which formal 
decision authority is held by a small group of 
people, typically those at the top of the 
organizational hierarchy, 475–476
Ceremonies Planned displays of organizational 
culture, conducted specifically for the benefit of an 
audience, 501, 506
Change
action research approach, 550–551
appreciative inquiry approach, 
551–554
approaches to, 549–555
breaking routines, 541
coalitions, social networks, and, 548
coercion, 543, 545
communication and, 543–544
cross-cultural and ethical issues in, 556
employee involvement, 543, 545
fear of unknown, 540
incongruent organizational systems, 541
incongruent team dynamics, 541
large group intervention approach, 
554–555
learning, 543, 544
Lewin’s force field analysis model, 
536–538, 546, 550, 556
negative valence of, 540
negotiation, 543, 545
not-invented-here syndrome, 540–541
parallel learning structure approach, 555
pilot projects and diffusion of, 548–549
reducing restraining forces, 543–546
refreezing desired conditions, 546
resistance to, 538–541
stress management, 543, 545
transformational leadership and, 547
urgency for, 542
Channel. see Communication channel
Charisma A personal characteristic or special 
“gift” that serves as a form of interpersonal 
attraction and referent power over others, 367, 
440–441
Charismatic visionary, 454
Chief executive office, 369
Circumplex Model of Emotions, 125
Clarity, 85–86, 87
Closed system, 9
“Closeness,” 373
Coaching-style feedback, 182
as influence tactic, 374–375, 379
organizational change and, 548
Coalition A group that attempts to influence 
people outside the group by pooling the resources 
and power of its members, 284
Codebook, 328–329
Coding-decoding. see Encoding-decoding 
process
Coercion, and change, 543, 545
Coercive power, 364, 365, 369, 370
Cognition (logical thinking), 124, 167
Cognitive dissonance An emotional experience 
caused by a perception that our beliefs, feelings, 
and behavior are incongruent with one 
another, 129
Cognitive intelligence, 451
Cognitive process, 126
Cohesion. see Team cohesion
Collective self, 84
Collective sense of purpose, 5
Collectivism A cross-cultural value describing 
the degree to which people in a culture emphasize 
duty to groups to which they belong and to group 
harmony, 65–66, 68, 213
Comforting, in Five Cs model, 292
Commission, 207, 210
Commitment, 378–379
Communication channel, 329, 376
Communication process model, 328–329
Communication proficiency, 339
barriers (noise), 340–342
change and, 543–544
channels of, 14
digital verbal, 332–334
media richness, 338–339
nonverbal communication, 330–332
persuasion and, 340
social acceptance, 337–338
social presence, 337
synchronicity, 336–337
cross-cultural, 342–344
digitally-based organizational, 345, 346–347
direct, 346–347
in Five Cs model, 292
importance of, 326–327
improving, 344–345
interpersonal, 344–345
model of, 328–329
problems in, 402
through grapevine, 347–348
workforce stability and, 514, 516
workspace design, 346
Communication The process by which informa￾tion is transmitted and understood between two 
or more people, 326. see also entries for specific 
communication types and channels
Companywide performance bonus, 211
Competency, employee, 223
Competency-based rewards, 208–209
Complementary mental models, 301
Complex environment, 487
Complexity, 84–86
Compliance, 379
Comprehend, drive to, 168–170
Compromising, in conflict-handling styles, 
403–405
Concurrent engineering, 470–471
Confirmation bias The processing of screening 
out information that is contrary to our values and 
assumptions, and to more readily accept confirming 
information, 92, 102, 249, 254
Conflict episode, 398–399
Conflict escalation, 399
Conflict-handling styles, 15, 292
choosing best, 404
interpersonal, 402–406
in model of conflict process, 398–399
“Conflict-is-bad” perspective, 394–395
Conflict management, 406–409
Conflict outcomes, 399
Conflict process model, 398–399
Conflict The process in which one party perceives 
that its interests are being opposed or negatively 
affected by another party, 394
benefits of, 394–395
consequences of, 394–395
employee stress and, 401
good vs. bad debate, 394
interpersonal conflict-handling styles, 
402–406
managing, 406–409
meaning of, 394–395
process model, 398–399
relationship, 395–398
resolving, through negotiation, 411–417
sources of, 398–402
structural approaches to managing, 406–409
structural sources, in organizations, 399–402
ambiguous rules, 402
communication problems, 402
differentiation, 400 
incompatible goals, 399
interdependence, 400–401
scarce resources, 401
task, 395–398
third-party conflict resolution, 409–411
Conformity, 58, 59
Conformity effect, 307
Conformity pressure, 305I-32 Glossary/Subject Index
Conscientiousness A personality dimension 
describing people who are organized, dependable, 
goal-focused, thorough, disciplined, methodical, and 
industrious, 48–51, 54
Consensus, 98–99
Consequences, 177
learning behavior, 179
of power, 369–370
unintended, 214–215
Conservation, 58, 59
Consistency, 85–86, 97, 98, 99
Constructionist principle, 552
Constructive conflict, 5, 395. see also
Task conflict
Constructive thought strategies, 224, 225–226
Constructs Abstract ideas constructed by the 
researcher that can be linked to observable 
information, 584–585
Contact hypothesis A theory stating that the 
more we interact with someone, the less prejudiced 
or perceptually biased we will be against that 
person, 105
Contingencies, 14
in conflict-handling styles, 402–406
in negotiation, 413
of organizational culture, 508–510
of organizational design, 486–490
of power, 367–369, 372
of reinforcement, 177–178
in social networks, 372
Contingency anchor, 12, 14
Contingency theory, 446–447. see also
Path–goal leadership theory
Continuance commitment An individual’s cal￾culative attachment to an organization, 139–140
Continuous feedback, 331
Continuous reinforcement, 177–178
Control system, 507, 508
Convergent thinking, 257
Cooperating, in Five Cs model, 292
Cooperativeness, in conflict-handling 
styles, 403
Coordination
communication for, 469–470
Five Cs model, 292
formal hierarchy, 471–472
micromanagement and, 471
organizational structures, 469–472
standardization, 470, 472
Core affect, 124
Core competency, 486
Corporate cult, 61
Corporate culture, 14, 509, 510
Corporate merger. see Merger
Corporate social responsibility (CSR) 
Organizational activities intended to benefit society 
and the environment beyond the firm’s immediate 
financial interests or legal obligations, 10
Correspondence bias, 99
Counterculture, 503
Counter-productive work behaviors (CWBS) 
Voluntary behaviors that have the potential to directly 
or indirectly harm the organization, 26, 28, 49, 54
Countervailing power The capacity of a per￾son, team, or organization to keep a more powerful 
person or group in the exchange relationship, 363
COVID-19 pandemic, 28, 127, 128, 303, 
332–333, 346, 348, 364, 479, 542
centralizing authority during, 488
Great Resignation during, 3
and hospitality industry, 138
incentives during, 210
and personality changes, 47
remote work during, 19, 20–22
self-isolation during, 303
social distancing during, 303, 401
Craftspeople
activities that encourage, 261–263
characteristics of creative people, 
258–259
organizational conditions supporting, 
259–260
process model, 257
Creativity The development of original ideas 
that make a socially recognized contribution,
256, 258
Credible feedback, 181, 182
Critical investigation, 585
Critical psychological states, 218, 219–220
Cross-cultural issues, 556
Cross-cultural study, 13
Cross-cultural value, 46
Cross-functional team, 283. see also Task 
force (project team)
Cross-pollination, 261
Cross-sectional survey, 13
Cultural fit, 516–518
Cultural subsystem, 8
Cultural tightness, 68
Cultural value, 58
Culture(s). see also Organizational culture
emotional display norms across, 130
social acceptance and, 337–338
values across, 65–68
Customer satisfaction, employee job 
satisfaction and, 138–139
Cycle time, 216, 217
Cynicism, 143
D
Dark triad A cluster of three socially undesirable 
(dark) personality traits: Machiavellianism, 
narcissism, and psychopathy, 52–54, 380
appraising opportunities, 251
Decentralization, 475–476, 487
Decision, 398
Decision evaluation biases, 256
Decision heuristics, 249–250
Decision maker, 12
constraints on team, 305–306
emotional influences, 251–252
employee involvement in, 263–265
evaluating decisions, 254–256
as function of communication, 326–327
imperfect rationality, 247
implementing, 254
intuition in, 251–254
as management skill, 242
rational choice paradigm, 249
assumptions versus organizational behavior 
findings, 248
bounded rationality, 247
example, 242–245
history of, 242
problems with, 245, 248–250
process of, 243–245, 247
satisficing and, 250
searching for, evaluating, and choosing 
alternatives, 247–251
sunk cost effect, 255–256
Decision making The conscious process of 
making choices among alternatives with the 
intention of moving toward some desired state 
of affairs, 242
emotions and, 252
personal values and, 59–60
Decisive leadership, 246
Decoded message. see Encoding–
decoding process
Decoupling, 408
Deculturation, of organizational cultures, 513
Deductive hypothesis testing, 588
Deductive process, 585
Deductive stage, of theory building, 584
Deep acting, 131–132
Deep-level diversity Differences in the 
psychological characteristics of employees, 
including personalities, beliefs, values, and 
attitudes, 15, 16
Defend, drive to, 168, 169
Deficiency need, 170
Degree centrality, 373
Delivering (destiny) stage, of Four-D 
model, 553
Departmentalization
divisional structure, 478, 479–481
functional structure, 478–479
influences, 477
matrix structure, 478, 482–485
network structure, 478, 485–486
simple structure, 478
team-based, 478, 481–482
types of, 477–486
Departmental team, 283
Dependence model of power, 362–363
Dependent variable, 587–589
Depersonalization, 143
Designing stage, of Four-D model, 
553–554
Design strategies, in research, 587
as creativity-building activity, 
261–263
history of, 242
rules in, 262–263Glossary/Subject Index I-33
Design thinking A human-centered, solution￾focused creative process that applies both 
intuition and analytical thinking to clarify 
problems and generate innovative solutions,
261–263
Differentiation
reduce, 407
as source of conflict, 398–399, 402
Differentiation-based conflict, 400
Digital communication
changes in, 333
channels, use of, 333
emerging channels and products, 325
“flaming,” 334
nonverbal, 335–336
verbal, 332–334
Digital written communication
for decision making, 335
problems with, 334
Direct communication
in informal communications, 470
with top management, 346–347
Direction, 23, 166
Directive leadership, 446, 584–585, 588. 
see also Task-oriented leadership
Direct supervision
formal hierarchy and, 471, 473
functional structure and, 
478–479
simple structure and, 478
Discovery stage, of Four-D model, 
553, 554
Discretion, 363, 367, 368–369
Discrimination, 96
Display rules, 130
Distinctiveness, 97–98, 97–99
Distress, 142
Distributed organizations, 20, 21
Distributed team. see Remote teams
Distributive approach, to negotiation, 
411, 416
Distributive justice The perception that 
appropriate decision criteria rules were applied to 
calculate how various benefits and burdens are 
distributed, 62, 184–187
Divergent thinking Reframing a problem in a 
unique way and generating different approaches to 
the issue, 257
Diverse environment, 488
Diversity
deep-level, 15, 16
inclusive workplace, 15–17
skill, 283
surface-level, 15, 16
team, 293
Divine discontent, 247, 537
Divisional structure An organizational 
structure in which employees are organized 
around geographic areas, outputs (products or 
services), or clients, 478, 479–481
Dominant culture, 503–504
Dreaming stage, of Four-D model, 553
Drives Hardwired characteristics of the brain 
that correct deficiencies or maintain an internal 
equilibrium by producing emotions to energize 
individuals, 166–168, 451
Driving forces, 537
Dynamic environment, 487
Dysfunctional conflict, 144
E
EAP. see Employee assistance program 
(EAP)
Effort-to-performance (E-to-P) expectancy, 
174, 175
Electronic brainstorming A form of 
brainstorming that relies on networked digital 
devices for submitting and sharing creative 
ideas, 306–307, 308
Email
synchronous versus asynchronous, 
336–337
Emojis, 335, 336
Emoticons, 335
Emotional contagion The nonconscious process 
of “catching” or sharing another person’s emotions 
by mimicking that person’s facial expressions and 
other nonverbal behavior, 331–332
Emotional display norms, 130
Emotional episode, 126
Emotional exhaustion, 142
dimensions of, 133–134
feedback and, 134452
outcomes and development, 134
Emotional intelligence (EI) A set of abilities to 
perceive and express emotion, assimilate emotion 
in thought, understand and reason with emotion, 
and regulate emotion in oneself and others,
397, 416, 451
training, police empathy and deescalation 
through, 135
Emotional labor The effort, planning, and 
control needed to express organizationally desired 
emotions during interpersonal 
transactions, 130–132
Emotional process, 125
Emotional stability, 48, 50, 129
Emotions-as-information effect, 252
Emotions performance
attitudes, behavior, and, 125–128
cognitive components, 125–126
cognitive dissonance, 129
in decision making, 251–252
displaying expected, 130–132
emotional intelligence, 133–135
faulty communication of, 334
personality and, 129
regulating, 131–132
types of, 124
in workplace, 124–129
Emotions Physiological, behavioral, and 
psychological episodes experienced toward 
an object, person, or event that create a state 
of readiness, 124
deep acting and, 131–132
faulty communication of, 334
regulation strategies, 132
Empathy A person’s understanding of and 
sensitivity to the feelings, thoughts, and situations 
of others, 105, 106
Empirical correlational research, 13, 585
Empirical research, 585
Employee assistance program (EAP), 147
benefits of, 141, 264–265
contingencies of, 265
in decision making, 263–265
model of, 265
in organizational changes, 543–545
Employee attitude, 5
Employee engagement Individual emotional 
and cognitive motivation, particularly a focused, 
intense, persistent, and purposive effort toward 
work-related goals, 166
Employee-firm goal congruence, 265
Employee involvement The degree to which 
employees influence how their work is organized 
and carried out, 141
Employee motivation. see Motivation
Employee productivity, 20
Employee retention, 138, 139
Employee satisfaction, 138–139
Employee skills and knowledge. 
see Human capital
Employee stock ownership plan (ESOP) A 
reward system that encourages employees to buy 
company stock, 211, 212
Employee turnover, 21, 86
Employee well-being, as function of 
communication, 327
Employment relationship, 214
Empowerment, 369. see also Psychological 
empowerment
psychological practices of, 223–224
Enacted cultural values, 502
Enacted values, 501–502
Encoding-decoding process, 328–329
Encounter stage, in organizational 
socialization, 521
Engineering subsystem, 8
Environmental contingencies, 446
Environmental stimuli, 91
Equality principle, 184
Equity theory A theory explaining how people 
develop perceptions of fairness in the distribution 
and exchange of resources, 168, 184–187
Escalation of commitment The tendency to 
repeat an apparently bad decision or allocate more 
resources to a failing course of action, 254–256I-34 Glossary/Subject Index
ESOP. see Employee stock ownership plan 
(ESOP)
Espoused cultural values, 501–502
Esteem need, 170
Ethical culture, 512
Ethical principal, 15, 62–63
Ethical sensitivity, 63. see also Moral 
sensitivity
Ethic of care, 63
integrity, 61
job satisfaction and, 139
in organizational change, 556
organizational culture and business, 
510–512
in organizational research, 587
values and behavior, 61–65
Ethics The study of moral principles or values 
that determine whether actions are right or wrong 
and outcomes are good or bad, 46, 61
E-to-P expectancies. see Effort-to￾performance (E-to-P) expectancy
Evaluating, 345
Evaluation apprehension Occurs when 
individuals are reluctant to mention ideas that 
seem silly because they believe (often correctly) 
that others in the decision-making group are 
silently evaluating them, 305
Evidence-based knowledge, reasons to 
overlook, 12–13
Evidence-based management The practice 
of making decisions and taking actions based on 
research evidence, 12–13
Exchange, 374, 378
Exchange credits, 378
Exciting goal, 180
Executive function, 48
Exhaustion, 142
Exhibitionism, 52
Exit-voice-loyalty-neglect (EVLN) model 
The four ways, as indicated in the name, that 
employees respond to job dissatisfaction,
136–137
Expectancy theory A motivation theory based 
on the idea that work effort is directed toward 
behaviors that people believe will lead to desired 
outcomes, 168, 174–176, 445
Experience, 124
Experimentation, in transformational 
leadership, 437, 440
Expert power, 364, 365–366, 371
External attribution, 97–99
External environment, 8
culture content aligned with, 
508–509
in organizational design, 486–487
External factor, 97
External locus of control, 89
External self-concept, 89
Extinction, 177
Extraversion A personality dimension describing 
people who are outgoing, talkative, sociable, and 
assertive, 48, 49, 145
Extraverted personality, 129
Extrinsic motivation Occurs when people are 
motivated to engage in an activity for instrumental 
reasons, that is, to receive something that is beyond 
their personal control, 171–173
F
Face-to-face communication. see also
Nonverbal communication
benefits of, 333
media richness of, 338–339
nonverbal communication during, 
330–332
open-space work arrangement and, 346
persuasion during, 376
‘Fail fast’ for creativity, 260
Fairness. see Justice
False-consensus effect A perceptual error in 
which we overestimate the extent to which others 
have beliefs and characteristics similar to our 
own, 102
Faulty communication of emotions, 334
Fearless dominance, 54
Fear of unknown, change and, 540
Feedback, 8
characteristics of effective, 181–182
in communication process model, 
328–329
continuous, 331
defined, 180
emotional intelligence and, 452
evaluating goal setting and, 183
during face-to-face communication, 377
job, 219
nonverbal communication and, 
330–332
persuasive communication and, 340
sources of, 182–183
through strengths-based coaching, 182
Feeling, 55, 125. see also Emotions
Field experiment, 588
Field survey Collects and analyzes information 
in a natural environment, an office, a factory, or 
some other existing location, 588–589
Fight-or-flight response, 169
Filtering, 341, 346–347
Financial rewards, 206, 207. see also
Money; Rewards
competency-based rewards, 208–209
global variations in individual 
performance-based pay, 210
job-status rewards, 208
membership- and seniority-based rewards, 
207–208
performance-based rewards, 210–212
First impression, in job application, 102
Five Cs model, 292
issues when applying, 51
work performance and, 49–51
Five-factor (Big Five) model The five broad 
dimensions representing most personality traits: 
conscientiousness, emotional stability, openness 
to experience, agreeableness, and extraversion,
47, 48–49, 56, 57, 259
Fixation, in teams, 307
Fixed-pay rewards, 207
Flat structure, 474–475
Flattening, organizational structure, 475
Flexible work arrangement, 18
Force field analysis Kurt Lewin’s model of 
systemwide change that helps change agents 
diagnose the forces that drive and restrain proposed 
organizational change, 537
Forcing, in conflict-handling styles, 402–403, 
404, 405
Forecasting, 366
Formal communication channel, 470
Formal hierarchy, 470, 471–472
Formalization The degree to which organizations 
standardize behavior through rules, procedures, 
formal training, and related mechanisms,
472, 476, 477
Formal team dynamics, 5
Four-D model, of appreciative inquiry, 
553–554
Four-drive theory A motivation theory based 
on the innate drives to acquire, bond, learn, and 
defend that incorporates both emotions and 
rationality, 168–170
Frequent job rotation, 221
Functional structure An organizational 
structure in which employees are organized around 
specific knowledge or other resources, 478–479
Fundamental attribution error The tendency 
to see the person rather than the situation as the 
main cause of that person’s behavior, 99
Future Festival, 366
Future search conference, 554
G
Gainsharing plan A team-based reward that 
calculates bonuses from the work unit’s cost 
savings and productivity improvement, 207, 211
Gamification, 178
Gaming the system, rewards and, 
214, 215
Gapjil, 67
Gendered network, 373–374
General adaptation syndrome A model of the 
stress experience, consisting of three stages: alarm 
reaction, resistance, and exhaustion, 142Glossary/Subject Index I-35
Generational diversity, 400
Generation X, 15, 329
Generation Z, 15, 329
GIFs, 335–336
Global competition, 15
Globalization
incompatible, 399
in negotiations, 412–413
problems with, in decision making, 
247–250
and remote teams, 303
and work-life integration, 17
and work overload, 144
Global mindset An individual’s ability to 
perceive, appreciate, and empathize with people 
from other cultures, and to process complex cross￾cultural information, 106–107
Goal A cognitive representation of a desired end 
state that a person is committed to attain, 180
Goal setting
employee motivation and, 180–183
as self-leadership practice, 224, 225
Golden handcuffs, 208
“Good evidence,” 13
Grapevine An unstructured and informal 
communication network founded on social 
relationships rather than organizational charts 
or job descriptions, 347–348
Great Resignation, 3
Greenhouse gas emissions, 21
Grounded theory A process of developing 
knowledge through the constant interplay of data 
collection, analysis, and theory development, 586
Groups. see Teams
Growth need, 170
Growth need strength, 220
Guanxi, 370
Guiding coalition, 548
H
Halo effect A perceptual error whereby our 
general impression of a person, usually based 
on one prominent characteristic, colors our 
perception of other characteristics of that 
person, 101
Harassment, workplace, 144
Hedonism, 58–59
Heuristic biases, 249
Hidden area, of Johari Window, 104
Hierarchy
as coordination mechanism, 471–472
improving communication throughout, 
345–347
High-activation emotion (positive and 
negative), 125
High-expectancy employee, 100
Homogenization, 95
Hospitality industry, COVID-19 pandemic 
and, 138
Human capital The knowledge, skills, abilities, 
creative thinking, and other valued resources that 
employees bring to the organization, 9–10, 303
Human relations, 5–6
Human rule, in design thinking, 262
Hybrid work arrangements, 20
I
IAT. see Implicit Association Test (IAT)
Identification-based trust, 300
Illumination (insight) stage, of creative 
process, 257, 258
Impact, 223
Imperfect rationality, 242, 245, 247, 250
Implicit Association Test (IAT), 103, 
104–105
Implicit favorite A preferred alternative that the 
decision maker uses repeatedly as a comparison 
with other choices, 248
Implicit leadership theory A theory stating that 
people evaluate a leader’s effectiveness in terms of 
how well that person fits preconceived beliefs about 
the features and behaviors of effective leaders 
(leadership prototypes) and that people tend to 
inflate the influence of leaders on organizational 
events, 448–450
Impression management Actively shaping 
through self-presentation and other means the 
perceptions and attitudes that others have of us, 
374, 375, 377–378
Inclusive workplace A workplace that values 
people of all identities and allows them to be fully 
themselves while contributing to the organization,
15–17
Incompatible goal, 399
Incongruent organizational systems, 541
Incongruent team dynamics, 541
Incubation stage, of creative process, 257
Independent power, 370
Independent variable, 587
Individual behavior
counter-productive work behaviors, 
26, 28
joining and staying with organization, 
26, 28
maintaining work attendance, 
26, 28–29
organizational citizenship, 26, 27–28
task performance, 26–27
types of, 26–29
values and, 59–60
Individual inputs and processes, 11
Individualism A cross-cultural value describing 
the degree to which people in a culture emphasize 
independence and personal uniqueness, 65–66, 68
Individual outcome, 11
Individual performance-based pay, 210
Individual rewards, 210
Individual rights, 62
Inductive hypothesis testing, 588
Inductive stage, of theory building, 584
Inequity, and employee motivation, 185–187
Inequity tension, 185–186
assertiveness, 375
coalition formation, 375
exchange, 375, 378
impression management, 375, 377–378
information control, 375
persuasion, 376–377
silent authority, 374, 375
tactics, 374–378
upward appeal, 375–376
Influence Any behavior that attempts to alter 
someone’s attitudes or behavior, 374, 379, 380
Informal communication, 468, 489
coordination through, 469–470
departmentalization and, 477–478
and self-directed teams, 473
Informal groups, 5, 284
Informal norm, 365
Information, 371
controlling, 365, 375
gathering, for negotiation, 414–415
misrepresent/falsify, 214
processing of
biased decision heuristics, 249
problems with, 248–250
Information overload A condition in which the 
volume of information received exceeds the person’s 
capacity to process it, 341–342
as communication barrier (noise), 
341–342
Information-processing capacity, 341–342
Ingratiation, 378–379
Innovation, 502, 503
Inoculation effect A persuasive communication 
strategy of warning listeners that others will try to 
influence them in the future and that they should 
be wary of the opponent’s arguments, 377
Input ratio, 185–186
Inquisition, 410
Instant messaging, 338. see also
Communication channel
Integrated environment, 488
Integration, of organizational cultures, 513
Integrative approach, to negotiation, 411–412
Integrative Model of Organizational 
Behavior, 10–11
Integrator role, 408, 470
Integrity, 452
Integrity, of leadership, 451
Intensity, 23, 166
Intentional discrimination (prejudice), 96
Interactional justice The perception that 
appropriate rules were applied in the way the 
people involved were treated throughout the 
decision process, 184, 188
Interdependence, 370, 399, 474. see also Task 
interdependence
Interdependent power, 370I-36 Glossary/Subject Index
Intergenerational differentiation, 474
Intergroup mirroring, 408
Internal attribution, 97–99
Internal communication, 327
Internal factor, 97
Internal locus of control, 89
Internal pay equity, 208
Internet, birth of, 332
Interpersonal conflict, 144, 402–406
Interpretation, perceptual organization and, 
92–94
Interpretivism The view held in many qualitative 
studies that reality comes from shared meaning 
among people in a particular environment, 584
Intervention
third-party, 409–411
Intranet, 182
Intrapersonal conflict, 394
Intrinsic motivation Occurs when people fulfill 
their needs for competence and autonomy by 
engaging in the activity itself, rather than from 
an externally controlled outcome of that 
activity, 171–172, 218, 448
Introversion, 48, 129, 145
Intuition The ability to know when a problem or 
opportunity exists and to select the best course of 
action without conscious reasoning, 251–254
Intuitive, 554–555
Investment advisory firms, 293
J
Jargon, 341
Job burnout, 143
Job characteristics model A job design model 
that relates the motivational properties of jobs to 
specific personal and organizational consequences 
of those properties, 218–220, 224
Job design
job enlargement, 222
job enrichment, 222–223
job rotation, 221
job specialization, 215, 216, 217
motivation and, 218–220
scientific management, 216
work efficiency and, 215–216
Job diagnostic survey, 232–233
Job enlargement The practice of increasing 
the number and variety of related tasks assigned 
to a job, 222
Job enrichment The practice of giving 
employees more responsibility for scheduling, 
coordinating, and planning their own work,
222–223
Job evaluation Systematically rating the worth 
of jobs within an organization by measuring the 
required skill, effort, responsibility, and working 
conditions, 208
Job feedback, 219
Job rotation, 221
business ethics, 139
customer satisfaction and, 138–139
importance of, 134
performance and, 137
problems with, 217
scientific management and, 216
in selected countries, 136
work behavior and, 136–137
Job satisfaction A person’s evaluation of his or 
her job and work context, 135, 218
Job specialization The result of a division of 
labor, in which work is subdivided into separate 
jobs assigned to different people, 215, 216
Job-status rewards, 208
Johari Window A model of mutual understand￾ing that encourages disclosure and feedback 
to increase our own open area and reduce 
the blind, hidden, and unknown areas,
104, 105, 408
Judgment, 125
Jungian personality theory, 54–56
Justice, 187, 188
distributive, 184–187
interactional, 184
procedural, 184
support and, 140
K
Knowledge-based trust, 300
Knowledge of work results, 218, 220
L
Labelling, 51
Laboratory experiment Any research study in 
which independent variables and variables outside 
the researcher’s main focus of inquiry can be 
controlled to some extent, 588
Language, 501
as communication barrier (noise), 
340–341
as cross-cultural communication 
barrier, 342
Large group interventions Highly participative 
events that view organizations as open systems (i.e., 
involve as many employees and other stakeholders 
as possible) and adopt a future and positive focus 
of change, 554–555
Lateness, employee, 28
cross-cultural issues in, 454–455
decisive, 247
gender and, 455
implicit, 448–450
managerial, 442–445
path-goal, 445–447
personal attributes perspective, 450–454
prototypes of, 449
romance of, 449–450
shared, 436–437
transformational, 437–442
trust in, 224
Leadership Influencing, motivating, and 
enabling others to contribute toward the 
effectiveness and success of the organizations 
of which they are members, 436
Leadership substitutes theory A theory 
identifying conditions that either limit a leader’s 
ability to influence subordinates or make a 
particular leadership style unnecessary, 448
Learned capabilities, 24
Learned needs theory, 173
Learning
change and, 543, 544
in organizational socialization, 519–520
Learning orientation A set of beliefs and norms 
in which people are encouraged to question past 
practices, learn new ideas, experiment putting ideas 
into practice, and view mistakes as part of the 
learning process, 260, 440, 509
Legitimate power An agreement among 
organizational members that people in specific 
roles can request a set of behaviors from 
others, 364–365, 370
Lewin’s force field analysis model, 536–538
action research approach, 550–551
cross-cultural and ethical issues in 
change, 556
leadership, coalitions, social networks, and 
pilot projects, 548
unfreezing and refreezing, 541
Liaison role, 470
Life experience, 48
authentic leadership, 453
path-goal theory of contingencies, 447
self-evaluation, 88–89
self-leadership, 227
Locus of control A person’s general belief about 
the amount of control he or she has over personal 
life events, 89
Low-activation emotion (positive and 
negative), 125
Loyalty, 137
“Lunch and learn” session, 408
M
Machiavellianism A personality trait of people 
who demonstrate a strong motivation to achieve 
their own goals at the expense of others, who 
believe that deceit is a natural and acceptable 
way to achieve their goals, who take pleasure in 
outwitting and misleading others using crude 
influence tactics, and who have a cynical disregard 
for morality, 46, 52, 380
Maintaining work attendance, 26, 28–29
interdependence of, and transformational 
leadership, 443
leadership substitutes theory, 448Glossary/Subject Index I-37
path-goal leadership, 445–448
servant leadership, 444
task- and people-oriented leadership, 
443–444
transformational leadership versus, 443
Male-female
communication conflicts between, 344
differences in communication, 
342–343
differences in negotiation, 417
issues in leadership, 455
value of money and, 207
Male-female leadership, 455
Management by wandering around (MBWA) 
A communication practice in which executives get 
out of their offices and learn from others in the 
organization through face-to-face dialogue, 346
Managerial leadership A leadership perspective 
stating that effective leaders help employees 
improve their performance and well-being toward 
current objectives and practices, 442–445
Manifest conflict, 398–399
Marketing/sales subsystem, 8
ability, 24–25, 549
employee motivation, 23
role perceptions, 25
situational factors, 25
strategies for diffusing of change, 549
MARS model A model depicting the four 
variables-motivation, ability, role perceptions, 
and situational factors-that directly influence an 
individual’s voluntary behavior and performance,
22, 88, 143, 166
Maslow’s needs hierarchy theory A 
motivation theory of needs arranged in a hierarchy, 
whereby people are motivated to fulfill a higher 
need as a lower one becomes gratified,
169–170, 245
Matrix structure An organizational structure 
that overlays two structures (such as a geographic 
divisional and a product structure) in order to 
leverage the benefits of both, 482–485
Maturity, 134
MBTI. see Myers–Briggs type indicator 
(MBTI)
Meaningful interaction, 105, 223
Meaningfulness, 219
Measurable goal, 180
Mechanistic structure An organizational 
structure with a narrow span of control and a 
high degree of formalization and centralization,
476–477, 487, 490
Media richness A communication channel’s 
data-carrying capacity-that is, the volume and 
variety of information that can be transmitted 
during a specific time, 338–339, 377
Mediation, 410
Membership- and seniority-based rewards, 
207–208
in communication, 330
of decision makers, 246
multilevel, 107
of team members, 294–295
Member similarity, 297
Mental imagery The process of mentally 
practicing a task and visualizing its successful 
completion, 225–226
Mental models Knowledge structures that we 
develop to describe, explain, and predict the world 
around us, 94
Mental skill set, 169
Merchants, in ancient Rome, 4
Merger, 512–513
Meritocracy, principle of, 185
Merit pay, 207
Micromanagement, coordination 
through, 471
Millennial (Gen Y), 15, 21, 329
Millennials, 15, 16, 329
Mindfulness A person’s receptive and impartial 
attention to and awareness of the present situation 
as well as to one’s own thoughts and emotions in 
that moment, 63–64
Mission statement. see Vision and mission 
statements
Model of Emotions, Attitudes, and 
Behavior, 126
Money, 206–207
Mood, 124. see also Emotions
Moral identity, 63
Moral intensity The degree to which an issue 
demands the application of ethical principles, 63
Moral sensitivity A person’s ability to recognize 
the presence of an ethical issue and determine its 
relative importance, 63–64
Morphological analysis, 261
ability-motivation-opportunity (AMO) 
model and, 22
attributional theory, 97–99
drive-based theories
four-drive theory, 168–170
intrinsic and extrinsic motivation, 
171–173
learned needs theory, 173
Maslow’s needs hierarchy theory, 
170–171
drives and needs, 166–168
expectancy theory, 174–176
four-drive theory, 168–170
goal setting and feedback, 165–166, 
180–183
for inclusion and assimilation with 
others, 89
inequity and, 185–187
intrinsic versus extrinsic, 171–173
of leadership, 450–451
learned needs theory, 173
and legitimate power, 364–365
MARS model and (see MARS model)
Maslow’s needs hierarchy theory, 170–171
organizational behavior modification, 
177–179
organizational justice, 184–188
self-concept and organizational 
behavior, 91
self-enhancement and, 87
self-fulfilling prophecy, 101
in service profit chain model, 138, 139
social cognitive theory, 179
Motivation The forces within a person that affect 
his or her direction, intensity, and persistence of 
effort for voluntary behavior, 10, 23, 549
Multicommunicate, ability to, 339
Multidisciplinary anchor, 12, 14
Multigenerational workforce, 15
Multigenerational workplace, 329
Multiple levels of analysis anchor, 
12, 14–15
Multisource (360-degree) feedback Informa￾tion about an employee’s performance collected 
from a full circle of people, including subordinates, 
peers, supervisors, and customers, 182
Mutual gains approach, to negotiation, 411
Mutual understanding intervention, 
407–408
Myers-Briggs type indicator (MBTI) An 
instrument designed to measure the elements 
of Jungian personality theory, particularly 
preferences regarding perceiving and judging 
information, 45, 54–56
N
Narcissism A personality trait of people with a 
grandiose, obsessive belief in their superiority and 
entitlement, a propensity to aggressively engage 
in attention-seeking behaviors, an intense envy 
of others, and tendency to exhibit arrogance, 
callousness, and exploitation of others for 
personal aggrandizement, 46, 52, 380
Natural grouping, 223. see also Job 
enrichment
Natural rewards, 224, 225–226
Nature versus nurture, 47–48
Need for achievement (nAch) A learned need 
in which people want to accomplish reasonably 
challenging goals and desire unambiguous 
feedback and recognition for their success, 173
Need for affiliation (nAff) A learned need in 
which people seek approval from others, conform to 
their wishes and expectations, and avoid conflict 
and confrontation, 173
Need for beauty (aesthetic need), 171
Need for power (nPow) A learned need in 
which people want to control their environment, 
including people and material resources, to benefit 
either themselves (personalized power) or others 
(socialized power), 173I-38 Glossary/Subject Index
Need principle, 184
Needs Goal-directed forces that people 
experience, 168
Need to know, 170, 171
Negative emotion, 124, 125, 129, 185, 186
Negative reinforcement, 178
Negative self-talk, 225, 226
Negative valence, of change, 540
Neglect, 136–137
audience for, 417
change and, 543, 545
distributive versus integrative approaches to, 
411–412
as exchange influence activity, 378
gender and, 417
location and physical setting for, 
416–417
preparing to, 412–413
process of, 414–416
resolving conflict through, 411–417
Negotiation The process whereby two or 
more conflicting parties attempt to resolve their 
divergent goals by redefining the terms of their 
interdependence, 411, 414
male-female differences in, 417
Network structure An alliance of several 
organizations for the purpose of creating a product 
or serving a client, 485–486
Neuroticism A personality dimension describing 
people who tend to be anxious, insecure, self￾conscious, depressed, and temperamental,
48, 49, 50, 129, 145
Newcomer socialization, 522
Nominal group technique A variation of 
brainwriting consisting of three stages in which 
participants (1) silently and independently 
document their ideas, (2) collectively describe these 
ideas to the other team members without critique, 
and then (3) silently and independently evaluate 
the ideas presented, 308
Nondirective leadership style, 585, 587
Nonprogrammed decision, 244
Nonsocial source, of feedback, 182–183
Nonsubstitutability, 363, 367–368
Non-territorial workspace, 401
Nonverbal communication, 330–332
body language mistakes in job 
interview, 331
difference across cultures, 343
digital, 335–336
emotional contagion and, 331–332
persuasion and, 340
sensitivity between gender, 344
verbal versus, 330
Normative commitment, 140
Norming, 295–296
performance-oriented, 447
psychological safety and, 397
social acceptance and, 337–338
Norm of reciprocity A felt obligation and 
social expectation of helping or otherwise giving 
something of value to someone who has already 
helped or given something of value to you,
140, 365, 378
Norms The informal rules and shared 
expectations that groups establish to regulate 
the behavior of their members, 130, 295–296
team, developing and changing, 296
Not-invented-here syndrome, 540–541
Nurture, 47–48
O
OB. see Organizational behavior (OB)
Omitting. see Filtering
Onboarding process, 522
Open area, of Johari Window, 104
Openness to change, 58–59
Openness to experience A personality 
dimension describing people who are imaginative, 
creative, unconventional, curious, nonconforming, 
autonomous, and aesthetically perceptive,
48, 49, 50, 58
Open office, 401
Open systems The view that organizations 
depend on the external environment for resources, 
affect that environment through their output, and 
consist of internal subsystems that transform inputs 
to outputs, 8–9
Opportunity, in decision making, 
243–244, 251
“Optimal conflict” perspective, 395
Organic structure An organizational structure 
with a wide span of control, low formalization, and 
decentralized decision making, 476–477, 487
Organizational behavior knowledge, 12–15
Organizational behavior modification 
(OB Mod) A theory that explains employee 
behavior in terms of the antecedent conditions 
and consequences of that behavior, 177–179
Organizational behavior research, 586
Organizational behavior (OB) The study of 
what people think, feel, and do in and around 
organizations, 4
corporate social responsibility (CSR), 10
guiding organizations through continuous 
turbulence, 15
historical foundations of, 5–6
importance for organizations, 7–10
importance for you, 6
integrative model, 10–11
organizations as open systems, 8–9
overview, 4–6, 29
personal theories to predict and 
influence, 7
self-concept and, 91
stakeholders, 10
values, 10
Organizational change. see Change
Organizational citizenship behaviors 
(OCBS) Various forms of cooperation and 
helpfulness to others that support the organization’s 
social and psychological context, 27–28, 49
Organizational commitment, 134
affective, 139
building, 140–141
continuance, 139–140
Organizational comprehension, 141, 518
Organizational constraint, 143
artifacts of, 501
benefits of, 508–509
business ethics and, 510–512
changing and strengthening, 514–518
content of, 502–503
contingencies of, 508–509
in corporate mergers, 512–513
deciphering, through artifacts, 504–506
elements of, 500–504
espoused versus enacted values, 501–502
importance of, 506–512
organizational socialization, 518–522
subcultures, 503–504
Organizational culture The values and 
assumptions shared within an organization, 500
Organizational design
contingencies of, 486–490
external environment, 486–488
organization size, 488–489
strategy, 489–490
technology, 489
Organizational effectiveness An ideal state 
in which an organization has a good fit with its 
external environment, effectively transforms inputs 
to outputs through human capital, and satisfies the 
needs of key stakeholders, 8
Organizational inputs and processes, 11
adverse consequences of, 380
individual differences in, 380
Machiavellianism and, 380
minimizing, 380–381
Organizational justice. see Justice
Organizational-level rewards, 212
Organizational outcomes (effectiveness), 11
Organizational politics The use of influence 
tactics for personal gain at the perceived expense 
of others and the organization, 53, 379
individual differences in, 380
Organizational power, 14
Organizational research
causation in, 586–587
design strategies, 587
ethics in, 587
sampling in, 586
Organizational rewards, 211–212
Organizational size, 488–489Glossary/Subject Index I-39
centralization, 472, 475–476
departmentalism, 472
elements of, 472–477
division of labor, 469, 472
flat structure, 474
in team effectiveness model, 287
work activities, 469–472
formal hierarchy, 471–472
formalization, 472, 476
improving, 521–522
informal communication, 469–470
learning and adjustment process, 518
mechanistic versus organic, 476–477
psychological contracts, 519
span of control, 472–475
stages of, 519–521
standardization, 470
Organizational socialization The process by 
which individuals learn the values, expected behav￾iors, and social knowledge necessary to assume 
their roles in the organization, 14
Organizational strategy The way the organiza￾tion positions itself in its environment in relation to 
its stakeholders, given the organization’s resources, 
capabilities, and mission, 489–490
Organizational structure The division of labor 
as well as the patterns of coordination, communica￾tion, workflow, and formal power that direct 
organizational activities, 58, 468
Organizations Groups of people who work 
interdependently toward some purpose, 4–5
Outcome-input ratio, 185
Outcome orientation, 502
Outcome valences, 174–175, 243, 445
Overconfidence (inflated team efficacy), 
305–306
Overreward inequity, 185, 187
Overt behavior, 399
P
Paid time off, 207
Parallel learning structure A highly participa￾tive arrangement composed of people from most 
levels of the organization who follow the action 
research model to produce meaningful 
organizational change, 555
Participative leadership, 446, 455
Past experience, 168, 170
contingencies, 446–447
evaluating, 447
leadership styles, 446
Path-goal leadership theory A leadership 
theory stating that effective leaders choose the most 
appropriate leadership style(s), depending on the 
employee and situation, to influence employee 
expectations about desired results and their positive 
outcomes, 445–448
Pay, skill-based, 209
People-oriented leadership, 443–444, 
446–447, 455
Perceived environment, 125
Perceived inequity, 186
Perceived value, of service, 138
attribution theory, 97–99
awareness of biases, 102–103
as communication barrier 
(noise), 340
confirmation bias, 92
conflict as, 399
false-consensus effect, 102
halo effect, 101
improving, 102–105
meaningful interaction, 105
mental models, 94
model of Perceptual process, 91
perceptual organization and interpretation, 
92–94
primacy effect, 102
processing and problems, 94–102
recency effect, 102
selective attention, 91
self-awareness, 103–105
self-fulfilling prophecy, 99–101
Perception The process of receiving information 
about and making sense of the world around us,
91, 362, 402
Perceptual bias, 102
Perceptual defense, 246
Perceptual organization, and interpretation, 
92–94
Performance, 302
job satisfaction and, 137
linking rewards to, 213
work, 49–51, 86
Performance appraisal, 165
Performance-based rewards, 89, 
210–212, 448
Performance criterion priority, 25
Performance-oriented norms, 447
Performance review, 182
Performance-to-outcome (P-to-O) 
expectancy, 174
evaluating organizational-level 
rewards, 212
increasing, 175
learning behavior consequences, 179
Persistence, 23, 166
Personal attributes perspective, of 
leadership, 450–454
Personal brand, 368
Personal identities, 90
Personality theory, 57
dark triad, 52–54
and effect of drives and needs on 
decisions and behavior, 170–171
emotions and, 130
five-factor (Big Five) model, 48–51
Jungian personality theory, 54–55
of leadership, 450–451
Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI), 
54–55
nature versus nurture, 47–48
and stress, 145
tests of, to select job applicants, 57
Personality The relatively enduring pattern of 
thoughts, emotions, and behaviors that characterize 
a person, along with the psychological processes 
behind those characteristics, 46
Personality trait, 46–47, 51
Personalized power, 173
Personal observation, 584
Personal values, 58–59, 170–171
elements of, 374–378
and grapevine communication, 348
and individual behavior, 59–60
Persuasion The use of facts, logical arguments, 
and emotional appeals to change another person’s 
beliefs and attitudes, usually for the purpose of 
changing the person’s behavior, 340
Physical role spaces, 19
Physical structure, 501, 506
Physiological need, 170
Physiological state, 124
Pilot projects, and diffusion of change, 
548–549
Poetic principle, 553
Police, and emotional intelligence 
training, 135
Politics. see Organizational politics
Pooled interdependence, 290
Positive emotion, 124
Positive organizational behavior A perspec￾tive of organizational behavior that focuses on 
building positive qualities and traits within 
individuals or institutions as opposed to focusing 
on what is wrong with them, 101, 551
Positive politics, 379
Positive principle, 552
Positive reinforcement, 177
Positive self-talk, 225
Positivism A view held in quantitative research 
that reality exists independent of the perceptions 
and interpretation of people, 584
Postdecisional justification, 254, 256
Potential, 362
consequences of, 369–370
contingencies of, 367–369
meaning of, 362
of social networks, 370–374
sources of, 364–367
Power distance A cross-cultural value describing 
the degree to which people in a culture accept 
unequal distribution of power in a society, 66
Power distance culture, 67
Power The capacity of a person, team, or organi￾zation to influence others, 5–6, 58–59, 173
consequences of, 369–370
contingencies of, 367–369
deference to, 367
Practical intelligence, 451–452
Practical orientation anchor, 12, 13–14I-40 Glossary/Subject Index
Preemployment socialization, 519–520
Preferred path, 445
Prejudice. see Discrimination; Stereotyping
Preliminary theory, 584
Preparation stage of creative process, 257
Presenteeism, 29
Prevention, 366
Primacy effect A perceptual error in which we 
quickly form an opinion of people based on the first 
information we receive about them, 102
Primary needs. see Drives; Maslow’s needs 
hierarchy theory
Principle of meritocracy, 185
Principle of randomization, 586
Privacy, in organizational research, 587
Proactive task performance, 26, 27, 49–50
Probability
expectancy theory, 174, 175, 243
four-drive theory, 169–170
goal setting, 180, 183
organizational behavior modification, 
178–179
rational choice decision making, 
242–243
social cognitive theory, 179
Problem identification, in decision making, 
245–247
Problem solving
as conflict-handling style, 402–403, 404
Procedural justice The perception that 
appropriate procedural rules were applied 
throughout the decision process, 184, 188
Process losses Resources (including time and 
energy) expended toward team development and 
maintenance rather than the task, 285–286
Production blocking A time constraint in team 
decision making due to the procedural requirement 
that only one person may speak at a time, 305
Production subsystem, 8
Proficient task performance, 26–27, 49
Profit-sharing bonuses, 212
Profit-sharing plan A reward system that pays 
bonuses to employees on the basis of the previous 
year’s level of corporate profits, 207, 212
Programmed decision, 265
Promotion-based pay increase, 207
Prospect theory An innate tendency to feel 
stronger negative emotion from losing a particular 
amount than positive emotion from gaining an 
equal amount, 255
Psychological contract The individual’s beliefs 
about the terms and conditions of a reciprocal 
exchange agreement between that person and 
another party (typically an employer), 519
Psychological empowerment A perceptual 
and emotional state in which people experience 
more self-determination, meaning, competence, and 
impact regarding their role in the 
organization, 223–224
Psychological ownership, 141
Psychological research, 14
Psychological safety A shared belief that it 
is safe to engage in interpersonal risk-taking; 
specifically, that presenting unusual ideas, 
constructively disagreeing with the majority, and 
experimenting with new work behaviors will not 
result in coworkers posing a threat to their self￾concept, status, or career, 306, 397
Psychological state, 124, 218, 219
Psychopathy A personality trait of people who 
ruthlessly dominate and manipulate others without 
empathy or any feelings of remorse or anxiety, 
use superficial charm, yet are social predators who 
engage in antisocial, impulsive, and often 
fraudulent thrill-seeking behavior, 46, 52–53, 380
P-to-O expectancies. see Performance-to￾outcome (P-to-O) expectancy
Punishment, 177
Purchasing system, 8
R
“Rapport talk,” 343
appraising decisions and, 247
biased decision heuristics, 249
bounded rationality and, 247
evaluating decisions and, 254
example, 242–243
history of, 242
human emotions and, 251
imperfect rationality, 247
problems with, 245, 248–250
process of, 243–245
satisficing and, 250
sunk cost effect, 254, 255–256
Realistic job preview (RJP) A method of 
improving organizational socialization in which 
job applicants are given a balance of positive and 
negative information about the job and work 
context, 521
Reality shock The stress that results when 
employees perceive discrepancies between their 
preemployment expectations and on-the-job 
reality, 521
Recency effect A perceptual error in which the 
most recent information dominates our perception 
of others, 102
Reciprocal interdependence, 290, 401
Re-design rule, in design thinking 
rule, 262
Reduced personal accomplishment, 143
as CEO power, 369
social networks and, 370–371
as source of power in organization, 364
Referent power The capacity to influence others 
on the basis of an identification with and respect 
for the power holder, 366–367
Referral, customer, 138–139
Refreezing The latter part of the change process, 
in which systems and structures are introduced that 
reinforce and maintain the desired behaviors,
537, 541, 546
Relational conflict, 397
Relational contract, 519
Relational safe, 84
Relationship conflict A type of conflict in which 
people focus their discussion on qualities of the 
people in the dispute, rather than on the qualities 
of the ideas presented regarding a task-related 
issue, 396–397
Relevant feedback, 181
Relevant goal, 180
Remote teams Teams whose members operate 
across space, time, and organizational boundaries 
and are linked through information technologies to 
achieve organizational tasks, 303–304
Remote work, 19, 20–22
benefits and risks, 20–21
contingencies of success, 22
defined, 20
“Report talk,” 343
Representativeness heuristic A natural 
tendency to evaluate probabilities of events or 
objects by the degree to which they resemble (are 
representative of) other events or objects rather 
than on objective probability information,
249–250
Representative sampling Sampling 
a population in such a way that we can 
extrapolate the results of the sample to the 
larger population, 586
Research design strategy, 587
Resistance, 142, 378–379
Resistance point, in negotiation, 412
Resistance to change, 537
breaking routines, 541
fear of unknown, 540
incongruent organizational systems, 541
incongruent team dynamics, 541
negative valence of change, 539
not-invented-here syndrome, 540–541
reasons for, 539–540
Resource scarcity. see Scarce resources
Respect, 503
Responding, 344, 345. see also Feedback
Responsibility, 218, 220
Restraining forces, reducing, 537, 
543–545
Reviewing goal, 180
Reward inflation, 179
Reward power, 364, 365, 370
Rewards
and culture, 514, 515
improving effectiveness of performance￾based, 212–215
performance-based, 89, 210–212, 448
team-based, 295–296
in team effectiveness model, 287–289Glossary/Subject Index I-41
Rituals The programmed routines of daily 
organizational life that dramatize the 
organization’s culture, 501, 505–506
RJP. see Realistic job preview (RJP)
Role ambiguity, 25
Role A set of behaviors that people are expected 
to repeatedly perform because they hold formal or 
informal positions in a team and organization, 296
Role clarity, 25
Role management, 25, 521
Role perceptions The degree to which a person 
understands the job duties assigned to or expected 
of him or her, 22–23, 549
Role-related boundaries, 20
Roundtable forum, 346
Routines, breaking, 541
S
Safety need, 170
Sampling, in organizational research, 586
Satisficing Selecting an alternative that is satis￾factory or “good enough,” rather than the alterna￾tive with the highest value (maximization), 250
Scarce resources, 399, 401, 409
Scenario planning A systematic process of 
thinking about alternative futures and what the 
organization should do to anticipate and react to 
those environments, 254
Schadenfreude, 52
Schedules of reinforcement, 177–178
Scientific management The practice of system￾atically partitioning work into its smallest elements 
and standardizing tasks to achieve maximum 
efficiency, 216
Scientific method Systematic, controlled, em￾pirical, and critical investigation of hypothetical 
propositions about the presumed relationships 
among natural phenomena, 584, 585–586
SDTs. see Self-directed teams (SDTS)
Security, 59–60
Seinfeld, 246
Selective attention The process of attending to 
some information received by our senses and ignor￾ing other information, 91
Self-actualization need, 170
Self-awareness, 103–105
characteristics on well-being and behavior, 
86–87
complexity, consistency, and clarity, 84–86
as leader identity, 450–451
locus of control, 89
motivation process and, 168, 171
and organizational behavior, 91
self-enhancement, 87
self-evaluation, 88–89
self-verification, 87–88
social self, 89–91
Self-concept An individual’s self-beliefs and 
self-evaluations, 84, 452
Self-determination, 223
Self-directed teams (SDTS) Cross-functional 
work groups that are organized around work pro￾cesses, complete an entire piece of work requiring 
several interdependent tasks, and have substantial 
autonomy over the execution of those tasks,
283–303, 473
Self-direction, 59
and explanation for stereotyping, 
95–96
positive and negative consequences, 87
Self-efficacy A person’s belief that he or she has 
the ability, motivation, correct role perceptions, and 
favorable situation to complete a task successfully,
88, 179, 181, 227
Self-enhancement A person’s inherent motiva￾tion to have a positive self-concept (and to have 
others perceive him or her favorably), such as being 
competent, attractive, lucky, ethical, and important,
59, 90, 255
Self-esteem, 88, 227, 377
Self-evaluation, 87, 88–89
Self-expansion, 84
Self-fulfilling prophecy The perceptual process 
in which our expectations about another person 
cause that person to act more consistently with 
those expectations, 99–101
Self-isolation, 303
Self-justification effect, 254
constructive thought strategies, 224, 
225–226
effectiveness of, 227
natural rewards, 225, 226
personal and situational predictors of, 
227–228
personal goal setting, 224–225
practices of, 224–228
self-monitoring, 224, 225, 227
self-reinforcement, 224, 227
Self-leadership Specific cognitive and behavioral 
strategies to achieve personal goals and standards 
through self-direction and self-motivation, 10, 
224, 448
Self-monitoring, 224, 227
Self-promotion, 52
Self-regulation, 179
Self-reinforcement Reinforcement that occurs 
when an employee has control over a reinforcer but 
doesn’t “take” it until completing a self-set goal,
179, 224, 227
Self-serving bias The tendency to attribute our 
favorable outcomes to internal factors and our 
failures to external factors, 99, 100
Self-talk The process of talking to ourselves about 
our own thoughts or actions, 225
Self-transcendence, 59
Self-verification A person’s inherent motivation 
to confirm and maintain his or her existing self￾concept, 84, 87
Self-view, 85
Sense making, 508
Sensing, 54, 55, 345
Separation, of organizational cultures, 513
Sequential interdependence, 290, 401
Servant leadership The view that leaders 
serve followers, rather than vice versa; leaders 
help employees fulfill their needs and are coaches, 
stewards, and facilitators of employee development,
444–445
Service profit chain model A theory explain￾ing how employee’s job satisfaction influences com￾pany profitability indirectly through service quality, 
customer loyalty, and related factors, 138
Service quality, 138–139
Sexual harassment, 144
Share assumptions, 501–502
Shared leadership The view that leadership 
is a role, not a position assigned to one person; con￾sequently, people within the team and organization 
lead each other, 436–437
Shared mental models, 301, 329
Shared values, 58, 140–141, 500
Silence, as cross-cultural communication 
barrier, 342–343
Silent authority, 374
Silents, 15
Similarity-attraction effect, 297
Simple environment, 487
Simple structure, 478
Simultaneity principle, 552
Situational factors, 22, 23, 64, 549
Skill-based pay, 209
Skill diversity. see Diversity
Skill variety The extent to which employees must 
use different skills and talents to perform tasks 
within their jobs, 218
SMARTER acronym, 180
Social acceptance, 337–338
Social capital The knowledge, opportunities, and 
other resources available to members of a social 
network, along with the mutual support, trust, reci￾procity, and coordination that facilitate sharing of 
those resources, 370–371
Social cognitive theory A theory that explains 
how learning and motivation occur by observing 
and modeling others as well as by anticipating the 
consequences of our behavior, 179, 224
Social distancing, 303, 401
Social feedback, 220I-42 Glossary/Subject Index
Social glue, 508
Social identity, 141
in China, 90
false-consensus effect, 102
and stereotyping, 95
Social identity theory A theory stating that 
people define themselves by the groups to which 
they belong or have an emotional attachment,
89, 284
Social interaction, 167, 220
Social isolation, 21
Socialization, 168, 516. see also
Organizational socialization
Socialization agent, 522
Socialization subsystem, 8
Socialized power, 173
centrality in, 372–373
dark side of, 373–374
power through, 372–374
and viral change, 548
Social loafing The problem that occurs when 
people exert less effort (and usually perform at a 
lower level) when working in teams than when 
working alone, 221, 286–287, 307
Social media Digital communication channels 
that enable people to collaborate in the creation 
and exchange of user-generated content,
334–335, 372
Social networks Social structures of individuals 
or social units that are connected to one another 
through one or more forms of interdependence,
284, 370
Social norms, 167, 168, 170
Social presence The extent to which a 
communication channel creates psychological close￾ness to others, awareness of their humanness, and 
appreciation of the interpersonal relationship, 337, 339
Social responsibility, 173
Social self (social identity), 85, 86
Social source, of feedback, 182–183
Social system, 14
Social vitality, 47
Sociologist, 14
Solution-focused problem, 245
South Korea
gapjil problems in, 67
Specific feedback, 181
Specific traits, 51
Spoken communication, 340. see also Verbal 
communication
Stability, 502, 514, 516
Stable environment, 487
Stakeholders Individuals, groups, and other 
entities that affect, or are affected by, the 
organization’s objectives and actions, 10, 246
Standardization, 470, 472
Standard of performance, 185
State of readiness, 124
Status-based benefits, 207
Stereotypes
explanations for, 94–96
exposing, in South Africa, 95
problems with, 96–97
Stereotype threat An individual’s concern 
about confirming a negative stereotype about his 
or her group, 96, 397
Stereotyping The process of assigning traits to 
people based on their membership in a social 
category, 94
activation of, 97
defined, 94
discrimination and, 96–97 
foundations of, 95–96 
problems with, 96–97
Stimulation, 58–59
Stock options A reward system that gives 
employees the right to purchase company stock 
at a future date at a predetermined price, 207, 211
Stories and legends, 501, 505
Storming, 295
Strategic vision. see Vision
causes of, 143–145
general adaptation syndrome, 142
individual differences, 145
management strategies, 141–147
at work, 141–142
Strengths-based coaching A positive 
organizational behavior approach to coaching and 
feedback that focuses on building and leveraging 
the employee’s strengths rather than trying to 
correct his or her weaknesses, 182
Stress An adaptive response to a situation that 
is perceived as challenging or threatening to the 
person’s well-being, 141, 145, 394, 448
Stress management, change and, 543, 545
change perceptions of, 146
control consequences of, 146–147
receive social support, 147
removing, 145–146
types of, 143–145
withdraw from, 146
Stressors Any environmental conditions that place 
a physical or emotional demand on the person, 143
Structural empowerment, 224
Structural hole A gap between two or more 
social networks that lack network ties, 373
“Structure follows strategy,” 489
Subculture, 503–504
Substitutability A contingency of power 
pertaining to the availability of alternatives,
363, 367–368, 413
Subsystem, 8
Sufficiently frequent feedback, 182
Summarizing. see Filtering
Sunk cost effect, 255–256
Superordinate goals Goals that the conflicting 
parties value and whose attainment requires the 
joint resources and effort of those parties, 406
Supervisor leadership style, 5
Supportive leadership, 446, 584
Surface acting, 131
Surface-level diversity The observable demo￾graphic or physiological differences in people, such 
as their race, ethnicity, gender, age, and physical 
disabilities, 15, 16
Surgical team, 311
Swift trust, 300
Symbol, 506
Synchronicity The extent to which the channel 
requires or allows both sender and receiver to be 
actively involved in the conversation at the same 
time (synchronous) or at different times 
(asynchronous), 336–337
Systematic and controlled research, 585
Systematic research anchor, 12–13
T
Tangible rule, in design thinking, 262, 263
Target point, in negotiation, 412, 413, 474
Task analyzability, 220, 289, 489
Task analyzability The degree to which job 
duties allow the application of established 
procedures and rules to guide decisions and 
behavior (high analyzability); employee creativity 
and judgment are necessary to perform jobs with 
low task analyzability, 220
Task conflict A type of conflict in which people 
focus their discussion around the issue (i.e., the 
task) in which different viewpoints occur while 
showing respect for people involved in that 
disagreement, 395–398
Task control, and stress, 145
Task force (project team), 283
conflict source, 406
reducing, 408–409
Task identity The degree to which a job requires 
completion of a whole or an identifiable piece of 
work, 219
Task interdependence The extent to which 
team members must share materials, information, 
or expertise in order to perform their jobs, 220, 
289–290
Task-oriented leadership, 444. see also
Directive leadership
evaluating path-goal theory, 447
gender and, 455
interdependence of, 443
Task performance The individual’s voluntary 
goal-directed behaviors that contribute to 
organizational objectives, 26–27, 286, 299
Task scheduling priority, 25Glossary/Subject Index I-43
Task significance The degree to which a job has 
a substantial impact on the organization and/or 
larger society, 219
Task structure, 447
Task variability, 220, 289, 489
Task variability The degree to which job duties 
are nonroutine and unpredictable; employees 
perform diverse tasks from one day to the next 
because they are faced with unfamiliar and 
unexpected issues, 220
Team-based organizational structure An 
organizational structure built around self-directed 
teams that complete an entire piece of work, 478, 
481–482
Team cohesion The degree of attraction people 
feel toward the team and their motivation to remain 
members, 297–299, 394, 395, 447
Team development, 397
Team diversity, 293
cohesion, 297
decision making and, 306
Team dynamics, 5–6, 447, 541, 549
Team effectiveness, model of, 287–289
Team efficacy The collective belief among team 
members in the team’s capability to successfully 
complete a task, 305–306
Team/interpersonal inputs and processes, 11
Team orientation, 502
Team-oriented culture, 285
Team performance, 17, 298–299, 394
Team permanence, 283
Team processes
cohesion, 297–299
development, 294–296
norms, 295–296
trust, 299–300
Team rewards, 210–211, 213
characteristics of, 283
cohesion, 297–299
composition of, 291–293
decision making, 305–308
design elements, 289–293
development of, 294–295
diversity, 293
model of effectiveness, 287–289
norms, 295–296
organizational and team environment, 289
processes, 288, 294–302
remote (virtual), 303–304
self-directed, 302–303
size of, 290–291
task characteristics, 289–290
team development
roles, 296–297
stages of, 294–295
trust among members of, 299–300
Teams Groups of two or more people who 
interact with and influence each other, are mutually 
accountable for achieving common goals associated 
with organizational objectives, and perceive 
themselves as a social entity within an 
organization, 283–284
benefits and limitations of, 284–287
improving through team building, 
301–302
Team spaces, 346
Team trust. see Trust
Technological change, 15, 547
Technological subsystem, 8
Technology, 19
and organizational design, 489
and remote teams, 303
and work overload, 144
Telecommuting, 20. see also Remote work
Teleworking, 20. see also Remote work
Temporary team, 470
Text messaging, 333, 336
Theory A general set of propositions that 
describes interrelationships among several 
concepts, 584
Thinking, 55
Third-party conflict resolution, 410
Third-party conflict resolution Any attempt 
by a relatively neutral person to help conflicting 
parties resolve their differences, 409–410
Time blocks, scheduling, 19
Time constraints, on teams, 305
Time-framed goal, 180
Timely feedback, 181
Town hall meeting, 346
Tradition, 58, 59
Trait. see Personality trait
Transactional contract, 519
change and, 547
cultural change and, 515
elements of, 437–439, 441–442
interdependence of managerial 
and, 443
managerial leadership versus, 442–443
vision, 437–439
Transformational leadership A leadership 
perspective that explains how leaders change teams 
or organizations by creating, communicating, and 
modeling a vision for the organization or work 
unit and inspiring employees to strive for that 
vision, 437, 440–441, 447, 452
Triple-bottom-line philosophy, 10
dynamics of, 300
foundations of, 299, 300
in negotiation, 416–417
Trust Positive expectations one person has toward 
another person in situations involving risk, 141, 
224, 363
Turnover. see Employee turnover
U
Ultimate dependent variable, 8. see also
Organizational effectiveness
Uncertainty avoidance A cross-cultural value 
describing the degree to which people in a culture 
tolerate ambiguity (low uncertainty avoidance) 
or feel threatened by ambiguity and uncertainty 
(high uncertainty avoidance), 65, 66–67
Underreward inequity, 185, 187
Unfreezing The first part of the change 
process, in which the change agent produces 
disequilibrium between the driving and restraining 
forces, 557
Unintended consequences, 214–215
Unintentional (systematic) discrimination, 96
Universalism, 58–59
Unknown area, of Johari Window, 104
Unmet expectations, 521
Upward appeal A type of influence in which 
someone with higher authority or expertise is 
called on in reality or symbolically to support the 
influencer’s position, 375–376
User-generated content, 334
Utilitarianism, 62
V
Valence, 124, 125, 174–175
across cultures, 65–68
congruence in, 60–61
cultural, 58
ethical, and behavior, 61–65
and individual behavior, 59–60
organizational, 58
personal, 57–58
shared, 58
types of, 58–59
Values awareness, 60
Values Relatively stable, evaluative beliefs that 
guide a person’s preferences for outcomes or 
courses of action in a variety of situations, 57, 65, 
501–502
Value system, 57
Variable ratio schedule, 178
Verbal communication, 330
digital, 332–334
Verification stage, of creative process, 
257, 258
Video chat, 335
Video chats, 332
Video conferencing, 338
Video journalism, 222–223
Viral change, 548
Viral marketing, 548
Virtual team. see Remote teams
Visibility, 363, 367, 368
Vision, in transformational leadership, 
437–439
Vision and mission statements, 5
Voice, 137
Voice intonation, 342
Voice-only communication, 332
“Voicing our Values,” 64I-44 Glossary/Subject Index
W
Wage dispersion, 185
Warnings, 408
Wikis, 341
Win-lose orientation The belief that conflicting 
parties are drawing from a fixed pie, so the more 
one party receives, the less the other party will 
receive, 402–403, 404, 411, 417
Win-win orientation The belief that conflicting 
parties will find a mutually beneficial solution to 
their disagreement, 411, 417
Women. see Male-female
conflict-handling styles of, 15
in negotiations, 417
stereotyping and, 96
view of money by, 206
Work activities, coordination of, 469–472
Workaholism, 145
Workforce stability, 514, 516
Work-life integration The degree that people 
are effectively engaged in their various work and 
nonwork roles and have a low degree of role 
conflict across those life domains, 18–20, 145
strategies to improve, 18
Work overload, 144
Work performance, 49–51, 87
Workplace behavior and events, 7
Workplace design, 346
Workplace emotions. see Emotions
Workplace landscape
diversity and inclusive workplace, 15–17
remote work, 20–22
work-life integration, 17–20
Workplace value. see Values
Written communication
digital, 333–334
persuasion and, 340
Y
Yielding, in conflict-handling styles, 403, 
404, 405
Z
Zone of indifference, 364–365
