i
Organizations and Complex 
Adaptive Systems
Organizations and Complex Adaptive Systems explains complexity theory 
within the organizational studies and discusses the applicability of complex 
adaptive systems principles for intraorganizational and interorganizational 
levels.
Complex adaptive systems and complexity theory have been studied in 
many different fields of science. When studying the application of complex 
adaptive systems within social sciences, not many are seen in real terms 
in contrary to the myriads of theories and propositions available. The 
complex adaptive systems perspective is presented in quantitative terms 
in natural sciences, but a quantitative approach has not been used within 
social sciences a lot comparatively. This book links the basics of complex 
adaptive systems to social sciences, focusing on organizational studies and 
covering interorganizational, organizational, and individual levels.
It shows the latest state of knowledge on the topic and will be of interest 
to researchers, academics, managers, and students in the fields of manage￾ment, organizational theory and behavior, and strategic management.
Mahsa Fidanboy received her Ph.D. in Management and Organization 
from Ankara Yıldırım Beyazıt University, Social Sciences Institute, and is 
a professional consultant with Fidanboy Consulting, Turkey.ii
Routledge Focus on Business and Management
The fields of business and management have grown exponentially as areas 
of research and education. This growth presents challenges for readers 
trying to keep up with the latest important insights. Routledge Focus on 
Business and Management presents small books on big topics and how they 
intersect with the world of business research.
Individually, each title in the series provides coverage of a key academic 
topic, whilst collectively, the series forms a comprehensive collection across 
the business disciplines.
The Multiple Case Study Design
Methodology and Application for Management Education
Daphne Halkias, Michael Neubert, Paul W. Thurman and 
Nicholas Harkiolakis
Organizations, Strategic Risk Management and Resilience
The Impact of Covid-19 on Tourism
Patrizia Gazzola, Enrica Pavione and Ilaria Pessina
Organizations and Complex Adaptive Systems
Mahsa Fidanboy
Managing Complexity in Healthcare
Lesley Kuhn and Kieran Le Plastrier
Work Organizational Reforms and Employment Relations in the 
Automotive Industry
American Employment Relations in Transition
Kenichi Shinohara
For more information about this series, please visit: www.routledge.com/
Routledge-Focus-on-Business-and-Management/book-series/FBMiii
Organizations and Complex 
Adaptive Systems
Mahsa Fidanboyiv
First published 2022
by Routledge
605 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10158
and by Routledge
4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2022 Mahsa Fidanboy
The right of Mahsa Fidanboy to be identified as author of this work has been asserted in 
accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised 
in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or 
hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any information 
storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, 
and are used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Fidanboy, Masha, author. 
Title: Organizations and complex adaptive systems / Dr. Masha Fidanboy. 
Description: New York, NY : Routledge, 2022. | 
Includes bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2022006230 | ISBN 9781032022932 (hardback) | 
ISBN 9781032022956 (paperback) | ISBN 9781003182764 (ebook) 
Subjects: LCSH: Social sciences–Methodology. | 
Quantitative research. | Strategic planning.
Classification: LCC H61 .F46 2022 | DDC 300.1–dc23/eng/20220214
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2022006230
ISBN: 978-1-03-202293-2 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-1-03-202295-6 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-1-00-318276-4 (ebk)
DOI: 10.4324/9781003182764
Typeset in Times New Roman
by Newgen Publishing UKv
To my all, my son, Vedat Ozan
and
my grandparents, Babaji and Mamaryam,
my mom, my sister, and my husbandvivi
Contents
1 System 1
Organizational Level 2
Interorganizational Level 8
2 Complexity 18
Organizational Complexity 19
Interorganizational Complexity 22
3 Adaptation 25
Organizational Adaptation 27
Interorganizational Adaptation 39
4 Application of CAS Perspective in Organizations 44
Case 1: Organization and Customer Relationship 44
Case 2: The Overconfidence of the Organization 45
Case 3: The Customer Service Problem 46
Case 4: Top Management and the Technical Team 48
Case 5: Too Much Paperwork and Agility 49
Index 51
newgenprepdfvi1
DOI: 10.4324/9781003182764-1
1 System
System, a word which we use and hear in our everyday life, is used in many 
different situations and contexts, not in variant meanings, but all in almost 
similar or close senses despite the level of complexity of the situation. 
What we generally mean by the system is the whole consisting of the parts 
of which each has a function that might be similar or different from the 
functions of the other parts, and all parts follow the goals(s) determined 
for the system. The easiest example is our body consisting of many parts 
called organs with the common goal of making the system live in spite 
of the malfunctions they show from time to time that may not satisfy the 
common goal. In this example, the proximity of the parts to each other 
is seen even though this is not same for all the systems, for instance, the 
health system of a country. It subsumes all health organizations and health 
workers even at the farthest part located from the capital. Thus, the geo￾graphical distance is not a barrier on the way to consider a part away from 
the other parts as part of a system. An example in the context of business 
organizations can be a main company with several branches located world￾wide which altogether form a bigger system. Besides the proximity of the 
parts, the function(s) of each part should also be paid attention to. As 
in the healthcare system, a cleaning staff in a hospital has different tasks 
from a surgeon though their common goal is to deliver the health ser￾vices to the people, and when viewing from the system point, the parts, 
regardless of their functions, are all committed to reach the goals of the 
system. Furthermore, looking back at the example again makes us think 
of the different levels present within a system, the health workers as the 
individual, the hospitals and health institutes as the organizations, and the 
national health system as part of the worldwide health system. Given all 
mentioned, the key points to be focused on when talking of a system can 
be listed as follows:
1 The proximity and location of the parts
2 The functions of the parts
3 The main goal(s) of the system
4 The levels nested in the system
5 The interactions both between the parts and among the different levels.2 System
2
This can help in defining the system as a whole consisting of many parts in 
direct or indirect relationship with each other, and all serve the system to 
reach its common goal.
Classification as a method to distinguish and explore the dissimilar 
characteristics of different groups can be used here too. Systems can be 
divided into two separate groups: open and closed systems. These two 
systems are well-defined in the natural sciences such as chemistry by 
explaining the concepts of enthalpy and entropy. To describe them in a nut￾shell, enthalpy is the sum of the internal energy in a system while entropy 
refers to the level of disorder in the system. Viewing them from the stand￾point of social sciences, enthalpy, the exchange of energy and work can be 
represented as the resources provided to an organization which can be in 
any of its forms such as human resources, financial resources, and so on. 
As for entropy, the disorder in the organization can be perceived similarly 
in its general usage, and changes of the disorder level result in different 
states in an organization including ‘order,’ ‘chaos,’ and between these, at 
the edge of ‘chaos,’ rests ‘complexity’ (Dodder & Dare, 2000). The level of 
disorder is the lowest in the order state, increases when moving from order 
to complexity, and from complexity to chaos, reaching its highest point at 
the chaos state.
The perspective used in this book is a complex adaptive systems (CAS) 
perspective which consider the systems as both complex and adaptive at 
the same time, each of which will be elucidated in the following chapters. 
In a nutshell, complex systems are systems made of many connected and 
interacting parts. With respect to the adaptive systems, four components 
were suggested for them – sensor, adjustment mechanism and controller, 
actuator, and feedback and adaptation loops, which are all needed for 
the system to be adaptive (George & Lin, 2017). A model was presented 
in the same article consisting of these components in accordance with 
the control systems approach. From a CAS standpoint, adaptive systems 
are the systems able to adapt themselves to the changes in their environ￾ments, and according to the literature, they possess learning capabilities 
(Stacey, 1996).
Organizational Level
When putting the organizations under lenses at different levels of study, the 
properties of the system are needed to be defined each time accordingly. 
The organizational level study of the organizations as complex adaptive 
systems will have some similarities with organizational studies of the same 
level, although the differences root from the perspective from which the 
system is viewed from. The organization from a CAS viewpoint has an 
organic structure that supplies the organization with the flexibility required 
in order to be adaptive at the time of changes. The other perspectives may 
deem the organizations with mechanistic structure, unable to change 
or adapt. These perspectives are mainly among the ones ignoring the System 3
3
adaptation, but regarding the selection as the key impact of environment 
on the organization.
In addition, the organization is a whole consisting of physical and non￾physical assets, and all can be taken as parts of a system when being taken 
into consideration from other perspectives, yet the individuals are the main 
focus of the CAS perspective in the context of the social sciences.
Individuals
Among the numerous parts of an organization, the individuals are the 
key role players from a CAS standpoint. These individuals, in order to 
be considered in the system, should bear some characteristics which are 
explained in the following.
First of all, they should be in interactions with each other to a high 
level (Anderson, 1999; Tan, Wen, & Awad, 2005). By interactions, com￾munication can be perceived simply; however, when looking at it more 
carefully, the action and the reaction can be more meaningful concerning 
its perception; an individual acts and another individual reacts to it, and 
vice versa. The action of the individual which then triggers the reaction 
might have either direct or indirect impact on the reactive responses. These 
can be clarified with some examples. In a software development company, 
a customer requested for the conformity of an ongoing software project 
to a new quality standard. The project manager is needed to adjust the 
project’s cost, time, and scope to the new requirements, and his reactions 
have been directly influenced by the change request. After the approval of 
the changes by the project manager and the top management, the changes 
are communicated to the development team to act accordingly. The cus￾tomer decision is taken as the trigger action, and the conformity of the 
team is the last reaction that was affected indirectly through the mediator 
role of the changes of the project attributes. The direct or indirect nature of 
the impact can be determined this way: If the action forces the changes on 
the other action without any mediators, the impact is taken as direct; how￾ever, in the situation where an action changes the context for performance 
of the other action, the impact is regarded indirect. Identifying the chain 
of interactions enables us to specify the triggers, changes, and notably 
the dynamics of a system. In relation to this, two not-apparent-blurred￾bordered mindsets come up: taking the changes as a cycle or considering 
them as a chain. The chain cannot be necessarily a finite one, and when it 
is infinite, the determination of its future path, whether it is going back 
to its initial point which makes it a cycle, would not be easy to trace. This 
may result in the usage of the cycle and chain words interchangeably in 
some cases.
In addition to the interactions between the parts, the system interacts 
with its environment as well (Oughton, Usher, Tyler, & Hall, 2018). CAS is 
a kind of open systems; the systems which exchange energy and informa￾tion with the environment surrounding them (Ali, 2015). The environment 4 System
4
outside, beyond the borders of a system, can be decomposed into imme￾diate and universal environment. The immediate environment is the part 
in close contact with the system, and it is posited in a bigger environ￾ment itself, the universal environment. Taking a hospital as the system, 
the national health organizations can be its immediate environment, and 
all the international health organizations make the universal environment. 
From another point of view, for a hospital in a small town, the town can be 
perceived as the immediate environment and the country can be assumed in 
the role of the universal environment. In line with the purpose of the study, 
several environments might be identified which they may be nested in each 
other or having parts in common with the other environments or unique 
to themselves; nevertheless, all are part of the universal environment. The 
changes can be imposed on the system from the environment or the other 
way around. Although the environment is bigger than the system in size, 
or we may say it is infinite, the changes that the system pushes toward the 
environment can be small but still effective enough to make changes to 
the environment. From a CAS perspective, even a small change should be 
taken into consideration as it may lead to remarkable changes in the future 
of the system.
The second characteristic of the individuals is the interdependencies 
between them and as a whole with the larger environment (Anderson, 
1999; Tan, Wen, & Awad, 2005). The interdependencies between the 
components of the system restrict their freedom. Interestingly, reducing 
or increasing the levels of freedom of the components of a system plays 
an important role in the determination of its level of complexity as well 
as the scale whether small or large (Siegenfeld & Bar-Yam, 2020). If the 
freedom given to the agents is low, they may have less options regarding 
the behavior they will show in response to the changes. This will probably 
restrict their degrees of creativity and innovation. In contrast, when the 
agents have much freedom, more than the ideal level, they will behave in 
every possible way, regardless of the history of the system and the decisions 
of other agents. This will end with chaos which is not a favorable state for 
the organizations. Besides, understanding the tradeoff between complexity 
and scale can assist in making decisions on narrowing the scope of manu￾facturing or widening it.
Similar to the interdependencies between the components of the system, 
interdependency with the environment exists to different extents. Being 
too interdependent with the environment means more efforts needed to 
be made to conform to the changes, and if done successfully, it actually 
implies more adaptability. The less a system is interdependent with its 
environment, the less it is impacted from it which then enables the firm to 
act more freely. This situation can be either hazardous or beneficial to the 
firm, depending on the many visible and invisible factors. It is like just a 
situation at which a technology company introduces a new gadget to the 
market. The outcome of the radical innovation when the firm has its own 
way of thinking and making, irrespective of what is imposed on it from the System 5
5
environment, will vary, bringing about two possible cases; the new gadget 
may become either so popular or a huge disappointment. This is the exact 
point at which the famous questions arises; ‘adapt or not to adapt, if yes, 
so to what extent?’
The third characteristic of the individuals is acting in unpredictable ways 
by using their freedom (Van Eijnatten, 2004). This unpredictability exists 
in the long term, but not in the short term (Schueler, 1996). In the case of 
the individuals as parts of the system, predicting the behavior and the deci￾sion of them can be possible if the predictions are being made for a short 
time, close to now. However, foreseeing the outcomes, the further future 
might not be as easy as it seems to be. The sensitivity to initial conditions 
makes the situation harder for predictions due to the fact that even a small 
change in the behavior of an individual or a decision slightly different from 
the previous ones can lead to completely different conditions in the future.
The fourth characteristic of the individuals is their ability to research, 
learn, self-organize, and adapt to the changes in their environments at 
various levels (Carlisle & McMillan, 2006). It is noteworthy that the envir￾onment plays a key role in the adaptation of an organization. Even if 
the sources seem to root in the decision of a manager or the implemen￾tation of a new procedure, the main reason is the environment definitely. 
In the previous examples, some changes in the environment might have 
triggered the change of strategy in a firm or the need for the modification 
of the procedures. Apart from the impact of the environment, the agents’ 
capabilities should also be taken into account. The critical capability for 
adaptation is learning. What is seen in the real world cases is that not all 
employees are willing to learn, and not all of those who are willing to learn, 
learn at the same speed with the others. Even the amount of what they 
learn during a certain amount of time varies which is the reason why for 
some job positions, being a quick learner is included as the characteristics 
of the individuals the companies are looking for. Particularly, learning 
becomes so momentous when the nature of environment is highly dynamic 
and turbulent.
Agents
Agents were referred to as the bases of a CAS (Dooley, 1996). Agents 
attempt to be fitted with their environment through adaptation, which then 
leads to the evolution of the overall system over time. They were labeled as 
‘semi-autonomous’ (Dooley, 1996). This can be interpreted as having the 
freedom to decide how to behave, though being located in the context of 
a system puts some restrictions on the range or the depth of their choices. 
It can be considered true for all agents in a system as they are all part of 
a whole, interconnected with other agents, not as isolated elements. In the 
organizational studies, these agents can also be called as decision makers 
or the decision-making entities due to their decision-making ability. It 
should not be overlooked that as the systems can be considered differently 6 System
6
in accordance with the level of study, the same condition is also valid for 
the agents. Agents may be persons, a team, a department, a business unit, 
or even the organization as a whole (Choi, Dooley, & Rungtusanatham, 
2001). The most interesting and hard-to-measure part of CAS is the rules 
these agents act according to. These rules originate from a ‘mental tem￾plate’ (Dooley, 1996) or a ‘cognitive structure’ (Anderson, 1999) which 
form and determine the rules the behavior comes from.
Schemata
Each agent has its own way of interpreting the environment and the 
situation with which he/she encounters, and consequently, his/her per￾ception of the environment may differ from another agent’s perception 
even if all the factors related to the situation can be taken as fixed. The 
difference or the resemblance comes from the agent’s schema. To be 
clear, the cognitive structure according to which the agents behave may 
differ among different agents or they may be same (Eisenhardt & Bhatia, 
2005; Anderson, 1999). The difference between the schemata may be 
even seen at the upper levels, for example, in the organizations (Stacey, 
1996). These schemata provide us with descriptions of the situations 
along with both predictions and prescriptions (Gell-Mann, 1994). Each 
of these three notions bear remarkable importance; the descriptions are 
specially needed for the righteous perception of the situation currently 
faced. The predictions are done for the new situations rise, the ones not 
encountered before. The decisions for these new situations are made 
based on the current situation of the system, together with using the 
cumulative knowledge and experience of the decision makers through 
the years whether at the same organization or not. These decisions are 
accompanied by prescriptions since predicting will not suffice when 
solutions are not to be suggested. To sum up, the schemata not only 
affect the current behavior of the system but also have an influence 
on the future of the system. One point should not be neglected here 
which is about the decision maker. The decision makers who have been 
working at the same organization for a long time should be careful with 
not being trapped into the locked-in situation resulted from being so 
path-dependent. A completely opposite condition may exist for the deci￾sion makers newly started at an organization facing the risk of taking 
decisions that are not in line with the previous ones along with the his￾tory of the organization, using the CAS terminology, the case of low 
path-dependency which will also bring drawbacks to the system.
Schemata might be hard to comprehend when being viewed as a cogni￾tive structure, instead they can be interpreted as a guidance for the actions 
which define the limits of the actions, prioritizing them, assigning them 
time, and representing a how-to guide for the actions (Eisenhardt & Bhatia, 
2005; Eisenhardt & Sull, 2001). The schemata not only influence the actions 
of the agents but also have an impact on the interactions between them by System 7
7
determining their rules (Dooley, 1997). These interactions are in the form 
of the exchange of information and resources. This can be clarified within 
an example. Two different departments of an organization managed by 
two persons who can be labeled as agents share the information on their 
progresses, impediments, delays in their plans, etc., with each other. This is 
not limited to the information only, and in some cases they may share their 
resources like their staff or reassign budgets among their projects.
Apart from the individual approach to schemata, there exists a collective 
approach toward them where the schemata are defined as the beliefs, norms, 
values, as well as the assumptions held commonly by a group of people; for 
instance, the norms and beliefs held among the employees of an organiza￾tion or a group of organizations working as the branches of a headquarter 
can be looked on as the organizational schemata. Hence, when studying 
the schemata, the aforementioned factors should not a disregarded, and 
this implies that the organizational culture should be concentrated on the 
related studies. Looking at the literature provides some interesting examples 
on the importance of schemata in practice. As an example, if a buyer and a 
supplier have common schemata, the communication taken place between 
them will be more efficient, and the transaction costs will decrease (Choi, 
Dooley, & Rungtusanatham, 2001). Likewise, the implementation of inter￾national quality standards, models, and frameworks will bring about the 
benefits of sharing the common schemata. This will be explained in detail 
in Chapter 4.
Till now, the individual schemata and the collective schemata have 
been mentioned as well as the factors affecting them, although a kind of 
schema seems to be missing, the one related to the strategies and plans 
of the system (McCarthy, 2003). Being a part of a system does alter the 
schemata in a way to be fitted with the goals of the system. The impact 
might vary from an agent to the other, and it is predicted to be associated 
with the organizational identification and the organizational commitment. 
Taking all the above-mentioned factors into consideration, the schemata 
can be categorized under three different groups: individual, collective, and 
strategic which can be the focus of studies compliant with their relevant 
level. In order to predict the behavior of a system, the rules of each of 
these categories and their effects on each other are needed to be extracted 
and interpreted.
In order to model the schemata, the rules need to be identified and 
recorded in the form of verbal rules or in the form of mathematical 
algorithms. As schemata embrace three different sections, the descriptions, 
the predictions, and the prescriptions (Gell-Mann, 1994), each statement 
or the mathematical instruction of the model can be marked as one of 
these. What should not be forgotten about the schemata is their rational 
bounded nature due to the biased or incomplete information (Dooley, 
1996). To put it in other words, since the schema is a cognitive structure 
and the human is rationally bounded, the schema will bear the same prop￾erty of being bounded rationally.8 System
8
Behavior
The behavior is shown as an outcome of the schemata, and this is the 
reason why studying the schemata is of high significance for the predic￾tion of behavior. How these rules work can be summarized into three steps 
(Nan, 2011): inspection, execution, and fitness in agreement with the posi￾tive or negative feedbacks. By the continuance of repetition of these steps 
or it can be said as iteration, each time that a decision is being made, the 
agents learn from their experience, and that is why a CAS is a learning 
system. The learning process helps the agents to adapt to their environ￾ment. This includes both the environment outside the border of the system 
and also the part in the system which is altered from time to time resulting 
from the actions of the other agents. Therefore, the behavior is shaped 
mutually, and this mutually developed adaptive behavior is called as inter￾action (Nan, 2011).
The levels of a CAS are nested or, to say it differently, there exists the 
inclusion of a system in another. Similar to the schemata and in the same 
line with it, the behavior can be categorized as the behavior of the indi￾vidual, the collective behavior, and the strategic behavior. Based on the 
situation involved in, the behavior that is indicated may be one or some of 
these, or a new behavior rooting from the combination and consideration 
of all.
Interorganizational Level
Widening the locus of focus of study from the organizations to 
the interorganizational level necessitates the concentration on how 
organizations interact with each other, and the answers to several questions 
are sought: How do organizations exchange information and resources 
with each other? How often and to what extent is this flow seen? How is the 
direction of this flow most of the time? How are the relationships between 
organizations? Do they compete against each other or do they collaborate 
together? To what extent are competition and collaboration seen between 
the organizations? While answering these questions, some issues should not 
be turned a blind eye to. The first is that in cases where an organization 
control the market and has a dominant position like what is in a mon￾opoly market, the competition or collaboration might seem to get faded 
but they actually exist. The extent to which these two take place may differ 
from time to time, and from case to case, but they may not become zero in 
practice. An example can help with the understanding of this statement. 
Suppose there is only one TV manufacturer in a country and there are no 
imports from other countries as well. The market is a monopoly. A smart￾phone manufacturer starts to produce phones with bigger screens and sells 
its phones with a free video streaming application already installed on 
them. At first glance, a TV manufacturer does not assume a smartphone 
manufacturer as a rival; nonetheless, as the time passes, it indicates that System 9
9
the time of watching videos on TV is decreasing drastically whereas the 
time of watching on a smartphone has been rocketed to the top. This can 
imply that even in a blue ocean, a breeze can make waves that can grad￾ually turn into a storm. Living in a dynamic world makes it unavoidable 
to compete or for those who are reluctant to use the word ‘competition,’ it 
will be impossible to ignore what others are doing and refuse to take the 
next steps according to the acts of the others. That is what being part of a 
system means, not being isolated, but being intertwined with the system.
The second issue is that competition and collaboration may coexist 
although in some situations one will be too low to be noticed. This is the 
desire for competition and collaboration which push the organizations 
toward the choice of forming alliances, joint ventures, and horizontal or 
vertical integrations. What matters is to put a mile, or miles of distance, 
between the organization and its rivals, and as already known, this is not 
a kind of paving the path for the rivals, yet using some strategies to slow 
them down or even stop them from progressing such as creating market 
entry barriers.
The third issue is the competition, either positive or negative. Though 
the negative and positive competitions have been mostly highlighted among 
the individuals, the same notion can be utilized for the organizations simi￾larly. Sometimes the efforts of an organization to overcome its rival are 
destructive to the point that it worsens the situation for all who are present 
in the market, even itself. Hence, when competing, the consequences of 
the actions which are going to be taken must always be anticipated and 
estimated for they may at last return to the actors themselves since all of 
them are part of a macro system, and any changes, even the mild ones, have 
the potential to cause catastrophic results.
In order to investigate how the relationships between the organizations are 
and work, first, the context at which they are posited should be determined; 
whether they have built clusters with the ones in the same industry or if 
they are part of a network or to be more precise and plain, which economic 
agglomerations they have formed with other organizations. Studying the 
organizations in their contexts is what is prescribed by CAS perspective for 
the reasons that first, the elements of the system are not separate from each 
other, oppositely, they are interdependent with each other, and second, the 
system is an open system which is interdependent with its environment.
Clusters
What is defined as a cluster is the concentration of the firms geographic￾ally for the purpose of obtaining some kind of benefits. Among the various 
economic agglomerations, clusters are the ones embracing organizations 
from the same industry, and what the force behind this formation is stated 
to be innovation (Boja, 2011) or, elsewhere in literature, knowledge accu￾mulation (Malmberg, Solvell, & Zander, 1996). Though the two are not 
the same actually, the first element of knowledge accumulation at the 10 System
10
local level was suggested to be in connection with the innovation process 
(Malmberg, Solvell, & Zander, 1996). The advantages of being a member 
of a cluster are not limited to the development of the organization, 
fostering innovation, increased competition, external economies, and joint 
actions (Carpinetti, Galdamez, & Gerolamo, 2008). In some countries, 
governments have allocated special sites to the firms making them gather 
together with the view to forming clusters. In addition to this allocation, 
extra benefits are presented to the firms such as tax exemption and finan￾cial support in order to foster the growth in the number of the firms as well 
as the formation of clusters which subsequently is expected to increase the 
level of innovation.
Looking back at the literature, some characteristics presumed to be 
common between clusters are the existence of linkages between firms 
within a cluster, the exchange of information among them, the presence of 
an institutional infrastructure that backs the activities of the cluster, and 
forming and sharing social and cultural identities which are based on their 
common values (Carpinetti, Galdamez, & Gerolamo, 2008; Altenburg & 
Meyer-Stamer, 1999). Additionally, elsewhere in the literature, external 
economies and joint actions were suggested as the other characteristics of 
clusters (Carpinetti, Galdamez, & Gerolamo, 2008). To be clearer, external 
economies are the savings in the costs gained from the geographical con￾centration of the firms originating from specialization, knowledge transfer, 
and innovation (Dayasindhu, 2002).
Clusters were modeled under four different categories in terms of the role 
of the members and their interactions (Markusen, 1996). In order to decide 
the type of cluster, the existence of hub firms and how firms are related 
need to be inspected. Some of the questions rise in the relevant studies are 
as follows: What are the sizes of the firms? Are there any hub firms? Hub 
firms are dominant firms with which some other firms are connected dir￾ectly, situating them in a center of the connections (Boja, 2011); Are there 
any branches or parent firms or state-related organizations in the cluster? 
Regardless of the type of the cluster, firms are in collaboration and com￾petition with each other. Taking either a cluster or the organizations in a 
cluster as agents denotes the fact that not all the agents have impact on 
the system equally. This matters even more when there is a hub firm or a 
state-related firm present in the cluster, affecting the system more than the 
other agents do. This casts light on why the identification of the agents is 
not sufficient for the CAS studies; nevertheless, the impact of the agents is 
required to be specified in the system.
Getting into more details concerning clusters, first, the industrial clusters 
embrace firms from a set of industries which are somehow related to each 
other (Reveiu & Dardala, 2012) which bear some remarkable characteristics 
subsuming foreign ownership, the dynamic nature of cluster, having a 
share in that country’s export (Birkinshaw & Hood, 2000), generalized 
reciprocity, flexible specialization, and external economies (Dayasindhu, 
2002). The relationships between the industries might root from what are System 11
1
common between them such as common buyers, suppliers, technologies, 
distribution channels, or labors (Reveiu & Dardala, 2012; Porter, 1990).
Regional cluster is a kind of industrial cluster at which the companies 
from a common or related industries gather in a specific region (Reveiu & 
Dardala, 2012). The characteristics of regional clusters can be summarized 
as the gathering of firms of specific sectors in small spatially concentrated 
areas which is accompanied by the formation of local production net￾work where the flexible production methods are used within the firms, and 
some of the firms are active in dominant industries, and some, not all are 
regional innovation systems (Isaksen, 1996).
The most interesting fact about the clusters is that the competition and 
collaboration exist simultaneously in the clusters (Boja, 2011). Being posited 
at the same place makes the companies more aware of their competitors’ 
activities. Even if they may not know fully what the other companies are 
doing, feeling the presence of a rival makes them work harder to exceed 
the others. On the other side, the proximity in terms of the space makes 
the collaboration more possible and easier. For instance, a software com￾pany needs a special license for one of their software programs and a firm 
just nearby is the provider and distributor of that program. The spatial 
closeness makes the company to prefer the nearby firm as it naturally seems 
more available in the case of the occurrence of any kind of problems. The 
examples might not only be restricted to the provision and supply of goods 
but also entailing services. In one of the cases, an education company 
once encountered a problem with its online education website. They were 
just the users of the program and they called whom they had purchased 
the program from for solving the problem. The seller company told them 
that the solution might take a few days to be presented since their tech￾nical team was working on another urgent problem. The education com￾pany then decided to ask one of the coders of the neighbour firms to see 
whether he could solve the problem or not and it worked. The examples 
of competition and collaboration within clusters are far more than can be 
discussed; nevertheless, the first step to take is to decide whether the com￾panies have formed any kind of clusters or not. It is also noteworthy that 
sometimes collaboration might not be present as clearly as it was depicted 
here, though, it will be through the specialization.
Similar to organizations that can gain competitive advantage, the clusters 
can bear competitive advantages too. Two types of interdependencies￾based characteristics of the clusters can turn into competitive advantages 
for them: traded and non-traded interdependencies where the first one is in 
respect of formal exchange of economic value and the second is related to 
the share of knowledge (Niu, 2010).
Networks
The word ‘network’ can be interpreted in many different ways. It can 
be described as the relationships formed between agents themselves, or 12 System
12
between the agents and resources, or the agents and tasks, or the agents 
and the knowledge (Carley, 2005) formed horizontally or vertically; hori￾zontal relationships are constructed between an organization and others 
all at the same phase of the supply chain, for instance, the merger of two 
companies doing the same business or the merger of two companies active 
in close complementary businesses, and vertical relationships are shaped 
between the organizations from the different phases(levels) of the supply 
chain mainly consisting of customers and suppliers. Taking into consid￾eration the levels of study, the agents can also point to the individuals, 
organizations, a group of organizations, or the economy of a country as 
well. This highlights the importance of the determination of the agents 
in the system due to the fact that the relationships and the networks are 
defined successively.
There are rules for the formation of the networks, and these rules con￾sider different characteristics of agents posited within the network like 
the centrality or the connectivity degree (Schweitzer, Fagiolo, Sornette, 
Vega-Redondo, & White, 2009). These agents may collaborate or com￾pete with the other agents in the network, and at the interorganizational 
level, the determination of these types of relationships helps to under￾stand the flow of information and the resources much better. What should 
not be neglected here is the fact that there will not be only the signs of 
competition or collaboration in a specific relationship, nevertheless, they 
may coexist with each other at the same time. This might be a bit sur￾prising although possible, for instance, moderate levels of collaboration 
and competition were seen in the research conducted on the techno￾parks in Ankara, Turkey (Fidanboy, 2020). One question raised here is 
‘to what extent the collaboration and competition can coexist’ or, to put 
it differently, ‘does being more involved in competition have any kind 
of influence on the degree of collaborating or not?’ Even as individuals, 
we sometimes make choices of collaboration with the ones we compete 
with in order to increase our chance of becoming successful or achieving 
more success. Other examples can be taking the bests into your team for 
a project despite the fact that those bests are our rivals as well. It is also 
seen in the academia where two or more strong academicians gather to 
collaborate on an academic work. This collaboration may bring dozens 
of benefits to the parties; the parties might not need to assign too many 
resources to the tasks compared to when they are doing the tasks on their 
own since the resources are shared among them; the parties will be able 
to free up their time and their resources, therefore, they can concentrate 
on doing other tasks or accepting other projects too; and what is really 
important is the risk mitigation for the reason that the risks taken are 
shared between the parties or we might say that the impact of the risks will 
be lessened due to the division between individuals. Apart from the finan￾cial benefits resulting from the risk mitigation, it also helps the parties 
to be more assured and confident in their decisions and activities, and at 
the individual level, it reduces their stress level, affecting their well-being System 13
13
at their jobs. Like any other concept, collaborations may not be without 
drawbacks when it is not performed in the right desired way. In some situ￾ations, collaboration becomes the source of stress to individuals like when 
the disagreements and disputes remain unsolved or when the individuals’ 
only attempts turn to proving themselves right and the others wrong on 
the argued subject. At the organizational level, the collaboration fails to 
be fruitful especially when the schemata regarding the collaboration have 
not been shared between the parties.
Likewise, the competition may have advantages or drawbacks. It can 
work as a motivator, fostering the agents to perform their tasks in the best 
way in the shortest time, even though excessing its threshold will result 
in exhaustion, disappointment, and demotivation. The aforementioned 
threshold varies from agent to agent and depends on their capacities to 
outperform their rivals. Along with the capacity, the duration of the com￾petition plays an important role alike. The urge to compete for a long time 
may cause burnout in both the individuals and the organizations. A host 
of companies have failed while trying hard to catch the latest technologies 
or reaching a desired level of quality due to the long time it took for them 
to reach a certain goal, and then, another goal was headed toward, neces￾sitating constant efforts continuously, making them struggle for a long 
time which would eventually lead to a burnout situation at the end, and, at 
worst, endanger the survival of the organization.
When talking of network, like any other concepts, the quality of 
it comes to mind. What is perceived from the quality of a network can 
range widely and its quality can be identified in numerous ways such as the 
benefits it provides its organizations with or the frequency and density of 
communications taking place in the network. The number of organizations 
found in a network might have an influence on the quality of the network 
as well. Each network may be in some ways similar to or different from 
the other networks. Hence, it is essential to define the characteristics a net￾work bears at the first step of each study. The relational characteristics of 
a network were suggested as the network structure, tie modality, and the 
membership of it (Gulati, Nohria, & Zaheer, 2000; Galaskiewicz & Zaheer, 
1999). Each of these characteristics can be explained and operationalized 
in line with the purpose of the study being conducted. For the purpose of 
this book and to combine the network and CAS perspectives, the network 
structure can be interpreted as the general pattern of the relationships 
between the agents, and in the case where the level of study is organiza￾tional, it points at the interorganizational relationships. By tie modality, 
a set of rules and norms behind the behavior of the members of network 
are implied. From a combined viewpoint, it can be explained as the net￾work context-related rules and when talking of the rules of behavior, sche￾mata come to mind which further make it possible to call it as the network 
schemata. The last characteristic to discuss is the network membership 
including everything related to the composition of a network, and in appli￾cation of a merged standpoint, it includes some of the main concepts such 14 System
14
as agents, their level of impact on the network, and the flows of informa￾tion and energy.
Given all mentioned, it can be realized that the networks of relationships 
affect the performance and the conduct of the organizations positioned 
within (Gulati, Nohria, & Zaheer, 2000). What is noteworthy here is that 
the positive effects of being situated in a network cannot be guaranteed 
since in some cases, it will be the source of the impediments and barriers 
toward the mobility of the firm within an industry.
Back to the CAS perspective, a system evolves with its environment 
and as a result of both adaptation and evolution, the new patterns emerge. 
With reference to the networks, when an organization is embedded within 
a network, the immediate environment consisting of the relationships of 
the system is that network through which the system exchanges informa￾tion and resources, adapts to the changes in the network, or even imposes 
changes on it albeit it might be minor but, definitely, will impact the con￾text in some ways. Therefore, the study of networks in CAS will not view 
the relationships merely as relationships, but concurrently viewing them as 
the environment for an open system. This makes it almost impossible to 
study the system and its network separately.
Districts
What force the organizations of related industries to accumulate together are 
the transaction efficiency and flexibility in industrial districts (Malmberg, 
Solvell, & Zander, 1996). The industrial districts owe their success to the 
cooperation of their members in innovation and creating knowledge, and 
product and process innovations were diagnosed as their outcomes (Keeble 
& Wilkinson, 1998). It is noteworthy that though the innovation might be 
the outcome, it is not the chief reason behind its formation.
Another type of district which has gained attention and has undergone 
many changes compared to its initial structure during the recent years is 
called the innovation districts. They were first designed to be a closed area 
within specific boundaries aimed at the provision of appropriate environ￾ment for innovation (Yigitcanlar, Adu-McVie, & Erol, 2020). Just like what 
was stated before, the purpose behind the foundation of these districts was 
merely increasing innovation. Gradually as the environment has continued 
to change attributable to its dynamic nature, the boundaries have begun 
to become more and more permeable to the extent that there exist no 
clear boundaries nowadays, and only blurred boundaries are left. Another 
change that has happened is the innovation system that has turned into an 
open innovation system. These districts are of great significance for the 
nations for the reason that they have become like the economic growth 
poles for the development in different fields. Their success originates from 
fostering the formation of networks and collaboration (Yigitcanlar, Adu￾McVie, & Erol, 2020), valuing the innovation, and making the environment 
an innovation-growing place.System 15
15
The main difference between the innovation districts and the industrial 
districts are the homogeneity of their structures in respect of the indus￾tries their members are active at. While in the innovation districts, firms 
come from diverse industries, in industrial districts the industry is almost 
same or at least related. This is ascribed to the difference between the 
purposes behind their establishment which is innovation for the innov￾ation districts, and for industrial districts are transaction efficiency and 
flexibility. For instance, companies that work in the telecommunication 
sector, the medical sector, or even an agricultural sector may be found at a 
same innovation district for the fact that their common goal is innovation 
prominently.
Other Agglomerations
The reasons for the preference of agglomerations by the firms are 
decreasing the spatial distance between the organization and its partners, 
together with speeding the communication between the suppliers and 
customers (Malmberg, Solvell, & Zander, 1996). Urban and innovative 
agglomerations consist of the firms working in different sectors. Urban 
agglomerations, as perceived from its name, consist of companies located 
in the same urban area (Boja, 2011).
Like the innovation districts, the purpose of the foundation of innova￾tive agglomerations is innovation while the purposes behind the establish￾ment of urban agglomerations are identical to industrial districts, which 
are economic efficiency and flexibility.
Bibliography
Ali, S. H. (2015). Using Complex Adaptive System Theory to Drive System Health 
Measures for a Province-wide Higher Education System (Master Thesis ed.). 
Lethbridge: University of Lethbridge.
Altenburg, T., & Meyer-Stamer, J. (1999). How to Promote Clusters: Policy 
Experiences from Latin America. World Development, 27, 1693–1713.
Anderson, P. (1999). Complexity Theory and Organization Science. Organization 
Science, 10(3), 216–232.
Birkinshaw, J., & Hood, N. (2000). Characteristics of Foreign Subsidiaries in 
Industry Clusters. Journal of International Business Studies, 31(1), 141–154.
Boja, C. (2011). Clusters Models, Factors and Characteristics. International Journal 
of Economic Practices and Theories, 1(1), 34–43.
Carley, K. M. (2005). Intraorganizational Complexity and Computation. In J. A. 
Baum (Ed.), The Blackwell Companion to Organizations (pp. 208–232, Ch 9). 
Oxford: Blackwell Publishing.
Carlisle, Y., & McMillan, E. (2006). Innovation in Organizations from a Complex 
Adaptive Systems Perspective. Emergence: Complexity & Organization, 
8(1), 2–9.
Carpinetti, L. C., Galdamez, E. V., & Gerolamo, M. C. (2008). A Measurement 
System for Managing Performance of Industrial Clusters; A Conceptual Model 
and Research Cases. International Journal of Productivity, 57(5), 405–419.16 System
16
Choi, T. Y., Dooley, K. J., & Rungtusanatham, M. (2001). Conceptual Note; Supply 
Networks and Complex Adaptive Systems: Control versus Emergence. Journal 
of Operations Management, 19, 351–366.
Dayasindhu, N. (2002). Embeddedness, Knowledge Transfer, Industry Clusters 
and Global Competitiveness: A Case Study of the Indian Software Industry. 
Technovation, 22(9), 551–560.
Dodder, R., & Dare, R. (2000, October 31). Complex Adaptive Systems and 
Complexity Theory: Inter-related Knowledge Domains. Retrieved January 26, 
2017, from http://web.mit.edu/esd.83/www/notebook/ComplexityKD.PDF.
Dooley, K. (1996). A Nominal Definition of Complex Adaptive Systems. The 
Chaos Network, 8(1), 2–3.
Dooley, K. J. (1997). A Complex Adaptive Systems Model of Organization Change. 
Nonlinear Dynamics, Psychology, and Life Sciences, 1(1), 69–96.
Eisenhardt, K. M., & Bhatia, M. M. (2005). Organizational Complexity and 
Computation. In J. A. Baum (Ed.), The Blackwell Companion to Organizations
(pp. 442–466, Ch 19). Oxford: Blackwell Publishing.
Eisenhardt, K. M., & Sull, D. N. (2001, January). Strategy as Simple Rules. Harvard 
Business Review, 79(1), 107–116.
Fidanboy, M. (2020). A Multi-level Study of Technoparks within Complex Adaptive 
Systems Perspective: A Case Study of Factors Influencing R&D Performance
(PhD Dissertation). Ankara: Ankara Yildirim Beyazit University.
Galaskiewicz, J., & Zaheer, A. (1999). Networks of Competitive Advantage. In 
D. Andrews, & D. Knoke (Eds.), Research in the Sociology of Organizations
(pp. 237–261). Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Gell-Mann, M. (1994). Complex Adaptive Systems. In G. Cowan, D. Pines, & 
D. Meltzer (Eds.), Complexity: Metaphors, Models, and Reality (pp. 17–45). Los 
Alamos, NM: Addison-Wesley.
George, G., & Lin, Y. (2017). Analytics, Innovation, and Organizational Adaptation. 
Innovation: Organization & Management, 19(1), 16–22.
Gulati, R., Nohria, N., & Zaheer, A. (2000). Strategic Networks. Strategic 
Management Journal, 21(3), 203–215.
Isaksen, A. (1996). Regional Clusters and Competitiveness: The Norwegian Case.
Oslo, Norway: STEP Group.
Keeble, D., & Wilkinson, F. (1998). Collective Learning and Knowledge 
Development in the Evolution of Regional Clusters of High Technology SMEs 
in Europe. Regional Studies, 33(4), 295–303.
Malmberg, A., Solvell, Ö., & Zander, I. (1996). Spatial Clustering, Local 
Accumulation of Knowledge and Firm Competitiveness. Geografiska Annaler: 
Series B, Human Geography, 78(2), 85–97.
Markusen, A. (1996). Sticky Places in Slippery Space: A Typology of Industrial 
Districts. Economic Geography, 72(3), 293–313.
McCarthy, I. P. (2003). Technology Management – A Complex Adaptive Systems 
Approach. International Journal of Technology Management, 25(8), 728–745.
Nan, N. (2011). Capturing Bottom-Up Information Technology Use Processes: A 
Complex Adaptive Systems Model. MIS Quarterly, 35(2), 505–532.
Niu, K.-H. (2010). Industrial Cluster Involvement and Organizational Adaptation: 
An Empirical Study in International Industrial Clusters. Competitiveness 
Review: An International Business Journal, 20(5), 395–406.
Oughton, E. J., Usher, W., Tyler, P., & Hall, J. W. (2018). Infrastructure as a Complex 
Adaptive System. Complexity, 2018, 1–11.System 17
17
Porter, M. E. (1990). The Competitive Advantage of Nations. New York: Free Press.
Reveiu, A., & Dardala, M. (2012). The Influence of Cluster Type Economic 
Agglomerations on the Entrepreneurship, in Romania. Theoretical and Applied 
Economics, XIX(2012), 12(577), 111–124.
Schueler, G. J. (1996, March). The Unpredictability of Complex Systems. Journal 
of the Washington Academy of Sciences, 84(1), 3–12.
Schweitzer, F., Fagiolo, G., Sornette, D., Vega-Redondo, F., & White, D. R. (2009). 
Economic Networks: What Do We Know and What Do We Need to Know? 
Advances in Complex Systems, 12(4), 1–17.
Siegenfeld, A. F., & Bar-Yam, Y. (2020). An Introduction to Complex Systems 
Science and Its Applications. Hindawi, Complexity, 2020, 1–16.
Stacey, R. D. (1996). Complexity and Creativity in Organizations (1st ed.). San 
Francisco: Berrett Koehler.
Tan, J., Wen, H. J., & Awad, N. (2005, May). Health Care and Services Delivery 
Systems As complex Adaptive Systems. Communications of the ACM, 48, 37–44.
Van Eijnatten, F. M. (2004). Chaos and Complexity: An Overview of the ‘New 
Science’ in Organisation and Management. La Revue des Sciences de Gestion, 
40, 123–165.
Yigitcanlar, T., Adu-McVie, R., & Erol, I. (2020). How Can Contemporary 
Innovation Districts Be Classified? A Systematic Review of the Literature. Land 
Use Policy, Elsevier, 95(C). DOI: 10.1016/j.landusepol.2020.104595.18
DOI: 10.4324/9781003182764-2
2 Complexity
Complexity is used to talk about a great number of different elements 
(Begun, Zimmerman, & Dooley, 2003; Eidelson, 1997). It was defined as 
the behavior shown by a CAS which is complicated and is deemed diversely 
from the complexity noticed in the system itself (Eisenhardt & Bhatia, 
2005; Gell-Mann, 1994).
In effect, complexity is the word usually employed in case of 
encountering problems and issues and is mainly selected to point at the 
difficulty with respect to the nature of a problem or the difficulty seen in 
finding the suitable solutions to that problem. A problem will be probably 
considered complex when it consists of many properties or it is under the 
impact of numerous factors which makes it to become vaguer, and this 
increased level of uncertainty is what causes stress and doubt, making the 
decision makers to go over the same problem and the same solutions time 
and again, spending extra time and effort on it to finally reach an accept￾able solution. Although within each decision, there exists some level of 
uncertainty, the changing level and the capacity of the decision makers 
for accepting the uncertainty play roles in labeling a situation as a com￾plex one.
The second condition is when the problem itself does not seem to 
be complex, but finding the solutions is perceived complex. This usu￾ally happens to the decision makers who are prone to view the big pic￾ture of the problem, which sometimes results in turning an easily solved 
problem into a time-taking one. Indeed being able to view the big picture 
of an issue is an invaluable asset for the decision makers; occasionally, it 
is not welcomed. In these cases, the complexity of finding solutions is not 
denied, but there is a need for quick appropriate solutions which can be 
only reached through simplifying the picture of the problem and acting on 
it accordingly. The complexity of the solution might be due to the avail￾ability of different choices or the absence of a suitable one; selecting from 
a myriad of solutions may be as hard as finding a feasible solution.
The third probable situation in which a problem is taken complex is 
the complexity of the context the problem is found at. The complexity 
of the context may be dependent on various dynamic factors which results 
in the problem getting complex. This can be clarified via an example. Complexity 19
19
Suppose a company is planning to purchase a machine from another com￾pany in a different country. The decision for purchasing the new machine 
has been already made, and the need for the new machine had been identi￾fied at the first place. In this example, purchasing might not seem to be too 
complex, and it can be thought as simple as giving the money, and taking 
the new machine just like the daily shopping an individual does even if the 
purchased good might be a want instead of a need. In fact, the context 
of the problem is far more complex than it is seemed at first glance. The 
questions which can be raised regarding the context may include: Is it a sole 
manufacturer or are there other manufacturers? Are there any machines 
produced nationally which can be bought directly instead of importing it? 
If there is no national manufacturer, then, are the currencies of the two 
countries same or different? If they are different, in which currency does 
the transaction take place? How does the taxation change when importing 
a machine from another country? What are the legal procedures to be 
followed for the import process? What are the exchange rates? Does the 
exchange rate change between banks or exchange offices? Is it the right 
time to exchange money? Will the exchange rate change in the company’s 
favor in the near future? If so, can the purchase be delayed? If the answer 
is yes, then, how long can it be delayed? If the currencies are same, how 
will the payment be made? Are there common banks within the two coun￾tries? If not, how does the transaction fee change between the banks and 
what are the preferences for the selection of a bank? These are just some 
of the questions to be considered for a simple purchase. For those who 
have been doing a job which involves taking similar decisions constantly, 
the questions are fixed among the cases, nevertheless, the answers may not 
show the same consistency over time, and this is the reason why each deci￾sion, despite its similarity to the many previous ones, has to be examined 
carefully each time.
Organizational Complexity
Organizational complexity definitions vary widely, and the 
operationalization differs accordingly. Organizational size and the struc￾tural complexity were mentioned as two of the aspects of organizational 
complexity (Damanpour, 1996); what is meant by structural complexity 
may change between studies but it can be summarized as the level of dif￾ferentiation on diverse dimensions of organizations. Starting from the def￾inition, the traditional approaches toward the complexity were categorized 
under two main strands: first, the complexity related to the structure of an 
organization which can be divided into vertical and horizontal complexity, 
and second, the complexity associated with the behavior of the system 
(Fioretti & Visser, 2004).
The structural complexity represents the complexity in the elements 
and their relationships in a system. By complexity, the differentiation of 
the elements and the number of the elements and the relationships can be 20 Complexity
20
signified. The vertical and horizontal division is based on the vertical and 
horizontal concepts of the structure. The vertical dimension points at the 
number of hierarchical levels that exist in an organization. For instance, in 
a software development company the levels can be depicted as the technical 
team within which there might exist hierarchies as well, the project man￾ager, the chief technology officer, and at the top, the chief executive officer. 
This may vary between the organizations in different sectors, and even 
between the organizations from the same sector. Apart from this variety, 
the hierarchical levels of an organization might change during the lifetime 
of an organization too; some levels can be added, some can be excluded 
or interestingly, they can be only labeled differently. For instance, in agile 
projects, the project manager is sometimes labeled as the scrum master 
disregarding the righteousness of this action. To sum up, the vertical com￾plexity is the differentiation of the hierarchical levels of an organization 
compared to its size.
Likewise, the horizontal complexity is the differentiation in the 
number of units or departments or the job positions at the same level 
of the hierarchy. In accordance with the purpose of the study, each or 
some of these dimensions may be chosen to represent the horizontal com￾plexity. For instance, in one of the studies available in the literature, the 
departmentation and the occupational differentiation were preferred as 
the dimensions representative of the extent of the horizontal complexity 
(Damanpour, 1996).
There still remain some gaps which are to be filled with further research 
concerning the structural complexity. Most of the gaps take their root from 
the operationalization of the concept, and to be more precise, to turn all 
these verbal definitions into a number or numbers which can be compared 
and illustrated much more easily. For those opposing this positivist view, 
the verbal notion may remain verbal, nonetheless, for the application of 
agents-based models, and to fulfil the final goal of all these studies, which 
is running an estimate of the future behavior of the system, there seems 
to be the need for some kind of quantitative data. What is worth empha￾sizing here is that the complex adaptive systems are neither predictable nor 
controllable in a similar vein with what was stated in the literature: the 
view of the future is unpredictable; one of the assumptions of the com￾plexity science (Fidanboy, 2020; Begun, Zimmerman, & Dooley, 2003). 
It should be kept in mind that this fact does not devalue the attempts to 
model the systems and run the simulations and estimations. In some cases, 
the researchers want to understand the behavior of the system in the past 
and/or find some explanations for the current behavior of the system. The 
behavior of the system in future may or may not vary from its previous 
behavior, it cannot be foreseen, yet, getting to know the system, its elements, 
the relationships, the patterns of its behavior, all within the boundaries of 
the system, all out in its environment, and all on its boundaries will provide 
some ideas on the probable behavior of the system. Even though this is all 
about probability, even a 1% is worth a lot relative to a mysterious black Complexity 21
21
box where even the elements of the system are not known. Here is where 
the point rests: managing the complexity. The suggestions and the findings 
of the studies in complexity science are not after controlling the uncon￾trollable, nonetheless, managing the complexity has always been of great 
attention. Managing the complexity is not about controlling. Oppositely, 
it enables the organization to maintain its freedom between choices of 
diverse patterns; thus, the organization might be enabled to show these 
patterns of behavior without being entangled in any impending situations, 
or being too dependent on the past, deterring it from experiencing the new 
patterns. Managing the complex adaptive systems is more difficult because 
these systems are complex and adaptive at the same time. For adaptability 
to become a lasting property of these systems, the choice between explor￾ation and exploitation must be considered carefully. It is noteworthy that 
the balance between these two is used for the determination of adaptive 
capacity of the systems (Duit & Galaz, 2008).
Before looking at the second strand of complexity research, there is a 
need for clarification. Horizontal and vertical complexity are not the only 
types of complexity associated with the structure of the organizations. 
The differentiation may occur in other structural dimensions of the organ￾ization as well. The spatial differentiation is another dimension (Daft, 
Organization Theory and Design, 1992; Anderson, 1999), and the com￾plexity concerned with it originates from the numerous locations at which 
the employees of a company can work at. To determine the extent of this 
kind of complexity, factors such as the number of locations, their prox￾imity, and their relationships can be taken into account.
As it is seen, the complexity is mostly taken in association with the 
structure of the organization, and in many researches, it was defined and 
measured accordingly. Nevertheless, there were attempts to shift the con￾sideration of complexity as an objective property to the cognitive effort 
taken by the decision makers for solving the problems and issues the 
organizations face (Fioretti & Visser, 2004). The second strand of com￾plexity views the complexity as no structural property. In this view, com￾plexity is comprehended as the effects it has on the human cognition 
specific to each problem or the way the decision makers interpret them 
(Fioretti & Visser, 2004). In line with the steps taken in this approach, after 
the preparation of the cognitive map of the decision maker, it is compared 
with what are seen in practice, and complexity is determined as the extent 
of their variance. To say it in a straightforward way, the complexity is the 
mismatch between the reality in the mind and the reality in the real world.
Taking the operationalization, complexity can be measured in 
accordance with the purpose of the study being taken place. For example, 
in one study, it was measured as geographic and/or product line diversi￾fication, and the industry and geographic concentration were stated as 
two aspects of the organizational complexity (Bushman, Chen, Engel, & 
Smith, 2004). In addition, it can be taken as properties of an organization 
which is associated with the number of parts making up an organization, 22 Complexity
2
the diversities among them, and the relationships between them (Fioretti 
& Visser, 2004).
Like what was mentioned earlier, organizational size is sometimes 
considered as an aspect of organizational complexity, and sometimes, as 
an indicator of structural complexity. The measurement of organizational 
size is usually done using the number of employees in an organization; 
however, in some studies, the non-personnel indicators were also utilized, 
for instance, the physical capacity of the organization (Damanpour, 1996). 
Simply, the organizational size refers to the fact that whether the organ￾ization is large or small. When an organization is perceived large, the first 
reason which comes to the mind is the number of employees. Rethinking 
about it, then, widen the meaning it implies such as the number of the 
physical assets or the amount of the resources like financial resources. 
Precisely, it can denote different meanings as regards the type of the organ￾ization. Assuming a hotel as the organization adds an extra meaning to 
the organizational size. The size of the hotel can be represented as the 
number of rooms it has. In educational institutions such as schools or uni￾versities, the number of students may indicate the organizational size. For 
a sports facility, the size may be displayed in the form of the number of 
the branches of sports it provides courses at or, perhaps, the number of its 
gyms and pools. It doesn’t matter which definitions or the indicators for 
measurement are preferred. The important issue is to select the one con￾sistent with the purpose and the nature of a specific study.
Interorganizational Complexity
Apart from the complexity at the organizational level, it can be present at 
upper levels as well. Organizations are not isolated properties with no bonds 
with their context; however, they are sometimes so embedded in their con￾text that makes it hard to identify the boundaries of the organization. This 
is where the term ‘blurred boundaries’ is preferred. Beyond the boundaries, 
whether clear or blurred ones, the other organization, elements, or agents 
exist which may be in some kind of relationship with the organization. 
The complexity which is seen between the organizations is dependent on 
the type of economic agglomeration the organization is posited in. Due 
to the different characteristics and properties of the numerous economic 
agglomerations, complexity can be defined for each of them separately.
In clusters, complexity can be identified in relation to the structure of 
clusters. The factors that influence the degree of complexity in clusters may 
include the number of firms, the number of dominant firms, the number 
of firms that are branches of a main firm, the homogeneity of the size 
of the firms located within the cluster, and the number of connections. 
In a similar vein with structural complexity in organizations, an increase 
in the number of the firms, the variety among them, and the number of 
connections within a cluster are expected to increase the degree of com￾plexity. Conversely, the number of the branches connected to a central firm Complexity 23
23
is anticipated to have a negative relationship since the branches move in 
harmony with each other which can be considered as a whole; thus, the 
increase in the number of branches of a certain company in a cluster is 
predicted to reduce the degree of complexity for that cluster. The homo￾geneity of the cluster in terms of the sizes of its firms is expected to have a 
negative relationship with complexity, whereas the increase in the difference 
between the sizes of the companies is foreseen to increase the complexity. 
Finally, the more dominant firms can be perceived as more influential deci￾sion makers, naturally followed by more decisions and more various types 
of behavior which raise the cluster complexity.
The complexity of the networks will be much harder to evaluate since 
networks are more complex with respect to their elements and connections. 
Within a network, individuals, teams, or organizations can be connected 
with each other from different geographical locations. Regardless of the 
type of entities connected, the increase in the number of entities, the rise 
in the variety of the connections, and the number of various locations are 
expected to cause the network complexity rise.
Almost true for any other economic agglomerations, the number of 
the agents and entities, the number of the connections, the variety of the 
connections, the heterogeneity in terms of the size of the firms in that eco￾nomic agglomeration, and the number of dominant and controlling firms 
are proposed to be positively related to the degree of complexity within 
that economic agglomeration.
Looking back at the literature shows us that the complexity between 
organizations have attracted more researchers’ attention as the partnership 
and alliances are becoming the popular choices organizations prefer. This 
need for collaboration and cooperation might root from different reasons. 
The more dynamic environment compared to the past can be just one of 
the sources. This way the organization can alleviate the negative outcomes 
from the risks and the decisions it is taking by sharing it with another 
partner. This sharing of the bad can be in the form of sharing the mon￾etary loss or even the resources. Imagine the cooperation between two com￾panies. Both companies designate different staff to the common project. It 
means that they are limiting their human resources for the other projects 
by this designation or to put it in another way, the employees working on 
the common project cannot be included in other projects full time. Even if 
the failure seems to bring no monetary loss to the sides, it sure causes some 
kind of loss in one or several kinds of the resources since the occupied 
resources cannot be utilized for the other projects utterly.
Other than sharing the risks taken by collaboration and/or cooper￾ation, the companies can have the resources they haven’t had before. These 
resources might be the ones who bring some kind of competitive advantage. 
For example, there may be some rare resources owned by a few number 
of companies, or perhaps, the resource cannot be easily afforded. These 
can be clarified in the explanation of the cases brought in the following. It 
might not seem believable when it is presented in the movies; nonetheless, 24 Complexity
24
there have always been individuals who are sought out by many companies 
for working with them. This person may own special technical knowledge, 
for instance, a great programmer, or may own the experience which makes 
the companies look for it, like some of the recognized CEOs employed 
by big companies. When talking of the human resources, one or some of 
the following three traits may be what makes an individual unique: the 
knowledge, the skill(s), or the experience. Apart from the human resources, 
the resource which the company wants to own as a result of the partner￾ship can be a technological asset that is rare or probably costly to afford. 
Similarly, the nonphysical assets such as a software or a certification or an 
accreditation can be the reasons behind the partnerships as well. Moreover, 
the financial resources may push the companies toward the preference of 
partnership in a similar way. Especially in the small- or medium-sized com￾panies, the realization of some of the goals needs an extra financial resource 
beyond the companies’ affordable financeable resources. In the past, lots of 
similar cases were seen. To summarize, owning the unaffordable or hard-to 
afford resources such as human resources and technological resources can 
tempt the companies into partnerships.
Bibliography
Anderson, P. (1999). Complexity Theory and Organization Science. Organization 
Science, 10(3), 216–232.
Begun, J. W., Zimmerman, B., & Dooley, K. (2003). Health Care Organizations as 
Complex Adaptive Systems. In S. M. Mick, & M. Wyttenbach (Eds.), Advances 
in Health Care Organization Theory (pp. 253–288). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Bushman, R., Chen, Q., Engel, E., & Smith, A. (2004). Financial Accounting 
Information, Organizational Complexity and Corporate Governance Systems. 
Journal of Accounting and Economics, 37(2), 167–201.
Daft, R. L. (1992). Organization Theory and Design (4th ed.). St Paul, MN: West.
Damanpour, F. (1996). Organizational Complexity and Innovation: Developing and 
Testing Multiple Contingency Models. Management Science, 42(5), 693–716.
Duit, A., & Galaz, V. (2008). Governance and Complexity – Emerging Issues 
for Governance Theory. Governance: An International Journal of Policy, 
Administration, and Institutions, 21(3), 311–335.
Eidelson, R. J. (1997). Complex Adaptive Systems in the Behavioral and Social 
Sciences. Review of General Psychology, 1(1), 42–71.
Eisenhardt, K. M., & Bhatia, M. M. (2005). Organizational Complexity and 
Computation. In J. A. Baum (Ed.), The Blackwell Companion to Organizations
(pp. 442–466, Ch 19). Oxford: Blackwell Publishing.
Fidanboy, M. (2020). A Multi-level Study of Technoparks within Complex Adaptive 
Systems Perspective: A Case Study of Factors Influencing R&D Performance
(PhD Dissertation). Ankara: Ankara Yildirim Beyazit University.
Fioretti, G., & Visser, B. (2004). A Cognitive Approach to Organizational 
Complexity. Tinbergen Institute Discussion Paper, No. 04-033/1, Tinbergen 
Institute, Amsterdam and Rotterdam, 1–32.
Gell-Mann, M. (1994). Complex Adaptive Systems. Retrieved January 26, 2017, 
from http://tuvalu.santafe.edu/~mgm/Site/Publications_files/MGM%20113.pdf.25
DOI: 10.4324/9781003182764-3
3 Adaptation
Adaptation is one of the many concepts which can be investigated at 
numerous levels. The adaptation at the microlevel of a society is the indi￾vidual adaptation. Scales were developed to measure the individual adap￾tation, and they are used for various purposes such as recruitment or 
directing the candidates toward the fields of study they are mostly fitted 
with characteristically. The individuals’ adaptive capacities differ just like 
many other personality traits. Some accept the changes sooner and easier 
than the others and then show adaptive responses. These adaptive responses 
can be in different forms. They may take actions in order to conform to the 
changes or conversely, their actions are in the direction of decreasing the 
changes or the possible effects of the changes. The other group of individ￾uals are the ones who don’t want to accept the changes and want to keep on 
with their old behavior. This is the situation at which the inertia occurs. The 
organizational inertia is a known phenomenon and there are myriads of 
research about it, yet before being considered as an organizational notion, 
it originates from the behavior of the individuals in an organization. As it 
is comprehended, one main issue with multilevel concepts is that how these 
concepts are related to each other at different levels. To be more precise and 
clear, if the adaptation of the individuals working at the department of an 
organization is measured, and, at the same time, the adaptation of their 
department is identified by measurement as well, how their relationship 
impacts on one another can be explained. There are many questions to seek 
answers for: Are there any formulas or a set of processes through which the 
individual adaptation measurements can be then turned into one upper 
level measurement, for example, the adaptation of their department? How 
are these different level concepts related and how do they affect each other? 
How is a change in one of them reflected in the other one’s amount? What 
are the factors influencing each of them and both of them? The answers to 
all of these questions and other similar questions provoke a final question 
present at the end of every research which is whether the findings can be 
generalized or not. Even if a research embraces all the answers, the issue is 
in which context the research has been conducted and how similar is this 
context to the other contexts so that the same findings can be reached. The 26 Adaptation
26
generalization is what makes it hard to spread the findings to any other 
contexts.
One of the very famous issues concerning the adaptation is the dialect￾ical debate of adaptation and selection. While some scientists view them 
as two opposite notions, some others think of them as a complementary 
notion, yet the third view of them in the character of two interrelated 
processes of change (Levinthal, 1991) is more close to the approach of this 
book. The first critique to the preference of this approach originates from 
the use of the word ‘adaptive’ in the CAS perspective; therefore, it is auto￾matically perceived that the approach of CAS toward the debate is in favor 
of adaptation. The organizational inertia plays the principal role in their 
relation. Organizational inertia was suggested as the basis for selection 
and the inertial forces in the role of a prerequisite for intelligent organiza￾tional adaptation (Levinthal, 1991). The following explanations can help 
with the clarification of this paradoxical role. Imagine an organization that 
has detected changes in its environment. It is making preparations to take 
actions toward gaining a new fit with it like many other rivals in the same 
environment. Some of the organizations will act more rapidly compared to 
others. In biology, when talking of selection, the populations of animals or 
plants are examined for several generations during an almost long period 
of time. There, the duration of the study seems to be more crucial than 
the speed the dominant group consumes the resources in the environment. 
The speed is also of great momentousness for the reason that the envir￾onmental resources are constrained, and they can be hardly available to 
everyone, and the one who is faster can take advantage of the resources. If 
the advantage is the food, the latecomers may lose their chance for survival, 
and through this, the selection eventuates. In a similar vein with biology, in 
the organizational studies, the same rules are valid. The companies delayed 
for the adaptation to their environment bear the least or no probability to 
survive in spite of the fact that the failure or the vanishing of the company 
may take some time like the examples in biology. In biology, many factors 
determine whom to survive, whom and when to become extinct, such as 
the type of the resource in the environment, or the scarcity and vitality of 
that resource for that specific population. Considering it from the resource 
dependency theory of the organizations, the resources and their changes 
can trigger the adaptation process in the organizations as well. Suppose 
there is only one manufacturer for a hardware used in a widely used electric 
device. All the manufacturers of that electric device are highly dependent 
on their supplier, part of their environment. The hardware manufacturer 
is moving on to altering the hardware with a new version which will not 
be compliant with old electric devices. Here, the speed matters. The elec￾tric device manufacturers have to make their manufacturing processes con￾sistent with the new hardware, otherwise, they will face the problem of 
supplying the old hardware, and they have to stop their production. The 
electric device manufacturer who changes its production line accordingly 
can conquer the market for a period of time till the other rivals adapt too. Adaptation 27
27
The rivals might go under the required changes or might fail. Granted 
all mentioned, the significance of the speed in providing the appropriate 
adaptive response can be neither denied nor underrated. This also implies 
that the selection can be done based on the organizational inertia. Besides, 
the inertia enhances the efficacy of selection in the organizations (Levinthal 
& Marin, 2015).
This is now the turn to elucidate the relationship between the adaptation 
and the inertial forces. Notwithstanding the drawbacks of inertia and the 
problems it causes, it can be advantageous in some cases. With reference 
to the example of the electric device manufacturer, another scenario can 
be devised. Among the electric device manufacturers, one adapted faster 
than the others and had lots of sales. The other manufacturers joined him 
too after a few months. As time passed, users started to complain about 
the new version of the electric device, a problem which was related to the 
use of the new hardware. All the electric device manufacturers contacted 
their seldom supplier to ask for returning to the old hardware. Hence, the 
hardware manufacturer began producing the new versions of the same old 
hardware, and the only electric device manufacturer who had the appro￾priate production line left for the old hardware was the delayed one in 
adaptation, the one with the highest organizational inertia. This can be 
considered as a kind of intelligent adaptation roots from the inertial forces. 
The very similar example can be the companies active in very turbulent 
environments such as the stock market. The delays generated by the iner￾tial forces bring more time to the company for making more logical and 
wiser decisions which lead to earning more profits from time to time.
Organizational Adaptation
An organization as a whole bear many characteristics, and they have 
always been the interests of the researchers. The organization may be hard 
to be supposed as a living thing; however, as long as it lives it shows certain 
types of behavior and holds specific characteristics. Just like the personal 
traits at the individual level, each organization possesses some features and 
characteristics which make it identifiable from other organizations such as 
age, size, identity, and so on.
One of the very interesting studies was the one exploring diverse 
perspectives toward organizational adaptation. In that study, some of 
the main organizational theories were categorized under three main 
perspectives: deterministic, voluntaristic, and coevolutionary (Abatecola, 
2012). As comprehended from their names, the deterministic perspectives 
include the theories which consider the environment as the key role for 
selecting which organizations can survive; thus, the fate of an organiza￾tion is determined by the environment. In contract, the voluntaristic 
views highlight the role of the management in taking actions on the 
environment voluntarily; therefore, they have the chance to select their 
responses. With reference to the coevolutionary perspectives, the first two 28 Adaptation
28
perspectives can exist at different periods of time and at different intensities 
(Abatecola, 2012).
The studies on organizational adaptation were suggested to regard 
three groups of variables: the variables associated with the environment, 
the variables related to the structure of the organization, and strategy 
making (Miller & Friesen, 1980). The debate between the structure and 
the strategy gains attention in this condition; whether the strategy comes 
before the structure or the structure is prior to the strategy. Using the CAS 
perspective, the change in the structure means any kind of changes in the 
elements of the systems or their connections while the change in strategy 
originates from the changes in the behavior shown by the agents, and this 
behavior itself originates from the schemata of the actors or decision 
makers. Consistent with the changes infused into the system, there may be 
a need to modify the schemata or change the structure of the system. To be 
plainer, the CAS perspective does not make any specific preference between 
strategy and structure, but leave the choice to be made in consistency with 
the situation. This is when adaptation makes sense.
Adaptation to the environment depends on many factors. The factors 
can be grouped as environmental factors and organizational factors if 
to be viewed as an open system from a CAS perspective. In line with the 
assumptions held for the open systems, these systems have boundaries 
that separate the systems from their environment. This categorization of 
the factors will be the easiest way to investigate them. Starting with the 
organizational factors, there will be many of them like the employees’ 
openness to change, their individual adaptive capacity, the structure of the 
organization in terms of its flexibility to adapt, and the decision makers 
as the key roles. In most of the researches, the organizational construct 
comes forward, and the role of the decision makers in the adaptation is 
usually faded and dissolved when exploring the construct at the organ￾izational level. Nonetheless, the decision makers influence the adaptation 
in countless ways. In the available literature on the organizational adapta￾tion, the importance of how decision makers interpret their environment 
was emphasized (Ford & Baucus, 1987), and these are the interpretations 
on which the organizations act in response to the changes. The other pos￾sible way of the decision maker’s influence is how he depicts the changes 
in the eyes of the other employees. If he does not welcome changes, the 
chance that employees will welcome the changes will be low. For example, 
a manager is introducing some new requirements as part of the adaptive 
response, but he uses the words which can be perceived in a negative way. 
In such a situation, when the employees don’t feel the support from the top 
management, they may not accept the changes or they may not be fully 
committed to them. One of the factors which impact the acceptance of the 
changes may be the job satisfaction of the employees. The employees unsat￾isfied with their jobs may be more unwilling to endure any changes when 
the changes seem to be hard to be implemented. Another factor can be the 
organizational commitment. Regardless of the kind of the commitment, Adaptation 29
29
the less commitment might be related to less contribution to the adaptation 
processes.
Looking at the structure of the organizations, determination of the type 
best for being adaptive is not that easy. The structure of an organization has 
many dimensions such as formalization, specialization, and centralization 
(Daft, 2007). There will be a host of combinations of all these dimensions 
and each will show a different level of adaptation when confronting 
changes. This requires further research to predict the adaptation of these 
combinations in different contexts. In part of the literature, the companies 
with high R&D performance were found to show more adaptation in all 
the dimensions except for rules and regulations when compared with the 
companies with low R&D performance (Fidanboy, 2020).
Adaptive responses have been brought up a lot in all previous 
discussions, but what is really meant by adaptive responses needs some 
more explanations and examples. Suppose you are the manager of a food 
company. The manufacturing processes are done on a regular basis and 
everything seems to be monotonously going on. Even you, as the manager, 
sign the same papers and do the same office work. Do you think every￾thing will keep working like this forever? Of course, not. Even in the bluest 
ocean, when no competitors are present and no one seems to enter the 
market for a long time, what you view as a slight and minor change can 
ruin all the routines, procedures, and processes. All at once, a new scien￾tific research shed light on the potential harms on one of the ingredients 
in your products, and the media begin making news of these harmful 
ingredients. The sale starts to fall drastically. What happened to that blue 
ocean? You have no choice except finding solutions or downsizing your 
company which will continue till the complete collapse of the company 
and failure of your strategies as a manager. Your employees will start to 
blame you as the manager for not being able to predict such an incident or 
at least finding a solution when it happens. Referring to the scientific ter￾minology, the first response is called the proactive response and the latter 
response is the reactive response to the changes. In the similar vein with the 
literature, adaptation is not all waiting for the changes in the environment 
to occur and then initiating the reactions accordingly (Cameron, 1984). It 
is worth emphasizing that the proactive responses are also demonstrated 
in the existence of some kind of mismatch between the organization and 
the environment. It cannot be necessarily a change in the environment, 
but a change inside the organization which gives rise to an inconsistency 
between the organization and the environment it is posited at. The point 
which should be paid attention to is that what is labelled as the adaptation 
is any kind of changes sourcing from the environment or imposed on the 
organization by the environment even if the changes seemed to root from 
something within the organization at the first glance. As the managers, the 
identification of the main sources of changes requires more than taking a 
look at it, but deepening the understanding of the change and the factors 
affecting it, and finally, pinpointing the source.30 Adaptation
30
In addition to the reactive and proactive responses to the changes in 
the environments, there is another possible situation in terms of the rela￾tionship between the environment and the organization which was named 
as ‘defensive’ (Chakravarthy, 1982). The companies that are ‘defenders’ 
(Chakravarthy, 1982) try to ignore the changes in the environment, and in 
spite of making adjustments, they make efforts to narrow their exchange 
with their environment and deter from interacting with it. The decisions 
are then made and the strategies are defined according to this approach. 
The success of such companies is dependent on the level of similarity 
between the future and today’s environment. If the environment stays same 
as before, they have the opportunity to survive, though today’s dynamic 
environment aggravates the possibility of success and survival.
Two main reasons were provided for the selection of specific adaptive 
responses by the firms which are the adaptive ability consisting of organ￾izational and material capacity along with the process of adaptation 
which embraces adaptive generalization and adaptive specialization 
(Chakravarthy, 1982). This categorization can be further expanded to the 
debate between the strategy and structure. During the adaptive general￾ization, the adjustments in the material and organizational capacity are 
followed by the adjustments in the strategy while at the time of the adaptive 
specialization process, the modifications and alterations in the strategy 
induce the structure of the organization to adapt accordingly.
One of the very enlightening explanations was exhibited in the litera￾ture on how to differentiate planned change from adaptation. To sum￾marize, some of the main differences of planned organizational change 
and the adaptation were proffered as the source of the changes, the level 
of the changes whether individual or organizational, the focus of change, 
and their literature (Cameron, 1984). These can be described with some 
examples from the practice and experience. Moving back to the food 
company example, the change related to the ingredients is compelled to 
the company from the environment; hence, this is considered an adapta￾tion. In the same company, training is scheduled for the employees in the 
manufacturing process in association with a food standard. The training is 
supposed to be informative and educative in a supplementary way as the 
employees have already known the standard. The management decides to 
hire a consultant to assure that what had been taught during the training are 
executed in practice as well. After several weeks, some behavioral changes 
in the employees are seen in accordance with the training concepts. Some 
visible changes are like being more careful, more cautious, and performing 
more elaborate observations. Having it viewed from the eye of an organiza￾tional researcher, the training has obviously impacted the organizational 
culture. Approaching from a CAS perspective, the changes in the schemata 
of the employees have resulted the changes in their behaviors and these 
changes are also be reflected in the organizational culture. This type of 
organizational change is not taken into account as an adaptation but as a 
planned organizational change. As it has always been of great attention, in Adaptation 31
31
uncertain and dynamic environments, the adaptation matters more, when 
predications and anticipations can hardly be made or require professional 
insight and knowledge.
The next difference between the planned organizational change and 
adaptation is the focus of change which are intraorganization and on the 
exchange of resources and information between the organization and its 
environment, respectively. The last difference is their literature. For the 
planned organizational changes, the manager or the project manager or 
the one has the authority prepares a plan containing cost, budget, and 
time needed for the change along with the scope of the change. In some of 
the companies, there are forms required to be filled out for the approved 
changes. On the other hand, the literature of adaptation is about how the 
changes are taking place and what is obtained from the adaptation at the 
end. Like what mentioned earlier, the adaptation is a process, not a rule, not 
a specific task or a product. It is more about answering the ‘how’ questions 
rather than the ‘what’ questions.
Another issue related to the adaptation is the modes of adaptation; what 
the different kinds of adaptation are, to say it simply. In this respect, ‘track’ 
was introduced as the paths taken by the organization over its lifecycle, 
and it can be used to explain whether the organization will change and if 
so, how it will change (Fox-Wolfgramm, Boal, & Hunt, 1998). In the same 
article, four different modes for adaptation were discussed. Integrating 
these modes of adaptation with the assumptions of CAS produces the 
following four possible conditions a system may experience at the time 
of encountering with changes. Before moving through the conditions, 
emergence should be discussed first. What is implied by emergence is the 
new patterns, properties, qualities, or structures that appear in the system 
(Mitleton-Kelly, 2003) as a result of change. As for the first condition, 
facing some of the changes leads to the emergence temporarily, and after 
some time, the organization will go back to its initial status. It cannot be a 
good example in terms of the nonethical issues it bears; however, it is just 
like the organizations under some kind of appraisal, and during the time 
of their appraisal, they make some changes. After the appraisal is finished, 
they start doing what they do as they did before and everything goes back 
to its previous form.
The second condition is the permanent emergence. The organization 
takes a new form in terms of one, all or some of the patterns of behaviors, 
properties, the structures, or/and qualities. For instance, a new model 
is going to be applied to an organization for the purpose of improving 
some of the current processes, creating some new processes, and excluding 
some of them. The organization will keep on doing the processes in their 
updated manner. One example of this condition can be a transition from 
using the traditional project management to agile methods. In such a case, 
not only the processes are modified and altered, but also some structural 
modifications will be made. The traditional project management is com￾pliant with the hierarchical structure of the organizations, whereas the 32 Adaptation
32
agile methods favor and suggest a more vertical structure. Till now, in this 
example, the processes and the structure have been changed. Moving for￾ward with the same example, the agile methods welcome changes while the 
traditional project management is more reluctant to infuse any changes 
into the project after the planning. This is reflected in the difference between 
their quality approaches, the customer-oriented quality approach, and the 
outcome–income-based quality approach, respectively. As a result, in this 
case, the emergence of new patterns of behaviors is demonstrated too. The 
emergence of new patterns of behavior can also be noticed as a result of 
the change in the hierarchical structure. In the traditional project manage￾ment, the project manager is the authority control who checks and orders 
the members of the technical team; nonetheless, in the agile methods, the 
hierarchy is not seen, and the one standing near the team, helping them, 
and guiding them is called coach or master based on the agile method 
being utilized. This omission of the command-control authority induces 
behavioral changes in the members of the team like feeling more motivated 
to work, more willing to share their new ideas, more creative, or more 
helpful to their team members. Granted all mentioned, the agile methods 
are one group of methods very well fitted within the CAS perspective as 
they are concentrated on the acceptance of changes throughout the project 
lifecycle. This implicitly points toward the constant adaptation since the 
source of the changes is mostly customers, beyond the boundaries of the 
organization, part of its environment.
The third condition is chaos. Imagine an axis. On the left side is the order 
state, in the middle is the complexity, and on the right side rests the chaos 
state ranging from zero connections to full connections (Potts, 2000). In the 
chaos condition, the system experiences no dominant pattern, but fluctu￾ating between different patterns. The absence of a structure makes barriers 
on the way of the exchange of information which, at last, will cause the 
system to ‘disintegrate into unpredictable performance’ (Comfort, 1994). 
What is needed to be stressed here is that creativity and innovation come 
about at the edge of chaos (Bak, 1996; Faucher, 2010).
The fourth condition is what was labelled as inertia (Fox-Wolfgramm, 
Boal, & Hunt, 1998). It happens when the organization resists the change 
and it is reluctant to experience any kind of changes, trying to maintain 
its previous pattern. The inertia is one of the key issues at the failure of 
the change. Poor change management cannot handle the inertia naturally 
shown by the organization. The use of the word ‘naturally’ is to accentuate 
the fact that inertia, as originated from natural sciences, is accompanied 
with natural phenomena. It is not a notion that exist apart and then added 
to the phenomena, but it comes with them in a natural manner. Inertia 
may seem to be a trivial matter, yet it has been among the main reasons 
the organization couldn’t implement the change desirably. Taking a look at 
one real-world example can shed light on this fact. An educational organ￾ization tended to apply a new system to its language-teaching processes. 
The employees were designated for each of the tasks planned to get done. Adaptation 33
3
For the aim of control and check, a person was assigned the tasks related 
to supervision. After a few months, the outcomes of the system were not 
as expected. From an organizational studies viewpoint, the organization’s 
attempts for executing the changes might not be sufficient or appropriate. 
Sometimes the team members do not attempt enough to achieve the goals 
or oppositely, they make lots of efforts but the efforts are not made in 
the right direction for reaching the goal. The continuous effort with no 
desired outcome gained is just one of the factors that make the employees 
to become worn out and in some cases, it eventually ends with quitting. 
The same thing happened in this instance. After several months, the turn￾over rate increased and even those who didn’t leave their jobs have thought 
of resignation at least once. What was not foreseen in this case was the 
inertia on the way to change. In agreement with what was stated before, the 
inertia cannot be prevented, but can be mitigated to the level which does 
the least harm to the organization, to the extent it would not be felt much. 
Managers, based on their knowledge or experience, have diverse ways to 
deal with inertia. For the example discussed earlier, inertia could have 
been mitigated by more transparency in terms of giving description on the 
tasks, the process of the assignments of the tasks, the benefits provided by 
the changes, and the justifications for the need for the changes. This may 
not suffice without a control mechanism. The tasks should be observed 
closely, and the staff should be monitored constantly to see whether they 
are performing according to the plans or not. Too much observation and 
monitoring may have negative effects on the employees. A useful solution 
can be self-organized teams in which the team members are empowered 
to add their own methods and techniques, and they are kept motivated 
to work, committed to the changes. What should be kept in mind is that 
even the strictest model or framework devised for implementation in the 
organizations presents the option of tailoring. Not every change is abso￾lutely profitable for every organization or every context. Consequently, 
a good decision is to leave some subjects open to negotiations through 
a small and trivial amount, so that the employees feel the empowerment 
and the value organization gives them. Being able to speak their opinions 
and ideas openly can help to increase their motivation and job satisfac￾tion, and the feeling of being actively involved in the process of change 
makes them more committed. Commitment to the changes is very crucial 
throughout the change period as it may vary easily due to many factors. 
Keeping the members of the organizations committed is one of the respon￾sibilities of the managers. There are many companies which are really hard 
for people to get into, and those who start working in these companies usu￾ally won’t resign, but continue working till their retirement. Whatever their 
commitment strategy is, they are successful in preventing the drawbacks 
originating from the turnover, especially the turnover of human resources 
which are the source of competitive advantages.
A very similar and almost same concept to adaptation modes were 
named as the adaptation forms: relative inertia, adjustment, reorientation, 34 Adaptation
34
and strategic renewal (Burgelman, 1991). These forms were defined and 
described in association with the strategy-making processes. Here, they 
are integrated with CAS perspective, explained within examples. An elec￾tronics company has just changed its R&D strategies to catch up with 
the worldwide technological innovations. The R&D strategy changes were 
imposed on the company as a result of their choice for entering the global 
market. Viewing it from a CAS lens illustrates the widening of the envir￾onment; the national market remains while an international market has 
been added. The part of the environment new to the organization urges 
it to take new steps toward reaching a fit with the bigger environment. 
Consequently, the strategies were modified. After some time, the fit turns 
into the misfit for the reason that the requirements for the fit have been 
replaced, and the environmental changes trigger more strategic changes 
in the organizations posited within it. What is simply needed is to change 
the strategies again. The new changes can also take place, nevertheless, 
the relativity of inertia points at the reduction of such changes as time 
passes, and when making a comparison between the changes required by 
the environment and the changes in the strategies, the changes in the strat￾egies will be relatively lower. The reactive response is the most probable 
response at the first stages of the process, even so, by the time passing, 
reactive responses are less made and thus, the defensive responses will 
become perceptible.
The adjustment argument delineates that despite the inertia on the way 
to adaptation, adjustments, even minor ones, may come out. Although the 
minor adjustments are useful to some point, after a period, there are needs 
for major changes of the strategies. The aforementioned electronics com￾pany might go on with some minor changes, yet the strategies will not be 
fruitful, sufficient, and legitimate later. This is consistent with the earlier 
discussions of temporary emergence and permanent emergence. The emer￾gence of new strategies can be temporarily experienced, but the permanent 
emergence will be demanded eventually. In terms of the type of response, 
the reactive response is seen during adjustment.
The reorientation is same as the chaos state described earlier. The 
interesting issue here is that the major changes in the strategies might save 
the organization from the collapse for the time being, albeit in the long 
term, it decreases the life expectancy of the organization (Burgelman, 
1991). In addition, the type of adaptive response is mainly reactive, waiting 
for the environment to force changes on the organization and then com￾mencing taking actions. Regarding the electronic company, the company 
efforts in order to develop its R&D activities had continued, even though, 
due to the major changes in the structure pursued by major changes in 
the strategy, it had already made lots of trouble for the company. The 
strategies worked at first; nonetheless, after several months of struggling, 
the company failed in the global market and receded to its previously 
concentrated national market. It is noteworthy that the concept of envir￾onment for a CAS as a kind of open system might be deemed more related Adaptation 35
35
to natural sciences than the social studies, although underestimating it in 
the social studies will give rise to devastating problems and failures to the 
organizations. Consequently, before making any decisions concerning the 
environment like expanding the environment by entering into new markets, 
or changing the environment by changing the product manufactured, or 
the service being provided, or changing the location of the company, the 
changes which were and are in demand by the environment should be 
explored well. The current needs should not suffice for a deep comprehen￾sive understanding of the environment; thus, it would be better to take a 
look back at the history of the environment and investigate the trend of 
the changes in the past, probing into the factors playing key roles in the 
changes, and further, link the past with the current situation. The lack of a 
clear view of the environment is a barrier on the adaptation processes since 
the environment is what the organization intends to adapt to.
The last adaptation mode is the strategic renewal. During the strategic 
renewals, first, the internal experimentation and selection occur which are 
what differentiate the renewal from reorientation, followed by strategic 
changes which helps the organization to remain adaptive (Burgelman, 
1991). Moreover, the strategic renewal enables the company to show pro￾active adaptive responses in the future (Burgelman, 1991).
The adaptation modes have been discussed earlier in this section. 
A question which is still left unanswered is that ‘what makes the 
organizations choose similar or different adaptation modes?’ Three sources 
of forces were offered for the similarities between the choices of the adap￾tation modes: coercive, normative, and mimetic forces – where coercive 
forces compel the organizations to select the same modes while the nor￾mative forces root from the norms regarding the institutional context, and 
the mimetic forces are related to the imitation of the mode preferred by the 
successful organizations (Fox-Wolfgramm, Boal, & Hunt, 1998).
The extent to which organizations experience adaptation differ, and a 
division was made in the literature for the levels. According to an article, an 
organization can go under the adaptation at different levels: high, medium, 
and low levels (Jennings & Seaman, 1994). The relationship between the 
adaptation and the structure of the companies has become apparent in the 
same study. The structure of the firm is either as organic or as mechanistic 
structure, where the organic structure has the flexibility to adapt to the 
changes compared to the mechanistic structure which is more rigid and 
stricter toward the changes. In this regard, the organizations with high level 
of adaptation will have organic structure, whereas the organizations with 
adaptation of low level will have mechanistic structure (Jennings & Seaman, 
1994). One good example of the companies with organic structure is the 
companies that are implementing agile frameworks. Such companies do 
not possess the traditional hierarchical structure through which the com￾munication whenever needed should follow the below-top or the top-below 
directions. The communication is so frequent in these companies and it is 
mostly taking place among the vertical levels. Whenever communication 36 Adaptation
36
between hierarchical levels is required, due to the low number of levels, it 
can also occur quickly and easily comparatively.
With regard to the rules, the companies with organic structure are mainly 
working with fewer but just fundamental rules, whereas in the companies 
with mechanistic structure, conformance to the rules is of great importance 
to the point that it sometimes turns into chains, keeping the organizations 
from finding an optimal solution rapidly, and it costs time to the organiza￾tion, besides, in some situations it is accompanied by the negligence of cre￾ative and innovative solutions. Furthermore, adaptation in terms of rules 
and regulation has shown a different behavior from other dimensions of 
adaptation among companies with low and high R&D performance. The 
high performers were found to show more adaptation in terms of all organ￾izational adaption dimensions except for rules and regulations (Fidanboy, 
2020). The occurrence of adaptation in dimension may be low due to the 
few numbers of rules and regulations in high performers. They don’t feel 
any need to modify or alter these few rules for two main reasons; the first is 
that they are few in number, and the second reason is that the rules are the 
fundamental rules, rarely demanded to be altered.
Moving toward the field of practice, one of the very useful features of 
the agile companies is the omission of the extra unnecessary hierarchical 
levels which brings about numerous critical benefits. First, the communi￾cation taken place at the vertical level can be done in a shorter time, and 
subsequently, the solutions can be reached faster. Second, the employees 
may feel more empowered, less under pressure and stressed when the hier￾archical structure does not compel them to report their works to the upper 
levels, but to a person at the same level with them, designated as the team 
coach or the team master. Third, whenever new ideas and opinions emerge 
at the technical level, they should not follow all the hierarchical levels since 
they will be reported directly to the coach at the same level. The convenience 
provided to the employees for sharing their thoughts and ideas makes the 
working environment more innovative and creative. In spite of efficiency, 
the effectiveness of the agile methods cannot be denied. Fourth, in the agile 
organizations, the changes are proceeded neither in a top-down manner 
nor in a down-top manner, however, within and through the organization 
as a whole. The approval of the changes will usually need the confirmation 
from the top management or any other top-level authority; hence, they will 
be informed of the changes. Nonetheless, the changes do not go through 
all top-down structures to be announced to the technical team members. 
Conversely, the approved changes are handled by the team coach or master 
and shared with the technical team members directly. This is the prominent 
reason why the agile organization are good at adaptation, dissolving the 
change right into the project.
‘Which organizations are successful in terms of adaptation?’ has been 
the main research question of many studies. Some of the characteristics for 
the organizations with successful adaptation are: having flexible structure, 
going under more changes, recruiting employees more than removing them Adaptation 37
37
from their jobs, bearing a higher ratio of change to the number of agents 
(Carley, 1997).
The changes in an organization come out at two levels: strategic and 
operational levels (Carley, 1997). At the strategic level, an organization 
make attempts to obtain a fit with its environment through the strategies 
being made while the operational level adaptation is about the agents 
performing the tasks in the organizations and are capable of learning from 
the experience and using the lessons learnt in their future execution of tasks. 
The learning is a crucial characteristic sought in the employees in adaptive 
organizations. Considering the agile companies as a good exemplification 
of the adaptive organizations, the learning takes place throughout the 
project, all the time. It is happening continuously and the lessons learnt 
are both stored in the memories of the team members along with keeping 
them in written forms, either hard or soft forms as a guide for future refer￾ence. The advantage of agile companies with respect to the lessons learnt 
is that they don’t leave the learning to the employees due to the fact that 
the lessons learnt might be perceived dissimilarly from one individual to 
another one and may be forgotten after some time. Thus, after the com￾pletion of a project, the team members and other authorities gather in a 
meeting to discuss the lessons they have learnt from the completed pro￾ject and they are recorded and saved for further reference. Since the agile 
companies confront the changes a lot, they should be so careful with their 
decisions in order to make wise and appropriate decisions, together with 
making efforts to avoid the past mistakes.
In a similar vein with the levels of changes in an organization, the cap￾ability of learning can be investigated at two levels in an organization as 
well: the strategic and the operational level (Carley & Lee, 1998). At the 
strategic level, the learning is done by altering the connections, whereas at 
the operational level, the employees obtain experience (Carley & Lee, 1998).
A model consisting of five processes was proposed for the organizational 
adaptation to environmental changes: scanning, noticing, interpretation, 
choosing, and learning (Milliken, Dutton, & Beyer, 1992). These processes 
will be explained integrated with the CAS perspective. Consider an elec￾tronics company which produces home appliances. Employees in almost 
all departments related to the production usually research for the new tech￾nologies, changes in the market, changes in the needs of customers, follow 
the latest trends related to home appliances, and a host of other informa￾tion. Of course, not all the information is useful and can be utilized later. 
Thus, some of the information is worth paying attention to since the atten￾tional resources were stated to be constrained (Milliken, Dutton, & Beyer, 
1992). The next stage is to interpret the data which were noticed before. 
The interpretation is a subjective process just like the noticing process for 
the reason that what data should be heeded and what should be omitted is 
dependent on the subjectivist view of the relevant agents together with how 
to interpret the data. These subjectivist opinions and decisions remind the 
cognitive part of a CAS, schemata. The schemata, the source of the behavior 38 Adaptation
38
shown by the individuals, bear an important role especially during these 
two processes. What is labelled as the organizational schemata will help 
to reduce the disagreements and variations among diverse interpretations; 
nonetheless, in case of any existing disagreements which cannot be fixed 
or when sufficient information is not supplied for making the right inter￾pretation, a scanning process will be asked to be repeated. Subsequently, 
the noticing process will face some changes too. This feedback mechanism 
assures the decision makers to make the most intelligent decision despite all 
uncertainty that is present in all projects all the time. What matters here is 
that the uncertainty that is not inevitable in any projects can be thought of, 
which implies the uncertainty of the environment. On the other hand, the 
organization is a CAS and its behavior is neither predictable nor control￾lable. Thus, good managers don’t tend to control the behavior of a CAS or 
predict it as it is not really feasible. A good decision is the one being made 
after taking into consideration all available data as well as exploring the 
history of the organization including, but not limited to, the best practices, 
experiences, lessons learnt, and the previous decisions.
The next process of organizational adaptation is choosing the best inter￾pretation of the problems and changes which will be then responded to. The 
selection of the interpretation is again partially subjective. The data based 
on the fact shape the objective part of the decision; nonetheless, due to 
the involvement of a decision-making process or to be clearer, the engage￾ment of the cognitive map of the decision makers with the decision making 
is partly subjective too. This is true for almost every matter dealt with in 
management. In spite of the use of engineering tools and other quantita￾tive tools in the field of management and the organizational studies, these 
tools remain solely as supportive tools, not determining tools. The data are 
given to the software or are entered into the processing and the information 
is the outcome either in a qualitative form or in a quantitative form. Based 
on this information and the experience and knowledge of the decision 
maker, a decision is made. The quantitative information such as the tables 
depicting the production on a monthly basis cannot be reported to the 
employees labeled as the ‘new decision of the manager.’ These raw infor￾mation needs to be processed cognitively to become comprehensible and 
executable. The decisions are next announced in the form of statements 
or in some cases, they may include a quantitative statement like increasing 
the production by 10% which is the outcome of processing the informa￾tion extracted from software, figures, tables, etc., subsequently simplified in 
such a sentence to be clearly understood by the relevant staff. The clarity of 
the decisions is an important issue which its dearth causes many problems. 
Some examples associated with the vagueness attributable to the use of 
words when numbers are needed are ‘increase in production is needed’ or 
‘the deadline is next month.’ The questions rise after such statements are: 
‘How much increase is aimed at? How is the increase calculated; in the 
form of percentage or the number of products manufactured?’ or ‘when 
is exactly the deadline? Which day? What is the date?’ To conclude, the Adaptation 39
39
management of an organization is involved with both objective and sub￾jective decisions and, additionally, dealing with quantitative and qualita￾tive data and information.
Learning is the last process of organizational adaptation, through which 
the organization begins taking actions in response to the changes in the 
environments. The first issue here is that the organization must learn how 
to learn. Furthermore, the culture of the organization should support the 
learning as well. The trainings, workshops, and seminars organized by the 
organizations for their employees are just some of the means for reaching 
this goal. Giving promotion to the employees who continue learning new 
skills is another way to buoy the learning culture in the organization.
Interorganizational Adaptation
The organizations in a network may be loosely or tightly connected with 
each other. As the strength of the connections varies, the characteristics 
of the connections differ too. In one of the previous studies, the findings 
suggested that strong ties help the organizations to reduce the uncer￾tainty and foster adaptation through communication and sharing infor￾mation with others (Kraatz, 1998). Thus, it can be implied that the weak 
relationships would not assist the organization in dealing with the changes 
in the environment. The exchange of information is not good in weak 
relationships, and the organization may not receive enough information 
regarding the changes in the environment or concerning the actions the 
other organizations are taking in response to the changes toward the 
adaptation.
Apart from the strength of the connections within a network, the size of 
the network also plays an important role in predicting the benefits it provides 
its members with or, oppositely, the restrictions it chains its organizations 
with. What is usually seen in the organization with large networks is that 
they have the novel information sooner than the atomistic organizations, 
and thus, whenever being fast is required in this dynamic world, they are 
the ones who exceed their rivals in this rat race. Such a situation may not 
always be of advantage. The risk of the diffusion of wrong information, 
which is sometimes spread to trap the organizations, is so high. This not￾on-fact-based information are created by the organizations to cause harm 
to the others, and make them involved in a situation, distracting them 
from what is actually going on and making them waste their resources on 
unnecessary issues. It is the responsibility of the decision makers to be wise 
in detecting the truthfulness of information and then start acting on them. 
The other problem with the large networks is that the communication may 
not be as frequent as in the small networks along with the less intimacy. 
For instance, an organization located in a large network can have close 
and frequent relationships with several organizations, but not the rest. To 
say it more clearly, the frequency and the closeness of the connections of 
an organization is not necessarily the same through all of its connections.40 Adaptation
40
Looking at the adaptation in large networks, the organizations have 
the chance to gain more information from more resources, be aware of 
their environment more, and therefore, showing more suitable adaptive 
responses. On the other hand, in networks of small size, the information 
resources might not be that many, though they have the chance to observe 
the organizations closely, watch their actions, copy their adaptive actions, 
or tailor them based on their needs or even deterring the wrong adaptive 
responses to be given by the organization. Both large and small networks 
provide some advantages and disadvantages to their members in terms of 
adaptation. Nevertheless, it is noteworthy that the size and the strength 
of connections are not the only factors with influence on the adaptation 
responses in a network.
Till now, some of the characteristics of the connections have been 
mentioned; the frequency and the length. By length, the closeness is meant; 
an arm-length connection represents a close relationship between the 
organizations. The third characteristic is the age of the connection, whether 
the connection has been recently established or it is old enough to bring 
what the passing of time brings to the relationships. The effect of time 
in the relationship is not negligible; the actors know each other well and 
they can predict each other’s future actions. In its positive manner, mutual 
trust can be formed while in the negative manner, it restricts the choices 
of organization in terms of the options to work with. From a CAS point 
of view, the aforementioned possible cases are related to path dependency 
in making decisions concerning the partners and collaborators. Not too 
high or too low level of path dependency is desired but an average level. 
Taken all said so far, the strength of the connection is dependent on the 
frequency, length, and the age of the connection.
The fourth characteristic, which is a determinant of the strength of the 
connection, is whether there is an amplifier to the connection or not. The 
amplifier is what makes an organization prefer a connection over another 
one. This may have different reasons. For example, the managers of the 
two companies are relatives or old friends. This amplifier can be a contrac￾tual condition like the contract to work with an organization for a specific 
amount of time. This was labeled as ‘bonds,’ an aspect of relationships, 
which was identified in different kinds as follows: knowledge, technical, 
socioeconomic, planning, and legal (Johanson & Mattsson, 1987).
Looking at the networks, as mentioned earlier, they may be large or 
small, subsuming strong or weak ties, or they may be homogenous or het￾erogeneous. They are homogenous if they consist of firms that are active in 
the same sector, and they are taken as heterogeneous when their firms come 
from different sectors.
Interorganizational adaptation literature was studied with respect to 
two dimensions: technical and behavioral; the behavioral dimension is in 
association with the organizational behavior on the connection between 
the two organizations, while the technical dimension is related to tech￾nical elements like processes (Knoppen & Christiaanse, 2007). This can Adaptation 41
41
be viewed from a CAS perspective, pointing at the fact that after spending 
time in a connection, the two sides commence to share similar schemata 
with each other which these schemata, granted that they are the rules 
behind the behaviors, then cause the organizational behaviors of the two 
organizations to become more and more alike.
The selection of the adaptation modes is dependent on the context the 
organizations were founded in. The investigation of the possible modes 
in different types of networks can clarify the concept more. Starting with 
the size of the networks, small or large, the choice of adaptation will vary. 
In small networks, the number of organizations is limited, and for this 
reason, they have the opportunity to communicate with each other more 
often, making them become closer. As a result, the mimetic force is the 
most probable force responsible for the similarities seen in the patterns of 
organizational adaptation.
The large networks subsume many companies and when the number 
of companies increases, the communication will be harder to happen 
frequently. The lack of sufficient communication is expected to fade the 
role of the mimetic force due to the lack of enough information on the 
characteristics of the processes performed in other organizations. The most 
probable force is predicted to be the normative force since the organizations 
don’t want to act differently from what the other organizations are doing, 
or to put it in another way, they would rather stick to the norms which 
look reasonable to the majority than doing what is considered strange and 
awkward. The power of norms should not be underestimated on many 
organizational factors such as commitment and adaptation. When saying 
norms, for some of the scientists with a positivist view, it can be underrated. 
However, looking at the real-world examples will help in the realization of 
its importance. These days, social media groups are so common among 
colleagues. There is no written rule concerning answering the messages; 
however, in one of the organizations, every member of the group feel 
obliged to provide a response to the messages within an hour otherwise he 
felt urged to provide excuses and make apologies for the delay. The other 
example is again technological, related to social media. Every employee of 
the organization with a social media account feels impelled to like every 
post on the social media page of the organization. These were just two of 
the many instances in which norms put the pressure on employees to adopt 
the same approaches. An exemplar of conforming to non-technological 
norms can be depicted in relation to the dress code of an organization. 
In this organization, apart from the dress code specified in the contract, 
the employees wear certain pieces of clothes with certain colors. The old 
employees have become accustomed to this kind of clothing as a norm. 
During the first weeks of the recruitment, the new employees wore clothes 
consistent with the dress code defined in the contract but not in agreement 
with the norms. After some time passed, it was noticed that some of the 
new employees have conformed to the norms for clothing. Some of them 
who could not conform to the norms resigned from the organization during 42 Adaptation
42
the following years. The others still remain in the same organization. The 
factor that should neither be ignored nor underrated in the social studies 
is the human factor. The personality of people vary, so do their reactions, 
and each prescription and theory cannot cover all types of individuals. 
The ones still working in the organization might bear some characteristics 
such as the ignorance of others, being self-centered, or simply continuing 
working due to financial matters.
The next two discussions are concentrated on the forces of adaptation 
modes in networks with strong ties and networks with weak ties. While the 
size of the network is about the number of companies found in a network, 
the strong and weak categorization is in association with the strengths of the 
connections formed in a network. Within networks of strong connections, 
both normative and mimetic forces are expected to be active. The networks 
with weak connections are more prone to be under the impact of the coer￾cive forces attributable to the lack of enough communication within them. 
They don’t communicate and share their information with each other suf￾ficiently which then deter them from getting to know the norms and the 
processes of other organizations, making the normative and mimetic forces 
less powerful and more ineffective.
In the clusters, the extent to which an organization is engaged in an 
industrial cluster has an impact on its adaptation outcomes though the 
advantages provided by the adaptation is dependent on how the engage￾ment is taking place (Niu, 2010). The companies in a cluster compete and/
or collaborate with each other, and the degree of competition and collabor￾ation and their probable interaction are some of the factors related to how 
involved they are with their clusters.
Bibliography
Abatecola, G. (2012). Organizational Adaptation: An Update. International Journal 
of Organizational Analysis, 20(3), 274–293.
Bak, P. (1996). How Nature Works: The Science of Self-Organized Criticality (1st 
ed.). New York: Springer-Verlag.
Burgelman, R. A. (1991). Intraorganizational Ecology of Strategy Making and 
Organizational Adaptation: Theory and Field Research. Organization Science, 
2(3), 239–262.
Cameron, K. S. (1984). Organizational Adaptation and Higher Education. The 
Journal of Higher Education, 55(2), 122–144.
Carley, K. M. (1997). Organizational Adaptation. Annals of Operations Research, 
75, 25–47.
Carley, K. M., & Lee, J.-S. (1998). Dynamic Organizations: Organizational 
Adaptation in a Changing Environment. Advances in Strategic Management, 
15, 269–297.
Chakravarthy, B. S. (1982). A Promising Metaphor for Strategic Management. The 
Academy of Management Review, 7(1), 35–44.
Comfort, L. K. (1994). Self-Organization in Complex Systems. Journal of Public 
Administration Research and Theory (J-PART), 4(3), 393–410.Adaptation 43
43
Daft, R. L. (2007). Organization Theory and Design (9th ed.). Willard, OH: 
Thomson Higher Education.
Faucher, J.-B. P. (2010). Reconceptualizing Knowledge Management: Knowledge, 
Social Energy, and Emergent Leadership in Social Complex Adaptive Systems
(PhD Thesis ed.). Dunedin: University of Otago.
Fidanboy, M. (2020). A Multi-level Study of Technoparks within Complex Adaptive 
Systems Perspective: A Case Study of Factors Influencing R&D Performance
(PhD Dissertation). Ankara: Ankara Yildirim Beyazit University.
Ford, J. D., & Baucus, D. A. (1987). Organizational Adaptation to Performance 
Downturns: An Interpretation-Based Perspective. The Academy of Management 
Review, 12(2), 366–380.
Fox-Wolfgramm, S. J., Boal, K. B., & Hunt, J. G. (1998). Organizational Adaptation 
to Institutional Change: A Comparative Study of First-Order Change in 
Prospector and Defender Banks. Administrative Science Quarterly, 43(1), 
87–126.
Jennings, D. F., & Seaman, S. L. (1994). High and Low Levels of Organizational 
Adaptation: An Empirical Analysis of Strategy, Structure, and Performance. 
Strategic Management Journal, 15(6), 459–475.
Johanson, J., & Mattsson, L.-G. (1987). Interorganizational Relations in Industrial 
Systems: A Network Approach Compared with the Transaction-Cost Approach. 
International Studies of Management & Organization, 17, 34–48.
Knoppen, D., & Christiaanse, E. (2007). Interorganizational Adaptation in Supply 
Chains: A Behavioral Perspective. The International Journal of Logistics, 18(2), 
217–237.
Kraatz, M. S. (1998). Learning by Association? Interorganizational Networks and 
Adaptation to Environmental Change. The Academy of Management Journal, 
41(6), 621–643.
Levinthal, D. A. (1991). Organizational Adaptation and Environmental Selection￾Interrelated Processes of Change. Organization Science, 2, 140–145.
Levinthal, D. A., & Marin, A. (2015). Three Facets of Organizational Adaptation: 
Selection, Variety, and Plasticity. Organization Science, 26(3), 743–755.
Miller, D., & Friesen, P. H. (1980). Momentum and Revolution in Organizational 
Adaptation. The Academy of Management Journal, 23(4), 591–614.
Milliken, F. J., Dutton, J. E., & Beyer, J. M. (1992). Understanding Organizational 
Adaptation to Change: The Case of Work-Family Issues. In D. M. Schweiger 
& K. Papenfuß (Eds.), Human Resource Planning (pp. 279–295). Gabler Verlag. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-322-83820-9_25.
Mitleton-Kelly, E. (2003). Ten Principles of Complexity and Enabling 
Infrastructures. In E. Mitleton-Kelly (Ed.), Complex Systems and Evolutionary 
Perspectives on Organizations; The Application of Complexity Theory to the 
Organizations (p. 43). Oxford: Elsevier Science Ltd.
Niu, K.-H. (2010). Industrial Cluster Involvement and Organizational Adaptation. 
Competitiveness Review: An International Business Journal, 20(5), 395–406.
Potts, J. (2000). System Theory and Complexity. In J. Potts (Ed.), The New 
Evolutionary Microeconomics; Complexity, Competence and Adaptive Behavior
(pp. 83–108). Cheltenham: Edward Elgar Publishing Limited.4
DOI: 10.4324/9781003182764-4
4 Application of CAS Perspective 
in Organizations
Case 1: Organization and Customer Relationship
A software company took an order to create a software compliant with 
one type of quality standards. The customer company did not have a clear 
understanding of the mentioned standard, only requested it in order to be 
able to meet the requirements of a project; therefore, it hired a consultant 
to help them with improving their knowledge of those quality standards. 
Similarly, the software company also asked a consultancy company to 
observe their current processes and to guide them through the whole pro￾ject regarding the quality standards.
After the first release and demonstration, the problems started to rise 
due to the variance between the customer company’s expectations and the 
software company’s deliverables.
As of the first solution, the project manager of the software company 
held several meetings with the customer to adjust the list of requirements 
according to their requests. After several meetings, the project manager 
found it hard to satisfy the customer for the reason that not any solutions 
seemed to be adequate. The project manager approved the changes time 
after time; nevertheless, the feedbacks from the customer’s side did not 
become positive. The technical team started complaining about the number 
of changes imposed on the project.
The second approach toward solving the problems taken by the pro￾ject manager was to offer the customer to ask his consultants to meet 
their consultants in the hope of the clarification of any blurred insights. 
The meeting took place with the attendance of the consultants from both 
sides together with the project managers of the both companies. The first 
meeting did not end much fruitful as the consultants did not make any 
efforts to listen to each other. The meeting was mostly an event for them to 
prove their knowledge and experience instead of a tool for negotiation or 
reaching a compromise.
Already learnt from the experience, as the third solution, the project 
managers of the customer and software companies asked their consultants 
to prioritize the clauses of the standards’ guide regarding their importance 
to them. After preparing the list, the project managers of the two sides held Application of CAS Perspective in Organizations 45
45
meetings and discussed the priorities in order to find a common solution. 
This had not been made easy just after the project managers used the same 
system for prioritization and for assigning weights to each of the items, 
and at last, the final list was prepared. They, then, showed the final list to 
their consultants for their opinions. Even if the weights were assigned, the 
same meaning was not meant by each number. Hence, the project man￾agers made efforts to convince their consultants on their determined list of 
requirements and it worked.
Approaching the problem from a CAS standpoint identifies the problem 
as the difference in the schemata of the companies originating from the 
difference in the schemata of the consultants directing them throughout 
the processes. The frameworks, models, and the standards are all for har￾monizing the schemata of different organizations if to be viewed from a 
CAS point. Although the harmonization is the main aim, there exists the 
‘tailoring’ or in the other cases ‘customizing’ whenever they are being made 
suitable for the use in a specific context. The solution to inconsistent sche￾mata is to hold meetings and to designate mediators till a shared schemata 
or similar ones are shaped. The issue which cannot be neglected here is the 
process of selection of the negotiators. They should have sufficient know￾ledge of the organization, the processes, and more importantly a positive 
view of adaptation since modifying, changing, or even replacing the sche￾mata are all part of the adaptation that occurs in the CASs.
Case 2: The Overconfidence of the Organization
The traps on the way of an organization toward success are not few, and 
they are not sometimes recognized. One of the traps in which mostly the 
successful organizations get involved is the knowing-all trap. This makes the 
organization become overconfident about the occurrence of success, and 
this may occasionally result in overlooking the changes that happen con￾sistently, and the contexts which are altered from time to time. Reviewing 
some of the failures of big companies can be explained from this view￾point. Even though, in some cases, the failure might not be directly related 
to the overconfidence, it might have been rooting from the ignorance of 
part of the whole of a dynamic context.
In this case, an IT company contacted a quality consultant for their pro￾ject of gaining a standard certification and get accredited. The standard 
was not new to the organization and some of the employees had prior 
knowledge and experience as regards the standard. The consultant tried to 
teach all the relevant employees, irrespective of their background, the basic 
principles of the standard first. At this stage, the experienced employees 
attended the sessions actively trying to show their superiority in the sub￾ject, and they, from time to time, asked questions related to the advanced 
topics in order to prove themselves. The encouraging attitude of the con￾sultant made the sessions so fruitful, and even those advanced questions 
helped with a better understanding of the subject.46 Application of CAS Perspective in Organizations
46
After a few weeks of the practice and review of the basic concepts, the 
second training session took place. In this session, more advanced topics 
were discussed, and some disputes were raised between the new learners 
and the experienced members. Despite the efforts of the consultant to find 
a common solution and provide a reasonable answer to both sides, they 
remained unsolved. In alike cases, the remaining issues would again show 
up when the practice starts.
The implementation of what was taught during the training sessions 
started, and the consultant guided the members through the processes. 
There still existed some disagreements rooting from the previously discussed 
ideas. The attempts of the consultant to reach a consistency between the 
members in terms of their perceptions of the standard were successful, and 
the organization was certified and accredited.
When considering the problem from a CAS lens, it becomes clear that 
there were two main issues which the organization faced. The first was the 
high path dependency degree of the experienced members, and the second 
was the differences between the schemata of the experienced and new-to￾the-standard members. Path dependency, as an important key factor of the 
CAS, should not be too high to result in a locked-in situation both for the 
organization and the individuals, and not too low, since the new decisions 
will be too departed from the previous ones, making the new decisions even 
riskier.
Case 3: The Customer Service Problem
The problems are not always present at only the production processes. 
All after the release of a product, there may exist problems as well at the 
departments in relationship with the customer, customer service. These 
departments, regardless of whatever they are called, have the responsi￾bility to reflect the end user problems to the technical team; therefore, the 
problems will not rise in the future versions of a product or new products. 
Although three main processes of quality management, including quality 
planning, quality control, and quality assurance, are among the not-skipped 
processes done by the companies, there are still feedbacks from customers 
which inform the company of the failure in some features of a product or 
minor flaws occurring from time to time. These are not restricted to small￾or medium-sized companies, and even large companies known to everyone 
sometimes recall all products of a special model or version due to certain 
flaws from the market.
The third case of this chapter is related to the issue which has been 
already mentioned. A software company had sold one of its products, and 
after passing some time, the problems started to appear with the usage of 
the program. There were several calls to the customer service in order to 
find solutions to the constant problems. The team at the customer service 
own some kind of technical knowledge; nevertheless, their technical know￾ledge is not as expert as the ones on the technical teams. Facing the cases Application of CAS Perspective in Organizations 47
47
where more professional advice and assistance are required, the customer 
service team asks the customers to leave their numbers and wait for them to 
call them back. During this time, the customer service team consults with 
the technical team, seeking solutions, and translating the solutions into 
an easily comprehensible non-technique language so as to discuss it with 
the customers. What should be noticed here is that the customers are not 
always technical people, but just an end user with the knowledge to use the 
software program, not more, not less. Thus, the role of the customer ser￾vice team gains more importance in these cases since they are the mediators 
between the technical team and the customers. Rarely, the problems are 
hard to fix by this mediation role, and the technical team prefers to con￾tact the customer directly to help them. In such situations, the technical 
team takes the responsibility to guide the customer as simple as it can be 
done without involving much technical processes. As of the last option for 
these rare situations, an appointment can be made for fixing the ongoing 
problem.
Looking back at the example casts light on the fact that the customer 
service team was not able to understand the technical team completely, 
and the technical team couldn’t explain the solutions to the customer ser￾vice team fully. The mutual misunderstanding between these two teams 
resulted in a delay to get back to the customer, and there were some 
more complaints. Viewing the case from a CAS lens identifies two main 
problems. The first problem is the inadequate or inappropriate connection 
between the agents of different levels, customer service level and tech￾nical level. Based on the definition of a CAS, the agents of the system 
are interconnected. Each connection bears two main characteristics: 
quality and quantity. The quality of the connection is about how well the 
connection is making the transfer of energy and information possible, 
faster, and easier. By quantity, the extent to which transfers are taking 
place via the connection is comprehended. It can be operationalized by 
the frequency of the transfers. With reference to the cases, the quantity of 
the connection seemed to be at the satisfactory level since the two teams 
were at continuous communication with each other or to say it differently, 
the communication was adequate. The issue was with the appropriateness 
or the quality of the connection between the two teams which appeared 
to be low. In line with the experience and practice, increasing the quantity 
of the communications is done much easier by managers comparing with 
rising the quality of the communication. One example for increasing the 
adequacy of the communication is holding more meetings or gatherings in 
order to share their information. Some companies, especially in IT sector, 
approach agile methods for this purpose, trying to implement them right￾eously while the others just adopt the concept of holding various meetings 
at different points of time during a project without implementing any other 
concepts of the agile methods. This might seem to be fruitful to meet the 
adequacy goal of the connection, of course, not the appropriateness goal. 
The quality of the communication is dependent on many factors including 48 Application of CAS Perspective in Organizations
48
the individual factors, for instance, if a person can work as part of a team 
or prefer doing tasks isolated from others.
The second problem was the inconsistency of the schemata among the 
two teams. Many factors may have impact on the structure of schemata 
such as the educational background, work experience, job experience, and 
so on. The difference between the schemata of technical and nontechnical 
staff usually originates from how they perceive a problem. The technical 
staff views the problem in relation with the technical causes like coding 
problems whereas the nontechnical personnel focuses more on the effects 
of the problem. For example, a webpage cannot be viewed properly by the 
end users. The nontechnical statement for the problem is: ‘The web page 
cannot be displayed,’ and a technical statement might be: ‘There are incor￾rect settings on the web browser.’
The problem between the Customer Relationship Management (CRM) 
team and the technical team was finally solved by hiring a consultant to 
attend the two teams’ meetings, having him clarifying the issues whenever 
they are vague, by simplifying the technical terms, interpreting the daily 
user problems into the technical language, and easing the occurrence of 
appropriate communication between them.
Case 4: Top Management and the Technical Team
An IT company had been poring over different frameworks to find the most 
suitable one for implementation in the organization. The decision of the 
need for a new framework had been made after the approval from top man￾agement and the team coach. After conducting a remarkable amount of 
research, a framework was chosen and they began to implement it in their 
company. Prior to the implementation, the top management was informed 
of their choice and has approved it. The time for release and demonstra￾tion of the product finally arrived. The meeting with the customer passed 
well, although after the meeting, the top manager requested for another 
meeting with the technical team. During that meeting, he criticized the 
team for failing to do the tasks in the right way. The disputes were tried to 
be silenced by the team coach, and the meeting ended this way.
During the following weeks, the team coach made attempts to explain 
the new framework to the top manager and justify that the team had 
performed the tasks in accordance with the new framework. Despite the 
time it took for convincing the top manager, the problem was solved at last.
From a CAS point of view, the different schemata of the top man￾ager from the technical team were the problem in this case. The meetings 
which are held in the organizations are just one of the many ways to har￾monize the schemata in an organization. Organizing seminars, workshops, 
trainings, and other platforms to share the knowledge and information are 
also effective for this purpose. Another issue is that the organization is not 
the only entity to adapt. The top manager of an organization is required 
to adapt to the changes too. The learning should take place both at the Application of CAS Perspective in Organizations 49
49
individual and organizational level. In today’s highly volatile environ￾ments, the managers are expected to update their knowledge frequently. 
There is another issue associated with the top management which is that 
they should have some kind of technical knowledge related to the products 
and processes of the company. In the past, there were many examples of 
the managers who managed the companies just because they were the 
founders. Many of these companies couldn’t survive actually. Management 
is about both knowing how to manage and having information on what 
is to be managed. The lack of knowledge on the products, processes, and 
procedures within an organization can lead to mismanagement which can 
compel the organization to pay the price.
Case 5: Too Much Paperwork and Agility
As some words have negative impact on listeners, the others are naturally 
perceived in a positive way like adaptive, agile, and intelligent. After the 
introduction of agile methods to the companies, they, out of their curi￾osity, began researching them and learning how they work. Saying that 
a company is an agile company would have been considered a privileged 
characteristic. Apart from the companies that had investigated the rele￾vant concepts absolutely, the other companies just imitated some parts of 
the concepts by looking at the other companies or perhaps, after looking 
through the methods. There are still some of these companies which just 
pretend to be agile, but actually none of their processes are executed in an 
agile manner. One of them was an online educational company that offered 
online courses to the students. The education market is not immune to the 
changes, and it has gone under lots of modifications due to the changes 
in technology. This educational organization intended to become agile so 
as to be more rapid in responding to the changes in their environment; 
nevertheless, a huge amount of paperwork was still present in the organ￾ization. Documenting is necessary, particularly for an educational organ￾ization, although recording everything on the paper demands lots of time 
and space. They intended to employ a consultant to take them out of this 
paradoxical situation: abundant paperwork and agility. The consultant 
suggested them to use the programs to record the information in soft form, 
and some of the information was automatically recorded at the same time 
as it was entered onto the website; thus, the time spent on the documenta￾tion was reduced. Using the program helped the company to make changes 
whenever needed without being compelled to look for that certain docu￾ment in the archives.
Employing the CAS perspective to this case helps with the identification 
of several issues which are described in the following. The first issue is the 
imitation of the agile companies which happens because of the mimetic 
forces. These coerce the organization to adapt; though in some cases, the 
organization may lack the appropriate infrastructure. The second issue 
is the partial adaptation where some elements of the organization adapt, 50 Application of CAS Perspective in Organizations
50
whereas the others remain same as they were before. The organizational 
adaptation is about the adjustments in the organizational elements wher￾ever it has to be done. During some adaptation processes, only a certain 
number of elements should be altered; however, in other situations, all the 
elements should experience some kind of change albeit mildly. Even in the 
partial adaptation, the elements which were first unchanged will experi￾ence change at a time in future for the reason that the changes in the other 
elements have altered the context for their action and behavior. This is what 
happened at the example of the online educational organization.51
Index
adaptation 25
adaptation forms 33
adaptive responses 29; see also
proactive responses; reactive 
responses 
adjustment 34
agents 5
agglomerations 15
behaviour 8
chaos 32
clusters 9
collaboration 9
competition 9
complexity 18
districts 14
emergence 31
individuals 3
inertia 32
interactions 3
interdependencies 4
interorganizational adaptation 39
interorganizational complexity 22
interorganizational level 8
modes of adaptation 31
networks 11
organization 3
organizational adaptation 27
organizational complexity 19
organizational size 22
proactive responses 29
reactive responses 29
reorientation 34
schemata 6
strategic renewal 35
system 1
unpredictability 552
