Our Ancient LakesOur Ancient Lakes
A Natural History
Jeffrey McKinnon
The MIT Press
Cambridge, Massachusetts
London, England© 2023 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form by any electronic or
mechanical means (including photocopying, recording, or information storage and retrieval)
without permission in writing from the publisher.
Grant funding provided by Furthermore: a program of the J. M. Kaplan Fund.
The MIT Press would like to thank the anonymous peer reviewers who provided comments on
drafts of this book. The generous work of academic experts is essential for establishing the
authority and quality of our publications. We acknowledge with gratitude the contributions of these
otherwise uncredited readers.
This book was set in Adobe Garamond Pro by New Best-set Typesetters Ltd.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available.
ISBN: 978-0-262-04785-2
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
d_r0For Rene, Tara, and AndrewContents
Preface
1 Why Ancient Lakes Deserve Our Attention, and How They Got Mine
2 The Ecological Causes of Diversity
3 Evolving Together and Apart
4 Species in the Eye of the Beholder
5 Cricket, Cabers, and the Sinister Advantage
6 On the Virtues of Interspecific Relations
7 Splendor in the Mud
8 The Blue Eye of Siberia
9 Pliocene, Pleistocene, Holocene, Anthropocene . . . Ancient Lakes Meet
Modern Homo sapiens
Acknowledgments
Glossary
References and Further Reading
IndexPreface
I think that by retaining one’s childhood love of such things as trees, fishes, butterflies
and . . . toads, one makes a peaceful and decent future a little more probable.
—George Orwell, 1946
It was in Irkutsk, just down the Angara River from Siberia’s Lake Baikal,
that I got religion on ancient lakes. The year was 2002, and I had already
read many scientific papers about the exotic faunas of Baikal, Tanganyika,
Titicaca, and others, and had been conducting my own work on Sulawesi’s
Lake Matano. But seeing Baikal and attending my first Speciation in
Ancient Lakes conference, hosted in Irkutsk, switched a light on and made
material the striking differences between ancient lakes and other freshwater
systems (figure P.1 shows ancient lakes based on a relatively inclusive
definition; for more on definitions of ancient, see chapter 1). Baikal, whose
age is measured in the tens of millions of years, was sublime, with
multicolored shrimplike amphipods teeming in the shallows and
candelabra-shaped sponges abundant just a little deeper. The lake seemed
endless as we explored a small corner of it on a cruise after the conference,
in a vessel I would have guessed came from the North Pacific had I seen it
in a photo. At the conference, I had heard mesmerizing reports from a
community of researchers who were looking at the wildly diverse denizens
of these, our planet’s oldest bodies of freshwater.Figure P.1
Locations of ancient lakes as characterized by Stephanie Hampton and colleagues. Source: Slightly
modified from Hampton et al., “Recent Ecological Change in Ancient Lakes,” Limnology and
Oceanography 63 (2018). Published under a Creative Commons CC BY-NC 3.0 license
(https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0).
Figure P.2
Attendees at the 2022 Species in Ancient Lakes conference in Kigoma, Tanzania, on the shores of
Lake Tanganyika. Source: Photo by Mupape Mukuli.
I have since attended several ancient lake conferences (the participants at
the last conference before I completed this book are shown in figure P.2)
and have always come away inspired. Yet when I get home and talk about
the wonders of the lakes with nonconference colleagues, including experts
in ecology and evolution who work in marine or terrestrial systems, I am
often met with blank stares. Frequently my peers are familiar with thecichlid fishes of Africa’s Lake Victoria and their extinction crisis, or have
some vague notion that Lake Baikal is old and contains an awful lot of fresh
water. But they seldom know what is meant by the term ancient lake, or
why such lakes matter.
As time passed, my professional frustrations evolved into a deeper
concern for the lakes and their often-perilous circumstances. These
frustrations and worries came to a head during fieldwork in Sulawesi in the
2000s as I saw development exploding around Lake Matano. I can still hear
my old friend Peter Hehanussa, a senior Indonesian scientist, as he pleaded
with the management of the nickel mine that dominated the area not to
build a road around the lake, so sure was he that it would accelerate the
degradation of Matano and its fauna. Hectare after hectare of forest was
being cleared, and houses were popping up like mushrooms after a spring
rain. I was also hearing of ever more nonnative fishes becoming established
—new ones most every year—and knew that the situation was the same or
worse in other lakes. It seemed time to attempt something beyond basic
research and an occasional outreach effort. I thought that a book might draw
more attention to the lakes and communicate their importance, especially if
it was not too full of jargon or despair. I resolved to get started on a
manuscript.
So how is it that the publication date on this volume is 2023? A job
change, move, and new administrative responsibilities came up before I was
able to make meaningful progress on my book plan. The manuscript ended
up on hold for over a decade until I stepped away from administrative
duties. When I finally returned to the project, I quickly found myself of two
minds. I was pleased to find that the book I had imagined seemed yet to be
needed. But I was also a little sad that ancient lakes were still not broadly
appreciated, despite the efforts of my conference colleagues, and that the lot
of most lakes seemed to be worse.Who Is This Book For?
I wrote this book with the goal of reaching a broad readership, particularly
people who are interested in natural history or lakes but are not professional
scientists, or at least not specialists in ecology or evolution. This seems to
me an important audience. When some precious patch of nature is about to
be lost through human action—for example, if an old-growth forest is about
to be logged—the brave individuals who sacrifice careers and livelihoods to
protect it frequently have no specialized training. Sometimes a powerful
personal commitment can be every bit as crucial as an advanced degree.
Other nonspecialists make essential contributions by giving up meat, voting
with nature in mind, or making donations to the conservation organizations
that are working hard to keep more green in the world. And of course, it is
nonscientists in positions of power who often make the most critical
decisions about the future of nature.
More broadly, I hope I have written for anyone who is simply curious to
learn a little more about the diversity of life. For myself, that reader is
personified by my (late) father-in-law, Al Hodgins. Al was a high school
English teacher who had long enjoyed a hike or a day of fly-fishing, but
who only became an enthusiast of science and natural history writing when
I started giving him works by Stephen Jay Gould. I still miss our
conversations about those books. In a similar vein, one reviewer suggested
that his parents would enjoy the chapter I asked him to read from this
volume. I hope he is right, even if I have no expectation of rivaling Gould
or Ed Yong. And I will be delighted if my efforts lead a few folks living
along the shores of an ancient lake to feel more pride in their aquatic
treasure.
I have also had in mind readers who are not quite professional scientists
but not exactly laypeople either—that is, students. Really, it is younger
versions of myself that I am thinking of. Accessible writing about nature
and science was tremendously important to me during my childhood and
youth, and I continue to enjoy such writing today. I still have copies of
Herbert S. Zim’s Zoology and similar Golden Guides from my childhood,
and have lost track of how many times I have read Gerald Durrell’s MyFamily and Other Animals. As a young adolescent I reveled in memoirs of
field biologists like Eugenie Clark, dreaming of someday doing such work.
Even as a university student majoring in zoology, I learned a great deal
from the semipopular writings of E. O. Wilson, Gould, Dawkins, and
others. I also found inspiration in their words, which may have been just as
significant as any knowledge they transmitted. I hope a few nascent
scientists, teachers, naturalists, and activists can find something they value
in these pages.
My expert colleagues are an audience I cannot help but imagine looking
over my shoulder as I write and revise, since they are the readers I know
best and the ones most likely to catch a slip. Their imagined gaze can be
especially intimidating when I am trying to synthesize and communicate
topics on which I do not work directly, which is often the case in a book this
broad. I have tried hard to be accurate, but also to resist getting bogged
down in the qualifications and details that are sirens for scientists.
Hopefully the balance I have struck seems sensible and any errors are
minor.
There are enough lakes and intriguing studies that writing a truly
comprehensive book would almost certainly mean writing a very long,
repetitive one, so I have had to pick and choose which examples to present.
I apologize sincerely to the authors of the many superb investigations that I
could not fit into these pages, and acknowledge the biases that are
inevitable given the limits of one person’s knowledge. As well, I should
note that I have not attempted to write a comprehensive review of how
living things diversify or any other conceptual topic. Instead, my goal has
been to convey the contributions being made by research in ancient lakes.
Reading This Book
This volume was written pretty much as I imagined it would be read, from
chapter 1 through 9. Still, I have tried to avoid having the later chapters rely
too much on earlier material. Thus, the reader in a rush could likely skip a
few stretches without getting hopelessly confused. The glossary might help
too. Some chapters could potentially be read on their own, especially
chapter 5 on some of the ways variation is maintained within populations,and chapter 8 on Baikal. But, of course, I hope most readers will find the
whole book of interest.
I have provided a brief summary at the end of each chapter because I find
these handy when I am the reader. Particularly if one’s time with a book is
often interrupted, it can be helpful to be reminded at the end of a chapter
about its beginning, which one may have read a good while earlier. A brief
summary can also ease the transition to the following chapter during
reading.
Rather than scatter citations throughout the text, I have gone with the less
formal arrangement of providing citations and suggestions for further
reading at the end, organized by chapter and then topic. My intention is
thereby to minimize interruptions; distractions are a bane of modern life,
and few of us wish more. It is a somewhat informal, less academic format,
but that seems all right.
Conservation, Celebration
When I started graduate school, most students of ecology and evolutionary
biology received a training in basic research and expected to pursue such
work throughout their careers, with the exception of those who chose
applied areas like fisheries or forestry. Conservation biology was an
emerging field that was still becoming established. Today the situation is
different. Conservation-related questions and considerations play a role in
the work of most researchers who conduct field studies or analyze data
from natural systems. For many, investigating how natural populations and
systems are responding to human-caused environmental changes is the
central task.
One could easily devote a whole volume to the dangers facing ancient
lakes and the ways in which they are already degraded. Indeed, it is
tremendously important that we allocate much more time and resources to
these problems. I devote the final chapter of this volume exclusively to
those issues, and they come up elsewhere in the book as well. But my main
goal is to celebrate the lakes and their life, for themselves, the wonder they
inspire, and what they are teaching us about nature’s fundamental
processes. We need to better care for the marvelous living things uniquelypresent on our singularly green planet, but it is good to simply delight in
them too.1
Why Ancient Lakes Deserve Our Attention, and
How They Got Mine
Teto’omo rilipu doro / Kadolidinya Rano Poso
Maramba kojo nasindi ando / Mampalindo raya mawo
Busy village / The beauty of Lake Poso
Beautiful to behold by the sun / There is peace in the longing heart
—“Kadolidi Rano Poso,” traditional song of the Poso region, in the Pamona
language
I was an eighteen-year-old zoology student when I arrived on the shores of
Lake Matano, excited beyond measure to be on the Indonesian island of
Sulawesi and seeing tropical biodiversity for myself. I was especially keen
to visit the forests and had even arranged to collect insect specimens for the
University of British Columbia, where I had recently begun studying. The
lake itself was magnificent, clean and clear and fringed by verdant forest,
and I asked both locals and expatriates if the lake’s fish were interesting.
Everyone I met assured me they were not. I would be much better off to try
to get down to the coast to see the coral reefs, which I would be sure to
love. This made sense to me as many hours of television nature programs,
especially Jacques Cousteau’s, had long since convinced me of the wonders
of corals. But what I had heard about Lake Matano was wrong.
The popular media notwithstanding, there is much more to biodiversity
than tropical forests and coral reefs, marvelous as such systems are. In fact,
the Malili Lakes of Central Sulawesi (especially Lakes Matano and
Towuti), together with a collection of similar lakes scattered about the
globe, contain biodiversity that is remarkable in extent, beauty, and
uniqueness—and studies of these lakes are changing the way we think
about how new species form and how fast.
I found myself at Matano because in the late 1970s, two of my uncles,
employees of the mining company INCO (also known as InternationalNickel), had moved from their homes in Thompson, Canada, to Indonesia to
work in a mine being started on Matano’s shores; one of my aunts and a
cousin also made the move and they all remained there several years. I
could get to Sulawesi cheaply because my father was a pilot for a Canadian
airline. As an aspiring biologist and naturalist, the trip was a natural for me,
beyond the powerful pull of tolerant relations with a spare bed and full
fridge.
The former Celebes is one of the world’s most biologically idiosyncratic
islands. It is famous in particular because of the work done there by Alfred
Russel Wallace, the co-originator with Charles Darwin of the theory of
natural selection. Wallace showed that Sulawesi marks a transition between
the faunas characteristic of Asia to the west and Australia to the south and
east. Like many before me, I was enchanted by the island and its natural
history. It seemed a peaceful, if not quiet, place with forests full of buzzing,
clicking, sometimes screeching insects among the tree ferns, pitcher plants,
and other exotic vegetation. With a little luck, you occasionally got a
glimpse of one of the various species of macaques found only on the island
or even a babirusa—Sulawesi’s peculiar “deer-pig” in which males possess
canines that curve up and then inward, sometimes piercing their flesh
(figure 1.1). Easier to see were sailfin lizards, which when young will run
on water like the famous basilisks (or “Jesus lizards”) of South and Central
America, or white-bellied sea eagles, majestic creatures whose white and
gray plumage was hard to miss as they soared regally over Lake Matano.Figure 1.1
Babirusa skull, modified slightly from color original. Source: Didier Descouens, Wikimedia
Commons. Published under a Creative Commons CC BY-SA 4.0 license
(https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/deed.en).
It was only years later that I learned from The Ecology of Sulawesi, a
volume published well after my trip, that Matano contains a fascinating, if
little studied, set of fish species. In addition, a second, almost completely
distinct set is found just a few miles downstream in a sister lake, Towuti.
When I read a series of papers on the Malili Lakes fishes published in 1990
and 1991 by Swiss scientist Maurice Kottelat, I became convinced that I
must return to the lakes. I was most excited by Kottelat’s descriptions of the
radiations, to use evolutionary biology’s term for diversifying groups, of
the Telmatherinidae, or sailfin silversides. But getting back took me until
2000, almost twenty years.
Fortunately, it was well worth the wait and effort; my return to Lake
Matano was one of the most wondrous and inspirational experiences I have
had as a biologist. Simply getting the permits to do the work proved a huge
job, so receiving the approvals was the first exciting milestone. But once I
got there—what fish! Their colors were brilliant, and their behavior
frenetic, complex, and bubbling with research possibilities. Within a day I
had made the observations that would propel a major branch of my research
program for years. I saw striking variation in the colors of males of the
same species—hues from extremes of violet through vibrant yellows and
shades from near black to almost luminous white—as well as intriguing
differences in the visual environments of different lake habitats. I could nothelp but wonder if variation in fish color patterns and light environments
might be linked, and this was to become one of our key research topics.
The fish seemed to be spawning much of the time, but not the simple
pairings typical of mammals such as ourselves. Instead, there were often
two, three, or even four males sidling up to a female as she pressed her
belly to the mud to release eggs, trying to give their sperm a few more
lottery tickets for the next generation. Then it really got macabre as once the
spawning ended, some of the fish spun around to bite at the muck in
apparent cannibalism of their own offspring. Theoretical explanations for
some of these behaviors occurred to me, yet it would require years of work
before we would know if the evidence from this system matched the theory.
Figure 1.2
Left to right: Fadly Tantu, Suzanne Gray, and the author on Lake Matano in 2003.
I also saw the variation in body shape and size, and in feeding behaviors,
that had been described by Kottelat. Most obviously, some fish appeared to
spend their time foraging in the aufwuchs, as German scientists call the
layer of algae and tiny organisms that often carpets submerged rocks and
hard sediments, while others followed courting pairs of fish around,
brazenly darting in to search for eggs every time a spawning occurred. I
also caught occasional glimpses of a rapidly moving, streamlined fish that I
suspected was a species thought possibly to eat the scales off other
telmatherinids, a peculiar and unsavory way of making a living that has
arisen in several lineages on different continents (although the Matanospecies has turned out to be a more conventional predator). In the last two
decades, my collaborator Fabian Herder and his laboratory have made a
good deal of progress working out natural selection’s role in the
diversification of the telmatherinid fishes in morphology, feeding habits,
and other traits in addition to helping resolve the history of these radiations.
From these and other studies it is becoming clear that the formation of new
species (speciation) is often tightly intertwined with ecological opportunity
and can occur even within a single lake.
Fabian, myself, and various others were drawn to the Malili Lakes not
just by their remarkable biodiversity but also the fact that they are not
overwhelmingly diverse—at least not in comparison to the most famous
lake radiations, the cichlids of the African Great Lakes of Tanganyika,
Malawi, and Victoria (and some smaller nearby water bodies as well).
Cichlids are a diverse group of colorful fishes, typically about five to
twenty centimeters long, that are popular with aquarists. Each of these lakes
contains 250 to 500 or more unique species of cichlid fish. They provide
some of the most iconic examples of adaptive radiation, which can be more
formally defined as the rapid diversification of an ancestor into various new
species through natural selection arising from different environments or
resources.
To convey the scale of these radiations, let’s consider Lake Malawi, with
at least 500 cichlid species (possibly 850). I say at least because the lake’s
cichlid diversity has not been fully described, there is disagreement about
when to call two forms different species, and extinctions are likely
occurring. Nevertheless, this single body of water without question has
more species of cichlid in it—almost all evolved right there, in that lake—
than the entire United States has mammals, reptiles, or amphibians. A more
like-for-like comparison is with the vast but young inland sea of Lake
Superior, the largest of North America’s Great Lakes. About 10,000 years in
age, Superior is home to less than 100 fish species, many of which arrived
recently with the intentional or unintentional help of people. Most of its
fauna is also found in other lakes.
In a different African Great Lake, Victoria, the number of cichlid species
is again immense and the pace of speciation is even more extreme, with a
faster sustained pace than in possibly any other vertebrate lineage. One can
argue, though, that while cichlids and the African Great Lakes are special,we should expect them to be at least a bit exceptional merely by virtue of
being in fresh water. It is not widely appreciated, regrettably, that freshwater
habitats are unusually diverse almost across the board. Despite covering
less than 1 percent of the planet’s surface, fresh waters harbor more than
half of all fish species (for at least some of their life cycle) and one-quarter
of all vertebrates. The ratios are still more extreme when framed in terms of
the volume of fresh water relative to salt water. Even so, Africa’s Great
Lakes stand out conspicuously.
Beyond impressive numbers of species, the cichlid radiations of the
African Great Lakes have resulted in some genuinely odd creatures. Among
my favorites is Tanganyika’s Neolamprologus pulcher, which has been
studied in both field and lab by Barbara and Michael Taborsky and their
colleagues at the University of Bern. As in wolves, scrub jays, bee-eater
birds, and a small set of other vertebrates, members of this species breed
cooperatively. Some adults forgo rearing their own families to help raise the
offspring of others, which may mean caring for brothers and sisters, though
not always. From the perspective of conventional Darwinian natural
selection, such altruism is puzzling, and heated controversies over how to
explain it continue to smolder in journals. In retrospect, I suppose I should
not have been so surprised to learn while a graduate student that quixotic
social arrangements could be found in freshwater fish; yet years later, I still
find this species remarkable.
Another oddity, and one with broad evolutionary implications, is found in
the sex determination systems of African cichlids. Most of us don’t think
too much about the genetics of the sexes, taking it for granted that the
presence of a Y chromosome makes one genetically male, and that is about
it, although of course in our species one’s genetic sex and one’s self￾identification/perception may not be the same. But since X-Y is how sex is
determined not just in ourselves but also in most of the animals we interact
with day-to-day, such as dogs, cats, and most farm animals—indeed almost
all mammals—the matter might seem settled and inflexible at the
chromosome level. It is not. In birds and butterflies, for example, it is the
presence of a W chromosome that makes a female, while males have two
Zs. The Zs are analogous to the two Xs of human females, but with the
sexes reversed. Still, birds and butterflies are pretty big, old groups
comprising thousands of species each, so even after taking them into
account, sex determination still looks predictable and orderly. In Africancichlids, this falls apart. In cichlids, multiple different genes may code for
being male or female in utterly different ways, and on different
chromosomes within a single species.
In light of theories of sex determination and sex chromosome evolution,
this is less surprising than one might guess. Theory predicts that if an allele
(an allele is a form of a gene—i.e., different alleles code for blue or brown
eyes in humans) has benefits in one sex and costs in the other, it will be
favored more strongly if it occurs more often in the sex it helps. So an allele
that makes sperm swim fast when in males but disrupts ovulation when in
females will be most successful if it is frequently present in males and
rarely in females—for example, if it sits on the same chromosome as and
near to an allele that codes for being male. This is roughly equivalent in a
mammal to being on the Y chromosome. In some Lake Malawi cichlids, an
allele for a color pattern that appears advantageous only in females is
tightly linked to an allele (not yet identified) that makes fish female.
Moreover, this allele makes a fish female regardless of which X or Y
chromosomes are present—the familiar XY sex determination system is
also found in these and many other cichlids, but it can be overridden. As if
that were not enough, a similar color pattern is present in Lake Victoria
cichlids and associated with sex, but it appears to result from a different
allele than in the Malawi species.
Given their apparently distinct genetic foundations, the female color
pattern and sex determination systems in Malawi and Victoria are an
example of convergent evolution, defined as the independent evolution of
similar traits in different lineages. Convergence is important in part because
when traits are consistently associated with specific environmental
challenges or selection pressures across lineages, some of the most
compelling evidence for evolution by natural selection is obtained.
Convergent evolution is rampant in the cichlids and other ancient lake
groups for traits ranging from sex determination and color pattern, as in this
case, to tooth shape, body shape, color vision, and more.
With new genomic methods and the rising flood of genomic data, we are
no longer confined to describing convergent traits at the level of what can
be seen or directly measured. Now that we have sequenced all the DNA for
thousands of species, and have the ability to track sequences across
generations and lineages as well as even edit genes, we can often work out atrait’s molecular genetics. It is possible, for instance, to ask if the same or
different genes are used to generate similar shapes and other features. One
unexpected result of such studies is the growing number of examples in
which similar traits from different species are indeed the result of changes
in the same genes. Further, they sometimes involve not just the same gene
but the very same mutation too; this finding was a major surprise—one that
can be explained by interspecific matings allowing such mutations to move
between species. With the proliferation of genomic tools, the evidence is
mounting that such hybridization and the exchange of genes between
seemingly distinct species is much more common than had been thought. It
has also been suggested, and now supported by increasing evidence, that
widespread hybridization in the early stages of adaptive radiations may be a
key catalyst to rapid diversification. This idea is largely due to Ole
Seehausen of the University of Bern—one of the most creative researchers
working in ancient lakes.
The breathtaking diversity in the numbers of species, feeding behavior,
social behavior, sex determination, and numerous other features seen in the
Malili Lakes and African Great Lakes inevitably prompts the following
question: Is it commonplace for lakes to contain dozens or hundreds of
unique species if we look hard enough?
Sadly, it is not. Many lakes contain distinctive populations of widespread
species, such as lakes with threespine stickleback fish, a species that has
become an important model for evolutionary biology and that I also study.
Some lakes possess a single unique fish species or perhaps a pair of
sticklebacks, but few host substantial radiations. One major reason is
probably insufficient time. Most lakes are young, less than 10,000 years of
age, and unlikely to persist a great deal longer. This is because many lakes
soon fill with sediment, or in polar regions, are buried under ice when the
glaciers come back. And a great many lakes, especially in northern nations
like my original home of Canada, only formed as the last round of
glaciation ended about 12,000 years back.
Lakes like Matano and Malawi, relatively old and with substantial
numbers of unique species, have been referred to as “ancient lakes” since at
least 1950, when John Langdon Brooks published an influential synthesis
titled “Speciation in Ancient Lakes.” Brooks surveyed four additional lakes
beyond those we have already considered, and since that time a consensushas emerged that more should be added to the category. There is no
universally agreed-upon definition, however, and thus no indisputable list
(the lakes that will feature most often in this book are shown in figure 1.3).
A recent overview of ecological changes in ancient lakes suggests they be
defined as lakes that have existed since at least the beginning of the last
interglacial period, about 130,000 years ago. Using this definition, the
authors, who started their work while meeting on the shores of Japan’s
ancient Lake Biwa, identified twenty-nine matching water bodies spread
across Australia and every continent but Antarctica (Antarctica is home to
fascinating subglacial lakes, but they are probably best for another book).
The consistency of their approach (see figure P.1) is attractive. Yet one
effect of using a strictly time-based classification is that not every lake on
their list has many unique species in it.Figure 1.3
The best-known ancient lakes and the main radiations featured in this book. Lake details are
approximate, for illustrative purposes, and not all radiations (e.g., ostracod crustaceans and diatoms)
are illustrated. Sources: Haleigh Mooring; modeled in part after Cristescu et al., “Ancient Lakes
Revisited: From the Ecology to the Genetics of Speciation,” Molecular Ecology (2010).
I will discuss a few less biodiverse and/or well-studied ancient lakes at
points in this volume, in particular with regard to the tragedies of the Aral
Sea of Central Asia and Lake Lanao of the Philippines. Other intriguing
lakes that will hopefully be better studied soon include Ohrid’s neighbor
Prespa and Lake Inle of Myanmar. North America is home to four ancientlakes, including the well-known Lake Tahoe, but none host distinctive
faunas on the scale of the lakes illustrated in figure 1.3.
The observation that not every old lake hosts extensive radiations
highlights the fact that time is just one of the factors important for
diversification and the evolution of endemics, which are unique species
present only in a limited area. For example, Lake Victoria, which certainly
harbors more endemic cichlids than does Lake Tanganyika, appears to have
dried up only about 15,000 years ago—a victim of the water level
fluctuations that are typical of ancient lakes (frequently young lakes too) as
a result of changes in climate and geology. The geological basin in which
Victoria resides is older, perhaps 400,000 years, and because the whole
basin did not dry out, Victoria’s entire fauna did not go extinct during that
drying. But no matter how you measure age, Victoria is both younger and
hosts more endemic species than Lake Tanganyika, which is approximately
ten million years in age. Some would argue that Victoria should not be
included in a discussion of ancient lakes, but Victoria’s cichlids possess an
unusual form of antiquity that will emerge as their story unfolds, so I will
include Victoria. Working out why only some lineages go through
extraordinary radiations and lakes of a similar age host different numbers of
unique species are two of the major challenges for those studying ancient
lake biodiversity.
So far, I have described tropical ancient lakes, and in general there is a
great deal more biodiversity in tropical regions than in temperate or polar
areas. This remains true whether one is looking at terrestrial, marine, or
freshwater habitats. But perhaps the most remarkable of ancient lakes, the
one Brooks began his 1950 paper with, is just about as untropical as most of
us want to think about: Lake Baikal of Siberia.
Baikal is impressive in almost every possible way. At twenty-five million
years of age (or more), it is the oldest lake. And its statistics for size are also
extraordinary: Baikal is 636 kilometers long, almost 80 kilometers in width
at its broadest point, and reaches 1,642 meters in depth, or the deepest of
any lake on our planet. Put together, these numbers yield a volume much
greater than that of any other freshwater lake, with a surface area also in the
top ten. What is most unusual about Baikal’s depths, though, is not so much
their extent as what they contain. Many lakes are stratified at least some of
the year, divided by depth into layers with different temperatures andsometimes different concentrations of dissolved gases or other chemicals.
This can result in little oxygen in deep water and consequently little life,
especially large organisms. Baikal, however, has relatively high oxygen
levels at depth and a distinctive deepwater fauna.
Among the lineages that have colonized Baikal’s depths is one of its best
studied, the amphipods—small, laterally compressed crustaceans—of the
genus Gammarus (figure 1.3) and related genera, which have diversified
into over 265 species. In Baikal they have achieved a diversity of sizes
otherwise seen only in the oceans and an even more extensive diversity of
forms. These creatures, which typically look like diminutive shrimp, will be
familiar to many who have used them as fish bait (scuds), or encountered
them during a biology or limnology class that involved scooping and
examining tiny creatures from the bottom of a pond. I have a perhaps
unreasonable fondness for them myself, having spent many childhood hours
watching them scoot around pickle jars after I caught them from the
drainage ditch in front of my family’s home (I think ditches are an
underappreciated incubator of future biologists). They have an intriguing
mate-guarding behavior in which males typically grab onto females and
don’t let go until the female molts, at which point her eggs can be fertilized.
Such behaviors along with a general hardiness also make them well suited
to introductory biology laboratories.
The amphipods of Baikal include some run-of-the-mill Gammarus much
like those seen in many freshwater and marine locales, feeding on detritus
along the bottom. More interesting are the species that have taken up novel
ecological roles, including predatory forms, parasitic types that make their
living from other amphipods, and one highly unusual species that lives in
the open water, migrating from the depths to shallower waters every
evening to feed. This radiation includes “armored” species reminiscent of
medieval knights and exceptionally large gammarids, leviathans of the
freshwater amphipod world that can reach 9 centimeters in length.
In light of the diversity of forms and ecologies in this radiation, it was
long thought that the lake must have been invaded repeatedly by different
lineages of amphipods, and as many as nineteen such invasions were
hypothesized. More recent molecular studies suggest fewer such events, but
this is an active area of research.Other members of Baikal’s fauna are reminiscent of marine forms and
contributed to early speculations that some ancient lakes were former seas.
In particular, Baikal’s sponges are not the drab, beige creatures often
encountered in fresh water but instead branching structures of 1.2 meters or
more in height that can form “forests” along the bottom of some parts of the
lake. Their color is also striking, with some species an attractive green as a
result of a photosynthesizing microbe that lives in their tissues. Even more
evocative of the ocean is the “nerpa,” confined entirely to Baikal and the
only species of seal that lives exclusively in fresh water. I was lucky to see
Baikal’s sponges when I visited there for a conference, and they were
impressive, but despite spending time on the lake and looking for them, I
did not see any nerpa. Fortunately, this is not because they are disappearing.
They number in the tens of thousands despite centuries of exploitation, the
stress of serious pollution, and major disease outbreaks; it is refreshing to
find a creature thriving that one might expect to be in trouble.
Baikal has persisted for so long because it is not the result of short-term
processes such as glacial advances and retreats along with their associated
flooding and drying. Rather, it is a product of tectonic activity involving
changes in the earth’s crust. Baikal is more specifically a tectonic graben—
a lake produced when a long, narrow block sinks between two parallel
faults and the basin fills with water (figure 1.4). Over half the ancient lakes
in figure 1.3 are grabens or related half-grabens, and all of them are tectonic
in origin. Of the freshwater lakes in figure 1.3, Baikal and Tanganyika are
by far the oldest, and the largest too, by volume. Malawi is next in size,
followed by Victoria and then Titicaca. The Caspian Sea has the greatest
area, but is not fresh water, though with only about one-third the salt of the
oceans on average. It is considered a lake because it has no connection to
the ocean.Figure 1.4
Grabens and half-grabens, the geological formations underlying many ancient lakes. Source:
Modified from Aymath2, Wikimedia Commons. Published under a Creative Commons CC BY 3.0
license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/deed.en).
Deep as Baikal is, it would be much deeper but for the kilometers of silt
that have accumulated beneath it as the millennia have rolled by. Happily
for evolutionary biologists and ecologists, deep sediments are present in
many lakes and provide an often-continuous record, in layers conveniently
arranged ancient to recent from bottom to top, of conditions in a lake, what
lived there, and what lived around it. Ecologists interested in what is
happening on land frequently identify pollen in the layers of silt extracted
from sediment samples and thereby identify the land-dwelling plants of
times past, also enabling inferences about past environments.
Much more can be done with lake sediment samples than identifying land
plants, of course, including addressing a surprising shortcoming of research
on the origins of modern biodiversity: the often-platonic relationship
between evolutionary studies of living organisms and studies of fossils.
Comparative biologists will sometimes use fossils to calibrate the
evolutionary trees they are building and work out rates of change, but the
relationship rarely goes much further, at least in any systematic way. Yet in
lakes, especially old ones, aquatic biologists with access to sediment
records can readily look, quantitatively, at the hard parts of aquatic plants
and animals to infer what was present. Moreover, with improvements in the
analysis of ancient as well as environmental DNA (which has been releasedfrom an organism into the environment), and the collection of samples that
are being handled with these analyses in mind, extraordinary new insights
are possible. The promise of these more evolution-focused studies of lake
cores is at the earliest stages of being realized, but interesting results are
starting to emerge. For example, new samples from Albania and North
Macedonia’s Lake Ohrid, which is at least 1.3 million years of age, are
being used to evaluate the relative importance of environmental changes in
propelling speciation in the lake.
Studies of lake sediments and genomes not only can provide powerful
insights into evolutionary history but help us to anticipate the future too,
specifically the effects of coming environmental changes. It is thus a
curious and useful quirk of ancient lakes that their age, and the long history
embedded and encoded in their slowly decreasing depths, are improving our
focus as we attempt to look forward so as to plan for and manage a future in
which our greatest challenges may be ecological.
* * *
When we think about biodiversity, we often think of habitats such as
tropical forests and coral reefs. Yet a disproportionate amount of
biodiversity is in fresh water, and many unique species are concentrated in
tectonic lakes whose origins precede the last round of glaciation—ancient
lakes. They include Baikal, Titicaca, the African Great Lakes, and
additional lakes scattered across the globe. They are home to numerous
evolutionary oddities and some of the most extreme diversifications known,
and their study is changing how we think about the formation of new
species and how life diversifies.2
The Ecological Causes of Diversity
shihō yori / hana fuki irete / nio no nami
From all four quarters / cherry petals blowing in. / To Biwa’s waters!
—Basho, 1690
We seldom hear about chimprillas or gorpanzees. If you are lucky enough
to find yourself in a forest in Central Africa—and happily there are such
forests quite close to lakes I have visited—you might, with a little luck or
effort, see chimpanzees. With some more effort you might see gorillas.
Either way, you will not come across any creatures that are halfway in
between, whether for ear shape, brain size, skull shape, testis size, or any of
the long list of characteristics that separate these relatives of ours. And you
certainly won’t happen on a population of apes in which each individual
possesses a haphazardly assembled collection of chimpanzee and gorilla
features and traits. Rather, you will encounter members of distinct species,
and where they occur side by side it will not be hard to distinguish one from
the other, even if the odd chimp is big enough to be mistaken initially for a
gorilla.
As most of us know intuitively, this is what we usually find in nature,
especially in the sorts of animals and plants that can be seen with the naked
eye. At any particular location, the diversity of life is separated into pretty
much discrete packets that are known as species. Each species comprises
populations of individuals that share many traits with each other, but differ
in a variety of ways from members of other species. There are exceptions of
course (there almost always are in living systems), but for most organisms
in most places, the great majority of individuals are readily assigned to one
species or another. This is why field guides are useful, and why they are
profitable enough that they keep being published. There has been a modest
amount of argument among biologists about the reality of species, with theopposing view being that they are arbitrary constructs of the human mind,
but most of us find the concept useful and rely on it in our work.
Still, perhaps this is not how things had to be. Why is life organized into
these more or less nonoverlapping units? How exactly do we decide when
we have two species rather than one? And are there better ways to describe
biological diversity than just counting species?
Let’s start with a definition. Unfortunately, coming up with a species
definition that a good number of biologists can agree on turns out to be no
small thing, and several are in use. Even philosophers have gotten in on the
act and generated a surprising volume of verbiage concerning what a
species is from a philosophical perspective. But a great many biologists,
and especially those whose research focuses on how species are formed,
mainly rely on a single definition. It states that a species is a set of
populations (or members of a single large population) that actually or
potentially interbreed and exchange genes only with each other; this is
known as the biological species concept. Oddly enough, it is not something
that Darwin handed down to us, at least not explicitly. Although his most
famous work was titled On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural
Selection, Darwin for the most part treated species as extremes of the
varying forms he saw throughout nature. He did not give much special
attention to this unit in the Origin—though he did comment on it here and
there, and considerably more in some of his unpublished writings.
The biological species concept was due mainly to Ernst Mayr, a
remarkable scientist with whom I briefly overlapped, to my good fortune,
while starting my graduate studies at Harvard in the late 1980s (there is a
photo of him in chapter 4). Professor Mayr was then in his own eighties and
still publishing regularly—something he carried on doing almost
continuously until he died at age 100. I well recall his aggressive questions
and comments at seminars, and he is reported to have remarked, “I’m not
dogmatic, I’m simply right!” We students held him in awe.
The main problem with Mayr’s “BSC,” as it is often known, arises when
dealing with sets of populations that have wide distributions. Things really
go downhill when there are breaks in distributions. In the Malili Lakes of
Sulawesi, for example, there is a ricefish (Oryzias marmoratus) that is
found in more than one lake and varies somewhat between lakes. Since the
lakes are separated by rivers that are likely more difficult for the fish totraverse, movement between lakes and opportunities for interbreeding may
be rare. Would fish from different lakes interbreed if placed together, and
would their offspring survive and themselves be able to breed? Maybe, but
with so many millions of species of animals and plants we can rarely do the
necessary tests to address these questions—certainly not for every break in
the distribution of every species—and it is often necessary to make a
judgment call (highlighting these challenges is the fact that the evolution of
O. marmoratus has become an increasingly complex matter just during the
writing of this book). With more molecular data now available, we
frequently have a better idea just how genetically distinct different
populations are, but judgment is still involved in deciding when we have
two or more species rather than just one.
Distinct species that live alongside one another yet occasionally
interbreed can also complicate life for the biologist trying to apply the BSC.
It can be tough to decide just how much interbreeding is too much and at
which point one species should be treated as two. In addition, the BSC only
works when reproduction is sexual and thus interbreeding is a possibility;
no sex means no interbreeding and an irrelevant BSC. This was long
perceived to be a major problem for many microorganisms, especially
bacteria. Lately, however, microbiologists are finding that exchange of
genes with similar individuals, much like what happens in sexual
reproduction, is more common than once thought for a wide range of
microscopic creatures. Hence the BSC, its difficulties notwithstanding, may
apply even more broadly than once supposed. In fact, it is now clear that
even viruses can exchange genetic material when different strains infect a
single host at the same time. Moreover, they exchange genetic material
much more often with genetically similar viruses, contributing to clusters of
individuals much alike in genes and form, and surprisingly comparable to
the clusters that comprise an animal species. All in all, then, the BSC
remains the species definition of choice for most, but those who study
speciation appreciate its limitations and are increasingly bypassing them by
treating speciation as a process that leads to a continuum of levels of
reproductive isolation, rather than to necessarily discrete outcomes.
Taxonomists, however, have to assign species names and are obliged to use
their best judgment in this sometimes arduous task.Is Biodiversity the Number of Species?
Well-defined species concepts are important in the study of biodiversity in
part because they enable us to delineate species in a reasonably consistent
way and count the number present in a lake, or whatever sort of unit one is
interested in. We can then compile counts for different lakes as one way to
compare biodiversity across localities, or we can use slightly more
complicated indexes that are based on relative abundance as well as species
counts. For instance, a lake with five clam species in it, all equally abundant
at 20 percent of the total numbers each, might be considered more diverse
than a different five-species lake where 98 percent of the clams are of one
type, with few of each of the other four. There are also some quite different
approaches that can be used to quantify the biodiversity of a lake. One
important one, which is gaining in popularity for conservation work in
particular, is based on calculations of how much unique evolutionary
history is represented by the organisms in the lake.
Basically, the patterns on an evolutionary tree for a group of creatures are
used as the basis for calculating how much unique history is present in any
one species. This can be noteworthy for its own sake and can also be a
guide to how unusual the organism might be for characteristics of interest
but not yet examined —say, its immune system if biomedical issues are the
focus. An evolutionary tree, known to biologists as a phylogeny, shows the
relationships among a group of species as a branching pattern extending
from an ancient ancestor to modern descendants, with intermediate
ancestors at the branching points. The longer a branch (in time, DNA
sequence differences, or more often both) leading to a species and its near
relatives, and the fewer near relatives it has, the more unique history it
possesses (figure 2.1).
Evolutionary trees are roughly analogous to family trees (genealogies),
so here a family tree can help illustrate the idea. Suppose there were two
sisters, each with children. Sister Alice had five children while sister Viola
had one. Each of Alice’s children also had five offspring, who in turn had
five each. By the third generation of her descendants, Alice has
accumulated 125 great-grandchildren (this is actually a bit like my
Grandmother Thompson’s family from rural Canada, but I digress).
Meanwhile, Viola’s only child kept up the family tradition and also had an
only child, who did the same. After three generations, Viola has just onedescendant, Victor. Victor is the sole receptacle for three generations of his
family’s genetic history. He is pretty unique, even if his family reunion
picnics are a bit quiet and lonely. In the meantime, over on Alice’s branch
of the family tree, her great-grandchild Andrew goes to huge picnics. He
has plenty of company from folks who are a lot like him, and you could
hardly say there is much unique about Andrew—with four siblings, twenty
first cousins, and 100 more distant cousins (not to mention all the uncles
and aunts, great-aunts, and so on). If you were charged with choosing the
person who carried in their genes the most unique history, you would have
to go with Victor over Andrew. Lose Victor and a long tree branch is gone;
lose Andrew and a small twig is lost from a bush.
Figure 2.1
Evolutionary tree, or phylogeny, on which modern species “E,” alone at the end of a long branch, has
more unique evolutionary history, shared with no other species, than does species “A,” or any of the
other species shown. The past is on the left, and the present is on the right.
For an evolutionary example, we can compare the ricefish lineage in
Lake Matano, Sulawesi, to the lineage of sailfin silversides found there.
Ricefish, mentioned briefly earlier, are a group of small fish—the size you
would come across in a pet shop—that are found in East and Southeast
Asia. There are about thirty-six species in total, with more on Sulawesi than
anywhere else. They have become important as a model system for basic
research; the medaka, Oryzias latipes, a Japanese ricefish, is used for a widevariety of biomedical investigations. There is just one ricefish in Lake
Matano, which we will assume for our illustration has been evolving there
on its own for about as long as Matano has been a lake—something on the
order of one to two million years. We will assume the sailfin silversides
started evolving in Lake Matano at about the same time, but were more
prolific, with about ten silverside species now living in the lake. So if you
were to consider only the fish in the lake and ask which fish has a more
unique evolutionary history, the ricefish or Matano silverside, Telmatherina
prognatha, you would probably have to go with the ricefish. This sort of
approach can be used as the basis for prioritizing areas to protect or
designing sets of protected areas that conserve as much evolutionary history
as possible. Some folks working in conservation and management are now
grinding through these sorts of calculations. Usually they take into account
what the risk of extinction is for each species as well. For now, such
sophisticated approaches may not be practical for the ancient lakes covered
in this volume. But as management of the lakes gets more intense and
evolutionary data accumulate—which is happening quickly—this could
change.
The third approach you might take to quantifying biodiversity, the last
one we will consider, would be to use form and function. This approach
requires more data, but sometimes it is possible. Rather than just counting
species, or calculating how distinct one or more species are in terms of their
location on a family tree, one can calculate how distinct a species is (or set
of species are) for one or more traits. Thus, a fish with an unusual diet, for
example, or that is exceptionally big or tiny in size, might be considered
more distinct from a functional perspective than one possessing a common
diet or that is of an average size for its lineage. Thinking back to Alice’s
large family and Viola’s modest one, suppose Alice’s great grandson
Andrew was 7 feet (213 cm) tall and everyone else on either side of the
family tree was around 5’10’’ (178 cm) plus or minus a few inches—
including Viola’s one great-grandchild, Victor. If we were focused on
distinctiveness in terms of height rather than family history, we might now
reverse our original ranking and decide Andrew was more noteworthy than
Victor.
This approach can be applied to our fish example. Our Matano ricefish
seems so far to be a fairly typical ricefish—with nothing especially
distinctive about it. Telmatherina prognatha, however, is a bit unusual for alake fish in that as an ecological specialist that preys on other fish, it has
evolved a torpedo-shaped body and wide jaw gape. This is distinctive
because most fish species in freshwater lakes, especially from its family, eat
invertebrates. So despite the fact that it has several close relatives and does
not possess as much unique evolutionary history as the ricefish, it is more
distinctive in terms of its feeding ecology and the features it has evolved
that help it make a living feeding extensively on other fish. Consequently, if
our focus was ecological distinctiveness, we might rank T. prognatha above
the Matano ricefish. And we might rank lakes that possess a higher number
or proportion of ecologically unusual species more highly in terms of their
biodiversity than those filled with more conventional creatures—even if
those conventional creatures embody a lot of independent evolutionary
history (features at the ecosystem level are sometimes also emphasized). In
practice, though, differences in form and function are often correlated with
uniqueness in terms of tree position and branch length, so we don’t have to
choose between them. Moreover, tree measures are sometimes used as a
proxy for form/function, when only limited information is available about
the ecology and natural history of the creatures in question.
Speciation
Regardless of how you choose to measure biodiversity, to get very much of
it requires speciation. Since we are used to thinking about biodiversity in
terms of numbers of species, this might seem self-evident—but there is a
more subtle and important way in which the formation of new species
enhances biodiversity. A new species is an independently evolving unit. A
pair of new species cease to exchange genes with each other (or nearly so);
they are free to diverge, to evolve in new and different directions, with
neither holding the other back. As speciation events and species
accumulate, the opportunities for independent evolution and diversification
multiply.
The barriers to gene exchange that separate species can take many
different forms. Who mates with who is of course critical, and mating
between incipient (i.e., not fully isolated, often young) species can slow
down or stop for a variety of reasons. Sometimes these new species mate indifferent habitats or at different times of day or year (or even in different
years in the case of some salmon and cicadas!), or reject potential partners
of the other species when the opportunity to interbreed does arise. In other
cases, they are physically unable to mate, for example, if their genitalia
have become too different. Even if they mate, the eggs and sperm may
never find each other, or fail to fuse and begin development. Should things
get that far, hybrid offspring may still not develop properly or may be less
likely to survive. And even if they survive, they may be sterile or fail to find
mates. Things can break down in a lot of different ways.
How and why these barriers evolve are the central questions of research
on speciation. In addition to providing us with an influential species
definition, Mayr set the direction and tone for fifty or sixty years of
research in this area when he argued that in order for incipient species to
diverge enough to stop exchanging genes, they each need some time alone.
Each would need to spend a period of time evolving independently as a
result of a geographic barrier of some sort—say, a piece of land separating
two lakes when the water levels fall (for a fish) or a river breaking up a
piece of land when the water levels rise (for a squirrel). The key notion is
that a temporary physical barrier to gene exchange is needed in order for a
permanent biological barrier to have a chance to evolve. Thus, if an
ancestral, river-dwelling ricefish colonized two different lakes that had no
connection to each other, after some thousands or millions of years the
ricefish in each lake may come to differ. They may diverge enough that if
the lakes happen to become connected, the two populations do not
exchange genes and can persist as distinct forms. They might mate at
different depths, at different seasons, or have different courtship behaviors,
or maybe they have developmental differences that cause their fertilized
eggs to die before hatching. There may be a few different biological
isolating barriers preventing the exchange of genes between them.
With Mayr and others arguing aggressively that speciation was nearly
impossible without a period of physical isolation to jump-start things,
ambitious young biologists were keen to challenge what some saw as a
dogma. The problem, though, was proving a negative; it can be difficult to
obtain definitive evidence showing that currently overlapping species were
never separated in a past that we did not see and cannot visit. Even so,
persuasive case studies were eventually documented to the satisfaction of
most evolutionists, and some of the most compelling and widely discussedexamples came from lakes. Researchers basically showed that the various
fish species found only in a single lake were all more closely related to each
other than they were to any fish outside the lake—and the shape and history
of the lake made a past period of geographic separation seem unlikely. In
the most famous cases, these are relatively young crater lakes, which
possess simple bowl shapes because they are the remnants of extinct but
geologically young volcanoes. One recent example of speciation in a bowl￾shaped lake comes from a more ancient water body, Sulawesi’s Lake Poso.
This work was conducted by a group of scientists based mainly at the
University of the Ryukyus in Okinawa, toward the southern tip of Japan and
not so far from Sulawesi, at least as distances go in the tropical Pacific.
Nobu Sutra was the lead author on the paper, which also included K. W.
Masengi of Sulawesi’s Sam Ratulangi University. The team collected tissue
samples and made measurements of body shapes from the three ricefish
species found in Lake Poso as well as from the nearest populations that they
could locate of other ricefish. Using a method that provides extensive
samples of DNA sequence spread across every chromosome, they were able
to show that the three ricefish species in the lake are indeed more closely
related to each other than to any ricefish from outside the lake, at least for
most of their DNA.
An ecological aspect to these speciation events was suggested by
differences in shape and size between the ricefish. In addition, they found
intriguing evidence for some curious complications to the main findings:
their analyses suggested at least one and potentially three episodes of gene
exchange occurred between nascent ricefish species, one possibly from a
population outside the lake, and the best-documented episode between
species within the lake. Such an exchange preceded at least one speciation
event and possibly both. Thus, the geographic context of speciation was a
little messy—a finding arising time and again as genetic data get better and
better, and as our perspective on what is possible becomes a little more
flexible. The time frame their analyses suggest is consistent with Lake
Poso’s estimated age of one to two million years, and Poso’s shape would
make geographic separation within the lake implausible. It would be helpful
to sample more extensively within and around the lake in order to assess
these conclusions more definitively, but right now it looks like these
ricefish evolved into new species within the lake.It is increasingly well accepted that speciation sometimes happens with
extensive or complete geographic overlap, as in the Poso ricefish example,
but the prevailing view among evolutionary biologists is that most
speciation indeed involves periods of geographic isolation between
incipient species, much as Mayr argued. Speciation in the presence of
ongoing gene exchange may occur more frequently when there is only a
small level of geographic overlap—say, between fish in a river and a lake.
A shift in speciation research took place in the 1990s, an exciting one.
The focus moved from working out the geography of how species form,
which was really about the extent to which gene exchange prevented
speciation, to identifying the processes that accelerated species formation
by enhancing the evolution of biological barriers to gene exchange. Thus,
the shift was from studying what prevented speciation to working on what
propelled it. Sounds more positive, doesn’t it? Certainly it seemed so at the
time, at least to me. Some of the most influential ideas in this area came
from the laboratory of Dolph Schluter at the University of British
Columbia, where I received valuable and inspiring training at the start of
my career. One of Dolph’s great insights was to recognize the critical role
that ecology, through ecologically based natural selection, could play in
causing the evolution of reproductive isolation. Equally important was
working out the signature patterns that would help us recognize when
natural selection had been the driving force rather than other, more
haphazard processes.
I have mentioned natural selection a few times already, and it will be a
central topic in this book, so a definition seems in order. Defining it
properly also helps reveal the marvelous simplicity and inevitability of the
process given a few quite ordinary conditions. Just as a piece of granite is
bound to sink if you drop it in a lake, evolution by natural selection will
occur if there is variation in a trait, that variation is heritable (the offspring
resemble their parents), and one form of a trait consistently has higher
reproductive success than others—that is, individuals with one form of a
trait contribute more offspring to the next generation. To illustrate, suppose
some fish have larger mouths and some have smaller ones; parents with
larger mouths have offspring with larger mouths (i.e., there is a genetic
component); the fish are eating large prey, and fish with larger mouths get
more to eat, survive better, and leave more offspring. Each generation, the
average mouth size in the population will increase. This is evolution bynatural selection. It is that simple. If the conditions are met, selection and
evolution happen, just as a rock must sink if the conditions are met of being
in a less dense liquid and the presence of gravity. Given certain starting
conditions, some outcomes almost inevitably come to pass.
In addition to his evolutionary insights, Dolph has a talent for presenting
an idea or finding in a memorable, compelling way—an ability often
present in the most successful scientists, especially today when the
scientific literature is exploding and the competition for attention is fierce,
not only attention from readers, but from reviewers of grant proposals.
Scientific tools are expensive, and grant reviewers hold the keys to the
vault.
As he was developing his ideas about natural selection’s role in
speciation, Dolph made informal presentations during our laboratory
meetings, mainly to the graduate students and postdoctoral fellows. These
are often the most exciting settings for science, and it was at one of them
that I first heard the term ecological speciation. Dolph used it to describe
the evolution of barriers to gene exchange that arise, in a diversifying
lineage, as a result of contrasting adaptations to different ecological
conditions. At the time, numerous types of speciation had already been
proposed and the literature was muddied by the sometimes-confusing
jargon that accompanied them. I was doubtful about the value of
encouraging another bit of specialized speciation verbiage and said so at
one of the meetings. But Dolph knew that this case was different; the term
captured a valuable insight and efficiently conveyed an important concept.
He also emphasized its connection to natural selection rather than using it
more loosely to reference any of the ways by which ecological differences
might influence the speciation process.
A straightforward illustration of ecological speciation is when a fish
comes to occupy new ecological niches as it colonizes a lake that
previously lacked fish, causing one species to divide into two or more. For
example, in Lake Matano, Sulawesi, the sailfin silversides comprise most of
the fish species and probably had few competitors when the first such fish
arrived in the lake. T. prognatha, mentioned earlier, preys extensively on
other fish, unlike the other members of its lineage and most telmatherinids.
Hence T. prognatha occupies a fairly distinct niche—and has becomesubstantially reproductively isolated from two closely related forms that
feed mainly on invertebrates.
The ecological speciation hypothesis lends itself to experimental and
comparative tests, and there have now been many such assessments. I
became acquainted with one noteworthy study, led by Jelena Rajkov when
she was a PhD student in Basel, because I was involved in the editing of her
manuscript. Working in and around Lake Tanganyika, she studied the
cichlid fish known as Burton’s mouthbrooder (Astatotilapia burtoni) in
river- and lake-dwelling populations as they diverged into potentially
distinct species. She tested for lower survival, as predicted by the ecological
speciation hypothesis, of river fish relative to lake fish, in lake
environments. The cichlids that had been evolving in the lake for
generations should have been better adapted to that environment. In
addition, she examined the survival of the offspring of matings between
these populations; offspring of matings between populations should be
ecologically intermediate and survive less well than lake fish, though better
than pure (nonhybrid) river fish.
She confirmed that river fish survived poorly in the lake environment,
and their offspring, whether pure river or from one river parent and one lake
parent, also did relatively badly. When I first read her manuscript, I
wondered why there was no reciprocal experiment, for example, with the
various types of fish all placed in enclosures in a river. The authors
explained the reason in the revised final version of the paper, and I found
their comments memorable. They first noted the practical constraints of
their remote research site—for example, how hard it was to get to and from.
They went on to state that owing to “the presence of crocodiles and hippos
in the riverine environment, no reciprocal control experiment in river
environment could be performed.” Most of my own efforts at field
experiments have been with stickleback fish, near Vancouver, Canada. I
have occasionally had to deal with a cranky landowner or seagull trying to
steal my lunch, but this paper helped me understand one reason there have
been relatively few field experiments in the African Great Lakes, especially
around rivers. I have seen hippos up close, and they are magnificent but
scary. They kill hundreds of people every year, let alone being hard on field
enclosures.One of the most distinctive patterns predicted by the hypothesis of
ecological speciation is parallel speciation, an idea both clever and
audacious. To explain it, let us suppose closely related fish populations are
found in physically isolated ponds scattered across a landscape, some with
predators, in which a small body size is selected for, and others with no
predators and a large body size favored. Parallel speciation occurs if fish
from populations with similar patterns of predation and natural selection
evolve similar body sizes and other traits, and will mate with one another,
whereas populations from different predation regimes will not. In this
scenario, not only do particular traits evolve in parallel across parallel
environments, so does reproductive isolation. And this is predicted to
happen even though all the populations are evolving independently—the
bold part of the prediction.
As with ecological speciation, I encountered this idea in an informal
presentation by Schluter at the University of British Columbia. Dolph gave
a noon-hour talk about this topic, which he had learned of from two studies
of fruit flies in which replicated populations evolved for generations in
similar or different selective environments, all completely separate with no
movement between them. Remarkably, the predicted parallelism in
reproductive isolation was indeed observed. When I first heard this idea and
these lab findings presented, I was literally speechless. It was just so
original and exquisite in how it linked theory and observation. Moreover, it
allowed for a definitive test of a truly unique prediction of the ecological
speciation hypothesis. This is important because often in science, the most
impassable obstacle we face is to come up with a unique prediction of a
hypothesis—a testable prediction for which the data can be readily
collected. Parallel speciation was all that. Even better, it turned out to be
present in nature, not just a curiosity of laboratory fruit flies.
There seem not to have been any full tests of parallel speciation in the
major ancient lake systems, but Joana Meier, then at Bern, and her
colleagues have proposed a closely related yet decidedly novel scenario for
Lake Victoria. They suggest that two pairs of closely related Lake Victoria
cichlid species have evolved through parallel hybrid speciation (figure 2.2).
Using Pundamilia species and populations, Meier and colleagues conducted
detailed analyses of multiple individual genomes from sister species of
Pundamilia on several islands, including Makobe Island in the main area ofthe lake and Python Island, which is in Tanzania’s Mwanza Gulf and
somewhat isolated from the main body of Lake Victoria.
From their genomic data, they inferred that the P. pundamilia–nyererei
species pair first evolved in the main area of the lake, including on Makobe
Island. The more shallow-dwelling, widely distributed, and likely older
species, P. pundamilia, which features blue males, then colonized the
Mwanza Gulf and Python Island. A little later, individuals from the deeper￾dwelling P. nyererei, which possesses red-shifted vision and red males,
arrived and interbred with the P. pundamilia, forming a hybrid population.
From this hybrid population, a new shallow-adapted population of P.
pundamilia–like fish subsequently evolved with blue males alongside a
deeper-adapted population of P. nyererei–like cichlids with red males.
Substantial reproductive isolation also evolved between them.
Because the two species pairs did not evolve entirely independently, they
are not quite an example of parallel speciation of the sort that Schluter
proposed. And at the genome level, there was a mixture of parallel
divergence between the old and young pairs involving the same parts of the
genomes, and different regions diverging in the younger pair. But overall,
the consistencies across different locations in the lake do suggest an
important role for divergent selection, acting in parallel on similar genetic
raw material that became available to the younger pair through
hybridization.Figure 2.2
Parallel hybrid speciation in Pundamilia. P. pundamilia, here darker, colonized the Mwanza Gulf and
Python Island followed by P. nyererei, here lighter. They interbred, forming a hybrid population from
which a new shallow-adapted population of P. pundamilia–like fish evolved, here darker, alongside a
deeper-adapted population of P. nyererei–like cichlids, here lighter. Source: author, based on figures
by Joana Meier.
Adaptive Radiation
Ecological speciation is closely linked to the idea and theory of adaptive
radiation (though they will not always occur together). Adaptive radiation is
an intuitive concept in which a lineage of organisms rapidly diversifies as it
adapts to new environments and opportunities. Central to the theory is a
guiding role for natural selection in driving divergence in ecologically
important traits. It may also contribute to the formation of new species, in
particular through ecological speciation. For example, when fish colonize a
lake that lacked fish previously, selection often causes some to evolve traits
that allow them to feed along the bottom and mainly live in that habitat,
while others evolve traits that help them catch tiny free-swimming prey inthe open water. Those fish in each habitat that possess genes for traits well
suited to their local setting leave more offspring, and genetic differences
accumulate over generations—even faster if speciation gets started.
Bottom-feeding and open water–feeding fish become more and more
different, as each becomes better at feeding and surviving in its preferred
habitat.
The term adaptive radiation can be thrown around a bit casually, and
some use it when discussing any collection of related species. At least in
principle, however, a lineage can diversify with a minimal role for natural
selection through a haphazard differentiation of physiological,
developmental, and other traits that are not always tied to ecology or the
environment. This can occur even for animals and plants that live in
environments that vary little, especially if they spend their entire lives in a
small area, not moving far even when young. If their habitat is patchy, as
for some rock-dwelling cichlids in lakes with mainly mud on the bottom
and only occasional patches of rock, populations can easily become
spatially divided. They can diverge through the processes Mayr emphasized
owing to a lack of gene exchange even if selection differs little between,
say, rocky outcrops. Thus, sets of related species are not necessarily
products of adaptive radiation. Diversification mainly as a result of physical
isolation, though, is generally expected to be slower and less predictable.
Ancient lakes are perhaps best known among biologists and certainly
among students for providing case studies of adaptive radiation. Biology
texts commonly feature a figure showing how cichlid fish in different
African Great Lakes have evolved similar forms and appearances as they
have adapted to similar diets and ecologies in different lakes. Those of us
who have looked at figures of this sort time and again throughout our
careers can easily start to take such convergence for granted. But if I stop
and reflect just a moment, it really is a wonder. From ancestors as
genetically different from each other as we are from apes, fish in lakes
hundreds of kilometers apart have evolved strikingly similar heads, body
shapes, and fins when confronted by similar ecological challenges. An
example of such is shown in figure 2.3.
Some of these patterns are also seen even farther afield. In Sulawesi’s
Lake Matano, for example, one can find thick-lipped fish from a completely
different lineage located thousands of kilometers away, in a lake on adifferent landmass, which are reminiscent of forms in the African Great
Lakes. In addition, the divergence described earlier, between a shallow￾water, bottom-feeding lifestyle versus open water cruising and feeding, is
replicated for different groups of fish in different lakes across the entire
planet. Just as human economic systems lead to certain similar occupations
most everywhere, such as fishing versus farming, fish in different lakes
show certain commonalities in how they make a living.Figure 2.3
Convergent evolution in two ancient lakes. The species in the left column are all from Lake
Tanganyika, and the ones on the right are from Lake Malawi. Source: Reprinted with permission
from Springer Nature, from Albertson and Kocher, “Genetic and Developmental Basis of Cichlid
Trophic Diversity,” Heredity (2006).
What is less well-known, and arguably even less expected, is that
different and relatively unrelated lineages of fish have sometimes
diversified in parallel within a single lake. Walter Salzburger and his
colleagues at the University of Basel have stressed this pattern for the
cichlids of Lake Tanganyika. The cichlids of Tanganyika are special in that
they are to the cichlids of the other African Rift Lakes as Africa is tohominins; Tanganyika is the oldest of the trio that also includes Victoria and
Malawi, and its cichlids are more genetically diverse than those of the other
lakes. In fact, the radiations in the other lakes evolved mainly from lineages
within the Tanganyika radiation. The diversity of form present in
Tanganyika’s cichlids is readily apparent to even the casual snorkeler, and I
found Tanganyika’s waters and fishes captivating during a brief visit there.
It surely deserves more attention from travelers.
Working with Salzburger and Adrian Indermaur, Moritz Muschick
analyzed the shapes, ecologies, and evolutionary relationships for a large
sample of Tanganyika cichlids encompassing lineages that have been
evolving independently for millions of years. Much as for the comparisons
between lakes, he documented fish evolving similar feeding habits and
adaptations, ranging from jaw shape to body shape, over and over—but
these fish, of different species and from different evolutionary backgrounds,
were often side by side in exactly the same habitat in the same small area of
the lake. This observation raises questions of how they coexist and how
they evolved such convergence in the first place. Possibly some convergent
forms originated in different parts of the lake, especially during low water
periods when Tanganyika was divided into separate basins since periods of
temporary fragmentation are not unusual in the larger and older lakes.
Ongoing coexistence may have been aided by differences in other key
traits; for example, some of the cichlids studied spawn on the lake bottom
whereas in others the female carries the fertilized eggs in her mouth. But
these explanations do not always apply, and although within-lake
convergence is especially obvious and well studied in Tanganyika, it is not
unique to this adaptive radiation. Research into this intriguing topic
continues.
Although adaptive radiation is a persuasive and intuitively satisfying
explanation for many patterns in nature, it is always important in science to
conduct decisive tests of our most fondly held explanations. If ecological
opportunity mediates diversification, as predicted, it should be possible to
identify which aspects of ecology are important and link opportunity to the
diversification rate. This has been done in large-scale comparative analyses
initiated by Ole Seehausen (figure 2.4), who I have mentioned before. Ole’s
group has bases both in Bern, Switzerland, and at a research center in the
picturesque Swiss village of Kastanienbaum, on the shores of the exquisite
Lake Lucerne—which is itself home to radiations of whitefish and charr.Ole is well-known for the intensity of his fascination with cichlid fish, and I
had an enjoyable experience of this during a visit to Kastanienbaum. It was
entertaining, inspirational, and informative to spend a few hours with Ole in
his fish lab. He had a marvelous tale to tell about every tank, what had
already been learned, and what he wished to do next. He chose his words
carefully as he spoke, but also with humor and the joy in the work that is a
delight to see in colleagues and students. Later, at a group dinner, I was
reminded that even elite scientists are people with families and lives when
one of Ole’s teenage children joined us. My own eldest had recently moved
out of our home, and I felt nostalgic watching the affectionate give-and-take
between daughter and father.
Figure 2.4
Ole Seehausen in his laboratory in Kastanienbaum, 2019.
Seeking to test hypotheses of adaptive radiation, Catherine Wagner, a
young US scientist then working in the Seehausen lab (who later moved to
Wyoming), led a series of analyses of cichlid fish and their ecologies across
forty-six African lakes. These included the three great lakes we have
focused on. Wagner and her collaborators asked what factors made a cichlid
newly colonizing a lake more likely to evolve into at least two species, orfive or more species. They found that cichlids were more likely to diversify
in lakes with characteristics associated with ecological opportunity: greater
depth and greater net solar radiation. Depth should provide a wider
diversity of habitats to colonize, and more solar energy should support
larger populations and/or more species. Surprisingly, lake area was not
consistently important in triggering diversification, although large-scale
radiations were seen only in the largest lakes. Further, when they looked at
the total number of species that had evolved in a lake (a little different from
the previous measure), adding up all the different lineages of cichlid
present, there were indeed more species in lakes with bigger areas. This
could be because of a greater range of ecological opportunities in such
lakes, but it could also be because they are large enough for speciation to
occur between related populations in different parts of the lake. In lakes in
which speciation had taken place, lake age led to greater diversity as well,
although the effects of time were not always straightforward.
The Seehausen group has continued these analyses of cichlid
diversification in work that expands their data sets to include every species
of cichlid. This effort was led by Matt McGee, another intrepid US
scientist. There are more than 1,700 cichlids (probably quite a lot more; this
estimate is likely low), which comprise more than 5 percent of all teleost
fishes; teleosts are what we usually think of when we think of fish. Perch,
tuna, salmon, and most other fish are teleosts, whereas lampreys, sharks and
rays, lungfish, and a few other groups with fewer species are not. For
comparison, there are about 6,400 species of mammals on the entire planet.
If the 1,700 cichlids had hair and mammary glands, they would represent
over one-quarter of mammals. If they had a land-dwelling adult stage, they
would account for more than one-fifth of the 8,000 or so amphibians so far
described and named (which are mostly frogs, it turns out). This more
comprehensive cichlid data set includes fish from South America, India,
Madagascar, and a few other spots as well as Africa, and a large number of
river-dwelling species in addition to those in lakes. Perhaps it is not
surprising, then, that when the relationships between speciation rate and
environmental variables are reanalyzed, things have changed a bit.
As far as external factors go, the biggest development in the new data is
the appearance of predators. Analysis of this broader data set suggests that
when large, visually oriented predatory fish are present, speciation is slower
and species accumulate less quickly (note the new analyses are ofspeciation rate, which is also a little different from examining whether
radiations start or not, or looking at the total number of species—though the
measures are all related); possibly predators suppress population densities
of the species they eat, thereby reducing competition among prey and thus
pressure to diversify to obtain enough food. A dry climate also acts as a
brake, not surprising for fish. Deep water still facilitates cichlid speciation
in the expanded data set, but the effect is weaker. There are additional
intriguing correlates, more internal than environmental, which we will
explore in later chapters. Nevertheless, environmental correlates of
diversification remain in this massive compilation of data in which
environmental classifications are of necessity somewhat crude. And these
correlates are connected to ecological opportunity. Therefore adaptive
radiation is supported, though perhaps less clearly than when one considers
only lakes.
Most studies of adaptive radiations and the processes that drive them
have either looked at large-scale patterns in traits, ecology, and diversity, or
sought to measure selection itself in a much smaller number of species,
typically one or two. A study of telmatherinid fish from Sulawesi’s Lake
Matano took a different and notably ambitious approach in an effort to test
adaptive radiation theory more directly and comprehensively. For the five
or more incipient species comprising the Matano sharpfin group, Jobst
Pfaender and his collaborators collected wide-ranging data from over 1,000
individual fish, including feeding habits, habitat, body shape, and relative
liver weight, a measure of body condition thought to be indicative of
evolutionary fitness. Evolutionary fitness is essentially the relative
contribution to the next generation’s gene pool—thus whether a trait is
becoming more common or disappearing as a result of differential survival
and reproduction. Liver weight is sometimes used as an indicator of fitness
because the liver carries energy stores. These stores are an index of the
energy available to the fish for growth, reproduction, or other functions, and
an indicator of how well the fish is doing day-to-day in terms of feeding
success, resisting stress from disease, and so on. It can reveal whether an
animal is scrawny and scraping by, or plump and prosperous.
Pfaender and colleagues plotted their liver-based fitness index against
measures of shape. These composite shape measures summarized multiple
features like relative head width and body depth—features that have often
been found to affect how successful fish are when feeding on particularprey types. Such plots are referred to as adaptive or fitness landscapes
(figure 2.5). A value for a trait (or set of traits) indicates success on a fitness
landscape if it is on a fitness peak, and suggests failure if it is in a valley of
depressed fitness. If ecological selection acts strongly in favor of members
of incipient species and against hybrids, the average value for each species
should be on a peak of fitness whereas hybrid values should have low
fitness and be in valleys. This is the pattern seen in Pfaender and
colleagues’ data, in which peaks are generally associated with sets of
features characteristic of members of the five known species while areas
between species, where hybrids should usually be located, are generally of
lower fitness. Not every peak is exactly where it was expected to be, and
some statistical results are not definitive, but the overall pattern is clear and
provides satisfying support for hypotheses of ecological speciation and
adaptive radiation. The tremendous effort involved in the study turns out to
have been well justified.
One of the coauthors on this paper deserves recognition here for the
contributions she made to this and many more of the studies on Indonesian
lake fishes that will be recounted in this volume as well as the taxonomic
work that made some of the theoretically focused studies possible. Renny
Hadiaty (figure 2.6) was the systematic ichthyologist at the Indonesian
Institute of Sciences Research Center for Biology as well as head of the
Ichthyology Laboratory and the curator of the fish collection at the Museum
Zoologicum Bogoriense. In a career that ended too soon with her death in
2019 at age fifty-nine, she published over fifty papers in three languages
and made important contributions to the growth of Indonesian fish biology.
She also had three fish species named after her!Figure 2.5
Fitness landscape for sharpfin telmatherinid fish from Lake Matano, Sulawesi. The horizontal axes
are summary measures of shape, and the vertical axis is a proxy for biological fitness. The “pins”
indicate mean values for each species and are mainly on peaks of fitness, with valleys of low fitness
between them—where intermediate hybrids generally do poorly. Source: Modified from Pfaender et
al., “Rugged Adaptive Landscapes Shape a Complex, Sympatric Radiation,” Proceedings of the
Royal Society B: Biological Sciences (2016), under a Creative Commons CC BY 4.0 license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0).Figure 2.6
Renny Hadiaty (right) with Daniel Lumbantobing and Sopian Sauri during 2010 fieldwork. Source:
Photo by Lynne R. Parenti, © Smithsonian Institution.
Our attention is often drawn to isolated radiations as in Lake Matano or
spectacular radiations that involve many species as in the African Great
Lakes. A quite different pattern of diversification is seen in Japan’s
somewhat less speciose Lake Biwa, though it occurs to some degree in
probably every ancient lake. Biwa is located on the main Japanese island of
Honshu, almost midway between the massive urban centers of Nagoya and
Osaka, just upstream from the cultural center of Kyoto. The lake is over
four million years old, but underwent substantial geological changes about
400,000 years ago when most of its current deepwater areas were added as
a result of a tectonic process known as a fault-block movement associated
with grabens and half-grabens. These deeper waters, now reaching over 100
meters, are associated with species living entirely in open water, away from
the lake bottom. Biwa contains sixteen endemic or semiendemic—confined
mainly to Biwa—fish species or subspecies, out of about sixty total species
and subspecies (forms that are differentiated, but not quite enough for
taxonomists to label them as distinct species).
In contrast to better known ancient lakes, Biwa’s endemic species are not
mainly the result of a few lineages undergoing repeated speciation events
and rapid within-lake diversification. Instead, multiple lineages that are
found mainly in nearby rivers have each evolved into one or a few new lakespecies, often through adaptation to habitats found in the lake yet not
present in the surrounding waters. In addition, the lake harbors some
lineages now absent from the rest of Japan, or that are genetically distant
from other Japanese forms. Thus, Lake Biwa may have served as a reservoir
of species and genetic diversity, and made an important contribution to the
freshwater fish communities of western Japan outside the lake. This
reservoir or refugium (also sometimes described as a museum, in contrast to
a cradle) role has also been suggested for some other ancient lakes, at least
for some groups of animals. The gastropods (snails) of Lake Tanganyika are
a prime example.
Studies of Biwa’s snails highlight another important feature of lake
radiations: how different lineages can respond differently to the same
environments. Snails of the genus Biwamelania resulted from two distinct
colonizations of the lake. They diversified into fifteen different species as
they occupied new habitats and depths following the lake’s expansion and
deepening about 400,000 years ago. The study of this system is at a
somewhat early stage, but it currently looks like spatial isolation may have
contributed to speciation in this system in addition to ecological divergence.
Some species are confined to individual islets or river mouths, and lack a
free-swimming or drifting open water stage that would help the snails
disperse. Hence fish and snail diversity have accumulated in different ways
in the same lake. We have made important progress in the study of adaptive
radiations, but there is much more to come.
* * *
Counting the species in a location is one way to measure biodiversity. Other
methods take into account relative abundance, evolutionary history, and
ecological distinctiveness. Biodiversity ultimately arises through the
evolution of new species, and ecological differences are increasingly
considered to be important to speciation, but spatial isolation, time, and
chance can play roles too. During adaptive radiations, lineages of organisms
rapidly diversify as they adapt through natural selection to new
environments and opportunities, and ecological speciation may occur.
Ancient lakes provide support for the theory of adaptive radiation and
extraordinary case studies. Ancient lakes may also serve as reservoirs of
biodiversity, seeding the areas around them.3
Evolving Together and Apart
The smaller univalve . . . so much resembles a Nerita or Calyptraea that it would be
taken for a sea-shell if its history were not well authenticated.
—S. P. Woodward, Proceedings of the Zoological Society of London (1859)
regarding Tanganyika gastropod genus Spekia
When biologists think of adaptive radiation, we generally imagine one
species evolving into various new ones in response to ecological
opportunity. Opportunity usually means there are few other creatures about
and thus plenty of resources, whether because new habitat has opened, such
as a lake forming, or competitors have gone extinct. A spectacular example
of the latter is found in the opportunities that appeared for mammals when
most of the dinosaurs (except birds, which are to dinosaurs as bats are to
mammals) were wiped out by an errant asteroid about sixty-six million
years ago. But in ancient lakes, other factors can also be important in
determining which groups arrive in the lake at all as well as their
propensity, once established, to give rise to new species or diversify in form
and function. In this chapter, we explore some of these other factors and the
intriguing creatures that have resulted. We finish with an account of how
even an ancient lake that has vanished may leave a biodiversity legacy.
Coevolving Snails and Crabs
While empty habitats can provide opportunities, the presence of other fauna
and flora can sometimes accelerate or direct evolution, and may even
trigger speciation and diversification. This is especially likely when
organisms interact closely, with parasites and their hosts supplying one of
the most extreme illustrations. These tight evolutionary interactions, in
which species influence each other’s evolution, are known as coevolution,
and can also occur between predators and prey. Hence organisms livingclosely together and coevolving may evolve in new directions; you might
say they evolve apart from their nearest relatives.
In a famous example from Lake Tanganyika, the story begins with some
puzzling snails. Gastropods, which are the group to which snails belong,
can achieve quite large body sizes in the ocean; conchs and abalone are
well-known instances. In Lake Tanganyika, there are freshwater gastropods
with thick shells and complex shapes and structures that make them look
more like marine species than like the fragile, algae-scraping little animals
familiar from many streams, ponds, and lakes. Once Tanganyika’s
gastropod oddities came to the attention of European scientists, speculations
as to their origins quickly began to appear. The first idea was that they were
marine relicts left from an ancient connection to the ocean. Another popular
notion for a time was that Tanganyika has an unusual, calcium-rich water
chemistry that leads to heavier and more ornate shells. Other suggestions
were that the spines of some species provide stability on soft bottoms or
that thicker shells are beneficial in the shallows because of strong wave
action. There were serious problems, however, with all of these hypotheses
when they were considered carefully and critically. All were discarded.
A more promising possibility was that Tanganyika snails differed from
those in most other freshwater sites because they experienced more
ferocious and effective predation, most likely from the heavily clawed crabs
known to occur in the lake. In a series of experiments on several species of
snails and crabs from Tanganyika as well as localities with more typical
freshwater snails and crabs, Kelly West of the University of California at
Los Angeles and Andrew “Andy” Cohen of the University of Arizona tested
predictions of this hypothesis. They found Tanganyika snails have more
“sculpture”—features such as spines and ribbing that they suspected were
protective. Tanganyika shells were also much thicker around the shell
aperture, the entry and exit through which the snail squeezes much of its
body and retreats when threatened. When their strength was tested
quantitatively using an instrument from an engineering laboratory, the
Tanganyika shells were found to be dramatically stronger than other
freshwater shells of similar size. Their strength was more akin to the shells
of tropical marine species that are thought to be exceptionally resistant to
predation. Also consistent with strong predation pressure, the Tanganyika
shells showed much higher frequencies of shell “repair,” indicating
recovery from damage caused by predators (figure 3.1).Figure 3.1
Tanganyikan crab Platytelphusa armata, showing large, molariform claws, and prey species
Lavigeria paucicostata, showing unsuccessful crab predation and shell scarring (left shell) and
successful, lethal predation (two shells on right). Note shells are enlarged about twofold relative to
the crab. Source: Reprinted with minor modifications with permission from John Wiley and Sons,
from West et al., “Morphology and Behavior of Crabs and Gastropods from Lake Tanganyika,
Africa,” Evolution (1991).
When interactions with crabs were investigated more directly, some of
the same features of snail shells were found to enhance survival or force
predators into more time-consuming attacks. On the crab’s side, bigger
claws led to attacks that succeeded more quickly. Moreover, the crabs had
evolved claws that were truly impressive—sometimes longer than the width
of the crab’s shell. These snail-feeding claws had toothlike projections on
them that are well suited to crushing. They were broader and sturdier than
the “dentition” found on other freshwater crabs, just as our molars are wider
than our canines and better at crushing foods such as nuts and seeds.
Reflecting this analogy, such claw dentition is known as molariform.When a crab encountered a snail too sturdy for it to crush, the alternative
was much less efficient. It would carefully peel the shell back, starting at its
opening—a methodical process that required at least forty minutes.
Tanganyika crabs are patient!
All in all, it appears likely that Tanganyika crabs and gastropods are so
distinctive because of a long history of coevolution in this unusually ancient
and stable lake, leading to escalation in predatory traits in the crabs and
antipredator traits in the snails. Yet there are only two species of heavily
clawed, gastropod-eating crabs in Tanganyika, and some analyses suggest
that Tanganyika gastropods, while unusually diverse in terms of their
shapes and shell features, have not speciated particularly rapidly. In this
case, coevolution may have contributed more to increasing the diversity of
forms, and generating unusual ones, at least for a lake, than to quickening
the pace of speciation.
A surprisingly similar example of crab-gastropod coevolution has been
described from Sulawesi. In each of Sulawesi’s ancient lakes, freshwater
snails of the genus Tylomelania coexist with predatory crabs bearing large
claws with, again, molariform dentition. Both are frequently abundant in the
lakes. I would see crabs regularly in Lake Matano, and snails were present
almost everywhere one looked underwater. The snails are intriguing in
several ways—one being their unusual reproduction. They give birth to live
young that already possess shells, and their young at birth are the largest
known from freshwater gastropods. Their shells, though, show many
similarities with those of the shells seen in Tanganyika species preyed on by
crabs, as shown by Thomas von Rintelen, Matthias Glaubrecht, and
additional collaborators at the Museum of Natural History in Berlin. In each
of the snail lineages that have colonized the Malili Lakes, where the most
investigation has occurred, lake species have thicker shells than do species
found in nearby rivers that lack snail-eating crabs, and shell thickness is
correlated with shell strength. Further, about half of specimens from lake
species have repair scars, whereas less than 20 percent of individual snails
from the rivers possess scars.
The trait most associated with the ecological diversification of the snails,
however, is used in feeding. In mollusks, the key feeding structure is the
radula, a tonguelike organ covered with rows of tiny teeth, which is used in
Tylomelania to scrape food from whatever surface the snail is crawlingover. Most river-dwelling species have nearly identical radulae covered in
small teeth. But in a series of analogous evolutionary events, species that
have specialized on hard lake substrates (the bottom material the snails
crawl on or through) have convergently evolved strongly enlarged teeth
with several distinct forms present.
Species within a lake often differ in the substrate on which they are
found, but there is some variation by depth too. In addition to these
environmental patterns, spatial isolation has been important to snail
diversification given that the species present in nearby lakes are frequently
different. Some even have limited geographic distributions within a lake.
The genetic basis of radula evolution is now being investigated, and there is
some evidence that radula-associated genes have evolved especially rapidly,
as expected if they have played a central role in the adaptive radiation of
this group. The number of species of Tylomelania currently sits at twenty￾eight, but some species are highly variable and more may yet be described.
Despite the fact that the Malili Lakes are neither exceptionally old as
ancient lakes go nor unusually large, this is one of the most extensive
gastropod radiations known for a single lineage in a lake system. It seems
that the radula of the snail is the beak of the (Darwin’s) finch for this
inverted archipelago of lakes.
Dispersal and Diversification: Sponges
One of the most profound decisions an organism makes is choosing where
to live. Within our own species, some spend their lives on the block where
they grew up, while others leave their hometown, state or province, or
maybe even country. I once had a barber, originally from Greece, who had
given a good deal of thought to the issue of immigration. Musing on this
topic, Andy once told me between scissor clips, “You know, a man who
moves to a new country after thirty is no good for either country.” I started
my shift from Canada to the United States in my twenties, but only finished
it in my thirties, so am not sure where I fit in Andy’s scheme, but his words
often come back to me. Much as for people, how far to disperse is a
defining trait for animals and plants, with substantial evolutionaryimplications. Dispersal usually occurs early in life, but sometimes takes
place after maturity.
A long-standing scheme for characterizing the immense diversity of
animal dispersal strategies contrasts species that produce armies of cheap,
mobile offspring, which are good at finding new homes and opportunities,
with those that invest in just a few expensive offspring that do well in
dense, competitive environments. Groups with limited dispersal should
have lower levels of gene exchange with other populations, and both natural
selection and more haphazard local processes should have stronger and
quicker effects, leading more readily to the evolution of reproductive
barriers and new species. In one truly ancient group of animals—sponges—
dispersal capabilities have diverged dramatically among lineages and over
time. Some of the most interesting and striking patterns involve ancient
lakes.
I first began to give sponges more than passing attention when I visited
Lake Baikal. I was on a field trip on the lake with a group of biologists, all
of us there for a conference, and we had set anchor in a shallow cove for
some diving. One of the divers brought up a bright green, candelabra-like
structure, which I initially took to be some sort of plant, but it was in fact an
animal—a sponge. I knew sponges could live in fresh water, but the ones I
had come across in North American ponds were small, gray, and
nondescript. The Baikal sponges had a decidedly marine look to them and
were impressive, even more so when I saw photos of them in their
underwater habitats (figure 3.2). Since that experience, I have developed a
much greater curiosity about sponges and been surprised at what I have
learned about their evolution in fresh water. It requires a little general
background to explain their presence in Baikal and appreciate their story in
ancient lakes.Figure 3.2
Sponges of Baikal. Source: Olga Kamenskaya.
The sponges are an ancient, mainly marine group and a very early branch
off the tree of animals that includes us. Sponges lack organs and have only
a few specialized cell types. All sponges have a “skin” of T-shaped or
flattened cells and typically an internal system of canals. Lining these
canals are specialized cells possessing tiny whips, or flagella, whose regular
motions cause water movement. This flow of water allows the sponge to
filter out microscopic food particles. Between the skin and flagellated cells
is a space containing a protein matrix as well as additional specialized cell
types and other microscopic organisms. Despite their structural simplicity,
sponges can be meters wide and take diverse forms. They can be crusts on
rocks or possess complex structures, sometimes quite rigid and sturdy
owing to tiny silica or calcium-based bodies known as spicules, and/or
proteinaceous fibers of spongin. Some sponges are literally rock-hard, with
limestone constructions. There are over 9,000 species in total, with many
more almost certainly awaiting discovery, as with so many invertebrate
groups.
Relative to the vast time frame of their evolution, sponges arrived in
fresh water only quite recently, about 300 million years ago, and did not
diversify into their modern range and habitats until much later. Whereas
many different lineages of fish, mollusks, and other groups have colonized
fresh water, with multiple distinct colonizations for each group, just one
lineage of sponges has done so. This group, the Spongillida, contains about240 species, though there are certainly more to be found and named.
Members of the Spongillida are not as diverse in form as marine sponges,
but still show extensive variation. Yet there is a single trait that seems to
have been critical to the success of this lineage. The Spongillida possess a
distinctive reproductive body known as a gemmule—a mellifluous name
that seems to evoke something precious, despite referencing a group of
organisms seldom thought of as beautiful or praiseworthy.
Gemmules are small, collagen-covered globules of cells, each with the
potential to develop into a mature sponge. They play important roles in both
the persistence and dispersal of sponges. Gemmules of some species are
tolerant of environmental extremes, including freezing or drying. Some
possess chambers that enable them to float and disperse by wind, while
others have tiny silica-based spicules that can hook onto flying insects,
mammals, and even birds, allowing the minute gemmules to hitch a ride
and travel sometimes enormous distances. With such adaptations,
freshwater sponges have managed to colonize every continent but
Antarctica and evolve into forms ranging from encrustations, which can be
challenging to recognize as sponges, to structures more than a meter tall
that look like leafless treelets, such as I saw in Baikal. Some individual
species are exceptionally widespread, with ranges extending across
different continents. Freshwater sponges are even found in desert lakes.
Wherever you are as you read this, unless this book has made its way to
Antarctica, there could be a gemmule flying over you now, attached to a
bird or insect. What a surprising world this is, in which sponges fly around
us as we turn pages or tap away at computers.
Gemmules are produced without sex and are in one sense an extension of
the ability most sponges possess to grow a new individual from a broken￾off fragment. Like marine sponges, freshwater species also reproduce
sexually, but the sponge larvae are not good swimmers and typically do not
disperse very far.
Although gemmules appear to have played an important role in the
success and spread of freshwater sponges and are rare in marine species,
they are not present in every member of the Spongillida, the freshwater
sponge lineage. The species from which gemmules have been lost, however,
seem not to be a random or haphazard assortment of sponges. Gemmules
have consistently been lost by species living in particular localities,specifically the ancient lakes, and this loss is evidenced on multiple
continents. The lakes whose sponges are known to lack gemmules include
Titicaca in South America, Poso on Sulawesi, Ohrid in Albania or North
Macedonia, the Caspian Sea in western Asia, Baikal in Russia, and Malawi
and Tanganyika in Africa. Continuing research will surely result in more
discoveries of gemmule loss and add to this list.
The geographic distribution of gemmule loss resulted in considerable
taxonomic confusion about the relationships among these lake species, at
least before DNA sequence data became widely available for more
powerful and definitive analyses of relationships. Gemmule-lacking
sponges from five of the lakes were initially placed into a single family, the
Malawispongiidae, a name referring to the home lake of one member genus.
Yet modern taxonomists, the scientists who classify organisms and give
them names, almost always insist that classifications be natural. By natural,
they mean that all species in a group should be descendants of a single
ancestor and all descendants of that ancestor should be included in the
group, including the ancestor. For the Malawispongiidae, or any
classification that put sponges from multiple ancient lakes together by
themselves, it always seemed a bit doubtful that these requirements could
be met.
In recent years, enough sequence data have accumulated to allow the
construction of reliable evolutionary trees for substantial numbers of
freshwater sponge species—with complete genomes even starting to appear
—and these data confirm the problems with the Malawispongiidae. Rather
than most or all the gemmule-lacking ancient lake sponges being descended
from a common ancestor that was somehow transported among them, it
appears gemmules have been lost time and again from the very freshwater
sponges in which they had seemed so essential. Sequence data suggest
strongly that the sponges now inhabiting ancient lakes have evolved in a
series of independent evolutionary steps from widely distributed gemmule￾possessing ancestors. In some cases, they have diversified further within
individual lakes, likely subsequent to gemmule loss, with the most
noteworthy example being Lake Baikal. In Baikal, fourteen species have
been named and assigned to four different genera, all classified within the
family Lubomirskiidae. The most abundant species is Lubomirskia
baikalensis, which forms Baikal’s marvelous “sponge forests.” In Baikal,
these sponges have been estimated to constitute nearly half of the mass ofall living organisms inhabiting the lake’s bottom. That is an awful lot of
sponge, and their volume alone indicates they are important ecological
players.
It seems likely that gemmule loss, and the reduction in gene exchange
among populations that must result, has played a pivotal role in the
evolution of endemic species of sponges in ancient lakes as well as in the
further diversification that has occurred in some cases. Unfortunately, the
critical analyses have not yet been conducted to definitively confirm or
refute such a hypothesis. Nevertheless, the powerful pattern of convergent
loss of gemmules in ancient lakes, at distant locations, argues strongly that
selection favors this change—that it is an adaptation. The presumed
explanation for repeated gemmule loss is that the stable, predictable
environments provided by ancient lakes reduce the benefits of producing a
structure specialized for wide dispersal and survival through severe
disruptions such as the habitat drying out. Evolutionists think of most every
trait as having a cost of some sort, and that will certainly be true for a form
of reproduction like gemmules, so when it offers little benefit, gemmule
production should be selected against and eventually be lost. The strong
convergence observed here also argues for important environmental
similarities among even distant ancient lakes, at least from the perspectives
of the organisms inhabiting them. To a sponge, it seems to be critically
important whether a lake is of the ordinary sort or ancient.
Additional data will be needed to test hypotheses about the evolutionary
advantages and disadvantages of convergent gemmule loss. Basic
taxonomic work is needed too, but this may not move quickly because
freshwater sponges are a neglected group, with few scientists specializing in
them—quite possibly fewer, for example, than work on the single species of
Atlantic salmon. Things may be looking up, though. Sponges have been
attracting more interest from bioprospectors, who assay extracts from
sponge tissues in search of new compounds with potential applications in
the treatment of disease or use in biotechnology. Many of the compounds of
interest are not produced by the sponges themselves but rather by bacteria
and other organisms that live within the sponges, and may have been
coevolving with sponges for a long time.Shrimp Resplendent and Radiating
In the freshwater shrimp of the family Atyidae, found in several ancient
lakes, diversification has been proposed to result from an interaction
between opportunity and dispersal more subtle than is seen in the sponges.
This widespread, almost exclusively freshwater group has undergone
radiations in Sulawesi’s lakes and Lake Tanganyika, with the Sulawesi
forms more extensively studied. Most of the work has been led by Kristina
von Rintelen at the Museum of Natural History in Berlin. There have been
two von Rintelens working on Sulawesi invertebrates; the work on snails
discussed earlier in this chapter was done mainly by her husband, Thomas.
Their fieldwork has sometimes been a family project, with their two
daughters helping out on one trip. For their contributions, and to highlight
the importance of the shrimp for coming generations, each daughter had
one Lake Poso shrimp named eponymously for her: Caridina lilianae and
Caridina marlenae.
Atyid shrimp have diversified in both Lake Poso and the Malili Lakes
(figure 3.3), but their investigation has been more extensive in the Malili
Lakes. Fifteen endemic species are found in the Malili system, with thirteen
in Lake Towuti. I would see them sometimes when I worked in Lake
Matano, peering out from between the rocks as they poked daintily at the
algal communities growing around them. They looked impossibly fragile,
and I marveled at their ability to persist in the presence of larger crabs and
fish, which seemed loutish by comparison with the elegant atyids.
Some species (most, really) are arrestingly attractive with complex,
unexpected patterns of stripes, bands, and spots of most any hue one might
imagine, and differing greatly from one species to the next. Caridina
profundicola, for example, has a subtly yellow background color with
tasteful, slim orange stripes stretched side to side here and there across its
body. In some females, this pattern is paired with eggs of a blue-green hue
that seems unnatural, as if photoshopped to contrast with the mother’s body.
The aptly named Caridina striata possesses a series of alternating red and
white stripes running from its head to the end of its tail. Although eye￾catching in a photograph, von Rintelen and Yixiong Cai (in a 2009 paper
naming several new species and generally reorganizing the group; Cai is
based at Singapore’s National Biodiversity Centre) comment that the body
of this species, as for some others, can be inconspicuous in natural settings.Its white chelipeds, however, the long set of legs ending in pincerlike claws,
are always clearly visible. While reds and oranges are prominent in the
color palette of the Malili Lake shrimp, blue is rarely seen on their bodies.
Thus, the azure patches on Lake Poso’s C. caerulea are so noteworthy as to
inspire its name—caeruleus means blue in Latin. The blue appears in two
almost-glowing ovals on the final segments of its tail, part of a fringe of
blue comprising also its legs and antennae, all providing a vivid frame for a
peach body. Most species, regrettably, are listed as critically endangered on
the International Union for Conservation of Nature Red List.Figure 3.3
Map of Sulawesi ancient lakes with shrimp collecting sites indicated (left) and examples (right) of
shrimp chelipeds of species found in different habitats. Source: Reprinted with minor modifications
with permission from John Wiley and Sons, from von Rintelen et al., “Adaptive Radiation and
Ecological Diversification of Sulawesi’s Ancient Lake Shrimps,” Evolution (2010).
Von Rintelen has investigated the anatomies and distributions of these
shrimp in detail, and conducted analyses of their evolutionary relationships
as well. In contrast to early suggestions that the anatomy of shrimp was
unrelated to their feeding habits and ecologies, von Rintelen observed
strong relationships. The first and second pairs of chelipeds possess
paintbrush-like structures that are used, in most species, to brush fine foodparticles from the substrate. Just as teeth differ among mammals depending
on whether they use them to grind plant matter or cut through animal flesh,
chelipeds vary among shrimp living in different habitats and eating different
foods. In the case of the Malili Lakes shrimp, the differences among species
with different ecologies are obvious, and much clearer to even a casual
glance than the shape differences among members of some fish radiations.
The chelipeds of open water (pelagic) species, which are elongate and
delicate, are especially distinct from the short, burly chelipeds of species
found on wood substrates (figure 3.3).
Not all shrimp species were confined to a specific habitat, however.
Generalist and river-dwelling species could occupy multiple ecological
settings. Von Rintelen and colleagues suggest that differences in habitat
flexibility have affected the propensity to disperse; a species with narrow
habitat needs will more often encounter unsuitable areas across which it
cannot disperse, in particular the rivers that link the lakes. Such strong
habitat preferences may, as a result, cause one species to perceive a barrier
where another does not, and lead to speciation through geographic isolation
where a barrier is perceived. Similar suggestions have been made for other
groups in other lakes. In the African Great Lakes, for example, some of the
cichlids have inflexible habitat requirements, especially those species
confined to rocky outcroppings that are separated by sand or mud. The sand
or mud may be an insurmountable barrier to the rock dwellers, and
populations separated by an estuary or small bay may exhibit extensive
genetic differentiation as well as color pattern differences. Yet fluctuations
in lake levels, which appear to have been over 400 meters in as little as the
last 100,000 years, provide a complication. When such massive changes
occur, the formerly separated rock-dwelling populations may come into
contact, putting a stop, even if temporary, to further differentiation.
Conversely, lake basins that are connected when water is high can be
separated from each other, promoting divergence between sets of
populations isolated by that process.
At least one shrimp has a particularly unusual habitat requirement for a
freshwater species, and a notably constrained geographic distribution as
well: Caridina spongicola lives exclusively in and on a freshwater sponge
in Lake Towuti. Both sponge and shrimp are found only in a single bay,
which leads to Towuti’s outlet river, at depths of about three to ten meters.
The sponge is so little studied that it does not yet have a Latin name, butbased on DNA sequence data and its visible features it is clearly distinct
from Sulawesi’s other freshwater sponges. It is a respectable size for a
freshwater species, up to about twenty centimeters across, and possesses a
cluster of distinct cavities similar to those of many marine sponges (figure
3.4). The cavities are where the shrimp are mainly found, with as many as
137 individuals on a single sponge. The shrimp don’t seem to be eating the
sponge, nor do they appear to be providing it any benefit. Probably the
relationship is a “commensal” one, in which the shrimp gain shelter and
perhaps a food supply inside the sponge, without causing the sponge any
substantial harm or paying it any sort of rent. They are a bit like well￾behaved squatters in an empty building, although these squatters seem to be
feeding on microscopic algae, which accumulate in the cavities of the
sponges.
Figure 3.4
Atyid shrimp, Caridina spongicola, and the sponge with which it is commonly associated in Lake
Towuti (note shrimp at greater magnification). Source: Used with minor modifications with
permission of the Royal Society, from von Rintelen et al., “Freshwater Shrimp–Sponge Association
from an Ancient Lake,” Biology Letters (2007); permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance
Center, Inc.
In marine systems, shrimp live in or on a remarkably long and diverse list
of creatures, with which they seem in many cases to be coevolving. These
range from corals to sea urchins to oysters to sea cucumbers as well as
sponges, of course. Such relationships are rare in fresh water, which
prompts the question of how a shrimp came to be living in a sponge in Lake
Towuti. Von Rintelen and her colleagues have proposed a hypothesis for the
origins of sponge dwelling, again connected to the dynamic water levels of
lakes, and based on their observations of the shrimp and sponges over
several years and a wide range of climatic conditions. Although
commonplace lake-level changes of one to two meters seemed to have littleeffect on the shrimp or their habitats, in a year with exceptionally low water
levels, some shallow rocks were exposed to the air. These typically provide
important habitat for rock-dwelling shrimp species, which had to find new
homes. That same year, rock-dwelling shrimp were observed alongside C.
spongicola for the first time on sponges that were not as far below the
surface as they had been. Von Rintelen and colleagues suggest that such a
shift may have contributed to sponge dwelling, and even now may facilitate
hybridization between shrimp species normally found in distinct habitats.
The presence of freshwater shrimp in an apparently obligatory
relationship with sponges is also noteworthy for the intriguing possibilities
it raises. In the sea, sponge-dwelling shrimp have repeatedly evolved a
reproductive and social system that is more familiar from ants, bees, and
termites, known technically as eusociality. Eusociality is usually defined as
involving the cooperative care of offspring, including the offspring of other
individuals (common in our own species, with day care an obvious modern
example), overlapping generations, and a division of labor between
reproductive and nonreproductive individuals—queens versus sterile
workers in honeybees, for instance. Eusociality has been suggested to be a
key to the enormous ecological success of ants, bees, and termites, but until
it was discovered in the marine snapping shrimp genus Synalpheus, it was
known only from land-dwelling groups. There are as yet no published
reports on the social system of C. spongicola, and quite possibly it is
entirely ordinary . . . but maybe those 137 sponge-cohabiting shrimp are
doing more than just sharing a squat.
Can an Ancient Lake Explain Fish Diversity in
Southern African Rivers?
So far in this chapter we have been seeking to understand how coevolution
with other species, dispersal, and ecological opportunity each may have
contributed to biodiversity in ancient lakes, and how they can interact. We
finish by reversing that approach and ask if an ancient lake might leave a
legacy of biodiversity even after its depths have become dry land. If true,
then the diversity that evolves in one radiation may enable a wider range of
forms in a new setting.This tale begins with Hull University’s Domino Joyce, who together with
an international group of collaborators sought to explain oddly high
diversity in the cichlid fish of southern African rivers, relative to rivers
farther north. Such a pattern is surprising because of the well-documented
tendency for biological diversity to increase as one approaches the equator
and diminish as one approaches a pole. Yet in the rivers abutting Lakes
Malawi and Victoria, the diversity of haplochromine cichlids, which
radiated so explosively in those lakes, is low—typically just one species
from each of the two major haplochromine lineages. In contrast, river
systems a little to the south (farther from the equator) as well as two to the
west usually contain several haplochromines and in one case at least twelve.
Beyond their impressive species numbers, the river-dwelling cichlids of
southern Africa occupy an unexpectedly broad range of ecological niches,
with a correspondingly enhanced diversity of body shapes and feeding
traits. At the same time, their DNA sequences suggest evolutionary
relationships among these fishes that are not easily explained.
By combining analyses of evolutionary relationships of the riverine
cichlids with data on their distributions, Joyce and her colleagues arrived at
the surprising conclusion that their exceptional diversity is a persistent
signature of evolutionary events that took place in an extinct lake, Lake
Palaeo-Makgadikgadi. Until about 2,000 years ago, a lake at times larger
than Switzerland occupied a portion of Botswana where there is now mostly
dry salt pan or seasonal lagoons. Like Victoria or Malawi, this immense
body of water provided a wide range of ecological opportunities during its
periods of greatest size and depth. The “megalake” periods were somewhat
intermittent, though. Interspersed with periods when the lake may have
fragmented and even dried completely, their transient nature presents a
potential issue with this hypothesis. Nevertheless, when Joyce and
colleagues mapped the distributions of the region’s river-dwelling
haplochromine cichlids, their highest diversity centered on the location of
the former lake. This was not true for other fish groups, in particular
members of the genus Barbus (familiar to aquarists as barbs), which is the
most species rich of the mainly river-dwelling African fish groups. Barbus
showed a more familiar pattern of increasing diversity toward the equator,
with a jump in numbers in the Congo River, and no peak at the location of
Lake Palaeo-Makgadikgadi.The range of body shapes present in the river radiations of
haplochromine cichlids were revealed, by a quantitative analysis, to be
similar in scale to what is seen in Lakes Malawi and Victoria, and much
greater than what is present in the river species of East Africa. Certain
combinations of traits were missing, particularly those characteristic of fish
that feed in the open waters of lakes. The authors suggest that these may
have evolved in the extinct lake, but that fish possessing such open water–
adapted traits were unable to transition to rivers that lacked appropriate
habitat—whereas snail eaters, for example, could find prey in a river just as
they had in a lake.
Joyce and her colleagues conclude that the ecological opportunities
afforded by Lake Palaeo-Makgadikgadi enabled the generation of
ecological and anatomical diversity in the lake’s haplochromine cichlids of
a sort that would not have appeared in rivers—but that large rivers provide
sufficient ecological variety to maintain a great deal of this diversity once it
has evolved. African riverine cichlids are currently being investigated
extensively using larger and more robust DNA data sets because a better
understanding of the evolution of river species is widely perceived as
important for interpreting cichlid evolution in Africa’s lakes. It will be
fascinating to see if Joyce and her colleagues’ hypothesis holds up, and if
indeed an ancient lake may sometimes generate a multiplicity of forms and
ecologies that persist even after the lake’s waters have long since departed.
* * *
Ecological opportunity is central to adaptive radiation, but which groups
arrive at an open habitat, which other groups they coevolve with, and
additional factors may also influence the rate and direction of evolution. In
Lake Tanganyika and Sulawesi, predatory crabs and their snail prey have
coevolved and converged. In ancient lakes from Africa to South America,
stable habitats have led freshwater sponges to lose their dispersive
gemmules, facilitating divergence. Atyid shrimp in Sulawesi have similarly
diverged in dispersal tendencies as they have adapted to different lake
habitats. Puzzling fish diversity and distributions in southern African rivers
did not result from the extraordinary dispersal abilities of the groups
involved but instead may have arisen through “seeding,” by a now-defunct
ancient lake and its adaptive radiations.4
Species in the Eye of the Beholder
Lake, oh fresh lake of rivulets in-land sea . . .
In riches is Africa, Malawi’s reigns of all lakes
—Paul Mwenelupembe, 2013
If your memory stretches back to incandescent bulbs, you will know how
different a room looks and feels with the warm, somewhat-red tones of
incandescent lighting relative to more sterile “cool white” fluorescent
lights. You may also have noticed that the colors of paint and furniture can
seem different depending on the light source. Our brains compensate
somewhat for this, but these effects are still detectable and at times quite
strong. This is because the color of an object is a result of both the
wavelengths of light hitting it and which wavelengths are most likely to
bounce off it (and in which directions, though we will not explore that point
for now) versus being absorbed. Thus, in terms of the environment’s role,
an animal’s color is quite different from the sounds it makes. We produce
sounds, but only reflect the light that conveys color. It is a bit like the
difference between a motorboat, which propels itself, and a sailboat, which
has to work with the wind.
As with artificial lighting, environmental light in nature varies with the
light source as well as the weather and time of day. Habitat too has an
effect; forests, for example, have green-tinged light in their interiors. We
perceive such differences because our eyes contain cones that are sensitive
to long (red cone), intermediate (green cone), or short (blue cone)
wavelengths of light. When one or two cones are stimulated more and the
other(s) less, we perceive color rather than white, black, or shades of gray.
But not everyone’s perception is the same. For instance, those with red￾green color blindness are typically missing either a functional red or green
cone and can completely miss colors and patterns that are obvious to
everyone else—something it is wise to take into account when choosingcolors for a graphic or illustration. Much variation in color vision is based
in genes that encode the different opsin proteins that are characteristic of
each cone type.
Underwater, ambient lighting differs more from place to place than it
does in terrestrial environments. This is because water generally absorbs
much more light than does air, and different wavelengths are often absorbed
unequally, affecting the light spectrum. These effects can vary depending on
how much sediment and other materials are in the water.
Ole Seehausen recognized early on that variation in underwater light
environments could have major implications for speciation and species
persistence in groups for which color is important in communication and
reproduction. In an influential 1997 study, he and two colleagues presented
a novel data set that provided evidence of such effects. Their focus was
three groups of rock-dwelling cichlid fish from Lake Victoria. Males of
closely related species in each group typically have different coloration,
with one species mainly blue, and the other mainly red or yellow; these
colors are a good match to the peak sensitivities of cones in the eyes of the
fish. Distinct color patterns are also present within some species, especially
for males, once again usually blue individuals versus others with differing
amounts of red or yellow. Conveniently for Seehausen’s study, these fish
inhabit rocky bottoms associated with islands that are frequently separated
from each other by long stretches of sand or mud that are inhospitable to the
fish. Thus, the populations and fish communities on each rocky area are
substantially independent, making them well suited to analyses comparing
the characteristics of different populations.
For fish from thirteen rocky islands in southern Lake Victoria, Seehausen
and his colleagues documented an unexpectedly strong relationship
between male color, the number of species present from these three groups
of cichlids, and the turbidity of the water. Where the water was more turbid,
or cloudy, and the light hitting the fish comprised a reduced range of
wavelengths, there were fewer distinct male color patterns present and
males more often exhibited duller hues. It seems there is little point having
intense blue color—reflecting light from the short wavelength end of the
spectrum, the blue portion—if there is no such light in the environment. The
same would go for the long wavelength red light at the opposite end of thespectrum. Further, there were fewer species of each group at the islands
with a narrower range of light (figure 4.1).
Seehausen and his colleagues suggest that the reduction in the number of
species at narrowly illuminated sites results from a breakdown in mating
isolation. In a light environment that reduces the ability of females to
perceive color differences between species, it becomes harder to identify
their own males—a difficulty that increases further as male color patterns
evolve to be less distinct. Mismatings result, and because intrinsic
incompatibilities are largely absent in this young radiation, two well￾differentiated species can quickly become a single, somewhat variable one,
or one species can be essentially absorbed into another. Seehausen’s group
has obtained additional support for this interpretation in laboratory
experiments in which the light spectrum is manipulated.
Figure 4.1
Relationship between the width of the underwater light spectrum at Lake Victoria rocky islands and
the number of species present. Source: Reprinted with minor modifications with permission from
AAAS, from Seehausen et al., “Cichlid Fish Diversity Threatened by Eutrophication That Curbs
Sexual Selection,” Science (1997).
This is a significant conservation issue because human activity causes
much of the turbidity that affects what fish can see. Historical data indicate
that the cutting down of forests and changes in farming practices have been
causing Victoria’s water to become murkier since at least the 1920s. Whenwe think of extinctions caused by human activity, we usually think of
overexploitation, like what happened to the passenger pigeon, or
catastrophic consumption by introduced predators, such as the effect of
feral cats and foxes on Australian marsupials. Habitat destruction also
comes quickly to mind, as for the enormous numbers of tropical forest
species now extinct, or nearly so, following the conversion of forests to
palm plantations and pastures. But with turbidity, human-initiated
environmental changes often lead different species to merge rather than one
or both disappearing in the familiar way—yet biodiversity is just as surely
lost as through better known processes. These effects are not confined to
fish or even vision. Whether through increased underwater turbidity,
elevated noise in cities, or explosions in the deep sea from weapons tests,
disruptions of animals’ sensory environments by human activities are
increasingly acknowledged to be a significant conservation problem.
Competing for Mates: Sexual Selection
The findings from Lake Victoria highlight the importance of competition
for mates in the evolution and persistence of species, and emphasize how
the environment can mediate such competition. Selection of this sort,
known as sexual selection, is the solution that Darwin identified to a
difficult challenge to his theory of evolution by natural selection: the
puzzling existence of conspicuous traits—like the absurdly large tails of
peacocks or vibrant colors of some fish—that seem unlikely to help animals
survive better or be better parents. Frequently the opposite appears more
likely: a brilliantly colored tail longer than one’s body should attract the
attention of predators and make it harder to escape from them—and such
costs have now been documented in studies with a wide range of animals.
In addition, extravagant, expensive traits may disadvantage an animal trying
to catch prey or provide for its offspring. All else being equal, conspicuous
and costly traits would seem destined for quick elimination by natural
selection, which made their ubiquity in nature a long-standing puzzle.
Darwin hypothesized that although potentially costly in terms of survival,
ornaments could be advantageous in the pursuit of matings. So even if a
long tail makes predation more likely, if females reject males lacking thesecumbersome appendages, the males contributing their genes to the next
generation will be the ones with long tails—and their sons will also have
such tails. Thus, sexual selection, in which males with conspicuous,
exaggerated traits get more matings, could compensate for natural selection
against such ornaments and lead to their evolution.
Comparative analyses suggest that sexual selection has contributed,
alongside divergent natural selection, to adaptive radiations of cichlids.
Catherine Wagner and colleagues’ analyses, reviewed in chapter 2, also
reveal that color differences between the sexes are positively associated
with diversification. These differences function as a proxy for the strength
of sexual selection in some comparative studies and are thought to indicate
strong sexual selection on males. Patterns suggestive of sexual selection’s
influence are weaker in Matt McGee and colleagues’ larger survey.
There is also a good deal of evidence from African Great Lakes’ cichlids
that not only does the overall hue of a male’s coloration—that is, whether it
is red or blue—influence his success at obtaining matings but the intensity
of his color is important too, at least in suitable lighting. Mike Pauers, then
at the Milwaukee campus of the University of Wisconsin, conducted one of
the first studies documenting such effects. I helped Mike with some of this
work and got to know him along the way. He studied the Lake Malawi
species Labeotropheus fuelleborni (since renamed Labeotropheus
chlorosiglos), which has a complex color pattern including an orange belly
and sky-blue back. Mike showed that females prefer males whose orange
and blue patches are intensely colored rather than washed out. His results
also suggest that females prefer males with greater dissimilarity between
their various color patches—as if the more striking contrast between a vivid
orange and intense blue, compared to the contrast between a dull orange￾brown and faded blue, was attractive in and of itself. It is reminiscent of
how people sometimes choose articles of clothing, selecting a skirt or tie to
contrast strongly with the blouse or jacket next to it, for a more eye￾catching overall effect.
Pauers’s fascination with sensory biology and the aesthetics of animal
social preferences likely has roots in his second career, based in nightclubs
and recording studios rather than laboratories and classrooms. Mike is an
accomplished saxophone player, recording and performing with a jazz
ensemble as well as joining in with touring acts in need of a skilledsaxophonist. This is not as unusual as it might seem, as I have often seen
artistic and scientific creativity side by side in colleagues, and their
families. There seems to be great overlap in the wellsprings of creativity,
regardless of the form in which it is expressed.
I have so far focused on sexual selection on males, and that is the norm in
evolutionary studies because males more often display extravagant
ornaments and perform strangely complex, conspicuous displays. The most
widely accepted hypothesis to explain this pattern is based on investment:
simply put, sperm are small and cheap whereas eggs are big and expensive.
Consequently, in the marketplace of mating, there usually should be an
excess of sperm available and males ready to mate, while eggs will take
longer and more resources to generate. Other factors also influence the
costs and benefits of mating for each sex along with the direction of sexual
selection, but investment is central.
Since sexual selection concerns mating success and patterns, it makes
good sense that it could play a role in speciation. It was not until late in the
twentieth century that this possibility started to attract sustained attention
from researchers, but the scientific community had been aware of the issue
for considerably longer. One of the most important ideas about how sexual
selection could accelerate the evolution of reproductive barriers came from
the famous statistician and mathematical biologist R. A. Fisher. In the first
decades of the twentieth century, Fisher hypothesized a mechanism by
which the rate of evolution by sexual selection could be rapid indeed and
proceed to almost shocking extremes.
Fisher, however, was more than a talented theoretician. He was also a
eugenicist, and a case study in how science in the twenty-first century is
struggling with the challenge of giving appropriate credit for scientific
contributions while rejecting destructive or unethical ideas and behaviors.
Eugenic thinking has led to forced sterilization and worse, and because of
Fisher’s support for eugenics, his name is being removed from awards,
buildings, and so on. It is a difficult legacy, but one which is crucial to
acknowledge.
The Runaway Hypothesis of Sexual SelectionFisher pointed out that the strength or even presence of a female preference
for, say, males with long tails will generally vary among individuals, and
such variation will usually have a genetic basis. Some females might carry
an allele that causes them to mate only with long-tailed males, while others
might have alleles and preferences for short-tailed males or be ambivalent
about tail length. Tail length, or whatever conspicuous ornament is the
target of the preference, should be genetically variable as well. With both
traits genetically variable, it follows that when a long-tail-preferring female
produces offspring, they will possess alleles for both the preference,
inherited from their choosy mother, and long tails, inherited from the long￾tailed male their mother chose to mate with, their father. Daughters of this
union will choose long-tailed partners, as their mother did, and sons will
express their dad’s long tail (though each sex will carry alleles for both
traits). As time goes on, a population-wide pattern should emerge for
individuals with alleles for long tails in males to also carry alleles causing a
preference for such tails.
Where this gets really interesting is if long-tailed males are favored in the
population overall, which could cause the pace of change to accelerate. This
might occur if the preference for long tails is a little more common than that
for short tails, or maybe long-tailed males are carrying other beneficial
alleles, sometimes known as “good genes.” In any case, if the long tail
allele is favored, it will get a little more common each generation—and
since males with long tails usually carry an allele for the long tail￾preference, the frequency of the preference will get pulled upward. With the
preference getting more common, the benefit of having a long tail keeps
increasing too! Thus, long-tail success begets a stronger preference begets
still more long tails, and so on. This self-reinforcing process is sometimes
described as runaway sexual selection. It can result in not only rapid but
also somewhat arbitrary changes in both male ornaments and female
preferences.
The female preferences and male traits that evolve to extremes through
the runaway process may not be the same in different populations. Chance
typically plays some role in evolution, whether through which mutation
happens to appear first or other random processes that become especially
significant when populations are small—and the runaway process has
immense potential to amplify such random differences. The important
insight here is that if the potential for sexual selection is high, even brieflyseparated populations can quickly evolve different preferences and
ornaments and come to reject each other as mating partners. Some
modeling suggests that such processes can even propel a single population
to divide into two daughter species without any physical barriers.
With the development of some of the first thorough mathematical models
of runaway sexual selection in the 1980s, enthusiasm was so great that
some suggested the runaway process should be the default explanation (the
null hypothesis is the five-dollar term scientists usually use) for extravagant
male courtship traits and female preferences for them. Speciation by
runaway sexual selection was also championed as a possible explanation for
the mind-boggling rates of speciation that were starting to be confirmed
through molecular studies of some ancient lake radiations. Genetic patterns
consistent with the runaway process, though possibly not unique to it, have
indeed been observed in natural populations including freshwater fish and
in laboratory evolution studies. But further models have called into question
whether this process will play as big a role in divergence as was supposed,
and almost forty years after runaway models first began to appear, there are
no examples of speciation in nature that we can point to as clearly the result
of such sexual selection. Ruling out competing explanations for the
evolution of female preferences is always difficult, so it is important to
acknowledge that the absence of evidence in this case may not be definitive
evidence of absence. In addition, runaway-like processes may complement
and augment ecological divergence, thereby contributing to speciation
without being the sole driver; indeed, sexual selection is generally thought
to be most likely to contribute to speciation when acting in concert with
natural selection. A different approach to the evolution of mating
preferences and male display traits has, however, lately supplanted runaway
as a research focus, especially in the context of speciation.
Sensory Drive
As we have seen, Seehausen and his colleagues provided persuasive
evidence, starting in the late 1990s, that water turbidity can influence
cichlid mating patterns and the expression of mating preferences. When
water clarity deteriorates enough, speciation can even reverse itself, andtwo well-defined species can collapse into a swarm of ill-defined hybrids.
But there is more going on. In the 1980s and 1990s, shortly after the study
of sexual selection began its resurgence, the role of sensory systems in
sexual selection started to receive more attention. One of the leaders in this
body of work was (and remains) John Endler, a scientist who hails
originally from Canada and has worked extensively on guppies and bower
birds, among other groups. I first met John while a graduate student, and
was impressed (as I still am) with the breadth of his knowledge and
interests as well as how he was able to link the details of natural history and
physiology with mathematical models of genetic processes, generating
unexpected insights along the way. When John was at the University of
California at Santa Barbara, I once spent a happy Saturday afternoon with
him while visiting to get help with an instrument calibration. We drank tea
and watched hummingbirds court from the balcony of his house, which was
set on a hillside and surrounded by trees. His enthusiasm for closely
observing the behavior of these birds was contagious, and I have no doubt
that such habits of careful observation in natural settings helped lead him to
the highly synthetic sensory drive hypothesis that emerged from work by
himself and several other scientists.
Sensory drive is, in essence, the hypothesis that environmental factors
play a central role in the evolution of both mating preferences and
ornaments. In the case of mating preferences, this will typically occur when
sensory systems are molded by natural selection to function effectively in
an organism’s particular sensory environment. The strongest selection is
expected to be for finding food and other activities directly related to
survival, with effects on mate preferences often a by-product. Ornaments
that have evolved to attract mates should be influenced by both the sensory
biases of receivers and the direct effects of the environment on which types
of ornament are most conspicuous. In the case of visual signals, these
effects can arise through the spectra of light that illuminate ornaments as
well as through the backgrounds against which courting males are seen and
extent to which ornaments contrast with those backgrounds (figure 4.2).
Working in Sulawesi’s Lake Matano, Suzanne Gray, along with several
collaborators including myself, found evidence for the importance of
contrast with the background in a comparison of different populations of a
fish, Telmatherina sarasinorum, in which five different male color patterns
are present. She first evaluated Telmatherina vision using a closely relatedspecies and characterizing the types of cones present in their eyes and their
sensitivities. She then used those data to evaluate the conspicuousness of
each type of male in each of the two environments in which they courted
and spawned, using careful measurements of the light reflected from the
bodies of the males in addition to measuring the background light spectrum.
She included ultraviolet light as well as wavelengths visible to our species,
since these fish, like many animals, can see in ultraviolet light. In one
environment, spawning took place on roots hanging in relatively open water
with a mainly bluish background. In the other, fish spawned in shallow
water where they saw each other mainly against the typically yellow-brown
rocks. Blue and yellow males had the most extreme difference in coloration
among the five color types. Suzanne found that blue males were most
conspicuous to females, and had the highest mating success, in the shallow￾water habitat where they were most abundant and also appeared most
conspicuous to the human eye. Yellow males were more conspicuous and
most successful in the root-spawning site, with its blue-green open water
background, where they were also most abundant. We don’t know yet if
color vision varies between the environments, but this possibility has been
investigated in Lake Victoria cichlids in the context of speciation.Figure 4.2
Conspicuousness can vary with color and background. Here lightness versus darkness is illustrated,
but examples discussed in this chapter mainly concern hue, such as for blue- versus yellow-colored
fish. Source: Reprinted with minor modifications with permission from Elsevier, from Gray and
McKinnon, “Linking Color Polymorphism Maintenance and Speciation,” Trends in Ecology and
Evolution (2007).
Pundamilia nyererei, in which males are usually red, and Pundamilia
pundamilia, in which males are usually blue, are two closely related species
that were introduced earlier. Work has continued on this species complex,
and provided insights into not only how environmental change can cause
species to merge but also how environmental variation can contribute to the
maintenance and formation of species through sensory drive. These two
species often overlap in where they are found, but there are subtle
differences as well, with P. pundamilia usually occurring in shallower water
than P. nyererei. In locations with intermediate turbidity, Victoria’s waters
tend to filter short wavelength, blue light quickly with depth, resulting in P.
pundamilia being found in a more broad-spectrum light environment and P.
nyererei occurring in a habitat in which light is red shifted. This is thought
to be the reason that the visual tuning of the two species also varies
consistently with depth, as has been shown repeatedly along the descending
slopes of different islands.
The opsin proteins found in the long wavelength, red-sensitive cones of
P. nyererei have a genetic difference from those of P. pundamilia that causestheir peak sensitivity to be a little further toward the red end of the
spectrum, likely enabling P. nyererei to make better use of the limited light
in their environment, much of which is red. This could help them, for
example, in finding prey. Seehausen and his colleagues hypothesize that
this difference also contributes to selection for red coloration in P. nyererei
males; not only do red males ensure they are reflecting light and making
themselves visible in their local environment but they also ensure they are
reflecting wavelengths of light readily detected by females. Of course, they
may not contrast well with the background in terms of hue, but with modest
ambient lighting there may be little option. Not all links in this
hypothesized scenario are fully confirmed yet. Still, evidence of one key
connection, linking survival to the light environment and thus natural
selection, has now been obtained.
Martine Maan of the University of Groningen in the Netherlands led a
study of how rearing in different light environments affects lab-bred P.
pundamilia–like and P. nyererei–like (they are referred to as “like” because
these fish came from Python Island and are the result of “parallel hybrid
speciation”; henceforth I will omit the “like”) as well as hybrids between
them. Measuring survival was not initially a goal of the study; in their
published paper describing the work, the authors note that “the results
reported here emerged serendipitously from counts that were conducted for
administrative purposes only.” I am sure many scientists reading this feel
envious of an important finding arising entirely as a by-product of another
study and leading to a major publication. Many of our seemingly best￾designed and most laborious experiments do not yield such consequential
outcomes.
The key result was that the juvenile P. pundamilia survived better in a
blue-shifted light environment, akin to that of the shallow waters they
typically inhabit, whereas the P. nyererei suffered fewer deaths in more red￾shifted light similar to what is present in the slightly deeper waters of Lake
Victoria, where they are usually found. The differences were surprisingly
large: almost 40 percent after a year. Hybrids of the two species were
roughly intermediate, as would be expected. Hybrid survival did not differ
between light treatments and from the “pure” forms in either light
environment, although the trend was for them to generally do a little worse
than P. pundamilia under blue light or P. nyererei under red light. There are
at least two plausible reasons for the survival differences observed, thoughadditional data would be needed to resolve which, if either, applies. First,
fish may not be as good at detecting and capturing food in an ill-suited light
environment. This could result in reduced growth, social disadvantages, and
ultimately an early death. Alternatively, inappropriate light environments
may cause stress and contribute to aggression and conflict. The essential
outcome in terms of sensory drive and speciation is that sensory divergence
that can influence mating preferences is shown to be favored by natural
selection entirely outside the context of mating, facilitating the formation
and maintenance of species. Such divergence could operate in isolation, but
seems more likely to complement other forms of ecological divergence
between environments.
Learning and Development
Biologists have often treated mating preferences and numerous other traits
as if they were strictly genetically determined—as if, say, one allele means
a female always chooses the red male while a different allele means she
always chooses the blue male. It makes sense to start with simple
assumptions like these, see how much insight they can provide, and then
layer complexity on top. In the case of mate preferences, there is a good
deal of layering that we can do. In particular, we know that experience and
the environment in which an organism develops can modify sensory
systems, color patterns, and social behavior, and such effects are now being
studied and incorporated into our understanding of how species are formed.
Several studies have built on the Lake Victoria Pundamilia system. They
were mainly conducted in Maan’s laboratory in Groningen by a former
research student of mine, Shane Wright. I sometimes tell Shane’s story to
my undergraduate students at East Carolina University, many of whom
come from struggling small towns and cities in our economically stressed
region and are the first in their families to attend university; Shane is a
model for some. He too comes from a small city, in his case in western
Virginia. He worked terrifically hard, funding his education himself, and
made excellent use of the opportunities that came his way, including a spell
in my laboratory working on stickleback fish. He went on to join the Maan
laboratory for his PhD, conducting fieldwork in Tanzania and laboratorywork in the Netherlands—all of it a long way from small-town Virginia. I
visited him in Groningen while he was there and was reminded that he is
one of the most positive people I have known.
Shane’s investigations of how a fish’s early light environment shapes its
mate preference, vision, and color patterns made use of individuals from the
rearing experiment described above in which fish were raised in different
light regimes. When Shane and his colleagues tested the mating preferences
of the surviving adults, they found that the early environment of the fish
had had a significant effect. Fish raised in the shallow-water, broad￾spectrum light regime in which P. pundamilia normally reside showed a
stronger preference for blue P. pundamilia males than did fish raised in the
red-tinged environment typical of P. nyererei; the latter individuals tended
to respond more to the red P. nyererei males. In contrast, the rearing
environment had little effect on how male color developed. P. nyererei
males consistently turned out red while P. pundamilia males were
consistently blue as breeding adults. Both, though, developed a little more
green on their bodies in the red-shifted habitat.
One interpretation of the preference results is that an early light
environment should have a similar effect to that of selection acting on
vision and cause fish to prefer males native to the environment in which
they were raised; this could contribute to speciation. But in the paper
presenting these findings, Shane and his coauthors also point out that the
opposite effect on speciation is possible, though perhaps less likely. Should
a female end up in the “wrong” light habitat early in life, developmental
effects will cause her to be more likely to choose males of that habitat rather
than those of her own population—inhibiting speciation.
In additional analyses of the genes associated with color vision, there was
no straightforward relationship between a female’s opsin expression and her
mate preference. The opsin genotypes (genotype refers to the variants of
genes present at one or more genes) of the red cones, however, for which
there was unexpectedly extensive mixing of different combinations of P.
pundamilia and P. nyererei genes, proved more important. Under wide￾spectrum light, females with exclusively P. nyererei–like red cones
preferred red males whereas females with only P. pundamilia–like red
cones preferred blue males; females with one cone gene of each type
showed no preference. Yet in red-tinged light, there were no cleardifferences in preference. The upshot of these experiments is that the light
under which fish are reared affects mating preferences in the same direction
—with deeper-water fish preferring red males and shallow-water fish
preferring blue males—as the effects of the red cones characteristic of each
depth.
During the rearing of the fish used in these studies, special care was
taken to minimize interactions between the recently hatched young cichlids
and their mothers. This is because the mother cichlid often cares for her
offspring for several weeks, carrying them in her mouth, and then guards
them even after they are free swimming—and parent-offspring interactions
are well-known to influence mating preferences. Birds have been found to
“imprint” on their parents and the songs they hear such that their choice of
mates as adults reflects their experience during early life. Machteld
Verzijden, then at Leiden University in the Netherlands, wondered if such
effects might also be present in these cichlid fish and if they could play a
role in the explosive speciation rates in the African Great Lakes.
To test this possibility, she switched fertilized eggs between mothers.
Two to five days after spawning, she gently induced new Pundamilia
mothers to spit out their recently fertilized eggs. She then moved the eggs
between mothers—sometimes mothers of the same species, as a control,
and sometimes those of different species. Mothers were left with the eggs
and fry for four weeks, and then the fry were raised to maturity. The mature
females were tested with a red male P. nyererei and blue male P. pundamilia
using an experimental design that took advantage of the male-female size
difference. Males were kept apart using grid dividers that the smaller
females could cross but the males could not, ensuring females had a full
opportunity to choose and males could not directly interfere with one
another.
The results showed an unexpectedly strong effect of which type of
mother had reared the females. Those reared by mothers of their own
species preferred males of their own species. But females reared by females
of the other species preferred those males! Thus, a P. nyererei female who
had been mouth brooded and guarded by a female of her own species, but
not her mother, preferred a red male of her own species over a blue male of
P. pundamilia. But a P. nyererei female who had been mouth brooded and
guarded by a P. pundamilia female rejected the courtship of males of herown species and responded positively to the courtship of P. pundamilia
males. The key issue was the species of the female who had cared for her,
not who her genetic parents were. The fish could interact fully, so it is
possible that the preference was based on chemical cues, but other studies
suggest these are not important in Pundamilia. Visual cues are a possibility
because females, although generally similar between species, weakly
express some aspects of the color patterns that distinguish males. In any
case, what is unequivocal is that a female’s choice of mate is influenced by
the mother who rears her, and in a way that could accelerate speciation as
populations diverge. It has long been thought that sexual selection can
complement or even reinforce divergent natural selection’s role in the
speciation process if mating with members of one’s own species is favored
to avoid producing hybrids with poor prospects. These experiments suggest
that imprinting may lead to an analogous outcome.
Conflict
We have seen how female preferences and male traits can coevolve to yield
good “fits” within populations, and how early developmental effects and
imprinting can complement such coevolution. Yet most of us have had our
share of disputes with our family members (whether by birth or marriage)
and friends. We know from experience that social interactions often involve
conflict as well as cooperation, including the interactions involved in
mating and reproduction. It is becoming clear that conflict is a major part of
animal courtship as well, with potential consequences for speciation and
diversification.
An example of sexual conflict is seen in Gray’s work, on which I was a
collaborator, on the fish Telmatherina sarasinorum in Lake Matano,
Sulawesi. This species feeds mainly on the eggs of other Telmatherina as
they are spawning, especially Telmatherina antoniae, but this feeding habit
can lead to conflict in reproduction. When a female goes to spawn with a
male, frequently other males rush in to try to fertilize the eggs too. The first
conflict arises if the female is not interested in having the other males
fertilize her eggs—but it gets worse.Males sometimes turn around immediately after spawning and try to eat
the eggs of the female they just mated with (figure 4.3). This rarely happens
if there is only one male involved in the spawning. But as more males are
involved, the probability of such cannibalism goes up rapidly.
Figure 4.3
Spawning of Telmatherina sarasinorum sailfin silversides (a) followed by (b) males attempting to
cannibalize eggs. F = female; M = paired male; S = sneaker male; and C = nonmating cannibal male.
Source: Reprinted with minor modifications with permission from Springer Nature, from Gray and
McKinnon, “A Comparative Description of Mating Behaviour in the Endemic Telmatherinid Fishes
of Sulawesi’s Malili Lakes,” Environmental Biology of Fishes (2006).When two or more additional males join in the spawning, the original
male tries to cannibalize the eggs over 80 percent of the time. Before
collecting any data, we hypothesized that this would happen because the
likelihood that the male is the father should go down as more males are
involved. There are just more sperm in the water around the eggs, and
although Suzanne did not collect data on paternity for her study, it is well￾known from other animal species that paternity is easily diluted as more
sperm compete for fertilizations. In addition, if the other males are going to
eat the eggs anyway, it probably pays for a male to try to get his share; if he
can’t become a father, at least he won’t go hungry. Suzanne also collected
data supporting the latter interpretation. Even with no sneakers, males were
more likely to try to eat the eggs of the female with whom they just
spawned when other males rushed in to feast. It was satisfying, if a little
macabre, to see our predictions borne out. The paper was titled “Cuckoldry
Incites Cannibalism.”
A more subtle form of conflict can occur within individual genes when
different forms of a gene, different alleles, are favored in different sexes.
We already explored an example of such conflict, or sexual antagonism as it
is formally known, when discussing the rapidly evolving sex determination
systems of cichlids. It is becoming clear that the coexistence of different
sex-determining systems even within cichlid species and populations is a
quite ordinary state of affairs, and cichlid sex determination can rapidly
evolve along different pathways in different populations. For instance,
different genes can determine sex, or a gene for maleness can be dominant
in one population (and femaleness recessive) and a gene for femaleness can
be dominant in a different population (and maleness recessive). As I write,
at least twenty-two different sex determination systems have been identified
in East African cichlid fishes, spread across eighteen of their twenty-three
chromosomes. Potentially, such differences can cause incompatibilities
between males and females of different populations and result in offspring
of reduced fitness, thereby contributing to the evolution of reproductive
isolation between the populations and ultimately speciation.
When crosses between young species have been conducted, the predicted
incompatibilities have been observed. Sina Rometsch, Julián Torres￾Dowdall, and Axel Meyer of the University of Konstanz compiled all
available data on such crosses for cichlids. They confirmed that sex ratio
distortions (unexpectedly high proportions of males, or of females) werecommon between even closely related forms and their frequency increased
rapidly with the evolutionary distance between species—much more
quickly than other incompatibilities, such as the reduced survival of hybrid
offspring. Additional data and analyses will be needed to assess whether the
surprising diversity of cichlid sex determination systems and the ensuing
problems with some hybrids have helped cause the elevated speciation rates
often seen in these fish—or alternatively, are themselves a by-product of
explosive adaptive radiation.
* * *
Some traits are difficult to explain solely in terms of their survival
advantage. For such traits, an advantage in mating is frequently the
explanation and thus the process of sexual selection. Like natural selection,
sexual selection may play an important role in speciation, and the direction
and strength of sexual selection will also be influenced by an organism’s
ecology. Comparative evidence suggests that sexual selection has
contributed to ancient lake adaptive radiations. Sexual selection necessarily
involves a social component in which both learning and conflict may be
important, with consequences for speciation. How natural and sexual
selection interact to generate biodiversity is one of the most exciting areas
of research in ancient lakes.5
Cricket, Cabers, and the Sinister Advantage
Wallace did not anticipate the existence of this ancient lake system. If he had chosen a
slightly different route over Sulawesi, maybe not the Galapagos finches, but the sailfin
silversides of the Malili Lakes would have become the most popular reference system
for speciation research.
—Fabian Herder and colleagues, 2006
Why do cricket and baseball matches usually feature so many left-handed
batters, especially at the top levels and on the best teams? And what might
the answer to that question reveal about the causes of biodiversity? I will
start with a little background, and then come back to the intriguing issue of
lefties in sports and the broader processes they illustrate.
Evolution requires genetic variation, which originates in mutations.
Media reports often treat evolution and mutation as the same thing, but they
are not. Mutations are, in essence, changes to an organism’s DNA sequence.
They matter for evolution if they occur in cell lines that can be passed to the
next generation, usually via sperm, pollen, eggs, or another sort of
reproductive cell. But most mutations are dead ends and lost shortly after
they appear, even if they are in sperm or eggs. This is because random
changes are usually disruptive, throwing a wrench into the finely tuned
machinery of a genome with billions of years of evolution and selection
behind it. These disruptive, harmful mutations are removed by natural
selection that is “purifying.” Purifying selection tends to reduce genetic
variation or at least prevent it from increasing.
Yet some mutations are not purged by purifying selection. Some
mutations stick around alongside other alleles, coexisting in the same
population for the long term. The presence of such “standing genetic
variation” in large numbers of genes provides critical raw material for
evolution. It can speed up adaptation, speciation, and adaptive radiation a
great deal—with a bigger tool kit along with a wider range of parts and
pieces, innovation is easier and faster. For these reasons, any process thatincreases genetic variation in nature, or at least helps it persist, is important
to understand for those investigating the causes of biodiversity.
A Sinister Sporting Advantage, but Not in Every
Sport
This brings us back to the issue of left- and right-handers in human
populations. Sinister, by the way, is related to the Latin word for being left￾handed; historically, being left-handed had negative associations, at least in
some cultures. But to a biologist, the presence of both sorts of handedness is
important and intriguing because it is such a conspicuous example of
different forms of a trait coexisting, seemingly indefinitely.
Although left- and right-handers are present in most every human
population, their frequencies are not always the same. One of the best￾studied exceptions to typical frequencies is the elevated proportion of lefties
in some sports (figure 5.1). Lefties are more common in cricket and
baseball, as already noted, but there are also more left-handed fencers than
there are left-handers in the general population. And the same goes for
badminton, table tennis, rugby, soccer, volleyball, and ice hockey—as well
as martial arts. Lefties are frequently more common than expected.
A hint at an explanation can be found by comparing these sports, all of
which have interactive components somewhat like fighting, with those in
which the contests are less direct. Less directly competitive sports that have
been studied quantitatively include swimming, gymnastics, skiing, rowing,
archery, ice dancing, and caber tossing—yes, there apparently are data on
caber tossing. In these less directly interactive sports, the proportion of left￾handers is about the same as in the general population at roughly 10 to 13
percent.
A powerful explanation for the difference between more and less directly
interactive sports involves the costs and benefits of being rare. When a sport
involves direct contests between individuals, a combatant/competitor can
gain an advantage by having a strategy that is unfamiliar to opponents. For
example, left-handed boxers, who are generally less common, will be
familiar with right-handed opponents, as right-handers are frequentlyencountered. But right-handers will have less experience of southpaws—
giving the rare left-handers an advantage. This is one illustration of a
general principle known as frequency dependence, which is when the
success of a tactic or allele depends on its frequency, on how common it is.
It is less likely to be an issue in a race between, say, swimmers, who never
interact directly and simply must be fast, or for caber tossers, who need to
be excellent at throwing logs end over end, but do so independently of other
caber tossers.
Figure 5.1
Top: In both caber tossing and swimming, there is no direct interaction between competitors and
lefties have no advantage. Bottom: In fencing and cricket, left-handers are more common than in the
general population. Sources: Reprinted with minor modifications, caber toss, public domain;
swimming, E. J. Herson, Department of Defense news photos, under a Creative Commons CC BY
2.0 license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0); fencing, Marie-Lan Nguyen, under a CC
BY 3.0 license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0); and cricket, Duncan Rawlinson, under
a CC BY 2.0 license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0).
Frequency dependence is important because if a trait or allele
experiences greater success when it is rare, it will tend to persist in the
population. This sort of frequency dependence is known, a bit moreprecisely, as negative frequency dependence because it involves a negative
relationship between frequency and biological fitness. In such a scenario, as
soon as the frequency of a trait declines for whatever reason, the success of
the trait, its biological fitness, shifts in the opposite direction and increases.
Individuals possessing the trait make a larger contribution to the next
generation, leaving more offspring, and it starts to become more common
again. But if its frequency goes up too much, its advantage disappears and
other traits or alleles are favored. Thus, different forms of a trait are
maintained in the population, doing especially well whenever they become
uncommon, and variation thus persists or even increases. This explanation
leaves out whether the allele is dominant or recessive, which can also affect
the details, though it is a secondary issue.
Variation, especially standing genetic variation, is essential to evolution
yet cannot be assumed. Other processes are constantly eroding variation—
and not just purifying natural selection, the mechanism discussed earlier.
Chance processes will trim away variation too. If populations are not large
or fluctuate in size, there will be a continual process of random sampling
with every round of survival and reproduction. Even as some individuals
survive, mate, and contribute to the next generation, others will not, simply
by chance. These chance effects, like lotteries, coin flips, or the dealing of
cards, will cause alleles to drift randomly up and down in frequency.
Sometimes, particularly in small populations, they will drift to the point that
an allele is lost completely. It is the same principle that is in play when you
pick cards randomly from a deck. Pick twenty cards and at least one will
usually be a club. Pick two cards and you can easily find no clubs in your
hand, entirely by chance. Hence the loss of alleles becomes inevitable if
populations are small or enough time passes. All else being equal, then,
genetic variation should be continually trimmed from most natural
populations, unless some other process, like frequency dependence, pushes
back.
In the case of human handedness, the process causing both lefties and
right-handers to persist is probably negative frequency-dependent success
in fighting. Sports act as a proxy for fighting, at least those sports with
direct interactions between competitors. Conveniently for the researcher,
there are immense archives of readily available sports data and statistics.
These make it possible to confirm another expected pattern: that the
frequency-dependent advantage of being left-handed should disappear oncelefties are as common as right-handers and comprise 50 percent of the
population. As expected, left-handed players do reach 50 percent in some
interactive sports, but almost never surpass that level owing to their
advantage fading away as they become ordinary and familiar.
Differences in the frequencies of left- and right-handers between males
and females also provide support for the frequency-dependent combat
hypothesis. Males in most cultures are more likely to be involved in
fighting and combat, which can influence survival, mating success, and the
ability to provide for offspring. More left-handed males than females are
therefore expected, and indeed in large data sets there are usually a couple
percent more lefties among males than among females.
Frequency dependence is not the only process that can maintain a balance
among alleles in a population and preserve variation. Another important
form of balancing selection, the formal term for selection that maintains
different alleles by balancing their success, occurs when having different
alleles for the two copies most organisms possess of each gene (being
heterozygous) results in greater biological fitness than having two copies of
the same allele (being homozygous). When having two different alleles is
advantageous, neither allele is likely to disappear from a population and
variation will be promoted. The most famous case study comes from
humans: the allele that causes sickle cell anemia, if an individual possesses
it exclusively (thus is homozygous), confers resistance to malaria when it is
heterozygous and paired with a typical allele. This provides a survival
advantage in malarial regions despite the suffering of those with the
misfortune to be homozygous for the sickle cell allele. Genetic variation
can also be maintained in a population if the success of different traits
varies with habitat, time of year, or similar variables.
Some of the best-understood examples of balancing selection involve
frequency dependence, and here ancient lake systems are making important
contributions, with some captivating natural history mixed in. One of the
classic examples has analogies with human laterality, the general term that
includes left- versus right-handedness. I say classic because biologists have
been talking about it for decades, but the story continues to take unexpected
twists.Scale Eating, Right or Left
This case of laterality arises from a habit first reported, at least in a
definitive way, in a 1954 paper with the title “A Curious Ecological ‘Niche’
among the Fishes of Lake Tanganyika.” It was written by two scientists,
Marlier and Leleup, based in Uvira on the northwest shore of Lake
Tanganyika in then Belgian Congo. I cannot see mention of Belgian Congo
without thinking of the many horrors associated with that place and era as
well as the continuing suffering in the region; it is a set of associations
completely at odds with a little paper about fish diets.
Marlier and Leleup report that in a group of Tanganyika cichlids, the
Perissodini, the adults subsist mainly on the scales of other fish, which they
tear off their living prey with fearsome teeth. Marlier and Leleup note that
the fish they held in an aquarium would not eat “earthworms, fish powder
or insects” or anything else they presented other than the scales of live fish.
Although the report from Uvira does not comment on it, this feeding habit
has since been found to be associated with laterality in both feeding
behavior and more unusually mouth shape (figure 5.2).
One of the first publications to look carefully at evolution in these
unusual fish had Karel Liem as the lead author, a fish biologist famous for
his extroverted personality as well as his many important contributions.
Karel was one of my major advisers when I was a graduate student at
Harvard, and I remain grateful to him. At that time, it was out of the
ordinary for faculty hired into junior roles to receive tenure at Harvard—
tenure was generally reserved for well-established senior scientists hired
away from other institutions—and junior people typically left after several
years, with their graduate students orphaned as a result. That happened to
me with my initial advisers, Steve Austad and Bruce Waldman. Karel kindly
took me into his lab, where I finished my thesis work. Also a gifted teacher,
Karel was beloved by many students, and his introductory course was one
of the most popular at the university. Yet he often did his best to make life
difficult for administrators. If, for example, he was unhappy with the room
he was given for a class, he would encourage students to have their parents
call the university to complain about not getting their money’s worth.
Chairs and deans rarely saw the humor in this. Looking back, I have a better
appreciation for Karel in a different way: for what a groundbreaker he was,and the challenges he must have faced as one of the first nonwhite faculty
members in biology.
Figure 5.2
Right- and left-skewed mouths of the scale-eating cichlid Perissodus microlepis, from above. Source:
Reprinted with minor modifications, from Lee et al., “Genetic and Environmental Effects on the
Morphological Asymmetry in the Scale-Eating Cichlid Fish, Perissodus microlepis,” Ecology and
Evolution (2015), under a Creative Commons CC BY 4.0 license
(https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0).
In their paper on scale eaters, Liem and his coauthor Stewart described
the various adaptations to this feeding habit in jaws and teeth, in particular,
and how the apparent extent of scale eating varies across the group. They
described a new species with notably extreme laterality and suggested that
adaptations in the head shape of members of this group arise mainly
through the differential growth of skull elements. This proved to be an
enduring insight.
The most influential paper on feeding and mouth laterality in
Tanganyika’s scale eaters appeared a little later and was written by Michio
Hori, who was then based at Wakayama Medical College (Japan)—though
like Marlier and Leleup, he conducted his research out of Uvira, which by
that point, 1993, was part of the Republic of Zaire. For most of a decade, I
presented the work described in this paper every time I taught a course inevolution to undergraduate biology students. It is quite literally a textbook
case study.
Hori reported that his study animal, Perissodus microlepis, typically
attacks by striking the prey fish on the side of the body, approaching from
the rear to be less visible. Individual fish strike from mainly one side or the
other, and their mouths are twisted correspondingly. This increases the area
of the mouth and number of teeth in contact with the prey’s body while still
allowing the scale eater to sneak up from behind. For example, a fish that
strikes from the right will tend to have a mouth that is twisted to the left
(figure 5.2); conversely, a fish that strikes from the left should have a mouth
that is twisted to the right. Prey fish of course seek to avoid having scales
and sometimes pieces of underlying flesh ripped off.
If the scale eaters always struck from one side, say, the right, this would
be simpler for the prey as they would only have to be guarding against
Perissodus attacks from the right. Therefore in a population where attacks
all came from the right, the occasional scale eater that bit from the left
should do particularly well as prey should be paying no attention to that
side. Of course as lefties became more common, the prey should shift their
attention accordingly. In sum, the situation should lead to frequency
dependence along with the persistent presence of both left- and right￾attacking Perissodus in the population, at something close to fifty-fifty
unless some other factor affects feeding success from each side.
Hori found that when he towed a prey fish behind a boat and captured
wild scale eaters after they struck it, individuals attacking from the right
always had a mouth with a left twist, whereas individuals attacking from the
left always had a mouth that twisted right. He was also able to identify
scales, from Perissodus stomachs, as having come from the left or right side
of the prey based on pore patterns on the scales. Much as with strike
observations, fish with right-twisted mouths had eaten scales from the left
side of prey fish and left-twisted scale eaters had eaten scales from the right
side of the prey. The most noteworthy part of the paper, however, was the
evidence for frequency dependence.
Hori was able to test for frequency dependence by taking advantage of
natural oscillations in the relative abundance of fish with right- or left￾twisted mouths. The frequency of the two mouth types never got too far
from fifty-fifty. But about every 2.5 years, the population shifted frommainly lefty fish, a maximum of about 65 percent, to mainly fish with right￾twisted mouths, with a similar peak of about 65 percent. By looking at scars
on the sides of prey fish, Hori was able to estimate the relative success of
the morph that was less common at any given time. He found that as
expected, whichever twist type was less abundant left more scars and
achieved more successful scale bites, with success rates flipping when the
rare morph’s frequency increased and it became the abundant type. Looking
at frequencies of each morph for breeding pairs possessing broods of
offspring, he found that the probability of breeding was consistently the
reverse of population frequency, much as for feeding success. Possibly
because they were better fed, lefties were more likely to be breeding when
individuals with right-twisted mouths were common and right twists were
more likely to have broods of offspring when lefties were common (figure
5.3).
Comparing the direction of twisting in each member of a reproducing
pair, relative to mouth twisting in the offspring they were brooding, Hori
also obtained data with which to model the genetics of laterality. He
reported that the frequencies of left versus right twists in the mouths of
offspring could be explained by a single gene, with a right twist genetically
dominant over a left twist, though his sample size was modest. This genetic
mechanism combined with a key detail of growth and development might
help to explain the oscillations in frequency too. Since juvenile Perissodus
are too small to eat scales, they feed on other prey for about two years
before switching to a scale diet. Thus, any increase in the reproductive
success of lefties, for example, does not affect the frequency of attacks by
left-twisted scale eaters until the offspring are old and large enough to make
such attacks, a couple of years later, potentially introducing a lag and
contributing to oscillations.Figure 5.3
Michio Hori’s (1993) original data showing oscillations in the frequency of individuals with left￾twisted or sinistral mouths (the remainder being right twisted) for two sites—one open circles, and
one closed. Stars, also highlighted with arrows, indicate the frequencies for breeding pairs, which are
usually of the rare form. Source: Reprinted with minor modifications with permission from AAAS
and Michio Hori, from Hori, “Frequency-Dependent Natural Selection in the Handedness of Scale￾Eating Cichlid Fish,” Science (1993).
There are few such well worked out examples of how frequency
dependence can maintain variation in nature, so many biology instructors
made use of this example in their teaching, as I had. Its appearance in
textbooks encouraged that. Consequently, on a trip to Germany for a
conference, I was interested to learn that there might be a good deal more
nuance and complexity to the system. I was in Konstanz visiting my
colleague Axel Meyer, along with a couple other evolutionary biologists,
prior to the start of a meeting in nearby Tübingen.
Professor Meyer is a personality on the scale of Karel Liem (with whom
he worked briefly) and has made seminal contributions to the study of
ancient lake biodiversity. He is famous for the ambition, breadth, and
productivity of his research program as well as his willingness to wade into
controversial areas—sometimes upsetting an apple cart along the way. Axel
is also a marvelous host, with a keen sense of humor. We stayed with Axel
and his wife, Gabi, in their home on a hillside overlooking Lake Konstanz.
Their house was full of oversize windows and striking views, and populated
with large pieces of art and mementos, often with a whimsical or playful
aspect.While in Konstanz, I met with most members of the Meyer laboratory
and learned that some were following up on Hori’s work, looking at the
development and genetics of mouth laterality in scale eaters. They had just
started publishing a series of papers with Henrik Kusche and Hyuk Je Lee
in the lead roles, and later Francesca Raffini. Their work, and that of other
laboratories, raised the possibility that scale-eater mouths did not always
twist as clearly to the left or right as had been thought, and while twisting
was heritable, the genetic details could not yet be resolved. These studies,
and continuing work by Hori and his colleagues, have also suggested
interesting developmental interactions between the laterality of mouth
twisting and the side of scale-eating attacks. Some results indicate that an
early behavioral tendency to strongly favor attacking from one side, which
could arise in various ways, could lead to a remodeling of the bones of the
jaw and contribute to the twisting of the mouth. Bone is more dynamic than
many of us realize, building up with use and disappearing with disuse, and
in many organisms, side asymmetries in shape and form result from how
each side happens to be used during development. This scenario would be
consistent with Liem’s suggestion that the growth of bones in the jaw was
key to laterality. In addition, however, there is evidence of an effect in the
opposite direction: the laterality of mouth twisting can influence behavior,
and fish may learn to attack from the more advantageous side based on how
their mouth twists. Effects in both directions are not necessarily mutually
exclusive, and some differences in findings could be due to variation in the
fish themselves, among populations. Research on the genetics and
development of mouth twisting continues.Figure 5.4
Axel Meyer and Ernst Mayr (discussed in chapter 2) in Konstanz, Germany, in 1998. Source: Axel
Meyer.
Studies to further test the possibility of negative frequency-dependent
selection on scale eater laterality yielded more straightforward results than
did the work on genetics and development. This research was led by Adrian
Indermaur, working in the laboratory of Walter Salzburger at the University
of Basel, Switzerland. I have met both scientists at ancient lake conferences
as well as during a visit to Switzerland. Adrian seems the quintessential
field biologist, bearded and unconcerned about the discomforts and dangers
of the remote sites he often works in—to a degree that impresses even the
other field-workers in his lab. Walter is also a dedicated field scientist as
well as a remarkably productive scholar, who comes across as utterly
unruffled by the dozens of projects that appear to be underway
simultaneously in his group. His students talk about how envious they are
of his ability to go directly to sleep on long bus and plane rides in Africa, so
his good-natured demeanor seems an advantage during travel as well. When
I visited his laboratory, I was much impressed by the cabinets of
Tanganyika cichlids and related samples—a remarkably comprehensive set
of males and females of almost every species in the lake, around 240
species in total.
Adrian, Walter, and two other Basel colleagues conducted a more
definitive test of frequency dependence in Perissodus than in any previous
study. They placed a series of underwater enclosures at six to nine meters
depth on the bottom of Lake Tanganyika, each enclosing sixteen cubicmeters of water and open on the underside to the lake bottom, for realism.
Each enclosure was stocked with prey fish, either 100 percent lefties, 100
percent right twists, or a fifty-fifty mixture of the two, though always the
same total number of prey and scale eaters. The use of underwater
enclosures is unusual in studies of lake fish—typically enclosures are in
shallow water and open at the top—but the depth and location in the lake
likely reduced disturbances by waves, larger creatures and passersby as well
as providing suitable fish habitat (figure 5.5).
Figure 5.5
Underwater enclosures used by Adrian Indermaur and colleagues to study scale eating, six to nine
meters beneath the surface of Lake Tanganyika. Source: Reprinted with minor modifications with
permission from John Wiley and Sons, from Indermaur et al., “Mouth Dimorphism in Scale-Eating
Cichlid Fish from Lake Tanganyika Advances Individual Fitness,” Evolution (2018).
The frequency-dependence hypothesis predicts that prey fish can most
effectively adjust to scale eaters of just one laterality, such as all lefties.
With attacks coming predictably from one side, the prey should be able to
avoid the scale eaters better than with a mixture of right- and left-biased
Perissodus. Conversely, then, the Perissodus should experience the greatest
feeding success in the mixed group, where the prey cannot predict the
direction of attacks. This was indeed the case: by the end of the three-day
experiment, prey fish housed with both lefties and right-twisted scale eaters
had lost more scales on average, and the scale eaters were more likely to
have scales in their digestive tracts. This was an important finding.For a long time, a key gap in this body of work was a test of whether
selection favors scale eaters with mouths that are strongly twisted, either to
the left or right, rather than being just a little nonsymmetrical. This sort of
selection is known as disruptive selection. It occurs when, say, a typical bell
curve for some trait is “disrupted” by intermediate individuals having
poorer survival or reproductive success, whereas individuals toward the
extremes do well. Even evolutionary biologists have not always made the
subtle distinction between frequency-dependent and disruptive selection,
which can result from similar underlying causes, but it is crucial to
investigate both.
Yuichi Takeuchi, Hori, and two colleagues made important progress on
this missing puzzle piece. They looked for patterns indicating disruptive
selection on scale eater laterality in a field study that extended across nine
research seasons, from 1990 to 2014, all at the southern end of Lake
Tanganyika. They quantified the number of scales in the stomachs of scale
eaters as well as the strength of each individual’s mouth asymmetry, and
found that among similar-size fish, feeding success was indeed correlated
with mouth asymmetry. Thus, fish with stronger mouth twisting were more
successful in acquiring larger helpings of their grisly meals. It appears
diversity is favored not only because bearers of whichever type of side bias,
left or right, is less common are able to obtain more food but also because
those with stronger bias eat the most. As a consequence, they should be
better able to contribute offspring and their genes for extreme twisting to
the next generation. Given our limited understanding of the genetic and
developmental basis of scale eating, these results may not be the final word
on disruptive selection in this system, but they are important.
Sexual Trickery
Biting scales off other fish is an implicitly sneaky way to make a living, but
explicit duplicity (if that is not too much of an oxymoron) is also well￾known in nature, once again with a frequency-dependent aspect. Theory
predicts that deceptive individuals or behaviors will usually be rare in a
population since otherwise the victims may learn to avoid tricksters, just as
the prey of scale eaters can learn to which side to attend. And over thelonger term, selection will more strongly favor the ability to detect
deception. Some peculiar forms of deception are known from ancient lakes,
with one of the most unusual involving the fish Telmatherina sarasinorum,
a species studied by Suzanne Gray in Sulawesi’s Lake Matano. We have
discussed T. sarasinorum before with regard to courtship and reproduction;
here we shift to foraging and feeding.
Over the course of three field seasons of work, Suzanne and her
collaborators (I was involved too, though Suzanne and her assistants
collected all the data) made over 130 separate observations of male T.
sarasinorum feeding on the eggs of another common telmatherinid species,
T. antoniae, at shallow beach sites. Individual T. sarasinorum males would
follow a courting pair of T. antoniae as they swam along the mud and sand,
with the pair occasionally laying eggs. Typical Telmatherina courtship is
shown in figure 5.6. Each time the T. antoniae pair performed their
spawning behavior, which involves pressing their bellies to the mud in
unison and briefly quivering, the T. sarasinorum male would rush in and
nip at the spot where the pair had just quivered, trying to eat the eggs. The
T. sarasinorum males also did their best to monopolize their T. antoniae
meal tickets. They fought often with other fish of their own species that
tried to join in on the egg feast and in some instances even defended “their”
T. antoniae pair from other male T. antoniae that were interested in
challenging for the female. As I watched the T. antoniae pairs, I could not
help but feel sympathy for them, constantly harassed by a hungry predator
of their just-fertilized eggs as they tried to get on with their brief romance.
Still, the situation sometimes became even worse for the little couples.
During four of their observations, Suzanne and her assistants saw the
male T. sarasinorum chase away the male of the T. antoniae pair. This was
surprising enough given that the pair was presumably feeding (unwittingly
and one suspects unwillingly) the T. sarasinorum its eggs, but what came
next was even more unexpected. The T. sarasinorum male took up where
the departed T. antoniae male had left off, courting the female as she
roamed over the mud bottom. When she settled to the substrate to spawn,
the T. sarasinorum male accompanied her, though he did not quiver and
presumably did not release sperm even as the female quivered and likely
deposited eggs. The female then moved on, as is normal, but the male
turned around and snapped at the mud where the female had just been in
pursuit of her eggs. This “sneaky egg eating,” as Suzanne termed it, was thefirst case we could find of a male of one species deceptively courting the
female of another and then eating her just-laid eggs. Other instances are
known of deceptive courtship in which a female of one species courts a
male of a related species and then eats him, famously in some fireflies, but
eating eggs seems to be unusual. Observations of this odd behavior have
also been made by another group, Alexander Cerwenka and collaborators,
so Suzanne’s observations were not just a freak occurrence in one or two
eccentric fish.Figure 5.6
Typical courtship in the telmatherinid fish of Sulawesi. (a) Pairs swim together, (b) the male performs
circles, (c) and the pairs lower to the mud and quiver together, spawning; males are sometimes
challenged by other males of the same or (d) different color pattern, in some cases even species, and
may (e) fight and raise fins in displays. Source: Reprinted with minor modifications with permission
from Springer Nature, from Gray and McKinnon, “A Comparative Description of Mating Behaviour
in the Endemic Telmatherinid Fishes of Sulawesi’s Malili Lakes,” Environmental Biology of Fishes
(2006).
It is nonetheless noteworthy and possibly important that this behavior
was observed so seldom. If sneaky egg eating were happening at a high
frequency, we would expect female T. antoniae to either learn to detect
deceptive T. sarasinorum males or evolve an aversion to these males in
response to the strong selection that results from many eaten eggs. Thus,
rarity is expected. A proper test for frequency-dependent selection on this
behavior, however, would require an experiment more like Indermaur’swith the scale eaters, in which frequencies were manipulated and success
was tracked. That would be a tougher order for sneaky egg eating, which is
performed by males only now and then, and not known to be associated
with some other obvious trait, in contrast to the strong association between
the direction of scale eating and mouth twisting.
These accounts of Suzanne’s work would be incomplete without
describing the context for these fascinating observations. On the one hand,
working in the Malili Lakes was quite comfortable as fieldwork goes
because INCO, the company that owned the nearby mine (where my
relatives had worked), considerably facilitated our research. INCO usually
provided us with comfortable housing and food along with a cheap rental
car. On the other hand, there was rather disturbing and frightening terrorist
activity in the region when Suzanne was working in the 2000s. As her
project was getting underway, the Al Qaeda–affiliated group Jemaah
Islamiyah set off a series of bombs in nearby Bali that killed over 200
people, many of them Western tourists, as well as staging attacks in Jakarta
and elsewhere. Muslim-Christian conflicts were taking place around the
same time in nearby Poso (a town near the eponymous lake, a few hundred
kilometers to the west of the Malili Lakes), and Maluku (aka the Moluccas),
the islands just east of Sulawesi. The Poso and Maluku attacks resulted in
the deaths of hundreds of people. At an especially tense point, physically
huge and terrifically intimidating security officers, some reportedly with
backgrounds in Britain’s Special Air Service, started to appear around
INCO and Sorowako, the town where we were based. Although there were
no terrorist attacks in Sorowako while we were there, we later learned that a
cell had been conducting training exercises in a nearby forest area.
I well recall the difficult discussions we all had about whether it was just
too dangerous for Suzanne or any of us to continue our work. For myself, I
thought sometimes of my master’s thesis research, which had taken place
along the coast of Peru when the Sendero Luminoso, a Maoist revolutionary
group, was active there, and parts of the country were in near civil war. We
had to be careful, but both the work and our research team turned out all
right. Suzanne had the further challenge, especially when she was there on
her own, of trying to run a research program in a somewhat remote locale
while working overwhelmingly with men, some more progressive than
others. But Suzanne was brave, in most every sense, and determined; I am
still impressed at how she persevered and collected an exceptional body ofdata. I wish I could say our story was unique, but field biologists have often
had to deal with political conflicts and even civil wars while doing their
work, in addition to the serious risks frequently posed by tropical disease,
jammed roads, and remote research sites. As Westerners, we were of course
fortunate to be able to fly away to safe communities at the end of our
fieldwork, in contrast with some of our Indonesian and, in my earlier
studies, Peruvian colleagues. One of the more heartbreaking pieces of news
I have received from a colleague was from Indonesia, when a friend and
collaborator lost a small child during a dengue fever outbreak.
Color, Contrast, Courtship, and Conflict
I earlier discussed another finding of Suzanne’s from her work in Lake
Matano: at different sites around the lake, the male T. sarasinorum color
pattern that contrasted most strongly with the background tended to be
favored and more abundant. If movement between sites was infrequent, and
thus the flow of genes weak, it is not hard to imagine different color
patterns becoming established at locations with contrasting backgrounds—
with some variation at each as a result of occasional migrants (and the
migrants’ descendants) moving about the lake. But thinking about color and
contrast led me to wonder if such microhabitat-specific advantages, even
occurring over modest distances and with frequent movement of individual
fish between habitats, might still lead to an advantage for rare male color
patterns and tend to promote a more variable population. To address such a
question requires a theoretical analysis. I lacked the training to do the
necessary mathematics, but I was fortunate to know a then up-and-coming
theoretician, Maria Servedio, who I thought might be able to help.
I knew Maria because I had been the graduate teaching assistant in an
animal behavior course she took as an undergraduate, which eventually led
her to a position as a summer research assistant on some of my PhD studies
with stickleback fish. We kept in touch as Maria carried on with her training
and career. She matured into a leading theorist and took a position at the
University of North Carolina, just up the road from my current location.
Maria brought in a talented PhD student, Amanda Chunco, to lead the
modeling, which confirmed my suspicion of rare male mating advantages,at least if some plausible assumptions are satisfied. In the model, females
prefer the most conspicuous male—let’s say blue or yellow in color—the
habitats (and backgrounds) that make either male type appear most
conspicuous are about equally common, and females are evenly distributed
among these habitats. With these conditions, males of whichever color
pattern is rare will tend to obtain more matings. Basically, if yellow males
get almost all the matings in the habitat where they have higher contrast and
yellow males are also uncommon, they will get more matings per individual
than the abundant blue males do in the habitat where blues do better. If the
situation changes and yellows become more common, the advantage shifts
and now rare blue males do better per capita. Greater success when rare
helps both yellow and blue males persist even if the relative number of one￾color type experiences a chance dip—as can easily happen.
There are other ways that female mating preferences can lead to the
frequency dependence of male mating success and help to maintain
variation. A quite distinct and intriguing behavioral process that occurs
within a sex may also be important, however, and has emerged mainly from
studies of ancient lake cichlids. This involves conflict and aggressive
interactions, between males or females, that depend on color pattern.
Negative frequency-dependent selection may arise through aggressive
interactions if males (usually the sex studied in this context, but females too
in some cases) direct more aggression toward individuals who possess the
same color pattern or are similar in some other way. Considering once more
the example of blue and yellow fish, the idea is that blues are more
aggressive toward blues and yellows toward yellows. This pattern could
arise in several ways, but we will simply focus on what happens if it does.
If blues become more common, then each blue male will experience more
aggression from the abundant fish that share his color pattern and direct
their belligerence toward him. In this scenario, uncommon yellow males get
little grief from the ubiquitous blues, who tend to ignore them. Yellow
males may seek disputes with other same-color males, but the uncommon
yellows seldom bump into one another, and hence are spared a good deal of
hostility and conflict. If the frequencies reverse, yellow males will be the
ones perpetually engaged in disputes while blue males will go unmolested.
Continually defending oneself from aggression is likely to be stressful,
leaving little time or resources for feeding, courting, or other activities
associated with high biological fitness. The stress can even lead to illness,as any overburdened parent, student or employee can attest to after ending
up with a cold during a period of high tension and reduced rest. Through
this mechanism, rare types of males will have increased fitness and two or
more male forms will be expected to persist.
This idea was first suggested by two scientists we have met before, Ole
Seehausen and Dolph Schluter, based on a collaboration they pursued when
Ole made an extended visit to Vancouver, Canada, where Dolph is located.
In their initial efforts to test it, they looked at patterns in cichlid territories
across a set of relatively isolated sites in Lake Victoria in which males hold
territories for courtship and mating. Cichlids defend their territories from
other males, sometimes of other species as well as males of their own.
Seehausen and Schluter examined several species simultaneously, some
closely related and differing mainly in color pattern, and others more
distantly related and differing in several types of traits. They suspected that
color might influence aggressive interactions and the distribution of
territories between closely related species (some still in the process of
speciation) in addition to within species, and that negative frequency￾dependent selection acting on color could thus play a role in speciation and
species persistence as well as maintaining variation within a species.
According to the frequency dependence hypothesis, males from closely
related species, which are most likely to interact, should typically differ in
color when present at the same site because males with different color
patterns more easily coexist. This is the very pattern Seehausen and
Schluter observed in their data. Yet it was not observed for distantly related
species that interact less intensely and frequently, again as expected.
Similarly, when looking at individual territories rather than whole
populations, they found that closely related neighboring males belonged
disproportionately often to different species with different color patterns.
This is the pattern expected if more similar males target each other for
aggression, making it more difficult to live side by side.
Other hypotheses have been suggested that could explain some of the
patterns documented by Seehausen and Schluter, so testing this idea in
multiple ways is also important, such as by looking directly at the intensity
of aggression between males with the same or different color patterns.
Several such studies have been conducted, and they have often found
evidence of the predicted pattern of stronger aggression between moresimilar individuals—but frequently with complications. For example, males
with one color pattern might show the expected bias and males with a
different pattern fail to, or an experiment may only partially test the
hypothesis by looking at biases in just one type of male. At present, it
appears that biased aggression plays a role in maintaining variation within
some ancient lake species and may contribute to the formation and
persistence of species. Many times, though, additional traits and processes
are also involved in maintaining variation.
* * *
Genetic variation is an essential raw material of evolution, including
speciation and adaptive radiation. The astonishing range of forms and traits
present in most every natural population is fascinating in its own right as
well. Ancient lake studies have provided important instances of a key
process that can maintain biological variation, negative frequency￾dependent selection, in which the long-term fitness of different forms of a
trait are balanced. Frequency dependence can arise in diverse ways,
including scale eating by cichlids with mouths twisted to the left or right,
and more frequent aggressive interactions between fish with similar color
patterns. What unites these examples is interactions between individuals
such that those possessing the less common form of a trait are more
successful.6
On the Virtues of Interspecific Relations
Wavuvi wazee husema kuna nyoka mkubwa sana katika ziwa, ana macho mekundu
yapata kama futi 50. Huyu nyoka huibuka juu baada ya miaka 50. Akiibuka tu, wavuvi
huvua sana samaki.
The old fishermen say there is a huge snake, which has red eyes and only comes up
every 50 years. When it comes up, fishermen catch a lot of fish.
—Traditional story (translated from Kiswahili) of Lake Victoria from Mbarika,
Mwanza Gulf, Tanzania
A birder trying to add gulls to their life list will often need a good deal of
patience, persistence, and tolerance of failure. The same goes for a hiker
trying to identify the oak trees they happen across while walking through a
forest in the eastern United States. The problem is that many individual
gulls and oaks can never be identified to the species level, even with a
specimen in hand and DNA sequence, let alone from a brief glance. This is
because gulls of different species frequently mate with one another, yielding
offspring that don’t belong definitively to either parental species. Oaks do
the same. Sometimes these hybrid offspring go on to mate with other
hybrids, or they may “backcross,” mating with individuals of one of the
parental species; things quickly become messy.
Beyond birders and hikers, the issue of interspecific hybridization and
gene transfer between species (technically known as introgression, different
from hybridization in that it emphasizes the transfer of genes rather than the
matings themselves) have attracted more widespread attention in recent
years as evidence has emerged that billions of us are carrying DNA that
originated with Neanderthals and Denisovans—which are generally
considered different species from ours. Moreover, some of these
introgressed genes can influence important traits such as how likely we are
to contract serious diseases, and how such diseases affect us. For example,
two different fragments of the Neanderthal genome, which many people
possess, have been shown to be correlated with how severely ill a person is
likely to become if infected with SARS-CoV-2, which causes COVID-19.On the other side of the disease coin, the exchange of genes between
different strains of influenza has resulted in some of the worst flu
pandemics.
These observations clearly pose a challenge to the biological species
concept, and the issue is not new. Nevertheless, hybridization was long
treated as anomalous by the mainstream of science and quietly neglected.
With more and more genomes becoming available, including large samples
of genomes from different individuals for some species, hybridization and
introgression have become much easier to detect and study, and their
evolutionary significance has become more apparent.
One consequence of extensive hybridization can be extinction. We
explored earlier how human-caused changes to lake water and light
transmission can cause formerly well-defined cichlid species to collapse
into a single gene pool. This can also result when people move animals into
new locations where the new arrivals encounter populations or species with
which they can interbreed, but from which they were previously separated
by distance or physical barriers. For example, nonnative tilapia
(Oreochromis sp.), escaping from aquaculture or released deliberately, with
usually good intentions, are prone to mating with native wild fish and thus
are putting native species at risk in some Tanzanian waters. The problem
can be worse if the environment is disturbed in a way that makes
interbreeding more likely or helps the hybrid offspring survive.
The effects of hybridization are not always so harmful, however.
Hybridization can at times contribute to speciation, adaptation, and even
adaptive radiation. In plants, the origin of new species through
hybridization, or hybrid speciation, is surprisingly common, but involves
genetic mechanisms that occur less frequently in animals. Nevertheless,
young animal species with clearly hybrid origins have on occasion been
documented. In chapter 2, we explored examples from ricefish and cichlids
in which hybridization was involved in the formation of new species,
including parallel hybrid speciation in Pundamilia from Lake Victoria. An
additional pair of likely cases comes from Lake Victoria, this time involving
“parental” species so distinct that they are in different genera—Pundamilia,
once more, and the related genus, Mbipia.
Irene Keller and her colleagues in Ole Seehausen’s laboratory at the
University of Bern collected genomic and other data from five members ofthese genera at a single site in Lake Victoria, Makobe Island. Their analyses
suggest that two of the species, one in each genus, are a result of recent
hybridization between a species of Pundamilia and species of Mbipia. With
such a messy situation, the existing classification scheme and genus names
are in serious trouble, although to be fair, classification is generally a
fraught enterprise in Lake Victoria, certainly when attempted above the
level of species.
Hybridization can also contribute to adaptation without any need to form
a new species. The steps and mechanisms involved may be straightforward
or more subtle. In the simplest scenario, matings between species may
enable one partner lineage to acquire a beneficial allele from the other. The
benefit of the “imported” allele may, for example, be that it can replace a
gene damaged by mutation. Or the new allele may be better suited to a
changed environment; adaptation to higher temperatures comes to mind in
our time. Introgression of this sort certainly occurs and may contribute to a
commonly observed anomaly: analyses based on mitochondrial DNA often
indicate different evolutionary relationships for a set of species than do
analyses based on the remainder of the genome, which is generally referred
to as the nuclear genome because it is found in the nucleus.
Mitochondria are key organelles in the cells of animals and plants,
performing certain valuable metabolic reactions that cannot be completed
without them. Mitochondrial DNA is separate from the rest of the cell’s
DNA because mitochondria evolved from bacteria that were engulfed by
our ancient single-celled ancestors. Over time, mitochondria came to live
permanently inside our cells in a mutually beneficial arrangement: we got a
more efficient metabolism, and they got a safe home stocked with all of
their needs. Thus, each animal, each of us, is the result of a symbiosis,
which means organisms of different species living together. The
organization, structure, and seeming unity of our bodies is a bit illusory—
the result of an ongoing collaboration between two distinct genomes. This is
one of those familiar facts of biology that can become remarkable again
with a moment or two of reflection.
Housed inside the mitochondria themselves, mitochondrial genes are
inherited almost exclusively through eggs (in animals), separately from an
organism’s other genes. Essentially clonal, mitochondrial genes do not take
part in sexual reproduction. With these differences, it is not surprising thatwhen we estimate evolutionary trees using the mitochondrial genes from a
set of species or populations, the results sometimes differ from the trees
suggested by the rest of the genome. Occasionally, though, the
inconsistencies are major. Different species or subspecies sometimes share
nearly identical versions of their mitochondrial genes despite substantial
differences across the rest of the genome or for more visible traits. These
inconsistencies can be explained by hybridization that is followed by
selection favoring the new mitochondrial type, allowing it to sweep through
the population. This may occur even if little mixing happens between the
species for the rest of the genome. Selection is not the only explanation for
such patterns, and more haphazard processes can also result in
mitochondrial sweeps. For our purposes, it is the resulting discrepancy that
is mainly of interest. These discordant patterns between mitochondria and
the rest of the genome, which have been seen in several ancient lake
radiations such as Sulawesi’s telmatherinid fishes, were one of the first
indications that hybridization may be more common during adaptive
radiations than had been suspected.
The Transgressions of Genes
The newly mixed genes of two species can sometimes produce traits quite
different from those present in either parent, and not simply in the sense of
being intermediate or even combining traits previously found only in
different species. On the surface, the parental species in this scenario may
be outwardly similar to each other. Naively, we might expect that their
hybrid offspring would be similar to both. Suppose, for example, that two
species of lemur had evolved an elongated finger to help them catch insect
larvae living in holes in trees (lemurs do such things, but the details in my
example are hypothetical). If the superficially similar parental species
mated, their hybrid offspring might be expected to have similarly long
fingers, and if the hybrids continued breeding with one another we might
expect things to stay about the same, generation after generation.
But depending on the genetics and details of how the long fingers of each
species develop, things might be more complicated and more interesting.
For instance, one species might achieve long fingers owing to a mutationfavored by selection that causes an extra bone to be added. This is plausible
since primate fingers already vary in the number of bones they possess,
with the human thumb, for example, having lost one of the bones present in
the other fingers.
In the second species with a particularly long finger, a single finger bone
might grow longer, with no change in the number of bones. When genes for
these different mechanisms end up together in hybrid offspring, the
resulting finger lengths could be more extreme than those of either parent,
depending on which alleles are dominant or recessive. For example, if both
an elongated bone and the addition of a bone to each finger are dominant
traits, hybrid offspring will have one notably long finger bone as well as an
extra bone (figure 6.1). With two mechanisms of finger elongation both
present in individual hybrid lemurs, those hybrids should have even longer
fingers than either of the parental species—which already had impressive
digits. The outcome will be different if the genetic details are different, but
as long as there are not too many genes involved and the hybrids keep
interbreeding for a few generations, we expect to see more extreme finger
lengths in some of these hybrid individuals (figure 6.1). The key point is
that the variation in the hybrids is expected to transgress the range seen in
the pure (nonhybrid) forms, leading to this phenomenon’s technical name,
transgressive segregation, or a little less formally, transgressive variation.Figure 6.1
An ancestral lemur gives rise in different places to two new species, each having evolved a long
finger to catch insect larvae in tree holes, but via different genetic changes. When they hybridize, the
hybrid has a longer finger than either parent. Source: Haleigh Mooring.
The opportunities for transgressive variation can be surprisingly
extensive. In our imaginary lemurs, there are other ways fingers could
elongate. Considering just one bone, it could end up longer by either
growing faster or for a longer period—processes that could easily involve
different genes. Or instead of the final finger bone lengthening, it could be
the middle bone that elongates or the first bone at the base of the finger.
Combining these different bones with the alternatives of faster- or longer￾duration growth, the possibilities start to add up fast. And we have not even
thought about what could happen at the levels of cells, molecules, and
biochemical pathways. In addition, transgressive variation can arise through
other processes subtly different from the example here. There are a lot of
possibilities.
Conceptual illustrations are helpful for thinking through and explaining
the possibilities, but what evidence is there that transgressive variation has
contributed to evolution? One of the first and most influential studies in thisarea, helping set the stage for a long series of ancient lake studies, involved
fruit flies. It was conducted by a giant of population genetics and one of its
more memorable personalities, R. C. “Dick” Lewontin. I knew him a little
bit because I took his class in population genetics while a PhD student. He
left a strong impression. Lewontin was famously a Marxist and interested in
student learning but disinterested in grades, so he let us know at the
course’s start that the default plan was for everyone to get a B+. A
charismatic and slightly eccentric lecturer, he almost always dressed in a
near uniform of denim shirt and khaki pants, and addressed the class with
some of the quirky mannerisms you might include if you were designing an
old-school professor from scratch. He was also generous with students, at
one point initiating a weekly reading group, almost a course, in an area he
was not enthusiastic about because students were interested.
Lewontin’s seminal publication on the role of hybridization in adaptation
continues to be cited annually in dozens of scientific papers, including
articles on ancient lake radiations, more than fifty years after it first
appeared. Together with collaborator L. C. “Charles” Birch, he studied a
late nineteenth- and twentieth-century expansion in the geographic range
and temperature tolerance of an Australian fruit fly, Bactrocera tryoni (then
called Dacus tryoni), an important agricultural pest. Based on observations
of apparent hybrids in nature, they inferred that interbreeding with a sister
species had occurred, possibly as a result of human changes to their
habitats. They hypothesized that the introgression of genes into B. tryoni
had facilitated adaptation to a new temperature range not formerly tolerated
by either species.
To test important assumptions of this hypothesis, they collected the two
species from their natural distribution and started hybrid and pure B. tryoni
populations in the laboratory at a range of temperatures. The flies are small
and short-lived enough that one can use them to study the process of
evolution experimentally, allowing different populations to evolve over
several generations. Initially the hybrids did not survive and reproduce as
well as the pure populations, but as time passed the hybrids improved, and
also came to resemble the B. tryoni in appearance. At moderate, relatively
optimal temperatures, the later generations of hybrids roughly matched the
performance of the pure B. tryoni. But at the most extreme temperature,
31.5°C, the hybrids were superior. This is a remarkable finding. That
temperature is clearly beyond the optimal range for the sister species aswell as B. tryoni. Somehow the combination of genes from the two species
substantially improved survival and reproduction beyond the usual
tolerance of either “parental” species. In this system, therefore, there was
transgressive variation for biological fitness at high temperatures.
Such multigenerational experiments have not been performed yet with
ancient lake species, but a notably original study of the performance of
hybrids in novel ecological situations was conducted by Oliver Selz.
Working with Seehausen in Kastanienbaum, he conducted this “proof-of￾concept” experiment using African cichlids. I met Oliver before he
performed these experiments, when he visited my laboratory early in his
graduate studies to discuss a possible internship. Even just starting his PhD,
he was an impressive scholar as well as delightful guest (even bringing
fondue ingredients with him from his native Switzerland).
The transgressive segregation study began with Selz and Seehausen
setting up matings between a Lake Victoria Pundamilia cichlid and two
other species, each with a different ecology. The Pundamilia sp. had a
narrow, specialized diet of zooplankton, the tiny crustaceans and other
animals that circulate in the open water of the lake. One of the species with
which the Pundamilia were mated was a specialist feeder that scrapes algae
from rocks; it is also native to Lake Victoria. The third species used in the
crosses was a generalist, with broad, flexible feeding habits and tolerances,
and native to Lake Malawi. The familiar part of the study involved
measuring the feeding success of each species and their hybrid offspring on
the prey types typical of those eaten by the two specialist species. The
ecological speciation hypothesis predicts that the specialists should be most
successful on the diets to which each has been adapting for many
generations, compared to the other pure species or the hybrids. The more
noteworthy part of the study involved presenting the pure parentals and
hybrids with food items distinct from those of the parental specialist
species. The novel foods were a freshwater shrimp and gammarid
crustacean (the latter distantly related to the gammarids that radiated so
spectacularly in Baikal), which are similar to prey eaten by some other
species of fish, including other cichlids. If hybridization and transgressive
variation give rise to novel forms with the ability to colonize new
ecological niches, the hybrids should be superior on at least some of the
novel prey. It was a potentially risky test of a bold hypothesis.In their initial analyses, Selz and Seehausen confirmed the long-standing
prediction that pures, when feeding on their usual prey items, should
generally outperform hybrids and specialists adapted to other prey. For
example, algae scrapers fed more successfully on algae (actually a
laboratory approximation) than did the zooplankton feeders or the hybrids.
Thus, the baseline results were largely as expected. But on novel prey,
things were more interesting. On the unfamiliar prey items, the hybrids
always did at least as well as the parental pures, and in some cases they did
better. Specifically, the hybrid offspring of the algae scrapers and
zooplankton feeders were the best at catching a novel and ecologically
distinct prey species—freshwater shrimp. Similarly, in a different crossing
in which the zooplankton eater, the generalist, and their hybrid offspring
were each given an alga-like prey item, quite unlike either parental’s usual
foods, the hybrids again had the greatest success. The authors interpret their
results cautiously and present a number of caveats. Yet their evidence that
hybrids can surpass their parents in some novel ecological contexts argues
that hybridization, possibly involving transgressive variation, has at least
the potential to play an important role in adaptive radiation.
Speciation typically involves barriers to mating too. In a related study,
Selz and several collaborators asked if hybridization might initiate such
mating isolation. They asked if hybrids between cichlid species might
sometimes mate more often with each other, preferring the same sort of
hybrids, than with either of the parental species. As in the feeding study,
they again began by crossing a set of Lakes Victoria and Malawi cichlid
species with each other, generating sets of hybrid offspring from three
pairings of parental species. These were raised apart from their mothers to
avoid imprinting effects. When females of each of the parental species were
allowed to choose among males of their own species, male hybrids, or
males of a different species, they always showed a strong preference for
males of their own species, mating with them almost exclusively. This was
not a surprise, but much more difficult to predict was what the hybrid
females would do. One commonality was that all three sets of hybrid
females rejected the males of at least one parental species, and all mated
fairly readily with hybrid males. The most startling and intriguing finding,
though, was that hybrid females of a pair of parental species from Lake
Malawi strongly preferred hybrid males, rejecting both types of “pure”
male. Hence partial premating isolation arose in a single generationbetween hybrids and their parental species, and nearly complete premating
isolation in some instances. When Selz and colleagues analyzed color
variation in the Malawi pair, their results suggested that hybrids were
transgressive for color. And since the transgressive color patterns were
preferred by hybrid females but rejected by pures, it follows that the
preference could also be considered transgressive.
Even with strong premating isolation between the first generation of
hybrids and parental species, it is unlikely that a new species would be
instantly established by the hybrids. The problem is that first-generation
hybrids do not usually “breed true,” to use the language of animal breeders,
showing the same traits one generation after another. Rather, when the
hybrids interbreed, their offspring will generally exhibit more of the
variation present in the pures, with different combinations in each
individual second-generation hybrid. Still, if both sexual and natural
selection were acting to favor hybrid traits, a new species could emerge
over time.
In a quite different but notably detailed example from a small radiation,
the Cyprinodon pupfish of the Bahamian island of San Salvador,
hybridization and introgression are hypothesized to have facilitated both
ecological innovation and speciation. Although not located in an ancient
lake, these pupfish have strong links to ancient lake systems. They are
members of the same family that radiated in Lake Titicaca and include a
scale eater, reminiscent of Lake Tanganyika, but in this case with apparently
no right or left lateral twisting.
Emilie Richards, Chris Martin, and colleagues, working mainly at the
University of North Carolina and University of California, have found that
different populations and species of Cyprinodon, distributed across the
Caribbean and nearby landmasses, almost invariably have a simple diet of
algae and detritus (i.e., bottom muck). However, in San Salvador’s lakes,
which are less than about 10,000 years old, a species of scale-eating
specialist (or even two) has evolved as well as a snail-eating specialist.
Overall, the San Salvador pupfish miniradiation is not especially genetically
variable, but is noteworthy for possessing unusually large amounts of
adaptive genetic material from distant Caribbean islands—though from
generalist species—and these genes are disproportionately associated with
the newly evolved specialist feeding habits. Thus, “ancient” alleles presentin generalists from different localities have been reassembled through
hybridization, introgression, and natural selection into new adaptive
combinations, reminiscent of the fruit flies studied by Lewontin and Birch,
though more extreme in their innovations.
Hybridization and Introgression Could Have
Accelerated Adaptive Radiation. . . . Did They?
Several lines of evidence suggest that ecological opportunity, combined
with the capacity to evolve reproductive isolation quickly through sexual
selection, are important for explaining the most extreme ancient lake
radiations such as the cichlids of the African Great Lakes. But are they
really enough to account for the almost-surreal pace of diversification seen
in the most extreme cases? Some models as well as intuition suggest there
must be more going on. We have seen evidence from relatively small-scale
studies that hybridization is a plausible candidate through the additional
variation it can provide. The challenge, a daunting one, has been to identify
unique, testable predictions about what patterns should be seen if
hybridization and introgression have indeed played important roles in
accelerating major adaptive radiations in ancient lakes. The largest genomic
data sets currently available, with the sort of data essential for addressing
such questions, are from the cichlids of the African Great Lakes.
A first step is to ask if there is evidence for hybridization at the start of a
radiation to seed it, and in addition, ask if hybridization was ongoing as
diversification proceeded. Lake Victoria, the youngest of these lakes, has
almost certainly experienced the highest sustained pace of speciation and
thus is the greatest challenge to explain. As more and better genome
sequences accumulate, a process that is itself accelerating, research findings
will surely grow more definitive, but important results have already
appeared.
Substantial evidence does indeed indicate that hybridization between
long-separated lineages of cichlids occurred during the early stages of the
adaptive radiation in Victoria and associated lakes. The cichlids of these
lakes, which include Lakes Edward, Kivu, and Albert along with Victoria
and a few smaller bodies of water, are often referred to as the Lake VictoriaRegion Superflock (figure 6.2). One of the first hints of hybridization at the
start of this radiation was the inconsistency between the results from
analyses of mitochondrial DNA and genes from nuclear DNA, specifically
for Lake Victoria species. The mitochondrial data suggest an extremely
young and genetically homogeneous species group, whereas some of the
nuclear data reveal more variation and hence an older diversification. This
pattern could be explained if hybridization and introgression had occurred
early on.
Figure 6.2
The relationships among African cichlids (hybridizations not illustrated), with particular reference to
the African rift valley lakes. Source: Reprinted with minor modifications with permission from
Springer Nature, Ronco et al., “Drivers and Dynamics of a Massive Adaptive Radiation in Cichlid
Fishes,” Nature (2020) as modified by Svardal et al., “Genetic Variation and Hybridization in
Evolutionary Radiations of Cichlid Fishes,” Annual Review of Animal Biosciences (2021).
More extensive analyses of nuclear sequences sampled from across the
genome of a wider range of African cichlid species have provided further
support for the hybridization-at-the-start hypothesis. Joana Meier, who led
this study with a group of collaborators from Bern, found that the nearest
relatives of the species flock came from the Congo drainage, but not all
genes told the same story. About 20 percent of the genome suggests a closer
relationship to an upper Nile lineage. Their interpretation of this pattern is
that substantial hybridization occurred between Congo and Nile lineages at
the start of the radiation—a result in part of the active geology of the regionand changes in connections between rivers. Critically, the patterns in the
DNA are different from what would be seen if separate Congo and Nile
lineages simply diversified alongside one another with a hybridization now
and then. Rather, the analyses by Meier and her colleagues reveal that genes
of Congo and Nile origin are often interspersed throughout a single
individual’s genome. Further, the proportion of Nile-origin genes is about
the same across all the lakes, indicating that hybridization occurred in the
common ancestor of the superflock and the introgressed genes persisted as
the radiation proceeded. Because there was substantial evolutionary
divergence between the Congo and Nile lineages prior to hybridization, the
probability of transgressive variation in the hybrids is considerable.
One of the best-studied individual genes in the system, for the long
wavelength-sensitive opsin, appears to have one major set of alleles with a
Nile origin and another with a Congo origin. Differences between the
opsins similar to those between P. pundamilia and P. nyererei pop up time
and again throughout the Lake Victoria radiation. Generally, the shorter
wavelength-sensitive form of the opsin gene is originally associated with a
Congo lineage, whereas the longer (redder) wavelength-tuned allele has a
mainly Nile history. In Lake Victoria, the longer wavelength-sensitive allele
is generally found in species living in more turbid and/or deeper waters, just
as in Pundamilia.
Matt McGee, Seehausen, and a large group of international and Bern
collaborators, including Meier and others mentioned previously, have
looked further into hybridization and diversification in Victoria and beyond,
assembling and analyzing several large cichlid data sets in a landmark
study. We have already reviewed some of their findings from an
evolutionary tree that included sequence data from every species of cichlid
with regard to ecological opportunity and sexual selection. They also
conducted innovative analyses of 100 complete genomes sampled
strategically from the more than 500 cichlids native to Lake Victoria and
ecologically divergent pairs of species native to a set of lakes of varying
ages that contain cichlid radiations.
One of their main efforts focused on genome evolution in Lake Victoria
species for which conventional evolutionary trees could not be considered a
given. Rather, these analyses assumed a network of species exchanging
alleles with each other. If hybridization is frequent enough, this makessense, since different parts of the genome will not have descended from the
same ancestor, as in the branching pattern of evolution that is usually
assumed. Each genome will instead be a mishmash of genes that came
together at different times, some perhaps early in the radiation and others
quite late, through a recent hybridization event. In these analyses, species
with similar diets and habitats still shared more genetic material than
expected by chance. Yet the results for stretches of DNA associated with
color patterns and presumably carrying genes for color suggested that
closely related species more often differ for color genes. This is consistent
with the hypothesis that sexual selection and color divergence have played
an important role in cichlid speciation in Lake Victoria.
McGee and colleagues also used analytic methods that enabled them to
extract more information from the genome sequences than has often been
the case in studies based on genome comparisons. They were able to more
fully consider not just the sequences of the nucleotides that comprise DNA
but large-scale insertions and deletions of DNA sequences too. Insertions
and deletions are important and informative because they are usually a
distinctive, even unique type of mutation, and large ones are infrequent. In
general, the presence of the same major insertion or deletion in two species
argues that either each inherited it from a common ancestor or there was a
recent exchange of genes between the species, such as through
hybridization. Because they are so distinctive, insertions and deletions can
act like tags with which we can follow a chunk of DNA as it passes through
a radiation, much as we might follow a radio-tagged bear across a
landscape. In both cases, it is not the tag that is informative but rather what
it is attached to.
Unlike a radio tag, an insertion or deletion will not always be attached to
something of interest, but with large samples of such markers, some
inevitably will be, and their distinctiveness will allow their histories to be
traced. McGee and his collaborators treated insertions and deletions as
indicators of relatively old genetic variation since they originate
infrequently and should accumulate slowly. Sets of species with a great deal
of such variation separating them are presumed to have been diverging for a
long time or have obtained their ancient, divergent alleles in some other
way, such as hybridization with other species. Applying this reasoning,
McGee and colleagues calculated how many large insertions and deletions
were present in the genomes of the ecologically divergent species theyanalyzed within each lake relative to the time separating the species
sampled from that lake’s radiation. They then compared their measure of
insertion and deletion “enrichment” to a separate calculation of the rate of
speciation in each lake. In the lakes with the most rapidly evolving
radiations, especially Victoria and Malawi, there was more evidence of old
genetic markers separating species than in the lake lineages with less rapid
diversification, resulting in a positive correlation overall. The sample size of
lakes is small, and avoiding spurious results can be challenging in such
analyses, but it will be fascinating to see if the positive correlation they
observed persists as data sets expand and the analyses are refined.
McGee and colleagues next concentrated on insertion and deletion
variation within the 100 sequenced species from Lake Victoria. They
emphasized old variants—the ones that also differed between lineages
thought to be representative of the ancestors of the Victoria radiation. These
markers were often correlated with particular ecological traits within the
Victoria species, which would be expected if some of the individual
insertions and deletions were located close to, or even within, genes that
were adapted to particular ecological functions in the ancestral species.
Presumably they were utilized in similar ways in Victoria cichlids,
facilitating rapid adaptation and diversification. One particularly
noteworthy association involved a region on chromosome 9 harboring a
small set of markers. This region was “fixed”—that is, the only form
present—in all fourteen of the Lake Victoria cichlids (in this study) that ate
fish, an unusual diet for cichlids. It was also fixed in a predatory cichlid
from Lake Kivu and a more distantly related lineage of predatory cichlids
from southern Africa, Serranochromis. Given the relationships among these
species, the allele may have originated as long as ten million years ago,
possibly in fish eaters in a lake that has since disappeared. Exactly what
role it plays in fish eating, however, remains to be worked out.
The genomic results for Lake Victoria may help to resolve the puzzle of
how a lake that is relatively young (though its basin is a little older) can be
home to a cichlid radiation comparable to those in the more truly ancient
lakes of Malawi and especially Tanganyika. It appears that much of the
variation underlying the ecological diversity of Victoria’s cichlid radiation
is in fact very old, and hybridization at the start of the radiation and
subsequently has allowed it to be remixed into a wide variety of ecological
types. The rapid speciation involved may have been facilitated by bothecological opportunity and strong sexual selection, with the latter linked to
environmental variation as well.
Large-scale genomic analyses of the Lake Malawi cichlid radiations have
also been conducted, led by Milan Malinsky, Hannes Svardal, and an
international group of collaborators based at Cambridge University as well
as several other institutions. Some Malawi lineages have diversified almost
as fast as Lake Victoria’s, and there are even more species in Lake Malawi
than in the Victoria region superflock. The radiation is somewhat older too.
The Malawi radiation appears, again, to have involved hybridization at
the start, in this case of lineages estimated to be separated by more than
three million years of evolution, even more than for those founding the
Lake Victoria radiation. The Malawi radiation is dominated by DNA closely
related to that of a lineage that includes Lake Victoria superflock cichlids as
well as a group of widely distributed riverine cichlids. The second lineage
that contributed to the Malawi radiation is today represented by a river￾dwelling species of the genus Astatotilapia, which has only an informal
name, “Ruaha blue” (based partly on where it was collected). One of the
more surprising observations that emerges from this work is that this
hybridization could easily have been missed. The Ruaha blue lineage is
known only from one species first collected in 2012, at a site a considerable
distance from Lake Malawi. If the lineage had gone extinct or been
overlooked, detecting and making sense of the hybridization would have
been problematic. Thus, an immense quantity of genome sequences may be
required to get a complete picture of hybridization history.
The Malawi data also suggest that basal hybridization, at the beginning
of the radiation, was important to diversification within the lake. Svardal
and colleagues evaluated genetic differences between species that live and
forage along the bottom versus those that do so in the open water
environment—a form of ecological divergence known to be ubiquitous in
freshwater systems and crucial in the early stages of the Malawi radiation.
They found that the genetic differences between the bottom-living and open
water species disproportionately involved Victoria-associated DNA in one
and Ruaha blue DNA in the other. They then looked throughout the genome
at those genes for which a Ruaha blue version was present in some species
and a Victoria variant in others. As for Lake Victoria, genes for opsins,
which underlie color vision and are implicated in both adaptation todifferent lake environments and mating preferences, were particularly
common among such genes.
The Malawi results also confirm the role of ongoing gene flow
throughout the radiation. By comparing evolutionary trees suggested by
different portions of the Malawi cichlid genomes, the research team inferred
that after initial divergence into three main lineages, hybridization
continued in Lake Malawi. Some hybridization was of intermediate age, not
at the start of the radiation, but between the ancestors of multiple modern
species. Recent hybridizations between sometimes distantly related species
are suggested by their analyses too. Variation in lake levels and conditions
may have contributed to intermittent periods of elevated hybridization, as
different species and groups were brought together by declining water
volumes and reduced water clarity increased interspecific mating.
I have so far said little about hybridization in the most ancient of the
African Great Lakes, Tanganyika. Fabrizia Ronco and colleagues in Walter
Salzburger’s laboratory at the University of Basel have investigated this
topic in the most comprehensive genomic analysis to date of the cichlids of
an African Great Lake. They sampled 240 species, or nearly every species
in the radiation. I saw her present the initial results of this study at a
conference on the shores of Lake Victoria in 2018, and the thoroughness of
the work was impressive and memorable. Ronco and colleagues observed
considerable hybridization between species within major branches of the
Tanganyika radiation, known as “tribes,” though little between major
branches. This is not so surprising given the great age of the major branches
of the Tanganyika tree, but contradicts some earlier findings that suggested
hybridization early in the Tanganyika radiation.
In a test of hybridization’s potential role in mediating diversification rates
among these branches, there was no clear effect. The speciation rate was not
correlated with the hybridization rate. A different, potentially related pattern
was present, however: the branches containing species with the highest
average levels of heterozygosity—that is, genes with two different alleles—
were the most rapidly speciating. Since hybridization would be expected to
elevate heterozygosity and teasing apart these effects is difficult, a
consequential role for hybridization in the radiation remains a possibility.
Considering the African Great Lakes together, there is considerable and
growing evidence that hybridization at the beginning of the two youngerradiations, in Victoria and Malawi, was important to their dazzlingly rapid
diversification. Hybridization continued in each of the lake radiations and
has likely made ongoing contributions to diversification.
Genomic data on the scale necessary to look reasonably comprehensively
at the role of hybridizations in ancient lake diversifications only started to
become available in the 2010s, and as I write, the African Great Lakes data
sets are almost unique among large radiations. Still, the findings to date on
the Telmatherinids of Sulawesi’s Malili Lakes, ricefish speciation in the
Malili Lakes and Poso (reviewed in chapter 2), and pupfish of Titicaca all
support the concept of extensive hybridization in ancient lake adaptive
radiations. I read almost daily about new initiatives to expand the breadth
and depth of genome sequencing across the tree of life, so we can anticipate
the proliferation of vastly larger data sets with which to explore more
powerfully, extensively, and decisively the role of hybridization in adaptive
radiation. In the meantime, a different, younger set of freshwater systems
provide complementary data on the roles that hybridization and standing
genetic variation can play in speciation and adaptation, and merit a short
foray out of the oldest lakes.
The Transporter Hypothesis
Studies of smaller, younger bodies of water have advantages as
evolutionary systems owing to the replication they sometimes provide and
tractability of their smaller scales. Research on one inhabitant of such
habitats, the threespine stickleback, is generating results that notably reflect
and complement those emerging from ancient lakes. Stickleback lived in
the drainage ditch in front of the house I grew up in, and I later did my PhD
work with them, so I have a particular fondness for these prickly little
creatures and their frantic, jerky courtship dances. Today they are probably
the most extensively studied vertebrate in evolutionary biology even
though, unlike the cichlids, they never form large species flocks.
What is special about the stickleback is that it has done certain things,
including colonizing fresh water from the ocean, over and over and over
again in thousands of different streams, rivers, and lakes on similarly
extraordinary numbers of landmasses, from continents to tiny islands. Indoing so, sticklebacks have evolved in parallel on a hemispheric scale,
typically in response to lakes and streams opening up as glaciers retreated,
but in a few instances finding newly available habitat when earthquakes
moved coastal landscapes up and down. I have studied these charming fish
in many locations, and one of my most memorable experiences was to see
stream-resident stickleback in Gifu, Japan, for the first time. I knew that
between British Columbia and Gifu, the stickleback of the Pacific Ocean
were larger, bonier, longer spined, and more silvery than the dull little
freshwater-resident fish scooting about the shallow streams of my
hometown. Yet the Gifu fish, which my friend and collaborator Seiichi Mori
showed me, could have been mistaken for the stickleback from the ditch in
front of my parents’ house. They were marvelous.
Considering freshwater sticklebacks from Japan, Europe, Alaska, and
other distant locales, one might have guessed that the adaptations related to
each freshwater colonization involved mainly different mutations, maybe
even at different genes. A team led by Pam Colosimo in David Kingsley’s
lab at Stanford, collaborating with Dolph Schluter and his group, tested this
possibility for one of the most conspicuous traits that often distinguish
freshwater and marine sticklebacks: the bony plates along the side of the
body. Marine stickleback have no scales, but possess prominent bony plates
extending from just behind the head all the way to the tail. They look like
the armored steeds of twelfth-century Europe, whereas the freshwater fish,
especially in western North America, usually have just a few of these plates
toward the head. Differences in predators and the relative cost of producing
the plates probably contribute to selection favoring fewer plates in fresh
water; the details are still debated somewhat, but what selection generally
favors in each environment is clear. What is also clear is that plate genetics
are unexpectedly simple.
In a series of experiments and comparative studies, Colosimo and her
colleagues showed that a single gene, known as Eda, is responsible for
much of the variation in bony plates. And to the surprise of many of us, the
very same Eda allele reappears in freshwater lakes and streams all over the
Northern Hemisphere, especially in Pacific-connected streams and lakes.
The explanation is that the recessive low-plated alleles are at low frequency
and thus almost always in a heterozygous state in the ocean, paired with a
dominant full-plate allele that causes the heterozygotes to look much like
every other fully plated marine fish. The current thinking is that the low-plate allele is advantageous in fresh water, but occasional hybridization with
marine, specifically anadromous, stickleback results in hybrids and
“leakage” of low-plate alleles back into the marine population. The result is
that when marine stickleback colonize a new freshwater habitat, the low￾plate allele, now favored, can increase in frequency and the low-plate form
can reappear. Colonizations of fresh water, both experimental and
accidental, have been watched in real time, and the low-plated form has
been seen to reemerge from marine colonists, rising to almost 100 percent
in just a few decades. This process, in which low-plated fish seem to pass
invisibly from one freshwater site to another, reminded Schluter of how a
person in Star Trek’s transporter room would dematerialize only to reappear
in identical form in a new locale, leading to the irreverent name for this
hypothesis (figure 6.3). It is now clear that many other freshwater genes
also leak into fresh water and are reused, so Eda is easy to detect but not
unusual.
Figure 6.3
The transporter hypothesis of threespine stickleback evolution. Source: James Vaughan, under a
Creative Commons CC BY-NC-SA 2.0 license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/2.0),
with modifications by Dolph Schluter and the author.
Much like genomic regions associated with Lake Victoria’s fish predation
niche, which originally evolved for that role in a different system and place,
adaptation in stickleback frequently makes repeated use of the same genetic
material in different freshwater systems. As a result, the low-plate Eda
allele, like other freshwater-adapted alleles, is much older than thefreshwater populations in which it often appears. Hence adaptation and
even speciation do not always rely on new mutations but instead can make
use of standing genetic variation, much of which has been around for a long
time. It is interesting to speculate that the availability of more extensive,
ecologically diverse ancient genetic variation may be a crucial difference
between the tremendous breadth of Lake Victoria’s radiations relative to the
presence of just one or at most two species of sticklebacks in so many
Northern Hemisphere lakes. Exploration of the planet’s biodiversity at the
genomic level has only just begun, and the data are accumulating at a
breathtaking rate. More surprises are surely forthcoming.
* * *
We are accustomed to thinking of hybridization as an occasional problem
for identifying animals in the field and a brake on biodiversity. But the
jumbling of genetic material that occurs with hybridization may result in
novel traits and lead to diversification along new ecological paths.
Hybridization may have been an especially important yet long
underappreciated factor in accelerating diversification in the most
extraordinary ancient lake radiations. The reuse of ancient variation through
hybridization may also help to resolve the enigma of Lake Victoria’s cichlid
radiation and how this young lake has come to show diversity more typical
of truly ancient systems. Evolution may make use of standing genetic
variation, some of it quite old, more frequently than was suspected and
occasional exchanges of genes between species will facilitate such reuse.7
Splendor in the Mud
The existence of Lake Victoria’s diverse endemic biota must be reconciled with the
incontrovertible geophysical and paleoecological evidence . . . and not vice versa.
—J. Curt Stager and Thomas C. Johnson, 2008
I once gave a presentation on my Malili Lakes research in Bogor, Indonesia,
to a group of university and museum scientists. I was delighted with how
our work was going as we looked at the relationships between light
environments, color patterns, and behavior to better understand how fish
coloration evolved and diversity was maintained. So I was disappointed
when a member of the audience asked how I could study evolution without
looking at fossils and thus without direct information about how things had
changed over time. I was taken aback and did my best to explain our
approach, but it was a fair question. Most twenty-first-century evolutionary
biologists are focused on the flora and fauna alive today. We mostly infer
the history of organisms indirectly, estimating changes over time using
DNA sequences, geographic distributions, and other features we can readily
examine in the here and now. Lakes offer the possibility of looking at
history more directly and ancient lakes offer extraordinary timelines.
The history available from lakes, relative to what can typically be
gleaned from terrestrial records about life on land, is a bit like the
information in a diary compared to that in a shredded letter. We can rarely
find comprehensive terrestrial records of land-dwelling organisms. For a
terrestrial creature to become a conventional fossil, dying in or near water
helps a great deal. It then must be covered by sediments before it can be
destroyed by other organisms or the elements. Of course, running this
gauntlet is much more likely for bones and shells, which means that the
fossil record is largely lacking for creatures without hard parts, like most
worms, for example, or jellyfish in the marine environment. Next, the
sediments containing the candidate fossil must be stable for the many
thousands of years required for fossilization, at least in the geological sense.Finally, the rock containing the fossil has to be eroded just enough to come
to the attention of a scientist, but not so thoroughly that the fossil is
destroyed. There are oddities and exceptions, like frozen mammoths, tar
pits, some caves, insects in amber, and a few others, but by and large this is
the process. It involves a series of steps, each unlikely on its own, and the
probability of the whole sequence is vanishingly low. One encouraging
development for terrestrial systems comes from studies of ancient
environmental DNA (free in the environment rather than inside organisms)
from permafrost sediment samples. These have contributed to remarkable
data sets on the distribution of plants and animals across the arctic over the
last 50,000 years and provided important insights on a number of important
topics, such as how long extinct species persisted. Still, permafrost has a
limited distribution, and samples from lake sediments are sometimes also
included alongside the permafrost analyses.
In contrast, the sediments beneath an ancient lake will often comprise a
layered, thorough record, older at the bottom to more recent toward the top,
of what has been in the lake. The sediments accumulate gradually as
material slowly rains down from above. If the lake is deep and stable, the
water close to the bottom may also lack oxygen, which means few
organisms other than bacteria will be present and decay will be slow.
Whether oxygen is present or not, organisms that have died in or on the
sediment, or drifted down from above, frequently just stay where they fell,
as if waiting for a researcher to dig them up. I first encountered an ancient
lake sediment sample while visiting my friend and colleague Doug Haffner
at the University of Windsor in the early 2000s. Doug had returned from
Indonesia with some of the first samples of Malili Lakes sediments and was
incredibly excited about his treasures. As I came to understand the
information that could be extracted from such samples, I better understood
his enthusiasm.
While the information that can be gained from lake sediments is
remarkable, the process of collecting the needed samples is daunting,
involving amounts of money and logistical complexity well outside the
comfort zone of many field biologists. These endeavors have as much in
common with particle collider-scale physics, or large medical trials, as with
the work Charles Elton, Eugene Odum, and the other architects of modern
ecology did day-to-day.At the heart of sample collection is a corer, a long tube driven vertically
into the lake bed in order to retrieve a core, a long, hopefully intact sample
of the lake bed sediments. The coring device is typically lowered from a
barge (figure 7.1), which itself may be in hundreds of meters of water.
Frequently the deeper parts of lake basins are the most stable and have the
longest continuous records; thus, they are both informative and difficult to
access. In the oldest lakes, sediments may extend many hundreds of meters
beneath the lake bed, resulting in enormously long cores. Often parallel,
overlapping cores must be collected to obtain a complete, “composite” core.
The borehole itself is also of interest, and tools may be lowered into it to
measure various physical properties of the sediments that surrounded the
core. Not surprisingly, the machinery involved in this work is highly
specialized. I once saw Thomas Wilke, who has played a lead role in
addressing biological questions with the sediment data from North
Macedonia and Albania’s Lake Ohrid, give a presentation on his and his
colleagues’ drilling efforts there. They had to ship their massive, yet
extremely difficult to replace, drilling equipment from Salt Lake City in the
United States to an inland lake in the Balkans. This was a gargantuan
logistical effort that inevitably had complications, including a fire onboard
the transport vessel on the way to Europe.
Figure 7.1
Drilling rig on Lake Ohrid. Source: Reprinted with minor modifications with permission from
Elsevier, from Wilke et al., “Scientific Drilling Projects in Ancient Lakes: Integrating Geological and
Biological Histories,” Global and Planetary Change (2016).Despite the many obstacles, several ancient lakes have now been drilled
and had sediment cores collected, though for a long time a central goal in
core collection and analysis was to obtain records of climate, and
sometimes terrestrial vegetation. This resulted in much less information
than later, more comprehensive efforts, although the work was a good deal
simpler. In twenty-first-century studies, ancient lake coring projects often
involve dozens of scientists from a wide range of disciplines, including
geology, climatology, hydrology, evolutionary biology, fisheries, aquatic
ecology, terrestrial ecology, and even anthropology. The anthropological
insights are perhaps the most surprising products of extracting old mud
from deep under a lake. But climate and vegetation records from East
African lakes are providing increasingly detailed information about the
conditions in which our own species and our recent ancestors evolved—as
well as effects that our ancestors, in turn, had on their environments.
For those of us interested in the lakes themselves, it is the improved,
sometimes entirely new approaches to discovering the history of the lakes
and their denizens that are of greatest interest. To generate such records, a
key initial task is to estimate the likely age of each portion of the sediment
core, ideally in such a way that core samples from different portions of a
lake can be matched with each other. Volcanic events of known age can
play a valuable role here as they will leave a distinctive layer of ash,
referred to as tephra, that can be detected in different cores and even
different lakes. Tephra deposits can provide firm chronological anchors
owing to frequently abundant potassium-rich minerals in these deposits,
suitable for absolute radiometric dating. A variety of other approaches and
data are also utilized in the dating effort, including the orientation of the
earth’s magnetic field, as indicated by the alignment of magnetic particles
in a core’s layers. The magnetic field periodically changes its polarity, and
the timing of these changes is usually known, facilitating dating.
Radiocarbon dating may be used for organic materials such as terrestrial
plant fragments and pollen. In younger portions of the core, annual layers
may be visible, although earthquakes, volcanic activity, and other
disturbances can result in the loss or distortion of portions of the record.
Hence many core studies report only quite rough dating, but methods have
improved over time. No matter the details, the analysis of cores remains a
slow, labor-intensive undertaking that can continue for years after
collection.Once the initial steps are completed and reasonably reliable age estimates
are available for the various sections of a core, the biological and
environmental data can be plotted against time. Physical and chemical
properties of the sediments and borehole can provide information from
throughout the lake’s history regarding temperatures, salt content, rainfall,
erosion around the lake, and other variables. Lake levels can often be
estimated too, especially if some cores come from areas of a lake that have
actually dried at times. Such drying leaves a strong, direct signal in the
record.
Cores from shallower sections of a lake will draw the keen interest of
biologists because many fish, mollusks, and other creatures are found
mainly in such areas. Their downside is that shallow cores can be
incomplete due to occasional drying. Entire skeletons of creatures as large
as fish are sometimes encountered, but rarely, and even if present, they may
be damaged or lost during processing. Smaller hard parts, however, are
often abundant, to the point that they can be analyzed quantitatively
throughout the time period covered by the core. Remains can include shells
of mollusks and exoskeletons of crustaceans and insects as well as the
bones, scales, and teeth of fish. Some microorganisms also leave large
numbers of fossils, enabling especially powerful quantitative analyses.
Pollen from land plants continues to be a major focus in core analyses
owing to what it can tell us directly and indirectly about terrestrial
ecological communities and even climates. In addition, it is now clear that
many microscopic organisms live in the sediments themselves, and these
too are getting more attention. This “subsurface biosphere research” has
revealed slow-growing microbes deep below the bottoms of lakes and even
beneath the seafloor. The biosphere is much, much larger than long
assumed.
Shells, teeth, and other hard parts have tremendous value, but more can
be done with the remains of animals than to identify and count such items,
even if that process is sped up by automation. It has been possible for some
years to retrieve and investigate the molecular remains of lake organisms,
and the information to be gained from such efforts grows more and more
sophisticated. The data arising can include proteins or other biomarkers,
which may identify the sorts of organisms that were present, or reveal
important information about their activities or metabolisms. The most
exciting prospect, though, is the recovery of ancient DNA. Ancient DNAhas been explored extensively with extinct terrestrial animals, to the point
where efforts are underway to bioengineer a woolly mammoth, or at least a
first approximation of one, based on genetic information from frozen
animals. Ancient DNA investigations have also helped reveal our own
hybrid history, involving Neanderthals and Denisovans. Such DNA has
usually been retrieved from intact tissues of various sorts, particularly when
the intent was to compile a genome. But “environmental DNA,” which is
no longer associated with an organism or its tissues, can sometimes also be
retrieved and studied, as in the aforementioned permafrost studies. For
biologists today, this is simply another tool—but of course it is much more
than that from a slightly longer perspective. To scoop fossil DNA from the
mud deep in a lake (i.e., “sedimentary ancient DNA”), sequence it, then
quickly identify it through reference to vast genetic archives available from
a computer connected to other computers through the ether might have
sounded quite Star Trek or Harry Potter-ish just decades ago. Yet here we
are.
One challenge associated with studying living microbes, environmental
DNA, and many biomarkers is that the samples must be pristine (figure
7.2). Unfortunately, core samples can easily be contaminated, particularly
since they are being collected from the bottom of a deep lake in likely a
remote area; high temperatures, ultraviolet radiation, and even the lake
water itself are a threat to the samples. And the problems don’t end with the
acquisition of the core, even if it emerges from the collection process
untainted. When DNA and other delicate molecules are to be analyzed, the
core, or at least subsamples from it, will need to be kept under extremely
cold conditions. All of this is a great deal easier if the field site is closer to
well-equipped laboratories than is likely to be the case on many ancient
lakes. Even so, these logistical challenges are being solved.Figure 7.2
To avoid sample contamination, especially for analyses of ancient DNA, a researcher (a) wears a full
body suit and other coverings before (b) scraping the potentially contaminated surface off a core and
(c) collecting samples from its interior. Source: Reprinted with minor modifications with permission
from John Wiley and Sons, from Parducci et al., “Ancient Plant DNA in Lake Sediments,” New
Phytologist (2017).
Almanacs in the Mud
Fortunately, the tremendous effort involved in collecting and analyzing the
sediment cores of ancient lakes has proven well worth the trouble. And the
results are starting to come in.
One of the most important results yet to emerge from lake sediments is
the astonishing youth of Lake Victoria. It has been known for many years
that the start of the current interglacial period was a dry time in East Africa.
Still, the findings from work led by Thomas Johnson of the University of
Minnesota’s Large Lakes Observatory were clear: Lake Victoria dried
completely at least once as the polar glaciers retreated, possibly for a few
thousand years.
In an influential publication that appeared in the journal Science in 1996,
Johnson and his colleagues reported the results of an extensive set of cores
from Lake Victoria. They complemented the core analyses with seismicreflection profiling, which involves sending acoustic waves through the
water and lake bed, and then collecting and analyzing the reflected energy
to map the subsurface; the principles involved are much like those of radar
or sonar. The bottom line is that at several sites around the deepest parts of
the lake, ordinary sedimentation dates back to about 15,000 years ago (the
estimated timing has shifted a little over the years) and then there is a
hiatus. Through coring, it was determined to correspond to a layer of
terrestrial soil; there are even vertical plant rootlets growing through the
deposits! Other indicators tell the same story, and among geologists it
seems beyond dispute that the lake was dry for a time. Johnson and
colleagues make the case that not only were the sites desiccated but it is
also unlikely that any remnant lakes persisted within or along the
boundaries of the modern lake, at least on a scale that might have supported
ecologically diverse populations of cichlid fishes. Their reasoning is that
because evaporation from Victoria itself contributed so much to
atmospheric water and precipitation, there could be no lakes of any
consequence in that vicinity without a substantial version of Victoria.
There was a good deal of discussion of Johnson and colleagues’
conclusions for a time, some of it skeptical, but that seems to have faded
and a broad consensus has become established that a major drying did
occur. Any small water bodies that remained would have been more pond￾like and salty, quite different from a large lake. Such clear evidence for the
desiccation of Victoria, for some or all of the period from about 17,000 to
15,000 years ago, dramatically changed how biologists thought about the
evolution of Victoria’s cichlids. Mainly, it increased still further the
estimates of the speed at which that radiation occurred.
Lake Malawi is older than Lake Victoria and its fluctuations tell a quite
different story, but one that changes our take on evolution in that lake—the
lake that houses more species of endemic fish than any other. The time
calibration of Malawi cores has been notably extensive, reaching deep into
its history. Sarah Ivory, then at Brown University and now at Pennsylvania
State, worked on this project with a team of collaborators from multiple
institutions, including the University of Arizona’s Andy Cohen, one of the
most influential, interdisciplinary scientists working on the analysis of
ancient lake sediments (as well as the crab-snail coevolution discussed
earlier). Ivory and her colleagues worked with a 380-meter (!) core, the
length of about four US football fields, which itself came from beneathwater 590 meters deep—which is almost half again as deep as the deepest
point in North America’s Lake Superior. Their calculations and analyses
reveal a strikingly dynamic, almost-volatile lake history with features that
illustrate processes also observed in other lakes.
The record worked out by Ivory and colleagues extends back about 1.2
million years, spanning the entire “modern” history of the lake. Although
the Lake Malawi basin had the features of a deep lake beginning over 4
million years ago, it was largely dry from about 1.6 million years ago until
the period covered by Ivory and colleagues’ study. The early parts of the
core suggest a relatively shallow lake, which alternated with even shallower
marshy conditions, on a geologically short cycle of up to about 12,000
years. There was consistent riverlike flow through the system during both
lake and marsh episodes. The main outlet, through which water left the
lake, was the Ruhuhu River, which itself was connected with drainages that
carried the outflow to the Indian Ocean on the east side of the African
continent.
Starting about 800,000 years ago, the lake’s cycles began to change, with
riverlike characteristics and marsh stages disappearing. Instead, the deep
phase of the lake involved deeper, blue water conditions with a strong,
stable layering of the lake’s waters. During such phases of stratification, the
depths of the lake lacked oxygen. These conditions, much like those of the
modern lake, alternated over longer periods of 20,000 years with a
shallower lake that was saltier, more alkaline, and exhibited thorough
mixing rather than stratification. It also had higher algae levels and
therefore is referred to as the “green lake” phase.
What happened to trigger these changes and a different set of cycles?
One key development likely started with a geological event. Ivory and
colleagues suggest that tectonic uplift, a movement in the surface of the
earth, lifted the edge of the lake basin above the point of access to the
Ruhuhu River (figure 7.3). This resulted in a new, higher outlet at the Shire
River, which is the current outlet, and a higher lake level. It is as if a bucket
had two holes in its side, one low and one high. If the low one gets plugged,
the bucket can hold more water before it starts to leak. Thus, during some
portions of the climate cycle, which had entered a phase in which periods
with high lake levels were longer, the lake filled with water to the new
outlet and took essentially its modern form. It became highly stratified, withlow oxygen in its depths and extensive blue water. In addition, its shallow,
rocky outcrops were covered by water, resulting in the complex underwater
geography of the modern lake. This is biologically important because it has
been suggested that these rocky patches, separated by areas of sand and
mud, enhance isolation, speciation, and diversification in some rock-loving
cichlids.
When there was not enough water entering the lake, however, its level
could not get high enough to access this new, elevated outlet. Thus, during
drier portions of the climate cycle, there was insufficient water in Lake
Malawi for the new outlet to be reached. With no flow through, salts
became more concentrated in the lake. At this time the lake was also well
mixed all the way into its depths, ensuring that key nutrients were available
for algae and leading to green, turbid water. It was like some disturbed
modern lakes, where water is diverted for irrigation before reaching the
lake, even as nutrients pour in from agriculture or dwellings with
inadequate sewage treatment. Ivory and colleagues suggest that these low–
water level, saline, turbid phases were likely periods of increased extinction
and hybridization among the cichlids whereas the blue water phases would
have been times of diversification (figure 7.3).Figure 7.3
Lake Malawi. The vertical axis in the lower panel shows lake depth, with cichlid evolution
characterized above each period. Before the benchmark 800,000 years ago (“ka” is thousand years),
shallow-deep cycles were shorter and the lake was always shallower than it would be later, especially
during the extended deep lake periods at 800,000 years ago, 400,000 years, and recently. The dark￾colored lake in the right upper panel is deep and clear. Between the three deep lake periods, lake
levels cycled more rapidly with saltier, more alkaline, high algae conditions when the levels were low
(illustrated by the contracted, lighter-colored lake). Source: Reprinted with minor modifications with
permission from the National Academy of Sciences of the USA, © 2016 National Academy of
Sciences, from Malinsky and Salzburger, “Environmental Context for Understanding the Iconic
Adaptive Radiation of Cichlid Fishes in Lake Malawi,” Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences (2016).
The blue water phases were all longer than they were prior to 800,000
years ago, but they were not all of the same duration. Exceptionally long
blue water episodes have occurred on a 400,000-year cycle, with the first
starting around 800,000 years ago when the modern lake was being
established, and the last currently underway. Ivory and her colleagues make
the case that it was only during these extended blue water phases that
extraordinary diversifications such as the modern one could unfold. Overall,
the scenario they have presented is broadly consistent, and satisfyingly so,
with the major genomic analyses reviewed in the previous chapter. Theinitial radiation began around the time that the modern lake appeared about
800,000 years ago or a little later, followed by repeated episodes of
hybridization and introgression.
There is one other finding from the Malawi studies that bears special
emphasis: the change in the outlet river that occurred with the transition to
the modern deep lake, or at least the modern deep-lake cycle. Whereas
previously the water exiting the lake had flowed from the north end almost
directly east toward the Indian Ocean, after the uplift the outlet shifted
toward the south and the Zambezi River system. The outflow still
eventually ended up in the Indian Ocean, but along a quite different routing
via the Zambezi drainage. Such changes in connections between water
bodies and drainages occur in many freshwater systems, and can result in
the mixing of faunas, with hybridization and introgression, or isolation and
divergence of species and populations. Changes in drainage connections are
often profoundly significant biological events.
Some of the features documented in the Lake Malawi studies have
reappeared in analyses of cores from Lake Towuti, the largest and most
biodiverse of Indonesia’s Malili Lakes. These Towuti cores were collected
in 2015 by another large international consortium, led by James Russell of
Brown University and Hendrik Vogel of the University of Bern. Some
initial results appeared quickly, but it was several more years before many
of the major analyses and findings began to be reported, illustrating the
time-consuming processing and analysis involved with long cores. One of
the key results to emerge was an estimate of the age of the lake, which
previously was based on only rough calculations. Russell, Vogel, and their
colleagues, including Haffner and Thomas von Rintelen, whom we met
earlier, estimate the age of the lake to be about 1 million years, comparable
to the modern Lake Malawi.
Modern Lake Towuti exhibits extremely low biological productivity, but
the cores show that this has not always been the case. Today, algal growth
appears to be limited in part by unusually low levels of phosphorus, an
essential nutrient. Phosphorus is, for example, a principal ingredient of most
garden fertilizer and key component of the agricultural runoff that
sometimes results in pea-soupy lakes overwhelmed by algal blooms. One
cause of Towuti’s low phosphorus is the unusual, metal-rich water
chemistry of the Malili Lakes. In both Towuti and Matano, highconcentrations of iron oxides interact with phosphorus to make the latter
unavailable to diatoms. Much of the phosphorus ends up in the sediments
and essentially removed from the system. The permanent stratification of
the modern lake, distinct from temperate lakes, which typically experience
seasonal mixing, further ensures that deep-lake phosphorus never becomes
available to diatoms and plants in shallower water where photosynthesis
can take place. Diatoms, which are important in Towuti and other ancient
lakes, are single-celled algae that possess robust silica shells that preserve
well in lake sediments. Diatoms are mainly bottom dwelling, but are
sometimes found in open water.
Towuti’s “green” periods, at least two substantial ones over the last
million years, occurred when diatom abundance in the water column
increased to high levels. The sediment core layer containing one of these
periods, evocatively described as “diatomaceous ooze” in the publications,
sits on top of the tephra from a volcanic explosion, whereas the other such
layer is close to tephras but not adjacent. Russell and colleagues interpret
this as evidence that phosphorus in the tephras, which may have eroded
slowly and released material for an extended period, likely contributed to
the bursts of diatom abundance. Thus, volcanoes may have played a key
role in the ecology of the lake. However, changes in how phosphorus cycled
within the lake and its availability to diatoms were likely also important,
and may have resulted from complex interactions of physical and biological
processes. More detailed analyses of the species composition of the diatoms
by Mariam Ageli and colleagues, based mainly at Canada’s University of
Windsor, have emphasized such nuance, including the potential role of
variation in seasonal patterns of water column mixing.
As with Malawi, these results from Towuti’s sediments are broadly
consistent with what we know about the main fish radiation there, involving
the Telmatherinidae, or sailfin silversides. The current estimated age for
Towuti is in the general ballpark for the time frame of the telmatherinid
radiations there, but to say something more definitive, it will be important
to learn more about the other lakes in the system, some of which may be
older, and further investigate telmatherinid divergence times. What is
unequivocally striking is that once again there are periods of murky and
ecologically disrupted conditions in a system with a history of
hybridizations. Unlike the African cichlids, color is not currently known to
be significant in maintaining barriers between species in the telmatherinids,but changes to water transparency and chemistry could also affect mating
patterns based on traits other than color, such as shape and behavior. Water
chemistry changes might even influence the perception of chemical cues
known to be crucial to courtship and mating in many fish.
Thinking back to my own experience of Towuti, one of the features that
today distinguishes it from Lake Matano, where fish biologists have more
often worked, is the presence in Towuti of saltwater crocodiles. Saltwater
crocodiles are infamous for hunting and eating people, including in nearby
Australia. In Indonesia, they seem to be less feared and in some places are
treated with reverence. Unfortunately, crocodiles do sometimes attack
people in Towuti. My friend and collaborator Fadly Tantu lost a fisherman
friend to a Towuti crocodile. This was especially sad because it was
probably preventable; he had been spearfishing at night. Hence Towuti is
more problematic for making extensive underwater observations of fish and
other organisms, though some undaunted scientists have nonetheless spent
quite a bit of time in the lake (and really, the crocodiles tend to be
localized). In coming years, underwater drones with video cameras could
potentially make the entire lake more readily accessible for collecting
observational data on fish, so as to complement the extensive sediment
record and the further results that will undoubtedly emerge from it.
Bibles in the Mud
The Thompsons of Manitoba, my mother’s family, had a family bible in
which births, deaths, marriages, and other key events were recorded with
dates. This practice is a common one. Today, evolutionary trees inferred
from living species can give us a rough equivalent of the Thompson bible’s
records for the lineages presently found in ancient lakes. These trees,
however, tend to miss the evolutionary equivalents of the deaths in the
family bible, which are extinctions. Trees constructed using DNA data from
living species can be pretty fuzzy on dates too. Consequently, a quantitative
record from the lake sediments of what species lived there and when,
regardless of whether or not they are alive today, could be an extraordinary
step forward for evolutionary biology. Further, it is a step almost
unimaginable with many research systems.Important results of this sort are already emerging from Lake Victoria’s
sediments. Moritz Muschick, working at both the University of Bern and
Swiss Federal Institute of Aquatic Science and Technology, and an
international team of collaborators including Russell of the Towuti cores,
Johnson of the Victoria desiccation work, and Ole Seehausen, have studied
fish remains, especially teeth (figure 7.4), from the earliest postdrying
period of Lake Victoria. They reviewed samples from some of the same
1994–1996 cores collected by Johnson and colleagues for their influential
study of the lake. The cores had been stored in a long-term facility in
Duluth, Minnesota. Long-term retention and preservation, a now-standard
practice, helps ensure that the maximum possible information is garnered
from valuable and difficult-to-obtain core samples. There can be a
downside to such extensive use, though, as Muschick and colleagues report
fungal growth and concerns about carbon contamination. Fortunately, the
fish teeth that the team were studying were unlikely to be affected.Figure 7.4
Fossil teeth from (a) Lake Victoria sediments and (b) modern counterparts. Haplochromini are the
cichlids that massively radiated in the lake, while Oreochromini are cichlids that did not radiate. The
Cyprinidae (did not radiate) teeth are from an open water plankton feeder. Oral teeth are the familiar
teeth readily visible within the fish’s mouth whereas pharyngeal teeth come from the pharyngeal
jaws, which are located in the throat. Images are not to scale. Source: Reprinted with minor
modifications with permission from the Royal Society, and with permission conveyed through
Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., from Muschick et al., “Arrival Order and Release from
Competition Does Not Explain Why Haplochromine Cichlids Radiated in Lake Victoria,”
Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences (2018).
The ability to identify fish teeth from the cores enabled Muschick and
colleagues to address a long-standing question about ancient lakeradiations. Was the success of the fastest-radiating lineages, here
haplochromine cichlids, simply a result of their priority? Of being the first
group in an empty habitat and adaptively radiating into available niches
before other groups arrived? Often it is hard to know exactly which groups
first became established during lake formation, but with cores and the
ability to identify teeth it should be possible to confidently address this
question.
Muschick and colleagues’ main result was surprising: the haplochromine
cichlids indeed appeared just after the lake started filling, but so did other
fish lineages. They found that two potentially effective fish competitors
appeared in the lake at the same time as the haplochromine cichlids—the
group that would undergo the fastest sustained adaptive radiation yet known
among vertebrates. The competitor lineages were oreochromine cichlids,
commonly known as tilapia, and cyprinids, a family that includes minnows
and carps. Both groups have undergone radiations in other lakes so they
have at least some potential for diversification. Moreover, the species of
tilapia, cyprinids, and also catfish that were present in the early lake
occupied particular feeding and habitat niches into which haplochromines
subsequently diversified. It is possible, and arguably likely, that there were
other consequential ecological differences between the evolving
haplochromines and their apparent competitors, despite dietary overlap. In
any case, the other groups remained and were successful, but did not
exclude the haplochromines.
This finding does not refute the ecological opportunity hypothesis of
adaptive radiation by itself, but it does show that the haplochromines did
not occupy a lake entirely empty of fish competitors and that simple
opportunity does not adequately explain the success of the haplochromines.
Certainly it raises the possibility that the capacity of the haplochromines to
evolve and diversify quickly has been critical to their success. One feature
sometimes suggested to be important to this ability in cichlids, including
haplochromines, is illustrated in figure 7.4: the pharyngeal jaws and teeth, a
second set of jaws and teeth present in the throats of ray-finned fishes (the
vast majority of fishes). In 1973, Karel Liem hypothesized that
modifications in cichlids to their pharyngeal jaws, making them more
powerful and versatile, are a “key innovation” that facilitated the
independent evolution of the familiar oral jaws relative to the pharyngeal
jaws, thereby facilitating ecological specialization and diversification.Subsequent studies have continued to emphasize the importance of their
pharyngeal jaws to the ecological versatility of cichlids, but there may be
greater integration between the oral and pharyngeal jaws than in Liem’s
original vision.
The next task in Lake Victoria research is to trace the diversification of
the haplochromines through the history of the lake. Nare Ngoepe, a PhD
student in Bern, is leading an analysis of the fish fossils, working with
Muschick and Seehausen on more recently collected cores. Her study of
teeth identified using their visible features is being complemented by
investigations based on DNA extractions and analyses. In other younger
lake systems and the ocean, environmental DNA from sediments has begun
to yield results for timeframes shorter than those of most ancient lakes. In
two Swedish lakes, sediment DNA showed different histories of postglacial
colonization by whitefish over a scale of about 10,000 years, while in
Beppu Bay, Japan, variation in the abundance of anchovy, sardine and jack
mackerel over the last 300 years was broadly similar in datasets derived
from sedimentary DNA and more traditional methods. Approaches using
ancient DNA will likely prove informative in ancient lakes too; the question
will be how far back in time reliable results can be obtained, and whether
their quality will be sufficient to allow analyses to go beyond identifications
that rely on individual genes, for example to look at patterns of
hybridization. The technical challenges are substantial, but the insights
generated could be extraordinary. The Lake Victoria researchers have
presented some initial genetic results, and other studies have made use of
environmental DNA to study Tanganyika fish in the modern lake.
In Lake Ohrid, which straddles Albania and North Macedonia, studies of
diatoms in sediment samples have enabled some of the most comprehensive
analyses of diversification and extinction yet reported for an ancient lake
radiation, or perhaps any radiation. Diatoms are exquisitely complex in
form—miniatures of abstract art. Some electron microscope images from
Ohrid’s sediments are shown below (figure 7.5), but I encourage the
diatom-smitten reader to also look at the many color images available with
a few keystrokes and an internet connection.
The Ohrid record is exceptionally long at 1.36 million years and extends
from the formation of the lake to the present. Wilke worked with a large
international team to sample diatoms across the entire 447-meter (of thecomposite core) Ohrid record, at a resolution of 2,000–4,000 years (fig.
7.6). They encountered and quantified 152 species endemic to Ohrid, or
about 75 percent of those known to have occurred in the lake, tracking the
appearance and disappearance of each as measures of speciation and
extinction.
In the lake’s early history, when it was still widening and deepening from
1.36 to 1.15 million years ago, both the formation and extinction of species
occurred at high rates, as shown in the lower two panels of figure 7.6. The
net effect was for species richness to increase, as shown in the top panel.
This increase continued, even as both the speciation and extinction rates
diminished, eventually plateauing. The change in extinction rates is perhaps
the most novel part of this study and was not obviously predicted by theory
—although it makes intuitive sense when conditions are changing. Wilke
and colleagues interpret the gradual plateauing of overall diversity
alongside the decline in the speciation rate as resulting from the diatom
community approaching the lake’s ecological limits to species diversity. It
is striking that these processes were so steady and consistent even as
glaciers toward the poles came (the dark bars at top) and went (the light
bars), and the authors stress the buffering effect of the deep lake.Figure 7.5
The fossil diatom diversity of Lake Ohrid (scanning electron microscope image, scale bars 1–10 µm).
Source: Reprinted with minor modifications with permission from AAAS, from Wilke et al., “Deep
Drilling Reveals Massive Shifts in Evolutionary Dynamics after Formation of Ancient Ecosystem,”
Science Advances (2020), © the authors, with some rights reserved; exclusive licensee AAAS.
Distributed under a CC BY-NC 4.0 license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0).Figure 7.6
Changes in extinction rate, speciation, and species richness for endemic Lake Ohrid diatoms over
1.36 million years. The darker bars at the top of the figure indicate periods of glaciation; the light
bars indicate interglacial periods. Representative diatoms are pictured. Source: Reprinted with minor
modifications with permission from AAAS, from Wilke et al., “Deep Drilling Reveals Massive Shifts
in Evolutionary Dynamics after Formation of Ancient Ecosystem,” Science Advances (2020), © the
authors, with some rights reserved; exclusive licensee AAAS. Distributed under a CC BY-NC 4.0
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0).
These findings suggest considerable stability, at least as the lake is
experienced by its endemic diatoms. It will be fascinating to compare long￾term sediment fossil data sets from other ancient lakes to Ohrid’s as well as
patterns for different groups of organisms.
* * *
We have mainly studied evolution using observations and samples from
modern organisms, or by assembling the best data we could from the often￾sparse records in sedimentary rocks. Ancient lake sediments allow us to
directly assess nearly complete histories of aquatic environments and even
organisms over long timeframes. Sediment data show that Lake Victoria’s
cichlid flock evolved in an astonishingly short time and provide anenvironmental context for repeated episodes of hybridization in Malawi.
Fossil fish teeth have shown nascent Victoria to have been less ecologically
vacant than anticipated by theory. Ohrid’s diatom records enable the
incorporation of extinction as well as origination into models of
biodiversity, where extinction results differed from expectation. Sediment
DNA results are just starting to arrive, but will likely soon form a cascade.
They could be revolutionary.8
The Blue Eye of Siberia
От Байкала начинается сибирская поэзия.
Siberian poetry begins from Lake Baikal.
—Anton Chekhov, in letter to A. N. Pleshcheyev, 1890
Baikal, or the Sacred Sea as it is known in Russia, is the largest, deepest,
and most ancient of freshwater ancient lakes. At Baikal’s beginning, usually
considered to have been about 25 million years ago, our planet was a quite
different place—the fauna, climate, and even continents were not as they
are today.
If, for example, you were somehow to find yourself by the North
American seaside of that time, you might encounter Pelagornis sandersi, a
seabird with a wingspan of over twenty feet, about the same as an Andean
condor and a wandering albatross placed wing tip to wing tip and measured
together. Venture inland a little ways and wildlife would likely have been
common, as human hunters would be far in the future, but the mammalian
grazers would have seemed odd. Camels, or at least members of the camel
family, were abundant. South America, where the Camelidae had not yet
arrived and given rise to llamas, had an even more exotic fauna in the late
Oligocene and early Miocene (the Oligocene-Miocene boundary was 23
million years back, just after Baikal appeared), but would have been hard to
get to. The Isthmus of Panama was still beneath the waves, and the seas
were far from welcoming. Megalodon, the fifteen meters or so relative of
today’s great white sharks, was widespread.
Still, South America might well have been worth the trip. Among the
stranger sights would have been a collection of gigantic, plant-eating,
armadillo-like creatures—the glyptodonts. Your greatest worry might have
been a bird, two or three meters tall and flightless—a sort of ostrich meets
Tyrannosaurus rex. Known colloquially as terror birds, various species of
these dinosaur-esque hunters preyed and scavenged across much of South
America all the way through Baikal’s early years.Primates were well established in both South America and the old world
25 million years ago, but our own family, the Homininae, would not appear
on the drying savannas of Africa for another 15 million years or more. Even
the apes (the Hominoidea) had only just appeared, splitting off from the
other old-world monkeys and their kin.
The weather was balmy in the late Oligocene, and some of the higher
latitude regions had much more pleasant winters than they have today. In
general, the climate varied less between the poles and equator. Ice had by
this point covered Antarctica in a permanent blanket, but the glaciers later
to dominate the far north would not become established for many millions
of years. While the continents were close to their current positions, they
were not quite there. The Americas, for example, were a little closer to
Europe and Africa than they are today; the Atlantic was still opening up, a
result of slow but steady spreading along the mid-Atlantic Ridge.
Baikal too was very different 25 million years ago. In fact, while the age
of Baikal is typically given as 25–30 million years, the rift in which it is
located first appeared and filled with water much earlier, about 70 million
years back. Thus, an early form of Baikal, archeo-Baikal (figure 8.1), may
have had dinosaurs along its banks, perhaps the eight-meters-long duck￾billed dinosaur Amurosaurus, for example (figure 8.2). Archeo-Baikal
possessed a moist, subtropical climate, and while probably ecologically
significant in its time, we would not recognize it as the modern lake. It was
a string of smaller bodies of water, at most tens of meters deep, not
consistently connected and occupying only the southern basin of today’s
lake. Still, there is some evidence that a few of the invertebrate lineages
found in Baikal today got their start in the time of archeo-Baikal.
It is the Baikal that took shape 25–30 million years ago that is widely
treated as recognizably today’s lake, despite differences from the Baikal we
know, so that is the time frame I have emphasized when discussing the
lake’s beginnings. Sometimes known as proto-Baikal (figure 8.1), it was
initially two separate lakes, one in the modern south and central basins,
more or less, and one in the farther reaches of the north basin, with the
intervening areas largely dry. Owing to uplifting of surrounding land,
however, the lake had become deeper, reaching depths of hundreds of
meters in both sections.During the proto-Baikal period, the climate remained much warmer than
ours, but it was nonetheless drying and cooling. Along the shores of the
lake, forests were gradually replaced by steppe and desert-steppe
landscapes. The lake itself was not static during the long period of proto￾Baikal and continued to evolve. Approximately 10 million years ago it
became a single, continuous body of water with the submergence of the
entire northern basin. Other parts of the lake continued to deepen, reaching
over 500 meters.
Figure 8.1
The early days of Lake Baikal (the outline of the modern lake is shown, but only the shaded areas
had water): (a) archeo-Baikal stage, close to 70 million years ago; (b) proto-Baikal stage, about 25
million years ago. Depths and substrates: (1) a few meters deep, (2) up to tens of meters, (3) up to a
few hundred meters, (4) up to several hundred meters, (5) up to 1,000 meters, (6) > greater than
1,000 meters, (7) deltas, and (8) main faults. Source: Reprinted with minor modifications with
permission from Springer Nature, from Mats et al., “Late Cretaceous-Cenozoic History of the Lake
Baikal Depression and Formation of Its Unique Biodiversity,” Stratigraphy and Geological
Correlation (2011).
Dramatic changes occurred in the climate and lake starting about 3.5
million years ago, which also marks the end of the proto-Baikal period.
With continued cooling and the onset of cycles of “ice ages” about 2.6million years ago, Siberia moved toward its modern climate, or an even
colder one during episodes of glaciation. Baikal, though, was never
glaciated, even when regularly covered by ice during both glacial and
interglacial episodes, including the interglacial we are in today. It did
become much less productive when the glaciers grew, with diatom
abundance in sediments greatly reduced as ice a mile deep spread across the
northern reaches of the planet. It also continued to deepen as the Pleistocene
proceeded, reaching about1,000 meters in the south basin approximately 1.6
million years ago, at the latest. But its depth went up and down with the
advances and retreats of the Pleistocene’s massive blankets of ice too. The
ice affected precipitation, winds, and the flow of rivers around Baikal and
across most of the planet.
Figure 8.2
Amurosaurus riabinini, a duck-billed dinosaur found in eastern Russia at the time of archeo-Baikal.
Source: Institut Royal des Sciences Naturelles de Belgique.
It was surprisingly recently, in only the last 150,000 years, that Baikal
became the ultradeep, consistently oxygenated lake that we know today,
now 1,642 meters at its deepest point. There are a few other cool, deep
lakes in the northern reaches of our planet, some fairly old (see figure P.1),
but only Baikal has evolved a distinctive deepwater fauna and an open
water ecosystem dominated by a unique set of organisms.
Offshore BaikalSome of the key ecological players in Baikal’s extensive offshore waters are
utterly unlike those of any other water body. And they seem to get odder as
you work your way up the food chain.
The base of the food chain, at least in terms of animals, is a species
endemic to Baikal but not especially peculiar: the 1.5-millimeter copepod
crustacean Epischurella baikalensis (known until recently as Epischura).
Copepods are tiny crustaceans (the same group as crabs, shrimp, and
crayfish) that are usually abundant in large lakes and seas, though most
lakes lack an endemic species. When I think of these creatures, I always
think of North Atlantic right whales because a former lab mate of mine
spent many hours poring through copepod samples in order to better
understand the ecology of right whales, which were feeding on the
copepods. I still find it perplexing that despite their diminutive dimensions,
these tiny crustaceans can be abundant enough to support warm-blooded
animals as massive as whales. In Baikal, there are of course no whales
(there is a seal, which we will come to), but Epischurella is indeed
ecologically dominant among zooplankton, the lake’s tiny open water
animals, and enormously important as food for larger creatures. It is not
common in sheltered bays, especially during the summer, but in the open
waters of the lake, Epischurella often comprises more than 90 percent of
the zooplankton. It feeds on a mixture of open water algae and
microorganisms such as ciliates (with ciliates possibly more important than
long assumed), and is popularly credited with keeping the water clean and
clear.
The great majority of the Epischurella are found, year-round, in the upper
250 meters of the water column—a range extending deeper than the bottom
of most lakes, but of course encompassing only the shallower portions of
Baikal. In the summer, Epischurella exhibit “diel vertical migration,”
coming within about 5 meters of the water surface at night and heading
deeper during the day. This is a widespread phenomenon that is observed in
the zooplankton of many water bodies. It is generally thought of as an
adaptation to avoid visually hunting predators during the day, when the
waters just below the surface are well lit, while allowing feeding on
shallow-dwelling algae at night. Epischurella is well adapted to Baikal’s
chilly waters and will tolerate only a narrow range of temperatures, doing
poorly above about 15°C.There are exceptional long-term data sets for Epischurella as well as
other planktonic species and the waters they inhabit owing to a remarkable
long-term sampling effort. Three generations of Siberian biologists, all
members of a single family, began collecting physical and biological data in
Baikal in 1945 and continued into the twenty-first century (figure 8.4). At
least once a month, and usually every seven to ten days, they collected nine
sets of samples at preestablished depth intervals from 0–250 meters at a site
about 2.7 kilometers offshore, where the water is 800 meters deep. Their
collection site is a little way off the head of the Angara River, which is
shown in figure 8.3, upstream from Irkutsk. This would be an impressively
consistent record in an easily accessed subtropical location—but in a
sometimes frigid and difficult locale like Baikal it is heroic. Winter
sampling required walking over the ice at temperatures that would be
daunting for even my hardiest Canadian relatives. Occasionally the ice was
not thick enough to walk on yet was impassable by boat as well, resulting in
virtually the only situations in which sampling did not take place.
Fortunately, such conditions were infrequent and temporary.
Data collection persisted not just through difficult weather but also
through the reign of Soviet leader Joseph Stalin, the end of the Soviet
Union, and a collection of other national and international upheavals and
transitions. The initiator of the effort was Mikhail Kozhov, a professor at
Irkutsk State University and author of a famous book about Baikal from the
early 1960s. His daughter Olga Kozhova continued the program and took a
position at Irkutsk State too, followed by her daughter, Lyubov Izmest’eva,
who has now retired from that institution (though data collection continues
at a slightly reduced frequency). The family’s long-term data have enabled a
variety of analyses, including quantitative assessments of how zooplankton
communities have changed with a warming climate and shrinking ice cover.
Some of this work suggests a decline in Epischurella relative to other
zooplankton species as the lake has warmed, which we will return to.Figure 8.3
Modern Lake Baikal and its major drainages, with depth contours. Source: Reprinted with minor
modifications from Swann et al., “Changing Nutrient Cycling in Lake Baikal, the World’s Oldest
Lake,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (2020). Published under a Creative
Commons CC BY 4.0 license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0).
Figure 8.4Left to right: Lyubov Izmest’eva, as a child, with her grandfather, Mikhail Kozhov, 1955; Olga
Kozhova, about 1975. Source: Lyubov Izmest’eva.
The next link in the food chain is also a crustacean and member of the
zooplankton, but larger and more unusual. This is the gammarid amphipod,
Macrohectopus branickii, a creature up to about thirty-eight millimeters
long and a peculiar outlier in one of Baikal’s most extraordinary radiations.
Among the more than 265 species of gammarids in Baikal (the number is
tough to pin down), smaller radiations in Titicaca and a few other lakes, and
another radiation among the caves and underground waters of Europe, this
is the only freshwater gammarid amphipod to have taken up an entirely
open water existence and become a key component of an offshore food
chain.
The evolution of Macrohectopus and the other Baikal gammarids was
touched on in the first chapter, but the entire group merits a little more
attention. If nothing else, the gammarids are noteworthy for being a truly
ancient-ancient lake radiation. Exactly how long Baikal’s gammarids have
been in the lake is not known with accuracy, as the dating of their radiations
is a work in progress, but they may be as old as the modern lake itself and
could have been in archeo-Baikal.
The idea that Baikal’s gammarid radiations were the result of repeated
colonizations by non-Baikalian lineages has long been accepted, but there
has been little agreement about just how many times this happened. A trend
has emerged, however, for estimates to settle at two colonization events.
This includes the report of the most comprehensive study yet, based on
extensive sequence data, by a large international group including Sergey
Naumenko at Moscow State University and Lev Yampolsky at East
Tennessee State University as well as a follow-up study also involving
Yampolsky. Their work emphasizes the radiation that resulted from the
second invasion, the Acanthogammaridae and allies. This contains much of
the ecological diversity seen in Baikal’s gammarids, such as the “abyssal”
species found in the depths of the lake and species that live parasitically
inside the brood chambers of a different amphipod (brood chambers are a
little bit like the pouches of kangaroos). It also includes those gammarids
most associated with Baikal: heavily armored species like
Acanthogammarus victorii, which are convergent with species in Titicaca
and the Caspian Sea (figure 8.5).Figure 8.5
Left to right: Convergent body armature in gammarids from the Caspian Sea (Axelboeckia spinosa),
Lake Baikal (Acanthogammarus lappaceus), and Lake Titicaca (Hyalella armata). Source: Reprinted
with minor modifications with permission from Springer Nature, from Copilaș-Ciocianu and Sidorov,
“Taxonomic, Ecological and Morphological Diversity of Ponto-Caspian Gammaridean Amphipods:
A Review,”Organisms Diversity and Evolution (2022).
One finding emerging from studies of this main Baikalian gammarid
radiation is that speciation and diversification rates were highest close to its
start. This is satisfying in its consistency with theory, which predicts most
rapid diversification when the ecological opportunity is greatest—
sometimes known as an “early burst.” But it makes settling on the
relationships among the major lineages, which diverged then, especially
difficult. It also creates challenges for working out the relationships with
non-Baikalian gammarids. Things happened fast at the start followed by
millions of years of further evolution that tend to throw a genetic smoke
screen in front of the earliest events. It is as if evolution were playing the
children’s game of telephone, where one child whispers a phrase to another
one, who then whispers it to another child, and so on. After passing between
a dozen or so players, the phrase may be changed yet easily recognizable or
almost entirely different. The more players in telephone, or the more
generations since the burst of an adaptive radiation, the greater the potential
for change and the more difficult it is to make out the phrase, or
relationships, at the start.
The older but less extensive radiation, known as the Micruropodidae,
contains mainly species that are “fossorial,” living buried in the sediments
most of the time and possessing smooth bodies well suited to such a
lifestyle. Unexpectedly, it is in this group that repeated analyses have placed
the open water–living Macrohectopus. It is a genuinely puzzling result thata species with a wildly distinctive form and ecology should be found to
have evolved from a group in which shape, body features, and ecology are
relatively homogeneous and based on a life within the sediments—rather
than from a larger set of species exhibiting much greater diversity. There is
no clear explanation for this odd state of affairs as yet, but one observation
may prove telling. One of the burrowing species, Micruropus wahli, has
been caught in large quantities in surface waters at night. Perhaps habits of
this sort in members of the Micruropodidae facilitated the evolution of a
free-swimming open water feeder. It is likely also pertinent that in this older
lineage, there was abundant time for Macrohectopus to diverge and adapt to
its new lifestyle. In addition, over such a long expanse of time, related
species that might have clarified the evolution of Macrohectopus may have
gone extinct in one of the many ecological upheavals that punctuate
Baikal’s long history. Analyses of sequence data indicate strong natural
selection has taken place on the genes of Macrohectopus, possibly in
support of adaptations to an active planktonic mode of life as well as the
low temperatures and high-pressure characteristic of the deep open waters
in which it often occurs.
Macrohectopus is so abundant in the modern Baikal that it is frequently
compared to krill, the crustacean of the Southern Ocean that is the key food
source for a long list of marine mammal and bird species as well as the
focus of a human fishery. Abundant and large enough to have substantial
energetic value, Macrohectopus is a critical food for several Baikal fishes,
including the omul, the whitefish that has been the basis for Baikal’s most
important fishery (and I understand why; omul really is delicious).
Like the smaller plankton on which it feeds, Macrohectopus performs
vertical migrations. Occupying a wide range of depths from the surface to
700 meters, it typically moves from deeper waters during the day to the
upper 50 meters of the water column at night. The density of its
aggregations is noteworthy, as is the synchronization of its vertical
migrations, which can involve ascents as rapid as 4 meters per minute.
Keeping in mind this pace corresponds to one to two hundred body lengths,
it is about the same as a human swimmer of 1.5 meters height rising at 150–
300 meters per minute. Anyone who has tried to free dive to any depth or
even just do some speedy lengths in a pool can appreciate just how fast that
is.Not every Macrohectopus makes exactly the same migration, though. It
is the large females that move the farthest. Males, which are only a fraction
of the size of females, tend to make a shorter vertical migration. The
movements of the juveniles, who typically do not go as deep during the day,
are also less extreme than those of the adult females.
One of the most abundant fish in Baikal feeds extensively on
Macrohectopus and is equally exceptional, as it is also an open water
species from a group that almost always sticks to the bottom. It is also
simply a strange creature, the golomyanka, Comephorus baicalensis. It is
the most unusual member of a radiation of sculpins, an ancestrally marine
group of fishes that have evolved into 100 or so freshwater species across
the Northern Hemisphere, but that are nowhere as diverse in ecology or
form as in Baikal.
Most freshwater sculpins, members of the superfamily Cottoidea, live
along the bottom of streams, rivers, and lakes in relatively shallow waters.
In Baikal, they have diversified into about thirty-three species found
nowhere else, evolving in two novel ecological directions: into the depths,
the abyss of the lake, and the open water zone. Given how thoroughly they
dominate the fish community of each zone and how few competing species
are present, the ecological excursions of this lineage of Siberian sculpins
are likely another example of opportunity-driven adaptive radiation. The
sculpins comprise well over half of the fifty-two species and subspecies of
fish that are native to the lake.
Compared to the great age of the gammarid diversification, the radiation
of the sculpins is relatively recent. Estimates of the radiation’s timing are
still being refined, but it seems clear that it took place in the essentially
modern version of Baikal, most likely between roughly one and five million
years ago, but a few million years earlier is quite possible. In another
departure from the patterns seen in the gammarids, Baikal’s sculpins appear
to have all evolved from a single ancestor. Thus, they are all more related to
each other than to any non-Baikal sculpin. Most likely they evolved from
another species of freshwater sculpin from within, more or less, the genus
Cottus. This placement suggests that the various Baikalian sculpins,
currently assigned to different families, will need to have their classification
revisited. One point of overlap between Baikal’s sculpins and gammarids,
though, is the tempo of their diversification. The sculpins diversified rapidlyat the start too. Moreover, these groups are linked ecologically in that
different species of gammarids are the main prey items for the various
species of sculpins; their radiations are connected.
One of the reasons an open water sculpin is considered such an exotic
creature is that among fishes, sculpins are notably ill-suited for this way of
life. An open water sculpin is almost as biologically incongruous as a
celery-feeding shark. The main shortcoming of sculpins when it comes to
open water life is that they lack a swim bladder, the organ that most fishes
living off the bottom use to maintain buoyancy. Through fine adjustments,
many fishes dial up or down the gas present in this organ in order to stay
neutral and level, neither sinking nor rising, much as a scuba diver does
with a buoyancy compensator. Too little gas in the diver’s inflatable vest
and the diver sinks; too much and they rocket to the surface, which can be
even more dangerous. Sculpins cannot make any such adjustments so they
have had to find other ways to keep a stable position in the water column
without expending undue amounts of scarce energy. They especially need to
avoid sinking, the natural tendency of fish adapted to living on the bottom
(still, partially open water sculpins less extreme than Baikal’s occur in at
least two North American lakes, though seldom mentioned in the literature).
There are a few species of open water sculpins in Baikal, but it is the
golomyanka (the big one; there is a second smaller species that we will
come to shortly) that shows the most extreme adaptations for maintaining
neutral buoyancy. Whereas bottom-dwelling sculpins can have bodies
containing less than 3 percent body fat, the adult golomyanka is commonly
over 40 percent fat by volume. This is a remarkable amount; a fatty
hamburger, for example, is about 20 percent fat, or 30 percent at the most.
Cheddar cheese, one of the fattiest of cheeses, is about 33 percent lipid.
Brie, which seems to me awfully rich, is about 28 percent. They are all
much lighter fare than golomyanka. The golomyanka also has bones that are
less mineralized than those of bottom-dwelling sculpins. Reduced bone
mineralization and thus density is likely even more important for buoyancy
in the other open water sculpin species, none of which have lipid levels at
all close to those of the golomyanka. In addition to its high fat levels and
reduced bone density, the golomyanka is similar to some deepwater marine
fish in having almost no pigmentation. Therefore under some conditions,
the tail end of a golomyanka can be eerily translucent.In most sculpins, females lay their eggs underneath stones; males spray
their sperm over the eggs in order to fertilize them and then defend them as
they develop. The larvae may be bottom or open water dwelling, depending
on the species, but they eventually develop into bottom-dwelling adults. But
the golomyanka and the closely related Comephorus dybowskii, the little
golomyanka, have also modified their reproduction for a fully open water
existence. Instead of the male releasing sperm over the eggs after they leave
the female’s body, the two species have evolved internal fertilization and
live birth, completely emancipating both of them from any link to the
bottom of the lake.
Both species also show a predictable dietary progression as they develop.
At small sizes, they mainly eat the copepod, Epischurella, and then shift to
the open water gammarid Macrohectopus as they grow. This remains the
overwhelmingly dominant prey item for little golomyankas, but as they
grow larger both species eat golomyanka larvae as well as the larvae of
other pelagic sculpins. For the little golomyanka, fish larvae seem to be an
infrequent food, but for the larger species they are sometimes the main prey
item. Both species participate in the daily vertical migrations of Baikal’s
open water fauna, following their copepod and gammarid prey as they
move toward the surface at night and the depths during the day. The
golomyanka go deeper than some, however—sometimes reaching the
abyssal depths of the lake. While doing research on coral reef fish, I have
sometimes hung in the water of a passage leading from the open ocean to
the lagoon of an atoll as schools of open water fishes move onto or off the
reef. It is an awesome sight, watching all of that life move past. I imagine
that if one could hang in Baikal’s water column, it would be an equally
beautiful and much eerier procession as the translucent golomyanka make
their way up or down, along with dense layers of Epischurella and
Macrohectopus, at twilight and dawn.
Unfortunately for those living alongside Baikal, the golomyanka are
solitary creatures and thus difficult to fish profitably. They are of great
value, though, to the next step up the food chain to another odd creature to
find in a freshwater lake.
Baikal’s most famous denizen is the nerpa, Pusa sibirica, the only
species of seal confined entirely to fresh water. There are seals that occur in
freshwater lakes in other places—such as eastern Canada and northernEurope—but they are clearly populations of familiar marine species that
occasionally colonize short-lived postglacial lakes. There is one other lake,
the Caspian Sea, that is home to a species of seal, but a seal in a vast salty
lake usually labelled a “sea” seems less noteworthy than Baikal’s nerpa.
Anyway, the Caspian seal, Pusa caspica, is closely related to the nerpa.
So how did a seal come to inhabit a lake over a1,000 kilometers from the
nearest ocean and even more distant if one follows the rivers? The most
likely scenario is that the seals swam there from the frigid seas along the
north coast of Siberia via the Yenisei River and then Angara River, into
which Baikal drains. The DNA sequence data, and shared parasites too,
suggest that Baikal seals evolved from adventurous ringed seals that
managed to make this ambitious trip. The Caspian seal likely had a similar
origin, though separate and independent from the nerpa’s. Sequence
analyses suggest the nerpa lineage broke off from the ringed seal well after
the radiations of the gammarids and sculpins, about 1.15 million years ago,
give or take 500,000 years. Thus, the nerpa arrived in Baikal decidedly after
the start of the Pleistocene and its cycles of glacial advance and retreat.
River flows varied greatly with changes in the glaciers, and huge temporary
lakes sometimes came and went. It is possible that these dynamics played a
role in the colonization of Baikal by ringed seals, and the Caspian too,
although no well-supported scenario has yet emerged.
Owing to Baikal’s size and climate, nerpa have been able to establish a
life cycle and ecology surprisingly similar to that of other ice-loving seals.
These relatively small seals, which reach about 1.65 meters and 130
kilograms, live mainly in the northern and central basins of Baikal, most of
the year staying in open water well away from the coasts. Adult animals
winter alone on the ice using the thick claws on their front flippers to
maintain a hole through which to access air when they are in the water. In
February or March, females bear young in a lair made among the snowdrifts
and nurse them for 1.5 to 2 months—longer than ringed seals. The life span
of the nerpa is also relatively long, sometimes over 50 years. These
extended suckling times and life spans are likely a reflection, at least in
part, of a great advantage to a seal of life in Baikal: a paucity of predators.
Ringed seals, the closest relative of the nerpa, are a key food item for
several large predators of far northern seas, including the polar bear and
killer whale; Greenland sharks also eat ringed seals. In departing the Arctic
Ocean, the nerpa left these voracious and effective predators behind. Thereare brown bears at Baikal, and they may take an occasional hauled-out seal,
but their hunting is nothing like that of the polar bear, an essentially marine
animal that achieves much of its annual caloric intake while hunting from
the sea ice. Humans hunt nerpa and have likely done so for a long time, but
the population seems so far to tolerate the numbers taken, some of which
are hunted legally and others illegally.
The resilience of the nerpa to all manner of human insult may well be the
seal’s most remarkable characteristic—resilience not just to hunting but also
to the effects of viruses that we and our animals may have helped spread,
and pollutants such as dioxin and mercury. Amazingly for a large mammal
in such a constrained environment, the nerpa is an International Union for
Conservation of Nature “species of least concern.” Some of the population’s
hardiness may be a result of a stable food source, as nerpa eat a great deal
of golomyanka, both the big and small ones. Because there is no fishery for
these solitary open water sculpins, their abundance has not been depressed
by human removals, which is a serious problem for other marine mammals
that compete with human fisheries. But the seals also eat the even more
abundant Macrohectopus amphipods, and a detailed study of the seal’s
feeding behavior, published in 2020, has revealed that nerpa are better
adapted to this food source than was long appreciated.
Yuuki Y. Watanabe of Japan’s National Institute of Polar Research,
Eugene Baranov of the Baikal Seal Aquarium in Irkutsk, and Nobuyuki
Miyazaki of the University of Tokyo temporarily attached biologging
packages to several foraging nerpa in 2018. Each package contained
equipment that recorded aspects of the seal’s environment and swimming,
including a video recorder. Marine mammals that eat open water
invertebrate prey typically do so by catching many at a time using
adaptations like the baleen of right whales, which sieve copepod prey by the
thousands. The data from the foraging seals, however, revealed that they
caught Macrohectopus one by one—but fast, at the highest rates yet
recorded for single-prey-feeding aquatic mammals. Seals caught an average
of fifty-seven Macrohectopus per dive, with each dive lasting about ten
minutes. This led to the consumption of sometimes thousands of these
gammarids per day.Figure 8.6
Depth data for the foraging dives of individual nerpa in June 2018. As the Macrohectopus ascend at
dusk, the seals’ move shallower, and their foraging depth decreases even within a single dive. The
reverse happens as the Macrohectopus descend, with dawn’s approach (note dusk comes late and
dawn early at Baikal’s latitude in the summer). Source: Reprinted with minor modifications with
permission of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA, © 2020, National Academy of
Sciences, from Watanabe et al., “Ultrahigh Foraging Rates of Baikal Seals Make Tiny Endemic
Amphipods Profitable in Lake Baikal,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (2020).
Hunting was so efficient in part because the seals followed the vertical
migrations of their prey, feeding on the gammarids mainly at night when
they are shallower. In addition, they tracked the dense layer of migrating
gammarids as it moved over the course of the evening and even during a
single dive (figure 8.6). This highlights the pace and synchrony of these
migrations.
Nerpa may also be aided in their high-speed snapping up of tiny prey by
teeth that appear to be specialized for this purpose (figure 8.7). Like a few
other seal species that feed on open water crustaceans, nerpa have comblike
postcanine teeth. These likely allow the large amounts of water taken in
during rapid foraging to be efficiently expelled while retaining prey.
The convergence with crabeater seals, which forage on krill in Antarctic
waters, is especially striking, as is the contrast between the teeth of the
nerpa and those of the closely related Caspian seal, which does not feed on
amphipods. It remains to be seen if nerpa can suck in prey at a distance, as
crabeater seals can. A captive crabeater was observed to suck in prey from
half a meter!
Watanabe and colleagues suggest that the nerpa foraging on gammarid
amphipods, rather than on the fish that eat the amphipods, has important
ecosystem implications as well as for the nerpa. By eating lower on thefood chain, the nerpa can take advantage of higher prey abundance owing to
the energy that would have been lost in the transition from amphipods to
fish. This may help to explain the exceptional abundance of nerpa in a deep,
cold, unproductive lake; nerpa densities are several times higher per square
kilometer than the densities of Caspian seals or two other freshwater seal
populations. The nerpa’s ability to survive and maintain high densities in a
stressed, limited environment by eating lower on the food chain may carry a
message for us too. Our odds of lasting a little longer in our own stressed,
high-density habitat will likely be higher if we move down the food chain a
link or two.Figure 8.7
The jaws and teeth of the nerpa and other seals, with feeding on krill or amphipods indicated, and
their relationships. Note how different the Nerpa’s teeth are from those of the closely related Caspian
seal. Source: Reprinted with minor modifications with permission of the National Academy of
Sciences of the USA, © 2020, National Academy of Sciences, from Watanabe et al., “Ultrahigh
Foraging Rates of Baikal Seals Make Tiny Endemic Amphipods Profitable in Lake Baikal,”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (2020).
The Abyss: Desert and OasisBaikal’s sponge forests are distinctive and beautiful, and its open water
food chain is like no other. But among freshwater lakes, its most unique
feature is its abyss.
Oxygen levels in the deepest areas of Baikal are often slightly lower than
at the surface, but a great deal higher than in the depths of other ancient
lakes and more than sufficient to support mature fish, amphipods, and other
large invertebrates. Light from the surface, however, is almost absent below
about 400 meters, meaning there is no photosynthesis and most food, which
is sparse, must come from above. Temperatures are relatively constant,
from about 3.2 to 4.0°C. Thus, the environment is stable, if difficult.
In the abyss, below about 400 meters, Baikal’s fishes are all endemics
and all sculpins. Other fish just do not go so deep, with pressure being one
important reason. The majority of sculpin species occupy a wide depth
range, including shallower waters that receive natural light and at least
some of the deep, dark waters; about nine species are confined to shallower
waters and do not venture into the abyss. About six bottom-dwelling species
(i.e., excluding the golomyankas of open waters) live overwhelmingly
below 400 meters, including two that are generally found below 900 meters.
In their authoritative overview of Baikal’s biodiversity, Kozhova and
Izmest’eva provide an unappealing portrait of these deepwater sculpins:
“[They have] a flabby body, covered with a tender skin easily gathering in
folds . . . [and their] eyes are mostly reduced. The body is colorless or light
pale-yellow and, as a rule, there are no spots.” In the gammarids, the vast
majority of species are either native to shallow waters or can live in a wide
range of depths. The number of species found in the abyss is small, and the
number found there exclusively is smaller still. Kozhova and Izmest’eva
describe some common features of the abyssal species: “[The] eyes . . . lack
pigmentation or are pale pink, but their antennae, as a rule, are very long.
Body coloration is usually whitish or pinky-white.”
Other Baikalian invertebrate radiations are less well studied than the
gammarids, but are known to be represented in Baikal’s dark depths. These
include annelid worms, among them Tubifex sp., which are related to the
worms sold as live food in aquarium shops, and planarian flatworms that
include a set of frequently carnivorous deepwater species up to thirty
centimeters in length. For those of us who know planarians as tiny creatures
sometimes used in biology teaching laboratories, usually with an emphasison their remarkable regenerative abilities, these large predatory worms are a
bit nightmarish. If their regenerative capacities are like those of their
smaller relations, they would seem a perfect model for a horror movie
creature, and indeed they sit surprisingly high on the food chain. There are
also sponges, snails, and copepod crustaceans. At a smaller scale, numerous
undescribed nematode worms await study, as they do in many habitats;
ostracod crustaceans, or seed shrimp, are notably diverse as well.
The abyssal denizen that is perhaps most surprising is an insect. It is
quite ordinary to find insect larvae in streams and lakes, but finding them
under more than a kilometer of water, which they must somehow safely
traverse to metamorphose into adults and reproduce, is unexpected to say
the least. Yet in the stygian recesses of Baikal, where for millions of years
sunlight has been a rumor from afar, and the difference between a blistering
July and the most numbing January is a fraction of a degree, one can find
the larvae of chironomid midges. These are not exotic beasts like a horror
movie flatworm or a golomyanka but instead prosaic little creatures that are
related to the “bloodworms” commonly sold as frozen food for aquarium
fish.
Most of the deepwater denizens of Baikal get their nutrition from the rain
of dying, dead, and decaying organic matter that emanates from productive
waters closer to the surface, just as do many deep-sea creatures. Thus, the
depths are in most places something of a desert, though really there is no
terrestrial habitat that provides a satisfactory analogy. Even in a desert there
are cacti or other organisms that manage to perform photosynthesis and
provide a foundation for a food chain. In the deep, there is just that slow
rain and the occasional bonanza of a dead sturgeon or maybe a seal, likely
to be quickly pounced on by specialized scavenging gammarids with keen
senses for the detection of such prizes.
Except . . . just as in the deep sea, in Baikal one can sometimes find a
source of energy and carbon that comes from below. Baikal has
hydrothermal vents and methane seeps, and these are the basis for higher￾density animal communities, much like in the ocean. So far, there do not
seem to be any Baikalian equivalents of the tube worms and bivalves of
deep-sea vents, which have chemoautotrophic (i.e., extracting energy from
the materials flowing from the vent, without photosynthesis) bacteria living
symbiotically within them, but there are free living bacteria that similarlyform the basis for food chains. This is not completely unprecedented in
fresh water. For example, there are vents in Lake Tanganyika that are
associated with communities of microbes, but any such communities in the
abyss of Tanganyika would be in waters that generally lack oxygen. Hence
persistent animal communities around deepwater vents would not be
possible.
The study of Baikal’s vent and seep communities only got started in the
last few decades as deep-diving minisubmarines became available for the
direct exploration of the lake’s deeps. Exploring Baikal’s unknown abyss in
a minisub sounds like a fantasy come to life for anyone who grew up
watching Jacques Cousteau and similar programs, as many of us did. But
apparently these trips require fortitude. A colleague of mine who has made
descents in the Atlantic reported how tight the confines were, with two or
three people crammed together and no bathroom facilities. On one trip
some years back, one of the scientists developed digestive tract problems;
since there is great reluctance to interrupt these expensive excursions and
the ascent can easily take a few hours regardless, the atmosphere in the sub
became rather thick.
The advantage of the subs is that direct, recorded observations can be
made of the environment around the sub, and carefully selected samples,
including live animals, can be collected with slurp guns, sediment corers,
and other devices. The video observations have revealed otherworldly
environments quite different from the flat, deep sediment that otherwise
dominates the bottom of Baikal.Figure 8.8
“Saint Petersburg” Baikal methane seep community. Source: Reprinted with minor modifications
with permission from Springer Nature, from Sitnikova et al., “Trophic Relationships between
Macroinvertebrates and Fish in St. Petersburg Methane Seep Community in Abyssal Zone of Lake
Baikal,” Contemporary Problems of Ecology (2017).
At the Saint Petersburg methane seep, about 1,400 meters below the
surface in the central portion of Baikal, the bottom landscape is small hills
of four to six meters in height (figure 8.8). These are composed partly of
ice-like, transparent blocks of gas hydrate, which are best known from the
deep sea. In the ocean, they sometimes form where methane bubbles up
under the terrific pressures and low temperatures of deep water. At other
sites, small, gurgling mud volcanoes may occur, or hillocks and tubes of
bitumen, essentially an oily tar.Figure 8.9
The abyssal sculpin Abyssocottus korotneffi alongside a giant planarian of the Dendrocoelidae at
Baikal’s Saint Petersburg methane seep. Source: Reprinted with minor modifications with permission
from Springer Nature, from Sideleva, “Communities of the Cottoid Fish (Cottoidei) in the Areas of
Hydrothermal Vents and Cold Seeps of the Abyssal Zone of Baikal Lake,” Journal of Ichthyology
(2016).
Mats of bacteria are common at these lake-floor oases and likely form the
basis for the food chains. Many of the organisms generally characteristic of
abyssal Baikal are present at these sites, though in much-elevated numbers.
Thus, there are sponges, sculpins, planarian worms, annelid worms,
gastropods, chironomid midge larvae, and others. Large flatworms are often
notably common (figure 8.9).
While the species present overlap extensively with those of the
surrounding lake-floor desert, the relative abundances of individual species,
which are best known for sculpins and gammarids, may be different. They
may also differ between seeps and vents. Among the sculpins at the Saint
Petersburg methane seep, for example, Valentina Sideleva of the Russian
Academy of Sciences reports that Neocottus werestschagini is the most
common species. This species, however, is infrequently encountered on the
lake bottom generally, or about fourteen times less often relative to other
species, than at the seep. At the Frolikha Bay hydrothermal vents, located in
400–480 meters of water, a species of the same genus was overwhelmingly
dominant, but this time it was Neocottus thermalis, a more extreme
specialist in that it is only found at hydrothermal vents and is the only
sculpin known to possess such an exclusive affinity. It has no obviousadaptations that restrict it to the vents so the reason for this inflexible
association remains unknown. The two golomyanka species are also notably
abundant at both the vent and seep sites. Up to fifteen individuals could be
seen in a single video frame taken at the vent, and thirty at the seep. They
were therefore several times more abundant than they are in the open lake.
This pattern too is a puzzle, as they are not feeding on vent or seep
organisms; instead, they are sometimes eaten by the bottom-dwelling
sculpins that are abundant there.
By examining the carbon and nitrogen isotopes present in the organisms
dwelling at the seep, Sideleva and a group of Russian colleagues from
several institutions were able to infer whether seep organisms’ nutrition
originated with seep microorganisms or came from a food chain that began
with photosynthetic production closer to the surface. They found that many
of the bottom-dwelling sculpins, gammarids, and planarians appeared
ultimately to be deriving most of their energy and carbon from the seeps.
Similar results have been obtained for vent systems, although in contrast to
the bottom-dwelling sculpins, golomyankas were found to derive their
nutrition from the open water ecosystem, where most energy originates with
photosynthesis near the surface. None of these analyses have identified any
organisms that appear to be hosting symbiotic bacteria that are generating
energy and carbon compounds. But all conclusions for these systems are
still based on small samples. Surely there will be many more surprises
coming, especially as exploration expands through the use of less
expensive, remotely controlled underwater drones.
Baikal in the Anthropocene
The final chapter of this book is focused on the accelerated pace of change
lately confronting ancient lakes, as our species comes to dominate this
unusual little planet ever more exhaustively. Yet it would seem incomplete
to depart from Baikal without saying a few words about the developments
there during the last decades, particularly since they encompass major
features of its massive ecosystem. Processes in Baikal are also somewhat
special because although there are other ancient lakes at high latitudes,
especially if one uses Stephanie Hampton and colleagues’ definition, Baikalis the highest-latitude ancient lake with extensive endemism, and the only
such lake covered in ice each winter.
As the largest and deepest of freshwater lakes, with a vast volume
comprising 20 percent of the planet’s liquid fresh water, one might expect
Baikal to be resistant to change. Thus, there was a good deal of interest
when comprehensive analyses began to appear in the 2000s of the sixty￾year data sets collected by Kozhov, Kozhova, and Izmest’eva. These and
other data show clearly that Baikal is warming and that the annual duration
of ice is shrinking (figure 8.10). It is also becoming apparent that these
changes are affecting the lake’s organisms indirectly through effects on
other physical processes in the lake as well as directly. In some cases,
changes in physical processes are affecting how organisms interact with
each other.
In the first major report presenting comprehensive analyses of the data
collected by the Kozhov family, Hampton, of the US National Center for
Ecological Analysis and Synthesis (now at the Carnegie Institution for
Science), Izmest’eva, and a team of collaborators from multiple institutions
reported on the biological changes that had accompanied the warming of
Baikal. They found that algal mass has been increasing overall, as have the
numbers of a group of widely distributed zooplankton known as
cladocerans, which do well at higher temperatures. In contrast, the endemic,
cold-loving Epischurella has been either declining slightly or stable. Owing
to physiological and other differences between the different types of
zooplankton, Hampton, Izmest’eva, and colleagues suggest that if these
trends persist or intensify, patterns of nutrient cycling in the lake could be
substantially affected, with broad ecological consequences.
In a complementary analysis of data from shallow sediment cores, an
international team led by British scientists George Swann (University of
Nottingham) and Anson McKay (University College London) looked at
how natural and human-driven changes have affected nutrient and chemical
cycling, and ultimately changes in algae productivity. Their time frame of
2,000 years was longer, but still comparatively recent. Their most important
conclusion is that since the mid-nineteenth century, the supply of key
nutrients has greatly increased, from the nutrient-rich deeper waters to the
nutrient-limited shallower waters where light is high and algae can be
productive. They suggest that this is the result of documented increases inwind strength over the lake, which can cause more extensive “ventilation”
of deep waters. The cause of increased wind strength is not yet known with
confidence, but decreased ice cover along with increased air and surface￾water temperatures likely contribute.
Figure 8.10
Temperature and ice cover trends at Baikal. Source: Reprinted with minor modifications from Swann
et al., “Changing Nutrient Cycling in Lake Baikal, the World’s Oldest Lake,” Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences (2020). Published under a Creative Commons CC BY 4.0 license
(https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0).
Hampton and Izmest’eva have built on these and other findings in a
mathematical model of the Baikal open water ecosystem, developed with
several additional collaborators including Sabine Wollrab of Michigan State
University and Berlin’s Leibniz Institute of Freshwater Ecology and Inland
Fisheries. In the model, they seek to integrate biological interactions
between organisms with changes in the physical environment. Their goal is
to better understand the causes of the recent changes in seasonal patterns of
algae abundance, especially in the winter. Baikal, with sunlight penetrating
its clear winter ice, has traditionally had a peak in algae productivity in thewinter and early spring—yet another unusual feature of this system. In the
late twentieth century, these peaks were often delayed, weaker, or simply
absent. The Kozhov family’s data detected these patterns, which can seldom
be evaluated in lakes, because of their determined sampling through the
winters. The model, which takes into account Epischurella abundance and
grazing, and considers separate populations of cold-adapted and warm￾water-adapted algae, suggests that these changes in algae abundance may be
largely the result of reduced annual ice cover and that if ice coverage
continues to diminish the winter algae peak may disappear altogether. The
model is somewhat complex, but its predicted outcomes arise at least in part
from the greater ability of the Epischurella to suppress algae population
growth by eating the algae when there is less ice cover. The model describes
a “regime shift,” a steplike switch from one state of a system to a different
state involving a different range of variation. No model is final, and this one
may evolve as our understanding of the ecological interactions evolves, but
the contrast between regime shift and steady, gradual change is worrisome
and even frightening. It indicates that global warming and other human￾generated environmental changes may sometimes cause abrupt shifts in
ecosystems that may be hard to both predict and reverse.
* * *
Lake Baikal, the largest and most ancient of freshwater ancient lakes, had
its start in the time of the dinosaurs and began to take its modern form well
before the appearance of our own lineage, the Homininae. Yet it only
assumed its current deep and thoroughly oxygenated character in the late
Pleistocene. Among its diverse endemic fauna, its gammarid amphipods and
sculpins are especially well studied. Species from both radiations are
uncharacteristically important in open water food chains, and also as prey
for the planet’s only species of freshwater seal, the nerpa. Other gammarid
and sculpin species are important in Baikal’s highly distinctive abyssal vent
and seep communities. As the biodiverse ancient lake at the highest latitude,
Baikal is showing the direct and indirect effects of global warming on its
physical and biological systems and processes. The lake may be
experiencing an ecological regime shift that should give pause to creatures
living in a larger yet still finite ecosystem—one that is quickly heating too.9
Pliocene, Pleistocene, Holocene, Anthropocene . . .
Ancient Lakes Meet Modern Homo sapiens
We want to leave a lake without pollution for our children. . . . [W]e can fight every day
to care for and clean our Lake Titicaca, unique in the world.
—Anonymous, from an interview in Peru near shore of Titicaca (translated from
Aymara)
When I first went to Sulawesi as a teenager in the 1980s, I spent a few days
in Jakarta on my way home, visiting the extended Indonesian family I
gained when my (Canadian) uncle Brent married my (Indonesian) aunt
Paulina. One of my cousins toured me around Jakarta on his motorbike, and
although neither of us had much facility in the other’s language, we had a
grand time. After I returned home, we lost touch, but I looked him up
almost twenty years later when I returned to start research in Lake Matano.
He too had finished his education and had begun a career in the tech field,
but when the Asian financial crisis hit in the late 1990s, he had to find other
work. He ended up in the timber business, buying and selling logs. In
Indonesia in the 1990s and 2000s, this meant dealing with private
companies, but also the military, which operated a variety of businesses. It
was fascinating to hear of his experiences, for a biologist interested in
conservation, but disturbing too. Indonesia’s forests are dwindling, like
most tropical forests, and their loss affects watersheds, lakes, and ultimately
local as well as global climates. I was left with a strong sense of the
economic realities and contingencies that drive the individual decisions that
collectively, will have major effects on how badly the current mass
extinction turns out.
As we move into the Anthropocene, the proposed geological epoch that
began with the start of significant human impact on the earth’s ecosystems
and geology, ancient lakes are experiencing some of the same stresses that
are affecting tropical forests. They are also subject to other, distinct
stressors and are in important respects especially vulnerable; lakes are likeislands of water in a sea of land, and their denizens are susceptible to
disturbance in the same way that creatures that have evolved in isolation on
islands are easily extinguished, and their ecosystems disrupted. We know
that of the extinctions documented since European expansion around the
globe, approximately 75 percent have occurred on islands, and islands
harbor about half of the species that are currently threatened—despite
covering less than 7 percent of land surface area. It has also become clear
that population declines and extinction risks are generally higher for
freshwater species than for other habitats. Moreover, as for some islands,
the discrete boundaries typical of large lakes remove an important option
available to land-dwelling continental organisms. If lake creatures are
suffering from warming (or other stressors), they can rarely just move to a
new home farther from the equator or at a higher altitude. Thus, global
warming is expected to cause many more ancient lake extinctions in the
coming years, but other human-caused stresses have already caused
extinctions. Mindanao Island’s Lake Lanao provides an extreme example.
Figure 9.1
Lake Lanao. Source: Björn Stelbrink.
Lake Lanao (figure 9.1) is the largest lake in the Philippines. Its age is
somewhat uncertain, but it is likely over 100,000 years and is widely treated
as an ancient lake (see, for example, figure P.1). Lanao is not notably large,
but with an area of 357 square kilometers and a maximum depth of 112meters, it is substantial. When John Langdon Brooks wrote about Lanao in
his classic 1950’s synthesis, he emphasized the radiation of cyprinid fishes
(minnows, carps, and kin) that completely dominate the lake’s fishes, with
approximately eighteen endemic species and only two species of fish from
other groups. Albert Herre of Stanford University conducted the initial
studies of Lanao’s fishes and found some of the cyprinids so distinct in
form that he assigned them to different genera—a total of five. George
Sprague Myers, also of Stanford University, was just as impressed with the
diversity and uniqueness of Lanao’s fishes, asserting that “the peculiar . . .
lower jaw modifications . . . are approached nowhere else in the very large
family Cyprinidae, which is generally distributed throughout Eurasia,
Africa, and North America, and exhibit many remarkable
specializations . . . [that] transcend the familial limits of all the 1,500 to
2,000 non-Lanao cyprinid species in the world.”
In addition to the cyprinids highlighted by Brooks, there is a substantial
array of gastropod mollusks in Lanao. Thomas von Rintelen, whom we met
earlier, collected there in the late 2010s with Björn Stelbrink of Germany’s
Giessen University. Björn was involved in several of the studies already
discussed. Alongside being an intrepid field collector, he is noteworthy for
the breadth of his ancient lake expertise, having worked on diatoms,
invertebrates, and vertebrates from lakes spread over four continents.
With the specimens from their fieldwork, von Rintelen, Stelbrink,
Philippines scientist P. O. Naga, and two additional colleagues conducted
the first DNA sequence-based analyses of Lanao invertebrates. The exact
number of species in Lanao is the subject of continuing study, but the
diversity is likely comparable to the fishes, and may involve one or more
endemic radiations with a wide range of forms.
The tragedy of Lanao is that of the eighteen endemic cyprinid fishes,
sixteen appear to be extinct, based on surveys in the late 2000s by Gladys
Ismail and colleagues at Oregon State University. (One of these colleagues
was David Noakes, one of my professors when he was at the University of
Guelph. He died in 2020, but left a fine legacy of former students and
valuable contributions, such as the paper described here.) The situation is
not entirely hopeless because it is clear from surveys conducted over the
preceding decades that particular endemic species have sometimes
disappeared for a time and later reappeared. This could be partly a result offishing methods, as most of the survey work relied heavily on collections by
fishers, and partly due to the low numbers of endemics. Nevertheless, it is
not encouraging that dramatic increases in introduced fish species have
accompanied the decline of endemic fishes; in fact, Ismail and her
coworkers documented more species of nonnative fish in the lake than
native! And additional introductions have since been documented. A further
complicating factor is the political situation in the area, which has often
involved a level of violence and insecurity that makes scientific research
not only difficult but at times genuinely dangerous too. Still, further genetic
work on the fishes of Lake Lanao is presently underway to facilitate
identifications. One hopes that as these efforts expand, they will enable
environmental DNA surveys and perhaps detect populations of some of the
species currently suspected to be extinct.
The rapid decline of Lanao’s cyprinids is still more regrettable because
they are so little known; even preserved specimens are sparse. Herre’s
original collection was destroyed in 1945 during the World War II battle for
Manila. A few specimens collected separately were placed in Stanford
University’s Natural History Museum and the US Smithsonian Museum,
but they are no substitute for Herre’s.
Things seem to be better for Lanao’s mollusks. No extinctions have been
reported, and Stelbrink and his colleagues collected a wide range of species
of diverse forms in 2016 and 2017. Worrisomely, however, they observed
high numbers of an invasive species, and human activities have caused
deterioration of the water quality. As well, the invertebrates are so poorly
known that some could have disappeared before they were ever collected
and documented.
The situation in Lake Lanao is extreme, but the problems found there are
widespread in freshwater ecosystems, including most of the ancient lakes
explored in this volume. Before further reviewing the difficulties that our
species is creating for ancient lakes and their biotas, though, it is worth
thinking about why conserving these systems merits some effort. Having
read this far, you may be like me and find it obvious why biodiversity is
important, its value perhaps one of the “truths (we hold) to be self-evident,”
to quote a document that is famous where I live. But the worth and
importance of biodiversity are not so obvious to all.The Value of Ancient Lake Biodiversity
Biologists, economists, ethicists, and others from a range of backgrounds
have ruminated deeply about why declining biodiversity should concern us,
and why we should be willing to invest resources in arresting that decline.
For myself, like many people, the issue is an emotional and moral one. I
find joy and connection in the animals and plants I encounter in lakes,
forests, and just my garden, and I find time in nature restorative. It also
seems to me deeply immoral that we would accept the decline of the only
biodiversity we know of, not just on this moist little rock, but on any planet
anywhere. This view is at least partially shared by most major religions,
though not discussed terribly often, unfortunately. I suspect that these
rationales may prove the most important ones in the long term, but there are
more practical arguments for slowing the extinction rate.
In 2020, Robert Sterner of the Large Lakes Observatory at the University
of Minnesota at Duluth, along with an interdisciplinary team of Minnesota
colleagues, reviewed the ecosystem services provided by large freshwater
lakes, including several ancient lakes. This compendium is the first of its
kind and offers a helpful starting point for considering why we should value
ancient lakes, even if from a slightly selfish “What have you done for me
lately?” perspective.
The complete list of services provided by earth’s ecosystems, including
lakes, is a long one. The European Environmental Agency’s Common
International Classification of Ecosystem Services (version 5.1, cices.eu),
which Sterner and colleagues reference, lists ninety such “contributions that
ecosystems make to human well-being.” Other organizations, such as the
US Environmental Protection Agency, have their own schemes. The
European list was developed to facilitate a more systematic, standardized
approach to mapping, valuing, and generally describing the services
supplied by ecosystems. These are the major categories: provisioning of
material and energy needs; regulation and maintenance of the environment
for humans; and cultural—that is, the nonmaterial characteristics of
ecosystems that affect the physical and mental states of people. Sterner and
his colleagues decided to focus on six of the most readily quantifiable
services, four from the provisioning category and two that are cultural.
Their twenty-one-lake survey included the five largest freshwater ancient
lakes from three continents—the African Great Lakes of Malawi,Tanganyika and Victoria; Baikal (Asia); and Titicaca (South America)—as
well as sixteen large but younger lakes.
The preeminent quantified service in their analysis was the provision of
fish, and this was dominated by the African Great Lakes (figure 9.2). The
total catch by commercial and artisanal fishers for Malawi, Tanganyika, and
Victoria was estimated at 1.3 million tonnes per year, which comprises 95
percent of all the fish commercially landed from the planet’s twenty-one
largest lakes, and over 10 percent of landings by freshwater fisheries
overall. These fish catches are also important locally as a source of
nutrition, especially in areas of high food insecurity. At one time, fisheries
were estimated to provide 70 percent of the total animal protein in Malawi,
which is landlocked, although that percentage has decreased. Lake Victoria
is distinct because so much of its fish harvest is destined for export, mainly
of the introduced Nile perch (which I have seen for sale at my local grocer),
and because of the exceptional scale of its fisheries. These estimates do not
include subsistence fisheries, which may be substantial and provide
valuable nutritional benefits locally. Another major service of lakes is
supplying water for drinking, irrigation, and other uses. Biodiversity is
relevant to water itself because living organisms and ecosystems frequently
play a major role in water quality. Wetlands, for example, can remove
impurities and toxins, whereas some algae and other microorganisms may
introduce them, especially with the addition of agricultural fertilizers. The
ancient lake providing the most water for agriculture was Titicaca, with no
other lakes at all close. Sterner and colleagues were unable to quantify
water removed for drinking that did not go through public treatment (treated
water was included), but this is likely to be a vitally important service for
many.Figure 9.2
Fish for sale in a market near Lake Malawi.
Lakes are popular locales for tourism and recreation almost wherever
they are found, and in lakeside communities, residents often care
passionately about “their” lake. Many of us have seen this ardor for a local
water body in members of our own communities and families. The analysis
by Sterner and colleagues used social media data to evaluate tourism and
recreational activity. They documented substantial activity at all the ancient
lakes relative to the rest of their data set, although the social media data
offer only a crude first approximation of the scale and value of this service.
The one ancient lake for which reasonably reliable quantitative data were
available, concerning the financial value of tourism, was Baikal. Baikal has
become a major tourist attraction. The economic value of Baikal’s tourism
was estimated at US$266 million per year.Although not a principal focus, Sterner and colleagues were able to
collect some data relevant to how ecosystems support scientific
investigation by counting the number of scientific papers associated with
each lake from 1900 to 2018. Baikal had the highest value, followed by the
African Great Lakes, with Titicaca well behind. My impression is that
scientific research on the lakes is rapidly growing and broadening so these
estimates too are probably conservative. And studies published so far are
likely to be the tip of the iceberg.
The Minnesota team was able to summarize and analyze data on other
services supplied by lakes, such as functioning as a transportation corridor,
or providing water for electric generation or cooling a power plant.
Although these activities could affect biodiversity, likely negatively, they
rely on living things very little. In contrast, numerous other services are
potentially important and more directly linked to biodiversity, but difficult
to quantify at present. These include services related to “aquaculture,
mediation of wastes, regulation of flow, biodiversity protection, climate
regulation, nutrient cycling, and spiritual and heritage benefits.”
Aquaculture, in particular, is currently increasing at a tremendous rate on
several of the lakes.
One underutilized and undervalued service bears particular emphasis: the
provision of new drugs along with molecules possessing scientific, medical,
and even industrial utility and value. It is now well-known and appreciated
that many drugs originated in natural systems. Some famous examples
include aspirin, which was originally derived from willow bark, and
digitalis, a drug that originated with the foxglove plant and is used to treat
heart disease. Penicillin and morphine are others. Perhaps just as important,
key molecules for biotechnology and scientific research continue to emerge
from microbiology. Most notably, the CRISPR Cas9 and related systems,
which are revolutionizing diverse areas of biology by enabling much more
precise genome editing, are derived from the immune systems of microbes.
These molecules and systems evolved to protect bacteria and archaea (a
lineage of structurally simple microbes similar to yet distinct from bacteria)
from viruses and other parasites. Thus, they are a product of coevolution
between the bacteria and their parasites. A distinct but equally famous
illustration is Taq DNA polymerase, the crucial enzyme in the polymerase
chain reaction (PCR), the DNA amplification process now used throughout
biology and medicine—including in an important diagnostic procedure forCOVID-19. Taq polymerase was originally derived from Thermus
aquaticus bacteria living in the heated springs and lakes of the Yellowstone
National Park in the United States. The enzyme’s ability to function at high
temperatures, which is essential to its role in PCR, is an evolutionary
adaptation to the torrid conditions in which the bacteria live.
Research continues to generate new discoveries and applications in drug
discovery, molecular biology, and related fields that rely on the adaptations
present in the diversity of nature. Given that a large proportion of extant
species have not even been formally named, and many more have received
little more than a name, there is clearly an immense reservoir of
biochemical tools awaiting discovery. It is both sobering and awe-inspiring
to consider the abundance of molecular systems that have evolved over
billions of years as organisms have adapted to the changing physical world
and each other, finding ways to overcome extremes of temperature, acidity,
pressure, and toxins physical and organic. All the while they have
maintained essential physiological processes and the machinery of
reproduction, and solved endless additional challenges. Hence the
information contained in the living world is unimaginably vast.
The literature on bioprospecting for drugs and other valuable molecules
has to date emphasized biodiverse terrestrial systems such as tropical
forests, and in the marine setting, coral reef ecosystems. But work is
beginning to appear from ancient lake systems. As aquatic islands of unique
evolution, ancient lakes must possess solutions to problems that face us
today or that may confront us 100 or even 500 years from now. And with
the revolutions taking place in genomics and related fields, including our
ever-increasing computational abilities, humanity’s ability to find and
recognize these valuable products of natural selection grows more powerful
almost by the day. Surely this immense natural capital should be more
highly valued, and we should be more conscious of it.
In considering cultural services, we have discussed tourism because it
can be quantified, but of course the cultural significance of iconic places,
landscapes, and organisms as well as the intertwined traditions have deeper
value. I live in North America, where we lack lakes quite like Tanganyika
and Baikal. Nevertheless, we have analogies, and it may be helpful for
readers from my original neck of the woods to imagine the cultural impact
if, say, the last patch of British Columbia’s old-growth forest were to burnup, or if the orcas of the North Pacific were to succumb to their many
stresses and disappear entirely. Unfortunately, addressing the cultural
importance of ancient lakes adequately is beyond what I can manage here.
But some of the quotations at the beginning of each chapter can perhaps
convey a small sense of the significance of the lakes to the cultures linked
to them.
Extinction, Ecology, and HIPPO
Threats to biodiversity are sometimes summarized with the acronym
HIPPO, which is short for habitat destruction, invasive species, pollution,
population growth (human), and overharvesting. The order is often
described as roughly reflecting the order of importance of these factors,
though that will vary among localities. The acronym is a handy one, and
particularly helpful for terrestrial habitats, but like any simplification of a
multifaceted issue it has shortcomings, and more so when applied to fresh
water. The biggest problems are the overlap and interdependence of the
categories, especially population, which affects all the others, and where
climate change fits. In an ambitious review paper with a large, international
team, Stephanie Hampton and collaborators, whose work we looked at
earlier with regard to Baikal, used a related but distinct scheme to
summarize the ecological changes taking place in ancient lakes. I roughly
follow their approach in this section.
The elephant in the room, or perhaps the HIPPO in the lake, for any
twenty-first-century discussion of environmental issues is bound to be
climate change, aka global warming, aka global heating; every term has its
enthusiasts and merit. Certainly the lakes are warming. Hampton and
colleagues compiled summer temperature data for fifteen of the twenty-nine
lakes in their survey and confirmed warming for all of them, including
seven of those emphasized in this volume. Almost all values fell between
about 0.1 and 0.8°C per decade. This rate of increase, every ten years
yielding differences large enough that a person could feel them on their
skin, is somewhere between jaw-dropping and horrifying, and maybe both.
Ten years! As we have seen, the lakes have experienced changes before,sometimes fast and in other instances more gradual, but the changes have
had consequences, and the current rate of change is very, very rapid.
Temperature changes of this scale can affect organisms directly,
especially as the decades scroll by and warming accumulates. Some of
Baikal’s species that are adapted to a narrow and frigid range of
temperatures come to mind. At the other extreme, organisms in tropical
lakes may be living at their physiological maxima and also suffer as
temperatures elevate. But as for terrestrial environments, changes in the
temperature regimes of lakes may have their greatest effects on ecosystems
indirectly through other changes to the physical environment. The most
obvious one is how long ice cover lasts each year as well as ice thickness
and extent; these effects are seen on Baikal at present, as noted in the
previous chapter. They affect the Caspian Sea too.
A less visible but ecologically highly consequential effect of warming is
on how lakes are layered by temperature, or to use the more formal term,
stratified. In warm lakes, warmer water is layered on top of colder water,
and with a stable environment, the deep water loses oxygen and becomes
inhospitable to any oxygen-dependent organism, including almost all
animals. The upper layers have their oxygen replenished by algae as they
perform photosynthesis, whereas in deep water there is not enough light for
this process and only oxygen-depleting activities occur, such as the
breakdown of organic materials floating down from above. With little
mixing, the oxygen gradient can become extreme. Such stratification is
common in tropical lakes like Tanganyika, and with warming, thermal
stratification can increase further.
Andy Cohen, who made appearances in earlier chapters, has worked with
a team of collaborators from several institutions to analyze data from a
series of shallow Tanganyika sediment cores, and evaluate the links
between temperature, stratification, and biological processes over the last
1,500 years. Warmth-enhanced stratification in Tanganyika has been
suggested to correlate with reduced productivity of algae because the
strengthened stratification reduces the amount of mixing between the
shallow waters where algae live and photosynthesize, and the deeper waters
that contain key nutrients needed by the algae. This can result in reduced
productivity from the nutrient-starved algae, and since they are the basis for
the rest of the food web, reductions in abundance of the animals thatultimately depend on the tiny photosynthesizers. The patterns in the
sediments studied by Cohen confirmed temperature increases in lake water
that were accompanied by reduced algal productivity, particularly in the
twentieth century. Corresponding declines were documented in the fossils
of bottom-dwelling snails in the samples from intermediate depths, where
they should be most affected by a shallower layer of well-oxygenated water
(figure 9.3). Calculations by Cohen and his collaborators show that the area
of Tanganyika’s bottom that has enough oxygen to support most animal life
is shrinking rapidly as oxygenated waters penetrate less deeply each decade.
The reduction in habitable lake floor since just 1946 is estimated at 38
percent.
Fish from Tanganyika comprise about 60 percent of the animal protein
consumed in the lake’s vicinity—a really immense proportion if one
compares it to typical North American diets. Thus, shrinking catches are a
cause for deep concern. Cohen and colleagues’ analyses show, somewhat
unexpectedly, that the declines in catches are much less a result of
overfishing than had been thought. Instead, the catch declines are associated
with processes linked to climate change, most likely owing to reduced
productivity. In fact, the declines started before large-scale fishing got
underway on the lake, although this falling off has surely been exacerbated
by overharvesting. One way to put the scale of the sediment data in
perspective is to think of them in terms of human history. The data in figure
9.3 mainly start shortly after the fall of the Roman Empire, just as the Sui
dynasty was becoming established in China and the Arab conquests beyond
the Arabian Peninsula were about to begin. The data set continues,
essentially uninterrupted, to the start of the twenty-first century.Figure 9.3
Changes in lake temperature, level, and faunal abundance (scales and bones for fish) from about
1,500 years of Lake Tanganyika sediments. Note that the temperature increases toward the bottom of
the page in “A,” and the numbers decline for nearly every organism in the twentieth century, as
temperature change accelerates. Source: Reprinted with minor modifications with permission from
the National Academy of Sciences of the USA, © 2016 National Academy of Sciences, from Cohen
et al., “Climate Warming Reduces Fish Production and Benthic Habitat in Lake Tanganyika, One of
the Most Biodiverse Freshwater Ecosystems,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
(2016).Figure 9.4
Tumaini “Tuma” Kamulali sub-sampling Lake Tanganyika cores at LacCore facility, University of
Minnesota. Source: Tumaini Kamulali.
The analyses by Cohen and his colleagues focused on samples from
Tanganyika’s northern basin, which is generally better studied than the
lake’s southern reaches. But Tanganyika is our planet’s longest lake, at
about 670 kilometers from its northernmost to southernmost points, and it
would not be surprising if ecological processes varied over such a scale.
This possibility was explored using sediment cores from Tanganyika’s
southern basin by Tumaini “Tuma” Kamulali (figure 9.4), a PhD student in
Cohen’s group who also holds an appointment with the Tanzania Fisheries
Research Institute. I met Tuma at the 2022 Species in Ancient Lakes
conference in Kigoma, Tanzania, where he won an award for best student
presentation. His account of the sacrifices involved in conducting his
research and pursuing his studies was affecting; having traveled to Arizona
to begin his analyses before the COVID pandemic started, he was unable to
return to his wife and new baby for a total of four years owing to pandemic
travel restrictions and complications. Isolation and sacrifice are regrettably
commonplace among foreign graduate students, but even so his experience
was extreme.
Overall, the results for the southern basin also indicate that changes in
climate have mediated the lake’s productivity, which has declined, but the
southern basin is often less stratified than the northern, and the links
between temperature and productivity are less consistent. Kamulali and
colleagues also found unexpected evidence that although deeper reaches of
the southern basin frequently lacked oxygen, there were several episodes in
the sediment records during which bottom-dwelling species were present at
great depths. Hence there appear to have been periods of elevated oxygen
even along the lake bottom, possibly when oxygen-containing river waters
that were cooler or more turbid (and denser) flowed into the lake and down
its steep sides. I find this idea intuitively appealing because I encountered a
similar phenomenon in Lake Matano while swimming along the outlet of a
cool stream as it entered the lake. I could feel the water plunging, which
was disconcerting as I looked down into the darkness and felt a little tug
toward the depths.Climate change is expected to affect lake levels as well, which as we
have seen have often changed by hundreds of meters, with dramatic effects
on physical and biological processes. The effects may be most severe in
lakes located in warm, arid areas where a shift in the relative rates of
evaporation and precipitation could cause rapid changes in that balance.
The effects of climate change may be compounded or even superseded
by dams on inflows, outflows, or both. These are present in most ancient
lakes. In the Malili Lakes, for example, when I visited as a teenager there
was already a dam on the outflow, the Larona, which was built to provide
electricity for the nickel mine where my uncles worked. Another dam was
added in the 2000s on the Petea River, which ultimately influences the
water entering the Larona through the intervening Lakes Mahalona and
Towuti. Depending on policies at any given time, these structures may
result in higher or lower lake levels, but the effects of dams on lakes are
often further complicated by the withdrawal of water from rivers feeding
into a lake. The most extreme instance of such effects is the five-million￾year-old Aral Sea.
Located in Central Asia and stretching across the border between the
nations of Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan, the Aral Sea was once the fourth￾largest lake in the world. There have been human settlements on the Aral’s
shores for thousands of years, and its levels have fluctuated substantially
over the millennia. With no outflow rivers, it has also been slowly filling in
for approximately 140,000 years. The Aral’s situation changed beginning in
the mid-twentieth century when humanity’s impact entered a catastrophic
phase.
In the 1960s, irrigation to support cotton was stepped up and massive
amounts of water were diverted before they ever entered the sea, rapidly
changing the net water budget into a severe deficit. With the 90 percent
reduction in water volume that followed, the sea was not just reduced in
depth; as it got shallower it shrank, fragmenting into several smaller water
bodies separated by marsh and desert (figure 9.5). Hundreds of thousands of
people were displaced from their homes, and chronic disease and even
death rates rose with exposure to agrochemicals and toxic metals from the
uncovered sediments. The region’s terrestrial ecosystems also suffered, but
the remaining waters of the sea suffered more, with salt concentrations
coming to exceed those of typical seawater, whereas previously the sea hadbeen brackish. While researching this topic, I was reminded of a remark
from a cotton farmer I used to know, as cotton is grown where I live. When
I asked him about cotton’s reputation for requiring a lot of chemicals, he
said, “If you aren’t spraying it, you’re thinking about spraying it.” Cotton is
a demanding crop, generating export dollars in places that can well use
them, and it is perhaps unrealistic to think that its cultivation will end any
time soon in the Aral watershed. But the environmental price is terrible;
accounts of Aral read like the plot of a postapocalyptic movie. The
suffering, though, is real and heartbreaking.
Figure 9.5
The shrinking of the Aral Sea. The dark coloration indicates water. Note that the two internal water
bodies shown in 2018 were shallow and temporary. Source: Reprinted with minor modifications from
Aladin et al., “The Zoocenosis of the Aral Sea: Six Decades of Fast-Paced Change,” Environmental
Science and Pollution Research (2019). Published under a Creative Commons CC BY 4.0 license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0).
The news out of the Aral Sea is seldom good, but some reports have been
more upbeat in recent years. One of the remaining fragments of the sea,
toward the north and known as Small Aral, has experienced rising water
levels with the building of dams to retain its water. Its salinities have
become more moderate, and its fishing economy has begun to return along
with some native fish species. The Aral Sea will probably not be what it
was prior to 1960 anytime soon, and improvements have not been
consistent, but further progress is possible.
After climate change, eutrophication may be the most direct and severe
ecological harm visited by human actions on ancient lakes. Eutrophicationmainly occurs when agricultural fertilizers enter lakes, but it may have
other causes including untreated sewage and detergents that contain
phosphorus. These substances, which in the case of fertilizers are designed
to cause plant growth, enable the rapid expansion of algal populations,
especially blue-green algae (also known as cyanobacteria). The algae often
go through die-offs, causing oxygen depletion as they decompose, and
particularly in the case of blue-green algae, may also produce toxins. Such
processes are frequently responsible for the fish kills seen at local levels in
many streams, rivers, and lakes. If eutrophication becomes widespread in a
lake, it can even cause extinctions, either on its own or as one of a suite of
stressors. In addition, cloudy water can make choosing a mate of one’s own
species more difficult for visually oriented organisms, as discussed in
chapter 4—potentially leading to the disappearance of species.
Local eutrophication has been documented for most ancient lakes around
human settlements and other sources of nutrients. For example, alarming
reports emerged from Baikal in the 2010s concerning the effects of coastal
eutrophication on the magnificent underwater sponge forests as well as
other bottom-dwelling animals and plants found in shallower waters. This
contrasts with the much healthier condition of offshore waters and
organisms, although changes are taking place offshore too, as we have seen.
The deterioration of water quality, some of it related to eutrophication, may
have played a role in the extinctions in Lake Lanao too. Eutrophication is
particularly extensive and intense in some parts of Lake Victoria, which is
one of the lakes for which atmospheric deposition, in which nutrients arrive
in the wind, is a surprisingly large source of the nitrogen and phosphorus
that cause algal blooms. An estimated 55 percent of Victoria’s phosphorus
and 14 percent of its nitrogen arrive from the atmosphere. These
atmospheric effects are most important in lakes that have large surface areas
and limited catchments (the area drained by the rivers and streams that feed
into a lake). The nitrogen entering lakes from the atmosphere derives from
fossil fuel–burning power plants, vehicle emissions, and agriculture.
Nitrogen deposition is projected to increase greatly in coming years—
although one hopes that these projections will change as fossil fuel use
peaks and declines.
Eutrophication, like virtually all human-caused stresses of ancient lakes,
is made worse by human population growth and the associated changes in
land usage. At least five of the ancient lakes that have been the focus of thisvolume host major urban centers with more than 300,000 people. The
Caspian Sea has the most, but all the African Great Lakes have major
centers along them ranging from Victoria and Tanganyika with four
substantial cities each to Malawi with one. Baikal has two, and the tragic
Aral Sea has four, while Biwa has high population densities and major
population centers just downstream. Baikal, however, has much higher
numbers of people along its shores than indicated by its permanent
population owing to a large increase in tourism in the twenty-first century,
much of it from China. The situation at Ohrid, like Baikal also a UNESCO
World Heritage Site, is similar.
In the coming decades, population pressures from permanent residents
may diminish for Baikal, Biwa, and Ohrid if national patterns are reflected
locally. This will certainly not be true for the African Great Lakes, as the
nations of East and Central Africa are expected to have some of the highest
rates of population growth on the planet. Additional urbanization can be
expected to accompany population increases as well as agricultural
expansion and intensification. Population growth and land use changes will
likely also contribute to increases in a wide range of other pollutants,
ranging from metals to plastics to organochlorine and organophosphate
compounds. Of course, these and other pollutants are not confined to areas
of high population density, and some are often elevated around mines in
particular. Petroleum extraction is planned or has begun for some of the
African Great Lakes, with potential for severe pollution.
Species Introductions, Harvesting, and
Interactions with Other Impacts
The introductions of nonnative species constitute one of the most serious
problems that human activities have caused in ancient lakes, potentially
harming native species in a variety of ways. The main possibilities are that
aliens may directly consume native species, outcompete them for precious
resources, alter their habitats in harmful ways, or infect them with parasites
for which the natives have not evolved defenses. Unfortunately, nonnative
species have become established in every lake discussed in this volume.
Lake Matano, the ancient lake where I have mainly worked, has hadestablished introduced fish for decades, some over a century, and continues
to experience new arrivals. When I first traveled there to do research in
2000, my collaborators and I observed several species that were already
ensconced, including carp, tilapia, Clarias walking catfish, and snakeheads.
All are commonly introduced across Southeast Asia and elsewhere, often
through aquaculture escapes or deliberate stocking as food fish. We also
observed an African cichlid, a single individual, that seemed likely to have
come from the aquarium trade, and a tambaqui, a mainly herbivorous
member of the same South American family as the piranha. The tambaqui,
or blackfin pacu, is popular for aquaculture and sometimes kept in aquaria.
Although we were in Sulawesi to do basic research, we became
concerned about these new arrivals and felt we should try to prevent further
introductions. Our efforts included a short, informal guide to Matano’s
fishes, in English and Indonesian, community presentations, and later a
poster campaign supported by the mining company and others to inform
people about the danger of introduced species (figure 9.6). My friends and
colleagues Fadly Tantu and Jusri Nilawati of Tadulako University made
many additional efforts to communicate the importance of native Matano
and Towuti species along with the threats to them; they deserve much credit
for this work. But preventing introductions is a difficult enterprise, and our
efforts were not enough, sadly.
In 2010, Fabian Herder and others documented yet another Matano
invader: an aquarium species known as the flowerhorn cichlid or luohan.
This creature is a human-generated hybrid of new-world cichlids and is now
established in the wild in several Asian countries. In Lake Matano, it spread
at an impressive and disturbing rate, and could be observed all the way
around the lake by mid-2012. Subsequent reports suggest it continues to do
well and feeds widely on native species including crabs, shrimp, snails, and
fish, and overlaps in diet with several native fishes. Some research has
begun into possible control methods. The possible effects of the flowerhorn
include declines in a native goby as well as five snail species, the latter
newly described in 2023 from collections made from 2003 to 2005, that
appear already to be extinct. At the same time, the story is an instructive
one. This is a lake next to a massive surface mine, where two dams have
been added to the system in addition to pollutants and sewage, and in a
region where climate change is making critical monsoon rains less
predictable. Yet an indirect effect of mining and increased human densitymay pose the greatest threat to endemic biodiversity: the careless release of
our pets.
Since Herder and colleagues first reported them in Matano, flowerhorn
cichlids have also become abundant in nearby Lake Mahalona and have
appeared in the more distant Lake Poso, which is in a different drainage. In
addition, a Lake Malawi species, the “golden cichlid,” Melanochromis
auratus, has become more abundant in Poso than flowerhorns, which are
not so ubiquitous as in Matano; overall, the number of nonnative species in
Poso is greater than the number of native fishes. It is also noteworthy that
Poso may have already experienced extinctions of natives, as one goby and
two ricefish have not been recorded since the 1980s.Figure 9.6
The poster we made (with Fadly Tantu, Suzanne Gray, and Peter Hehanussa) in the 2000s to
discourage introductions in Lake Matano.
The most famous ancient lake invasion was not at all accidental: the Nile
perch of Lake Victoria. The Nile perch is a large, carnivorous fish, which
can reach a massive 200 kilograms and almost 2 meters in length. It is much
valued for the quality of its flesh and is native to several African rivers and
major water bodies, but not to Lake Victoria. It was introduced to Victoria
in the 1950s and 1960s by fisheries officials seeking to produce better and
more valuable food fish from the lake. Reading accounts of this process, I
learned that Geoffrey Fryer, a prominent cichlid biologist, had vigorously
opposed this introduction, though to no avail; it reminded me of Peter
Hehanussa and I trying to talk INCO out of building a dam at Lake Matanoand later an expanded road network, with little effect too. The Nile perch
has sometimes been credited with the extinction of tens or hundreds of
species of Lake Victoria’s haplochromine cichlids in the late twentieth
century. In a synthetic account of events in Lake Victoria that appeared in
2021, however, Vianny Natugonza of Uganda’s Busitema University,
together with a team of colleagues from four African and European nations,
suggest there is a good deal more to the story.
After carefully reviewing the sequence of events in the lake and two
associated smaller lakes, Natugonza and colleagues find that the initial
major wave of declines in native cichlids took place in the first half of the
twentieth century and into the 1950s as a result of overfishing, which
gradually got worse during this period. The decline was mainly of two
native species of Oreochromis cichlids, and less so the megadiverse
haplochromines. Subsequently, two nonnative species of Oreochromis (aka
tilapia) were introduced along with the Nile perch in the 1950s. The
introduced cichlid species tend to better tolerate heavy fishing and possibly
Nile perch as well, so there were potential fisheries advantages to them.
Lake levels increased in the early 1960s with heavy rains, causing
inshore habitat changes that may have stressed haplochromines. Catches of
the introduced Oreochromis went up in the late 1960s and 1970s, with Nile
perch catches following later in the mid-1980s. A haplochromine-focused
trawl fishery was also established in the 1970s, and at the same time
eutrophication increased rapidly owing to changes in human activities
around the lake. Water transparency declined with eutrophication and so did
dissolved oxygen, as the algal community became increasingly dominated
by blue-green algae. In the early 1980s, the haplochromine cichlids went
through a catastrophic collapse: 40 percent of the estimated five-hundred￾plus species of haplochromines disappeared. Fish-eating haplochromines
suffered disproportionately high declines and extinction rates. They are
likely to be competitively inferior to Nile perch at preying on fish owing to
their modified pharyngeal jaws—a second set of jaws present in the throat
that help with prey requiring intensive processing such as plants and hard￾shelled mollusks. Cichlid pharyngeal jaws may have facilitated the group’s
massive radiations—but they are a hindrance for preying on fish. Nile perch
and Oreochromis landings continued to increase.In 1989, the highly invasive South American water hyacinth plant
became established. As it spread around much of the lake’s shoreline, it
often caused low oxygen levels beneath it (and favored air-breathing
lungfish!), but the weed may also have provided a refuge from the Nile
perch for some haplochromines. Climate change likely contributed to low
oxygen levels in deeper waters, as in Tanganyika. In the 1990s, the Nile
perch stock declined under heavy fishing pressure, and late in the decade,
the water hyacinth was brought under better control. The least anticipated
development of the 1990s, however, was that haplochromine numbers
experienced a substantial resurgence—one that has continued. The complete
haplochromine diversity has not come back: there are fewer species, they
are less ecologically diverse, and total abundance is not the same. In
addition, several of the returning haplochromines that have been carefully
studied exhibit ecological and morphological changes, which could reflect
evolutionary adaptation as well as developmental or physiological
responses. Possibly hybridization has been involved, as it was during the
haplochromine radiations. Regardless, the overall status of the
haplochromines is much improved.
What is clear from this account is that the haplochromines experienced
multiple severe stresses in quick succession and even concurrently. And
while Nile perch certainly ate cichlids, changes in cichlid numbers only
partially mirrored Nile perch abundance. Thus, it is unlikely that
haplochromine extinctions and declines were entirely an effect of Nile
perch, and there may have been interactions among factors, such as
eutrophication making haplochromines less able to evade their invasive
predator. The direct effects of eutrophication on hybridization are also well￾known, as discussed earlier. On a more positive note, it is apparent from the
recent developments in Victoria that an initial decline in native species is
not necessarily permanent if the stresses can be removed. Extinctions are
forever (barring extraordinary interventions), and an ancient lake with
fewer stresses is unlikely to be the same as it was before modern humans,
but some species and ecosystem services can return. This has been the
experience in other, younger lakes too, for example, in central Europe,
where extinctions took place, notably of whitefish, but eutrophication has
been addressed and some species and ecosystem services have come back.Prospects
So what is coming next? And what can we do to slow the rate of extinction
and ecosystem degradation in ancient lakes?
As we have seen, ancient lakes are much like islands, with high numbers
of endemic species and a worrisome vulnerability to human-caused
stressors. It is clear that more global warming will occur in even the best￾case scenarios and more invasive species will arrive, or invasives already
present will increase in numbers and impact as they adapt to local
conditions or conditions change to suit them. There is therefore no likely
future in which some major stresses do not increase for every ancient lake,
even lakes like Biwa and Ohrid that are located in relatively wealthy and
politically stable regions. In addition, lakes in areas where populations are
growing and projected to grow further tend to be in locations where
resources for conservation are constrained, especially the African Great
Lakes and Titicaca. It is hard not to be concerned about the medium-term
prospects for Victoria.
There are reasons for hope as well. For some of the worst human-caused
stressors, it is obvious what needs to be done, the needed steps have direct
benefits to people, and consensus in support of the necessary actions is
growing. While only modest steps have been taken so far on climate
change, many societies are much closer to a consensus in support of
effective action than was the case at the end of the twentieth century—when
scientific consensus already existed—and the needed technologies have
become vastly cheaper. Also encouraging, eutrophication has been reversed
in some lakes in Europe and North America and the necessary policies are
well-known; some of these will reduce other pollutants too.
Concerning introduced species, a reduction in the rate of introductions is
feasible with better regulation of the pet and aquarium trade, aquaculture,
and other risky activities, though we are further from a societal consensus
on the control of introductions, even in North America. The expense and
difficulty of controlling or eliminating invasives once established is also
cause for deep concern (I am especially worried for Sulawesi’s lakes) and a
strong argument for prevention. Still, there have been notable successes in
the removal of invasives from terrestrial islands, sometimes leading to the
rapid growth of endemic populations. Thus, successful models exist, andnew approaches continue to be developed. Even so, the management of
current and future invasives will be a continuing task, and a difficult one.
Fisheries management is never easy, but there are enough success stories
to know that it is possible. For example, protected areas in which fishing is
prohibited have proven tractable and effective in some marine systems, and
their use is growing. Many ancient lakes are large enough for such spatial
approaches to be viable, and they are being implemented in some, such as
Tanganyika.
For lakes that extend across international borders such as Titicaca and the
African Great Lakes, coordination between nations is important to effective
management, but this is rarely easy or straightforward. Nongovernmental
conservation organizations can play key roles in such efforts, and they have
begun to do so in some cases, with Lake Tanganyika again providing an
example.
A key step will be a more explicit recognition by international bodies and
major conservation organizations of the value of ancient lakes as threatened
hot spots of biodiversity—together with prioritizing their conservation.
There is growing appreciation of the importance of freshwater biodiversity,
the many threats to it, and the value of large lakes, a category that includes
several ancient lakes. National and international reports and publications on
these matters have been appearing regularly in the 2020s.
Beyond recognition and prioritization, money and expertise will be
required, as for most worthwhile endeavors. Money will need to come from
those who have more of it, hence wealthier countries, but it will need to be
spent in partnership with people living around the lakes such that they
benefit and traditional knowledge can be engaged. It is also crucial to invest
in augmenting scientific and management expertise in the nations
surrounding the lakes, and to support those scientists and managers. The
rising frequency of publications in aquatic ecology, management, and
evolution by researchers from some of the less wealthy ancient lake nations
is a trend that deserves further encouragement, investment, and support.
I think most of the positive steps outlined here (and others as well) will
be taken. Several decades from now—five? nine? more?—most of the lakes
may be starting to emerge from the difficult period they are currently in—
one that is likely to get worse in the near term. What is harder to know is
how soon we will take those needed actions, and how much time we have.Will we do too little too late? Will most lakes emerge from this period of
trauma having suffered numerous extinctions, with their ecosystems
permanently and severely degraded, and temperatures still rising? Or will
we act sooner and effectively enough that their endemic faunas and floras
largely persist, ready to bounce back, with the major features of their
ecosystems also poised to return and warming slowed? I am not sure I am
optimistic, but I am hopeful—hopeful enough to have written this book.
There is much to do.
* * *
Ancient lakes are like aquatic islands in a sea of land, and like islands, can
easily suffer extinctions with human disturbance. Emotional and moral
justifications for maintaining lake biodiversity are bolstered by documented
ecosystem services, including the provision of fish protein in protein￾deficient areas, clean water, and tourism. The value of biochemical
adaptations for drugs and industry is likely underestimated. Human￾generated changes that threaten ancient lakes include global warming (in
tropical areas too), water diversion, eutrophication, species introductions,
and overharvesting. These can interact. The stresses on most lakes will
likely increase in the near term, but some may later diminish. With foresight
and timely action, it is possible that much ancient lake biodiversity can
endure the current difficult moment.Acknowledgments
I have had a great deal of help in putting this book together and the work
that necessarily came before. Brent, Carol, Jack, and Paulina Thompson,
along with Perry and Sharon McKinnon, helped me get started on ancient
lakes. Andrew McKinnon, Mike Pauers, Irene Raphael, George Savage, and
Ian Timberlake read the whole manuscript and provided helpful critiques as
well as encouragement. Rebecca Asch, April Blakeslee, Valentina Burskaia,
Rod Campbell, Bob Christian, Heather Dail, Suzanne Gray, Bob Green,
Carolyn Green, Stephanie Hampton, Todd Hatfield, Steve Heard, Claudia
Jolls, Tuma Kamulali, Trip Lamb, David Marques, Tara McKinnon, Joana
Meier, Nare Ngoepe, Jusri Nilawati, Oliver Selz, Maria Servedio, Alena
Shirokaya, Björn Stelbrink, Fadly Tantu, Hendrik Vogel, Kristina von
Rintelen, Thomas von Rintelen, Katie Wagner, Margaret Whiting Blome,
and Shane Wright each reviewed at least one chapter, and sometimes more.
Anonymous referees offered comments on both the book proposal and draft
book, leading to a host of revisions. I thank Lyubov Izmest’eva, Chris
Martin, Greg Mayer, Matt McGee, and Alvaro Taveira for helpful
discussions and exchanges. Randall Brummett, Ana Cristina Canales
Gomez, Andy Cohen, William Darwall, Aneth David, Paola Ferreyros,
Masanja Fortunatus, Juan Jose Miranda Montero, Michael Morris, Nare
Ngoepe, Jusri Nilawati, Horace Owiti, Mike Pauers, Titus Bandulo Phiri,
Walter Salzburger, Alena Shirokaya, Björn Stelbrink, Fadly Tantu, Martin
Van der Knaap, and Griselle Felicita Vega helped identify quotations for the
chapter openings. B. Blakely Brooks and Vladimir Condo generously aided
with translation. Lyubov Izmest’eva, Tuma Kamulali, Axel Meyer, Mupape
Mukuli, Lynne R. Parenti, and Björn Stelbrink kindly shared photographs.
Oke Anakwenze and Brady Lloyd helped me keep working.
At the MIT Press, Anne-Marie Bono and Deborah Cantor-Adams were
wonderful editors, and Debora Kuan and Oscar Sarkes were also a great
help. Tim Lee helped with indexing. Haleigh Mooring persisted on the
illustrations despite my many fussy requests. Steve Austad helped me
begin, as did Larry Dill and Bambang Soeroto in different ways. Jim Costaand Steve Heard provided valuable guidance on the process. I am grateful
for the hospitality of Doug Haffner, Peter Hehanussa, Axel Meyer, Jusri
Nilawati, Walter Salzburger, Ole Seehausen, and Fadly Tantu during visits,
and all that I learned. Doug Haffner helped me stick with ancient lakes.
I thank the University of Wisconsin–Whitewater, East Carolina
University, Canadian International Development Agency, and US National
Science Foundation for generous and essential support. I also thank the
Furthermore program of the J. M. Kaplan fund.
The organizers of the Speciation/Species in Ancient Lakes conferences, a
group of dedicated, enthusiastic, and generous researchers, have done
science and nature a considerable service through their efforts. They
introduced me to much of the work described here and several of the
scientists. Some of the lead organizers (the list of all involved is much
longer) of conferences I attended were Christian Albrecht, Andy Cohen,
Doug Haffner, Ishmael Kimerei, Koen Martens, Axel Meyer, Frank Riedel,
Casim Umba Tolo, Walter Salzburger, and Oleg Timoshkin.
Peter Hehanussa was a superb partner, friend, and ally. Dolph Schluter
taught me a great deal and kindly shared his transporter illustration. Fadly
Tantu and Jusri Nilawati became dear friends as well as valued colleagues
during time spent together in Sulawesi (including their hospitality during a
visit to Palu), North Carolina and Windsor; I remain grateful for all their
generosity.Glossary
Adaptive radiation The rapid diversification from an ancestor into various
new species through natural selection arising from different environments
or resources.
Allele One of the alternative forms of a gene.
Anthropocene A proposed geological epoch beginning with the start of
significant human impact on the earth’s ecosystems and geology.
Balancing selection Selection that favors more than one allele and
maintains genetic variation in a population; includes negative frequency￾dependent selection.
Convergent evolution The independent evolution of similar traits in
separate lineages, usually in response to similar selection.
Disruptive selection Selection where extremes of a phenotypic distribution
are favored over intermediate phenotypes within a population.
Divergent selection When different phenotypes are favored over
intermediates in different environments (and usually populations).
Dominant allele An allele that produces the same phenotype whether
paired with an identical or different allele.
Endemic A reference to a species confined to a limited area.
Environmental DNA Organismal DNA that can be found in the
environment rather than being collected from an organism.
Frequency-dependent selection Selection where the fitness of an allele
depends on its frequency in the population; selection favoring the rare
allele is negative frequency dependent, and selection favoring the
common allele is positive frequency dependent.
Genome The totality of an organism’s DNA.
Heterozygous Having different alleles for the two copies of a gene (in a
diploid organism like ourselves).Homozygous Having the same allele for the two copies of a gene (in a
diploid organism like ourselves).
Mutation Any change to the genomic sequence of an organism.
Natural selection A mechanism that can lead to adaptation whereby
heritable differences in a trait cause some individuals to survive and
reproduce more effectively than others.
Parallel evolution The independent evolution of similar traits, starting from
a similar ancestral condition.
Phylogeny An evolutionary tree; a visual representation of the evolutionary
history of species, populations, or genes.
Population A group of organisms belonging to the same species and living
in the same area at the same time.
Purifying selection Selection that removes deleterious alleles from a
population.
Recessive allele An allele that produces its characteristic features only
when paired with an identical allele (i.e., homozygous).
Sexual selection Differential reproductive success resulting from
competition for fertilization.
Speciation An evolutionary process by which new species arise, and one
evolutionary lineage splits into two or more.
Species A set of populations (or members of a single large population) that
interbreed and exchange genes only with each other (biological species
concept).
Species flock A substantial number of closely related species confined to a
limited area, such as a lake; closely related to adaptive radiation.References and Further Reading
Preface
Clark, E. 1953. Lady with a Spear. New York: Harper.
Durrell, G. 1956. My Family and Other Animals. Harmondsworth, UK:
Penguin.
Hampton, S. E., S. McGowan, T. Ozersky, S. G. P. Virdis, T. T. Vu, T. L.
Spanbauer, B. M. Kraemer, et al. 2018. “Recent Ecological Change in
Ancient Lakes.” Limnology and Oceanography 63: 2277–2304.
Orwell, G. 1946. “Some Thoughts on the Common Toad.” Tribune, April
12. Reprinted in The Collected Essays, Journalism and Letters of George
Orwell. Volume 4: In Front of Your Nose 1945–1950. Harmondsworth,
UK: Penguin.
Zim, H. S., R. W. Burnett, and H. L. Fisher. 1960. Zoology: An Introduction
to the Animal Kingdom. Racine, WI: Western Publishing Company.Chapter 1
Sulawesi and Telmatherinid Fish
Costa, J. T. 2014. Wallace, Darwin and the Origin of Species. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Gray, S. M., and J. S. McKinnon. 2006. “A Comparative Description of
Mating Behaviour in the Endemic Telmatherinid Fishes of Sulawesi’s
Malili Lakes.” Environmental Biology of Fishes 75: 471–482.
Herder, F., A. W. Nolte, J. Pfaender, J. Schwarzer, R. K. Hadiaty, and U. K.
Schliewen. 2006. “Adaptive Radiation and Hybridization in Wallace’s
Dreamponds: Evidence from Sailfin Silversides in the Malili Lakes of
Sulawesi.” Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 273:
2209–2217.
Kottelat, M. 1990. “Sailfin Silversides (Pisces: Telmatherinidae) of Lakes
Towuti, Mahalona and Wawontoa (Sulawesi, Indonesia) with
Descriptions of Two New Genera and Two New Species.” Ichthyological
Exploration of Freshwaters 1: 35–54.
Kottelat, M. 1991. “Sailfin Silversides (Pisces: Telmatherinidae) of Lake
Matano, Sulawesi, Indonesia, with Descriptions of Six New Species.”
Ichthyological Exploration of Freshwaters 1: 321–344.
Wallace, A. R. 1869. The Malay Archipelago: The Land of the Orang-Utan
and the Bird of Paradise; a Narrative of Travel, with Studies of Man and
Nature. London: Macmillan.
Whitten, A. J., M. Mustafa, and G. S. Henderson. 1987. The Ecology of
Sulawesi. Yogyakarta: Gadjah Mada University Press.
African Great Lakes and Their Cichlids
El Taher, A., F. Ronco, M. Matschiner, W. Salzburger, and A. Böhne. 2021.
“Dynamics of Sex Chromosome Evolution in a Rapid Radiation of
Cichlid Fishes.” Science Advances 7: eabe8215.
Goldschmidt, T. 1996. Darwin’s Dreampond. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Marques, D. A., J. I. Meier, and O. Seehausen. 2019. “A Combinatorial
View on Speciation and Adaptive Radiation.” Trends in Ecology &
Evolution 34: 531–544.
Meyer, A., Kocher, T. D., P. Basasibwaki, and A. C. Wilson. 1990.
“Monophyletic Origin of Lake Victoria Cichlid Fishes Suggested by
Mitochondrial DNA Sequences.” Nature 347: 550–553.
Miller, E. C. 2021. “Comparing Diversification Rates in Lakes, Rivers, and
the Sea.” Evolution 75: 2055–2073.
Roberts, R. B., J. R. Ser, and T. D. Kocher. 2009. “Sexual Conflict Resolved
by Invasion of a Novel Sex Determiner in Lake Malawi Cichlid Fishes.”
Science 326: 998–1001.
Salzburger, W., B. Van Bocxlaer, and A. S. Cohen. 2014. “Ecology and
Evolution of the African Great Lakes and Their Faunas.” Annual Review
of Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics 45: 519–545.
Taborsky, M. 2016. “Cichlid Fishes: A Model for the Integrative Study of
Social Behavior.” In Cooperative Breeding in Vertebrates, edited by
W. D. Koenig and J. L. Dickinson, 272–293. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Ancient Lake Overviews
Brooks, J. L. 1950. “Speciation in Ancient Lakes.” Quarterly Review of
Biology 25: 30–60.
Couston, L. A., and M. Siegert. 2021. “Dynamic Flows Create Potentially
Habitable Conditions in Antarctic Subglacial Lakes.” Science Advances
7: eabc3972.
Cristescu, M. E., S. J. Adamowicz, J. J. Vaillant, and D. G. Haffner. 2010.
“Ancient Lakes Revisited: From the Ecology to the Genetics of
Speciation.” Molecular Ecology 19: 4837–4851.
Hampton, S. E., S. McGowan, T. Ozersky, S. G. P. Virdis, T. T. Vu, T. L.
Spanbauer, B. M. Kraemer, et al. 2018. “Recent Ecological Change in
Ancient Lakes.” Limnology and Oceanography 63: 2277–2304.
Kawanabe, H., G. W. Coulter, and A. C. Roosevelt. 1999. Ancient Lakes:
Their Cultural and Biological Diversity. Ghent: Kenobi Productions.Martens, K. 1997. “Speciation in Ancient Lakes.” Trends in Ecology &
Evolution 12: 177–182.
Rossiter, A., and H. Kawanabe. 2000. Ancient Lakes: Biodiversity, Ecology
and Evolution. London: Academic Press.
Baikal
Hampton, S. E., R. Lyubov, M. V. Izmest’eva, S. L. Moore, B. D. Katz, and
E. A. Silow. 2008. “Sixty Years of Environmental Change in the World’s
Largest Freshwater Lake–Lake Baikal, Siberia.” Global Change Biology
14: 1947–1958.
Macdonald, K. S., III, L. Yampolsky, and J. E. Duffy. 2005. “Molecular and
Morphological Evolution of the Amphipod Radiation of Lake Baikal.”
Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 35: 323–343.
Sherbakov, D. Y. 1999. “Molecular Phylogenetic Studies on the Origin of
Biodiversity in Lake Baikal.” Trends in Ecology & Evolution 14: 92–95.
Thomson, P. 2007. Sacred Sea: A Journey to Lake Baikal. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Lake Sediments
Cohen, A. S. 2012. “Scientific Drilling and Biological Evolution in Ancient
Lakes: Lessons Learned and Recommendations for the Future.”
Hydrobiologia 682: 3–25.
Cohen, A. S. 2018. “The Past Is a Key to the Future: Lessons
Paleoecological Data Can Provide for Management of the African Great
Lakes.” Journal of Great Lakes Research 44: 1142–1153.
Wilke, T., T. Hauffe, E. Jovanovska, A. Cvetkoska, T. Donders, K.
Ekschmitt, A. Francke, et al. 2020. “Deep Drilling Reveals Massive
Shifts in Evolutionary Dynamics after Formation of Ancient Ecosystem.”
Science Advances 6: eabb2943.
Wilke, T., B. Wagner, B. Van Bocxlaer, C. Albrecht, D. Ariztegui, D.
Delicado, A. Francke, et al. 2016. “Scientific Drilling Projects in AncientLakes: Integrating Geological and Biological Histories.” Global and
Planetary Change 143: 118–151.Chapter 2
Henderson, H. G. 1958. An Introduction to Haiku: An Anthology of Poems
and Poets from Basho to Shiki. Garden City, NY: Doubleday Anchor.
Species Concepts
Bobay, L. M., and H. Ochman. 2018. Biological Species in the Viral World.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 115: 6040–6045.
Coyne, J. A. 2005. “Ernst Mayr (1904–2005).” Science 307: 1212–1213.
Coyne, J. A., and H. A. Orr. 2004. Speciation. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer
Associates.
Darwin, C. 1859. On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection.
London: John Murray.
Mandagi, I. F., R. Kakioka, J. Montenegro, H. Kobayashi, K. W. Masengi,
N. Inomata, A. J. Nagano, et al. 2021. “Species Divergence and Repeated
Ancient Hybridization in a Sulawesian Lake System.” Journal of
Evolutionary Biology 34: 1767–1780.
Stankowski, S., and M. Ravinet. 2021. Defining the Speciation Continuum.
Evolution 75: 1256–1273.
Stankowski, S. and M. Ravinet. 2021. Quantifying the Use of Species
Concepts. Current Biology, 31: R428–R429.
Measuring Biodiversity
Herder, F., A. W. Nolte, J. Pfaender, J. Schwarzer, R. K. Hadiaty, and U. K.
Schliewen. 2006. “Adaptive Radiation and Hybridization in Wallace’s
Dreamponds: Evidence from Sailfin Silversides in the Malili Lakes of
Sulawesi.” Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 273:
2209–2217.
Mandagi, I. F., R. Kakioka, J. Montenegro, H. Kobayashi, K. W. Masengi,
N. Inomata, A. J. Nagano, et al. 2021. “Species Divergence and RepeatedAncient Hybridization in a Sulawesian Lake System.” Journal of
Evolutionary Biology 34: 1767–1780.
Miesen, F. W., F. Droppelmann, S. Hullen, R. K. Hadiaty, and F. Herder.
2018. “An Annotated Checklist of the Inland Fishes of Sulawesi.” Bonn
Zoological Bulletin 64: 77–106.
Redding, D. W., and A. Ø. Mooers. 2006. “Incorporating Evolutionary
Measures into Conservation Prioritization.” Conservation Biology 20:
1670–1678.
Veron, S., V. Saito, N. Padilla-García, F. Forest, and Y. Bertheau. 2019.
“The Use of Phylogenetic Diversity in Conservation Biology and
Community Ecology: A Common Base but Different Approaches.”
Quarterly Review of Biology 94: 123–148.
Speciation (See Also “Species Concepts” Above)
Herder, F., J. Pfaender, and U. K. Schliewen. 2008. “Adaptive Sympatric
Speciation of Polychromatic ‘Roundfin’ Sailfin Silverside Fish in Lake
Matano (Sulawesi).” Evolution 62: 2178–2195.
Lewontin, R. C. 1970. “The Units of Selection.” Annual Review of Ecology
and Systematics 1: 1–18.
Meier, J. I., D. A. Marques, C. E. Wagner, L. Excoffier, and O. Seehausen.
2018. “Genomics of Parallel Ecological Speciation in Lake Victoria
Cichlids.” Molecular Biology and Evolution 35: 1489–1506.
Meier, J. I., V. C. Sousa, D. A. Marques, O. M. Selz, C. E. Wagner, L.
Excoffier, and O. Seehausen. 2017. “Demographic Modelling with
Whole-Genome Data Reveals Parallel Origin of Similar Pundamilia
Cichlid Species after Hybridization.” Molecular Ecology 26: 123–141.
Nosil, P. 2012. Ecological Speciation. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Rajkov, J., A. A. Weber, W. Salzburger, and B. Egger. 2018. “Immigrant and
Extrinsic Hybrid Inviability Contribute to Reproductive Isolation
between Lake and River Cichlid Ecotypes.” Evolution 72: 2553–2564.
Schluter, D. 2009. “Evidence for Ecological Speciation and Its Alternative.”
Science 323: 737–741.Sutra, N., J. Kusumi, J. Montenegro, H. Kobayashi, S. Fujimoto, K. W. A.
Masengi, A. J. Nagano, et al. 2019. “Evidence for Sympatric Speciation
in a Wallacean Ancient Lake.” Evolution 73: 1898–1915.
Adaptive Radiation
Albertson, R. C., and T. D. Kocher. 2006. “Genetic and Developmental
Basis of Cichlid Trophic Diversity.” Heredity 97: 211–221.
Chaparro-Pedraza, P. C., G. Roth, and O. Seehausen. 2022. “The
Enrichment Paradox in Adaptive Radiations: Emergence of Predators
Hinders Diversification in Resource Rich Environments.” Ecology
Letters, 1–12.
Gillespie, R. G., G. M. Bennett, L. De Meester, J. L. Feder, R. C. Fleischer,
L. J. Harmon, A. P. Hendry, et al. 2020. “Comparing Adaptive Radiations
across Space, Time, and Taxa.” Journal of Heredity 111: 1–20.
Kocher, T. D., J. A. Conroy, K. R. McKaye, and J. R. Stauffer. 1993.
“Similar Morphologies of Cichlid Fish in Lakes Tanganyika and Malawi
Are Due to Convergence.” Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 2:
158–165.
McGee, M. D., S. R. Borstein, J. I. Meier, D. A. Marques, S. Mwaiko, A.
Taabu, M. A. Kishe, et al. 2020. “The Ecological and Genomic Basis of
Explosive Adaptive Radiation.” Nature 586: 75–79.
Miura, O., M. Urabe, T. Nishimura, K. Nakai, and S. Chiba. 2019. “Recent
Lake Expansion Triggered the Adaptive Radiation of Freshwater Snails
in the Ancient Lake Biwa.” Evolution Letters 3: 43–54.
Muschick, M., A. Indermaur, and W. Salzburger. 2012. “Convergent
Evolution within an Adaptive Radiation of Cichlid Fishes.” Current
Biology 22:2362–2368.
Parenti, L. R., and D. Wowor. 2020. “Renny Kurnia Hadiaty (1960–2019).”
Copeia 108: 430–433.
Pfaender, J., R. K. Hadiaty, U. K. Schliewen, and F. Herder. 2016. “Rugged
Adaptive Landscapes Shape a Complex, Sympatric Radiation.”
Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 283: 20152342.Schluter, D. 2000. The Ecology of Adaptive Radiation. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Tabata, R., R. Kakioka, K. Tominaga, T. Komiya, and K. Watanabe. 2016.
“Phylogeny and Historical Demography of Endemic Fishes in Lake
Biwa: The Ancient Lake as a Promoter of Evolution and Diversification
of Freshwater Fishes in Western Japan.” Ecology and Evolution 6: 2601–
2623.
Wagner, C. E., L. J. Harmon, and O. Seehausen. 2012. “Ecological
Opportunity and Sexual Selection Together Predict Adaptive Radiation.”
Nature 487: 366–369.
Wagner, C. E., L. J. Harmon, and O. Seehausen. 2014. “Cichlid Species￾Area Relationships Are Shaped by Adaptive Radiations That Scale with
Area.” Ecology Letters 17: 583–592.
Wilson, A. B., M. Glaubrecht, and A. Meyer. 2004. “Ancient Lakes as
Evolutionary Reservoirs: Evidence from the Thalassoid Gastropods of
Lake Tanganyika.” Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological
Sciences 271: 529–536.Chapter 3
Woodward, S. P. 1859. “On Some New Freshwater Shells from Central
Africa.” Proceedings of the Zoological Society of London 27: 348–350.
Snails and Crabs
Glaubrecht, M., and T. von Rintelen. 2008. “The Species Flocks of
Lacustrine Gastropods: Tylomelania on Sulawesi as Models in Speciation
and Adaptive Radiation.” In Patterns and Processes of Speciation in
Ancient Lakes, edited by T. Wilke, R. Väinölä, and F. Riedel, 181–199.
Dordrecht: Springer.
Hilgers, L., S. Hartmann, M. Hofreiter, and T. von Rintelen. 2018. “Novel
Genes, Ancient Genes, and Gene Co-option Contributed to the Genetic
Basis of the Radula, a Molluscan Innovation.” Molecular Biology and
Evolution 35: 1638–1652.
Hilgers, L., S. Hartmann, J. Pfaender, N. Lentge-Maaß, R. M. Marwoto, T.
von Rintelen, and M. Hofreiter. 2022. “Radula Diversification Promotes
Ecomorph Divergence in an Adaptive Radiation of Freshwater Snails.”
Genes 13: 1029. https://doi.org/10.3390/genes13061029.
Poettinger, T., and C. D. Schubart. 2014. “Molecular Diversity of
Freshwater Crabs from Sulawesi and the Sequential Colonization of
Ancient Lakes.” Hydrobiologia 739: 73–84.
Schubart, C. D., and P. K. L. Ng. 2008. “A New Molluscivore Crab from
Lake Poso Confirms Multiple Colonization of Ancient Lakes in Sulawesi
by Freshwater Crabs (Decapoda: Brachyura).” Zoological Journal of the
Linnean Society 154: 211–221.
von Rintelen, T., P. Bouchet, and M. Glaubrecht. 2007. “Ancient Lakes as
Hotspots of Diversity: A Morphological Review of an Endemic Species
Flock of Tylomelania (Gastropoda: Cerithioidea: Pachychilidae) in the
Malili Lake System on Sulawesi, Indonesia.” Hydrobiologia 592: 11–94.
von Rintelen, T., and M. Glaubrecht. 2005. “Anatomy of an Adaptive
Radiation: A Unique Reproductive Strategy in the Endemic FreshwaterGastropod Tylomelania (Cerithioidea: Pachychilidae) on Sulawesi,
Indonesia and Its Biogeographical Implications.” Biological Journal of
the Linnean Society 85: 513–542.
von Rintelen, T., A. B. Wilson, A. Meyer, and M. Glaubrecht. 2004.
“Escalation and Trophic Specialization Drive Adaptive Radiation of
Freshwater Gastropods in Ancient Lakes on Sulawesi, Indonesia.”
Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 271: 2541–2549.
West, K., and A. Cohen. 1994. “Predator-Prey Coevolution as a Model for
the Unusual Morphologies of the Crabs and Gastropods of Lake
Tanganyika.” Ergebnisse der Limnologie 44: 267–283.
West, K., A. Cohen, and M. Baron. 1991. “Morphology and Behavior of
Crabs and Gastropods from Lake Tanganyika, Africa: Implications for
Lacustrine Predator-Prey Coevolution.” Evolution 45: 589–607.
Wilson, A. B., M. Glaubrecht, and A. Meyer. 2004. “Ancient Lakes as
Evolutionary Reservoirs: Evidence from the Thalassoid Gastropods of
Lake Tanganyika.” Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological
Sciences 271: 529–536.
Sponges
Erpenbeck, D., A. Galitz, G. Wörheide, C. Albrecht, R. Pronzato, and R.
Manconi. 2020. “Having the Balls to Colonize: The Ephydatia fluviatilis
Group and the Origin of (Ancient) Lake ‘Endemic’ Sponge Lineages.”
Journal of Great Lakes Research 46: 1140–1145.
Kenny, N. J., W. R. Francis, R. E. Rivera-Vicéns, K. Juravel, A. de
Mendoza, C. Díez-Vives, R. Lister, et al. 2020. “Tracing Animal
Genomic Evolution with the Chromosomal-Level Assembly of the
Freshwater Sponge Ephydatia muelleri.” Nature Communications 11: 1–
11.
Kenny, N. J., and V. B. Itskovich. 2020. “Phylogenomic Inference of the
Interrelationships of Lake Baikal Sponges.” Systematics and Biodiversity
19: 209–217.
Kenny, N. J., B. Plese, A. Riesgo, and V. B. Itskovich. 2019. “Symbiosis,
Selection, and Novelty: Freshwater Adaptation in the Unique Sponges of
Lake Baikal.” Molecular Biology and Evolution 36: 2462–2480.Manconi, R., and R. Pronzato. 2016. “How to Survive and Persist in
Temporary Freshwater? Adaptive Traits of Sponges (Porifera:
Spongillida): A Review.” Hydrobiologia 782: 11–22.
Van Soest, R. W. M., N. Boury-Esnault, J. Vacelet, M. Dohrmann, D.
Erpenbeck, N. J. De Voogd, N. Santodomingo, et al. 2012. “Global
Diversity of Sponges (Porifera).” PLoS ONE 7: e35105.
Shrimp (Also Cichlid Dispersal)
Brooks, K. C., R. Maia, J. E. Duffy, K. M. Hultgren, and D. R. Rubenstein.
2017. “Ecological Generalism Facilitates the Evolution of Sociality in
Snapping Shrimps.” Ecology Letters 20: 1516–1525.
Horká, I., S. De Grave, C. H. J. M. Fransen, A. Petrusek, and Z. Ďuriš.
2016. “Multiple Host Switching Events Shape the Evolution of
Symbiotic Palaemonid Shrimps (Crustacea: Decapoda).” Scientific
Reports 6: 1–13.
Husemann, M., M. Tobler, B. Ding, R. Nguyen, C. McCauley, T. Pilger, and
P. D. Danley. 2019. “Complex Patterns of Genetic and Phenotypic
Divergence in Populations of the Lake Malawi Cichlid Maylandia
zebra.” Hydrobiologia 832: 135–151.
Klotz, W., T. von Rintelen, D. Wowor, C. Lukhaup, and K. von Rintelen.
2021. “Lake Poso’s Shrimp Fauna Revisited: The Description of Five
New Species of the Genus Caridina (Crustacea, Decapoda, Atyidae)
More than Doubles the Number of Endemic Lacustrine Species.”
ZooKeys 1009: 81–122.
Koblmüller, S., W. Salzburger, B. Obermüller, E. V. A. Eigner, C.
Sturmbauer, and K. M. Sefc. 2011. “Separated by Sand, Fused by
Dropping Water: Habitat Barriers and Fluctuating Water Levels Steer the
Evolution of Rock-Dwelling Cichlid Populations in Lake Tanganyika.”
Molecular Ecology 20: 2272–2290.
von Rintelen, K. 2011. “Intraspecific Geographic Differentiation and
Patterns of Endemism in Freshwater Shrimp Species Flocks in Ancient
Lakes of Sulawesi.” In Phylogeography and Population Genetics in
Crustacea, edited by C. Held, S. Koenemann, and C. D. Schubart, 257–
271. Boca Raton: CRC Press.von Rintelen, K., and Y. Cai. 2009. “Radiation of Endemic Species Flocks
in Ancient Lakes: Systematic Revision of the Freshwater Shrimp
Caridina H. Milne Edwards, 1837 (Crustacea: Decapoda: Atyidae) from
the Ancient Lakes of Sulawesi, Indonesia, with the Description of Eight
New Species.” Raffles Bulletin of Zoology 57: 343–452.
von Rintelen, K., P. De los Ríos, T. von Rintelen, G. C. B. Poore, and M.
Thiel. 2020. “Standing Waters, Especially Ancient Lakes.” In Evolution
and Biogeography, vol. 8, edited by M. Thiel and G. Poore, 296–318.
New York: Oxford University Press.
von Rintelen, K., M. Glaubrecht, C. D. Schubart, A. Wessel, and T. von
Rintelen. 2010. “Adaptive Radiation and Ecological Diversification of
Sulawesi’s Ancient Lake Shrimps.” Evolution 64: 3287–3299.
von Rintelen, K., T. von Rintelen, M. Meixner, C. Lüter, Y. Cai, and M.
Glaubrecht. 2007. “Freshwater Shrimp–Sponge Association from an
Ancient Lake.” Biology Letters 3: 262–264.
Zitzler, K., and Y. Cai. 2006. “Caridina spongicola, New Species, a
Freshwater Shrimp (Crustacea: Decapoda: Atyidae) from the Ancient
Malili Lake System of Sulawesi, Indonesia.” Raffles Bulletin of Zoology
54: 271–276.
Cichlids of Lake Palaeo-Makgadikgadi
Astudillo-Clavijo, V., M. L. Stiassny, K. L. Ilves, Z. Musilova, W.
Salzburger, and H. López-Fernández. 2022. “Exon-Based Phylogenomics
and the Relationships of African Cichlid Fishes: Tackling the Challenges
of Reconstructing Phylogenies with Repeated Rapid Radiations.”
Systematic Biology syac051.
Joyce, D. A., D. H. Lunt, R. Bills, G. F. Turner, C. Katongo, N. Duftner, C.
Sturmbauer, and O. Seehausen. 2005. “An Extant Cichlid Fish Radiation
Emerged in an Extinct Pleistocene Lake.” Nature 435: 90–95.
Schmidt, M., M. Fuchs, A. C. G. Henderson, A. Kossler, M. J. Leng, A. W.
Mackay, E. Shemang, and F. Riedel. 2017. “Paleolimnological Features
of a Mega-Lake Phase in the Makgadikgadi Basin (Kalahari, Botswana)
during Marine Isotope Stage 5 Inferred from Diatoms.” Journal of
Paleolimnology 58: 373–390.Chapter 4
Mwenelupembe, P. 2013. “Lake Malawi” (poem). Accessed September 22,
2022. https://www.poemhunter.com/poem/lake-malawi.
Vision and Light
Endler, J. A. 1990. “On the Measurement and Classification of Colour in
Studies of Animal Colour Patterns.” Biological Journal of the Linnean
Society 41: 315–352.
McGee, M. D., S. R. Borstein, J. I. Meier, D. A. Marques, S. Mwaiko, A.
Taabu, M. A. Kishe, et al. 2020. “The Ecological and Genomic Basis of
Explosive Adaptive Radiation.” Nature 586: 75–79.
Seehausen, O., and J. J. M. van Alphen. 1998. “The Effect of Male
Coloration on Female Mate Choice in Closely Related Lake Victoria
Cichlids (Haplochromis nyererei Complex).” Behavioral Ecology and
Sociobiology 42: 1–8.
Seehausen, O., J. J. M. van Alphen, and F. Witte. 1997. “Cichlid Fish
Diversity Threatened by Eutrophication That Curbs Sexual Selection.”
Science 277: 1808–1811.
Selz, O. M., M. E. R. Pierotti, M. E. Maan, C. Schmid, and O. Seehausen.
2014. “Female Preference for Male Color is Necessary and Sufficient for
Assortative Mating in 2 Cichlid Sister Species.” Behavioral Ecology 25:
612–626.
Van der Sluijs, I., S. M. Gray, M. C. P. Amorim, I. Barber, U. Candolin,
A. P. Hendry, R. Krahe, et al. 2011. “Communication in Troubled Waters:
Responses of Fish Communication Systems to Changing Environments.”
Evolutionary Ecology 25: 623–640.
Wagner, C. E., L. J. Harmon, and O. Seehausen. 2012. “Ecological
Opportunity and Sexual Selection Together Predict Adaptive Radiation.”
Nature 487: 366–369.Wagner, C. E., L. J. Harmon, and O. Seehausen. 2014. “Cichlid Species￾Area Relationships Are Shaped by Adaptive Radiations That Scale with
Area.” Ecology Letters 17: 583–592.
Competing for Mates: Sexual Selection
Darwin, C. 1871. The Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to Sex.
London: Murray.
Kokko, H., H. Klug, and M. D. Jennions. 2012. “Unifying Cornerstones of
Sexual Selection: Operational Sex Ratio, Bateman Gradient and the
Scope for Competitive Investment.” Ecology Letters 15: 1340–1351.
Pauers, M. J., J. S. McKinnon, and T. J. Ehlinger. 2004. “Directional Sexual
Selection on Chroma and Within: Pattern Colour Contrast in
Labeotropheus fuelleborni.” Proceedings of the Royal Society B:
Biological Sciences 271: S444–S447.
Trivers, R. 1972. “Parental Investment and Sexual Selection.” In Sexual
Selection and the Descent of Man: The Darwinian Pivot, edited by B.
Campbell, 136–179. Chicago: Aldine Press.
The Runaway Hypothesis of Sexual Selection
Fisher, R. A. 1930. The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Lande, R. 1981. “Models of Speciation by Sexual Selection on Polygenic
Traits.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 78: 3721–
3725.
Paul, D. B., and H. G. Spencer. 1995. “The Hidden Science of Eugenics.”
Nature 374: 302–304.
Reilly, P. R. 2015. “Eugenics and Involuntary Sterilization: 1907–2015.”
Annual Review of Genomics and Human Genetics 16: 351–368.
Servedio, M. R., and J. W. Boughman. 2017. “The Role of Sexual Selection
in Local Adaptation and Speciation.” Annual Review of Ecology,
Evolution, and Systematics 48: 85–109.Sensory Drive
Cummings, M. E., and J. A. Endler. 2018. “25 Years of Sensory Drive: The
Evidence and Its Watery Bias.” Current Zoology 64: 471–484.
Fuller, R. C., and J. A. Endler. 2018. “A Perspective on Sensory Drive.”
Current Zoology 64: 465–470.
Gray, S. M., L. M. Dill, F. Y. Tantu, E. R. Loew, F. Herder, and J. S.
McKinnon. 2008. “Environment-Contingent Sexual Selection in a Colour
Polymorphic Fish.” Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological
Sciences 275: 1785–1791.
Gray, S. M., and J. S. McKinnon. 2007. “Linking Color Polymorphism
Maintenance and Speciation.” Trends in Ecology & Evolution 22: 71–79.
Maan, M. E., O. Seehausen, and T. G. G. Groothuis. 2017. “Differential
Survival between Visual Environments Supports a Role of Divergent
Sensory Drive in Cichlid Fish Speciation.” American Naturalist 189: 78–
85.
Seehausen, O., Y. Terai, I. S. Magalhaes, K. L. Carleton, H. D. J. Mrosso, R.
Miyagi, I. Van Der Sluijs, et al. 2008. “Speciation through Sensory Drive
in Cichlid Fish.” Nature 455: 620–626.
Learning and Development
Verzijden, M. N., and C. ten Cate. 2007. “Early Learning Influences
Species Assortative Mating Preferences in Lake Victoria Cichlid Fish.”
Biology Letters 3: 134–136.
Verzijden, M. N., C. ten Cate, M. R. Servedio, G. M. Kozak, J. W.
Boughman, and E. I. Svensson. 2012. “The Impact of Learning on Sexual
Selection and Speciation.” Trends in Ecology & Evolution 27: 511–519.
Wright, D. S., N. Demandt, J. T. Alkema, O. Seehausen, T. G. G. Groothuis,
and M. E. Maan. 2017. “Developmental Effects of Visual Environment
on Species-Assortative Mating Preferences in Lake Victoria Cichlid
Fish.” Journal of Evolutionary Biology 30: 289–299.
Wright, D. S., E. Rietveld, and M. E. Maan 2018. “Developmental Effects
of Environmental Light on Male Nuptial Coloration in Lake Victoria
Cichlid Fish.” PeerJ 6: e4209.Wright, D. S., R. van Eijk, L. Schuart, O. Seehausen, T. G. G. Groothuis,
and M. E. Maan. 2020. “Testing Sensory Drive Speciation in Cichlid
Fish: Linking Light Conditions to Opsin Expression, Opsin Genotype
and Female Mate Preference.” Journal of Evolutionary Biology 33: 422–
434.
Conflict
Arnqvist, G., and L. Rowe. 2005. Sexual Conflict. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Gray, S. M., L. M. Dill, and J. S. McKinnon. 2007. “Cuckoldry Incites
Cannibalism: Male Fish Turn to Cannibalism When Perceived Certainty
of Paternity Decreases.” American Naturalist 169: 258–263.
Gray, S. M., and J. S. McKinnon. 2006. “A Comparative Description of
Mating Behaviour in the Endemic Telmatherinid Fishes of Sulawesi’s
Malili Lakes.” Environmental Biology of Fishes 75: 471–482.
Kocher, T. D., K. A. Behrens, M. A. Conte, M. Aibara, H. D. J. Mrosso,
E. C. J. Green, M. R. Kidd, et al. 2022. “New Sex Chromosomes in Lake
Victoria Cichlid Fishes (Cichlidae: Haplochromini).” Genes 13: 804.
Moore, E. C., P. J. Ciccotto, E. N. Peterson, M. S. Lamm, R. C. Albertson,
and R. B. Roberts. 2022. “Polygenic Sex Determination Produces
Modular Sex Polymorphism in an African Cichlid Fish.” Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences 119: e2118574119.
Rometsch, S. J., J. Torres-Dowdall, and A. Meyer. 2020. “Evolutionary
Dynamics of Pre- and Postzygotic Reproductive Isolation in Cichlid
Fishes.” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 375:
20190535.Chapter 5
Herder, F., A. W. Nolte, J. Pfaender, J. Schwarzer, R. K. Hadiaty, and U. K.
Schliewen. 2006. “Adaptive Radiation and Hybridization in Wallace’s
Dreamponds: Evidence from Sailfin Silversides in the Malili Lakes of
Sulawesi.” Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 273:
2209–2217.
Lefty Sporting Advantage and Balancing Selection
Brooks, R., L. F. Bussiere, M. D. Jennions, and J. Hunt. 2004. “Sinister
Strategies Succeed at the Cricket World Cup.” Proceedings of the Royal
Society B: Biological Sciences 271: S64–S66.
Jamie, G. A., and J. I. Meier. 2020. “The Persistence of Polymorphisms
across Species Radiations.” Trends in Ecology & Evolution 35: 795–808.
Raymond, M., D. Pontier, A. Dufour, and A. P. Møller. 1996. “Frequency￾Dependent Maintenance of Left Handedness in Humans.” Proceedings of
the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 263: 1627–1633.
Scale Eating
Hori, M. 1993. “Frequency-Dependent Natural Selection in the Handedness
of Scale-Eating Cichlid Fish.” Science 260: 216–219.
Indermaur, A., A. Theis, B. Egger, and W. Salzburger. 2018. Mouth
Dimorphism in Scale-Eating Cichlid Fish from Lake Tanganyika
Advances Individual Fitness.” Evolution 72: 1962–1969.
Kusche, H., H. J. Lee, and A. Meyer. 2012. “Mouth Asymmetry in the
Textbook Example of Scale-Eating Cichlid Fish Is Not a Discrete
Dimorphism after All.” Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological
Sciences 279: 4715–4723.
Lee, H. J., V. Heim, and A. Meyer. 2015. “Genetic and Environmental
Effects on the Morphological Asymmetry in the Scale-Eating CichlidFish, Perissodus microlepis.” Ecology and Evolution 5: 4277–4286.
Lee, H. J., H. Kusche, and A. Meyer. 2012. “Handed Foraging Behavior in
Scale-Eating Cichlid Fish: Its Potential Role in Shaping Morphological
Asymmetry.” PLoS ONE 7: e44670.
Liem, K. F., and D. J. Stewart. 1976. “Evolution of the Scale-Eating Cichlid
Fishes of Lake Tanganyika: A Generic Revision with a Description of a
New Species.” Bulletin of the Museum of Comparative Zoology 147:
1975–1977.
Marlier, G., and N. Leleup. 1954. “A Curious Ecological ‘Niche’ among the
Fishes of Lake Tanganyika.” Nature 174: 935–936.
Palmer, A. R. 2009. “Animal Asymmetry.” Current Biology 19: R473–
R477.
Palmer, A. R. 2010. “Scale-Eating Cichlids: From Hand(ed) to Mouth.”
Journal of Biology 9: 1–4.
Raffini, F., and A. Meyer. 2019. “A Comprehensive Overview of the
Developmental Basis and Adaptive Significance of a Textbook
Polymorphism: Head Asymmetry in the Cichlid Fish Perissodus
microlepis.” Hydrobiologia 832: 65–84.
Takeuchi, Y., M. Hori, S. Tada, and Y. Oda. 2016. “Acquisition of
Lateralized Predation Behavior Associated with Development of Mouth
Asymmetry in a Lake Tanganyika Scale-Eating Cichlid Fish.” PLoS ONE
11: e0147476.
Takeuchi, Y., and Y. Oda. 2017. “Lateralized Scale-Eating Behaviour of
Cichlid Is Acquired by Learning to Use the Naturally Stronger Side.”
Scientific Reports, 1–9.
Van Dooren, T. J. M., H. A. Van Goor, and M. Van Putten. 2010.
“Handedness and Asymmetry in Scale-Eating Cichlids: Antisymmetries
of Different Strength.” Evolution 64: 2159–2165.
Sexual Trickery
Cerwenka, A. F., J. D. Wedekind, R. K. Hadiaty, U. K. Schliewen, and F.
Herder. 2012. “Alternative Egg-Feeding Tactics in Telmatherinasarasinorum, a Trophic Specialist of Lake Matano’s Evolving Sailfin
Silversides Fish Radiation.” Hydrobiologia 693: 131–139.
Gray, S. M., and J. S. McKinnon. 2006. A Comparative Description of
Mating Behaviour in the Endemic Telmatherinid Fishes of Sulawesi’s
Malili Lakes.” Environmental Biology of Fishes 75: 471–482.
Gray, S. M., J. S. McKinnon, F. Y. Tantu, and L. M. Dill. 2008. “Sneaky
Egg-Eating in Telmatherina sarasinorum, an Endemic Fish from
Sulawesi.” Journal of Fish Biology 73: 728–731.
Lloyd, James E. 1965. “Aggressive Mimicry in Photuris: Firefly Femmes
Fatales.” Science 149: 653–654.
Color, Contrast, Courtship, and Conflict
Chunco, A. J., J. S. McKinnon, and M. R. Servedio. 2007. “Microhabitat
Variation and Sexual Selection Can Maintain Male Color
Polymorphisms.” Evolution 61: 2504–2515.
Dijkstra, P. D., and S. E. Border. 2018. “How Does Male–Male Competition
Generate Negative Frequency-Dependent Selection and Disruptive
Selection during Speciation?” Current Zoology 64: 89–99.
Seehausen, O., and D. Schluter. 2004. “Male–Male Competition and
Nuptial–colour Displacement as a Diversifying Force in Lake Victoria
Cichlid Fishes.” Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences
271: 1345–1353.Chapter 6
Hybridization in Neanderthals and Fish
Ballard, J. W. O., and M. C. Whitlock. 2004. “The Incomplete Natural
History of Mitochondria.” Molecular Ecology 13: 729–744.
Blackwell, T., A. G. Ford, A .G. Ciezarek, S. J. Bradbeer, C. A. Gracida
Juarez, A. M. Smith, B. P. Ngatunga, et al. 2021. “Newly Discovered
Cichlid Fish Biodiversity Threatened by Hybridization with Non-Native
Species.” Molecular Ecology 30: 895–911.
Herder, F., A. W. Nolte, J. Pfaender, J. Schwarzer, R. K. Hadiaty, and U. K.
Schliewen. 2006. “Adaptive Radiation and Hybridization in Wallace’s
Dreamponds: Evidence from Sailfin Silversides in the Malili Lakes of
Sulawesi.” Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 273:
2209–2217
Keller, I., C. E. Wagner, L. Greuter, S. Mwaiko, O. M. Selz, A. Sivasundar,
S. Wittwer, and O. Seehausen. 2013. “Population Genomic Signatures of
Divergent Adaptation, Gene Flow and Hybrid Speciation in the Rapid
Radiation of Lake Victoria Cichlid Fishes.” Molecular Ecology 22:
2848–2863.
Shechonge, A., B. P. Ngatunga, S. J. Bradbeer, J. J. Day, J. J. Freer, A. G. P.
Ford, J. Kihedu, et al. 2019. “Widespread Colonisation of Tanzanian
Catchments by Introduced Oreochromis Tilapia Fishes: The Legacy from
Decades of Deliberate Introduction.” Hydrobiologia 832: 235–253.
Vijaykrishna, D., L. L. M. Poon, H. C. Zhu, S. K. Ma, O. T. W. Li, C. L.
Cheung, G. J. D. Smith, et al. 2010. “Reassortment of Pandemic
H1N1/2009 Influenza A Virus in Swine.” Science 328: 1529–1529.
Zeberg, H., and S. Pääbo. 2020. “The Major Genetic Risk Factor for Severe
COVID-19 Is Inherited from Neanderthals.” Nature, 610–612.
Zeberg, H., and S. Pääbo. 2021. “A Genomic Region Associated with
Protection against Severe COVID-19 Is Inherited from Neandertals.”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 118: e2026309118.The Transgressions of Genes
Lewontin, R. C., and L. C. Birch. 1966. “Hybridization as a Source of
Variation for Adaptation to New Environments.” Evolution 20: 315–336.
Richards, E. J., and C. H. Martin. 2017. “Adaptive Introgression from
Distant Caribbean Islands Contributed to the Diversification of a
Microendemic Adaptive Radiation of Trophic Specialist Pupfishes.”
PLoS Genetics 13: e1006919.
Richards, E. J., and C. H. Martin. 2022. “We Get By with a Little Help from
Our Friends: Shared Adaptive Variation Provides a Bridge to Novel
Ecological Specialists during Adaptive Radiation.” Proceedings of the
Royal Society B 289: 20220613.
Richards, E. J., J. A. McGirr, J. R. Wang, M. E. St. John, J. W. Poelstra,
M. J. Solano, D. C. O’Connell, et al. 2021. “A Vertebrate Adaptive
Radiation Is Assembled from an Ancient and Disjunct Spatiotemporal
Landscape.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 118:
e2011811118.
Selz, O. M., and O. Seehausen. 2019. “Interspecific Hybridization Can
Generate Functional Novelty in Cichlid Fish.” Proceedings of the Royal
Society B: Biological Sciences 286: 20191621.
Selz, O. M., R. Thommen, M. E. Maan, and O. Seehausen. 2014.
“Behavioural Isolation May Facilitate Homoploid Hybrid Speciation in
Cichlid Fish.” Journal of Evolutionary Biology 27: 275–289.
Hybridization and Introgression Could Have Accelerated
Adaptive Radiation. . . . Did They?
Blaxter, M., J. M. Archibald, A. K. Childers, J. A. Coddington, K. A.
Crandall, F. Di Palma, R. Durbin, et al. 2022. “Why Sequence All
Eukaryotes?” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 119:
p.e2115636118.
Ivory, S. J., M. W. Blome, J. W. King, M. M. McGlue, J. E. Cole, and A. S.
Cohen. 2016. “Environmental Change Explains Cichlid Adaptive
Radiation at Lake Malawi over the Past 1.2 Million Years.” Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences 113: 11895–11900.Malinsky, M., H. Svardal, A. M. Tyers, E. A. Miska, M. J. Genner, G. F.
Turner, and R. Durbin. 2018. “Whole-Genome Sequences of Malawi
Cichlids Reveal Multiple Radiations Interconnected by Gene Flow.”
Nature Ecology and Evolution 2: 1940–1955.
McGee, M. D., S. R. Borstein, J. I. Meier, D. A. Marques, S. Mwaiko, A.
Taabu, M. A. Kishe, et al. 2020. “The Ecological and Genomic Basis of
Explosive Adaptive Radiation.” Nature 586: 75–79.
Meier, J. I., D. A. Marques, S. Mwaiko, C. E. Wagner, L. Excoffier, and O.
Seehausen. 2017. “Ancient Hybridization Fuels Rapid Cichlid Fish
Adaptive Radiations.” Nature Communications 8: 1–11.
Meyer, A., T. D. Kocher, P. Basasibwaki, and A. C. Wilson. 1990.
“Monophyletic Origin of Lake Victoria Cichlid Fishes Suggested by
Mitochondrial DNA Sequences.” Nature 347: 550–553.
Ronco, F., M. Matschiner, A. Böhne, A. Boila, H. H. Büscher, A. El Taher,
A. Indermaur, et al. 2020. “Drivers and Dynamics of a Massive Adaptive
Radiation in Cichlid Fishes.” Nature 589: 76–81.
Seehausen, O., E. Koetsier, M. V. Schneider, L. J. Chapman, C. A.
Chapman, M. E. Knight, G. F. Turner, et al. 2003. “Nuclear Markers
Reveal Unexpected Genetic Variation and a Congolese-Nilotic Origin of
the Lake Victoria Cichlid Species Flock.” Proceedings of the Royal
Society B: Biological Sciences 270: 129–137.
Svardal, H., F. X. Quah, M. Malinsky, B. P. Ngatunga, E. A. Miska, W.
Salzburger, M. J. Genner, et al. 2020. “Ancestral Hybridization
Facilitated Species Diversification in the Lake Malawi Cichlid Fish
Adaptive Radiation.” Molecular Biology and Evolution 37: 1100–1113.
Svardal, H., W. Salzburger, and M. Malinsky. 2021. “Genetic Variation and
Hybridization in Evolutionary Radiations of Cichlid Fishes.” Annual
Review of Animal Biosciences 9: 55–79.
Takahashi, T., and E. Moreno. 2015. “A RAD-Based Phylogenetics for
Orestias Fishes from Lake Titicaca.” Molecular Phylogenetics and
Evolution 93: 307–317.
The Transporter HypothesisColosimo, P. F., K. E. Hosemann, S. Balabhadra, G. Villarreal, M. Dickson,
J. Grimwood, J. Schmutz, et al. 2005. “Widespread Parallel Evolution in
Sticklebacks by Repeated Fixation of Ectodysplasin Alleles.” Science
307: 1928–1933.
McKinnon, J. S., J. Kitano, and N. Aubin-Horth. 2019. “Gasterosteus,
Anolis, Mus, and More: The Changing Roles of Vertebrate Models in
Evolution and Behaviour.” Evolutionary Ecology Research 20: 1–25.
Nelson, T. C., and W. A. Cresko. 2018. “Ancient Genomic Variation
Underlies Repeated Ecological Adaptation in Young Stickleback
Populations.” Evolution Letters 2: 9–21.
Roberts Kingman, G. A., D. N. Vyas, F. C. Jones, S. D. Brady, H. I. Chen,
K. Reid, M. Milhaven, et al. 2021. “Predicting Future from Past: The
Genomic Basis of Recurrent and Rapid Stickleback Evolution.” Science
Advances 7: eabg5285.
Schluter, D., and G. L. Conte. 2009. “Genetics and Ecological Speciation.”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 106: 9955–9962.Chapter 7
Stager, J. C., and T. C. Johnson. 2008. “The Late Pleistocene Desiccation of
Lake Victoria and the Origin of Its Endemic Biota.” Hydrobiologia 596:
5–16.
Sediments Introduction
Cohen, A. S. 2012. “Scientific Drilling and Biological Evolution in Ancient
Lakes: Lessons Learned and Recommendations for the Future.”
Hydrobiologia 682: 3–25.
Cuenca-Cambronero, M., C. J. Courtney-Mustaphi, R. Greenway, O. Heiri,
C. M. Hudson, L. King, K. D. Lemmen, et al. 2022. “An Integrative
Paleolimnological Approach for Studying Evolutionary Processes.”
Trends in Ecology & Evolution 37: 488–496.
Parducci, L., K. D. Bennett, G. F. Ficetola, I. G. Alsos, Y. Suyama, J. R.
Wood, and M. Winther Pedersen. 2017. “Ancient Plant DNA in Lake
Sediments.” New Phytologist 214: 924–942.
Russell, J. M., P. Barker, A. Cohen, S. Ivory, I. Kimirei, C. Lane, M. Leng,
et al. 2020. “ICDP Workshop on the Lake Tanganyika Scientific Drilling
Project: A Late Miocene–Present Record of Climate, Rifting, and
Ecosystem Evolution from the World’s Oldest Tropical Lake.” Scientific
Drilling 27: 53–60.
Wang, Y., M. W. Pedersen, I. G. Alsos, B. De Sanctis, F. Racimo, A.
Prohaska, E. Coissac, et al. 2021. “Late Quaternary Dynamics of Arctic
Biota from Ancient Environmental Genomics.” Nature 600: 86–92.
Wilke, T., B. Wagner, B. Van Bocxlaer, C. Albrecht, D. Ariztegui, D.
Delicado, A. Francke, et al. 2016. “Scientific Drilling Projects in Ancient
Lakes: Integrating Geological and Biological Histories.” Global and
Planetary Change 143: 118–151.
Almanacs in the MudAgeli, M. K., P. B. Hamilton, A. J. Bramburger, R. P. Weidman, Z. Song, J.
Russell, H. Vogel, et al. 2022. “Benthic-Pelagic State Changes in the
Primary Trophic Level of an Ancient Tropical Lake.” Palaeogeography,
Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 594: 110937.
Crowe, S. A., A. H. O’Neill, S. Katsev, P. Hehanussa, G. D. Haffner, B.
Sundby, A. Mucci, and D. A. Fowle. 2008. “The Biogeochemistry of
Tropical Lakes: A Case Study from Lake Matano, Indonesia.” Limnology
and Oceanography 53: 319–331.
Doble, C. J., H. Hipperson, W. Salzburger, G. J. Horsburgh, C. Mwita, D. J.
Murrell, and J. J. Day. 2020. “Testing the Performance of Environmental
DNA Metabarcoding for Surveying Highly Diverse Tropical Fish
Communities: A Case Study from Lake Tanganyika.” Environmental
DNA 2: 24–41.
Ivory, S. J., M. W. Blome, J. W. King, M. M. McGlue, J. E. Cole, and A. S.
Cohen. 2016. “Environmental Change Explains Cichlid Adaptive
Radiation at Lake Malawi over the Past 1.2 Million Years.” Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences 113: 11895–11900.
Johnson, T. C., C. A. Scholz, M. R. Talbot, K. Kelts, R. D. Ricketts, G.
Ngobi, K. Beuning, et al. 1996. “Late Pleistocene Desiccation of Lake
Victoria and Rapid Evolution of Cichlid Fishes.” Science 273: 1091–
1093.
Malinsky, M., and W. Salzburger. 2016. “Environmental Context for
Understanding the Iconic Adaptive Radiation of Cichlid Fishes in Lake
Malawi.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 113: 11654–
11656.
Russell, J. M., S. Bijaksana, H. Vogel, M. Melles, J. Kallmeyer, D.
Ariztegui, S. Crowe, et al. 2016. “The Towuti Drilling Project:
Paleoenvironments, Biological Evolution, and Geomicrobiology of a
Tropical Pacific Lake.” Scientific Drilling 21: 29–40.
Russell, J. M., H. Vogel, S. Bijaksana, M. Melles, A. Deino, A. Hafidz, D.
Haffner, et al. 2020. “The Late Quaternary Tectonic, Biogeochemical,
and Environmental Evolution of Ferruginous Lake Towuti, Indonesia.”
Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 556: 109905.
Stelbrink, B., I. Stöger, R. K. Hadiaty, U. K. Schliewen, and F. Herder.
2014. “Age Estimates for an Adaptive Lake Fish Radiation, ItsMitochondrial Introgression, and an Unexpected Sister Group: Sailfin
Silversides of the Malili Lakes System in Sulawesi.” BMC Evolutionary
Biology 14: 1–14.
Bibles in the Mud
Cohen, A. S. 2018. “The Past Is a Key to the Future: Lessons
Paleoecological Data Can Provide for Management of the African Great
Lakes.” Journal of Great Lakes Research 44: 1142–1153.
Conith, A. J., and R. C. Albertson. 2021. “The Cichlid Oral and Pharyngeal
Jaws Are Evolutionarily and Genetically Coupled.” Nature
Communications 12: 1–11.
Kuwae, M., H. Tamai, M. K. Sakata, T. Minamoto, and Y. Suzuki. 2020.
“Sedimentary DNA Tracks Decadal-Centennial Changes in Fish
Abundance.” Communications Biology 3: 1–12.
Liem, K. F. 1973. “Evolutionary Strategies and Morphological Innovations:
Cichlid Pharyngeal Jaws.” Systematic Zoology 22: 425–441.
Muschick, M., E. Jemmi, N. Lengacher, S. Hänsch, N. Wales, M. Kishe, S.
Mwaiko, et al. 2023. “Ancient DNA Is Preserved in Fish Fossils from
Tropical Lake Sediments.” Preprint.
Muschick, M., J. M. Russell, E. Jemmi, J. Walker, K. M. Stewart, A. M.
Murray, N. Dubois, et al. 2018. “Arrival Order and Release from
Competition Does Not Explain Why Haplochromine Cichlids Radiated in
Lake Victoria.” Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences
285: 20180462.
Olajos, F., F. Bokma, P. Bartels, E. Myrstener, J. Rydberg, G. Öhlund, R.
Bindler, et al. 2018. “Estimating Species Colonization Dates Using DNA
in Lake Sediment.” Methods in Ecology and Evolution 9: 535–543.
Ronco, F., and W. Salzburger. 2021. “Tracing Evolutionary Decoupling of
Oral and Pharyngeal Jaws in Cichlid Fishes.” Evolution Letters 5: 625–
635.
Stelbrink, B., E. Jovanovska, Z. Levkov, N. Ognjanova-Rumenova, T.
Wilke, and C. Albrecht. 2018. “Diatoms Do Radiate: Evidence for a
Freshwater Species Flock.” Journal of Evolutionary Biology 31: 1969–
1975.Wilke, T., T. Hauffe, E. Jovanovska, A. Cvetkoska, T. Donders, K.
Ekschmitt, A. Francke, et al. 2020. “Deep Drilling Reveals Massive
Shifts in Evolutionary Dynamics after Formation of Ancient Ecosystem.”
Science Advances 6: eabb2943.Chapter 8
Introducing the Blue Eye
Emlen, D., and C. Zimmer. 2020. Making Sense of Life. 3rd ed. New York:
Macmillan.
Godefroit, P., Y. L. Bolotsky, and J. Van Itterbeeck. 2004. “The
Lambeosaurine Dinosaur Amurosaurus riabinini, from the Maastrichtian
of Far Eastern Russia.” Acta Palaeontologica Polonica 49: 585–618.
Ksepka, D. T. 2014. “Flight Performance of the Largest Volant Bird.”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111: 10624–10629.
Mats, V. D., D. Y. Shcherbakov, and I. M. Efimova. 2011. “Late
Cretaceous-Cenozoic History of the Lake Baikal Depression and
Formation of Its Unique Biodiversity.” Stratigraphy and Geological
Correlation 19: 404–423.
Mitchell, K. J., A. Scanferla, E. Soibelzon, R. Bonini, J. Ochoa, and A.
Cooper. 2016. “Ancient DNA from the Extinct South American Giant
Glyptodont Doedicurus sp. (Xenarthra: Glyptodontidae) Reveals That
Glyptodonts Evolved from Eocene Armadillos.” Molecular Ecology 25:
3499–3508.
O’Brien, C. L., M. Huber, E. Thomas, M. Pagani, J. R. Super, L. E. Elder,
and P. M. Hull. 2020. “The Enigma of Oligocene Climate and Global
Surface Temperature Evolution.” Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences 117: 25302–25309.
Reis, M. D., G. F. Gunnell, J. Barba-Montoya, A. Wilkins, Z. Yang, and
A. D. Yoder. 2018. “Using Phylogenomic Data to Explore the Effects of
Relaxed Clocks and Calibration Strategies on Divergence Time
Estimation: Primates as a Test Case.” Systematic Biology 67: 594–615.
Sherbakov, D. Y. 1999. “Molecular Phylogenetic Studies on the Origin of
Biodiversity in Lake Baikal.” Trends in Ecology & Evolution 14: 92–95.
Offshore BaikalBowman, L. L., Jr., D. J. MacGuigan, M. E. Gorchels, M. M. Cahillane, and
M. V. Moore. 2019. “Revealing Paraphyly and Placement of Extinct
Species within Epischura (Copepoda: Calanoida) Using Molecular Data
and Quantitative Morphometrics.” Molecular Phylogenetics and
Evolution 140: 106578.
Dean, C. 2008. “Family Science Project Yields Surprising Data about a
Siberian Lake,” New York Times. May 6.
https://www.nytimes.com/2008/05/06/science/earth/06lake.html.
Hampton, S. E., R. Lyubov, M. V. Izmest’eva, S. L. Moore, B. D. Katz, and
E. A. Silow. 2008. “Sixty Years of Environmental Change in the World’s
Largest Freshwater Lake—Lake Baikal, Siberia.” Global Change
Biology 14: 1947–1958.
Kozhov, M. 1963. Lake Baikal and Its Life. The Hague: W. Junk Publishers.
Kozhova, O. M., and L. R. Izmest’eva. 1998. Lake Baikal Evolution and
Biodiversity. Leiden: Backhuys Publishers.
Ozersky, T., T. Nakov, S. E. Hampton, N. L. Rodenhouse, K. H. Woo, K.
Shchapov, K. Wright, et al. 2020. “Hot and Sick? Impacts of Warming
and a Parasite on the Dominant Zooplankter of Lake Baikal.” Limnology
and Oceanography 65: 2772–2786.
Offshore Baikal, Gammarid Amphipods
Burskaia, V., S. Naumenko, M. Schelkunov, D. Bedulina, T. Neretina, A.
Kondrashov, L. Yampolsky, and G. A. Bazykin. 2020. “Excessive
Parallelism in Protein Evolution of Lake Baikal Amphipod Species
Flock.” Genome Biology and Evolution 12: 1493–1503.
Copilaș-Ciocianu, D., and D. Sidorov. 2022. “Taxonomic, Ecological and
Morphological Diversity of Ponto-Caspian Gammaridean Amphipods: A
Review.” Organisms Diversity & Evolution 22: 285–315.
Hou, Z., and B. Sket. 2016. “A Review of Gammaridae (Crustacea:
Amphipoda): The Family Extent, Its Evolutionary History, and
Taxonomic Redefinition of Genera.” Zoological Journal of the Linnean
Society 176: 323–348.
Hou, Z., B. Sket, C. Fišer, and S. Li. 2011. “Eocene Habitat Shift from
Saline to Freshwater Promoted Tethyan Amphipod Diversification.”Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108: 14533–14538.
Macdonald, K. S, III, L. Yampolsky, and J. E. Duffy. 2005. “Molecular and
Morphological Evolution of the Amphipod Radiation of Lake Baikal.”
Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 35: 323–343.
Melnik, N. G., O. A. Timoshkin, V. G. Sideleva, S. V. Pushkin, and V. S.
Mamylov. 1993. “Hydroacoustic Measurement of the Density of Baikal
Macrozooplankter Macrohectopus branickii.” Limnology and
Oceanography 38: 425–434.
Moore, M. V., B. T. De Stasio Jr., K. N. Huizenga, and E. A. Silow. 2019.
“Trophic Coupling of the Microbial and the Classical Food Web in Lake
Baikal, Siberia.” Freshwater Biology 64: 138–151.
Moskalenko, V. N., T. V. Neretina, and L. Y. Yampolsky. 2020. “To the
Origin of Lake Baikal Endemic Gammarid Radiations, with Description
of Two New Eulimnogammarus spp.” Zootaxa 4766: 457–471.
Naumenko, S. A., M. D. Logacheva, N. V. Popova, A. V. Klepikova, A. A.
Penin, G. A. Bazykin, A. E. Etingova, et al. 2017. “Transcriptome-Based
Phylogeny of Endemic Lake Baikal Amphipod Species Flock: Fast
Speciation Accompanied by Frequent Episodes of Positive Selection.”
Molecular Ecology 26: 536–553.
Naumova, E. Y., I. Y. Zaidykov, and M. M. Makarov. 2020. “Recent
Quantitative Values of Macrohectopus branickii (Dyb.) (Amphipoda)
from Lake Baikal.” Journal of Great Lakes Research 46: 48–52.
Rudstam, L. G., N. G. Melnik, O. A. Timoshkin, S. Hansson, S. V. Pushkin,
and V. Nemov. 1992. “Daily Dynamics of an Aggregation of
Macrohectopus branickii (Dyb.) (Amphipoda, Gammaridae) in Barguzin
Bay, Lake Baikal, Russia.” Journal of Great Lakes Research 18: 286–
297.
Takhteev, V. V. 2000. “Trends in the Evolution of Baikal Amphipods and
Evolutionary Parallels with Some Marine Malacostracan Faunas.”
Advances in Ecological Research 31: 197–220.
Offshore Baikal, Sculpins
Goto, A., R. Yokoyama, and V. G. Sideleva. 2015. “Evolutionary
Diversification in Freshwater Sculpins (Cottoidea): A Review of TwoMajor Adaptive Radiations.” Environmental Biology of Fishes 98: 307–
335.
Ikusemiju, K. 1975. “Aspects of the Ecology and Life History of the
Sculpin, Coitus aleuticus (Gilbert), in Lake Washington.” Journal of Fish
Biology 7: 235–245.
Kontula, T., S. V. Kirilchik, and R. Väinölä. 2003. “Endemic Diversification
of the Monophyletic Cottoid Fish Species Flock in Lake Baikal Explored
with mtDNA Sequencing.” Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 27:
143–155.
Miyasaka, H., Y. V. Dzyuba, M. Genkai-Kato, S. Ito, A. Kohzu, P. N.
Anoshko, I. V. Khanayev, et al. 2006. “Feeding Ecology of Two
Planktonic Sculpins, Comephorus baicalensis and Comephorus
dybowskii (Comephoridae), in Lake Baikal.” Ichthyological Research 53:
419–422.
Sideleva, V. G. 1996. “Comparative Character of the Deep-Water and
Inshore Cottoid Fishes Endemic to Lake Baikal.” Journal of Fish Biology
49: 192–206.
Sideleva, V. G. 2000. “The Ichthyofauna of Lake Baikal, with Special
Reference to Its Zoogeographical Relations.” Advances in Ecological
Research 31: 81–96.
St. John, C. A., T. J. Buser, V. E. Kee, S. Kirilchik, B. Bogdanov, D. Neely,
M. Sandel, and A. Aguilar. 2021. “Diversification along a Benthic to
Pelagic Gradient Contributes to Fish Diversity in the World’s Largest
Lake (Lake Baikal, Russia).” Molecular Ecology 31: 238-251.
Woodruff, P. E., and E. B. Taylor. 2013. “Assessing the Distinctiveness of
the Cultus Pygmy Sculpin, a Threatened Endemic, from the Widespread
Coastrange Sculpin Cottus aleuticus.” Endangered Species Research 20:
181–194.
Yoshii, K., N. G. Melnik, O. A. Timoshkin, N. A. Bondarenko, P. N.
Anoshko, T. Yoshioka, and E. Wada. 1999. “Stable Isotope Analyses of
the Pelagic Food Web in Lake Baikal.” Limnology and Oceanography
44: 502–511.
Offshore Baikal, SealsFulton, T. L., and C. Strobeck. 2010. “Multiple Fossil Calibrations, Nuclear
Loci and Mitochondrial Genomes Provide New Insight into
Biogeography and Divergence Timing for True Seals (Phocidae,
Pinnipedia).” Journal of Biogeography 37: 814–829.
Klages, N. T. W., and V. G. Cockcroft. 1990. “Feeding Behaviour of a
Captive Crabeater Seal.” Polar Biology 10: 403–404.
Kozhova, O. M., and L. R. Izmest’eva. 1998. Lake Baikal Evolution and
Biodiversity. Leiden: Backhuys Publishers.
Palo, J. U., and R. Väinölä. 2006. “The Enigma of the Landlocked Baikal
and Caspian Seals Addressed through Phylogeny of Phocine
Mitochondrial Sequences.” Biological Journal of the Linnean Society 88:
61–72.
Watanabe, Y. Y., E. A. Baranov, and N. Miyazaki. 2020. “Ultrahigh
Foraging Rates of Baikal Seals Make Tiny Endemic Amphipods
Profitable in Lake Baikal.” Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 117: 31242–31248.
The Abyss: Desert and Oasis
Kozhova, O. M., and L. R. Izmest’eva. 1998. Lake Baikal Evolution and
Biodiversity. Leiden: Backhuys Publishers.
Papoucheva, E., V. Proviz, C. Lambkin, B. Goddeeris, and A. Blinov. 2003.
“Phylogeny of the Endemic Baikalian Sergentia (Chironomidae,
Diptera).” Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 29: 120–125.
Sideleva, V. G. 1996. “Comparative Character of the Deep-Water and
Inshore Cottoid Fishes Endemic to Lake Baikal.” Journal of Fish Biology
49: 192–206.
Sideleva, V. G. 2000. “The Ichthyofauna of Lake Baikal, with Special
Reference to Its Zoogeographical Relations.” Advances in Ecological
Research 31: 81–96.
Sideleva, V. G. 2016. “Communities of the Cottoid Fish (Cottoidei) in the
Areas of Hydrothermal Vents and Cold Seeps of the Abyssal Zone of
Baikal Lake.” Journal of Ichthyology 56: 694–701.Sideleva, V. G., and V. A. Fialkov. 2014. “Fauna of Cottoid Fish (Cottoidei)
in the Area of Methane Seep in the Abyssal of Lake Baikal.” Doklady
Biological Sciences 459: 351–353.
Sitnikova, T. Y., I. V. Mekhanikova, V. G. Sideleva, S. I. Kiyashko, T. V.
Naumova, T. I. Zemskaya, and O. M. Khlystov. 2017. “Trophic
Relationships between Macroinvertebrates and Fish in St. Petersburg
Methane Seep Community in Abyssal Zone of Lake Baikal.”
Contemporary Problems of Ecology 10: 147–156.
Tiercelin, J. J., C. Pflumio, M. Castrec, J. Boulégue, P. Gente, J. Rolet, C.
Coussement, et al. 1993. “Hydrothermal Vents in Lake Tanganyika, East
African Rift System.” Geology 21: 499–502.
Zemskaya, T. I., T. Y. Sitnikova, and O. M. Khlystov. 2014. “Baikal Deep￾zone Studies.” Herald of the Russian Academy of Sciences 84: 183–187.
Zemskaya, T. I., T. Y. Sitnikova, S. I. Kiyashko, G. V. Kalmychkov, T. V.
Pogodaeva, I. V. Mekhanikova, T. V. Naumova, et al. 2012. “Faunal
Communities at Sites of Gas-and Oil-Bearing Fluids in Lake Baikal.”
Geo-Marine Letters 32: 437–451.
Baikal in the Anthropocene
Hampton, S. E., R. Lyubov, M. V. Izmest’eva, S. L. Moore, B. D. Katz, and
E. A. Silow. 2008. “Sixty Years of Environmental Change in the World’s
Largest Freshwater Lake–Lake Baikal, Siberia.” Global Change Biology
14: 1947–1958.
Swann, G. E. A., V. N. Panizzo, S. Piccolroaz, V. Pashley, M. S. A.
Horstwood, S. Roberts, E. Vologina, et al. 2020. “Changing Nutrient
Cycling in Lake Baikal, the World’s Oldest Lake.” Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 117: 27211–27217.
Wollrab, S., L. Izmest’eva, S. E. Hampton, E. A. Silow, E. Litchman, and
C. A. Klausmeier. 2021. “Climate Change–Driven Regime Shifts in a
Planktonic Food Web.” American Naturalist 197: 281–295.Chapter 9
Introduction, Islands
Fernández-Palacios, J. M., H. Kreft, S. D. H. Irl, S. Norder, C. Ah-Peng,
P. A. V. Borges, K. C. Burns, et al. 2021. “Scientists’ Warning: The
Outstanding Biodiversity of Islands Is in Peril.” Global Ecology and
Conservation 31: e01847.
Nogué, S., A. M. C. Santos, H. J. B. Birks, S. Björck, A. Castilla-Beltrán, S.
Connor, E. J. de Boer, et al. 2021. “The Human Dimension of
Biodiversity Changes on Islands.” Science 372: 488–491.
Tickner, D., J. J. Opperman, R. Abell, M. Acreman, A. H. Arthington, S. E.
Bunn, S. J. Cooke, et al. 2020. “Bending the Curve of Global Freshwater
Biodiversity Loss: An Emergency Recovery Plan.” BioScience 70: 330–
342.
Introduction, Lanao
Abdulmalik-Labe, O. P., and J. P. Quilang. 2019. “DNA Barcoding of
Fishes from Lake Lanao, Philippines.” Mitochondrial DNA Part B 4:
1890–1894.
Herre, A. W. C. T. 1933. “The Fishes of Lake Lanao: A Problem in
Evolution.” American Naturalist 67: 154–162.
Ismail, G. B., D. B. Sampson, and D. L. G. Noakes. 2014. “The Status of
Lake Lanao Endemic Cyprinids (Puntius Species) and Their
Conservation.” Environmental Biology of Fishes 97: 425–434.
Myers, G. S. 1960. “The Endemic Fish Fauna of Lake Lanao, and the
Evolution of Higher Taxonomic Categories.” Evolution 14: 323–333.
Stelbrink, B., T. von Rintelen, C. Albrecht, C. Clewing, and P. O. Naga.
2019. “Forgotten for Decades: Lake Lanao and the Genetic Assessment
of Its Mollusc Diversity.” Hydrobiologia 843: 31–49.Value
Coutinho, F. H., P. J. Cabello-Yeves, R. Gonzalez-Serrano, R. Rosselli, M.
López-Pérez, T. I. Zemskaya, A. S. Zakharenko, et al. 2020. “New Viral
Biogeochemical Roles Revealed through Metagenomic Analysis of Lake
Baikal.” Microbiome 8: 1–15.
European Environmental Agency. n.d. Common International Classification
of Ecosystem Services Version 5.1. https://cices.eu.
Howes, M. J. R., C. L. Quave, J. Collemare, E. C. Tatsis, D. Twilley, E.
Lulekal, A. Farlow, et al. 2020. “Molecules from Nature: Reconciling
Biodiversity Conservation and Global Healthcare Imperatives for
Sustainable Use of Medicinal Plants and Fungi.” Plants, People, Planet
2: 463–481.
Koonin, E. V., and K. S. Makarova. 2019. “Origins and Evolution of
CRISPR-Cas Systems.” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society
B 374: 20180087.
Sterner, R. W., B. Keeler, S. Polasky, R. Poudel, K. Rhude, and M. Rogers.
2020. “Ecosystem Services of Earth’s Largest Freshwater Lakes.”
Ecosystem Services 41: 101046.
Extinction, Ecology, and HIPPO
Aladin, N. V., V. I. Gontar, L. V. Zhakova, I. S. Plotnikov, A. O. Smurov, P.
Rzymski, and P. Klimaszyk. 2019. “The Zoocenosis of the Aral Sea: Six
Decades of Fast-Paced Change.” Environmental Science and Pollution
Research 26: 2228–2237.
Cohen, A. S., E. L. Gergurich, B. M. Kraemer, M. M. McGlue, P. B.
McIntyre, J. M. Russell, J. D. Simmons, and P. W. Swarzenski. 2016.
“Climate Warming Reduces Fish Production and Benthic Habitat in Lake
Tanganyika, One of the Most Biodiverse Freshwater Ecosystems.”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 113: 9563–9568.
Hampton, S. E., S. McGowan, T. Ozersky, S. G. P. Virdis, T. T. Vu, T. L.
Spanbauer, B. M. Kraemer, et al. 2018. “Recent Ecological Change in
Ancient Lakes.” Limnology and Oceanography 63: 2277–2304.Kamulali, T. M., M. M. McGlue, J. R. Stone, I. A. Kimirei, P. J. Goodman,
and A. S. Cohen. 2022. “Paleoecological Analysis of Holocene Sediment
Cores from the Southern Basin of Lake Tanganyika: Implications for the
Future of the Fishery in One of Africa’s Largest Lakes.” Journal of
Paleolimnology 67: 17–34.
Micklin, P. 2007. “The Aral Sea Disaster.” Annual Review of Earth and
Planetary Sciences 35: 47–72.
Plotnikov, I. S., Z. K. Ermakhanov, N. V. Aladin, and P. Micklin. 2016.
“Modern State of the Small (Northern) Aral Sea Fauna.” Lakes and
Reservoirs: Research and Management 21: 315–328.
Verheyen, E., R. Abila, P. Akoll, C. Albertson, D. Antunes, T. Banda, R.
Bills, et al. 2016. “Oil Extraction Imperils Africa’s Great Lakes.” Science
354: 561–562.
Species Introductions, Harvesting, and Interactions with Other
Impacts
Dönz, C. J., and O. Seehausen. 2020. “Rediscovery of a Presumed Extinct
Species, Salvelinus profundus, after Re-Oligotrophication.” Ecology 101:
e03065.
Goldschmidt, T. 1996. Darwin’s Dreampond. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Haase, M., T. von Rintelen, B. Harting, R. Marwoto, and M. Glaubrecht.
2023. “New Species from a ‘Lost World’: Sulawesidrobia
(Caenogastropoda, Tateidae) from Ancient Lake Matano, Sulawesi,
Indonesia.” European Journal of Taxonomy 864: 77–103.
Herder, F., J. Möhring, J. M. Flury, I. V. Utama, L. Wantania, D. Wowor,
F. B. Boneka, et al. 2022. “More Non-Native Fish Species than Natives,
and an Invasion of Malawi Cichlids, in Ancient Lake Poso, Sulawesi,
Indonesia.” Aquatic Invasions 17: 72–91.
Herder, F., U. K. Schliewen, M. F. Geiger, R. K. Hadiaty, S. M. Gray, J. S.
McKinnon, R. P. Walter, and J. Pfaender. 2012. “Alien Invasion in
Wallace’s Dreamponds: Records of the Hybridogenic ‘Flowerhorn’
Cichlid in Lake Matano, with an Annotated Checklist of Fish Species
Introduced to the Malili Lakes System in Sulawesi.” Aquatic Invasions 7:
521–535.Hilgers, L., F. Herder, R. K. Hadiaty, and J. Pfaender. 2018. “Alien Attack:
Trophic Interactions of Flowerhorn Cichlids with Endemics of Ancient
Lake Matano (Sulawesi, Indonesia).” Evolutionary Ecology Research 19:
561–574.
McGee, M. D., S. R. Borstein, R. Y. Neches, H. H. Buescher, O. Seehausen,
and P. C. Wainwright. 2015. “A Pharyngeal Jaw Evolutionary Innovation
Facilitated Extinction in Lake Victoria Cichlids.” Science 350: 1077–
1079.
Nasution, S. H., A. M. Muchlis, and H. T. Cinnawara. 2022. “The
Abundance of Alien Fish Species Flowerhorn (Cichlasoma
trimaculatum) (GÜNTHER, 1867) in Its Fishing Ground Area at Lake
Mahalona, South Sulawesi.” IOP Conference Series: Earth and
Environmental Science 1036: 012103.
Natugonza, V., L. Musinguzi, M. A. Kishe, J. C. van Rijssel, O. Seehausen,
and R. Ogutu-Ohwayo. 2021. “The Consequences of Anthropogenic
Stressors on Cichlid Fish Communities: Revisiting Lakes Victoria,
Kyoga, and Nabugabo.” In The Behavior, Ecology and Evolution of
Cichlid Fishes, edited by M. E. Abate and D. L. G. Noakes, 217–246.
Dordrecht: Springer.
Sentosa, A. A., and D. A. Hedianto. 2020. “Gillnets Selectivity and
Effectivity for Controlling Invasive Fish Species in Lake Matano, South
Sulawesi.” IOP Conference Series: Earth and Environmental Science
535: 012039.
Prospects
Albert, J. S., G. Destouni, S. M. Duke-Sylvester, A. E. Magurran, T.
Oberdorff, R. E. Reis, K. O. Winemiller, and W. J. Ripple. 2021.
“Scientists’ Warning to Humanity on the Freshwater Biodiversity Crisis.”
Ambio 50: 85–94.
Di Franco, A., P. Thiriet, G. Di Carlo, C. Dimitriadis, P. Francour, N. L.
Gutiérrez, A. J. de Grissac, et al. 2016. “Five Key Attributes Can Increase
Marine Protected Areas Performance for Small-Scale Fisheries
Management.” Scientific Reports 6: 1–9.Jenny, J. P., O. Anneville, F. Arnaud, Y. Baulaz, D. Bouffard, I. Domaizon,
S. A. Bocaniov, et al. 2020. “Scientists’ Warning to Humanity: Rapid
Degradation of the World’s Large Lakes.” Journal of Great Lakes
Research 46: 686–702.
Ripple, W. J., C. Wolf, T. M. Newsome, J. W. Gregg, T. M. Lenton, I.
Palomo, J. A. J. Eikelboom, et al. 2021. “World Scientists’ Warning of a
Climate Emergency.” BioScience 71: 894–898.
Glossary
Emlen, D., and C. Zimmer. 2020. Making Sense of Life. 3rd ed. New York:
Macmillan.
Gray, S. M., and J. S. McKinnon. 2007. “Linking Color Polymorphism
Maintenance and Speciation.” Trends in Ecology & Evolution 22: 71–79.Index
Acanthogammaridae (amphipods), 203–204
Adaptive radiation, 6, 10, 41–42, 45, 47, 49–50, 54–55, 61, 70, 78, 205, 207, 271, 273
and hybridization/introgression, 137, 139, 146, 148–150, 158–159
and records in lake sediments, 178, 186
and sexual selection/conflict, 84, 103–104
and standing genetic variation, 106, 132
African Great Lakes, 6–7, 11, 20, 37, 42, 44, 52, 72, 85, 98, 149, 157–158, 238, 240, 254, 262–263
African Rift Lakes. See African Great Lakes
Ageli, Mariam, 181
Aggression, 95, 130, 132
Albania, 19, 65, 169, 188
Albert, Lake, 149
Al Qaeda, 127
Amurosaurus riabinini, 195, 197
Angara River, ix, 200, 211
Antarctica, 14, 65, 194, 215
Anthropocene, 224, 232, 271
Aquaculture, 137, 240–241, 255, 262
Arabian Peninsula, conquests from, 246
Aral Sea, 14, 250–254
Archeo-Baikal (Lake), 195, 197, 203
Arctic Ocean, 212
Asian financial crisis, 231
Astatotilapia, 36, 156
Atlantic Ocean, 195, 220
Atyidae (freshwater shrimp), 68–69, 73, 78
Austad, Steve, 113
Australia, 2, 14, 83, 182
Babirusa, 3
Bactrocera (fruit fly), 143
Baikal, Lake, i, xi, xv, 12–13, 15–20, 62–63, 65, 67, 145, 193–198
abyss, 203, 207, 210, 217–224
Baikal, Lake (cont.)
conservation/ecosystem services/Anthropocene threats, 224–229, 238, 240, 243–244, 253–254offshore/open water ecology, 198–216
Baikal seal. See Nerpa
Baikal Seal Aquarium, 213
Bali, 127
Baranov, Eugene, 213
Barbus (fish), 76, 77
Beppu Bay (Japan), 187
Bible, family, 183
Biodiversity, 1–2, 6, 15, 19, 20, 54, 56, 75, 83, 104, 105–106, 118, 163, 192, 218, 263–265
measuring, 25–30
threats to, 243–261
value of (ancient lake), 236–243
Biological species concept (BSC), 23–25, 136, 273
Biomarkers (in lake sediments), 172
Bioprospecting, 68, 242
Biotechnology (ecosystem service), 68, 241
Birch, L. C. (Charles), 143, 148
Biwa, Lake, 12–14, 21, 52–53, 254, 261
Biwamelania (snails), 53
Blue-green algae, 252, 259
Bogor (Indonesia), 52, 165
Borehole (of lake core), 168, 170
Botswana, 76
British Columbia, 1, 34, 38, 160, 243
Brooks, John Langdon, 11, 15, 233, 234
Brown University, 175, 180
Busitema University, 258
Caber tossing, 107–109
Cai, Yixiong, 69
Camelidae/camels, 193
Canada, 2, 11, 26, 37, 61, 90, 131, 181, 211
Cannibalism, 5, 100–102
Caribbean, 148
Caridina (freshwater shrimp), 69–75
Carp, 186, 233, 255
Caspian Sea, 12–13, 18, 65, 204, 211–212, 245, 254
Cerwenka, Alexander, 126, 289
Cheese (fat content), 209
Chekhov, Anton, 193
Cheliped (crustacean), 68, 71
Chemoautotroph(ic), 220Chironomid (midge), 219, 222
Chunco, Amanda, 129
Cichlid(s), xi, 6–10, 12–13, 14–15
conservation/Anthropocene threats, 258–261
hybridization and adaptive radiation, 137, 144–146, 149–159, 163
invasive, 255–257
scale eating, 112–123, 133
sexual selection and speciation, 80–82, 84–85, 90, 93, 98, 102–103, 130–132
speciation/adaptive radiation, 36, 39–40, 42–48, 72, 75–77, 175–179, 182, 184–187, 191
Ciliates (in zooplankton), 199
Clarias (catfish), 255
Clark, Eugenie, xiv
Climate change/global warming, 228–229, 232, 243–244, 246, 249–250, 252, 256, 260–262, 265
Coevolution, 56, 59, 75, 100, 175, 241
Cohen, Andy, 57, 175, 245–248
Color blindness, 80
Colosimo, Pam, 160–161
Comephorus (baicalensis, dybowskii), 207, 210. See also Golomyanka
Common International Classification of Ecosystem Services, 237
Cones (eye), 80–81, 91, 93, 97–98
Conflict, sexual, 100
Congo River, drainage, 77, 151
Conservation, xiii, xvi, 25, 28, 71, 83, 213, 232, 262–263
Convergent evolution, 9–10, 43–45, 60, 67–68, 204, 271
Copepod (crustacean), 199, 210, 213, 218
Core (of lake sediments), 19, 167–176, 180–181, 183, 185, 187–188, 225, 245, 248
Corer (of lake sediments), 167, 221
Cottoidea. See Sculpin(s)
Cotton, 250–252
Cousteau, Jacques, 2, 220
COVID–19, 136, 241, 249
Crab(s), 12–13, 56–60, 69, 78, 175, 199, 215, 256
Crabeater seal, 215
Cricket (sport), 105, 107–108
CRISPR Cas9, 241
Crocodile(s), 37, 182
Cyanobacteria. See Blue-green algae
Cyprinidae/cyprinid (fishes), 185–186, 233–235
Cyprinodon. See Pupfish
Dacus (fruit fly), 143
Dam(s), 250, 252, 256, 258Darwin, Charles, 2, 8, 23, 61, 83–84
Deletion (genomic), 153–154
Denisovan(s), 136, 172
Dentition (of crab claws), 59–60
Development (biological), 31, 41, 43, 95, 97, 100, 117–120, 123, 260
Diatom(s), 12, 180–181, 188–192, 198, 234
Dinosaur, 55, 194–195, 197, 228
Dispersal (ecological), 61–62, 64, 67–68, 75, 78
Ditch(es), 16, 159–160
DNA, 10, 26, 32–33, 66, 73, 76–77, 105, 135–136, 138, 151, 153, 156, 165, 183, 187, 211, 234, 241
ancient, 172–173
environmental, 19, 166, 172, 187–188, 235, 272
mitochondrial, 138, 150
sediment/sedimentary, 172, 187, 192
Drift, genetic, 110
Drugs (ecosystem service), 241–242, 265
Durrell, Gerald, xiv
East Tennessee State University, 203
Ecological opportunity, 6, 45, 47, 49, 55, 75–78, 148, 152, 155, 186, 204
Ecosystem service(s), 237–243, 261, 264
Eda (gene), 161–162
Edward (Lake), 149
Egg eating, 124–126
Elton, Charles, 167
Endler, John, 90
Environmental Protection Agency (US), 237
Epischurella/Epischura (baikalensis), 199–200, 202, 210, 225, 227–228
Eugenics, 86–87
European Environmental Agency, 237
Eusociality, 74–75
Eutrophication, 82, 252–254, 259, 261–262, 265
Evolution, convergent. See Convergent evolution
Evolutionary tree, 19, 25–27, 66, 139, 152, 157, 183, 272. See also Phylogeny
Extinction(s), xi, 7, 28, 179, 183, 237, 243, 253
causes/threats in Anthropocene, 232, 243–258, 261–264
through hybridization, 83, 136
Lake Lanao, 233–236
Lake Victoria cichlids, 258–261
records in sediments, 188–192
Fencing/fencers, 107–108Fertilization, internal, 210
Fisher, R. A., 86–87
Fisheries, xvi, 169, 213, 238, 258–259, 263
Flatworm, 218, 219, 222
Flowerhorn cichlid, 256, 258
Fossil(s), 19, 165–166, 171–172, 185, 187, 189, 191–192, 246
Frolikha Bay hydrothermal vents, 223
Fruit fly(s), 38, 142–143, 148
Fryer, Geoffrey, 258
Gammaridae/Gammarus/Gammarids, 12–13, 16–17, 145, 202–208, 210–211, 214–215, 218–219,
223, 228
Gas hydrate (blocks), 221
Gastropods, 53, 55–56, 58–61, 222, 234. See also Snails
Gemmule (sponge), 64–68, 78
Genetic drift. See Drift, genetic
Genetic variation, standing, 106, 109, 159, 162–163
Genome(s), 10, 20, 39, 66, 106, 136–139, 149–158, 161, 163, 172, 179, 241–242, 272
Germany, 118, 119, 234
Giessen University, 234
Gifu (Japan), 160
Glaciation, 11, 17, 20, 159, 174, 190–191, 194, 198, 211
Glaubrecht, Matthias, 60
Glyptodont(s), 194
Golomyanka, 207, 209–211, 213, 218–219, 223–224. See also Comephorus
Gould, Stephen Jay, xiii, xiv
Graben, 18, 53
Gray, Suzanne, 5, 91–92, 100–101, 123–125, 257
Gulls (hybridization), 135
Hadiaty, Renny, 50, 52
Haffner, Doug, 167, 180
Hampton, Stephanie, x, 224–225, 227, 244
Haplochromini/Haplochromine (cichlids), 76–77, 185–187, 258–261
Harvard University, 23, 113
Hehanussa, Peter, xii, 257–258
Herder, Fabian, 6, 105, 256
Herre, Albert, 233–235
HIPPO (acronym for threats to biodiversity), 243–244
Hippopotamus (animal), 37
Homininae, 194, 228
Hominoidea, 194Honshu (Japan), 52
Hori, Michio, 114–118, 122
Hull University, 75
Hybridization, 10, 41, 74, 179, 180, 182, 188, 192, 260–261
and adaptive radiation, 136–139, 141, 143, 145–159, 161, 163
Ice cover, extent (on lakes), 200, 202, 225–228, 244
Incandescent (bulbs, vs. fluorescent), 79
INCO (International Nickel), 2, 127, 258
Indermaur, Adrian, 44, 120–121
Indian Ocean, 176, 179
Indonesia, xii, 1–2, 50, 52, 128, 165, 167, 180, 182, 231–232, 255
Inle, Lake, 14
Insertion (genomic), 153–154
International Union for Conservation of Nature, 71, 213
Introgression, 136, 138, 143, 147–151, 179–180
Irkutsk (city), ix, 200, 213
Irkutsk State University, 202
Irrigation, 177, 238, 250
Island(s), 1–3, 39–40, 52, 81–82, 93–94, 127, 137, 147–148, 159
lakes as, extinctions on, 232–233, 242, 261, 264
Ismail, Gladys, 234–235
Isotope, carbon/nitrogen, 223
Ivory, Sarah, 175–179
Izmest’eva, Lyubov, 202, 218, 225, 227
Japan, 14, 28, 32, 52–53, 114, 160, 187, 213
Jemaah Islamiyah, 127
Johnson, Thomas C., 165, 174–175, 183, 185
Joyce, Domino, 75–77
Kamulali, Tumaini (Tuma), 248–249
Kastanienbaum (Switzerland), 45–46, 144
Kazakhstan, 250
Keller, Irene, 137
Kigoma (Tanzania), xi, 249
Kingsley, David, 160
Kiswahili (language), 135
Kivu (Lake), 149, 155
Kottelat, Maurice, 4–5
Kozhov, Mikhail, 202, 225, 227
Kozhova, Olga, 202, 218, 225
Kusche, Henrik, 118Labeotropheus (cichlid fish), 85
Lanao, Lake, 14, 233–236, 253
Landscape, fitness/adaptive, 50–51
Large Lakes Observatory (University of Minnesota), 174, 237
Laterality (handedness), 112, 114, 116, 118–120, 122
Lavigeria (snail), 58
Lee, Hyuk Je, 113, 118
Left-handed(ness), 105–111
Leibniz Institute of Freshwater Ecology and Inland Fisheries, 227
Leiden University, 98
Leleup, N., 112, 114
Lemur, 140–142
Lewontin, R. C. (Dick), 142–143, 148
Liem, Karel, 112, 114, 118–119, 187
Liver (weight, as indicator of fitness), 49–50
Lubomirskia (Baikal sponges), 67
Lungfish, 48, 260
Luohan. See Flowerhorn cichlid
Maan, Martine, 94, 96
Macrohectopus (branickii), 202–203, 205–207, 210, 213–214
Mahalona (Lake), 250, 258
Makobe Island, 39, 137
Malawi, Lake, 6, 9, 11–13, 18, 43–44, 65, 76–77, 79, 85, 145–147, 154–158, 192, 238–239, 254,
258
sediments, history, 175–181
Malawispongiidae, 66
Malili Lakes, 2, 4, 6, 11–13, 23, 60–61, 69, 71, 101, 105, 125–127, 158, 165, 167, 180, 250
Malinsky, Milan, 155, 178
Maluku/Moluccas, 127
Manitoba, 183
Marlier, G., 112, 114
Martin, Chris, 148
Masengi, K. W., 32
Matano, Lake, ix, xii, 1–6, 11–13, 27–29, 36, 42, 49, 51–52, 60, 69, 91, 100, 123, 128, 180, 182,
231, 249, 255–258
Mayr, Ernst, 23, 31–33, 42, 119
Mbarika (Tanzania), 135
Mbipia, 137–138
McGee, Matt, 47, 85, 152–154
McKay, Anson, 225
Megalodon (shark), 194Meier, Joana, 38–40, 151–152
Melanochromis auratus (golden cichlid), 258
Methane seep, 219–224, 228
Meyer, Axel, 103, 118–119
Michigan State University, 227
Micruropodidae (amphipods), 205
Micruropus (gammarid), 205
Minisub, 220
Miocene, 194
Mitochondria, 138–139, 150
Miyazaki, Nobuyuki, 213
Mori, Seiichi, 160
Moscow State University, 203
Muschick, Moritz, 44, 183, 185–187
Museum of Natural History, Berlin, 60, 68
Museum Zoologicum Bogoriense, 52
Mutation(s), 10, 88, 105–106, 138, 140, 153, 160, 162, 272
Mwanza Gulf, 39–40, 135
Myers, George Sprague, 234
Naga, P. O., 234
National Biodiversity Centre, Singapore, 69
National Institute of Polar Research (Japan), 213
Natugonza, Vianny, 258–259
Naumenko, Sergey, 203
Neanderthal(s), 136, 172
Neocottus thermalis, 223
Neocottus werestschagini, 223
Neolamprologus pulcher, 7
Nerpa (baikal seal/Pusa sibirica), 17, 211–217, 228
Netherlands, 94, 96, 98
Ngoepe, Nare, 187
Niche (ecological), 36, 76, 112, 145, 161, 185–186
Nickel mine, xii, 250
Nilawati, Jusri, 256
Nile perch, 238, 258–261
Nile River, drainage, 151–152
Nitrogen, as fertilizer/pollutant, 253
Noakes, David, 235
North Macedonia, 20, 65, 169, 188
Oaks (hybridization), 135Odum, Eugene, 167
Ohrid, Lake, 12–14, 20, 65, 168–169, 188–192, 254, 261
Oligocene, 194
Opsin, 80, 93, 97, 151–152, 157
Orcas (whales), 243
Oregon State University, 234–235
Oreochromini/Oreochromine/Oreochromis (cichlids), 137, 185–186, 259–260
Orwell, George, ix
Oryzias latipes, 28
Oryzias marmoratus, 23
Ostracod (crustacean), 12, 219
Oxygen (in lake water), 15–16, 167, 176–177, 198, 217, 220, 228, 245–246, 249, 252, 259–260
Palaeo-Makgadikgadi, Lake, 76–77
Pamona (language), 1
Pauers, Mike, 85
Pelagornis sandersi, 193
Pennsylvania State University, 175
Perissodus/Perissodini (cichlid fish), 112–123
Peru, 127–128, 231
Petea River, 250
Petroleum extraction, 254
Pfaender, Jobst, 49–51
Pharyngeal jaws/teeth (fish), 184–187, 259–260
Philippines, 14, 233–234
Phosphorus, as fertilizer/pollutant, 180–181, 252–253
Phylogeny, 26–27, 272. See also Evolutionary tree
Plates (bony, lateral, of stickleback), 160–162
Platytelphusa (crab), 58
Pleistocene, 198, 211, 228, 232
Pollen, in lake sediments, 19, 170–171
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR), 241–242
Poso, Lake, 1, 12–13, 32–33, 65, 69, 71, 127, 158, 258
Potter, Harry, 172
Prespa, Lake, 14
Proto-Baikal (Lake), 195, 197–198
Pundamilia (sp. / pundamilia / nyererei), 39–40, 93–99, 137–138, 144–145, 151–152
Pupfish, 12–13, 147–148, 158
Pusa caspica (Caspian seal), 211
Pusa sibirica. See Nerpa
Python Island, 39–40, 94Radiocarbon dating, 170
Radula (of snail), 60–61
Raffini, Francesca, 118
Rajkov, Jelena, 36
Recreation (ecosystem service), 239–240
Reservoir/refugium (of biodiversity), 53–54, 242
Ricefish, 12–13, 23–24, 27–29, 31–33, 137, 158, 258. See also Oryzias latipes; Oryzias marmoratus
Richards, Emilie, 148
Right whale, 199, 213
Roman Empire, fall of, 246
Rometsch, Sina, 103
Ronco, Fabrizia, 150, 157
Ruaha blue (cichlid lineage), 156–157
Ruhuhu River, 176–177
Runaway (sexual selection), 87–89
Russell, James, 180–181, 183
Russia, 65, 193, 197, 223
Sailfin lizard, 3
Sailfin silversides (Telmatherinidae/Telmatherinid[s]), 4, 6, 12–13, 27–29, 36, 49, 51, 100–101, 105,
123–126, 139, 158, 182. See also Telmatherina antoniae; Telmatherina prognatha; Telmatherina
sarasinorum
Saint Petersburg methane seep, 221–223
Salzburger, Walter, 44, 120, 157, 178
Sam Ratulangi University, 32
San Salvador, 147–148
SARS-CoV-2, 136
Scale eating, 6, 112–123, 126, 133, 148
Schluter, Dolph, 34, 38–39, 131–132, 160–162
Sculpin(s), 12–13, 207–211, 213, 217–218, 222–224, 228
Seal, ringed, 211–212
Seehausen, Ole, 10, 45–47, 80–82, 90, 93, 131–132, 137, 144–145, 152, 183, 187
Segregation, transgressive, 142, 144–147, 151
Selection, natural, 2, 6, 8, 10, 23, 34–36, 38, 41, 49–50, 54, 62, 84, 89, 91, 94–95, 103, 139–140,
147–148, 160–161, 206, 242
balancing, 111, 271
defined, 34–35, 272
disruptive, 122–123, 271
divergent, 84, 99, 271
frequency-dependent, 110–111, 115–126, 129–133, 271–272
purifying, 106, 109, 272
Selection, sexual, 82–104, 128–132, 149, 152–153, 155, 272Selz, Oliver, 144–147
Sendero Luminoso, 127
Sensory drive, in sexual selection and speciation, 90–95
Serranochromis, 155
Servedio, Maria, 129
Sex chromosome, 9
Sex determination, 8–11, 102–103
Shire River, 177
Shrimp(s), 12–13, 16, 68–75, 78, 145–146, 199, 256
Siberia, ix, 15, 193, 195, 197–198, 200, 207, 211
Sideleva, Valentina, 222–223
Smithsonian Museum (US), 235
Snail(s), 12–13, 53–61, 68, 77–78, 148, 175, 218, 246, 256. See also Gastropods
Snakehead (fish), 255
Sorowako (Indonesia), 127
Soviet Union, 200
Speciation, 6–7, 11, 20, 25, 30–41, 47–48, 53–54, 56, 59, 72, 105–106, 137, 145–147, 149, 153–
155, 158–159, 162, 177, 188, 190–191, 204, 273
ecological, 35–38, 41, 50, 54, 145
parallel, 37–39
parallel hybrid, 39–41, 94, 137
and sexual selection/conflict, 79–104, 130–132
Species/speciation in Ancient Lakes Conference, ix, xi, 120, 249, 268
Spectrum, light, 80–82, 91, 93, 97
Sponge(s), ix, 12–13, 17, 61–68, 72–75, 78, 217, 218, 222, 253
Spongillida (sponges), 64–65
Stager, J. Curt, 165
Stalin, Joseph, 200
Stanford University, 160, 234–235
Star Trek, 161, 172
Stelbrink, Björn, 233–234, 236
Stickleback, threespine, 11, 37, 96, 129, 159–162
Stratification (lake), 15, 176–177, 181, 245, 249
Sui dynasty (China), 246
Sulawesi, ix, xii, 1–3, 23, 27, 32, 36, 42, 49, 51, 59, 65, 68, 70, 73, 78, 91, 100–101, 105, 123, 125,
127, 139, 158, 231, 255
Superior, Lake, 7, 176
Sutra, Nobu, 32
Svardal, Hannes, 150, 155–156
Swann, George, 201, 225–226
Swim bladder (lack of), 208
Swimming (sport), 107–109Swiss Federal Institute of Aquatic Science and Technology, 183
Switzerland, 45, 76, 120, 144
Symbiosis, 139
Synalpheus (snapping shrimp), 75
Tadulako University, 256
Tahoe, Lake, 14
Takeuchi, Yuichi, 122
Tambaqui/blackfin pacu, 255
Tanganyika, Lake, ix, xi, 6–7, 12–15, 18, 36, 43–45, 53, 55, 66, 68, 148, 155, 157–158, 188, 220,
238, 243, 254, 260, 263
Tanganyika, Lake (cont.)
coevolving snails, crabs, 56–60, 78
scale-eating cichlids, 112–123
stratification and global warming, 245–249
Tantu, Fadly, 5, 182, 256–257
Tanzania, xi, 39, 96, 135, 137, 249
Tanzania Fisheries Research Institute, 249
Tectonic (plates), 18, 53, 177
Telephone, children’s game, 205
Telmatherina antoniae, 100, 124, 126
Telmatherina prognatha, 28–29, 36
Telmatherina sarasinorum, 91, 100–101, 123–126, 128
Tephra (in lake cores), 170, 181
Terror bird(s), 194
Tilapia, 137, 186, 255, 259
Titicaca, Lake, ix, 12–13, 18, 20, 65, 148, 158, 203–204, 231, 238, 240, 262–263
Torres-Dowdall, Julián, 103
Tourism (ecosystem service), 239–240, 243, 254, 265
Towuti, Lake, 2, 4, 12–13, 69, 72–74, 180–183, 250, 256
Transporter hypothesis, 159, 162
Tubifex (worm), 218
Turbidity water, 81, 83, 90, 93, 152, 177, 179, 249
Tylomelania (snails, Sulawesi), 60–61
Uganda, 258
UNESCO World Heritage Site, 254
University College London, 225
University of Arizona, 57, 175
University of Basel, 36, 44, 120, 157
University of Bern, 8, 10, 39, 45, 137, 151–152, 180, 183, 187
University of British Columbia, 1, 34, 38University of California at Los Angeles, 57
University of California at Santa Barbara, 90
University of Groningen, 94, 96
University of Guelph, 235
University of Konstanz, 103
University of Minnesota, 174, 248
University of Minnesota at Duluth, 237
University of North Carolina, 129, 148
University of Nottingham, 225
University of the Ryukyus, 32
University of Tokyo, 213
University of Windsor, 167, 181
University of Wisconsin, 85
US National Center for Ecological Analysis and Synthesis, 225
USSR (Soviet Union), 200
Uvira (Democratic Republic of the Congo), 112, 114
Uzbekistan, 250
Vancouver (Canada), 37, 131
Variation, transgressive. See Segregation, transgressive
Vent, hydrothermal, 219–220, 223–224, 228
Vertical migration, 199, 206–207, 210, 214
Verzijden, Machteld, 98, 287
Victoria, Lake, xi, 6–7, 9, 12–15, 18, 39, 44, 76–77, 80–83, 93–94, 96, 131, 135, 137–138, 144–146,
149–158, 161–163, 183–185, 187–188, 191–192, 238, 253–254, 258, 262
age, 14–15, 150, 165, 174–175, 191
cichlid extinctions, 258–261
Vogel, Hendrik, 180
Volcano(es), 32, 170, 181, 222
von Rintelen, Kristina, 68–74
von Rintelen, Thomas, 60, 68–74, 180, 234
Wagner, Catherine, 47, 84
Wakayama Medical College, 114
Waldman, Bruce, 113
Wallace, Alfred Russell, 2, 105
Watanabe, Yuuki Y., 213–215, 217
Water hyacinth, 260
West, Kelly, 57–58
Wetlands, 238
Wilke, Thomas, 168, 188–191
Wilson, E. O., xivWollrab, Sabine, 227
Woodward, S. P., 55
Wright, Shane, 96
Yampolsky, Lev, 203
Yellowstone National Park, 241
Yenisei River, 211
Yong, Ed, xiii
Zaire, Republic of, 114
Zambezi River, 179
Zim, Herbert S., xiv
Zooplankton, 145–146, 199, 202, 225
