Overcoming Obstacles and 
Finding Success
This valuable book identifies common obstacles in any endeavor that 
can impact on success and offers highly accessible exercises to help 
readers overcome them. Featuring expertise from dozens of high-level 
performers regarding their journey to the top of their domain, it offers 
practical advice on how to separate yourself from your competition 
and stand out from the crowd.
All performers, whether beginners or world class, in sports, business, 
the arts, and beyond, have encountered obstacles in their careers. 
Acknowledging that every successful person must work hard, this 
book offers a blueprint for those wanting to map out their own success 
based on over twenty years of research into performance, and the 
authors’ experiences of guiding career development among their 
mentees and teaching courses on the topic. Each chapter includes a 
case study that exemplifies one of the most common obstacles individ￾uals face in their efforts to be successful, including topics like impostor 
syndrome, artificial ceilings, facing rejection, and not allowing for rest 
or recovery. Following this, the chapter goes on to provide a series of 
engaging exercises for readers to reflect on their own performance and 
techniques, and enables them to strategize ways they can modify their 
performance to achieve better results. Throughout, the book is under￾pinned by theoretical frameworks from performance psychology, clear 
actionable steps for achieving success, and suggested readings for fur￾ther study.Written with career development in mind, the applications of this 
book are far-reaching, with relevance for all those looking to excel in 
their chosen fields.
Kevin R. Harris is the associate chair and a professor in the Department 
of Psychological Science and Counseling at Austin Peay State University, 
USA. He has spent the past quarter century studying performers at the 
highest level.
Emily Pica is an associate professor in the Department of Psychological 
Science and Counseling at Austin Peay State University, USA. Her 
current research interests involve investigating ways in which we can 
improve eyewitness identification accuracy as it is one of the leading 
causes of wrongful convictions.Overcoming Obstacles 
and Finding Success
The Power of Performance Psychology
KEVIN R. HARRIS AND EMILY PICACover Image: t_kimura via Getty Images
First published 2025
by Routledge
605 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10158
and by Routledge
4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2025 Kevin R. Harris and Emily Pica
The right of Kevin R. Harris and Emily Pica to be identified as authors of this work has been 
asserted in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised 
in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or 
hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any information 
storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, 
and are used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
ISBN: 978-1-032-45555-6 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-1-032-45551-8 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-1-003-37754-2 (ebk)
DOI: 10.4324/9781003377542
Typeset in Dante and Avenir
by Newgen Publishing UKContents
About the Authors vii
Acknowledgments viii
1 Historical vs. Recent Views of Success 1
2 Satisficing: This is Good Enough! 19
3 Impostor Syndrome: Feeling Like a Fraud 33
4 Artificial Ceilings: This is Where I Top Out 52
5 Giving Up: I Should Just Quit 72
6 Limiting Your Scope: Think Like a Kid 95
7 Facing Rejection: Taking “No” as a Cue to 
Stop Grinding 110
8 Aiming for Perfection: Identify Your Threshold and 
Dive In 127
9 Being Vague: Evaluate Your Own Path/Needs 143vi Contents
10 Sugarcoating: Acknowledge What You Aren’t 
Doing Well 155
11 Not Allowing for Rest/Recovery: Make Rest a PRIORITY 168
12 Staying Off the Rails: Forgive Yourself and Regroup 182
13 Not Standing Out: Be Blueberry Yogurt 194
14 Tough Crowd: Seek Out Feedback/Criticism 210
15 Not Selling Your Accomplishments: It’s Not Bragging 229
16 Advice for the Aspirational 246
Index 258About the Authors
Kevin R. Harris is the associate chair and a professor in the Department 
of Psychological Science and Counseling at Austin Peay State University, 
USA. He has spent the past quarter century studying performers at 
the highest level, and co-created The Path Distilled podcast to facilitate 
discussions on this topic. Dr. Harris had the opportunity to study at 
the Center for Expert Performance Research with heavyweights of the 
field, such as K. Anders Ericsson, A. Mark Williams, Paul Ward, and 
David W. Eccles. He fell in love with studying expert performance and 
recognized how the concepts were applicable to not only his own back￾ground, but to the students he was encountering daily. This book was 
conceptualized with a goal of sharing these views on maximizing the 
potential to be successful as widely as possible.
Emily Pica is an associate professor in the Department of Psychological 
Science and Counseling at Austin Peay State University, USA. Her 
current research interests involve investigating ways in which we can 
improve eyewitness identification accuracy as it is one of the leading 
causes of wrongful convictions. Additionally, she examines which 
factors may be more (or less) influential in jurors’ decision making. 
She is a first-generation college student who overcame most of the 
obstacles presented in this book, ultimately finding success in academia, 
and enjoys giving back to her students through her own experiences.Acknowledgments
The authors wish to acknowledge and thank some of the individuals 
who helped make this book a reality.
First, our interviewees. The advice and wisdom each of you shared 
was priceless. The book was exponentially better because of your will￾ingness to speak with us.
We also want to thank James Dylan Brown and Bristia Hartley for 
assisting us with organizing the content of the interviews. We appre￾ciate your help.
A huge thanks to Connie Harris for editing the seemingly never￾ending drafts of the manuscript and serving as a general sounding 
board. Your skills and experience were invaluable.
Finally, we wish thank Zoe Thomson-Kemp at Taylor & Francis for 
the patience and support.
newgenprepdfDOI: 10.4324/9781003377542-1
Historical vs. Recent 
Views of Success
And they lived happily ever after. These are the closing lines of your first 
novel – what a relief! Six hundred and thirty pages and more hours 
than you wish to count. You almost tear up recalling your internal 
daily struggle – the difficulty of keeping everything in your head while 
extracting what was needed to complete the next line. It would have 
been much easier to give up on it long ago. But, you finally did it.
Now delete it and start over.
This counterintuitive approach is advocated in actual practice both lit￾erally and figuratively. Author Joyce Carol Oates took this approach lit￾erally as a college student. Oates “would write a novel longhand, then 
turn the pages over, writing another novel on the flipside. Both novels 
would then be tossed in the trash” (Kellogg, 2006, p. 397).
Oates often modeled these “practice” novels after the works of 
famous authors. She obviously intended to improve the quality of 
her writing by adopting this process. More importantly, she believed 
that she could improve and knew how to go about improving it. These 
types of intensive, often grueling activities have not always been 
observed by us mere mortals. The traditional view, heavily influenced 
by the writings of Sir Francis Galton (discussed more extensively in 
Chapter 4), was that each person was allotted (at birth) a given amount 
of ability in a particular domain, and there would be limits to how 
12 Historical vs. Recent Views of Success
much we could improve based upon this “ceiling” we were born 
with. Consequently, only a select few have been aware of how to go 
about significantly improving their performance, and even fewer have 
engaged in activities designed to do so. This approach has been pre￾dominant for generations.
You might be thinking that Joyce Carol Oates is the exception. 
Surely this level of involvement is not common practice. Well, it is and 
it is not. The best performers in the world operate this way, but your 
neighbor, Trevor, likely does not.
Consider the wise words of accomplished screenwriter and pro￾ducer, Jonathan Goyer: “Your first five scripts will probably suck. And 
I do mean five. Blade was my eighth script. Everything before that, I’m 
embarrassed about” (Donnelly, 2005, p. 56).
Think about that for a moment. These are not the words of your server 
at the coffee shop declaring that their first seven scripts were embarrassing. 
These are the words of someone who is the writer, cowriter, and/or pro￾ducer of an impressive number of blockbuster films, television series and 
video games – including Batman Begins (Nolan, 2005), Terminator: Dark 
Fate (Miller, 2019), and a Call of Duty video game series (Treyarch 2010a; 
2010b; 2012). Obviously, Goyer’s advice, embedded in that quote, is to keep 
writing until you get considerably better.
Now, we have mentioned two examples of scribes from different 
genres who believe that one must put in their time with their craft –
writing in their cases – to get really good at it. You already might be 
wondering about pursuits beyond creative writing and if this level of 
dedication is applicable.
The answer is a definitive, “yes!” Consider Stephen Curry who is 
known to get in 1,000 shots before practice even begins (Fleming, 2015). 
Michael Jordan captured this sentiment well with one of his better￾known quotes, “I’m not out there sweating for three hours every day 
just to find out what it feels like to sweat.” Similarly, Usain Bolt stated, 
“I trained four years to run nine seconds, and people give up when they 
don’t see results in two months.”
There are limitless examples across any domain, for pursuits that are 
mentally and/or physically draining. Implicitly, and sometimes explicitly, 
the message in these examples and from these performers is threefold.
First, one must put in their time to get really good at something. 
Even if your cousin was pretty impressive and way better than you at Historical vs. Recent Views of Success 3
bowling after two weeks on the lanes, she has a long way to go before 
she will be competing with professionals. Additionally, she likely will 
never reach that level of world class performer (more on this point 
later). This sentiment is applicable to any other skilled pursuit you can 
imagine – playing guitar, playing chess, learning to be an accountant, 
and so on.
The second message is that one must believe at some level that they 
can improve by putting in their time. This might sound obvious, but 
there is anecdotal evidence illustrating that we do not believe it. You 
might not have taken a difficult class because, “I’m just not good at 
that,” or not taken an art class because you do not consider yourself 
artistic. Stanford University’s Carol Dweck spent decades studying 
how the beliefs one holds about their own abilities – she labeled it 
“mindset” – impacts what one eventually accomplishes by influencing 
every step of their journey (Dweck, 2006). We will spend considerable 
time on what her research tells us in a subsection below and her work 
on mindset will be repeated throughout the book.
The third message is that how one practices is important, and 
knowing the techniques that others used is beneficial for improvement. 
These three messages will be revisited often throughout the book as 
we do our best to unpack the issues related to understanding the best 
performers and what we can learn from them. Because these themes 
arise so frequently, we now provide brief overviews of each of these 
messages in the sections below.
Putting in the Time
My (Kevin speaking) home is located in a heavily wooded, rural area. 
There is a significant amount of upkeep with regard to the trees and 
land in the form of mowing and trimming, and the typical needs of 
a rural property. While trimming the perimeter of the property near 
the woods-line I noticed a seedling of an oak tree emerging among the 
blades of grass. Since we did not want a tree growing in that particular 
spot, I used the trimmer to easily remove it. This act left me thinking 
about how easy it was to remove the seedling that had the potential to 
become a mighty oak tree. Then it hit me – this is a great analogy for 
the importance of putting in the time. In the beginning, the oak tree 4 Historical vs. Recent Views of Success
is as easy to take down as a blade of grass. However, it grows into one 
of the hardiest trees in the forest when given the time and necessary 
cultivation.
The development of a performer also takes time. Nobel Laureate 
Herbert Simon and his colleague, William Chase, systematically 
investigated the best chess players in the world to identify what made 
them better players than others (Chase & Simon, 1973; Simon & 
Chase, 1973). Though we will revisit their work throughout the book, 
the specifics of what they did and found is beyond the scope of our 
present focus. For now, we mention them because they were one of 
the first, if not the first, to propose that an expert requires roughly ten 
years or 10,000 hours of intense and specific training to reach world￾class status.
Roughly two decades later, Simon’s former post-doctoral mentee, 
K. Anders Ericsson, coined the term “deliberate practice” to describe 
the activities in which performers reaching the highest levels had 
engaged to reach their current levels (Ericsson, Krampe, & Tesch￾Römer, 1993). Moreover, Ericsson and his colleagues’ study of world￾class musicians led them also to conclude that around ten years or 
10,000 hours of intense training was needed to reach world-class status. 
Critically, Ericsson and his colleagues also discovered that the most 
elite musicians had engaged in a greater amount of deliberate prac￾tice than the next closest group of musicians, the near-elite musicians, 
who had engaged in a greater amount of deliberate practice than the 
lesser-skilled musicians. The implication of the findings was that there 
is a direct relationship between the amount of time someone had 
dedicated to engaging in intense practice and their ultimate perform￾ance level.
These early discoveries – Simon and colleagues in the late 1960s 
and Ericsson and colleagues in the early 1990s – led to what was even￾tually dubbed the ten-year rule. Malcolm Gladwell’s New York Times
bestseller, Outliers, can be credited with introducing the ten-year 
rule to the mainstream (2008). The so called ten-year rule ultimately 
generated a healthy amount of debate, some of which was surprisingly 
heated. Since the popularization of the term, we have known that the 
10,000-hour benchmark was a starting point for reflecting the idea of 
the need for putting in time with specialized training to reach the top 
performance levels for most domains. Some domains might require Historical vs. Recent Views of Success 5
longer periods of investment to reach world-class status than others. 
Traditional times to reach world-class status might also be shortened as 
new techniques are developed and/or effective techniques are shared. 
Again, the intent was never to specify immutable time requirements 
but to reflect the requirements for a specific domain by exploring the 
best performers operating within it. Thus, akin to the mighty oak tree, 
fragile beginnings can turn into an impressive being.
Just as the seedling transitions to a sapling, and ultimately a full￾grown tree, so too do performers engaging in deliberate practice 
activities transform. We begin unpacking the idea of transformations 
resulting from prolonged engagement in activities designed to improve 
performance by considering a relatively straightforward, and uncon￾troversial, example. Let us assume that you have the financial means, 
required time to allot, and social connections to secure a physical fitness 
trainer whose clients have included some of the fittest celebrities in 
Hollywood. It would be a safe bet to assume that if someone, even 
you or we, followed their proposed training regimen and incorporated 
their feedback, they would become physically fit within the expected 
timeframe. Underweight individuals would gain needed weight, and 
overweight individuals would lose weight. More importantly, everyone 
sticking with the trainer and their award-winning regimen would 
ultimately reach their fitness goals. This transformation is not diffi￾cult to imagine. We have seen it play out in real life with Chris Pratt 
and Kumail Nanjiani transforming their physiques for Guardians of the 
Galaxy (Gunn, 2014) and The Eternals (Zhao, 2021) respectively.
Because we have observed actors and athletes physically transform 
their bodies, and possibly have personally experienced our own trans￾formations, these types of changes are readily accepted. However, 
changes that are visually apparent are not the only types of transform￾ations experienced by the best performers following prolonged training. 
There also are changes to the way the brains of high performers 
function and how they process information when they dedicate time 
and effort to appropriate training.
Consider the case of licensed London taxi drivers. London taxi 
drivers must be tested in order to be licensed. One of the requirements 
is that the entirety of the street layout of London be memorized. Keep 
in mind that London’s street layout is considered one of the most com￾plex in the world, so memorization is a difficult task, to put it mildly. An 6 Historical vs. Recent Views of Success
interesting research finding is that the posterior hippocampi, an area of 
the brain associated with memory formation, of London taxi drivers 
is significantly larger than that of an average person (Maguire et al., 
2000). Such findings suggest that engaging in rigorous mental activity –
in this case, memorizing the archaic street layout of London – led to a 
change in the size of the taxi drivers’ hippocampi. In a similar example, 
a different group of researchers found that the cerebellum, an area of 
the brain responsible for coordinating movement, was significantly 
larger in elite mountain climbers than in non-climbers (Di Paola, 
Caltagirone, & Petrosini, 2013). Presumably, the larger cerebellum was 
the end result of the volume of frequent climbs over time in which the 
elite mountain climbers had engaged.
A skeptical reader might suggest that the findings from the London 
taxi drivers and elite mountain climbers could have been due to some￾thing different altogether. A skeptic might explain the findings as indi￾viduals with good memorization skills having a greater likelihood of 
becoming a London taxi driver and someone with excellent motor 
skills having a greater likelihood of becoming a mountain climber. 
While this is possible, other studies have provided evidence that more 
strongly supports domain engagement as being the causal factor for 
changes to brain anatomy and functioning. A bonus to this line of 
research is that the findings are applicable to each and every one of the 
readers of this book, and anyone else who has learned to read.
Researchers designed a clever fMRI study and determined that 
learning to read led to anatomical changes to the brain, as well as 
changes in brain activity, in readers compared to non-readers. A key 
finding was that these changes occurred for adults who learned to 
read as adults but not for illiterate adults (Dehaene et al., 2011). Such 
findings suggest that it is engaging in the activities to improve perform￾ance that leads to changes in the brain as progress is made. In this par￾ticular example, the brain functioning associated with learning to read 
did not occur until after someone had learned to read, even if it did not 
occur until adulthood.
Prolonged engagement also can lead to changes in cognition 
that will benefit the performer. At the most basic level, the per￾former becomes more comfortable as they gain experience and has 
a better understanding of the performance requirements for a par￾ticular domain. As engagement in the appropriate training activities Historical vs. Recent Views of Success 7
continues, and/or other engagement such as formal competitions 
or carrying out occupational responsibilities, the way that the per￾former processes information related to task performance also can 
be enhanced. These changes can include an elevated ability to keep 
situation-relevant information easily accessible in long-term memory 
to be pulled rapidly into short-term memory as needed. This enhanced 
retrieval ability was named long-term working memory and can be 
thought of as a specialized filing system within our brains for relevant 
information (Ericsson & Kintsch, 1995). The high-level performer has 
task/domain related information organized very precisely in their 
long-term memory, and, as a result, has the ability to place information 
that is relevant at a given time, or potentially could be, into the existing 
structure – a type of efficient mental filing cabinet.
In contrast, a novice would miss many of the relevant environ￾mental/task cues and would need to search long-term memory in 
a traditional way without the aid of having acquired the long-term 
working memory abilities. You might have experienced a version of 
this as you progressed through your academic major. Early on, reading 
textbook or research materials might have seemed overwhelming, but 
you eventually began to see the connections and interrelatedness as you 
gained experience. Once you were seeing these connections, each new 
reading was processed differently than before as you were then able to 
mentally, often subconsciously, file the new information as “similar to 
study on X,” or “counter to the work on Y.” Hopefully, this simplified 
example illustrates the premise of long-term working memory.
Typically, high performers also will have developed enhanced 
domain-relevant anticipatory and pattern recognition skills as they pro￾gress. There are numerous examples related to enhanced anticipatory 
and pattern recognition skills – too many to consider each one in full. 
However, we will briefly consider a number of examples for which this 
enhancement is considered one of the key components of the high￾performers’ advantage. The enhanced ability to anticipate what will 
happen next is considered to be a tremendous advantage for high-level 
tennis players, especially for their ability to return a high-speed serve 
(Williams et al., 2002). High-level tennis players are better able to pre￾dict than most of us where the served ball will travel based on cues 
provided by the server’s body positioning during the serve itself. This 
information derived before the tennis ball is even struck is then used by 8 Historical vs. Recent Views of Success
high-level players to better plan their return. Similarly, better batters in 
baseball are able to identify how to successfully hit the ball sooner in 
the pitch via anticipation based on their reading of the pitchers’ body 
position and movement (Fadde, 2016). Presumably, this advantage of 
anticipatory ability is applicable to any performer in a sport for which 
an object must be struck with a hand-held object while airborne.
In potentially life-threatening domains, such as firefighting, medi￾cine, and the military, enhanced anticipation is aided in part by the 
superior pattern recognition of the high performer. For example, as 
an experienced firefighter enters a burning building, they might store 
multiple environmental cues in memory as described above – how the 
smoke is behaving and appears, the color of the fire, the direction and 
intensity of the flames, and other relevant cues. The firefighter might 
then anticipate a potentially catastrophic event, such as a collapsed roof, 
based on their reading of the combination of cues (Klein, Calderwood, 
& Clinton-Cirocco, 2010). Making these connections also is enhanced 
by the long-term working memory functionality described above.
While it is important to put in the time to become a high performer, 
we also must have the belief that we can improve in a given domain.
Believing That One Can Improve
I jokingly told a friend several years ago that one of my fitness goals 
was to have six-pack abs. The friend’s priceless response was, “That will 
be quite the undertaking.” In reality, though it would be nice, having 
six-pack abs is not one of my fitness goals. One of the biggest reasons 
is that there does not seem to be enough time in a day that I would be 
willing to dedicate to attempting to get there (and there also is a level 
of personal doubt that it would be possible for me to have six-pack abs 
at all).
This example illustrates that we all have areas of our lives for which 
we think our goals are reachable, and other areas for which they seem 
impossible. In other words, do not beat yourself up if you find yourself 
battling self-doubt or imposter syndrome (which is covered extensively 
in Chapter 3) with some pursuits. However, it is important to realize 
that you can accomplish way more than you probably realize, and one 
of the mechanisms for doing so is putting in the time with a focus on Historical vs. Recent Views of Success 9
the proper activities. If you do not believe that improvement is possible 
then the likelihood is that you will not be putting in the amount of 
work required – it would be analogous to me not taking any steps to 
obtain the six-pack abs or giving up on it pretty quickly.
Returning to Carol Dweck’s work at Stanford, she spent much of 
her career investigating the views one might hold about their own abil￾ities. Among other contributions from this line of research, she ended 
up coining the terms “fixed mindset” and “growth mindset.” The 
bare bones idea behind these are that someone with a fixed mindset 
believes that they have been given the capability to perform at a max￾imum level and/or possess a certain amount of given ability, which 
they cannot move beyond – academically, athletically, and/or music￾ally. This view very much mirrors Galton’s arguments which have been 
consistently perpetuated over generations. In contrast, someone with a 
growth mindset believes that there are no arbitrary limits on perform￾ance beyond natural human limitations (e.g., we never will be able to 
outrun a car), and performance can be enhanced over time.
It is important to remember that you generally can have a growth 
mindset, but there will be areas you believe to not be your area, a selective
fixed mindset, to add to Dweck’s terminology. In reality, you probably 
recognize that you could excel in that same area if a list of stipulations 
could be met, such as unlimited time to train, study, or practice, along 
with access to excellent resources. In other words, my goal of six-pack 
abs would be more likely to happen if a movie studio gave me one 
year to get in shape with no other responsibilities and provided me 
with the best personal trainer on their roster. The important point is 
that having these areas of selective fixed mindsets does not diminish 
an overall growth mindset for most, as long as the ratio of selective 
fixed mindsets to the overall growth mindset remains relatively low –
you believe that improvement is possible for most things. However, 
you must also know what to do to get better at something or achieve 
your goal.
Knowing the Techniques
A multicolored puzzle was all the rage when I was a youngster. The 
Rubik’s Cube had just made its USA debut, and demand was palpable. 10 Historical vs. Recent Views of Success
Eight-year-old me was very excited when my father took me to the 
store to purchase one of my very own. The memory of sitting in 
the passenger side of my father’s car as we pulled into the driveway 
with my newest possession is one of the more vivid ones from my 
childhood. As my father was placing the car’s gearshift into “Park,” 
I was eagerly shuffling the pieces around as quickly as possible. My 
father was in no hurry at the time and paused to watch my activity 
from the driver’s seat. After a minute or so of eager shuffling, I turned 
to my father and earnestly asked, “Do you think that’s enough or do 
you think it will it be too easy?”
The cube was never fully solved. It never had more than roughly 
one side solved at any given time. This occurred not long after the 
invention of the Rubik’s Cube, and unlike today, the algorithms for 
solving the cube were not widely known. My unsuccessful approach 
was that of trial-and-error, and I eventually gave up because of my 
lack of success. It was decades later before I learned that the key to 
solving the Rubik’s Cube was in algorithms that one should follow, 
choosing the appropriate one depending on the starting point of the 
cube. If someone wants to learn to solve the puzzle these days, there 
is a great deal of information on how to go about doing so using these 
algorithms. It will still take putting in the time to learn to solve it easily, 
and the best at solving them are impressive to watch.
My experience with the Rubik’s Cube mirrors the experiences of 
many others in their own pursuits. Potentially unaware of what to do, 
the uninformed aspiring performer might also give up on their pursuits 
because they do not experience the progress that they are expecting. 
Critically, they might have found an impressive level of success had 
they been aware of techniques used by performers who were already 
successful. It is impossible to know how much more successful my 
Rubik’s Cube pursuits would have been had I known the techniques 
used by the best Rubik’s Cube solvers, but one can assume that they 
would have been greater with the additional knowledge.
Let us now consider some examples of when knowledge of the 
appropriate techniques led to improved outcomes, which can, in some 
cases, transform altogether how the best performers in a domain go 
about training. One of our favorite examples for illustrating this concept 
comes from the area of minesweeping. The minesweeping example 
also illustrates the hierarchical nature of knowledge of appropriate Historical vs. Recent Views of Success 11
techniques; it is not uncommon to discover as one advances within an 
area that the “best of the best” have a seemingly secret toolkit of ways 
to improve.
At some point, everyone has likely had the experience of learning 
a new job or task and later being told by someone experienced in that 
activity, “Yeah, that’s not what we really do.” The gap in how you were 
doing it and what is really done can vary, ranging from inconsequential 
to potentially deadly – as in the minesweeping domain. Unfortunately, 
soldiers typically are not initially very good at detecting mines, even 
when they have received training on the techniques for detecting them. 
Because minesweeping is a skill like any other – for which a notable 
amount of time must be invested to get good at it – anything that 
might accelerate performance improvement is a good thing. This is an 
example of a situation in which researchers who study expertise can, 
and did, make a difference.
Expertise researchers James Staszewski and Alan Davison reasoned 
that a minesweeper with over 30 years of experience had demonstrated 
a level of excellence, just by nature of their decades of survival in 
the job, worthy of attempting to uncover their techniques for mine 
detecting (2000). Staszewski carefully studied how the expert mine￾sweeper went about detecting mines and realized that the technique 
being used was notably different from the minesweeping technique 
officially taught in the military. Compellingly, when minesweepers 
who recently completed training that emphasized traditional methods 
were then provided additional training incorporating the experts’ 
techniques, their performance increased to a shocking degree, 
improving mine detection performance on some types of mines up to 
nine times (!!) compared to a group not using the expert techniques. 
A nine-fold improvement in performance would be remarkable in any 
field. It is especially remarkable for a task for which there could be 
deadly consequences.
The domain of chess provides a similar example in which learning 
additional training techniques led to a shift in the way training was 
viewed. During the days of the former Soviet Union, the Soviets 
produced a considerable number of competitive chess players. The 
common view was that the people of the former Soviet Union had a 
natural proclivity for chess. However, following the fall of the Soviet 
Union – the so-called Iron Curtain – it was discovered that the Soviets 12 Historical vs. Recent Views of Success
operated chess-training academies (Shadrick & Lussier, 2004). It was 
the training activities in these academies that was responsible, at least 
in part, for the high number of chess players emerging from the Soviet 
Union. Further strengthening this assumption is the notable progress 
made by aspiring chess masters upon adopting the same, or similar, 
training techniques.
This approach of identifying the best performers in a particular 
domain, pinpointing the parts of their performance responsible for 
the observed performance differences, tracing their paths and devel￾opmental progress, and translating what is learned into training for 
performers in various phases of development has been increasing in 
recent years (see Harris & Eccles, 2021 for a review). Variations of 
this approach have been named Expert Performance Based Training 
(ExPerT; Ward, Suss, & Basevitch, 2009) and expertise-based training 
XBT (Fadde, 2009), depending on which researchers’ camp is being 
discussed. This approach and/or the related components also has 
been used informally, without the title, by an even greater number of 
expertise researchers. The main consideration is that the knowledge 
of the appropriate techniques needed to improve performance is very 
important and can often be shared.
Chapter Summary
In this chapter, we briefly reviewed the traditional view of what is 
responsible for high levels of performance. We also proposed a more 
recent explanation of expertise and high performers for which some 
basic considerations typically occur. The first is that one must put in 
their time in order to get really good at something. It need not be the 
misunderstood 10 years/10,000 hours, but it will require an extended 
stretch of putting in the work. Our second element was that someone 
must believe that what they are doing will lead to improvements or 
be working with someone who does. The third element was that the 
appropriate type of practice is crucial. We will revisit these themes 
throughout the book as they can be considered an underpinning of 
the approach.
Do not get too caught up in the terminology here. In simplified terms, 
you typically must work hard at the right things for some time in order Historical vs. Recent Views of Success 13
to get really good at something. It also is important to understand that 
the “right things” part of the equation is of the utmost importance. It 
has been repeatedly noted that one will minimally benefit from simply 
repeating a task without a strategy in place, such as simply returning 
tennis balls from a machine for an hour per day. A second consideration 
is that you should think of this approach with a wide lens. In other 
words, while perfecting a tennis serve can be accomplished using this 
approach, so can almost any other aspiration. The remaining chapters 
will fill in some of the potential gaps in relation to how to go about 
applying this to your own life. More importantly, it will do so in a man￾ageable way regardless of your current performance level.© 2023–2024 Expert Performance International Collective (EPIC). This exercise is copyrighted by Kevin Harris and the Expert 
Performance International Collective (EPIC). All rights reserved. Used with permission.
14 Historical vs. Recent Views of Success
That’s a Lot of Work!
Chapter 1: Historical vs. Recent Views of Success
This multi-part exercise will help you to realize how much work some 
of your favorite performers have put into their craft, and to reflect 
on something that you have spent time trying to improve. In the first 
part of the exercise, you will be asked to choose two well-known 
performers whom you admire and identify some of the activities they 
credit for their success. These should be quantifiable when possible. 
In the second part, you will be asked to identify something for which 
you attempted to improve, unpack what you did, and assess how well 
it worked.
1. Choose two performers and identify some of the activities they have 
said contributed to their success.
Performer 1:
Performer 1’s Activities:© 2023–2024 Expert Performance International Collective (EPIC). This exercise is copyrighted by Kevin Harris and the Expert 
Performance International Collective (EPIC). All rights reserved. Used with permission.
Historical vs. Recent Views of Success 15
Performer 2:
Performer 2’s Activities:
2. Answer the following questions.
What is something that you have attempted to improve?© 2023–2024 Expert Performance International Collective (EPIC). This exercise is copyrighted by Kevin Harris and the Expert 
Performance International Collective (EPIC). All rights reserved. Used with permission.
16 Historical vs. Recent Views of Success
What specifically did you do when you attempted to improve? What is 
your assessment of your plan? Please discuss which parts worked well 
and which parts were least successful.Historical vs. Recent Views of Success 17
References
Chase, W.G., & Simon, H.A. (1973). The mind’s eye in chess. In W.G. Chase 
(Ed.), Visual Information Processing (pp. 215–281). Academic Press.
Dehaene, S., Pegado, F., Braga, L.W., Ventura, P., Nunes Filho, G., Jobert, A., 
... & Cohen, L. (2010). How learning to read changes the cortical networks 
for vision and language. Science, 330(6009), 1359–1364. https://doi.org/
10.1126/science.1194140.
Di Paola, M., Caltagirone, C., & Petrosini, L. (2013). Prolonged rock climbing 
activity induces structural changes in cerebellum and parietal lobe. Human 
Brain Mapping, 34(10), 2707–2714. https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.22095.
Donnelly, S. (2005, June). How to: Write a screenplay. Maxim, 90, 56.
Dweck, C.S. (2006). Mindset. Random House.
Ericsson, K.A., & Kintsch, W. (1995). Long-term working memory. Psychological 
Review, 102(2), 211–245. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.102.2.211.
Ericsson, K.A., Krampe, R.T., & Tesch-Römer, C. (1993). The role of delib￾erate practice in the acquisition of expert performance. Psychological 
Review, 100, 363–406. DOI:10.1037/0033-295X.100.3.363
Fadde, P. J. (2009). Expertise-based training: Getting more learners over the 
bar in less time. Technology, Instruction, Cognition and Learning, 7, 171–197.
Fadde, P.J. (2016). Instructional design for accelerated macrocognitive 
expertise in the baseball workplace. Frontiers in Psychology, 7. DOI: 10.3389/
fpsyg.2016.00292.
Fleming, D. (2015, April). Stephen Curry, the full circle. ESPN the Magazine. 
Retrieved from http://www.espn.com/espn/feature/story/_/id/12728
744/how-golden-stat.
Gladwell, M. (2008). Outliers: The Story of Success. Little, Brown.
Gunn, J. (Director). (2014). Guardians of the Galaxy [Film]. Marvel Studios.
Harris, K.R., & Eccles, D.W. (2021). Training derived from expert 
performers: The extractable components of deliberate practice and the 
expert performance approach. Journal of Expertise, 4(2), 208–219. https://
www.journalofexpertise.org/articles/volume4_issue2/JoE_4_2_Harris_
Eccles.pdf.
Kellogg, R.T. (2006). Professional writing expertise. In K.A. Ericsson, N. 
Charness, P.J. Feltovich, & R.R. Hoffman (Eds.), The Cambridge Handbook of 
Expertise and Expert Performance (pp. 389–402). Cambridge University Press.
Klein, G., Calderwood, R., & Clinton-Cirocco, A. (2010). Rapid decision 
making on the fire ground: The original study plus a postscript. Journal of 
Cognitive Engineering and Decision Making, 4(3), 186–209.18 Historical vs. Recent Views of Success
Maguire, E.A., Gadian, D.G., Johnsrude, I.S., Good, C.D., Ashburner, J., 
Frackowiak, R.S., & Frith, C.D. (2000). Navigation-related structural 
change in the hippocampi of taxi drivers. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences, 97(8), 4398–4403. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.070039597.
Miller, T. (Director). (2019). Terminator: Dark Fate [Film]. 20th Century Fox.
Nolan, C. (Director). (2005). Batman Begins [Film]. Warner Brothers Pictures.
Shadrick, S.B., & Lussier, J.W. (2004). Assessment of the Think Like a Commander 
Training Program. (ARI Research Report 1824). US Army Research Institute 
for the Behavior and Social Sciences.
Simon, H.A., & Chase, W.G. (1973) Skill in chess. American Scientist, 61, 
394–403.
Staszewski, J., & Davison, A. (2000). Mine detection training based on 
expert skill. In A.C. Dubey, J.F. Harvey, J.T. Broach, & R.E. Dugan (Eds.), 
Detection and remediation technologies for mines and mine-like targets V. 
Proceedings of Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers 14th Annual 
Meeting, SPIE, 4038, 90–101.
Treyarch. Call of Duty: Black Ops [Microsoft Windows, Play Station 3, Wii, and 
Xbox 360]. (2010a). Activision.
Treyarch. Call of Duty: Cold War [Windows, Play Station 4, Play Station 5, 
Xbox One]. (2010b). Activision.
Treyarch. Call of Duty: Black Ops II [Microsoft Windows, Play Station 3, Wii U, 
and Xbox 360]. (2012). Activision.
Ward, P., Suss, J., & Basevitch, I. (2009). Expertise and expert performance￾based training (ExPerT) in complex domains. Technology, Instruction, 
Cognition and Learning, 7, 121–146.
Williams, A.M., Ward, P., Knowles, J.M., & Smeeton, N.J. (2002). Anticipation 
skill in a real-world task: Measurement, training, and transfer in tennis. 
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 8, 259–270.
Zhao, C. (Director). (2021). Eternals [Film]. Marvel Studios.DOI: 10.4324/9781003377542-2
Satisficing
This is Good Enough!
I make enough money for me. I don’t want a raise; don’t want a promo￾tion. I just want to get my work done and then do stuff I want to do.
– Anonymous
Invariably, no matter what your genetic makeup is, I think you need 
to have a real passion of interest in what it is that you want to do. 
Finding something that you have that passion and interest in, I think, 
is very, very important. And then, after that, of course, then it is a long, 
long road.
– A. Mark Williams, world-renowned expertise researcher
Gerald was the epitome of stagnation and mediocrity. He avoided diffi￾cult courses as much as possible during the entirety of his academic life. 
He currently works as a salesperson for an auto dealership and is con￾sistently near the bottom of the monthly sales rankings. Gerald likes to 
play tennis and bowl with friends, but has not improved much over the 
past decade. As jarring as this sounds, Gerald’s current circumstances 
and lack of identifiable progress is not atypical. It is not uncommon for 
us to reach a level of performance that allows us to get by on a daily 
basis and stay there – enough to keep our jobs, pay our bills, or play a 
competitive sport recreationally with friends.
Nobel Laureate Herbert Simon (introduced in Chapter 1) labeled 
this phenomenon “satisficing” while studying decision-making 
220 Satisficing: This is Good Enough!
limitations when one is provided a given amount of information on 
the issue (e.g., Simon, 1972). Essentially, Simon found that we typically 
do not make the optimal decision when given the opportunity. Rather, 
we commonly satisfy some level of need and then settle – the satis￾ficing part. For example, we might choose the first car we encounter 
that seems to work for our needs when looking to buy a new one – one 
that is within our price range, seems to drive okay, and has four doors. 
This type of satisficing stands in contrast to an attempt at maximizing 
the purchase by exhaustively researching fuel consumption, safety 
ratings, longevity, and other related factors to make the absolute best 
purchase possible. We will return to these differences momentarily; 
however, it should be obvious that while there are some people who 
will make attempts to maximize at all costs, most will choose the route 
of satisficing for at least some of the decisions that must be made. This 
sentiment can extend beyond the original laboratory decision-making 
studies to include stagnation or mediocrity in someone’s life, to explain 
how one might adopt this approach – intentionally or unintentionally. 
In other words, if we consider all of our life choices within this frame￾work – whether to take a certain class or ask for a raise, or how to set 
up a workout regimen – every aspect of our lives can be viewed through 
the lens of satisficing.
It actually can be very reasonable for one to engage in satisficing. 
This is particularly true when the stakes are low and one has reached 
a level of comfort with how things stand. For example, Tristan might 
decide that making just enough sales to keep his job and pay his bills is 
preferable to making as many sales as possible. If Tristan and others in 
his life are good with how he is managing his career, then Tristan’s satis￾ficing seems appropriate. However, satisficing will not be considered a 
wise choice when there are areas in which someone wants to improve. 
Despite being okay with staying where he is with his sales at work, 
Tristan might be interested in improving in other areas of his life – his 
tennis game or painting skills. Let’s now consider why there is a level 
of comfort in satisficing, and later we will consider reasons it can per￾sist even when you want to move to the next level.
There certainly is a level of comfort in satisficing and “good enough” 
thinking. It would be very taxing to attempt, and unlikely to succeed, 
if we insisted upon maximizing everything in our lives. Trying to maxi￾mize every single thing in our lives, as opposed to satisficing some of 
the time, would slow us down both mentally and physically. Think of Satisficing: This is Good Enough! 21
how much it would slow down your grocery shopping if you did all you 
could to get the absolute lowest price per ounce for every single item of 
food that you purchased. This might require a comparison of all sizes 
of mustard available for a particular style, and doing the calculations 
for each brand to identify the lowest price per ounce. While feasible, 
it becomes apparent that this can become quite time consuming with 
a fairly large list of items to purchase. While there are undoubtedly 
shoppers who already engage in this practice in order to have the lowest 
possible grocery bill, it does not seem to be a widely adopted practice. 
The other extreme would be shoppers who paid no attention to the 
cost of the items. Presumably, most shoppers will engage in satisficing 
and make a judgment as to whether an item is reasonable to purchase 
given their individual needs and preferences.
While such a maximizing approach as the one described above might 
result in some savings, it likely would not be worth it for all shoppers. 
Some might decide that the time and energy directed at obtaining the 
savings could be better spent elsewhere, such as making additional 
sales at work, resulting in a greater payoff monetarily. Additionally, 
there are motivational differences to consider, with some individuals 
possessing high levels of motivation and others having little, or no, 
motivation. For the latter, the “good enough” of satisficing might be all 
that is ever needed. There also are those who find deserved comfort in 
having reached a level of stability, and derive contentment from being 
able to engage in satisficing for some areas while maximizing others. 
In the example above, Tristan might appreciate the work-life balance 
of his current job situation and use it as an opportunity to maximize 
the time he is able to spend with loved ones. Without knowledge of 
such considerations, it is difficult to compare one person’s satisficing 
to another’s.
In Chapter 9, we discuss the need for one to analyze their own needs 
and goals. This individualization is critical and the picture is incom￾plete without it. We mention this because the discussion about satis￾ficing thus far should not be viewed as a judgment call – the pieces of 
the puzzle comprising the picture of your life are unique. One need not 
seek out a trophy, position, or other specific aspiration to find content￾ment. Some will aspire to a Nobel Prize, a world record, or to become 
a C-suite member, and many will not. Both approaches are equally rea￾sonable. A goal to have six-pack abs in no way diminishes someone 22 Satisficing: This is Good Enough!
else’s goal to be physically fit, or just healthy, overall. To summarize, 
engaging in satisficing is to be expected, is normal, and can provide a 
certain level of satisfaction.
However, many of you have what is often described as a “burning 
desire” or longing for certain things in life. This longing could be for 
almost anything, including the variety of domains we cover in this 
book – a particular hobby, career, sport, or similar pursuit. For many 
satisficing is not an option when it comes to something for which they 
have experienced this longing. You might have had this type of longing 
experience yourself when you have attempted to discontinue a pursuit 
but found yourself unable to give it up. This longing to get better was 
a common theme in our interviews with top performers, and among 
top performers across the board – let us now consider a few examples.
Comedian Henry Cho described it as a “never-ending pursuit” 
and that he is still working every day to get better after decades of 
performing. Music executive Randall Foster noted:
“I think we get to a point in our roles where we do feel like we’ve 
mastered the role. I think, at that moment, we have the ability 
to operate at a high caliber doing that role. But I just know my 
personal curiosity, my yearning for growth in a consistent way, 
definitely needs to be fed. So, when I get to those points, it’s when 
I kind of start looking over the bush and I look over the hedge.”
A second theme from the interviews with top performers was a 
commitment to going all in with what you are pursuing. Major League 
Baseball pitcher Alec Mills shared his thoughts on this, “I wanted to 
commit to something 100 percent versus commit to two things at 
60 percent or 75 percent. I thought it was only fair to myself, and hon￾estly fair to my teammates, that I commit to something 100 percent, all 
in.” Committing to “something 100 percent, all in” certainly paid off 
for Alec. This decision was one of the factors that propelled him from 
a walk-on collegiate pitcher to a major leaguer with a rare no-hitter 
to his credit. We dedicate entire chapters to not giving up (Chapter 5) 
and facing rejection along your path (Chapter 7); but it is this longing 
to both be around and to succeed within a domain that is one of the 
foundations of the desire to move beyond your current level of per￾formance and give it 100 percent by going “all in.”Satisficing: This is Good Enough! 23
In a particularly memorable example, Tony Hawk was describing a 
fall he experienced attempting to perfect a skateboarding move in the 
documentary film Bones Brigade (Peralta, 2012). This fall was particu￾larly gruesome, resulting in a trip to the hospital, broken bones, and 
the loss of several teeth. Counterintuitively, Tony recalled that this was 
the moment he knew that he would never give up skateboarding. He 
knew that skateboarding was something he would be unable to live 
without, regardless of the dangers he was experiencing.
My life is littered with similar occurrences in which a novel pursuit 
was ended abruptly – from my failed first aerial bicycle trick to crossing 
the foul line on a bowling lane and falling in front of the other youth 
players on the first day. Both incidents ended my pursuit of those goals; 
for me, the risk was not worth continuing. There were other pursuits 
for which my persistence lasted longer than an initial botched attempt 
and for which a relative degree of skill was obtained. However, it is 
unlikely that my interest would have survived a tumble similar to the 
one Tony Hawk experienced. Ultimately, it can come down to that 
longing one experiences for a pursuit and the degree to which it tips 
the scales towards doing what is required to not only find some level 
of success within the domain but to withstand the demands required 
of you.
Scholars have explored this concept extensively, referring to it as 
“passion” in their work. The research suggests that passion was a key 
predictor of performance and ultimate achievement. This makes sense 
when considering the time commitment necessary to reach the highest 
levels of performance discussed in Chapter 1. In particular, passion 
was as important as perseverance in determining the ultimate level of 
success. True passion combined with perseverance was likely to lead to 
immersion in a domain (the going “100 percent all in” or really close 
to 100 percent), and this immersion could lead to significant gains in 
performance (Jachimowicz et al., 2018). It is also important to acknow￾ledge that it is unlikely, if not impossible, to reach world-class status 
without immersion. This is because immersion will include prolonged 
engagement in a domain, if not engagement in deliberate practice 
specifically.
Thus, satisficing, as considered here, is a very different concept to 
immersion. Arguably one could immerse themselves in a domain and 
only satisfice, but this seems unlikely given the driving role of passion 24 Satisficing: This is Good Enough!
in leading to immersion. In other words, it seems contradictory 
that someone would exhibit passion at a level that compels them to 
immerse themselves in an area, but settle for “good enough” once 
there. Consider a hobby such as baseball card collecting – it would be 
difficult to imagine someone considering themselves immersed in the 
area of collectibles by learning a “smidge” about baseball cards and 
owning only a few. Rather, someone with a passion for collecting base￾ball cards, or similar collectibles, likely will know a great deal about 
them and possess a large number of them.
As previously mentioned, satisficing often is a choice and can be a very 
reasonable option for someone. There also are considerations beyond 
our control that may impact whether one engages in satisficing. The 
first three considerations were mentioned in Chapter 1, (a) that put￾ting in the time is required to become a high-level performer; (b) belief 
that one can improve, i.e., mindset; and (c) degree of awareness of the 
appropriate techniques. We also present a fourth consideration related 
to the concept of satisficing, (d) access to, and lack of, resources.
To consider each of these in relation to satisficing, we must consider 
why one would choose to satisfice – essentially choosing to settle at 
their current level – and satisficing out of necessity because of a lack 
of resources or similar. Moreover, it seems unlikely that satisficing by 
choice will persist once someone is able to get past an initial stage of 
involvement and into immersion. The immersion likely will lead to 
performance gains (e.g., Jachimowicz et al., 2018) and knowledge that 
will render the satisficing-by-choice considerations moot.
Putting in the Time
Typically, there were only three to five of my fellow undergraduate 
students who earned A grades in one of my classes – one large enough 
to meet in an auditorium. Mysteriously, one of my fellow students iden￾tified me as one of the “A students.” He approached me to learn the 
secrets of my success in the course and asked if we could study together 
for the next exam. In our study session, I unpacked my approach to 
studying step-by-step (the knowing the techniques part discussed below). 
Within 30 seconds of my spiel, my “study partner” declared, “That 
seems like a lot of work,” and abruptly ended the study session. This Satisficing: This is Good Enough! 25
experience illustrates that not everyone is willing to commit the time 
required to obtain the results they are seeking.
Thus, when it comes to putting in the time in the context of satis￾ficing, the choice is pretty straightforward: choose to invest time and 
effort, or choose not to. This can apply to a range of decisions, from 
whether to study for an exam to whether to attempt to qualify for 
the Olympics. It is certainly reasonable to be aware that world-class 
performers invest a tremendous amount of time and effort, and make 
a deliberate decision not to pursue a similar path. Potential reasons for 
such a decision were discussed earlier in the chapter, such as finding 
a “sweet spot” that works within life circumstances (e.g., preferring 
a better work-life balance or deciding to pursue another endeavor 
instead). We now consider a different factor in relation to satisficing, 
the impact of believing or not believing that one can improve their 
performance.
Believing That One Can Improve – The Impact 
of Mindset
The position that there was no way to prepare for the Graduate Record 
Exam (GRE; a test often required for master’s or doctoral program 
admission) was common advice during my undergraduate years. We 
commonly heard that scores were rarely impacted by studying for 
the standardized exam and that any gains would be inconsequential. 
Thankfully, I disregarded this advice and formed a GRE study group, 
resulting in significant improvements in the scores for everyone in the 
group. We almost certainly would not have formed the study group 
had we bought into the idea that such preparation would not lead to 
noteworthy improvements in our actual scores. This simple example 
illustrates the idea that one generally must believe that one can improve 
at a given pursuit, or an effort will not be made.
This stance makes intuitive sense. I would not have prepped for the 
GRE if I did not believe that prepping would help me when taking 
the actual exam. Likewise, we generally would not study for an exam, 
exercise, or do anything else if we did not expect a resulting payoff. It 
is unlikely that someone believing that improvement is impossible will 
“double down” whenever things get difficult or after experiencing early 26 Satisficing: This is Good Enough!
failures. Most likely, they will either choose to satisfice from that point 
onward, or leave the domain altogether if that is an option.
The impact of the type of mindset one holds about abilities and how 
one goes about preparing seems straightforward, at least as described 
in the paragraph above. However, considerable debate has emerged 
on the topic of mindset. The concept of mindset has been studied fre￾quently by scholars since its introduction, and it eventually made it into 
the mainstream.
As awareness of the proposed impact of mindset grew, mindset 
interventions became very popular. The best way to go about 
conducting mindset interventions, including what to emphasize, is cur￾rently still being sorted by researchers. However, what is important for 
us here is that the crux of the idea is that you must believe that you 
can improve before you will begin, or continue, attempting to improve 
in a given area. Thus, we are using growth mindset (Dweck, 2006) as 
a belief that one can improve in a given area. In Chapter 4, we discuss 
the idea that once you believe that improvement is possible, you can 
proceed with everything else. However, what happens if you believe 
you can improve but do not have access to the resources?
Lack of Resources
The late Neil Peart was a legendary drummer for the successful pro￾gressive rock band Rush. Widely considered one of the best of all 
time, Peart’s name has come up in many conversations of drumming 
greats during my lifetime. In particular, he was known for his technical 
prowess and innovative style; any other drummer is considered to have 
advanced skills if they were able to play almost any one of the Rush
songs. Yet, when I came across Deden Noy, an Indonesian drummer, 
playing a Rush classic almost perfectly, I was surprised by what I saw. 
Why the surprise? Deden was playing on a hodge-podge set created 
with homemade pieces – metal tubes with material stretched over 
them, used fast-food buckets, and homemade circular metal pieces. To 
complete the tableau, Deden was seated on two stacked green plastic 
chairs that you would be seated on to eat your bologna sandwich by 
the swimming pool. Digging a little deeper, he also was nailing a selec￾tion of other legendary rock songs.Satisficing: This is Good Enough! 27
There are countless pursuits that require resources. Sometimes 
the needed resources are minimal or can be easily mimicked. A bag 
stuffed with whatever was available and taped shut has been used as the 
ball for many football (soccer) matches. A stick and your choice from 
the variety of other objects lying around can easily be the basis of a 
game that resembles baseball to varied degrees. However, the cost can 
be prohibitive to participate in a domain in many other cases. These 
costs can include equipment needs, membership fees, and specialized 
training. This prohibitive access is not limited to sporting domains. For 
example, schools located in affluent areas typically have an abundance 
of resources as a function of greater tax revenues and general finan￾cial support. Similarly, there are opportunities and connections made 
in costly preparatory schools and exclusive country clubs that will be 
unavailable to many of us.
This assessment of restricted resources can be discouraging on the 
surface, and someone might decide that a pursuit is not worth it, given 
the limited resources available to them. To counter this view, there are 
many cases of successes by people who carried on despite dealing with 
limited resources. Instead of giving up, someone might decide that they 
will do their best with what is available. We could devise an effective 
fitness routine using an old car axle, blocks of wood, buckets filled with 
dirt, and a hill to sprint up and down. There is no reason to assume 
that someone could not achieve the same level of physical perform￾ance and exertion using a low-tech environment as one could using 
multimillion-dollar facilities. Granted, some domains likely would still 
be out of reach without the appropriate resources. For example, horse￾jumping, motorsports, or fencing would all require significant finan￾cial investments. We now discuss a fourth consideration of whether 
someone might choose to satisfice.
Lack of Awareness of Techniques
It felt like time had slowed to a crawl. I was not even sure how long it had 
been. Looking around the room, there were no obvious clues on what 
to do get out of there. Finally, I heard someone else coming. A welcome 
relief. They had been sent in to check on me. The gentleman asked me 
what I was doing, just sitting there, and began manipulating items in 28 Satisficing: This is Good Enough!
the room. Around the eighth thing he did was pick up a bowling bowl 
and roll it down a guide into a hole in a box – an action that opened an 
exit door. A great sense of relief overcame me, and I stepped out into 
the sunlight. My relieved father asked why I stayed in there for so long. 
I was a 6-year-old who had been trapped in a puzzle room (a precursor 
of an escape room) at the local fair. I was oblivious to what the room 
was and that I was supposed to solve the puzzles to get out. In other 
words, I was unaware of the necessary techniques. Casting aside the 
question of why a 6-year-old was sent into the room alone without 
explanation, this example illustrates the importance of knowing appro￾priate techniques.
Access to equipment or resources will not magically endow you 
with the ability to maximize, or even use, the resources. The highest￾end flight simulator would be a mix of buttons and knobs that would 
likely have little meaning. Similarly, a simulated patient would not 
transform you into a skilled nurse by simply existing. Both of these 
examples require an awareness of techniques that you would learn 
through training. Such training could occur in multiple ways, including 
computer/AI systems set up to provide training or through a skilled 
human trainer (at least more skilled than your current level).
Other examples of the importance of techniques are plentiful. 
Examples could include a variety of things, such as knowledge of 
the proper form when executing an athletic move, how to produce 
music/film, how to diagnose medical conditions, and many more. The 
appropriate techniques can sometimes be discerned by sticking with a 
domain.
I became a pretty decent tennis player with no official lessons while 
learning with an antiquated wooden racquet that had been handed 
down by my brother-in-law. A good friend and I would hit the courts 
almost daily just for fun. Full disclosure – I had modeled my tennis 
strokes after the poster displayed near the water fountain in the park 
where we played. Imagine my surprise when I discovered that my tech￾nique was actually pretty accurate upon taking my first official tennis 
class in college. It was also quite a shock to discover that I was able to 
beat every former high-school player (though not the current schol￾arship collegiate players) in the advanced tennis class a few semesters 
later. This example shows that, while there are some cases in which 
one can become relatively skilled without extensive resources, it would Satisficing: This is Good Enough! 29
not have been unusual if I had given up the pursuit of tennis given the 
lack of resources available.
Chapter Summary
In this chapter we discussed the concept of satisficing, or the idea of 
settling where one currently is. We revisited the three primary consid￾erations introduced in Chapter 1; (a) putting in the time is required to 
become a high-level performer, (b) belief that one can improve, i.e., 
mindset, and (c) degree of awareness of the appropriate techniques. 
We have now presented a fourth consideration related to the concept 
of satisficing, (d) access to, and lack of, resources. Each of these were 
considered in relation to how they might lead one to decide to satis￾fice – resolving that where they are is good enough. In a nutshell, you 
could see this option as the best for you if you did not want to work 
hard, did not think that working toward something would make you 
better, lacked access to the required resources, or were unaware of 
how to go about your desired pursuit. This chapter was dedicated to 
the influence such considerations might have on whether you decide 
to embark on a pursuit. In Chapter 4 we unpack the influence these 
same considerations can have on the artificial limits you might place on 
yourself after deciding to begin the pursuit of your goals.© 2023–2024 Expert Performance International Collective (EPIC). This exercise is copyrighted by Kevin Harris and the Expert 
Performance International Collective (EPIC). All rights reserved. Used with permission.
30 Satisficing: This is Good Enough!
Meh, I’m Good
Chapter 2: Satisficing: This is Good Enough!
This exercise is intended to help you become familiar with the con￾cept of satisficing. In the first part of the exercise, you will be asked to 
write-down at least one example of a time you stopped a pursuit when 
you knew that you could have accomplished more. The second part
will ask you to reflect on the reasoning for this stalling.
1. Please provide at least one example of a time you stopped pursuing 
something despite thinking you could have gone further.© 2023–2024 Expert Performance International Collective (EPIC). This exercise is copyrighted by Kevin Harris and the Expert 
Performance International Collective (EPIC). All rights reserved. Used with permission.
Satisficing: This is Good Enough! 31
2. What are some reasons behind why you stopped pursuing the 
example(s) you noted above?32 Satisficing: This is Good Enough!
References
Dweck, C.S. (2006). Mindset. Random House.
Jachimowicz, J.M., Wihler, A., Bailey, E.R., & Galinsky, A.D. (2018). Why 
grit requires perseverance and passion to positively predict performance. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 115(40), 9980–9985.
Peralta, S. (2012). Bones Brigade: An Autobiography [Film]. Power Peralta 
company.
Simon, H.A. (1972). Theories of bounded rationality. Decision and Organization, 
1, 161–176.DOI: 10.4324/9781003377542-3
Impostor Syndrome
Feeling Like a Fraud
When you take on new things that maybe push the envelope on your 
core competencies, I think that there is a tendency to question and doubt 
yourself. And I also think that we are our very own worst critics.
– Randall Foster, Chief Creative Officer and General Manager of 
the National Operation for Symphonic Distribution
I feel, from what I’ve learned in my experience, and in talking with other 
artists and animators, [impostor syndrome]’s something that never goes 
away. I still deal with that. I’ve been in working professionally since 
1997, and I still struggle with that.
– Thomas Estrada, feature film and videogame illustrator
Marcus was in his fourth year of undergraduate studies, getting ready to 
submit his application for graduation when thoughts of self-doubt started 
plaguing his mind. He questioned his own knowledge of his major and 
second guessed his abilities as a student. Marcus was feeling overwhelmed 
with his responsibilities and class work when he heard other students 
mention that their coursework was easy, and they were breezing through 
their classes. Granted, his was the more advanced coursework of the 
program. Nevertheless, he felt as though there was no way he would 
accomplish anything after he graduated. He felt like an impostor.
Soon after these feelings crept in, he was watching the news and 
learned Lady Gaga had experienced something similar. When she was 
younger and aspiring to be a singer, classmates said she would never 
334 Impostor Syndrome: Feeling Like a Fraud
make it, and even resorted to attacking her character and looks. Marcus 
thought to himself that, despite the naysayers, and Lady Gaga’s similar 
feelings of being an impostor, she went on to become a successful – even 
famous – singer and actress. He regained the motivation he needed, 
ultimately completed his undergraduate training, went on to graduate 
school, and became a university professor.
We have likely all felt the same way as Marcus at one point in our 
lives. This feeling that we are somehow masquerading as being able 
to do something is a phenomenon known as Impostor Syndrome. 
The term itself was first coined in 1978 when two Georgia State 
University researchers and psychotherapists, Pauline Rose Clance and 
Suzanne Imes, found that a number of high-achieving women were 
unable to attribute their accomplishments to their abilities. According 
to Clance and Imes, the women in their study “do not experience 
an internal sense of success” (p. 1). These successful women felt as 
if they had fooled everyone despite earning advanced degrees and 
praise from their colleagues, as well as other objective measures of 
success. The researchers concluded, at the time, that the women had 
self-doubts which contributed to difficulty taking ownership of their 
accomplishments, and furthermore, impostor syndrome was less 
likely to be observed in men and more likely to appear in women who 
worked in male-dominated professions.
Since the original study introducing the concept, it has become 
clear that impostor syndrome is much more common than originally 
thought – chances are that you have felt it yourself. Scholars studying 
imposter syndrome estimate that a large percentage of us – 70 percent –
will experience it at least once (Sakulku & Alexander, 2011). While this 
number is remarkable on the surface, the scope becomes even more 
apparent when applying the percentage to theoretical populations 
with large numbers. For example, at an event with an attendance of 
10,000, there would be 7,000 people who would report that they have 
experienced imposter syndrome. When considering 500,000 people, 
the number of us reporting imposter syndrome would be 350,000. Our 
suspicion is that the percentage could be even higher and is either not 
recognized or the person chose not to share the information.
While it is good to know that we are not alone in our feelings, when 
we as individuals experience impostor syndrome, we convince our￾selves that we are the only one in our circle who feels like a fraud.Impostor Syndrome: Feeling Like a Fraud 35
From Co-author Emily:
During my dissertation defense, I was asked the simple question, 
“What is a theory?” I couldn’t think of an answer on the spot. It 
was at the point that I thought there was no way I got to this point 
in school because of my competency. Rather, it was sheer luck 
I made it that far. Who doesn’t know what a theory is? I felt like a 
fraud – like an impostor. I wasn’t alone (remember the 70% of us 
we discussed), although at the time I sure felt like I was.
In this chapter, we will discuss the common characteristics of impostor 
syndrome, how common it is, and some possible ways to overcome 
these feelings when they arise.
What Do They See in Me? Common Characteristics of 
Impostor Syndrome
There are common characteristics of those who are facing impostor 
syndrome, and if we think hard enough, we might even see that we are 
displaying some of these characteristics without realizing it. Jaruwan 
Sakulku and James Alexander are two international scholars who do an 
excellent job discussing the six characteristics of impostor syndrome 
reported through Clance’s (1985) research:
(1) The impostor cycle
(2) The need to be special or to be the very best
(3) Superman/superwoman aspects
(4) The fear of failure
(5) The denial of competence and discounting praise
(6) Fear and guilt about success.
As we explore these six characteristics further, note that they essen￾tially boil down to one common theme: individuals feel that others 
have overestimated their abilities, attribute their success to external 
factors, and are fearful that their limitations will be revealed.
For those experiencing it, the vicious cycle of impostor syndrome 
restarts with every opportunity we encounter. Think about the last 
time you faced a consequential task – closing a game-changing account 36 Impostor Syndrome: Feeling Like a Fraud
with a prestigious client, playing a guitar solo in front of thousands, 
or completing an important class assignment. As we will discuss in 
Chapter 8, it is very common to feel nervous when facing these oppor￾tunities, even when we are excited about the task at hand. However, 
someone experiencing impostor syndrome might experience a level of 
anxiety that exceeds that of the proverbial butterflies. In such cases, 
this anxiety might lead the person experiencing impostor syndrome 
to take one of two extreme approaches – overpreparing or procras￾tinating with a later rush to be prepared (Sakulku & Alexander, 2011).
Critically, the self-perceived impostors who overprepared attributed 
their success to the amount of work they put in, rather than recognize 
that they were not impostors or frauds (Sakulku & Alexander, 2011). 
The procrastinators attributed their success to luck. In both cases, the 
impostor cycle was perpetuated because the individuals did not allow 
themselves to be credited for the outcome – at least for their capabil￾ities. Additionally, regardless of which route the perceived impostor 
took, they also tended to discount positive feedback, and focus instead 
on negative feedback, even considering what most of us would label to 
be constructive criticism as a sign of how much of an impostor they 
really are. This inability to accept positive feedback or accept due credit 
for their accomplishments feeds self-doubt, which then increases the 
feelings of being a fraud. This vicious impostor cycle then starts all 
over again (Clance, 1985; Sakulku & Alexander, 2011).
Let us return to the story of Marcus from the beginning of the 
chapter. Even though there were self-doubts about his abilities while 
submitting his graduate school applications, he was accepted, restoring 
his confidence. With relief, he realized he was among the very best of 
his cohort in his studies and assumed it would be the same when he 
began graduate study. He could not have been more wrong. The very 
first graduate school paper Marcus got back with feedback had a huge 
“D” handwritten on the title page. He felt a horrible sinking feeling, and 
his belief that he was a fraud returned. Marcus’s experience – earning 
a “D” on his first graduate school paper – highlights the interrelated 
second and third characteristics of impostor syndrome: the need to be 
the best and superwoman/superman aspects (Clance, 1985; Sakulku & 
Alexander, 2011).
The need to be the best is a pretty straightforward consideration –
someone wants to be the best at something. They might even have a Impostor Syndrome: Feeling Like a Fraud 37
history of being the best in a variety of situations. However, increased 
level of competition can prevent them from being the best – poten￾tially triggering the feeling of being an impostor. The superwoman/
superman aspect of impostor syndrome is exemplified when self￾perceived impostors strive to perform as flawlessly as possible. When 
they do not, they take it as evidence that they are an impostor (Clance, 
1985; Sakulki & Alexander, 2011). Marcus was not an impostor; he 
simply had not acclimated to the increased demands and differences 
between an undergraduate and graduate education. Additionally, 
while Marcus wanted to be perfect in everything he did, that does not 
happen in reality (see Chapter 8 for more on perfectionism).
Pass or fail. Passing or failing are the two options introduced to most 
of us in elementary school and stick with us until we are finished with 
formal education. Of course, there are variations of these options. The 
passing option typically has several gradients. The pass/fail concept 
is engrained in us from an early age as an objective measure of per￾formance, and the failure component looms large. (We discuss failure 
throughout the book; see Chapters 4 and 8 for more on how we think 
about failure). Some of us may even develop a fear of failure – the 
fourth characteristic of impostor syndrome (Clance, 1985; Sakulki & 
Alexander, 2011). Because failure can be viewed by a self-perceived 
impostor as proof of their assessment, they tend to overwork them￾selves in an attempt to avoid failure. For example, Marcus (from the 
opening vignette of the chapter) might spend triple the time needed on 
his second paper to avoid another grade of “D.” While this may seem 
to be a relatively rational response to the first bad grade, the tendency 
to overwork can be common among self-perceived impostors. They 
might spend an inordinate, and often unnecessary, amount of time on 
task as a consequence of their fear of failure.
Another common characteristic of impostor syndrome reviewed by 
Sakulki and Alexander (Clance, 1985; Sakulki & Alexander, 2011) is the 
denial of competence and discounting praise. Self-perceived impostors 
have a mental barrier to acknowledging their success for what it is. 
Consider Lauren, a very accomplished female STEM researcher 
with many publications and a multi-year, multi-million-dollar grant. 
She experiences impostor syndrome and does not give herself the 
credit she deserves for her accomplishments. Instead, she credits her 
success to being part of a good team and even finds ways to discount 38 Impostor Syndrome: Feeling Like a Fraud
her undeniable individual contributions. Relatedly, the self-perceived 
impostor discounts praise or dismisses it altogether.
From Co-author Emily:
I passed my dissertation defense, even after I could not explain 
the definition of a theory. While my committee heaped praise 
upon me for how well I performed in the defense, I was unable 
to accept the praise in that moment, still stuck on the fact that 
I couldn’t answer such a simple question.
For self-perceived impostors this can be the norm – they tend to dis￾miss the positive feedback/praise, even when it is plentiful and from 
trusted sources. Moreover, the tendency is to focus on any available 
evidence to support the idea that they are an impostor. Emily’s example 
illustrates this concept. She couldn’t move beyond her inability to pro￾vide an explanation of what a theory is.
Lastly, those with impostor syndrome share guilt about, and maybe 
moreso, a fear of, success. While self-perceived impostors do not want 
to feel like frauds, they also do not want their hard work to come 
with the consequences of more work. The risk of higher demands 
precipitates a fear that they will be eventually exposed as the fraud they 
perceive themselves to be. It is important to note that those experi￾encing impostor syndrome typically, indeed, have the competence 
to perform the task at hand; however, they attribute their success to 
external forces rather than their own skills and knowledge (Kastelic & 
Ogilvie, 2022).
We All Experience Impostor Syndrome?
Dr. Tim Hunt won a Nobel prize in Physiology and Medicine. When 
interviewed, it was clear he also faced impostor syndrome – in disbelief 
that it had really happened:
Well, the news sinks in slowly, and you feel uncomfortable 
because you worry that other people might think that you are 
not really worthy of it: that’s what I thought. Interestingly, 
about a couple of weeks after the announcement, I ran into Paul 
[Nobel prize co-awardee] and he said, ‘Oh Tim, I’ve just had most Impostor Syndrome: Feeling Like a Fraud 39
ghastly weekend because I felt so unworthy.’ I was not alone, 
then! Winning a Nobel certainly leads to a lot of soul searching 
and you end up thinking, ‘Why me?’ You reflect back upon your 
career. If you read the autobiographies of previous Laureates, 
you will see that this reaction is common (Cerejo, 2015; see also 
Grossman, 2023).
This description of a Nobel Laureate feeling unworthy of the prize was 
quite an eye-opener. We tend to think of anyone performing at that 
level to be immune from such feelings of self-doubt. While impostor 
syndrome was initially examined among females in a male-dominated 
career, researchers have found that impostor syndrome can affect 
anyone. And, impostor syndrome can emerge with anything, where 
any level of performance is required – compared to me, you are a 
better bowler, antiques buyer, speller, writer, parent, professor, and so 
on. This makes sense as there is no reason to assume that feelings of 
self-doubt would not exist in such areas. Having said that, it is unlikely 
that there is much research or conversation about how the car buyer at 
the auto dealership secretly felt that they were winging it, did not really 
know what they were doing, and would be found to be an impostor 
any day now. This is in part because it is unlikely that anyone has 
even asked, and it is unlikely that they would proactively bring it up. 
However, we will now explore some of the research into those who 
experience impostor syndrome and highlight additional examples –
some may come as a surprise.
We now know that all of us are susceptible to feeling like an impostor, 
even Nobel Laureates. It is also not limited to any specific domains –
we may feel like a fraud in anything we pursue. Recall the estimate 
that 70 percent of us have experienced or will experience impostor 
syndrome. Not surprisingly, impostor syndrome is evident among 
many students pursuing a college degree. Researchers have found that 
physician assistant, psychology, nurse practitioner, medical residency, 
and molecular biology were among the top academic programs where 
students experienced impostor syndrome (Joshi & Mangette, 2018). 
This is likely due to the competitive nature of the fields. If the winner 
of the Nobel prize in Physiology and Medicine can experience self￾doubt about his accomplishment, then college sophomore Katrina is 
likely also prone to questioning whether she belongs.40 Impostor Syndrome: Feeling Like a Fraud
Impostor syndrome may be especially present for those just starting 
out in their careers. For example, physicians who are in the early stages 
of their careers may make mistakes and experience moments of self￾doubt when they believe their medical skills and knowledge are not 
as good as others thought (LaDonna et al. 2017). They might start 
to question themselves and ask, “what am I doing here?” Academic 
scholars may compare themselves to others at the same level by com￾paring the number of publications or length of their CVs to those of 
others, which can increase self-doubt if they do not measure up. We 
consider such comparisons and some of the potential roots of impostor 
syndrome later in this chapter.
Even the best-known performers, such as celebrities and profes￾sional athletes have discussed their feelings of impostor syndrome. For 
example, Kate Winslet, known for her role in Titanic (Cameron, 1997), 
stated “I’d wake up in the morning before going off to a shoot and 
think, I can’t do this; I’m a fraud” (Warrell, 2014; see also Grossman, 
2023). Maya Angelou also described her experiences, “I have written 11 
books, but each time I think, ‘uh oh, they’re going to find out now. I’ve 
run a game on everybody and they’re going to find me out’ ” (Warrell, 
2014; see also Grossman, 2023). Thus, achieved success at the level 
mentioned in these examples is often not enough to douse these feelings 
of self-doubt. A recent documentary produced by ABC underscores 
this point. Country-rapper Jelly Roll, who is experiencing tremendous 
success for his music and is now a household name, discussed having 
impostor syndrome and battling it every day (Pearlman & Roll, 2023).
Our own interviews with high performers led to stories of their 
experiences with impostor syndrome. Comedian Henry Cho said:
I still [experience impostor syndrome]. I walk off going, ‘Wow! 
I can’t believe I got away with another one!’ It’s still one of those 
things. I can’t believe I get to do this. I wouldn’t say I feel like a 
fraud, but I’m getting away with it.
On a similar note, actor Talon Beeson shared the frequency with which 
he experiences impostor syndrome:
I still every day wake up and think, ‘Today’s the day they figure 
out I’m a fraud. I have no idea what I’m doing.’ But, you know, Impostor Syndrome: Feeling Like a Fraud 41
I don’t think any of us really know what we’re doing. It doesn’t 
change the fact that I know I’m not alone in this, that we all wake 
up and think, ‘Well, I don’t really understand how this works. It’s 
just kind of working, and today’s the day.
Alec Mills, a professional baseball pitcher, shared with us his experience 
with impostor syndrome:
I think that [impostor syndrome] happens a lot in baseball. I think 
it happens in any career, or anything anybody wants to do, but 
baseball, especially. It can really kick you while you’re down. 
My first outing ever in professional ball was in Idaho Falls. I got 
drafted in ’12, and it was some time after that … and my first 
appearance. First batter I ever faced was a double off the wall that 
I’m not sure got any higher than 15 feet. It was hit so hard. And 
then the next guy had a homer, and I think, you hit it right on the 
head. It was definitely like, ‘Okay, do I belong here? Did I miss? 
Did I mess up?’ And, all these thoughts creep in your head, and 
I’m on the mound. I remember several times, you know, kind of 
being in the shower after a game, and just like leaning my head 
against the wall like, ‘Man, this is not for the faint of heart. This 
is not easy. This is not something that I guess I thought it was 
going to be.
It is helpful knowing that we are not alone and that even people we 
look up to in various contexts experience the same feelings of impostor 
syndrome that we do. These examples show us that anyone can experi￾ence impostor syndrome, not just those in an academic setting. These 
feelings of being a fraud are becoming more and more talked about 
in the public domain which makes it easier for others to relate and 
develop skills to help overcome their self-doubt and feelings of being 
an impostor.
Why Are We Prone to Experiencing Impostor Syndrome?
Monica and John were discussing their feelings of impostor 
syndrome over lunch one day, and they were trying to determine 
the reasons for their feelings. While they were deep in conversation, 42 Impostor Syndrome: Feeling Like a Fraud
Monica realized that she had always been very critical of herself 
while growing up. This self-criticism became engrained as a per￾sonality trait, and because of its persistence, her feelings of being 
an impostor intensified. John realized during the conversation that 
he always compared himself to everyone else. In particular, John 
realized he was comparing himself to graduate students who were 
further along than him, and he felt like a fraud because he did not 
have as many publications as they did.
While the feeling of impostor syndrome is the same across the two 
examples above, we can distinguish the cause of the development 
of impostor syndrome between the individuals. Sanne Feenstra and 
a group of international colleagues identified the underlying causes 
of impostor syndrome as clinical-psychological, as with Monica, and 
social-psychological, as with John (Feenstra et al., 2020). The clinical￾psychological perspective attributes impostor syndrome at the indi￾vidual level and likens it to a personality trait. Early researchers 
suggest that the experience of impostor syndrome is due to a nega￾tive, critical self-concept (Clance & Imes, 1978). This is the proposed 
root of Monica’s impostor syndrome. She developed a recurring ten￾dency of self-criticism that perpetuated itself in an ongoing cycle of 
increasing self-criticism leading to further self-doubt, which magnified 
the self-criticism.
Feenstra and colleagues did not feel that the clinical-psychological 
approach adequately explained how everyone could be prone to 
impostor syndrome and proposed the social-psychological perspective. 
The social-psychological perspective considers an individual’s social 
context and how it influences our susceptibility to impostor syndrome 
(Feenstra et al., 2020). This approach considers possible root causes 
from three perspectives: societal level, institutional level, and inter￾personal level. Starting with the societal level, comparing ourselves to 
others is human nature, and this is one of the reasons we may experi￾ence impostor syndrome. Like John, we often compare ourselves to 
others to see where we stand in a social/performance hierarchy (see 
Chapter 6 for more on such comparisons).
A problem can occur when we compare with the wrong person or 
group. This could be an undergraduate student comparing themselves 
to a graduate student (inherently more advanced in the field) or a med￾ical resident comparing themselves to an attending (who would have Impostor Syndrome: Feeling Like a Fraud 43
years more experience with hands-on care). These comparisons often 
make us feel as though we are falling short, exacerbating the feeling of 
impostor syndrome. We are functionally comparing our weaknesses 
with others’ strengths (Warrell, 2014). This can occur even when com￾paring to others at the same level by not taking contextual or histor￾ical factors into account. For example, a newly enrolled piano student 
may compare themselves to another who began classes on the same 
day. However, they did not know that the other student was the child 
of a professional piano player, with the opportunity to observe their 
parent’s performance from a very young age and thus have the advan￾tage of previous, though informal, training. Taking this information 
into account, we are essentially comparing apples to oranges.
The societal-level explanation of impostor syndrome illustrates that 
the groups we belong to, and the portrayal of these groups in society, 
can impact how we view ourselves and our accomplishments (Feenstra 
et al., 2020). This reflects the themes we discussed in Chapters 1 and 
2 related to how society has conditioned us to see our potential as 
limited. Someone buying into the traditional view of set performance 
ceilings can certainly fall into the impostor cycle by not believing in 
their true potential. The second consideration of the societal level 
is that getting really good at something takes time. This is true for 
everyone. However, the intensity of what it takes during training or 
practice often happens behind the scenes. Because of this, unless we 
are privy to that improvement process for others, we may expect our 
own progress to happen much more quickly than is reasonable. When 
getting better takes more time than initially expected, we might then 
blame ourselves and see it is as evidence of performance ceilings. We 
come to believe we are not able to achieve a higher level of success. 
These views lead to self-doubt and increase the likelihood that we give 
up altogether.
Conversely, we are often surprised at what we end up accomplishing 
when such thoughts do not get the best of us, and we stick with 
something. Doctoral student Tyler Tims shared his experience when 
we asked if he had ever faced impostor syndrome. “I feel impostor 
syndrome almost every day,” he said. “But, now I’m starting to experi￾ence moments of developing my professional identity and feeling 
like I am finally coming into it.” This underscores the need to keep 
plugging at something until you begin to feel comfortable.44 Impostor Syndrome: Feeling Like a Fraud
The next consideration of the social-psychological causes of 
impostor syndrome is classified as the institutional level – the idea that 
we determine our worth by observing who is performing what and for 
whom at the institution. When we do not see anyone else similar to us 
or with similar backgrounds, we may conclude that we do not belong –
that we are impostors. This is very much in alignment with the original 
studies that observed impostor syndrome at pervasive levels in women 
in STEM fields, when men, generally, were not believed to experience 
it at the same levels.
Lastly, when examining impostor syndrome through the interpersonal￾level lens, Feenstra and colleagues (2020) suggest that there are social 
evaluative cues guiding our appraisals of self-worth and how we perceive 
whether we deserve our place in our careers. In other words, we are 
keenly aware of how others are treating us. If it seems we are being 
treated poorly, then we could internalize those feelings and conclude 
that we might not actually belong – we feel we are an impostor.
While everyone is at risk, certain groups might be more likely to 
experience impostor syndrome than others. Similar to women in STEM 
fields observed to have high levels of impostor syndrome – who likely 
saw very few other women in the ranks and may have been treated 
poorly, other groups who are underrepresented in their institutions 
often experience self-doubt. For example, first-generation college 
students, individuals from lower socio-economic backgrounds, 
members of ethnic minorities, and women in other male-dominated 
fields or institutions are all susceptible to impostor syndrome.
Researchers have found that, as a group, incidents of impostor 
syndrome are higher for students in minority populations. Cokely 
and colleagues (2013), examined impostor syndrome among African 
American, Asian American, and Latinx students, and found that the 
presence of impostor syndrome was a strong predictor of psycho￾logical stress, leading to a negative effect on their overall well-being. In 
fact, high-achieving members of underrepresented groups appear to 
face increased test anxiety, negative psychological effects, and reduced 
confidence in their own intelligence as a result of impostor syndrome 
(Cokely et al., 2013; Kumar & Jagacinski, 2006; McGregor, Gee, & 
Posey, 2008).
First-generation college students also have this predisposition. 
They are constantly navigating labyrinths of offices, terminology, Impostor Syndrome: Feeling Like a Fraud 45
and expectations unlike anything they have ever experienced. Making 
matters worse, college is the first taste of true freedom for many, making 
it essential to be diligent in following the correct processes at the right 
times, as well to learn from mistakes. It can be quite embarrassing to 
discover you are on the proverbial “wrong page.” Clint Smith wrote 
an article in The Atlantic describing how difficult it can be for someone 
not fortunate enough to be from a prestigious background to navi￾gate the world of an elite college (2019). In particular, he notes how 
something seemingly minor to some, such as “TR” on a class schedule 
referring to both Tuesday and Thursday, can cause inordinately nega￾tive consequences to someone unfamiliar with the abbreviation. This 
may be evident to anyone with more than a semester of college experi￾ence, but someone new to the notation may begin to have doubts that 
this environment – or college in general – is even for them. While this 
particular issue may not occur for everyone, it is an example of how 
simple issues can perpetuate the negative thinking that you do not 
belong because you are a fraud.
How Will I Know if It Is Impostor Syndrome?
Well-known author on impostor syndrome, Dr. Lisa Orbe-Austin, 
discusses identifiable signs of impostor syndrome, which can be helpful 
if we are unsure that we are experiencing impostor syndrome (2020, 
p. 4). They include:
(1) You are a high achiever
(2) You engage in the impostor cycle
(3) You want to be the best
(4) You attribute success to luck or mistake
(5) You discount praise
(6) You fear being discovered as a fraud
(7) You do not feel intelligent
(8) You have self-esteem issues
(9) You struggle with perfectionism
(10) You overestimate others and underestimate yourself
(11) You do not experience an internal feeling of success
(12) You overwork or self-sabotage.46 Impostor Syndrome: Feeling Like a Fraud
Think of this as a checklist. Do these sound familiar? If so, you may be 
experiencing impostor syndrome without realizing it.
Further complicating the issue, impostor syndrome can present 
in multiple ways. Dr. Valerie Young unpacks some of these consid￾erations in her book, The Secret Thoughts of Successful Women and 
Men: Why Capable People Suffer from Impostor Syndrome and How to 
Thrive in Spite of It (2011). For example, she describes the perfectionist 
who creates unattainable goals and feels like an impostor when they 
are not met; the expert who feels inadequate believing they do not 
have sufficient knowledge of the topic, leading to feelings of being a 
fraud; the super-person who takes on too much work to handle just 
to feel respected by peers; and the genius who experiences shame 
when they have to put in effort to develop a skill. Do any of these 
resonate with you? Sound like someone you know? We certainly see 
these behaviors quite frequently and probably engage in some of 
them ourselves. Any us of can demonstrate these behaviors without 
even realizing we are doing so or understanding the detrimental 
effects on our performance.
What Can I Do About It? Working Through Impostor 
Syndrome
The first step in working through impostor syndrome is recognizing 
that you have it (Arleo et al., 2021). Dr. Mardie Warrell, the author of 
several books to help you improve your performance provides advice 
on overcoming impostor syndrome (Warrell, 2014). She proposes that 
self-acceptance is critical to the process. We also must be intentional 
in owning our successes and training ourselves to think that we did 
not “get lucky” – that our achievements are products of our work 
and accomplishments. It seems easy enough to just say, “I am not an 
impostor; I got here because of my skills!” But, it is a lot easier said 
than done. Once we notice the feelings or characteristics of impostor 
syndrome, we can begin to mitigate those by making a list of our 
qualifications to help us own our accomplishments and manifest our 
success. A similar tactic, arising from other research focusing on a var￾iety of academics led by Lisa Jaremka, is to focus on past successes 
to help refute the feeling of being an impostor (Jaremka et al. 2020). Impostor Syndrome: Feeling Like a Fraud 47
Another theme that emerged from Jaremka’s work is that we often 
subscribe to messages that we should “be” a certain way. For example, 
there is the stereotypical portrayal of how a professor should look, 
act, or sound. While we should recognize that these types of pre￾conceptions are myths, we often internalize these messages. Working 
through impostor syndrome is not something that will happen over￾night; rather, it is a series of skills developed over our lifetimes –
impostor syndrome is something that does not fully go away.
Because awareness of the frequency of impostor syndrome is critical, 
a trusted network of your peers, colleagues, and friends from across 
different domains who suffer from impostor syndrome can create a 
space to discuss your struggles openly. Such communication allows for 
opportunities to learn from one another and provide support.
Chapter Summary
We have discussed how anyone can be susceptible to impostor 
syndrome – students, faculty, celebrities, professional athletes, and 
even the highest achievers – people we would not think would ever 
doubt themselves.
Additionally, impostor syndrome can actually cause psychological 
distress (Kumar & Jagacinksi, 2006; McGregor et al., 2008). Those 
experiencing impostor syndrome may actually push themselves to 
work harder so that their “secret” is never discovered, which can lead 
to burn out, overworking, and self-sabotage (Orbe-Austin, 2020). 
Furthermore, the relationship between perfectionism and impostor 
syndrome is reciprocal, meaning many battling impostor syndrome 
are likely also battling perfectionism (more on perfectionism in 
Chapter 8). Additionally, culture and environment can prevent these 
individuals from asking for help because of a fear of appearing inad￾equate or being perceived as a failure, further confirming their feelings 
of inadequacy. This also can negatively impact professional develop￾ment and create barriers to promotion, salary, and other advancement 
opportunities because they feel they are not good enough. A network 
of trusted individuals who have experienced impostor syndrome can 
help maintain a healthy perspective by openly discussing these feelings 
and learning from one another.© 2023–2024 Expert Performance International Collective (EPIC). This exercise is copyrighted by Kevin Harris and the Expert 
Performance International Collective (EPIC). All rights reserved. Used with permission.
48 Impostor Syndrome: Feeling Like a Fraud
You belong here!
Chapter 3: Impostor Syndrome: Feeling Like a Fraud
This exercise is intended to help you realize how commonplace 
impostor syndrome is, and how to recognize and counteract it in your 
own life. In the first part of the exercise, you will be asked to identify 
three (or more) people who have stated they have experienced impostor 
syndrome. In the second part, you will be asked to list times you have 
personally felt impostor syndrome. In the third part, you will be asked 
to reflect on what this means for your own levels of respectability.
1. Others: Identify at least three people who have stated they have 
experienced impostor syndrome and/or did not have what it took. 
The three examples could be well-known performers or personal 
acquaintances.© 2023–2024 Expert Performance International Collective (EPIC). This exercise is copyrighted by Kevin Harris and the Expert 
Performance International Collective (EPIC). All rights reserved. Used with permission.
Impostor Syndrome: Feeling Like a Fraud 49
2. You: Think about times when you have experienced impostor 
syndrome. List as many as you can recall.
3. Reflection: You have now identified multiple individuals who have 
stated they have experienced impostor syndrome. Most likely, these 
folks are widely respected. What is the implication for how others 
view you when such well-respected individuals have also experienced 
impostor syndrome?50 Impostor Syndrome: Feeling Like a Fraud
References
 Arleo, E.K., Wagner-Schuman, M., McGinty, G., Salazar, G., & Mayr, N.A. 
(2021). Tackling impostor syndrome: A multidisciplinary approach. Clinical 
imaging, 74, 170–172. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clinimag.2020.12.035.
Cameron, J. (1997). Titanic [Film]. Paramount Pictures.
Cerejo, C. (2015). Nobel Laureate Tim Hunt on What It’s Like to Win a Nobel Prize. 
https://doi.org/10.34193/EI-IV-5765. Accessed November 11, 2023.
Clance, P.R. (1985). The Imposter Phenomenon: Overcoming the Fear that Haunts 
Your Success. Peachtree Publishers.
Clance, P.R., & Imes, S.A. (1978). The impostor phenomenon in high achieving 
women: Dynamics and therapeutic intervention. Psychotherapy: Theory, 
Research, and Practice, 15, 241–247. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0086006.
Cokley, K., McClain, S., Enciso, A., & Martinez, M. (2013). An examination 
of the impact of minority status stress and impostor feelings on the 
mental health of diverse ethnic minority students. Journal of Multicultural 
Counseling and Development, 41(4), 82–95.
Feenstra, S., Bageny, C., Ryan, M., Rink, F., Stoker, J., & Jordan, J. (2020) 
Contextualizing the impostor “syndrome”. Frontiers in Psychology, 11, 1–6. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.575024.
Grossman, V.A. (2023). Impostor syndrome: Destructive self-doubt among 
nursing professionals. Journal of Radiology Nursing, 41, 242–246. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jradnu.2022.08.002.
Jaremka, L., Ackerman, J., Gawronski, B., Rule, N., Sweeny, K., Tropp, 
L., … Vick, B. (2020). Common academic experiences no one talks 
about: Repeated rejection, impostor syndrome, and burnout. Perspectives 
on Psychological Science, 15. https://doi.org/10.1177/1745691619898848.
Joshi, A., & Mangette, H. (2018). Unmasking of impostor syndrome. Journal 
of Research, Assessment, and Practice in Higher Education, 3(1), 3. https://
ecommons.udayton.edu/jraphe/vol3/iss1/3/.
Kastelic, J., & Ogilvie, T. (2022). Is the “impostor syndrome” affecting you and 
limiting your achievements? The Canadian Veterinary Journal, 63, 347–348.
Kumar, S., & Jagacinski, C.M. (2006). Imposters have goals too: The imposter 
phenomenon and its relationship to achievement goal theory. Personality 
and Individual Differences, 40(1), 147–157.
LaDonna, K.A., Ginsburg, S., & Watling, C. (2018). “Rising to the level of 
your incompetence”: What physicians’ self-assessment of their perform￾ance reveals about the imposter syndrome in medicine. Academic Medicine, 
93(5), 763–768. https://doi.org/10.1097/ACM.0000000000002046.Impostor Syndrome: Feeling Like a Fraud 51
McGregor, L., Gee, D., & Posey, K. (2008). I feel like a fraud and it depresses 
me: The relation between the imposter phenomenon and depression. 
Social Behavior & Personality: An International Journal, 36, 43–48.
Orbe-Austin, L. (2020). Own Your Greatness: Overcome Impostor Syndrome, Beat 
Self-doubt, and Succeed in Life. Ulysses Press.
Pearlman, B. (Director), & Roll, J. (Writer) (2023). Jelly Roll. Save Me. [docu￾mentary]. Hulu. https://www.hulu.com/welcome.
Sakulku, J., & Alexander, J. (2011). The impostor phenomenon. The Journal of 
Behavioral Science, 6(1), 75–97.
Smith, C. (2019). Elite colleges constantly tell low-income students that they 
do not belong. The Atlantic. https://www.theatlantic.com/education/
archive/2019/03/privileged-poor-navigating-elite-university-life/585100/. 
Accessed November 10, 2023.
Warrell, M. (2014). Afraid of being ‘found out?’ How to overcome imposter 
syndrome. Forbes. https://www.forbes.com/sites/margiewarrell/2014/
04/03/impostor-syndrome/?sh=7dd6012648a9. Accessed December 
13, 2023.
Young, V. (2011). The Secret Thoughts of Successful Women and Men: Why Capable 
People Suffer from Impostor Syndrome and How to Thrive in Spite of It. Crown 
Currency.DOI: 10.4324/9781003377542-4
Artificial Ceilings
This is Where I Top Out
I’ll never feel complacent. I’ve always been a person that likes being 
uncomfortable. I feel like if I’m uncomfortable, that means it’s some￾thing for me to aspire to. I guess that’s how I’ve gotten into all these 
different avenues. Always being ready to learn something new and figure 
it out – okay, how can I do this? Or it’s been somebody reached out to 
me. Why don’t you try it?
– Justin Causey, artist and artist management
Always push to the next level. I wish I could say it has a lot to do with the 
entertainment industry, but it has a lot to do, I think, with any industry. 
If you sit on your laurels, you just kind of stagnate, specifically in the 
entertainment industry.
– Talon Beeson, actor and director
Stacey wanted to learn to use a leading video editing software system 
but was intimidated by the program’s power. A similar, but freely avail￾able, software on her laptop seemed less complex and appeared to have 
some overlap with the higher-end version. Her plan was to get familiar 
with the free software’s functionality first and then see what translated 
to the professional version that currently intimidated her. She opened 
both programs to get a first-hand look and to review any obvious shared 
functionality. Satisfied that she was at least tentatively comfortable 
with the two programs, she decided to dive in and practice. An hour 
4Artificial Ceilings: This is Where I Top Out 53
into her session, Stacey was impressed with her progress and decided 
to move on to the professional version. The catch is, she was already 
working in the professional program’s interface. She had enlarged the 
wrong window at the start and never noticed the difference. Because 
Stacey had mistakenly started working in the more complex program, 
she was not bound by the artificial performance ceiling that she would 
have placed on herself. This allowed her to work without the anxiety 
that she would have encountered by knowingly trying to work through 
the higher-end professional version.
That is impossible! Chances are you have contemplated a project or 
goal and concluded that it was out of reach – a running time, GPA, 
dream job, or other aspiration. Collectively, humankind always has 
been aspirational. We harnessed fire, achieved flight, explored space, 
and so many more accomplishments. In some instances, progress is 
made only when an individual or a select few see things others have yet 
to see. Oftentimes, what was once deemed impossible becomes com￾monplace. Consider the painstaking process endured by Orville and 
Wilbur Wright, known commonly as the Wright brothers, to achieve 
flight in their rudimentary aircraft. They persisted despite an unre￾lenting barrage of doubt and ridicule aimed directly at them. Moreover, 
it is obvious to almost anyone that air travel is a ubiquitous component 
of modern life, and it would be difficult to find a single individual still 
proclaiming that the feat of air travel is impossible (though I am sure 
one might exist).
A message that can be gleaned from the Wright brothers’ example 
is that it is not unusual for certain achievements to be considered impos￾sible until they are not. However, these same achievements often become 
commonplace once they have been attained. In fact, we take many 
“impossible” achievements for granted on a daily basis, including elec￾tricity and the internet. The four-minute mile was once considered the 
Holy Grail for mid-distance runners but is now a very achievable, and 
common, running time (e.g., Krüger, 2006).
A more recent, fascinating example is when a change in fabric led 
to a mental recalibration of what was considered within the realm of 
human possibility. A new swimsuit – the “supersuit,” made of a new 
fabric – was introduced for use by competitive swimmers for the 2008–
2009 season. The athletes who wore the new suit were very successful. 54 Artificial Ceilings: This is Where I Top Out
Very successful. As in setting-43-world-records successful. As with most 
good things, the run of the swimsuit came to an end – it was banned 
by 2010. However, something fascinating occurred: overall swimming 
performance increased in the years that followed the introduction and 
banning of the “supersuit” (Robinson, 2022). The critical lesson is that 
it was not the fabric itself that led to improved performance; it was 
the removal of the mental barrier to reaching that level of perform￾ance. This example epitomizes the idea of an artificial ceiling. In the 
swimsuit example, it was a collectively agreed upon artificial ceiling 
among competitive swimmers and coaches, but an artificial ceiling 
nonetheless.
The swimming and four-minute mile examples reminded us of 
a practice used by the US motorsports organization NASCAR. The 
organization requires the use of restrictor plates on the racecars to 
control the speed at which the racecars can travel. This enhances 
the fan experience by increasing the likelihood of a close race, and it 
increases the need for strategy/skill by the drivers. This struck us as an 
excellent, and literal, parallel for the role of the artificial ceilings that 
we tend to place on ourselves. As mentioned, the root of these ceilings 
can be from a collective view, as in the banned swimsuit example, or 
from the individual themselves. However, removing these metaphor￾ical restrictor plates allows you to move forward at “full speed.”
More broadly, we often do not realize how much we are capable of 
accomplishing when the proper circumstances are cultivated. Granted, 
many of our life circumstances are beyond our control. However, as 
we hope to convey throughout this book, we have a greater degree of 
control than is often recognized. This chapter will focus on the arti￾ficial ceilings that we place on ourselves individually, along with the 
role that collective societal views can have on what we deem achiev￾able. We will present some of the factors that potentially shaped how 
the general populace views impossible achievements, particularly 
with a lens toward the potential impact on individual performance, 
and discuss how all of this influences our own, individual, artificial 
limits. Finally, we unpack the lessons and themes gleaned from our 
discussions with some very successful performers and provide insights 
into how you can reduce the tendency toward artificial ceilings on 
your own capabilities.Artificial Ceilings: This is Where I Top Out 55
The Impact of Default Societal Beliefs
As noted in Chapter 1, Sir Francis Galton’s view of predetermined, 
individual ceilings on performance influenced the cultural lens 
through which performance was viewed for well over a century. In a 
nutshell, Galton proposed that each individual possesses a natural limit 
on performance that is impossible to exceed. According to this view, if 
Johnny has reached his ceiling in mathematical abilities, no amount of 
training or practice would allow him to move to a performance level 
beyond this proposed “ceiling.” We presented the counterargument in 
Chapter 1 that continual improvements are possible through prolonged 
engagement in activities designed to improve performance along with 
iterative adaptations to training as needed. Several decades of research 
back up this view (e.g., Miller et al., 2020), and prolonged engagement 
is deemed a necessary component of improving performance (e.g., 
Campitelli & Gobet, 2011)
Despite this evidence, Galton’s viewpoint of performance ceilings 
had a tremendous impact on how society collectively has viewed high 
performance – one that lingers today. It is common to hear the best 
performers be described as “gifted” or “naturals.” Because this lens 
through which high performance is viewed is so engrained in society, 
it has taken tremendous efforts to convey widely that one can enhance 
their level of performance to a greater extent than they might have 
been aware. Rather than recognize the evidence of the impact of 
controllable factors in elite performance, many of us seem to have 
engaged in a type of collective confirmation bias related to natural 
abilities. For example, the athlete with an extensive training history 
is lauded for their natural abilities following an impressive game per￾formance. Because many were looking for evidence that the player 
was in possession of disproportionate natural abilities, the work put 
in by the player was overshadowed by the belief that their natural abil￾ities that had been “confirmed” – the confirmation bias. Legendary 
National Basketball Association player Michael Jordan was famously 
bothered when his hard work was dismissed and it was suggested that 
his success was primarily due to a special gift of some kind. He shared, 
“I’m not out there sweating for three hours every day just to find out 
what it feels like to sweat.”56 Artificial Ceilings: This is Where I Top Out
Thus, Galton’s academic work contributed to the idea of artificial 
performance limits at the societal level. When observing amazing 
performances, there was a collective tendency to deem the performer 
a “natural talent.” There is nothing inherently problematic with attrib￾uting the source of someone’s performance to natural abilities. The 
problem arises when the label leads to overlooking the tremendous 
amount of preparation of most, if not all, top performers. In some 
instances, the performer reveals the degree of their preparation. 
Stephen Curry shared that he had adopted the very specific training 
regimen of a player deemed a great shooter by Curry’s coach (Davis, 
2015). This new training technique elevated him to the league leader in 
three-point shooting shortly thereafter. Unfortunately, but understand￾ably, not all performers are as open to sharing their training processes 
with the masses. But why? In the particular example of Stephen Curry, 
adopting the training techniques of a fellow player performing at the 
highest level, the training techniques were relatively well known around 
the league and nowhere close to being secret training techniques. 
However, there are obvious competitive advantages to keeping proven 
techniques close to the vest for a variety of reasons.
The Advantages of Not Sharing Training Techniques
In a perfect world we all would encourage one another, celebrate each 
other’s accomplishments, and openly share our path to achievement. 
Obviously, we do not live in a perfect world, and the main advantage 
of not sharing the techniques to reach a higher-level performance is 
pretty straightforward. Withholding such information provides a com￾petitive advantage to the possessor, which in turn empowers them. 
Thus, sharing the source of a competitive advantage is a step too far for 
some performers under many circumstances, and for other performers 
under any circumstances. Although someone might not be willing to 
go as far as to sabotage a competitor, even the most generous person 
is unlikely to hand over the playbook in competitive situations. Such 
situations could span the spectrum from maintaining a lead as the best 
salesperson at an organization to actual competitive sports.
An interesting point here is that researchers have, in some instances, 
attempted to identify scientifically the factors that distinguish one level Artificial Ceilings: This is Where I Top Out 57
of performer from the other. Once identified, the path taken by the per￾former can be unpacked by having the performer share their training 
techniques to reach various benchmarks of development – maybe the 
training drills in which they initially engaged or how they overcame 
a plateau. A related approach for the researchers involves working to 
pinpoint the specific component(s) of performance responsible for 
their advantage and then develop training based on that information 
that accelerates the development of less-skilled performers.
For example, Peter Fadde, a researcher who does a great deal of work 
on baseball performance, and his colleagues, identified the best colle￾giate baseball hitters on their teams based on batting averages across 
actual game performances (2016). This meant that the batting perform￾ance level of each player was well-tested, having been accumulated 
over multiple games, and was not a judgment based on informal 
observations or hunches. This is an important point as it lends cred￾ibility to what the researchers discovered next. With a technique called 
visual occlusion, they were able to identify when the advantage of the 
best batters occurred – the points at which the players’ predictions of 
how the pitch would behave were accurate for only the best batters. 
Once identified, the batters with lesser batting averages were then 
trained to develop the ability to better predict the behavior of the pitch 
at the points identified in the original phase. Did it work? Turns out 
that the team ended up leading the league in batting averages that 
season. As mentioned in Chapter 2, this approach has been codified 
under the names Expert Performance Based Training (ExPerT; Ward, 
Suss, & Basevitch, 2009) and XBT (Fadde, 2009).
Another advantage of not sharing the steps to reach a high level 
of success is a psychological one. It can provide a feeling of super￾iority. Many lucrative pursuits have what can only be described as 
“gatekeepers” – the entertainment industry, athletics, or competitive 
universities. Gaining access to these realms can provide a level of pres￾tige and allow the grantees to feel as if they have been admitted to 
an exclusive club. Existing members of these exclusive groups might 
withhold guidance for reasons ranging from wanting others to “pay 
their dues” to a sense that they are among the chosen ones, essentially 
a feeling of superiority. Everyone presumably has experienced the 
desire to be granted access to something off-limits. It is understandably 
invigorating once access has been granted via landing a coveted acting 58 Artificial Ceilings: This is Where I Top Out
gig, signing a contract to play professional sports, or securing a spot in 
a prestigious law school.
It should be noted that not everyone will perform at the level 
required to be successful in competitive domains and some degree of 
gatekeeping is a necessity. However, a greater number of performers 
would potentially make the cut if the information on how it can be 
accomplished were more widely available. Unlike gatekeepers of the 
past, such gatekeeping in the modern era often takes the form of 
collective judgment via likes or similar engagement on social media. 
Moreover, while the degree to which high performers are willing to 
share their techniques varies, it is understandable that some level of 
confidentiality will be in place. Finally, someone might simply feel a 
sense of exhilaration from not sharing because it provides a feeling of 
holding a secret.
Societal views of high performers have a lasting impact on the 
perceived performance ceilings we place on ourselves, and there are 
advantages of not revealing techniques that are known to help one 
overcome such beliefs. Fundamentally, it provides a potential competi￾tive advantage to hold on to the “trade secrets” by allowing superior 
preparation and by keeping the competitive field smaller. What impact 
do these societal views and practices have on an individual?
The Impact of Societal Views on Mindset
Awareness of the societal factors discussed earlier in the chapter is 
important for understanding high performers and success as it is gen￾erally defined. It is understandable to wonder whether the overall soci￾etal view trickles down to the individual level to any significant degree. 
As with most matters of substance, the answer is “it is complicated.” 
It is less likely that someone will place artificial ceilings on themselves 
in the most ideal of circumstances – adequate financial resources, 
interested or knowledgeable parents, access to great facilities, access to 
great coaches/educators, and similar advantages. As with many things 
experienced by the average person, these folks would be spared many 
of the disadvantages of life. However, the collective societal view of 
artificial performance ceilings can have a tremendous impact for most 
of us, resulting in a wide variety of outcomes.Artificial Ceilings: This is Where I Top Out 59
Understandably, the societal factors described above resulted in 
many performers internalizing the message that they are not capable 
of achieving success. Such internalization had a tremendous impact 
on the lens through which these individuals viewed their perform￾ance ceilings. Consider Carson, a student at a rural high school, who 
is experiencing difficulty with one of his mathematics classes, viewing 
himself as “not a math person” who will never be able to grasp the 
concepts. Because of this view, Carson never makes an earnest attempt 
to learn the material. The situation was dire enough that a concerned 
teacher offered additional tutoring during Carson’s dedicated study 
hour to help get things back on track. Believing that any additional 
effort was pointless, Carson ghosted the teacher and snuck out to join 
his friends in the parking lot instead. This decision results in a self￾fulfilling prophecy, as Carson continues to both do poorly in the math￾ematics class and see himself as being bad at math. While Carson’s 
story represents a single example, it captures the difficulty of getting 
someone to engage in activities to improve their performance when 
they have set artificially low ceilings on their performance and do not 
believe they can improve regardless of their preparation.
Recall from Chapter 1 that Stanford University’s Carol Dweck coined 
the terms “fixed” and “growth” mindset while investigating the views 
one might hold about their own abilities (e.g., Dweck, 2006). Someone 
adopting a fixed mindset believe that they possess a given level of ability 
in an area and that they will be unable to move beyond that level. This 
view stands in contrast with a growth mindset, a viewpoint that arbi￾trary limits on performance are a fallacy, and one can always enhance 
their performance over time by taking appropriate steps.
Among Dweck’s noteworthy findings were that, relative to those 
with a growth view, individuals possessing a fixed view were less likely 
to be comfortable with novel tasks or situations, exhibited less willing￾ness to attempt challenging tasks, and were less willing to stay with a 
task following difficulties or failures. These tendencies were identified 
in children (Dweck & Leggett, 1988) and last into adulthood (Murphy 
& Dweck, 2010). It also appears that the view one holds is likely handed 
down by parents (Haimovitz & Dweck, 2016). In particular, parents 
who have a strong aversion to failure tend to focus on a child’s per￾formance rather than the possible lessons to be learned and/or per￾formance improvements that could be made when things go wrong. 60 Artificial Ceilings: This is Where I Top Out
This hyper-focus on the performance aspect over possible learning 
opportunities can understandably lead children to also over-emphasize 
the performance component and adopt a fixed view of performance. 
To simplify the point – the children presumably come to believe that 
if growth and learning were the important parts of developing skills, 
then the parents would not be freaking out when things did not go well.
This transfer of mindset from parents to children can occur both 
implicitly, such as the example in the preceding paragraph, or expli￾citly, via the parent mentioning limitations directly. Perhaps influenced 
by the societal view, parents can have a tremendous impact when they 
place artificial ceilings on their children’s potential by making limiting 
statements about the child. The potentially damaging statements are 
distinct from the practice of identifying what someone is not doing well 
(Chapter 10) or constructive feedback on performance to help improve 
(Chapter 14) – these are the possible learning opportunities described 
earlier. Rather, these potentially harmful statements are about the 
child themselves, and/or possibly the end results of performance (e.g., 
“Welp, you just are not a math person”). This dynamic potentially can 
be exacerbated when the parent has little experience in a domain, such 
as a nonathlete parent of an athlete or a parent of a first-generation 
college student.
Not Seeing Possibilities
A storm with hurricane level winds came through my current hometown 
and did considerable damage. There were at least six downed trees on 
my property as a result. Additionally, fallen limbs were scattered about 
and it looked as if someone had emptied giant matchboxes across my 
yard. It was quite a mess. I invested in a quality chainsaw and began 
sectioning the fallen trees for removal. Once that initial task was com￾plete, the task of picking up the limbs commenced. It was arguably a 
more difficult task than cutting up the fallen trees because it felt endless. 
Eventually, it seemed as if the end was within reach, and I would be 
able to move on to another chore. However, it became obvious that 
there were almost as many medium and small limbs to remove once 
the largest, most obvious ones were cleared. It was fascinating to me 
was that I truly had not realized that the additional layer of medium Artificial Ceilings: This is Where I Top Out 61
and small limbs was there until the larger ones had been removed. This 
all happened while the planning of this book was in full force, and 
the parallels to the themes of the book immediately stood out. First, 
it reminded me that we often do not see the possibilities available to 
us, even when those opportunities are sometimes in plain sight. The 
second parallel is that sometimes it takes putting in a certain amount 
of effort to reach a given benchmark before we can psychologically 
see, or even be able to work on, the finer details.
This limitation can be exacerbated by being a first-generation 
anything. It is often a family member or trusted family friend that 
introduces one to a domain. A coach or teacher might take the reins 
following the introduction, but family members and friends often have 
some grasp of what one needs to do to get better, especially at these 
earliest stages. These folks often provide the primary or secondary 
guidance to get one well on their way. This can be a student attempting 
to qualify for a spelling bee, join a youth bowling league, play chess, 
or any other pursuit. The lack of more highly skilled guidance might 
hinder progress and ultimately feed into the idea of a fixed mindset –
I guess I am just not good at X.
Thankfully, the difficulties of being a first-generation college stu￾dent have garnered a good deal of attention. While it is true that one 
has already navigated a minefield of unknowns if they are enrolled in 
college, being unaware of possibilities can hinder someone well before 
reaching college enrollment. For example, a student could miss out on 
preparatory classes or opportunities to strengthen their chances to gain 
admission to college. While it is less likely to occur in the age of social 
media, an older sibling who is off the mark in understanding even 
the types of majors that could be pursued could really sideline their 
younger brother hoping to find the right college. The subset of norms 
for most domains take time to learn and learning them is enhanced by 
having someone capable of showing you the proverbial ropes.
An unfortunate consequence of being a first-generation college 
student is that the feeling of being out of place or inferior is a diffi￾cult one to overcome. We dedicated the entire preceding chapter, 
Chapter 3, to the phenomenon known as impostor syndrome, which is 
the feeling that one is a fraud regardless of accomplishments. Being a 
first-generation college student is one of the factors that increases the 
likelihood of experiencing impostor syndrome, as well as magnifying 62 Artificial Ceilings: This is Where I Top Out
the feeling of stress when experiencing it (Holden et al., 2024). A first￾generation college student might always battle the irrational fear of 
being “found out.”
As we will discuss in Chapter 10 (acknowledging what you are not 
doing well) and Chapter 14 (seeking out feedback and criticism), these 
same folks can provide critical feedback on how well one is progressing. 
It is easy to overestimate, or underestimate, how well one will do at a 
given task – the now popularized Dunning-Kruger effect that we dis￾cuss in Chapter 10. Dr. Kevin Eva, a medical education scholar, noted 
that as much effort should be made to keep in place the qualified folks 
who do not yet recognize their potential as there is with correcting the 
erroneous perceptions of being good at something by the less capable. 
This certainly would apply here and to our discussion of highly capable 
first-generation students.
As a final consideration regarding seeing possibilities: it is not the fault 
of the person who is unable to see the possibilities. Again, the degree 
to which you do not see the possibilities can be greatly impacted by 
being a first-generation participant in something. The common feeling 
of being seated at a formal dinner and being unsure of which utensil 
to use, or the appropriate way to eat something, is something that you 
likely have experienced. Imagine having this feeling with almost every￾thing you encounter. This is often the experience when you are the first 
in your family to enter college or a particular field. Disproportionate 
energy spent on figuring out the environment, while not standing out 
like a sore thumb, likely decreases the opportunities to recognize the 
possibilities available to you. We now share a potentially unexpected 
lens through which to view failure.
Failing to Win
What comes to mind when you think of “failure?” The concept of 
failure is one that is frequently misunderstood. Many of you might 
have imagined a desolate, miserable existence. Others might have 
envisioned a specific event that was particularly memorable, or some￾thing along the lines of the time you cost your team the win. While 
these conceptualizations certainly fall under the umbrella of the 
term, failure is an integral part of the process of getting better. You Artificial Ceilings: This is Where I Top Out 63
might make 300 attempts at something before finally getting it right 
or obtaining the desired outcome. The first 299 will be considered 
failures. But this is nothing more than the process of reaching your 
goals or the standards you have set for yourself. Someone giving up on 
a domain on the 79th attempt might rightfully consider it a failure in 
the way that the term is commonly used if it ultimately results in them 
ending their pursuit of their goals.
However, what if we reframed failure and what it means for you? 
As with the other topics of this chapter, we can consider the impact 
failure might have on your potential based on how it influences what 
you pursue, and this influence is dependent on your mindset. Someone 
with a fixed mindset will see failure as an embarrassment to be avoided 
because it will potentially expose their “limitations.” In such cases, 
multiple failures will suggest that someone has reached the ceiling of 
their supposed limited abilities. In these cases, the person will pass on 
opportunities for which multiple tries (and failures) might be neces￾sary. In contrast, someone with a growth mindset would focus on the 
process and would not see multiple tries (and failures) to be problem￾atic (Murphy & Dweck, 2010). This is because someone with a growth 
mindset would generally believe that failure would not expose any 
existing limitations of their abilities.
We encourage you to adopt the approach of reframing failure as 
part of the process, regardless of your perspective on a fixed versus 
growth mindset or even if you are dismissive of the concept of 
mindset altogether. The bottom line is that you will not progress at 
anything, much less get really good, unless you experience failure 
repeatedly. Embrace the opportunity to use things that do not go as 
planned as a way to seek improvement. Failure in the sense that it is 
traditionally viewed occurs when this process is not allowed to play out 
and you drop a pursuit prematurely. We now consider a related consid￾eration – not being afraid to attempt something new.
Not Being Afraid to Try
An important message gleaned from our interviews with high 
performers is that one should not be afraid to try something. This 
initially might sound like generic and overused advice repeated by 64 Artificial Ceilings: This is Where I Top Out
self-help types ad nauseum. This is understandable. However, consider 
everything that we discussed above in this chapter – Galton’s lingering 
influence, mindset, and self-imposing artificially low performance 
ceilings. The combination of these and other factors interacting in 
both major and subtle ways ultimately determines the trajectory of 
a given individual’s efforts. Who knows what would have happened 
had Carson, our high school student struggling with math, taken the 
teacher’s offer of additional assistance and spent additional time on his 
own working to improve? The researchers David Yeager and Gregory 
Walton stated it eloquently when they described the interplay of a 
myriad of factors allowing an object weighing several tons to achieve 
lift and fly. As noted in their quote below, subtle changes to any one 
component can have noticeable impacts on outcome:
One reason planes fly is because their wings are sculpted to create 
an aerodynamic force (“lift”) that elevates the plane. It is nat￾ural to wonder how a small change in the shape of a wing could 
make a heavy object fly. Basic laboratory research helps explain 
the principles of air flow and shows that the shape and position 
of wings cause air to flow faster below them than above them, 
lifting a plane beyond what might seem possible. In a similar 
way, hidden yet powerful psychological forces, also investigated 
through basic science, can raise student achievement. An engineer 
uses theories of fluid dynamics to fine-tune a wing, which in the 
context of other factors, makes a plane fly. Analogously, a social￾psychological perspective uses basic theory and research to iden￾tify educationally important psychological processes and then 
subtly alters these processes in a complex academic environment 
to raise performance (Yeager & Walton, 2011, p. 274).
This is not unlike the shift that occurred once the upper limits of 
swimming performance changed because of the temporary swim￾suit use described in an earlier section of this chapter. The swimmers 
recalibrated their perception of performance limits based on what 
had changed in relation to finishing times. You currently might have 
a mental barrier regarding a performance ceiling of which you are 
unaware. To reiterate the point, sometimes something seems impos￾sible until it simply does not. This change in perception can occur at 
the broader societal level; other times it occurs at the individual level.Artificial Ceilings: This is Where I Top Out 65
Once the swimmers adjusted their idea of what was possible, they 
consistently elevated their performance to a new level once the new 
bar had been set. It is worth repeating – it was the idea that changed. 
Other changes can be more subtle – a student improving academic 
performance or a bowler improving their game. Hopefully, the situ￾ation with the swimmers compels you to reevaluate any performance 
ceilings you have placed on yourself. Do not self-impose artificial 
limits, and do not be afraid to try something new because of perceived 
limitations.
Let us consider a few examples of real-world high performers not 
being afraid to try something new. Thomas Estrada has always loved 
to draw. He was a family man working in pest control when he got the 
opportunity to work in the film industry. Thomas has worked on major 
motion pictures for studios such as Disney and DreamWorks. As impres￾sive as that is, the reason we are discussing his career in this section is 
that Thomas entered the career when everything was drawn manually 
by hand. The animation process changed tremendously several years 
into his career when computer-generated animation became prevalent 
in the industry. Thomas loved what he did and did not want to change 
careers despite the changes in production processes. The problem 
was that he did not know how to operate a computer at all. Seriously, 
Thomas did not even know how to set up his password because he was 
unfamiliar with the character part of the term, “special characters.” 
Therefore, Thomas immediately went back to the pest control job and 
is doing very well.
As you might have suspected given the title of the subsection, that 
last sentence is not true. Thomas was understandably anxious at news 
of the transition. He considered finding a new career or at least a new 
job that would allow him to continue producing hand-drawn art. It 
was in those moments of reflection that Thomas had a moment of 
clarity – he realized that he already had relearned his art over and over 
throughout the years. He decided to view it as simply learning a new 
technique for producing art – and learn it, he did. Thomas has remained 
a respected feature film illustrator using the oft-changing techniques of 
the industry. This outlook of not placing artificial ceilings on himself 
continued to serve him well as the field continued to advance. Because 
of this initial leap into learning computer animation, Thomas viewed 
each new advancement in the industry as learnable. Thomas adds that 66 Artificial Ceilings: This is Where I Top Out
this initial step was a “big deal,” and the skills he honed along the way 
led to opportunities to also work in the video game industry.
Justin Causey, a manager in the music/entertainment and artist 
industries, went a step further to say that he embraces being uncom￾fortable. Causey, as he likes to be called, has worked in a variety of 
areas ranging from (the aforementioned) artist management to film 
production, even having designed a shoe for Nike. He shared that he 
makes it a practice to be ready to learn something new and figure 
out “How can I do this?” When someone reaches out to him with 
something new, Causey takes the leap, knowing the potential result 
is worth the attempt. This approach is an excellent example of one 
not artificially limiting their performance ceilings and missing out on 
opportunities.
Talon Beeson is an actor who experienced this firsthand when the 
stage manager of a play in which he was performing worked at a voice￾over studio. After attending a show from their production, the owner 
of the voice studio was impressed with Talon’s voice and suggested 
that he give voice-over a try. At the time, he did not even know that 
voice-over work was a thing. The owner of the studio offered to make 
a demo reel in exchange for Talon creating a website for the studio. 
The issue was Talon did not know how to create a website, but he was 
undeterred: “I said, ‘yes,’ anyway, and taught myself HTML over the 
weekend and built her website.” Within a month, this exchange of a 
website for a demo tape led to a national spokesperson booking lasting 
two years.
Chapter Summary
In this chapter, we discussed how Sir Francis Galton’s view of inherent 
performance ceilings persists and can cause us to place artificial per￾formance ceilings on ourselves. A combination of such societal views 
of performance ceilings and not believing that one can improve by 
putting in the work can lead to many of us ultimately limiting what 
we accomplish. Such limitations are illustrated by a story of how a 
specialized type of fabric recalibrated what was thought to be possible 
for maximum human performance, and how the higher performance Artificial Ceilings: This is Where I Top Out 67
limits remained after the fabric was banned. These artificial limits we 
place on ourselves can lead to the pitfalls of not being able to see pos￾sibilities available to us, the fear of making mistakes, and not viewing 
mistakes as an opportunity to learn. Finally, we presented the way in 
which these factors can lead us to be afraid of even taking the first step 
within a domain.© 2023–2024 Expert Performance International Collective (EPIC). This exercise is copyrighted by Kevin Harris and the Expert 
Performance International Collective (EPIC). All rights reserved. Used with permission.
68 Artificial Ceilings: This is Where I Top Out
I Did That?
Chapter 4: Artificial Ceilings: This is Where I Top Out
This exercise will help you identify some instances when you 
accomplished more than you thought possible, as well as some of your 
current fears about meeting your goals. In the first part of the exercise, 
you will be asked to write down at least one example of a time when 
you accomplished way more than you thought possible. The second 
part will ask you to identify some potentially frightening next steps.
1. Please provide at least one example of a time you accomplished 
something that surprised/shocked you.© 2023–2024 Expert Performance International Collective (EPIC). This exercise is copyrighted by Kevin Harris and the Expert 
Performance International Collective (EPIC). All rights reserved. Used with permission.
Artificial Ceilings: This is Where I Top Out 69
2. What are some next steps that either frighten you or feel out 
of reach?70 Artificial Ceilings: This is Where I Top Out
References
Campitelli, G., & Gobet, F. (2011). Deliberate practice: Necessary but not suf￾ficient. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 20(5), 280–285. https://
doi.org/10.1177/0963721411421922.
Davis, S. (2015, June). How Stephen Curry became the best shooter in the 
NBA. Business Insider. Retrieved from http://business insider.com/.
Dweck, C.S. (2006). Mindset. Random House.
Dweck, C.S., & Leggett, E.L. (1988). A social-cognitive approach to motiv￾ation and personality. Psychological Review, 95, 256–273. https://psycnet.
apa.org/doi/10.1037/0033-295X.95.2.256.
Fadde, P.J. (2009). Expertise-based training: Getting more learners over the 
bar in less time. Technology, Instruction, Cognition and Learning, 7, 171–197.
Fadde, P.J. (2016). Instructional design for accelerated macrocognitive 
expertise in the baseball workplace. Frontiers in Psychology, 7. https://doi.
org/10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00292.
Haimovitz, K., & Dweck, C.S. (2016). Parents’ views of failure predict 
children’s fixed and growth intelligence mind-sets. Psychological Science, 
27(6), 859–869. https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797616639727.
Holden, C.L., Wright, L.E., Herring, A.M., & Sims, P.L. (2024). Imposter 
syndrome among first-and continuing-generation college students: The 
roles of perfectionism and stress. Journal of College Student Retention: Research, 
Theory & Practice, 25(4), 726–740. https://doi.org/10.1177/1521025121
1019379.
Krüger, A. (2006). Training theory and why Roger Bannister was the first four￾minute miler. Sport in History, 26(2), 305–324.
Miller, S.D., Chow, D., Wampold, B.E., Hubble, M.A., Del Re, A.C., Maeschalck, 
C., & Bargmann, S. (2020). To be or not to be (an expert)? Revisiting the 
role of deliberate practice in improving performance. High Ability Studies, 
31(1), 5–15. https://doi.org/10.1080/13598139.2018.1519410.
Murphy, M.C., & Dweck, C.S. (2010). A culture of genius: How an 
organization’s lay theory shapes people’s cognition, affect, and behavior. 
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 36(3), 283–296. https://doi.org/
10.1177/0146167209347380.
Robinson, M.A. (2022). Glimpsing the impossible: How artificially enhanced 
targets improve elite performance. Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology, 
44(3), 177–188. https://doi.org/10.1123/jsep.2021-0034.Artificial Ceilings: This is Where I Top Out 71
Ward, P., Suss, J., & Basevitch, I. (2009). Expertise and expert performance￾based training (ExPerT) in complex domains. Technology, Instruction, 
Cognition and Learning, 7, 121–146.
Yeager, D.S., & Walton, G.M. (2011). Social-psychological interventions in 
education: They’re not magic. Review of Educational Research, 81(2), 267–
301. https://doi.org/10.3102/0034654311405999.DOI: 10.4324/9781003377542-5
Giving Up
I Should Just Quit
I don’t think I would be an artist without the drive that I got. The drive 
never stops, and the want to create never stops. I don’t think I’ve ever 
been in a position where I’ve gone, “I want to quit.” I know I’ve been 
in a position where I’ve gone, “This is really hard, and I wish someone 
would help me.”
– Katie Cole, touring member of The Smashing Pumpkins and 
singer-songwriter
I feel like there’s times almost every round where everybody’s ready to 
quit. It’s, you know, it’s kind of one of those things – you don’t ever say 
it or put it on the table as an option. It’s the same kind of mentality that 
successful marriages have of never putting divorce on the table – never 
putting it on the table as an option to even be able to turn to.
– Taylor Hull, Formula Drift professional driver
From Co-author Emily:
I had just finished my master’s degree program and successfully 
defended my thesis with no revisions. When I entered my doc￾toral program, I was confident I would do just as well. About 
a year and a half into the program, I submitted my dissertation 
prospectus to my PhD. supervisor. It was returned with full pages 
marked with red Xs. The voices in my head were telling me to give 
up, that I was not cut out for this if I could not successfully write 
5Giving Up: I Should Just Quit 73
a dissertation prospectus. My colleagues and family members 
encouraged me to not give up. I decided to work even harder 
and sought help with my writing and feedback from previous 
professors I trusted. I then submitted another draft, and this time, 
there were only a scattering of red marks. Had I listened to those 
voices telling me to quit, I would not have graduated with honors 
and become a successful researcher and professor.
We have likely all felt like Emily at some point. It is human nature to feel 
like giving up, at least sometimes, when something goes wrong. Giving 
up can feel much easier than facing the challenge head on. Maybe we 
determine that sticking with it just is not worth it. You might reach a 
level of performance and decide that you are okay with where things 
stand (recall the idea of satisficing discussed in Chapter 2).
We might also be afraid that our limitations will be revealed if we stay 
with something we are struggling with. As we discussed in Chapter 1, 
this consideration comes from the influence of a fixed mindset, the 
opposite of a growth mindset. Someone with a fixed mindset believes 
that they have a given amount of ability and that this level is mostly, 
or always, stable (e.g., Dweck, 2006). For example, someone may 
believe that preparing for the SAT is pointless because their score 
would be the same regardless of their level of preparation. This view 
of personal limitations also feeds into impostor syndrome (discussed 
in Chapter 3). Someone with a fixed mindset and/or struggling with 
impostor syndrome might give up so they are not perceived by those 
around them as a failure.
Such considerations are common, and impostor syndrome is a valid 
concern with very real consequences. However, as we proposed in 
Chapter 1, “you typically must work hard at the right things for some 
time in order to get really good at something.” Time is a key compo￾nent of this statement in our conversation. Getting really good at 
something almost always takes significant time. To be clear, we are 
not talking about only getting good enough to win the Thursday night 
bowling league at the local bowling alley. While anyone consistently pla￾cing near the top of the rankings likely has invested a notable amount 
of time, someone could feasibly become good enough to rank locally 
after a brief stint. Objectively, however, this would depend on the level 
of competition. As Anders Ericsson and colleagues noted (Ericsson, 74 Giving Up: I Should Just Quit
Roring, & Nandagopal, 2007), we often reach a level of stable per￾formance that allows us to perform well enough to maintain in a given 
area. An example of this would be golfing well enough to join your 
coworkers for a friendly game or playing table-tennis well enough to 
complete a game with friends. In these situations, you can easily get a 
false sense of how well you are doing. Being truly competitive at some￾thing almost always requires a much more intensive time investment.
More skeptical readers may think that the need to devote this extra 
time is not the case with the 99.9th percentile of performers. The argu￾ment could be that this 0.1 percent of performers might have natural 
abilities that preclude such time requirements. This may be the case. 
However, two considerations must be mentioned. The first is that we 
have no good way of separating the effort and time that the performers 
in the top 0.1 percent put in from their natural abilities. It is unlikely that 
someone with tremendous potential reached it without putting in work 
to develop it – athletes train, scholars think and write, entrepreneurs 
analyze and brainstorm, and so on. If they were lucky, some of them 
grew up in a household with parents blazing the trail – a musician, 
thinker, or athlete whose parents were good at each respective pursuit.
The second consideration is that, by default, there are not very many 
of us falling within the 99.9th percentile. That’s inherently built into the 
concept. Broken down, the rate means that one person out of a thou￾sand for whatever is being considered will be in the top 0.1 percent (1/
1000). So, when you attend a sporting event or concert at the closest 
venue with a capacity of 50,000, you can expect there to be roughly 50 
attendees with IQs in the top 0.1%. Cities with a population of around 
500,000 will have 500 residents in the top 0.1%. Such rough estimates 
are strictly statistical considerations, but they illustrate how few of us 
would fall into this designation.
However, it is likely that the top 15.8 percent (the above-average 
threshold we will discuss in Chapter 10) of any domain will be the floor 
of your competition. In a city of 500,000, that equates to 79,000: at 
our 50,000-person event, that is almost 8,000. One of the points we 
are making is that even if the above-average performers are considered 
to have greater “natural abilities” than the average and below-average 
performers, the most common competitors for high-level performers 
likely will fall within the above-average group of performers. Their 
potential ability to accelerate the benefit from their training will Giving Up: I Should Just Quit 75
be similar to other competitors at their level. We propose that the 
statement, “you typically must work hard at the right things for some 
time in order to get really good at something” holds.
Thus, we have maintained that putting in time is still of great 
importance, and this means that you will have to stick with something 
over time to be really good, which is the opposite of giving up. The 
remainder of this chapter will explore some of the research on not 
giving up. We primarily explore the work on perseverance, grit, and 
resilience. We then revisit some of the considerations first introduced 
in previous chapters on how aspiring performers can get derailed, 
including societal views of limited performance ceilings, lack of 
resources, and lack of awareness of techniques. Next, we explore the 
role goals might play in helping you not give up as easily. We discuss 
the concept of “fake it ‘til you make it” and how the high performers 
we interviewed view the phrase. Finally, we introduce and share our 
thoughts on what is known as the sunken-cost fallacy.
Feeling Like Giving Up?
James was enrolled in one of the hardest courses he had ever taken. 
Up to this point, he had received A grades in all of his classes, but 
not in this class. He started doubting himself, and his self-belief kept 
diminishing with each assignment. These experiences led to a fear 
of failure and negative thinking, and he was losing patience with the 
assignments. He was ready to give up and accept that he would fail the 
course. However, when James shared his frustrations with friends, they 
told him to stop being overly critical of himself and focus on the task 
at hand. They also reminded James to focus on his accomplishments 
rather than his failures. While all of this was not easy for James to 
do, it did help. Once he changed his thinking about himself and the 
course, he saw it as a challenge to do better. In essence, his fear of 
failure became a motivator.
The road to success typically is not linear. Rather, it is a winding road 
with different potential setbacks at each curve. You might encounter a 
stretch that surprises you because it is curvy when you did not expect 
it, or you may be surprised at the number of curves you must navigate. 
Similarly, you might encounter a curve that seems to be particularly 76 Giving Up: I Should Just Quit
long. Such experiences with these metaphorical curves will sometimes 
test your patience. When we are dealing with difficult stretches, it is 
easy to forget what could lie ahead – progress towards completing our 
goal. Giving up might seem like the best option at times, but if you 
persevere and complete your goal, you will be proud of overcoming 
the obstacles to success. James passed the course with a B, and while 
it ended his A streak, he was very proud of the fact he did not give up.
Research into (not) giving up falls under labels such as perseverance, 
grit, and resilience, and it is extensive. Feeling as if perseverance was 
understudied as a predictor of performance (Duckworth & Quinn, 
2009), Dr. Angela Duckworth and colleagues proposed the concept of 
“grit,” and conceptualized it as perseverance, passion, and consistency 
of pursuing goals (Duckworth et al., 2007). Specifically, Dr. Duckworth 
and her colleagues described the concept: “Grit overlaps with 
achievement aspects of conscientiousness but differs in its emphasis 
on long-term stamina rather than short-term intensity. The gritty indi￾vidual not only finishes tasks at hand but pursues a given aim over 
years (p. 1089).” Think of it as a combination of being a “go getter” 
with “stick-with-it”-ness.
The concept of grit is one way psychologists attempt to explain 
why two people of equal abilities, such as athleticism or intelligence, 
may have different levels of accomplishment. For example, one indi￾vidual may have grit that keeps them going and helps them to perse￾vere over the obstacles they face, while the other individual does not 
have this grittiness. Pertinent to the topic of giving up, Duckworth and 
colleagues (2007) state that those with grit have the stamina to keep 
going no matter what is thrown their way; those low in, or lacking, 
grit, will change their course or give up completely when curveballs 
are thrown their way. Because of this, grit is linked with leadership and 
high achievements.
The concept of grit has been the subject of a great deal of spirited 
debate since being proposed by Duckworth and her colleagues. While 
the concept has been effective in predicting retention in extremely 
demanding domains, including the United States Military Academy 
(Duckworth et al., 2007), there was a question as to how much overlap 
there was with existing measures such as conscientiousness and per￾severance (e.g., Credé, Tynan, & Harms, 2017). Other scholars (e.g., 
Jachimowicz et al., 2018) proposed that passion was an underemphasized Giving Up: I Should Just Quit 77
piece for understanding grit and must also be considered to best pre￾dict who will stick with something. Conversations about grit – what 
it is and what it can predict – ultimately became quite complex. The 
sheer number of differing interpretations and (mis)uses of the concept 
even led Duckworth to request a pause on claims related to grit until 
the issues to be resolved could be better organized (e.g., Dahl, 2016).
The critical point is that all of these terms allude to continuing with 
the pursuit – not giving up. While the intricacies of these encompassing 
terms will continue to be hashed out, the bottom line is that they all 
are intended to explain/describe the act of sticking with something. 
For our purposes, these broad considerations are inconsequential 
(or at least secondary) to the causes of why you choose to not give 
up – or the respective labels. In other words, we are not concerned 
with whether it is labelled grittiness, perseverance, resiliency, or some￾thing else. Although such distinctions are important for researchers to 
explore, the fact that you did not give up is our most important con￾sideration. Let us revisit some of the obstacles introduced in the pre￾ceding chapters and how they might contribute to someone giving up 
on a pursuit.
“I do not have what it takes” – The Impact of Default 
Societal Beliefs
As we have mentioned in preceding chapters, Sir Francis Galton’s 
views on individual performance ceilings heavily influenced our soci￾etal view of high performers. Adherents of such a view proposed that 
these performance ceilings were determined by inherent abilities, and 
such abilities could be improved only to a level predetermined by the 
performer’s natural endowment. This view does not seem unreason￾able on the surface, and we all have human limitations. This point 
can be considered to fall firmly on the “nature” side of the nature 
versus nurture continuum. These views directly influenced societal 
perceptions and actions for over a century.
Thus, it would be reasonable to attribute these views to someone 
giving up on a domain. If you are struggling to develop your football 
skills and have bought into the dominant societal view that Premier 
League players are there strictly because of natural ability, then you 78 Giving Up: I Should Just Quit
might assess your own struggles and determine that you will never 
reach that level. For the readers who potentially just took issue with 
making the nature versus nurture spectrum a dichotomy in the pre￾ceding statement – that was the point! The default societal view was 
creating a dichotomy all along: one that favored the nature side of the 
spectrum. It was so ingrained in the societal view that initial attempts 
to highlight the incredible work involved in being a top-level performer 
were jarring.1
 Thus, it is understandable that someone struggling 
within a domain would determine that they do not have what it takes 
to succeed and ultimately give up.
“I never have what I need” – The Impact of Lack of 
Resources
One of the frustrating parts of being a broke college student is needing 
auto repairs. This is especially true when the vehicle in question 
is likely on its last leg, and it is your primary means of transporta￾tion away from campus. It can seem as if there are a never-ending 
stream of repairs. We are sure many of you can relate to this experi￾ence – the need for ongoing resources to keep something going. This 
is particularly stressful if you have limited financial means. It also can 
be the reason that you choose to drop out of a pursuit. Compared 
to the other considerations, the aspect of resources available to us 
is more difficult to control as the amount we earn or have available 
varies widely. Our pursuits also require differing amounts of time 
investments depending on the domain. The best we can do here is to 
remind you of the other factors we cover in the book, such as having 
a growth mindset and setting achievable goals, which hopefully will 
increase the likelihood of being successful in a domain. If you stick 
with your pursuit long enough, there is a good chance something will 
break your way.
Obviously, there are no guarantees, but we have seen examples 
throughout the book of smaller opportunities leading to larger ones. 
These opportunities can make the difference. We address the con￾versation about not sticking with something for too long because you 
have already invested significant time and resources, a concept labelled 
the sunken cost fallacy, later in the chapter. However, we now discuss Giving Up: I Should Just Quit 79
the potential impact of the lack of awareness of proper/appropriate 
techniques on choosing to give up.
“I keep being out of position” – The Impact of Lack of 
Awareness of Techniques
“I don’t understand,” I told my older sister, who was attempting to 
help me with math homework. I was very young, so the homework 
was elementary – the kind with pictures that look as if they belonged 
in a coloring book. We were working on multiplication, and it was 
not immediately clicking for me. Perhaps realizing that everything had 
been presented abstractly thus far, my sister decided to take a different 
approach. She went to the kitchen and gathered some objects – a 
spatula, a whisk, and the like. She put the items on the surface of 
our makeshift table, one of those old-fashioned wood console stereo 
systems. Placing three items on the top of the stereo, she asked me, 
“How many items are on the stereo?” I accurately responded that there 
were three items. Then, she did something that made the difference in 
my understanding. She placed another set of three of kitchen items on 
the stereo and asked me how many items were there. Though growing 
slightly frustrated with both my own struggles and the time my sister’s 
demonstration was taking to unfold, I responded with exasperation 
that there were now six items on the stereo. And, it happened – it all 
made sense. She pointed out that six was the answer to the multiplica￾tion problem of 2 x 3 and then explained that the three items in each 
of the two piles she had created represented the “3” in the multipli￾cation problem and that the two piles represented the “2.” Then, she 
threw on the secret sauce – she pointed out how we could reverse these 
designations by making three piles of two items each. I got it! I under￾stood multiplication conceptually. In the long term, that turned out to 
be a technique and a situation that provided me with a level of confi￾dence that stopped me fearing math at the level that many do. Granted, 
I simply could have memorized the multiplication charts, but now 
I understood the concept at a very young age. It set me up for success.
We have discussed in earlier chapters how important an awareness 
of the techniques used by the best performers can be. These are often 
identified by researchers and coaches attempting to identify the activities 80 Giving Up: I Should Just Quit
the performer engaged in along their path in order to extract and share 
this information (Harris & Eccles, 2021). Having these techniques can 
be extremely valuable for both trainers and trainees. Techniques are 
vetted, and the ones resulting in performance gains are retained. The 
techniques not resulting in performance gains are discarded.
Performers might also develop their own techniques as they navigate 
domain requirements. However, this typically requires that the per￾former is already familiar with common techniques allowing them to 
reach a given level of performance. While this approach can be useful 
if the performer is able to identify techniques that improve perform￾ance, using the techniques already deemed successful might end up 
saving valuable training time. Knowledge of established techniques can 
come from the extraction processes mentioned earlier in this section 
or by informal channels from the performers themselves: for example, 
you have a conversation with them, and they are willing to reveal their 
techniques. However, as we discuss in Chapter 4, there are competi￾tive reasons for performers not always sharing their techniques. It also 
is possible that these casual exchanges are attempts to sabotage your 
development (again, giving them a competitive edge).
Nevertheless, awareness of improvement techniques is critical. It 
is rare that someone will improve without some basic knowledge of 
what to do. Even my earlier example of learning to play tennis with 
limited resources, playing at a public park with a discarded, outdated 
tennis racquet, was supplemented by the poster of proper technique. 
My friend and I had to “wing it” and never really knew if we were doing 
it correctly, but we did have the picture with a description of what it 
should look like. The bottom line is that limited or no awareness of 
the techniques required for a domain will make it more likely that you 
give up.
“I didn’t make it to 12, but I got 11” – The Potential 
Impact of Goals on Not Giving Up
Goal setting and whether we end up giving up can go hand in hand. On 
one hand, if we accomplish a goal, we feel satisfied, and we likely will 
move on to the next goal. On the other hand, if we fail at accomplishing 
a goal, we may get stuck in a negative frame of mind where giving up Giving Up: I Should Just Quit 81
feels like the only way out. We discuss the process and benefits of goal 
setting extensively in Chapter 9. The discussion in Chapter 9 includes 
the importance of feedback in assessing goal progress, the different 
types of goals, and the ongoing discussion as to the benefit of goal￾setting. For the current chapter, we will discuss goal-setting through 
the lens of how it has been used for some time.
One way we can attempt to help prevent giving up on a pursuit 
is to create small goals leading to the larger, final goal and outcome. 
Dr. Edwin Locke and Gary Latham are the pioneers of goal-setting 
theory, which defines a goal as something we are consciously trying to 
do (Locke & Latham, 1990), and they spent decades studying the impact 
of goals and goal-setting on performance (e.g., Locke & Latham, 2002). 
You are making goals almost nonstop, even when you do not recognize 
it – brushing your teeth, making a sandwich for lunch, and stopping to 
refuel are all goals. We often do not recognize them as such because 
they are typically achievable within a short timeframe. You are likely to 
only recognize them as goals when something goes awry. For example, 
you run out of toothpaste on a holiday and cannot find a store, or you 
cannot get to the place you had calculated being able to reach because 
you are out of fuel. Are you kidding me?!
Suddenly, these typically simple tasks are recognized as goals because 
you now have to figure out how to reach them while working around 
an unexpected obstacle. Granted, most of us are talking about goals 
of a different type when we mention our goals, but it is important to 
recognize the scope of the term. Let us now consider goals in the trad￾itional sense and how goal-setting might help us stay with our pursuits.
One way is that goals often increase motivation, especially when 
smaller steps – goals along the way – are successfully completed while 
working toward a larger goal, sometimes the end result. However, 
goals should have specific features to increase the likelihood that they 
strengthen our performance (Locke & Latham, 1990). Goals should be 
specific, be difficult but attainable, and have deadlines. Examples of this 
would be Jamal writing at least 20 pages of his dissertation by the end 
of every week for 11 months, or Kimberly increasing her running dis￾tance by one mile every month until she reaches the 26.2 miles (42.195 
km) required to run a marathon. Again, we dig more deeply into the 
process of goal setting in Chapter 9. For now, we will mention that it 
can be a great feeling when we finally accomplish one of our goals! 82 Giving Up: I Should Just Quit
This sense of accomplishment can serve as motivation to continue our 
pursuits, and we likely will continue to create and work on future goals.
A Little Bit of This and a Lot of That – The Impact of 
Competing Goals
I remember standing on the stage, thinking, “A standing ovation. Wow! 
Maybe there is something to me doing this stand-up thing.” I was 
excited. Later that evening, the headlining comic who followed my per￾formance inquired whether I would be interested in becoming a full￾time stand-up comic. She offered to connect me with her management 
team. Needless to say, I was very flattered. A career in comedy had 
always been on my radar. I reveled in making my friends and classmates 
laugh throughout my childhood, and I was pretty good at doing so. 
After a debate broke out over who was the most hilarious classmate in 
sixth grade, it was ultimately resolved by a student-led vote. I came in 
as second funniest classmate. It stung a tad to not be in first place, but 
I was happy with it. My peers voted me second, after all. It would be 
over a decade before I attempted to transfer this penchant for getting 
laughs into the art of stand-up comedy on stage, when I finally made 
my debut in front of an audience after honing my set of jokes for 
months with a karaoke machine. A fellow comic who would go on 
to be a writer for NBC’s Saturday Night Live pulled me aside to tell me 
how well written my jokes were and encourage me to stick with it. So, 
when I finally got the offer to do stand-up comedy for a living while 
simultaneously being offered access to a management team, I declined.
You presumably found the conclusion of the previous scenario to be 
jarring. Why would I turn down such an opportunity? It was very diffi￾cult not to consider the potential upside of taking the offer – eventually 
performing at arenas and making feature films. However, I was within 
a couple of years of earning my doctorate and had already invested 
a tremendous amount of time in rigorous academic programs. This 
meant moving across multiple states and living on the earnings of a 
graduate student and whatever employment my wife had secured. 
I was leaning toward dedicating my time and energy to finishing my 
PhD. At least this way, I likely would be earning a consistent paycheck in 
a few years. Besides, there already had been a tremendous investment Giving Up: I Should Just Quit 83
made in pursuing the PhD. On top of that, road comics must travel 
long distances to performance venues and may only be on stage for 
an hour or less. This would obviously require significant spans of time 
away from home. And, finally, overhearing a headliner with recogniz￾able credits in the entertainment industry asking for additional gigs 
just to cover living expenses solidified my decision to decline the offer.
This example might seem counter to the message of the book. 
Specifically, why did I not take the opportunity if I had wanted to be a 
stand-up comic in the past? The short explanation is that I had already 
made significant strides toward a different goal by the time I received 
the offer to become a professional stand-up comic. I was fully immersed 
in obtaining my doctorate and knew that I could not pursue both goals. 
If anything, I felt that I had a better chance of pursuing both academia 
and comedy if I finished the doctoral program first.
This situation with competing goals illustrates how conflict can 
arise as we work toward goal attainment. Researchers have identified 
two types of conflict relevant to the current discussion: inherent con￾flict and resource conflict (Segerstorm & Nes, 2006). When creating 
goals, typically we have more than one goal we are working toward. 
Inherent conflict occurs when we are progressing toward one goal, 
which in turn, increases difficulty in attaining another. In other words, 
some things cannot happen simultaneously because of the inherent 
nature of it – think of the phrase “it is black and white.” Something 
cannot simultaneously be both black and white, and someone cannot 
be the class clown and also be the quiet one. Resource conflict, how￾ever, arises when there are limited resources to attain a specific goal. 
Any goal pursuit consuming the available resources will reduce the 
capacity available to pursue a different goal. Time spent on the road 
travelling to stand-up comedy gigs will diminish time available to be 
successful in the doctoral program or even be at home with family. 
How can these conflicts be resolved?
“I Don’t Mess With That Stuff Anymore” – 
Resolving Goal Conflicts
Ian had always dreamed of playing in football’s (soccer’s) highest level, 
The Premier League. He had been under development since he was a 84 Giving Up: I Should Just Quit
very young player. Moreover, he had performed very well on the pitch 
against the early competition he faced growing up. Unfortunately, 
Ian did not grow as tall as he had hoped. He was staying roughly the 
same size while the other players were hitting growth spurts or adding 
weight to match their newfound height. Ian was a skilled enough 
player to continue advancing, even though he was losing ground as the 
others grew taller and stronger. However, he realized it was becoming 
increasingly unlikely that he would move much higher than his current 
tier. Ian had watched players he dominated when they were younger 
become physically dominant players in their current tier and ultimately 
advance. He did not want to give up on football altogether and used his 
contacts to secure a coaching gig working with a respected head coach.
Ian’s example of pivoting his goals from being a player at the highest 
level to coaching demonstrates an idea referred to as accommoda￾tion of a goal pursuit (Brandstädter & Renner, 1990). The players who 
continued on their original path were undoubtedly presented with 
ever increasing demands required to continue to advance. Successfully 
encountering and navigating such increasing requirements can be 
referred to as assimilation in a goal pursuit. Scholars think of these 
as tendencies we demonstrate – either accommodative or assimila￾tive tendencies. With the assimilative tendency, we try to modify the 
situation to line up with our goal. In general terms, we stick with our 
initial plan/goal as much as possible and absorb (assimilate) the new 
demands as we encounter them: for example when facing speedier 
competition, we focus on improving our own overall speed or reac￾tion time. The pre-med student encountering difficult courses might 
develop new study strategies or carve out additional time for a par￾ticularly difficult class (we are looking at you, Organic Chemistry). They 
might also seek out other ways to enhance the chances of reaching 
their goals, for example, by seeking opportunities to engage in high 
impact practices to further hone their skills or fostering relationships 
with faculty who could provide coaching or helpful insight.
Pivoting to a different goal would represent the accommodative ten￾dency. This often happens when we determine our original goal is not 
realistic for us or we no longer are willing to invest in pursuing it. Ian 
disengaged from the goal of being a footballer in The Premier League 
and redirected his resources to becoming a coach. The pre-med student 
could disengage from the goal of attending medical school and change Giving Up: I Should Just Quit 85
their major to a similar subject area of interest. A more extreme pivot 
would be giving up on any pursuits related to the original goal. An 
example of an extreme pivot would be leaving the domains of football 
and academia altogether and becoming a customer service representa￾tive for a major cell phone company. No wonder this accommodation 
process has been proposed to result in disorientation and depression 
(e.g., Brandstädter & Renner, 1990). Presumably, the newly refined 
goals will be the least disruptive when they end up as close to the ori￾ginal goal as possible – Ian coaching rather than playing football or 
Kevin being able to insert humor into his lectures rather than being a 
stand-up comic.
However, the decision to pivot or abandon goals is often a lengthy 
process that unfolds over time. The scholarly work on this process was 
spearheaded by the same researcher leading the research discussed 
in the preceding paragraphs, Jochen Brandstätter (Brandstätter, 
Hermann, & Schüler, 2013). We often will encounter an action crisis 
when working toward our goals. Action crises can be thought of as 
circumstances in which you have invested a great deal of effort and 
resources into your goal, but suffer from ongoing or major setbacks. 
We may go from being optimistic to pessimistic, and have an increase 
in goal-related doubt and a decrease in psychological and physiological 
well-being. The conflict arises between having invested just enough to 
not want to take the losses resulting from giving up, but being unsure 
about or unwilling to continue to sink further resources into the goal. 
This situation can lead to either reducing the value we place on the 
goal or assessing whether goal attainment is even a realistic possibility.
“Sure, I Can Do That” – Fake It ‘Til You Make It?
My stepfather decided to teach me to drive a vehicle with a manual 
transmission (a stick-shift), which typically requires some practice 
to get the hang of. I was growing a little frustrated with the process. 
Around the same time, he was painting a storage building and placed 
a stepladder in the back of his pick-up to reach the walls located just 
below the apex roof (disclaimer: do not attempt anything described in this 
scenario yourself). As if that was not unorthodox enough, he wanted me 
to drive the truck around the building while he stood on the ladder in 86 Giving Up: I Should Just Quit
the truck bed. I honestly hoped he was trying to get a laugh, and I was 
thinking there was no way this would actually happen. I was not yet 
comfortable or skilled, and the jerking from not releasing the clutch 
smoothly would surely not have a good outcome. Fearing the worst￾case scenario, I vehemently protested but found myself sitting behind 
the wheel preparing to move the truck – with my stepdad standing on 
the ladder in the back. “I trust you,” he said. Shockingly, I released the 
clutch with absolutely no issues, and I was both surprised and relieved. 
From that day forward, I was able to drive a stick-shift vehicle.
What about fake it until you make it? We have likely all heard this 
phrase. If we have doubts about an upcoming situation or are not 
prepared to do something, this is a fairly common piece of advice. 
But, what exactly does it mean? We turned to the high performers we 
interviewed to help us uncover what the phrase meant to them. Three 
themes emerged from the interviews: a) pushing beyond your comfort 
zone, b) keeping yourself/trainee in a domain or situation long enough 
to gain self-confidence, and c) a negative connotation of putting up a 
front or being “fake.”
The first interpretation, situations in which you are being asked 
to do something new or just above your current level, was explained 
by Thomas Estrada, the film and video game animator, through an 
example from when he was asked to produce a piece of art for the 
legendary band, the Foo Fighters:
I got a gig working with the Foo Fighters, and they needed the 
artwork I was doing in a particular format for their production 
needs that I had no idea about. I was like, “Absolutely.” And then 
I hung up the phone. I was like, ‘okay, what does that mean?’ 
I jotted that down. I’m like, okay, how do I do this? I had no idea. 
But, I thought ‘I’m not going to let that stop me.’ Fortunately. we 
live in the information age where I can get online. And so yeah, 
I don’t know if that ever, if that ever stops, you know. So, there’s 
always those times when things come up like that where it’s like, 
“I’m just going to have to figure this out.” You know?
Mark Johnson, cofounder of Hobnail Trekking Co., shared a similar 
example of combining his songwriting experience with his upbringing 
on a farm to produce a writing sample needed for a job interview with Giving Up: I Should Just Quit 87
a national farming magazine. These examples suggest that, while we 
might initially feel uncomfortable with new or unknown aspects of the 
situation, successfully moving forward with completing the task can 
reduce or remove the feeling of “faking it.”
The second interpretation is to keep yourself, or a trainee, in a domain 
long enough to gain self-confidence or reduce self-doubt. Often, when 
we are starting a new position or a new sport, or performing for the 
first time, we do not necessarily “know” with confidence whether we 
are doing something correctly or not. It is critical to not allow this lack 
of confidence to derail us because putting in the time to get better 
is critical to becoming really good at something. High-performance 
researcher, Joe Baker, noted, “Competence comes from participation.” 
These early stages can be thought of as applying what we have learned 
to new situations; essentially, we are faking it (by taking what we have 
previously learned) until we make it (becoming confident in doing 
what we are doing; Gunder, 2010).
Fundamentally, this is a way of persevering through the early stages 
of an endeavor (Nielsen, 2015). We are figuring out what works for 
us in real-time – faking it until we make it our own. We might know 
where we want to get, but we have a long way to go. The amount of 
time you choose to invest or the long-term choice not to give up a 
pursuit will begin with these initial experiences. Joe Baker adds, “Get 
them coming back the next day because they love what they’re doing. 
They enjoy what they’re doing, because if they do that, you probably 
have solved the competence. The “fake until you make it” [concept] 
sounds like the same kind of a thing – you fake it because it keeps you 
coming back. And you coming back is the thing that eventually leads 
to you making it, which from one perspective, is straight-up deliberate 
practice.”
The third interpretation of putting up a front or “being fake” is the 
interpretation with a negative connotation. Hip-hop artist Brian Brown 
captured this sentiment:
Try that or just make it look like this, make it like that. But, it’s 
like, why would you? Why would you not make it real, so some￾body can know what they’re dealing with? You faking? Anybody 
who might be trying to follow in your footsteps, or is in the same 
world, might not know exactly what’s coming to them.88 Giving Up: I Should Just Quit
He added, “To me it’s lying, and I don’t like lying. I have no reason to 
fake anything.”
In the context of facing challenges that could lead to giving up, we 
encourage you to heed this solid advice. You might experience self￾doubt or feel unqualified when encountering new tasks or opportun￾ities. These thoughts can lead to you experiencing some unpleasant 
feelings/emotions (see Chapter 8 on how our perceptions of these 
feelings can influence the outcome). Pushing through these thoughts 
and feelings or sticking around until you realize that you are capable is 
key. The feelings of self-doubt should be minimized once we achieve 
some small successes. Many of us will be prone to self-doubt as we 
discussed in the chapter on impostor syndrome (Chapter 3). However, 
if it happens to a Nobel Laureate, then it can happen to anyone at any 
phase. It is not a cue to stop.
“Year 43 of Acting Will Finally Be My Big Break”
Being good at something takes a lot of work and investment of 
resources. At the very least, you will have invested your time. Some 
performers will exit a domain quickly, and others will stick with it for 
a long time. In any domain, there will be a tremendous amount of 
competition and rejection (Chapter 7) along the way. The investments 
into and experiences of pursuing success in a domain can lead us to feel 
that we cannot give up because we do not want what we already have 
invested, or the experiences we endured, to be in vain. The numerous 
stories we have shared demonstrate how individuals overcame 
obstacles they faced to find success. We highlighted the experiences of 
a variety of folks accomplishing some amazing things – world tours, 
successful businesses, and renowned scholarship. Your favorite pro￾fessor? It is likely they did not get their job on the first try. Rather, they 
most likely went through many interviews at different schools before 
landing a job. It would not make sense for you to drop out of college a 
credit short or bail on your business without giving it time to flourish. 
However, as we discussed, sometimes we must make accommodations 
for our goals when things do not go as planned.
Sometimes, such accommodations can be just what we need. Ian 
was able to coach football even though he could no longer play. So, we Giving Up: I Should Just Quit 89
can think about the term “giving up” in a different way. While often 
stigmatized, it can lead to a positive, if unforeseen, outcome. If we 
truly know that something is not for us, we should consider moving 
on. For example, being miserable in a career but sticking with it is not 
healthy. While we may give up on a specific iteration of a goal, we are 
also able to decide that we would like to set a new goal. The accom￾modative tendency allows us to step back and determine a new path. 
We ultimately should be as happy as possible with the decisions we are 
making.
The aforementioned conflict that comes with shifting goals when we 
have invested time and resources. This can lead us to sometimes stick 
with a pursuit longer than we reasonably should because we want the 
sacrifices to be worth it. This phenomenon has been dubbed the “sunk 
cost fallacy” by scholars (e.g., Friedman et al., 2007). We often feel a 
need to recoup our investment, despite the negative impact it might 
have on us. For example, if you have invested life savings in a failing 
business, you may try to keep it open when, by objective measures, it 
should have been shuttered. Hopefully, you would eventually recoup 
your investment, right? To be clear, we encourage you to stick with 
your plans during the tough stretches. That can be considered part of 
the process. However, sacrificing your well-being would not be worth 
it, and it is up to each individual to determine when that point has been 
reached.
It makes sense that we are prone to thinking this way. If you have 
spent years or decades pursuing something, it can be an odd experi￾ence to suddenly give up. We often see examples of those who stayed 
with something “just long enough” for it to work out. Despite such 
examples, there are also individuals stuck in perpetual “near-success 
experiences.” Hobnail Trekking’s Mark Johnson described such an 
experience:
I was on a trajectory. I was working with big producers and 
publishing companies in Nashville, so when I rerecorded my last 
album, everybody that was involved with me thought that this 
was going to be the thing that was going to get me a major-label 
record deal. And then, things were going to move on from there. 
That didn’t happen, and it disillusioned me to the point at which 
I said, ‘you know what, I’m done with the music industry. I’ve 
given it everything, and I was just wiped out.’90 Giving Up: I Should Just Quit
Mark had to decide whether he should stick with his original goal 
of becoming a musical artist signed to a record deal or move on. He 
ultimately decided to move on, “Either I’m going to stop and do some￾thing else, or I’m going to be an old guy playing Brown Eyed Girl and 
Margaritaville in clubs when I’m 60 years old, and I don’t want to do 
that. I do not want to be that guy. So, I quit that.” As a reminder, he is 
now a successful entrepreneur
Chapter Summary
In this chapter we discussed the importance of not giving up and the 
variety of terms used to describe sticking with a goal over the long 
term. We also revisited how the lingering default societal views of high 
performers, the access to resources, and the act of setting goals can 
each influence whether we do give up. We discussed the concept of 
“fake it ‘til you make it” and shared the themes identified when we 
asked the high performers what the concept means to them: a) pushing 
beyond your comfort zone, b) keeping yourself/trainee in a domain or 
situation long enough to gain self-confidence, and c) a negative con￾notation of putting up a front or being “fake.” Finally, we considered 
that it is sometimes healthier to give up on a pursuit, even when there 
already have been significant investments.© 2023–2024 Expert Performance International Collective (EPIC). This exercise is copyrighted by Kevin Harris and the Expert 
Performance International Collective (EPIC). All rights reserved. Used with permission.
Giving Up: I Should Just Quit 91
Keep Pushing!
Chapter 5: Giving Up: I Should Just Quit
This exercise is intended to help you identify some “bail out” phrases 
to help you get past the inevitable moments when you will consider 
giving up. In the first part of the exercise, you will be asked to write 
down instances where you were successful prior to reaching the point 
of wanting to give up. The second part will ask you to identify some 
phrases you can use when the voices in your head start telling you to 
give up.
1. You have done many things well to get to the point at which you 
might consider giving up. Please provide at least three examples 
of things you have done well that preceded feelings of wanting to 
give up.© 2023–2024 Expert Performance International Collective (EPIC). This exercise is copyrighted by Kevin Harris and the Expert 
Performance International Collective (EPIC). All rights reserved. Used with permission.
92 Giving Up: I Should Just Quit
2. Think of at least one phrase you can use to replace the thoughts of 
quitting as they begin to appear.Giving Up: I Should Just Quit 93
Note
1 In the spirit of transparency, there were equally strong attempts to 
attribute the performance abilities of the highest-level performers 
to the nurture side of the spectrum (e.g., Ericsson, Roring, & 
Nandagopal, 2007). Most scholars in this area, ourselves included, 
have proposed that we move on from these types of comparisons 
(e.g., Hambrick et al., 2016; Ward et al., 2017) and work to uncover 
the subtleties of how the world’s best performers get to where 
they are.
References
Brandtstädter, J., & Renner, G. (1990). Tenacious goal pursuit and flexible 
goal adjustment: Explication and age-related analysis of assimilative and 
accommodative strategies of coping. Psychology and Aging, 5(1), 58–67.
Brandstätter, V., Hermann, M., & Schüler, J. (2013). The struggle of giving 
up personal goals: Affective, physiological, and cognitive consequences 
of an action crisis. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 39, 1668–1682. 
https://www.doi.org/10.1177/0146167213500151.
Credé, M., Tynan, M.C., & Harms, P.D. (2017). Much ado about grit: A meta￾analytic synthesis of the grit literature. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 113(3), 492–511. https://doi.org/10.1037/pspp0000102.
Dahl, M. (2014) Don’t believe the hype About grit, pleads the scientist behind 
the concept. New York Magazine: The Cut. https://www.thecut.com/2016/
05/dont-believe-the-hype-about-grit-pleads-the-scientist-behind-the-conc
ept.html. Accessed January 24, 2024.
Duckworth, A.L., & Quinn, P.D. (2009). Development and validation of the 
Short Grit Scale (GRIT–S). Journal of Personality Assessment, 91 (2), 166–174. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/00223890802634290.
Duckworth, A.L., Peterson, C., Matthews, M.D., & Kelly, D.R. (2007). 
Grit: Perseverance and passion for long-term goals. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 92(6), 1087–1101. https://doi.org/10.1037/
0022-3514.92.6.1087.
Dweck, C.S. (2006). Mindset. Random House.
Ericsson, K.A., Roring, R.W., & Nandagopal, K. (2007). Giftedness and evi￾dence for reproducibly superior performance: An account based on the 94 Giving Up: I Should Just Quit
expert performance framework. High Ability Studies, 18, 3–56. https://doi.
org/10.1080/13598130701350593.
Friedman, D., Pommerenke, K., Lukose, R., Milam, G., & Huberman, B.A. 
(2007). Searching for the sunk cost fallacy. Experimental Economics, 10, 79–
104. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10683-006-9134-0.
Gunder, M. (2010). Fake it until you make it, and then …. Planning Theory, 10,
201–212. https://doi.org/10.1177/1473095210387542.
Hambrick D.Z., Macnamara B.N., Campitelli G., Ullén F., Mosing M.A. 
(2016). Beyond born versus made: A new look at expertise. In Ross B.H. 
(Ed.), The psychology of learning and motivation (Vol. 64, pp. 1–55). San 
Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Harris, K.R., & Eccles, D.W. (2021). Training derived from expert 
performers: The extractable components of deliberate practice and the 
expert performance approach. Journal of Expertise, 4 (2), 234–247. https://
www.journalofexpertise.org/articles/Volume4_issue2/JoE_4_2_Harris_
Eccles.pdf.
Jachimowicz, J.M., Wihler, A., Bailey, E.R., & Galinsky, A.D. (2018). Why 
grit requires perseverance and passion to positively predict performance. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 115(40), 9980–9985. https://
doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1803561115.
Locke, E.A., & Latham, G.P. (1990). A theory of goal setting and task performance.
Prentice Hall.
Locke, E.A., & Latham, G.P. (2002). Building a practically useful theory of 
goal setting and task motivation: A 35-year odyssey. American Psychologist,
57(9), 705–717. https://doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.57.9.705.
Nielsen, K. (2015). “Fake it ‘til you make it”: Why community college students’ 
aspirations “hold stead”. Sociology of Education, 88, 265–283. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0038040715601889.
Segerstrom, S.C., & Nes, L.S. (2006). When goals conflict but people 
prosper: The case of dispositional optimism. Journal of Research in 
Personality, 40(5), 675–693. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jrp.2005.08.001.
Ward, P., Belling, P., Petushek, E., & Ehrlinger, J. (2017). Does talent exist? 
A re-evaluation of the nature–nurture debate. In J. Baker, S. Cobley, J. 
Schorer, & N. Wattie (Eds.), Routledge Handbook of Talent Identification 
and Development in Sport (pp. 19–34). Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/
9781315668017-3.DOI: 10.4324/9781003377542-6
Limiting Your Scope
Think Like a Kid
I didn’t have anyone telling me to think of a realistic goal. People never 
put limitations on me.
– Lauren Regula, Olympian and professional athlete 
(on The Path Distilled podcast)
Create the highest, grandest vision for your life because you become what 
you believe.
– Oprah Winfrey
Josh was interested in starting his own clothing line, which would 
feature original designs to market in the highly competitive clothing 
market. He began securing funding, sourcing materials, designing the 
clothes, and identifying a manufacturer. Josh’s clothes finally hit the 
market after much initiative, planning, and work – the critical thing is 
that Josh is 14 years old. There were plenty of voices throughout this 
process telling Josh not to continue with his plans, or to wait until he 
was older. Josh obviously did not listen.
The opening vignette is based on an actual event. In this chapter, 
we discuss the obstacle of limiting your scope, or setting the bar too 
low for yourself, and the power of thinking like a child. This does not 
mean that one should flippantly pursue any impulse that comes to 
mind, but often, the voices telling us to lower our bar are those inside 
696 Limiting Your Scope: Think Like a Kid
our own head. We often discourage those around us from thinking 
too grandiosely when deciding what they want to accomplish. Phrases 
like “pie in the sky” are used to describe ambitious pursuits, and the 
pursuits themselves often are dismissed as child-like naivete. Despite 
such dismissals, it is often the performers who never let go of gran￾diose pursuits who end up accomplishing them. Because we discuss 
both imposing limitations on oneself and goal-setting in this chapter, 
let us take time to distinguish the purpose of this chapter from those of 
Chapter 4: Artificial Ceilings and Chapter 9: Being Vague, which focus 
heavily on goal setting, before fully diving in.
The most straightforward way to think of the distinctions between 
the content of the chapters would be that Chapter 4 focuses on 
how perceptions of artificial ceilings shape beliefs about one’s own 
limitations and whether a pursuit should even be undertaken. While 
there is overlap between Chapter 4 and the current chapter, the 
emphasis of this chapter is not aiming too low once embarking on 
a path. For example, Chapter 4 might consider that Jason thinks that 
he would never be capable of sewing well enough to be the costume 
designer for the local high school play (the artificial ceiling). The pre￾sent chapter, Chapter 6, considers that Jason should not limit his scope 
and can reasonably consider pursuing a goal that most consider unreal￾istic – becoming a Hollywood wardrobe designer or creating his own 
clothing line. Finally, Chapter 9 emphasizes that, in addition to lofty 
ambitions and the ability to create amazing clothing, Jason also will 
need a roadmap to success.
It is not surprising that we often end up limiting the scope of 
our ultimate goals. There are multiple reasons for this ranging from 
individual differences in achievement seeking (see Chapter 2) to the 
shaming of someone with ambitious goals. As noted in the earlier 
chapters, societal views, fixed mindsets, and a lack of knowledge about 
how to get there are also limitations. Additionally, we will discuss the 
stigma and misunderstandings that have accompanied the concept of 
“ambition” in the sections below – the differences in how ambition 
has been viewed throughout human history are noteworthy and the 
magnitude of the disdain was surprising. The chapter also includes 
discussions about how we might go about comparing ourselves to 
others to gauge our own status and the risk of not taking opportunities 
we deem to be beneath our current status.Limiting Your Scope: Think Like a Kid 97
“Too Big for Your Britches” (and My Tattered 
Self-esteem)
A fellow graduate student of mine, Monte, shared a story of having 
grown up on a farm. He worked the farm with his family throughout 
his childhood and was mostly neutral about the line of work. However, 
Monte felt a drive to attend the nearby Florida State University to try 
his hand at preparing for a different line of work. He submitted his 
application and waited as patiently as he could; any day could be the 
day that the admittance letter arrived. Finally, it came. Monte had 
been accepted! As he began walking the long gravel driveway back to 
his house, he was thinking about whom he should tell first after his 
parents. About that time, a neighbor driving down the road slowed to 
a stop to chat with Monte. Monte decided in the moment to go ahead 
and share, “I was just accepted to Florida State,” while holding up the 
letter. The response from his neighbor left him speechless, “I thought 
you were a good boy!”
There is something embedded in the fabric of the culture of the 
southeastern region of the US that discourages sharing lofty goals. 
This is likely also the case in other places, but this example is one 
with which I am intimately familiar. Although it could also refer to 
someone – often a child – misbehaving, the phrase, “too big for your/
their britches” was commonly used when someone shared aspirations 
that seemed too grand for others in that particular community. Its 
meaning is similar to the pejorative phrase “forgetting where you came 
from” if success is realized. These examples illustrate that not everyone 
is rooting for the success of others. Could it be that observing someone 
achieve great accomplishments, or even express aspirations to do so, is 
a threat to the self-esteem of some witnessing it play out?
One of the world’s best-known scholars, Roy Baumeister, and his 
colleagues spent considerable time studying a version of this question, 
fundamentally asking, what are the consequences of both low self￾esteem, and more generally, what happens when someone’s self￾esteem is threatened? Their work could provide insight into why not 
everyone is rooting for you to be successful. In an extensive review, the 
scholars countered the view that low self-esteem was a primary cause 
of violent behavior by arguing that threats to someone’s positive view 
of themselves were more likely a cause of violence and aggression 98 Limiting Your Scope: Think Like a Kid
(Baumeister, Smart, & Boden, 1996). This explanation makes intui￾tive sense on an interpersonal level and likely can explain the tenuous 
relationship with, and often negative societal perception of, ambition 
described in the coming sections.
In a follow-up laboratory test of the idea that violence and aggression 
were likely to result from a threat to someone’s positive self-view (ego￾tism), researchers either boosted or diminished the participants’ egos by 
providing either positive or negative fake feedback on an essay that was 
written by the participant (Bushman & Baumeister, 1998). Relative to 
praised participants, the insulted participants subsequently aggressed 
the person believed to be the source of the feedback by blasting them 
with an unpleasant noise at a higher decibel level and for longer. Thus, 
it is not a stretch to assume that observing someone else do well, 
potentially accomplishing things that the observer may have strived to 
accomplish themselves, could be a threat to one’s ego. Someone doing 
particularly well, with a collection of accumulated accomplishments, 
could threaten the ego of many.
More generally, ambition has historically been met with scorn. 
For example, Timothy A. Judge and John D. Kammeyer-Mueller, two 
scholars whose work falls at the intersection of business and psych￾ology, provided a brief historical overview on how ambition has been 
historically viewed (2012). Their analysis suggests that lofty ambition 
has historically been seen as a negative. Perhaps naively, we found this 
negative connotation surprising – after all, this is a book on not limiting 
yourself! Nevertheless, some comments they collected for their work 
suggest that ambition generally might have been viewed as a vice, at 
least among philosophers. However, Judge and Kammeyer-Mueller 
sought to distinguish the role of ambition from achievement motiv￾ation for success. The scholars believed that much of the controversy 
stemmed from the lack of a clear definition of the terms.
To summarize their assessment, ambition is considered to be a gen￾eral aspiration for success in life, which is distinct from achievement 
motivation, a desire to be good at something regardless of external 
rewards. Much of the prior work on the distinction between 
achievement motivation and ambition suggested that achievement 
motivation enhanced the likelihood of satisfaction as compared to 
ambition, presumably because the desire is to be good at something 
without consideration of what will come from our efforts. However, Limiting Your Scope: Think Like a Kid 99
the need to make the distinction might not be as strong as initially 
proposed, as the researchers found that greater ambition led to greater 
educational and work success, which appeared to enhance overall life￾satisfaction (Judge & Kammeyer-Mueller, 2012).
Discovering that this distinction had been made so adamantly, and 
has been the center of a debate lasting centuries, came as another 
huge surprise. Understandably, too much or misaligned ambition falls 
within the realm of mental health disorders (e.g., Yager & Kay, 2023). 
However, we will be using ambition in a positive sense – without the 
historical baggage. For us, ambition is not limiting your scope when 
deciding what might be possible. An aspirational author or baseball 
player should not feel shame when stating that they hope to have a 
best-selling book or make it to the major leagues, particularly if they 
are willing to take the steps to move closer to such a goal. As noted 
by Olympian and professional athlete Lauren Regula in her opening 
quotation (Harris & Tashman, 2021), limitations were not placed upon 
her, and she ultimately benefitted from it. It is remarkable that her sib￾ling, Jason Bay, was a long-time professional baseball player. It is rela￾tively unusual to have two siblings from a small town both reach the 
pinnacle of their domains, particularly in sports. Thus, the distinction 
between wanting to be the best at something and desiring the outcome 
associated with being the best will not be made for our purposes.
Aiming for the Stars and Hitting the Trees – The Role of 
Counterfactual Thinking
Standing on the platform as they drape your bronze medal around 
your neck, the feeling of pride washes over you. You did not end up 
with a gold or silver medal, but you did medal. Not to mention the 
field of competitors you bested to make it to this point. It is one of the 
biggest accomplishments of your life. You look around with the hope 
of remembering as much of this moment as possible. The gold med￾alist appears to also be taking in the moment and seems as proud as you 
are. Moving your gaze beyond the gold medalist, you see something 
surprising – the silver medalist is almost inconsolable. Rather than cele￾brating and savoring the moment, they are emotionally distraught.100 Limiting Your Scope: Think Like a Kid
This counterintuitive scenario was the topic of a series of research 
studies that determined that bronze medalists were typically happier 
than silver medalists with their placement (Medvec, Madey, & Gilovich, 
1995). The reason? Their frame of reference. The silver medalists felt 
that they just missed finishing in first place – “second place is the first 
loser.” On the other hand, the bronze medalists were using the frame 
of reference that they were the last competitors to reach the threshold 
for being awarded a medal. To reiterate, the silver medalist (second 
place) bested a greater number of opponents than the bronze medalist 
(third place) but felt comparatively less enthusiastic.
This example begs the question as to how someone generally 
compares themselves to others to ascertain their status and potentially 
gauge progress toward their goals. The evidence strongly suggests 
that we tend to compare ourselves to those with higher status – an 
upward comparison (Weingarten, Davidai, & Barasch, 2023). This is 
understandable as most of us are aspiring to move to a better position 
in relation to our goals, with the possible exception of your slacker 
cousin and similar others. Because we are seeking to move up the pro￾verbial ladder, these comparisons allow us to judge where we currently 
stand in relation to others. However, this line of research on upward 
and downward comparisons is vast, and the direction of comparison 
depends on a variety of factors.
Let us discuss a limited selection of the relevant factors in this vast 
array of research. We have already discussed the impact placing second 
versus third can have on which direction a comparison is made. Another 
determining factor of whether someone will make an upward or down￾ward comparison is where they fall in the general tiers (upper, middle, 
bottom) of a particular field (Weingarten, Davidai, & Barasch, 2023). 
For example, we tend to want to avoid being last at anything – dubbed 
“last place aversion” (Kuziemko et al., 2014). As with the medalists, 
this phenomenon does not always make logical sense. For example, 
the last pick of the National Football League (NFL), a professional 
American-style football league, is noted each year; the pick is dubbed, 
“Mr. Irrelevant.” However, there are thousands of other free agent or 
unsigned prospects on the market for a spot who would have loved to 
be drafted in any position.
Thus, it seems that benchmarks of any kind can serve as demarca￾tion points influencing those we select for comparison. Presumably, Limiting Your Scope: Think Like a Kid 101
this would function within the tiers themselves in the sense of asking, 
“where do I fall?”, when reflecting on your place within the upper, 
middle, or lower tiers. Many of us will strive to be at the top of our 
respective tiers, which would keep the next closest tier within reach. 
Someone presently in the top tier would be striving to be the best of all 
competitors. However, as already mentioned, there is a strong mental 
component to how the comparison is made. Thus, in alignment with 
ideas underlying “last place aversion,” someone ranking near the 
bottom of a tier might make a downward comparison instead (e.g., 
Garcia, Tor, & Gonzalez, 2006). This could be the performer in the 95th
slot looking at the 96th–100th performers. Similarly, even someone who 
is typically nonchalant with their performances might make an all￾out effort to avoid being last – the aforementioned last place aversion 
(Kuziemko et al., 2014).
This downward comparison might also be a buffer that minimizes 
the blow to someone’s self-esteem that could occur from relatively low 
performance. By making the comparison to performers ending up in 
a worse position than themselves, one can convince themselves that 
they were at least better than someone else – the “at least I am not that 
guy” approach. The good news is that this type of comparison can 
work to reduce the blow to self-esteem. However, keep in mind that 
success is a relative concept – the second-place finisher was ahead of all 
but one competitor, but as discussed, can feel less successful than the 
third-place finisher.
The relative nature of success was made crystal clear in a conversa￾tion I had with Katie Cole, who appears throughout the book. Katie is 
a successful singer-songwriter and touring member of the legendary 
rock band, The Smashing Pumpkins. I commented that the podcast 
I created and cohosted, The Path Distilled, had, at the time, just reached 
its 66th country for listeners. Katie had been a guest on the podcast, and 
I wanted her to know our reach was strong. Katie’s response was some￾thing along the lines of “do not be discouraged by the reach.” I was ini￾tially puzzled but quickly realized that she tours the world with one of 
the better-known bands of all time. Not only that, their reach through 
online streaming services and sales would extend to all of the countries 
of the world – roughly tripling that of The Path Distilled podcast. Her 
sincere and supportive comments were based on her experiences in 
the upper tier of the music industry. The message of this story is that 102 Limiting Your Scope: Think Like a Kid
the reach of the podcast still can be celebrated while striving to land 
listeners in the remaining countries. Success does not exist in a vacuum. 
There are myriad factors at play as to how we view our own success 
and how others view us. It is inevitable that some will be threatened by 
our success while others will not. Similarly, some will be supportive of 
our success, and others might actively attempt to counter it.
The bottom line is that focusing on others, regardless of whether they 
are supportive or not, can be counterproductive. The best approach is 
to focus on the tasks in front of you – the ones that you must do to get 
to where you want to be. Recording artist Stephanie Quayle shared this 
sentiment – a great metaphor – on The Path Distilled podcast:
I remember running the marathon, and it was mile 19 [of] 26.2. 
I remember it so vividly because I remember there was a moment 
where it was just like, ‘OK should I just call it? No one’s going 
to really know if I finish.’ You go through all these things in 
your mind where you convince yourself it’s okay to quit, and 
I remember I’m slowing down a little bit. And I looked to my 
right, and I looked to my left now. Not quick, like, I turned my 
neck both ways, and it slowed me down, paying attention and 
focusing on the people passing me (Harris & Tashman, 2020).
This also could factor into the collective shaming described earlier, as 
each person from your own personal environment accomplishes some￾thing impressive, another can be demoted in the accomplishment hier￾archy – Jamal overtook you in annual sales, or you lose your top spot 
in the local table-tennis rankings. This will lead some “competitors” 
to actively root against you. In extreme cases, competitors might go 
as far as attempting to sabotage your performance. Such examples 
reflect explicit efforts to shame, or even damage, the standing of other 
performers.
However, a related consideration is that this compulsion to shame 
might not even be recognized by those attempting to shame you. 
Humans are really good at maintaining a positive self-view, even 
when the evidence doesn’t support it – “I’m [cute, funny, attractive, 
athletic, charming, a great conversationalist],” or too many more to 
list. A clever study by Yu Niiya and colleagues demonstrated just how 
seemingly inclined we are to maintain this positive self-image when 
it is associated with something of importance to us (Niiya, Brook, Limiting Your Scope: Think Like a Kid 103
& Crocker, 2012). Their surprising findings suggest that individuals 
with growth mindsets, who are personally invested in a domain, will 
engage in behaviors that minimize the blame they would attribute 
to themselves if they were to fail. For example, when presented with 
very difficult problems, participants whose academic performance 
was important to their self-worth were more likely to self-handicap 
by intentionally selecting music labelled as “highly distracting” or pass 
up practice opportunities altogether. Such choices provide an oppor￾tunity to blame poor performance on the distracting music, or lack of 
practice. These unexpected findings – that individuals with a growth 
mindset were eager to protect their self-worth when the tasks were 
related to areas that were personally relevant and the task was diffi￾cult – changed the way that scholars viewed the differences between 
those with fixed versus growth mindsets.
The findings of Niiya and colleagues make sense when considered 
within the realm of high performance. If one is participating in a 
competitive domain, a tremendous investment of resources is to be 
expected. The competition only increases as one progresses through 
the ranks. Making your way through the competitive ranks is tough –
really tough. Impostor syndrome (Chapter 3) and self-doubt are real 
phenomena. One must become comfortable with the necessary level 
of work (Chapter 1) and repeated rejections (Chapter 7) – all while 
allowing for rest and recovery (Chapter 11) and forgiving oneself when 
things do not go as planned (Chapter 12). Thus, it makes sense that, 
when we are heavily invested in an area and a task is presented as a 
key step for success in that area, even someone with a healthy growth 
mindset potentially would engage in actions to protect their self-worth, 
like foregoing practice or causing a distraction to have something else 
to blame. If this form of self-handicapping happens, hopefully it will 
buffer the impact that not performing well might have. In the long run, 
this might be the desired outcome if it enhances the perseverance of 
the performer. In other words, we all are human. The obstacles we 
encounter can take a tremendous amount of courage, a lot of “guts,” 
and the right mentality to overcome. These factors providing a buffer 
can mean the difference between persevering to reach our goals and 
making an earlier-than-anticipated exit from the domain. We now turn 
to the opposite end of limiting one’s scope – not taking advantage of 
small opportunities.104 Limiting Your Scope: Think Like a Kid
Smaller Opportunities Leading to Larger Opportunities
The bulk of this chapter is about not limiting one’s scope, and the 
pushback that can be experienced when someone states aspirations 
that exceed the comfort level of others, which can lead to threatening 
their self-esteem. We must also be mindful of not minimizing more 
subtle opportunities that could lead to new contacts or help us in some 
other way. It is not unreasonable to be skeptical of opportunities that, 
upon first glance, do not seem to fit into the upward trajectory one is 
seeking. However, smaller opportunities almost always lead to larger 
opportunities. Let us turn directly to the content of our interviews to 
highlight some examples of this.
Kevin Rapillo, musical director and drummer for country music star 
Rodney Atkins, noted how progress often requires a series of smaller 
events:
It’s always the smaller things. It’s never some gigantic thing, 
lottery-winning situation. It never is. It may seem like that from 
the outside. Oh, they just won a Grammy – like somehow, that 
just happened magically out of nowhere. It’s all those little 
opportunities, even playing with someone like Rodney came 
from a smaller opportunity of a friend. I was playing with this 
folk singer in Nashville. He knew Rodney before he had any￾thing, and I just did it as a one-off gig – one weekend, like the 
millions of other one-off gigs I did in Nashville. Here I am, 
20 years later, still playing with that guy. It’s all small things; 
I think the mistake is people don’t listen to the small things, 
right? They just sort of blow them off, waiting for this gigantic 
thing to happen, where all these small opportunities just keep 
spreading out into more. Nashville being a perfect example 
of that… it’s all, ‘Oh, I played with this guy or this woman, 
and that led to that, led to that,’ even if it was four years later. 
It sort of circles back around, you know. So that’s very much 
the Nashville scene. I think people ignore that, especially now, 
I think, because [Nashville] became so popular. Younger people 
move to town and just are upset that Keith Urban hasn’t called 
them in the first month.Limiting Your Scope: Think Like a Kid 105
The anonymous gold-record musician we interviewed reiterated this 
by noting that smaller opportunities leading to larger opportunities:
usually happens by meeting someone that leads you into a new 
door. The industry is an infinitely overlapping network of individ￾uals that know each other, from big acts to small acts. If someone 
wants to help you, for whatever reason, then they can easily propel 
you to bigger opportunities. Small opportunities can sometimes 
lead to events that change the trajectory of your entire life.
Rondal Richardson, philanthropist and former musician manager, 
shared how his multi-decade career in the entertainment industry 
began with what he perceived to be a summer gig with “a single raising 
of my hand at my high school.” A visitor was recruiting someone to sell 
merchandise for Ricky Skaggs during summer concerts. Rondal recalls 
that the visitor was looking for someone who, “isn’t overly infatuated 
with country music artists. Who can go out on the road and be around 
them. Eat dinner with them in a way that’s not in their faces or in the 
way.” Rondal thought he was an excellent candidate. He shared, “I was 
the perfect kid for that. I was nervous to ask my parents. They were 
first to say, ‘you’re crazy if you don’t do this.’ But I remember raising 
my hand in one small way, and that moment changed my life.” And 
that is no exaggeration. Rondal went on to work with some of the 
best-known musical artists of all time.
Comedian Henry Cho took the approach of the beneficial combin￾ation of putting in the work and taking advantage of the subsequent 
opportunities arising from it. He told us:
So that’s how it works. Work breeds work. I tell my openers that 
all the time. They’ll go, ‘Hey. So, they want us to do this thing, 
but it only pays X.’ Or it’s a six-hour drive or eight-hour drive. 
I go, ‘Do it. Work breeds work.’ I get more work being on stage 
than I do not being on stage.
The advice is crystal clear. Take the opportunities you might consider 
to be small ones. It often will be these smaller opportunities putting 
you in a position to eventually land that larger opportunity you were 
hoping to get.106 Limiting Your Scope: Think Like a Kid
Chapter Summary
In this chapter, we discussed some of the factors that can lead us to 
limit the scope of what we hope to accomplish, such as the histor￾ical negative connotation associated with ambition and societal norms. 
Research suggests that an observer can experience a blow to their self￾esteem when witnessing someone accomplish something remarkable, 
especially if they are similar to the observer. As a result, we begin to 
limit our goals in order to better fit in with others instead of thinking 
like a child and not limiting ourselves. We also unpacked how we com￾pare ourselves to others to gauge how well we are doing, and how 
someone who just missed reaching a goal can feel worse than those 
not making it as far. Finally, our high performer interviewees shared 
the importance of taking the small opportunities that come your way 
and how they can lead to larger opportunities.© 2023–2024 Expert Performance International Collective (EPIC). This exercise is copyrighted by Kevin Harris and the Expert 
Performance International Collective (EPIC). All rights reserved. Used with permission.
Limiting Your Scope: Think Like a Kid 107
You Wanna Do What?!?
Chapter 6: Limiting Your Scope: Think Like a Kid
This exercise is intended to help you identify what you would attempt 
to do if you were not afraid to try and/or had unlimited resources. In 
the first part of the exercise, you will be asked to write down some 
things you would love to try if there were no risks. The second part
will ask you to identify your specific fears and some possible solutions.
1. What are some things you would love (have loved) to attempt if 
there were no risk involved and you would be guaranteed to accom￾plish it?© 2023–2024 Expert Performance International Collective (EPIC). This exercise is copyrighted by Kevin Harris and the Expert 
Performance International Collective (EPIC). All rights reserved. Used with permission.
108 Limiting Your Scope: Think Like a Kid
2. Thinking about the previous question, list at least three thoughts/
things that kept you from pursuing the things you wanted to 
attempt. What are some potential ways to get past such thoughts?Limiting Your Scope: Think Like a Kid 109
References
Baumeister, R.F., Smart, L., & Boden, J. M. (1996). Relation of threatened 
egotism to violence and aggression: The dark side of high self￾esteem. Psychological review, 103(1), 5–33. https://doi.org/10.1037/
0033-295X.103.1.5.
Bushman, B.J., & Baumeister, R.F. (1998). Threatened egotism, narcissism, 
self-esteem, and direct and displaced aggression: Does self-love or self-hate 
lead to violence? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75(1), 219–229. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.75.1.219.
Garcia, S.M., Tor, A., & Gonzalez, R. (2006). Ranks and rivals: A theory of 
competition. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 32(7), 970–982. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0146167206287640.
Harris, K.R., & Tashman, L. (Hosts). (2021, May 2). Lauren Regula [Audio 
podcast episode]. The Path Distilled. https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podc
ast/the-path-distilled-podcast/id1511069681?i=1000519697850.
Harris, K.R, & Tashman, L. (Hosts). (2020, August 9). Stephanie Quayle 
[Audio podcast episode]. The Path Distilled. https://podcasts.apple.com/
us/podcast/the-path-distilled-podcast/id1511069681?i=1000487566447.
Judge, T.A., & Kammeyer-Mueller, J.D. (2012). On the value of aiming 
high: The causes and consequences of ambition. Journal of Applied 
Psychology, 97(4), 758–775. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0028084.
Kuziemko, I., Buell, R.W., Reich, T., & Norton, M.I. (2014). “Last-place 
aversion”: Evidence and redistributive implications. The Quarterly Journal 
of Economics, 129(1), 105–149. https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjt035.
Medvec, V.H., Madey, S.F., & Gilovich, T. (1995). When less is 
more: Counterfactual thinking and satisfaction among Olympic medalists. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 69(4), 603–610. https://doi.org/
10.1037/0022-3514.69.4.603.
Niiya, Y., Brook, A.T., & Crocker, J. (2010). Contingent self-worth and self￾handicapping: Do incremental theorists protect self-esteem? Self and 
Identity, 9(3), 276–297. https://doi.org/10.1080/15298860903054233.
Weingarten, E., Davidai, S., & Barasch, A. (2023). Who’s on first? People 
asymmetrically attend to higher-ranked (vs. lower-ranked) competitors. 
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 104, 104405. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jesp.2022.104405.
Yager, J., & Kay, J. (2023). Ambition and its psychopathologies. The Journal 
of Nervous and Mental Disease, 211(4), 257–265. https://doi.org/10.1097/
NMD.0000000000001644.DOI: 10.4324/9781003377542-7
Facing Rejection
Taking “No” as a Cue to Stop 
Grinding
Over the years, I’ve gotten better at trying to separate myself from the 
rejection, because most of it isn’t personal.
– Kandle Osborne, artist, singer, and actress
I hate it when people are like, “Oh, I love failure. I love rejection.” No, 
you don’t. You’re lying. We are hardwired [whereby] that kind of criti￾cism creates an error signal in your brain, which is meant to be pro￾foundly aversive… right?... to tell you something’s wrong. Pay attention. 
So, it’s never going to feel good. That’s not the point. But what you’re 
really trying to do is, get better at things that matter to you.
– Todd Rose, bestselling author and thought leader
Jaylen moved to Los Angeles to make it as a performer in the music 
industry. He arrived in an older model Honda Accord with two changes 
of clothes and eight dollars to his name. Jaylen quickly got to work 
and was making or performing music almost every day. He settled into 
a routine and decided he would give himself at least three years to 
“make it” in the music business. After the second year, Jaylen’s hopes 
were realized, and he was signed to a major label. Unfortunately, he 
was dropped from the label after only one year. The years that followed 
were a dizzying roller coaster of interest, ultimately followed by rejec￾tion. Jaylen stayed the course and is now a successful performer touring 
nonstop with a worldwide fanbase.
7Facing Rejection: Taking “No” as a Cue to Stop Grinding 111
We have all faced rejection at some point in our life – at school, 
at work, or in our personal lives. The thing about rejection is that 
it stings. Really stings. There is evidence that social rejection results 
in the same activation of the brain responsible for physical pain 
(MacDonald & Leary, 2005). While this claim has been heavily 
debated (e.g., Woo et al., 2014), there are distinct areas of the brain 
dedicated to processing social rejection. Rejection can cause one to 
think less of themselves, magnify fears of being an impostor (the 
topic of Chapter 3), or give up all together (the topic of Chapter 5). 
However, rejection is quite commonplace – something that everyone
experiences. In fact, most successful people experience rejection mul￾tiple times, so we must recognize rejection for what it is and learn to 
live with it. If Jaylen had given up after he was dropped from his label, 
he would not have become a successful performer. In this chapter, 
we will share examples of both high-profile and everyday people, and 
their experiences with rejection. We will then discuss the science on 
the pain of rejection, look at some of its consequences, and ultimately 
suggest ways to move past it.
“We Regret to Inform You” – Rejection Is Commonplace
Lainey Wilson, a Grammy-winning country singer shared that she was 
rejected seven times by the televised singing competition, American 
Idol (Norwin, 2024). Seven times! Let us consider another example – the 
beloved Walt Disney. What if he had given up after having his Mickey 
Mouse idea rejected? The cartoons we know and love today, the Disney 
movies, and the theme parks never would have come to fruition (Johal, 
2020). Legendary boxer Muhammad Ali failed all of the tests assessing 
a boxer’s skill level when he first started out, but he continued training 
and became one of the greatest boxers of all time. Similarly, Michael 
Jordan was cut from his high school basketball team!
Whew! That sounds like a lot of rejection. It seems a little jarring 
to read because we tend to avoid discussing our rejections because of 
the associated stigma. Rejection is justifiably considered a bad thing. 
However, as many of you have already experienced, the likelihood of 
experiencing rejection increases as you strive to accomplish more and 
advance to the next level. We do not have videos of college applicants 112 Facing Rejection: Taking “No” as a Cue to Stop Grinding
getting word of their acceptances into the most competitive schools 
because the majority of applicants tend to be accepted. To the con￾trary; the majority of applicants are rejected. The same applies to what 
many consider to be dream jobs. On The Path Distilled podcast, Logan 
Mize shared his experience of being rejected by every record label in 
Nashville (Harris & Tashman, 2020). Logan has certainly found success 
in the music industry but has experienced repeated rejections over the 
course of his career.
Similarly, the number of athletes competing at a professional level 
is minuscule. For US athletes having gotten through the winnowing 
process to make it to the collegiate ranks (roughly 500,000 out of eight 
million high school athletes; National Collegiate Athletic Association 
[NCAA], 2013), the odds of reaching the highest professional level are 
still slim at around 1 percent for basketball and football (NCAA, 2015). 
Even making it on a team prior to a season does not come without 
rejection or the fear of it. Consider the National Football League (NFL), 
the most prestigious league for American football. On the final day 
of cuts to determine who makes the roster, 1,187 players are released 
from the roster of the team for which they managed to survive the ini￾tial rounds of releases. This is a large number for a mass rejection by 
any standard. The cuts have to be a gut punch for each and every player 
who experiences this. Granted, some players end up making it on an 
NFL team’s final roster or being signed to a practice squad. Others 
will play professionally in lower-tier leagues. However, the majority of 
players will have played for the last time.
Rejection is certainly not limited to domains that already seem like 
a long shot, such as entertainment or professional sports. Applicants to 
prestigious universities, medical schools, top law firms, or other highly 
competitive jobs face similarly high likelihoods of rejection. One of the 
coauthors of this book was rejected from five PhD programs, and the 
other coauthor tallied eight of them – a combined 13 rejections! And, 
they are not alone – far from it. Getting the rejection letters does not 
mean you are unworthy of entering a graduate program or obtaining 
a job. The reality is that hundreds of applicants apply; only a few are 
selected. According to the American Psychological Association (APA), 
the average acceptance rate during the 2022–2023 academic year for 
doctoral programs was 11 percent, and the average acceptance rate for 
master’s programs was 44 percent (2023).Facing Rejection: Taking “No” as a Cue to Stop Grinding 113
And, the rejections keep coming. Social psychologist Dr. Josh 
Ackerman counted his rejections to share with attendees at a sympo￾sium he was leading (Jaremka et al., 2020). He later found the exer￾cise of compiling his rejections to be helpful (more on this in a later 
section) but was initially rattled by the results:
It was a little disheartening to relive my rejections and to rec￾ognize how small the chances are of not being rejected in some 
pursuits. For instance, across the various academic jobs for which 
I have applied, I have a 5.1 percent success rate of moving from 
application to on-campus interview and only a 2.9 percent rate of 
receiving an offer. Also apparent were the rejection valleys, where 
negative experiences cluster together (e.g., a very successful 
colleague reports having 10 manuscripts rejected in a row and 
knowing another scholar who had around 20 such repetitions). 
By the time I finished documenting these failures, I was having 
serious doubts about my life choices (p. 525).
Those are long odds. And these rejection rates are not limited to aca￾demic jobs. Desirable jobs in any field are in high demand. It is not 
uncommon for experienced professionals to submit well over 100 
applications to secure just three to five initial interviews. We discuss 
ways to make yourself more competitive and increase the likelihood 
that you will make the initial cut in Chapter 13. The point here is that 
all of us have faced rejection – we have, you have, your cousin Katrina 
has – and the rejection hurts.
“Ouch, That Hurts!” – The Physical Pain of Rejection
The chirping birds outside the window of your dormitory seemed 
to be encouraging you to head outside to the quad. It was not only 
the center of life on campus; the trees and other foliage were breath￾takingly beautiful. Especially on a day like today – sunny and slightly 
breezy. Although you could not stop thinking about the paper due 
this week, a spring day like this does not come around very frequently. 
Just as you are about to decide to take a study break and head out for 
some sunshine, your suitemates pop in and ask if you want to head to 
the quad to toss a flying disc (the one with the trademarked name). 114 Facing Rejection: Taking “No” as a Cue to Stop Grinding
Definitely! Everyone is able to position themselves quite nicely to toss 
the disc despite the collection of fellow classmates who also could not 
pass up the opportunity to be outside on such a beautiful day.
It starts out well enough as the three of you toss the disc around 
pretty traditionally, with each getting the disc roughly every third throw, 
except when it ventured off course. Then, you get skipped when it was 
supposed to come to you. “No big deal,” you think after the first time it 
happens. The disc comes to you the next time you expected it. You are 
relieved. Then… skipped again. Now, you are puzzled. Initially they are 
skipping you here and there, but eventually, you are left out altogether. 
This goes on for at least 20 minutes until they decide to wrap up and 
head back in. It is certainly confusing, but it also hurts … truly hurts.
The pain you felt in the preceding example is not hyperbole. 
Rejection – social ostracism in this case – has been found to activate the 
same brain areas responsible for physical pain (MacDonald & Leary, 
2005). As mentioned, the specifics of how this works have resulted 
in ongoing debate about whether the activation occurs in the same 
brain pathways as, or ones adjacent to, those activated in physical pain 
response, but it is clear that we react neurologically in a similar way 
(e.g., Woo et al., 2014). Rejection hurts!
Much of the research in this area uses a computerized version of 
the flying disc example at the beginning of this section – a ball tossing 
game called “Cyberball” (Williams, Cheung, & Choi, 2000). The game, 
created by a team of Australian researchers, has been particularly 
helpful in studying the effect of rejection on a variety of measures. 
A review of hundreds of studies with more than 11,000 participants 
revealed that the game was very effective at generating a perception of 
being ostracized (Hartgerink et al., 2015).
Possible Causes of Rejection
Someone once tried to give me a house. Granted, it needed a lot of 
work. Oh, and the property taxes were due soon. After a very brief 
contemplation, I decided to decline the offer. Between the expense of 
completing the work needed to make the house viable and paying the 
property taxes for the past year, it just did not seem worth it. Not to 
mention the fact that the current owner was giving the house away. Facing Rejection: Taking “No” as a Cue to Stop Grinding 115
Literally, not metaphorically. Needless to say, the demand was low 
for that particular house. Contrast this experience with some of the 
home purchases made in the recent housing market. Many sellers 
are receiving multiple offers above asking price. Potential buyers are 
writing letters to the sellers to secure their favor. Many good offers 
were rejected because of the large number of interested buyers for a 
given property. The point illustrated in this example is that rejection 
can be associated with pursuits involving a notable amount of com￾petition. This competitiveness can arise from the intrinsic value of the 
end-goal, scarcity, or both.
Another hard truth is that how to gain an advantage over others is 
not always common knowledge (see Chapter 2 for more on this aspect). 
What separates you from the hundreds of other applicants vying for 
the same position? Many applicants prepare themselves in similar ways 
and have similar selling points (check out Chapter 13 for some ways 
to distinguish yourself ). The majority of this collection of generally 
qualified but indistinguishable applicants will be rejected, and they are 
likely unaware of how underwhelming or average they actually appear 
among the applicant pool. The applicants who have learned to stand 
out will likely not share their techniques with potential competitors. 
This is the concept of “gatekeeping” – once granted entry to some 
fields or achieving a certain level, some performers are not inclined to 
share how they, themselves, were successful.
The hard truth is that some gatekeeping is necessary for many 
fields. One of the advantages of social media is that some have been 
able to circumvent the traditional gatekeepers such as record labels. 
A currently viable model is to record your music, using readily avail￾able software, and release it on the platform(s) of your choice. This 
new model has led to some really great musicians gaining an audience 
that would have been more difficult to gain in years past. However, 
there are a lot of promotional videos for musicians that appear on my 
social media feeds, and many of them are not ready to be heard by the 
masses. While being a horrible singer or mediocre band is perfectly 
fine if you choose to stand on the sidewalk to perform, being a horrible 
singer or mediocre band is unacceptable if my company is footing the 
bill (give us back the cheese tray you ordered for your dressing room). 
Moreover, you certainly would not want the surgeon to operate on you 
before their mentors have given the greenlight that they are ready, and 116 Facing Rejection: Taking “No” as a Cue to Stop Grinding
we certainly want the pilot of our cross-country flight to have been 
sufficiently gatekept. In other words, while some gatekeeping is super￾ficial or competitive, it also can serve a legitimate need.
Unfortunately, rejection is sometimes the result of biases – some 
are well-known, such as those based on race or gender, but there could 
be other biases active. For example, the way you speak could lead to 
rejection. This could be because of improper grammar or the regional 
accent or dialect of the speaker. Other potential biases that can con￾tribute to rejection are based on height (e.g., Habibov et al., 2020) and 
weight (e.g., Roehling, 1999). It has been found that taller people are 
more likely to be employed and earn more than shorter people – a 5 per￾cent salary increase for men and 12 percent salary increase for women 
(Habibov et al., 2020). Relatedly, evidence suggests women are more 
likely than men to experience weight bias (Hebl & Mannix, 2003). The 
list of biases potentially contributing to rejection is probably endless. 
Such biases combined with other potential causes of rejection, already 
discussed, combine to create a realistic idea of how common rejection 
actually is. We discuss in a coming section how this realization of the 
pervasiveness of rejection can be used to help us better cope with rejec￾tion and its aftermath.
Consequences of Rejection – “I Know You Are But 
What Am I?”
We discussed some of the causes of rejection in the preceding section. It 
should not be considered an exhaustive list, and there also will be other 
factors that undoubtedly contribute. In this section, we now will con￾sider some of the very real consequences of rejection. These include 
anger and depression, and an increase in the stress hormone cortisol 
(Blackheart, Eckel, & Tice, 2007). There is also the aforementioned 
physical pain associated with rejection (e.g., MacDonald & Leary, 2005; 
Woo et al., 2014). And of course, rejection ultimately can increase 
feelings of self-doubt/being an impostor (Chapter 3), stall progress of 
what you are working toward, or ultimately lead someone to decide 
that they do not belong in a certain domain or field and dropping out 
(quitting was covered in Chapter 5).Facing Rejection: Taking “No” as a Cue to Stop Grinding 117
Each person can be located on a continuum of rejection tolerance, 
ranging from tolerating a few of them to facing as many rejections as 
it takes to get where they want to be. Many will take rejection as a cue 
to give up on their pursuits. Some will never take the risk at all and will 
therefore (perhaps intentionally) face minimal rejections. Others will 
take a risk but drop their pursuits after the first rejection they experi￾ence. This continuum matters because, as we discussed in Chapter 1, 
you have to do the right things for the appropriate amount of time 
to get good at something. By dropping out prematurely (Chapter 5) 
because of rejection, we certainly prevent ourselves from contributing 
the amount of time needed to advance in the endeavor and miss out on 
opportunities that would eventually arise
“It Does Not Hurt Anymore” – Ways to Move Beyond 
Rejection
I worked with a colleague for months on a conceptual paper applying 
the work on expertise to the specialty area of the colleague. It was 
essentially a guide for helping the specialty area of this colleague iden￾tify unanswered empirical questions that needed to be addressed to 
increase the likelihood that the practitioners were operating at the 
highest level. I received an email notifying me that it had been sub￾mitted to a particular journal with a line added, “I submitted the manu￾script today. I am not confident they will take it.” The uncertainty was 
over whether the journal accepted any articles that were strictly the￾oretical considerations and not empirical studies for which data were 
collected. Nevertheless, the comment demonstrated the recognition 
that rejection is a possibility – we know that rejection is commonplace 
and a part of the process of our work.
We shared some well-known names who overcame rejection, along 
with how commonplace rejection is, earlier in the chapter. Awareness 
of how common rejection is should be one of the first tools we use to 
move beyond its negative impacts. Dr. Lisa Jaremka’s article on a variety 
of topics, including rejection, was intended to help with destigmatizing 
such issues as they typically have not been openly discussed. Two of 
the contributors, Drs. Sweeney and Molina, echoed the sentiment that 118 Facing Rejection: Taking “No” as a Cue to Stop Grinding
rejection is part of the process. We should add that it is part of the pro￾cess for most pursuits – especially competitive ones.
In this regard, the academic environment is useful because we 
sometimes are able to count the specific rejections, as Dr. Ackerman 
did (discussed earlier), in order to share the frequency. The American 
Philosophical Association (APA; 2023) reported that, from 2015 to 
2019, the acceptance rate of paper submissions to be presented at their 
annual convention was 25.3 percent across all divisions. This means 
roughly three-quarters of applicants who submitted a paper to be 
presented at professional conferences were rejected. When it comes to 
publishing research in a journal, the acceptance rate drops to roughly 
10 percent. This means that the most common decision when sub￾mitting a manuscript is a rejection. However, there is also a plus-side 
to this. When your manuscript is rejected, you get feedback on ways 
to improve. This can help if you then want to try again by submitting to 
a different journal. These examples underscore the point that rejection 
will be more commonplace than acceptance. If we know we will be 
getting more rejections than acceptances, we can lessen the sting and 
move forward more easily.
Had we taken our own rejections to our PhD program applications 
as a cue that graduate school was not for us, we would not be the 
professors we are today. Rather than ending our pursuits, we both 
continued our path with some slight modifications. One of us applied 
to master’s programs, was accepted, and actually had several to choose 
from. While the rejections and need to pivot really stung at first, it was 
the best possible outcome. The pivot led us to network more exten￾sively than we otherwise would have, meeting mentors and peers who 
shaped our careers.
Again, recognizing how commonplace rejection is and viewing it as 
an expected part of the process are some ways to cope with the experi￾ence. Musical artist Kandle Osborne echoed this sentiment during our 
interview with her:
Over the years, I’ve gotten better at trying to separate myself 
from the rejection, because most of it isn’t personal.” However, 
the road of getting to this realization was quite difficult, “I have 
people that are amazing label heads and managers. They come to 
my shows and sing along, but they won’t sign me. And, I’ve had Facing Rejection: Taking “No” as a Cue to Stop Grinding 119
very strange things happen – like a couple of years ago, a very big, 
major label said they were sending me a contract the following 
week. My lawyer was ready for it. ‘We are excited,’ they said. I was 
going to be the focus artist of the next year, and all the plans. We 
had many hours of phone calls, and [I] never heard from them 
again. But, that’s happened enough times in my career, where 
you just kind of, you know nothing’s a sure thing until it’s actu￾ally happening. And, that’s harder to learn when you’re younger, 
because you know 22-year-old me being told that I was the next 
big thing – I believed it. I was excited, and then each disappoint￾ment just really breaks your heart.
Logan Mize shared with The Path Distilled podcast (Harris & Tashman, 
2020) that he also was put through the wringer with rejection before 
sticking with it long enough to realize success. He spent years getting 
close to being signed by many major record labels just to be rejected, 
repeatedly. Ultimately, he stuck with it and is a very successful musi￾cian. Kandle and Logan were able to stick around, in part, because they 
withstood the ongoing experiences with rejection. Such rejection can 
lead to you feeling as though you are a fraud, you will never be good 
enough, and that you cannot produce quality work.
Recognizing how common rejection is can be helpful for beginning 
to change the way you view rejection. It can also help to consider rejec￾tion as an opportunity to gain feedback and possibly learn something 
to improve upon. As mentioned earlier, whenever an academic manu￾script is rejected, the reviewers provide feedback for improvement. Co￾author Emily learned to accept such rejections as learning experiences 
after her PhD advisor would tell her, “It’s okay; we will find it a home.” 
That guidance reframed her mindset.
Using feedback as a learning experience dovetails with the continuous 
learning angle of resilience (Pulley & Wakefield, 2001). Resiliency can 
be thought of as two processes: being exposed to adversity and having 
a positive adaptation (Fletcher & Sarkar, 2003). When we face an obs￾tacle we do not think we can overcome, but we do, that is resiliency. 
The question becomes – how do we get from point A to point B when 
we face obstacles that make us want to give up, such as rejection? The 
short answer: do not give up. Face each battle head on and become 
more resilient each time. When we face rejection, whether it be from 120 Facing Rejection: Taking “No” as a Cue to Stop Grinding
a job interview or a potential promotion, learn from the experience. 
What can we fix or change to increase our chances of an acceptance 
for the next time? We learn what works (or not) with each scenario we 
face, and we develop courage to keep going, and strength and experi￾ence to overcome future rejections. This approach aligns well with 
the second component of resilience, reflection (Pulley & Wakefield, 
2001). Many of us will want to move right to the next thing after being 
rejected. However, if we do not take the time to reflect on the experi￾ence, we cannot expect to learn and grow from it.
Another method of reframing proposed by Dr. Ackerman (Jaremka 
et al., 2010) is to examine other factors besides you or your work that 
may have contributed to the rejection. On the surface, this seems to 
be at odds with taking a close look at what you need to improve upon. 
While you still need to be open and honest in seeking out what you 
can do better, sometimes there are things out of your control that have 
nothing to do with you or you work. Consider the biases mentioned 
above, the limitations on number of acceptances possible, or even how 
well you slept the night before. Bottom line – continue seeking con￾tinuous improvement, but be aware that sometimes “stuff happens.”
Relatedly, rejection should be viewed as impersonal, which is often 
difficult. Remember Kandle Osborne’s view on rejection: “most of it 
isn’t personal.” We are fairly certain that the reviewers were not criti￾cizing us personally when they rejected our manuscripts. Similarly, 
there might be three amazing candidates for a single position within a 
company. This means that two outstanding candidates will experience 
rejection. From the employers’ perspective, there are often candidates 
in high demand for competing employers. These candidates may receive 
multiple offers but can only accept one, and then, the employers will 
experience rejection. Again, these candidates likely did not make their 
decision as a personal affront to their suitors.
Not taking rejection personally might be more difficult when it 
comes to promotions with an existing employer or after extended time 
within a domain. This is because there actually is a history with the 
person rejecting you. After months or years in a position, you may 
be turned down for a promotion or raise. This type of rejection can 
trigger feelings of not being good enough or of being a fraud (see 
Chapter 3 for more on impostor syndrome). This happened to one of 
our interviewees who was asked to serve in a senior leadership position Facing Rejection: Taking “No” as a Cue to Stop Grinding 121
at a company on an interim status. They absolutely loved serving in 
the position. When it came time to find a full-time person for the pos￾ition, they thought they would be the obvious choice to fill the pos￾ition permanently, but the company selected a different candidate. The 
rejection stung, and they felt like giving up on the company altogether. 
As mentioned, it was the track record with the organization and key 
players that made the decision feel so personal.
“You sure are sensitive”
Nobody likes the feeling of being rejected. So, why do some of us 
continue to pursue our goals and dreams when experiencing repeated 
rejections, and others drop out when it happens? One reason that 
researchers have discovered is that there are differences in how sen￾sitive individuals are to rejection – some of us are impacted more 
severely than others. This phenomenon was dubbed rejection sensi￾tivity (e.g., Downey & Feldman, 1996). Our sensitivity to rejection falls 
on a continuum from rejection having very little impact to having a 
tremendous impact. Those with a high rejection sensitivity experience 
rejection more intensely and anxiously expect rejection, which would 
presumably impact performance and perception. For example, coming 
across as “on edge” could create the opposite vibe from what you are 
hoping to achieve, particularly if you end up coming across as hostile 
or defensive.
Researchers were able to capture the impact of rejection sensi￾tivity in a study in which participants were led to believe that they had 
been rejected by a peer (Ayduk, Gyurak, & Luerssen, 2008). The same 
participants were later allowed to deliver a variable amount of hot 
sauce to the person they thought had rejected them. The participants 
were led to believe that the person did not like spicy foods. Rejected 
participants who rated high in rejection sensitivity applied a signifi￾cantly greater amount of hot sauce compared to the other rejected 
participants, even more when the rejection was unexpected.
Presumably, even those who have high rejection sensitivity can over￾come such tendencies, but it is also possible that someone with high 
rejection sensitivity would drop out of a domain. This being the case, 
we propose that viewing repeated rejection as part of moving up the 122 Facing Rejection: Taking “No” as a Cue to Stop Grinding
ranks might help. We both see rejection as part of the cost of existing 
in academic positions. As the examples throughout the chapter illus￾trate, it is the same with other domains. Staying in the mix despite the 
rejections is critical for getting where you want to be.
Chapter Summary
In this chapter, we discussed rejection and the tremendous impact it 
can have on someone striving to become a high performer. Rejection 
is commonplace, and we shared examples of both high-profile and 
everyday people experiencing it, ranging from hypothetical job 
applicants to Nobel Laureates. Research suggests that social rejec￾tion activates the same, or possibly adjacent, neural pathways as when 
we experience physical pain. Nevertheless, rejection mimics physical 
pain – it hurts. Other consequences include anger and depression, 
and an increase in the stress hormone cortisol (Blackheart, Eckel, & 
Tice, 2007). Rejection ultimately can result in increased feelings of self￾doubt/being an impostor (Chapter 3), stall progress of what you are 
working toward, or ultimately result in someone deciding that they 
do not belong in a certain domain or field and dropping out (quitting 
was covered in Chapter 5). Suggestions to move past rejection include 
being aware of the high rate of rejection in most domains and coming 
to view it as part of the process, even learning from it.© 2023–2024 Expert Performance International Collective (EPIC). This exercise is copyrighted by Kevin Harris and the Expert 
Performance International Collective (EPIC). All rights reserved. Used with permission.
Facing Rejection: Taking “No” as a Cue to Stop Grinding 123
“You’ll Never Make It In…!”
Chapter 7: Facing Rejection: Taking “No” as a Cue to 
Stop
This exercise will help you realize that rejection is normal and reduce 
the stigma. In the first part of the exercise, you will be asked to provide 
examples of times you have personally been rejected. The second part
will ask you to recall what the ultimate outcome was for each example 
of rejection you provide.
1. Provide three (or more) examples of rejections you have experienced.© 2023–2024 Expert Performance International Collective (EPIC). This exercise is copyrighted by Kevin Harris and the Expert 
Performance International Collective (EPIC). All rights reserved. Used with permission.
124 Facing Rejection: Taking “No” as a Cue to Stop Grinding
2. High performers typically continue their pursuits despite multiple 
rejections along the way. Reflect on the rejections you provided in 
the previous question and describe the outcomes on the goals you 
were pursuing. Did you give up altogether or were you ultimately 
successful?Facing Rejection: Taking “No” as a Cue to Stop Grinding 125
References
American Philosophical Association (APA) (2023). APA paper submission 
guidelines: Paper acceptance rates. https://www.apaonline.org/page/
papersubmission. Accessed November 21, 2023.
American Psychological Association (APA) (2023). Graduate education data 
tool: Applications, acceptances, and enrollments. https://www.apa.
org/education-career/grad/survey-data/graduate-education-data-tools. 
Accessed November 21, 2023.
Ayduk, Ö., Gyurak, A., & Luerssen, A. (2008). Individual differences in the 
rejection–aggression link in the hot sauce paradigm: The case of rejection 
sensitivity. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 44(3), 775–782. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jesp.2007.07.004.
Blackhart, G.C., Eckel, L.A., & Tice, D.M. (2007). Salivary cortisol in response 
to acute social rejection and acceptance by peers. Biological Psychology, 
75(3), 267–276. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsycho.2007.03.005.
Downey, G., & Feldman, S.I. (1996). Implications of rejection sensitivity for 
intimate relationships. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 70(6), 
1327–1343. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.70.6.1327.
Fletcher D. & Sarkar M. (2013). Psychological resilience: A review and critique 
of definitions, concepts, and theory. European Psychologist, 18, https://doi.
org/12–23.10.1027/1016-9040/a000124; https://doi.org/10.1027/1016-
9040/a000124.
Habibov, N., Auchynnikava, A., Luo, R., & Fan, L. (2020). Influence of 
height on likelihood of employment, occupational sorting, and earnings 
in 27 post-communist countries. American Journal of Human Biology, 32(6), 
e23422. https://doi.org/10.1002/ajhb.23422.
Harris, K.R., & Tashman, L. (Hosts). (2020, May 24). Logan Mize [Audio pod￾cast episode]. The Path Distilled. https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/
the-path-distilled-podcast/id1511069681?i=1000475563956.
Hartgerink, C.H., Van Beest, I., Wicherts, J.M., & Williams, K.D. (2015). The 
ordinal effects of ostracism: A meta-analysis of 120 Cyberball studies. PloS 
One, 10(5), e0127002. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0127002.
Hebl, M.R., & Mannix, L.M. (2003). The weight of obesity in evaluating 
others: A mere proximity effect. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 
29(1), 28–38. https://doi.org/10.1177/0146167202238369.
Jaremka, L.M., Ackerman, J.M., Gawronski, B., Rule, N.O., Sweeny, K., Tropp, 
L.R., Metz, M.A., Molina, L., Ryan, W.S., & Vick, S.B. (2020). Common 
academic experiences no one talks about: Repeated rejection, impostor 126 Facing Rejection: Taking “No” as a Cue to Stop Grinding
syndrome, and burnout. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 15(3), 519–543. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/1745691619898848.
Johal, S. (2020). Bouncing back: 6 stories of triumph after rejection. LinkedIn. 
https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/bouncing-back-6-stories-triumph-after￾rejection-shawn-johal. Accessed November 22, 2023.
MacDonald, G., & Leary, M.R. (2005). Why does social exclusion hurt? The 
relationship between social and physical pain. Psychological Bulletin, 131(2), 
202–223. https://psycnet.apa.org/doi/10.1037/0033-2909.131.2.202.
National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) (2013). Probability of com￾peting beyond high school. https://www.ncaa.org/sports/2013/12/17/
probability-of-competing-beyond-high-school.aspx. Accessed February 
20, 2024.
National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) (2015). Estimated prob￾ability of competing in professional athletics. https://www.ncaa.org/
sports/2013/12/17/probability-of-competing-beyond-high-school.aspx. 
Accessed February 20, 2024.
Norwin, N. (2024) Lainey Wilson’s past ‘American Idol’ rejection shocks judge 
Luke Bryan: “Don’t always get it right.” Y! Entertainment. https://www.
yahoo.com/entertainment/lainey-wilson-past-american-idol-093545
138.html#:~:text=“I%20tried%20out%20seven%20times,it%20past%20
the%20first%20round. Accessed February 23, 2024.
Pulley, M., & Wakefield, M. (2001). Building Resiliency: How to Thrive in Times 
of Change. Center for Creative Leadership.
Roehling, M.V. (1999). Weight-based discrimination in employ￾ment: Psychological and legal aspects. Personnel Psychology, 52(4), 969–1016. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1744-6570.1999.tb00186.x.
Williams, K.D., Cheung, C.K., & Choi, W. (2000). Cyberostracism: Effects of 
being ignored over the Internet. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
79(5), 748–762. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.79.5.748.
Woo, C.W., Koban, L., Kross, E., Lindquist, M.A., Banich, M.T., Ruzic, L., 
Andrews-Hanna, J. R., & Wager, T. D. (2014). Separate neural representations 
for physical pain and social rejection. Nature Communications, 5(1), 5380. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms6380.DOI: 10.4324/9781003377542-8
Aiming for Perfection
Identify Your Threshold 
and Dive In
When you realize how many people would love this job [Disney], and to 
do what you’re doing, it can be really a lot of pressure to keep up and to 
be perfect; and to do more even than you are expected to, just to compete.
– Thomas Estrada, film and video game animator
If everybody’s a perfectionist, you never make it on the racetrack, 
because the car’s never perfect. It’s as much as you want it to be. Things 
happen. Cars happen. We push them really hard. All of them almost are 
over 1,000 horsepower, and parts just aren’t designed to last long-term 
making that kind of power, taking that kind of abuse. So, perfection is 
relative to some degree.
– Taylor Hull, Formula Drift Pro driver
While mindlessly scrolling through a popular social media site one day, 
an image captured my attention. It was a picture of a camel climbing a 
steep sand dune. The most intriguing part was that the camel appeared 
to be crawling. The camel’s neck was extended parallel to the steeply 
angled dune with front legs bent as if crawling with its front knees. 
While this technique certainly could not be considered elegant, it must 
be quite effective. This got me thinking about perfectionism.
In many instances, we are afraid to take the initial steps or want 
to wait until we are just a little better. In some cases, we will wait for 
a perfect moment to launch, or until we have experienced a perfect 
performance. This approach is flawed for many reasons. As we will 
8128 Aiming for Perfection: Identify Your Threshold and Dive In
discuss below, perfectionism is often maladaptive. Just as the camel 
uses a seemingly awkward technique to climb dunes, sometimes we 
must jump in to get something done with what we have or know at the 
time. We also discuss how these opportunities might lead to mistakes 
along the way, how these mistakes can help us in the long term, and 
how not taking the leap with small opportunities can lead to missed 
larger opportunities.
Perfectionism in the Traditional Sense
When Malik entered his master’s degree program, he was given a set 
timeframe in which to complete his thesis. As he reviews it in prepar￾ation to submit, Malik is not sure what is bugging him about the manu￾script. He just cannot bring himself to submit a draft for his advisor to 
review. The thesis is objectively well written. However, Malik finds some￾thing to revise every time he reviews – changing a word on one page 
or deleting a sentence on another. Making matters worse, he is already 
several months behind schedule. It makes sense that the tardiness of the 
submission is stressful but not nearly as stressful as the current state of 
his paper. It just is not… something. It just is not… perfect. Ultimately, 
Malik exhausted his window of eligibility and never earned his degree.
Malik’s example illustrates one of the potential negative consequences 
of perfectionism. For example, perfectionism has been associated with 
a long list of negative outcomes, including increased stress, burnout, 
and depression (Moate et al., 2016). Additionally, work by U.K. scholars 
Thomas Curran and Andrew Hill suggests perfectionism has been on 
the rise since the 1980s (Curran & Hill, 2019). Their meta-analysis of 
American, British, and Canadian teens found that present-day teens are 
more prone to perfectionism. The researchers determined that present￾day teens experience greater societal demands and are more demanding 
of themselves, and they themselves contribute to the increased societal 
demands. A later empirical study by the same scholars identified that 
parental criticism had also increased over time, and it contributed dir￾ectly to the increased perfectionism identified in the teens (Curran & 
Hill, 2022).
While there are proponents of perfectionism because it can 
improve performance in certain circumstances, such as the adaptive Aiming for Perfection: Identify Your Threshold and Dive In 129
perfectionism helping medical students meet the rigorous demands 
of medical school (Enns et al., 2001), there also is evidence that per￾fectionism leads some to limit their scope (the topic of Chapter 6). 
For example, a team of Canadian researchers expanded the work on 
the impact of perfectionism to college professors and found that per￾fectionism stymied productivity (Sherry et al., 2010). In particular, 
professors holding themselves to standards of perfectionism tended to 
avoid situations in which they might fail or receive criticism – sounds 
much like one of the potential consequences of a fixed mindset that we 
introduced in Chapter 1. This led them to both think less creatively and 
to produce fewer deliverables than someone not striving for perfection.
You might have found yourself in a similar position if you have per￾fectionist tendencies. Even for those without the perfectionist tenden￾cies, criticism and failure are not pleasant. Anecdotally, this reminds me 
of a common refrain among musicians and artists about the pressure 
they can feel once they experience some degree of success. Their early 
artistic work likely was produced based on what the musician or artist 
enjoyed or were drawn to create. Their original album might have been 
written over several years. However, once some success is attained, 
there often is pressure to maintain the momentum of their original 
success in a much shorter window of time. There is nothing inher￾ently problematic with attempts to maintain momentum. However, 
perfectionism, or perfectionism-like tendencies, might enter the pic￾ture given the higher expectations.
Evidence for such pressure to maintain success, and its potentially 
limiting impact on creativity, was provided by a clever study conducted 
by a group of researchers analyzing the stylistic originality of songs 
released by musical artists following Grammy nominations (Negro 
et al., 2022). Artists who won a Grammy subsequently released 
music that was noticeably stylistically different from their peers. The 
researchers labelled this “artistic differentiation.” Grammy winners 
subsequently exhibited increased differentiation from other artists 
with their releases when compared to their music prior to the Grammy 
nomination. Critically, the artists who were nominated for a Grammy 
but ultimately did not win ended up sounding more like their peers with 
subsequent releases. This illustrates the impact that the lens through 
which one is viewing performance can ultimately have on the out￾come – including pressure to maintain momentum and perfectionist 130 Aiming for Perfection: Identify Your Threshold and Dive In
tendencies. It takes an understanding of the potential value of both 
criticism and failure to begin appreciating the usefulness of each, and 
perfectionist tendencies complicate this process.
“You Sure do Train a Lot and Keep Working on 
Improving”
There are many examples to choose from when highlighting the inten￾sity of the training of world-class performers. You might have seen 
videos of high-level athletes training in sandpits to add an extra layer of 
difficulty. Presumably, running on a typical field or pitch would seem 
easy after attempting to go full speed in the sandpit. Another version 
of this type of training is having the athlete sprint up steep inclines or 
while wearing additional weights. Brandon Payne, a basketball skills 
trainer who has worked extensively with NBA player Steph Curry, 
shared with The Path Distilled podcast that he uses a similar training 
technique by creating situations that exceed what might be expected in 
an actual game (Harris & Tashman, 2020). By doing so, the game can 
seem much slower to a player trained in such as way.
These intense training techniques are not limited to physical pursuits; 
Chapter 1 opened with the model of Joyce Carol Oates writing practice 
novels to be thrown away (Kellogg, 2006) and acclaimed screenwriter 
Jonathan Goyer noting that you will need to have written numerous 
screenplays before they begin turning out well (Donelly, 2005). While 
this writing is quite distinct from physically training in a sandpit, writing 
a full novel or screenplay to improve your craft is intense. Almost any 
domain with high levels of performance will have some version of this 
intense training.
An observer of such training could very easily, and understandably, 
be prone to labelling what they are witnessing as prime examples of 
perfectionism. The person being observed might be working iteratively 
to get the best possible line in a novel or consistently make a shot on 
the basketball court. Moreover, they typically are consistently striving 
to reach the next level of performance. These observed behaviors 
could easily appear to be one and the same as perfectionism in action. 
However, there is a term that better encapsulates what typically occurs 
with world-class performers – excellencism. Patrick Gaudreau and Aiming for Perfection: Identify Your Threshold and Dive In 131
colleagues have spent considerable time distinguishing perfectionism 
from excellencism (Gaudreau et al., 2022). While both perfectionism 
and excellencism involves the pursuit of high levels of performance, a 
key distinguishing feature between the two is flexibility.
In other words, excellencism can be thought of as striving to be your 
best without the baggage that frequently accompanies perfectionism. 
Pursuing excellencism allows you to work toward your goals, presum￾ably with a reduced risk of being derailed by unrealistic expectations 
or failing to reach perfection. Having said that, the expectations one 
might have for themselves can still be set very high and the performer’s 
expectations of themselves extremely demanding. The flexibility 
allotted in striving for excellencism, as opposed to perfectionism, comes 
in part from providing the mental space that will allow for mistakes 
to be made. At least, that is the way it should be approached. While 
such mistakes are typically not made intentionally, taking advantage 
of the opportunity to analyze and learn from them is advantageous for 
improving performance
Never a Perfect Time to Launch – Embrace the 
Uneasiness
Chace and Tina were bonding over coffee at a local bistro. When he 
got home, Chace could not stop thinking about Tina. He thought that 
there might have been some romantic interest. Always self-conscious 
about his appearance, he wanted to drop at least ten pounds before 
asking her on a date. He figured that he could hit the gym and be ready 
to ask her out in a couple of months. Unfortunately for Chace, Tina 
was beaming at their weekly coffee meet-up three weeks into Chace’s 
plan – she had met someone! Chace realized in that moment that his 
window of opportunity was closed, and he could kick himself for not 
asking Tina out much sooner.
Pay very close attention to this next statement. There never will be a 
perfect time to launch. This applies to almost anything. There will always 
be something that could be better or improved. Chace lost out on his 
chance to ask Tina on a date over a perceived issue with his weight. In 
the previous section, Malik lost out on his chance to earn a graduate 
degree because he felt his thesis could always be improved. He was 132 Aiming for Perfection: Identify Your Threshold and Dive In
concerned about perceived mistakes that may never have been noticed 
by the committee reviewing his work. Another common fear is of 
making mistakes, especially when attempting to enter a domain or 
move up in a hierarchy. As we will see in the next section, the mistakes 
one makes can be excellent learning tools. Hooman Rahini, PROSPEC 
Formula Drift driver, noted the advice he received from his father 
about making mistakes:
There’s no chance that I don’t mess up eventually. I’m going to 
make a mistake. But something my dad taught me early was, you 
can make a million mistakes. Just learn from them. If you learn 
from every mistake, then it’s a mistake, but it’s not the end of 
the world. You can move on; you can grow from it and actually 
become better.
We dive a little deeper into the potentially surprising benefits of failure 
in a coming section. We also discuss, in a separate upcoming section, 
how you also could miss out on some of the smaller opportunities that 
eventually lead to the larger opportunities by waiting on the sidelines 
too long. Now, let us discuss the somewhat paradoxical experience of 
the anxiety and other negative feelings induced by doing something 
that we really want to do – and some research-based potential ways to 
overcome them.
It is often unrecognized that doing something new can be unnerving, 
even if you really want to do it. This could be standing on a stage with 
a microphone attempting to make a crowd laugh by performing stand￾up comedy. It could be competing in a local tennis tournament or 
making a pitch to secure funding for your start-up. It could be any￾thing that you really want to do but still gives you butterflies. Rondal 
Richardson, philanthropist and former musician manager, was part of 
Garth Brooks’ management team when Brooks played Central Park 
in the 1990s. Rondal shared the story of Brooks – despite already 
performing at sold-out stadiums across the globe – having his breath 
taken away upon observing the size of the crowd. Many of you reading 
this book aspire to accomplish great things. Some level of discomfort 
will always remain. Consider Brandon Flowers of the legendary band, 
The Killers. Brandon shared with the Smartless podcast hosts that he 
still gets butterflies before taking the stage over 20 years into his career 
(Batemen, Hayes, & Arnett, 2024).Aiming for Perfection: Identify Your Threshold and Dive In 133
There are some techniques to counter the jitters that are used by 
those consistently in the thick of it. For example, Darryl McDaniels, 
aka DMC of the legendary hip-hop group Run-DMC, revealed in a 
recent documentary about the group that he adopted the persona of 
a superhero to help him get past the performance jitters that never 
went away (Simmons et al., 2024). Beyoncé revealed some time ago 
during an interview with Oprah Winfrey that she adopts the persona 
of an imaginary person when she is performing – Sasha Fierce, who 
is fearless (Winfrey, 2008). This persona can handle the demands of 
performing with ease and without the jitters commonly accompanying 
them. Doing this allows Beyoncé or DMC to not fret about the jitters 
they are experiencing too much – Sasha and the superhero can handle 
it. Many of the first steps you, as well as most anyone, take will feel 
uncomfortable, at least in the beginning. Lean into this. Recognize it 
for what it is and move past it. Let us consider some examples of why 
this is possible – if you understand the combined psychological and 
physiological components at play.
Empirical studies support the position that to what we attribute 
our physiological experiences can play a huge role in our interpret￾ation of the situation, and ultimately, our performance. The official 
line of research is called misattribution of arousal. In the classic study, 
participants were injected with epinephrine, which causes physio￾logical arousal (e.g., increased heartrate), or a placebo before engaging 
in staged interactions with actors, who were either angry or jovial. 
Participants injected with the epinephrine labelled their arousal differ￾ently, based on the scenario in which they were involved (Schacter & 
Singer, 1962). In other words, participants interacting with the jovial 
actor interpreted their arousal as meaning they were having a good 
time. The arousal was interpreted as anger when they were interacting 
with the seemingly angry participant.
Later findings suggest that misattribution of arousal can even play 
a role in sexual attraction whereby physiological arousal is attributed 
to a person who is present. For example, physiological arousal from 
music can lead participants to provide comparatively higher attract￾iveness ratings of a face as compared to physiologically non-aroused 
participants (Marin et al., 2017). These examples show how prone we 
are to misinterpreting our own physiological responses and reminds us 
that we are interpreting the responses based on cues in the environment.134 Aiming for Perfection: Identify Your Threshold and Dive In
Can awareness of the misattribution of arousal phenomenon actu￾ally make a difference in your performance? Absolutely! Let us consider 
two examples. Researcher James Olson found empirical support for this 
conclusion. In his well-known study, when participants were told that 
the sound being piped in through their headphones would make them 
“unpleasantly aroused” while giving a speech, the participants made 
fewer errors than participants who were told the music would make 
them relax or there would be no effect (1988). Why was this the case? 
They were able to attribute their jitters to the noise coming through 
their headphones instead of doubts about their own abilities. Being 
able to attribute their jitters to something other than the task allowed 
the participants to functionally trick themselves – “if the task is not 
making me nervous then maybe I got this.”
This phenomenon was made even more applicable when a different 
group of researchers, Jessi Smith and Meghan Huntoon, conducted a 
variation of this study by asking women in college to write an essay 
explaining why they deserved a scholarship (Smith & Huntoon, 2014). 
When the women were told that subliminal noises occurring while 
writing their essays would make them uncomfortable, they engaged 
in greater self-promotion (a topic covered in Chapter 15) compared 
to women who were not informed that the noises would make them 
uncomfortable. Once again, having something other than the task, 
or their own thoughts about the task, to account for their discomfort 
led to higher performance. Our own experiences have been that high￾level performers eventually learn to recognize feelings of discomfort 
as part of the process. The need for an external source to which the 
uneasiness can be attached goes away, and it is deemed part of the 
experience.
Failing to Win
In Chapter 2 we discussed Tony Hawk’s tremendous dedication to 
getting better at skateboarding. This dedication to improving included 
experiences with some pretty extensive injuries in the pursuit of 
mastering his craft. The anecdote was used to provide an example of 
someone not becoming complacent and attempting to move on to the 
next performance level. Implicit in this scenario is the willingness of Aiming for Perfection: Identify Your Threshold and Dive In 135
Tony and his fellow skateboarders to repeatedly fail in their attempts to 
pull off a particular maneuver. This repeated failure occurs frequently 
in most every domain. In some cases, such as the skateboarding 
examples, the failures have physical consequences. In other domains, 
the failures take different forms – a computer coding failure or a recipe 
not being what was expected. These failures can teach us tremendous 
lessons.
In many pursuits, it is this repeated failure that eventually leads to 
large gains for the performer. More specifically, attempts to move beyond 
current levels of ability lead to multiple failures, but these failures 
eventually lead to successful performance increases. These increases 
arise, in part, from the lessons learned during the iterative process 
of attempting something, mostly failing at it, and then repeating the 
attempting/failing cycle until performance stabilizes. Anders Ericsson 
(who coined the term deliberate practice and is mentioned throughout 
the book) and his coauthors used figure skating as an example to illus￾trate this principle in action (Ericsson, Roring, & Nandagopal, 2007; see 
also Deakin & Cobley, 2003). The authors highlight the high frequency 
of failed attempts when attempting to master skills required for high￾level figure skating. And, just like Tony Hawk attempting to master 
his moves on the skateboard, failed attempts in figure skating can be 
painful as they often result in physical falls. Critically, the most elite 
skaters spent the majority of their training attempting the moves they 
had yet to master while the skilled, but lower status, skaters spent the 
majority of their practice time working on moves they were already 
good at performing. In other words, the most elite performers were 
not only comfortable with failure, they expected it. It was part of the 
process. Thankfully, failures in many domains are not painful, but they 
still provide tremendous opportunities for learning.
The Soviet chess training academies introduced in Chapter 2 provide 
another example of learning from failing. A practice they employed 
was to study in-game positions of previously played games and iden￾tify why a trainee’s selected move differed from the higher-level grand￾master in the actual game. The trainee then moved on to other in-game 
positions to repeat the process (Shadrick & Lussier, 2004). While 
mistakes in chess are not physically painful, the process is similar –
identify mistakes and use them to improve performance on subsequent 
attempts. The goal again would be to reach stable performance on the 136 Aiming for Perfection: Identify Your Threshold and Dive In
skill originally out of reach and then turn attention to reaching the 
next level of performance.
Major League Baseball’s (MLB) Alec Mills shared:
There’s a lot of times where I’ve learned more things from a bad 
outing than I have from a good outing. I think that’s life, period, 
you know. I think we learn from our mistakes, and that’s how 
we get better from our mistakes. Mistakes are something that 
we know we’ve done wrong, and a lot of times when things are 
going well, it’s hard to learn from that, because nothing’s going 
wrong. I’m learning more from losing or learning more from 
doing poorly. Take when things don’t go well and learn from 
that, and leapfrog that into your next outing, or next day, or even 
next hour.
Andrew Lang, founder of Leatherwood Distillery, shared a similar 
sentiment, “I’m also of the mindset you can’t win every time. There’s 
going to be downfalls. You’re going to trip and fall. And, as long as you 
learn from it and fix it the next time, things will work out.”
Thus, failure is part of the process of becoming really good at 
something. Those of you who have made it to a high level are already 
aware of this. However, the collective societal views discussed in 
Chapter 1 come back into the picture with regard to failure. When 
someone drops out of a domain because of failure, it feeds the soci￾etal views by maintaining the belief that they could not make it. In 
reality, there is a pretty good chance that the person dropping out was 
impacted by the issues highlighted throughout this book, including the 
impact this view can collectively have on mindset in combination with 
a lack of resources available for some.
Researchers Ronnel King and Jose Eos Trinidad (2021) analyzed 
the data for over 15,000 middle school students and confirmed that 
a growth mindset was predictive of success for wealthier students 
but not for students on the lower end of socioeconomic status. Such 
findings make intuitive sense. Believing you can get better at some￾thing is not particularly helpful if you do not have the resources 
needed to do so (more on these factors can be found in Chapters 1 
and 2). Thus, it seems that we tend to drop or rise to the level of our 
surroundings.Aiming for Perfection: Identify Your Threshold and Dive In 137
Small Opportunities Leading to Larger Opportunities
Another consideration related to waiting for things to be perfect is the 
consideration that we have already discussed in Chapter 6 – that small 
opportunities often lead to larger opportunities. Implicit in this is that 
you are involved in the domain of interest at some level. Relevant to 
the current chapter, this could be making sacrifices to get initial oppor￾tunities, or it could be just showing up (which you cannot do if you 
have dropped out). Let us consider some examples of this playing out 
by turning to some of the experiences of our interviewees.
Brian Bates is a stand-up comedian and co-host of the very successful 
Nateland podcast. He discussed this premise as a guest on The Path Distilled
podcast (Harris & Tashman, 2020). Brian mentioned that, despite still 
working a full-time job, he would hang out at the local comedy club. The 
club is well known and features nationally touring comedians – many of 
them household names. The goal was to get as much stage time as pos￾sible and to gain exposure to other comics. Brian got to know many of 
the comedians, and opportunities began to pile up. In addition to his pod￾cast hosting gig, he currently tours nationally as a stand-up comedian. 
These opportunities arose, in part, by his immersion in the local scene 
and willingness to take less glamorous opportunities for years.
Presumably, Brian was viewing each opportunity as a building block 
for the next. Mark Johnson, co-owner of Hobnail Trekking Company, 
echoed this sentiment, “You rarely get presented large, big, fat, hairy 
opportunities at the beginning. My experience has been that, for every 
success that I’ve had, it’s been a progression of small opportunities to 
big ones.” As a reminder, these smaller opportunities can be derailed 
by perfectionistic tendencies. Nothing in this chapter should be taken 
as guidance to jump into something when you are definitively subpar 
at whatever the domain is – you have to at least be on par with the 
performance expected at your current level of the domain. Instead, 
it is a reminder to not keep yourself on the sidelines once you have 
reached a reasonable level of performance by seeking perfection. Our 
world-touring, gold-record selling, anonymous musician reminds us 
how taking the smaller opportunities can potentially change our lives:
This usually happens by meeting someone that leads you into a 
new door. The industry is an infinitely overlapping network of 138 Aiming for Perfection: Identify Your Threshold and Dive In
individuals that know each other, from big acts to small acts. If 
someone wants to help you, for whatever reason, then they can 
easily propel you to bigger opportunities. Small opportunities 
can sometimes lead to events that change the trajectory of your 
entire life.
These examples illustrate the ultimate impact that taking what are 
considered to be small opportunities can have – leading to larger oppor￾tunities. Critically, withholding yourself from a domain by waiting for 
things to be perfect can obviously hinder this progress. Even if your 
hesitation does not reach the level of perfectionism in the traditional 
sense, you might be hesitant to begin. Though you should not jump 
into something when you are so unskilled that you will damage your 
reputation, you should not wait too long to immerse yourself in a 
domain you strive to enter. As stated earlier in the chapter, there never
will be a perfect time to start.
Chapter Summary
In this chapter, we discussed the pitfalls of perfectionism and how it is 
on the rise. Perfectionism can stall our progress by causing us to feel 
that we are not ready or convincing us to wait on the “perfect” time to 
launch. Either of these approaches can either hinder our progress or 
lead to us not participating because we never identify a time to launch. 
Watching the training of high performers can be intense and they 
can appear to exhibit perfectionism to an observer. However, a rela￾tively new concept called “excellencism” is a better term to describe 
the intense commitment of high performers and their attempts to be 
the best version of themselves possible. Excellencism is the pursuit of 
excellence rather than perfection. We also proposed that feeling anx￾ious when performing, especially early on, is a normal part of the pro￾cess and should not discourage us from continuing. Rather, we can 
learn from our mistakes if things do not go as planned, and as we 
discussed in the previous chapter, small opportunities can lead to larger 
opportunities. Waiting until we no longer feel anxious or for the “per￾fect” moment is counterproductive.© 2023–2024 Expert Performance International Collective (EPIC). This exercise is copyrighted by Kevin Harris and the Expert 
Performance International Collective (EPIC). All rights reserved. Used with permission.
Aiming for Perfection: Identify Your Threshold and Dive In 139
Let’s Go Now
Chapter 8: Aiming for Perfection: Identify Your Threshold 
and Dive In
This exercise is intended to help you counter the idea that circumstances 
should be “perfect” before proceeding on a path. In the first part of 
the exercise, you will be asked to provide examples of things you have 
wanted to do but have postponed. The second part will ask you to spe￾cify what is holding you up.
1. Provide at least one example of something you have wanted to do 
but have postponed and/or you feel anxious about doing.© 2023–2024 Expert Performance International Collective (EPIC). This exercise is copyrighted by Kevin Harris and the Expert 
Performance International Collective (EPIC). All rights reserved. Used with permission.
140 Aiming for Perfection: Identify Your Threshold and Dive In
2. High performers often still feel anxiety about performing, even 
when they really want to do it. Reflect on the examples you provided 
in part 1. Specifically identify what is holding you up or making you 
anxious. Finally, make a plan outlining how you are going to proceed 
despite feeling anxious. (Note: ensure you meet minimal safety/per￾formance thresholds.)Aiming for Perfection: Identify Your Threshold and Dive In 141
References
Bateman, J., Hayes, S., Arnett, W. (Hosts). (2024, February 5). The Killers 
[Audio podcast episode]. Smartless. https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podc
ast/the-killers/id1521578868?i=1000643216888.
Curran, T., & Hill, A.P. (2019). Perfectionism is increasing over time: A meta￾analysis of birth cohort differences from 1989 to 2016. Psychological Bulletin, 
145(4), 410–429. https://psycnet.apa.org/doi/10.1037/bul0000138.
Curran, T., & Hill, A.P. (2022). Young people’s perceptions of their parents’ 
expectations and criticism are increasing over time: Implications for perfec￾tionism. Psychological Bulletin, 148(1–2), 107. https://psycnet.apa.org/doi/
10.1037/bul0000347.
Deakin, J.M., & Cobley, S. (2003). A search for deliberate practice: An exam￾ination of the practice environments in figure skating and volleyball. In 
J.L. Starkes & K.A. Ericsson (Eds.), Expert Performance in Sports: Advances in 
Research on Sport Expertise (pp. 115–135). Human Kinetics.
Donnelly, S. (2005, June). How to: write a screenplay. Maxim, 90, 56.
Enns, M.W., Cox, B J., Sareen, J., & Freeman, P. (2001). Adaptive and mal￾adaptive perfectionism in medical students: A longitudinal investiga￾tion. Medical Education, 35(11), 1034–1042. https://doi.org/10.1111/
j.1365-2923.2001.01044.x.
Ericsson, K.A., Roring, R.W., & Nandagopal, K. (2007). Giftedness and evi￾dence for reproducibly superior performance: An account based on the 
expert performance framework. High Ability Studies, 18(1), 3–56. https://
doi.org/10.1080/13598130701350593.
Gaudreau, P., Schellenberg, B.J., Gareau, A., Kljajic, K., & Manoni-Millar, S. 
(2022). Because excellencism is more than good enough: On the need to 
distinguish the pursuit of excellence from the pursuit of perfection. Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 122(6), 1117–1145. https://psycnet.apa.
org/doi/10.1037/pspp0000411.
Harris, K.R., & Tashman, L. (Hosts). (2020, May 10). Brandon Payne (TPD 
developing high performers series) [Audio podcast episode]. The Path 
Distilled. https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/the-path-distilled-podc
ast/id1511069681?i=1000474135647.
Harris, K.R., & Tashman, L. (Hosts). (2020, September 13). Brian Bates [Audio 
podcast episode]. The Path Distilled. https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podc
ast/the-path-distilled-podcast/id1511069681?i=1000491079368.
King, R.B., & Trinidad, J.E. (2021). Growth mindset predicts achievement 
only among rich students: Examining the interplay between mindset 142 Aiming for Perfection: Identify Your Threshold and Dive In
and socioeconomic status. Social Psychology of Education, 24(3), 635–652. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11218-021-09616-z.
Kellogg, R.T. (2006). Professional writing expertise. In K.A. Ericsson, N. 
Charness, P.J. Feltovich, & R.R. Hoffman (Eds.), The Cambridge Handbook of 
Expertise and Expert Performance (pp. 389–402). Cambridge University Press.
Marin, M.M., Schober, R., Gingras, B., & Leder, H. (2017). Misattribution 
of musical arousal increases sexual attraction towards opposite-sex faces 
in females. PLoS One, 12(9), e0183531. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0183531.
Moate, R.M., Gnilka, P.B., West, E.M., & Bruns, K.L. (2016). Stress and burnout 
among counselor educators: Differences between adaptive perfectionists, 
maladaptive perfectionists, and nonperfectionists. Journal of Counseling & 
Development, 94(2), 161–171. https://doi.org/10.1002/jcad.12073.
Negro, G., Kovács, B., & Carroll, G. R. (2022). What’s next? Artists’ music after 
Grammy awards. American Sociological Review, 87(4), 644–674. https://doi.
org/10.1177/00031224221103257.
Olson, J.M. (1988). Misattribution, preparatory information, and speech anx￾iety. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 54(5), 758–767. https://psyc
net.apa.org/doi/10.1037/0022-3514.54.5.758.
Schachter, S., & Singer, J. (1962). Cognitive, social, and physiological 
determinants of emotional state. Psychological Review, 69(5), 379–399. 
https://psycnet.apa.org/doi/10.1037/h0046234.
Shadrick, S.B. & Lussier, J.W. (2004). Assessment of the Think Like a Commander 
Training Program. (ARI Research Report 1824). U.S. Army Research Institute 
for the Behavior and Social Sciences.
Sherry, S.B., Hewitt, P.L., Sherry, D.L., Flett, G.L., & Graham, A.R. (2010). 
Perfectionism dimensions and research productivity in psychology 
professors: Implications for understanding the (mal) adaptiveness of per￾fectionism. Canadian Journal of Behavioural Science/Revue Canadienne des 
Sciences du Comportement, 42(4), 273–283. https://psycnet.apa.org/doi/
10.1037/a0020466.
Simmons, J., McDaniels, D., Masterson III, W., Hunt, B., Goodman, D., 
Lehman, M., & Blamoville, E. (Producers) (2024). Kings from Queens: The 
RUN DMC Story [Television Series]. Believe Entertainment Group.
Smith, J.L., & Huntoon, M. (2014). Women’s bragging rights: Overcoming 
modesty norms to facilitate women’s self-promotion. Psychology of Women 
Quarterly, 38(4), 447–459. https://doi.org/10.1177/0361684313515840.
Winfrey, O. (2008). Beyoncé is Sasha Fierce. Oprah.com. https://www.oprah.
com/oprahshow/beyonces-alter-ego/all. Accessed February 28, 2024.DOI: 10.4324/9781003377542-9
Being Vague
Evaluate Your Own Path/Needs
I think the concept is the same of trying to identify, “Okay, what do 
I need to do to improve in this situation or to do better?” And then setting 
yourselves goals and targets, and then working on how you can achieve 
that goal and target.
– A. Mark Williams, world-renowned expertise researcher
If you can have those little goals that [you can say], “Okay, I hit that 
goal,” It’s mentally a hurdle that you can get over and say, “Okay, I got 
there.”
– Alec Mills, pitcher, Major League Baseball (MLB)
Nina wanted to take a beach vacation, so she hopped in her car and 
started driving. She despised travelling via the interstate system, so she 
was taking as many secondary roads as possible – following any that 
held the promise of being scenic. Nina was having little luck finding 
a place to stay at night because of the isolated locations of the roads 
she was taking. When she did find a hotel, there would be no vacan￾cies. By the third day of her trip, Nina had been sleeping in her car 
each night. She also was now out of gas and flat broke. This might 
seem like an extreme example of failing to plan, yet it is a surprisingly 
common approach to reaching one’s goals. In this chapter, we discuss 
the importance of evaluating one’s goals and identifying actionable 
steps that can be taken to move closer to reaching them.
9144 Being Vague: Evaluate Your Own Path/Needs
What did, or do, you want to be when you grow up? Those ini￾tial aspirations are likely well behind you. (Granted, some of you 
have ended up becoming astronauts, physicians, professional athletes, 
farmers, or anything else you considered very early on in life.) Some of 
this shift can be chalked up to ambitions naturally shifting – the thought 
of working with blood ultimately ending the medical career ambitions. 
However, as we begin to solidify our interests, it is still important to 
know where you want to ultimately end up – world champion or local 
star. Thankfully, there is a history of studying goal-setting that we can 
pull from to better understand how setting goals can benefit us.
There has been a significant amount of research in the past century 
on goal-setting and identifying how performers can best benefit from 
making use of goal-setting strategies. This work generally has been 
very informative and has led to an excellent structure for considering 
the issues. Also, much like some of your stated relationship statuses –
“it’s complicated.” For example, an Olympic Gold medalist shared on 
The Path Distilled podcast that he finds goal-setting to be counterpro￾ductive (Harris & Tashman, 2020). Frankly, this stance surprised me, 
as goal-setting is an integral component of the framework for both 
studying expert performers and developing expertise. I subsequently 
learned that there is a contingency of practitioners who question 
whether one should engage in goal-setting and decided to dig a little 
deeper.
Although we will dive into some of the specific research on goal￾setting in coming sections, we begin with some overarching facets of 
goals that we believe to be uncontentious. First, you must have some 
general idea of what you want to achieve – essentially, which direction 
you will start moving. Second, goals generally can be broken down 
into smaller pieces/sub-goals. Third, there are many different types of 
goals. The three that seem to have the greatest amount of agreement 
on how they are defined and used are: outcome goals, performance 
goals, and process goals.
Cooking with a Recipe Versus Winging It
I have rarely seen my mother use a recipe when she cooks. She is 
an excellent cook and tends to cook by instinct – the proverbial, “a Being Vague: Evaluate Your Own Path/Needs 145
little bit of this and a little bit of that.” This is an ability that I have 
not developed yet. It is unclear whether the comfortable feeling of 
having a recipe to follow is the culprit. Winging it would drive my 
anxiety level sky high – “let me see the recipe!” Surely, there will be 
many cooks who prefer to wing it, as well as many who will want a 
recipe with precise measurements. This example of cooking with a 
specific recipe versus winging it sets the stage to discuss the benefits 
of goal-setting.
The first useful comparison of goal-setting with cooking is that 
the desired outcome is important. This could be a delicious pan of 
lasagna or stepping on stage to a sold-out crowd. In other words, you 
must know what dish you intend to make to move toward the end 
product. Someone is unlikely to utter the phrase, “I have a goal of 
making lasagna,” or “I have the goal of making delicious lasagna,” but 
the goal is inherent in deciding to make lasagna. Ditto for other desired 
outcomes. We include these when considering the term, “goal(s).” 
This does not imply that there is not an extensive body of research 
on goals with some very specific considerations. Nevertheless, we are 
taking a broad approach and consider any desired status or end result 
to be a goal.
As we will see in the upcoming sections, there are many ways that 
we can move ourselves closer to the goals we set for ourselves. For 
instance, we can get ourselves to the goal of a final dish by using a 
recipe to prepare and cook the meal versus winging it in the lasagna 
example. We obviously have similar leeway in determining what our 
own life-goals will be – a certain occupation, performance level, finan￾cial status, or living in a certain city. A critical point is that it is advanta￾geous, if not a requirement, to know where you want to end up – you 
cannot earn a college degree without identifying at least one university 
you want to apply to.
You must have some general idea of what you want to achieve. This 
idea can be extremely vague or short term, but it must exist. These 
ideas should be considered initial goals – losing weight, earning an A, 
shaving a minute off your running time, making money, or any other 
idea of something you want to achieve. Go ahead and call that a “goal.” 
Identifying the things that you want to achieve need not be very spe￾cific in this initial stage, although it could be. One of the benefits is 
that it potentially allows you to identify the needed and/or next steps. 146 Being Vague: Evaluate Your Own Path/Needs
Prominent goal-setting theorist, Edwin Locke (Locke et al.,1981; see 
also Weinberg, 2013) argued that goal-setting is generally an effective 
practice, in part, because goals serve to direct attention and action. He 
also proposed that it provides a target for your efforts. Even these ini￾tial, potentially ill-defined or vague, goals should allow you to begin 
developing or refining strategies on how to move closer to the identi￾fied goal.
Mowing in Chunks
As newlyweds, my wife and I found a fixer-upper in the country. The 
yard was larger than a push lawn mower could accommodate. We had 
hardly any money and ended up with a push mower anyway. It seemed 
like a never-ending task to use the push mower to get the job done, so 
I began using crude mental tricks to make the task more bearable. One 
of these tricks was to focus on a chunk of the yard at a time. While this 
is nothing novel, it did allow me to identify sizeable tasks that could 
be accumulated to eventually get me to the final goal. The task was 
made more manageable by focusing on mowing smaller chunks of the 
overall yard.
The concept illustrated here could be applied to almost anything. 
Alec Mills, an MLB pitcher, stated it well:
[A goal] needs to be attainable. A lot of times for me, it’s some￾thing that’s measurable and attainable within two weeks. Okay, 
so then you get that, go, ‘Okay, let’s do another one.’ In two 
weeks, you get that goal. If you keep stacking goals, then eventu￾ally that long-term goal is going to become a lot closer and a lot 
more attainable than it was before.
Consider something that you want to achieve as a long-term goal –
a raise, weight-loss, a recording contract, or anything else. What are 
some potential, attainable short-term goals you could set to get you 
closer to the overall goal? To use Alec’s terminology, how will you be 
stacking goals? These examples you just came up with illustrate the 
individualized nature of goals. However, there are commonalities 
across goal categories.Being Vague: Evaluate Your Own Path/Needs 147
Three Common Types of Goal
In a well-known psychology study, Elizabeth Loftus presented to 
participants a video of a car accident and asked them to provide an 
estimate of how fast the cars were going when they “smashed” into 
one another (Loftus & Palmer, 1974; Loftus, 1975). The participants 
estimated that the cars were travelling at approximately 64.65 km/hr 
(40.8 mph). While this estimate is unremarkable by itself, something 
fascinating happened when a different group of participants was asked 
how fast the cars were going when they “contacted” each other. This 
time, the participants estimated the cars were travelling at approxi￾mately 51.17 km/hr (31.8 mph). The implication was that the way 
the question was asked (“smashed” versus “contacted”) influenced 
the answer. This example illustrates the importance of specificity of 
language.
There has been considerable debate about the success of goal￾setting and one of the root causes could be the variety of meanings 
when using the term, “goal.” Joe Baker, a researcher who studies high 
performers, conveyed this sentiment in our conversation with him:
It comes back to the same problem we have with talent as 
well. How do we clearly define this concept that we’re talking 
about? Because I doubt that they’re not goal-setting. It’s just 
they’re not seeing it as traditional sort of SMART (Specific, 
Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, Timebound) goal, or what￾ever; that sort of overly simplistic old school goal-setting that 
we think about.
We will now consider the three particular types of goal, mentioned 
earlier, that can be differentiated based on their scope – outcome goals, 
performance goals, and process goals (Locke et al., 1981; Weinberg, 
2013). A quick note before getting to what they are – it took a great deal 
of effort to track down the definitions. The terms were showing up fre￾quently in the sizable amount of goal-setting research, but none of the 
articles actually defined them. However, I finally came across the work 
on goals by the esteemed scholar, Robert Weinberg. Weinberg spent 
much of his career studying athletes’ goals and how best to use goals 
to improve performance.148 Being Vague: Evaluate Your Own Path/Needs
The least specific of the three types of goal, in terms of actions to 
take, would be an outcome goal. As the name suggests, an outcome 
goal refers to the “end result” of something (a goal related to the out￾come). Weinberg described it as referring to “winning or losing” (2013, 
p.171), but we will be using it more broadly. Specifically, an outcome 
goal could be to reach a specific weight, win an art contest, or win a 
marathon. Using the example earlier in the chapter, graduating from 
college would be considered an outcome goal. You might have noticed 
that some of these outcome goals happen on vastly different timelines. 
For example, an outcome goal for a college degree could be years in the 
making, while a different outcome goal could potentially be reached in 
months (or sooner).
The second type of goal we cover are performance goals. Weinberg 
describes these goals as “one’s actual performance in relation to their 
own standard of excellence” (2013, p.171). These are the goals for which 
we ask ourselves if we are performing where we want to be and if we 
need to attempt to improve our performance. You might be asking 
yourself if you should improve your walking time by three minutes, 
increase your sales by 20 percent, or write an additional 20 pages a 
week of your manuscript (asking for a friend). Performance goals can 
be thought of as providing some specificity to the outcome goals – “I 
will be salesperson of the year by increasing my sales by 20 percent.”
Finally, process goals have an even greater level of specificity and focus 
on the specific process that you will engage in. Weinberg described 
these goals for athletes as, “how an athlete performs a particular skill, 
displays a certain technique or carries out a specific strategy” (2013, 
p.171), such as using proper form when batting or returning a tennis 
serve. However, we also consider process goals in a broader sense. 
Process goals can be thought of as the specific things you will do to 
increase your sales by 20 percent (follow up with all leads), improve 
your walking time by three minutes (stay hydrated, use proper form, 
and improve nutritional value of diet), or write an additional 20 pages 
of your manuscript (allot blocks of time and write anything that comes 
to mind for later editing).
You likely noticed that these definitions represented a hierarchy. The 
outcome goals were overarching in scope; the performance goals were 
used as a mechanism to move closer to the ultimate outcome goals; 
and the process goals also could be considered as the means to work Being Vague: Evaluate Your Own Path/Needs 149
toward reaching the performance goals and ultimately the outcome 
goal(s). However, this hierarchy is not a requirement. Feasibly, these 
can work independently of one another. However, it certainly seems 
that it would make a lot of sense to direct all of these goals towards the 
same end. Consider each of these levels when you complete the I Need 
to Start Doing… exercise (Expert Performance International Collective 
[EPIC], 2023).
“I Wanna Be a Judge When I Grow Up” – The 
Individualized Nature of Goals
Being a judge was never a personal goal of mine. Chances are, some 
of you actually did have a childhood goal of becoming a judge. As 
is the case with any type of goal, the goals themselves and the way 
that we reach them are quite individualized. Let us assume that you 
have established your end goal – where you want to end up and/or 
what you want to accomplish. Now give some thought to how things 
are right now. Spend some time thinking about the steps that will be 
needed to reach your end goal. Really dig into these last things (the I 
Need to Start Doing… exercise at the end of the chapter will help you 
do this). These will be your sub-goals. They could take the form of 
the performance, process, or even multiple, progressing outcome goals 
(Weinberg, 2013), described earlier in the chapter. As you embark on 
this path, it is critical to identify what suits you as you work toward 
reaching the goals you have set for yourself. Ways to do this include 
seeking feedback on your performance by being honest about what 
you are not doing well (covered in Chapter 10) and seeking feedback/
criticisms of your performance (covered in Chapter 14). We will not 
do a deep dive into these topics in this chapter since the topics have 
dedicated chapters. However, we want to reiterate the importance of 
personalizing your goals.
We learned relatively recently that there is a measurable contingency 
of researchers and practitioners who advocate against goal-setting. 
This stance surprised us as goal-setting is an integral component of 
the framework for both studying expert performers and developing 
expertise. One of the core tenets of improvement is identifying a 
current level of performance and striving to move to the next one that 150 Being Vague: Evaluate Your Own Path/Needs
is currently out of reach. As noted earlier in the chapter, we count 
this as a goal. Presumably, the argument against goal-setting includes 
at least two considerations. Echoing Joe Baker’s earlier comments, we 
assume one of the arguments against goal-setting is disagreement with 
the rigid approach specified in the academic realm about goal-setting.
It turns out that much of the second issue has been with large, 
overarching goals – becoming a professional athlete or winning the 
Boston Marathon. Olympic Gold-medalist Joe Jacobi shared this sen￾timent on The Path Distilled podcast (Harris & Tashman, 2020). This 
makes sense given the discussion of the types of goals in the earlier 
section. Such outcome goals without the specific steps to accom￾plish them – the performance or process goals – are of limited value. 
However, our use of what is considered goal-setting is much broader 
than what is typically inferred Stating you want to go to college or 
make enchiladas will count. These are statements of a goal. This 
illustrates how someone can say that they do not practice goal-setting 
but also state a variety of personal goals. Some will argue that these are 
plans or ambitions. For our purposes, same difference. As with other 
concepts presented in this book, at its core, goal-setting is identifying 
where you want to be/what you want to achieve. Identifying how to 
get there can be called your plan, your steps, your aspirations, or any￾thing else. Fundamentally, they can be considered goals. Even having 
lunch today is a goal.
A final consideration related to goals is that success builds 
momentum and leads to new goals. As you immerse yourself in a 
domain, you likely will be made aware for the first time of new pos￾sibilities. As we noted in earlier chapters, one of the hindrances to 
domain involvement includes lack of awareness of techniques and lack 
of resources. We do not always know what to aim for until we are 
immersed in a domain. You likely will adjust your goal pursuits upward 
as you become more successful. Such success often affords us with a 
greater awareness of both effective techniques and possibilities. You 
might even end up finding yourself in the role of “gatekeeper;” a role 
determining who among the next “generation” of aspirers is granted 
access to your domain.Being Vague: Evaluate Your Own Path/Needs 151
Chapter Summary
In this chapter, we presented some of the seminal work on goal-setting 
and considered the impact goal-setting can have on becoming a high 
performer. Recently, there have been instances in which the import￾ance of goal-setting has been questioned. However, goal-setting should 
be considered more generally as there are some overarching facets of 
goals that we believe to be uncontentious. First, you must have some 
general idea of what you want to achieve – essentially, which direction 
you will start moving in. Second, since goals generally can be broken 
down into smaller pieces/sub-goals, doing so can make the overall goal 
seem more attainable and allow for progress to be gained. The three 
types of goals that seem to have the greatest amount of agreement 
on how they are defined and used are outcome goals, performance 
goals, and process goals. Using these hierarchical goals can allow one 
to personalize goals, gauge progress, gain momentum, and ultimately 
identify new goals.© 2023–2024 Expert Performance International Collective (EPIC). This exercise is copyrighted by Kevin Harris and the Expert 
Performance International Collective (EPIC). All rights reserved. Used with permission.
152 Being Vague: Evaluate Your Own Path/Needs
I Need to Start Doing…
Chapter 9: Being Vague: Evaluate Your Own Path/Needs
This exercise is intended to help you identify the steps required to get 
where you want to be and how to take those steps. In the first part of 
the exercise, you will be asked to provide some of the requirements of 
the domain you are pursuing. The second part will ask you to assess 
where you currently are in relation to the requirements and develop a 
plan to get there.
1. What are some of the domain requirements of what you hope to 
accomplish?© 2023–2024 Expert Performance International Collective (EPIC). This exercise is copyrighted by Kevin Harris and the Expert 
Performance International Collective (EPIC). All rights reserved. Used with permission.
Being Vague: Evaluate Your Own Path/Needs 153
2. Reflect on where you currently stand regarding the requirements 
noted in part 1. What are some specific ways you can close the 
gap between where you currently stand and what you hope to 
accomplish?154 Being Vague: Evaluate Your Own Path/Needs
References
Expert Performance International Collective (EPIC) (2023). I Need to Start 
Doing… [Exercise]. Nashville; New York City.
Harris, K.R., & Tashman, L. (Hosts). (2020, September 20). Joe Jacobi [Audio 
podcast episode]. The Path Distilled. https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podc
ast/the-path-distilled-podcast/id1511069681?i=1000491859964.
Locke, E.A., Shaw, K.N., Saari, L.M., & Latham, G.P. (1981). Goal-setting and 
task performance: 1969–1980. Psychological Bulletin, 90(1), 125–152. https://
psycnet.apa.org/doi/10.1037/0033-2909.90.1.125.
Loftus, E.F. (1975). Reconstructing memory: The incredible eyewitness. 
Jurimetrics Journal, 15(3), 188–193. https://www.jstor.org/stable/29761487.
Loftus, E.F., & Palmer, J.C. (1974). Reconstruction of automobile destruc￾tion: An example of the interaction between language and memory. 
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 13(5), 585–589. https://doi.
org/10.1016/S0022-5371(74)80011-3.
Weinberg, R.S. (2013). Goal setting in sport and exercise: Research and prac￾tical applications. Revista da Educação Física/UEM, 24, 171–179. https://doi.
org/10.4025/reveducfis.v24.2.17524.DOI: 10.4324/9781003377542-10
Sugarcoating 10
Acknowledge What You Aren’t 
Doing Well
Sometimes, there are workouts that aren’t that great even when you’re 
dealing with the greatest shooter that’s ever played. There are days when 
the ball doesn’t go in as much as we want it to in our workouts. How we 
improve is we’ve got to look deeper. What causes us not to have a great 
shooting day?
– Brandon Payne, Stephen Curry’s basketball skill 
development coach (on The Path Distilled podcast)
Honest feedback is very important. It’s difficult nowadays, where it 
seems the culture has kind of shifted where everything is affirmed. No 
matter what you’re doing, you’re great at it. This is what most people 
will tell you. It can be tough. Because when you get out there in the real 
world and you start applying for jobs, it can be tough when suddenly 
someone tells you this stuff isn’t that great. And what are you going to 
do with that?
– Thomas Estrada, feature film and video game animator
Trent was a rising star in the world of high-school football. The quar￾terback was named Mr. Football for the state of Texas his senior year. 
Now playing for a large state university, coaches felt that Trent would 
be the unquestioned starter if he worked to correct two issues with 
his game – holding the ball too long and his foot placement. Having 
thrown for just under 5,000 yards in high school, Trent was not keen 
on changing anything about his game. He transferred after sophomore 156 Sugarcoating: Acknowledge What You Aren’t Doing Well
year to a different school but never became the starter. Trent now owns 
a landscaping company in his hometown. Trent’s example illustrates 
the unwillingness and/or blind spots that most people have regarding 
recognizing what they are not doing well along with the devastating 
consequences. The frequency of such blind spots is surprisingly 
common. In fact, you might be shocked to discover how large your 
own blind spots are. We now unpack some of the psychological factors 
leading to these blind spots.
“I’m Pretty Good at This – At Least Better Than Most”
How do you feel about your driving skills? Would you say that you are 
an average or above average driver? If you are like most people, you 
will tell us that you are an above average driver – even if you recently 
caused a crash. In fact, almost 90 percent of respondents declared that 
they were above average drivers (Svenson, 1981, as cited in Dunning, 
Meyerowitz, & Holzberg, 1989). Not only is this hard to believe, 
having driven on public roads recently, but it does not line up with the 
way statistics actually work. When something is said to be normally 
distributed, it takes the shape of a bell – the bell curve. Let us break 
this down in common language before you decide to skip to the next 
section or chapter because we are talking about statistics so early in 
this chapter.
Consider the average height of women in the United States of 
America, which is around 161.3 cm (5 ft 3.5 in), according to the 
National Center for Health Statistics (2024). Obviously, not every 
woman is 161.3 cm, and it only takes looking around a crowded place to 
notice a variety of heights. In fact, because we know that the standard 
deviation is 5.59 cm (2.2 in) (National Bureau of Economic Research), 
we also know that 68.2 percent of women in the crowd can be expected 
to be between 155.71 cm and 166.89 cm (5 ft 1.3 in and 5 ft 5.7 in). This 
breaks down as roughly 34.1 percent above 161.3 cm (5 ft 3.5 in), and 
34.1 percent below. This entire 68.2% of women represent what we 
consider to be the range of “average.” Because we are accustomed to 
thinking of average in terms of the single number, 161.3 cm (5 ft 3.5 
in) in this example, it can be easy to forget that it is an actual range. 
Consider IQ scores – the IQ test scores for many common tests, such 
as the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale (WAIS; Wechsler, 1997), are Sugarcoating: Acknowledge What You Aren’t Doing Well 157
calculated using a special technique such that 100 will always be the 
average IQ. However, average “intelligence” is represented by the range 
created by adding and subtracting the standard deviation, typically 15, 
resulting in 85–115 being the typical range for what is considered an 
average IQ score.
Getting back to the height example, some of you might be wondering 
about the really short or really tall people. They are represented, too. 
There just are not as many of them. As we go to the extremes of 
anything normally distributed, there are fewer and fewer of them –
geniuses with an IQ greater than 145 or women who are 178.07 cm 
(6 ft 1.6 in) tall. These extremes are two standard deviations above 
the mean, exceeding 99.9% of women in height or 99.9% of others 
regarding IQ. This also works in the opposite direction, such as there 
are relatively few women shorter than 160.12 cm (4 ft 11.1 in) or indi￾viduals scoring less than 70 on the WAIS.
This brings us back to the driving example. For anything on a true 
bell curve, only 15.8 percent of anything is above average. Full stop. 
However, most of us tend to see ourselves as above average in some, 
or possibly many, aspects of our lives. For example, almost two-thirds 
(65 percent) of Americans believe that they possess above-average 
intelligence (Heck, Simons, & Chabris, 2018). Again, only the top 
15.8 percent of Americans could actually be above average. The finding 
that 94 percent of college professors consider themselves to be above 
average (Cross, 1977, as cited in Dunning, Meyerowitz, & Holzberg, 
1989) never fails to generate a hearty laugh among our colleagues. 
However, the reality is that the majority of us will likely retreat back to 
our own thoughts, confident that we are not among those inflating our 
actual performance or standing.
This phenomenon originally was labelled the “above average effect” 
and was found to be very common. For example, in a now classic 
survey of over a million high school students conducted by the College 
Board in the late 1970s, only 2 percent of students judged themselves 
to be below average in leadership ability (70 percent rated themselves 
above average) and only 6 percent rated themselves below average for 
athletic ability (60 percent rated above; as cited Dunning, Meyerowitz, 
& Holzberg, 1989). It appears that we are very ill-suited to gauging 
our abilities and relative performance. Analysis of this line of thinking 
evolved into what is now known as the Dunning-Kruger effect.158 Sugarcoating: Acknowledge What You Aren’t Doing Well
The concept of the Dunning-Kruger effect eventually reached the 
mainstream, and you likely have heard it mentioned outside of aca￾demic conversations. The initial findings were that the majority of us 
overestimate our actual performance capabilities (Kruger & Dunning, 
1999). Justin Kruger and David Dunning had Cornell students estimate 
their ability to perform a variety of tasks such as grammar and logic 
tasks. All but the highest performing students overestimated their per￾formance. Critically, the lowest performing students had estimated 
their performance would be well above average. In a particularly illus￾trative variation of the original study, students were asked just before 
taking an exam how they would rank compared to their classmates 
once the exam had been graded. The predictions were all on the 
higher-end of percentile rankings – everyone estimated that their per￾formance would be near the top. All but the very top performers had 
overestimated their performance. The highest performers had slightly 
underestimated theirs. This was one of the original studies examining 
the Dunning-Kruger effect.
When we say that the Dunning-Kruger effect reached the main￾stream, it did so in a huge way. Having been in the field for decades, 
we know that something is huge when the concept starts showing up 
in everyday conversations with those not working with it daily. The 
Dunning-Kruger effect has joined the list of psychological science 
concepts that have permeated popular culture, such as situation 
awareness, “the 10,000-hour rule,” growth mindset, and cognitive dis￾sonance. Typically, the original meaning of a concept is diluted, or lost 
altogether, when this happens. An interesting layer of consideration 
with the Dunning-Kruger effect is that we all still tend to overesti￾mate our performance – even when we are aware of the concept and 
this exact risk. You likely did consider yourself to be an above-average 
driver, but so did the thousands (millions?) of other readers.
However, we must remember that only a small percentage of you 
can actually be above (or below) average. Just over two-thirds of us are 
statistically average on a variety of things. The remainder is divided 
into being above (or below) average by one standard deviation or by 
two standard deviations. As you likely have already determined, the 
difference between being one standard deviation versus two standard 
deviations above or below the mean can also result in noticeable 
differences. Recall from the earlier discussion that it is a difference Sugarcoating: Acknowledge What You Aren’t Doing Well 159
between being in the top 15.8 percent and being in the top 0.1 per￾cent. This would translate into the difference between being noticeably 
bright and being a true genius.
The Chicken or the Egg?
As noted in the previous section, one of the key findings related to the 
Dunning-Kruger effect was that most of the performers overestimated 
their actual performance. In some cases, the overestimation of perform￾ance is minimal; in others, the estimates are off by “miles.” However, 
a finding that generally receives less attention is equally intriguing. In 
particular, the top performers slightly underestimated their actual per￾formance. Obviously, this stands in contrast to the findings related to 
the low-performers, who consistently overestimate their status or abil￾ities. As you know by this point in the chapter, this high-performing 
group also represents a much smaller percentage of performers. It 
does raise a fascinating empirical question of whether being better at 
assessing your own performance increases the likelihood of being a 
top performer? Or is that being a top performer then allows you to 
better assess others by comparing your own performance? There are 
two studies that could provide some insight.
Researchers investigating the accuracy of surgical interns when esti￾mating their own skills found that the interns generally underestimated
their performance compared to their actual outcomes (Karnick et al., 
2021). A quick note on this finding before we proceed. Although this 
finding of underestimation is obviously out of line with the predictions 
expected of performers on the lower end of performance based on 
most discussions of the Dunning-Kruger effect, the finding that this 
accomplished, highly selective group (by proxy of succeeding in a 
highly specialized, complex, and demanding field) is likely the high￾performing group that would underestimate their own abilities, as 
found in some of the original Dunning-Kruger effect studies. They 
literally are the top-performers who tend to underestimate their per￾formance. As the researchers noted, these interns could rate them￾selves on the higher end of performance and still be underestimating 
their actual performance – akin to predicting a 95 on the exam and 
making a 100 in the traditional examples of the Dunning-Kruger effect. 160 Sugarcoating: Acknowledge What You Aren’t Doing Well
It is worth noting that the interns with the best performance tended 
to be relatively harsher in their self-assessments than the relatively 
lower performing ones. The interns who were most accurate at self￾assessment showed the greatest improvement, which suggests that it is 
possible that the greater self-assessment accuracy could be one of the 
mechanisms ultimately leading to better performance. If this were the 
case, it would represent a potentially trainable component, meaning 
that they were able to identify their “weak spot” and develop ways to 
improve that could be taught to others.
An alternative explanation is that the highest performers have yet 
to recognize their ability. This fits the original finding of the Dunning￾Kruger effect with roughly a flat line for estimates of performance, 
with the observed differences arising from the actual performance. 
Momentarily venturing into the realm of creativity, researchers 
discovered an interesting breakdown when students across a variety 
of years/grades in school were asked to first give estimates of their 
creativity and then subsequently were tested for creativity (Urban & 
Urban, 2021). While over half of the overall participants were found 
not to be creative based on the test, only half of that group recognized 
their lack of creativity. The more interesting finding is that almost half 
of the participants (44.3 percent) were actually creative but did not 
realize it – a category the researchers labelled “skilled and unaware.” 
Taken as a whole, these findings fit the general pattern of Dunning￾Kruger results as only a quarter of the students were accurate in esti￾mating their ability – creativity in this example. However, the number 
of participants who are actually creative but unaware of it begs the 
question of how common this underestimation could be. What are 
the factors that impact how accurate a performer will be at identifying 
how well they perform?
We Are Horrible at Self-assessment. Now What?
There are at least two layers of acknowledging what you are not doing 
well that are relative to high performance. The first is being aware of 
the tendency for most people to overestimate their performance – the 
Dunning-Kruger effect described earlier in this chapter. Such awareness 
might not necessarily prevent you from overestimating your own Sugarcoating: Acknowledge What You Aren’t Doing Well 161
performance. However, being aware of the tendency to overestimate 
our own performance can put you on a path to identifying better ways 
to obtain insight into your own performance. We dedicate a chapter 
to seeking out feedback and criticism (Chapter 14) but will introduce 
some considerations here.
In their work related to medical training, Kevin Eva and Glenn 
Regehr (2008) provided excellent analysis of some of the relevant 
issues. While the entire analysis is thought provoking, there are some 
key points that are most applicable to our discussion. The authors 
remind us that we all are vulnerable to this inaccuracy and suggest 
that we treat it as a “we” problem rather than a “they” problem. In 
other words, we all are prone to inflating how well we think we per￾form compared to how well we actually perform. It is not a case of 
just getting to someone via an intervention in order to have them try 
to get better at self-assessment. Rather, the authors recommend that 
training and educational systems should be set up so that assessment 
is a built-in part of the process. Moreover, reliance on measures of 
self-assessment, without other evidence, should be minimized: “The 
empirically derived conclusion that humans are generally poor at self￾assessment merely indicates that we are inaccurate as often as not and 
that, as a result, one should not rely on self-assessments to provide 
valid indications of ability” (Eva & Regehr, 2008, p. 17).
While minimizing the use of self-assessment might seem like an 
extreme stance, it might be better stated with the qualifiers of “at least 
for now,” and certainly “as the sole measure.” As we have established, 
we are not very good at assessing our own performance, particularly 
when there are no other, corroborating external measures. Eva and 
Regehr also point out that knowing how well we are doing is a con￾tinuum (2008). We might be very attuned to how well we are doing 
(poorly or well) for some things, and way off base for others (poorly or 
well). Eva and Regehr use the example of someone commenting that 
self-assessment is easy because they knew they would never make it 
as a professional athlete. The authors used this comment to point out 
that this is one of the low-hanging fruits of the aforementioned con￾tinuum – the odds of anyone becoming a professional athlete are slim. 
It does not take a great amount of self-assessment skill to make such a 
call. It is the subtler calls that we often struggle with. How well did you 
do with the last presentation/talk that you gave? An interviewer once 162 Sugarcoating: Acknowledge What You Aren’t Doing Well
asked me how well my job presentation went, after they had attended 
it. While my answer was that it went well, my actual thoughts were 
that they should be telling me.
However, many situations provide other means of indicating how 
well you are doing, including some type of external feedback – a 
patient stabilizing, opposing players unable to return your tennis serve, 
or a critique from a thesis advisor. It is the examples used during 
the discussions of the above-average effect that are most prone to 
misjudgments – relative ranking as a driver or professor. There are 
vague measures on which to base such judgments, such as frequency 
of accidents or student feedback. Unfortunately, such measures still 
leave a great deal to be interpreted, and these interpretations tend to 
be unreliable. Thus, we suggest acknowledging that there are things 
you might not be doing well and seeking out other sources of feedback 
to assess further. You also should continue monitoring beyond the ini￾tial assessment by seeking ongoing feedback. We will expand on this 
in Chapter 15.
“I’ll Have the Truth – No Sugar, Please”
Taking your 928th free throw shot in basketball or taking a tumble for 
the 56th time on the half-pipe can provide organic feedback. However, 
akin to my job presentation mentioned earlier, there are situations 
where you just do not know what you are doing well or not. It could 
be that you are too new to the domain to recognize the indicators. The 
competition might also be too low level to get a good sense of how 
well you are doing in a broader sense. We are sure that many of you 
have been embarrassed playing a video game because you were pretty 
good at the game against the computer as an opponent but found that 
a skilled human opponent outplayed you. Someone once shared that 
he was considered one of the best local football (soccer) players in his 
hometown. As a result, he was pretty confident in his performance. 
It was not until his cousins visited from a country with a much more 
ingrained football culture that he realized he was not really very good 
at football – at least not as good as he thought.
Identifying what it is that you are not doing well is one of the keys to 
reaching the next level, and potentially the top level. We have already Sugarcoating: Acknowledge What You Aren’t Doing Well 163
mentioned in Chapter 8 that the best figure skaters, relative to the mid￾level skaters, spent a greater amount of their practice on what they 
were not doing well. The Chapter 8 discussion was to suggest that you 
should not let waiting on things to be perfect sideline you for too long. 
However, another aspect of this is that you must also be able to iden￾tify those areas, commonly called “weak spots,” before you can work 
to fix them. Obtaining appropriate feedback is the topic of Chapter 14. 
However, there also is a psychological component at play when we 
acknowledge what we are not doing well.
It can be uncomfortable for us if we are able to see around our 
“blind spot” or use other feedback to recognize that there are things 
we are not doing well. In some instances, this can cause you to have 
to reassess how you will proceed. However, as we noted earlier, it is 
more common for the best performers to target their weaknesses. This 
makes perfect sense. Once you reach a level of stable high performance 
at a task within a domain, you can turn your attention to the weakness 
in your performance. As long as you do not completely neglect what 
you were already good at, you should continue to improve by targeting 
identified weaknesses.
You also might find yourself reaching the level of performance at 
which an observer would consider your refinements to be overkill. 
Stephen Curry’s personal skills trainer, Brandon Payne, provided an 
excellent example of such refinement on The Path Distilled podcast, 
“you have to be tough enough, mentally, to be able to dissect your 
performance on a daily basis to locate why things went badly or went 
well. And that’s a big part of improvement as well. So, it’s this idea of 
incremental improvement” (Harris & Tashman, 2020).
Brandon’s example of ongoing refinement should be encouraging to 
all of us. It shows that even the most elite performers are still working 
on what they can improve. Some of you are likely discouraged by what 
might sound like a never-ending process. However, think of it as illus￾trating how much you can still accomplish. We encourage you to con￾dition yourself to hear the hard truth. Acknowledge what you are not 
doing well and develop a strategy to work on that piece. Chapter 15 is 
dedicated to seeking feedback and some specific strategies that you can 
use to assess performance and the effectiveness of any interventions.164 Sugarcoating: Acknowledge What You Aren’t Doing Well
Chapter Summary
In this chapter, we introduced the research on how poorly we do in 
assessing our performance and how this blind spot can hurt our pro￾gress toward becoming the best performer possible. Most people 
believe themselves to be above average at most things – driving ability, 
intelligence, most anything. However, this assessment does not match 
up with reality as the amount of us who could be above average is 
statistically limited. This “above average” effect evolved into the well￾known Dunning-Kruger effect, a tendency for underperformers to be 
unaware that they are underperforming. This phenomenon occurs, in 
part, because we tend not to seek feedback or acknowledge it when it is 
available. High performers actively seek out the things that they are not 
doing well and attempt to improve upon them. Therefore, we should 
all heed the message of the importance of seeking as much feedback 
as possible, including evidence of the things that we are not currently 
doing well.© 2023–2024 Expert Performance International Collective (EPIC). This exercise is copyrighted by Kevin Harris and the Expert 
Performance International Collective (EPIC). All rights reserved. Used with permission.
Sugarcoating: Acknowledge What You Aren’t Doing Well 165
“I Am Really Bad At…”
Chapter 10: Sugarcoating – Acknowledge What You 
Aren’t Doing
This exercise is designed to help you identify areas in which you could 
improve your performance and to normalize looking for room to 
improve. In the first part of the exercise, you will be asked to identify 
some areas you need to improve. The second part will ask you to iden￾tify some potential ways to go about this (it could be combined with 
the Chapter 9 exercise, I Need to Start Doing…).
1. Please identify three (or more) things that you are not doing well or 
could do better.© 2023–2024 Expert Performance International Collective (EPIC). This exercise is copyrighted by Kevin Harris and the Expert 
Performance International Collective (EPIC). All rights reserved. Used with permission.
166 Sugarcoating: Acknowledge What You Aren’t Doing Well
2. Reflect on the areas of potential improvement you identified in 
part 1. What are some specific ways you can go about improving?Sugarcoating: Acknowledge What You Aren’t Doing Well 167
References
Dunning, D., Meyerowitz, J.A., & Holzberg, A.D. (1989). Ambiguity and 
self-evaluation: The role of idiosyncratic trait definitions in self-serving 
assessments of ability. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 57(6), 
1082–1090. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.57.6.1082.
Eva, K.W., & Regehr, G. (2008). “I’ll never play professional football” and 
other fallacies of self-assessment. Journal of Continuing Education in the 
Health Professions, 28(1), 14–19. https://doi.org/10.1002/chp.150.
Harris, K.R., & Tashman, L. (Hosts). (2020, May 10). Brandon Payne (TPD 
developing high performers series) [Audio podcast episode]. The Path 
Distilled. https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/the-path-distilled-podc
ast/id1511069681?i=1000474135647.
Heck, P.R., Simons, D.J., & Chabris, C.F. (2018). 65% of Americans believe 
they are above average in intelligence: Results of two nationally represen￾tative surveys. PloS One, 13(7), e0200103. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0200103.
Karnick, A., Limberg, J., Bagautdinov, I., Stefanova, D., Aveson, V., Thiesmeyer, 
J., ... & Fahey III, T. J. (2021). Can general surgery interns accurately 
measure their own technical skills? Analysis of cognitive bias in surgical 
residents’ self-assessments. Surgery, 170(5), 1353–1358. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.surg.2021.04.008.
Kruger, J., & Dunning, D. (1999). Unskilled and unaware of it: How difficulties 
in recognizing one’s own incompetence lead to inflated self-assessments. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 77(6), 1121–1134. https://doi.
org/10.1037/0022-3514.77.6.1121.
National Center for Health Statistics (2024). Body Measurements. https://
www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/body-measurements.htm. Accessed January 
20, 2024.
Urban, M., & Urban, K. (2021). Unskilled but aware of it? Cluster analysis of 
creative metacognition from preschool age to early adulthood. The Journal 
of Creative Behavior, 55(4), 937–945. https://doi.org/10.1002/jocb.499.
Wechsler, D. (1997). Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale--Third Edition (WAIS-III)
[Database record; APA PsycTests]. https://doi.org/10.1037/t49755-000.DOI: 10.4324/9781003377542-11
Not Allowing for Rest/
Recovery
Make Rest a PRIORITY
But when you’re not rested, you’re going to make bad decisions. Your 
judgment doesn’t work.
– Major General Walter Lord, US Army (Ret.)
The default is to think about and prioritize the training, and not con￾sider resting and recovery efforts. Particularly from a psychological per￾spective, that was often overlooked. So once again, if you’re an athlete, 
it’s much more likely that you’re considering ice baths, foam rolling, 
staying off your feet, massage, very light exercise to get the ball moving 
on rest days, these kinds of things. But you’re not considering trying to 
avoid your training facility on your rest day, not continuously hanging 
out with your teammates all day on a rest day.
– Dr. David Eccles, professor and world-renowned 
scholar on expert performance and rest
John comes from a long line of farmers. His grandfather bought the 
land that John farms over 70 years ago, and it has been in the family ever 
since. The farm is comprised of over 600 acres but at least a quarter of 
it is currently lying fallow – not being used for a predetermined span 
to allow the soil to recuperate and replenish critical nutrients. This rest 
is critical for the longevity and health of the soil. We also need these 
periods of dedicated rest/recovery for both our physical and mental 
health. This chapter will focus on the importance of rest, how to rest, 
and the consequences of not incorporating rest into our routines.
11Not Allowing for Rest/Recovery: Make Rest a PRIORITY 169
“Lying fallow.” This idea in relation to human performance can 
be thought of as the concept of “rest.” Rest is one of the commonly 
overlooked components of the expertise literature (Eccles et al., 2022). 
Although rest was heralded as an essential component of becoming 
a world-class performer by some of the early researchers, such as 
Anders Ericsson (Ericsson, Krampe, & Tesch-Römer, 1993), it did not 
gain as much traction as the other components – the type of practice 
or amount of practice. There are numerous instances of evidence 
suggesting that rest should be a priority for anyone seeking the highest 
levels of excellence. For example, the amount of time allocated to the 
rigorous mental demands of writing should be limited to a window of 
one to four hours for most professionals (e.g., Kellogg, 2006), and daily 
naps are common among world-class performers (Ericsson, Krampe, & 
Tesch-Römer, 1993). However, the importance of rest was commonly 
left out of the conversation when the idea of putting in a great deal of 
work over a period of time began gaining traction. We rarely, if ever, 
heard anything about the importance of rest as part of the equation 
whenever the idea of the so-called “10,000-hour rule” (see Chapter 1
for more on how this amount is actually quite variable) began creeping 
into everyday conversations. Despite the neglect, rest is a critical part 
of becoming a high performer.
Rest, Rest, Where Art Thou?
“Rest? If I rest, I won’t have enough time to finish everything on my 
to do list!” Does this sound like you? How about someone you know? 
Or how about the opposite – you feel as if you have so much to do so 
you rest to avoid work? Either way, our body could be telling us some￾thing: it is time to take a break. How will you respond? We hope that 
you will make time to rest and recuperate. However, the concept of 
rest can be tricky. Rest does not come easy for many of us. We might 
feel we will get further behind if we rest. Still, others may not realize 
that rest is more than just physical. It is not difficult to read the signs 
when we are physically fatigued. Our paces might become slower 
or our performances decline markedly. Ignoring the signs of phys￾ical fatigue can result in our body shutting down – many of us have 
observed the common sight of a marathon runner moving awkwardly 170 Not Allowing for Rest/Recovery: Make Rest a PRIORITY
toward the finish line because their limbs will no longer obey the 
brain’s signals to perform correctly. The marathoner might even be on 
the ground crawling toward the finish line. Mental and psychological 
fatigue is often less obvious to observers than physical fatigue but is 
just as important to recognize.
Dr. David Eccles is a well-known researcher in the field of expert per￾formance and performance psychology, and has worked with athletes 
internationally. He has worked extensively on conducting research to 
help us better understand how the best performers develop their skills 
across a variety of domains and what we can learn from them to poten￾tially apply to training. These efforts include attempts to make the 
proposed tools for understanding expert performance as user-friendly 
as possible.
While carrying out his scholarly work, Dr. Eccles realized that the 
idea of rest as part of the training process was commonly overlooked 
(Eccles at al., 2022). While physical rest and sleep are important for 
consolidating memories, learning, and other biological processes, 
mental rest is not discussed as frequently. When many people hear rest, 
they might think of taking a nap or taking a breather from a basket￾ball game. However, mental rest is also critically important. Recall that 
becoming a high-level performer is a demanding process, both men￾tally and physically, but it is not a given that rest will be prioritized 
despite the intensity of mental and physical exertion. The performer 
might be fearful of losing ground to the competition or drawing the 
ire of their coach. This is one of the reasons Dr. Eccles has emphasized 
the need to make rest as much of a priority as the other aspects of 
becoming a high-level performer. As highlighted by Dr. Eccles and his 
colleagues, it was considered an integral component in the early days 
of studying high performers.
You probably have experienced the benefit of prioritizing rest and 
recuperation – a spa day or just a random “mental health” day. These 
often result in some level of restoration. Thankfully, there are multiple 
ways to benefit from spontaneous rest. For example, it could be resting 
your mind by partaking in a mundane task where your mind is not 
focusing on anything specific. This could be video games for you and 
painting for someone else. Along these lines, when Dr. Eccles asked 
athletes what rest meant to them, common responses were time away 
from the sport or time not thinking about the sport.Not Allowing for Rest/Recovery: Make Rest a PRIORITY 171
Mental rest can be thought of as a psychological state that is sub￾jective to each individual; therefore, there is no one definition or 
experience that can inform people on when mental rest is important. 
However, there are warning signs that indicate you may not be 
performing at your best, and your mental abilities are showing you 
need to rest. Let us consider the case of Nikki. Nikki realized that she 
was always feeling tired, lacked motivation to continue with what she 
was doing, was applying very little effort, and was finding less joy in 
things she used to enjoy. She could not figure out what was going on, 
but when she started to talk about this with her family, they told her 
it was a sign she needed to rest mentally and recuperate. But what 
does mental rest look like? What constitutes mental rest can be quite 
individualized. For example, mental rest for Emily could be sitting in 
the recliner with her favorite television show on in the background –
where she is not actively engaging in anything, whereas mental rest for 
Kevin could be taking a walk through nature. Dannelle Whiteside, an 
attorney, shared that for her:
Self-care looks different depending on the day. Besides a 
demanding career, I have a busy family. I’m not always able to go 
and treat myself to a massage or something like that. But, I can 
get to say, ‘Okay, I will take time journaling, meditating, that kind 
of thing, every day.’
Therefore, we can consider the determination of how to rest and recu￾perate to be something that you must identify as being effective for you. 
While the exact approach to being able to rest will be personalized, we 
now consider some the commonalities of mental rest.
“But I Didn’t Work Out This weekend” – 
The Considerations of Mental Rest
The movement to return rest to its rightful place in the development 
of high-level performance is still in its infancy. The majority of research 
related to this push has been focused on mental rest in athletes; how￾ever, these tactics can apply outside of the world of sports. Dr. Eccles 
and colleagues outline six wakeful resting experiences to help us 172 Not Allowing for Rest/Recovery: Make Rest a PRIORITY
recuperate mentally: (1) taking a break from always thinking about 
work, school, or one’s sport; (2) getting a break from any effortful 
thinking; (3) getting a break from feeling like your life is controlled by 
work, school, or sport; (4) getting a break from the daily monotony of 
your routine; (5) being able to catch up on important work tasks; and 
(6) being able to have a personal life outside of work, school, or sport 
(Eccles et al., 2021).
We need to be able to psychologically detach from our schooling, 
work, sports, or anything else with which we consistently engage that 
is a potential stressor. Think about it – even things you initially find 
enjoyable potentially would be causing you distress during the ninth 
month of intense engagement. Such involvement can be consuming 
to the point that we are always thinking about something related to it. 
This is why the psychological detachment is important; it refers to our 
ability to be mentally away from what we are immersed in. Using the 
analogy of an on/off switch, this detachment would be turning the 
switch “off ” in our minds. This detachment can be an important way 
to allow you some level of recuperation.
The issue is that most of us have difficulties, at least some of the 
time, being able to turn off the switch. This might translate into 
thinking about what needs to get done or how you can improve some 
aspect of your performance during what are supposed to be “off ” 
times. Perhaps we need to start practicing “turning off ” thinking about 
our obligations. However, this might be easier said than done. I have 
spent many nights trying to get back to sleep because a thought enters 
my mind and leads to a deluge of all of the related things that need to 
get done. You might have similar experiences. Someone once told me 
that a project is not truly yours until you are thinking about it in the 
shower. Thus, we might have difficulties with being able to psycho￾logically detach.
This can be especially difficult if we feel as though we are not 
accomplishing everything we should in a given time period. However, 
it is important to remember that if we run ourselves until we feel as 
though we are on “empty,” we will not be producing quality work. We 
might even cause ourselves more work in the long-run when accounting 
for the extra effort needed and the potential errors resulting from 
being at less than full capacity, compared to if we had incorporated rest 
into our schedule in the first place. Our colleagues who specialize in Not Allowing for Rest/Recovery: Make Rest a PRIORITY 173
industrial-organizational psychology frequently emphasize the import￾ance of a work-life balance, and that is essentially the takeaway from 
this first point. If you are able to use that on/off switch, switch it to 
“on” when you are at work or school, or playing your sport, and then 
turn it back “off ” once you leave the campus or field.
But it can be hard to turn our brains off, especially when we have 
been working intensely toward a goal. Whether we are at work, 
at school, or on the field, we are prone to adopting a mentality of 
just doing what needs to be done to be successful. This is especially 
the case when you are striving to compete on a world stage. When 
interviewing Dr. Eccles for this book, he shared that when asked 
what rest meant to them, National Football League (NFL) athletes 
stated that rest was time away from the sport or time to not think 
about the sport. This is a prime example of the aforementioned psy￾chological detachment, accomplished in this case by not engaging 
in any effortful thinking, whether it be about your sports team, 
work, or school. This sometimes can be as simple as immersing 
yourself in a book, movie, or hobby. We have heard of gardening 
referred to as “dirt therapy” because the focus of your thoughts 
can be blissfully limited to the task at hand – the decision of when 
to prune or adjust the soil occupies your mind. One specific way 
to potentially decrease our engagement in effortful thinking is 
through mindfulness. Researchers have found that when we prac￾tice mindfulness-based techniques, we can detach from work, have 
an increased satisfaction with work-life balance, and have decreased 
psychological conflict over time (Althammer et al., 2021).
We have all believed or have been told at some point in our life that 
our schooling, work, or sport should come first so we can put in our 
best-efforts. However, this mindset is essentially allowing the task to 
control us, either explicitly or subconsciously. In these orbits, we can be 
controlled by deadlines, goals, assignments, or meetings. It can come 
to consume our thoughts, and we may feel an unhealthy obligation 
to accomplish our goals and meet those deadlines. If we do not meet 
our goals or deadlines, we fear we will be seen as a failure or even 
see ourselves that way. Training ourselves to engage in an activity that 
interests us, such as painting, walking through nature, or listening to 
music, can allow us to mentally rest because our mind is not focusing 
on the deadlines or other obligations we have prioritized.174 Not Allowing for Rest/Recovery: Make Rest a PRIORITY
When talking with high-performing students, we have found that 
many use these types of creative outlets to rest. They find that taking 
the time away from studying and focusing on something else actually 
helps enhance their ability to study and their motivation to learn. To 
do this, you can incorporate a rest day or even a chunk of a day that 
is dedicated to something you enjoy that is not what your daily rou￾tine consists of. Letting go of that controlled feeling we have due to 
deadlines or daily practices can be a hard obstacle to overcome, but 
once we figure out a way that works for us, we can start incorpor￾ating that into our schedules so we are performing at our best. When 
interviewing Justin Causey, the multi-faceted artist manager and 
operations manager at BlackCity recordings, he made a great point 
that if he cannot be 100 percent for himself [in these times], then he 
cannot be 100 percent for others. This is another important reason why 
rest is so crucial. If we want to perform at our best, we need to be well 
rested – mentally and physically.
Similarly, we may have a monotonous daily routine. Granted, some 
of us will prefer a consistent daily routine, but the grind of daily training 
activities can be grueling, particularly for athletes looking to reach 
world-class status. With this in mind, Eccles and colleagues suggest 
that we can break up the monotony in various ways such as switching 
up activities, locations, and people. Let us apply this to the domain in 
which we, the authors, primarily work. Academics often have the same 
routine Mondays through Fridays. They come to campus and are in 
their office, conducting research in the laboratory, or are teaching every 
day. Many researchers also feel pressure to be productive and extend 
their efforts across the weekend. The monotony of this routine could 
contribute to burnout at some point, sometimes before mid-semester. 
While in this situation, it is more difficult to switch up location and 
people, it is easy to switch up activities. For example, instead of using 
your lunch break to eat in your office, you could break up the day by 
going for a walk or meeting a non-work friend for lunch.
Students could take a different route to class and pay attention to 
their surroundings or make new friends in each class so that their social 
circle expands. While you are with the same people in your classes, 
you typically see different people from class to class. When it comes 
to athletes, they can easily adjust all three. For example, instead of 
engaging in or thinking about the sport, they can read for fun, drive Not Allowing for Rest/Recovery: Make Rest a PRIORITY 175
a different route, take a day trip somewhere they have never been, or 
hang out with friends other than their teammates (Eccles et al., 2021). 
Each of these examples is a way to achieve some level of mental rest. 
Try some of them and also spend some time thinking about things you 
can do to break up the monotony of your routine. Tyler Tims, a doc￾toral student that we interviewed, discussed that self-care such as going 
to the gym, hanging out with friends, and being around people is how 
he rests and feels replenished. For him, being alone allows his mind to 
wander which actually makes him feel less rested. This highlights the 
fact that rest can look different for everyone; it is not a one-size-fits-all 
definition.
Remember those deadlines we mentioned earlier that potentially 
can subconsciously control us? Well, sometimes, being able to catch 
up on important tasks can be a way of mentally resting. Deadlines can 
cause us to feel stressed, especially if we feel as though we are not 
meeting them quickly enough. Stressing out in this situation is the 
opposite of what we want when we discuss mentally resting. If we 
slowly chip away at our to-do list and start completing our tasks, we 
are removing some of those stressors which can help remove the meta￾phorical weight from our shoulders. Deadlines and due dates are all 
too common for all of us. Moreover, our deadlines and obligations are 
not limited to work, school, or training. Many of us also have family 
obligations that can make deadlines even more complicated to navi￾gate. It might sound counterproductive to achieving mental rest, but 
using any break throughout the day to tackle something on your to￾do list could be helpful – sometimes 15–20 mins at a time. Your day 
might seem more intense at first but catching up on your tasks can 
lead to meeting a greater number of deadlines because you have been 
clearing some out of the way. Another possibility is designating a 
limited amount of time on an “off day” to tackle some projects. This 
could be a four-hour window on a Saturday once a month. I reserve 
this latter strategy for times when my list of tasks seems impossible to 
tame otherwise.
The last resting experience is being able to have a personal life out￾side of work, school, or sport. Not being able to have a social life outside 
of our job, schooling, or sport can lead to frustrations and stress – not 
only for ourselves but for those around us. Self-care researchers refer to 
the working part of our life as the professional self, and the personal self 176 Not Allowing for Rest/Recovery: Make Rest a PRIORITY
is the individual outside of the workplace (Bressi & Vaden, 2017). One 
aspect of self-care is ensuring that we maintain equilibrium between 
our professional and personal selves. Problems can arise when we are 
unable to keep these two selves sufficiently separate (including the 
state of burnout discussed in the upcoming section). Eccles and his 
colleagues suggest that we schedule time for personal activity. If we 
put it in our schedule, it is accounted for in the context of everything 
else going on, reducing our frustrations, which in turn, will lead to us 
feeling more rested.
The idea to schedule breaks was brought to Emily’s attention by 
friends and colleagues. She never made time for her personal life 
and always put her job first. This led to increased stress in the home, 
because instead of focusing on herself and her family, she focused on 
the job. She knew there were deadlines to be met, she did not want to 
let people down, and she felt that if she stopped working, it just would 
not get done. For a couple of years she was burned out by the end 
of the first month of the semester. She was not mentally resting; she 
thought her frequent naps throughout the week were enough. Now, 
she has realized how important it is to separate her work and home life, 
and she tries as much as possible to not to bring work home with her 
or work past five o’clock so that she can keep the two separated. Emily 
was also not taking time to incorporate non-work activities into her 
day. As a reminder, these activities are individualized based on personal 
preferences – exercising, painting, playing or listening to music, or any 
other activity unrelated to work life.
All the suggestions discussed in this section will require effort to 
implement. You likely have excelled at something because of the time 
and effort you have invested. Hopefully, now that we know what needs 
to be done to rest mentally, we can create and implement a plan to 
ensure that we are getting both the physical and mental rest that we 
need. Once we see what works for us, we can adjust as needed. For 
example, Kevin Rapillo, the drummer for Rodney Atkins’ band, has 
learned how to do just that. When it comes to rest, he stated:
So one of the first times in a long time, I’ve kind of prioritized 
giving myself a break to say it’s okay to be tired. And it’s okay to 
need a break from running around. So that has been one of my 
best features – that I know when to just take a break and give it 
a rest.Not Allowing for Rest/Recovery: Make Rest a PRIORITY 177
We can assume that Kevin was suggesting the importance of priori￾tizing both mental and physical rest. We now consider some of the 
negative consequences of not prioritizing rest.
“I Hate This!” – The Impact of Burnout
We have discussed some of the psychological consequences of not 
getting enough rest, but perhaps the most detrimental consequence is 
burnout. Not getting sufficient physical and/or mental rest could lead 
to feeling unable, or unwilling, to handle anything else related to our 
pursuits – burnout. Burnout can be thought of as a cluster of symptoms 
due to chronic stress at school, at work, or in sports. Researchers 
conducted a systematic review of the literature concerning burnout 
and found that it can lead to detrimental effects to both our mental 
and physical health. Common mental health examples of burnout 
include emotional exhaustion, loss of energy, detachment, decreased 
self-efficacy, and reduced coping skills. Other problems that result 
from burnout can include depression, sleep problems, and increased 
substance use (Salvagioni et al., 2017). Frustratingly, Salvagioni 
and colleagues actually found that burnout led to increased rates of 
insomnia, thus leading to lower levels of both physical and mental rest. 
This literally means that not getting enough rest can lead to reaching 
a state of being that can make it likely that the suffering person will be 
less able to achieve sufficient rest.
The reputation that burnout has for being disruptive is well deserved. 
It can derail an aspirational performer by contributing to them giving 
up altogether (see Chapter 5) or sitting out for too long (see Chapter 12). 
Burnout also can be reasonably assumed to lower the level of effort 
across the board, either by choice or because the symptoms of burnout 
have made further effort impossible. However, a promising finding by 
researchers was that rest breaks as brief as ten minutes helped decrease 
the feelings of burnout among nurses (Stutting, 2023). These short 
breaks potentially could be implemented into anyone’s schedule, even 
if they are just aimed at relaxation without focusing on any stressors 
or going for a walk to get away from your desk. This simple addition 
to our schedules could help decrease or avoid altogether the effects of 
burnout.178 Not Allowing for Rest/Recovery: Make Rest a PRIORITY
However, we must again acknowledge that the techniques described 
in this chapter to help ensure that you are getting sufficient rest will 
require your attention to implement. These efforts will include priori￾tizing time for rest and enforcing the time you set aside. You also will 
need to identify in advance some ways to rest that you believe will 
work for you. Once the possible restful activities have been chosen, 
confirm that your choices were appropriate for you – i.e., did the 
activity leave you feeling replenished and allow you to block intrusive 
thoughts about the domain from which you are seeking a break? You 
likely will need to make refinements to your regimen of rest similar to 
the adjustments you would make as you work to become a better per￾former. To echo Dr. Eccles once again, we need to return to making 
rest as much of a consideration as anything else related to attempts to 
enhance human performance.
Chapter Summary
In this chapter, we discussed how rest is integral to becoming a high 
performer but has been mostly overlooked. This is especially the case 
as compared to other components of becoming a high-level performer, 
such as deliberate practice, and there have recently been focused efforts 
to reemphasize its importance. It is critical to allow for both physical 
and mental rest, although we tend to neglect mental rest because of 
fears we will fall behind. Not getting enough rest can be harmful, and 
we should proactively seek opportunities for appropriate rest and recu￾peration. Finally, failure in this regard can lead to burnout and put us at 
risk of leaving, or failing in, a domain.© 2023–2024 Expert Performance International Collective (EPIC). This exercise is copyrighted by Kevin Harris and the Expert 
Performance International Collective (EPIC). All rights reserved. Used with permission.
Not Allowing for Rest/Recovery: Make Rest a PRIORITY 179
“You Look Tired”
Chapter 11: Not Allowing for Rest/Recovery – Make Rest 
a PRIORITY
This exercise will help you identify, and potentially refine, your plan 
for rest and recuperation. In the first part of the exercise, you will be 
asked to identify your current approach to rest and recuperation. The 
second part will ask you to identify some potential ways to improve 
this approach.
1. Please describe your current plan/approach to rest, recuperation, 
and general self-care.© 2023–2024 Expert Performance International Collective (EPIC). This exercise is copyrighted by Kevin Harris and the Expert 
Performance International Collective (EPIC). All rights reserved. Used with permission.
180 Not Allowing for Rest/Recovery: Make Rest a PRIORITY
2. Reflect on the approach noted in response to part 1. What are some 
specific ways you can go about improving it?Not Allowing for Rest/Recovery: Make Rest a PRIORITY 181
References
Althammer, S.E., Reis, D., Van der Beek, S., Beck, L., & Michel, A. (2021). 
A mindfulness intervention promoting work–life balance: How segmen￾tation preference affects changes in detachment, well-being, and work–life 
balance. Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 94(2), 282–
308. https://doi.org/10.1111/joop.12346.
Bressi, S.K., & Vaden, E.R. (2017). Reconsidering self care. Clinical Social Work 
Journal, 45, 33–38. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10615-016-0575-4.
Eccles, D.W., Balk, Y., Gretton, T.W., & Harris, N. (2022). “The forgotten 
session”: Advancing research and practice concerning the psychology of 
rest in athletes. Journal of Applied Sport Psychology, 34(1), 3–24. DOI: 10.1080/
10413200.2020.1756526.
Eccles, D.W., Caviedes, G., Balk, Y.A., Harris, N., & Gretton, T.W. (2021). 
How to help athletes get the mental rest needed to perform well and stay 
healthy. Journal of Sport Psychology in Action, 12(4), 259–270. https://doi.
org/10.1080/21520704.2021.1873208.
Ericsson, K.A., Krampe, R.T., & Tesch-Römer, C. (1993). The role of delib￾erate practice in the acquisition of expert performance. Psychological 
Review, 100, 363–406. DOI:10.1037/0033-295X.100.3.363.
Kellogg, R.T. (2006). Professional writing expertise. In K.A. Ericsson, N. 
Charness, P.J. Feltovich, & R.R. Hoffman (Eds.), The Cambridge Handbook of 
Expertise and Expert Performance (pp. 389–402). Cambridge University Press.
Salvagioni, D.A.J., Melanda, F.N., Mesas, A.E., González, A.D., Gabani, 
F.L., & Andrade, S.M.D. (2017). Physical, psychological and occupa￾tional consequences of job burnout: A systematic review of prospective 
studies. PloS One, 12(10), e0185781. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0185781.
Stutting, H.L. (2023). The relationship between rest breaks and professional 
burnout among nurses. Critical Care Nurse, 43(6), 48–56. https://doi.org/
10.4037/ccn2023177.DOI: 10.4324/9781003377542-12
Staying Off the Rails
Forgive Yourself and Regroup
I know I can look back on it and be like, “You know what? I gave it every￾thing I had.” I had my ups and downs, but I can look at myself in the 
mirror and say that I busted my butt. And I gave it everything I had. So, 
I can live with myself. I think at the end of the day, I think for me, I think 
that’s what forgiveness is at the end of the day when it comes.
– Alec Mills, pitcher, Major League Baseball (MLB)
I do [forgive myself] now. I used to punish myself for weeks on end. 
Now, I have developed healthy confidence, so I don’t feel the need for 
self-reprimanding behavior. I also realize that nothing in terms of art￾istic endeavor or passion is all that important long term, as far as the 
world goes.
– Anonymous musician from a globally-touring band who has 
reached Gold status in sales
The crowd, if you could call it that, was small. Around a dozen or 
so folks were either fiddling with the label of their beer or chatting 
with each other as Nathaniel and his band gave it their all. None of the 
patrons seemed to be paying attention to the performance at all. To 
make matters worse, the band had just dropped their latest album to 
mixed reviews. While the positive ones were raving and outnumbered 
the negative ones, the negative ones were excoriating. They were so 
negative, they felt personal. These reviews combined with the luke￾warm reception had Nathaniel considering whether he should just call 
12Staying Off the Rails: Forgive Yourself and Regroup 183
it quits. He also blamed himself for letting down not only himself, but 
his band, management, and producers. These thoughts plagued him 
for almost a year, but he stuck with it. Around the same time, a song 
that he had recently released took off, and the past decade or so has 
been successful by any metric. In this chapter, the authors discuss how 
easily negative experiences can send us to the sidelines, sometimes for 
good. The importance of regrouping and jumping back in and for￾giving ourselves when necessary are also discussed.
Think of a train. When a train begins moving, it takes a while to 
gain momentum and get to the desired speed on the tracks. Likewise, 
in our pursuits, things will typically start out slowly. We likely are 
not going to meet our goals as quickly as we hope, because it takes 
time to gain and ultimately maintain momentum. Even then, we will 
have experiences with the potential to slow us down or even derail 
us. When those experiences arise, there are two things that must be 
differentiated: the barriers themselves and our perceptions of those 
obstacles. While a barrier can certainly end the pursuit of a goal, our 
perceptions can absolutely shape how impactful the barrier actually 
is – is it, indeed, an insurmountable obstacle and a cue to stop, or is it a 
temporary blip to consider a learning experience?
Imagine you are an aspiring singer who has been putting in the 
work and taking all the “right” steps to get noticed. You have worked 
past the pain of low attendance at your shows or the audience not 
paying attention. You now draw a pretty large crowd in the region –
enough to generate the interest of big-time record labels. Could you 
withstand being told the label was no longer interested? How about 
going through being courted by labels five times? This is exactly the 
scenario that Logan Mize, a very successful performer, shared with 
The Path Distilled podcast (Harris & Tashman, 2020). If we consider 
each rejection Logan experienced as a derailment (remember the train 
metaphor), he did not stay off the rails. Logan continued pursuing his 
dream of becoming a successful musical artist, and it has played out in 
his favor.
Lainey Wilson is the Grammy-winning country singer we learned 
about in Chapter 7, who had been rejected seven times by the televised 
singing competition, American Idol (Norwin, 2024). To underscore 
Lainey’s experience with American Idol – she auditioned and was 
rejected. Auditioned a second time – was rejected. Auditioned a third 
time – was rejected. Auditioned a fourth time – was rejected. Are you 184 Staying Off the Rails: Forgive Yourself and Regroup
dejected? Auditioned a fifth time – was rejected. It will happen the next 
time. Auditioned a sixth time – was rejected. Auditioned a seventh, and 
final, time – was rejected. She revealed that she also had been rejected 
by The Voice. Despite these rejections, Lainey did not stay off the rails. 
She kept her train moving, and it paid off.
Are We There Yet? – Staying (Or Not Staying) the Route
It is common to have to determine whether you should stay on or off 
the track. While it can ultimately be costly, staying off the rails can 
seem very appealing at times of rejection or difficulty. Being successful 
is a laborious process. Alec Mills, an MLB pitcher, echoed this senti￾ment in his conversation with us, “Life, in general. Sports, in general. 
Baseball, specifically, will beat you down. It really does.” We often find 
ourselves in situations that require us to grind it out and push ourselves 
back into the mix. It can be very tempting in the midst of this process 
to just pull yourself out of the situation. Alec added, “it’s just a men￾tally exhausting thing to do every day.”
Andrew Lang, founder of Leatherwood Distillery, shared the experi￾ence of a fire closing down his distillery after being open for only two 
years. Andrew faced the decision of what to do next. He shared:
We’re shut down for about two months. I was at a decision point, 
because we weren’t quite at the point where distribution was 
enough [to cover rebuilding]. People coming into the bar wasn’t 
enough. But something in me just couldn’t quit. We rebuilt; 
started back over almost from zero and just kept pushing along.
The decision to continue paid off. “We expanded everything; basically, 
[we have] quadrupled our production and our distribution,” he said.
Since high school, Jonathan had wanted to earn a PhD in psych￾ology. To make himself more competitive, he worked hard on his 
master’s thesis. He developed his own study idea, created the materials, 
and executed the study. In order to pass his thesis, he was required 
to write an APA-formatted paper. He spent countless nights writing 
and re-writing to make it the best version possible, but he could not 
believe his eyes when his advising professor returned his paper after Staying Off the Rails: Forgive Yourself and Regroup 185
review. The feedback was that this was the worst paper he had read 
in a long time and needed major revisions if he wanted to move on 
to his defense. His train was completely derailed for the time-being. 
He ended up taking a semester off to decide whether it was worth 
staying in the program or if he should just try to get a job where he had 
completed his internship.
It was not until he had coffee with some friends from school 
that Jonathan realized he had never forgiven himself for what had 
happened. He blamed himself and determined that he was not at the 
level to write these types of papers. His friends encouraged him to 
re-examine the situation as an obstacle rather than an end, make the 
recommended revisions, and try to finish the program. At least he 
would have persevered after a time of adversity. Jonathan decided to 
go back the following semester and make a plan with his thesis adviser. 
Two semesters later, Jonathan graduated with his master’s degree and 
is now in a PhD program.
Andrew and Jonathan did not want to quit, but both had been 
thrown off by a barrier they did not anticipate. Unfortunately, any one 
of us can be blindsided at any given time. When we encounter these 
types of challenges, it is understandable to get derailed and question 
whether to do what it takes to get back on the rails or change our plans 
and stay off the rails. One way to not go off the metaphorical track for 
good is to forgive ourselves, examine the situation, and then strategize 
about ways to meet the challenges we are facing.
“I Must Be the Worst at This” – The Critical Role of 
Self-forgiveness
It can be very easy to blame ourselves when things go poorly. It would 
have been very easy for Logan Mize and Lainey Wilson to blame them￾selves when they were rejected multiple times, but we can assume 
that was not the case, at least not in the long run. If they initially 
questioned whether to continue, they successfully moved past their 
doubts to withstand repeated rejections and ultimately earn success 
(see Chapter 7 for more on rejection). We are considering this to be a 
form of self-forgiveness.186 Staying Off the Rails: Forgive Yourself and Regroup
Much of the work on self-forgiveness falls within the clinical realm 
and/or the type of self-forgiveness needed when we have wronged 
others. In both cases, self-forgiveness is needed for troubling or ques￾tionable behaviors such as excessive drinking or hostility to a loved 
one. Dr. Michael Wohl has studied forgiveness extensively. He and a 
colleague (Wohl & McLaughlin, 2014) suggest that self-forgiveness 
involves letting go of negative feelings and perceptions we adopt 
when we believe we have failed at something or that we have failed 
someone else. For our purposes, we can view self-forgiveness through 
a slightly different lens – the context of withstanding the barriers and 
setbacks we experience in our pursuits of success. Through this lens, 
self-forgiveness refers to our ability to forgive ourselves, or not blame 
ourselves in the first place, when things do not go as planned or for 
how we initially respond. To be clear, self-forgiveness should not be 
interpreted as not taking ownership of our mistakes. It is recognizing 
that mistakes and setbacks will occur despite our best efforts. Hooman 
Rahimi, a professional Formula DRIFT PROSPEC driver, had a very 
insightful response when asked whether he forgives himself when 
things do not go well.
I forgive myself, but I learn from it. My slogan is ‘I’m only 
Hooman.’ I’m going to mess up. There’s no chance that I don’t 
mess up eventually. I’m going to make a mistake. But you know 
it’s kind of something I think my dad taught me early was, you 
can make a million mistakes, just learn from them, you know. If 
you learn from every mistake, then it’s, you know, it’s a mistake, 
but it’s not the end of the world. You can move on, you can grow 
from it and actually become better.
We discuss the self-serving attribution bias in Chapter 15, which is about 
not promoting yourself and your accomplishments. In a nutshell, most 
people take credit when things go well and assign blame to someone 
or something that happened when things do not go well (Allen et al., 
2020). For example, Matt and Kim might both take credit for closing 
a huge deal with a client – each confident that the success was due 
in large part to the role they played in wooing the client. However, if 
the client ended up going with a competitor, Matt/Kim might blame 
the deal falling through on Kim/Matt’s incompetence, upper manage￾ment, or the horrible weather the day of the meeting. This bias can Staying Off the Rails: Forgive Yourself and Regroup 187
serve to provide a buffer to the impact of something going wrong. We 
presumably would be less impacted by the setback because we did not 
internalize it in the first place.
However, when we do place the blame on ourselves, self-forgiveness 
is most critical. Blaming ourselves could stem from internalizing the 
rejections we experience even when this would be unjustified. It is 
unlikely that Lainey Wilson suddenly developed her ability to perform 
only after auditioning for the shows that ended up rejecting her. But 
the blame could also come from actual mistakes on our part. This is 
exactly what had happened in Jonathan’s case. He had made the poten￾tial mistakes of not getting feedback, proofreading, or having multiple 
people read his paper before submitting it to his supervisor. Before 
realizing this, Jonathan thought of himself as “dumb” and not cut out 
for graduate school. He needed to recognize that everyone will make 
mistakes, and he ultimately reached the point of forgiving himself. In 
the time since Jonathan went back to complete the requirements for 
his degree, he has flourished in a government position. Jonathan is now 
happy with his life, but he had to learn to forgive himself and not stay 
off the rails.
Walt Lord, a retired US Army Major General, shared his perspective 
on making mistakes:
One of the things I always share with emerging leaders – and 
I did with the cadets yesterday – it’s okay to make mistakes. We 
expect our leaders to make mistakes. In fact, with lieutenants and 
brand-new officers, we almost want them to make mistakes, as 
long as they don’t get anybody hurt, if they react in the right way. 
So, I tell them, you know when you make a mistake, you will not 
cover it up. No. Don’t blame somebody else. Don’t try to ignore it 
and hope it goes away. Don’t make it your boss’s problem unless 
you also offer some solutions. What I tell them is to own your 
mistake. If it’s a critical mistake, go to your boss and tell them 
you made a mistake. Tell them what you’re doing to fix it, and 
let them know you’ll be back if you need their help, if it’s beyond 
your capability. Learn from it. But more importantly, great leaders 
learn from their mistakes. The greatest leaders help others learn 
from their mistakes. So, I tell them, be very open and honest in 
sharing your mistakes with leaders when you progress through 
the ranks. So that you can help them avoid them. And so, I think 188 Staying Off the Rails: Forgive Yourself and Regroup
you know, recognizing shortcomings in your own, in your own 
knowledge and expertise and experience, is sort of the same as 
reacting to a mistake.
He goes on to add, “be honest about it and ask for help.” A key message 
here is that mistakes are to be expected as part of the growth process. 
There is no need to internalize the mistakes you make along the way or 
take them as a sign that you should stop. Feedback is critical for developing 
high performance and these mistakes are part of the process.
What About Grit?
Individual differences also can play a role in how well we persevere 
through negative experiences. We can either let the negative experi￾ence completely derail us and give up, or we can let the negative experi￾ence help us learn and grow through perseverance. Grit has been the 
commonly used term that encompasses perseverance and consistency 
of interests (Duckworth et al., 2007). Researchers have reliably found 
that those high in grit are more likely to have higher levels of academic 
achievement, career retention, physical health, and overall well-being 
(see Duckworth et al., 2007 for a review). Most of us will face the 
obstacles discussed throughout this book. Some of us will give up on 
a given pursuit relatively quickly. Others will stick with a pursuit at 
all costs.
Not everyone attains the ultimate level of success they are seeking, 
even when pursuing it at all costs. Their business might fail. They may 
be denied a promotion. They might get injured, or underperform, and 
fail to make the cut for an athletic team. The offer for a leading role or 
admission to medical school might never come. However, staying with 
something often increases the odds of being successful. Comedian 
Henry Cho shared with us his thoughts: “Stay true to who you are 
and what you want,” and “just stick to it.” This advice is applicable 
for anyone in the early stages of a pursuit. Henry’s advice can also be 
applied when someone has experienced an objective level of success 
but then derails.
Probably one of the most well-known cases of perseverance is 
the acclaimed actor Robert Downey Jr. (Picotti, 2024). During his 
childhood, he was an actor in various films and on Saturday Night Live. Staying Off the Rails: Forgive Yourself and Regroup 189
However, in his early 20s his life was completely derailed by substance 
abuse. It was not until he played a role of someone with substance 
abuse issues that he realized things needed to change. He reached out 
for help and entered a rehabilitation facility. For a while, he was back 
on track but was then derailed again. This time, however, in addition 
to the substance abuse, he found himself in legal trouble and served 
a year in prison. After an additional legal issue, he was fired from the 
well-known show Ally McBeal because the employers considered him a 
risk. He reached an agreement with his lawyers and was able to serve 
three-years in a treatment facility rather than prison. This could have 
been the moment he called it quits and stayed off the rails. Instead, 
he emerged from the three-year treatment sober and went back to 
work. It was during this time that he appeared in box office hits such 
as The Avengers franchise, starting with Iron Man (Favreau, 2008), and 
most recently Oppenheimer (Nolan, 2023), for which he won his first 
Academy Award.
Robert Downey Jr. is an excellent example of not staying off the rails 
after derailing. He regrouped and continued his work. Again, persever￾ance often pays off for the person staying the route. Removing your￾self from consideration is a surefire way to not get to where you want 
to be. This might require adjusting how you go about getting there 
and what you consider success to be in your own situation. Identify 
how you personally define success and go for it. Katie Cole, a touring 
member of The Smashing Pumpkins and singer-songwriter, shared how 
her experiences with difficulties while working toward her goals led 
her to forge her own path:
I’ve experienced a lot of failures, and I have no hesitation about 
calling it what it is. A lot of people are like, ‘it’s a learning experi￾ence; you learned so much from that’ – like, in a way to kind of 
polish it into something shiny. It’s like when I said I made all those 
choices that I made, and stopped following a better-known path 
and started sort of paving my own. It makes me responsible for 
the choices I made, the successes I have, and the values I have. 
Failures come with the successes. They’re not a hindrance.
As you can see, you are not alone with feeling as though you are going 
off the route you set for yourself. Your ultimate goal might need to be 
adjusted along the way. A band with aspirations to perform in stadiums 190 Staying Off the Rails: Forgive Yourself and Regroup
might end up making a good living playing smaller venues. The lens 
through which we view our progress and status can determine how we 
think of it. A healthy approach would be to try to stay true to ourselves 
and be proud of what we have accomplished. We may not achieve the 
final goal we set for ourselves or do so in the way we wanted. However, 
we remind you that growth is rarely linear. Being derailed during 
our pursuits can be difficult enough that we consider dropping out 
altogether. However, not internalizing the rejections we face, learning 
self-forgiveness, and/or being okay with adjusting our route when 
necessary can help us keep moving in the direction of our goals.
Chapter Summary
In this chapter, we discussed the importance of getting back into the 
swing of things after experiencing setbacks. It can be an easy choice to 
stay off the rails after experiencing hardship. However, we presented 
several examples of high performers who experienced setbacks but 
regrouped and kept trying. In our examples, the performers ultimately 
found success despite continuous setbacks and rejections. We also 
introduced the importance of forgiving ourselves when things do not 
go as planned. This strategy includes identifying where we ultimately 
want to be, being comfortable with alternate routes as needed, and not 
internalizing mistakes or setbacks. Ultimately, we can use setbacks as 
learning opportunities when possible.© 2023–2024 Expert Performance International Collective (EPIC). This exercise is copyrighted by Kevin Harris and the Expert 
Performance International Collective (EPIC). All rights reserved. Used with permission.
Staying Off the Rails: Forgive Yourself and Regroup 191
“I Might Be Done”
Chapter 12: Staying Off the Rails – Forgive Yourself and 
Regroup
This exercise is designed to help you recognize the importance of 
staying the course. In the first part of the exercise, you will be asked to 
identify specific instances when you almost gave up but continued with 
a pursuit. The second part will ask you to identify some of the specific 
fears you had about what was going to happen if you continued versus 
what actually happened.
1. Please describe one or more times that you came close to giving up 
on a pursuit but ended up pushing through to continue.© 2023–2024 Expert Performance International Collective (EPIC). This exercise is copyrighted by Kevin Harris and the Expert 
Performance International Collective (EPIC). All rights reserved. Used with permission.
192 Staying Off the Rails: Forgive Yourself and Regroup
2. Reflect on the examples provided in your answer to part 1. What 
are some specific fears you had about continuing and how did these 
fears compare to what actually occurred?Staying Off the Rails: Forgive Yourself and Regroup 193
References
Allen, M.S., Robson, D.A., Martin, L.J., & Laborde, S. (2020). Systematic 
review and meta-analysis of self-serving attribution biases in the competi￾tive context of organized sport. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 
46(7), 1027–1043. https://doi.org/10.1177/0146167219893995.
Duckworth, A.L., Peterson, C., Matthews, M.D., & Kelly, D.R. (2007). 
Grit: Perseverance and passion for long-term goals. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 92(6), 1087–1101. https://doi.org/10.1037/
0022-3514.92.6.1087.
Favreau, J. (2008). Ironman [Film]. Marvel Studios.
Harris, K.R., & Tashman, L. (Hosts). (2020, May 24). Logan Mize [Audio pod￾cast episode]. The Path Distilled. https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/
the-path-distilled-podcast/id1511069681?i=1000475563956.
Nolan, C. (2023). Oppenheimer [Film]. Syncopy Atlas Entertainment.
Norwin, N. (2024). Lainey Wilson’s past ‘American Idol’ rejection shocks 
judge Luke Bryan: “Don’t always get it right.” Y! Entertainment. https://
www.yahoo.com/entertainment/lainey-wilson-past-american-idol￾093545138.html#:~:text=“I%20tried%20out%20seven%20times,it%20p
ast%20the%20first%20round.” Accessed February 23, 2024.
Picotti, T. (2024) Robert Downey Jr. Biography.com. https://www.biography.
com/actors/robert-downey-jr. Accessed February 23, 2024.
Wohl, M., & McLaughlin, K. (2014). Self-forgiveness: The good, the bad, and 
the ugly. Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 8, 422–435. https://doi.
org/10.1111/spc3.12119.DOI: 10.4324/9781003377542-13
Not Standing Out
Be Blueberry Yogurt
I can’t expect everybody to want the same things, or to strive for the same 
type of excellence I’m going after, whether it be music or everyday life.
– Brian Brown, hip-hop artist
The skill, the time, and the practice that it takes to get to that level is just 
so insane. I’ll try to share that, if you really want to do that you should 
be drawing all the time, like these people do. It’s that kind of thing. You 
have to let people know you can do it. I don’t want to just say you can’t. 
But if you want to be as good as these people, to get this kind of job, this 
is the level and amount of time you should be doing already without 
somebody having to tell you.
– Thomas Estrada, feature film and video game animator
Sasha was hungry – quickly approaching hangry. She was visiting her 
parents and all the food that they had on-hand was yogurt – lots of it. As 
she scanned the containers, Sasha discovered that all but one was plain 
yogurt. Alas, the plain yogurt was not appealing, but she was pleas￾antly surprised to find a blueberry yogurt stashed behind all the plain 
ones. In this chapter, we discuss how Sasha’s experience of finding the 
blueberry yogurt among the plain is akin to you standing out from 
the competition by amassing evidence of your accomplishments (your 
blueberries!). The plain yogurt will not stand a chance.
So, what was it that drew Sasha to the blueberry yogurt compared 
to the plain yogurt? It stuck out! It was different from all the rest. Most 
13Not Standing Out: Be Blueberry Yogurt 195
importantly, it was the most appealing of the options. You will want to 
accumulate as many blueberries – your accomplishments – as possible, 
so you can be the blueberry yogurt and stand out in a positive way. You 
will have a competitive advantage when you are up against others who 
are applying to the same job or graduate school, competing for a spot 
on an athletic team, or anything else. As you will recall, in Chapter 9
we discussed how important it was to identify where you currently are 
in the process of completing your goals and develop a specific plan to 
work toward them. In this chapter, we will discuss ways in which you 
can stand out from your peers.
Throughout this book, we have discussed how long the road to 
success can be. We also discuss the multitude of potential obstacles 
that we might encounter and provide strategies for overcoming each 
of them. Accumulating as many accomplishments as possible (the 
blueberries!) over time will allow you to overcome the obstacle of not 
standing out. In previous chapters, we have discussed stages of pro￾gress toward a goal, with each having an inherent triumph as you move 
into the next phase. Each triumph represents an accomplishment of 
some kind that could help you stand out among the crowd.
The Top Candidate by Far – The Importance of 
Standing Out
The energized crowd was clapping enthusiastically. It was one of the 
best presentations by a job candidate that many had ever observed. The 
speaker was energetic, the topic was interesting, and the candidate’s 
list of accomplishments was remarkable. Many were left wondering, 
“What else could anyone ask of a candidate?” The excitement at the 
possibility of bringing the candidate on board was palpable. They had 
stood out among even the most qualified. Unfortunately, multiple 
employers were equally excited, and the candidate had the luxury of 
multiple offers to choose between from an eager group of suitors.
We extensively discuss the importance of making our 
accomplishments known in Chapter 15. This includes a need to over￾come the feeling that by talking about our accomplishments we are 
bragging. However, we first must have accomplishments to our credit in 
order to sell them. Then we must have an awareness that what we have 196 Not Standing Out: Be Blueberry Yogurt
done is considered an accomplishment. There likely are achievements 
or successes that you take for granted – ones that you might not rec￾ognize but impress everyone else. We encourage you to begin tracking 
your accomplishments – no matter how small – as soon as possible. 
Add past accomplishments to the list. As your list grows, it will help 
you create your own narrative (see Chapter 15). The first priority is to 
accumulate a list that meets the minimum requirements to gain entry 
to or to be taken seriously in a domain. This varies depending on the 
domain. In some cases, the respectable minimum will be very explicit –
sometimes in writing, but in other situations, the minimum will be 
informal, making it difficult to evaluate at times.
We can think of our accomplishments as part of a tiered system –
common/minimal accomplishments, separator accomplishments, and 
dominator accomplishments. This first tier, common/minimal 
accomplishments, represents the foundation from which to build, but 
these do nothing to help you stand out from others. They are the 
equivalent of the plain yogurt option in the opening vignette – the 
basic accomplishments that most of your competition will have. (In 
the yogurt example, the plain version was edible.) Examples of these 
accomplishments would be learning to play an instrument at a basic 
level, joining a research team, making an athletic team, or joining an 
organization. The rub is that almost everyone in the next tier will have 
done the exact same thing. You may stand out compared to anyone not 
currently in the domain but not compared to others in the domain. 
You will need to do more.
The second tier of accomplishments, the separator accomplishments, 
are accomplishments that demonstrate that you have begun to stand 
out among your peers. In these cases, they might only be recognized 
as successes by others within the domain. These can be objective 
accomplishments such as those measured by income generated, 
running time, or win-loss records, and they might be achieved by sim￾ultaneously doing a variety of things well. Attention to detail, doing 
things on time, every time, and proactively seeking opportunities for 
growth, all matter. The aforementioned world-class musician from the 
certified Gold-selling band shared a way that musicians begin to sep￾arate themselves from their peers:Not Standing Out: Be Blueberry Yogurt 197
They should educate themselves in musical areas and genres out￾side of their primary genre. Then they will bring something to 
the table that their peers aren’t. I have tried to do this in hopes 
of developing a unique style. I did this by transcribing other 
instruments, such as the saxophone, to get outside of the box. 
Often, a different perspective than everyone else is all that is 
needed to stand out.
The accomplishments here would be reflected as the breadth of know￾ledge and the potential improvements to their playing style. While the 
means to separate ourselves will differ depending on the field, we can 
all heed this advice.
The third tier, dominator accomplishments, tend to be recognized by 
any observer. These are performances and accomplishments that sep￾arate you from all but the very best in a domain. These accomplishments 
are readily recognized when reading the books of the best writers or 
watching the best athletes of all-time in competition. These performers 
have built upon previous accomplishments – adding blueberries until 
there is an undeniable difference separating them from the second tier. 
Continuing the advice of the anonymous successful musician, who 
suggests looking for ways to expand our skill set:
For example, if I feel like I have a rock technique down really well, 
then I’ll immerse myself in bebop, which is completely outside 
the old box. It’s a whole other universe. This way, there will never 
be a ceiling. It would take you ten lifetimes to even scratch the 
surface of what’s possible.
Since the accomplishments build upon one another in this proposed 
tiered system, why are we not all accumulating tons of accomplishments? 
The reasons likely are the same ones we have discussed throughout the 
book – lingering impact of traditional societal views, lack of awareness 
of techniques, impostor syndrome, fixed mindsets, and the like. 
These considerations seem to have a disproportionate impact on the 
accomplishments we accrue and our general success.198 Not Standing Out: Be Blueberry Yogurt
“You’ll Never Be Able to Do That” – The Impact of 
Traditional Societal Views
The traditional view that there is something fundamentally different 
about high performers can potentially impact how we go about 
seeking opportunities. We must believe that we can improve before 
we will attempt to do so. For example, we learned in Chapter 4 that 
there may be achievements that we do not think are possible to accom￾plish until we accomplish them. This occurs at a larger societal and 
at an individual level. Recall from Chapter 4 the bump in worldwide 
competitive swimming times because of the short-lived use of a new 
swimsuit fabric dubbed a “supersuit” (Robinson, 2022). The bump 
in swimming performance originally attributed to the new fabric 
remained even after the fabric was banned. The mental barrier of 
what was possible had been removed, and a new standard was set. We 
often place artificial ceilings on ourselves because we believe there are 
limitations in place for our ultimate performance potential. This can 
lead us to not even attempt to move beyond our perceived limits. We 
also are at risk of buying into the artificial ceilings that others might 
place upon us. For example, a highly accomplished sibling might be 
held up as the standard for another sibling. The pressure of trying to 
live up to this standard could lead the other sibling to self-impose a 
ceiling because they do not believe that they are as capable as their 
sibling.
These perceptions of artificial ceilings might also be made explicit by 
others. For example, when Emily was in her undergraduate program, 
a professor in the program told her that she would never succeed in a 
graduate program – an artificial ceiling placed on her by someone else. 
However, if we ultimately do not participate because of these perceived 
limitations, how will we stand out in relation to our peers? Chances 
are, we will not. Standing out typically involves pushing the boundaries 
of what we (others) thought possible. That extra push will most likely 
garner attention, and related opportunities, by accumulating notable 
accomplishments along the way. Thankfully, Emily broke through the 
artificial ceiling that her professor attempted to create. More import￾antly, she has thrived in her role as professor – and has reached the tier 
of dominator accomplishments.Not Standing Out: Be Blueberry Yogurt 199
“I’ll Never Be Able to Do That” – The Impact of Mindset 
and Impostor Syndrome
In some cases, we might choose to stay where we are because it is com￾fortable – the satisficing discussed in Chapter 2. Someone choosing not to 
accumulate accomplishments might be comfortable with their current 
status or not place much value on the accomplishments themselves. 
There is nothing wrong with this approach. These folks are making a 
choice to stay where they are. However, there are a multitude of add￾itional factors that can impact how we approach accomplishments.
One of these is our belief about whether we are able improve – or 
“mindset” (Dweck, 2006). A fixed mindset adherent believes we have a 
limited amount of potential (the fixed part) that we will not be able to 
exceed regardless of what we do. A growth mindset adherent believes 
that we can improve our capabilities at a given task through experi￾ence and effort. There are some ongoing considerations related to how 
mindset manifests itself discussed elsewhere in this book. However, we 
can safely assume that a fixed mindset would limit domain engage￾ment at some level. Our stance remains that we are less likely to take 
steps to improve if we believe our attempts to improve will ultimately 
be futile. This might have been a factor in the artificial ceiling one sib￾ling placed upon themselves after being compared to a successful sib￾ling in the earlier example.
Thus, a fixed mindset can lead to us seeking fewer opportunities than 
we otherwise would, leading to a decreased likelihood of standing out 
relative to others. This can also lead to a self-fulfilling prophecy cycle 
(e.g., Noskeau, Santos, & Wang, 2021), in which the lack of accomplish￾ment and acknowledgement serves as evidence to the person with the 
fixed mindset. They interpret the lack of accomplishments as evidence 
that they are indeed incapable of improving much beyond their current 
status. Attempts to engage in a domain will decrease accordingly.
Impostor syndrome (Chapter 3) also can artificially decrease the 
number of accomplishments someone accumulates or even attempts 
to accumulate. Impostor syndrome can be quite limiting for anyone 
experiencing it. It can discourage us from moving forward or trying 
new things. These are precisely the things we can do to help us stand 
out more. Maybe we are active in a domain but feel we do not know 200 Not Standing Out: Be Blueberry Yogurt
what we are doing – that we are frauds fooling everyone else. This is 
limiting in many ways. We may feel that the more we are in the spot￾light, the more likely we are to be detected as a fraud, so we avoid pur￾suing our goals and becoming the blueberry yogurt. Randall Foster, an 
executive in the music industry, witnessed this firsthand. He shared:
I do feel like it’s a big problem – impostor syndrome and self￾doubt – in the music space. From an artistic standpoint, I feel like 
it causes paralysis. It sets people up where instead of making a 
decision to go left or right, we just stay still, because that seems 
to be the safest place to be. And I’ve seen it shut down the most 
talented people;s careers for a year or more.
“You Did What?” – Lack of Awareness of Opportunities 
and Lack of Resources
We have discussed the limitations resulting from a lack of awareness 
of opportunities and resources throughout the book. In some cases, 
we might not be achieving certain types of accomplishments because 
we are not aware of them or lack the resources to pursue them, so we 
obviously will not engage in them. Finding a trusted mentor can be 
tremendously helpful in this regard (see Chapter 14 for more about 
this). Emily inquired about an internship as an undergraduate because 
she originally wanted to go to graduate school to become a therapist. 
Emily knew these opportunities existed because they were on the list of 
classes students could choose from, but it was not until she talked with 
her mentor that she realized what they required and how important 
they could be.
The second issue can be even more difficult to overcome. It will 
not matter how many opportunities we know about if we do not 
have the means to pursue them. These barriers often exist because 
of a lack of financial means but could also be lack of time available 
to dedicate to a pursuit. They could also be related to gatekeeping 
for a specific domain. For example, someone with control over 
infrastructure or distribution can limit access to entry, knowledge, 
or resources. These limitations certainly can stall our attempts at 
accumulating accomplishments. These also can be particularly Not Standing Out: Be Blueberry Yogurt 201
frustrating for someone who has the desire and confidence to 
pursue a goal, but finds themselves unable to progress. In these 
cases, how can we continue to accumulate accomplishments?
Make a Plan
One suggestion to make ourselves competitive is to develop a specific 
plan where we evaluate our own path and needs (see Chapter 9), and 
determine both our goals and a plan for meeting them. This approach 
will allow us to accumulate accomplishments to help us stand out. By 
nature of developing a specific plan, we will be setting ourselves up to 
accumulate accomplishments just by taking the outlined steps toward 
our goal.
Recall baseball pitcher Alec Mills’s comment on his cycle of 
stacking goals:
[A goal] needs to be attainable. A lot of times, for me, it’s some￾thing that’s measurable and attainable within two weeks. Okay, so 
then you get that go, ‘Okay, let’s do another one.’ In two weeks, 
you get that goal. If you keep stacking goals, then eventually that 
long-term goal is going to become a lot closer and a lot more 
attainable than it was before.
Alec is not only moving through his cycle of goals, he is accumulating 
accomplishments directly by improving his skills both in practice and 
during games. In other words, the advances he gains in practice (the 
blueberry of having a better curveball) also leads to objective gameplay 
accomplishments (the blueberry of having a better win-loss record or 
earned run average).
Both authors have supervised many student research projects over 
the years. In most cases, the students have wanted to do what they 
could to stand out, and completing their own research study was a way 
to help achieve this. They had included this as part of their plans, and 
they were able to add them as blueberries to better stand out compared 
to other applicants who may not have engaged in similar experiences. 
The Be Bluberry Yogurt! exercise (Expert Performance International 
Collective [EPIC], 2023) will help you do this.202 Not Standing Out: Be Blueberry Yogurt
Do the Thing – Smaller to Larger Opportunities
We have all experienced a point in our lives where we feel like if we take 
on one more thing, we will not be able to make anything we are doing 
work. We have to walk the fine line between doing enough to stand 
out and taking on too much, which could lead to us dropping out of a 
domain either temporarily (Chapter 12) or permanently (Chapter 5). It 
is critical for you to assess what you will be capable of handling while 
incorporating rest and recuperation (Chapter 11) as part of the process.
With that being said, if you find yourself trying to decide whether 
to take something on – do the thing. Even though you might be tired 
and have what you think is a full plate, it could be this one extra role 
that helps you stand out. Talon Beeson, an actor and director who also 
teaches acting shared his thoughts on this:
What I tell my students all the time is, you have to respect your 
mental health and you have to take care of yourself. But if there 
is any way you can feasibly say ‘yes’ to a project, you should say 
‘yes’ to it.
He reiterates the need to preserve your mental health but adds, “You 
never know where that’s going to lead.”
Take Izabella, for example. Not only does she have a full course 
load in her last semester, she works outside of school, is com￾pleting an honors thesis, and joined another faculty member’s lab 
to help run participants. However, she is not stopping there. She 
also volunteers as a mentor in a program for juvenile offenders. 
When writing her personal statement and getting letters of recom￾mendation, this one extra thing made her stand out. She collected 
a large number of blueberries compared to the other applicants, 
and her efforts paid off. Izabella has been offered a position at her 
top choice for graduate programs and will continue working with 
troubled youth. She knew her end goal and what she would have to 
do to achieve it, so she sacrificed a bit of her social life to complete 
these high-impact experiences to stand out.
A secondary advantage when we “do the thing” is that such 
experiences can confirm that we are on the right path, or indicate that 
we are on the wrong track and need to consider an off ramp. Such Not Standing Out: Be Blueberry Yogurt 203
pivots can ultimately lead to greater success in the long run. It was 
not until Emily did her internship at a behavioral science unit that she 
realized counseling was not for her. After that internship, Emily took 
her first psychology and law course, and realized that is where her 
interests lay, so she created her very own research study related to the 
field. This pivot resulted in her first journal article publication as an 
undergraduate student – a huge accomplishment that might not have 
happened had she not participated in the internship. Echoing Talon’s 
earlier advice, “do the thing,” if there is any possible way.
Tame Impostor Syndrome
Some of us might be cringing at the advice to “do the thing” because 
of our old nemesis, impostor syndrome. Maybe we feel as if we are 
already faking it, and doing more seems like a horrible idea. Or, we are 
comparing ourselves to others and feel as if we have not done enough 
to be considered anything but a fraud so why would we add this new 
thing? We often compare ourselves to others whether we realize it or 
not. Someone like Izabella – even with as much as she was doing – may 
look at themselves and feel as though they are a fraud because they have 
not done as much or the same things as someone else. That is just not 
necessarily the case. You are not a fraud just because you are not doing 
as much as another person. Recall from Chapter 6 how Katie Cole, a 
touring member of The Smashing Pumpkins and a singer-songwriter, 
caught me off guard by responding that I should not be discouraged 
when I mentioned that The Path Distilled podcast had reached 66 coun￾tries? I was initially confused by her kind words of encouragement 
and realized that the success she has experienced is at least triple that 
reach. Even though my efforts have not reached the audience size of a 
legendary band, I can still be proud of the reach of my podcast.
Getting Creative
We each have our own set of circumstances that will both hinder and 
benefit us in achieving our goals. We mentioned the impact of lack 
of awareness of opportunities on accomplishments. To overcome our 
individualized special circumstances, the advice is to “do the thing,” 204 Not Standing Out: Be Blueberry Yogurt
if at all possible, and seek mentorship to help identify opportunities. 
However, applying some creativity might be required in some cases to 
pull this off. For example, doing something to put yourself in the orbit 
of a potential mentor or other key players can help you. However, it 
is not always obvious how to go about this. One way is to volunteer 
for something that increases the likelihood of encountering a potential 
mentor. Brian Bates, nationally touring stand-up comedian and cohost 
of the Nateland podcast mentioned on The Path Distilled podcast (Harris 
& Tashman, 2020) that he had felt that opportunities to perform stand￾up comedy would increase if he was frequently around successful 
stand-up comics, and this idea paid off for Brian. In a sport, partici￾pating in a summer league, where recruits are often identified, could 
lead to encounters with someone who could help. Even an attempt 
to find opportunities of this nature could increase the likelihood that 
you cross paths with someone who could provide direction toward key 
opportunities.
Students who work outside of classes to maintain financial stability 
often find it difficult to engage in multiple high-impact practices, but 
there are other ways we can separate ourselves from others by thinking 
creatively about what “counts.” For example, we may not be thinking 
of the ways our job is actually teaching us transferable skills, but if you 
have ever trained anyone at your job, you were in a leadership position. 
Look for examples of when you demonstrated critical thinking skills or 
handled high-stress situations. These situations illustrate transferable 
skills. They will be particularly important in cases for which you have 
limited examples that are more directly related to larger goals.
We also can be creative in finding ways to use whatever is avail￾able to work toward our end goal. There are entire exercise regimens 
pitched as not needing any equipment other than what is already in 
most houses, with the promise that we will be able to achieve results 
equivalent to working out with traditional exercise equipment. There 
is no reason to doubt these claims as lowering myself up and down 
from a kitchen chair taxes my muscles in a functionally similar way 
as using a piece of exercise equipment. There are many examples of 
this idea. We have mentioned some of them elsewhere – a stuffed bag 
serving as a soccer ball. Someone looking to improve fitness can use 
an array of items such as buckets or car axles. Are there ways to find 
similar workarounds to the particular resource limitations in question? Not Standing Out: Be Blueberry Yogurt 205
This is not always possible, but we encourage you to think of similar 
creative ways to ease such limitations so that you can progress anyway. 
Progress anyway.
Take Full Advantage of Training/Mentorship
Another way to potentially lessen the impact of these limitations is 
to lean into training and mentorship opportunities. For an athlete, 
this might mean taking extra reps before or after practice, or trying 
out the training you thought was unnecessary. If you are fortunate 
enough to already be receiving mentorship, do everything within your 
power to get as much as possible out of the opportunity. Andrew Lang, 
Leatherwood Distillery founder, echoed this:
If you didn’t grow up in a business setting or have a partner that 
actively engaged [in business], I feel like there’s really no way you 
would know how to do it. Surrounding yourself with people that 
are smarter than you, better at it than you, is the only way to 
go. You can’t have an ego in business. When you’re starting out, 
you’ve got to swallow that ego and take advice.
Check your ego at the door. Communicate clearly. Ask for clarifica￾tion if you did not understand something. These are themes discussed 
elsewhere in this book. However, it is even more important if you are 
facing the obstacles of lack of awareness of opportunities or lack of 
resources.
Willingness to be coached and receptiveness to feedback most likely 
will compel a mentor to invest even more into your development. This 
can lead to opportunities that you would not have otherwise known 
about. It also could provide you with an ally to help secure resources 
that were previously out of reach. Andrew Lang added, “Networking 
is huge. Any time you meet someone that’s willing to help you, helping 
them out any way possible always leads them introducing you to 
someone else.” Take advantage of these opportunities.
Emily recently mentored a group of five students who were hoping 
to stand out. The students were already willing to go the extra mile and 
conduct their own research studies, but they needed to learn how to 
take constructive criticism to improve their writing skills. Their main 206 Not Standing Out: Be Blueberry Yogurt
goal was to either present at a conference or publish a paper, neither of 
which would be possible without improving their papers. This required 
many drafts to get to their final product. Some students took the criti￾cism and revisions better than others, but the efforts paid off. Three of 
them were published in a peer-reviewed journal, and four presented 
at conferences. All of them were accepted into graduate programs, 
some with multiple offers. They did what they needed to do to be blue￾berry yogurt. It was certainly more work and stress, but the end results 
were phenomenal – publications, poster presentations, and getting into 
graduate school. Mentorship can come in different forms, but once we 
match with a mentor willing to help us succeed, we should take full 
advantage of it.
Chapter Summary
In this chapter, we discussed the importance of accumulating as many 
accomplishments as possible. This list of accomplishments will then 
allow you to stand out among others vying for the same opportun￾ities. Traditional societal views and impostor syndrome can hinder 
us in seeking opportunities out of a belief that we would not be able 
to successfully accomplish them. Many of us are unaware of which 
opportunities are available and this certainly can stymie the pursuit 
of accomplishments. It is important to make a plan to begin tracking 
our accomplishments and to take the small opportunities, which can 
lead to much larger ones; both small and large opportunities will add 
to your list of accomplishments. Finally, we proposed the import￾ance of seeking mentorship and how this can help us accumulate 
accomplishments.© 2023–2024 Expert Performance International Collective (EPIC). This exercise is copyrighted by Kevin Harris and the Expert 
Performance International Collective (EPIC). All rights reserved. Used with permission.
Not Standing Out: Be Blueberry Yogurt 207
Be Blueberry Yogurt!
Chapter 13: Not Standing Out: Be Blueberry Yogurt
This exercise is designed to extend the plans developed in the Chapter 9
I Need to Start Doing… exercise and help you identify ways to separate 
yourself from competitors. In the first part of the exercise, you will 
be asked to brainstorm and/or research what sets apart the most 
successful performers in the domain you identified in your Chapter 9
exercise. The second part will ask you to identify some of the spe￾cific steps you could take to accumulate as many accomplishments as 
possible.
1. Some accomplishments are considered more valuable than others. 
Thinking about the domain of interest you identified in the Chapter 9
exercise, do some research on what the most successful performers 
in that domain have done to set themselves apart.© 2023–2024 Expert Performance International Collective (EPIC). This exercise is copyrighted by Kevin Harris and the Expert 
Performance International Collective (EPIC). All rights reserved. Used with permission.
208 Not Standing Out: Be Blueberry Yogurt
2. Reflect on the examples you provided in part 1. What are some 
specific steps you can take to accumulate as many high-value 
accomplishments as possible?Not Standing Out: Be Blueberry Yogurt 209
References
Dweck, C.S. (2006). Mindset. Random House.
Expert Performance International Collective (EPIC) (2023). Be Blueberry Yogurt
[Exercise]. Nashville; New York City.
Harris, K.R., & Tashman, L. (Hosts) (2020, September 13). Brian Bates [Audio 
podcast episode]. The Path Distilled. https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podc
ast/the-path-distilled-podcast/id1511069681?i=1000491079368.
Noskeau, R., Santos, A., & Wang, W. (2021). Connecting the dots between 
mindset and impostor phenomenon, via fear of failure and goal orienta￾tion, in working adults. Frontiers in Psychology, 12, 588438.
Robinson, M.A. (2022). Glimpsing the impossible: How artificially enhanced 
targets improve elite performance. Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology, 
44(3), 177–188.DOI: 10.4324/9781003377542-14
Tough Crowd
Seek Out Feedback/Criticism
[Mentorship]‘s very important. This is why I’ve spent so many years 
being a mentor and actually helping the sports psych organization 
develop their mentoring more. It’s a role, and it’s a skill. And so, there￾fore, people have to learn how to do that well. Just having a mentor may 
or may not be useful. If you have a great mentor, [they are] someone who 
understands mentoring; understands how to help develop others – how 
to help share their knowledge. Then, it’s hugely important.
– Lauren Tashman, Vice President of Research and 
Innovation, master coach, Valor Performance; 
certified mental performance coach
You don’t want to just constantly be twisting in the wind based on other 
people’s feedback. So, it’s finding people who you deeply trust to get to 
speak hard truth to you. And, this all becomes more and more important, 
the sort of bigger your name is, because a lot of people are around you 
because they think they can get something out of it. So, having a trusted 
group that could tell you exactly what they think, and they have enough 
of a track record. I would put the time into thinking about who I really 
am and what it is I’m trying to accomplish. Because if I don’t know 
that, then what do I do with the feedback?
– Todd Rose, best-selling author and thought leader
A passerby might have assumed that they were walking past an 
intense argument. The voices were adamant and seemed highly 
14Tough Crowd: Seek Out Feedback/Criticism 211
emotional. However, this was not an argument in the traditional 
sense. This was a meeting of high-profile researchers and their 
trainees, and the heated debate was the goal. The team’s philosophy 
was that any idea brought to the group should be thoroughly 
vetted – a sincere belief that “an idea that cannot withstand scrutiny 
in our lab does not deserve to see the light of day.” Importantly, this 
was not just lip service as the team members did not pull punches in 
the debate. The result was consistent adherence to a high standard 
in their work. In this chapter, we explore the idea of acknowledging 
what you are not doing well by seeking ways to obtain honest, 
accurate, and ongoing feedback.
We already have discussed the difficulty that we often have with 
acknowledging what we are not doing well in Chapter 10. Some of this 
difficulty can be the result of our own “blind spots” related to our per￾formance, where we are truly unable to recognize where improvement 
is needed. We also generally tend to overestimate how we compare 
with others with regard to performance. This was the above-average 
effect and related Dunning-Kruger effect, also discussed in Chapter 10. 
We also identified two important considerations in relation to our 
inability to see how well we are doing. The first was to recognize that 
we are not good at assessing how well we are doing or where we stand 
in relation to others with regard to performance. The second was that 
we suggested that you seek out other sources of feedback in order to 
obtain a fuller picture of where you currently stand and help identify 
what potentially could be improved. These considerations, and related 
issues, will be the focus of this chapter.
“You sure don’t take criticism very well,” my thesis advisor said 
matter-of-factly. I shouted angrily, “What do you mean!” That last 
part did not actually happen. However, I was a little stunned by this 
comment from a respected mentor. I had always been a good student, 
and teachers always seemed to like my friendly, curious approach. 
I felt I responded well to constructive criticism throughout my under￾graduate career. It was an undergraduate mentor who first nudged me 
to consider graduate training, so it was a little jarring to hear such an 
assessment so early in the process. Looking back on the experience, 
I fully recognize that I did not take criticism very well back then. These 
types of demanding interactions and receiving brutally honest feed￾back will be common for many of you. You might have been a member 212 Tough Crowd: Seek Out Feedback/Criticism
of a debate team or been in educational systems where the instructors 
challenged students to this degree.
Many of us need to develop the skill of accepting and integrating 
criticism. This is especially true when we consider the nature of 
moving up the ranks of a hierarchy. The demands increase – some￾times substantially – as our skill level progresses. In academic envir￾onments, these increased demands include conveying our thoughts in 
both speaking and writing very clearly. This means that we must truly 
understand what we are intending to say and be able to state it in a 
digestible way. Academics must also act as skeptics to fellow academics. 
The issue at hand in the situation with my thesis adviser was that 
I was conveying a defensive tone when I needed clarification for his 
suggestions for improvement. At the time, I had never encountered the 
intense demands at this level of academic training.
Immersion in an environment that required me to fully understand, 
and be able to articulate, my stance was the best place for me at the 
time. While this was one of my first experiences with this type of 
feedback, it was consistent for the remainder of my graduate training 
and beyond. Another example happened while writing my thesis. 
I grew frustrated with what seemed to be an endless cycle of red-ink 
comments and corrections from my thesis advisor. I finally asked my 
advisor, “When are you going to stop marking up my thesis so much?” 
His response? “I’m going to mark up it up for as long as you keep resub￾mitting.” However, it was the rest of the response that reflects the tone 
of the message of this chapter: “It is up to you to decide when you are 
ready to defend it.”
“When you are ready.” Those are powerful words as they imply there 
will be a time when we are ready. There also are multiple layers of 
meanings to the phrase. The phrase could be intended/interpreted to 
mean: a) being sufficiently prepared to perform, b) an assessment that 
you are ready to perform, or c) a reflection of an eagerness to per￾form. Any or all of these meanings may be accurate or inaccurate. For 
example, you might be well prepared for something and know that 
you are well prepared – an athlete heading into a big event. You might 
be well prepared and make an assessment that you are not ready –
impostor syndrome or perfectionist tendencies at work. There also will 
be some of us who think we are prepared but actually are not – the Tough Crowd: Seek Out Feedback/Criticism 213
Dunning-Kruger effect. The question, then, is how best to obtain 
accurate feedback and use it to improve performance.
We already have discussed Dr. Kevin Eva’s proposal in Chapter 10 that 
we make feedback a systemic consideration. In particular, Dr. Eva and 
his colleagues brought awareness to the limitations of self-assessment, 
particularly as the sole measure, for assessing performance status. We 
agree on both points and propose a web of feedback that includes 
layers of coaches, mentors, computer/AI generated feedback, and 
other types of training tools. These sources of feedback should collect￾ively provide enough information to help in your assessment of where 
you actually stand with regard to your performance.
For such feedback to be effective, you will have to make appropriate 
changes based on the given feedback. This means that you will have 
to determine which feedback is valid. In some cases, the feedback is 
objective, and there is no leeway for interpretation – a specific running 
time or returning only 35% of tennis serves. However, some feedback 
will come in the form of suggestions and you must decide whether 
to incorporate them into action – do this instead of that. Thankfully, 
you are able to assess the effectiveness of such advice by the impact 
it makes on objective measures – does your running time decrease? 
Arnd Krüger stated this idea well in his article exploring why Roger 
Bannister was able to be the first runner to run a four-minute mile. He 
stated:
This is also the basis for ‘coaching theory’ as coaches do not care 
too much why somebody is running faster as long as he or she 
is running faster. Athletics makes testing easy because the out￾come is on the track: if you are winning or setting a new record, 
the chances are that your theory was better than the theory your 
opponent was using all other things being equal” (2006, p.307).
In other words, feedback allows you to determine what is and is not 
working, regardless of your approach. This is a big deal! Not only can 
we adopt what has been successful, we also can determine whether a 
particular technique is actually working. We can even develop some 
of our own techniques if we identify something that is verifiably good 
based on our feedback.214 Tough Crowd: Seek Out Feedback/Criticism
“I Didn’t Realize How Much I….”
I used to teach a class in which students chose a specific behavior they 
considered problematic and developed a plan to change it. I vividly 
recall how often my students stated they had not realized how much 
they actually engaged in the behavior. For example, some students 
would measure the amount of time spent on social media or track the 
number of sugary drinks consumed. It was not until they were in the 
phase of collecting baseline data that they realized the actual scope of 
what they were doing. Once this base-rate was identified, the students 
could test their plan to see if it made a difference in their behavior. It 
was this comparison that allowed them to determine if their strategy 
was effective. Did they spend less time on social media or consume 
fewer sugary drinks compared to when they started?
Establishing this baseline seems like a simple concept, and we 
naturally establish one for a variety of things in our lives. You prob￾ably know your typical interstate driving speed and whether you are 
adjusting your speed upwards or downwards for a particular trip. Our 
officemates have consistent, individual arrival times within a small 
window – they arrive at almost the same time every workday. It is 
noticeable when there is deviation from their traditional arrival time. 
You likely have documented your daily intake of calories or a particular 
exercise at some point. We use these examples to demonstrate the ten￾dency we already have to establish our baselines and then sometimes 
compare whatever is happening at the time. Anyone trying to get really 
good at something will be engaging in a more rigorous version of this. 
However, we already have established the demanding nature of trying 
to improve performance. Because of such demands, we must also con￾sider two additional questions – “Where should I get the feedback?” 
and “How will I know whether to trust the feedback?” In other words, 
“Is this working?”
Sources of Feedback
Feedback is proposed to be critical in the early writings about deliberate 
practice (e.g., Ericsson, Krampe, & Tesch-Römer, 1993). In these early 
proposals, the “teacher or coach” was the primary source of feedback Tough Crowd: Seek Out Feedback/Criticism 215
provided to the performer. While the person overseeing the training 
still plays an important role, the means by which we collect feedback 
has expanded in a notable way. Playing chess online with opponents, 
from all over the world, at a skill level that once would have been diffi￾cult to match in-person locally or regionally, has long been the norm. 
Such matches can occur with a frequency that was also unprecedented. 
Surgeons can now engage in surgical simulations allowing for realistic 
feedback as many times as they prefer, without damaging the tissue of 
an actual patient. This list could continue with many more examples. 
It should be clear that the number of sources of feedback has grown 
tremendously.
The impact of this feedback on performance cannot be overstated. 
In one example, a group of German physicians manipulated the fre￾quency of feedback offered to medical students learning a medical pro￾cedure with a high risk of complications when performed incorrectly 
(Bosse et al., 2015). Students were randomly assigned to training groups 
in which they would receive either low-frequency or high-frequency 
feedback. Promisingly, performance gains were observed in both the 
groups of medical students, but the best performance came from the 
students receiving high-frequency intermittent feedback. Thus, we can 
conclude that feedback played a role in improving performance and 
that providing more frequent feedback further enhanced performance. 
It also is worth noting that these medical students exhibited relatively 
high levels of performance from the start of training, and they still 
exhibited notable improvements. This would suggest that appropriate 
feedback can be useful across the board, regardless of current perform￾ance levels.
These types of examples are too numerous to cover in this chapter. 
However, we must consider that you must also know how to inter￾pret and apply the feedback for it to be helpful. This often still requires 
the guidance of a teacher, coach, or other more-skilled mentor. For 
example, you might find that you have improved on some metric, 
but are clueless as to how it can be integrated into your perform￾ance and what to progressively work on as the next step. Some early 
simulations provided computer-generated feedback, which has evolved 
to the increasing use of artificial intelligence to generate feedback, but 
still, this feedback may require interpretation to implement. Scholars 
writing about this very issue suggest that there is far more information 216 Tough Crowd: Seek Out Feedback/Criticism
resulting from AI analyses than can be interpreted correctly (Raab, 
Schinke, & Maher, 2023). They provide an excellent example of this 
by stating that simply positioning a goalkeeper in the center of the 
goal for 40 percent of the shots taken by opponents would be a mis￾guided response to data pointing out that 40 percent of shots are center 
shots. The opponent is often making the decision to place their shot 
in the position with the greatest chance of success – the spots where 
the goalkeeper will not be located in real time. A goalkeeper should 
also be familiarized via training with the other available cues indicating 
where a shot might be headed. As the scholars point out, this combin￾ation of cues actually leads to the goalkeepers being able to block an 
incoming shot.
This goalkeeper scenario is only one example, but it demonstrates 
the need for some form of guidance in interpreting and using feed￾back during training. There always has been a tendency to take new 
advances and broadly implement them without ensuring that the 
users understand the underpinnings of why it is being used (Harris 
et al., 2013). We might be able to get away with this when returning 
a tennis ball from an automated machine and still improve. However, 
there historically has been a surprising number of simulation centers 
founded without a stated curriculum (Kapadia et al., 2007; Tsuda et al., 
2009; see also Harris et al., 2013). For context, simulation centers pro -
vide training environments that allow students of a domain to enter 
scenarios based on real situations without the risk of causing harm by 
their mistakes. In medical training, students are exposed to simulated 
clinical situations where they treat either actors posing as patients or 
computerized mannequins that respond to procedures, and then are 
evaluated on their process. Well-intentioned trainers and educators 
rushed to implement the promising new tools once simulators had 
been deemed to lead to improved performance without always real￾izing that it is the way simulation is used that makes the difference in 
most cases. Think about it: this is true with most things – a guitar is just 
a guitar and a saw is just a saw until the virtuoso plays the guitar and 
the skilled carpenter puts the saw to work. Neither would be effective 
in either of our hands. You might find yourself in a similar situation if 
you are unable to interpret feedback and a suitable mentor is not avail￾able. The bottom line is that AI can certainly be a useful tool, but as 
of writing, it is not a complete substitution for other guidance. Having 
said that, it very well could get there some day.Tough Crowd: Seek Out Feedback/Criticism 217
“Does This Milk Smell Funny to You?” – Being Mindful of 
Misguided/Erroneous Feedback
“Don’t take financial advice from broke people.” I have heard variations 
of this advice my entire life. It certainly makes intuitive sense. We should 
be very skeptical of advice that is provided by someone who seems to 
be bad at whatever they are pontificating about. There certainly are 
exceptions to this, such as a physically out-of-shape coach with a track 
record of winning. However, it rings true under most circumstances. 
Study tips from a low performing student? Driving tips from the worst 
driver you know? Thanks, but no thanks! Hopefully, our mentors will 
be able to assist our ongoing advancement, but we always run the risk 
of accepting mentorship from someone not up to par (Thomas & 
Lawrence, 2018). The quality of mentorship can run the gamut. We, 
the authors, are aware of several situations in which someone received 
guidance or advice for development that someone more successful 
than the mentor had considered ill-advised. Of course, there will be 
circumstances for which trailblazers are doing things that have yet to 
be understood. In most cases, it can just be considered poor guidance. 
The risk is that a mentor could end up limiting you by shaping you to 
do only what they have done (Thomas & Lawrence, 2018). Mentors 
are a necessary part of getting better and are often invaluable to your 
growth, so let us explore avoiding these potential pitfalls by actively 
seeking criticism and mentorship from multiple sources.
“Let Me Have It!” – Seeking Out Criticism/Mentorship
“Is that your best shot?!?” Like most research universities, my depart￾ment at Florida State University would host speakers presenting their 
ideas and research. As with any field, academics commonly experience 
butterflies when giving these types of talks, especially when just starting 
out. Sound advice in the field is to prepare for tough questions from the 
audience (the theme of this chapter). That is exactly where the opening 
quote of this section came from. A new faculty member uttered a 
version of those words at the end of one of his research presentations –
“Is that your best shot?!?” Being in attendance that day, I did not inter￾pret his statement as a sign of arrogance; rather, it appeared to be a 218 Tough Crowd: Seek Out Feedback/Criticism
sign of preparedness – a declaration that he had covered all of his bases. 
Both our mentors created similar circumstances for us in our training 
programs by expecting us to be able to defend every statement, idea, 
plan, or action related to our work at any time. This dynamic leads one 
to realize that they are capable of withstanding the rigors of sharing 
their thoughts and to be comfortable doing so. Ongoing feedback from 
a capable mentor is a huge component of this process.
In contrast to the situation with my thesis adviser from earlier in this 
chapter, I now relish constructive feedback. I constantly seek feedback 
that allows me to monitor progress toward long-term goals and make 
decisions. I would much prefer hearing something that is at odds with 
what I propose than have someone not share concerns. I have noticed that 
many will preface such input with statements along the lines of, “I’m sorry 
for bringing this up,” or “Sorry for being a troublemaker.” In my mind, 
there is no need to preface with such statements as this is exactly what we 
should be doing. Considering as many data points as possible helps with 
decision making by casting the widest net possible. The same will be true 
with feedback as you seek to improve your own performance. We suggest 
actively seeking as many sources of feedback as possible.
These sources will include the measurable components that would 
result from tracking your performance metrics, including the afore￾mentioned computer-aided feedback. Maximize the use of the feed￾back sources you have found to be effective as determined by objective 
performance measures. You should also seek feedback from as many 
trusted people as possible. Granted, you might receive competing 
advice, but having multiple sources will allow you to account for 
varying points of view on your status and potential. The hope is that 
these viewpoints will help you construct the most accurate picture of 
where things stand.
One way to maximize the effectiveness of your sources is to become 
comfortable hearing the difficult parts. This is something that might 
take some work. I admittedly felt an initial burst of anger when my 
mentor informed me that I did not take criticism very well, but it 
helped me realize that it was something to improve upon. My mentor 
could have gone about his day without pointing it out, and nothing 
would have changed in his own life. However, I might have eventu￾ally irritated someone with less patience, costing me in some way. The 
point is to seek feedback from as many sources as possible, even if it is 
initially hard to receive.Tough Crowd: Seek Out Feedback/Criticism 219
You also must cultivate a relationship with mentors that allows 
them to feel comfortable giving even tough feedback. What is the 
point if they provide feedback, and you respond in a way that makes 
them uncomfortable? This does not imply that no reaction is expected 
from you; however, they should be assured that you are seeking honest 
feedback, and that there will be no grudges resulting from it. A certain 
level of trust must be present on both sides. Music industry executive 
Randall Foster noted the importance of this type of relationship. He 
shared, “Having trusted confidants. Having mentors in your orbit, that 
you will ask for feedback, that will give you unfiltered feedback, that you 
respect is really important artistically. I think that you know everybody’s 
got to have their tribe.” Attorney Danelle Whiteside shared:
I make myself available to hear it and try to try to take it in. Having 
those people to talk to, to lean on, to share, and have them pour 
into me. That’s totally made a difference in my life, and my path 
and my career. I don’t know what I would do without that sort 
of support.
This level of trust is sometimes labelled psychological safety – “a 
social environment within which individuals take interpersonal risks 
by speaking up, sharing concerns, raising questions, and offering ideas 
because they feel safe to do so” (Jowett et al., 2023, p.1). Functionally, 
it is an open communication stream. In our earlier examples, both the 
mentor and mentee would feel comfortable in an exchange of feedback 
moving in both directions. Such open exchanges can allow for ongoing 
feedback as to how things are progressing, allow for troubleshooting of 
approaches, and for any concerns to be identified. Critically, everyone 
can speak up without being fearful.
Psychological safety is certainly something one should strive to 
achieve. Very few of us, if any, would seek a situation in which we were 
fearful of speaking up. Not surprisingly, team “conflict” enhanced 
overall team performance when the team members experienced psy￾chological safety (Bradley et al., 2012). In this case, what was being 
described as “conflict” meant differing opinions were provided on 
how to go about completing a task. When members of the five-person 
teams were allowed to share their thoughts freely because of a high 
level of psychological safety amongst the team members, the respective 
team’s performance exceeded that of the teams experiencing a high 220 Tough Crowd: Seek Out Feedback/Criticism
level of conflict but a low level of psychological safety. Critically, the 
free exchange of ideas within the teams comfortable sharing them also 
led to improved performance compared to the teams with low levels 
of team conflict. It turns out that feeling free to speak up and exchange 
ideas with team members is a good thing. As expected, psychological 
safety has been deemed effective for increasing team cohesiveness and 
for enhancing a sense of wellbeing within the trainees in the few sport 
domain studies in which it has been researched (Jowett et al., 2023).
There are concerns that the term has become the new popular buzz￾word and questions have arisen about what the concept suggests (e.g., 
Taylor, Collins, & Ashford, 2022). Some of these criticisms relate to the 
specific needs of competitive sports domains – a fear that there is an 
expectation that coaches be “too easy” on players or that hierarchies 
of skill are removed. While these concerns that the concept of psycho￾logical safety had gained widespread traction prematurely while also 
being misunderstood were shared in relation to sport (Taylor, Collins, 
& Ashford, 2022), it is likely such concerns exist in other domains 
making use of the premise. Thus, we ask you to once again step back 
from competing approaches and consider the idea of psychological 
safety for what it is – being able to have open communication and voice 
concerns and feedback without fear of retaliation or being ostracized. 
The training and feedback still can be as honest, sometimes harsh, as 
ever. Once psychological safety has been established, the feedback can 
be viewed for what it is – feedback intended to improve your perform￾ance. It is preferable to get such feedback from someone rooting for 
your success than someone who is potentially indifferent or pulling 
for you to be unsuccessful. Seek someone who will provide you with 
honest feedback and opinions from a position of mutual respect. 
Anyone who has put in their time will recognize where you stand and 
see a little bit of themselves in you.
Where Did You Come From? – Seeking and Finding 
Mentorship
Mentorship has been part of the process of becoming the best versions 
of ourselves for millennia. Socrates’ mentorship led to generations of 
mentorship of great thinkers – Plato, Aristotle, Alexander the Great Tough Crowd: Seek Out Feedback/Criticism 221
(Ma, Mukherjee, & Uzzi, 2020) – with each mentor passing along 
knowledge and techniques to the next in line. While none of us will be 
considered in the same league as these great mentors, we can recog￾nize the illustration of good mentorship. These relationships can vary 
widely, ranging from occasional, informal advice to full-blown one￾on-one training as part of a formal curriculum. Moreover, informal 
mentorship often progresses to more formal mentorship as you 
become more involved in a particular domain.
Management researchers located in Italy, Silvia Bagdadli and Martina 
Gianecchini extensively reviewed the impact of mentorship on career 
success reported in 51 research studies (Bagdadli & Gianecchini, 2019). 
The scholars found that mentorship was consistently associated with 
relatively higher salaries and opportunities for promotions in about 
half of the mentees (51 percent). The remaining mentees either 
experienced no benefit of mentorship (47 percent) or experienced a 
negative impact (2 percent). These mixed results can be viewed posi￾tively but should remind us of the importance of who is providing 
the guidance. Dr. Lauren Tashman, Vice President of Research and 
Innovation and a master coach for Valor Performance, captures this 
sentiment regarding the variability of mentorship well in her opening 
quotation.
It can be incredibly frustrating to learn that roughly half of the 
mentees experienced no benefit or even were negatively impacted. 
Not only do we have to go through the process of identifying a poten￾tial mentor (or being identified) and cultivating the relationship, we 
ultimately might end up with ineffective mentorship. There is some 
comfort that the researchers found only a small percentage of mentees 
were actually harmed by having a particular mentor. It also is likely 
that you will have multiple mentors along the way. Being attuned to all 
sources of feedback and who is providing the most valuable advice or 
feedback will help you decide which mentors to give the greatest cre￾dence. You also will identify which aspects of mentorship you prefer 
and need the most. This allows you to further reduce or increase your 
personal collection of mentors as you see progress. We may have 
different mentors that we consult depending on the issue at hand. In 
longstanding and successful mentoring relationships, you will find that 
your mentors often will even proactively recognize your upcoming 
needs and act accordingly.222 Tough Crowd: Seek Out Feedback/Criticism
It is safe to say that all of us can be mostly optimistic about 
mentorship. Success in receiving pay raises and promotions were 
attributed to mentorship for over half of the employees in the review 
by Bagdadli and Gianecchini (2019). It also is likely that the other half 
of employees who were reported to have received no benefit from 
mentorship in the form of raises or promotions did benefit to some 
degree. This could be advice/feedback that made a difference in small 
ways or mentors simply serving as a sounding board to help navigate 
a tricky issue.
We propose the following ways to increase the chances of working 
with a quality mentor based on our experience: a) stand out, b) per￾form at a high level on even the small things, c) be coachable, d) 
network or jump in, e) cultivate relationships and ask, and f ) make 
something easier for a mentor. Let us now consider each of these 
in greater detail.
We dedicated an entire chapter (Chapter 13) to the first way to 
increase your chances of working with a mentor, standing out. This 
might seem underwhelming at face value since mentorship can 
enhance the likelihood of standing out. It appears to be a variation of 
the common question, “How do I get the experience to get the jobs 
that require experience?” However, high-performing potential mentors 
are drawn to effort. They will be drawn to you if you are performing 
well or even if you seem to be earnestly putting in the work. Put in a 
more consistent effort than your cohorts, and you will likely draw the 
attention of someone who can help you along the way. Expect a nudge 
in the right direction if you handle yourself in way that exudes doing 
what needs to be done, when it needs to be done.
Another way to increase the chances of working with a mentor is to 
perform at a high level whenever possible. We assure you that even the 
small things are being noticed by potential mentors, and these small 
things collectively make you an ideal candidate for mentorship. You 
might even accumulate enough accomplishments to successfully stand 
out while you are at it.
Mike Squires, creator of the Couch Riffs podcast, is a long-time musi￾cian who has worked with some all-time musical greats. Mike shared 
on The Path Distilled podcast (Harris & Tashman, 2021) that his take for 
making yourself stand out to a mentor is to “prove it” if say you care a 
lot about something.Tough Crowd: Seek Out Feedback/Criticism 223
Being coachable also is important. Be prepared to hear feedback and 
advice, and to act upon it. It can be frustrating to offer feedback or 
advice only for it to be ignored. There always will be a need to dis￾cern which advice to act upon, but consistently disregarding the bulk 
of a mentor’s advice could lead them to stop providing it or potentially 
ceasing to mentor you.
Networking or jumping into a domain also can increase the chances 
of mentorship. Andrew Lang, founder of Leatherwood Distillery, 
mentioned the symbiotic nature of networking: “Networking is 
huge. Anytime you meet someone that’s willing to help you, helping 
them out any way possible always leads to them introducing you to 
someone else.” Recall from Chapter 8 that Brian Bates, stand-up com￾edian and co-host of the Nateland podcast, immersed himself in the 
domain by hanging out with other comedians in comedy clubs (Harris 
& Tashman, 2020). These networking opportunities led to performing 
in large venues across the country. Your own benefits of networking 
might look different to Brian’s but nevertheless can lead to greater 
opportunities. It could be one of these opportunities that leads to you 
connecting with your potential mentor.
Turning a potential mentor into an actual mentor might also come 
down to cultivating the relationship and asking directly. This direct ask 
may not be stated as, “Will you be my mentor?” It could amount to 
asking for advice on a common aspect of the domain or if you can get 
their input on something. Outside of formal pairings of mentors with 
mentees, the most direct request would likely be along the lines of, 
“Would you be willing to work with me on…” in something related 
to your area of need. Andrew Lang shared his experience on seeking 
advice, “I legitimately have this question. Can you help? And 90 percent 
of people are willing.”
Another way of going about securing mentorship is to make some￾thing easier for the mentor – helping them with something already on 
their plate. Making the potential mentor’s load lighter could pay off 
by providing them with support, creating an opportunity to cultivate a 
relationship, and an opportunity to gain a new accomplishment. This 
also could be tricky because there is a decent chance that your involve￾ment would actually result in a greater workload for them, so be sure 
that you will be able to hold your own in the situation. Otherwise, this 
approach can be counterproductive as a means to secure a mentor by 224 Tough Crowd: Seek Out Feedback/Criticism
serving as a negative start to the relationship. If the mentor relation￾ship is already established, your engagement will require an additional 
amount of their time and focus, but the mentor should have a good 
sense of the investment you require.
Chapter Summary
In this chapter, we suggested that all of us should proactively seek feed￾back and criticism. Many of us have a difficult time accepting feedback 
and criticism, even if we claim otherwise, and should work to be better 
in doing so. It is important to develop effective ways of measuring 
performance and then use these measures as a means to gauge pro￾gress. From these measures, we can then determine if adjustments are 
needed. Identifying potential mentors will be beneficial when seeking 
feedback. We provided some ways to go about seeking mentorship and 
cautioned about the risks of misguided mentorship. Finally, it is benefi￾cial to have access to unfiltered feedback, and psychological safety can 
help create a relationship conducive to maximizing performance.© 2023–2024 Expert Performance International Collective (EPIC). This exercise is copyrighted by Kevin Harris and the Expert 
Performance International Collective (EPIC). All rights reserved. Used with permission.
Tough Crowd: Seek Out Feedback/Criticism 225
“I’m The Best”
Chapter 14: Tough Crowd: Seek Out Feedback/Criticism
This exercise is designed to help develop a plan to position yourself to 
receive feedback/constructive criticism. In the first part of the exer￾cise, you will be asked to brainstorm and/or research potential sources 
of feedback for your pursuit/domain of interest. The second part will 
ask you to identify how many of these sources you currently use.
1. We know that feedback ideally will come from multiple sources. Do 
some research on some potential sources of feedback for your par￾ticular domain/activities.© 2023–2024 Expert Performance International Collective (EPIC). This exercise is copyrighted by Kevin Harris and the Expert 
Performance International Collective (EPIC). All rights reserved. Used with permission.
226 Tough Crowd: Seek Out Feedback/Criticism
2. Reflect on the examples you provided in part 1. How many of these 
sources of feedback do you currently incorporate? Create a specific 
plan for incorporating some that you do not currently use.Tough Crowd: Seek Out Feedback/Criticism 227
References
Bagdadli, S., & Gianecchini, M. (2019). Organizational career management 
practices and objective career success: A systematic review and frame￾work. Human Resource Management Review, 29(3), 353–370. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.hrmr.2018.08.001.
Bosse, H.M., Mohr, J., Buss, B., Krautter, M., Weyrich, P., Herzog, W., Jünger, 
J. & Nikendei, C. (2015). The benefit of repetitive skills training and fre￾quency of expert feedback in the early acquisition of procedural skills. BMC 
Medical Education, 15(1), 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12909-015-0286-5.
Bradley, B.H., Postlethwaite, B.E., Klotz, A.C., Hamdani, M.R., & Brown, 
K.G. (2012). Reaping the benefits of task conflict in teams: The critical role 
of team psychological safety climate. Journal of Applied Psychology, 97(1), 
151–158. https://doi.org/10.1037/A0024200.
Ericsson, K.A., Krampe, R.T., & Tesch-Römer, C. (1993). The role of delib￾erate practice in the acquisition of expert performance. Psychological 
Review, 100, 363–406. DOI:10.1037/0033-295X.100.3.363.
Harris, K.R., Eccles, D.W., Ward, P., and Whyte, J. (2013). A theoretical frame￾work for simulation in nursing: Answering Schiavento’s call. Journal of 
Nursing Education, 52 (1), 6–16. https://doi.org/10.3928/01484834-20121
107-02.
Harris, K.R., & Tashman, L. (Hosts). (2020, September 13). Brian Bates [Audio 
podcast episode]. The Path Distilled. https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podc
ast/the-path-distilled-podcast/id1511069681?i=1000491079368.
Harris, K.R., & Tashman, L. (Hosts). (2021, March 7). Mike Squires [Audio 
podcast episode]. The Path Distilled. https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podc
ast/the-path-distilled-podcast/id1511069681?i=1000511921710.
Jowett, S., Do Nascimento-Júnior, J.R.A., Zhao, C., & Gosai, J. (2023). Creating 
the conditions for psychological safety and its impact on quality coach￾athlete relationships. Psychology of Sport and Exercise, 65, 102363. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.psychsport.2022.102363.
Kapadia, M.R., DaRosa, D.A., MacRae, H.M., & Dunnington, G.L. (2007). 
Current assessment and future directions of surgical skills laboratories. 
Journal of Surgical Education, 64, 260–265. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jsurg.2007.04.009.
Krüger, A. (2006). Training theory and why Roger Bannister was the first four￾minute miler. Sport in History, 26(2), 305–324.228 Tough Crowd: Seek Out Feedback/Criticism
Ma, Y., Mukherjee, S., & Uzzi, B. (2020). Mentorship and protégé success in 
STEM fields. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 117(25), 14077–
14083. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1915516117.
Raab, M., Schinke, R., & Maher, C.A. (2023). Technology meets sport psych￾ology: How technology and artificial intelligence can shape the future of 
elite sport performance. Journal of Sport Psychology in Action, 1–7. https://
doi.org/10.1080/21520704.2023.2287324.
Taylor, J., Collins, D., & Ashford, M. (2022). Psychological safety in high￾performance sport: Contextually applicable? Frontiers in Sports and Active 
Living, 4, 823488. https://doi.org/10.3389/fspor.2022.823488.
Thomas, R.P., & Lawrence, A. (2018). Assessment of expert perform￾ance compared across professional domains. Journal of Applied Research 
in Memory and Cognition, 7(2), 167–176. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jar
mac.2018.03.009.
Tsuda, S., Scott, D., Doyle, J., Jones, D.B. (2009). Surgical skills training and 
simulation. Current Problems in Surgery, 46, 271–370. https://doi.org/
10.1067/j.cpsurg.2008.12.003.DOI: 10.4324/9781003377542-15
Not Selling Your 
Accomplishments
It’s Not Bragging
The biggest thing is knowing that there’s a big difference between 
bragging about all the little things you do and showcasing your compe￾tence trying to make a professional name for yourself.
– Tyler Tims, doctoral candidate
I always tell people whatever you’re comfortable with. There’s no real 
rule for it. I think it’s important to let people know what you’ve done. 
I don’t do it enough.
– Kevin Rapillo, musical director and drummer 
for country music artist Rodney Atkins
I experienced an intense combination of anxiousness and excitement 
as my flight touched down. I was heading to a job interview at a large 
university, and my dissertation defense was on the horizon. I had sev￾eral things going for me that would increase the likelihood of being 
offered a position. I had worked hard, was reasonably well published 
for a recent graduate, and had worked with one of the best-known 
scholars in the domain. While the interview seemed to go well, I got 
word that they were going with a different candidate. My critical mis￾take was that I expected my impressive curriculum vitae (CV) to speak 
for itself, and not further elaborating on what was on there or offering 
other examples of accomplishments. After some reflection, I changed 
my approach and pushed myself just out of my comfort zone, where 
15230 Not Selling Your Accomplishments: It’s Not Bragging
I actually pointed out successes leading up to these interviews. This 
new approach paid off. I ended up with multiple offers for consider￾ation. In this chapter, we discuss the importance of learning to sell 
yourself and your accomplishments, and help the reader reach a level 
of comfort around sharing their own accomplishments.
John is the best dancer who ever lived. Seriously. Just ask him. He 
himself will tell you, “I am the best dancer who ever lived. There 
isn’t anyone who even comes close.” Stacey and her friends had the 
opportunity to observe John on the dance floor. Their feedback was 
quite different. They didn’t think he was very good. Their exact words 
were, “Terrible dancer!” And it was not just Stacey and her friends. In 
fact, everyone who was asked about John’s performance felt the same 
way – he is a horrible dancer. Why is there such a gulf between John’s 
impression of his dancing ability and the observers’ perception? John is 
emphasizing his own assessment of his performance without feedback 
or anything else to support it. There is a high likelihood that someone 
has, or would, provide feedback on John’s dancing, but he either has 
not sought it out or has not listened.
We have discussed the Dunning-Kruger effect in previous chapters 
(Chapter 10 and Chapter 14) – the phenomenon of overestimating our 
own abilities relative to our peers or our actual performance measures. 
We also discussed the critical importance of feedback in assessing and 
improving performance (Chapter 14). The issue we hope to highlight 
for this chapter is that selling your accomplishments is very distinct 
from bragging. Many of us do not feel comfortable talking about what 
we have accomplished. It feels too much like we are bragging. We do 
not want to come across like John. The good news is that selling your 
accomplishments is quite different from bragging.
Let us envision a world in which John is actually a good dancer. 
Saying he is the best dancer in the world could still be considered 
bragging. However, he would not be bragging if he listed off the 
dance competitions he had won to someone looking to hire a dancer 
for a television show. In the second scenario, John is merely sharing his 
accomplishments. It is very factual.
Sharing your accomplishments in this way is applicable across 
domains – your batting average in baseball, amount of donations 
generated annually, or books you have published. The list could go on. Not Selling Your Accomplishments: It’s Not Bragging 231
It is critical that we get comfortable with selling ourselves in a factual 
way. We all will find ourselves vying for coveted opportunities with 
plenty of others hoping to be selected for the same thing. Holding back 
your accomplishments in such a scenario is a definite way to increase 
your chances of being passed over. In the coming sections, we explore why 
we are uncomfortable selling our accomplishments, the consequences 
of not doing so, and some ways to help you feel more comfortable 
selling what you have done. We now consider one of the reasons that 
we might not be comfortable selling our accomplishments – peer 
comparisons
“Look at Mr. Smarty Pants”
Kiersten was identified in elementary school as academically advanced 
for her age and was selected for a program intended to enhance her 
educational experience. It was a program with an enhanced curriculum 
designed for students who might find a traditional curriculum boring. 
Kiersten was excited for the opportunity and enrolled as soon as she 
was able to clear it with her parents. Then came the problem – the 
program was being hosted at a different school. The students selected 
from her school had to take a bus to get there. They lined up in the hall 
by the door waiting for the transportation. While being selected was 
an honor, Kiersten hated waiting in that line, where her fellow students 
could see and question her. Even worse, they had to walk to the bus as 
it waited in the parking lot. Kiersten hated the feeling of being in the 
spotlight like this. Some of the other students accused her of thinking 
she was better/smarter than them. Kiersten’s participation lasted just 
over a week before the unwelcomed attention caused her to withdraw. 
Limiting our scope was discussed in Chapter 6. This included how 
someone might limit themselves because of pressure from others in 
close proximity. This often stems from perceptions that they will be seen 
negatively by trying to better themselves. A root cause of this pressure 
to not make your goals too grand is the threat to the self of esteem of 
the observer (e.g., Baumeister, Smart, & Boden, 1996). The threats to 
self-esteem could lead to the negativity being directed toward you and 
your ambitious goals. Hesitation in selling your accomplishments can 
stem from similar concerns.232 Not Selling Your Accomplishments: It’s Not Bragging
You might have experienced this negativity when asked about 
your own goals or specifics about your life. Attempting to become a 
musician, physician, or even attending a university can lead to nega￾tive reactions from others. This can be particularly surprising when 
we expected the person to be supportive. Despite such reactions, we 
should not feel ashamed about having goals and working toward 
achieving them. You have overcome obstacles to get where you are 
today! You also may have felt like giving up at some point during this 
process because of the negativity. These reactions and resultant inse￾curities can stem all the way back to elementary school as we saw with 
the example of Kiersten. Similarly, high-achieving student(s) garnering 
multiple awards during school awards days are often singled out nega￾tively. Such reactions likely stemmed from the other students feeling 
left out over not getting their own awards and related self-esteem 
threats. The award winners who experience ridicule often eventually 
determine it best to keep their achievements to themselves. We have 
also probably felt like Kevin at some point. We might have an impres￾sive résumé or CV, but we also may feel it is easier to show that on 
paper than it is to discuss it in person. Do these pressures extend to 
society more broadly?
“You’ll Never Reach My Level of Modesty”
Society has made it hard to discuss our accomplishments with others 
without feeling like we are bragging. We often are taught that we are 
supposed to be modest and humble. We are certainly not supposed to 
“brag.” Remember the case of John earlier in the chapter? You were 
likely annoyed by John based on how we depicted him. The word 
“bragging” has a negative connotation to it. If we feel like what we 
are doing is bragging, we likely will just keep quiet. Many graduate 
students can relate to this, especially when it comes to the number 
of publications they have as students. Let us say that Jenna has more 
publications and a richer CV than Sarah. Jenna may feel as though she 
is bragging if she is talking to Sarah over lunch about her product￾ivity and everything else she has in the pipeline. Emily felt this way 
when she was asked to be an external examiner for a master’s degree 
thesis defense. She had to submit her CV to show she was qualified Not Selling Your Accomplishments: It’s Not Bragging 233
as an “expert” in the field; the person who replied back to her made a 
comment about how impressive her CV was. At the defense, the CV 
and all of her accomplishments were discussed before the student came 
in. Emily felt uncomfortable because she was not sure what the CVs 
looked like for the remaining committee members. She did not want 
to talk about her CV because she did not want to appear as though she 
was bragging.
The unspoken societal standard that we should be modest about 
our accomplishments potentially has an even greater impact for cer￾tain groups. Interestingly, researchers have found that women are less 
likely to nominate themselves or share a successful story about them￾selves compared to nominating or sharing accomplishments of other
women (Smith & Huntoon, 2014). Women who discuss their own 
accomplishments violate the gender norm of modesty because women 
are expected to be more modest than men (Rudman, 1998). However, 
when women discuss the accomplishments of other women, they are 
not seen as violating that gender norm. These gender norms can be 
engrained in us at such a young age that it is hard to overcome them 
at a later age, and they can cause a negative physiological arousal that 
increases anxiety.
Thus, girls and women are prone to feeling anxiety when talking 
about what they have accomplished. Does this mean it will cause 
them to promote themselves and their accomplishments less than 
they would otherwise? The answer seems to be a definitive “yes.” 
Remember the study from Chapter 8 in which researchers Jessi Smith 
and Meghan Huntoon asked college women to write about why they 
deserved a scholarship (Smith & Huntoon, 2014)? This particular study 
was a variation of the classic misattribution of arousal studies (e.g., 
Schacter & Singer, 1962) in which physiological arousal is interpreted 
based on cues within the environment. For example, physiological 
arousal stemming from listening to music was interpreted as sexual 
attraction as measured by the increased ratings of attractiveness for 
faces presented to participants having listened to music compared to a 
silent condition (Marin et al., 2017).The women writing essays about 
why they deserved a scholarship engaged in greater self-promotion 
when they were told that a subliminal noise being piped into the 
room would make them uncomfortable (Smith & Huntoon, 2014). 
Promoting themselves led the women to experience such discomfort 234 Not Selling Your Accomplishments: It’s Not Bragging
that they tended to hold back – unless they could attribute the discom￾fort to something else.
These results support the idea that, because women are typic￾ally uncomfortable promoting themselves, they are likely to under￾sell themselves. Women, like everyone else, must understand that 
when talking about their accomplishments they are not bragging or 
overselling. That is where the concept, discussed earlier, of accumu￾lating a list of accomplishments helps. It allows us to share them with 
others without hesitation. When sharing our lists under appropriate 
circumstances, we would be just stating facts. Whenever we undersell 
ourselves, we have to realize that someone else is going to discuss their 
accomplishments, and they may be the one to get the scholarship, job, 
or award. We must promote our own accomplishments; no one else 
knows them as well as we do.
The traditional pressure to not promote yourself is so strong that 
some have resorted to something known as humblebragging (Sezer, 
Gino, & Norton, 2018). This is an approach taken by some to present 
their accomplishments in a more negative light to avoid the feeling of 
bragging. For example, let us say that Michelle got an on-ground inter￾view at three different campuses for an assistant professor position. This 
is a pretty big feat. But instead of outright saying that, she says something 
to the effect of, “I have interviews at three different schools to prepare 
for; now, I have to do even more work to research these schools.” Note 
that the first part of that sentence (I have interviews at three different 
schools) is the accomplishment, but for Michelle to make herself appear 
as though she is not bragging, she combines it with a complaint (…now 
I have to do even more work…). While the individual may feel as though 
they are promoting their accomplishments in a humble way, Sezar and 
colleagues suggest the complaint part of humblebragging may come 
across as insincere. Sincerity is a key determining factor in the success of 
self-promotion. We recommend sticking with the approach of accumu￾lating a respectable list of accomplishments and growing comfortable 
with sharing the accomplishments when self-promotion is necessary –
job searches, graduate school admissions interviews, securing sponsor￾ship, making a sale, and the like.
Andrew Lang, Leatherwood Distillery founder, shared that it took 
time for him to become comfortable sharing his accomplishments, 
including serving as a Green Beret, despite the themes of the distillery Not Selling Your Accomplishments: It’s Not Bragging 235
being based on his military service. “Our whole brand is based around 
my career in special forces; our logos and the storylines behind it. And 
it took me two years to actually be able to tell some of those stories,” 
he said, and went on to add that it was advice from his mentors that 
helped him realize he should own his accomplishments. “If you’re 
not telling the story, what’s the point of having the story behind your 
brand?” they asked.
“What? Was that Good?”
We have discussed impostor syndrome throughout this book and 
dedicated a full chapter to the topic in Chapter 3. Putting it simply, 
impostor syndrome is the feeling of being a fraud. This could mani￾fest as a feeling that we do not know what we are doing, everyone will 
figure out that we are frauds, or that all our accomplishments were 
due to luck rather than ability. It can manifest in a variety of ways with 
regard to selling our accomplishments. One of these is the fear that, by 
discussing our accomplishments, we will be asked a question that we 
are unable to answer in the moment. This could reinforce the fear that 
we do not know what we are doing or that we will be discovered as a 
fraud. So, we find safety from those fears caused by impostor syndrome 
by not discussing our accomplishments with anyone. There is a kernel 
of truth to this fear as stakeholders often ask questions intended to test 
your chops. For example, a seasoned videographer might ask a new￾comer what equipment they are using or about a particular function. 
This can be a question generated purely out of curiosity, or it can be a 
test to quickly gauge the newcomer’s skill level. The newcomer could 
very easily reveal themselves as a complete novice in their response.
Another possibility is that we simply do not recognize our 
accomplishments due, in part, to impostor syndrome. If you are prone 
to seeing yourself as an impostor, it is unlikely that you will have a 
grasp on what you are accomplishing. Even if you do recognize the 
accomplishments, you might be dismissive of what they actually 
mean. This could be as simple as how good you are at writing prose 
to how advanced you are with your grasp of a particular subject; the 
way you play guitar or swing a golf club in textbook form. For some, 
they are oblivious to the ease with which they can explain things to a 236 Not Selling Your Accomplishments: It’s Not Bragging
learner. Impostor syndrome can blind us to both the small and large 
accomplishments we experience along the way. What about when we 
recognize our accomplishments but attribute our success to luck rather 
than our hard work and abilities?
Think of the last time someone was rude or cut you off in traffic. 
You most likely had some particular thoughts and choice words for 
the culprit – at least in your mind. They were undoubtedly a rude 
person or someone with a mean streak – definitely someone you 
would not want to spend much time around. However, what if they 
were rushing a family member to the hospital or just received tragic 
news? The fundamental attribution error model (see Langdridge & 
Butt, 2004 for a thorough review and critique) distinguishes the ini￾tial explanation for their behavior, such as being a rude person, from 
considering something happening to the person. The recommended 
approach is to consider an explanation that considers what might be 
happening to the person – an external or situational attribution. 
The fundamental attribution error is commonplace and occurs 
mostly outside of our awareness. Our first inclination is to consider 
the internal attribution – the student is late “because they are dis￾respectful,” without the knowledge that there was an unanticipated 
traffic backup on their route. The cashier was rude “because they 
are a mean person,” without the knowledge that this is the last hour 
of a double shift and a newborn kept him awake the night before.
The self-serving attribution bias is a related concept whereby success 
is generally attributed to internal qualities (business savvy or athleti￾cism), and failure is attributed to external sources (an incompetent 
partner or equipment failure; Allen et al., 2020). However, someone 
experiencing impostor syndrome might do the opposite – attribute 
success to an external/situational source, such as “it was luck,” rather 
than our own disposition, such as “I was smart enough to pass this 
test after studying.” When we do this, it is harder to discuss our 
accomplishments because we do not necessarily believe we deserve 
recognition. An obvious goal when attempting to overcome impostor 
syndrome is to reframe our thinking so that we attribute our successes 
and accomplishments to ourselves as individuals, rather than outside 
sources. We now consider some potential ways to make us more com￾fortable with selling our accomplishments.Not Selling Your Accomplishments: It’s Not Bragging 237
”I’ll Have Another” – The Impact of Accumulating 
Accomplishments
We encourage you to begin accumulating accomplishments, and 
keeping track of them, as soon as possible (see Chapter 13 for more on 
standing out). Many of you already have been doing this. For others, 
you can begin tracking them now and add past accomplishments 
into the mix retroactively. Consider a scenario where you supervised 
a team of 30 employees responsible for generating over $254 million 
in revenue during the past fiscal year, a 3.5 percent increase over 
the previous year. Sharing this would be stating factual information 
and should not be considered bragging. It might be bragging if you 
followed John’s lead and suggested you are the best supervisor or sales￾person of all time. The point is that actually accumulating a list of your 
accomplishments will provide you with impressive factual information 
to share. This could be the earlier $254 million sales example, that you 
have an article in a quality publication, or that you have won the city’s 
tennis tournament for the past five years. These accomplishments will 
be very specific to you and your pursuits. Recognizing them in a way 
that allows you to easily and confidently discuss them is the goal. It 
might take practice recognizing all the things you are doing, or have 
done, that will show you are putting in the work. Recognizing these 
accomplishments might also serve to increase your self-confidence and 
self-efficacy.
Self-confidence is an implicit component in all the domains we have 
discussed in this book thus far. Self-confidence can be thought of as our 
perceived idea of how well we will do on a given task or in a certain 
situation. When considering athletic performance, self-confidence can 
refer to an athlete’s belief of how well they will do on a specific task 
as opposed to a global assessment (Feltz, 2007). This is an important 
consideration, as accumulating a list of accomplishments should allow 
us to see evidence that we are actually capable of performing well – at 
least at the tasks related to the accomplishments. Ideally, this would 
increase confidence in our abilities to perform successfully within a 
domain, whether it be academic, athletic, professional, or something 
else. The legendary Albert Bandura developed a theory of self-efficacy 
in the 1970s that is still present today (Bandura, 1977). According to 
Bandura, there are four components to this theory: performance 238 Not Selling Your Accomplishments: It’s Not Bragging
accomplishments, vicarious experiences, verbal persuasion, and 
physiological arousal.
Performance accomplishments are perhaps the most important of 
these components because they are based on our own achievements. 
If we do well, our self-efficacy increases; conversely, if we do not do 
well, our self-efficacy decreases. For example, let us consider Debbie. 
She has taken the time to cultivate all the leads she was provided when 
starting her new sales job, and she has closed three sales. Debbie’s self￾efficacy, at least for sales, will increase. However, if Mark spends weeks 
contacting his leads, specifically high-potential ones, and he has no 
sales to report, his self-efficacy will decrease. Who is more likely to 
sell their accomplishments, when appropriate, in this scenario? Debbie, 
because she did well with sales and her self-efficacy was increased. She 
can share her success at following up on leads and closing the sales 
when she is trying to secure a promotion or is seeking employment 
with a different company. Unfortunately, Mark will need to rely on 
other accomplishments or extend the window of his body of work to 
market himself as successful.
The second and third components of Bandura’s model of self￾efficacy, vicarious experiences and persuasion, are not as helpful as 
accomplishments when it comes to self-efficacy; particularly in the 
context of this chapter. The idea behind vicarious experiences is that 
we would attempt to model ourselves after others. In other words, 
we might determine we are doing something correctly by modeling 
someone who is more experienced. When we start a new job, we usu￾ally do not have all the skills necessary to complete the job daily, so 
we must watch what others are doing and continuously seek feed￾back to ensure we are doing things the right way. However, the appli￾cation of this depends on numerous factors that are too lengthy to 
cover here. For example, it is unlikely that someone with impostor 
syndrome would make an accurate assessment or that we would know 
how to select the right person for comparison. The third component 
of Bandura’s model, persuasion, in this context, would be telling our￾selves, or others telling us, that we are doing well. As you probably 
have gleaned, there could be the issue of someone not believing either 
source. Thus, these two particular components might come into play 
once issues such as not recognizing our accomplishments or impostor 
syndrome have been addressed.Not Selling Your Accomplishments: It’s Not Bragging 239
Despite securing a list of accomplishments, we often can feel uncom￾fortable simply stating our accomplishments to others. Our levels of 
physiological arousal when we are put into situations of needing to 
sell ourselves can reveal to us our own level of comfort with doing 
so. We have all been there – whether it is before a big exam, a job 
interview, or getting on the pitching mound, our physiological arousal 
increases. Some of you will already be comfortable sharing your 
accomplishments. Congratulations! This could feasibly stem from 
possessing a high level of self-efficacy and self-confidence, leading you 
to feeling comfortable in your own skin.
If we can find ways to increase self-confidence, we likely will feel 
more comfortable discussing our accomplishments. This is subtle but 
important, as we have earned that right! In this vein, we have mentioned 
recognizing accomplishments as a step toward doing this. Another way 
to become more comfortable sharing accomplishments is to practice
(see the Give Me Three! Exercise; Expert Performance International 
Collective [EPIC], 2023). We interviewed Talon Beeson, a successful 
actor and director, and he had wonderful insight into the concept of 
bragging versus selling your accomplishments:
I think there’s a difference between bragging and stating a fact 
like, ‘I booked this job.’ That is a fact. ‘I booked this job, and 
therefore I’m better than you are’ is bragging. And so, I think, 
as long as we can recognize the line between those two things. 
What we’re doing, it’s hard to pat ourselves on the back. It goes 
back to that politeness idea. Oh, I don’t want to stand forward. 
I get that. I don’t like being the center of attention. I would much 
rather do my job and then be done. I’m not one of those actors 
that enjoys going out and seeing people after the show so they 
can pat me on the back. It’s actually my least favorite thing in 
the world… I’m there to do my job, and my job is the thing that 
I enjoy. So, it’s not about the accolades, and it’s not about making 
yourself bigger. I think it’s just about doing what you do. And 
then, taking pride in your work.
He adds, “Don’t hide your light, take up space. Put your light in the 
world.”
This is a very important point for several reasons. We should not 
dim our light or downplay our accomplishments because we feel as 240 Not Selling Your Accomplishments: It’s Not Bragging
though we are bragging. We encourage you to practice sharing your 
accomplishments. The more we are able to share our accomplishments, 
the greater the likelihood of reaching our goal. This was the case with 
my experience described at the beginning of this chapter. I pushed 
myself to become comfortable talking about my accomplishments, 
and it resulted in gaining significant traction in my job search. No offers 
turned to multiple job offers. We recently have seen this general dis￾comfort with selling accomplishments in students in our career devel￾opment course. During one of our interviews for this book, I shared 
the rationale for asking the interviewees for their advice on selling your 
accomplishments:
So, the background for the question is a lot of my students are 
fairly young, sometimes sophomores in college. And they’ve 
accomplished great things, and I’ve seen them do great things. But 
when you ask them to start articulating what they’ve done, they 
almost always either don’t say anything or anything good. I guess 
they could be doing things they don’t recognize, or they don’t 
want to say it. Once you realize that they do know that they’re 
doing those things, then you start talking to them, and they say, 
‘Well, I didn’t want to come across, as you know, bragging.’ Or, 
they’ve been taught by society, and sometimes their parents, don’t 
oversell yourself, or don’t try to stand out. And so, one of the 
things we wanted to do is have some gems of wisdom that we 
could give to them from people that have done well. [You’ve] 
already kind of pointed out what I actually tell them in class. 
If you do a lot, accomplish a lot of things, you’re not bragging. 
You’re just telling people. You’re sharing the information about 
what you accomplish.”
Holly Johnson, cofounder of Hobnail Trekking Company, reiterated 
this point of selling our accomplishments as an uncomfortable but 
necessary part of the process:
One is you have to do that when you’re looking for work. You 
just have to. It’s uncomfortable, and you do it anyway. But, I think 
a lot of it is in the way that you tell stories, so you know, I don’t 
think that anything that Mark said [in this interview] sounded like 
bragging, but he was talking about things that he’s accomplished. Not Selling Your Accomplishments: It’s Not Bragging 241
And so, I think it’s about how you say it more than what you say. 
You are the question [to the evaluator/observer] in the context of 
somebody trying to get a job, or start a business or something, or 
just in general.
To reiterate Holly’s point, if we are tracking our accomplishments 
but feel uncomfortable discussing them, we can pay attention to 
how we phrase our points. The idea all along has been to emphasize 
your accomplishments as the primary focus. For example, instead 
of saying something to the effect of, “I am the best candidate for this 
position,” we could share the accomplishments that would make us 
the best candidate. This would be something along the line of, “In 
my role at ABC Inc., I managed a team of five, and under my leader￾ship, we increased project completion by at least 5 percent year over 
year for three years in a row. As a result, we were recognized as the 
company’s top team.” This also could be a statement about a spe￾cific amount of sales, a description of the research projects in which 
you were involved, or a running time – each demonstrating a con￾crete accomplishment. These examples are very brief; they would 
most likely be presented as part of an overall narrative, mentioned 
by Holly, that you will use to share your body of work. If we can 
control the narrative on how we present our accomplishments, we 
may feel more inclined to discuss them. The bottom line is, we need 
to feel comfortable in selling ourselves because it helps make us 
more competitive for whatever it is we are seeking.
Chapter Summary
In this chapter, we acknowledged that talking about our 
accomplishments can make us feel uncomfortable because we feel we 
are bragging. Society suggests that we not be self-centered, and many 
of us want to avoid coming across as the person who seems to be full of 
themselves. However, we proposed that it is imperative that we are able 
to share what we have accomplished as we are best positioned to do so. 
Besides, our competition will be selling their own accomplishments, 
and it will work in their favor. Finally, we proposed some strategies to 
help us become comfortable selling our accomplishments.© 2023–2024 Expert Performance International Collective (EPIC). This exercise is copyrighted by Kevin Harris and the Expert 
Performance International Collective (EPIC). All rights reserved. Used with permission.
242 Not Selling Your Accomplishments: It’s Not Bragging
Give Me Three!
Chapter 15: Not Selling Your Accomplishments: It’s Not 
Bragging
This two-part exercise is intended to help you become comfortable 
with sharing your accomplishments. In the first part of the exercise, 
you will be asked to write down three (or more) examples for each of 
the categories listed below. The second part will require you to identify 
three (or more) individuals with whom to share your accomplishments. 
We strongly encourage you to follow through with sharing these as it 
will help you grow accustomed to sharing accomplishments.
1. Provide three (or more) examples for the following three questions 
(do not forget the blueberries!). Remember that these should be spe￾cific and reflect tangible outcomes.
My accomplishments include:
I am good at:© 2023–2024 Expert Performance International Collective (EPIC). This exercise is copyrighted by Kevin Harris and the Expert 
Performance International Collective (EPIC). All rights reserved. Used with permission.
Not Selling Your Accomplishments: It’s Not Bragging 243
Some reasons to hire or mentor me include:© 2023–2024 Expert Performance International Collective (EPIC). This exercise is copyrighted by Kevin Harris and the Expert 
Performance International Collective (EPIC). All rights reserved. Used with permission.
244 Not Selling Your Accomplishments: It’s Not Bragging
2. Identify three individuals who you are going to share your 
accomplishments with.Not Selling Your Accomplishments: It’s Not Bragging 245
References
Allen, M.S., Robson, D.A., Martin, L.J., & Laborde, S. (2020). Systematic 
review and meta-analysis of self-serving attribution biases in the competi￾tive context of organized sport. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 
46(7), 1027–1043. https://doi.org/10.1177/0146167219893995.
Bandura, A. (1977). Self-efficacy: Toward a unifying theory of behavioral 
change. Psychological Review, 84(2), 191–215. https://doi.org/10.1037/
0033-295X.84.2.191.
Baumeister, R.F., Smart, L., & Boden, J.M. (1996). Relation of threatened 
egotism to violence and aggression: The dark side of high self￾esteem. Psychological review, 103(1), 5–33. https://doi.org/10.1037/
0033-295X.103.1.5.
Expert Performance International Collective (EPIC) (2023). Give Me Three!
[Exercise]. Nashville; New York City.
Feltz, D.L. (2007). Self-confidence and sports performance. In D. Smith & M. 
Bar-Eli (Eds.), Essential Readings in Sport and Exercise Psychology (pp. 278–
294). Human Kinetics.
Langdridge, D., & Butt, T. (2004). The fundamental attribution error: A phe￾nomenological critique. British Journal of Social Psychology, 43(3), 357–369. 
https://doi.org/10.1348/0144666042037962.
Marin, M.M., Schober, R., Gingras, B., & Leder, H. (2017). Misattribution 
of musical arousal increases sexual attraction towards opposite-sex faces 
in females. PLoS One, 12(9), e0183531. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0183531.
Rudman, L.A. (1998). Self-promotion as a risk factor for women: The costs 
and benefits of counterstereotypical impression management. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 74(3), 629–645. https://psycnet.apa.
org/doi/10.1037/0022-3514.74.3.629.
Schachter, S., & Singer, J. (1962). Cognitive, social, and physiological 
determinants of emotional state. Psychological Review, 69(5), 379–399. 
https://psycnet.apa.org/doi/10.1037/h0046234.
Sezer, O., Gino, F., & Norton, M.I. (2018). Humblebragging: A distinct—
and ineffective—self-presentation strategy. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 114(1), 52–74. https://doi.org/10.1037/pspi0000108.
Smith, J.L., & Huntoon, M. (2014). Women’s bragging rights: Overcoming 
modesty norms to facilitate women’s self-promotion. Psychology of Women 
Quarterly, 38(4), 447–459. https://doi.org/10.1177/0361684313515840.DOI: 10.4324/9781003377542-16
Advice for the 
Aspirational
We have reached the final chapter. This chapter was conceptualized 
later than the others. It was not until we were well into our interviews 
with high performers that we realized our question, “What advice 
would you give someone coming up through the ranks?”, would 
produce enough content to merit a chapter. Sometimes their responses 
overlapped with the content covered elsewhere in the book. Sometimes 
their responses were related to situations or topics we had not been 
discussing. We even failed to ask the question on a couple of occasions. 
Nevertheless, we recognized the tremendous value in the advice 
being shared with us. This wisdom was coming from high performers 
with great success within their domains – bestselling authors, actors, 
musicians touring the world, feature film and video game animators, 
professional athletes, and world-renowned scholars.
This list might seem to be a class of performers who have 
accomplished a degree of success that seems out of reach. However, 
they should not be viewed this way. We discussed how much of a 
focus to place on high performers at their level of success because of 
this potential perception. The decision was to continue to highlight 
them. This appears to be the correct decision as we learned how much 
ground that most of our guests had to cover, and are still covering, 
to get where they are. Many of them started with modest means and 
worked their way up the hierarchy. These were exactly the types of 
stories we wanted to uncover – the idea that any of us could begin the 
journey with a reasonable chance of becoming successful. To be clear, 
16Advice for the Aspirational 247
we are not pitching the idea that “anyone can be anything.” There is 
a very real chance that many of us will not reach the pinnacle of our 
domain. The person with a great performance coming in fourth while 
vying for three slots will still be left out. Likewise, if 400 applicants 
apply for five openings at a particular graduate program, 395 applicants 
will need to make other plans. The circumstances you face will vary. 
However, it is probably safe to say that very few, if any, of you will have 
an easy path to reach your goals.
The strategies suggested throughout the book can provide you with 
tools to help you stick with your pursuits and hopefully find a way to 
achieve your goals. We identified some consistent themes when we 
reviewed the advice provided by our high performer guests: (a) be 
aware that it is a long road to success, (b) know what you want and 
what you are getting into, (c) you will need to spend time learning and 
putting in the work, (d) use small, measurable goals, (e) help others 
along the way/network, and (f ) take risks/explore the small opportun￾ities. We now present each of these in turn.
High Performer Advice 1: The Long Road to Success
We proposed in Chapter 1 that, based on what we know from decades 
of studying high-level performers, “you typically must work hard at the 
right things for some time in order to get really good at something.” This 
first piece of advice is highlighting the “for some time” part of the quote. 
Recall that Chapter 1 was about how the view that high performers tend 
to spend time engaging in activities designed to improve performance 
was a relatively recent proposal. It ran counter to the view that our per￾formance was limited by innate performance ceilings that we would 
never be able to exceed. The advice of our high performers mirrored the 
need to work at something over a period of time to find success.
Mark Williams, a world-renowned expertise researcher characterizes 
the pursuit as a “long, long road.” Justin Causey, artist and artist man￾ager, echoes this sentiment, “It is not overnight.” He adds that it might 
take up to a decade before your efforts will even be noticed. And he 
says to think again if you expect to see quick results, “You’re not going 
to see results of it as soon as you start.” Because it almost always takes 
time for your efforts to pay off, human performance researcher Peter 248 Advice for the Aspirational
Fadde suggests that any aspirational performer begin their journey as 
early as possible. He adds, “You want to work on it before you need it.” 
By starting early and putting in the time, Fadde argues that the effects 
of the training will show up when you need it, specifically as the level of 
competition begins to rise. Thus, becoming a high-level performer not 
only takes time, it can be a grueling process.
However, as observers we often only see the end result – the high 
performer’s payoff of performing well. Katie Cole, touring member 
of The Smashing Pumpkins and singer-songwriter, added that the hard 
work is the part that most people do not share and many do not want 
to see. Part of this process is surrounding yourself with people who 
are willing to work with you while you are on this long road. She adds 
that, “You also want people that are going to push you to get the most 
out of yourself.” Because the road to becoming a high-level performer 
is so grueling, David Eccles, human performance researcher, proposes 
incorporating mental rest and recovery efforts into your plans if you 
want your efforts to be sustainable.
High Performer Advice 2: Know What You Want and 
What You Are Getting Into
Another theme from the high performers we spoke with was that 
you should have a realistic idea of what you are getting into. By all 
accounts, it is a long and grueling process to get to where we want to 
be. We shared how Katie Cole feels that this part is often not shared by 
the person going through it. She went on to discuss how curated what 
we end up seeing on social media can be. For example, completing a 
world tour can be grueling, but only a select version of the best and 
most fun parts will be seen on social media. This can lead to comments 
from fans or even other musicians that they would “love to be on tour.” 
Katie shared her thoughts on this perception:
[They tell me] ‘I wish I was doing that,’ not realizing that I’m 
performing, and my toe’s fractured. Or I’m performing, and 
I’m horribly sick. I literally have a lozenge in my mouth while I’m 
singing because I’m trying not to cough into the microphone. 
Whatever it is. People see all this stuff on social media and go Advice for the Aspirational 249
‘that’s supposed to be life’ or a representation of life, and it’s not. 
It’s a very small, crafted version of a part of the life.
To be clear, Katie is very appreciative of the opportunity to be on 
tour and live the life she has been able to live. The point was to 
highlight that even the best opportunities can come with a down 
side. This could be the daily grind of training, being away from 
home and loved ones, not having enough time to do much else, 
financial investments, and social isolation. This is nowhere close to 
an exhaustive list. Because of these realities, our high performers 
shared the importance of both knowing what you want out of your 
efforts and what you are getting into. Professional drifter Hooman 
Rahimi echoed the advice of knowing why you are pursuing a par￾ticular path. Hooman’s advice was to:
...make sure you’re in it for the reasons that you want to be in it. 
For some drivers, I think they go into it because they want fame 
or something like that, and then it doesn’t work out for them. 
I think, if you truly enjoy the sport, and you know what you’re 
getting into, then all the other things will be worth it.
Fellow professional drifter Taylor Hull emphasized both of the points, 
“you have to really love it, like really love it. And, you have to be willing 
to sacrifice more than you think you will.” He later added:
It takes as much as you will give it. The more you can invest in it, the 
more it’s going to give you back out. So, your level of success is 
largely dependent on your level of sacrifice that you’re willing to 
give up. So, just be honest with yourself of what you truly want, 
and what you’re willing to give up to get there because there’s 
nothing wrong with drifting for fun.
Taylor was not alone in sharing the importance of knowing what 
you are willing to give and what you hope to achieve on the front 
end. Justin Causey said this about the need to love whatever it is you 
pursue, “don’t do it if you don’t have the genuine love for it. Don’t do 
it. Because if not, you won’t have any fun in it. I have fun in it, because 
I generally love music.” Justin goes on to mention the grind needed to 250 Advice for the Aspirational
be successful and that someone not loving it should “do something else 
because it’ll drive you crazy.”
Comedian Henry Cho suggested that the key is to identify what 
we really want and then plan from there. Hobnail Trekking co￾founder Mark Johnson advised that we identify what we excel at 
doing and then make our plans around that. This is similar to identi￾fying what we want and likely will be one of the underlying factors 
in deciding what we ultimately pursue. Musician Kandle Osborne 
suggests that we trust our instincts and listen to our gut feelings, “if 
you have a bad feeling about something, you’re probably right. And 
it will only get worse.”
The general message here is that reaching their level of success 
requires a great deal of hard work and sacrifice. Anyone aspiring to 
this level of performance should be aware of what they are getting 
into. This decision should be made based on more than the parts that 
look fun as a fan/observer. Anyone can withstand the fun parts; the 
question will be whether you have what it takes to make it through the 
difficult parts of the journey. Hooman Rahimi suggested that we ask if 
we could handle things not working out as planned. He said:
My best recommendation is, don’t just think about the drift aspect 
of it. Think about your whole life. I’ve seen drivers that are in their 
twenties spend hundreds of thousands of dollars over the years. 
I think of them, and I see that they live with their parents. They 
don’t have a house, they don’t have anything to their name, and 
it’s like in 10 years’ time. Is that the choice that you want to make? 
Because that’s fine if that’s your choice. If you want to sacrifice 
that for this dream, then accept it but also accept what happens if 
you don’t achieve your dream. Are you willing to take that risk? 
And, that’s probably the hardest thing for people to swallow their 
pride in that situation.
Hooman highlights a somewhat extreme example because most 
pursuits would not require that level of financial investment. Having 
said that, ask yourself if you can handle a situation where your plans 
do not work out. We hope that you never have that experience, but 
we agree that you should be aware of the potential investment and 
sacrifices that will be required during the pursuit of your goals.Advice for the Aspirational 251
High Performer Advice 3: Spend Time Learning and 
Putting in the Work
We saw in the first section of high performer advice that we should 
be prepared for a long road leading to success. Another consistent 
theme that emerged was the “working hard at the right things” part 
of our statement from Chapter 1: “you typically must work hard at the 
right things for some time in order to get really good at something.” 
Much like how the difficulties and sacrifices that high performers must 
make can be hidden from view, so can the amount of time that high 
performers have spent learning and putting in the work. Actor and dir￾ector Talon Beeson shared this advice:
I would say, learn how to do the thing. Don’t be that person that’s 
just like ‘that’s easy; anyone can do it.’ It’s not easy. We spend a 
long time learning how to do it, and we’re never done. We’re 
always learning how to do it right. So, learn how to do it.
He underscored how common it is for the work he has put in to not 
be recognized with a personal experience of being approached at a 
party by someone wanting him to get them set up in the entertain￾ment industry with voiceover gigs. Talon responded by asking them to 
get him set up in their specialty area, which required significant prepar￾ation and even specialized degrees. The person realized their request 
was offensive and moved on. Talon added, “Just because you love it 
doesn’t necessarily mean that you know how to do it. If you really love 
it, you’ll spend the time to learn about it. And, then you can do it.”
So, what was the advice given on how to put the right amount of 
effort into the work? It reflected the suggestions provided throughout 
the book. The anonymous acclaimed musician suggested working on 
yourself daily. Major League Baseball pitcher Alec Mills advised finding 
a routine and sticking with it. Alec added the importance of setting 
measurable goals: “If you can have those little goals that okay, I hit 
that goal. So, that’s something. That’s mentally a hurdle that you can 
get over and say, ‘okay, I got there.’ ” The importance of learning from 
the mistakes you make during these efforts is something noted by 
both Alec and Major General Walt Lord. Katie Cole adds that, “You 
also want people that are going to push you to get the most out of 252 Advice for the Aspirational
yourself.” She shared an example of a producer pushing her, “I’ll go 
back, and I’ll rewrite it. And whatever it is. You know, if I can come up 
with something that’s 5 percent better, it’s still 5 percent better.”
Thomas Estrada recommended being open to letting this process of 
daily improvement happen by being “pleasant, friendly, and humble.” 
In other words, being open to feedback and not being reactive. Thomas 
said this:
You’re learning, you’re still growing, no matter how far you go. 
Because you get to that point where you just think that you’ve got 
it down. And unfortunately, a lot of students come out of school 
with that already. And, it’s like you haven’t even worked in the 
industry yet, and you’ve got this attitude like I figured it all out. 
I got it all down. You’re just going to fail immediately. You have 
to be able to put your ego aside to say, ‘I don’t know everything 
I need to learn.’
He shared a particular example of his time working on a feature film 
at DreamWorks studios:
“You could do the perfect piece of animation. Technically it has 
everything that it needs to have. If it’s not what the director is 
envisioning, or whoever’s in charge, whether it’s your supervisor 
or above them, the director or the head of the studio. I’ve worked 
with DreamWorks where Jeffrey Katzenberg, the head of the 
studio, is sitting in ‘dailies’ watching animation that we’re doing. 
If your perfect piece of animation just happens not to be what 
he had in mind, it’s wrong. It’s no good. You have to do it again.”
High Performer Advice 4: Use Small, Measurable Goals
We dedicated an entire chapter to goal-setting (Chapter 9) and refer 
to goals in several other chapters throughout the book. Thus, it is not 
surprising that several of the high performers shared advice related to 
goals. Mark Williams gave this advice on goals:
I think the concept is the same of trying to identify, ‘Okay, what 
do I need to do to improve in this situation or to do better?’ And Advice for the Aspirational 253
then setting yourselves goals and targets, and then working on 
how you can achieve that goal and target.
Human performance scholar Joe Baker proposed that goals will help 
keep you on track during the unpredictable stretches of your journey. 
He stated:
My advice for performers is to focus on the quality of the journey. 
And, it’s almost that basic goal-setting approach that we use with 
sports. It’s so simple but so powerful. Focus on what you can con￾trol today. And improve today. And maximize today. And then 
link those days of consecutively doing that into some short-term, 
moderate-term, and long-term goals. Sometimes things are going 
to get out of your control, but that doesn’t mean you can’t have 
more of those consecutive days in a row, that’s going to lead you 
more likely into that path that you want to go.
Attorney Danelle Whiteside’s advice notes the illusion of having con￾trol over the outcomes:
There is no such thing as control. You can’t control everything, 
and you have to really focus on what’s in your power to control. 
And realistically speaking, although you want to control every￾thing, there is very little that you have the power to control. You 
can control yourself and what you do every single day, but when 
it comes to others, and when it comes to your outcome, there’s a 
lot that you cannot control.
Alec Mill’s earlier quotation on setting measurable goals is also applic￾able here: “If you can have those little goals that… okay, I hit that goal. 
So, that’s something. That’s mentally a hurdle that you can get over 
and say, ‘Okay, I got there.’ ” He added that these goals are important 
because success can be difficult to measure. Having these goals in 
place allows us to determine if we are meeting them and if tweaks are 
needed in our plan. Alec referred to his strategy of “stacking goals” in 
a previous chapter. He does this by setting incremental and measur￾able goals that are intended to lead him to reaching a larger goal once 
the sequence has been completed. Everyone mentioning goals as part 
of their advice has some type of professional association with sport 254 Advice for the Aspirational
as either a scholar or athlete. However, this tactic can be adopted by 
performers in most, if not all, domain areas.
High Performer Advice 5: Help Others Along the Way/
Network
Another theme that we identified was the advice to help out others 
along the way and that networking will be required. We have discussed 
gatekeeping as a means of keeping the pool smaller for some domains. 
Hip-hop artist Brian Brown believes that we should help others coming 
up through the ranks and argues against gatekeeping. He said:
I’ve always hated the slogan, ‘The game is to be sold, not to be 
told.’ Because it’s like, ‘Why are we withholding knowledge and 
information, and putting the price on it?’ That’s not fair. That’s 
not cool. Some people might not be able to afford whatever you 
feel like you’re giving… It’s just information. Especially informa￾tion to save somebody from something, put them in a position 
to grow, or go down the same route that you want to take. I’m 
always going to tell somebody to give it back.
Major General Walter Lord echoed this approach in his advice to lead 
compassionately and bring others along as much as you possibly can. 
Rondal Richardson, philanthropist and former music-industry man￾ager, reminds us that, for competitive fields, there often are limited 
opportunities available. He shared, “I think you have to remember 
when these great things happen to you that maybe they also didn’t 
happen to others. Your acceptance into this [elite] group might mean 
someone else’s rejection.”
Katie Cole shared the importance of networking and knowing your 
own boundaries. Her advice was:
Sometimes you do have to do little bit of this and a little bit of 
that to open a door. I don’t mean a little bit of showing leg; I don’t 
mean that sort of stuff. I don’t mean anything that’s going to 
be derogatory to you as a human being, or harmful to you as a 
human being. Sometimes there are career choices. You’ve got to 
do this interview, or you’ve got to meet with this person. You’ve Advice for the Aspirational 255
got to go out. Have drinks with this person or this festival is in 
town. You’re going to go schmooze, or whatever it is. That comes 
with entertainment, because everybody wants to be special and 
be spoken to, and feel special. All that stuff. But you have to be 
the barometer of what’s okay for you, and what’s not. Because 
everyone will push your boundaries as far as they can, and you 
have to be the one to go, ‘That’s too far.’ Because if you’re not the 
one that’s paying attention, before you know it, you will be here 
or there feeling uncomfortable with a career you’re not happy 
with, or things that you can’t undo.
Andrew Lang, Leatherwood Distillery founder, also commented on 
the importance of networking. He stated, “You’ve got to surround 
yourself with people that are going to help you when [you] do trip, 
because it’s going to happen.” Randall Foster echoed this need to build 
these relationships. Part of his advice was “always take the meeting 
and always build the bridge. Build the connection.” Musician Kevin 
Rapillo suggested that for some fields, we might need to seek people 
with whom we want to connect. Kevin shared this advice:
So, you have to go find your people. Just go. Whatever that is. You 
really have to go find it. You’re going to sit in your hometown and 
wait? You’re not finding your people [there], and that was hard 
for me, too. Because I was in a band in high school with my great 
friends. And, I thought we could just go do it with these guys. 
Even my dad was like, ‘Yeah, they’re not going with you.’ You 
know what I mean? Like that was a nice, naive thing to think, but 
even he knows. You have got to go do it. You can’t stay in your 
hometown and think you’re good. Do it. You’ve got to go find 
your people.
High Performer Advice 6: Take Risks/the Small 
Opportunities
Musician Kevin Rapillo’s advice of moving out of your hometown to 
find your people was accompanied by his advice to not play it safe. 
In other words, be willing to take risks. We also have discussed how 
small opportunities can lead to larger opportunities throughout this 256 Advice for the Aspirational
book. These two pieces of advice were a reoccurring theme amongst 
our high performers. Rondal Richardson compared taking such risks to 
skydiving. He stated, “There’s a feeling that you get when you’re right 
up on the edge. You have to pull yourself out. They don’t push you; 
you have to pull yourself.” In other words, it is up to us to take the leap. 
Bestselling author Todd Rose gave advice on overcoming our fear of 
taking risks. Todd said:
I think one of the biggest lessons is that the fear of something is 
almost always worse than the reality – way worse; it’s paralyzing. 
The fear of being criticized paralyzes you so much worse than the 
sting of actual criticism. And so, I think that so many of us, myself 
included for parts of my life, end up restricting the kind of lives we 
live because we’re afraid. We wouldn’t say it that way, but it’s true. 
There’s something that’s just so freeing when you get clear about the 
kind of life you want to live. You don’t compromise on that.
Co-founder of Hobnail Trekking Company Mark Johnson gave this 
advice:
It sort of circles back to what I said earlier about following paths 
until the end. Not having regrets. Taking chances and opportun￾ities that are placed before you. Because either it’s something for 
you, or it’s going to teach you something about yourself. Maybe 
you’re going to learn that’s something I never want to do. But it’s 
good to learn that, too.
Randall Foster shared similar advice about how seemingly small oppor￾tunities paid off in a big way. Randall’s advice is:
Take the damn meeting. Give everybody one meeting. If you give 
them one meeting, and they come, and they show you their tail 
feathers, don’t ever be with them again. It’s fine. You’re out 30 
minutes and a coffee. But, some of the greatest opportunities I’ve 
had come my way, from a deal-making standpoint, from career 
growth standpoint, from relationships, from speaking at events 
on panels, have come from an innocuous coffee that I didn’t think 
was going to amount to anything that turned into something 
great. I think we are really the sum of our relationships.Advice for the Aspirational 257
Valor Performance vice president and certified mental performance 
coach Lauren Tashman adds that we sometimes do not know the mag￾nitude of the opportunities that are available until we begin gaining 
experience.
Chapter Summary
In this chapter, we turned to our performers and asked them to share 
their advice for our readers. The goal was to give us all the best chance 
of finding success in each of our respected domains. The advice 
provided was truly outstanding. We identified some consistent themes 
when we reviewed the advice: (a) be aware that it is a long road to 
success, (b) know what you want and what you are getting into, (c) you 
will need to spend time learning and putting in the work, (d) use small, 
measurable goals, (e) help others along the way/network, and (f ) take 
risks/explore the small opportunities.
We hope that you found this book to be helpful in your own pursuits. 
We believe that you are capable of reaching levels of performance that 
exceed what you think is possible.Index
10-year rule 4–5, 12
10,000 hours rule 4–5, 12
“above average effect” 157–158, 162, 164, 211; see also Dunning￾Kruger effect
above-average performers 74–75, 156
academic success: “above average 
effect” 157; accepting and 
integrating criticism 212–213; 
competing goals 82–83; 
impostor syndrome 39–40, 46–47; rejections 112, 113, 118; 
satisficing 19–20
accommodative tendency 84
accomplishments: the 
impact of accumulating 
accomplishments 237–241; 
impostor syndrome 235–236; 
pointing out to others 
229–231; tiered system of 
196–197; see also selling 
yourself
Ackerman, Josh 113, 118, 120
aggression, and self-esteem 97–98
Alexander, James 35–38
ambition: advice for the 
aspirational 246–257; 
distinction from achievement 
motivation 98–99; from early 
childhood 144, 149; knowing 
what you want 248–251; 
negativity around 231–232; 
stigma and misunderstandings 
96–99; “that is impossible” 53
Angelou, Maya 40
arousal, physiological 133–134, 239
artificial ceilings 52–54; the 
advantages of not sharing 
training techniques 56–58; 
default societal beliefs 55–56; 
failing to win 62–63; impact 
of societal views on mindset 
58–60; limitations 96; not being 
afraid to try 63–66; not seeing 
possibilities 60–62; standing out 
198, 199; see also limiting your 
scope
aspirations: advice for the 
aspirational 246–257; 
from early childhood 144, 149; knowing what you 
want 248–251; negativity 
around 231–232; stigma and 
misunderstandings 96–99; 
“that is impossible” 53
assimilative tendency 84
Atkins, Rodney 104Index 259
attribution bias 186–187, 236
averages 156–159; see also
statistics
Baker, Joe 87, 147, 253
Bandura, Albert 237–238
Bates, Brian 137
Bay, Jason 99
Beeson, Talon 40–41, 52, 66, 251
bias: attribution 186–187, 236; 
impostor syndrome 44; racial 
44; rejections 116
blaming ourselves 187–188
blind spots 155–156, 163, 211; 
see also sugarcoating
blueberry yogurt example 194–195, 201, 202
Bolt, Usain 2
bragging 229, 237, 239–240; 
see also selling yourself
brain activity 6
Brandstätter, Jochen 85
Brown, Brian 87–88, 254
burnout 177–178
Causey, Justin 52, 66, 174, 247–248, 249–250
ceilings see artificial ceilings
chess training 11–12, 135–136
childhood aspirations 144, 149
Cho, Henry 22, 40, 105, 188, 250
Clance, Pauline Rose 34
coaching theory 213
Cole, Katie 72, 101–102, 203, 248–249, 254–255
collective shaming 102–103
commitment 22–23
comparing yourself to others 
100–102
competence: “fake it ‘til you 
make it?” 85–88; impostor 
syndrome 37–38; see also
performance improvement
competitive advantage 56, 194–195
confirmation bias 55
constructive feedback 217–220
counterfactual thinking 99–103
creative writing 1–3
creativity 160
critical self-concept 42; see also
impostor syndrome
criticism see feedback
Curran, Thomas 128
curriculum vitae (CV) 229, 232–233
Curry, Stephen 2, 56, 163
Davison, Alan 11
deadlines: goal setting 81; and 
mental rest 173, 175
“deliberate practice” 4
derailing 189–190; see also giving 
up
direction of comparison 100–102
dirt therapy 173
Downey, Robert Jr. 188–189
drumming example 26
Duckworth, Angela 76–77
Dunning, David 158; see also
Dunning-Kruger effect
Dunning-Kruger effect 62, 157–158, 211, 230
Dweck, Carol 3, 9, 59–60
Eccles, David 168, 170–172, 173, 174, 248
Ericsson, K. Anders 4, 73–74, 169
erroneous feedback 217
Estrada, Thomas 33, 65–66, 86, 127, 155, 252
ethnic minority populations 44
Eva, Kevin 62, 161, 213
excellencism 130–131
Expert Performance Based 
Training (ExPerT) 12, 57
expertise: 10,000 hours rule 4, 12; 
value of expert trainers 11–12, 57
expertise-based training (XBT) 
12, 57
facing rejection see rejection
Fadde, Peter 57
failure: failing to win 134–136; 
growth mindset 59–62; 
learning from 132; meaning of 260 Index
62–63; not being afraid to try 
63–65; see also giving up
“fake it ‘til you make it?” 85–88
fatigue 169–170; see also rest as a 
priority
feedback: accepting and 
integrating criticism 212–213; 
being mindful of misguided/
erroneous feedback 217; facing 
rejection 119–120; honesty in 
155, 162–163; making mistakes 
187–188; overestimating 
performance 157–158; receiving 
praise 34, 37–38; receptiveness 
to 205–206; seeking out criticism 
217–220; seeking out feedback 
210–213; seeking out mentorship 
220–224; self-awareness 160–162, 214; sources of 214–216; 
underestimating performance 
159–160
Feenstra, Sanne 42, 44
fitness goals example 8–9
fixed mindset 9, 59, 63, 73
forgiving yourself: negative 
experiences 182–184; self￾forgiveness 185–188
Foster, Randall 22, 33, 200, 219, 256–257
Galton, Francis 1–2, 9, 55–56
“gatekeepers” 57–58, 115–116
Gaudreau, Patrick 130–131
gender: impostor syndrome 
34, 44; modesty 233; selling 
yourself 233–234
giving up 72–75; “fake it ‘til 
you make it?” 85–88; goal 
accommodations 88–90; goal 
conflicts 83–85; goals - impact 
of competing goals 82–83; 
goals - impact of goal setting 
80–82; impact of default 
societal beliefs 77–78; impact 
of lack of awareness of 
techniques 79–80; impact 
of lack of resources 78–79; 
setbacks and grit 75–77
Gladwell, Malcolm 4–5
goalkeeper scenario 216
goals/goal setting: competing 
goals 82–83; conflicts and 
changing goals 83–85; “fake it 
‘til you make it?” 85–88; goal 
accommodations 88–90; 
impact on not giving up 80–82; 
importance of 143–144; 
individualized nature of goals 
149–150; short-term 146; small 
and measurable 252–254; 
stacking goals 146, 201, 253–254; 
strategies for 144; three 
common types 147–149; 
vagueness 145–146; winging it 
144–146
“good enough” 19; see also
satisficing
Goyer, Jonathan 2
Graduate Record Exam (GRE) 
25–26
Grammy winners 129–130
grit 76–77, 188–190
growth mindset 9; having 
resources 136; parental and 
societal views 59–62; self￾esteem 102–103; self-fulfilling 
prophecy cycle 199
Hawk, Tony 23, 134–135
helping others 254–255
Hill, Andrew 128
historical vs. recent views of 
success 12; believing that one 
can improve 8–9; knowing the 
techniques 9–12; putting in the 
time 3–8; starting again 1–3
Hull, Taylor 72, 127, 249–250
humblebragging 234
Hunt, Tim (Nobel prize winner) 
38–39
Huntoon, Meghan 134
Imes, Suzanne 34
immersion 23–24
“impossible” achievements 
53Index 261
impostor cycle 36, 43
impostor syndrome 33–35; 
common characteristics 
35–38; feeling unworthy 
38–41; identifiable signs 45–46; 
reasons for being prone to 
41–45; selling yourself 235–236; 
standing out 199–200, 203; 
working through 46–47
improvement see performance 
improvement
IQ test scores 156–157
Jacobi, Joe 150
Jaremka, Lisa 46–47, 117
job offers: rejection rates 113; 
selling your accomplishments 
229–230, 240
Johnson, Holly 240–241
Johnson, Mark 86–87, 89–90, 137, 250, 256
Jordan, Michael 2, 55
Judge, Timothy A. 98–99
Kammeyer-Mueller, John D. 
98–99
King, Ronnel 136
knowing what you want 248–251; 
see also aspirations
Krüger, Arnd 213
Kruger, Justin 158; see also
Dunning-Kruger effect
Lady Gaga 33–34
Lang, Andrew 136, 184, 205, 223, 234–235, 255
language use 147
last place aversion 100–101
Latham, Gary 81
learning, taking time over 
251–252
life-satisfaction 98–99
limitations: see also artificial 
ceilings
limiting your scope 95–96; 
counterfactual thinking 99–103; 
self-esteem 97–99; smaller 
opportunities leading to larger 
opportunities 104–105; see also
goals/goal setting
Locke, Edwin 81
Loftus, Elizabeth 147
London taxi drivers 5–6
“long road” to success 247–248
long- term memory 7
‘longing’ for success 22, 23
Lord, Major General Walter 168, 254
McDaniels, Darryl 133
medal winners 99–100
memory 6–8
mental barriers 53–54
mental rest 170–177
mentorship 205–206; misguided/
erroneous feedback 217; 
seeking and finding 220–224; 
seeking out criticism 217–220
Mills, Alec 22, 41, 136, 146, 182, 184, 201, 253–254
mindset 3; artificial ceilings 63; 
believing that one can improve 
8–9, 25–26; fixed 9, 59, 63, 73; 
impact of societal views on 
mindset 58–60; self-fulfilling 
prophecy cycle 199; standing 
out 199–200; see also growth 
mindset
minesweeping 10–11
misattribution of arousal 133–134
misguided feedback 217
mistakes: learning from 251–252; 
self-forgiveness 187–188; 
starting again 1–3
Mize, Logan 112, 119, 185
monotony 174
motivation: distinction from 
ambition 98–99; goal setting 
81–82; importance of mental 
rest 171, 174; impostor 
syndrome 33–34; satisficing 21
natural ability vs. training 55–56, 74, 77–78262 Index
near-success experiences 89
negative experiences: grit 188–190; 
rejection rates 113; staying 
on-track 182–183, 184–185
nerves: impostor syndrome 
36, 40–41; misattribution 
of arousal 133–134; selling 
yourself 233–234
networking 205–206, 223, 254–255
Niiya, Yu 102–103
“no” see rejection
Nobel prize winner example 
38–39
novel writing see creative writing
Oates, Joyce Carol 1, 2, 130
Obsorne, Kandle 110
on-track: grit 188–190; negative 
experiences 182–184; 
perseverance 76–77, 189; 
self-forgiveness 185–188; 
staying the route 184–185
opportunities: awareness of 
200–201; smaller opportunities 
leading to larger opportunities 
104–105, 137–138, 202–203; 
taking risks 255–257
Orbe-Austin, Lisa 45
Osborne, Kandle 110, 118–119, 120, 250
outcome goals 147–148
overestimating performance 
157–158
overpreparation 36
parental influence: growth 
mindset 59–62; perfectionism 
128
“passion” 23–24, 76–77
pay rises 222
Payne, Brandon 155, 163
Peart, Neil 26
perfectionism 127–128; failing 
to win 134–136; impostor 
syndrome 46; never a perfect 
time 131–134; smaller 
opportunities leading to larger 
opportunities 137–138; in 
the traditional sense 128–130; 
training and improving 
130–131
performance accomplishments 
see accomplishments
performance goals 147, 148
performance improvement: 
believing that one can improve 
8–9, 25–26; impact of feedback 
on 214–216; knowing the 
techniques 9–12, 27–28; lack 
of resources 26–27, 28–29; 
learning and hard work 251–252; 
perception of limits 63–66; 
perfectionism 130–131; putting 
in the time 3–8, 24–25; starting 
again 1–3; time taken to 
improve 73–74
performer nerves see nerves
perseverance 76–77, 189; see also
on-track
physical fatigue 169–170; see also
rest as a priority
physiological arousal 133–134, 239
practice: believing that one 
can improve 8–9; to improve 
at a skill 1–3; knowing the 
techniques 9–12; putting in the 
time 3–8
praise 34, 37–38; see also feedback
process goals 147, 148
procrastination 36
productivity: modesty 232–233; 
perfectionism 129
promotions at work 120–121, 222
psychological safety 219–220
Quayle, Stephanie 102
quitting see giving up
racial bias 44
Rahimi, Hooman 132, 186, 249, 250
Rapillo, Kevin 104, 176–177, 255
receptiveness, to feedback 205–206Index 263
Regehr, Glenn 161
Regula, Lauren 96, 99
rejection 110–111; as 
commonplace 111–113; 
consequences 116–117; 
physical pain of 113–114; 
possible causes 114–116; 
staying on-track 183–184; ways 
to move beyond 117–121
rejection sensitivity 121–122
resilience 76–77, 119–120
resources, lack of: as barrier to 
success 26–27; giving up 78–79; 
making good use of resources 
28–29; standing out 200–201
rest as a priority 168–171; 
considerations of mental rest 
170–177; impact of burnout 
177–178
Richardson, Rondal 105, 132, 256
risk-taking 255–257
Roll, Jelly 40
Rose, R 210
Rose, Todd 110, 256
Rubik’s Cube 9–10
Sakulku, Jaruwan 35–38
Salvagioni, D. A. J. 177
satisficing: believing that one can 
improve 25–26; in different 
areas in life 19–24; vs. passion 
23–24; putting in the time 
24–25
scope see goals/goal setting; 
limiting your scope
self-assessment: awareness of 
abilities 160–162; establishing 
a baseline 214; overestimating 
performance 157–158; 
underestimating performance 
159–160
self-care 171, 175–176; see also rest 
as a priority
self-confidence: “fake it ‘til 
you make it?” 85–88; selling 
yourself 239–241; theory of 
self-efficacy 237–238
self-doubt 40, 42–43, 88; see also
impostor syndrome
self-efficacy 237–238
self-esteem: growth mindset 
102–103; limiting your scope 
97–99; negativity around 
revealing our aspirations 
231–232
self-forgiveness 185–188
selling yourself: bragging 
229, 231–232; the 
impact of accumulating 
accomplishments 237–241; 
impostor syndrome 235–236; 
modesty 232–235; pointing out 
accomplishments 229–231
sensitivity, to rejection 121–122
setbacks 75–77; see also failure; 
giving up
shaming 102–103
Simon, Herbert 4, 19–20
sincerity 234
Skaggs, Ricky 105
Smith, Clint 45
Smith, Jessi 134
society: default societal beliefs 
55–56, 77–78; impact of societal 
views on mindset 58–60; 
standing out 198
Soviet Union chess training 11–12, 135–136
Squires, Mike 222
standard deviation 156–157, 158
standing out 115–116; competitive 
advantage 194–195; getting 
creative 203–205; importance 
of 195–197; impostor syndrome 
199–200, 203; lack of resources 
200–201; making a plan 201; 
mindset 199–200; taking 
opportunities 200–201, 202–203; taking up training/
mentorship 205–206; 
traditional societal views 198
Staszewski, James 11
statistics: averages and exceptions 
156–159; being rejected 112; 264 Index
bias 116; high- and above￾average performers 74–75, 156–157; standard deviation 
156–157
staying on-track see on-track
stopping see giving up
stress: burnout 177–178; mental 
rest 170–177; and self-care 
175–176
success criteria: ambition and 
self-esteem 96–99; believing 
that one can improve 8–9; 
commitment 22–23; knowing 
the techniques 9–12; ‘longing’ 
for 22; putting in the time 3–8; 
starting again 1–3
sugarcoating 155–156; averages 
and exceptions 156–159; 
awareness of abilities 160–162; 
honest feedback 155, 162–163; 
overestimating performance 
157–158; underestimating 
performance 159–160
sunk costs fallacy 89–90
superwoman/superman 37
swimsuit example 53–54, 64–65
Tashman, Lauren 210, 221
taxi drivers 5–6
The Path Distilled podcast: 
audience size 101–102, 203; 
counterfactual thinking 
101–102; goal setting 144, 150; 
incremental improvement 163; 
mentors 222; rejection 112, 119, 183; smaller opportunities 
leading to larger opportunities 
137, 204; training techniques 
130
the ten-year rule 4–5, 12
time spent learning 251–252
time taken to improve 73–74, 247–248
tiredness 169–170; see also rest as 
a priority
tough feedback 219
training: the advantages of not 
sharing training techniques 
56–58; “deliberate practice” 
4; impact of feedback on 
214–216; impact of lack of 
awareness of techniques 
79–80; knowing the techniques 
9–12, 27–28; natural ability 
vs. training 55–56, 74, 77–78; 
perfectionism 130–131; taking 
full advantage of 205–206
Trinidad, Jose Eos 136
underestimating performance 
159–160
vagueness, in goals 145–146
violence, and self-esteem 97–98
Warrell, Mardie 46
Weinberg, Robert 147
Whiteside, Danelle 253
Williams, A. Mark 19, 247
Wilson, Lainey 111, 183–184, 185
Winfrey, Oprah 96
Winslet, Kate 40
Wohl, Michael 186
work-life balance: mental rest 
173; satisficing 21, 25; self-care 
175–176
Young, Valerie 46
