“The study of gaming is a burgeoning and exciting academic feld. However, 
we have lacked rigorous academic examination of the foundational core of 
contemporary gaming – wargaming and historical simulations. Suckling's 
work in Paper Time Machines fnally rectifes this defcit. This book is 
mandatory reading for academics, and established and aspiring game 
designers alike.” 
Jason Matthews, game designer 
“Maurice Suckling has written a highly informative book that gives sound 
guidance to readers who may want to add their own contributions to the 
practice of civilian wargaming. It is also long overdue that game studies took 
this sector seriously.” 
Brian Train, wargame designer 
“This book gives us a unique vision of the game design process from the 
inside, as exposed by a creative and innovative author in full activity. I 
heartily recommend this very accessible text to anyone who wants to gain 
a good understanding of the tools of the trade and their practical use in 
recreating history in game form.” 
Riccardo Masini, wargame expert and YouTube vlogger 
“For the last decade, a seemingly unlikely corner of tabletop game design has 
nurtured innovative new mechanics and a community of designers and players 
willing to take on diffcult and sensitive topics. That seemingly unlikely space 
is wargaming. In this book, Maurice Suckling – himself a practicing wargame 
designer – charts the ways in which wargaming has made itself relevant 
beyond the battlefeld, examining key games and milestones and providing 
readers with a toolkit for beginning to design (and play!) for themselves.” 
Matthew Kirschenbaum, Distinguished University Professor, 
University of Maryland, and Co-Editor, Zones of Control: 
Perspectives on Wargaming (MIT Press, 2016) Paper Time Machines 
James Dunnigan’s memorable phrase serves as the frst part of a title for this book, where it seeks to be 
applicable not just to analog wargames, but also to board games exploring non-expressly military history, 
that is, to political, diplomatic, social, economic, or other forms of history. Don’t board games about his￾tory, made predominantly out of (layered) paper, permit a kind of time travel powered by our imagination? 
Paper Time Machines: Critical Game Design and Historical Board Games is for those who consider 
this a largely rhetorical question; primarily for designers of historical board games, directed in its more 
practice-focused sections (Parts Two, Three, and Four) toward those just commencing their journeys 
through time and space and engaged in learning how to deconstruct and to construct paper time machines. 
More experienced designers may fnd something here for them, too, perhaps to refresh themselves 
or as an aid to instruction to mentees in whatever capacity. But it is also intended for practitioners of all 
levels of experience to fnd value in the surrounding historical contexts and theoretical debates pertinent 
to the creation of and the thinking around the making of historical board games (Parts One and Five). In 
addition, it is intended that the book might redirect some of the attention of the feld of game studies, so 
preoccupied with digital games, toward this hitherto generally much neglected area of research. 
Key Features: 
• Guides new designers through the process of historical board game design 
• Encapsulates the observations and insights of numerous notable designers 
• Deeply researched chapters on the history and current trajectory of the hobby 
• Chapters on selected critical perspectives on the hobby 
Maurice W. Suckling teaches and researches games at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, NY. He is also 
a game designer. His frst published game was Driver (1999) for the PlayStation, for which he wrote the 
script. The game won a BAFTA in the Interactive: Moving Images category. Since then, he has worked 
on over 50 published video games, including Borderlands: The Pre-Sequel (2014), Civilization VI (2016), 
and Lost Words: Beyond the Page (2020). He has also published fve board games. His second published 
game, Chancellorsville: 1863 (2020) won the Charles S. Roberts Award for the Best American Civil War 
Era Board wargame in 2021. Paper Time Machines 
Critical Game Design and Historical Board Games 
Maurice W. Suckling 
Foreword by Volko Ruhnke First published 2025
by Routledge
605 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10158
and by Routledge
4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2025 Maurice W. Suckling
The right of Maurice W. Suckling to be identified as author of this work has been asserted in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the 
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other 
means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without 
permission in writing from the publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and 
explanation without intent to infringe.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Suckling, Maurice, author. 
Title: Paper time machines: critical game design and historical board 
games / Maurice W. Suckling. 
Description: Boca Raton, FL : Taylor and Francis, 2025. | Includes 
bibliographical references and index. 
Identifiers: LCCN 2024007914 (print) | LCCN 2024007915 (ebook) | ISBN 
9781032416922 (hardback) | ISBN 9781032416915 (paperback) | ISBN 
9781003359265 (ebook) 
Subjects: LCSH: Board games—Design. | Board games—History. | Board 
games—Design—Case studies. 
Classification: LCC GV1312 .S83 2025 (print) | LCC GV1312 (ebook) | DDC 
794--dc23/eng/20240520 
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2024007914
LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2024007915
ISBN: 978-1-032-41692-2 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-1-032-41691-5 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-1-003-35926-5 (ebk)
DOI: 10.1201/9781003359265
Typeset in Times
by Deanta Global Publishing Services, Chennai, IndiaTo Rupert, intrepid boyhood player of a hailstorm of broken prototypes from a younger brother.
Also to my students at RPI.
And to my children, Myra and Merlin.Contents
Acknowledgments ix
Foreword xi
A Note on Dates xiii
List of Abbreviations xiv
1 Introduction 1
PART 1 Context 17
2 What Is Critical Game Design? 19
3 What Are Historical Simulations? 42
4 A Brief History of Board Wargames 77
5 A Briefer History of Pol-Mil Wargames or The Greatest Victory Is That Which 
Requires No Battle 110
6 An Even Briefer History of Non-Wargame Historical Board Games or Non￾Military Complex 124
PART 2 Design Process and Tools 129
7 Overall Design Process 131
8 Devising a Thesis 144
9 Common Components and Major Mechanics 160
10 Major Card Functions and Metaphors 166
11 Board Design 175
12 Development and Publication 192
PART 3 Designing Historical Board Wargames 203
13 Historical Board Wargame Design: Reference Books and Conventions Overview 205
14 Design Conventions: Units 208
Contents Contentsviii Contents
15 Design Conventions: Combat Resolution 216
16 Design Conventions: Movement, Morale, and More 237
17 Design “Unconventions” 247
PART 4 Designing Non-Wargame Historical Board Games 253
18 Case Study #1: Operation Barclay 255
19 Case Study #2: Crisis: 1914 261
20 Case Study #3: Peace 1905 270
PART 5 Selected Critical Topics 279
21 Two Unsolvable Problems in Historical Board Game Design 281
22 War Stories: Intersections in Storytelling and Board Wargame Design 286
23 The Postcolonial Turn 296
24 Paper Beats Silicon 312
Index 319ix
Acknowledgments
Friends. So many friends. Generous with time and knowledge. Happy to share wisdom (what else should 
one do with it?) and a love of a peculiarly remarkable hobby. I extend deep appreciation to you all for 
enriching my life and helping, in all manner of ways, to make this book possible.
Brian Train has been something of an extra brain and constant companion throughout the writing 
of this book, particularly answering questions about the history of the hobby in its earlier form. Since I 
bought a copy of Pentantastar from you in 2020, a friendship has formed – and I may not have played 
that game yet, but what an excellent purchase that turned out to be! Thank you also for permission for the 
Tupamaro board.
Volko Ruhnke not only kindly agreed to write the foreword, but he has given much food for thought 
and much generosity of time throughout. Inviting me, as a newly published and mostly unheard-of 
designer, to play Verdun: Steel Inferno on your back porch in Virginia remains a cherished memory.
Jason Matthews, thank you for the inspiration for Chapter 5. Thank you for your friendship and for 
the adventure of making games together, and, from very early on, making me feel like a designer who was 
welcomed within the community.
Frank Davis, thank you for reaching out across the internet to discover we were in neighboring states, 
for the conversations about game design and lunches with you and Ron. Thank you for permission to 
include the board for Divine Wind.
Mike and Grant Wylie, and Sean Cooke. Thank you for taking on Freeman’s Farm: 1777, and helping 
to make all that has happened since then possible - with the release of Crisis: 1914 that’s now five games 
of mine you’ve published. Thank you again for letting me use so many Worthington images for this book.
Meeple Foundry and Salt & Pepper Games, thank you for permission to include the Operation 
Barclay board prototype. Gonzalo – thank you for asking me to design something for you. How could I 
say no?
Gene Billingsley, thank you for the sales information on GMT, and for other conversations in the 
course of my writing.
Renaud Verlaque, thank you for allowing me to present your currently still unused combat resolution 
concept – I still like it!
There are so many others to thank, and all have contributed to making me feel part of a commu￾nity of historical board gamers and wargamers that has helped inform and inspire me, in your various 
guises as designers, developers, publishers, commentors, thinkers, teachers, players, friends, or friends 
in the making, many of you taking time to engage in conversation within this field of human activ￾ity: Daniel Burt, Riccardo Masini, Liz Davidson, Jeromey Martin, David Thompson, Kevin Bertram, 
Gonzalo Maldonado, Nathaniel Berkley, Bill Sullivan, S.P. Shaman, Fred Serval, Grant and Alexander of 
The Player’s Aid, Cody Carlson, Hermann Luttmann, Sobhi Youssef, Sergio Schiavi, Harold Buchanan, 
Andrew Bucholtz, Candice Harris, Jason Carr, Jan Heinemann, Ken Kuhn, Mitch Reed, Jason Perez, Ian 
Brody, Patrick Rael, Charles Vasey, Sebastian Bae, Dan Bullock, Clint Warren-Davey, Mark Wylie, Ron 
Toelke, Jaro Andruszkiewicz, Ian Rocky Mountain Navy, Ted Raicer, Taylor Shuss, Alan Emrich, Wayne 
Hansen, Yves Roig, Natalia Wojtowicz, Alison Collins, Alex Knight, Cole Wehrle, Matthias Cramer, 
Jeremiah McCall, Miguel Conceição, Nathan Hansen, Dorian Richard, Matthew Kirschenbaum, Rodger 
MacGowan, Mark Herman, Mark Miklos, Dave Stiffler, “Meandering Mike” Anthony, Phil Orbanes, and 
The Gameskeeper, Oxford UK – a store now gone but not forgotten – thank you Carol and John Benney 
for giving me somewhere to spend my lunch money.x Acknowledgments
Some of those already listed above also helped with reading earlier draft material – many thanks 
to you - especially to Jason Matthews for your keen and deeply appreciated insights, and to Miguel 
Conceição for your thoroughness. Thanks also to friends and readers Derek Duval and Christopher 
Jeansonne – everything you said helped.
Pat Harrigan and Matthew Kirschenbaum for their 2016 Zones of Control collection are also worthy 
of a thank you for ‘awaking me from my dogmatic slumbers’ although not as a response against the vol￾ume, but a response towards it.
Of course, also a thank you to James F. Dunnigan, although we have never met, this book’s title is 
clearly deeply indebted to you, as is so much else in the history of the hobby.
Thank you to Anna Gardner and all at the Folsom Library, RPI for helping to make this book possible.
Thank you to the Strong National Museum of Play in Rochester, New York for the Fellowship in 
January 2024 to help me root out some of the earliest board wargames.
Thank you, Sean Connelly, and Danielle Zarfati at Routledge. Thank you, Ross Berger, for the 
suggestion.
Richa – for your support throughout – and who knew we could fit quite so many board games and 
books in just one house?
Also, to my older brother, Rupert. I’m infinitely glad you decided to buy that copy of Kingmaker. 
Clever you to know of such things and to introduce them to me.
To my father, and late and much missed mother – I have little recollection of anything that happened 
at a certain soccer tournament where I played for Woodstock Boys in 1978 – I know we didn’t win – but 
I do remember afterwards, and you giving me the small, bright red, hardback copy of Bruce Quarrie’s 
Napoleonic Wargaming. So began a lifetime’s fascination. Thank you.Foreword
Hello, my name is Volko, and I’m a history nut. I love seeing how people lived in different times and dif￾ferent places. I’m a time tourist.
Before reaching the fourth grade, I was a regular at our town’s library, mostly to read about people of 
the past. I wanted to be an archaeologist when I grew up. And then there was TV. I happened to like old 
horror and sci-fi movies. I liked the creatures. And I was interested in the future as I was in the past. As I 
watched these fictional films, I couldn’t help noticing that the people in movies from each era—the ’30s, 
the ’40s, the ’50s—looked, talked, and acted differently. Fascinating!
In those days (the 1970s), regular toy stores offered shelves of Avalon Hill bookcase games and stacks of 
SPI flat-tray games—historical board wargames. I acquired my first such game as a sixth grader, France, 1940
(1971). Learning how military forces interacted across a specific geography and, particularly, maneuvering 
them myself was somehow even more thrilling than just reading about them or seeing a portrayal in a film. Even 
so, these games fed my appetite for reading history books and watching movies with historical reenactments.
That interest in playing out military history led to a college history degree and a career not as a his￾torian but as an intelligence analyst. I could earn a good living thinking and writing about how military 
affairs might play out in the current day and near future. My first job turned out to be playing a game, as 
a contractor for the US Army, to help test out strategies for the defense of West Germany.
Eventually, that career took me to teaching others how to analyze world affairs of all sorts. Games 
were a key tool in teaching my analyst students about how mass human affairs worked and what possi￾bilities they might hold—not just war but politics, economics, law enforcement, and more. And I taught 
analysts how to use games in their own research.
Games have been so woven into my exploration of the world that I am incapable of understanding the 
idea—still abroad at this late hour in the development of serious gaming—that games are trivial. To me, 
it is absurd to argue that some topics are just too serious to explore in a game, that games are for fun and 
cannot teach history as it happened, only wrong history.
When game designer and author Elizabeth Sampat, quoted in this book, tells us, “Saying that all 
games should be fun should sound as weird to us as saying that all movies should be sad …”, she assuredly 
does not mean that there is no joy in playing serious or even disturbing games. When we read disturbing 
books or watch disturbing films or plays, we do that willingly, typically, with our free time. We are indeed 
there for joy—a joy that is not trivial fun but rather the joy of pursuing understanding. Sampat’s compari￾son points out the silliness of denying that games offer a like benefit.
Games have transported me to different times and places at least as potently as have books, films, 
plays, photography, paintings, travel, music, scents, or food. Boardgames and other tabletop games espe￾cially have their own unique ability to open dynamic human worlds by enabling us to climb inside, oper￾ate their system, and experiment. As these pages discuss, boardgames’ manual models are accessible to 
players in a way that electronic games are not, unless one happens to be a computer programmer who has 
created or studied that very game’s code. To play a boardgame, we have to know how the system works. 
That seeming barrier in fact opens possibilities of understanding unavailable elsewhere, about which I 
have written and spoken elsewhere and will not belabor here.
For that reason, I have never feared the death of historical boardgames. Nor am I surprised by the 
ongoing explosion in the medium described in this volume. Computers did not replace but rather fed 
our interest in manual models. Decisively, the Internet enabled boardgame and wargame enthusiasts to 
find each other, to amplify their mutual enjoyment of the tabletop through endless global conversation. 
Computer networks have accelerated the improvement of boardgames themselves—in design, in develop￾ment, in graphics, in distribution. The Golden Age is now.xii Foreword
An exciting aspect of the Golden Age that is upon us is that more practitioners, academics, and enthu￾siasts are not only playing historical boardgames but making them. Unlike video games, you don’t need to 
know how to write code or have the support of a corporation to produce a high-quality design. Professionals 
are finding new knowledge and hobbyists are finding new joy in small-scale tabletop game design.
Like others, I learn heaps of history when I play historical boardgames. But I go much deeper when I 
design them myself. I always come out of a game design project viewing the subject historical setting dif￾ferently. When I reread favorite history books in support of a game design, I find entirely new insights in 
the course of the treasure hunt for whatever clues the historian has left for how this or that dynamic might 
have worked historically, that I now want to reproduce on my table.
Like a school term-paper assignment, but more forcefully, a design project focuses our search for 
information—in this case, the need to build a model that actually runs. With brilliant results, university 
professors such as Phil Sabin in London and Sebastian Bae in Washington DC in recent years have har￾nessed this focusing power by assigning their students to design boardgames and then defend the research 
and interpretation in their designs.
The current explosion in historical boardgame design leverages an abundance of new tools—home 
desktop graphics, spreadsheet, and word processing software for crafting and presenting prototypes; elec￾tronic boardgame facsimile platforms for online testing and quick prototype modification; and collabora￾tive virtual environments to draw dedicated global volunteer teams around developmental games. These 
tools range from low cost to free. The power of any of us to go from concept to playable prototype to 
refined product has never been greater.
Making games, next to playing games, is a joy all its own—even short of the prospect of any eventual 
publication. And you don’t have to dedicate yourself just to designing something from nothing: there is 
playtest, development, editing, critique … a range of ways to participate in the design side of our historical 
boardgaming community.
It well befits this surge of activity that we should receive this book now. In Paper Time Machines, my 
friend Maurice Suckling has taken Delbrückian thoroughness to the examination of the concepts, history, 
and method of historical boardgaming. What theory underpins the examination of human history through 
tabletop games? What is “critical game design”? What is the power of games? What is the current state of 
the art, and how did it come to be? What are the elements of historical simulation? How might each of us, 
as mere enthusiasts of games and history, go about designing our own take on whatever historical setting 
dynamics happen to grab our interest? 
Paper Time Machines will pose for you Maurice’s answers and alongside them as well a variety 
of thinking, insights culled from the speech, essays, and even game rules of a wide range of designers, 
scholars, and other experts on wargames, historical boardgaming, and games in general. In these pages, 
you will hear from:
• Mark Herman, who survived board wargaming’s first Golden Age to become the designer most 
influential in creating the next.
• Cole Wehrle, translator of deep political and cultural dynamics into mainstream boardgame hits.
• Jason Matthews, co-designer of one of the world’s most popular historical conflict simulation 
games, a title that remained for years the very top-rated of all modern tabletop games.
• Amabel Holland, co-owner of a modest publishing house thriving today in taking on a range 
of subjects from religion to slavery, topics long presumed taboo for anything as frivolous as a 
mere boardgame.
… and so many more.
As gamers or historians, professional or avocational, we live in a world of abundance. We can forgive 
ourselves a little if—like McDuck swimming in his money bin—we revel in counting our coins, in the 
accounting and structure that Professor Suckling brings to our riches.
Volko Ruhnke
Virginia, January 2024A Note on Dates
All dates for game publications throughout this volume are taken from BoardGameGeek.com (BGG), 
which should be treated with some caution because they do not always correlate with the exact publication 
date, with the following exceptions:
• We The People is given as 1994 in this volume, a date referenced by designer Mark Herman 
(Zones of Control 2016, 133), not 1993 as given by BGG.
A Note on Dates A Note on DatesList of Abbreviations
AH Avalon Hill
BGG BoardGameGeek.com
CDG Card-Driven Game
CRT Combat Results Table
C3I Command, Control, Communications, Intelligence
D&D Dungeons & Dragons
DOD Department of Defense (U.S.A.)
D6 six-sided dice
D10 ten-sided dice
GDW Game Designers’ Workshop
M.O.D. Ministry of Defence (U.K.)
RPG Role Playing Game
SPI Simulations Publications Inc.
TTRPG Tabletop Role Playing Game
List of Abbreviations List of Abbreviations 1
1 Introduction
A wargame is an attempt to get a jump on the future by obtaining a better 
understanding of the past. A wargame is a combination of “game”, history, 
and science. It is a paper time machine. 
(Dunnigan 1992, 13)
INTENTIONS
James Dunnigan’s memorable phrase serves as the first part of a title for this book, where it seeks to be 
applicable not just to analog wargames, but also to board games exploring non-expressly military history, 
that is, to political, diplomatic, social, economic, or other forms of history. Don’t board games about his￾tory, made predominantly out of (layered) paper, permit a kind of time travel powered by our imagina￾tion? This is a book for those who consider this a largely rhetorical question; primarily for designers of 
historical board games, directed, in particular, in its more practice-focused sections (Parts Two, Three, 
and Four), toward those just commencing their journeys through time and space, engaged in learning how 
to deconstruct and to construct paper time machines. More experienced designers may find something 
here for them too, perhaps as a means to recap or refresh, or as an aid to instruction to mentees in whatever 
capacity. But it is also intended that practitioners of all levels of experience find value in the surrounding 
historical contexts and theoretical debates pertinent to the creation of and the thinking around the mak￾ing of historical board games (Parts One and Five). In addition, it is intended that the book might redirect 
some of the attention of the field of game studies, so preoccupied with digital games, toward this hitherto 
generally much neglected area of research.
For clarity, this book is born out of a graduate topics course in “Historical Simulations” at Rensselaer 
Polytechnic Institute (RPI), New York, where the Critical Game Design graduate program began in 2020. 
This book is intended as a core text for that course, for those like it, in part or in whole, and for support 
to mentors in less formal workshop or critical analog design-focused contexts such as the Zenobia Award 
initiative, where designers from under-represented backgrounds are encouraged to add their own per￾spectives to the board gaming hobby, that it might continue to evolve and grow, increasing in popularity, 
invention, and daring. It is also intended for the broad audience of practitioners and scholar-practitioners 
of historical board games.
INTERSECTIONS BETWEEN BOARD 
GAMES AND HISTORY
For further clarity, this is a book with its focus squarely on commercial board games and what might, albeit 
contentiously, be termed simulations within that space. This is not a book about professional wargames, 
Paper Time Machines Introduction
DOI: 10.1201/9781003359265-1
10.1201/9781003359265-12 Paper Time Machines 
those designed for non-commercial application for the military or political think-tanks, although com￾mercial games are known to cross into the professional sphere on occasions (as can be attested to by 
professional practitioners such as Mitch Reed, Sebastian Bae, Matt Evers, and Natalia Wojtowicz – from 
personal correspondence 2023). This is also a book directed at analog games – with a targeted focus on 
board games, in large part excluding role playing games, and miniatures wargaming (although board 
wargames do have a relationship with both of those areas). That said, some of this chapter, and Chapters 
2 and 3 have some broad relevance to historians and designers of digital historical games, with regard to 
definitional and methodological concerns.
For broader context, it might be helpful to briefly consider here the three main ways in which com￾mercial board games intersect with history:
• There are what we might call games as history quizzes
• History as backdrop to games which really aren’t about history at all
• And games that achieve some kind of serious engagement with history
It is customary within the hobby to speak of “theme” as a synonym for “setting,” or indeed, “subject matter” 
(BGG 2018). This is unfortunate, because there are clear advantages to both scholarly and design perspectives 
in utilizing “theme” as a distinct element expressing a unifying idea for a work, the way literary scholars and 
writers do; “theme is a writer’s interpretation of life” (original emphasis, Yorke 2015, 195). To permanently 
conflate the two and draw no finer distinction would be akin to taking a Dickens novel and declaring late 
Nineteenth Century London is both the setting and the theme, and there is no theme – that the novel is about 
nothing – beyond this setting. (Perhaps this is somewhat true if we consider London to operate at the level of 
synecdoche for humanity, but this is surely broad and there are more useful ways of exploring theme in finer 
detail.) Yet, whereas literary scholars will investigate the use of language to ascertain one or more themes, 
in games our primary focus in investigations is interactivity, and all that this might encompass, perhaps, yes, 
including language, but also physicality, and the engagement with systems. Following McLuhan’s “the medium 
is the message” (McLuhan 1996, 13), this investigation of interactivity will lead us to regard theme as resid￾ing in the effects generated by the game’s mechanics; these are where games find their unifying ideas. “The 
mechanic is the message” as the saying popularized by Brenda Romero goes (The Strong Museum 2013). 
Alternatively, Elizabeth Sampat gives us: “systems make statements” (Sampat 2017, 13).
Games as history quizzes test a player’s knowledge of history, for the purposes of education and/or 
entertainment. Commercial examples of this kind of game are Chronology (1996) and Timeline (from 
2012). In both instances, players place cards in the correct sequence in a chronology formed by a tableau; 
if players are right, they get to discard and get closer to winning the game; if players are wrong, they pick 
up another card and so are further from winning the game.
There are games that use history as a backdrop and make no serious attempt to engage with the 
subject matter which they really leverage for design and marketing purposes. Such games use history 
purely as a setting, and their theme – the thing they are really about – whatever it might be, is not making 
an intentional historical statement. Commercial examples of this kind of game are Battle Line (2002), 
Puerto Rico (2002), and London (2010). These games make no serious attempt to represent or realign 
the historical record connected to the battles of Alexander the Great, the colonization of the island of 
Borinquén, or the development of the city of London. Such games exploit the potential of a given histori￾cal setting to engage the imagination of an audience and to help communicate the mechanics within the 
game design. In and of itself, this opportunism may be a judicious design decision for heuristic purposes 
and does not necessarily carry any particular moral weight – the decision to leverage history in this way 
is not necessarily problematic – although as we shall see, it can assuredly end up being so. We might, in 
very broad terms, call games shaped predominantly by their mechanics “eurogames,” although there are 
considerable problems with such a breadth of definition as we shall return to in Chapter 4 of this book. 
Perhaps “history-as-backdrop games” is a more apt, albeit clumsier term. Patrick Rael offers the rather 
neater “historyish,” which he elaborates as being “a gesture … nod towards history without being serious 
history” (Shelf Stories 2022).1 • Introduction 3
In games with some self-conscious attempt to engage seriously with history, there are concerns beyond 
those of marketing or to help explain game mechanics. In such games, there is an intentional engagement with 
the subject matter to the extent that some kind of thesis on the subject matter is usually being consciously 
projected through the nature of the design – through its mechanics. Such a thesis is usually defensible through 
arguments connected to historical research. In such games, history is not just the setting, but also, these games 
project their thesis through their theme – they have something intentional to say about history. Commercial 
examples of such games are common within the wargames sector of the board gaming world – Twilight 
Struggle (2005), Washington’s War (2010), and Quartermaster General (2014) being just some amongst many. 
In these kinds of games, we may even claim some kind of model representing one or more aspects of history is 
being projected. To this extent, we may say that the game design is, in some sense, serving history, serving the 
pursuits of engaging with history, rather than history merely serving the game design. Within this broad cat￾egory, there is a broad spectrum. Some games attempt to represent more complex aspects of history, and these 
attempts may be more or less abstract (although all are abstract) and be more or less coherent or defensible.
If we attempt to assert this form of distinction, there will be an obligation to acknowledge cases where 
the lines are blurred. Diplomacy (1959), a foundational game to the historical board games hobby about 
European geopolitics at the turn of the Twentieth Century, might be more historyish than simulation of 
early Twentieth Century politics and warfare. Yet, whilst the game is certainly no deep simulation, the 
designer was clearly a student of history (see Calhamer 1998 if there is any doubt on this) and the game 
does capture some fundamental elements of the axes of pre-World War I geopolitics; it blends politics 
and military matters in a fashion that has few comparisons, and in so doing has the potential for broader 
application in the teaching of history and the intersection of politics and warfare (Harris 2007, 85).
However, we choose to categorize them, all of these design approaches to the intersection of history and 
games can encode simplistic or problematic perspectives, consciously or otherwise suppressing, distorting, 
omitting, or amplifying certain aspects of the historical record. History-themed games, such as Puerto Rico, 
may so exploit history that they distort it beyond recognition and then, wittingly or not, promote this distortion 
to audiences far and wide. But a game that consciously attempts to represent history may do it poorly, and a 
game that makes no conscious attempt to represent history may still hit on something of representational value.
Within this context, then, the focus of this book is on the third category – games consciously achiev￾ing a serious engagement with history and formulating a coherent thesis about it. Of course, “historical 
games” could also be used as a term to refer to games found within history, as opposed to those about it, 
and there are many landmark games within history that now have their own histories. But this book is 
not about the history of games, at least not for the most part; it terms ‘historical games” those with their
settings in history. (Their themes are another matter, which depends on each individual game and what it 
has to tell us about the history within its purview.)
WHY WARGAMES MATTER?
Wargames matter in two regards: in a general sense that play and games matter, and in a more specific 
sense related to their own space within the field of games. The nature and value of play is a deep and con￾tested subject. The term “fun” is so contentious and broad, and sometimes couched in prejudiced notions 
that are simplistic and childish, that it drives debate across entire sectors of game studies, anthropology, 
sociology, and psychology (see, for example, Salen and Zimmerman 2004, 334–5; McGonigal 2011, 64–9; 
Koster 2014; Sharp and Thomas 2019, 27–43, 154–5.) Salen and Zimmerman prefer the term “pleasure” 
but still appear to see it as the core concept for player engagement). Designers and scholars also offer 
concepts of considerable profundity lying at the root of play:
If we, as humans, are pattern-noticing machines (so to speak), then the unfolding of contingent outcomes 
in a semibounded (sic) domain such as a game is inherently compelling, presenting, as it does just the right 4 Paper Time Machines 
mix of the expected and the unexpected … Making a game, then, is about creating the complex, implicit, 
contingent conditions wherein the texture of engaged human experience can happen.
(Malaby 2007, 107)
We play because we are human, and we need to understand what makes us human, not in an evolutionary 
or cognitive way but in a humanistic way. Play is the force that pulls us together. It is a way of explaining 
the world, others, and ourselves. Play is expressing ourselves – who we want to be, or who we don’t want 
to be. Play is what we do when we are human.
(Sicart 2014, 6)
Play is being in the world, through objects, toward others. We play not to entertain ourselves or to learn or 
be alienated: we play to be, and play gives us, through its characteristics, the possibility of being.
(Sicart 2014, 18)
Play is a fundamental phenomenon of existence, just as primordial and independent as death, love, 
work and ruling, but it is not directed, as with the other fundamental phenomena, by a collective 
striving for the final purpose … Play is activity and creativity and yet it is near to eternal and tran￾quil things. Play “interrupts” the continuity and context of our course of life that is determined by 
an ultimate purpose.
(original emphasis of italics retained, Fink 2016, 21)
Play is a dynamic process of interaction with structures that afford a degree of designed uncertainty. Play 
heightens awareness of the present moment that is fueled by imagination. When others are involved in the 
play situation, it has the potential of creating a sense of togetherness.
(original emphasis of italics retained, Calleja 2022, 11)
From designer and former CIA analyst Volko Ruhnke:
If it’s humanity … if it’s an aspect of humanity … you can gain by gaming it … you can gain understanding 
by gaming it, that’s my assertion.
(Chatter 2023)
Such perspectives help to demonstrate the vivacity and nuance of the debate and its vitality to human 
experience.
With regard to the more specific sense in which wargames matter, Andreas Tolk and Bill Lademan 
tell us:
Wargames help to think through options, investigate new ideas for operations, and prepare military deci￾sion-makers by confronting them with surprises requiring a quick response … wargames help to set the 
stage by providing dynamic context including the necessary complexity of the challenge for decision￾making … Wargames are no longer limited to military planning. Domain-specific tabletop games are 
conducted today in various other domains, from preparing local administration and government for con￾ducting large events, like the Olympics or a sports world championship, or for responding to natural or 
man-made disasters like earthquakes, hurricanes, tsunamis, or terror attacks. Even in business, wargames 
are conducted to evaluate different options, strategies, and possibilities.
(Tolk and Lademan 2022, xli)
In a similar but even more extensive vein, Natalia Wojtowicz identifies four audiences, “scientists,” “sol￾diers,” “businessmen,” and “civilians” with varying agendas for wargames related to their audience. These 
agendas include, but are not limited to, problem identification, searching for boundaries of uncertainty, 1 • Introduction 5
optimization, decision-making, hypothesizing future outcomes, budgeting, prioritization, testing infra￾structure, intelligence collection, detection of threats, human behavior patterns, testing personnel in their 
individual capacities, understanding complex, uncertain environments and the changing character of war￾fare, understanding the operational impacts of technology trends, future challenges, and military com￾petition, helping distinguish between wise and unwise investment decisions (Wojtowicz 2022, 52–65).
Wargames, then, have considerable social utility. Per Wojtowicz’s list, even if only sixteen out of 
forty-two bullet points she lists have been referenced above, we might argue, on top of the arguments for 
play and games, that civilization could ill afford to do without wargames. What other activity could boast 
such a deep and expansive list of existentially essential affordances?
WHAT IS A WARGAME?
This expansive criticality also accounts for the definitional tumult of wargames. Because this is a book attempt￾ing to explore both historical board wargames and non-military historical board games achieving a serious 
engagement with history, it is necessary to pause to explore how we might define a wargame, as opposed to a 
non-wargame. Brushing aside the portmanteau word issue of a “war game” or a “wargame,” in the hobby, this 
topic – how to define a wargame – is notoriously problematic and is charted more by wrecks than safe passage 
(Curry 2011, 23; Buchanan 2021, 46–7; Ruhnke 2021, 47). To give some sense of the breadth of the debate, a 
series of quotations, joining the Dunnigan quote at the beginning of this chapter, might suffice.
From professional wargaming:
The specific recommendation and distinguishing feature of any wargame is that it enables tactical and stra￾tegical study to be prosecuted by the contest of mind against mind under circumstances which simulate, 
more or less exactly, the conditions of war.
(Bohne 2023)
A wargame is a model of a military reality set up by a judicious process of selection and aggregation, yield￾ing the results of the interactions of opponents with conflicting objectives as these results are developed 
under more or less definite rules enforced by a control or umpire group.
(original emphasis of italics retained, Paxson 1971, 278)
There is no single, commonly accepted, definition of “wargaming”. NATO defines a war game as: a simu￾lation of a military operation, by whatever means, using specific rules, data, methods and procedures … A 
wargame is a process of adversarial challenge and creativity, delivered in a structured format and usually 
umpired or adjudicated. Wargames are dynamic events driven by player decision making. As well as hos￾tile actors, they should include all “oppositional” factors that resist a plan. Wargames are analytic games 
that simulate aspects of warfare at the tactical, operational, or strategic level. They are used to examine 
warfighting concepts, train and educate commanders and analysts, explore scenarios, and assess how force 
planning and posture choices affect campaign outcomes.
(RAND n.d.)
A wargame is a warfare model or simulation in which the flow of events shapes, and is shaped by, decisions 
made by a human player or players during the course of those events.
(Perla 2008a, 26)
Wargames are tools for gaining insights into the dynamics of warfare. They can help players come to a 
more complete understanding of the sources and motivations underlying the decisions made by historical 
commanders by placing players in the shoes (or at least the headquarters) of those commanders and chal￾lenging them to do better.
(Curry 2011, 23)6 Paper Time Machines 
… our working definition of “wargame” will be any multisided (sic) simulation of armed conflict in which 
the decisions of the participants influence the outcomes.
(Caffrey 2019, 5)
A wargame involves human players or actors making decisions in an artificial contest environment and 
then living with the consequences of their actions. Games consist of actors who make decisions, an envi￾ronment they seek to effect, rules that govern what decisions they can make, and adjudication models that 
specify how actions affect both actors and the environment.
(Wong et al. 2019, 5)
Natalia Wojtowicz notes the US-based Military Operations Research Society (MORS) cites several over￾lapping definitions of wargame:
A simulation, by whatever means, of a military operation involving two or more opposing forces using 
rules, data, and procedures designed to depict an actual or assumed real-life situation.
[A] model or simulation of war conducted without maneuvering actual forces and with a sequence of events 
that is affected by decisions of the players.
Adversarial by nature, wargaming is a representation of military activities, using rules, data, and pro￾cedures, not involving actual military forces, and in which the flow of events is affected by, and in turn 
affects, decisions made during the course of those events by players acting for all actors, factions, factors 
and fictions relevant to those military activities.
Method wherein the human intellect uses a synthetic construct that replicates a conflict and requires deci￾sions for resolution in order to consider a real problem.
(Wojtowicz 2022, 15–16, quoting Simpson 2015)
The MORS War Gamer’s Handbook itself (updated January 9, 2020) uses the 1990 Peter Perla definition:
a warfare model or simulation whose operation does not involve the activities of actual military forces, and 
whose sequence of events affects and is, in turn, affected by the decisions made by players representing 
the opposing sides. 
(War Gamer's Handbook n.d. 4)
A scenario-based warfare model in which the outcome and sequence of events affect, and are affected by, 
the decisions made by the players.
(UK MOD Wargaming Handbook 2017, 5) (This definition includes the note: “The importance placed on 
the decisions of the wargame players, not contained in the NATO definition, means this handbook uses 
the working definition of wargaming contained in the Red Teaming Guide.” What is being referred to 
here is the Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre (DCDC), Red Teaming Guide, 2nd Edition 2013, 
Lexicon. The 3rd edition does not reference this definition.)
The UK MOD definition also includes the flowchart shown in Figure 1.1, labeled “the general purposes of 
wargames,” which is cited from McHugh, F., Fundamentals of War Gaming, US Naval War College, third 
Edition, 1966, page 9: 
a wargame is a tool for exploring and informing human decision-making. 
(Markley 2015, 1)
All wargames produce information that informs a decision-maker.
(Downes-Martin 2021 GUWS Malign Wargaming lecture)1 • Introduction 7
War gaming is a tool for exploring decision-making possibilities in an environment with incomplete and 
imperfect information 
(War Gamers’ Handbook n.d., 3)
Wargames are interactive scenarios, presented in the form of a game, representing conflict or competition 
in which people make decisions and respond to the consequences of those decisions. As they can depict 
competition between groups, non-kinetic actions are a possible pathway to victory.
(RockyMountainNavy 2023) (For an extended exploration of some of the history of the definition see 
Bohne 2023.)
FIGURE 1.1 Wargame definitional flowchart (UK MOD Wargaming Handbook 2017, 10). (Wojtowicz notes 
the same flowchart, but with a curious alteration in the first box, “simulation of selected aspects of conflict or 
peace situation” (emphasis added, Wojtowicz 2022, 17). This would appear to be taken from an earlier online 
version of the UK MOD Wargaming Handbook.)8 Paper Time Machines 
Wargames are representations of competitive, contested and/or confrontational situations in an environ￾ment in which each of these participants make decisions and react to the consequences of these decisions. 
(Manuel du Jeu de Guerre 2023, 18, translated by the author)
From board gaming:
A wargame simulates an armed conflict, be it a battle, a campaign, or an entire war. 
(Wikipedia n.d.)
Wargames are games that depict military actions. Wargames are set in a variety of timelines, from the 
Ancient period to present conflicts and even in the future. Thematically, Wargames cover everything from 
actions between small units on a very small board to larger, extremely detailed conflicts and even global￾scale wars. Although most Wargames are based on historical situations, there are Wargames based on 
fantasy or science fiction, as well as Wargames based on hypothetical but historically-based situations (e.g., 
nuclear war between the Soviet Union and the USA). 
(BGG n.d.)
From commercial wargaming:
A wargame (manual or computer) usually combines a map, playing pieces representing historical person￾ages or military units, and a set of rules telling you what you can or cannot do with them. The object of any 
specific wargame (historical or otherwise) is to enable the player to re-create a specific event and, more 
important, to be able to explore what might have been if the player decides to do things differently.
(Dunnigan 1992, 13)
It is a game … that is an opposed, adversarial military-based simulation that will recreate a specific histori￾cal event or is an exploration of a potential military event or operation in game form. 
(Mentioned in Dispatches 2020, Maurice Fitzgerald)
opposed military action, does it have to be military? Is it just competition of a sort? … Do we really want 
to call it a simulation, or do we want to call it a game? … I think some folks get mixed up by trying to call 
a wargame by what it is physically … Dunnigan did us no favors here … but a wargame isn’t the physical 
board … it’s more a thought process … Wargames are decisions about some kind of competition … you 
have an environment … a board and rules will tell you what you can do, and then there’s an adjudication 
model. 
(Mentioned in Dispatches 2020, Ian Bohne)
you talk about opposed sides and a competition with decisions and an adjudication model and, you know, 
Carcassonne fits that description, and I’m not sure we would necessarily consider that a wargame … [a 
wargame is] a game, not necessarily a simulation … where the primary path to victory has to be military 
conflict, otherwise it’s not a wargame … Civilization games, I wouldn’t consider them wargames, because 
the primary path to victory isn’t necessarily military … and there are all kinds of strategy games out there 
that are not wargames ….
(Mentioned in Dispatches 2020, Brant Guillory)
As may be apparent, this is a Bermuda Triangle for hobbyists, professional practitioners, and academics 
alike, bearing in mind, as outlined, there are professional wargames which are distinct from commercial 
wargames, and sometimes the lines may blur. However, professional wargamers may be far more comfort￾able with broad and fluid definitions than commercial gamers (see Wojtowicz 2022). In the commercial 
sphere, the debate may be fueled and exacerbated by nostalgia. In commercial games, the question resur￾faced again in May 2023 when Votes for Women, a game about the women’s suffrage movement in the 
USA 1848–1920, was placed third in the Best Wargame category of the 2022 Golden Geek Awards. It may 1 • Introduction 9
be telling that Flashpoint: South China Sea, a game that was also in the same category, also has question￾able wargame status, dependent on definitions (at any rate, it is a game about conflict that does not extend 
to the conduct of war), was not targeted in the awards fallout. This appears to validate the concerns of Liz 
Davidson that what is being debated here is not just the definition of the term “wargame,” but who gets 
to define it, and who the definition is for. It may, indeed, be significant that Votes for Women is designed 
by Tory Brown, a woman (with no extensive design track record before this game), and Flashpoint: South 
China Sea is designed by a man, Harold Buchanan (with a Charles S. Roberts Award for his Liberty 
or Death: The American Insurrection (2016)). (For the full blog see Beyond Solitaire 2023, “What is a 
Wargame?: A Case Study.”) Kevin Bertram, the publisher of Votes for Women through his Fort Circle 
Games, wrote a blog post and concluded:
Votes for Women uses the mechanics of the wargaming tradition to refight the battle to ratify the 19th 
Amendment. The fight to ratify the 19th Amendment was a bitter conflict that saw battles and campaigns, 
casualties and losses, and ultimately victory. Votes for Women is a wargame.
(Kevin Bertram 2023)
With all these dizzying, sometimes overlapping and sometimes conflicting definitions in mind (and the 
above sampler is far from exhaustive), it is tempting to leave the last word to designer Harold Buchanan:
Wargamers will tend to speak around the question: “What is a wargame?” for hours without acknowledg￾ing the most important factor in their definitions – they are all intensely personal. Everyone has a different 
definition for wargame.
(Buchanan 2021, 46)
Or else we might leave the last word to Volko Ruhnke:
answering the title question [What is a Wargame?] will tend at least to implicitly take on a personal nature, 
and so it should. If you ask me, “what is a wargame?”, my answer should include “to me” or “for me.” 
The alternative – to seek instead to encompass all things that someone at some point called “wargames” 
– would be reaching for common meaning among, for example, military training exercises, paintballing, 
intelligence community political simulations, and boardgames. There may be some commonality across 
them, but it’s thin gruel. 
(Ruhnke 2021, 47)
However, given this book draws a line between wargames and non-wargames, not only for the pur￾poses of structuring chapters, but also because this seems a debate scholarship should not be lagging 
too far behind players and designers, it seems appropriate to attempt to offer something. As might be 
readily apparent from an overview of the debate, and as Ruhnke indicates, commentators are approach￾ing this question from different perspectives and it can be helpful to examine what these might be. A 
wargame might be defined through its subject matter (being related to war), through its mechanics 
(using mechanics characteristic of wargames), through components (with different specifications con￾sidered characteristic of a wargame), or through its approach to history (where a “wargame” might be 
considered to be attempting, perhaps achieving a serious engagement with history, and a “not-wargame” 
might be “historyish, per our previous definition). Other lenses through which to attempt definitions 
are through a game’s alignment with marketing expectations (wargames are for a certain kind of audi￾ence), or within the context of awards (which have clear marketing intersections). In the latter case, if a 
given award has an agenda of promoting the hobby and expanding its reach, there are clear incentives to 
define a game as a wargame, especially if that game might otherwise not be eligible for any award since 
no others that are appropriate exist. In the case of the Charles S. Roberts Awards, there is some irony, 
given that, in any event, the charter uses the term “conflict simulation” and not “wargame” (Charles S. 
Roberts Award 2023).10 Paper Time Machines 
A broad definition, such as that offered by Bertram, entails an inherent logic – where else might Votes 
for Women be eligible for awards? And if the answer is elsewhere but in fewer categories than if it was 
deemed a wargame that cannot be a satisfactory answer for the publisher or designer concerned. Similarly, 
all of these perspectives carry different agendas in support of different rationales. It is surely germane, for 
example, that “wargame” functions not only as a noun, but also as a verb. A wargame is an artifact. Yet 
“to wargame” is also a process. To “wargame out a situation” is to have designed a model of a situation, 
and imbued players with agency within the context of bounded rules and to explore the outcomes of these 
choices within that model. Indeed, to wargame out a situation might not involve playing in any commonly 
understood sense, and might entail a discussion-driven reasoning process, which might or might not be 
military in context.
Even when it is a noun, a “wargame” can both be a genre of game, and a tool for analyzing complex 
situations. This would seem to account for some of the breadth of definitions we have. It would explain 
why we can have a game about peace negotiations or a game about the expansion of women’s suffrage 
and call them “wargames.” In the wargame as a noun that is a tool, or in the wargame as a verb definition 
we are describing a means to conduct a process, or the process itself. This is generally the perspective we 
see from professional wargamers, who tend to be expressing an alignment with the methodology tied to 
their profession. It is perhaps also worth stating that professional wargaming is not confined to just the 
DOD and military organizations within governments. Intelligence agencies, the Coast Guard, and even 
commercial corporations who may not be engaged in the military complex at all, may “wargame” out a 
situation to explore potential outcomes from proposed actions within projected models not necessarily 
concerned with military, or even security topics. Indeed, the definitional question of wargames is parallel 
to the definitional question of games in general. We might recall the words of Elliott Avedon and Brian 
Sutton-Smith:
Each person defines games in his own way – the anthropologists and folklorists in terms of historical 
origins; the military men, businessmen, and educators in terms of usages; the social scientists in terms of 
psychological and social functions. There is overwhelming evidence in all this that the meaning of games 
is, in part, a function of the ideas of those who think about them.
(Avedon and Sutton-Smith 1971, 438)
The view taken here is that a methodologically derived definition of wargame (that is, wargames as a pro￾cess) may be too broad a term, which may deter potential players of games about history because it makes 
them all sound like games about military history. Historians may reasonably balk at the notion that any 
serious game about any aspect of history, even those expressly non-military in nature, necessarily falls 
under the umbrella of “wargame.” With such thinking, all of history may fall within the wargame term 
and might give the troubling and problematic impression that all history is unequivocally and indisputably 
military history. Thus, the definition used here is derived through subject matter, akin to the way histori￾ans might categorize historical topics, with a taxonomy of more potential utility for the broad engagement 
with history. But as is acknowledged, there are numerous perspectives that could be adopted, including 
blended perspectives. Further, all that is attempted here is the modest goal of distinguishing between 
games primarily concerned with military and political-military history, and those primarily concerned 
with other aspects of history. Thus, the definition offered here:
A wargame is a strategy game where the focus of play is predominantly concerned with the execution of 
military or political-military operations of some kind.
An analog wargame is a strategy game where the components are mostly or entirely physical items. An 
historical board wargame, then, is a strategy game where the focus of play is predominantly concerned 
with the execution of historical or counterfactual military or political-military operations of some kind 
with mostly or entirely physical items. By extension, a non-military historical board game is a game 
where the focus of play is predominantly not concerned with the execution of military or political-military 1 • Introduction 11
operations, but with some other aspect of history. Washington’s War and Quartermaster General are 
examples of historical board wargames. In contrast, with this definition, Freedom: The Underground 
Railroad (2013) a game about ante-bellum USA abolitionists seeking to free slaves from slave-holding 
states, Watergate (2019) a game about hiding or exposing President Nixon’s complicity in the Watergate 
scandal, and Votes for Women are examples of non-military historical board games. Working with this 
definition, Twilight Struggle, concerned with the conduct of the Cold War and with its focus on global 
political tussling, and its persistent proxy wars, would sit inside a wargame definition. The inclusion 
of political-military subject matter alongside purely military subject matter is justified in consideration 
of Clausewitz’s dictum that war is merely the continuation of politics by other means (Francis Miyata, 
“The Grand Strategy of Carl von Clausewitz” 2021), which is met by Foucault’s rejoinder that politics 
is the continuation of war by other means (Jason Edwards “Foucault and the Continuation of War” The 
Metamorphoses of War 2012, 21–40), which may help us to see how neatly the two go together. We will 
look closer at this justification in Chapter 5. To put the pieces back together, in the field of board games, 
perhaps the simple term “historical board game,” or “history board game,” could be used for games that 
may or may not be military or political-military in focus (or indeed counterfactual) but, in any case, 
have an historical setting. The issue of awards eligibility is a serious matter for publishers and designers, 
however, and any potential future adoption of “historical” or “history board games” could only be com￾mercially meaningful with synthesis within award structures.
Let us further add, “conflict simulation” (as mentioned briefly above) or “ConSim” is another term 
familiar to those in this space. It may function as a clear synonym to “wargame” for some. “A wargame 
is a playable simulation. A conflict simulation is another name for wargame, one that leaves out the two 
unsavory terms ‘war’ and ‘game’” (Dunnigan 1992, 236). Thus “ConSim” may be considered better or 
worse by others. Perhaps better, insofar as we may infer from Dunnigan, that while “wargame” carries the 
uncomfortable connotation of trivializing the deadly seriousness of war, the “simulation” term may carry 
the notion of something scientific and so connote a greater sense of worthiness as an activity. We shall 
explore this in more detail in Chapter 3. Perhaps it is better too because it might be used to embrace all 
types of conflict (military and non-military, and also preclude any necessity for a separate political-mil￾itary (Pol-Mil) distinction) – thus Flashpoint: South China Sea, Twilight Struggle, and Votes for Women 
can all live comfortably within that term.
Perhaps “ConSim” is worse than “wargame,” because it deceitfully attempts to mask the identity of 
the activity through the connotation of science and worthiness. In any case, this is also not a new term 
and we have had it since at least the 1970s (Buckley 2022, 63). As we shall see in Chapter 3, the terms 
“historical simulation” and “historical simulations game” are also adjacent. In turn, adjacent to these 
terms is the inclusion of wargames within the serious games classification (CSIAC 2023). This is a much 
broader field of games where the design’s primary purpose is something other than pure entertainment, 
and, aside from wargames, also includes games for training, education, scientific exploration, health care, 
emergency management, city planning, engineering, politics, and art (Djaouti, Alvarez, and Jessel 2015; 
Serious Games 2015).
CHAPTERS IN THIS BOOK
As for the structure of this book, following this Introduction chapter, there are five sections. Part One is 
concerned with contextualizing the rest of the book, with chapters delving into what is meant by Critical 
Design, Historical Simulation, and chapters exploring the history of historical board games.
Chapter 2 asks What Is Critical Game Design? The chapter first seeks to define “game,” and sub￾stantially works with Jane McGonigal’s four definitional traits of a goal, rules, a feedback system, and 
voluntary participation. From here the provenance of critical design, and critical game design is explored 
– with the work of Dunne and Raby establishing the notion of using design as a tool to not take accepted 12 Paper Time Machines 
narratives for granted, exploring their hidden agendas and implicit biases. The alignment of these per￾spectives with the work of games scholar-practitioners such as Mary Flanagan is also explored. In general, 
critical game design can be said to operate in two intersecting orbits – analysis and synthesis. The funda￾mental perspective at the heart of critical analysis is that all games are socially contextualized historical 
cultural artifacts expressing viewpoints about the world within which they sit, regardless of the game 
designer’s own awareness of these perspectives. Autoethnography, rhetorical analysis, various historical 
methodologies, dialectical opposition, and emergent narrative are key tools for this analysis. The work of 
synthesis involves leveraging this analysis into game form, and the chapter closes by looking at the ways 
some critically thinking historical board game designers approach their work.
Chapter 3 asks What Are Historical Simulations? This chapter works with the key definition that a sim￾ulation is the imitation of the operation of a real-world process or system over time, and attempts to ensure 
this is understood in contradistinction from prediction. Arguments on the limitations of games, and the 
disparaging views by some historians on the value of counterfactualism, are aired, before a riposte arguing 
for the utility of counterfactual thinking is mounted. Forays into the contributions of games scholars, and of 
historical games scholars in particular, are made, to outline some of the key thinking done to date on simula￾tions as it intersects with history. This work can help to distinguish between the modes of understanding and 
explaining realities: between representation (which we are highly accustomed to in the form of narrative) and 
simulation (which is a process with agency). After a brief foray into Adaptation Studies, the chapter focuses 
on the notion of historical models, what they are, what they do, and what their limitations are.
Chapter 4 uses the focal point of designer Charles S. Roberts’ Gettysburg (1958), the first commer￾cially available “modern” board wargame, to represent an historical battle; this chapter maps out the rise, 
fall, and rise again of commercial board wargaming. An initial section explores the roots of board gaming 
in general, the advent of Kriegsspiel, the development of entertainment wargames, the cultural interest 
in popular history, and Roberts’ earlier work, contextualizing the provenance of Gettysburg. 1958–1981 
sketches out The First Rise of Board Wargaming; 1982–1999 sketches out how, as prominent designer 
Jason Matthews described it, “Wargaming Destroyed Itself,” and 2000–2023 sketches out The Second 
Rise of Board Wargaming. Collectively these chapters cover the broad beats of the narrative of what land￾mark games arrived when and how the overall shape of the hobby has evolved.
Chapter 5 explores the ways in which politics in board wargames was poorly (or not) represented for 
much of its first three and a half decades, and only with Mark Herman’s groundbreaking We The People 
do we first see momentum shifting, and strategic-level games finding more elegant ways to incorporate 
political dimensions within their designs. Some brief case studies exploring design approaches to politics 
in the first 30 years of the hobby are followed by a brief look at Twilight Struggle and the momentum now 
building in the Pol-Mil design space.
Chapter 6 briefly explores the earliest non-wargame historical board games, encompassing James 
Dunnigan’s The Plot to Assassinate Hitler (1976), and then lists, by brief description, many of the major 
games in this growing and rapidly diversifying sector in recent years. The chapter suggests some sub￾genres are already formulating, such as election games, assassinations, trials, women’s suffrage, civil 
unrest, the slave trade, diplomatic crises, peace treaties, and political leadership, amongst others.
Part Two takes a look at design processes and tools. Chapter 7 walks new designers through the over￾all process of designing a game. It starts by imploring designers to play games, to explore modding and 
working with pre-existing game systems. It then presents several different design methodology models to 
consider for practical utilization. The chapter concludes by considering the “mechanics or theme” debate 
as a starting point for projects, offering the primacy of intended player experience as a more helpful 
perspective, and touches on the interlocking relationship these elements have with the nature of research.
Chapter 8 guides designers through the process from idea formation to devising a thesis – the central 
argument the design is making. This process entails answering a series of key questions. What is your 
design’s purpose? What do you want you players to feel? Do you have a key research question? How 
replayable will your game be? What is the scope and scale? Who are the actors, and what are the factors? 
What are the ends, ways, and means? By exploring these questions, designers will be poised to transform 
their thesis into a full design.1 • Introduction 13
Chapter 9 urges fledgling designers to find mechanics that can function as appropriate metaphors for 
the subject matter that is the focus of their game. The chapter presents a list of the 10 most commonplace 
components and how they might serve some potential mechanical purpose. The second half of the chapter 
presents a list of 15 core general mechanics with brief descriptions.
The focus of Chapter 10 is designing with cards, which is now a significant aspect of many historical 
board games. The chapter looks at 33 common functions for cards, covering major mechanics as well as 
some utilities, followed by consideration of the potential metaphors these mechanics might carry. There 
are brief discussions on the innovation of the card-driven game (CDG) in We The People, rule exceptions 
in card design, and on “flavor text” – descriptive text on cards that carries no gameplay function but which 
evokes and supports historical detail and narrative.
Chapter 11 briefly surveys the four main approaches to map design on game boards: regulated grids, 
irregular areas, point to point, and conceptual maps. The advantages and disadvantages of these differ￾ent approaches are weighed, with the opportunities they provide to designers considered alongside the 
implications these approaches carry for historians. A number of outliers, examples of game boards that 
take more unconventional approaches, are also briefly explored, including a hybrid approach such as in 
Kingmaker (1974).
Chapter 12 covers development and publication. It includes documentation, rules writing, prototype 
development, testing and iterating, retaining player engagement, balancing, a publisher pitch, contracts, 
and other aspects related to the publication of a game. This is a whistle-stop overview of an entire area 
worthy of far closer examination but is beyond scope for the present volume.
Part Three walks designers through the major design elements they will likely need to consider to 
conceptualize and develop their own historical board wargames.
Chapter 13 briefly summarizes some of the most notable books to date within the broad bibliography 
of writing about wargames, wargame design, and board game design, as they all intersect with board 
wargame design.
Chapter 14 takes a high level view of the five main approaches designers take with regard to the use of 
game pieces to represent military units: unit counters, the two major uses of blocks, miniatures (“minis”), 
cards, and other pieces (including meeples). Figures are provided to illustrate examples, and the inherent 
advantages and disadvantages for each approach are briefly surveyed.
Chapter 15 works largely with the taxonomy of the second edition of Engelstein and Shalev’s Building 
Blocks of Tabletop Game Design: An Encyclopedia of Mechanisms (2022). The chapter discusses the six 
most commonly used combat resolution mechanics in historical board wargames: Unit Strength Ratio, 
Cumulative Hits, Stat Check, High Number, Deterministic Resolution, and Card Play. It also looks briefly 
at four less commonly used mechanics: Physical Action, Prisoner’s Dilemma, Force Commitment, and 
Rolling and Locking. The chapter concludes with a brief discussion of an eleventh category: Hybrids. 
The chapter provides ten tables and six figures with examples for the relevant concepts under discussion.
Chapter 16 sketches out the other major design conventions in board wargames outside of board 
design, units, and combat resolution. These major conventions are considered to be four different kinds of 
sequences of play (symmetric, asymmetric, alternating, and simultaneous), initiative, movement points, 
zones of control, stacking, move some all or none, action points, CDG wargames, chit pull, hidden move￾ment, fixed maneuver, morale, supply, production, research, and bots.
Chapter 17 explores some examples of innovation within the field, giving us games that blend digital, 
analog, RPG, turn-based mechanisms and real-time mechanisms together (Uboot), deck building with his￾torical wargames (Undaunted series), bots that retain hidden movement for solo players (Chancellorsville: 
1863), and innovation within board design and approaches to code-breaking (Divine Wind), amongst 
many others.
Part Four takes a brief foray into case studies of three non-wargame historical board games. Perhaps 
one of the main reasons (in conjunction with market forces) designers have until relatively recently not 
attempted designs on non-overtly military topics is the problem of how to implement these concepts: 
military topics have pre-existing and malleable templates to simulate kinetic conflict, yet non-kinetic 
conflicts are, in the commercial sphere, less common. The development of Eurogames would appear to 14 Paper Time Machines 
be giving designers ways to address these topics, borrowing, and adapting mechanics from other board 
game genres.
Chapter 18 first summarizes the history relating to Operation Barclay, the military intelligence opera￾tion in early 1943 to feed the German military intelligence community disinformation so as to mislead 
them on the Allied plans to invade Sicily. The chapter then covers the design approach taken to attempt 
to simulate this history, which blends two sub-games together, one as a metaphor for disinformation and 
the other as a tile revelation game to reveal, or conceal, information relating to the planned Allied attack 
targets.
Chapter 19 explores Crisis: 1914, a 1–5 player game about the diplomatic crisis that gave rise to World 
War One, known as the July Crisis. After a brief summary of the historical crisis, the chapter details the 
rationale behind the design approach – the ways in which brinkmanship has been modeled, and how and 
why other aspects of the historical causality have been modeled.
Chapter 20 summarizes the history of the 1905 Treaty of Portsmouth, which ended the Russo￾Japanese War, then details the rationale behind the design approach. This approach attempts to model 
the non-zero-sum situation in which 2 players attempt to get the better of peace negotiations by winning 
Issues (terms of the Treaty), which also and unavoidably generates Tension moving the other player closer 
to leaving the conference, thereby causing the otherwise winning player to lose the game.
Part Five pulls focus on some selected critical topics – two unsolvable problems in historical board 
game design, how storytelling intersects with wargame designs, how postcolonialism intersects with his￾torical board games, and ways in which we might meaningfully compare the advantages and disadvan￾tages of board games in relation to digital games about history. These are intended to give players and 
designers a sense of some of the critical issues resonating with the games they may be playing, and the 
games they may be making.
REFERENCES
Avedon, M. Elliott, and Brian Sutton-Smith. 1971. The Study of Games. New York: Wiley.
Bertram, Kevin. 2023. May 11. https://ludorum.substack.com/p/is-votes-for-women-a-wargame?publication_id
=1193864&utm_medium=email&action=share&isFreemail=true Accessed June 23, 2023.
Beyond Solitaire. 2023. “What is a Wargame?: A Case Study.” May 12, 2023. https://www.beyondsolitaire.net/blog/
what-is-a-wargame-a-case-study Accessed June 23, 2023.
BGG. n.d. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgamecategory/1019/wargame
BGG. 2018. December 11. https://boardgamegeek.com/geeklist/15398/meta-list-game-themes Accessed January 13, 
2023.
Bohne, Ian “RockyMountainNavy.” 2023. “What’s a Wargame? A Historical Review.” Armchair Dragoons, May 
19, 2023. https://www.armchairdragoons.com/articles/columns/wargamehistoricaldefinitions/ Accessed June 
23, 2023.
Buchanan, Harold. 2021. “That’s Not a Wargame!” C3i Magazine, Nr. 35, 46–7. RBM Publication.
Buckley, James. 2022. “Wargames: Simulation or Stimulation?” C3i Magazine, Nr. 36, 62–3.
Caffrey, Matthew B. 2019. On Wargaming: How Wargames Have Shaped History and How They May Shape the 
Future. Newport RI. Naval War College Press.
Calhamer, Allan B. 1998. Calhamer on Diplomacy: The Boardgame “Diplomacy” and Diplomatic History. 
Bloomington, Indiana: First Books.
Calleja, Gordon. 2022. Unboxed: Board Game Experience and Design. Cambridge, MA and London, England: The 
MIT Press.
Charles S. Roberts Award. 2023. https://charlessrobertsawards.com/award-charter/ Accessed July 26, 2023.
Chatter. 2023. “National Security Insights from Board Games with Volko Ruhnke.” Lawfare, July 20, 2023.
CSIAC. 2023. https://csiac.org/articles/introduction-to-serious-games-to-enhance-defense-capabilities-modeling
-simulation-special-edition/ Accessed June 22, 2023.
Curry, John, ed. 2011. Peter Perla’s The Art of Wargaming: A Guide for Professionals and Hobbyists. Morrisville, 
NC: Lulu Publishing.1 • Introduction 15
Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre (DCDC). 2013. Red Teaming Guide. 2nd ed. Lexicon: DCDC.
Djaouti, Damien, Julian Alvarez, and Jean-Pierre Jessel. 2015. http://www.ludoscience.com/files/ressources/classify￾ing_serious_games.pdf Accessed June 24, 2023.
Downes-Martin,Stephen. 2021 "Malign Wargaming." August 16, 2021. https://youtu.be/8cKsN3IBO2M?si=a9
-UKsMRADIRxaLE. Accessed June 23, 2023.
Dunnigan, Jim, 1992. The Complete Wargames Handbook: How To Play, Design & Find Them. New York: William 
Morrow.
Edwards, Jason. 2012. “Foucault and the Continuation of War.” In The Metamorphoses of War, edited by A. Plaw, 
21–40. Amsterdam: Rodopi. https://arditiesp.files.wordpress.com/2012/12/edwards_on_foucault_war_2012
.pdf Accessed November 22, 2022.
Fink, Eugen. 2016. Play as Symbol of the World and Other Writings. Studies in Continental Thought. Baltimore, 
MD: Project MUSE; Bloomington: Indian University Press.
Harris, Larry. 2007. "Diplomacy." In Hobby Games: The 100 Best, edited by James Lowder. Seattle, WA: Green 
Ronin Publishing.
Herman, Mark, Mark Frost, and Robert Kurz. 2009. Wargaming for Leaders. New York:McGraw Hill. 
Koster, Raph. 2014. A Theory of Fun for Game Design. Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly Media, Inc.
Malaby, Thomas. 2007. “Beyond Play: A New Approach to Games.” Games and Culture 2, no. 2: 95–113.
Manuel du Jeu de Guerre: Menerf un project de Wargaming. 2023. Breton, France: CICDE.
Markley, James. 2015. “United States Army War College Strategic Wargaming Series Handbook.” https://csl.army￾warcollege.edu/DSE/StrategicWargamingDivision/publications/USAWC%20Wargame%20Handbook%201
%20July%2015.pdf Accessed October 8, 2023.
McGonigal, Jane. 2011. Reality is Broken: Why Games Make Us Better and How They Can Change the World. New 
York: Penguin.
McLuhan, Marshall. 1996. Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Mentioned in Dispatches. 2020. “Season 5. Episode 13.” December 4, 2020. https://ragoons.com/podcast/mentioned
-in-dispatches-season-5-episode-13-what-is-a-wargame/ Accessed June 23, 2023.
Ministry of Defence. 2017. Wargames Handbook. Shrivenham, Swindon. https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/
government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/641040/doctrine_uk_wargaming_handbook.pdf
Accessed June 23, 2023.
Miyata, Francis. 2021. “The Grand Strategy of Carl von Clausewitz.” March 26, 2021. https://warroom.armywarcol￾lege.edu/articles/grand-strategy-clausewitz/# Accessed January 22, 2023.
Paxson, E. W. 1971. “War Gaming.” In The Study of Games, edited by M. Elliott Avedon and Brian Sutton-Smith, 
278–305. New York: Wiley.
Perla, Peter. 2008a. Quotation cited in Appleget, Jeff, Robert Burks, and Fred Cameron. 2020. The Craft of 
Wargaming: A Detailed Planning Guide for Defense Planners and Analysts. Annapolis: Naval Institute Press.
Perla, Peter. 2008b. “So a Wargamer and a Black Swan Walk into a Bar.” Phalanx 41, no. 4 (December): 26–30.
RAND. n.d. https://www.rand.org/topics/wargaming.html# Accessed June 23, 2023.
Ruhnke, Volko. 2021. “What is a Wargame?” C3i Magazine, Nr 35, 47. RBM Publication.
Salen, Katie, and Eric Zimmerman. 2004. Rules of Play: Game Design Fundamentals. Cambridge, MA and London, 
England: The MIT Press.
Sampat, Elizabeth. 2017. Empathy Engines: Design Games That Are Personal, Political, and Profound. North 
Haven, CT: CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform.
Serious Games. 2015. https://cs.gmu.edu/~gaia/SeriousGames/index.html Accessed June 24 2023.
Sharp, John, and David Thomas. 2019. Fun, Taste, & Games: An Aesthetics of the Idle, Unproductive, and Otherwise 
Playful. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Shelf Stories. 2022. “War Games Are Better at History Than Euro Games? with Dr. Patrick Rael.” August 10, 2022. 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8GmOZdC5fEI Accessed June 23, 2023.
Sicart, Miguel. 2014. Play Matters, Playful Thinking. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Simpson, W. 2015. “A Compendium of Wargaming Terms of the Military Operations Research Society.” https://
connectionswargaming.files.wordpress.com/2015/06/a-compendium-of-wargaming-terms-7-july-2015.pdf
Accessed June 23, 2023.
Strong Museum. 2013. June 25. https://www.museumofplay.org/blog/brenda-romero-the-mechanic-is-the-message/
Accessed June 23, 2023.
Tolk, Andreas, and Bill Lademan. 2022. “Prologue to Wargaming and Simulation - An Introduction to the Viewpoints 
and Challenges.” In Simulation and Wargaming, edited by Charles Turnista, Curtis Blais, and Andreas Tolk, 
xli – xlviii, New Jersey: Wiley.16 Paper Time Machines 
War Gamers’ Handbook: A Guide for Professional War Gamers. n.d. Newport, RI: Defense Automated Printing 
Service. https://www.mors.org/Portals/87/Documents/WarGamersHandbook%20NWC.pdf?ver=P--F3y8Hys
Wx4agnHWGdMw%3d%3d Accessed June 23, 2023.
Wikipedian.d.https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wargame#:~:text=A%20wargame%20is%20a%20strategy,the%2 0natu
re%20of%20potential%20conflicts.
Wong, Yuna Huh, Bae, Sebastian Joon, Bartles, Elizabeth M. and Benjamin Smith. 2019. Next-Generation 
Wargaming for the U.S. Marine Corps: Recommended Courses of Action. RAND https://apps.dtic.mil/sti/pdfs
/AD1083952.pdf Accessed June 23, 2023.
Wojtowicz, Natalia. 2022. Wargaming Experiences: Soldiers, Scientists and Civilians. Coppell, Texas: NW.
Woods, Stewart. 2012. Eurogames: The Design, Culture and Play of Modern European Board Games. Jefferson, 
NC. McFarland & Company.
Yorke, John. 2015. Into The Woods: A Five-Act Journey Into Story. New York, NY: Overlook Press.PART 1
Context
PART ONE PART ONE19
2 What Is Critical 
Game Design?
The Ph.D. in Critical Game Design is designed to train scholar￾practitioners deeply versed in game production, game studies theory, 
and scholarly writing and research. This degree program is a hybrid 
theory and practice program that immerses students in the game studies 
literature, game design principles, and topical consideration of the 
social and structural issues surrounding games and interactive media 
commensurate with the student’s research area.
(RPI Games and Simulation Arts and Science Program website 2023)
WHAT IS A GAME?
The text above will be familiar to graduate students at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI), though it 
warrants further examination. In order to explore Critical Game Design, we first need to be sure we know 
what a game is. This may be a little backwards, since the previous chapter explored what a wargame is, 
but a focus on Critical Game Design and how it applies within historical board game design necessitates 
pulling multiple threads together. Let us first work with Jane McGonigal’s definition:
when you strip away the genre differences and the technological complexities, all games share four defin￾ing traits: a goal, rules, a feedback system and voluntary participation.
The goal is the specific outcome that players will work to achieve. It focuses their attention and continually 
orients their participation throughout the game. The goal provides players with a sense of purpose.
The rules place limitations on how players can achieve the goal. By removing or limiting the obvious 
ways of getting to the goal, the rules push players to explore previously uncharted possibility spaces. They 
unleash creativity, and foster strategic thinking.
The feedback system tells players how close they are to achieving the goal. It can take the form of points, 
levels, a score, or a progress bar. Or, in its most basic form, the feedback system can be as simple as the 
players’ knowledge of an objective outcome: “The game is over when …”Real time feedback serves as a 
promise to the players that the goal is definitely achievable, and it provides motivation to keep playing.
Finally, voluntary participation requires that everyone who is playing the game knowingly and willingly 
accepts the goal, the rules, and the feedback. Knowingness establishes common ground for multiple people 
to play together. And the freedom to enter, or leave a game at will ensures that intentionally stressful and 
challenging work is experienced as safe and pleasurable activity.
(original emphasis retained, McGonigal 2011, 21)
This will allow us to take an (arguably) historical board game such as Diplomacy (1959) – a game that 
has some kind of intersection with history – and to see, through this lens, the goal is to control 18 Supply 
Centers (the regions with black dots in Figure 2.1), the rules limit the way pieces (fleets and armies, which 
Paper Time Machines What Is Critical Game Design?
DOI: 10.1201/9781003359265-3
10.1201/9781003359265-320 Paper Time Machines 
are used to achieve or maintain control of Supply Centers) are moved and created (“built”), the feedback 
system is the board, which shows the map of Europe (and parts of Asia and North Africa) and its 56 land 
regions (18 of which contain the Supply Centers) and 19 sea regions, and the placement of players’ pieces 
in relation to them – so counting the controlled Supply Centers is the feedback system informing players 
how they are progressing in relation to the goal (Diplomacy rules 1983, 1–2).
Note that scholars differentiate between a goal and a purpose. In what C. Thi Nguyen terms “striving 
play,” where the player “acquires, temporarily, an interest in winning for the sake of the struggle,” he sees 
an inversion from ordinary life:
In ordinary practical life, we pursue the means for the sake of the ends. But in striving play, we pursue the 
ends for the sake of the means. We take up a goal for the sake of the activity of struggling for it. 
(Nguyen 2020, 8–9)
A non-tournament playing Diplomacy player is likely motivated toward the struggle – that is their goal, 
not toward the purpose of winning, which is what Nyugen says we see in “achievement play.” Winning is 
the motivation of a tournament player (Nguyen 2020, 8).
Anna Anthropy and Naomi Clark note that “verbs are the rules that allow the player to interact with 
other rules in the game” (Anthropy and Clark 2014, Loc 467), and they term these the “most important 
rules in the game” because they let the player “do something” (original emphasis Anthropy and Clark 
2014, Loc 467).
Voluntary participation ensures an understanding of the context in which the goal is attempted in 
relation to the rules and feedback system. Bernard Suits tells us “[p]laying a game is the voluntary attempt 
to overcome unnecessary obstacles” (Suits 2004, 38). Brian Upton is among those who take issue with 
this and Suits’ consequent difficulty in explaining why overcoming some obstacles does not feel playful 
(Upton 2015, 16). There is a term, the “magic circle,” from Zimmerman, Lantz, and Salen, via Huizinga 
FIGURE 2.1 Diplomacy (1959), author’s copy, game setup. Photograph by the author.2 • What Is Critical Game Design? 21
(Zimmerman 2012) which has been widely adopted (Brown 2015) which may have its limitations with 
regard to delimiting the space between virtual and real (Castronova 2005, 159–60) and may be overstated 
in some interpretations as a space divorced from the realities of its cultural context (Game Studies Study 
Buddies 2019, Episode 13) but can still be a useful way to think of the cultural framework around volun￾tary participation – especially when used as intended (Zimmerman 2012). “Liminoid” is an alternative 
term (Game studies Study Buddies 2022, Episode 50). “Liminoid,” a space between social constructs, 
derives from Victor Turner via van Gennep and refers to being “marked by the option a person had to 
engage in a particular experience” (Korol-Evans 2009, 8) within a nevertheless persistent cultural frame￾work. Perhaps such a framing does not overstate – or is less likely to be interpreted as an overstatement 
of – the nature of the voluntary participation wherein social rituals are entirely suspended, and is possibly 
more nuanced as “an intermediate stage between separation and reincorporation in the typical structure of 
initiation rituals” (Crocker 1990, 361). But perhaps this is an unnecessary and belabored distinction fueled 
by a scholarly overzealous misrepresentation of the “magic circle” and its intended use.
Of far greater import is the discussion that challenges Huizinga’s notion that play exists in contra￾distinction from a “fixed, stable reality” of “ordinary life” (Ehrmann, Lewis, and Lewis 1968, 55; 33). 
Jacques Ehrmann, Cathay Lewis, and Phil Lewis tell us:
To define play is at the same time and in the same movement to define reality and to define culture. As each 
term is a way to apprehend the two others, they are each elaborated through and on the basis of the two 
others. None of the three existing prior to the others, they are all simultaneously the subject and object of 
the question which they put to us and we to them. 
(original emphasis of italics retained, Ehrmann, Lewis, and Lewis 1968, 55)
Gordon Calleja is among the scholars who adopt Erving Goffman’s concept of frames (variously termed) 
from his influential Frame Analysis, first published 1974. These frames contextualize social interactions 
as always being nested within relational and porous contexts, rather than functioning as exclusionary and 
discrete. As Calleja expresses it:
the experiential and social context of play have no perimeters as discrete as those implied by the magic 
circle … I do not consider play to be a separate activity from the everyday world … I […] instead treat play 
as a mode of experience with particular characteristics … [structured interaction, designed uncertainty, 
imagination, togetherness]. 
(Calleja 2022, 5–20)
In any event, there is a consensus that there is a voluntary nature to the context within which play occurs.
With these concepts, we may explore the concept of agency. Janet Murray has given us the defini￾tion as the “satisfying power to take meaningful action and see the results of our decisions and choices” 
(Murray 1998, 126). However, we do not always see the results of our choices – board games with hidden 
movement are pertinent examples. Nguyen considers the concept of agency sufficiently unsettled to be 
cautious of offering a definition, but he does offer:
the medium of the game designer is agency. If you want a slogan, try this one: games are the art of agency. 
(Nguyen 2020, 17)
Gordon Calleja suggests the succinct encapsulation: “[b]y enabling and giving meaning to actions, rules 
create a sense of agency in games” which he expands upon with:
Agency in games is the ability to perform actions through game mechanics that affect the state of the game 
world and its inhabitants. 
(original emphasis of italics retained, Calleja 2022, 51)22 Paper Time Machines 
Affect here is key, and the verb entices us to examine the noun. Aubrey Anable may tell us that “[v]ideo 
games are affective systems … as structures of feeling” (Anable 2018, xii–xvii), and this is no less true 
of board games. Indeed, as Elizabeth Sampat tells us in her Empathy Engines: “[g]ames are the ultimate 
expression of immersive empathy, because systems are the purest ways to transfer feelings and mindsets 
between one person and another” (Sampat 2017, 11). As Manuel Rozoy says:
Emotion. Emotion. Only emotion. With emotion, people forget they have a system in front of them. They 
forget the system. They are in the fiction. They connect to the function with their emotion. It’s why board 
games are a great experience. 
(Calleja 2022, 240)
Sampat further distinguishes between cognitive empathy (“more evolved, less instinctual”) and emo￾tional empathy (“when people can feel in their gut how other people are feeling”): “telling someone a 
story creates cognitive empathy, whereas putting someone in a situation creates emotional empathy” 
(Sampat 2017, 39; 63). Board games are capable of either, but are perhaps most distinct in their capacity 
for the latter: for emotional empathy. We will return to this topic in Chapter 8, when we look at generat￾ing feelings within players.
Thus, games have a goal (not always the same as a purpose), rules, a feedback system, and voluntary 
participation, wherein they facilitate the player agency to participate in the generation of emotion. This is 
sufficient for us to investigate what a board game is.
The Merriam-Webster definition gives us “board game (n.): a game (such as checkers, chess, or back￾gammon) played by placing or moving pieces on a board” (Merriam-Webster n.d.). This might be largely 
serviceable in its breadth, but then we might pause at the same dictionary telling us we have only had the 
term “board game” since 1854, and yet we have had all three of checkers, chess, and backgammon far 
longer than that. We should bear in mind that there are games such as 7 Wonders (2010) where there is a 
board for each player, games like U-Boot (2019) where the shared board is three-dimensional in addition 
to individual player boards, and games such as Carcassonne (2000) or Undaunted: Normandy (2019) 
where there is no singular board, but, instead, multiple modular boards, or tiles, that dynamically create 
the game space as play progresses (in the case of the former) or in accordance with different set scenarios 
(in the case of the latter). There are also games such as 1750: Britain vs. France (2017) which we might 
still call board games where there is no board, but the play space is created by arrangements of cards, 
again wholly, or in part, dynamically generated during the act of play. Should we call that a board game, 
or a card game? If a card game such as War of the Ring: The Card Game (2022) (based on a board game, 
which was in turn based on Tolkien’s novels) can be played without a board, or with an additionally pur￾chased “play mat,” or if a game such as Peace 1905 (2025) is sold with a board but has spent most of its 
development time without one (and could still essentially be played without one), where does that leave us?
Here “tabletop game” is a term which dates at least as far back as Dave Arneson’s Corner of the 
Table Top fanzine from 1971 (Secrets of Blackmoor 2021). The term can be applied to TTRPGs, which, 
like board games, are generally played on a table, or flat surface, even if sometimes there is no board in 
use, or the play space is populated by cards or other pieces (or even digital monitors) in lieu of a board. 
“Analog” is a term that helps encompass all these others, except that its adoption seems largely to reside 
within academia (see Analog Game Studies 2014), and popular culture appears to have largely sniffed at 
it and moved away. There is also the complication that sometimes board games have digital intersections 
– where the use of an app is part of the essential play experience – like U-Boot, Mansions of Madness 
(second edition) (2016), and Lord of the Rings: Journeys in Middle Earth (2019) – so we cannot call these 
analog, and need to call them “hybrid” (except where this is already implicit in the definition of analog, 
see Analog Game Studies 2014), or some other similar term. Indeed, the complication deepens when we 
consider the specific meaning of analog within computer science, meaning a continuous measurement or 
transmission of a signal, or pertaining to a domain involving a continuous space of values (TechTerms 
2023). With the contrasting definition of digital means working within a discrete, and often finite space of 
values, this can lead to confusing definitional conclusions that operate away from definitions concerned 2 • What Is Critical Game Design? 23
with the devices on or components through which they are played. Through the computer science lens, 
chess might be termed digital because there are discrete, finite sets of states of play, discrete and finite 
player turns, and a discrete and finite set of outcomes; basketball might be termed analog in some regards 
because space is continuous, and is generally played in continuous time, and digital in others, such as in 
the outcome which takes the form of an unbounded integer number of points for each of the two teams 
(Project Nayuki 2022). There are evident vagaries here, but we will move on from here.
WHAT IS CRITICAL (GAME) DESIGN?
We are well warned that “[t]o date the use of the term ‘critical’ in the design fields is as varied as the fields 
themselves” (Malazita and O’Donnell 2023, 6). A portion of the Dunne and Raby website is instructive 
on critical design:
1. What Is Critical Design?
Critical Design uses speculative design proposals to challenge narrow assumptions, preconceptions and 
givens about the role products play in everyday life. It is more of an attitude than anything else, a position 
rather than a method. There are many people doing this who have never heard of the term critical design 
and who have their own way of describing what they do. Naming it Critical Design is simply a useful way 
of making this activity more visible and subject to discussion and debate.
Its opposite is affirmative design: design that reinforces the status quo 
(Dunne and Raby n.d.)
This concept of critical design being a means of inquiry is further foregrounded by Dunne and Raby 
elsewhere.
The critical sensibility, at its most basic, is simply about not taking things for granted, to question and look 
beneath the surface. This is not new and is common in other fields; what is new is trying to use design as 
a tool for doing this. 
(Dunne and Raby 2009)
As Jeffrey Bardzell and Shaowen Bardzell summarize: “Critical design is a research through design 
methodology that foregrounds the ethics of design practice, reveals potentially hidden agendas and values, 
and explores alternative design values” (Bardzell and Bardzell 2013, 3297). Bardzell and Bardzell trace 
the origins of critical design back to the critical theory of the Frankfurt School, where the emphasis is on 
disruption with social ramifications. “Critical design, like Frankfurt School critical theory before it, is 
a research strategy dedicated to transgressing and undermining social conformity, passivity, and similar 
values of capitalist ideology, in hopes of bringing about social emancipation” (Bardzell and Bardzell 
2013, 3298).
This corresponds to the perspective of queer games as expressed by board game designer Taylor 
Shuss (Stonewall Uprising 2022, The Sacred Band forthcoming):
Queer games, to me, can emerge from two primary points - either from a queer designer or from a queer 
standpoint. There is an interesting question of if every game a queer designer works on is inherently queer. 
Games from a queer standpoint I would define as games that question the norms and narratives other pieces 
of media don't, especially those of oppression and justice since so many minorities get the short end of the 
stick historically-speaking.24 Paper Time Machines 
A great example of this can be found in Amabel Holland's This Guilty Land, how the "neutral" centrists 
are mechanically throwing their votes on the status quo, which amounts to voting for slavery which most 
other games wouldn't question or call out. Likewise in my game Stonewall Uprising, it's reasonable to say 
I am asking players to question the intentions of The Man by having their win condition being to tear apart 
the movement Pride is trying to build. 
(Shuss 2023, personal correspondence)
Malazita and O’Donnell also outline that the transgression and undermining of conformity extends in 
both breadth and depth into society in their use of the term “Critical Game Design.” 
Critical game design, then, is not just a synthesis of critical corrective and design practice, or only develop￾ing a more representative narrative and more ethical gameplay; it is an interrogation of the power of the 
operational logics in games and in games spaces and institutions. 
(Malazita and O’Donnell 2023, 11)
Lyndsey Grace uses the term “critical gameplay” to express notions not so dissimilar to those of critical 
design with its concern for inquiry and disruption. For Grace, there is observation, deconstruction, and 
reorientation.
Critical gameplay is the study and production of computer and video games that seek to explore alternate 
ways to play. These play models are derived from critical reflection on the standards of gameplay and the 
culture that exists around them. As a three-step process, critical gameplay is created by observing a set of 
standard assumptions, deconstructing the assumptions in that standard, and reorienting that set of assump￾tions through the production of an alternate model of play. 
(Grace 2010, 128)
Mary Flanagan has noted the potential of games to transgress and subvert.
Because they primarily exist as rule systems, games are particularly ripe for subversive practices. A hall￾mark of games is that they are structured by their rule sets, and every game has its “cheats” – even play 
itself, pushing at the boundaries of a game system, could be said to involve a kind of subversion. This idea 
is supported by games scholarship; to scholars of play such as Brian Sutton-Smith, play is associated, at 
least in part, with transgressive and subversive actions.
(Flanagan 2013, 11)
Indeed, Gonzalo Frasca has noted the applicability of the work of Augusto Boal and his “Theater of 
the Oppressed” techniques, building on the work of Bertolt Brecht and the Marxist drama school, for 
disruption and social change, and for unsettling Aristotelian drama and storytelling within the context 
of games.
Marxists argue that Aristotelian drama and storytelling neutralize social change because they present real￾ity as an inexorable progression of incidents without room for alterations. Boal’s answer to this problem can 
be found in his corpus of drama techniques – the Theater of the Oppressed – which combines theater with 
games in order to encourage critical debate over social, political and personal issues.
(Frasca 2003, 228)
Flanagan may prefer to use the term “critical play,” but her usage suggests close alignment with terminol￾ogy and concepts sketched out above:
Critical play means to create or occupy play environments and activities that represent one or more ques￾tions about aspects of human life. These questions can be abstract, such as rethinking cooperation, or 2 • What Is Critical Game Design? 25
winning, or losing; or concrete, involved with content issues such as looking at the U.S. military actions in 
Cambodia in the early 1970s. Criticality in play can be fostered in order to question an aspect of a game’s 
“content,” or an aspect of a play scenario’s function that might otherwise be considered a given or neces￾sary. Criticality can provide an essential viewpoint or an analytical framework. Those using critical play 
as an approach might create a platform of rules by which to examine a specific issue – rules that would 
be somehow relevant to the issue itself. Critical play is characterized by a careful examination of social, 
cultural, political, or even personal themes that function as alternates to popular play spaces. 
(Flanagan 2013, 6)
Where the “Design” of Critical Game Design leads to the experimentation through “speculation” of 
Dunne and Raby (Dunne and Raby 2013, 2), the “transgression” of Bradzell and Bardzell, the “frontiers” 
of Grace, the “radicalism” of Flanagan, and the questioning of norms of Shuss – all running deep into 
societal infrastructures – we should pause to consider the full ramifications of the inquiries and observa￾tions that the above scholars and practitioners suggest can (and should) inform the act of design.
The fundamental perspective at the heart of a critical inquiry is that all games are socially contextualized 
historical cultural artifacts expressing viewpoints about the world within which they sit, regardless of whether 
the game’s designer is aware of these viewpoints or not, and quite feasibly contrary to what they may under￾stand of their own work. Just as Johan Huizinga tells us “All play means something” (Huizinga 2014, 1), we 
might restate this as all design means something; designing, after all, is to play with the elements of playing. 
Mary Flanagan’s interview with Liz Davidson on the Beyond Solitaire podcast is a further articulation of this.
Davidson: … so I think a lot of games claim to not be there for any particular purpose other than to be 
enjoyed. Do they still say something?
Flanagan: Yes.
Davidson: Can there ever be a game that is just a game?
Flanagan: No …
Games carry meaning in them whether the designer intends that meaning or not …that is the 
responsibility of a designer to look at it with open eyes.
Let’s just talk about chess … that’s something that everybody’s seen, played … oh, it’s just a 
game, there’s two sides, it’s like a wargame, or whatever, I’m gonna win, there’s strategy …
Okay, well let’s unpack it some more. Chess has a social hierarchy built into it. It has a royal 
family. It has servants of the royal family, and advisors, right? It has plebeians, the everyday 
people, the pawns, and they’re less valued, right? There’s a lot of them and they’re less valued, 
they're expendable … and the most important thing is to save the ruler and not the people. 
Conflicts have two sides … and there’s only going to be one winner … and total annihilation’s 
fine. There’s a lot of stuff packed into that game if you just unpack it.
(Beyond Solitaire 2022)
This “unpacking” is the challenge in critical design. With regard to chess, Flanagan tells us:
it’s easier to do because – psychological distance -… it’s an old game, and it’s like, I didn’t make it … so 
can you do that with your own games?
can you do with games that you’ve made or you love to play and can you pull out its values? It doesn’t mean 
you have to throw it … you have to burn all your games or anything if they have a problematic thing in 
them but it’s good to know with open eyes about the kind of structures and assumptions made around you 
so that we can actually be aware of them, we can talk about them and we can change them.
(Beyond Solitaire 2022)
What any game is saying is defined within the frame of possibilities of its design, and further refined by 
issues of balance. In a game where you cannot “win,” there is a very clear viewpoint being expressed. (Is 
that still a game? Yes. Perhaps a poor one, or one where the goal might generally be considered to be to 26 Paper Time Machines 
survive as long as possible (Tetris 1984), or one where its fundamental point is precisely its imbalance or 
the unattainability or irrelevance of its – perhaps deceitful – objectives.)
This critical methodology, informed by the “hermeneutics of suspicion,” to borrow a phrase from 
Ricoeur (Carroll 1993, 245–52, even if removed from its intended context, Scott-Baumann 2009, 1), is an 
essential first step for a games scholar (and prospective scholar-designer), or arguably an attentive player. 
With an ability to deconstruct a game with a tenacious critical suspicion, an entire world of interpretive 
powers becomes accessible.
Diplomacy is a game about conquest, alliances, production (new units), and betrayal, where 18 Supply 
Centers must be controlled to win. Since these are the things players do in order to achieve the victory condi￾tions, what the game is capable of saying is bounded by these acts in relation to the objectives. The game tells 
us that, to win, players must conquer, form alliances, produce, and betray with adroit timing. Given that six of 
the seven playable nations all start with three pieces on the board, and one (Russia) starts with four, the game is 
ostensibly roughly balanced, even if players have strong preferences for nations to play; it is possible to calculate 
percentages to discern what the most successful nations are over 60 years and numerous tournaments.
However, since Diplomacy is not, or, at the very most, is only loosely and in the most carefully delineated 
and limited terms, an historical simulation, these percentages can carry little meaning beyond the game itself. 
Even so, game balance, and the possibility of achieving a victory condition, is surely a fundamental contributor 
to what a game might be saying. This is a concept we may borrow from literary theory, with Frank Kermode 
telling us “[w]e give ourselves meaning by inventing critical time” (Kermode 2000, 164), and the “portents 
of [a] climactic day … make sense by a benefaction of meaning; the end makes a concord with what has pre￾ceded it” (Kermode 2000, 178). Further, “[t]he fictive end purges the interval of simple chronicity. It achieves a 
‘temporal integration’—it converts a blank into a kairos (sic), charges it with meaning” (Kermode 2000, 192). 
Previously Kermode has aligned himself with a definition of the Greek kairos with “a point in time filled with 
significance, charged with a meaning derived from its relation to the end” (Kermode 2000, 47).
Yet a lens trained on an ending is fraught with difficulties to overcome. How can a game be meaning￾fully interpreted if the players play it poorly as they attempt to reach its end? Players might play poorly 
in terms of playing it “incorrectly,” by not following the rules, or play it poorly as they make consistently 
injudicious choices (even if they are rule-obeying). In either case, there is a potentially catastrophic impact 
on any meaning the game might reasonably be interpreted to have intended.
Further, with the lens of critical game design, we can explore design approaches that destabilize the 
notion of victory conditions. Storytelling games such as Fiasco (2009), Microscope (2011), The Play’s The 
Thing (2012), and A Tragedy in Five Acts (2013) are all overtly more concerned with the telling of stories 
and player experiences than any sense of winners and losers. These games are collaborative storytelling 
experiences where any concept of winning is essentially disregarded; playing well means a satisfying 
story is created. Similarly, the board game Tales of the Arabian Nights (1985) does have stated victory 
conditions, but these are subservient to the player experience of the storytelling the game systems engen￾der. Fog of Love (2017), with its subtitle “Romantic Comedy as a Board Game,” is also overtly “all about 
creating a good story” and, as the designer Jacob Jaskov says:
Almost all games are about conflict, competition or optimization (either between the players or between 
the players and the system). My vision was to create mechanics that somehow simulate a completely differ￾ent sphere of human experience, namely interpersonal relationships and the building of trust. 
(Fog of Love 2017, 3–11)
We have examples in historical board games too, as highlighted by Amabel Holland in her video essay 
“Do Board Games Need Victory Conditions?” Holland tells us:
scoring is a source of meaning, victory conditions usually are, but I’m wondering, what do we gain? What 
kind of things can we express and explore in one of the oldest artforms that we have, if victory conditions 
aren’t the source of meaning, if the meaning of the game is in conflict with the victory conditions or if there 
are no victory conditions at all?
(Holland 2023)2 • What Is Critical Game Design? 27
This Guilty Land (2018), designed by Holland, and published by her co-owned Hollandspiele, about the 
political debate over slavery in the USA, has (unattainable) automatic victory conditions, but the central 
“argument” of the game, as clearly asserted in the rules and supplemental playbook, is that the Civil 
War will begin where the game leaves off, that the political framework within which the slavery debate 
was conducted was incapable of abolishing slavery, and thus the war is inevitable. This destabilizes the 
sense that a game imaginatively opens up a timeline with alternative possibilities (This Guilty Land 2018, 
Rules 1; Playbook 11). That Others May Live: Combat Search and Rescue – Vietnam (2023), also a 
Hollandspiele game, is a solitaire game about conducting a successful rescue mission. If any of the rescue 
party of the original downed airman are captured the game is lost, yet, the game rules stipulate that:
you might lose the game due to a Survivor being killed or captured before the game is ended. Continue to 
play the game, attempting to save remaining Survivors, and learn from your failures. 
(That Others May Live 2023, 7).
Thus, the game has victory conditions, but these are evidently in conflict with the source of the game’s 
meaning; attempts at rescue are not aborted or redundant as a result of failure if there are others still to be 
saved; one must continue to operate with the sobering consequences of failure. Endurance (2023), another 
Holland design and Hollandspiele publication, is a solitaire survival game about the 1914 Imperial Trans￾Antarctic Expedition (more colloquially known as the Shackleton Expedition), which stranded twenty￾eight men (and dogs, ponies, and a cat) on the ice of the Antarctic for nearly two years. Players engage with 
the game system, with the rules telling us:
The game will end in one of four ways:
• Mutiny (all men Demoralized)
• All Lifeboats Lost at Sea
• The James Caird Lifeboat Lost at Sea
• Rescue
• There is no victory or defeat, only survival. (Endurance 2023, 15) 
Thus, we have a game with no overt victory conditions, just four different ways the game ends. Such a for￾mulation begs – and refuses to answer – the question, what is the value of a single life? Players must search 
their own feelings for the meaning they derive from their conduct during the game and the meaning they 
derive from the end game state. An earlier passage in the rulebook may help to clarify the thoughts of the 
designer (Amabel Holland):
Probability in Historical Games:
History sometimes has a way of seeming inevitable. Because things happened a certain way, we become 
convinced that they had to happen that way. Models of historical events that tend to recreate the historical 
result are deemed to be good models, and models in which the historical result occurs rarely are deemed 
to be bad ones.
But that assumes that the historical result was the most probable. That if you charted all the possible results 
to a summed roll of two dice, “what actually happened” would sit in the center of the bell curve. But as 
anyone who rolls dice can attest, sometimes you don’t roll a seven – sometimes you roll snake eyes or box 
cars. Sometimes. In games as in history the result you end with is the most improbable.
The crew of the Endurance suffered through disaster piled atop disaster, any single one of which might 
have – perhaps should have – resulted in their deaths. Their survival was, indeed, a miracle: an impossible, 
unbelievable thing.
This game reflects that. It positions the historical result as a fluke. It evokes the miracle not through recre￾ation, but absence.
(Endurance 2023, 6)28 Paper Time Machines 
Geoff Engelstein offers further food for thought when he tells us about the game Schrödinger’s Cat: a 
game of curiosity (2018) where players are instructed to never tell each other of their key decision at the 
end of the game, so the game, in a sense, never ends. Engelstein tells us: “Think differently about victory. 
You never know where you might end up” (Engelstein 2023). In considering the RPG The Quiet Year 
(2013), a collaborative storytelling game without a fixed player perspective or set victory conditions, Cole 
Wehrle offers us:
Without explicitly stated guidelines as to who the players might embody and what their goals are, players 
are encouraged to explore a broader affective space …
Games can make us feel, but so too can they numb us to each other’s feelings. In this sense, then, the vic￾tory conditions in a specific game serve to mute other (and potentially richer) player relationships. Without 
this drive to win, players are left to explore what remains, a complex knot of desires and hopes and fears, 
a network of affect in which to play. 
(original emphasis of italics retained, Wehrle 2019, 156–7)
Regardless, aside from game balance and game endings, there are many other elements of a game’s design 
and the experience of playing it that we can examine. Further, we do have some tools for the kind of 
inquiry Flanagan advocates which can help us see the structures and assumptions she mentions with open 
eyes.
From literary theory, we have a means of conceiving of games as “texts.” Far from being an ill-fitting 
term hijacked from an utterly alien and reluctant discipline, we can think of it as being a remarkably apt 
one. Roland Barthes tells us “the Text is experienced only in an activity, in a production (sic). It follows 
that the Text cannot stop (for example, at a library shelf); its constitutive moment is traversal” (Barthes 
1986, 58). A game is certainly experienced as an activity and assuredly a matter of being traversed. Alan 
McKee develops this idea as he tells us “[w]henever we produce an interpretation of something’s meaning 
(sic) … we treat it as a text. A text is something we make meaning from” (McKee 2003, 4). Thus, we may 
derive a hermeneutical methodology, that is, “an educated guess at some of the most likely interpretations 
that might be made of that text” (McKee 2003, 1).
If we accept a game as a text, we can then avail ourselves of the tools of textual analysis, and there 
is a great store of potential within this field that may be of service on any given game. Alayna Cole and 
Dakoda Barker, for example, explore a series of lenses that might be labeled “liberal humanist universal 
truths,” “structuralist,” “Marxist,” “feminist,” “queer,” “health-focused,” and “environment-focused” (see 
Cole and Barker 2021). Reception theory, structuralism, semiotics, post-structuralism, psychoanalysis, 
political criticism, and influence theory are all lenses of potential validity for game scholars no less than 
for literary scholars (see Eagleton 1983).
With any of these perspectives, we are interpreting articulations of the experience of play – something 
which is deeply rooted in a sense of agency and is inherently social – and this experience of gameplay 
is shaped by a design that is being interpreted as a text. For all the benefits of these tools, other scholars 
(Bogost 2008; Booth 2015; Lankoski and Björk 2015; Rael 2019 amongst others) have indicated that the 
participatory nature of games sets limits on what a textual analysis might achieve. Paul Booth contributed 
a lens of “ludo-textual analysis,” which
augments a pure textual analysis with an additive of interactive and participatory elements … board games 
… [are] more than just a text … more than simply constructed by the designers. They are instead complex 
systems that unite the designer, the author, the publisher, and the player as cocreators of meaning. 
(Booth 2021, 19)
That is, a replete interpretation of a board game’s meaning can only be derived through the playing of it. 
Lankoski and Björk reach the same assessment of what they term a “formal analysis” saying it “... depends 
on playing a game and forming an understanding [of] how the game system works” (Lankoski and Björk 
2015, 23).2 • What Is Critical Game Design? 29
The playing of it can be seen as both product and process, and ludo-textual analysis inherently recog￾nizes the iterative nature of any single instance of play as being part of a larger and continually evolving 
pattern. 
AUTOETHNOGRAPHY
It’s also important to recognize that play is shaped by the individuals who are playing. Here the methodol￾ogy of autoethnography (Greek roots: autós = self + ethnos = people + graphia = writing) is of comple￾mentary value to the broad project of critical game design analysis. As Booth defines this through the 
work of Matt Hills, autoethnographic exploration views “the game’s particular ludic functionality through 
the lens of actual gameplay” (Booth 2015, 12). Further, this approach “asks the researcher to examine his 
or her own place within the media environment” (Booth 2015, 12). Adams et al. give a more extended 
definition, delineating autoethnography as a qualitative research method that:
• Uses a researcher’s personal experience to describe and critique cultural beliefs, practices, and 
experiences.
• Acknowledges and values a researcher’s relationships with others.
• Uses deep and careful self-reflection – typically referred to as “reflexivity” – to name and inter￾rogate the intersections between self and society, the particular and the general, the personal 
and the political.
• Shows people in the process of figuring out what to do, how to live, and the meaning of their 
struggles.
• Balances intellectual and methodological rigor, emotion, and creativity.
• Strives for social justice and to make life better (Adams et al. 2015, 1–2)
The alignment of the social concerns within autoethnography and those of critical game design at large 
are evidently complementary. For all the considerable scope of the autoethnographic lens, it should be 
clarified that its key concern is to constantly question and to open up “... ‘the subjective’ and the intimately 
personal … to the cultural contexts in which it is formed and experienced” (Hills 2002, 72–6). That is, as 
Booth succinctly states “[a]utoethnography requires constant questioning of the self” (Booth 2015, 12).
RHETORICAL ANALYSIS
Furthermore, an attempt to explore interpretations is bound up in a questioning of the means through 
which we think any given game is persuading us of its perspectives. For this inquiry, we turn to rhetorical 
analysis. Ian Bogost has presented a concept of “procedural rhetoric” – whereby the notion of meaning is 
carried through processes – and he describes ludic rhetoric as that which “describes the argument made 
by the actual play procedures the game asks you to undertake” (Bogost 2008, 117–40). Or, what are the 
actions players perform, and how do these function as analogs for meaning because they are performed? 
Patrick Rael has contrasted procedural rhetoric with discursive rhetoric, the latter he describes as “the 
way a game makes its argument through words unrelated to how you actually play” (Rael 2019, 10). Rael 
outlines discursive rhetorical elements as the introduction to the rulebook, informal appendices, or flavor 
text on cards which translate the mechanics into theme. This ludic rhetoric, or “experiential rhetoric” as 
the current author has termed it (Suckling 2023, 39) to clarify what is meant, is the arguments derived 
from the player actions and how they feel about them, not the game system functions, in turn, appear to 30 Paper Time Machines 
resonate with what Booth called “studying games as activities,” and what Stenros and Waern referred 
to as the active creation of a game session through the game system (Booth 2021, 9–10). There is reso￾nance here with the game writing mantra that appends the dictum “[s]creenwriting is showing not telling” 
(Yorke 2015, 113) with DO, then SHOW then TELL. The deepest level of meaning for a player resides not 
in what they are shown, but in what they do.
HISTORICAL METHODOLOGIES
Within the context of interpreting historical games available analytical tools extend into historical (and nar￾rative) methodologies. Of particular potential relevance to historical games might be structuralism (through 
the emphasis of systems), formalism (with its focus on content to the exclusion of orbiting and contextualizing 
dynamics), the Annals School (through the emphasis on complex extensive systems), the narrative turn in 
history (through its self-consciousness of the coherence that comes through narrative), and Marxist method￾ologies. The most pronounced sympathies between critical game design and any historical methodology are 
perhaps with Marxist theory. In both cases, we are urged to think beyond pre-existing narratives with settled 
axes of power that generally, and uncritically, leverage myths associated with shallow if reassuring national 
identities trumpeting righteous exceptionalism and concerned with their perpetuance.
It may be rather comforting to consider history a matter of collecting facts and then all else being 
interpretation, and, where facts are insubstantial, speculation might fill in – with full disclosure that it 
is mere speculation. Such is a Positivist (Rankean) view. As E. H. Carr neatly summarizes the position: 
“First ascertain the facts … then draw your conclusions from them” (Carr 1961, 5). But this is to omit two 
utterly crucial considerations: selectivity and the narrative turn. Historians have long been self-aware of 
the heavy hand of selectivity. As Carr expresses it:
History consists of a corpus of ascertained facts. The facts are available to the historian in documents, 
inscriptions, and so on, like fish on a fishmonger’s slab. The historian collects them, takes them home, and 
cooks them and serves them in whatever style appeals to him.
(Carr 1961, 6)
Further, and linked to this selectivity, since the narrative turn of the 1970s onward and the work of Hayden 
White in particular, any notion of an equation of facts + interpretations = history, or even selected facts + inter￾pretation = history, is unsustainable. Indeed, even Carr in the 1960s is clear that “[t]he belief in a hard core of 
historical facts existing objectively and independently of the interpretation of the historian is a preposterous 
fallacy, but one which is very hard to eradicate” (Carr 1961, 10). Even if we agree that there are such things as 
facts, things that definitively and incontrovertibly did occur, and even if we restrict ourselves to speaking only 
of those on the historical record, only those we can verify, then what happens when we begin to speak of them? 
(Or, indeed, to perceive them.) What happens when we attempt to move a fact out of the realm of pure concept 
into the realm of communication? What, in Carr’s terms, happens when we attempt to cook and serve the fish 
we selected? Since Carr, and compounded by the narrative turn, the answer has been that once we speak of the 
facts, once we select them within the shape of the story we set about to tell (or the story we set about to disrupt, 
which is a story of its own), these facts are pulled into the orbit of that story (Iggers 2005, 2). These facts are 
no longer conceptually purely the things that definitively did occur, they are now things about which we speak. 
They are now part of our narrative. The narrative does not cause the facts to disappear, in fact it is closer to 
the opposite, that the narrative results in the facts being presented to an audience, and thus sustained. Yet, as a 
result of being within the narrative, the facts lose their quality of pure concept and are pulled within the narra￾tor’s orbit – meaning these facts are shaped by the narrator not only through the commentary on their selection, 
but also by the existence (or lack of it) within the interpretation in the first place. We are through the looking 
glass. There is no fact + interpretation = history. If we speak of the fact, then the fact comes pre-charged with 
our interpretation, bearing witness to the narrator’s agendas and biases. The narrator may be well-intentioned, 2 • What Is Critical Game Design? 31
attempting objectivity and self-consciousness over pre-existing biases. But the narrative turn urges caution and 
interrogation over any such claims or appearances of such claims. Even the context within which a narrative sits 
is a clue to and substantive of the agendas and biases, and shapes the narrative that sits there.
There is no value-free history. We can see that such critical skepticism can be leveraged within the 
oppositional and probing lenses of critical game design. Amabel Holland uses the term “political art” 
for her games in place of “‘balanced’ works of history,” yet there might be less distance between the two 
than we might be comfortable acknowledging (Hutson 2023). For White, the narrativization of history 
is far from lamentable and is the means through which it delivers its meaning (White 1980, “The value 
of narrativity in the representation of reality,” 5–27). White causes us to hesitate to say if we are certain 
that “balanced” history is possible, and if so, how far the history we formulate might be from political art.
CRITICAL HISTORICAL GAME DESIGN
There may appear to be significant tension between the concerns of critical game design with the aspira￾tion for games to engage with and even to simulate history. If one considers critical game design to be pri￾marily driven by the intention to perform and enact social justice, this would seem to collide in spectacular 
fashion with history which would appear both markedly socially unjust as well as immutable. In short 
– you can’t change history, and if you do it’s not history. This apparent tension warrants closer analysis.
It would be a profound misreading of critical game design to see its engagement with history as an 
attempt to sanitize it. Shifting a focus on social justice to a focus on unsettling the status quo may help 
address this apparent tension. Let us shift the focus to not taking things for granted, to questioning, to 
relentlessly digging beneath the surface. Critical game design’s primary focus with regard to history is 
not to sanitize but to critique; that is, it serves to critique our thinking about history and the way we use 
that critical thinking to design games intersecting with history. Sanitizing is the opposite to critiquing. To 
reduce critical game design to an attempt to reformulate moral parameters to contemporary tastes is to not 
only perversely distort it, but to lose sight of its two key tenets. To recap, in the current author’s view, criti￾cal game design is concerned with (i) an emphasis on using critical thinking as the lens for inquiry, and 
(ii) on the capacity of this lens to subvert and unsettle preconceived and established perspectives. It would 
be execrable – that is to say unsupportable – history to suggest that slavery, for example, did not exist, or 
that it was actually moderately benign. But a critical game design lens does not encourage us to disengage 
with the topic as too “sensitive,” or “difficult,” or “unsavory”; instead it encourages us to consider alterna￾tive narratives we might explore more deeply within this topic. Such a lens encourages us to take on this 
work with care and awareness that the “difficult” or “unsavory” quality of this topic compels us to adopt. 
Entirely the opposite of being a critical lens to shut down inquiry, it compels us to go further with greater 
acuity of mind. With research we will discover narratives of resistance and agency, together with religious 
justification, the perversion of scientific enquiry, and numerous other perspectives to sit alongside more 
established narratives of slavery; we will deepen our thinking and our understanding of it, and thereby to 
keep it vital to us, so that it is not completed and indexed, shelved, and to be dusted off when in need of 
re-checking the facts of it (the kind of “ultimate history” Carr was disdainful of in the 1960s, Carr 1961, 
4). History becomes meaningful by not completing it, but by perpetually reexamining, researching, and 
pulling it into focus with our present moment of meaning-making. As Carr says:
The function of the historian is neither to love the past nor to emancipate himself from the past, but to 
master and understand it as the key to the understanding of the present.
(Carr 1961, 29)
To restate for clarity, the task of critical game design with regard to history is not to sanitize. The task 
is to search out where we have not been critical enough of past interpretations of structures, systems, or 32 Paper Time Machines 
processes, and where we have not been critical enough in current interpretations. With closer inspection 
and a more critical eye (both of ourselves and the history we investigate), we are far more likely to find 
history far more unjust, in a variety of captivating and revealing ways, than we are to find it was perfectly 
just. We are unlikely to find our attempts to explore injustices a detriment to the project of history. The 
focus of the work of critical game design historians is not to present the world as they wish it to have been 
– although flights of fancy might be encouraged when it is clear they are such, in that counterfactual his￾tory is serious history (see Chapter 3) – but to go deeper into showing us how it was, with greater skepti￾cism and less contentment at our current perspectives.
The “social justice” implicit within critical historical game design is not to “correct history” but 
to do a better job of exposing its – and our own – biases. It is bad history to ignore narratives sup￾ported by the historical record. It is bad history to retell history in such a way that it rests in platitu￾dinal indifference. It is bad history that permits no other telling than the one that offers unflinching 
comfort. (If it always makes you comfortable it is almost certainly not history.) We do better service 
to society as historians by probing what is ignored and what is uncomfortable and making it unignor￾able. And, we might add, there is a great deal that has been ignored, and a very great deal we might 
feel far more uncomfortable about than we do.
History is indeed unjust; but likely not nearly as unjust as we understand it to be, for reasons we 
are still exploring, in ways that are still becoming apparent. History is also perpetually being reinter￾preted, and thereby perpetually being changed – as our vistas and contemporary junctures dictate, as 
we make meaning from the world within which we live, and as this world also changes. With a keener 
grasp of what critical game design intends and aspires to be, there should be no tension between it and 
the project of history at large. The real tension is between the aspiration to tell good history and the 
practical constraints on doing so within the format of a game. This is something explored across much 
of this book.
DIALECTICAL OPPOSITION
We should also consider that, as narrative experiences, historical games are a medium not simply for 
cohesive arguments, but also for opposing dialectics. That is to say, through the complexity of the inter￾relationships between game systems, and intra-relationships within those systems, games are a potential 
forum for more than just projections of rhetorically stable dogma; games are also a potential forum for the 
dynamism of unsettled debate. This is something the historian-trained game designer Cole Wehrle has 
expressed in an interview, again with Liz Davidson:
Davidson: To what extent are your historical designs arguments about how a certain period of time or 
historical situation worked?
Wehrle: Well all games can’t help but be arguments – actually everything’s an argument, goes the old …
saying … every piece of art, every piece of media, has to reflect the qualities of its creation, 
the world that birthed it, and so therefore it has all those arguments kind of baked into it. But, 
more than that, I think that I try to design games that … even though they’re full of arguments 
that I don’t fully understand in that I’m sure they say things I wouldn’t like them to say too 
… I really work hard to make sure that my games are teaching something and trying to make 
certain claims and seeking to prove those claims in a way … that feels honest to the historical 
record … if you read … a history article … a scholarly article, someone has an argument and 
they seek to prove it, and games can do the same thing, except you’re offering a model and so 
you have to be really careful … because you’re designing the world in which your argument 
exists … it can sometimes make it seem like you’re stacking the deck, and like, of course …
your game suggests precisely what you think it suggests, so you want to build a model that is 2 • What Is Critical Game Design? 33
capacious enough that it can leave room for disagreement and … can give people an under￾standing of the whole picture … So I haven’t … fully worked through this in a rigorous way, 
but the way I tend to think about it is … history games offer these big models, and within 
those models there is room for arguments but there’s also room for counter arguments, and …
I want someone walking out of my game to understand how different elements of the system 
were, like, held in tension … One thing I try really hard not to do in my games is to preach to 
my players … I think one of the things that’s so lovely about games is that …. I feel like rarely 
do I have, like, a single thesis, instead it’s more like many diffuse thoughts, and it’s not … an 
argument, it’s more like a system of arguments.
(Beyond Solitaire 2021)
Indeed, this capacity to function as a locus of debate may be one of the unique affordances of the medium 
of games within a scholarly context, and a distinct and qualifying means for games to constitute scholar￾ship – as artifacts in themselves – outside of the purview of scholarship about games. If this is so, and if 
the dynamism with which debates might be conducted is unique within playable texts, it is not without 
precedent. Indeed, literary scholarship has been a fold for grammatical networks of “literary structures 
and meaning” (Culler 1975, 114), wherein:
the text [is] an open network which is the very infinity of language, itself structured without closure; it tries 
to say no longer from where the text comes from (historical criticism), nor even how it is made (structural 
analysis), but how it is unmade, how it explodes, disseminates – by what coded paths it goes off. 
(original emphasis of italics retained, Barthes 1977, 126–7)
Further, we do have Leonard Bernstein to thank for the resonant declaration: “A work of art does not 
answer questions, it provokes them: and its essential meaning is in the tension between contradictory 
answers” (Bernstein 2007, 141). Such thinking, tracing a provenance back into Hegel and Plato, leads into 
what literary scholars call dialectics, or the dialectical method, whereby the contradictions and conflicts 
within a work of literature are the focus of study (see McKeon 1989 for a more detailed discussion).
EMERGENT NARRATIVE
We might see parallels between this way of thinking about games – as dialectic systems – and emergent nar￾rative frameworks, where narratives may be opposed and held in tension within a system. Game studies is now 
familiar with the concept of “emergent narrative,” the arising of stories through the process of playing. The 
story elements of emergent narrative contrast with embedded narrative that is pre-scripted and will always 
occur at the same specific juncture in chronological player progress, which in video games we most often see in 
cut scenes of various types (Suckling and Walton 2017, 160–2). Emergent narrative also contrasts with systemic 
scripts which are tied to specific game triggers which may be un-linked to chronological progress (Suckling 
and Walton 2017, 175). What is distinct about emergent narrative is that it derives from and through a designed 
system the player, or players, interact with (Ip 2011, 219). This concept of emergent narrative first emerged 
in 1999 when Ruth Aylett discussed the design of systems which would facilitate the generation of narrative 
through user input (Aylett 1999, 86). Emergent narratives are also sometimes referred to as “procedural story￾telling” where a noted characteristic is the capacity of a system to react to player input and so create a dynamic 
environment within which storytelling may occur (Suckling and Walton 2017, 342–3). A helpful analogy may 
be found in considering the work of a theater troupe in working with conventional narrative through the spe￾cific and carefully ordered dialogue, stage instructions, and sets, to create a linear experience that intends for 
consistent and unwavering replicability. Emergent narrative, in contrast, is more akin to writing no script, but 
to setting items on a stage loaded with dramatic potential, perhaps with some probabilities of their sequential 34 Paper Time Machines 
use (predicated on judicious level design and the utility of environmental affordances – such as lines of sight) 
and then unleashing the audience onto the stage for the narrative to unfold itself through their experience of the 
dramatic potential turned into drama.
There is a distinction of possible use within emergent narratives between emergence through sys￾tems and “player-created emergence” (Murnane 2018, 18), a term Eric Murnane uses to help tease these 
concepts apart where the latter is a random occurrence “characterized by a simple set of rules leading to 
complex, often unforeseeable consequences” (Louchart and Aylett 2004, 6). Operating within the anal￾ogy above, the player-created emergence would come from occurrences the the troupe did not know 
would occur, whereas emergence through systems would be occurrences the troupe expected, planned for, 
anticipated, and/or thought possible. In either case, the player is an active participant in the creation of the 
narrative (“an actor in a play, enacting (sic) the events” Klevjer 2002, 198).
Further, it can be helpful to distinguish “framing narrative” from other narrative within a game, 
which is a layer to “contextualize and guide audiences,” perhaps first used in games studies by Klevjer 
(2002) and used in opposition to “ludonarrative” by Bissell (2010, 37), both citing the example of cut 
scenes (Chapman 2016, 121).
Adam Chapman describes the narrative of historical games as “an active historical discourse 
between player and developer-historian, with play functioning as a form of shared historical narration”
(original emphasis, Chapman 2016, 120). Accordingly, he defines “ludonarrative” as the narrative “spun 
emergently from the decision of the player, aligning it with the concept of emergent narrative outlined 
above” (Chapman 2016, 122). Chapman further proposes that ludonarrative be understood as comprising 
two structural elements (aside from player agency): “lexia” and “framing controls.” Chapman first notes 
Bissell’s distinction between “framing narrative” and ludonarrative, where the framing narrative “takes 
control away from the player” (Bissell 2010, 37) – and, as noted above, this is what developers and players 
often refer to as cut scenes – lexia are more subtle elements:
lexia are the basic components of the semantics of the particular game, whereas framing controls are 
syntaxical in function, allowing the developer to retain some control over the constitutive relationships 
between these semantics despite player agency
Lexia should … be understood as the most basic narratively charged units that players can combine with other 
lexia to produce ludonarrative. The difference between lexia and narrative fragments of the framing narrative 
is roughly akin to the difference between an actor’s use of a prop, gesture, or line (lexia) and being subject to a 
sequence of events in the script (narrative fragments). In games, lexia are therefore combinable ludic representa￾tions of agents, objects, social structures, architecture, processes, actions and concepts. 
(Chapman 2016, 123)
Thus, lexia afford, encourage, and operate through player agency, and narrative fragments are agency-free 
(in gameplay terms). In terms of historical board games, we might think in terms of the framing narra￾tive being the setting and the game setup (to understand what the counterfactual jumping off point is), 
with narrative fragments perhaps coming in the form of event cards, and/or through the structure of the 
sequence of play (when and how a game turn or round ends), and the lexia coming in the form of player 
actions bounded and contextualized by the game system.
MATERIALIZED IDEOLOGIES
All of these theoretical frameworks and methodologies of critical analysis lead us back to the question 
of what is critical game design? Just as RPI’s graduate program is an attempt to fuse scholarship with 
practice, Plowman tells us:2 • What Is Critical Game Design? 35
designed artifacts and the experience of them … are “materialized ideologies” … [they] … help to create 
our subjective experience by acts of what Louis Althusser [1972] called “hailing”. These are acts of attract￾ing attention (hailing), compelling individuals to generate meaning (interpretation) and behave in specific 
relation to designed artifacts.
(Plowman 2003, 31)
In this way we can see design as materialized ideologies, as implementations of critical perspectives, as 
scholarship given form, or agendas as artifacts. We can also think of these practices as means to open up 
perspectives, as engendering possibilities; that is, critical game design as the manifestation of theory. As 
Patrick Rael says:
This is why we play, this is what play is about. If you can’t imagine it you can’t do it, and what games gives 
(sic) us is a space to play where we can imagine the extraordinary, we can practice doing things that are 
impossible … you can explore possibilities for social change that are not possible otherwise.
(Shelf Stores 2022)
HISTORICAL BOARD GAME DESIGNERS 
ON DIFFICULT TOPICS
We can reconnoiter this further when we listen to designers speaking about their practice. In April 2023 
Conflicts of Interest (CoI), the SD Historicon Journal of Historical Boardgaming, designer Volko Ruhnke 
approached prominent designers with this prompt:
Historical boardgames often tackle difficult, unpleasant, or unconventional topics like war, slavery, the 
economics and social structure of exploitive colonial economics, human rights abuses, terrorism, piracy, 
dirty politics, and medieval social systems, as a few examples.
As a game designer facing the paradoxical linkage between unpleasant issues and fun gameplay, what sorts 
of topics would you find most difficult? How do you decide whether to tackle a difficult topic? And when 
you do, what do you abstract out and what do you include in the game?
(SD HistCon 2023)
To give some flavor of the responses, Sebastian Bae begins by asking: “Should war be fun? Should war 
be clean and neat? These are the questions I routinely ask myself as a professional wargame designer in 
the defense community” (SD HistCon 2023). Amabel Holland also begins by asking herself questions:
The first question I ask, and the one I ask the most frequently throughout the process, is why am I telling 
this story? And I ask this question for a couple of reasons. First, a game design on a difficult subject is one 
that’s going to be mentally and emotionally exhausting for me … Another reason I ask this question is to 
figure out if my voice is useful or needed. That is, maybe I really feel “the story” needs to be told, but am 
I specifically the one who should be telling it? 
(SD HistCon 2023)
Jason Matthews also frames his response by way of an initial question:
Since Georg von Reisswitz invented Kriegspiel in the early 19th century, we’ve been asking the same ques￾tion in different forms, “Can we learn something from playing a game about it?” The answer to this ques￾tion is essential to responding to the issue posed by Conflicts of Interest. Because the danger of tackling 
difficult, political and socially sensitive topics is that a game – as a form of entertainment – will trivialize 
the subject matter and demean the human suffering that the game abstracts.36 Paper Time Machines 
I look at game design as a form of storytelling. A good game, at least in the historical corner of the hobby, 
should also have a narrative arc that says something about its subject matter. So, my first rule of thumb 
about sensitive subjects is to have something important to say.
Games that routinely illustrate the danger of failing to have something to say include those with a colonial￾ism theme. For many Euro designs in particular, colonialism is a convenient context for an incremental 
empire-building contest. But the designs expressly avoid trying to say anything about their context. In fact, 
they rather notoriously gloss over the unpleasantries of colonialism and, instead, often present a historical 
narrative that we can describe as a whitewashing of history. So, any designer venturing into an area like 
this really needs to think hard about what they are trying to say with the design.
My second rule of thumb is that the truth is the best defense when tackling sensitive subjects. If you are 
honest about human suffering, honest about the less-than-righteous motivations that most nation states are 
pursuing, a game on a sensitive topic will garner a lot less criticism.
(SD HistCon 2023)
Akar Bharadvaj begins his response by saying:
Personally, I am less concerned with a game’s subject matter itself than in how the game handles it. I 
believe that boardgames, as much as any other art form, are capable of saying much about the human con￾dition even when they challenge mainstream norms. That said, the more transgressive a game, the more 
difficult it is to create.
For that reason, my choice about whether to design a game is less about difficulty in the sense of discom￾fort, and more about difficulty in the sense of how challenging a game is to design. So, my primary factor 
in deciding whether to tackle a subject matter in a game is personal knowledge and design skills relevant 
to the topic.
(SD HistCon 2023)
Cole Wehrle’s response is concerned with the responsibility of players. His response is rendered in full:
To a degree, each game I’ve designed grapples directly with some difficult subject. Perhaps nowhere is that 
more true that (sic) with John Company. The game charts the rise of the British East India Company and its 
incorporation within the larger framework of the British Empire in the 18th and 19th Centuries. The game 
covers many aspects of this story, including the rampant looting of Indian wealth, the suppression of rebel￾lions, and the pervasive corruption that informed nearly every element of the British involvement in India.
The game takes itself and its players very seriously. It draws on about a decade of research into both pri￾mary materials and contemporary scholarship. For all of that, the game can often be quite silly. In fact, 
of my games, it is probably the most likely to excite its players. There’s no shortage of hackneyed English 
accents and play-acting. I’ve often seen players yowl in delight as a risky gambit pays off or gasp at an 
unexpected turn-of-fate.
It’s tempting to read these responses as implicitly condoning the actions of their historical counterparts. 
Should players really be having so much fun playing in history? A part of me wants to slap them on 
the wrist or shake them by the collar. The game couldn’t make (sic) any clearer: the British East India 
Company was a horrible, venal institution that corrupted everything it touched. Don’t they care about the 
implications of their actions within the game? In point of fact, their immersion is an indication that they 
do care, and the extent of their care is demonstrated by the degree to which they have let themselves slide 
into the world of the game.
Theorists of games love to isolate these immersive experiences as a way of protecting players from the 
implications of their experiences within a game. Perhaps the best example of this effort can be found in the 
development of what is called the “magic circle.”
Loosely adapted from the late-1930s work on play of the Dutch writer Johan Huizinga, the idea gained 
currency in the early 2000s, when Eric Zimmerman and Katie Salen began applying it explicitly to games. 2 • What Is Critical Game Design? 37
The concept is simple and powerful: the act of playing a game creates an exceptional social space that is 
subject to its own rules. On the face of it, this is a wonderful idea. There is something magical about the 
experience of play that separates it from ordinary life. Most everyone I’ve met who plays games regularly 
has gotten lost in the rhythm of a game or has felt transported by a game’s setting.
It is tempting to apply the idea forcefully. After all, societies erect huge stadiums to separate athletic games 
from the ordinary life around them. These games feature plenty of costumes and funny behaviors that 
would be nonsensical in any other context. However, these strict divisions are the exception, not the rule. 
In practice, the magic circle is porous. Players may be entering an exceptional space when they sit down 
to play a game, but they are still themselves and are therefore still situated in the social, historical, and 
cultural framework that exists outside of the game.
This is a sobering truth for anyone designing games. A game’s design certainly informs play, but the people 
sitting around the table matter too. Whatever meanings or truths a game reveals are negotiated with its 
players. This is true, of course, for any form of expression, but, games grant their players a heightened 
agency within the work. Players are collaborators who both author and experience their creation as it 
comes into being.
For this reason, the choice of a game’s theme has moral implications. It is one thing to attend a performance 
of Othello and to witness someone playing the role of Iago. But, it is another thing entirely to ask a player 
to improvise their own lines and blocking – to author Iago while playing him.
Yet, this kind of emergent play-acting is precisely what a game demands and what makes the format so 
powerful. Historical games ask players to imagine themselves in a particular role and to attempt to align 
their sympathies with their counterparts. This can be tremendously uncomfortable. No one wants to play 
a Nazi sympathizer or a robber baron. But these roles, like that of Iago, are the great dynamos of our best 
stories and illuminate the broader historical forces which have shaped our present moment.
Here, it’s worth remembering that players are not merely playing a role for themselves. They are also witnessing 
an exclusive performance of the game’s drama, usually limited by the number of chairs around the table. When 
I see players laugh at some disastrous roll in John Company, they might be ruefully laughing as rivals within the 
game’s drama or enjoying the irony as if they were watching the performance in a music hall, cheering as Punch 
wallops Judy or at the crocodile as its gobbles everyone up. They are, in that moment, enjoying the benefits of a 
kind of split consciousness where they get to observe their game even as they help create it.
That door swings both ways. Not all of history is farce, and not every winning move in John Company will 
have the players cheering. Sometimes, the optimal move will turn a player’s stomach. Though it may have 
been strategically sound to block a relief package for a famine in India, players will often pause to wonder 
if they had the correct moral priorities.
Good. Many people living at that time wondered the same question. These are the sorts of moments where 
the game becomes so much more than its rulebook or its components. For a moment, the players conjured 
something very real into their homes and hopefully felt the weight of the past in a new and different way. 
If they are lucky, it will haunt them for at least a little while longer.
(SD HistCon 2023)
Brian Train covers much ground and his response is rendered here extensively:
CoI’s first question seems to assume that there is a paradox between unpleasant issues and fun gameplay 
that is unresolvable. I do not agree that this is so, because there are games that present well in both aspects. 
Take, for example, games on plagues; there are about a dozen that I can find on BoardGameGeek (BGG) 
without looking too hard that focus on the Black Death alone … Of course, there are also games on 
unpleasant issues that are not fun to play, because they are badly designed, or because they are bad jokes, or 
because the designer had some point to make and could not resist walloping players over the head with it…
However, CoI’s prompt relates primarily to my own published work and design choices. Almost all of my 
ludography would fall in the category of serious games… And some of my designs do encompass very 
unpleasant events, for example, various modern civil wars and colonial or post-colonial insurgencies that 
saw incidents and practices of great and unapologetic cruelty.38 Paper Time Machines 
A while ago, someone asked me about A Distant Plain, “How do you respond to someone who asks [in an 
emotional state and a leading way] how you can play a wargame in which lots of Americans and Afghan 
troops and civilians got killed?… Where does one draw the boundaries of what is OK to play a game on 
(i.e., some World War II title) versus not to play (i.e., A Distant Plain)?”
I don’t think anyone ever directly confronted me on this topic in those words. Certainly, I have come across 
people who have said they would not play A Distant Plain because of their personal experiences there or 
the experiences of family members. I have encountered others who held the opinion that designing a game, 
any game, on a contemporary war was at best an exercise in trivialization, and at worst something in the 
service of an external agenda.
We can and some do level the same questions and reactions against books, films, TV shows, indeed any 
creative endeavor about contemporary conflicts. But it seems that games come in for a special helping of 
abuse because of our cultural tenet that anything called a “game” is inherently trivial and superficial. I’ve 
seen very little movement on this point in the 45 years that I’ve been playing wargames, just as I have seen 
very little willingness to move past the simple-minded notion that representation equals endorsement.
There is a story about how someone once cornered Redmond Simonsen (of SPI fame) at a party, and 
hearing that Simonsen designed wargames, accused him of being a warmonger. Apparently his retort 
was something like, “I make numerical models of real-life things and processes. If I spent my time doing 
research and making mathematical models of cancerous growths, would you call me a cancermonger?”
The question about where to draw the line of what is okay and what is not okay to play (and by extension, 
design about) is THE perennial query about the morality of the hobby of civilian wargaming itself. And it’s 
one which will never stop being asked or answered.
I think any line someone decides to draw about what they will and will not consume is obviously a personal 
choice, and we should respect it like any personal choice. I also think that it says more about the consumer 
than anyone else, and it’s up to them, not the designer (or the author, or the film director), to be able to state 
where they drew that line and why … if and when anyone ever asks.
But the reverse is also true; designers can choose what they will or will not produce. And it’s incumbent 
on them just as much to be able to explain themselves: what influenced the work and why they felt led to 
create it.
I believe that I design games first as a way for me to explore “real-life things and processes” through 
research and modeling methods, and then to share my perceptions and understanding in game form while 
showing my work. It’s part of how I try to make personal sense of the world and its past. And I think I 
would be doing it even if the game publishing industry did not exist and there were no one to share it with.
I feel compelled to complete research of enough quality and breadth to help me determine what factors and 
forces were present in the conflict that materially influenced its outcome (or progress to date, in the case of 
a conflict that isn’t finished yet), how they could be integrated into a workable game design in such a way 
that they are roughly proportionate in effect, and how I could “show my work” to this end.
Sometimes, such design requires reflection of some cruel and unpleasant practices. For example, in 
Colonial Twilight, I felt the need to acknowledge the widespread use of torture and forced resettlement of 
the non-white population of Algeria because these were material factors in the French conduct of the war. 
And if I were to design a game on the Nigerian Civil War or the more recent civil conflicts in the Sudan or 
Yemen, I would feel the need to reflect the use of deliberately induced famine as a weapon, as I did in my 
game Somalia Interventions (1994).
I do not believe it is possible to create a completely objective, all-encompassing, and neutral wargame, any 
more than it is possible to create such a novel or film. This is the limitation inherent in the creative process 
and in the decisions the creator must make during that process. But I think it is possible to create something 
that is simultaneously aware of this limitation and which nevertheless presents itself as informed about its 
subject matter, considered in its portrayal, and ultimately helpful in promoting knowledge and understand￾ing of a conflict. Just how the player will receive and interpret this creative work is something beyond the 
designer’s control and responsibility.
(SD HistCon 2023)2 • What Is Critical Game Design? 39
All of these responses demonstrate designers are formulating games from and through critical positions; 
they are doing critical game design. The bulk of this book is concerned with how this work is done, with 
the remainder concerned with how we might approach thinking about some of this doing. Here we refer 
back to Nguyen, whose reluctance to define agency is of utility, because it retains a focus on the investiga￾tion of what that agency is. Nguyen suggests that: “[g]ames turn out to be a way of writing down forms 
of agency, of inscribing them in an artifact,” and once we can “write something down, that enables us to 
more easily study and refine it” (original emphasis, Nguyen 2020, 18). That is, agency is something we 
may only really be able to study through its manifestation in experience derived through play situations 
set in motion by designers and reified through players.
Working within the historical game space, there is another dimension to critical game design, and 
this is an exploration of the nature of the relationship of the design to history in the context of simulations. 
This is the focus of the next chapter.
It may be clear in what has already been said, but for the avoidance of doubt, an essential perspective 
in critical game design is that it is also critical of itself; it must be critical of its own compulsion to arbitrate 
and to define justice within its own temporal and cultural constraints. Whilst conclusions are inevitable 
and desirable from weighed evidence, we must not delude ourselves that the evidence selected is drawn 
in the first place without bias or weighed with achievable objectivity, or judged by impartiality. We do 
not just carry our own limitations and agendas with us, we perceive through them (recall the discussion 
earlier in this chapter on selectivity and the narrative turn). A considerable weakness of critical theory is 
that we may fail to fully realize this, and be carried away by the vigor of our own judicial sentences in the 
midst of a cavalcade of liability claims, unaware that we have become the law. A considerable strength of 
critical theory is that, fully utilized, wholly embraced, probing itself for fallibility, it is a means to unsettle, 
disrupt, challenge, investigate, question, and learn.
REFERENCES
Adams, Tony E., Stacy Holman Jones, and Carolyn Ellis. 2015. Autoethnography. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Anable, Aubrey. 2018. Playing with Feelings: Video Games and Affect. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 
Analog Game Studies. 2014. “Reinventing Analog Game Studies | Analog Game Studies.” August 1, 2014. Accessed 
July 1, 2023.
Anthropy, Anna, and Naomi Clark. 2014. Game Design Vocabulary, A: Exploring the Foundational Principles 
Behind Good Game Design. Crawfordsville, Indiana: Addison-Wesley.
Aylett, Ruth. 1999. “Narrative in Virtual Environments – Towards Emergent Narrative.” Proceedings of the AAAI 
Fall Symposium of Narrative Intelligence. http://www.aaai.org/Papers/Symposia/Fall/1999/FS-99-01/FS99
-01–014.pdf. Accessed January 19, 2021.
Bardzell, Jeffrey, and Shaowen Bardzell. 2013. “What Is ‘Critical’ About Critical Design?.” Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 3297–306.
Barthes, Roland. 1977. Image Music Text. Translated by Stephen Heath. New York: Hill and Wang.
Barthes, Roland. 1986. The Rustle of Language. New York: Hill and Wang. https://www.d.umn.edu/~cstroupe/hand￾outs/8500/barthes_work_to_text.pdf Accessed June 29, 2023.
Bernstein, Leonard. 2007. The Infinite Variety of Music. Huddersfield, West Yorkshire, UK: Amadeus Press.
Beyond Solitaire. 2021. “Podcast 34: Cole Wehrle on Games as Historical Arguments.” February 15, 2021. https://
youtu.be/Xr8mu4BxdqE Accessed June 29, 2023.
Beyond Solitaire. 2022. “Podcast 70: Mary Flanagan on Games that Change Minds.” February 8, 2022. https://youtu
.be/8R3enOPtEKU Accessed June 29, 2023.
Bissell, Tom. 2010. Extra Lives: Why Video Games Matter. New York: Pantheon Books.
Bogost, Ian 2008. “The Rhetoric of Video Games.” In The Ecology of Games: Connecting Youth, Games, and 
Learning, edited by Katie Salen, 117–40. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Booth, Paul. 2015. Game Play: Paratextuality in Contemporary Board Games. New York: Bloomsbury.
Booth, Paul. 2021. Board Games as Media. New York: Bloomsbury.
Brown, Douglas. 2015. “Games and the Magic Circle.” In Encyclopedia of Computer Graphics and Games, edited 
by N. Lee. Cham: Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-08234-9_32-1 Accessed June 30, 2023.40 Paper Time Machines 
Calleja, Gordon. 2022. Unboxed: Board Game Experience and Design. Cambridge, MA and London, England: The 
MIT Press.
Carr, Edward. Hallet, 1961. What Is History? New York: Vintage.
Carroll, Noël. 1993. “Anglo-American Aesthetics and Contemporary Criticism: Intention and the Hermeneutics 
of Suspicion.” The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism 51, no. 2 (Spring). Aesthetics: Past and Present. 
Published by: Wiley on behalf of The American Society for Aesthetics. https://www.jstor.org/stable/431391
Accessed July 1, 2023.
Castronova, Edward. 2005 Synthetic Worlds: The Business and Culture of Online Games. Chicago, IL: University 
of Chicago Press.
Chapman, Adam. 2016. Digital Games as History: How Videogames Represent the Past and Offer Access to 
Historical Practice. New York: Routledge.
Cole, Alayna, and Dakoda Barker. 2021. Games as Texts: A Practical Application of Textual Analysis to Games. 
Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
Crocker, Richard R. 1990. “Review of Betwixt and Between: Patterns of Masculine and Feminine Initiation.” 
Reality of the Psyche series by (eds.) Louise Carus Mahdi, Steven Foster, Meredith Little. Journal of Ritual 
Studies 4, no. 2, Ritual and Power (Summer): 361–3 Published by: Pamela J. Stewart and Andrew J. Strathern. 
https://www.jstor.org/stable/44368485 Accessed June 30, 2023.
Culler, Jonathan. 1975. Structuralist Poetics. London: Routledge & Kagan Paul.
Diplomacy Rules 1983. Gibsons Games. London: H. P. Gibson Sons Ltd.
Dunne, Anthony, and Fiona Raby. n.d. http://dunneandraby.co.uk/content/bydandr/13/0 Accessed June 30, 2023.
Dunne, Anthony, and Fiona Raby. 2009. “Interpretation, Collaboration, and Critique: Interview with Dunne and 
Raby.” September 1, 2012. https://dunneandraby.co.uk/content/bydandr/13/0 Accessed January 30, 2024.
Dunne, Anthony, and Fiona Raby. 2013. Speculative Everything: Design, Fiction, and Social Dreaming. Cambridge, 
MA: The MIT Press.
Eagleton, Terry. 1983. Literary Theory: An Introduction. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Ehrmann, Jacques, Cathy Lewis, and Phil Lewis. 1968. “Homo Ludens Revisited.” Yale French Studies, 41: 31–57. 
Game, Play, Literature.
Endurance. 2023. Hollandspiele. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/377945/endurance.
Engelstein, Geoff. 2023. “The Many Faces of Victory; Engaging with Amabel Holland.” August 22, 2023. https://
gametek.substack.com/p/the-many-faces-of-victory?utm_source=profile&utm_medium=reader2 Accessed 
August 22, 2023.
Flanagan, Mary. 2013. Critical Play: Radical Game Design. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Frasca, Gonzalo. 2003. “Simulation versus Narrative: Introduction to Ludology.” In The Video Game Theory Reader, 
edited by Mark J. P. Wolf and Bernard Perron, 221–35. New York and Abingdon: Routledge.
Game Studies Study Buddies. 2019. Episode 13 - Huizinga - Homo Ludens, June 29.
Game Studies Study Buddies. 2022. “Episode 50: Dovey and Kennedy, Game Cultures.” August 31, 2022. https://
rangedtouch.com/2022/08/31/50-dovey-and-kennedy-game-cultures/ Accessed June 30, 2023.
Grace, Lindsay. 2010. Critical Gameplay: Design Techniques and Case Studies. Designing Games for Ethics, Vol. 
II. IGI Global. http://www.lgrace.com/documents/Chapter_9_Games_for_Ethics_Critical_Gameplay_Design
_Techniques_Case_Studies.pdf Accessed June 30, 2023.
Hills, Matt. 2002. Fan Cultures. London: Routledge.
Holland, Amabel. 2023. “Do Board Games Need Victory Conditions?” Accessed August 18, 2023. https://www
.youtube.com/watch?v=QxZcDZ1MUjk
Huizinga, Johan. 2014. Home Ludens: A Study of the Play-Element in Culture. Mansfield Center: Martino Publishing.
Hutson, Matthew. 2023. “The Personal, Political Art of Board-Game Design.” New York Times, December 21, 2023.
Iggers, Georg G. 2005. Historiography in the Twentieth Century: From Scientific Objectivity to the Postmodern 
Challenge. Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press.
Ip, Barry. 2011. “Narrative Structures in Computer and Video Games: Part 2: Emotions, Structures, and Archetypes.” 
Games and Culture 6, no. 3: 203–44. Accessed June 27, 2023.
Kermode, Frank. 2000. The Sense of an Ending: Studies in the Theory of Fiction. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Klevjer, Rune. 2002. “In Defense of Cutscenes.” In Computer Games and Digital Cultures Conference Proceedings, 
edited by Frans Mäyrä, 191–202. Tampere: Tampere University Press. http://www.digra.org/wp-content/
uploads/digital-library/05164.50328.pdf Accessed 27 June, 2023.
Korol-Evans, Kimberly Tony. 2009. Renaissance Festivals: Merrying the Past and Present.Jefferson, NC: McFarland 
& Company, September 10, 2009.
Lankoski, Petri, and Staffan Björk. 2015. Game Research Methods: An Overview. Pittsburgh, PA: ETC Press.
Louchart, Sandy, and Ruth Aylett. 2004. “Narrative Theory and Emergent Interactive Narrative.” International Journal of 
Continuing Engineering Education and Life Long Learning 14, no. 6: 506–18. Accessed July 1, 2023.2 • What Is Critical Game Design? 41
Malazita, James, and Casey O’Donnell. 2023. “Introduction: Toward Critical Game Design.” Design Issues 39, no. 
1 (Winter): 4–14.
McGonigal, Jane. 2011. Reality is Broken: Why Games Make Us Better and How They Can Change the World. New 
York: Penguin.
McKee, Alan. 2003. Textual Analysis: A Beginner’s Guide. London: Sage.
McKeon, Michael. 1989. “A Defense of Dialectical Method in Literary History.” Diacritics 19, no. 1 (Spring): 82–96. 
The Johns Hopkins University Press Stable. https://www.jstor.org/stable/465290 Accessed July 1, 2023.
Merriam-Webster. n.d. https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/board%20game Accessed July 1, 2023.
Murnane, Eric. 2018. “Emergent Narrative: Stories of Play, Playing with Stories.” PhD diss., University of Central 
Florida.
Murray, Janet H. 1998. Hamlet on the Holodeck: The Future of Narrative in Cyberspace. Cambridge, MA and 
London, England: The MIT Press.
Nguyen, C. Thi. 2020. Games Agency As Art. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Project Nayuki. 2022. August 7. https://www.nayuki.io/page/analog-vs-digital-games. Accessed July 1, 2023.
Plowman, Tim. 2003. “Ethnography and Critical Design Practice.” In Design Research: Methods and Perspectives, 
edited by Brenda Laurel. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Rael, Patrick. 2019.”Pax Exasperation.” https://tildesites.bowdoin.edu/~prael/Rael-Pax-Exasperation.pdf?fbclid
=IwAR0WmxaRraPhkSIbBIle0Ey-wtHC3SpCasVae2fJVioqfuVB5mcj9yY5Bfo Accessed July 1, 2023.
RPI. 2023. https://hass.rpi.edu/gsas/critical-game-design-0 Accessed July 1, 2023.
Sampat, Elizabeth. 2017. Empathy Engines: Design Games That Are Personal, Political, and Profound. North 
Haven, CT: CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform.
Scott-Baumann, Alison. 2009. Ricoeur and the Hermeneutics of Suspicion. London: Continuum.
SD HistCon. 2023. “Designer Roundtable: Gaming the Unpleasant.” SDHist, April 19, 2023 Accessed July 1, 2023.
Secrets of Blackmoor. 2021. “Corner of the Table Top Fanzine from 1971.” April 17, 2021. https://www.secretsof￾blackmoor.com/blog/blackmoor-first-last-and-always Accessed July 1, 2023.
Shelf Stories. 2022. “War Games are Better at History than Euro Games? with Dr. Patrick Rael: Good Trouble.” 
August 10, 2022. https://youtu.be/8GmOZdC5fEI Accessed June 29, 2023.
Shuss, Taylor. 2023. Private correspondence, March 20, 2023.
Suckling, Maurice W. 2023. “Design Elements in Postcolonial Commercial Historical Board Wargames.” In Heritage, 
Memory and Identity in Postcolonial Board Games, edited by Michal Morchoki, 26–44. London: Routledge.
Suckling, Maurice, and Marek Walton. 2017. Video Game Writing: From Macro to Micro. Dulles, VA: Mercury 
Learning.
Suits, Bernard. 2004. The Grasshopper. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
TechTerms. 2023. https://techterms.com/definition/analog Accessed July 1, 2023.
Upton, Brian. 2015. The Aesthetic of Play. Cambridge, MA and London, England: The MIT Press.
White, Hayden. 1980. "The Value of Narrativity in the Representation of Reality." Critical Inquiry 1 (Autumn): 5–27.
Yorke, John. 2015. Into The Woods: A Five-Act Journey Into Story: New York, NY: Overlook Press.
Zimmerman, Eric. 2012. “Jerked Around by the Magic Circle – Clearing the Air Ten Years Later.” Gamasutra, 
February 7, 2012 https://www.gamedeveloper.com/design/jerked-around-by-the-magic-circle---clearing-the
-air-ten-years-later#close-modal Accessed July 1, 2023.42
3 What Are Historical 
Simulations?
For the general public, games and simulations have no differences …. While 
a simulation is designed for evaluative or computational purposes, a game is 
designed for entertainment and educational purposes. While accuracy is the 
upshot of simulations, clarity is the upshot of games. While a simulation is a 
serious effort to precisely represent a real phenomenon in another, a game is 
an artistic representation of some phenomenon …. When games are stylized, 
simulations are very detailed. Games are known to suppress details whereas 
simulations elaborate on all the details. 
(Prabhat 2017)
DEFINITIONS
In this book there have already been references to games as models, simulations, or representations, or 
as ways of engaging with history. Framing historical games – or more specifically, wargames – in these 
ways is one of the claims they have to a serious games categorization; that is, being a game designed with 
a primary purpose other than entertainment (Djaouti, Alvarez, and Jessel 2011).
The distinction Prabhat outlines above perhaps captures a general sense of the difference between 
games and simulations, having disentangled them as synonyms – the former are not detailed, they are 
artistic projections, and are for entertainment or education. The latter are highly detailed, and are con￾cerned with computational accuracy. Conversations such as those held by podcast Three Moves Ahead 
frame simulations as being complex to the point that agency is hindered, and victory conditions are sub￾ordinate to the narrative experience (Three Moves Ahead 2023).
Simulation, however, is a contested concept. The philosopher Jean Baudrillard brings us the notion 
that simulation is “the generation by models of a real without origin or reality; a hyperreal … never 
exchanged for the real, but exchanged for itself, in an uninterrupted circuit without reference or circum￾ference” (Baudrillard 1994, 1–6). Baudrillard attempts to clarify this by way of the example of rein￾terpreting a Borges fable of a map. If something is a representation, the territory the map depicts will 
precede it, and the map will follow, as an encoded set of signs referring to the territory in its absence. 
If something is a simulation, the map will precede the territory, the reality of which becomes superflu￾ous. “To simulate is to feign to have what one doesn’t have” (Baudrillard 1994, 1–3). Such thinking 
encourages caution where symbols lose their point of reference and become their own form of reality, 
or a “hyperreality,” as Baudrillard neologized (Baudrillard 1994, 35). We may leverage such thinking 
to pave a way to hypothesize that all human cognition of existence operates as a simulation (Bostrom 
2003, 243–55). Baudrillard’s thinking about how simulations might precede reality may be clarified 
and reified in the example of a fighter pilot who can only fly in supersonic conditions through training 
– in a simulation – preparing body and mind for the task, such that the simulation precedes and shapes 
the reality that follows – creating “an “ecstasy of control,” a delusional effect of complete, perfect, and 
absolute control” (Bogard 1996, 59).
Paper Time Machines What Are Historical Simulations?
DOI: 10.1201/9781003359265-4
10.1201/9781003359265-43 • What Are Historical Simulations? 43
What Are Historical Simulations?
But let us find a definition that may better ground the current discussion.
Simulation is the imitation of the operation of a real-world process or system over time. 
(Banks et al. 2001, 3)
Perhaps such a definition, coming from the combined worlds of system, industrial, manufacturing, electrical, 
and computer engineering may satisfy with its scientific provenance. It may help to further bound this definition 
in contrast to prediction. From the world of computational simulation, we can see definitional lines:
It’s easy to conflate simulation and prediction. After all, both extrapolate what might happen next week, next 
month, or next year. But while prediction generally strives for accuracy – for example, by providing a better point 
estimate of a single metric over a given time interval – simulation aims to compare the relative future impacts of 
choices you face today … I like to think of simulation as a small epistemic step toward a deeper understanding 
of the world. Simulation is a testing ground for making better decisions – and a better future. 
(Epistemix 2023)
Prediction, then, in this formulation, derives precise outputs, whereas simulation derives relative outputs. 
If we take the Banks et. al. definition and the notion of relative outputs into the field of history, we see 
historical simulations as imitations of the operations of real-world – historical – processes or systems over 
time. Such a view necessarily engages with philosophical notions of history on a variety of levels. What 
historical processes or systems might we identify, with what methodologies, with what sense of priority, 
from which perspectives, in relation to whose agency, with what degree of determinism, driven by what? 
To debate historical processes and systems, and to attempt to evaluate history through identified processes 
and systems, and thereby to imaginatively contemplate alternative historical outcomes is to spar with his￾torians disdainful of counterfactualism and games.
AGAINST COUNTERFACTUALISM
Counterfactualism is to express alignment not with what has happened, but with what has not happened but 
could, would, or might have happened under differing conditions. Philosopher Michael Oakeshott tells us:
The question in history is never what must, or what might have taken place, but solely what the evidence 
obliges us to concede did take place. Had George III been King of England when the trouble arose in the 
American colonies, it is possible that the differences there might never had led to war; but to conclude from 
this that George III was an odd chance which at this critical point altered the ‘natural’ sequence of events 
is to have abandoned history for something less profitable if more entertaining … The Historian is never 
called upon to consider what might have happened had circumstances been different. 
(Oakeshott 1933, 128–45)
E. H. Carr concurs, and tells us “one can always play a parlour (sic) game with the might-have-beens 
of history” (Carr 1961, 127), which he elsewhere describes as a “savoury (sic) red herring” he labels 
“Determinism in History, or the Wickedness of Hegel” (Carr 1961, 119). (The other “savoury red herring” 
he labels “Chance in History, or Cleopatra’s Nose” (Carr 1961, 119).) E. P. Thompson amps the hostility 
when he tells us “counterfactual fictions” are “Geschichtswissenschlopff, unhistorical shit” (Thompson 
1978, 300). Seemingly writing in response to the contemporary rise in Reacting To The Past role-playing 
experiences in classrooms, William Robison asserts:
History is, by definition, an empirically based discipline, one that requires knowing – that is, one must 
know facts, circumstances, sequence of events, cause and effect, and all sorts of particular details. Even 
where the imagination may be useful in connecting facts into a larger narrative, the goal is still to discern 44 Paper Time Machines 
the reality of the past. Suppose, however, that an instructor asks a student to imagine what it was like to be 
a slave or a soldier. That does not lead to knowing – for no one who has not been a slave or a soldier can 
genuinely “imagine” that experience in a way that produces real knowledge. To know – or at least approach 
knowing – what it was like, a student must read accounts that slaves or soldiers have written about their 
lives and empathize with their experience. 
(Robison 2013, 5–6)
Martin Ryle tells us:
I find that historical simulations that are based upon manipulation of quantities of things like economic 
production, religious intensity, foreign trade, bureaucratic development, and literacy indeed, fall more into 
the realm of sociology or anthropology than history. Certainly, these simulations may be quite interesting 
and enlightening to the historian, but they are, I think, fundamentally unhistorical. The discipline of his￾tory focuses on the particular, on a given time in place, and on the particular evidence that remains from 
that time and place. 
(Ryle 1989)
Perhaps this objection to the emphasis on process is less a criticism of historical games, and more a criti￾cism of a certain kind of history. Indeed, such a criticism of process would be entirely discredited by the 
longue durée of The Annales School of history, where the essential paradigm is precisely one of processes 
and the long duration over which they occur (see Braudel 1972, 1973).
Regardless, even (perhaps especially) those who write on the intersection between games and history 
are sensible to the limitations of games. Form carries its own restrictions: “what we say about the past is 
in part determined by how we say it” (original emphasis, Chapman 2020, 134). Indeed, the limitations 
of games may be beyond aspects of cultural taste and have moral as well as epistemological dimensions 
(Chapman 2020, 135). Adam Chapman tells us:
the tendency of games to provoke controversy when dealing with difficult or sensitive topics can be under￾stood as due to the “limits of play” … If … this is due to fears concerning the perceived trivialized nature 
of ludification and the possibility for certain playable positions to allow players to reenact historical epi￾sodes of exploitation, cruelty or abuse as the historical antagonist (Chapman and Linderoth 2015), then 
clearly the playful nature of the game form exerts some pressure on the kind of history we see in games …
thus play itself exerts pressure on historical representation (Chapman 2020, 135). 
(See Chapman, Adam; Linderoth, Jonas. 2015. 137–53)
Chapman goes further. He considers the potential utility of Huizinga’s argument in Homo Ludens (1938) 
– that history is characterized and partly determined by the relationship between culture and its play ele￾ment, and that this relationship is one of flux – to suggest that the structure of games and playful activities 
may be “more or less suited to the representation of particular historical periods, practices and ideas” 
(Chapman 2020, 135). If this is so, then we might also wonder what game mechanics and other design ele￾ments might suit particular historical periods, practices, and ideas, and which ones might, to our current 
understandings, seem beyond games. Indeed, these are fundamental considerations for a designer, and we 
shall attempt some form of address to this question in Parts Two, Three, and Four.
THE UTILITY OF COUNTERFACTUALISM
As Niall Ferguson contests in his spirited defense of counterfactualism in the introduction of Virtual 
History, there are reasonable ripostes to the hostilities outlined above.3 • What Are Historical Simulations? 45
[B]y narrowing down the historical alternatives we consider to those which are plausible – and hence by 
replacing the enigma of “chance” with the calculation of probabilities – we solve the dilemma of choosing 
between a single deterministic past and an unmanageable infinite number of possible pasts. The counter￾factual scenarios we therefore need to construct are not mere fantasy: they are simulations based on cal￾culations about the relative probability of plausible outcomes in a chaotic world (hence “virtual history”). 
(Ferguson 2011, 85, original emphasis of italics retained)
Similarly, Jeremy Black encourages us to see the relevance in counterfactual thinking as extending beyond 
investigations into the past to approach complex deliberations about the present and future:
Counterfactualism is not simply a subject of the past. It is as much the topic of discussion and planning 
now about both present and future. Indeed, much of the methodology and vocabulary associated with the 
counterfactual approach take on their potency precisely because they are not employed solely for discus￾sion about the past but, instead, take a more central role in consideration of the future. 
(Black 2008, 4)
Peterson, Miller, and Fedorko assert the utility of counterfactualism as a means to explore the ramifica￾tions of contingency:
counterfactuals are helpful for understanding causality across the social sciences because they enable the 
investigator to test processes, which may explain outcomes or how outcomes would change given different 
choices, events, and stimuli.
(Peterson, Miller, and Fedorko 2013, 38)
But perhaps the most full and direct riposte comes from Patrick Rael across two different episodes of 
Shelf Stories, where he argues for imaginative and empathetic projection into the problem space and that 
counterfactualism is fundamental to the act of historicizing:
Games engage history in a unique way, a way that is distinct from the way other forms engage history …
The thing that defines them, as games, is that the outcomes can change, that there is player agency that 
can impact the course of the narrative that is unfolding on the table … and that’s what makes them such 
powerful representers of history. 
(Shelf Stories August 10, 2022)
Counterfactual history is real history … to engage in counterfactual history is actually to engage historical 
thinking, historical methods and skills … Counterfactual history is serious history, and this is why: all 
history is explicitly or implicitly counterfactual. You cannot do history, I would contend, without engaging, 
at some level, with counterfactual thinking. This is something that games taught me that I did not know 
before I got into history games …Counterfactual history is built into every historical claim worth making. 
If you say, Gee – Andrew Johnson really screwed up Reconstruction, it would have been much better if 
Abraham Lincoln had lived, you’re engaging in counterfactual thinking … Every relative comparison …
any time you’re imagining what happened with what might have happened – which is the only way to eval￾uate what happened – you are engaging with counterfactual history. So counterfactual history is history.
(Shelf Stories August 16, 2022)
Through Rael, embracing counterfactual thinking isn’t just a portal into the philosophical underpinnings 
of the value of games, but is also a portal into the philosophical underpinnings of history itself, where 
contingency is a primary characteristic brought into sharp relief. As Marc Bloch says:
To evaluate the underpinnings of an event is to weigh its chances of taking place. That granted, is it 
legitimate to speak of the possibility of a past event? Obviously not, in the absolute sense. Only the 46 Paper Time Machines 
future has contingency. The past is something already given, which leaves no room for possibility. 
Before the die is cast the probability that any number might appear is one to six. A problem vanishes 
as soon as the dice box is emptied … In a correct analysis, however, the use which historical research 
makes of the idea of probabilities is not at all contradictory. When the historian asks himself about the 
probability of a past event, he actually attempts to transport himself, by a bold exercise of the mind, 
to the time before the event itself, in order to gauge its chances, as they appeared upon the eve of its 
realisation (sic). Hence, probability remains properly in the future. But since the line of the present has 
somehow been moved back in the imagination, it is a future of bygone times built upon a fragment, 
which, for us, is actually the past. 
(Bloch cited in Ferguson 2011, 84–5)
Oakeshott et al. may repudiate that, but their work predates the advent of both game studies, and its off￾shoot historical game studies, the latter of which complements and entwines with the potential within 
counterfactual approaches. Even if it did not, there is good cause to argue that no history is ever able to 
escape this process of relative evaluation, whether based on new historical evidence, or based on new 
critical interpretations of existing evidence, and these opponents of counterfactualism were engaged in 
essentially counterfactual practices whether they acknowledged it or not.
Grasping the import of contingency and how it frames the concerns of historical actors is not only key 
for historical analysis, but it is also a quality that games are especially well disposed to deliver on. Thomas 
Malaby sees contingency as core to his conception of play, noted in Chapter 1 (Malaby 2007, 107). As 
Calleja also notes, Malaby discerns four main kinds of contingency:
Stochastic contingency refers to unknowns produced by randomness. Social contingency accounts for 
the unpredictability of other players’ thoughts and plans of action. Performative contingency refers to the 
unknown level of competence that a player will exhibit in a particular outing of a game. Finally, semiotic 
contingency relates to the unpredictability of interpreting a game’s outcomes. 
(original emphasis of italics retained, Calleja 2022, 17)
Games and simulations are precisely the frameworks appropriate to exploring contingency.
GAME STUDIES AND SIMULATIONS
In his DiGRA 2007 Conference Proceedings, Jesper Juul gives us the notion of simulation as the overlap 
between a game’s rules and its fiction.
If we assume the perspective that games have two complementary elements of rules and fiction, all content 
in a game can either be purely fictional and not implemented in the rules (such as in the case of a game's 
back story), purely rules and unexplained by the fiction (such as the multiple lives of a player), or in the 
zone in between, where the rules of the game are motivated by the game's fiction (cars that can drive, birds 
that can fly, etc.) … The combination of rules and fiction is sometimes described as virtual or simulation. 
(Juul 2007)
As Clara Fernández-Vara glosses on this, and in Figure 3.1, “the overlap between the rules and the fic￾tional world is the simulation; the more overlap there is between rules and world the more nuanced the 
simulation will be” (Fernández-Vara 2019, 147).
This is striking in at least two regards. Firstly, this seems at odds with how we might visualize a 
definition of simulation given conceptualizations earlier in this chapter, which might be rendered as in 
Figure 3.2.3 • What Are Historical Simulations? 47
Secondly, defining “simulation” as achieved through the alignment of game narrative within a game’s 
system of rules runs contrary to other conceptions of it which, as we shall see, tend to frame narrative 
(as a form of representation) as distinct from simulation (which is a process). Yet this may be to not fully 
grasp what Juul is attempting to convey here, and we shall return to this toward the end of this chapter 
after deeper discussion.
If we take games scholar Alice Henton’s lead and see games as “elaborate constructs dependent on 
systems of rules, objectives, and strategic behaviors” (Henton 2012, 68) whilst we hold the idea of simula￾tions as systems and processes in mind, we can see a resemblance between the two, with the (potentially 
variable) objectives driving agents within the simulation to catalyze the systems and behaviors. Such par￾allels may be a means to argue for the suitability of historical games as historical simulations, being wary 
of what may be at peril by a wholesale conflation of games with simulations. Indeed, Philip Sabin uses the 
terms games and simulations “almost interchangeably” in his Simulating War; he argues that simulations 
are self-contained systems that mimic real processes without the need for human intervention, whereas 
FIGURE 3.1 Simulation overlap, from Juul (2007), via Fernández-Vara (2014, 2019), (Fernández-Vara 2019, 147).
FIGURE 3.2 Visualization of simulation as an overlap between a game and reality.48 Paper Time Machines 
games are more unpredictable and heuristic activities (Sabin 2015, 4) (see Klabbers 2009; Schlenker 
and Bonoma 1978). Dunnigan, as we have seen in Chapter 1, pithily conflates wargame, simulation, 
and conflict simulation: “A wargame is a playable simulation. A conflict simulation is another name for 
wargame, one that leaves out the two unsavory terms ‘war’ and ‘game’” (Dunnigan 1992, 236). What of a 
state machine, a computational model tracking existing states in any given framework and the transitions 
between them? If it is concerned with mimicking historical processes and we can manipulate it, do we 
have a game or a simulation? The plot thickens.
Brant Guillory proposes a relational quality between games and simulations, where games dictate 
competitiveness and necessitate choice. He sees simulations as not necessitating a scoring mechanism, nor 
necessitating a participant and being a “reflection of real world phenomena replicated or modeled in the 
tool,” which he visually presents as seen in Figure 3.3 (Dragoon Commander 2020):
It places games and simulations as perpendicular to each other, declaring that games incline to the 
competitive and away from the non-competitive, while simulations incline toward the realistic, away from 
the abstract. Guillory’s visualization clearly pulls games distinctly away from simulations.
As an alternative approach, in the infancy of game studies, Roger Caillois gave us the distinction 
between paidia and ludus, which he describes through examples rather than through direct definitions, 
but they are somewhat akin to the English distinction between “play” and “game.” So where paidia refers 
to the form of play present in early children (“a kind of uncontrolled fantasy … frolicsome and impul￾sive exuberance … anarchic and capricious”), ludus represents games with social dynamics (“arbitrary, 
imperative, and purposely tedious conventions”) and rules (Caillois 2001, 13).
Paidia may be a way to differentiate games and simulations, where the “sandbox” quality of a 
simulation play-space is the compelling factor for players, above the specifics of any end-state objec￾tives. Yet, somewhat paradoxically, what historical board gamers often refer to as “narrative-driven 
wargames” which often tailor exclusively to solo play – games such as The Hunters: German U-Boats at 
FIGURE 3.3 Visualization from Brant Guillory on games and simulation for training and learning (Dragoon 
Commander 2020).3 • What Are Historical Simulations? 49
War, 1939–43 (2013); Target for Today: Bombers Over the Reich, 1942–1945 (2017), Target for Tonight: 
Britain’s Strategic Air Campaign Over Europe, 1942–1945 (2020), Western Front Ace: The Great War 
in the Air 1916–1918 (2023) – also seem to correspond with being more paidia than ludus textured. 
Discussions on the Facebook group “Narrative-Driven Solitaire Wargames” tend to emphasize narrative 
elements (which characters survived which missions and how “I like the emotional connection that grows 
for the characters in my game,” Gerry Hiebert, June 30, 2023) within a simulation of a mission where 
the mission’s success (to, for example, bomb a particular target) is less of a measure of satisfaction (or, 
indeed, success) than the narrative that results from the game (or, perhaps, simulation). Similarly, discus￾sions where the primacy of narrative is emphasized within simulations are not uncommon (such as those 
in the aforementioned Three Moves Ahead podcast). There is potential here to confuse narratives about 
simulations with simulations themselves, which are systematized spaces capable of generating narra￾tives. Perhaps there is little wonder there is confusion. How else might we speak of experiences within 
simulations? This is, though, something Gonzalo Frasca may help us with.
Frasca has given us a more extensive working definition of “simulation” of potential utility to us here:
“[T]o simulate is to model a (source) system through a different system which maintains to somebody 
some of the behaviors of the original system.” The key term here is “behavior”. Simulation does not simply 
retain the – generally audiovisual – characteristics of the object but it also includes a model of its behaviors. 
This model reacts to certain stimuli (input data, pushing buttons, joystick movements), according to a set 
of conditions.
(Frasca 2003, 223)
With this, Frasca helps us clarify the significant distinction between representation and simulation, which 
are otherwise much elided:
For millennia, we have relied on [representation] for both understanding and explaining our realities. This 
is especially true with a particular form of structuring representation: narrative … It is because of its 
omnipresence that it is usually difficult to accept that there is an alternative to representation and narrative: 
simulation …
Traditional media are representational, not simulational. They excel at producing both descriptions of traits 
and sequences of events (narrative). A photograph of a plane will tell us information about its shape and 
color, but it will not fly or crash when manipulated. A flight simulator or a simple toy plane are not only 
signs, but machines that generate signs according to rules that model some of the behaviors of a real plane.
A film about a plane landing is a narrative: an observer could interpret it in different ways … but she can￾not manipulate it and influence how the plane will land since film sequences are fixed and unalterable. On 
the other hand, the flight simulator allows the player to perform actions that will modify the behavior of 
the system in a way that is similar to the behavior of the actual plane … games are just a particular way of 
structuring simulation, just like narrative is a form of structuring representation.
(Frasca 2003, 222–4)
But he goes even further to delineate distinctions within simulation ideologies: those where representa￾tional elements (such as character skins, or settings) may be switched to alter ideologies; those where rules 
may be manipulated through the nature of the model; those where goals must be achieved to progress; and 
those where design elements may be altered by players. In the process of this delineation, Frasca coins the 
term “narrauthor” to denote authors who control the narrative of the game, “pretending to give freedom 
to the player while maintaining narrative coherence,” and “simauthor” to denote those who do not focus 
on the Aristotelian closure as the source for the user’s pleasure.” If “narrauthors” have executive power 
dealing with specific instances within their design, “simauthors” function as legislators, crafting rules and 
laws, and perhaps modifying them, but then releasing the participants into the simulation to engage with 
those rules (Frasca 2003, 227–8). Indeed, this has evident connections with the discussion in the previous 
chapter on emergent narrative, as players engage with narrative systems to generate experiences.50 Paper Time Machines 
Where Frasca notes the correlation between the work of Boal and its relevance to encouraging debate 
on social, political, or personal issues through dramatic techniques to destabilize Aristotelian narrative 
structures, he also notes:
The forum theater, one of [Boal’s] most popular techniques, re-enacts the same play several times by 
allowing different audience members to get into (sic) the stage and take the protagonist’s role. This short 
play always depicts an oppressive situation and the audience is encouraged to participate by improvising 
possible solutions to the problem that is being staged. Boal’s ultimate goal is not to find an actual solution 
to the crisis – even if sometimes the technique actually accomplishes this – but rather to create an environ￾ment for debating not just through verbal communication but also through performance. Forum theater 
perfectly fits the definition of simulation: it models a system (the oppressive situation) through another 
system (the play).
(Frasca 2003, 228)
Scholars in this field have also alerted our attention to the dictates of genre. As Stefan Simond says “when 
we look at how history is represented we have to at least … consider that games are tied into genres, they 
are tied to genre aesthetics … [to] the logic of how game systems work” (Studying Pixels 2022). Thus, our 
considerations of a game are bounded … by the dictates of genre: a wargame has genre attributes that are 
likely to distinguish it from an RPG or a platform game, or a point-and-click adventure game. Any design 
is working within at least some genre context shaping expectations and design decisions. (Jeansonne and 
Suckling n.d.)
This means, in our formulation of simulation spaces of the real-life processes we are attempting 
to mimic, games are shaped by the medium they move within, but there are also finer dictates of form 
to be mindful of in the guise of genre. Designers might work with or fight against genre conventions, 
or they might seek to blend many, or subvert many in various combinations. But ignoring these genre 
conventions is not only far from critical, but an audience is far less likely to be capable of or willing 
to ignore them; designers are held in harness to them regardless of their own inability to perceive 
them.
HISTORICAL GAME STUDIES AND SIMULATIONS
Let us pause for a moment to define historical game studies as:
the study of games that in some way represent the past or relate to discourses about it, the potential 
applications of such games to different domains of activity and knowledge, and the practices, motiva￾tions and interpretations of players of these games and other stakeholders involved in their production or 
consumption. 
(Chapman, Foka, and Westin 2017)
There are alternative definitions for a historical game as something that must: “begin at a clear point in 
real world history and [where] history has to have a manifest effect on the nature of the game experience” 
(MacCallum-Stewart and Parsler 2007, 204), or, more broadly: “games that in some way represent the past 
or relate to discourses about it” (Chapman, Foka, and Westin 2017).
Within this context, Kappel and Elliott, building on the work of games scholars, identify the 
two dominant modes of inquiry in the 1990s and early 2000s: of the narratologists, who view games 
through the perspective of narrative, and the ludologists, who view games through the perspective 
of gameplay, argue within their Playing With The Past (2013) for a “middle way” between the two. 
They suggest:3 • What Are Historical Simulations? 51
for narratologists the point is about the story while for ludologists the “play’s the thing”. In digital games 
that begin from within a historical narrative, however, the thing is the play within the narrative. 
(original emphasis of italics retained, Kapell and Elliott 2013, 19)
A certain kind of historian (someone in the Braudelian mold) might add, lest we forget, this historical nar￾rative is, itself, a mere snapshot within a system. Steven Johnson’s cultural thought experiment might be 
helpful to consider here. In a parallel universe, games chronologically precede books and parents bemoan 
the solitary and far less interactive new form of books over the more established form of socially con￾nected interactive games (Johnson 2005, 19). In such a universe, a reactionary historian would likely fur￾ther add that the only way to faithfully imitate a system is with another system, and to attempt to imitate a 
system with a static representation, to write a book about a game, is doomed to failure courting unavoid￾able distortions; it is to take mere snapshots of processes, and to be like Kafka’s philosopher in the short 
story “The Top.” In Kafka’s story, the philosopher’s compulsion to understand the spinning top causes 
him to pick it up and thereby to stop its spinning and so destroys the source of his fascination (Kafka 
1991, 134). Such a thought experiment suggests that, if history is a process, or, rather, a complex system of 
interlinking processes (some of which originate, while others atrophy over time), then making simulations 
(which are processes) about it is a better, and more faithful, methodology than to attempt to write about 
it. In such a trajectory, the logical conclusion of historical game studies is to make games about history.
This is perhaps a dangerous (and paradoxical) trajectory to invoke in the current context (a book), yet 
this notion of the uniqueness of play has been seized on by others, including Henry Brown, where he tells 
us: “by constructing a virtual past and granting the player agency within it, video games have become the 
ideal medium for teaching the lesson of contingency” (Brown, 2008, 118). Kappel and Elliott also note 
that the ludic nature of games – that they must be played obliges us to understand them differently (Kappel 
and Elliot 2013, 3). They go further:
If history is a process of selection and assembly, it is the latter process in which historical video games …
demonstrate their greatest capacity to engage players actively in constructing meanings and understanding 
history as a process rather than a master narrative of Great Men and their actions or acknowledged Social 
Forces and their effect. 
(original emphasis retained, Kapell and Elliott 2013, 14)
In all cases, we might omit the restriction to “video games” and see the relevance to board games. Suckling 
has touched on this topic too, in his expression of the “elixir of experiential historiography” in an attempt 
to capture the way in which historical games may cause players to experience feelings of value to his￾torical understanding (Suckling 2017, 118). Aforementioned in the preceding chapter are also the tools 
of rhetorical analysis, many of which are applicable to this concept, as well as concepts related to affect 
theory – placing emotion at the heart of the experience of play. In a related vein, Lünen et al. also invoke 
the notion of the value of history as a form of playing (Lünen et al. 2020, xiii).
Of particular note, and for our present purposes of considering the nature of simulations, one of the 
most significant observations in historical games studies comes from a 2005 chapter by William Uricchio, 
which has been cited as a foundational work in the field of historical games studies (Chapman 2016, 17; 
Chapman, Foka, and Westin 2017):
Simulations is a curious word in the English language. From the mid fourteenth century until the mid 
twentieth century, it was associated with meanings ranging from “false pretense” and “deception” to “the 
tendency to assume a form resembling that of something else.” After World War II, the term finally gave 
way to a more familiar “technique of initiating the behavior of some situation or process by means of a 
suitably analogous situation or apparatus, especially for the purpose of or study of personnel training. 
This rather dramatic shift in meaning, located by the Oxford English Dictionary in 1947, indicates a move 
away from simulation both as willful misrepresentation and something more akin to representation, to a 
modeling of behavior that is dynamic in nature, analogous in relationship, and pedagogical in goal. Unlike 52 Paper Time Machines 
representation, which tends to be fixed in nature, a simulation is a process guided by certain principles. 
Simulation is capable of generating countless encounters that may subsequently be fixed as representations, 
fixed, that is, as narrative or image or data set summations of a particular simulated encounter; whereas 
representation does not necessarily generate or include within it simulation. The difference is a crucial one, 
and speaks to just how radically the term transformed over the past half decade. A simulation is a machine 
for producing speculative or conditional representations.
(Uricchio 2005, 323 – original emphasis in italics retained)
Perhaps this is even more helpful than Frasca’s delineation above. The focus on simulation as a system, 
or a series of systems, or a machine for generating representation for a user, appears distinct from a “sys￾tem-less,” “snapshot,” and “locked” representation. Although even here we might cite Reader Response 
Theory from literary studies and push back that even a print book will not operate itself and sits within a 
system of language within a cultural constellation that is yet another system, and, in any case, representa￾tions through narrative remain mutable and open to reformulations. Indeed, even the word “text” from 
the Latin textus, meaning “tissue of a literary work, that which is woven or a web” carries connotations 
of being linked to a machine, and being machinistic itself (Mukherjee 2015, 30). Yet progress in a game 
is a direct consequence of a player’s input, and systems become operationalized, and the game’s state of 
being is altered through this input. These characteristics do not seem genuinely analogous to the way 
text becomes meaningful and yet undisrupted as it is read; the text is not open to “manipulation,” to use 
Frasca’s term, in the same way.
In any event, others have also subsequently noted the mutability in the meaning of “simulation”:
I think there was a moment in game studies or maybe in the allied disciplines of game studies, maybe 
computer science … where the MIC … the military industrial complex notion of simulation was natural￾ized as what simulation is … I think what’s important there is that simulation under this sort of paradigm 
gets put forth as a representation that’s more trustworthy because it has … data backing, or there’s some 
sort of impartial programmatic processing behind it. And what is fascinating about this is that simulation 
as a distinct term arises in English specifically to describe things that are more deceitful than normal 
representations.
(Game Studies Study Buddies 2022)
Writing with regard to digital games, Adam Chapman discerns two particular categories of simulation, 
what he terms realist and conceptual simulations (Chapman 2016, 59, original emphasis). He defines 
realist simulations through “stylistic approach to representation … most obviously characterised (sic) by 
their high degree of specificity,” referring to “a ‘realistic’ audio-visual style” (Chapman 2016, 61–2). He 
contrasts this with conceptual simulation which “tell us about the past without purporting to show it as it 
appeared” (sic), and includes the Civilization series (Chapman 2016, 70, original emphasis). These catego￾ries appear to map in some ways with Uricchio’s distinctions. Chapman’s conceptual simulation appears 
to align closely with Uricchio’s “abstracted historical process” games, such as Civilization III and Oregon 
Trail. Uricchio’s specific, speculative representations, which include wargames, carry the specificity of 
Chapman’s realist simulation but not its audio-visual realism (Uricchio 2005, 328).
Peterson, Miller, and Fedorko tell us:
History is the analysis of human action in past events, the circumstances surrounding their occurrence, 
and their implications for other people and subsequent events … [and] historical analysis [of these events] 
leads to the creation of historical representation, which assembles facts into a reasonable causal narrative 
… these representations of the past are not definitive … new research approaches have become increas￾ingly multidisciplinary and have experimented with new tools for cultivating historical interpretation. One 
of the most powerful of these tools is historical simulation … Simulation … is neither fixed nor passive. A 
simulation is an imitation of real-world situations or processes as they function over time. A participant in 
the simulation operates within the confines of a modeled process, with mechanisms that are not perfectly 
known to the player, meaning the effects are not perfectly predictable … Simulations necessarily fail as 3 • What Are Historical Simulations? 53
tools of legitimate historical representation because simulations are defined by player interaction. From the 
moment the player makes their first decision, they are no longer seeing actual history. Instead, they are act￾ing within a counterfactual … While commercial simulation video games fail to act as genuine historical 
representation, we argue that they successfully model conceptual frameworks necessary to understand and 
construct historical representations better than alternate media.
(original emphasis retained, Peterson, Miller, and Fedorko 2013, 35–8)
They speak of video games, but there is clearly much value for board games here. Aside from this rep￾resentation jibing with Frasca’s aforementioned narrative representation, working with the conceptual 
framework that simulations offer can help us to tease apart the notions of historical accuracy and histori￾cal authenticity which can consume (overmuch) oxygen in the field of historical game studies.
Since at least 1962 and the work of Donald Featherstone writing about miniatures wargaming, design￾ers have been evidently concerned with what he termed “realism” (Curry 1962, 21, 37, 41, 113, 144). Since 
at least 1969, commentators on games have contemplated the importance of what Richard C. Giberson 
termed “Historical Realism” (Giberson 1969, 4), by which he meant the means to measure “the accuracy 
with which the board, counters, and rules represent the military situation represented by the game, within 
the constraint that the game has been scaled down in its fine details” (Phillies 2014, Loc 772). George 
Phillies tells us, “Historical realism and historical accuracy refer to the extent to which the play of the 
game corresponds to historical factors and events” (original emphasis, Phillies 2014, Loc 822). The term 
“historicity” is widely used amongst historians to denote historical authenticity or accuracy – “the histo￾ricity of a claim about the past is its factual status” (Rockmore and Margolis 2006, 95) – but tends to be 
of little use in teasing those concepts apart.
Within this muddied context, it can prove helpful to consider accuracy, which means different things 
to different historians, as meaning “consistent with critically used evidence” (McCall 2020). McCall 
considers critically used evidence to mean “defensible models” that can provide “defensible analogies” 
(McCall 2023, 30). In contrast, authenticity can be considered something that meets subjective criteria. 
An adjacent term to “historical authenticity” is “historical memory” – “the space between myth, history 
and fiction” – which we might also elide with collective memory, social memory, and popular memory 
(Quiroga 2023, 16). Historical memory gives us a collective sense of what an audience might expect to see 
in a game in order to consider it authentic, as it helps to shape historical consciousness (Aronsson 2000, 
18–19). Such terms are adjacent to the term “historiography,” which is the study of the changing interpre￾tations about history (Furay & Salevouris 1988, 223), or the history of history.
Another way of pulling “accuracy” and “authenticity” apart might be to define accuracy by 
something that demands specificity in relation to critically used evidence; we are only being accurate 
about an event if we depict it happening in the same specific way, in the same specific time and place, 
within the same causal narrative, with the same provenance and consequences as complies with the 
definitive events. Since, as discussed earlier, this is highly problematic because of the complication 
of extracting events from the realm of concept into the realm of communication (in fact, prior to that, 
from the realm of cognizance), and would be to demand a level of accuracy in games we cannot even 
commit to within our understanding of history (even if we commute this to complying with events 
held within the historical record). Yet even by this metric, it is likely impossible for a game – by 
definition of the choices it permits – to conform to this formulation. A more useful consideration for 
historical games might be the degree of historical authenticity they evoke. With authenticity we could 
say that what is at stake is a depiction of something that might reasonably have happened given the 
general situation presented in the game (Studying Pixels 2022). This is to dance into the possibilities 
of counterfactualism, and to focus on history as contingency without being constrained by strict nar￾rative causality, but rather to conceive of an agency bounded by historical plausibility. We may see 
Aristotle’s approval in this accuracy/authenticity distinction, as it echoes, with some irony, his view 
on the superiority of poetry over history – “poetry is something more philosophical and more worthy 
of serious attention than history: for while poetry is concerned with universal truths, history treats of 
particular facts” (Aristotle 1988, 11).54 Paper Time Machines 
A further methodological framework from this space, with a bearing on the ways we might frame our 
simulations, comes from Jeremiah McCall’s “historical problem space” (McCall 2023, 30–3).
all history games … create what I call historical problem spaces. They present the past in terms of a player 
agent, like a main character who’s in some kind of game world, has goals set for them by the designer …
and the problem is how in that game world to work with or against or around the things that are in it – the 
elements – in order to get the goal?
(Studying Pixels 2022)
Such a framework helps re-focus design decisions of the playable space within the context of what choices 
designers will provide to players (the parameters of the playable space) as they balance other issues, such 
as playability, alongside considerations such as historical sources and interpretations. As with the issue of 
accuracy, and as with the issue of genre conventions outlined above, it helps to remind us not to berate a 
game for failing to provide what it had no intention (or capacity) to provide in the first place. Yet nor does 
it force a game designer to capitulate to the position that the game has nothing to say, and can be of little 
value, other than perhaps a distraction; what we might term the it’s just a game defense. For our simula￾tions in board games, our route to the imitation of reality is through abstractions. Although abstractions 
they are, we should not lightly retreat into declaring they mean nothing.
As one final point here, let us add, in 2003 Kevin Burns wrote:
To attract more people to the [board wargaming] hobby, I suggest we use the term “historical simulation 
games,” rather than wargames. Historical simulation is really what they are about after all. History involves 
many things, only one of which is war … Admittedly, the subject matter of the games “Third Reich” and 
“War and Peace” amongst others, are the Second World war and the Napoleonic Wars respectively … (but) 
they are historical games, and that is what I hope to learn about, when I sit opposite you, and roll the dice.
(Burns 2003, quoted in Uricchio 2005, 333)
The provenance of the term “historical simulations” goes back at least as far as 1969 with the foundation 
of Simulations Publications, Inc. by James Dunnigan (Dunnigan 1992, 149). The adjacent term “conflict 
simulation” may have been adopted by the hobby in the 1970s and 1980s due to its use in academia and to 
negative public opinion from the term “wargame” (Siggins, cited in Buckley 2022, 63).
At the risk of embroiling ourselves in further semantic turbulence, the point here is we have had his￾torical games (or simulations) in popular culture and within hobby groups for quite some time before we 
had historical games (or simulation) studies, and there would appear to be quite some ground to make up, 
especially in the field of board game studies, where research in the early 2020s still appears to be in its 
infancy, and considerably lagging behind digital game studies.
ADAPTATION STUDIES AND SIMULATIONS
Adaptation studies, a scholarly field adjacent to both media studies and games studies, serves to 
remind us of the central utility and nature of metaphor, with its implicit grounding in philosophical 
values. “In every rhetorical definition of metaphor is imposed not just a philosophical position, but a 
conceptual network within which philosophy as such is constituted” (Derrida 1974, 30). As Kamilla 
Elliott points out: “Roman Jackobson argued that metaphor and metonymy are (sic) (rather than are 
metaphors for) the paradigmatic and syntagmatic axes of all symbolic communication” (Elliott 2020, 
260). This alignment with simulation constructs comes closer into focus when we consider the nature 
of analogy (a word, like “analog” with its roots in the Greek “logos,” and here meaning proportion). 
In the field of rhetorical logic, “analogy” is defined as a “process of arguing from similarity in known 3 • What Are Historical Simulations? 55
respects to similarity in other respects” (OED, “analogy,” definition 7.b cited in Elliott 2020, 262). 
Indeed, “adaptation” itself is defined as:
3a. The quality of being adapted or suitable for a particular use, purpose, or function, or to a particular 
environment; adaptedness.
6. A result of a process of adapting or being adapted; an adapted or modified version of form.
(OED, 2nd.. ed., s.v. “adaptation,” cited in Elliott 2020, 181)
Such definitions would appear to align closely with Frasca’s interpretation of simulations outlined above. 
In adaptation studies, the potency of analogy as the means to operate between one media and another 
is extensively well remarked upon, and it has been deemed the key to the practice, and theorizing, of 
adaptations (Elliott 2020, 263). Even a brief excursion into adaptation studies can encourage us to see our 
simulations as metaphors extended into analogies; the point here being that our simulations may not nec￾essarily be encumbered with complexity even if the real-world process they imitate is itself deeply com￾plex. We may consider it possible to approach the imitation of complexity in the real world via adaptation 
into something far less complex in another format. It is not the rendering of the complexity that defines the 
simulation as being accurate or not. What defines the simulation’s accuracy is that a metaphor or analogy 
of the process, or the perception of the process, is rendered faithfully.
We may weigh the thoughts of wargame designer Frank Chadwick on the topic of accuracy, where 
he comments that:
there are two distinct forms of accuracy: product accuracy and process accuracy. The former, if 
viewed in complete isolation from the latter, is typified by the ‘it all comes out in the wash’ school of 
thought … The latter, again in isolation, holds that the final outcome is irrelevant; what is important 
is the feel of each turn. 
(Chadwick 1978, 28)
Our metaphors, our analogies, our simulations might be deemed accurate, if indeed they are, because 
they are blends of these “product” and “process” metrics, which may feel satisfying; and this feeling is 
not necessarily to be considered inferior to complex accumulations of computational data. As Riccardo 
Masini says:
complexity is not a synonym for accuracy … simplicity is not an arbitrary 1–3 I win, 4–6 you win dynamic; 
it’s representing acceptable levels of detail in a manageable way, that does not hurt the cognitive economy, 
personal vision, historical plausibility of the overall game experience had by the players.
(Masini 2023 The Board Wargamer group)
This should not be read as an argument to necessarily pull away from complexity, merely as a note of 
caution on not assuming complexity equates to accuracy. Indeed, on a linked thread in the same Facebook 
group, Matthew Kirschenbaum reasserts the case that details are what confers immersion, as he responds 
to and quotes a previous comment:
“Every device created for simulation in a game is a step away from the goal of immersing players” (sic)
Not obvious at all that this assertion is true. Take ASL [Advanced Squad Leader], certainly the poster child 
for a complex game. Rule book runs to hundreds of pages, dozens of charts. Even experienced players often 
have to pause a game to look up something obscure.
And yet. Anyone who has played it will tell you it’s one of the most immersive games around. Total absorp￾tion in the tiny world on the board. Fantastic narrative generator. People talk about things that happened in 
their games years later. “That time the crew bailed out of a tank with a malfunctioning gun, scrounged the 56 Paper Time Machines 
turret MG, and then stopped an enemy attack in its tracks until they went berserk, charged a lone hero, and 
were slaughtered to a man.” That sort of thing.
Everything in that little sketch is possible precisely *because* (sic) there are explicit rules that enable it 
(and that’s why the rule book is hundreds of pages). You can’t have a narrative like that if all you’re doing 
is rolling sixes to hit. Complexity *yields* (sic) immersion. 
(Kirschenbaum 2023 The Board Wargamer group)
It is, indeed, true, as Kirschenbaum says, that complexity yields immersion. Yet it can also be true that 
complexity is a barrier to it. Not all audiences are alike, and different design topics have their own inher￾ent challenges, on which audience expectations (and familiarity), genre conventions, and the array of 
available game mechanics are brought to bear.
It is perhaps possible to consider the act of historical game design as, in essence, an exercise in find￾ing and applying the correct mechanics to function as metaphors for the narrative and/or simulation goals 
underpinning the design. The Required Military Operations in Twilight Struggle are a design subsystem 
that functions as a metaphor for the internal pressures driving each side to be self-evidently active in a 
military context. The rule dictating that Scoring Cards in Twilight Struggle must be played before the 
end of a round is a metaphor for strategic limitations, and the trade-off between intelligence and other 
resources – you can know where the scoring is going to occur, or be able to apply resources somewhere, 
but you can’t have both at the same time in the same area; intelligence is its own resource, and resources 
are not limitless.
HISTORICAL GAMES AS MODELS
Closely associated with the term “simulation,” and already referenced from numerous sources, is the 
notion of “models,” or the “modeling” of processes that sit within the simulation and are run by it. Indeed, 
within professional wargaming “modeling and simulation” or “M&S” are essentially conjoined elements 
of a methodology. The way the term “model” is used is frequently with the implicit meaning of a “simula￾tion model”. Scott Page tells us:
Models are formal structures represented in mathematics and diagrams that help us to understand the 
world. Mastery of models improves your ability to reason, explain, design, communicate, act, predict, and 
explore.
(Page 2018, 1)
From this same world, Mitch Reed (Senior Strategic Wargame Analyst, The Joint Staff at the time of 
writing) gives us:
in my line of work simulation means a process without human decision making, I can create a model to run 
a simulation and then use that run to inform a wargame which uses human decision making or compare 
the results of each.
(Reed October 17 2023, Facebook)
Thus, models are structures not only for processes but also structures that facilitate data outputs. Yet there 
is far more to say here. The adjacent field of game theory, “the logical analysis of situations of conflict 
and cooperation” (Straffin 1993, 3) or “the science of interactive decision making” (Zagare 2019, 7), is 
instructive. In this field a game is “equivalent to a table of possible outcomes” (Poundstone 1993, 47), and 
game theorists have developed several ways to represent game structure (Zagare 2019, 9). These models 3 • What Are Historical Simulations? 57
(referred to as “games” with specific names in game theory) help to demonstrate the essential features of 
real-world phenomena in a simplified and abstract form, and then permit analysis and prescription of these 
situations (Straffin 1993, 4). The work of game theorists can be leveraged by game studies to help find the 
mathematical and/or visual means for representing game structures, which can be an immensely helpful 
tool in analysis. Similarly, the work of game theorists can be of immense help to game designers when 
they are attempting to visualize the structures of their games in development. We will return to this topic 
in Chapter 8 when we look at systems analysis visualizations.
A well-known game in this field is the Prisoner’s Dilemma. Figure 3.4 is the Prisoner’s Dilemma 
presented in the specific form known as the Arms Race Game. Here both State A and State B each have 
two choices: to arm or not to arm. If they both choose to arm, the result is an arms race and the states have 
reached what is termed a “Nash equilibrium,” where neither player has any incentive to switch strategy 
(Zagare 2019, 11).
Figure 3.5 is a further example of a visual model, known as the Unilateral Deterrence Game. This is 
a way to represent the dilemmas confronting the key decision makers of France and Germany in the 1936 
Rhineland crisis.
A model is a purposeful simplification of reality as it is perceived, or at least as it is expressed by 
the designer (Tolk 2015, 87–106; King, Keohane, and Verba 1994, 49). We do well to recall the words of 
statistician George Box: “All models are wrong but some are useful.” (Box 1979, 202) That is: “we make 
tentative assumptions about the real world which we know are false but which we believe may be useful 
nonetheless” (Box 1976, 792). As J. D. Williams tells us:
If the biophysicist can usefully employ simplified models of the cell and the cosmologist simplified models 
of the universe, then we can reasonably expect that simplified games may prove to be useful models for the 
more complicated conflicts [any game considered in Game Theory terms is a conflict]. 
(Williams 1982, 3–5)
There are numerous antecedents to this core insight from myriad fields, with Picasso’s “Art is a lie that makes 
us realize truth” (Picasso 1923, 10), Walter Shewhart (the founder of statistical process control) and his “any 
model is always an incomplete though useful picture of the conceived physical thing” (Shewhart 1939, 19), and 
poet Paul Valéry’s “Ce qui est simple est toujours faux, ce qui ne l’est pas est inutilisable” [Whatever is simple 
is always wrong, whatever is not is unusable] (Wolfson 1998, 3), amongst many others.
We are, then, well-cautioned that models will be limited and inaccurate. As King, Keohane, and 
Verba tell us:
All models range between restrictive and unrestrictive versions. Restrictive models are clearer, more par￾simonious, and more abstract, but they are also less realistic (unless the world really is parsimonious). 
FIGURE 3.4 Arms Race Game (Zagare 2019, 9).58 Paper Time Machines 
Models which are unrestrictive are detailed, contextual, and more realistic, but they are also less clear and 
harder to estimate with precisions.
(King, Keohane, Verba 1994, 50)
What matters is that we are aware of where our focus lies, so that we may concern ourselves with the 
aspects of the models we create we wish to be most useful; this is where we need to ensure our models 
are not, what Box would term “importantly wrong.” As he says: “It is inappropriate to be concerned about 
mice when there are tigers abroad” (Box 1976, 792). We might even go so far as to say that every model 
is unavoidably inherently wrong; extracting sub-systems from a universe that can no longer function in 
their wholly inter-relational context once extracted is to replay Kafka’s The Top, once again. However, 
seeing these sub-systems in some form of relief permits some opportunity to meaningfully perceive them.
Some models in professional wargaming may be derived from what mathematicians would know 
as Monte Carlo methods. This is a methodology that operates through probabilities and is a class of 
computational analysis to help solve extremely complicated problems. It is an approach that seeks to 
solve complexity through randomness. When professional game designers attempt to model reality, they 
are undertaking an extremely complicated problem. As Paxson says: “Military events are frequently, if 
not always, concatenations of chance subevents” (Paxson 1971, 281). At the core of this approach is to 
determine the probabilistic outcome of any given input (or event) through a large data sample – the larger 
the data sample set the more reliable the output data (Shonkwiler and Mendivil 2009, 1–6). As Paxson 
summarizes:
FIGURE 3.5 The 1936 Rhineland Crisis (from Zagare 2019, 27).3 • What Are Historical Simulations? 59
Monte Carlo is an exercise in statistical sampling … The Monte Carlo method is a highly useful tool in 
maximizing the information potentially available in what is usually a submodel in a large war game.
(Paxson 1971, 283)
However, in hobby wargame designers will most likely never derive models from this methodology. More 
than likely they will employ rules of thumb in common usage across the hobby (see Herman 2022 for his 
C3i article about the largely mythical 3:1 force ratio for a successful attack, for example), or they will use 
their own research to sift data in various forms – predominantly the work of scientists or historians – to 
derive understandings of history and to systematize these findings into their game (see Herman 2022;
Dupuy Institute 2020). Scott Page would tell us the “wisdom hierarchy” takes data, which is transformed 
into information, which, in turn, is transformed into knowledge, which, in turn, is transformed into wis￾dom (Page 2018, 7), where wisdom is the highest evolutionary form data may achieve.
In any event, what matters is our awareness of the limitations in the creation of the model and so the 
limitations of what it might purport to demonstrate – and to whom. As Volko Ruhnke says:
the upshot of the prevalence of complex systems in life is that modelbuilding is the best tool that we have to 
obtain for ourselves a fighting chance at understanding at least the most important aspects of the problems 
facing us. Professionals in disciplines whose thinking can be proven right or wrong—mathematicians, 
scientists, and engineers—all know this to be true.
And that is what conflict simulations, the sort of games discussed in these pages, are: models. They are 
purposeful simplifications of human interactions, of strategic interaction specifically.
(The Forge 2023)
Across the professional wargames field, as it skews into the hobby space there seems broad agreement 
about foundational ways of thinking about what a model is. Three extended passages from key commenta￾tors/designers will help to bring alignments into focus first, from Peter Perla:
Wargames use models as representations of all the aspects of reality the game may be required to simulate. 
These models may take various forms. Many nineteenth-century wargames relied largely on the judgment 
of experienced professional soldiers and sailors. Modern professional games often employ complex math￾ematical expressions programmed into high-speed computers. Modern hobby games use a combination of 
unit ratings and tabulated battle outcomes (combat results tables) chosen by comparing opposing ratings.
A professional wargames models and the results they produce are best considered as inputs to the game, 
devices to move gameplay along rather than measures to evaluate player success or failure. Specific model 
needs vary from game to game. Some of the broad categories of models most likely to be required in 
wargames are the following:
• Physical environment
• Kinematics
• Intelligence collection and dissemination
• Command, control, and communications
• Sensors
• Weapons
• Logistics
No matter what the former subject of wargame models, good ones share the following key characteristics:
• They accurately reflect factors most prominent for player decision levels.
• They are flexible enough to deal with unusual decisions
• They are adaptable to changes in the data base.
• They are stochastic to the extent reality is stochastic
• They are documented to allow others to understand assumptions and algorithms.60 Paper Time Machines 
Chief among these characteristics is the need to reflect accurately the influence of those factors, most 
prominent in the decision processes of the game’s player roles. (Curry 2011, 197–8)
We see highly similar language and concerns for the same kinds of concepts from Philip Sabin:
military simulation games are made up of two fundamental components. The first is an underlying math￾ematical model of reality, which seeks to simulate the terrain of the battle area, the deployment and capa￾bilities of military forces, and the passage of time during the engagement, thereby providing a synthetic 
experimental environment that mirrors in certain key respects the real range of potential courses and 
outcomes associated with the armed conflict concerned. The second, equally fundamental, component 
of military simulation games consists of an iterative set of active decision inputs by one or more players 
to guide the simulated actions of the combatants, and to respond to the changing course of the simulated 
conflict, in order to maximize their relative or absolute performance in terms of artificial victory criteria 
established to reflect the real measures of success and failure associated with the actual engagement. It 
is this combination of mathematical modelling (sic) and active decision inputs that gives wargames their 
unique potential as a source of insight into armed conflict, since the combination mirrors the dual character 
of war itself as a set of physical realities in terms of force capabilities that is given life only by the interact￾ing strategies of the competing antagonists.
(Sabin 2015, 4)
Volko Ruhnke has also spoken at some length, across a range of print and video interviews and presenta￾tions, about modeling:
Most board games and video games that are about something are models … Trading games, railroad 
building games, shooting games, strategic war games. They all communicate the game designers’ model 
of certain aspects of human affairs. A historical board game designer typically will not do much original 
historical research … Instead, they read lots of historians’ books on a historical period, then express the 
models underlying those experts’ writing in game form. Politics concern the affairs of millions of human 
beings deciding who gets what when…These affairs are so complex that we must simplify them to interpret 
them. When we think about politics, the dynamic interactions of millions, the filters that we use are mental 
models, either explicit or intuitive. When we debate politics thoughtfully, we are discussing competing 
models … A political model must include the interaction of human incentives, capacities, decisions, and 
outcomes leading to new decisions … That equals a game. Victory conditions … player moves that affect 
something, winners and losers … Experiencing a game, players can then decide if they buy that model …
If so, then perhaps someone’s political point is made. Far more importantly, if players do not completely 
buy the model, they have refined or at least made more explicit their own model of the world in contrast 
with that in the game.
The game’s model can enable players to experience in a simplified way the interactions of many aspects 
of politics.
(Shut Up & Sit Down 2015)
Elsewhere Ruhnke has referred to models as addressing complexity in terms that resonate with the US 
military’s use of the term “interactive complexity” which we shall return to at the end of this chapter:
What I mean … by complexity and complex systems is in the … formal sense, in the mathematical sense, 
complex adaptive systems, meaning the … interactions of many actors and factors – actors with agency – 
the interactions themselves creating a nature of the whole that is fundamentally different from any of its 
parts … small inputs produce big outputs – they’re non-linear – that’s complexity. 
(Chatter 2023)
Models do not only give us a means to render complexity in an accessible form, but as core and shaping 
concepts within game design they also express a viewpoint. This viewpoint is shaped according to defined 
possibilities and their related probabilities. How likely anything is to occur within your model – and when 3 • What Are Historical Simulations? 61
– is dictated to by the way you design it. Who is likely to be able to drive what outcomes and what the 
likelihood is of those outcomes leading to further outcomes is also part of the model’s viewpoint. Your 
model is a (re)construction of the decision-space available to your historical actors, and an expression of 
the potential potency of their agency. In historical simulation games, your viewpoint is bounded by plausi￾bility. If you construct a model capable of historical implausibilities, you have failed to create an historical 
model. Models, then, are not just distillations of reality (however and unavoidably flawed), they are, by 
necessity of that distillation, expressions of the nature of plausibility (however distorted or misguided). 
We may think of the models at the heart of historical games as being engines for exploring plausibility. We 
should, however, be cautious to equate these “plausibility engines” as being “prediction engines.” Ruhnke 
has expressed his skepticism of the potency of games to predict human affairs (Beyond Solitaire 2021), 
and to quote him directly:
The reasons for my skepticism are the complexity and non-linear outputs of decisions made by so many 
human individuals … Political games are best for the support of discourse, training, and education …
Endeavors that help us prepare or position for the future even if they do not predict. Used appropriately, 
simulation gaming of human affairs such as politics can help us think more fully and deeply about future 
possibilities … It can open scenarios that we had not considered … It can raise questions about assump￾tions that we had not even realized that we held. It can start conversations among us about how political 
affairs work and where they might go … It makes political conversations more productive … Because they 
are structured around a commonly experienced but not necessarily commonly accepted model: a game.
(Shut Up & Sit Down 2015)
Models, after all, are built from analysis, but experienced through synthesis. As Ruhnke says:
We can chop up the problem to understand its pieces – that’s the definition of analysis. But seeing the whole is a 
different level of challenge. To succeed, we don’t need better analysts, we need better synthesists … By the last 
decade of my career, it had become evident that systems complexity was the key barrier to intelligence agen￾cies providing policy and operational consumers with effective opportunity analysis. The most consequential 
challenge for an analytic training curriculum then would be, how can we equip analysts to better deal with the 
complexity of the world? Searching far and wide, the answer boiled down to a single word: models.
(The Forge 2023)
Brien Miller tells us:
Useful models tend to exhibit three criteria (derived from George Box, as cited in Odlyzko 2010):
• They contribute to a rational understanding of the subject under study.
• They often provide a basis for extrapolation of conditions worthy of further investigation.
• They tend to be efficient in the use of parameters of output. (In short, they meet the Ockham’s 
razor test: the principle of parsimony, economy, or succinctness used in problem solving devised 
by William of Ockham [c.1287–1347]). (Miller 2016, 184)
He offers two approaches for validating models: statistical and forensic.
Statistical validation models [range] from simple data aggregation to the more complex data analyses such 
as Bayesian inference and data topology … However, in the realm of historical models – that is, models 
based on historical events – applying statistical approaches can be fraught with difficulties due to the sub￾stantial lack of data.
(Miller 2016, 186)
Simply put, the forensic approach asks the question: given our knowledge of knowable conditions, what 
can we predict about the unknowable conditions? It is generally accepted that there are two types of 62 Paper Time Machines 
“unknowable” conditions: knowable unknowables, and the unknowable unknowables. The focus of foren￾sic evaluation is to establish a rational basis-of-estimate for filling the gaps in the knowable unknowables.
(Miller 2016, 196–7)
Let us add a third approach to validation, one that hinges on player feedback to engagement within the 
model. Here it is the experiential nature of being within the model’s dynamic experience-field, of acting 
within and against its constraints, that is a determinant of the model’s quality; we cannot get there with￾out the analysis required to build the model, but unless we experience it the model is a machine we have 
never turned on; it is just the idea of a machine. When it is turned on – when it is used by players – then 
it becomes a simulation.
However, as we are about to see, not everyone agrees that models is a term we should even be using.
The Re-Stated Limitations of Games
In 2022, in the hobby magazine C3i, James Buckley, development director at Phalanx Games, tells us:
I think that terms like “modelling” (sic) and “simulations” are disingenuous. More importantly, I wonder 
if it’s unhelpful. Disingenuous because a map, some counters, dice and 40 pages of rules are not capable 
of simulating much.
I discussed this point with Dr David Banks, the Academic Director of the King’s College Wargaming 
Network. His view is that both American-style games and wargames are “representative”; they claim to 
represent something, rather than just providing a vehicle for delivering game mechanics. The difference is 
that American-style games focus more on aesthetics and components (models and art), to deliver this rep￾resentation, while wargames turn to rules. These rules provide what David calls the “synthetic experience” 
of making realistic decisions, which is for wargames what drives the representation. Ergo – and these are 
my words, not his – the role of extensive and detailed rules around supply or reinforcements in wargames is 
not to create a simulation. It’s a lubricant. Wargamers, particularly those very historically inclined, need to 
believe to allow the theatre (sic) of the mind to start kicking in … Unhelpful because I fear such discourse 
may create barriers to entry to the hobby, barriers to diversity in the community …
Why do we use such scientific terms to describe the act of playing a game? Here are three reasons I can 
think of.
One: the nature of the design and the background of the designer. Often the design will be the fruit of 
years of historical research into the subject matter. The designer may themselves be an amateur historian, 
immersed in academic discourse. Or someone with connections to the professional side of wargaming, 
where such terminology is commonplace. It’s not unnatural he or she would lean into academic terms when 
describing their game.
Two (and this harks back to the sensitive subject matter some wargames cover): Academic euphemisms can 
provide a layer of protection against potential criticism that certain subjects are too important to discuss in 
“game” terms. Indeed, I reached out to Mike Siggins, publisher of the famous 90s board gaming magazine 
Sumo, for an explanation of the etymology of “conflict simulation.” He recalled it was in part adopted in 
response to its use in academia, and in part in response to the negative public response that came from 
the term “wargame” in the 70s and 80s, both from peace activists and, in countries like West Germany, 
in general.
Three: a desire by the designer, publisher or reviewer to make the endeavour (sic) of wargaming seem more 
worthwhile than just gaming; of empirical value.
(Buckley 2022, 63)
This deserves a response, substantially because “model” and “simulation” are preferred terms in this 
current volume for reasons outlined above – although, for greater clarity, whilst some games might be 
considered models, this is not the case for all games. Further, perhaps the term “game” should and could, 3 • What Are Historical Simulations? 63
in time, be sufficient in its own right, and ought not to require “simulation” to provide a sense of gravitas. 
The increasing pervasiveness of the application of gameful learning within education and the deepening 
of the roots of gaming in popular culture may yet mean “game” ultimately becomes entirely sufficient. 
However, as of the date of writing, we do not yet appear to be at this juncture. The “Games and Simulation 
Arts and Sciences program” at RPI was not called the “Games program” with good reasons – not all of 
them because the word “game” was fearful for an academic institution – but certainly some of which lean 
into Buckley’s rationale. Academic framings matter in key contexts and can afford designers and their 
projects degrees of covetous legitimacy.
That said, if “simulation” is being used because it carries more sense of something accurate beyond the 
intentions or capabilities of “games,” or because it appears to align with scientific and more scholarly rigorous 
criteria than “representations” we would do well to pause. As outlined above, the word “simulation” has shifted 
its meaning over time, and although its use carries some patina of legitimate scholarship, it cannot be used in 
such a context without due caution – as perhaps the nature of this chapter might demonstrate. It may promise 
much, but there is a price to pay for its careless use; even its careful use also carries a cost.
Regardless, the real issue here is Buckley’s “a map, some counters, dice and 40 pages of rules are 
not capable of simulating much” (Buckley 2022, 63). Whilst it is assuredly the case that not all such 
combinations of physical elements are capable of simulating much, and no such combination may be 
capable of simulating much for everyone, the view held strongly here is that, as per the previous chapter, 
and the previous section of this current chapter, it is possible to simulate a very great deal with a map, 
some counters, dice, and 40 pages of rules. Indeed, with such components, far more may be possible 
and far more may be being simulated than designers may fully appreciate. Historical games are – to 
return to the title of this book – paper time machines. Well-designed games explore and evoke history, 
capturing and challenging the imaginations of players while generating the “experiential rhetoric” we 
explored in Chapter 2.
The point may rest in definitions, if we are prepared to accept that some whiff of history may be 
represented in a game but we are less willing to agree that anything is simulated. Buckley himself says: 
“one can get lost in fruitless discussion on semantics and definitions – exactly the kind of academic over￾analysis I propose we try to move away from” (Buckley 2022, 63). Yet if we return to a definition from 
near the beginning of this chapter and think of simulation as the imitation of a real-world process, as 
indicative of mimicry rather than suggestive of accuracy, and we acknowledge that a model, by definition, 
cannot be accurate – all models are wrong, but some are useful – then perhaps we may simply step off 
the carousel of fruitless over-analysis. Does this not make everything stop spinning? We must then only 
accept that the real world does have processes and that, if we are circumspect in our ambitions, and judi￾cious in our attempts, we may find some ways to isolate and mimic some of them in some form, and thus 
to be simulating something.
If we cannot accept “simulation” without it answering to some sense of accuracy and practical appli￾cability, we can turn to examples of games and wargames, even commercial board games as being of 
use. Dunnigan refers to two parallel approaches by the DOD post-WWII, one he refers to as driven by 
scientific principles, with algorithms and vast amounts of data, and the other he terms an “historical 
approach, where less precise algorithms were created, based on less complete data, and refined using his￾torical experience, to produce a ‘good enough’ simulation of combat” (Dunnigan 2020, 8). Immediately 
following the 1990 Iraq invasion of Kuwait, the DOD wished to wargame out the situation but found its 
billion-dollar computerized systems too slow to respond to the situation. Instead, Mark Herman’s board 
game Gulf Strike (1983) – available in hobby stores for under $50 – was instrumental in helping plan 
initial responses (Dunnigan 2020, 8). This may be one distinct and rare example of a hobby game having 
direct professional specific application, but there are other examples of what Dunnigan terms “manual 
wargames” being of contextual professional utility. Dunnigan cites the example of a wargame German 
commanders were conducting during the Allied invasion of France in 1944.
Despite overwhelming ground, and aerial superiority plus Ultra and the element of surprise the Germans 
proved remarkably adept at moving the few troops they had available at Normandy to block an expected 64 Paper Time Machines 
quick advance. The breakout from Normandy took place later than expected and it wasn’t until years later 
that a manual German wargame was described as part of the reason. 
(Dunnigan 2020, 8)
Dunnigan further asserts:
The development and application of computers, operations, analysis (OR) and systems analysis during 
World War II firmly implanted the idea that simulations of war had to, and could, provide precise and 
unambiguous answers. It was ignored that history-based games, despite being relatively imprecise, and 
ambiguous, had usually been accurate enough to be very useful. So as the decades rolled by after 1945, 
even the slow learners realized that the scientific approach could not match the usefulness, reliability and 
timely accuracy of the older style wargames. Finally, in the 1980s, the Department of Defense, without 
abandoning its science approach to wargaming, allowed the older historical games (both manual and com￾puterized) to have a place at the table.
Several military war games summed up the problem, very succinctly by pointing out that there is a trade￾off between the accuracy of your war game and how much time and resources you have available. In 
wartime, commanders have discovered that they can prepare a “good enough” analysis (or wargame) of a 
situation in a few hours. A few days, a few months or a few years, can create more accurate wargames, but 
these don’t count if they’re not available when needed.
(Dunnigan 2020, 8)
Again, then, we might recalibrate our expectations on the accuracy we demand from our games. Historical 
board games need not be deemed a zero sum game. They may be inaccurate and limited, but that does 
not mean we must accept that they are wholly inaccurate and incapable of some accuracy, and therefore 
incapable of modeling, in some form, something that is real and of real value – to return to Williams’ 
argument from earlier in this chapter, biophysicists model, cosmologists model, why not historians too? 
(Williams 1982, 3–5).
ROLEPLAY OR SIMULATION?
In the same article discussed above, Buckley has another important and related point to make about 
wargames being simulations in the sense of role-playing games. Buckley alludes to comments made by 
Matt Lees, of Shut Up & Sit Down (a popular board game review website) as the spur to his thinking, 
which, although not rendered in Buckley’s article, are presented here in fuller form:
... wargames – these binary bash ups, red versus blue, I increasingly think that they’re not about winning at all. 
The one thing that binds them together is detail, right? These granular little nods to specific little wrinkles. And 
I always assumed that this focus on detail was for the purpose of accuracy – you know – simulation. And I think 
a lot of people who are fans of the hobby in this particular part of the genre will still claim that that’s the case, 
but I don’t, I don’t necessarily think that’s all that true. I think the detail here is just about texture, and I think 
that secretly wargames have a ton more in common than you might expect with role-playing games. Maybe 
wargames are just an exercise in collaborative storytelling, in which you explore a familiar setting that then 
mutates because of the choices you both make, and because of the outcomes of rolled dice. 
(Shut Up & Sit Down 2023)
Buckley picks up from here.
Matt Lees isn’t the first person to observe that wargames are a type of roleplay game. Decades ago, John 
Hill compared his game Squad Leader to Dungeons and Dragons. “In both games, things tend to go wrong, 3 • What Are Historical Simulations? 65
and being caught moving in the street by a heavy machinegun (sic) is like being caught by a people-eating 
dragon.
(Buckley 2022, 62)
Buckley also cites Ruhnke, with a fuller reference given here:
Conflict simulations are in some part roleplay. Players represent historical actors or, more often collections 
of historical actors who had certain purview.
(Ruhnke 2021, 6)
Buckley is correct. There are numerous other references to role-playing within wargames. Indeed, role￾playing exists as an often overlapping tradition within and across wargames. Jon Peterson has traced the 
origins of “rollenspiel” – this term also has its origins in the German language – from psychotherapy to 
Viennese experimental theater, into RAND where it blended with kriegsspiel, and role-playing further 
intersected with collaborative and performative storytelling and into Dungeons & Dragons (Peterson 
2012, 373–7). Of especial significance is the Gary Gygax and Jeff Perren skirmish-level medieval 
wargame ruleset Chainmail (1971 onward) and its “fantasy supplement.” Shannon Appelcline tells us:
Its 14 pages described how to introduce singular heroes, superheroes, and wizards into Chainmail play. 
Wizards even had a variety of spells such as fireball, lightning bolt, phantasmal force, darkness, and more.
(Appelcline 2014, 9)
Peter Perla, too, can help to show us something of this blended tradition, and again we see how the model 
of a simulation is bounded by plausible agency:
if the essence of wargaming is decisions, then the essence of playing wargames lies precisely in the player’s 
ability to assume a meaningful decision-making role … Well-respected historical-board-game designers 
such as Frank Chadwick of Game Designers Workshop have argued that “all historical-based games are 
role-playing games.” [Frank Chadwick My Two Cents] In the last few years, computer-wargame design￾ers like William Nichols {Seventh Fleet and Long Lance) (sic) have also come to the same conclusions. 
Nichols’s games make use of what he calls the “viewpoint oriented” approach, in which the players (sic) 
knowledge and control over the situation is restricted to as accurate a representation of the limitations of 
real-world command as the game designer can devise.
(Curry 2011, 221)
Nichols terms his design style in Long Lance “viewpoint oriented.” The more widely used hobby term is 
“role simulation.” The role simulation places the game player in a well-defined role and attempts to re￾create that role’s decision-making responsibility. It also tries to restrict the information the player receives 
as well as limit his control by the C3 [command, control, communications] limitations of his real-life 
counterpart.
(Perla 2011, 269)
There are certainly RPGs that blend with historical board games, such as Uboot (2019), where players 
adopt the roles of groups of characters as they attempt their missions and I, Napoleon (2024), not released 
at the time of writing, but the player appears to take on the role of Napoleon, where managing his family 
is no lesser concern than managing military and political affairs – indeed, they seem all inter-related. 
There are historical RPGs such as Flashing Blades (1984) putting players in the world of The Three 
Musketeers, and Space: 1889 (1989) – the latter being alternate history with science fiction of H. G. Wells 
and Jules Verne blended with an historical late nineteenth century. We also have card-driven historical 
RPGs in Legion of Honor (2014), about roleplaying through the career of a Napoleonic soldier. Perhaps 66 Paper Time Machines 
The Grizzled (2015), about a small group of French poilus cooperatively attempting to survive the Great 
War, might be categorized as a card-driven historical light-RPG. In any case, Buckley himself notes a 
disparity between RPGs and historical board games in general, then builds to a key point:
These two esteemed gents [John Hill and Volko Ruhnke] are not talking about roleplay in the way Lees 
was. Theirs is a loose comparison. Lees is referring to role-playing more in the first-person, RPG sense. 
While I think he’s onto something, I don’t think roleplay is the right label. To actively roleplay or represent a 
specific “character,” particularly drawn from history, requires a degree of awareness of the individual, their 
thought process, desires, habits and foibles. It might be possible if you are playing Napoleon or MacArthur. 
But for most wargames, the detail of individual’s shoes we are trying to fit in are largely unknown.
Rather, through the stories they tell, for me wargames are games that drive the “theater of the mind”. What 
does this mean? It’s a concept drawn from roleplaying. It refers to deferral to players’ imagination – rather 
than battle mats and miniatures – to create the world in which the game is occurring. There’s a difference 
in the context of theater of the mind for wargaming compared to roleplaying. In the latter, you typically 
have a persistent, external storyteller, a GM, doing a lot of the heavy, creative lifting. Their narration cre￾ates the outline, players’ imagination fills in the color.
In wargaming, the burden lies more on the player. Prompts in the game, random events, map, card or 
counter, art, famous units, Generals’ special abilities, allow us to recall books we’ve read, films or docu￾mentaries we’ve seen. These provide flickering images, short video reels in our heads as we play … These 
images aren’t always pleasant. It’s war after all. But they are stimulating. They are, I think, what makes for 
many of us a wargame that is more enjoyable to play than an abstract or euro-style game.
In that sense, wargames and not so much roleplay games, but in the same family as “thematic” games, also 
known as American-style or Ameritrash games. These are games where the theme and storytelling come 
first, and the mechanics are there to enrich them. Unlike roleplay games, these games lean on the player 
rather than a GM to do the heavy creative lifting.
Yet listening to the dialogue in the community you wouldn’t know there’s a connection. On the contrary, a 
common view seems to be that wargames are “a bit different”. They are “conflict simulations.” They don’t 
tell stories, they “model” possible outcomes. Rooted in academic enquiry. More than just a game.
(Buckley 2022, 62-63)
Buckley is surely right to distinguish the experience of playing an RPG broadly away from the experi￾ence of playing a board game. As he says, the GM (Game Master, or Dungeon Master/DM) in the former 
is replaced by the player in the latter. Further, Björk, and Holopainen (2004) and Chapman (2020) have 
noted that genre qualities such as improved abilities through leveling up in RPGs may speak more to rep￾resenting power fantasies, and these qualities also seem to pull them away from the type of role inhabited 
by players of historical board games. (A solo RPG such as Thousand Year Old Vampire (2020), where 
player characters atrophy and lose memories would seem to be an example of an inversion of this power 
fantasy.) Operable design systems are rarely front and center of player experience in an RPG in the same 
way they are in a board game, and such instances where they are, such as in Uboot appear to denote a 
blend of RPG and board game within that specific design, rather than causing us to conflate those catego￾ries into the same thing because they are universally indistinguishable.
Yet deeper into his thinking Buckley appears to fall back into seeing games as a representation as we 
have previously understood it in this chapter, where he speaks of the flickering images provided through 
game elements helping us to recall books, or movies. But, again, this is to deny any additive quality games 
might offer. Historical game studies scholars such as Kapell and Elliott are keen to point out that the kind 
of experiences historical game players are having is analogous to the kind of “assembly” that historians 
conduct while forming their narratives (Kapell and Elliott 2013, 13–14). A reductive view where games 
can at best offer an evocative aid to recall is quite some distance away from the potency of opening the 
doors to experiencing something of a historical process. If we experience a process, we are quite likely 
to tell stories about it, but this does not mean the story was all there was. A narrative about, and created 
through the experience of a simulation, does not diminish the existence of the simulation. This would be 3 • What Are Historical Simulations? 67
like going on a carousel ride, and telling a story about it, and then using the story you extract from it as a 
means to disprove the existence of the carousel. If we now reconsider Juul’s perspective from Figure 3.1,
we might see how it expresses this: through the game systems the narrative is no longer “just” narrative, 
it is operationalized into a playable process – into a simulation.
Conflict simulations might, with certain parameters, be called “wargames,” or perhaps simply 
“games”. These games can model aspects of history, and they are also open to academic inquiry. Yet they 
are also systems for story generation, which necessitates some form of actor agency which is unavoidably 
tied to perspective, which entails roleplay.
Buckley’s article’s central argument may be that the scientific/academic framing is a barrier to 
entry to wargames for more generalist board gamers (Buckley 2022, 63). If this is so, this is assur￾edly a well-intentioned supposition, and the discussion points embedded in the article are also of 
value. As of the time of writing (2023) we do not appear to be in danger of an imminent repeat of the 
late 1980s/early 1990s precipitous decline of the historical board wargaming hobby through over￾complicating rule sets. Perhaps we might, for now, allow for a less fearful view: the world of board 
games is broad. There is room for a full spectrum from generalist to more niche design work, and 
room for many different perspectives as we deconstruct that work and debate the hobby space and the 
industry around it. Indeed, the growth of historical board wargames into academic programs might 
be a cause for optimism; rather than reading this as a contraction and indicative of sequestering into 
ivory towers, we might read it as the deepening of the roots of popular culture in readiness of further 
cultural dissemination – as another way the hobby continues to grow. However, possibly this very 
growth is becoming the key problem. As Philip Sabin says: “we’re swamping the market” (Harold 
on Games 2021), and this may be the primary cause for concern rather than an academic framing or 
overly complex rules. Time will tell.
SIMULATION BY ABSTRACTION
Might these various interpretations of simulation be reconciled with each other? One way we might attempt 
to do so is to think in the following terms: there is simulation in detail, and simulation by abstraction. 
Simulation in detail takes a discrete system, event, or subject environment and constructs an interaction 
space through wholesale detailed inputs to process meaningful outputs as a result of the interactions that 
occur within it. The integrity of the interaction space is jeopardized by the failure to adhere to the requisite 
level of detail demanded. An example of simulation in detail would be a flight simulator. With sufficiently 
detailed inputs, the interaction space can be navigated to deliver meaningful output (training and learn￾ing). In contrast, simulation by abstraction does not rely on detail in all regards. Rather, simulation by 
abstraction permits a focus-pull to highlight or explore different kinds of inputs, interactions, or outputs. The 
abstractions not only assist with prejudicing playability over the value of outputs, but they can also skew the 
interaction space to having a greater focus on process – a greater focus of being in the simulation – on the 
experiential quality of it. That is, in a simulation in detail there is an inclination to demonstrate the holistic 
integrity of the interaction space, but in the act of playing the simulation in detail’s emphasis is not directing 
player experience in any particular sense. Yet with a simulation by abstraction, the system design attempts 
to guide player focus toward some essentialized aspect of the experience. As an example, in Alex Knight’s 
Land and Freedom (2023) about the Spanish Civil War, the essential experience is on the negotiated out￾comes between individual and collective interests of the factions all fighting against the Fascists; in Fabien 
Riffaud’s and Juan Rodriguez’s The Grizzled, the essential focus is on collaborative empathic action in a 
situation of stress – surviving the war.
Aaron Trammell uses the terms “simulation” and “simulationist,” which also allow for differentiation:
I use the term “simulationism” to describe a philosophy of game design that aims to produce an authentic 
and historically accurate model of a game … While both simulation and simulationism aim to accurately 68 Paper Time Machines 
model events, simulations are predictive and often relied on by both governments and businesses. 
Simulationist games are marketed to a hobby audience interested in “what if” scenarios. 
(Trammell 2023, 58)
But if “simulationism” is primarily concerned with the imaginative play of a “what if” scenario, a distinc￾tion might be drawn with “simulation by abstraction” which is neither focused on the imaginative “what 
if” or any specific outcome, but, rather, on the experience of the process – the experiential rhetoric – 
through which the play is enacted, and the metaphors operationalized through the abstraction, as the two 
blend together to create the overall play experience.
Professional wargames are an example of simulation in detail meeting simulation by abstraction. 
Because not all details can be known, approximations and probabilities (in some cases founded on Monte 
Carlo methods) are deemed “good enough” and fit for purpose rather than deeply accurate. Commercial 
historical board games from the wargaming tradition are an example of simulation by abstraction where 
outputs are of far less value – other than for entertainment – because the inputs that build the interac￾tion space are less detailed. Even if the order of battle is highly detailed, the application of it within the 
game environment and the rules that govern it can seldom be considered detailed and reliable such that 
any output can be deeply meaningful. However, commercial historical board games potentially offer the 
emphasis of how it feels to be in the simulation.
The game Twilight Struggle (2005) about the Cold War tussle between the US and the USSR has 
details – dates, names, events, geopolitical causal connections, a compulsion to sustain military activ￾ity whilst navigating the threat of nuclear war – but it is not a simulation in detail. The inputs are not 
highly controlled, in relation to the interaction space; they are systematized to assist playability. In the 
game, cards are played from a deck that makes a nonsense of causal narrative connections between 
events (they can be played entirely out of chronological sequence, the three “era” deck concept notwith￾standing) and scoring cards do not align with the reality of how the Cold War may have been won or 
lost – neither side held such cards and no real-life mechanism compelled them to be played within any 
given round. Indeed, as Alonge and Fassone point out, Twilight Struggle, without asymmetric victory 
conditions which would render it closer to historical realities for the two different sides, is missing “not 
just a mechanism of victory conditions based on history, but historical simulations per se” (Alonge 
and Fassone 2020, 57). Yet the way an opponent’s events can trigger when you play a card, the way it’s 
harder to secure influence in a region if you don’t have influence in adjacent regions, the way matters 
outside a player’s own control compel military operations and the playing of scoring cards can all help 
to put players in a place where they feel constrained; they feel compelled to act outside of their comfort 
levels; they can feel as if there is no good move, only a choice between poor moves and worse moves; 
players can feel as if they are locked in a complex game of second-guessing, and so – by design abstrac￾tions – this can make players feel as if they are within a simulation of key strategic decisions in relation 
to the subject matter.
Similarly, the game Crisis: 1914 (2024), about the July Crisis that gave rise to World War I, has details 
– dates, names of participants, alliance blocks, causal systems design, and more, but it is not a simulation 
in detail. The inputs are not highly controlled, in relation to the interaction space, they are systematized 
to assist playability. In the game, cards are drawn from a deck in such a way that do not align with the 
reality of cabinet meetings and the availability of personnel to be at those meetings or to apply pressure 
on formal state diplomacy whether by invitation or not. The 24-card deck size is not a detailed input – this 
is a design decision to set the deck size (there are characters in history that might have been added to the 
game, or others removed from it if there wasn’t the design format to work within), much like the decision 
to set the rotation speed of the player decks. Cabinet ministers would be more available than this, and we 
would see that depicted in a simulation in detail. The scoring mechanisms of the game cannot be said to 
align in terms of inputs that connect in any detailed way to reality. There was no end of week score check 
step in history. However, the push your luck mechanic and hand-management/tableau-builder system the 
game utilizes places players in an experiential space where there is an abstracted sense of attempting to 
thread the needle of pushing state prestige whilst limiting the diplomatic tension this causes, and all the 3 • What Are Historical Simulations? 69
while only having partial control of the situation – like herding temperamental cats which will sometimes 
get you what you want, and sometimes will not. (We will look closer at this game in Chapter 19.) Thus, 
like Twilight Struggle, and most games under consideration in this book, the argument is that we might 
consider Crisis: 1914 to be a simulation by abstraction.
In the commercial board game space, historical games generally focus on simulation by abstraction, 
where the experience of the process being explored appears to be the focus of the interaction space. It is 
only possible to generate this experience through the inputs being of a certain level of detail – and that 
align with notions of historical memory. Yet these levels of detail, and the rules that govern their applica￾tion within the interaction space, will not amount to simulation in detail. Thus in this formulation, many 
parties may all be aligned together: those who speak of wargames as a branch of serious games, of histori￾cal games as artistic projections, those who speak of games as simulations, those who speak of represen￾tation through narrative, those who speak in terms of a simulation by means of metaphor, and those who 
speak of role-playing as the focal point of experience.
Such thinking has precedents from within the hobby. In 1977, Redmond Simonsen, renowned artist 
and designer at SPI, wrote an article for SPI’s Moves magazine in which he outlined his thinking about 
the distinction between what he termed “naturalism” and “realism,” supposing that people generally mean 
the former when they use the latter. That is:
Naturalism is a term I've borrowed from art history jargon. Naturalism (in art) is used to describe a rep￾resentational painting in which all of the minute detail is painstakingly brushed in – usually to the detri￾ment of the painting as a work of art. Realism transcends naturalism. A realistic painting may or may not 
have the intensity of detail found in its naturalistic counterpart – that is irrelevant. What matters is that 
the structural essence of the subject is brought into sharp focus and totally explored in a meaningful and 
enlightening manner. Put another way: naturalism captures the symptoms of truth; realism captures the 
substance of truth.
(Simonsen 1977, 2)
Such terms appear to map closely with the distinction drawn above between simulation in detail and 
simulation by abstraction. In effective defense of the validity of the notion of simulation by abstraction, 
Simonsen tells us:
To take a huge and complicated subject and describe it well with a few strokes of the pen is an infinitely 
greater achievement than to detail to death a segment of that same subject. 
(Simonsen 1977, 2)
What simulation by abstraction is attempting to convey also has other formulations within the hobby. For 
example, see these comments by BGG user Tim Smith of the Annapolis-Area Strategy Gaming Club on 
Frank Davis’ 1975 Fredrick the Great:
“Frederick the Great” falls in the category we in the AASGC call a “low-resolution, historically/scien￾tifically accurate simulation model”. It provides a superb representation of 18th-century continental￾European campaign strategy, providing an excellent complement to the works of Duffy, et al. It is a 
strategic game, isolating the primary factors governing the nature of warfare in that era with a minimum 
of “chrome”. FtG succeeds in simulating chess-like maneuver in an aristocratic age when princes fought 
for limited, non-ideological ends with armies that were professional, few, small, rigid and unwieldy. 
Within the constraints of its low-resolution focus, FtG accurately conveys the dynamics of armies tightly 
tethered to their supply sources (networks of fortresses and depots), constrained in their capacity for inde￾pendent maneuver, and facing high risk in battle, the outcome of which was unpredictable and often quite 
costly in losses (troop casualties, prisoners, and leaders, who led from the front and often paid the cost). 
One seemingly good-odds battle can go wrong and render an entire field army ineffective for an extended 
period thereafter (if not in fact for the remainder of a campaign season).
(BGG 2017)70 Paper Time Machines 
Frank Davis himself has commented on this analysis. “Instead of ‘low resolution,’ I would use the term 
‘fundamentalist’ game design. My aim is to get the historical fundamentals right and not fret about the 
details” (Frank Davis 2023, personal correspondence). The point being, we see many different attempts 
from different sources to convey a concept essentially in line with simulation by abstraction, and so even 
if we may dispute the most fitting terminology, we do see a broad consensus in the essence of what they 
attempt to articulate: simulation is not in binary opposition to abstraction, and accuracy is not synony￾mous with detail. It Is defter to supply the symptoms of truth than the substance of It.
INTERACTIVE COMPLEXITY
We can also point to considerably more contemporary support for validity in a design approach and 
experience that appears consonant with what we have termed “simulation by abstraction” if we look 
closer at military and strategic studies documentation, specifically on the heels of Systemic Operational 
Design and its impact on the US military since 2005. The US Army’s CACD (Commander’s Appreciation 
and Campaign Design) TRADOC (Training and Doctrine Command) Pamphlet 525-5–500 (2008), The 
Hague Center for Strategic Studies’ Designing Future Stabilization Efforts (2014), ADP (Army Doctrine 
Publication) 5–0: The Operations Process (2019), Army FM 3–0 (2022), and Field Manual 5–0 Planning 
and Orders Production (2022) all point to a methodology not overburdened with detailed inputs to mani￾fest a simulation in detail. All of this documentation, amidst others, openly favors a “design-oriented” 
approach in military planning over one that is “engineering-oriented.” See Table 3.1, extracted from 
Figure 1–2 of the TRADOC Pamphlet 525-5-500, which clarifies, by way of comparison, definitional 
interpretations with regard to cognitive processes.
There are two things of particular note about this trajectory. Firstly, as Engberg-Pedersen tells us, 
sounding remarkably redolent of Clausewitz’s “friction”:
The CACD … revived the old art-science debate and argues that the idea of war as a practical art must 
be reimplanted into military discourse after decades of modeling and detailed planning that followed a 
scientific idea of complete knowledge and full control … Waging war in the twenty-first century, according 
to the CACD, is a matter of inspired form-giving, of intuition, creativity, artistry, and play – it is a matter 
of design. 
(Endberg-Pederson 2023, 128–9)
TABLE 3.1 Designing and Engineering Definitions from CACD’s TRADOC Pamphlet 525-5-500 2008, 13, 
Comparing Cognitive Processes.
Designing Engineering
Problem-framing Problem-solving
Start with a blank sheet Start with a coherent design or plan
Questions the limits of existing knowledge Functions within the existing paradigm
Questions assumptions and method Follows established procedure
Conceptual Physical and detailed
Develops understanding Develops products
Paradigm setting Paradigm accepting
Complements planning, preparation, and assessment Patterns and templates activity
Output: a broad approach to problem solving (a design) Output: detailed plan for action (blueprints)3 • What Are Historical Simulations? 71
Such thinking again echoes with Simonsen’s article cited above:
Notwithstanding all its numbers and probabilistic tables, a wargame is closer to a work of art than a work 
of technology. As such, a simulation game is not the "object” – it is an abstraction of an aspect or aspects 
of the object. Just as in art, the level of abstraction is not directly related to the level of realism (strictly 
defined) found in a given game. The higher one goes into the levels of abstraction, the less obviously real￾istic the game will seem; the lower the level; the more apparently realistic the simulation will seem. 
(Simonsen 1977, 2, original emphasis of italics retained)
Secondly, as becomes more overt in the CACD – see Figure 3.6 – the design-oriented approach is consid￾ered inclining more to complexity than the engineering-oriented approach, which is considered inclining 
to less complexity (CACD 2008, 14).
This complexity in the design-oriented approach is substantially accounted for due to the focus in the 
documentation on “interactive complexity,” thus defined:
Interactive complexity is based upon the behavior of the parts and the resulting interactions between them. 
The greater the freedom of action of each individual part and the more linkages among the components, 
the greater is the system’s interactive complexity. 
(CACD 2008, 5)
This substantially inverts the supposition we began this chapter with, where the popular conception of 
simulation, due to its depth of detail, supplies greater fidelity to reality. Here we have doctrine highly 
invested in fidelity to training efficiency and effective outputs that asserts the interaction space is of 
greater utility than the depth of detail. Possibly, then, simulation by abstraction – with its focus on expe￾riential process and interactive complexity – is, in some sense, closer to encompassing and engaging with 
military doctrine than commercial designers and players have hitherto routinely appreciated.
CONCLUSION
All the attempts to clarify and draw distinctions in order to answer the headline question of this chapter 
should not obscure the reality that games come in a vast variety of forms. The distance between “history￾ish” to “historical games” is not always a clear line, or even on a linear scale, often defying the project of 
a simple delineation across many tens of thousands of games, compelling us to consider each game (or 
simulation?) on a case by case basis. Redmond Simonsen tells us:
A game can be both naturalistic and realistic, and it can be both in varying proportions. It can also be 
neither … Complexity alone is not an accurate gauge of whether a game should be considered realistic, 
FIGURE 3.6 Military planning visualization (from CACD 2008, 14).72 Paper Time Machines 
naturalistic, or a synthesis of both qualities… It may be unwise, therefore, to speak of simulation games as 
a single concept against which the various individual products should be measured. There is a spectrum 
(which has a three-dimensional quality to it) that includes games that are not realistic but have so much 
historical "decoration" that they seem realistic; and then there are those games that are realistic in a non￾obvious way. 
(Simonsen 1977, 3)
Certainly broad sweeping statements are likely to be caught on thorny edge cases in an ever more highly 
populated design space. Instead of seeking definitional distance between simulation and games through 
realism, we can find another paradigm for differentiation. Complexity, as per the CACD, is one means to 
do it. The focus on a curated experiential process is another, and it is not an isolated notion, as we see from 
designers/scholars Peter Perla and Chris Crawford, and from novelist Jerzy Kosinski, where, again, as per 
the CACD assessment above, we make the essential case for art and design:
The Analyst focuses on modeling the real world, including the players as elements of the model. The Artist 
focuses on immersing players in a story that they become part of, engaging them intellectually and emo￾tionally. The Architect focuses on distilling a simplified decisionmaking (sic) environment to challenge 
players with key decisions.
(Perla and McGrady 2007)
A game is to a simulation as a painting is to a blueprint. A painting of a house gives you an emotional 
impression of the house; a blueprint of the house tells the carpenter exactly where to put the windowsill.
(Crawford 1986, 7)
The principles (sic) of true art is not to portray, but to evoke. 
(Teicholz 1993, 105)
Simulations by abstraction, through their lack of detail, actually draw us deeper into some experiential 
insight into history through the very transparency of their process-oriented design being focused on a 
particular lens of seeing that event. Simulations in detail, by contrast, can actually distance us by virtue 
of trying to address a comprehensive array of aspects of an event; as human beings we do not operate that 
way; consciously or unconsciously, we always create limited systems of decision-making that value nar￾row aspects of a situation’s infinite complexity.
REFERENCES
ADP (Army Doctrine Publication) 5–0: The Operations Process. 2019. https://armypubs.army.mil/epubs/DR_pubs/
DR_a/ARN18126-ADP_5-0-000-WEB-3.pdf Accessed September 30, 2023.
Alonge, Giame, and Riccardo Fassone. 2020. “Twilight Struggle, or: How We Stopped Worrying About The 
Hexagons.”– In Rerolling Boardgames: Essays on Themes, Systems, Experiences and Ideologies, edited by 
Douglas Brown and Esther MacCullum-Stewart, 48–68. Jefferson, NC: McFarland and Company Inc.
Appelcline, Shannon. 2014. Designers & Dragons: A History of the Roleplaying Game Industry ‘70 - ‘79. Silver
Spring, MD: Evil Hat Productions.
Aristotle. 1988. Classical Literary Criticism. Aristotle/Horace/Longinus. Translated by T. S. Dorsch. London: 
Penguin.
Army FM 3–0. 2022. https://armypubs.army.mil/epubs/DR_pubs/DR_a/ARN36290-FM_3-0-000-WEB-2.pdf
Accessed September 30, 2023.
Aronsson, Peter. 2000. “Historiekultur i förändring." In Makten över minnet: Historiekultur i förändring, edited by 
Peter Aronsson. Cited in Quiroga 2023, 16. Studentlitteratur.3 • What Are Historical Simulations? 73
Banks, Jerry, John S. II Carson, Barry L. Nelson, and David M. Nicol. 2001. Discrete-Event System Simulation. 
London, England: Pearson Education.
Baudrillard, Jean. 1994. Simulacra and Simulation. Translated by Shelia Faria Glaser. Ann Arbor: University of 
Michigan Press.
Beyond Solitaire 2021. “Podcast 58: Volko Ruhnke and Brian Train on A Distant Plain.” September 20, 2021. https://
youtu.be/znyV4F7EgBg Accessed June 29, 2023.
BGG. 2017. January 17, 2017. https://boardgamegeek.com/thread/1710052/frederick-great-aasgc-game-review
Accessed November 17, 2023.
Björk, S. and J. Holopainen. 2004. Patterns in Game Design. Hingham: Charles River Media.
Black, Jeremy. 2008. What If? Counterfactualism and the Problem of History. London: The Social Affairs Unit.
Bogard, William. 1996. The Simulation of Surveillance: Hypercontrol in Telematic Societies. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Bostrom, Nick. 2003. “Are We Living in a Computer Simulation?” The Philosophical Quarterly 53, no. 211 (April 
28): 243–55. https://academic.oup.com/pq/article-abstract/53/211/243/1610975?redirectedFrom=fulltext
Accessed May 14, 2023.
Box, G. E. P. 1976. “Science and Statistics.” Journal of the American Statistical Association 71, no. 356: 791–9. 
http://www-sop.inria.fr/members/Ian.Jermyn/philosophy/writings/Boxonmaths.pdf Accessed May 14, 2023.
Box, George E. P. 1979. "Robustness in the Strategy of Scientific Model Building." In Robustness in Statistics, edited 
by R. L. Launer and G. N. Wilkinson, 201–36. London, UK, and Washington DC, USA: Academic Press.
Braudel, Fernand. 1972, 1973. The Mediterranean and the Mediterranean World in the Age of Phillip II. Translated 
by S. Reynolds. London: Harper and Row.
Brown, Henry J. 2008. Video Games and Education. Armonk, NY: M. E. Sharpe.
Buckley, James. 2022, “Wargames: Simulation or Stimulation?” C3i Magazine. Nr. 36. RBM Studio Publication.
Burns, Kevin. 2003. “The Historical Simulation Board-gamers Society of Japan.” www07.u-page.so-net.ne.jp/tg7/
kevin/articlesabouthistoricalgaming.htm - quoted in Uricchio 2005.
CACD (Commander’s Appreciation and Campaign Design) TRADOC (Training and Doctrine Command) Pamphlet 
525-5–500. 2008.
Caillois, Roger. 2001. Man, Play and Games. Translated by Meyer Barash. Urbana and Chicago: University of 
Illinois Press.
Calleja, Gordon. 2022. Unboxed: Board Game Experience and Design. Cambridge, MA and London, England: The 
MIT Press.
Carr, Edward Hallett. 1961. What Is History? New York: Vintage Books
Chadwick, Frank. 1978. “My Two Cents.” The Grenadier 2. no. 1.
Chapman, Adam. 2016. Digital Games as History: How Videogames Represent the Past and Offer Access to 
Historical Practice. Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge.
Chapman, Adam. 2020. “Playing Against The Past?: Representing the Play Element of Historical Cultures in Video 
Games.” In Historia Ludens: The Playing Historian, edited by Alexander von Lünen, Katherin J. Lewis, 
Benjamin Litherland, and Pat Cullum. New York and London: Routledge.
Chapman, Adam, Anna Foka, and Jonathan Westin. 2017. ”Introduction: What Is Historical Game Studies?” 
Rethinking History: The Journal of Theory and Practice 21. First published online November 29, 2016. https://
www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/13642529.2016.1256638 Accessed July 3, 2023.
Chapman, Adam, and Jonas Linderoth. 2015. “Exploring the Limits of Play: A Case Study of Representations of 
Nazism in Games.” In The Dark Side of Game Play, edited by E. Mortensen, J. Linderoth and A. M. L. Brown, 
137–53. London: Routledge.
Chatter. 2023. “National Security Insights From Board Games with Volko Ruhnke.” July 20, 2023. https://shows.acast
.com/chatter/episodes/national-security-insights-from-board-games-with-volko-ruhnk Accessed October 25, 
2023.
Crawford, Chris. 1986. “Balance of Power the Book International Politics as the Ultimate Global Game.” https://
www.erasmatazz.com/MyResources/Balance-of-Power-the-Book.pdf Accessed January 22, 2023.
Curry, John, ed. 2011. Peter Perla’s The Art of Wargaming: A Guide for Professionals and Hobbyists. 
Morrisville, NC: Lulu Publishing.
Curry, John. 2014. Donald Featherstone’s War Games Battles and Manoeuvres With Model Soldiers: The Book That 
Launched Modern Wargaming. Morrisville, NC: Independent Publisher. (First published 1962.)
Derrida, Jacques. 1974. “White Mythology: Metaphor in the Text of Philosophy.” TransMoore, F. C. T. New Literary
History 6, no. 1 (Autumn): 5–74.
Djaouti, Damien, Julian Alvarez, and Jean-Pierre Jessel. 2011. “Classifying Serious Games: The G/P/S Model.” 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/266462473_Classifying_Serious_Games_the_GPS_model
Accessed July 3, 2023.74 Paper Time Machines 
Dragoon Commander. 2020. “Games & Sims for Training & Learning.” You Tube, May 13, 2020. https://youtu.be/
ZzaGUNHZX08?si=1g3qUpUa4eP6rJkp Accessed January 23, 2024.
Dunnigan, James F. 1992. The Complete Wargames Handbook: How To Play, Design & Find Them. New York: 
William Morrow.
Dunnigan, James F. 2020. “Lessons Learned.” C3i Magazine. Nr. 34. RBM Studio Publication.
Dupuy Institute. 2020. “Mystics & Statistics: A Blog on Quantitative Historical Analysis Hosted by The Dupuy 
Institute.” January 2, 2020. https://www.dupuyinstitute.org/blog/tag/quantified-judgement-model-qjm/
Accessed January 23, 2024.
Elliott, Kamilla. 2020. Theorizing Adaptation. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Endberg-Pederson, Anders. 2023. Martial Aesthetics: How War Became An Art Form. Stanford, CA: Stanford 
University Press.
Epistemix. 2023. https://blog.epistemix.com/blog/simulation-not-prediction Accessed July 3, 2023.
Ferguson, Niall, ed. 2011. Virtual History: Alternatives and Counterfactuals. London: Penguin Books.
Fernández-Vara, Clara. 2019. Introduction to game Analysis. New York and London: Routledge. (First published 
2014.)
Field Manual 5–0 Planning and Orders Production. 2022. https://armypubs.army.mil/epubs/DR_pubs/DR_a/
ARN36775-FM_5-0-001-WEB-3.pdf Accessed September 30, 2023.
Frasca, Gonzalo. 2003. “Simulation versus Narrative: Introduction to Ludology.” In The Video Game Theory Reader, 
edited by Mark J. P. Wolf and Bernard Perron, 221–35. New York and Abingdon: Routledge.
Furay, Conal, and Michael J. Salevouris. 1988. The Methods and Skills of History: A Practical Guide. Wheeling, IL. 
Harlan Davidson.
Game Studies Study Buddies. 2022. “Episode 50: Dovey and Kennedy Game Cultures.” August 31, 2022. https://
blubrry.com/gssb/89045334/50-dovey-and-kennedy-game-cultures/ Accessed July 3, 2023.
Giberson, Richard C. 1969. “Play-balance, Play-ability, & Historical Realism.” Avalon Hill’s The General 6, no. 4 
(November–December): 4.
Harold on Games. 2021. “Interview with Phil Sabin and Volko Ruhnke.” November 12, 2021. https://www.youtube
.com/live/luHPZUbF4fY?si=ve-2fn_cYRoF7lmX Accessed July 6, 2022.
Henton, Alice. 2012. “Game and Narrative in Dragon Age: Origins: Playing the Archive in Digital RPGs.” In 
Dungeons, Dragons, and Digital Denizens: The Digital Role-Playing Game, edited by Gerald A. Voorhees, 
Joshua Call, and Katie Whitlock, 66–87. New York: Continuum.
Herman, Mark. 2022. “Wargame CRTs or How To Resolve Chaos.” C3i Magazine. Nr.36. (A reprint of “Clio’s 
Corner.” Nr.13. RBM Publication.
Jeansonne, Christopher, and Suckling, Maurice. n.d. Forthcoming Publication for University of Michigan Press.
Johnson, Steven. 2005. Everything Bad Is Good For You. London: Penguin.
Juul, Jesper. 2007. "A Certain Level of Abstraction." In Situated Play: DiGRA 2007 Conference Proceedings, edited 
by Akira Baba, 510–15. Tokyo: DiGRA Japan, 2007. http://www.jesperjuul.net/text/acertainlevel Accessed 
July 20, 2023.
Kafka, Franz. 1991. “The Top.” In The Great Wall of China and Other Stories, Editor and translator, Malcolm 
Pasley. London: Penguin.
Kapell, Matthew Wilhelm, and Andrew B. R. Elliott. 2013. Playing With The Past: Digital Games and the Simulation 
of History. New York: Bloomsbury.
King, Gary, Robert O. Keohane, and Sydney Verba. 1994. Designing Social Inquiry: Scientific Inference in 
Qualitative Research. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Kirschenbaum, Matthew. 2023The Board Wargamer Facebook Group, April 30.
Klabbers, J. H. G. 2009. “Terminological Ambiguity: Game and Simulation.” Simulation & Gaming, 40, no. 4: 
446–63.
MacCallum-Stewart, Esther., and Justin Parsler. 2007. “Controversies: Historicising the Computer Game.” 
Proceedings of DiGRA 2007 Conference, 203–10.
Malaby, Thomas. 2007. “Beyond Play: A New Approach to Games.” Games and Culture, 2, no. 2: 95–133.
Masini, Riccardo. 2023The Board Wargamer Facebook Group, April 27.
McCall, Jeremiah. 2020. “Game Studies - The Historical Problem Space Framework: Games as a Historical 
Medium.” September 2020. https://gamestudies.org/2003/articles/mccall Accessed July 3, 2023.
McCall, Jeremiah. 2023. Gaming The Past: Using Video Games to Teach Secondary History. New York and 
Abingdon: Routledge.
Miller, Brien J. 2016. “The Application of Statistical and Forensics Validation to Simulation Modeling in Wargames.” 
In Zones of Control: Perspectives on Wargaming, edited by Pat Harrigan and Matthew G. Kirschenbaum, 
183–200. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.3 • What Are Historical Simulations? 75
Mukherjee, Souvik. 2015. Video Games and Storytelling: Reading Games and Playing Books. London and New 
York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Oakeshott, Michael. 1933 Experience and its Modes. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Odlyzko, Andrew. 2010. “Social Networks and Mathematical Models Electronic Commerce: A Research 
“Commentary on Critical Mass Willingness to Pay for Social Networks” by J. Christopher Westland.” Research 
and Applications, Vol. 9, No. 1, 26–28.
Page, Scott E. 2018. The Model Thinker: What You Need to Know to Make Data Work for You. New Your: Basic 
Books.
Paxson, E. W. 1971. “War Gaming.” In The Study of Games, edited by Elilott, M. Avedon, and Brian Sutton-Smith, 
278–305. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley and Sons.
Perla, Peter, and McGrady, eds. 2007. “Wargaming and Analysis. Presentation for MORS Special Meeting.” https://
apps.dtic.mil/sti/citations/ADA475206 Accessed January 24, 2024.
Peterson, Jon. 2012. Playing at the World: A History of Simulating Wars, People and Fantastic Adventures, from 
Chess to Role-Playing Games. San Diego: Unreason Press.
Peterson, Rolfe Daus, Andrew Justin Miller, and Sean Joseph Fedorko. 2013. “The Same River Twice: Exploring 
Historical Representation and the Value of Simulation in the Total War, Civilization, and Patrician Franchises.” 
In Playing With The Past: Digital Games and The Simulation of History, edited by Matthew Wilhelm Kapell 
and Andrew B. R. Elliott, 33–48. London: Bloomsbury.
Phillies, George. 2014. Designing Wargames - Introduction. Studies in Game Design - 5. Kindle, Smashwords, Third 
Millennium.
Picasso, Pablo. 1923. "Picasso Speaks." The Arts 3: 315–26; reprinted in Barr, Alfred H., Jr. 1939. Picasso: Forty 
Years of his Art, Museum of Modern Art; 9–12. https://monoskop.org/images/0/0a/Picasso_Forty_Years_of
_His_Art_MoMA_1939.pdf Accessed July 3, 2023.
Prabhat, S. 2017. "Difference Between Games and Simulations." In Difference Between Similar Terms and Objects, 
June 27. http://www.differencebetween.net/technology/difference-between-games-and-simulations/#ixzz7zu￾p0y9oS Accessed July 3, 2023.
Poundstone, William. 1993. Prisoner’s Dilemma. New York: Anchor Books.
Quiroga, Stefan Aguirre. 2023. White Mythic Space: Racism, The First World War, and Battlefield 1. Oldenbourg: 
De Gruyter.
Robison, William B. 2013. “Stimulation, Not Simulation: An Alternate Approach to History Teaching Games.” The 
History Teacher 46, no. 4 (August): 577–88. https://www.jstor.org/stable/43264159 Accessed 3 July 2023.
Rockmore, Tom, and Joseph Margolis. 2006. History, Historicity and Science. Aldershot Burlington: Ashgate 
Publishing.
Ruhnke, Volko. 2021. “C3i Simulating Levels of Warfare.” C3i Magazine. Nr. 35. RBM Studio Publication.
Ryle, Martin. 1989. Humanist Mailing List, Vol. 2, No. 592. Date: Sat, 11 February 89 10:47 EST
Sabin, Philip. 2015. Simulating War: Studying Conflict Through Simulation Games. London: Bloomsbury.
Schlenker, B. R., and T. V. Bonoma. 1978. “Fun and Games: The Validity of Games for the Study of Conflict.” 
Journal of Conflict Resolution 22, no. 1: 7–38.
Shelf Stories. 2022a. “War Games are Better at History than Euro Games? with Dr. Patrick Rael: Good Trouble.” 
August 10, 2022. https://youtu.be/8GmOZdC5fEI Accessed June 29, 2023.
Shelf Stories. 2022b. “How To Make A Great History Game (and Avoid a Bad One): Good Trouble.” August 16, 
2022. https://youtu.be/twm3s-QocKw Accessed June 29, 2023.
Shewhart, W. A. 1939. Statistical Method From the Viewpoint of Quality Control, U.S. Department of Agriculture. 
Garden City, New York.
Shonkwiler, Ronald. W., and Franklin Mendivil. 2009. Explorations in Monte Carlo Methods. New York: Springer.
Shut Up & Sit Down. 2015. “Interview: Volko Ruhnke’s Modern Wargames.” https://www.shutupandsitdown.com/
interview-volko-ruhnke/ Accessed July 3, 2023.
Shut Up & Sit Down. 2023. “The Hobbit: Battle of Five Armies.” April 28, 2023 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v
=6qbeq8dk7To Accessed June 29, 2023.
Simonsen, Redmond, ed. 1977. “So What If It’s Accurate – Is It Realistic?” In Moves: Conflicts Simulation Theory 
and Technique, edited by R. A. Simonsen, Nr. 31. New York: SPI.
Straffin, Philip D. 1993. Game Theory and Strategy. The Mathematical Association of America.
Studying Pixels. 2022. “Episode 54. ‘Games As Historical Problem Spaces' (with Jeremiah McCall).” October 23, 
2022.
Suckling, Maurice. 2017. “Board with Meaning: Reflections on Game Design and Historiography.” CEA Critic 79, 
no. 1 (March): 110–19.
Teicholz, Tom, ed. 1993. Conversations with Jerzy Kosinski. Jackson, MS: University Press of Mississippi.76 Paper Time Machines 
The Forge. 2023. “Ruhnke, Volko. Games as a Window on a Complex World.” https://theforge.defence.gov.au/
wargaming/games-window-complex-world Accessed July 3, 2023.
The Hague Center for Strategic Studies. 2014. “Designing Future Stabilization Efforts.” https://www.researchgate
.net/publication/260061840_Designing_Future_Stabilization_Efforts Accessed September 30, 2023.
Thompson, E. P, ed. 1978. “The Poverty of Theory.”In The Poverty of Theory and Other Essays, edited by E. P. 
Thompson. London: Merlin Press
Three Moves Ahead Episode 589 April 21, 2023. https://www.idlethumbs.net/3ma/episodes/board-game-vs-simula￾tion-style-strategy-games Accessed July 3, 2023.
Tolk, A. 2015. “Learning Something Right from Models That Are Wrong – Epistemology of Simulation.” In Concepts 
and Methodologies in Modelling and Simulation, edited by L. Yilmaz, 87–106. Berlin: Springer–Verlag.
Trammell, Aaron. 2023. The Privilege of Play: A History of Hobby Games, Race, and Geek Culture. New York: New 
York University Press.
Uboot: The Board Game. 2019. London: Phalanx Games.
Uricchio, William. 2005. “Simulation, History, and Computer Games.” In Handbook of Computer Game Studies, 
edited by J. Raessens and J. Goldstein, 327–38. Cambridge: The MIT Press–.
von Lünen, Alexander, Katherine J. Lewis, Benjamin Litherland, and Pat Cullum, eds. 2019. Historia Ludens: The 
Playing Historian. New York: Routledge. 
Williams, J. D. 1982. The Compleat Strategist: Being a Primer on the Theory of Games of Strategy. New York: 
Dover Publications.
Wolfson, M. C., and B. B. Murphy. 1998. "New Views on Inequality Trends." Monthly Labor Review (April): 3–23. 
https://www.bls.gov/opub/mlr/1998/04/art1full.pdf Accessed July 3, 2023.
X-Humanist: Vol. 2 Num. 592 (182). https://humanist.kdl.kcl.ac.uk/Archives/Converted_Text/humanist.1988–1989.t
xt Accessed July 3, 2023.
Zagare, Frank C. 2019. Game Theory, Diplomatic History and Security Studies. Oxford: Oxford University Press.77
4 A Brief History of 
Board Wargames
Which came first, warfare or wargames? Given the lethal nature of actual 
warfare and man’s penchant for self-preservation, it is quite possible that 
some form of wargame occurred before the first organized war. Whatever the 
case, wargames have been around for a long time. Warfare may have got 
more attention, but wargames are a lot safer. 
(Dunnigan 1992, 145)
INTRODUCTION
In 1958, newly founded, The Avalon Hill Game Company (AH) published a game called Gettysburg. It is 
generally considered the first commercially available board wargame that represented a historical battle 
(Zocci 2007, 130–3). Gettysburg had a square-gridded board with terrain modifiers affecting combat, 
combat factors for the units (see Figure 4.1), and a concept similar to what would later be called a “zone 
of control” with adjacency to a unit compelling combat. The game also had a combat results table (CRT), 
which functioned by cross-referencing odds ratios with die rolls, which were affected by modifiers – see 
Table 4.1. We had seen all of these design features before in Roberts’ Tactics (1954). Gettysburg also had 
inch long rectangular cardboard pieces, and range cards (for measuring ranged fire, and conducting move￾ment in the tournament game). The latter was the convention in contemporary miniatures wargames. It 
also had optional rules on hidden movement – players moved units with the other player “out of sight of 
the opponent” (Gettysburg 1959, 18) noted their new positions, then returned units to their previous loca￾tions and called the other player back. Players had to notify each other if their units in their true position 
could be seen by the enemy.
Gettysburg was plagued by design issues, having been published before playtesting, but nevertheless, 
sold well – helped by its release around the centenary of the battle – and became a nexus for the history 
of the development of board wargames from this point on (Roberts 1983). There have been a great many 
developments in board wargaming from those early days as an identifiable sector into the 2020s. Many 
companies have been founded, and many folded – including AH. Trends have waxed and waned. The 
audience has grown and shrunk and grown again. We’ll pick up this story as it develops from AH onward 
soon, but first, two points:
• Gettysburg (and Tactics) were the games that created the timeline we’re currently traveling 
along with regard to a certain tradition of board wargaming.
• Gettysburg itself did not emerge out of nowhere. We will start here, and briefly recount the 
various threads that feed into the publication of Gettysburg. 
Paper Time Machines A Brief History of Board Wargames
DOI: 10.1201/9781003359265-5
10.1201/9781003359265-578 Paper Time Machines 
BEFORE GETTYSBURG
There are five identifiable intersecting narrative threads that feed into the publication of Gettysburg.
• Board games in general
• Kriegsspiel
• Early board wargames
• Cultural interest in popular history
• Roberts’ earlier work.
Board games have been with us, in some form, since at least around 6000 BCE, before the Egyptian game 
of Senet (c.5000 BCE). These earliest games appear to be abstract strategy games with boards like those 
used to play Mancala (Livingstone and Wallis 2019, 20–36). For the next several thousand years abstract 
strategy games, and to a lesser extent race games, dominated – games like Ur (c.2600 BCE), Hounds and 
Jackals (c.2000 BCE), Mancala (c.1000 BCE), Go (c.400 BCE), Hnefatafl/The Viking Game (c.400), 
Backgammon (c.500), Chess (c.600), Xiangqi (762) Checkers (c.1100), and Pachisi (c.1500s) (Livingstone 
FIGURE 4.1 The author’s copy of Gettysburg (1958), in play. Photograph by the author.4 • A Brief History of Board Wargames 79
and Wallis 2019, 8–9, BGG n.d. a1). Chess and Hnefetafl, as we shall see, would help pave the way for 
Kriegsspiel (in English sometimes dropping one “s”) in the nineteenth century.
The nineteenth century saw further developments in abstract strategy games, with Mahjong (c.1850), 
Halma (c.1880), and Othello (c.1885) (Livingstone and Wallis 2019, 10). The nineteenth century saw 
numerous race games too, with the likes of Every Man To His Station (1825), Fortunio and His Seven 
Gifted Servants (1846), Snakes and Ladders (c.1890), known in the USA as Chutes and Ladders (1943) 
and its provenance stretching back to India (Liman 2017, 60–1; Livingstone and Wallis 2019, 10; Topsfield 
2007, 13). Of particular note is the London published The Mansion of Happiness: An Instructive Moral 
and Entertaining Amusement (1800 onward) (Angiolillo Collection 1800). Its 67-space track culminated in 
players reaching heaven, giving the game a discernible narrative progression, giving the end space, and so 
the whole journey of the game, some metaphorical meaning outside of merely winning the game. The game 
itself was extremely popular, with at least 13 editions, and it was also widely copied. It became popular 
in the USA after its first publication there, in 1843 (Salem Gazette 1843, 3, column 5). We can identify its 
essential format in a lineage that takes us through to Milton Bradley’s The Checkered Game of Life (1860), 
and the perennially popular The Game of Life (1960 onward) with its many editions (BGG n.d. a3).
We start to see different kinds of board games in the twentieth century with games like Pit (1904), a 
stock market trading game, The Landlord’s Game (1903), Monopoly’s precursor and a template for many 
twentieth century designs, Monopoly (1935), Buccaneer (1938), Scrabble (1938), a tabletop soccer game 
Subbuteo (1946) with its own lineage coming from nineteenth century miniaturized sports games played 
indoors and on tables, Clue/Cluedo (1949), and Yahtzee (1956) (Livingstone and Wallis 2019, 10–11). Of 
TABLE 4.1 CRT from Gettysburg (1959).
1–6 1–5 1–4 1–3 1–2 1–1 2–1 3–1 4–1 5–1 6–1
1 1
elim
1
elim
1
elim
1
elim
1
elim
Att
elim
1
elim
1
elim
1
elim
1
elim
1
elim
2 1
elim
1
elim
1
elim
1
elim
1
elim
Att
back
1
1
elim
1
elim
1
elim
1
elim
1
elim
3 1
elim
1
elim
1
elim
1
elim
1
back
2
Def
elim
1
back
2
1
elim
1
elim
1
elim
1
elim
4 1
elim
1
elim
1
elim
1
back
2
1
back
2
Def
back
1
1
back
2
1
back
2
1
elim
1
elim
1
elim
5 1
elim
1
elim
1
back
3
1
back
2
1
back
2
Att
back
1
1
back
2
1
back
2
1
elim
1
elim
1
elim
6 1
elim
1
back
3
1
back
3
1
back
2
2
back
1
Def
back
1
2
back
1
1
back
2
1
back
3
1
back
3
1
elim
The figures running vertically on the extreme left of the table represent the figure thrown on the cubit.
The first top row of figures represent the odds comparison. THE ATTACKER’S ODDS (COMBINED FACTOR 
VALUE) ARE ALWAYS FIRST – THE DEFENDER’S SECOND. For example, 3–1 means the attacker has 3 factors 
and the defender 1. Note than an attacker has little chance when the odds drop lower than 1–1 and that he 
has increasingly good chances as the odds build in his favor. Odds of more than 6–1 represent an “automatic 
elimination” of the defender. The defender cannot be removed until the end of the attacker’s turn.
“Elim” on the table means “eliminated from the board.” “1 Elim” means of course that the player with the 
factor of 1 is eliminated.
“1 Back (sic) 2” means that the player with the factor of 1 moves back 2 squares on the board, the exact 
direction to be determined by the winner.80 Paper Time Machines 
note was a game called Suffragetto (1909), and another called Pank-a-Squith (1909). They have their roots 
in abstract strategy games and race games, respectively. But are, nevertheless, representations – albeit 
immensely light – of contemporary political events relating to the suffragettes. The name Pank-a-Squith 
is a portmanteau of the name of leading suffragette Emily Pankhurst, and the name of the then British 
prime minister, Herbert Asquith (Women’s Social and Political Union 1917; BGG n.d. b). Throughout this 
evolution of board games, a cultural tradition has developed of people spending time together to sit – most 
often – at a table – playing games in their leisure time.
Kriegsspiel, from the German “wargame,” comes to us through Chess and Hnefatafl. Chess has its 
roots in India, coming from Chaturanga (c.sixth century BCE – Chaturanga is referenced in the Sanskrit 
tale Vasavadatta, date unknown.). Chess is a “symmetric design,” meaning both players have the same 
pieces with the same attributes, playing on a board that is the same for both sides. In chess the only dif￾ference is one side always goes first. Hnefatafl, in contrast, is asymmetric. The attacker has more units 
than the defender – and a different objective: surround the king, whereas the defender is attempting to 
get the king off to the side of the board. Out of these joint traditions we start to see modifications that 
give us games like Tamerlane Chess (1370) with more pieces, and variants with larger boards (BGG n.d. 
c). We see further developments with William Fulke’s Metromachia (1578), Christopher Weickmann’s 
New-erfundenes Großes-Königsspiel (Newly Invented Great Game of Kings) (1644), and Johan Hellwig’s 
Wargame (1780) (Livingstone and Wallis 2019, 80; Van Creveld 2013, 145; BGG n.d b2). These games 
still used the square-grid board familiar to chess players, but in varying sizes – usually considerably larger 
than 8x8. Hellwig gave us squares with differing topographic meaning – rivers, swamps, mountains. Units 
still moved like chess pieces, but now they had differing strength values. The design had all the modular￾ity requisite to represent a theoretically limitless array of battlefield configurations. By 1782, people were 
using Hellwig’s game to recreate historical battles. The Battle of Krefeld (1758), from the Seven Years’ 
War, may be the first instance of an actual historical battle being “re-fought” with some meaningful 
reference to recorded topography (Peterson 2012, Loc 6042). Hellwig’s concept was developed by a mili￾tary writer from Schleswig, Georg Vinturius, who, in 1798, created a game with the system with 3,600 
squares depicting the Franco-Belgian border, which had representations of supply and communication 
lines (Palmer 1977, 16).
A friend of Hellwig’s, and frequent player of the game, was one Leopold von Reisswitz. Spurred into 
action by criticism of the limitations of square-gridded boards, von Reisswitz began experimenting with 
freer forms of terrain modeling, alighting on the idea of using damp sand for its malleability (Peterson 
2012, Loc 6251). In 1811 von Reisswitz presented his Taktische Kriegs-Spiel (Tactical War-Game) to the 
Prussian court (Peterson 2012, Loc 6260). The game developed into an elaborate custom-built cabinet, 
and von Reisswitz kept working at the rules, but it remained, essentially, unfinished and commercially 
unviable. The game’s development was taken on by Leopold’s son, Georg, culminating in his publication 
of Kriegsspiel (1824). This game addressed several practical issues from the elder von Reisswitz’s work, 
such as ground and time scale, and returned to a square-grid board system, but with levels of elevation 
depicted (Peterson 2012, Loc 6344). The pieces used – wooden blocks, not miniature figures – were rep￾resentational of precise pace sizes that their corresponding units would occupy on a corresponding terrain 
ground scale. The game also included customized dice with results tables in a form that future players 
would recognize as an early version of a CRT (Combat Results Table) (Kirschenbaum 2016, 282–3). Table 
4.2 shows a dice table from von Reisswitz’s game pared down to show just the battle resolution element (a 
letter) for the five dice used in the game. The actual tables also showed casualty determinations for each 
side. The tables allowed players to customize their dice, and in playing the game, these customized dice 
were used so there was no need to use a dice table to look up the results – they were all given on the dice 
themselves (the dice subsumed the need for an actual CRT), players just had to be sure to reference the 
rules to roll the right dice for the right circumstances. Table 4.3 shows a cell for just Dice I with the face 
“1” result (the matching [D] for the result of close combat, but all cells follow the same format, with ten 
numbers in each cell: on the left four numbers from top to bottom would show the casualties an infantry 
unit inflicts when firing across four different ranges, from close range at the top to long range at the bot￾tom, on the right the four numbers would show the casualties skirmishes inflict across those same four 4 • A Brief History of Board Wargames 81
ranges, then the topmost number in the central space is the casualties suffered by the attacking unit in 
close combat, and the number beneath that is the casualties suffered by the defending unit in close combat. 
Some dice also include large dots on them for use with artillery bombardment, where a red circle around 
a dot denotes a fire starts if buildings are hit.
When, in 1824, the game was shown to General von Muffling, chief of the general staff, he is said 
to have remarked: “This is not a game! This is training for war! I must recommend it to the whole army” 
(Curry 2012, Loc 962). With the martial esteem of Frederick the Great now shaded by the recent humilia￾tions under Napoleon, the Prussian army was looking for a way to understand their own failings. Muffling 
understood that von Reisswitz had developed a means of analysis and a preparation for war.
There is more to the development of Kriegsspiel from here, with “free” and “rigid” variations utiliz￾ing fewer or more rules and differing levels of formalization and regulations, with significant contributions 
from Erich von Tschischwitz and Jakob Meckel amongst others. Perhaps of particular note is the 1876 game 
developed by Colonel von Verdy du Vernois of the Prussian general staff which opened development to 
more umpire-focused approaches (Peterson 2016, 13). Often an umpire was used to adjudicate combat reso￾lutions and to judge the success of attempted movements. Without umpires, games incorporated random 
inputs which helped to represent the concept von Clausewitz would term “friction,” which he describes as 
“an indefinite quality.” And “difficult to calculate” (Clausewitz 2021), and which he further expressed thus:
Everything is very simple in War, but the simplest thing is difficult. These difficulties accumulate and 
produce a friction, which no man can imagine exactly who has not seen War … This enormous friction, 
which is not concentrated, as in mechanics, at a few points, is therefore everywhere brought into contact 
with chance, and thus incidents take place upon which it was impossible to calculate, their chief origin 
being chance. 
(Clausewitz 2021)
To be clear, von Clausewitz’s work was not published until 1832–1835, and we don’t see a reference to his 
work in Reisswitz (Holmes 2010, 1). Erich von Tschischwitz’s Anleitung zum Kriegsspiel (Instructions for 
Wargames) (1870) does not reference von Clausewitz either, but we do see some dice tables and other charts 
in this work. We also have Jakob Meckel’s Studien über das Kriegsspiel (Studies about Kriegsspiel) (1873) 
directly referencing von Clausewitz’s friction, and a reference to “fog of unknowns” (Meckel 1873, 14–16).
TABLE 4.2 Proportional Dice Tables from Von Reisswitz’s Kriegsspiel (1824), Showing Only Overall Combat 
Result. (Leeson 1989, xiv; Command Post Games 2016). 
DICE # ODDS FACE “1” FACE “2” FACE “3” FACE “4” FACE “5” FACE “6”
I 1:1 [D] [T] [R] D T R
II 3:2 o [R] [R] D T R
III 2:1 [R] [R] T D R D
IV 3:1 D R T o o [R]
V 4:1 D D T R [R] o
D = Defeated; T = Totally Defeated; R = Attacker Repulsed; o = No definite result. Die result “faces” have been added for 
ease of reading. In this version of the table constructed by the author from von Reisswitz, via Leeson, the cells with the hard 
parenthesis denote the attacker (“Blue” results in Reisswitz’s terms).
TABLE 4.3 Detail from Dice I, cell “Face 1” from the Proportional 
Dice Table from Von Reisswitz’s Kriegsspiel (1824) (Leeson 1989, xiv; 
Command Post Games 2016).
30 25 25
20 [D] 15
10 3
4 10 282 Paper Time Machines 
Broadly speaking, we may say that following the rapid success of the smaller Prussian army 
during the Franco-Prussian War (1870–1), where the Prussian general staff had utilized Kriegsspiel 
in their preparations, the notion of the usefulness of wargaming began to be understood by other 
states. The adoption and practical implementation of professional wargaming into military spheres is 
its own fascinating story, if out of scope for us here. (The story may be followed in several sources: 
Caffrey, Matthew. 2019. On Wargaming: How Wargames Shaped History and How They May Shape 
The Future (2019); Curry, John. (Ed.) Andrew Wilson’s The Bomb and the Computer: The History of 
Professional wargaming 1780–1968 (2014); Peter Perla’s The Art of Wargaming: a guide for profes￾sionals and hobbyists (2012).)
In 1881 the British writer Robert Louis Stevenson is recorded to have played a version of Kriegsspiel 
on his floor (Osbourne 1898, 709–19). This literary crossover continued in 1913, as H.G. Wells published 
Little Wars – or to give it its full title, Little Wars: a game for boys from twelve years of age to one 
hundred and fifty and for that more intelligent sort of girl who likes boys’ games and books (Palmer 
1913). It was a more accessible and commercial reformulation of Kriegsspiel, unconcerned with levels of 
accuracy claiming to be simulation, and more focused on broad and playable representations of battles 
to ignite the imagination. Little Wars doesn’t use a regulated board at all; instead, as with Stevenson, 
the floor is recommended for play (Gutenberg 2009). Although essentially unplayable now because the 
spring-loaded cannon required for play, once ubiquitous enough, are no longer in production, Little Wars 
was instrumental in propelling Kriegsspiel into the commercial world, leading to the development of the 
miniature wargames hobby that would start to spike in popularity in the 1950s. The Californian Jack 
Scruby began to cast inexpensive miniature models and to develop a network of wargamers in the USA 
and UK (Peterson 2016, 19). This momentum carried through to the significant popularizing contribu￾tions of British designers and authors such as Donald Featherstone, Bruce Quarrie, Tony Bath, and Paddy 
Griffiths (Wikipedia n.d. a, b).
By 1958 the Kriegsspiel tradition had developed and commercialized in miniature wargames 
such that AH’s Gettysburg was leveraging its concepts of close simulation modeling, concerned with 
the accuracy of orders of battle, topographic verisimilitude, timings of unit deployments matching 
the historical record. Gettysburg was perhaps more game than detailed simulation, its combat and 
movement factors were abstractions for these concepts without always having clearly supportable 
mathematical frameworks, and there was no modeling for units being unresponsive, for order delays, 
message confusion, officer incompetence in response to movement orders, and the like. Nevertheless, 
it is hard to conceive of Gettysburg without this vision of, and the tools for, an accurate depic￾tion of battles. Indeed, Kriegsspiel too had given us depictions of actual historical battles, but just 
not in commercial form. A year after the release of the first edition of Gettysburg Roberts noticed 
a RAND Corporation wargame in Life magazine and realized the potential of bringing hexagons 
(hexes) from professional wargames into the commercial sphere (Caffrey 2019, 78). Variations of 
this origin story appear in (Ed.) Harrigan’s and Kirschenbaum’s Zones of Control, Loc 2680–2703, 
and in (Ed.) Curry, J. Peter Perla’s The Art of Wargaming: a guide for professionals and hobbyists
(2012), Loc 2690, among other publications. A wholly different version of the story is told by Lance 
Macmillan, relaying Alan Emrich’s telling of what Roberts had said publicly, which although perhaps 
now impossible to verify, and therefore credit, does have undeniable dramatic allure:
sometime in the early '60s Roberts was "invited" by the FBI to come for an interview at RAND head￾quaters (sic); they didn't tell him the subject they wanted to discuss. When he got there he was grilled 
intensively for over an hour about how he'd come up with his now (in)famous 3:1 CRT. Apparently 
RAND had been working on a classified project for the Department of Defense and had spent (alleg￾edly) over a million dollars coming up with a very detailed “scientific algorithm” to determine the 
outcome of various hypothetical combat scenarios. After roughly a year of secretive work, their hush￾hush project had yielded a formula that produced results remarkably similar to those found on Robert's 
3:1 CRT. The "interview" was to find out who the "spy" was that had leaked that sensitive information 
to Roberts (remember, this was in the early '60s and we were still deep in the depths of the Cold War 
– many were convinced there were commie agents hiding behind every shrub). Roberts was able to 4 • A Brief History of Board Wargames 83
convince them that he'd simply extrapolated his CRT based off his reading military history. Then, 
while being escorted out of the building, Roberts glanced through a couple of open office doors and 
saw maps with hex grids super-imposed on them, which is where he said he got the idea to use hex 
grids for commercial wargames.
(BGG 2017)
Whatever the case may be, the first of Avalon Hill’s board wargames to use hex grids were Chancellorsville 
(1961) and the revised edition of Gettysburg (1961) (BGG n.d. c2). Hex-grid boards would come to be the 
established convention for board wargames and remain, to this day, immensely popular. This is further 
evidence that the Kriegsspiel tradition was feeding directly into board wargames.
We also see early board games that are expressly themed around war. We see what may be the first 
historical battle map in the mid-nineteenth century, in Die Schlacht bei Leipzig, a German game roll and 
move game about the Battle of Leipzig (BGG n.d. c3; Games of War 2021). We see specialized dice in 
the UK game H. M. Squadron, or Naval Maneuvers (c.1880) which uses two six-sided dice for movement, 
numbered 1–5, with a G on the sixth face to denote a gale, which means no player gets to move (Games of 
War 2021). The Spanish game Combat Navale (1915) also has a cardboard die bearing the flag of one of 
the naval powers in World War I to allocate hits (Games of War 2021).
L’Attaque (1909) was perhaps the first game to give us a hidden set up – although it is not clear if it 
predated the Chinese games Lu Zhan Ju Qi or Si Guo Da Zhan and all three games bear distinct similari￾ties (BGG n.d. e, f, g). In a somewhat similar vein, Salvo/Battleship(s) (1931) and Stratego (1946) (BGG 
n.d. h, i) I would follow. These were all relatively simple games that used the medium of board games to 
give some representation of fog of war. Fog of war is a concept often attributed to Clausewitz. Though as 
Eugenia Kiesling points out, this attribution is somewhat misplaced, and he was really pushing for us to 
understand the uncertainty at the heart of his concept of “friction” (Kiesling 2001, 85). In any event it is 
a concept long understood by military historians, game designers, and players. We might also render it as 
“restricted intelligence,” and it appears as one of Clausewitz’s four central elements in the guise of “intel￾ligence.” The other three are physical exertion, friction, and danger, which he considers to all fall under 
the broader concept of “friction.” In L’Attaque/Stratego troops are represented by cards or wood or plastic 
stands, and the face containing the information of the troop strength/capabilities faces the respective own￾ing player, with the opponent seeing only cards or stands equal in appearance. When combat occurs the 
missing details are revealed to the opponent. This design format was ingeniously simple, making the side 
of the board where players were seated matter, and giving us a lineage that would run through to block 
wargames – even if they are generally more complex and for a narrower market – with Quebec: 1759 
(1972) through to the present (BGG n.d. j). Salvo/Battleship(s) applies the same principle to unit posi￾tion – you know where your ships are, but not where your opponent’s are. The game also makes it matter 
which side of the board players sit, and usually uses a vertical component, either as a screen between 
player board sections, or by making the board itself vertical and utilizing pegs in holes. These games 
demonstrated there was an interest in and a market for low complexity games themed on war. They also 
demonstrated the broad market appeal of low complexity innovations – none of these games were, at the 
time, conventional, but none of the innovations were complex in terms of player accessibility, or complex 
in terms of production technologies.
Likely feeding off the popularity of invasion literature which began in the early years of the new cen￾tury, War Tactics: Or Can Great Britain Be Invaded? (1911) has a square-gridded board showing Britain, 
parts of France, Belgium, the Netherlands, Germany, Denmark, Norway, and Sweden, and gave players 
optimal starting forces to choose from (IWM n.d.). The board shows ports, forts, towns, and cities. Units 
include land units, dreadnoughts, torpedo boats, cruisers, air units, and submarines. Players score points 
by occupying key locations, and most points wins. The game demonstrates an interest in hypothetical 
history.
In Jungdeutschlands Schlachtenspiel (1912) players assemble modular battle terrain on a blank 
square grid. Movement and combat rules are similar to checkers. Of note, in addition to the modular grid, 
this game provided players with multiple scenarios to choose from (BGG n.d. k).84 Paper Time Machines 
We first see the Zones of Control concept in the Austro-Hungarian game Marschall Vorwärts (1914) 
(Games of War 2021). With a 5x6 grid each player rolls several dice to score movement points, with which they 
attempt to move metal miniatures, each valued from 1 to 10 (similar to L’Attaque). The closer the miniatures 
get to the enemy the more effective their fire, but it becomes more expensive to move them towards the enemy 
(movement point costs are doubled on the second rank of their grid, and tripled on the front rank adjacent to the 
enemy). Also of note is Moderner Seekrieg Neues Marine-Schach (Modern Naval Warfare. New Naval Chess)
(1920), a game that blends chess elements, but with a zone of control concept that prevents pieces from entering 
squares that are covered by greater enemy firepower (BGG n.d. l; Games of War 2021).
The CRT in Gettysburg (1958) may be in a form that most wargamers would recognize as still in use 
in the early twenty-first century, but this was not the first CRT devised for commercial wargames. There 
is an earlier commercial CRT in the British game Tri-Tactics (1925), shown in Table 4.4, and it did not 
function through odds ratios (BGG n.d. m).
Tri-Tactics was the ultimate evolution of L’Attaque, involving land, air and sea units fighting on a board that 
included lakes, rivers and an ocean as well as land terrain. While in L’Attaque, the strongest unit prevailed 
except in a few certain circumstances, Tri-Tactics had to integrate combat outcomes both by type of unit 
and location of battle.
The result was a highly complex table …
• A Seaplane kills any land-based air over the water, but the reverse is true over land.
• A Seaplane kills weaker land units when attacked over the coastline, but the reverse is true over 
land.
• An Anti-Aircraft Gun on a coast kills a Seaplane, but can be killed by a Destroyer.
• The powerful Heavy Artillery can kill ships, but only across a coastline, or if the ships are on 
a river. 
(Games of War 2021)
The Japanese game Gunjin Shogi (“Soldier Chess”) which BGG lists as published even earlier in 1910 also has 
a piece-differentiation CRT, with 15 pieces types mirrored on each side, in what appears to be predominantly 
land-based conflict, and this may be earliest published example of a CRT in any form (BGG n.d. n).
Table 4.5 shows what may be the first odds-based CRT, which was published in the US in 1943 with the 
release of Air-Attack (BGG n.d. o). “[T]he strength of a force is not the power of the individual aircraft (all 
were equal), but rather how many units were in a formation (string of adjacent squares)” Games of War 2021).
Although Avalon Hill’s Chancellorsville and its more popular sister title Gettysburg are clear sources 
of the widespread commercial implementation of hexes, they do have at least one often neglected precur￾sor. Bunker (1939), is an abstract German battle game and perhaps the first commercial game to use a hex 
grid; it is also a card-assisted design (BGG n.d. c2, p; Games of War 2021).
Batailles sur Mer (1945), a Belgian game, is perhaps the first published example of a double-blind 
wargame, that is, one where the players involved don’t know the position or movements of each other’s 
units (in Salvo/Battleships pieces don’t move). In this case, this is achieved through each player having 
their own board and facing away from each other (Games of War 2021).
Another German game, Export (1948), although a game about trade, is perhaps the first example of a game 
using the area control approach to a map (blended, in this instance, with point-to-point movement) (BGG n.d. q).
There are other games that show us wargames in a recognizable format predating Gettysburg, thus 
demonstrating there was some latent sense of a market for Avalon Hill to fill. Tactics: A Game Of World 
Strategy (1940) is an abstract, symmetrical wargame, with contemporary technologies – battleships, sub￾marines, transports, planes, and gold reserves (BGG n.d. r). A year later we have Tallyho: The War Cry of 
the RAF (1941) (BGG n.d. s). This is a game about being a pilot – with a cardboard cockpit replete with 
moving dials. Gameplay is concerned with set collecting cards, but the square-gridded board represents 
Britain, the Channel, and “Naziland” – Nazi occupied Europe.
Another key thread that prepares the ground for Gettysburg is a sufficiently pervasive cultural interest 
in popular history. This is a far broader topic than is explored here. But it should be clear, this is a non-trivial 4 • A Brief History of Board Wargames 85
TABLE 4.4 CRT from Tri-Tactics (1925).
BATTALION. 1.
BRIGADE. 2.
DIVISION. 3.
ARMY CORPS. 4.
ARMY. 5.
ANTI-AIRCRAFT GUN. AA
FIELD ARTILLERY. FA
HEAVY ARTILLERY. HA
SCOUT. 1.
BOMBER. 2.
BATTLE PLANE. 3.
SEA PLANE. SP
SUBMARINE. SM
DESTROYER. 1.
CRUISER. 2.
DREADNOUGHT. 3.
FLAGSHIP. 4.
SEARCHLIGHT. SL
Battalion. 1. X 2 3 4 5 1 FA 2 § 1
Brigade. 2. 2 X 3 4 5 FA HA §
Division. 3. 3 3 X 4 5 X HA 2 §
Army Corps. 4. 4 4 4 X 5 4 HA
Army. 5. 5 5 5 5 X 5 HA
Anti-Aircraft Gun. 
AA
1 FA AA AA AA AA †
Field Artillery. FA FA FA X 4 5 FA X HA
Heavy Artillery. HA HA HA HA HA HA X 2 ¶ ¶ ¶ ¶ ¶
Scout. 1. AA X 2 3 • 1
Bomber. 2. 2 2 AA 2 2 X 3 •
Battle Plane. 3. AA 3 3 X •
Sea Plane. SP § § § AA • • • ‡ SP 1 SP
Submarine. SM ¶ SP SM SM SM SM
Destroyer. 1. † ¶ 1 SM X 2 3 4
Cruiser. 2. ¶ SM 2 X 3 4
Dreadnought 3. ¶ SM 3 3 X 4
Flagship. 4. ¶ SM 4 4 4 X
Searchlight. SL 1 1 SP86 Paper Time Machines 
TABLE 4.5 CRT from Air-Attack (1943).
EVEN 
BATTLE
2 TO 1 3 TO 1 4/5/6 TO 1 3 TO 2 4 TO 2 5 TO 2 6 TO 2 4 TO 3 5 TO 3 6 TO 3 5 TO 4 6 TO 4 6 TO 5
1 Red 
Plane 
Down
Single 
Plane 
Down
Single 
Plane 
Down
Single 
Plane 
Down
One of 
Two 
Down
One of 
Two 
Down
One of 
Two 
Down
One of 
Two 
Down
One of 
Three 
Down
One of 
Three 
Down
One of 
Three 
Down
One of 
Four 
Down
One of 
Four 
Down
One of 
Five 
Down
2 Blue 
Plane 
Down
Single 
Plane 
Down
Single 
Plane 
Down
Single 
Plane 
Down
One of 
Two 
Down
One of 
Two 
Down, 
Other 
Escapes 
10 Spaces
One of 
Two 
Down
One of 
Two 
Down
One of 
Three 
Down
One of 
Three 
Down
One of 
Six 
Down
Each 
Side 
Loses 
One 
Plane
One of 
Four 
Down
One of 
Five 
Down
3 Blue 
Plane 
Down
One of 
Two 
Down
Single 
Plane 
Down
Single 
Plane 
Down
One of 
Two 
Down
One of 
Two 
Down
One of 
Two 
Down
One of 
Two 
Down
One of 
Three 
Down
One of 
Three 
Down
One of 
Six 
Down
Each 
Side 
Loses 
One 
Plane
One of 
Four 
Down
One of 
Five 
Down
4 Red 
Plane 
Down
Single 
Plane 
Down
One of 
Three 
Down
Single 
Plane 
Escapes 
10 
Spaces
One of 
Two 
Down
One of 
Two 
Down, 
Other 
Escapes 
10 Spaces
One of 
Two 
Down
One of 
Two 
Down
One of 
Three 
Down
One of 
Three 
Down
One of 
Three 
Down
One of 
Four 
Down
One of 
Six 
Down
Each 
Side 
Loses 
One 
Plane
5 Blue 
Plane 
Down
Single 
Plane 
Down
Single 
Plane 
Down
Single 
Plane 
Down
One of 
Three 
Down
The Two 
Planes 
Escape a 
Total of 
10 Spaces
One of 
Two 
Down
One of 
Two 
Down
One of 
Four 
Down
One of 
Three 
Down
One of 
Three 
Down
One of 
Five 
Down
One of 
Six 
Down
Each 
Side 
Loses 
Two 
Planes
6 Blue 
Plane 
Down
One of 
Two 
Down
Single 
Plane 
Escapes 
8 Spaces
Single 
Plane 
Down
One of 
Three 
Down
One of 
Four 
Down
One of 
Five 
Down
One of 
Two 
Down
One of 
Four 
Down
One of 
Five 
Down
One of 
Six 
Down
Each 
Side 
Loses 
Two 
Planes
Each 
Side 
Loses 
One 
Plane
Each 
Side 
Loses 
Two 
Planes
7 Red 
Plane 
Down
Single 
Plane 
Escapes 
6 Spaces
Single 
Plane 
Escapes 
10 
Spaces
Single 
Plane 
Down
One of 
Two 
Down
The Two 
Planes 
Escape a 
Total of 
10 Spaces
One of 
Five 
Down
One of 
Six 
Down
One of 
Four 
Down
One of 
Five 
Down
The Three 
Planes 
each 
escape 6 
Spaces
One of 
Four 
Down
The Four 
Planes 
Each 
Escape 
6 
Spaces
Each 
Side 
Loses 
One 
Plane
8 Red 
Plane 
Down
Single 
Plane 
Escapes 
8 Spaces
Single 
Plane 
Down
Single 
Plane 
Down
Two 
Planes 
Escape 
a Total 
of 10 
Spaces
One of 
Four 
Down
The Two 
Planes 
Escape 
a Total 
of 10 
Spaces
One of 
Six 
Down
Three 
Planes 
Escape 
a Total 
of 10 
Spaces
One of 
Five 
Down
Each Side 
Loses 
One 
Plane
One of 
Four 
Down
Each 
Side 
Loses 
One 
Plane
Each 
Side 
Loses 
One 
Plane4 • A Brief History of Board Wargames 87
component to the popularity of historical wargames in the Gettysburg, and post Gettysburg world. State￾approved education systems have long formulated national myth endorsing narratives, high on patriotic 
exceptionalism, martial triumphs, and high-status individuals with blood the color of the nation’s flag. The 
transmission of this culturally significant set of narratives is sustained not just through the study of history in 
education systems, but across the full spectrum of cultural life - including the art, literature, movies, archi￾tecture, and games that it generates, consumes, and exports. A cultural climate that thought less of war and 
more of trade, less of conflict and more of cooperation, less of national identity and more of transnational 
sympathies would have been less predisposed to consume wargames with such enthusiasm. Indeed, we see 
nationally resonant history in the board games of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries – in Britain, in 
particular. These are generally games with clear pedagogic and state-narrative-compliant intent, impart￾ing the names and dates of sovereigns, and details of national, or perhaps world historical significance. An 
example of such a game is The Royal Game of British Sovereigns, exhibiting the most remarkable events 
in each reign from Egbert to George III (1820) (Liman 2017, 98). Another example is Historical Pastime: 
a new game of the history of England (1803) (Liman 2017, 102). A further example is The Destruction of 
Jerusalem (1824) (Liman 2017, 108). In these games, history is not played, so much as it is reduced to a set of 
events or chronologies that are stretched over an increasingly tired ludic format – usually a race game, or a 
set collecting card game. Here it is the promotion of a national history that is significant to our story of board 
wargame development, far more so than the nature of the gameplay – such as it is – of the games themselves.
We do, in fact, have a potential means to test the hypothesis about the distorting influence of deep￾rooted nationalist narratives on cultural reception, as we see the popularity of certain game types in 
Germany after World War II. There, war, as a theme, is surmounted in popularity by games stressing horse 
racing, travel, and fishing: Jagersro (1945), Explore Europe (1954), Alpenreise (1966), and Fische Fangen
(1956) (BGG n.d. t1, t2, u, v) serving as examples. But the picture is not as clear as all that. Ravensburger, a 
large publisher, also published nothing overtly war themed in their catalog before either world war. Perhaps 
the BGG listing for Ravensburger of only one game, Teufelsrad (1938), an abstract strategy game, within 
the span 1934 and 1944 is also telling (BGG n.d. w). Regardless, it is in Germany where we start to see 
route-building and tile placement games like Locomotion (1987), and worker placement games like Forum 
Romanum (1988) (BGG n.d. x1, x2). It is from these games that we would start to see what would come to 
be termed “Eurogames” with the likes of Catan (1995), and Kraut & Rüben (1998) (BGG n.d. y, z).
The final thread that contributes – directly, in this case – to Gettysburg’s publication is Roberts” earlier 
work. Had it not been for the commercial success – breaking even with its 2,000 printed copies – of Tactics
(1954), as well as its design innovations, there would have been no Gettysburg (BGG n.d. aa; Avalon Hill
1980, 5; Caffrey 2019, 77–8). Tactics was an abstract wargame between two non-historically defined sides (a 
blue army, and a red army) in a non-historically defined abstract but representational space with topographi￾cal features, such as roads, rivers, coast, mountains, forests, and built-up areas. Each side is symmetrically 
balanced in terms of forces, although the board is asymmetrical. The technology of the forces involved 
roughly corresponds to World War II/contemporary technology, with parachute, mountain, amphibious, 
armored, and infantry divisions. Tactics gave us the CRT, and terrain modifiers. Two design innovations 
that were so successful they effectively became design templates for an entire genre and its linked genres. 
(Indeed, the history of historical board wargames consistently blends with the history of fantasy sci-fi, alter￾nate history, and abstract wargames.) From the success of this game, Roberts took the confidence he needed 
to propel a company, Avalon Hill, and this company became the nexus of – for the first time – a viable com￾mercial board wargames industry in its own right. It is from here that we pick up our history.
1958–1981: THE FIRST RISE OF BOARD WARGAMING
We should be clear. Gettysburg was not the first wargame. As of May 2020, BGG listed 18,094 games as 
wargames, the earliest, dated 1500, are all variations on the Japanese abstract strategy game of Shogi: Tai Shogi, 88 Paper Time Machines 
Maka Dai-Dai Shogi, Dai-Dai Shogi, Tenjiku Shogi, and Wa Shogi. There are 146 other wargames that in 
BGG’s database predate Roberts’ Tactics. Nor was Gettysburg the first instance of actual historical battles being 
represented. It was, however, the first commercially available board wargame that represented an historical 
battle. Gettysburg was not the first instance of a design with a CRT, although it did help sustain the popularity of 
this design feature. It was, however, the first to depict unit types with NATO symbols and to allocate them com￾bat and movement factors. Gettysburg was also the first game released through AH – Roberts’ new company.
Within a year of the release of Gettysburg, two landmark games were published. Risk (1959) and 
Diplomacy (1959) were “lighter” games than the new trajectory AH was beginning. Risk is an area con￾trol game, with a light integration of cards (set collecting), some strategy (Australia!), and plenty of dice 
rolling (Robinson n.d.). Diplomacy is a game light on rules, but deep on human psychology. It delivered 
a sense of realpolitik in pre-World War I Europe, with recognizable geography, asymmetric design, and 
simultaneous orders. It still has a flourishing niche scene, replete with its own world championship, zines, 
and active communities. These games were sustaining the lineage of more accessible games going back 
to L’Attaque, although, as suggested, Diplomacy was rather more than that, and is a sub-genre in its own 
right, and both these two titles have been hugely successful. It was a lineage still present through the 
1970s, with games like Tank Battle (1975) (BGG n.d. bb).
Over the next five years there were 25 further releases from AH, with a range of topics, includ￾ing Chancellorsville (1961), D-Day (1961), sinking the Bismarck (Bismarck, 1962), Waterloo (1962), 
Stalingrad (1963), as well as some transport and sports related titles. (See Aaron Trammell’s chapter 
“Avalon Hill’s Race Problem” for a more detailed exploration of the early history of AH in his book The 
Privilege of Play 2023) The majority of AH’s wargames utilized the (commercially and seemingly) new 
hex-grid format in conjunction with CRTs. Then, in 1963, AH was sold to Monarch Office Services and 
J.E. Smith & Co. to settle debts (Appelcline 2011, 175; Dunnigan 2005, 141–2). The new owners let the 
company continue in much the same fashion. Roberts left to pursue publishing in other sectors, especially 
railroad history, while his friend, Tom Shaw, who had already been at AH, took over (Appelcline 2011, 
175). The sale gave AH access to superior physical components.
From 1964 onward AH had a two games a year schedule and augmented its profile and output with 
the launch of a bi-monthly periodical, The General (The General 1980). Roughly half of AH’s titles were 
wargames, which included historical battles, campaigns, wars, some historical tactical, two ahistorical 
tactical games (Tactics 1954; Tactics II 1958), some fantasy, and some sci-fi (Wikipedia n.d. f).
The success of AH, the appetite created amongst consumers, and its relatively meager output created 
a demand that small magazine print runs attempted to meet. In 1966–67 Chris Wagner launched Strategy 
& Tactics, and in 1969, with Issue #18, James Dunnigan founded Simulations Publications, Inc. (SPI) (SPI 
1977, 17–20). With aggressive – and new – approaches to marketing, such as the feedback system (get￾ting reader responses back into the editors via simple to fill out cards supplied with the magazine) – SPI 
rapidly began to pull alongside AH. The sales of Strategy & Tactics began to out-sell AH’s The General, 
and by the mid-1970s SPI was grossing $2 million a year. By the early 1980s SPI was responsible for 
around 60–70% of the board games sold worldwide (Costik.com 1996). Board wargames had indisputably 
become an industry now (Costik.com 1996; Rand.org. 2019, 15).
The board wargames market continued to grow through the 1970s, with numerous companies being 
founded (Rand Games Associates, Simulation Design Corps, Panzerfaust, Conflict Games, Operational 
Studies Group, Yaquinto, Worldwide Wargames (3W), Simulations Canada) although not all remained 
in business for long. Three of the companies that did prosper were Columbia Games, Game Designers’ 
Workshop (GDW), and Tactical Studies Rules (TSR).
Columbia Games gave us the first block game, Quebec: 1759 (1972) mentioned above, and now 
branded as “the home of block wargaming,” with over 30 published block games. The company is still in 
business (Columbiagames.com n.d.).
Games Designers’ Workshop (GDW) was founded in 1973 by Frank Chadwick, Rich Banner, Marc 
Miller, and Loren Wiseman. The company’s prodigious output has been estimated to have amounted to one 
new product every 22 days for the 22-year life of the company (which included magazines and supplements, 
as well as complete games) (Farfuture.net 2003). One of their releases, A House Divided: War Between the 4 • A Brief History of Board Wargames 89
States 1861–1865 (1981), was designed by Frank Chadwick and Alan Emrich. It featured a point-to-point 
(P2P) board. Instead of regulating movement through a grid, movement was regulated from one signifi￾cant strategic point – usually a city/town or fort to another significant point. The points are connected via 
lines representing roads, railroads, and rivers. A House Divided was a critically successful game, winning 
a Charles S. Roberts Award (considered the premier award in the industry), and running through four edi￾tions (to date). It may account for the rise in the popularity of the P2P design in general. There are games 
predating A House Divided that use a P2P system, Saratoga: 1777, Burgoyne vs Gates (1974), being one, but 
none achieved an equitable critical response, and the design approach failed to take hold until after A House 
Divided in the 1980s. As Emrich has said: “But like Leif Erikson and Hoi Shen, it didn't count that they dis￾covered America before Columbus. After Columbus it stuck” (Alan Emrich 2023, personal correspondence).
TSR was founded by Gary Gygax and Don Kaye in 1973 to publish miniature rules of the Tactical 
Studies wargaming club (hence, Tactical Studies Rules). Numerous miniature rule sets were released, 
together with three wargames, and several board and card games, but it was as the publishers of Dungeons 
& Dragons (D&D) (1974) that TSR is best known (Wikipedia n.d. e). D&D ignited a frenzy of interest 
in role-playing games which, from beginning as a sub-genre inside wargaming, rapidly came to become 
a multi-million-dollar industry in its own right, far outstripping its parent as a cultural phenomenon. 
The story of this development is also fascinating and beyond scope for this book. (See Appelcline 2011; 
Peterson 2012; Arnaudo 2018 chapters 3, 6–7 in particular.)
With partial reference to SPI’s Wargame Design (SPI 1977, 39–40), significant major landmarks in 
the hobby’s early years include:
1953: Charles S. Roberts designs Tactics
• Zones of control concept
• Square grid
1958: Avalon Hill is formed.
Gettysburg (AH)
• First historically based wargame of the modern era
• Unit facing
1959: Diplomacy (Alan Calhamer)
Area control
• Multiplayer
• Simultaneous play of movement/combat for all players
• Negotiation game
Risk (Parker Brothers)
• Area control
• Multiplayer
• Opposed roll (cumulative hits) combat resolution
• Card set collecting
1961: Chancellorsville (AH)
• Hexagonal grid system
• Secondary zones of control
U-Boat (AH)
• Semi-hidden movement
• Tactical naval warfare
1962: Bismarck (AH)
• Fully hidden movement
• Strategic and tactical levels90 Paper Time Machines 
1964: Avalon Hill publishes The General
Afrika Korps (AH)
• Overrun rule
• Supply units
Midway (AH)
• Separate air units and air rules
1965: Guadalcanal (AH)
• Step reduction record
• Defensive artillery
• Ranged weapons fire
Vietnam (Gamescience)
• Global win index
• Political factors
• Insurgency
• Unit production
1966: Christopher Wagner publishes Strategy & Tactics
1967: 1914 (AH)
• Semi-active zones of control
• Inverted and dummy counters
• Multiple combat results tables
• Reduced strength counters
• Refitting of units
Confrontation (Gamescience)
• Point-to-point movement
1968: Battle of Britain (Gamescience)
• First air warfare system
• “Brick” grid system
• Skill level for veterans
Trafalgar (Roger Cormier)
• First multi-scenario game
• First tactical sail warfare game
• Point coordinate grid
1969: Hannibal (Laurence Rusiecki)
• Strategic ancient warfare
• Land combat in the same hex
Blitzkrieg Module System (Poultron Press)
• Modular rules
• Multi-phase movement and combat
Deployment (Poultron Press)
• Line and column formations
Crete (Poultron Press)
• First magazine game
• Airborne assault simulation
Flying Fortress (Poultron Press)4 • A Brief History of Board Wargames 91
• Linking of games for campaign
• Secret/variable victory conditions
Lensman (Spartan International)
• First science fiction game
1970: Kriegspiel (AH)
• Matrix combat results table
• Geomorphic map
Tac 3 (Poultron Press) / PanzerBlitz (AH)
• Line of sight/fire
• Modern company level warfare
• Fire-before-movement
• Vehicle silhouette counters
Leipzig (Poultron Press)
• Historically evaluated leaders
• Strategy I (Poultron Press)
• Chit randomizer in lieu of die roll
• Indexed rules
Renaissance of Infantry (Poultron Press)
• Leader units for command control
• Panic/morale effects
James Dunnigan and Redmond Simonsen incorporate as Simulations Publications Inc.
1971: USN (SPI)
• Numbered hexes
1972: Napoleon at Waterloo (SPI)
• First game designed as introductory game
• 1812 (SPI)
• Area and hex versions
• Flying Circus (SPI)
• Air-to-air combat
• Quasi three-dimensional play
• American Revolution (SPI)
• Strength differential combat results table
• Quebec 1759 (Columbia Games)
• First block wargame
1973: Battles of Bull Run (SPI)
• Simultaneous movement
• Sniper! (SPI)
• Individual soldier level
• Battle for Hue (Simulation Design Corporation)
• “First fire”
• Fall of Rome (SPI)
• First solitaire game
1974: StarForce (SPI)
• Full three-dimensional play
• Non-linear movement92 Paper Time Machines 
Bar-Lev: The Yom-Kippur War of 1973 (Conflict Games)
• Different scale for different fronts
Tank! (SPI)
• Counters without any data
Europa Series (Game Designers’ Workshop)
• Series of linked games
Prestags Series (SPI)
• Integrated multiple era games
Rise and Decline of the Third Reich (AH)
• Strategic attrition combat
1976: Invasion: America (SPI)
• “Untried” inverted counters
Dixie (SPI)
• Expenditure of administrative points to take any action
Starship Trooper (AH)
• First adaptation of a novel
Wellington’s Victory: The Battle of Waterloo 18 June 1815 (SPI)
• Terrain elevation
• Multi-tiered CRT
• asymmetric sequence of play
Terrible Swift Sword (SPI)
• Ammunition supply and casualty count
• “Split-fire”
1975–1982 saw a further spike in publishers and publications, a diversification in genre – with sci-fi and 
fantasy genres expanding, and diversification into platforms – with microgames, like Car Wars (1981), 
sold in a box around the size of a paperback novel, as well as the larger games the hobby is better known 
for. This era has been considered the ‘Golden Age of Wargaming’ (Owen 1990, 136).
Richard Berg’s Terrible Swift Sword (1976), about the Battle of Gettysburg, is of particular note. It 
had over 1,000 counters, is one of the largest board wargames ever made, and is reported to often take 
longer than the three days of the historical battle to conclude – hence its moniker of a “monster game” 
(Niles 2007, 309–11). Yet it was still a big commercial success, followed by the even bigger success of War 
of the Ring (1977), (co-designed with Howard Barasch), also published by SPI (Ford 1979, 100). Richard 
Berg, perhaps the most prolific wargame designer in history (BGG n.d. qq), is also the designer of a The 
Campaign for North Africa (1978), published by SPI, somewhat notorious as a game that takes a reputed 
1,500 hours to conclude, has a board that is 9.5 feet (3m) long, and is highly complex, with a legendary (in 
the hobby) “macaroni rule” to cater for Italian troops requiring additional water supplies for boiling water 
(Gioconomicon 2012; Washington Post 2018).
There is a curious aside here that Redmond Simonsen noted in 1977 through data collected from cus￾tomer responses; people were certainly buying these “big games,” but they were seldom actually playing
them. People were buying them “because they provided a detailed and realistic treatment of a subject” 
(Simonsen 1977, 2).
Some hobby stalwarts come from this time. Star Fleet Battles (1979) a hex-grid strategy game in 
the world of Star Trek which, without a license, doesn’t mention Star Trek, is still in print. Squad Leader 
(1977), a revered game of tactical combat in World War II with three expansions 1979–1980, established 
what would subsequently become one of the wargaming world’s most perennial brands (BGG n.d. cc). In 
Axis and Allies (1981), we saw a crossover game, which reached out further afield from a core wargames 
audience into a broader gaming audience that was still drawn to popular history. The game was sufficiently 
successful that it has spawned 46 BGG entries in the series so far, including full titles, expansions, acces￾sories, fan-made mods and variants, the most recent (at the time of writing), Axis and Allies Anniversary 4 • A Brief History of Board Wargames 93
Edition: World on Fire, in 2019, suggesting the series is not out of steam yet (BGG n.d. dd). There were 
other titles too, that occupied this crossover space – what at the time was often called a “beer and pret￾zels” game (Palmer 1980, 30–6). Games like Broadsides and Boarding Parties (1982), and Crossbows 
and Catapults (1983), looking and, in the case of Crossbows and Catapults, playing rather more like 
toys than wargames – unless holding H. G. Wells” Little Wars clearly in mind (BGG n.d. ee1, ee2). With 
Crossbows and Catapults the core combat resolution was built around the use of a catapult to physically 
knock down the other player’s pieces. These types of games being published in the 1980s is evidence of 
one of those other traditions in wargaming that is sometimes ignored as the story of wargaming is told 
by grognards (hardcore wargamers, named after Napoleon’s long-serving grumbling veterans). These 
games come from a lineage we can trace back to Risk (1959), and further back to Stratego, Battleships, 
and L'Attaque – low complexity, more abstracted games, sometimes, increasingly, with sculpted pieces 
to help carry more evocation of the subject matter. It is a tradition not always favorably looked upon by 
elements of the wargaming community (BGG 2016). (To some extent block wargames straddle this space 
too – they are often a blend of more accessible mechanics meshed with deeper strategic potential and more 
detailed orders of battle.)
1982–1999: WARGAMING DESTROYED ITSELF
After the significant failure of an RPG tie-in of the TV show Dallas, SPI hit financial trouble in 1982 and 
was ultimately bought out by TSR (Grognard.com 1988). Few meaningful new products were developed. 
The work of the Ragnar Brothers in this time would constitute an exception. Games such as Angola (1988) 
and History of the World (1991) – an AH publication – were blends of historical strategy games but with 
simple mechanics and random turn order sequences of play that perhaps aided accessibility, and, we might 
argue were precursors of the fusion of American and European game design traditions we would see in 
the early 2000s and will address below. It is tempting to suggest the Ragnar Brothers, being British, were 
well placed culturally to meld American and European perspectives together (BGG n.d. ff, gg).
The publication of Advanced Squad Leader (ASL) (1985) might not be deemed new but it would build 
on the successes of its predecessor and 11 ASL modules 1985–1998 and Action Packs 1 and 2, containing 
new boards and scenarios sustained the brand through the period (BGG. hh, Wikipedia n.d. g). However, 
the circulation of Strategy & Tactics plummeted (Owen 1990). Subsequently some of the SPI staff were 
hired by a new subsidiary of AH, called Victory Games (Dunnigan 2005). Victory Games published 35 
titles, mostly wargames of some sort, but also a James Bond licensed RPG, James Bond: 007 (1983) and 
Dr. Ruth’s Game of Good Sex (1985) over the next 9 years, before publications ceased (Wikipedia n.d., 
BGG n.d. ii).
In 1994 AH released We The People (BGG n.d. kk) (see Figure 4.2), a strategic-level wargame about 
the American Revolutionary War, designed by Mark Herman, a former SPI employee and one of the hob￾by’s most highly regarded designers. By 1991 he had already been inducted into the Charles S. Roberts 
Hall of Fame, and as of 2023, has 95 credits (BGG n.d. jj). We The People showcased a new use of cards in 
a system that came to be known as a card driven game design (CDG) (BGG 2005a). We will return to this 
innovation in relation to the modeling of politics in Chapter 5, and the topic of cards in general in Chapter 
10, and CDG design in more focus in Chapter 16, but suffice to say here CDGs would prove to be a signifi￾cant design innovation, creating not just a sub-genre of sorts using cards in a similar fashion, but also, pos￾sibly, encouraging further development with card design in all manner of other related ways (BGG 2019). 
In 1999 AH released Richard Borg’s Battle Cry, a game that featured a command card mechanic BGG 
lists as never having been seen before. With this design players could only activate units in the section 
of the battlefield where they had corresponding cards, neatly representing command constraints (BGG
n.d. ll). That We The People might have helped lead to Battle Cry and other subsequent wargames where 
cards feature prominently in the design, is hard to press, because cards had long been a feature in board 94 Paper Time Machines 
FIGURE 4.2. The author’s copy of We The People (1994), in play. Photograph by the author.4 • A Brief History of Board Wargames 95
wargames, albeit not in those that come from the lineage we can trace directly back to Gettysburg. 4,407 
wargames utilized cards in some way up to and including the year 1993 – that is, the year before We The 
People’s release. If we only include wargames published up to the year 1992 that number is 4,227. (This 
number is likely higher, because not all games that use card mechanics are listed in the BGG database.) 
In addition, we know that “Tactical Cards” were part of the miniature wargaming tradition by at least the 
early 1970s (Featherstone 1973, 110–12). Further, in the 1980s Up Front (1983) a tactical World War II 
wargame, and Pentantastar (1983) a fantasy game, both used cards in significant ways that were deeply 
integrated into the design (BGG 2005b). In Up Front players manage a hand of cards that drives their 
ability to move and conduct other actions. In Pentantastar cards have a split purpose, either being used 
for their Magic Point values (to help you control the magic part of a game turn), or for their mobilization 
(to help you move your own military units) or hazard qualities (to help you impinge on the other player’s 
military units), and each side also has their own unique deck with different card strengths and types. In 
Broadsides and Boarding Parties (1984) a light age of sail game, players use cards to plan moves three 
cards/three moves at a time – representing how maneuvering a sailing ship takes some forethought, and 
cards are revealed simultaneously – representing how real time works. Indeed, we can trace the lineage of 
cards in games back to at least the ninth century in Tang Dynasty China, even if those cards were likely 
pieces of paper where gambling forfeits were written (Temple 2007, 130–1). In any case we do know that 
by 1294 people were playing cards in China (Livingstone and Wallis 2019, 56–9). We may say, then, that 
cards are one of the other traditions, in addition to Roberts” Gettysburg, which account for the history of 
board wargames into the early 2020s.
Regardless of the CDG innovation, and the success of block wargames, the 1980s and 1990s were 
evidently a challenging time for the industry. The sustained popularity of Games Workshop’s Warhammer
brand, the popularity of RPGs, the rise of video games, and the rise of collectable card games, would all 
seem to have had a part to play in cannibalizing the same core audience, pulling players away from the 
hobby. D&D was still the most popular RPG, but there were now also Tunnels & Trolls (1975), Runequest 
(1978), Traveler (1977), Space: 1889 (1988), and numerous others. These games were more than just 
games – they were entire game systems demanding large amounts of time to fully explore with effectively 
limitless potential for play. Perhaps still the best known and most commercially successful collectable 
card game, Magic: The Gathering was first released in 1993, with 20 million players as of 2015 (web
.archive.org 2006). Warhammer is a remarkable marketing success story. Consider that one (at least ini￾tially) specific genre – across a whole range of different historical/fantasy/sci-fi settings, at one specific 
scale – across the whole range of 2mm, 6mm, 10mm, 12mm, 15mm,1/72nd, 28mm, 30mm, and 54mm 
succeeded in having a high street presence in 531 dedicated stores, as of June 2020 (Statista.com 2023).
There were problems from within the board wargaming industry too. The preponderance of mods 
and variants for the Axis and Allies series (there were 11 in the 1980s and 1990s) seems to speak to a loss 
of confidence in the sector, in contrast to a plethora of diverse products (BGG n.d. dd). 1982–1999 we also 
see games becoming on average more complex and “denser,” with behemoth rulebooks, becoming longer 
to understand and play, with play times extending to 20 hours, and, more realistically, far beyond (even 
if Berg’s earlier work was not eclipsed in grandeur). Games in question are such as The Civil War: 1861–
1865 (1983) and The Korean War: June 1950–May 1951 (1986) (BGG n.d. mm, nn). From BGG scores 
it seems these games were well enough received at the time, but they, or, at least, the games published in 
this time in general, did a poor job of introducing new players to the hobby. As designer Jason Matthews 
has described it: “War-gaming destroyed itself” (Web.Archive.org 2018). In contrast, RPGs were devel￾oping a whole sub-genre of easy on-ramp experiences in the form of Choose Your Own Adventure (1979 
onward) and Fighting Fantasy (1982 onward) books well-suited to bringing pre-teens and early teens into 
the hobby, while Games Workshop conducted a masterclass in retaining and expanding an audience.
With Simonsen’s data qualified observations about the reasons people were purchasing the big game 
– because they were deemed “detailed and realistic” (Simonsen 1977, 2), it is tempting to speculate that 
the customer base as a whole now had the information it needed on the games that interested them. We 
might further speculate that their homes were full, and/or their attention and income were diverting into 
family life, as the generational dynamics of the customers of 1958–1981 shifted.96 Paper Time Machines 
The net result was a great deal of pressure on the board wargaming industry facing a contracting 
audience base. Wargame sales of 2.2 million units in 1980 diminished to 400,000 by1991 (Dunnigan 
2005b). GDW shut down in 1996 (Gamecareerguide.com n.d.). Wizards of the Coast purchased TSR in 
1997, bringing the curtain down on the remnants of SPI too (Rpg.net 2006). Then, in 1998 Monarch sold 
AH and its Victory subsidiary to Hasbro (Gis.net 2003).
There can be no more neatly distilled indication of the state of gaming culture at the time than this 
sale. AH was sold to Hasbro because they were looking for trademarks to convert to digital formats (The 
Baltimore Sun 1998). That the poster child of the board wargaming world, AH, should amount to being 
trademarks to be plundered for digital reformation seemed to symbolize the death of board wargaming, 
and to usher in the birth of a parasitic digital wargame that spurned its heritage as it feasted on it but 
offered little new. This would change as digital wargames began to find their own identity in the twenty￾first century, and as wargaming had its own resurgence.
Germane to that point, there is another essential story to extract from the 1982–1999 span. Amid the 
downturn some companies of particular note were being founded. GMT Games (GMT) was founded in 
1990 (LinkedIn Gene Billingsley n.d.). Avalanche Press was founded in 1994 (LinkedIn Mike Bennighof 
.n.d.). Multi-Man Publishing was also founded in 1994 (Wikipedia n.d. h). All would slowly build criti￾cally acclaimed catalogs. GMT has published well over 564 games to date (August 2023), including 
expansions (BGG n.d. oo . Avalanche has published 318 games to date, including expansions (Wikipedia 
n.d. c ). Multi-Man has published 248 games to date, including expansions of individual games (BGG n.d. 
pp).
2000–2023: THE SECOND RISE OF BOARD WARGAMING
From the end of the twentieth century to the present has been a blended story of six interlinking threads:
• The flourishing of GMT
• The burgeoning of new publishers
• The sustained presence of lighter wargames
• The appearance of history games beyond wargames
• The sustained presence of hex and counter games
• Digital rapprochement
GMT now occupies the position as the industry’s premier publisher. As Mike Hoyt put it on one forum 
thread discussing whether GMT had now surpassed AH in importance: “Is Neil Armstrong more impor￾tant than the Wright Brothers?” (BGG 2017). Highly rated designs, and the production quality of compo￾nents are two reasons for this ascendance. From a business perspective its P500 scheme seems pivotal. It 
was first implemented in the 1990s and was somewhat akin to a proto-Kickstarter model (Web.Archive.
Org 2018). It has been running ever since. Game designs were featured on the website, but not moved into 
production until they hit 500 pre-orders, and then printed as the numbers hit somewhere around 700 to 
750. It means any print run will always be commercially viable. As of the early 2020s GMT also houses 
(or part-houses) a number of high-profile designers. Mark Herman (95 BGG titles), Richard Borg (134 
BGG titles), Volko Ruhnke (35 BGG titles), Mark McLaughlin (26 BGG titles), Mark Simonitch (24 BGG 
titles), Ted Raicer (35 BGG titles), Jason Matthews (20 BGG titles), Brian Train (64 BGG titles), and Ty 
Bomba (167 BGG titles), and John Butterfield (31 BGG titles) (figures correct at the time of writing) are 
amongst the names wargamers most recognize (BGG n.d. jj, rr1, rr2, ss, tt, uu, vv, ww1, ww2, ww3). 
Between them they are designing and/or developing a large number of games through GMT.
GMT also has a combination of bestselling and critically acclaimed titles, such as Paths of Glory
(1999), Battle Line (2000) (BGG classifies the latter as a strategy game, not a wargame), Twilight Struggle 4 • A Brief History of Board Wargames 97
(2005), and Here I Stand (2006), and highly regarded series, such as Command & Colors (C&C), the 
COIN games, and the more recent Levy & Campaign series. C&C is a system that isn’t exclusively pub￾lished by GMT. There are eight different eras covered (to date), and only four of them - Ancients (2006), 
Napoleonics (2010), Medieval (2019), and Samurai Battles (2021) are GMT publications, but each of these 
have, or will surely soon have, numerous expansions (CommandandColors.net 2023). At their heart they 
utilize the same core system first seen in Battle Cry, and are all Richard Borg designs.
However, we gloss too quickly over Twilight Struggle: The Cold War 1945–1989 (to give its full title). 
A detail from a game in play is shown in Figure 4.3. It would be hard to overstate the significance of this 
particular title within the hobby. At a time when the hobby was only barely resuscitating itself, and it 
remained possible that digital games might extinguish board games, Twilight Struggle moved rapidly to 
number 1 on BGG’s Top 100 list and remains in the top 20. The game has accrued lifetime sales of well 
over 130,000 copies in English, and over 25,000 sales in other languages (Gene Billingsley 2020, personal 
correspondence). For context, among GMT’s 20 all-time bestselling titles most sell 10–15,000 copies. 
GMT titles also regularly outsell other board wargame publishers. Twilight Struggle has done perhaps 
incalculable service to the hobby, establishing a bar of excellence, helping to keep the wargame niche of 
the board game hobby closer to a more mainstream audience and therefore attached to a notion of com￾mercial relevance – let alone the influence it has had on designers (Suckling n.d.).
The COIN series, beginning in 2012, has, at the time of writing, over 20 titles in the series covering a 
diverse range of topics and eras, and from activity on the Discord server there are more to come (BGG n.d. 
xx). Figure 4.4 shows Cuba Libre, the second published COIN game in mid setup. COIN is another sys￾tem with cards deeply integrated into the design, although here players don’t have a hand of cards to play. 
Instead, the central deck of cards helps shape the play experience, dictating player options, somewhat like 
an event deck with repercussions. We might term this “card-assisted” design, rather than “card-driven.” It 
is also a system that permits multi-factional play, with those factions shifting in allegiance over the course 
of the game. Where C&C has a broad market appeal, COIN games have a clear critical draw. It is a system 
that does much to support the argument that games can, indeed, be models (see Chapter 3), and we shall 
return to highlight an aspect of the significance of this series in Chapter 23.
FIGURE 4.3 Detail of the author’s copy of Twilight Struggle (2005), in play. Photograph by the author.98 Paper Time Machines 
From the early 2000s, we also see a gamut of new, small publishers appearing, among them: Worthington 
Publishing (2004), Compass Games (2004), Lock ‘N Load Publishing (2006), Academy Games (2008), 
White Dog Games (2008), Victory Point Games (2008, bought by Tabletop Tycoon in 2018), Flying Pig 
Games (2010), The Plastic Soldier Company Games (2012), Hollandspiele Games (2012) (BGG. yy, zz, 
aaa, bbb, ccc; Wikipedia n.d. d; LinkedIn Victory Point Games n.d.; Worthington date comes from 2020 
personal correspondence). These publishers have not only increased the overall output in the sector to keep 
an audience fed, they have also created low complexity games, like 1775: Rebellion (2013), and 1759: The 
Siege of Quebec (2018) to help keep that audience broad (BGG n.d. eee1, eee2). These publishers have also 
taken more risks with designs to help sustain innovation, in terms of gameplay, and themes. Amabel Holland 
at Hollandspiele has designed a game, Westphalia (2019) that isn’t playable without six players (BGG n.d. 
fff); the company has published games on challenging topics, such as the history of slavery in the USA - 
This Guilty Land (2018), and the opium trade in China - An Infamous Traffic (2016) (BGG n.d. ggg1, ggg2). 
Worthington has operated on multiple tiers, publishing not only hex and counter games, like Shiloh: 1862 
(2020), as well as block wargames like War Along The Great Lakes (2020), lower complexity games like 
1565: The Siege of Malta (2022), and command card driven games Hold The Line: American Civil War 
(2019), but also book games, like Bismarck Solitaire (2021) and Waterloo Solitaire (2021), and games in 
which stripped down mechanics and/or new themes are in evidence, like Freeman’s Farm: 1777 (2019), 
Napoleon Returns 1815 (2020), and Crisis: 1914 (2024). In addition, their Lands of the Mesozoic (2024) fur￾ther indicates the company’s expanding range. (GMT and Hollandspiele are also among the wargames pub￾lishers of dinosaur games in their Dominant Species (2010), and Dinosaur Table Battles (2020) respectively.)
The tradition of lighter wargames never went away. As we saw, it carried through from Risk and
Diplomacy through to Tank Battle, Broadsides and Boarding Parties, Axis & Allies, through Battle Cry, 
and C&C, and Battle Line. We see it now in resurgence with War Of The Ring (2004), War Of The Ring 
Second Edition (2012) (even if its miniatures-heavy ostensibke lower complexity appeareance belies the 
FIGURE 4.4 The author’s copy of Cuba Libre (2013), in play. Photograph by the author.4 • A Brief History of Board Wargames 99
reality of its actual significant compexity),Tide of Iron (2007) and its seven variants, Wiz-War (2012) now 
in its eighth edition, Fortress America (2012), Star Wars: Rebellion (2016), and Twilight Imperium now in 
its fourth edition (2017), amongst others. Risk itself has also been reimagined in the form of Risk: Legacy 
(2011) (BGG n.d. iii). Risk: Legacy ushered in a new legacy game mechanic, predicated on repeated plays 
on the same board leading to board and gameplay modifications shaping the play experience around spe￾cific outcomes a given set of players arrive at through repeated play.
These types of miniatures-heavy wargames are often described as “Ameritrash” (BGG n.d. jjj). This 
means different things to different people but tends to mean games that focus on theme over mechanics, on 
sculpted plastic miniatures (minis) over abstract representations of wooden blocks, on war topics, over trading 
or other non-war topics, on dice rolling and randomness over other less luck-based mechanics (BGG 2012). 
The name is a reference to this type of game often assumed – not always correctly – to be predominantly 
published in the USA It also, of course, carries a pejorative weighting too. A plethora of minis can engender 
that reaction in certain kinds of gamers – perhaps wargamers in particular. The term “Ameritrash” contrasts 
with “Eurogames,” or “Euros.” The Ludology podcast suggests an Ameritrash game focuses on managing 
luck, while a Eurogame focuses on managing resources (Ludology Episodes 188 & 190 2018). A Euro tends 
to denote a game with a focus on mechanics over topic (or theme), on more abstract pieces, on skill over luck, 
on trading and non-war themes, on card play and worker placements over dice rolling. The name is evidently a 
reference to Europe where these types of games are predominantly published – in Germany in particular. The 
rise of Euro games, notable in titles such as The Settlers of Catan (1995 onward), Carcassonne (2000 onward), 
Ticket To Ride (2004 onward), Power Grid (2004 onward), has now fused with wargames. We now have 
games that have sometimes been called Waros or Weuros (BGG 2006). Games like Condottiere (1995), Martin 
Wallace’s Waterloo (2009), his A Few Acres of Snow (2011), Scythe (2016), Undaunted: Normandy (2019), and 
Freeman’s Farm: 1777 (2019) might fit within this description, although there seems little consensus.
Indeed, for all that these Ameritrash and Euro games are ostensibly at different ends of a spectrum 
they are both poles apart from the hardcore complex wargames of the late 1970s through to the early 
1990s. As we get deeper into the 2020s it may be harder to maintain that there’s still any meaning in 
these terms with games that might fit either definition. What is the Quartermaster General series (2014 
onward), if it is sometimes published in the USA. with wooden blocks, sometimes published in Europe 
with plastic minis (or wooden pieces), entirely driven by card play – which are the resources, but there 
is also luck in the draw, no dice, simple mechanics, but always with the clear subject matter of warfare? 
There is further fusion too, as the tradition of card integrated designs has also continued, often within 
both ostensibly quintessential Ameritrash wargames as well as with Euro-inspired wargames. War Of 
The Ring, Tide of Iron, Wiz-War, Fortress America, Star Wars: Rebellion, and Twilight Imperium all 
have cards integrated into their designs and have been described as Ameritrash. The Undaunted and 
Worthington’s Battle Formations series might be described as Euro-inspired and most certainly rely on 
card play, but the former has clear (albeit perhaps unconscious) roots in Squad Leader, and the latter too 
has conventional wargame elements like the centrality of moral tests.
Since the turn of the late 1990s we have also seen more games embrace history without focusing 
directly, or even indirectly, on war. We will look closer at this in Chapter 6.
Whilst 2000–2023 has seen both the sustained presence of lighter wargames, and the development 
of non-war history games, it has also been characterized by the sustained presence of hex and counter 
games. Significant numbers of games from the 1970s, 80s, and 90s have been republished: Vietnam, 
Korean War, Pacific War, Third World War, Peloponnesian War, We The People (as Washington’s War), 
The Russian Campaign (twice), and NATO, amongst many others.
There has been a rapprochement, of sorts, with board wargaming’s digital cousin. The world of digi￾tal commercial wargaming is a whole other story worthy of its own dedicated space, but digital games that 
are concerned with depictions of history tend to fall within one of four categories:
• Turn based (examples: Slitherine Software/Matrix Games, Civilization series, 1991 onwards)
• Real time (examples: Call of Duty (2003 onward), Medal of Honor (1999 onwards)
• Hybrids (examples: Total War series, 2000 onwards)100 Paper Time Machines 
• Historical narrative (or at least myth in the case of the first example) as narrative context (exam￾ples: Broken Sword series (1996 onward), We. The Revolution (2019), Pentiment (2022)
Whatever the appeal of digital games concerned with history, it has failed to be the case that analog expe￾riences have been rendered redundant. It appears, ironically enough, that digital games have contributed 
to the resurgence in the analog space. It seems that increasing digitization within society has encour￾aged people to seek time away from screens to socialize and for their own independent entertainment 
(FinancialExpress.com 2020; StonemaierGames.com 2019). Perhaps the preponderance of digital user 
interfaces with multiple functions has also educated analog game designers and players sufficiently to 
account for the way counters and tracks feature in analog games. More concretely some publishers have 
cited digital sales as boosting analog sales of the same games (The Board Game Family 2012).
Beyond the division of digital and analog, we also now see the rise of hybrid games, blending analog 
and digital games, in games like Mansions of Madness (2nd edition) (2016), Detective: A Modern Crime 
Board Game (2018), and Chronicles of Crime (2018). Digital analog hybrids are not new – we had Brian 
Clough’s Football Fortunes in 1987 – combining a Monopoly like board, with cards representing play￾ers, chance cards, and digital input of strengths, together with digital outputs of scores and league posi￾tions (BGG n.d. kkk). We can also look back to Dark Tower (1981) helping to facilitate battle resolution 
and track food storage, as well as playing music at significant moments (BGG n.d. lll). But the narrative 
implementation is now far deeper. We have not yet seen a new wave of this hybrid form in wargames 
fully embracing this. But we have seen beginnings in the form of Phalanx’s Uboot (2019), and there has 
been a long tradition of miniatures gamers embracing technology to assist with the more arduous tasks of 
logistics, especially in campaign length games, and we should perhaps expect to see this space explored 
with ARG or VR in the mix too.
CONCLUSION
The modern games market is vast and complex. The global video games industry has been projected to 
reach the value of $249.60 billion in 2023 and is projected to reach $363.20 billion in 2027, at a growth 
of 9.83% ( Statista 2023). The global board games industry has been valued at $18.93 billion in 2022, and 
is projected to rise to $39.99 billion by 2028 at a growth of 13.3%, (Statista 2023). “Strategy and War” 
as “market themes” have been reported as over 10% of the global market, second only to “Educational” 
games at 70.9%, ahead of “Fantasy,” “Sports’. and “Others.” In that same market report “Strategy and 
War” games also have a compound annual growth rate of 15.12% in 2019, projecting from 2018 through 
to 2024, higher than the second placed growth category of “Sports” at 14.25% (Arizton 2019, 211).
In the early 2020s, we have a confluence of traditions, some of them flowing and intermingling with 
each other, to give us a rich and varied world of mechanics, topics, player numbers, play lengths, complex￾ities, and play styles. We have what might be termed conventional hex and counter two-player games, that 
are tactical, like Antietam (2020), operational, like The Dark Summer: Normandy 1944 (2020), and strate￾gic, like The Fulda Gap: The Battle for the Center (2020). We have block games, like Philadelphia: 1777 
(2020), and games that look like a block game, but are innovations on the standard format, like Napoleon 
Returns 1815 (2020). We have more variations on the COIN series, in All Bridges Burning: Red Revolt 
and White Guard in Finland 1917–1918 (2020). We have card-driven innovations like Imperial Struggle 
(2020). We have lighter games incorporating euro style resource and card management like Undaunted: 
North Africa (2020), games exploring hidden movement Hunt for the Bismarck (2021), solo games like In 
Magnificent style: Pickett’s Charge (2021). We have games focused on logistics, such as Supply Lines of 
the American Revolution: The Northern Theater, 1775–1777 (2017), and the human scale of organizing 
and motivating labor, as in Halls of Hegra (2023). We have games that have euro style resource and card 
management as well as hidden movement, optional solo play, and are variations on a block game format 4 • A Brief History of Board Wargames 101
in Chancellorsville: 1863 (2020). We have games about significant treaties Versailles: 1919 (2020), Peace 
1905 (2025), games about political trajectories like Votes for Women (2020), co-op games about surviving 
war, like The Grizzled (2015), and semi-co-op games with hidden traitors with an historical setting, like 
Hidden Strike: American Revolution (2021). We have seen a recent resurgence in book games, such as 
Bismarck Solitaire (2021) and Waterloo Solitaire (2021) from Worthington, and Mike Lambo’s 21 game 
series (at the time of writing) of solitaire book wargames (2022 onward), all of which play essentially as 
board games in more paper form. Indeed, Bismarck Solitaire is also published in board game form – see 
Bismarck Solitaire Board Game (2023), and it began its development life as a board game (Mike Wylie, 
2023 personal correspondence). Waterloo Solitaire Board Game (2023) has also subsequently followed. 
There is also the Dave Neale and David Thomspon design War Story: Occupied France, just announced 
at the time of writing, which promises intriguing innovations in narrative-driven wargaming.
In an attempt to see these game types in some relational context, see Table 4.6. This table demon￾strates GMT Games” top 60 bestsellers, which represent 60% of sales from the period Q3 2022 to Q4 
2023, sourced directly from GMT Founder Gene Billingsley (2024 personal correspondence). We can also 
represent just those highlighted 60% of sales in Figure 4.5.
TABLE 4.6 GMT Top 60 Bestsellers 4Q 2022–3Q 2023.
GAME TYPE DETAILS %
Twilight Struggle and children 2 of 30 (and 2 of the top 3 sellers)
Twilight Struggle: Red Sea.
Twilight Struggle Deluxe edition. 8th printing.
8.4
Pure Solo or Co-op games/products 4 of 30 11.2
Hex and counter wargames 6 of 30 (mostly series games)
North Africa ‘41
The Russian Campaign
Next War supplement 3
Next War: Poland, 2nd edition
Under the Southern Cross
Battle of White Plains
10.9
COIN Series games 6 of 30
The British Way
People Power
Fire in the Lake, 3rd printing
Cuba Libre, 4th printing
Liberty or Death, 3rd printing
Sovereign of Discord
10
Non hex and counter historical wargames/
strategy games
8 of 30
Atlantic Chase, 2nd printing
Plantagenet
Inferno
Border Reivers
Seas of Thunder
Sekigahara
Ancient Civilizations of the Middle East
The Barracks Emperors
13.3
Non-Twilight Struggle Card-Driven Games 2 of 30
Paths of Glory, Deluxe edition, 2nd printing
Clash of Sovereigns
3
Euro-Type Strategy Games 2 of 30
Charioteer
Dominant Species Marine, 2nd printing
3.1102 Paper Time Machines 
The remaining 40% of GMT sales for the same period is accounted for by 123 games, broken 
into slightly different categories, shown in Table 4.7. We can see the preponderance of hex and counter 
wargames here. The remaining sales not allocated in either Tables 4.6 or 4.7 is accounted for in roughly 
6% of sales though various accessories, such as counter trays, and mounted maps. 
These sales from Table 4.7 are also represented in Figure 4.6.
Twilight Struggle and 
children
14%
Pure Solo or Co-op
19%
Hex and Counter 
Wargames
18%
COIN series
17%
Non hex and counter 
historical wargames
22%
Non-Twilight Struggle 
CDGs
5%
Euro-Type Strategy
5%
GMT
TOP 60 BESTSELLERS
4Q 2022 - 3Q 2023
FIGURE 4.5 GMT Top 60 Bestsellers 4Q 2022–3Q 2023.
TABLE 4.7 GMT Lower 40% Sellers 4Q 2022–3Q 2023.
GAME TYPE NUMBER OF GAMES %
Hex and counter wargames 57 14
Non hex and counter strategy games/wargames 17 4.1
Pure Solo or Co-op games/products 7 3.6
Card-Driven Games 11 2.7
Commands & Colors series 7 2.4
Euro-Type Strategy Games 6 2.2
18XX Titles 4 1.4
COIN Series games 11 1.1
Sci Fi/Space games 3 1
Combat Commander series 7 0.64 • A Brief History of Board Wargames 103
There is so much happening right now. We might, perhaps, describe the current time as a new 
golden age.
If it is a new golden age, it is different from the first. The industry is broader, but shallower, finan￾cially. There may be no 200,000 unit wargames these days, but the games are more varied in style, subject 
matter, and player counts. They include better quality components, are generally more accessible, have 
shorter rule books, and play shorter (Costik.com 1996). Was the golden age really so golden the first time 
around?
REFERENCES
Angiolillo Collection. 1800. London: Laurie and Whittles.
Arizton. 2019. Board Game Market: Global Outlook and Forecast 2019 - 2024. Chicago, IL.
Appelcline, Shannon. 2011. Designers & Dragons. London: Mongoose Publishing.
Pure Solo or Co-op, 11%
COIN series, 3%
18xx Titles, 4%
Hex and Counter 
Wargames, 42%
Non hex and counter
strategy games/
wargames, 13%
CDGs, 8%
Euro-Type Strategy, 7%
GMT
LOWER 40% SELLERS
4Q 2022 - 3Q 2023
Combat Commander
Series, 2%
Sci Fi/Space
Games 3%
Command s &
Colors Series, 7%
FIGURE 4.6 GMT Lower 40% Sellers 4Q 2022–3Q 2023.104 Paper Time Machines 
Archive.Org. 2012. The General Magazine Index and Company History. 1980. August 5, 2015. https://archive.org
/details/GeneralMagazine_GeneralIndexVolumes1to16/page/n3/mode/2up?view=theater Accessed February 
13, 2023.
Arnaudo, Marco. 2018. Storytelling in the Modern Board Game: Narrative Trends from the Late 1960s to Today. 
Jefferson, NC: McFarland and Company.
Avalon Hill's General Magazine. 1980. Index and Company History 1952–1980. Volume 1- Volume 16. Baltimore, 
MD.
BGG. 2005a. BoardGameGeek.com. "Card-driven wargames." https://boardgamegeek.com/geeklist/9882/card
-driven-wargames Accessed May 14, 2024.
BGG. 2005b. “BoardGameGeek.com, .” March 13, 2005. https://boardgamegeek.com/filepage/9395/front-rulespdf
Accessed July 26, 2020.
BGG. 2006. BoardGameGeek.com, November 5, 2006. https://boardgamegeek.com/thread/133826/waros-or-weu￾ros-which-right-word-euro-wargames Accessed February 3, 2023.
BGG. 2012. BoardGameGeek.com, February 9, 2012. https://boardgamegeek.com/thread/763154/what-difference
-between-euro-or-ameritrash-my-syst Accessed February 3, 2023.
BGG. 2016. BoardGameGeek.com, November 29, 2016. https://boardgamegeek.com/thread/1681268/why-so-many
-people-seem-hate-games-minis Accessed February 3, 2023.
BGG. 2017. BoardGameGeek.com, April 24, 2017. Accessed January 26, 2024. https://boardgamegeek.com/thread
/1762462/hexes-wargames-history/page/2
BGG. 2017. BoardGameGeek.com, April 30, 2017. https://boardgamegeek.com/thread/1772401/avalon-hill-last
-gasp Accessed February 3, 2023.
BGG. 2019. BoardGameGeek.com, April 29, 2019. https://boardgamegeek.com/thread/2194899/26-years-card
-driven-war-games-26-cdws-still-evolv Accessed February 3, 2023.
BGG. n.d. a1 “Xiangqi.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/2393/xiangqi Accessed 
January 27, 2024.
BGG. n.d. a2 “Checkered Game of Life.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/40244/
checkered-game-life. Accessed January 7, 2023.
BGG. n.d. a3 “Game of Life.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/2921/game-of-life
Accessed January 7, 2023.
BGG. n.d. b “Pank-A-Squith.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/image/57832/pank-squith
Accessed January 7, 2023.
BGG. n.d. b2 “Metromachia.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/42755/metromachia
Accessed January 7, 2023.
BGG. n.d. c “Tamarlane Chess.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/37462/tamerlane
-chess Accessed January 7, 2023.
BGG n.d. c2 "Chancellorsville." BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/13614/chancellors￾ville Accessed May 13, 2024
BGG. n.d. c3 “Die Schlacht bei Leipzig.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/247716/
die-schlacht-bei-leipzig Accessed August 3, 2023.
BGG. n.d. e “L’Attaque.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/9246/lattaque Accessed 
February 28, 2023.
BGG. n.d. f “Lu Zhan Ju Qi.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/8909/lu-zhan-jun-qi
Accessed January 24, 2024.
BGG. n.d. g “Si Guo Da Zhan.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/19655/si-guo-da
-zhan Accessed January 24, 2024.
BGG. n.d. h “Battleship.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://www.boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/2425/battleship
Accessed February 28, 2023.
BGG. n.d. i “Stratego.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/1917/stratego Accessed 
February 28, 2023.
BGG. n.d. j “Quebec 1759.” BoardGameGeek.com. Accessed February 28, 2023. https://www.boardgamegeek.com
/boardgame/85/quebec-1759
BGG. n.d. k “Jungdeutschlands Schlachtenspiel.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://bgg.cc/boardgame/94263/jung￾deutschlands-schlachtenspiel Accessed August 3, 2023.
BGG. n.d. l “Moderner Seekrieg: Neues Marine-Schach.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://bgg.cc/boardgame/357016
/moderner-seekrieg-neues-marine-schach Accessed August 3, 2023.
BGG. n.d. m “Tri-Tactics.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://bgg.cc/boardgame/2605/tri-tactics/images Accessed 
August 3, 2023.4 • A Brief History of Board Wargames 105
BGG. n.d. n “Gunjin Shogi.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/20620/gunjin-shogi
Accessed January 24, 2024.
BGG. n.d. o “Air-Attack.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://bgg.cc/boardgame/21851/air-attack Accessed August 3, 
2023.
BGG. n.d. p “Bunker.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://bgg.cc/boardgame/307519/bunker Accessed August 3, 2023.
BGG n.d. q. "Export". BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/174915/export Accessed 
April 10, 2024. 
BGG. n.d. r “Tactics.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://www.boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/19050/tactics Accessed 
February 28, 2023.
BGG. n.d. s “Tallyho.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://www.boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/33050/tallyho
Accessed January 7, 2023.
BGG. n.d. t1 “Jagersro.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://www.boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/1869/jagersro
Accessed February 28, 2023.
BGG. n.d. t2 “Explore Europe.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://www.boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/2484/explore
-europe Accessed February 28, 2023.
BGG. n.d. u “Alpenreise.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://www.boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/25387/alpenreise
Accessed February 28, 2023.
BGG. n.d. v “Fische Fangen Ein Frohes Petri Heil.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://www.boardgamegeek.com/
boardgame/115480/fische-fangen-ein-frohes-petri-heil Accessed February 28, 2023.
BGG. n.d. w “Teufelsrad.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://www.boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/26993/teufelsrad
Accessed February 28, 2023.
BGG. n.d. x1 “Locomotion.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://www.boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/8007/locomo￾tion Accessed February 28, 2023.
BGG. n.d. x2 “Forum Romanum.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://www.boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/302/forum
-romanum Accessed February 28, 2023.
BGG. n.d. y “Catan.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://www.boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/13/catan Accessed 
February 28, 2023.
BGG. n.d. z “Kraut & Rüben.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://www.boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/1028/kraut
-ruben Accessed February 28, 2023.
BGG. n.d. aa “Tactics.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://www.boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/31766/tactics
Accessed February 28, 2023.
BGG. n.d. bb “Tank Battle.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/2598/tank-battleAc￾cessed February 28, 2023.
BGG. n.d. cc “Squad Leader.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/geeksearch.php?action=search
&objecttype=boardgame&q=squad%20leader Accessed February 13, 2023.
BGG. n.d. dd “Axis and Allies.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/geeksearch.php?action=search
&objecttype=boardgame&q=axis%20and%20allies Accessed February 3, 2023.
BGG. n.d. ee1 “Broadsides and Boarding Parties.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame
/96/broadsides-and-boarding-parties Accessed February 28, 2023.
BGG. n.d. ee2 “Crossbows and Catapults.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/2129/
crossbows-and-catapults Accessed February 13, 2023.
BGG. n.d. ff “Angola.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/4688/angola Accessed 
December 21, 2023.
BGG. n.d. gg “History of the World.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/224/history
-world Accessed December 19, 2024.
BGG. n.d. hh “Advanced Squad Leader.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/243/
advanced-squad-leader Accessed January 5, 2024.
BGG. n.d. ii “Dr. Ruth’s Game of Good Sex.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/7348
/dr-ruths-game-good-sex Accessed January 5, 2024.
BGG. n.d. jj “Mark Herman.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgamedesigner/152/mark
-herman Accessed February 13, 2023.
BGG. n.d. kk “We The People.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/620/we-people
Accessed February 28, 2023.
BGG. n.d. ll “Battle Cry.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/551/battle-cry Accessed 
February 3, 2023.
BGG. n.d. mm “The Civil War: 1861-1865.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/2081/
civil-war-1861–1865 Accessed February 13, 2023.106 Paper Time Machines 
BGG. n.d. nn “The Korean War: June 1950–May 1951.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/board￾game/7349/korean-war-june-1950-may-1951 Accessed February 13, 2023.
BGG. n.d. oo “GMT Games.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgamepublisher/52/gmt
-games/linkeditems/boardgamepublisher Accessed February 28, 2023.
BGG. n.d. pp “Multi-Man Publishing.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgamepublisher
/196/multi-man-publishing Accessed February 13, 2023.
BGG. n.d. qq "Richard Berg." https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgamedesigner/135/richard-h-berg Accessed May 
14, 2024.
BGG. n.d. rr1 “Richard Borg.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgamedesigner/25/richard
-borg Accessed February 28, 2023.
BGG. n.d. rr2 “Volko Runke.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgamedesigner/772/volko
-ruhnke; Accessed February 28, 2023.
BGG. n.d. ss “Mark McLaughlin.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgamedesigner/4595/
mark-mclaughlin Accessed February 28, 2023.
BGG. n.d. tt “Mark Simonitch.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgamedesigner/140/mark
-simonitch Accessed February 28, 2023.
BGG. n.d. uu “Ted Raicer.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgamedesigner/484/ted-raicer
Accessed February 28, 2023.
BGG. n.d. vv “Jason Matthews.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgamedesigner/3877/
jason-matthews Accessed February 28, 2023.
BGG. n.d. ww1 “Brian Train.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgamedesigner/1678/brian
-train Accessed February 28, 2023.
BGG n.d. ww2 "Ty Bomba". https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgamedesigner/1747/ty-bomba Accessed April 10, 
2024. 
BGG. n.d. ww3 “John H. Butterfield.” https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgamedesigner/679/john-h-butterfield Accessed 
June 6, 2024.
BGG. n.d. xx “COIN: Counterinsurgency Game Series.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/board￾gamefamily/18749/series-coin-gmt Accessed February 3, 2023.
BGG. n.d. yy “Compass Games.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgamepublisher/3929/
compass-games Accessed February 13, 2023.
BGG. n.d. zz “Academy Games.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgamepublisher/7747/
academy-games-inc/linkeditems/boardgamepublisher Accessed February 13, 2023.
BGG. n.d. aaa “White Dog Games.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgamepublisher/11015
/white-dog-games/linkeditems/boardgamepublisher Accessed February 13, 2023.
BGG. n.d. bbb “Flying Pig.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgamepublisher/28732/flying
-pig-games/linkeditems/boardgamepublisher Accessed February 13, 2023.
BGG. n.d. ccc “PSC Games.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgamepublisher/29198/psc
-games/linkeditems/boardgamepublisher Accessed February 13, 2023.
BGG. n.d. ddd. Hollandspiele. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgamepublisher/33711/hollandspiele Accessed 
April 10, 2024. 
BGG. n.d. eee1 “1775 Rebellion.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/128996/1775
-rebellion Accessed February 13, 2023.
BGG. n.d. eee2 “1759 Siege of Quebec.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/258131
/1759-siege-quebec Accessed February 13, 2023.
BGG. n.d. fff “Westphalia.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/290380/westphalia
Accessed February 13, 2023.
BGG. n.d. ggg1 “This Guilty Land.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/250488/guilty
-land Accessed February 13, 2023.
BGG. n.d. hhh “Infamous Traffic.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/206490/infa￾mous-traffic Accessed February 13, 2023.
BGG. n.d. iii “Risk Legacy.” BoardGameGeek.com.https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/105134/risk-legacy
Accessed February 3, 2023.
BGG. n.d. jjj “Ameritrash.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/wiki/page/Ameritrash Accessed 
February 3, 2023.
BGG. n.d. kkk “Brian Clough’s Football Fortunes.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame
/254196/brian-cloughs-football-fortunes Accessed February 3, 2023.
BGG. n.d. lll “Dark Tower.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/30/dark-tower Accessed 
January 25, 2024.4 • A Brief History of Board Wargames 107
Caffrey, Matthew B. 2019. On Wargaming: How Wargames Shaped History and How They May Shape The Future. 
Newport RI: Naval war College.
Clausewitz, Carl von. 2021. “On War.” https://www.gutenberg.org/files/1946/1946-h/1946-h.htm. Accessed September 
26, 2023.
Columbia Games. n.d. https://secure.columbiagames.com/products/wargame Accessed March 1, 2023.
Commandandcolors.net. 2022. https://www.commandsandcolors.net/ Accessed February 13, 2023.
Command Post Games. 2016. https://www.commandpostgames.com/ever-wonder-what-kriegsspiel-dice-looked
-like/ Accessed October 23, 2023.
Costik.com. 1996. “SPI Died for Your Sins.” http://www.costik.com/spisins.html Accessed February 23, 2023.
Curry, J., ed. 2012. Peter Perla’s The Art of Wargaming: A Guide for Professionals and Hobbyists. Morrisville, NC: 
Lulu Publishing.
Curry, J., ed. 2014. Andrew Wilson’s The Bomb and the Computer: The History of Professional Wargaming 1780–
1968. Morrisville, NC: Lulu Publishing.
Dunnigan, James F. 1992. The Complete Wargames Handbook. New York, NY: William Morrow and Company.
Dunnigan, James F. 2005. The Complete Wargames Handbook. New York, NY: William Morrow and Company.
Farfuture.net. 2003. December 30–2021, July 12. https://web.archive.org/web/20060715082237/http://www.farfu￾ture.net/ffe/n1000.html Accessed February 23, 2023.
Featherstone, Donald. 1973. Solo Wargaming. London: Kaye & Ward.
FinancialExpress.com. 2020. https://www.google.com/amp/s/www.financialexpress.com/lifestyle/digital-detox
-many-are-moving-from-screen-to-board-for-entertainment/1827723/lite/ Accessed February 28, 2023.
Ford, John M. 1979. “Ón Tabletop Universes.” https://archive.org/details/Asimovs_v03n04_1979-04/page/n99/mode
/2up Accessed August 2, 2023.
Gamecareerguide. n.d.https://www.gamecareerguide.com/features/327/on_game_design_a_history_of_video_.php
?page=2 Accessed July 14, 2020.
Games of War. 2021. https://www.gamesofwar.org/wargame-firsts Accessed August 3, 2023.
Gettysburg. 1959. Rulebook. Fifth Printing (August 1959) of the First Edition (August 1958). Baltimore, MD: The 
Avalon Hill Company.
Gioconomicon. 2012. https://www.gioconomicon.net/modules.php?name=News&file=article&sid=6108&title=il
-gioco-in-scatola-pi-complesso-del-mondo Accessed August 2, 2023.
Gis.net. 2003. https://web.archive.org/web/20130203105143/http://www.gis.net/~pldr/fah.html Accessed February 
13, 2023.
Grandviewresearch.com. 2020. “U.S. Fruit & Vegetables Market Size Report, 2022–2030.” grandviewresearch.com
Accessed February 13, 2023.
Grognard. 1988. https://grognard.com/zines/so/so43.txt Accessed February 13, 2023.
Gutenberg. 2009. https://www.gutenberg.org/files/3691/3691-h/3691-h.htm Accessed February 28, 2023.
Holmes, Andrew. 2010. Carl von Clausewitz’s On War: A Modern-day Interpretation of a Strategy Classic. Oxford, 
UK: Infinite Ideas.
IWM. n.d. https://www.iwm.org.uk/collections/item/object/30082433 Accessed January 7, 2023.
Kiesling, Eugenia. 2001. “On War: Without The Fog.” Military Review, September– October, 2001, 85–7.
Kirschenbaum, Matthew. 2016. “Kriegsspiel.” In Debugging Game History: A Critical Lexicon, edited by Henry 
Lowood and Raiford Guins, 354–364. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Leeson, Bill. 1989. Von Reisswitz Kriegsspiel: 1824 The Prussian Army War Game. Translated by Bill Leeson. 
Hemel Hempstead: Bill Leeson.
Liman, E. 2017. Georgian and Victorian Board Games: The Liman Collection. New York, NY: Pointed Leaf Press.
LinkedIn Gene Billingsley. n.d. https://www.linkedin.com/in/gene-billingsley-46891693/ Accessed February 13, 
2023.
LinkedIn Mike Bennighof. n.d. https://www.linkedin.com/in/mike-bennighof-630b13/ Accessed February 13, 2023.
LinkedIn Victory Point Games. n.d. https://www.linkedin.com/company/victory-point-games Accessed February 
13, 2023.
Livingstone, Ian, and James Wallis 2019. Board Games in 100 Moves: 8,000 Years of Play. London: Dorling 
Kindersley.
Ludology. 2018. https://ludology.libsyn.com/gametek-classic-190-ameritrash; https://ludology.libsyn.com/gametek
-classic-188-eurogames Accessed February 13, 2023.
Meckel, Jakob. 1873. Studien über das Kriegsspiel. Berlin: Mittler.108 Paper Time Machines 
Niles, Douglas. 2007. "Terrible Swift Sword." In Hobby Games: The 100 Best. Green Ronin Publishing, edited by 
James Lowder, 309–311. Seattle, WA: Green Ronin Publishing. 
Osbourne, L. 1898. "Stevenson at Play (With an Introduction by Lloyd Osbourne)." Scribner's Magazine 24, no. 6 
(December): 709–719.
Owen, S. 1990. "The History of Wargaming 1975–1990." Strategy & Tactics, July 1990.
Palmer, F. 1913. "Little Wars. By H. G. Wells." The Spectator, 16 August 1913.
Palmer, N. 1977. The Comprehensive Guide to Board Wargaming. New York, NY: Hippocrene Press Inc.
Palmer, N. 1980. The Best of Board Wargaming. New York, NY: Hippocrene, 1980.
Peterson, Jon. 2012. Playing at the World. San Diego, CA: Unreason Press.
Peterson, Jon. 2016. “A Game Out of All Proportions: How A Hobby Miniaturized War.” In Zones of Control: 
Perspectives on Wargaming, edited by Pat Harrigan and Matthew G. Kirschenbaum, 3–31. Cambridge, MA 
and London, England: The MIT Press.
Rand.org. 2019. Accessed March 1, 2023. https://www.rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/research_reports/RR2200/
RR2227/RAND_RR2227.pdf, Accessed August 2 2023.
Roberts, Charles S. 1983. https://web.archive.org/web/20081006202444/http://www.alanemrich.com/CSR_pages/
Articles/CSRspeaks.htm Accessed January 7, 2022.
Robinson, Garrett. n.d. “The Strategy of Risk.” https://web.mit.edu/sp.268/www/risk.pdf Accessed August 2 2023.
Rpg.net. 2006. August 3. https://www.rpg.net/columns/briefhistory/briefhistory1.phtml Accessed March 1, 
2023.
Simonsen, Redmond. 1977. “Consuming The Indigestible: The Large Game Syndrome.” In Moves: Conflict 
Simulation Theory & Technique, edited by R. A. Simonsen. Nr. 35. New York: SPI, October/
November.
SPI. 1977. Wargame Design: The History, Production, and Use of Conflict Simulation Games. Strategy & Tactics 
Staff Study Nr. 2. New York: SPI.
Statista.com. 2023. https://www.statista.com/outlook/dmo/digital-media/video-games/worldwide. Accessed November 
14, 2023.
StonemaierGames.com. 2019. https://stonemaiergames.com/top-10-reasons-for-the-rise-in-popularity-of-tabletop
-games/ Accessed February 13, 2023.
Suckling, Maurice W. n.d. “Innovation and Inspiration in Contemporary Board Wargames: Discussions with 
Designers.” In EuroWarGames. Bénodet, France: Nuts! Publishing.
Temple, Robert, K. G. 2007. The Genius of China: 3,000 Years of Science, Discovery, and Invention. 3rd ed. 
London: André Deutsch.
The Baltimore Sun. 1998. https://www.baltimoresun.com/news/bs-xpm-1998-08-05-1998217009-story.html
Accessed February 13, 2023.
The Board Game Family. 2012. https://www.theboardgamefamily.com/2012/03/digital-board-games-boost-sales-of
-physical-games/ Accessed February 13, 2023.
The Salem Gazette. 1843. p. 3, column 5, November 24, 1843.
Topsfield, Andrew. 2007. The Art of Play: Board and Card Games of India. Mumbai, Maharashtra, India: Marg 
Foundation.
Trammell. Aaron. 2023. The Privilege of Play: A History of Hobby Games, Race, and Geek Culture. New York: New 
York University Press.
Van Creveld, Martin. 2013. Wargames: From Gladiators to Gigabytes. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Wargaming.co. n.d. http://www.wargaming.co/recreation/details/tbcampaigns.htm Accessed August 2, 2023.
Web.Archive.org. 2006. September 1, 2006. https://web.archive.org/web/20060901100217/http://faculty.bschool
.washington.edu/skotha/website/cases%20pdf/Wizards%20of%20the%20coast%201.4.pdf Accessed March 1, 
2023.
Web.Archive.Org. 2018. July 17, 2018. https://web.archive.org/web/20180907202809/https://www.washingtonpost
.com/lifestyle/magazine/the-cold-war-themed-board-game-that-feels-more-relevant-than-ever/2018/07/16
/45be9be4-7a4e-11e8-93cc-6d3beccdd7a3_story.htmlAccessed February 23, 2023.
Wikipedia. n.d. a “Donald Featherstone.” https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Donald_Featherstone_(wargamer) Accessed 
March 1, 2023.
Wikipedia. n.d. b “Paddy Griffith.” https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paddy_Griffith Accessed March 1, 2023.
Wikipedia. n.d. c “Avalanche Press.” https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Avalanche_Press Accessed March 1, 2023.
Wikipedia. n.d. d “Lock ‘n Load Publishing.” https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lock_'n_Load_PublishingAccessed 
March 1, 2023.
Wikipedia. n.d. e “TSR. Inc.” https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/TSR,_Inc.#Wargames Accessed March 1, 2023.4 • A Brief History of Board Wargames 109
Wikipedia. n. d. f. "The General (magazine)." https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_General_(magazine) Accessed May 
15, 2024.
Wikipedia. n.d. g “Advanced Squad Leader.” https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Advanced_Squad_Leader Accessed 
January 5, 2024.
Women’s Social and Political Union. 1917. https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5e110c97b135de2d59b8d485/t/5e1
1184508c15a57c8358d22/1578178630321/Suffragetto-Rules-3.pdf Accessed January 7, 2022.
Zocci, L. 2007. "Gettysburg." In Hobby Games: The 100 Best, edited by J. Lowder, 130–133. Seattle, WA: Green 
Ronin Publishing, 2007.110
5 A Briefer History of 
Pol-Mil Wargames 
or The Greatest 
Victory Is That Which 
Requires No Battle
The mere fact that we have the term “Pol-Mil Simulation” is really sort of 
interesting, because … the term suggests that there’s politics and there’s 
military and the two things … have to be somehow integrated because 
they’re really separate concepts and separate schools of thought … It’s kind 
of curious where we’re in a circumstance where we talk about politics and 
military affairs as if they’re completely separate entities. 
(Matthews 2022)
THE ILLUSION OF SEPARATION
Our definition of wargames, given in Chapter 1 (“[A] wargame is a strategy game where the focus of play 
is predominantly concerned with the execution of military or political-military operations of some kind”) 
was determined through subject matter and briefly justified on the grounds of the inherent intersectional 
nature of these spheres of theory and practice. We might extrapolate further in broad terms. Certainly the 
associations between the projection of military power and the foundations of political power run deep in 
history. As Jason Matthews tells us: “Military might and political power have been the same thing through 
most of human history” (Matthews 2022; for an extended discussion, see Freedman 1998).
Most emphatically at a strategic level, and also at an operational level, war cannot be divorced from 
political imperatives and constraints. What are they being fought for? What constitutes victory? How 
are resources for war gathered and expended? What determines the involvement of third parties? Yet the 
default position at the hobby’s beginnings and for much of its history has been to see political dimensions 
of strategic and operational level wargames as generally ancillary, random, deterministic, and only lightly 
modeled. Only in rare cases do we see it initially modeled with an eye to complexity. To describe this 
modeling as both random and deterministic might sound like a paradox. Yet, as we shall shortly see, we 
have examples of both elements in some of the same games, the common denominator being that the com￾plexity of politics and its entwined nature with military operations is routinely discounted, disregarded, 
and either willfully not understood or else mistakenly distorted into a differentiated sphere from military 
concerns.
Paper Time Machines A Briefer History of Pol-Mil Wargames
DOI: 10.1201/9781003359265-6
10.1201/9781003359265-65 • A Briefer History of Pol-Mil Wargames 111
A Briefer History of Pol-Mil Wargames
The origins of this division are worthy of some consideration. As Matthews pointed out in a lecture 
to the Georgetown University Wargaming Society (GUWS) in 2022, the American context of the birth of 
the commercial board game hobby appears utterly central to this schism. This context brings a wariness 
of the intersection between politics and military matters that we see realized in the Constitution (Article 
1, Section 8, Clause 12). Yet, more specifically, the birth of the hobby (the 1950s–1960s) comes at a time 
when the DOD is deeply enamored of the doctrinal philosophies of Robert McNamara. Indeed, systems 
analysis which lies at the foundation of design concepts central to wargaming was one such McNamara￾era initiative (Enthoven and Smith 1971, 48–58).
It was a time when the lessons of the unpredictability of political dimensions within military affairs 
had yet to be fully appreciated and were far from digested, as the US escalated its political and military 
investments in Vietnam. Yet more specifically still, through key individuals, such as James Dunnigan, 
Peter Perla, John Prados, and Randall Reed, who worked with or for the DOD in various capacities, the 
biases of a segregated political-military mindset were inbuilt into the foundations of the wargames hobby. 
Indeed, Avalon Hill also strategically fostered relations with the US military to leverage credibility with 
its audience (Trammell 2023, 65).
It is rather curious that Diplomacy (1959) – a game so committed to the concept of the integrated 
nature of politics and warfare – comes from the same era. But then the designer, Alan Calhamer, had no 
prior or subsequent connections with the DOD and in many ways sits outside or to one side of the wargam￾ing hobby. It is notable too that Charles S. Roberts is a name missing from those associated with the DOD. 
Perhaps, given that he left the hobby with the sale of Avalon Hill in 1963, he was out of the picture by the 
time the DOD might have called on him (Dunnigan 1992, 147–8).
Aaron Trammel, in his Privilege of Play (2023), posits a further reading. He sees what he terms “ide￾ological racism” riven through Avalon Hill’s The General magazine and its games. He posits pervasive 
traits of fetishizing good commanders fighting for bad causes, and a sympathetic focus on Confederate 
and Nazi commanders and iconography, such that there may be a distinct absence of politics within the 
gameplay of their games, but the political dimension within the Avalon Hill brand is all too apparent. 
Trammel posits conscious flirtation with white supremacist tropes and cites the repeated valorization of 
such on front covers and in articles of The General (Trammell 2023, 51–76).
Trammell’s argument appears compelling, especially with regard to the xenophobic tendencies of 
writer Jerry Pournelle (Trammell 2023, 54–8). A game such as Victory in the West: Plan Yellow, The 
French Campaign 1940 (1993) is notable because it aligns with Trammell’s thesis (even if not explicitly 
mentioned in Privilege of Play). This is a two-player game about the German invasion of France, and its 
title is arresting – it is not Defeat in the West, or the more neutral War in the West, or just Plan Yellow, 
The French Campaign 1940. Perhaps the title is consciously drawn from the 1941 Nazi Propaganda movie 
Sieg Im Westen (Victory in the West) (New York Times 1942).
Beyond this instance, there are, however, other perspectives to weigh. There were 189 issues of 
The General, between 1964 and 1998 (View From The Trenches n.d.). Just focusing on front covers 
(and putting the content of the articles to one side), we may determine 30 to be clear valorizations 
of Confederate or Nazi perspectives, which is 15.8%. The other 84.2% most commonly include valo￾rizations of Ancient Roman, Union (during the American Civil War), and USA, Soviet, and British 
(during WWII) perspectives, with some that are a mixture of perspectives, from the selected sweep 
of military history. The American Civil War and WWII do dominate as topics, and the most common 
image type is of German armor with a German commander visible. However, the statistics suggest a 
good case can be made for an attempt at some objective balance. Indeed, there are five images that 
valorize Union perspectives, two that valorize Confederate perspectives, and two that represent both 
in some form of balance. Volume 21 No. 5 has a front cover considered (by the current author) to be 
a valorization of the Nazis in the statistics captured above (and is an image noted by Trammell), with 
a noble looking Hitler headshot prominent atop several smaller headshots of other key national lead￾ers in the war – where they all look equally noble, albeit smaller. This artwork is from the box of the 
game Hitler’s War (1981), which that issue was promoting. The naturalistic art style is perhaps more 
suggestive of an attempt at objectivity, with the same style applied to all leaders rather than suggesting 112 Paper Time Machines 
any particular pro-Nazi bias. The game’s title seems to carry a sense of condemnation (Hitler was to 
blame for the war) and gives good reason for Hitler’s image being largest and most prominent, beyond 
any white supremacist agenda.
Rapprochement, too, should also not be downplayed. Since at least 1913, we can trace a strong tradi￾tion of rapprochement between Union and Confederate causes, when over 54,000 veterans of Gettysburg 
met up at the site for the 50th anniversary of the battle (Rada 2013). Similarly, West Germany joined 
NATO in 1955, and we can see from Congressional reports this was a topic of serious strategic concern 
(CRS Report for Congress 1997, 8–9). Nazi General Erwin Rommel does appear on the front cover of 
three issues of The General, more than anyone else. However, Rommel is not the most overt choice to 
capture a white supremacist trope. His legacy is complicated by his likely involvement in the 20 July Plot 
to assassinate Hitler; Rommel was found guilty and invited to commit suicide to spare his reputation and 
family, instead of facing execution (Evans 2009, 642). This grants his image a patina of acceptability – 
certainly more so than other Nazi commanders who were perhaps more prominent, militarily superior, 
and more uniformly politically aligned with Hitler – such as Field Marshals von Manstein, Guderian, von 
Rundstedt, von Bock, and Keitel. Rommel was also associated with Allied victories in North Africa and 
Normandy (as the defeated enemy commander), so the reassertion of his genius is also a way to praise 
(higher) Allied genius in his defeat. In the context of rapprochement with a new ally in the Cold War, 
Rommel is a choice it may not be possible to better. Rommel is a selection that attempts to teach Germans 
it was acceptable to oppose Hitler and so to move forward into a future without him, and also directs 
attention away from the more ethnically charged (and genocidal) aspects of the war on the Eastern front – 
thereby also not presenting an icon in clear and direct opposition to the new enemy of the USSR (Rommel 
did not fight on the Eastern Front). Yet the selection of Rommel also promotes a narrative of a genius who 
was vanquished by higher (Allied) geniuses. Indeed, Rommel’s death also surely helped safeguard his 
image in a way beneficial to the Allies occupying West Germany in the midst of rapprochement. For all 
the political utility of this form of beatification of Rommel, it intersects with the clean Wehrmacht myth 
and we must be aware of the extent to which the narrative was constructed (Beorn 2014, 12–17). Rommel 
was a Nazi general applying his talents, and limitations, in the service of the Third Reich. Even his likely 
involvement in the 20 July Plot is no evidence that he had values in opposition to the regime, its ideologies, 
and its war aims, overall.
All this said, none of this should detract from the central observation Trammell makes that The 
General is a preserve of white males, and with only heterosexual perspectives in evidence. As Trammell 
says, perhaps a line from the first page of the first volume articulates the position well:
There is no Mr. Avalon, nor is there a Mr. Hill … the very first games were published in a Baltimore suburb. 
Avalon, high up on a hill literally overlooking the genteel plantation land of picturesque south Baltimore It 
was there that Gettysburg was conceived ... labor of love in which the famous civil war battle was rehashed 
time and time again by admitted Confederate sympathizers (in the “border” state of Maryland southern 
loyalty ran high.) One of the very first correspondents was an elderly Alabama gentleman who was having 
the time of his life "slaughtering those damyankees (sic).” 
(The Avalon Hill General 1964, 1, original emphasis of quotation marks and original ellipsis retained, 
original emphasis of underlining rendered in italics)
The “genteel plantation land” with its “picturesque” quality does indeed carry connotations of reverence 
for the Confederacy, and Trammell does make a case for AH cultivating a predominantly white player 
base operating with generally low-key racism (Trammell 2023, 62). Indeed, white men founded wargam￾ing, role-playing, and the model railway hobby because they were the ones with the leisure time and eco￾nomic resources to do so, and why they had these is also deeply connected to the structures undergirding 
society. There is also further seemingly emphatic support for Trammell’s observation about the intersec￾tion between white supremacist sympathies and the wargaming hobby when we consider the names of 
wargaming clubs in the 1960s and 1970s, such as SS Panzer Corps, Wehrmacht III, Gauleiter of San 
Francisco, 4th Reich, The Gestapo, and Deutschland Uber Alles among numerous others (SPI 1977, 35). 5 • A Briefer History of Pol-Mil Wargames 113
Perhaps there is some adolescent thrill of transgression here, rather than entirely cohesive sympathy with 
Nazi causes. But such discussions are best addressed in a dedicated work on this topic.
To refocus the current chapter, it remains the case that politics within the design of board wargames 
is still largely dismissed, or subsumed and incorporated within military concerns, and it is distinctly a 
politics of the far right. The politics that is dismissed is essentially democratic. The political “militaristic” 
preoccupation of these games is essentially driven by “military classes.” Where, indeed, are the games 
at the beginning of the hobby, and until recently, that are concerned with democratic processes before, 
during, and after the conduct of wars? There is marked irony in the criticism that the German military pre￾World War I operated in a (democratic) political vacuum (Lebow 1988, 78), when such a vacuum appears 
to be much the same fantasy played out in numerous “American-shaped” wargames inviting players to 
defeat (or sustain) such militarism. The subtext here appears clear: the only way to defeat the forces of 
militarism is with the forces of militarism (but couched in patriotic rhetoric, and adorned with the laurels 
of historical victory), and then, when the war is won, politicians may be welcomed back to take over once 
again; until their inadequacies lead to war, and the military is needed once more. It is entirely understand￾able that professional wargames focus on military dimensions – if indeed they do; this is their raison 
d'être. That said, the military doctrine we have seen in publication since at least 2008 and the CACD’s 
TRADOC Pamphlet 525-5-500 onward would seem to clearly encourage the less static problem-framing 
that political dimensions incorporate. Indeed, we see evidence of the US military’s inclusion of political 
dynamics in documentation such as in Mitch Reed and Phil Bolger’s 2020 Theater Reactive Environment 
Wargame for Military Analysis (TREWMAN) Methodology (Reed and Bolger 2020).
Given the credibility sought by early wargames companies from the military establishment, we may 
understand the reasoning behind their “militaristic” preoccupation. What is perhaps most curious is why 
it has taken commercial wargames quite so long to explore and incorporate politics in less confined (and 
distorted) parameters. Perhaps implicit sympathies and interests of designers coincided with a fear that 
the marketplace would not be receptive. Let us explore the history of Pol-Sim wargames here a little more.
POLITICS IN WARGAMES PRIOR TO 
WE THE PEOPLE (1994)
In early wargame after wargame, we see politics rendered as ancillary in strategic and operational war￾fare, as if history has been reimagined in a military dreamland where politics has as little bearing as pos￾sible on the conduct of war; this is a place where the paper time machine takes them back to a time and 
place where the military commanders are left alone to run the war the way they should have been in the 
first place. Politics is rendered ancillary by no concept of a political will to fight (there is an exception here 
we shall discuss shortly), by almost no concept of politicians as even existing, by no concept of politicians 
having domestic elections to win compelling certain results along certain timelines, by simplistic victory 
conditions, and by its random and deterministic qualities.
By depicting it as both random and deterministic, politics is thereby shown not to be central to player 
agency – the realm of politics is one that cannot be engaged with in this politics-free version of military 
history. Instead, we see it as an element acting on the player but not permitting the player to act back onto 
politics and re-shape it. The implicit bias of this military fantasy has politics as something that must be 
tolerated, even if it is frequently depicted in a diminished form.
It is customary in these early strategic-level games to have rigid conquest-determined victory condi￾tions: capture a capital city to conquer a country (Rise and Decline of the Third Reich, 1974 – although 
conquering Russia is more complex); have 25 Control Points (from controlling cities) more than the 
Americans to win as the British, or survive until the game clock runs out to win as the Americans (1776: 
The Game of the American Revolutionary War, 1974); capture/retain Berlin before the game clock expires 114 Paper Time Machines 
to win (Hitler’s War – 1981). Here the politics is tolerated – it even must be obeyed, but it can seem arbi￾trary – which, again, enforces the distinction between the military world that players can affect and where 
there are systems in place to be mastered, and the world of politics, which is fixed and beyond the magic 
circle of the game world. In contrast with the perspective from the game 1776, the American Revolution 
is an exemplar of how controlling cities does not equate to victory in war (see Procknow 2015). Further, 
does capture of a capital city necessarily lead to that country’s surrender? Napoleon’s capture of Moscow 
in 1812 is a pointed reminder that the answer is not always “yes.” These static victory conditions distort 
reality. Of course, reality is complex. Games must simplify, but this does not mean there is no other way 
to conceive of these dynamics. As Matthews says:
Early wargames define politics as static, and battlefield conditions as evolutionary. Whereas in the history 
of human conflict, more often it’s the other way around.
(Jason Matthews 2023, personal correspondence)
The static quality exists not just in non-dynamic victory conditions, but also in a deterministic framing 
where events always occur in the same unalterable sequence. In Hitler’s War the USA will always join 
the war at the end of the Winter 1941 turn. No events that happen in the game can alter this – except the 
Axis player conquering the USA prior to this event. The Axis player may be building aircraft carriers and 
nuclear bombs destined for the USA and this would neither speed up nor deter American entry to the war. 
Similarly, in this game, Italy, Finland, Hungary, Romania, and Bulgaria all join the war according to their 
historical dates of entry. Although this may be more “historical” than random entry dates, this is a “sur￾face historicity” without the substance of historicity, and random entry dates are not the only alternative. 
The contention here is that this kind of determinism is at odds with the counterfactual possibilities inher￾ent within historical games. It is revealing that the counterfactuals these games are focused on are purely 
military. If Romania always joins the war in November 1940 because this is what happened, why does the 
Battle of Stalingrad in the same game not always have to end in a Soviet victory because this is what hap￾pened? If the answer is because one is a political game, and the other is a wargame concerned only with 
military matters, as designers and players we are deceiving ourselves if we don’t see that this perspective 
grossly distorts the military reality. If commanders have a reliable – and unalterable – timetable of certain 
future events, then we aren’t exploring counterfactuals of the past through the perspectives of historical 
actors, but an alternate reality in which certain isolated parts of the past’s future are known and unalter￾able. The historical reality of the entry of those nations into World War II is that they were conditional. It 
is hard to make any serious argument that Italy joining the war was not related to the evident success of 
the German offensive against France in 1940. If Germany did not attack France, or if the offensive had 
stalled, can we be certain Mussolini would still have made the decision he did? We might ask similar 
questions of all the belligerents. If Finland had not been attacked by the USSR, it clearly would not have 
had the same incentive to become a German ally. A game with historically weighted probabilities on the 
past’s potential future events (such as nations entering the war) may lack some of the surface historicity 
of set historical events, but it has more “substance historicity,” because with these weighted probabilities 
there is an attempt to reflect the historical contingencies as they appeared to the historical actors, which 
are themselves perceived in terms of probabilities, and thus demonstrate a greater fidelity to historical 
causality. The distorting effect of hindsight can then be mollified at least to some extent, rather than giving 
it free rein by being in obeisance to a wholly deterministic framing.
Victory conditions have a deterministic quality too. The Axis player who knows at the start of a game 
that she will win by retaining Berlin by the end of the game is in a distinctly different position from an 
Axis supreme commander in September 1939 who surely aspired to something more expansive than bare 
survival. Thus, the Axis player will make her decisions with a survival mentality, where this survival in 
the game’s terms constitutes something far closer to the opposite in real terms. Of course, games must 
simplify and abstract, but to invert survival in a wargame appears a serious design misstep and suggests 
that the focus of what’s being simulated here is less the imaginative possibilities of counterfactualism, and 
more the predictable reliability of surface detail. It is therefore no accident that these earlier wargames 5 • A Briefer History of Pol-Mil Wargames 115
boast astounding detail in their orders of battle, and yet they seldom dare to creatively re-envision what it 
might mean to win a war, a campaign, or perhaps even a battle. Similarly, these early wargames demon￾strate far more interest in modeling economics – with production points, or similar concepts, where units 
are “built” and added to the board – than in modeling politics. Indeed, Matthews suggests the preponder￾ance of engineers within the DOD and a kind of engineering focus there in general – solve problems with 
mathematics – helps account for this early absence of politics, which, in its propensity to engage with the 
unpredictability of humans has a far messier quality than the certainty of mathematics.
Yet these games also demonstrate depictions of a political dimension as random; that is, the player 
cannot control certain events, and nothing he or she does can influence how these elements play out in the 
game. 1776 has a Random Events Table, Table 5.1, where players roll 2 D6 in the spring and fall season 
interchanges (March and September turns):
These events, like the deterministic events such as set (historical) timetables for nations to enter 
World War II, demonstrate the impact of politics in the wargame, but, similarly, the player cannot influ￾ence them. These events suggest the existence of politicians, but such an existence is spectral and random, 
without modifiers that could make any one of these events more or less likely. The message here is politi￾cians work behind the scenes, and there is no relationship between the military developments in the war 
and what these spectral politicians do.
Pax Britannia (1985) gives player control of major colonial powers prior to the Great War. From the 
rules:
Each player spends money and maneuvers military forces to establish control over various areas of the 
world, and each controlled Area can generate income that will, in turn, increase the player’s treasury. This 
income generated by a player’s colonies is then used to further extend his empire, to construct new military 
units and maintain them in the field, and to accumulate victory points.
As conflicting colonial strategies develop, players form alliances and negotiate with other Great 
Powers. When compromise and conciliation fail, wars may occur. Moreover, various Random Events can 
instigate unrest among a players (sic) colonies, forcing players to quell native uprisings or face the loss of 
a colony.
TABLE 5.1 Random Events Table from 1776 (BGG 2022, 11).
DR BRITISH AMERICAN
2 Increased Effort to End War at Home: enter 
2BR on one controlled Port
Spain Invades Georgia: enter 2 SP and a nameless 
1-star Leader on one hex within 3 hexes of 
Savannah (use French counters)
3 Additional Supply form England: enter 1 
Supply on controlled Port
Improved Dragoon Training: replace 1RM with 1RD 
at no cost
4 Successful Attempt to Gain Indian Allies: 
enter 1BI on Montreal
France Increases Support: enter 1 American or 
French Supply on an uncontrolled Port
5 Successful Recruitment of TM : enter 2TM, 
one each on North and South map 
portions
Congress Raises Bounty for CA: enter 2CA on 
uncontrolled Town nearest largest American 
force
6-8 No Effect No Effect
9 Tories Fear Reprisals: remove 2TM, one 
each from North and South map 
portions
Locals Fear Reprisals: remove 2RM, one each from 
North and South map portions
10 Storms Appear: next month, Fleets in 
Ports or entering Ports must remain 
there for the turn
Royal Navy Interrupts French Aid: remove 1 
American or French Supp anywhere on the 
board
11 Scandal in Admiralty: only 1 Supply this 
turn
French Monarch Loses Interest: remove Fleet A for 
next month reappearing on an OBM Transit Box
12 War Rumors in Europe: deduct 2BR from 
British reinforcements
Local Governors Discourage Enlistments: deduct 2CA 
from American reinforcements116 Paper Time Machines 
Ultimately, each player will attempt to fulfill his own colonial expansion strategy at the expense of other 
players. Conflict is to be expected, although players must be careful to avoid sparking the Great War.
2003
Players control military and economic destinies, but politics is also depicted here in random events tables, 
and in unrest tables that have no bearing on the presence of troops. These random events (see Table 5.2) 
take political interplay out of the hands of players. All politics is wholly subsumed within the role of a 
colonial office where it may be helped or hindered by domestic developments within their own countries 
or in other countries. But either help or hindrance is entirely random – rather like a kind of political 
weather that must be tolerated whatever it might bring. It cannot be reasoned with or influenced.
The kinds of events in the Random Events Table of Table 5.2 feel central to the experience of guiding 
a nation through the 1880s into the first decade or two of the twentieth century, yet instead of creating 
them, players are buffeted or boosted by them as they carry on their path of military and economic devel￾opments. Indeed, players of Pax Britannica might extract from it that there is not any contest between 
imperial and indigenous forces, as this is essentially a foregone conclusion from the way the game is 
designed; it is more a question of whether players are able to conquer faster and more decisively than other 
players, which not only diminishes any sense of meaningful historical contingency, but also de-focuses 
any political dynamics and reframes player agency – and the history it is engaging with – as a metric 
concerned with speed and economic efficiency. Politics of this ilk is purely a shell game for economic and 
military success. This is a deeply troubling perspective to discern and to reemphasize as if it is not pos￾sible to even challenge this formulation.
Where politics is represented as neither random nor simple and deterministic, that is, where it is mod￾eled to represent consequences with probabilities, it is generally only lightly modeled. In 1776, French 
entry becomes more likely the longer the game/war continues, which does align with the views of many 
historians (Mackesy 1964, 1; Simms 2007, 600–1; among others), yet there are no consequential actions 
either players can take to accelerate or decelerate this, to make it more or less likely. In contrast, in 
history the British surrender at Saratoga was a considerable modifying factor (Mackesy 1964, 147–60; 
O’Shaughnessy 2014, 61).
The Guns of August (1981) Variable Entry Chart (see Table 5.3) shows a clear correlation between 
military actions (such as the invasion of Belgium, or the initiation of Unrestricted Submarine Warfare) 
and political consequence – meaning an increased likelihood of Britain and the USA respectively joining 
the war. It is a rare example of a game of its era with a more considered modeling of politics in relation 
to war.
If we look for exceptions that buck the trend, of particular note is the game Viet Nam (1965), designed 
by Phil Orbanes because it does directly, in a non-optional variant, tie military progress directly to politi￾cal will in a global game loss index driven up or down by control or loss of cities. On the surface, this 
might appear similar to the Control Points of 1776, and the Vietnam War is also a good example of a war 
in which the control of cities does not determine military victory. Yet the global index in Viet Nam – in 
fact, two of them, one for each side, called Situation Indices – accommodate more than just geographical 
conquest. They also permit the modeling of aspects of political stability, world opinion, terror, psychologi￾cal warfare, and ambushes, outside of conventional warfare and outside of purely military dimensions. 
Orbanes has stated that there were no direct precedents to this design formulation (Phil Orbanes 2023, 
private correspondence).
Also of note is Kingmaker (1974), a 2–7 player game which illuminates the political complexity 
as factions shifted in allegiance to either House of York or House of Lancaster during the civil wars 
popularly known as the Wars of the Roses. Not only could subsequent generations shift allegiance from 
ancestors, but the broad military situation also intersected with the political desire for titles, offices, and 
the allure for calling parliament to session. Players had incentive to attend Parliament, because titles and 
offices conferred troop strength, but the distribution of these titles and offices is controlled by factions 
serving their own ends, and attending parliament in the hope of receiving some troops might entail a form 
of military trap.5 • A Briefer History of Pol-Mil Wargames 117
TABLE 5.2 Random Events Table from Pax Britannia (BGG 2005, 4–5).
1ST 
DIE
2ND 
DIE
EVENT
1 1 War in the Balkans: Increases ETI by 4. First time for this event, connection between Serbia 
and Greece established. Second time for this event, connection between Serbia and 
Anatolia severed, connection between Bulgasria and Greece established, and Bulgaria also 
has a Mediterranean coast.
2 Conservative Victory in Britain: Double the British income from its Colonial Office this 
turn. The British Player must spend at least £30 maintaining and/or constructing Military 
units other than garrison units this turn. (Ignore and re-roll if Liberal Victory already rolled 
this turn.)
3 Liberal Victory in Britain: Halve (rounded down) the British income from its Colonial Office 
this turn. The British player can spend no more than £10 constructing new Military units 
this turn. (Ignore and re-roll if Conservative Victory already rolled this turn.)
4 Serbia defies Austria-Hungary: Increase the ETI by 4. The German player can then, at his 
option, move Austro-Hungarian units into Serbia this turn (So long as no other player has a 
Control marker there) and engage in Colonial Combat for control this turn. The German 
player may purchase an Austro-Hungarian Protectorate or Possession marker to try to 
establish control.
5 Upheaval in Russia: Russia receives no income from its Colonial Offoce this turn.
6 Protests in China: Increase ETI by 1 and CRI by 5.
2 1 War in South America: Increase ETI by 1. The US player can, at his option, move army units 
into any one South American area (So long as no other player has a Control marker there) 
and engage in Colonial Combat for control this turn. The US player may purchase a 
Protectorate or Possession marker to try to establish control.
2 American “Yellow Press” Journalism: Double the US income from its Colonial Office for 
this turn. The US player must spend at least £30 building and/or maintaining Military units 
this turn. This event constitutes a Casus Belli for the US against Spain during this turn only.
3 French anti-German Agitation: Increase ETI by 2. Double the French income from its 
Colonial Office for this turn. The French player must spend at least £30 building and/or 
maintaining Military units this turn.
4 German Navy League Agitation: Double the German income from its Colonial Office for 
this turn. The German player must spend at least £20 building and/or maintaining Naval 
units this turn.
5 German Colonial Agitation: Increase ETI by 2. Double the French income from its Colonial 
Office for this turn.
6 Pan-Slav Agitation in Russia: Increase ETI by 2. Double the Russian income from its 
Colonial Office for this turn. The Russian player must spend at least £30 building and/or 
maintaining Military units this turn.
3 1 Italian Irredentist Agitation: Increase ETI by 2. Double the Italian income from its Colonial 
Office for this turn. The Italian player must spend at least £30 building and/or maintaining 
Military units this turn.
2 Australian Pressure for Dominion: The British player must grant Australia Dominion 
status this turn (provided he has a Protectorate or Possession in Australia), or the British 
player loses 5 victory points. (Ignore and re-roll if Australia already a Dominion, but if Britain 
has no control marker in Australia do count it as an event).
3 New Zealand Pressure for Dominion: The British player must grant New Zealand 
Dominion status this turn (provided he has a Protectorate or Possession in New Zealand), or 
the British player loses 5 victory points. (Ignore and re-roll if New Zealand already a 
Dominion, but if Britain has no control marker in New Zealand do count it as an event).
(Continued)118 Paper Time Machines 
Of note too is Machiavelli (1977), a 4–8 player game set in Renaissance Italy. In many respects, this 
is a more granular re-envisioning of the core design of Diplomacy, with more complexity, but with the 
same essential co-mingling of military and political dynamics.
Empires in Arms (1983) is a further exception. It is a game about the Napoleonic Wars for up to 7 players, 
integrating diplomacy within the wargame and permitting not only the formation and cessation of alliances, but 
also the ceding of provinces and minor powers, turning minor powers into free states, and the “Call to Allies” 
in response to offensive moves from enemies (Australian Design Group 1984, 4–5). There Is also a further sig￾nificant exception In The Republic of Rome (1990) which gave us a game where military and political dimen￾sions extensively, and inextricably, overlap and blend with roleplay (The Republic of Rome 1990). 
WE THE PEOPLE AND BEYOND
The release of the Mark Herman designed game We The People (1994) is a milestone for the histori￾cal board games, because it is considered pivotal to the development of card-driven mechanics (The 
Boardgaming Way 2014). As Herman himself has said:
I hit on the notion of using cards as the activation mechanism for army movement, political activity, and 
singular significant events. In a nutshell, cards were the mechanism that allowed a player to drive the action 
in the game. The result was We The People, published by Avalon Hill … which created a new game genre, 
the card-driven game.
(Herman 2016, 133, original emphasis of italics retained)
There is more to be said, elsewhere, on the origins of card-driven mechanics in historical board games 
but suffice to say here that what was also significant about Herman’s design was these cards were used 
TABLE 5.2 (CONTINUED) Random Events Table from Pax Britannia (BGG 2005, 4–5).
1ST 
DIE
2ND 
DIE
EVENT
4 South Africa Pressure for Dominion: The British player must grant South Africa Dominion 
status this turn (provided he has a Protectorate or Possession in South Africa), or the British 
player loses 5 victory points. (Ignore and re-roll if South Africa already a Dominion, but if 
Britain has no control marker in Cape Colony do count it as an event).
5 Alaska Pressure for Statehood: The US player must grant Alaska Statehood status this 
turn (provided the US has a Protectorate or Possession in Alaska), or the US player loses 5 
victory points. (Ignore and re-roll if Alaska is already a State, but if the US has no control 
marker in Alaska do count it as an event).
6 Boer Oppresion of Uitlanders: Increase ETI by 1. The British player may, at his option, 
move army units into Transvaal and/or Orange Free State (if no other player has a Control 
marker there) and engage in Colonial Combat this turn. The British player may purchase a 
Protectorate or Possession to try to establish control.
4 1 Japanese War Party Gains Prestige: Increase ETI by 1. Double the Japanese income from 
its Colonial Office for this turn. The Japanese player must spend at least £30 building and/
or maintaining Military units this turn.
2-3 Unrest: Roll on Unrest Table A
4-6 Unrest: Roll on Unrest Table B
5 1 Unrest: Roll on Unrest Table B
2-6 Unrest: Roll on Unrest Table C
6 1-6 Unrest: Roll on Unrest Table D5 • A Briefer History of Pol-Mil Wargames 119
as a way to incorporate political dimensions into the game. Cards with political elements had been used 
prior to We The People in wargames – in James Dunnigan’s 1914 (1968), for example. But these cards 
functioned in much the same way as the random events tables outlined above. They changed the game 
state for players without players having any agency in these political dimensions.
With We The People, instead of politics being either random, or deterministic, or both, the cards 
gifted players some agency in the political sphere. As cards like the “William Pitt Peace Talks” and “Don 
Bernardo Galvez Leads a Spanish Offensive” helped pull politics and military matters back together in 
a non-random and non-irksome fashion. The cards, in effect, are able to carry mini-rule exceptions that 
don’t require tiresome rule learning or combing. Matthews himself has cited We The People as reener￾gizing his interest in the hobby with its capacity to integrate politics, and rule exceptions into the design 
(Matthews 2022). He has also noted that this reintegration of politics back into (at least some) wargames 
TABLE 5.3 Optional Variable Entry Table for The Guns of August (BGG 2007, 21).
GAME YEAR
1914 1915 1916 1917 1918
West Front
Britain 6 6 6 6 6
Italy 2–5 3–6 4–6 4–6 4–6
United States 1–6 2–6 3–6 4–6 5–6
East Front
Turkey 1–3 1–3 1–3 1–3 1–3
Bulgaria 1–6 1–3 1–3 1–3 1–3
Rumania 1–6 2–6 3–6 3–6 3–6
Greece 1–6 2–6 3–6 3–6 3–6
Explanation:
If the die roll is within the printed range, the country remains neutral. If the die 
roll is greater than the larger number, the country joins the Central Powers. If 
the die roll is less than the smaller number, the country joins the Allies. Note: 
Britain and the US may never join the Central Powers. Turkey may never join 
the Allies. 
West Front Modifiers:
(+1) If central Powers control Paris.
(+1) If Britain is a Neutral. *
(−-1) If Submarine Warfare is in effect.**
(−1) If US is an Ally.
(−1) For each Objective city in Germany the Allies currently control.
(+1) If Allies declared war on Belgium.
(−2) If Central Powers declared war on Netherlands.
(−3) If Central Powers declared war on Belgium.***
* Not applicable to Britain.
** Not applicable to Italy.
*** Only applicable to Britain.
East Front Modifiers:
(+1) For each Objective city in Russia the Central Powers currently control.
(−1) For each Objective city in Germany or Austria-Hungary the Allies currently 
control.
(−1) If any Allied combat unit is in Greece.*
(+1) If Turkey is a Central Power.*
(+1) If Bulgaria is a Central Power.*
(−1) If US is an Allied country.*
*Applicable only to Greece.120 Paper Time Machines 
occurred after the failures of US policies in Vietnam had become obvious and were being more fully 
digested. Matthews suggests that the McNamara era of a kind of engineering-oriented approach to politi￾cal problems was exposed for its shortcomings (Matthews 2022). 
Since the early 1990s we have seen a developing momentum of Pol-Mil wargames. Of particular note 
is the work of prolific designer Brian Train, publishing since 1995, on a range of topics, more often than 
not concerned with post-World War II history, often concerned with civil unrest, and most often integrat￾ing political and military dynamics. His work would serve as inspiration for developments to come from 
Volko Ruhnke’s COIN series (2012 onward), and Train would go on to design, or co-design three titles in 
this series (at the time of writing). The COIN series developed a means to model an integrated complex 
blend of asymmetric Pol-Mil perspectives, resources, capabilities, and objectives. We will look closer at 
both COIN and the work of Brian Train in Chapter 23 of this book. (For a more detailed look at standout 
design elements in COIN and the work of Brian Train, see Suckling 2023, 26–44).
Perhaps no Pol-Mil wargame is more noteworthy than the Jason Matthews and Ananda Gupta 
designed Twilight Struggle (2005) about the Cold War from 1945 to its conclusion, with two players con￾testing allegiance of political entities through the placement of influence points. The game’s significance 
to the board wargaming hobby was briefly discussed in Chapter 4. The game is concerned not with the 
production and movement of and combat between military units, but with the allocation of political influ￾ence. Whilst the specter of war is ever-present, if players cause the cold war to heat up, or permit the other 
player to heat it up (on their turn) they will lose the game. Thus, players are compelled to walk a tightrope 
– to maintain victory points by expanding influence in the right global regions at the right time (intersect￾ing with the playing of Scoring Cards), and to maintain military operations (or face penalties), and yet to 
also avoid war. The design elegantly speaks to the complexity of political incentives in war.
Since this 2005 release we’ve seen a sustained rise in the publications of Pol-Mil games. A non￾exhaustive list is representative of developments in this area:
In what we might term the Ancients era we have Pericles: The Peloponnesian War (2017), another 
Mark Herman game entwining military strategy with politics; Time of Crisis: The Roman Empire in 
Turmoil, 235–284 AD (2017); Triumph (2024) (on Kickstarter at the time of writing) about becoming the 
Roman emperor, balancing military and political factors, co-op, and competitive incentives.
In what we might term the Gunpowder era we have: Here I Stand: Wars of the Reformation 1517–
1555 (2006), covering political and religious conflicts In Europe; Pax Porfiriana: Power & Empire in 
Mexico, 1898–1920 (2012) covering much of the duration of the de facto rule of President Porfirio Diaz 
of Mexico and the aftermath of his fall from power, which blends military, political, and business dimen￾sions together; (BGG n.d. a) 1714: The Case of the Catalans (2014) about the Spanish War of Succession; 
Prelude to Rebellion: Mobilization & Unrest in Lower Canada 1834–1837 (2018); Westphalia (2019), 
covering the end of the Thirty Years War; Imperial Struggle (2020) – also a Jason Matthews and Ananda 
Gupta design – about the intercontinental rivalry between Britain and France during the eighteenth cen￾tury incorporating peace and trade dynamics alongside war; Congress of Vienna (2024), a game based 
on Mark Herman’s Churchill (2015) about the end of the Napoleonic Empire and what peace might look 
like in the near future; Patria Libre (2022) about Mexican independence; Border States (2022) about the 
Pol-Mil contest for the allegiance of border states prior to and during the US Civil War; Coalitions (2024) 
about the Napoleonic Wars, but putting politics and the flux in alliances central to the design; Europa 
Universalis: The Price of Power (2023) about governing a European state through 400 years of history – 
this includes war, but also encompasses diplomatic and administrative dimensions (this is an adaptation of 
the computer game, which, in turn, traces lineage back to a 1993 board game); The Halls of Montezuma 
(2023) about the Mexican-American War, but including the broader perspective of the Polk administra￾tion; 1793: Patriots & Traitors (2023) with a focus on the politics of the French Revolution more than the 
military dimensions (BGG n.d. b); Napoleon’s Conquests (2023); I, Napoleon (2024), a Ted Raicer game 
blending military and political dimensions alongside RPG elements; 1848: The Springtime of Nations 
(forthcoming) is concerned with the revolutions and social ruptures that convulsed Europe in 1848.
In the early twentieth century, we have: Rise of Totalitarianism (2017) about the political strug￾gle between competing ideologies in the 1920s and 1930s; Europe in Turmoil: Prelude to the Great 5 • A Briefer History of Pol-Mil Wargames 121
War (2018), followed by Europe in Turmoil II: The Interbellum Years 1920–1939 (2023) both leverage 
Twilight Struggle mechanics at their core to depict ideological struggles prior to world wars, rather than 
kinetic conflict; Dual Powers: Revolution 1917 (2018) and Prelude to Revolution: Russia’s Descent into 
Anarchy 1905–1917 (2023) both blending military and political action in the Russian Revolution; Land 
and Freedom (2023) a three-player co-opetition game where players fight against Fascism in the Spanish 
Civil War; Weimar: The Fight For Democracy (2023), and The Weimar Republic: Political Struggle in 
Germany, 1919–1933 (2024) about interwar German politics and paramilitary control;
In World War II we have: Codeword: Barbarossa, and The Seeds of Disaster, both John Prados games 
in Four Roads to Moscow (2010) and Four Roads to Paris (2015), in four-game box sets about the 1941 inva￾sion of Russia and the 1940 invasion of France respectively; Churchill (2015) another Mark Herman design 
which is a three-player co-opertition game where the Soviets, Britain, and the USA work together to defeat 
the Axis forces in World War II, but they must think about the peace they are winning when the war is over 
(we will look closer at this game in Chapter 17); Triumph and Tragedy (2015) and Cataclysm (2018), both 
grand strategic-level World War II games incorporating the political lead up to the war; The Other Side of 
the Hill, on Kickstarter at the time of writing is of note for its intended narrative framework:
The Other Side of the Hill allows players to simulate for the first time the effects of command disfunctions 
(sic) in a totalitarian state at war. In doing so, the game dispels the idea that the German generals were a 
professional elite that could have won the war without Hitler’s interference and openly exposes the myth of 
the clean Wehrmacht. It also debunks the idealized vision of the German officer cops (sic) as a monolithic 
structure only focusing on professional goals.
(Kickstarter 2023)
In the Cold War Era we have: 1989: Dawn of Freedom (2012) about the end of the Cold War (also a Jason 
Matthews co-design); Twilight Struggle itself has also seen further editions, not only in digital formats, 
but also further analog versions, with Twilight Struggle: Red Sea – Conflict in the Horn of Africa (2023) 
being a shorter form of the game, and Twilight Struggle: South Asian Monsoon (forthcoming) being some￾where between Red Sea and the original game in terms of play length and complexity. (Both games are 
designed by Jason Matthews, and the latter is a Jason Carr co-design); The Promised Land (in develop￾ment at the time of writing) is a Matthias Cramer game about the political dynamics between Israel and 
Egypt which might or might not include fighting wars, depending on player decisions.
For more contemporary settings we have: No Motherland Without: North Korea in Crisis and Cold 
War (2021) about the political survival of North Korea and 1979: Revolution in Iran (2021) (both designed 
by Dan Bullock); Flashpoint: South China Sea (2022) is about the US/China geopolitical contest for hege￾mony mixing politics, economics, and military resources.
The field of game theory brings us ways of thinking about nonzero-sum games, which has become 
the standard form of analysis in international politics since the end of the 1950s (Zagare 2019, 8). Frank 
Zagare’s definitions are helpful:
A zero-sum game is any game in which the interests of the players are diametrically opposed. In a zero￾sum game, what one player wins, the other loses … By contrast, a nonzero-sum game is an interactive 
situation in which the players have mixed motives, that is, in addition to conflicting interests, they may also 
have some interests in common.
(Zagare 2019, 8)
It now seems that this thinking is seeping into historical board games – Churchill and games in the COIN 
series are evident examples. Indeed, there is much at stake here. As Mary Flanagan says, “We must look 
to transcend old conflict models, or we risk perpetuating the damaging myth that there are limited ways 
of resolving conflicts” (Flanagan 2023).
If Sun Tzu is right, and the greatest victory is that which requires no battle, then Pol-Mil games facili￾tate ways of enacting this truth. Therefore, any strategic-level game that incorporates political dimensions 122 Paper Time Machines 
to forestall wars, or reformulate objectives, or recalibrate resources in line with dynamic political agendas 
gives players access to a grander strategic-level experience. Without the human and messy elements innate 
to politics, the military dimension alone is narrow and the history we are exploring is vastly restricted and 
distorted. This area is ripe for critical game designers to set to work.
REFERENCES
Australian Design Group. 1984. Empires in Arms Rules. Australian Design Group.
Beorn, Waitman. 2014. Marching into Darkness. London, UK: Harvard University Press.
BGG. 2003. “Upload May 25, 2007, but the date of the rules revision is given as 2003.” https://boardgamegeek.com
/file/download_redirect/c66d839e5ef882cf86295abc25caef76456ef0ed43746421/Pax+4th+Ed.+Rules+2nd
+edition.doc Accessed July 4, 2023.
BGG. 2005. July 8 2005. https://boardgamegeek.com/file/download_redirect/6d30f1c62f57772ed35f2dbd42c5fdd
cbb18967c1da47a02/Pax_Britannica_Tables.pdf Accessed July 4, 2023
BGG. 2007. February 25 2007. https://boardgamegeek.com/filepage/22580/3rd-ed-rulespdf Accessed July 4, 2023.
BGG. 2022. June 7. https://boardgamegeek.com/file/download_redirect/4a4c310f47c6771d27da3282c17a4a68fe1
c411374a428ca/1776+3rd+Edition+Rules+%28Jun-22%29.pdf Accessed July 4, 2023.
BGG. n.d. a “Pax Porfiriana.” https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/128780/pax-porfiriana Accessed January 28, 
2024.
BGG. n. d. b "1793: Patriots and Traitors." https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/375311/1793-patriots-and-traitors
Accessed May 14, 2024.
CRS Report for Congress. 1997. https://www.everycrsreport.com/files/19971208_97-1041_464c8034c93f87a58bd
9be3989734f33c59bca6d.pdf Accessed August 11, 2023.
Dunnigan, James F. 1992. The Complete Wargames Handbook:How to Play, Design, and Find Them. Brecksville, 
OH: Quill. 
Enthoven, Alain C. and K. V. Smith. 1971. How Much Is Enough?: Shaping the Defense Program, 1961–1969. Santa 
Monica, CA: Rand Corp.
Evans, Richard J. 2009. The Third Reich at War. New York: Penguin.
Flanagan, Mary. “What If Wargames Could Be Something Else?” https://thereader.mitpress.mit.edu/what-if
-wargames-could-be-something-else/ Accessed August 10, 2023.
Freedman, Lawrence. 1998. “Military Power and Political Influence.” In International Affairs (Royal Institute of 
International Affairs 1944-Oct., 1998), vol. 74, no. 4, 763–80. Oxford University Press on Behalf of the Royal 
Institute of International Affairs, October. https://www.jstor.org/stable/2625369 Accessed July 4, 2023.
Herman, Mark. 2016. “Empire of the Sun - The Next Evolution of the Card-Driven Game Engine.” In Zones of 
Control: Perspectives on Wargaming, edited by Pat Harrigan and Matthew G. Kirschenbaum, 133–140. 
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Kickstarter. 2023. https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/edicionesmasqueoca/the-other-side-of-the-hill-the-game
Accessed December 2, 2023.
Lebow, Richard Ned. 1988. Nuclear Crisis Management: A Dangerous Illusion. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University 
Press.
Mackesy, Piers. 1964. The War for America: 1775–1783. London: Longmans.
Matthews, Jason. 2022. “Politics in Wargaming and Wargaming Politics.” August 23, 2021. https://www.youtube
.com/watch?v=ub2Nj6iKBbM Accessed July 4, 2023.
New York Times. 1942. “'The World at War,' a Powerful Documentary Survey of the Past Decade, at Rialto -- New 
Film at Palace.” September 4, 1942. https://www.nytimes.com/1942/09/04/archives/the-world-at-war-a-power￾ful-documentary-survey-of-the-past-decade-a.html?searchResultPosition=1 Accessed January 2, 2024.
O’Shaughnessy, Andrew. 2014. The Men Who Lost America: British Command during the Revolutionary War and 
the Preservation of the Empire. London: Oneworld Publications.
Procknow, Gene. 2015. “How The British Won the American Revolutionary War.” https://allthingsliberty.com/2015
/07/how-the-british-won-the-american-revolutionary-war/ Accessed July 4, 2023.
Rada, James Jr. 2013. No North, No South: The Grand Reunion at the 50th Anniversary of the Battle of Gettysburg. 
Boulder, CO: Active Interest Media.
Reed, Mitch, and Phil Bolger. 2020. Global Engagement. Theater Reactive Environment Wargame for Military 
Analysis (TREWMAN) Methodology, March 11, 2020.5 • A Briefer History of Pol-Mil Wargames 123
Simms, Brendan. 2007. Three Victories and a Defeat: The Rise and Fall of the First British Empire 1714–1783. New 
York: basic Books.
SPI. 1977. Wargame Design: The History, Production, and Use of Conflict Simulation Games. Strategy & Tactics 
Staff Study Nr. 2. By the Staff of Strategy & Tactics Magazine. New York: Simulations Publications, 
Incorporated.
Suckling, Maurice W. 2023. “Postcolonial Design Elements in Commercial Historical Board Wargames.” In Heritage, 
Memory and Identity in Postcolonial Board Games, edited by Michal Mochocki, 26–44. London: Routledge.
The Avalon Hill General. 1964. Vol 1. No. 1. May 1, 1964. Baltimore, MD.
The Boardgaming Way. 2014. Mossman, Harvey. “The Art of Card Driven Game Design - A Boardgaming Way 
Analysis.” March 23, 2014. https://theboardgamingway.com/the-art-of-a-card-driven-game-design-a-board￾gaming-way-analysis/ Accessed July 12, 2023.
The Republic of Rome. 1990. Baltimore, MD: The Avalon Hill Company.
Trammell, Aaron. 2023. The Privilege of Play: A History of Hobby Games, Race, and Geek Culture. New York: New 
York University Press.
View From The Trenches. n.d. https://www.vftt.co.uk/ah_mags.asp?ProdID=PDF_Gen Accessed August 11, 2023.
Zagare, Frank C. 2019. Game Theory, Diplomatic History and Security Studies. Oxford: Oxford University Press.124
6 An Even Briefer 
History of Non￾Wargame Historical 
Board Games or Non￾Military Complex
Wargames are more effective [than Euros] at … representing history seriously, 
at engaging history seriously … my thought is that it’s not war that does 
this, it’s not conflict that makes that the case, it is mechanics, that this is a 
part of the hobby that stresses mechanics because it’s interested in simulating 
history. The fact that it’s interested in simulating the history of conflict is 
the sociological part. You can make equally complicated games – you can 
make mechanics do the same work of simulating history seriously and closely 
without themes of conflict … I’m really interested in writing about seeing, 
supporting, making, teaching good history games. And in my view that Euro 
approach, which is trimmed down rulesets, moves towards abstraction, sort 
of generalization and … simplicity and ease over complication specificity …
that Euro-game model isn’t as good at replicating history, but if you took the 
mechanics from wargames, stripped them of their conflict themes, you could 
do an awful lot with history. 
(Shelf Stories 2022)
ORIGINS OF NON-WARGAME HISTORICAL GAMES
If we exclude history as quizzes, and what we in Chapter 1 termed “historyish” games, and focus solely 
on those commercial games attempting and arguably achieving some serious engagement with history, we 
can say that historical board games we might consider to be non-wargames are not new. In 1972, Martin 
Campion had a name for (at least some) of these historical non-wargames – “Peace” games (with inverted 
double commas). As he says:
“Peace” is in quotation marks because the games … are still conflict simulations to a greater or lesser 
degree, and can be defined as peace games only by the fact that they are not wargames.
(Campion 1972, 12, original emphasis of italics retained)
In a chart of “Peace” games in the SPI magazine Moves, Campion lists seven categories: “Biological 
Conflict” (one game), “Urban Planning and Conflict” (six games), “Other Social Conflict” (two games), 
Paper Time Machines An Even Briefer History of Non-Wargame Board 
Games
DOI: 10.1201/9781003359265-7
10.1201/9781003359265-76 • An Even Briefer History of Non-Wargame Board Games 125
An Even Briefer History of Non-Wargame Board 
Games
“War of the Sexes” (two games), “US Politics” (five games), “The Stock Market” (two games), and 
“Criminal Conflict” (one game) (Campion 1972, 15). Clearly not all the games on this particular list 
should be considered “history” or perhaps “serious,” but there is much here of note. Taking a closer look 
at just a small number of games on this list reveals, from the Urban Planning and Conflict category, 
Chicago-Chicago (1970), a James Dunnigan design about the 1968 Chicago riots in the wake of the assas￾sination of Martin Luther King Jr., focusing on the kinetic dimensions of the riots. In the same category, 
Blacks & Whites (1970), a Robert Sommer and Judy Tart design, originally a free insert inside Psychology 
Today March 1970, is described on BGG thus:
“Blacks & Whites” was a socially-conscious game which not only reflected the signs of the times but was 
also meant to effect change. In a sense, it was something more akin to a social experiment and performance 
art in game form … Players were divided into Whites and Blacks and had to make economic progress 
while competing with each other. Based on “Monopoly”, the idea was to demonstrate how the odds were 
stacked against black people in society by having different rules for each race in the game.
(BGG n.d. a)
Blacks & Whites is perhaps more history now than it was at the time, but it clearly appears to demonstrate 
a critical and socially-conscious lens. (There was also a 2021 50th anniversary edition of the game.) In the 
US Politics category, there is yet another Dunnigan design, The Next President (1971), one of the earliest 
commercial election games, which, many years later, would develop into its own sub-genre. The earliest 
election game may be another in this category, Mr. President (1967 & 1971), which had an earlier release 
with the same title and publisher but distinctly different designs in 1960 and 1965). The game Der Fuhrer, 
about German politics in 1930s Germany followed in 1976.
By at least 1972 there is, therefore, evidence of a significant variety in subject matter. We see this 
trend continue through the 1970s. Yet some of these notable “non-wargames” are essentially indistin￾guishable from wargames. By way of a leading example let us consider The Origins of World War I (1969), 
and The Origins of World War II (1971), both designed by James Dunnigan. According to parameters set 
out in Chapter 1, these are not wargames; they are not strategy games where the focus of play is predomi￾nantly concerned with the execution of military or political-military operations of some kind. These are 
games that – ostensibly, and according to their declared subject matter – are concerned with diplomacy 
and politics. This diplomatic and political subject matter may have a bearing on prospective military 
operations, but the focus is squarely on treaties and alliances. Historians would call this diplomatic or 
political history. Yet their implementation is, in essence, nothing but wargame through mechanics – the 
currency of power is Political Factors (PFs) that are formally no different from military strength points in 
a contemporary or later wargame. These “strength points” are then pitted against each other via Combat 
Results Tables (CRTs), where ratios are deduced, a die is rolled, and a result is determined, perhaps lead￾ing to strength points being eliminated. Nevertheless, in terms of subject matter, this is still a topic not 
about war but about politics. These games are firmly within the “politics through engineering” taxonomy 
Matthews identifies (Matthews 2022). Indeed, so engineered is the politics in these games that it’s been 
transformed into military history to the point that barely a distinction remains.
Another James Dunnigan game, Up Against The Wall Motherf*****! (1969) tackles the subject of 
the 1968 Columbia University student protests and uses an influence mechanic to drive markers in either 
direction of a track – toward the player of the students (the “radicals”) or the Administration. It uses 
essentially the same conflict resolution system as we see in Dunnigan’s Origins games with a CRT (BGG 
n.d. b).
The Plot to Assassinate Hitler (1976), also designed by James Dunnigan, similarly leverages wargame 
mechanics into non-overtly military subject matter. The game includes concepts such as “investigation” 
and “interrogation,” but these are really thin “narrative wrappers” for concepts the game addresses such 
that it is essentially indistinguishable from combat, with an “effectiveness rating” replacing the term “com￾bat strength” but results determined by a die roll in relation to a results table are no different in broad terms 
from a CRT. In the first half of the game, characters may be pushed back (through “harassment”), rather 126 Paper Time Machines 
than wounded or killed, and the overall effect might be considered closer to a sports scrimmage, rather than 
actual combat. Indeed, it seems the mechanics of the game may trace lineage to an American football game 
Scrimmage: Tactical Professional Football (1973) (BGG 2015). Perhaps the “double cross” concept, where 
being in possession of a chit matching the name of a character in the possession of the other player (the SS 
player or the Abwehr player) causes that character to change sides, is the most significant way whereby the 
mechanics of the game resonate most effectively with the subject matter (BGG 2015).
Another game from 1976, Richard Berg’s Conquistador: The Age of Exploration demonstrates a set￾ting that blends military history with other historical elements such as exploration, exploitation, and the 
acquisition of gold (albeit both are related to military dynamics). But the relatively poor sales may serve 
as a general indication of why the hobby tended to remain focused on more overtly military subject matter 
for so long (Costikyan 1985).
With the release of Civilization (1980), we see a game that has politics and military dynamics pre￾sented alongside other topics – such as technological development and trade. The game, set around 8,000 
BCE at the invention of agriculture, is certainly historical, but will not fit many definitions of “wargame.” 
It may be more appropriate to consider it the first in a line of “civilization games,” which has been flour￾ishing in a digital form since 1991, and also reappearing in board game formats under the “Sid Meier’s 
Civilization” brand name.
Through the 1980s to the early 2010s, the examples of what are here termed non-wargame historical 
board games in the commercial space tend to be sparse and occasional, with no sense of a tradition about 
to emerge. In the related commercial space of the museum store market, we did, in 2009–10, see the brief 
emergence of games by Chatham Hill Games, on topics such as surviving Jamestown, trade on the Erie 
Canal in the 1830s, the Underground Railroad, the 1849 California Gold Rush, developing electricity with 
Thomas Edison, and discovering the Dutch New Netherlands 1609–73, among other topics (Ron Toelke 
2023, personal correspondence). Perhaps these games – generally light, highly abstracted, intended for 
a broad audience, and suitable for older children – were indications of what was to come in the more 
simulation-adjacent part of the hobby.
THE FLOWERING OF NON-WARGAME 
HISTORICAL GAMES
If you could get people … the same people who are interested in wargames, if you can get their buy-in on 
games that are not about conflict, or at least military conflict, think of what’s possible. We can start model￾ing social movements, we can start modeling political elections, we can start modeling … conflicts over 
environmental resources … the whole field of history could open up if we could just crack this fetishiza￾tion, in a way … of military themes … So that’s what I’m really going for. That’s where I think the pay-off 
is … taking … the willingness to engage the cognitive load of wargame mechanics and if we can move that 
to history in some fashion I think we’ll all be better served.
(Shelf Stories 2022)
This quote is from Patrick Rael. We would now appear to be at the very inflection point Rael hoped for.
As of 2023–24 designers are bringing forth many more aspects of history beyond military and politi￾cal-military history. Even though the lineage of non-wargames extends further back, momentum is build￾ing (again) and taking us into even more diverse topics, and in more diverse ways. We also appear to be at 
this inflection point because of a blend in wargame and Euro sensibilities and cultures, which warrants a 
far closer examination that is out of scope here. Wargames bring a longstanding willingness to undertake 
a certain cognitive load, a willingness to attempt to engage with history seriously, and the pre-existence 
of an audience and publisher base around which this can coalesce. Euros bring sensibilities that incline to 6 • An Even Briefer History of Non-Wargame Board Games 127
shorter rules, fewer and less complex pieces (carrying fewer levels of detail on each piece – perhaps just 
a meeple representing one thing, rather than a one-inch cardboard square carrying information on unit 
nationality, type, attack, defense, and movement values, together with perhaps a unit signifier and/or name 
in line with orders of battle), less complex boards, and a broader array of subject matter. A non-exhaustive 
list is representative of developments in this area:
We have election games: Liberté (1988), about the French Revolution; 1960: The Making of the 
President (2007) about the Kennedy/Nixon campaign (a Christian Leonhard and Jason Matthews design); 
Campaign Manager: 2008 (2009) (a Christian Leonhard and Jason Matthews design); Swing States (2012) 
a solo game about contemporary US elections; Divided Republic (2012) about the 1860 presidential elec￾tion; Bull Moose: 1912 Election Game (2015) about the US Presidential Elections; Corrupt Bargain: The 
1824 Presidential Election (2022).
We have games about the signing of the US Constitution: Founding Fathers (2007) by Up and Away 
Games; Founding Fathers (2010 Jolly Roger Games) (a Christian Leonhard and Jason Matthews design).
We have games about historical assassinations: The Plot to Assassinate Hitler (1976); Black 
Orchestra, 2016), about assassinating Hitler. Where the former leveraged wargame mechanics, the latter 
finds distinctly more mechanically satisfying approaches to the subject matter.
We have games about historical trials: Nuremberg: The Trial of the Century (1999); High Treason: 
The Trial of Louis Riel (2016); Unforgiven: The Lincoln Assassination Trial (2021); United States Versus 
Aaron Burr (forthcoming, a Jason Matthews design). Of note is the Avalon Hill game Verdict (1959) which 
is a game about conducting, or defending, a prosecution case in a trial, albeit none of the cases in this 
game are overtly historical.
We have games about women’s suffrage: The Vote: Suffrage and Suppression in America (2020); 
Suffrage: Votes for Women (2021); Votes for Women (2022). As we saw from Chapter 4, we also have 
Suffragettes In and Out of Prison (1908), Suffragetto (1909), and Pank-a-Squith (1909) in this lineage, 
even if they are essentially abstract strategy games.
We have games about civil unrest: Red Flag Over Paris (2021) about the 1871 Paris Commune; 
Stonewall Uprising (2022) about the fight for gay civil rights; Prelude to Revolution: Russia’s Descent 
into Anarchy 1905–1917, (2023); games about revolutions (Dual Powers: Revolution 1917) about the 
Russian Revolution; games about the civil rights movement (Free At Last, 2022); Chicago '68 a game in 
development at the time of writing by the Dietz Foundation, about the 1968 Chicago riots with less focus 
on the kinetic aspects than Dunnigan’s 1970 game on the same topic. Striking Flint (2024) is a game about 
the 1937 autoworkers’ strike in Flint, Michigan. Hellraisers (unsigned at the time of writing) is a game 
about the industrial unrest in North Carolina coal mines in the early 1930s. Which Side Are You On? (in 
development at the time of writing) is a game about the struggle of New York workers in the 1910–1911 
winter textile fires.
We also have a large catalog of games from Brian Train, many focusing on civil unrest. This work is 
extensive and significant enough to warrant a closer examination in Chapter 23 of this book on postcolo￾nialism in historical board games.
We have games about the slave trade: Pax Emancipation (2018); This Guilty Land (2018), and the 
emancipation of slaves: Freedom: Underground Railroad (2013). In development at the time of writing 
is a game about John Brown’s attempt to end slavery in the 1850s, with the working title Harper’s Ferry, 
from Alex Knight, the same designer as Land and Freedom (2023).
We have games about political/diplomatic crises: 13 Days: The Cuban Missile Crisis 1962 (2016); 
Fort Sumter: The Secession Crisis, 1860–61 (2018); Sleepwalkers: Imperial Rivalries and the Great War 
(2023), charting pre-war rivalries from 1900; Crisis: 1914 (2024) about the six-week “July Crisis” sparked 
by the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand, leading to World War I; The Bell of Treason: The 1938 
Munich Crisis in Czechoslovakia (forthcoming). Indeed, we might, with caveats addressed above, men￾tion here Origins of World War I (1969), and Origins of World War II (1971).
We have games about treaties: Versailles 1919 (2020); Peace 1905 (2025); Peace of Nicias (forthcom￾ing), about the treaties of Versailles, Portsmouth and the treaty of 421 BCE respectively.128 Paper Time Machines 
We have games about Nineteenth Century business within an imperial context: An Infamous Traffic
(2016), about the operation of the opium trade; John Company (2017 & 2022), about the East India 
Company and the acquisition of personal wealth through the company’s exploitation of India.
We have games about political leadership with their focus away from war, although war may be 
included within the scope of the design: Mr. President (2024) is about being the US president in a contem￾porary setting; Prime Minister (2023) is about being the British prime minister in the Nineteenth Century.
We have games about the Ming voyages of exploration in the early 1400s: Admiral Zheng He (2019); 
The Ming Voyages (2020); Zheng He: Admiral of the Ming Voyages (forthcoming), amongst others on 
the topic. We have a number of other games on the topic of exploration going at least as far back as 
Exploration (1967), although not all are sophisticated takes on the subject.
We have games about surviving war (The Grizzled, 2015) which, although set in wartime, is less 
about military operations, and principally about survival and friendship (the tagline for the game is “Can 
Friendship be stronger than War?”); we have games about biblical history (Nicaea, 2021), political scan￾dals (Watergate, 2021), social history (Hegemony: Lead Your Class to Victory, 2023), about the formation 
of the Supreme Court from 1789 to 2023 (First Monday in October, forthcoming), about Shackleton’s 1914 
Antarctic expedition (Endurance, 2023), about the development of the socio-economic processes of urban 
development in the South Bronx 1940–2000 (Cross Bronx Expressway, forthcoming); about the Indian 
caste system (Tyranny of Blood: India’s caste System Under British Colonialism, 1750–1947, forthcom￾ing); about developing independence initiatives in schools for women in Dutch colonial Indonesia 1800–
1900 (Kartini: From Darkness to Light, 2024); games; games about Edward VIII’s 1936/37 abdication 
crisis (in development, and another Jason Matthews design); games about vying for military contracts in 
the War in Afghanistan (Blood and Treasure: A Game About the US-Afghan War and Those That Would 
Profit From It (unreleased at the time of writing), also from Dan Bullock; games about the nature of his￾tory scholarship itself (Wiñay Kawsay, forthcoming). Even more examples of diverse historical topics 
are up-coming. These games might indeed be problematic in some regards or have highly problematic 
elements on an individual basis – which is a series of targeted case studies for another day and another 
book, but this should not blind us to something significant occurring in the board games hobby. It appears 
as if this trajectory for diverse historical topics (with or without problematic treatments) is in earnest and 
subgenres are already forming.
REFERENCES
BGG. n. d. a “Blacks and Whites.” https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/7245/blacks-and-whites Accessed May 
14, 2024.
BGG. n.d. b “Up Against The Wall Mutherf.” https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/12246/against-wall-motherf/
images Accessed January 25, 2024.
BGG. 2015. https://boardgamegeek.com/thread/1375503/creative-innovative-daring-experiment-failed Accessed 
July 5, 2023. (The contributor to the thread on the Scrimmage game is Brian Train.)
Campion, Martin. 1972. “War and ‘Peace’: A Guide to Conflict Simulations.” In Moves: Conflict Simulation Theory 
and Technique, edited by R. A. Simonsen. Nr. 4. August 1972. New York: SPI.
Costikyan, Greg. 1985. http://www.costik.com/conqnotz.html Accessed August 7, 2023.
Matthews, Jason. 2022. “Politics in Wargaming and Wargaming Politics.” August 23, 2021. https://www.youtube
.com/watch?v=ub2Nj6iKBbM Accessed July 4, 2023.
Shelf Stories. 2022. “War Games are Better at History than Euro Games? with Dr. Patrick Rael: Good Trouble.” 
August 10, 2022. https://youtu.be/8GmOZdC5fEI Accessed June 29, 2023.PART 2
Design Process and Tools
Part TwoDesign Process & Tools131
7 Overall Design Process
PLAY
Before designing there is one essential step for prospective designers to undertake: to play. Play games on 
the topics that draw you in. Play games for the way they look. Play games with mechanics that intrigue 
you. Play games you do not think you will like, to see if you are right. If you don’t like them, play them 
again to try to understand why. Play all kinds of things. Play. Play. Play. Game design is rather like a con￾versation that has been going on for thousands of years, and most especially since the 1950s with regard 
to historical board games. To make a meaningful contribution is almost impossible without some under￾standing of some salient aspects of that conversation. Play to understand what is possible. Play to acquire 
a full broad and growing set of skills to enlarge your design “toolbox.” Play to identify the frontiers of 
experimentation. Play to understand audiences. Play to understand your areas of interest as a designer and 
what you might have to say. Play to find – and then use – your voice.
MODDING AND PRE-EXISTING GAME SYSTEMS
“Modding” – creating modifications for pre-existing games – can be a helpful way for designers to learn 
their craft, as well as a means to undertake critical perspectives, through reexamination and re-exploration 
of those systems as you consider what meanings are carried within wrought changes. “Within the critical 
play method, difference and value are fundamental concerns” (Flanagan 2009, 258). Taking aspects of 
an existing design and creating additional/optional subsystems is much less intimidating than creating a 
whole new game from scratch. You might take an existing strategic-level WWI game, for example, and 
add aircraft into the design to see how it might interact with existing economic, movement, and combat 
models (how much does a unit cost to build, how far does it move in a turn, and what effect does it have 
on combat?). You might take the Command & Colors system and devise alternative setups for well-known 
battles, or new scenarios for battles the publishers haven’t covered.
A step up in complexity is to take a pre-existing game system and to use it to make your own game, 
shifting to a different, yet still suitable, subject. Within wargames the States of Siege or the Great Sieges
systems (both published by Worthington at the time of writing) – see Figures 7.1 and 7.2, respectively, for 
board examples – are good introductions for new designers. Systems such as COIN and Levy & Campaign 
are a significant step up in terms of complexity.
PROCESS
Design process methodology is a vast field (Engberg-Pedersen 2023, 130–2). The field is also informed 
by considerable subjectivity. Many designers prefer to find their own way through a process. Some begin 
Paper Time Machines 
DOI: 10.1201/9781003359265-9
10.1201/9781003359265-9132 Paper Time Machines 
Overall Design Process
their process with a map design, and build the project around that as the catalyzing element everything 
else develops around. Others first focus on a topic and then identify mechanics that help to tell the story 
that unfolds around that topic. Still others identify a key mechanic and then begin research to find the 
most appropriate setting to leverage that mechanic. Whichever process works for a designer – that is, that 
allows them to realize their design intentions – might be deemed to be the best for that designer. We shall 
offer ten perspectives on process below, many demonstrating close alignments with each other. Readers 
may find themselves drawn to one or more approaches over the others due to familiarity or other personal 
preferences.
JAMES DUNNIGAN’S “TEN-STEP PROCESS”
1. Concept development
2. Research
3. Integration of research and game mechanics
4. Development of a prototype
5. First draft of rules
6. Game development/playtesting
7. Blind testing (beta testing)
8. Editing
FIGURE 7.1 Soviet Dawn (2021) board. Example of the States of Siege system. Worthington Publishing.7 • Overall Design Process 133
FIGURE 7.2 1759: Siege of Quebec (2018) board. Example of the Great Sieges system. Worthington 
Publishing.134 Paper Time Machines 
9. Production
10. Feedback
 Much of this is self-explanatory. By blind testing, Dunnigan means players playing a prototype 
without the designer present. By editing, he is referring to the copy-editing required to prepare 
files for publishers (Dunnigan 2005, 110). Here concept development is light and exploratory, 
setting out the project goals, and the rules can wait until there is a stable prototype.
MARK HERMAN’S “TEN POINTS”
Wargame (and other games) designer Mark Herman also lists ten points he considers representative of his 
general thought process:
• Role: Who do the players represent? Are they specific individuals? Do they represent a collection 
of leaders with their staffs at a level of warfare (e.g. strategic, operational, or tactical), or are they 
a blend of several levels?
• Decision Space: based on who the player represents, what is the universe of decisions and chal￾lenges that I want them to face during the game?
• Intelligence: What kinds of information will be available to the player for decision making?
• Player Objectives: How is victory defined? How does a player win?
• Physical Simulation: How will the design handle time and space factors? How will a player’s 
resources kinetically interact with the map and the opposing forces?
• Orders of Battle: What is the granularity of the simulation? Said another way, what are the small￾est force quanta in the game? What kinds of forces are being represented and how detailed will 
they be in the simulation?
• Conflict Resolution: How are the kinetic and psychological factors represented in combat? How 
is the chaos of war captured in the simulation?
• Logistics: How will logistics impact player decisions and force capabilities? At what level of 
detail will logistics be modeled?
• Historical Narrative: How do the elements of the design fit together to offer historically plausible 
narratives in an unscripted environment?
• Playing Time: How long, on average, will it take to play the game? 
(Herman 2016, 134.)
THE STANFORD DESIGN SCHOOL K12 
LAB SIX-PHASE PROCESS
• Empathize
• Define
• Ideate
• Prototype
• Test
• Iterate
(K12 Lab n.d.)
This process moves through phases of understanding a problem, defining it, conceiving of an approach to 
find a design solution, prototyping, testing, and revising the design.7 • Overall Design Process 135
SALEN AND ZIMMERNAN’S 
“ITERATIVE DESIGN” PROCESS
Katie Salen and Eric Zimmerman emphasize what they term “iterative design,” advocating moving to a 
prototype as soon as possible:
Iterative design is a play-based process. Emphasizing playtesting and prototyping, iterative design is a 
method in which design decisions are made based on the experience of playing a game while it is in 
development. In an iterative methodology, a rough version of the game is rapidly prototyped as early in 
the design process as possible. This prototype has none of the aesthetic trappings of the final game, but 
begins to define its fundamental rules and core mechanics. It is not a visual prototype, but an iterative one. 
This prototype is played, evaluated, adjusted, and played again, allowing the designer or design team to 
base decisions on the successive iterations or versions of the game. Iterative design is a cyclic process that 
alternates between prototyping, playtesting, evaluation, and refinement.
(original emphasis of italics retained, Salen and Zimmerman 2004, 11)
In this approach, the prototype is the nexus of design and, out of the playing and iterating on that, the 
design formulates and stabilizes.
MARY FLANAGAN’S “TRADITIONAL 
ITERATIVE GAME DESIGN MODEL”
Mary Flanagan offers what she terms a “Traditional Iterative Game Design Model” which has recogniz￾able parallels with the K12 model, and we can visualize in Figure 7.3:
Here rules come early, as the second step after a design goal is set, and in each re-set of the process, 
rules get rewritten ahead of playing the prototype.
MARY FLANAGAN’S “CRITICAL PLAY 
GAME DESIGN MODEL”
Flanagan also offers a refinement of this, which she terms the “Critical Play Game Design Model.” This 
approach, visualized in Figure 7.4, encompasses more self-consciousness and “reflective practice,” which 
might involve recalibrating design priorities through playtest findings (Schön 1984, 155). This model also 
compels the designer to cater to diverse playstyles and to facilitate subversion of conventional approaches 
to the play space.
THE FOUR-POINT LOOP MODEL
The author’s “four-point loop model” (Figure 7.5) has similarities to Dunnigan’s ten steps and the K12 
Lab’s six steps, as well as the two Flanagan perspectives outlined above, albeit simplified. The reflective 136 Paper Time Machines 
practice and design for a breadth of playstyles are not excluded, but already subsumed within the process. 
Aligning with the Salen and Zimmerman practice of iterative design, as well as both Flanagan models, 
this model visually emphasizes the cyclical nature of development.
An initial research/devise thesis phase evolves into a devising of the design phase, which in turn 
progresses to a prototype, which is then tested, and further research and thesis and/or design revisions 
continue to loop through prototyping and testing phases until such time as the design is published. It may 
be that further revisions come after publications, with errata, or updated editions. In a digital format, the 
step “back” from publication into fresh revisions circumvents physical reformulations, as patches and 
updates are made available.
In this model, “Publish” is really an umbrella term for a number of phases that occur after a game 
moves into a publisher’s production schedule, and these phases may be somewhat different in intensity, 
and sometimes in chronology, depending on the publisher, but they might broadly be:
• Prototype pitch to publisher
• Rules submission to publisher
• Contract
• Payment of advance (sometimes)
• Publisher internal/external playtesting
• Design revisions
• Marketing material (copy text in support of the game)
• Other product support (historical and design notes, demoing at conventions)
• Fielding player queries during marketing campaigns and post-launch
FIGURE 7.3 Traditional iterative game design model (original source Flanagan 2009, 255).7 • Overall Design Process 137
REINER KNIZIA’S “UNFIXED PROCESS”
As a counterpoint to these seven perspectives, let us also add the views of board game designer Reiner 
Knizia:
I don’t have a fixed design process. Quite the contrary, I believe that starting from the same beginning will 
frequently lead to the same ending. Finding new ways of working often leads to innovative designs. Of 
course, there are always the basic ingredients of game mechanics, game materials, and the theme or the 
world. These are good anchor points and in a balanced design these dimensions will blend together nicely 
FIGURE 7.4 “Critical Play” Game Design Model (original source Flanagan 2009, 257).
FIGURE 7.5 Four-point loop model.138 Paper Time Machines 
and support each other. Furthermore, there are some fundamental design questions about the player’s point 
of view: Who am I? What am I trying to achieve? What are my main choices?
My primary design technique is to create a game first in my mind and play it there over and over again. 
This can go on for many weeks. When I feel the need for practical playing experience, I finally build the 
first prototype and play it with my playtest groups. The decision to enter the prototype stage is critical. 
Moving too early without a clear concept wastes a lot of time, and is much simpler to change things in one’s 
mind than a physical prototype. Moving too late may not reveal design weaknesses early enough and may 
require a complete redesign.
Once the initial concept is properly elaborated, playtesting becomes the core activity of game development. 
The fun and excitement of playing cannot be calculated in an abstract fashion: it must be experienced. I 
prepare each of my playtest sessions in great detail – I plan the exact issues I want to monitor and test. 
During play, I record relevant data about the game flow. Afterwards, I analyze the results and then make 
necessary or exploratory changes. This becomes the preparation for the next playtest session, during which 
I can find out how the changes will affect the game. The revolving process usually continues for many 
months, sometimes years. 
(Knizia 2004, 22–5)
For all that Knizia may eschew a process, and elsewhere elaborates that he likes his game designs to 
“begin with elaborate concepts and too many features, and then later streamline the game play, only 
retaining the best parts of the design” (Knizia 2004, 26), there are still evident similarities with the 
other models of a development process provided here: playtesting and design iterations – both con￾ceptual and implementations – loop around each other. The “process-free” process Knizia outlines 
begins to feel increasingly more like a process the more he expounds on it. Perhaps, ultimately, the 
most contrasting point Knizia makes here is not to move too early to a prototype phase, whereas Salen 
and Zimmerman advocate developing a rough prototype “as early in the design process as possible.” 
Perhaps they are not in profound disagreement with each other – an understanding of “too early,” and 
“early as possible” are vague parameters after all. But this question – when is the right time to begin 
a prototype? – is not without complications, even for experienced designers. Both approaches – using 
your mind to design/play the game/redesign it and prototyping as soon as possible – have their advan￾tages. In some ways, the former is more efficient and may unlock fresher approaches, but it is nebulous. 
The latter is more dependable, but consumes time, effort, and other resources to effect. It may be that 
each design makes its own case to each designer. In any event, a design cannot progress until a playable 
prototype has been developed.
COLE WEHRLE’S “PRE-PRODUCTION PHASE”
As a ninth perspective, Cole Wehrle speaks in terms of a pre-production phase which necessitates a work￾ing proof of concept, team buy-in, and an aesthetic strategy, and two broad stages of design development, 
a first phase where the task is to:
make sure that every single element in the game is as interesting, as expressive as it can possibly be, now 
and I use … “expressive” here very specifically, because one way of thinking about a game is thinking 
about a game as a kind of language … a game design presents its players with nouns and verbs, that they 
can use to assemble stories, and so when I talk about expressiveness in a game what I’m interested in 
is, well, what kind of poetry can you write using this game … what sort of verbs are you getting access 
to, what sort of nouns? … so the first stage of development is let’s make sure the players have every tool 
they can possibly use … at a certain point we realize that the game is expressive enough and then it is 
time to sort of close up development which enters the second stage of development. The second stage of 7 • Overall Design Process 139
development is primarily focused on … limiting design liabilities … if the goal of the first wave of develop￾ment is to make the game as interesting as possible, the goal of second wave of development is to make sure 
the game doesn’t break … every time you make a change in the second stage of development, the primary 
thing that I’m worried about is did this change, which made the game better, did it break something else? 
And so this process tends to be very closely aligned with the work of editors and with the work of playtest￾ers who are interested in finding exploits and bugs in the core system.
(Playing with the Past 2023a)
There are evident parallels here with video game development with its “alpha” phase of development – 
in which all core features are implemented, but bugs exist and polish is required – and its “beta” phase 
where major bugs are addressed, polish is applied, and user feedback is incorporated to bring a title to 
commercial release.
JASON CARR’S “FIVE KEY CATEGORIES”
Overlapping and expanding the nine process perspectives outlined above, Jason Carr, Director of Game 
Development at GMT, speaks of five key categories in development: modeling, mechanics, usability, bal￾ance, and completeness (Carr 2021, 40). We shall explore modeling in Chapter 8, mechanics in Chapters 
9 and 10, and usability, balance, and completeness in Chapter 12.
IDEAS
The chicken or egg debate in board game design is which comes first, mechanics or theme (Reddit 2022)? 
“When many game designers sit down to tackle a new project, they aim at it from one or two angles. They 
either figure out the mechanics first or go straight for the metaphor instead” (Forbeck 2011, 19). As noted 
in Chapter 1, “theme” is frequently used as an unhelpful synonym for “setting,” or “topic”, or “subject 
matter.” Reportedly designers invariably begin a project with one or the other clearly in focus, and this is 
the seed from which the entire project flowers. Justin Gary, using quotation marks, describes himself as 
“generally a ‘mechanics first’ designer” (Gary 2018, 48). Some designers switch between either starting 
with one or the other depending on the project itself. “I have found that my games always begin with either 
a theme or a mechanism” (Looney 2011, 34).
Even where designers assert the primacy of one element over the other, as a means to commence a 
project in earnest, closer examination can reveal an inseparability between elements. For example, Jeff 
Warrender is definitive that he begins with a story – the subject matter:
Step 1: Start with a story … we established that we as humans respond favorably to stories. We would do 
well to steer into that instinct and seek to create games with richly evoked stories. Starting with an interest￾ing story or world or setting will suggest ideas for the game’s mechanics.
(Warrender 2020, 25)
Yet Warrender is no less clear that the mechanics the design employs also account for the player’s 
engagement:
Mechanics are the means by which the players actually interact with the game. A game mechanic … can be 
thought of a bundled set of operations. An operation is the core unit of action in a game … Thus mechanics 140 Paper Time Machines 
form the practical answer to the question, “what do I actually do in the game?” … Your game’s mechanics 
will dictate the degree of engagement your game generates among its players, so it’s important to build 
your game on a solid mechanical foundation.
(Warrender 2020, 34–5, original emphasis of italics retained)
Because mechanics are an active manifestation of story development, both must inform, encompass, and 
vivify the other. Amabel Holland expresses it thus:
There's a Henry James quote I'm fond of. What is character but the determination of incident? And what is 
incident but the illumination of character? "Incident" here is a fancy word for plot, and so what he's saying 
is that plot should come out of characterization, and that characterization should be revealed as a result of 
the plot. They're not separate things, but the same thing, hopelessly intertwined, impossible to separate or 
to consider in isolation.
And one reason I'm fond of it is, if you change "character" and "incident" to "theme" and "mechanisms", 
we're suddenly talking about game design. Theme is an expression of the mechanisms, and mechanisms 
an expression of theme.
(Hollandspiel.com 2021)
In historical board games, a story without mechanics is just a story, and a mechanic without a story is just 
a mechanic. Joined together, you have the beginnings of an idea.
Lewis Pulsipher goes beyond “mechanics” and “theme.” As we can see from Figure 7.6, Pulsipher 
suggests there are three other additional potential sources of ideas: constraints, a particular game system 
FIGURE 7.6 Five possible origins of games (original source Pulsipher 2012, 10).7 • Overall Design Process 141
or genre, or components, and sometimes ideas come from one of these sources, and other times they come 
from various combinations.
There is another approach to offer here, which is certainly accessible through mechanics or theme 
or the constraints, components, or the specifics of a given game, system, or genre, as noted by Pulsipher, 
but it can be helpful to target directly as your primary design objective, and to then shape it through these 
other paradigms. Think in terms of your intended player experience. As Joe Slack says:
If you’re able to come up with a vision for your game, including what experience you want players to feel, 
this will really help determine what theme and mechanics you’ll want to use. You may find the theme and 
mechanics naturally follow in order to help attain the experience you’re aiming for. This isn’t to say that 
you can’t start with theme or mechanics, but it’s often easier and more helpful to start with an overall idea 
for your player experience first.
(Slack 2017, 69)
Further, think in terms of the emotions and thought processes you want your players to experience. Do 
better than hope your players “have fun.” Think in terms of specific sensations you plan to target. We will 
look closer at this in Chapter 8.
RESEARCH
Research may be the spur for either the mechanic, story, constraints, components, or for a specific take on 
a pre-existing game/system/genre, or for an intended player experience or a specific emotion or cognitive 
effect. As research deepens, it likely continues to inform, encompass, and vivify any or all of these origin 
spaces, so all come to exist in an interlocking relationship, deepening and expanding the core game idea. 
Research, for historical board game designers, often takes the form of absorbing history through more 
conventional media (books, art, movies, etc.) and also through games, which provide not just history for 
designers to mull over, but also mechanical and other ludic approaches to this history. The games, in their 
design details and/or in player responses to them, provide opportunities and/or warnings about how to 
engage with the history under consideration as a game designer.
The duration of a research phase may be a long process, potentially as long or longer than the actual 
design phase. It is likely heavily bounded by project realities (deadlines). Designer and DOD analyst 
David Thompson cites six months to a year as his typical duration, and states that he does not design while 
he is gathering information (Playing with the Past 2023b). Designers need to be interrogating their sources 
(and interrogating their own use of sources) in an attempt to understand what the key aspects of their 
topic are – what are the significant narrative beats (“[a] beat is an exchange of action/reaction in character 
behavior,” McKee 1999, 258), and what are the key decisions made by the key historical actors? We will 
look closer at this in the following chapter.
CONCLUSION
As established in this chapter, there are numerous processes available to designers. Chapters 8 to 12 in 
this volume assume a process that essentially works in line with Figure 7.5’s four-point loop model, sum￾marized as follows:
• Research thesis (Chapter 8)142 Paper Time Machines 
• Devise thesis (Chapter 8)
• Devise design
• Have some broad and perhaps only vague concept of components, mechanics and their 
metaphors, and, if relevant the use of cards and the metaphors they carry (Chapters 9
and 10)
• Board design (Chapter 11)
• Return to consider components, mechanics, and metaphors in more detail (Chapters 9 and 10)
• Develop prototype/test/revise thesis/revise design/publish (Chapter 12)
Although the current author usually performs the devise thesis and board design phases at essentially 
the same time, this is only possible because there is already an inherent understanding of likely compo￾nents, mechanics, and metaphors that will be carried by the design and implemented on the board. Newer 
designers are therefore encouraged to read Chapters 9, 10, and 11 in sequence, even if they find, as seems 
likely, that designs do not reach a critical traction until the first iterations of the board design (if the design 
utilizes one). At this point, broad ideas about mechanics become more clear because they are defined in 
direct relation to the board – or the lack of one – and the concepts tracked there as key feedback mecha￾nisms to the players.
REFERENCES
Carr, Jason. 2021. “What is Game Development?” C3i. Nr. 35, March 8, 2021, 40–1.
Dunnigan, James F. 2005. https://www.professionalwargaming.co.uk/Complete-Wargames-Handbook-Dunnigan
.pdf Accessed July 7, 2023.
Engberg-Pedersen, Anders. 2023. Martial Aesthetics: How War became an Art Form. Stanford, CA: Stanford 
University Press.
Flanagan, Mary. 2009. Critical Play: Radical Game Design. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Forbeck, Matt. 2011. “Metaphor vs. Mechanics.” In The Kobold Guide to Board Game Design, edited by Mike 
Selinker, 19–23. Kirkland, Washington: Open Design.
Gary, Justin. 2018. Think Like A Game Designer: The Step-by-Step Guide to Unlocking Your Creative Potential. 
Lake Placid, NY: Aviva.
Herman, Mark. 2016. “Empire of the Sun - The Next Evolution of the Card-Driven Game Engine.” In Zones of 
Control: Perspectives on Wargaming, edited by Pat Harrigan and Matthew G. Kirschenbaum. Cambridge, 
MA: The MIT Press.
Hollandspiel.com. 2021. “Theme and Mechanisms.” April 23, 2021. https://hollandspiele.com/blogs/hollandazed
-thoughts-ideas-and-miscellany/theme-mechanisms Accessed November 21, 2023.
K12 Lab. n.d. Cited in Engberg-Pedersen 2023, 133.
Knizia, Reiner. 2004. “The Design and Testing of the Board Game Lord of the Rings.” In Rules of Play: Game 
Design Fundamentals, edited by Katie Salen and Eric Zimmerman, 22–7. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press–.
Looney, Andrew. 2011. “How I Design a Game.” In The Kobold Guide to Board Game Design, edited by Mike 
Selinker, 34–41. Kirkland, Washington: Open Design.
McKee, Robert. 1999. Story: Substance, Structure, Style, and the Principles of Screenwriting. London: Methuen.
Playing with the Past. 2023a. “Cole Werhle Talks Game Design and the Production Process.” October 24, 2023. https://
podcasters.spotify.com/pod/show/alypv1/episodes/Cole-Werhle-talks-Game-Design-and-the-Production-Process
-e2b0f0a Accessed November 20, 2023.
Playing with the Past. 2023b. “David Thompson Talks Historical Game Design and Lanzerath Ridge.” October 
20, 2023. https://podcasters.spotify.com/pod/show/alypv1/episodes/David-Thompson-talks-Historical-Game
-Design-and-Lanzerath-Ridge-e2ar6rm Accessed November 22, 2023.
Pulsipher, Lewis. 2012. Game Design: How To Create Video and Tabletop Games, Start to Finish. Jefferson, NC and 
London: McFarland & Company, Inc.
Reddit. 2022. https://www.reddit.com/r/tabletopgamedesign/comments/wjtppt/what_comes_first_mechanics_or
_theme/ Accessed July 7, 2023.7 • Overall Design Process 143
Salen, Katie, and Eric Zimmerman. 2004. Rules of Play: Game Design Fundamentals. Cambridge, MA: The MIT 
Press.
Schön, Donald. 1984. The Reflective Practitioner. New York: Basic Books.
Slack, Joe. 2017. The Board Game Designer’s Guide. Toronto, Canada: Joe Slack. Kindle edition.
Warrender, Jeff. 2020. You Said This Would Be Fun: What Makes a Good Game and How to Make a Good Game. 
Averill Park, NY: Belltower Press.144
8 Devising a Thesis
FROM AN IDEA INTO A THESIS
Once you have an idea for a game, the next part of the process is to grow the idea, fed by research (of both 
source subject matter and design possibilities) into a full design. One of the elements of the design process 
illuminated by the four-point loop model discussed in the previous chapter is that historical research never 
really ends. It may continue throughout the design process, supporting or challenging assumptions and design 
treatments, even potentially supporting or challenging the central thesis of design late into development.
We now build upon the tenet that a game design is projecting a thesis – a core argument about history, 
or indeed, potentially multiple competing arguments about history (the dialectical opposition discussed in 
Chapter 2). This thesis may be different from what the designer initially intended depending on variables 
in development execution. It also may alter due to player reception and interpretation, together with the 
proceeds of ongoing research. In this chapter, we will explore a means by which a designer devises their 
thesis. This requires us to answer a primary question – what is the purpose of your game? – as well as to 
consider replayability in the design. Answering this question helps to frame all subsequent design work.
The second question to answer is, what do you want your players to feel? We shall explore this more 
below.
Subsequently, there are three linked groupings of questions and answers: Scope & Scale; Actors & 
Factors; Ends, Ways, Means. This formulation was made familiar to the author by Volko Ruhnke in his 
public Georgetown University talk in 2020, and again in his non-public Central Michigan University 
guest lecture for the course “Using Games to Teach: What You Can Convey Through Play” in 2023. This 
formulation has precedents in, among other places, the work of Clark Abt when he discussed the “scope 
and detail” of problems, “determining the actors who are the principal adversaries of the problem,” identi￾fying their objectives, resources, and the win criteria for each of these actors – see Abt 1970, 106–9. It also 
has precedent in Peter Perla’s TREADS acronym for Time, Relationships, Entities, Activities, Dynamics, 
and Space (Perla and McGrady 2007). These linked groupings are presented here in linear form, but in 
reality they are relational and all help to inform each other, not necessarily in a linear fashion.
PURPOSE?
If a historical board game design is a model of history, and if a model is a purposeful simplification of 
reality (see Chapter 3), then what is its purpose? Education, training, research, analysis, and commercial 
ambitions all impose their own form.
Players will be familiar with seeing back (or front or side) of box details such as in Figure 8.1.
This is marketing information, helping prospective buyers to make the decision to purchase the game, 
and/or prospective players to make the decision to play it. But it is also key information to help discern 
your design’s purpose. There are four essential questions inherent within this information which you, as 
a designer, need to answer:
Paper Time Machines Devising a Thesis
DOI: 10.1201/9781003359265-10
10.1201/9781003359265-108 • Devising a Thesis 145
Devising a Thesis
1. What is the intended player count for your game?
2. Will it be suitable for solitaire play?
3. How complicated do you intend for it to be?
4. How long do you think it will take to play the game to conclusion for the optimal player count?
Answers to these questions will tell you about what kind of potential market demographic you are design￾ing for. Does this market demographic already exist? If so, what games are these people playing? What 
are their expectations? Or are you attempting to find a new market for something that has not existed in 
this form before? If so, how might you engage with that audience and what are their expectations?
You may decide to design without knowing any of these answers, and to explore and experiment. 
Such an approach is encouraged only if you have the time and mentality to engage with such an open￾ended process. For most designers, certainly new designers, it is recommended that clear answers to these 
questions be formulated at the outset of the design process. The answers may change along the way, due 
to research and iterative design and playtesting, but having clear parameters at the outset will generally 
ensure clearer progress is made more rapidly. With answers to these questions, all subsequent design work 
will occur within the conceptual framework they provide.
When considering how long your game may take to play, Geoff Engelstein advocates a Turn Time 
Budget (TTB) to help designers rein in the play lengths of their designs.
The concept is very simple. First answer two questions:
• How long do you want the full game to be?
• How many turns do you expect that each player will take?
Your TTB is the total length divided by the total number of turns (Engelstein 2023a).
It can be an immensely helpful approach to design “into” a block of time, instead of “out” into indeter￾minate time. Although you will likely be unable to answer these questions fully until you have addressed 
other questions that help you devise a thesis, you should hold them in mind to return to. And, again, your 
answers to these questions may shift as your thesis evolves.
WHAT DO YOU WANT YOUR PLAYERS TO FEEL?
Understanding your audience’s expectations and familiarities is essential and no small task. Devising 
ways to surprise, entertain, and engage that audience by subverting or challenging their expectations 
FIGURE 8.1 Example of back of box detail. From Chancellorsville: 1863 (2020) by Worthington Publishing.146 Paper Time Machines 
while remaining true to your thesis may be a significant challenge. (In Chapter 7, we implored designers 
to play games to become familiar with design concepts, as well as to become familiar with audiences.) 
As David Thompson tells us, all design decisions really cascade out of a determination of your intended 
audience (Playing with the Past, 2023a).
What do you want your players to feel? In Chapter 1, the brief discussion on “fun” hopefully gave 
some sense of the limitations of thinking in terms of fun as a design goal. For historical simulation game 
designers, “fun” may not be a design intention at all. In an historical simulation game What do you want 
your players to feel? really amounts to What do you think the historical actors felt, and what of those feel￾ings do you hope to deliver to your players? This is the “procedural rhetoric,” the “experiential rhetoric” 
referred to in Chapters 2 and 3. We will look closer at this later in the current chapter in the section Actors 
and Factors below.
Amabel Holland has commented on her designs This Guilty Land (2018) about the struggle to end 
slavery in the USA, and The Vote (2020) about womens’ suffrage in the USA, and said ““[t]hey’re meant 
to evoke frustration” … to demonstrate the difficulty of political progress – “which is not usually what 
people are looking for in games”” (Hutson 2023). Indeed, in the same New Yorker article Elizabeth 
Sampat is quoted as saying: “Saying that all games should be fun should sound as weird to us as saying 
that all movies should be sad … There’s such a wider palette of emotional experiences that we can be 
working with” (Hutson 2023).
Cole Wehrle concurs:
I’m not interested in whether or not a game is fun … I think we want something to be compelling, and the 
things that compel us exist on a wide emotional spectrum. 
(Winkie 2024)
Robert Plutchik’s “wheel of emotions,” shown in Figure 8.2, serves to visualize something of the vastness 
of the palette available to designers.
The field of grounded cognition argues that there are techniques we may employ in crafted media to 
evoke specific emotions in our audience, which are grounded in the previous experiences of the audience, 
and effectively reimported into a new context. As Katherine Isbister says:
if we see or hear (or form a mental picture of) a person experiencing feelings in a social setting that we, 
too, are immersed in, our brains are “tricked” into believing that a real social experience is taking place. 
(Isbister 2017, 8)
Isbister is referring to what Angus Fletcher defines as “sympathy,” which he distinguishes from 
“empathy”:
Empathy is when you feel for a character. Sympathy is when you feel with a character. For example, imag￾ine that a character feels fear. If you have empathy for the character, then you feel sorrow or pity or outrage 
for her fear. But if you have sympathy for the character, then you literally feel her fear. 
(Fletcher 2017, 35)
This intersects with the observation from Elizabeth Sampat noted in Chapter 2, that there is cognitive 
empathy (“more evolved, less instinctual”) and emotional empathy (“when people can feel in their gut 
how other people are feeling”) (Sampat 2017, 39; 63).
Thus the key to generating sympathy (in Fletcher’s terms) or emotional empathy (in Sampat’s terms) 
and therefore engagement with historical actors is to place your players in situations analogous to those 
actors with resultant analogous feelings. This requires research, imagination, and an awareness of viable 
game mechanics that might convey the feelings you are targeting.8 • Devising a Thesis 147
Gordon Calleja has begun to map out ways we might think of player engagement, conceiving of 
cognitive attention as an expendable resource and necessary prerequisite to ensure involvement in various 
forms. Calleja lists ludic (player objectives), social (community), fictional (player imaginative participa￾tion in the story world’s setting), narrative (what Calleja sees as a composite of two elements he terms 
“scripted narrative” and “emergent narrative”), and material (components made of matter with physical 
attributes) involvement (Calleja 2022, 26–44). By scripted narrative Calleja means the more overt deliver￾ies of narrative into a game (such as event cards), and by emergent narrative he means that generated by 
players making meaning from causally related mental images derived through the playing of the game 
(Calleja 2022, 35). Calleja keeps these terms - attention and involvement - distinct from the synonym-like 
“immersion”, which he reserves for a specific meaning: 
Board game immersion is the imagined habitation of a mechanically structured, spatially represented 
fictional world through embodiment in a single entity that is able to exert agency in accordance with the 
rules of that world. 
(Calleja 2022, 203)
FIGURE 8.2 Plutchik’s “wheel of emotions.” Image credit: Machine Elf 1735, Wikipedia Commons, Public 
Domain.148 Paper Time Machines 
Setup time, rule complexity, and downtime are cited as key means to break involvement. Calleja cites 
Jonathan Gilmour, designer of Dead of Winter: A Crossroads Game (2014) amongst numerous other titles 
as stating a golden ratio of setup time being no longer than a quarter of the intended play time (Calleja 
2022, 37).
Of possible utility in the board game design space is a concept from tabletop RPGs known as “Session 
0” (zero). Among other agendas (such as setting expectations and house rules), this session helps players 
to establish characters and relationships (RPG StackExchange 2017). We see this concept applied in the 
Montage sessions in the game Red Carnations on a Black Grave (2021), an RPG about the 1871 Paris 
Commune which help to expedite the generation of player sympathy with their characters:
At the end of the Prologue and again at the end of Act Two a special kind of scene called a Montage is 
played out. This consists of brief glimpses of each of the characters in the game, only a few sentences, with 
no dialogue. The Montage is conducted in two rounds, with each player narrating their scene about only 
one of their characters at a time. 
(Ramen 2019, 27)
This may be a concept currently beyond the conventions of historical board game design, but it need not 
remain so indefinitely.
RESEARCH QUESTION
Research questions in historical board games might take many forms – how might Napoleon have fought 
the Waterloo battle or campaign successfully? How might Napoleon have won the Napoleonic Wars, and 
what might such a victory entail? Might the Napoleonic Wars have been avoided? David Thompson is 
among designers who speak of their designs as being driven by a central question. In Lanzerath Ridge 
(2022), Thompson is asking how was it possible that a single platoon could delay an entire division for 
a day, on the first day of the Battle of the Bulge? (Playing with the Past, 2023a). Further examples, from 
among the author’s own designs include:
• What were the key decisions commanders faced at the Battle of Freeman’s Farm, and how 
might this battle be depicted in an accessible and entertaining format, given that this was not a 
battle with a great deal of maneuver? (Freeman’s Farm: 1777, 2019.)
• How might the climax of the Chancellorsville campaign have worked out differently, and is 
it possible to effect hidden movement in a playable and accessible format that can render key 
command decisions? (Chancellorsville: 1863, 2020)
• How might we depict the acquisition of intelligence and trade in disinformation in the intelli￾gence war in the Mediterranean in 1943 in a fast-play, non complex 2-player game? (Operation 
Barclay, 2024)
• Might war have been avoided in 1914, given that there was a complex mix of motivations within 
all the great powers throughout the July Crisis, and how might such a question be explored in 
an accessible multiplayer format that could also work for solitaire play? (Crisis: 1914, 2024)
• How might we model the fraught treaty negotiations that ended the Russo-Japanese War in an 
accessible 2-player format that does not hinge primarily on the luck of a card draw or the roll 
of dice? (Peace 1905, 2025)
A central research question can help to clarify your purpose, help to define what you want your players to 
feel, and in turn can drive answers to the upcoming and defining question groups: scope & scale; actors 
& factors; ends, ways, means.8 • Devising a Thesis 149
REPLAYABILITY?
Another key question related to your design purpose and the player experience you are setting out to 
make, but usually not given a “back of box” profile, relates to replayability. Most historical board game 
designers, by default, likely design games for an indeterminate number of replays. But the advent of 
legacy games in the more mainstream board game market is a reason to pause for thought, even if his￾torical board games in published form have seldom embraced this trend. Legacy games are a type of 
game that tends to encourage definitive changes to components, such as the board and cards (including 
the addition of non-removable stickers and tearing up cards), and that have a paced narrative devel￾opment (including the opening of specific packages at specific junctures). These games discourage 
replayability, at least in the initially intended form of the game. Sometimes legacy games are rendered 
unplayable after completion (see Pandemic Legacy: Season 1, 2015). Some designs, such as Betrayal 
Legacy (2018), compel players to adapt the board and components in such a way that, upon completion, 
the game remains playable but in a “finalized,” no longer adaptable form. That said, note Undaunted: 
Stalingrad (2022), a historical board wargame that does have distinct legacy elements, such as modular 
tiles tracking the destruction of the city, and a system that incorporates the progression and regression 
of units’ battle experience over time.
Even if not working with a legacy format in mind, it can be helpful to think about how many times 
a player will play a given design and what manner of experience you wish them to have with it. You will 
want to be sure that players get the chance to experience key elements of the design such that they miss 
nothing vital you wish to convey to them if they play just once, yet still give them reasons to return. It is 
possible that rare outcomes in the game leading to unsatisfying results for players – a one in 50,000 chance 
of losing the game on a first-ever turn, for example – may still compel designers to find a way to mitigate 
against this catastrophic experience despite its rarity (see Engelstein 2023b).
A player who has a terrible first experience with a game may be unlikely to ever return to it or to 
encourage others to play it, so it can be helpful to think about what a single playthrough experience might 
be like. Do you have sufficient means for players to recover from poor decisions (or poor dice throws, or 
card draws)?
George Phillies also discusses the adjacent term of “depth” which measures “the extent to which play 
can be improved with practice, study, or contemplation” (Phillies 2014, Loc 798). This encourages design￾ers to think in terms of where players might find potential depth in their designs.
SCOPE AND SCALE?
If you consider your game design to be a model of some aspect of history, you already understand it to be 
bounded. But you need to work your way to specify where these bounds lie. There is an apocryphal Mark 
Twain quote: “Writing is easy. All you have to do is cross out the wrong words” (Mark Twain Studies 
2020). This philosophically aligns with the essential wisdom that what you decide to leave out of a model 
is every bit as significant as what you decide to include, for a model must be a meaningfully tailored 
subset of reality and must exclude aspects of reality in order to bring focus to bear on some purposefully 
selected elements. (See Chapter 3 for a more detailed discussion on historical models.) To return to Jerzy 
Kosiniki’s encapsulation, we are seeking to evoke, not to portray (Teicholz 1993, 105).
As you consider scope and scale, you must ask: what is the expanse of space and time you are 
attempting to model? Military thinkers are accustomed to considering three different scopes, or levels of 
warfare, which Daniel Sukman visualizes in Figure 8.3 and elucidates on:150 Paper Time Machines 
Joint Publication 3-0, Joint Operations, defines the tactical, operational, and strategic levels of war. The 
strategic level is the level of war at which a nation, individually or as a group of nations, determines national 
or multinational strategic security objectives and guidance, then develops and uses national resources to 
achieve those objectives. The operational level of war is the level of war at which campaigns and major 
operations are planned, conducted, and sustained to achieve strategic objectives within theaters or other 
operational areas. The tactical level of war is the level of war at which battles and engagements are planned 
and executed to achieve military objectives assigned to tactical units or task forces.
(Sukman 2016)
There are also additional levels sometimes considered distinct, or sometimes considered sub-tiers of these 
other levels. One such level is the “grand strategic,” which Liddell Hart defined as “the single overarching 
high-level end goal; for example, to defeat the Axis, or to eradicate Carthage … [a] grand strategy is typi￾cally supported by more than one strategy” (Tow 2003, 135). We might define “grand tactical” as a large 
battle, and/or encompassing the operational movements just prior to or after a battle.
With these different levels of warfare come associated implied scales. A grand strategic level wargame 
will usually encompass a whole war, a strategic level wargame will likely encompass a whole theater of 
war, or a whole dedicated aspect of a war, meaning a board might be scaled to show the entire world, or 
just certain continents, or whole countries; an operational level wargame will encompass a campaign, or 
an operation – this might dictate a board scaled to show several miles, or perhaps several hundred miles 
within which the operations take place; a tactical level wargame will usually dictate a scale of a skirmish 
or a battle – perhaps a board shows a small section of a battlefield, or a whole battlefield (which may vary 
in scale depending on the era in which it is fought and the complexity and range of weaponry). We will 
look closer at board design in Chapter 11.
With scope and scale comes a determination of the environment relevant for your design. Your deci￾sions here are informing which approach, or hybrid of approaches, to take with the design of your board: 
which type of map do you need? What are the advantages and disadvantages inherent with each choice? 
FIGURE 8.3 Levels of warfare. From Sukman 2016.8 • Devising a Thesis 151
Of course, your design might be concerned with some non-military related aspect of history. However, its 
scope and scale is still determined by your subject matter. For example, a diplomatic crisis involving two 
neighbor nations that lasted two weeks already suggests a scope and scale for you to work with, which has 
implications for the approach you might take with your board.
To determine your scope, you must again consider the purpose of your model and choose a circum￾scribed focus for your design. Remember, you are attempting to simplify some aspect of history, and this 
necessarily and unavoidably means you will be introducing inaccuracies into your model; the only accu￾rate depiction of reality is reality, but that is not a model and in no way a simplification.
It can be highly advantageous to attempt to sketch out the core dynamics of your design focus in some 
visual form, to help represent what aspects of your design influence other aspects and in which ways. 
Ruhnke offers:
If you think of your conflict as a machine, and it has levers and pulleys and … it’s connected up in some 
way, and it’s … interacting … draw that machine with whatever … graphic analogy you like. Can you crys￾tallize your mental model, your mental picture on a piece of paper and … use that to fill in gaps, because 
… the reason we call complexity complex, I think, is because … there are so many interactions … it’s very 
difficult to hold all of these in your head at the same time. 
(Ruhnke 2020)
When we simplify aspects of history through our models we are systematizing qualities. This often entails 
a form of adaptation, of, in effect, often quantifying qualities, and then applying those quantities into a 
system that permits interactivity. Once we have quantities we have mathematical values, and with these 
we can then effect interaction as we discern what other values alter these values, how, and when, and by 
how much.
Even without definite values, if we have the relational dynamics of concepts in mind, we can begin 
to discern the core focus of our thesis. As we contemplate visually representing what we think lies at the 
heart of our model, it can help to bear in mind this is just one take on the topic concerned, the designer’s 
own perspective: it is one strand of what Scott Page would call the “many-model approach”:
The logic behind the many-model approach builds on the age-old idea that we achieve wisdom through a 
multiplicity of lenses.
(Page 2018, 5)
The point being designers should not agonize over their model not achieving everything. It can only ever 
achieve a dedicated focus on limited aspects of the topic at hand.
In Figure 8.4, we can see a visualization of an early system analysis for the game Freeman’s Farm: 
1777 (2019). This is a game about a highly significant battle in the American Revolutionary War in which 
little maneuver happened (although some was attempted), and there were successive costly attacks by the 
British on the American positions. Indeed, the essence of the battle seems to be a matter of command 
and control and maintaining formation cohesion. In many ways the British attacks, although intended 
FIGURE 8.4 Early systems analysis visualization for Freeman’s Farm: 1777 (2019).152 Paper Time Machines 
to dislodge the defenders, often achieved little more than depleting the attacking formations’ cohesion 
(Ketchum 1997, 360–4; Snow 2016, 81–137). In this design, morale was identified as a key resource, 
which was used as a value to indicate a formation’s cohesion. The systems analysis visualization dem￾onstrates how there is risk/reward and the key to the game is the management of the resource of morale.
It is important to bear in mind here that such visualizations are not necessarily for anyone else to ever 
see, so designers do not need to abide by any formal flowchart conventions – you must just ensure that the 
visualization makes sense to you, even if you leave the project and don’t return for many weeks, months, 
or years. You may also decide that you wish to blend aspects of the game flow (the sequence through 
which play moves over the course of a turn, round, or game) into your systems analysis visualization. 
Sometimes this is distinctly different from a systems analysis, and when this is the case, the recommenda￾tion is to be fully aware and to resist muddying the picture. However, often there is a clear relationship 
between the game flow and the system you are visualizing, and player actions map closely onto it, in 
which case blending them together can be useful. If the design is heavily dependent on narrative choices 
that generate causal chains of contingency (nodes in game theory terms), then this structure is the system 
and it makes sense to map this game flow to visualize it. Again, the function of these visualizations is to 
help clarify thinking. If they are serving that purpose, they are effective tools. Ultimately these visualiza￾tions are not the games themselves and may well – and most likely certainly will – alter over the course 
of development.
Figure 8.5 is an early visualization of the systems in Rebellion: Britannia, a game in development 
with GMT Games at the time of writing, designed by Daniel Burt and Maurice Suckling. This game is set 
in the first Century C.E. after the initial Roman invasion of Britannia. Players take on the role of Rome, 
controlling four Legions, or one of three major Briton factions (the Iceni, Silures, or Brigantes) control￾ling far more, but far weaker Warbands and/or Tension pieces, the latter representing political agency in 
non-military form. This visualization is attempting to show how Roman Legions have different ways to 
generate Victory Points (VP), through destroying Briton Warbands, building, or suppressing Briton ten￾sion. The Britons may use Warbands to destroy Legions, or to destroy what Legions have built to generate 
VP. In addition, Britons may use their Tension pieces to generate VP through various means (this might 
be by expanding them, or removing them to keep Rome happy, for example), or they may convert Tension 
into Warbands – or Warbands into Tension. Bear in mind, the Legions cannot do any damage to Tension, 
FIGURE 8.5 Early systems analysis visualization for Rebellion: Britannia (forthcoming).8 • Devising a Thesis 153
but will destroy Warbands if they can find them exposed. Further, Legions, just by their presence, can 
generate Tension (the Britons do not respond well to the presence of enemy armies), and by building settle￾ments, forts, and roads (the Britons do not respond well to the emergence of new structures dominating 
their landscapes). This visualization does not capture the dynamics around the different Briton factions.
Figure 8.6 shows an early systems analysis of Elizabeth: England Aflame (in early development, at 
the time of writing). This is a game where players take on the role of agents during the early years of the 
reign of Elizabeth I of England. Each player has a secret role, of being loyal to England, to France, or to 
Spain. Players who are loyal to England must work together to avoid being defeated through an “Invasion” 
or a “Rebellion,” and attempt to successfully mount a counter plot to secure Elizabeth’s position on the 
throne. Players with other loyalties must work against these agendas, but they are far more likely to suc￾ceed if they can keep their intentions hidden until later in the game. In this visualization, there is no 
attempt to show that players are also able to influence the loyalties of other players and to change their 
own loyalties at certain points.
As a final example, Crisis: 1914 (2024) is a game about the diplomatic crisis that led to World War I. 
Figure 8.7 represents the concepts, incentives, and win/loss outcomes driving the focus of the thesis. High 
prestige will win the game, but will also generate high tension, which will lose the game. Thus, a high 
prestige carries risk, yet a low prestige will also ensure a loss condition. This is a way to model the policy 
of brinkmanship. We will look closer at this design in Chapter 19.
With a systems analysis visualization there is clarity of intention for the focus of the thesis, and usu￾ally scope and scale are already being defined. In this instance, if the game was concerned with a scope of 
brinkmanship beyond the six weeks of the July Crisis, we would likely expect it to include other concepts 
too. Indeed, the Benjamin Richter design, Sleepwalkers: Imperial Rivalries and the Great War (2023) 
FIGURE 8.6 Early systems analysis visualization for Elizabeth: England Aflame (forthcoming).
FIGURE 8.7 Early systems analysis visualization for Crisis: 1914 (2024).154 Paper Time Machines 
takes a longer view, focusing on the period from 1900 onward, and includes concepts such as an arms 
race, as well as colonial, and industrial rivalries.
This visualization is also a demonstration of what we referred to in Chapter 2 as “dialectical opposition.” 
Here we see two ideas in conflict with each other; two theses about how the world (in this model) work, pull￾ing in opposing directions. We must drive the Diplomatic Pressure up to score Prestige high enough to win. 
But we must also keep the Diplomatic Pressure low enough to not get the Tension so high that we lose.
We may see parallels here with theories on dramatic writing when Angus Fletcher tells us it is cus￾tomary for characters to be in conflict with their story world in relatively non-complex dramatic construc￾tion; we might see a relatively non-complex ludic system where we have just objective and opposition 
(Fletcher 2017, 30–7). But a more complex dramatic construction has a character not only in conflict 
with their story world, but also with themselves – with their own “deep fear,” and even their own fears in 
conflict with each other.
In parallel, it is a more complex ludic system where we have an objective in some form of conflict 
with itself. For example, in Crisis: 1914, players need to push Diplomatic Pressure high, which is how 
they create game-winning Prestige, and yet the same action also likely generates game-losing Tension. 
In dramatic writing, this complexity is achieved through the encouragement of “sympathy” feeling with
a character (as distinct from “empathy” feeling for a character) delivered through soliloquies (not neces￾sarily solely in dialogue form), which dramatically demonstrate the conflict (Fletcher 2017, 35). In a game 
this “dramatic” complexity is achieved through the interrelationship of systems, delivered through the act 
of play. We might see a further parallel when we consider Fletcher encourages writers to build their char￾acters out of their fears because “fears are the most powerful drivers of human behavior … [and] fears are 
what cognitively bonds audiences to characters, making them care” (Fletcher 2017, 34), and these fears 
are the foundation of the conflicts they encounter. Players, too, may experience fear as they play, that they 
will lose, or they will fail to appreciate the game experience fully, and this may be instrumental in making 
them care, so they are invested in the game.
Visualizations can function as clear structural skeletons upon which the core of your thesis, and so 
the heart of your design, will be built. It is a useful tool to help clarify what you think most matters in the 
subject area you are working on and a means to rapidly ascertain where the major errors, or unsupportable 
assumptions, sit within your model. Such visualizations are also a potentially useful tool for the analysis 
of your own, or other games.
ACTORS AND FACTORS?
The second linked grouping of questions to ask yourself is who are the actors, and what are the factors in 
your chosen area of focus? Actors are the humans involved, and factors are the non-human elements with 
a bearing on your topic.
You will need to determine who the most significant actors are for your topic. Which actors, due to 
their relative insignificance, can your purposeful simplification justify removing from your model? What 
is the smallest number you can operate with? Which of these actors will the players represent? Do players 
represent an individual, or a collection of leaders?
What do these actors want? What can they do to get that? Who is stopping them? Who is helping 
them? How did these actors feel? On what grounds can you make such determinations?
What are the factors pertinent to your topic? Are economics relevant? Manpower? Skills? Technology? 
Geography? Weather? Attitudes? Uprisings? Paranoia? Secrecy? Specific events? If events, could they be 
encouraged or discouraged, or do you take a deterministic view that they will happen regardless of what￾ever your actors do? Or are specific events only probabilities? If so, how high are the probabilities? What 
modifying factors might alter the nature of the probabilities? How few of these factors can your thesis 
operate with to deliver on your intended focus?8 • Devising a Thesis 155
What is the nature of the relationship between these actors and factors? How does one influence the 
other? How do these relationships drive players towards their goals? What are the factors stopping the 
actors getting what they want? What are the factors helping them? What is the place of luck within your 
model? How much luck do you think those historical actors were contending with? What are the asym￾metries, or the symmetries you see that different actors within your model experienced? How might you 
model these?
ENDS, WAYS, MEANS?
From Arthur F. Lykke Jr. we have the conceptual framework of ends, ways, and means (Lykke 1998, 3). 
The ends are what the actors want, what their goals or objectives are; the ways are how the actors pur￾sue their ends, the actions available to the actors; and the means are the resources and requirements the 
actors are working with, the things that facilitate their activities and the requirements that delimit them. 
As Eikmeier tells us, we can express this as “Strategy = Ends + Ways + Means” (Eikmeier 2007, 63). 
Eikmeier expands:
Ends are the objectives or desired outcomes of a given strategy. The term end-state is synonymous with 
ends. An end or ends comprise the goal of the strategy. Ways are actions. They are the methods and process 
(sic) executed to achieve the ends. More simply, they answer the question, How are you going to get to the 
end-state? Means are the resources required to execute the way. 
Eikmeier 2007, 63)
Ruhnke has noted the alignment between the ends, ways, means, and formulation of strategy with game 
design.
Indeed, games are tailor made to model and convey the interaction of strategy. For example, a game’s key 
elements – victory conditions, mechanics of play, and pieces – each map almost one-for-one to the ends, 
ways, and means that comprise strategy.
(Ruhnke 2023)
In Chapter 2, we briefly looked at endings as significant in relation to a game’s meaning. The end goal 
of a player is no less significant. Jeff Warrender, citing Jonathan Degann, reminds us that “Your scoring 
design IS (sic) your game design; Savvy players will follow the incentive structures built into the game’s 
scoring system, and optimize their play based on those incentives” (Warrender 2020, 15). Warrender also 
advises designing by giving players incentives, rather than limiting them through restrictions (Warrender 
2020, 14). As Gordon Calleja says: “… it is often the case that the foundational structure of a board game’s 
design is the connection between its goals and the core mechanics [those most often repeated] that allow 
players to pursue those goals (Calleja 2022, 60). These ends, or incentives, combined with the ways and 
means, which determine how players get there, through what strategies, and with what complications – are 
another way to think of your game’s meaning. Indeed, this is also a way to think about the very nature of 
fun:
Games – a particular type of ludic form set outside of ordinary experience that generates ambiguity – are 
always becoming and never the same twice. They exist, in any meaningful sense, only while at play. The 
material of the game provides the structure, but the player brings the game to life and finds sometimes 
momentary, sometimes longer-lasting meaning in the ambiguity of the engagement. Once inside the game, 
the player is set outside of life in sometimes nearly imperceptible but in other times bold and obvious ways. 
Once they are at play, the player operates the ludic form – the game. This operation produces play, from 156 Paper Time Machines 
which personal, contingent experience emerges. That’s where fun comes into the picture. Fun is the lens 
through which we can make sense of our play experiences.
(Sharp and Thomas 2019, 155)
This may resonate with those familiar with Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi’s concept of “flow,” “the state in 
which people are so involved in an activity that nothing else seems to matter; the experience itself is so 
enjoyable that people will do it even at great cost, for the sheer sake of doing it” (Csikszentmihalyi 1990, 
5). Csikszentmihalyi also refers to flow as “the total involvement with life” (Csikszentmihalyi 1990, xi).
In his novel, The Third Reich, Roberto Bolaño, the narrator, gives some evocation of this state of flow 
as he ruminates on board games, and in particular on the board game Rise and Decline of the Third Reich 
(1974), through which the novel derives its name, when he writes:
the urge to play is simply a kind of song and that the players are singers performing an infinite range of 
compositions, dream compositions, deep-bore compositions, wish compositions.
(Bolaño 2011, 126)
Regardless, think carefully about what your ends are. As we shall see in Chapter 9, Engelstein and 
Shalev’s Building Blocks of Tabletop Game Design (2022) lists 21 approaches to game end and victory, 
and this is not the sum of options. As a designer, you have choices, but they all say something prejudicial 
about the history that is your subject matter. Wargame conventions such as victory conditions that we 
might identify as “Player Elimination” (Engelstein and Shalev 2022, 229), which we see in Risk (1959), 
for example, compel us to think of military conquest as a zero sum game and one that brings definitive 
closure (something there is considerable evidence to counter as historians – how many military defeats 
have truly led to definitive and irrevocable loss not followed by some resistance, and/or some eventual 
reversal of the conquest?).
With regard to ways – that is, how actors pursue ends – be advised that players need interesting deci￾sions to choose from, and difficult choices to make. Sid Meier is quoted as saying: “A [good] game is a 
series of interesting choices” (Rollings and Morris 2004, 38). In a similar vein, Cole Wehrle speaks in 
terms of games as decision spaces where:
my primary goal is to just think about what is the feeling that I want the game to generate? Or the exercise 
that I use sometimes is how do I want players to think about the game when they’re not playing? And that 
can be a very good way of kind of trying to triangulate what you want the feeling of the game to be, and 
from that I will design a set of mechanical systems to try to create those tensions. 
(Playing with the Past 2023b)
What choices can you give your players that deliver on the fantasy of the role you are ascribing them in 
the game? What things can you make your players want to do, such that they can never do all of them on 
a turn? As David Thompson tells us, this restriction is an effective means to generate tension into that 
decision space (Playing with the Past, 2023a). We might think in terms of choices as verbs – as things 
players do – with each game making implicit promises by its scope and scale, and by its actors and factors 
about what players will expect to be able to do in the game. Are you able to match your scope and scale to 
a correspondingly plausible set of actors? Do you have too few or too many? Can you justify combining 
some actors together, or splitting them to correspond with a satisfying player count, where each player 
has enough interesting choices to make/things to do and the history is faithfully depicted? Do your actors 
have historically plausible choices to make, with historically plausible outcomes to be derived from these 
choices? How concerned are you with accuracy or with historical memory? We will look at related topics 
some more in Parts Three, Four, and Five.
In a game, in addition to being its “pieces” as Ruhnke indicated above, (including its cards), the 
means might also be the resources available to operationalize the “pieces.” We can extend this concept 8 • Devising a Thesis 157
further into the number of available player actions, and what determines the accessibility to these actions 
at a given time. In this case, the number of available actions – the means – is distinct from the mechanics 
of the actions themselves – the way – which is what those actions do. We will briefly explore potential 
means – at least with regard to components – in Chapter 9. We will touch briefly on the second aspect 
determining the means – on game balancing (the setting of limitations of actions) in Chapter 12.
HISTORICAL STRESS TEST
Both as you formulate your thesis and as you move into a full design of it into a form where you can test 
it, it is immensely useful to conduct an “historical stress test.” In the formulation of a thesis, and in the 
early parts of a design, this will be played out in your mind, as per the process advocated by Reiner Knizia 
outlined in Chapter 7 (Knizia 2004, 24). When you have a prototype, you will be able to conduct this 
through the prototype itself. An historical stress test is a means of ensuring that your model is capable of 
delivering a narrative, through its systems (or projected systems) that aligns in satisfactory manner with 
the source material history itself. A successful stress test is a means to satisfy your own sense of the cred￾ibility of your model.
FROM A THESIS INTO A DESIGN
Working through the consequences of your thesis – of the decisions taken to formulate it – will lead you 
more deeply into the design process. Now you will attempt to implement your thesis into a full design, 
devising how those “pulleys and levers” operate in detail.
As you set about working the details of your thesis into a full design, let us also consider the theatri￾cal shape of your game. To some extent this is defined by your answer to the scope and scale questions. 
But also bear in mind that the game experience, such that your players will encounter it, is defined and 
framed by the time span over which it is played. Even if this time span is indeterminate due to player 
actions, perhaps ending the game at earlier or later points, it is still true that the designer can, through the 
systems within their design, exert some influence on the game pacing as it ramps up to a conclusion. Your 
systems will be interactive, and so we might term them “non-linear,” but time, for your players, will still 
be experienced in a linear way. This means you have design opportunities, related to your understanding 
of where players may be in their experience of the game in relation to an end point, to introduce ways 
to escalate the game’s overall drama. These opportunities are usually not related to a finite point in time 
(although in a real-time game like Captain Sonar (2016) they very much could be); they are related to 
discernible junctures in your game tied to player progress; they are quantifiable measures toward definable 
goals. This matters because (recalling Chapter 3) game design intersects with emergent narrative, and that 
field has things to teach us about sustaining player engagement and designing with systems orchestrating 
dramatic climaxes; these systems may house “tripwires” to harmonize dramatic threads as players “trip” 
them. As Warrender expresses it, referencing Tony Farrand, “The game should funnel inexorably towards 
an exciting conclusion” (Warrender 2020, 16). These design elements might sometimes be referred to as 
endgame triggers. Consider the example of Mistborn: House War (2017), as described by Reddit user 
JRandomHacker172342:
the endgame trigger is one of my favorite parts. Flavor-wise, you’re trying to hold together a city in the 
midst of a revolt, while garnering favor with the ruler. If the leaders of the rebellion are defeated before 
the unrest track rises too high, the city stands, and the highest point total wins. If unrest reaches 8, the 158 Paper Time Machines 
city falls, the ruler is killed, and you very much don’t want to be associated with him – so the lowest point 
total stands.
(What are the best endgame triggers? Reddit 2018)
In a related matter, depending on your design, you might have players experiencing “dead man walking” 
situations where they know they can’t win, and yet the game is far from over. Being aware of this potential 
situation helps you design to counter it. Consider the example of the games in the Quartermaster General 
series, where players accumulate victory points: if at any time any one alliance’s victory point total gets 
too far ahead of the opposing alliance, the game is won by an automatic victory.
Your thesis becomes a design by applying specific detail to it, by applying sufficient detail in your 
choice and execution of mechanics such that you can build a playable prototype. In this stage of develop￾ment, designers define concepts more clearly by ascribing them definite values. Similarly, at this stage, the 
values of these concepts are modified in certain ways through specific actions that require set conditions 
to be applied with definable consequences with a feedback mechanism (often a board and/or a separate 
score tally system). If these actions take place on and are regulated by a board, then the design of this 
board must be sufficiently rich in detail for meaningful playtesting to occur. Of course, playtesting will 
likely compel significant alterations in the design, but these alterations cannot come into view until there 
is a design to test.
REFERENCES
Abt, Clark C. 1970. Serious Games. New York: Viking Press.
Bolaño, Roberto. 2011. The Third Reich. Translated by Natasha Wimmer. London: Picador.
Calleja, Gordon. 2022. Unboxed: Board Game Experience and Design. Cambridge, Massachusetts/London, England: 
The MIT Press. 
Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly. 1990. Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience. New York, NY: Harper Collins.
Eikmeier, Dale C. 2007. “A Logical Method for Center-of-Gravity Analysis.” In Military Review. Fort Leavenworth, 
KS: The United States Army Combined Arms Center, September–October 2007. https://www.armyupress
.army.mil/Portals/7/military-review/Archives/English/MilitaryReview_20071031_art009.pdf Accessed July 
18, 2023.
Engelstein, Geoffrey. 2023a. https://gametek.substack.com/p/slicing-time-and-space-the-value Accessed August 7 
2023.
Engelstein, Geoffrey. 2023b. https://gametek.substack.com/p/small-chance-big-problem Accessed August 7 2023.
Engelstein, Geoffrey, and Isaac Shalev. 2022. Building Blocks of Tabletop Game Design. Boca Raton, FL: CRC 
Press.
Fletcher, Angus. 2017. Screenwriting 101: Mastering the Art of Story. Chantilly, VA: The Great Courses.
Hutson, Matthew. 2023. “The Personal, Political Art of Board-Game Design.” New York Times, December 21, 2023.
Isbister, Katherine. 2017. How Games Move Us: Emotion by Design. Cambridge, MA and London, England: The 
MIT Press.
Ketchum, Richard M. 1997. Saratoga: Turning Point of America’s Revolutionary War. New York: Holt Paperbacks.
Knizia, Reiner. 2004. “The Design and Testing of the Board Game Lord of the Rings.” In Rules of Play: Game 
Design Fundamentals–, edited by Katie Salen and Eric Zimmerman, 22–7. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Lykke Jr., Arthur F., ed. 1998. Military Strategy: Theory and Application. Carlisle Barracks, PA: U.S. Army War 
College.
Mark Twain Studies. 2020. December 7, 2020. https://marktwainstudies.com/the-apocryphal-twain-writing-is-easy
-all-you-have-to-do-is-cross-out-the-wrong-words/ Accessed November 17, 2023.
Page, Scott E. 2018. The Model Thinker: What You Need to Know to Make Data Work for You. New York: Basic 
Books.
Perla, Peter, and McGrady, ed. 2007. “Wargaming and Analysis. Presentation for MORS Special Meeting.” https://
apps.dtic.mil/sti/citations/ADA475206 Accessed January 24, 2024.
Phillies, George. 2014. Designing Wargames - Introduction, Seattle, WA: Amazon. 8 • Devising a Thesis 159
Playing with the Past. 2023a. “David Thompson Talks Historical Game Design and Lanzerath Ridge.” October 
20, 2023. https://podcasters.spotify.com/pod/show/alypv1/episodes/David-Thompson-talks-Historical-Game
-Design-and-Lanzerath-Ridge-e2ar6rm Accessed November 22, 2023.
Playing with the Past. 2023b. “Cole Wehrle Talks Game Design and the Production Process.” October 24, 2023. https://
podcasters.spotify.com/pod/show/alypv1/episodes/Cole-Werhle-talks-Game-Design-and-the-Production-Process
-e2b0f0a Accessed November 20, 2023.
Ramen, Catherine. 2019. Red Carnations On A Black Grave. (No city listed.) Aviatrix Games. 
Reddit 2018. https://www.reddit.com/r/boardgames/comments/8dswmz/what_are_the_best_endgame_triggers/
Accessed April 11, 2024. 
Rollings, Andrew, and Dave Morris. 2004. Game Architecture and Design. San Francisco, CA: New Riders.
RPG StackExchange. 2017. August 16, 2017. https://rpg.stackexchange.com/questions/105388/what-is-a-session-0
Accessed January 26. 2024.
Ruhnke, Volko. 2020. “How to Design a COIN Wargame.” March 24, 2020. https://youtu.be/FbfLZE_NTRI
Accessed July 18, 2023.
Ruhnke, Volko. 2023. “The Forge: Games as a Window on a Complex World.” https://theforge.defence.gov.au/
wargaming/games-window-complex-world Accessed July 18, 2023.
Sampat, Elizabeth. 2017. Empathy Engines: Design Games That Are Personal, Political, and Profound. North 
Haven, CT: CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform.
Sharp, John, and David Thomas. 2019. Fun, Taste, & Games: An Aesthetics of the Idle, Unproductive, and Otherwise 
Playful. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Snow, Dean. 2016. 1777: Tipping Point at Saratoga. New York: Oxford University Press.
Sukman, Daniel. 2016. “The Institutional Level of War.” May 5, 2016. https://thestrategybridge.org/the-bridge/2016
/5/5/the-institutional-level-of-war?format=amp Accessed July 18, 2023.
Teicholz, Tom, ed. 1993. Conversations with Jerzy Kosinski. Jackson, MS: University Press of Mississippi.
Tow, Rob. 2003. “Strategy, Tactics and Heuristics for Research: A Structuralist Approach.” In Design Research: 
Methods and Perspectives, edited by Brenda Laurel, 135–144. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Warrender, Jeff. 2020. You Said This Would Be Fun: What Makes a Good Game and How to Make a Good Game. 
Averill Park, NY: Belltower Press.
Winkie, Luke. 2024. “Board Not Boring.” January 28, 2024. https://slate.com/human-interest/2024/01/best-board
-games-root-cole-wehrle-john-company-molly-house.html Accessed January 28, 2024.160
9 Common 
Components and
Major Mechanics
COMMON COMPONENTS
Entwined with potential mechanics and their potential metaphors is the likely physical (or simulated) 
implementation of them through particular components. The most common components are listed in 
Table 9.1 with potential functions – their practical uses within a design.
Our list of common components will exclude the core component of the rules, but we will look closer 
at this element, albeit briefly, in Chapter 12. 
Some general awareness of mechanics and their relationship with components is often helpful to 
inform a thesis, which, in turn, informs the use of mechanics and components.
The art treatment of these components in their final implementation will contribute to the func￾tioning of your paper time machine. That is, they will help to convey a sense of time and place to 
your players and help to transport them there with the engagement of their imaginations. Cole Wehrle 
speaks in terms of Deco-Rationalism ensuring components sit within a cohesive whole, and Amabel 
Holland speaks in terms of “literalizing systems” (Playing with the Past 2023; Hollandspiel.com
2021). Both help us to think more clearly that components have functionality that resonates beyond 
what may be immediately apparent. A marker denoting a wound might be rendered in a range of 
materials, but the choice to render it in dark red glass that sits on a player’s character board has a dif￾ferent quality than in bright red plastic, or on a dull cardboard counter that moves along a board on 
a track. All these decisions have affective consequences in how we emotionally respond to the game 
system and its created and curated environment.
MAJOR MECHANICS
There is an array of definitions available for a “mechanic” and a lack of consensus on precisely how 
the term might be used (Järvinen 2009, 247–50). Mechanics are likely to be uppermost in your mind as 
you develop ideas around a historical topic. Jeff Warrender gives us the definition of a mechanic as “a 
bundled set of operations” (Warrender 2020, 34). Joe Slack defines it as the means “by which players can 
do the things they need to do in order to accomplish the goals of the game” (Slack 2017, 75). Salen and 
Zimmerman define mechanics as “the essential play activities players perform again and again in a game” 
(Salen and Zimmerman 2004, 316). Also of utility is mechanics as “the rules and procedures that guide 
Paper Time Machines Common Components and Major Mechanics
DOI: 10.1201/9781003359265-11
10.1201/9781003359265-119 • Common Components and Major Mechanics 161
Common Components and Major Mechanics
the player and the game response to the player’s moves or actions” (Theknowledgeguru.com 2013, origi￾nal emphasis). David Parlett gives us the term “ludeme” – “[l]udemes are the conceptual elements of the 
game, most typically equivalent to its “rules” of play” – and a mechanic is “an element of play,” distinct 
from “an instrument of play” – which is a component (Parlettgames.uk 2023).
In any case, you may have a precise topic in mind but don’t yet see which key mechanic might be of 
primary use to you in bringing that topic to the form of a game. You are looking for mechanics that will 
serve as metaphors for what your topic is really about. If your topic is military history, then mechanics 
that speak to kinetic conflict – to movement and combat – are what you need. If your topic is imperial 
conquest, then mechanics that facilitate a depiction of geographic expansion are of great utility. If your 
topic is betrayal, a hidden traitor mechanic might be your best choice. If your topic is an election, then 
mechanics that speak to winning votes are what you need. There is a huge amount to say here and it 
might consume a volume of its own. We will look closer at design conventions related to mechanics for 
wargames in Part Three of this book. In Part Four, we will also look at some mechanical considerations 
in non-wargames.
TABLE 9.1 Common Components and Potential Functions.
COMPONENT POTENTIAL FUNCTIONS
Board, or individual 
player boards
A space to track placement of pieces, and, as such, a key device for feedback 
toward player goals, and most frequently (when not replaced in function by cards 
or other components), the site of implementation of player actions.
Cardboard pieces Might be used to convey information on the pieces (unit type, capabilities, etc.), as a 
chit functioning as a tool for randomization, as markers for the board, or as 
resources for use on or off the board.
Cards/paper sheets Vast possibilities for use. In Chapter 10, we will focus on the potential utilities of 
cards alone.
Dice Randomizer tool providing results from a range of probabilities derived from the 
game systems; might include a range of different dice types all of which are 
connected to a variety of probabilities and differing player experiences. Might also 
be used as markers for the game board.
Player Aids Sometimes small cards, sometimes large sheets of card, sometimes in fold-out 
format, to help players with rules, key tables, charts, and to remind players of play 
sequence, and available actions. Sometimes used to help players run games solo 
and to help them manage the non-playable factions within a game.
Screens Made from cardboard or other materials to mask aspects of the board and/or player 
pieces and/or cards – of use when working with concepts related to hidden 
information.
Spinner Randomizer tool.
Standees Generally cardboard pieces placed in a plastic stand to represent a unit or key figure 
in a game. Sometimes the standee has text on it carrying details, to support the 
artwork and to carry relevant information for players.
Tiles Pieces used to convey two different states of information, perhaps hidden and 
unhidden, might be subsumed with cardboard or pieces of other materials 
performing the same function. Might also create a modular play space with 
dynamic mechanical effects.
Wooden/glass/other 
pieces
Might be used in the same way as cardboard pieces, but usually cardboard is 
capable of conveying more information (because it is easier to print text and 
imagery onto it), yet non-cardboard pieces have a potential advantage in being less 
intimidating because of this, and may bring certain aesthetic advantages, related to 
design goals and audience expectations.162 Paper Time Machines 
TABLE 9.2 Major Mechanics and Brief Descriptions.
MECHANIC DESCRIPTION
Action point 
allowance
You have a menu of actions to choose from, each with their own cost in points. Even if 
each action costs the same, players are tasked with choosing an option from the menu 
on their turn. There is a variation, which blends with Role Selection, where a choice may 
preclude other players from choosing an option from the menu.
Examples: Liberty or Death: The American Insurrection (2016); Crisis: 1914 (2024).
Auctions You must bid on a commodity with a currency.
Examples: Condottiere (1996); Versailles 1919 (2020).
Dice allocation You roll a personal supply of dice and allocate the results to specific uses.
Examples: War of the Ring, second edition (2011); Table Battles (2017 onwards).
I divide - you 
choose
You divide a set of commodities into one or more sets, and another player chooses which 
set to take.
Example: Biblios (2007).
Press your luck You roll dice, or play cards to make progress toward a goal. You can stop, or keep going. If 
you keep going and get an undesired result, some or all your progress might be lost, or 
some other penalty might be incurred.
Examples: Freeman’s Farm: 1777 (2019); Tarawa: 1943 (2021).
Programming You select and commit to decisions for your turn ahead of enacting them – perhaps 
writing them down before revealing simultaneously with other players.
Examples: Diplomacy (1959); A Game of Thrones: The Board Game, second edition (2011).
Note: Programming relating to cards is also covered in Chapter 10.
Role selection A variation on drafting, where you select actions from a menu, perhaps preventing other 
players from choosing an action you have already selected.
Examples: Age of Steam (2002); also, see COIN games.
Roll and move Roll dice (or some other random input) to move pieces on the board.
Examples: Monopoly (1935); Colosseum (2007).
Secret traitor Used in ostensibly cooperative games, one or more players has a traitor role and is secretly 
working against the interests of the non-traitor players.
Examples: Battlestar Galactica: The Board Game (2008); Hidden Strike: American 
Revolution (2021).
Set collection Acquire sets of commodities to win, possibly trading them in for some rewards; in either 
case, the larger the sets the greater the benefit, but the harder it is to acquire.
Examples: Eight-Minute Empire (2012); 7 Wonders: Duel (2015).
Stock holding Invest in corporations at the right time to ultimately benefit on the fortunes of the stock.
Examples: 18XX games (1974 onward); Imperial (2006).
Tile-laying Modular dynamic creation of a play space (board), possibly with rewards for judicious 
arrangements of tiles.
Examples: Carcassonne (2000); Azul (2017).
Time tracks A turn selection mechanic, and variation on action point allowance. Actions taken have a 
time cost and may alter your placement in a turn sequence accordingly.
Examples: Thebes (2007); Red November (2008).
Trading You are permitted or encouraged to exchange in-game commodities with other players, 
perhaps connected with set collections.
Examples: Civilization (1980); Chinatown (1999).
Worker 
placement
A variation on role selection, you place a piece (a “worker”) on a space on the board to 
perform the related action, perhaps preventing others from selecting the same space.
Examples: Agricola (2007); Lords of Waterdeep (2012).9 • Common Components and Major Mechanics 163
TABLE 9.3 Major Mechanics and Potential Metaphors.
MECHANIC POTENTIAL METAPHORS
Action point 
allowance
There are constraints on player agency. In military matters Command, Control, 
Communications and Intelligence is often referred to as “C3I” (Orr 1983, vii). Any 
mechanic with inherent limitations to it can serve as a metaphor for the constraints 
commanders operate within. All other historical actors also operate within constraints 
– politicians, diplomats, protestors, etc.
Auctions Anything that a historical actor wants and is prepared to pay for (for example military 
initiative in a campaign, technology, or scouting information) can be represented as a 
literal auction, but the auction may also function as a metaphor for the expense of 
resources exerted in the attempt to gain it. If the auction is blind and does not return all 
(or perhaps any) of the exerted resources, it can function as a metaphor for the 
opportunity cost, or the waste of resources in unsuccessful endeavors.
Dice 
allocation
As with action point allowance, this mechanic can operate as a metaphor for constraints on 
player agency and C3I.
I divide – you 
choose
This might function as a metaphor for a treaty or other negotiated agreement.
Press your 
luck
Pressing your luck could function as a metaphor for a military offensive, calling for more 
commitment and more resources (with each roll of the dice, or play of extra cards coming 
at the expense of some other resource, like morale and/or manpower) with the result in 
the balance and jeopardy retained until the attack if successful or called off.
Programming Planning a campaign of any kind demands commitment to actions, which can reap rewards 
if the plan is enacted without disruption, but can be costly, even disastrous if the plan is 
second-guessed, or otherwise is disrupted, or not sufficiently well thought through.
Role selection Similar to Programming, where commitments are made. Possibly the Role Selection 
precludes other players from making the same choices, which can be metaphors for being 
the first to achieve or monopolize some action – such as attaining a technology, acquiring 
the loyalty of a significant historical actor, or dominating a particular resource.
Roll and move A potential metaphor for constraints of player agency, C3I, and/or the unpredictability of 
historical actors, or military units, to act as intended. (Dice rolls may be modified or work in 
conjunction with outcome charts to generate probabilities which can be strategized 
around and off-set with other factors.)
Secret traitor Self-evidently, a potential metaphor for espionage with hidden and perhaps shifting 
loyalties.
Set collection This is similar to Press your luck and could function as a metaphor for similar topics. This is 
also potentially a metaphor for monopoly of information or resources of any kind – 
including loyalty or control.
Stock holding This could function not as a metaphor, but as a direct application of investment in 
corporations. However, stock could be other than financial – for example, stock could be 
loyalty to a cause.
Tile-laying Could be a metaphor for the dynamic quality of a play-space, as “new geography” is 
“discovered.” Could be a metaphor for exploration, or for the way a play-space is altered 
over the course of a game, due to new inventions, new trade routes, or new financial 
commitments.
Time tracks The more complex the action taken and the greater its potential benefits, the greater the 
delay until another action might be taken. Could be a metaphor for C3I, and how strategic 
decisions demand more resources and administrative focus, and so there are limitations on 
repeating this action too soon.
Trading Trading is still literally trading, regardless of the qualities traded; however, trade could be a 
metaphor for an alliance or agreement of some kind.
Worker 
placement
A potential metaphor for limited areas of administrative focus, similar to the constraints on 
agency metaphors noted above, including C3I.164 Paper Time Machines 
To help fledgling designers, listed in Table 9.2 are 15 major (and general) game mechanics of 
potential use, depending on your design intentions. Out of scope here is an exploration of the history 
of these mechanics and how they originated and developed over time. This list also barely scratches 
the surface of a full breakdown of available mechanics. A more thorough listing (although even this 
is acknowledged by its authors as falling short of exhaustive) with more expansive descriptions can 
be found in Geoff Engelstein and Isaac Shalev’s Building Blocks of Tabletop Game Design (2022), a 
volume dedicated to this subject matter. In the second edition of their over 600-page book, the authors 
list ten approaches to game structure, 17 approaches to turn order and sequence, 23 approaches to 
actions, 26 approaches to (action) resolution, 21 approaches to game end and victory, 14 approaches 
to uncertainty, 20 approaches to economics, 18 approaches to auctions, eight approaches to worker 
placements, 24 approaches to movement, eight approaches to area control, five approaches to set col￾lection, and nine approaches to card mechanisms. It would be superfluous here to attempt to replicate 
such significant work.
Table 9.2 works with definitions provided by Jeff Warrender (Warrender 2020, 35–40) rephrased 
and reworked into a table, but excludes the five card-related mechanics Warrender lists. The mechanics 
relating specifically and solely to cards are sufficient in number and scope of possibilities, even in a non￾exhaustive list, to warrant a chapter of their own (Chapter 10).
Note: examples in Table 9.2 are drawn from board games as a whole, and are not exclusively histori￾cal board games.
Table 9.3 shows some potential metaphors for mechanics within a design. 
In Chapter 3, a significant question arose: are there particular aspects of history – periods, practices, and 
ideas – that might be beyond games to address? What might be beyond games is determined by the cul￾tural forces shaping designer and player conscience, and cultural forces shaping notions of art and design. 
Brenda Romero’s Train (2009), a game/art project where players manage the logistics of passenger trains 
to what turns out to be a Nazi concentration/extermination camp, is a reminder that even the most hor￾rifying of historical topics might not be beyond what a game can thoughtfully engage with (the game is 
about complicity with systems and the reveal is the significant part of the player experience). Train also 
demonstrates that our conceptions of what a game can be and do (and how we might define a game) are 
also under consideration when we address the question of the suitability of games to all aspects of history 
(Romero 2019).
REFERENCES
Engelstein, Geoffrey, and Isaac Shalev. 2022. Building Blocks of Tabletop Game Design. Boca Raton, FL: CRC 
Press.
Hollandspiel.com. 2021. “Theme and Mechanisms.” April 23, 2021. https://hollandspiele.com/blogs/hollandazed
-thoughts-ideas-and-miscellany/theme-mechanisms Accessed November 21, 2023.
Järvinen, Aki. 2009. Games Without Frontiers: Theories and Methods for Game Studies and Design. Saarbrücken: 
Verlag Dr. Müller.
Orr, George E. 1983. Combat Operations C3I Fundamentals and Interactions. Maxwell Air Force Base, AL: Air University 
Press. https://www.airuniversity.af.edu/Portals/10/AUPress/Books/B_0082_ORR_COMBAT_OPERATIONS_C3I
.pdf Accessed July 15, 2023.
Parlettgames.uk. 2023. https://www.parlettgames.uk/gamester/whatsaludeme.html Accessed July 9, 2023.
Playing with the Past. 2023. “Cole Werhle Talks Game Design and the Production Process.” October 24, 2023. https://
podcasters.spotify.com/pod/show/alypv1/episodes/Cole-Werhle-talks-Game-Design-and-the-Production
-Process-e2b0f0a Accessed November 20, 2023.
Romero, Brenda. 2019. http://brenda.games/train Accessed July 9, 2023.
Salen, Katie, and Eric Zimmerman. 2004. Rules of Play: Game Design Fundamentals. Cambridge, MA: The MIT 
Press.9 • Common Components and Major Mechanics 165
Slack, Joe. 2017. The Board Game Designer’s Guide. Toronto, Canada: Joe Slack. 
Theknowledgeguru.com. 2013. http://www.theknowledgeguru.com/learning-game-design-mechanics/ Accessed 
July 9, 2023.
Warrender, Jeff. 2020. You Said This Would Be Fun: What Makes a Good Game and How to Make a 
Good Game. Averill Park, NY: Belltower Press.166
10 Major Card Functions 
and Metaphors
MAJOR CARD FUNCTIONS
Building on the previous chapter, let us now look at 33 major card functions. Many of these are mechan￾ics, but some are better defined as utilities, because not all amount to activities players engage in, and are 
instead design uses that relate to mechanics. Accordingly, to not become distracted by teasing mechanics 
away from design utilities that relate to mechanics, we shall group together these major functions under 
one umbrella. As with the previous chapter, it is out of scope to explore the history of these functions. 
However, we will pause here to note the major innovation in historical game design of the card-driven 
game (CDG). We have touched on this in Chapter 5, where we looked briefly at We The People (1994), and 
noted the potential of a CDG design to incorporate political as well as military dimensions, and to include 
pivotal events, giving players a choice of function. A card with multiple possible but mutually exclusive 
uses might be termed “a multi-use card”, which we will look at briefly below. But there are at least four 
significant functions of cards which are not game mechanics, but rather are ways to use cards which may 
be applied to almost any card, regardless of its particular mechanical application: hidden information, 
random occurrence, rule exceptions, and flavor text.
Cards, by their nature, are planal: they have two sides, a face, and a back, with the former often being 
exposed solely to the player who “owns” the card within a sequence of play; thus, they are a way of repre￾senting hidden information – information held by one player and not others.
Cards possess a different quality of randomness from dice. Where any given specific die roll may be 
uncertain (although modifiable to make it increasingly or decreasingly probable for it to ever occur), any 
given card (providing the card is in the deck, cannot be removed from it, and the game cannot end before 
the card might be drawn) is certain to be drawn at some point. There are decks of cards we might term 
“seeded” or “scripted” if they are “pre-built” in some way, such that a certain card or selection of cards 
will occur within a defined variable within a deck of cards. We see seeded decks in Pandemic (2008, 3), 
where the 4–6 epidemic cards are shuffled into sub-decks of 53 other player cards of near or equal and 
varying sizes depending on difficulty level and player count, and then the sub-decks are layered on top of 
each other. Thus, any given epidemic card will occur within a certain defined range of cards bounded by 
the sub-deck size. Similarly, in the COIN series the four Propaganda cards are shuffled into “roughly (or, 
if desired, exactly) equal piles” of the 48 event cards (Cuba Libre 2018, 20).
It may be that certain aspects of the design ensure a given card cannot take its effect, or its effect 
might be modified in some way, but a designer is making different statements about probability with the 
uncertain certainty of a card’s appearance (it will appear, but it is not clear when), than with the uncertain 
uncertainty of a given dice result’s appearance (it might never appear). This statement about probability 
is further complicated if the card might be used in a variety of ways. For example, cards also possess a 
quality of agency that dice rolls do not; a player is likely to feel a greater sense of making choices from 
cards they hold in their hand – from the tacticity and the sense of ownership – as opposed to rolling dice 
and cross-referencing results on tables – although this really depends on if the dice are also “owned” by 
Paper Time Machines Major Card Functions and Metaphors
DOI: 10.1201/9781003359265-12
10.1201/9781003359265-1210 • Major Card Functions and Metaphors 167
Major Card Functions and Metaphors
individual players and perhaps modified through play, and depends on the tables and the capacity for 
players to modify their rolls in line with previous decisions. Additionally, cards might well be combined 
with dice (or indeed other components) for various effects relating to probability and agency, so definitive 
statements here are problematic.
In the formulation of the cards from We The People, the political and singular event aspects of the multi￾use cards amount to rules exceptions (the use for military operations sit within existing rules but afford vary￾ing degrees of agency, represented by a range of point values). We noted this too in Chapter 5, but it is worth 
stating that these rules exceptions don’t need to apply only to political dimensions or events; they might apply 
to anything within the remit of your design, to encourage dynamism of possibilities, unique one-off options, 
narrative representation, and bringing players an engaging decision to make (how best to use the card at the 
time, or whether to save for future use). We have seen rule exceptions used in mainstream card games since at 
least Magic: The Gathering was released in 1993, and it is now a familiar concept across all aspects of analog 
design utilizing cards. Rule exceptions are included in Tables 10.1 and 10.2 below.
The second use of a card that may be applied to almost any card regardless of mechanical function is 
flavor text. Flavor text is text that evokes some historical or narrative detail to help pull the abstractions of 
the game design back into a historical or narrative frame recognizable to players. It may be that the term 
“flavor text” was coined by David Howell, a designer working at Wizards of the Coast during the develop￾ment of Magic: The Gathering (Fandom.com n.d.). However, the use of descriptive text (beyond merely 
FIGURE 10.1 Flavor text from 1565: Siege of Malta (2022).168 Paper Time Machines 
TABLE 10.1 Major Card Functions and Brief Descriptions.
FUNCTION DESCRIPTION
AI in Cards An “AI” deck controls the actions of non-player factions.
Examples: States of Siege games (2008 onward); Chancellorsville: 1863, solo mode 
(2020).
Cards as Bidding or 
Voting Tool
Players utilize decks of cards to effect a bidding or voting mechanism (that may be 
infiltrated by traitor players).
Examples: Dune (1979); Battlestar Galactica: The Board Game (2008).
Cards as Objectives Cards are the objectives players are competing over, either face down and hidden, 
or face up and apparent to all players.
Examples: Sleeping Queens (2005); Peace 1905 (2025).
Cards as Secret 
Objectives
Players hold cards where their secret objectives are hidden from other players.
Examples: Ticket to Ride (2004); 1714: The Case of the Catalans (2014).
Cards as the Board The playable area might be entirely composed of cards, or heavily modified by 
randomly allocated cards, making the playable space unpredictable.
Example: Illuminati (1982); 1750: Britain vs. France (2017).
Cards as Action 
Options
Cards represent the array of options available to a player at any given time, out of 
which they attempt to build a coherent strategy.
Examples: Commands & Colors series (2006 onward); 1775: Rebellion (2013).
Cards as Causal 
Triggers
The playing of specific cards ensures other game effects, either temporary or 
permanent, are triggered. Related to the concept of Cards as Rule Exceptions, but 
in this instance the causal triggers open a window of opportunity for the play of 
other cards or other player actions; that is, they become nodes of contingency 
that may develop beyond the one-off instance of the rule exception.
Examples: Twilight Struggle (2005); Crisis: 1914 (2024).
Cards as Decoys Cards are placed face-down and hide their value until a later moment in the game, 
which allows for some, all, or none of the cards to be decoys.
Examples: Combat Commander: Europe (2006); The Fog of War (2016).
Cards as Player Aids Summaries of the rules and/or player actions are placed on cards.
Examples: Pandemic: Iberia (2016); 1944: Battle of the Bulge (2020).
Cards as Randomizer 
Tool
Cards are revealed from a face-down deck as a random number, or result 
generator, related to probabilities held within the number of cards in the deck.
Example: Kingmaker (1974); Dune (1979).
Cards as Role 
Allocation
At the beginning of a game, and/or at designated junctures, cards are distributed 
allocating roles to players.
Example: Battlestar Galactica: The Board Game (2008); Secret Hitler (2016).
Cards as Status 
Indicators
The orientation of cards can be used to remind players of their status. Cards might 
be rotated and/or flipped to track use.
Examples: Magic: The Gathering (1993); Everdell (2018).
Cards as Tableaux Instead of being played and then discarded as Action Options, cards might be 
played into a shared or player-specific tableau which accumulates over the course 
of a round or an entire game, providing the opportunity for synergies between 
already played cards.
Examples: Land and Freedom: The Spanish Revolution and Civil War (2023); Crisis: 
1914 (2024).
Cards as Time Clocks A deck of cards is a means of tracking time, counting down the time remaining in 
the game.
Examples: Example: COIN series (2012 onward); 1565: Siege of Malta (2022).
Cards as Units or 
Commanders
Cards are the military units (or commanders with designated units under their 
control), used either in lieu of a board or in conjunction with pieces representing 
the unit locations on a board.
Examples: Up Front (1983); Blue vs. Gray (1999).
(Continued)10 • Major Card Functions and Metaphors 169
TABLE 10.1 (CONTINUED) Major Card Functions and Brief Descriptions.
FUNCTION DESCRIPTION
Core Cards Players have their own or a shared deck, but they will have frequent or persistent 
use of their own core cards.
Example: Magic: The Gathering (1993); The Price of Freedom: The American Civil 
War 1861–1865 (2008).
Deck Building You add to your personal deck from a central supply, use the deck, and shuffle in 
preparation of re-use.
Examples: Dominion (2008); Undaunted: Normandy (2019).
Deck Destruction Players incrementally deplete their hand by exhausting cards from their supply.
Examples: Lincoln (2018); Struggle for Europe: 1939–1945 (2019).
Detection Probabilities Cards carry the possibility of being detected by another player – the more powerful 
the card the higher the chance of detecting it and so devaluing it.
Example: Empire of the Sun: The Pacific war 1941–45 (2005).
Drafting As an alternative to a draw pile (where card identities may be uncertain), cards are 
drafted from an open display, perhaps at some cost.
Examples: Through the Ages: A Story of Civilization (2006); 7 Wonders (2010).
Event Decks Revealed (potentially modifiable) cards from a universal deck that set universal 
conditions for players during a turn or round.
Examples: Kingmaker (1974); Battlestar Galactica: The Board Game (2008).
Game End Cards Cards controlled by the players contribute to the game end condition being met.
Examples: 1775: Rebellion (2013); Terraforming Mars (2016).
Individual Decks Players draw from their own individual decks, forming their own unique hand.
Examples: Empire of the Sun: The Pacific war 1941–45 (2005); Quartermaster 
General (2014).
Mirrored Decks All players have their own deck, but it’s mirrored (the same number of cards with 
the same values/effects are in each player’s deck).
Examples: The King Is Dead (2015); Peace 1905 (2025).
Multi-use cards Cards possess multiple functions, but you must choose only one to employ.
Examples: Paths of Glory: The First World War 1914–1918 (1999); Twilight Struggle 
(2005).
Player Turn 
Determinant Cards
Potentially combined with Event Decks, but may also control player turn order. This 
turn order may be determined by a combination of the cards with previous player 
actions.
Example: COIN series (2012 onwards).
Programming You select and commit to decisions for your turn ahead of enacting them – perhaps 
through placing cards in an unalterable sequence, then revealing them without 
being able to change them.
Examples: Colt Express (2014); 1565: Siege of Malta (2022).
Note: Programming relating to other methods of implementation is also covered in 
Chapter 9.
Reciprocal Effects Player cards are multi-use, but one choice will trigger the use of the lower part of 
the card which is an effect beneficial to the other player.
Examples: Twilight Struggle (2005); Europe in Turmoil: Prelude to the Great War
(2018).
Rule Exceptions The card carries details that allow for an action that is not available beyond the use 
of this card.
Examples: Twilight Struggle (2005); Quartermaster General (2014).
Shared Decks Players draw from the same deck or decks, forming their own hand, to then play 
into the game space.
Examples: Condottiere (2995); Battle Line (2000).
(Continued)170 Paper Time Machines 
evocative titles) extends at least as far back as Doug Malewicki’s Nuclear War (1965). See Figure 10.1 for 
an example of flavor text from the game 1565: Siege of Malta (2022), which reads: “The Janissaries were 
elite troops. They were Christian-born slaves who converted to Islam.” The other text on the card is func￾tional and necessary for playing the game (with the exception of the title). This design is also an example 
of the mechanic “Programming,” where players commit to decisions before revealing those choices and 
calculating the results.
Stylistic conventions within a specific game design, or game series, might dictate the specific place￾ment and/or use of italics, or other font options (including size), and perhaps even specific word count 
restrictions, to distinguish flavor text from “operational” or “game function” text. For designers, and for 
artists and graphic designers, one of the considerations is whether there is sufficient space on the card to 
accommodate flavor text.
Nathan Altice also notes three additional qualities inherent within cards which may seem self￾evident but are of value to note. Cards possess qualities that are what Altice terms “uniform,” “ordinal,” 
and “spatial,” as well as “planal” and “textual” (Altice 2016, 37–48). The uniform quality permits easy 
association into distinct decks by unifying card backs, and allows for compositional templates to assist 
expedited comprehension. The ordinal quality permits considerable deck variation – roughly 8.0658 x 
1067 possible combinations in a standard 52-card deck, which Altice tells us is more than the observable 
stars in the universe (Altice 2016, 43). The spatial quality permits the specific placement (or absence) 
of cards to carry mechanical and metaphorical meaning. Further, Altice notes that the rectangularity 
of cards affords for their rotation to a new orientation (what in Magic: The Gathering, where the con￾cept derives, is termed “tapping”) to convey additional information. Altice considers this “revolution” 
from Richard Garfield (the designer of Magic: The Gathering) to be one of card games’ most influential 
mechanics. Indeed, although this mechanic has to date featured little in historical board games with a 
heavy use of cards, Altice notes that:
The conspiracy-focused On the Edge (1994) uses “cranking” to indicate a card’s triggered power, attack, 
or movement. Pokémon (1996) extends Magic’s positional cues, using each cardinal direction to indicate 
a card’s status: a counterclockwise turn shows that your Pokémon is asleep, a clockwise turn shows that 
it is paralyzed, and a full 180∘
 turns shows that it is confused. Yu-Gi-Oh (1999) uses rotation to indicate 
battle position: upright cards attack, rotated cards defend. Whether cards exhaust (Warhammer 40,0000: 
Conquest (2014)), boot (Doomtown (1998), engage (Dune 1997)), disengage (Galactic Empires (1994)), bow 
(Legend of the Five Rings (1995)), floop (sic) (Adventure Time Card wars (2014)), open (Heresy: Kingdom 
Come (1995)), tack (Seventh Sea (1998)), or turn (Shadowrun (1997), Shadowfist (1995), Firestorm (2001)), 
the physical action is the same. (Altice 2016, 35)
TABLE 10.1 (CONTINUED) Major Card Functions and Brief Descriptions.
FUNCTION DESCRIPTION
Shared Deck 
(Contested) or 
Accessible Tableau
Players can freely access (within wider game constraints) a shared deck of cards and 
compete for ownership of them through other game systems. Once attained, 
these cards function as modifiers for other aspects of the game, and are not the 
same as game-ending objectives.
Examples: Hitler’s Reich: WW2 in Europe (2018); Pax Pamir: second edition (2019).
Scoring Cards Players score points by attaining objectives hidden on cards, or by the play of cards 
that assess the current game state and generate a score at the time.
Examples: Airlines (1990); Twilight Struggle (2005).
Trick-taking After receiving cards, you attempt to build the best hand, or hands, perhaps 
connected with bidding.
Examples: Oh Hell! (1930); Battle Line (2000).10 • Major Card Functions and Metaphors 171
Such an adaptable mechanic might yet find wider application within the historical games space.
There are more functions for cards beyond the list In Table 10.1, but they are generally in less common 
use, at least within historical board games. Note: examples in Table 10.1 are drawn from board games and 
card games as a whole, and are not exclusive to historical board games. Not included in this list are card games 
where the goal is to be rid of all your cards (Uno 1971, Once Upon A Time: The Storytelling Card Game 
1993), or to tally points, either high or low (Rat-a-Tat-Cat 1995). This list doesn’t cover storytelling tabletop 
role-playing games (TTRPGs) where cards may be used as prompts for player progress or as other scaffolding 
for dramatic contexts. There are also games where cards take on a physical dimension, such as the “Curious 
Incident of the Tortoise at Dinnertime” Quest in CoraQuest (2022), in which players must stack the cards and 
some dice into a tower such that their characters might reach the top shelf of a bookcase to reach a magical 
sword.
POTENTIAL METAPHORS 
Several mechanics above are noted as potential metaphors for issues relating to C3I. As we saw in the 
previous chapters, there are a number of non-card mechanics that can also function as metaphors for 
constraints around C3I (Table 10.2). But it may be helpful here to cite Herman as he explains a little 
about how this metaphor functions (at least in his formulation of a CDG with a tripartite of military, 
political, and event options, with the event pertinent to either military or political dimensions, or 
possibly both together):
The pivotal CDG concept presents a player with a decision trade space between military and political 
activity. Prior to the CDG concept, the assumption was that this trade space was bounded by the kinetics 
of moving, supporting, and fighting your forces, with all other political effects treated as a free good. The 
reality is that any senior decision structure can only handle some finite number of priority issues; the CDG 
concept acknowledges this limitation of senior decision maker bandwidth and the finite number of issues 
that can be implemented at any given time. Even in an era of large military staffs, one only has to reexam￾ine the months of meetings, plans, and effort to conduct the US troop “surges” into Iraq and Afghanistan 
to see the veracity of this concept.
(Herman 2016, 133)
Whether we are dealing with purely military matters or not, Herman’s point stands for anything with 
administrative overhead. Decisions take time, effort, and resources. Pertinent to the discussion in 
Chapter 5, thinking of political decisions within a military context as something other than “free” 
is to begin to value them. In more general terms, ascribing constraints around actions – not just the 
number that might be taken, or the sequence in which they must be taken, but also limiting their 
chances of success when taken – is to open the door to metaphors that speak to myriad pressures 
around any significant actor. We may see some precedent to Herman’s insight relating to his We The 
People (1994) innovation in Howard Barasch’s and Richard Berg’s War of the Ring (1977), where the 
rulebook tells us, with regard to the concept of Shadow Points (allocated each game turn through a 
die roll) and the limitations of the “Eye”:
Sauron cannot attend to everything at once. There are the Nazgul to direct, Saruman to watch, Denethor 
to debilitate, the Ringbearer to search for, the southern allies to keep in line, and his enemies to cope with. 172 Paper Time Machines 
TABLE 10.2 Major Card Mechanics and Potential Metaphors.
FUNCTION POTENTIAL METAPHORS
AI in Cards An opponent’s intentions are uncertain (perhaps even unknowable).
Cards as Bidding or 
Voting Tool
Player intentions are uncertain (perhaps even unknowable).
Cards as Objectives Objectives can be conceptual and unrelated to geography, or they may form 
relationships with locations on the board.
Cards as Secret 
Objectives
Player intentions are hidden.
Cards as the Board The play space might be modular and dynamic.
Cards as Action 
Options
Player agency is constrained, perhaps relating to C3I issues.
Cards as Causal 
Triggers
Narrative contingency can have significant “hinge points” where decisions taken 
may have profound importance and develop along branching causal lines.
Cards as Decoys Player resource allocation (and therefore intentions) are uncertain.
Cards as Player Aids Not a metaphor – a function for ease of learning and play.
Cards as Randomizer 
Tool
Outcomes are uncertain but tied to probabilities.
Cards as Role 
Allocation
Player allegiances are uncertain.
Cards as Status 
Indicators
Not a metaphor – a function for tracking play decisions.
Cards as Tableaux Player actions have consequences, skillful play is a measure of planning (to attain 
beneficial card combinations) in conjunction with some luck management to 
acquire needed cards at the right moment.
Cards as Time Clocks Self-apparent – time is limited, but the precise ending of the game may be 
uncertain if there are cards within the deck that may end the game before the 
final card is drawn.
Cards as Units Not a metaphor – unless the card details may be hidden, in which case it is a 
metaphor for fog of war.
If the card details are not hidden, it is a function for carrying information necessary 
to play the game.
Core Cards There are core decisions players always have access to, equating to a base level of 
agency within the system.
Deck Building Expertise and efficiency takes careful planning over time to develop.
Deck Destruction Resources are finite, and decisions taken have consequences on future choices (or 
the lack of choices).
Detection Probabilities The more complex and the more destructive an operation might be to your 
opponent, the greater the likelihood that your opponent will detect it (through 
increased communications relating to it).
Drafting You know what you are investing in and what the investment will yield.
Event Decks Life is full of unpredictability. Sometimes more information can mitigate this 
situation.
Game End Cards You are complicit in bringing about the end of a situation (perhaps a war) for some 
gain, but you surrender agency in determining precisely when the situation will 
end; short term gains bring longer term risks and rewards.
Individual Decks Player factions or personalities have their own unique set of resources, 
opportunities, risks, and limitations.
Mirrored Decks All players have the same array of options – of resources, opportunities, risks, and 
limitations, but it is the timing of them that matters most.
(Continued)10 • Major Card Functions and Metaphors 173
Thus the eye – the Dark Power Player – despite nearly unlimited potential power is limited in what can be 
accomplished at any one time.
(War of the Ring 1977, 12)
Perhaps not incidentally, this version of War of the Ring also uses cards (with eight different decks) in 
ways that make it a contender as a possible early influence on the first designers of CDG games, subcon￾sciously or otherwise. As the designers of War of the Ring tell us, the Event deck is a way to ensure the 
various stories from the Lord of the Rings books (1954 onward) have a presence which is “secured” (War 
of the Ring 1977, 28).
DESIGNING WITH CARDS
There is far more to say about designing with cards that can be said here, but one especially instructive 
point for new designers is to consider ways to mitigate against “poor draws” which can make players 
respond poorly to the game, feeling it’s “unbalanced.” We will look more closely at the topic of balance in 
Chapter 12. However, the current author operates with a “no bad cards” design philosophy outlined below.
As established, there are myriad and diverse uses of cards, or perhaps it has a faster cooldown period 
and it can be reused sooner. There are, however, essentially two kinds of cards: those designed to cata￾lyze player actions (event decks, and enemy AI decks, for example), and those designed to be of direct 
utility for the player. Of course, even here it can be complicated by event cards or cards in an AI deck 
sometimes being of direct utility to players and perhaps coming into their hand to play at a later time – 
see Kingmaker (1974), for example). The “no bad cards” broad design philosophy relates to these cards 
TABLE 10.2 Major Card Mechanics and Potential Metaphors.
FUNCTION POTENTIAL METAPHORS
Multi-use cards The use of resources, opportunities, risks, and limitations carry decisions within 
them; to act is to make decisions.
Player Turn 
Determinant Cards
Life is unpredictable.
Programming Decisions entail commitments; some decisions take some time to put into effect 
and may not be changed lightly, or perhaps at all.
Reciprocal Effects Decisions you take may afford your opponents opportunities to act against you.
Rule Exceptions You may make decisions that entail a paradigm shift, quite unexpected by 
opponents.
Shared Decks Resources are finite and shared, and information you have partially informs you of 
what your opponents lack.
Shared Deck 
(Contested) or 
Accessible Tableau
Objectives are freely contestable at any time (with the requisite resources) and are 
not necessarily bound by geographic constraints. In the case of a tableau the 
availability of cards may shift dynamically, representing windows of opportunity to 
work within.
Scoring Cards Information/resources held in one regard come at the expense of information/
resources held in another regard; if you have a scoring card which must be 
played, you have valuable information – but this comes at the expense of having 
a card that lets you apply more resources into the region where you are about to 
adjudicate the score.
Trick-taking Winning requires strategizing and working within limitations.174 Paper Time Machines 
intended exclusively for player utility, as opposed to occasional utility and more often as a source of player 
problem generation. Whilst cards will likely have a variety of different values, effects, and other attri￾butes, the “no bad cards” philosophy encourages designers to find ways to ensure there is a form of bal￾ance (“balance between game objects”) even with low valued cards. Perhaps a card with a low value might 
have one or more other effects that significantly improves its utility. Perhaps not all cards will be equally 
useful at any given time, and perhaps a card that would be considered poor in some circumstances will 
be rendered highly efficacious in others, perhaps helping achieve a synergy with other cards. This design 
approach may be more aspirational than feasible in the context of any given design. In the Undaunted 
series this philosophy may appear to run aground. There are explicitly “bad cards” in the form of “Fog 
of War” cards. However, by design they are acquired through other performed actions and are part of the 
cost of doing something else advantageous, or are the result of an enemy action – so the design still works 
within, or at least does not contravene the essence of the philosophy.
REFERENCES
Altice, Nathan. 2016. “The Playing Card Platform.” In Analog Game Studies: Volume 1, edited by Aaron Trammell, 
Evan Torner, and Emma Leigh Waldon. ETC Press.
Cuba Libre. 2018. Rulebook. Hanford, CA: GMT Games.
Fandom.com. n.d. https://mtg.fandom.com/wiki/David_Howell Accessed November 20, 2023.
Herman, Mark. 2016. “Empire of the Sun - The Next Evolution of the Card-Driven Game Engine.” In Zones of 
Control: Perspectives on Wargaming, edited by Pat Harrigan and Matthew G. Kirschenbaum, 133–140.
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Pandemic. 2008. Rulebook. Rigaud: Canada: Z-Man Games.
War of the Ring. 1977. New York: SPI.175
11 Board Design
FOCUS DICTATES BOARD DESIGN
In historical board games, there are four broad design approaches to boards. Three of these approaches 
are concerned with mapping geographical (or interstellar) space, which we might term “types” and define 
as regulated grids, irregular areas, and point to point. The fourth broad approach is concerned with track￾ing “conceptual” elements – concepts other than primarily geospatial ones. Many board designs combine 
these conceptual elements with one of the geospatial maps (although some are purely conceptual), and 
some, more rarely, combine some of the other design approaches together. Some boards include combina￾tions of maps of different scales in order to apply the required focus across the design as a whole. David 
Thompson’s Pavlov’s House (2018) is an example of a game with three different scales all on the same 
board, ranging from an operational (or grand tactical scale), to a tactical, and a skirmish level (Pavlov’s 
House 2018). There are also rare occasions when cards or tiles function as modular and perhaps dynamic 
sub-sections of board. Where these are used (1750: Britain vs. France, or Undaunted: Normandy, for 
example), they still conform to one of these four broad design approaches.
The map type relevant for your design is related to the thesis you devise. As discussed in Chapter 8, 
the scope and scale you are working with determine the approach you will likely take with your board 
(or even if you feel you need one – perhaps you will use card tableaux or other components to create a 
playspace). A board has edges, and so it is a visual demonstration of your area of focus – both in terms 
of geography, but also conceptual concerns. If an element is not on the board in any form (or represented 
by any cards or other components ever played to the table), then it is likely not of great importance to 
your model; conversely, if it is of importance to your model, then why is there no visual representation 
of it? If players see a feature, they understand it must be important; if they get to do something with or to
something, they can be in no doubt as to its importance. When deciding what to include on your board/
map, you are making decisions relating not just to scope and scale, but also to actors, and factors, ends, 
ways, and means. As with the construction of your overall design model, what you decide to leave out of 
your board design is every bit as important as what you decide to include. The precise way you handle the 
elements you include is also significant. In your purposeful simplification, you must determine how much 
importance to assign to each element. As examples, perhaps only cities of a certain size are included, or 
only places of military significance given the subject matter. Perhaps you only show airfields and radar 
stations in a game about air combat. In any case, you are looking to include only those elements that are 
purposeful in your simplification. Everything else should be excluded.
When a project from a board game designer reaches him, artist/graphic designer Domhnall Hegarty 
speaks in terms of discerning “two paths to keep track of … UX/UI as well as trying to make it look 
pretty” (Game Design Deep Dive 2023). User Experience and User Interface design and graphic design 
aesthetics are interlinking fields of expertise not covered here, most especially not the latter. However, as 
a designer, even at an early stage in development, you are effectively engaging with UX and UI as you 
explore visual means to exert your thesis, or permit it to be tested and contested and consider how you 
will get your players to feel what you want them to feel. The UX/UI you need is whatever achieves your 
design aims.
Paper Time Machines 
DOI: 10.1201/9781003359265-13
10.1201/9781003359265-13176 Paper Time Machines 
Akin to flavor text on cards, there are non-functional elements with which you may choose to aug￾ment your board – Hegarty’s “trying to make it look pretty.” These elements – images, graphic design 
elements, historical quotations, and the like, as with all art and component choices in your game – will 
assuredly help to convey a sense of time and place to your players and assist the functioning of your paper 
time machines. However, any such elements must justify their inclusion. They should not be present at the 
expense of key functional information, nor obscure that information, nor overwhelm your players with too 
much “board clutter” that makes it hard for them to discern what is functional and what is not – which, in 
turn, impacts the clarity of the focus of your model. If you are not an artist, artists will, at an appropriate 
point in development (that is, after playtesting has settled), be able to help you with more detailed develop￾ment of UX/UI and of aesthetics.
Boards come in many different sizes. Among the most common at the time of writing are:
• 17 x 22 inches; (roughly 43 x 55.8 cm)
• 22 x 25 inches; (roughly 55.8 x 63.5 cm)
• 22 x 33 inches; (roughly 55.8 x 83.8 cm)
There are many other variations, including squares and much longer rectangles. Some boards use trian￾gles or hexagons, and some boards are modular, created by combining numerous smaller boards together. 
Some games employ double or even triple (or more) boards to cover the scope and scale and to accom￾modate the actors and factors the design requires. Ultimately, the size and shape of your board is related 
to your overall thesis and what your design is attempting to convey. Your board should be the smallest 
size that is practical to make your model function and to allow your players a pleasing experience overall 
– without frustrations at the lack of space or clarity.
Regardless of the type of map appropriate to the design, there are additional considerations with 
regard to board design, such as overall game space real estate imprint. How much space will the game 
require in addition to the board? This can include space for player boards, space for players to place played 
cards and cards “held in their hand,” rules, pieces, and player placement around the board. Will players 
be instructed to sit around the board wherever they choose, or will the board imply or directly instruct 
specific player placement? Will players be seated in such a way that corresponds with where their “home 
spaces” are or where they will likely place the majority of their units? Will players be seated around the 
board in such a way that corresponds with the sequence of play (see Chapter 16)? Are there psychological 
dynamics encoded in the game design that an instructed player placement around the board can reinforce? 
For example, Jason Carr, Director of Game Development at GMT, has spoken of the intentionality behind 
player placement around the Fire in the Lake (2014) board, where the player factions compelled to engage 
in negotiations are seated adjacent to each other (Jason Carr 2023, personal correspondence).
Following is an overview of four of the most effective approaches to board/map design. Each approach 
has different aesthetic qualities (and audience expectations) as well as different inherent attitudes towards 
time and space.
REGULATED GRID MAPS
The grid removes the need for measuring distances, since the scale is hard-baked into the playing sur￾face. A regulated grid board is a judicious design choice when fidelity to rates of movement of specific 
unit types over specific terrain types (perhaps modified by seasons and weather) is significant within the 
parameters of the designer’s overall objectives. Sometimes square grids are used, or perhaps triangles, but 
since the popular introduction of hexagons (or hexes) in 1961 with Charles S. Roberts’ second edition of 
Gettysburg, this shape has become the most common regulated grid type. Hexes have certain advantages. 
Where a grid of squares creates a problem with diagonal movement and range-finding, because they 
Board Design11 • Board Design 177
disrupt the scaling, hexes have no such drawbacks – the center of every hex is at a uniform scaling to all 
other surrounding spaces. Yet hexes do have drawbacks. They distort underlying terrain: in particular, 
there is a problem with 90-degree angles, giving buildings unnatural shapes. Movement along straight 
lines at certain angles (and along one cardinal axis) is impossible. They also reduce the board to a set of 
known, if not always speedily calculable, sets of modifiers. As has been expressed elsewhere:
Historiographically, regulated grids usually tell us space is knowable, or can be knowable, to degrees of 
detail, and has definable topographical features with calculable effects and definable meanings – such 
as production or victory point values. With regulated grids most space is traversable, to lesser or greater 
degrees, depending on the abilities of units, but context shifts the logic and relevance of occupying this 
space. Regulated grids give us space, and therefore history that can be controlled, and (at least theoreti￾cally) known in detail, with varied possibilities for navigating it.
(Suckling 2023a, 63)
Figure 11.1 shows a board with an hexagonal grid map. Aside from other player information on the board, 
such as charts, there are also two tracks for each player (for resource points and turn tracks). We might 
term these tracks “conceptual map” elements. In historical board games, it is common for boards of a 
regulated grid, irregular areas, or point-to-point maps to also utilize conceptual elements of some kind – 
most frequently tracks to mark the passage of time, or to record current resource or victory point levels. 
The convention is that only friendly units may occupy the same hex, and that adjacency permits combat 
to occur. However, games such as Frederick the Great (1975), where combat occurs between units within 
the same hex, are a reminder that there are exceptions to convention (Frederick the Great 1975).
Figure 11.2 depicts a simplification of a supplemental “Battle Board,” designed for two players, and 
dual-oriented so they face each other, with the text the right way up on the spaces relevant to the respective 
player’s units. This kind of board is used in addition to the main game board in some block games, such as 
Napoleon: The Waterloo Campaign, 1815 (1974), and Saratoga: 1777 (2017), as well as Kingmaker (1974) 
(BGG n.d. a). Players take pieces from the main game board, move them to the battle board to conduct the 
battles, and return any remaining pieces to the main game board. The battle board is generic, permitting 
any number of battles to be fought occurring in any location on the main game board. In Napoleon: The 
Waterloo Campaign, 1815 and Saratoga: 1777, the main game board uses a point-to-point map, but a simi￾lar approach combines with any map type (as in Kingmaker) where such a board is used for optional combat 
rules, to move between levels of warfare, or even levels of focus in the game. Games such as Asia Engulfed 
(2007) demonstrate a variation of the battle board, which includes boxes for screened and arriving units.
IRREGULAR AREA MAPS
Irregular areas tailor to what is known as area control. This design approach will be familiar to anyone 
who have seen Risk (1959) or Diplomacy (1959).
This design approach often retains recognizable geographical or geopolitical representations, like nations, 
and other sub- or transnational regional territories, such as mountain ranges. What matters in this design 
approach is what control of the region represents, and how regions connect within a holistic network of 
spaces.
(Suckling 2023a, 63)
This approach has the advantage of these spaces being far larger than hexes, accommodating more or 
larger pieces on the board without confusion as to their precise location. Larger pieces means more infor￾mation could be contained on them, although most often this is not the case with irregular areas, which 178 Paper Time Machines 
FIGURE 11.1 1944: Battle of the Bulge (2020). Worthington Publishing.11 • Board Design 179
tend to use miniatures (minis) for their visual appeal over more detailed unit pieces. But a drawback of 
irregular areas is the potentially arbitrary and abstract nature of the divisions with regard to movement 
parameters. Not only can units move potentially vast distances in a turn in large scale maps (while non￾phasing players must wait their turn to respond), but this can be exacerbated when (as is usually the case) 
not all regions connect to the same number of other regions, potentially distorting realities. A designer 
might legitimately counter this by ensuring that the divisions between regions are consistent with coherent 
intentions within the design itself. The Rhur might be smaller in a WWII game, perhaps paradoxically 
emphasizing its relative importance per square mile, and if the game is concerned with industrial produc￾tion output, this makes sense. Strategically creating regions with more connections to others allows the 
designer to emphasize their importance as transport hubs and so amp up their strategic value. Another 
downside of this approach is that the act of maneuvering around enemy forces is hard to convey, as when 
units move in large “clouds” and collide into other enemy “clouds” in large areas. There is less scope 
for stealth and deceit within areas. (Although Fog of War (2016) shows us there actually can be deceit, 
depending on other elements in the design.) Irregular areas tell us land can be divided in such ways as to 
denote broad strategic regional importance, either overtly dominated by cities (Diplomacy), or suggestive 
of the value of the land regardless of any explicit urban control (Quartermaster General: 1914, 2016).
Historiographically, irregular areas provide space, and again history, freed from strictly scaled distance 
measurements (asking us: why does scale matter?) that can emphasize relational qualities between places 
(showing us that relational qualities matter).
(Suckling 2023a, 63)
This approach therefore gives us history that is more abstracted yet less conformed by scale, and what it 
exchanges in detail it potentially gains in clarity of meaning. Figure 11.3 shows an example of an irregular 
area map. This board is for a naval game, so the sea areas and ports are essential for the functioning of the 
game, where the depiction of Europe helps deliver a sense of time and place. Note the inclusion of tracks 
once more, and to the right of the board, the same basic battle board concept in which pieces meeting in 
combat conduct that battle in a separate space. This is incorporated into the main board itself in a fashion 
similar to the picture-in-picture approach in visual digital arts.
POINT-TO-POINT MAPS
Point-to-point maps (sometimes point-to-point, P2P, or space-to-space) first emerged in the 1970s, but it 
was with the arrival of the Charles S. Roberts’ Award-winning A House Divided: War Between the States 
1861–1865 (1981) that the concept gained traction.
FIGURE 11.2 Depiction of a supplemental Battle Board.180 Paper Time Machines 
FIGURE 11.3 Holdfast: Atlantic 1939–45 (2016). Worthington Publishing.11 • Board Design 181
A point-to-point map distills the playable space into the key locations relevant to the topic in question – in 
wargames these are most often towns, cities, forts, places of definable strategic significance. Points are 
usually connected to each other via lines, typically representing roads, trails, railroads, and sea lanes. The 
system channels play along historically bound axes through these points. Areas of little or no historical 
relevance to the topic are absent or marginalized with few nodal connections. These maps offer markedly 
limited and knowable possibilities, distilling movement, and thus history, into definable channels of fea￾sible outcomes.
(Suckling 2023a, 64)
This approach also potentially reduces the number of units on a board by focusing only on key spaces. A 
downside is that maneuver is de-emphasized, and movement is heavily constrained. Players can reason￾ably feel the game’s abstraction is overt, with the “points” and the connections to and from them being 
aesthetically dominating, and any recognizable contextualizing shapes (like country borders or coast￾lines) can seem redundant.
Figure 11.4 is an example of a point-to-point map from the game Chancellorsville: 1863 (2020). In 
this particular design, which is at the operational level, not all points are named (other than with numbers) 
or have a definable and definitive strategic value. This is generally uncommon. Even less conventionally, 
this design to some extent emphasizes maneuver and hidden movement. The other tracks on the board 
are conceptual, tracking unit cohesion levels. Other spaces on the board are for card placement and for 
resource pools. The board also has charts to help players resolve combat.
Occasionally boards utilize tracks that function in essentially the same way as point-to-point maps, 
but the end points of the tracks carry specific meaning beyond solely geospatial representations. Good 
examples are the tracks leading to Germany and Japan in Churchill (2015), which relate to the end game 
state, and the tracks leading to defeat in States of Siege games. The tracks in Malcolm Greensmith’s The 
Battle of Balaclava (1975) and The Battle of Waterloo (1975) function to narrow the scope for maneuver 
(BGG n.d. c, d). In these games, each turn a D6 is rolled, players must choose to move one piece a cor￾responding number of spaces on one of several different tracks. Players must attempt to successfully reach 
the end of a track to remove an enemy piece while avoiding running out of track or landing on a shell blast, 
or suffer the loss of a piece.
AREA CONTROL
Within irregular grids as well as point-to-point maps, the terms “area control” or “area influence” are 
sometimes used. This design approach permits players to contest control within these spaces, not just 
between them. That is, instead of a zero-sum situation of a player’s units either controlling or not control￾ling any given space on the board, with area control more than one player may have units present in the 
same region, and thus that region may be contested. As Jonathan Rey Lee says:
Area control games depict struggles for influence or control within territories. One consequence of this 
shift is that these games are more conducive to portraying “soft power” like cultural influence … these 
games present all territories as perpetually and simultaneously contestable, a change that redirects the 
operational glance away from contested borders and towards a plurality of targets. 
(original emphasis, Lee 2023, 134–5)
GMT’s COIN series games are examples of irregular area maps integrating with the area control concept. 
GMT’s Twilight Struggle (2005) is an example of a game using point-to-point maps with area control. 
As we see in Figure 11.5 from a detail of a game in play, each “point” is a location segregated into two 
halves, wherein players place their own influence points over the course of the game, and these totals may 182 Paper Time Machines 
FIGURE 11.4 Chancellorsville: 1863 (2020). Worthington Publishing.11 • Board Design 183
increase and decrease depending on player actions. The US player places their points on the left of the 
location, and the USSR player places their points on the right.
CONCEPTUAL MAPS
Many boards of the other three types often include conceptual map elements within them. As Jonathan 
Rey Lee says, “most board games require tracking some manner of data that lend significance to player 
agency” (Lee 2023, 127). Any track or index may be a conceptual map element, representing some idea 
not necessarily related to geospatial concerns. Tracks or indexes might represent the capacity for a nation 
to wage war, or the willingness of a political opponent to resist, or their capacity to generate funding. 
FIGURE 11.5 Twilight Struggle (2005), point-to-point and area control maps. Photograph by the author.184 Paper Time Machines 
The possibilities extend far and wide, as befits your design agendas. More rarely, but far from unheard 
of, entire boards concern themselves with conceptual elements. The Paul Hellyer design Prime Minister 
(2023) is an example where the board is solely concerned with tracking non-geospatial elements, such as 
prospective votes and support across sectors of the populace for a sitting government and its opposition, 
and the relative constitution of moderates and partisan Members of Parliament within political parties. 
There is, of course, some geospatial reference, because the game is concerned with the governance of 
Britain in the Victorian era, and some voters are associated with the regions of Ireland and Scotland. 
However, the board is not tracking movement of pieces between regions, but rather tracking the fluctua￾tion of support across regions, unbounded by geospatial proximity, Instead the map operates on the axis 
of Conservative or Liberal party support relating to the success or failure of the passage of bills into law, 
and the consequences forthcoming. Conceptual elements likely have some form of relationship with geo￾graphical space, but beyond the narrative subject matter that relationship may be largely aesthetic, with 
geography assisting in conveying a sense of historical setting to players, rather than being playable in any 
sense.
Figure 11.6, Crisis: 1914 (2024) has a map of Europe as its underlay, but no pieces are moved through 
this geography. All the tracks and spaces for markers are spaces to house physical representations of 
intangible concepts, such as Prestige, Tension, Diplomatic Pressure, Initiative, and the passage of Time. 
The map underlay could be removed without any impact to the way the game functions.
The “4 box family” designs of Brian Train (which we see in his Tupamaro (2001) in Figure 11.7, as 
well as in several subsequent designs) also demonstrate conceptual maps (BGG n.d. e). This series of 
games
named because each map has four boxes on it: UG (Underground insurgents), Ops (space for operations to 
be executed by both sides), Ops Comp (where pieces are placed after completing an operation), and PTL (a 
Patrol, where static forces wander and wait). 
(Suckling 2023b, 31)
demonstrates conceptual map elements that do have a more direct reference to geography, for example, 
“Downtown,” “University,” “Shops.” However, the board and the design are so dominated by these “boxes” 
that an irregular areas categorization would be deeply misleading about how space is conceived of here.
As Train tells us:
The reason why I took this approach for Tupamaro was the extreme time and space mismatch, and the 
nature of the conflict itself. There were only a few hundred to thousand Tupamaro combatants, fighting 
against the much more numerous security forces over four years in a single city with a population of 1.5 
million. So the time, space and motion dilemmas common to most wargames did not exist, and the prize 
in the conflict was not necessarily the outright destruction of enemy forces but of allegiance of the Social 
Sector Areas which are the major divisions of the map ... “Downtown” does not mean that actual area of 
Montevideo, it represents the people who live and work there, or in that sector of the economy (Banks) or 
society (University). 
(Brian Train 2023, personal correspondence)
A visual design might map time or causality such that it bears extremely close resemblance to a point￾to-point map, tracking progress through key “nodes,” yet in such a design the geographical space is not a 
key concern and may not be represented at all. The game’s narrative might be more concerned with the 
exchange of views between historical actors and how these moments help to resolve or escalate any given 
issue. In such a case, space might be of relative unimportance perhaps because distances are short, or tele￾phones or other communication devices play a key part in the narrative, and perhaps the narrative funda￾mentally cannot develop until the historical actors exchange views and resolve or escalate any given issue.
Conceptual maps focus our attention not on geography, but on other concepts of central significance 
to the design. That said, a downside of this approach is the rendering of intangible concepts into concrete 11 • Board Design 185
FIGURE 11.6 Crisis: 1914 (2024). Worthington Publishing.186 Paper Time Machines 
terms can appear too abstract – conveying difficult and contentious concepts into numbers in various dif￾ferent geometric shapes can be potentially disengaging for an audience.
OUTLIERS
There are also numerous outliers outside of the four design approaches delineated above. In Figure 11.8, 
Kingmaker (1974, but the figure shows the 2023 edition) demonstrates a hybrid use of both irregular areas 
(even if some of the areas look closer to a regulated grid), combined with a point-to-point map through the 
road network – which allows rapid movement along entire lengths of road where all castles and towns are 
held by (or by the alliance of) the moving player.
Andean Abyss (2012) with its pipelines/lines of communication, and Gandhi: The Decolonization 
of India, 1917–1947 (2019) and its railroads are more recent examples of the hybrid use of irregular area 
maps and point-to-point maps, with the pipeline/line of communication/railroad overlaid for expedited 
movement through the irregular area space, but also potentially granting economic bonuses in return for 
control.
Three games by Rachel Simmons, Bonaparte at Marengo (2005), Napoleon’s Triumph (2007), and 
The Guns of Gettysburg (2013), appear to be conventional irregular area maps. However, closer engage￾ment with the designer’s research and process reveals something notably different. Simmons explains her 
thinking in relation to Napoleon’s Triumph (see Figure 11.9):
FIGURE 11.7 Tupamaro (2001). BTR Games.11 • Board Design 187
FIGURE 11.8 The author’s copy of Kingmaker (2023) in set-up. Photograph by the author.188 Paper Time Machines 
FIGURE 11.9 The author’s copy of Napoleon’s Triumph (2007) in set-up Photograph by the author.11 • Board Design 189
I settled on an area design. While hexes in a grid system are basically units of distance, the areas in 
Napoleon’s Triumph are basically units of time: the size of an area represents roughly how far the forces 
of the armies could move in an hour. Difficult terrain was represented by small areas and open terrain was 
represented by large areas. Further, the boundaries between the areas followed a military analysis of the 
terrain. In defining them, I looked first for the sorts of features that Napoleonic armies preferred to defend, 
with ridges, hills, streams, and towns topping the list. Where these features existed, I put area boundaries. 
After these, additional boundaries were added as needed to keep the areas at the sizes to reflect movement 
rates. In this way, the area design was, as much as possible, grown organically from the underlying terrain 
of the battlefield, rather than being an arbitrary grid imposed upon and overpowering it.
(Simmons 2016, 204)
These areas are not just irregular, and defined by their connectivity to other areas; they are regulated 
through movement rates and delineated by military analysis – by their defensibility.
In Figure 11.10, Divine Wind (forthcoming) utilizes a novel “bi-level” design approach, wherein there 
are eight Campaign Zones, and inside them 24 Operations Zones, and all of these spaces are accessible 
every turn (Frank Davis 2023, personal correspondence). In this design, a turn represents three months, 
and within that time span, it is possible for fleets to reach any destination on the board. Thus we have an 
example of a board that is clearly depicting geography (as well as some conceptual elements on the board’s 
periphery), and in some ways, we might term this a point-to-point map – units can, indeed, move from 
point to point, but because all points are always accessible to every other point, and there is no need for 
interconnecting lines, we really have something that falls outside of that categorization.
Sometimes boards are conceptual insofar as they inform players where to place cards, which carry 
the conceptual information. The board template helps players to organize the play space for ease of learn￾ing and the conduct of play. 1815: Scum of the Earth (2022) is an example of such a board.
Some boards depict the placement of units, but within designs that largely or entirely eschew the 
concept of unit movement to pull focus onto the conflict between units and meaningful player choices, so 
there may be few or no means to track movement. We might call these boards “fixed maneuver” boards. 
Examples include W1815 (2015), Freeman’s Farm: 1777 (2019), and Saladin (2022). Freeman’s Farm: 
1777 permits almost no movement, although there are exceptions. In this design, unit positions, although 
they sometimes carry modifying effects on combat, are ultimately not as important as retaining unit cohe￾sion, or depleting the unit cohesions of opposing units, which is how the game is lost or won. In any event, 
this design and other “fixed maneuver” designs frame the game at the moment the battle begins, with 
unit positions largely or entirely set. Such designs utilize boards as, in a sense, regulated opportunities 
for attack, and as a means to track losses in combat (unit formations, morale, or cohesion, for example). 
Battleship (1931) is an example of a design where unit movement does not occur, and an example of a 
board which allows players to track locations of attacks as well as combat losses.
There are also examples of boards that demarcate an area of play without strictly regulating it. The 
Wings of Glory series (2012 onward) and the Pub Battles series (2015 onward) are examples of such, and 
in some considerable regards function as miniatures games. In the case of the Wings of Glory, the play 
mats depict the ground beneath the play space, and other than circumscribing the play area and what 
constitutes being within play or out of bounds, they primarily provide evocative aesthetics rather than 
functional utility. In the case of Pub Battles, the board’s topographic features have modifying qualities 
to movement and combat, but movement is not finely regulated by the board; instead, as per a miniatures 
game, they are regulated with range sticks in conjunction with board elements.
Player Aid Cards sometimes function as additional game board real estate, allowing for additional 
tracks, diegetic information, or rule stipulations or reminders. Crisis: 1914 is an example of player aid 
cards functioning in this way. W1815 and Freeman’s Farm: 1777 use formation cards which carry specific 
information relating to the use of the formations, and in the latter case also carry information relating to 
each unit’s morale. In effect, these cards are extensions of the board.
We also sometimes see what can be termed “double boards,” or “recessed boards,” which permit 
players to place game components within recessed spaces – to help offset the possibility of accidental 190 Paper Time Machines 
FIGURE 11.10 Divine Wind (forthcoming). Permission granted from Frank Davis.11 • Board Design 191
misplacement, but also to further create a sense of the material presence of any given marker and there￾fore what feelings this might convey to the players. Matthias Cramer’s Weimar: The Fight for Democracy 
(2023) is an example of such a board, with numerous recess slots.
The board you need is the one that is a feedback system for your core concepts, so players understand 
how they are progressing toward their goals and what the consequences of their actions might be. This 
might dictate any combination of approaches within the same physical board. The execution of these ideas 
is a specialized skill balancing functional with aesthetic concerns. Do not be despondent if such skill is 
beyond you. This is what board game artists do.
REFERENCES
1815: Scum of the Earth. 2022. Orlando, FL: Tristan Hall.
BGG. n. d. a. “Kingmaker.” https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/987/kingmaker Accessed May 15, 2024.
BGG. n. d. b. “A House Divided: War Between the States 1861-65.” https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/701/a
-house-divided-war-between-the-states-1861-65 Accessed May 16, 2024.
BGG. n. d. c. “The Battle of Waterloo.” https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/20293/the-battle-of-waterloo
Accessed May 16, 2024.
BGG. n. d. d. “The Battle of Balaclava.” https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/11936/the-battle-of-balaclava
Accessed May 16, 2024.
BGG. n. d. e. “Tupamaro.” https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/7448/tupamaro Accessed May 16, 2024.
Chancellorsville: 1863. 2020. Virginia Beach, VA: Worthington Publishing.
Crisis: 1914. 2024. Virginia Beach, VA: Worthington Publishing.
Fog of War. 2016. Boynton Beach, FL: Stronghold Games.
Freeman's Farm: 1777. 2019. Virginia Beach, VA: Worthington Publishing.
Frederick the Great: The Campaigns of the Soldier King 1756-1759. 1975. Baltimore, MD: Avalon Hill.
Game Design Deep Dive. 2023. “Interview with Domhnall Hegarty.” https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/inter￾view-with-domhnall-hegarty/id1625912406?i=1000629942489 Accessed January 22, 2024.
Kingmaker. 2023. Sutton: Gibsons.
Lee, Jonathan Rey. 2023. “Deterritorializing Game Boards: Mapping Imperialism in RISK and Modern Board 
Games.”– In Material Game Studies: A Philosophy of Analogue Play, edited by Chloé Germain and Paul 
Wake, 123–42. London: Bloomsbury Academic.
Napoleon's Triumph. 2006. Sunnyvale, CA: Simmons Games.
Pavlov's House. 2018. Upland, CA: DVG.
Prime Minister. 2023. Hanford, CA: GMT Games.
Simmons, Rachel. 2016, “Goal-Driven Design and Napoleon’s Triumph.” In Zones of Control: Perspectives on 
Wargaming, edited by Pat Harrigan and Matthew G. Kirschenbaum. 201–207. Cambridge, MA: The MIT 
Press.
Suckling, Maurice W. 2023a. “Historiography in Space: Approaches in Commercial Wargame Board Design.” –In 
Playing Place: Board Games, Popular Culture, Space, edited by Chad Randl and Medina Lasansky, 61–5. 
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Suckling, Maurice W. 2023b. “Design Elements in Postcolonial Commercial Historical Board Wargames.” –In 
Heritage, Memory and Identity in Postcolonial Board Games, edited by Michal Mochocki, 26–44. London 
and New York: Routledge.
Twilight Struggle: The Cold War 1945-1989. 2005. Hanford, CA: GMT Games.
Weimar: The Fight for Democracy. 2023. Cincinnati, OH: Capstone Games.192
12 Development and 
Publication
DEVELOPMENT
What is rendered here in one relatively brief chapter might be covered more thoroughly in an entire book 
dedicated to the subject of development, and in an entirely other book dedicated to publishing (and then 
another again about self-publishing). The intention here is to attempt a whistle-stop tour of the topic 
instead of circumventing it entirely. Chapter 7 explored processes that position developers to achieve their 
desired results; however, experienced designers earn an appreciation that game development entails a 
substantial amount of exploration, and dispel the notion that flawless execution of careful planning neces￾sarily achieves successful results. Game development involves many discoveries (often unexpected ones), 
some which do not emerge until prototypes are built and played. (See SD HistCon 2023a for a deeper 
discussion on this topic.)
DOCUMENTATION
As a design coalesces, you move closer to being able to create a prototype. As this happens, and you feel 
sufficiently clear in your thinking and the research foundations underpinning it, you must create docu￾mentation to keep track of development. It is strongly advised that you write rules early in development. 
Writing your thoughts down is beneficial, not only for tracking them, but also sanity checking them. If 
they are taking a long time to explain, especially to yourself, you may have introduced unnecessary com￾plications that will be a barrier to accessibility. Or perhaps you simply have something that takes some 
time to explain, but you need to be certain you can justify the space taken to do so. It is important to 
generate notes in a sufficiently clear format such that you are able to follow them even if you spend several 
days, weeks, months, or perhaps even years away from them. In time, notes will give way to the writing 
of more formal rules, and there is much to say on that particular topic.
In addition to notes and proto-rules, other important documentation includes keeping track of com￾ponents, research sources, marketing-related material (such as copy or images), and card manifests. There 
are many ways to organize this type of information. One is to divide the documentation into a public￾facing rules document to be kept as current as time and other commitments permit, and a secondary 
non-public-facing document in which notes (including design and historical notes), ideas, links, images, 
and other project-related material can all be generated and stored. If designing with cards, it is necessary 
to keep track of card manifests. Such information might be placed in the appendix of either the public or 
non-public-facing document, or in a document of its own. It is recommended to keep track of manifests in 
spreadsheet or table form (some publishers work in this format, so having the table ready will help them). 
Ultimately, an artist and/or publisher will want access to this information.
Paper Time Machines Development and Publication
DOI: 10.1201/9781003359265-14
10.1201/9781003359265-1412 • Development and Publication 193
Development and Publication
Table 12.1 is an example of a card manifest (taken from the game Crisis: 1914). It shows the first five 
Austro-Hungarian cards, from a deck of 24. In this format, the cards can be checked and updated during 
development. The reference column with a card identifier number may appear superfluous, since it doesn’t 
carry essential information for players. However, it is an efficient means to reference specific cards dur￾ing development as well as after publication. More columns could be added to track more variables (such 
as hyperlinks to images, or for tracking the production pipeline), and color-coding could be applied for 
greater clarity to help distinguish between card types or effects.
RULES
Writing rules is often a considerable challenge. It is easy for designers to assume knowledge players don’t 
have when writing rules, and often difficult for designers to realize they are making these assumptions. 
The three common ways to address this are to rewrite with a fresh head (with some time away from the 
game), to have someone else write the rules, and to test the effectiveness of the rules you have through 
“blind playtesting” and make amendments accordingly. “Blind playtesting” is a term in common use in 
the hobby (Woodruff 2011, 101; Pulsipher 2012, 154; BGG 2013; Slack 2017, 135–8) to mean playtesting 
done not in the presence of the designer or someone else capable of explaining it, and so these playtesters 
must rely purely on the rules supplied with the prototype copy. These are not mutually exclusive and might 
all be applied to the same set of rules. Of these, the third approach is perhaps the most dependable (subject 
to the players), especially if the feedback is thorough and astute.
When writing rules, it is important to recognize that they are read by players in two primary ways: 
sequentially the first time as players are learning the game, and after that, non-sequentially as reference 
material for targeted reading of specific sections. This means that concepts need to be structured in such 
TABLE 12.1 Card Manifest Example.
# VALUE TEXT RET, P OR R 
DISCARD
01 0 Summer Harvest Leave
Austro-Hungarian troops are not available for mobilization.
In Week 2, instead of the First Draw Step, play this card to your Tableau.
Ultimatum
If Summer Harvest Leave and The Kaiser’s Blank Cheque are both 
Permanent Discards, shuffle Ultimatum into your Draw Pile.
P
02 4 Biliński
Leon Biliński, Finance Minister
Assertion
x2 Prestige if you have 4+ Assertion cards on your Tableau.
R
03 1 The Emperor
Franz Joseph I of Austria, King of Hungary
Consensus
For every 2 Consensus cards on your Tableau you may play +1 card to it.
R
04 3 Stürgkh
Count Karl von Stürgkh, Austrian Prime Minister
Assertion
x2 Prestige if you have 4+ Assertion cards on your Tableau.
R
05 2 Burián
Baron Stephan Burián von Rajecz, Minister Besides The King of Hungary
Consensus
For every 2 Consensus cards on your Tableau you may play +1 card to it.
R194 Paper Time Machines 
a way that they facilitate some causal flow for ease of first reading but cannot be dependent on that flow 
on subsequent readings. Star Wars: Rebellion (2016) takes the approach of splitting the rules into two 
booklets: one that explicitly teaches play (and so is read sequentially) and one that is explicitly a reference 
guide (and so is structured non-sequentially). In addition, rules may be read in three other contexts beyond 
learning the game: to learn the game to teach it to others; to understand the game not necessarily to play 
but to achieve a degree of comprehension about it; or as a means to help define the game according to its 
rules (Carr 2023). These differing contexts apply different pressures on rules documentation.
Rules should perhaps be structured with an initial introduction to core components and concepts and 
explain conditions for winning the game. They must clearly explain key terminology, including concepts 
such as movement, combat, actions, morale, supply, prestige, influence, tension, etc., followed by instruc￾tions on setting up, and then structured around the sequence of play, with the intention of aligning player 
exposure to core concepts in the rules with their chronological exposure to them while playing the game 
– helping a rough mind map coordination.
Alternatively, rules might move from an introduction and a survey of components straight into set￾ting up, and then a sequence of play, and then carry discussions about key concepts within the flow of 
the sequence of play. Yet another approach is to provide a brief summary of play at the beginning of the 
rules, outlining the sequence of play of a typical round, to give players a fast and rough idea of how the 
game works.
Jesse Ross suggests six key sections will usually help to structure any board game ruleset:
1. Intro
2. Objective
3. Setup
4. Gameplay
5. Game End
6. Player Aids (Jesse Ross, 2021)
To Ross, “Gameplay” is synonymous with how the game is played and the sequence of play. We might 
add to these six points additional elements such as a section for the game credits, and a section for design 
and historical notes, although some rulesets splice design and historical notes within the body of the rules, 
either in addition to or instead of a larger section elsewhere in the rulebook.
Anecdotally, from experience teaching games in various educational and recreational contexts to a 
variety of audiences, mentioning how to win earlier in a rulebook, or within the teaching of a game, car￾ries the advantage of generally engaging the attention of the audience.
In any event, rules require thoughtful information mapping to help players navigate their way through 
them. Designer Frank Davis tells us:
A game rulebook without a good information strategy is like a stairwell without handrails. Better yet, use 
notched handrails so even a blind person can foresee the steps … When you enter a tall building, you consult 
the floor directory in the lobby, which functions like a Table of Contents in the front of a rulebook. But inter￾estingly, the floor number is usually shown prominently on the stairwell door of the elevator landing wall. 
Usually there’s another sign in that area that directs you to the lower numbered rooms in one direction and the 
higher numbered rooms in the opposite direction. And that’s not all. Each door on the floor begins with the 
floor number. That’s an example of user-friendly information mapping that’s missing from our game rules.
(Frank Davis 2023, personal correspondence)
Davis observation evokes early hobby rulebook conventions of a numbering format that runs to numbered 
subsections – rule 1.1.1.1, for example – and although this convention may be favored by some players, 
it is not a convention we see maintained in the current shape of the industry. However, this is not what 
Davis appears to be advocating. Rather, he is urging designers to think more carefully about structuring 
and signposting within rulesets.12 • Development and Publication 195
Ibrahim Yucel reminds us of the utility of “chunking,” as “one of the simplest and most common 
ways of taking complex sets of rules and organizing them to make them easier to memorize and reference” 
(Yucel 2016, 169). William Lidwell, Kritina Holden, and Jill Butler define “chunks” as:
a unit of information in short-term memory – a string of letters, a word, or a series of numbers. The tech￾nique of chunking seeks to accommodate short-term memory limits by formatting information into a small 
number of units. The maximum number of chunks that can be efficiently processed by short-term memory 
is four, plus or minus one.
(Lidwell, Holden, and Butler 2010, 40)
Others have delved more extensively into the topic of rules writing, and it deserves a more thorough 
examination than is given here (see Slack 2017, 131–4; Delwood 2019.)
But let us add three rules of thumb: use unified terminology, use capitalization with caution, and 
be consistent. In the process of designing a game, some concepts or components might have become 
known by various terms, and this may happen quite organically. But rules are clearer where one term is 
identified for one concept and/or component and used throughout. It can be helpful to capitalize proper 
nouns and key terms, but only apply this rule if you think there is good reason to – perhaps your use of 
the term is specific and moves away from how the word is generally understood. Be consistent with your 
formatting choices – this applies to unified terminology, capitalization, and other grammatical or format 
choices, such as font selection, or the use of italics or colored text for examples or design, or historical 
notes.
PROTOTYPE
Creating a playable prototype is no small matter. Reiner Knizia’s advice from Chapter 7 is well grounded 
– it’s faster and easier to design in your mind, up to a point. But without a playable prototype, you don’t 
have a game, you just have the ideas for and prospects of a game. As we shall see, even with an early pro￾totype, you may still be a considerable distance from a prototype that conveys the game you were trying 
to make and delivers on that promise.
A physical prototype may still be the preferred format for many designers, players, and publishers. 
However, there are significant advantages to developing a digital prototype: remote access for publishers 
and game competitions; a broader pool of playtesters; updates are likely faster and easier to accommodate 
(no whole new set of cards need to be printed and shipped); and it can speed transition from prototype to 
publication (in terms of art assets). Even so, digital development is no small matter, and playing through a 
digital format can still feel like playing board games while wearing oven gloves.
TESTING AND ITERATING
With a playable prototype, you can test your design. No matter how well you have designed in your head, 
how pleased you are with your design documentation, and regardless of how experienced you are, you 
should assume the testing will spark significant changes to your design. Indeed, the more experienced you 
become, the more you are likely to understand that testing is really developing the game. Imagine a pot￾ter’s wheel. The wet clay is the prototype, and through the act of testing, the clay is formed into a shape 
first intended. As testing continues, a new design emerges with your hands on the clay once you have a 
better grasp of what is possible.196 Paper Time Machines 
Indeed, the centrality of testing and iterating to the design process – in large part to being the design 
process – is something we sketched out from numerous sources in Chapter 7. But let us reemphasize it 
again here and say something about how it might be approached. Joe Slack presents what he calls “The 4 
I’s Framework” approach (Figure 12.1) and explains it thus:
1. Inquire through playtesting
2. Identify any problems
3. Illuminate potential solutions
4. Iterate and revise your game 
First you must inquire. By this, I am referring to running your playtest and observing the results.
Next, identify any problems by asking your playtesters for feedback. Determine what didn’t work and 
what aspects of your game could have been improved. Remember, we’re looking to first identify problems 
rather than solutions. This is a key distinction.
Third, you will try to illuminate potential solutions by brainstorming a number of ideas, either by your￾self or with the help of the other designers or playtesters.
Fourth, you will iterate. By this, I mean that you will select the best option from these potential solutions 
to test and make a revision to your game, which you will turn playtest again. 
(Slack 2017, 106, original emphasis retained throughout)
As with the other development process models we sketched out in Chapter 7, this “loop” can be longer or 
shorter (or, more often, longer or even longer) depending on the design in question, the problems detected, 
the inclinations of the designer and publishers, and the time permitted for this loop to be repeated. Some 
designs never leave this loop and never progress to publication.
Slack also offers the advice of beginning playtesting either on your own, or with just one other per￾son. This enables the designer to be flexible and prepared to let go of ideas. It also allows you to be wary 
of making your game different but not necessarily better by affecting various changes. The process is 
enhanced by changing one thing at a time, before re-implementing and re-testing, and to continuously be 
taking notes throughout development (Slack 2017, 107–27).
Teeuwynn Woodruff distinguishes between five different kinds of playtesting:
• A developmental playtest is a playtest before the rules are finalized … These playtests don’t 
worry about conveying how to play the game; instead we’re concerned only with if the game 
plays well …
• A hand-taught playtest is a better way to test how the game itself is playing. Here, you …
recruit people in the target demographic …
• [A] blind playtest [is] when the game is very close to finished. A blind playtest involves a num￾ber of people in the target demographic for the game, with no association to the game or its 
creators, playing the game as if they had just bought it at a store …
FIGURE 12.1 Joe Slack’s 4 I’s Framework.12 • Development and Publication 197
• [A] double-blind playtest [is a session] where even the person running the session doesn’t know 
how to play the game …
• A … focus group playtest … [is] a carefully selected group of people in your target demographic.
(original emphasis, Woodruff 2011, 100–1)
These distinctions can be helpful for designers to consider as they move through a production schedule 
into publication.
Lewis Pulsipher gives the following time estimates in relation to tabletop game design:
• 10%, conception and pre-production
• 10%, creating playable prototype(s)
• 40%, playtesting and modifying to get something that “works”
• 40%, playtesting and modifying to get something that’s good (Pulsipher 2012, 24)
Historical games, requiring deep research, can skew these statistics considerably in the conception and 
pre-production phases. In any case, Pulsipher references Reiner Knizia’s view that the difficult part of 
game development is the “final 20%,” that takes a game from being an “80%” game to a “100% game.” 
Pulsipher’s first playtesting and modifying stage, where the design “works” he equates with being at what 
Knizia describes as the “80%” stage (Pulsipher 2012, 24). The point being how much time on a project 
is consumed by playtesting, and how much playtesting defines and shapes the original ideas and early 
development.
PLAYER ENGAGEMENT
Through testing, you will acquire feedback relating to player engagement. Some of this engagement con￾cerns what Jason Carr refers to as “usability” – testing that players are manipulating components with 
sufficient ease to match design intentions (Carr 2021, 41).
Justin Gary tells us player engagement in board games is typically lost due to one of three reasons:
1. Too much downtime
2. The game is too difficult or too easy
3. The player no longer feels he or she can win (Gary 2018, 177)
Downtime can be reduced by shorter turns, and by considering ways for players not taking their turns to 
remain engaged in the game. Perhaps there are actions they can take to interrupt an active player, per￾haps decisions the active player makes can be profoundly disruptive to ongoing plans a non-active player 
has, and perhaps there are too many decisions players are making that have too small an impact on the 
development of the game (often called “grind” in video games). Rachel Simmons, referring specifically 
to analog wargames, tells us:
I had come to conceive of a game as being like a machine to translate the player’s decisions into physical 
reality. An important measure of the quality of the machine was its efficiency. The path between intent and 
reality should be as short and direct as possible. 
(Simmons 2016, 202–3)
Adjusting difficulty may relate to several aspects of the game. The game might be too hard to learn, or 
too easy to master, or its difficulty curve might be too imbalanced to hold player engagement. It might be 198 Paper Time Machines 
too hard for one side if the game has any kind of asymmetry to it – or perhaps too hard for either side for 
different reasons. We will look more closely at balancing later in this chapter.
Gary suggests four approaches to reducing the certainty of outcomes:
1. Comeback Mechanics
2. Random End Game
3. Hidden Information
4. Negative Feedback Loop (Gary 2018, 181–3)
The first three of these are self-explanatory – ways for trailing players to catch up that do not entirely 
negate the progress a winning player has made to date; ways of the game’s ending being unpredictable, 
even if its likelihood is increasing over time, thus aiding tension, but making the actual end point uncer￾tain; and players not having perfect information over who is winning (mechanics like secret objectives 
are an example of this approach). By a negative feedback loop, Gary means mechanics within your design 
that explicitly work against a leader’s advantage. In the game Diplomacy, for example, other players have 
the capacity to negotiate a combined response to a leader to curtail that leader’s advantage (unless they 
have waited too long).
Alex Knight’s Land and Freedom (2023), a three-player coopetition game about the Spanish Civil 
War, is an example of a game that addresses three (arguably all four) issues in a single (albeit nested) 
design element: the “Bag of Glory.” This design is worthy of some focus. Whoever has the most of their 
own tokens on the nine Glory spaces on the board at the end of the game is the winner (unless everyone 
loses to the Fascists, controlled by the game system). Players begin the game with one of their own tokens 
in the bag. They contribute tokens to that bag over the course of the game – at the end of every game 
“turn” and, additionally, at the end of each “Year” (four rounds of each player taking one turn each in 
each Year, and three Years in the game). Players can usually only contribute their token to the bag if they 
possess what is termed “the Initiative.” Initiative is won in accordance with the placement of markers on 
five intersecting tracks on the board: Liberty, Collectivization, Government, Soviet Support, and Foreign 
Aid. Players attempt to balance fighting the Fascists for their collective benefit while manipulating the 
tracks for their own singular benefit.
At the end of Year 1, a single token is pulled from the bag and placed on a Glory space. At the end of 
Year 2, two tokens are pulled from the bag and placed on a Glory space. At the end of Year 3, there is a 
Final Bid where players discard cards to compete for a definitive spot on the Glory space, and five other 
tokens are drawn from the bag.
In some sense, this delivers a hidden information mechanic because players cannot look inside the 
opaque bag, and they cannot be sure what token they will be drawing from it at any time. Players could, 
without much difficulty, keep track of how many tokens each player has in the bag at any particular time, 
so this does not classify as what many designers would likely consider to be actual hidden information. 
The probabilities are always clear, but the certainty of winning is not because winning is determined 
through those probabilities.
There is game end randomness here. The game can end suddenly, by a loss to the Fascists – a loss 
for everyone. If this does not happen, there is also game end randomness related to who will win. There 
are evident probabilities involved as the bag fills with different numbers of tokens belonging to different 
players. This incentivizes players to play well, that is, to secure the Initiative with a frequency. Yet so long 
as you have some tokens in the bag you still believe – rightly – that you have a chance of winning, or, at 
the very least, the winner, even if it is not you, is not necessarily certain.
There are also comeback mechanics here. If players fail to add an Initiative token into the bag, they 
are awarded Hero Points, which is a subsystem affording various benefits and additional actions, thus 
failing to increase the probability that you will win becomes tied to a comeback mechanic helping you in 
the next sequence of play.
There is a negative feedback loop here too, within the structure of the game’s coopetition dynamics. 
The player who is winning is most invested in not losing the game to the Fascists, and so more inclined to 12 • Development and Publication 199
use their turn to fight the Fascists. However, this means that the winning player is less likely to be manipu￾lating the aforementioned tracks on the board – the ones that will help them win Initiative. At the same 
time, losing players are less likely to contribute to fighting against the Fascists and more likely to use their 
turns manipulating those tracks to win the Initiative. Thus, winning generates a negative feedback loop 
which ties back into the comeback mechanics (Land and Freedom 2023, 2–10). It would be a disservice 
to the designer to suggest this design approach was necessarily solely reactive to and addressing playtest 
issues and not more systematically contemplated. After all, all these design elements assist the coherence 
of a thesis (cooperation is essential, but problematic) and through that a fraught emotional experience for 
players (torn by conflicting bifurcating agendas).
BALANCING
When we think of the balance of a game, we tend to think in terms of the balance between objects 
(such as cards) valued appropriately, given their relative costs (Engelstein 2023a). Further, Ian Schreiber 
and Brenda Romero in Game Balance (2022) identify seven different kinds of balance for designers to 
consider:
• Mathematical Balance. In most contexts, when designers or players refer to a game’s balance, 
they are referring to something mathematical, whether it be a level curve, the cost of items, hit 
points, or the rarity of an object …
• Balanced Difficulty. The progression of difficulty over time is referred to as a difficulty curve. In 
general, difficulty scales over the course of the game experience to provide continuous challenge 
for the player as they grow in skill …
• Balanced Progression. Progression is defined as the rate at which the player passes through the 
power, difficulty, narrative, or gameplay ramp of the game. Progression is balanced when the 
player is neither stagnated nor rushed through play …
• Balanced Initial Conditions … we call a game balanced if all players have a similar chance to 
win when the game starts, assuming equal player skill …
• Balance between Multiple Strategies … the game is balanced if each strategy can be viable and 
competitive with other strategies, given equal player skill …
• Balance between Game Objects. Within a game, we may also describe individual game objects 
as balanced or unbalanced … a game object [is] a single item in one of the game’s systems: an 
individual card … a particular unit … a single tech in a tech tree …. a single character … An 
individual object is balanced with respect to other objects if everything about it is in aggregate 
(its stats, cost, rarity, strengths, weaknesses, and so in) is comparable to other objects in aggre￾gate, with reasonable tradeoffs between them …
• Balance as Fairness. The common thread with each of these elements is the concept of fairness. 
A balanced game is one that feels fair to players. (Schreiber and Romero 2022, 5–9)
Geoff Engelstein offers insightful thoughts on the balance between game objects and provides advice on 
applying conversions between objects and considering balance with regard to time – that is how often a 
game object (a card, perhaps) might be used before the end of the game and using this as a measure to 
help determine its value. See Engelstein 2023b for a full discussion. With regard to balanced progression, 
Engelstein notes:
I refer to this more as “pacing”. Does the game advance in a smooth way? It doesn’t need to be linear – 
where every stage takes exactly the same amount. In fact, controlling this is an important and challenging 
design decision. In an engine building game you want players to have the chance to play with their ‘toys’ 
- I’ve played too many games that end just as things are getting interesting. Yet if turns get more complex 
later in the game you don’t want it to drag out either. Wingspan handles this in an interesting way by deal￾ing with the increasing complexity by reducing the number of actions, balancing things out, at least from 200 Paper Time Machines 
a time perspective. Through the Ages quickens the pace by giving players more actions and larger hand 
sizes, which accelerates how fast cards are drawn (the Age timer).
(Engelstein 2023a)
For designers of historical games, all these forms of balance are potentially problematic. Few, if any, situations 
in history afford balanced conditions in any – let alone all – of the areas described above. History is almost 
always imbalanced in difficulty, progression (or pacing), and initial conditions with respect to its individual ele￾ments in aggregate with others. History, like life, is anything but “fair.” Yet designers can – and do – embrace 
the asymmetries in the history they depict to evoke historical texture, and to simulate the essence of the histori￾cal situation concerned. This doesn’t mean balance doesn’t matter. Rather, it means there is yet another form 
of balance historical game designers are working with – balancing specific and interrelated design elements 
with history. Even here they are balancing between the historical record, their own research, and historical 
memory – which may not all be pulling in the same direction, and quite possibly in conflicting ones. This is 
no straightforward task. Even if we aspire to follow Jason Matthews’ advice from Chapter 2, “truth is the best 
defense when tackling sensitive subjects” (SD HistCon 2023b), and apply it as a design principle when engag￾ing with history in every respect, it can be hard to ascertain what that even is. As highlighted in Chapter 3, the 
defunct equation of facts + interpretation = history can lead to uncomfortable, albeit unavoidable compro￾mises between playability and historicity. We will return to this topic in Chapter 21.
PUBLISHER PITCH
When first approaching a publisher, it is generally advisable to send a brief (paragraph long) introduction 
about yourself, and a brief (paragraph long) introduction about your game. In that second paragraph, it is 
helpful to place your game in some kind of context, not only describing your game’s subject matter, but 
also where the game sits within the context of the hobby. How is it similar to existing games, and how does 
it differ? What unique or distinct contributions does your game offer?
If publishers like the sound of your game, they will typically ask to see rules and a prototype. They 
may also ask if you will be attending upcoming conventions with a view to meeting you there and have 
you demo the game for them.
CONTRACTS
If a publisher sufficiently likes what you have, perhaps with recommendations for changes that they stipu￾late, they will prepare a contract. Contracts generally specify designer royalties in the range of 4–8% of 
net sales excluding translations (at the time of writing). Contracts may include provisions for a payment 
advance, and/or payment for the supply of a prototype, they may stipulate minimum print runs, and will 
likely include the purchase of the game rights in physical form as well as digital adaptations. Rights gener￾ally return to the designer after a certain period of inactivity (no sales) for that design.
PUBLICATION
Prior to and after publication, there are a number of tasks to address. These might vary in kind and detail 
depending on the mode of publication (self-publication, print and play (PnP), or with a publisher), and 12 • Development and Publication 201
can also vary depending on the specific publisher. In general, there are tasks relating to preparing the 
prototype, rules, and other files for publication. These must then be edited and rechecked during and after 
the involvement of artists and/or graphic designers, rules editors, playtesters, and other personnel con￾nected with the publisher. Some of these are tasks Jason Carr refers to as concerned with “completeness” 
(Carr 2021, 40). There are many tasks related to supporting the game, including website copy, copy for 
Kickstarter or similar sites, sourcing images for a website to support the game, conducting interviews, 
writing other articles related to the game, and helping with or making video content. Post publication, 
you may be required to continue helping to promote the game, or to assist in answering rules queries or 
supporting the community of players in other ways.
REFERENCES
BGG. 2013. “How Do You Go about Blind-playtesting?” June 11, 2013. https://boardgamegeek.com/thread/989999/
how-do-you-go-about-blind-playtesting Accessed July 19, 2023.
Carr, Jason. 2021. “What is Game Development?” C3i. Nr. 35, March 8, 2021, 40–1.
Carr, Jason. 2023. “The Four Needs of a Ruleset.” SD HistCon.
Delwood, Robert. 2019. “Writing War Gaming Rules Correctly.” July 7, 2019. https://robertdelwood.medium.com/
writing-war-gaming-rules-correctly-43e0428fd966 Accessed July 19, 2023.
Engelstein, Geoff. 2023a. “Balancing Act.” March 28, 2023. https://gametek.substack.com/p/balancing-act Accessed 
July 19, 2023.
Engelstein, Geoff. 2023b. “Balance Part 2.” April 1, 2023. https://gametek.substack.com/p/balance-part-2 Accessed 
July 19, 2023.
Gary, Justin. 2018. Think Like a Game Designer: The Step-by-Step Guide to Unlocking Your Creative Potential.
Lake Placid, NY: Aviva Publishing.
Jesse Ross. 2021. “How To Write a Rulebook - Designing a New Board Game.” January 13, 2021. https://www.you￾tube.com/watch?v=eaayIuMtAfQ&t=159s Accessed November 22, 2023.
Land and Freedom. 2023. Murfreesboro, TN: Blue Panther LLC.
Lidwell, William, Kritina Holden, and Jill Butler. 2010. Universal Principles of Design: 125 Ways to Enhance 
Usability, Influence, Perception, Increase Appeal, Make Better Design Decisions, and Teach through Design. 
2nd ed. Minneapolis, MN: Rockport Publishers.
Pulsipher, Lewis. 2012. Game Design: How To Create Video and Tabletop Games, Start to Finish. Jefferson, NC and 
London: McFarland & Company Inc.
Schreiber, Ian, and Brenda Romero. 2022. Game Balance. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
Slack, Joe. 2017. The Board Game Designer’s Guide. Toronto, Canada: Joe Slack.
SD HistCon. 2023a. “Suckling, Maurice. W. Designing Crisis: 1914; The Meandering Path of Development.” In 
SDHistCon, July 17 2023. https://sdhist.com/maurice-suckling-designing-crisis-1914/ Accessed July 19, 2023.
SD HistCon. 2023b. ““Designer Roundtable: Gaming the Unpleasant – SDHist.” April 19 2023 Accessed July 1, 
2023.
Simmons, Rachel. 2016. “Goal-Driven Design and Napoleon’s Triumph.” In Zones of Control: Perspectives on 
Wargaming, edited by Pat Harrigan and Matthew G. Kirschenbaum, 201–207.Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Woodruff, Teeuwynn. 2011. “It’s Not Done Till They Say It’s Done.” In Kobold Guide to Board Game Design, edited 
by Mike Selinker. Kirkland, Washington: Open Design.
Yucel, Ibrahim. 2016. “Rules for Writing Rules: How Instructional Design Impacts Good Game Design.” In Analog 
Game Studies, edited by Aaron Trammell, Evan Torner, and Emma Leigh Waldron., 167–173. ETC Press.PART 3
Designing Historical 
Board Wargames
DESIGNING HISTORICAL BOARD WARGAMES
10.1201/9781003359265-15DESIGNING HISTORICAL BOARD WARGAMES205
13 Historical Board 
Wargame Design
Reference Books and 
Conventions Overview
INTRODUCTION
Part Two of this volume has already referenced some broad design considerations for designing an histori￾cal board wargame. Some of those considerations were sufficiently broad that they can apply generally to 
any kind of board game design. Other considerations, such as the nature of the board design, are of more 
direct relevance to historical board games. There is, however, far more to say when focusing specifically 
on board wargames. At the time of writing there are over 60 years of design conventions to be aware of 
across all aspects of design, covering multiple levels of warfare, spanning all historical eras, and includ￾ing a variety of scales, player count, complexity, and models. These conventions are not static, as they 
constantly evolve and blend with other design ideas, destabilizing conventions and becoming their own 
new trajectories. Indeed, a comprehensive discussion of the evolution of these design conventions could 
fill multiple volumes.
REFERENCE BOOKS
We do have a small but growing number of books on wargame theory and design that serve a general 
audience; however, where they address the designer, they tend to focus on a professional and sometimes 
generalist wargamer audience, rather than specifically a board wargame designer audience. Some of the 
better known and more recent titles in this area are Wargames: From Gladiators to Gigabytes (2013) 
by Martin van Creveld, Simulating War: Studying Conflict through Simulation Games (2014) by Philip 
Sabin, On Wargaming (2019) by Matthew B. Caffrey, Wargaming Experiences: Soldiers, Scientists and 
Civilians (2020), and Wargaming Discussions (2023) by Natalia Wojtowicz, and John Curry’s edited 
Successful Professional Wargames: A Practitioner’s Handbook (2023).
We have wargame design books from the miniatures tradition – with a large bibliography from the 
1960s onward from Donald Featherstone, Paddy Griffiths, Bruce Quarrie, Charles Grant, and Charles 
S. Grant, as well as other foundational authors such as Tony Bath. This tradition has transitioned from a 
wide tidal river into more of a stream, but it assuredly continues. More recent work includes Henry Hyde’s 
The Wargaming Compendium (2013), Neil Thomas’ One Hour Wargames (2014), Rick Priestley and John 
Lambshead’s Tabletop Wargames: A Designers’ and Writers’ Handbook (2016), Bob Cordery’s edited 
The Portable Wargame Compendium (2017 onward), and the publications from Osprey Publishing and 
Paper Time Machines 
DOI: 10.1201/9781003359265-16
10.1201/9781003359265-16206 Paper Time Machines 
Reference Books and Conventions Overview
Pen & Sword, among others. These titles tend to be about using the design parameters set out within the 
books to design one’s own scenarios, rather than designing one’s own design parameters; when this is not 
the case, they are (naturally) focused on miniatures systems.
There are also relevant books directly concerned with board wargames – such as Nicholas Palmer’s 
The Comprehensive Guide to Board Wargaming (1977), The Best of Board Wargaming (1980), and the 
significantly more recent The Sword and The Hexagon (2024) from Riccardo Masini – which come from 
the perspective of players and commentators steeped in the hobby’s history.
If we exclude titles dedicated purely to the design of digital games, we do find some intending to 
serve both board game and digital game designers. Prominent examples here include James F. Dunnigan’s 
The Complete Wargames Handbook (1992 onward), Chris Crawford’s On Game Design (2003), Lewis 
Pulsipher’s Game Design: How to Create Video and Tabletop Games, Start to Finish (2012), and George 
Phillies’ Designing Wargames: Introduction (2014). George Phillies, we should note, has also published 
titles on tabletop game analysis, such as Stalingrad Replayed (2013), on the 1963 Avalon Hill game.
We also have titles that are focused on board game design in general and/or applicable to historical 
board game development in general ways, such as George D. J. Phillies’ and Tom Vasel’s, Contemporary 
Perspectives on Game Design (2006), Mike Selinker’s edited Kobold Guide to Board Game Design 
(2011), Greg Costikyan and Drew Davidson’s Tabletop: Analog Game Design (2011), Stewart Woods’ 
Eurogames: The Design, Culture and Play of Modern European Board Games (2012), George Phillies’ 
and Tom Vasel’s Modern Perspectives on Game Design (2012), Geoffrey Engelstein’s Gametek: The 
Math and Science of Gaming (2017), Jeff Warrender’s You Said This Would Be Fun (2020), Joe Slack’s 
The Board Game Designer’s Guide (2020), Geoffrey Engelstein and Isaac Shalev’s Building Blocks of 
Tabletop Game Design (2020 onward), Gordon Calleja’s Unboxed: Board Game Experience and Design 
(2022), and Scott Rogers’ Your Turn: The Guide to Great Tabletop Game Design (2024). There is also the 
Guides to Tabletop Game Design series from CRC Press edited by Geoffrey Engelstein (2024 onward). 
The first in the series is Sarah Shipp’s Thematic Integration in Board Game Design (2024).
Also notable is Pat Harrigan’s and Matthew Kirschenbaum’s edited Zones Of Control: Perspectives 
on Wargaming (much cited in this current volume). It is a title with breadth from numerous perspectives, 
including those from or directly pertinent to board wargame designers.
All of these traditions are of relevance to the field of historical board game design. However, we have 
very few books dedicated specifically to the design of board wargames, and some of those that we do have, 
such as Strategy & Tactics Magazine’s Wargame Design: The History, Production, and Use of Conflict 
Simulation Games (1977) predate the Card-Driven Game (CDG) innovation of the early 1990s. We do have 
Design Elements of Contemporary Strategy Games (2006) from George Phillies and Tom Vasel, as well as 
their more recent Designing Modern Strategy Games (2012), and also George Phillies’ Designing Wargames
(2014), with its focus on hex-and-counter games. These are joined by Mark Herman’s Wargames According 
to Mark: An Historian’s View on Wargame Design (2024). As previously mentioned, Herman is the progeni￾tor of the CDG, and for several other reasons, many addressed in this book, is one of the most significant 
designers in the entire history of this hobby. Wargames According to Mark is an even more recent addition 
(not yet published at the time of writing) to the articles (many of them written by Herman) dedicated specifi￾cally to the topic of historical board game design in various print and online magazines; magazines such as 
C3i, Conflicts of Interest, War Diary, Against the Odds, Strategy & Tactics, Vae Victis, and World at War.
CONVENTIONS OVERVIEW
Given that each level of warfare and every design focus has its own design parameters, and that the current 
volume has a breadth of other intentions to balance, space here is constrained, and ambitions are appro￾priately modest. The intent for the next three chapters, therefore, is to cover only the most high profile and 
introductory topics relating specifically to historical board wargame design, staying agnostic to levels of 13 • Reference Books and Conventions Overview 207
warfare, or specific series or genre conventions. For more exhaustive coverage, look to the resources listed 
above and to the community online in general.
To contextualize the chapters on “Units,” “Combat Resolution,” and “Movement, Morale, & More,” it 
is helpful to focus on the basic format of board wargames. This format generally involves different players 
controlling their own sets of pieces (or units) of some kind, placed on a map board, attempting to remove 
each other’s pieces, or to place their own in certain parts of the map board (or prevent the other player’s 
pieces from reaching those locations), perhaps within a certain timeframe, and to have these pieces bound 
by sets of rules governing combat, movement, morale, supply, communications, and more.208
14 Design Conventions
Units
INTRODUCTION
Military units come in a vast variety of types, categorized in a variety of ways. They are categorized by histori￾cal era and allegiance (often, although not always, nationality or another form of state); they are categorized by 
the area of operations – such as land, sea, or air; they are categorized by troop type – such as infantry, cavalry, 
or artillery. Even within these designations, there are many different types: light infantry, line infantry, guard 
units, rifles, marines, foot artillery, horse artillery, guard artillery, rockets, heavy cavalry, light cavalry, and 
dragoons. Further, even within the actual unit, there might be further divisions of specialism. A Napoleonic 
line infantry battalion, for example, would comprise four to ten companies of 50 to 200 soldiers in each; in most 
armies of the era, one of these companies would be a “light” company, and another a “grenadier” company, 
with different responsibilities from the other line companies (Quarrie 1982, 65–6).
Which units you need for your game is a matter of the scope and scale relevant to your design (see 
Chapter 8). A tactical level game will almost certainly call for more granularity than a grand strategic 
level game. In a tactical-level game, you might need to know precisely what type of unit you have in any 
given terrain, which direction the unit is facing, and what the unit’s ammunition, exhaustion, and morale 
levels are. You might decide to differentiate between all the different unit types, to show their differ￾ent capacities for moving, defense, and offense all on a cardboard counter, and to have ways of keeping 
track of their statuses in various regards, including, perhaps, their formations. In the Napoleonic era, for 
example, infantry might be in skirmish order, or line, column, marching, or in square, or in maneuvers 
between these formations. In a strategic-level game, none of this is likely to matter (and is too unwieldy 
for the scale). Here you might just need to know that there is an army present, or an army group, or several 
army groups, or perhaps even just a “front.” You might decide you merely need a single wooden block to 
represent the military presence of this perhaps extremely large body of troops of many different kinds. 
There are broadly five main approaches designers take with regard to the depiction of units in a game and 
the use of pieces on a board: Unit Counters, Block Games, Minis, Cards, and Other Pieces.
UNIT COUNTERS
Unit counters are most often printed onto cardboard, but they might be printed onto stickers and applied 
to some other material, such as wood or plastic. Counters are capable of conveying a great deal of infor￾mation about a unit. Perhaps most conventionally, a nationality (or allegiance) is conveyed through the 
background color of the counter, additionally showing a troop type, and a combat and movement factor. 
Perhaps the combat factor might be split into two numbers, with an attack and a defense value. The coun￾ter might also carry information such as the unit’s name (often named after its commander), its size, and 
the larger organizational unit (such as a corps) that it sits within. These counters are, most conventionally, 
square. Where they are rectangular they can also easily carry information about a unit’s facing, which can 
Paper Time Machines Design Conventions
DOI: 10.1201/9781003359265-17
10.1201/9781003359265-1714 • Design Conventions 209
Design Conventions
be highly significant in a tactical game. A resilient convention, dating back to Charles S. Roberts’ Tactics 
II (1958), is the use of NATO symbols for unit types (crosses for infantry inside a rectangle, a diagonal 
line inside a rectangle for cavalry, a dot in the center for artillery, etc.).
Figure 14.1 shows an image of a unit counter from 1944: Battle of the Bulge (2020) on the edge of the 
board near to the legend that explains how to read it. The unit symbol, like the sketch of birds in flight, 
is the NATO symbol for airborne units (paratroopers). Here, instead of the more conventional “attack” 
and “defense ratings,” then a “movement points” allowance, the three largest font size numbers denote 
the number of dice rolled in combat, the unit’s strength points, and its movement points. This legend also 
explains the step loss mechanic in this game, which means units that suffer casualties are flipped over or 
replaced to show the unit’s reduced values in line with combat results. With a four-step reduction, design￾ers might use one counter rotated to each of its four sides (from “four” to “one” as the counter moves 90 
degrees) without the counter being flipped, or two counters, each of which is flipped as necessary, but 
without the unit rotation angle being of importance to tracking strength. With a two-step reduction, only 
one counter is necessary, flipping it to show the reduced value. What is sometimes termed a “Pollard” or 
“eight-step reduction” – possibly named after Bob Pollard, one of the designers of On To Richmond (1980) 
– is more rarely utilized, with just one unit counter with four sides to track the value “four” to “one,” but 
with an additional “tracking counter” which sits atop this counter and is rotated to four sides from “eight” 
to “five” as the counter is moved through 90-degree rotations to reflect step losses (BGG 2018).
Sometimes the information contained is more sparse – perhaps just a nationality and a strength total 
(see Struggle for Europe 1939–1945 (2019) as an example). Hitler’s War (1981) is an example of only a 
nationality and a unit name on the counter, which corresponds with an army group designation. Here 
all other unit details – its composition in terms of any leaders present, infantry, mechanized strength, 
tactical air power, amphibious forces, and paratroop strength, are all tracked on fairly large lightweight 
supplemental player boards called Record Cards with the use of counters, shown in Figure 14.2. This fig￾ure shows the Canadian first Army piece – which would usually be placed on the board – next to its unit 
FIGURE 14.1 Detail of the author’s copy of 1944: Battle of the Bulge (2020). Photograph by the author.210 Paper Time Machines 
details, showing it has four Infantry strength points, three Mechanized strength points, and two Tactical 
Air strength points.
This approach considerably reduces board clutter and yet permits a degree of granularity in unit details.
BLOCK GAMES
Block games are their own sub-genre. The term refers especially to wooden blocks – usually about 2cm (0.79 
of an inch) square – with a uniform color to denote allegiance/nationality and with a sticker on the block’s face. 
The face is directed toward the owning player, so the opponent (or opponents) can only see the location of units 
they don’t control but not their identity. This is a simple way to convey a sense of the fog of war.
When opposing units meet in the same location, they are usually revealed, battles conducted, and 
destroyed units are removed from the board. Battles may be conducted with the use of a supplemental 
battle board (see Chapter 11). Over the course of a game, players may come to learn where opposing units 
are, even though they never see the faces of those blocks when not directly in combat with them, either 
from memory and/or by logical deduction.
Block games also frequently use the “step loss” design system. In this simple system, the four sides 
of the block are utilized to give up to four “step changes” in the value of the block, due to casualties. With 
each “step loss” the block is rotated, so its new, lower, value is showing on the face oriented upward.
Figure 14.3 shows a detail of a block game in progress. We can see the faces of the (blue) American 
units, and see they are all at full strength, and so oriented accordingly. We can only see the backs of the 
(red) British units.
MINIS
Miniatures (or “minis” as they are frequently termed) provide certain design advantages over other kinds 
of units: their aesthetic qualities may create player engagement with the sense of time and place; the tactile 
FIGURE 14.2 Detail of the author’s copy of the Allies Record Card from Hitler’s War (1981). Photograph by 
the author.14 • Design Conventions 211
quality may appeal more than cardboard counters. As Meriläinen et al. say, citing Bateman and Walton: 
“The miniature … acts as a prop for imagining; it prescribes imaginings” (Meriläinen, Heljakka, and 
Stenros 2023, 96, original emphasis).
In addition, minis may also assist with marketing concerns – perhaps encouraging players who enjoy 
collecting and painting figures, and perhaps broadening the appeal of the game beyond a core wargames 
market – the assumption being that counters suggest a more complex and inaccessible game, and minis 
suggest a more accessible game. This, however, is not necessarily the case. Memoir ‘44 (2004) a game 
with minis may be less complex than Advanced Squad Leader (1985) a game without them, but War of 
the Ring: Second Edition (2011) a game with minis is considerably more complex than Blitzkrieg!: World 
War Two in 20 Minutes (2019), which has unit counters.
Minis come with certain drawbacks too. Aside from cost, a mini is unable to convey as much infor￾mation as a counter, and it will mostly be confined to offering designers just three variables: color, size, 
and shape. (Perhaps on some occasions it might carry a variable relating to its orientation – the direction it 
is facing too.) Even though sizes and shapes can theoretically vary widely, it is possible that similar sizes 
with similar poses and equipment (human soldiers all with swords and shields, for example) might lead to 
unintended confusion and so add further limitations to the use of minis. Minis might be more subject to 
damage. Unlike cardboard counters which are susceptible to water damage, minis are more susceptible to 
other kinds of damage, with limbs and weapons perhaps breaking off if handled roughly.
Further, as Cole Wehrle tells us, Deco-Rationalism – which dictates that components feel as if they 
sit coherently within their design space – discourages the use of minis, which appear to speak to digital 
game aesthetics, within a board game (Playing with the Past 2023).
Figure 14.4 shows minis on the board of a game in progress (this is the first edition; the second edition 
uses wooden pieces). In wargames, minis are most commonly used on boards with irregular area maps, 
which permit larger numbers of minis in one area. Quartermaster General: 1914 is unusual in that most 
areas will have just one mini, and there is a stacking limit of two.
FIGURE 14.3 The author’s copy of Saratoga: 1777 (2017) in play. Photograph by the author.212 Paper Time Machines 
CARDS
As we have seen in Chapter 10, there are a great many uses for cards. They may also be used to represent 
units, either in a game where the cards effectively are the board (that is, the critical sum total of the play 
area), and/or as components that interrelate with other pieces on the board. In the latter case, the cards 
denote greater detail of the composition of an army, fleet, or other kind of military force, which has a 
representational piece on the board. Figure 14.5 shows both the location of the Earl of Oxford piece on 
the board (to the right of the city of Lincoln and to the left of the Admiral of England card) and the cards 
belonging to this noble – his titles, offices, mercenaries, and towns, which augment his abilities in vari￾ous ways and include his total troop strength (in this case 30 + 50 + 20). These cards are kept off the 
board beside a player who can review them as they might wish. These cards belong to different nobles 
(who, in turn, belong to different players) across different games, and change ownership throughout play, 
thus altering the strength, composition, and abilities of the representational pieces on the board. (Indeed, 
nobles too may change ownership many times during a game.)
OTHER PIECES
Units may also be represented by a variety of other pieces, most commonly wooden blocks, or other 
shapes, but also meeples (crafted wooden pieces, seemingly a portmanteau of “my” and “people” and 
seemingly coined by Alison Hansel in 2000, playing Carcassonne) (Gis.net 2001).
FIGURE 14.4 The author’s copy of Quartermaster General: 1914 (2016). Photograph by the author.14 • Design Conventions 213
FIGURE 14.5 The author’s copy of Kingmaker (2023 edition). Photograph by the author.214 Paper Time Machines 
Blocks have the advantage of being inexpensive, resilient to most kinds of damage, and being easy to 
store within a game box. Like minis, these other pieces generally offer the advantage of seemingly prom￾ising an accessible low-complexity game, with evocative, tactile components; they come with the same 
disadvantage of offering fewer variables (than counters) for designers to work with.
In the COIN system games, there are generally three shapes: cubes representing regular troops or 
paramilitary police, cylinders representing guerrillas and irregulars, and disks representing bases (which 
have various political, administrative, and military functions). What makes these abstract wooden shapes 
different from cardboard counters or blocks with ratings on them is that they do not represent discrete 
military formations. If anything, they represent an abstraction of the total amount of useful force or 
energy a faction has that is available at that time, wobbling back and forth between potential and kinetic 
states within the system (see A Distant Plain 2013, 27 for further elucidation on this).
Figure 14.6 shows blocks from Rachel Simmons” Napoleon’s Triumph (2007). This design combines 
the simplicity of rectangular blocks with the hidden face of a block game, which holds unit detail informa￾tion. In this particular game, the effect is especially marked by the details printed on the stickers of the 
metal pieces representing leaders, evocative of miniatures games. In this game, as in other wargames also 
using wooden rectangular blocks laid horizontally, there is an aesthetic quality conveyed by the inten￾tional sense of using “kriegsspiel-like” components. Indeed, this is something Simmons has discussed.
I felt the urge to design a game that would use the visual symbology of nineteenth-century period battle 
maps, which I thought quite beautiful, and which would look like such a map in play. I came to call this 
appearance “The Look,” and achieving it was one of the most important considerations in the design 
process for Napoleon’s Triumph. It was because of this that I could not use a hex and counter-design. The 
imposed geometry of the grain of the hex grid with its 60∘
 angles would overwhelm the geometry of the 
long thin lines of the armies with their terrain-following subtleties that I wanted to express. Cardboard 
counters posed a similar visual problem in that their printed surfaces can look attractive when viewed from 
directly above, but their sides, where the raw cardboard edges are exposed, are an eyesore, which made 
counters not acceptable on a purely visual level...
While there is a subgenre of wargames called block wargames that had been using square, rotatable blocks 
decades before Napoleon’s Triumph, they had nothing to do with the design of my blocks, which were not 
based on them, but on the block shape used in the much older nineteenth-century German krigesspiel. My 
purpose in selecting this shape was not functional but aesthetic, in that it was what was required to give my 
game The Look. Also present was a second class of pieces new to Napoleon’s Triumph: metal flag stands 
labeled with stickers to represent corps commanders. These pieces, quite striking in play, are a departure 
FIGURE 14.6 Detail of the author’s copy of Napoleon’s Triumph (2007). Photograph by the author.14 • Design Conventions 215
from the cartographic tradition that dominates the visual design of the rest of the game. They instead bor￾row from the tradition of miniatures wargaming, and are there to take visual advantage of the fact that I 
was designing a three-dimensional game rather than a two-dimensional map.
(Simmons 2016, 202–4)
In this design, the choice of color is also pertinent, with the kriegsspiel-derived strong reds and blues of 
the two different sides popping distinctly in contrast with the muted map board.
REFERENCES
BGG. 2018. https://boardgamegeek.com/thread/2049113/pollard-markers Accessed October 16, 2023.
A Distant Plain. 2013. Playbook. Hanford, CA: GMT Games.
Gis.net. 2001. http://www.gis.net/~dber/SessionReport/25Nov2000.htm Accessed September 19, 2023.
Meriläinen, Mikko, Katriina Heljakka, and Jaakko Stenros. 2023. “Lead Fantasies: The Making, Meaning and 
Materiality of Miniatures.”– In Material Game Studies: A Philosophy of Analogue Play, edited by Chloé
Germain and Paul Wake, 83–101 . London: Bloomsbury Academic.
Playing with the Past. 2023. “Cole Werhle talks Game Design and the Production Process.” October 24, 2023. https://
podcasters.spotify.com/pod/show/alypv1/episodes/Cole-Werhle-talks-Game-Design-and-the-Production
-Process-e2b0f0a Accessed November 20, 2023.
Quarrie, Bruce. 1982. Napoleon’s Campaigns in Miniature: A Wargamer’s Guide to the Napoleonic Wars 1796–
1815. Cambridge: Patrick Stephens.
Simmons, Rachel. 2016. “Goal-Driven Design and Napoleon’s Triumph.”– In Zones of Control: Perspectives on 
Wargaming, edited by Pat Harrigan and Matthew G. Kirschenbaum, 201–7. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.216
15 Design Conventions
Combat Resolution
INTRODUCTION TO COMBAT RESOLUTION
Engelstein and Shalev list 26 approaches to resolution of actions (Engelstein and Shalev 2022, 142–211). 
Although this taxonomy includes many examples from games with a focus on conflict it is of utility across 
board game design in general, and this chapter is concerned with the design conventions in common cir￾culation more specifically, and in more detail, in historical board wargaming. Accordingly, this chapter 
will focus on just six broad categories of combat resolution mechanics, with four less common categories. 
In some cases these categories have differing names from the ones in use by Engelstein and Shalev. But 
reference will be made to their taxonomy throughout in the interests of reading comprehension if working 
in close consideration with their encyclopedia.
The six most commonly used categories this chapter will explore are termed Unit Strength Ratio, 
Cumulative Hits, Stat Check, High Number, Deterministic Resolution, and Card Play. The four less com￾monly used categories are termed Physical Action, Prisoner’s Dilemma, Force Commitment, and Rolling 
and Locking. The chapter concludes with a brief look at what we might deem an eleventh category overall: 
Hybrids.
In general, there are two basic forms of combat in tactical games: ranged fire and melee (close quar￾ters/hand-to-hand fighting). Operational and strategic-level games tend not to make these distinctions, but 
may include (depending on the era) extremely long-range artillery and missile fire, and may incorporate 
the effects of airpower.
The concept of ranged fire can include the idea not just of a maximum range of a weapon, but also a 
notion of the weapon’s accuracy and capacity to cause damage decreasing over the extent of its range (or 
perhaps, to some extent, increasing if the weapon disperses shrapnel, for example). This may be modified 
in the game by the nature of the target’s armor or protection from other sources (fortifications or other 
forms of cover), and by the speed the target is moving and perhaps the direction of movement. Ranged 
fire usually includes the concept of “line of sight,” which determines whether or not the firing unit can see 
its target. Targets might be obstructed by the environment or other forces, including those belonging to 
the same player as the firing unit. The game’s rules may accommodate for greater granularity including 
terrain elevations, meaning firing units might not be obscured by units directly in front of them if they are 
lower down, and, indeed, none of this might matter if the weapon is intended for indirect fire (such as a 
mortar) and/or if the gunners are trained in indirect fire and have appropriate spotting support.
Combat resolution is sometimes broken into two parts: firstly an overall combat result which deter￾mines who wins combined with any consequent movement – such as an advance or retreat; and secondly 
a casualty determination. Sometimes both parts are subsumed within one part or the other, with either an 
overall combat result also dictating casualties (if relevant in the system) by a set ratio or percentage related 
to the result, or by directly determining casualties, and the extent of the casualties sustained amounting 
to an expression of an overall result.
As Tables 4.2 and 4.3 in Chapter 4 show, von Reisswitz’s dice system is an example of a combat 
resolution approach that combines overall battle result with a casualty determination into the same die 
roll. Indeed, the system also combines ranges and troop types into the same rolls, with conditions such 
Paper Time Machines Design Conventions
DOI: 10.1201/9781003359265-18
10.1201/9781003359265-1815 • Design Conventions 217
Design Conventions
as enfilade fire and cover determining which die gets rolled. Considering its relative elegance and how 
granular this approach allows designers to be, it is somewhat surprising that it has been so rarely repli￾cated in modern designs.
In some game systems, the damage to or destruction of specific units is irrelevant, since there might 
not be sufficient granularity in the design to differentiate unit types. In other game systems there is granu￾larity, and within these designs casualties might be allocated by the player who caused them, or chosen 
by the player who owns the units, or they might be allocated randomly. Deciding which units to apply 
casualties to can be a key strategy within the game system.
SIX MOST COMMON MECHANICS
In the absence of more detailed study, the current volume makes no claims on popularity of combat reso￾lution approaches derived through any statistical analysis. At the present time, these assertions are derived 
through assumptions and experience as a player and designer.
UNIT STRENGTH RATIO
Unit Strength Ratio is essentially what Engelstein and Shalev term “Ratio/Combat Results Table” 
(Engelstein and Shalev 2022, 149), with the exception that, as we shall see, a unit ratio mechanic does not 
necessarily utilize a CRT, and a CRT also has applicable uses in other categories of combat resolution.
With a Unit Strength Ratio mechanic, players compare the total value of their engaged strength points 
in the combat zone and usually roll a modified die on a table to determine the overall combat result; the 
odds will dictate the probability of any given result and the modified die will specify which result in the 
relevant column is to be read. Thus an attacking force with a greater odds ratio advantage over a defending 
force will have a better chance of success in the combat than if it has a lesser or even negative odds ratio. 
The table is generally called a Combat Results Table, or CRT. Although a table is usually utilized, a game 
such as Kingmaker (1974) is a reminder that an odds ratio system could be subsumed within a design in 
lieu of a die roll on a table. In the case of Kingmaker the odds ratio is subsumed within a deck of cards, 
with the probability of higher odds ensuring favorable outcomes reflected by the greater instances of these 
cards granting favorable results. Indeed, from as early as Strategy I (1970), we also have a reminder that 
a die roll may be replaced by a chit pull mechanism. Nevertheless, CRTs with die rolls are the more com￾mon expression of odds ratios being resolved.
CRTs are used across all levels of warfare (tactical, operational, strategic). They might be used spe￾cifically in relation to melee combat, or with a concept of ranged fire, or in a conjunction of both, and, 
indeed, in certain eras above a tactical level they may be effectively indistinguishable. Beyond the wide 
variety of approaches to CRTs which are determined by level of warfare, the era, and the designer’s 
choices on the specifics of implementation, there are two broad categories of CRTs: combat ratio and 
combat differential. In Chapter 4 we looked at the CRT in the 1959 edition of Gettysburg, together with 
two examples of earlier CRTs. Gettysburg and Air-Tactics (1943) are examples of combat ratios; while 
(Tri-Tactics, 1925) is an example – perhaps confusingly, and certainly unusually – of a different combat 
resolution type: Deterministic Resolution, but in CRT form.
Deterministic Resolution is usually sufficiently simple that no CRT is required (see the section below 
in the current chapter). However, Tri-Tactics has a large range of unit types with conditional factors alter￾ing the resolution in specific instances, such that a CRT is required. In any event, in a Deterministic CRT, 
by definition, no die is rolled; one specific unit will always defeat another specific unit under the same 218 Paper Time Machines 
specific conditions. Players simply cross-reference the two unit types, ensure they are taking into account 
specific conditions (such as locations) related to the encounter, and then read off the result – likely remov￾ing a defeated unit from play, or perhaps compelling a defeated unit to retreat.
In a combat ratio CRT, players calculate the sum total of combat factors involved in the combat, 
derive the ratios involved (the odds), roll a die and cross-reference the number rolled with the appropriate 
odds column, and then read off the results. Since 1954 the convention has developed and endured with a 
rule of thumb that an attacker needs odds of 3:1 to have a reasonable chance of victory and to minimize 
risk in an open battle (Herman 2022, 5). As Mark Herman points out, the validity of this guideline is 
debatable and worthy of deep skepticism (Herman 2022, 5). It is also worth noting that this ratio applies 
only to field battles. With regard to sieges in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, military 
wisdom held that odds of at least 7:1 were necessary to have reasonable hope of capturing a strong, well￾defended fortress (Creveld 2004, 41). More substantial are the mathematical theories derived from F.W. 
Lanchester’s Aircraft in Warfare: the Dawn of the Fourth Arm (1916), which gives us theories both on 
aimed fire and area fire. As Fred Preston tells us:
for area fire, the attrition rate of friendly forces is equal to the product of the sizes of both forces times 
the enemy combat effectiveness (individual rate of enemy fire times proportion of friendly area affected 
by each round) … In the aimed fire case the attrition rate of each side is equal to the size of the opposing 
force times its combat effectiveness (individual rate of fire times single shot kill probability) … Since 1916, 
these two theories have been generated and extended to more complex situations. While not everyone is 
convinced that Lanchester's theory is entirely realistic, nonetheless it is widely accepted and is the basis of 
many of the military's computer war games. 
(Preston 1973, 22)
To bring this more up to date, the US military offers no definitive unclassified quantified formula for tracking 
probabilities for combat resolutions. A variety of Correlation of Forces calculators are in use, attempting to 
take into account a range of factors to determine combat effectiveness including force numbers. However, 
force numbers are only one metric in a complex blend of other elements, such as training, organization, and 
equipment that might be used to determine quantified values for forces in conflict. US Army Command 
and General Staff College (CGSC) instructors have computed unit values using approved Modified Tables 
of Organization and Equipment (MTOEs) from the Force Management System website (FMSWeb) for US 
forces and Decisive Action Training Environment (DATE) opposing force (OPFOR) tables from the Army 
Training Network (ATN) (Spurlin and Green 2017, 15). Even with such data inputs, these formulas are 
inherently prone to inaccuracies through omissions (such as terrain and weather determinants) and by force 
asymmetries and subjective inputs relating to qualitative attributes, such as morale (Spurlin and Green 
2017, 16). In addition, metrics relating to assessments of force readiness and Commanders Assessment of 
Percent Effective (PCTEF) and metrics such as the Status of Resources and Training System (SORTS) 
demonstrate granular complexity but no single workable combat resolution equation through this complex￾ity (Joint Staff Washington D.C. 2011, C-17; Trunkey 2013). This compels us to work with a rule of thumb 
but to wield it with deep skepticism. We may do better instead to consider how the experience of playing 
the game feels; whether it feels as if it is giving the right results by asking the right kinds of questions of the 
players, forcing them to focus on the right kinds of elements to strategize towards success.
Refocusing on CRTs, Table 15.1 is an example of a combat ratio CRT from Napoleon at Waterloo 
(1971). The die result can be below one and more than six due to modifiers (such as cover, or morale, or 
enfilade fire). Note how at odds of 3:1 the AE result no longer appears as a possibility.
However, this table alone does not determine combat losses. To calculate losses another table or some 
other metric (such as a percentage of engaged forces) can be utilized in conjunction with a combat ratio 
CRT. Table 15.2 is a CRT from Saratoga 1777: Burgoyne vs. Gates (1974) which combines with Table 15.3
to calculate the losses from the same combat. A roll on 15.2 determines the result, after first determining 
ratios so players know which column to check. With a winner determined, or perhaps a stalemate result, 
players then roll on Table 15.3 to determine what the result means in terms of the losses to their forces.15 • Design Conventions 219
Table 15.4, from Frederick the Great (1975), shows a more nuanced combat ratio CRT which incorpo￾rates combat losses, and also includes the notion of units surrendering and being captured. Thus removing 
the necessity to roll twice, once for a result, and once for the losses.
In contrast, with a combat differential CRT, players compare the sum total of combat factors involved 
in combat, subtract the lower total from the higher total to derive a “differential” total, roll a die and cross￾reference the number rolled with the appropriate differential column, and then read off the results. Table 
15.5 shows a combat differential CRT for fire combat from the Terrible Swift Sword (1976).
In essence, the difference is that a ratio CRT tasks players with performing addition to calculate com￾bat factors, then division to calculate the odds, whereas a differential CRT tasks players with performing 
addition then subtraction to calculate the difference in totals.
As Table 15.6 (also from Terrible Swift Sword) demonstrates, a CRT might be used for resolving fire 
combat as a separate entity from melee combat.
In addition, a Unit Strength Ratio might be used to effect an “Overwhelming Attack” or “Overrun” 
rule, permitting sufficiently numerically superior forces to automatically defeat defenders without com￾bat. Examples of this kind of rule can be found in Frederick the Great (1975) with its “Overwhelming 
TABLE 15.1 Combat Ratio CRT from Napoleon at Waterloo (1971) (SPI 1977, 46).
PROBABILITY RATIOS: ATTACK TO DEFENSE STRENGTHS
DIE RESULT 1 TO 4 1 TO 3 1 TO 2 1 TO 1 2 TO 1 3 TO 1 4 TO 1 5 TO 1 6 TO 1 DIE RESULT
−-1 AE AE AE AE AE Ar Dr Dr EX −1
0 AE AE AE AE Ar Ar Dr EX EX 0
1 AE AE AE Ar Ar Dr Dr EX DE 1
2 AE AE Ar Ar Ar Dr Dr EX DE 2
3 AE AE Ar Ar Dr Dr EX DE DE 3
4 AE AE Ar Dr Dr Dr EX DE DE 4
5 AE AE Ar Dr Dr EX DE DE DE 5
6 AE Ar Dr Dr EX DE DE DE DE 6
7 AE Ar Dr Dr EX DE DE DE DE 7
8 Ar Ar Dr EX DE DE DE DE DE 8
Attacks at greater than “6 to 1” are treated as “6 to 1”
Attacks at less than “1 to 4” are treated as “1 to 4”
Key: AE = Attacker Eliminated. Ar= Attacker retreat. Dr = Defender retreat. EX = Exchange (both 
sides lose equal strength points equivalent to the total in the smaller army). DE = Defender 
Eliminated.
TABLE 15.2 Combat Ratio CRT from Saratoga 1777: Burgoyne vs. Gates (1974).
ROLL ODDS
1 TO 4
DOWN
1 TO 3 1 TO 2 1 TO 1 2 TO 1 3 TO 1 4 TO 1
UP
1 ─ ─ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○
2 ● ─ ─ ○ ○ ○ ○
3 ● ● ─ ─ ○ ○ ○
4 ● ● ● ─ ─ ○ ○
5 ● ● ● ● ─ ─ ○
6 ● ● ● ● ● ─ ─
Key:
○ Attacker winner, Defender loser
● Defender winner, Attacker loser
─ Stalemate, neither wins220 Paper Time Machines 
Attack” rule for 4:1 odds or higher, which captures all defending units, and in Saratoga: 1777 (2017) with 
its “Overrun” rule where three or more units attacking a non-fort location defended by fewer than three 
units, causes the defender to take casualties and to retreat.
CUMULATIVE HITS
This category encompasses two listed by Engelstein and Shalev: “Critical Hits and Failures” and “Die 
Icons” (Engelstein and Shalev 2022, 147–8, 152–4), and most aspects of a third term, their “Stat Check 
term” (Engelstein and Shalev 2022, 145–6) – those relating to a success by rolling a number that registers 
a “hit” – bringing them into an umbrella term here that may be more commonly understood by historical 
board wargame designers and players as being concerned with registering “hits” on targets to diminish 
and ultimately remove them from play.
With a Cumulative Hits mechanic, sometimes, depending on the context, termed the “bucket of dice” 
approach, designers are potentially subsuming the notion of numerical superiority within the concept of how 
many dice are rolled. The convention here is that more available units corresponds with more available dice 
to roll, up to a given maximum. Other factors such as unit types, terrain, leaders, card play, and weather may 
modify the die rolls. Hits might be determined by an absolute value (for example a five or six on 1D6, or rolling 
a target unit icon), or a relative value (better rolls than your opponent). In either case, the number of success￾ful hits determine the number and/or the type of casualties inflicted. Hits might be applied in a wide variety 
of ways, most commonly, in sequence, with either the defender or the attacker rolling and applying hits first 
(prejudicing defense or attack). Sometimes the sequence of rolling is irrelevant because hits are not allocated 
until both sides have rolled, in which case hits might be applied simultaneously or only after the relative scores 
are assessed. In conjunction with hits, units usually have a designation of hit points – which, once expended, 
leads to the units being downgraded (taking a “step loss”) and then removed.
In Saratoga: 1777 (2017) defenders allocate their hits before the attacker rolls. The number of dice 
each unit rolls is determined by their strength – a stronger unit rolls more dice – and the type of unit 
determines what constitutes a hit: Artillery hit on a five or six on a regular six-sided die, and Infantry hit 
on a six (Saratoga: 1777 2017, 5–6).
In An Attrition of Souls (2020), the attacker rolls a number of dice determined by the number of viable 
units, and both the attacker and defender simultaneously allocate a number of hits to enemy units by cor￾responding the die results to the matching icons on their participating units.
TABLE 15.3 Combat Losses CRT from Saratoga 1777: Burgoyne vs. Gates (1974).
ROLL WINNER LOSER STALEMATE
−1 0% ─ ─
0 0% ─ 10%
1 10% 20% 20%
2 10% 25% 25%
3 20% 33.1/3% 33.1/3%
4 20% 33.1/3% 33.1/3%
5 25% 50% 50%
6 33.1/3% 66.2/3% 66.2/3%
7 ─ 75% 75%
8 ─ 100% ─
Key:
If one side has a 2–1 superiority over the other, subtract one from its die roll and 
add one to the weaker side’s roll: if 3–1 or greater superiority, the stronger side 
subtracts two from its roll and the weaker side adds two.15
• Design Conventions 221
TABLE 15.4 Combat Ratio CRT from Frederick the Great (1975) (SPI 1977, 48).
PERCENTAGE RATIO (ATTACKER DIVIDED BY DEFENDER)
33% THRU 
65%
66% THRU 
99%
`100% THRU 
149%
150% THRU 
199%
200% THRU 
299%
300% THRU 
399%
400% OR MORE
ADJUSTED 
DIE ROLL
ATK
LOSS
%
DFD
LOSS
%
ATK
LOSS
%
DFD
LOSS
%
ATK
LOSS
%
DFD
LOSS
%
ATK
LOSS
%
DFD
LOSS
%
ATK
LOSS
%
DFD
LOSS
%
ATK
LOSS
%
DFD
LOSS
%
ATK
LOSS
%
DFD
LOSS
%
ADJUSTED 
DIE ROLL
−2 25 5 20 5 25 10 15 10 10 10 10 25 ● P −2
−1 25L 5 20 5L 25L 10 15 10L 10L 10 10 25L ● P −1
0 25 5L 25L 10 25 10L 10L 10 10 20L 10L 25 ● P 0
1 25L 5 25 10L 20L 10 10 10L 10L 20 10 25L ● P 1
2 25 5 25L 10 15 10L 15L 20 10 20L 10L 25 ● P 2
3 25 5L 25L 10 20 20 10 20 10 25 10 40 ● P 3
4 20 5 20 10 15 20 10 20 10 25 10 40 ● P 4
5 20L 5 20 10L 15L 20 10 20L 10L 25 10 40L ● P 5
6 20 10L 20L 20 10 20L 10L 25 10 40L ● P ● P 6
7 20L 10 25L 25L 10L 20 10 25L 10L 40 ● P ● P 7
8 20 20L 10L 10 25L 10L 25 25 10 40L ● P ● P 8
9 5 10 5 10 10 25 5 20 ● P ● P ● P 9
KEY: Number = % lost; L = Lowest ranked leader elimated; P = Entire force captured; ● = No Effect.222 Paper Time Machines TABLE 15.5 Combat Differential CRT for Ranged Fire from Terrible Swift Sword (1976) (SPI 1977, 49). TOTAL FIRE STRENGTH DIRECTED INTO HEX
DIE ROLL 1–3 4–6 7–9 10–15 16–21 22–27 28–33 34–39 40–45 46–49 50+ DIE ROLL
1 ● ● ● ● Pin 1 1 1 1 2 2 1
2 ● ● ● Pin 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2
3 ● ● Pin 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 3
4 ● 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 3 4
5 Pin 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 3 3 4 5
6 (D) 1* 1* 1* 2 2 2 3 3 4 4 5 6 (D)
Results shown are losses in Combat Strength points: the Combat Strength is reduced by the number result.
(D) = If a “six” is rolled, roll again and check for Ammunition Depletion (see Case 12.21). Pin = unit is Pinned; see 10.84.
*= If Artillery is firing against Infantry-type, defending unit is Pinned instead of taking loss. ● = No effect
ADJUSTMENTS TO
TOTAL FIRE STRENGTH COLUMN:
Never more than a two-Column final Shift in any one direction.
Move One Column to Left if …
…Defending unit is fired on through adjacent UpSlope Ridge hexside.
…Defending unit is fired on thorugh adjacent Breastwork or Stone 
Wall.
…Defending unit is B-, C-, S- or P-type.
…Defending unit is Woods hex.
Move One Column to Right if …
…Defending unit is limbered Artillery.
…Defending unit is Infantry in Column formation.
...Defending unit is fired on through an Enfliade hexside.
Move Two Columns to Right if …
…Defending unit is mounted Cavalry.15
• Design Conventions 223
TABLE 15.6 Combat Differential CRT for Melee from Terrible Swift Sword (1976) (SPI 1977, 49).
MELEE STRENGTH DIFFERENTIAL (ATTACKER MINUS DEFENDER)
DIE ROLL −4 −3 −2 −1 0 +1 +2 +3 +4 +5 +6 +7 DIE ROLL
1 Attkr: R2 Eng Eng K ● ● K ● ● ● ● ● 1
Defdr: ● Eng Eng C1R2 C1R2 C1R2 C1R3 C2R3 C2R3 C2R3 C2R3 C2R3
2 Attkr: C1R2 R2 Eng Eng K ● ● K ● ● ● ● 2
Defdr: ● ● Eng Eng C1R2 R2 C1R2 C1R2 C2R2 C2R2 C2R2 C2R2
3 Attkr: C1R2 C1R2 R2 Eng Eng K ● ● K ● ● ● 3
Defdr: ● ● ● Eng Eng C1R2 C1R2 C1R2 C1R2 C1R2 C1R2 C1R2
4 Attkr: C1R2 C1R2 C1R2 R2 Eng Eng K ● ● K ● ● 4
Defdr: ● ● ● ● Eng Eng C1R2 C1R2 C1R2 C1R2 C2R2 C2R2
5 Attkr: C2R2 C2R2 C1R2 C1R2 R2 Eng Eng K ● ● K ● 5
Defdr: ● ● ● ● ● Eng Eng C1R2 C1R2 C1R2 C1R2 C2R2
6 Attkr: C3R3 C3R2 C2R2 C1R2 C1R2 C1R2 Eng Eng K ● ● K 6
Defdr: ● ● ● ● ● K Eng Eng C1R2 C1R2 C1R2 C1R2
EXPLANATION OF RESULTS:
Attkr: Effect on Attacker.
Defdr: Effect on Defender.
K = 1 Strength Point becomes a casualty.
C1, 2 or 3 = That number of Strength Points is captured by the Enemy.
R1, 2 or 3 = Unit must retreat that number of hexes, then check for possible Rout.
Eng = The units are Engaged; see Case 13.83.
● = No result against that side.
Terrain and Leader Effects on Melee Combat: See Cases 13.3 and 13.4.
Retreats are always executed after losses; a C2R2 means remove two Points are captured (sic) then retreat the remaining units two hexes.224 Paper Time Machines 
The Birth of America series, beginning with 1812: The Invasion of Canada (2012), is an example of 
a historical board game that blends Cumulative Hits with other results. This game uses customized dice 
(showing icons), which give up to three results: a hit, flee, or a command decision. With a flee result, the 
rolling player’s own corresponding unit flees the battle, to be potentially re-recruited in a subsequent 
phase of the game. With a command decision result, the rolling player may decide to move a correspond￾ing unit to an adjacent region – as a retreat, and/or as a move to reinforce another region. Other systems 
might use icons to cause different results – perhaps forcing units to delay their attacks, or to lose com￾munication with command structures entirely. The Command & Colors (2006 onward) and Memoir ‘44
(2004 onward) series are also examples of this approach. This use of die with specific icons is termed “Die 
Icons” by Engelstein and Shalev, but they also note that although icons may be most common on dice they 
may also be placed on cards (Engelstein and Shalev 2022, 152–4).
Hitler’s War (1981) is an example of a game that combines Cumulative Hits with a CRT, as we see in 
Table 15.7. Instead of hits being generated by multiple dice for multiple units, only one die is used but it is 
modified by the strength of the firing unit; thus the greater the strength of the firing unit, the more likely 
it will be to cause greater damage.
Hitler’s War also combines this Firepower Table with a Unit Strength Ratio mechanic for a type of 
combat resolution the game terms “an Advance,” which is movement effectively through enemy units or non￾occupied hexes in the Combat Phase. Defenders use the Firepower Table to reduce the strength of attacking 
units, which might then choose to use the same table to reduce the defender’s strength, but ultimately an 
advance on the space is predicated on a successful roll on a CRT that compares the ratio of mechanized and/
or paratroop strength relative to the defender’s total strength. The better the ratio for the attacker, the more 
likely they are to be able to advance successfully, forcing the defender to retreat. If the defender retreats, they 
may suffer further casualties calculated by the difference in their relative tactical air strength.
Hits, once achieved through other mechanisms, might also come in a variety of types covering a range of 
severities. In Wings of Glory (2012 onward), the details of hits and the amount of damage each one generates 
is determined by a tailored deck of cards, including not only a variety of damage severities, but also compli￾cating events such as weapons jams of the firing plane, or the disabling of different parts of the target plane.
In addition to the odds ratio subsumed within a deck of cards, Kingmaker has a secondary battle 
resolution mechanic on the same cards, with the names of nobles killed in the battle in the same deck of 
cards, amounting to a random (or semi-random, as some nobles names occur more frequently than others) 
Hit, which is definitive and certainly kills the noble if they are present in the battle, regardless of which 
side they were on and what the result of the battle was.
The Pub Battles Series (2015 onward) blends Cumulative Hits with a positional effect. Whilst a first 
hit on a unit will cause it to be spent, and flipped, a second hit compels a unit to retreat, with a third hit 
destroying the unit.
TABLE 15.7 Firepower Table from Hitler’s War (1981).
FIRING STRENGTH POINTS
DIE ROLL 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
1 1 1 1 2 2 2 3 3 4 4
2 0 1 1 1 2 2 2 3 3 4
3 0 0 1 1 1 2 2 2 3 3
4 0 0 0 1 1 1 2 2 3 3
5 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 2 2 2
6 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 2 2
7 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1
1. Numbers shown indicate strength points destroyed.
2. Owner decides which strength point to lose.
3. Strength points in excess of ten fire separately.
4. Die results greater than 7 are treated as 7.15 • Design Conventions 225
There are numerous other ways Hits are determined in board wargames, most of which use dice of 
some kind. Although it is tempting to think in terms of prevalent use of dice as being indicative of greater 
randomness, it is helpful for designers to consider this seemingly paradoxical dynamic: the more dice 
used, the less random the result is likely to be, making it more likely that you will roll an average result. 
As Geoffrey Engelstein succinctly states: “More dice means less luck” (Engelstein 2017, 65). Consider 
Figures 15.1 to 15.4, which show how four dice give more reliably predictable results than one. This is 
what designers are referring to when they use the term “a bell curve,” which shows that the probability of 
distribution becomes increasingly predictable with more dice.
Engelstein and Shalev term “Critical Hits and Failures” as:
Dice are rolled, and those exceeding a target number generate success. Certain rolls (typically the highest 
and/or lowest on the die) generate additional success or extreme failure. 
(Engelstein and Shalev 2022, 147)
FIGURE 15.2 Results distribution probabilities, 2 Dice, from Engelstein 2017, 67.
FIGURE 15.1 Results distribution probabilities, 1 Die, from Engelstein 2017, 67.226 Paper Time Machines 
This is an approach most commonly seen in skirmish level games, where the crossover with RPG design 
conventions, such as critical hits or failures is more redolent. In historical board wargaming, we see this 
approach used in Advanced Squad Leader (1985 onward) and in rulesets closely aligned with miniatures 
gaming such as Age of Dogfights: WWI (2020) (BGG n.d. a1, a2).
STAT CHECK
This category is synonymous with “Stat Check” listed by Engelstein and Shalev (Engelstein and Shalev 
2022, 145–6). With a Stat Check mechanic, players apply what is usually a modified random input (typi￾cally a die roll) to attempt to achieve a specific threshold value to secure a success. A success might be 
to secure a specific region, to push back an enemy unit/to advance your own unit (casualties might be 
automatically determined within this result), or perhaps be irrelevant to the system given its scale and 
focus. In the States of Siege system, a modified 4 on a D6 might be sufficient to push back an enemy front. 
In Churchill (2015), a roll on a D10 that is less than or equal to your Front’s modified strength constitutes 
FIGURE 15.4 Results distribution probabilities, 4 Dice, from Engelstein 2017, 67.
FIGURE 15.3 Results distribution probabilities, 3 Dice, from Engelstein 2017, 67.15 • Design Conventions 227
success, advancing your Front one space forwards. In both cases these successful die rolls are not “hits,” 
but successes in a more general sense.
As noted above, a success with a Stat Check mechanic might also register a hit against a targeted 
unit, as in Axis and Allies (1981 onward) (BGG n.d. a3). In such cases, a Stat Check functions in essen￾tially the same way as a Cumulative Hit (see above), except that it is usually mutually exclusive from “Die 
Icons” because a Stat Check depends on numerical values (which can be modified to confer advantage or 
disadvantage)
HIGH NUMBER
This category is synonymous with “High Number” listed by Engelstein and Shalev (Engelstein and Shalev 
2022, 142–4). With this mechanic, players apply what is usually a modified random input (typically a die 
roll) to attempt to achieve a value higher than their opponent to secure a success. As with a Stat Check, 
or Cumulative Hits, a success might secure a region with casualties being automatically determined by 
the nature of the success, or casualties being determined by an additional system, perhaps requiring an 
additional die roll. Sometimes this mechanic is termed an “opposed roll,” although opposed rolls can also 
be used to determine Cumulative Hits (as in Risk) and don’t necessarily equate to the same thing as a 
combat result in its own right. In Risk the die rolls determine casualties, but because players may continue 
to attack after the casualties have been allocated the die roll does not determine the absolute result, just 
the casualties in any given round of rolls. Unhappy King Charles (2008) is an example where the modi￾fied opposed High Number rolls (that Is, the difference between modified die rolls of factions in combat) 
determine the combat result, and casualties are determined according to that result.
Washington’s War (2010) is another example of the High Number mechanic. Players each tally their 
own scores from a variety of factors, and the side with the most points wins the battle. There are then a 
variety of possible ways of determining the losses. Tables 15.8 and 15.9 show the method of loss deter￾mination from Washington’s War. The combat resolution factors include strength totals, and usually ele￾ments such as leaders and terrain advantages. They always include some random element, which is usually 
a die roll, chit pull, or card play. It might include both a die roll and some optional card play, as is the case 
in Washington’s War.
TABLE 15.8 Casualties Resolution for Loser of Combat, from Washington’s War (2010).
Casualties – Loser
On a roll of …
1–3 –1 Combat Unit (CU)
4–5 –2 Combat Unit (CUs)
6 –3 Combat Unit (CUs)
TABLE 15.9 Casualties Resolution for Winner of Combat, from Washington’s War (2010).
Casualties – Winner
Losing General’s Agility Rating Loses 1 Combat Unit (CU) on a roll of …
No General 1
(1) 1–2
(2) 1–3
(3) 1–4228 Paper Time Machines 
DETERMINISTIC RESOLUTION
This category encompasses the mechanic listed as “Alternate Removal” in Engelstein and Shalev 
(Engelstein and Shalev 2022, 162–3), but the term “Deterministic Resolution” is preferred as having 
broader application than the definition offered there and because the current author’s definition of Rock 
Paper Scissors as a mechanic is more tightly bound by three interlinking hierarchies that are not extended. 
Engelstein and Shalev give this definition of “Alternate Removal”:
The player with fewer units removes one. Then players alternate removing units until reaching a set num￾ber, one player is out of units, or some other stopping mechanism.
(Engelstein and Shalev 2022, 162–3)
Deterministic Resolution is when the outcome of any given combat is predetermined according to specific 
conditions. Chess is one of the best examples of deterministic resolution. When one piece is able to “take” 
another, if the player elects to take that permitted action, the result is always certain according to the rules 
- that piece is always taken with no possibility of failure.
In Land and Freedom: The Spanish Revolution and Civil War (2023) the play of cards with “Action 
Points” may, if the player chooses to use the card for this effect, add military strength to a sector of the 
map, removing one Fascist Attack or adding one Republican Strength (Land and Freedom 2023, 6). This 
is purely deterministic resolution with open information.
We see a noteworthy implementation of deterministic resolution in the Rachel Simmons games 
Bonaparte at Marengo (2003), Napoleon’s Triumph (2007), Guns at Gettysburg (2013), and Triomphe 
à Marengo (2023). In all four games, we see hidden information akin to block game designs com￾bined with deterministic battle resolution that, at its heart, bears some resemblance with L’Attaque 
(1909) as unit strength hierarchies are revealed at the point of conflict and the difference between the 
hitherto hidden information of unit strengths substantially determines casualties and consequences. 
For full disclosure, there are additional contributors to combat resolution in these designs, such as 
the defense approach penalty (determined by terrain type intersections) and counter attacking penal￾ties (as players decide, in line with given restrictions, whether to apply counter attacking forces to 
the combat).
We see an earlier implementation of deterministic resolution in yet another James Dunnigan design, 
Grenadier: Tactical Warfare 1680–1850 (1972) where ratios of combat strength between firing or attack￾ing units and the top unit of any stack (where none of this information is hidden) determine if the targeted 
unit is unaffected, disrupted, or eliminated (BGG n.d. a4). A die is only used in the case of a disruption 
result, which then gives a variety of outputs.
In the strictest sense, deterministic resolution means there is no random element within it. However, 
we actually do see random elements within what are still generally considered deterministic resolution 
approaches. The random element is evident in the die required for disruption results in the Grenadier game. 
In the Rachel Simmons games noted above, there is hidden information, so players do not know what units 
will be revealed upon contact. The variable setups (within constraints) of L’Attaque provide its drama and 
replayability. In the Quartermaster General series (2014 onward), a “Battle” card will result in the success￾ful removal of an enemy piece from a region, which is a non-complex deterministic resolution. However, 
there are always two significant caveats: players must have the card in their hand in order to play it (and this 
game system includes a deck destruction mechanic, so most cards are only ever single use and players are 
not guaranteed to have any of these cards in their hand at the start of the game), and in addition it is possible 
for other players to counter these cards in various ways across the series (but this also depends on those 
cards being available for play at the required time, which usually means having been placed face down on 
a preceding round of play). Thus, although a deterministic resolution is where the outcome of any given 
combat is predetermined within the context of any given set of conditions, there will likely be uncertainty 15 • Design Conventions 229
over the way players interact with the game’s systems. A chess player may have multiple options of oppo￾nent pieces to take on their turn, and even then may decide not to take any. The system may be pre-set and 
the results of combat uncomplicated by randomness within any specific set of conditions, but uncertainty 
over player interaction with the system (or we could say the variability of player options within it) may still 
generate an output of randomness, thus generating von Clausewitz’s friction.
A subset of deterministic resolution is known as Rock-Paper-Scissors (RPS), in which the system 
determines results. This mechanic is named after the two-player zero sum game played with hands and 
the simultaneous reveal of one of three specific hand gestures, where rock always beats scissors, paper 
always beats rock, and scissors always beats paper. This approach is listed by Engelstein and Shalev 
(Engelstein and Shalev 2022, 157–8) who take a broader view on what games constitute RPS by extend￾ing the hierarchical systems beyond the three of RPS in the strictest sense. The term RPS most closely 
resembles the hand game because there is uncertainty over which of the options players will choose, the 
choice is unconstrained, and the choice is revealed simultaneously. Within historical board wargames this 
mechanic is, to date, rarely used in the strictest sense. At the time of writing (2023), of the 1,002 games 
listed on BGG with an RPS mechanic perhaps 14 might meet some criteria to be considered historical 
games, but most would be better termed “historyish” for their approaches to the history concerned. Even 
among these, games such as L’Attaque are listed, which may be better considered broadly determinis￾tic, rather than a RPS mechanic – there are not three options with result pairings between them, there 
are ranks from 1–10, with the highest rank winning in combat, other than a Spy (rank 1) defeating a 
Commander-in-Chief (rank 10), and Mines defeating all other pieces except Sappers (BGG n.d. b). (This 
concept is used in some abstract games, such as Dong Wu Qi (undated) where the elephant is the strongest 
animal, but susceptible to the mouse (BGG n.d. c1).)
Field Command (1991) and Balance of Power (2012) are among the few examples in historical (or 
perhaps more accurately, “historyish”) board wargames that utilize RPS, according to BGG, at the time 
of writing. Field Command takes the core concept of RPS and complicates it with not only a triumvirate 
of hierarchies with Infantry, Cavalry, and Guerillas, and a difference between terrain types altering those 
hierarchies, but also a triumvirate of hierarchies within unit types (first Cavalry removes second Cavalry, 
second Cavalry removes third Cavalry, third Cavalry removes first Cavalry), and Artillery also removing 
any piece, with its range dependent on its altitude in relation to the enemy.
All that said, closer study reveals several more instances where a much broader interpretation of 
the RPS mechanic features in historical board wargames as a subsystem. The Tactical Matrices of 1776
(1974), Saratoga (1998), and Congress of Vienna (2024) are three such examples. In each case, there are 
more than three options to choose from (seven or eight), and the pairings do not determine ultimate vic￾tory or defeat in the combat encounter (although they may determine that there is no battle if both players 
take non-aggressive options). Instead, these matrices provide modifiers to the combat system. Table 15.10
from Saratoga shows how cross-referencing the blind choices made by each player confers a modifier to 
the battle system, with the number being applied to another combat table (a unit strength ratio CRT) which 
adds other modifiers and a die roll to determine a result.
Kriegspiel (1970), a Thomas N. Shaw design, is also of note. Indeed Shaw’s significance to the hobby 
as a whole is of note. He also has design credits on games such as Waterloo (1962), Bismarck (1962), 
Stalingrad (1963), The Battle of the Bulge (1965), Blitzkrieg (1965), and Origins of World War II (1971), 
and was responsible for AH’s output 1963–1982, after Smith paper Box Company and Monarch Printing 
took over and Charles S. Roberts left the company (Orbanes 2019, 191; Appelcline 2011, 175). To return 
to Kriegspiel, it uses a combination of odds ratios and an RPS system in that one player chooses a type 
of defense (among four options) and the other player a type of attack (among three options), and the 
cross-index of the two gives a combat result without any dice (BGG n.d. d). We see a development of this 
approach in the Brian Train games, Autumn Mist: The Battle of the Bulge (2004), Summer Lightning: The 
Invasion of Poland 1939 (2011), Winter Thunder: The Battle of the Bulge (2015), and Balkan Gamble
(2015), where there are six defensive options and four attacking options, and the cross-index gives set 
advance and retreat distances and a possible casualty check. In this system, odds ratios are only taken into 
account with a 3:1 superiority which gives a die roll modifier on the index (BGG n.d. e, f, g, h).230 Paper Time Machines 
CARD PLAY
This category is synonymous with “Card Play” listed by Engelstein and Shalev (Engelstein and Shalev 
2022, 155–6).
Some games such as Condottiere (1995), Battle Line (2000), and 1815: Scum of the Earth (2022) 
resolve combat entirely through Card Play. Given that these are entirely or mostly card games, this is 
little surprise. In Condiettere, cards function per the mechanic High Number, with some complications 
increasing or decreasing the value of certain cards in a player’s own hand or across all players’ hands in 
the current battle. In 1815: Scum of the Earth, cards function per the mechanic Cumulative Hits, with 
cards having their own sustainable damage levels. In Battle Line, cards are played in an attempt to take 
tricks of three cards (sometimes more). This is a more nuanced approach on the High Number mechanic, 
where more probabilistically difficult tricks to take beat those that are easier to achieve. High numbered 
cards are still valuable, but unless they are combined with other cards into a trick they will be defeated by 
lower numbered cards that are. This is an elegant way to express C3 concerns.
A large number of historical board games use cards within battle resolution systems, but they are 
usually combined with other mechanisms, such as serving as modifiers for a Unit Strength Ratio (for 
example Washington’s War) or as the functional component in Deterministic Resolution (for example 
Quartermaster General), or as player action tools for a wide range of uses (for example, Freeman’s Farm: 
1777).
The games Friedrich (2004) and Maria (2009) essentially resolve combat entirely through Card Play 
(High Number), but the play of these cards is limited not only to those in hand (determined by the Tactical 
Cards draw phase of play), but also by where on the board the corresponding army piece is located and 
how many troops each army has (Friedrich 2004, 3–5). The board is broken into regulated grids cor￾responding to one of four card suits (hearts, spades, diamonds, clubs) intersecting with an under or over￾layed point to point map. Pieces move on the point-to-point map, but the suit they can play in combat is 
regulated by the suit of the sector that piece is in.
TABLE 15.10 Tactical Matrix from Saratoga (1998).
ATTACKER
DEFENDER SKIRMISH ATTACK ON 
ECHELON
STAND 
FAST
WITHDRAW FRONTAL 
ASSAULT
COMMIT 
RESERVE
TURN 
FLANK
REFUSE 
FLANK
Skirmish 0 −1 +1 NC +2 −1 −1 0
Attack on 
Echelon
+1 0 −1 −1 0 0 +1 −1
Stand Fast −1 +1 0 NC −1 −1 +2 0
Withdraw NC +1 NC NC +2 0 0 NC
Frontal 
Assault
−2 0 +1 −2 0 +1 +1 0
Commit 
Reserve
+1 0 +1 0 −1 0 −1 −1
Turn Flank +1 −1 −2 0 −1 +1 0 +2
Refuse 
Flank
0 +1 0 NC 0 +1 −2 0
NC = No combat; light-shaded background Requires leader;
dark-shaded background requires leader and open flank15 • Design Conventions 231
In Napoleon Returns 1815 (2020), combat is also almost entirely resolved (apart from determining 
reinforcements) through Card Play which combines with systems dictating how many cards may be drawn 
into a player’s hand for use in a battle (determined by the presence of leaders and the number and qualities 
of the corps present in a battle, or that later join a battle as reinforcements).
FOUR LESS COMMON MECHANICS
Although not considered by the current author in such common use as the preceding six categories, 
there are four mechanics of particular note, deemed worthy of mention here: Physical Action, Prisoner’s 
Dilemma, Force Commitment, and Rerolling and Locking.
PHYSICAL ACTION
This category is synonymous with “Physical Action” listed by Engelstein and Shalev, “[a] physical action 
needs to be performed by one or more players to determine the outcome of the action” (Engelstein and 
Shalev 2022, 164).
One of the more common ways that the Physical Action mechanic is implemented in board 
wargames is with the placing of tiles or other components into a bag and then drawing from the bag 
at designated moments in the game. This is sometimes known as “bag building/drawing from a bag.” 
We see this mechanic in Sails of Glory (2013), War Chest (2018), Blitzkrieg!: World War II in 20 
Minutes (2019), and Bloodstones (2023) (BGG n.d. i, j, k, l). This may be considered more of a meta￾mechanic because it can be used in a multitude of ways. In War of the Ring: Second Edition (2011), 
for example, the tiles are drawn from the bag not for combat resolution but for resolving the hunt for 
the Fellowship (BGG n.d. m).
Bag building permits players to physically add tiles to the bag, thus to generate shifting probabilities 
on what tiles will be physically drawn (and by whom) in relation to when players draw from it. New tiles 
may be added in accordance with attained objectives and/or in relation to the passage of time, making 
certain contingent events increasingly probable to occur. Of course, the same approach can be generated 
through adding cards to a deck, and shuffling new cards into the deck, or a strata within the deck, but the 
bag dispenses with the need to shuffle, and has its own different tactile quality.
Chapter 16 of this book looks at the Chit Pull mechanism which is highly adjacent. In many respects 
it is the same, but with chits in a visible pool, face-down, rather than in a bag. However, pools of chits are 
not so frequently “built” (added to in line with causal developments), and there is a dramatic quality in 
the performative uncertainty in the draw from a bag that is not directly equivalent in the draw of a chit (or 
functionally similar component) from a pool,
The battle tower in Dirk Henn’s Wallenstein (2002) and Shogun (2006) is also predicated on 
Physical Action. Players cast participating unit blocks (cubes) into the tower along with any in the 
tower tray from a previous battle Those that come out of the bottom of the tower and are relevant to 
the combat are compared, and all are removed back to players’ supplies on a one-for-one basis, with 
the difference surviving and being placed back on the board in the battle region. Figure 15.5 shows 
the tray after a battle. Five black blocks attack a space with three yellow blocks (ignoring other 
complications of other factions), and all are poured into the funnel at the top of the tower. Some fall 
through the tower, while others remain stuck inside. Some blocks already in the tower may also be 
dislodged by others being poured through it. In this example the four black blocks outnumber the two 
yellow blocks in the tray, so two black blocks return to the board, as survivors, and all the others are 232 Paper Time Machines 
returned to players’ supplies. The blocks in the tray after the physical action of being cast into the 
tower are then resolved by Deterministic Resolution.
U-boot The Board Game (2019) is another good example of combat resolution through Physical 
Action, resolving combat with a combination of real-time mechanics – players must act fast enough – in 
conjunction with a digital app and screen interface, and an analog mini map to plot torpedo trajectories.
PRISONER’S DILEMMA
This category is synonymous with “Prisoner’s Dilemma” listed by Engelstein and Shalev, “[e]ach player 
has a choice between Cooperating or Defecting. The total payoff is maximized if both players Cooperate, 
but if one Defects and the other Cooperates, the Defector will score more individual points” (Engelstein 
and Shalev 2022, 159).
Although the notion of points does not directly apply to the game Diplomacy (1959) it still serves as 
the most enduring example of how this mechanic works within a kinetic conflict situation. In Diplomacy 
an attack with greater numbers on defending units (if given valid support orders) will always succeed; 
without greater numbers an attack will always fail. Orders are written and hidden from other players dur￾ing the order phase of the game, and all orders are resolved simultaneously. There can be mutual benefits 
for two or more “cooperators,” and there may be much to gain for a “defector” (the one who “stabs in the 
back”) depending on the context of the game at the time.
FIGURE 15.5 The Battle Tower in Shogun (2006), from the author’s collection. Photograph by the author.15 • Design Conventions 233
FORCE COMMITMENT
This category is synonymous with “Force Commitment” listed by Engelstein and Shalev, “players select 
how many of their forces they will commit to the battle to different categories. The players then reveal 
their assignments and resolve” (Engelstein and Shalev 2022, 174).
The essence of combat resolution in Dune (1979, 2019) is a Force Commitment mechanic, combined 
with leader modifiers, and with mechanics that have been termed in the current chapter Card Play, and 
High Number. Clearly Dune is not a historical topic, but the original design was based on a Roman Empire 
concept and the combat resolution in its design is of particular note (BGG 2011). Even if this adaptation 
had never taken place, the mechanic as it is executed in Dune would still be of note for historical board 
game designers. Players set their Battle Wheel, shown in Figure 15.6 (assembled with the interchangeable 
leader token removed from its space, and preassembly) to a total equal to or lower than their available 
forces in the contested region. This number is the number of forces they will commit to the battle and will 
lose. Thus players are attempting to second guess how many forces an opponent will commit to a battle, 
such that they can arrive at the minimum number they need to commit to still win. Players augment their 
Battle Wheel total with the (modifying) leader they select and with the play of Treachery cards.
REROLLING AND LOCKING
This category is synonymous with “Rerolling and Locking” listed by Engelstein and Shalev, “[d]ice may 
be rerolled or may be locked, preventing rerolling” (Engelstein and Shalev 2022, 191).
The concept of rerolling and locking is likely most familiar to players through the game Yahtzee
(1956), where dice are rolled up to three times (rerolled twice) locking any chosen dice along the way, to 
achieve the desired result (BGG n.d. n). This concept has been integrated into historical board games in 
Worthington’s Battle Formation series, with its first appearance known to the author in Freeman’s Farm: 
1777 (2019), designed by the author. That design aspired to demonstrate how there is risk/reward in the 
nature of an attack, and managing the resource of morale is a key strategy is the management of the 
FIGURE 15.6 The Battle Wheel in Dune (2019), from the author’s collection. Photograph by the author.234 Paper Time Machines 
resource of morale. (This is explored in more detail in Chapter 8 when we look at an early systems visu￾alization of that design.) Further, the design also aspired to reclaim the combat resolution as a moment of 
drama, heightened by players having an increased sense of agency in the decision of whether to reroll dice 
to achieve a preferred result but to pay the resource cost (usually morale) for doing so. (This is explored in 
more detail in Chapter 22 when we look at the intersection of storytelling and wargame design.)
Rerolling and locking with the penalty cost to reroll has since appeared in the author’s Chancellorsville: 
1863 (2020), and is in games in development, such as Custer’s Last Stand 150 Year Commemoration, 
by Steve Bissett, and games on Gettysburg, by Yves Roig, Andy Loakes, and Valentin Crespel, and 
Brandywine, by Yves Roig (Steve Bissett 2024, Yves Roig 2024, personal correspondence). The desired 
results in these games amount to Cumulative Hits. The author’s Leipzig Campaign prototype also utilizes 
Rerolling and Locking, and combines it with opposed rolls – both players roll together to resolve combat. 
The dice results amount to an overall battle resolution including casualty calculations subsumed within 
the system.
HYBRIDS
A great number of historical board wargames have what we might deem Hybrid combat resolution sys￾tems, or systems combining two or more other battle resolution mechanics together. Games such as those 
in the Command & Colors Series combine Cumulative Hits with Card Play; as mentioned, Napoleon 
Returns 1815 combines Unit Strength Ratio with Card Play – the number of units and leaders in a combat 
increases the hand size available. Napoleon Returns 1815’s predecessor, Hannibal: Rome vs. Carthage 
(1996) also combines Unit Strength Ratio with Card Play (which also takes into consideration contextual 
political control to add to the card count), as well as what Engelstein and Shalev term a Bluffing Mechanic 
(Engelstein and Shalev 2022, 263). In the game the longer the battle continues and the more cards are 
played and the probability of the casualty count being high increases. Sekigahara: The Unification of 
Japan (2011) also combines Unit Strength Ratio with Card Play – the number of available units and lead￾ers doesn't determine hand size, but it gives the cards greater utility.
The Levy & Campaign Series combines Deterministic Resolution with Cumulative Hits. The 
Quartermaster General Series, Lincoln (2018), and Struggle for Europe 1939–1945 (2019) all combine 
Deterministic Resolution with Card Play. The Cousin’s War (2017) combines Cumulative Hits (through 
opposed rolls), with Card Play and Betting and Bluffing – essentially a retooling of Liar’s Dice/Perudo
(1800), as player’s can claim any feasible results of their dice rolls and keep those results, unless success￾fully challenged by the opposing player – which forces the actual results to be revealed, and a successful 
challenge is beneficial to the challenger and an unsuccessful challenge benefits the roller (the challenger 
removes a cube from their side of the battlefield). Hidden Strike: American Revolution (2021) is an exam￾ple of a game that combines Deterministic Resolution, Card Play, Stat Check, and High Number, as play￾ers secure regions by playing cards that will always result in victory if there are at least 8 points of strength 
in that region, providing they are 2 points ahead of the point total of opponents.
The Great Sieges Series (2018) is a combination of Card Play with Cumulative Hits, and the hits are 
calculated through a CRT. There is a huge and ever expanding variety of hybrid approaches to combat 
resolution, and this will be an intriguing trend to follow as the field continues to evolve.
The combat system in Freeman’s Farm: 1777, mentioned above, combines Rerolling and Locking 
with Cumulative Hits, Card Play, and Force Commitment. In the Battle Formations system the Force 
Commitment mechanic means spending the resource (Morale or Formation Block) to re-roll any of the 
combat dice and thereby to have the chance of achieving the desired results on the dice. (Players may keep 
as many dice results as they like between rerolls, and so they may have a sense that they are progressing 
towards their goal, but at the expense of a resource with each extra roll.) This decision is not bounded by 
the restrictions of available player actions (once an attack is underway the active player decides when to 15 • Design Conventions 235
terminate it), but bounded by the extent of the resources themselves – players can continue to bid/expend 
resources in this way until the resource is depleted (or they induce a failed morale check on the active 
formation) or until they decide not to continue bidding/expending.
OTHER RESOLUTION MECHANICS
Engelstein and Shalev list two other combat resolutions approaches to note briefly here: “Minimap,” 
which is not considered a different mechanic here, but as a separate location for your feedback system for 
players, and is discussed in Chapter 11 as a Battle Board (Engelstein and Shalev 2022, 171). They also 
mention the “Action Speed,” “Actions are rated for speed or initiative. Faster actions are executed first” 
(Engelstein and Shalev 2022, 189). We see this in games with combat and cards, such as War of the Ring: 
Second Edition, and Critical Mass: Patriot vs. Iron Curtain (2018) (BGG n.d. o).
Engelstein and Shalev also list 12 other resolution mechanics: Static Capture, Enclosure, Voting, 
Player Judge, Targeted Clues, Tiebreaker, Dice Selection, Kill Steal, Hot Potato, Flicking, Stacking and 
Balancing, and Neighbor Scope. These are not in common use in historical board wargames.
REFERENCES
1812: The Invasion of Canada. 2012. Fremont, OH: Academy Games.
1815: Scum of the Earth. 2022. Orlando, FL: Tristan Hall.
An Attrition of Souls. 2020. Hartford, CT: Compass Games.
Appelcline, Shannon. 2011. Designers & Dragons. London: Mongoose Publishing.
Battle Line. 2000. Hanford, CA: GMT Games.
BGG. 2011. https://boardgamegeek.com/blogpost/3419/interview-peter-olotka-cosmic-encounter-and-dne Accessed 
November 24, 2023.
BGG. n.d. a1 “Advanced Squad Leader.” https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/243/advanced-squad-leader
Accessed January 29, 2024.
BGG. n.d. a2 “Age of Dogfights: WWI.” https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/308652/age-dogfights-ww1 
Accessed January 28, 2024.
BGG. n.d. a3 “Axis and Allies.” https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/98/axis-allies Accessed January 29, 2024.
BGG. n.d. a4 “Grenadier.” https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/8788 Accessed January 25, 2024.
BGG. n.d. b “L'Attaque.” https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/9246/lattaque Accessed May 17, 2024.
BGG. n.d. c1 “Dong Wu Qi.” https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/23578/dong-wu-qi Accessed January 27, 2024.
BGG. n. d. c2 “1776.” https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/3312/1776-the-game-of-the-american-revolutionary
-war Accessed May 16, 2024.
BGG. n.d. e “Autumn Mist.” https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/11448/autumn-mist-battle-bulge Accessed 
January 25, 2024.
BGG. n.d. f “Summer Lightning.” https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/42591/summer-lightning-invasion-poland
-1939 Accessed January 25, 2024.
BGG. n.d. g “Winter Thunder.” https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/186514/winter-thunder-battle-bulge Accessed 
January 25, 2024.
BGG. n.d. h “Balkan Gamble.” https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/189017/balkan-gamble Accessed January 
25, 2024.
BGG. n.d. i “Sails of Glory.” https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/109291/sails-glory Accessed January 29, 2024.
BGG. n.d. j “War Chest.” https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/249259/war-chest Accessed January 29, 2024.
BGG. n.d. k “Blitzkrieg!: World War Two in Twenty Minutes.” https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/258210/
blitzkrieg-world-war-two-20-minutes Accessed January 29, 2024.
BGG. n.d. l “Bloodstones.” https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/284587/bloodstones Accessed January 29, 2024.236 Paper Time Machines 
BGG. n.d. m “War of the Ring Second Edition.” https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/115746/war-ring-second
-edition Accessed January 29, 2024.
BGG. n.d. n “Yahtzee.” https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/2243/yahtzee Accessed January 29, 2024.
BGG. n.d. o “Critical Mass Patriot vs Iron Curtain.” https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/172008/critical-mass
-patriot-vs-iron-curtain Accessed January 29, 2024.
Chancellorsville: 1863. 2020. Virginia Beach, VA: Worthington Publishing.
Churchill. 2015. Hanford, CA: GMT Games.
Condottiere. 1995. Roseville, MN: Fantasy Flight Games.
Congress of Vienna. 2024. Hanford, CA: GMT Games.
Creveld, Martin Van. 2004. Supplying War: Logistics from Wallenstein to Patton. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press.
Dune. 2019/1979. Baltimore, MD: Avalon Hill Games.
Engelstein, Geoffrey. 2017. Gametek: The Math and Science of Gaming. USA: Ludology Press.
Engelstein, Geoffrey, and Isaac Shalev. 2022. Building Blocks of Tabletop Game Design: an Encyclopedia of 
Mechanisms. Abingdon, OX. CRC Press.
Field Command. 1991. Walter E. Johnston IV.
Frederick the Great: The Campaigns of the Soldier King 1756-59. 1975. Baltimore, MD: Avalon Hill Games.
Freeman's Farm: 1777. 2019. Virginia Beach, VA: Worthington Publishing.
Friedrich. 2004. Rio Rancho. New Mexico: Rio Grande Games.
Hidden Strike: American Revolution. 2021. Virginia Beach, VA: Worthington Publishing.
Herman, Mark. 2022. “Wargame CRTs or How To Resolve Chaos.” In C3i, edited by R. B. MacGowan. RBM Studio.
Hitler’s War. 1981. Baltimore, MD: Avalon Hill Games.
Kingmaker. 1974. Baltimore, MD: Avalon Hill Games.
Joint Staff Washington D.C. 2011. Force Readiness Reporting. 20318. Washington, DC: Joint Chiefs of Staff, May 
31, 2011.
Land and Freedom. 2023. Murfreesboro, TN: Blue Panther LLC.
Preston, Fred. 1973. “Realism Theory.” In Moves: Conflict Simulation Theory & Technique, Nr. 9. New York: SPI, 
June/July 1973.
Pub Battles: Brandywine. 2015. Parker, CO: Command Post Games.
Quartermaster General. 2014. Woodstock, NY: Griggling Games.
Risk. 1959. Beverly, MA: Parker Brothers. https://www.hasbro.com/common/instruct/risk.pdf Accessed August 16, 
2023.
Saratoga. 1998. Hanford, CA: GMT Games.
Saratoga 1777: Burgoyne vs. Gates. 1974. Gamut of Games.
Shogun. 2006. Troisdorf, Germany:Queen Games..
SPI. 1977. Wargame Design: The History, Production, and Use of Conflict Simulation Games. Strategy & Tactics Staff 
Study Nr. 2. By the Staff of Strategy & Tactics Magazine. New York: Simulations Publications, Incorporated.
Spurlin, Dale and Matthew Green. 2017. “Demystifying the Correlation of Forces Calculator.” In Infantry, 14–17. 
Fort Moore, GA, January–March 2017. https://www.moore.army.mil/infantry/magazine/issues/2017/JAN
-MAr/pdf/7)Spurlin_CoFCalculator.pdf Accessed November 17, 2023.
Trunkey, R. Derek. 2013. “Implications of the Department of Defense Readiness Reporting System.” https://
www.researchgate.net/publication/338432747_Implications_of_the_Department_of_Defense_Readiness
_Reporting_System#fullTextFileContent Accessed November 17, 2023.
Uboot: The Board Game. 2019. London: Phalanx Games.
Unhappy King Charles: The English Civil War. 2008. Hanford, CA: GMT Games.
Wallenstein. 2002. Troisdorf, Germany: Queen Games.
War and Peace. 1980. Baltimore, MD: Avalon Hill Games.
Washington’s War. 2010. Hanford, CA: GMT Games.
Wings of Glory: WW1 Rules and Accessories Pack. 2012. Capezzano Pianore, Italy: Ares Games.237
16 Design Conventions
Movement, Morale, 
and More
AND MORE
There is clearly a great deal more to board wargame design than deciding how to represent units, and how 
to resolve combat between them. Chapter 11 included conventional approaches to board design which help 
address that aspect, but there is still far more to cover. This chapter briefly sketches out a broad range of 
other relevant topics, each important to grasp as design conventions in historical board wargames.
SEQUENCE OF PLAY
Before players engage in combat resolution, there are usually actions that players take to bring their 
forces into contact with each other. To structure the play experience, designers usually work with what is 
commonly termed a “sequence of play.” This informs players who can do what and when, directing them 
through the sequential steps to conduct the play of the game.
Engelstein and Shalev list 17 approaches to turn order and play structure within board games: Fixed 
Turn Order, Stat Turn Order, Bid Turn Order, Progressive Turn Order, Claim Turn Order, Pass Order, 
Real-Time, Punctuated Real-Time, Simultaneous Action Selection, Role Order, Random Turn Order, 
Action Timer, Time Track, Passed Action Token, Interleaved vs. Sequential Phases, Lose a Turn, and 
Interrupts (Engelstein and Shalev 2022, 31–75).
Board wargames do utilize other forms of sequences of play, but these usually fall outside of estab￾lished conventions, which is the focus of the current chapter. Within board wargames, there are four 
primary approaches to a sequence of play, which we might consider conventions at the time of writing. 
Within these four conventions, there are a great many varieties, including symmetric, asymmetric, alter￾nating, and simultaneous sequences of play.
A symmetric sequence of play is where, as Mark Herman defines it “[b]oth sides in turn conduct 
identical sequences” (Herman 2021, 26). One side completes its sequence, followed by the other side. 
Examples include Civil War (1961), The Battle of the Bulge (1965), Quartermaster General (2014). This 
approach is sometimes referred to as “I go, you go,” or, more commonly, “IGO-UGO,” and was possibly 
coined by Richard Berg (Herman 2020, 25).
An asymmetric sequence of play is where, as Herman describes, “[b]oth sides in turn conduct com￾mon mechanics through different sequences of play” (Herman 2021, 27). Examples include Breakout and 
Pursuit (1972), Napoleon (1974), and Panzerguppe Guderian (1976), in which different restrictions and 
abilities confer asymmetric advantages and disadvantages to different sides.
An alternating sequence of play is when, as Herman defines it “[p]layer turns are based on multiple 
rounds where each side in turn takes actions as triggered by a game mechanic (e.g., die roll, chit pull, or 
Paper Time Machines Design Conventions
DOI: 10.1201/9781003359265-19
10.1201/9781003359265-19238 Paper Time Machines 
card play)” (Herman 2021, 28). In an alternating sequence, players are capable, perhaps only on specific 
occasions, of interrupting the existing sequence, by passing, or by preventing another player from playing 
as intended. Examples include For The People (1998 onwards), War of the Ring (2004 onward), Empire of 
the Sun (2005 onward), and Star Wars: Rebellion (2016). An alternating sequence is sometimes referred 
to as an area impulse mechanism (BGG n.d. a). This is a mechanism where players take turns to activate 
units or specific areas on the board. This mechanism introduces uncertainty in the precise sequence of all 
unit movement and actions, leading to greater unpredictability in how conflict situations will escalate and 
be conducted. The Armchair Dragoons site defines it thus:
Area Impulse: a type of game characterized by a turn being divided into phases, or impulses, and the num￾ber of impulses a player gets in each turn varies due to randomizing factors, such as situations calling for 
dice rolls or drawing random cards. This mechanic adds a level of prioritizing, uncertainty, and strategy to 
each turn. It also adds complexity and can make games longer. 
(Armchair Dragoons 2016)
A simultaneous sequence of play is where, as Herman defines it, a “[p]layer records their moves, reveals 
them, and then executes their orders and any combat situations that arise” (Herman 2021, 29). Simultaneous 
sequences of play have players making decisions on upcoming actions and implementing these actions at the 
same time – or, more usually, in some sequential way (so players can follow the decisions taken and their con￾sequences without confusion) in a kind of suspended cognition of time wherein no actions have any temporal 
priority, even if they are unavoidably revealed in a sequential manner. Diplomacy (1959) is an example of a 
simultaneous sequence of play – players writing orders in the same time period, then all revealing them at the 
same time, and then resolving any conflicts resulting from these movements. Other examples of a simultaneous 
sequence of play include Kampfpanzer (1973), and In the Quiet Fields: Antietam (1988).
INITIATIVE
Complicating a sequence of play is the concept of an initiative. An initiative grants certain advantages (or 
disadvantages) in the sequence of play – either taking a turn first, or choosing to defer in the sequence, or 
perhaps it confers some advantages in the course of play that does not affect the sequence of play itself. 
Initiative is something players may compete for in a distinct phase before the sequence settles for a set 
phase (as in Twilight Struggle, 2005, or Undaunted: Normandy, 2019), or compete for during play (as in 
Crisis: 1914, 2024). Alternatively, initiative might be dictated by rolling a die and adding that total to a 
modifying number derived through their Army Morale total, as in Saratoga (1998) (Saratoga 1998, 4).
MOVEMENT POINTS
Since Roberts’ Tactics II (1958), we have had a concept of movement points (or “Basic Turn Allowance” in 
Tactics II) where units have a certain number of movement points which they expend when they have an 
opportunity to move – expending from none, up to the maximum total of points they possess. Each differ￾ent terrain type has its own cost, and this cost in movement points must be expended in order to enter the 
terrain. Related to this, each unit type has its own different movement capabilities, making some terrain 
more difficult to enter than others, and some terrain types being entirely prohibited. Roads or railways 
might mitigate terrain restrictions and expedite movement for relevant unit types and tend to be applied 
more frequently with more granularity in regulated grids, and are less frequently applied in irregular 16 • Design Conventions 239
areas maps and at a strategic level. Figure 16.1 shows the Terrain Chart from 1944: Battle of the Bulge
(2020) for an example of how this concept is applied to a specific design. Note how this concept has often 
been integrated with regulated grids, with some terrain features (such as forests) being “inside” the hex, 
and others (such as rivers) being “alongside” a hex edge, meaning there can be cumulative costs for enter￾ing a forest hex across a river. The concept of movement points is not confined solely to regulated grids 
FIGURE 16.1 Terrain Chart from 1944: Battle of the Bulge (2020). MP stands for “Movement Points.”240 Paper Time Machines 
and can be applied to any other map type. There is, however, increased granularity within the concept of 
movement points afforded by regulated grids.
ZONES OF CONTROL
As we have seen in Chapter 4, some regulated grid games have utilized a zones of control type concept 
as far back as Tactics (1954), and possibly further, to 1914. The basic idea is that a military unit exerts 
an effect on the area around the one it directly occupies, impinging movement of enemy troops in these 
adjacent spaces. We can see this represented in Figure 16.2, where ZOC indicates a “zone of control” is 
exerted in every hex adjacent to the unit.
STACKING
Since the earliest board games, on boards with regulated and sometimes irregular grids, there has been a 
convention of only permitting a certain number of units, or a certain number of units of a certain kind in 
any given space. Afrika Korps (1964) was one of the earliest games to expand the stacking limit to more 
than one unit. Some games expand on this idea to permit tiered stacking limits, for example, up to two 
infantry or cavalry units, and one artillery unit (Guns of August 1981).
FIGURE 16.2 Zones of control.16 • Design Conventions 241
MOVE SOME, ALL, OR NONE
With regard to movement, one of the most stable conventions from the late 1950s through to the advent 
of the Action Points mechanic and then the CDG (see below) has been the concept of being able to move 
some, all, or none of your pieces on your turn; see Gettysburg (1958), Rise and Decline of the Third Reich
(1974), Wellington’s Victory (1976), Hitler’s War (1981). We start to see this convention being disrupted 
in the 1980s with the more widespread advent of action points. With the concept of moving some, all, 
or none of your units, movement is usually not subject to the possibility of failure. The implicit meaning 
behind this convention, then, is that all units operate at optimum responsiveness, and complete intended 
movements with certainty. War and Peace (1980) is an example of a game that disrupts the convention 
without recourse to action points. In War and Peace players may choose to attempt force marches – grant￾ing additional movement capacity on top of a base movement allowance, and these force marches are 
determined by a die roll, which may be modified. Failure may cause units to suffer casualties.
ACTION POINTS
With action points, players have agency restricted, and instead of moving some, all, or none of their units, 
they must decide how and where to allocate points to move units or else to affect other actions the game 
affords them. Examples include Up Front (1983), Advanced Squad Leader (1985), and Hannibal: Rome 
vs. Carthage (1996). Curiously, Tactics (1954) has a concept much like action points, termed a “movement 
allowance,” permitting a total of up to 30 squares of movement, to be distributed as players see fit – for 
example, one unit might move 30 squares, or 30 units might all move one square, or any combination in 
between, and not all (or even any) of the movement allowance must be used. It would not be until later in 
the hobby that the essence of this idea, and the implicit sense it carries of a finite restriction on administra￾tive resources, would be developed.
CDG WARGAMES
With the advent of the CDG, the “move some, all, or none” convention was further disrupted. CDGs 
are a diverse category of board wargames that use cards to drive various aspects of gameplay, includ￾ing movement, combat, and potentially all actions in a game. Within this diverse category, one of the 
most consistent conventions is that cards have multiple potential effects, and players must choose which 
of these to apply. Most conventionally, the choice is between “Ops” (Operations) or “Events,” that is, a 
choice between points a player can utilize in a variety of less restrictive ways, or on specific effects. These 
“Events” usually attempt to convey some specific narrative resonance and are sometimes one-off effects 
that result in the card being removed from play. There are a wide range of conventions beyond this, includ￾ing Events which can only trigger for one side and not the other, Events which will trigger for the opposing 
player if the Event applies exclusively to that opposing player (see Twilight Struggle 2005), and multiple 
effects giving players further options to take with the playing of each card (see Paths of Glory 1999).242 Paper Time Machines 
CHIT PULL
The use of chit pull as a game mechanism, where players draw random chits to determine actions, 
events, or conflict resolution, became more prominent in wargaming during the 1990s and early 
2000s (see BGG n.d. b). It is possible that Richard Berg’s The Battle of Waterloo (1994) by GMT 
helped propel this mechanic into the orbit of wargames designers because we do see more wargames 
using this mechanic after this date. However, such a claim requires grounding to be taken seriously. 
We do know that chit pull as a mechanic goes back much further. We see examples in the 1930s in 
Nuggets, The Rush To The Klondike (1937) and Tarzan Jungle Map and Treasure Hunt (1933), and 
even as far back as Über Land und Meer (1895), but these were all simple flip and place mechanics 
(BGG n.d. c, d, e). What we would recognize as being a chit pull that determines action sequences 
seems to first appear in French Foreign Legion (1982) where a random chit pull determines which 
Arab tribe group or Legionnaire squad can act next, reflecting unpredictable degrees of command, 
control, and communication (BGG n.d. f). We also see a random chit pull in Operation Typhoon: 
The German Assault on Moscow 1941 (1978). The system was used again in Patton’s 3rdArmy: The 
Lorraine Campaign (1980), Operation Grenade: The Battle for the Rhineland 23 Feb–5 Mar ‘45 
(1981) in Strategy & Tactics Jan/Feb Nr. 84, and Sicily: The Race for Messina 10 July–17 August 
1943 (1981) in Strategy & Tactics Nr. 89. In the Operation Typhoon iteration of this system, players 
randomly draw a combat strength chit from a pool of stratified possibilities determined by the unit 
combat class (a regiment, battalion, or brigade) and its morale rating (1–3). For example, a regiment 
with a morale rating of 1 will draw a chit from a pool where the possibilities range from 1–7, and a 
regiment with a morale rating of 3 will draw a chit from a pool where the possibilities range from 
3–9; a brigade with a morale rating of 1 will draw a chit from a pool where possibilities range from 
1–12, and a brigade with a morale rating of 3 will draw from a pool where possibilities range from 
6–16. These combat strength chits are then placed underneath the unit counter and kept hidden from 
the other player until combat occurs. These combat strengths are then used to determine combat 
outcomes in conjunction with a CRT with die roll and terrain effect modifiers. Chit pull is utilized to 
simulate the unpredictable nature of war – Clauswitz’s friction (BGG n.d. g, h, i).
HIDDEN MOVEMENT
Since Batailles sur Mer (1945) we have had the concept of hidden movement in board wargames, where 
neither side knows where the other side’s units are, and in this game it took the form of what is often 
known as “double-blind,” with each player using their own board to track their own units without hav￾ing access to the other player’s board (Games of War 2021). Larry Pinsky’s and Lindsley Schutz’s AH 
published Midway (1964) then reintroduced the double-blind concept, with both sides needing to locate 
each others’ fleets. GDW also published a trio of games with the double-blind system: The Normandy 
Campaign (1983), 8th Army: Operation Crusader (1984), and Operation Market Garden: Descent into 
Hell (1985). Despite more recent examples of games using hidden movement, sometimes with player 
screens hiding information on mini-maps, such as Chancellorville: 1863 (2020) the concept is, on bal￾ance, infrequently used commercially.
Commercially, it is more common to see the adjacent concept of masked information utilized, 
whereby players see all units on the same board, but various techniques are applied to hide other informa￾tion relating to them – such as their strength, or their unit type. We have had this concept since L’Attaque 
(1909)/Stratego (1946) and Battleships (1931) (although with the latter there is no movement of units) and 
we see it reintroduced with Quebec 1759 (1972) and block wargames.16 • Design Conventions 243
FIXED MANEUVER
A more recent development, at least insofar as it has become a convention, is the concept we might term 
“fixed maneuver,” which gives players extremely limited movement options. These designs focus not 
on maneuver but on other aspects of the military arts, such as command and control. Examples include 
W1815 (2015), Freeman’s Farm: 1777 (2019), and Saladin (2022).
MORALE
Renaissance of Infantry (1970) has at least one optional rule for morale breaking some units (akin to min￾iatures wargaming), and Napoleon at Waterloo (1972) has a victory condition associated with demoraliz￾ing the enemy army (by destroying sufficient combat factors), but it is not until games such as Wellington’s 
Victory (1976) and Terrible Swift Sword (1976) (and possibly a little earlier) that we begin to see the con￾cept become more developed. In Wellington’s Victory there is consideration of both an individual unit’s 
morale, requiring checks at moments of stress, and an army morale value, “a qualitative enumeration of 
the relative endurance capacity of each army” (Wellington’s Victory 1976, 18). Should the army morale 
reach a demoralization point that does not necessarily mean the game will immediately end, as is the case 
with Napoleon at Waterloo. Instead it may have other effects, such as it not being possible to rally a rout￾ing formation if the army is demoralized.
Some rules of thumb exist for the level of casualties a unit may sustain before it breaks. Victor 
Madeja cites research telling us 15-35% losses in an infantry division before a break is likely, with 
daily losses over 7% being rare (Madeja 1973, 8). However, without clear citations or an indication as 
to which specific era and examples we might be drawing these percentages from, they are of modest 
value.
Morale is a concept we continue to see applied in numerous ways – pertaining to specific units 
(Freeman’s Farm: 1777, 2019), to whole armies (Saratoga 1998, 14), and to entire nations (Hitler’s War
1981). Morale continues to be used as a key variable which may need to be retained above a certain level 
in order for units to remain fully effective, or, indeed, in order not to lose the game. Morale might be 
used to determine initiative, as noted with Saratoga. In the case of Freeman’s Farm: 1777 and the Battle 
Formations series, morale is the key resource which permits players to take actions with which to attempt 
to win the game.
SUPPLY
Keeping forces supplied with sufficient ammunition, food, water, and other equipment has been a feature 
of board wargames at least since Afrika Korps (1964). We might even say Diplomacy (1959) is an example 
of simple modeling of the importance of supply, with units needing an equal number of supply centers to 
remain on the board in the winter turn. Numerous games have a concept of supply that will render units 
incapable of movement if out of supply and/or will dictate that they are removed from play if out of supply 
for a certain duration (see Hitler’s War).
The criticality of retaining lines of supply is central to numerous games, including the Quartermaster 
General series (2014 onward). Games such as Supply Lines of the American Revolution: The Northern 244 Paper Time Machines 
Theater, 1775-1777 (2017),1944: Race to the Rhine (2014), 1941: Race to Moscow (2023), and Keep ‘em 
Rolling: Race to the Rhine (2023) are essentially games predominantly more about logistics than about 
combat resolution.
The convention within wargames is well established. However, the notion of long contiguous lines 
unbroken along their entirety (perhaps emanating from a capital city of considerable abundance) that 
would equate to a catastrophic loss of supply integrity does not always align with historicity, certainly 
from the early modern period up until the modern era. As Martin van Creveld tells us:
eighteenth-century armies lived as their predecessors had always done, as their successors were destined 
to do until – and including – the first weeks of World War I; that is by taking the bulk of their needs away 
from the country. 
(Creveld 2004, 37)
Van Creveld disrupts any notion of what he terms an “umbilical cord of supply” as he discusses the con￾cept of localized magazines as prearranged supply depots for distribution, and the ability to prevent the 
enemy from extracting subsistence from shared country being key strategic parameters that shape mili￾tary maneuver (Creveld 2004, 17–39). As van Creveld underlines:
That logistics did exercise an influence on the two centuries of warfare under discussion [1560–1760] is 
of course true, but this influence had little if anything to do with supposed “umbilical cords of supply” 
restricting the movements of armies. Rather, the problem facing commanders from the Thirty Years’ War 
onward consisted precisely in that armies, with their hordes of retainers, had grown too large to remain for 
long at any one place; … Under such conditions, some of the most famous marches of that age … really 
consisted of “flights forward” and were carried out for no better reason than that, since money for maga￾zines was not forthcoming, it was impossible to sit still.
(Creveld 2004, 38)
This is a helpful reminder that some of our design conventions do not always retain traction with 
historicity. (See also John Lynn’s edited Feeding Wars (Lynn 1993) for further discussion on the 
topic of military supply.) Phil Orbanes and John Young’s 1812: The Campaign of Napoleon in Russia 
(1972) is an early example of a design that utilizes an innovative depletion of a region’s resources 
concept, with markers helping to show if any region on the board is undepleted, 50% depleted, or 
100% depleted.
PRODUCTION
A convention within strategic level games, sometimes seen in operational level games (such as the Levy & 
Campaign Series, 2019 onward) has players deciding how to spend what are sometimes termed “produc￾tion points.” Players allocate between different unit types for their varying advantages in varying contexts, 
often with varying costs and sometimes varying production schedules associated with them, so mecha￾nized units might be more expensive than infantry, for example, and ships might take longer to build than 
aircraft. A related convention of replacements for units that are removed over the course of play extends 
all the way back to Roberts’ Tactics (1954). We see an example of deception blending with production in 
the game Triumph & Tragedy: European Balance of Power 1936–1945 (2015), where each “unit step” 
(that is, its combat strength/hit points) costs one production point and the nature of the unit built (or the 
card drawn) is not revealed (Triumph & Tragedy, 2015, 7).16 • Design Conventions 245
RESEARCH
Sometimes linked to the production convention is a research convention, permitting players to access 
and eventually produce new technology, or to continue to produce existing technology at a cheaper rate. 
Examples include Hitler’s War (through using production points for research rolls), Axis & Allies (through 
buying research dice with Industrial Production Certificates to roll), and Empire of the Sun (2005) (through 
the play of Resource Event cards) (BGG n.d. j).
BOTS
Although the conventional definition of a game in game theory is that it must have two or more players 
making rational choices, bots permit players to replace human players with a set of automated behaviors, 
which are sometimes referred to as a form of game AI (Zagare 2019, 6). These bots enable solitaire play, 
where a player’s opponent conducts play through a set of automated behaviors. Similarly, bots may replace 
human players in games with a larger player count, with mixtures of bots and humans playing the game 
“together” (see COIN games, for example).
The history of bots in board wargames, at least in some nascent form, goes back at least as far as Fall 
of Rome (1973). But this development does not occur in a vacuum, and closer examination may reveal the 
significance of developments in miniatures wargaming. Certainly the work of Donald Featherstone and 
his Solo Wargaming (1973) merits closer consideration. Of particular note is Featherstone’s leveraging of 
the chance card concept from Monopoly (1935), which he expands on thus:
Far too promising in its scope to be allowed to rest on a Monopoly board, the chance card system is tailor￾made for wargaming and is ideal when the lonely wargamer plays by himself. Chance cards introduce 
into solo-wargaming a frustration factor by causing eventualities both pleasant and unpleasant which can 
materially affect the course of the conflict. 
(Featherstone 1973, 103)
There is far more to discuss about the origins and development of bots, but suffice to say here that a con￾vention has developed with sufficient ubiquity and complexity that they are a feature of the contemporary 
design space. Sometimes bots require fairly complex routines to be followed, perhaps assisted by flow 
charts. Sometimes bots are far simpler and perhaps only require a card to be revealed and its effects to 
be implemented. For designs with sufficient bots devised for the game’s playable factions, it is possible to 
play “nullitaire” games, where no player is actually playing the game, but are “merely” implementing the 
set behaviors of the bots to operate the game (see Nullitaire Gaming, 2022).
REFERENCES
Afrika Korps. 1964. Baltimore, MD: Avalon Hill Games.
Armchair Dragoons. 2016. https://www.armchairdragoons.com/wargaming-terms/#:~:text=Area%20Impulse%3A
%20a%20type%20of,rolls%20or%20drawing%20random%20cards Accessed August 16, 2023.
Axis & Allies. 1981. Springfield, MA: Milton Bradley.246 Paper Time Machines 
BGG. n.d. a “Area Impulse.” https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgamemechanic/2021/area-impulse Accessed January 
25, 2024.
BGG. n.d. b “Chit Pull Mechanic.” https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgamemechanic/2057/chit-pull-system/
linkeditems/boardgamemechanic Accessed January 25, 2024.
BGG. n.d. c “Nuggets Rush to the Klondike.” https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/64499/nuggets-rush-klondike
Accessed January 25, 2024.
BGG. n.d. d “Tarzan Jungle Map and Treasure.” https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/23431/tarzan-jungle-map
-and-treasure-hunt Accessed January 25, 2024.
BGG. n.d. e “Über Land Und Meer.” https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/117911/uber-land-und-meer Accessed 
January 25, 2024.
BGG. n.d. f “French Foreign Legion.” https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/1618/french-foreign-legion Accessed 
January 25, 2024.
BGG. n.d. g. "Operation Typhoon." https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/7844/operation-typhoon-the-german
-assault-on-moscow-194 Accessed May 16, 2024.
BGG. n.d. h. "Patton's 3rd Army: The Lorraine Campaign." https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/8250/pattons
-3rd-army-the-lorraine-campaign Accessed May 16, 2024.
BGG. n.d. i. "Sicily: The Race for Messina." https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/8320/sicily-the-race-for-mes￾sina Accessed May 16, 2024.
Creveld, Martin Van. 2004. Supplying War: Logistics from Wallenstein to Patton. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press.
Empire of the Sun. 2005. Hanford, CA: GMT Games.
Engelstein, Geoffrey, and Isaac Shalev. 2022. Building Blocks of Tabletop Game Design: An Encyclopedia of 
Mechanisms. Abingdon, OX: CRC Press.
Featherstone, Donald. 1973. Solo-Wargaming. London: Kaye & Ward.
Games of War. 2021. https://www.gamesofwar.org/wargame-firsts Accessed November 17, 2023.
Herman, Mark. 2020. “Designing Unbalanced Games or How to Create Strategic Surprise.” C3i. Nr. 34. RBM 
Studio.
Herman, Mark. 2021. “The Sequence of Play, or How to Organize Chaos.” C3i. Nr. 35. RBM Studio.
Hitler’s War. 1981. Baltimore, MD: Avalon Hill Games.
Lynn, John A. 1993. Feeding Wars: Logistics in Western Warfare from the Middle Ages to the Present. Boulder, CO 
and Oxford, UK: West View Press.
Madeja, Victor. 1973. “Realism Theory.” In Moves: Conflict Simulation Theory & Technique, edited by J. F. 
Dunnigan. Nr. 8. New York: SPI, April/May 1973.
Nullitaire Gaming. 2022. https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCF-XGjG1i77fRN68sectr-Q Accessed November 17, 
2023.
Saratoga. 1998. Hanford, CA: GMT Games.
Triumph & Tragedy: European Balance of Power 1936–1945. 2015. Hanford, CA: GMT Games. Rulebook.
War and Peace. 1980. Baltimore, MD: Avalon Hill Games.
Wellington's Victory: The Battle of Waterloo - 18 June 1815. 1976. New York: SPI.
Zagare, Frank. 2019. Game Theory, Diplomatic History and Security Studies. Oxford: Oxford University Press.247
17 Design 
“Unconventions”
MECHANICAL INNOVATIONS
In the re-burgeoning field of board wargame design, new developments are pushing its frontiers in all 
manner of directions. Whilst it would be an overstatement to claim every game is innovative, there is 
perhaps something innovative in many board wargames, even if it is a small and subtle element. A closer 
analysis would reveal if there is truth to this. Even series games (for example COIN, Undaunted, and
Levy & Campaign) are usually compelled to innovate to attempt to faithfully accommodate the different 
historical contexts within which their systems operate. That is, for all the conventions we have so briefly 
sketched out in the previous three chapters, board wargames are not an ossifying field. Some of the 
notable innovations that are more overt from 2019 onward include the following:
• Uboot (2019) is a hybrid analog-digital design, blending turn-based and real-time experi￾ences which combine with role-playing elements, worker placement and resource management 
mechanics. General Orders: World War II (2023) has taken the worker placement mechanic 
and reapplied it to a semi-abstract operational context (BGG n.d.).
• Undaunted: Normandy (2019) has brought the deck-building mechanic into play with tactical 
warfare, with additional settings including North Africa, Stalingrad, and the Battle of Britain, 
so far, as well as an expansion (Reinforcements) designed for solo play.
• Chancellorsville: 1863 (2020) has a solitaire mode with a ‘bot’ system to manage the activity 
of the non-player side during the game. We have looked briefly at bots in Chapter 15. What 
appears to hitherto be without precedent is a bot that retains a notion of hidden movement 
– something that is a non-trivial design challenge for a solitaire analog game. This hidden 
movement is achieved through the use of dedicated bot activation cards, specially designed 
for solo play, which drive the non-player side’s actions in the game with an integrated Hidden 
Movement Track (HMT). The HMT is a simple track of five spaces marked: 0, 1, 2, 3, 4+. The 
bot controlled units on the HMT are not actually anywhere on the board - if they were, the 
player could see them. Instead, these units are in a series of possible locations, with the range of 
possibilities increasing the higher up the HMT track those units go. The bot’s activation cards 
drive units up the HMT, or cause them to leave it and enter the board, or may also cause them 
to leave the board and to enter the HMT. If the formation moves onto the HMT in its current 
turn this ends that formation’s movement. If the formation is already on the HMT, players 
apply any modifiers to the track (for example: “Otherwise +2 HMT”), then check to see if any 
conditions apply. If they do not, this ends the formation’s movement. When a unit comes off the 
HMT onto the board is when you find out where it most likely was. But the design hides this 
from the player because it is not important for players to know this in order to play the game, 
and withholding this information keeps all housekeeping tasks to the absolute minimum. The 
important thing is not being able to see formations in transit and those that are not adjacent, 
Paper Time Machines Design “Unconventions”
DOI: 10.1201/9781003359265-20
10.1201/9781003359265-20248 Paper Time Machines 
and their arrival points being broadly consistent with the movement speeds in the game system, 
and with these also being consistent with historical possibilities. Figure 17.1, shows how the 
Reynolds formation will attack, if adjacent to an enemy south of the river, otherwise it will 
move up 2 spaces on the HMT. If the unit is already at HMT 2 it will attack space 17, or, if 
there is nothing there to attack it will cycle through the listed options in order. If it is at HMT 3 
or higher there is a different cycle of target location options (because the range of possibilities 
is different and broader). If none of these conditions apply the formation will build a redoubt in 
its current objective, or, if that is not applicable, it will attack towards its nearest objective on 
the board. Thus, if Reynolds’ formation is at HMT 1 the subclasses of the first condition apply 
and +2 HMT will move the Reynolds piece to HMT 3, where it will end its current turn. The 
Sedgwick formation has its own set of conditions to respond to.
• Atlantic Chase: The Kriegsmarine versus the Home Fleet 1939–1942 (2021) uses plotted fleet 
trajectories on the board to depict projected routes of travel, conveying both fog of war and the 
nature of strategic planning, forcing players to commit to actions but making the precise pres￾ence of a fleet on the board uncertain unless combat occurs. From the rules:
A ship or group of ships operating together, called a Task Force in this game, can be represented 
as a line, called a Trajectory. It can also be represented more conventionally as a point, in this 
game called a “Station.” As a Trajectory, a Task Force is not in one place on the Operations Map, 
it is somewhere along a line, and that line represents information you and your opponent have 
about a Task Force’s location.
(Atlantic Chase 2021, 3)
• Divine Wind (forthcoming) makes code breaking central to the conduct of the Pacific War 
(Frank Davis, 2023-4, personal correspondence). Indeed, it is hard to see codebreaking as 
FIGURE 17.1 Bot card example from Chancellorsville: 1863 (2020).17 • Design “Unconventions” 249
anything other than central to the shape the war took, given its critical role in the crucial Battle 
of Midway alone (Winton 1993, 2–10). John Winton asserts, on Midway, that “Joe Rochefort 
and his HYPO team had brought off what was arguably the greatest intelligence coup (sic) in 
all naval history,” and that Midway was a “smashing strategic victory to rank with Salamis and 
Lepanto” (Winton 1993, 2). Winton’s Ultra in the Pacific demonstrates how there is more to 
consider than just Midway alone, including other major naval battles, the submarine war and 
the ‘Atoll War’. Divine Wind operates with a relatively simple system, reliant on mutual player 
trust, which permits players to reveal hidden information relating to each other and to keep this 
revelation secret. In such a way, players are left unsure if their codes have been broken or not, 
and so are unsure if the other player knows the details of their forces in different campaign 
zones.
These are just a few examples from a fertile design field, and each is significant in its own right. 
Yet numerous other examples can be drawn from other sources. Indeed, we might consider that 
even such well-known and highly utilized components such as 6-sided die can still be repurposed 
in unusual ways. Table 17.1 is a CRT for an unpublished prototype by designer Renaud Verlaque 
(whose credits include Age of Napoleon (2003), The Price of Freedom: The American Civil War 
1861–1865 (2008); The Big Push: Trench Warfare on the Western Front in World War One
(2017); Swords around the Throne (2022)). Here the odds of victory aren’t built around the core 
metric of a strength point or manpower differential which is modified. Instead, one side having 
a force strength advantage is just one of the six metrics determining the probability of victory 
for a player’s forces (Renaud Verlaque 2023, personal correspondence). With this mechanic odds 
ratios may range from 5–1 to 1–5 (covering odds of 2–1, 1–1, and 1–2) with no complex modifiers 
to tally. The result on the sixth face, which has a medal icon on it, means the battle is won by the 
side that is deemed better in the majority of other result-determining categories (for example, 
with a Medial icon result, if a side is defending, and has the better commander, and the larger 
force, it will defeat an attacking force that is fresher).
CRITICAL GAME DESIGN AND “UNCONVENTIONS”
This being a book about critical game design, of particular concern here are developments that chal￾lenge the status quo in terms of what power structures, agendas, unsupportable assumptions and biases 
consciously lie behind - or are unconsciously wrapped up in - design conventions. In addition to the few 
examples given above there are numerous examples of designs offering these more profound disruptions. 
In this current volume, these examples refer us back to Chapters 4, 5, and 6 – Chapter 5 most of all, as we 
TABLE 17.1 CRT from Unpublished Prototype by Renaud Verlaque.
Roll Outcome
Defend/Artillery icon The defending force is victorious.
Attack/Cavalry icon The attacking force is victorious.
Commander/hat icon The force with the better commander is victorious. If tied: Defend/Artillery 
icon result.
Large force icon The larger force (with more corps) is victorious. If tied: Commander/hat icon 
result.
Health/ heart icon The fresher force (i.e. with the lower strategic fatigue, adjusted for OOS) is 
victorious. If tied: Commander/hat icon result.
Medal icon The better force overall is victorious. If tied: Commander/hat icon result.250 Paper Time Machines 
briefly examine the ostensibly “politics free” agenda of early board wargames which, below that veneer, 
is riven with a “politics secondary to military concerns” political framing. These examples also refer us 
forward to Chapter 22, when we will look at the mounting momentum of designs with postcolonial per￾spectives, and explore something of the development history of these games.
CHURCHILL
We looked briefly at Mark Herman’s Churchill: Big Three Struggle For Peace (2015) in Chapter 5, but let 
us now dive deeper. Churchill is designed for up to three players, but facilitates one or two players as well, 
through bots, and, indeed, even permits “no players,” with all factions controlled by bots. The playable 
factions of the UK, USA, and USSR must, collectively seek to defeat the Axis powers, but they also have 
their own individual agendas, to push through their own vision of a post-war world. To further complicate 
matters, any faction that achieves too much dominance as the war wraps up will not win the game – the 
notion being that any ostensible “winner” so far ahead of the other two will be a catalyst to an alliance 
formed by those clearly “losing” powers post-war, and thus the winner will not win. The rules lay out the 
details fully:
There are three end game situations:
Alliance Victory: If both Axis powers surrender and the score differential between the players with the 
most points and fewest points is 20 or fewer victory points, the player with the most victory points wins.
Broken Alliance: If both Axis powers have surrendered and the score differential between the highest and 
lowest scores is more than 20 victory points, compare the score of the player with the highest score against 
the combined score of the other two players. If the score of the player in first place exceeds, not equals, the 
combined scores of the other two players, the player with the highest score wins. If the first place score does 
not exceed this combined score the player with the second highest score wins.
Global Hegemon, Axis Conditional Surrender: If one or both Axis powers have not surrendered, then the 
player with the most points subtracts 5 points, the player with the second most subtracts 3 points, and the 
player with the fewest points adds 5 points to their respective totals …. After these adjustments, the player 
with the most VPs wins.
(Churchill 2022, 6–7)
The board is divided into two halves – see Figure 17.2. One half contains the score track and is also 
dominated by the “Conference Display,” the representation of a conceptual conference table, and the 
other half of the board is the “Military Display,” allowing for a representation of the strategic military 
situation in European and Pacific theaters demonstrating the progress players make towards defeating 
Germany and Japan with the use of tracks reminiscent of race games. During the “Conference Phase,” 
players use the values on their “staff cards” to attempt to pull issues towards their “side” of the “table,” 
the values equating to conceptual spaces the issues may be moved towards the player faction concerned. 
When a Conference Phase ends, players turn to the Military Display part of the board. Players place 
covert operations to affect the political alignment of countries in Europe, and move their “fronts” closer 
toward the Berlin and Tokyo spaces on respective tracks to win the war. The issues players have won in the 
Conference Phase highly modulate the capabilities of their armies and covert operations. The placement 
of the armies and covert operations and the relative dominance of one faction in some locations on the 
strategy board secures victory points. Play continues in these broad cycles – negotiations at a conference 
followed by strategic implementation until the game ends (by running out of time in the chosen scenario, 
or by an automatic victory condition triggering before then).17 • Design “Unconventions” 251 FIGURE 17.2 The author’s copy of Churchill (2015) – the board. Photograph by the author.252 Paper Time Machines 
This design disrupts notions of Allied powers working together during WWII with perfectly aligned 
end goals. It demonstrates political complexity and expediency at the heart of Allied strategic decision￾making driving and surmounting military decisions. Herman himself cites no inspiration for this design 
other than detecting the void in games addressing Allied diplomacy during WWII (Mark Herman 2023, 
personal correspondence). Indeed, there appear to be no clear direct precedents within the history of board 
wargaming. We have only broad precedents in games such as Diplomacy (1959), Dune (1979), Civilization 
(1980), and The Republic of Rome (1990), where players must blend competition with cooperation.
Regardless, Churchill is deeply significant within the context of the hobby. Not only has it been fol￾lowed by Herman’s own design of Pericles: The Peloponnesian War (2017), and his co-design with Geoff 
Engelstein of Versailles 1919 (2020), but other subsequent designs such as Mr. President: The American 
Presidency 2001–2020 (2023), Land and Freedom (2023), Weimar: The Fight for Democracy (2023), 
Crisis: 1914 (2024), Peace 1905 (2025), Prime Minister (2023), Congress of Vienna (2024), and The 
Weimar Republic: Political Struggle in Germany, 1919–1933 (forthcoming) all appear to be able to trace 
some form of lineage back to it. All of these designs focus on diplomatic and/or political rather than solely 
military history, with military strategy either subservient to this lens or entirely absent within the game. 
Some of these designs also utilize similar notions of winning being achieved through modulated forms of 
success: that is, “winning too hard” may be a way to (diplomatically) lose. This is also a disruption of vic￾tory conventions, introducing diplomatic complexity in the modeling of historical and military-adjacent 
topics.
REFERENCES
Atlantic Chase: The Kriegsmarine against the Home Fleet 1939-1942. 2021. Hanford, CA: GMT Games.
BGG. n.d. "General Orders: World War II." https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/381435/general-orders-world
-war-ii Accessed May 16, 2024.
Chancellorsville: 1863. 2020. Virginia Beach: Worthington Publishing.
Churchill. 2022/2015. Hanford, CA: GMT Games.
Herman, Mark. 2015/2022. Churchill: Big Three Struggle for Peace. Hanford, CA: GMT Games.
Uboot. The Board Game. 2019. London: Phalanx Games.
Undaunted: Normandy. 2019. Oxford, UK: Osprey Publishing.
Winton, John. 1993. Ultra in the Pacific: How Breaking Japanese Codes & Cyphers Affected Naval Operations 
Against Japan 1941–45. Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press.PART 4
Designing Non-Wargame 
Historical Board Games
CASE STUDIES
In the absence of established design conventions, Part 4 of this book will not attempt, in a few short 
chapters, to offer advice on how to critically design any conceivable board game on any conceivable non￾military/non-political-military topic from history, of any complexity or player count. Instead, there is a far 
more modest intention. The next three chapters are case studies on three different designs. Beyond these 
case studies, new designers are referred back to Part 2 for general guidance on the design process and a 
broad if basic introduction to relevant tools.
PART FOUR
DOI: 10.1201/9781003359265-21
10.1201/9781003359265-21DESIGNING NON-WARGAME HISTORICAL 
BOARD GAMES255
18 Case Study #1
Operation Barclay
INTRODUCTION
Operation Barclay (2024), designed by Maurice Suckling, is published by Salt & Pepper Games. It is a 
two-player game, of low/medium complexity, which plays in about 30–40 minutes. It perhaps applies the 
most stress to the definition of a non-wargame as stated in Chapter 1 in this volume; it is set during a war, 
and it is concerned with the conduct of war, but the operations are military intelligence-based with rami￾fications on military strategy, rather than the conduct of military or political-military operations per se.
BRIEF HISTORY
With the success of Operation Torch, the American-led Allied invasions in multiple North African loca￾tions in November 1942, and the subsequent military operations, the Axis powers gradually lost control of 
North Africa. Although the final surrender of Axis troops in the theater didn’t occur until May 13, 1943, 
significant Axis withdrawals were in effect in April. Yet, even prior to this, as early as January 1943 when 
Churchill and Roosevelt met at Casablanca (January 14–24), Sicily had been identified as the next target. 
Operation Husky, the invasion of Sicily, would begin July 9, 1943 (Macintyre 2010, 37).
But there was a problem. As Ben Macintyre tells us:
If the strategic importance of Sicily was clear to the Allies, it was surely equally obvious to Italy and 
Germany. Churchill was blunt about the choice of target: “Everyone but a bloody fool would know it was 
Sicily.”
(Macintyre 2010, 37)
The problem was also worse than that. At the end of February 1943 Bletchley Park, the headquarters of 
Allied code breaking, deciphered a message from the Nazi high command to its forces in Tunisia.
From reports coming out about Anglo-American landing intentions it is apparent that the enemy is practic￾ing deception on a large scale. In spite of this, a landing on a fairly large scale can be expected in March. 
It is thought the Mediterranean is the most probable theatre (sic) of operations and the first operation to 
be an attack against one of the large islands, the order of probability being Sicily first, Crete second, and 
Sardinia or Corsica third. 
(Macintyre 2010, 100)
Not only did the enemy suspect Sicily would be the target, but they also knew that deception activities 
were in full force to attempt to mislead them about what they already knew. On top of this, with Operation 
Husky already planned for early July, there was little time for Allied intelligence to react.
Paper Time Machines Case Study #1
DOI: 10.1201/9781003359265-22
10.1201/9781003359265-22256 Paper Time Machines 
Plan Barclay, as it was initially known, was drawn up by Dudley Clarke of A Force in Cairo, 
March 15–21, 1943, and fell within the auspices of Lieutenant Colonel John H. Bevan’s London 
Controlling Section in London (Holt 2004, 17–20; Smyth 2010, 69; Macintyre 2010, 37–9). (The game 
uses the date January as the start of the calendar track as the date of the Casablanca Conference, 
when Operation Husky was set and when a deception plan became necessary, even if one did not 
materialize until March.) The British intelligence community was further complicated by the exis￾tence of MI5 (domestic counterintelligence) and MI6 (the secret intelligence service), as well as 
the Twenty Committee, which ran the double-cross operations. The Twenty Committee was des￾ignated XX, Roman numerals for Twenty, and also, hiding in plain sight, a literal double cross – as 
Churchill said, “Who in war will not have his laughter among the skulls?” (Macintyre 2010, preceding 
Contents).
Barclay had two aims: to simultaneously discourage the Axis powers from reinforcing Sicily, whilst 
also encouraging the Axis to believe the targets for invasion would be elsewhere – Southern France, 
Sardinia/Corsica, the Peloponnese, or the Dodecanese (Macintyre 2010, 39).
Although the Allies were confronted with a considerable task, they did have some cause for opti￾mism. As noted above, the Allies had the code-breaking abilities afforded by Bletchley Park. Due to 
the painstaking efforts of Alan Turing and his team, since 1941 the Allies had been capable of breaking 
German codes, even the ones using the Enigma machine (Hinsley and Stripp 1993, xx). Any high-level 
codes became designated by the British as “Ultra,” meaning “Ultra Secret” as a designation above “Most 
Secret,” and this designation came into common use by the Allies (Lewis 2001, 64). This enabled the 
Allies to see how their deception efforts might be landing and where to push and pull their efforts to try 
to get the Axis powers to swallow the bait they needed them to take.
Through the ingenuity of Dudley Clarke, they had also convinced the Germans of the existence of 
a British Twelfth Army, which was an extremely potent force of two army corps, each comprising one 
armored division and three infantry divisions, with two additional armored divisions, an extra tank bri￾gade, and an airborne division (Smyth 2010, 70); potent that is, except for its entirely fictional quality. 
The specter of this force was significant in the minds of German intelligence officers who could “see” 
the damage this force was capable of inflicting on them in the Mediterranean. Indeed, through Ultra, the 
Allies were well aware that the German high command was extremely nervous about their Balkan supply 
routes: bauxite from Yugoslavia, Romania, and Greece, chrome from Yugoslavia and Bulgaria, and most 
especially oil from Romania were crucial to the German war economy (Smyth 2010, 70–1). Decrypts in 
September 1942 had revealed Hitler’s personal obsession with Crete, and his ideas of fortifying the island 
from imminent Allied attack (Smyth 2010, 71).
In addition, since as early as September 29, 1939, the Allies had in their possession Admiral John 
Godfrey’s “Trout Memo,” most likely substantially the work of Godfrey’s personal assistant, Lieutenant 
Commander Ian Flemming (later of James Bond novels fame). The memo contained 51 ideas for “decep￾tion, ruses de guerre, [and] passing on false information and so on,” including idea 28:
The following suggestion is used in a book by Basil Thompson: a corpse dressed as an airman, with 
despatches in his pockets, could be dropped on the coast, supposedly from a parachute that had failed. I 
understand there is no difficulty in obtaining corpses at the naval Hospital, but, of course, it would have 
to be a fresh one. 
(Macintyre 2010, 11–12)
This might be recognizable to many as the seed of what would become known as Operation Mincemeat, 
the plan devised by Captain Ewen Montagu and Squadron Leader Charles Cholmondeley (pronounced 
Chumley), to take a corpse, dress it as Captain (Acting Major) William Martin, and to place plans in his 
pockets to lead the German high command away from the idea of Sicily. Their intent was to float the 
body off the coast of Spain so that it would be found by Spanish agents sympathetic to the Nazis, who 
would pass this information along to them (see Smyth 2010; Macintyre 2010). The 2021 movie Operation 18 • Case Study #1 257
Mincemeat ably conveys how there was indeed difficulty obtaining the right kind of corpse, and the plan 
was wrought with uncertainties – not least of which was that if the deception had been revealed, it would 
have been a clear signal that Sicily was the real target after all.
The plan can trace lineage back to what the military intelligence community came to know as “the 
Haversack Ruse” of 1917.
In one of the most famous deception operations in history, [Major Richard] Meinzerhagen dumped an 
army haversack in a place where it was picked up by Turkish soldiers. It contained a series of false docu￾ments outlining a plan to attack Gaza with a two-pronged land and amphibious assault, with a diversionary 
attack on Beersheba ….
(Crowdy 2008, 132)
Ultimately, Operation Mincemeat worked, and has since, by the exuberant Macintyre, been deemed “the most 
spectacular single episode in the history of deception,” and “perhaps the most successful single deception of 
the entire war” (Macintyre 2010, 295). Gregory Hospodor, almost indistinguishably, tells us it was “...perhaps 
the single most successful and spectacular deception action of the entire war” (Hospodor 2018, 71). The bogus 
training of Greek troops, wireless traffic about the British Twelfth Army in Greece, the purchase of substantial 
amounts of Greek currency, the exhibition of dummy training craft in Cyrenaica and Egypt, and the active 
work of agents and double-agents also helped sell Operation Barclay (Smyth 2010, 72, 256–8).
The tangible results of the success were that minesweepers that might have been of use in the defense 
of Sicily were sent to the Aegean to defend Greece (Macintyre 2010, 289), and the first Panzer division 
was transferred from Southern France to Greece (Smyth 2010, 239). The order to move the Panzer divi￾sion was decrypted on May 21, seven days after it was clear Mincemeat had been “swallowed rod line and 
sinker” (Smyth 2010, 228). Crowdy, however, counsels caution:
Whatever Berlin may have initially believed about the Allied intentions in the western Mediterranean 
it soon became clear that Sicily was the most likely target. On 11 June the Allies captured the island of 
Pantelleria just 62 miles (100km) off the south-western tip of Sicily, despite agent Gilbert telling his con￾trollers not to be alarmed as the attack on Pantelleria was a feint. The fact that Hitler did not reinforce the 
two depleted German divisions on the island was more because the Germans feared that a general Italian 
collapse would leave their troops vulnerable and cut off than because they did not suspect an invasion. 
(Crowdy 2008, 206)
Even so, we know that on July 13th Hitler called off Operation Citadel, the German Kursk offensive, in the 
belief that even though the Allied invasion of Sicily was underway, he still believed another attack through 
Greece was imminent (the British Twelfth Army was still out there somewhere, presumably) (Smyth 2010, 
277). At least ten German divisions were committed ineffectively (Hospodor 2018, 75). The Allies did not 
have the resources for two major offensives – in the game’s terms a primary and secondary offensive – but 
the Germans did not know that, and so, after Operation Husky, they kept waiting for the other shoe to fall. 
There was no other shoe. As Crowdy says:
Whatever the reality, the real achievement of Mincemeat was the way it kept the Germans focused on 
Greece even after Husky went ahead. When the Allies began making plans to invade Italy, German inter￾ceptors showed that Greece was more likely to be a target than the Italian peninsula. In that sense A Force 
and the Twenty Committee had scored a resounding success. 
(Crowdy 2008, 206)
One week after the invasion of Sicily, Hitler transferred the SS Panzerkorps from the Eastern front to Italy 
(Macintyre 2010, 294). Once the German high command relinquished the initiative on the Eastern front, it 
was never recovered (Smyth 2010, 277). General Guderain himself said: “With the failure of Zitadelle we 
have suffered a decisive defeat…From now on, the enemy was in undisputed possession of the initiative” 
(Macintyre 2010, 294).258 Paper Time Machines 
KEY CONSIDERATIONS
1. What is the intended player count for your game?
 Two-player game.
2. Will it be suitable for solitaire play?
 No solo play.
3. How complicated do you intend for it to be?
 Low to medium complexity.
4. How long do you think it will take to play the game to conclusion?
 Roughly 30-40 minute game duration, after the game is learned.
What do you want your players to feel?: To feel clever if they can successfully bluff and second-guess their 
way through the game; anticipation and optimism that they can build the hands they wish; apprehension 
that they are being hood-winked by the other player.
Research Question: How might we depict the acquisition of intelligence and trade in disinformation 
in the intelligence war in the Mediterranean in 1943 in a fast-play, non complex 2-player game?
Replayability: This is not a legacy game. A short game time combined with little complexity but 
opportunities for skill (strategizing over probabilities) and misdirection might encourage replayability.
Scope and Scale: High-level intelligence decisions in the Mediterranean theater, over the six months 
from January to June 1943.
Actors and Factors: The game is played through the point of view of intelligence directors and through 
an amalgam of senior intelligence officer perspectives; a number of these officers are also represented on 
cards in the game. The game will incorporate five possible invasion targets in the Mediterranean, spies, 
some inclusion of double-cross operations, bluffing, and disinformation.
Ends, Ways, Means: To win, the Abwehr player must reveal sufficient “Intelligence tokens” to discover 
the Allied plans, and the Allied player must prevent sufficient Intelligence tokens from being revealed. 
Tokens are revealed by securing Evidence tokens. Evidence tokens are secured through the skillful play of 
cards. After setup, each turn each player plays one card and receives a new card into their hand.
DESIGN APPROACH
Operation Barclay puts players in the shoes of competing military intelligence directors, attempting to 
mask or learn the truth about the Allied invasion plans for 1943. Skillful management of the situation is 
the key to success for the military campaign about to begin. The Abwehr must attempt to learn where the 
Allies intend to land next, after ejecting Axis forces from North Africa. The London Controlling Section 
(LCS), the core intelligence agency responsible for Allied intelligence, must prevent the Abwehr from 
discovering the truth.
The central design problem is how to execute this as a game without clear precedents? The key 
approach was to blend a broad metaphor for disinformation – where the one who consumed the least dis￾information would be better placed to win overall – with a literal depiction of what that information could 
be used to reveal, or withhold. This design, then, is structured on two sub-games: a bluffing game (to win 
information), and a token revelation game (to use or restrict this information) directly related to the board, 
which represents the strategic level situation.
In the first sub-game players compete to take tricks, a conventional card game format broadly similar 
to the game of poker. However, what matters far more than who has the best hand, is who thinks who will 18 • Case Study #1 259
have the best hand at the end of the round. This, then, becomes a bluffing sub-game, as befits the subject 
matter of an intelligence war.
The information is then used to turn over Intelligence tokens on the board (or to prevent them from 
being turned over), which, we can see from Figure 18.1, bears close similarity with a strategic-level map.
We might represent the early systems analysis, demonstrating the player motivations blended with the 
high-level flow of the game, by way of a visualization in Figure 18.2: 
The more information the Abwehr player attains, the closer they get to discovering the truth of where 
the Allies plan to invade. Although in history the target was Sicily, in the game the setup allows the LCS 
player to choose two locations – a primary offensive target, and a secondary offensive target, from the five 
possibilities on the board. As noted above, even if the Allies only had the capacity for one major offensive, 
the Abwehr did not know this, so their own resources would still be split. There are more details pertinent 
FIGURE 18.1 Board design prototype for Operation Barclay (2024). Salt & Pepper Games and Meeple 
Foundry.260 Paper Time Machines 
to the design implementation but this may suffice In the current chapter, as a broad description of the 
design approach.
REFERENCES
Crowdy, Terry. 2008. Deceiving Hitler. Oxford: Osprey.
Foot, M. R. D., ed. 1990. Holland at War Against Hitler: Anglo-Dutch Relations 1040–1945. London: Routledge.
Hinsley, F. H., and Alan Stripp, eds. 1993. Codebreakers: The Inside Story of Bletchley Park. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Holt, Thaddeus. 2004. The Deceivers: Allied Military Deception in the Second World War. New York: Scribner.
Hospodor, Gregory S. 2018. “Operations Barclay, Cascade, and Mincemeat: Allied Deception in the Mediterranean, 
1943” In Weaving the Tangled Web: Military Deception in Large-Scale Combat Operations, edited by 
Christopher M. Rein. 63-78. Fort Leavenworth, Kansas: Army University Press.
Lewin, Ronald, ed. 2001. Ultra Goes to War. London: Penguin Group.
Macintyre, Ben. 2010. Operation Mincemeat. New York: Harmony.
Operation Barclay. 2024. Madrid: Salt & Pepper Games.
Smyth, Denis. 2010. Deathly Deception: The Real Story of Operation Mincemeat. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Trevor-Roper, Hugh. 1992. The Last Days of Hitler. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Winks, Robin W. 1996. Cloak & Gown: Scholars in the Secret War, 1939–1961. New Haven and London: Yale 
University Press.
FIGURE 18.2 Early systems analysis visualization for Operation Barclay (2024).261
19 Case Study #2
Crisis: 1914
INTRODUCTION
Crisis: 1914 (2024), designed by Maurice Suckling, is published by Worthington Publishing. It is a 1–5 
player game of medium complexity which plays in about 40 minutes to 3 hours depending on the player 
count. We briefly looked at this game concept in Chapter 8, discussing its early systems analysis visu￾alization as an example of opposing dialectics, and in Chapter 11, when we looked at boards depicting 
conceptual space rather than geographic space.
BRIEF HISTORY
On June 28, 1914, the Archduke Franz Ferdinand and his wife Sophie were assassinated. By early August 
the five major powers of Europe were at war in two alliance blocks. The diplomatic crisis that gave rise to 
WWI is often termed the July Crisis. This crisis saw Austria-Hungary issue an ultimatum (technically, offi￾cials from the Dual Monarchy termed it a “note with a timetable,” Jannen 1996, 4) to Serbia, for its complic￾ity in the assassinations. Russia backed Serbia. Germany backed Austria-Hungary – indeed the ultimatum 
was not issued without Austria-Hungary first being certain of German support. France supported Russia. 
Britain’s Sir Edward Grey did make several attempts to mediate, but his lack of clarity on Britain’s position 
may have done more to exacerbate the crisis by not deterring Germany sooner (Ponting 2003, 200). By 
the time Britain issued an ultimatum to Germany to withdraw from its invasion of Belgium, it was far too 
late for Germany and Russia to stop their mobilizations. This complex story is well covered in numerous 
volumes, including Harry Barnes’ The Genesis of World War (1929), Luigi Albertini’s three volume The 
Origins of the War of 1914 (1953 onward), James Joll and Gordon Martel’s The Origins of the First World 
War (1984 onward), Clive Ponting’s Thirteen Days (2002 onward), and more recently Christopher Clark 
The Sleepwalkers (2012), Sean McMeekin’s July 1914 (2013), and T.G. Otte’s July Crisis (2014).
KEY CONSIDERATIONS
1. What is the intended player count for your game?
 1–5-player game.
2. Will it be suitable for solitaire play?
 Solo play with minimum additional complexities – no bots.
3. How complicated do you intend for it to be?
 Medium complexity.
Paper Time Machines Case Study #2
DOI: 10.1201/9781003359265-23
10.1201/9781003359265-23262 Paper Time Machines 
4. How long do you think it will take to play the game to conclusion?
 Roughly 120-minute game duration with three players, after the game learned (longer with 
more players; perhaps 30 minutes in solo play).
What do you want your players to feel?: To feel conflicted over whether to stick or twist – whether to 
increase their score, but risk going bust, or stick with the score they have, but risk being overtaken by oth￾ers; to feel apprehensive about not having full control over the cards they will have at their disposal each 
turn, and so feel uncertain about how to proceed; to feel clever if they can manipulate the cards during the 
game to get what they want to come out when they need it to.
Research Question: Might war have been avoided in 1914, given that there was a complex mix of 
motivations within all the great powers throughout the July Crisis, and how might such a question be 
explored in an accessible multiplayer format that could also work for solitaire play?
Replayability: This is not a legacy game. Opportunities for skill (strategizing over probabilities) and 
the mechanics involved in the game of chicken might encourage replayability.
Scope and Scale: High level governmental decisions within the five major European powers, over the 
course of the July Crisis, from June 28 to early August, 1914.
Actors and Factors: Each player will take on the role of one of the five key historical actors within 
each major power’s governmental structures. Each player’s government will consist of a combination of 
hawks and doves. The existence of alliances and other historical factors, including stock market crashes, 
assassination investigations, the Cailloux Trial, and The Kaiser’s Blank Cheque, are the key issues perme￾ating the diplomatic decision space at the time of the crisis. The game incorporates concepts of national 
prestige and tension – the latter being a measure of how close a player’s country is to entering the war. 
Going to war in this game will be a loss condition.
Ends, Ways, Means: To win, players must achieve the highest national prestige, and players will 
lose if tension reaches certain levels. With the skillful play of cards players create both national 
prestige and tension. Players take one action from a set of options each turn, including playing cards 
to their tableau, drawing more cards, and altering the sequence of play, which is also a means to 
securing prestige.
DESIGN APPROACH
In Crisis: 1914 players take on the roles of the highest profile statesmen of the July Crisis: Berchtold for 
Austria-Hungary, Sazonov for Russia, Bethmann Hollweg for Germany, Poincaré for France, and Grey 
for Britain. Players attempt to win by generating the most Prestige, but will lose if they create too much 
Tension, and so force their opponents to mobilize. In this game players lose if they compel other players 
to mobilize; they are held responsible for causing the Great War to begin.
The overall premise of Crisis: 1914 is readily apparent. The assassinations in Sarajevo on June 28, 
1914 and the so-called July Crisis that ensued did not lead inevitably to full-scale European/world war in 
August. This is a view expressed by others (Martel 2014, 126; Otte 2014, 188; Joll and Martel 2023, 74). 
Further, the game design contends that the war was a result of conscious rational brinkmanship (Tunstall 
2003, 131; Williamson 1991, 213) fueled by projections of diplomatic pressure in the attempt to win 
prestige within the broader context of imperial rivalries operating along the axes of rival alliance blocks 
(Martel 2014, 159; Sagan 1986, 151–75). As Nomikos and North put it: “Self-preservation, as understood 
by national leaders, may seem to depend upon self-extension and the maximizing of power” (Nomikos 
and North 1976, 22). The rival alliance blocks are represented in this game by the concept of oppos￾ing nations, but since players win (or lose) individually, players are concerned with the success of their 
individual state and not with the success of the alliance as a unit, which is consistent with the historical 
record (Zagare 2011, 113–15) and the nature of rational state governance as a whole. These projections 19 • Case Study #2 263
of diplomatic pressure are represented by what the game calls “Diplomatic Pressure” (DP) points tracked 
on the Score Track, which is assessed and adjudicated at the end of each of the six possible game weeks. 
Players are rewarded for generating the most DP – and for some other actions of value – with points the 
game calls “Prestige,” and this is the currency of victory. At the same time, the game also punishes high 
DP and a specific action (a “Belligerence action”) with “Tension” – a measure of how close a nation is 
pushing another to a state of war.
The brinkmanship of the July Crisis is represented by a push-your-luck mechanic (Engelstein and 
Shalev 2022, 267–70) related to the acquisition of DP and a further manifestation of that mechanic in the 
Belligerence actions. The base push-your-luck mechanic has a random input (a potentially blind draw off 
the top of a deck with a card of variable value from 0 to 4). This means players cannot be certain when 
to stop escalating their DP total because they cannot readily fine-tune exactly how much of it they will 
create each game week, unless they still have cards in hand. Belligerence actions double the DP value 
of any card, but they also escalate Tension to a threshold value below which it cannot deescalate for the 
remainder of the game. There is incentive to take this action (increase DP and so have a better chance of 
winning Prestige), but it comes at some cost (increased Tension that cannot be deescalated).
As Tension increases it not only pushes opposing nations closer to war, which will cause the player 
responsible to lose the game, but also restricts future scope for DP gain: If you have already brought an 
opposing nation to three Tension, for example, then any DP total on the Score Track in excess of 24 will 
cause three more Tension – and once a nation is at six Tension, sabers have been rattled to the point of 
war. If you are responsible, you lose, everyone remaining finishes the current game week, and anyone who 
has not caused six Tension will compare their Prestige totals to determine a winner. (A game week is an 
indeterminate number of rounds, dependent on player actions, that, once completed, enables scoring and 
game end checks to occur.)
Participants were historically not sure how much tension their actions might have been generat￾ing, when or whether they might force opponents to back down (Zagare 2011, 114–17). In the end, 
of course, none of the major nations backed down when it came to war. The scoring of Prestige, as 
a measure of DP in relation to opponents” DP (if you score the most DP, you score three Prestige), 
ensures players compete in the game’s conceptual framework of rational brinkmanship and means the 
design embraces a concept of what is known as “Chicken” in game theory (Rapoport and Chammah 
1966, 10–14, 23–8).
Each player’s deck represents key personnel (and concepts) in that nation’s cabinet, government, 
military, and diplomatic corps. In the game’s terms, players do possess a degree of agency, such as when 
it comes to drawing cards or taking other actions, but this agency is constrained – by the available action 
choices in a turn and by the make-up of the decks themselves, which together reflect the belief that his￾torical factors like competition and domestic concerns limited agency themselves (Nomikos and North 
1976, 9). With this in mind, the perspective the game adopts is that of key agents in complicated situa￾tions they cannot fully control, rather than as state monoliths making predictable and stable calculations. 
As Nomikos and North have it, “without numbers of individual human beings there would be no states 
or empires and, in fact, there are no national policies or actions aside from those that are conceived and 
undertaken by people” (Nomikos and North 1976, 19).
The DP values on the cards represent a composite of each named character’s ability to project dip￾lomatic pressure and their assertiveness for war, bearing in mind their personality, personal views and 
circumstances, and the nature (scope and remit) of their given political and/or diplomatic role; in the case 
of specific concepts, it represents the extent to which that concept might have propelled a nation toward an 
assertive position. Players may decide when to draw a card to add to their Tableau value, but they cannot 
be certain if it will push them a little (or not at all) in the right direction toward a high DP or if it will push 
them too far and thereby move an opposing nation unwittingly closer towards war. Players want high￾value cards, up to a point: Too many of them, or perhaps at the wrong time (when they already have a high 
DP total), could be a disaster. Some cards in a player’s deck are not only worth 0 DP, but will also trigger 
discards from a player’s hand and make it even harder to safely navigate up the DP Score Track. These 
cards represent opposition to war – indeed, sometimes the personnel involved were so opposed to the war 264 Paper Time Machines 
that they resigned to make their position clear. Their resignations make the task of the players harder in 
the short term, even as they serve to unify the cabinet and consequently simplify the task in the long term.
Ambassador cards have the Diplomatic Back-Channel effect, which allows players to increase their 
DP total and ignore some part of the penalty in Tension. These back-channel maneuvers were informal 
and deniable (McMeekin 2013, 89).
Some personalities are afforded a “Consensus” evaluation, which permits, in conjunction with another 
Consensus card, an additional card to be played to the tableau and increases the options for players in the 
current week. Such personalities may not carry the highest DP value, but they can help maintain a high 
DP in combination with other like-minded people. This design element attempts to, in very simple terms, 
represent some of the collaborative means through which decisions in a crisis might be reached (Nomikos 
and North 1976, 19–29).
Other personalities are afforded an “Assertion” evaluation. This means they are particularly likely 
to push their nation’s DP up and, in combination with others of a similar mindset on the Tableau at the 
same time, guarantee increased Prestige. Four or more Assertion cards on a Tableau doubles the Prestige 
scored in a Week.
Often, but not always, Assertion abilities are paired with Momentum abilities. Three or more of these 
on a Tableau prevent players from opposing nations from taking Deliberate or Reorganize actions. This 
design element attempts to illustrate the ways in which the development of discussions might restrict the 
scope of maneuvers of diplomats, including by harrying them and preventing them from making optimal 
decisions. As Nomikos and North point out, “the greater the stress of crisis, the more difficult it may be 
to discern more than one or two options” (Nomikos and North 1976, 29).
The Reorganize action simulates the idea that for a cost (1 discard) players can slow down the speed 
of their responses and in exchange have a better idea of who (or what) in cabinet discussions might help 
or hinder them in the current week.
The Deliberate action simulates the idea that diplomats could take stock of the situation and increase 
their options – playing a card to their Tableau and taking two cards into hand – while also acknowledging 
that there is some cost to doing so (1 discard) and indicating that such an action surrenders any diplomatic 
initiative if it was held. Players are rewarded with Prestige for ensuring that their diplomat token occupies 
the position at the top of the Initiative track; using the Deliberate action sends a player’s diplomat token 
to the bottom of the track. This concept of initiative during the crisis affording options is the corollary of 
the design thinking in terms of the Momentum from other states limiting options (Nomikos and North 
1976, 29).
The composition and details of the decks in Table 19.1 attempts to convey a number of aspects of the 
historical situation:
The decks all possess 24 cards, but those belonging to Berchtold, Sazonov, and Bethmann Hollweg 
have a higher potential aggregate value than the decks belonging to Poincaré and Grey. This is an attempt 
to reflect a greater likelihood that they will push for higher DP totals in a week – they were most respon￾sible for setting the pace during the crisis, whereas Poincaré and Grey were relatively more reactive. 
However, contextual triggers in Berchtold’s and Bethmann Hollweg’s decks mean they get “stronger” 
as the game progresses and can also make them unpredictable. At the same time, these three decks 
(Berchtold, Sazonov, and Bethmann Hollweg) all contain game loss cards capable of causing the player 
controlling any one of these decks to lose the game by drawing the wrong card at the wrong time (see 
Figure 19.1); in other words, their higher aggregate values also come with a risk.
The generally “weaker” decks of Poincaré and Grey, on the other hand, are balanced with more 
Diplomatic Back-Channel effects, as well as more National Interests (cards that permit an additional 
play to the tableau) and Momentum effects. It is also the case that more of their 0-point cards will 
cycle out of each deck and so reflect the evolving strength of will and applications of focus of their 
respective governments as the crisis develops. The intention is therefore to balance some sense of 
historicity in the decks, as a whole, and in the cards themselves with gameplay concerns; the end 
result consequently aims to bring together historical details and characteristic asymmetries with 
a feeling of rough balance between all players, each of whom will face their own unique sets of 19 • Case Study #2 265
challenges within their respective decks. The goal of balance is further made by each deck contain￾ing six Assertion cards and by Belligerence actions remaining consistent between decks. Managing 
and timing the play of Assertion cards and Belligerence actions are perhaps the two most crucial 
decisions a player can make in their attempt to win the game.
There are some key contingencies and causal connections built into the card design. The most sig￾nificant network of cards, for instance, attempts to model the causality between the Austro-Hungarian 
ultimatum and the Russian and German mobilizations. Figure 19.1 demonstrates the nature of these rela￾tionships, which connect nine cards split across the decks of Berchtold, Sazonov, and Bethmann Hollweg.
If both the Summer Harvest Leave and The Kaiser’s Blank Cheque cards are in Berchtold’s Permanent 
Discard pile, they trigger the shuffling of the Ultimatum card into his Draw pile. Summer Harvest Leave 
is the first Draw card for Berchtold in Week 2 and is a Permanent Discard at the end of that Week. 
Meanwhile, The Kaiser’s Blank Cheque will become a Permanent Discard if it is on Berchtold’s tableau 
at the end of a week when his DP score is 14 or higher. This will likely happen in the first or second week; 
although a very risk-averse player may try to ensure it never happens, it will be difficult to win sufficient 
Prestige to win the game with this approach.
TABLE 19.1 Crisis: 1914 deck compositions.
VALUE AUSTRIA￾HUNGARY
RUSSIA GERMANY FRANCE BRITAIN
0 4 3 2 3 6
1 1 2 2 4 4
2 3 3 3 4 1
3 3 3 2 2 8
4 8 11 6 8 2
0/3 2 0 1 0 0
2/3/4 1 0 0 0 0
0/4 1 0 2 0 0
2/0 1 0 0 2 0
1/2/3 0 0 1 0 0
2/1 0 1 0 0 0
4/2/0 0 0 1 0 0
4/2 0 0 1 0 0
3/4 0 0 3 0 0
0/1/3 0 0 0 1 0
1/3 0 0 0 0 1
1/4 0 0 0 0 1
4/8 0 0 0 0 1
Max: 60 63 68 57 56
Min: 46 62 49 48 47
Assertion 6 6 6 6 6
Diplomatic Back-Channel 3 3 3 4 4
Consensus 4 4 4 4 5
National Interests 1 1 1 2 2
Caution 2 2 2 2 4
Momentum 5 5 5 6 5
Reduce Tension 2 3 4 3 3
Against War 0 1 1 1 0
Diverted Cabinet 0 0 0 1 1266 Paper Time Machines 
This design doubles down on the weight given to the so-called “Blank Cheque” and its signifi￾cance for the war party in Vienna, which felt sufficiently encouraged to formulate the ultimatum to 
Serbia (McMeekin 2013, 100). As Williamson says: “The German ‘blank cheque’ gave Vienna the 
assurance it needed to opt for decisive action against Serbia” (Williamson 1991, 196). Moreover, we 
know that these discussions on the timing of the issuance of the ultimatum were constrained by the 
furlough of various army corps around the harvest season. The nature of Summer Harvest Leave, as 
well as its relationship with the Kaiser’s Blank Cheque, means that the Ultimatum is most likely to 
come – in the game’s terms – in Week four (July 19–25); historically, of course, it would come on 
July 23 (McMeekin 2013, 122–3).
There are several consequences if the Ultimatum is played to Berchtold’s tableau. In addition to 
increasing Berchtold’s Prestige, it must be played as a Belligerence action, which ramps up irrevocable 
tension. At the same time, it triggers the entry of two additional game loss cards: the Austro-Hungarian 
General Mobilization card is shuffled into Berchtold’s Draw pile, and the Maskirovka card is shuffled into 
Sazonov’s Draw pile.
Once the ultimatum was issued on July 23 – with a response deadline of 48 hours – war with Serbia 
may have been highly likely; it was, after all, rejected and had been written “with such far-reaching 
demands that their rejection could be certain, and military operations inevitable” (Nomikos and North 
FIGURE 19.1 Interrelationship of Game Loss Cards in Crisis: 1914.19 • Case Study #2 267
1976, 55). Yet even if it was highly likely, war was not necessarily imminent – and a European-wide war 
was also quite another matter entirely. There still remained a window of opportunity for mediation (Otte 
2014, 286).
Grey made renewed attempts at mediation on July 25 and 26 (Nomikos and North 1976, 83, 116). 
Arthur Nicolson, Permanent Under-Secretary at the British Foreign Office, appears to have been of a 
similar mind, expressing his conviction that if Germany did not mobilize on July 26, there would be no 
war (Otte 2014, 295–96). That being said, these views may also simply demonstrate the extent to which 
London remained “out of touch” with the crisis on the ground.
Even so, Grey and Nicolson were not alone. On July 26, after Serbia had responded to the ultima￾tum and failed to comply with its measures in full, Sazonov and Frigyes Szapáry, the Austro-Hungarian 
Ambassador to Russia, continued to discuss modifications to the ultimatum; Germany’s Friedrich von 
Pourtalès noted at this point that Szapáry “had not excluded entirely the possibility of the Vienna cabinet 
modifying to a certain extent the form of certain demands” (Nomikos and North 1976, 111). At the same 
time, Szapáry’s counterpart in London, Albert von Mensdorff, made it clear to Grey that “the Austrian 
note was not an ultimatum, but a démarche with a time limit, and that if the Austrian demands were not 
met, Austria would break off diplomatic relations and would start military preparations, but not opera￾tions [original emphasis]” (Nomikos and North 1976, 81). Grey reported being “relieved” to hear this 
(Nomikos and North 1976, 82).
There also remained the possibility that any potential war could still be localized. Even if Bethmann 
Hollweg had already decided on a localization policy prior to the ultimatum, its issuance did not alter his 
course (Nomikos and North 1976, 63–6). This was not an anti-war policy, it was a war in the Balkans 
policy, but it was also one that did not spread beyond the region and did not involve any German mobi￾lization. At the same time, Berlin continued to doubt – at least as late as July 24 – that Austria-Hungary 
would actually complete mobilization or that Russia would actually mobilize in response (Nomikos and 
North 1976, 97, 98).
If Austro-Hungarian General Mobilization is played to Berchtold’s tableau, Berchtold loses the 
game. The design thereby makes it likely, although not certain, that this may be played to the tableau 
in Week 6. (It’s also possible for it to be played at any point from Week 3, but a play in Week 3 is only 
a possibility with incautious play by the Berchtold player.) The game argues that any general mobi￾lization will lead to a full-scale war, as indeed was the case, even as it allows for some uncertainty 
about whether any mobilization must necessarily follow the rejected ultimatum – or, at least, when 
that mobilization might take place. It is perhaps most likely that any deviation from Vienna’s path 
to war at this point would come from Berlin – to localize the war, or by encouraging (or not actively 
discouraging) mediation.
Certainly, the German Ambassador in London, Max Lichnowsky, understood the onus on 
Germany for mediatory action (Nomikos and North 1976, 99). However, because this game is 
designed to be playable without a third (German) player, there are no dependencies with the play of 
the German deck to bring out the Austro-Hungarian General Mobilization card. (This is also why 
the Kaiser’s Blank Cheque is in Berchtold’s deck and rendered here as something the Kaiser initiates, 
rather than Bethmann Hollweg.)
Maskirovka, Russia’s secret partial mobilization, likewise offers the Sazonov player incentives and 
disincentives to play it. On the one hand, it offers additional (+2) Prestige and drives German General 
Mobilization, a game loss condition card, into Bethmann Hollweg’s deck. On the other hand, it also drives 
Russian General Mobilization, itself a game loss condition card, into Sazonov’s own deck. Maskirovka – 
like Berchtold’s Ultimatum card – must also be played as a Belligerence action, which in each case ramps 
Tension, and may boost Prestige if the week is won or reduce it if the week is lost. The possibility that 
Russian General Mobilization may be drawn, rather than the certainty that it will be drawn or played, 
is intended to reflect the uncertainty that surrounded mobilization in Russia. Although partial mobiliza￾tion preceded general mobilization, the latter was neither guaranteed to take place at a certain time nor 
guaranteed to take place at all – indeed the Czar did indeed change his mind in the process (Nomikos and 
North 1976, 145–50).268 Paper Time Machines 
That the design asserts a causal connection between Maskirovka (July 28) and German General 
Mobilization (August 1) demands explanation. On July 28, three days after the Serbian response to the 
ultimatum – which, although a rejection, was nevertheless an acceptance of its most severe demands – 
the Kaiser noted that “EVERY CAUSE FOR WAR HAS VANISHED. But a GUARANTY [sic] that 
the promises WILL BE CARRIED OUT is unquestionably necessary” (Nomikos and North 1976, 135). 
Further, a partial mobilization softened German attitudes to the possibility of their own mobilization: 
Moltke expressed the view that Russian partial mobilization gave Germany no reason to mobilize, while 
Lichnowsky expressed the view that a partial Russian mobilization would be tolerated (Trachtenberg 
1990, 132, 133; Nomikos and North 1976, 117).
Nevertheless, reports of Russia’s suspected secret mobilization were confirmed on July 29 and taken 
as a response to the Austro-Hungarian declaration of war on Serbia on July 28; Russian mobilization was 
considered a move against Austria and thus compelled Germany to mobilize in response (Nomikos and 
North 1976, 144). There was in fact evident, if not unified, belief in Berlin from July 29–30 that a Russian 
partial mobilization demanded a German mobilization, even if General Falkenhayn was prepared to wait 
two or three days to respond given Germany’s greater mobilization speed (Nomikos and North 1976, 
155). As with the Russian General Mobilization card, the sense of uncertainty of precisely when German 
General Mobilization might be placed on a tableau is represented by its presence in the Draw pile. It is 
entirely possible it might not be drawn at all – and if it is drawn, it might be held by the player and not 
necessarily played.
There is another rarer means by which Maskirovka can enter Sazonov’s deck. If Nicholas II is 
on Sazonov’s tableau when either Berchtold or Bethmann Hollweg have a Belligerence level of 3 (or 
higher), Nicholas II becomes a Permanent Discard at the end of the current week and Maskirovka 
is added to Sazonov’s Recycled Discard pile. This represents the idea that Maskirovka might have 
occurred without the issuance of the ultimatum. Although unlikely in both history and the game 
– indeed, a Belligerence of 3 or higher by either Berchtold or Bethmann Hollweg is not likely to 
come early and can be avoided if it does if Sazonov uses Deliberate and Reorganize actions to keep 
Nicholas II off of the tableau – it is nevertheless supported as a possibility by general trends and 
cases in European affairs over the latter part of the nineteenth-century. The Liman von Sanders 
Affair of December 1913 and January 1914, for instance, illustrated the speed with which tensions 
could rise in St. Petersburg when the Russians felt themselves to be under evident pressure in the 
Balkans (Albertini 1965, 542–3; McMeekin 2013, 54).
Unrelated to Sazonov playing Maskirovka, another means by which German General Mobilization
enters Bethmann Hollweg’s deck occurs when the Kaiser’s Blank Cheque has been removed to 
Berchtold’s Permanent Discard pile and Mobilization Timetables is on Bethmann Hollweg’s tab￾leau with any Entente power (Russia, France, or Britain) at a Belligerence level of 4 or higher. This 
mechanism represents the idea that there is a possibility Berlin might have felt such extreme pressure 
from Russia, France, or Britain as the crisis developed that it felt compelled to mobilize – unrelated 
to a causal chain of Ultimatum leading to Maskirovka. This, indeed, is fanciful. Berlin would have 
had to feel certain that Entente powers were set on using the crisis as justification for launching a 
war. However, there is some reason to think, especially with historical German anxieties over such 
issues as a growing Russian population and the development of its railways, that this could have been 
a potentiality at the onset of the crisis, even if it did not develop this way (Albertini 1965, 573–8). 
In any case, the game models the possibility as suitably remote given that, even if the Kaiser’s 
Blank Cheque is likely to be a Permanent Discard by the end of Week 2, Mobilization Timetables is 
unlikely to be on the tableau with a Belligerence level of 4 or higher by a single Entente power until 
Week 4 at the soonest – or, more likely, Week 6. And in the event that the Belligerence action condi￾tion is met, Bethmann Hollweg can also usually find ways (e.g., Deliberate or Reorganize actions) to 
avoid playing Mobilization Timetables to his tableau.
These are the ways the core systems of the game are informed by history, but there is also history 
within individual cards and in the perspectives taken by the player characters, which are out of scope for 
the current chapter to detail (see Crisis: 1914 for the historical notes booklet).19 • Case Study #2 269
REFERENCES
Albertini, Luigi. 1965. The Origins of the War of 1914, Vol. I, II. Translated and Edited by Isabella M. Massey. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Barnes, Harry Elmer. 1929. The Genesis of World War. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Clark, Christopher. 2012. The Sleepwalkers: How Europe Went to War in 1914. New York: HarperCollins Publishers.
Crisis: 1914. 2024. Virginia Beach, VA: Worthington Publishing.
Engelstein, Geoffrey, and Isaac Shalev. 2022. Building Blocks of Tabletop Game Design. 2nd ed. Boca Raton, FL: 
CRC Press.
Jannen, William Jnr. 1996 The Lions of July; Prelude to War 1914. Novato, CA: Presidio.
Joll, James. 1984. The Origins of The First World War. London: Longman.
Joll, James, and Gordon Martel. 2023. The Origins of The First World War. London and New York: Routledge.
Martel, Gordon. 2014. The Month That Changed The World: July 1914. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
McMeekin, Sean. 2013. July 1914: Countdown to War. London: Basic Books.
Nomikos, Eugenia V., and Robert C. North. 1976. International Crisis: The Outbreak of World War I. Montreal: 
McGill-Queen’s University Press.
Otte, T. G. 2014. July Crisis: The World’s Descent Into War, Summer 1914. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ponting, Clive. 2003. Thirteen Days: Diplomacy and Disaster, The Countdown to the Great War. London: Pimlico.
Rapoport, A. and A. M. Chammah. 1966. “The Game of Chicken.” American Behavioral Scientist 10, no. 3: 10–28.
Sagan, Scott D. 1986. “1914 Revisited: Allies, Offense, and Instability.” International Security 11, no. 2 (Fall): 
151–75.
Trachtenberg, Marc. 1990–1991. “The Meaning of Mobilization in 1914.” International Security 15, no. 3 (Winter): 
120–50.
Tunstall, Gordon A., Jr. 2003. “Austria-Hungary.” In The Origins of World War I, edited by Richard F. Hamilton and 
Holger H. Herwig, 112–149. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Williamson, Samuel R., Jr. 1991. Austria-Hungary and the Origins of the First World War. New York: St. Martin’s 
Press.
Zagare, Frank C. 2011. The Games of July: Explaining the Great War. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.270
20 Case Study #3
Peace 1905
INTRODUCTION
Peace 1905 (2025) designed by Nathaniel Berkley, S.P. Shaman, Maurice Suckling, and Bill Sullivan, and 
published by Fort Circle Games. It is a one-to-three-player game of medium complexity, which plays in 
about 30 minutes to an hour depending on the player count. The game’s subject matter is the 1905 Treaty 
of Portsmouth that ended the Russo-Japanese War. Players engage in a non-zero-sum game to win, but 
must avoid winning in such a way that they cause the negotiations to break down and thus to lose the game 
as a result. This concept can be referred to as “winning too hard.”
BRIEF HISTORY
The Treaty of Portsmouth was negotiated between the Russian delegation of Sergei Witte and Baron 
Roman Rosen, and the Japanese delegation of Komura Jutarō and Takahira Kogorō, in the Naval Lodge 
in Kittery, Maine. The negotiations formally began on Wednesday August 9, 1905 and concluded 20 days 
later on Tuesday August 29, with the protocols following on September 1, the formal signing on September 
5, and ratification following in both countries on October 15 (Randall 1985, 47–76). The delegates were 
all lodged at the Wentworth Hotel in New Castle, New Hampshire (Portsmouth, New Hampshire was the 
town they passed through each day to move between the hotel and the Kittery Naval Lodge). The war had 
begun on the night of February 8/9 1904 with a surprise attack by Japanese torpedo boat destroyers on the 
Russian controlled Port Arthur, in Manchuria. Port Arthur, now known as Lüshunkou, is located at the 
southern tip of the Liaodong Peninsula, which juts into the northeastern part of the Yellow Sea, dividing 
the Korean Peninsula from the eastern coast of China. Port Arthur was a key Russian holding leased from 
China as a “warm water port” and the base of the Russian Pacific Fleet. The attack was launched before a 
formal declaration of war, which came February 10. The attack heavily damaged the Russian battleships 
the Tsarevich and Retvizan, and the cruiser Pallada (Connaughton 2004, 48–51). This attack set the war 
in motion.
The causes for the war can be most directly traced to the 1895 Triple Intervention (from Russia, 
France, and Germany) stripping Japan of the Liaodong Peninsula after initially securing it from China in 
the First Sino-Japanese War (1894–1895) (Kowner 2006, 375). This intervention was then soon followed 
(December 16, 1897) by Russia’s Pacific Squadron occupation of Port Arthur, which compelled China 
to lease it soon after (Schimmelpenninck 2005, 32–3). This occupation led to other European powers 
implementing their own copy-cat initiatives, which helped give rise to the Boxer Rebellion (1899–1901), 
resulting in Russian troops remaining in Manchuria while the Trans-Siberian railway was further devel￾oped – increasingly cementing Russia’s military position (Schimmelpenninck 2005, 43; Nakashini 2005, 
55). All this, compounded with a Russian failure to formally acknowledge exclusive Japanese interests in 
Korea, extinguished Japanese patience. As Marquis Ito Hirobumi’s government collapsed, Count Katsura 
Paper Time Machines Case Study #3
DOI: 10.1201/9781003359265-24
10.1201/9781003359265-2420 • Case Study #3 271
Case Study #3
Taro began to leverage these bitter resentments and formulate them into a policy that professed war with 
Russia was the sole viable option (Schimmelpenninck 2005, 40–3). Japanese military think tanks deemed 
this war better executed before Russia developed a second line for the Trans-Siberia railway (Nakashini 
2005, 74).
By August 1905, the war had put over a million soldiers, sailors, and engineers in arms, cost 
the lives of between 120,000 to 200,000 participants, and brought death and destruction to civilians 
(Dumas and Vedel-Petersen 1923, 57–9; Jukes 2002, 84). After numerous battles on both sea and 
land, including the sinking of both the Russian Pacific and Baltic fleets, the latter with the devastating 
Japanese victory of Tsushima (27–28 May 1905) and the great sieges at Port Arthur and Mukden, the 
Japanese were indisputably enjoying greater military success (Randall 1985, 2–3). Russia had been 
militarily humiliated, two of its Admirals (Stepan Makarov and Wilhelm Vitgeft) had been killed in 
action, Port Arthur had surrendered, and Russia was no longer able to compete at sea. With the extent 
of the military humiliations, domestic discontent had reared its head in January 1905 as Father Gapon’s 
followers, attempting to present a petition at the Winter Palace, were fired upon and the massacre of 
Bloody Sunday ensued. As many as 4,000 people were killed (Salisbury 1981, 125). On the heels of 
this, around 414,000 people stopped work in protest (Ascher 2004, 28). Russia had good reason to want 
the war to end.
Yet the situation was finely balanced. Russia still had 291,000 troops in Manchuria, outnumbering 
Japan’s 207,000, with two more corps on their way from Europe, with an efficient, if single track, Trans￾Siberian railway (indeed, the use of side-tracks ensured all trains could head east to rapidly amass a large 
military force, and Japanese military thinking seriously miscalculated how efficient a single track could 
be) (Esthus 1988, 24; Connaughton 2004, 341; Nakashini 2005, 74). Richard Connaughton tells us “The 
domestic situation was highly volatile, yet in Manchuria the Russian generals were not universally in 
favour (sic) of discontinuing the war” (Connaughton 2004, 342). Indeed, the Battle of Mukden (February 
23, 1905–March 10, 1905) had resulted in a Japanese tactical victory, but it sat within the context of what 
became clear was strategic stalemate (Esthus 1988, 24–5).
Further, although the Czar had assented to negotiations, he stipulated to Witte (whom he detested 
and was his third choice as the first plenipotentiary) that no indemnity was to be paid and no land was to 
be ceded; thus there were serious impediments to the likely success of the negotiations (Esthus 1988, 61; 
Wien 2017, 67).
The Japanese, for all their successes, had good reason to want the war to end. Japanese forces in 
Manchuria were held in deadlock and their military reserves were expended, both in manpower and 
materiel. They may have had 700,000 volunteers wishing to join the war, but these were untrained, 
and, in any case, the nation was also financially exhausted (Connaughton 2004, 342). The Japanese 
government had estimated one year of war would cost 450 million yen, and at the start of the war had 
52 million yen in the treasury (Nakashini 2005, 3–4). By August 1905, the war had already cost around 
1.8 billion yen and was costing an estimated one million dollars a day (Wien 2017, 74). The treasury 
had only been kept afloat by a series of international bonds driven by the efforts of banking envoy 
Takahashi Korekiyo (Nakanishi 2005, 57–62, 79–83). These efforts had been significantly aided by 
the Jewish banker Jacob Schiff’s response to Russia’s Kishinev pogrom of April 1903 (followed later 
by a further pogrom in October 1905) (Penkower 2004, 187; Nakashini 2005, 59). Indeed, Schiff was 
to visit Witte at the Wentworth Hotel in August and to appeal to him directly over Russia’s treatment 
of Jews (Portsmouth Peace Treaty 2005). In any event, Komura had been instructed by his government 
to make peace, but with an indemnity or reparation payment deemed essential or Japan faced financial 
ruin, thus initiating the peace process but sending it hurtling into an inevitable collision with the Czar’s 
stipulation in due course (Dennett 1959, 298–9).
Through a network of diplomatic and financial channels, and in the wake of Secretary of State John 
Hay’s serious illness, US President Theodore Roosevelt facilitated the potential for peace negotiations 
throughout the war, personally directing US foreign policy (Ki-Jung 2007, 488; Randall 1985, 3).
In the wake of the destruction of a second Russian fleet at Tsushima, Japan formally asked Roosevelt 
on May 31, 1905 to invite the warring parties to negotiate (Takeuchi 1935, 149). Roosevelt’s June 8 272 Paper Time Machines 
invitation made it clear he wished not to be directly involved (Esthus 1988, 42). Although both Russia and 
Japan agreed to the negotiations, first there were negotiations over where the negotiations would occur.
Russia first suggested Paris but Japan countered with Chefoo, China. Roosevelt mentioned The Hague, 
Netherlands, but when Russia suggested Washington, Japan agreed. As Washington was (and is) well 
known for its oppressive summer heat, Roosevelt interpreted the agreement on the American capital to 
mean that an East Coast site would be acceptable, assuming it had comfortable weather.
(Randall 1985, 11)
Prior to negotiations, in private conversations Roosevelt persuaded Komura (the Japanese Foreign 
Minister) to drop a thirteenth term, the demand of the port of Vladivostok to be disarmed, with this provi￾sion already being effectively covered by another item. Roosevelt also persuaded Komura to use the term 
“reimbursement” instead of “indemnity” (Wien 2017, 74; Esthus 1988, 70–1; Trani 1969, 119).
When negotiations did open on August 9, the Japanese delegates set out 12 terms for peace, shown 
in Table 20.1. These were not terms dictated by the Japanese delegates, but by the government they rep￾resented (Esthus 1988, 54–5).
Eight of these terms (numbers one through four, six to eight, and 12) were quickly accepted, at least in 
principle (Wien 2017, 96). However, Witte rejected numbers five (ceding Sakhalin), nine (reimbursement), 
ten (surrender of interned warships), and 11 (limiting naval strength).
Over the coming days, agreements were reached on ten and 11, but the fraught impasse over reim￾bursement/indemnity and Sakhalin over the next weeks threatened to terminate negotiations and continue 
the war. Neither side appeared willing to back down on the two remaining issues. Roosevelt became more 
involved, including crafting a letter to the Czar, which he allowed Japan’s special envoy Kaneko Kentarō
to see before sending (Nakashini 2005, 90–1; Wien 2017, 110–12).
On Wednesday, August 23, Komura proposed a compromise of offering northern Sakhalin in 
exchange for reimbursement. Witte countered by asking if Russia were to give up the whole island, would 
Japan drop the financial claim. Komura told him no, and Witte was able to place Komura in the position 
of continuing the war on the grounds of money (Trani 1969, 144–8).
TABLE 20.1 Initial Terms of the Treaty of Portsmouth (from Wien 2017, 94).
# ISSUE # ISSUE
1 Russia recognizes Japan’s paramount interests 
in Korea, and not to obstruct any of her 
control in Korea.
7 Transfer to Japan the Port Arthur Harbin railway 
and related coal mines.
2 Russia to evacuate from Manchuria at a 
certain date to be determined, and forego 
any territorial advantages in China.
8 Russia to retain the Trans-Manchuria railway but 
restricted to commercial purposes.
3 Return all occupied territories to the 
sovereignty of China except for Port Arthur 
lease which Japan will retain.
9 Japan to be reimbursed for all war expenses in 
an amount to be determined later.
4 Japan and Russia not to obstruct China’s 
open commerce in Manchuria.
10 Russia to surrender war vessels to Japan now 
docked in neutral ports.
5 Cede Sakhalin Island to Japan. 11 Russia to limit her naval strength in Extreme 
East waters.
6 Transfer of Port Arthur lease and related 
Russian interests to Japan.
12 Russia to grant full fishing rights along coasts of 
Japanese territories in Japan, Okhotsk, and 
Bering Seas.20 • Case Study #3 273
On Saturday August 26, Komura told Witte that Japan would drop all indemnity claims if Russia 
ceded all of Sakhalin. Witte refused. Komura then proposed dropping the indemnity claim if Russia gave 
up half of Sakhalin, and Witte accepted (Trani 1969, 154–5).
In St. Petersburg there were mixed responses to the peace terms, some still feeling a Russian military vic￾tory in Manchuria was likely if the war continued (Esthus 1988, 167). In Tokyo, the news of the peace terms 
was met with hostility – riots, causing three deaths and hundreds injured, with Japanese newspapers declaring: 
“The fruits of our arms have been lost by weak diplomacy. Japan victorious in the field has been defeated in the 
conference chamber” (The Mainichi Shimbun, cited in Esthus 1988, 167), and “After eighteen months of war, 
at the conference at Portsmouth, Nippon has been disgraced by a defeat more serious, more far-reaching in con￾sequences, than the disgrace of ten years ago” (referring to the Triple Intervention, cited in Randall 1985, 75).
Around the world peace was generally greeted warmly, although in Britain, an ally to Japan since 
1902, there was suspicion that Roosevelt had applied pressure on financiers to withhold any further funds 
to continue the war, and there was astonishment that Japan had fared so poorly in the final terms of the 
treaty. Jacob Schiff, a key financier throughout the war, had indeed encouraged Takahira to come to 
terms, but there is no evidence that Roosevelt was behind this. For his part, Roosevelt was concerned over 
the extent to which Russia claimed a diplomatic victory (Esthus 1988, 169–72). He was awarded the Nobel 
Peace prize in 1906 for his contributions to the treaty (Wien 2017, 152).
KEY CONSIDERATIONS
1. What is the intended player count for your game?
 Two-player game (this would later become a one-to-three-player game).
2. Will it be suitable for solitaire play?
 No solo play (this would later change).
3. How complicated do you intend for it to be?
 Low to medium complexity.
4. How long do you think it will take to play the game to conclusion?
 Roughly 30-minute game duration, after the game learned.
What do you want your players to feel?: To feel conflicted over whether to play a high card or low card – to 
win an Issue or to lose it, to secure the victory points (VPs), or to ensure the other player remains engaged 
in the conference and/or achieves their national priorities and so the game is not lost; to feel clever if they 
can keep track of the likelihood of what card the other player will play on any given turn.
Research Question: How might we model the fraught treaty negotiations that ended the Russo￾Japanese War in an accessible 2-player format that does not hinge primarily on the luck of a card draw 
or the roll of dice?
Replayability: This is not a legacy game. A short game time combined with little complexity but 
opportunities for misdirection might encourage replayability.
Scope and Scale: The game will see players attempt to formulate a peace treaty between them, cover￾ing the whole duration of the treaty negotiations.
Actors and Factors: Each player will take on the role of the key delegate for Japan or Russia. Delegates 
debate the twelve key terms of the Treaty of Portsmouth, known as Issues. Players seek to secure the treaty 
on their terms (with the most VPs), but there is also a concept of tension that might drive the other player 
to abandon the conference if this gets too high. The game also incorporates the concept of national priori￾ties, ensuring that delegates win sufficient core terms of the treaty, and other historical concepts such as 
the broader international diplomatic situation.
Ends, Ways, Means: Players win by ending the game with the most VPs. VPs are achieved by win￾ning Treaty Issues. Treaty Issues are secured through the skillful play of Position cards.274 Paper Time Machines 
DESIGN APPROACH
The initial design was formulated as part of ConSim Game Jam 2 in 2022, a 72-hour competition to design 
a playable conflict simulation game, where the specific brief was to use no more than 54 cards, no more 
than 54 components, and to have no board (other than, perhaps a board derived through the use of the 
cards) (ConSim Game Jam 2023). Original inspiration came from Mark Herman’s Churchill (2015) where 
negotiations are a key aspect. In that game negotiations are essentially half of the game, and the other 
half is concerned with implementing the results of those negotiations on the strategic map. In addition, 
the negotiations in Churchill are conducted through the use of a hand of cards drawn from a larger deck, 
representing key historical and narratively redolent personalities, whose abilities are represented with a 
numerical value ranging from one to seven. Each negotiation round, players may have stronger or weaker 
hands to draw from.
The existence of Churchill argued there may be interest in a negotiation game driven by cards. The 
context of the competition - an extremely tight timescale – compelled a tight scope for the game, and the 
Treaty of Portsmouth was chosen as a topic small enough that the requisite research could be conducted 
sufficiently quickly to allow for the maximum time to develop the concept. In addition, initially only a 
two-player game format (with players taking on the role of either Japanese or Russian delegates) was cho￾sen to help expedite the process. Later in development (after the competition), this was expanded into a 
solo player mode (playing as Theodore Roosevelt) and a three-player mode (again, with Roosevelt being 
the additional role for players to take on).
In the case of the Treaty of Portsmouth, there were not a large number of potential historical nar￾ratively redolent personalities to draw on. Instead, there were just the two delegates from each side, one 
interpreter (the Japanese used English to communicate, and the Russians used French), and one secretary 
(Wien 2017, 90). In addition, it was reported that the first plenipotentiaries, Komura and Witte, substan￾tially dominated proceedings – even casting their second plenipotentiaries in minor roles, so there was 
even less argument to base the cards on personalities (Randall 1985, 11). In addition, in Peace 1905 there 
was no strategic map on which to implement the results of the negotiations. This game would attempt to 
capture some sense of the peace negotiations, not as a means to perpetuate and conduct the war (as was 
the case with Churchill) but rather to end it.
Early in the design concept phase, there was an understanding that treaty terms can be considered 
to be elements that negotiators compete over, and that they have some means by which they conduct this 
competition. The decision was taken, then, to make the 12 terms of the Treaty into 12 “Issues cards” 
over which players would compete; each would accord with victory points, perhaps differing in value 
for each side, and securing sufficient numbers of these would secure sufficient victory points to win the 
game. These cards, then, would be objectives (the ends), and other cards, termed “Positions,” would 
be the means with which to secure these ends; thus everything was contained within cards, and there 
was no need for a board. Later in development, a board would be added to the design, largely to help 
players keep track of card placements, but also to allow for tracking of conceptual elements (such as 
tension and VPs).
The non-zero-sum nature of the negotiations and the necessity to mask information from the other 
player was central to the design approach (Brams 2003, xxi). The designers felt it critical to convey 
through the mechanics that neither side had negotiated well if they shaped a treaty that the other party 
could not tolerate – this would be no peace treaty at all and the negotiations would collapse and the war 
would continue. Thus, there was a concept that each issue players won would generate Tension, pushing 
the other player closer to walking out of the negotiations (if a player has nine Tension they leave the con￾ference), and if this happened it would be the fault of the player causing it to happen, and they would lose; 
thus players could “lose by winning too hard.”
Figure 20.1 is an early systems analysis visualization to demonstrate this early design thinking. Each 
player, for Japan or Russia, had, at this stage in development, 14 “Position” cards, each representing a 20 • Case Study #3 275
stance they play (face down) in response to any given Issue. Each of these Positions has a value rang￾ing from 0 (Acquiesce/Feint/Mollify/Deliberate) up to 4 (Threaten). The player with the highest value 
Position card played to the Issue wins it and secures the victory points associated with it. Yet the differ￾ence in the Position card’s value also manifests as Tension acquired by the losing player – thus it is caused 
by the winning player. In this way a player gets closer to winning by winning Issues, but also closer to 
losing by winning these Issues by too great a margin.
Although accounts credit Witte (the Russian plenipotentiary) with more cunning than Komura the 
decision was taken to allow players to role-play such that they were responsible for the degrees of cunning 
their strategies might exude (Esthus 1988, 145; Wien 2017, 118). Players were given an essentially identical 
chance of success in the negotiations through mirrored decks of Position cards: no one side has any unique 
abilities, each side is equally able to make the same decisions, at least at the start of the game, before used 
cards are removed from a player’s hand. See Table 20.2 for the manifest of one side’s Position cards (each 
FIGURE 20.1 Early systems analysis visualization for Peace 1905.
TABLE 20.2 Position Card Deck Manifest for Peace 1905.
# POSITION INFLUENCE TEXT
1 Listen 1 During Issue Resolution, skip this Issue during the first round.
If your opponent did not play a Threaten, you may play a 
second Position card on this Issue when it is resolved.
2 Listen 1 During Issue Resolution, skip this Issue during the first round.
If your opponent did not play a Threaten, you may play a 
second Position card on this Issue when it is resolved.
3 Listen 1 During Issue Resolution, skip this Issue during the first round.
If your opponent did not play a Threaten, you may play a 
second Position card on this Issue when it is resolved.
4 Discuss 2 After Issue Resolution, return this card to your hand.
5 Placate 2 If you win this Issue, the other player loses one Tension.
6 Emphasize 2 If you win this Issue, take a VP token.
7 Confront 3 Raising the temperature
8 Confront 3 Raising the temperature
9 Threaten 4 Not very diplomatic
10 Threaten 4 Not very diplomatic
11 Acquiesce 0 After Issue Resolution, return this card to your hand.
12 Feint 0 After Issue Resolution, if you lose this Issue, you gain no Tension 
and the other player loses one VP.
13 Mollify 0 When this issue is resolved, the other player loses two Tension 
tokens.
14 Deliberate 0 If you have the most Tension this card is worth two Influence.276 Paper Time Machines 
deck is identical). Connected to this, all these Position cards are in a player’s hand at the beginning of the 
game, so the design mitigates against a sense of luck determining the strength of an initial draw.
To deliver on the sense of masked information, to add uncertainty over how to strategize play, and 
to increase the possibility of a failed peace conference (by failing to respond to cues for compromise, or 
by cynically exploiting the other player’s inclination to respond to what they erroneously believe to be 
a cue for compromise), the design introduced a concept of hidden objectives termed national priorities. 
These correspond to the 12 terms of the treaty, but each game, every player will randomly receive three 
different national priorities; two of these correspond with Issues that the player’s side is deemed to care 
more about than the other side, and one of which might be shared by the other side. In reality, we know 
that indemnity and the ceding of Sakhalin were the most contentious issues, which could be represented 
in the game by each having one of these shared priorities. However, for the reasons listed above, the 
game makes this information variable and masks it, and, in any case, each delegation was attempting to 
work with the objective parameters of their respective governments and they were not determining these 
themselves. The game is lost by both players if either player fails to secure at least two of their national 
priorities. In this way, it is necessary for players to consider further compromises they may need to make 
to ensure a successful peace negotiation, and to harness their most powerful cards to ensure they win 
enough Issues necessary for victory. If both players have the same national priority for the same Issue, it 
may be necessary for them to engage in table talk to come to this realization and to ensure that they tie this 
Issue. However, this permits players to exploit the situation and to plead they need to tie an Issue without 
this genuinely being the case. Such a decision space is rich with potential negotiation, wholly fitting for a 
game about negotiations.
Three further decks of cards were added (in addition to Issues and Positions) which represent three 
different kinds of events. International Events cover a range of possibilities (including realigning Japan’s 
national priorities, and a Russian troop build up in Manchuria), and are always drawn at near the begin￾ning of a round, before players commit Position cards to any Issues. Town Events are triggered if both 
players have a Tension total of three or more, and these generally help to reduce Tension, representing 
historical events such as a day trip, billiards, and drinks amongst the delegates. Roosevelt Events are trig￾gered if either player has a Tension of four or more, and these events allow for various methods to restore 
equity to the negotiations, perhaps through some degree of player choice, reducing Tension, or awarding 
victory points (or both), or removing the most high-value Position cards from a player’s hand.
Play is divided into four rounds of three Issues being contested. A Renegotiation Round was added 
during development to allow players an opportunity to recover from a situation in which they would lose 
the game by not securing sufficient national priority issues, allowing them to not only renegotiate tied 
issues but also previously lost issues (up to a maximum of just three Issues between both players for this 
final round). The designers felt this also represented the reality of the negotiations wherein the most con￾tentious issues were pushed back in the schedule and not resolved until the very end of the conference.
One-player and three-player modes followed later in development. In the one-player mode, the player 
takes on the role of Theodore Roosevelt and attempts to gain a high victory point total, by ensuring each 
country wins their national priority issues (or that they tie if they both share the same one), and by keeping 
Tension for either country low. Both modes make adjustments to the Roosevelt Event deck, replacing it 
with an Uneasy Compromise deck in the case of the one-player game, altering various dynamics of play to 
increase the challenge the player undertakes, or removing the deck entirely in the case of the three-player 
mode. Having a player take on the role of Roosevelt, who was not present at the conference and made it 
clear he did not wish to be directly involved warrants an explanation. Roosevelt was instrumental in mak￾ing the conference happen, and where it happened. As sketched out above, his letter to the Czar when the 
negotiations were in crisis was likely crucial to the hopes for peace (Wien 2017, 110–12). But Roosevelt’s 
involvement runs far deeper. As early as the war’s opening Roosevelt was active in diplomatic efforts, 
to position himself as a potential mediator between the warring nations, and to cultivate credibility on 
the world’s diplomatic stage (Wien 2017, 13). Tyler Dennett details this in his Roosevelt and the Russo￾Japanese War, which began as lectures at Johns Hopkins University in 1924 (Dennett 1959, v). Norman 
Saul tells us:20 • Case Study #3 277
The road to Kittery was still a long one that led along two paths, the low one through a succession of 
Russian defeats and Japanese victories, and a high one through complex international channels that were 
ultimately dominated by the American president. 
(Saul 2005, 488)
Stanley Wien’s Ambassador for Peace: How Theodore Roosevelt Won the Nobel Peace Prize (2017) pulls 
focus on the treaty negotiations directly onto Roosevelt. Wien brings Roosevelt center stage and discusses his 
reliance on back channels to stay informed. In particular, Roosevelt relied upon Cal O’Laughlin (reporter at 
the Chicago Tribune) who was stationed in Portsmouth, Secretary Herbert Peirce (Third Assistant Secretary 
of State) Roosevelt’s official representative at Portsmouth, Baron Kaneko in New York, and George Meyer, 
ambassador in St. Petersburg (Wien 2017, 88). We know that Kaneko called on Roosevelt at Sagamore Hill 
on Long Island four times during the 20 days of negotiations (Nakshini 2005, 90). Roosevelt’s counsel to 
Keneko on June 5, 1905, in pre-conference discussions, advocating the wisdom in the seizure of Sakhalin 
might also be deemed highly significant – without the leverage this gave Komura we can speculate that the 
conference would not have ended with agreed terms (Kowner 2006, 338–9). Further, winning the Nobel 
Peace Prize perhaps gives some sense of the true scale of Roosevelt’s involvement. Thus, in a one-player 
game, Roosevelt is cast as puzzle-solver, attempting to find a path of compromise for both sides.
In the three-player mode, the players take on the roles of Witte, Komura, and Roosevelt. Witte and 
Komura players attempt to win and avoid losing in the same way as the two-player mode, while the 
Roosevelt player, using a similar but different set of Position cards and his or her own deck of secret objec￾tives, wins by having both side’s victory points tied. The secret objectives are called Presidential Priorities 
and, like the National Priorities, they correspond with specific Issues, incentivizing winning them. In the 
case of Presidential Priorities, at the time of writing, with development ongoing, they reward the Roosevelt 
player for either Russia or Japan winning one of four randomly chosen Issues (drawn from a deck) with 
the ability to transfer victory points between sides (at the expense of causing Tension to accrue on the side 
that loses victory points).
REFERENCES
Ascher, Abraham. 2004. The Revolution of 1905. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press
Brams, Steven J. 2003. Negotiation Games: Applying Game Theory to Bargaining and Arbitration. London and 
New York: Routledge.
Connaughton, Richard. 2004. Rising Sun and Tumbling Bear: Russia’s War with Japan. Reading, UK: Cassell.
ConSim Game Jam. 2023. https://consimgamejam.com Accessed November 2, 2023.
Dennett, Tyler. 1959. Roosevelt and the Russo-Japanese War a Critical Study of American Policy in Eastern Asia 
in 1902–5, Based Primarily Upon the Private Papers of Theodore Roosevelt. Gloucester, MA: Peter Smith.
Dumas, S. and K. O. Vedel-Petersen. 1923. Losses of Life Caused By War. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Esthus, Raymond A. 1988. Double Eagle and Rising Sun: The Russians and Japanese at Portsmouth in 1905. 
Durham and London: Duke University Press.
Herman, Mark. 2015. Churchill: Big Three Struggle for Peace. Hanford, CA: GMT Games. 
Jukes, Geoffrey. 2002. The Russo-Japanese War 1904–1905. Essential Histories. Wellingborough: Osprey 
Publishing.
Ki-Jung, Kim. 2007. “The War and US-Korean Relations.” In The Russo-Japanese War in Global Perspective: 
World War Zero, edited by John Steinberg, Bruce Menning, David Schimmelpenninck van der Oye, David 
Wolff, and Shinji Yokote, Volume II, 467–89. Leiden, Netherlands: Brill.
Kowner, Rotem. 2006. Historical Dictionary of the Russo-Japanese War. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press.
Nakanishi, Michiko. 2005. Heroes & Friends: Behind the Scenes of the Treaty of Portsmouth. Portsmouth, NH: 
Peter E. Randall Publisher.
Penkower, Monty Noam. 2004. "The Kishinev Pogrom of 1903: A Turning Point in Jewish History." In Modern 
Judaism, vol. 24, no. 3, 187–225. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, October 2004.278 Paper Time Machines 
Portsmouth Peace Treaty. 2005. http://www.portsmouthpeacetreaty.org/schiff.cfm Accessed October 10, 2023.
Randall, Peter E. 1985. There Are No Victors Here! A Local Perspective on The Treaty of Portsmouth. Portsmouth, 
NH: Portsmouth Marine Society.
Salisbury, Harrison E. 1981. Black Night White Snow. Lebanon, IN: Da Capo Press.
Saul, Norman E. 2005. “The Kittery Peace.” In The Russo-Japanese War in Global Perspective: World War Zero, 
Volume I 485–587. Leiden, Netherlands: Brill.
Schimmelpenninck van der Oye, David . 2005. “The Immediate Origins of the War.” In The Russo-Japanese War in 
Global Perspective: World War Zero, Volume I 23–44. Leiden, Netherlands: Brill.
Takeuchi, Tatsuji. 1935. War and Diplomacy in the Japanese Empire. New York: Doubleday, Doran & Company, 
Inc.
Trani, Eugene P. 1969. The Treaty of Portsmouth: An Adventure in American Diplomacy. Lexington, KY: University 
of Kentucky Press.
Wien. Stanley. 2017. Ambassador for Peace: How Theodore Roosevelt Won The Nobel Peace Prize. Morrisville, NC: 
Lulu Publishing. PART 5
Selected Critical Topics
PART FIVESELECTED CRITICAL TOPICS281
21 Two Unsolvable 
Problems in Historical 
Board Game Design
UNSOLVABLE?
The title of this chapter is part mere provocation. All designers “solve” these problems in their own way 
– perhaps in the manner of by-passing them, or by making a satisfactory specific determination in the 
context of their own game and its own system constraints. Yet this chapter title is also part sincere. Two 
broad topics specific to the world of historical board game design are “unsolvable,” in that whatever solu￾tions designers find for their own designs, these problems persist for other designers on new projects, with 
their own parameters and constraints.
PLAYABILITY VERSUS HISTORICITY
There is a noted perpetual tension between playability and historicity, dating at least as far back in writ￾ten form to 1969 with Richard C. Giberson’s Avalon Hill General article “Play-balance, Play-ability, 
& Historical Realism” (Giberson 1969, 4). This tension has been expressed in numerous ways by vari￾ous commentators, with board wargames being “one means toward achieving the elusive compromise 
between gameplay and simulation, between abstraction and realism” (Harrigan and Kirschenbaum 
2016, xvi).
In his 2023 SDHistCon East talk, designer Frank Davis tells us wargames are a “contradiction in 
terms,” and that whilst games are characterized as:
• Fun
• With players having omniscience
• Affording solitaire systems
• With deterministic odds
• A set sequence of play
• With clear rules
• And balanced systems …
… in contrast, “real war has none of these characteristics, but wargamers want as many of those charac￾teristics as they can get, and that presents a real problem for a serious game designer” (SDHist East 2023).
There are assuredly counters to each of these thoughts:
Paper Time Machines Two Unsolvable Problems in Historical Board 
Game Design
DOI: 10.1201/9781003359265-26
10.1201/9781003359265-26282 Paper Time Machines 
• As we briefly looked at in Chapter 2, history game players may not even be (or at least not wholly) 
concerned with “fun”. Even when players are, fun isn’t really just fun. It is often frustrating and 
hard work. As Jane McGonigal tells us, games involve high-stakes work, busywork, mental work, 
physical work, discovery work, and creative work (McGonigal 2011, 29–31). McGonigal also tells 
us there is more to the benefit of these various kinds of work than something we might term unex￾amined “fun.” She tells us of the emotional benefit of “fiero,” Italian for “pride,” but English has no 
adequate direct translation, and that it is closer to the feeling of “triumph over adversity,” and that:
Scientists have recently documented that fiero is one of the most powerful neurochemical highs 
we can experience. It involves three different structures of the reward circuitry of the brain, 
including the mesocorticolimbic center, which is most typically associated with reward and 
addiction. Fiero is a rush unlike any other rush, and the more challenging the obstacle we over￾come, the more intense the fiero. 
(McGonigal 2011, 33)
• Not all historical board wargames grant full omniscience; some have hidden information ele￾ments, and some have hidden movement. Solitaire systems may not be like real war but can 
nevertheless be useful ways of exploring decision making.
• Odds may exist in regulated form that might be considered deterministic but most games have 
some element of “friction” that means a result is seldom entirely certain – most of the time odds 
are established by dice, or some other component giving random result outputs, and are used in 
conjunction with those odds to actually determine a result.
• A set sequence of play comes with abstraction, precisely to make wargames not like real war and to 
distill the real time chaos and dynamic environment of war into a space where it can be approached 
without real casualties in exchange for the potential for analysis. This exchange does not render this 
regulated abstraction valueless. We may cite Admiral Nimitz’s statement, that apart from the kami￾kaze attacks nothing that happened in the Pacific War was a surprise, and see this as a full vindica￾tion of wargaming formulations, of ludic abstractions and set sequences of play. However, as Peter 
Perla helps to clarify, this was at a strategic level, and at a tactical level in the Pacific War there were 
notable failures through the wargaming systems in use (Curry 2011, 79–83).
• Clear rules also come with this abstraction, but this does not necessarily mean that nothing 
unpredictable may happen; CDGs, in particular (although not exclusively), have the capacity to 
bring immediate game state-altering rule exceptions.
• We might dispute the claim that all games require balanced systems, and referring back to 
Chapter 12, we might ask precisely what form of balance we are truly discussing here. Games, 
of course, perhaps even more so those based on historical topics, do not necessitate “symmetri￾cal designs”; some games might be more difficult to play as one side or other, or, through asym￾metrical design elements (such as set up, abilities, restrictions, and victory conditions) games 
might be considered balanced in terms of fairness, difficulty, or other balance metrics, and yet 
still evoke the intended history (Alonge and Fassone 2020, 57).
Even when delving even deeper into countering the problems game designers face in attempting playable 
(and accessible) ludic forms of history, such responses do not make the issues go away in any permanent 
sense. Rather, these counters demonstrate the validity in Davis’ thinking – designers must perpetually 
find responses to Davis’ points precisely because these concerns continue to preoccupy their thinking. 
The tension between playability and historicity must be wrestled with within each design on its own 
terms. As Volko Ruhnke says:
because we are trying, through a tabletop manual model, to transport you through time … to inhabit a dif￾ferent actor’s mind and body, there are just problems that are very difficult to overcome that will always 
leave a gap between … play and realism. 
(Chatter 2023)21 • Two Unsolvable Problems in Historical Board Game Design 283
Perhaps it is helpful here to recall the thinking of Jeremiah McCall, quoted in Chapter 3.
all history games … create what I call historical problems spaces. They present the past in terms of a player 
agent, like a main character who’s in some kind of game world, has goals set for them by the designer …
and the problem is how in that game world to work with or against or around the things that are in it – the 
elements – in order to get the goal?
(Studying Pixels 2022)
McCall encourages us to perceive all design decisions existing within the context of playability, alongside 
considerations of historicity, and not in terms of historicity alone.
THE DISTORTION OF HINDSIGHT
When the historian asks himself about the probability of a past event, he actually attempts to transport 
himself, by a bold exercise of the mind, to the time before the event itself, in order to gauge its chances, as 
they appeared upon the eve of its realisation (sic). Hence, probability remains properly in the future. But 
since the line of the present has somehow been moved back in the imagination, it is a future of bygone 
times built upon a fragment, which, for us, is actually the past.
(Bloch cited in Ferguson 2011, 84–5)
The “bold exercise of the mind” that Marc Bloch speaks of, to move to a “time before the event” is bold 
indeed. This use of the imagination is what powers our paper time machines. However, there are consid￾erable pressures on this imagination to accomplish such an exercise of the mind. As the novelist Arthur 
Phillips tells us:
History is written by the future, and therefore distorted at its start. There’s no other way to write it, of 
course, but it always glows with the unnatural clarity of having eliminated all the possibilities that didn’t 
happen. The present doesn’t feel like a link in a chain leading to the eventual coherent historical event, and 
unlived futures infinitely outnumber the one statistically improbable reality that occurred.
(Phillips 2020, 260, original emphasis of italics retained)
Phillips is writing with a novelist’s hyperbole about statistical improbabilities in which not all outcomes 
are considered statistically improbable, but his point surely stands – we see the past through the lens of 
where we are – from the past’s future. The bold exercise of the mind involves pretending not to know it is 
moving the mind back through already traversed time precisely as part of the very same act.
As designers we usually (and certainly ought) to know how history turned out, and we have optimal and 
suboptimal decisions to weigh probabilities (perhaps distorting them toward what did happen, deeming them 
more likely than perhaps we should) and to instill players with both expectations about what should be in the 
game and to forewarn them about it too. In a game about the 1940 German invasion of France we must both 
permit players to launch a surprise offensive through the Ardennes (for historicity), and to be able to predict 
it and prevent it (for playability), leaving us with not only a tension between historicity and playability, but 
hindsight means the surprise cannot actually be a surprise. Is this lack of the possibility of surprise the sum 
total of the actual surprise? Can we do any better? How might designers navigate this problem?
What Philip Sabin calls “iron maiden” rules impose restrictions on players or mandate behaviors to align 
the design with historicity. Sabin purports that these work better when they restrict but otherwise allow free 
rein, rather than mandating specific compelled actions (Sabin 2014, 122). John Govostes speaks in terms of 
“idiocy rules,” referencing Jim Dunnigan’s “idiocy factor” thoughts in relation to game design, accounting for 284 Paper Time Machines 
deviant or irrational behavior. These idiocy factors exist on three levels: “personal,” “military,” and “political” 
(Govostes 1972, 20). Lenny Glynn, aware of the pun, speaks in terms of “limited intelligence” driving the idi￾ocy factor and suggests “overturned” and “dummy” counters to eliminate the need for iron maiden rules (Glynn 
1972, 30). Such an approach may solve some issues but not all. What should a designer do about strategic-level 
motivations? For example, what should a designer do in a strategic-level Napoleonic game about the invasion of 
Russia? How might a designer incentivize such an offensive? Should the designer allow for the possibility that 
Napoleon could be successful? Surely so, but how might success be determined, and on what grounds? The 
capture of Moscow is evidently a problematic victory condition.
CDGs offer some potential solutions with iron maiden rules, permitting rule exceptions, which may 
alter game state conditions to incentivize or realize low probability outcomes. David Thompson has spo￾ken of the advantages of designing for solitaire play, with the historical idiocy factor subsumed within the 
game system, so that the player has no agency over them but instead is afforded the agency to counter them 
(Playing with the Past 2023). However, as with playability versus historicity, the way in which hindsight 
distorts our perception of history is a perpetual problem that designers must confront on their own terms 
within the contexts of their own systems.
PLAUSIBILITY
As intractable as both these problems are, there is one fundamental lodestar for designers offering poten￾tial guidance: historical plausibility, a topic briefly considered in Chapter 3 where we looked at historical 
games as models. If designers consider certain objectives (ends), actions (ways), or means (resources fuel￾ing ways) to be historically plausible even if not historically realized, these may help to expand the param￾eters of playability but not to transgress beyond plausible historicity. If something was historically plausible 
it is still within the bounds of historicity. If the model you have designed is fit for purpose it should generate 
the plausible possibilities that are pertinent to the topic you, as a designer, are seeking to explore.
Similarly, historical plausibility may also offer some solutions for the distortion of hindsight, perhaps 
compelling or constraining actions, or redefining objectives. This is to engage in counterfactual history – 
to ask not just what happened, not just why and how it happened, but also what else did not happen, and 
might have done, and what might have been the consequences of these alternative narrative causalities? 
To re-quote Patrick Rael from Chapter 3 of this volume: “Counterfactual history is real history … to 
engage in counterfactual history is actually to engage historical thinking, historical methods and skills …
Counterfactual history is serious history …” (Shelf Stories August 16, 2022).
It will naturally follow that the next consideration, then, is how plausible any counterfactual is, and 
whether its probability weighting within a game design might be deemed appropriate. Consider that even 
key events in the historical record - such as the 1940 German advance through the Ardennes, or Hannibal 
or Napoleon crossing the Alps - might have been deemed markedly implausible by contemporary histori￾cal actors, and yet happened all the same. Ultimately, what is plausible will be a matter for individual 
designers to square with their own game systems, intended play experiences, research, thesis and con￾science. This, in turn, will ask us to reexamine why are we attempting to “game” the history in question?
REFERENCES
Alonge, Giame and Riccardo Fassone. 2020. Rerolling Boardgames: Essays on Themes, Systems, Experiences and 
Ideologies, edited by D. Brown and Esther MacCallum-Stewart. Jefferson, NC: McFarland Company, Inc., 
Publishers.21 • Two Unsolvable Problems in Historical Board Game Design 285
Chatter. 2023. “National Security Insights from Board Games with Volko Ruhnke.” July 20, 2023.
Curry, John, ed. 2011. Peter Perla’s The Art of Wargaming: A Guide for Professionals and Hobbyists. Bristol, UK: 
History of Wargaming Project.
Ferguson, Niall, ed. 2011. Virtual History: Alternatives and Counterfactuals. London: Penguin Books.
Giberson, Richard C. 1969. “Play-balance, Play-ability, & Historical Realism.” In Avalon Hill’s The General, edited 
by T. Shaw, vol. 6. no. 4, November–December 4, 1969.
Glynn, Lenny. 1972. “Limited Intelligence.” In Moves: Conflict Simulation Theory and Technique, edited byJ. F. 
Dunnigan. Nr. 2. 30. New York: SPI.
Govostes, John. 1972. “Idiocy or Reality?.” In Moves: Conflict Simulation Theory and Technique, edited by J. F. 
Dunnigan. Nr. 2. 20–21. New York: SPI.
Harrigan, Pat and Matthew G. Kirschenbaum, eds. 2016. Zones of Control: Perspectives on Wargaming. Cambridge, 
MA: The MIT Press.
McGonigcal, Jane. 2011. Reality Is Broken: Why Games Make Us Better and How They Can Change the World. 
New York: Penguin.
Phillips, Arthur. 2020. The King at the Edge of the World: A Novel. New York: Random House.
Playing with the Past. 2023. “David Thompson Talks Historical Game Design and Lanzerath Ridge.” October 20, 
2023. https://podcasters.spotify.com/pod/show/alypv1/episodes/David-Thompson-talks-Historical-Game
-Design-and-Lanzerath-Ridge-e2ar6rm Accessed November 22, 2023.
Sabin, Philip. 2014. Simulating War: Studying Conflict Through Simulation Games. London, UK and Broadway, 
NY: Bloomsbury Academic. 
SDHist East. 2023. “Frank Davis July 27 Walks through Divine Wind.” https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fJoff￾c7hYyI Accessed November 20, 2023.
Shelf Stories. 2022. “How To Make A Great History Game (and Avoid a Bad One): Good Trouble.” August 16, 2022. 
https://youtu.be/twm3s-QocKw Accessed June 29, 2023.
Studying Pixels. 2022. “Episode 54. ‘Games As Historical Problem Spaces' (with Jeremiah McCall).” October 23, 
2022.286
22 War Stories
Intersections in 
Storytelling and Board 
Wargame Design
INTRODUCTION
On the surface, there appears to be little intersection between storytelling and board wargame design. One 
might be determined “an activity of directed linear authorial intent,” and the other as “the creation of game 
systems informed by history, geography, military sciences (amongst other disciplines) predicated on prob￾abilities, inviting (or indeed requiring) player agency to determine multi-linear outcomes.” Viewed this 
way, they are two distinct constellations. Indeed, there are precious few scholars who even visit both for 
any meaningful duration, given the ostensible distance between them. Those who do are often viewing 
wargames as subject matter and metaphor within literature, or are exploring ways of reading wargame docu￾mentation (see, for example, MacCallum-Stewart 2016; Ghamari-Tabrizi 2016). The inclusion of wargaming 
in Laurence Sterne’s The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy (1759 onward), the wargaming interests of 
high-profile writers Robert Louis Stevenson and H.G. Wells, the publication of Little Wars by the latter, and 
the 1957 Oscar-winning screenplay of The Red Balloon by Albert Lamorisse (creator of Risk (1959)), may be 
noted as curiosities, but little is usually developed of this connection beyond individual biographical detail.
However, the advent of interactive fiction, video games writing, and narrative-focused analog games 
give us ways of thinking of narrative that go far beyond “directed linear authorial intent.” Considering sto￾rytelling from non-Western perspectives can also expand our notion of storytelling as more than directed 
linear authorial intent. In aboriginal traditions, for example, the story is shared between teller and audi￾ence, as the latter interjects and redirects the story as it is told (Aboriginal Stories 2022). Storytelling 
in games can often be about the creation of narrative systems that invite or even require player agency 
to determine outcomes. Thus there are parallels between what a narrative designer does and what a 
wargame designer does in the creation of playable systems, with circumscribed moments of agency. 
Marco Arnaudo’s Storytelling in the Modern Board Game is a rare exception, where wargaming is given 
scholarly narratological considerations. Indeed, from Arnaudo we may draw some helpful frameworks 
for this discussion.
METHODOLOGIES
To clarify – there is no intention here to persuade that wargames are games that tell stories on the grounds 
that all games tell stories – QED everything is subsumed within the narrative turn. Such a view appears 
Paper Time Machines War Stories
DOI: 10.1201/9781003359265-27
10.1201/9781003359265-2722 • War Stories 287
War Stories
to come from scholars such as Janet Murray and Celia Pearce (Arnaudo 2018, 8). In a similar vein, some 
scholars including Richard Bartle suggest even abstract games have stories – the stories of how you played 
the game (Arnaudo 2018, 8). The problem is that with such a broad critical lens, it is hard to bring much 
detail into focus, and these methodologies do not sufficiently equip us to see wargames as a game type 
broadly distinct from other games that tell stories within historical settings. Storytelling games – such 
as Fiasco (2003) and Microscope (2011) – might be defined as games in which players carry the major￾ity of the storytelling load, leveraging the game’s systems for structure and inspiration but manifestly 
creating the story detail themselves. In contrast, storytelling games such as Sherlock Holmes: Consulting 
Detective (1982) and Legacy of Dragonholt (2017) certainly need players for there to be any story to 
experience. Through their choices, the systems do the work of imbuing those choices with consequence 
and revealing those consequences to the players. The current author defines the former as “systemic/story￾making hybrids” and the latter as “tailored storytelling games,” and further distinguishes “story-making 
games” – such as Once Upon a Time (1993) – and “systemic storytelling games” – such as Legion of 
Honor (2014) – “systemic/story-making/tailored hybrids” – such as Dungeons & Dragons (1974) – among 
other categorizations (Suckling 2022, 67–84).
If we compress all those game types into just “they give us story,” we have no way to distinguish, for 
example, between Washington’s War (2010), Pandemic: Fall of Rome (2018), Legion of Honor (2014), Fog 
of War (2016), Undaunted Normandy (2019), or The Grizzled (2015), by genus. We must go laboriously to 
each individually to examine in detail before we can say anything distinguishing. Does this matter? For 
many, perhaps not. But for scholars of wargaming, it is surely preferable to attempt to acquire the critical 
tools for analysis than to employ those that are too unwieldy to be useful. Or, indeed, to use none at all. If 
scholarly analysis is to be relevant it surely cannot lag so far behind the consensus of hobbyists that it is 
erroneous to describe all of the above equally as “wargames,” or at least wargames of the same kind. The 
author posted a poll through the Wargamers group on Facebook (12,422 members at the time), on April 
12, 2020. Below is the original text and the votes registered by April 17, 2020:
The following poll is part of a paper I’m researching on storytelling and wargame design:
Please vote for each game below you consider to be a wargame:
The Grizzled: 6
Legion of Honor: 12
Undaunted Normandy: 43
Fog of War: 13
Pandemic: Fall of Rome: 7
Washington’s War: 65
We can only speculate on why this apparent disparity in views exists – if indeed it really is a disparity. 
There are evident issues with this poll. There’s no way from these data to be certain that the majority of 
responders didn’t only vote for games that they know. Perhaps we’re seeing popularity more than any 
other distinction. However, given that this is a wargames group that could also be telling – accounting for 
the popularity of Washington’s War and Undaunted: Normandy insofar as wargamers know them pre￾cisely because they sit within their understanding of what wargames are. (Regardless, this is not intended 
as a definitive study in this regard, merely an indication of an issue warranting enquiry.) The Grizzled
and Legion of Honor seem more akin to storytelling games with historical subject matter – or “systemic 
storytelling games” (Suckling 2022, 72). Fog of War might be thought of more as a game of bluff, rather 
than a wargame – although this may only reveal prejudices as to how wargames are expected to function 
(Creaking Shelves 2016; Daily Worker Placement 2023). Further, as will become apparent, the concern 
here is prescient for design practitioners, who may benefit from more nuanced considerations of the sto￾rytelling/wargame design intersection. Arnaudo suggests working with Onega and Landa’s definition of 
story as “the semiotic representations of a series of events meaningfully connected in a temporal and 
causal way” (Onega and Landa 1996, 3). Through this lens we arrive at Arnaudo’s notion that wargames 
demonstrate prominent representational components and significant, even highly compelling “narrative 288 Paper Time Machines 
content,” but not sufficient for us to consider them games that tell stories, at least not the same kind we find 
in novels and movies (Marco Arnaudo 2020, personal correspondence). Arnaudo’s thinking is nuanced 
and supported in terms of narratology by the likes of Seymour Chatman, but principally the distinction is 
through the absence of individual characters in wargames as the ludic lens through which players engage 
and exploit the game system. (Arnaudo 2018, 13–35). It is Chatman who tells us: “since narrative appeals 
through the emotions and moral sense, it requires the audience to share interests and antagonisms with 
the characters” (Chatman 1978, 111). Arnaudo acknowledges wargames have dramatic causally connected 
arcs but says he doesn’t think of them – or feel about them – in the same way he does about games that 
tell stories (Marco Arnaudo 2020, personal correspondence). This view appears to be echoed by Antoine 
Bourguilleau when he says:
Wargaming creates not so much of a narrative as a narrative material. By playing wargames, the historian 
may be led to ask questions that they have never asked themselves before, at least not in the same way. 
It also brings the historian out of their usual stance of neutrality: studying Bonaparte’s 1796 Italian cam￾paigns is not the same thing as playing Bonaparte himself. 
(Napoleon.org 2020)
This view that narrative in wargames is not the same as narrative in more traditional storytelling media 
is a reasonable position for those of us who regularly play many different types of games, including 
wargames and games that tell stories. There can, of course, be hybrids and edge-cases. In particular, there 
are character-driven tactical wargames/skirmish games which potentially blur distinctions. For the most 
part skirmish-level wargames give the presentation of individual soldiers/characters but afford players the 
agency of controlling all of those characters, more akin to the perspective of a commander, rather than 
through the lens of all of those soldiers spectrally at once. Where the ludic lens is just through one indi￾vidual character that usually means we are moving into RPG games. There are exceptions here, too, with 
games such as Gladiator (1981), but perhaps we might term that a “wargame/RPG hybrid” (BGG n.d.).
The reason that narrative in wargames is of a different quality than narrative in other more traditional 
media is found in the ludic/narratological lens through which the player agency is affected. Perhaps the 
reason these distinctions may not be universally perceived is that causal progression always looks like plot 
progression to narratologists. Perhaps “games in stories,” and “stories in games” are not the domain of 
narratologists or ludologists – but for those who can fuse both disciplines, to see not essentially in terms of 
a primacy, but, rather in terms of the quality of the experiential delivery to the audience. Narraludologists 
perhaps? Or ludonarratologists? (In 2020 a new online conference for video game writers was initiated 
with the name LudoNaraCon.)
STORYTELLING FOR WARGAME DESIGNERS
What might a closer examination of narrative content within wargames reveal for wargame designers? Let 
us look at this narrative content in more discrete elements.
• Tone and Theme
As suggested in Chapter 1, it is preferable to think of “theme” as a viewpoint on a subject matter, rather 
than the subject matter alone. Tone, then, is the means by which the theme is executed. Any wargame 
design is – consciously or otherwise – an expression of an historiographic viewpoint. The linked mecha￾nisms, themes, and systems are ways of saying something about the subject matter. An American Civil 
War game, for example Lincoln (2018), in which it is easier for the Confederates to win early in the war, 
and easier for the Union to win later, is an expression of a somewhat non-contentious historiographic 22 • War Stories 289
viewpoint (unless the view is taken that the Confederates could never have won). In this way, the system 
a wargame designer creates is not without authorial intent. A wargame designer, like a storyteller, is con￾cerned with clarity of expression in relation to tone and theme. What this practically means will differ 
depending on the medium of the storytelling, but for a video games writer tone and theme are interdis￾ciplinary elements, brought forth through systems design, user interface design, art direction, character 
design, audio design, voice acting and direction, as well as text. A board wargame designer may have 
fewer opportunities to deliver on tone and theme (rarely is audio or animation a viable opportunity, for 
example), but he or she is similarly concerned with the interplay of multiple elements, not just the system 
design. The system must also be expressed through the medium, and player feedback must be considered. 
Arnaudo offers some sage warnings over attempting to distinguish intended from perceived expressions.
If a game is called "The War of Northern Aggression" I think I know what the designer thinks about the 
ACW... but then suppose I play it, and continue to lose when playing the south, what am I to make of that? 
The game is pro-south but I am not good enough to see that perspective? The game is pro-south but I mis￾understood a rule and I am playing it wrong? The game was supposed to be pro-south, but it is objectively 
unbalanced and ends up being pro-north? The game is ironic – a trap for revisionist historians that will be 
attracted by the title but are supposed to learn that the war was unwinnable? Suppose I don't even have a 
title like "War of Northern Aggression" but a neutral one, like "The American Civil War", then how many 
plays do I go through, and with how many different players, before I can ascertain that the messages I see 
are trends buried in the design and not effects of specific circumstances of gameplay? And do I know that 
any trend I see was meant by the design? This is why user-oriented criticism tends to emphasize what texts 
can say and tend to say rather than what they wanted to say.
(Marco Arnaudo 2020, personal correspondence)
Arnaudo’s point is well made. Attempting definitive interpretations of game designs is assuredly perilous, 
even more so than attempts at analysis of “stable texts” like movies or literature. Nevertheless, we must 
surely attempt interpretations and maintain a discussion relating to the perceived possible or likely mean￾ings within game design. Indeed, Arnaudo talks in terms of meanings that games “imply” rather than 
manifestly generate, and this seems a sober way to proceed (Arnaudo 2018, 137). A wargame designer 
should also take heed of this. Design intentions may be clear, but the execution may be muddled, or unin￾tentionally inaccessible, or players may extract quite unintended meanings from the game played. Games 
in general are especially prone to this, as Arnaudo neatly articulates above. Even so, a wargame designer 
can still attempt a coherent historiographic expression through tone and theme. Indeed, he or she can 
hardly avoid offering a viewpoint. Just as for historians, there is no agnostic position. Every interpretation 
of fact, and every omission (conscious or otherwise), is formulating a historiographic position. Whether it 
is ultimately coherent, or accessible, or misconstrued is another matter. No comment is still a comment.
Freeman’s Farm: 1777 (2019) serves as an example. It is an entirely conscious design decision that 
it is harder work for the British to win this battle. By the time the two forces met, the American’s held 
many advantages: hampered routes for the attacking British moving towards good defensive positions, 
rested troops, and, most of all, no need to destroy the enemy. Merely surviving and so blocking the British 
advance would – as it ultimately did – lead to an unsustainable position for the British. This is reflected 
in the game by the British player needing to take more risks to win the game than the American player 
needs to. Designer Mark Miklos has noted this design (im)balance, that “the British have to be played 
almost flawlessly to win.” However, he also notes that, at the RevCon tournament where the game is 
played, one out of its three winners thus far has played as the British side (Mark Miklos 2024, personal 
correspondence).
• Where to Start?
“Where shall I begin, please, your Majesty?” he asked.
“Begin at the beginning,” the King said gravely, “and go on till you come to the end: then stop.” (Carroll 
1986, 166)290 Paper Time Machines 
Such is the advice of the King in Alice in Wonderland. The king, of course, is right. Unless he isn’t, and 
a story should always start in media res. Like each storyteller, each wargame designer must consider 
their audience, the medium, and the essence of the experience they wish to present to their audience. 
Sometimes the incremental build up is the essential experience to convey. In other cases it is imperative 
to move quickly to the moments of dramatic crisis, because this is a better route into the overall intended 
experience. A wargame in which forces never actually meet could either be infuriating and missing the 
point, or an articulate demonstration of the importance of maneuver. All is relative to the intentions of the 
designer – and the expectations of the audience. Ultimately this is a framing that’s a function of an overall 
scope and scale of the intended experience with due consideration to the actors, factors, and ends, ways, 
and means with which the designer is working.
Take the Chancellorsville campaign of 1863 as an example. When in the historical timeframe should 
a game representing that begin? Should you focus on the climax of May 2 as Jackson achieves his flank 
move? Or perhaps the die is already cast then, so step back to May 1? Or maybe that too diminishes the 
positional jostling that was at the heart of the campaign? Perhaps, then, start in January with Hooker’s 
appointment to command the Army of the Potomac? Or is that so far back it has no real recognizable 
shape of the campaign, so you’re reneging on an implicit promise to your players? In Chancellorsville: 
1863 (2020) April 27 is the rough start date. At this date the disposition of forces is recognizable to play￾ers, but allows time for them to shape it their own way and to feel like they have some agency to make their 
own determinations. From here players can attempt Hooker’s right flank move, or split their forces like 
Lee, or try to concentrate Union forces at Fredericksburg, or even attempt to split Union forces by an auda￾cious central attack over the Rappahannock – but the initial troop dispositions are likely to be recognized 
as being those relating to the Chancellorsville campaign, not an alternative history setting.
• Thesis-Antithesis-Synthesis
There are many ways of thinking of story structure. One is to consider Aristotle’s beginning, middle, and 
end as a three-part dialectic of thesis, antithesis, and synthesis. To expand, we may see this as the intro￾duction of an idea presented through a protagonist (perhaps representing the status quo), the presentation 
and development of an opposing idea presented through an antagonist, and the tussle that unfolds as a 
result of this opposition, ultimately culminating in the synthesis – new state of affairs that could never 
have come about were it not for that tussle. Wargames take many forms, but often they are a means of 
testing ideas through a system generated to facilitate such explorations. Put another way, they are arenas 
for pitching an antithesis at a thesis, to discover a synthesis. The practical value for the wargame designer 
in embracing such a formulation is to help clarify key goals for the system and for the specific game, and 
to try to prevent losing the wood for the trees. Recalling fractions of modified movement points might 
be important, but it can be helpful to remember what the overall design goal was in the first place before 
falling too far down rabbit holes that don’t take you where you intended to go.
• Reversals and Revelations
Aristotle stated that the two most essential means by which stories play on our emotions, and therefore 
attain and retain audience interest, are reversals and revelations - the latter also being sometimes trans￾lated as “discoveries”: “a reversal is a change from one state of affairs to its opposite … a discovery is a 
change from ignorance to knowledge” (Aristotle 1965, 40–6).
A wargame designer would do well to bear this insight in mind. Of course, there are different kinds 
of wargames, with different audiences – but for commercial games, if not also in professional spheres, it 
is surely dangerous to ignore considerations of pacing. A system that affords no reversals or revelations 
before attention spans are exhausted will lose its audience. Tangibly, what might this mean? Systems with 
serious “runaway winner” design problems are a long wearisome slide into an inevitable outcome. Some 
video games employ a “rubber banding” technique – a discreet way of ensuring players can’t fall too far 
behind other cars in a race, so the game remains of interest where it might otherwise be categorically lost. 22 • War Stories 291
Similarly, techniques exist for board game designers to implement reversals and revelations. Designing 
with cards can facilitate rule modifications and rapid game state changes. Napoleon’s Triumph (2007) is 
an example of a game with rules that allow for a transformation of a game state without cards. The game 
represents the Battle of Austerlitz. The Allied player must take objectives behind the French lines as the 
default win condition, but if the French player utilizes the discretionary two corps reinforcements avail￾able but hidden (a revelation) it reverses the win conditions so the French player must now capture objec￾tives behind the Allies to win (Simmons 2016, 205–6).
Combat resolution might arguably be considered the dramatic apex of a wargame. Yet this critical 
moment is susceptible to a loss of dramatic potential. CRTs can be an impediment to dramatic pacing. 
Players are required to calculate odds, add modifiers, subtract others, roll dice, read the results and cross￾reference them on a CRT, perhaps two (one for the result and another for casualties). This is an exercise 
that might take a minute or two to be certain all numbers have been factored correctly into the calculation. 
Even when it is faster and perhaps only half a minute, this is a crucial 30 seconds in dramatic time where 
players are stalled right at the moment when they should be at their emotionally engaged.
One approach here is to make less complex CRTs and take the loss in complexity of the combat 
model. Another approach is to consider other combat resolution systems. Let’s explore a case study to 
demonstrate how a different design approach might lower the cognitive load and help designers with 
pacing.
CASE STUDY: BATTLE FORMATIONS SYSTEM
Working within the broad category we termed “Cumulative Hits” in Chapter 15, Freeman’s Farm: 1777 
and Chancellorsville: 1863 are both games in the Battle Formations series published by Worthington. 
What follows is a brief outline on how this system works – which is broadly similar across the series, but 
reference will be made to the specifics of the Chancellorsville game.
Each player has a certain number of formations – just five for the Confederates (divisions), and 
seven for the Union (corps). Each formation has a Cohesion rating, which starts at a value of 14 and 
degrades through the game towards 0. If it reaches 0 the formation is destroyed. Cohesion is a numeri￾cal representation of a unit’s overall combat effectiveness. It combines concepts of troop numbers, 
morale, stamina, equipment, and experience into one unified value for ease of play, and to concentrate 
the design lens on maneuver and high-level strategies. Cohesion, then, amounts to a formation’s “life” 
or “hit points.”
At the start of a game each player assembles a hand of three Activation cards, drawing from a deck of 
fifteen cards. Each Activation card carries information on which formations may be moved, and the num￾ber of Momentum cubes that the player receives for using this card – a number ranging from one to three. 
Once played, the chosen Activation card allows the player to move the listed formations. Each time a 
formation is moved there is a cost of one Cohesion point. The design rationale is that whenever command￾ers ask anything of their troops there is always a cost. Even troops who march happily into battle become 
tired. Troops riding a wave of elan cannot evade hunger or the need to sleep indefinitely. Campaigns take 
a toll on formations so long as those formations are put to any task. Accordingly, the game concept of 
Cohesion includes formations “degrading” with use. This has the additional design benefit of ramping 
games to an end state, in which multiple formations (especially those bearing the brunt of battle) will 
be red-lining their ability to remain effective. Formations are not only destroyed by dint of them being 
attacked by the enemy. They are also destroyed by dint of their own offensive endeavors.
A formation’s movement could – as you would expect in a wargame – lead it into combat with the 
enemy. To resolve this combat, players roll a certain number of dice – usually four or five, but possibly 
higher or lower depending on one or two modifiers (unit quality and attacking across a river). Players (the 
attackers) then check the results per Table 22.1.292 Paper Time Machines 
Players might not like what they roll, in which case they can re-roll but at a cost. The player must 
either expend three precious Momentum cubes – which are also the currency for purchasing the Tactics 
cards which are usually essential in shaping the outcome of games, granting various bonuses or abilities – 
or the formation in question must spend another Cohesion point. Players can do this as many times as they 
like, or as many times as they are able to – before they run out of Momentum cubes or run out of Cohesion. 
Formations can exhaust themselves – even destroy themselves – by repeatedly rerolling – or, within the 
game’s own narrative – by repeatedly assailing a position. Tactics cards that players have purchased may 
be used at various times as they roll, but that in essence is combat resolution in a Battle Formations game. 
This has a lower cognitive load on the player, but arguably a greater dramatic quality because there is less 
time between roll and comprehension of its meaning.
However, the moment of climax in combat between many hundreds of troops in this era is often not 
just one moment on which everything is staked. It is also an ebb and flow lasting many minutes, and there 
is tension in the build-up to the apex of a drama (Cooper 1972, 44–8). Even better if the player has the 
agency to determine the extent of this build-up. That way players are complicit in the construction of the 
drama. This type of conceptualizing is the heart of what games writing, or narrative designing, is really 
about. Therefore, making rerolling central to the combat results moment provides a way to capture some 
of this thinking. Offering rerolling in the Battle Formations system is a method for representing the tacti￾cal choice commanders made between pushing an attack or relenting. Pushing an attack would always 
incur losses, perhaps propelling a unit closer to implosion but might prove to be the best call. Throughout 
it all, the player is making difficult choices at the center of this drama.
Although there are many dice in a Battle Formations game, it’s not just a matter of rolling and seeing 
if you’re lucky or not. The question is how you respond to the rolls. Do you use your Momentum cubes to 
reroll, or save them for the Tactics cards? Do you reduce your Cohesion levels to reroll, or accept the lost 
opportunity and cut your losses, hoping to gain an advantage in a later attack? Do you have your eye on 
the Tactics tableau and how to maximize your situation in upcoming turns?
The point is, the intention behind the combat design in the Battle Formations system was to try to 
reclaim the combat resolution as a moment of drama – a moment of a key revelation at least – what the 
dice result means – if not also a moment of reversal too – I thought I was losing, but now I’m not, or I 
thought I was winning, but now I’m not. The aspiration here was to find a way to make combat resolution 
experientially appealing – more Give me the dice I want to roll!, rather than I hate figuring out the odds 
and modifiers so let me take a deep breath first while I think about it and you get bored. The intention 
was to attempt to conceive of combat resolution as a gameplay moment that could reflect something of 
historical truth at the same time as it could be fun.
Riccardo Masini has written in support of these notions:
I sincerely think that storytelling in simulation games is not just an engagement and psychological neces￾sity, but also an analytical one to keep you focused on understanding the dynamics at work, and not how 
you should make them work in game terms.
TABLE 22.1 Combat Resolution in Freeman’s Farm: 1777 (2019). 
DICE ROLL RESULT
Double 1s Attacker loses 1 Cohesion
Double 2s Attacker loses 1 Cohesion
3 Attacker gains 1 Momentum cube
Double 4s Defender loses 1 Cohesion
Double 5s Defender loses 1 Cohesion
Double 6s Defender loses 2 Cohesion
Note: a single “3” will always grant 1 momentum cube, and all other 
results, single 1s etc. all give no result.22 • War Stories 293
I particularly appreciated how you stressed out the importance of reducing the cognitive distance between 
game mechanics and results. This is true for narrative engagement reasons, but also to get a more precise 
historical view.
Actually, if we expand a bit the topic, my point is that also from an historical point of view, over-compli￾cated systems tend to shift the focus from the actual situation to the rules, just as Sabin repeatedly pointed 
out in his works.
(Twitter/X August 17, 2020)
WARGAME DESIGN FOR STORYTELLERS
Is there anything wargame designers can tell storytellers?
• Emergent Story Systems
Wargame designers can certainly speak to the development of game systems that talk to each other – 
something designers in video games such as Civilization, or narrative designers in games such as Planet 
of the Apes: Last Frontier (2017), are often also engaged in. In open world games like Far Cry (2004 
onward), this is precisely the intention behind some narrative systems, giving us player-directed emergent 
stories. In such systems, the storyteller learns to tell less. Instead he or she learns to be a facilitator of 
potential drama, rather like stacking a stage with props full of possibilities, but not dictating which must 
come into play or a definitive sequence – although the truth is sequences are often heavily suggested at, 
and at times clearly gated, prohibiting player progress and confining it down deceptively linear routes.
• Conflict
What could be better instruction for a storyteller than to consider the centrality of conflict to their art? 
(Other than, possibly, change?) Wargames are – by definition – engines of conflict. “Broadly, the system 
of a wargame is the set of mechanisms that simulate the conditions of the battle and allow for the resolu￾tion of conflict” (Peterson 2012, 203). One or more sides are pitted against others where the outcome is 
uncertain. A story where the outcome is certain will likely fail to retain audience engagement – as sug￾gested above. An audience of a story might, in fact, have a good idea what an outcome might be as deter￾mined by genre and intended audience, but often doesn’t have a good idea how that outcome will unfold. 
Uncertainty about the details of the conflict’s ultimate resolution is critical.
• Meaningful Agency
A successful commercial design is likely to offer players meaningful moments of agency in which they 
can influence the game’s outcome. Frequently, of course, this amounts to choices of units to move, 
attacks to launch, cards to play, alliances to make or break … But design around agency is more than just 
the selection of available meaningful choices. It is also – perhaps foremost – about circumscribing the 
moments of choice within the game systems; it is designing the space within a game where choices may 
be enacted. This might not necessarily mean I-Go-You-Go. For example, this can be seen in simultaneous 
play (Diplomacy, 1959), or a non-active player’s shooting phase spliced between an active player’s move￾ment round (Saratoga, 1998). These can be more than just disruptions to ludic conventions. These design 
choices can amplify themes or mechanics within the game design. Simultaneous play is surely a strong 
choice if you wish to amplify the consequences of unexpected betrayal. A spliced-in firing phase is an 
effective way of representing the ability to fire on advancing troops, rather than missing the chance until 
the enemy is already upon you.294 Paper Time Machines 
For the storyteller this is immensely close to what a narrative designer in video games does when they 
circumscribe the space within which a story may be told within a game. Similarly, when working with 
dialogue systems, a key decision is when and where to offer choice, and how much is fundamentally cir￾cumscribing and therefore highly influencing the content within. Equally, designing meaningful agency 
need not necessarily be about choices to alter a story. It might be that the “choice” provided through the 
design permits players the means to experience a predetermined story in a variety of different ways. 
Consider video games like Her Story (2015) and Return of Obra Dinn (2018). In such instances players 
can experience dramatic ironies of their own pacing and in their own uniquely stitched sequences, but 
they can never fundamentally change the details of what characters do within the content, or any deci￾sions they make. Instead, players experience a range of interpretations about these actions and decisions. 
Crucially, they experience a sensation of ownership of these interpretations, because players have arrived 
at them themselves.
CONCLUSION
There is more to say about the interrelationship between storytelling and wargame design than either: all 
games are stories and wargames are stories too, or its diametrically opposite position, there is nothing to 
be said about the two distant constellations. Instead, the suggestion is that storytelling helps to inform the 
work of wargame designers. Both need to consider consistency and control of tone and theme. Both need 
to consider how to frame the scope and opening of the experiences they shape for their audience. Both 
may benefit from working with a broad structure of thesis-antithesis-synthesis. Both benefit from under￾standing the importance of delivering audience engaging reversals and revelations. Further, wargame 
design may help to inform storytelling. Both can leverage meaningful experiences for their audience 
through emergent storytelling systems. Both benefit from the centrality of conflict and the uncertainties of 
its resolution. Both benefit from an understanding of when, where and how to deliver meaningful agency 
to audiences within the affordances of their relative mediums.
REFERENCES
Aboriginal Stories. 2022. https://aboriginalstories.com.au/aboriginal-storytelling/ Accessed October 24, 2023.
Aristotle. 1965. “Aristotle: On the Art of Poetry.” In Classical Literary Theory, edited by Aristotle/Horace/Longinus, 
29–75. London: Penguin.
Arnaudo, Marco. 2018. Storytelling in the Modern Board Game: Narrative Trends from the Late 1960s to Today. 
Jefferson, NC: McFarland and Company.
BGG. n.d. “Gadiator.” https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/1693/gladiator Accessed October 24, 2023.
Carroll, Lewis. 1986. Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland. Honk Kong: Macmillan Children’s Books.
Chancellorsville: 1863. 2020. Virginia Beach, VA: Worthington Publishing.
Chatman, Seymour. 1978. Story and Discourse: Narrative Structure in Fiction and Film. Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press.
Cooper, H. John. 1972. Chancellorsville, 1863. London: Charles Knight & Co. Ttd.
Creaking Shelves. 2016. https://www.creakingshelves.com/first-impressions-of-the-fog-of-war/ Accessed October 
24, 2023.
Daily Worker Placement. 2023. https://dailyworkerplacement.com/2017/01/30/the-fog-of-war-done-right/ Accessed 
October 24, 2023.
Freeman's Farm: 1777. 2019. Virginia Beach, VA: Worthington Publishing.
Ghamari-Tabrizi, Sharon. 2016. “Wargames as Writing Systems.” In Zones of Control: Perspectives on Wargaming, 
edited by Pat Harrigan and Matthew G. Kirschenbaum, 331–353. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.22 • War Stories 295
Napoleon.org. 2020. https://www.napoleon.org/en/magazine/interviews/antoine-bourguilleau-by-playing-wargames
-the-historian-may-end-up-asking-questions-they-have-never-asked-themselves-june-2020/ Accessed October 
24, 2023.
MacCallum-Stewart, Esther. 2016. “Wargames (as) Literature.” In Zones of Control: Perspectives on Wargaming, 
edited by Pat Harrigan and Matthew G. Kirschenbaum, 555–572. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Onega, Susana, Jose Landa, and Garcia Angel. 1996. Narratology: An Introduction. London: Longman.
Peterson, Jon. 2012. Playing at the World: A History of Simulating Wars, People and Fantastic Adventures, from 
Chess to Role-Playing Games. San Diego: Unreason Press.
Simmons, Rachel. 2016. “Goal-Driven Design and Napoleon’s Triumph.” In Zones of Control: Perspectives on 
Wargaming, edited by Pat Harrigan and Matthew G. Kirschenbaum. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Suckling, Maurice. 2022. “Storytelling and Board Games.” In Storytelling for New Technologies and Platforms: A 
Writer’s Guide to Theme Parks, Virtual Reality, Board Games, Virtual Assistants, and More, edited by Ross 
Berger, 67–84. Boca Raton, London, and New York: CRC Press.296
23 The Postcolonial Turn
COLONIALISM
Historical board games have long engaged with colonial narratives, affording little to no strategic-level 
agency to indigenous peoples that is not framed within an expansionist/colonial context. Such a context 
includes both what we may term settler colonialism (Nayar, 2015, 137) – with a focus on assimilation and 
uniformity (Young 2015, 19–20) – and exploitation colonies (Nayar 2015, 77) – with a focus on association 
and diversity (Young 2015, 19–20). What we might term two prominent colonialist “traditions” within the 
hobby are in evidence, a “strategic-level colonialism” and a “tactical-level colonialism.”
In one tradition, we see strategic-level games that afford no agency to indigenous peoples, where 
they are non-playable military and/or logistical impediments to conquest built into the game system. 
See for example: Conquistador: The Age of Exploration (1976), Civilization (1980), Pax Britannica: 
The Colonial Era 1880 to the Great War (1985), History of the World (1991), Struggle of Empires
(2004 onward), Colonial: Europe’s Empires Overseas (2011), and Colonialism (2013). In these games, 
indigenous peoples usually have little to no representational identity. We might consider Risk (1959) 
and Diplomacy (1959) – where no non-imperial/invading forces (tied to player agency) are represented 
at all – to be examples of a form of “pure” strategic-level colonialism; every agency-infused polity is 
either colonizing or it is nothing, and every agency-infused colonizing polity is either better at it than 
others (winners) or worse (losers).
In Struggle of Empires, the playable factions are Britain, France, Spain, Russia, Austria, Prussia, 
and the United Provinces (BGG n.d. a). Other polities in the game are the Ottoman Empire, and clusters 
of regional polities – the German States, the Baltic States, Central Europe, the Mediterranean, North 
America, the Caribbean, South America, Africa, India, and the East Indies. These polities/clusters have 
no agency in the game, but they are represented as regions granting various victory points – the German 
States being the highest valued region, followed by the Mediterranean and Central Europe. The capacity 
for these regions to defend themselves is represented through the random allocation of face-up counters 
drawn from the supply pool indicating a strength value from 1 to 5. The range of available strength points 
varies between regions. For example, the German States have 26 points allocated to nine different coun￾ters, with the highest single value being 4. In contrast, the Ottoman Empire has 17 points allocated to four 
counters, with a single highest value of 5, and South America and Africa each have just 1 point on one 
single counter. Defeating some of these counters in battle will grant additional victory points (against the 
Ottoman Empire), or gold (in India) to the victorious player. In addition, each region, instead of receiving 
strength points with which to defend itself, may grant additional resources for colonial exploitation – 
either “population” (representing immigration from home countries) or “slaves” (representing the trading 
and importing of slaves from Africa). These resources are also regionally tailored. The European regions 
have no population or slave resources, whereas India and Africa each have two population counters, the 
Caribbean has two population and five slave counters, and the East Indies, North America, and South 
America have three, four, and five counters of various combinations, respectively. In such a design, indig￾enous peoples are not absent, they are represented through non-agency affording systems.
In Colonialism each player controls a “nondescript colonial power” (BGG, Colonialism Rules v2.3 
2010, 2). The color of player discs, representing influence, and small wooden ships, representing fleets, 
Paper Time Machines The Postcolonial Turn
DOI: 10.1201/9781003359265-28
10.1201/9781003359265-2823 • The Postcolonial Turn 297
The Postcolonial Turn
are blue, red, green, and white. The native influence, represented by gray disks, must be removed for the 
colonial powers to take the resources from the six different land regions and thereby win the game. The 
gray discs are added by the game system at specific junctures in the play sequence, in specific quantities, 
and removed by players as they seek to achieve victory conditions. There is no name for the discs beyond 
“native influence” (BGG, Colonialism Rules v2.3 2010, 5), and there is no distinction made between the 
different regions or within them. The rules tell us the discs represent “the various interests and peoples 
that are the native power in each region” (BGG, Colonialism Rules v2.3 2010, 5).
In some versions of the rules, the land regions are named: North Africa, Sub-Saharan Africa, Middle 
East, India, China, South East Asia (BGG n.d. b). The sea regions are also named in these versions of 
the rules: Mediterranean, Gulf of Guinea, Arabian Sea, Indian Ocean, Pacific Ocean. In printed copies 
of the board, these regions are not named, yet the delineation of coastlines makes it impossible not to 
see that the map is referencing the real world. The rules openly state: “Colonialism is a game of C19th 
imperialism.” (BGG, Colonialism Rules v2.3 2010, 2). Details on the cards, such as “Gurkhas” and their 
impact in the India region, “Berlin Conference” and its impact on the Sub-Saharan region, and “Boxer 
Rebellion” and its impact in the China region, further underline that the real world, and real history are 
being referenced. The approach here appears intended to align the game with history, but to constrain 
any sense of glorification. It is notable that many graphic elements within the game show the chains of 
slavery. Indeed, the box cover art of the game on BGG is nothing but a ball, chain, and cuff. The game, 
then, seeks to address the subject of colonialism without shying away from the centrality of slavery and 
subjugation to it.
Of course, some of these games might be considered critiques of colonialism. Indeed, Colonialism
has a sub-header in its entry on BoardGameGeek “Plunder foreign lands in this brutal critique of the 
Colonial Period” (BGGn.d. b). As briefly outlined above, the game design does evoke and provoke the 
conflict and exploitation bound up in colonialism. But however much one considers the game to critique 
colonialism rather than presenting a demonstration of it, and wherever the designer’s intentions lay, the 
game still exists firmly within a colonial framework. The design may be dismissive of this framework, but 
the way the design orders the world and makes sense of interacting with it is demonstrably colonialist. The 
same observations have been made of John Company: Second Edition (2022), a game about profiteering 
through the English/British East India Company, which its designer Cole Wehrle describes as a “satire” 
(Winkie 2024). Tom Brewster of Shut Up & Sit Down, despite his high recommendation of the game as a 
work of art, says of the game:
To many people this game uses horror as its playground. It revels in a period of history so monstrously evil 
that to even represent it is an act of violence. No matter its intentions, it cannot escape the gravity of that 
terror. 
(Shut Up & Sit Down 2023)
In another tradition within the hobby, we also see games where indigenous peoples are given agency at a 
tactical level, being a playable faction in a battle that is often noteworthy within the context of a colonial 
narrative about ultimate military conquest. Examples of such games are: Remember Gordon: The Battle 
of Omdurman (1982), Zulu Attack (1982), Khyber Rifles (1984), Victoria Cross: The Battle of Rorke’s 
Drift (2004), and Victoria Cross II: Battle of Isandlwana & Rorke’s Drift (2011).
Without agency indigenous peoples are written into the margins of history, or else written out entirely. 
Without strategic-level agency, conquest and submission appear ultimately inevitable and perhaps essen￾tially military contests, with plurality and complexity boiled away into more brutalist and colonialist 
terms. Even with tactical-level agency indigenous histories are confined and contextualized as military 
triumph or disaster, but within a framework of a persistent colonial narrative – we learn little of indige￾nous history other than their ability or inability to defeat colonial forces in battle at any given time. Where 
are the games on the expansion of the Zulu empire, before it encountered the British? We have Zulus on 
the Ramparts: The Battle of Rorke’s Drift (2009), which is a solo game, from the British perspective. 
There are as yet no games of this battle solely from the Zulu perspective. The small manageable number 298 Paper Time Machines 
of defenders in this battle is only part of the issue. The heroic gloss of the narrative from the British per￾spective also carries primary sway.
There are traceable reasons why such traditions exist. Player count is a factor. A game about the 
Scramble for Africa has many participants and perspectives to consider. Aside from the number of 
European powers participating in the acquisition of colonies (up to as many as seven), there are consider￾able numbers of different African polities to consider who are attempting to resist being acquired as colo￾nies – perhaps, on occasion, by means of assisting in the colonization of rival African polities. All games 
seeking to depict history must streamline and gloss, so where does the designer draw the line if the design, 
and the market, will only tolerate a four-player game? Game time, of course, is a further connected factor. 
Which factions get assigned agency? To complicate matters for the designer, how do you make certain 
factions playable? If the type of warfare conducted by indigenous peoples is so strikingly different from 
that conducted by colonizing forces, and the strategic context of the war is so strikingly different for each 
participant, might you end up really needing to design two – or more – totally different games and then 
somehow need to splice them all together? What kind of disjointed and uncomfortable experience might 
that be for players?
Miniatures wargaming has a long tradition of accommodating asymmetric design elements – dif￾ferent units have different strengths and weaknesses, so this is not a serious issue within tactical-level 
wargames. See, for example, Bruce Quarrie’s Napoleon’s Campaigns in Miniature (1977), with its infor￾mation carried in tables on troops types by national characteristics, demonstrating the superior morale 
of elite units, faster movement of cavalry, the lower fire factor of inferior troops, the lack of control 
modifiers for guerilla troops, etc. (Quarrie 1977, 172–5). However, at a strategic level the design tools for 
asymmetric representations seem to have taken time to evolve more fully. Perhaps the far most significant 
reason is pervasive cultural and historical dynamics. The majority of designers of board wargames have 
come and continue to come from the West (especially the US and UK, with Canada, France, Poland, 
Spain, Italy, Germany, and Japan also being areas of note), and these designers have persistently drawn 
from their own cultural context to develop games that generally make commercial sense within that same 
cultural context. This assertion, in a preponderance of US and UK designers, with France, Poland, Italy, 
Germany, and Japan also represented above other nationalities is assuredly hard to prove. However, cross￾referencing many of the major designers over the last 50 years, with many well-regarded games as listed 
on BGG and winners of awards such as the Charles S. Roberts awards appears to bear this out. A fuller 
study is necessary to be able to make this claim with greater certainty. In any event, familiar cultural nar￾ratives not only inspire designers, they also ensure the potential of a receptive audience (and publisher), so 
the narratives keep being moved around and it is hard for new narratives to break into this cultural space. 
It may have been hard to persuade a British board game publisher in the 1980s that there was a market 
for a game giving Igbo people (one of the ethnic groups in Nigeria) agency in a three-player game about 
the Scramble for Africa. As long as those Igbo people have no presence in the cultural narrative, it will 
continue to be a fixed loop reinforcing Eurocentric colonialism. Even today a Western publisher might 
reason there is considerably more commercial interest from a predominantly Western market in a game 
about Rorke’s Drift designed from the British perspective, rather from that of the Zulus.
THE POSTCOLONIAL TURN
However, that cultural loop is not wholly fixed. It takes time for new narratives to penetrate it, but it can be 
done. This is the work of critical thinking and the way it permeates (or fails to) into the media and the cul￾tural landscape. If we look at games such as Khyber Rifles: Britannia in Afghanistan (2012), Navajo Wars: 
A History of the American Southwest 1598–1864 (2013), Pax Pamir (2015 and 2019), Comanchería: The 
Rise and Fall of the Comanche Empire (2016), Colonial Twilight: The French Algerian War: 1954–62 
(2017), The White Tribe: Rhodesia’s War 1966–1980 (2018), Gandhi: The Decolonization of British India 23 • The Postcolonial Turn 299
1917–1947 (2019), The Red Burnoose: Algeria 1857 (2022), and The British Way: Counterinsurgency at 
the end of Empire (2023), we can say that the beginnings of a third tradition in relation to colonialism has 
also been emerging. We may even say this tradition is now flowering, and perhaps consider we are at a 
“postcolonial moment.” That said, we should accept that “postcolonial” is a problematic term for a host 
of reasons, including the effects of the colonial era still being with us, and, indeed, colonialism itself still 
being evident and perhaps even inescapable (Williams 1993, 91–102). In addition, if we define colonial￾ism as “one nation taking territory and dominating the people in this conquered territory” (Flanagan and 
Jakobsson 2023, 9), it can appear impossible to conceive of a wargame as ever being anything other than 
colonial.
Accordingly, we should pause to clarify terms. Let us work with a broader definition of “post-colo￾nial” – “all the culture affected by the imperial process from the moment of colonization to the present 
day” (Ashcroft, Griffiths, and Tiffin 1989, 2). Within this definition, the moment of colonization might 
not necessarily pertain only to the successful (from the perspective of the colonizer) completion of the act 
in any given polity, but also extends to the process of attempted colonization. The same authors also give 
us the definition of “post-colonization” as “a process in which colonized societies participate over a long 
period, through different phases and modes of engagement with the colonizing power during and after
the period of direct colonial rule (sic).” (Ashcroft, Griffiths, and Tiffin 2002, 195). The breadth of these 
definitions permits an extension into the topics under consideration within this chapter. We may broaden 
this further if we include the notion that:
[p]ostcolonial critique incorporates the legacy of the syncretic traditions of Marxisms that developed out￾side the west in the course of anti-colonial struggles, and subsequently in the development of the further 
forms of emancipation, of gender, ethnicity and class, necessary for liberation from bourgeois nationalism. 
(Young 2016, 10)
This perspective will become especially pertinent as we proceed to consider the origins of the postco￾lonial tradition within the hobby. This may still frame nations and people through conflict, but it is not 
confined to military conquest; it also incorporates political and internal conflict.
Colonial board wargames tend to be reductive about political modeling, framing the conflict as supe￾rior technology versus inferior technology (often few in number against many), saving the colonies from 
their own “backwardness” (Borit, Borit, and Olsen 2018, 17). A colonial framing has a developed civili￾zation confronting a primitive one – the “West over the Rest” as Hall terms it (Hall 2007, 221). However, 
a postcolonial perspective allows for non-imperial perspectives, and gives the potential of an identity, 
validity, and complexity to a non-imperial political context on its own terms. It releases the player from 
being “forced to enact the narrative in a colonialist manner, concerned only with expansion and depleting 
resources” (Dillon 2008, 132).
This chapter focuses on three key design elements which determine a wargame as “post-colonial”:
• A strategic-level agency is given to a colonized/would-be colonized people.
• There is a representation of complex strategic-level asymmetries of multiple (e.g., political, 
cultural, economic, technological) aspects of the historical situation.
• There is a representation of conflict asymmetries between the colonized and colonizers mod￾eled also on the operational and tactical levels.
Although the postcolonial tradition is both more recent and less prominent than the colonialist traditions 
outlined above, it deserves attention because of its contrasting characteristics and the momentum it is 
gaining in design communities and in the marketplace. In this tradition, indigenous peoples are given 
meaningful strategic-level agency in conflicts in which objectives are redefined in line with anticolonial￾ist perspectives, and the conflict itself may be contextualized beyond a merely military dimension. As 
additional political elements are incorporated, there is an increase in the complexity of the history being 
represented, which speaks to a deeper appreciation of the variety of narratives threaded into the history 300 Paper Time Machines 
of the military conflict. Indeed, if Clausewitz has it right that war is merely the continuation of politics 
by other means (Francis Miyata, “The Grand Strategy of Carl von Clausewitz,” 2021), Foucault is correct 
that politics is the continuation of war by other means (Jason Edwards “Foucault and the Continuation of 
War” The Metamorphoses of War 2012, 21–40). To embrace postcolonialism in wargames is to embrace 
not just the agency of the indigenous and would-be colonized, but also to embrace their perspectives, and 
so too the broader contextualizing frameworks for conflict.
Navajo Wars by Joel Toppen is a solitaire game in which the player controls the fate of the Diné
(Navajo) from Spanish incursion (1595) through to US government subjugation (1864). Toppen’s subse￾quent game, Comanchería, also delivered an experience from a Native American perspective. Khyber 
Rifles: Britannia in Afghanistan is a two-player strategic-level game about British imperial expansion. One 
player plays the British, the other the combined Afghan tribes (BGG n.d. c). Pax Pamir is also set in late 
Nineteenth-Century Afghanistan, with the British and Russian empires vying for control, a situation often 
referred to as the Great Game (BGG n.d. d, e). But players control neither empire. Instead, they control dif￾ferent Afghan leaders attempting to navigate a route to survival through the fluctuating balance of power in 
the region. Players win by having the most invested with the faction – British, Russian, or combined Afghan 
– which achieves supremacy at the end of the game. The first edition of Pax Pamir (2015 – second edition 
2019) is also noteworthy for its historical note by co-designer Phil Eklund where a brief case is made for the 
defense of British Colonialism, on the grounds of the British legal system (Pax Britannica) abolishing the 
slave trade and slavery, and globalization (Pax Pamir 2015). There is no such note in the second edition, in 
which Cole Wehrle is the sole credited designer, and Phil Eklund is thanked in design notes. Cole Wehrle 
has publicly distanced himself from Phil Eklund’s politics (Beyond Solitaire 2021a). The Pax Pamir second 
edition is itself noteworthy, beyond specific design considerations, for raising over $400k in its Kickstarter 
campaign in 2020 – including reprints (Kickstarter 2020). Such figures demonstrate the significance of this 
moment and suggest that the market is receptive to postcolonial perspectives.
The Red Burnoose is noteworthy as a one-to-four-player co-op game set during the French colonial 
invasion of Algeria, where no player controls the French. All players work together as Algerian resistance 
fighters attempting to prevent French conquest (BGG 2022). Working against the game system coopera￾tively binds players in a shared experience against an entity that loses humanity and cannot be meaning￾fully bartered with, only confronted. We might consider that an appropriate way to frame colonialism.
Colonial Twilight is a one-to-two-player game where players control either the Government (French 
and Algerian) or the Front de Liberation Nationale (FLN). It is a game in the COIN (COunter INsurgency) 
series published by GMT Games. This series began with Andean Abyss in 2012 and (at the time of writ￾ing) stands at 17 published or publicly announced as planned “volumes” or “multipacks” (games on differ￾ent topics), excluding expansions. The topics include post-Roman Britain, Caesar in Gaul, the American 
Revolution, US and allies in Afghanistan, Gandhi, Muromachi Japan (c.1136–1573 CE), the Vietnam War, 
and China 1937–1941 (GMT n.d.). The series has been both a commercial and a critical success, with its 
own vibrant community of players and designers (with its own active Discord server at the time of writ￾ing). COIN games usually ascribe agency to anticolonialist factions focused on insurgency, as well as 
conflicting colonialist/counterinsurgent factions. Further, each faction plays within its own dimension of 
motivations and resources. The game system facilitates a representation of irregular warfare which may 
include a variety of political aspects. The asymmetric motivations, resources, and abilities encoded within 
the COIN system enable a modeling of militarily and politically imbalanced strategic situations.
In Colonial Twilight, the FLN wins if it exceeds a victory total of 30 points, composed of the points 
from “Opposition” and from its number of “Bases” (Colonial Twilight 2017 Rules). The Government 
wins if it exceeds a total of 35 points, composed of the points from “Support” and from “Commitment.” 
Opposition points are attained by totaling the population value in all cities and sectors in opposition to the 
government. Support points are attained by totaling the population value in all cities and sectors in sup￾port of the government. These cities and sectors range from a population value of 0, up to 3. For example, 
Algiers has a population value of 3, Tunisia of 1. Bases are immovable force pieces that have a bearing on 
a number of functions, including feasible actions, and the potential to gain resources. Commitment is a 
measure of the government and the people’s willingness to continue prosecuting the war.23 • The Postcolonial Turn 301
COIN games not only present playable factions with different motivations, but they also equip those 
factions with different player actions in order to achieve them. In Colonial Twilight the player actions are 
called “Operations” and “Special Activities,” a distinction important because there are limitations placed 
on when Operations may be played in combination with Special Activities, or when Operations may only 
be played without a Special Activity (Colonial Twilight 2017 Rules) In general, Operations are more 
standard actions, and Special Activities are more specifically targeted and unusual actions. (In addition, 
players may, on occasions, choose to perform no action at all, but to implement the effect of an Event card 
from the top of that deck and visible to both players.) For the FLN, the Operations are Rally (add forces), 
March (move specific forces), Attack (eliminate enemy forces), and Terror (neutralize support in a sec￾tor). For the FLN, the Special Activities are Extort (gain Resources), Subvert (remove or replace enemy 
forces – specifically Algerian government forces, not French ones), or Ambush (an especially effective 
form of attack). The Government Operations are Train (add forces or Support), Garrison (move police and 
activate guerillas – meaning turn over the FLN pieces to expose them to possible attack – a fuller explana￾tion follows below), Sweep (move troops and activate guerrillas), and Assault (eliminate the enemy). The 
Government Special Activities are Deploy (move French forces), Troop Lift (mass French troops quickly 
for an operation), and Neutralize (destroy exposed FLN pieces).
This concept of exposing guerrilla forces is a central mechanic to COIN and is an effective way to 
evoke the asymmetry in irregular warfare. FLN pieces are small wooden cylinders. One end of each 
cylinder is embossed with a crescent moon and star representing the key detail of the Algerian national 
flag. When the guerrillas are hidden the cylinder is placed embossed side down. When the guerrillas 
are exposed – through either police actions or by their own activities – the embossed side is placed face 
up. No pieces are ever literally hidden in COIN (all pieces are visible on the board), but this concept of 
exposing a “masked presence” means players may be able to see a piece of the board, but there may be no 
means by which a government player can do anything to get to that guerrilla piece, unless that piece has 
the embossed side face up. However, once those guerrilla pieces are face up, they are immensely vulner￾able. For the FLN, the name of the game is hit-and-run and stay out of sight until you select a target. For 
the government forces, the name of the game is find/expose the guerrillas and draw them into combat, 
where government forces excel. This key dynamic is an exceedingly useful design tool, even outside of 
the context of COIN’s other design elements. For a deeper exploration of design elements in postcolonial 
games, especially COIN games, see the author’s chapter “Design Elements in Postcolonial Commercial 
Historical Board Wargames” in Heritage, Memory, and Identity in Postcolonial Board Games (Mochocki 
2023, 26–44).
Players, then, have a range of options for the actions they might take on their turn, but in each case 
certain criteria must be met to perform one of these actions (or two actions in combination). Turn order 
is frequently in flux, depending on what actions players performed in the previous turn, and in the cur￾rent turn a player’s choice of action will limit available options for the second player. Further, each action 
(Operation or Special Activity) is constrained by having the right kinds of units available in the right 
kind of location at the time the action is performed, and by having sufficient available “Resources” (the 
wherewithal to affect anything). Special Activities can also only be chosen in combination with specific 
Operations. For the FLN, for example, the Operation Rally may only be combined with the Extort or 
Subvert Special Activity, and not with the Ambush action.
Gandhi: The Decolonization of British India 1917–1947 is another COIN game. It is a one-to-four￾player game, and the playable factions are the British Raj, the Indian National Congress, The Muslim 
League, and Revolutionaries. Their respective victory conditions are: Total Support + Raj Controlled 
Population >38 (British Raj); Total Opposition >20 (Congress); Muslim Opposition + twice Muslim State 
Population >14 (Muslim League); Unrest Population + Bases >14 (Revolutionaries) (S3 US West 2019). 
The names of each faction’s actions may be sufficient to make the point of how different and tailored 
these actions are to the faction in question. The British Raj COIN Operations are: Deploy, Garrison, 
Sweep, Assault, with the Special Activities being: Treaty, Govern, and Martial Law. The Indian National 
Congress Nonviolent Operations are: Rally, Demonstrate, Civil Disobedience, and Non-Cooperation, 
with the Special Activities being: Negotiate, Satyagraha (a form of nonviolent resistance that permits this 302 Paper Time Machines 
player to move the Gandhi piece and to remove Unrest), and Persuade. The Muslim League Nonviolent 
Operations are the same as those of the National Congress, but the Special Activities are Negotiate, 
Infiltrate, and Persuade. The Insurgent Operations of the Revolutionaries are: Rally, March, Attack, 
Unrest, with the Special Abilities being Aid, Infiltrate, and Assassinate.
In addition to the asymmetric capabilities and resources reflected in the different actions, there is 
asymmetry in the different objectives that each faction is using its actions to steer a path toward. Victory 
for the British Raj comes from the extent of their support and of their Raj-controlled population. Victory 
for Congress comes in the extent of their opposition. Victory for the Muslim League comes from the 
extent of their Muslim opposition and Muslim State population. Victory for the Revolutionaries comes 
from the extent of the unrest among the population and from their number of bases. These asymmetric 
objectives reflect political-strategic complexities and divergent perspectives that give voice to postcolonial 
perspectives.
We might also see a postcolonial dimension to the decentering of strategic objectives by the way the 
play order fluctuates – through the Event deck which offers players a choice of an Event (which grants 
different benefits depending on which player elects to utilize it), and through the use of the Initiative 
Track. The first player to take their turn in a round may choose to use the Event card, to Pass (to increase 
their Resources), or to perform a Limited Operation (a restricted version of what is achievable with an 
Operation action). Then the second player in a round may perform an Operation and Special Activity, or 
just an Operation. In such a world, a player might formulate clear intentions to achieve objectives but be 
frustrated by the nature of time and logistics, the element of surprise, and the presentation of opportunities 
such that complications arise and the certainty of a “colonial” framework of operations is shaken (Ganguly 
2004, 162). There is no simple action-to-reaction cycle of causality. In this example, even turn sequence is 
not guaranteed with clear ramifications on the ability to effect strategy. Plans are begun, then aborted, due 
to an unexpected move by the enemy, but each faction’s plans are frequently unsettled or contorted by each 
other in the strategic flux. The design of these kinds of systems – systems which demonstrate instability 
and degrees of unpredictability – are evidence of alternatives to games in the “Imperial Mode.”
[Imperial Mode] [G]ames [are] where enemies are killed, subjugated, displaced, where we design juicy 
feedback to enhance the sadistic thrill of maiming our opponents, god games, turn-based military simu￾lations, even farming games where the player dominates and brings to productive order the landscape, 
4X games, many strategy games. On the thematic level, games that are about conquest, war, overcoming 
enemies through violence, overthrowing nations, becoming king / boss / tycoon, or even achieving mastery 
over the game’s systems.
(Jayanth 2022)
These games may still be turn-based simulations, strategy games, and be about conquest, war, and usually 
overcoming enemies through violence, and sometimes be about overthrowing nations, but they are not 
always about achieving mastery over the game’s systems. These games, as noted, are also often about vio￾lence as part of a broad political complexity, and a deep asymmetric modeling of elements in the historical 
record to attempt a more nuanced representation of a given historical topic. The systems themselves also, 
to some extent, defy notions of total mastery, with the random but seeded placement of potentially game￾ending Propaganda cards within the Event deck making for unpredictable outcomes.
In a COIN game, when there are four factions (as in most COIN games) the asymmetry is pronounced. 
Learning a COIN game is often a process of acquiring several strategies before players fully appreciate 
what the other factions are attempting, or perhaps masking. The success of COIN unequivocally demon￾strates that having a game so asymmetric that each faction plays markedly different, with different moti￾vations and resources, need not necessarily be disjointed or uncomfortable to play. COIN is a remarkably 
flexible system in terms of the settings and political-military contexts it accommodates. The British Way: 
Counterinsurgency at the end of Empire is another COIN game, and the series appears to be maintaining 
and even escalating its momentum. Indeed, the COIN series is pivotal in terms of the asymmetric perspec￾tives it provides players, and the design tools it offers designers in this postcolonial moment.23 • The Postcolonial Turn 303
The influence of the COIN series may run deep into the hobby for many decades. Compass Games 
has announced a COIN-like game, The Troubles: Shadow War in Northern Ireland 1964–1998 (BGG 
n.d. f1). The Dietz Foundation has announced a COIN-inspired game After The Last Sky about the first 
Palestinian Intifada 1987–1993 (BGG n.d. f2). Root (2018) is another Cole Wehrle design which seems to 
be inspired by the asymmetric multi-factionalism of COIN. The game has a distinctly family-friendly set￾ting (a fictional woodland with rival critter factions) and secured $631,770 in Kickstarter backing in 2017 
(Kickstarter 2019). Werwolf: Insurgency in Occupied Germany 1945–48 (2023) published by Legion 
Wargames posits German resistance fighters carrying on the war with the Manhattan Project not com￾pleted (BGG n.d. f3) At the time of writing, GMT Games signed Rebellion: Britannia, with the possibil￾ity of it evolving into a series of games (BGG n.d. g1). This game/potential series shares evident design 
DNA with COIN – the asymmetry in motivations and resources and a representation of irregular warfare, 
and blends these elements with CDG elements. The series focuses on rebellions which have been largely 
ignored by game designers, from a postcolonial perspective.
The Zenobia Award initiative of 2021 (and 2023, to date) should also be considered in light of any 
notion of a “postcolonial moment” (Zenobia n.d.). Board wargaming is a hobby in which the designers 
are overwhelmingly white, male, heterosexual, and 50+. The Zenobia Award is intended to encourage 
designers from marginalized backgrounds. One of the founders and board members of the initiative is 
Volko Ruhnke, the initial designer of the COIN series. Ruhnke not only designed the essential game 
engine retained throughout the series, but he has also designed Cuba Libre (2013) (with Jeff Grossman), 
A Distant Plain (2013) (with Brian Train) on Afghanistan, Fire in the Lake (2014) (with Mark Herman), 
on Vietnam, and Falling Sky (2016) (with Andrew Ruhnke) on Caesar’s campaigns in Gaul.
It seems no coincidence that Ruhnke is instrumental in both COIN – a design toolbox for postco￾lonial perspectives – and the Zenobia Award. It is also notable that the Zenobia Award generated an 
array of games with postcolonial frameworks, at least in conception. Finalists in the competition include 
Liberation-Haiti, where players have the role of the escaped slaves fighting the French colonial govern￾ment, and Kartini: From Darkness to Light, in which players seek Indonesia’s independence from colonial 
masters. The eventual winner of the Award, Tyranny of Blood, has players control the destinies of differ￾ent Indian castes from 1700 to 1947 and appears to present some postcolonial perspectives. (Until more 
details are released about the game it is hard to be sure how the design handles its subject matter. If castes 
vie for ascendancy against each other, it will be intriguing to learn more about the justifications for this, 
as castes by their definition are not imbued with a concept of social mobility.)
It is indeed possible that we are not so much at a “Postcolonial Moment,” but at a “Postcolonial Turn.” 
There is sufficient momentum now behind these “postcolonial” games that it is hard to conceive of turn￾ing back. We now have the design tools to explore asymmetric political and military situations, and are 
finding new ways of encouraging marginalized developers to bring their own perspectives. So many top￾ics in military and political history have been neglected that there is reason to believe we have passed an 
important threshold here.
A further possible indicator of the “Turn” might be cited in GMT’s decision (and – here – a reminder 
that GMT is the most significant publisher by volume in the board wargaming space by some margin, 
and is the publisher of COIN, and Labyrinth) to cancel publication of the game Scramble for Africa, in 
2019 (BGG 2019). The cancellation came after various objections to the treatment of the setting as well 
as the game mechanics, as they were described in pre-publication copy. It was clear from this copy that 
player agency resided solely with “the great European powers,” and the game mechanics were primar￾ily concerned with exploration, exploitation, expansion, and the acquisition of riches. (GMT’s copy is no 
longer available, but the thread that emerged on BGG still exists, BGG 2019.) The agency of indigenous 
peoples is further repressed, such that the concept of resistance is rendered as the tool of European pow￾ers in conflict with each other, and not as an expression of autonomy. “Meanwhile, you may need to raise 
colonial garrisons as other players may incite local uprisings and independence movements to hinder your 
country’s efforts” (BGG 2019). A game of this nature might have been unsurprising in the 1970s or 1980s 
– or indeed, perhaps at any time up until 2019 – but for some prospective players in 2019 it clearly crossed 
a line. Debate ensued not only about the suitability of this game to a contemporary audience, and GMT’s 304 Paper Time Machines 
responsibility in the game moving so close to publication, but also about whether canceling the game was 
the right response. “[B]ut please do not let your sense of what’s right and wrong mean that the rest of us 
are not allowed to buy and play what could be a very good game with historical lessons” (BGG 2019). In 
any event, the fact that potential customers can apply such pressure to publishers is significant.
This is far from suggesting a “turn” means a turn away from colonialist/imperialist perspectives. 
Rather, what is suggested is a turn into the addition of postcolonial/post-imperial perspectives alongside 
what we already have. Those existing colonialist traditions still persist. As just one example, in 2021 
Legion Wargames published Heart of Darkness: An Adventure Game of African Exploration (BGG n.d. 
g2). The game’s box art shows a jungle with a black panther looking back over its shoulder, and a stream 
leading into the background. The box art, together with the title, and the explanation of the game – a game 
about seemingly white/Western explorers funded by newspapers to explore “deepest Africa” to publish 
fantastic stories,” whilst attempting to retain “sanity” are all deeply redolent of Orientalist tropes that cer￾tainly appear to reinforce imperialist perspectives. The box art, in fact, bears an extremely close resem￾blance to an edition of Kipling’s Jungle Book, as revealed in the Jacobin Wargaming group of Facebook 
(Facebook 2021). Perhaps this game should not be considered a wargame, even if its publisher – Legion 
Wargames – predominantly publishes wargames. In any event, board games are not likely to pull back 
entirely, or fast, from colonialist dynamics, and neither will historical board wargames. Some of these 
games may serve to deconstruct colonialist dynamics, whilst others may reinforce them.
Indeed, there is a great deal of colonialism in history – and in the present – and if our games wish 
to simulate that history, or future outcomes, then we must have games – and systems within those games 
– that allow us to do that. In the context of historical board games – with the intention and capacity to 
engage with history seriously, the point is not that we should not have these games, but that there are other 
types of games to have as well. The narrow perception of solely colonialist perspectives, and the social 
Darwinist survival of the fittest thinking about history and human interaction leads to some deeply trou￾bling conclusions – racial segregation, ethnic cleansing, and genocide most prominent amongst them. The 
perception of only this perspective is also just bad history; it is a perspective that chokes the history we can 
tell into a narrow homogenous channel – one that precludes the possibility of more varied interpretations 
– not unlike a colonialist perspective in and of itself. With a solely colonialist perspective we eradicate 
the potential to see the riches in other cultural traditions - ones that focus on alternative paradigms – for 
example harmony with our environment, rather than domination of it. With the eradication of alternative 
paradigms we diminish the whole project of history – we lose varied narratives we might not understand 
the relevance of yet, but we deny their utility for the future. Further, if we deny and eradicate these nar￾ratives, we eradicate humanity. (Worse than bad history, this is bad living.) Furthermore, a perspective 
that all life is colonialist is not remotely supportable with research or any breadth of cultural knowledge. 
Board games that only conceive of colonialist perspectives deny the complexity of life as we can evidently 
experience it – and as we can discern it to be from history.
To clarify, the contention here is that we are at a point of cultural significance within the world of 
historical board wargaming, and we are now at the Postcolonial Turn. There is perhaps some irony here. 
As we saw in chapters earlier in this book, wargames derive from military and colonialist traditions. As 
we also saw, eurogames emerged as a movement away from and a counter to the direct conflict-driven 
focus of wargames. Eurogames sit within a commercial space associated with broad accessibility, with 
families, and tend to focus on interpersonal interaction (Woods 2012, 155). Eurogames are now at the 
heart of what we might describe as mainstream board gaming (Woods 2012, 6, 83). Yet mainstream board 
gaming is sorely afflicted with critiques of colonialism (Faiduti 2017; No Pun Included 2021; Shelf Stories 
2021). The niche space of historical board wargaming, despite the irony of its military and colonialist 
provenance, is reaching its postcolonial moment well ahead of mainstream board games. Indeed Patrick 
Rael, Professor at Bowdoin, has made the same observation (Shelf Stories 2022).
It should be clarified here, that even being at a “turn” should not suggest the colonial is not 
still evident even in the midst of the postcolonial. A Distant Plain, cited above, is a case in point. 
One of the player actions for the Coalition is called “Civic Action” (GMT Games 2015). The action 
expends Resources to remove Terror markers, or replaces Government cubes with a base, or transfers 23 • The Postcolonial Turn 305
Patronage to Government Resources. The underpinning assumption is that if the Coalition, on the 
behalf of the government it strives to support, generates civic works – the construction and mainte￾nance of roads and sewage infrastructures, schools and other civic buildings and institutions – the 
populace of Afghanistan will respond by approving of the government, thereby cementing its legiti￾macy and therefore power. This may have seemed a reasonable assumption in 2011–2013, while the 
game design was moving through development and publication. But the withdrawal of US forces and 
the ensuing rapid collapse of the government and the Taliban’s seizure of power in August 2021 gives 
rise to debate as to whether this assumption, that civic works will lead to approval, is even viable. 
It may be a distinctly colonial take on the situation. Ruhnke himself has raised this very question 
(Beyond Solitaire 2021b). That said, co-designer Brian Train is clear that Civic Action should not 
be construed as mere construction or repair of infrastructure, it is, rather, a wide range of activities 
demonstrating that local forces are acting as a responsible and effective government (Brian Train
2023, personal correspondence). In any event, in the same Beyond Solitaire interview Ruhnke sug￾gested that any potentially faulty assumption far from invalidated the historical model that A Distant 
Plain presents; rather, the game facilitates a way to test assumptions. This, indeed, seems the point 
here. The real value of the game, beyond entertainment, is that it gives us a means of examining and 
reassessing assumptions. Postcolonialism is perhaps more process than fixed position.
ORIGINS OF POSTCOLONIALISM
How, then, did we get here? The first COIN release in 2012 (Andean Abyss) may be highly significant, but 
there were other games coming out in 2012 and 2013 – like Khyber Rifles and Navajo Wars that suggest 
there is clearly more to the matter of origins than COIN. This returns us to the muddy topic of how new 
narratives permeate a cultural loop. We might further add, from the perspective of Afghans or Navajo 
people, these narratives are manifestly not new, but merely newly heard in other places, or newly afforded 
agency.
What we can say is that Ruhnke has clearly cited a relationship between Andean Abyss and his game 
Labyrinth: The War on Terror: 2001-? (2010), which was published two years earlier (Andean Abyss 
2012, Playbook 27–8). The latter is a one-to-two-player game about the post-9/11 Islamist jihad and the 
global war on terror. The game is asymmetric and may be played one-player as either the US or the jihad￾ists. It is concerned with irregular warfare and its fusion with political dimensions. There are design 
elements here we see recurring later in the COIN series. The US has a specific set of operations: War of 
Ideas, Deploy, Disrupt, Alert, and Reassessment. These are distinct from those of the jihadists: Recruit, 
Travel, Jihad, and Plot. US troops fare well in open combat, but the jihadist cells can be present on the 
board but in the same “masked presence” we see in COIN (GMT Games 2011). If they are “sleeper cells” 
their embossed side is placed face down and the US is unable to directly target and eliminate them. If the 
cell becomes “active” the embossed side is placed face up. At this point, the cell will likely have caused 
damage, but now it will be vulnerable to a US reaction.
Two other games from 2010 are also of note. Black Eagles: A Game of the Great Slave Rebellions of 
Santo Domingo (Haiti) 1790–1804 ascribes agency to, amongst other factions, the Haitian revolutionar￾ies (BGG n.d. g3). The game has not yet been published but has been in development at least since 2010 
and has had public profile for much of this time (John Poniskie 2024, personal correspondence; Board 
Game Oracle n.d.). The Haitian Revolution is a moment of deep significance in global history – the first 
time a slave uprising led to the creation of a new state, ruled by non-whites and former captives (Knight, 
F. W. 2000 “The Haitian Revolution,” The American Historical Review. 105 (1): 103–15; Joseph, C L. 
2012 “‘The Haitian Turn’: An Appraisal of Recent Literary and Historiographical Works on the Haitian 
Revolution” Journal of Pan African Studies 5 (6) 37–55). It is long overdue as a topic for a published 
game. Liberation: Haiti, possibly now called Ten To One Is greatly anticipated (BGG n.d. g4).306 Paper Time Machines 
Published in 2016 but designed in 2010 is EOKA: The Cyprus Emergency 1935–1939. EOKA is 
set during the conflict between the terrorist group EOKA (Ethnikí Orgánosis Kipriakoú Agónos, the 
National Organization of Cypriot Struggle) and the security forces of the UK and the Government of 
Cyprus. The subject matter and the political-military strategic perspective casts it in a postcolonial light 
(BGG n.d. g4). But of particular relevance is the designer, Brian Train.
Train, as noted above, is the co-designer of the COIN game A Distant Plain, with Ruhnke. He is also 
the designer of Colonial Twilight, and the forthcoming China’s War 1937–1941, also in the COIN series 
(GMT Gamesn.d.). But the more one looks backwards into the history of historical board wargames, the 
more evident it becomes that Train –- in conjunction with Ruhnke – is really the designer who lies at the 
heart of the origins of this Postcolonial Turn. Train is a prolific designer since the 1990s, with 66 credits 
on BGG at the time of writing. EOKA sits alongside others in Train’s ludography.
Andartes: The Greek Civil War 1947–49 (2014), is a two-player strategic-level game about the con￾flict between Communist-inspired guerillas and the Greek State (BGG n.d. h). Kandahar (2013), is a 
two-player strategic-level game about the conflict between the Taliban and Afghan National Security 
forces in southern Afghanistan (BGG n.d. i). Algeria: The War of Independence 1954–1962 (2000), is a 
two-player strategic-level game about the conflict between the FLN nationalist guerrillas and the French 
government 1954–62 (BGG n.d. j). Shining Path: The Struggle for Peru (1997–98), is a 2-player strategic￾level game about the conflict between the “Shining Path” Maoist guerrillas and the Peruvian State 1980 
– ongoing (BGG n.d. k). Tupamaro (1996), is a two-player strategic-level game about the conflict between 
the Tupamaro guerrillas and the Uruguayan State 1968–1972 (BGG n.d. l; BrTrain 2023). (Incorrectly 
listed as a 2001 publication on BGG, which was a later edition. The first edition was published in 1996.) 
All are concerned with modeling civic unrest, or insurgency, leaning hard into the topics of asymmetric 
factions and political dimensions, exploring narratives frequently ignored by other designers. Algeria is 
of particular note, not only because it foreshadows Train’s Colonial Twilight on the same topic, but also 
because Ruhnke has cited it as a direct inspiration for his card-driven Labyrinth, following ten years later 
(Volko Ruhnke 2021, personal correspondence). The player actions in Algeria, termed “missions” help us 
trace the lineage of the inspiration that led to Labyrinth and from there into COIN series. We should also 
note Ruhnke has cited the importance of Twilight Struggle (2005) and its card-driven system in contribut￾ing to Labyrinth (Volko Ruhnke 2021, personal correspondence). The titles of these player actions alone, 
without further explanation provide a sense of the evolution here. The FLN player missions are: Build, 
Augment, Harass, Propaganda, Strike (urban only), Intimidate, Movement. The government missions are: 
Patrol, Intelligence Mission Routine, Flush Mission Routine, React Mission Routine. A clear lineage can 
be traced back from COIN to Ruhnke’s Labyrinth, and from there back to Train’s Algeria, and then all the 
way back to Tupamaro, which shares the same broad philosophy in terms of a menu of asymmetric player 
actions and a fusion of political/strategic elements with operational/tactical elements.
In Train’s work we also see abstract concepts brought front and center to designs to represent non￾kinetic values that help define a faction’s capacity and/or resources to act, as well as a measure of a 
faction’s capacity to achieve its objectives. From Tupamaro onward, we see the concept of political will 
as a measure of quantifiable progress towards victory – or at least defeat – with zero representing a cata￾strophic collapse in the ability to maintain a struggle. This kind of global game loss index has a long 
lineage in board wargames. It goes back at least as far as Viet Nam (1965), where driving the index up by 
capturing cities brings a player closer to victory, and also unlocks further operational upgrades – such as 
additional replacements, additional movement capacity of air units, imposing movement restrictions for 
the enemy – which, in turn assist the movement of the index towards victory (BGG n.d. m).
Prior to Train’s seismic contributions, there are only a handful of games in this space, most of which 
he was certainly aware of in formative years (Brian Train 2022, personal correspondence). Nicaragua 
(1988) is a two-player strategic-level game about the guerilla wars in Nicaragua of 1961–1988, published 
in Strategy & Tactics #120 (BGG n.d. n1). The modeling of the political dimension with intelligence oper￾ations and propaganda is suggestive of some of Train’s designs in this space. Indeed, Train has cited this 
game openly as an influence (Brian Train 2022, personal correspondence). Train has also cited the video 
game Hidden Agenda (1988) (Beyond Solitaire 2021b). The game systematizes political complexities 23 • The Postcolonial Turn 307
to represent how decisions made in the formulation of power dynamics restrict future latitude to make 
broader choices. In essence, an over-reliance on a single faction can hem in the player and constrain the 
breadth of future choices. This appreciation of the continuity between the acquisition and the maintenance 
of political power speaks to an appreciation of the continuity of and deep integration between political 
and military dynamics – Clausewitz’s and Foucault’s maxims reflect back at each other into infinity. The 
broad philosophy of Hidden Agenda appears evident in Train’s work.
A few years earlier saw the publication of Vietnam 1965–1975 (1985) which had some light politi￾cal modeling with morale and commitment represented (the latter referring to economic investment) by 
tracks, and some noteworthy victory conditions in the full campaign game (BGG n.d. n2). The US player 
can win only by not losing for the 40 turns of the game (4 seasons a year). The NLF player wins by captur￾ing Saigon at any point, or by controlling 200 of the 350 population points (each point representing around 
50,000 people). (The game was updated and reimplemented by GMT in 2022.)
I Will Fight No More Forever (1979) is a game about the Nez Perce people and their journey to reach 
Canada and go beyond the reach of the American military (colonizers). The design features mechanics 
on evasion, limited intelligence, tactical battle resolution as well as strategic movement, and has factions 
within both sides (BGG n.d. o).
South Africa: The Death of Colonialism (1977) (BGG n.d. p), is a two-player strategic/operational￾level game with overt postcolonial sentiments, beyond just the title. In the standard game it is not actu￾ally possible for the R.S.A. (government) faction to win – it is only a matter of seeing how long they 
may hold out for. Only in the optional variant is there some possibility of a victory through the advent 
of a Third World War breaking out and so cutting off any support to the black nationalist faction. The 
game is overtly postulating the inevitability of apartheid’s demise 13 years before it happened. The 
game also features police and guerilla units, in addition to conventional forces, which have contact and 
evasion capabilities.
Fortress Rhodesia (1976) (BGG n.d. q) is a two-player hex and counter operational-level game 
set in a seemingly contemporary Zimbabwe, with government forces confronting the guerrillas of the 
Zimbabwe African National Union (ZANU) and the Zimbabwe African Peoples Union (ZAPU). The 
subject matter is the noteworthy element here. First Indochina War (1974) is a 2-player hex and counter 
operational-level game set in Vietnam, 1950–1952 (BGG n.d. r). It has some modeling of guerrilla units 
confronting militarily superior forces. Dien Bien Phu: Strategic Game of Indochina 1950 55 (1973), is 
a two-player area control strategic-level game on the First Indochina War (1950–1955) (BGG n.d. s). 
The game is notable for its subject matter – it is the same designer, Guy Hail, as First Indochina War, 
and for the diceless combat resolution system. Also of interest is Bloodtree Rebellion: Guerilla Warfare 
on the Planet Somber (1979) (BGG n.d. t). It is a two-player operational-level hex and counter game 
on a sci-fi planet with a resistance and some political dimensions. Why this setting? Train himself, in 
conversation, is revealing:
Bloodtree Rebellion – It's anecdotal that Willis designed a game on Vietnam and took to GDW, who real￾ized they could not sell a game about that war yet (this was 1978 and the first one that got any traction was 
Victory Games' Vietnam in 1985 or so, by Nick Karp). So he was told to change the setting but when you 
look at the game it's obvious – "gunplats" are tanks, orbiting spaceships doing bombardment are B-52s, 
the Mykin clone infantry are prone to "panic fire" and shooting up the countryside, there is a neutral semi￾religious order you have to watch ... etc. Berg, in reviewing this for S&T long ago, was not fooled. 
(Brian Train 2022, personal correspondence)
It is curious then, that Viet Nam (1965) had no such quibbles about the overtness of its subject matter, 
just as the later Vietnam 1965–1975 had none either. Perhaps the war’s deteriorating perception with the 
US public between 1965 (Viet Nam) and 1979 (Bloodtree Rebellion) accounts for this. Perhaps GDW, the 
publisher of Bloodtree, was more distinctly cautious than Gamescience, the publisher of Viet Nam. In any 
case, Viet Nam, which has already been noted above for its use of a global victory index, is cited by Train 
and Ruhnke in their chapter in Harrigan and Kirschenbaum’s Zones of Control for notable features.308 Paper Time Machines 
[Viet Nam] was meant for team play, and players could win either by a diplomatic victory or a military 
victory. Rules included simultaneous and hidden movement, a government stability index, world opinion, 
terrorism, ambushes, air strikes, and psychological warfare – all in a four-page rulebook. 
(Harrigan and Kirschenbaum 2016, 514.)
Train and Ruhnke also make the claim here that Viet Nam is the first commercial wargame on insurgency 
(Harrigan and Kirschenbaum 2016, 514). Indeed, this appears to be as far back as we can reliably trace 
these kinds of broader and politically-informed complexities and strategic/operational asymmetries.
CONCLUSION
Since the early 2010s, we have seen a flowering of board wargames adopting postcolonial perspectives. 
More are on their way, and it is argued here that we are now at such a critical mass in terms of the interest 
from designers, publishers, and players that it seems inconceivable that this new strain of games will not 
continue in breadth of topics and in general appeal. In addition, we may be finding new ways to engage 
with new, previously marginalized designers. At the time of writing The Zenobia Award is in its sec￾ond iteration, and there will be at least nine titles from the first iteration that will be published (Beyond 
Solitaire 2023). The same cultural eddy that brought this initiative seems to have only become stronger 
since the Award was first conceived.
There remains plenty of work to do, though. There is work to maintain this momentum in the designs. 
There is certainly a great deal of work to encourage marginalized designers into this space. There is work 
to do in a deeper exploration into the provenance of postcolonial games. What is outlined above is merely 
a sketch of what might be found on closer analysis. Can the subaltern speak? Yes. And the subaltern is 
speaking now in historical board wargames, telling a story of the marginalized and the erased to unsettle 
conventional power dynamics. This does not mean that everyone is yet listening. Those other stories, 
where the subaltern does not speak surely will continue. But we are, perhaps, at a “turn” where the subal￾tern’s voice is meaningfully present in the cultural eddy.
REFERENCES
Andean Abyss. 2012. Hanford, CA: GMT Games.
Ashcroft, Bill, Gareth Griffin, and Helen Tiffin. 1989. The Empire Writes Back: Theory and Practice in Post￾Colonial Literatures. 1st ed. London. Routledge.
Ashcroft, Bill, Gareth Griffin, and Helen Tiffin. 2002. The Empire Writes Back: Theory and Practice in Post￾Colonial Literatures. 2nd ed. London. Routledge.
Beyond Solitaire. 2021a. “Podcast 34. Cole Wehrle on Games as Historical Arguments.” https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=Xr8mu4BxdqE Accessed November 22, 2022.
Beyond Solitaire. 2021b. “Podcast 58. Volko Ruhnke and Brian Train on A Distant Plain.” https://www.youtube.com
/watch?v=znyV4F7EgBgt=1818s Accessed September 6, 2022.
Beyond Solitaire. 2023. “Podcast 129: Christienne Hinz and Akar Bharadvaj on Zenobia II.” https://www.youtube
.com/watch?v=T73YTCl8uj0 Accessed November 21, 2023.
BGG. 2010. “Colonialism Rules v2.3.” BoardGameGeek.com, July 30, 2010. https://boardgamegeek.com/board￾game/67917/colonialism/files Accessed September 6, 2022.
BGG. 2019. “Unpublished Prototype.” BoardGameGeek.com, March 26, 2019. https://boardgamegeek.com/thread
/2174984/scramble-africa-i-thought-we-were-past Accessed November 23, 2022.
BGG. 2022. “Red Burnoose Rules.” BoardGameGeek.com, August 23, 2022. https://boardgamegeek.com/filepage
/245392/red-burnoose-english-rules Accessed November 22, 2022.23 • The Postcolonial Turn 309
BGG. n.d. a “Struggle of Empires.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/9625/struggle
-empires Accessed November 22, 2022.
BGG. n.d. b “Colonialism.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/67917/colonialism
Accessed November 22, 2022.
BGG. n.d. c “Khyber Rifles: Britannia in Afghanistan.” https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/129311/khyber
-rifles-britannia-in-afghanistan Accessed May 17, 2024.
BGG. n.d. d “Pax Pamir.” https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/155255/pax-pamir Accessed May 17, 2024.
BGG. n.d. e “Pax Pamir: Second Edition.” https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/256960/pax-pamir-second-edi￾tion Accessed May 17, 2024.
BGG. n.d. f1 “The Troubles: Shadow War in Northern Ireland 1964-1998.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://board￾gamegeek.com/boardgame/344136/troubles-shadow-war-northern-ireland-1964–199 8 Accessed November 
22, 2022.
BGG. n.d. f2 “After the Last Sky.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/346609/after-last
-sky Accessed November 22, 2022.
BGG. n.d. f3 “Werwolf: Insurgency in Occupied Germany 1945–48.” https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame
/365391/werwolf-insurgency-in-occupied-germany-1945-48 Accessed May 17, 2024.
BGG. n.d. g1 “Rebellion: Britannia.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/363275/rebel￾lion-britannia Accessed September 6, 2022.
BGG. n.d. g2 “Heart of Darkness.” https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/183780/heart-of-darkness-an-adventure
-game-of-african-exp Accessed May 17, 2024.
BGG n.d. g3 “ Black Eagles: A Game of the Great Slave Rebellions of Santo Domingo (Haiti) 1790–1804.” https://
boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/88142/black-eagles-a-game-of-the-great-slave-rebellions Accessed May 17, 
2024.
BGG. n.d. g4. “Ten To One.” https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/349773/ten-to-one Accessed May 17, 2024.
BGG. n.d. g5 “EOKA.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/214564/eoka Accessed 
September 6, 2022.
BGG. n.d. h “Andartes: The Greek Civil War 1947–49.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/board￾game/158450/andartes-greek-civil-war-1947–49 Accessed September 6, 2022.
BGG. n.d. i “Kandahar.” https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/163603/kandahar Accessed May 17, 2024.
BGG. n.d. j “Algeria: The War of Independence 1954–1962.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/
boardgame/11293/algeria-war-independence-1954–1962 Accessed September 6, 2022.
BGG. n.d. k “Shining Path: The Struggle for Peru.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame
/7337/shining-path-struggle-peru Accessed September 6, 2022.
BGG. n.d. l “Tupamaro.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/7448/tupamaro Accessed 
September 6, 2022.
BGG. n.d. m. “Viet Nam.” https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/9827/viet-nam Accessed May 17, 2024.
BGG. n.d. n1. “Nicaragua.” https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/7058/nicaragua Accessed May 17, 2024.
BGG. n.d. n2 “Vietnam 1965-1975.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/5620/vietnam
-1965–1975 Accessed November 22, 2022.
BGG. n.d. o “I Will Fight No More Forever.” https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/14975/i-will-fight-no-more
-forever Accessed May 17, 2024.
BGG. n.d. p “South Africa: The Death of Colonialism.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/board￾game/5956/south-africa-death-colonialism Accessed November 22, 2022.
BGG. n.d. q “Fortress Rhodesia.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/13147/fortress
-rhodesia Accessed November 22, 2022.
BGG. n.d. r “First Indochina War.” https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/10241/first-indochina-war Accessed 
May 17, 2024.
BGG. n.d. s “Dien Bien Phu: Strategic Game of Indochina 1950–55.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://boardgamegeek
.com/boardgame/12527/dien-bien-phu-strategic-game-indochina-1950–55 Accessed November 22, 2022.
BGG. n.d. t “Bloodtree Rebellion: Guerilla Warfare on the Planet Somber.” BoardGameGeek.com. https://board￾gamegeek.com/boardgame/6921/bloodtree-rebellion-guerilla-warfare-planet-somber Accessed November 22, 
2022.
Board Game Oracle. n.d. https://www.boardgameoracle.com/boardgame/price/1hjAfTwF-d/black-eagles-a-game-of
-the-great-slave-rebellions-of-santo-domingo-haiti-1790-1804 Accessed May 17, 2024.
Borit, Cornel, Melania Borit, and Petter Olsen. 2018 “Representations of Colonialism in Three Popular, Modern 
Board Games: Puerto Rico, Struggle of Empires, and Archipelago.” Open Library of Humanities 4, no. 1: 17. 
https://olh.openlibhums.org/article/id/4474/#! Accessed September 26, 2022.
BrTrain. 2023. October 24, 2023. https://brtrain.wordpress.com/personal-ludography/ Accessed January 26, 2024.310 Paper Time Machines 
Colonial Twilight: The French-Algerian War, 1959-62. 2017. Hanford, CA: GMT Games.
Comanchería: The Rise and Fall of the Comanche Empire. 2016. Hanford, CA: GMT Games.
Dillon, Beth A. 2008. “Signifying the West: Colonialist Design in Age of Empires III: The Warchiefs.” Eludamos 2, 
no. 1: 129–44. https://septentrio.uit.no/index.php/eludamos/article/view/vol2no1-10/5838 Accessed September 
26, 2022.
Edwards, Jason. 2012. “Foucault and the Continuation of War.” In The Metamorphoses of War, edited by A. Plaw, 
21–40. Amsterdam: Rodopi. https://arditiesp.files.wordpress.com/2012/12/edwards_on_foucault_war_2012
.pdf Accessed November 22, 2022.
Facebook. “Jacobin Wargamers Group.” January 15, 2021. https://www.facebook.com/groups/jacobinwargamer/per￾malink/743108136321127/?mibextid=W9rl1R Accessed November 22, 2022.
Faidutti, Bruno. 2017. https://faidutti.com/blog/blog/2017/06/02/postcolonial-catan/ Accessed November 22, 2022.
Flanagan, Mary, and Mikael Jakobsson. 2023. Playing Oppression: The Legacy of Conquest and Empire in 
Colonialist Board Games. Cambridge, MA and London, UK: The MIT Press.
Gandhi: The Decolonization of British India 1917–1947. 2019. Hanford, CA: GMT Games.
Ganguly, Keya. 2004. “Tempossssrality and Postcolonial Critique.” In The Cambridge Companion to Postcolonial 
Literary Studies, edited by Neil Lazarus, 162–180. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
GMT Games. 2011. Labyrinth Rules. https://www.gmtgames.com/living_rules/Labyrinth-Rules-2011.pdf Accessed 
April 12, 2024. 
GMT Games. 2015. https://www.gmtgames.com/adistantplain/ADP-RULES-2015.pdf Accessed September 27, 
2022.
GMT Games. n.d. “COIN Series.” https://www.gmtgames.com/c-36-COIN-series.aspx#[PageNumber(0)|PageSize(5
0)|PageSort(Name)|DisplayType(Grid)] Accessed November 22, 2022.
Harrigan, P. and M. Kirschenbaum, eds. 2016. Zones of Control: Perspectives on Wargaming. Cambridge, MA and 
London, England: The MIT Press.
Hall, Stuart. 2007. “The West and the Rest: Discourse and Power.” In Race and Racialization: Essential Readings, 
edited by T. Das Gupta, 184–227. Toronto: Canadian Scholars Press.
Jayanth, Meghna. 2022. “Game Design in the Imperial Mode #CGSA 2022.” Medium.com. https://medium.com/
@betterthemask/game-design-in-the-imperial-mode-cgsa-2022-e5a9a6a57859 Accessed November 22, 2022.
Joseph, C L. 2012 “‘The Haitian Turn’: An Appraisal of Recent Literary and Historiographical Works on the Haitian 
Revolution.” Journal of Pan African Studies 5, no. 6: 37–55.
Kickstarter. 2019. April 2. https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/2074786394/root-a-game-of-woodland-might-and
-right Accessed November 22, 2022.
Kickstarter. 2020. October 26. https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/1243243962/pax-pamir-reprint Accessed 
November 22, 2022.
Knight, F. W. 2000"The Haitian Revolution." The American Historical Review 105, no. 1: 103–15.
Labyrinth: The War on Terror, 2001-?. 2010. Hanford, CA: GMT Games.
Miyata, Francis. 2021. “The Grand Strategy of Carl von Clausewitz.” March 26, 2021. https://warroom.armywarcol￾lege.edu/articles/grand-strategy-clausewitz/#:~:text=For%20Clausewitz%2C%20%E2%80%9Cwar%20is
%20not,force%2C%20to%20accomplish%20political%20ends. Accessed November 22, 2022.
Mochocki, Michal, ed. 2023. Heritage, Memory and Identity in Postcolonial Board Games. London: Routledge.
Navajo Wars: A History of the American Southwest, 1598-1864. 2013. Hanford, CA: GMT Games.
Nayar, Pramod K. 2015. The Postcolonial Studies Dictionary. Chichester, West Sussex: Wiley.
No Pun Included. 2021. “Colonialism – The Board Game Struggle.” February 19, 2021. https://youtu.be/
VQuFSxs9VXA Accessed September 27, 2022.
Pax Pamir. 2015. Stockholm, Sweden: Sierra Madre Games.
Quarrie, Bruce. 1977 Napoleon’s Campaigns in Miniature. Cambridge, UK. Patrick Stephens.
S3 US West. 2012. “Andean Abyss Playbook.” https://www.gmtgames.com/andeanabyss/AAPLAYBOOK-3.pdf
Accessed April 12, 2024.
S3 US West. 2017. “Colonial Twilight Rules.” com/gmtwebsiteassets/colonialtwilight/ColTwi-RULES-LR-May2018
.pdf Accessed November 22, 2022.
S3 US West. 2019. “Gandhi Rules.” https://s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/gmtwebsiteassets/Gandhi/GandhiRulesFINALLo
-Res.pdf Accessed November 22, 2022.
Shelf Stories. 2021. “Checking Slavery and Colonialism in Board Games.” January 4, 2021. https://www.youtube
.com/watch?v=ytCmiFwr8GQ&t=1s Accessed November 22, 2022.
Shelf Stories. 2022. “War Games Are Better at History Than Euro Games? with Dr. Patrick Rael.” August 10, 2022. 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8GmOZdC5fEI Accessed November 22, 2022.
Shut Up & Sit Down. 2023. “John Company: The Colossal Game of Colonialist Greed.” November 28, 2023. https://
www.youtube.com/watch?v=ykrqCX2_mhU Accessed January 29, 2024.23 • The Postcolonial Turn 311
The British Way: Counterinsurgency at the end of Empire. 2023. Hanford, CA: GMT Games.
Twilight Struggle: The Cold War, 1945-1989. 2005. Hanford, CA: GMT Games.
Williams, Patrick. 1993. “Problems of post-colonialism?” Inequality/Theory 1 Post-colonialism Racism, and Racial 
Difference 16 (March): 91–102. https://www-jstor-org.libproxy.rpi.edu/stable/43263394 Accessed November 
22, 2022.
Winkie, Luke. 2024. “Board Not Boring.” January 28, 2024. https://slate.com/human-interest/2024/01/best-board
-games-root-cole-wehrle-john-company-molly-house.html Accessed January 28, 2024.
Woods, Stewart. 2012. Eurogames: The Design, Culture and Play of Modern European Board Games. Jefferson, 
NC. McFarland & Company.
Young, Robert J. C. 2015. Empire, Colony, Postcolony. Chichester, West Sussex: Wiley.
Young, Robert J. C. 2016. Postcolonialism: An Historical Introduction. Chichester, West Sussex: Wiley.
Zenobia. n.d. https://zenobiaaward.org/ Accessed September 6, 2022.312
24 Paper Beats Silicon
SILICON BEATS PAPER
Rock beats scissors, paper beats rock, and scissors beats paper. Silicon also beats paper; that is, there are 
numerous and evident ways in which silicon (digital) forms of game are superior to their paper (cardboard) 
cousins. A non-exhaustive list of such ways includes:
• They facilitate rapid playtesting iterations, without resource- and time-consuming amendments 
to physical prototype components.
• They can be rapidly distributed and efficiently amended (“patched”) in ways that board games 
cannot.
• They are generally not prone to the same kind of physical damage (from drops of water and 
ripped paper) or wear and tear from use (or even just existence in an environment with light 
and/or oxygen) that analog games routinely are.
• They make remote play possible in a way that can only be approached in board games with 
some kind of digital portal or other technological intermediary.
• They can manage hidden information in ways that are generally more problematic or impos￾sible for physical games.
• They can enact instantaneous game setup (saved state and clear away) and manage instanta￾neous card deck shuffling and reshuffling in ways that are impossible for physical games.
• They routinely approach tutorials through gentle and interactive learning curves without 
recourse to external resources like rulebooks (which are generally how board games are learned 
if not through other people).
• They are designed to correctly apply a game’s ruleset, which ensures that any potential confu￾sion is greatly diminished.
• They routinely facilitate solitaire play that does not encumber the player with any additional 
cognitive load than if the player wished to play with a human player.
• They facilitate potentially highly complex real-time and dexterous (“twitch”) gameplay involv￾ing multiple potentially intersecting systems in a way that board games cannot.
• They can facilitate far more complex calculations (and keep records of these, as well as non￾complex events and developments) of all kinds without encumbering the players to do this work 
to keep the game functioning.
• They usually necessitate less physical real estate – they generally take up substantially less 
physical storage space and usually require less room to set up and play.
• They bring with them numerous possibilities for animation and audio enhancements and game￾play opportunities.
• Digital games, through their first person perspective cameras, through audio-visual software, 
and further augmented by virtual reality technologies, afford degrees of immersive simulation, 
of what Adam Chapman terms “realist simulation” which far outstrip the capabilities of analog 
games (Chapman 2016, 59–62).
Paper Time Machines Paper Beats Silicon
DOI: 10.1201/9781003359265-29
10.1201/9781003359265-2924 • Paper Beats Silicon 313
Paper Beats Silicon
At the time of writing, the difference in scale between the digital games industry and the cardboard games 
industry is considerable. While the global board games industry was valued at $18.93 billion in 2022 and is 
projected to grow by over 13% to $39.99 billion by 2028 (a growth of 13.3%), the global video games industry 
is projected to reach $249.60 billion in 2023 and grow nearly 10% to a staggering $363.20 billion by 2027 
(Businesswire 2023; Statista 2023). Further, such a comparison masks how the recent resurgence in board 
games is potentially fueled as a consequence of the prosperity of digital games. Digital culture facilitates the 
marketing and funding of games (through Kickstarter and Gamefound and their kind), propelling the growth 
and sustenance of board gaming cultures (through BoardGameGeek, and Discord servers, for example), as well 
as through the playing of board games in digitized form, through software such as Vassal, Tabletop Simulator, 
Tabletopia, Yucata, Cyberboard, and Rally the Troops. This gives analog games what Aaron Trammell terms 
“an oppositional-yet-contingent relationship to digital media” (Trammell 2019). In addition, the ubiquity of 
screen culture and its isolating nature may be a primary driver behind the rise of board game cafes and account 
for the cultural resurgence of board games (Washington Post 2022; Meeples Like Us 2018). Paul Booth’s sur￾vey of board game players notes the majority of respondents consider them to serve as a “respite from a world 
increasingly made frantic by digital distractions” (Booth 2021, 164).
Such a comparison also doesn’t explore the potential influences that digital games are bringing to 
bear on analog games. Where we see complex tracks, resource management interfaces, or complex vic￾tory point possibilities graphically represented on the boards of board games – such as in Weimar: The 
Final gut for Democracy (2023), or Power Grid (2004 onward), we might speculate that there is influence 
from the user interface and database-heavy design of digital games coming to bear.
PAPER BEATS SILICON
However, paper also beats silicon; that is, there are numerous and evident ways in which paper (cardboard) 
forms of game are superior to their silicon (digital) cousins. A non-exhaustive list of such ways would 
likely predominantly include:
• They are resistant to obsolescence in ways digital games are not; cardboard games may be 
susceptible to damage and decay, but if well cared for they may remain readily accessible and 
playable decades after their publication in a way that is not routinely the case for digital games 
made on hardware or software that may no longer be supported only a few years after a com￾mercial release.
• They are usually far less expensive and faster to make than digital games, involving far fewer 
people and technological dependencies, with a potentially far faster route to playtesting.
• They are generally far easier for players to modify, without requiring access to a code base.
• They generally offer a social experience of in-person play that digital gaming cannot.
• In conjunction with the above point, some empirical research has shown that players dem￾onstrate improved abilities to collaborate, which can mean improved performances in games 
requiring collaboration and systems thinking when compared with players playing the same 
game but in a remote/digital form (see Kaufman and Flanagan 2013).
• These five factors above can mean that in a classroom situation, even in the early twenty-first 
century, an analog game may well be a preferred choice for an instructor instead of a digital 
game, especially if learning aspects of the technology itself are not the specific objective of the 
class. As Kaufman and Flanagan noted in their “Lost in Translation” study, an analog game, 
in comparison with essentially the same digital game, facilitated greater learning and attitude 
change (Kaufman and Flanagan 2013).
• Analog games, by virtue of being experiences not predicated on screens, are enticing for play￾ers where there is such a marked cultural ubiquity of digital screens. Some of the rise of board 314 Paper Time Machines 
games might be attributed to this screen-free experience (Washington Post 2022; Meeples Like 
Us 2018; Booth 2015, 2; Booth 2021, 164–5; Calleja 2022, 1–2).
• Analog games generally offer an experience predicated on physicality and tactility that digital 
games cannot. Some scholars consider this physicality to carry profound implications: “games, 
like buildings, are actualized by the intentional acts of those who encounter them, these acts 
bring players (Huizinga’s worshippers) into being through participation” (Wake 2023, 53). 
The “material turn” in game studies has highlighted the material affordances of the elements 
with which we play and how meaning is imposed on materials and environments (Wake and 
Germain 2023, 8).
• Analog games generally possess far more transparent systems than digital games. See below.
TRANSPARENT SYSTEMS
What is meant here by “transparent systems”? The contention that analog games generally have far 
more transparent systems is not a fresh insight. Other designers and thinkers on games have also 
noted this.
Cole Wehrle, in an interview with Liz Davidson, speaks of the impossibility of playing a board game 
“thoughtlessly,” because of the necessity to “operate it”:
Davidson: You know what’s interesting, though, what you’ve told me about your efforts to make your 
games more accessible for other people to riff off of in the future … I would guess that what 
you’re doing is leaving the door open for people to argue with you and to … to twist your sys￾tem in ways that you cannot foresee … I think a lot of people who put out historical arguments 
do not always welcome fights about it … do you have even the hope, maybe that people … will 
… reveal cracks in your perspective you didn’t think were there?
Wehrle: … In some respects I hope they do … historical games … I think they should be dominant …
history is something we all get to share so it becomes an incredibly resonant reference point 
… I used to love to use history games as a way to understand a period I didn’t know much 
about … the game is a component of me understanding the period … it’s tremendously pow￾erful … because … you have to have studied a game to operate it … a book you can read 
thoughtlessly, a game you can’t play thoughtlessly … it requires you to internalize the rules 
to operate it. 
(Beyond Solitaire, 2021)
Volko Ruhnke uses some similar language, together with the term “accessibility”:
what are the advantages for actually simulating something and learning something, what are the advan￾tages of a board game over a computer game for time travel, you know, for visiting history, which is the 
main fun I have with … the games? And there … the issue is accessibility … with a computer game, what￾ever the detail, I can’t really look inside the box, I don’t know the computer code, and it all comes down to 
the user interface, the interaction, to let me know why did something just happen? If it’s a manual game I 
operate it myself, I’m pushing the pieces myself … I learn the rules, now I’ve got complete access to the 
model, if you will, that’s in the game that fascinates me, and by operating it myself I understand it more 
fully, I understand more fully how is it that the designer thinks history worked in this war, or this country, 
or this engagement.
(Chatter 2023)
Further, Ruhnke points out the advantages of learning through these transparent systems, not just to play￾ers, but to designers too:24 • Paper Beats Silicon 315
Designers learn by their designs what the gaps are in their mental models. You find the gaps in your own 
expertise … in that exercise of designing the game we gained insights … So there’s one thing about – 
okay, we’ve got our … expert’s model of parliamentary politics, we’re gonna play this game … present it 
to students and we’re going to have them gain insights from a model that we built for them – okay … but, 
inevitably, because I’ve seen this happen many times, the expert himself, or herself, who then builds that 
model learns more …. 
(Chatter 2023)
In the context of citizen journalism – fast design of current events keeping in step with news cycles (thus 
leveraging the advantages of analog games in relative speed and inexpensiveness) – and in reference (and 
deference) to the foundational work of James Dunnigan, Brian Train again argues for the advantages in 
understanding through system transparency and operator agency when he tells us:
Playing an analog game is very different from playing a computer game because playing an analog game 
brings its players into really intimate contact with the game’s design and its mechanics that are expressed 
through its rules. You can’t help but have to understand – if you're thinking about it at all – to be exposed 
to the game’s structure and logic and intent in a very different way from the unseen code that underlies a 
digital game. And I think this is important. This gives power to the person who likes to play games and 
maybe has something of their own to say, in that they can change the game, alter it, subvert it, parody, 
invert it, to suit their own purposes. And it’s this kind of critical questioning attitude that people obviously 
have and I think they can express it through analog news games, and I think this gives an added dimension 
and a potential function of what we would call … citizen journalism as a form of interpreting modern day 
events … or significant chapters of history that have been ignored, and bringing them to peoples’ notice, 
and that’s what really … separates it from the efforts that people had on digital news games, which need 
to have a coda … and a platform, a technology, and it’s … in the end a very frustrating kind of black box 
syndrome …. 
(Five Games For Doomsday 2023)
Any comparison between board games and digital games regarding accessibility or transparent systems 
warrants closer examination. A comparison between the systems of turn-based analog strategy games 
with real-time digital shooting games is likely specious and unrevealing. Those digital systems are assur￾edly less transparent, as they are built on complex physics models. Even a comparison between turn-based 
analog strategy games and real-time digital strategy games reveals little: real-time games depend on the 
judicious use of time and the ability to click with speed (and skill, and thought) on the right commands at 
the right time and place to construct a winning strategy. The gameplay of such systems function with and 
derive any meaning through the key metric of time.
The gameplay of turn-based systems function with and derive any meaning through the values that 
are altered as a consequence of the choices made within the “turn,” that is through the key metric of con￾textualized choice. A comparison between systems of turn-based analog strategy games and turn-based 
digital strategy games would be a more apt exercise. We do see digital systems capable of transparency, 
so we must be cautious of distorted claims. The digital game Europa Universalis IV (2013) withholds no 
information from players that would allow them to make fully informed decisions in battle. Players can see 
the current status of their army and understand the modifiers that will be applied to a die roll. However, we 
should note, in that game there are subsystems (such as relating to Estates) where even though the system 
will tell players what the immediate effect of a decision will be, there is still some information hidden in 
the game’s event system. To reveal this information usually requires exploration of the event files to parse 
what the code is saying. One player reports: “it can be a bit arcane and most players do not look into that 
except for certain very, very impactful events, IMO” (Jeromey Martin 2024, personal correspondence).
We should also clarify that numerous commercial releases (for example from Wargames Design 
Studio) demonstrate that modding need not be problematic for players, with accessible “slider” controls 
permitting players the ability to edit difficulty settings and alter combat outcomes accordingly (wargameds
.com 2023).316 Paper Time Machines 
This said, the extent of a digital system’s actual transparency is not necessarily transparent at all. 
That is, digital systems may appear to tell players the truth about how the system works, but this does 
not mean that they necessarily do. We cannot be sure when we see a given % chance of victory if this is 
a genuine chance of victory, and, even if it is, if the calculations have been adjusted to generate a more 
pleasing result for a player than the one the actual calculations would deliver. Sid Meier tells us about 
Civilization Revolution and “irrational” player responses to losing at 3:1 odds:
Ultimately, it didn’t matter whether the Civ Rev players blamed their unlikely defeat on chance, skill, 
or designer malice. The resulting loss of fun was the same, and we had to fix it. So we changed the 
actual odds behind the scenes, and made sure that the player would win any battle with odds of three￾to-one or greater.
(Meier 2020, 246)
Even if we believe the systems are not lying to us as players, there can still be an emotional disconnect 
when we do not handle the calculations and the random input ourselves. As Jake Salomon on XCOM says, 
regarding the chance to hit:
“Players may view that number not from a mathematical sense, but from an emotional sense,” says 
Solomon. “If you see an 85 percent chance to hit, you’re not looking at that as a 15 percent chance 
of missing. If you thought about it that way, it’s not an inconceivable chance you’re going to miss the 
shot. Instead, you see an 85 percent chance, and you think, ‘That’s close to a hundred; that basically 
should not miss.’” 
(Gamedeveloper,com 2016)
Thus we have grounds to argue that the act of an analog player operating a system, such as Wehrle, 
Ruhnke and Train expound, even where it can be mirrored in a functionally identical way in digital form, 
is not wholly identical. In the analog experience, the player has full transparency of the systems because 
they fully operationalize them. In the digital experience they have access only to what the systems permit 
because they seldom fully operationalize them (except, perhaps in the context of digital ports of analog 
systems). In sympathy with Solomon’s point above, Chris Klug argues that the transparency of analog 
systems, conjoined with their physicality, is a source of emotional engagement:
One of the tools for evoking player emotion that modern computer RPGs have taken away from game 
designers is the ability of the player to directly manipulate, understand and experience game systems 
themselves. The physical interaction of player (sic) and the game systems, if those systems are designed 
well, induce emotion in the players just from the way they work and how the players use them … Talk all 
you want about digital media being “interactive,” I posit that there is no greater degree of interactivity than 
the kind a player gets when they have the dice in their hand and are trying to manifest a particular result to 
appear, face-up, on any particular throw of the dice. One reason for the power of this activity, I believe, is 
a kind of “head fake” where the player, because she is holding the random number generator in her hand, 
believes that they can affect the roll in some fashion. While the left-brains amongst us would claim they 
don’t really believe this is possible, almost every game player I’ve ever met feels as if they can, indeed, 
affect the roll … Today’s computer games hide all the calculations from the player. This can be an advan￾tage, in that the designer can utilize calculations of much greater complexity than ever before. This allows 
a greater range of game possibilities. But designers struggle to find ways to weave back into gameplay some 
sense of the dramatic.
(Klug 2011, 41–2)
Research into the validity of this “head fake” notion aside, the argument commentators are making about 
the connection between players and analog systems may be supported in parallel research. With reference 
to Espen Aarseth’s work on ergodic literature (1997), Paul Wake argues that the tactile mechanics of board 
games “facilitate immersive gameplay through – rather than despite – their sometimes clunky, clumsy, 24 • Paper Beats Silicon 317
‘ergodic’, and always material, demands” (Wake 2019). The Farkas, Cairns, Wiseman, and Fiebrink 
grounded analysis paper on immersion in board games concludes that:
whilst board games and video games have distinct interactive experiences with regard to multimedia, the 
two seem to elicit similar feelings of immersion according to some definitions of video game immersion. 
We note that board game players are given somewhat more control over their own immersion however 
through the ability to add to, ignore, extend, and change aspects of the way a board game is played in a way 
that may not be as easy within video games. 
(Farkas et al. 2020, 436)
Perhaps we might also look to further research demonstrating the differences in cognitive processing 
between learning to write by physically forming letters with a pen or pencil and by typing on a digital 
keyboard into a digital monitor – which are demonstrating the greater effectiveness of physical implemen￾tation over the digital (Askvik, van der Weel, and van der Meer 2020). Further studies will reveal what 
validity there may be in such a speculation. Certainly studies do exist showing that digital environments 
have “tremendous potential” to alter our perceptions, impact our cognitive processes and affect structures 
in our brains (Kirjakovski 2023).
Paper time machines assuredly have many and considerable disadvantages in comparison with their 
digital cousins, even as they are perhaps indebted in considerable ways to these cousins. However, paper 
time machines also have unique affordances that may yet help ensure their sustained existence deep into 
the future as they continue to transport us through history.
REFERENCES
Aarseth, Espen J. 1997. Cybertext—Perspectives on Ergodic Literature. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University 
Press. 
Askvik, Eva Ose, van der Weel, F. R. (Ruud), and van der Meer, Audrey L. H. 2020. “The Importance of Cursive 
Handwriting Over Typewriting for Learning in the Classroom: A High-Density EEG Study of 12-Year-Old 
Children and Young Adults.” Frontiers in Psychology, July 28, 2020. https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10
.3389/fpsyg.2020.01810/full Accssed November 14, 2023.
Beyond Solitaire. 2021. “Beyond Solitaire Podcast 34: Cole Wehrle on Games as Historical Arguments.” February 
15, 2021. https://youtu.be/Xr8mu4BxdqE?si=5YZZgBB3QRgZtDl1 Accessed October 20, 2023.
Booth, Paul. 2015. Gameplay: Paratextuality in Contemporary Board Games. New York, NY and London, UK: 
Bloomsbury.
Booth, Paul. 2021. Board Games as Media. New York, NY and London, UK: Bloomsbury.
Businesswire. 2023. April 18. 2023. https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20230418005743/en/Global-Board
-Games-Market-Outlook-Report-2023-A-39.99-Billion-Market-by-2028---Opportunities-with-Increased
-Strategic-Product-Launches-and-Capitalizing-on-Board-Game-Conventions---ResearchAndMarkets.com
Accessed November 14, 2023.
Calleja, Gordon. 2022. Unboxed: Board Game Experience and Design. Cambridge, MA and London, England: The 
MIT Press.
Chapman, Adam. 2016. Digital Games as History: How Videogames Represent the Past and Offer Access to 
Historical Practice. Abingdon, OX: Routledge.
Chatter. 2023. “National Security Insights From Board Games with Volko Ruhnke.” July 20, 2023. https://shows.acast
.com/chatter/episodes/national-security-insights-from-board-games-with-volko-ruhnk Accessed October 25, 
2023.
Farkas, Timea, Paul Cairns, Sarah Wiseman, and Rebecca Fiebrink. 2020. “A Grounded Analysis of Player￾Described Board Game Immersion.” CHI PLAY ‘20, November 2–4, 2020. Virtual Event, Canada. https://dl
.acm.org/doi/pdf/10.1145/3410404.3414224 Accessed January 27, 2024.
Five Games for Doomsday. 2023. “Brian Train.” https://www.spreaker.com/show/five-games-for-doomsday
Accessed July 25, 2023.318 Paper Time Machines 
Gamedeveloper,com. 2016. March 1, 2016. https://www.gamedeveloper.com/design/jake-solomon-explains-the
-careful-use-of-randomness-in-i-xcom-2-i- Accessed November 14, 2023.
Kaufman, Geoff F., and Mary Flanagan. 2013. “Lost in Translation: Comparing the Impact of an Analog and Digital 
Version of a Public Health Game on Players’ Perceptions, Attitudes, and Cognitions.” International Journal of 
Gaming and Computer-Mediated Simulations 5, no. 3 (July–September): 1–9. https://tiltfactor.org/wp-content
/uploads2/Lost-in-Translation-Comparing-the-Impact-of-an-Analog-and-Digital-Version-of-a-Public-Health
-Game-on-Players-Perceptions-Attitudes-and-Cognitions.pdf Accessed November 14, 2023.
Kirjakovski, Atanas. 2023. “Rethinking Perception and Cognition in the Digital Environment.” Frontiers in 
Psychology, December 1, 2023. https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fcogn.2023.1266404/full
Accessed January 28, 2024.
Klug, Chris. 2011. “Dice as Dramaturge.” In Tabletop Analog Game Design, edited by Greg Costikyan and Drew 
Davidson, 39–47. Pittsburg, PA: ETC Press.
Meeples Like Us. 2018. November 26, 2018. https://www.meeplelikeus.co.uk/board-games-and-social-isolation/
Accessed November 14, 2023.
Meier, Sid and Jennifer Lee Noonan. 2020. Sid Meier’s Memoir! A Life in Computer Games. New York: W. W. 
Norton Company Ltd.
Statista. 2023. https://www.statista.com/outlook/dmo/digital-media/video-games/worldwide Accessed November 
14, 2023.
Trammell, Aaron. 2019. “Analog Games and the Digital Economy.” March 10, 2019. https://analoggamestudies.org
/2019/03/analog-games-and-the-digital-economy/ Accessed January 29, 2024.
Wake, Paul. 2019. “Token Gestures: Towards a Theory of Immersion in Analog Games.” Analog Game Studies X, 
no. II (September 16). https://analoggamestudies.org/2019/09/token-gestures-towards-a-theory-of-immersion
-in-analog-games/#note-10 Accessed January 27, 2024.
Wake, Paul. 2023. “Component Parts: Board Games as Architecture and Performance.” In Material Game Studies: A 
Philosophy of Analogue Play, edited by Paul Wake and Chloé Germain, 47–64. London: Bloomsbury.
Wake, Paul and Germain, Chloé eds. 2023. “Introduction: Material Game Studies.” In Material Game Studies: A 
Philosophy of Analogue Play, edited by Paul Wake and Chloé Germain, 1–18. London: Bloomsbury.
Wargameds.com. 2023. https://wargameds.com/ Accessed November 14, 2023.
Washington Post. 2022. December 24, 2022. https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/2022/12/24/board-game
-popularity/ Accessed November 14, 2023.319
Index
1565: Siege of Malta (2022), 167
1759: Siege of Quebec (2018) board, 133
1776: The Game of the American Revolutionary War (1974), 
113
1815: Scum of the Earth (2022), 189, 230–231
1944: Battle of the Bulge (2020), 178, 209, 239
1958-1981, first rise of board wargaming, 87–93
1982-1999, wargaming destroyed itself, 93–96
2000-2023, second rise of board wargaming, 96–100
Abstraction, 54, 67–70, 282
Academy Games, 98
Action points, 241
Actors and factors, 154–155, 262
Adaptation, 12, 55
Adaptation studies, 54–56
Advanced Squad Leader (1985), 55, 93, 211, 226, 241
Afrika Korps (1964), 90, 240, 243
Air-Attack (1943), 84, 86
Albertini, Luigi, 261, 268
Allies Record Card from Hitler’s War (1981), 210
Altice, Nathan, 170
Andean Abyss (2012), 186, 300, 305
Angel, Garcia, 287
Anthropy, Anna, 20
Appelcline, Shannon, 65, 88, 89, 229
Area control, 84, 88, 181–183
Area Impulse, 238
Aristotle/Aristotelian, 53, 290
Arnaudo, Marco, 89, 286–287, 289
Ascher, Abraham, 271
Ashcroft, Bill, 299
Assertion evaluation, 264
Atlantic Chase: The Kriegsmarine versus the Home Fleet
1939–1942 (2021), 248
An Attrition of Souls (2020), 220
Aubrey, Anable, 22
Augusto, Boal, 24
Autoethnography, 29
Avalanche Press, 96
Avalon Hill, 77, 83, 84, 87–90, 111, 112, 118, 127, 206
Avalon Hill Game Company (AH), 77
Axis & Allies (1983), 98, 245
Aylett, Ruth, 33, 34
Bae, Sebastian, 2, 35
Balance
as fairness, 199
between game objects, 199
between multiple strategies, 199
Balanced difficulty, 199
Balanced initial conditions, 199
Balanced progression, 199
Balanced systems, 282
Balancing, 199–200
Bardzell, Jeffrey, 23, 25
Bardzell, Shaowen, 23, 25
Barker, Dakoda, 28
Barnes, Harry Elmer, 261
Barthes, Roland, 28
Bartles, Elizabeth N., 6
Battle board design, 177
Battle formations system, 291–293
Before Gettysburg (1958)
Belgian game, 84
British game, 84
Chess and Hnefatafl, 80
CRT from tri-tactics, 85–86
Egyptian game, 78–79
friction, 81–82
German game, 84, 87
Hellwig’s concept, 80
Hex-grid boards, 83
Japanese game, 84
Kriegsspiel, 80–82
Little Wars, 82
nineteenth century, 79
RAND Corporation wargame, 82
square-grid board system, 80
square-gridded board, 83–84
Tri-Tactics, 84
twentieth century, 79–80
zones of control concept, 84
Baudrillard, Jean, 42
Beorn, Waitman, 112
Berg, Richard, 92, 126, 171, 237, 241
Bernstein, Leonard, 33
Bertram, Kevin, 9
Beyond Solitaire (podcast), 9, 25, 33, 61, 300, 305, 306, 308 
(see also Davidson, Liz)
Bharadvaj, Akar, 36
Billingsley, Gene, 96, 97, 101
The Birth of America series, 224
Bissell, Tom, 34
Bjork, S., 28, 66
Bjork, Staffin, 28
Black, Jeremy, 45
Blacks & Whites (1970), 125
Blank Cheque, 266
Blind playtest, 196
Bloch, Marc, 45, 46, 283
Block games, 210
Bloodtree Rebellion (1979), 307
Board design
1944: Battle of the Bulge (2020), 178
area control, 181–183
Chancellorsville: 1863 (2020), 182
conceptual maps, 183–184
Crisis: 1914 (2024), 184
depiction of a supplemental battle board, 179
Index Index320 Index
Divine Wind (2024), 190
focus dictates, 175–176
Holdfast: Atlantic 1939–1945 (2016), 180
irregular area maps, 177–179
Kingmaker (2023), 187
Napoleon’s Triumph (2007), 188
outliers, 186–191
point-to-point maps, 179–181
regulated grid maps, 176–177
as train tells us, 184–186
Tupamaro (2001), 186
Twilight Struggle (2005), point-to-point and area control 
maps, 183
Board games, 1, 21–22, 63–65, 124; see also individual entries
history, 1–3
Board wargames, 237
Bogost, Ian, 29
Bohne, Ian, 5, 7, 8
Bolano, Roberto, 156
Bold exercise of the mind, 283
Bolger, Phil, 2, 5, 56, 113
Bomba, Ty, 96
Bonoma, Thomas V., 48
Booth, Paul, 28, 312
Borg, Richard, 93, 96, 97
Borit, Cornel, 299
Borit, Melania, 299
Bostrom, Nick, 42
Bots, 245
Box George (G.E.), 57, 61
Brams, Steven J., 274
Braudel, Fernand, 44
Brinkmanship, 14, 153, 262–263
British Raj, 301–302
Brown, Tory, 9
Buchanan, Harold, 9
Buckley, James, 11, 54, 62–67
Bullock, Dan, 121, 128
Butler, Jill, 195
Butterfield, John H, 96
C3I, 171
Caffrey, Matthew B., 6, 82, 87, 205
Caillois, Roger, 48
Cairns, Paul, 316
Calhamer, Allan B., 3, 89, 111
Calleja, Gordon, 4, 21-22, 46, 147-148, 155, 206, 313
Campion, Martin, 124–125
Card-driven game (CDG), 166, 171, 241
1565: Siege of Malta (2022), 167
designing with cards, 173–174
major card functions, 166–168
and brief descriptions, 168–171
and potential metaphors, 171–173
Card functions, 166–168
and descriptions, 168–171
and metaphors, 171–173
Card manifest example, 193
Card Play (combat resolution), 230
Cards, 212
Carr, E. H., 30, 43
Carr, Jason, 139, 176, 197, 201
five key categories, 139
Carroll, Lewis, 289
Carroll, Noel, 26
Case study
battle formations system, 291–293
Crisis: 1914 (2024)
brief history, 261
deck compositions, 265
design approach, 262–268
interrelationship of game loss cards, 266
introduction, 261
key considerations, 261–262
Operation Barclay (2024)
board design prototype, 259
brief history, 255–257
design approach, 258–260
early systems analysis visualization, 260
introduction, 255
key considerations, 258
Peace 1905 (2025)
brief history, 270–273
design approach, 274–277
early systems analysis visualization for, 275
initial terms of the Treaty of Portsmouth, 272
introduction, 270
key considerations, 273
position card deck manifest for, 275
Castronova, Edward, 21
Chadwick, Frank, 55, 65, 88, 89
Chancellorsville: 1863 (2020), 145, 182, 247–248
Chapman, Adam, 34, 44, 50–52, 66, 311
Chatman, Seymour, 288
Chatter (podcast), 4, 60, 282, 313–314
Chit pull, 242
Christian, Leonhard, 127
Churchill (2015), 120, 121, 181, 226, 250–252, 274
Civilization (1980), 126, 252
Clark, Abt, 144
Clark, Christopher, 261
Clark, Naomi, 20
Clausewitz, Carl von, 11, 300
Clean Wehrmacht myth, 112
Clear rules, 282
Cohesion rating, 291–292
COIN games, 214, 300–303
COIN series (2012 onwards), 97, 120, 252
Cole, Alayna, 28
Colonial board wargames tend, 299
Colonialism
agency, 297–298
critiques of, 297
miniatures wargaming, 298
nondescript colonial power, 296–297
strategic-level colonialism, 296
Struggle of Empires (2004), 296
tactical-level colonialism, 296
Zulu empire, 297–298
Colonialism (2013), 296
Colonial Twilight, 300–301
Columbia Games, 88, 91
Combat resolution in Freeman’s Farm: 1777 (2019), 292
Combat results table (CRT), 77, 217–219
unpublished prototype, 249
Comeback mechanics, 198Index 321
Command Post Games, 81
Compass Games, 98, 103
Complexity, 55–56, 60–61, 70–71, 273, 299
Components, 9–10, 141, 160–161, 165, 194–195
Conceptual maps, 183–184
Conflict resolution, 134
Conflicts of Interest, 35
Connaughton, Richard, 270–271
ConSim Game, 11, 274
Contingency, 45–46
Contracts, 200
Conventions overview, 206–207
CoraQuest (2022), 171
Costikyan, Greg, 126, 206
Counterfactual/counterfactualism, 10–12, 42–46, 114, 284
Counterfactual history, 45
The Cousin’s War (2017), 234
Cramer, Matthias, 121, 191
Crawford, Chris, 72, 206
Crisis: 1914 (2024), 184
brief history, 261
deck compositions, 265
design approach, 262–268
interrelationship of game loss cards, 266
introduction, 261
key considerations, 261–262
Critical design, 23–24
critical gameplay, 24
critical play, 24–25
fundamental perspective, 25
game rules, 27
issues of balance, 25–26
ludo-textual analysis, 28–29
probability in historical games, 27
queer games, 23
storytelling games, 26
texts, 28
Theater of the Oppressed techniques, 24
transgressive and subversive actions, 24
unpacking challenge, 25
victory conditions, 26–27
Critical game design, 23–29
autoethnography, 29
critical historical game design, 31–32
dialectical opposition, 32–33
emergent narrative, 33–34
historical board game designers on difficult topics, 
35–39
historical methodologies, 30–31
materialized ideologies, 34–35
rhetorical analysis, 29–30
and unconventions, 249–250
Critical historical game design, 31–32
Crocker, Richard, 21
Crowdy, Terry, 257
Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly, 156
Cuba Libre (2013), 166, 303
Culler, Jonathan, 33
Cummins, Pat, 51
Cumulative Hits (combat resolution)
bucket of dice, 220
use of dice, 224–226
Curry, John, 205
Davidson, Liz , 9, 25, 32, 313 (see also Beyond Solitaire),
Davis, Frank, 69, 70, 189, 194, 281
Decision space, 134
Deco-rationalism, 160, 211
Dennett, Tyler, 271, 276
Department of Defense (DOD) U.S.A., 10, 63, 111, 115, 141
Depiction of a supplemental battle board, 179
Derrida, Jacques, 54
Design conventions
action points, 241
bots, 245
CDG wargames, 241
chit pull, 241–242
fixed maneuver, 242
hidden movement, 242
initiative, 238
morale, 243
and more, 237
movement points, 238–240
move some, all, or none, 241
production, 244
research, 245
sequence of play, 237–238
stacking, 240
supply, 243–244
Terrain Chart from 1944: Battle of the Bulge (2020), 239
zones of control, 240
Design conventions combat resolution
The Battle Tower in Shogun (2006), 232
The Battle Wheel in Dune (2019), 233
casualties resolution for
loser of combat, from Washington’s War (2010), 227
winner of combat, from Washington’s War (2010), 227
combat differential CRT
for Melee from Terrible Swift Sword (1976), 223
for Ranged Fire from Terrible Swift Sword (1976), 222
combat losses CRT
from Saratoga 1777: Burgoyne vs. Gates (1974), 220
combat ratio CRT
from Frederick the Great (1975), 221
from Napoleon at Waterloo (1971), 219
from Saratoga 1777: Burgoyne vs. Gates (1974), 219
firepower table from Hitler’s War (1981), 224
four less common mechanics, 231
force commitment, 233
physical action, 231
prisoner’s dilemma, 232
rerolling and locking, 233–234
hybrids, 234–235
introduction to combat resolution, 216
other resolution mechanics, 235
results distribution probabilities
1 Die, from Engelstein 2017, 67, 225
2 Dice, from Engelstein 2017, 67, 225
3 Dice, from Engelstein 2017, 67, 226
4 Dice, from Engelstein 2017, 67, 226
six most common mechanics, 217
Card Play, 230
Cumulative Hits, 220–226
Deterministic Resolution, 228–230
High Number, 227
Stat Check, 226–227
Unit Strength Ratio, 217–220322 Index
Tactical Matrix from Saratoga (1998), 230
Design conventions units
1944: Battle of the Bulge (2020), 209
Allies Record Card from Hitler’s War (1981), 210
block games, 210
cards, 212
introduction, 208
Kingmaker (2023 edition), 213
minis, 210–212
Napoleon’s Triumph (2007), 214
other pieces, 212–215
Quartermaster General: 1914 (2016), 212
Saratoga: 1777 (2017), 211
unit counters, 208–210
Designing with cards, 173–174
Design process, 131
“Critical Play” game design model, 137
five key categories (Carr, Jason),” 139
five possible origins of games, 140
Flanagan, Mary
critical play game design model, 135
traditional iterative game design model, 135
four-point loop model, 135–137
ideas, 139–141
iterative design process (Salen, Katie and Zimmerman, 
Eric), 135
modding and pre-existing game systems, 131
play, 131
“pre-production phase (Wehrle, Cole)” 138–139
process, 131–132
research, 141
Soviet Dawn (2021) board, 132
the Stanford design school K12 lab six-phase process, 134
synopsis, 141–142
ten points (Herman, Mark), 134
ten-step process (Dunnigan, James), 132–134
traditional iterative game design model, 136
unfixed process (Knizia, Reiner) 137–138
Design process methodology, 131–132
Design unconventions
Churchill (2015), 250–252
critical game design and “unconventions,” 249–250
CRT from unpublished prototype (Verlaque, Renaud), 249
mechanical innovations, 247–249
Deterministic/determinism, 43, 114
Deterministic odds, 281–282
Deterministic Resolution, (combat resolution) 217–218
Alternate Removal, 228–229
Battle card, 229–231
chess, 229
implementation of, 228
Rock-Paper-Scissors (RPS), 229–230
Development, 192
Developmental playtest, 196
Devising thesis
actors and factors, 154–155
early systems analysis visualization for
Crisis: 1914 (2024), 153
Elizabeth: England Aflame (forthcoming), 153
Freeman’s Farm: 1777 (2019), 151
Rebellion: Britannia (forthcoming), 152
ends, ways, means, 155–157
historical stress test, 157
from an idea into a thesis, 144
levels of warfare, 150
Plutchik’s “wheel of emotions,” 147
purpose, 144–145
replayability, 149
research question, 148
scope and scale, 149–154
from a thesis into a design, 157–158
what do you want your players to feel, 145–148
Dialectical opposition, 32–33
Dillon, Beth A. (Elizabeth LaPensée), 299
Diplomacy (1959), 3, 19–20, 26, 68, 88–89, 98, 111, 118, 125, 
162, 177, 198, 232, 238, 243, 252, 296
Diplomatic Back-Channel effect, 264
Diplomatic Pressure (DP), 263–264
Directed linear authorial intent, 286
A Distant Plain (2013), 214, 303
Distortion of hindsight, 283–284
Divine Wind (2024), 190, 248–249
Divine Wind (forthcoming), 13, 189, 248–249
Documentation, 192–193
Double-blind playtest, 197
Downes-Martin, Stephen, 6
Dune (1979), 168, 233, 252
Dungeons & Dragons (1974), 65, 89, 95, 287
Dunne, Anthony, 11, 23, 25
Dunnigan, James, 1, 12, 54, 88, 91, 111, 119, 125, 132, 228, 314
ten-step process, 132–134
Eagleton, Terry, 28
Early systems analysis visualization, 151–153, 260–261, 
274–275
Edwards, Jason, 11, 300
Ehrmann, Jacques, Cathy Lewis, and Phil Lewis, 21
Eikmeier, Dale C., 155
Eklund, Phil, 300
Elliott, Andrew B.R., 50–51, 66
Elliott, Kamilla, 54
Emergent narrative, 33–34, 147
Emergent storytelling, 294
Empathy, 146
Ends, ways, means, 144, 155–157, 248, 262, 273
Endurance (2023), 27, 128, 243
Engberg-Pedersen, Anders, 70, 131
Engelstein, Geoffrey, 28, 145, 149, 161, 199-200, 206, 225 (see 
also Engelstein and Shalev)
Engelstein, Geoffrey and Shalev, Isaac, 13, 156, 164, 216-217, 
220, 224-226, 228-235, 237, 263
Espen J. Aarseth, 315
Esthus, Raymond, 271–273, 275
European geopolitics, 3
Evans, Richard J., 112
Faiduti, Bruno, 304
Farkas, Timea, 316
Fassone, Riccardo, 68, 282
Featherstone, Donald, 53, 82, 95, 205, 245
Fedorko, Sean Joseph, 45, 52, 53
Ferguson, Niall, 44–46, 283
Fernadez-Vara, Clara, 46
Fiebrink, Rebecca, 316
Field Command (1991), 229
Fiero, 282Index 323
Fink, Eugen, 4
Fire in the Lake (2014), 176, 303
First rise of board wargaming, 87–93
Five Games For Doomsday (podcast), 314
Five Games for Doomsday (podcast), 314
Fixed maneuver, 243
Flanagan, Mary, 12, 24–25, 121, 135, 312
critical play game design model, 135
traditional iterative game design model, 135
Fletcher, Angus, 146, 154
FLN pieces, 301
Flow, 5–7, 152, 156
Flowering of non-wargame historical games, 126–128
Flying Pig Games, 98
Focus dictates, 175–176
Focus group playtest, 197
Forbeck, Matt, 139
Force Commitment (combat resolution), 233
The Forge, 59, 61
Formation of ideas, 139–141
Forum theater, 50
Foucault, Michel, 11, 300, 307
Four less common mechanics, 231
Four-point loop model, 135–137
Framing narrative, 34
Frankfurt School, 23
Frasca, Gonzalo, 24, 49
Frederick the Great: The Campaigns of The Soldier King 
1756-1759 (1975), 69, 81, 177, 219, 221
Freeman’s Farm: 1777 (2019), 98–99, 148, 151, 189, 189, 230, 
233–234, 243, 289, 291, 292
Friedrich (2004), 230
Fun, 3, 35-37, 138, 141, 146, 155–156, 281–282, 292, 313, 315
Future, 1, 5, 8, 11, 43, 45, 46, 61, 114, 282, 304, 307, 317
Game
board game, 21–22
concept of agency, 21
concept of frames, 21
development
balancing, 199–200
card manifest example, 193
contracts, 200
development, 192
documentation, 192–193
Joe Slack’s 4 I’s Framework, 196
player engagement, 197–199
prototype, 195
publication, 200–201
publisher pitch, 200
rules, 193–195
testing and iterating, 195–197
emotion, 22
feedback system, 19–20
goal, 19
queer games, 23
rules, 19–20
tabletop game, 22–23
voluntary participation, 19–21
Game Designers’ Workshop (GDW), 88, 96, 242, 307
Game of chicken, 262–263
Games as history quizzes test, 2
Gamescience, 90, 307
Game studies and simulations, 46–50
Game Study Buddies (podcast), 21, 52
Game Theory, 56–57
Gandhi: The Decolonization of British India, 1917-1947
(2019), 186, 301
Ganguly, Keya, 302
Garfield, Richard, 170
Gary, Justin, 139, 197, 198
The General (Avalon Hill magazine), 112
The General magazine, 111–112
Georgetown University Wargaming Society (GUWS), 111
Gettysburg (1958), 77–78
Ghamari-Tabrizi, Sharon, 286
Giaime, Alonge, 68, 282
Global hegemon, axis conditional surrender, 250
GMT Games, 96-97, 100-103, 152, 300, 303–305
Grace, Lindsay, 24, 25
Griffin, Gareth, 299
Guillory, Brant, 8, 48
The Guns of August (1981), 119
Hall, Stuart, 299
Hand-taught playtest, 196
Harrigan, Pat, 206
Harris, Larry, 3
Hegarty, Domhnall, 175
Hellwig, Johan, 80
Henton, Alice, 47
Herman, Mark, 12, 63, 93, 96, 118, 120, 121, 134, 206, 218, 
237, 250, 252, 274, 303
Hexagons/hexes, 82-84, 88-92, 96, 98-103, 115, 176–177, 188, 
206, 214, 222-234, 239-240, 307
Hidden information, 101, 153, 161, 163, 166, 169, 171-172, 198, 
214, 229, 233, 242, 249, 276, 282, 291, 301, 311, 314
Hidden movement, 13, 21, 77, 83, 89, 100, 148, 181, 242, 247-
248, 282, 307
Hidden Movement Track (HMT), 247–248
High Number, (combat resolution) 227
Hinsley, F.H., 256
Historical board game, 175, 205, 296
conventions overview, 206–207
design, 144
designers on difficult topics, 35–39
reference books, 205–206
Historical games as models, 56–62
Historical game studies and simulations, 50–54
Historical methodologies, 30–31
Historical narrative, 134
Historical simulations
The 1936 Rhineland Crisis, 58
adaptation studies and simulations, 54–56
Arms Race Game, 57
against counterfactualism, 43–44
definitions, 42–43
game studies and simulations, 46–50
historical games as models, 56–62
historical game studies and simulations, 50–54
interactive complexity, 70–71
Military planning visualization, 71
re-stated limitations of games, 62–64
roleplay or simulation, 64–67
simulation by abstraction, 67–70
simulation overlap, from Juul (2007), 47324 Index
synopsis, 71–72
utility of counterfactualism, 44–46
visualization from Brant Guillory, games and simulation 
for training and learning, 48
visualization of simulation, overlap between a game and 
reality, 47
Historical stress test, 157
History of board wargames
1958–1981: the first rise of board wargaming, 87–93
1982–1999: wargaming destroyed itself, 93–96
2000–2023: the second rise of board wargaming, 96–100
CRT from Air-Attack (1943), 86
CRT from Gettysburg (1958), 78
CRT from Tri-Tactics (1925), 85
Cuba Libre (2013), 98
Gettysburg (1958), 79
before Gettysburg, 78–87
GMT Lower 40% Sellers 4Q 2022–3Q 2023, 102, 103
GMT Top 60 Bestsellers 4Q 2022–3Q 2023, 101
overview, 77–78
proportional dice tables, 81
synopsis, 100–103
Twilight Struggle (2005), 97
We The People (1994), 94
Hitler’s War (1981), 111, 114, 209, 224, 241, 243–244
Holden, Kritina, 195
Holdfast: Atlantic 1939–1945 (2016), 180
Holland, Amabel, 24, 26, 27, 31, 35, 98, 140, 146, 160
Hollandspiel Games, 27, 98, 140, 160
Holopainen, J., 28, 66
Holt, Thaddeus, 256
Hospodor, Gregory S., 257
A House Divided: war between the states 1861-1865 (1981), 179
Huizinga, Johan, 25, 36
Hutson, Matthew, 31, 146
Hybrids (combat resolution), 234–235
Idea into a thesis, 144
Ideas, 139–141
Identify, 196
Idiocy factor, 283–284
Iggers, Georg G., 30
Immersion, 147
Imperial Mode, 302
Initiative, 238
Inquire, 196
Intelligence, 134
Interactive complexity, 70–71
Introduction to combat resolution, 216
Iron maiden rules, 283
Irregular area maps, 177–179
Isbister, Katherine, 146
Iterate, 196
Iterative design process (Salen, Katie and Zimmerman, Eric), 
135
Jacobson, Mikael, 299
Jannen, William Jnr., 261
Jarvinen, Aki, 160
Jayanth, Meghna, 302
Joe Slack’s 4 I’s Framework, 196
Johnson, Steven, 51
Joll, James, 261–262
Joon Bae, Sebastian, 2, 6, 35
Jukes, Geoffrey, 271
Jutaro, Komura, 270–275, 277
Juul, Jesper, 46, 47, 67
Kafka, Franz, 51, 58
Kapell, Matthew Wilhelm, 50–51, 66
Kaufman, Geoff F., 312
Keohane, Robert O., 57, 58
Kermode, Frank, 26
Ketchum, Richard M., 152
Kiesling, Eugenia, 83
Ki-Jung, Kim, 271
King, Gary, 57, 58
Kingmaker (1974, 2023), 13, 116, 168, 169, 173, 177, 186, 187, 
213, 217, 224
Kirjakovski, Atanas, 316
Kirschenbaum, Matthew, 206
Klabbers, J.H., 48
Klevjer, Rune, 34
Klug, Chris, 315
Knight, Alex, 47, 127, 198
Knizia, Reiner, 157, 195, 197
unfixed process (Knizia, Reiner) 137–138
Korol-Evans, Tony Kimberley, 21
Kosinski, Jerzy, 72
Koster, Raph, 3
Kowner, Rotem, 270, 277
Kriegsspiel/Kriegspiel, 12, 35, 79–83, 229
Kriegsspiel-like components, 214–215
Labyrinth: The War on Terror, 2001-? (2010), 305
Lademan, Bill, 4
Lambo, Mike, 101
Lamorisse, Albert, 286
Lanchester, F.W., 218
Landa, Jose, 287
Lankoski, Petri, 28
Lebow, Richard Ned, 113
Lee, Jonathan Rey, 181, 183
Legacy games, 149
Lewis, Cathy, 21
Lewis, Katherine J., 51
Lewis, Phil, 21
Lewis, Ronald, 256
Lexia, 34
Lidwell, William, 195
Liminoid, 21
Line of sight, 216
Literalizing systems, 160
Litherland, Benjamin, 51
Livingstone, Ian, 78–80, 95
Lock ‘N Load, 98
Logistics, 134
Looney, Andrew, 139
Louchart, Sandy, 34
Ludonarrative, 34
Ludus, 48–49
Lykke Jr., Arthur F., 155
Lynn, John A., 244
MacCallum-Stewart, Esther, 50, 286
Macintyre, Ben, 255–257Index 325
Mackesy, Piers, 116
Madeja, Victor, 243
Magic: The Gathering (1993), 95, 167
Malaby, Thomas, 4, 46
Malazita, James, 23, 24
Map type design, 175–176
Markley, James, 6
Martel, Gordon, 262
Marxist, 24, 28, 30
Masini, Riccardo, 55, 206, 292
Materialized ideologies, 34–35
Mathematical balance, 199
Matthews, Jason, 12, 35, 95-96, 110-111, 114-115, 119-121, 
125, 127-128, 200, 237, 263
McCall, Jeremiah, 53, 54, 283
McGonigal, Jane, 11, 19, 282
McGrady, ed, 72, 144
McKee, Alan, 28
McKee, Robert, 141
McKeon, Michael, 33
McLaughlin, Mark, 96
McLuhan, Marshall, 2
McMeekin, Sean, 264, 266, 268
McNamara, Robert, 111, 119
Mechanical innovations
Atlantic Chase: The Kriegsmarine versus the Home Fleet
1939–1942 (2021), 248
Chancellorsville: 1863 (2020), 247–248
Divine Wind (2024), 248–249
Uboot (2019), 247
Undaunted: Normandy (2019), 247
Mechanics
common components, 160
and potential functions, 161
descriptions, 162, 164
general, 160–164
metaphors, 163, 164
Meier, Sid, 156, 315
Mendivil, Franklin, 58
Mentioned in Dispatches (podcast), 8
Metaphors, 161, 163, 166, 167, 169, 171–173
Methodologies, 286–288
Miklos, Mark, 289
Military units, 208
Miller, Andrew Justin, 45, 52, 53
Miller, Brien, J., 61, 62
Miniatures (minis), 210–212
Mistborn: House War (2017), 157
Miyata, Francis, 11, 300
Mochocki, Michal, 301
Modding, 131
Model, see Simulation
Momentum cubes, 291–292
Monte Carlo method, 58–59, 68
Morale, 243
Morris, Dave, 156
Movement points, 238–240
Moves (SPI magazine), 124
Move some, all, or none, 241
Mukherjee, Souvik, 52
Multi-Man Publishing, 96
Murnane, Eric, 34
Murray, Janet, 21, 287
Nakanishi, Michiko, 271
Napoleon, 65–66, 81, 91, 93, 98, 100, 114, 120, 148, 177, 188, 214, 
228, 231, 234, 237, 243–244, 249, 284, 288, 291
Napoleon’s Triumph (2007), 189, 214
Napoleonic era, 208
Napoleon Returns 1815 (2020), 98, 100, 231, 234
Narrative content, 287–288
Narrative-driven solitaire wargames, 49–50
Narrative fragments, 34
Nash Equilibrium, 57
Native influence, 297
NATO symbol, 209
Navajo Wars, 300
Nayar, Pramod K., 296
Negative feedback loop, 198–199
Nguyen, C. Thi, 20, 21, 39
Nomikos, Eugenia, 262–264, 266–268
Nondescript colonial power, 296–297
Non-zero-sum game, 270, 274
North, Robert C., 262–264, 266–268
O’Donnell, Casey, 23, 24
Oakeshott, Michael, 43, 46
Ockham’s razor, 61
Olsen, Petter, 299
Omniscience, 282
Onega, Susana, 287
One-player and three-player modes, 276
Operation Barclay (2024)
board design prototype, 259
brief history, 255–257
design approach, 258–260
early systems analysis visualization, 260
introduction, 255
key considerations, 258
Opposing dialectics, 32, 261
Orbanes, Phil, 116, 229, 244
Orders of battle, 134
Origins of non-wargame historical games, 124–126
Origins of postcolonialism
Bloodtree Rebellion, 307
COIN series, 305
EOKA, 306
faction’s capacity, 306
Fortress Rhodesia (1976), 307
Haitian Revolution, 305
I Will Fight No More Forever (1979), 307
political dimension, 306–307
two-player strategic-level game, 306
Viet Nam (1965), 307
Vietnam 1965–1975 (1985), 307
The Origins of World War I (1969), 125
The Origins of World War II (1971), 125
Orr, George E., 163
Other combat resolution mechanics, 235
Otte, T.G., 262, 267
Outliers, 186–191
Owen, S., 92–93
Page, Scott, 56, 59, 151
Paidia, 48–49
Palmer, F., 82
Palmer, N., 80, 93326 Index
Paper beats silicon, 312–313
silicon beats paper, 311–312
transparent systems, 313–316
Parlett, David, 161
Pax Britannica (1985), 116, 296, 300
Pax Pamir (2015, 2019), 298, 300
Paxson E.W., 5, 58, 59
Peace 1905 (2025)
brief history, 270–273
design approach, 274–277
early systems analysis visualization for, 275
initial terms of the Treaty of Portsmouth, 272
introduction, 270
key considerations, 273
position card deck manifest for, 275
Peace games, 124, 199–200
Penkower, Monty Noam, 271
Perez, Jason (see Shelf Stories)
Performative contingency, 46
Perla, Peter, 6, 59, 65, 72, 82, 111, 144, 282
Permanent Discard, 265
Peterson, Jon, 65, 80–82, 89, 293
Peterson, Rolfe Daus, 45, 52, 53
Phillies, George, 53, 149, 206
Phillips, Arthur, 283
Physical Action (combat resolution), 231–232
Physical simulation, 134
Picasso, Pablo, 57
The Plastic Soldier Company, 98
Plausibility, 284
Play, 131
Playability vs. historicity, 281–283
Playable prototype, 195
Player-created emergence, 34
Player engagement
board games, 197
comeback mechanics, 198
downtime, 197
four approaches, 198
hidden information, 198
negative feedback loop, 198–199
random end game, 198
too difficult/easy, 197
winning, 197–198
Player objectives, 134
Players feel, 145–148
Play games, 131
Playing time, 134
Playing with the Past (podcast), 51, 139, 141, 146, 148, 156, 
160, 211, 284
The Plot to Assassinate Hitler (1976), 12, 125, 127
Plowman, Tim, 34–35
Point-to-point maps, 179–181
Political art, 31
Political imperatives and constraints, 110
Politics, 112–113
Politics in wargames prior to We The People (1994)
deterministic events, 115–116
Empires in Arms (1983), 118
Great War, 115–116
Kingmaker (1974), 116
random and deterministic, 113
Random Events, 115–116
static victory conditions, 114
victory conditions, 114–115
Pollard, Bob, 209
Pol-Mil wargames/greatest victory
the illusion of separation, 110–113
optional variable entry table for The Guns of August, 
118–122
politics in wargames prior to We The People (1994), 
113–118
We The People and beyond, 118–122
Poniske, John, 305
Ponting, Clive, 261
Postcolonialism, 14, 127, 300, 305–308
Postcolonial turn, 298–305
colonialism, 296–298
origins of postcolonialism, 305–308
synopsis, 308
Post-colonization, 299
Poundstone, William, 56
Pournelle, Jerry, 111
Prados, John, 111, 121
Preston, Fred, 218
Prisoner’s Dilemma, 57, (combat resolution) 232
Probability, 27, 46, 166–167, 217–219, 225, 283–284
Procedural rhetoric, 28
Procedural storytelling, 33
Process, 131–132
Procknow, Gene, 114
Production, 244
building of units within a game’s design, 82–83
Prototype, 195
Pub Battles Series (2015), 224–225
Publication, 200–201
Publisher pitch, 200
Publish model, 136–137
Puerto Rico (2002), 2–3
Pulsipher, Lewis, 140, 143, 193, 197, 206
Purpose, 144–145
Quarrie, Bruce, 82, 205, 208, 298
Quartermaster General (2014), 3, 99, 179, 211, 228, 237, 243
Quartermaster General: 1914 (2016), 212
Quiroga, Stefan Aguirre, 53
Raby, Fiona, 11, 23, 25
Rael, Patrick, 2, 29, 35, 45, 126, 284, 304
Raicer, Ted, 96, 120
Ramen, Catherine, 148
RAND, 5, 65, 82, 88
Randall, Peter E., 270–274
Random/randomness, 110, 113–119, 166, 198, 224–226
Random end game, 198
Ranged fire, 216
Rapprochement, 112
Ravensburger, 87
The Red Burnoose: Algeria 1857 (2022), 299–300
Reed, Mitch, 2, 5, 56
Reed, Randall, 111
Reference books, 205–206
Regulated grid maps, 176–177
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI), 1, 19, 63
Reorganize action, 264
Replayability, 149, 262Index 327
The Republic of Rome (1990), 118
Rerolling and Locking (combat resolution), 233–234
Research, 141, 245
Research question, 148, 262
Re-stated limitations of games, 62–64
Rhetoric, 29, 146
Rhetorical analysis, 29–30
Rhineland Crisis, 57–58
On To Richmond (1980), 209
Risk (1959), 88, 93, 156, 177, 286, 296
Roberts, Charles S., 9, 12, 89, 93, 111, 176, 179, 209, 229, 298
Robison, William B., 43–44
Rock-Paper-Scissors (RPS) (combat resolution), 229–230
Role, 134
Roleplay, 64–67Rollings, Andrew, 156
Romero, Brenda, 2, 164, 199
Rommel, Erwin, 112
Roosevelt, Theodore, 271–274, 276–277
Roosevelt Events, 276–277
Ross, Jesse, 194
Ruhnke, Volko, 4-5, 9, 35, 59-61, 65-66, 96, 120, 144, 151, 
155-156, 282, 303, 305-306, 313, 315
Rulebook, 194
Rules
challenge, 193
description, 194
primary ways, 193–194
rulebook, 194
six key sections, 194
three rules of thumb, 195
Ryle, Martin, 44
Sabin, Philip, 47, 60, 67, 205, 283
Salen, Katie, 3, 20, 36, 135, 136, 138, 160
Salisbury, Harrison E., 271
Sampat, Elizabeth, 2, 146
Saratoga (1998), 229, 238, 243, 293
Saratoga: 1777 (2017), 177, 211, 220
Saratoga 1777: Burgoyne vs. Gates (1974), 218
Saul, Norman E., 276–277
Schlenker, Barry R, 48
Schon, Donald, 135
Schreiber, Ian, 199
Scope and scale, 149–154, 262
Scott-Baumann, Alison, 26
Scripted narrative, 147
SD HistCon, 35–38, 192, 200
Second rise of board wargaming, 96–100
Secrets of Blackmoor 2021, 22
Sequence of play, 237–238
Serious games, 11, 37
Set sequence of play, 282
Shalev, Isaac, (see Engelstein and Shalev)
Sharp, John, 3, 156
Shaw, Tom, 88
Shelf Stories (podcast), 2, 45, 124, 126, 284
Shewhart, Walter, 57
Shonkwiler, Ronald. W., 58
Shuss, Taylor, 23
Shut Up & Sit Down, 60, 61, 64, 297
Sicart, Miguel, 4
Silicon beats paper, 311–312
Simmons, Rachel, 186, 197, 214, 228, 291
Simms, Brendan, 116
Simonitch, Mark, 96
Simonsen, Redmond, 38, 69, 71, 91, 92
Simpson, W., 6
Simulations, 42–43, 54–56, 64–67
by abstraction, 67–70
Simulations Publications, Inc. (SPI), 38, 69, 71, 88, 89, 91–93, 
96, 112, 124, 219, 221–223
Six most common mechanics, 217
Slack, Joe, 141, 160, 193, 195, 196, 206
Smith, Benjamin, 6
Smyth, Denis, 256–257
Snow, Dean, 152
Social contingency, 46
Social justice, 31–32
Solitaire systems, 282
Soviet Dawn (2009, 2021), 132
SPI’s Wargame Design, 89–92
Stacking, 240
Stanford design school K12 lab six-phase process, 134
Star Wars: Rebellion (2016), 99, 194, 238
Stat Check (combat resolution), 226–227
Sterne, Laurence, 286
Stevenson, Robert Louis, 82, 286
Stochastic contingency, 46
Storytelling and wargame design, 286–294
Storytelling for wargame designers
Chancellorsville campaign of 1863, 290
combat resolution, 291
CRTs, 291
Freeman’s Farm: 1777 (2019), 289
reversals and revelations, 290–291
sage warnings, 289
starting, 289–290
thesis-antithesis-synthesis, 290
tone and theme, 288–289
types of, 290–291
Storytelling gam-es, 286–287
Straffin, Philip C., 56, 57
Strategic-level colonialism, 296
Stripp, Alan, 256
Struggle for Europe 1939-1945 (2019), 170, 209, 234
Struggle of Empires (2004), 296
Studying Pixels (podcast), 50, 53–54, 282–283
Suckling, Maurice, W., 152, 255, 261, 270
Suits, Bernard, 20
Sukman, Daniel, 149–150
Supplemental battle board, 179, 210
Supply, 243–244
Sutton-Smith, Brian, 10, 24
Sympathy, 146
Systemic storytelling games, 287
Systems analysis visualization for
Crisis: 1914 (2024), 153
Elizabeth: England Aflame (forthcoming), 153
Freeman’s Farm: 1777 (2019), 151
Rebellion: Britannia (forthcoming), 152
Tabletop game, 22, 197
Tabletop role-playing games (TTRPGs), 22, 171
Tactical-level colonialism, 296
Takeuchi, Tatsuji, 271
Teicholz, Tom, 72, 149328 Index
Terrain Chart from 1944: Battle of the Bulge (2020), 239
Terrible Swift Sword (1976), 92, 219, 243
Testing and iterating
Joe Slack’s 4 I’s Framework, 196
kinds of playtesting, 196–197
playable prototype, 195
tabletop game design, 197
That Others May Live: Combat Search and Rescue–Vietnam 
(2023), 27
Theme, 2–3, 37, 87, 99, 100, 139–141
Thesis into a design, 157–158
This Guilty Land (2018), 27, 98, 127, 146
Thomas, David, 3, 156
Thompson, David, 141, 146, 148, 156, 175, 284
Thompson, E.P., 43
Three Moves Ahead (podcast), 42, 49
Three-player mode, 277
Tiffin, Helen, 299
Tolk, Andreas, 4, 57
Toppen, Joel, 300
Tow, Rob, 150
Trachtenberg, Marc, 268
Train (2009), 164
Train, Brian, 37-38, 96, 120, 127, 184, 231, 303, 305–308, 
314-315
Trammell, Aaron, 67, 88, 312
Trani, Eugene P., 272–273
Transparent systems, 313–316
Treaty of Portsmouth, 274
Tri-Tactics (1925), 84, 217
Tunstall, Gordon A., 262
Tupamaro (1996, 2001), 184, 186, 306
Turn, 303–305
Turn Time Budget (TTB), 145
Twain, Mark, 149
Twilight Struggle (2005), 3, 68, 120, 238, 241, 252
point-to-point and area control maps, 183
Two unsolvable problems in historical board game design
distortion of hindsight, 283–284
plausibility, 284
playability vs. historicity, 281–283
unsolvable, 281
Uboot (2019), 13, 22, 65–66, 100, 247
Ultimatum, 265–268
Undaunted: Normandy (2019), 22, 99, 175, 238, 247, 287
Unilateral Deterrence Game, 57
Unit counters, 208–210
Unit Strength Ratio (combat resolution)
aimed fire and area fire, 218
combat losses, 218–220
combat resolution, 217
Overwhelming Attack, 219–220
US military, 218
Unpredictability, 46, 111
Unsolvable, 281
Up Front (1983), 95, 241
Upton, Brian, 20
Uricchio, William, 51, 52, 54
Utility of counterfactualism, 44–46
UX/UI, 175–176
Valery, Paul, 57
van Creveld, Martin, 80, 205, 218, 243, 244
Verba, Sidney, 57, 58
Verlaque, Renaud, 249
Victory Point Games, 98
Victory Points (VP), 152
Viet Nam (1965), 116, 306–308
Virtual history, 44–45
Visualization
games and simulation for training and 
learning, 48
simulation overlap between game and reality, 47
Voluntary participation, 19–21
von Lünen, Alexander, 51
von Reisswitz, Georg, 35, 216
Votes for Women (2022), 127
W1815 (2015), 189, 243
Wake, Paul, 313, 315–316
Wallace, Martin, 99
Wallis, James, 78–80, 95
Walton, Marek, 33, 211
War and Peace (1980), 54, 241
Wargames; see also individual entries
board gaming, 8
category, 8–9
commercial wargaming, 8
ConSim, 11
decision-making, 6–7
definition, 10–11
design for storytellers
agency, 293–294
conflict, 293
emergent story systems, 293
flowchart, 7
historical board and non-military historical, 5
matter
audiences, 4–5
human experience, 4
root of play, 3–4
social utility, 5
narrative content, 287–288
NATO, 5
UK MOD definition, 6–7
US-based Military Operations Research Society (MORS), 6
Wargaming destroyed itself, 93–96
War of the Ring (SPI) (1977), 92, 171, 173
War of the Ring: Second Edition (Ares) (2011), 211, 231, 235
Warrender, Jeff, 139, 155, 160, 164, 206
War stories
case study: battle formations system, 291–293
combat resolution in Freeman’s Farm: 1777 (2019), 292
methodologies, 286–288
overview, 286
storytelling for wargame designers, 288–291
synopsis, 294
wargame design for storytellers, 293–294
Washington’s War (2010), 3, 287–288
Wehrle, Cole, 28, 32, 36, 138, 146, 156, 160, 211, 297, 300, 
303, 313
“pre-production phase,” 138–139
Wellington’s Victory: Battle of waterloo Game–June 18th, 
1815 (1976), 92, 141, 243
Wells, H.G., 65, 82, 93, 286
We The People (1994), 12, 13, 93, 99, 113–122
Wheel of emotions, 146–147Index 329
White, Hayden, 30
White Dog Games, 98
Wien, Stanley, 275–277
Williams, Patrick, 299
Williams J. D., 57, 64
Williamson Samuel R., Jr., 262, 266
Wings of Glory (2012), 224
Winkie, Luke, 146, 297
Winton, John, 249
Wiseman, Sarah, 316
Witte, Sergei, 270–275, 277
Wojtowicz, Natalia, 2, 4–8, 205
Wong, Yuna Huh, 6
Woodruff, Teeuwynn, 193, 196–197
Woods, Stewart, 206
Worthington Publishing, 98, 145, 261
Writing rules, 193
Yorke, John, 2, 30
Young, Robert J.C., 296, 299
Yucel, Ibrahim, 195
Zagare, Frank C., 55–57, 65, 88–89, 121
Zenobia Award, 1, 303, 308
Zimmerman, Eric, 3, 20, 21, 36, 135, 136, 138, 160
Zones of control (ZOC), 77, 240
