PARAMEDIC POCKETBOOK OF
PRESCRIPTION
MEDICATIONS
ROSE MATHESON
WILEY BlackwellParamedic Pocketbook of 
Prescription Medications
Rose Matheson
Queen Margaret University
Edinburgh, UKThis edition first published 2024
© 2024 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial technologies 
or similar technologies. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, 
or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or 
otherwise, except as permitted by law. Advice on how to obtain permission to reuse material from 
this title is available at http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
The right of Rose Matheson to be identified as the author of this work has been asserted in 
accordance with law.
Registered Offices
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, USA
John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
For details of our global editorial offices, customer services, and more information about Wiley 
products visit us at www.wiley.com.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats and by print-on-demand. Some 
content that appears in standard print versions of this book may not be available in other formats.
Trademarks: Wiley and the Wiley logo are trademarks or registered trademarks of John Wiley & 
Sons, Inc. and/or its affiliates in the United States and other countries and may not be used without 
written permission. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners. John Wiley & 
Sons, Inc. is not associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this book.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty
The contents of this work are intended to further general scientific research, understanding, and 
discussion only and are not intended and should not be relied upon as recommending or promoting 
scientific method, diagnosis, or treatment by physicians for any particular patient. In view of ongoing 
research, equipment modifications, changes in governmental regulations, and the constant flow of 
information relating to the use of medicines, equipment, and devices, the reader is urged to review 
and evaluate the information provided in the package insert or instructions for each medicine, 
equipment, or device for, among other things, any changes in the instructions or indication of 
usage and for added warnings and precautions. While the publisher and authors have used their 
best efforts in preparing this work, they make no representations or warranties with respect to 
the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this work and specifically disclaim all warranties, 
including without limitation any implied warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular 
purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales representatives, written sales materials or 
promotional statements for this work. This work is sold with the understanding that the publisher is 
not engaged in rendering professional services. The advice and strategies contained herein may not 
be suitable for your situation. You should consult with a specialist where appropriate. The fact that 
an organization, website, or product is referred to in this work as a citation and/or potential source 
of further information does not mean that the publisher and authors endorse the information or 
services the organization, website, or product may provide or recommendations it may make. Further, 
readers should be aware that websites listed in this work may have changed or disappeared between 
when this work was written and when it is read. Neither the publisher nor authors shall be liable for 
any loss of profit or any other commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental, 
consequential, or other damages.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data applied for
Paperback ISBN: 9781394202492
Cover Design: WileyForeword ix
Acknowledgements xi
List of Abbreviations xii
Introduction xiv
Drug Legislation and Paramedic Practice 1
Schedule 19 of the Human Medicines Regulations 2012 1
Schedule 17 of the Human Medicines Act (Part 3.8) 2
Patient Group Directives 3
Associate of Ambulance Chief Executives Protocols 4
Prescribing 4
Controlled Drugs 5
References 7
Special Circumstances 8
Paediatrics 8
The Older Person 13
Kidney Injury and Disease 15
Hepatic Failure 19
Pregnancy and Breastfeeding 20
Palliative Care and Those at the End of Life 24
References 27
Medication Groups 28
An Example Table 32
Contents
iiiiv Contents
A 33
Aciclovir 33
Acetylcysteine 34
Alendronic acid 35
Alginates 36
Allopurinol 37
Amitriptyline 38
Amlodipine 39
Amoxicillin 40
Anakinra 41
Apixaban 42
Aripiprazole 43
Aspirin 44
Atenolol 45
Atorvastatin 46
Atovaquone/Proguanil (hydrochloride) 47
Azathioprine 48
Azithromycin 49
References for A 50
B 51
Beclometasone (dipropionate) 51
Bendroflumethiazide 52
Bisacodyl 53
Bisoprolol (fumarate) 54
Budesonide 55
Bumetanide 56
Buprenorphine 57
References for B 58
C 59
Candesartan (cilexetil) 59
Carbamazepine 60
Carbocisteine 61
Cefalexin 62
Ceftriaxone 63
Cetirizine (hydrochloride) 64
Chloramphenicol 65
Chlorphenamine 66
Ciprofloxacin 67
Citalopram 68
Clarithromycin 69
Clotrimazole 70
Clozapine 71
Co-Amoxiclav 72
Co-codamol 73
Codeine (phosphate) 74Contents
v
Colchicine 75
Colecalciferol (with calcium carbonate) 76
Co-trimoxazole 77
Cyanocoalbumin 78
Cyclizine 79
References for C 80 D 81
Dabigatran (etexilate) 81
Desogestrel (+/
− ethinylestradiol) 82
Digoxin 83
Dihydrocodeine (tartate) 84
Diltiazem (hydrochloride) 85
Diazepam 86
Docusate (sodium) 87
Domperidone 88
Donepezil (hydrochloride) 89
Doxazosin 90
Doxycycline 91
References for D 92 E 93
Enoxaparin (sodium) 93
Erythromycin 94
Estradiol 95
Ethinylestradiol 96
References for E 96 F 97
Felodipine 97
Fentanyl 98
Fexofenadine 99
Ferrous (fumarate/sulphate) 100
Finasteride 101
Flucloxacillin 102
Fluoxetine 103
Fluconazole 104
Fludrocortisone (acetate) 105
Folic Acid 106
Furosemide 107
References for F 108 G 109
Gabapentin 109
Gentamicin 110
Gliclazide 111
References for G 111vi Contents
H 112
Haloperidol 112
Hyoscine Butylbromide 113
Hyoscine hydrobromide 114
Hydroxocobalamin 115
Hypromellose 116
References for H 116
I 117
Indapamide 117
Infliximab 118
Insulin 119
Irbesartan 120
Isosorbide mononitrate 121
Isotretinoin 122
References for I 123
K 124
Ketoconazole 124
Ketamine 125
References for K 126
L 127
Lactulose 127
Lamotrigine 128
Lansoprazole 129
Latanoprost 130
Lercanidipine (hydrochloride) 131
Levetiracetam 132
Levothyroxine 133
Levodopa 134
Lidocaine 135
Linagliptin 136
Lisinopril 137
Lithium 138
Loperamide 139
Loratadine 140
Lorazepam 141
Losartan (potassium) 142
Lymecycline 143
References for L 144
M 145
Macrogol 145
Mefloquine 146
Mesalazine 147
Metformin (hydrochloride) 148Contents vii
Methadone (hydrochloride) 149
Methotrexate 150
Metronidazole 151
Mirtazapine 152
Montelukast 153
Morphine (sulphate) 154
Moxifloxacin 155
References for M 156 N 157
Naproxen 157
Nicotine 158
Nifedipine 159
Nitrofurantoin 160
Nystatin 161
References for N 161 O 162
Olanzapine 162
Omeprazole 163
Oxybutynin (hydrochloride) 164
Reference for O 164 P 165
Paroxetine 165
Perindopril (arginine) 166
Phenoxymethylpenicillin 167
Phenobarbital 168
Phenytoin 169
Pravastatin (sodium) 170
Prednisolone 171
Pregabalin 172
Propranolol (hydrochloride) 173
Permethrin 174
References for P 175 Q 176
Quetiapine 176
Quinine (sulphate) 177
Reference for Q 177 R 178
Ramipril 178
Ranitidine 179
Repaglinide 180
Rehydration Salts 181
Risperidone 182viii Contents
Rituximab 183
Rivaroxaban 184
References for R 185
S 186
Salbutamol 186
Salmeterol 187
Semaglutide 188
Senna 189
Sertraline 190
Sildenafil 191
Simvastatin 192
Sitagliptin 193
Sodium Valproate 194
Solifenacin (succinate) 195
Spironolactone 196
Sumatriptan 197
References for S 198
T 199
Tamoxifen 199
Tamsulosin (hydrochloride) 200
Temazepam 201
Tetracycline 202
Thiamine 203
Tiotropium (bromide) 204
Tolterodine (tartate) 205
Tramadol (hydrochloride) 206
Trimethoprim 207
References for T 208
V 209
Vancomycin 209
Venlafaxine 210
Reference for V 211
W 212
Warfarin (sodium) 212
Reference for W 212
Z 213
Zoledronic Acid 213
Zopiclone 214
Brand Names Index 215
Glossary 222ix
As paramedics, we are entrusted with the immense responsibility of 
caring for the health and well-being of those in need. Every day, we 
face countless challenges, potentially making split-second decisions 
that can have long-lasting effects.
The world of paramedicine continues to evolve at pace, one area 
that has changed beyond recognition in the last couple of decades is 
the paramedic’s knowledge of pharmacology; no longer is a protocol 
approach sufficient. The modern paramedic is expected to under￾stand and navigate the complexities presented by medications 
and drugs.
This remarkable book presents a treasure trove of easily accessible 
content offering a comprehensive guide to common prescription 
medications for paramedics working in a variety of environments. 
Within these pages you will find a wealth of information that will 
enhance your understanding of prescription medications and 
empower you to make informed decisions in this field. This book is a 
testament to the author in ensuring that paramedics have access to up 
to date and relevant information in this critical aspect of our practice.
What truly sets this book apart is its commitment to accessibility. A 
talented artist, Rose has presented the information in a visually 
engaging manner, using graphics to enhance comprehension. This 
practical approach is suited fabulously to the pragmatic people that 
we paramedics tend to be; each medication is presented in a concise 
and easily understandable manner, making it accessible even to those 
with a limited pharmacological background.
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to Rose, for her dedi￾cation and expertise in compiling this essential resource. Her 
Forewordx Foreword
commitment to excellence is evident in every page, and her passion for 
advancing knowledge and understanding of pharmacology shines 
through.
To my fellow paramedics, I encourage you to embrace this text as a 
companion on your journey to providing the highest standard of 
care. May this book serve as a trusted ally in navigating the complex 
arena of medications.
Kirsty Lowery-Richardson, Head of 
Education – College of Paramedicsxi
Thanks to the team at Wiley for helping me write my first book! 
Specifically, I would like to thank Tom Marriott at Wiley for initially 
reaching out to me with his idea for this book and Christabel and 
Valli for their support during the writing stages. Equally I would like 
to thank my partner Harry and loyal wire-haired pointer Marsco for 
their pastoral support! Thanks to my mum Fiona Matheson for read￾ing through early drafts for spelling errors just as she used to do for 
my school essays and Maya Walker who also lent me sharp eye! Most 
importantly, thank you to my students who have helped me get rid of 
my imposter syndrome (a bit) and to the students who are reading 
this book to try and learn more to support the people they treat.
Acknowledgementsxii
5HT – Serotonin
ACE – Angiotensin Converting Enzyme
AF – Atrial Fibrillation
AIDS – Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome
AKI – Acute Kidney Injury
BPH – Benign Prostate Hyperplasia
CCB – Calcium Channel Blocker
CK – Creatine Kinase
CKD – Chronic Kidney Disease
CKD-EPI – Chronic Kidney Disease Epidemiology Collaboration
CNS – Central Nervous System
COPD – Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease
COX – Cyclo-oxygenase
D2 – Dopamine
DIC – Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation
DMARDs – Disease Modifying Anti-Rheumatic Drugs
DOAC – Direct Oral Anti-Coagulant
DPP-4 – Dipeptidyl Peptidase 4
DRESS – Drug Reaction with Eosinophilia and Systemic Symptoms
DVLA – Driving and Vehicle Licensing Agency
DVT – Deep Vein Thrombosis
ECG – Electrocardiogram
FBC – Full Blood Count
GERD – Gastro-oesophageal Reflux Disease
GSL – General Sales List
H@H – Hospital at Home
INR – International Normalised Ratio
JIC – Just In Case
List of AbbreviationsList of Abbreviations xiii
LDL – Low Density Lipoproteins
LFT – Liver Function Tests
MHRA – Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency
NG – Nasogastric (tube)
NJ – Nasojejunal (tube)
NSAID – Non-steroidal Anti-inflammatory Drug
OCD – Obsessive Compulsive Disorder
P – Pharmacy
PC – Palliative Care
PCOS – Polycystic Ovary Syndrome
PE – Pulmonary Embolism
PEG – Percutaneous Endoscopic Gastrostomy (tube)
PGD – Patient Group Directive
POM – Prescription Only Medicine
PPCI – Primary Percutaneous Coronary Intervention
PRN – ‘pro re nata’ (take as required)
QRS – QRS Complex of Electrocardiogram
RAAS – Renin Angiotensin Aldosterone System
RIG – Radiologically inserted gastrostomy (tube)
SCARs – Severe Cutaneous Adverse Reactions
SLE – Systemic Lupus Erythematosus
SNRI – Serotonin and Noradrenaline reuptake inhibitor
STEMI – ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction
T2DM – Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus
TIA – Transient Ischaemic Attack
URTI – Upper Respiratory Tract Infection
VT – Ventricular Tachycardiaxiv
‘Have You Recently had a Change in Your 
Medications?’
This is one of my favourite questions to ask a patient. Mainly in the 
hope that I can use some pharmacological detective skills to find a 
medication that is causing their symptoms (Figure 1). Maybe their 
new blood pressure medication is the reason they are feeling dizzy 
when they stand up? Maybe their insulin dose is causing them to suf￾fer regular hypoglycaemic events? Has their steroid inhaler caused 
their oral thrush? Has their lidocaine patch sent them into an 
arrhythmia?
As paramedics, we have a unique knowledge of medications. We 
have the medications that we are privileged to provide people in an 
emergency through Schedule 17 and 19 of the Human Medicines 
Regulation 2012 and then some more that are mutually agreed to be 
beneficial and included in guidelines from the JRCALC or as a 
Patient Group Directive. As the role of the paramedic has devel￾oped from primarily a transport service to a mobile medical centre, 
we have developed into expert generalists in urgent and emer￾gency medicine. The role of the paramedic has been less of an 
emerging profession but an exploding one with a dramatic change 
in the demands on the profession over the last few decades.
However, a lot of this learning is done post-qualification. Education 
can still be focused on trauma and life-threatening calls of which the 
latter is now well expected to make up only 10% of our workload [1]. 
The other 90% of calls we attend don’t always align to our training. 
This can leave both new and experienced clinicians to suffer from 
Introduction
本书版权归John Wiley & Sons Inc.所有 0005812381.INDD 14 06-04-2024 12:20:24Figure 1 Ambulance call- outs due to medicines can be grouped into different categories which can hide behind 
common presentations that we might not consider to be related to a person’s medication.
本书版权归John Wiley & Sons Inc.所有 0005812381.INDD 15 06-04-2024 12:20:25xvi Introduction
regular bouts of uncertainty which when repeated can contribute to 
burnout [2]. The role of the paramedic involves attending more and 
more people with urgent presentations and chronic disease which 
has resulted in paramedics needing a more rounded knowledge of 
prescription medicines despite this not classically being part of the 
curriculum for paramedics. That is where I am hoping this book 
comes in useful, as an easy-to-use resource to familiarise ambulance 
clinicians with commonly prescribed medications. The list of medica￾tions used includes the top prescribed medications in England [3] but 
with a greater focus on medications in a primary care setting as these 
are more commonly encountered by ambulance clinicians in the pre￾hospital environment.
Due to my location and training, this book focuses on UK-based 
practice and legislation. However, in the main list, the drug names 
have been used rather than brand names and many of the uses, side 
effects and data will still be applicable elsewhere in the world. This 
pocketbook aims to provide an additional reference for ambulance 
staff and other non-prescribers in order to familiarise themselves 
with commonly prescribed medications. It is not meant to be used as 
an alternative to the British National Formulary (BNF) or a discus￾sion with a prescriber.
References
1 The Nuffield Trust. Ambulance Response Times [internet]. 2023. The Nuffield Trust: 
London. [cited 2023 08 29]. Available at: https://www.nuffieldtrust.org.uk/
resource/ambulance-response-times
2 Alzahrani, A., Keyworth, C., Wilson, C. and Johnson, J. Causes of stress and poor 
mental wellbieng among paramedic students in Saudi Arabia and the 
United Kingdom: a cross-cultural qualitative study BMC Health Serv Res 2023 5 
(23). [cited 2024 03 15]. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1186/s12913-023-09374-y
3 Audi, S., Burrage, DR., Lonsdale, DO., Pontefract, S. Coleman, JJ., Hitchings, 
AW. and Baker, EH. The ‘top 100’ drugs and classes in England: an updates ‘starter 
formulary’ for trainee prescribers Br J Clin Pharm 2018 84 (11) p2562–2571. [cited 
2023 06 01]. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1111/bcp.13709
本书版权归John Wiley & Sons Inc.所有 0005812381.INDD 16 06-04-2024 12:20:251
Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications, First Edition. Rose Matheson. 
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
Paramedics are able to administer several medications to patients 
autonomously, meaning without a discussion with a prescriber, but 
these medications do not all fall under the same legislation.
Schedule 19 of the Human Medicines 
Regulations 2012
These are medications that anyone can administer in an emer￾gency [1]. This is why anyone can give an EpiPen® to someone suf￾fering from suspected anaphylaxis and there is increasing training in 
‘Take Home Naloxone’ for opiate overdoses. Medications under 
this legislation include:
● Adrenaline 1:1000 up to 1mg for intramuscular use in anaphylaxis
● Atropine sulphate and obidoxime chloride injection
● Atropine sulphate and pralidoxime chloride injection
● Atropine sulphate injection
● Atropine sulphate, pralidoxime mesylate and avizafone injection
● Chlorphenamine injection
● Dicobalt edetate injection
● Glucagon injection
● Glucose injection
● Hydrocortisone injection
● Naloxone hydrochloride
● Pralidoxime chloride injection
● Pralidoxime mesylate injection
● Promethazine hydrochloride injection
Drug Legislation and Paramedic Practice2 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
● Snake venom antiserum
● Sodium nitrate injection
● Sodium thiosulphate injection
● Sterile pralidoxime
Note that the only indication here is for anaphylaxis and there is 
no clear guidance on when other medications should be indicated. 
Regulation 214 [2] may also be quoted in reference to paramedics 
which suggests prescription-only medications can only be admin￾istered parenterally in the presence of an ‘appropriate practitioner’ 
of whom paramedics are not identified. However, Regulation 238 
states that Regulation 214 should be disregarded in the instance of 
Schedule 19 medicines in order to save a life in an emergency. 
Therefore, these medications can still be given by anyone; however, 
the indication for giving them is not clear.
Schedule 17 of the Human Medicines Act 
(Part 3.8)
These prescription medications can be given by paramedics for the 
‘necessary’ treatment of sick people [2]. This schedule covers differ￾ent professions that have their own exemptions to allow them to pro￾vide certain prescription medications. These may be referred to as 
‘exemption medications’. Not all medications we use are covered by 
this legislation and some of the medications here have fallen out of 
favour (e.g. streptokinase). Some medications are listed but not indi￾cated for the use that they are now mainly given – for example, hepa￾rin is only stated to be used as a flush and not as part of cardiac 
thrombolysis. Again, there are no indications stated for all these 
medications.
These medications include:
● Adrenaline acid tartrate
● Adrenaline hydrochlorideDrug Legislation and Paramedic Practice 3
● Amiodarone
● Anhydrous glucose
● Benzylpenicillin
● Compound sodium lactate (Hartmann’s Solution)
● Diazepam 5mg/ml
● Ergometrine 500mcg
● Ergometrine maleate 500mcg and oxytocin 5 units (Syntometrine®)
● Furosemide
● Glucose
● Heparin sodium (only to flush a cannula)
● Lidocaine hydrochloride
● Metoclopramide
● Morphine sulphate
● Nalbuphine hydrochloride
● Naloxone hydrochloride
● Ondansetron
● Paracetamol
● Reteplase
● Sodium chloride
● Streptokinase
● Succinylated modified fluid gelatin
● Tenecteplase
Patient Group Directives
Patient Group Directives (PGDs) are legislation that allows for a 
certain group of health care professionals to administer a specific 
medication to a specific patient group [3]. An example is heparin; 
ambulance services create a PGD to allow paramedics to adminis￾ter heparin to people expecting Primary Percutaneous Coronary 
Intervention (PPCI) treatment or thrombolysis. Different ambu￾lance services will have different medications available as PGDs 4 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
and this can include a ‘new’ medication for paramedics such as 
codeine for moderate pain or a medication we use but in a differ￾ent form or route, e.g. nebulised adrenaline for croup. What is 
important to understand is that these medications can only be 
given for the presentations mentioned on the PGD and if you 
change employment to another ambulance service or trust you 
cannot give this medication unless it is also a PGD in your new 
service.
Associate of Ambulance Chief Executives 
Protocols
The Joint Royal College Ambulance Liaison Committee (JRCALC) 
list medications that ambulance services and trusts have gener￾ally agreed will benefit people if paramedics are able to admin￾ister them. These medications are more colloquially known as 
‘JRCALC medicines’. This includes medications such as clopidogrel. 
Individual ambulance trusts may have their own specific guidelines 
for these medications through PGD, or they will follow JRCALC 
guidance.
Prescribing
Some paramedics will choose to do additional training to gain their 
Non-Medical Prescribing qualification at Bachelors or Masters level. 
This allows them to prescribe medications from the BNF and they 
will be listed as an independent or supplementary prescriber on the 
Health and Care Professions Council (HCPC). However, at the time 
of writing, paramedic prescribers are only able to prescribe a limited 
list of controlled drugs [4].Drug Legislation and Paramedic Practice 5
Controlled Drugs
Since I’ve mentioned it, let’s talk about controlled drugs.
Paramedics can autonomously administer a selection of what are 
known as ‘controlled’ medications such as morphine sulphate and 
benzodiazepines through various forms of legislation. The Misuse of 
Drugs Act 1971 [5] places drugs in different ‘classes’ which are organ￾ised on a scale based on the potential harm when misused and 
includes both prescription drugs and illicit drugs.
Class A – Includes cocaine, heroin, LSD, MDMA, morphine, methadone.
Class B – Includes oral amphetamines, cannabis, codeine, dihydroco￾deine, ketamine and barbiturates.
Class C – Includes buprenorphine, benzodiazepines, tramadol, zopi￾clone, androgenic and anabolic steroids, gabapentin, pregabalin 
and most recently nitrous oxide.
The Misuse of Drugs (Safe Custody) regulations 1973 is related to 
the safe storage of controlled drugs and the Misuse of Drugs 
Regulations 2001 discusses who can provide controlled drugs and the 
requirements for supply, prescribing and record keeping (Table  1). 
This is where the terminology of having different ‘schedules’ of con￾trolled medications comes in. This is why morphine and midazolam 
need to be double locked in a safe whereas diazepam does not.
This legislation originates from attempts to prevent misuse of drugs 
to cause harm. The knowledge behind drug misuse is evolving and a 
greater understanding of life experiences that contributes to drug use is 
becoming clearer. There is greater appreciation that drug use and addic￾tion is a coping mechanism for early childhood trauma which can be 
supported through appropriate rehabilitation. Legislation is yet to 
reflect this; however, there is growing acceptance within the medicine 
and psychology fields that to tackle drug misuse legislation needs to be 
supportive not punitive [6].Table 1 Controlled Drug Schedules
SCHEDULE EXAMPLES REQUIREMENTS PREHOSPITAL 
EXAMPLES
Schedule 1
Hallucinogenic drugs, 
ecstasy-like drugs, opium, 
cannabis
Home office licence required for production, 
possession+supply. Controlled drugs 
register kept with pharmacy details.
NONE
Schedule 2
Opiates, stimulants, cocaine, 
ketamine, medicinal 
cannabis products
Controlled drugs register to be kept detailing 
administration of supply. Must be stored in a 
locked safe.
Morphine sulphate 
(IV preparation)
Ketamine
Schedule 3
Most barbituates, 
gabapentin, pregabalin, 
midazolam, temazepam
Some groups must be stored in a locked 
safe. Retention of invoices for 2 years Midazolam
Schedule 4
other benzodiazepines, 
Z-drug, anabolic + 
androgenic steroids
Retention of invoices for 2 years Diazepam
Schedule 5 Codeine phosphate, oral 
preparations of morphine Retention of invoices for 2 years Codeine, 
oramorph®Drug Legislation and Paramedic Practice 7
References
1 United Kingdom. The Humans Medicines Regulation 2012 No 1916 Schedule 19
2 United Kingdom. The Human Medicines Regulation 2012 no 1916 Schedule 17 
Part 3.8
3 Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Authority. Patient Group Directions: 
who can use them [internet] 2017 [cited 2024 03 18]. Available at: https://www.gov. 
uk/government/publications/patient-group-directions-pgds/patient-group-directions￾who-can-use-them
4 England, Wales and Scotland. The Misuse of Drugs Regulations 2023 No. 1345
5 United Kingdom, The Misuse of Drugs Act 1971 c.38
6 Maté, G. and Maté, D. The Myth of Normal. Vermillion: London, 2022, p213–2348
Special Circumstances
Figure 1 The special circumstances surrounding medications and 
paediatric patients.
Paediatrics
There are special circumstances surrounding medications and paedi￾atric patients due to their unique stages of development (Figure 1). 
Dose and route considerations are important and several medications 
are unlicensed which leaves scope for adverse effects.Special Circumstances 9
Not Small Adults
The phrase ‘children are not small adults’ is especially applicable to 
pharmacology. Paediatrics vary from adults not only in their size but 
also their organ maturity which can affect the pharmacokinetics and 
pharmacodynamics of a drug in the body.
Paediatrics is also not a single group, there are several stages of devel￾opment that can alter aspects of pharmacology as we go through child￾hood. Anecdotally, defining different groups within paediatrics is a grey 
area in paramedic practice and we are not often sure of the boundaries. 
Often, we only consider there to be neonates and paediatrics in relation 
to resuscitation guidelines. However, when it comes to medication, these 
groups can be subdivided and furthermore there is still considerable 
overlap in rates of metabolism, physical and mental development 
(Table 1). For example, did you know that the dose of adrenaline in car￾diac arrest is greater in a newborn than a one month old?1
Adverse Reactions
Reporting of adverse reactions to medications in paediatric patients 
from practice is vital. Not only for duty of candour and authenticity 
as a professional but also because most clinical trials for developing 
medications and randomised controlled trials for testing effects do 
not routinely involve paediatric populations. Understandably, this 
would not be easy to gain ethical approval for. This means that many 
drugs are considered ‘off-label’ or ‘unlicensed’ in paediatrics as they 
have not been fully tested on these patient groups. This means that 
many medications have not actually been tested for the same level of 
safety for paediatrics which can put both the prescriber and the child 
1 This is thought to be due to lower numbers of alpha-adrenergic receptors in 
the myocardium [1]; however, a lot of this information is based on animal studies 
and it is not entirely clear why this this the case.Special Circumstances 11
at risk. Many of the known side effects of medications on paediatric 
populations are because of people reporting adverse effects after 
using the medicine.
We have already seen that children are not just small adults and can 
have different levels of organ maturity which may mean that the 
action of a drug or metabolite may differ to that of an adult. Aspirin 
is a well-known example where, given to a person under 16 can cause 
Reye’s Syndrome2
 where the components of aspirin damage mito￾chondria in children but not adults. Clinical presentations of disease 
can also differ between adults and children  – croup is an example 
where a viral upper respiratory infection can be fatal in children but 
a mere annoyance in an adult.
Due to the important growth milestones throughout childhood, it 
is not certain how some medications might affect different stages of 
development.
Medications may not be available in formulations that allow for 
specific dosing for paediatrics. Continuing with croup, consider the 
use of dispersible tablet formulations of dexamethasone compared to 
the solution. It is much easier to give the exact dosing using the solu￾tion, but this is not always made available by ambulance trusts.
Dose and Route are Important
Children should be involved in discussions regarding their medica￾tions where possible to improve agency over their own health. 
Paediatric dosing can be complex when trying to balance an increased 
metabolic rate with a small blood volume which can result in increased 
daily dosing. It is important to consider the regime for drug dosing 
and to avoid midday doses in younger children who might be at school 
and away from a caregiver to provide or supervise administration.
2 This is a condition which can present with severe vomiting and changes to 
mental cognition due to encephalopathy. The real reasoning behind how aspirin 
causes Reye’s Syndrome is still not clear but correlation has been shown and 
seems to be particularly related to use of aspirin following a febrile illness.12 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Generally, the oral route is preferred by most children with solu￾tions being the easiest and most palatable. It can be common practice 
to disguise the taste of medicines using food – this is known as covert 
administration and if a person has capacity, they still must provide 
consent to being given the medication even if it is disguised. Caregivers 
must check that the medication absorption will not be hindered by 
being given with food. In children, this can also result in developing 
an aversion to certain foodstuffs as they are associated with medication.
Invasive parenteral routes such as intramuscular and intravenous 
administration should be avoided where possible. However, some 
drugs and clinical scenarios will necessitate the use of these routes 
especially in the prehospital environment. It is worth remembering 
that these procedures can be traumatic for both child and caregiver 
(as well as the clinician!) and there are some things we can try to help 
improve the overall experience:
– Try to avoid doing the procedure in a child’s ‘safe space’ so as to 
not tarnish an area of sanctuary.
– If a topical anaesthetic is available for pre-cannulation, then this 
should be utilised.
– Explain what you are doing in appropriate terms for the child 
and caregiver. Where possible explain each piece of equipment 
and perhaps practice on a cuddly toy or trusted adult (where 
appropriate!).
– Do not always assume a child will have a fear of needles. Some 
children may be accustomed or even interested in injections. 
Judge your response based on the child and react accordingly – 
assuming fear may just encourage a fear response.
Some children may have additional routes for providing medications 
such as NG, PEG or NJ tubes. Many medications are not licenced to be 
given this way, again due to the lack of individuals involved in the initial 
trials that have these enteral tubes. Unfortunately, paramedics have very 
limited training on the correct administration of medicines using these 
routes and so they should be avoided unless you have specialist training.Special Circumstances 13
The Older Person
There are several consdierations regarding medicines and the older 
person (Figure 2). Is this route still appropriate? Is the symptom being 
treated just a normal part of the aging process? What is their current 
medication burden?
Sensitivities
As we get older, we generally get more sensitive to the effects of 
drugs. This includes therapeutic effects but also adverse effects. This 
is partially due to changes in body composition, metabolic changes 
and the ageing of organs. We can start to assume a degree of organ 
damage – specifically in the kidneys, liver and heart – as we age. This 
means drug metabolism and excretion can be slow which can result 
Figure 2 There are several considerations regarding medicines and the 
older person14 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
in too little medication or a build-up of medication. Specifically, the 
elderly are more sensitive to the sedative effects of benzodiazepines 
and opiates and nephrotoxicity of NSAIDs and diuretics. Drugs with 
a narrow therapeutic index such as warfarin and digoxin can result in 
toxicity much quicker so tend to be given at a lower maintenance 
dose. Adverse drug reactions can therefore be more prevalent in the 
elderly and paramedics should have a heightened awareness of this.
Polypharmacy
As paramedics, we use the term polypharmacy when we talk about a 
person who is taking several medications. However, the modern defi￾nition of polypharmacy [3] incorporates more than that:
– The prescribing of medicines that are no longer appropriate for 
that person (e.g. short-term treatments such as laxatives being 
taken long term despite resolution of symptoms).
– The benefit of a medicine does not outweigh the harm (e.g. a 
person at the end of life taking statins).
– The combination of certain medicines has the potential to cause 
harm (e.g. warfarin and a SSRI both increase bleeding risk).
– The practicalities of using the medicines prescribed are unman￾ageable or causing distress (e.g. a high tablet burden that the per￾son can no longer manage).
Polypharmacy is not unique to the elderly; however, it is common 
in this patient group. The process of ageing can also be mistaken as 
disease progression or a symptom requiring pharmacological man￾agement. Ageing increases the prevalence and risk of chronic dis￾eases  [4] which often require individual treatments therefore 
increasing the risk of polypharmacy. As the number of medications a 
person takes at one time increases, there is an increased risk of adverse 
effects and interactions which could cause harm. There needs to be a 
careful balance of the risks without withholding medications that Special Circumstances 15
could provide benefit. Medication reviews should be carried out on a 
regular basis by the person’s GP practice; however, due to increasing 
demands on services, this might not always be possible. Within the 
ambulance service, we are in a good position to flag up people we 
have attended who may specifically benefit from a medication review. 
This can include stopping medications or finding alternative pharma￾cological and non-pharmacological approaches. Useful guidance 
such as the STOPP/START Criteria in the BNF  [5] and the Seven 
Steps to Appropriate Polypharmacy from NHS Scotland [6] can be 
discussed with patients when there is a risk of polypharmacy. 
Remember it is always important to include the person in these discus￾sions as much as possible and these discussions will also have to be 
made with a qualified prescriber.
As stated, the older person is at higher risk of organ failure. The following 
sections will cover kidney and liver failure in their own sections. They 
are not unique to the older person and they are particularly important 
regarding pharmacology due to their role in pharmacokinetics.
Kidney Injury and Disease
The kidneys are the most under-rated organ in the body. When they 
begin to fail, it can have a knock-on effect on several functions in the 
rest of the body. They are often a forgotten part of the development of 
red blood cells and so can be associated with anaemia as well as blood 
pressure control. Regarding medication, the kidneys are vital in 
excretion of most medications to prevent them building up in the 
body. They are also the site of action for a lot of medications that help 
control fluid and electrolyte balance, for example, loop diuretics like 
furosemide. If renal function is impaired, then some drugs may not 
function and there are increased side effects from those that do.
As paramedics, we cannot routinely assess for kidney function 
other than simply asking about urine output and maybe the 16 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
abnormal colour or odour. The standard measure of kidney function 
is a blood test of estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR). This is a 
very common blood test and forms part of the person’s urea and elec￾trolyte measures (often referred to as their ‘U&Es’). Most adults will 
have had them done at one point or another if they have ever had 
blood taken. A level greater than 90 is ideal but greater than 60 is 
acceptable in certain age groups. A value lower than this suggests an 
acute or chronic kidney injury [7] and a person’s eGFR can be used to 
measure the degree of injury to the kidneys (Table 2). It is worth con￾sidering that those with a low muscle mass will likely have an over￾estimation of their GFR and the converse is true for those with high 
muscle mass. Several things can cause damage to the kidneys includ￾ing hypertension, diabetes, dehydration and nephrotoxic medica￾tions such as ACE inhibitors and NSAIDs. Someone can also have 
chronic kidney disease where there is a progressive drop in their 
function over time or they can have an acute kidney injury where this 
deterioration happens quickly.
It is worth mentioning that there is another method of interpreting 
kidney function called the Cockcroft and Gault formula, CKD-EPI 
formula, and creatine clearance; however, these are much less likely 
to be utilised in the prehospital or primary care environment.
Table 2 Estimated Glomerular Filtration Rates and Kidney Disease 
Classification
EGFR ml/min/1.73m2 KIDNEY DISEASE STAGE
> 90 Stage 1
60 – 89 Stage 2
45 – 59 Stage 3a
30 – 44 Stage 3b
14 – 29 Stage 4
< 15 Stage 5Special Circumstances 17
Several groups of drugs are associated with nephrotoxicity:
– Paracetamol
– NSAIDS
– Antidepressants
– Antihistamines
– Aminoglycolsides
– Beta Lactam Antibiotics
– Fluroquinolones
– Sulfonamides
– Vancomycin
– Benzodiazepines
– Angiotensin-Converting 
Enzymes
– Statins
– Chemotheraputics
– Diuretics
– Proton pump inhibitors
– Allopurinol
– Phenytoin
– Ranitadine
The effect these drugs have on the kidneys can vary including an 
increased risk of rhabdomyolysis, chronic and acute interstitial nephri￾tis, glomerulonephritis, tubular cell toxicity. People on these medications 
should be monitored regularly for kidney damage. Many medications 
can be managed for those with renal impairment by reducing the dose or 
spacing out doses – which can be discussed with a qualified prescriber.
Sick Day Rules
People who are on nephrotoxic medications and at risk of dehydra￾tion should be counselled on ‘sick day’ rules to prevent kidney injury 
(Figure  3)  [8]. These are instructions for the person to consider 
stopping certain medications if they are unwell, e.g. vomiting, 
diarrhoea or fever.
These include:
Diuretics
Ace-Inhibitors
Metformin (speficially can cause lactic acidosis)
NSAIDSFigure 3 ‘Sick Day Rules’ are a useful piece of safety netting advice to give to patient at risk of an 
acute kidney injury.Special Circumstances 19
These medication groups can be easily remembered by the mne￾monic ‘Them DAMN drugs’ and this is a useful piece of health advice 
we can give to safety net those we leave at home however, the gov￾ernance surrounding this as non-prescribers is not clear.
Hepatic Failure
Metabolism
The liver is a main site of drug metabolism and therefore liver failure 
can induce changes in drug metabolism. However, liver failure needs 
to be quite severe to have an effect and there are several other factors 
that can affect pharmacology in relation to liver failure.
Protein Binding
Several medications travel around the body bound to proteins until 
they are needed, and these proteins are made by the liver. When the 
medication is bound to the proteins, they are (generally) inactive. 
Medications can be highly protein bound which means that large con￾centrations of the medication are actually bound to proteins while in the 
system and released in a slower more controlled manner. Therefore, if 
the liver is not functioning effectively and not producing enough of 
these proteins but the dose of drug remains the same, then there is a risk 
that there will be more of the drug ready for action. This can increase the 
risk of adverse effects. For example, warfarin is a highly protein-bound 
drug and if there is excess warfarin, then this can result in an increased 
bleeding risk beyond the therapeutic need.
Bleeding Risk
A poorly functioning liver also means that there is a reduction in the 
production of coagulation factors. This means there is an increased risk 
of bleeding in these people which should be considered when they are 
taking additional medications that can include bleeding risk. There are 20 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
several other factors that account for an increased risk of bleeding in 
liver failure such as portal hypertension and the presence of oesophageal 
varices. Those with liver failure might have a higher INR than expected.
Hepatotoxic Drugs
There are certain drugs that are particularly toxic to the liver:
– Antibiotics: Co-amoxiclav, Co-trimoxazole, Ciprofloxacin
– NSAIDs
– Statins
– Sodium valproate
– Phenytoin
– Disease Modifying Anti-Rheumatic Drugs (DMARDs)/‘Biologics’
In general, the effects of medications will only affect those with 
severe liver failure; however, medication use in those with any form of 
impairment should be carefully considered.
Pregnancy and Breastfeeding
The pregnant person presents an additional risk in one obvious way; 
there is not just one patient, but two. This is also the case in pharma￾cology. Just as we have a blood-brain barrier, a placental barrier exists 
between the mother and growing baby. Some medications can cross 
this barrier and others cannot. It is equally important to consider 
medication choices in men who are trying to conceive a baby as medi￾cations can also affect sperm development.
As with paediatrics, there is not often a clear-cut safety profile for the 
use of medications in pregnant and breastfeeding women due to a lack 
of clinical trials in these patient groups. Available data comes from 
reporting of adverse effects but even then, it is not always possible to 
correlate the outcome as an effect from the medication as it can be years 
before the effects present themselves. Therefore, the absence of a 
known concern does not imply that the medication is safe for the foetus.Special Circumstances 21
Breastfeeding also has limited evidence for similar reasons. It is 
important to consider breastfeeding because several drugs can be 
found in the breast milk and therefore have an unwanted effect on 
the child.
As paramedics, we also provide medications that can potentially 
cause harm and it is beneficial to be aware of the specific effects these 
medications can have at different stages of the pregnancy journey. 
This is summarised in Table 3 with the limited guidance available.
Known Teratogenic Medicines
There are certain medications that should never be given to the preg￾nant person because they are known to harm the foetus. This is not an 
exhaustive list as these effects are based on reporting and not all 
medications may have been reported. These are beneficial for prehos￾pital clinicians to be aware of in case they are missed during prenatal 
screenings.
ACE inhibitors – These can cause renal tubular aplasia and intra￾uterine growth retardation when taken in the 2nd or 3rd trimester.
Angiotensin-2 Blockers – Avoid as can alter foetal blood pressure, 
renal function and can cause skull defects.
Statins – These should be stopped 3months prior to conception 
due to altering foetal cholesterol synthesis.
Streptomycin and vancomycin – A risk of auditory and vestibular 
nerve damage if used in the 2nd or 3rd trimester.
Ibuprofen – Avoid in 3rd trimester as it risks premature closure of 
foetal ductus arteriosus and pulmonary hypertension.
Tetracycline – Avoid in the 3rd trimester as it can cause teeth and 
bone staining.
Trimethoprim – Avoid in the 1st trimester as it interferes with 
foleate metabolism.
Isotretinoin – Vitamin A preparations can cause malformations of 
the ear.
Warfarin – Avoid as it can cause several developmental abnormali￾ties and increase the risk of post-partum haemorrhage.Table 3 Prehospital Medication and the Pregnant or Breastfeeding Person
MEDICATIONS
FIRST 
TRIMESTER 
(0 - 14 weeks)
SECOND 
TRIMESTER 
(15 - 26 weeks)
THIRD 
TRIMESTER 
(26 - 40 weeks)
BREASTFEEDING
ASPIRIN No 
Information
No 
Information
Use antiplatelet 
dose with 
caution
Avoid analgesic No Information
doses in last 
weeks of 
pregnancy
CHLORPHENAMINE AVOID AVOID AVOID No Information
CLOPIDOGREL Manufacturer states avoid but no other guidance. Benefits of 
paramedic administration ‘may’ outweigh risks.
DIAZEPAM Use only for seizure control
Avoid 
breast - feeding 
for 24hrs after 
administration
HYDROCORTISONE
Short term use is unlikely to cause harm however 
those with fluid retention or pre-eclampsia should 
be monitored
No Information
IBUPROFEN AVOID AVOID AVOID No Information
IPRATROPIUM 
BROMIDE
Manufacturer advises to only use if benefit outweighs risk however it 
is not clear what risk is involved.
METOCLOPRAMIDE No Information No Information No Information AVOID
MIDAZOLAM Use only for seizure control
MISOPROSTOL ONLY USE IN POST-PARTUM HEMORRAGE Avoid for 4hrs 
after last dose
MORPHINE AVOID AVOID AVOID
Theraputic 
doses unlikely 
to cause harm
ONDANSETRON AVOID No Information No Information Avoid for 4hrs 
after last dose
TENECTAPLASE
AVOID (risk of 
premature 
placental 
seperation)
AVOID AVOID
Express and 
discard milk 
during use and 
for 24hrs from 
last dose
TRANEXAEMIC 
ACID
Can cross placenta so only use if benefit 
outweighs risk
small amount in 
Breastmilk but 
unlikely to have Special Circumstances 23
Lithium – Do not take in the 1st trimester as it can cause foetal 
heart valve abnormalities.
Sodium valproate – Should be avoided as can cause neonatal 
bleeding and hepatotoxicity.
Lamotrigine – Increased risk of foetal malformations.
Carbamazepine – Dose-dependent risk related to mental development.
Phenobarbital – Dose-dependent risk related to mental development.
Topiramate – Varied birth defects noted to increase with use.
Phenytoin – Causes Foetal hydantoin syndrome which causes sev￾eral structural changes.
Levothyroxine and carbimazole – Thyroid levels should be meas￾ured as too much, or too little, thyroxine can be detrimental to the foetus.
Methotrexate – Avoid as can cause several malformations.
Chloramphenicol – Avoid IV or oral use due to risk of ‘grey baby 
syndrome’.
Diethylstilbesterol – In first trimester can increase the risk of 
urogenital abnormalities in the mother and foetus.
Androgens – Causes masculinisation of the female foetus.
Drugs to Avoid in Breastfeeding
Aspirin – Avoid due to theoretical risk of Reye’s Syndrome.
Amiodarone – Avoid as found in high amounts in breast milk.
Atenolol – High levels found in breast milk.
Cimetidine – Safer alternatives available (e.g. ranitidine).
Ciprofloxacin – Avoid due to theoretical risk of tendon rupture.
Diazepam – Can accumulate in high or prolonged doses.
Fluconazole – Can accumulate in premature infants.
Lamotrigine – Avoid as large amounts found in breast milk.
Nitrofurantoin – Avoid in infants with G6PD deficiency.
Metronidazole – High doses can be found in breast milk.
Phenobarbital – Avoid due to high doses in breast milk.
Tetracycline – Avoid due to risk of teeth and bone staining.
Trimethoprim/co-trimoxazole – Avoid in infants with G6PD 
deficiency.24 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Palliative Care and Those at the End of Life
People under palliative care and those at the end of life are becoming 
an increasingly common group of patients under the care of prehos￾pital clinicians. These can be people who require palliative care for 
their illness or it could be alleviating the symptoms at the end of life.
One of the things I love about palliative care is the new and innova￾tive ways medication is used for symptom control. An effect con￾sidered a side effect generally, might become a ‘desired’ effect. For 
example, dexamethasone can increase appetite when used therapeu￾tically but in palliative care, this might be given to increase appetite 
where this would be beneficial. Equally there is a strong focus on 
non-pharmacological interventions to prevent any unwanted side 
effects thus negating the benefit of reducing symptoms of the disease. 
Examples include positioning, providing oral care and using a fan in 
breathlessness.
Many medications that are used in palliative care might not be used 
for the purpose for which they were granted a licence. Many pallia￾tive care teams will no longer prioritise traditional guidelines such as 
the BNF and instead new guidelines have been developed such as the 
Scottish Palliative Care Guidelines [9].
Remember people can be under palliative care yet not be consid￾ered ‘end of life.’ Palliative care includes the management of symp￾toms in those with a chronic, incurable disease which can be ongoing 
for years. This can include management of breathlessness in heart 
failure from balancing diuretics to providing PRN opiates.
Just in Case Medicines
Paramedics have a role in treating those at the end of life and this can 
sometimes include pharmacological intervention through ‘Just in 
Case’ (JIC) medications (Figure  4). This is a group of anticipatory 
medicines that are prescribed to someone nearing the end of their life Figure 4 Examples of Just in Case Medicines as per the Scottish Palliative Care Guidelines.26 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
to help control distressing symptoms should they occur. There can be 
regional variation in who can give these medications and tradition￾ally these medications were prescribed by a GP and given by district 
nurses. Now, most health care professionals and even named rela￾tives are able to provide these medications as long as they follow the 
prescription directions. Paramedics may also be able to provide trust 
issue medications to relieve symptoms depending on local protocols. 
JIC medications are given subcutaneously or through an indwelling 
port. The person may be on a syringe driver or taking oral medica￾tions for these symptoms and these breakthrough medications are for 
times when neither of these forms are managing to control the 
symptoms.
The medications generally include the following, but specific medi￾cations may vary between health boards:
An opiate – Morphine is generally the first-choice opiate and is 
generally prescribed for breathlessness and/or pain. Depending on 
your region, you may be able to use the ambulance supply of mor￾phine for the same indication but check with your local policy.
A sedative – This is prescribed for agitation and/or anxiety and/or
breathlessness. It may be midazolam or another benzodiazepine but 
levomepromazine can also be used. The latter tends to be reserved for 
terminal agitation in the last days of life and can also be prescribed 
for nausea and vomiting, so check the prescription. Again, depend￾ing on region paramedics may be able to administer midazolam from 
the ambulance supply according to local policy.
An anti-secretory – In the last days of life, a person can struggle to 
clear respiratory secretions which can produce a distressing ‘death 
rattle’. People can be given medications to reduce this and it tends to 
be Hyoscine Butylbromide (a.k.a. Buscopan®).
An anti-emetic – Nausea and vomiting can be common at the end of 
life, so anti-emetics are often prescribed for this. This may be 
Levomepromazine, but check that this is prescribed for nausea and not 
terminal agitation – otherwise, a discussion with a prescriber will be 
required.Special Circumstances 27
References
1 Antonucci, R., Antonucci, L., Locci. C., Porcella. A. and Cuzzolin, L. Current 
challenges in neonatal resusitation: what is the role of adrenaline? Paediatr Drugs 
2018 20 p417–428. [cited 2023 10 19]. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1007/
s40272-018-0300-6
2 European Medicines Agency. ICH topics E11 clinical investigation of medicine products 
in the paediatric population. [internet]. London: European Medicines Agency, 2001. 
p9–11. [cited 2023 08 20]. Available at: https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/
scientific-guideline/e-11-clinical-investigation-medicinal-products-paediatric￾population-step-5_en.pdf
3 Royal Pharmaceutical Society. Polypharmacy: getting our medicines right. [internet] 
n.d. [cited 2023 08 20]. Available at: https://www.rpharms.com/recognition/
setting-professional-standards/polypharmacy-getting-our-medicines-right
4 Barnett, K., Mercer, S.W., Norburty, M., Watt, G., Wyke, S., and Gurthrie 
B. Epidemiology of multimorbidity and implications for healthcare, research and 
medical education: a cross-sectional study. Lancet 2012 380(9836) p37–43. [cited 2012 
05 10]. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(12)60240-2. PMID: 
22579043.
5 Joint Formulary Committee – British National Formulary. Prescribing in the elderly. 
[internet]. London: BMJ and Pharmaceutical Press, 2023. [cited 2023 08 20]. Available 
at: https://bnf.nice.org.uk/medicines-guidance/prescribing-in-the-elderly/
6 NHS Scotland. Polypharmacy: manage medicines 7 steps. [internet]. [cited 2023 08 
20]. Available at: https://www.polypharmacy.scot.nhs.uk/for-healthcare￾professionals/7-steps/
7 National Kidney Foundation. Estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR). [internet] 
n.d. [cited 2023 08 21]. Available at: https://www.kidney.org/atoz/content/gfr
8 NHS Scotland. Effective prescribing and therapeutics: sick day rules. [internet] n.d. 
[cited 2023 10 26]. Available at: https://www.therapeutics.scot.nhs.uk/
polypharmacy/sick-day-rules/
9 NHS Scotland. Scottish palliative care guidelines [internet] 2023. Edinburgh: NHS 
Scotland. [cited 2023 08 29]. Available at: https://www.palliativecareguidelines. 
scot.nhs.uk/28
Medication Groups
Medication Group Example(s)
5α-reductase Inhibitors Finasteride
Alginates Gaviscon®
Alpha-1 Adrenoceptor Antagonists Doxazosin, Tamsulosin
Alkaloids Colchicine, Quinine
Anaesthetic (General) Ketamine
Anaesthetic (Local) Lidocaine
Analgesics (NSAID) Aspirin, Naproxen
Analgesics (Opiates) Buprenorphine, Co-Codamol, Codeine, 
Dihydrocodeine, Fentanyl, Methadone, 
Morphine, Tramadol
Angiotensin Converting Enzyme 
(ACE) Inhibitors
Lisinopril, Perindopril, Ramipril
Angiotensin-II Receptor Blockers 
(ARBs)
Candesartan, Irbesartan, Losartan
Antibiotics (Aminoglycoside) Gentamicin
Antibiotics (Antifolates) Co-Trimoxazole, Trimethoprim
Antibiotics (Beta lactams) Amoxicillin, Co-Amoxiclav, Flucloxacillin, 
Phenoxymethylpenicillin
Antibiotics (Cephalosporins) Cefalexin, Ceftriaxone
Antibiotics (Chloramphenicol) Chloramphenicol
Antibiotics (Fluroquinolones) Ciprofloxacin, Moxifloxacin
Antibiotics (Glycopeptide) Vancomycin
Antibiotics (Macrolides) Azithromycin, Clarithromycin, 
Erythromycin
Antibiotics (Nitrofuran) Nitrofurantoin
Antibiotics (Nitroimidazoles) Metronidazole
Antibiotics (Tetracyclines) Doxycycline, Lymecycline, Tetracycline
Anticoagulants (Direct Oral 
Anticoagulants)
Apixaban, Rivaroxaban
Anticoagulants (Direct Thrombin 
Inhibitor)
DabigatranMedication Groups 29
Medication Group Example(s)
Anticoagulants (Low Molecular 
Weight Heparin)
Enoxaparin
Anticoagulants (Vitamin K 
Antagonist)
Warfarin
Anticonvulsants Gabapentin, Carbamazepine, 
Levetiracetam, Phenobarbital, Phenytoin, 
Pregabalin, Sodium valproate
Antidepressants (Serotonin 
Noradrenaline Reuptake 
Inhibitors – SNRI)
Venlafaxine
Antidepressants (Selective 
Serotonin Re-uptake Inhibitors – 
SSRIs)
Citalopram, Fluoxetine, Paroxetine, 
Sertraline
Antidepressants (Tetracyclic) Mirtazapine
Antidepressants (Tricyclic) Amitriptyline
Anti-emetics Hyoscine butylbromide, Hyoscine 
hydrobromide,
Antifungals Clotrimazole, Fluconazole, Ketoconazole, 
Nystatin
Antihistamines (1st Generation) Chlorphenamine, Cyclizine
Antihistamines (2nd Generation) Cetirizine, Fexofenadine, Loratadine
Antimalarials Atovaquone/Proguanil (Malarone®), 
Mefloquine (Lariam®)
Anti-mania Drugs Lithium
Anti-motility drugs Loperamide
Antimuscarinics Oxybutynin, Solifenacin, tiotropium 
bromide, Tolterodine
Antioestrogens Tamoxifen
Antiplatelet drugs Aspirin
Anti-psychotics (1st generation) Haloperidol
Anti-psychotics (2nd generation) Aripiprazole, Clozapine, Olanzapine, 
Quetiapine, Risperidone
Antipyretics Aspirin
Antivirals Aciclovir
Benzodiazepines Diazepam, Lorazepam, Temazepam
Beta Blockers (Non-selective) Propranolol
Beta Blockers (Selective) Atenolol, Bisoprolol
Beta2-agonists Salbutamol, Salmeterol30 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Medication Group Example(s)
Biguanides Metformin
Bisphosphonates Alendronic acid, Zoledronic acid
Calcium Channel Blockers 
(Dihydropyridines)
Amlodipine, Felodipine, Lercanidipine, 
Nifedipine
Calcium Channel Blockers (Non￾dihydropyridines)
Diltiazem
Cardiac Glycosides Digoxin
Cholinesterase Inhibitors Donepezil
Corticosteroids Beclomethasone, Budesonide, 
Fludrocortisone, Prednisolone
Dipeptidyl pepidase-4 (DPP-4) 
inhibitor
Linagliptin, Sitagliptin
Disease Modifying Antirheumatic 
Drugs (DMARDs)
Anakinra, Azathioprine, Infliximab, 
Mesalazine, Methotrexate, Rituximab
Diuretics (Aldosterone 
Antagonists)
Spironolactone
Diuretics (Loop) Bumetanide, Furosemide
Diuretics (Thiazide and Thiazide￾like)
Bendroflumethiazide, Indapamide
Dopamine-2 Receptor Antagonists Domperidone
Dopaminergics for Parkinsons Levodopa
Glucose-like peptide1 (GLP 1) 
agonist
Semaglutide
Histamine (H2) Receptor Agonists Ranitidine
Hormones (excl. corticosteroids) Desogestrel, Ethinylestradiol, Estradiol, 
Insulin, Levothyroxine
Insecticides Permethrin
Iron supplements Ferrous fumarate/sulphate
laxatives (Osmotic) Docusate, Lactulose, Macrogol
Laxatives (Stimulants) Bisacodyl, Senna
Leukotriene Receptor Agonist Montelukast
Meglitinides Repaglinide
Mucolytics Acetylcysteine, Carbocisteine
Nitrates Glyceryl trinitrate, Isosorbide mononitrate
Ocular Lubricants Hypromellose
Phosphodiesterase-5 Inhibitor Sildenafil
Prostaglandin Analogues LatanoprostMedication Groups 31
Medication Group Example(s)
Proton Pump Inhibitors Lansoprazole, Omeprazole
Retinoids Isotretinoin
Serotonin Receptor Agonists Sumatriptan
Statins (HMG-COA Reductase 
Inhibitors)
Atorvastatin, Pravastatin, Simvastatin
Substance Replacement Methadone, Nicotine
Sulfonylureas Gliclazide
Vitamins and Mineral Replacement Colecalciferol, Cyanocoalbumin, Folic 
acid, Hydroxocobalamin, Rehydration 
salts (Dioralyte®), Thiamine
Xanthine-Oxidase Inhibitors Allopurinol
Z Drugs Zopiclone32
An Example Table
Medication
AKA What other names might this medication have?
Pronunciation How do you pronounce this medication?
Legal Status What legal categories does this medication belong in?
Medicine Group What group of medication does this medicine belong?
Conditions treated What conditions are commonly treated by this medication?
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action How does this medicine work?
Routes of 
administration
What different forms does this medication come in and 
how can it be given?
Half Life How long might it take for the medicine to wear off? 
(See: Glossary for a definition of ‘Half Life’)
Full Effect How long might it take for this medication to have an 
effect?
Common Side Effects What side effects should I be aware of?
Interactions Does this medicine interact with any medications that 
I might give in a prehospital setting? Are there any 
important interactions I should be aware of? Prehospital 
medications will be in bold and other medications in 
italics. Note that not all interactions are mentioned 
here only common reactions or medications that may 
be seen regularly. For a fill list, consult the Electronic 
Medicines Compendium for that medicine. When there 
is an interaction with a paramedic medication then the 
benefits of giving the medication likley outweigh the 
risks unless it is a known contraindication.
Overdose Symptoms How would a person who overdosed on this medication 
present? If ingested within one hour, consider activated 
charcoal for any overdose via oral ingestion.
Potential Callouts Other than overdose symptoms above, could this 
medication be the cause of a call-out?Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications, First Edition. Rose Matheson.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
33
A
Aciclovir
Pronunciation Ah-sik-low-veer
AKA Zovirax®
Legal Status 5% Aciclovir Cream – GSL for the treatment of cold sores. 
Other preparations are POM.
Medicine Group Antiviral
Conditions Treated Herpes zoster (shingles), Herpes simplex infection (e.g. 
cold sores, genital herpes), occasionally Varicella zoster 
(chickenpox).
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Aciclovir binds to viral DNA polymerase and therefore 
incorporates into viral DNA and encourages termination 
of the DNA chain.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet, dispersible tablet, oral suspension
Parenteral – solution for infusion, powder for solution for 
infusion, eye ointment, cream
Half Life 2–4 hours
Full Effect 4–6 days
Common Side Effects Nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, fatigue.
Interactions It can cause increased exposure when used alongside 
certain asthma medications (aminophylline and theophylline).
Overdose Symptoms Confusion, hallucinations, agitation, seizures. Fluids can 
be beneficial as these people are at risk of developing 
crystals in the urine which will damage the kidneys.
Potential Callouts Minimal association with ambulance attendance.
Did You Know? Aciclovir, among other antivirals, are based upon 
substances found naturally in marine sponges [1].
A34 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Acetylcysteine
Pronunciation As-seat-isle-sist-een
AKA NACSYS® (nack-sis), Mucolight®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Mucolytics
Conditions Treated COPD, cystic fibrosis
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Mucous is made up of macromolecules called 
‘mucins’ which contain disulphide bonds. Acetylcys￾teine disrupts these bonds, breaking down mucous 
and reducing the viscosity. Acetylcysteine also 
activates the ciliated epithelium which further helps 
exportation of mucous.
Routes of Administration Enteral – effervescent tablet
Parenteral – solution for infusion, eye drops
Half Life 2 hours
Full Effect 1 hour
Common Side Effects Gastrointestinal complications can occur with oral 
preparations.
Interactions Acetylcysteine can increase the risk of hypotension 
with Glyceryl Trinitrate.
Overdose Symptoms No severe effects from oral preparations but large 
doses of intravenous forms can cause anaphylactoid 
reactions and hepatic failure.
Potential Callouts Unlikely to be the cause of a call out.
Did You Know? Acetylcysteine is also given as an antidote in 
paracetamol overdose in acute hospital settings.35
A Alendronic acid
Pronunciation As written
AKA Alendronate, ‘calcium’
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Bisphosphonates
Conditions Treated Treatment and prevention of osteoporosis.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Inhibits osteoclasts from breaking down bone.
Routes of Administration Enteral – tablet, effervescent tablet, oral solution
Half Life 10 years once incorporated into bone
Full Effect 1 month
Common Side Effects Can cause oesophageal ulcers and oesophagitis.
Interactions Increased risk of gastrointestinal irritation if given 
alongside high-dose aspirin or ibuprofen.
Overdose Symptoms Upper gastrointestinal upsets such as indigestion or 
stomach ulcers may occur. Treat with milk or antacids.
Potential Callouts Overdose may present as chest pain and there is a rare 
side effect of biphosphates which is necrosis of the 
bone of the jaw.
Did You Know? Absorption is reduced by food.36 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Alginates
Pronunciation Al-g(hard g)-in-ates
AKA Gaviscon©, Pepto-Bismol©
Legal Status GSL
Medicine Group Antacids
Conditions Treated Indigestion, acid reflux
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Alginates form a raft on top of stomach acid which 
protects the oesophagus from acid should the con￾tents breach the oesophageal sphincter.
Routes of Administration Enteral – oral tablet or solution
Half Life The half-life is not documented; however, the effect 
of alginates will wear off in around 4 hours once the 
stomach empties.
Full Effect Within 10 minutes
Common Side Effects Gastrointestinal symptoms such as abdominal pain 
and diarrhoea.
Interactions Avoid taking certain antibiotics and hormonal 
medications within 2 hours of taking alginates.
Overdose Symptoms An overdose is likely to cause abdominal pain and the 
person might be at risk of an obstruction.
Potential Callouts When a person is suffering from indigestion-like pain, 
this should raise high suspicion for a myocardial 
infarction until proven otherwise. Consider a poten￾tial bowel obstruction in people who have consumed 
large volumes of alginates.
Did You Know? Alginates are derived from seaweed.37
A Allopurinol
Pronunciation Allo-pure-i-nol
AKA Zyloprim®, Alloprim®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Xanthine-Oxidase Inhibitors
Conditions Treated Gout
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
By inhibiting the action of xanthine-oxidase, less uric acid is 
produced and therefore available in the blood stream where 
it can accumulate in the joints of the body.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet, mouthwash
Half Life 0.5–1.5 hours
Full Effect Several weeks
Common Side 
Effects
Rashes and skin reactions.
Interactions No interactions with prehospital medications; however, be 
aware of concurrent therapy with ACE Inhibitors and diuretics
as they can exacerbate gout.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Adverse effects noted after ingestion of 20 g. Symptoms 
include nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea and dizziness. 
Encourage hydration to promote diuresis.
Potential Callouts Unlikely due to allopurinol alone. However, consider gout 
flare-up in unilateral joint pain with no history of trauma.
Did You Know? Allopurinol is one of the medications that can cause severe 
reactions such as Stevens–Johnson Syndrome and DRESS 
Syndrome.38 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Amitriptyline
Pronunciation Am-eh-trip-ta-lean
AKA Elavil®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group(s) Antidepressant (Tricyclic)
Conditions Treated Depression, neuropathic pain, migraines.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
As an antidepressant, amitriptyline works by reducing the 
reuptake of serotonin and noradrenaline, so there is more 
available in the synaptic cleft.
As an analgesic, amitriptyline is suspected to work by block￾ing sodium, potassium and NMDA receptors in the brain 
and spinal cord which helps reduce transmission of nerve 
pain signals.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet or solution
Half Life 25 hours
Full Effect 1–6 weeks
Common Side 
Effects
Drowsiness, QT Prolongation, anticholinergic syndrome.
Interactions Amitriptyline increases the effects of adrenaline. Furose￾mide, glyceryl trinitrate and nitrous oxide increase the 
risk of hypotension. Furosemide can also increase the risk 
of hyponatraemia. Diazepam, Midazolam and Morphine
increase the CNS depressant effects of amitriptyline.
Overdose 
Symptoms
These extend from anticholinergic effects to cardiac arrests. 
Arrythmias are often seen and an ECG typically shows a 
prolonged PR interval, widening QRS, QT prolongation, 
ST depression and T wave inversion. There is often a form 
of heart block seen and can progress to cardiac arrest. Give 
activated charcoal within one hour of ingestion and rapid 
transfer to hospital.
Potential Callouts Overdoses can be fatal and so need a low threshold for 
admission. Sodium Bicarbonate can be given by some 
critical care paramedics as a treatment.
Did You Know? Amitriptyline may alter blood sugar levels, so these should 
be monitored closely in those with diabetes. However, this 
recommendation is based on animal studies [2].39
A Amlodipine
Pronunciation Am-lod-i-peen
AKA ‘Blood pressure tablets’
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Antihypertensive – Calcium Channel Blockers – 
Dihydropyridines
Conditions Treated Hypertension, angina, heart failure
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Calcium is involved in the contraction of both smooth 
muscle and cardiac muscle cells. By blocking calcium 
channels, this allows muscle to relax which causes 
vasodilation which helps reduce blood pressure and 
cardiac workload.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet, oral suspension and oral solution
Half Life 35–50 hours (Longer in hepatic impairment)
Full Effect 1 day
Common Side Effects Abdominal pain, dizziness, drowsiness, flushing, 
headache, nausea, palpitations, peripheral oedema, skin 
reactions, tachycardia and vomiting.
Interactions Glyceryl trinitrate and nitrous oxide can increase the 
risk of hypotension.
Overdose Symptoms Excessive hypotension and reflex tachycardia. Reflex 
tachycardia is a response to a drop in blood pressure 
where the heart rate increases to try and compensate.
Potential Callouts Overdoses may present as widespread shock. People 
who are recently put on amlodipine may present with 
sudden onset tachycardia, postural hypotension or lower 
limb swelling.
Did You Know? Amlodipine is a dihydropyridine calcium channel blocker 
and all medicines in this group end in -dipine.40 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Amoxicillin
Pronunciation Amox-i-sill-in
AKA N/A
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Antibiotics – Penicillins – Beta-Lactam antibiotic
Conditions Treated Bacterial Infections – commonly respiratory 
infections
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Amoxicillin attacks the beta-lactam ring which is part 
of the integral structure of the bacterial peptido￾glycan cell wall. As the wall weakens, the cell will 
rupture and die.
Routes of Administration Enteral – capsule, powder for suspension
Parenteral – powder for solution for injection
Half Life 1 hour
Full Effect 3 days
Common Side Effects Be aware of undiagnosed allergies to penicillin. 
Diarrhoea and vomiting can be common. Interestingly, 
a rare side effect is a black, furry tongue!
Interactions Amoxicillin increases the anticoagulant effect of 
acenocoumarol and warfarin, so INR should be moni￾tored during antibiotic treatment. Methotrexate may 
increase the risk of toxicity when given with amoxi￾cillin, so should be monitored. Phenindione increases 
the risk of bleeding when taken with amoxicillin.
Overdose Symptoms Gastrointestinal upset in the short term and rarely 
fatal.
Potential Callouts Suspected allergic reactions following administration.
Did You Know? When someone is incorrectly treated with amoxicil￾lin when suffering with glandular fever, they will 
develop an extensive maculopapular rash [3]. For this 
reason, phenoxymethypenicillin is the better choice 
for suspected bacterial infections of the upper airway.41
A Anakinra
Pronunciation Anna-kin-ra
AKA Kineret®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Disease Modifying Antirheumatic Drugs (DMARDs)
Conditions Treated Rheumatoid arthritis, cyclic fever syndromes (e.g. Stills 
Disease, Cryopyrin associated periodic syndromes 
(CAPS)).
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Anakinra works by binding to interleukin-1 type 
receptors which block the action of the body’s natural 
inflammatory cytokines which trigger the symptoms of 
inflammation.
Routes of 
Administration
Parenteral – intramuscular injection
Half Life 4–6 hours
Full Effect 3 months
Common Side Effects Headache, neutropenia
Interactions No interactions with prehospital medicines but those 
due to receive vaccinations should avoid use of anakinra.
Overdose Symptoms No toxic doses or symptoms noted.
Potential Callouts People on DMARDs are more susceptible to neutrope￾nia but studies suggest DMARDS might protect from 
sepsis [4].
Did You Know? Anakinra is made through a form of biotechnology using 
the natural process of Escherichia coli recombinant produc￾tion of proteins to make large amounts of anakinra.42 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Apixaban
Pronunciation App-ix-iban
AKA Eliquis© ‘A Pixie ban’
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Direct Oral Anti-coagulants (DOAC)
Conditions Treated Atrial Fibrillation, pulmonary embolism and prevention 
or treatment of DVT.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Apixaban inhibits Factor Xa within the clotting cascade 
and thus prevents thrombus development. Apixaban 
does not influence platelets.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablets
Half Life 12 hours
Full Effect 3–4 hours
Common Side Effects Risk of bleeding, anaemia, bruising
Interactions Aspirin, clopidogrel, heparin, ibuprofen and 
Tenecteplase all increase the risk of bleeding.
Overdose Symptoms People should be monitored for bleeding. There is a 
specific antidote called Andexanet alfa which can be used 
to reverse apixaban overdoses.
Potential Callouts Consider the risks of severe bleeding in those on apixa￾ban; especially alongside other medications that cause 
bleeding (e.g. NSAIDs, SSRIs) following trauma or 
medical reasons.
Did You Know? Apixaban is still a relatively new drug only being 
approved in Europe in 2011.43
A Aripiprazole
Pronunciation Ar–ee-pip-pra–zoll
AKA Abilify©
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Anti-psychotic 2nd Generation
Conditions Treated Schizophrenia and mania
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action The action of aripiprazole is thought to be related to 
activation of D2 and 5HT receptors in the central 
nervous system.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablets, orodispersible tablet, oral solution
Parenteral – solution for injection, powder and solvent 
for suspension for injection
Half Life 75 hours
Full Effect 4–6 weeks
Common Side Effects Restlessness, nausea
Interactions Chlorphenamine, Diazepam, midazolam and morphine
increase sedentary effects. Furosemide, glyceryl trini￾trate and nitrous oxide increases the risk of hypotension. 
Aripiprazole reduces the effect of levodopa.
Overdose Symptoms Lethargy, hypertension, tachycardia, nausea, vomiting 
and diarrhoea. The person will require monitoring until 
recovered.
Potential Callouts Aripiprazole may be involved in multiple medicinal 
product overdoses.
Remember Although it sounds like other medications like omepra￾zole, clotrimazole and metronidazole, these are all differ￾ent groups of medicines.44 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Aspirin
Pronunciation As written
AKA Acetylsalicylic Acid, Blood thinners, ‘baby aspirin’, 
Anadin©, Alka Selzer©, Beechams®
Legal Status GSL
Medicine Group Analgesic (NSAID), Antiplatelet, Antipyretic
Conditions Treated Prevention of clot formation, active treatment of STEMI 
and TIA, acute pain, AF and prevention of pre-eclampsia.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Aspirin prevents the formation of prostaglandins through 
inhibiting the COX-1 and COX-2 enzymes. Prostaglandins 
are inflammatory substances that are responsible for a lot 
of inflammation processes in the body. This includes the 
production of Prostaglandin E1 which is known to elicit 
fever and Thromboxane A2 which activates new platelets 
to aggregate at a site of inflammation.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet, dispersible tablet, gastro-resistant tablet 
Suppository
Half Life 3–4 hours
Full Effect 20–30 minutes
Common Side Effects Dyspepsia and increased risk of haemorrhage is common. 
Not suitable for under 16 years due to risk of Reyes Syn￾drome. Be aware of bronchospasm in some asthmatics.
Interactions Several severe interactions with medications that increase 
the risk of bleeding (this includes clopidogrel, hydro￾cortisone, ibuprofen, Tenecteplase – benefit is likely to 
outweigh risk in emergency settings).
Overdose Symptoms Common features include vomiting, dehydration, tinni￾tus, vertigo, deafness, sweating, bounding pulses, warm 
extremities and hyperventilation.
Potential Callouts People may suffer indigestion or spontaneous bleeding 
due to ingestion of aspirin.
Did You Know? Aspirin was originally derived from a substance in the bark 
of a willow tree [5].45
A Atenolol
Pronunciation Aten-oh-lol
AKA Tenormin®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Beta Blockers (selective)
Conditions Treated Hypertension, angina, cardiac arrhythmias, hyper￾thyroidism and migraine prophylaxis.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Atenolol is a selective beta blocker which means it 
acts primarily on Beta-1-adrenergic-receptors which 
are found in cardiac muscle. Beta-1-adrenergic 
receptors are normally activated by the sympathetic 
nervous system which will increase heart rate, so by 
blocking these receptors it prevents an increase in 
heart rate.
Routes of Administration Enteral – tablet, oral suspension, oral solution
Half Life 6 hours
Full Effect 2 weeks
Common Side Effects Gastrointestinal discomfort, hypotension
Interactions Adrenaline can cause hypertension and bradycar￾dia. Amiodarone can increase adverse cardiovascu￾lar events – benefits outweigh risk in cardiac arrest 
situation. Syntometrine© will increase vasoconstric￾tion. Furosemide, Glyceryl trinitrate and nitrous 
oxide increase the risk of hypotension with atenolol.
Overdose Symptoms Bradycardia, hypotension, cardiac insufficiency and 
bronchospasm. Use of activated charcoal and laxatives 
are advised to remove any unabsorbed drug. Atropine 
in high doses may be effective against bradycardia. 
Treatment in hospital required with glucagon or 
dobutamine IV infusion.
Potential Callouts Atenolol may cause hypotension or symptomatic 
bradycardia resulting in a syncope.
Did You know? Atenolol has been shown through randomised 
controlled trials to be as effective as a placebo in 
controlling hypertension; however, it was shown to 
have a protective function against strokes [6].46 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Atorvastatin
Pronunciation Ah-tor-va-stat-in
AKA ‘statins’
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Statins/HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors
Conditions Treated High cholesterol/myocardial infarction prevention
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Atorvastatin works by inhibiting the action of an enzyme 
called HMG-CoA reductase which is involved in the 
production mevalonate, which is a precursor of ‘bad’ cho￾lesterol LDL. The lower level of cholesterol also increases 
the number of LDL receptors in the liver and therefore 
reducing the number of free LDL in the bloodstream.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet, chewable tablet and oral suspension
Half Life 14 hours
Full Effect 4 weeks
Common Side Effects Epistaxis, myalgia, hyperglycaemia, joint swelling, pain, 
URTIs
Interactions Statins can interact with conditions such as diabetes, 
interstitial lung disease and muscle toxicity. Amiodarone
increases exposure to atorvastatin. Paracetamol increases 
the risk of hepatotoxicity. Grapefruit increases potency of 
atorvastatin.
Overdose Symptoms An overdose of atorvastatin is likely to affect liver function 
and/or muscle toxicity, so LFTs and CK should be 
monitored.
Potential Callouts Non traumatic muscle pain, hyperglycaemia and liver 
disease can all occur as a result of atorvastatin.
Did You Know? Statins can increase the risk of rhabdomyolysis and myositis 
which might present as non-traumatic muscle pain in those 
who have recently started statins or take statins and have a 
risk of developing rhabdomyolysis (e.g. through excessive 
exertion or a long lie).47
A Atovaquone/Proguanil (hydrochloride)
Pronunciation Ato-va-k-own Pro-go-an-nil
AKA Malarone®, Maloff Protect®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Antimalarial
Conditions Treated Prophylaxis of malaria
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Atovaquone and proguanil work to kill off the schizont 
stage of the Plasmodium falciparium life cycle which 
is the parasite that causes malaria. They do this by 
inhibiting mitochondrial action and the synthesis of 
nucleic acids in the parasite.
Routes of Administration Enteral – Tablet
Half Life 2–3 days
Full Effect 2 days
Side Effects Abdominal pain, appetite decreased, cough, 
depression, diarrhoea, dizziness, fever, headache, 
nausea, skin reactions, sleep disorders, vomiting.
Interactions Metoclopramide decreases the concentration of 
atovaquone.
Overdose Symptoms The noted side effects are expected with an overdose 
and treatment should be symptomatic.
Potential Callouts Malaria can still present up to one year after return￾ing from a malarial country and it is worth noting that 
diarrhoea and vomiting will reduce the absorption 
of antimalarials. Symptoms may only appear after 
cessation of the prophylaxis. Symptoms include cyclic 
fevers and chills, muscle pain, headache, confusion and 
gastrointestinal symptoms.
Did You Know? Atovaquone/proguanil is often the favoured anti￾malarial due to its lack of serious side effects and short 
dosing regimen. However, it is also the most expensive 
antimalarial regime available [7].48 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Azathioprine
Pronunciation Az-ath-eye-o-preen
AKA Imuran©
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group DMARD
Conditions Treated Treatment of ulcerative colitis/Crohn’s Disease/
rheumatoid arthritis
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Azathioprine is a pro-drug that is broken down into its 
active form of 6-mercaptopurine but its precise mecha￾nism of action is unknown. Theories that exist include 
inhibition of T and B cells and purine synthesis.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet
Parenteral – powder for solution for injection
Half Life 4–6 hours
Full Effect 6–12 weeks
Common Side Effects Nausea, increased risk of infections, pancreatitis, risk of 
malignancies.
Interactions Allopurinol and Trimethoprim increases risk of haemato￾logical toxicity, so azathioprine dose needs to be reduced.
Calcium-channel blockers (e.g. ramipril) increase the risk 
of anaemia/leukopenia with azathioprine, so should be 
monitored.
Concurrent use when receiving vaccines can increase risk 
of infection and may need to be avoided.
Overdose Symptoms Long-term overdose is more common than acute cases 
and symptoms include unexplained infections, ulcera￾tion of the throat and increased bruising and bleeding. 
Evidence of acute overdose showed mild leukopenia and 
altered liver function but a good recovery.
Potential Callouts Sepsis due to supressed immune function or anaemia due 
to medication interactions.
Did You Know? Azathioprine is falling out of favour due to a link between 
its use and developing skin cancer [8].49
A Azithromycin
Pronunciation Az-ee-throw-mice-in
AKA N/A
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Antibiotic (macrolide)
Conditions Treated Multiple bacterial infections including respiratory, skin 
and genitourinary infections.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Macrolide antibiotics such as azithromycin work by inhib￾iting bacterial protein synthesis and therefore preventing 
bacterial proliferation.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet, capsule, or oral suspension
Parenteral – Powder for solution for infusion, eye drops
Half Life 2–4 days
Full Effect 7 days
Common Side Effects Eye pain, joint pain, gastrointestinal complaints, neuro￾logical and skin changes.
Interactions No specific interactions with ambulance medications. 
Azithromycin can increase potency of certain medications 
including direct oral anticoagulants (e.g. apixaban).
Overdose Symptoms A surprising symptom of a macrolide antibiotic overdose 
can be loss of hearing, but it can also include nausea, 
vomiting and diarrhoea. Activated charcoal can be given 
if within an hour of ingestion.
Potential Callouts Unlikely to be the cause of a call-out but consider 
increased bleeding risk with concurrent therapy with 
direct oral anticoagulants (e.g. apixaban).
Did You Know? Azithromycin is associated with Stevens–Johnson Syn￾drome which is a systemic reaction to certain medications 
that causes flu-like symptoms followed by a widespread, 
painful blistering rash.50 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
References for A
1 Lin, SC., Lehman, CW., Stewart, AK., Panny, L., Bracci, N., Wright, JLC., Paige, M., 
Strangman, WK. and Kehn-Hall, K. Homoseongomycin, a compound isolated from 
marine actinomycete bacteria K3-1, is a potent inhibitor of encephalitic alphaviruses. 
Antiviral Res [internet] 2021 191(102087). [cited 2023 03 23]. Available at: https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.antiviral.2021.105087
2 Chadwick, W., Wilson, G., van de Venter, M., Oelofsen, W. and Roux, S. Shifts in 
metabolic parameters surrounding glucose homeostatsis resulting from tricyclic 
antidepressant therapy: implications of insulin resistance? J Pharm Pharmacol 2007 
59 p95–103. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1211/jpp.59.1.0013
3 Chew, C. and Goenka, A. Question 2: Does amoxicillin exposure increase the risk of 
rash in children with acute Epstein-Barr virus infection? Arch Dis Childhood 2016 
101(5) p500–502. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1136/archdischild-2015-310364
4 Richter, A., Listing, J., Schneider, M., Klopsch, T., Kapelle, A., Kaufmann, J., Zink, 
A. and Strangerfeld, A. Impact of treatment with biologic DMARDs on the risk of 
sepsis or mortality after serious infection in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. 
Clin Epidemiol Res 2016 75 p1667–1673. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1136/
annrheumdis-2015-207838
5 Moon, JS. The tale of aspirin: a weeping willow to soothe your sorrows. 
Anaesthesiology 2022 137 p643
6 Carlberg, B., Samuelsson, O. and Lindholm, LH. Atenolol in hypertension: is it a 
wise choice? Lancet [internet] 2004. [cited 2023 10 26]. Available at: https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/S0140-6736(04)17355-8
7 Bryan, JP. Cost considerations of malaria chemoprophylaxis including use of 
primaquine for primary or terminal chemoprophylaxis. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2006 
75(3) p416–420
8 Inman, GJ., Wand, J., Nagano, I., Alexandrov, Lb., Purdie, KJ., Taylor, RG., 
Sherwood, V., Thomson, J., Hogan, S., Spender, LC., South, AP., Stratton, M., 
Chelala, C., Harwood, CA., Proby, CM. and Leigh, IM. The genomic landscape if 
cutaneous SCC reveals drivers and a novel azathioprine associated with mutational 
signature. Nat Commun 2018 9 p3667. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41467-018-06027-151
B
Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications, First Edition. Rose Matheson.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
Beclometasone (dipropionate)
Pronunciation Beck-low-meta-zone
AKA ‘brown inhaler’ ‘preventer inhaler’ Clenil Modulite®
Legal Status POM, GSL (nasal spray)
Medicine Group Corticosteroid
Conditions Treated Prophylaxis of asthma, treatment of eczema, oral ulcers
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Beclometasone and its metabolite act as a synthetic 
glucocorticoid and activate the natural corticosteroid pathways. 
This includes various anti-inflammatory properties such as 
reduction in inflammatory cells and mediators.
Routes of 
administration
Enteral – modified release tablet, pressurised inhalation, 
inhalation powder
Parenteral – Cream, ointment, spray
Half Life 1–3 hours
Full Effect 3–7 days
Common Side 
Effects
These vary between the route of administration. Oral tablets 
can cause several symptoms related to corticosteroid use. 
Inhaled corticosteroids and nasal sprays can cause development 
of oral thrush, throat irritation, altered taste and vocal changes.
Interactions Amiodarone can increase the risk of hypokalaemia. Aspirin
and ibuprofen can moderately increase the risk of 
gastrointestinal bleeding when taken with beclomethasone. 
Furosemide, ondansetron and salbutamol can increase the risk 
of hypokalaemia with beclomethasone.
Overdose 
Symptoms
The main overdose symptoms may be related to Cushing’s 
Syndrome e.g. hypertension, muscle wasting, skin ulcers, 
rounded face, behavioural changes and cardiac hypertrophy.
Potential Callouts Adrenal insufficiency may still occur in people taking 
beclomethasone inhalers up to 1000 mcg daily or oral 
beclomethasone over a long period of time that suddenly 
cease [1]. Therefore, this should be considered in any person 
presenting with symptoms of steroid withdrawal but no other 
obvious cause of adrenal insufficiency.
Did You Know? Case studies from a UK hospice trialled the use of 
beclometasone powder inhalers for inflamed stoma sites 
without compromising the adhesion of the stoma bag [2]. 
However, more research such as controlled trials will be needed 
to confirm it’s effectiveness.
B52 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Bendroflumethiazide
Pronunciation Bend-row-floo-meth-eye-ah-zide
AKA BFM, ‘Water tablets’
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Diuretic – Thiazide
Conditions 
Treated
Oedema, hypertension
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
BFM binds to the chloride binding site of sodium-chloride 
symporters in the convoluted distal tubule of the nephron. 
This prevents sodium and chloride from being absorbed 
and increases the concentration of sodium and chloride in 
the urine. This encourages more water to travel into the 
tubules through osmosis into the urine.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet
Half Life 3–8.5 hours
Full Effect 0.5–1 hour
Common Side 
Effects
Electrolyte imbalances, gastrointestinal upset, postural 
hypotension, dizziness.
Interactions The main severe interactions result in hypokalaemia, acute 
kidney injury and postural hypotension. Amiodarone, 
Ondansetron and salbutamol can cause hypokalaemia. 
Aspirin in high doses (>300 mg) and ibuprofen can increase 
the risk of acute kidney injury. Concurrent diuretic therapy, 
such as furosemide, can increase the risk of hypotension as 
well as electrolyte changes. Consider a risk of hypotension 
in medications such as glyceryl trinitrate, morphine and 
nitrous oxide.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Gastrointestinal upset and polyuria which result in 
dehydration, hypotension and electrolyte imbalances. 
Hypokalaemia may result in arrhythmias such as torsades 
des pointes and this is more likely in those with cardiac 
disease. Management is through fluid and electrolyte 
replacement.
Potential Callouts People who present with a fall/dizziness may be suffering 
from postural hypotension as a result of a new/increased 
dose of a diuretic. People may also present with symptoms 
of electrolyte imbalances. These often present with cardiac 
arrhythmias, altered consciousness and gastrointestinal 
symptoms that can be progressive or acute.
Did You Know? Thiazide diuretics increase the concentration of uric acid in 
the blood which is a substance involved in gout. Therefore, 
thiazide diuretics may cause gout or exacerbate those 53
B
Bisacodyl
Pronunciation Bice-a-co-dill
AKA 'Senna' (It’s not Senna®!)
Legal Status GSL, P and POM
Medicine Group Laxative (stimulant)
Conditions 
Treated
Constipation
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
A metabolite of bisacodyl directly stimulates the nerves 
of the parasympathetic nervous system to increase gut 
motility. Bisacodyl also encourages water to move into 
the bowel so stools are also softened.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – gastro-resistant tablet, suppository
Half Life 16.5 hours
Full Effect 6–12 hours
Common Side 
Effects
Abdominal cramps, nausea.
Interactions Nil significant.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Diarrhoea is a common symptom in overdose. There may 
also be secondary hypokalaemia or kidney stones. 
Prolonged use may result in paralysis of gastric motility.
Potential Callouts Unlikely to be a cause of a call-out other than overdose 
resulting in diarrhoea.
Did You Know? The tablet form has an enteric coating which means it 
protects the active ingredient from stomach acid and only 
starts to dissolve in a more alkaline environment – such as 
the duodenum. This also means that indigestion remedies 
should be avoided when taking these tablets as this will 
lower the pH of the stomach and the enteric coating may 
dissolve prematurely.54 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Bisoprolol (fumarate)
Pronunciation Bi-sop-row-lol
AKA N/A
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Beta-Blocker (selective)
Conditions 
Treated
Atrial fibrillation, hypertension, angina, heart failure
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Selective beta blockers work by targeting the beta-1 
adrenergic receptors which are found in cardiac tissue. Beta-1 
receptors are normally activated by adrenaline and causes 
heart rate and blood pressure to increase. By blocking these 
receptors, bisoprolol decreases cardiac workload and 
therefore oxygen demand by reducing heart rate and blood 
pressure, so has proved useful for treating several 
cardiovascular conditions.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet
Half Life 10–12 hours
Full Effect 2–6 weeks
Common Side 
Effects
Abdominal discomfort, bradycardia, confusion, constipation, 
dizziness/postural hypotension/syncope, peripheral limb 
sensation changes. In general, beta-blockers tend to be 
avoided in those with COPD or asthma as they can cause 
bronchospasm but selective beta blockers are considered to be 
safer.
Interactions Adrenaline may increase the risk of hypertensive crisis in 
those taking bisoprolol. Amiodarone can also cause adverse 
cardiovascular effects. Syntometrine increases the risk of 
peripheral vasoconstriction. Many medications interact to 
increase the risk of hypotension and/or bradycardia and this 
includes ambulance medications such as furosemide and 
glyceryl trinitrate.
Overdose 
Symptoms
An overdose of bisoprolol results in bradycardia and 
hypotension. This can also come alongside hypoglycaemia 
and bronchospasm as well as cardiac insufficiency. 
Bradycardia can be treated with atropine but may not always 
be effective. Beta blocker overdoses should always be 
conveyed to hospital.
Potential Callouts People who are new to bisoprolol may suffer from 
symptomatic bradycardia or postural hypotension, especially 
if their dose has been increased too quickly.
Did You Know? People with heart failure are very sensitive to the effects of 
bisoprolol and so their dose should be titrated up slowly [4].55
B
Budesonide
AKA Bood-es-oh-nide
Pronunciation Symbicort©, Pulmicort©
Legal Status POM, GSL or P (Nasal spray)
Medicine Group Glucocorticoid
Conditions 
Treated
Asthma prophylaxis, allergic rhinitis, ulcerative colitis.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Glucocorticoids bind to the glucocorticoid receptor which 
results in decreased production of inflammatory mediators 
such as histamine and cytokines. This results in an overall 
anti-inflammatory effect.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – dispersible tablet, modified-release tablet, 
modified-release capsule, gastro-resistant capsule, 
gastro-resistant granules, rectal foam, enema
Parenteral – Inhalation Powder, Nebuliser liquid
Half Life 2–4 hours
Full Effect 3–7 days
Common Side 
Effects
Varies between routes, for example: Oral use causes dry 
mouth, muscle complaints, oedema and oral disorders 
whereas rectal use results in diarrhoea, gastrointestinal 
disorders.
Interactions There are several medications that interact with budesonide 
and the main outcomes are hypokalaemia, risk of 
gastrointestinal bleeding and changes in potency of itself or 
interacting medicines. Amiodarone, Furosemide, 
Ondansetron and salbutamol can increase the risk of 
hypokalaemia. Aspirin and ibuprofen increase the risk of 
gastric bleeding alongside the use of budesonide; however, 
this is unlikely to occur in a single dose.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Overdoses are not expected to be a clinical problem; 
however, there may be suppression of the hypothalamic￾pituitary-adrenal axis with high inhaled doses over a long 
period.
Potential Callouts If high doses are used long term, people may exhibit adrenal 
insufficiency. People taking concurrent medications may 
present with hypokalaemia or gastrointestinal bleeding.
Did You Know? Grapefruit increases the bioavailability of budesonide in the 
blood. This is because grapefruit inhibits an enzyme called 
CYP3A4 found in the liver and small intestine and is 
involved in metabolism of medications, including 
budesonide [5].56 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Bumetanide
Pronunciation Boo-met-a-nide
AKA ‘water tablets’
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Diuretic – loop
Conditions 
Treated
Oedema – related to heart failure, liver failure and 
renal dysfunction including nephrotic syndrome.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Loop diuretics such as bumetanide work on the 
Loop of Henle in the nephron by inhibiting the 
sodium/potassium ATPase pump. This blocks 
electrolytes from being reabsorbed from the urine 
alongside water.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet, oral solution
Half Life 0.75–2.6 hours
Full Effect 0.5–2 hours
Common Side 
Effects
Diuresis, electrolyte imbalances, dehydration, 
hypotension, skin reactions.
Interactions Amiodarone, dexamethasone, ondansetron and 
salbutamol can increase the risk of hypokalaemia 
and ibuprofen can increase the risk of 
hyponatraemia alongside bumetanide but a single 
dose is unlikely to cause harm. Glyceryl trinitrate
and nitrous oxide can increase the risk of 
hypotension.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Overdose results in excessive diuresis which leads to 
hypotension and electrolyte imbalances. This can 
present as altered mental status, muscle cramps, 
seizures and even coma.
Potential Callouts People recently put on diuretics may suffer from 
postural hypotension which may result in a fall or a 
history of pre-syncope symptoms.
Did You Know? Bumetanide is more potent but considered to be 
slightly safer for people with chronic kidney disease 
compared to other loop diuretics such as furosemide. 
This is related to the fact that bumetanide is 
metabolised partly by the liver whereas furosemide is 
metabolised and excreted as well as acting upon the 
kidneys [6].57
B
Buprenorphine
Pronunciation Boo-pren-or-feen
AKA Buvidal®, Sixmo®, Suboxone®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Analgesia – Opioid
Conditions 
Treated
Severe pain, opioid dependence
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Buprenorphine is an opioid, so works on μ receptors to 
produce an analgesic effect. Buprenorphine differs from 
other opioids as it exerts full agonism for analgesic effects 
and partial agonism for respiratory depression.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – Sublingual tablet, oral lyophilisates
Parenteral – Solution for injection, prolonged release 
solution for injection, transdermal patch, implant
Half Life 37 hours average depending on route
Full Effect 20 minutes – 1 day depending on route
Common Side 
Effects
Abnormal behaviour, anxiety, chest pain, chills, cough, 
decreased appetite, depression, diarrhoea, dysmenorrhea, 
dyspnoea, eye complaints, exacerbation of asthma, fever, 
gastrointestinal complaints, hypotension, infection risk, 
insomnia, joint pain, lymphoedema, malaise, migraine, 
myalgia, pain, pins and needles, peripheral oedema, 
speech issues, tremor, vasodilation
Interactions Chlorphenamine, diazepam, midazolam and nitrous 
oxide increase the CNS depressant effects of 
buprenorphine. Morphine use increases the risk of opiate 
burden when given with buprenorphine.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Symptoms of an opiate overdose include reduced 
consciousness, respiratory depression, pin-point pupils, 
bradycardia and hypotension. The reversal agent naloxone 
should be used; however, this will need to be repeated 
regularly due to mismatched half-lives.
Potential Callouts Although buprenorphine has a lower risk of respiratory 
depression, it is still capable of causing other signs of 
opiate toxicity such as delirium, constipation, nausea and 
sedation.
Did You Know? Oral lyophilisates are small patches that dissolve on the 
tongue. People should not swallow within two minutes of 
administration to allow sufficient absorption.58 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
References for B
1 Lapi, F., Kezouh, A., Suissa, S. and Ernst, P. The use of inhaled corticosteroids 
and the risk of adrenal insufficiency. Eur Respir J 2013 42 p79–86. Available at: 
https://doi.org/10.1183/09031936.00080912
2 Borland, J. and Brooks, D. Topical application of a beclomethasone steroid inhaler 
for treatment of stoma inflammation Palliative Med 2012 26 (11) p1055–1056. 
Available at: https://doi.org/10.1177/0269216312446
3 Bruderer, S., Bodmer, M, Jick, S. and Meier, CR. Use of diuretics and risk of incident 
gout. A population-based case-control study. Arthritis Rheum 2014 66 (1) p185–196. 
Available at: https://doi.org/10.1002/art.38203
4 Düngen, HD., Spostolović, S., Inkrot, S., Tahirović, E., Töpper, A., Mehrhof, F., 
Pretting, C., Putniković, B., Nešković, AN., Krotin, M., Saknać, D., Lainšćak, M., 
Edelmann, F., Wachter, R., Rau, T., Eschenhagen, T., Doehner, W., Anker, SD., 
Waagstein, F., Herman-Lingen, C., Gelbrich, G. and Deitz, R. Titration to target dose 
of bisoprolol vs carvedilol in elderly patients with heart failure: the CIBIS-ELD trial. 
Eur J Heart Failure 2011 13 p670–680. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1093/ 
eurjhf/hfr020
5 Veronese, ML., Gillen, LP., Burke, JP., Dorval, EP. Hauck, WW., Pequignot, E., 
Waldman, SA. and Greenberg, HE. Exposure-dependent inhibition of intestinal and 
hepatic CYP3A4 in vivo by grapefruit juice. J Clin Pharm 2003 43 p831–839. 
Available at: https://doi.org/10.1177/0091270003256059
6 Voelker, J., Cartwright-Brown, D., Anderson, S., Leinfelder, J., Sica, DA., Kokko, 
JP. and Brater, DC. Comparison of loop diuretics in patients with chronic renal 
insufficiency. Kidney Int 1987 32 p572–578. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
ki.1987.246Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications, First Edition. Rose Matheson. 
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
59
C
Candesartan (cilexetil)
Pronunciation Candy-sar-tan
AKA None of note
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Angiotensin Receptor Blockers (ARBs)
Conditions Treated Hypertension, heart failure, migraine prophylaxis.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Angiotensinogen is released by the liver and is converted 
to Angiotensin-1, then further into angiotensin-2. 
Angiotensin-2 works in several systems to increase 
reuptake of water in the nephron. By blocking the action 
of angiotensin-2, less fluid enters the vascular system and 
therefore lowers blood pressure.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – Tablet
Half Life 9 hours
Full Effect 2 hours–4 weeks
Common Side 
Effects
Abdominal pain, back pain, cough, diarrhoea, dizziness, 
headache, increased risk of infection, nausea, electrolyte 
imbalances and postural hypotension.
Interactions Glyceryl trinitrate, morphine and furosemide can increase 
the risk of hypotension alongside candesartan. Heparin and 
ibuprofen can increase the risk of hyperkalaemia.
Overdose 
Symptoms
The main symptom of a candesartan overdose is dizziness 
due to hypotension and treatment should be to counteract the 
hypotension. Recovery is reported to be uneventful.
Potential Callouts People who have recently started on candesartan might 
suffer from postural hypotension and so may suffer falls or 
collapses of unknown cause.
Did You Know? Early animal studies suggest that candesartan may have a 
neuroprotective effect against age-related neurodegenerative 
conditions [1].
C60 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Carbamazepine
Pronunciation Carb-a-maz-eh-peen
AKA Tegretol©
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Anticonvulsant
Conditions Treated Tonic-Clonic seizures, trigeminal neuralgia, bipolar disorder.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Carbamazepine works by reducing the activity of sodium 
channels on nerves. This reduces the number of action 
potentials that result in less stimulation of nerves.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – Tablet, modified release tablet, oral suspension, oral 
solution, suppository.
Half Life 36 hours after a single dose but reduces to 16–24 after 
repeated administration due to the auto-induction of liver 
enzymes.
Full Effect 2 days–1 week
Common Side 
Effects
Side effects are often dose dependent. These include 
dizziness, drowsiness, fatigue, gastrointestinal discomfort, 
headache, FBC and electrolyte changes, movement disorder, 
nausea, oedema, skin reaction, visual changes, vomiting and 
weight gain.
Interactions Carbamazepine alongside furosemide and/or ibuprofen can 
increase the risk of hyponatraemia. Carbamazepine influences 
liver metabolism, so therefore increases and decreases 
exposure to several medications such as midazolam, 
ondansetron and paracetamol. Carbamazepine also alters the 
effectiveness of hormonal contraceptives, blood thinners and pain 
killers.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Any suggested ingestion of carbamazepine should be treated 
with activated charcoal within the first hours of ingestion. 
Symptoms includes CNS and respiratory depression, 
tachycardia, hypotension, arrythmias, kidney failure and 
reduced bowel motility.
Potential Callouts People may suffer from an exacerbation of seizures when 
titrating this medication
Did You Know? Carbamazepine can trigger severe adverse reactions known 
as Stevens–Johnson Syndrome. This is a severe reaction of 
the skin and mucous membranes and is more common in 
those with particular alleles of a gene and therefore should be 
screened prior to starting this medicine.61
C
Carbocisteine
Pronunciation Carb-oh-sist-een
AKA Mucodyne®, Carbocystine (US)
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Mucolytic
Conditions Treated Reduces sputum viscosity in respiratory disorders.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Carbocisteine alters the ratio of glycoproteins within mucous. 
Glycoproteins are responsible for the viscosity of mucous and 
carbocisteine reduces the percentage of glycoproteins that 
increase viscosity.
Routes of 
administration
Enteral – capsule, oral solution
Half Life 1–2 hours
Full Effect 2–3 hours
Common Side 
Effects
The main reported side effects include skin reactions and 
gastrointestinal upset; however, the frequency of these is 
not known.
Interactions None known
Overdose 
Symptoms
Gastrointestinal upset is the most common side effect of 
carbocisteine overdose.
Potential Callouts Carbocisteine is unlikely to be a cause of a call out to 
ambulance services.
Did You Know? The oral solution comes in several flavours including cherry, 
raspberry, cinnamon or rum!62 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Cefalexin
Pronunciation Sef-al-ex-in
AKA May be spelt cephalexin
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Antibiotic (Cephalosporin)
Conditions Treated Several bacterial infections.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Cefalexin results in cell death by inhibiting cross linking in 
the cell wall. Cephalosporins are less susceptible to beta￾lactamase which is produced by bacteria that are penicillin 
resistant.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet, capsule, oral solution
Half Life 1 hour, increases in poor renal function
Full Effect 2–3 days
Common Side 
Effects
Abdominal pain, diarrhoea, dizziness, headache, nausea, skin 
reactions, white blood cell changes, vaginal thrush.
Interactions The main negative interaction with other medications is 
increased risk of nephrotoxicity - this includes ibuprofen.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Overdoses of cefalexin result in gastrointestinal upset and 
haematuria is also reported. Unless 5–-10 times the total daily 
dose is ingested, there is no need for gastrointestinal lavage.
Potential Callouts Cephalexin is unlikely to be the cause of a call out.
Did You Know? Cross sensitivity can occur with those who have an allergy 
to penicillin antibiotics. Therefore, those with a history of 
confirmed anaphylactic penicillin allergy should not be given 
cefalexin.63
C
Ceftriaxone
Pronunciation Sef-tree-axe-own
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Antibiotic (Cephalosporin)
Conditions Treated Several bacterial infections.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Ceftriaxone results in cell death by inhibiting cross linking in 
the cell wall. Cephalosporins are less susceptible to beta￾lactamase which is produced by bacteria that are penicillin 
resistant.
Routes of 
Administration
Parenteral – powder for solution for injection
Half Life 8 hours
Full Effect Several days
Common Side 
Effects
Abdominal pain, diarrhoea, dizziness, headache, nausea, skin 
reactions, white blood cell changes, vaginal thrush.
Interactions The main negative interaction with other medications is 
increased risk of nephrotoxicity. This includes ibuprofen.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Overdoses of ceftriaxone is likely result in renal 
complications, but the toxic dose is unknown. Symptoms can 
include nausea, vomiting and diarrhoea.
Potential Callouts Ceftriaxone is unlikely to be the cause of a call-out; however, 
remember that cross sensitivity can occur with those who 
have an allergy to penicillin antibiotics. Therefore, those with 
a history of confirmed immediate penicillin allergy should 
not be given ceftriaxone.
Did You Know? Animal studies with ceftriaxone have looked into its use in 
cocaine addiction and may be considered a future treatment to 
prevent relapses [2].64 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Cetirizine (hydrochloride)
Pronunciation Set-ir-a-zeen
AKA Benadryl®, Piriteze®, Pollenase®, Zirtek®
Legal Status GSL, P
Medicine Group Antihistamine (2nd Generation)
Conditions Treated Hayfever, dust/pet allergies, chronic urticaria, 
atopic dermatitis.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Cetirizine is a selective antagonist of peripheral Histamine-1 
receptors. This means they block the receptors for histamine, 
so it cannot trigger the allergic response.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet, capsule and oral solution
Half Life 10 hours
Full Effect 2 hours
Common Side 
Effects
No listed common side effects. Uncommon effects include 
agitation, asthenia, diarrhoea, malaise, paraesthesia and skin 
reactions.
Interactions None with ambulance medicines.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Symptoms are associated with anticholinergic effects. This 
includes confusion, dilated pupils, diarrhoea, dizziness, 
fatigue, headache, itching, malaise, restlessness, tachycardia, 
tremor and urinary retention.
Potential Callouts Cetirizine is unlikely to be the cause of an ambulance call-out.
Did You Know? As cetirizine is selective to peripheral histamine receptors and 
does not cross the blood brain barrier as easily, it does not 
produce the same drowsy effects of classic antihistamines such 
as chlorphenamine.65
C
Chloramphenicol
Pronunciation Klor-am-fen-ee-call
AKA Brolene©, Goldeneye©
Legal Status P, POM
Medicine Group Antibiotics (Chloramphenicol)
Conditions Treated Bacterial eye and ear infections, typhoid fever.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Chloramphenicol is a bacteriostatic agent that is broad 
spectrum and works by blocking the bacterial ribosomes and 
thus inhibiting protein synthesis.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – Capsule
Parenteral – Powder for solution for injection, ear drops, eye 
drops, eye ointment
Half Life Varies by route. 1–4 hours
Full Effect 2 days
Common Side 
Effects
No listed common side effects. However, chloramphenicol 
is known to cause aplastic anaemia and other bone marrow 
disorders.
Interactions None with ambulance medicines. However, chloramphenicol 
can increase exposure to gliclazide, so blood sugars should be 
monitored.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Symptoms will correlate with aplastic anaemia and other 
bone marrow disorders as well as increased iron, nausea, 
vomiting and diarrhoea.
Potential Callouts Chloramphenicol is unlikely to be the reason for an 
ambulance call-out.
Did You Know? Chloramphenicol is not metabolised by newborns because 
they lack mature livers and can cause ‘grey baby syndrome’. 
Therefore, oral and IV preparations should be avoided in 
pregnant women in the third trimester.66 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Chlorphenamine
Pronunciation Klor-fen-amine
AKA Piriton©, Chlorampheniramine
Legal Status P, POM
Medicine Group Antihistamines (1st Generation)
Conditions Treated Symptomatic relief from allergic reactions.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Chlorphenamine is a histamine-1 receptor antagonist which 
means it blocks the action of histamine in the body which 
causes symptoms associated with allergic reactions. By 
blocking histamine-1 receptors, these symptoms of an allergic 
reaction are reduced. Chlorphenamine is able to cross the 
blood brain barrier which means it can act on Histamine-1 
receptors in the brain which causes sedation.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet, oral solution
Parenteral – Solution for injection
Half Life 12–27 hours
Full Effect 0.5–1 hour
Common Side 
Effects
Impaired concentration, poor coordination, dizziness, dry 
mouth, fatigue, headache, nausea, blurred vision, drowsiness.
Interactions Atropine increases antimuscarinic effects. Diazepam, 
midazolam, morphine and nitrous oxide can have CNS 
depressant effects.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Sedation, paradoxical stimulation of the CNS, toxic psychosis, 
seizures, apnoea, convulsion, anticholinergic effects, dystonic 
reactions and arrhythmias including cardiovascular collapse. 
If the oral form is taken, then activated charcoal may be 
beneficial within 1 hour of ingestion; otherwise, treatment is 
symptomatic until arrival at hospital.
Potential Callouts Excessive drowsiness may cause alarm when used in 
paediatrics or accidents may occur with those driving or 
operating machinery after taking chlorphenamine.
Did You Know? Trials have shown caffeine can counteract the drowsy effects of 
chlrophenamine [3].67
C
Ciprofloxacin
Pronunciation Sip-row-flocks-a-sin
AKA ‘Cipro’
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Antibiotic (fluroquinolones)
Conditions Treated Several infections.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Ciprofloxacin is part of the fluroquinolone antibiotic group 
and they work by inhibiting replication, transcription, 
repair and recombination of bacterial DNA. They do this by 
inhibiting two enzymes called topoisomerase II and IV.
Routes of 
administration
Enteral – tablet, oral solution
Parenteral – Infusion, solution for infusion, ear drops, 
eye drops.
Half Life 4–7 hours
Full Effect 2–3 days
Common Side 
Effects
Decreased appetite, joint issues, gastrointestinal complaints, 
dyspnoea, fever, skin reactions, altered taste, tinnitus, visual 
changes, corneal deposits (when using topical eye drops) and 
arthropathy in children.
Interactions Several medications have a severe warning for an increase in 
the risk of seizures when given with ciprofloxacin and this 
includes ibuprofen. Ciprofloxacin should not be taken with 
dairy products or mineral-fortified drinks.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Symptoms include dizziness, tremors, headache, tiredness, 
seizures, hallucinations, abdominal discomfort, renal 
impairment, liver damage and urinary symptoms such as 
crystal formations and haematuria. People should be kept 
well hydrated and in theory an antacid containing calcium 
and magnesium should reduce the absorption of ciprofloxacin 
if within 1 hour of ingestion. Ciprofloxacin can also cause QT 
prolongation so cardiac monitoring should be applied.
Potential Callouts Ciprofloxacin is unlikely to be a cause of a call-out; however, 
be aware of allergic reactions that might occur and QT 
prolongation can occur
Did You Know? Fluoroquinolones such as ciprofloxacin are known to cause 
tendon injury including rupture [4]. This risk can be up to 
1 month following treatment and the risk is intensified if the 
person is also taking oral corticosteroids.68 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Citalopram
Pronunciation Sit-al-o-pram
Aka ‘Ctp’
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Anti-depressant (SSRI)
Conditions Treated Depression, panic disorder.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Citalopram works in the central nervous system to reduce 
the reuptake of serotonin in the synaptic cleft. At the synaptic 
cleft serotonin is released and any that is considered excess 
are reabsorbed into the neuron that released them by 
transporters. SSRIs reduce the amount of serotonin being 
reabsorbed into the neuron and therefore there is more 
available to be utilised.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet, oral drops
Half Life 35 hours
Full Effect 4–6 weeks
Common Side 
Effects
Acute angle glaucoma, apathy, flatulence, hypersalivation, 
migraine, rhinitis.
Interactions Amiodarone and ondansetron increase the QT interval. SSRIs 
can increase bleeding risk so consider other blood thinning 
agents including aspirin, clopidogrel, heparin, tenectaplase
as well as ibuprofen. Dexamethasone, furosemide, 
hydrocortisone, ibuprofen and salbutamol can increase the 
risk of hypokalaemia and/or hyponatraemia. Ondansetron
also increases the risk of serotonin syndrome.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Symptoms include nausea, vomiting, agitation, tremor, 
nystagmus, drowsiness and sinus tachycardia. Seizures may 
occur and in severe cases symptoms of serotonin syndrome 
may also occur.
Potential Callouts Citalopram is unlikely to be a cause of a call-out except in the 
case of adverse effects or overdose.
Did You Know? Nausea and vomiting are common side effects of SSRIs 
because serotonin is an important neurotransmitter within the 
vomiting centre of the brain.69
C
Clarithromycin
Pronunciation Clarith-row-my-sin
AKA N/A
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Antibiotic (Macrolide)
Conditions Treated Multiple infections.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Clarithromycin is a macrolide antibiotic which means that is 
prevents protein synthesis by binding to the 50s ribosomal 
RNA.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet, modified release tablet, granules, oral 
suspension
Parenteral – Powder for solution for infusion
Half Life 3–4 hours
Full Effect 2–3 days
Common Side 
Effects
Burping, dry mouth, muscle complaints, oral disorders, 
thrombocytosis, tremor.
Interactions Amiodarone and ondansetron can enhance QT prolongation. 
Clarithromycin can increase exposure to dexamethasone, 
hydrocortisone, midazolam, statins and anti-coagulants. 
Furosemide, hydrocortisone, salbutamol increases the risk of 
hypokalaemia.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Symptoms include gastrointestinal discomfort as well as 
more unusual symptoms like transient hearing loss and 
tooth staining. Hepatic failure can occur to varying degrees. 
Cardiac monitoring is required due to QT-prolongation.
Potential Callouts Clarithromycin may be associated with electrolyte 
disturbances and can result in arrhythmias.
Did You Know? Clarithromycin is a CYP3A4 inhibitor which means it can 
stop several medications from being metabolised and a risk 
of toxicity. This includes medications like colchicine and 
warfarin.70 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Clotrimazole
Pronunciation Clot-trim-a-zole
AKA Canesten©, Thrush cream
Legal Status P
Medicine Group Antifungal
Conditions Treated Fungal skin infections including otitis externa and vaginal 
candidiasis (thrush).
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Clotrimazole inhibits fungal growth by inhibiting ergosterol 
synthesis. Ergosterol is a sterol which is involved in the 
synthesis of the cytoplasmic membrane in fungal pathogens.
Routes of 
Administration
Parenteral – Pessary, liquid, cream, spray
Half Life Not available
Full Effect Not available
Common Side 
Effects
Oedema, paraesthesia and skin reactions.
Interactions Clotrimazole can increase or decrease exposure to 
colecalciferol, lomitapide and sodium zirconium cyclosilicate.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Unlikely to cause overdose with topical application. If 
accidental ingestion occurs, then gastric lavage may be 
required.
Potential Callouts Unlikely to be a cause of a call-out.
Did You Know? The term ‘thrush’ is thought to come from the similarities from 
the white, speckled plaques that form in the infection and the 
pattern on the breast of the common garden bird [5].71
C
Clozapine
Pronunciation Cloz-a-peen
AKA Clozaril®, Denzapine®, Zaponex®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Antipsychotic (2nd Generation)
Conditions Treated Schizophrenia, Parkinsons-related psychosis.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Clozapine antagonises several receptors in the brain including 
dopamine, histamine, adrenergic and muscarinic receptors. 
Its key action however is on the D4 receptor and aims to 
decreases dopamine levels which exert a parkinsonian effect 
on patients including emotional numbing and sedation.
Routes of 
administration
Enteral – Tablet, orodispersible tablet, oral suspension
Half Life 12 hours
Full Effect 6 weeks
Side Effects Agranulocytosis, constipation, decreased appetite, 
eosinophilia, fever, headache, hypertension, leucocytosis, 
nausea, speech impairment, sweat changes, syncope, 
temperature regulation abnormalities, urinary changes, vision 
blurred.
Interactions Atropine, chlorphenamine and ipratropium can increase 
the likelihood of antimuscarinic effects such as constipation. 
Chlorphenamine, diazepam, midazolam and nitrous 
oxide also have CNS depressant effects. Furosemide and 
nitrous oxide increase the risk of hypotension. Morphine
increases both the risk of CNS depression, hypotension and 
constipation.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Overdose can be fatal and symptoms include drowsiness, 
coma, hallucinations, delirium, tremors, muscle spasms, 
convulsions, blurred vision, hypotension, arrhythmias and 
respiratory failure. There is no specific antidote but activated 
charcoal is advised in the prehospital environment and 
medical supervision will be required for 5 days.
Potential Callouts Clozapine has been reported to cause myocarditis and 
cardiomyopathy within the first 2 months of starting 
Clozapine. Therefore, consider this in any person presenting 
with arrythmias or chest pain after starting clozapine.
Did You Know? Agranulocytosis is a known side effect of clozapine and early 
trials showed an increase of fatalities due to this condition. 
However, these studies were conducted in Finland where the 
rate of agranulocytosis is 20 times higher than anywhere else 
in the world [6].72 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Co-Amoxiclav
Pronunciation Co-am-ox-ih-clav
AKA Augementin©
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Antibiotic (beta-Lactam)
Conditions Treated Several bacterial infections.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Co-amoxiclav is a combination of amoxicillin and clavulanic 
acid. Amoxicillin carries the antibiotic properties by breaking 
down beta-lactam rings in the bacterial cell wall. Clavulanic 
acid is added and deactivates beta lactamase enzymes which 
are produced by bacteria when they develop resistance to 
penicillins. This makes Co-amoxiclav more effective than 
amoxicillin on its own.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – Tablet, oral solution
Parenteral – Powder for solution for injection
Half Life 1 hour
Full Effect 2–3 days
Common Side 
Effects
Increased risk of infections, diarrhoea, nausea, skin reactions, 
thrombocytopenia.
Interactions There are different interactions for amoxicillin and clavulanic 
acid. The main risk of clavulanic acid is increased risk 
of hepatotoxicity when given with several medications 
including alcohol and paracetamol. Amoxicillin has four 
severe interactions and include warfarin, phenindione
and acenocoumarol as it alters the anticoagulation effect. 
Amoxicillin also increases the risk of toxicity of methotrexate
when given together.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Gastrointestinal symptoms and electrolyte imbalances are 
the main symptom of an overdose and should be treated 
symptomatically with attention paid to the water/electrolyte 
balance.
Potential Callouts Co-Amoxiclav may be the cause of an allergic reaction and 
the increased bleeding risk should be considered in people 
taking warfarin.
Did You Know? The dose of co-amoxiclav will have two values; one for 
amoxicillin and another for clavulanic acid e.g. Co-Amoxiclav 
500 mg amoxicillin/125 mg clavulanic acid.73
C
Co-codamol
AKA Co-code-ah-mol
Pronunciation Solpadol®
Legal Status P
Medicine Group Analgesic (opioid)
Conditions Treated Moderate to severe pain.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Co-codamol is a combination of codeine and paracetamol 
and therefore has two analgesic effects. Codeine is a selective 
agonist for the μ-receptor that is found in the central nervous 
system and involved in the transmission of pain. The full 
mechanism of paracetamol is not known but can block the 
action of COX1 and COX2.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – Tablet, effervescent tablet, capsule, oral solution
Half Life 1–4 hours
Full Effect 1 hour
Common Side 
Effects
Arrhythmias, confusion, constipation, dizziness, drowsiness, 
dry mouth, euphoria, flushing, hallucination, headache, 
hyperhidrosis, miosis, nausea, palpitations, respiratory 
depression, skin reactions, urinary retention, vertigo, 
vomiting, withdrawal syndrome.
Interactions Paracetamol: No interactions with ambulance medicines; 
however, it is worth noting that concurrent use with 
flucloxacillin should be considered with caution due to a risk 
of developing metabolic acidosis. Codeine: concurrent use of 
chlorphenamine, diazepam, midazolam and nitrous oxide
can increase sedative effects. Be careful – some people might not 
know this contains paracetamol and/or codeine.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Due to the presence of both codeine and paracetamol, there 
is the risk of liver damage associated with paracetamol 
and respiratory depression, pin-point pupils and reduced 
consciousness associated with opiates. Opiate reversal can 
occur by giving naloxone hydrochloride and if ingestion was 
within 1 hour, activated charcoal can be considered. Moderate 
paracetamol overdose can be treated with acetylcysteine in 
hospital.
Potential Callouts Opiate toxicity may occur in people who are on long-term 
treatment or have renal or liver impairments that alter the 
metabolism and excretion of opiates.
Did You Know? Some people will have a duplication in their CYP2D6 
enzyme found in the liver which metabolises codeine into 
morphineThis group are known as ‘ultra rapid metabolisers’ 
as they convert codeine to morphine quickly [7].74 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Codeine (phosphate)
Pronunciation Co-deen
AKA N/A
Legal Status POM - Class B, Schedule 2 drug
Medicine Group Analgesic (opioid)
Conditions Treated Moderate to severe pain, acute diarrhoea, dry or painful 
cough.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Codeine is a selective agonist for the μ-receptor that is 
found in the central nervous system and involved in the 
transmission of pain. Codeine is considered to have a weaker 
affinity to μ-receptors than morphine but it is also believed to 
be converted into morphine in the body.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – Tablet, oral solution
Half Life 3 hours
Full Effect 0.5–1 hour
Common Side 
Effects
Arrhythmias, confusion, constipation, dizziness, drowsiness, 
dry mouth, euphoric moods, flushing, hallucinations, 
headache, nausea, palpitations, respiratory depressions, skin 
reactions, sweating, urinary retention, vertigo, vomiting.
Interactions Chlorphenamine, diazepam, midazolam and nitrous oxide
all increase the CNS depressant effects of codeine.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Symptoms of respiratory depression, pin-point pupils and 
reduced consciousness associated with opiate overdose. 
Opiate reversal can occur by giving naloxone hydrochloride 
and if ingestion was within 1 hour, activated charcoal can be 
considered if the person can follow instructions and is able to 
swallow.
Potential Callouts Opiate toxicity may occur in people who are on long-term 
treatment or have renal or liver impairments that alter the 
metabolism and excretion of opiates.
Did You Know? Morphine is not listed as a formal interaction with codeine and 
they can be given concurrently:
60 mg Codeine (max single dose) = 6 mg oral morphine = 2 mg 
IV morphine.
Therefore, if considered carefully, we can enhance our 
analgesia regime to include morphine where a person has 
already taken their own codeine [8].75
C
Colchicine
Pronunciation Coal-ch-scene
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Anti-inflammatory – Plant alkaloids
Conditions Treated Acute gout, Familial Mediterranean Fever, Pericarditis.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
The mechanism of colchicine is not entirely understood; 
however, it is believed to reduce inflammatory mediators 
specifically in relation to urate crystals (which precipitate 
around joint in gout).
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – Tablet
Half Life 3–10 hours
Full Effect 0.5–2 hours
Common Side 
Effects
Abdominal pain, diarrhoea, nausea and vomiting.
Interactions Amiodarone increases exposure to colchicine.
It is worth noting that concurrent therapy with statins and 
colchicine increase the risk of rhabdomyolysis.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Colchicine has a narrow therapeutic index and is highly 
susceptible to overdose. Anyone with a history of colchicine 
overdose should be transported to hospital for further 
assessment. Symptoms develop over time and start with 
gastrointestinal complaints and volume depletion. One 
to three days later they will develop multisystem organ 
dysfunction which can be fatal. If within 1 hour of ingestion, 
consider activated charcoal and otherwise symptomatic 
supportive treatment.
Potential Callouts Other than overdoses, colchicine is unlikely to be the cause of 
a call-out.
Did You Know? Colchicine is derived from the bulb of the autumn crocus 
which is native to the UK and mainland Europe [9]. In fact, 
the Latin name for an autumn crocus is Colchicum autumnale. 
The plant is toxic which is reflected in colchicine’s narrow 
therapeutic index.76 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Colecalciferol (with calcium carbonate)
Pronunciation Coal-eh-calsee-ferol
AKA May be spelt ‘Cholecalciferol’; vitamin D3, Adcal©, 
Calcichew©
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Vitamin analogue with calcium
Conditions Treated Vitamin D deficiency, osteoporosis.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Colecalciferol contains both calcium and vitamin D which 
are utilised by the body to aid bone maintenance. Vitamin D 
does this by enhancing the ability of the small intestine to 
absorb calcium. Metabolites of vitamin D are responsible for 
regulating parathyroid hormone and increasing reabsorption 
of calcium in the kidneys.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – Tablet, chewable tablet, dispersible table, capsule, 
oral solution, oral drops
Half Life 15 hours to 50 days depending on the form and genotype of 
the person
Full Effect 7 days
Common Side 
Effects
Abdominal pain, headache, hypercalcemia, hypercalciuria, 
nausea, skin reactions.
Interactions Nil with ambulance medications. Concurrent therapy with 
colecalciferol can increase the toxicity of digoxin.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Overdose on vitamin D analogues results in hypercalcaemia 
of which the symptoms are non-specific. It tends to include 
nausea, gastrointestinal symptoms, anorexia, fatigue, muscle 
pain and weakness. Hypercalcaemia can result in arrhythmias 
and pancreatitis. Reversal is slow and requires hospital 
treatment.
Potential Callouts People may develop hypercalcaemia if taking colecalciferol 
alongside additional over-the-counter vitamin D calcium 
supplements. People who are no longer taking their 
colecalciferol may be at a greater risk of fracture.
Did You Know? Vitamin D is naturally made in the body by special cells in 
the epidermis of the skin following sun exposure. This is why 
vitamin D deficiency is associated with areas with low levels 
of day light.77
C
Co-trimoxazole
Pronunciation Co-try-mox-a-zoll
AKA Sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim, Septrin©
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Antibiotics – (Antifolates)
Conditions Treated Several infections.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Co-trimoxazole is a mixture of trimethoprim and 
sulfamethoxazole in a ratio of 1:5. These two medications 
block the ability for a bacterial cell to produce nucleic acids 
necessary for DNA, RNA and protein synthesis.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – Tablet, oral suspension
Parenteral – Solution for infusion
Half Life 8.6–17 hours
Full Effect 2–3 days
Common Side 
Effects
Diarrhoea, electrolyte imbalance, fungal overgrowth, 
headache, nausea, skin reactions.
Interactions Sulfamethoxazole – No interactions with ambulance 
medications but it increases/decreases exposure to certain 
medications including Warfarin. Trimethoprim – Furosemide
can increase risk of hyponatraemia; heparin increases 
risk of hyperkalaemia; ibuprofen can increase risk of 
hyponatraemia, nephrotoxicity and hyperkalaemia. It is 
worth noting the trimethoprim is teratogenic in the first 
trimester of pregnancy.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Overdose symptoms include nausea, vomiting, dizziness 
and confusion. Bone marrow depression can also be seen. 
Co-trimoxazole is absorbed quickly in the acidic environment 
of the stomach and so activated charcoal can be attempted; 
however, the drug can be fully absorbed within 2 hours. Fluid 
output can be encouraged with fluids depending on the renal 
status of the person.
Potential Callouts Co-trimoxazole is linked to Stevens–Johnson Syndrome and 
toxic epidermal necrolysis. This is a drug reaction that causes 
a widespread rash over the skin. It tends to start with flu-like 
symptoms followed by a rash that starts with blisters in 
mucous membranes then spreads. These people need hospital 
treatment and supervision for days to weeks.
Did You Know? Sulphonamides are contraindicated in people with known 
‘acute porphyrias’. These are conditions where the body is 
unable to convert porphyrins into haem which is required for 
red blood cells. This can result in a build-up of porphyrins in 
the liver and can affect the nervous system and skin.78 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Cyanocoalbumin
Pronunciation Sigh-an-o-co-alb-you-min
AKA Vitamin B12
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Vitamin Analogue
Conditions Treated B12 deficiency, pernicious anaemia, macrocytic anaemias.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Vitamin B12 is given to those who do not have enough B12; 
this can be due to autoimmune responses that reduce the 
ability to absorb B12 or they do not receive enough B12 in 
the diet. B12 is important for the nervous system as well 
as the formation of red blood cells. Oral forms are given to 
help with maintenance; however, parenteral forms are more 
regularly given.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – Tablet
Parenteral – Solution for injection
Half Life 6 days
Full Effect Several weeks
Common Side 
Effects
None
Interactions None with ambulance medications.
Overdose 
Symptoms
None expected with high doses.
Potential Callouts A person who is undiagnosed as B12 deficient or who has 
not had their B12 can present with a variety of symptoms. 
Remember that this can be related to the central nervous 
system including fatigue, pins and needles, poor balance, 
visual changes and changes in their mental and cognitive 
health.
Did You Know? Cyanocobalamin is not as routinely used as its analogue 
hydroxocobalamin.79
C
Cyclizine
AKA Si-c-la-zeen
Pronunciation Buccastem® (it’s not Buccastem!), sea sickness tablets.
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Antihistamine (1st Generation)
Conditions Treated Nausea, vomiting, vertigo, motion sickness, labyrinthine 
disorders.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Cyclizine is traditionally an antihistamine, but it is shown to 
have anti-emetic effects which is now its main use. However, 
the mechanism of how it has these anti-emetic effects is still 
relatively unknown.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet
Parenteral – Solution for injection
Half Life 20 hours
Full Effect 1–2 hours
Common Side 
Effects
None specified; however, reduced consciousness has been 
reported. Concurrent use with other antimuscarinics may 
result in side effects such as dry mouth, bradycardia, urine 
retention, dilated pupils and flushing among others.
Interactions Antimuscarinic effects can increase with atropine. Diazepam, 
midazolam, morphine and nitrous oxide can increase CNS 
depressant effects.
Overdose 
Symptoms
These are antimuscarinic/cholinergic symptoms and can 
be peripheral (dry oral and nasopharynx, blurred vision, 
tachycardia, urinary retention) or central (drowsiness, 
dizziness, lack of coordination, ataxia, weakness, 
hyperexcitability, disorientation, impaired judgment, 
hallucinations, convulsions, hyperpyrexia and respiratory 
depression). Management can include activated charcoal and 
symptom management.
Potential Callouts Cyclizine is given in palliative care to help control symptoms 
of nausea and vomiting. This might be present in a person’s 
JIC box in parenteral forms and paramedics should be aware 
of correct administration.
Did You Know? Cyclizine was chosen by NASA to be tested for the Apollo 
11 mission to the moon due to its anti-emetic properties and 
since then cyclizine has been widely used to treat nausea and 
vomiting [10].80 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
References for C
1 Elkahloun, AG. and Saavedra, JM. Candesartan neuroprotection in rat primary 
neurons negatively correlates with aging and senescence: a transcriptomic analysis 
Mol Neurobiol 2019 57 p1656–1673. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1007/
s12035-019-01800-9
2 Bechard, AR. and Knackstedt, LA. The effects of Pavlovian cue extinction and 
ceftriaxone on cocaine relapse after abstinence Drug Alcohol Depend 2019 197 
p83-86. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2019.01.005
3 Kim, S., Bae, K., Shin, H., Kim, J., Shin, I. Kim, J., Kang, G. and Yoon, J. Caffeine 
counteracts impairments in task-orientated psychomotor performance 
induced by chlorpheniramine: a double-bline placebo-controlled crossover study 
J Psychopharmacol 2013 27 (1) p62–70.
4 Persson, R. and Jick, S. Clinical implications of the association between 
fluoroquinolones and tendon rupture: the magnitude of the effect with 
and without corticosteroids. Br J Clin Pharm 2019 85 p949–959. Available at: 
https://doi.org/10.1111/bcp.13879
5 Vila, T., Ahmed, SS., Montelongo-Jauregui, D. and Jabara-Risk, MA. Oral candidiasis: 
a disease of opportunity J Fungi 2020 6(1) p15.
6 Legge, S. and Walters, JTR. Genetics of clozapine-associated neutropenia: recent 
advances, challenges and future perspectives. Pharmacogenetics 2013 20 (4) 
p279–290. Available at: https://doi.org/10.2217/pgs-2018-0188
7 Kirchheiner, J., Schmidt, H., Tzvetkov, M., Keulen, J., Lötsch, J., Roots, I and 
Brockmöller, J.  Pharmacokinetics of codeine and it’s metabolite morphine in 
ultra-rapid metabolizers due to CYP2D6 duplication Pharm J 2007 p257–265. 
Available at: https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.tpj.6500406
8 Pain management [Internet]. Glasgow: Chronic Pain Education Group, 2023. 
Opioid Calculator; 2023 [2023 03 23]. Available at: https://www.paindata.org/
calculator.php
9 Dasgeb, B., Kornreich, D., McGinn, K., Okon, L., Brownell, I. and Sackett, 
DL. Colchicine: an ancient drug with novel applications Br J Dermatol 2018 178(2) 
p350–356. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1111/bjd.15896
10 Deane, FR., Wood, CD., Graybiel, A. and Cawrse, AC. The effect of drugs on altering 
susceptibility to motion sickness in aerobatics and the slow rotation room. 
Pensacola, Florida: National Aeronautics Space Administration, 1966, 16p. Available 
at: https://ntrs.nasa.gov/api/citations/19670016941/downloads/19670016941.pdfParamedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications, First Edition. Rose Matheson. 
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
81
DD
Dabigatran (etexilate)
Pronunciation Dab-ee-gat-ran
AKA Pradaxa®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Anticoagulant (Direct Thrombin Inhibitor)
Conditions Treated Prophylaxis and treatment of DVTs, PEs and CVAs.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Dabigatran works to inhibit thrombin which is involved in 
coagulation. Specifically, dabigatran is a competitive, 
reversible inhibitor of thrombin.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – capsule
Half Life 12–14 hours
Full Effect 0.5–2 hours
Common Side 
Effects
Anaemia, diarrhoea, gastrointestinal issues, haemorrhage 
and abnormal liver function, nausea.
Interactions Amiodarone increases the amount of dabigatran in the body. 
Several ambulance medications increase the risk of bleeding 
such as aspirin, clopidogrel, heparin and ibuprofen, so 
should be avoided. It is worth noting that the herbal 
medicine St Johns Wort also increases the potency of 
dabigatran.
Overdose 
Symptoms
The main symptom of an overdose would be the increased 
risk of bleeding which may be fatal. Bleeding should be 
managed as appropriate and TXA may be effective although 
this is not indicated in most paramedic PGDs [1]. There is a 
direct antidote to dabigatran overdose which is idarucizumab.
Potential Callouts People who are meant to be on this medication but have poor 
compliance may present with DVTs, PEs or CVAs. 
Conversely people who have suffered trauma will be at 
increased risk of bleeding if on dabigatran.
Did You Know? Dabigatran etexilate is a pro-drug that has no 
pharmacological effect. The pro-drug is metabolised in the 
liver to form dabigatran.
D82 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Desogestrel (+/− ethinylestradiol)
Pronunciation Des-oh-guest-rel
AKA The Pill, Progesterone only pill (without ethinylestradiol), 
combined pill (with ethinylestradiol) Bimizza®, Cerazette®, 
Cimizt®, Feanolla®, Gedarel®, Hana®, Lovima®, Marvelon®, 
Mercilon®, Zelleta®, POC, COC
Legal Status POM (exc. Hana® and Lovima® which can be P)
Medicine Group Oral Contraception
Conditions Treated Contraceptive, can be used for other menstrual symptoms 
and acne.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Desogestrel is a synthetic progesterone and ethinylestradiol 
is a synthetic estrogen, both mimic the natural form found in 
the body. It inhibits ovulation and increases the viscosity of 
cervical mucus .
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet
Half Life 30 days
Full Effect 4–5 days
Common Side 
Effects
Acne, breast abnormalities, headache, decreased libido, 
menstrual irregularities, mood changes, nausea, skin 
reactions, weight increase.
Interactions None with ambulance medicines; however, there are several 
POM medicines that reduce the efficiency of oral 
contraceptives. Many of these are anti-epileptic medicines.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Overdose symptoms tend to be mild such as nausea, 
vomiting and mild vaginal bleeds. Treatment should be 
symptomatic.
Potential Callouts Combined Oral Contraceptives have an increased risk of 
DVTs and should be a suspected risk factor when presented 
with a person who is symptomatic of a DVT or PE. It is 
worth also remembering that severe vomiting and diarrhoea 
can alter the absorption of the pill and therefore should be 
treated as a missed pill.
Did You Know? Feanolla®, Lovima® and Moonia® brands should not be given 
to those with a soya or peanut allergy.83
D
Digoxin
Pronunciation Didge-ox-in
AKA Lanoxin®, digitalis, foxglove
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Cardiac Glycoside
Conditions Treated Atrial fibrillation, atrial flutter, heart failure.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Digoxin increases myocardial contractility and does this by 
altering the amount of available calcium which is an important 
electrolyte for cardiac muscle contraction. Digoxin produces 
an increased availability of calcium ions to try increase 
contraction but also works on the autonomic nervous system 
to help reduce ventricular rate to increase filling time.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet, oral solution
Parenteral – Solution for injection, solution for infusion
Half Life 30–40 hours
Full Effect 1–2 weeks
Common Side 
Effects
Arrythmias, cerebral impairment, diarrhoea, dizziness, 
eosinophilia, nausea, skin reactions, vision disorders, 
vomiting.
Interactions Amiodarone and salbutamol increase the potency of 
digoxin. Several medications increase the potency of digoxin 
and this includes steroids, diuretics, colecalciferol and certain 
antibiotics.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Digoxin toxicity can be acute or chronic. There are cardiac 
effects that occur 3–6 hours after ingestion and can include 
several kinds of arrythmia that can progress to cardiac arrest: 
paroxysmal atrial tachycardia, AV blocks, slow AF, 
bidirectional VT, PVCs and bradycardia. Gastrointestinal 
disturbances can occur prior to cardiovascular symptoms 
and neurological symptoms can also occur and persist 
despite resolution of the overdose. The most common 
neurological symptom is changes in colour vision [2].
Potential Callouts Due to digoxin’s narrow therapeutic index, side effects can 
often occur and be severe. People may present with side 
effects shown above whether this is due to the current dose 
or overdose.
Did You Know? A person taking digoxin might show changes in their ECG 
known as the digoxin effect. This effect is a down sloping of 
the ST segment; flattened, inverted or biphasic T waves and a 
shortened QT interval [3].84 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Dihydrocodeine (tartate)
Pronunciation Die-hydro-code-een
AKA DHC, DF 118 Forte®, Co-dydramol is the preparation of 
paracetamol and dihydrocodeine
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Analgesic (opioid)
Conditions Treated Severe pain, cough suppressant.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
As a semi-synthetic opioid, dihydrocodeine works with the 
opioid receptors in the brain to reduce the sensation of pain 
by binding to μ-receptors.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – Tablet, modified release tablet, oral solution
Half Life 4 hours
Full Effect 0.5–1 hour
Common Side 
Effects
Arrhythmias, confusion, constipation, dizziness, drowsiness, 
dry mouth, euphoric mood, flushing, hallucinations, 
headache, hyperhidrosis, miosis, nausea, palpitations, 
respiratory depression, skin reactions, urinary retention, 
vertigo, vomiting.
Interactions Chlorphenamine, diazepam, midazolam and nitrous oxide
increases CNS depressant effects of dihydrocodeine.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Dihydrocodeine is an opiate, so overdose symptoms include 
respiratory depression, pin point pupils and reduced 
consciousness. This can be reversed by naloxone 
administration.
Potential Callouts Overdose is possible but consider other side effects such as 
constipation which might present as abdominal pain and 
postural hypotension that might case a fall.
Did You Know? Synthetic opioids still add to an opiate burden so are worth 
considering with dosing. A starting adult dose of 
dihydrocodeine is 30mg and this is the equivalent to 1mg IV 
morphine [4]85
D
Diltiazem (hydrochloride)
Pronunciation Dill-tie-a-zem
AKA Cardizem®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Calcium Channel Blockers (nondihydropyridines)
Conditions Treated Angina, hypertension, chronic anal fissures.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Diltiazem works by inhibiting calcium from entering 
myocardial muscle and smooth muscle fibres. Calcium is 
vital for muscle contraction and therefore by reducing 
calcium entering the muscles, they will not contract as 
strongly. This reduces vasoconstriction which is beneficial for 
hypertension and reduces cardiac work which reduces 
anginal pain.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – Modified release tablet, modified release capsule
Half Life 6–8 hours
Full Effect 2–4 weeks
Common Side 
Effects
Cardiac conduction disorders, constipation, gastrointestinal 
discomfort, malaise.
Interactions Amiodarone can increase the risk of cardio depression. 
Furosemide, glyceryl trinitrate and nitrous oxide increase 
the risk of hypotension. Diltiazem increases the exposure to 
midazolam. People who are already on medications to relax 
the heart or blood vessels such as beta blockers may suffer 
more severe hypotension or poor cardiac output.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Overdose will result in profound hypotension and the 
potential for cardiac conduction abnormalities. This can be 
bradycardia and AV conduction blocks or dissociation. 
Suggested treatments available to paramedics include 
atropine; however, hospitals may provide glucagon and/or 
inotropic infusions.
Potential Callouts A person who has recently been put on diltiazem may show 
side effects shortly after starting that result in ambulance 
attendance such as bradycardia or hypotension.
Did You Know? Nondihydropyridine calcium channel blockers like Diltiazem 
are more selective for cardiac cells rather than the smooth 
muscle of blood vessels.86 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Diazepam
AKA Dia-az-eh-pam
Pronunciation Valium, yellows, blues, benzos
Legal Status POM – Class C schedule 4
Medicine Group Benzodiazepines
Conditions Treated Anxiety, muscle spasms, convulsions, drug induced dystonic 
reactions.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Benzodiazepines work on the neurotransmitter GABA. It 
binds to the GABA receptor which causes an influx of 
chloride ions which hyperpolarises the membrane and 
causes the neurons to reduce firing.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablets, oral suspension, rectal solution
Parenteral – Solution for injection, emulsion for injection
Half Life 1–2 days (can be longer)
Full Effect 1–2 hours
Common Side 
Effects
Altered mood, anxiety, ataxia, confusion, depression, 
dizziness, drowsiness, dysarthria, fatigue, headache, 
hypotension, muscle weakness, nausea, respiratory 
depression, sleep disorders, tremor, visual disturbance.
Interactions Chlorphenamine, morphine, nitrous oxide and midazolam
also have CNS depressive effects.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Overdoses of diazepam cause profound drowsiness; 
however, in most cases monitoring of vital signs and 
symptomatic care is all that is needed. Activated charcoal can 
be given in cases where large volumes have been ingested 
and the airway is protected. There is a reversal agent for 
benzodiazepines called flumazenil; however, this is not 
routinely used due to its interaction with tricyclic 
antidepressants and risk of seizures.
Potential Callouts Diazepam may be the cause of a call due to its sedative effects 
that would make a person unrousable. Diazepam is also a 
common drug that is misused with an increased street value.
Did You Know? Diazepam is a highly lipid soluble medicine. This means that 
it has a long half-life because it is absorbed into body fats. It is 
also the reason that it will not be absorbed as quickly after a 
meal high in fat. It will be absorbed into the contents of the 
meal rather than into the bloodstream.87
D
Docusate (sodium)
AKA Dock-you-sate
Pronunciation Dulcoease®, Dioctyl® sulfosuccinate
Legal Status GSL, P, POM
Medicine Group Laxative (osmotic)
Conditions Treated Constipation, earwax impaction.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Docusate sodium works by increasing the amount of water 
that is absorbed into the stool (or ear wax).
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet, oral solution, rectal solution
Parenteral – Ear drops
Half Life Not available
Full Effect 1–2 days (oral) or 20 minutes (rectal).
Common Side 
Effects
No common side effects; however, abdominal cramps, 
nausea and diarrhoea have been reported with oral 
administration. Skin reactions can occur from topical use 
with ear drops.
Interactions There are no interactions with ambulance medicines and the 
only interaction is with Baloxavir marboxil.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Diarrhoea is the main symptom of an overdose which may 
result in dehydration and electrolyte depletion. Treatment 
should be to replace lost fluids and electrolytes.
Potential Callouts Unlikely to be a cause for a call-out.
Did You Know? The effectiveness of docusate sodium has been called to 
question with several randomised controlled trials suggesting 
that it is as effective as a placebo [5].88 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Domperidone
AKA Dom-perry-doe-n
Pronunciation Motilium®, ‘Dom perignon’
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Dopamine-2 Receptor antagonist
Conditions Treated Nausea and sickness.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Domperidone is a dopamine antagonist which works on the 
chemoreceptor trigger zone in the brain, but it is also thought 
to have peripheral effects such as increased gastric emptying 
and motility.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet, oral solution
Half Life 7–9 hours
Full Effect 0.5–1 hour
Common Side 
Effects
Dry mouth is the only listed common side effect.
Interactions Amiodarone and ondansetron can increase the risk of QT 
prolongation.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Symptoms include agitation, altered consciousness, 
convulsions, disorientation and extrapyramidal effects 
(restlessness, muscle contraction, parkinsonism and facial 
twitching).
Potential Callouts QT prolongation is a reported side effect of domperidone; 
however, it is rare. This is worth being aware of in case a 
person taking domperidone develops arrhythmias. 
Domperidone is contraindicated in those with cardiac 
disease.
Did You Know? Domperidone is not approved for any use in the USA and 
distribution is illegal [6].89
D
Donepezil (hydrochloride)
Pronunciation Dun-ep-a-sill
AKA Aricept®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Cholinesterase inhibitor
Conditions Treated Dementia due to Alzheimer’s disease.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
The main action of Donepezil is inhibition of 
acetylcholinesterase which is an enzyme that breaks down 
Acetylcholine. Acetylcholine is a neurotransmitter which is 
believed to be present in smaller concentrations in those with 
dementia [7]. Therefore, if less acetylcholine is broken down, 
the overall concentration will increase which will aid nerve 
transmission using these cholinergic pathways.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – Tablet, dispersible tablet, oral solution
Half Life 3 days
Full Effect 4–6 weeks
Common Side 
Effects
Aggression, agitation, bradycardia, cold symptoms, 
decreased appetite, diarrhoea, dizziness, fatigue, 
gastrointestinal disorders, hallucination, headache, muscle 
cramps, nausea, pain, skin reaction, sleep disorders, syncope, 
urinary incontinence.
Interactions Amiodarone can increase the risk of bradycardia with 
donepezil.
Overdose 
Symptoms
‘Cholinergic crisis’ is the result of an overdose of 
cholinesterase inhibitors as the body has too much 
acetylcholine. This overstimulates the parasympathetic 
nervous system. It is characterised by nausea, vomiting, 
hypersalivation, diaphoresis, bradycardia, hypotension, 
respiratory depression and convulsions. There can be 
progressive muscle weakness which can result in collapse 
and respiratory arrest. Atropine can be given as an 
anticholinergic to reverse the effects.
Potential Callouts Donepezil is known to cause bradycardia and syncope, so if 
this was started recently, it might be the cause of an 
unexplained fall.
Did You Know? Donepezil should be stopped after 3 months if there is no 
improvement, so this should be considered with those on 
long-term treatment.90 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Doxazosin
Pronunciation Dock-zah-zo-sin
AKA Cardura®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Alpha-1 Adrenergic Receptor Antagonist
Conditions Treated Benign Prostatic hyperplasia, hypertension.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Doxazosin inhibits alpha-1 adrenergic receptors on smooth 
muscle. These are found on blood vessels and inhibition of 
these receptors causes vasodilation. These receptors are also 
found on the smooth muscle of the prostate and bladder and 
by relaxing the muscle, it can potentially help improve 
urinary flow.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – Tablets
Half Life 9–22 hours
Full Effect 2 weeks
Common Side 
Effects
Arrhythmias, asthenia, chest pain, cough, cystitis, dizziness, 
drowsiness, dry mouth, dyspnoea, gastrointestinal disorder, 
headaches, hypotension, increased infection risk, muscle 
complaints, nausea, oedema, pain, palpitations, skin 
reactions, urinary issues, vertigo.
Interactions Furosemide, glyceryl trinitrate, nitrous oxide and morphine
can increase the risk of hypotension.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Hypotension, drowsiness and tachycardia can be present. 
Treatment involves using activated charcoal to absorb 
undigested Doxazosin and symptomatic treatment such as 
IV fluids for the hypotension.
Potential Callouts Doxazosin is known to cause first dose hypotension, but this 
can also occur after taking it for a while. Therefore, those on 
doxazosin may suffer from postural hypotension and 
syncope as a result.
Did You Know? Doxazosin is known as a ‘highly protein bound’ drug. This 
means that 98% of the drug is bound to plasma proteins in the 
blood stream and only 2% can be actively metabolised at any 
time.91
D
Doxycycline
Pronunciation Dox-ee-cyc-lin
AKA ‘Doxy’, Vibrimycin® Efracea®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Antibiotic (Tetracycline)
Conditions Treated Several infections, malaria prophylaxis, acne, rosacea
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Tetracycline antibiotics are bacteriostatic and interrupt the 
production of vital bacterial proteins. In the case of malaria, 
doxycycline is believed to block protein translation in the 
malarial parasite.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – Tablets, capsules
Half Life 18 hours
Full Effect 1–2 days
Common Side 
Effects
Angioedema, diarrhoea, dyspnoea, exacerbation of lupus, 
headache, Henoch–Schönlein purpura, hypersensitivity, 
hypotension, increased risk of sunburn, nausea, pericarditis, 
peripheral oedema, tachycardia, vomiting.
Interactions Antacids and iron decrease the absorption of doxycycline. 
Paracetamol may increase the risk of hepatotoxicity as can 
statins. Doxycycline can increase the anticoagulant properties 
of warfarin.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Overdose on doxycycline is poorly reported in humans. 
Symptoms are considered to relate to the expected side 
effects and managed accordingly. Animal studies suggest 
that overdose can result in cardiomyopathy [8].
Potential Callouts Doxycycline can cause an autoimmune condition known as 
Henoch–Schönlein purpura which presents in children as a 
non-blanching rash that mainly affects the limbs and is 
associated with gastrointestinal pain, joint pain and 
haematuria. Symptoms usually resolve in a few weeks.
Did You Know? Doxycycline should not be given to pregnant women, 
especially in the third trimester. This is because it can result in 
brown staining of the child’s teeth.92 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
References for D
1 Wood, B., Sholzberg, M. and Ackery, A. Direct oral anticoagulants and the bleeding 
patient. CMAJ [internet] 2016 188(3) p215. [cited 2023 03 23]. Available at: https://
www.cmaj.ca/content/188/3/215
2 Lawrenson, JG., Kelly, C., Lawernson, AL. and Birch, J. Acquired colour vision 
deficiency in patients receiving digoxin maintenance therapy. Br J Opthalmol 
[internet] 2002 86(11) p1259–1261. [cited 2023 03 23]. Available at: https://bjo.bmj. 
com/content/86/11/1259
3 Life in the Fast Lane. Digoxin effect [internet]. Melbourne, Australia: Life in the Fast 
Lane, 2022. [cited 2023 03 23]. Available at: https://litfl.com/digoxin-effect-ecg-library/
4 Pain management. Glasgow: Chronic Pain Education Group. [internet] 2023. Opioid 
Calculator; 2023 [cited 2023 23 03]. Available at: https://www.paindata.org/
calculator.php
5 Fakheri, RJ. and Volpicelli, FM. Things we do for no reason: prescribing docusate for 
constipation in hospitalized adults. J Hosp Med [internet] 2019 14(2) p110–113.  
[cited 2023 03 23]. Available at: https://doi.org/10.12788/jhm.3124
6 Alzheimers Society. How do drugs for Alzheimer’s disease work? [internet]. 
London, United Kingdom: Alzheimers Society n.d. [cited 2023 03 23]. Available at: 
https://www.alzheimers.org.uk/about-dementia/treatments/dementia-drugs/
how-do-drugs-alzheimers-disease-work#:~:text=Acetylcholine%20helps%20to%20
send%20messages,disease%20get%20worse%20over%20time
7 United States Food and Drug Administration. Information about Domperidone. 
[internet] United States Food and Drug Administration 2023 [cited 2024 03 15]. 
Available at: https://www.fda.gov/drugs/information-drug-class/information￾about-domperidone#:~:text=Domperidone%20is%20not%20an%20FDA,or%20
enhance%20breast%20milk%20production
8 El-Neweshy, MS. Experimental doxycycline overdose in rates causes 
cardiomyopathy. Int J Exp Path [internet] 2013 94(2) p109–114. [cited 2023 03 23]. 
Available at: https://doi.org/10.1111/iep.12013Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications, First Edition. Rose Matheson.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
93
E
Enoxaparin (sodium)
Pronunciation Ee-knocks-a-paar-in
AKA Lovenox®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Anticoagulant (low molecular weight heparin)
Conditions Treated Treatment and prophylaxis of deep vein thrombosis, 
pulmonary embolism, angina and ST-elevation 
myocardial infarction.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Enoxaparin works on the coagulation cascade by 
binding antithrombin to factor Xa and inactivates it 
and so clots cannot be formed.
Routes of Administration Parenteral – solution for injection (subcutaneous or 
intravenous)
Half Life 4 hours
Full Effect 5–10 minutes when given intravenously and 3–5 hours 
given subcutaneously
Common Side Effects Haemorrhagic anaemia, headache, hypersensitivity, 
thrombocytopenia, thrombocytosis, haemorrhage, skin 
reactions.
Interactions Aspirin, clopidogrel, heparin, ibuprofen and 
tenecteplase can cause bleeding and so should be 
considered with caution when used with enoxaparin. 
Heparin and ibuprofen also increase the risk of 
hyperkalaemia. Remember other prescription 
medications can increase the risk of bleeding such 
as SSRIs.
Overdose Symptoms Haemorrhage is the main side effect of an overdose 
and can be partially reversed by an infusion of 
protamine in hospital. If enoxaparin is taken orally, it is 
not likely absorbed.
Potential Callouts Be aware of any risk of bleeding such as following 
trauma with those on enoxaparin.
Did You Know? Some forms of enoxaparin are ‘black triangle’ 
medications which means all side effects need to be 
reported to the MHRA.
E94 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Erythromycin
Pronunciation Er-ee-throw-my-sin
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Antibiotic (macrolide)
Conditions Treated Several infections
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action As a macrolide antibiotic, erythromycin is 
bacteriostatic and binds to the 50S ribosomal 
subunit of susceptible bacteria and prevents protein 
synthesis.
Routes of Administration Enteral – Tablet, gastro-resistant tablet, oral 
suspension
Parenteral – Powder for solution for infusion
Half Life 3.5 hours
Full Effect 3 days
Common Side Effects Appetite decreased, diarrhoea, dizziness, 
gastrointestinal discomfort, headache, hearing 
impairment, insomnia, nausea, pancreatitis, 
paraesthesia, skin reactions, altered taste, 
vasodilation, visual changes, vomiting.
Interactions Can increase QT interval alongside ondansetron
and amiodarone. Dexamethasone, furosemide and 
hydrocortisone and salbutamol can increase the 
risk of hypokalaemia. Erythromycin increases 
exposure to several medications including DOACs, 
statins and midazolam.
Overdose Symptoms Symptoms include hearing loss, severe nausea, 
vomiting and diarrhoea. Management is 
supportive.
Potential Callouts Be aware of the risk of QT prolongation for those on 
erythromycin. This may develop into lethal 
arrythmias.
Did You Know? Erythromycin is metabolised by the cytochrome 
P450 enzyme system and specifically the family 
known as CTP3A4. These enzymes can be altered by 
several drugs including erythromycin which can 
result in altered concentrations of medications such 
as warfarin95
E
Estradiol
Pronunciation Estra-die-all
AKA Hormone Replacement Therapy, HRT, natural 
oestrogen
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Hormone Replacement Therapy
Conditions Treated Symptoms of Menopause including recurrent UTIs 
and vaginal atrophy.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Estradiol is a naturally occurring hormone in 
females but it decreases in concentration when 
approaching menopause. This decrease in oestrogen 
contributes to symptoms of menopause and so HRT 
attempts to replace lost oestrogen.
Routes of Administration Enteral – tablet
Parenteral – Pessary, transdermal patch, gel, spray
Half Life 1–12 hours
Full Effect Up to 4 months
Common Side Effects Asthenia, gastrointestinal discomfort, haemorrhage, 
menstrual cycle irregularities, muscle complaints, 
pelvic pain, weight changes.
Interactions None with ambulance medicines. Several 
anti-epileptic medicines reduce the efficacy of 
estradiol.
Overdose Symptoms Breast tenderness, nausea, vomiting, metrorrhagia 
from oral oestrogens. Overdose of progestogens can 
cause depressive mood, fatigue, acne and hirsutism.
Potential Callouts The use of oestrogen therapy can increase the risk 
of developing a DVT.
Did You Know? Early HRT treatments were often derived from 
pregnant horse urine and some are still available [1]96 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Ethinylestradiol
Pronunciation Eth-an-nile-estra-die-all
AKA Contraceptive Pill, synthetic oestrogen, Akizza®, Bimizza®, 
Brevinor®, Cimizt®, Dianette®, Eloine®, Evra®, Femodene®, 
Femodette®. Gedarel®, Levest®, Logynon®, Lucette®, Maexeni®, 
Marvelon®, Mercilon®, Microgynon 30®, Millinette®, Norimin®, 
Nuvaring®, Ovranette®, Rigevidon®, Synphase®, Teragezza®, 
Triregol®, Yacella®, Yasmin®, Yiznell®.
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Contraceptive pill
Conditions 
Treated
Contraceptive, Menstrual disorders, short term treatment of 
oestrogen deficiency.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Ethinylestradiol is a synthetic version of oestrogen and so it acts 
in the same way to prevent ovulation, among other effects.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablets
Parenteral – transdermal patch, vaginal ring
Half Life 8 hours
Full Effect 7 days once started for full effect
Common Side 
Effects
Nausea, vomiting, weight gain, headaches, altered mood, breast 
tenderness. Remember that vomiting or diarrhoea may mean 
that the pill has not been absorbed sufficiently.
Interactions There is only one interaction and this is with Fostemsavir.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Nausea, vomiting and vaginal bleeding have been reported.
Potential 
Callouts
Oral contraceptives have been known to increase the risk of 
a DVT.
Did You Know? Different brands of contraceptive pill have different proportions 
of hormones and therefore some may cause side effects whereas 
others will not [2].
References for E
1 British National Formulary. Conjugated Oestrogens (equine). [internet] 2024 (cited 
2024 03 15). Available at: https://bnf.nice.org.uk/drugs/conjugated￾oestrogens-equine/
2 National Institute for Clinical Excellence. Contraception – combined oral 
contraceptive methods: Scenario: Combined oral contraceptive. [internet] 2023 (cited 
2024 03 15). Available at: https://cks.nice.org.uk/topics/contraception-combined￾hormonal-methods/management/combined-oral-contraceptive/#types-of-cocParamedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications, First Edition. Rose Matheson.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
97
F
Felodipine
Pronunciation Fell-odd-i-peen
AKA Cardioplen®, Delofine®, Felotens®, Folpik®, Neofel®, 
Paramid®, Pinefeld®, Vascalpha®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Calcium Channel Blocker (dihydropyridine)
Conditions Treated Hypertension, angina.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
As a calcium channel blocker, felodipine works by binding to 
calcium channels in the smooth muscle of blood vessels. 
Calcium normally needs to enter the muscle cells for them to 
contract; however, as they are unable to do this, the vessels 
remain dilated. As a dihydropyridine calcium channel 
blocker which means that they have a greater effect on 
vasodilation and reduced effect on heart function.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – modified release tablet
Half Life 15–30 hours
Full Effect A few weeks
Common Side 
Effects
Abdominal pain, dizziness, drowsiness, flushing, headache, 
nausea, palpitations, peripheral oedema, skin reactions, 
tachycardia, vomiting.
Interactions Felodipine can increase the risk of hypotension with 
furosemide, glyceryl trinitrate, nitrous oxide and several 
POMs. Grapefruit juice also increases exposure to felodipine
Overdose 
Symptoms
Marked hypotension which may be associated with 
bradycardia. If within 1 hour of ingestion, consider activated 
charcoal. Treat hypotension with fluids and bradycardia with 
atropine. Requires hospital admission.
Potential Callouts A person recently started on felodipine may present with 
postural symptoms or tachycardia after their first dose.
Did You Know? Dihydropyridine CCBs can cause ‘reflex’ tachycardia which 
occurs when the heart tries to compensate for a drop in blood 
pressure [1]. This is one reason why this group of CCBs are 
not as good for angina prophylaxis.
F98 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Fentanyl
Pronunciation Fent-a-nil
AKA Abstral®, Effentora®, Instanyl®, PecFent® Do not confuse 
with Alfentanil
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Analgesic (Opioid)
Conditions Treated Acute and chronic pain.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Fentanyl is a synthetic opioid with a potency that is 50–100
times greater than morphine. It works on the μ-receptors to 
induce a primarily analgesic effect.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – Sublingual tablet, buccal tablet, lozenge, nasal 
spray
Parenteral – Solution for injection, Solution for infusion, 
transdermal patch
Half Life 7 hours
Full Effect 30 minutes
Common Side 
Effects
Abnormal sensations, apnoea, anxiety, appetite decreased, 
asthenia, depression, diarrhoea, dyspnoea, hypertension, 
hypotension, insomnia, malaise, muscle rigidity, oral 
disorders, peripheral oedema, respiratory disorders, 
temperature changes, tremor, vascular pain, visual 
impairment.
Interactions Amiodarone can increase the concentration of fentanyl and 
increase the risk of bradycardia. Chlorphenamine, 
diazepam, midazolam and nitrous oxide and fentanyl can 
increase the CNS depression effects. Ondansetron and 
fentanyl increase the risks of serotonin syndrome.
Overdose 
Symptoms
As this is an opioid, an overdose can result in respiratory 
depression, coma and pinpoint pupils. Naloxone 
hydrochloride should be administered.
Potential Callouts People under palliative care may be on fentanyl and have 
lozenge and spray forms available as fast acting break 
through pain.
Did You Know? You might hear someone mention a ‘fentanyl lollipop’ this is 
the nickname for the oral transmucosal fentanyl citrate 
lozenge which is used in military trauma management [2].99
F
Fexofenadine
Pronunciation Fex-o-fen-a-deen
AKA Allegra®, Allevia®
Legal Status POM, GSL
Medicine Group Antihistamines
Conditions Treated Symptoms of allergy.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Fexofenadine is a selective H1antagonist. By inactivating H1 
receptors, it prevents allergens binding and causing 
symptoms such as urticaria, rhinitis and itching. 
Fexofenadine does not cross the blood-brain barrier and so is 
less likely to cause CNS effects.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – Tablet
Half Life 11–15 hours
Full Effect 1 hour
Common Side 
Effects
Dizziness, drowsiness, headache, nausea.
Interactions None with ambulance medicines. Antacids reduce absorption 
of fexofenadine.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Toxicity from fexofenadine has not been reported. Symptoms 
of an overdose can include dizziness, drowsiness, fatigue 
and a dry mouth. Treatment should be symptomatic.
Potential Callouts Unlikely to be the cause of a call-out.
Did You Know? In December 2020, fexofenadine was made available as a 
General Sales List medication in the UK in the 120 mg form. 
This makes it available in the same way that loratadine and 
cetirizine are.100 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Ferrous (fumarate/sulphate)
Pronunciation Ferris
AKA Iron tablets
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Iron Supplements
Conditions treated Iron-deficient anaemia.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Iron is an essential component of haemoglobin and so 
ferrous iron salts can increase concentrations of iron in 
those who are deficient.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – Tablet, Modified release tablet, Capsule, Oral 
solution, Oral drops
Half Life 6 hours
Full Effect 4 weeks
Common Side 
Effects
Black stools, constipation, diarrhoea, nausea.
Interactions None with ambulance medicines. Antacids can reduce 
absorption.
Overdose Symptoms Iron overdose can be very severe and can occur in stages 
over a series of weeks initially, or if mild, there are 
gastrointestinal symptoms including haematemesis and 
rectal bleeding. More severe overdoses can result in 
hypoperfusion, metabolic acidosis and hyperemesis. 
The most severe cases result in hepatocellular necrosis 
which leads to jaundice, hypoglycaemia, 
encephalopathy and metabolic acidosis. This can result 
in renal failure and partial and complete bowel 
obstruction. These people need hospital treatment for 
their symptoms and partial reversal with desferrioxamine.
Potential Callouts People who have recently started iron tablets may be 
concerned by their black stools, especially alongside 
abdominal pain.
Did You Know? Iron can also be given intravenously in other forms and 
this is regularly given to people with chronic renal 
failure on haemodialysis.101
F
Finasteride
Pronunciation Fin-ah-ster-ride
AKA Propecia®, Proscar®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group 5α-reductase inhibitor
Conditions Treated Benign Prostate Hyperplasia, adrogenetic alopecia
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Finasteride blocks the action of the enzyme 5α-reductase 
and primarily works to convert testosterone to 
dihydrotestosterone (DHT). DHT is more potent than 
testosterone and a reduction in DHT is related to a reduction 
in the size of the prostate. Another 5 α-reductase works at the 
site of hair follicles and helps prevent baldness.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – Oral
Half Life 6–8 hours
Full Effect Up to 6 months
Common Side 
Effects
Sexual dysfunction, depression.
Interactions None noted
Overdose 
Symptoms
No overdose symptoms or management noted.
Potential Callouts Unlikely to be a cause of a call-out; however, finasteride has 
been reported to cause palpitations and angioedema.
Did You Know? Finasteride is contraindicated in pregnancy due to its effect on 
testosterone which is required for normal sexual development 
of a foetus. Finasteride can travel in the semen and so people 
who are trying to conceive should be warned of this.102 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Flucloxacillin
Pronunciation Floo-clocks-ah-sill-in
AKA N/A
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Antibiotic (beta-lactam)
Conditions Treated Several infections – commonly skin infections.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Flucloxacillin is a beta-lactam antibiotic which means that is 
prevents the synthesis of the cell wall by disrupting the 
beta-lactam links within the bacterial wall.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – Capsule, oral solution
Parenteral – Powder for solution for injection
Half Life Approximately 1 hour
Full Effect 2–3 days
Common Side 
Effects
Gastrointestinal disorders, skin reactions
Interactions Paracetamol has been reported to cause metabolic acidosis 
and increases the risk of hepatotoxicity. Flucloxacillin can 
also alter the anticoagulant effect of warfarin and so INR 
should be monitored.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Gastrointestinal symptoms are the most common symptoms 
of overdose and should be managed symptomatically.
Potential Callouts High doses of flucloxacillin can cause severe hypokalaemia 
but this is mainly via the parenteral route.
Did You Know? Although rare, jaundice may occur up to two months after 
taking flucloxacillin due to an associated risk of cholestatic 
jaundice and hepatitis.103
F
Fluoxetine
Pronunciation Floo-ox-eh-teen
AKA Prozac®, Olena®, Prozep®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitor
Conditions Treated Depression, anxiety, bulimia nervosa, OCD, menopause 
symptoms.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
As a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor, fluoxetine 
prevents serotonin from being reabsorbed into the pre￾synaptic neuron, so more serotonin can be utilised in the rest 
of the system.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – Tablet, dispersible tablet, capsules, oral solution
Half Life 1–4 days
Full Effect 2–4 weeks
Common Side 
Effects
Anxiety, appetite changes, arrhythmias, arthralgia, asthenia, 
poor concentration, confusion, gastrointestinal changes, 
dizziness, dry mouth, haemorrhages, headache, 
hyperhidrosis, malaise, memory loss, menstrual change, 
myalgia, mydriasis, sexual dysfunction, skin reactions, sleep 
disorders, altered taste, tinnitus, tremor, urinary disorders, 
visual changes, vomiting, yawning.
Interactions Fluoxetine increases the risk of bleeding so there needs to be 
caution considering the concurrent use of aspirin, 
clopidogrel, heparin, ibuprofen and tenecteplase. 
Furosemide increases the risk of hyponatraemia and 
ondansetron increases the risk of serotonin syndrome.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Symptoms include nausea, vomiting agitation, tremors, 
nystagmus, drowsiness, arrhythmias, and convulsions may 
occur.
Potential Callouts Serotonin syndrome is a condition that can occur when the 
body has too much serotonin. Symptoms can be mild such as 
nausea, vomiting and diarrhoea or can present more severely 
such as a high temperature, muscle spasms and convulsions.
Did You Know? SSRIs should be reduced gradually and not stopped abruptly. 
Fluoxetine tends to have fewer effects when being withdrawn 
due to its long half-life compared to other SSRIs such as 
sertraline [3].104 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Fluconazole
Pronunciation Floo-con-a-zoll
AKA Canesten®, Thrush cream, Diflucan®
Legal Status P, POM
Medicine Group Antifungal
Conditions Treated Candidiasis/yeast infections – genital, oral and dermal
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Fluconazole blocks the synthesis of fungal ergosterol which 
is an important component of fungal cell membranes.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – Capsule, oral suspension
Parenteral – Solution for infusion
Half Life 30 hours
Full Effect 7 days
Common Side 
Effects
Gastrointestinal upset, headache, skin reactions.
Interactions Amiodarone and ondansetron increase the risk of QT 
prolongation. Fluconazole can increase bleeding risk with 
anticoagulants, diuretics (furosemide), salbutamol and steroids
(hydrocortisone) and can increase the risk of hypokalaemia. 
Fluconazole increases the bioavailability of benzodiazepines
and statins but decreases the bioavailability of clopidogrel. 
Paracetamol and fluconazole increase the risk of 
hepatotoxicity.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Reported symptoms include hallucinations and paranoid 
behaviour. Treatment is normally symptomatic; however, 
encouraging urination may increase the rate of elimination.
Potential Callouts Severe cutaneous reactions can occur in people with AIDS.
Did You Know? Fluconazole is to be avoided in pregnancy due to its link to 
several congenital abnormalities.105
F
Fludrocortisone (acetate)
Pronunciation Floo-d-row-cort-i-zone
AKA N/A
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Corticosteroid
Conditions Treated Postural hypotension, adrenocortical insufficiency.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
As a synthetic mineralocorticoid, fludrocortisone replaces or 
encourages the action of mineralocorticoids such as 
aldosterone which is involved in water balance.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – Tablet
Half Life 1–3.5 hours
Full Effect 2–4 weeks
Common Side 
Effects
Abnormal behaviour, anxiety, cataract subscapular, cognitive 
impairment, Cushing’s syndrome, electrolyte imbalances, 
fatigue, fluid retention, gastrointestinal disorders, headache, 
hirsutism, hypertension, impaired healing, increased 
infection risk, menstrual changes, osteoporosis, peptic ulcer, 
psychiatric reactions, skin reactions, sleep changes, weight 
increase.
Interactions Amiodarone, furosemide, ondansetron, and salbutamol
increase the risk of hypokalaemia when given with 
fludrocortisone. Fludrocortisone decreases the concentration 
of aspirin. Ibuprofen and aspirin increase the risk of 
gastrointestinal bleeding.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Symptoms can be acute or gradual and relate to Cushing’s 
Syndrome. This includes hypertension, oedema, 
hypokalaemia, muscle pain, weight increases and 
cardiomyopathy. If gradual, then cessation of treatment 
usually resolves symptoms whereas acute overdoses may 
need closer monitoring.
Potential Callouts Consider the risk of adrenal insufficiency in those that have 
stopped their fludrocortisone or have been unwell.
Did You Know? Long-term steroid use can increase the risk of infections 
and severity, particularly true for those who are at risk of 
chickenpox or measles, as well as reducing bone density 
and skin atrophy.106 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Folic Acid
Pronunciation Foal-ic acid
AKA Folate, Vitamin B9
Legal Status GSL, POM
Medicine Group Vitamin
Conditions Treated Folate-deficient anaemia, prevention of neural tube defects.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Folate is an essential vitamin that cannot be produced in the 
body and so has to be obtained from the diet. Folic acid is 
involved in the development of erythropoiesis and 
nucleoprotein synthesis.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet, oral solution
Half Life N/A
Full Effect 1–2 weeks
Common Side 
Effects
Abdominal distension, decreased appetite, exacerbated 
vitamin B12 deficiency, flatulence, nausea.
Interactions None with ambulance medicines. Some severe interactions 
with anti-epileptic and cancer treatments.
Overdose 
Symptoms
High doses unlikely to cause harm.
Potential Callouts Unlikely to be a cause of a call-out.
Did You Know? Folic acid comes from the latin folium which means leaf 
because folic acid is found in leafy vegetables [4].107
F
Furosemide
AKA ‘Water tablets’, Frusol®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Diuretic (loop)
Conditions Treated Heart failure, hypertension, oedema (peripheral or 
pulmonary).
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Furosemide works on the loop of Henle in the nephron of the 
kidneys by blocking the sodium-potassium pump co￾transporter. This means less fluid is reabsorbed into the 
blood stream and instead is passed through the urine.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet and oral solution
Parenteral – solution for injection
Half Life 4–4.5 hours
Full Effect 20 minutes–1 hour 45 minutes depending on route
Common Side 
Effects
Diuresis, dizziness, electrolyte imbalance, fatigue, headache, 
metabolic alkalosis, muscle spasms, nausea, postural 
hypotension.
Interactions Furosemide can result in hypokalaemia if taken with a 
number of medications. This includes amiodarone, 
ondansetron, salbutamol and hydrocortisone. Medications 
such as glyceryl trinitrate, nitrous oxide and morphine may 
exacerbate hypotension. Furosemide increases digoxin
toxicity.
Overdose Severe hypotension, hypokalaemia, drowsiness, delirium, 
cardiac arrhythmias. Within 1 hour of ingestion, provide 
activated charcoal, provide intravenous fluids and monitor 
12-Lead ECG.
Potential Callouts Too much furosemide – Postural hypotension, dizziness, 
arrythmias, confusion.
Too little furosemide – Worsening shortness of breath, 
bilateral lower limb or sacral swelling.
Did You Know? Furosemide can be abused by those in the sporting industry 
to maintain weights, enhance and mask the effects of 
performance drugs and alter the concentration of illicit drugs 
in the system [5].108 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
References for F
1 National Institute for Care Excellence. Angina: Calcium Channel Blockers. [internet] 
2023 National Institute of Clinical Excellence. [cited 2024 03 15]. Available at: 
https://cks.nice.org.uk/topics/angina/prescribing-information/
calcium-channel-blockers/
2 Wedmore, IS., Kotwal, R., McManus, J., Pennardt, A., Tablot, TS., Fowler, M. and 
McGhee, L. Safety and efficacy of oral transmucosal fentanyl citrate for pre-hospital 
pain control on the battlefield. J Trauma Acute Care Surg 2012 73(6) p2490–2495. 
Available at: https://doi.org/10.1097/TA.0b013e3182754674
3 Nottinghamshire Area Prescribing Committee. Primary care Guide to 
Antidepressants: Prescribing, stopping and swapping. [internet] 2022. [cited 2024 03 
15]. Available at: https://www.nottsapc.nhs.uk/media/fxsnplnk/primary-care￾guide-to-antidepressants.pdf
4 Collins Dictionary. Definition of ‘folic acid’. [internet] 2024. [cited 2024 03 15]. 
Available at: https://www.collinsdictionary.com/dictionary/english/folic-acid
5 Cadwallander, A., De La Torre, X., Tieri, A. and Botré, F. The abuse of diuretics as 
performance enhancing drugs and masking agents in sport doping: pharmacology, 
toxicology and analysis. Br J Pharm [internet] 2010 161(1) p1–16. [cited 2023 11 01]. 
Available at: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1476-5381.2010.00789.x109
Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications, First Edition. Rose Matheson. 
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
G
Gabapentin
Pronunciation Gab-ah-pent-in
AKA Neurontin®
Legal Status POM, Schedule 3 Controlled drugs
Medicine Group Anticonvulsant
Conditions Treated Seizures, neuropathic pain, menopausal symptoms in people 
with breast cancer, symptoms of multiple sclerosis and/or 
motor neurone disease.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Gabapentin is similar in structure to the neurotransmitter 
GABA but the mechanism of action of gabapentin is 
not entirely known. GABA is the primary inhibitory 
neurotransmitter of the CNS; therefore, in theory, by 
increasing a structurally similar substance, it may prevent 
neural overactivity.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet, capsule, oral solution
Half Life 5–7 hours
Full Effect 1–2 weeks
Common Side 
Effects
Anxiety, joint pain, changes in appetite, change in behaviour, 
confusion, constipation cough, depression, gastrointestinal 
disorders, dizziness, drowsiness, dry mouth, difficulty 
breathing, fever, abnormal weight gain, headache, 
hypertension, insomnia, white cell changes, fatigue, memory 
loss, changes in movement and sensation, nystagmus, 
oedema, pain, sexual dysfunction, muscle spasms.
Interactions Chlorphenamine, diazepam, midazolam, morphine, 
nitrous oxide alongside gabapentin increases the risk of CNS 
depressive effects.. Furosemide and ibuprofen can increase 
the risk of hyponatraemia.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Symptoms include dizziness, double vision, slurred speech, 
drowsiness, loss of consciousness and mild diarrhoea.
Potential Callouts Gabapentoids have gained an increased street value and so 
may be increasingly involved in drug misuse cases.
Did You Know? Gabapentin at high doses reduces the amount of the medicine 
that can be absorbed and therefore minimises the toxicity in 
the case of overdoses, however gabapentin increases opiate 
sensitivity and is involved in many drug related deaths [1].
G110 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Gentamicin
Pronunciation Gent–a–my-sin
AKA ‘Gent’, Cidomycin®, Genticin®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Antibiotic – aminoglycloside
Conditions Treated Several Infections.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Gentamicin is a bactericidal antibiotic which binds to parts of 
the bacterial ribosomes which causes the mRNA to produce 
faulty proteins.
Routes of 
Administration
Parenteral – eye drops, ear drops, solution for injection, 
infusion
Half Life 2–3 hours
Full Effect 4 days
Common Side 
Effects
Altered taste, bronchospasm, chest discomfort, cough, 
deafness, decreased appetite, difficulty or inability to speak, 
fever, haemoptysis, headache, nausea, throat pain, renal 
impairment, skin reaction, tinnitus, vomiting.
Interactions Gentamicin increases the risk of nephrotoxicity alongside 
several medications including furosemide and ibuprofen. 
Furosemide can also increase the risk of ototoxicity.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Symptoms of nephrotoxicity (reduced urine output, fluid 
retention, high blood pressure, confusion, drowsiness, 
dehydration, diarrhoea) and ototoxicity (tinnitus, hearing 
loss, nausea, balance problems) can result from an overdose 
of gentamicin.
Potential Callouts Gentamicin is often given IV and so people will likely be 
given it in hospital, H@H or ambulatory care schemes. 
This  should be considered for people recently discharged 
from such services with side effects of symptoms of toxicity.
Did You Know? Gentamicin can also cause a neuromuscular blockade resulting 
in muscle weakness which can result in respiratory depression. 
This can be reversed by intravenous calcium.111
G
Gliclazide
Pronunciation Glick-la-side
AKA Dacadis®, Diamicron®, Nazdol®, Ziclaseg®, Zicron®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Sulfonylureas
Conditions Treated T2DM.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Sulfonylureas stimulate insulin secretion from β-cells in the 
pancreas to increase conversion of glucose to glycogen.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet, modified release tablet
Half Life 10–12 hour
Full Effect 1–2 days
Common Side 
Effects
Abdominal pain, anaemia, angio-oedema, diarrhoea, 
dyspepsia, hypersensitivity vasculitis, hypoglycaemia, 
hyponatraemia, nausea, SCARs.
Interactions Several medications increase the exposure to gliclazide 
which should suggest monitoring of blood sugars, including 
amiodarone.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Hypoglycaemia is the main symptoms of a gliclazide 
overdose. Treatment should be with glucose or glucagon.
Potential Callouts Any person who has recently started or had a dose adjustment 
of gliclazide may be at risk of a hypoglycaemia episode. 
Be cautious with those taking modified release preparations 
as they will need more continuous monitoring to prevent a 
relapse into hypoglycaemia.
Did You Know? People who are taking sulfonylureas such as gliclazide need to 
inform the DVLA if they drive a bus or lorry [2].
References for G
1 Kuehn, B. Gabapentin increasingly implicated in overdose deaths JAMA 2022 327 
(24) p2387
2 Driver and Vehicle Licensing Authority. Diabetes and Driving [internet] n.d. 
[cited 15 03 2024]. Available at: https://www.gov.uk/diabetes￾driving#:~:text=diet%20or%20both.-,Bus%2C%20coach%20or%20lorry%20licence, 
tablets%20or%20non%2Dinsulin%20injectionsParamedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications, First Edition. Rose Matheson.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
112
Haloperidol
Pronunciation Hall-oh-per-ee-doll
AKA Haldol®, Halkid®, Serenace®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Antipsychotic (1st Generation)
Conditions Treated Schizophrenia, delirium, bipolar disorder, Tourette’s 
syndrome, Huntington’s, nausea, vomiting, agitation and 
restlessness.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Haloperidol is a central dopamine antagonist which acts on 
the type 2 dopamine receptors in the areas of the brain 
associated with reward and motivation.
Routes of 
administration
Enteral – tablet, oral solution
Parenteral – solution for injection
Half Life 14–20 hours
Full Effect Rapidly for IV administration but several weeks in enteral 
forms
Common Side 
Effects
Depression, eye disorders, headache, hypersalivation, 
nausea, neuromuscular dysfunction, psychotic disorder, 
visual changes, weight loss.
Interactions Amiodarone and ondansetron can prolong the QT interval 
alongside haloperidol. Chlorphenamine, diazepam, 
midazolam, morphine and nitrous oxide increase sedative 
CNS effects. Dexamethasone, furosemide, hydrocortisone
and salbutamol can increase the risk of hypokalaemia and 
arrythmias. Glyceryl trinitrate and nitrous oxide can 
increase the risk of hypotension.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Severe hypotension and sedation are likely in the case of 
overdoses. This can be mild to profound and some cases may 
demonstrate cardiac arrhythmias.
Potential Callouts Haloperidol can produce cardiac arrythmias such a 
QT-prolongation and Torsades de Pointes may be observed in 
some people.
Did You Know? Haloperidol is contraindicated in those with Lewy body 
dementia and Parkinson’s disease and cannot be used for 
agitation and delirium in these patient groups.
H113
H
Hyoscine Butylbromide
Pronunciation Hi-oh-scene Boot-ill-bro-my-d
AKA Buscopan®
Legal Status P, POM
Medicine Group Anti-emetic
Conditions Treated IBS, muscle spasm related to genitourinary (e.g. kidney 
stones), gastro intestinal or biliary spasm (e.g. gallstones), 
respiratory secretions in palliative care.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Hyoscine butylbromide works on the smooth muscle of 
gastrointestinal, genitourinary and biliary tracts by exerting 
an anticholinergic effect causing relaxation. Additional 
anticholinergic effects such as a dry mouth are used to 
reduce secretions in palliative care.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – Tablet
Parenteral – Solution for injection
Half Life 5 hours
Full Effect 15–30 minutes
Common Side 
Effects
Constipation, dizziness, dilated pupils, drowsiness, dry 
mouth, dyspepsia, feeling hot, headache, hypotension 
nausea, palpitations, skin reactions, sweat changes, 
tachycardia, urinary disorders, visual changes, vomiting.
Interactions Chlorphenamine and ipratropium also causes 
antimuscarinic effects alongside hyoscine butylbromide.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Anticholinergic effects are reported in overdose such as 
urinary retention, dry mouth, flushing, tachycardia, 
constipation and visual changes. Activated charcoal can be 
given in cases of oral overdose followed my magnesium 
sulphate.
Potential Callouts Hyoscine butylbromide is commonly found in parenteral 
form in JIC boxes for those at the end-of-life to control 
respiratory secretions that can be distressing. Paramedics can 
provide these medications in these circumstances.
Did You Know? Hyoscine butylbromide is used for respiratory secretions due 
to it’s anticholinergic properties that can result in a dry mouth 
which benefits patients at the end of life.114 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Hyoscine hydrobromide
Pronunciation Hi-oh-scene hydro-bro-my-d
AKA Kwells®, Joy-rides®, Scopoderm®
Legal Status P, POM
Medicine Group Anti-emetic
Conditions Treated Motion sickness, respiratory secretions in palliative care, 
hypersalivation in certain conditions.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Hyoscine hydrobromide has an anticholinergic effect on the 
vestibular system but also acts centrally on the vomiting 
centre.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet, chewable tablet
Parenteral – solution for injection, transdermal patch
Half Life 4.5 hours
Full Effect 30 minutes
Common Side 
Effects
Constipation, dizziness, drowsiness, dry mouth, dyspepsia, 
eye or eyelid irritations, flushing, headache, nausea, 
palpitations, skin reactions, tachycardia, urinary disorders, 
visual changes, vomiting.
Interactions Chlorphenamine and ipratropium bromide also causes 
antimuscarinic effects alongside hyoscine hydrobromide.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Symptoms include tachycardia, arrythmia, blurred vision, 
photophobia and urinary retention. Treatment is 
symptomatic.
Potential Callouts Hyoscine hydrobromide can be found parenteral form in JIC 
boxes for those at the end-of-life to control respiratory 
secretions that can be distressing. Paramedics can provide 
these medications in these circumstances.
Did You Know? Hyoscine is naturally found in ‘deadly nightshade’ or 
Belladonna. This is a highly toxic plant; however, it is distilled 
into forms that can be used for medical purposes.115
H
Hydroxocobalamin
Pronunciation High-d-rocks-o-co-bal-a-min
AKA Vitamin b12, ‘B12 Injection’, Cyanokit®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Vitamin
Conditions Treated Macrolytic anaemias, Pernicious anaemia, ‘B12 Deficiency’, 
Lazy eye due to tobacco, Leber Optic Atrophy, cyanide 
poisoning.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Hydroxocobalamin acts to replace vitamin B12 that would 
normally be obtained from the diet; however, some people 
will not be able to absorb B12 and so it needs to be given 
parenteral routes.
Routes of 
Administration
Parenteral – Solution for injection, powder for solution for 
infusion
Half Life Stored in the liver for 2–10 months before repeat dose 
required
Full Effect Several days – weeks
Common Side 
Effects
Arrhythmia, chills, diarrhoea, dizziness, drug fever, 
dysphagia, extrasystole, headache, hot flushes, 
hypokalaemia, gastrointestinal disorders, malaise, memory 
loss nausea, oedema, pain, restlessness, skin reactions, throat 
changes, thrombocytosis, tremor, urine changes, vomiting.
Interactions None
Overdose 
Symptoms
No symptoms reported
Potential Callouts Those who suffer from Vitamin B12 deficiency can suffer 
symptoms such as pins and needles, ataxia, muscle 
weakness, visual changes and confusion. Therefore, absence 
of their B12 injections can cause symptoms that can be quite 
severe.
Did You Know? The powder form is used as an antidote for cyanide poisoning 
because hydroxocobalamin binds tightly to the cyanide ion to 
form cyanocobalamin which is non-toxic and excreted in the 
urine [1].116 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Hypromellose
Pronunciation High-pro-mell-los
AKA Artificial Tears, Artelac®
Legal Status P
Medicine Group Ocular lubricants
Conditions Treated Tear deficiency, Sjogren’s Syndrome.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Hypromellose moistens the cornea and conjunctiva to allow 
for smooth movement and prevent irritation.
Routes of 
Administration
Parenteral – eye drops
Half Life N/A
Full Effect Immediate
Common Side 
Effects
N/A
Interactions None
Overdose 
Symptoms
No symptoms reported.
Potential Callouts Unlikely to be a cause of a callout.
Did You Know? Red and irritated eyes might be a red flag for acute angle 
glaucoma, especially if associated with visual changes, 
vomiting and headaches [2].
References for H
1 Beelitz, J., Clemens, K., Feldmann, C., Wulf, H., Vogt, N., Veit, F. and Dersch, 
W. Resuscitation after smoke inhalation with cyanide intoxication: influence of 
hydroxocobalamin on the change of blood cyanide level during resuscitation. 
Resuscitation 2017 118 e94.
2 National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Glaucoma: How is primary angle 
closure glaucoma diagnoses? [internet] 2023. [cited 15 03 2023]. Available at: 
https://cks.nice.org.uk/topics/glaucoma/diagnosis/primary-angle￾closure-glaucoma/Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications, First Edition. Rose Matheson. 
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
117
I
Indapamide
Pronunciation In-dap-eh-my-d
AKA Natrilix®, TENSAID®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Diuretic (Thiazide like)
Conditions Treated Hypertension.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Indapamide has several antihypertensive functions that 
result in relaxation of vascular smooth muscle including 
modification of transmembrane calcium, prostaglandins 
and bradykinins.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet, modified release tablet
Half Life 15–18 hours
Full Effect 1–2 weeks
Common Side Effects Constipation, diarrhoea, dizziness, electrolyte imbalance 
(low chloride), erectile dysfunction, fatigue headache, 
hyperglycaemia, hypersensitivity, hyperuricaemia, nausea, 
postural hypotension, skin reactions, vomiting.
Interactions Amiodarone, dexamethasone, hydrocortisone, 
ondansetron and salbutamol can increase the risk of 
hypokalaemia. Furosemide increases the risk of 
hypotension, hyponatraemia and hypokalaemia. Glyceryl 
trinitrate and nitrous oxide also increase the risk of 
hypotension. Aspirin and ibuprofen can increase the risk 
of acute renal failure. Several severe interactions with 
prescription medications.
Overdose Symptoms Symptoms are related to water or electrolyte imbalance. 
There can also be nausea, vomiting, cramps, vertigo, 
drowsiness and changes in urine output. If oral ingestion, 
then activated charcoal can be given but water and 
electrolyte balance needs to be treated symptomatically.
Potential Callouts Indapamide use reports hypersensitivity as a common side 
effect. Therefore, a person on indapamide may report 
allergy-like symptoms.
Did You Know? Indapamide might exacerbate gout but by taking it every 
other day can reduce this [1].
I118 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Infliximab
Pronunciation In-flicks-i-mab
AKA Flixabi®, Inflectra®, Remicade®, Remsima®, Zessly®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group DMARD
Conditions Treated Crohn’s disease, ulcerative colitis, Rheumatoid arthritis, 
ankylosing spondylitis, psoriatic arthritis, plaque 
psoriasis.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Infliximab has anti-inflammatory properties that block 
the action of NTF-α which is an important cytokine 
involved in inflammatory responses.
Routes of 
Administration
Parenteral – solution for injection, powder for solution 
for infusion
Half Life 7–10 days
Full Effect 2–6 weeks
Common Side Effects Abscesses, alopecia, anaemia, arrhythmias, chest pain, 
chills, constipation, changes to white cell counts, 
depression, diarrhoea, dizziness, dyspnoea, eye 
inflammation, fatigue, fever, gastrointestinal discomfort, 
haemorrhage, headache, hyperhidrosis, hypertension, 
hypotension, increased infection risk, insomnia, joint 
pain, liver problems, muscle pain, nausea, oedema, pain, 
respiratory changes, abnormal sensation, skin reactions, 
vertigo.
Interactions None with ambulance medications.
Overdose Symptoms No cases reported.
Potential Callouts People who are on DMARDs are at increased risk of 
neutropenia but studies suggest DMARDS might protect 
from sepsis [2].
Did You Know? Infliximab itself is an antibody that is created through 
recombinant DNA from humans and rodents.119
I
Insulin
Pronunciation Ins-you-lin
AKA Insulin aspart, Insulin degludec, Insulin detemir, 
Isophane insuline, Insulin Glargine, Insulin gluisine, 
Insulin lispro, Fiasp®, NovoRapid®, Trurapi®
▼Humulin®, Insulatard®, Insuman®, Levemir®, Tresiba®, 
Toujeo®, Apidra®, Admelog®, Humalog®, Lyumjev® ▼
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Synthetic Hormone
Conditions Treated Diabetes Mellitus 1 and 2.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Insulin is naturally produced by the pancreas: however, in 
those with diabetes mellitus, they may not be able to 
produce sufficient insulin and so it must be 
supplemented. Insulin reduces blood glucose levels by 
converting it to glycogen to be stored in the liver.
Routes of 
Administration
Parenteral – solution for injection
Half Life Natural insulin has a half-life of 151 minutes. Medical 
insulin can have a half-life of 81 minutes to 12 hours 
depending on the formation.
Full Effect This depends on the formation as some will start working 
in 10 minutes while others take several hours.
Common Side Effects Hypoglycaemia, oedema, skin reactions.
Interactions None with ambulance medicines. Consider the increased 
risk of hypoglycaemia alongside T2DM medications and 
other prescriptions medications, e.g. steroids.
Overdose Symptoms Symptoms of hypoglycaemia. Some instances may be 
managed out of hospital; however, if long-acting insulins 
are used, they may be prone to relapse a few hours later.
Potential Callouts When a person has recently been put on insulin or their 
form of insulin has been changed, there may be an 
increased risk of hypoglycaemia. Patients and carers must 
be well educated on the correct dosing regimen for the 
insulin being used.
Did You Know? Different kinds of insulin have different durations of 
action. There are long acting, intermediate and rapid 
acting insulin. It is important the patient or carers know 
when to give the correct form.120 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Irbesartan
Pronunciation Ir-bay-sar-tan
AKA Aprovel®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Angiotensin-2 Receptor Blocker
Conditions Treated Hypertension, renal disease when receiving 
haemodialysis.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Irbesartan works by blocking receptors for 
angiotensin-2 which is part of the renin-angiotensin￾aldosterone system. Angiotensinogen is released by the 
liver and is converted to Angiotensin-1 by renin, then 
further into angiotensin-2 by angiotensin converting 
enzyme. Angiotensin-2 works in several systems to 
increase reuptake of water in the nephron and cause 
vasoconstriction, thus increasing blood pressure.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet
Half Life 11–15 hours
Full Effect 4–6 weeks for full effect
Common Side Effects Abdominal pain, asthenia, cough, diarrhoea, dizziness, 
headache, hyperkalaemia, (postural) hypotension, 
nausea, musculoskeletal pain, renal impairment, vertigo, 
vomiting.
Interactions Furosemide, glyceryl trinitrate and nitrous oxide can 
increase the risk of hypotension. Heparin and ibuprofen
can increase the risk of hyperkalaemia.
Overdose Symptoms Symptoms are likely to include hypotension, bradycardia 
and tachycardia. Monitoring is required with 
symptomatic treatment.
Potential Callouts Side effects such as postural hypotension may occur 
within hours of the first dose taken. This is especially 
true for those taking diuretics or dehydrated.
Did You Know? ARBs should be avoided in those who are pregnant due 
to effects on the blood pressure of the baby [3].121
I
Isosorbide mononitrate
Pronunciation Eyes-oh-sor-bide mono-night-rate
AKA Isotard®, Modisal®, Relosorb®, Trangina®, Xismox®, 
Elantan®, Isodur®, Nyzamac®, Carmil®, Chemydur®, 
Imdur®, Isib®, Ismo Retard®, Monomax®, Monomil®, 
Monosorb®, Zemon®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Nitrates
Conditions Treated Angina, Congestive Heart failure.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Isosorbide mononitrate is a cardio selective nitrate which 
means that is has a greater effect on reducing the 
ventricular end diastolic pressures of the heart than 
systemic vasodilation. This produces a more profound 
effect to reduced preload than vascular hypotension.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet, modified release tablet, modified release 
capsule
Half Life 5 hours
Full Effect Starts working within the hour but takes a few days for a 
full effect.
Common Side Effects Arrythmias, asthenia, cerebral ischaemia, dizziness, 
drowsiness, flushing, headache, hypotension, nausea, 
vomiting.
Interactions Furosemide, nitrous oxide and glyceryl trinitrate
increase the risk of hypotension.
Overdose Symptoms Hypotension, signs of shock, headache, nausea, 
vomiting, diarrhoea are the most likely symptoms of an 
overdose. These could be profound.
Potential Callouts Those who have just started isosorbide mononitrate may 
experience side effects such as hypotension within the 
first hour of taking the medication. Therefore, they may 
experience symptoms of hypotension such as dizziness, 
diaphoresis and potential collapse.
Did You Know? Isosorbide mononitrate has also been investigated as a 
compound to be used for induction of labour however 
there is not enough support to prove it is beneficial [4].122 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Isotretinoin
Pronunciation Eyes-oh-tret-a-no-in
AKA Roaccutane®
Legal Status POM (Specialist), ▼
Medicine Group Retinoid
Conditions Treated Severe Acne.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Isotretinoin is a form of Vitamin A. The precise action of 
isotretinoin has not been fully established; however, it has 
been noticed to supress the action of sebaceous glands 
and subsequently reduce their size and number even after 
cessation of treatment.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – capsules
Half Life 19 hours
Full Effect 10 days, but several months of treatment required.
Common Side Effects Anaemia, angular chellitis, eye complaints, haemorrhage, 
headache, musculoskeletal pain, nasal dryness, 
neutropenia, proteinuria, photosensitivity, skin fragility 
and reactions, thrombocytosis and thrombocytopenia.
Interactions None with ambulance medications. Tetracycline antibiotics
should be avoided due to increased risk of benign 
intracranial pressure.
Overdose Symptoms Overdose symptoms occur due to vitamin A toxicity 
which includes a severe headache, nausea, vomiting, 
drowsiness, irritability, and itching. Management is 
symptomatic.
Potential Callouts These can be several severe side effects of isotretinoin 
such as pancreatitis, rhabdomyolysis and severe 
cutaneous adverse reactions.
Did You Know? Females of child-bearing age must be on a pregnancy 
monitoring programme when taking isotretinoin as the 
medication is highly teratogenic.123
I
References for I
1 Inaba, M. Noguchi, Y., Yamamotos, T., Imai, T., Hatano, M. Yagi, S. and Katayama, 
S. Effect of low dose of indapamide, a diuretic, given daily or every-other-day on 
blood pressure and metabolic parameters Hypertension Res 2004 27 (3) p141–145. 
Available at: https://doi.org/10.1291/hypres.27.141
2 Richter, A., Listing, J., Schneider, M., Klopsch, T., Kapelle, A., Kaufmann, J., Zink, 
A. and Strangerfeld, A. Impact of treatment with biologic DMARDs on the risk of 
sepsis or mortality after serious infection in patients with rheumatoid arthritis Clin 
Epidemiol Res 2016 75 p1667–1673. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1136/
annrheumdis-2015-207838
3 Gersak, K., Cvijic, M. and Cerar, LK. Angiotensin II receptor blockers in pregnancy: 
a report of five cases. Rep Toxicol 2009 28 p109–112. Available at: https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.reprotox.2009.02.004
4 Collingham, J., Fuh, K., Caughey, AB., Pullen, K., Lyell, DJ. and El-Sayed, YY. Oral 
misoprostol and vaginal isosorbide mononitrate for labour induction: a randomised 
controlled trial. Obs Gyn 2010 1116 (1) p121–126. Available at: https://doi.org/ 
10.1097/AOG.0b013e3181e408f2Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications, First Edition. Rose Matheson. 
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
124
Ketoconazole
Pronunciation Key-toe-con-a-zole
AKA Nizoral®, Dandrazol®
Legal Status P, POM
Medicine Group Anti-fungal
Conditions Treated Fungal Skin Infections (including athletes foot, candidiasis, 
seborrheic dermatitis), Cushing’s syndrome.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Ketoconazole works by altering the permeability of the cell 
membrane of certain yeast and fungi pathogens. It also 
influences cortisol and androgen synthesis, hence its use in 
Cushing’s Syndrome.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – Tablets ▼
Parenteral – Cream, shampoo
Half Life 8 hours
Full Effect 2–6 weeks
Common Side 
Effects
Skin reactions, adrenal insufficiency, diarrhoea, 
gastrointestinal discomfort.
Interactions Ketoconazole increases exposure to dexamethasone and 
hydrocortisone, midazolam and several other medications 
such as anticoagulants and statins.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Overuse of parenteral forms is likely to result in skin 
reactions. Overdose of enteral forms may result in signs of 
adrenal insufficiency.
Potential Callouts Those taking oral Ketoconazole may be at risk of adrenal 
insufficiency. Activated charcoal can be given if ingestion 
within the last hour and hydrocortisone should be given.
Did You Know? Carbonated drinks improve the bioavailability of oral 
ketoconazole [1].
K125
K
Ketamine
Pronunciation Ket-a-min
AKA Ketalar®, ‘Special K’, ‘Vitamin K’, Esketamine (not strictly 
ketamine but a derivative)
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Anaesthetic (general)
Conditions Treated Anaesthesia, acute pain, antidepressant.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Ketamine works by interacting with glutamate which is 
one of the main excitatory neurotransmitters in the brain. 
Ketamine and its metabolites bind to NMDA receptors and 
block the action of glutamate which explains its analgesic 
and anaesthetic effects. Its effect as an antidepressant are 
not fully understood.
Routes of 
Administration
Parenteral – Solution for injection, spray (esketamine)
Half Life 2.5 hours
Full Effect Anaesthetic/analgesic – Within minutes. Within 
hours – anti-depressant
Common Side 
Effects
Anxiety, abnormal behaviour, confusion, double vision, 
hallucinations, increased muscle tone, nausea, nystagmus, 
skin reactions, sleep disorder, seizures, vomiting.
Interactions Chlorphenamine, diazepam, midazolam, morphine and 
nitrous oxide increase CNS depressant effects. 
Syntometrine® may increase blood pressure with 
ketamine. Furosemide, glyceryl trinitrate and nitrous 
oxide increase the risk of hypotension with ketamine.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Respiratory depression can occur in an overdose of 
ketamine which may require support.
Potential Callouts Ketamine is used as a recreational drug and uncontrolled 
doses can result in a dissociative state known as a ‘K-hole’. 
The person ends up in a catatonic state and may be very 
difficult to rouse. Although appearing unresponsive they 
will be experiencing vivid hallucinations that are often 
distressing. This can also occur in controlled medical 
environments.
Did You Know? Ketamine and it’s components are being trialled for 
treatment-resistant depression and has shown to have an 
effective and rapid onset of action [2].126 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
References for K
1 Normani, H., Moghadam, AT., Emami, SA., Mohammadpour, AH., Johnson, TP. and 
Sahebkar, A. Drug interactions of cola-containing drinks. Clin Nutr 2019 38 
p2545–2551. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clnu.2019.01.029
2 Hashimoto, K. Rapid-acting antidepressant ketamine, it’s metabolites and other 
candidates: a historical overview and future perspective. PCN Psychiatry Clin 
Neurosci 2019 37 p613–627. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1111/pcn.12902Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications, First Edition. Rose Matheson. 
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
127
L
Lactulose
Pronunciation Lack-to-lows
Legal Status P
Medicine Group Laxative (osmotic)
Conditions Treated Constipation.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Lactulose is a derivative of lactose and it works as a 
laxative by increasing the osmotic gradient into the 
bowel. This increases the water content of the stool 
making it softer. Lactulose also works to increase 
peristalsis.
Routes of Administration Enteral – oral
Half Life Nil available
Full Effect Up to 48 hours
Common Side Effects Abdominal pain, diarrhoea, flatulence, nausea and 
vomiting.
Interactions Nil
Overdose Symptoms Overdose may cause diarrhoea and/or vomiting 
which might result in extensive fluid loss which will 
require treatment and monitoring.
Potential Callouts Unlikely to be the cause of a call-out.
Did You Know? You might see lactulose being given for a more 
serious condition known as hepatic encephalopathy 
because of it’s ability to change the amount of 
ammonia in the gut which can contribute to hepatic 
encephalopathy [1].
L128 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Lamotrigine
Pronunciation Lam-ot-ridge-een
AKA Lamictal®
Legal Status P
Medicine Group Anticonvulsant
Conditions Treated Epilepsy, bipolar disorder.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Lamotrigine is thought to block voltage-gated 
sodium channels and reduce the action of 
glutamate which is an excitatory 
neurotransmitter involved in seizures.
Routes of Administration Enteral – tablet, dispersible tablet
Half Life 33 hours, but this reduces with concurrent 
therapy with other anti-epileptics
Full Effect 6 hours
Common Side Effects Aggression, agitation, diarrhoea, dizziness, 
drowsiness, dry mouth, fatigue, headache, 
irritability, joint pain, nausea, rashes, sleep 
problems, tremors and vomiting.
Interactions Chlorphenamine, Diazepam, Midazolam, 
Morphine and Nitrous oxide increase CNS 
effects.
Overdose Symptoms Nystagmus, ataxia, impaired consciousness, 
convulsions and coma. ECG changes have 
been noted such as QRS widening >100 ms 
which may be seen in severe toxicity. Activated 
charcoal should be used if ingestion was 
within 1 hour.
Potential Callouts Lamotrigine is one of the medicines associated 
with Stevens–Johnson Syndrome and toxic 
epiderma necrolysis. This rash develops in the 
first 8 weeks and is associated with concurrent 
therapy with valproate and incorrect dosing.
Did You Know? Lamotrigine is one of the safer epileptic 
medications to use in pregnancy [2].129
L
Lansoprazole
Pronunciation Lanz-op-ra-zoll
AKA Zoton®
Legal Status P
Medicine Group Proton Pump Inhibitor
Conditions Treated Gastrointestinal reflux, Helicobacter pylori infection.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Proton pump inhibitors inhibit the action of proton 
pumps in the stomach which stop the production 
of acid which needs an excess of protons. Overall, 
this reduces the acidity of the stomach.
Routes of administration Enteral – orodispersible tablet and gastro-resistant 
capsule
Half Life 1–2 hours
Full Effect 4 weeks
Common Side Effects Abdominal pain, dizziness, Dry throat, fatigue, 
gastrointestinal upset, headache, insomnia, 
nausea, skin reactions.
Interactions None with ambulance medications
Overdose Symptoms No symptoms reported. Any symptoms are likely 
to be related to side effects.
Potential Callouts Unlikely to be the cause of a call-out.
Did You Know? Lansoprazole is used for Helicobacter pylori
infections because it reduces the acidity of the 
stomach to make it uninhabitable to the bacterium.130 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Latanoprost
Pronunciation Lat-an-oh-prost
AKA Monopost®, Xalatan®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Prostaglandin analogue
Conditions Treated Glaucoma.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Latanoprost is an analogue of prostaglandin 
F2α which increases draining of aqueous 
humour which reduces pressure within the eye.
Routes of Administration Parenteral – eye drops
Half Life 17 minutes
Full Effect 12 hours
Common Side Effects Eye discolouration, eye discomfort, eye 
inflammation, visual changes.
Interactions None reported.
Overdose Symptoms No symptoms reported.
Potential Callouts Unlikely to be the cause of a call-out.
Did You Know? There is an emergency form of glaucoma that is 
known as acute angle glaucoma and presents 
with nausea, vomiting, acute unilateral eye 
pain and hallows around bright lights [3]. On 
examination there may be a fixed pupil, cloudy 
cornea and a bloodshot eye.131
L
Lercanidipine (hydrochloride)
Pronunciation Ler-can-i-dip-peen
AKA Zanidip®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Calcium Channel Blockers (Dihydropyridine)
Conditions Treated Hypertension.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Lercanidipine is a dihydropyridine calcium 
channel blocker which means it mainly acts upon 
vascular smooth muscle. Dihydropyridines 
inhibit the flow of calcium ions unto smooth 
muscle which prevents contraction.
Routes of Administration Enteral – tablet
Half Life 8–10 hours
Full Effect 2–4 weeks
Common Side Effects Abdominal pain, dizziness, drowsiness, flushing, 
headache, nausea, palpitations, peripheral 
oedema, skin reactions, tachycardia, vomiting.
Interactions Furosemide and nitrous oxide increase the risk of 
hypotension.
Overdose Symptoms Mild overdose can cause nausea, vomiting, 
dizziness, agitation and confusion. This is due to 
widespread vasodilation resulting in shock. More 
severe cases will result in unconsciousness and 
coma. Admission for monitoring is likely 
necessary.
Potential Callouts Lercanidipine may be the cause of peripheral 
oedema or postural hypotension.
Did You Know? A recent review suggests that lercanidipine may 
be particularly beneficial to those with both 
hypertension and renal insufficiency however 
more studies will be needed to confirm this [4].132 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Levetiracetam
Pronunciation Lev-uh-tir-ass-i-tam
AKA Keppra®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Anticonvulsant
Conditions Treated Epilepsy
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action The full mechanism of action of levetiracetam is not 
fully understood. Some studies show that it reduces 
levels of calcium and alters other chemicals within 
the brain.
Routes of Administration Enteral – tablet, granules, oral solution
Parenteral – Solution for infusion
Half Life 6–8 hours
Full Effect 2–4 weeks (within minutes for with IV route)
Common Side Effects Anxiety, appetite decreases, asthenia, behaviour 
changes, cough, depression, dizziness, drowsiness, 
gastrointestinal disorder, headache, infection risk, 
insomnia, movement disorders, nausea, skin 
changes, tremors, vertigo, vomiting.
Interactions Chlorphenamine, diazepam, midazolam, morphine
and nitrous oxide all increase the CNS effects.
Overdose Symptoms Agitation, aggression, reduced level of 
consciousness, respiratory depression can be seen in 
overdose.
Potential Callouts Levetiracetam is known to prolong the QT interval.
Did You Know? Levetiracetam can also be used to treat status 
epilepticus where benzodiazepines have been 
ineffective.133
L
Levothyroxine
Pronunciation Leave-oh-thigh-rocks-een
AKA Eltroxin®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Hormone replacement
Conditions Treated Hypothyroidism
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Levothyroxine is a synthetic version of thyroxine 
(T4) which is involved in metabolism but can be 
low in some individuals.
Routes of Administration Enteral – Tablet, capsule, oral solution
Half Life 6–7 days
Full Effect Several weeks
Common Side Effects Angina, anxiety, cardiac arrythmias, diarrhoea, 
dyspnoea, fever, flushing, headache, hyperhidrosis, 
insomnia, joint pain, malaise, menstrual changes, 
muscle spasms, oedema, palpitations, skin 
reactions, tremor, vomiting, weight loss.
Interactions Amiodarone may increase the risk of thyroid 
dysfunction. Several foods decrease the absorption 
of levothyroxine.
Overdose Symptoms Symptoms of overdose reflect those of side effects 
and can include a racing heart, sweating, tremors 
and pyrexia. New atrial fibrillation has also been 
reported. Activated charcoal can be beneficial if 
ingested within 1 hour. Symptoms can often be 
controlled with beta-blockers until thyroxine has 
been cleared from the system.
Potential Callouts Levothyroxine can alter glucose levels and therefore 
diabetics may suffer hypoglycaemia.
Did You Know? Too much thyroxine in the body is sometimes called 
a ‘Thyroid Storm’.134 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Levodopa
Pronunciation Lev-oh-dope-a
AKA Duodopa®, Lecado®, Lecigon®, Madopar®, 
Sinemet®, Stalevo®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Parkinsons Medications
Conditions Treated Parkinsons.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Levodopa is a dopamine precursor that is 
metabolised into dopamine. It is used in 
combination with decarboxylase inhibitors such as 
carbidopa which prevents levodopa from being 
converted to dopamine outside of the brain to 
increase its availability where it is needed.
Routes of Administration Enteral – Dispersible table, capsule, modified 
release tablet and intestinal gel
Half Life 0.5–1.5 hours
Full Effect 20 minutes–1 hour
Common Side Effects Anxiety, arrythmias, decreased appetite, depression, 
diarrhoea, hallucinations, movement disorders, 
nausea, parkinsonism, postural hypotension, sleep 
disorders, altered taste, vomiting.
Interactions Atropine, chlorphenamine, ipratropium bromide
and metoclopramide decrease the absorption of 
levodopa. Furosemide, glyceryl trinitrate and 
nitrous oxide increase the risk of hypotension.
Overdose Symptoms Symptoms can include arrythmias and psychiatric 
changes. Vitamin B6, aka pyridoxine, is an antidote to 
levodopa but not necessarily for levodopa in 
combination.
Potential Callouts Those who are on dopaminergic mediations can 
develop Dopamine Dysregulation Syndrome which 
presents as a change in behaviour with poor 
impulse control, addictive behaviour including 
drug seeking.
Did You Know? Parkinsons medications need to be taken at the 
same time every day to prevent symptoms 
relapsing [5]. Therefore, this is a group of 
medications that should be taken to hospital with 
apatient.135
L
Lidocaine
Pronunciation Lie-doe-cane
AKA LMX®, Xylocaine®, Ravlo®, Versatis®
Legal Status POM, P and Lidocaine are also found in various OTC 
topical medications
Medicine Group Anaesthetic (local)
Conditions Treated Topical and regional anaesthesia, ventricular 
arrythmias (including cardiac arrest), pain relief in 
various circumstances.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Lidocaine blocks the initiation and conduction of nerve 
impulses. It works locally wherever applied but can 
also work centrally and can also effect the myocardium 
where it reduces overall excitability including the force 
of contraction, conduction rate.
Routes of Administration Parenteral – Solution for injection, cream, ointment, 
spray, medication plaster
Half Life 2 hours
Full Effect 10–20 minutes
Common Side Effects Anxiety, arrythmias, AV blocks, cardiac arrest, 
confusion, dizziness, drowsiness, headache, 
hypotension. Methemoglobinemia, muscle spasms, 
mood changes, nausea, neurological effects, 
nystagmus, pain, respiratory disorders, seizures, 
sensations changes, tinnitus, tremors, visual changes, 
vomiting.
Interactions Chlorphenamine, diazepam, midazolam, morphine
and nitrous oxide increase CNS depressant effects. 
Beta blockers increase the risk of cardiovascular 
collapse.
Overdose Symptoms Overdose symptoms can be seen through the nervous 
or cardiovascular system. This can include numbness, 
tinnitus, muscle tremors, convulsions to 
unconsciousness. Cardiovascular symptoms can 
include hypotension, bradycardia, arrythmias and 
cardia arrest.
Potential Callouts Topical lidocaine is unlikely to be the cause of a 
call-out; however, medicated plasters may be capable 
of producing side effects.
Did You Know? Lidocaine is contraindicated in anyone with any form 
of atrioventricular blocks.136 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Linagliptin
Pronunciation Lin-ah-glip-tin
AKA Trajenta®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group DPP-4 Inhibitors
Conditions Treated Type 2 Diabetes
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action ‘Gliptins’ inhibit the enzyme DPP-4 which normally 
breaks down incretin hormones. Incretin hormone 
levels rise after a meal and encourage insulin 
synthesis and therefore storage of glucose. By 
preventing these being broken down results in more 
glucose being stored and lowering glucose levels.
Routes of Administration Enteral – Tablet
Half Life 6 days
Full Effect 2 hours
Common Side Effects Cough, nasal symptoms, skin reactions.
Interactions None with ambulance medicines.
Overdose Symptoms None reported. Activated charcoal may be beneficial 
in the first hour of ingestion and management should 
be supporting of symptoms.
Potential Callouts Linagliptin has been related to pancreatitis; therefore, 
it should be considered with any person on 
linagliptin with acute abdominal pain and symptoms 
suggestive of pancreatitis.
Did You Know? Several DDP-4 Inhibitors are not suitable for use in 
those with T2DM and heart failure but Linagliptin 
appears to be safe for this patient group, however this 
study was funded by the creator of Trajenta® [6].137
L
Lisinopril
Pronunciation Liss-sin-oh-pril
AKA Zestril®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Angiotensin Converting Enzyme Inhibitor
Conditions Treated Hypertension, heart failure, renal complications from 
diabetes.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Lisinopril inhibits the action of Angiotensin Converting 
Enzyme (ACE) which breaks down Angiotensin. 
Angiotensin is involved in the RAAS system and converts 
angiotensin-1 to angiotensin-2. Angiotensin 2 causes 
blood vessels to constrict and therefore without ACE, 
angiotension-2 is not made, so BP is lowered.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – Tablet, oral solution
Half Life 12 hours
Full Effect 6 hours
Common Side Effects Alopecia, angina pectoris, angioedema, arrythmias, 
asthenia, chest pain, constipation, cough, depressions, 
diarrhoea, dizziness, drowsiness, dry mouth, dyspnoea, 
electrolyte imbalance, gastrointestinal problems, 
headache, hepatic impairment, hypotension, muscle pain, 
nausea, palpitations, pins and needles, postural 
hypotension, renal impairment, rhinitis, skin reactions, 
sleep changes, taste changes, tinnitus, vertigo, vomiting.
Interactions Allopurinol and lisinopril can increase the risk of 
hypersensitivity and haematological reactions. 
Furosemide, glyceryl trinitrate and nitrous oxide can 
increase the risk of hypotension. Heparin and ibuprofen
increase the risk of hyperkalaemia.
Overdose Symptoms Hypotension, signs of shock, electrolyte imbalance, renal 
failure and arrhythmias may occur. Intravenous saline 
should be given and activated charcoal if ingestion within 
1 hour. They will need monitoring until elimination.
Potential Callouts ACE-Inhibitors can cause angioedema which might be 
mistaken for anaphylaxis. There will not be any hives and 
symptoms will be resistant to adrenaline. Although this is 
not true anaphylaxis, the person may still have an airway 
compromise and could be considered an emergency.
Did You Know? The original ACE Inhibitor was developed from snake 
venom [7].138 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Lithium
Pronunciation Lith-ee-um
AKA Lithium carbonate, Lithium Citrate
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Anti-mania Medications
Conditions Treated Bipolar disorder.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action The exact mechanism of lithium for treatment of 
bipolar disorder is unknown. It is a mood stabiliser 
that is thought to have an effect on several 
neurotransmitters, receptors and electrolytes.
Routes of Administration Enteral – Tablet, modified release tablet, oral 
solution (lithium citrate)
Half Life 18–36 hours
Full Effect 1–3 weeks
Common Side Effects Increased thirst, fine tremors, polyuria, 
gastrointestinal symptoms and vertigo.
Interactions Aspirin can increase nephrotoxicity. Diuretics (inc. 
furosemide), ARBs, ACE inhibitors and NSAIDs
(inc. ibuprofen) increase the concentration of 
lithium. Ondansetron increases the risk of 
serotonin syndrome and several antibiotics interact 
with lithium.
Overdose Symptoms Lithium has a narrow therapeutic index and so 
there is a high risk of toxicity. Overdose can be 
acute or chronic and symptoms tend to be worse if 
there are signs of kidney disease or dehydration. 
Mild symptoms include nausea, diarrhoea, tremors, 
drowsiness, blurred vision and muscle weakness. 
This can progress to more exaggerated reflexes, 
convulsions, coma, cardiac arrythmias, hypotension 
and cardiovascular collapse. There is no specific 
antidote and all patients will need to be monitored.
Potential Callouts Lithium can cause specific lithium toxicity, but it 
can also cause serotonin syndrome. This can 
present in a similar way to lithium toxicity and can 
be as dangerous.
Did You Know? Lithium salts are able to dissolve uric crystals and 
was first used as a treatment for gout where early 
forms of bipolar were known as ‘cerebral gout’ [8].139
L
Loperamide
Pronunciation Low-per-ah-mide
AKA Imodium®
Legal Status GSL, P, POM
Medicine Group Anti-motility
Conditions Treated Diarrhoea, faecal incontinence.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Loperamide binds to the opiate receptors in the gut 
which slows peristalsis and increases water 
absorption in the colon. It also works to increase tone 
of the anal sphincter.
Routes of Administration Enteral – Tablet, orodispersible tablet, capsule
Half Life 9–14 hours
Full Effect 30 minutes
Common Side Effects Constipation, headache, nausea.
Interactions Consider concurrent use of opioids which will also 
cause constipation.
Overdose Symptoms CNS depression, constipation, urinary retention, 
bowel obstruction and QT prolongation may occur.
Potential Callouts Those who have taken loperamide may suffer from 
abdominal pain due to constipation which may 
develop into a bowel obstruction.
Did You Know? Naloxone can be used as an antidote to a loperamide 
overdose as loperamide works on the opioid receptors 
of the gut [9].140 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Loratadine
Pronunciation Lore-at-ah-deen
AKA Clarityn®
Legal Status GSL, P, POM
Medicine Group Antihistamine (2nd Generation)
Conditions Treated Allergy Relief.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Loratadine is a H1-receptor antagonist which exerts 
antihistamine effects. Loratadine is selective to 
peripheral H1 receptors and therefore does not have 
sedative effects.
Routes of Administration Enteral – Tablet, oral solution
Half Life 8 hours (28 hours for the active metabolite)
Full Effect 1 hour
Common Side Effects Drowsiness, nervousness
Interactions None with ambulance medicines. Interactions known 
with MAOIs.
Overdose Symptoms Drowsiness, tachycardia and headaches may occur 
due to anticholinergic effects.
Potential Callouts Unlikely to be the cause of a call-out.
Did You Know? Desloratidine is also available on prescription and it 
is the active metabolite of loratadine.141
L
Lorazepam
Pronunciation Lore-as-eh-pam
AKA Ativan®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Benzodiazepines
Conditions Treated Anxiety (short term), insomnia, conscious sedation, 
convulsions.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Benzodiazepines increase the action of the 
neurotransmitter GABA which has sedentary effects.
Routes of Administration Enteral – Tablet, oral solution
Parental – Solution for injection
Half Life 12 hours
Full Effect Within 30 minutes
Common Side Effects Asthenia, coma, disinhibition, extrapyramidal 
symptoms, hypothermia, memory loss, respiratory 
depression, slurred speech, suicidal behaviour.
Interactions Chlorphenamine, morphine and nitrous oxide with 
lorazepam increase CNS depressant effects.
Overdose Symptoms Symptoms of CNS depression from mild drowsiness 
to coma with hypotension and respiratory 
depression. Activated charcoal can be used if 
ingestion was within 1 hour. In hospital, flumazenil
may be given as an antidote but it has a high risk of 
seizures.
Potential Callouts Lorazepam may be taken in intentional or accidental 
overdoses resulting in a loss of consciousness.
Did You Know? Lorazepam appears to play a role in memory and 
has an amnesic effect but are also being used in 
dissociative states to retrieve memories [10].142 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Losartan (potassium)
Pronunciation Low-sart-tan
AKA Cozaar®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Angiotensin-2 Receptor Blockers
Conditions Treated Hypertension, diabetic nephropathy, heart failure.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Angiontensin-2 is a vasoconstrictor so by 
blocking its receptor will encourage vasodilation. 
Angiotension-2 also encourages the release of 
other hormones in the RAAS system.
Routes of Administration Enteral – Tablet
Half Life 6–9 hours (active metabolite)
Full Effect Side effects may present within 1 hour but several 
weeks for therapeutic effects
Common Side Effects Anaemia, hypoglycaemia, postural disorders
Interactions Furosemide, glyceryl trinitrate and nitrous oxide
can increase the risk of hypotension. Heparin and 
ibuprofen increase the risk of hyperkalaemia.
Overdose Symptoms Symptoms such as hypotension and arrhythmias 
are likely to occur but limited data is available for 
overdose in humans. Activated charcoal can be 
given if ingestion within 1 hour.
Potential Callouts Losartan is known to cause postural hypotension 
and so should be ruled out in any syncope.
Did You Know? Losartan is thought to prevent diabetic neuropathy 
by increasing the blood flow to nerves and an 
antioxidant effect [11].143
L
Lymecycline
Pronunciation Lime-a-psych-lin
AKA Tetralysal®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Antibiotic (tetracycline)
Conditions Treated Several infections, acne.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action As a tetracycline antibiotic, lymecycline has a 
bactericidal effect by inhibiting the action of protein 
synthesis by ribosomes.
Routes of Administration Enteral – Capsule
Half Life 10 hours
Full Effect One week to take effect
Common Side Effects Angioedema, diarrhoea, gastrointestinal discomfort, 
headache, Henoch–-Schonlein purpura, nausea, 
pericarditis, photosensitivity, skin reactions, 
vomiting.
Interactions None with ambulance medicines. Lymecycline does 
increase the anticoagulant properties of warfarin.
Overdose Symptoms No specific symptoms reported.
Potential Callouts Lymecycline can cause headaches and visual 
disturbances associated with benign intracranial 
hypertension.
Did You Know? Tetracyclines should not be given to pregnant 
women due to their effect on skeletal development 
and tooth discoloration.144 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
References for L
1 Said, VJ. and Garcia-Trujillo, E. Beyond lactulose: treatment options for hepatic 
encephalopathy. Gastroenterol Nurs 2019 42 (3) p277–285. Available at: https://doi. 
org/10.1097/SGA.0000000000000376
2 Medicines & Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency. Antiepileptic drugs: review of 
safety of use during pregnancy. [internet] 2021 HM Government. [cited 2024 03 26]. 
Available at: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/public-assesment￾report-of-antiepileptic-drugs-review-of-safety-of-use-during-pregnancy/
antiepileptic-drugs-review-of-safety-of-use-during-pregnancy#plain--
language-summary
3 National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Glaucoma: How is primary angle 
closure glaucoma diagnoses? [internet] 2023. [cited 15 03 2023]. Available at: https://
cks.nice.org.uk/topics/glaucoma/diagnosis/primary-angle-closure-glaucoma/
4 Hajdys, J., Fularski, P., Leszto, K., Majchrowicz, G., Stabrawa, M., Młynarska, E., 
Rysz, J. and Franczyk, B. New insights into the nephroprotective potential of 
lercanidipine. I J Mol Sci 2019 24 p14048. Available at: https://doi.org/10.3390/
ijms241814048
5 Care Quality Commission. Time Sensitive Medicines. [internet] 2023. [cited 2024 
03 16]. Available at: https://www.cqc.org.uk/guidance-providers/adult-social￾care/time-sensitive-medicines
6 McGuire, DK., Alexander, L., Johansen, OE., Perkovic, V., Rosenstock, J., Cooper, 
ME., Wanner, C., Kahn, Se., Toto, RD., Zinma, B., Baanstra, D., Pfarr, E., Schnaidt, 
S., Meincke, t., Goerge, J.T., con Eynatten, M. and Marx, N. Linagliptin effects on 
heart failure and related outcomes in individuals with type 2 diabetes mellitus at 
high cardiovascular and renal risk in CARMELINA Circulation 2019 139 (3). 
p351–351. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.118.038352
7 Bakhle, YS. How ACE inhibitors transformed the renin-angiotensin system. Br J 
Pharmacol 2020 177 p2657–2665. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1111/bph.15045
8 Carvahlo, AF., Solmi, M., Husain, MI., Berk, M. and Vieta, E. The rebirth of lithium 
as the archetypal mood stabilizer. Bipolar Disorder 2020 23 p211–212. Available at: 
https://doi.org/10.1111/bdi.13031
9 Wu, PE. and Juurlink, D. Clinical review: loperamide toxicity. Ann Emerg Med 
2017 70 (2) p245–252. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annemergmed. 
2017.04.008
10 Seo, Y., Shin, M., Kim, S. and Kim, J. Effectiveness of lorazepam-assisted 
interviews in an adolescent with dissociated amnesia Neural Regener Res 2013 8 
(2) p186–190. Available at: https://doi.org/10.3969/j.issn.1673-5374.2013.02.012
11 Kostourou, DT., Milonas, D., Polychronopoulos, G., Sofogianni, A. and Tziomalos, 
K. The role of angiotension receptor blockers in the personalized management of 
diabetic neuropathy. J Pers Med 2022 12 (8) p1253. Available at: https://doi.org/ 
10.3390/jpm12081253Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications, First Edition. Rose Matheson.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
145
M
Macrogol
Pronunciation Mack-row-gall
AKA Polyethylene glycol (PEG), Cosmocol®, Klean Prep®, 
Laxido®, Molaxole®, Movicol®, Moviprep®, Plenvu®, 
Strigol®, Vistaprep®
Legal Status P, POM
Medicine Group Laxative (osmotic)
Conditions Treated Constipation, pre-colonoscopy.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Macrogol exerts an osmotic effect on the bowel 
encouraging water to move into the bowel to soften 
the stool, increase volume and encourage defecation.
Routes of Administration Enteral – powder for reconstitution with water
Half Life 4 hours
Full Effect 24–48 hours
Common Side Effects Flatulence, gastrointestinal discomfort, nausea, 
vomiting.
Interactions Nil significant.
Overdose Symptoms Extensive diarrhoea can result in electrolyte 
abnormalities and hypotension. These people may 
also have abdominal pain and distension.
Potential Callouts There is a risk of aspiration when administering 
Macrogol to people who have dysphagia which 
could manifest as pneumonia or fatal asphyxia.
Did You Know? Macrogol is contraindicated in patients with a bowel 
obstruction and so care must be taken to rule this out 
in those with constipation.
M146 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Mefloquine
Pronunciation Meh-flow-queen
AKA Lariam®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Antimalarial
Conditions Treated Treatment and prophylaxis of malaria.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action The mechanism of action or mefloquine is not fully 
understood; however, it may target ribosomes of 
Plasmodium falciparum inhibiting protein synthesis.
Routes of Administration Enteral – tablet
Half Life 21 days
Full Effect Must be taken 1–3 weeks prior to arrival in a malarial 
region and 4 weeks after returning
Common Side Effects Anxiety, depression, diarrhoea, dizziness, 
gastrointestinal disorders, headache, nausea, skin 
reactions, sleep issues, visual changes, vomiting.
Interactions Amiodarone and ondansetron can increase the risk 
of QT-prolongation with mefloquine.
Overdose Symptoms Symptoms are likely to be neuropsychiatric or 
cardiac in nature. Activated charcoal can be given if 
ingestion within one hour but there is no antidote.
Potential Callouts Mefloquine is known to produce quite severe 
psychiatric side effects and travellers are encouraged 
to try a ‘test’ dose 10 days before travel to reveal 
these side effects.
Did You Know? Mefloquine was developed after the Vietnam War due 
to the number of deaths by malaria by US troops and 
the side effects may have exacerbated PTSD [1].147
M
Mesalazine
Pronunciation Meh-sal-a-zeen
AKA Asacol®, Mezavant®, Octasa®, Pentasa®, Salcrozine®, 
Salofalk®, Zintasa®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Anti-inflammatory (aminosalicylate)
Conditions Treated Ulcerative Colitis, Crohn’s ileo-colitis.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action The true mechanism of mesalazine is unknown; 
however, it is thought to reduce the amount of 
prostaglandins and other inflammatory markers.
Routes of Administration Enteral – modified release tablet, gastro-resistant 
tablet, modified release granules, foam, suppository, 
enema
Half Life 5 hours
Full Effect Hours–weeks
Common Side Effects Cough, diarrhoea, dizziness, fever, gastrointestinal 
discomfort, headache, joint pain, leukopenia, nausea, 
skin reactions, vomiting.
Interactions No interactions with ambulance medicines.
Overdose Symptoms No symptoms noted; however, if taken by ingestion 
diuresis is encouraged.
Potential Callouts People who stop their mesalazine without 
consultation may experience a flare up of their 
ulcerative colitis.
Did You Know? Medications that make stools acidic (e.g. Lactulose) 
may prevent mesalazine working as effectively.148 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Metformin (hydrochloride)
Pronunciation Met-for-min
AKA Axpinet®, Glucophage®, Digamet®, Glucorex®, 
Meijumet®, Metabet®, Metuxtan®, Sukkarto®, 
Yaltormin®, Glucient®, Jesacrin®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Biguanide
Conditions Treated T2DM, PCOS.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Metformin reduces circulating glucose levels in three 
ways. (1) reducing the amount of glucose released 
from glycogen stores in the liver, (2) increasing the 
capacity of membrane glucose transporters and 
(3) delay of intestinal glucose absorption resulting in 
weight loss.
Routes of Administration Enteral – tablet, modified release tablet, oral solution, 
powder
Half Life 6.5 hours
Full Effect Days–months
Common Side Effects Abdominal pain, appetite reduction, diarrhoea, 
gastrointestinal disorders, nausea, taste alteration, 
vitamin B12 Deficiency, vomiting.
Interactions None with ambulance medications.
Overdose Symptoms Hypoglycaemia is not a risk of metformin overdose; 
however, lactic acidosis is. This includes symptoms 
like DKA including tachypnoea, nausea, vomiting, 
confusions, muscle cramps, aches, abdominal pain 
and diarrhoea.
Potential Callouts Those who keep taking metformin while unwell and 
at risk of dehydration are at risk of lactic acidosis. 
Therefore, any person who is unwell and on this 
medication should be told to stop it while they 
feel unwell.
Did You Know? Metformin should not cause hypoglycaemia on its own 
due to its mechanism.149
M
Methadone (hydrochloride)
Pronunciation Meth-a-doe-n
AKA Amidone, Dolllies, Fizzies, junk, jungle juice, Metharose®, 
Physeptone®
Legal Status POM, Class A, Schedule 2
Medicine Group Analgesic (Opioid)
Conditions Treated Opioid dependence, severe pain, cough.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Methadone is a form of opiate which means it works on the 
μ-receptor in the brain to provide an analgesic effect 
alongside known side effects of opiates. Methadone is used 
to treat opioid dependence to reduce cravings and prevent 
withdrawal symptoms. This occurs due to its long half-life 
compared to other opiates.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet, oral solution
Parenteral – solution for injection
Half Life Wide ranging 15–60 hours
Full Effect 2–6 hours
Common Side 
Effects
Asthma exacerbation, drowsiness, dry eyes, dysuria, 
hyperproteinlactinaemia, hypothermia, menstrual cycle 
irregularities, mood altered, nasal dryness, postural 
hypotension, pin-point pupils, QT interval prolongation, 
respiratory depression, vomiting.
Interactions Amiodarone and ondansetron increase the risk of QT 
prolongation. Chlorphenamine, diazepam, midazolam
and nitrous oxide increase the CNS depressant effects of 
methadone. Dexamethasone, furosemide, hydrocortisone
and salbutamol increases the risk of developing 
hypokalaemia. Ondansetron also increase the risk of 
serotonin syndrome.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Symptoms of an opiate overdose include reduced 
consciousness, respiratory depression, pin-point pupils, 
bradycardia and hypotension. The reversal agent naloxone 
should be used; however, this will need to be repeated 
regularly due to mismatched half-lives.
Potential Callouts Consider withdrawal symptoms in those who have not 
taken methadone for several days or those who have gone 
‘cold turkey’ from opiates. These symptoms are flu-like and 
can produce excessive vomiting and diarrhoea which can 
cause electrolyte imbalances and hypovolaemia.
Did You Know? Methadone is typically associated with opioid dependence 
but it is used as an analgesic in palliative care [2].150 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Methotrexate
Pronunciation Meth-oh-trex-ate
AKA Maxtrex®, Jylamvo®, Nordimet®, Zlatal®, Methofill®, 
Metoject®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group DMARD
Conditions Treated Rheumatoid arthritis, Crohn’s Disease, Neoplastic diseases, 
Psoriasis.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Methotrexate inhibits dihydrofolate reductase which is an 
enzyme involved in the production of purines and 
pyrimidines which are involved in DNA synthesis. It 
specifically works in the immune system and to prevent the 
development of new cells.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet, oral suspension, oral solution
Parenteral – solution for injection, solution for infusion
Half Life 3–15 hours (dose-dependent)
Full Effect Up to 12 weeks
Common Side 
Effects
Abnormal blood counts, decreased appetite, diarrhoea, 
drowsiness, fatigue, gastrointestinal disorders, headache, 
increased risk of infection, nausea, oral disorders, 
respiratory disorders, skin reactions, throat ulcers, vomiting.
Interactions Aspirin, ibuprofen and nitrous oxide can increase the risk 
of toxicity with methotrexate. Penicillin antibiotics can also 
cause an increased risk of toxicity.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Symptoms relate to haematological changes and 
gastrointestinal complaints. This includes but is not limited 
to: anaemia, bone marrow suppression, thrombocytopenia, 
gastrointestinal ulcers, stomatitis and gastrointestinal 
bleeding. Calcium folinate (leucovorin) is a specific antidote to 
methotrexate overdose.
Potential Callouts Methotrexate is an immunosuppressant and so can make 
people more prone to infection and therefore sepsis.
Did You Know? Methotrexate is taken once a week and patients and carers 
should be aware of this to avoid accidental overdose.151
M
Metronidazole
Pronunciation Met-ron-eye-da-zoll
AKA Acea®, Anabact®, Flagyl®, Metrogel®, Metrosa®, Rozex®, 
Zidoval®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Antibiotics (Nitromidazole)
Conditions treated Several infections (bacterial and protozoan), tetanus, 
rosacea.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Metronidazole is thought to prevent DNA synthesis in 
anaerobic bacteria and protozoan parasites as well as 
producing toxic metabolites inhibiting their proliferation.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet, oral suspension, Suppository
Parenteral – Infusion, cream, gel, vaginal gel
Half Life 6–10 hours
Full Effect A few days
Common Side 
Effects
Dry mouth, muscle pain, nausea, oral disorders, metallic 
taste, pelvic discomfort, skin reactions, vomiting, 
vulvovaginal disorders.
Interactions Amiodarone increases the risk of peripheral neuropathy. 
Metronidazole increases the effect of warfarin.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Reported symptoms include vomiting, ataxia and 
disorientation. There is no known antidote and treatment 
should be symptomatic and supportive.
Potential Callouts Alcohol and metronidazole should be avoided due to 
‘Disulfiram-like’ reactions. Disulfiram is a medication use to 
treat alcohol dependency and produces unpleasant side 
effects such as nausea, vomiting, vertigo, hypotension, 
tachycardia, flushing and palpitations.
Did You Know? Metronidazole sounds like aripiprazole and omeprazole but 
these both belong in completely different medicine groups!152 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Mirtazapine
Pronunciation Mir-taz-eh-peen
AKA Zispin (discont.)
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Antidepressant (tetracyclic)
Conditions Treated Depression.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Mirtazapine has action upon both noradrenergic and 
serotonergic activity. It acts centrally by antagonising 
presynaptic α2-receptors to encourage serotonin 
transmission.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet, orodispersible tablet, oral solution
Half Life 20–40 hours
Full Effect 1 week
Common Side 
Effects
Anxiety back pain, confusion, constipation, decreased 
appetite, diarrhoea, drowsiness, dry mouth, fatigue, 
headache, joint pain, muscle pain, nausea, oedema, 
postural hypotension, sleep issues, tremor, vomiting, 
weight gain.
Interactions Chlorphenamine, diazepam, midazolam, morphine and 
nitrous oxide all increase the CNS depressant effects of 
mirtazapine. Ondansetron increases the risk of serotonin 
syndrome.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Mild overdose will present with sedation, disorientation 
and blood pressure changes. At higher doses, mirtazapine 
can cause QT prolongation and so ECG monitoring is 
required. Activated charcoal can be given if ingestion is 
within one hour.
Potential Callouts Since taking an antidepressant increases serotonin levels, 
paramedics must be aware of signs of serotonin 
syndrome where the level of serotonin gets too high. 
Symptoms include agitation, tachycardia, hypertension, 
pyrexia, poor coordination, gastrointestinal upset, 
shivering and tremors.
Did You Know? Mirtazapine is used as an appetite stimulator in cats and 
dogs [3].153
M
Montelukast
Pronunciation Mon-tell-oo-cast
AKA Singulair®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Leukotriene Receptor Antagonist
Conditions Treated Asthma.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Montelukast binds to and blocks leukotriene receptors 
which are normally bound by mediators released by 
mast cells and other WBCs. By blocking these sites, 
mediators cannot bind and exert their action to produce 
the symptoms associated with asthma such as 
bronchoconstriction and mucous production.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet, chewable tablet, granules
Half Life 2–5 hours
Full Effect 1 day
Common Side Effects Diarrhoea, fever, gastrointestinal symptoms, headache, 
nausea, skin reactions, upper respiratory infections, 
vomiting.
Interactions Clopidogrel increases the exposure to montelukast; 
therefore, monitor for side effects.
Overdose Symptoms Symptoms of overdose from montelukast are rare but 
include abdominal pain, drowsiness, thirst, headache, 
vomiting and tremors.
Potential Callouts Neuropsychiatric reactions have been reported in those 
taking montelukast and this can include obsessive–
compulsive symptoms but also speech impairments.
Did You Know? A rare side effect on montelukast is Eosinophilic 
Granulomatosis (aka Churg–Strauss Syndrome) which is 
when there are too many eosinophils in the blood vessels 
and tissues [4]. It is often associated with corticosteroid 
withdrawal and these people may suffer from a rash, 
respiratory symptoms, cardiac complications and 
peripheral nerve damage.154 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Morphine (sulphate)
Pronunciation Morph-een
AKA Severdol®, Actimorph®, MST®, Morphgesic®, Zomorph®, 
MXL, Oramorph®
Legal Status POM, Class A, Schedule 2
Medicine Group Analgesic (opiate)
Conditions 
Treated
Pain, cough, breathlessness.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Morphine exerts its effect on μ-receptors in the body. This 
includes analgesic and sedentary effects centrally but can 
also cause respiratory depression, cough suppression and 
constipation.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet, orodispersible tablet, modified release 
tablet, modified release capsule, oral solution
Parenteral – solution for injection, solution for infusion
Half Life 2–4 hours
Full Effect Minutes to hours depending on route
Common Side 
Effects
Arrhythmias, confusion, constipation decreased appetite, 
dizziness, drowsiness, dry mouth, flushing, 
gastrointestinal issues, hallucinations, headache, insomnia, 
malaise, mood changes, nausea, neuromuscular 
dysfunction, respiratory depression, skin reactions, urinary 
retention, vertigo, vomiting.
Interactions Chlorphenamine, diazepam, midazolam and nitrous 
oxide can increase the CNS depressant effects of morphine.
Overdose 
Symptoms
As an opiate, morphine overdose will include symptoms 
such as reduced consciousness, pin-point pupils and 
respiratory depression. Naloxone can be given as an 
antidote; however, this will need to be repeated due to 
mismatched half-lives.
Potential Callouts Consider opiate toxicity in those who are long-term and 
slow release morphine products with reduced kidney 
function. Symptoms can include drowsiness, confusion, 
altered behaviour and hallucinations.
Did You Know? Alcohol causes rapid release in modified release 
preparations and so should be avoided in those taking these 
formulations [5].155
M
Moxifloxacin
Pronunciation Mocks-ee-flocks-a-sin
AKA Avelox®, Moxivig®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Antibiotic (fluroquinolone)
Conditions Treated Suspectable infections.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Quinolines such as moxifloxacin work by blocking the 
action of two enzymes which are involved in synthesis and 
transcription of bacterial DNA and cell division. This 
therefore inhibits bacterial growth.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet
Parenteral – infusion, solution for infusion, eye drops
Half Life 12 hours
Full Effect A few days
Common Side 
Effects
Constipation, decreased appetite, diarrhoea, dizziness, 
difficulty breathing, eye disorders, fever, gastrointestinal 
disorders, headache, increased risk of infection, joint pain, 
muscle pain, nausea, QT prolongation, skin reactions, sleep 
disorders, taste altered, tinnitus, visual changes, vomiting.
Interactions Amiodarone and ondansetron increase the risk of QT 
prolongation. Dexamethasone, furosemide, hydrocortisone
and salbutamol increase the risk of hypokalaemia. 
Ibuprofen increases the risk of seizures alongside 
moxifloxacin.
Overdose 
Symptoms
The most concerning risk of an overdose of moxifloxacin is 
the risk of QT prolongation and therefore torsades des pointes. 
Therefore, ECG monitoring is required. Activated charcoal 
can be given if less than one hour since ingestion.
Potential Callouts Quinolones can have some rare, yet serious side effects. This 
can include tendon rupture within 48 hours of starting 
treatment, risk of heart valve regurgitation and increased 
risk of aortic aneurysm dissection.
Did You Know? When given intravenously, moxifloxacin may cause 
convulsions when taken with NSAIDs even in those with no 
history of convulsions.156 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
References for M
1 Tse, EG., Korsik, M. and Todd, MH. The past, present and future of anti-malarial 
medicines. Malaria J 2019 18 (93) p1–21. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1186/
s12936-019-2724-z
2 Furst, P. The use of low-dose methadone as add-on to ongoing opioid treatment in 
palliative cancer care-an underrated treatment? Life 2022 12 (5) p679. Available at: 
https://doi.org/10.3390/life12050679
3 Agnew, W. and Korman, R. Pharmacological appetite stimulation: rational choices in 
the appetent cat. J Feline Med Surg 2014 16 (9) p749–756. Available at: https://doi. 
org/10.1177/1098612X14545273
4 Hauser, T., Mahr, A., Metzler, C., Coste, J., Sommerstein, R., Gross, WL., Guillievin, 
L, and Hellmich, B. The leukotriene receptor antagonist montelukast and the risk of 
Churg-Strauss syndrome: a case-crossover study. Thorax 2008 63 (8) p677–682. 
Available at: https://doi.org/10.1136/thx.2007.087825
5 Johnson, FK., Ciric, S., Boundriau, S., Kisicki, J. and Stuffer, J. Effects of alcohol on 
the pharmacokinetics of morphine sulphate and naltrexone hydrochloride extended 
release capsules. J Clin Pharmacol 2012 52 (5) p747–756. Available at: https://doi. 
org/10.1177/0091270011403740Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications, First Edition. Rose Matheson.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
157
N
Naproxen
Pronunciation Nap-rox-en
AKA Naprosyn®, Stirlescent®, Vimovo®, ‘Period Pain Relief’
Legal Status P, POM
Medicine Group Analgesia (NSAIDs)
Conditions Treated Pain in MSK, periods, gout, migraine, pericarditis.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
As with many NSAIDs, the full mechanism of naproxen is 
unknown. However, they are known to prevent 
prostaglandin synthesis via non-specific inhibition of COX-1 
and COX-2 enzymes which are involved in inflammation.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet, Effervescent tablet, gastro-resistant tablet, 
oral suspension
Half Life 12–15 hours
Full Effect 3 days on regular regime, effects felt within 1 hour
Common Side 
Effects
Extensive list affecting all systems; however, gastrointestinal 
complaints are the most common. Any new symptom may 
be related to naproxen use!
Interactions Aspirin, clopidogrel, heparin, ibuprofen and tenectaplase
all increase the risk of bleeding with naproxen. 
Dexamethasone and hydrocortisone increase the risk of 
gastrointestinal bleeding specifically. Furosemide increases 
the risk of hyponatraemia whereas heparin can increase the 
risk of hyperkalaemia. Naproxen can also influence the effect 
of anticoagulants.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Symptoms include headache, heartburn, nausea, vomiting, 
epigastric pain, gastrointestinal bleeding, behavioural changes, 
drowsiness, dizziness, tinnitus and syncope. Liver and renal 
damage can occur in larger doses. Treatment is symptomatic 
with activated charcoal a possibility within 1hour of ingestion.
Potential Callouts NSAIDs are known to increase asthma due to its effect on the 
COX-1 pathway. This causes activation of lipoxygenase 
which increases the amount of leukotrienes which causes 
bronchospasm and mucous production.
Did You Know? NSAIDs may cause thrombotic events which can result in an 
MI or CVA; however Naproxen has the lowest associated risk 
of thrombotic events [1].
N158 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Nicotine
Pronunciation Nick-oh-teen
AKA Nicassist®, Nicorette®, Nicotinell®, NiQuitin®
Legal Status GSL
Medicine Group Substance Replacement
Conditions Treated Nicotine replacement therapy.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Nicotine is a naturally occurring substance that is found in 
tobacco products. It is a nicotine receptor agonist and has 
pronounced effects on the cardiovascular and nervous 
system and can lead to addiction. Withdrawal can result in 
unpleasant side effects and so replacement therapy is 
given to reduce these effects during smoking cessation.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – sublingual tablet, lozenge, medicated chewing 
gum
Parenteral – inhalation vapour, transdermal patch, spray
Half Life 2 hours
Full Effect 45 minutes
Common Side 
Effects
Dizziness, headache, hyperhidrosis, nausea, palpitations, 
skin reaction, vomiting
Interactions None reported; however, tobacco smoke can increase the 
metabolism of some drugs.
Overdose 
Symptoms
If orally ingested, nicotine is likely to result in nausea and 
vomiting. General symptoms of nicotine poisoning include 
side effects listed above but can also include 
gastrointestinal symptoms, arrythmias and neurological 
symptoms such as convulsions and hallucinations. 
Treatment should be symptomatic.
Potential Callouts Consider accidental overdose in children due to the nature 
of the medication looking like sweets and chewing gum. 
Nicotine poisoning is more severe in children with a lower 
threshold for concern.
Did You Know? Nicotine treatments result in less nicotine exposure when 
breastfeeding than second hand smoking [2]. Therefore, 
these treatments should not only be recommended to the 
mother but to those that live in the home.159
N
Nifedipine
Pronunciation Nif-eh-dip-een
AKA Adipine®, Coracten®, Fortipine®, Nifedipress®, Tensipine®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Calcium Channel Blocker (Dihydropyridine)
Conditions Treated Raynaud Syndrome, hypertension, angina, postponement 
of premature labour, hiccups, anal fissures.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Calcium channel blockers reduce the amount of vascular 
and myocardial tone by altering the movement of calcium 
ions involved in contraction. This makes blood vessels 
relax and thus dilate, reduce workload on the heart, 
increase blood flow to the peripheries and prevents uterine 
contractions.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – modified release tablet, capsule, modified release 
capsule, oral drops
Half Life 1–3 hours (seems longer for modified release tablets)
Full Effect Hours to weeks
Common Side 
Effects
Abdominal pain, constipation, dizziness, drowsiness, 
flushing, headache, malaise, nausea, oedema, palpitations, 
skin reactions, tachycardia, vasodilation, vomiting.
Interactions Furosemide, glyceryl trinitrate and nitrous oxide increase 
the risk of hypotension with nifedipine.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Symptoms include severe hypotension because of 
peripheral vasodilation. Metabolic acidosis and 
hyperglycaemia can also occur. More acute symptoms 
include nausea, vomiting, dizziness, agitation, confusion 
and loss of consciousness.
Potential Callouts Nifedipine can cause postural hypotension and so consider 
it as a factor if dealing with a syncope of uncertain cause.
Did You Know? The importance of calcium in cardiac muscle contraction 
was discovered by accident. A lab technician was fed up of 
distilling water so they used tap water to suspend cardiac 
cells. The distilled water did not allow the tissue to contract 
whereas the tap water did. This was because calcium is not 
present in distilled water [3].160 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Nitrofurantoin
Pronunciation Nitro-few-r-an-toe-in
AKA Macrobid®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Antibiotics (nitrofurans)
Conditions Treated Urinary Tract Infections.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Nitrofurantoin is converted into substances that inhibit the 
citric acid cycles as well as DNA, RNA and protein 
synthesis in susceptible bacteria.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet, capsule, modified-release capsule, oral 
suspension
Half Life 30 minutes
Full Effect 3–5 days
Common Side 
Effects
Multiple side effects but frequency is unknown. Severe 
effects include hepatic disorders, pulmonary reactions, 
haematological and neurological syndromes.
Interactions None with ambulance medications.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Symptoms include gastrointestinal symptoms such as 
nausea and vomiting. There is no known antidote but 
urination should be encouraged to remove the product. 
Liver function tests and blood counts should be taken.
Potential Callouts Side effects of nitrofurantoin are extensive and can be 
severe such as Stevens–Johnson Syndrome. If symptoms 
occurred shortly after nitrofurantoin was initiated, then it 
may be related.
Did You Know? Nitrofurantoin can cause pulmonary fibrosis and this is 
more common in the elderly [4]. Urinary tract infections are 
also common in the elderly and so this may be an 
underappreciated cause of deteriorating lung function.161
N
Nystatin
Pronunciation Nigh-stat-in
AKA Nystaform®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Antifungal
Conditions Treated Oral candidiasis.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Nystatin works by breaking holes in the fungal membrane 
which causes a leakage in water and electrolytes from the 
fungal organism resulting in cell death.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – oral suspension
Half Life Not specified
Full Effect 2 days
Side Effects Abdominal distress, angio-oedema, diarrhoea, facial 
oedema, nausea, sensitisation, skin reactions, Stevens–
Johnson Syndrome, vomiting.
Interactions Nil significant.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Nystatin is destroyed by stomach acid and so systemic 
symptoms are rare; however, nausea and vomiting have 
been reported.
Potential Callouts Nystatin has been reported to cause facial oedema which 
may be mistaken as an anaphylaxis reaction.
Did you know? Nystatin is more likely to bind to fungal cell membranes 
because it has a high affinity to ergosterol which is a key 
component of fungal cell membranes.
References for N
1 Gerstein, NS., Gerstein, WH., Carey, MC., Lam, NCK., Ram, H., Spassil, NR. and 
Schulman, PM. The thrombotic and arrythmogenic risks of perioperative NSAIDs. 
J Cardiovasc Vasc Anesthesia 2014 28 (2) p369–378. Available at: https://doi. 
org/10.1053/j.jvca.2013.05.018
2 National Institute of Care Excellence. Smoking cessation: Scenario: Pregnant or 
breastfeeding. [internet] 2023. [cited 2024 03 17]. Available at: https://cks.nice.org. 
uk/topics/smoking-cessation/management/pregnant-or-breastfeeding/ 
#:~:text=Explain%20that%20it%20is%20the,health%20risk%20to%20the%20baby
3 Kadza, S. The Story of Nifedipine. In: Lichtlen, P.R., Reale, A. (eds) Adalat. Berlin: 
Springer; 1991. P.9–26. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-85498-9_3
4 O’Bryen, J., Hannahy, G. and Gleeson, S. Nitrofurantoin-induced pulmonary 
fibrosis. Aust J Gen Pract 2022 51 (3) p149–151. Available at: https://doi.org/ 
10.31128/AJGP-01-21-5814162
Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications, First Edition. Rose Matheson.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
Olanzapine
Pronunciation Oh-lanz-a-peen
AKA Zyprexa®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Antipsychotic – phenothiazines
Conditions Treated Schizophrenia, bipolar disorder.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Olanzapine antagonises several receptors in the brain 
including dopamine, histamine, adrenergic and 
muscarinic receptors. Its key action however is on the 
D2 receptor to reduce the amount of dopamine being 
utilised.
Routes of Administration Enteral – tablet, orodispersible tablet, oral lyophilisate
Half Life 30 hours
Full Effect 4–6 weeks
Common Side Effects Anticholinergic syndrome, constipation, drowsiness, 
eosinophilia, glycosuria, increased appetite, joint pain, 
oedema, sexual dysfunction, weight gain.
Interactions Chlorphenamine, diazepam, midazolam, morphine
and nitrous oxide increase the CNS depressant effects 
of olanzapine. Furosemide, glyceryl trinitrate and 
nitrous oxide can increase the risk of hypotension with 
olanzapine.
Overdose Symptoms Symptoms include tachycardia, agitation, joint pain, 
muscle spasms, tremors and a reduced level of 
consciousness. There is no specific antidote; however, 
activated charcoal may benefit by reducing 
bioavailability.
Potential Callouts Neuroleptic malignant syndrome is a complication 
from antipsychotic medications. This includes pyrexia, 
arrhythmias, tachypnoea, muscle rigidity, blood 
pressure changes and altered mental status.
Did You Know? Weight gain is common side effect of antipsychotics and 
studies found that olanzapine causes the most 
significant weight gain [1].
OO
163
Omeprazole
Pronunciation Oh-mep-raz-ol
AKA Losec®, Mezzopram®
Legal Status P, POM
Medicine Group Proton Pump Inhibitor
Conditions Treated Acid reflux, Helicobactor pylori infection, dyspepsia, 
gastrointestinal ulcers, Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, 
oesophagitis.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Omeprazole blocks proton pumps in the 
gastrointestinal tract. Protons are required to create 
an acid and so by blocking these pumps, less acid 
is produced.
Routes of Administration Enteral – gastro-resistant tablet, gastro-resistant 
capsule, oral suspension
Parenteral – powder for solution for infusion
Half Life 0.5–1 hour
Full Effect 2–3 days
Common Side Effects Abdominal pain, constipation, diarrhoea, 
dizziness, dry mouth, gastrointestinal disorders, 
headache, insomnia, nausea, skin reactions.
Interactions Omeprazole decreases the efficacy of clopidogrel.
Overdose Symptoms Side effects listed above are the symptoms of an 
omeprazole overdose. Treatment is symptomatic.
Potential Callouts Remember indigestion is a strong mimic for a 
myocardial infarction.
Did You Know? Omeprazole can be bought over the counter for 
short-term use and does not always need a 
prescription.164 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Oxybutynin (hydrochloride)
Pronunciation Oxy-bute-eh-nin
AKA Ditropan®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Antimuscarinic
Conditions Treated Overactive bladder.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Oxybutynin works on the smooth muscle of the 
bladder by blocking muscle spasms by inhibiting the 
effect of acetylcholine on smooth muscle which causes 
muscle contractions.
Routes of Administration Enteral – tablet, modified release tablet, oral solution
Parenteral – transdermal patch
Half Life 2 hours
Full Effect 3–4 hours
Common Side Effects Constipation, dizziness, drowsiness, dry eye, dry 
mouth, dyspepsia, flushing, gastrointestinal 
discomfort, headache, increased risk of infection, 
nausea, palpitations, skin reactions, tachycardia, 
urinary disorders, vision disorders, vomiting.
Interactions Chlorphenamine and ipratropium bromide increases 
antimuscarinic effects of oxybutynin.
Overdose Symptoms Symptoms include restlessness, agitations, flushing, 
hypotension, respiratory failure, paralysis and coma. 
Antimuscarinic toxicity can be reversed with 
physostigmine and otherwise symptoms should be 
treated symptomatically.
Potential Callouts Antimuscarinics can result in urinary retention and 
this may present with abdominal pain and discomfort 
when starting oxybutynin.
Did You Know? Anticholinergic syndrome is a toxidrome that can often 
accumulate as over 600 medications have an 
anticholinergic effect including oxybutynin. Symptoms 
mirror that of an overdose of oxybutynin.
Reference for O
1 Barton, BB., Segger, F., Fischer, K., Obermeier, M. and Musil, R. Update on weight￾gain caused by antipsychotics: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Expert Opin 
Drug Saf 2020 19 (3) p295–314. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1080/14740338. 
2020.1713091Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications, First Edition. Rose Matheson.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
165
P
Paroxetine
Pronunciation Par-ox-e-teen
AKA Seroxat®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Antidepressant – SSRI
Conditions Treated Depression, anxiety, PTSD, OCD, menopausal symptoms.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Paroxetine allows serotonin to be used by the post￾synaptic neuron by preventing it from being reabsorbed by 
the pre-dynamic neuron.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet, oral suspension
Half Life 24 hours
Full Effect 4 weeks
Common Side 
Effects
Anxiety, appetite changes, arrythmias, behaviour change, 
blurred vision, concentration difficulties, confusion, 
constipation, dilated pupils, diarrhoea, dizziness, drowsiness, 
dry mouth, fever, gastrointestinal disorders, haemorrhage, 
headache, hyperhidrosis, joint pain, malaise, memory loss, 
menstrual changes, muscle pain, nausea, palpitations, pins 
and needles, QT interval prolongation, sexual dysfunction, 
skin reactions, sleep issues, taste altered, tinnitus, tremors, 
urinary disorders, vomiting, weight changes, yawning.
Interactions Aspirin, clopidogrel, heparin, ibuprofen and tenecteplase
increase the risk of bleeding. Furosemide, heparin and 
ibuprofen increase the risk of hyponatraemia. 
Ondansetron increases the risk of serotonin syndrome.
Overdose 
Symptoms
In isolation, paroxetine overdose will cause the side effects 
listed above. No specific antidote is known. Activated 
charcoal may be beneficial, otherwise treatment is 
symptomatic.
Potential Callouts SSRIs have an increased risk of bleeding which is not 
always well known. Consider this in those who present 
with internal or external haemorrhage.
Did You Know? Paroxetine is believed to help with hot flushes associated 
with menopause by causing vasodilation allowing effective 
heat loss all over rather than during hot flushes [1].
P166 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Perindopril (arginine)
Pronunciation Per-in-doe-pril
AKA Coversyl®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group ACE Inhibitor
Conditions 
Treated
Hypertension, heart failure, coronary artery disease.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Perindopril inhibits the conversion of angiotensin 1 into 
angiotensin 2. Angiotensin 2 is a potent vasoconstrictor. 
Angiotensin is also involved in the maintenance of the 
RAAS systems regarding electrolyte and fluid balance.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet
Half Life 17 hours
Full Effect 1 month
Common Side 
Effects
Alopecia, angina, angioedema, arrhythmias, chest pain, 
constipation, coryzal symptoms, cough, depression, 
diarrhoea, difficulty breathing, dizziness, drowsiness, dry 
mouth, electrolyte imbalance, gastrointestinal discomfort, 
headache, hypotension, myalgia, muscle cramps, nausea, 
palpitations, pins and needles, renal impairment, skin 
reactions, sleep changes, syncope, taste changes, tinnitus, 
vertigo, visual impairment, vomiting.
Interactions Furosemide, glyceryl trinitrate and nitrous oxide can 
increase the risk of hypotension. Heparin and ibuprofen
can increase the risk of hyperkalaemia.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Shock, electrolyte disturbances and renal failure are the 
most concerning symptoms of an ACE inhibitor overdose. 
More acute symptoms include hypotension, arrhythmias, 
palpitations, dizziness, anxiety and cough. Priorities should 
be to treat any signs of shock or electrolyte imbalance.
Potential Callouts ACE inhibitors can cause angioedema which may be 
mistaken for anaphylaxis. That does not mean that these 
people may not be suffering from airway compromise.
Did You Know? ACE inhibitors should be stopped if the person is unwell 
and at risk of dehydration to prevent kidney injury [2]. 
However, the guidance to non-prescribers providing this 
advice is unclear.P
167
Phenoxymethylpenicillin
Pronunciation Fen-oxy-meth-isle-pen-eh-sill-in
AKA Penicillin V
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Antibiotics (Beta-lactams)
Conditions 
Treated
Upper respiratory infections, recurrent cellulitis, 
rheumatic fever.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
As a penicillin, phenoxymethylpenicillin works by 
preventing bacterial walls to form resulting in cell lysis.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet, oral solution
Half Life 45 minutes
Full Effect 2–4 days
Common Side 
Effects
Circulatory collapse, coagulation disorders, diarrhoea, 
eosinophilia, hypersensitivity, increased risk of infection, 
nausea, neurotoxicity, oral disorders, pins and needles, skin 
reactions, thrombocytopenia, vomiting.
Interactions None with ambulance medications. Warfarin is altered by 
phenoxymethylpenicillin.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Gastrointestinal symptoms are the main symptom but 
seizures have also been reported. Symptomatic treatment is 
advised.
Potential Callouts Allergies to penicillin often means a cross-sensitivity with 
cephalosporins because they both have a similar chemical 
structure.
Did You Know? Phenoxymethylpenicillin is a narrow spectrum antibiotic. This 
means it only works against certain groups of bacteria which 
happen to be those that commonly cause upper respiratory 
and dental infections.168 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Phenobarbital
Pronunciation Feen-oh-barbie-tall
AKA Phenobarbitone, Phenobarb
Legal Status POM, Schedule 3
Medicine Group Anticonvulsant
Conditions Treated Epilepsy.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Phenobarbital has a sedative effect and increases the 
threshold of activation of seizures. This is done by 
prolonging how long chloride channels are open causing 
hyperpolarisation and stops the nerve impulse 
transmitting.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet, oral solution
Parenteral – solution for injection
Half Life 4 days
Full Effect 30–60 minutes
Common Side 
Effects
Agitation, anaemia, anxiety, aplastic anaemia, Dupuytren’s 
contracture, hypocalcaemia, irritability, megaloblastic 
anaemia, thrombocytopenia.
Interactions Chlorphenamine, diazepam, midazolam, morphine and 
nitrous oxide increase the CNS depressant effects of 
phenobarbital. Dexamethasone, hydrocortisone, 
midazolam, ondansetron and paracetamol have reduced 
efficacy when taken with phenobarbital.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Drowsiness, ataxia, nystagmus, disinhibition, hypotension, 
respiratory, cardiac depression and can be fatal. 
Symptomatic treatment and encouraging diuresis is 
required and haemodialysis may be needed.
Potential Callouts Phenobarbital has been reported to be used as an overdose 
in suicide attempts.
Did You Know? Barbiturates, like phenobarbital, includes a lethal drug called 
sodium thiopental which was portrayed as a “truth serum” 
due to it’s short acting effect on lowering someone’s 
inhibitions [3].P
169
Phenytoin
Pronunciation Fen-eye-toe-in
AKA Dilantin®, Epanutin®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Anticonvulsant
Conditions Treated Seizures.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
The mechanism is not fully understood but is thought to 
reduce excitatory transmission, block the release of 
neurotransmitters and block repetitive neuron firing.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – Tablet, chewable, capsule, oral suspension
Parenteral – solution for injection
Half Life 22 hours
Full Effect 4 weeks
Side Effects Arrythmias (can be fatal), electrolyte imbalance, 
hypotension, necrosis near injection site, pneumonitis, 
respiratory disorders, seizures, vitamin D deficiency.
Interactions Amiodarone, diazepam and midazolam affect the 
concentration of phenytoin. Phenytoin decreases exposure 
to dexamethasone, furosemide, hydrocortisone, 
ondansetron and paracetamol.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Symptoms include nystagmus, ataxia, hyperglycaemia and 
dysarthria. coma, hypotension, respiratory depression, 
arrythmia and cardiac arrest can occur in severe cases. 
There is no specific antidote and treatment should be 
symptomatic.
Potential Callouts Anticonvulsants are known to cause Stevens–Johnson 
Syndrome. Be aware of any person new to phenytoin who 
develop a blister-like rash or difficulty breathing.
Did You Know? Phenytoin has a narrow therapeutic index which means that 
there is a narrow range where the medication will have an 
effect. If the levels in the body rise above this range, then 
there is a greater fisk of adverse effects.170 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Pravastatin (sodium)
Pronunciation Pra-va-stat-in
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Statins
Conditions Treated Hypercholesterolemia, hyperlipidaemia.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Pravastatin reduces the amount of cholesterol produced by 
inhibiting the action of HMG-CoA reductase which is 
involved in production of LDL cholesterol. This in turn 
increases the number of LDL receptors and therefore clears 
the amount of circulating LDL cholesterol.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – Tablet
Half Life 1.5–2 hours
Full Effect 2 days
Side Effects Constipation, diarrhoea, dizziness, drowsiness, flatulence, 
gastrointestinal symptoms, headache, joint pain, muscle 
complaints, nausea, sleep disorders, thrombocytopenia.
Interactions Paracetamol can increase the risk of hepatoxicity.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Minimal information available. Treatment should be 
symptomatic.
Potential Callouts Statins are known to increase the risk of rhabdomyolysis. If 
a person on statins presents with muscle pain, weakness or 
cramps, they should have their creatine kinase levels 
measured.
Did You Know? Statins, including pravastatin, were developed from fungi 
but have also been shown to have anti-fungal properties [4].P
171
Prednisolone
Pronunciation Pred-nis-oh-lone
AKA Pred, Rescue Meds, Pevanti®, Prednesol®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Corticosteroids
Conditions 
Treated
Exacerbation of COPD or asthma, croup, local inflammation, 
allergic or inflammatory disorders, idiopathic thrombocytopenic 
purpura, ulcerative colitis, Crohn’s disease, neuritic pain, 
myasthenia gravis, ocular myasthenia, rheumatoid arthritis, 
polymyalgia rheumatica, temporal arteritis, polyarteritis nodosa, 
polymyositis, systemic lupus erythematosus, anorexia (PC), 
pneumocystis pneumonia, cluster headaches, proctitis, COVID-19.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Prednisolone is a synthetic glucocorticoid which has anti￾inflammatory properties. There are short-term effects such as 
reduced vasodilation but also long-term changes in the 
inflammatory process.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet, soluble tablet, gastro resistant tablet, oral solution
Parenteral – ear drops, eye drops, foam, suppository, enema
Half Life 3–4 hours
Full Effect 1–4 days
Side Effects Abnormal behaviour, anxiety, cataract subcapsular, cognitive 
impairment, Cushing’s Syndrome, diarrhoea, dizziness, 
dyslipidaemia, electrolyte imbalance, fatigue, fluid retention, 
gastrointestinal disorders, hirsutism, hypertension, impaired healing, 
increased risk of infection, lipomatosis, menstrual changes, nausea, 
osteoporosis, peptic ulcer, protein catabolism, psychotic disorder, 
scleroderma renal crisis, skin reactions, sleep disorders, weight gain.
Interactions Amiodarone increases the risk of hyperkalaemia with 
prednisolone. Prednisolone reduces the concentration of aspirin. 
Furosemide, ondansetron and salbutamol increase the risk of 
hypokalaemia. Ibuprofen increases the risk of gastrointestinal 
bleeding with prednisolone.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Acute symptoms of overdose are rare and treatment should be 
symptomatic. Long-term build up is more common and has 
been associated with neuropsychiatric disorders, arrhythmias 
and Cushing’s syndrome.
Potential 
Callouts
Prednisolone may be the cause of several attendances: adrenal 
insufficiency in those who withdraw from prednisolone; they 
are more susceptible to infection and may present abnormally 
and prednisolone increases the risk of osteoporosis and so there 
may be a greater fracture risk and skin-tears
Did You Know? When long term prednisolone doses are tapered down, they are 
reduced rapidly to 7.5mg which is equivalent to the physiological 
body to adjust.172 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Pregabalin
Pronunciation Pre-gab-ah-lin
AKA Alazin®, Axalid® Lyrica®, Buds, Budwisers
Legal Status POM, Class C Schedule 3
Medicine Group Anticonvulsant
Conditions Treated Neuropathic pain, focal seizures, generalised anxiety 
disorder.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Pregabalin binds to voltage-gated calcium channels in 
pre-synaptic neurons to prevent the release of several 
neurotransmitters.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet, capsule, oral solution
Half Life 6 hours
Full Effect 1 week
Side Effects Abdominal distension, abnormal gait, abnormal 
sensations, appetite changes, cervical spasm, confusion, 
constipation, diarrhoea, dizziness, drowsiness, dry 
mouth, gastrointestinal disorders, headache, increased 
risk of infection, joint complaints, memory loss, mood 
changes, movement disorders, muscle complaints, 
nausea, oedema, pain, sexual dysfunction, sleep 
disorders, speech impairment, vertigo, visual changes, 
vomiting, weight changes.
Interactions Chlorphenamine, diazepam, midazolam, morphine and 
nitrous oxide and pregabalin have CNS depressant effects.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Drowsiness, confusion, agitation, seizures and 
restlessness. There is no known antidote and treatment 
should be symptomatic.
Potential Callouts Seizures may be exacerbated by pregabalin and it can 
cause respiratory depression in certain groups.
Did You Know? Pregabalin was reclassified to a Class C Schedule 3 drug in 
2019 due to its increasing street value [6].P
173
Propranolol (hydrochloride)
Pronunciation Pro-pran-oh-lol
AKA Bedranol®, Beta-prograne®, Inderal®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Beta-blocker (non-selective)
Conditions Treated Thyrotoxicosis, hypertension, portal hypertension, 
pheochromocytoma, angina, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 
anxiety, tremor, post myocardial infarction, migraine, 
arrhythmias.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Beta blockers work on the beta-adrenergic receptors in the 
body. Propranolol is a non-selective beta blocker. This 
means that they work on any beta receptor and are not 
specific to those found in the heart.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet, modified release capsule, oral solution
Half Life 3–6 hours
Full Effect 1–2 hours
Side Effects Abdominal discomfort, bradycardia, cold peripheries, 
confusion, depression, diarrhoea, dizziness, dry eye, 
dyspnoea, erectile dysfunction, fatigue, headache, heart 
failure, nausea, peripheral vascular disease, pins and 
needles, rash, sleep disorders, syncope, visual impairment, 
vomiting.
Interactions Adrenaline and propranolol can cause hypertensive crisis. 
Amiodarone increases the risk of cardiovascular effects. 
Furosemide, glyceryl trinitrate and nitrous oxide increase 
the risk of hypotension.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Overdose can be fatal. Symptoms include cardiovascular 
collapse, neurological symptoms, bronchospasm and 
hyperkalaemia. Glucagon can be used as an antidote; 
however, this has not been thoroughly studied and the 
required dose is larger than that carried by prehospital 
providers. Symptomatic care should be prioritised.
Potential Callouts Propranolol may reduce the effectiveness of adrenaline 
when given in both life-threatening asthma and 
anaphylaxis. Multiple doses may be required but may also 
cause severe hypertension and bradycardia.
Did You Know? Propranolol is a banned substance in particular sports 
according to the World Doping agency due to its beneficial 
effect on performance anxiety [7].174 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Permethrin
Pronunciation Per-meth-rin
AKA Lyclear®
Legal Status P, POM
Medicine Group Insecticide
Conditions Treated Scabies, crab lice.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Permethrin induces electrochemical disturbances across 
membranes of susceptible parasites resulting in 
excitability, discoordination and collapse.
Routes of 
Administration
Parenteral – liquid, cream
Half Life N/A
Full Effect 8–12 hours, often needs multiple applications
Side Effects Scalp irritations, skin reactions.
Interactions Corticosteroids may reduce the immune response; however, 
this is mainly for topical preparations of corticosteroids 
rather than systemic administration.
Overdose 
Symptoms
There are no current reports of overdose of permethrin but 
ingestion may result in nausea, headache, vomiting, 
dizziness and confusion. Excessive application is likely to 
cause localised skin reactions.
Potential Callouts Unlikely to be the cause of a call-out.
Did You Know? Permethrin is based on a natural chemical from the 
chrysanthemum flower [8].P
175
References for P
1 Ghogare, AS., Talhan, TS., Madavi, P., Joshi, AC., Telgote, SA. and Ambad, 
RS. Beyond the antidepressant action, paroxetine in managing the hot flashes in 
women with menopause: a systematic review. Global J Med Pharm Biomed Update 
2023 18 (31). Available at: https://doi.org/10.25259/GJMPBU_38_2023
2 NHS Scotland. Effective Prescribing and Therapeutics: Sick Day Rules [internet] n.d. 
[cited 2024 03 17]. Available at: https://www.therapeutics.scot.nhs.uk/
polypharmacy/sick-day-rules/
3 Orkaby, A. and Desai, S. The death of sodium pentothal: the rise and fall of an 
anaesthetic turned lethal. J Hist Med Allied Sci 2021. 76 (3) p294–318. Available at: 
https://doi.org/10.1093/jhmas/jrab016
4 Tavakkoli, A., Johnson, TB. and Sahebkar, A. Antifungal effects of statins. Pharmacol 
Ther 2020 208 p107483. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pharmthera. 
2020.107483
5 National Institute for Care Excellence. Prednisolone [internet] 2024. [cited 2024 03 
17]. Available at: https://bnf.nice.org.uk/drugs/prednisolone/
6 M Government. Pregabalin and gabapentin to be controlled as class C drugs 
[internet] 2018. [cited 2024 04 17]. Available at: https://www.gov.uk/government/
news/pregabalin-and-gabapentin-to-be-controlled-as-class-c-drugs
7 World Anti-Doping Agency. The Prohibited List – Beta Blockers. [internet] n.d. [cited 
2023 11 02]. Available at: https://www.wada-ama.org/en/
prohibited-list?filters%5Bprohibited_type%5D%5B%5D=%22Beta-blocker%22
8 National Pesticide Information Centre. Permethrin General Fact Sheet [internet] 
2009. [cited 2024 03 17]. Available at: http://npic.orst.edu/factsheets/PermGen. 
html#:~:text=Permethrin%20is%20an%20insecticide%20in,public%20health%20 
mosquito%20control%20programsParamedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications, First Edition. Rose Matheson. 
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
176
Quetiapine
Pronunciation Kwe-tie-a-peen
AKA Atrolak®, Biquelle®, Brancico®, Mintreleq®, Seroquel®, Sondate®, 
Zaluron®
Legal Status POM
Medicine 
Group
Antipsychotic
Conditions 
Treated
Schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, depression.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Quetiapine antagonises several receptors in the brain including 
dopamine, histamine, adrenergic and muscarinic receptors. Its 
key action however is on the D2 receptor.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet, modified release tablet, oral suspension
Half Life 6–7 hours
Full Effect 4–6 weeks
Side Effects Blurred vision, drowsiness, dyspepsia, dyspnoea, fever, headache, 
increased appetite, joint pain, peripheral oedema, rhinitis, sleep 
disorders, suicidal behaviours, syncope, withdrawal symptoms.
Interactions Chlorphenamine, diazepam, midazolam, morphine and nitrous 
oxide have CNS depressant effects. Furosemide, glyceryl 
trinitrate and nitrous oxide increase the risk of hypotension.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Symptoms include drowsiness, tachycardia, hypotension, QT 
prolongation, seizures, rhabdomyolysis, respiratory depression, 
urinary retention, delirium and coma. There is no specific 
antidote for quetiapine; however, activated charcoal should be 
considered and medical supervision until recovered.
Potential 
Callouts
Consider the increased risk of suicidal behaviour in people who 
have recently started on quetiapine. This is most likely to be at its 
greatest at the start of treatment.
Did You 
Know?
Anti-psychotic medications work on these patient groups by 
inducing parkinsonism (this includes inducing emotional 
numbing as well as physical responses) and there is little evidence 
that it treats the underlying disease [1].
QQ
177
Quinine (sulphate)
Pronunciation Kwin-neen
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Alkaloid
Conditions Treated Nocturnal leg cramps, treatment of malaria.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
The precise mechanism for malaria treatment is unknown but 
it is thought to affect lysosome function and nucleic acid 
synthesis in the parasite. For muscle cramps, quinine is 
expected to increase the muscle cell refractory period.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet
Half Life 18 hours
Full Effect 4 weeks
Side Effects Abdominal pain, agitation, angioedema, arrhythmias, 
asthma, blood disorders, bronchospasm, cardiotoxicity, 
cerebral impairment, coagulation disorders, coma, confusion, 
diarrhoea, dyspnoea, fever, flushing, gastrointestinal 
disorders, headache, hearing impairment, hypersensitivity, 
loss of consciousness, muscle weakness, nausea, ocular 
toxicity, oedema, photosensitivity, renal impairment, skin 
reactions, tinnitus, vertigo, visual changes, vomiting.
Interactions Amiodarone and ondansetron with quinine prolong the QT 
interval. Dexamethasone, furosemide, hydrocortisone, and 
salbutamol can increase the risk of hypokalaemia with quinine.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Overdose can include irreversible visual loss as well as 
convulsions, nausea, vomiting, tinnitus, headache, 
respiratory depression, QT prolongation, renal failure and 
cardiogenic shock. Fatalities have been reported. Consider 
activated charcoal if ingestion within 1 hour and people need 
to be monitored and treated symptomatically.
Potential Callouts Quinine has a narrow therapeutic index which means that 
there is narrow range where there is therapeutic action but no 
adverse effects. Any increase in the amount in the body 
means there is an increased risk of side effects and toxicity.
Did You Know? Quinine is found in tonic water to produce a bitterness.
Reference for Q
1 Filer, N. This book will change your mind about mental health. London: Faber and 
Faber, 2019, p202Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications, First Edition. Rose Matheson.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
178
Ramipril
Pronunciation Ram-eh-prill
AKA Tritace®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group ACE Inhibitors
Conditions Treated Hypertension, heart failure. Post myocardial infarction, 
nephropathy.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors work by 
blocking the enzyme that converts Angiotension-1 to 
Angiotensin-2. Angtiotensin-2 is a potent vasoconstrictor 
and is also involved in water and electrolyte balance 
homeostasis.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet, capsule, oral solution
Half Life 13–17 hours
Full Effect 1 week
Side Effects Alopecia, angina, angioedema, arrhythmias, chest pain, 
constipation, cough, depression, diarrhoea, dizziness, 
drowsiness, dry mouth, dyspnoea, electrolyte imbalance, 
gastrointestinal disorders, headache, hypotension, 
increased risk of infection, muscle spasm, muscle pain, 
nausea, palpitations, pins and needles, renal impairment, 
rhinitis, skin reactions, sleep disorders, syncope, taste 
changes, tinnitus, vertigo, vomiting.
Interactions Furosemide, glyceryl trinitrate and nitrous oxide can 
increase the risk of hypotension. Heparin and ibuprofen
increase the risk of hyperkalaemia.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Symptoms include hypotension, bradycardia, electrolyte 
imbalances and renal failure. Treatment is symptomatic.
Potential Callouts ACE inhibitors can cause angioedema which can be 
mistaken for true anaphylaxis. This does not mean that 
these people cannot suffer from airway compromise and 
breathing difficulties.
Did You Know? Ramipril is a prodrug which means that it needs to go 
through first-pass metabolism to form the active metabolite 
that has a therapeutic action.
RR
179
Ranitidine
Pronunciation Ran-it-ih-deen
AKA Gavilast®
Legal Status GSL, P, POM
Medicine Group H2-Receptor Antagonist
Conditions Treated Gastrointestinal ulcers, dyspepsia, GERD.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Ranitidine is an antagonist of histamine-2 receptors 
which are involved in secretion of gastric acid.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablets, Gastro-resistant tablets, oral solution
Parenteral – solution for injection
Half Life 2–3 hours
Full Effect 30 minutes
Side Effects Constipation, diarrhoea, dizziness, fatigue, headache, 
myalgia, skin reactions.
Interactions None with ambulance medications.
Overdose Symptoms No particular symptoms are reported. Symptomatic 
treatment should be given.
Potential Callouts Unlikely to be the cause of a call out.
Did You Know? Ranitidine can be sold on GSL to those over 16 years old 
if the pack has no more than 2 weeks supply (14 tablets).180 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Repaglinide
Pronunciation Rep-ah-glin-ide
AKA Enyglid®, Prandin®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Meglitinides
Conditions Treated T2DM.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Meglitinides encourage the pancreas to secrete insulin 
which in turn lowers blood sugar levels. Therefore, it 
relies on functioning β-cells.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet
Half Life 1 hour
Full Effect 30 minutes
Side Effects Abdominal pain, diarrhoea, hypoglycaemia.
Interactions Clopidogrel increases exposure to repaglinide and 
therefore increases the risk of hypoglycaemia.
Overdose Symptoms Symptoms of hypoglycaemia are expected to occur in 
overdose and should be corrected through providing 
glucagon or glucose.
Potential Callouts As repaglinide increases insulin secretion these people 
may suffer from episodes of hypoglycaemia especially 
when first introduced to the medicine or changing dose.
Did You Know? As a therapy for T2DM, repaglinide can only be given 
alone or with metformin [1].R
181
Rehydration Salts
Pronunciation As written
AKA Dioralyte®
Legal Status GSL
Medicine Group Electrolytes
Conditions Treated Dehydration associated with diarrhoea.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action The sachet contains electrolytes and when combined with 
water, they can be absorbed by the gastrointestinal tract 
to replace those lost.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – oral powder for reconstitution with water
Half Life N/A
Full Effect N/A
Common Side Effects None reported.
Interactions None
Overdose Symptoms Serum electrolytes should be reviewed in the case of a 
suspected overdose. Any abnormalities should be 
corrected where possible.
Potential Callouts Unlikely to be the cause of a call-out.
Did You Know? A simple alternative can be made up using a half teaspoon 
salt and six teaspoons of sugar in a 1 litre of water or 
juice [2].182 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Risperidone
Pronunciation Ris-per-ih-doe-n
AKA Okedi®, Risperdal Consta®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Antipsychotic
Conditions Treated Psychosis, aggression in Alzheimer’s dementia, 
Schizophrenia.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
The biochemical action of risperidone antagonises several 
receptors in the brain including dopamine, histamine, 
adrenergic and muscarinic receptors. Its key action however 
is on the D2 receptor to reduce the amount of dopamine 
being activated in the brain.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet, orodispersible tablet, oral solution
Parenteral – powder and solvent for suspension for injection
Half Life 3 hours
Full Effect 3–4 weeks
Side Effects Anaemia, anxiety, appetite changes, chest discomfort, 
conjunctivitis, constipation, cough, depression, diarrhoea, 
dyspnoea, drowsiness, epistaxis, falls, fever, gastrointestinal 
discomfort, headache, hypertension, increased risk of 
infection, joint disorders, laryngeal pain, muscle spasms, 
nasal congestion, nausea, oedema, oral disorders, pain, 
sexual dysfunction, skin reactions, sleep changes, urinary 
disorders, visual changes, weight decrease.
Interactions Amiodarone and ondansetron also prolong the QT-interval. 
Chlorphenamine, diazepam, midazolam, morphine and 
nitrous oxide also have CNS depressant effects. 
Dexamethasone, furosemide, hydrocortisone and 
salbutamol increase the risk of hypokalaemia. Glyceryl 
trinitrate and nitrous oxide increase the risk of hypotension.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Symptoms include drowsiness, tachycardia, hypotension, 
tremors, QT-prolongation and convulsions have been 
reported. There is no known antidote and treatment should 
be symptomatic.
Potential Callouts Risperidone can cause movement issues or make people 
excessively drowsy which might come across as alarming to 
both the patient and any carers.
Did You Know? Anti-psychotic medications work on these patient groups by 
inducing parkinsonism (this includes inducing emotional 
numbing as well as physical responses) and there is little 
evidence that it treats the underlying disease [3].R
183
Rituximab
Pronunciation Rit-ux-ih-mab
AKA MabThera®, Rixathon® ▼, Ruxience® ▼, Truxima® ▼
Legal Status POM, Specialist
Medicine Group DMARD
Conditions Treated Rheumatoid arthritis, granulomatosis with polyangitis, 
non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, lymphocytic leukaemia, 
pemphigus vulgaris.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Rituximab binds to the antigen CD20 which is found on 
B-cells. This then marks these cells to be destroyed by the 
immune system.
Routes of 
Administration
Parental – solution for injection, solution for infusion
Half Life 30 days
Full Effect 3 days
Side Effects Angioedema, arrhythmias, bursitis, cancer pain, cardiac 
disorder, chest pain, chills, dizziness, dyspnoea, electrolyte 
imbalance, gastrointestinal discomfort, hepatitis B, 
hypercholesterolaemia, hyperglycaemia, hypertension, 
hypotension insomnia, lacrimation disorder, migraine, 
multi-organ failure, muscle tone increased, nausea, nerve 
disorders, oral ulceration, osteoarthritis, respiratory 
disorders, sepsis, skin reactions, tinnitus, vasodilation.
Interactions None with ambulance medicines.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Limited data is available on overdose symptoms; however, 
flu-like symptoms and respiratory failure have been 
noted.
Potential Callouts People on rituximab should be considered at risk of 
neutropenia but studies suggest DMARDS might protect 
from sepsis [4].
Did You Know? Rituximab in the forms of Rixathon®, Ruxience® and 
Truxima® are ‘black triangle medications’ which means that 
any adverse effects must be reported via the MHRA Yellow 
Card system.184 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Rivaroxaban
Pronunciation River-ox-a-ban
AKA Xarelto®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group DOAC
Conditions Treated Prophylaxis for AF, DVT, PE and atherosclerosis.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Rivaroxaban inhibits factor Xa which is part of the 
coagulation cascade and therefore prevents clot formation.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet
Half Life 5–13 hours
Full Effect Several hours
Side Effects Anaemia, constipation, diarrhoea, dizziness, drowsiness, 
fever, gastrointestinal discomfort, haemorrhage, headache, 
hypotension, menorrhagia, nausea, oedema, pain in 
extremities, post procedural anaemia, renal impairment, 
skin reactions, vomiting, wound complications.
Interactions Amiodarone may increase the exposure to rivaroxaban. 
Aspirin, clopidogrel, heparin, ibuprofen and 
tenecteplase increase the risk of bleeding.
Overdose 
Symptoms
People who overdose on rivaroxaban should be monitored 
for signs of bleeding. There is a specific antidote called 
andexanet alfa which can be used to bind to rivaroxaban.
Potential Callouts Consider the risks of severe bleeding in those taking 
rivaroxaban especially alongside other medications that 
cause bleeding (e.g. NSAIDs, SSRIs) following trauma or 
medical reasons.
Did You Know? Rivaroxaban is structurally similar to an antibiotic linezolid
yet they have completely different uses [5].R
185
References for R
1 National Institute for Care Excellence. Treatment Summaries: Type 2 diabetes 
[internet] 2024. [cited 2024 03 17]. Available at: https://bnf.nice.org.uk/treatment￾summaries/type-2-diabetes/
2 Rehydration Project. How do I prepare an Oral Rehydration Salts ORS solution at 
home? [internet] 2019. [cited 2024 03 17]. Available at: https://rehydrate.org/faq/
how-to-prepare-ors.htm
3 Filer, N. This book will change your mind about mental health. London: Faber and 
Faber, 2019, p202
4 Richter, A., Listing, J., Schneider, M., Klopsch, T., Kapelle, A., Kaufmann, J., Zink, A.  
and Strangerfeld, A. Impact of treatment with biologic DMARDs on the risk of 
sepsis or mortality after serious infection in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. 
Clin Epidemiol Res 2016 75 p1667–1673. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1136/
annrheumdis-2015-207838
5 Vrbický, M. Macek, K., Pochobradský, J., Svoboda, J., Sedlák, M. and Drabina, P. 
 The asymmetric Henry reaction as synthetic tool for the preparation fo the drugs 
linezolid and rivaroxaban Beilstein J Org Chem 2022 18 p436–445.Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications, First Edition. Rose Matheson. 
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
186
Salbutamol
Pronunciation Sal-bute-a-mol
AKA Salbulin®, Ventolin®, ‘Albuterol’
Legal Status POM
Medicine 
Group
Beta-2 agonist
Conditions 
Treated
Asthma, bronchospasm due to allergy or exercise, uncomplicated 
premature labour (specialised in hospital).
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Salbutamol is a selective β2-adrenergic receptor agonist which 
means that it causes bronchodilation.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet, oral solution
Parental – solution for injection, solution for infusion, 
pressurised inhalation, inhalation powder, nebuliser liquid
Half Life 2–5 hours (nebulised)
Full Effect 5 minutes
Side Effects Arrhythmias, headache, muscle cramps, oropharynx irritations, 
palpitations, pulmonary oedema, tremor.
Interactions Amiodarone, dexamethasone, furosemide, hydrocortisone and 
ondansetron can increase the risk of hypokalaemia with 
salbutamol. Ipratropium bromide can increase the risk of 
glaucoma when given with salbutamol.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Symptoms include tachycardia, dizziness, hypertension, tremors, 
hyperactivity, lactic acidosis and hypokalaemia.
Potential 
Callouts
Salbutamol and steroids are known to increase the risk of 
hypokalaemia and so consider this as a risk in those who are 
taking both salbutamol and steroids.
Did You 
Know?
Salbutamol is increasing in popularity regarding it’s use in 
hyperkalaemia however there are little to no current prehospital 
guidelines to support this at present [1].
S187
S
Salmeterol
Pronunciation Sal-meter-all
AKA Avenor®, Combisal®, Fixkoh®, Fusacomb®, Neovent®, 
Sereflo®, Seretide®, Serevent®, Sirdulpa®, Soltel®, 
Stalpex®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Beta-2 Agonist
Conditions Treated Asthma, bronchospasm due to allergy or exercise.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Salmeterol is a selective β2-adrenergic receptor agonist 
which means that is causes bronchodilation. Salmeterol 
is a longer acting β2 agonist than salbutamol.
Routes of 
Administration
Parenteral – pressurised inhalation, inhalation powder
Half Life 5.5 hours
Full Effect 20 minutes and lasts 12 hours
Side Effects Arrhythmias, headache, muscle cramps, palpitations, 
tremor.
Interactions Amiodarone, dexamethasone, furosemide, 
hydrocortisone and ondansetron can increase the risk 
of hypokalaemia with salbutamol. Ipratropium 
bromide can increase the risk of glaucoma when given 
with salmeterol.
Overdose Symptoms Symptoms include tachycardia, dizziness, 
hypertension, tremors, hyperactivity, lactic acidosis 
and hypokalaemia.
Potential Callouts Salmeterol and steroids are known to increase the risk 
of hypokalaemia and so consider this as a risk in those 
who are taking both salmeterol and steroids.
Did You Know? Beta-2 agonists are on the World Anti-Doping Code 
prohibited medications list (dose dependent) [2].188 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Semaglutide
Pronunciation Sem-ah-glue-tide
AKA Rybelsus®, Ozempic® (both Black Triangle)
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group GLP-1 Receptor Agonists
Conditions Treated T2DM.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Semaglutide binds to GLP1 receptors which increases 
insulin production and reduces glucagon production.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – oral
Parenteral – solution for injection
Half Life 7 days
Full Effect 8 weeks
Side Effects Abdominal pain, burping, cholelithiasis, constipation, 
decreased appetite, diarrhoea, dizziness, fatigue, 
hypoglycaemia (in combination with insulin or a 
sulphonylurea, e.g. gliclazide), nausea, vomiting, 
weight loss.
Interactions Nil with ambulance medicines.
Overdose Symptoms Reports of overdose are minimal due to the nature of 
this being a new drug. The most commonly reported 
symptom was nausea and hypoglycaemia has not 
been reported.
Potential Callouts The injectable form of semaglutide is only given once 
a week and may get confused with injectable insulin 
and other diabetic agents which tend to be given daily.
Did You Know? Semaglutide has recently been trialled and gained a 
licence for use as a weight loss drug.189
S
Senna
Pronunciation Sen-ah
AKA Manevac®, Senokot®
Legal Status GSL, P
Medicine Group Laxative (stimulant)
Conditions Treated Constipation
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Senna has two mechanisms of action; one is to stimulate 
peristalsis of the gut and the other is to increase the 
amount of water and electrolytes in the stool.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet, oral solution
Half Life 6–7 hours
Full Effect 8–12 hours
Side Effects Albuminuria, diarrhoea, electrolyte imbalance, fluid 
imbalance, gastrointestinal discomfort, haematuria, 
pigmented colon, skin reaction, urine discoloration.
Interactions None with ambulance medications.
Overdose Symptoms Diarrhoea, abdominal pain and consequential fluid and 
electrolyte loss.
Potential Callouts People who take senna unknowingly with a bowel 
obstruction could worsen their symptoms.
Did You Know? Long-term senna use leaves pigmentation on the bowel 
called pseudomelanosis coli which on colonoscopy looks 
like leopard skin!190 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Sertraline
Pronunciation Sert-rah-leen
AKA Contulen®, Lustral®, Zoloft®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Antidepressant (SSRI)
Conditions Treated Depression, OCD, Panic disorders.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Sertraline works by preventing serotonin being reabsorbed 
by the presynaptic neuron and so there is more to be used 
by the post-synaptic neuron.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet
Half Life 26 hours
Full Effect 4 weeks
Side Effects Abnormal appetite, altered taste, anxiety, arrhythmias, chest 
pain, confusion, constipation, depersonalisation, depression, 
dilated pupils, diarrhoea, dizziness, drowsiness, dry mouth, 
fever gastrointestinal disorders, haemorrhage, headache, 
hyperhidrosis, impaired concentration, increased risk of 
infection, joint pain, malaise, memory loss, menstrual cycle 
changes, muscle pain, nausea, neuromuscular dysfunction, 
palpitations, paraesthesia, QT interval prolongation, sexual 
dysfunction, skin reactions, sleep disorders, tremor, urinary 
disorders, vasodilation, visual changes, vomiting, weight 
change, yawning.
Interactions Amiodarone and ondansetron also prolong the QT interval. 
Ondansetron also increases the risk of serotonin syndrome. 
Aspirin, clopidogrel, heparin, ibuprofen and tenecteplase
increases the risk of bleeding. Furosemide and ibuprofen
also increase the risk of hyponatraemia.
Overdose Symptoms Symptoms include drowsiness, gastrointestinal 
disturbances, tachycardia, tremor, agitation, dizziness and 
QT prolongation has been reported.
Potential Callouts Serotonin syndrome is worth noting regarding any SSRI. 
Serotonin syndrome occurs when the concentration of 
serotonin in the body is too high. Symptoms include 
agitation, muscle spasms, tremors, pyrexia, tachycardia and 
hypertension.
Did You Know? Sertraline was tested as a potential treatment for Ebola in 
2017 due to positive studies in rodents however it was 
proven to be ineffective before reaching human clinical 
trials [3].191
S
Sildenafil
Pronunciation Sill-den-a-fill
AKA Aronix®, Granpidam®, Liberize®, Revatio®, Viagra®, 
Vizarsin®
Legal Status P, POM
Medicine Group Phosphodiesterase-5 Inhibitor
Conditions Treated Pulmonary arterial hypertension, erectile dysfunction, 
digital ulcers.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Sildenafil works by increasing the amount of cGMP 
which causes vasodilation and increases blood flow. This 
occurs by releasing nitric oxide and inhibiting an 
enzyme that breaks down cGMP.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet, oral suspension
Parenteral – solution for injection
Half Life 3–5 hours
Full Effect 30 minutes
Side Effects Alopecia, anaemia, anxiety, cough diarrhoea, dizziness, 
fluid retention, gastrointestinal discomfort, headaches, 
increased risk of infection, insomnia, nasal complaints, 
nausea, night sweats, pain, skin reactions, tremor, 
vasodilation vision disorders.
Interactions Amiodarone and ondansetron prolong the QT interval 
alongside sildenafil. Dexamethasone, furosemide, 
hydrocortisone and salbutamol increase the risk of 
hypokalaemia. Glyceryl trinitrate and nitrous oxide
increase the risk of hypotension due to similar 
mechanisms of action.
Overdose Symptoms Symptoms include headache, flushing, hypotension, 
dizziness, dyspepsia, nasal congestion and visual 
changes. Treatment is symptomatic as there is no known 
antidote.
Potential Callouts Postural hypotension may relate to sildenafil use.
Did You Know? Sildenafil was originally discovered while looking for a 
medication for angina [4].192 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Simvastatin
Pronunciation Sim-vast-at-in
AKA Zocor®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Statins
Conditions Treated Hypercholesterolemia
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Simvastatin inhibits HMG-CoA reductase which is 
involved in the synthesis of cholesterol. The lowered 
levels of cholesterol in turn reduces the number of LDL 
receptors.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet, oral suspension
Half Life 2 hours
Full Effect 4 weeks
Side Effects Constipation, diarrhoea, dizziness, drowsiness, 
flatulence, gastrointestinal discomfort, headache, joint 
pain, muscle complaints, nausea, sleep disorders, 
thrombocytopenia.
Interactions Amiodarone increases the exposure to simvastatin. 
Paracetamol increases the risk of hepatotoxicity.
Overdose Symptoms No particular symptoms have been noted but treatment 
should be symptomatic.
Potential Callouts Statin use is associated with muscle pain associated 
with rhabdomyolysis and should be considered in 
anyone presenting with non-traumatic muscular pain 
and concurrent statin use.
Did You Know? Simvastatin is derived from a natural product from the 
fungus Aspergillus terreus [5].193
S
Sitagliptin
Pronunciation Sit-a-glip-tin
AKA Januvia®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Dipeptidylpeptidase-5-inhibitors
Conditions Treated T2DM
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Sitagliptin increases the level of incretin hormones such 
as glucagon-like-peptide(GLP-1) and glucose-dependent 
insulinotropic polypeptide to increase insulin 
production and lower levels of circulating glucose.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet
Half Life 12 hours
Full Effect 1–2 hours
Side Effects Headaches
Interactions None with ambulance medications.
Overdose Symptoms Minimal data is available regarding overdose; however, 
a minimal prolongation of QT interval was noted in one 
study.
Potential Callouts Pancreatitis has been reported with sitagliptin and so 
should be considered with severe abdominal pain.
Did You Know? Sitagliptin does not cause hypoglycaemia as it has a 
glucose-dependent function and so will only work when 
glucose levels rise.194 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Sodium Valproate
Pronunciation So-dee-um val-pro-ate
AKA Depakin®, Dyzantil®, Epilim®, Epival®, Episenta®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Anticonvulsant
Conditions Treated Epilepsy, mania, migraines.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action The mechanism of sodium valproate is not entirely 
known but it is thought to supress the action by 
preventing its synthesis and metabolism.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet, modified-release tablet, gastro-resistant 
tablet, modified release capsule, modified release 
granules, oral solution
Parental – solution for injection, powder and solvent for 
solution for injection
Half Life 16 hours
Full Effect Several weeks
Side Effects Abdominal pain, abnormal behaviour, agitation, 
alopecia, anaemia, confusion, deafness, diarrhoea, 
dizziness, drowsiness, haemorrhage, hallucinations, 
hepatic disorders, hypersensitivity, hyponatraemia, 
impaired concentration, increased weight, memory loss, 
menstrual cycle changes, movement difficulties, nail 
changes, nausea, nystagmus, oral disorders, seizures, 
stupor, thrombocytopenia, tremors, urinary disorders, 
vomiting.
Interactions Paracetamol increases the risk of hepatotoxicity.
Overdose Symptoms Nausea, vomiting and dizziness have been reported in 
mild overdoses. CNS, respiratory and circulatory 
depression have been reported in larger overdoses. 
Management should be symptomatic.
Potential Callouts Sodium valproate is highly teratogenic which means it 
can induce miscarriage and cause foetal defects.
Did You Know? Most forms of sodium valproate are ‘black triangle’ 
medications which means that any adverse effects need 
to be reported to the MHRA ‘Yellow Card’ scheme.195
S
Solifenacin (succinate)
Pronunciation Soul-ih-fen-a-sin
AKA Vesicare®, Vesomni®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Antimuscarinics
Conditions Treated Overactive bladder, urinary incontinence.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action The bladder is stimulated by the parasympathetic nervous 
system and acetylcholine causes the smooth muscle 
surrounding the bladder to contract. Solifenacin works by 
inhibiting the acetylcholine receptors and preventing this 
contraction.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet, oral suspension, oral solution
Half Life 55 hours
Full Effect Starts working in 8 hours, full effect 4 weeks
Side Effects Constipation, dizziness, drowsiness, dry mouth, flushing, 
gastrointestinal discomfort, headache, nausea, 
palpitations, skin reactions, tachycardia, urinary 
disorders, vision disorders, vomiting.
Interactions Atropine, chlorphenamine and ipratropium bromide
may enhance antimuscarinic effects. Solifenacin has been 
reported to prolong QT interval as does ondansetron.
Overdose Symptoms Antimuscarinic effects from dry mouth, constipation, 
urinary retention to hallucinations, convulsions and 
respiratory difficulties. Treatment should be symptomatic.
Potential Callouts Solifenacin can be so effective at controlling an overactive 
bladder that people can go into retention causing 
abdominal pain.
Did You Know? Oral forms of solifenacin can cause numbness in the 
mouth as it dissolves and so it should aways be followed 
by a glass of water.196 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Spironolactone
Pronunciation Spire-oh-no-lack-tone
AKA Aldactone®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Diuretic (Aldosterone antagonist)
Conditions Treated Oedema, ascites, nephrotic syndrome, heart failure, 
resistant hypertension, primary hyperaldosteronism.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Spironolactone is a competitive aldosterone antagonist. 
Aldosterone is a hormone involved in the RAAS system 
that affects water and electrolyte imbalance. 
Spironolactone works by increasing sodium and water 
excretion but reducing potassium excretion.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet, oral suspension
Half Life 7 hours (metabolite)
Full Effect 2–3 days
Side Effects Acidosis (hyperchloremic), AKI, agranulocytosis, 
alopecia, benign breast neoplasm, breast pain, confusion, 
dizziness, electrolyte imbalance, excessive hair growth, 
gastrointestinal symptoms, gynaecomastia, hepatic 
disorders, hyperkalaemia, leg cramps, leukopenia, libido 
disorder, malaise, menstrual changes, nausea, SCARs, 
skin reactions, thrombocytopenia.
Interactions Glyceryl trinitrate and nitrous oxide increase the risk of 
hypotension. Ibuprofen increases the risk of 
hyponatraemia. Furosemide increases the risk of 
hyponatraemia and hypotension. Heparin increases the 
risk of hyperkalaemia. Ibuprofen also increases the risk 
of hyperkalaemia.
Overdose Symptoms Acute overdose can present with drowsiness, confusion, 
nausea, vomiting, dizziness and diarrhoea. 
Hyponatraemia and hyperkalaemia are more likely to 
present in chronic overdose. Management should be 
symptomatic.
Potential Callouts As spironolactone blocks the action of aldosterone, 
which is depleted in Addison’s disease, it can exacerbate 
Addison’s disease causing crisis. This could also occur in 
those on long-term steroid use.
Did You Know? Spirolonactone is also an androgen antagonist which 
means that it blocks the action of testosterone which is 
why side effects such as gynecomastia occur.197
S
Sumatriptan
Pronunciation Soo-mah-trip-tan
AKA Imigran®, Migraitan®, Boots Migraine Relief®
Legal Status P, POM
Medicine Group Serotonin Receptor Agonist
Conditions Treated Migraines, cluster headaches.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Sumatriptan is a selective serotonin receptor 
agonist. It is specific to receptors that are found in 
cranial blood vessels responsible for 
vasoconstriction. Dilation and oedema build up 
around these blood vessels is thought to be a cause 
of migraines.
Routes of Administration Enteral – tablet
Parental – solution for injection, nasal spray
Half Life 2 hours
Full Effect 15–30 minutes (depends on route)
Side Effects Abnormal sensations, altered taste, breathing 
difficulties, dizziness, drowsiness, flushing, 
myalgia, nasal irritation, nausea, pain, skin 
reactions, temperature sensation altered, throat 
irritation, vomiting.
Interactions Ondansetron can increase the risk of serotonin 
syndrome.
Overdose Symptoms Minimal information available for the symptoms 
of sumatriptan overdose.
Potential Callouts Serotonin syndrome may occur with sumatriptan if 
taken alongside other medications that increase 
serotonin (e.g. SSRIs). Symptoms include agitation, 
tremors, pyrexia, muscle stiffness, hypertension 
and tachycardia.
Did You Know? Sumatriptan can be bought without a prescription 
in 50mg tablets in those with pre-diagnosed 
migraines.198 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
References for S
1 Thomas, MG., Haddow, P. and Williams, N. Identifying and managing 
hyperkalaemia in the prehospital environment J Paramedic Pract 2022 14 (1) p1–6. 
Available at: https://doi.org/10.12968/jpar.2022.14.1.CPD1
2 World Anti-Doping Code. International Standard Prohibited List 2024 [internet] 
2024. [cited 2024 03 17] p9. Available at: https://www.wada-ama.org/sites/
default/files/2023-09/2024list_en_final_22_september_2023.pdf
3 Honko, AN., Johnson, JC., Marchand, JS., Huzella, L., Adams, RD., Oberlander, N., 
Torzewski, LM., Bennett, RS., Hensley, LE., Jarling, PB. and Olinger, GG. High dose 
sertraline monotherapy failres to protect rhesus macaques from lethal challenge 
with Ebola virus Makona Sci Rep 2017 7 p5886. Available at: https://doi. 
org/10.1038/s41598-017-06179-y
4 Jackson, G., Gilles, H. and Osterloh, I. Past, present and future: a 7-year update of 
Viagra® (sildenafil citrate) Int J Clin Prac 2005 59 (6) p680–691. Available at: 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1368-5031.2005.00578.x
5 Hajar, R. Statins: past and present Heart Views 2011 12 (3) p121–127. Available at: 
https://doi.org/10.4103/1995-705X.95070Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications, First Edition. Rose Matheson.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
199
T
Tamoxifen
Pronunciation Tam-ox-ih-fen
AKA Nolvadex®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Anti-oestrogen
Conditions Treated Breast cancer, anovulatory infertility, gynaecomastia.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Tamoxifen binds to oestrogen receptors in the brain which 
disrupts the amount of oestrogen produced alongside 
other growth factors.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet, oral solution
Half Life 7 days (14 days for metabolite)
Full Effect 5–10 years
Side Effects Abnormal sensations, alopecia, altered taste, anaemia, 
cataracts, constipation, diarrhoea, dizziness, embolism and 
thrombosis, fatigue, fluid retention, headache, hepatic 
disorders, hot flushes, hypersensitivity, 
hypertriglyceridemia, muscle issues, nausea, neoplasms, 
retinopathy, skin changes, uterine disorders, vaginal 
bleeding, vomiting, vulvovaginal disorders.
Interactions Tranexaemic Acid can increase the risk of a 
thromboembolism.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Exacerbation of above side effects and QT prolongation 
have been reported. Treatment is symptomatic.
Potential Callouts Tamoxifen has an associated risk of producing a thrombus 
or embolus and so there may be a higher risk of DVT, MI, 
PE and CVA in people taking tamoxifen.
Did You Know? Tamoxifen was originally discovered when trying to create 
a contraceptive pill but actually caused ovulation and was 
seen as a failure until it was recognised for its properties 
against breast cancer [1].
T200 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Tamsulosin (hydrochloride)
Pronunciation Tams-U-low-sin
AKA Combodart®, Contiflo®, Dutrozen®, Faramsil®, Flowmax®, 
Flomaxtra®, Omsula®, Tabphyn®, TAMFREX®, Vecit®, 
Vesomni®
Legal Status P, POM
Medicine Group Alpha-1 Adrenoceptor Antagonist
Conditions Treated BPH.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Tamsulosin binds specifically to alpha1 receptors in the 
smooth muscle of the prostate. This causes it to relax to 
allow passage of urine.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – modified release tablet, modified release capsule
Half Life 17 hours
Full Effect 5 days
Side Effects Dizziness, hypotension, sexual dysfunction.
Interactions Furosemide, glyceryl trinitrate, morphine and nitrous 
oxide all increase the risk of hypotension.
Overdose Symptoms Severe hypotension can occur. Activated charcoal can be 
used if ingestion within 1 hour. Treatment is symptomatic.
Potential Callouts Tamsulosin is selective but it can still cause hypotension 
and so may cause postural hypotension.
Did You Know? Alpha1 receptors are also found in the urethra and ureter 
and have been used to help passage of kidney stones [2].201
T
Temazepam
Pronunciation Tem-az-eh-pam
AKA May have street names e.g. vallies, jellies, roofies, moggies
Legal Status POM, Schedule 3
Medicine Group Benzodiazepine
Conditions Treated Insomnia, conscious sedation in dentistry.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
As a benzodiazepine, temazepam works by increasing the 
action of GABA which causes CNS and muscle relaxation.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet, oral solution
Half Life 10 hours
Full Effect 30 minutes
Side Effects Altered mood, anxiety, ataxia, confusion, depression, 
dizziness, drowsiness, dry mouth, dysarthria, fatigue, 
gastrointestinal disorder, headache, hypotension, 
hypersalivation, inattention, muscle weakness, nausea, 
psychosis, respiratory depression, sleep disorders, slurred 
speech, tremor, urinary incontinence, visual changes, 
withdrawal symptoms.
Interactions Diazepam and midazolam will increase the 
benzodiazepine burden and morphine and nitrous oxide
can increase the risk of CNS depression.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Signs of benzodiazepine overdose include drowsiness, 
ataxia, confusion, coma, hypotension and respiratory 
depression. Activated charcoal can be given if ingestion 
within 1 hour. If symptoms do not present after 4 hours, 
they are unlikely to develop. Flumazenil may be given in 
hospital as an antidote to benzodiazepine overdose but it 
has a high risk of seizures.
Potential Callouts Ataxia and confusion as side effects may be more profound 
in the elderly due to their reduced kidney function.
Did You Know? Hypnotics such as temazepam are often given in military 
aviation to encourage better sleep between missions [3].202 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Tetracycline
Pronunciation Tetra-psych-leen
AKA Sumycin®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Antibiotic (tetracycline)
Conditions Treated Various infection, rosacea, acne, diabetic diarrhoea, 
urethritis, Helicobacter pylori.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Tetracycline binds to the bacterial ribosome and prevents 
the binding of tRNA to mRNA preventing protein 
synthesis.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet
Half Life 8 hours
Full Effect 1 week (4–6 weeks for acne/rosacea)
Side Effects Angioedema, diarrhoea, exacerbation of SLE, headache, 
Henoch–Schönlein purpura, hypersensitivity, nausea, 
pericarditis, photosensitivity, skin reactions, vomiting.
Interactions Paracetamol increases the risk of hepatotoxicity.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Symptoms of liver failure and pancreatitis may present 
from overdose of tetracycline. Treatment should be 
symptomatic.
Potential Callouts Tetracycline should be taken with a large glass of water 
while standing up because it is prone to causing 
oesophageal ulceration which produces symptoms similar 
to indigestion.
Did You Know? Tetracycline should not be given to children under 12 or 
pregnant women as it can have adverse effects on bone and 
teeth development such as staining.203
T
Thiamine
Pronunciation Thigh-ah-mine
AKA Vitamin B1, Pabrinex®, VIgranon-B®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Vitamin Supplement
Conditions Treated Vitamin B1 deficiency due to nutrition, alcohol 
dependence and diuretic use.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Thiamine is a component normally found in the diet its 
main function is in carbohydrate metabolism.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet, modified release tablet, oral solution
Parenteral – solution for injection (with other vitamins)
Half Life N/A
Full Effect A few weeks
Side Effects N/A
Interactions N/A
Overdose Symptoms N/A
Potential Callouts Injectable forms are mainly utilised in hospital 
environments, but they have been shown to cause an 
increased risk of anaphylaxis.
Did You Know? Thiamine deficiency is also known as Beriberi and has a 
‘wet’ form and a ‘dry’ form. The wet form affects the heart 
and gastrointestinal systems while the dry form affects the 
nervous system [4].204 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Tiotropium (bromide)
Pronunciation Tee-oh-trope-ee-um
AKA Acopair®, Braltus®, Spiriva Respimat®, Tiogiva®, Yanimo 
Respimat®, Long Acting Muscarinic Antagonist (LAMA)
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Antimuscarinic
Conditions Treated COPD, Asthma.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Tiotropium binds to the muscarinic receptors of the 
smooth muscle in the bronchial tree. This stops 
acetylcholine binding and causing bronchoconstriction.
Routes of 
Administration
Parenteral – inhalation powder, inhalation solution
Half Life 30 hours
Full Effect Starts to work within hours, full effect in 1–2 months
Side Effects Arrythmias, constipation, cough, dehydration, dizziness, 
dry mouth, headache, joint swelling, nausea, skin ulcers.
Interactions Atropine, chlorphenamine and ipratropium bromide can 
increase anticholinergic effects. Morphine may increase 
the risk of constipation.
Overdose Symptoms Ingestion is unlikely to cause harm. Excessive inhalation 
may cause anticholinergic effects such as dry mouth, 
dilated pupils, constipation, urinary retention, and visual 
changes.
Potential Callouts There have been reports of aspiration and choking risks 
with inhaler use including tiotropium.
Did You Know? Tiotropium inhalers tend to be green in colour.205
T
Tolterodine (tartate)
Pronunciation Tall-ter-oh-deen
AKA Blerone®, Detrusitol®, Mariosea®, Neditol®, Preblacon®, 
Tolterma®, Tolthen®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Antimuscarinic
Conditions Treated Overactive bladder.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Tolterodine is selective to the smooth muscle in the bladder 
by binding to muscarinic receptors and preventing the 
binding of acetylcholine causing muscle contraction.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet, Modified release tablet
Half Life 2.5 hours
Full Effect Starts working in a few hours but can take 4–8 weeks for 
full effect
Side Effects Abdominal pain, bronchitis, chest pain, diarrhoea, dry eye, 
fatigue, gastrointestinal disorders, peripheral oedema, pins 
and needles, vertigo, weight increase.
Interactions Amiodarone and ondansetron can increase QT 
prolongation. Atropine, chlorphenamine and ipratropium 
bromide increase anticholinergic effects. Dexamethasone, 
furosemide, hydrocortisone and salbutamol increase the 
risk of hypokalaemia.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Anticholinergic effects such as urinary retention and dilated 
pupils have been reported. Treatment is symptomatic.
Potential Callouts Anticholinergics can result in both constipation and urinary 
retention which can both present as abdominal pain. This is 
particularly important if multiple anticholinergics are 
being taken.
Did You Know? Women who suffer from urinary incontinence should be 
offered non-pharmacological management before 
pharmacological management is considered [5].206 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Tramadol (hydrochloride)
Pronunciation Tram-ah-doll
AKA Brimisol®, Marol®, Maxitram®, Trilodol®, Tradorec®, 
Tramulief® Zamadol®, Zydol®
Legal Status POM, CD – Schedule 3
Medicine Group Analgesia (Synthetic Opiate)
Conditions Treated Pain (moderate to severe).
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Tramadol is a non-selective agonist of opioid receptors but 
has a high affinity for the μ-receptor. This means that it is 
less likely to cause respiratory depression or constipation.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – soluble tablet, orodispersible tablet, modified 
release tablet, capsules, modified release capsule, oral 
solution, oral drops
Parenteral – solution for injection
Half Life 8 hours
Full Effect 30–60 minutes
Side Effects Arrythmias, confusion, constipation, dizziness, 
drowsiness, dry mouth, euphoria, fatigue, flushing, 
hallucination, headache, hyperhidrosis, nausea, 
palpitations, respiratory depression, skin reactions, urinary 
retention, vomiting, withdrawal.
Interactions Chlorphenamine, diazepam, midazolam and nitrous 
oxide also have CNS depressant effects. Ondansetron can 
reduce the effect of tramadol. Morphine will increase the 
opiate burden.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Overdose can present as a typical opiate overdose with 
respiratory depression, drowsiness, pin-point pupils and 
cardiovascular collapse. Tramadol overdose can also 
present as a serotonin syndrome.
Potential Callouts Tramadol in the modified form can be prescribed in 12 and 
24 hour preparations and if this is not specified on a 
prescription and the wrong preparation is given, it may 
cause withdrawal or overdose. Serotonin syndrome may 
also occur.
Did You Know? Tramadol has an opiate mechanism but also works to 
increase the amount of serotonin utilised at synapses. This 
is why use with Ondansetron (which is a serotonin receptor 
antagonist) can dampen the effects of both drugs [6].207
T
Trimethoprim
Pronunciation Tri-meth-oh-prim
AKA Co-Trimoxazole (in combination with sulfamethoxazole)
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Antibiotic (antifolate)
Conditions Treated Several infections.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Trimethoprim prevents the production of folate in 
bacterium through the inhibition of an enzyme. When 
combined with sulfamethoxazole, folate metabolism is 
disrupted by two pathways increasing the effect of 
trimethoprim.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet, oral solution
Parenteral – solution for infusion (Co-trimoxazole)
Half Life 14 hours
Full Effect 2–3 days
Side Effects Diarrhoea, electrolyte imbalances, fungal infections, 
headache, nausea, skin reactions, vomiting.
Interactions Furosemide increases the risk of hyponatraemia. Heparin
increases the risk of hyperkalaemia. Ibuprofen increases the 
risk of hyponatraemia, nephrotoxicity and hyperkalaemia.
Overdose 
Symptoms
Nausea, vomiting, dizziness, confusion are likely to occur 
and bone marrow suppression may occur in some 
overdoses. Treatment is symptomatic.
Potential Callouts One-third of UTIs are from bacteria that are resistant to 
trimethoprim [7] and so some people may not improve on 
trimethoprim.
Did You Know? Trimethoprim should not be given in pregnancy as it is 
teratogenic.208 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
References for T
1 Jordan, CV. Tamoxifen: catalyst for change to targeted therapy Eur J Canc 2008 44 
p30–38. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejca.2007.11.002
2 Meltzer, A., Burrows, PK., Wolfson, AB., Hollander, JE., Kurz, M., Kirkali, Z., Kusek, 
JW., Mufarrij, P., Jackman, SV. and Brown, J. Effect of tamsulosin on passage of 
symptomatic ureteral stones: a randomised clinical trial. JAMA Int Med 2018 178 (8) 
p1051–1057. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1001/jamainternmed.2018.2259
3 Wingelaar-Jagt, YQ., Wingelaar, TT., Reidel, WJ. and Ramaekers, JG. Fatigue in 
aviation: safety risk, preventative strategies and pharmacological interventions 
Front Phyisiol 2021 12 p712628
4 Smith, TJ., Johnson, CR., Koshy, R., Hess, SY., Qureshi, UA., Mynak, ML. and 
Fischer, PR. Thiamine deficiency disorders: a clinical perspective Ann N.Y Acad Sci 
2020 1498 p9–28. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1111/nyas.14536
5 National Institute for Care Excellence. Treatment Summaries: Urinary incontinence 
and pelvic organ prolapse in women [internet] British National Formuary 2024. 
[cited 2024 03 18]. Available at: https://bnf.nice.org.uk/treatment-summaries/
urinary-incontinence-and-pelvic-organ-prolapse-in-women/
6 Miotto, K., Cho, A., Khalil, M., Blanco, KBS., Sasaki, JD. and Rawson, R. Trends in 
tramadol: pharmacology, metabolism and misuse. Anesthetics Clin Pharmacol 2017 
124 (1) p44–51. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1213/ANE.0000000000001683
7 National Institute for Care Excellence. Antibiotic Resistance is not “common” in 
urinary tract infections. [internet] 2017. Available at: https://www.nice.org.uk/
news/article/antibiotic-resistance-is-now-common-in-urinary-tract-infectionsParamedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications, First Edition. Rose Matheson. 
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
209
V
Vancomycin
Pronunciation Van-co-my-sin
AKA Vancocin®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Antibiotic (glycopeptide)
Conditions Treated Susceptible infections.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Vancomycin works by preventing the synthesis of 
bacterial cell walls.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – capsules
Parenteral – powder for solution for infusion
Half Life 4–6 hours
Full Effect 2–3 days
Side Effects Agranulocytosis, dizziness, drug fever, eosinophilia, 
hypersensitivity, nausea. Nephritis tubulointerstitial, 
neutropenia, renal failure. SCARs, skin reactions, 
thrombocytopenia, tinnitus, vasculitis, vertigo.
Interactions Furosemide and ibuprofen increase the risk of ear 
disorders.
Overdose Symptoms Oral forms of vancomycin are poorly absorbed but 
overdose from intravenous routes may result in side 
effects listed above. Treatment is symptomtic.
Potential Callouts Vancomycin can cause ototoxicity which can present 
as tinnitus, deafness and balance problems.
Did You Know? Vancomycin is not well absorbed and so it is only 
used orally for local treatment of Clostridioides 
difficile infection.
V210 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Venlafaxine
Pronunciation Ven-la-fax-een
AKA Efexor®, Majoven®, Politid®, Sunveniz®, Venaxx®, 
Vencarm®, Venlablue®, Venlasov®, Venladex®, Vensir®, 
Venzip®, ViePax®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Antidepressant – SNRI
Conditions Treated Depression, anxiety, panic disorder, menopausal 
symptoms in breast cancer.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Venlafaxine works by inhibiting noradrenaline and 
serotonin from being reabsorbed into the neuron so it 
can be utilised.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet, modified release tablet, modified 
release capsule, oral solution
Half Life 3–7 hours (9–13 hours active metabolite)
Full Effect 4–6 weeks
Side Effects Altered taste, anxiety, arrhythmias, asthenia, chills, 
confusion, constipation, decreased appetite, 
depersonalisation, diarrhoea, dilated pupils, dizziness, 
dry mouth, dyspnoea, headache, hot flush, hypertension, 
increased muscle tone, menstrual, cycle changes, 
movement disorders, nausea, palpitations, pins and 
needles, sedation, sexual dysfunction, skin reactions, 
sleep disorders, sweat changes, tinnitus, tremor, urinary 
disorders, vomiting, weight changes, yawning.
Interactions Amiodarone and ondansetron also increase the QT 
interval. Ondansetron also increases the risk of 
serotonin syndrome. Aspirin, clopidogrel, heparin, 
ibuprofen increase the risk of bleeding. 
Chlorphenamine, diazepam, midazolam, morphine
and nitrous oxide also have CNS depressant effects. 
Dexamethasone, furosemide, hydrocortisone and 
salbutamol can increase the risk of hypokalaemia.
Overdose Symptoms Tachycardia, changes in consciousness, dilated pupils, 
convulsions and vomiting. ECG changes have also been 
reported. Treatment is symptomatic.
Potential Callouts Venlafaxine withdrawal is reported to have a higher 
suicide risk than other antidepressants.
Did You Know? Venlafaxine is also used for hot flushes in women who 
have breast cancer as HRT is contraindicated in many 
cases [1].211
V
Reference for V
1 Loibl, S., von Minckwitz, K., Strohmeier, G., Mehta, KM. and Kaufmann, 
M. Venlafaxine is superior to clonidine as treatment for hot flashes in breast cancer 
patients – a double blind randomized study Ann Oncol 18 (4) p689–693. Available 
at: https://doi.org/10.1093/annonc/mdl478Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications, First Edition. Rose Matheson.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
212
Warfarin (sodium)
Pronunciation War-far-in
AKA Marevan®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Anticoagulant (Vitamin K Antagonist)
Conditions Treated AF, prosthetic heart valve, DVT, PE and TIA.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Warfarin prevents clotting but preventing the 
synthesis of any clotting factors in the clotting 
cascade beyond vitamin K.
Routes of Administration Enteral – tablet, oral suspension
Half Life 40 hours
Full Effect 2–4 days
Side Effects Haemorrhage
Interactions Amiodarone, dexamethasone, glucagon and 
paracetamol increase the effect of warfarin. Aspirin, 
clopidogrel, heparin, hydrocortisone and ibuprofen
increase bleeding risk.
Overdose Symptoms Haemorrhage is the biggest risk of overdose 
and warfarin can be reversed with Vitamins K1 
(phytomenadione) given intravenously or orally.
Potential Callouts INR can increase due to diet, lifestyle and other 
medications that may increase the person’s risk of 
bleeding without them realising.
Did You Know? Warfarin was originally developed as a rat poison [1].
Reference for W
1 Lim, G. Warfarin: from rat poison to clinical use. Nat Rev Cardiol 2017. Available at: 
https://www.nature.com/articles/nrcardio.2017.172
WParamedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications, First Edition. Rose Matheson.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
213
Z
Zoledronic Acid
Pronunciation Zoll-eh-dron-ic acid
AKA Bisphosponate, Aclasta®, Zoledronate Zometa®
Legal Status POM
Medicine Group Bisphosphonate
Conditions Treated Hypercalcaemia, Paget’s disease, osteoporosis, fracture 
prevention.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of 
Action
Bisphosphonates are absorbed into bone which helps slow 
down bone degeneration.
Routes of 
Administration
Parenteral – Infusion, solution for infusion.
Half Life 167 hours
Full Effect 1 year
Side Effects Alopecia, anaemia, chills, constipation, decreased appetite, 
dizziness, drowsiness, dysphagia, diarrhoea, electrolyte 
imbalance, eye inflammation, fever, flu-like illness, flush￾ing, gastritis, gastrointestinal discomfort, headache, illness, 
joint pain, malaise, myalgia, nausea, oesophageal ulcer, 
oesophagitis, pain, peripheral oedema, renal impairment, 
skin reactions, taste changes, vomiting.
Interactions Ibuprofen can increase the risk of nephrotoxicity.
Overdose Symp￾toms
There is limited data available but people should be moni￾tored for hypocalcaemia (seizures, muscle spasms, numbness 
and pins and needles).
Potential Callouts Zoledronic acid has been associated with osteonecrosis of 
the jaw and may present as a heaviness in the jaw as well as 
increased risk of ‘atypical’ femur fractures.
Did You Know? Bisphosphonates may also be given to those on long-term 
steroids due to the increased fracture risk.
Z214 Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications
Zopiclone
Pronunciation Zop-eh-clone
AKA Zimovane®
Legal Status POM, CD Schedule 4
Medicine Group Z Drug
Conditions Treated Short-term insomnia.
Pharmacology
Mechanism of Action Zopiclone works by having a high affinity to GABA recep￾tors producing a sedentary effect.
Routes of 
Administration
Enteral – tablet
Half Life 5 hours
Full Effect 1 hour
Side Effects Bitter taste, dry mouth
Interactions Chlorphenamine, diazepam, midazolam and nitrous 
oxide also have CNS depressant effects.
Overdose Symptoms CNS depression of various stages from drowsiness to coma. 
Ataxia, hypotonia, hypotension, methemoglobinemia and 
respiratory depression may also occur. Flumazenil may be 
considered as an antidote in severe cases.
Potential Callouts The excessive drowsiness may make people harder to rouse 
which may cause concern.
Did You Know? Zopiclone is pharmacodynamically similar to benzodiaze￾pines but not classed as such.215
Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications, First Edition. Rose Matheson.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
Medications will have a generic name but many are more commonly 
known by the name given by the company that produced the 
medication – this is known as the drug’s brand name. Here is a list of 
the known brand names of medications included in this book.
Brand Names Index
Abilify® – Aripiprazole
Abstral® – Fentanyl
Acea® – Metronidazole
Acopair® – Tiotropium
Actimorph® – Morphine
Adipine® – Nifedipine
Admelog® – Insulin
Alazin® – Pregabalin
Alclasta® – Zoledronic Acid
Aldactone® – Spironolactone
Alka slezer® – Aspirin/ 
Paracetamol
Allegra® – Fexofenadine
Allevia® – Fexofenadine
Alloprim® – Allopurinol
Akizza® – Ethinylestradiol
Anabact® – Metronidazole
Anadin® – Aspirin
Apidra® – Insulin
Aprovel® – Irbesartan
Aricept® – Donepezil
Aronix® – Sildenafil
Artelac® – Hypromellose
Asacol® – Mesalazine
Ativan® – Lorazepam
Atrolak® – Quetiapine
Augmentin® – Co-Amoxiclav
Avelox® – Moxifloxacin
Avenor® – Salmeterol
Axalid® – Pregabalin
Axpinet® – Metformin
Bedranol® – Propranolol
Beechams® – Aspirin
Benadryl® – Cetirizine
Beta-progane® – Propranolol
Bimizza® – Desogestrel/
Ethinylestradiol
Biquelle® – Quetiapine
Blerone® – Tolterodine
Boots Migraine 
Relief® – Sumatriptan216 Brand Names Index
Boots Period Pain 
Relief® – Naproxen
Braltus® – Tiotropium
Brancico® – Quetiapine
Brimisol® – Tramadol
Brolene® – Chloramphenicol
Brevinor® – Ethinylestradiol
Buscopan® – Hyoscine 
butylbromide
Buvidal® – Buprenorphine
Calcichew® – Colecalciferol
Canesten® – Clotrimazole or 
Fluconazole
Carmil® – Isosorbide mononitrate
Cardioplen® – Felodipine
Cardizem® – Diltiazem
Cardura® – Doxazosin
Cerazette® – Desogestrel
Chemydur® – Isosorbide 
mononitrate
Cidomycin® – Gentamycin
Cimizt® – Desogestrel/
Ethinylestradiol
Clarytin® – Loratadine
Clenil 
modulite® – Beclometasone
Clozaril® – Clozapine
Combisal® – Salmeterol
Combodart® – Tamsulosin
Contiflo® – Tamsulosin
Contulen® – Sertraline
Coracten® – Nifedipine
Cosmocol® – Macrogol
Coversyl® – Perindopril
Cozarr® – Losartan
Cyanokit® – Hydroxocobalamin
Dacadis® – Gliclazide
Dandrazol® – Ketoconazole
Delofine® – Felodipine
Denzapine® – Clozapine
Depakin® – Sodium valproate
Detrusitol® – Tolterodine
DF 118 
Forte® – Dihydrocodeine
Diamicron® – Gliclazide
Dianette® – Ethinylestradiol
Diflucan® – Fluconazole
Digamet® – Metformin
Dilantin® – Phenytoin
Dioctyl® – Docusate sodium
Dioralyte® – Rehydration Salts
Ditropan® – Oxybutynin
Duadopa® – Levadopa (and 
carbidopa)
Dulcoease® – Docusate sodium
Dutrozen® – Tamsulosin
Dyzanil® – Sodium valproate
Efexor® – Venlafaxine
Effentora® – Fentanyl
Efracea® – Doxycycline
Elavil® – Amitriptyline
Elantan® – Isosorbide mononitrate
Eliquis® – Apixaban
Elione® – Ethinylestradiol
Eltroxin® – LevothyroxineBrand Names Index 217
Enyglid® – Repaglinide
Epanutin® – Phenytoin
Epilim® – Sodium valproate
Epival® – Sodium valproate
Episenta® – Sodium valproate
Evra® – Ethinylestradiol
Faramsil® – Tamsulosin
Feanolla® – Desogestrel
Felotens® – Felodipine
Femodene® – Ethinylestradiol
Femodette® – Ethinylestradiol
Fiasp® – Insulin
Fixkoh® – Salmeterol
Flagyl® – Metronidazole
Flixabi® – Infliximab
Flowmax® – Tamsulosin
Flowmaxtra® – Tamsulosin
Foleate – Folic Acid
Folpik® – Felodipine
Fortipine® – Nifedipine
Frusol® – Furosemide
Fusacomb® – Salmeterol
Gavilast® – Ranitidine
Gaviscon® – Alginates
Gedarel® – Desogestrel/
Ethinylestradiol
Genticin® – Gentamicin
Glucophage® – Metformin
Glucient® – Metformin
Glucorex® – Metformin
Goldeneye® – Chloramphenicol
Granpidam® – Sildenafil
Halodol® – Haloperidol
Halkid® – Haloperidol
Hana® – Desogestrel
Humalog® – Insulin
Humulin® – Insulin
Imdur® – Isosorbide 
mononitrate
Imigran® – Sumatriptan
Imodium® – Loperamide
Imuran® – Azathioprine
Inderal® – Propranolol
Inflectra® – Infliximab
Instanyl® – Fentanyl
Insulatard® – Insulin
Insuman® – Insulin
Isib® – Isosorbide mononitrate
Ismo Retard® – Isosorbide 
mononitrate
Isodur® – Isosorbide 
mononitrate
Isotard® – Isosorbide 
mononitrate
Januvia® – Sitagliptin
Jesacrin® – Metformin
Joy-rides® – Hyoscine 
hydrobromide
Jylamvo® – Methotrexate
Kineret® – Anakinra
Keppra® – Levetiracetam
Ketalar® – Ketamine
Klean Prep® – Macrogol218 Brand Names Index
Kwells® – Hyoscine 
hydrobromide
Lamictal® – Lamotrigine
Lanoxin® – Digoxin
Lariam® – Mefloquine
Laxido® – Macrogol
Lecado® – Levadopa (and 
carbidopa)
Legicon® – Levadopa (and 
carbidopa)
Levemir® – Insulin
Levest® – Ethinylestradiol
Liberize® – Sildenafil
LMX® – Lidocaine
Logynon® – Ethinylestradiol
Losec® – Omeprazole
Lovenox® – Enoxaparin
Lovima® – Desogestrel
Lucette® – Ethinylestradiol
Lustral® – Sertraline
Lyclear® – Permethrin
Lyrica® – Pregabalin
Lymujev® – Insulin
MabThera® – Rituximab
Macrobid® – Nitrofurantoin
Madopar® – Levadopa (and 
carbidopa)
Maexeni® – Ethinylestradiol
Majoven® – Venlafaxine
Malarone® – Atovaquone/
Proguanil
Manevac® – Senna
Marevan® – Warfarin
Mariosea® – Tolterodine
Marol® – Tramadol
Marvelon® – Desogestrel/
Ethinylestradiol
Maxitram® – Tramadol
Maxtrex® – Methotrexate
Meijumet® – Metformin
Mercilon® – Devogestrel/
Ethinylestradiol
Metabet® – Metformin
Metharose® – Methadone
Methofiill® – Methotrexate
Metoject® – Methotrexate
Metrogel® – Metronidazole
Metrose® – Metronidazole
Metuxtan® – Metformin
Mezavant® – Mesalazine
Mezzopram® – Omeprazole
Microgynon 30® – Ethinylestradiol
Migranitan® – Sumatriptan
Millinette ® – Ethinylestradiol
Mintreleq® – Quetiapine
Modisal® – Isosorbide mononitrate
Molaxole® – Macrogol
Monomax® – Isosorbide 
mononitrate
Monomil® – Isosorbide 
mononitrate
Monopost® – Latanoprost
Monosorb® – Isosorbide 
mononitrate
Morphgesic® – Morphine
Motilium® – DomperidoneBrand Names Index 219
Movicol® – Macrogol
Moviprep® – Macrogol
Moxivig® – Moxifloxacin
MST® – Morphine
Mucodyne® – Carbocystine
Mucolite® – Acetylcystine
MXL® – Morphine
NACSYS® – Acetylcystine
Naprosyn® – Naproxen
Natrilix® – Indapamide
Nazdol® – Gliclazide
Neditol® – Tolterodine
Neofel® – Felodipine
Neovent® – Salmeterol
Neurontin® – Gabapentin
Nicassist® – Nicotine
Nicorette® – Nicotine
Nicotell® – Nicotine
Nifedipress® – Nifedipine
NiQuitin® – Nicotine
Nizoralv – Ketoconazole
Nolvadex® – Tamoxifen
Nordimet® – Methotrexate
Norimin® – Ethinylestradiol
NovoRapid® – Insulin
Nuvaring® – Ethinylestradiol
Nystaform® – Nystatin
Nyzamac® – Isosorbide 
mononitrate
Okedi® – Risperidone
Olena® – Fluoxetine
Omsula® – Tamsulosin
Oromorph® – Morphine
Otosca® – Mesalazine
Ovranette® – Ethinylestradiol
Pabrinex® – Thiamine
Paramid® – Felodipine
PecFent® – Fentanyl
Penicillin V®
– Phenoxymethylpenicillin
Pepto-bismol® – Alginates
Pentasa® – Mesalazine
Pevanti® – Prednisolone
Physeptone® – Methadone
Pinefeld® – Felodipine
Piriteze® – Cetirizine
Piriton® – Chlorphenamine
Plenvu® – Macrogol
Politid® – Venlafaxine
Pollenase® – Cetirizine
Pradaxa® – Dabigatran
Prandin® – Repaglinide
Preblacon® – Tolterodine
Prednesol® – Prednisolone
Propecia® – Finasteride
Proscar® – Finasteride
Prozac® – Fluoxetine
Prozep® – Fluoxetine
Pulmicort® – Budesonide
Ravlo® – Lidocaine
Remicade® – Infliximab
Relosorb® – Isosorbide 
mononitrate
Remisima® – Infliximab220 Brand Names Index
Revatio® – Sildenafil
Rigevidon® – Ethinylestradiol
Risperdal Consta® – Risperidone
Rixathon® – Rituximab
Roaccutane® – Isotretinoin
Rozex® – Metronidazole
Ruxience® – Rituximab
Salbulin® – Salbutamol
Salcrozine® – Mesalazine
Salofalk® – Mesalazine
Scopoderm® – Hyoscine 
hydrobromide
Senokot® – Senna
Septrin – Co-trimoxazole
Sereflo® – Salmeterol
Serenace® – Haloperidol
Seretide® – Salmeterol
Serevent® – Salmeterol
Seroquel® – Quetiapine
Seroxat® – Paroxetine
Severdol® – Morphine
Sinemet® – Levadopa (and 
carbidopa)
Singulair® – Montelukast
Sirdulpa® – Salmeterol
Sixmo® – Buprenorphine
Solpadol® – Co-codamol
Soltel® – Salmeterol
Sonodate® – Quetiapine
Spiriva Respimat® – Tiotropium
Stalpex® – Salmeterol
Stavelo® – Levadopa (and 
carbidopa)
Stirlescent® – Naproxen
Strigol® – Macrogol
Suboxone® – Buprenorphine
Sukkarto® – Metformin
Sumycin® – Tetracycline
Sunveniz® – Venlafaxine
Symbicort – Budesonide
Synphase® – Ethinylestradiol
Tabphyn® – Tamsulosin
TAMFREX® – Tamsulosin
Tegretol – Carbamazepine
TENSAID® – Indapamide
Tensipine® – Nifedipine
Teragezza® – Ethinylestradiol
Tetralysal® – Lymecycline
Tiogiva® – Tiotropium
Tolterma® – Tolterodine
Tolthen® – Tolterodine
Toujeo® – Insulin
Tradorec® – Tramadol
Trajenta® – Linagliptin
Tramulief® – Tramadol
Trangina® – Isosorbide 
mononitrate
Tresiba® – Insulin
Trilodol® – Tramadol
Triregol® – Ethinylestradiol
Tritace® – Ramipril
Trurapi® – Insulin
Truxima® – Rituximab
Vancocin® – Vancomycin
Vascalpha® – Felodipine
Vecit® – Tamsulosin
Venaxx® – VenlafaxineBrand Names Index 221
Vencarm® – Venlafaxine
Venlablue® – Venlafaxine
Venlasov® – Venlafaxine
Venladex® – Venlafaxine
Vensir® – Venlafaxine
Ventolin® – Salbutamol
Venzip® – Venlafaxine
Versatis® – Lidocaine
Vesicare® – Solifenacin
Vesomni® – Solifenacin and 
Tamsulosin
Viagra® – Sildenafil
Vibrimycin® – Doxycycline
ViePax® – Venlafaxine
VigranonB® – Thiamine
Vimovo® – Naproxen
Vistaprep – Macrogol
Vitamin B1 – Thiamine
Vitamin B9 – Folic Acid
Vitamin B12 – Cyancoalbumin 
(tablet) or Hydroxocobalamin 
(injection)
Vitamin D3 – Colecalciferol
Vizarsin® – Sildenafil
Xalatan® – Latanoprost
Xarleto® – Rivaroxaban
Xismox® – Isosorbide 
mononitrate
Xylocaine® – Lidocaine
Yacella® – Ethinylestradiol
Yaltormin® – Metformin
Yanimo 
Respimat® – Tiotropium
Yasmin® – Ethinylestradiol
Yiznell® – Ethinylestradiol
Zaluron® – Quetiapine
Zamadol® – Tramadol
Zanidip® – Lercanidipine
Zaponex® – Clozapine
Zeletta® – Desogestrel
Zemon® – Isosorbide 
mononitrate
Zessly® – Infliximab
Zestrel® – Lisinopril
Zidoval® – Metronidazole
Ziclaseg® – Gliclazide
Zicron® – Gliclazide
Zimovane® – Zopiclone
Zintasa® – Mesalazine
Zirtek® – Cetirizine
Zispin® – Mirtazapine
Zlatal® – Methotrexate
Zocor® – Simvastatin
Zoledronate Zometa® – 
Zoledronic Acid
Zoloft® – Sertraline
Zomorph® – Morphine
Zoton® – Lansoprazole
Zovirax® – Aciclovir
Zydol® – Tramadol
Zyloprim® – Allopurinol
Zyprexa® – Olanzapine222
Paramedic Pocketbook of Prescription Medications, First Edition. Rose Matheson.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
Anticholinergic Burden When people take multiple medications 
with an anticholinergic effects, they can build up and cause short-term 
and long-term effects of an anticholinergic toxidrome.
Bacteriostatic Antibiotic An antibiotic that supresses cellular activity 
such as reproduction but is not involved in cell death.
Bactericidal Antibiotic An antibiotic that kills bacteria.
Black Triangle Medicines When medications are first brought onto 
the market, they undergo a period as a ‘black triangle’ medication. 
This means that every adverse effect that could be attributed to the 
medication must be reported to the MHRA. This is to help build up 
the safety profile of the medication.
Breakthrough Medication Medications that are required to man￾age a symptom in isolation or on top of an ongoing medication 
regime.
Clotting Cascade The process involved in clot formation in the 
human body that has both intrinsic and extrinsic pathways.
Cross Sensitivity Medications that have similar origins or mecha￾nisms of action can cause allergic reactions in people with a known 
allergy to one group of similar medications.
Enteral Any medication that is given via the digestive tract and may 
undergo first pass metabolism.
Extrapyramidal Effects Side effects that occur from certain medica￾tions that effect the extrapyramidal system in the brain resulting in 
involuntary movements.
Glossary
本书版权归John Wiley & Sons Inc.所有 0005812382.indd 222 5/23/2024 6:55:06 PMGlossary 223
First Pass Metabolism When medications are taken via the digestive 
tract, they are absorbed into the blood stream and taken to the liver 
where they will undergo a degree of metabolism before being uti￾lised. This initial metabolism is called First Pass Metabolism. Some 
medications will be designed to go through this process in order to 
activate.
Half Life The time it takes for the concentration of a drug in the body 
to reach 50% concentration.
Henoch–Schönlein Purpura An inflammation of the blood vessels 
causing a rash of red spots and associated with pain in the joints 
and kidney injury. It usually resolves on it is own but the rash can 
present similarly to meningococcal septicaemia.
Hyponatraemia Low levels of sodium in the blood.
Hypernatraemia High levels of sodium in the blood.
Long Lie A person who has fallen and remained on the floor unable 
to get up for a significant period. Guidance is not clear on when a 
fall becomes a long lie; however, more than one hour on the floor 
should increase suspicion of a patient developing complications 
such as rhabdomyolysis. This can vary based on their range of 
movement while on the floor – those who are paralysed will be at 
greater risk than those who are able to move around.
Narrow Therapeutic Index Drugs with a narrow therapeutic index 
have a small window where they can have a therapeutic effect 
before coming toxic or exerting negative side effects.
Nephrotic Syndrome Mostly diagnosed in children, this condition 
causes high amounts of protein in the urine. This can lead to symp￾toms such as urine changes, peripheral oedema, infections and 
blood clots.
Off Label An off label use for a medicine means that is has been 
granted a licence to treat certain conditions but not the one it might 
be getting use for. This might be because there have not been 
enough clinical trials in that patient group.
本书版权归John Wiley & Sons Inc.所有 0005812382.indd 223 5/23/2024 6:55:06 PM224 Glossary
Parenteral This is a method of administration that occurs out with 
the gastrointestinal tract.
Peak Plasma This is the highest concentration a drug can reach in 
the blood stream following administration.
Plasma Protein Binding Medications vary in how much they are 
able to bind to plasma proteins in the blood. Some will have a high 
affinity while others will not. Those that are bound to these pro￾teins tend to be inactive while those unbound can be utilised by 
the body.
Reflex Tachycardia This occurs when the blood pressure drops and 
the heart beats faster in an attempt to compensate. This can be a 
negative side effect of medications that lower blood pressure.
Serotonin Syndrome This is a toxidrome that occurs when the levels 
of serotonin in the body are too high. Symptoms include hyper￾thermia, shivering, tremors, agitation, hypertension and 
tachycardia.
Steady State This is the term for when a medication reaches a con￾stant therapeutic level in the blood over a period of time.
Teratogenic This is a term for medications that are harmful to unborn 
foetuses.
Toxidrome This is a pattern of symptoms that relate to an overdose 
of groups of medications.
Unlicenced Medication This is a medication that does not have a 
licence to be used in the UK.
本书版权归John Wiley & Sons Inc.所有 0005812382.indd 224 5/23/2024 6:55:06 PMWILEY END USER LICENSE AGREE￾MENT
Go to www.wiley.com/go/eula to access Wiley’s ebook 
EULA.
