lan43463_fm_i-1.indd i 07/17/23 06:07 pm
Payroll 
Accounting 2024
Final PDF to printerlan43463_fm_i-1.indd ii 07/17/23 06:07 pm
Final PDF to printerlan43463_fm_i-1.indd iii 07/17/23 06:07 pm
Jeanette M. Landin, Ed.D., 
M.B.A.
Landmark College
Paulette Schirmer, D.B.A., 
M.B.A.
University of Alaska Southeast
Tenth Edition
Payroll 
Accounting 2024
Final PDF to printerlan80332_fm_ise.indd ii 07/28/23 03:06 pm
PAYROLL ACCOUNTING 2024
Published by McGraw Hill LLC, 1325 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019. Copyright ©2024 by 
McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. No part of this publication may 
be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without 
the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC, including, but not limited to, in any network or other electronic 
storage or transmission, or broadcast for distance learning.
Some ancillaries, including electronic and print components, may not be available to customers outside the 
United States.
This book is printed on acid-free paper. 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 LWI 27 26 25 24 23
ISBN 978-1-266-28033-7
MHID 1-266-28033-2
Cover Image: Chombosan/Shutterstock
All credits appearing on page or at the end of the book are considered to be an extension of the copyright page.
mheducation.com/highered
The Internet addresses listed in the text were accurate at the time of publication. The inclusion of a website does 
not indicate an endorsement by the authors or McGraw Hill LLC, and McGraw Hill LLC does not guarantee the 
accuracy of the information presented at these sites.
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYlan43463_fm_i-1.indd v 07/17/23 06:07 pm
v
Paulette Schirmer
University of Alaska Southeast
Paulette Schirmer is an assis￾tant professor of accounting 
with the University of Alaska 
Southeast for its account￾ing courses. She received 
her B.S. in accounting from 
Metropolitan State College 
of Denver (now Metropolitan 
State University of Denver), 
her M.B.A. from Regis University, and her D.B.A. from 
the University of Phoenix, where she researched globaliza￾tion strategies for small businesses.
Dr. Schirmer was also recently an accountant with the 
Division of Finance for the State of Alaska. She worked 
as the statewide training coordinator and assisted with 
developing and troubleshooting the accounting program’s 
reporting system. Dr. Schirmer was active in preparing 
Alaska’s Annual Comprehensive Financial Report, Annual 
Compensation and Travel Report, assisted with budget￾ary implementation, departmental accounting, and struc￾ture training. Dr. Schirmer is an active member of the 
Institute for Management Accountants (IMA), Teachers of 
Accounting at Two-Year Colleges (TACTYC), the Society 
for Human Resource Management (SHRM), American 
Payroll Association, and Quality Matters.
Jeanette Landin
Landmark College
Jeanette Landin is an associ￾ate professor of professional 
studies at Landmark College 
in Putney, Vermont, where 
she teaches undergraduate 
accounting and business 
courses to an at-risk student 
population. She is a bacca￾laureate student advisor and 
is the program coordinator 
for both associate’s and bach￾elor’s level degrees offered 
by the school of Professional Studies. Dr. Landin earned 
her B.A. degree from the University of California at Irvine 
before receiving her M.B.A. and Ed.D. from the University 
of Phoenix, where she researched college success strate￾gies for at-risk students. She has earned master’s certifi￾cates in accounting and autism spectrum disorders.
Dr. Landin is an active member of the Institute for 
Management Accountants (IMA), the American Accounting 
Association, Teachers of Accounting at Two-Year Colleges 
(TACTYC), the Society for Human Resource Management 
(SHRM), Association of Certified Fraud Examiners (ACFE), 
and Vermont Women in Higher Education (VWHE) and a 
Fellow with the International Society for Development and 
Sustainability. She previously served as an active member 
of the California Business Educators Association and the 
Western Business Educators Association. Dr. Landin has 
served as the IMA’s Committee for Academic Relations 
chair and as a peer reviewer for the American Accounting 
Association. She is a peer reviewer for the Transnational 
Journal of Business and the associate editor for accounting 
with the Multimedia Educational Resource for Learning and 
Online Teaching (MERLOT).
About the Authors
Dedications
The authors dedicate this book to the following individuals:
For Chris, Kira, and Meg, who remind me to relax, 
and for Mom and Dad, who believed in me until the very end.
—Jeanette Landin
For Royce and Elizabeth, who kept me grounded and 
reminded me to have fun. For Christina, who reminds me to 
stop and breathe.
—Paulette Schirmer
©Tom Raffelt
©Ryan Kauzlarich
Final PDF to printervi
lan43463_fm_i-1.indd vi 07/17/23 06:07 pm
We are excited to share the new edition of Payroll Accounting 2024 with you. Payroll accounting is detailed, deadline￾driven, and of utmost importance for the successful functioning of a business. The changing, detailed nature of payroll 
accounting involves legal challenges, economic changes, technological advances, and—above all—governmental obliga￾tions. Our text takes a modern approach to payroll accounting, incorporating coverage of real-world issues that many 
students will face in their careers, such as cybersecurity, payroll fraud, labor planning, artificial intelligence, and labor 
costs. We believe that this textbook’s information and ancillary materials contribute to a comprehensive understanding 
of payroll accounting in the 21st century and will make accounting students more valuable to the organizations they work 
for in their careers.
But as educators, we understand that providing the content is not enough, so we provide multiple opportunities for 
students to practice in Connect. Whether you are teaching face-to-face, hybrid, or online, Payroll Accounting 2024 is 
flexible enough to be used in courses as short as 3 weeks and as long as 15 weeks. We are proud of what we have accom￾plished with this text, and we thank the faculty and students who have provided feedback to refine the content in this edition. 
We strongly believe that we have taken payroll accounting education to a higher level of rigor.
Our payroll accounting approach differs from other texts because of our perspective on payroll’s role in business. To us, 
payroll is more than pressing buttons, writing checks, and submitting forms—payroll is the story of people. These people 
include the ones within the business who make decisions about the company’s directions and the people who work for the 
business and depend on their paychecks to support their livelihoods. We wrote this text because we wanted students to 
understand how business directly affects employees’ lives and vice versa.
In light of the COVID-19 pandemic and changes to payroll practices that started in 2020, we have included information 
specific to employees’ and employers’ governmental provisions, many of which are sunsetting soon. We wanted to make 
the information available for students who may encounter workplace issues related to the pandemic in the future.
To foster the connection between business and people, each chapter’s introductory story contains recent events involv￾ing payroll accounting that highlight the connections among payroll, legislation, business decisions, and people affected by 
all the decisions made. In Chapter 1, we highlighted a shift in workers’ attitudes to work that emanated from the changes 
to the work environment during COVID-19 shutdowns: the demand for a better work-life balance supported by employers. 
For Chapter 2, we discussed the current movement of refugees into the workplace and highlighted the difference between 
H-1B and refugee work visas. In Chapter 3, we explored the challenges of new pay transparency laws that have been 
enacted in many places. Chapter 4 explores the need for flexible benefits that suit both traditional and remote workers and 
the “out of sight, out of mind” challenges that remote workers face. In Chapter 5, we focused on the demand for flexible pay 
or on-demand pay that is gaining popularity. In Chapter 6, we discussed the challenge of rising labor costs that employers 
face, many of which have resulted in layoffs. Finally, our Chapter 7 introduction considers the effects of artificial 
intelligence, the Great Resignation, and COVID-19, all of which have led to a shortage of accountants.
What makes this text a modern approach is that we believe that payroll is the connection between financial and 
managerial accounting. It has everyday connections to businesses, people, and the greater economy in a myriad of ways. 
Our approach is to encourage students to know the how of computing payroll and the why inherent to its logic because 
we believe strongly that the future of the accounting profession involves people with higher-order knowledge of both the 
process and the purpose within the broader scheme of business. We have included materials to demonstrate the integration 
of payroll in other aspects of both managerial and financial accounting and business operations. Within Appendixes D and 
E, we have provided information that allows readers to connect their learning about payroll within the context of their own 
state’s legal framework and links to each state’s revenue department to facilitate specific learning. We are passionate about 
the connections students make between college education and their lives because we understand their importance, and we 
bring a wealth of experience in accounting, education, industry, and governmental settings that informs our writing.
Our text features many interesting real-world connections. We have drawn examples from many disciplines to help make 
payroll accounting come alive for teachers and students alike. We want to call specific attention to two discussions that are 
unique to our text: (1) the content in Chapter 6 explores labor planning for employers (Learning Objectives 6-5 and 6-6), 
and (2) the discussion in Chapter 7 about the function of labor costs in business and employee benefits reports as strategic 
tools (Learning Objectives 7-5 and 7-6). We believe this information contributes to a comprehensive understanding of 
payroll accounting as it evolves in the 21st century. It will make accounting students more valuable as emerging accountants 
embark upon their careers.
A Note from the Authors
Final PDF to printervii
lan43463_fm_i-1.indd vii 07/17/23 06:07 pm
We strongly believe that payroll accounting needs to be applied, so we provide both a continuing problem, located at 
the end of each chapter, and a comprehensive problem, located in Appendix A, that may be presented in either three-month 
or one-month versions. Technological integration of the continuing problem and Appendix A within Connect provides an 
excellent tool for student learning and faculty assessment of course learning objectives. To facilitate student assessment, 
we included formative assessments in our comprehensive problem in Appendix A in the form of Stop & Check ques￾tions. SmartBook 2.0 and guided example videos of tax-form completion reinforce integral concepts and key terminology. 
We are excited to produce this work through McGraw-Hill because of its top-quality teaching and learning resources 
available through Connect. Teaching traditional payroll accounting and Internet-based financial accounting via 
McGraw-Hill’s Connect platform for several years has been a wonderful experience for our students and ourselves.
The AACSB guidelines encourage achieving the highest possible standards in business education. We believe that 
students should understand both how payroll should be completed and how it can be manipulated for personal gain. 
Payroll fraud continues to be a major source of loss for companies, and it is surprising to find how common it is. We have 
included examples of the frauds that employees have perpetrated in recent years. According to the Association of Certified 
Fraud Examiners, payroll fraud of all types, including misclassification of workers, costs businesses $62,000 per instance 
and approximately $130 billion annually. We hope that these stories enliven and enrich your class discussions. We have 
updated the payroll processing options in Chapter 1 to reflect an accurate representation of the current state of the avail￾able technology used by businesses of any size (Learning Objective 1-5). In Chapter 2, we explored situations where an 
individual may have multiple employers and how to report new employees per legal requirements (Learning Objective 2-2). 
We believe that this information about multiple employers and multistate employees is a growing issue that will challenge 
employers, especially as payroll employees have been working from remote locations. As such, we explored cybersecurity 
and payroll in more depth in Learning Objective 2-5 to attenuate students to this growing concern.
We have updated our section about cryptocurrency as a means of transmitting payroll amounts due in Learning Objective 
5-6. It is important to understand that cryptocurrency as a means of paying employees, while being considered, is a 
complicated issue because of its connection to the stock market, as opposed to a central bank, as a basis for its value. 
This topic is evolving. We are certain that we will witness the evolution of payment methods involving cryptocurrency 
in the future regarding regulating its use and protecting employee pay and employer tax remittance.
We continue to rely on our colleagues’ guidance, instructor feedback, and student suggestions to keep us grounded 
and push us to deliver the best possible content. We hope you enjoy reading this book as much as we enjoy writing it!
Jeanette Landin
Paulette Schirmer
Final PDF to printerviii
lan43463_fm_i-1.indd viii 07/17/23 06:07 pm
Changes to the Tenth Edition
Chapter 3
Chapter 3 contains an updated the Department of Labor 
ruling about gig economy workers. We clarified travel 
time with multiple stops per workday and added an exam￾ple. We updated guidance about the use of subminimum 
wages, which has seen a legislative reduction in its use. 
We have clarified pay practices for on-call time and have 
included holiday and vacation pay examples using the pay￾roll register. We continued to update the minimum wage 
tables and tipped minimum wage tables.
Chapter 4
We continue to expand the discussion of fringe benefits 
in Chapter 4. We explored specific fringe benefits that 
employers have offered during the pandemic. We added 
information on new benefits requested by employees. We 
added contribution limits for SIMPLE 401(k) and updated 
amounts for 2023. We also added guidance from the IRS 
about household employees.
Chapter 5
Chapter 5 expanded our explanation about using pages 
3 and 4 of the 2020 (and later) Form W-4. We added 
clarification to the computation of Social Security tax 
for employees whose wages approach the annual wage 
base, which increased significantly for 2023. We dis￾cussed how employees who work from home might 
Chapter 1
Chapter 1 contained the biggest changes of the year. 
It involved the enactment of the SECURE 2.0 and 
Respect for Marriage Acts. These two acts changed 
many pieces affecting payroll, especially the treatment 
of retirement accounts and student loan payments and 
the treatment of spouses. Another important piece of 
legislation is the burgeoning amount of pay transpar￾ency laws. We updated payroll-related legislation to 
reflect as many changes as possible before publication. 
We updated the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics’ employ￾ment and salary information and updated COVID￾19 pandemic changes regarding payroll and OSHA 
penalties. We updated ERISA guidelines about retirement 
funds that are sensitive to environmental, sustainability, 
and governance risks. We updated right-to-work laws and 
paid family leave. We included industry best practices for 
cybersecurity.
Chapter 2
Chapter 2 contains a table of state payday requirements 
to facilitate an understanding of statewide pay frequency 
laws. We updated the list of required employee data and 
updated data about paycard use and the rationale for the 
expansion of its use. We discussed the growing practice of 
flexible workplaces, which started during COVID-19 and 
has started becoming a norm in many companies.
We have included additional content in this tenth edition of Payroll Accounting based on our reviewers’ and users’ 
feedback. While updating the tenth edition content, we updated many laws in Chapter 1. In Chapter 2, we added clar￾ity to the pros and cons of Internet-based payroll apps. In Chapter 3, we explored a trend toward repealing the sub￾minimum wage laws in some states. For Chapter 4, we added a summary of pre- and post-tax deductions with 
the note that some can be either. Chapter 5 contains information about pay on demand and its implications for 
employers. We added a year-end payroll checklist to Chapter 6, and information about the integration of artificial intelli￾gence into the payroll industry in Chapter 7.
We have maintained our content about the available payroll certification exams. A correlation guide is included 
in Appendix F that aligns the learning objectives in the text with the topics included on payroll certification 
examinations offered by the National Association of Certified Professional Bookkeepers (NACPB), the American Institute 
of Professional Bookkeepers (AIPB), and the American Payroll Association (APA).
We appreciate all feedback and user recommendations we have received because they have helped us create a stronger, 
more complete text. The changes we have made have added clarity, updated information, and additional opportunities for 
students to demonstrate their understanding of the concepts presented.
The following are specific changes to each chapter.
Final PDF to printerix
lan43463_fm_i-1.indd ix 07/17/23 06:07 pm
New Hire Report form for Nevada and updated the payroll 
register to reflect current practices. We included Stop & 
Checks in the Appendix to provide formative assessment 
opportunities.
Appendix C: Federal Income Tax Tables
We updated the percentage and the wage-bracket 
methods of determining federal income tax withholding 
to reflect the most current tax rates available. We have 
included Publication 15-T in this appendix.
Appendix D: State Income Tax Information
We updated the tax rates for each state in Appendix D.
Appendix F: Payroll Certification 
Information
We continued to correlate the learning objectives in this 
text with the topics included in payroll certification exami￾nations offered by the National Association of Certified 
Professional Bookkeepers (NACPB), the American 
Institute of Professional Bookkeepers (AIPB), and the 
American Payroll Association (APA). We included the 
certification exam requirements and contact information 
for each certification organization.
be subject to different state and local taxes because of 
the change in their primary work location. We added 
tables to explain garnishment maximums by category. 
We updated information on the number of people who use 
online banking.
Chapter 6
In Chapter 6, we explained how the CARES Act provisions 
affect employer tax due dates. We discussed the changes to 
tax forms in 2023. We explored exclusions to FUTA for 
U.S. citizens who work for foreign employers. We updated 
the required periodic employer reporting forms.
Chapter 7
Chapter 7 explores the declining number of accountants 
and efforts to bring more people into the profession. We 
explored the use of artificial intelligence and how it could 
affect the payroll profession. We highlighted the need for 
payroll accountants as a vital part of business operations.
Appendix A: Comprehensive 
Payroll Project
In Appendix A, we continued to emphasize the completion 
of the payroll register and data transfer to both employees’ 
earnings records and accounting entries. We included the 
Final PDF to printerx
lan43463_fm_i-1.indd x 07/17/23 06:07 pm
Text Features
Confirming Pages
34   Chapter 1  Payroll Practices and System Fundamentals
lan43463_ch01_002-045.indd 34 
© McGraw Hill: DRAFT REVIEW COPY – NOT FOR PUBLICATION OR DISTRIBUTION
Choosing payroll technology can be a complex task for employees charged with find￾ing appropriate technological solutions. Some of the considerations include:
 • Flexibility in employee pay options.
 • Time collection procedures.
 • Tax reporting.
 • Geotagging of employee work locations.
 • Software affordability.
 • Software update schedules.
What Is the Difference?
&Check Stop
In a few words, compare the following:
 a. Manual payroll systems
 b. Computerized payroll systems
 c. Outsourced payroll systems
 d. Certified payroll
LEGAL ENVIRONMENT
To say that the legal environment of payroll is continually evolving is an understatement. Since 2018, 
we have witnessed the following legal challenges:
 • Increasing numbers of private employers and localities raise the minimum wage significantly to 
close the gap between the minimum wage and the living wage.
 • Supplemental wage rate changes for payments of bonuses.
 • State enforcement of predictive scheduling and fair/flexible scheduling laws on changing 
employees’ schedules.
 • Reframing the federal income tax structure, treatment for nonresident aliens, supplemental 
wage withholding rates, and inflation adjustments.
 • An increase in the need for centralized and fully communicated company policies to meet 
remote workers’ and companies’ needs.
Future trends to watch include: 
 • A shift to complete digitalization of payroll processes, including partial or complete remote work 
options.
 • Increased guidance about payroll tax impacts involving Indian tribal employees and student loan 
deferrals.
 • A focus on employee retention could include unlimited paid time off without specific tracking of 
hours used. 
 • Increases in employees with multiple part-time jobs could lead to legislative changes involving 
“gig” employee classification and related benefits.
 • Changes in worker attitudes about the minimum pay for which they are willing to work, as 
opposed to the legislated minimum wage.
Trends to Watch
Chapter Opener
Each chapter opens by focusing on a payroll accounting 
topic related to real-world companies to set the stage for 
the chapter’s topic.
Chapter 1  Payroll Practices and System Fundamentals   3
lan43463_ch01_002-045.indd 3 05/09/23 06:52 pm
© McGraw Hill: DRAFT REVIEW COPY – NOT FOR PUBLICATION OR DISTRIBUTION
Healthy Work-Life Policies Are the New Norm
The “Now Hiring” signs remain, but the unemployment rate in the United States is at a 
historic low. Employers seek employees, but the most recent crop of workers no longer 
wants to work for low wages or in demeaning work environments. They seek fulfilling jobs, 
both monetarily and culturally, and want bosses who respect their skills and future poten￾tial. This shift may seem like worker entitlement; however, it reflects the aftereffects of the 
COVID pandemic and a new breed of employees who know what they want, know who 
they are, and demand healthy work-life boundaries.
In response to employee demands, employers such as Nintendo and Microsoft, among 
many others, have included work–life balance offerings demonstrating respect for their 
employees. Nintendo explicitly expresses an attitude of partnership with its employees, 
an example of which is the acceptance of diversity and equality issues, which may not 
be a societal norm in some places in the world but is how the company chooses to treat 
its employees. Microsoft, Netflix, and Salesforce offer unlimited paid time off to salaried 
employees.
While some companies have experienced issues with staffing shortages, it is increas￾ingly important to understand why the shortage is occurring and what can be done to 
balance employer needs and employee desires while following legal mandates and cor￾porate mission and vision statements. Employees’ demands for respectful, livable working 
conditions have also extended to pay transparency laws, flexible pay dates, and expanded 
benefit offerings, which have driven changes in contemporary workplaces. Employers are 
responding by offering higher pay and remote work opportunities. Other hiring tactics 
have included emphasizing professional development and career progression, promoting 
company culture, and benchmarking salary offers to similar jobs in the industry.
(Sources: Nintendo, Paychex, SHRM)
Andrey_Popov/Shutterstock
Trends to Watch
Each chapter contains a feature box that connects 
payroll-related recent events with industry trends 
that shape the future of the profession. These 
trends offer instructors more opportunities to 
expand upon chapter topics, fostering discussion 
and application.
Confirming Pages
Chapter 1  Payroll Practices and System Fundamentals   11
lan43463_ch01_002-045.indd 11 05/09/23 06:52 pm
© McGraw Hill: DRAFT REVIEW COPY – NOT FOR PUBLICATION OR DISTRIBUTION
extending the Work Opportunity Tax Credit, which has been authorized until the end of 2025. 
The Protecting Americans from Tax Hikes (PATH) Act of 2015, which also prevented cer￾tain tax fraud schemes, extended the ATRA provisions by offering employers tax credits for 
hiring qualified veterans and individuals who have endured long-term unemployment.
As times change, new legislation will be enacted, and existing laws are sometimes repealed 
and amended. An example of evolving legislation includes new local laws regarding fairness 
in scheduling employees’ shift work schedules. Right-to-work laws are another example of 
employment-related legislation. As of 2023, 28 U.S. states and Guam have enacted right-to￾work legislation that promotes an employee’s right to opt out of union membership. At the 
time of this writing, the notion of the right to work without forcing union participation is 
being considered by the U.S. Congress.
The payroll accountant’s job requires continual learning and research to ensure that the 
company complies with all current regulations and reporting requirements. Many states, but 
not all, have additional payroll tax laws. Federally mandated payroll laws will be addressed 
in the next section.
(Source: WagePoint)
LO 1-2 Discuss the Legal Framework Specific 
to Payroll Accounting
Federal income tax withholding was temporarily instituted in 1861 to 
recover from the Civil War’s high costs; however, this tax was repealed in 
1872. Throughout the 19th century, cities were growing in the wake of the 
Industrial Revolution, as factories and companies increased automation 
and institutionalized mass production. In unprecedented numbers, people 
moved from rural to urban areas, and the need for infrastructure and civil 
Which Law?
&Check Stop
 1. Requires employers to verify the employee’s legal right 
to work in the United States.
 2. Protects the rights of disabled workers.
 3. Governs the management of retirement plans.
 4. Protects workers over age 40 from employment 
discrimination.
 5. Creates safe work environments for employees.
 6. Mandates equal pay for equal work.
 7. Extends medical benefits for terminated employees.
 8. Ensures that child support obligations will be paid.
 9. Protects workers and families with preexisting 
medical conditions.
 10. Enforces payment of monetary damages because of 
discrimination.
 11. Requires internal controls on payroll practices of public 
companies.
 12. Gives employees incentives to participate in retirement 
plans.
 a. COBRA
 b. ERISA
 c. Civil Rights Act of 
1991
 d. PRWOR
 e. SOX
 f. ADEA
 g. HIPAA
 h. ADA
 i. OSHA
 j. Equal Pay Act of 
1963
 k. IRCA
 l. SECURE 2.0
Create jobs 51/Shutterstock
Stop & Check
The Stop & Check feature allows students 
to review their understanding of the content 
just read. It also enables instructors to con￾duct formative assessments at multiple points 
throughout each chapter, testing the students’ 
understanding informally and offering oppor￾tunities to expand on the material.
Final PDF to printerxi
lan43463_fm_i-1.indd xi 07/17/23 06:07 pm
Confirming Pages
lan43463_ch01_002-045.indd 37 05/09/23 06:52 pm
Chapter 1  Payroll Practices and System Fundamentals   37
© McGraw Hill: DRAFT REVIEW COPY – NOT FOR PUBLICATION OR DISTRIBUTION
 14. Which act created the term “full-time equivalents”?
 15. How has cloud-based payroll processing affected contemporary payroll practices?
 16. What are two of the differences between the completion of the I-9 and the use of 
E-Verify systems?
 17. What were three provisions of the SECURE 2.0 Act?
 18. What are two of the challenges that arise from the use of outsourced payroll systems?
 19. What distinguishes a “living wage” from the minimum wage?
 20. How does the Equal Pay Act of 1963 differ from the Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act of 2009?
 21. What are the differences between ARPA and TCDRA? 
 22. What did ARPA and TCDRA do to the CARES Act?
Exercises Set A   
E1-1A.
LO 1-1, 1-2
Lupore Fabrics obtained a contract in Watts Mills, South Carolina, that 
involves the production of materials for military uniforms, a project con￾tracted with the federal government for $2,800,000. What laws govern the 
wages Lupore Fabrics pays its workers for this project? (Select all that apply.)
 1. Davis–Bacon Act
 2. Sarbanes–Oxley Act
 3. Walsh–Healey Act
 4. FLSA
E1-2A.
LO 1-1, 1-2
Dylan Piccirillo works as the payroll clerk for Centinix, a security company 
that hires many part-time and temporary workers who are paid hourly. 
What law(s) govern(s) the hiring or documenting of these workers? 
 1. ADEA
 2. FLSA
 3. IRCA
 4. USERRA
E1-3A.
LO 1-1, 1-2
London Franco was dismissed from employment at Precision Dynamics 
because of a race-related incident. London sued Precision Dynamics for 
$150,000 because of the discrimination. Which of the following laws pro￾vides for monetary awards during discrimination lawsuits?
 1. FLSA
 2. ADEA
 3. ADA
 4. Civil Rights Act of 1991
E1-4A.
LO 1-1, 1-2
Ines, Inc., is a qualified private-sector company that provides health insur￾ance to its employees. The company is self-insured. Which of the follow￾ing forms should the company provide its employees to comply with the 
Affordable Care Act?
 1. 1095-A
 2. 1095-B
 3. 1095-C
E1-5A.
LO 1-3
Addison Roy is a payroll accountant who works for a private firm. Their 
most recent professional development course was completed in 2010. 
Which of the following ethical issues has Addison violated?
 1. Confidentiality
 2. Objectivity and independence
 3. Professional competence and due care
 4. Integrity
End-of-Chapter Assessments
Students can demonstrate their understanding through 
assessments that complement the chapter’s learning objec￾tives. Each chapter has review questions, exercises, and 
problems, with the exercises and problems having two sets 
in each chapter (Set A and Set B). Each type of assessment 
is designed to measure student learning as follows:
∙ Questions for review are designed to check for 
students’ remembrance of concepts.
∙ Exercises check for understanding and application 
of chapter concepts.
∙ Problems allow students to apply and analyze 
payroll accounting principles.
Confirming Pages
lan43463_ch01_002-045.indd 41 05/09/23 06:52 pm
Chapter 1  Payroll Practices and System Fundamentals   41
© McGraw Hill: DRAFT REVIEW COPY – NOT FOR PUBLICATION OR DISTRIBUTION
P1-3B.
LO 1-3
Blake Hudnall is Conosis Incorporated’s payroll accountant. During a casual 
conversation with coworkers, Blake learns that Teagan Vinkovic, a coworker, 
is deliberately overstating the number of hours worked during each pay 
period because of a personal economic situation. Which ethical guidelines 
pertain to this situation? What should Blake do with this knowledge?
P1-4B.
LO 1-4
Amari Meyers works in the payroll department for Racine Traders. The 
company has experienced a decline in revenue over the past six months. 
The company president asks Amari to delay the remittance of payroll 
taxes to make more cash available to the company. Which act would be 
violated if Amari complies with the company president’s request?
P1-5B.
LO 1-1, 1-2, 1-3
During a review of payroll records, Ocean Morena notices that a female 
employee in Department A receives a significantly lower salary than 
similarly skilled male employees in the same department. What actions 
should Ocean take in this situation?
P1-6B.
LO 1-3
Sawyer Alescio is an accountant for Diado, a multinational firm. Sawyer 
notices that the new state payroll tax updates have not been installed 
during payroll processing in the firm’s software. What ethical guidelines 
govern Sawyer’s behavior in this situation?
P1-7B.
LO 1-2
Nyx Croce is an employee of Autonder, a contractor that provides gov￾ernmental construction services in Washington, DC. The current contract 
is for $250,000. Nyx is 22 and is paid $9.50 per hour. How does the 
Walsh–Healey Public Contracts Act affect Nyx?
P1-8B.
LO 1-4
Marlon Moyo works as a payroll clerk at Semiconductor, Inc. Marlon 
shares an office with three other coworkers and must examine docu￾ments containing personal information as a regular part of the duties. 
Based on the provisions of the Privacy Act of 1974, what responsibili￾ties does Marlon have regarding handling the payroll records?
P1-9B.
LO 1-5
West is a senior payroll administrator for Falcive Landscape Design. The 
company has 15 employees and annual revenues of $10 million. The 
company has been using and maintaining manual payroll records for 
the last 20 years. The president of Falcive Landscape Design wants to 
explore options for computerized payroll processing. Which payroll option 
is the most suitable for both West and Falcive Landscape Design? Why?
P1-10B.
LO 1-2
Angel Bellini is the payroll accountant for Pyrondo Fireworks, and has 
been asked for information about employees and independent contrac￾tors. What are three of the key differences between employees and inde￾pendent contractors?
Critical Thinking
 CT1-1. You have been hired as a Dynozz Medical Software consultant, facing an IRS audit 
of its accounting records. During your review, you notice anomalies in the payroll 
system involving overpayments for labor and payments to terminated employees. 
What should you do?
 CT1-2. You are the accountant for Cryologic, a local nonprofit organization. You have 
been tasked with managing the payroll costs so that staffing levels can remain the 
same even if funding levels change. One consideration is outsourcing the payroll 
functions to a payroll processing company. What are some factors that should be 
considered in this decision? Why are these factors important?
In the Real World: Scenario for Discussion
Domino’s Pizza franchises in New York were sued by the state of New York for wage theft 
at 10 stores. Under New York law, a corporation and a franchiser are joint employers if 
they meet certain employee control criteria. The state found that Domino’s met the criteria 
Confirming Pages
lan43463_ch01_002-045.indd 41 05/09/23 06:52 pm
Chapter 1  Payroll Practices and System Fundamentals   41
© McGraw Hill: DRAFT REVIEW COPY – NOT FOR PUBLICATION OR DISTRIBUTION
P1-3B.
LO 1-3
Blake Hudnall is Conosis Incorporated’s payroll accountant. During a casual 
conversation with coworkers, Blake learns that Teagan Vinkovic, a coworker, 
is deliberately overstating the number of hours worked during each pay 
period because of a personal economic situation. Which ethical guidelines 
pertain to this situation? What should Blake do with this knowledge?
P1-4B.
LO 1-4
Amari Meyers works in the payroll department for Racine Traders. The 
company has experienced a decline in revenue over the past six months. 
The company president asks Amari to delay the remittance of payroll 
taxes to make more cash available to the company. Which act would be 
violated if Amari complies with the company president’s request?
P1-5B.
LO 1-1, 1-2, 1-3
During a review of payroll records, Ocean Morena notices that a female 
employee in Department A receives a significantly lower salary than 
similarly skilled male employees in the same department. What actions 
should Ocean take in this situation?
P1-6B.
LO 1-3
Sawyer Alescio is an accountant for Diado, a multinational firm. Sawyer 
notices that the new state payroll tax updates have not been installed 
during payroll processing in the firm’s software. What ethical guidelines 
govern Sawyer’s behavior in this situation?
P1-7B.
LO 1-2
Nyx Croce is an employee of Autonder, a contractor that provides gov￾ernmental construction services in Washington, DC. The current contract 
is for $250,000. Nyx is 22 and is paid $9.50 per hour. How does the 
Walsh–Healey Public Contracts Act affect Nyx?
P1-8B.
LO 1-4
Marlon Moyo works as a payroll clerk at Semiconductor, Inc. Marlon 
shares an office with three other coworkers and must examine docu￾ments containing personal information as a regular part of the duties. 
Based on the provisions of the Privacy Act of 1974, what responsibili￾ties does Marlon have regarding handling the payroll records?
P1-9B.
LO 1-5
West is a senior payroll administrator for Falcive Landscape Design. The 
company has 15 employees and annual revenues of $10 million. The 
company has been using and maintaining manual payroll records for 
the last 20 years. The president of Falcive Landscape Design wants to 
explore options for computerized payroll processing. Which payroll option 
is the most suitable for both West and Falcive Landscape Design? Why?
P1-10B.
LO 1-2
Angel Bellini is the payroll accountant for Pyrondo Fireworks, and has 
been asked for information about employees and independent contrac￾tors. What are three of the key differences between employees and inde￾pendent contractors?
Critical Thinking
 CT1-1. You have been hired as a Dynozz Medical Software consultant, facing an IRS audit 
of its accounting records. During your review, you notice anomalies in the payroll 
system involving overpayments for labor and payments to terminated employees. 
What should you do?
 CT1-2. You are the accountant for Cryologic, a local nonprofit organization. You have 
been tasked with managing the payroll costs so that staffing levels can remain the 
same even if funding levels change. One consideration is outsourcing the payroll 
functions to a payroll processing company. What are some factors that should be 
considered in this decision? Why are these factors important?
In the Real World: Scenario for Discussion
Domino’s Pizza franchises in New York were sued by the state of New York for wage theft 
at 10 stores. Under New York law, a corporation and a franchiser are joint employers if 
they meet certain employee control criteria. The state found that Domino’s met the criteria 
In the Real World: Scenario for 
Discussion
Each chapter contains a discussion scenario that is drawn 
from real-world events. These scenarios encourage the 
expansion of chapter content and allow students to apply 
their learning to real situations.
Critical Thinking Exercises
Want to challenge your students further? The Critical 
Thinking exercises require students to consider complex 
real-world situations that build confidence and turn learn￾ing into mastery. These exercises offer possibilities for 
team presentations or class debates.
Final PDF to printerxii
lan43463_fm_i-1.indd xii 07/17/23 06:07 pm
Confirming Pages
42   Chapter 1  Payroll Practices and System Fundamentals
lan43463_ch01_002-045.indd 42 05/09/23 06:52 pm
© McGraw Hill: DRAFT REVIEW COPY – NOT FOR PUBLICATION OR DISTRIBUTION
for being a joint employer because it mandates many policies with which franchisers must 
comply. The problem arose when Domino’s mandated the use of PULSE payroll software, 
which the pizza company knew to be flawed and did not attempt to remedy. The flawed 
software led to employees being paid at rates below the legal minimum wage, failing to 
pay overtime, not reimbursing employees for vehicle use, and abusing tip credit guidelines.
Food for Thought:
 1. Should the franchisees be held liable as joint employers with Domino’s? Why or why not?
 2. Which laws pertain to employee wages? How would they apply in this situation?
 3. What could be done to ensure future legal compliance?
Internet Activities
 1-1. Using the website www.jstor.org, search for articles about payroll-related laws or rel￾evant employment legislation. Once you find an article, summarize the article and 
explain how the legislation influenced contemporary payroll practices.
 1-2. Visit the website of the American Payroll Association at www.americanpayroll.org. On 
the right side of the home page, you will find articles about recent developments in 
payroll practices and legislation. Choose an article and create a presentation to your 
class about how its content affects payroll practice.
 1-3. Want to know more about the specifics of some of the concepts in this chapter? 
Check out these websites:
www.dol.gov/whd/
www.taxhistory.com/1943.html
www.workerscompensationinsurance.com
connecteam.com/employee-time-clock-app/
www.adp.com
www.paychex.com
 1-4. Would it help to see a video explanation of FLSA coverage? Go to the following link 
and select Topic 1: Coverage. https://www.dol.gov/whd/flsa/videos.htm
 1-5. Check out www.employer.gov to see the Department of Labor’s Office of Compliance 
site. This site contains guidelines for employers about their specific responsibilities 
to employees, compliance deadlines, posters, and other resources. Its employee￾focused website, www.worker.gov, contains worker-focused resources geared to fos￾ter an understanding of employee rights under the law.
 1-6. Using the website www.ncsea.org, search for research about child support statistics, 
collections per year, and payroll professionals’ role in the process.
sianc/Shutterstock
Continuing Payroll Project: Prevosti Farms and 
Sugarhouse
Toni Prevosti is opening a new business, Prevosti Farms and 
Sugarhouse, a small company that will harvest, refine, and sell maple 
syrup products. In subsequent chapters, students will have the oppor￾tunity to establish payroll records and complete payroll information for 
Prevosti Farms and Sugarhouse.
Toni has decided that she needs to hire employees for the business to grow. Complete 
the application for Prevosti Farms and Sugarhouse’s Employer Identification Number 
(Form SS-4) with the following information:
Continuing Payroll Project: 
Prevosti Farms and 
Sugarhouse
Starting with Chapter 1, each chapter has an integrated, 
continuing payroll project—about fictional company 
Prevosti Farms and Sugarhouse—that matches the chapter 
content and affords students a macro-level understanding 
of how each piece of payroll fits together.
Confirming Pages
42   Chapter 1  Payroll Practices and System Fundamentals
lan43463_ch01_002-045.indd 42 05/09/23 06:52 pm
© McGraw Hill: DRAFT REVIEW COPY – NOT FOR PUBLICATION OR DISTRIBUTION
for being a joint employer because it mandates many policies with which franchisers must 
comply. The problem arose when Domino’s mandated the use of PULSE payroll software, 
which the pizza company knew to be flawed and did not attempt to remedy. The flawed 
software led to employees being paid at rates below the legal minimum wage, failing to 
pay overtime, not reimbursing employees for vehicle use, and abusing tip credit guidelines.
Food for Thought:
 1. Should the franchisees be held liable as joint employers with Domino’s? Why or why not?
 2. Which laws pertain to employee wages? How would they apply in this situation?
 3. What could be done to ensure future legal compliance?
Internet Activities
 1-1. Using the website www.jstor.org, search for articles about payroll-related laws or rel￾evant employment legislation. Once you find an article, summarize the article and 
explain how the legislation influenced contemporary payroll practices.
 1-2. Visit the website of the American Payroll Association at www.americanpayroll.org. On 
the right side of the home page, you will find articles about recent developments in 
payroll practices and legislation. Choose an article and create a presentation to your 
class about how its content affects payroll practice.
 1-3. Want to know more about the specifics of some of the concepts in this chapter? 
Check out these websites:
www.dol.gov/whd/
www.taxhistory.com/1943.html
www.workerscompensationinsurance.com
connecteam.com/employee-time-clock-app/
www.adp.com
www.paychex.com
 1-4. Would it help to see a video explanation of FLSA coverage? Go to the following link 
and select Topic 1: Coverage. https://www.dol.gov/whd/flsa/videos.htm
 1-5. Check out www.employer.gov to see the Department of Labor’s Office of Compliance 
site. This site contains guidelines for employers about their specific responsibilities 
to employees, compliance deadlines, posters, and other resources. Its employee￾focused website, www.worker.gov, contains worker-focused resources geared to fos￾ter an understanding of employee rights under the law.
 1-6. Using the website www.ncsea.org, search for research about child support statistics, 
collections per year, and payroll professionals’ role in the process.
sianc/Shutterstock
Continuing Payroll Project: Prevosti Farms and 
Sugarhouse
Toni Prevosti is opening a new business, Prevosti Farms and 
Sugarhouse, a small company that will harvest, refine, and sell maple 
syrup products. In subsequent chapters, students will have the oppor￾tunity to establish payroll records and complete payroll information for 
Prevosti Farms and Sugarhouse.
Toni has decided that she needs to hire employees for the business to grow. Complete 
the application for Prevosti Farms and Sugarhouse’s Employer Identification Number 
(Form SS-4) with the following information:
Internet Activities
The Internet Activities at the end of each chapter offer 
students the chance to use their online navigation skills to 
expand their learning. These exercises attract tech-savvy 
learners, allowing them to form their understanding of 
payroll concepts on their terms.
First Pages
404
lan43463_appA_404-447.indd 404 05/12/23 02:38 pm
© McGraw Hill: DRAFT REVIEW COPY – NOT FOR PUBLICATION OR DISTRIBUTION
Comprehensive Payroll 
Project: Wayland Custom 
Woodworking
Wayland Custom Woodworking is a firm that manufactures custom cabinets and woodwork 
for business and residential customers. Students will have the opportunity to establish payroll 
records and complete a month of payroll information for Wayland.
Wayland Custom Woodworking is located at 12850 Old Highway 50, Glenbrook, Nevada, 
89413, phone number 775-555-9877. The owner is Mark Wayland. Wayland’s EIN is 
91-7444533, and the Nevada Employer Account Number is E6462582020-6. Wayland has 
determined it will pay its employees on a semimonthly basis. Federal income tax should be 
computed using the percentage method for manual payrolls with Forms W-4 from 2020 or 
later.
Students will complete the payroll for the final quarter of 2023 and will file the fourth 
quarter and annual tax reports on the appropriate dates. At the instructor’s discretion, students 
may complete a short version, which contains the payroll transactions beginning December 1. 
Directions for completion of the short version follow the November 30 transactions.
Rounding can create a challenge. For these exercises, the rate for the individuals is not 
rounded. Take the employee’s salary and divide it by 2,080 (52 weeks at 40 hours per week) 
for full-time, nonexempt employees. Note: Leave the hourly rate rounded to five decimal 
places, as shown in the next example. After the gross pay has been calculated, then round the 
result to two decimal points before calculating taxes or other withholdings.
Appendix A A
EXAMPLE: ANNUAL SALARY TO AN HOURLY RATE, NONEXEMPT EMPLOYEE
Employee Cooper’s annual salary is $62,000 and he is a nonexempt employee.
Hourly rate = $62,000/(52 × 40) = $62,000/2,080
Hourly rate =
Comprehensive Payroll 
Project: Wayland Custom 
Woodworking
The Comprehensive Payroll Project (Appendix A) allows 
students to track a quarter’s worth of payroll transactions 
for a company. This Comprehensive Payroll Project offers 
instructors increased flexibility in teaching and assessment 
by offering a simulation equivalent to a full quarter of a 
fictitious company’s payroll activities, including payroll 
transactions, pay processing, and tax form completion. 
The Comprehensive Payroll Project may be presented in 
different lengths—as short as one month or in its three￾month entirety—to meet curricular needs. Instructors may 
assign this in connection with many book chapters or use it 
as a final project for their courses.
Final PDF to printerxiii
lan43463_fm_i-1.indd xiii 07/17/23 06:07 pm
Connect for Payroll 
Accounting 2024
∙ SmartBook® 2.0 A personalized and adaptive learn￾ing tool used to maximize the learning experience by 
helping students study more efficiently and effectively. 
SmartBook 2.0 highlights where in the chapter to 
focus, asks review questions on the materials 
covered, and tracks the most challenging content for 
later review. SmartBook 2.0 is available both online 
and offline.
∙ End-of-chapter content is a robust offering of review 
and question material designed to aid and assess the 
student’s retention of chapter content. The end-of￾chapter content is composed of both static and 
algorithmic exercises, problems, critical thinking 
exercises, and continuing payroll projects, which are 
designed to challenge students using McGraw Hill 
Education’s state-of-the-art online homework 
technology. Guided example videos are also provided 
with select end-of-chapter problems, which help 
walk students through complex payroll processes. 
Instructors can also assign test bank questions to 
students in static and algorithmic versions.
∙ Auto-graded payroll and tax forms are integrated 
into Connect and are assignable. Students can 
complete the forms in these problems to gain a better 
understanding of how payroll forms are prepared in 
today’s digital world.
∙ Guided example videos are also provided with select 
end-of-chapter problems, which help walk students 
through complex payroll processes. Instructors can 
also assign test bank questions to students in static and 
algorithmic versions.
∙ Lecture videos are new to this edition! There are 
three- to five-minute videos that accompany each learn￾ing objective per chapter. There is also an introduction/
overview video for Appendix A and a continuing project 
at the end of each chapter.
∙ The comprehensive payroll project from Appendix 
A is available on Connect in an auto-graded format. 
Students will apply skills, such as preparing tax forms 
and payroll registers, to complete the payroll process 
for a company from start to finish. Instructors can 
choose from the full three-month version or the shorter 
one-month version for their Connect assignment.
∙ The test bank for each chapter has been updated 
for the ninth edition to stay current with new and 
revised chapter material, with all questions available 
for assignment through Connect. Newly available 
within Connect, Test Builder is a cloud-based tool that 
enables instructors to format tests that can be printed 
or administered within an LMS. Test Builder offers 
a modern, streamlined interface for easy content con￾figuration that matches course needs without requiring 
a download. Test Builder provides a secure interface 
for better content protection and allows just-in-time 
updates to flow directly into assessments.
Auto-Graded Forms
Comprehensive Payroll Project
Wayland Custom Woodworking
Anthony Chinson
Mark Wayland
Sylvia Peppinico
Stevon Cooper
Leonard Hissop
Student Success
Totals
Anthony Chinson 4215
4216
4217
4218
4219
4220
Mark Wayland
Sylvia Peppinico
Stevon Cooper
Leonard Hissop
Student Success
Totals
Final PDF to printerlan43463_fm_i-1.indd xiv 07/17/23 06:07 pm
65%
Less Time
Grading
Tools to enhance your unique voice
The Power of Connections
A complete course platform
Connect enables you to build deeper connections with your students through 
cohesive digital content and tools, creating engaging learning experiences. 
We are committed to providing you with the right resources and tools to 
support all your students along their personal learning journeys.
Solutions for 
your challenges
A product isn’t a solution. Real 
solutions are affordable, reliable, 
and come with training and ongoing 
support when you need it and how you 
want it. Visit supportateverystep.com
for videos and resources both you 
and your students can use throughout 
the term.
Every learner is unique
In Connect, instructors can assign an adaptive reading 
experience with SmartBook® 2.0. Rooted in advanced 
learning science principles, SmartBook 2.0 delivers 
each student a personalized experience, focusing 
students on their learning gaps, ensuring that the time 
they spend studying is time well-spent.
mheducation.com/highered/connect/smartbook
Affordable solutions, 
added value
Make technology work for you with 
LMS integration for single sign-on access, 
mobile access to the digital textbook, 
and reports to quickly show you how 
each of your students is doing. And with 
our Inclusive Access program, you can 
provide all these tools at the lowest 
available market price to your students. 
Ask your McGraw Hill representative for 
more information.
Laptop: Getty Images; Woman/dog: George Doyle/Getty Images
Final PDF to printerlan43463_fm_i-1.indd xv 07/17/23 06:07 pm
Effective tools for efficient studying
Connect is designed to help you be more productive with simple, flexible, intuitive tools that maximize 
your study time and meet your individual learning needs. Get learning that works for you with Connect.
Everything you need in one place 
Your Connect course has everything you need—whether reading your digital eBook 
or completing assignments for class—Connect makes it easy to get your work done.
“I really liked this 
app—it made it easy 
to study when you 
don't have your text￾book in front of you.”
- Jordan Cunningham, 
 Eastern Washington University
Study anytime, anywhere
Download the free ReadAnywhere® app and 
access your online eBook, SmartBook® 2.0, 
or Adaptive Learning Assignments when it’s 
convenient, even if you’re offline. And since 
the app automatically syncs with your Connect 
account, all of your work is available every time 
you open it. Find out more at 
mheducation.com/readanywhere 
Students
Get Learning that Fits You
Learning for everyone 
McGraw Hill works directly with Accessibility 
Services Departments and faculty to meet the 
learning needs of all students. Please contact your 
Accessibility Services Office and ask them to email 
accessibility@mheducation.com, or visit 
mheducation.com/about/accessibility
for more information.
iPhone: Getty Images
Final PDF to printerxvi
lan43463_fm_i-1.indd xvi 07/17/23 06:07 pm
Acknowledgments
This tenth edition of Payroll Accounting would not have been possible without the patience, guid￾ance, and encouragement of Steve Schuetz, executive portfolio manager; the support and leadership 
of Jill Eccher and Brian Nacik, content project managers; and Amanda Lam, product coordinator, 
who handled every formatting request with professionalism. Special thanks to M. Jeff Quinlan, 
Madison Area Technical College, for his contributions to verifying the accuracy of our content.
Countless other colleagues have offered their feedback, insights, and inspiration during various 
stages of this project. We want to extend sincere thanks to the reviewers who helped us shape the 
tenth edition:
Kim Anderson
Elgin Community College
Kathleen Bent
Cape Cod Community College
Gerald Childs
Waukesha County Technical College
Crystal Cleary
Terra State Community College
Arnold L. Cristobal
Kapiolani Community College and UH 
Maui College
Clint Doyle
Lehigh-Carbon County Community College
Corey Frad
Eastern Iowa Community College
Marina Grau
Houston Community College
Tanya Haddad
Southwestern College
James Halstead
Neosho County Community College
Jessica Hazel
McLennan Community College
Sophia Ju
Edmonds College
Melody Kamerer
Butler County Community College
Gary Laycock
Ivy Tech Community College
Christy M. Lefevers
Catawba Valley Community College
William Gregory Luszcz
South Piedmont Community College
Richard Mandau
Piedmont Technical College
Gerald T. McFadden
Lorain County Community College
Kelly Westphal Murphy
Des Moines Area Community College
Joseph Malino Nicassio
Westmoreland County Community College
Matthew Njoku
Central Piedmont Community College
Roshelle Overton
Central New Mexico Community College
Denice Pardee
Arapahoe Community College
Paige Paulsen
Salt Lake Community College
Theresa Powell
Central Community College
Suzette Reagan, CPP
Florida State College at Jacksonville
Morgan Rockett
Moberly Area Community College
Erynn Stainback
Central Carolina Community College
Stephanie Swaim
Dallas College North Lake Campus
Pamela Watkins
Durham Technical Community College
Cammy Wayne
Harper College
Our heartfelt thanks go to all who have helped us continue to develop this text throughout the 
ever-changing world of payroll accounting.
Jeanette Landin
Paulette Schirmer
Final PDF to printerxvii
lan43463_fm_i-1.indd xvii 07/17/23 06:07 pm
Brief Contents
1 Payroll Practices and System 
Fundamentals 2
2 Payroll System Procedures 46
3 Gross Pay Computation 118
4 Fringe Benefits and Voluntary 
Deductions 176
5 Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods 216
6 Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor 
Planning 278
7 The Payroll Register, Employees’ 
Earnings Records, and Accounting System 
Entries 360
APPENDIXES
A Comprehensive Payroll Project: Wayland 
Custom Woodworking 404
B Special Classes of Federal Tax 
Withholding 448
C Federal Income Tax Tables 455
D State Income Tax Information 513
E State Revenue Department or Labor 
Information 518
F Payroll Certification Information 523
GLOSSARY 527
INDEX 533
Final PDF to printerxviii
lan43463_fm_i-1.indd xviii 07/17/23 06:07 pm
Contents
About the Authors v
Text Features x
Chapter 1
Payroll Practices and System Fundamentals 2
1-1 Identify Legislation That Pertains to Payroll and 
Business 4
1-2 Discuss the Legal Framework Specific to Payroll 
Accounting 11
1-3 Discuss the Ethical Guidelines for Payroll 
Accounting 19
Confidentiality 20
Professionalism 20
Integrity 20
Objectivity and Independence 21
Professional Competence and Due Care 21
1-4 Identify Contemporary Payroll Practices 22
Payroll Preparation Options 23
Privacy Protection 25
1-5 Compare Payroll Processing Options for Different 
Businesses 28
Large Businesses 28
Small Businesses 29
Computer-Based Systems 30
Internet-Based Systems 31
Manual Systems 32
Outsourced Payroll Systems 32
Certified Payroll 33
 Trends to Watch: Legal Environment 34
 Summary of Payroll Practices and System 
Fundamentals 35
 Key Points 35
 Vocabulary 36
 Review Questions 36
 Exercises Set A 37
 Problems Set A 38
 Exercises Set B 39
 Problems Set B 40
 Critical Thinking 41
 In the Real World: 
Scenario for Discussion 41
 Internet Activities 42
 Continuing Payroll Project: Prevosti Farms and 
Sugarhouse 42
 Answers to Stop & Check Exercises 44
Chapter 2
Payroll System Procedures 46
2-1 Identify Important Payroll Procedures and Pay 
Cycles 48
Pay Cycles 49
2-2 Prepare Required Employee Documentation 51
Employees versus Independent Contractors 51
Reporting New Employees 54
Entering New Employees into the Database 64
2-3 Differentiate between Exempt and Nonexempt 
Workers 65
Leased and Temporary Employees 67
2-4 Explain Pay Records and Employee File 
Maintenance 68
Pay Records 68
Pay Rate 69
Entering Hours 71
Calculations of Weekly Regular Time and 
Overtime 72
2-5 Describe Internal Controls and Record Retention 
for a Payroll System 73
Review of Time Collected 75
Overtime Approval 75
Approval for Leave of Absence or Other Unpaid 
Time Off 76
File Security 76
Cybersecurity and Payroll 77
Alternating Duties and Cross-Training 78
Best Practices Involved in Employee File 
Maintenance 79
Electronic Records 79
Payroll as a Non-Solo Effort 80
Document Retention Requirements 81
2-6 Discuss Employment Termination and Document 
Destruction Procedures 84
Employee Termination 84
Document Destruction 85
Electronic Records 87
 Trends to Watch: Payroll Procedures 88
 Summary of Payroll System Procedures 88
 Key Points 89
 Vocabulary 89
 Review Questions 89
 Exercises Set A 90
 Problems Set A 92
 Exercises Set B 98
Final PDF to printer Contents   xix
lan43463_fm_i-1.indd xix 07/17/23 06:07 pm
Pension Payments 158
Retroactive Pay 158
Wages for Deceased Employees 159
 Trends to Watch: Employee Compensation 159
 Summary of Gross Pay Computation 160
 Key Points 160
 Vocabulary 161
 Review Questions 161
 Exercises Set A 162
 Problems Set A 163
 Exercises Set B 166
 Problems Set B 168
 Critical Thinking 171
 In the Real World: 
Scenario for Discussion 171
 Internet Activities 171
 Continuing Payroll Project: Prevosti Farms and 
Sugarhouse 172
 Answers to Stop & Check Exercises 173
Chapter 4
Fringe Benefits and Voluntary Deductions 176
4-1 Define Fringe Benefits within the Context of 
Payroll 178
Purpose of Fringe Benefits 178
Including Benefits in Pay 179
Fringe Benefits and Payroll Taxes 179
4-2 Interpret Cafeteria Plan Types 182
Premium-Only Plan (POP) 182
Flexible Spending Arrangement (FSA) 183
Health Savings Account (HSA) 185
FSA vs. HSA 185
4-3 Describe Fringe Benefit Exclusion Rules 187
Prizes and Awards 187
Gym Memberships 187
Personal Use of Company Vehicle 188
Gift Cards 188
Employer-Provided Snacks and Meals 188
4-4 Explain Fringe Benefit Valuation Rules 189
General Valuation Rule 189
Unsafe Conditions 191
Other Transportation Benefits 192
4-5 Differentiate between Pre-Tax and Post-Tax 
Deductions 193
Insurance 193
Supplemental Health and Disability Insurance 194
Retirement Plans 195
Post-Tax Deductions 196
4-6 Apply Rules for Withholding, Depositing, and 
Reporting Benefits 198
Rules for Withholding Amounts Related to 
Benefits 198
 Problems Set B 99
 Critical Thinking 105
 In the Real World: 
Scenario for Discussion 105
 Internet Activities 105
 Continuing Payroll Project: Prevosti Farms and 
Sugarhouse 105
 Answers to Stop & Check Exercises 115
Chapter 3
Gross Pay Computation 118
3-1 Analyze Minimum Wage Pay for Nonexempt 
Workers 120
Minimum Wage 120
Tipped Employees 123
3-2 Compute Gross Pay for Different Pay Bases 127
Salaried Workers 127
Hourly Workers 130
Hourly Workers in More Than One Job 
Classification 130
Commission Work 131
Piece-Rate Work 133
3-3 Calculate Pay Based on Hours and Fractions of 
Hours 136
Hourly Calculations 137
Quarter-Hour System 137
Hundredth-Hour System 138
3-4 Calculate Overtime in Various Situations 140
Standard Overtime Pay 140
Overtime for Employees of Hospitals and Residential 
Care Facilities 141
Tipped Employee Overtime 142
Piece-Rate Employee Overtime 143
Salaried Nonexempt Overtime 144
Overtime for Employees Who Work in Two or More 
Separate Functions 144
3-5 Create a Payroll Register 145
Payroll Register Data 145
Track Employee Compensation Using a Payroll 
Register 147
3-6 Apply Combination Pay Methods 149
Base Salary Plus Commission 149
Payroll Draw 150
Salary Plus Commission and Draw 151
Incentive Stock Options (ISOs) 152
3-7 Explain Special Pay Situations 153
Compensatory Time 153
On-Call Time 153
Sleep Time, Travel Time, and Wait Time 154
Jury Duty 155
Vacation and Holiday Hours 155
Subminimum Wage Situations 156
Nonqualified Deferred Compensation 158
Final PDF to printerxx   Contents
lan43463_fm_i-1.indd xx 07/17/23 06:07 pm
 Summary of Employee Net Pay and Pay 
Methods 253
 Key Points 253
 Vocabulary 254
 Review Questions 254
 Exercises Set A 254
 Problems Set A 256
 Exercises Set B 262
 Problems Set B 264
 Critical Thinking 268
 In the Real World: 
Scenario for Discussion 269
 Internet Activities 269
 Continuing Payroll Project: Prevosti Farms and 
Sugarhouse 269
 Answers to Stop & Check Exercises 276
Chapter 6
Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor 
Planning 278
6-1 List Employer-Paid and Employee-Paid 
Obligations 280
Social Security and Medicare Taxes 280
Federal and State Unemployment Taxes 282
FUTA Credit Reduction 285
State Unemployment Taxes 285
Other State and Local Employer-Only Payroll 
Taxes 288
Workers’ Compensation Insurance 288
6-2 Discuss Reporting Periods and Requirements for 
Employer Tax Deposits 290
Lookback Period 290
Deposit Frequencies 291
6-3 Prepare Mid-Year and Year-End Employer Tax 
Reporting and Deposits 293
Form 941 293
Schedule B 293
State Tax Remittance 295
Form 944 295
Unemployment Tax Reporting 305
Matching Final Annual Pay to Form W-2 307
6-4 Describe Payroll within the Context of Business 
Expenses 315
Taxes and Other Deductions Remittance 315
Tax Penalties 316
Employees and Company Framework 318
6-5 Relate Labor Expenses to Company 
Profitability 318
The Labor Distribution Report 319
6-6 Complete Benefit Analysis as a Function of 
Payroll 320
Annual Total Compensation Report 321
 Trends to Watch: Employer Taxes and Benefit 
Analysis 324
Treatment of Taxable Benefit Withholdings 199
Rules for Depositing Amounts Related to 
Benefits 199
Rules for Reporting Benefits 200
 Trends to Watch: Employee Benefits 201
 Summary of Fringe Benefits and Voluntary 
Deductions 202
 Key Points 202
 Vocabulary 203
 Review Questions 203
 Exercises Set A 203
 Problems Set A 205
 Exercises Set B 206
 Problems Set B 208
 Critical Thinking 209
 In the Real World: 
Scenario for Discussion 210
 Internet Activities 210
 Continuing Payroll Project: Prevosti Farms and 
Sugarhouse 211
 Answers to Stop & Check Exercises 214
Chapter 5
Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods 216
5-1 Compute Employee Net Pay 218
Pay Computation Steps 218
5-2 Determine Federal Income Tax Withholding 
Amounts 220
Federal Income Taxes 220
Federal Income Pre-Tax Computation Examples 221
Wage-Bracket Method 225
Percentage Method 227
5-3 Compute Social Security and Medicare Tax 
Withholding 233
Social Security Tax 234
Examples of Social Security Tax Computations 235
Medicare Tax 235
Examples of Medicare Tax Computations 236
5-4 Calculate State and Local Income Taxes 238
State-Specific Taxes 239
Local Income Taxes 240
5-5 Apply Post-Tax Deductions 241
Charitable Contributions 241
Garnishments 242
Consumer Credit 244
Union Dues 245
Employee Advances and Overpayments 245
5-6 Discuss Employee Pay Methods 246
Cash 246
Check 247
Direct Deposit 249
Paycards 250
Cryptocurrency 251
 Trends to Watch: Taxes and Payment 
Methods 252
Final PDF to printer Contents   xxi
lan43463_fm_i-1.indd xxi 07/28/23 03:10 pm
7-6 Explain Payroll Entries in Accounting Reports 377
Labor Reports 379
 Trends to Watch: Economic Effects of 
Payroll 381
 Summary of the Payroll Register, Employees’ 
Earnings Records, and Accounting System 
Entries 381
 Key Points 381
 Vocabulary 382
 Review Questions 382
 Exercises Set A 383
 Problems Set A 384
 Exercises Set B 389
 Problems Set B 390
 Critical Thinking 396
 In the Real World: 
Scenario for Discussion 397
 Internet Activities 397
 Continuing Payroll Project: Prevosti Farms and 
Sugarhouse 398
 Answers to Stop & Check Exercises 401
Appendixes
Appendix A: Comprehensive Payroll Project: 
Wayland Custom Woodworking 404
Appendix B: Special Classes of Federal Tax 
Withholding 448
Appendix C: Federal Income Tax Tables 455
Appendix D: State Income Tax Information 513
Appendix E: State Revenue Department or 
Labor Information 518
Appendix F: Payroll Certification 
Information 523
Glossary 527
Index 533
 Summary of Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor 
Planning 324
 Key Points 325
 Vocabulary 325
 Review Questions 326
 Exercises Set A 326
 Problems Set A 328
 Exercises Set B 339
 Problems Set B 340
 Critical Thinking 351
 In the Real World: 
Scenario for Discussion 352
 Internet Activities 352
 Continuing Payroll Project: Prevosti Farms and 
Sugarhouse 352
 Answers to Stop & Check Exercises 357
Chapter 7
The Payroll Register, Employees’ Earnings 
Records, and Accounting System Entries 360
7-1 Connect the Payroll Register to the Employees’ 
Earnings Records 362
The Employees’ Earnings Records and Periodic Tax 
Reports 363
7-2 Describe Financial Accounting Concepts 364
Debits and Credits 365
The General Journal 365
The General Ledger 366
7-3 Complete Payroll-Related General Journal 
Entries 367
Employee Pay-Related Journal Entries 368
Employer Payroll-Related Journal Entries 368
Other Payroll-Related Journal Entries 369
Payroll Accruals and Reversals 369
7-4 Generate Payroll-Related General Ledger 
Entries 371
General Ledger Posting Practices 374
Payroll Account Reconciliation 374
7-5 Describe Payroll Effects on the Accounting 
System 375
Payroll-Related Business Expenses 375
Payroll-Related Liabilities 376
Final PDF to printerlan43463_fm_i-1.indd xxii 07/17/23 06:07 pm
Final PDF to printerlan43463_fm_i-1.indd 1 07/17/23 06:07 pm
Payroll 
Accounting 2024
Final PDF to printer2
lan43463_ch01_002-045.indd 2 06/08/23 02:57 pm
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying Chapter 1, you should be able to:
LO 1-1 Identify Legislation That Pertains to Payroll and Business
LO 1-2 Discuss the Legal Framework Specific to Payroll Accounting
LO 1-3 Discuss the Ethical Guidelines for Payroll Accounting
LO 1-4 Identify Contemporary Payroll Practices
LO 1-5 Compare Payroll Processing Options for Different Businesses 
Payroll systems are essential for job planning and strategic human resource 
management, cost management for products and services, and benefits 
analysis. A company’s payroll system has historically connected human 
resources and accounting departments. In contemporary businesses, 
payroll has taken on a strategic role in company direction and plans. The 
continual evolution of technological tools to manage company resources, 
including monetary and human, provides opportunities and challenges 
to employers regarding employee access and private information pro￾tection. A well-designed payroll system is a critical element in company 
management. For this reason, an understanding of payroll foundations is 
imperative. This chapter will explore the need for a payroll system, legal 
requirements, ethical guidelines, best practices, and variations in payroll 
practices among different-sized companies.
Payroll Practices and 
System Fundamentals
1
Chapter One
Final PDF to printerChapter 1  Payroll Practices and System Fundamentals   3
lan43463_ch01_002-045.indd 3 06/08/23 02:57 pm
Healthy Work-Life Policies Are the New Norm
The “Now Hiring” signs remain, but the unemployment rate in the United States is at a 
historic low. Employers seek employees, but the most recent crop of workers no longer 
wants to work for low wages or in demeaning work environments. They seek fulfilling jobs, 
both monetarily and culturally, and want bosses who respect their skills and future poten￾tial. This shift may seem like worker entitlement; however, it reflects the aftereffects of the 
COVID-19 pandemic and a new breed of employees who know what they want, know 
who they are, and demand healthy work-life boundaries.
In response to employee demands, employers such as Nintendo and Microsoft, among 
many others, have included work–life balance offerings demonstrating respect for their 
employees. Nintendo explicitly expresses an attitude of partnership with its employees, 
an example of which is the acceptance of diversity and equality issues, which may not 
be a societal norm in some places in the world but is how the company chooses to treat 
its employees. Microsoft, Netflix, and Salesforce offer unlimited paid time off to salaried 
employees.
While some companies have experienced issues with staffing shortages, it is increas￾ingly important to understand why the shortage is occurring and what can be done to 
balance employer needs and employee desires while following legal mandates and cor￾porate mission and vision statements. Employees’ demands for respectful, livable working 
conditions have also extended to pay transparency laws, flexible pay dates, and expanded 
benefit offerings, which have driven changes in contemporary workplaces. Employers are 
responding by offering higher pay and remote work opportunities. Other hiring tactics 
have included emphasizing professional development and career progression, promoting 
company culture, and benchmarking salary offers to similar jobs in the industry.
(Sources: Nintendo, Paychex, SHRM)
Andrey_Popov/Shutterstock
Final PDF to printer4   Chapter 1  Payroll Practices and System Fundamentals
lan43463_ch01_002-045.indd 4 06/08/23 02:57 pm
According to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, as of 2021, employment in account￾ing jobs was expected to increase by 6 percent through 2031, which is the average growth 
for business professions. Salaries average $47,459 for entry-level payroll clerks, $91,842 for 
payroll supervisors, and $112,988 for payroll managers, according to the 2023 salary guides 
available via www.salary.com.
The legislative framework governing employers’ payroll systems is complex. Although 
several fundamental laws still exist, payroll and human resource laws reflect societal evolu￾tion. Note how some of these laws have been challenged or changed since their inception.
The Equal Pay Act of 1963, which extended the provisions of the Fair Labor Standards 
Act (FLSA), mandated that males and females be paid equally for equal work. As of 2023, 
all 50 states have enacted legislation that clarifies and/or extends the original 1963 act. As of 
the end of 2022, pay transparency laws have been implemented in 17 states with the intent of 
promoting equal pay for equal work. Any employees who feel they have been paid unequally 
based on sex have legal options to rectify the situation:
∙ First, they should gather documentation regarding the differential and determine if other 
employees can substantiate the difference.
∙ Second, they should speak with their supervisor to question the pay differential.
∙ Should the supervisor be unwilling to discuss or adjust the pay discrepancy, an attorney may 
become a necessary third step.
This act was modified by the Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act of 2009, which removed the 
180-day statute of limitations on unequal treatment claims.
LO 1-1 Identify Legislation That Pertains to Payroll and Business
Unlike many other  types of accounting, payroll affects everyone in an 
organization. Payroll errors can lead to serious internal and external 
problems. Internal errors may cause a company to pay excessive wages 
for unneeded overtime, underpay employees, forego profits, employ the 
wrong number or types of workers during seasonal or workflow changes, 
or misclassify employees. To ensure operational effectiveness, manag￾ers use internal reports about labor usage, staffing levels, and employee 
compensation trends. Organizational decision-makers use these reports to 
control labor costs, hire additional employees to meet surge demands, and 
manage the cost of goods sold. Payroll errors can result in governmental fines, taxes, or legal 
charges related to labor law violations. Employers provide external reports to the Internal 
Revenue Service (IRS), state government tax departments, and many more agencies, depend￾ing upon the company’s nature.
Employment legislation is highly complex and dynamic. Large or 
small, employers must abide by the law and know when it changes. 
In Chapter 1, we will explore the basics of payroll systems, including 
legal and ethical issues involved with employee pay.
Zerbor/Shutterstock
Compliance with payroll regulations is a complex, multifaceted process. The type and 
location of the company are the starting point, and a comprehensive view is vital to 
payroll compliance. The integration of automated technology assists payroll personnel 
by ensuring legal compliance, reducing human error, and facilitating business growth. 
(Source: ADP)
Final PDF to printerChapter 1  Payroll Practices and System Fundamentals   5
lan43463_ch01_002-045.indd 5 06/08/23 02:57 pm
In 1979, Lilly Ledbetter, an employee of Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company, started 
at the same pay rate as males in the same position. Over time, management declined 
her raises based on negative reviews that Ms. Ledbetter later claimed were discrimina￾tory. Under the provisions of the 1963 Equal Pay Act, the claimant had 180 days to file 
a complaint. Although the U.S. Supreme Court agreed with her discrimination claims, 
it ruled in favor of Goodyear because of the lack of timeliness of Ms. Ledbetter’s filing. 
This ruling ultimately led to the Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act of 2009.
In June 2022, Google, LLC, agreed to pay $118 million in a class-action suit started 
in 2017 and involving 15,500 female employees. In Ellis v. Google, LLC, the company 
was required to submit to external verification of equality in hiring and pay practices 
for three years. 
(Sources: U.S. EEOC; CNET)
The Civil Rights Act of 1964 prohibited discrimination based on 
race, creed, color, sex, and national origin. Since 1964, this act has been 
extended by Executive Order 11478 to protect people with AIDS, preg￾nant workers, people with different sexual orientations, and people with 
disabilities. In 2022, the Respect for Marriage Act legislated that all 
marriage, including same-sex and interracial, was legal and could not be 
banned in any state. This extension of the 1964 Civil Rights Act repre￾sented another step toward the legal protection of worker dignity.
The Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (ADEA)
prevents mandatory retirement of older employees (older than age 40) and prohibits age￾based discrimination in hiring.
An American Association for Retired Persons (AARP) survey conducted in 2022 
reported that two out of three workers over age 50 have experienced age discrimina￾tion in their workplaces. Examples of age discrimination reported in this survey were 
unprofessional comments about age and being passed over for deserved promotions. 
Of the survey respondents, 93 percent reported that age discrimination was common￾place in their work environment. 
In 2022, the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) sued Eli 
Lilly and Co. for illegally refusing the employment of older-age sales workers. The 
pharmaceutical company claimed its “40 percent early career” policy of hiring millen￾nials for its sales force promoted increased sales and allowed people to obtain a good 
start to their careers. The EEOC sought to end this discriminatory practice. As of this 
writing, the case is in progress. 
(Source: AARP, Reuters)
Ground Picture/Shutterstock
The Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (OSHA) defined and enforced rules 
for healthy and safe working environments for employees. Employee safety programs and 
personal protective equipment represent an additional cost to the employer. Still, fines for 
noncompliance and payments made following workplace injuries are often far more costly: 
fines range from $15,625 per violation (serious and other-than-serious) to $156,259 per will￾ful or repeated violation (2023 figures).
Serious OSHA violations often occur, with an average of approximately a dozen cases 
per month. Numerous COVID-19 related violations occurred during 2022 and resulted 
in employer fines for worker safety and health. OSHA published workplace COVID-19 
regulations, summarized as follows:
(continued)
Final PDF to printer6   Chapter 1  Payroll Practices and System Fundamentals
lan43463_ch01_002-045.indd 6 06/08/23 02:57 pm
The Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA) regulates retirement and 
pension plans. ERISA has been extended by the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reformation 
Act of 1985 (COBRA). During 2007–2009, some employee retirement funds’ values 
decreased, causing employees to postpone retirement. The Internal Revenue Service imposes 
limitations on retirement plan contributions, and those limits have shifted to reflect the need 
for employees to recoup losses sustained during a recession. Since that time, employee retire￾ment benefits have shifted from being a financial burden to becoming an employee hiring and 
retention strategy. As of late 2022, ERISA-governed retirement plan participants could focus 
their investments on environmental, social, and corporate governance funds at their discre￾tion, which reflected a change to prior rules. 
In 2019, the Setting Every Community Up for Retirement Enhancement (SECURE) Act
granted small employers tax incentives to implement an automatic retirement plan enrollment 
for their employees. Alternatively, the act allows small employers to form a group that would 
allow each business’s employees to have better access to retirement plans than the employer 
could offer by itself. Legislation in 2022 passed as part of the Consolidated Appropriations 
Act extended provisions of the SECURE Act, known as the SECURE 2.0 Act.
1. OSHA required employers to provide appropriate personal protective equipment (PPE) 
for employees, including protection for eyes, hands, and face. Special provisions of this 
requirement included a respiratory protection plan when respirators were required. 
2. OSHA amended the general duty clause to require that employers provide a safe work￾place that protects employees from physical harm to the greatest possible extent.
3. Controversy:  
A. Mandatory COVID-19 vaccination policy with testing alternative
B. Monitoring of vaccination status
C. Maintaining documentation of vaccination
D. Written notice to employees regarding COVID-19
E. Enforcing masking and quarantine/isolation periods for exposed and 
infected employees per CDC guidelines
(Sources: OSHA; Porzio, Bromberg & Newman)
(concluded)
The SECURE 2.0 Act had 92 new provisions that can be summarized in a few cat￾egories, many of which will be mandatory as of 2025 for employers with 10 or more 
employees. The list of provisions includes, but is not limited to, the following:
1. Automatic enrollment in retirement plans at a rate between 3 and 10 percent of their 
annual pay. Employees can opt out of this benefit, which differs from the current opt-in 
model, and may withdraw funds within 90 days of their first contribution at no penalty.
2. Automatic escalation of contributions at a rate of 1 percent per year up to a maximum of 
10 to 15 percent of annual wages.
3. Employees 50 years of age and older may make post-tax “catch-up” contributions of up to 
$7,500 in 2023 and up to $10,000 as of 2025.
4. Starting in 2023, employees may elect to make contributions post-tax to avoid later taxa￾tion on retirement funds.
5. Effective in 2023, nonunion part-time employees who work a minimum of 500 hours for 
three consecutive years must be allowed to participate in their employer’s retirement plan.
6. Starting in 2024, employee student loan payments may be treated as contributions to the 
employee’s retirement plan.
Final PDF to printerChapter 1  Payroll Practices and System Fundamentals   7
lan43463_ch01_002-045.indd 7 06/08/23 02:57 pm
COBRA extended medical benefits for terminated employees at the 
employee’s expense for up to 18 months post-employment by quali￾fied employers. It should be noted that not all companies are subject to 
COBRA provisions and that states may offer “mini-COBRA” plans for 
companies with fewer than 20 employees. The repeal of the Defense of 
Marriage Act (DOMA) in 2013 forced employers to offer COBRA cover￾age to same-sex spouses, which has now been strengthened by the Respect 
for Marriage Act. As of 2021, terminated employees who opt not to enroll 
in COBRA plans could enroll in Marketplace plans or Medicaid for up to 
60 days post-termination. If employees choose not to use the COBRA plan immediately, they 
may enroll at the company’s next enrollment period.
COBRA benefits currently extend to beneficiaries, including employees, dependent 
spouses, and children. Benefits are paid to beneficiaries in the event of reduced hours or sepa￾ration of employment for any reason, excluding gross misconduct and upon the employee’s 
death. If the company offers retiree benefits, COBRA coverage also extends to beneficiaries 
in Chapter 11 bankruptcy. 
The Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986 (IRCA) requires employers to verify 
that employees are legally able to work in the United States. Form I-9 is the most common 
payroll-related application of this law. Immigration and citizenship laws require collecting 
information within an I-9, and retention is three years from the date of hire or one year from 
the date of termination, whichever is longer.
7. Employees may make emergency savings plan contributions to their retirement plan 
and may elect to withdraw such contributions without penalty or need for emergency 
documentation.
8. As of 2027, low-income employees may be eligible for up to $2,000 annual retirement sav￾ings match from the federal government. The federal matching contribution would be 50 
percent of the employee’s contribution and is phased out as employee income increases.
(Source: ADP)
Ground Picture/Shutterstock
Information collected on Form I-9 is monitored closely to ensure that the employee is 
legally authorized to work in the United States. Employers may also use the E-Verify
system to confirm legal employment eligibility. Note that the E-Verify system does not 
replace the completion of the I-9 but does offer employers the opportunity to check 
legal employment eligibility rapidly via the Internet. The Department of Homeland 
Security issued guidance on extensions and flexibility with I-9 requirements in January 
2022 due to the continued effects of COVID-19.
(Source: U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services)
The Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA) extended the pro￾visions of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 by ensuring that people with dis￾abilities have the same opportunities as those without mental or physical 
impairment. This law applies to employers with 15 or more employees on 
the payroll, including full-time and part-time workers. The enactment of 
the Americans with Disabilities Act Amendments Act (ADAAA) in 2008 
extended the definition of disability to include many disabilities. Final 
regulations on the ADAAA in 2011 clarified the definitions of disability 
and the required accommodations to include the following:
∙ The expansion of the definition of disability includes a lower standard of the definition 
of impairment.
BAZA Production/Shutterstock
Final PDF to printer8   Chapter 1  Payroll Practices and System Fundamentals
lan43463_ch01_002-045.indd 8 06/08/23 02:57 pm
∙ The determination of impairments requires the employee to be assessed individually.
∙ Except for corrective lenses, the determination of disability does not include devices that pro￾vide relief or mitigation of the condition, such as hearing aids.
∙ Impairments that occur periodically or episodically or that are in remission are still considered 
impairments.
∙ Any disability determination must not require extensive analysis.
The Civil Rights Act of 1991 granted employees who have been discriminated against the 
chance to be paid monetary damages through legal proceedings. This act applies to American 
employers and American-controlled employers with international-based operations.
Workplace diversity and inclusion have become an increasing priority at workplaces 
during the last decade. As of 2022, Diversity for Social Impact posted its listing of the 
best workplaces for diversity and inclusion, sourced from the diversity and inclusion 
policies of thousands of companies worldwide. In the United States, the top three com￾panies for diversity and inclusion were:
1. Disney
2. CarMax
3. Novartis
(Source: Diversity for Social Impact)
TommyStockProject/Shutterstock
The Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (FMLA) granted employ￾ees the right to take medical leave under reasonable circumstances without 
fear of job loss. The employee may take unpaid leave, but medical ben￾efits must continue under FMLA provisions. Upon returning from family 
leave, the employer must provide an equivalent position with equivalent 
pay, benefits, and employment terms. The employer has many responsi￾bilities under the FMLA that involves employee notification of benefits 
and processes while on leave. 
As of 2023, 11 states have enacted paid family leave legislation: California, Colorado, 
Connecticut, Delaware, Maryland, Massachusetts, New Jersey, New York, Oregon, Rhode 
Island, Washington, and Washington, DC. Other states have voluntary opt-in insurance pro￾grams to provide an option for paid family leave. Hawaii provides temporary disability insur￾ance, which is similar to paid family leave. 
In 2017, legislators passed the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act in Washington, DC. This provided a 
tax credit to employers offering paid leave under the FMLA. Employers may be eligible for a 
credit of 12.5 percent up to 25 percent, whereas the employee’s rate of payment is 50 percent 
or more of what the employee would normally be paid during the normal course of work for 
the company. Eligibility limits of the type of employer and employee exist under regulations 
(see Sec. §13403).
The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (TCJA) has led to specific focus areas for employers. These 
areas of focus include:
• Controversy: When the TCJA provisions expire at the end of 2025, companies may 
need to refile tax returns, making record-keeping and changes made due to the 
TCJA enactment a critical function in payroll.
• International tax: For companies with an international presence, including 
employees, the TCJA may result in new tax liabilities.
Final PDF to printerChapter 1  Payroll Practices and System Fundamentals   9
lan43463_ch01_002-045.indd 9 06/08/23 02:57 pm
The Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act of 1994 (USERRA)
governs military service members’ rights regarding the length of military service, return to 
work, and accommodations for injured veterans. USERRA was amended to further address 
service members’ rights in 2005. In 2011, USERRA was further amended by the Veterans 
Opportunity to Work Act, which allowed USERRA to recognize claims of a hostile work 
environment resulting from an individual’s military status.
• Compensation for executives: TCJA affected highly compensated employees’ 
tax treatment and fringe benefits offered to workers. This has led to scrutiny of 
compensation plans and their legal compliance.
• State taxes: Because of TCJA provisions, taxes have increased for employees in 
some states. Since each state has different tax laws, and not all states have chosen 
to comply with TCJA provisions, state taxation has become increasingly complex.
(Source: AICPA)
The U.S. Department of Labor investigates many cases involving service members’ 
rights. Army veteran Lisa Slater returned to her job as a security officer, which she held 
for 13 years with her company, after deployment on active duty. However, upon her 
return to her employment, she found that she was classified as a new employee, which 
was a violation of USERRA. She received approximately $20,000 in back wages, and 
her seniority was restored following arbitration.
(Source: U.S. DOL)
The Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996 
(PRWOR) mandated that employers file a new hire reporting form within 20 days after an 
employee initially commences work. This act protects children and needy families by enforc￾ing child support obligations. The child support provisions of PRWOR were strengthened by 
the passage of the Personal Responsibility, Work and Family Promotion Act of 2002, which 
reauthorized PRWOR when it expired. PRWOR is still federally mandated as of 2023. 
According to the Office of Child Support Enforcement (OSCE), collections supported 
approximately 18 percent of all children under age 18 in the United States and col￾lected over $29.5 billion for families as of the end of 2022. OSCE reported that 
employers collect approximately 63 percent of child and medical support through pay￾roll deductions.
(Sources: Office of Child Support Enforcement)
The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 
(HIPAA) protects workers and their families with preexisting medical 
conditions from discrimination based on those conditions. The Ebola 
outbreak in 2014 and the COVID-19 pandemic led to additional guid￾ance about HIPAA rights and notifications to interested parties, including 
employers, during emergencies.
Jeanette Landin
Final PDF to printer10   Chapter 1  Payroll Practices and System Fundamentals
lan43463_ch01_002-045.indd 10 06/08/23 02:57 pm
The Defense of Marriage Act of 1996 (DOMA) restricted payroll-related taxes and benefits 
to include only traditionally married couples, denying married status to people in same-sex 
unions. The U.S. Supreme Court overturned DOMA’s ruling in U.S. v. Windsor on September 
6, 2013. The Internal Revenue Service subsequently mandated that all married same-sex cou￾ples must be treated as married for all tax purposes. The repeal of DOMA had a ripple effect 
throughout all payroll phases because of the need to amend business and personal tax return 
filings back to 2011, owing to the three-year amendment rule. The repeal of DOMA provoked 
the need to clarify the term “family member.” Following the U.S. Supreme Court decision in 
Obergefell v. Hodges (2015), the U.S. Department of Labor updated the definition of a spouse 
to include same-sex marriages, regardless of where they live. Obergefell v. Hodges was codi￾fied by the Respect for Marriage Act in 2022.
HIPAA protections continue even after a business ceases operations. Filefax Inc. of 
Illinois was ordered to pay approximately $100,000 in fines because of HIPAA viola￾tions, although the company was no longer in business. The issue leading to the fines 
involved a lack of secure storage of employee health records following an investiga￾tion by the Office of Civil Rights.
(Source: U.S. HHS)
In U.S. v. Windsor, Ms. Windsor and her wife were recog￾nized as a married couple by the state of New York, and 
her compensation was taxed accordingly. However, the 
IRS sued Windsor for unpaid taxes because her same￾sex marriage violated DOMA. The U.S. Supreme Court 
found that DOMA violated Windsor’s Fifth Amendment 
right to liberty and overturned DOMA. The IRS subse￾quently dropped its lawsuit.
(Source: U.S. Supreme Court)
Maskot/Getty Images
The Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002 (SOX) provided criminal penalties for violations of 
ERISA. SOX provides protections for whistleblowers (Sec. § 806) and mandates auditors’ 
rotation among publicly owned companies (Sec. § 203). SOX Section 302 mandates that cor￾porate officers attest to the accuracy and completeness of the contents of the financial state￾ments. An additional consideration for SOX public companies regarding payroll is that the 
internal controls of a payroll system must be reported under the law’s guidelines (Sec. § 404). 
Costs of SOX compliance have sparked discussion about the act’s effectiveness. 
In 2020, SOX and the Dodd–Frank Act, which involved consumer protection and over￾sight of trading via the New York Stock Exchange, intersected to strengthen consumer 
protections (known as qui tam rewards). The intersection led to a bill introduced in 
Congress to create an independent board to oversee auditor conduct in publicly held 
companies, thus limiting conflicts of interest and protecting individuals who invest in 
companies traded on the stock market.
(Source: National Law Review)
The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (ARRA) provided tax credits 
for employers and employees through the Making Work Pay provisions. Although ARRA’s 
provisions have expired, parts of it were reinstated through the American Taxpayer Relief 
Act of 2012 (ATRA). Many of the ATRA provisions were extended through 2015 by 
Final PDF to printerChapter 1  Payroll Practices and System Fundamentals   11
lan43463_ch01_002-045.indd 11 06/08/23 02:57 pm
extending the Work Opportunity Tax Credit, which has been authorized until the end of 2025. 
The Protecting Americans from Tax Hikes (PATH) Act of 2015, which also prevented cer￾tain tax fraud schemes, extended the ATRA provisions by offering employers tax credits for 
hiring qualified veterans and individuals who have endured long-term unemployment.
As times change, new legislation will be enacted, and existing laws are sometimes repealed 
and amended. An example of evolving legislation includes new local laws regarding fairness 
in scheduling employees’ shift work schedules. Right-to-work laws are another example of 
employment-related legislation. As of 2023, 28 U.S. states and Guam have enacted right-to￾work legislation that promotes an employee’s right to opt out of union membership. At the 
time of this writing, the notion of the right to work without forcing union participation is 
being considered by the U.S. Congress.
The payroll accountant’s job requires continual learning and research to ensure that the 
company complies with all current regulations and reporting requirements. Many states, but 
not all, have additional payroll tax laws. Federally mandated payroll laws will be addressed 
in the next section.
(Source: WagePoint)
LO 1-2 Discuss the Legal Framework Specific 
to Payroll Accounting
Federal income tax withholding was temporarily instituted in 1861 to 
recover from the Civil War’s high costs; however, this tax was repealed in 
1872. Throughout the 19th century, cities were growing in the wake of the 
Industrial Revolution, as factories and companies increased automation 
and institutionalized mass production. In unprecedented numbers, people 
moved from rural to urban areas, and the need for infrastructure and civil 
Which Law?
&Check Stop
1. Requires employers to verify the employee’s legal right 
to work in the United States.
2. Protects the rights of disabled workers.
3. Governs the management of retirement plans.
4. Protects workers over age 40 from employment 
discrimination.
5. Creates safe work environments for employees.
6. Mandates equal pay for equal work.
7. Extends medical benefits for terminated employees.
8. Ensures that child support obligations will be paid.
9. Protects workers and families with preexisting 
medical conditions.
10. Enforces payment of monetary damages because of 
discrimination.
11. Requires internal controls on payroll practices of public 
companies.
12. Gives employees incentives to participate in retirement 
plans.
a. COBRA
b. ERISA
c. Civil Rights Act of 
1991
d. PRWOR
e. SOX
f. ADEA
g. HIPAA
h. ADA
i. OSHA
j. Equal Pay Act of 
1963
k. IRCA
l. SECURE 2.0
Create jobs 51/Shutterstock
Final PDF to printer12   Chapter 1  Payroll Practices and System Fundamentals
lan43463_ch01_002-045.indd 12 06/08/23 02:57 pm
services grew. Roads needed to be built, more law enforcement personnel needed to be hired, 
and disease outbreaks prompted the development of sanitation systems. Therefore, the U.S. 
Congress formalized the permanent continuation of the federal income tax instituted dur￾ing the Civil War as a means to fund the infrastructure improvements of the booming cities. 
After many failed attempts to reinstate a federal income tax, Congress passed the Sixteenth 
Amendment to the U.S. Constitution in 1909, ratified by states in 1913. This version incor￾porated a tiered income tax, including exemptions and deductions, to limit the tax on wages 
earned; it was the harbinger of many employment-related laws (see Figure 1-1).
During the Great Depression of the 1930s, the stock market collapsed, financial institutions 
went bankrupt, and companies released workers or ceased business operations. The govern￾ment needed money to fund programs that would stimulate economic recovery. Additionally, 
the need for a social welfare system emerged as the number of displaced workers increased. 
The 1930s became a decade of landmark employment legislation that defined the legal envi￾ronment for employers and employees, most of which remains in effect in 2023.
In 1931, Congress passed the Davis–Bacon Act, creating a standard of wages for gov￾ernmental contracts totaling more than $2,000. The increased standard wages created under 
the Davis–Bacon Act brought additional revenue to small businesses and the communities 
where the contract workers lived, bought groceries, and purchased other services or goods. 
The Davis–Bacon Act comprised more than 60 federal statutes, providing a prevailing wage 
and wage classification strategy to guide employers and contractors. The minimum contract 
rate for all employees affected by the Davis–Bacon Act increased in 2022 to reflect eco￾nomic changes. Per Executive Order 14026, the minimum contract rate effective for 2023 
is $16.20 per hour. Additionally, tipped employees working in connection with contracts 
covered by Executive Order 14026 have a minimum cash wage of $13.75 per hour. Both of 
these will be adjusted if the local prevailing minimum wage rate is higher.
FIGURE 1-1
Timeline of Payroll Legislation 
Sixteenth
Amendment
to the
Constitution
Federal
income tax
withholding
initiated
Davis–
Bacon
wages
Fair Labor
Standards
Act
Equal
Pay
Act
COBRA &
IRCA
Civil
Rights
Act
HIPAA &
PRWOR
CARES
Act
Respect for
Marriage Act
SECURE Act
2.0 2022 American
Recovery &
Reinvestment
Act Paycheck
Fairness
Act 2021
SSA &
FUTA
enacted
Current
Tax
Payment
Act
Civil
Rights
Act
ERISA
ADEA
ADA FMLA SOX
Act
Aordable
Health
Care Act
1862
Payroll Regulations Timeline
1931 1935 1938 1943 1963 1964 1967 1974 1986 1990 1991 1993 1996 2002 2009 2017 2021 202 2020 2 ???
Tax Cuts and
Jobs Act
(PL 115-97)
American
Rescue
Plan Act 2021
Taxpayer
Certainty and
Disaster Tax
Relief Act of
2020
The determination of wages paid to workers affected by the Davis–Bacon Act varies 
by geographic area, contract, and type of work performed. The U.S. Department of 
Labor maintains a website (https://sam.gov/). Employers may access the specific con￾tract in question and research the contract provisions to ensure that employees are 
paid appropriately.
The Walsh–Healey Public Contracts Act of 1936 affected governmental contractors pro￾viding goods or services exceeding $10,000. The act required companies to pay workers a 
minimum wage for all 40 or fewer hours worked per week. Additionally, employers must 
pay a premium (regular pay times 1.5) for work over 40 hours per week. The Walsh–Healey 
Final PDF to printerChapter 1  Payroll Practices and System Fundamentals   13
lan43463_ch01_002-045.indd 13 06/08/23 02:57 pm
Public Contracts Act also prohibited the employment of individuals younger than 16 years of 
age. Compliance with this act is enforced through the Employment Standards Administration 
Wage and Hour Division of the Department of Labor. These standards also apply to workers 
within the District of Columbia.
In 1935, the Social Security Act (SSA), also known as the Federal Insurance 
Contributions Act (FICA), established a contribution-driven fund to help the average U.S. 
worker respond to the social and financial distress caused by the Great Depression. Originally, 
the Social Security tax was designed such that younger workers supported retired, disabled 
workers, and surviving families of deceased workers, and was known as Old-Age, Survivors, 
and Disability Insurance (OASDI). It is important to note that the worker does not need to 
die or become disabled to receive Social Security benefits; the truth is that age and disability 
are components in the decision but are not the only factors considered when awarding Social 
Security benefits. 
As a contribution-based fund, employees and employers pay a set per￾centage of earnings into the Social Security fund. Originally, the fund 
was designed to be earmarked for a specific individual upon retirement. 
Still, the fund currently assists families who experience diminished wages 
and working situations because of the worker’s infirmity or the illness 
of a family member that prevents their entry into the workforce, and it 
provides monetary benefits to dependents of retired or deceased workers. 
Social Security is synonymous with Old-Age, Survivors, and Disability 
Insurance (OASDI). Medicare, a government-mandated health insurance 
program for individuals, was instituted to amend the Social Security Act under the Medicare 
and Medicaid Act of 1965 to fund medical services needed by older adults, disabled peo￾ple, and low-income persons. As of 2023, the age at which one may receive full retirement 
benefits is 67 years for people born after 1960. The full retirement age will increase from 65 
years by two months each year for people born before 1960 until it reaches the full retirement 
age of 67. Individuals may begin receiving permanently reduced benefits as early as age 62, 
but their Social Security payments will be reduced incrementally. As a side note, workers 
may continue to work past their full retirement age to increase their Social Security benefit 
payment.
(Source: Social Security Administration)
B Christopher/Alamy Stock Photo
As of 2023, approximately 20 percent of all Americans receive payments from Social 
Security. This figure includes 47 million retirees and dependents, 6 million survivors of 
deceased workers, and 10 million disabled workers and dependents. The 2023 cost 
of living increase in Social Security payments, combined with the increased number of 
recipients, reflects the largest increase in Social Security payments in 40 years. 
Furthermore, SSA estimated that approximately 62 percent of American retirees 
depended on their Social Security checks for basic food and shelter needs. The funds 
received from Social Security reduce the poverty rate among senior citizens. Social 
Security payouts vary based on age, years of work, and the highest wages earned.
(Source: Motley Fool, MSN)
As another part of its social welfare legislation, the U.S. Congress 
passed the Federal Unemployment Tax Act (FUTA) to help displaced 
workers, individuals from the workforce who find themselves unem￾ployed and meet certain state or federal qualifications. FUTA and its state 
counterpart, the State Unemployment Tax Act (SUTA), are based on the 
employees’ wages. Unlike Social Security taxes, only employers pay 
FUTA. Some states require both employers and employees to contribute 
Tommaso79/Shutterstock to SUTA. For example, Alaskan employees contribute up to an annual 
Final PDF to printer14   Chapter 1  Payroll Practices and System Fundamentals
lan43463_ch01_002-045.indd 14 06/08/23 02:57 pm
amount of $240.21 (2023 figure) to SUTA, which is collected at a rate of 0.51 percent of 
wages; employers contribute between 1 and 5.4 percent of employee wages until they reach 
$47,100 in annual gross earnings (2023 figure). Should an employee have more than one 
employer, the employee can request a return for the amounts over the annual earnings maxi￾mum in the following year. The COVID-19 pandemic strained states’ unemployment funds in 
2020 and 2021, and increases in SUTA rates and policies may be significant in future years.
The Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) of 1938 required more detailed record-keeping and 
worker protection. Before FLSA’s enaction, employers determined employee pay rates and 
hours. Low wages, long hours, and child labor were commonplace. This act regulates the 
minimum wage, which most workers are familiar with, stated as the lowest an individual 
under certain classifications can be paid. It stipulates the maximum hours per workweek at 
40. It also set the minimum age of 16 years for the workplace, although exceptions apply for 
family-run businesses and farms. Less commonly known, the minimum wage applies only to 
workers at businesses that meet certain conditions defined by either enterprise or individual 
coverage. Additionally, tipped employees, such as restaurant servers, are exempt from mini￾mum wage standards under FLSA. In the contemporary business world, a business that does 
not conduct interstate commerce is rare, but the provision in FLSA remains in effect.
FLSA: Enterprise vs. Individual Coverage
Under FLSA, two types of coverage prevail: Enterprise coverage and Individual 
coverage. 
Enterprise Coverage:
• The company must have a minimum of two employees.
• The volume of sales or business performed annually must exceed $500,000.
• Firms such as hospitals, schools, government agencies, and residential care facilities 
are always considered under enterprise coverage.
Individual Coverage:
• Firms that regularly conduct interstate business, such as companies that produce 
goods for shipment to a different state, have employees who travel to other states or 
otherwise conduct business with firms or people in other states.
(Source: DOL)
An important fact about FLSA wage guidelines is that no maximum wage cap exists. 
Securities and Exchanges Commission (SEC) regulations stipulate that high-ranking public 
companies’ employees’ compensation packages must be published with the company’s man￾datory annual report.
The Department of Health and Human Services determined in 2023 that the pov￾erty level for a single-person household was $14,580, which translates to a wage of 
approximately $7.00 per hour, assuming a 40-hour workweek. In other words, the min￾imum wage for a person to live comfortably (a living wage) varies by state and ranges 
from $14.85 to $23.13 per hour, depending on the state and city. As of this publication 
date, the federal minimum wage is $7.25 per hour, although many states and munici￾palities mandate a higher minimum wage. 
(Source: The Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation, World Population Review)
FLSA guidelines define maximum hours, minimum age, pay rates, and mandatory break 
times. This part of the FLSA was an outgrowth of the early 20th century’s industrial environ￾ment when no such guidelines existed. Horror stories about working conditions and children 
Final PDF to printerChapter 1  Payroll Practices and System Fundamentals   15
lan43463_ch01_002-045.indd 15 06/08/23 02:57 pm
working 12- to 14-hour days abounded during the 1930s. The FLSA created the classifica￾tions of exempt and nonexempt workers. Exempt workers are salaried workers who are not 
subject to certain wage and overtime provisions of FLSA. Nonexempt workers are protected 
by the provisions of the FLSA and are subject to wage and overtime provisions.
Additionally, FLSA regulation does not apply to pay periods or the amount of paid time off 
given to employees. Those two items are at the discretion of the employer. Mandatory paid 
time off has become a topic of discussion since 2010. McDonald’s began offering it to nonex￾empt employees in 2015 as a regular part of employee benefit packages in response to pres￾sure from labor leaders. Fifteen states and more than 30 municipalities have instituted paid 
sick leave for employees as of 2023. The paid sick leave laws vary widely among the states.
The third class of workers, independent contractors, is not subject to the payment provi￾sions of the FLSA. Independent contractors are typically treated as vendors of a business. 
Independent contractors are not company employees and are not reflected in payroll records. 
The IRS uses Form SS-8 to help determine employee or independent contractor status. The 
Department of Labor ruled that improper classification of workers diminished workers’ legal 
protections under the FLSA and declared that the following items must be considered when 
classifying a worker as an employee or an independent contractor:
1. The extent to which a worker is an integral element of the employer’s business.
2. Whether the worker’s managerial skills affect his or her opportunity for profit or loss.
3. Relative investments in facilities and equipment by both the employee and the employer.
4. The extent to which the worker exercises independent business judgment.
5. The permanent nature of the working relationship between the employer and employee.
6. The type and extent of the control that the employer has over the employee.
(Source: U.S. Department of Labor)
Penalties for the misclassification of employees as independent contractors can be 
high. If the misclassification is intentional on the employer’s part, the monetary amount 
of the penalty is higher. In the case of Fair v. Communications Unlimited Inc., the U.S. 
District in Missouri found that the employer had deliberately miscategorized workers in 
10 states as independent contractors to avoid paying overtime wages required under 
the FLSA. The employer was ordered to provide the names and other contact informa￾tion to the court to determine appropriate overtime compensation awards.
(Source: Google Scholar)
To obtain the remittance of employers’ withholding taxes, the federal government needed a 
way to standardize the collection of taxes from employers. Before the Current Tax Payment Act 
(CTPA) of 1943, no formalized guidelines for the remittance of taxes existed. Before the CTPA, 
employers’ remittance was inconsistent and unreliable as a funding source for governmental 
projects. The CTPA was passed during World War II to guarantee funds to support the country’s 
involvement in the war. The CTPA created the requirement to submit estimated taxes on wages 
earned during the year of earning instead of after the end of the year as previously required.
Another employer obligation is workers’ compensation, commonly known as workers’ 
comp. Unlike other payroll-specific laws, state laws govern workers’ 
compensation laws. Employer requirements for providing workers’ comp 
coverage vary from state to state. They are not required in certain states 
if the employer has fewer than a certain minimum number of employees. 
Because workers’ compensation is an insurance program, it is not con￾sidered a tax. However, it is a state-mandated employer payroll expense.
Workers’ compensation is an insurance policy employers carry to pro￾vide wage continuation and pay for medical services for workers injured 
Fertnig/Getty Images while doing business. The amounts assigned to the policy vary by work 
Final PDF to printer16   Chapter 1  Payroll Practices and System Fundamentals
lan43463_ch01_002-045.indd 16 06/08/23 02:57 pm
performed and associated risks for various professions. For example, heavy equipment opera￾tors would have a higher workers’ comp rate than office workers because their injury expo￾sure is deemed to be higher by the insurance industry. The COVID-19 pandemic’s impact on 
certain businesses, such as meat-packing plants, could lead to changes in workers’ compensa￾tion insurance procedures in future years.
Workers’ compensation plans are subject to annual audits and are based upon payroll wages 
less any employees exempted from the coverage, typically working owners. Employers must 
report all employee wages; however, only one-third of overtime hours have historically been 
reported to the workers’ compensation auditor. Each state has different requirements for cov￾erage and eligibility. The number of employees over which workers’ compensation insurance 
is required varies per state, as shown in Table 1-1.
The Affordable Care Act (ACA) of 2010 was one of the most significant payroll account￾ing changes in recent years. Although the act’s primary focus was to ensure healthcare cov￾erage for all Americans, employers have several reporting responsibilities related to the act. 
One of the responsibilities included in Section 1003 is the disclosure and justification for 
rates of plans and any increases in premiums. Another reporting requirement is the number of 
full-time equivalent (FTE) employees, the cost of insurance coverage provided to employees, 
and the elimination of a waiting period for health insurance coverage. The Affordable Care 
Act legislation comprises 974 pages and contains many provisions and contingencies, includ￾ing a requirement for continuing premium review. In 2017, the provision of the Affordable 
Care Act mandating financial penalties on individuals who elected not to have medical 
insurance was overturned by Executive Order 13765. In 2018, a judge in Texas ruled that 
Executive Order 13765 caused the ACA to be unconstitutional. In 2021, the U.S. Supreme 
Court vacated the lower court’s ruling in Texas, which means the ACA is consistent with the 
U.S. Constitution and remains a current law.
According to the Internal Revenue Service, employers must report whether they pro￾vide Minimum Essential Coverage as part of their company-sponsored benefits, includ￾ing any group health plans, COBRA plans, or preexisting insurance coverage. Health 
insurance coverage is reported on IRS Form 1095 A, B, or C as follows:
• Form 1095-A is for individuals who have purchased insurance from the Healthcare 
Marketplace, not through an employer. The Marketplace issues this form.
• Form 1095-B reports information to the IRS for individuals with minimum essential 
coverage through group insurance plans provided by governmental and qualified 
private-sector employers. Additionally, employers who are not applicable large 
employers but who sponsor self-insured group health plans must report information 
about employees (and their spouses and dependents) who enroll in the coverage to 
their employees, even though the employers are not subject to the employer shared￾responsibility provisions or the information reporting requirements for applicable 
large employers.
• Form 1095-C applies to large employers who provide health insurance where the 
employer is responsible for the act’s shared responsibility provision. This form is 
issued by employers who offer coverage but are not self-insured and have 50 or 
more full-time and/or full-time equivalent employees. 
The employer must file IRS form 1095-B or 1095-C and furnish a copy to the insured 
if the insured received medical insurance benefits for as few as one day of one month 
during a calendar year. The transmittal form, which contains a summary of all Form 
1095s issued, required by the IRS is Form 1094-A, B, or C, depending on the type of 
1095 issued.
(Source: IRS)
Final PDF to printerChapter 1  Payroll Practices and System Fundamentals   17
lan43463_ch01_002-045.indd 17 06/08/23 02:57 pm
Workers’ Compensation Laws by State
TABLE 1-1
(Sources: NFIB; WCC)
STATE MINIMUM NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES
Alabama 5
Alaska 1 (could be self-insured)
Arizona 1 
Arkansas 3
California 1 
Colorado 1
Connecticut 1 (including uninsured subcontractors)
Delaware 1
District of 
Columbia
1 (Homeowners with domestic workers must have coverage if they work more than 240 hours in a 
quarter during a previous year)
Florida 4 (except noted industries), 1 (construction), 6 (agricultural), 12 (seasonal)
Georgia 3
Hawaii 1 (LLC members must also be covered)
Idaho 1 (including part-time workers)
Illinois 1 (including part-time workers)
Indiana 1
Iowa 1 
Kansas 1 (exempt if annual gross payroll is less than $20,000 or agricultural employer; sole proprietors and LLC 
members are exempt from coverage)
Kentucky 1
Louisiana 1 (including part-time, either employees or subcontractors, with exceptions for agriculture-only employers)
Maine 1 (subcontractors must also be covered)
Maryland 1 (agricultural employers must have at least 3 employees or a payroll of less than $15,000 annually)
Massachusetts 1 (domestic workers must be covered if they work more than 16 hours per week)
Michigan 1 (certain family members who are employees may be exempt, certain very small employers are exempt), 
3 (private employers)
Minnesota 1
Mississippi 5 (certain subcontractors’ employees are covered, excludes domestic, farm, nonprofit fraternal, 
charitable, religious, or cultural organizations)
Missouri 5 (includes full and part-time, seasonal, temporary, corporate officers), 1 (construction), except farm laborers, 
domestic servants, certain real estate agents, direct sales, commercial motor-carrier owner-operators
Montana 1
Nebraska 1 (including part-time workers)
Nevada 1 (excluding independent enterprises)
New Hampshire 1 (including part-time workers)
New Jersey 1 
New Mexico 3 (construction employers must cover any employees)
New York 1
North Carolina 3 (only 1 employee for businesses that involve radiation exposure)
North Dakota 1 (including part-time, seasonal, and temporary workers)
Ohio 1
Oklahoma 1 (when a business has 5 or fewer family members as employees, the family members are exempt from 
coverage)
Oregon 1
Pennsylvania 1
Rhode Island 4
South Carolina 4 (some occupations exempt if <$3,000 in annual payroll), (including part-time workers)
South Dakota 1
Tennessee 5 (construction, subcontractors, and coal businesses must always have it)
Texas No mandatory coverage except for government contractors
Utah 1
Vermont 1 (agricultural/farming employers with annual payroll <$10,000 are exempt) (including part-time workers)
Virginia 2 (including part-time workers)
Washington 1
West Virginia 1 (independent contractors, agricultural employers with <3 employees, and casual employers are exempt)
Wisconsin 3 (including part-time workers, compliance time requirement varies by industry)
Wyoming 1
Final PDF to printer18   Chapter 1  Payroll Practices and System Fundamentals
lan43463_ch01_002-045.indd 18 06/08/23 02:57 pm
The 2017  Tax Cuts and Jobs Act  represented sweeping changes to the tax code. This 
law profoundly affected payroll taxes, especially employee federal income tax liability, and 
required a comprehensive reframing of employee income tax computation. Specific changes 
to payroll included a change to the Social Security wage base, adjustments to nonresident 
alien withholding, adjustments for inflation, and decreases in supplemental wage withholding 
rates. The Internal Revenue Service issued new mid-year tax withholding tables and forms in 
response to the changes mandated in this act. It introduced a new Employee’s Withholding 
Certificate (Form W-4) and tax guide (Publication 15-T) starting in 2020.
The Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2018 increased funding for the E-Verify program, 
an Internet-based system that offers employers instant verification of an employee’s eligibility 
to work in the United States. It is important to note that the E-Verify program does not replace 
the need to complete Form I-9 upon employee hire because it is a voluntary service. The fol￾lowing table from the USCIS compares the E-Verify program against the I-9 requirement.
Form I-9 E-Verify
Mandatory Voluntary for most businesses
Requires a Social Security number Requires a Social Security number
No photo is required on identity documents A photo is required on identity documents
MUST be used to re-verify expired employment 
authorization
MAY NOT be used to re-verify expired 
employment authorization
(Source: USCIS)
Another important part of the 2018 Consolidated Appropriations Act included monetary 
penalties of $1,000 per instance (plus damages) for employers who withhold employee tip 
earnings inappropriately. This section of the act repealed a 2017 Department of Labor regula￾tion that prevented employers from requiring that all tips be placed into a pool for tipped and 
nontipped employees. Although the act did not remove tip pools, it prevented managers and 
supervisors from participating in the tip pools.
The Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Stimulus (CARES) Act of 2020 was enacted 
to provide economic relief for individuals and businesses. It included an individual eco￾nomic stimulus and encouragement for businesses to keep their employees. A tax credit of 
50 percent of employees’ wages (up to $10,000 in wages per employee) promoted employee 
retention for firms that sustained economic hardship during the pandemic and offered loans, 
funded by the Small Business Administration, to employers. 
The Taxpayer Certainty and Disaster Tax Relief Act (TCDRA) of 2020 made adjust￾ments to the CARES Act by extending the employee retention credits (ERC) through June 30, 
2021, and increasing the amount of the credit per employee to $14,000. This legislation also 
allowed employers to take a refundable credit against their share of Social Security taxes up 
to 70 percent of qualified wages paid to the employees between December 31, 2020, and June 
30, 2021. The qualified wages were limited to $10,000 per employee per calendar quarter.
The American Rescue Plan Act (ARPA) of 2021 extended the ERC for COVID-19–related 
closures to include periods after June 30, 2021, and allowed companies to claim the credits 
for the entire calendar year. This extension also included changes to the employee sick and 
family leave credits by extending the time period to September 30, 2021, increasing the maxi￾mum amount of the family leave credit to $12,000, and eliminating the 10-day waiting period.
Pay transparency laws became enshrined in state law in Rhode Island, California, and 
Washington and were effective as of January 2023. These pay transparency laws 
required employers to post pay ranges on company pages and third-party websites 
like Glassdoor. Other states and cities are considering similar legislation, and certain 
companies have posted their wages voluntarily. The intent is to give applicants accu￾rate pay information when choosing potential employers. 
(Source: CNBC)
Final PDF to printerChapter 1  Payroll Practices and System Fundamentals   19
lan43463_ch01_002-045.indd 19 06/08/23 02:57 pm
Which Payroll Law?
&Check Stop
1. Established requirements for employer 
record-keeping.
2. Provided government assistance for workers who 
are too old or infirm to work.
3. Established protection for displaced workers.
4. Required employers to file taxes collected 
promptly.
5. Set aside funds for health insurance.
6. Regulated wages for employees whose employer 
engaged in governmental contracts.
7. Is governed on a state-by-state basis and pro￾tects employees injured during the course of 
work activities.
8. Is responsible for reporting requirements of 
essential health coverage for full-time equivalent 
employees.
9. Restructured payroll tax calculations, supple￾mental withholding allowances, and the Social 
Security wage base.
10. Funded E-Verify programs for employee eligibility 
to work.
a. Social Security Act
b. Workers’ 
compensation
c. Current Tax 
Payment Act
d. Fair Labor 
Standards Act
e. Tax Cuts and Jobs 
Act
f. Federal 
Unemployment Tax 
Act
g. Medicare
h. Consolidated 
Appropriations Act
i. Affordable Care 
Act
j. Davis–Bacon Act
LO 1-3 Discuss the Ethical Guidelines for 
Payroll Accounting
Professional ethics is critical in any accounting context, especially in 
payroll accounting. After the Enron accounting scandal and the subse￾quent passage of the Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002 (SOX), ethics became 
a focus of the accounting profession. Even with the SOX framework, 
the payroll industry is rife with ethical violations, including fraud and 
theft. The payroll accountant is entrusted to handle money belonging 
to the firm and rightfully owed to the government 
and company employees. Payment of these mon￾ies becomes a moral contract between the company 
and the recipients; therefore, ethics are vital in pay￾roll accounting. Several accounting organizations, 
including the American Institute of Certified Public 
Accountants (AICPA), the Institute of Management 
Accountants (IMA), and the International Federation 
of Accountants (IFAC), have delineated codes of 
ethics that are applied in the accounting profession. 
The basic guidelines of an ethics code include the 
tenets shown in Figure 1-2.
Stuart Miles/Shutterstock
FIGURE 1-2
Basic Guidelines for a Code of Ethics
Confidentiality
Professionalism
Integrity Objectivity and
Independence
Professional
Competence
and Due Care
Final PDF to printer20   Chapter 1  Payroll Practices and System Fundamentals
lan43463_ch01_002-045.indd 20 06/08/23 02:57 pm
Ethisphere maintains an annual list of the most ethical companies in the world. In 
2023, the list included many companies based in the United States, such as Best Buy, 
Hasbro, Salesforce, TIAA, and others. Although the companies on the list are in various 
industries, certain ethical principles are common: integrity, social responsibility, care 
for all stakeholders, and honesty and transparency in all business dealings. An inter￾esting fact is that Ethisphere found that large-cap companies that were on the list of 
most ethical companies outperformed similar unlisted companies by about 25 percent 
over a five-year period. It pays to be ethical.
(Source: Ethisphere)
Confidentiality
An accountant is responsible for protecting confidential information and exercising moral 
judgment. A payroll accountant deals with sensitive personnel information that must remain 
confidential. Social Security numbers, employee legal obligations, and an employer’s tax 
liabilities are a few examples of information that a payroll accountant must protect.
New Jersey enacted the Diane B. Allen Equal Pay Act, strengthening existing antidis￾crimination laws by preventing pay differences based on traits protected under other 
civil rights laws. It also protected employees who discussed pay with other employ￾ees. However, it should be noted that the payroll accountant is still responsible for 
maintaining the confidentiality of employee records for this law to function in the way 
it was intended. 
(Source: State of New Jersey 2018 Legislature)
Professionalism
Accountants must uphold professionalism by maintaining confidentiality, 
upholding the public’s trust, and upholding professionalism in their prac￾tice. In terms of payroll accounting, professionalism includes honoring 
the firm’s needs, its employees, and associated governmental entities. A 
payroll accountant must complete all tasks and adhere to deadlines despite 
personal issues. Personal honesty and transparency of transactions are the 
core of acting professionally.
fizkes/Shuttestock
Bechtel, a company that focuses on sustainable energy, company planning, and other 
location-based issues, has a code of conduct that has evolved over 100 years and in 
multiple countries. Their ethical code requires employees to become educated and 
aware of potential ethical and legal conflicts in the United States and other countries 
where they operate.
(Source: Bechtel)
Integrity
Integrity is the most important asset a professional can possess in the workplace. Integrity
involves doing the right thing despite external pressure, personal temptations, or conflicts of 
interest. When weighing the integrity of a decision, the main question is: Am I doing what is 
right and just for everyone concerned? Any course of action that lacks integrity potentially 
restricts the rights of interested parties and compromises the company’s best interests. The 
AICPA’s code of ethics includes explicit direction about not covering up mistakes as part of 
an accountant’s integrity.
Final PDF to printerChapter 1  Payroll Practices and System Fundamentals   21
lan43463_ch01_002-045.indd 21 06/08/23 02:57 pm
Objectivity and Independence
Accountants must take care to be independent of any pressures that would compromise the 
integrity of their work. These pressures can come from business or personal relationships that 
may affect a payroll accountant’s judgment concerning the best interests of all concerned in a 
given situation. Objectivity in accounting means that the accountant considers only facts rel￾evant to the task at hand, independent of all other pressures. The Public Company Accounting 
Oversight Board (PCAOB) specifies that independence may be compromised if any of the 
following situations occur:
∙ Commitment to a future purchase of a financial interest in a client’s business.
∙ Personal or family ownership is over 5 percent of a client’s business.
∙ Professional engagement with a client’s firm in which the payroll professional had a personal 
interest, such as partial ownership.
Payroll fraud can happen where pressures, opportunities, and rationalizations exist. 
A payroll specialist for a District of Columbia consulting firm was indicted on embezzle￾ment charges involving fictitious employees. The payroll specialist stole over $250,000, 
including amounts deposited for payroll taxes, by changing the pay disbursement details 
of terminated employees. Instead of leaving the employees’ files in a “terminated” status, 
the altered detail allowed automatic salary payments to continue but deposited to the 
payroll specialist’s personal account. The payroll specialist, who pled guilty to wire fraud, 
was ordered to repay the employer $250,000 and was sentenced to 21 months in prison.
(Source: U.S. Department of Justice)
Social obligations may compromise a payroll accountant’s objectivity. The AICPA Code 
of Ethics Section 17 specifically addresses social club membership as a factor in losing 
an accountant’s independence or objectivity. Such club membership could create a 
social debt that may cause an accountant to commit payroll fraud.
(Source: AICPA)
Professional Competence and Due Care
Professional competence and due  care revolve around an accountant’s competence and 
assume that the accounting professional is equally as competent as others in a similar role. 
In payroll accounting, due care is an ongoing process that involves education, training, and 
experience. According to the AICPA, an accountant must remain current 
with accounting practices and legal developments to comply with due 
care requirements. Payroll laws and tax guidelines change regularly. As a 
payroll accountant, it is essential to remain aware of annual changes that 
the IRS and other accounting bodies publish through participation in pro￾fessional accounting organizations, subscriptions to accounting industry 
Olivier Le Moal/Shutterstock publications, and discussions at accounting conferences.
Staying current with payroll changes is an ongoing task. Some sources for this informa￾tion include:
• IRS (www.irs.gov).
• AICPA (www.aicpa.org).
• Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) (www.fasb.org).
• American Payroll Association (www.americanpayroll.org).
• U.S. Department of Labor (www.dol.gov).
• Compliance Tools for HR Professionals (www.hr.blr.com).
Final PDF to printer22   Chapter 1  Payroll Practices and System Fundamentals
lan43463_ch01_002-045.indd 22 06/08/23 02:57 pm
LO 1-4 Identify Contemporary Payroll 
Practices
Contemporary accounting practices reflect the effects of technology and 
electronic communications on business. Payroll practices have adapted to 
include modern tools that facilitate data transmission, and new challenges 
such as the following have emerged: 
∙ Direct deposit regulations for employee pay and tax remittances.
∙ Electronic filing requirements.
∙ New timekeeping methods.
∙ The availability of paycards as a method of wage and salary disbursement.
∙ Government contract influences on payroll.
∙ International employees.
∙ Simultaneous in-house and outsourced payroll personnel.
∙ Integration of payroll into other company functions.
∙ Security of confidential, electronic personnel information.
∙ Cloud-based software designed for the security, accessibility, and portability of data.
Payroll is not a stand-alone department. Integrated software packages offered by main￾stream accounting software providers, such as QuickBooks and Sage 100, allow business 
owners to view data across departments and synthesize the information to make large-scale 
decisions. Contemporary payroll systems serve as a tool for strategic planning, perfor￾mance measurement, customer/vendor relations using mobile, and cloud-based platforms 
that may be accessed through Internet-connected devices. Payroll accountants are a key 
element in the decision-making process. They must remain educated about legal and com￾pliance issues and remain current in their knowledge of software applications and relevant 
technological concerns.
The payroll accountant plays a vital role in a company’s structure, whether large or 
small. Payroll and other employee benefits often represent the largest category of a com￾pany’s expenses. Chipotle Mexican Grill Inc. (CMG) originally started as a subsidiary of 
McDonald’s. Now a separate entity, CMG reported over $1.9 billion in labor expenses in 
its stores during the fiscal year 2022, which represented a 14.6 percent increase over 2011. 
As an innovative company in the fast-food market, CMG has integrated technology and sus￾tainability measures to engage customers and promote locally sourced ingredients to sup￾port local farmers. Notice in the following table how, despite technology integration, CMG’s 
labor expenses are nearly as large as its product-related expenses.
What’s Ethical?
&Check Stop
1. Stevie is the payroll accountant for Alpha Printworks. The boss informs 
Stevie that the company is considering switching payroll systems and 
asks for input. What are some ethical concerns involved in changing 
accounting software?
2. Karsyn, the payroll manager, is in a sorority. At a social event, she dis￾covers that one of her sorority sisters works for the same company. Her 
sorority sister asks Karsyn for confidential information about one of her 
department employees, claiming that the sorority oath requires Karsyn’s 
compliance. What should Karsyn do?
Jirsak/Shutterstock
Final PDF to printerChapter 1  Payroll Practices and System Fundamentals   23
lan43463_ch01_002-045.indd 23 06/08/23 02:57 pm
CHIPOTLE MEXICAN GRILL INC. 
OPERATING COSTS AND EXPENSES (in thousands, selected data)
Company-operated restaurant expenses 2022 2021 2020
Food, beverage, and packaging 2,602.2 2,308.6 1,932.8
Labor 2,198.0 1,917.8 1,593.0
Occupancy 460.4 416.6 387.8
Other operating costs 1,311.9 1,197.1 1,030.0
General and administrative expenses 564.2 606.9 466.3
Total operating expenses 7,474.2 6,742.1 5,694.5
Operating income 1,160.4 804.9 290.2
(Source: SEC)
Payroll Preparation Options
Several options exist for payroll preparation. The most frequently used methods for con￾temporary payroll preparation are electronic accounting programs. Other options available 
are the manual calculation of payroll using spreadsheets and charts prepared by the Internal 
Revenue Service and payroll preparation by outsourcing the process to a third party such 
as ADP, Paychex®, or myPay Solutions. A hybrid solution that allows the company to 
outsource certain payroll functions to an external provider exists with online accounting soft￾ware provided by companies such as Intuit and Sage, creators of QuickBooks and Sage 
100, respectively.
Online banks are starting to enter the payroll industry to facilitate smartphone access to 
payroll. Wells Fargo and Capital One 360 advertise access to directly deposited funds up 
to two days before the employer’s payment date, based on the employer’s funds availability. 
Another option targeted for small employers includes U.S. Bank, which offers payroll pro￾cessing, reporting, and banking services that simplify the payroll process for employers and 
their employees.
Regardless of the payroll preparation method, the payroll accountant must understand how 
the process should work. In the event of hardware failure, legislative actions, or tax changes, 
the accountant must ensure accurate payroll preparation. Companies can lose credibility due 
to flawed payroll computations and be subject to substantial fines, IRS audits, and civil litiga￾tion. Cases in which companies have paid fines for improper payroll practices abound.
A class-action lawsuit was filed against poultry producers for unfair worker practices. 
The companies named in the lawsuit (Cargill, Sanderson Farms, and Wayne Farms, 
who employ approximately 90 percent of all workers in the poultry industry) engaged 
in price fixing of their products that included the exchange of information among the 
involved companies about employee compensation to reduce the number of employ￾ees changing employers to earn a better salary and benefits. As of early January 2023, 
most firms named in the lawsuit have settled with plaintiffs. 
(Sources: PBS, Law360)
Some companies have seriously shortchanged employees’ paychecks, paying fines in 
addition to the standard payroll expenditures. Other tales of employee overpayment highlight 
payroll systems problems, such as computer glitches that have delayed payment of the com￾pany’s wages. Because the computer glitches are ultimately the responsibility of a company’s 
president or CEO and represent a potential for ethical breaches, the volume of legislation and 
stories of problems involving payroll administration point to the need for a well-established 
payroll system. Despite the numerous federal and state legislative actions concerning payroll 
practices, none delineate the format and design of a payroll system.
Final PDF to printer24   Chapter 1  Payroll Practices and System Fundamentals
lan43463_ch01_002-045.indd 24 06/08/23 02:57 pm
The information contained in the personnel records is highly sensitive and must be pro￾tected against intrusion from unnecessary parties. The Privacy Act of 1974 guarantees the 
safeguarding of information in private personnel records and mandates information safekeep￾ing and due process rights to individuals. Consider the implications of the legal requirements 
of information safekeeping:
∙ Personnel records contain information about an individual’s marital status, children, other 
dependents, and legal residence—sensitive information that must be protected under the 
Privacy Act of 1974.
∙ Payroll records generally contain each employee’s hourly rate and salary information. Access 
to these records is protected by provisions of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
(EEOC) and could provoke or inhibit discrimination lawsuits.
∙ The information contained in payroll records influences the accuracy and integrity of a com￾pany’s accounting records. The recording of payroll expenses and liabilities affects a com￾pany’s profitability, which influences investor and customer relations.
∙ Companies engaging in business with the federal government must comply with the Davis–
Bacon Act (for federal contracts) and potentially the Copeland Anti-Kickback Act of 1934 (or 
construction projects, protecting taxpayers from unethical pay practices).
∙ The number of hours an employee works must comply with the Fair Labor Standards Act 
provisions.
∙ Payroll deductions, especially for retirement plan contributions, must be documented and 
verified per the Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002.
Employers must file tax deposits for employee withholding, Social 
Security, Medicare, FUTA, and SUTA taxes according to an identified 
timeline depending upon the size of the company’s payroll. Taxes may be 
remitted via telephone, Internet, mail, or the company’s payroll software. 
Additional reports are required from the employer on either a quarterly or an 
annual basis. A company has many responsibilities within its payroll system:
∙ Tax withholding must be done consistently, reflecting the requirements of 
federal, state, and local authorities.
∙ Employers must match amounts withheld from employee paychecks for certain payroll taxes.
∙ Withholding of deductions that the employee voluntarily elects, such as health care, insurance, 
and investments, must be correctly recorded and reported.
∙ Timely and accurate payment must be made to the employee, government agencies, and com￾panies for which the employee has designated the voluntary deductions.
∙ Tax and other liabilities must be reported to governmental agencies per established deadlines.
An accurate payroll system allows managers to focus on the firm’s business, not payroll 
administration. A well-designed system benefits the employees, governmental agencies, and 
the firm. The timely forwarding of any monies withheld from employees, either by govern￾mental regulation or voluntary election, is critical to a firm’s success. 
Dilok Klaisataporn/Shutterstock
According to the accounting firm Ernst & Young, full-time employees spend a tremen￾dous amount of time and money each year correcting payroll errors. The average 
payroll error costs a company approximately $291 per employee. The errors were 
classified into the following categories:
• Missing or incorrect time recording
• Missing expense documentation
• Miscalculations in paid time off
• Employee availability to work a shift
• Incorrectly computed accruals for paid time off
Final PDF to printerChapter 1  Payroll Practices and System Fundamentals   25
lan43463_ch01_002-045.indd 25 06/08/23 02:57 pm
Besides administrating employee pay, a well-designed and accurately maintained payroll 
system is necessary during inevitable governmental audits or potential business operation 
interruptions, as seen during the COVID-19 pandemic. An audit is a process by which a 
third-party organization, either a public accounting firm or a government agency, inspects the 
accounting records for accuracy, integrity, and compliance with federal rules and regulations. 
During a payroll audit, the auditor inspects the company’s employee pay records, tax remit￾tance, and voluntary deduction maintenance. The thought of audits instills fear into the hearts 
of even the most seasoned accounting professionals. Their salvation, however, is to establish 
and maintain an accurate payroll system.
Consider the growth of selected companies:
∙ Tom’s of Maine started in 1968 as a local organic personal care product company and is now 
a nationally recognized leader in environmental stewardship and sustainability. (Source: www.
tomsofmaine.com)
∙ Ben and Jerry’s, which started with a $5 correspondence course in ice-cream making and a 
$12,000 investment in 1978, has become an icon of premium ice cream and environmental 
causes. Ben and Jerry’s has since been purchased by the Unilever Corporation and maintains an 
independent board of directors and the rights to product formulas. (Source: www.benjerry.com)
∙ McDonald’s Corporation was started in 1955 by the McDonald brothers, who sold their 
hamburger business to Ray Kroc. The brand is now an international icon for fast food, serving 
approximately 68 million customers in 120 countries daily. 
These companies share similar beginnings: one location, a few employees, and a sim￾ple payroll. As each company has grown, so has the payroll complexity, including multiple 
departments and facilities in many states and countries. At each company’s heart are a well￾run business model and a sound payroll system that has evolved with it.
Tracking and monitoring employee hours, locations, and applicable governmental require￾ments within various nations require knowledgeable payroll staff willing to remain current with 
accounting trends and international regulations. Sophisticated payroll systems enable companies 
to create, populate, and file many documents using current software and Internet technology.
Privacy Protection
A company must make every reasonable effort to protect personnel 
information contained in payroll records. This is a critical part of 
any payroll accountant’s job. Several federal privacy acts exist to 
protect the information contained in payroll and personnel records. 
Additionally, many states have enacted or expanded specific data 
privacy legislation. Each state’s privacy law refers to “reasonable” 
steps companies must take to protect customers’ information.
Privacy acts include (but are certainly not limited to):
∙ U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Privacy Act 09-40-0006 pertains to public 
employees’ eligibility for pay, entitlements, raises, and benefits.
∙ Common-Law Privacy Act, which pertains to freedom from misuse or abuse of one’s private 
affairs.
∙ Privacy Act of 1974, about the use of information about private citizens.
∙ Computer Fraud and Abuse Act (CFAA) of 1986 addresses cybercrime, an issue that has 
grown in importance in recent years.
These errors, which are costly for employers, conceal the other parts of the 
expenses: Legal costs, negotiated settlements, and fines. For these and other reasons, 
companies need dedicated, trained payroll specialists. 
(Source: Paycom)
PopTika/Shutterstock
Final PDF to printer26   Chapter 1  Payroll Practices and System Fundamentals
lan43463_ch01_002-045.indd 26 06/08/23 02:57 pm
The following image contains best practices as of 2023 to strengthen payroll system 
security:
(Source: Forbes)
Payroll access
restriction
Limit access to
paper check
information
Security when an
employee leaves
the company
Consider
outsourcing
payroll
Maintain separate
bank accounts
Strong computer
security
Physical payroll
data protection
Separation of
payroll duties
Payroll security
audit
Employee payroll
training
Continual payroll
software updates
Regularly
scheduled changes
to user login
credentials
The General Accounting Office of the federal government has been working on revis￾ing guidelines about the privacy of records and releasing information as the Internet and 
e-business evolve. The U.S. Congress has sought ways to address contemporary computer￾based cyber threats but has not passed legislation at the federal level. States have enacted pri￾vacy laws, especially regarding social media use, to protect employees against cyber hacks.
The common element among these laws is protecting sensitive employee information 
such as addresses, dependents, compensation amounts, and payroll deductions. The pay￾roll accountant is also responsible for discretion in discussing pay rates, bonuses, or other 
compensation-related topics with employees and management. Sensitive topics should never 
be discussed with anyone other than the employee or appropriate managers. All employment￾related items may be viewed during an audit of payroll records, and auditors must treat the 
information with absolute confidentiality.
One way the federal government keeps track of employers is with Employer Identification 
Numbers (EINs). The EIN allows the IRS to know which companies may have employ￾ees, generating employment tax revenue for the government and creating tax liabilities for 
employers. Form SS-4 (see Figure 1-3) is used to apply for an EIN by providing the personal 
Social Security number, type of business, and the existence of any prior EINs for a busi￾ness owner. The EIN is required for all tax deposits, tax returns, and informational returns. 
It will appear on the company’s Forms W-2, 940, and 941, state tax forms, and the company’s 
annual tax return. Form SS-4 may be completed either on paper or through an IRS online 
request portal that contains the same information as the paper form.
Confidential Records
&Check Stop
You are the payroll clerk of a company. A group of students approaches you 
to work on a class project and asks to see confidential personnel and payroll 
records. What would you do? What are the laws regarding the situation?
Final PDF to printerChapter 1  Payroll Practices and System Fundamentals   27
lan43463_ch01_002-045.indd 27 06/08/23 02:57 pm
FIGURE 1-3
Example of Form SS-4
(Source: Internal Revenue Service)
Final PDF to printer28   Chapter 1  Payroll Practices and System Fundamentals
lan43463_ch01_002-045.indd 28 06/08/23 02:57 pm
LO 1-5 Compare Payroll Processing Options for Different 
Businesses
Companies have several options for payroll processing. The option a company chooses 
depends on the business’s size, complexity in terms of geographic placement and business 
model, the capital available for payroll processing, and the availability of 
trained personnel.
During the middle of the 20th century, employers measured workers’ 
time using punch clocks and handwritten time sheets, and some employ￾ers continue to use this method. Contemporary time collection devices 
serve as more than simple time clocks. Companies have integrated differ￾ent time-collection systems in their office security and computer access 
procedures. Time clocks are part of a security system to log in people as 
they enter a building for work, yielding analysis of simple on-site versus 
working-hour time. 
Practices relating to time collection are a vital element in payroll accu￾racy. Many companies now use biometric devices such as fingerprint readers to collect time 
for their hourly employees. Systems such as UKG (formerly Kronos) and Paychex Flex
offer biometric badges and time-collection devices that connect with office telephones and 
employee smartphones. Using computer access as another collection device serves a simi￾lar function and can offer specific task tracking and precise timekeeping functionality. With 
mobile connectivity growth, companies now have many smartphone apps to track employee 
attendance and productivity, such as WhenIWork and ExakTime. These apps are particu￾larly useful for tracking the attendance and working hours of remote employees. 
The basic elements of a payroll system are similar for all companies, but this is when size 
does matter. However, it is the company’s size and the complexity of the federal, state, and 
local laws that affect payroll procedures. Let’s examine the differences between large and 
small company payrolls and then explore certified payroll issues.
Large Businesses
Large companies present intricate problems for payroll accountants. Companies such as 
Apple, Alphabet, and Microsoft have multiple divisions, many of which exist in dispersed 
geographical locations. General Electric (GE) has different companies that operate as sepa￾rate entities. Payroll procedures reflect the intricacy of the company’s structure and may take 
many forms.
One of the major challenges in larger organizations is the existence of multiple depart￾ments in which an individual employee may work on any given day. Some companies can 
have shared employees who allocate time to more than one department. For example, one 
employee may work for both the marketing and the production departments. When this 
occurs, the payroll accountant will have to record the time worked for each department 
and apply the appropriate pay rates based on the tasks that the employee performs for 
each department.
A common payroll procedure with large companies involves employee portals on company 
websites. On the company’s payroll website, employees may enter vacation time, overtime, 
and other payroll data issues. Through the same website, employees may change withholding 
allowances and voluntary deductions and maintain certain aspects of their human resources 
files. Such web-based portals contain highly sensitive information, and the security of the 
information is an obvious concern for the companies who use them. Multiple identity checks 
and security measures are in place to ensure employee data privacy, such as SSL (secure sock￾ets layer) encryption, VPN (a virtual private network), and CAPTCHA programs designed to 
differentiate between humans and other computer programs.
Jeanette Landin
Final PDF to printerChapter 1  Payroll Practices and System Fundamentals   29
lan43463_ch01_002-045.indd 29 06/08/23 02:57 pm
To overcome some of the issues with payroll processing, large companies may rely heav￾ily on payroll service vendors to assist with payroll preparation and human resources integra￾tion. Providers such as MyPaySolutions and ADP work with the company’s security needs 
to offer websites that are secure and integrate multiple personnel functions seamlessly. Some 
larger firms will work with software engineers to develop independent systems tailored to 
unique company needs.
Large companies face other issues related to accurate timekeeping, 
such as the volume of employee records. Companies with computer￾ized time-measurement systems may link employees’ computer logins, 
telephone logins, or building access with the payroll system. Companies 
working with radio frequency time cards and electronic payroll monitor￾ing can properly allocate employee time to specific machines or produc￾tion lines. With the currently available computer software and services, 
large companies have many options to maintain their payroll systems’ 
accuracy and integrity.
Small Businesses
One apparent difference between large and small businesses is the volume 
and handling of payroll records. A small number of employees gener￾ally leads to fewer payroll-related transactions. Manual payroll systems 
may be maintained in small businesses, including handwritten time cards. 
Outsourcing payroll activities may not be as prominent due to the cost of 
the service versus its benefits. With a small company, the amount of time 
to complete payroll-related tasks may be less than in a large company. 
For a small company, the task can be performed without disrupting the 
revenue-producing tasks of the business.
While small companies have the option of processing payroll in-house with a minimum of 
difficulty, they may lack specifically trained payroll personnel, which may place employee 
pay and benefits on other personnel and increase the risk of pay or tax inaccuracies. The 
human resource director, office manager, and payroll professional may be the same employee. 
Using payroll software and a properly designed payroll system, the task of payroll for a small 
company is generally manageable by minimal company staff. Small companies may choose 
to explore outsourcing as the company grows. Outsourcing payroll may be a viable option if 
the task becomes unwieldy or legal obligations become unmanageable.
Providing employees with Internet-based access to their personnel files is a challenging 
issue. Federal laws do not grant employees the right to access their personnel files, and 
companies must be aware of state laws before providing access. Questions of assign￾ing access to other parties (such as union representatives), access to file artifacts, and 
the employee’s right to challenge items in their file are issues that a firm should address 
when creating a web portal through which employees may access payroll records. Most 
importantly, issues of cybersecurity and online privacy must be addressed.
(Source: SHRM)
stockasso/123RF
Mavo/Shutterstock
Small companies have the option to use hosting services as a way to access cloud 
storage, subscription-based services that possess security comparable to on-site 
accounting software. Hosted payroll accounting software can change in scale without 
additional software licensing, update issues, or specific hardware.
(continued)
Final PDF to printer30   Chapter 1  Payroll Practices and System Fundamentals
lan43463_ch01_002-045.indd 30 06/08/23 02:57 pm
For more information about hosted payroll, check out these top-rated services:
• Paychex
• Intuit Payroll
• Gusto
• OnPay
• SurePayroll
(Source: Business News Daily)
(concluded)
Depending on the size of the company, the number of employees, and the complexity of the 
payroll process, the company may choose to purchase a computer- or cloud-based accounting 
system, it may continue to prepare worksheets and manual payroll checks, or it can decide to 
use an outsourced vendor for payroll preparation and associated tasks. Contemporary best 
practices often include cloud-based software due to the frequency and necessity of software 
updates and the file size. Whichever decisions the company makes as it grows, understanding 
the mechanics of the payroll process is paramount. Whether a company performs the payroll 
process in-house or outsources it, it is liable for payroll filing compliance. The next section 
provides an overview of the various computer-based systems available.
Common payroll mistakes made by small firms include:
• Misclassifying employees as independent contractors.
• Paying payroll late.
• Omitting the value of gift cards awarded to employees as part of their taxable 
income.
• Failure to make timely and/or accurate payroll tax deposits.
• Improper treatment of expense reimbursements made to employees.
• Incorrect treatment of taxable fringe benefits.
(Source: Accounting Today)
Large vs. Small
&Check Stop
1. What are three potential payroll processing issues faced by large 
companies?
2. How does payroll processing differ between large and small companies?
Computer-Based Systems
Various accounting software packages exist to facilitate payroll-related accounting tasks, 
including QuickBooks, Sage 100, and Microsoft Dynamics 365 GP. Using computerized pay￾roll systems eliminates approximately 80 percent of payroll processing time and errors, but 
the company is still responsible for the payroll data’s accuracy. Computerized accounting 
Final PDF to printerChapter 1  Payroll Practices and System Fundamentals   31
lan43463_ch01_002-045.indd 31 06/08/23 02:57 pm
systems foster the integration of payroll data with other company financial functions through 
Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP), allowing decision-makers to develop a comprehensive 
understanding of the company’s operational needs. Although payroll professionals must ver￾ify employee data and update the software at regular intervals, computerized systems reduce 
the burdens of manual pay calculations, pay disbursement, and report compilation from the 
payroll accountant.
When used properly, small companies may benefit from a computerized payroll system. 
Although concerns about the confidentiality of personnel records exist, electronic access to 
records may streamline certain tasks, such as employee information updates and overtime 
reporting. Additionally, as the year-end approaches, companies can deliver the employees’ 
W-2 (see Figure 1-4) tax forms electronically, ensuring employees’ rapid access to their tax 
documents.
A trend in payroll processing involves the issuance of electronic paycards, much like pre￾loaded credit cards, instead of paper checks. Paycards allow employees to wait for their pay￾checks to be deposited at a bank. Companies that offer direct deposit as a payment option 
must offer paycards to employees who do not have bank accounts. However, a paycard can be 
lost or stolen and, with it, the employee’s paycheck. Additionally, employers may be charged 
fees for loading a paycard. When companies consider paycards as an option, it is important 
to communicate to employees an understanding that there may be costs assessed by the card 
issuer.
Internet-Based Systems
Internet-based accounting software is an option for a company that does not need (or has 
the resources to purchase) a computer-based accounting system. Computer-based accounting 
systems such as QuickBooks, Microsoft Dynamics 365 GP, and Sage 100 offer both 
desktop and Internet-based services for businesses. Companies such as Wave have developed 
Internet-only accounting packages accessible for a monthly fee. The advantages of using 
Internet-based services include easy access for accounting personnel, employees, and man￾agers and automatic software updates. A potential disadvantage of relying on Internet-based 
software for a company’s accounting is information security issues.
FIGURE 1-4
Form W-2 Wage and Tax Statement 
(Source: Internal Revenue Service) 
Final PDF to printer32   Chapter 1  Payroll Practices and System Fundamentals
lan43463_ch01_002-045.indd 32 06/08/23 02:57 pm
Accounting Today conducted case studies with firms that had used Internet-based 
accounting software and highlighted the following:
It is estimated that advances in predictive software and artificial intelligence-based systems 
will make accounting software more useful for small businesses, enabling companies to 
engage in real-time business analysis previously out of their reach. Additionally, software 
advances will enable business owners to be more flexible in conducting business regarding 
work location, information demands, and data transmittal.
(Source: Accounting Today)
Positive Aspects Challenges
Timely identification of financial issues because 
of the ease of access to company records
Users cannot usually customize certain 
information layouts to suit specific company needs
Low price for software access and “real-time” 
knowledge of business information
Not suitable for highly complex businesses such 
as large manufacturing operations
Increased opportunity for collaboration in the 
business planning and monitoring process
Employee resistance to learning about new 
software and company accounting process
Continual software updates for changes in tax 
rates or other related practices
More options available than company personnel 
knew how to use
Manual Systems
With manual payroll systems, the payroll employee relies on deduction 
percentages presented in publications from the Internal Revenue Service. 
Publication 15 (also known as Circular E) and Publication 15-T are the 
payroll accountant’s best friends, along with periodic updates and supple￾mental publications.
The largest challenges the manual payroll preparer faces are time 
constraints and updated tax tables. Companies can determine the time 
between the end of the payroll period and the employee payments. However, employers must 
make every reasonable effort to pay their employees in a timely and accurate manner to avoid 
ethical breaches and potentially costly litigation.
Manual payroll accountants may use spreadsheet programs, such as Microsoft Excel. The 
accountant can create lookup formulas or other connecting formulas to facilitate the accurate 
completion of the payroll process. Spreadsheets with formulas or macros should be used only 
if the accountant understands the formulas and can verify the linkage before finalizing payroll 
to ensure that calculations are correct.
namtipStudio/Shutterstock
Approximately 40 percent of all small businesses make payroll errors, averaging $845 
in annual fines. Additionally, one-third of all employers make payroll errors. The most 
common errors include mathematical computations, missed payments, or late pay￾ments. When employees work during paid time off, make errors due to fatigue, or 
engage in time theft, the employer is vulnerable to payroll errors.
(Source: Business2Community)
Outsourced Payroll Systems
Outsourced payroll processing has become rather popular to ensure compliance with the 
changing legal structure and withholding requirements. When a company chooses to use an 
outsourcing firm to complete the payroll processes, there are several considerations: records 
retention, confidentiality, compliance, timeliness, and thoroughness. Managers should review 
the cost/benefits of outsourcing a firm’s payroll processes before committing.
External payroll providers offer flexibility and advanced data analysis that might be 
challenging for smaller internal departments. During a survey of over 2,000 accounting 
Final PDF to printerChapter 1  Payroll Practices and System Fundamentals   33
lan43463_ch01_002-045.indd 33 06/08/23 02:57 pm
professionals, an overwhelming margin stated they would prefer to outsource payroll func￾tions because of the time involved. External payroll management providers such as ADP and 
Paychex® assist company owners and managers with strategic planning and related human 
resources issues. However, outsourcing is not a wise decision for all companies. For a small 
company, outsourcing may not be cost-effective. For large or international companies, out￾sourcing may be the only option to manage payroll complexity and maintain legal compliance.
A trend in payroll accounting involves cloud-based computing, meaning that the data is 
housed on a server external to the firm and accessible via an Internet connection. Companies 
such as ADP offer cloud-based payroll and human resource functions for businesses. These ser￾vices reduce costs by allowing a company to avoid hardware and software costs associated with 
payroll. However, issues have arisen with payroll vendor stability and information security. 
Payroll processing company Kronos was the victim of a ransomware attack in late 
2021. Although Kronos was operating again as of January 2022, the company was 
the defendant in multiple lawsuits from companies such as PepsiCo and Marriott 
International. By the end of March 2022, Kronos was subject to nearly two dozen law￾suits alleging FLSA violations. As of this writing, Kronos no longer exists as an option 
for outsourced payroll, and its tribulations have become a cautionary tale for busi￾nesses that use similar outsourced vendors.
(Source: Bloomberg Law)
Certified Payroll
Companies who do business with the federal government under the Davis–Bacon Act must file 
a report (see Figure 1-5 for Form WH-347) delineating the payroll paid as part of the govern￾ment contract with each payroll. Certified payroll is how the federal government keeps track of 
the money spent on government contracts. Davis–Bacon Act–related wages and the state ver￾sions of those regulations require special handling and knowledge. Certified payroll facilitates 
governmental internal accountability and verifies that Davis–Bacon Act requirements are met.
Information needed to complete a Certified Payroll report includes:
∙ Company-specific identifying information.
∙ The job being worked on and its duration.
∙ Employee information that includes a Social Security number and address.
∙ Hours worked on each job and the pay rate associated with it.
∙ Gross pay earned for the week.
∙ Taxes, withholdings, and fringe benefits.
∙ Net pay earned per employee.
FIGURE 1-5
Form WH-347 Certified Payroll 
(Source: U.S. Department of Labor)
Final PDF to printer34   Chapter 1  Payroll Practices and System Fundamentals
lan43463_ch01_002-045.indd 34 06/08/23 02:57 pm
Choosing payroll technology can be a complex task for employees charged with find￾ing appropriate technological solutions. Some of the considerations include:
• Flexibility in employee pay options.
• Time collection procedures.
• Tax reporting.
• Geotagging of employee work locations.
• Software affordability.
• Software update schedules.
What Is the Difference?
&Check Stop
In a few words, compare the following:
a. Manual payroll systems
b. Computerized payroll systems
c. Outsourced payroll systems
d. Certified payroll
LEGAL ENVIRONMENT
To say that the legal environment of payroll is continually evolving is an understatement. Since 2018, 
we have witnessed the following legal challenges:
• Increasing numbers of private employers and localities raise the minimum wage significantly to 
close the gap between the minimum wage and the living wage.
• Supplemental wage rate changes for payments of bonuses.
• State enforcement of predictive scheduling and fair/flexible scheduling laws on changing 
employees’ schedules.
• Reframing the federal income tax structure, treatment for nonresident aliens, supplemental 
wage withholding rates, and inflation adjustments.
• An increase in the need for centralized and fully communicated company policies to meet 
remote workers’ and companies’ needs.
Future trends to watch include: 
• A shift to complete digitalization of payroll processes, including partial or complete remote work 
options.
• Increased guidance about payroll tax impacts involving Indian tribal employees and student loan 
deferrals.
• A focus on employee retention could include unlimited paid time off without specific tracking of 
hours used. 
• Increases in employees with multiple part-time jobs could lead to legislative changes involving 
“gig” employee classification and related benefits.
• Changes in worker attitudes about the minimum pay for which they are willing to work, as 
opposed to the legislated minimum wage.
Trends to Watch
Final PDF to printerChapter 1  Payroll Practices and System Fundamentals   35
lan43463_ch01_002-045.indd 35 06/08/23 02:57 pm
Summary of Payroll Practices and System Fundamentals
Accounting practices have existed for centuries, and a need continually exists for employers to 
compensate employees for the work they have performed. Payroll processing became increas￾ingly complex once the United States began taxing personal income. During the 20th cen￾tury, payroll practices evolved to include withholding taxes from employees, remitting payroll 
taxes to government agencies, maintaining accurate and confidential records, and incorporat￾ing civil rights-related legislation. Payroll accounting is a field that requires precision and 
attention to minute details due to its changing nature. Additionally, payroll accountants must 
adhere to ethical guidelines, including due care, objectivity, independence, professional com￾petence, integrity, and confidentiality because of the nature of their work.
The establishment of a 21st-century payroll system involves careful, deliberate planning. 
The framework used for the payroll system must have ample room for company growth, struc￾ture to ensure system stability, and trained payroll personnel to ensure that company and 
government deadlines are met. Using the best practices outlined in this chapter may help a 
company implement a robust payroll system, whether the system is maintained by company 
personnel, outsourced, completed manually, or accomplished using specifically designed 
software. A resilient payroll system design may reduce or prevent problems with employees 
and governmental entities.
Key Points
• Legislation that has affected employees’ working conditions has mandated many 
aspects of the workplace, including civil rights, retirement and health benefits, and rein￾vestment in American workers.
• Payroll-specific legislation has influenced working hours and employee wages and was 
updated in 2020 and later years to address contemporary employer concerns.
• Employer and employee tax laws have been enacted, and the remittance of tax obliga￾tions has been mandated.
• Payroll accountants must adhere to ethical guidelines because of the nature of the 
work performed.
• The ethical principles of confidentiality, integrity, objectivity, independence, profes￾sional competence, and due care guide the payroll accounting profession.
• Payroll practices include the electronic transmission of employee pay and tax 
obligations.
• Employee information security is an ongoing concern for companies, especially with 
the electronic transmission of sensitive data.
• Payroll may be processed at a central corporate site or through an outsourced payroll 
processing company.
• Many small companies use payroll accounting software, such as QuickBooks and Sage 
100.
• Cloud-based payroll processing has offered many resources for companies, including 
partial or total payroll preparation services.
• Payroll security and privacy are critical to ensure employer legal compliance and to 
protect employees.
• Outsourced payroll security has been vulnerable to cyberattacks, resulting in industry 
guidance regarding payroll security.
Final PDF to printer36   Chapter 1  Payroll Practices and System Fundamentals
lan43463_ch01_002-045.indd 36 06/08/23 02:57 pm
ACA
ADA
ADAAA
ADEA
ARRA
ARPA
ATRA
CARES Act
Certified payroll
Circular E
Civil Rights Act of 1964
Civil Rights Act of 1991
COBRA
Consolidated 
Appropriations Act of 
2018
Copeland Anti-Kickback 
Act
Coronavirus Aid, Relief 
and Economic Stimulus 
(CARES) Act of 2020
Current Tax Payment Act 
(CTPA) of 1943
Davis–Bacon Act of 
1931
DOMA
Due care
EEOC
Employer Identification 
Number (EIN)
Enterprise coverage
Equal Pay Act of 1963
ERISA
Ethics
E-Verify
FICA
FLSA
FMLA
FUTA
FTE
HIPAA
Independence
Independent contractor
Individual coverage
Integrity
IRCA
Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act 
of 2009
Living wage
Marketplace
Medicare tax
Minimum wage
OASDI
Objectivity
OSHA
Outsourced vendor
Personal Responsibility, 
Work and Family 
Promotion Act of 2002
Privacy Act of 1974
Protecting Americans from 
Tax Hikes (PATH) Act
Professional competence
Professionalism
PRWOR
Publication 15
Publication 15-T
Respect for Marriage Act
Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 
2002 (SOX)
SECURE Act
SECURE 2.0 Act
Sixteenth Amendment to 
the U.S. Constitution
Social Security Act (SSA)
SOX
SUTA
Tax Cuts and Jobs Act
TCDRA
USERRA
VPN
Walsh–Healey Public 
Contracts Act
Workers’ compensation
Vocabulary
Review Questions
1. What is the purpose of a payroll system?
2. What are two of the differences between large- and small-company payroll practices?
3. What is certified payroll? Which entities must use it?
4. Why might it be a good idea to let employees manage their payroll records? What are 
some of the pitfalls?
5. What are two ways a payroll system may protect a company in the event of a visit 
from a government auditor?
6. What is payroll outsourcing? When might a company consider outsourcing its payroll?
7. What are three examples of federal laws that are essential to ensure legal, fair hiring 
practices?
8. What are the major types of payroll processing methods?
9. What are two laws governing the taxes that employers must withhold from employees?
10. What are the guidelines for FLSA in terms of overtime and pay rate?
11. Why was the Social Security Act of 1935 created? What were its provisions?
12. How did the Medicare and Medicaid Act of 1965 modify the Social Security Act of 1935?
13. What are two of the advantages of a computerized payroll system over a manual 
system?
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch01_002-045.indd 37 06/08/23 02:57 pm
Chapter 1  Payroll Practices and System Fundamentals   37
14. Which act created the term “full-time equivalents”?
15. How has cloud-based payroll processing affected contemporary payroll practices?
16. What are two of the differences between the completion of the I-9 and the use of 
E-Verify systems?
17. What were three provisions of the SECURE 2.0 Act?
18. What are two of the challenges that arise from the use of outsourced payroll systems?
19. What distinguishes a “living wage” from the minimum wage?
20. How does the Equal Pay Act of 1963 differ from the Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act of 2009?
21. What are the differences between ARPA and TCDRA? 
22. What did ARPA and TCDRA do to the CARES Act?
Exercises Set A   
E1-1A.
LO 1-1, 1-2
Lupore Fabrics obtained a contract in Watts Mills, South Carolina, that 
involves the production of materials for military uniforms, a project con￾tracted with the federal government for $2,800,000. What laws govern the 
wages Lupore Fabrics pays its workers for this project? (Select all that apply.)
1. Davis–Bacon Act
2. Sarbanes–Oxley Act
3. Walsh–Healey Act
4. FLSA
E1-2A.
LO 1-1, 1-2
Dylan Piccirillo works as the payroll clerk for Centinix, a security company 
that hires many part-time and temporary workers who are paid hourly. 
What law(s) govern(s) the hiring or documenting of these workers? 
1. ADEA
2. FLSA
3. IRCA
4. USERRA
E1-3A.
LO 1-1, 1-2
London Franco was dismissed from employment at Precision Dynamics 
because of a race-related incident. London sued Precision Dynamics for 
$150,000 because of the discrimination. Which of the following laws pro￾vides for monetary awards during discrimination lawsuits?
1. FLSA
2. ADEA
3. ADA
4. Civil Rights Act of 1991
E1-4A.
LO 1-1, 1-2
Ines, Inc., is a qualified private-sector company that provides health insur￾ance to its employees. The company is self-insured. Which of the follow￾ing forms should the company provide its employees to comply with the 
Affordable Care Act?
1. 1095-A
2. 1095-B
3. 1095-C
E1-5A.
LO 1-3
Addison Roy is a payroll accountant who works for a private firm. Their 
most recent professional development course was completed in 2010. 
Which of the following ethical issues has Addison violated?
1. Confidentiality
2. Objectivity and independence
3. Professional competence and due care
4. Integrity
Final PDF to printer38   Chapter 1  Payroll Practices and System Fundamentals
lan43463_ch01_002-045.indd 38 06/08/23 02:57 pm
E1-6A.
LO 1-4, LO 1-5
Max Anson owns Uninix Computers, a company with five employees. As 
a small business owner, Max has several options for payroll processing. 
What factors should be considered when deciding which payroll process￾ing option is best for Uninix Computers? (Select all that apply.)
1. The number of independent contractors.
2. The physical size of the office facility.
3. The amount of money Max has to spend on payroll processing.
4. The computer technology used by the business.
E1-7A. Manual payroll a. A preloaded credit card is used to pay 
employees.
E1-8A. Time card b. The process of gathering information about 
hours worked for one or more employees.
E1-9A. Paycard c. A web-based application wherein employees 
can modify certain payroll-related information.
E1-10A. Employee Internet portal d. Governs accounting for firms with federal gov￾ernment contracts in excess of $2,000.
E1-11A. Certified payroll e. A record of the time worked during a period for 
an individual employee.
E1-12A. Outsourced payroll f. Examples of companies used for outsourcing 
payroll processing.
E1-13A. Auditor g. Provided funding for the E-Verify program.
E1-14A. ADP and Paychex® h. Payroll administration using a paper payroll 
register.
E1-15A. Time collection i. The use of an external company to track time 
and benefits and pay employees.
E1-16A. Davis–Bacon Act j. A person or group who examines a company’s 
accounting records for accuracy.
E1-17A. Consolidated 
Appropriations Act
k. A way for governmental agencies to track the 
payroll associated with a government contract.
Match the following terms with their definitions:
Problems Set A   
P1-1A.
LO 1-2
Ash Accardi is the accounting manager for a small local firm with full- and 
part-time staff. How do FLSA guidelines regarding working hours apply to 
Ash’s employees?
P1-2A.
LO 1-4, 1-5
Micah Sherman works in the payroll department at Radiance Windows. The 
employer has determined that the payroll functions should be moved to a 
cloud-based platform that can support its 500 employees, be used remotely, 
and has requested recommendations. What options could Micah propose?
P1-3A.
LO 1-1, 1-2
Eden Motta is the office manager and payroll clerk for his company, 
composed of 12 employees. An employee, Xai Gladwin, stops by Eden’s 
office and wants to view their payroll record. What privacy regulations 
must Eden consider before granting coworker access?
P1-4A.
LO 1-3
A group of employees who read on a website that income tax collection is ille￾gal approach Jules Furst, the controller for a large company. They ask that the 
company stop withholding income taxes from their pay without an explanation 
of what laws govern income tax collection. What should Jules tell them?
P1-5A.
LO 1-1, 1-2
Callen Germain is a warehouse worker for a small grocery market. While 
some merchandise was being moved, the loading dock door unexpectedly 
fell and injured Callen. How does OSHA apply to Callen for this type of injury?
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch01_002-045.indd 39 06/08/23 02:57 pm
Chapter 1  Payroll Practices and System Fundamentals   39
P1-6A.
LO 1-4
Quinn Magnus is a payroll accountant for Mama Bear Trading Co. A 
coworker from the packaging department contacts Quinn via electronic 
communication and asks to see all employees’ payroll records for a spe￾cific payroll date. How should Quinn respond?
P1-7A.
LO 1-3
Parker Alberighi and Val van Peij are friends who work for the same com￾pany. Parker manages a manufacturing department, and Val supervises 
the payroll clerks. Which ethical guidelines or rules would these friends 
need to remember when discussing work?
P1-8A.
LO 1-1, 1-2
At Denniston Industries, employees have the option of choosing employer￾sponsored health insurance. According to COBRA, what responsibilities 
does the employer have upon the termination of an employee?
P1-9A.
LO 1-3
Xan Preston is a new manager at Resterra, Inc. Xan is looking at using 
the E-Verify process for new hires. What recommendations can you give 
regarding the differences between having employees complete the I-9 
and the E-Verify process?
P1-10A.
LO 1-4
Landry Russell is a new employee in the payroll department for Palermo 
Industries. Landry has had several employees approaching with questions 
but is unsure how privacy regulations could affect the responses. What 
advice would you give Landry about privacy laws and payroll?
E1-1B.
LO 1-1, 1-2
Emery Devi is a military veteran who requires many absences for medi￾cal reasons. The supervisor at Baytery Farms has demanded Emery either 
reduce the number of sick days used or provide a medical history to sup￾port the absences. Which law(s) protect Emery? (Select all that apply.)
1. ADA
2. FLSA
3. USERRA
4. HIPAA
E1-2B.
LO 1-1, 1-2
Galen Rana is a production worker at Gexo Manufacturing, which produces 
air-conditioning systems. After working there for 10 years, she discov￾ers through conversations with a colleague with the same title and similar 
seniority that her wage is 20 percent lower than his wage. She feels that 
she has been a victim of discrimination. Which law(s) govern her situation?
1. FLSA
2. Civil Rights Act of 1964
3. ADEA
4. Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act of 2009
E1-3B.
LO 1-4, 1-5
Lyric Tesfaye is the new bookkeeper for Birch Online Enterprises, a small 
business consulting firm, and was hired to replace a long-time employee 
who retired. Lyric notices that the previous bookkeeper used a manual sys￾tem. The company owner has said that Lyric may update the payroll system. 
What options are available?
E1-4B.
LO 1-2
Zyon Deng is a payroll accountant at Sucre Foods. Zyon works remotely 
from home, communicates with colleagues via Zoom, and has a VPN to 
prevent hackers from accessing the computer data. Which privacy law(s) 
require Zyon to protect the information on the computer, even from family 
members? (Select all that apply.)
1. HHS Privacy Act 09-40-0006
2. Common-Law Privacy Act
3. Privacy Act of 1974
4. CFAA of 1986
Exercises Set B   
Final PDF to printer40   Chapter 1  Payroll Practices and System Fundamentals
lan43463_ch01_002-045.indd 40 06/08/23 02:57 pm
E1-5B.
LO 1-3
Regan Marrioni is in the payroll department at Seven Wonders International 
Foods. Regan is part of a social organization, along with several of his 
coworkers. Which of the following ethical standards could become compro￾mised in social situations?
1. Integrity
2. Professionalism
3. Professional competence and due care
4. Confidentiality
E1-6B.
LO 1-5
Kennedy Watson is the payroll accountant for Antizio Electronics, a com￾pany that engages in federal contracts. Kennedy wants to ensure that the 
company is compliant with the provisions of the Davis–Bacon Act. What is 
the process used to monitor payroll compliance in this situation?
1. Contracted payroll
2. Davis–Bacon verification
3. Certified payroll
4. Outsourced payroll
Match the following items with their definitions:
E1-7B. USERRA a. A provision of the Sarbanes–Oxley Act.
E1-8B. Respect for Marriage 
Act
b. Instituted a tiered income tax on workers.
E1-9B. Internal controls 
documentation
c. Prohibited employment of individuals younger 
than 16 years of age.
E1-10B. HIPAA d. Strengthened the child support provisions of 
PRWOR.
E1-11B. Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay 
Act
e. Legislation that governs the treatment of mili￾tary service personnel.
E1-12B. Sixteenth Amendment f. A worker who is not subject to a company’s 
direction or its payroll laws.
E1-13B. Walsh–Healey Public 
Contracts Act
g. Repealed the 180-day statute of limitations on 
equal pay complaints.
E1-14B. Independent contractor h. Reframing federal employee income tax 
computations.
E1-15B. Personal Responsibility, 
Work and Family 
Promotion Act of 2002
i. The law guaranteeing marriage equality under 
any circumstances.
E1-16B. IRCA j. Protects the confidentiality of employee medi￾cal records.
E1-17B. Tax Cuts and Jobs Act k. Mandates completion of Form I-9.
Problems Set B 
P1-1B.
LO 1-4, 1-5
Peyton Hatton is a payroll accountant with Embotelladora Traders, Inc. 
One of the employees poses a question about the legality of the deduc￾tion for Social Security tax from their pay. What should Peyton tell the 
colleague?
P1-2B.
LO 1-1, 1-2
Jaylin Thomas is the payroll clerk for Telemba Communications. One of 
the company’s employees, Dakota Boon, informs Jaylin that he feels that 
he was the victim of unequal pay three years prior. What law(s) guide 
Dakota’s complaint?
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch01_002-045.indd 41 06/08/23 02:57 pm
Chapter 1  Payroll Practices and System Fundamentals   41
P1-3B.
LO 1-3
Blake Hudnall is Conosis Incorporated’s payroll accountant. During a casual 
conversation with coworkers, Blake learns that Teagan Vinkovic, a coworker, 
is deliberately overstating the number of hours worked during each pay 
period because of a personal economic situation. Which ethical guidelines 
pertain to this situation? What should Blake do with this knowledge?
P1-4B.
LO 1-4
Amari Meyers works in the payroll department for Racine Traders. The 
company has experienced a decline in revenue over the past six months. 
The company president asks Amari to delay the remittance of payroll 
taxes to make more cash available to the company. Which act would be 
violated if Amari complies with the company president’s request?
P1-5B.
LO 1-1, 1-2, 1-3
During a review of payroll records, Ocean Morena notices that a female 
employee in Department A receives a significantly lower salary than 
similarly skilled male employees in the same department. What actions 
should Ocean take in this situation?
P1-6B.
LO 1-3
Sawyer Alescio is an accountant for Diado, a multinational firm. Sawyer 
notices that the new state payroll tax updates have not been installed 
during payroll processing in the firm’s software. What ethical guidelines 
govern Sawyer’s behavior in this situation?
P1-7B.
LO 1-2
Nyx Croce is an employee of Autonder, a contractor that provides gov￾ernmental construction services in Washington, DC. The current contract 
is for $250,000. Nyx is 22 and is paid $9.50 per hour. How does the 
Walsh–Healey Public Contracts Act affect Nyx?
P1-8B.
LO 1-4
Marlon Moyo works as a payroll clerk at Semiconductor, Inc. Marlon 
shares an office with three other coworkers and must examine docu￾ments containing personal information as a regular part of the duties. 
Based on the provisions of the Privacy Act of 1974, what responsibili￾ties does Marlon have regarding handling the payroll records?
P1-9B.
LO 1-5
West is a senior payroll administrator for Falcive Landscape Design. The 
company has 15 employees and annual revenues of $10 million. The 
company has been using and maintaining manual payroll records for 
the last 20 years. The president of Falcive Landscape Design wants to 
explore options for computerized payroll processing. Which payroll option 
is the most suitable for both West and Falcive Landscape Design? Why?
P1-10B.
LO 1-2
Angel Bellini is the payroll accountant for Pyrondo Fireworks, and has 
been asked for information about employees and independent contrac￾tors. What are three of the key differences between employees and inde￾pendent contractors?
Critical Thinking
CT1-1. You have been hired as a Dynozz Medical Software consultant, facing an IRS audit 
of its accounting records. During your review, you notice anomalies in the payroll 
system involving overpayments for labor and payments to terminated employees. 
What should you do?
CT1-2. You are the accountant for Cryologic, a local nonprofit organization. You have 
been tasked with managing the payroll costs so that staffing levels can remain the 
same even if funding levels change. One consideration is outsourcing the payroll 
functions to a payroll processing company. What are some factors that should be 
considered in this decision? Why are these factors important?
In the Real World: Scenario for Discussion
Domino’s Pizza franchises in New York were sued by the state of New York for wage theft 
at 10 stores. Under New York law, a corporation and a franchiser are joint employers if 
they meet certain employee control criteria. The state found that Domino’s met the criteria 
Final PDF to printer42   Chapter 1  Payroll Practices and System Fundamentals
lan43463_ch01_002-045.indd 42 06/08/23 02:57 pm
for being a joint employer because it mandates many policies with which franchisers must 
comply. The problem arose when Domino’s mandated the use of PULSE payroll software, 
which the pizza company knew to be flawed and did not attempt to remedy. The flawed 
software led to employees being paid at rates below the legal minimum wage, failing to 
pay overtime, not reimbursing employees for vehicle use, and abusing tip credit guidelines.
Food for Thought:
1. Should the franchisees be held liable as joint employers with Domino’s? Why or why not?
2. Which laws pertain to employee wages? How would they apply in this situation?
3. What could be done to ensure future legal compliance?
Internet Activities
1-1. Using the website www.jstor.org, search for articles about payroll-related laws or rel￾evant employment legislation. Once you find an article, summarize the article and 
explain how the legislation influenced contemporary payroll practices.
1-2. Visit the website of the American Payroll Association at www.americanpayroll.org. On 
the right side of the home page, you will find articles about recent developments in 
payroll practices and legislation. Choose an article and create a presentation to your 
class about how its content affects payroll practice.
1-3. Want to know more about the specifics of some of the concepts in this chapter? 
Check out these websites:
www.dol.gov/whd/
www.taxhistory.com/1943.html
www.workerscompensationinsurance.com
connecteam.com/employee-time-clock-app/
www.adp.com
www.paychex.com
1-4. Would it help to see a video explanation of FLSA coverage? Go to the following link 
and select Topic 1: Coverage. https://www.dol.gov/whd/flsa/videos.htm
1-5. Check out www.employer.gov to see the Department of Labor’s Office of Compliance 
site. This site contains guidelines for employers about their specific responsibilities 
to employees, compliance deadlines, posters, and other resources. Its employee￾focused website, www.worker.gov, contains worker-focused resources geared to fos￾ter an understanding of employee rights under the law.
1-6. Using the website www.ncsea.org, search for research about child support statistics, 
collections per year, and payroll professionals’ role in the process.
sianc/Shutterstock
Continuing Payroll Project: Prevosti Farms and 
Sugarhouse
Toni Prevosti is opening a new business, Prevosti Farms and 
Sugarhouse, a small company that will harvest, refine, and sell maple 
syrup products. In subsequent chapters, students will have the oppor￾tunity to establish payroll records and complete payroll information for 
Prevosti Farms and Sugarhouse.
Toni has decided that she needs to hire employees for the business to grow. Complete 
the application for Prevosti Farms and Sugarhouse’s Employer Identification Number 
(Form SS-4) with the following information:
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch01_002-045.indd 43 06/08/23 02:57 pm
Chapter 1  Payroll Practices and System Fundamentals   43
(Source: Internal Revenue Service)
Final PDF to printer44   Chapter 1  Payroll Practices and System Fundamentals
lan43463_ch01_002-045.indd 44 06/08/23 02:57 pm
Prevosti Farms and Sugarhouse is located at 820 Westminster Road, Bridgewater, 
Vermont, 05520 (which is also Ms. Prevosti’s home address), with phone number 802-555-
3456. Bridgewater is in Windsor County, Vermont. Toni, the responsible party for a limited 
liability corporation created in the United States with one member (disregarded entity), 
has decided that Prevosti Farms and Sugarhouse will pay its employees biweekly. Toni’s 
Social Security number is 055-22-0443. The beginning date of the business is February 
1, 2023. Prevosti Farms and Sugarhouse will use the calendar year as its accounting year. 
Toni anticipates that she will need to hire six employees initially for the business, three of 
whom will be agricultural and three who will be office workers. The first pay period ends 
on February 10, 2023, and the first wage disbursement to employees will be on February 
14, 2023. Toni has not had a prior EIN. The reason for filling out the SS-4 is the establish￾ment of the new business. 
Answers to Stop & Check Exercises
Which Law?
1. k
2. h
3. b
4. f
5. i
6. j
7. a
8. d
9. g
10. c
11. e
12. l
Which Payroll Law?
1. d
2. a
3. f
4. c
5. g
6. j
7. b
8. i
9. e
10. h
What’s Ethical?
1. Answers will vary. Some concerns include data privacy and integrity in the software 
switchover, tax and employee pay integrity on the new software, and employee pay 
methods.
2. Answers will vary. Karsyn could choose to ignore her sorority sister’s request, claim￾ing confidentiality. She could also discontinue active participation in the sorority. In 
any case, Karsyn must not consent to her sorority sister’s request for confidential 
information.
Confidential Records
As a payroll clerk, your task is to protect the privacy and confidentiality of the information 
you maintain for the company. If a student group—or any personnel aside from the com￾pany’s payroll employees and officers—wishes to review confidential records, you should 
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch01_002-045.indd 45 06/08/23 02:57 pm
Chapter 1  Payroll Practices and System Fundamentals   45
deny their request. If needed, you should refer the group to your department’s manager 
to discuss the matter in more depth. The laws that apply to this situation are the Privacy 
Act of 1974, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Privacy Act 09-40-
0006, the Common-Law Privacy Act, the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act, and potentially 
HIPAA.
Large vs. Small
1. Large companies face issues with multiple departments, employee access to online 
personnel portals, employee data security, and timekeeping accuracy.
2. For small companies, payroll processing will involve fewer employees than for larger 
companies. Smaller companies could maintain their payroll needs using company 
personnel because of the lower volume of transactions. Larger companies need 
to consider their available trained payroll accountants and other staff to determine 
if they can reliably handle the volume of payroll needs in a timely and accurate 
manner.
What Is the Difference?
a. Manual payroll systems involve paper-and-pencil record-keeping or a spreadsheet 
program, such as Microsoft Excel. This is most appropriate for very small firms.
b. Computerized payroll systems can be used by any company, regardless of size. 
Examples of computerized systems include QuickBooks, Sage 100, and Microsoft 
Dynamics 365 GP. These computer packages range in price, depending on the com￾pany size and operational scope.
c. Outsourced payroll involves the engagement of a third party to manage a compa￾ny’s payroll data, issue employee compensation, and prepare tax forms.
d. Certified payroll pertains to companies with employees who work on federal govern￾ment contracts. Certified payroll ensures that a company reports payroll expendi￾tures of contractually allocated money.
Dollar sign made from binary numbers: Ralf Hiemisch/Getty Images
Final PDF to printer46
lan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 46 05/09/23 06:58 pm
Payroll procedures have a dual focus: (1) governmental rules and (2) the 
company’s needs. The company must abide by the applicable govern￾mental and industrial regulations or face potential fines, sanctions, or clo￾sure. To comply with regulations, a company must make several decisions: 
pay frequency, pay types (e.g., direct deposit, paycards, or paper checks), 
employee benefits, and handling of pay advances. The payroll accountant 
must prepare for the integration of new hires, transfer of employees among 
departments, and terminations that occur during the normal course of busi￾ness. Employee benefits and government-required payroll deductions 
complicate the employee payment process.
Accountants handle documents that have varying levels of confidential￾ity. Some items include receipts for expenses, invoices from vendors, and 
other business-related documents that are not confidential. Payroll accoun￾tants handle employee-related documents that are usually private and 
often contain highly sensitive personal information. Various regulations 
regarding the length of retention and storage procedures apply to payroll 
documents. An important note about financial or personnel documentation 
is that any documents connected with fraudulent activity have no time limit 
for retention purposes. In the event of suspected fraud, investigators may 
request relevant fraud-related documents at any time.
Payroll System 
Procedures
2
Chapter Two
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying Chapter 2, you should be able to:
LO 2-1 Identify Important Payroll Procedures and Pay Cycles
LO 2-2 Prepare Required Employee Documentation
LO 2-3 Differentiate between Exempt and Nonexempt Workers
LO 2-4 Explain Pay Records and Employee File Maintenance
LO 2-5 Describe Internal Controls and Record Retention for a Payroll System
LO 2-6 Discuss Employee Termination and Document Destruction 
Procedures
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYChapter 2  Payroll System Procedures   47
lan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 47 05/09/23 06:58 pm
Refugees Enter the Workforce
Immigrant labor is nothing new in the United States. The use of H-1B visas is common 
but is generally restricted in terms of the time allowed to work in the United States and 
the number of visas allowed. H-1B visas are generally issued to people with special skills, 
mostly with a bachelor’s degree or higher. The specialty skills include doctors, architects, 
educators, and accountants, among other professions. H-1B visa costs are usually paid 
by the employer and generally permit the worker to stay in the United States for up to 
three years.
The United States has experienced an influx of asylum seekers from many countries, 
including Afghanistan, Syria, and Ukraine, among others. Those seeking asylum must 
prove the need to leave their country of origin because of war or other violence that 
threatens them or their family. Asylum seekers receive a special employment authoriza￾tion document (EAD) that replaces the need for an H-1B visa and does not have a time 
limit attached. To become employed, refugees must present their EAD, the Social Security 
card received upon admission to the United States, and a document from list B on the I-9 
to prove identity. Employers do not pay the fee for refugee workers. The maximum num￾ber of refugees permitted into the United States each year remains at 125,000 persons 
as of 2023.
(Sources: USCIS, SHRM, Forbes)
Jasmin Merdan/Moment/Getty Images
Personnel and payroll files are closely related. In Chapter 2, we will 
explore payroll system procedures, including information about file 
security, legally required documents, and internal controls.
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY48   Chapter 2  Payroll System Procedures
lan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 48 05/09/23 06:58 pm
LO 2-1 Identify Important Payroll Procedures and Pay Cycles
The documentation required for paying employees starts before the first 
employee is hired. The Employer Identification Number (EIN), obtained 
online from the IRS, is the first step in employer documentation, closely 
followed by the employee information files. Under the Fair Labor 
Standards Act (FLSA), certain information is required in every employee 
file. According to the U.S. Department of Labor, the required information 
to be maintained in the employee file includes:
1. Employee’s full name as used for Social Security purposes, and the employee’s identifying 
symbol or number, if used in place of the employee’s name on any time, work, or payroll 
records.
2. Address, including zip code.
3. Birthdate, if younger than 19.
4. Sex and occupation.
5. Time and day of the week when the employee’s workweek begins.
6. Hours worked each day and total hours worked each workweek.
7. The basis on which employee’s wages are paid.
8. Regular hourly pay rate.
9. Total daily or weekly straight-time earnings.
10. Total overtime earnings for the workweek.
11. All additions to or deductions from the employee’s wages.
12. Total wages paid each pay period.
13. Date of payment and the pay period covered by the payment.
Payroll documentation regulations protect employees by ensuring that they receive accu￾rate paychecks. These regulations also keep employers in compliance with tax regulations 
and provide an audit trail for government bodies. New-hire reporting requirements ensure 
that employees pay legal obligations such as child support and garnishments.
Figure 2-1 shows a sample Employee Information Form, which contains elements of the 
employee file’s information. Note that the firm’s human resources department maintains the 
employee file. The payroll department maintains the employee information form shown in 
Figure 2-1, so some FLSA elements may not appear on the form.
Klaus Tiedge/Image Source
FIGURE 2-1
Sample Employee Information Form
EMPLOYEE EARNING RECORD
Hire Date
Date of Birth
Position PT/ FT
Filing Status
Pay Rate $15 HR/ WK/ MO
Period
Ended
Hrs
Worked Reg Pay OT Pay
Fed Inc.
Tax
Social
Sec. Tax
State Inc.
Tax
Total
Deduct
1/13/2023 80.00 1,200.00 - 1,200.00 25.00 12.28 74.40 17.40 49.94 179.02 1,020.98 1,020.98
SOCIAL SECURITY
NUMBER
Step 4c W-4 Info none
987-65-4321 HR/Wk/Mo
CITY/STATE/ZIP Anytown, MD 21220 Step 4a W-4 Info none
TELEPHONE 202-555-4009 Married/Joint Step 4b W-4 Info none-standard
NAME Jonathan A. Doe Dependent child<17 1
ADDRESS 100 Main Street Dependent other 1
1/3/2023
4/16/2002
Sales
Gross Pay 401(k) Medicare Net Pay YTD
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYChapter 2  Payroll System Procedures   49
lan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 49 05/09/23 06:58 pm
The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission’s protection of employee rights, espe￾cially when it leads to a lawsuit, involves the firm’s personnel documentation. Accurate and 
correctly maintained payroll records are vital because they reflect employees’ treatment. In 
certain states, such as Illinois, employees can inspect their personnel files and issue rebuttals 
for incorrect items.
When a company develops or reviews its payroll system, the payroll accountant faces 
myriad tasks. The employer must answer several questions, including:
∙ How will the company handle new hires?
∙ What information will be maintained in employee personnel files?
∙ Where will files be stored, and who is responsible for file security?
∙ What will the procedure be when an employee transfers from one department to another?
∙ What is the procedure to follow upon employee termination?
∙ What processes should the company establish to ensure government compliance?
∙ How will employee time and attendance be tracked?
∙ How long do employee files need to be retained after an employee leaves the company?
∙ Do employees have the legal right to inspect their files, and what procedures should be in 
place when employees ask to see their files?
∙ Where will the mandatory FLSA Minimum Wage Poster (Figure 2-2) be displayed?
Pay Cycles
Let’s start with a basic question: How often should the company pay its employees? 
Regardless of which accounting system the company uses, determining the pay cycle, or pay 
periods, is the first thing a new company needs to establish. Options for payroll cycles include 
the following:
Daily payroll is typically paid at the end of the day or by the next business day. This 
payroll processing method is typical in day labor situations; however, it should be noted that 
day labor could be treated as independent contractor work and thus not be subject to pay￾roll, payroll taxes, or a W-2. Due to a leap year, daily payroll could potentially have 365 or 
366 pay periods.
Weekly payroll is typically used in a five-day workweek. The employees receive their 
paychecks the following Friday. Several types of companies use a weekly payroll system, 
including grocery stores, construction, and professional offices. This pay frequency may lead 
to 52 pay periods per year.
Biweekly payroll is typically processed based on a two-week period, and employees 
receive their paychecks approximately a week after the end of the pay period. Pay dates may 
be any weekday. This pay frequency generally has 26 pay periods per year. There may be 
27 pay periods in a biweekly payroll; however, this is rare, and typical calculations will use 26.
Semimonthly payroll is paid twice a month. Examples of semimonthly payroll pay dates 
include (1) the 1st and 15th of the month and (2) the 15th and last day of the month. This 
is not the same as biweekly payroll, and taxation and hours paid are different. Employees 
receive 24 pay disbursements per year when using a semimonthly payroll system.
Monthly payroll is less frequently used than other methods. Some companies process pay￾roll once per month and may allow a semimonthly draw to the employees. When employees 
are allowed to draw their wages at mid-month, the employer may or may not take payroll 
taxes out of the draw. If the mid-month draw does not have payroll taxes withheld, the month￾end payroll will need to recover all taxes and withholdings for the month from the employee.
Figure 2-3 shows the different types of pay cycles a company can offer its employees. 
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY50   Chapter 2  Payroll System Procedures
lan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 50 05/09/23 06:58 pm
FIGURE 2-2
FLSA Minimum Wage Poster
(Source: U.S. Department of Labor)
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYChapter 2  Payroll System Procedures   51
lan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 51 05/09/23 06:58 pm
LO 2-2 Prepare Required Employee Documentation
Employees versus Independent Contractors
People who work for a company may be classified as either employees or 
independent contractors, depending on the nature of the work and with￾holding payroll-related taxes from the worker’s compensation. According 
to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS), millions of workers have been 
misclassified, which has led to employers not depositing the full amount 
of taxes. Employees miss out on benefits. The use of IRS Form SS-8, 
the Determination of Worker Status for Purposes of Employment Taxes 
and Income Tax Withholding, is a way that employers may receive offi￾cial guidance about worker classification. This form is available from the IRS and elicits 
information about behavioral control, financial control, and the worker’s relationship to the 
firm as ways to determine the correct status of the worker as an employee or an independent 
contractor. When the employer submits this form, the IRS makes the final determination of 
employee status.
Maria Vonotna/Shutterstock
FIGURE 2-3
Pay Periods
Daily 365 or 366 periods
52 periods
26 periods
24 periods
12 periods
Weekly
Biweekly
Monthly
Semimonthly
What’s in the File?
1. Which of the following artifacts must be included in the employee file?
a. Full name and address
b. Occupation
c. Mother’s maiden name
d. Pay rate
e. Date of payment
f. Spouse’s name
Match the pay frequencies:
2. Monthly
3. Semimonthly
4. Biweekly
5. Weekly
The number of pay periods:
a. 26 or 27
b. 12
c. 52
d. 24
&Check Stop
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY52   Chapter 2  Payroll System Procedures
lan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 52 05/09/23 06:58 pm
Employees
The determination of a worker as an employee has two primary criteria 
according to labor laws. The first is work direction, meaning the employer 
substantially directs the worker’s performance. The employer provides 
the primary tools an employee uses; for example, the employee may be 
given a desk, computer, company car, or other items needed to complete 
the assigned work. The other criterion is material contribution, which means that the work 
that the employee completes must involve substantial effort. An employer withholds payroll 
taxes from an employee’s compensation, provides company-specific benefits, and includes 
the worker on governmental reports.
Independent Contractors
Classification of a worker as an independent contractor (IC) means that 
the employer does not direct the worker’s specific actions or provide the 
tools needed to complete the work. For example, if a worker performed 
accounting services for a company but used a privately owned computer 
and printer and determined the number and timing of the hours worked for 
the company, the worker could be classified as an independent contractor. 
An independent contractor may or may not perform work that constitutes 
a material contribution to the employer.
Another identifier of an independent contractor is the duration of the relationship with the 
employer. Independent contractors tend to have shorter-term relationships with the business 
than employees do. Furthermore, an independent contractor will not share in the profits or 
losses of the company in the same manner as employees. Finally, independent contractors are 
not subject to FLSA provisions for minimum wage and overtime pay.
Payment records for independent contractors, although maintained separately from payroll 
records, are instances in which payroll accountants must be aware of employee classification 
and record-keeping requirements to avoid fraudulent activity. Independent contractors gener￾ally work for specified fees that they bill to the company, which typically pays them through 
their accounts payable department, not payroll. Independent contractors are also responsible 
for their own payroll taxes. The topic of worker classification as an employee or indepen￾dent contractor has become increasingly important in the past decade. Many employers have 
sought to reduce governmental fines and other liabilities stemming from the incorrect clas￾sification of workers.
The IRS uses three common-law tests to clarify whether a worker is an employee or an 
independent contractor:
1. Behavioral Control: To what extent does the employer have the right to control and direct 
the worker’s actions?
2. Financial Control: This guideline pertains to the worker’s unreimbursed expenses, invest￾ment in job-related tools, availability of the worker’s services to other entities outside the 
company, and how the worker is paid.
3. Relationship of the Parties: This includes details related to any work-related contracts 
between the employer and the worker, benefits offered, the permanency of the relation￾ship, and the relationship between the worker’s services and the firm’s normal business 
operations.
As of 2020, the U.S. Department of Labor issued a final rule to clarify independent con￾tractor status determination. The Department of Labor withdrew this rule in 2021, returning 
to its earlier guidelines in Fact Sheet #13:
1. The worker’s contribution of equipment to perform the job
2. The permanence of the working relationship between the individual and the business
3. The importance of the individual’s work within the scope of the firm’s operations
4. Control of the worker’s activities by the employer
Rawpixel.com/Shutterstock
lenetstan/Shutterstock
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYChapter 2  Payroll System Procedures   53
lan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 53 05/09/23 06:58 pm
5. The amount of the worker’s judgment necessary for the company to remain competitive in 
its industry
6. The extent to which the worker is an independent organization (i.e., how much the worker 
performs tasks for one company versus several)
For additional clarification, the employer should review the new Independent Contractor 
Status final rule, which may be obtained via the Department of Labor.
The gig economy, where individuals engage in part-time, self-directed work, has 
evolved since the term was introduced over the last decade. One part of this evolu￾tion is governmental regulation, which has lacked clarity because of the independent 
nature of workers’ duties and needs. Another issue is the power of workers engaged 
in the gig economy. These workers have not formed unions, which would cloud the 
distinction between an employee and an independent contractor. Furthermore, work￾ers who rely on gig work to meet financial needs do not have long-term benefits such 
as company-sponsored medical and retirement assistance, leading to economic issues 
in the years to come.
McKinsey and Company researched the shift from workers having one employer to 
those with a traditional job and a second source of income, or “side hustle.” Based on 
their research, depicted below, the American workforce comprises 100 million work￾ers, and approximately 69 million workers engage in freelance (“gig”) work either as a 
side hustle or as their primary income source.
Freelance workforce distribution in the United States as of 2022 (in millions)
50
75
100
0
25
25 29
14
6
100
125
Number of workers in millions
Gig and contract,
freelance, and
temporary workers
Contract,
freelance, and
temporary only
Gig only Unemployed Permanent
workers
(Source: McKinsey & Company via Statista) 
Further clarification about determining employment status may be located in IRS 
Publication 1779. Upon request, the firm may request official guidance from the IRS by 
submitting Form SS-8. Penalties are levied on employers who deliberately misclassify 
employees to cut payroll costs; in addition to penalties, employers may have to provide 
unpaid wages to misclassified employees. As of 2022, the Wage and Hour Division of the 
Department of Labor had recovered more than $91 million in back wages due to approxi￾mately 1,600 workers. Starting with the tax year 2020, the IRS switched from using form 
1099-MISC to 1099-NEC for reporting independent contractor earnings over $600 when they 
have performed a service in line with the business. In 2022, the IRS removed the last two 
digits of the date, making this form useful going into future years without needing to update.
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY54   Chapter 2  Payroll System Procedures
lan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 54 05/09/23 06:58 pm
iQoncept/Shutterstock
Notice that the Form W-4 for 2020 and future years is significantly different from prior years:
• Step 1: Personal information, including full name, address, Social Security number, 
and marital status.
• Steps 2–4: These are used only for employees with additional income through a 
spouse’s job, deductions for dependents, and additional income tax adjustments 
based on worksheets contained in the full form. An employee will list “EXEMPT” in 
Step 4 if they do not owe, or expect to owe, any federal income taxes.
• Step 5: Employee’s and employer’s signature and date.
Reporting New Employees
Reporting newly hired employees is considered important by governmen￾tal bodies. Why is this so?
∙ First, reporting employees creates a registry to monitor people who owe 
child support or other court-ordered garnishments.
∙ Second, it helps immigration agencies track immigrants to ensure that 
they are still legally able to work in the United States.
∙ Third, for certain professions such as teaching, the new-hire reporting 
system can be used to communicate issues such as ethical violations for 
which governmental or accrediting bodies have censured the professional.
∙ Finally, the new-hire reporting system assists with administering COBRA medical benefits.
All newly hired employees must provide specific documentation. For legal purposes, the 
minimum amount of documentation allowed is Form W-4 (see Figure 2-4) and the I-9 (see 
Figure 2-5). Form W-4 is a publication of the Internal Revenue Service. The main purpose 
behind the W-4 is to help the employer determine the correct amount of federal income 
taxes to withhold from the employee’s payroll. Employees may change the information on 
Form W-4 at any time during the year. A best practice concerning Form W-4 is to request 
that employees file a new form each January. States may have similar withholding forms, 
which should similarly be completed. Since Form W-4 was significantly changed in 2020, it 
is worth noting that employees hired before 2020 do not need to complete a new Form W-4. 
Anyone hired in the current year must complete the new form. When providing employees 
with Form W-4, it is important to give them all four pages because there is information to 
help them complete it. If an employee is truly exempt from taxes, they only need to fill out 
Steps 1 and 5, writing “EXEMPT” in Step 4. One interesting thing to note is that employers 
are not responsible for verifying the exempt status or information claimed on the W-4 except 
for Steps 1 and 5.
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYChapter 2  Payroll System Procedures   55
lan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 55 05/09/23 06:58 pm
FIGURE 2-4
Form W-4 Employee Withholding Certificate (Completed Example)
Jonathan W. Doe
123 Main Street
Anytown, KS 54932
2000
2000
May 2, 2023 92-1117654
Homestead Retreat, 9010 Old Manhattan Highway, Olathe, KS 59384
(Source: irs.gov)
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY56   Chapter 2  Payroll System Procedures
lan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 56 05/09/23 06:58 pm
FIGURE 2-5
I-9 Employment Eligibility Verification Form 
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYChapter 2  Payroll System Procedures   57
lan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 57 05/09/23 06:58 pm
(Source: USCIS) 
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY58   Chapter 2  Payroll System Procedures
lan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 58 05/09/23 06:58 pm
The U.S. Citizen and Immigration Service (USCIS) implemented new changes in 2020:
• A fillable PDF version of the form with drop-downs for dates and prefilled lists
• A new citizenship/immigration status section
• Form availability in Spanish
The E-Verify system was implemented in 2017 to provide employers with a fast, free 
way to verify an employee’s legal eligibility to work in the United States. It should 
be noted that participation in E-Verify is voluntary, and that completion of the I-9 is 
mandatory.
(Source: USCIS)
In the following example, Jonathan W. Doe was born on 5/17/1991 and lives at 123 Main 
Street, Anytown, Kansas 54932. He is single and claims one withholding under 17. His Social 
Security number is 987-65-4321. His employer is Homestead Retreat at 9010 Old Manhattan 
Highway, Olathe, Kansas 59384, with an Employer Identification Number of 92-1117654. 
His email address is jonathandoe@anymail.com, and his phone number is (620) 555-2299. 
When he filled out his new-hire paperwork on May 2, 2023, Omin Sop in Human Resources 
for Homestead Retreat verified his identity with both his Social Security card and his driver’s 
license (G93847562), which expires on his birthday in 2025.
Additional Withholding
If an employee has more than one job or a spouse who works, an option to avoid paying 
taxes at the end of the year is to withhold additional federal income taxes from each check. 
Additional withholdings are requested within the employee’s Form W-4. This can be either 
a straight dollar value or an additional percentage. These amounts are withheld from the 
employee and submitted with the employer’s normal federal payroll tax deposits. Employees 
may elect to include backup withholding amounts in Step 4 of Form W-4, which directs 
the employer to withhold additional tax amounts. Backup withholding may occur when the 
employee received additional, nontaxable income (such as dividends, royalties, or interest 
payments) or when the IRS notified the employee of underreported income issues.
The I-9 form is published by the Department of Homeland Security, which stipulates 
that this form must be completed within three business days of the employee’s start date. 
Registration of employees using the I-9 form minimizes negative implications associated 
with monitoring legally authorized workers in the United States and tracking people with 
legal obligations such as child support and other garnishments.
The final page of the I-9 form contains the documents the employee provides to verify 
identity and eligibility to work in the United States. Employees must provide either one item 
from List A or one item from both List B and List C.
The payroll accountant should retain a copy of the Employment Eligibility Verification 
Form (I-9) and a current Employee Withholding Allowance Certificate (W-4) in every 
employee’s permanent file, although no legislation mandates that practice. The employer 
should request a new Form W-4 from employees annually in January to ensure that all 
addresses, life situations, and other information remain current. Because of the timing con￾straints on releasing annual tax documents such as Forms W-2 and W-3, employers should 
verify employees’ Form W-4 information as close as possible to January 1 each year.
Hiring Packet Contents
Many companies’ hiring packets may be as basic as completing the Forms W-4 and I-9 or 
could be incredibly complex if foreign workers and multiple types of voluntary or mandated 
deductions are involved. Common items in a hiring packet are the aforementioned federal 
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYChapter 2  Payroll System Procedures   59
lan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 59 05/09/23 06:58 pm
forms, state and local withholding allowance forms, elections for volun￾tary deductions, insurance paperwork, and an offer letter that specifies the 
pay rate and start date. Not all companies have the same items in the hir￾ing packet, and no federal legislative guidelines exist. After reviewing the 
company’s needs and the legal requirements for the position, the firm’s 
management determines the hiring packet contents. Many companies also 
include diversity self-declaration paperwork to ensure compliance with 
equal opportunity legislation, requirements under federal contracts, and 
other special requirements in the event of a payroll audit.
Notification of New Hires to State Offices
The Immigration Reform and Control Act mandates that employers notify 
state offices within 20 days of an employee’s start date. State forms for 
fulfilling this requirement vary, and states offer online registration for 
new hires. One purpose of registering new hires with states is to maintain 
databases for child support enforcement. Fines for nonreporting of new 
hires vary, both on the number of unreported new hires and incomplete 
information. The penalty for noncompliance is strictly enforced and ranges from $25 per 
unreported employee to $500 for intentional nonreporting. An example of a new-hire report￾ing form is in Figure 2-6. 
Reporting new hires is a complex task with a high potential for errors when companies 
have employees in multiple states. The Office of Management and Budget (OMB) has 
designed a form (see excerpt in Figure 2-7) for multistate employers to register and designate 
one state as the primary place to which they will send new-hire reports. They can designate 
on the form the other states in which they have employees. The use of the multistate registry 
helps employers ensure they remain in compliance with the law.
Another issue to consider is the multiple employer rule. For workers with multiple, and 
sometimes joint, employers, the issue of withholding appropriate taxes arises. According to 
the U.S. Department of Labor, the joint employer test involves four factors:
1. Who hires/fires the employee
2. Which employer substantially controls the employee’s work
3. Which employer determines the employee’s pay rate and method
4. Who maintains the employee’s employment records
Foreign Workers
Employers who hire foreign citizens face additional challenges. The employer must ver￾ify that the employee is legally allowed to work in the United States. Generally, the I-9 
form serves this purpose, but there may be occasions when the prospective employee does 
not have an appropriate government-issued visa for working in the United States. If no 
visa exists, the employer may file a petition with the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration 
Services office to gain permission for the foreign employee to work in the United States 
through an H-1B visa. The H-1B visa is authorized for employers to hire foreign workers 
who have specialized university-level expertise to benefit the company. As of 2023, the 
maximum number of regular H-1B visas permitted by USCIS was 65,000 employees. An 
additional 20,000 H-1B visas were available for foreign workers with advanced degrees. 
The fees for permanent workers not in the protected classes range from $500 to $5,000, 
depending on the classification of the worker’s preference, the size of the employer, and 
the employee’s nonimmigrant status. In the case of foreign workers, the employer must 
file Form 1042 for any payments made. For information about the Permanent Worker Visa 
Preference Categories, please visit the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services website 
(www.uscis.gov).
vgstudio/Shutterstock
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY60   Chapter 2  Payroll System Procedures
lan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 60 05/09/23 06:58 pm
FIGURE 2-6
Sample New-Hire Reporting Form
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYChapter 2  Payroll System Procedures   61
lan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 61 05/09/23 06:58 pm
FIGURE 2-7
Multistate Employer Registration Form
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY62   Chapter 2  Payroll System Procedures
lan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 62 05/09/23 06:58 pm
(Source: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services)
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYChapter 2  Payroll System Procedures   63
lan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 63 05/09/23 06:58 pm
U.S. Workers in Foreign Subsidiaries
Many companies have foreign subsidiaries and divisions that employ U.S. expatriate workers. 
The Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act (FATCA) of 2010 requires employers to report 
to the IRS the wages of permanent U.S. citizens working in foreign locations to facilitate 
the appropriate taxation of such workers. Under the IRS Foreign Earned Income Exclusion, 
expatriate workers must file Form 673 with their employer to exclude the first $120,000 of 
annual wages (2023 figure) from U.S. taxation. Still, they must pay income tax on income 
over that amount and declare foreign assets.
An H-1B visa’s purpose is to facilitate the employment of foreign workers who possess 
specialized skills, as defined by U.S. statute 20 CFR § 655.700. “Specialty occupa￾tion” is defined as possessing specialized knowledge, with the minimum educational 
requirement being a bachelor’s degree or commensurate experience, or a distin￾guished fashion model.
(Source: Cornell Law School)
Payroll for companies that operate in multiple countries requires additional consider￾ations in the payroll process. After establishing a legal business presence in another 
country, the firm must consider the country’s payroll laws. For example, some coun￾tries require employers to issue meal vouchers to employees, and employment con￾tracts’ legal content varies.
Another significant area of difference between the United States and other coun￾tries is data privacy. While many privacy laws exist in the United States, the General 
Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) in the European Union delineates stringent guide￾lines for personal information handling. Under GDPR, even Microsoft Excel spread￾sheets must have privacy protection to meet regulatory guidelines.
Other significant issues involve continual awareness of currency exchange rates 
and money transfers to ensure accurate and timely pay for employees. Finally, global 
companies should maintain consistent calendars to remain consistent in payments 
among the countries in which they operate, and they should issue receipts for amounts 
paid to employees.
(Source: Global Payroll Management Institute)
Statutory Employees
Some personnel, normally classified as independent contractors, must be treated as employ￾ees for tax purposes. The IRS classifies statutory employees as workers who meet any of the 
following guidelines:
Ahmet Misirligul/Shutterstock
∙ A driver who distributes beverages (other than milk) or meat, vegetable, 
fruit, or bakery products or picks up and delivers laundry or dry cleaning, 
if the driver is a single company’s agent or is paid on commission.
∙ A full-time life insurance sales agent whose principal business activity is 
selling life insurance or annuity contracts, or both, primarily for one life 
insurance company.
∙ An individual who works at home on materials or goods that a company 
supplies and that must be returned to that company or a designated agent 
in accordance with furnished specifications for the work to be done.
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY64   Chapter 2  Payroll System Procedures
lan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 64 05/09/23 06:58 pm
∙ A full-time traveling or city salesperson who works on a single company’s behalf and turns 
in orders from wholesalers, retailers, contractors, or operators of hotels, restaurants, or other 
similar establishments. The goods sold must be merchandise for resale or supplies for use 
in the buyer’s business operation. The work performed for that single company must be the 
salesperson’s principal business activity.
Recall that the primary differences between an employee and an independent contractor 
are that the independent contractor sets his or her own hours and provides the tools necessary 
to complete the task. A statutory employee is a hybrid of an employee and an independent 
contractor. To ensure proper and timely remittance of employment taxes, the IRS has man￾dated that the employer withhold FICA taxes from statutory employees in the same manner 
as other company personnel; however, federal income taxes are not withheld from statutory 
employees’ pay.
The term statutory employee may be applied to other types of workers on occasion. 
In 2019, Slawomir Fiedziuszko, an aerospace engineer who was semi-retired at the 
time, performed consulting work for a contractor of Space Systems Loral (now called 
Maxam). He contested the withholding of employment taxes, claiming that he was a 
consultant, not an employee. In the case, the judge upheld the decision to classify 
Mr. Fiedziuszko as an employee because he worked from home doing work 
designed specifically to meet Maxam’s specifications. Under the definition of a statu￾tory employee, Mr. Fiedziuszko met the third criterion to be considered a statutory 
employee because his work was completed using Maxam’s proprietary software in 
accordance with established specifications.
(Source: Forbes)
FIGURE 2-8
Employee Database Information Sample
Entering New Employees into the Database
The method of entering a new employee into the payroll system depends on the employer’s 
system. A manual system would require tasks such as adding the employee to the federal, 
state, and local lists for taxes withheld and adding the new hire to the list of employees to pay. 
Manual systems should have a checklist of all employees to ensure that no one is missed in 
the process.
Setting up a new employee in an automated system involves many more steps. The pay￾roll employee enters in the pertinent data (see Figure 2-8). Employee number, name, address, 
Social Security number, wage, pay frequency, withholding information from W-4, department, 
and contact information are typically included. The payroll employee must designate a work￾er’s compensation classification, state of employment, and local jurisdiction (when local taxes 
are applicable). Depending on state requirements and employer preferences, additional loca￾tion codes, job classification codes, and other identifying characteristics may also be required.
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYChapter 2  Payroll System Procedures   65
lan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 65 05/09/23 06:58 pm
LO 2-3 Differentiate between Exempt and Nonexempt 
Workers
Company employees may be classified as either exempt or nonexempt 
workers. The distinction between the two terms is how the wage and hour 
provisions of FLSA apply to the worker. Exempt workers are not sub￾ject to (i.e., are exempt from) the FLSA wage and hour provisions; wage 
and hour laws usually apply to nonexempt workers. The details of the 
worker’s classification as exempt or nonexempt are always maintained in 
payroll records. Still, the inclusion of this information in other personnel 
records is at the employer’s discretion.
Different types of employees are automatically classified as exempt 
from FLSA provisions, including certain computer professionals and out￾side salespersons. Companies will typically classify highly skilled workers such as accoun￾tants, general managers, human resource managers, and upper management as exempt, 
salaried employees. Because job titles alone are not a basis for the classification of employees 
as exempt from FLSA provisions, the U.S. Department of Labor has issued guidelines for the 
most common types of employees. Note that for workers to be classified as exempt, they must 
meet all elements in the following tests to achieve exempt status.
∙ Executive Exemption
Salary compensation must be no less than $684 per week.
Managing the firm must be the primary duty of the employee.
The employee must supervise and otherwise direct at least two other full-time employees 
(or an equivalent).
The employee must have the authority to hire and fire other employees.
∙ Administrative Exemption
Salary compensation must be no less than $684 per week.
The primary duty must include office performance or other nonmanual labor related 
directly to the management of the firm’s operations.
The employee must exercise independent judgment in the performance of normal duties.
∙ Professional Exemption
Learned Professional
∘ Salary compensation must be no less than $684 per week.
Kimberly P. Mitchell/Detroit Free 
Press/TNS/Alamy Stock Photo
Who Are You?
1. Go to the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services website, located at 
www.uscis.gov, and type I-9 into the search box on the website. Click on 
the link for the PDF version of the I-9 form to obtain a digital copy. What 
are two different ways that you would be able to prove your eligibility for 
work in the United States?
2. Go to the IRS website, located at www.irs.gov, and type W-4 into the 
website’s search box. Click on the link for the PDF version of the W-4 to 
obtain a digital copy. Assume you have more than one job, and estimate 
the amount to include as income from other jobs. Complete the multiple 
job worksheet. Was your estimate close? Explain.
3. What are three examples of statutory employees?
&Check Stop
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY66   Chapter 2  Payroll System Procedures
lan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 66 05/09/23 06:58 pm
∘ This employee must perform work characterized by advanced learning, primarily aca￾demic in nature, and requires consistent discretion and judgment.
∘ The employee’s advanced knowledge must be in a field that involves science or 
learning.
∘ The employee must have acquired that knowledge through specialized intellectual 
education.
Creative Professional
∘ Salary compensation must be no less than $684 per week.
∘ This employee’s primary work duty must involve invention, imagination, or originality, 
requiring judgment and discretion.
(Source: DOL)
When workers are employed on a salary basis, they are paid to perform a specific job 
regardless of the number of hours worked to accomplish that job. A primary difference bet 
exempt and nonexempt salaried workers is that nonexempt salaried workers receive over￾time pay for any hours exceeding 40 per week. The difference between salaried and hourly 
workers regarding overtime calculation is that salaried workers will receive their normal shift 
hours of pay, even when not working the full shift, and do not receive overtime when they 
work more than 40 hours per week.
Hourly nonexempt employees receive a predetermined amount per hour of work performed 
(or a fraction thereof). Some employers may make an election that permits four 10-hour 
shifts; should the election be made, the employee would be subject to overtime rates only 
after the 40 hours have been performed. It should be noted that certain states and employers 
have a company policy stating that they pay overtime for employees who work more than 
8 hours per day (or 10 hours, if that is the normal work shift); however, paid overtime is only 
mandated by the FLSA weekly. According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), the aver￾age number of hours worked per week was 34.3 hours in 2022 (see Figure 2-9) and fluctuated 
monthly. The BLS noted the number of hours worked per week varied by industry.
Classifying employee wages as salary versus hourly is a basic determination linked to the 
type of work performed and its position. Salaried exempt employees are not subject to over￾time, are paid to do a specific job, and fulfill the FLSA requirement of self-direction; however, 
FIGURE 2-9
Average Working Hours of All Employees
Monthly length of the average working week of all employees in the United States
from December 2021 to December 2022
Dec ’21
Jan ’22
Feb ’22
Mar ’22
Apr ’22
May ’22
Jun ’22
Jul ’22
Aug ’22
Sep ’22
Oct ’22
Nov ’22*
Dec ’22*
34.4
34.5
34.7
34.6
34.8
34.2
34.3
34.9
Hours of Work
34.8
34.6
34.7
34.6 34.6 34.6
34.5 34.5 34.5
34.4
34.3
34.6
34.5
(Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, Statista, 2023) 
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYChapter 2  Payroll System Procedures   67
lan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 67 05/09/23 06:58 pm
not all salaried employees are classified as exempt. Certain jobs such as nurses, police offi￾cers, and upper-level administrators may earn a fixed salary but are classified as nonexempt
because of the nature of management direction in their function. Nonexempt workers do not 
generally supervise other employees and generally work under the direction of a supervisor.
Leased and Temporary Employees
Employers occasionally experience a need to have an additional employee but do not have the 
time to use a traditional hiring process. In this event, employers may either lease an employee 
or contact a temporary employment agency. Although these terms may sound similar, the dif￾ference between the leased and temporary employees involves determining employer intent 
and liability for worker injuries and errors.
Under IRS code section 414(n), an employee is classified as a leased employee if all the 
following conditions exist:
1. A formal agreement exists between the employer and the employee leasing organization.
2. The employee works on a full-time basis.
3. Employee actions are directed by the recipient company (i.e., the lessee).
Leased employees are considered common-law employees and are eligible for the same 
benefits as regular employees, including compensation practices, employer contributions, 
and so forth. The IRS stipulates that no more than 20 percent of a company’s workers may 
be leased.
The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 included a provision in which employers who 
leased employees from Professional Employer Organizations (PEOs) could qualify for a 
20 percent profit deduction under section 199A of the Act. PEOs serve companies by 
acting as the hiring body and human resource managers for workers. In January 2019, 
the IRS clarified under §1.199A-2(b)(2)(ii) that employers who use third-party employ￾ees through a PEO could consider those leased employees as common-law employ￾ees and would qualify for the profit deduction and subsequent decrease in tax liability.
(Source: JDSupra)
A temporary employee differs from a leased employee in the direction of the employee’s 
actions. The temporary employee is an employee of the employment agency, which directs 
them to fill specific short-term needs of various employers. Temporary employees may work 
either full-time or part-time, depending on the employer’s needs, and are only eligible for the 
benefits made available by the temporary agency.
Exempt vs. Nonexempt
1. What is the difference between exempt and nonexempt workers?
2. What is the threshold after which an employee must be paid overtime, 
according to FLSA?
a. 30 hours
b. 35 hours
c. 40 hours
d. 45 hours
3. What is the difference between a leased employee and a temporary 
employee?
&Check Stop
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY68   Chapter 2  Payroll System Procedures
lan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 68 05/09/23 06:58 pm
LO 2-4 Explain Pay Records and Employee File Maintenance
One of the most important parts of any payroll system is maintaining employee pay records, 
especially considering the classification of exempt versus nonexempt employees and the 
legislation that pertains to overtime pay. The maintenance of accurate and detailed records 
that reflect the pay period, pay date, pay rate, and deductions is critical not only because it 
is a legal requirement for delivering accurate pay but also for positive employee relations. 
Employers retain physical copies of employees’ time records, pay advice, and any other doc￾umentation processed with the paycheck. Other types of documentation include:
∙ Request for paid time off.
∙ Reports of tardiness or absenteeism.
∙ Detailed records of work completed during that day’s shift.
∙ Records of overtime worked.
∙ Performance appraisals.
∙ Training records.
∙ Awards or recognitions (especially if cash is involved).
∙ Resignation letter or termination notice.
Technological advances allow employers to scan and save this infor￾mation digitally, such as using a digital file within the payroll account￾ing system or human resources information system. The trend toward 
remote work implies that employee records could become increasingly 
digital. Transitioning to digitized employee records has the advantage of 
being accessible through encrypted sites. They are also more vulnerable 
to hacking.
Mert Toker/Shutterstock
Many payroll apps allow for multiple payment methods and payment of employees, 
independent contractors, and part-time workers by scanning images directly into the 
software. These apps often include Human Resources integration. The following apps 
are examples of the increasing digitization of payroll functions:
• Square Payroll
• eFileCabinet
• TriNet
The availability of digital copies facilitates managerial, auditor, or authorized execu￾tives’ review, approval, or commentary on the documentation attached to payroll-related 
documents. Digital copies also permit transparency of records between the employer and 
employee, reducing miscommunication and payroll discrepancies, and facilitating Internet 
employee record portals.
Pay Records
Employee wages involve far more than simple hourly rates or periodic salary payments. 
The first payroll decision should be the company’s pay frequency (daily, weekly, biweekly, 
semimonthly, monthly). The choice of payment frequency affects the applicable amounts 
for employee income tax withholding. Separate schedules for federal income taxes are pro￾vided in IRS Publication 15-T (available at www.irs.gov), which is released in November for 
the following year (i.e., 2023 tax information would normally be released during November 
2022). Once the employer determines the pay frequency, the payroll accountant can establish 
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYChapter 2  Payroll System Procedures   69
lan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 69 05/09/23 06:58 pm
One aspect of pay dates a company must recognize is the minimum pay frequency man￾dated by state laws. The purpose of the requirement is to ensure that workers are paid on a pre￾dictable basis, and some states have limits on the time between paydays. Not every state has a 
pay frequency requirement. For the states that do, employers may pay their employees more 
often than required, but they cannot pay their employees less often. Table 2-1 has the require￾ments for each state. States without payday requirements have not been included in the table.
Pay Rate
The pay rate is the amount per hour that employees receive for their labor. The company 
determines the amount an employee should be compensated. The determination of pay rate 
depends upon many employee variables: experience, education, certifications, governmental 
regulations (e.g., minimum wage, Davis–Bacon wages), hours worked, or a combination of 
all of the above. Employers may also pay specific rates for jobs performed. For example, 
employees working in a manufacturing environment may be subject to a different pay scale 
when cross-trained and working in a sales capacity. Minimum wage rates vary per state, and 
different parts of the same state may have different wages and may increase minimum wage 
amounts at various times during the year. Salaried workers receive a fixed amount per pay 
period, no matter the number of hours worked.
There is a lot of attention being brought to the minimum wage and the concept of a living 
wage. Given the cost of living in some communities, the minimum wage can be far below the 
poverty level. Part of the push toward a $15 per hour minimum wage comes from the related 
concept of a living wage.
EXAMPLE: PAY PERIOD COMPUTATION, BIWEEKLY EMPLOYEE
Juan de la Cruz is a manager for a textile firm. He earns $52,000 per year, is classified 
as an exempt employee, and is paid biweekly. He normally works 40 hours per week.
During June, the following occurred:
Pay period ending June 15: Juan worked 85 hours.
Pay period ending June 29: Juan worked 78 hours.
Salary for the June 15 pay period = $52,000/26 periods per year = $2,000
Salary for the June 29 pay period = $52,000/26 periods per year = $2,000
Juan’s salary for each pay period would be a fixed amount no matter how many 
hours he worked because he is classified as an exempt employee.
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY70   Chapter 2  Payroll System Procedures
lan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 70 05/09/23 06:58 pm
TABLE 2-1
State Payday Requirements
State Weekly Biweekly Semimonthly Monthly
Alaska XX XX
Arizona XX
Arkansas XX
California XX XX XX XX
Colorado XX
Connecticut XX
Delaware XX
D.C. XX
Georgia XX
Hawaii XX XX
Idaho XX
Illinois XX XX
Indiana XX XX
Iowa XX XX XX XX
Kansas XX
Kentucky XX
Louisiana XX XX
Maine XX
Maryland XX XX
Massachusetts XX XX
Michigan XX XX XX XX
Minnesota XX XX
Missouri XX
Nevada XX XX
New Hampshire XX XX XX XX
New Jersey XX XX
New Mexico XX XX
New York XX XX
North Dakota XX
Ohio XX
Oklahoma XX
Oregon XX
Rhode Island XX XX XX
South Dakota XX
Tennessee XX
Texas XX XX XX
Utah XX XX
Vermont XX XX XX
Virginia XX XX XX XX
Washington XX
West Virginia XX
Wisconsin XX
Wyoming XX
(Source: U.S. DOL)
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYChapter 2  Payroll System Procedures   71
lan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 71 05/09/23 06:58 pm
Hourly employees are protected by the FLSA and are eligible for overtime pay. When 
overtime pay is applied, hourly employees may earn more than their salaried counterparts. 
The FLSA determines overtime rules and rates; however, some states may have additional 
requirements for overtime pay. Overtime is calculated at one-and-a-half times the employee’s 
hourly rate. For FLSA, overtime applies only to hours worked exceeding 40 in a week (with 
some exceptions). Some states, such as California, may also require that employees receive 
overtime pay for any hours worked exceeding 8 per day in addition to the 40 hours per week, 
making it possible for an hourly employee to earn overtime pay without reaching 40 hours in 
the week.
Note: In this textbook, nonexempt employees receive overtime pay for hours worked more 
than 40 hours per week, unless otherwise noted.
The concept of a fluctuating workweek for salaried nonexempt employees has been 
a source of confusion for employers. Some salaried nonexempt employees work 
in industries that require them to be available at different times based on company 
needs. Employees who are nonexempt and salaried but have hours that are change￾able due to the nature of the job may receive overtime during periods when they work 
more than 40 hours in a given week.
emin kuliyev/Shutterstock
The State of California enacted enhanced pay transparency legislation under SB 1162. 
As of January 1, 2023, employers with 15 or more employees, one of whom must work 
in California, must publish pay rates when advertising jobs. For piece-rate and commis￾sion work, the employer must post a reasonable range the employee could expect to 
earn in the course of work.
(Source: Mondaq)
Commissions and piece-rate compensation offer employees incentives 
for specific jobs. A commission is a percentage of sales or services per￾formed by an individual. An example of a commission would be a sales 
representative receiving 1 percent of all sales he or she initiates. Piece 
rate connects employee compensation with the production of a good or 
service. Piece rate compensation was widely used in the United States 
before industrialization and automated manufacturing. For example, 
when a shoe was being made, the person preparing the sole would receive 
a set rate per item.
Compensation structures can become complex if the employee is compensated using 
multiple payment types. A sales representative may receive a salary and commissions while 
working on the sales floor but receive hourly and piece rates if filling in on the manufacturing 
floor. Proper classification of the various aspects of the employee’s workday becomes excep￾tionally important for the payroll to be processed correctly.
Entering Hours
When it is time to prepare the payroll, an automated system will provide the payroll employee 
with a simple form to complete, typically including wage type and hours worked. An addi￾tional classification of job location may be required in complex organizations if the employee 
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY72   Chapter 2  Payroll System Procedures
lan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 72 05/09/23 06:58 pm
works in multiple departments or locations. The automated systems will complete mathemat￾ics to obtain gross pay. Most automated systems will calculate overtime and shift differentials 
(i.e., higher pay for working during times not considered “normal business hours”) when 
entered into the system by the payroll accountant.
Seb is a nonexempt employee at PMJ Plastics, where the standard workweek is 45 hours. 
Seb earns $15 per hour and is paid weekly. The pay would be computed as follows:
Number of Hours Pay Rate Total
Standard hours 45 $15.00 $675.00
Overtime hours 5 $7.50 37.50
Total pay $712.50
Notice that Seb will receive overtime pay for the hours. In the above example, the 
overtime hours are computed as an extra 0.5 times the regular rate. The computa￾tion method could be different. It is important to follow FLSA guidelines and pay the 
employee appropriately to avoid legal issues.
Many web-based applications exist to track employee 
attendance and calculate pay. TimeStation, 
ClockShark, and TimeDock use quick response (QR) 
codes, employee PINs, and GPS location tagging to 
verify employee work. These apps may be useful tools 
for companies with employees at remote locations. 
Apps such as CalculateHours allow employees to cal￾culate their hours worked and email the time sheet to 
a supervisor. Other apps, such as the iTookOff paid 
leave tracker, allow employees to manage their paid time off through a synchronized 
app. With the shift to flexible work locations, the market for payroll time-tracking appli￾cations has expanded to include many niche companies.
vinnstock/Shutterstock
Calculations of Weekly Regular Time and Overtime
Even with automated systems, the payroll accountant must determine the breakdown of each 
employee’s regular and overtime hours. Recall the discussion regarding the FLSA stan￾dard of 40 hours in a week. This is where the calculation of overtime becomes important. 
The employee’s hours are added up. The pay period’s total is computed to determine if the 
employee worked more than 40 hours total for any given week, and overtime is separated 
from regular hours worked for wage calculations. If the employee did not work more than 
40 hours, the total regular hours are noted on the time card. If the employee did work more 
than 40 hours, the hours worked will be divided between the 40 regular hours and the over￾time pay computation.
Employers’ definitions of workweek hours vary, although 40 is the standard length because 
of FLSA. According to IRS Fact Sheet 23, employers who define their standard workweek 
as greater than 40 hours must pay nonexempt employees overtime pay for any hours worked 
in excess of 40.
Depending upon company policy, the existence of paid holidays or sick days may alter 
payroll calculations. However, holiday hours, sick time used, and vacation days are not usu￾ally included in the worked hours to determine overtime. Figure 2-10 shows a few examples 
of states and locations that offer mandatory paid sick leave.
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYChapter 2  Payroll System Procedures   73
lan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 73 05/09/23 06:58 pm
LO 2-5 Describe Internal Controls and Record Retention for a 
Payroll System
The confidentiality of payroll information is one of the most important 
controls in establishing a payroll system, and internal controls are critical. 
Pay records such as time sheets are considered confidential documents, 
and personnel who handle or maintain such files, either paper or com￾puterized, must ensure the privacy of the information they contain. Small 
firms may maintain the confidentiality of handwritten time sheets; how￾ever, multifacility companies may need to use more secure time-collection 
methods to ensure information privacy.
Strategic planning of the payroll system prior to implementation can 
prevent data errors and losses related to inadequate internal controls. Most importantly, the 
payroll system design should be reviewed regularly to determine its effectiveness and appro￾priateness for the company size and to correct errors before they become magnified.
According to the FLSA, employers are not required to pay for employee sick time; 
however, many states have either passed legislation or have pending bills that would 
mandate employer-paid sick time. More than 30 separate locations, including cities 
and entire states, have passed paid sick time legislation. This is a partial list of areas 
that have legislated paid sick leave.
FIGURE 2-10
Locations with Mandatory Paid Sick Leave
States/Districts Counties
Washington, DC Orange County, FL
Arizona Montgomery County, MD
California Cook County, IL
Colorado Westchester County, NY
Connecticut
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
(Source: SHRM)
Note: States that have passed mandatory sick-time laws may have cities whose sick-time laws differ. 
City regulations may change frequently and are not represented individually.
States/Districts Counties
Michigan
Nevada
New Jersey
New Mexico
Oregon
Rhode Island
Vermont
Washington
Vitalii Vodolazskyi/Shutterstock
Worker Facts
1. Which classification of workers is subject to the wage and hour provisions 
for overtime in the Fair Labor Standards Act?
2. What is the difference between exempt and nonexempt employees in 
overtime pay requirements?
3. What is the difference between commission and piece-rate pay as the 
basis for compensation?
4. How do electronic time recording apps differ from manual time reporting?
&Check Stop
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY74   Chapter 2  Payroll System Procedures
lan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 74 05/09/23 06:58 pm
FIGURE 2-11
Payroll Review Process: Steps to Ensure Accurate Payroll 
Employee
completes
time card.
Manager verifies
the employee’s
time card.
Payroll clerk
computes the
period wages
for the
employee.
Payroll
supervisor
verifies the
payroll clerk’s
math.
Employee’s check
is presented with
payroll register
for verification
and signatures.
In Brattleboro, Vermont, an assistant judge was found to have received over $8,500 in 
wages by reporting hundreds of hours she did not work. This is not the first occurrence 
of misreporting from assistant judges. In Chittenden County, two assistant judges self￾approved $2,000 bonuses for personal use. These cases highlight a weakness in the 
payroll system for judges at different levels in the state.
(Source: VT Digger)
Internal controls are a necessity, especially for small companies. The need for internal 
controls increases as a company engages more fully with Internet portals such as time￾tracking and payroll processing sites. Technological changes introduce a new level of 
vulnerability to a company’s data, so robust internal control practices are vital. The shift 
to remote and flexible workplaces highlighted unexpected risks in the payroll audit 
process, including:
• Increased opportunity for fraud
• Compromised internal controls
• Increased potential for legal noncompliance
• Time tracking through apps linked to the company’s payroll department
• Increased working from home
At a time when businesses are experiencing employee shortages, cybercrime compa￾nies seem to have an abundance of employees who are highly skilled at their trade. 
Companies must be diligent and ensure that internal controls are in place. In small 
companies, separation of duties or internal verification is essential to prevent fraud.
A company with many departments and many employees will generally have a more com￾plex review process than a small company. In an organization with one office and a dozen or 
fewer employees, certain steps of the verification process may be omitted, and fewer people 
are required to conduct it. Conversely, a large organization with several departments and 
many employees could have several verification levels in the payroll review process. Even 
outsourced payroll requires levels of the review process. The payroll executed by an external 
company is only as accurate as the data provided. For instance, a company could have a pay￾roll review process like the one shown in Figure 2-11.
A critical issue for internal controls is the determination of authorized signers. A best prac￾tice is to have more than one designated signatory for payroll checks. Often, these signers are 
different people than those involved in the review process. The extra time it takes to review 
and obtain the necessary signatures is time well spent, as long as it prevents costly errors.
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYChapter 2  Payroll System Procedures   75
lan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 75 05/09/23 06:58 pm
One of the largest payroll fraud schemes involved $70 million in payroll deposits made 
to MyPayrollHR, a New York–based company engaged in cloud-based payroll pro￾cessing. Although the clients had done everything correctly, the owner of MyPayrollHR 
abruptly stopped operating after collecting employer funds and not disbursing payroll 
amounts due to employees for two consecutive pay periods.
(Source: KrebsonSecurity)
Documentation Controls
Procedure Example of Internal Control Activities Could Be Performed By
Review and approval of time data 
from time cards or other 
time-collection devices
Completion of the time-collection procedure 
Review of time collection for accuracy and approval
Employee’s supervisor
Overtime approval Approve the amount and type of overtime to be paid Employee’s supervisor
Approval for leave of absence or 
other unpaid time off
Obtain all prior approvals for unpaid time away due 
to FMLA or other reasons
Employee’s supervisor
Timely entering of payroll data Enter the payroll data into the payroll system on 
time, and check for data integrity and accuracy
Payroll clerk
Payroll system security Make sure that only designated employees or 
payroll vendors have access to payroll data
Payroll supervisor
Approval of the payroll before 
issuance
Obtain approval from the signatory before issuing 
checks
An authorized signer(s)
Maintenance of paid time off 
(e.g., vacation, sick)
Ensure that employees receive the exact amount 
agreed upon
Payroll clerk, employee, 
supervisor, other designees
Access to payroll data Ensure that payroll data is confidential and secure Payroll supervisor
Separation of duties Make sure that different people verify data, enter 
data, verify checks
Payroll supervisor
Training of payroll staff Ensure that payroll department employees and 
other department supervisors are aware of and 
follow company payroll policies
Payroll supervisor
TABLE 2-2
Documentation of the payroll process is vital. As should be clear by now, the execution of 
payroll is not merely writing checks to employees. Proper documentation of payroll entails 
a well-delineated procedure and properly trained personnel. Table 2-2 contains examples of 
different documentation controls, the activities involved in each, and the employees required 
to participate in internal controls.
Review of Time Collected
All workers’ hours reported manually on time cards or electronically through other meth￾ods must be verified for accuracy before completing any payroll. Simple issues in employee 
underpayment (which can cause federal penalties) or overpayment (which can erode the 
company’s available cash) can occur even with sophisticated systems. Time collection and 
employee payment errors can lead to reduced employee morale, lawsuits, and fines.
Overtime Approval
Hourly employees are subject to federal overtime provisions, commonly known as time-and￾a-half, but may include other pay bases such as double-time and so forth. FLSA guarantees 
nonexempt employees’ rights to appropriate pay for the hours worked; however, employ￾ees can misreport the overtime they work, costing the company money in the process. 
Therefore, the best practice is to obtain supervisor approval on all employee-reported over￾time. Computerized systems can also affect the reported overtime. The data is subject to the 
accuracy of the person who entered it.
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY76   Chapter 2  Payroll System Procedures
lan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 76 05/09/23 06:58 pm
One of the authors worked at a company that once paid her for 75 hours of overtime in 
one pay period—when she should have had only 7.5. This kind of error can cause chaos for 
both the employee, who must return the money, and the employer, who should not have 
paid it in the first place. Once again, improper pay can erode the morale of the employees. 
Overpayment on hours can create many other overpayments, including (but not limited to) 
federal withholding taxes, Medicare, Social Security taxes, and pension or 401(k) contribu￾tions that are driven by gross wages.
Rawpixel.com/Shutterstock
A significant percentage of corporate fraud involves payroll tampering or embezzle￾ment. In Atlanta, Georgia, a payroll and accounting manager pleaded guilty to wire 
fraud after investigators discovered that she had embezzled $1.5 million over a six￾year period through improper payroll deposits. The employee had created a fake 
employee and instructed the outsourced payroll company to direct deposit that 
employee’s pay into her own personal bank account. The employee had a file for the 
fictitious worker. A multiperson payroll verification process could have shortened the 
duration and reduced the amount of the embezzlement.
(Source: Accounting Today)
Web-based services facilitate requests, approvals, and tracking for paid time off. Apps 
such as Paychex Flex and Zenefits allow managers to adjust paid time off, approve 
and track employee requests, synchronize calendars, and download reports detailing 
employee time away from work.
Approval for Leave of Absence or Other Unpaid Time Off
The employee’s supervisor is one level of oversight to ensure that the payroll data reaches the 
payroll department accurately and quickly. Supervisors work closely with their employees 
and should approve overtime and paid time off. Supervisors review individual time sheets for 
accuracy before delivery to the payroll department. Control of time away from work is the 
responsibility of the employee’s supervisor, at the very minimum. The department supervi￾sor should approve the time off. This approval must be tracked and maintained by the payroll 
department to ensure the integrity of the payroll records. A suggested best practice is to keep 
requests for time away attached to the payroll stub for the affected pay period. The use of leave 
forms provides companies with a paper trail used to clarify perceived discrepancies in pay.
File Security
Based on the amount of legislation regarding the privacy and security of personnel infor￾mation, it is important to understand that all files about payroll, whether paper or elec￾tronic, must be kept secure from tampering. Another reason for file security, or restriction 
of personnel file access, is the firm’s governmental payroll obligations. The tax informa￾tion contained in the payroll records is required to prepare timely and accurate payment 
of payroll taxes, which is nearly as important as paying the employees. 
Examples of secure payroll records include multiple passwords for sys￾tem access, the locking of file cabinets with controlled key disbursement, 
and encryption programs.
Because payroll data contains highly personal and private information, 
the security of the data is important. To maintain file security, access to 
payroll records is restricted to a relatively small number of people. Paper￾based payroll data is stored in a secure location; similarly, electronic pay￾roll data is securely backed up and encrypted.
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYChapter 2  Payroll System Procedures   77
lan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 77 05/09/23 06:58 pm
Data privacy and fund protection are a high priority for companies and legislators. 
Preventing breaches of payroll record security is a high priority and an evolving issue. The 
Electronic Fund Transfer Act of 1978, created to prevent problems with newly created ATM 
cards, has been expanded to address fraud and theft issues with paycards, a preloaded credit 
card that allows an employee to access funds without needing a bank account. Paycard use 
for payroll disbursement was estimated to be nearly $57 billion in 2015. It continues to be the 
fastest-growing payroll method in the United States, with 5.9 million active paycards being 
used as of 2017, 8.4 million in 2022, and continued expected growth to accommodate work￾ers’ pay disbursement needs. With the gig economy’s expansion and the number of unbanked 
employees, paycards are a relatively secure method of disbursing immediately accessible 
pay. Interestingly, in 2019, 18 percent of users of paycards earned more than $200,000; 13 
percent earned between $150,000 and $200,000; and 18 percent earned between $100,000 
and $150,000 per year.
(Source: Creditcards.com)
In Jessie Chavez v. PVH Corporation (2013), the defendant had to pay $1.85 million 
to Chavez because of fees deducted from the plaintiff’s payroll card, which meant that 
the full amount of the wages was reduced; additionally, the plaintiff had not agreed to 
paycard use in advance. State laws vary regarding employment authorization for dis￾bursing pay in the form of a paycard. As of 2021, at least 10 percent of all employees 
are unbanked, meaning that they do not have a bank account and rely on paycards to 
receive their earnings.
The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) proposed legislation in 2014 to 
include specific language on paycards, informing employees of their right to request 
another form of payroll disbursement. As of October 2016, the CFPB issued a rule 
that regulated the posting of accounting, disclosures, and overdraft credit that became 
effective in October 2017. This rule was updated and finalized in 2019.
The Electronic Funds Transfer Act, of which Regulation E is the most pertinent to 
payroll cards, implemented specific protections for employees who use paycards to 
receive their pay. This ruling, which was effective in 2019, added Regulation Z that 
mandated the disclosure of all paycard-related fees and other paycard-related infor￾mation to employees.
(Sources: American Payroll Association; Law360)
Gorodenkoff/Shutterstock
Cybersecurity and Payroll
More than 70 percent of targeted companies for cybercriminals have been 
small businesses. This is a high risk for a small entity and can cause them 
to go out of business. Some firms reported losses of up to $308,000, and 
many businesses reported repeated attacks. When discussing cyberse￾curity in the context of payroll, the accountant needs to understand the 
defense of computers, servers, mobile devices, systems, and some home 
networks from attacks by individuals with a desire to get personal infor￾mation or to hold the company hostage.
Once into the company’s servers, the cybercriminal can have access to personnel data and 
bank accounts, and can even lock companies out of their own computers using ransomware. 
This makes the protection against cybercriminals something that companies should put at the 
forefront of their technology planning. The information taken from the company can cause 
the employees distress and can create distrust of the company as their personal information is 
spread and opens them up to personal identity theft exposure.
Payroll accountants could play a vital role in preventing cybersecurity breaches. By work￾ing with IT professionals, they can identify possible security gaps and use tools to avoid 
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY78   Chapter 2  Payroll System Procedures
lan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 78 05/09/23 06:58 pm
them, such as multifactor authentication. An example of this is the use of an authenticator 
that can only be unlocked through another computer (e.g., a smartphone or tablet) enabled 
with biometric security measures, such as the Google Authenticator app. Companies can 
strengthen their existing cybersecurity programs by encouraging longer, more complex pass￾words, training employees as part of their employment on common security breach tech￾niques, keeping the most current versions of anti-spyware and antivirus software on exposed 
equipment, and using secured connections to the servers. Another method to promote cyber￾security could be the use of IP lockdowns paired with a VPN if the payroll personnel worked 
from home. This method allows only people with a specific IP address and access to the VPN 
to access payroll records.
Once a company has been the target of a cybersecurity breach, there can be revenue losses, 
reputational damage, and regulatory costs, as well as loss of employees or customers. With 
the rising number of cyberattacks, many states, municipalities, and the federal government 
are looking at adopting regulations to encourage companies to protect themselves against this 
threat. Humans are the ultimate tool against company exposure in many cases, and education 
goes a long way toward preventing cyberattacks.
Cross-training employees has more benefits than fraud deterrence. Offering employ￾ees the chance to learn other duties empowers them in their professional develop￾ment, fostering a sense of fulfillment among employees. Cross-training also grants 
employees the opportunity to consider different perspectives and gain a broader 
understanding of the company’s operations. Finally, cross-training is linked to better 
problem-solving ability because employees understand diverse tasks.
(Source: Forbes)
At Ultimate Kronos Group, the parent company of Kronos payroll software, a cyberat￾tack that began on December 11, 2021, created payroll nightmares for the company 
and its customers. What started as a ransomware attack led to a system outage for 
weeks, forcing employers to use manual payroll methods to remain current with their 
payroll obligations. The timing of the attack disrupted end-of-period tax filings and left 
Kronos vulnerable to lawsuits and loss of customers. It was estimated that approxi￾mately 8 million employees of both public and private entities were affected by the 
payroll software outage, resulting in missed paychecks and compromised personally 
identifying information. Kronos no longer exists as a result of these attacks.
(Source: NPR)
Alternating Duties and Cross-Training
The cross-training of payroll professionals can act as a safeguard of payroll information. One 
of the goals of the Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002 was to protect the integrity of accounting data 
by legislating document retention requirements, corporate officer responsibility for financial 
accuracy, and the rotation of duties by auditors. The same principle applies to payroll system 
workers. Cross-training and alternating the people’s duties in the payroll process may avoid 
or minimize errors and potential issues stemming from corruption. Cross-training and rota￾tion of duties foster professional development and proficiency with multiple tasks. This rota￾tion of payroll duties refers only to personnel within the payroll department, not opening the 
payroll processing to non-accounting departments. Furthermore, cross-training can be highly 
effective in preventing cybersecurity breaches by restricting the information that each person 
could modify.
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYChapter 2  Payroll System Procedures   79
lan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 79 05/09/23 06:58 pm
Best Practices Involved in Employee File Maintenance
Maintenance of employee files is as important as the protection of employee information. 
IRS Regulation 26 CFR 1.6001 clearly states that the method of file maintenance is the 
employer’s responsibility. The Internal Revenue Code recommends record labeling, the cre￾ation of backup copies, and secure record storage. An important note is that despite the choice 
of record maintenance, the employer retains all liability for auditor access to the information 
upon demand. Items such as time and work records, including time cards and electronic work 
records, must be maintained to be available for auditors because these items are vital compo￾nents of a payroll system audit.
26 CFR 1.6001–1 Records.
(a) In general. Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, any person subject to 
tax under subtitle A of the Code (including a qualified State individual income tax which 
is treated according to section 6361(a) as if it was imposed by chapter 1 of subtitle A), 
or any person required to file a return of information concerning income, shall keep 
such permanent books of account or records, including inventories, as are sufficient to 
establish the amount of gross income, deductions, credits, or other matters required to 
be shown by such person in any return of such tax or information.
(Source: GPO)
Modella/Shutterstock
Who Does Which Job?
Imagine that you have been approached to assist a business owner con￾cerned about the security of his or her company’s payroll. In a team of three 
or four people, decide how you would distribute payroll responsibilities to 
implement excellent internal control procedures. How did you divide the &
responsibilities? Explain.
Check Stop
Payroll record maintenance is important for employees at all lev￾els of the organization. IRS Revenue Procedure 98-25, 1998-1 CB 689, 
was enacted in 1998 to govern the maintenance procedures and dura￾tion of record-keeping for companies with employees. Provisions of the 
law include payroll transaction details such as time worked, pay dates, 
employee status, record reconciliation, and correlation of IRS reports and 
employee records. Concerning executive-level pay, the company must 
keep records of how the executive’s pay was derived, including bench￾marks from similar companies, payout periods, and scheduled increases. 
All pay disbursed must be justified according to the amount and type of work performed, 
regardless of employee level or classification. A company’s payroll and legal department 
should work closely to determine and implement a maintenance and record destruction pro￾gram that complies with IRS requirements but avoids the inaccessibility of data that occurs 
with information overload.
Electronic Records
Many companies have moved to electronic scanned copies of payroll records that allow 
immediate access to employee files from a password-protected format. In remote locations, 
payroll accountants can send the managers and employees Adobe Acrobat files requiring a 
password to access pay records or use a secure web portal. Several data encryption programs 
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY80   Chapter 2  Payroll System Procedures
lan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 80 05/09/23 06:58 pm
are currently on the market, allowing payroll managers to select the best fit for their indi￾vidual companies. All hard copies (i.e., paper versions) of payroll information must be in a 
locked file cabinet with limited access.
Computers have become a necessary part of a business and offer significant benefits to 
the accounting department. Most accounting software for the preparation of payroll includes 
password requirements that the company can control, limiting access to electronic infor￾mation about employees, pay, and personal information. Many regulatory agencies have 
addressed record security and safeguarding procedures; for example, the Food and Drug 
Administration enacted 21 CFR Part 11, which delineates electronic record security and safe￾guarding procedures.
Payroll accounting, according to the definition by the Internal Revenue 
Code, is a closed system because only certain employees are granted 
access to the information contained in the electronic records. All aspects 
of information security are the employer’s responsibility, including 
access to, creating, and maintaining electronic personnel and pay records. 
Record identifiers log who had accessed an electronic file, when, and 
from what location. Record logging provides an additional measure of 
security and protection against hacking, as well as tracking whether unau￾thorized changes occur on records.
According to the FBI, more than $1 billion per year has been lost to hackers using ran￾somware. Ransomware is malicious code placed into a computer system by hackers to 
obtain a monetary fee to release access to a company’s computerized information. The 
city of Atlanta, Georgia, encountered ransomware that was downloaded onto the city’s 
computer system during a city-related Internet search. As a result of the attack, the 
city’s daily operations were halted because workers could not access their computers.
(Sources: ArsTechnica; TrendMicro)
James Lauritz/Getty Images
Andrey_Popov/Shutterstock
Like other payroll records, electronic records, especially those accessible over the Internet, 
must be safeguarded to prevent fraudulent activity and data corruption. Employers can access 
information via a company’s intranet (inside the organization) or the Internet using encryp￾tion programs, passwords, and secured website locations. It is important to note that once a 
company has allowed Internet access to its payroll files, it is opening itself up to additional 
risks from hacking or wrongful use of the payroll information. It is the payroll accountant’s 
responsibility to report any suspicious activity to company managers or the company’s infor￾mation security department.
Payroll as a Non-Solo Effort
One best practice is to have more than one person involved in generating 
and maintaining payroll records. Many errors can occur when the total 
payroll responsibility rests with one person. Errors that occur may result 
from a complex hacking effort or a simple failure to remove the system 
access from a former employee.
• Nonexistent or “ghost” employees could be created and paid via the payroll system. 
The person committing the fraud could circumvent the payroll system and divert the 
funds to himself or an accomplice.
• Terminated employees could continue to be paid via the payroll system, or the funds 
could be subverted to someone else perpetrating the fraud.
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYChapter 2  Payroll System Procedures   81
lan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 81 05/09/23 06:58 pm
Other instances of payroll fraud could have been avoided with a separation of duties, which 
involves the division of related tasks to prevent fraud. Internal controls promote improved 
accuracy when more than one person is involved in payroll preparation and disbursement. 
A division of record maintenance, employee verification, and the spread of pay disburse￾ment responsibilities among different employees, depending upon the company’s size, would 
prevent many of the preceding problems. This protects the employer from complaints and 
potential legal issues stemming from payroll anomalies and provides a level of protection and 
verification to employees. Auditors look for well-defined internal controls within organiza￾tions to ensure legal compliance and file integrity.
• A payroll worker, disgruntled with his job, stole almost $300,000 from different 
companies by transferring the organizations’ money into different bank accounts that 
he owned.
• A former bookkeeper forged $80,000 in payroll checks before the company owner 
discovered the discrepancy.
• In the Los Angeles Unified School District, internal inspectors found that the pay 
system was issuing paychecks to deceased employees.
• In an audit of the Department of Transportation records in Florida, the auditors found 
that the paper files supporting the payroll system had been discarded to make room 
in the office. The audit revealed overpayments to employees caused by incorrect 
calculations and a lack of payroll verification. Of the employees who were overpaid, 
only one returned the money.
• Sales commission plans, employee bonus plans, incentive programs, and other 
arrangements intended to induce particular behaviors are subject to the employee’s 
and management’s manipulation.
• The payroll checks distributed to employees could be stolen individually or en 
masse before their distribution. Also, check fraud could be perpetrated using actual 
checks or just the account information.
• The company’s payroll system or payroll service provider could suffer a breach of 
the security protocols protecting the computer systems, allowing any combination of 
fraud or theft to be perpetrated.
In the event of a data breach, the company must act quickly to contain the damage and pre￾vent additional issues. The American Payroll Association offered the following action steps 
that companies should take when they experience a breach in their accounting data software:
Step 1 Prevent the spread of the data breach by taking payroll systems to an offline state and 
restricting access to records.
Step 2 Determine the scale of the threat or breach. Gather all related data and facts involv￾ing the breach and assess any vulnerabilities in the system.
Step 3 Contact the appropriate law enforcement officials to notify them of the crime and to 
open an investigation. Notify the Federation of Tax Administrators at www.taxadmin.
org to engage their service in the investigation.
Step 4 Review the company’s data storage, retention, and authorization policies to identify 
ways to prevent future occurrences.
Document Retention Requirements
According to IRS Regulation 26 CFR 1.6001, records about any financial transaction must 
remain available for payroll audit, the inspection by regulating bodies, at all times. The pur￾pose of the tax code is to maintain records for legal purposes in the suspicion of fraudulent 
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY82   Chapter 2  Payroll System Procedures
lan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 82 05/09/23 06:58 pm
activity. IRS Regulation 26 CFR 1.6001 pertains to manual and computerized records, includ￾ing payroll records prepared by third-party sources. Both manual and electronic documents 
must be maintained so that they maintain accessibility for the duration, similar to tax record 
retention.
When a company institutes a retention schedule, the requirements of legislation and 
the IRS must be considered. The retention period does not begin until the disbursement of 
pay occurs or the employee terminates employment, whichever occurs last. Remember: In 
the event of fraudulent activity, retention requirements no longer apply, and the courts can 
request all company records.
Companies must abide by both state and federal law regarding document retention. 
Employee payroll records, consisting of all forms and payroll compensation statements, must 
be retained following termination or separation. Although no regulations exist for the reten￾tion and archiving of internal payroll documents (e.g., a payroll register), a general guideline 
is that the internal documents should be stored with the other payroll accounting records and 
destroyed per accounting record guidelines.
According to the FLSA, the following records must be maintained for a minimum of three years:
≫ Payroll and other related records.
≫ Union contracts.
≫ Contacts involving exclusions from the regular pay rate.
≫ Any agreements about overtime rates.
≫ Any certificates about workers who would receive sub-minimum wages.
≫ Records referring to sales that would form the basis for employee commissions.
Similarly, the following records must be retained for a minimum of two years under FLSA:
≫ Employment and earnings records.
≫ Any tables used to compute company wage rates.
≫ Worker schedules to support time worked.
≫ Any other records that contain information about wage additions or deductions.
Note that no guidelines exist for any particular order of these documents, but any copies of 
these records must be clear if copied or otherwise transmitted.
When an employee is terminated, records for the employee and reason for termination 
must be retained for a period of one year. If an employee qualifies under ADEA, all payroll 
records must be retained for a period of three years. The Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act created 
a record retention requirement of an additional three years for primary records (pay records or 
bargaining agreements) and two years for supplementary data (time cards, wage rate tables, 
and piece-rate records).
Note: As a suggested practice to meet the various requirements, many businesses will set 
document retention at three years for all files.
The Zeller Law Group, PC, posted guidelines for document retention for California 
employers. Although the retention guidelines are specific to California law, they are 
worth considering for all employers. The guidelines are as follows:
1. Maintenance of employee time records for four years.
2. Computer maintenance and backup of electronic employee paystubs to avoid loss due to 
technological or cybersecurity issues.
3. Protection of confidential employee records for at least four years.
4. Retrievability of I-9 forms for a long enough period.
5. Assurance that managers and supervisors are appropriately trained about payroll docu￾mentation procedures.
(Source: Zeller Law Group)
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYChapter 2  Payroll System Procedures   83
lan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 83 05/09/23 06:58 pm
Agencies that have the right to audit payroll records include:
∙ The Internal Revenue Service (IRS)
∙ Federal and state Departments of Labor
∙ Department of Homeland Security
∙ Other state and local agencies
∙ Labor unions
The following is a chart that explains federal record retention requirements, including rel￾evant laws and types of documents:
• Three-year retention period
• An additional five-year post-termination retention is recommended due
 to Lilly Ledbetter Act
• Includes employee data, any pay records, and all compensation,
 financial and nonfinancial
• Four years from date the tax is due or paid
• Includes all W-4s, state and local tax withholding forms, requests for
 additional tax withholding, and tax remittances
• Three years after hire OR
• One year after termination, whichever is longer
• Six years
• All retirement plan contributions, plan changes, records pertaining to
 any other employee voluntary deductions
• No written guidelines, but a minimum of six years is recommended
• All written notices about changes in health coverage, especially for
 health coverage after termination of employment
Payroll Records (time
sheets, electronic
records, etc.)
Employee Federal,
State, and Local Tax
Records
Form I-9 and
Accompanying 
Employment 
Eligibility Documents
Employee Benefits
and Contributions
Health Plan
Documentation
In 2017, the IRS levied a $1 million lien against the property of CCH Oncology of 
Buffalo, New York. The company failed to remit or file returns for income, Social 
Security, and Medicare taxes for both the employees’ and the employer’s shares start￾ing approximately July 2016. The lien amount included failure to pay and failure to file 
penalties as well as interest.
(Source: The Buffalo News)
Even if your company outsources payroll activities, it is still accountable for all records 
and the information transmitted to the payroll service companies. The third-party payroll 
service provider attends only to the processing of company payroll but is not responsible for 
payroll tax payments. Tax remittance remains the liability of the company. Instances in which 
companies have diverted payroll tax liabilities for personal purposes have resulted in sizable 
fines and corporate sanctions.
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY84   Chapter 2  Payroll System Procedures
lan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 84 05/09/23 06:58 pm
LO 2-6 Discuss Employment Termination and Document 
Destruction Procedures
When employees are terminated, either voluntarily or involuntarily, the employer has payroll 
issues unique to the situation. The common element to each termination is the paperwork 
needed. When an employer terminates a worker’s employment involuntarily, the burden of 
proof for the termination is on the employer, should the case ever require legal scrutiny.
Steve Debenport/Getty Images
Internal Controls and Audits
1. Which of these is not a payroll internal control procedure?
a. Overtime approval
b. Removal of payroll oversight
c. Cross-training
d. File security
2. Which of these records should be retained in the event of a payroll audit?
a. Employee medical records
b. Employee reviews
c. Employee time and work records
d. Employee nonpayroll correspondence
3. Which of the following represents protections against cyberattacks?
a. Complex passwords
b. Open networks
c. Employee training on common techniques of cyber criminals
d. Antivirus and anti-spyware software
&Check Stop
In Graziadio v. Culinary Institute of America (2016), the plaintiff was terminated invol￾untarily after taking two consecutive three-week leaves to care for her children. The 
Culinary Institute of America claimed that Graziadio had not filed the required paper￾work for leave under the FMLA. At first, the court ruled in favor of the Culinary Institute 
of America because the proper paperwork was not on file. However, further investi￾gation found that the Culinary Institute of America’s human resources director, who 
refused to allow Graziadio to return to work, had not responded to Graziadio’s numer￾ous email requests for FMLA paperwork to justify her absence and to return to work.
(Source: FindLaw)
Employee Termination
There are two different methods of separation of an employee from the 
company: termination and resignation. Termination is generally initi￾ated by the employer; resignation is usually requested by the employee. 
When an employee leaves a company, the payroll accountant must com￾plete several steps concerning the employee’s and the firm’s records. The 
employee’s final paycheck will reflect a culmination of hours worked 
and, depending on company policies, vacation earned and not taken and 
sick time earned and not taken. Depending on the company’s policies, if the employee’s com￾pensation is commission-based, there should be an agreement between management and the 
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYChapter 2  Payroll System Procedures   85
lan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 85 05/09/23 06:58 pm
employee regarding their sales and the final paycheck’s timing to ensure the payment of all 
earned commissions.
Final hours are calculated the same as for any normal pay period. The employee’s daily 
hours are calculated to determine regular and overtime, and the worked hours are added 
together to determine weekly hours and weekly overtime. If the employee earned any vaca￾tion or sick time, those hours might also need to be paid out on the final paycheck. Vacation 
and sick time are not included in the worked hours for the determination of overtime.
A limited amount of legislation exists about the payment of a severance package upon 
termination. In general, two situations exist in which severance packages may be required by 
legislation: The closure of a company facility and many employee layoffs. If a large number 
of employees is laid off, a severance package may be required if any promise, written or oral, 
of a severance package exists or if the company has a history of paying severance packages 
to laid-off employees. For specific guidelines, the state’s employment department would be 
the primary resource for official guidance (see Appendix E for state contact information).
In terms of payroll accounting, a major difference between the termination and the resigna￾tion of an employee, besides the circumstances surrounding the employee’s separation from 
the company (layoff, termination for cause, resignation, etc.), is the timing of the delivery of 
the final pay disbursement. When an employee quits, any compensation due will be processed 
and disbursed on the company’s next scheduled pay date. However, when the employee is 
terminated, the company may be mandated to immediately issue the final paycheck or within 
a short time frame to comply with state labor laws. There is no federal regulation for the tim￾ing of the issuance of the employee’s final pay, although the Department of Labor explicitly 
mandates back pay owed to former employees. Table 2-3 contains information about states’ 
employee termination pay guidelines.
United Furniture Industries Inc. operated from its headquarters in Mississippi since 
1983 and was an industry leader in home furnishings. In November 2022, 2,700 
employees received emails and texts during overnight hours, informing them that they 
should not report to work and that their employment was terminated immediately. All 
compensation and other benefits were terminated immediately. Mississippi currently 
has no termination pay guidelines. The employees had no access to retrieve personal 
items and no information about when they would receive any earned wages. United 
Furniture filed for bankruptcy in January 2023, and investigations commenced into 
that company’s demise and plans for former employees.
(Sources: Daily Mail, New York Post)
Document Destruction
Although many state and federal laws delineate the time requirement 
for document retention, there are also several methods for regulated 
document destruction of sensitive payroll data. How must confidential 
payroll-related documents be destroyed? It is not as simple as throwing 
old payroll documents in the trash. Preferred destruction methods of con￾fidential payroll documents include incineration, confidential shredding 
services, or paper records pulping. Electronic records must be purged 
from the server. Although specific destruction procedures and regula￾tions vary among states and localities, the basic guidelines for confiden￾tial destruction after the required retention period are common in most 
areas. From small-scale record destruction using in-office paper shredders 
to large-scale operations such as ProShred, Iron Mountain, and many 
other companies, the secure storage and destruction of confidential busi￾ness documents is a serious concern because of the federal privacy laws 
Ingram Publishing/SuperStock governing payroll documents.
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY86   Chapter 2  Payroll System Procedures
lan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 86 05/09/23 06:58 pm
States’ Termination and Resignation Pay Guidelines
State Guideline State Guideline
AK
AL
AR
AZ
CA
CO
CT
DC
DE
FL
GA
HI
IA
ID
IL
IN
KS
KY
LA
MA
MD
ME
MI
MN
MO
Within three working days upon termination; at the 
next regular pay date that is at least more than three 
days upon resignation.
No termination pay guidelines.
Within seven days of discharge; next scheduled pay 
date upon resignation.
Within seven working days or the end of the next pay 
period, whichever is sooner.
Immediately upon discharge for termination; within 
72 hours upon resignation.
Immediately upon discharge (i.e., within six hours 
of the next business day or 24 hours if payroll is 
processed off-site) for termination; next scheduled 
pay date upon resignation.
No later than the next business day upon termination; 
next scheduled pay date upon resignation.
No later than the next business day following 
termination; the next scheduled pay date or within 
seven days upon resignation.
Next regularly scheduled payday for termination and 
resignation.
No termination pay guidelines.
No termination pay guidelines.
At the time of termination unless conditions render 
pay impossible, otherwise the next business day. 
Next scheduled payday if resignation without notice 
or immediately if resignation with notice.
Next regularly scheduled payday for both termination 
and resignation.
Next regular payday or within 10 days, excluding 
weekends and holidays, whichever occurs first; 
within 48 hours upon employee’s written request for 
both termination and resignation.
Immediately when possible or the next regularly 
scheduled payday for both termination and 
resignation.
Next regularly scheduled payday for both termination 
and resignation.
Next regularly scheduled payday for both termination 
and resignation.
Next regular payday or 14 days, whichever is later, 
for both termination and resignation.
Next regular payday or 15 days, whichever is sooner, 
for both termination and resignation.
Immediately upon termination; next scheduled pay 
date or the following Saturday upon resignation.
Next regularly scheduled payday for both termination 
and resignation.
Next scheduled payday or within two weeks after a 
demand from the employee, whichever is sooner, for 
both termination and resignation.
Next regularly scheduled payday for both termination 
and resignation. Some industry-specific rules for 
termination timing.
Immediately upon termination; the next regular pay 
date upon resignation, unless there are less than 5 
days until payday, then 20 days after the last day of 
work under resignation.
Immediately upon termination; no law for resignation.
MS
MT
No termination pay guidelines.
Immediately upon termination unless the employer’s 
written policy extends the time to the next regular 
payday; the next regular pay date, or 15 days, 
whichever is earlier, for resignation.
NC Next regularly scheduled payday for both 
termination and resignation.
ND Next regularly scheduled payday for both 
termination and resignation.
NE Next regular payday or within two weeks, whichever 
is sooner, for both termination and resignation.
NH
NJ
NM
NV
NY
OH
Within 72 hours upon termination; the next pay date 
in the event of a layoff.
Next regularly scheduled payday for both 
termination and resignation.
Within five days upon termination; next scheduled 
pay date upon resignation. Task, commission, and 
piece rate are due within 10 days.
Within three days upon termination; the next 
scheduled pay date or seven days, whichever is 
sooner, upon resignation.
Next regularly scheduled payday for both 
termination and resignation.
Next scheduled pay date or within 15 days for both 
termination and resignation.
OK
OR
PA
RI
SC
SD
TN
TX
UT
VA
VT
WA
WI
WV
WY
Next regularly scheduled payday for both 
termination and resignation.
By the end of the next business day upon termination; 
immediately if the employee gave 48-hour notice or 
within five days without 48-hour notice.
Next regularly scheduled payday for both 
termination and resignation.
Next regularly scheduled payday for both 
termination and resignation.
Within 48 hours or the next scheduled payday, 
not to exceed 30 days, upon both termination and 
resignation.
Next regularly scheduled payday or whenever the 
terminated employee returns all the employer’s 
property for both termination and resignation.
Next regularly scheduled payday or 21 days, 
whichever comes later, for both termination and 
resignation.
No later than six days after termination; by the next 
scheduled pay date upon resignation.
Within 24 hours upon termination; next scheduled 
pay date upon resignation.
Next regularly scheduled payday for both termination 
and resignation.
Within 72 hours upon termination; the next 
scheduled pay date or the following Friday (if not 
pay date) upon resignation.
Next regularly scheduled payday for both termination 
and resignation.
Next regularly scheduled payday for both termination 
and resignation.
Next regularly scheduled payday for both termination 
and resignation.
Next regularly scheduled payday for both termination 
and resignation.
TABLE 2-3
(Source: Paycor)
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYChapter 2  Payroll System Procedures   87
lan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 87 05/09/23 06:58 pm
SVshot/Shutterstock
The proliferation of electronic accounting records, especially payroll-related data, has 
led to the Department of Defense Data Wipe Method’s adoption, commonly referred 
to as DoD 5220.22-M (the National Industrial Security Program Operating Manual), 
which sanitizes electronic records by forcing the user to verify multiple passes of the 
electronic document destruction process to prevent accidental document destruction. 
Various data wiping tools have this software tool, including DBAN, CBL Data Shredder, 
and ErAse.
(Source: Lifewire)
A best practice in document destruction is creating a policy regarding document reten￾tion and destruction schedules. An employee in charge of these schedules would be tasked 
with ensuring that all paper records are stored appropriately and retained for the proper legal 
time. Another best practice is to separate payroll-related documentation into the following 
categories:
∙ Private personnel information such as Forms W-4 and I-9, court-ordered garnishments, wage 
information, and direct deposit instructions.
∙ Employee benefits paperwork, including benefit elections, FMLA documentation, workers’ 
compensation evidence, and flexible spending account information.
∙ Any investigative information is maintained separately because of the absence of a statute of 
limitations on employee fraud.
By separating the employee paper files into these categories, document retention and 
destruction guidelines may be observed more efficiently.
Electronic Records
As the use of electronic payroll records has grown, the need to define 
appropriate destruction procedures has become increasingly apparent. 
Simply deleting a website or a portion of the data does not guarantee the 
security of confidential information. Details of the website’s design and 
system change documentation must be maintained to facilitate record dis￾posal. Guidelines for electronic records disposition include:
∙ Data disposition instructions, including dates and authorized administrators.
∙ Record destruction schedules involving security encryption.
∙ Technical documentation for each record system.
∙ Identifying information for file indexes and unique records.
∙ If a website is involved, technical documentation of the site architecture should be maintained.
Destroy and Terminate
1. How should paper payroll records be destroyed? How about electronic 
records?
2. Apollo, a resident of Hawaii, is terminated without cause from his job 
on October 11. He is terminated at the end of the day after the payroll 
manager has left. When must he receive his final pay? Is the employer 
&
required to pay a severance package? Explain.
Check Stop
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY88
lan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 88 05/09/23 06:58 pm
PAYROLL PROCEDURES
As we move further into the digital age, payroll procedures are changing to meet employer needs, 
technological availability, and employee accessibility. Some procedures that have changed since 
2018 include:
• Affordable Care Act employer reporting requirement clarifications
• An increase in the use of Internet-based employee files, which requires increasingly sophisti￾cated security software and company protocols
• Changes to limitations on the number of and fees related to visas for foreign workers
• More mobile-friendly workplaces and payroll management
• Increased use of cloud-based payroll processing
• Remote workers in the same and other states than the company
Future trends to watch include:
• An increase in the “virtual marketplace,” in which employers and employees will telecommute or 
otherwise perform work from geographically dispersed locations
• Changes to paid time off demands from workers
• Increases in the accuracy of worked hours using technology to track work hours and locations
• Digitization of employee records becoming the norm, not the exception
• Security breaches increasing in number and frequency, requiring stronger, more vigilant record￾keeping controls
• Increased desire for earned wage pay
Trends to Watch
Summary of Payroll System Procedures
The establishment of a payroll system involves careful planning and deliberation. The frame￾work used for the payroll system needs to have enough room for company growth and enough 
structure to make sure that company and governmental deadlines are met. Using the best prac￾tices outlined in this chapter can help a company implement a robust payroll system, whether 
the system is maintained by company personnel or outsourced, completed manually or electron￾ically using specifically designed software. Adequate payroll system design can save a company 
from problems with employees and governmental entities and prevent data breaches and fraud.
Although pay processes and methods vary among companies, the framework of internal 
review and the necessity for accuracy remains the fundamental aspects of any payroll sys￾tem. Documentation of an employee’s eligibility to work in the United States and the com￾pensation method, rates, tax liabilities, and voluntary withholdings are critical elements of 
employee files that the payroll accountant needs to produce accurate payroll disbursements. 
The process of entering items into a payroll system varies, depending on the type of work 
done and the compensation rates, for which the payroll accountant must have documentation. 
Depending on the company’s preferences, anything from manual records to computerized 
records to external payroll vendors may be used to track the payroll. At employee termination, 
a final payment must be issued, but the final payment’s timing depends on state legislation.
Payroll record-keeping and maintenance are complex issues and are subject to several fed￾eral and state regulations. Employee personal information must be safeguarded at all times, and 
information privacy is paramount. Now that many companies are resorting to electronic pay 
records, information safeguarding is essential, and encryption efforts are multidimensional, 
involving the accounting, legal, and information systems departments of an organization. 
Many electronic records and remote workers have created additional opportunities for cyber￾criminals to breach company defenses, and cybersecurity measures have evolved to counteract 
those breaches. Destruction of payroll-related documents after the required retention period is 
a serious concern, and an entire industry focuses on document retention and destruction.
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYlan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 89 05/09/23 06:58 pm
Chapter 2  Payroll System Procedures   89
Biweekly payroll
Commission
Daily payroll
Document destruction
Exempt
File maintenance
File security
Foreign Account Tax 
Compliance Act (FATCA)
Form SS-8
H-1B visa
Hiring packet
I-9
Independent Contractor
Internal control
Leased employee
Monthly payroll
New-hire reporting
Nonexempt
Pay period
Paycard
Payroll audit
Payroll register
Payroll review
Piece rate
Resignation
Remit
Review process
Semimonthly payroll
Separation of duties
Statutory employee
Temporary employee
Termination
W-4
Weekly payroll
Vocabulary
Key Points
• Communication protocol varies among companies and departments within companies.
• Upon employment, company personnel must ensure Form W-4 and the I-9 to deter￾mine accurate taxes and legal eligibility to work in the United States.
• States have a variety of required pay periods to protect workers and promote predict￾able paychecks.
• Ethical payroll practices require the protection of information and dissemination only to 
the employee or specifically relevant supervisory staff.
• Employees are classified as either exempt or nonexempt from FLSA provisions.
• To be classified as an exempt employee requires an examination of job duties.
• Control of the payroll system involves regular system design review and delineation of 
specific tasks.
• Whether completed internally or by an outsourced vendor, payroll is only as accurate as 
the information provided.
• Pay periods are at the discretion of the company.
• File security is of utmost importance, especially when files are stored electronically and 
accessed via an Internet portal.
• Documentation for payroll exceptions such as time away from work should be main￾tained separately from regular work time documentation.
• Calculations of pay can involve many variables and require reviewing each employee’s 
information before pay issuance.
• Final pay needs to reflect all earned compensation, paid time off, and deductions up to 
the termination date.
• The timing of final pay disbursement when an employee is terminated depends on 
state law.
• Document retention and destruction procedures are important for data security and 
audit purposes.
Review Questions
1. What are three necessary elements of internal control for a payroll department?
2. Why should more than one person prepare and verify payroll processing?
3. What documents should be included in all new-hire packets?
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY90   Chapter 2  Payroll System Procedures
lan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 90 05/09/23 06:58 pm
4. Why are new hires required to be reported to the state’s employment department?
5. When must a terminated employee be paid his or her final paycheck for the state in 
which you live?
6. What are the five main pay period frequencies?
7. How would you distinguish between exempt and nonexempt workers?
8. What are two of the best practices for establishing a payroll system?
9. What are the important considerations in setting up a payroll system?
10. What are two different tasks involved in payroll accounting?
11. What agencies or organizations can audit a company’s payroll records?
12. How can a company protect itself from cybersecurity breaches?
13. How long should employee records be retained?
14. Why are independent contractors not paid through a company’s payroll system?
15. What is the difference between termination and resignation?
16. Explain some of the differences in termination and resignation pay regulations.
17. What are the differences among daily, weekly, biweekly, semimonthly, and monthly 
pay periods?
18. What differentiates exempt and nonexempt employees?
19. What challenges does a company face when using cloud-based payroll and person￾nel records?
E2-1A. 
LO 2-1, 2-4
Nike Tran, a nonexempt employee at Refurbished Woods, in Marquette, 
Wisconsin, works a standard 7:00 a.m.–4:00 p.m. schedule with an hour for 
lunch each day. Nike received overtime pay for hours in excess of 40 per 
week. During the week, Nike worked the following schedule:
• Monday: 9.25 hours
• Tuesday: 7.5 hours
• Wednesday: 8.75 hours
• Thursday: 6.75 hours
• Friday: 8.25 hours
How many hours of overtime did Nike work this week?
1. 0 hours
2. 0.50 hours
3. 2 hours
4. 2.25 hours
E2-2A.
LO 2-1
London Weatherby is paid every other week while working for the federal 
government. Which of the following choices describes the pay frequency?
1. Biweekly
2. Semimonthly
3. Weekly
4. Monthly
E2-3A. 
LO 2-2
Sage Rivera is a new employee for De Terra Glass. Which federal forms must 
be completed as part of the hiring process? (Select all that apply.)
1. W-4
2. W-2
3. SS-8
4. I-9
Exercises Set A
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYlan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 91 05/09/23 06:58 pm
Chapter 2  Payroll System Procedures   91
E2-4A. 
LO 2-5, 2-6
West Matthews, a resident of Texas, resigned from employment with Grand 
Lake Cattle Farms on October 6, 2023. The next pay date for the company is 
October 13. By what date should the final pay be received?
1. October 6
2. October 13
3. October 27
4. October 31
E2-5A. 
LO 2-5
Xailen Kelley is a new nonexempt sales associate for Oyondo Retail Stores. 
After completing the time card for the pay period, what is the next step in the 
payroll review process to ensure proper internal controls?
1. Submit the time card to the payroll clerk.
2. Have a friend check her math for accuracy.
3. Submit the time card to her manager for review.
4. Enter the time card data directly into the payroll system.
E2-6A. 
LO 2-6
Addison Silva needs additional filing space at the end of the year in the com￾pany’s off-site, secured storage. There are several boxes of payroll records 
marked for the current year’s destruction. What methods can Addison use to 
dispose of the payroll records? (Select all that apply.)
1. Contact an off-site record destruction service.
2. Place the boxes containing the records in the company trash disposal.
3. Shred the records, and then dispose of the shredded paper.
4. Incinerate the payroll records marked for destruction.
E2-7A. 
LO 2-1
Jaylin Blue is a payroll clerk at Quaking Aspens Antiques. Through reviews of 
the employee files, what information should be present for each employee? 
(Select all that apply.)
1. Spouse’s name
2. Pay rate
3. Occupation
4. Supervisor name
E2-8A. 
LO 2-2
Camryn Klein is the payroll clerk for Neolane Transportation. A colleague 
who is classified as an independent contractor asks to be classified as 
an employee. What factors should Camryn consider? (Select all 
that apply.)
1. Relationship of the parties
2. Behavioral control
3. Method of compensation
4. Financial control
E2-9A. 
LO 2-2
What are the forms of identification that establish employment authorization
for the I-9? (Select all that apply.)
1. Driver’s license
2. Native American tribal document
3. Voter registration card
4. Social Security card
E2-10A. 
LO 2-2
What are the forms of identification that establish identity for the I-9 for 
employees over the age of 25? (Select all that apply.)
1. State-issued driver’s license
2. U.S. passport
3. School record
4. Certified copy of the birth certificate
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY92   Chapter 2  Payroll System Procedures
lan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 92 05/09/23 06:58 pm
E2-11A. 
LO 2-3
Rylen Patil is a candidate for the position of sales manager with Retrozz 
Furniture. This position will be required to supervise several employees and 
can determine the direction in which assignments will be completed. What 
guidelines should be followed when classifying workers as exempt or nonex￾empt? (Select all that apply.)
1. OSHA
2. FLSA
3. Department of Labor
4. IRS
E2-12A. 
LO 2-3
Tanner Robledo is the office manager for Wardley and Sons Auto Detailing. 
Because it is a small office, Tanner is required to keep track of all employee 
records and pay both employees and contractors. Which of the following are 
legal factors that will distinguish exempt from nonexempt employees? (Select 
all that apply.)
1. Number of hours worked
2. Type of work performed
3. Employee age and education
4. Amount of supervisor-given direction
P2-1A. 
LO 2-1
Sawyer Walker is a vice president of sales at Fields Brothers Autos in 
Davenport, Iowa, and earns an annual salary of $59,000. What is Sawyer’s 
period pay for each of the following pay frequencies?
1. Biweekly
2. Semimonthly
3. Weekly
4. Monthly
P2-2A. 
LO 2-2, 2-3
Xian Oni is a part-time worker for Senior Solvers and uses company equip￾ment to perform job duties. Xian asks the payroll supervisor to grant inde￾pendent contractor status. What should the payroll supervisor tell Xian?
P2-3A. 
LO 2-5
You are the new payroll supervisor for your company. Which payroll docu￾mentation control procedures are now your responsibility?
P2-4A. 
LO 2-2
Finley Figueroa is a new employee in the payroll department of Octolium 
Computers. After working at the company for one week, Finley asks you why 
it is so important to submit new-hire documentation. What guidance will 
you offer?
P2-5A. 
LO 2-4
You are the payroll accounting clerk for your company, Conose Advertising, 
which has 50 employees. The controller has recently switched the firm from 
an in-house payroll system to an outsourced payroll provider. What are your 
responsibilities within the company for payroll records and employee file 
issues?
P2-6A. 
LO 2-2
River Tallchief is a citizen of the Northern Pomo Indian Nation. In completing 
the I-9, River provides an official Northern Pomo Indian Nation birth certifi￾cate to establish identification and employment eligibility. Is this sufficient 
documentation? Why or why not?
Problems Set A
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYlan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 93 05/09/23 06:58 pm
Chapter 2  Payroll System Procedures   93
P2-7A. 
LO 2-3
Maria Rupert is the payroll supervisor at All Family Investments. Management 
is asking to have the investment salespeople, who are paid on an hourly 
basis, be classified as exempt employees because their job duties occasion￾ally require evening and weekend work. What tests should the investment 
salespeople meet to achieve exempt status?
P2-8A. 
LO 2-6
Twinte Cars, a California corporation, has internal corporate requirements 
that stipulate a three-year payroll document retention period. It enters into 
a contract with an international company that mandates a six-year payroll 
document retention requirement. How should Twinte Cars balance these 
requirements?
P2-9A. 
LO 2-2
Teagan McCormick is a full-time life insurance agent with Centixo 
Insurance, a small insurance company. The company has classified Teagan 
as an employee. Teagan feels the classification should be independent 
contractor because there are no company benefits and Teagan sets the 
office hours. Should Teagan be reclassified as an independent contractor? 
Why or why not?
P2-10A. 
LO 2-2
Ash Hardy is an employee of Polyent Plastics, a company with headquar￾ters in Rock Island, Illinois. Ash lives and works in Doha, Qatar, and earns an 
annual salary of $97,300. The company has been withholding U.S. federal 
income taxes from the pay, but Ash believes the wages should be exempt as 
an expatriate. What course of action should Ash take?
P2-11A. 
LO 2-2, 2-4
Complete the W-4 for employment at Plexivent Plastics starting 9/6/2023. 
The employer’s address is 1 Plastics Way, Lincoln Valley, ND 58430, and EIN 
is 56-4658631.
Harley W. Pierce
2024 Denhoff Highway, Apartment 12
Lincoln Valley, ND 58430
SSN: 687-55-4658
Marital status: Married filing jointly with two dependents under 17
One job and spouse does not work
Does not require any additional amount to be withheld
P2-12A. 
LO 2-2, 2-4
Complete the I-9 for employment at Plexivent Plastics starting 9/6/2023. The 
employer’s address is 1 Plastics Way, Lincoln Valley, ND 58430, and the EIN 
is 56-4658631. Harley is starting work on 9/6/2023. Be sure to complete 
Section 2 of Form I-9.
Harley W. Pierce
2024 Denhoff Highway, Apartment 12
Lincoln Valley, ND 58430
SSN: 687-55-4658
Marital status: Married
Date of Birth: 8/15/1999
U.S. Citizen
Harley’s North Dakota driver’s license number is MKJ-462856 and expires 
on 8/15/2027.
Office Manager Gabriel MacMillan verified the information for the company.
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY94   Chapter 2  Payroll System Procedures
lan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 94 05/09/23 06:58 pm
(Source: Internal Revenue Service)
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYlan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 95 05/09/23 06:58 pm
Chapter 2  Payroll System Procedures   95
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY96   Chapter 2  Payroll System Procedures
lan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 96 05/09/23 06:58 pm
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYlan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 97 05/09/23 06:58 pm
Chapter 2  Payroll System Procedures   97
(Source: U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services)
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY98   Chapter 2  Payroll System Procedures
lan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 98 05/09/23 06:58 pm
Exercises Set B
E2-1B. 
LO 2-1, 2-4
Dallas Walters, a nonexempt employee of Consolidated Utilities, works a 
standard 10:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. schedule with an hour for lunch. Dallas 
works in Weed, California, and the state requires overtime pay for hours 
exceeding 8 per day and for those exceeding 40 in a week. During the 
week, the following schedule was worked:
• Monday: 8.75 hours
• Tuesday: 7.75 hours
• Wednesday: 8.50 hours
• Thursday: 8.00 hours
• Friday: 8.25 hours
Based on the state’s requirements, how much overtime has Dallas worked 
during the period?
1. 2 hours
2. 1.25 hour
3. 1 hour
4. 2.75 hours
E2-2B. 
LO 2-1
Micah Volkov is a salaried employee earning $49,850 annually. Micah is paid 
twice per month. Which of the following best describes the pay frequency?
1. Biweekly
2. Semimonthly
3. Weekly
4. Monthly
E2-3B. 
LO 2-4, 2-6
On June 21, 2023, Dorian Goodman was terminated from Black Diamond 
Sports in New Hampshire. Black Diamond Sports pays its employees 
biweekly on Fridays, and the next payday is 7/7/2023. When must Dorian 
receive the final paycheck?
1. On the next pay date
2. Within seven days
3. Immediately upon discharge
4. Within 72 hours
E2-4B. 
LO 2-4, 2-6
Kal Andrews resigned from Atlas Inks on March 21, 2023. When is the earli￾est that Atlas Inks may destroy Kal’s payroll records?
1. March 23, 2024
2. March 23, 2025
3. March 23, 2026
4. March 23, 2027
E2-5B. 
LO 2-5
Blake Brown is a new payroll accountant at Zata Imports, a company with 
250 employees. After completing all time card data for the pay period, what 
should Blake’s next step in the payroll review process be?
1. Ask employees to verify that the time Blake entered is accurate.
2. Generate paychecks and prepare them for signature.
3. Ask the supervisor to verify the accuracy of the payroll data.
4. Have another payroll clerk verify the data accuracy.
E2-6B.
LO 2-6
Jesse Oliveria needs additional filing space at the end of the year in the 
company’s office and chooses to use off-site, secured storage. Upon arriv￾ing at the storage facility, the unit is nearly full and there are several boxes 
marked for destruction at the end of the calendar year. What are Jesse’s 
options regarding the destruction of the payroll records marked for destruc￾tion? (Select all that apply.)
1. Jesse should take the oldest year’s boxes to the closest recycling facility.
2. Jesse should make arrangements to pulp or burn the paper payroll 
records marked for destruction.
3. Jesse should arrange to have a document destruction service pick up the 
boxes marked for destruction.
4. Jesse should bring a shredding machine to the storage facility and pre￾pare to shred the records marked for destruction.
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYlan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 99 05/09/23 06:58 pm
Chapter 2  Payroll System Procedures   99
E2-7B. 
LO 2-1
Sam Rogers is conducting a review of the payroll files for each employee 
at Meejo Games. Which of the following items must be present in the file? 
(Select all that apply.)
1. The basis upon which compensation is paid
2. Overtime pay earned during each pay period
3. Hours worked during each pay period
4. Break times taken each day
E2-8B. 
LO 2-2
Jamie McCarthy is preparing to compute employee pay and needs to deter￾mine the amount of employee federal income taxes to be withheld. Which of 
the following should be consulted?
1. USCIS I-9
2. IRS Publication 15-T
3. DHS Schedule F
4. SSA Schedule 8
E2-9B. 
LO 2-2
Dana Baker is a new employee of Farnsdel and Babcock, LLP. Which of the 
following will provide proof of employment authorization for the completion 
of the I-9? (Select all that apply.)
1. U.S. passport
2. U.S. military identification card
3. U.S. citizen identification card
4. State-issued driver’s license
E2-10B. 
LO 2-2
Reed Pelliere is completing the I-9 as part of the new employment file with 
the state of New Mexico. Which of the following provides proof of identity? 
(Select all that apply.)
1. Social Security card
2. Certificate of birth abroad, issued by the U.S. Department of State
3. New Mexico driver’s license
4. U.S. passport
E2-11B. 
LO 2-3
Corey Watkins is a candidate for the position of marketing manager with the 
promotions department of Paramba Productions, earning $17.50 per hour. 
Corey will work occasional overtime in the new position and will not have 
managerial or supervisory duties as a regular part of the job description. Why 
should Corey be classified as a nonexempt employee? (Select all that apply.)
1. Corey’s annual wages are lower than the minimum exempt salary.
2. Corey has no supervisory or managerial duties.
3. Corey has the term clerk in the job title.
4. Corey will work occasional overtime.
E2-12B. 
LO 2-3
Ryan Marshall manages a ski resort with year-round and seasonal employ￾ees. Assuming that the ski resort engages in interstate commerce, what 
FLSA requirement(s) should Ryan consider? (Select all that apply.)
1. Hourly wages paid to employees
2. Safety of the working conditions
3. Number of hours worked per week
4. Employee age and weekly work schedule
P2-1B. 
LO 2-2
Stevie Webb is an independent contractor for Antimbu Exports, where you 
are the payroll accountant. Stevie feels entitled to employee benefits based 
on the number of hours dedicated to the company. What guidance could 
you offer Stevie?
P2-2B. 
LO 2-6
Max Wexler was terminated for cause by Santel Auto Parts in North Carolina 
on July 20, 2023. As of the date of his termination, he had worked 22 hours 
of regular time. Employees at Santel Auto Parts are paid semimonthly on the 
15th and last day of the month. Max would like to know when the final pay￾check will be available. What will you tell him?
Problems Set B
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY100   Chapter 2  Payroll System Procedures
lan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 100 05/09/23 06:58 pm
P2-3B. 
LO 2-2
Devin Coahoma is a member of the Algonquin Indian Nation and is a new 
employee at Pactco Game Designs. During the process of completing the 
I-9, Devin claims that the only way to prove his identity is the Algonquin 
Indian Nation’s official birth certificate. Is this document sufficient to prove 
identity for the purposes of the I-9? Why or why not?
P2-4B. 
LO 2-2
Addison Manning is a new employee of Symity Batteries. Addison is curious 
about the purpose of the requirements for new-hire documentation to be 
forwarded to government agencies. What should you tell Addison?
P2-5B. 
LO 2-3
Pax Arturo wants to start a company and hire employees. Because you are a 
seasoned payroll professional, Pax approaches you for guidance about the 
differences between exempt and nonexempt employees. What would you 
tell Pax?
P2-6B. 
LO 2-5
Skyler Alvarez is a new payroll clerk for Remm Plumbing. Skyler is curious 
about the purpose of the different steps in the payroll review process and 
asks you, as the supervisor, for guidance. What would you tell Skyler?
P2-7B. 
LO 2-4
Karsyn Aldri started as a payroll accountant at Sticktoit Adhesives, a com￾pany with 100 employees. Karsyn soon notices that the former payroll 
accountant had been processing payroll manually and suggested that the 
company immediately switch to cloud-based payroll. What types of docu￾mentation must be maintained in employee records?
P2-8B. 
LO 2-5
Yael Morris, a payroll clerk, has received a promotion and is now the payroll 
supervisor for Fligen Enterprises. What document control items could now 
become part of Yael’s responsibility?
P2-9B. 
LO 2-2
Kennedy Watkins is in the payroll department of Neombee Plastics, a multi￾state company. The company has historically been filing employee informa￾tion with each state. What alternative exists for multistate employers?
P2-10B. 
LO 2-1
Drew Allen is the payroll supervisor for Caposis Freight. The company is pre￾paring to merge with another distribution company that has a different pay 
cycle. The president of the company wants to know the difference between 
biweekly and semimonthly pay cycles as far as pay dates and payment 
amounts are concerned. What should Drew tell him?
P2-11B. 
LO 2-2, 2-4
Complete the W-4 for employment starting 5/23/2023 at Martel 
Semiconductors, located at 2445 Manchester Road, Lakehurst, NJ 08733, 
EIN 26-4684136.
Tatum A. Noren
221 First Street
Lakehurst, NJ 08733
SSN: 785-56-4321
Single with no dependents
No additional tax withholding
P2-12B. 
LO 2-2, 2-4
Complete the I-9 for employment starting 5/23/2023 at Martel 
Semiconductors, located at 2445 Manchester Road, Lakehurst, NJ 08733, 
EIN 26-4684136. Be sure to complete Section 2 of Form I-9.
Tatum A. Noren
221 First Street
Lakehurst, NJ 08733
SSN: 785-56-4321
Birthdate: 6/5/1998
Tatum presented a driver’s license and Social Security card to Human 
Resources Manager Angel Andrews to review.
New Jersey driver’s license #N15368497531246; expires 6/5/2027.
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYlan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 101 05/09/23 06:58 pm
Chapter 2  Payroll System Procedures   101
(Source: Internal Revenue Service)
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY102   Chapter 2  Payroll System Procedures
lan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 102 05/09/23 06:58 pm
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYlan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 103 05/09/23 06:58 pm
Chapter 2  Payroll System Procedures   103
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY104   Chapter 2  Payroll System Procedures
lan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 104 05/09/23 06:58 pm
(Source: U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services)
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYlan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 105 05/09/23 06:58 pm
Chapter 2  Payroll System Procedures   105
Critical Thinking
2-1. When Omnimia Graphics was looking to implement a payroll accounting system, the 
manufacturing firm had several options. With only 40 employees, the manual prepa￾ration of payroll through spreadsheets and handwritten time cards was a comfort￾able option for the firm. Another option was to convince the senior management of 
Omnimia Graphics to implement a software program for payroll processing. How 
should the company handle the maintenance of the current payroll records? What 
internal control issues should be addressed?
2-2. You have been hired as a consultant for Semiva Productions, a company facing an 
IRS audit of its accounting records. During your review, you notice anomalies in the 
payroll system involving overpayments of labor and payments to terminated employ￾ees. What should you do?
In the Real World: Scenario for Discussion
The Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act of 2009 centered on a case in which Ms. Ledbetter dis￾covered documents that revealed discrimination against her that resulted in unequal pay 
practices. The company argued that the documents were confidential and scheduled for 
destruction and that Ms. Ledbetter should not have had access to the information. What 
are the issues in this case in terms of document privacy and retention? How could the situ￾ation have been prevented in the first place?
Internet Activities
2-1. Using a search engine such as Google, Yahoo, or Bing, search the Internet for the 
term “new-hire packet contents.” Compile a list of the different new-hire packet items 
that you find in at least three companies. What are some unique items that you found 
on the companies’ lists?
2-2. Go to www.irs.gov and search for IRS e-file security. List the facts that the IRS cites 
about why e-filing is secure. What about these practices makes the customer’s infor￾mation secure? How could the IRS improve e-filing security?
2-3. Want to know more about some of the concepts discussed in this chapter? Check out
www.uscis.gov
www.irs.gov/businesses
www.archives.gov/federal-register/cfr/subject-title-26.html
www.proshred.com
www.ironmountain.com
2-4. The Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) has created a website with a liv￾ing wage calculator. This tool is designed to help people compute the wages they 
need to earn in order to achieve their desired lifestyle. Check it out at Living Wage 
Calculator.
Continuing Payroll Project: Prevosti Farms and Sugarhouse
Prevosti Farms and Sugarhouse pays its employees according to their job classification. 
The following employees make up Sugarhouse’s staff:
Employee Number Name and Address Payroll Information
A-Mille Thomas Millen 
1022 Forest School Rd 
Woodstock, VT 05001 
802-478-5055 
SSN: 031-11-3456 
401(k) deduction: 3% 
Section 125 deduction: $155
Hire Date: 2-1-2023 
DOB: 12-16-1992 
Position: Production Manager 
PT/FT: FT, exempt 
M/S: Married/Joint 
Pay Rate: $35,000/year 
Dependents under 17: 3 
Dependents over 17: 1 
Step 4 information: none
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY106   Chapter 2  Payroll System Procedures
lan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 106 05/09/23 06:58 pm
Employee Number Name and Address Payroll Information
A-Towle Avery Towle
4011 Route 100
Plymouth, VT 05102
802-967-5873
SSN: 089-74-0974
401(k) deduction: 5%
Section 125 deduction: $100
Hire Date: 2-1-2023
DOB: 7-14-2001
Position: Production Worker
PT/FT: FT, nonexempt
M/S: Single
Pay Rate: $15.00/hour
Dependents under 17: 0
Dependents over 17: 0
Step 4 information: none
A-Long Charlie Long
242 Benedict Road S.
Woodstock, VT 05002
802-429-3846
SSN: 056-23-4593
401(k) deduction: 2%
Section 125 deduction: $155
Hire Date: 2-1-2023
DOB: 3-16-1997
Position: Production Worker
PT/FT: FT, nonexempt
M/S: Married/Joint
Pay Rate: $15.00/hour
Dependents under 17: 2
Dependents over 17: 0
Step 4 information: none
B-Shang Mary Shangraw
1901 Main Street #2
Bridgewater, VT 05520
802-575-5423
SSN: 075-28-8945
401(k) deduction: 3%
Section 125 deduction: $100
Hire Date: 2-1-2023
DOB: 8-20-1980
Position: Administrative
Assistant
PT/FT: PT, nonexempt
M/S: Single
Pay Rate: $15.00/hour
Dependents under 17: 0
Dependents over 17: 1
Step 4 information: none
B-Lewis Kristen Lewis
840 Daily Hollow Road
Bridgewater, VT 05523
802-390-5572
SSN: 076-39-5673
401(k) deduction: 4%
Section 125 deduction: $155
Hire Date: 2-1-2023
DOB: 4-6-1991
Position: Office Manager
PT/FT: FT, exempt
M/S: Married/Joint
Pay Rate: $32,000/year
Dependents under 17: 2
Dependents over 17: 1
Step 4 information: none
B-Schwa Joel Schwartz
55 Maple Farm Way
Woodstock, VT 05534
802-463-9985
SSN: 021-34-9876
401(k) deduction: 5%
Section 125 deduction: $100
Hire Date: 2-1-2023
DOB: 5-23-1993
Position: Sales
PT/FT: FT, exempt
M/S: Married/Joint
Pay Rate: $32,000/year base plus
3% commission per case sold
Dependents under 17: 2
Dependents over 17: 0
Step 4 information: none
B-Prevo Toni Prevosti
820 Westminster Road
Bridgewater, VT 05520
802-555-3456
SSN: 055-22-0443
401(k) deduction: 6%
Section 125 deduction: $155
Hire Date: 2-1-2023
DOB: 9-19-1987
Position: Owner/President
PT/FT: FT, exempt
M/S: Married/Joint
Pay Rate: $45,000/year
Dependents under 17: 3
Dependents over 17: 2
Step 4 information: none
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYlan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 107 05/09/23 06:58 pm
Chapter 2  Payroll System Procedures   107
The company has the following departments:
Department A: Agricultural Workers
Department B: Office Workers
1. You have been hired to start on February 1, 2023, as the new accounting clerk. Your 
employee number is B-STUDE, where “B” denotes that you are an office worker. 
(Source: Internal Revenue Service)
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY108   Chapter 2  Payroll System Procedures
lan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 108 05/09/23 06:58 pm
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYlan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 109 05/09/23 06:58 pm
Chapter 2  Payroll System Procedures   109
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY110   Chapter 2  Payroll System Procedures
lan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 110 05/09/23 06:58 pm
(Source: U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services)
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYlan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 111 05/09/23 06:58 pm
Chapter 2  Payroll System Procedures   111
Your Social Security number is 555-55-5555, you are full-time, nonexempt, and paid 
at a rate of $34,000 per year. You have elected to contribute 2 percent of your gross 
pay to your 401(k) and will have $100 per pay period for Section 125. Complete the 
W-4 and the I-9 to start your own employee file. You are single with only one job. You 
live at 1644 Smitten Road, Woodstock, VT 05001. You will not be claiming anything 
for section 4 of the W-4. Your phone number is (555) 555-5555. Your date of birth 
is 01/01/2001. You are a citizen of the United States and provide a Vermont driver’s 
license #88110009 expiring 01/01/27 in addition to your Social Security card for 
verification of your identity. Mary Shangraw verified the information for the company. 
Prevosti Farms and Sugarhouse is located at 820 Westminster Road, Bridgewater, 
VT, 05520. Prevosti has an EIN of 22-6654454.
2. Complete the employee information form for each employee. Enter the pay rate earn￾ings for each employee.
EMPLOYEE EARNING RECORD
NAME Hire Date
ADDRESS Date of Birth
CITY/STATE/ZIP Position
TELEPHONE Filing Status
SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBER Exempt/Nonexempt
POSITION Pay Rate
Period Ended
Hrs
Worked Reg Pay OT Pay Holiday Comm
Gross 
Pay Ins 401(k)
Taxable Pay 
for Federal
Taxable Pay 
for FICA
Taxable 
Wages for 
Federal
Taxable 
Wages for 
FICA
Federal 
W/H
Social Sec. 
Tax
Medicare
Tax
State 
Inc. Tax
Total 
Deduc
Net 
Pay
YTD Net 
Pay
YTD Gross 
Pay
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY112   Chapter 2  Payroll System Procedures
lan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 112 05/09/23 06:58 pm
EMPLOYEE EARNING RECORD
NAME Hire Date
ADDRESS Date of Birth
CITY/STATE/ZIP Exempt/Nonexempt
TELEPHONE Married/Single
SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBER Pay Rate
POSITION
Period Ended
Hrs
Worked Reg Pay OT Pay Holiday Comm
Gross 
Pay Ins 401(k)
Taxable Pay 
for Federal
Taxable pay 
for FICA
Taxable 
Wages for 
Federal
Taxable 
Wages for 
FICA
Federal 
W/H
Social Sec. 
Tax
Medicare
Tax
State 
Inc. Tax
Total 
Deduc
Net 
Pay
YTD Net 
Pay
YTD Gross 
Pay
EMPLOYEE EARNING RECORD
NAME Hire Date
ADDRESS Date of Birth
CITY/STATE/ZIP Exempt/Nonexempt
TELEPHONE Married/Single
SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBER Pay Rate
POSITION
Period Ended
Hrs
Worked Reg Pay OT Pay Holiday Comm
Gross 
Pay Ins 401(k)
Taxable 
Wages for 
Federal
Taxable 
Wages for 
FICA
Taxable 
Wages for 
Federal
Taxable 
Wages for 
FICA
Federal 
W/H
Social Sec. 
Tax
Medicare
Tax
State 
Inc. Tax
Total 
Deduc
Net 
Pay
YTD Net 
Pay
YTD Gross 
Pay
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYlan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 113 05/09/23 06:58 pm
Chapter 2  Payroll System Procedures   113
EMPLOYEE EARNING RECORD
NAME Hire Date
ADDRESS Date of Birth
CITY/STATE/ZIP Exempt/Nonexempt
TELEPHONE Married/Single
SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBER Pay Rate
POSITION
Period Ended
Hrs
Worked Reg Pay OT Pay Holiday Comm
Gross 
Pay Ins 401(k)
Taxable Pay 
for Federal
Taxable Pay 
for FICA
Taxable 
Wages for 
Federal
Taxable 
Wages for 
FICA
Federal 
W/H
Social Sec. 
Tax
Medicare
Tax
State 
Inc. Tax
Total 
Deduc
Net 
Pay
YTD Net 
Pay
YTD Gross 
Pay
EMPLOYEE EARNING RECORD
NAME Hire Date
ADDRESS Date of Birth
CITY/STATE/ZIP Exempt/Nonexempt
TELEPHONE Married/Single
SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBER Pay Rate
POSITION
Period Ended
Hrs
Worked Reg Pay OT Pay Holiday Comm
Gross 
Pay Ins 401(k)
Taxable Pay 
for Federal
Taxable Pay 
for FICA
Taxable 
Wages for 
Federal
Taxable 
Wages for 
FICA
Federal 
W/H
Social Sec. 
Tax
Medicare
Tax
State 
Inc. Tax
Total 
Deduc
Net 
Pay
YTD Net 
Pay
YTD Gross 
Pay
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY114   Chapter 2  Payroll System Procedures
lan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 114 05/09/23 06:58 pm
EMPLOYEE EARNING RECORD
NAME Hire Date
ADDRESS Date of Birth
CITY/STATE/ZIP Exempt/Nonexempt
TELEPHONE Married/Single
SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBER Pay Rate
POSITION
Period Ended
Hrs
Worked Reg Pay OT Pay Holiday Comm
Gross 
Pay Ins 401(k)
Taxable Pay 
for Federal
Taxable Pay 
for FICA
Taxable 
Wages for 
Federal
Taxable 
Wages for 
FICA
Federal 
W/H
Social Sec. 
Tax
Medicare
Tax
State 
Inc. Tax
Total 
Deduc
Net 
Pay
YTD Net 
Pay
YTD Gross 
Pay
EMPLOYEE EARNING RECORD
NAME Hire Date
ADDRESS Date of Birth
CITY/STATE/ZIP Exempt/Nonexempt
TELEPHONE Married/Single
SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBER Pay Rate
POSITION
Period Ended
Hrs
Worked Reg Pay OT Pay Holiday Comm
Gross 
Pay Ins 401(k)
Taxable Pay 
for Federal
Taxable Pay 
for FICA
Taxable 
Wages for 
Federal
Taxable 
Wages for 
FICA
Federal 
W/H
Social Sec. 
Tax
Medicare
Tax
State 
Inc. Tax
Total 
Deduc
Net 
Pay
YTD Net 
Pay
YTD Gross 
Pay
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYlan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 115 05/09/23 06:58 pm
Chapter 2  Payroll System Procedures   115
Answers to Stop & Check Exercises
What’s in the File?
1. a, b, d, e
2. b
3. d
4. a
5. c
Who Are You?
1. Student answers will vary. One possible way to prove both identity and employment 
is a current U.S. passport. Alternatively, a current state-issued driver’s license and a 
Social Security card will work for the purposes of the I-9.
2. Student answers will vary. When evaluating the earnings of more than one job, the 
breakdown of the includable amount by pay period is often overlooked.
3. Student answers will vary. Examples of statutory employees include the following: A 
driver who distributes beverages (other than milk) or meat, vegetable, fruit, or bakery 
products or who picks up and delivers laundry or dry cleaning if the driver is a single 
company’s agent or is paid on commission. A full-time life insurance sales agent 
whose principal business activity is selling life insurance or annuity contracts, or 
both, primarily for one life insurance company. An individual who works at home on 
materials or goods that a company supplies and that must be returned to that com￾pany or a designated agent in accordance with furnished specifications for the work 
to be done. A full-time traveling or city salesperson who works on a single compa￾ny’s behalf and turns in orders from wholesalers, retailers, contractors, or operators 
EMPLOYEE EARNING RECORD
NAME Hire Date
ADDRESS Date of Birth
CITY/STATE/ZIP Exempt/Nonexempt
TELEPHONE Married/Single
SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBER Pay Rate
POSITION
Period Ended
Hrs
Worked Reg Pay OT Pay Holiday Comm
Gross 
Pay Ins 401(k)
Taxable Pay 
for Federal
Taxable Pay 
for FICA
Taxable 
Wages for 
Federal
Taxable 
Wages for 
FICA
Federal 
W/H
Social Sec. 
Tax Medicare
State 
W/H
Total 
Deduc
Net 
Pay
YTD Net 
Pay
YTD Gross 
Pay
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY116   Chapter 2  Payroll System Procedures
lan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 116 05/09/23 06:58 pm
of hotels, restaurants, or other similar establishments. The goods sold must be mer￾chandise for resale or supplies for use in the buyer’s business operation. The work 
performed for that single company must be the salesperson’s principal business 
activity.
Exempt vs. Nonexempt
1. Exempt workers are exempt from the overtime provisions of FLSA. Exempt workers 
tend to be employees in a company’s managerial or other leadership functions, in 
which they may need to work more than 40 hours per week to complete their tasks. 
Exempt workers usually receive a fixed salary per period that is not based on the 
number of hours worked. Nonexempt workers tend to be compensated on an hourly 
basis and often do not have managerial or leadership responsibilities. It should be 
noted that some nonexempt workers do have managerial or leadership responsibili￾ties and may receive a fixed salary; however, these particular employees are cov￾ered by the overtime provisions of FLSA.
2. c (40 hours)
3. The leased employee is a common-law employee of the firm, whereas the tempo￾rary employee is an employee of the temporary agency.
Worker Facts
1. Hourly workers and nonexempt workers are protected by FLSA.
2. Exempt workers receive a fixed amount of money and generally direct the actions of 
other employees; nonexempt workers are eligible for overtime and generally have 
their work directed by a manager.
3. Commission workers are typically tied to sales completed by the individual; piece￾rate pay is determined by the number of pieces the employee completes during a 
shift or period.
4. Student answers may vary but should include: the minimum hourly rate is set by the 
U.S. federal government. Minimum wage rates can and do vary per state, and differ￾ent parts of the same state may have different minimum wages. The minimum wage 
may differ from a “living wage,” which is an amount needed to meet basic subsis￾tence needs. A calculating tool was provided in the chapter for discussion on living 
wages in various locations.
Who Does Which Job?
Student answers will vary. The answer should reflect a clear separation of duties, cross￾training, rotation of tasks, and security protocols.
Internal Controls and Audits
1. b
2. b, c
3. a, c, d
Destroy and Terminate
1. Paper payroll records should be shredded or burned. Computer records should be 
purged from the server and all other storage devices.
2. Apollo should receive his final pay on October 11, and no later than October 12. His 
employer is not required to provide him with a severance package, although he may 
be eligible for his accrued vacation pay.
Dollar sign made from binary numbers: Ralf Hiemisch/Getty Images
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYlan43463_ch02_046-117.indd 117 05/09/23 06:58 pm
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY118
lan43463_ch03_118-175.indd 118 07/17/23 04:00 pm
Two important terms in payroll accounting are gross pay and net pay. Gross 
pay is the total amount of wages earned before deducting amounts for 
taxes or other deductions. Net pay is the amount of money the employee 
actually receives in a paycheck after all taxes and other deductions have 
been subtracted. In this chapter, we will focus on computing gross pay.
The calculation of an employee’s gross pay is the first step for payroll 
processing. Employee pay may be calculated in different ways. Hourly
employees are paid for each hour, or fraction thereof, that they work on a 
given day. Salaried employees are broken into two classifications based 
on FLSA legislation: exempt and nonexempt. Salaried exempt employ￾ees receive pay based on the job they perform, regardless of the number 
of hours it takes to perform the job. Salaried nonexempt employees may 
receive both salary and overtime. Another class of employees works on 
a commission basis, which means that some of their wages are based on 
sales revenue. The final classification is piece-rate employees. Typically 
found in manufacturing environments, employees are paid based upon the 
number of pieces completed during a work shift.
Gross Pay Computation
3
Chapter Three
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying Chapter 3, you should be able to:
LO 3-1 Analyze Minimum Wage Pay for Nonexempt Workers
LO 3-2 Compute Gross Pay for Different Pay Bases
LO 3-3 Calculate Pay Based on Hours and Fractions of Hours
LO 3-4 Calculate Overtime in Various Situations
LO 3-5 Create a Payroll Register
LO 3-6 Apply Combination Pay Methods
LO 3-7 Explain Special Pay Situations
Final PDF to printerChapter 3  Gross Pay Computation   119
lan43463_ch03_118-175.indd 119 07/17/23 04:00 pm
Inflation, Wage Increases, and Pay 
Transparency Puts Pressure on Employers
A consequence of the effect of COVID on the U.S. economy has been high inflation. With 
unemployment at its lowest point in many years, employers have been competing more 
to attract workers. Many employers have discovered a need to increase employee pay 
to remain competitive in what has become an opportunity for workers to demand and 
receive the pay increases they desire. The average pay increase has been 3.9 percent 
among U.S. employers.
Pay transparency laws in 17 states have made it easier for job candidates to com￾pare employers before deciding on accepting a job. Small and medium-sized employers 
have experienced the pressure from pay transparency laws more than large companies 
because of the pressure it creates to offer competitive wage packages. An interesting 
piece of employer pay competition is the minimum wage offered by states. Although 
approximately 40 percent of states have maintained the federal minimum, the other 60 
percent have legislated significant increases to the minimum wage for 2023. For example, 
New Hampshire has maintained the federal minimum wage since its inception in 2009, 
while neighboring Vermont offers a minimum wage that is nearly 82 percent higher. This 
puts pressure on employers, especially multi-state ones, to examine their competitiveness 
and what actions they can take to increase their allure for job seekers.
(Sources: Comp and Benefits Today1; Comp and Benefits Today2; Department of Labor)
Ink Drop/Shutterstock
Employee pay is the focus of Chapter 3. We will examine different 
bases for gross pay computations, discuss how these compensation 
bases differ, and introduce the payroll register as a tool in pay 
calculation.
Final PDF to printer120   Chapter 3  Gross Pay Computation
lan43463_ch03_118-175.indd 120 07/17/23 04:00 pm
LO 3-1 Analyze Minimum Wage Pay for Nonexempt Workers
Two primary classifications of employees exist: exempt and nonexempt. 
These classifications refer to the provisions of the Fair Labor Standards 
Act (FLSA). The FLSA provisions protect nonexempt employees, includ￾ing clerical, factory, and other nonmanagerial employees. Nonexempt 
employees are operative workers whose workdays may vary in duration, 
whose tasks do not meet the U.S. Department of Labor guidelines for 
exempt employees, and who do not generally have supervisory or mana￾gerial duties. Exempt employees include employees who meet the U.S. 
Department of Labor guidelines for exempt classification, including job 
titles such as Department Supervisor or Warehouse Manager.
For hourly workers, FLSA contains wage provisions that stipulate the minimum wage an 
employer may pay an employee. However, the law exempts some employers from the mini￾mum wage requirements. According to the U.S. Department of Labor, the following condi￾tions exempt an employer from paying the federal minimum wage:
∙ Firms that do not engage in interstate commerce as part of their business production.
∙ Firms with less than $500,000 of annual business volume.
Note that certain firms are always covered by the FLSA provisions, regardless of their 
interstate commerce or annual business volume participation. These businesses include hos￾pitals, schools for mentally or physically disabled or gifted children, preschools, schools of 
any level, and governmental agencies. Under FLSA section 3(y), law enforcement and fire 
protection employees may have specified work periods ranging from 7 to 28 days. Employees 
would be paid for overtime only after a predefined number of working hours.
FLSA was modified in 1974 to include explicit provisions about domestic workers. Since 
1974, minimum wage provisions cover domestic service workers, such as nannies and chauf￾feurs. Note that the 1974 modification specifically excluded occasional babysitters and employ￾ees who provide domestic companion services for the elderly. In 2015, the U.S. Congress 
further amended FLSA to include caregivers and other direct care employees who provide in￾home companionship services as being subject to the federal or state minimum wage, which￾ever is higher. It should be noted that domestic workers who reside on the employer’s premises 
permanently or for an extended time period are exempt from FLSA provisions.
Sorbis/Shutterstock
The pay and employment taxes of in-house employees such as nannies or elder care￾givers is becoming an important issue in 2023. Issues of withholding FICA taxes are 
receiving scrutiny from tax authorities. The cost of caregiving activities is another issue 
worth considering because of its relation with minimum wage provisions under FLSA. 
Another issue is economic considerations because the household worker is still eli￾gible for unemployment benefits when not terminated for cause.
Other considerations include the classification of the household employee. Many 
households classify the worker as an independent contractor when they should be 
classified as an employee. Third-party payments such as Venmo or Zelle have become 
noticed by the IRS. Finally, the Department of Labor stipulates that household workers 
who are required to work on a live-in basis must receive a minimum of eight hours of 
sleep, five of which must be consecutive.
(Source: Accounting Today, DOL)
Minimum Wage
The federal minimum wage was instituted in 1938. One purpose of the minimum wage was 
to protect the economy following the Great Depression that started in 1929. Another purpose 
was to help the lowest-paid workers who lacked the representation that wealthier employees 
Final PDF to printerChapter 3  Gross Pay Computation   121
lan43463_ch03_118-175.indd 121 07/17/23 04:00 pm
had. It was intended to create a standard of living for the poorest Americans. The following 
is a chart depicting the change in the minimum wage over time, both adjusted and unadjusted 
for inflation.
(Source: Statista)
Real and nominal value of the federal minimum wage in the United States from 1938 to
2022 (in 2022 U.S. dollars)
7.5
10
Unadjusted wage (real U.S. dollars) Inflation adjusted wage (nominal U.S. dollars)
12.5
0
2.5
5
15
Minimum wage in 2022 U.S. dollars
1938
1940
1945
1950
1955
1960
1965
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
An important consideration of the minimum wage provision of the FLSA is the existence 
of separate tiers of the minimum wage. Wages for tipped employees are lower than those of 
nontipped employees. Federal wage and hour laws as of 2023 stipulate a federal minimum 
wage of $7.25 and a minimum hourly wage of $2.13 for tipped employees. States may enact 
additional minimum wage laws to address the specific economic needs of their populations. 
This minimizes federal legislative needs to revisit the minimum wage annually.
In 2022, Nevada voters opted to change the two-tiered minimum wage system. 
The two tiers meant that employers who offered health insurance benefits to their 
employees could offer a lower minimum wage than employers without a health insur￾ance benefit. Ballot question 2 made a change to the Nevada state constitution to 
eradicate this two-tier system and offer the same minimum wage across the state as of 
January 1, 2024.
(Source: SHRM)
As of 2023, 29 states and the District of Columbia have minimum wage rates higher 
than the federal minimum wage. Note that five states have a minimum wage that is not 
specified. When the minimum wage is not specified, the federal minimum wage applies. 
These lower minimum wages may be paid by employers who are not subject to FLSA 
provisions because they do not conduct interstate commerce. A map depicting mini￾mum wages for 2023 is shown in Figure 3-1, and the details of specific minimum wage 
rates are shown in Table 3-1. Examples involving employee pay with different minimum 
wages follow.
Final PDF to printer122   Chapter 3  Gross Pay Computation
lan43463_ch03_118-175.indd 122 07/17/23 04:00 pm
FIGURE 3-1
Minimum Wage Hourly Rates for 2023
(Source: U.S. Department of Labor, 2023)
Legend: The states highlighted in dark blue have minimum wage amounts higher than the federal minimum wage of $7.25 
per hour.
AK $10.85 IA $7.25 MS None† PA $7.25
AL None† ID 7.25 MT $9.95* RI 13.00
AR 11.00 IL 13.00 NC 7.25 SC None†
AZ 13.85 IN 7.25 ND 7.25 SD 10.80
CA 15.50* KS 7.25 NE 10.50 TN None†
CO 13.65 KY 7.25 NH 7.25 TX 7.25
CT 14.00 LA None† NJ 14.13 UT 7.25
D.C. 16.50 MA 15.00 NM 12.00 VA 12.00
DE 11.75 MD 13.25 NV 10.75* VT 13.18
FL 11.00 ME 13.80 NY 14.20* WA 15.74*
GA 7.25 MI 10.10 OH 10.10* WI 7.25
HI 12.00 MN 10.59* OK 7.25* WV 8.75
MO 12.00 OR 13.50 WY 7.25
TABLE 3-1
2023 Minimum Wage Hourly Rates by State
(Source: U.S. Department of Labor, 2023)
*These states have stipulations that change the minimum wage based on different variables. Consult the state’s revenue office for specific details.
†
In states with no minimum wage or one lower than the federal minimum wage, the federal minimum wage prevails as long as they meet FLSA rev￾enue and interstate commerce thresholds.
EXAMPLE 1: NO STATE MINIMUM WAGE, APPLY FEDERAL 
MINIMUM WAGE
Alix works for an employer and earns the minimum wage in South Carolina. How much 
would Alix earn for a 40-hour pay period?
Federal minimum wage: $7.25 per hour
40 hours × $7.25/hour = $290
Because the state does not have a minimum wage, the federal minimum wage would 
be applied.
Final PDF to printerChapter 3  Gross Pay Computation   123
lan43463_ch03_118-175.indd 123 07/17/23 04:00 pm
Tipped Employees
Workers in professions such as waiters, waitresses, bartenders, food service workers, and 
some hotel service personnel may receive an hourly wage less than the minimum wage rates 
listed in Table 3-1. The rationale for the decreased minimum wage is that these employees 
can earn tips (tipped wages) from patrons of the establishments as a regular part of their 
employment. The federal minimum cash wage for tipped employees is $2.13 per hour; how￾ever, many states have different regulations about how much the employee must earn in tips 
to meet federal wage and hour laws.
EXAMPLE 2: STATE MINIMUM WAGE HIGHER THAN THE FEDERAL 
MINIMUM WAGE
West is a minimum wage worker in the State of Washington. They work for a national 
office supply chain and have a standard 37.5-hour workweek. How much would West 
earn during a 75-hour, two-week pay period?
Washington minimum wage: $15.74 per hour
75 hours × $15.74/hour = $1,180.50
Because West works for a national office supply chain, it is safe to assume that the 
company conducts interstate commerce and earns more than $500,000 in revenues 
per year. West would be compensated at the state minimum wage in any case.
In 2018, voters in Washington, DC, approved Initiative 77, which will gradually increase 
the tipped wage through 2026 until it meets the minimum wage area. As of 2021, a 
final rule allowed employers to require tipped employees to pool their tips with staff 
for which a tip is not expected. This rule was designed to offer an incentive to tradition￾ally nontipped restaurant employees.
(Source: The Hill)
The difference between the tipped employee minimum wage and the federal minimum 
wage is the tip credit. Federal wage and hour laws mandate that the tip credit is $5.12 per 
hour. Note that the tip credit is the difference between the minimum wage and the tipped 
employee minimum wage ($7.25 − $2.13 = $5.12). Some states such as Alaska, California, 
and Montana do not allow tip credit; instead, all workers receive the prevailing federal or 
local minimum wage. Table 3-2 contains the details about tip credit for each state. Some 
FIGURE 3-2
IRS Form 4070 for Tipped Employees to Report Tips
Final PDF to printer124   Chapter 3  Gross Pay Computation
lan43463_ch03_118-175.indd 124 07/17/23 04:00 pm
states have requirements on employers regarding information that must be obtained before 
applying for a tip credit. For example, North Carolina requires a monthly or per-pay-period 
affidavit from employees of the total amount of tips.
Employees must report tips in excess of $20 per month to their employer using IRS form 
4070. All tips, including cash, debit or credit card, or paid out must be included in this form. 
This form is due on the 10th of the following month (i.e., April 10 for the month ending 
March 31) unless the 10th is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday. Figure 3-2 contains an 
example of a completed Form 4070.
Jurisdiction
Basic 
Combined 
Cash and 
Tip Minimum 
Wage Rate
Maximum Tip 
Credit Against 
Minimum Wage
Minimum Cash 
Wage
Definition of Tipped 
Employee by Minimum 
Tips Received (monthly 
unless otherwise 
specified)
Federal: Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) $7.25 $5.12 $2.13 More than $30
State Law Does Not Allow Tip Credit
Note: The minimum rate is the same for tipped and nontipped employees.
Alaska 10.85
California 15.50
Minnesota:
Large employer Annual receipts > 
$500,000 per year
10.59
Small employer Annual receipts < 
$500,000 per year
8.63
Montana:
Business with gross annual sales 
exceeding $110,000
9.95
Businesses with gross annual sales of 
$110,000 or less
4.00
Nevada 10.50 With no health insurance 
benefits provided by the 
employer and received by 
the employee
9.50 With health insurance 
benefits provided by the 
employer and received by 
the employee
Oregon 13.50
Washington 15.74
State Law Allows Tip Credit
Arizona 13.85 3.00 10.85 Not specified
Arkansas 11.00 8.37 2.63 More than $20
Colorado 13.65 3.02 10.63 More than $30
Connecticut: 14.00 At least $10 weekly for 
full-time employees or 
$2.00 daily for part-time 
in hotels and restaurants. 
Not specified for other 
industries.
Hotel, restaurant 7.62 6.38
Bartenders who customarily receive tips 5.77 8.23
Delaware 11.75 9.52 2.23 More than $30
District of Columbia (D.C.)1 16.10 10.75 5.35 Not specified
Florida 11.00 3.02 7.98
Hawaii 12.00 1.00 11.00 More than $20
Idaho 7.25 3.90 3.35 More than $30
TABLE 3-2
2023 Minimum Hourly Wages for Tipped Employees by State
Final PDF to printerChapter 3  Gross Pay Computation   125
lan43463_ch03_118-175.indd 125 07/17/23 04:00 pm
Jurisdiction
Basic 
Combined 
Cash and 
Tip Minimum 
Wage Rate
Maximum Tip 
Credit Against 
Minimum Wage
Minimum Cash 
Wage
Definition of Tipped 
Employee by Minimum 
Tips Received (monthly 
unless otherwise 
specified)
Illinois 13.00 40% of the 
applicable 
minimum wage
(5.20)
7.80 Not specified
Indiana  7.25 5.12 2.13 Not specified
Iowa  7.25 2.90 4.35 More than $30
Kansas  7.25 5.12 2.13 Not specified
Kentucky  7.25 5.12 2.13 More than $30
Maine 13.80 50% of the 
applicable 
minimum wage 
(6.90)
6.90 More than $30
Maryland 13.25 9.62 3.63 More than $30
Massachusetts 15.00 8.25 6.75 More than $20
Michigan 10.10 6.26 3.84 Not specified
Missouri 12.00 50% of the 
applicable 
minimum wage
(6.00)
6.00 Not specified
Nebraska 10.50 8.37 2.13 Not specified
New Hampshire  7.25 55% of the 
applicable 
minimum wage
(3.99)
45% of the 
applicable 
minimum wage 
(3.26)
More than $30
New Jersey 14.13 8.87 5.26 Not specified
New Mexico 12.00 9.00 3.00 More than $30
New York See website2 Not specified
North Carolina  7.25 5.12 2.13 More than $20
North Dakota  7.25 33% of the 
applicable 
minimum wage
(2.39)
4.86 More than $30
Ohio: Applies to employees of 
businesses with annual gross receipts of 
greater than $342,000 per year
10.10 5.05 5.05 More than $30
Oklahoma  7.25 5.12 2.13 Not specified
Pennsylvania  7.25 4.42 2.83 More than $30
Rhode Island 13.00 9.11 3.89 Not specified
South Carolina  7.25 5.12 2.13 Not specified
South Dakota 10.80 50% of the 
applicable 
minimum wage
(5.40)
5.40 More than $35
Tennessee  7.25 5.12 2.13 More than $30
Texas  7.25 5.12 2.13 More than $20
Utah  7.25 5.12 2.13 More than $30
Vermont: Employees in hotels, motels, 
tourist places, and restaurants who 
customarily and regularly receive >$120/
month in tips for direct and personal 
customer service
13.18 6.59 6.59 More than $120
Virginia 12.00 9.87 2.13 More than $30
West Virginia  8.75 70% of the 
applicable 
minimum wage
(6.13)
2.62 Not specified
Wisconsin  7.25 4.92 2.33 Not specified
Wyoming  7.25 5.12 2.13 More than $30
(Source: U.S. Department of Labor, 2023)
Final PDF to printer126   Chapter 3  Gross Pay Computation
lan43463_ch03_118-175.indd 126 07/17/23 04:00 pm
EXAMPLE: TIPPED EMPLOYEE IN OKLAHOMA, MINIMUM WAGE MET
Argyle Hansford is a tipped employee in Stillwater, Oklahoma. During a 40-hour work￾week and pay period, she earned $220 in tips.
Hourly tipped minimum wage: $2.13 per hour.
$2.13 per hour × 40 hours = $85.20 in wages
Tips earned: $220
Total wages and tips earned during the pay period:
$220 + $85.20 = $305.20
The federal and state minimum wage is $7.25 per hour. The minimum wage for a 
40-hour workweek:
$7.25 per hour × 40 hours = $290
Therefore, Argyle has earned more than the federal and state minimum wage. The 
employer does not need to contribute to Argyle’s pay during the pay period.
EXAMPLE: TIPPED EMPLOYEE IN RHODE ISLAND, 
MINIMUM WAGE NOT MET
Grayson Jeffries is a tipped waiter in Warwick, Rhode Island. During a 40-hour work 
and pay period, he earned $75 in tips.
Hourly tipped minimum wage: $3.89 per hour.
$3.89 per hour × 40 hours = $155.60 in wages
Tips earned: $75
Total wages and tips earned during the pay period:
$155.60 + 75 = $230.60
The state minimum wage for Rhode Island is $13.00 per hour. During a 40-hour work￾week and pay period, the minimum pay for an employee is:
$13.00 per hour × 40 hours = $520.00
Because Grayson has not earned the minimum wage, the employer must pay the dif￾ference between the earned wages and tips and the minimum wage:
$520.00 – $230.60 = $289.40 to be added to Grayson’s pay by the employer to 
bring his pay to the minimum wage.
Pay Your Employees Correctly
Check Stop 
1. Pai works as a clerk receiving minimum wage for a pharmaceutical com￾pany in North Carolina that pays its employees biweekly. Pai is classified 
as nonexempt, with a standard workweek of 40 hours. During a two-week 
period, Pai worked 88 hours and received $638.00. Was Pai’s pay cor￾rect? Explain.
2. Terry works as a publisher’s representative receiving minimum wage in 
Maryland. This week Terry worked 39.5 hours. What should Terry’s gross 
pay be?
3. Morgan is a temporary worker for a popular radio station, a large employer 
in Minnesota. Morgan receives the minimum wage and works 32 hours 
per week. How much should be the gross pay for two weeks of work?
4. Toby is a tipped minimum wage worker for a Montana restaurant with 
$615,000 in annual revenues. Toby worked 75 hours during a biweekly pay 
period and earned $1,000 in tips. What is Toby’s gross pay (excluding tips)?
&
Final PDF to printerChapter 3  Gross Pay Computation   127
lan43463_ch03_118-175.indd 127 07/17/23 04:00 pm
LO 3-2 Compute Gross Pay for Different Pay Bases
Salaried Workers
Employees in highly technical, qualification-driven positions within 
a company are generally classified as exempt from FLSA regulations. 
Accountants, engineers, lawyers, managers, and supervisors are included 
in this classification. Section 13(a)(1) of the FLSA defines the eligible 
exempt employees in the following job descriptions: Executives, admin￾istrative personnel, professionals, and outside sales representatives. 
Section 13(a)(17) of the FLSA also allows specific computer-related 
employees to be included in salaried workers’ classification. The FLSA provides a minimum 
wage for salaried workers of not less than $684 per week, per the Final Rule that went into 
effect in January 2020. Also, the Final Rule, according to 29 CFR 778.114, stipulates an 
employer may use the fluctuating workweek method if the employee works hours that vary 
from week to week and receives a fixed salary as straight-time compensation. The hourly rate 
is then computed by dividing the salary amount by the number of hours actually worked.
Companies often use a technique called “job leveling” to determine salaries for exempt 
employees. This technique uses job analysis to define common types of responsibili￾ties to generate pay grades. Although this technique intends to determine objective 
pay criteria, this practice has led to staffing imbalances, multiple titles for similar jobs, 
and employee morale issues.
Since job leveling was clarified in 2015, firms have experienced mixed results regard￾ing employee morale and engagement. Changes in work location, flexible schedules, 
and certain job duties have prompted additional classification to the idea of job level￾ing. The driving question has changed from “what the employee does” to “why is this 
job necessary.” The focus of job leveling has become a discussion of the job’s purpose 
within its operations’ broader context.
(Sources: SHRM; Lattice)
Pixelfit/E+/Getty Images
For nonexempt salaried workers, the employment contract entered into between the 
employee and the employer determines at what level of hourly work they would receive over￾time pay. Many salaried nonexempt worker contracts, when specified, are for 45 hours per 
week. If the contract stipulates that 45 hours per week is the standard workweek for a sala￾ried, nonexempt employee, then the employee is still subject to FLSA overtime rules for hours 
worked past 40. For this textbook, the standard workweek is five days out of a seven-day week.
EXAMPLE: SALARIED, NONEXEMPT EMPLOYEE
Dallas is a salaried, nonexempt employee, earns $1,000 per week and has a standard 
45-hour workweek.
Hourly compensation: $1,000/45 hours = $22.22 per hour
Overtime rate = $22.22 × 1.5 = $33.33 per hour
Because this employee is classified as nonexempt according to FLSA guidelines, the 
employee is subject to overtime compensation, and the hourly rate is needed to com￾pute overtime pay.
For the same salaried, nonexempt employee, if the contract between the employee 
and employer stated that all hours exceeding 45 were covered, the individual would 
need to work 45.25 hours or more in the week to qualify for overtime. These are typi￾cally non-FLSA companies.
However, if the contract stated that only 40 hours were required before the over￾time rates are applied, then the 5 hours would be paid at overtime rates.
Note: A salaried exempt worker would be paid $1,000 per week regardless of the number of hours worked.
Final PDF to printer128   Chapter 3  Gross Pay Computation
lan43463_ch03_118-175.indd 128 07/17/23 04:00 pm
Employers may not prorate a salaried worker’s pay when the number of hours worked is 
fewer than the contractual hour requirement. An exception to this would be time away from 
work per the employer’s sick or vacation policy. The company would allow employees to take 
paid time off under either of these programs to supplement their missed wages. Companies 
may also offer salaried employees the option of leave without pay for missed days; however, 
contractual hours covered under leave without pay must be documented and signed by both a 
manager and the employee.
Salary Translation to Hourly Rates
The calculation of gross pay for salaried employees depends on the firm’s choice of pay peri￾ods. An employee’s gross pay is determined by dividing the annual pay by the number of pay 
periods in a year. For instance, if a firm paid employees every month, then the salary calcula￾tion would be _1
12of the yearly amount. It is occasionally necessary to determine the hourly 
rate for salaried employees. To get the hourly rate, you would use the following equation:
Hourly rate = Annual amount
Total hours worked per year
Hourly rate = Annual salary
Number of hours in a standard workweek × 52 weeks per year
Number of Hours in the 
Regular Workweek
Annual salary
Number of hours × 52 weeks Hourly 
Rate
40 60,000
(40 × 52)
$28.85
37.5 60,000
(37.5 × 52)
$30.77
35 60,000
(35 × 52)
$32.97
EXAMPLE: SALARY TO HOURLY RATE COMPUTATIONS
Jesse earns a salary of $60,000 per year for ABD Industries. ABD Industries pays its 
employees every month.
Gross pay = $60,000 per year/12 months = $5,000 per month
If Jesse were a nonexempt employee, it would become necessary to calculate the 
hourly rate. When calculating the hourly rate, using the correct number of hours in a 
regular workweek is critical in determining the overtime pay rate. Note the following 
examples of computing the hourly rate using different regular workweeks.
To arrive at the total number of hours worked per year, multiply the number of weeks in a 
year (52) by the number of hours worked in a standard workweek without overtime.
Because the calculation of overtime, holiday, or vacation time for salaried workers could 
be based upon the individual’s job duties, knowing how to calculate that amount will enable 
accurate pay.
Final PDF to printerChapter 3  Gross Pay Computation   129
lan43463_ch03_118-175.indd 129 07/17/23 04:00 pm
What happens if the salaried employee decides to take unpaid leave during a pay period? 
That amount must be deducted from the gross pay amount. With unpaid leave, the amount of 
time taken and the number of regular hours in the pay period are the major factors.
EXAMPLE: UNPAID LEAVE
Barre wants to take two extra days off around a holiday but has no paid time remain￾ing for the year. ABD Industries pays Barre $60,000 annually on a biweekly basis, and 
there are 80 hours in a pay period. At 8 hours per day, Barre will be taking 16 hours of 
unpaid leave (8 hours × 2 days).
Using the example of Barre’s work with ABD Industries with the regular working 
hours as 40 hours per week, the normal salary is
80 hours × $28.85/hour = $2,308 per pay period
To calculate the pay, including the unpaid leave, we need the proportion of the pay￾check that will be unpaid. We calculate the proportion of the total paycheck Barre will 
be taking as unpaid leave.
Unpaid portion: 16 hours
Normal hours per pay period: 80
Unpaid portion = 16/80 = 0.20
That means Barre will receive 100 – 0.20 = 0.80 (or 80 percent) of the normal gross pay.
Gross pay per period with 16 hours of unpaid time:
$2,308 × 0.80 = $1,846.40
Note: Using a rounded hourly rate (shown in this example) to compute period pay will differ from results using 
nonrounded hourly rates. We have also not separated the holiday pay intentionally for this example.
In many instances, nonexempt employees are paid on a salary basis to avoid paperwork 
such as time cards or pay sheets if they consistently work a fixed number of hours per week. 
According to 29 CFR 778.113(a), the employer and employee must agree on the standard 
number of hours to be worked each week for which the employee shall receive pay. However, 
if the employee is classified as nonexempt, the FLSA requires that these salaried workers 
be eligible for overtime. A nonexempt hourly rate is necessary to compute pay beyond the 
agreed-upon weekly hours per 29 CFR 778.113(a).
If the employee works fewer than the agreed-upon number of hours during the week, some 
states have provisions by which the employee’s salary is adjusted to match the actual hours 
worked. In this case, the hourly rate is again needed to make sure the gross pay is correctly 
calculated.
Salaried Workers and Minimum Wage Comparisons
For a salaried nonexempt worker for whom FLSA provisions apply, the fixed weekly salary 
must adhere to minimum wage guidelines. The minimum wage applies to salaried nonexempt 
employees whose wages do not exceed $684 per week. The U.S. Department of Labor has 
established this salary level as one of the exemption tests from FLSA provisions.
EXAMPLE: SALARIED NONEXEMPT EMPLOYEE PAY
Skyler is a receptionist for KTC Incorporated, located in California, and is salaried with 
a schedule of 40 hours per week. Skyler is nonexempt based on the job classification 
as nonmanagerial.
If Skyler were paid $275 per week
Hourly wage = $275/40 hours per week = $6.88/hour (continued)
Final PDF to printer130   Chapter 3  Gross Pay Computation
lan43463_ch03_118-175.indd 130 07/17/23 04:00 pm
Hourly Workers
Hourly workers are paid for any hours or fraction of the hours they work. These employees 
may be either skilled or unskilled. Hourly employees must receive overtime for hours worked 
more than 40 per week, according to FLSA. Overtime is the same for hourly workers as it is 
for salaried nonexempt workers. Hourly workers may be paid for each minute worked, and 
the computation of those minutes depends upon company policy. Companies may offer dif￾ferent work shifts and workday lengths, such as four 10-hour shifts or five 8-hour shifts, to 
reach the 40 hours needed. State regulations may require the company to file an election to pay 
no overtime for the two additional hours per day. The reason stated should not be overtime 
avoidance, but a deemed economic benefit for the longer schedules. For example, setup time 
in a manufacturing environment can eliminate anywhere from half an hour to an hour or more 
of productive time. By working longer schedules, manufacturing efficiency can be improved.
In Asheville, North Carolina, the city changed the working hours for employees in the 
public works department to 10-hour shifts. The change in working hours has led to 
increased employee satisfaction. Additionally, the department consumed less elec￾tricity and natural gas by closing the office one day per week. Although a four-day 
workweek is not appropriate for all departments and job functions, it is an option that 
employers may consider.
In 2020, research into the idea of longer workdays and shorter workweeks revealed 
that the flexibility of having shorter workweeks would be an advance for traditional 
U.S. companies. The possibility for increased flexibility, especially when working from 
home or with a hybrid work schedule, appealed to most employees.
This flexibility came to light with the COVID-19 closures and other pandemic ramifica￾tions. In January 2021, the average working week was 35 hours. There were many ups 
and downs, never quite reaching that point again and in January 2022 the average of 
34.5 working week hours was the lowest in years.
(Sources: WLOS; SHRM; Statista)
This amount is below the federal minimum wage test for exempt employees. Skyler 
would need to be paid a minimum of $290 per week to meet FLSA minimum wage 
requirements because of the weekly 40-hour work agreement with the employer. 
Considering that California has a much higher minimum wage than the federal mini￾mum wage, it would be necessary to determine the appropriate minimum wage for the 
location, industry, and company size. The employer must contribute additional money 
to meet the minimum wage requirement.
(concluded)
Hourly Workers in More Than One Job Classification
An employee working for an hourly wage may work in more than one job classification. 
When this occurs, the employee’s pay per classification may vary. For example, a manu￾facturing employee may work on the sales counter, where the pay differential provides an 
additional $1.50 per hour. When situations like this occur, the payroll accountant must be 
informed of hours performed for each job classification to provide accurate pay, classifica￾tion, and reporting. Methods used to communicate this include notes on the time card, sched￾ules provided to the payroll clerk, or job duty notification forms. Known in the industry as 
“shared employees,” these individuals can solve some of a company’s short-staffing issues 
that result from cutbacks or economic downturns.
Final PDF to printerChapter 3  Gross Pay Computation   131
lan43463_ch03_118-175.indd 131 07/17/23 04:00 pm
Commission Work
Commissions are compensation based on a set percentage of the sales revenue for a product 
or service that the company provides. Commission-based compensation is appropriate in the 
following types of situations:
∙ Retail sales personnel.
∙ Automotive sales personnel.
∙ Media databases or monitoring that pertains to media relations.
∙ Marketing sales agents.
EXAMPLE: HOURLY PAY WITH DIFFERENT RATES
Cabral is an hourly worker for a fast-food establishment in Louisiana and earns $7.25 
per hour. Occasionally Cabral fills in as the crew chief, which results in a $2 per hour 
differential. During a 40-hour workweek, Cabral worked 16 hours as a crew chief and 
24 hours as a regular employee. The pay would be calculated as follows:
Regular pay: 24 hours × $7.25/hour = $174
Crew chief pay: $7.25/hour + $2.00/hour differential = $9.25/hour
16 hours × $9.25/hour = $148
Gross pay = $174 + $148 = $322
EXAMPLE: COMMISSION WORKER PAY
An ice machine company may have sales representatives earning a 5 percent commis￾sion on all sales made. If sales representative A sells $100,000 worth of ice machines 
during July, the commission due is computed as follows:
Sales price × Commission rate = $100,000 × 5% = $5,000
Note: Commissions may be contingent upon the company’s commission return/war￾ranty policy.
If sales representative A had returns of $7,500 during August, the commission for that 
month could be reduced:
Returns × Commission rate = deduction from commissions $7,500 returns × 5% 
commission rate = $375 deducted from commissions during August.
Note that the commission deduction policy varies among employers and is not man￾dated by any legislation.
An important classification of a sales representative’s job is the difference between inside 
and outside sales. An inside sales representative conducts business via telephone, email, or 
other electronic means and may not travel to customer sites. An outside sales representative 
meets with customers either at the customer’s facility or another agreed-upon location. Some 
inside sales representatives are covered under the FLSA and must receive at least minimum 
wage for their labor. Outside sales representatives are excluded from minimum wage require￾ments under FLSA. In a 2010 circuit court decision, the judge ruled that inside sales represen￾tatives are nonexempt from FLSA wage and hour provisions, whereas outside sales and retail 
sales representatives are exempt.
Final PDF to printer132   Chapter 3  Gross Pay Computation
lan43463_ch03_118-175.indd 132 07/17/23 04:00 pm
Gross Pay for Commission-Based Employees
In situations where the employee is principally engaged in the sale of a product or service but 
in no way engaged in the item’s manufacturing, a commission pay basis is appropriate. In 
some states, the commission-based employee may receive commissions for work, even after 
termination, if the sale was completed before termination. In many ways, commission-based 
pay is a contract between the employer and the employee to sell a product. The payment for 
such a contract may not be reneged upon, even after termination of employment. It should be 
noted that many states prohibit deductions about the cost of doing business from an employ￾ee’s commission. In other words, if a customer received a product that was damaged, lost, or 
otherwise destroyed, the employee’s commission would not be affected.
Syda Productions/Shutterstock
EXAMPLE: INSIDE SALES REPRESENTATIVE, LESS THAN MINIMUM WAGE
Steinel works as an inside sales representative in the company store and receives a 
5 percent commission for all completed sales during the shift. During the week, there 
were 15 telephone sales with a total dollar value of $1,500.
Commissions = Dollar value of sales × Commission rate
Commissions = $1,500 × 5% = $75
Based upon a 40-hour workweek, Steinel would have effectively earned $1.88 per hour; 
thus, the employer would be responsible for meeting the minimum wage requirements 
under FLSA. The employer would have to adjust Steinel’s compensation to meet the 
minimum wage requirements for the specific location and local laws.
EXAMPLE: OUTSIDE SALES REPRESENTATIVE, LESS THAN MINIMUM WAGE
Durant works as an outside sales representative. During the week there were $2,000 
of sales with an agreed-upon commission percentage of 10 percent of total sales rev￾enue. Commission = 2,000 × 10% = $200; $200 per week/40 hours = $5.00 per hour. 
As an outside sales representative, Durant is exempt from minimum wage regulations 
under FLSA.
EXAMPLE: OUTSIDE SALESPERSON
Devin Hin works as an outside salesperson with Bayfront Watercraft 
in California. Devin’s whole function with Bayfront is to sell the 
company’s products to customers at the customer’s facility or other 
agreed-upon locations. Devin receives a commission of 5 percent 
based on the retail price of all sales made. During May, there were 
sales of $20,000 in products during one week.
Commission = $20,000 × 0.05 = $1,000
Commission pay can vary by employer, client, sales volume, and employee based on their 
seniority or experience with the company. Different products may also have varying commis￾sion rates, and changes in sales volume can alter commission rates. A sample of a commis￾sion tracking sheet follows.
EXAMPLE: COMMISSION TRACKING SHEET
Salesperson Client
Product 
or Service
Total Sales 
Price Rate Commission
Andy Bauer Thompson Milbourne RR-223 $1,245 2% $24.90
Andy Bauer Kockran Heights RS-447 $2,016 5% $100.80
Andy Bauer Hoptop Ranges RT-11   $892 3.5% $31.22
Final PDF to printerChapter 3  Gross Pay Computation   133
lan43463_ch03_118-175.indd 133 07/17/23 04:00 pm
Commissions earned must be tracked closely for a variety of reasons:
∙ Employees’ pay accuracy
∙ Sales employee performance
∙ Sales tracking
∙ Job order tracking
∙ Returns/reductions of commissions paid accuracy
Commission pay must still meet FLSA minimum wage standards unless the employee 
is classified as an exempt worker. Like salaried nonexempt employees, commission-based 
employees are subject to the 40-hour workweek as a basis for FLSA minimum wage 
computations.
EXAMPLE: EFFECTIVE PAY RATE, EXCEED MINIMUM WAGE
In the example concerning Sage Hinton at Bayfront, Sage’s pay was $1,000 for 40 
hours of work.
Sage’s effective wage = $1,000/40 hours = $25/hour
EXAMPLE: EFFECTIVE PAY RATE, LOWER THAN THE MINIMUM WAGE
Ari Edwards, another inside sales commission-based employee at Bayfront Watercraft, 
made only $250 in commission for the week during the 40 hours.
Effective hourly rate = $250/40 hours = $6.25/hour
This amount is below the minimum wage in California. The employer’s responsibility 
is to compensate the employee at the appropriate minimum wage, so Bayfront would 
have to adjust Ari’s compensation to meet FLSA requirements.
Piece-Rate Work
Piece-rate work involves paying employees for each unit they manufac￾ture or each action they complete. Compensation based on task comple￾tion is one of the oldest forms of performance-based pay. Dating back to 
the 16th century, piece-rate pay is thought to have evolved from journey￾man artisans whose masters paid them per unit they completed. Before 
computations of hourly wages, piece rate was an accurate measure of how 
productive an employee was. Frederick Taylor wrote about a piece-rate 
system in 1896, citing that it emphasized efficiency and production. However, a criticism of 
Taylor’s writing is that the piece-rate system overemphasizes production and may create an 
adversarial relationship between workers and managers.
Marianne Purdie/Getty Images
California’s AB 1513, passed in 2016, amended California Labor Code 226.2 and 
mandated that piece-rate workers be paid for nonproductive time during the workday. 
Pay during the nonproductive time would be at a different rate than the normal piece￾rate work. This nonproductive time includes the employee’s time under the employ￾er’s control but not on a rest or recovery break. The argument for paid nonproductive 
time for piece-rate workers is that the employee remains under the employer’s control 
despite the lack of productivity.
(Source: California Department of Industrial Relations)
Final PDF to printer134   Chapter 3  Gross Pay Computation
lan43463_ch03_118-175.indd 134 07/17/23 04:00 pm
FLSA requirements subjected the piece-rate system to minimum wage requirements. 
Piece-rate workers must be paid no less than the minimum wage for their location, forcing 
employers to accurately track their work. In many ways, piece-rate pay is more difficult to 
track and administer than other payment types. Not only must the employees be compensated 
for the work they complete, but they are also subject to FLSA minimum and daily break 
provisions, including lunch and other breaks. Piece-rate work has also fallen under some 
suspicion regarding the quality of work being performed. This can require adding a review to 
the completed work.
EXAMPLE: PIECE-RATE PAY, EXCEEDING THE MINIMUM WAGE
Julian is a piece-rate worker in Tennessee who receives $15 per completed piece of 
work. During a week, there were 30 completed pieces during 40 hours of work.
Julian’s pay = $15/per piece completed × 30 pieces completed = $450
Hourly rate equivalent = $450/40 hours = $11.25/hour
Since Tennessee has no minimum wage requirements, the federal minimum wage 
would apply. Julian’s pay exceeds the FLSA minimum wage for this location, so the 
employer does not have to adjust Julian’s compensation.
EXAMPLE: PIECE-RATE WORKER, BELOW MINIMUM WAGE
Kaydon McDowell works for the same employer as Julian and receives the same rate 
of pay. Kaydon completes 15 pieces during the week.
Kaydon’s pay = $15/piece × 15 = $225
Hourly rate equivalent = $225/40 = $5.63/hour
Kaydon’s pay does not meet the minimum wage requirement, so the employer would 
have to examine Kaydon’s work and pay rates to ensure that the company meets the 
FLSA minimum wage requirements.
A wide variety of occupations benefit from piece-rate pay systems. Some of these occupa￾tions are:
Vineyard workers Inspectors
Carpenters Property assessors
Machinists/fabricators Production workers
Sheep shearers Forest workers
The common thread is that each position has an output that is quantifiable and linked to 
some aspect of a manufacturing or service industry. The important part of piece-rate work 
is that a quantifiable base must be linked with a specified standard rate per amount of work.
Vineyard workers: Tons of grapes harvested
Inspectors: Number of items inspected
Installers: Number of items installed
Customer service agents: Number of customers assisted
Machinists/fabricators: Number of items produced
Sheep shearers: Pounds of wool gathered
Forest workers: Amount of wood chopped and/or processed
At Bayfront Watercraft, the manufacturing department has different types of fabricators, 
installers, and other production workers in addition to Pat (the hull maker). Let us assume that 
Justice works in the upholstery department, where she constructs vinyl covers for seats. Rian 
is in the assembly department and assembles steering mechanisms for the boats.
Final PDF to printerChapter 3  Gross Pay Computation   135
lan43463_ch03_118-175.indd 135 07/17/23 04:00 pm
Worker Number of Items Rate per Item Gross Pay
Pat Wu 30 hulls $100 $3,000
Justice Yoder 100 seat covers     25   2,500
Rian Karmaran 25 steering mechanisms     40   1,000
EXAMPLE: PIECE-RATE COMPUTATION, DIFFERENT EMPLOYEES 
Worker Item Number of Items Pay per Item Total Pay
Brick Brichacek Motor installation 10 motors $50 per motor $500
Rudder installation 15 rudders   20 per rudder   300
Total pay for John: $800
EXAMPLE: TOTAL PAY, ONE PIECE-RATE EMPLOYEE
EXAMPLE: PIECE RATE WITH OVERTIME PAY
Bayfront determines that 50 ignition assemblies can reasonably be completed in a 
40-hour workweek by one worker. Ignition assemblies are paid at a rate of $25 per 
assembly.
Standard amount paid per 40-hour workweek: $1,250
50 assemblies × $25/assembly = $1,250
Hourly amount = $1,250/40 hours = $31.25/hour
If the employee worked overtime, the rate would be computed as follows:
Overtime wages = (Hourly rate + (0.5 × Hourly rate)) × Overtime hours
If an employee worked a 45-hour workweek, the pay would be computed as:
Standard amount per week + Overtime pay
= $1,250 + ($31.25/hour × 5 hours overtime) + ($15.625 × 5 hours overtime)
= $1,484.375, which would be $1,484.38 (rounded)
Each worker is compensated based on the work he or she completes. In some compa￾nies, workers may work on multiple items for which different rates exist. In cases where one 
worker completes multiple pieces at different rates, each piece’s rates must be computed.
A separate record for each employee is important in piece-rate pay, especially when the 
employee works with multiple production items at different rates. Overtime rates for piece￾rate workers are computed differently than for hourly workers. Once the standard number 
of pieces per hour is determined, the amount per hour per piece can be computed. Since the 
hourly rate now includes the overtime hours worked, the specific overtime hours would only 
be multiplied by 1/2 instead of the 1-1/2 of other workers.
According to FLSA provisions, piece-rate workers must have a standard number of items 
that can be reasonably completed each day that allows for breaks and rest periods. To increase 
compensation, it could be straightforward for an employee to overwork to complete more 
items. According to 29 CFR 525.12(h)(2)(ii), piece-rate employees must have a standard 
number of items per period, and most are subject to minimum wage provisions. However, if 
an employee is paid a different rate for nonproductive time, the regular rate is the regular rate 
and the nonproductive rate.
Final PDF to printer136   Chapter 3  Gross Pay Computation
lan43463_ch03_118-175.indd 136 07/17/23 04:00 pm
Andrey_Popov/Shutterstock
Computations for Different Bases
Check Stop
1. Amari is a marketing representative who earns a 3 percent commission 
based on the revenue earned from the marketing campaigns completed. 
During the current pay period, the completed marketing campaign had 
$224,800 in revenue. How much commission will Amari receive from this 
campaign?
2. Sybil is a specialty artisan for a luxury car maker based in South Carolina. 
Sybil makes handcrafted dashboards and receives $550 per completed 
assembly. During a semimonthly pay period, Sybil completes two dash￾board assemblies and works 90 hours. How much does Sybil receive for 
the completion of the assemblies? Does this amount comply with mini￾mum wage requirements? Explain.
3. Karstyn is a salaried worker making $57,000 per year for a company 
using biweekly payroll. The standard schedule is 40 hours over five days 
per week. Karstyn used all available vacation time before this pay period 
and fell ill for three days. What effect does this have on the current pay 
period? Will the gross pay be the same as if Karstyn had vacation time 
available? (Note: Only round final calculations.)
&
LO 3-3 Calculate Pay Based on Hours and 
Fractions of Hours
Both salaried nonexempt and hourly employees are paid based on the 
number of hours (or fractions thereof) worked. The payroll accountant 
must learn how to convert a fraction of a 60-minute clock into a fraction of 
100. While accounting software packages can convert minutes into pay￾able units, the payroll accountant typically does this math. Fortunately, 
the math for this calculation is fairly straightforward.
EXAMPLE: CONVERSION OF MINUTES TO DECIMALS AND FRACTIONS
If an employee works 30 minutes, then the computation for pay purposes is:
30 minutes ÷ 60 minutes/hour = 0.5 hour or 50/100
If an employee works 33 minutes, the payroll computation is
33 minutes ÷ 60 minutes/hour = 0.55 hour or 55/100
Note: This calculation is necessary when the employer pays using the hundredth-hour method instead of the 
quarter-hour method. If this had been a quarter-hour computation, the number of minutes would have been 
rounded to the closest 15-minute increment, which is 0.50 hours.
Calculations of employee wages are broken down by the hour or fraction thereof. 
Regardless of the employee’s classification, a determination of pay per pay period causes 
the payroll accountant to break down all wages. Salaries are determined based on a yearly 
salary and therefore need to be broken down per pay period (monthly, semimonthly, weekly, 
or biweekly). Companies may pay employees by fractions of an hour (hundredth-hour basis) 
or by the quarter-hour (rounded to the nearest 15-minute interval), depending upon company 
policy. The next section will walk you through the calculations of both the hundredth and 
quarterly processes.
Final PDF to printerChapter 3  Gross Pay Computation   137
lan43463_ch03_118-175.indd 137 07/17/23 04:00 pm
Hourly Calculations
Depending on the company’s policy, time payments can be paid either by the individual 
minute or rounded to the nearest designated interval. Hourly calculations are a combination 
of minutes and hours. Hours are broken into two categories: regular and overtime. When 
determining the hourly wage for a salaried individual, the number of average hours required 
under the salary agreement must be known. Hourly wages are commonly needed for accurate 
recording of paid time off and holiday pay.
EXAMPLE: HOURLY WAGE COMPUTATION, SALARIED EMPLOYEE
If an exempt manager is contracted to work 45 hours per week at $75,000 per year, 
the effective hourly wage would be:
$75,000/(45 × 52 weeks) = $75,000/2,340 = $32.05 per hour (rounded)
EXAMPLE: WEEKLY PAY INCLUDING PAID SICK TIME
A nonexempt employee worked four days during the payroll week. The employee 
worked 7.5 hours on the first day, 8.75 hours on the second day, 7 hours on the third 
day, and 9.5 hours on the fourth day. The employee used 8 hours of paid sick leave 
on one day during the week. The employee is only paid overtime for any hours worked 
more than 40 per week.
Regular hours: 7.5 + 8.75 + 7 + 9.5 = 32.75 hours
Sick hours: 8 hours
Gross pay = 32.75 regular hours + 8 sick = 40.75 hours
Even though the employee has more than 40 hours on this payroll, the 8 hours of sick 
time are not considered “worked” and would therefore not be included in the calcula￾tion to determine overtime.
EXAMPLE: WEEKLY PAY INCLUDING PAID HOLIDAY TIME
Kit Golliff worked four days during the week with a holiday on Monday. This week’s 
hours worked were 8.25 hours on the first day, 9 hours on the second day, 7.75 hours 
on the third day, and 8.5 hours on the fourth day. The company pays 8 hours for a holi￾day. Per policy, Kit is paid for any hours worked more than 40 hours per week.
Regular hours: 8.25 + 9 + 7.75 + 8.5 = 33.5 hours
Additionally, there will be 8 hours of regular pay for the holiday.
Kit’s gross pay will contain 41.5 hours of regular pay, including 8 hours of holiday pay. 
Kit has not worked more than 40 hours because the holiday is not included in worked
hours, so she will not receive overtime.
Quarter-Hour System
Some employers compensate employees based on rounding working hours 
to the nearest 15 minutes, a system widely known as the quarter-hour 
system. The payroll accountant becomes responsible for rounding the 
time either up or down consistently across all individuals and pay periods. 
A person who worked 8 hours and 6 minutes would be paid for 8 hours. 
However, a person who worked for 8 hours and 8 minutes would be paid 
for 8 hours plus 15 minutes of overtime if the company pays for overtime 
on any hours worked over 8 in a day.
niroworld/123RF
Final PDF to printer138   Chapter 3  Gross Pay Computation
lan43463_ch03_118-175.indd 138 07/17/23 04:00 pm
One of the broader ethical challenges comes when an employer operates under a 
quarter-hour system and employees see the benefit of waiting a minute to clock out so 
they receive an additional 15 minutes of pay. One of the authors has seen individuals 
clocking in for others so the employee was not marked tardy and received unearned 
pay. In reciprocation, the employee would clock out the other employee later so that 
they both received additional pay for the period.
This practice is called time theft. According to the American Payroll Association, time 
theft affects nearly 75 percent of businesses, and over 40 percent of employees have 
engaged in this practice. The use of time cards and many other time measurement sys￾tems makes time theft possible. Biometric time measurement systems have reduced 
this practice.
(Source: Software Advice)
EXAMPLE: ROUNDING MINUTES FOR THE QUARTER-HOUR SYSTEM
• 0–7 minutes past the previous 15-minute interval rounds down to the previous 
15-minute interval.
Example: 10:06 a.m. would count as 10:00 a.m. in the quarter-hour system.
• 8–15 minutes past the previous 15-minute interval rounds up to the next 15-minute 
interval.
Example: 10:09 a.m. would count as 10:15 a.m. in the quarter-hour system.
EXAMPLE: QUARTER-HOUR SYSTEM COMPUTATION, ROUNDING TO 
THE PREVIOUS QUARTER-HOUR
Leong worked from 8 a.m. until noon then took one hour for lunch and returned to 
work at 1 p.m. At the end of the day, Leong ended up leaving work at 4:20 p.m. To 
determine total time using the quarter-hour system:
• From 8 a.m. to noon: 4 hours
• From 1 p.m. to 4:20 p.m.: 3.25 hours, because 4:20 p.m. rounds down to 4:15 p.m. 
under the quarter-hour system.
• Total time: 4 + 3.25 = 7.25 hours
EXAMPLE: QUARTER-HOUR SYSTEM COMPUTATION, ROUNDING TO 
THE NEXT QUARTER-HOUR
Peyton Fretwell worked from 8 a.m. until 12:30 p.m. before taking a half-hour lunch. 
Peyton returned at 1 p.m. and worked until 4:10 p.m. The employer pays on the 
quarter-hour system, so Peyton would be paid as follows:
• From 8 a.m. to 12:30 p.m.: 4 hours, 30 minutes = 4.5 hours
• From 1 p.m. to 4:10 p.m.: 3.25 hours, because 4:10 p.m. rounds up to 4:15 p.m. 
under the quarter-hour system.
• Total time for the day: 7.75 hours
Hundredth-Hour System
The hundredth-hour system is similar to the quarter-hour system in that it calculates partial 
hours of work performed. Instead of rounding the employee’s time to 15-minute intervals, the 
Final PDF to printerChapter 3  Gross Pay Computation   139
lan43463_ch03_118-175.indd 139 07/17/23 04:00 pm
hundredth-hour system divides the hour into increments. The calculation of partial minutes 
is simple:
Conversion of minutes to hundredth hour = Number of minutes in partial hour
60 minutes per hour
EXAMPLE: CONVERSION FROM MINUTES TO HUNDREDTH-HOUR
If an employee worked 4 hours and 16 minutes,
4 hours + 16 minutes/60 minutes per hour = 4.27 hours
EXAMPLE: HUNDREDTH-HOUR TIME COMPUTATION
Remy Mellor works an eight-hour shift that had 15 minutes of additional overtime. 
Remy’s normal hourly rate is $15/hour. The pay would be computed as follows:
• 8 hours × $15 per hour = $120 regular pay
• 15 minutes overtime = 15/60 = 0.25 hour
• Overtime = 0.25 hours × $15/hour × 1.5 = $5.63 (rounded)
• Total pay for the day = $80 + $3.75 = $125.63
Following is an example of how the time may appear on an individual’s time card. Note 
that an employer should choose only one method of computing partial hours—quarter-hours 
or hundredth-hours—and apply it to all situations and all employees.
In the next example, notice how the same employee with the same amount of time worked 
would have different hourly computations based on hundredth-hour computations. The dif￾ference in the hourly computations leads to a difference in compensation for the period.
EXAMPLE: QUARTER-HOUR COMPUTATION, WEEKLY PAY DETAILS
Employee Number 1776M
Clock In Clock Out Clock In Clock Out Hours Worked
08:00 11:00 12:00 16:54 
rounds up
7 hours 54 minutes
= 8.00 hours
08:00 11:30 12:30 17:05 
rounds down
8 hours 5 minutes
= 8.00 hours
07:00 12:09 
rounds up
13:15 17:30 9 hours 24 minutes
= 9.5 hours
07:30 12:20
rounds down
13:22 
rounds up
17:30 8 hours 52 minutes
= 8.75 hours
Total 34.25 hours
EXAMPLE: HUNDREDTH-HOUR COMPUTATION, WEEKLY PAY DETAILS
Employee Number 1776M
Clock In Clock Out Clock In Clock Out Hours Worked
08:00 11:00 12:00 16:54 7 hours 54 minutes
= 7.9 hours
08:00 11:30 12:30 17:05 8 hours 5 minutes
= 8.08 hours
07:00 12:09 13:15 17:30 9 hours 24 minutes
= 9.4 hours
07:30 12:21 13:24 17:30 8 hours 57 minutes
= 8.95 hours
Total 34.33 hours
Final PDF to printer140   Chapter 3  Gross Pay Computation
lan43463_ch03_118-175.indd 140 07/17/23 04:00 pm
LO 3-4 Calculate Overtime in Various 
Situations
Nonexempt employee overtime may occur in a variety of situations. 
When an employee works past the FLSA maximum hours per week, the 
employee must be compensated at a rate of 1.5 times the regular hourly 
rate. However, situations exist when employees must be compensated at 
more than the standard overtime premium, and others exist when exempt 
employees may receive overtime pay. We will explore examples of overtime compensation 
in a variety of situations.
Standard Overtime Pay
In general, FLSA-stipulated overtime includes hours worked more than 40 during a seven￾day, 168-hour week. No limit on the number of hours an employee may work per week exists 
for employees over 16 years of age. No legislation stipulates that employees must be paid 
at overtime rates on Saturdays and Sundays as long as the total number of hours worked is 
less than 40 during a period of seven consecutive days. An important fact to note is that the 
regular pay rate may not be below the FLSA or state-based minimum wage, especially when 
overtime pay has been earned.
fizkes/Shutterstock
BEST PRACTICE: QUARTER-HOUR OR HUNDREDTH-HOUR?
Debate exists around the question of which timekeeping system is better, quarter-hour 
or hundredth-hour. The best practices in this regard focus on consistency and accuracy. 
If the company feels that the hundredth-hour timekeeping system is more appropriate 
for its needs, it must create that policy and implement it through its payroll and time￾keeping systems. The FLSA guidance is that the quarter-hour method is the federal 
requirement.
Which is the best practice? It is up to the employer. The most accurate method of wage 
determination is the hundredth-hour method.
Quarter-Hour vs. Hundredth-Hour
&Check Stop
1. Blue Sky Manufacturing has historically paid its employees according to the 
quarter-hour system. Software changes have caused them to change to the 
hundredth-hour system. See the table below. What is the number of hours worked 
under the quarter-hour system? What is the time worked under the hundredth-hour 
system? (Hint: Convert to a 24-hour clock to make calculations easier.)
2. Why do discrepancies exist between the quarter-hour time and the 
hundredth-hour time totals?
3. Why would it be worthwhile for Blue Sky Manufacturing to switch to the 
hundredth-hour system?
Employee Time In Time Out Time In Time Out Total
A 8:06 a.m. 12:25 p.m. 1:20 p.m. 4:57 p.m. Quarter-hour: 
Hundredth:
B 7:58 a.m. 12:02 p.m. 1:02 p.m. 5:05 p.m. Quarter-hour: 
Hundredth:
C 8:32 a.m. 11:54 a.m. 1:05 p.m. 5:32 p.m. Quarter-hour: 
Hundredth:
Final PDF to printerChapter 3  Gross Pay Computation   141
lan43463_ch03_118-175.indd 141 07/17/23 04:00 pm
The first example explains basic overtime pay computation for a nonexempt employee 
with a 40-hour workweek. The second part of the example reflects the bonus payment as a 
normal part of the employee’s pay.
Overtime on retail or service salaries with a commission has two rules that must be met 
for the commissions to be included in the wage base for the overtime calculations: (1) the 
employee’s regular payments must be more than 1½ times the statutory minimum wage and 
(2) more than one-half of the employee’s compensation must be from the commissions.
According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the average number of weekly overtime 
hours as of November 2022 was 2.9 per employee for nonmanufacturing industries, 
and this continued into 2022. Although this may seem to be a relatively low number, 
employee overtime can become a significant amount for a large employer.
For example, Kynd Hearts Home Care, LLC, was ordered to pay over $1.5 million to 
nearly 200 workers because it willfully did the following:
• Failed to pay nonexempt employees who worked more than 40 hours during a 
seven-day period.
• Reduced employees’ hourly rates when they worked more hours and paid overtime 
at that reduced rate.
• Did not document overtime on internal payroll records.
(Sources: Bureau of Labor Statistics; Wavy.com)
EXAMPLE: NONEXEMPT PAY CALCULATION
Monroe works as a maintenance worker at a busy office building. Monroe earns 
$52,000 annually, is paid weekly, and is classified as nonexempt. Monroe’s standard 
workweek is 40 hours. Since Monroe is classified as a nonexempt worker, overtime is 
any hours worked more than 40 per week per her employment contract.
During the pay period ending April 22, Monroe worked 50 hours. As a result, Monroe 
would receive the weekly pay plus overtime calculated to include the nondiscretionary 
bonus. To determine the hourly wage, divide the annual pay by the total hours worked 
during the year. The gross earnings for the April 22 pay period would be as follows:
Note that Monroe’s regular pay and overtime pay are calculated separately and 
then added together to determine the gross pay.
Hourly rate plus bonus
If Monroe were eligible for a bonus as part of the employment agreement, the bonus 
would be added to the regular pay to determine an hourly rate on which the overtime 
is based. In this example, if Monroe received a $120 bonus for the work, the overtime 
computation would be as follows:
* Calculation: $40 * 25 = $1,000 + 120 = $1,120 / 40 = $28 * 1.5 = $42 * 10 = $420
Name M/S #Dep Hourly Rate
No. of Regular 
Hours
No. of Overtime 
Hours
Regular
Earnings
Overtime
Earnings 
Gross 
Earnings
Monroe S 1 25.00 40 10 1,000.00 375.00 1,375.00
Name M/S #Dep Hourly Rate
No. of Regular 
Hours
No. of Overtime 
Hours Bonus
Regular 
Earnings
Overtime 
Earnings
Gross 
Earnings
Monroe S 1 25.00 40 10 120.00 1,000.00 420.00* 1,540.00
Overtime for Employees of Hospitals and Residential Care Facilities
Overtime computation differs from the standard rate for employees who work at hospitals 
and residential care facilities. FLSA section 7(j) applies a rule to these workers known as the 
Final PDF to printer142   Chapter 3  Gross Pay Computation
lan43463_ch03_118-175.indd 142 07/17/23 04:00 pm
Eight and Eighty (8 and 80) rule. According to the 8 and 80 rule, the number of consecu￾tive days is 14 instead of 7. Similarly, the threshold for overtime is 80 hours during the work 
period instead of 40. An example reflecting the 8 and 80 rule follows.
Name M/S #W/H Hourly Rate
No. of Regular
Hours
No. of Overtime
Hours
Regular
Earning
Overtime
Earning
Gross
Earning
Val S 1 31.50 80 15 2,520.00 708.75 3,228.75
EXAMPLE: 8 AND 80 OVERTIME CALCULATION
Val is a licensed practical nurse (LPN) at Fountainside Hospital. During the period start￾ing June 5 and ending June 18, Val worked 95 hours. Val is classified as nonexempt and 
earns an hourly wage of $31.50. Val’s pay for the two-week period would be as follows:
Note that the first 80 hours are paid at the regular hourly rate. The 15 additional hours 
are paid at the overtime premium rate.
Overtime for nurses took on a different aspect during the COVID-19 pandemic. Most 
nurses worked overtime as of mid-2020 to respond to the critical needs of the hospi￾tals. Nurses in Milford, Massachusetts, involved the National Labor Relations Board in 
their drive to have reasonable hours and safe working conditions.
In 2021, the issue of nurse pay gained an additional dimension: traveling nurses. 
Nurses who took on additional work during the COVID-19 pandemic received the 
same wages as they did before the outbreak. However, traveling nurses had more 
control over their time and could command higher pay. States considered increasing 
nurse pay but found the wage increase unsustainable for future fiscal periods.
(Sources: Patch; KSLA)
Tipped Employee Overtime
Another overtime situation involves tipped employees. According to the FLSA, employers may 
consider tips earned by the employee when computing overtime pay. A best practice when 
the employer chooses to use the tips earned as part of the overtime computation is to notify 
employees in advance that their tips will be included in the overtime pay calculation. An exam￾ple of both situations will show how wage computations differ with and without tips included.
Name M/S #W/H
Hourly 
Rate
No. of Regular 
Hours
No. of Overtime
Hours Tips
Regular
Earning
Overtime
Earning
Gross
Earning
Keegan S 1 13.65 40 8 546.00 163.80 709.80
EXAMPLE: TIPPED EMPLOYEE OVERTIME
Keegan is a nonexempt tipped employee at the Love House Bar and Grill in Arvada, 
Colorado. The minimum cash wage in Colorado is $10.63 per hour, and the tip credit 
is $3.02 per hour (i.e., the minimum wage for Colorado is $13.65 per hour). During 
the pay period beginning January 30, 2023, and ending February 4, 2023, Keegan 
worked 48 hours and earned $300 in tips.
Without the consideration of tips, and based on the state minimum wage, Keegan 
must be paid $709.80 for the 48 hours worked, as follows:
Overtime pay with tips included as part of the hourly wage
If the employer counted the $300 in tips earned toward the minimum cash overtime 
wage, Keegan would not be eligible for any further compensation because the gross 
earnings exceeded the minimum due.
Final PDF to printerChapter 3  Gross Pay Computation   143
lan43463_ch03_118-175.indd 143 07/17/23 04:00 pm
Name M/S #W/H Hourly Rate
No. of Regular
Hours
No. of Overtime
Hours Tips
Regular
Earnings
Overtime
Earnings
Gross
Earnings
Keegan S 1 10.63 40 8 300.00 725.20 217.56 942.76
Name M/S #W/H Hourly Rate
No. of Regular
Hours
No. of Overtime
Hours Tips
Regular
Earning
Overtime
Earning
Gross
Earning
Keegan S 1 10.63 40 8 300.00 425.20 127.56 852.76
Earnings calculation
Regular earnings: $300 + (10.63 × 40) = $300 + 425.20 = $725.20
Overtime earnings: $725.20/40 = $18.13/hour × 1.5 = $27.195 × 8 = $217.56
Overtime pay excluding tips as part of the hourly wage
If the employer did not count Keegan’s tips toward the hourly wage, the pay would be 
computed as follows (note that overtime is omitted from minimum wage computations):
In this case, the employer would not need to pay Keegan the difference between 
the minimum wage and the minimum tipped wage: 
$(425.20 + 127.56)/40 = $552.76/40 = $13.819/hour
Note: State laws vary as to the inclusion of tips in tipped employee overtime calculations. Additionally, the 
employee earned more than the state’s minimum wage. 
Piece-Rate Employee Overtime
Piece-rate workers are eligible for overtime on a similar basis to that of hourly nonexempt 
employees. However, because they are paid on a piece-rate basis, the overtime computation 
is based on the number of pieces completed and the total number of productive hours worked 
during the consecutive seven-day period.
The overtime earnings are computed based on the piece-rate earnings plus the product of 
the nonproductive hours times the hourly rate (which is the minimum wage in this case) to 
obtain the regular earnings. The overtime is computed using the sum of the piece-rate earning 
plus the regular earnings divided by the total number of hours worked to obtain the overtime 
hourly rate. The overtime hourly rate is multiplied by 0.5 and by the number of overtime 
hours to determine the overtime earnings. See 29 CFR 778.111.
EXAMPLE: PIECE-RATE EMPLOYEE OVERTIME
Easton is a piece-rate employee at Snowy Day Sculptures in Terrace Lake, New 
Mexico. Easton earns $75 per finished sculpture. During the week of February 20, 
there were 48.5 hours worked and 12 sculptures completed. Easton is paid minimum 
wage (i.e., $12.00 per hour) for nonproductive time, of which there were four nonpro￾ductive hours. Easton’s overtime would be calculated based on the productive time of 
44.5 hours as follows:
Earnings calculation
Piece-rate earnings: 12 × $75 = $900
Regular earnings = 4 × $12.00 = $48.00
Overtime = $948/44.5 = $21.3034 × 0.5 = $10.6517 × 4.5 (productive hours) = $47.93
Name M/S #W/H Piece Rate
# of Pieces
Completed
No. of Regular
Hours
No. of Overtime
Hours
Piece Rate
Earnings
Regular
Earnings
Overtime
Earnings 
Gross
Earnings
Easton S 1 75 12 40 4.5 900.00 48.00 47.93 995.93
Final PDF to printer144   Chapter 3  Gross Pay Computation
lan43463_ch03_118-175.indd 144 07/17/23 04:00 pm
Salaried Nonexempt Overtime
When the employee is a salaried nonexempt worker, the standard number of working hours 
per week may depend on the hiring agreement. If the number of hours agreed upon is 40 per 
week, then the standard overtime examples should be followed. However, if the number of 
agreed-upon hours is 45 per week, the overtime is calculated using 45 hours to determine the 
hourly rate, and time worked more than 40 hours is subject to overtime premiums. The same 
principle applies to employees who work four 10-hour shifts, shifts with differential rates, or 
other similar arrangements.
Name M/S #W/H Salary
No. of Regular
Hours
No. of Overtime
Hours* Regular Earning Overtime Earning Gross Earning
Clay S 1 2,000.00 90 19 2,000.00 633.33 2,633.33
EXAMPLE: SALARIED NONEXEMPT POSITION WITH A NORMAL 
45-HOUR WORK SCHEDULE
Clay is an administrator for Strickland Farms and earns $52,000 annually, paid 
biweekly. Clay is a salaried nonexempt employee with a standard 45-hour workweek. 
During the biweekly pay period ending September 22, Clay worked 99 hours. The 
overtime would be computed as follows:
Earnings calculation
*Although Clay has a 45-hour standard workweek, per FLSA Clay must be paid overtime for all hours worked in excess of 40. 
The number of overtime hours is 99 − (2 weeks × 40 hours/week), or 19.
Overtime rate = $52,000/(45 × 52) = $22.22222 × 1.5 = $33.33333 × 19 = $633.33
The U.S. Department of Labor recovered over $259,000 in overtime and back wages 
for 330 Michigan healthcare workers from two West Michigan employers in 2021. The 
employers were found in violation of the 8 and 80 FLSA rules when the employers paid 
for overtime only after 12 hours in a day or paid straight time regardless of the number 
of hours worked. This brought the total recovered wages for Michigan’s healthcare 
workers from 2019 through 2021 to $3.5 million.
(Source: DOL)
EXAMPLE: EMPLOYEE WITH TWO DIFFERENT PAY RATES FOR 
DIFFERENT FUNCTIONS
Kian works equally for Sidwell Industries as both an accounts payable clerk and a front 
desk clerk. Kian earns $18.50 in accounts payable and $15 per hour for front desk 
work. During the week ending October 27, Kian worked 50 hours; 26 hours were in 
accounts payable (6 of these hours were overtime), and the rest were at the front desk. 
The pay would be computed as follows:
Overtime for Employees Who Work in Two or More Separate Functions
Suppose an employee works in two separate functions in the company and earns a different 
rate for each function. For example, the employee may work in accounts payable and as a 
front desk receptionist, each with different pay rates. In this case, the overtime rate is often 
calculated using the average of the two pay rates.
Final PDF to printerChapter 3  Gross Pay Computation   145
lan43463_ch03_118-175.indd 145 07/17/23 04:00 pm
Note that company policies on overtime pay may vary from the situations described. When 
in doubt, the payroll accountant should refer to the FLSA overtime calculator advisor pub￾lished by the U.S. Department of Labor.
Name M/S #W/H Hourly Rate
No. of Regular
Hours
No. of Overtime
Hours
Regular
Earning
Overtime
Earning
Gross
Earning
Kian—accounts 
payable
S 1 18.50 20 6 370.00 166.50 536.50
Kian—front desk S 1 15.00 20 4 300.00 90.00 390.00
Total Earnings 926.50
How Does Overtime Affect Gross Pay?
&Check Stop
1. A hospital worker in New Hampshire is a nonexempt salaried worker with 
a 40-hour workweek. Which rule governs this employee’s overtime pay?
2. A salaried nonexempt employee who earns $39,000 per year, paid 
biweekly, with a commission is based on the sales of service contracts 
(represents less than half their pay). How does the commission income 
affect any overtime compensation?
3. A waitperson at Good Cooking Diner is a tipped employee. What are the 
two ways that this employer might compute overtime earnings regarding 
tip income?
LO 3-5 Create a Payroll Register
The payroll register is the payroll accountant’s internal tool that helps 
ensure the accuracy of employee compensation. A payroll register can be 
completed manually, in a spreadsheet program such as Microsoft Excel, 
in accounting software programs such as QuickBooks, or by payroll out￾sourcing companies such as ADP or Paychex. Like other worksheets that 
accountants use, the payroll register is a company’s confidential docu￾ment subject to document retention and destruction rules.
Payroll Register Data
The payroll register is annotated at the top with the beginning and end dates of the payroll 
period. Each employee has a separate row in the register. The register contains columns to 
reflect each employee’s specific payroll information, such as:
1. Employee name
2. Filing status
3. Number and type of dependents
4. Hourly rate or period salary
5. The number of regular hours worked
6. The number of overtime hours worked
7. Regular pay
8. Overtime pay
9. Gross pay
Pressmaster/Shutterstock
Final PDF to printer146   Chapter 3  Gross Pay Computation
lan43463_ch03_118-175.indd 146 07/17/23 04:00 pm
10. Federal income tax withheld
11. Social Security tax withheld
12. Medicare tax withheld
13. State income tax withheld (where applicable)
14. Other state taxes
15. Local taxes (if applicable)
16. 401(k) or other retirement plan deductions
17. Insurance deductions
18. Garnishments or levies
19. Union dues
20. Any other deductions
21. Net pay
22. Check or payment ID number
It may seem tedious to complete a register each payroll period, but the register offers more 
information than just employee compensation. The register also contains information about 
employer liabilities for taxes and the employees’ voluntary deductions that the employer must 
remit to the appropriate places at a future date. A sample payroll register with annotations to 
correlate with the preceding list of items is shown in Figure 3-3.
Note that other columns may be added to meet the company’s needs. Other columns that 
may appear on a payroll register include commission, piece rate, standby hours, and sleep 
time. The purpose of the payroll register is to document the employees’ time and hours 
worked and provide totals of the compensation for each category. Employers use these cat￾egorizations as part of labor analysis and planning tasks.
A separate payroll register is maintained for each pay period. To ensure accuracy, the 
accountant totals, proves, and rules the register.
FIGURE 3-3
Sample Payroll Register with Annotations
P/R End Date Company Name
Check Date
Filing 
Status
Hourly 
Rate or 
Period 
wage
No. of 
Regular 
Hours
No. of 
Overtime 
Hours
Regular 
Pay
Overtime 
Pay
Gross 
Earning Sec 125 401(k)
Taxable 
Wages 
for 
Federal
Taxable 
Wages 
for FICA
Gross 
Earning
Taxable 
Wages 
for 
Federal 
Taxable 
Wages 
for FICA
Federal 
W/H
Social 
Security 
Tax 
Medicare 
Tax
State 
W/H
Garnish./ 
levies
Union 
Dues Net Pay
Check or 
ID No.
Name
Totals
Totals
Name
1 2 
&
3
4 5 6 7 8 9
10 11 12 13
*
17 16
9 18 19 21 22
† 1
*Other state and local taxes would have columns after the state withholding tax.
†
Other voluntary or mandated deductions would be in this location.
Final PDF to printerChapter 3  Gross Pay Computation   147
lan43463_ch03_118-175.indd 147 07/17/23 04:00 pm
Track Employee Compensation Using a Payroll Register
A payroll register is a tool used by payroll accountants to ensure accurate tracking of employee 
compensation. The following examples will demonstrate different scenarios using a payroll 
register.
WHAT DO TOTAL, PROVE, AND RULE MEAN?
Total: Each column and row are totaled.
Prove: The column totals are added horizontally, and row totals are totaled vertically. 
The aggregate column and row totals must be equal.
Rule: Column totals are double-underlined to show that they have been totaled.
Hourly Rate 
or Period 
Salary
No. of 
Regular 
Hours
No. of 
Overtime 
Hours
No. of 
Holiday 
Hours
No. of 
Vacation 
hours
Gross 
Earning
Pre-tax 
Insurance 401(k)
Taxable 
Wages for 
Federal 
W/H
Total
Total
Total
Total
Total
Total
Total Total Total Prove
Taxable 
Wages for 
Federal W/H
Taxable 
Wages 
for 
FICA
Federal 
W/H
Social 
Security 
Tax 
Medicare 
W/H
State W/H 
Tax Net Pay Check No.
Total
Total
Total
Total
Total
Total
Total Total Total Total Total Total Prove
Name
Name
Filing 
Status
Total
Total Total
Gross 
Earning
EXAMPLE 1: WAGE PAYMENTS, NO OVERTIME
Bailey, a nonexempt, hourly employee of CM Bakeries, receives $12.50/hour and 
receives overtime for any time worked more than 40 hours/week. Bailey is single with 
one dependent under 17 years of age. During the week ending April 21, Bailey worked 
37 hours. The payroll register would appear as follows:
Name Filing Status Dependents Hourly Rate or Period Wage No. of Regular Hours Gross Earnings
Bailey S 1<17 12.50 37 462.50
In Example 1, the employee’s hourly rate is multiplied by the number of hours worked to 
obtain the period’s gross pay. The use of the Regular Earnings column is introduced here, 
although no overtime exists. Example 2 will show how overtime is included in a payroll 
register.
EXAMPLE 2: WAGE PAYMENT WITH OVERTIME
Ash is a nonexempt, hourly employee of Strong Tea Company and earns $18.50/hour. 
Ash is married and filing jointly with two dependents under 17 years of age. Overtime 
is calculated for any hours worked over 40 during a weekly period. During the period 
that ended September 15, Ash worked 45.75 hours. The payroll register would appear 
as follows:
(continued)
Final PDF to printer148   Chapter 3  Gross Pay Computation
lan43463_ch03_118-175.indd 148 07/17/23 04:00 pm
Notice that the payroll register in Example 2 is expanded to include a breakdown of reg￾ular earnings and overtime earnings. This practice aims to facilitate computations, ensure 
accuracy, and allow for future analysis of overtime worked during a given period.
Example 3 contains a payroll register for a salaried, exempt employee. Notice the differ￾ence in the columns used to record the period salary.
*Overtime earning = $18.50/hour × 5.75 hours × 1.5 (overtime premium) = $159.56.
(concluded)
Name
Filing 
Status Dependents
Hourly 
Rate or 
Period 
Wage
No. of 
Regular 
Hours
No. of 
Overtime 
Hours
Reg.
Earnings
Overtime
Earnings
Gross 
Earnings
Ash MJ 2<17 18.50 40 5.75 740.00 159.56* 899.56
Name Filing Status Dependents Hourly Rate or Period Wage Gross Earnings
Rae MJ 3<17; 1 Other 2,000.00 2,000.00
EXAMPLE 3: SALARY PAYMENT
Rae is a manager at Tet Torr Industries. Rae is a salaried, exempt employee, married, 
filing jointly with three dependents under 17 and one other dependent. Rae earns a 
salary of $2,000 per pay period. For the period ending July 31, the payroll register 
would appear as follows:
It is common in a company to have both salaried and hourly employees, and all employees 
must be represented on a payroll register. Example 4 contains employees with pay variations 
that commonly exist in business.
Name
Filing
Status Dependents
Hourly
Rate
or Period
Wage
No. of
Regular
Hours
No. of
Overtime
Hours
Reg.
Earnings
Overtime
Earnings
Gross
Earnings
Justice S 1<17 15.25 40 610.00 610.00
Corey MJ 3<17 2,750.00 2,750.00 2,750.00
Sam MJ 4<17 1 Other 21.50 40 6 860.00  193.50 1,053.50
Total 4,220.00 193.50 4,413.50
EXAMPLE 4: PAYROLL REGISTER FOR MULTIPLE EMPLOYEES
PBL Freight pays its employees on a biweekly basis. The standard workweek for hourly 
employees is 40 hours, and employees receive overtime pay for any hours worked 
more than 40 during an established seven-day period. The following payroll register is 
for the period ending March 17:
Notice how the columns are totaled in Example 4. Each earnings column is totaled verti￾cally, and the double underline (i.e., ruling) denotes that the computations are concluded. The 
total in the bottom-right corner proves that the sum of the rows in the Gross Earnings column 
equals the Regular Earnings and Overtime Earnings columns. Once the payroll register is 
totaled, proved, and ruled, it is ready for the next step in the payroll process.
Final PDF to printerChapter 3  Gross Pay Computation   149
lan43463_ch03_118-175.indd 149 07/28/23 03:17 pm
The Payroll Register
&Check Stop
1. What is the purpose of the payroll register?
2. What are five of the columns that usually appear in a payroll register?
3. Why are computations for regular hours and overtime hours entered in 
different columns?
LO 3-6 Apply Combination Pay Methods
Employers often offer combination pay methods. Sometimes the employee 
performs two different jobs for the same employer, and those two tasks 
have different compensation bases. Other situations involve payroll-based 
incentives that link to company productivity. Note how the payroll register 
reflects these combination pay methods in the following examples.
Base Salary Plus Commission
A common method includes a base salary plus a commission or piece rate, depending on 
the nature of the work performed. Another method is salary plus hourly compensation that 
reflects a standard set of work hours plus additional hours that are paid only when worked. 
The combination pay method aims to meet minimum wage requirements and encourage 
employees to achieve sales or production goals. The base salary offers both the employer and 
the employee a level of stability in pay amounts because they will know the minimum amount 
of compensation for each pay period. Whatever the employees earn above the base salary 
may vary from pay period to pay period, depending on their capabilities, production needs, 
and customer needs.
Name
Filing
Status Dependents
Hourly
Rate or
Period
Wage Commissions
Gross
Earnings
West S 2<17 1,500.00 400.00 1,900.00
EXAMPLE: BASE SALARY PLUS COMMISSION
West is a salaried, exempt employee of Night Lights Security. West is single with two depen￾dents under the age of 17. The compensation package includes a commission based on 
sales of security system packages to customers. During the pay period ending January 13, 
West earned $1,500 in salary and a 4 percent commission on $10,000 in sales.
Commission = $10,000 × 0.04 = $400
Many types of jobs have a combination pay method because it has been 
found to boost employee productivity and maintain FLSA compliance. 
Some jobs that use combination pay methods are:
District managers Account executives
Recruiters Retail sales workers
Farmworkers Real estate salespersons
To compute combination pay methods, it is essential to know how to 
compute the employee’s base salary plus any variable items.
michaeljung/Shutterstock
Shutterstock
Final PDF to printer150   Chapter 3  Gross Pay Computation
lan43463_ch03_118-175.indd 150 07/17/23 04:00 pm
Like any other type of payment method, the important element in computing combination 
pay is accurate maintenance of the base salary, the variable rate, and the number of items or 
sales for which the variable rate must apply. The payroll register’s use facilitates the compu￾tations and ensures the accuracy of the employee’s gross pay.
Payroll Draw
A special situation in commission-based pay is a situation called a draw. A draw generally 
involves an employee whose regular compensation is little more than the minimum wage, 
such as a retail sales position. Employees have sales goals they must meet and receive com￾pensation on a commission basis once they meet or exceed those sales goals. If the sales goal 
is not met, the employee may draw a salary against future commissions. The expectation with 
a draw is that the employee will eventually generate enough sales to cover any draws during 
pay periods when sales revenues were lower than expected.
Name
Filing
Status Dependents
Hourly Rate or
or Period Wage Commissions Gross Earnings
Avery MJ 4<17; 2 Other 1,384.62 500.00 1,884.62
Name
Filing
Status Dependents
Hourly Rate or
Period Wage Piece Rate Pay Commissions 
Gross 
Earnings
Avery MJ 4<17; 2 Other 1,384.62 500.00 1,884.62
Dana S 1<17 1,000.00 800.00 1.800.00
Totals 2,384.62 800.00 500.00 3,684.62
EXAMPLE: DIFFERENT COMBINATION METHODS, THE SAME COMPANY
Avery is an account executive for Bayfront Watercraft. Avery earns a base salary of 
$36,000 plus a commission of 0.5 percent on each sale made. Avery is married with 
six dependents: four under the age of 17 and two other dependents. Suppose that 
Avery sold $100,000 of boats during a biweekly pay period ending June 16.
Base salary = $36,000/26 = $1,384.62.
Commission = $100,000 × 0.5% = $500.
Total pay for Avery: $1,884.62
The payroll register for Avery’s June 16 pay would appear as:
Dana installs the seating in the boats for Bayfront Watercraft. Dana is single with one 
dependent under the age of 17 and earns a base salary of $26,000 per year plus a 
piece rate of $100 for each boat completed during the pay period. During the pay 
period, Dana installed the seating for eight boats.
Salary = $26,000/26 = $1,000
Piece-rate pay = $100 × 8 = $800
Total pay for Dana: $1,800
The payroll register, including both employees for the June 17 pay period, would 
appear as follows:
A draw is generally associated with a commission-only job in which the employer allows 
new employees to receive money for expected future commissions. With a draw, it is 
implied that the draw may occur regularly. However, paying employees solely based on 
commission and draw has been challenged because it does not recognize employee 
rest breaks and nonproductive time. In Bermudez Vaquero v. Stoneledge Furniture 
LLC, the court upheld the FLSA rules regarding mandatory rest breaks.
(Source: MorganLewis)
Final PDF to printerChapter 3  Gross Pay Computation   151
lan43463_ch03_118-175.indd 151 07/17/23 04:00 pm
Salary Plus Commission and Draw
Salaried employees who receive commission may be eligible to draw against that commis￾sion at the company’s discretion. This pay combination could be for external salespeople who 
have commissions as a relatively large portion of their regular income.
Name
Filing
Status Dependents
Hourly
Rate or
Period
Wage
Reg.
Earnings Draw Commissions
Gross
Earnings
Brooke S 1<17 1,000.00 1,000.00 1,000.00 1,000.00 3,000.00
EXAMPLE: SALARY PLUS COMMISSION AND DRAW
Brooke is an employee in the sales department of Rozz Escape. Brooke is single with 
one dependent under the age of 17 and has an annual base salary of $12,000, paid 
monthly. Brooke is expected to earn between $1,000 and $3,000 in sales commis￾sions each month and may draw up to $3,000 per month against future earnings.
During October, Brooke earned $1,000 in commissions in addition to their salary. 
Brooke decided to take an additional $1,000 draw against future earnings. The payroll 
register would reflect this compensation as follows:
In this case, Brooke could have withdrawn up to $3,000 against future earnings. If the 
employment is terminated before enough sales commission is earned to cover the draw, 
then the employee must repay the company the amount not earned. It is important to 
keep track of employee draws to ensure that the employee repays the unearned draw.
Another example where the company may allow individuals to draw on their payroll exists 
when the pay period is monthly. In this situation, many employers may allow their employ￾ees to draw up to 30 to 40 percent of their wages at mid-month. Some organizations may not 
withhold taxes from the draw, and the employee will have the full amount of taxes withdrawn 
upon the next payroll.
Employers must be careful when allowing employees to draw against future wages. A 
written and signed authorization must be obtained from the employee that specifies when the 
draw will be deducted from the employee’s future wages to avoid legal issues with deduc￾tions, such as wage garnishments, that could be affected by the draw.
EXAMPLE: SALARY PLUS DRAW, EMPLOYEE INELIGIBLE FOR 
COMMISSION
Rowan is a new salesperson with Warm Blu, hired on September 18. Rowan has no 
dependents, receives a base salary of $19,500 per year, is paid biweekly, and receives 
a 5 percent commission once a sales quota of $20,000 during a pay period has been 
reached. During the pay period ending September 29, Rowan closed $10,000 in sales, 
and thus was ineligible for a September commission. Rowan may draw up to the mini￾mum commission for the pay period, $20,000 × 5%, or $1,000. The payroll register 
would reflect his pay as follows:
Name
Filing
Status Dependents
Hourly
Rate or
Period
Wage
Reg.
Earnings Draw Commissions
Gross
Earnings 
Rowan S 0 750.00 750.00 1,000.00 1,750.00
Period salary = $19,500/26 pay periods = $750.00
Commission draw = $20,000 × 0.05 = $1,000.00
Final PDF to printer152   Chapter 3  Gross Pay Computation
lan43463_ch03_118-175.indd 152 07/17/23 04:00 pm
Incentive Stock Options (ISOs)
Other employee compensation plans, known as incentive stock options 
(ISOs), allow an employee to report a small base salary for tax purposes 
and be issued company stock that must be held for a certain period before 
being sold. In some instances, the stock option may be exercised after 
three months of employment, and in other cases, it may be after one year 
of employment. The purpose of ISO stock option plans is a deferral of 
taxes and salary liabilities for the employer and employee. This type of 
compensation is often found in executive pay packages.
tupungato/Getty Images
In the class-action lawsuit McElrath v. Uber Technologies, the plaintiff stated that 
employees were offered an ISO as a significant part of the compensation package. 
The issue arose because Uber had accelerated the exercisability of its ISOs to make 
the compensation attractive. However, when employees exercised their options, the 
company refused to allow employees to receive the promised compensation on a tax￾deferred basis consistent with an ISO. Instead, Uber changed the ISOs to nonqualified 
stock options (NSOs), which changed the taxation on employee compensation.
(Source: Classaction.org)
EXAMPLE: EXECUTIVE SALARY WITH ISO
Raven Wilde was hired as a regional manager with Amificat International. Amificat 
International’s stock had a market price of $25 per share when Raven was hired. Raven 
was offered an annual salary of $78,000 paid biweekly and an ISO of 1,000 shares at 
$25 per share that could be exercised one year after the hire date.
Biweekly salary = $78,000/26 = $3,000
Note that the ISO, valued at $25,000 at the time of hire, may not be exercised for one 
year. The stock option’s value would depend on the market price on the date that Raven 
exercised the stock option by selling the shares. In any case, the ISO does not appear 
on the payroll register but would be included in the employee’s total compensation.
Combination Pay Methods
&Check Stop
1. A service administrator receives a base salary of $42,000 per year paid 
semimonthly, plus a $100 commission for each service contract sold to 
customers. During a pay period, five contracts were sold. What is the 
administrator’s gross pay for the period?
2. A new salesperson with S&D Music receives a base salary of $36,000 
paid monthly. Company policy allows the salesperson to draw 35 percent 
of their salary on the 15th of each month. How much will the salesperson 
receive at mid-month if they elect to take a draw? How much will they 
receive at the end of the month if they take the 35 percent draw?
3. An executive for Adarma Chemicals receives an annual salary of $75,000 
plus an additional 3 percent in an ISO. What is the amount of stock 
received annually? What is the total annual compensation?
Final PDF to printerChapter 3  Gross Pay Computation   153
lan43463_ch03_118-175.indd 153 07/17/23 04:00 pm
LO 3-7 Explain Special Pay Situations
Compensation laws have many exceptions. According to the FLSA, every 
aspect of labor legislation, including minimum wage and overtime provi￾sions, has its less common applications. The introduction of new types of 
knowledge-based employment during the 21st century and the continu￾ance of more traditional agricultural tasks necessitate examining these 
special pay situations.
Compensatory Time
The FLSA allows public employees to receive compensatory (comp) time in place of over￾time. According to section 3(s)(1)(c) of the FLSA, exempt public employees must receive 
comp time equal to 1.5 times the overtime hours worked. Therefore, if a public employee 
worked 5 hours of overtime, the comp time awarded must be 7.5 hours.
The private sector often misconstrues comp time. FLSA provisions for comp time are only 
for public-sector employees, such as government workers, law enforcement, and seasonally 
hired laborers. Unless specifically designated by a firm’s policies, a private-sector employer 
is not required to offer comp time. Additionally, many private-sector employers offer comp 
time on a straight-line basis, meaning that they offer the same number of compensatory hours 
as the number of overtime hours worked. Firefighters, police, and other emergency workers 
may receive a maximum of 480 comp hours annually; other public-sector employees are 
eligible for up to 240 hours of comp time based on union-negotiated contracts. Certain union 
comp time contracts will only cover specific peak periods for the work being performed.
When calculating an employee’s gross pay, it is prudent to know any effects that a comp 
time award may have on overtime pay to ensure that the employee’s compensation is accurate.
MDM79/Shutterstock
EXAMPLE: PUBLIC EMPLOYEE COMPENSATORY TIME
Remy works as an exempt employee of the federal government. During the cur￾rent pay period, Remy accrued 8 hours of overtime when completing additional 
work for an absent coworker. According to FLSA regulations, Remy must receive 
12 hours of comp time since the position is not eligible for paid overtime as an exempt 
government employee.
On-Call Time
Some professions require employees to be available for work outside of normal working 
hours. This availability is known as on-call time, and two classes of on-call time exist: on-call 
at the employer’s premises and on-call away from the employer’s premises.
∙ If the employee is required to remain at the employer’s premises, the employee’s freedom is 
restricted, and they must be compensated for the on-call time.
∙ If the employee is not restricted to the employer’s premises for the on-call time, compensation 
is not required.
The town of Jay, Maine, began a pilot program in June 2020 during which firefighters 
received on-call pay to be available 10 hours per day. The purpose of the program was 
to provide fire department support during daytime hours. Each firefighter receives a sti￾pend of $40 for being on-call in addition to regular pay. Despite the payroll cost, the 
response time improved, and services became more available for the surrounding towns.
(Source: Sun Journal)
Final PDF to printer154   Chapter 3  Gross Pay Computation
lan43463_ch03_118-175.indd 154 07/17/23 04:00 pm
In either case, company policy must be specific regarding the conditions of the on-call 
time. The number of hours specified for on-call compensation must be added to the employ￾ee’s gross pay. Company policy should also be specific about the pay rate for the on-call time, 
especially if the pay rate differs from the employee’s regular pay rate.
Name
Filing 
Status Dependents
Hourly 
Rate or 
Period 
Wage 
No. of 
Regular 
Hours 
No. of 
On-Call 
Hours 
Reg. 
Earnings 
On-Call 
Earnings
Gross 
Earnings
Aiden MS 2<17 19.25 80 14 1,540.00 269.50 1,809.50
EXAMPLE: ON-CALL TIME
Aiden works as a service representative for Hon Wolf, an equipment manufacturer. Aiden 
earns $19.25/hour for a standard 40-hour workweek and is married, filing separately with 
two dependents under the age of 17. Hon Wolf requires that each service representative 
rotate on-call duties in one-week increments, during which they remain available for ser￾vice calls outside of working hours but may otherwise engage in personal activities. During 
this on-call time, company policy stipulates that on-call service representatives receive 
two hours of regular pay for each on-call day. Aiden was on-call during the biweekly pay 
period ending February 25 and would receive 14 hours of additional straight-time pay for 
the on-call time. The payroll register would reflect the on-call pay as follows:
Sleep Time, Travel Time, and Wait Time
Although a growing trend toward telecommuting exists, employees have tra￾ditionally commuted to and from work. Traveling to and from an office is 
not a compensable time; however, many employees do not work at a single 
location. Additionally, many employees travel for their employer’s benefit 
for training or other business requirements. Similarly, employees may be 
required by their employer to wait, as in the case of a chauffeur or a truck 
driver. Other employees, such as firefighters or medical personnel, may be 
required to work 24-hour shifts and be given at least five consecutive hours 
of paid sleep time during that 24-hour period. An agreement between the employer and employee 
may exclude up to eight hours if the employer provides furnished facilities for uninterrupted sleep.
According to FLSA, the guideline that assists in determining compensable activity in these 
three situations is if the activity is for the employer’s benefit. Travel among customer- or 
business-related sites are compensable as travel time because it directly benefits the employer. 
Requiring a driver to wait as part of the job description also benefits the employer and is com￾pensated as wait time. Traveling from the employee’s home to the office or the first customer 
site in the morning and returning home in the evening benefits the employee and is not com￾pensable. In general, travel required by the employer is compensable (even overnight stays), 
but the travel from home at the beginning of the day and returning home at the end of the day 
is not compensable. Exceptions, such as emergency travel or work in another city that requires 
an unusual amount of travel, are compensable. See 29 CFR 790.6 and 29 CFR 785.
Monty Rakusen/Getty Images
EXAMPLE: TRAVEL AMONG MULTIPLE JOB SITES DURING A WORKDAY
Rani is a nonexempt employee who works from home as an equipment repair techni￾cian for AB Generators. The job demands travel among customer sites throughout the 
day. During the course of the day, Rani traveled as follows:
Home to first customer site: 1.5 hours
First customer site to second customer site: 1 hour
Second customer site to third customer site: 2 hours
Third customer site to home: 45 minutes
Final PDF to printerChapter 3  Gross Pay Computation   155
lan43463_ch03_118-175.indd 155 07/17/23 04:00 pm
According to FLSA guidelines, Rani would be paid for the three hours of travel 
between worksites, but not the 2.25 hours traveling to the first customer worksite and 
home from the third customer worksite.
EXAMPLE: SLEEP TIME
Monroe is a first-year surgical resident at Mercy Hospital and is classified as a nonex￾empt employee who earns $124,000 per year, paid semimonthly. The standard work￾week is 40 hours. Monroe is single with no dependents and works two 24-hour shifts 
per week in the regular course of employment. The employer provides a quiet sleep￾ing area, per FLSA requirements. During a single 24-hour shift in the November 17 
pay period, Monroe slept 7 hours. According to FLSA guidelines, the pay may not be 
reduced for the first 5 hours slept. Monroe’s gross pay will reflect a 2-hour reduction 
for the additional sleep over the 5-hour requirement.
The hourly rate needs to be computed to determine the deduction for the excess 
sleep time: $124,000/(40 × 52) = $59.62 (rounded).
The payroll register would appear as follows:
Note the inclusion of the sleep hours over 5 and the deduction. The purpose of 
tracking this information is to highlight specific issues with employee performance and 
related costs, which leads to stronger managerial control.
Name
Filing
Status Dependents
Hourly
Rate or
Period
Wage
Hourly
Rate
Sleep
Hours
>5
Reg.
Earnings
Less Excess
Sleep Time
Gross
Earnings
Monroe S 0 5,166.67 59.62 2 5,166.67 (119.24) 5,047.43
Jury Duty
Employees may be summoned to serve on a jury for court cases. If an 
employee is required to serve jury duty, the pay given to employees for 
the time spent away from work in this capacity is at the employer’s discre￾tion. Some employers pay their employees their full compensation, while 
others pay a predetermined alternate amount. If an employee receives full 
compensation while on jury duty, the company may require the employee 
to return or reject the jury duty pay.
Vacation and Holiday Hours
Employees commonly have paid time off in the form of holiday or vacation time. Although 
no legislation exists for the number of holidays observed by a company or the number of 
vacation hours per employee, the time for these situations should be classified using the pay￾roll register to ensure its annotation in the employees’ files. The following examples show 
how vacation and holiday pay should be annotated.
Image Source
EXAMPLE: HOLIDAY HOURS
Tanner is an hourly employee at Naira Dram Company, earning $15.60 per hour, paid 
biweekly on a 40-hour-per-week basis. Tanner is single, has no dependents, and is 
eligible for two weeks of vacation per year. During one pay period, Tanner took three 
days of vacation. The payroll register would appear as follows. Notice how the regular 
hours and the vacation hours are recorded in different columns.
(continued)
Final PDF to printer156   Chapter 3  Gross Pay Computation
lan43463_ch03_118-175.indd 156 07/17/23 04:00 pm
An employer may obtain a certificate to pay a worker with disabilities related to the work 
performed an amount less than the minimum wage. According to Section 14(c) of the FLSA, 
employers must obtain a certificate to pay less than the minimum wage.
Filing
Status Dependents
Hourly
rate or
period
salary
No. of
regular
hours
No. of
vacation
hours
Gross
Earnings
Tanner S 0 15.60 56 24 1,248.00
Filing
status Dependents
Hourly
rate or
period
salary 
No. of
regular
hours
No. of
overtime
hours
No. of
holiday
hours
Gross
Earnings
Spencer MJ 2 1,500.00 64 5 16 1,640.63
A similar approach is taken with holiday pay.
In November 2023, Naira Dram Company has holidays on Thursday and Friday, 
November 23 and 24, to celebrate Thanksgiving. A different employee, Spencer, is 
a nonexempt salaried employee earning $39,000 annually, paid biweekly. Spencer is 
married filing jointly and has two dependents under the age of 17. Spencer works five 
hours of overtime during this holiday period, but not during the week of the holiday. In 
this case, the annual salary must be converted to hourly pay to determine the amount of 
overtime pay, although the regular hours and holiday hours remain at the period salary.
Annual Salary = $39,000/ (52 weeks × 40 hours) = $18.75 per hour
Overtime pay = $18.75/hour × 1.5 = $28.13 (rounded) × 5 hours = $140.65
(concluded)
Subminimum Wage Situations
Tipped employees are not the only workers who may legally receive 
compensation lower than the minimum wage. Other specific classes of 
employees may receive an hourly wage that is less than the FLSA mini￾mum wage. Some states have eliminated the subminimum wage entirely 
or for specific classes of workers, so it is important to remain current with 
any state law changes.
A 1996 amendment to the FLSA, described in Section 6(g), allows 
workers younger than the age of 20 to be paid a minimum wage of $4.25 
per hour, but only for the first 90 calendar days of employment.
Note that overtime worked by employees who are paid at subminimum wage rates may not 
be less than the federal minimum wage.
wavebreakmedia/Shutterstock
Name
Filing
Status
Hourly
Rate or
Period
Wage
No. of
Regular
Hours
Reg.
Earnings
Gross
Earnings
Coree S-0 4.25 37 157.25 157.25
EXAMPLE: YOUNG EMPLOYEE
Coree is a new employee of Big Chicken, a fast-food restaurant in Glendale, Arizona, 
where new employees are paid minimum wage. Coree is 18 years of age and is sin￾gle with no dependents. During the weekly pay period ending July 18, Coree worked 
37 hours. The payroll register would appear as follows:
Final PDF to printerChapter 3  Gross Pay Computation   157
lan43463_ch03_118-175.indd 157 07/17/23 04:00 pm
Name
Filing
Status
Hourly
Rate or
Period
Wage
No. of
Regular
Hours
No. of
Overtime
Hours
Reg.
Earning
Overtime
Earnings
Gross
Earnings
Snow S-2 6.10 40 4 244.00 36.60 280.60
EXAMPLE: DISABLED WORKER
Snow is employed as a call-center representative with OEC Dispatch in Provo, Utah. 
Snow is disabled due to a hearing impairment, and OEC Dispatch has obtained a cer￾tificate under section 14(c) of the FLSA to pay Snow $6.10/hour, which is less than 
Utah’s minimum wage of $7.25/hour. During the weekly pay period ending March 10, 
Snow worked 44 hours, 4 of which were overtime. Snow is single with two depen￾dents. The payroll register for the period would appear as follows:
Full-time students in the employ of retail establishments, agriculture, colleges, and uni￾versities may receive a wage that is 85 percent of the federal minimum wage under FLSA 
Section 14(c). Like disabled employees, the employer must obtain a certificate authorizing 
the subminimum wage.
Name
Filing
Status
Hourly
Rate or
Period
Wage
No. of
Regular
Hours
Reg.
Earning
Gross
Earnings
Stone S-0 6.16 35 215.60 215.60
EXAMPLE: FULL-TIME STUDENT WAGE
Stone works in the café at Valparaiso University in Valparaiso, Indiana. Stone is a 
full-time student at the university and is 20 years old, single, with no dependents. 
According to the FLSA, Stone may receive 85 percent of the minimum wage.
Indiana minimum wage: $7.25/hour
Full-time student wage = $7.25/hour × 0.85 = $6.16/hour (rounded)
Stone may legally be paid $6.16 per hour while continuing to be a full-time stu￾dent. During the week of May 6, Stone worked 35 hours. The payroll register 
would appear as follows:
According to Section 14(a) of the FLSA, student learners in vocational education pro￾grams may be paid at a rate of 75 percent of the federal minimum wage. Similar to situations 
involving disabled employees, the employer must obtain a certificate authorizing the sub￾minimum wage.
EXAMPLE: STUDENT WORKER IN A VOCATIONAL EDUCATION PROGRAM
Addison is enrolled at Middlebury High School in Maine and is taking a shop class as 
part of the school’s programs. Addison is 16, single, with no dependents. Addison 
works for Vining’s Cabinets as an apprentice woodworker. After obtaining a certifi￾cate from the U.S. Department of Labor’s Wage and Hour National Certification Team, 
Vining’s Cabinets pays Addison an hourly wage of $10.35 ($13.80 minimum wage 
× 75 percent) due to the enrollment in the shop class at the high school. During the 
weekly pay period ending December 15, Addison worked 36 hours. The payroll regis￾ter would reflect the pay as follows:
(continued)
Final PDF to printer158   Chapter 3  Gross Pay Computation
lan43463_ch03_118-175.indd 158 07/17/23 04:00 pm
Nonqualified Deferred Compensation
Certain employees may be subject to the nonqualified deferred compensation provisions of IRS 
Code section 409(a). Nonqualified deferred compensation pertains to employees who earn com￾pensation in one period but elect to receive it later. A common example of this practice involves 
teachers who work during the nine-month academic year but elect to receive compensation for 12 
months. Under section 409(a), this type of compensation is taxed like any other employee pay.
Pension Payments
Employers occasionally offer pension plans to their employees. The per￾centage of employees who participate in employer-sponsored pensions 
has decreased due to the availability of alternate retirement plans (401(k), 
403(b), etc.), and pension funding has experienced shortfalls among both 
private and governmental employers. When the pension enters the payout 
period, the retired employee receives the pension less any federal tax due. 
FICA taxes do not apply to pension plan payments.
Retroactive Pay
If an employee is due retroactive pay (“back pay”) because of compensa￾tion increases or labor union negotiations, the wages must be issued at the 
earliest time, and all applicable taxes are due. To receive back pay, the 
FLSA has three methods available:
1. The Department of Labor’s Wage and Hour Division may provide super￾vision for the payment.
(concluded)
Name
Filing
Status
Hourly
Rate or
Period
Wage
No. of
Regular
Hours
Reg.
Earnings
Gross
Earnings
Addison S-0 10.35 36 372.60 372.60
Shutterstock / BOSANESDRA
States have been working to repeal the subminimum wage. As of 2023, the following 
states have repealed the subminimum wage:
• Alaska
• California
• Colorado
• Delaware
• Maine
• Maryland
• New Hampshire
• Oregon
• Rhode Island
• South Carolina
• Tennessee
• Washington
Other states are currently working to remove the subminimum wage for disabled 
workers.
(Source: APSE)
Final PDF to printerChapter 3  Gross Pay Computation   159
lan43463_ch03_118-175.indd 159 07/17/23 04:00 pm
2. The Secretary of Labor may bring a lawsuit for back pay plus an equal amount of damages.
3. The employee may initiate a lawsuit for the back pay plus an equal amount of damages plus
attorney’s fees and court costs.
It is important to note that the statute of limitations for back pay lawsuits is two years. 
However, if willful nonpayment can be proven, the statute of limitations is three years.
In early 2019, the Gilroy Federation of Paraeducators in California agreed to grant pay 
raises to the educational support staff retroactive to July 1, 2017. This pay raise was 
spread incrementally over two fiscal years to spread the impact on the school district’s 
budget.
(Source: Gilroy Dispatch)
EMPLOYEE COMPENSATION
Employee compensation tends to be a hot topic because it affects people on a personal level. Some 
developments since 2019 in employee compensation include the following:
• Increased diligence in overtime tracking and compensation following a lawsuit involving large 
companies
• New types of incentive pay to increase employee engagement, including merchandise rewards, 
additional company benefits, and other nonmonetary awards
• Discussions of the legality of differential pay levels for travel time by nonexempt employees
• Discussions about gaps in wages between people with and without a college education
• An increased minimum wage for exempt employees
Future trends to watch include:
• Employee pay including flexible work location agreements
• Rising inflation driving pay increases
• Expanded salary transparency laws
• Variable pay structures increasing to recognize employee contributions
• A federal minimum wage increase to $15/hour by 2026
• Elimination of subminimum wages at the state level
Trends to Watch
Wages for Deceased Employees
If an employee dies while being a current employee of a firm, it is important to understand 
the payroll implications associated with gross pay. IRS guidelines stipulate that wages earned 
before the employee’s death must be paid as accurately as possible to reflect the amount of 
work performed. A special note about deceased employee pay is that the employee’s pay 
if issued specifically in a check form may need to be reissued to the deceased employee’s 
estate. In many states, the pay for a deceased employee goes to the surviving spouse or chil￾dren (if no surviving spouse exists) as long as the pay is below state-mandated thresholds.
Final PDF to printer160   Chapter 3  Gross Pay Computation
lan43463_ch03_118-175.indd 160 07/17/23 04:00 pm
Summary of Gross Pay Computation
Gross pay is the employee’s compensation before taxes and other withholdings are deducted; 
net pay is the amount of money an employee receives after taxes and other deductions are 
subtracted. We discussed the different types of pay computation methods, including salary, 
hourly, commission, and piece-rate pay. Gross pay is complex, and various combinations exist 
to meet the needs of traditional, hybrid, and gig economies.
We looked at the effect of FLSA provisions and the applicability of different compensation 
methods and offered examples of some job classifications that could be compensated using 
different methods. We discussed using a payroll register in computing gross pay and explored 
the concepts of the total, prove, and rule to ensure accurate computation of gross pay.
We explored a variety of situations involving overtime pay and discussed the computations 
for different pay bases. We concluded with a discussion of special compensation situations, 
including on-call time, time spent unoccupied for the employer’s benefit, and situations in 
which an employee may receive less than the FLSA minimum wage. The conclusion had an 
explanation of retroactive pay and other less-common pay situations.
Key Points
• Gross pay is the total amount earned by an employee before the deductions for taxes 
or other withholdings.
• Employees may be subject to the wage and hour provisions of the FLSA (nonexempt), 
or they may not (exempt), depending on the type of job and employee duties.
• Nonexempt hourly employees are compensated on the basis that recognizes an eco￾nomic connection between work performed and wages paid.
• Nonexempt salaried employees work a fixed number of working hours per week and 
receive overtime compensation.
• Exempt employees receive a fixed salary and may work more hours than their nonex￾empt colleagues.
• Commission-based pay connects employee compensation with sales revenue.
• Piece-rate pay compensates employees based on the manufacturing or completion of 
goods or services.
• The payroll register is an integral tool to ensure the accuracy of payroll computations, 
especially in combination pay situations.
•
future earnings.
What Is the Correct Pay?
&Check Stop
1. A nonexempt employee of The Silver Club (a governmental entity) works 
10 hours of overtime during a pay period and asks to receive compensa￾tory time instead of overtime pay. The Silver Club’s overtime policy states 
that compensatory time may be offered at 1.5 times the number of hours 
worked more than 40. The employer grants the request and offers 10 hours 
of compensatory time. How much comp time should they receive? Explain.
2. A student in a vocational program at a cosmetology school accepts 
employment as a shampooer at Cuts & Styles Hair Salon in Alabama. The 
agreement between the school and the salon is that students receive the 
student-learner minimum wage. How much should the student be paid 
per hour?
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch03_118-175.indd 161 07/17/23 04:00 pm
Chapter 3  Gross Pay Computation   161
Combination pay
Compensatory (comp) time
Draw
Eight and Eighty (8 and 80)
Gross pay
Hourly
Hundredth-hour system
Incentive stock option (ISO)
Net pay
Nonexempt
On-call time
Overtime
Prove
Quarter-hour system
Rule
Salary
Sleep time
Time card
Tip credit
Tipped employee
Tipped wage
Total
Travel time
Wait time
Vocabulary
Review Questions
1. How is overtime pay computed for nonexempt, salaried workers?
2. For which employees do overtime rates apply?
3. How does minimum wage affect commission employees?
4. How does the tipped minimum wage differ from the FLSA minimum wage?
5. What types of occupations are typically salaried?
6. What is an ISO, and how does it affect employee pay?
7. What is the difference between a salary and a draw?
8. How is overtime computed for piece-rate employees?
9. In what situations could a salaried employee receive overtime pay?
10. What is the primary difference between commission work and piece-rate work?
11. In what situations might an employee draw money against his or her future pay?
12. What is the difference between quarter-hour and hundredth-hour pay?
13. Why are companies moving toward the hundredth-hour system?
14. What is comp time?
15. Under what circumstances may an employee receive compensation for on-call time?
16. When are wait time, travel time, and sleep time compensable?
17. Aside from tipped employees, under what circumstances may an employee receive 
less than the FLSA minimum wage?
18. What is one of the three methods for employees to receive retroactive pay?
19. What amount did the Final Rule stipulate as the minimum wage for salaried workers?
20.
• ISOs are a means of offering compensation on a tax-deferred basis connected to the 
market price of the company’s stock.
• Compensatory time is legally required for public-sector exempt employees and may be 
offered to private-sector employees at the employer’s discretion.
• Overtime pay is computed according to the IRS guidelines, as appropriate to the 
employee’s pay base.
• Employees may be compensated when they are unoccupied if they are required to be 
available for the employer’s benefit.
• Retroactive “back pay” and pension pay are situations requiring additional care in pro￾cessing to avoid lawsuits.
• In certain circumstances, employees may receive less than the FLSA minimum wage.
Final PDF to printer162   Chapter 3  Gross Pay Computation
lan43463_ch03_118-175.indd 162 07/17/23 04:00 pm
Exercises Set A
E3-1A.
LO 3-1
A minimum wage worker in Nevada is contemplating a move to another 
state. Which of the following states would be the most favorable in terms 
of the highest minimum wage? (Select all that apply.)
1. Idaho
2. California
3. Utah
4. Arizona
E3-2A.
LO 3-1
FLSA provisions always cover certain types of businesses. Which of the fol￾lowing businesses are always covered by FLSA? (Select all that apply.)
1. Fruit stands selling only locally obtained goods that conduct no inter￾state business
2. A school for children with learning disabilities
3. A privately run hospital
4. A Social Security Administration branch office
E3-3A.
LO 3-1
What is the minimum tipped wage for a tipped employee in Washington, DC?
1. $2.13/hour
2. $3.25/hour
3. $4.55/hour
4. $5.35/hour
E3-4A.
LO 3-1
A server at the Seven Wonders Restaurant in Honolulu, Hawaii, receives 
the tipped minimum wage. During a 40-hour workweek, how much must 
be earned in tips to meet the minimum wage requirement?
1. $30.00
2. $40.00
3. $75.20
4. $125.30
E3-5A.
LO 3-2
An employee of HyroSports is compensated based on sales of store prod￾ucts to customers. Which type of pay best represents this basis?
1. Piece rate
2. Hourly
3. Commission
4. Salary
E3-6A.
LO 3-3
The accounting clerk at Tenity Enterprises is paid $18.15 per hour. During 
a week’s pay period, the employee worked 39 hours and 41 minutes. 
Based on a hundredth-hour pay method, what is the gross pay for the 
period? (Round the final answer to two decimal places.)
1. $726.00
2. $721.46
3. $716.93
4. $720.25
E3-7A.
LO 3-4
According to the FLSA, what is the basis used to determine overtime 
worked for standard nonexempt workers?
1. The 8 and 80 rule
2. The excess over 40 hours during any pay period
3. The excess of over 40 hours in seven consecutive days
4. The excess over 8 hours in a 24-hour period
E3-8A.
LO 3-4
A shared employee for Tetra Computers works in both the program￾ming and the research departments and splits time equally between the 
roles. The employee earns $20 per hour in the programming department 
and $28 per hour in the research department. What is the pay rate if the 
employee worked overtime in the research department?
1. $30 per hour
2. $36 per hour
3. $42 per hour
4. $48 per hour
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch03_118-175.indd 163 07/17/23 04:00 pm
Chapter 3  Gross Pay Computation   163
E3-9A.
LO 3-5
Of the items in the following list, which one(s) should appear in a payroll 
register? (Select all that apply.)
1. Name
2. Home address
3. Shifts worked
4. Hours worked
E3-10A.
LO 3-5
Mikah is a salaried, exempt employee with CaxKyat Stores. Mikah is single 
with one dependent under 17 and earns $35,568 per year. Complete the 
payroll register for the biweekly pay period ending March 10, 2023, with a 
pay date of March 15, 2023.
E3-11A.
LO 3-6
Latan is an employee of Giant Computers, where the job responsibilities 
include selling computers and software to customers. Latan is married and 
filing jointly with two dependents under 17. The annual salary is $42,000, 
and Latan receives a 3 percent commission on all sales. During the semi￾monthly pay period ending September 29, Latan sold $20,000 worth of 
computers and software. Complete the payroll register for the September 
29 pay period with a pay date of October 4.
E3-12A.
LO 3-7
Jude is a full-time student working in the library at Sioux City College in 
Sioux City, Iowa. What is the minimum hourly wage that Jude may receive?
1. $7.25 per hour
2. $6.50 per hour
3. $6.16 per hour
4. $5.44 per hour
P/R End Date:
Check Date: Company Name:
Name
Filing 
Status Dependents
Hourly Rate 
or Period Wage
No. of 
Regular Hours 
No. of 
Overtime
Hours Commissions
Reg. 
Earnings
Overtime 
Earnings
Gross 
Earnings
P/R End Date:
Check Date: Company Name:
Name
Filing 
Status Dependents
Hourly Rate 
or Period Wage
No. of 
Regular Hours 
No. of 
Overtime
Hours Commissions
Reg. 
Earnings
Overtime 
Earnings
Gross 
Earnings
Problems Set A
P3-1A.
LO 3-3
Brick worked the following schedule: Monday, 9 hours; Tuesday, 7 hours 
30 minutes; Wednesday, 8 hours 48 minutes; Thursday, 8 hours 25 min￾utes; Friday, 8 hours. The employer pays overtime for all time worked in 
excess of 40 hours per week. Complete the following table. Determine 
Brick’s total time worked according to (a) the quarter-hour method and (b) 
the hundredth-hour method. Which is the more favorable method for Brick, 
quarter-hour or hundredth-hour?
Quarter-Hour Time Hundredth-Hour Time More Favorable Method
 Brick
Final PDF to printer164   Chapter 3  Gross Pay Computation
lan43463_ch03_118-175.indd 164 07/17/23 04:00 pm
P3-2A.
LO 3-2
Bobi is a salaried exempt employee at Coric Industries. Bobi is married 
and filing jointly with two dependents under 17. The contract stipulates 
a 40-hour work week at $47,500 per year. During the week ending 
November 24, there was a company-paid holiday for one day. Calculate 
Bobi’s weekly pay. Round period wages to five decimal points.
Name
Filing 
Status Dependents
Hourly Rate
or Period Wage
No. of 
Regular 
Hours
No. of 
Holiday 
Hours
Reg. 
Earnings
Holiday 
Earnings
Gross 
Earnings
P3-3A.
LO 3-2
Casey finished designing 22 custom cakes on an 18-cake contract as an 
employee of Yuan Fox Wedding Planners. There is a bonus earned if the 
individual exceeds 145 percent of their piece-rate contract. How many 
cakes must Casey complete in the remainder of the week to receive the 
bonus?
P3-4A.
LO 3-5
Lann works for Talbert Electronics. As a shared employee, Lann works in the 
manufacturing department and has been trained to work the sales counter 
when needed. During this period Lann was asked to work the sales counter 
for two days, five hours each day during other employees’ vacations. Lann 
earns $17.75 per hour in the manufacturing department and a $1.50 pay 
differential for working the sales counter. There was a total of 38 hours and 
38 minutes worked during the week. Lann is married filing jointly with no 
dependents. Compute Lann’s pay for the week ending August 18 using the 
hundredth-hour system. (Use a separate line for each job classification.)
Name Filing Status Dependents
Hourly Rate 
or Period Wage No. of Regular Hours Reg. Earnings
Total Pay
In Out In Out
Total Hours with 
Quarter-Hour
Total Hours with 
Hundredth-Hour
8:00 11:22 12:17 5:22
7:29 12:30 1:45 4:10
9:12 11:45 12:28 3:36
8:00 11:00 12:02 5:00
P3-5A.
LO 3-3
Winter submitted a pay card reflecting the following hours worked at Kicy, 
Inc. Winter earns $16.02 per hour. The company pays overtime only on 
hours worked exceeding 40 per week. The company is considering chang￾ing from quarter-hour to hundredth-hour time collection. Under the current 
quarter-hour system, each time the employee clocks in or out, the time is 
rounded to the nearest quarter-hour. Calculate Winter’s time for both the 
quarter-hour and hundredth-hour systems. (Round your intermediate calcu￾lations and final answers to two decimal places.)
What is Winter’s total pay in a quarter-hour system? _____
What is Winter’s total pay in a hundredth-hour system? _____
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch03_118-175.indd 165 07/17/23 04:00 pm
Chapter 3  Gross Pay Computation   165
P3-6A.
LO 3-4
Rey is a nurse at Central City Hospital and is paid $32.50 per hour for a 
40-hour standard workweek. During the biweekly pay period from January 
9–20, Rey worked a total of 87 hours. What is Rey’s gross pay?
P3-7A.
LO 3-5
Terry, a single employee with two dependents under the age of 17, is paid 
$12 per hour and receives a commission on net sales for a company in 
Russelville, Oklahoma. No commission is received until net sales exceed 
$150,000. Once the minimum net sales are reached, the 4 percent com￾mission on sales applies. During the week of January 27, there were 
$87,000 of sales; however, there were $2,250 of returns from the prior 
week’s sales. Company policy requires that commissions on sales returns 
are deducted from the employee’s pay, regardless of current commission 
earnings. Compute Terry’s gross pay for the 40-hour weekly pay period.
Name
Filing 
Status Dependents
Hourly Rate 
or Period Salary
No. of 
Regular 
Hours Reg. Earnings Commissions
Gross 
Earnings
Employee
Number of New 
Customers Signed
Total 
Commission
Difference between 
Commission and 
Minimum Pay (if the 
minimum is not met) Total Gross Pay
A 25
B 18
C 23
D 15
P3-8A.
LO 3-1, 3-2
Shawn, an outside sales representative for Marosh Communications in 
Caldwell, Idaho, receives a 20 percent commission on all new marketing 
packages sold within the sales territory. During the week of April 6, there 
were $9,700 of new subscriptions sold during 40 hours of work.
What is Shawn’s gross pay?
Are the wages subject to minimum wage laws?
Why or why not?
P3-9A.
LO 3-1, 3-2
Telemarketers receive a $15 commission on all new customers that sign 
up for cell phone service through Movill Networks in Mississippi. Each 
telemarketer works 40 hours. The company ran a competition this week to 
see who could sign up the largest number of new customers, and the win￾ner would get a bonus of $75. Because these employees are paid solely 
on commission, the employer must ensure that they earn the federal mini￾mum wage for 40 hours each week. Compute the gross pay for each of 
the following outbound sales representatives.
P3-10A.
LO 3-1, 3-2
Each of the following workers is a piece-rate worker at Golden Boats in 
Connecticut. If the employees have a standard 40-hour workweek, what 
is their effective hourly wage? Based on the state’s minimum wage in 
Connecticut, calculate each employee’s minimum weekly pay. What is the 
difference the employer must pay between the calculated gross pay and 
the calculated state’s minimum pay if any? (Reminder: Divide gross pay by 
40 hours to determine the hourly wage.)
Final PDF to printer166   Chapter 3  Gross Pay Computation
lan43463_ch03_118-175.indd 166 07/17/23 04:00 pm
Worker Number of Items Rate per Item
Gross 
Pay
Gross Pay/
40 Hours
Minimum 
Pay
Difference to 
Be Paid by the 
Employer
P 25 boat hulls $25
Q 150 seat covers $10
R 15 steering 
mechanisms $24
Name
Filing 
Status Dependents
Hourly
Rate or
Period
Wage
Overtime 
Rate
No. of 
Regular
Hours
No. of 
Overtime 
Hours
Reg. 
Earnings Tips
Overtime 
Earnings
Gross 
Earnings
Name
Filing 
Status Dependents
Period 
Salary
Hourly 
Rate
No. of 
Regular 
Hours
No. of 
Overtime 
Hours
Reg. 
Earnings
Overtime 
Earnings
Gross 
Earnings
P3-11A.
LO 3-4
Corey, a nonexempt salesperson with Verent Enterprises, earns a base 
annual salary of $30,000 with a standard 40-hour workweek. In addition, 
a 3 percent commission on all sales during the pay period applies. During 
the weekly pay period ending August 25, Corey closed $25,000 in sales 
and worked four hours of overtime. What is the gross pay for the period?
P3-12A.
LO 3-1,
3-2, 3-4
Reed is a waiter at Albicious Foods in South Carolina. Reed is single with 
one other dependent and receives the standard tipped hourly wage. 
During the week ending October 20, 2023, 44 hours were worked, and 
Reed received $210 in tips. Calculate Reed’s gross pay, assuming tips are 
included in the overtime rate determination.
Does Albicious Foods need to contribute to Reed’s wages to meet FLSA 
requirements? _____
If so, how much should be contributed? _____
P3-13A.
LO 3-5
Parker is a salaried, nonexempt administrator for Forise Industries and is 
paid biweekly. The annual salary is $63,000 with a standard workweek of 
40 hours. During the pay period ending February 3, 2023, Parker worked 
eight hours of overtime. Parker is married filing jointly with two dependents 
under the age of 17. Complete the following payroll register for Parker’s 
pay. (Round intermediate calculations to two decimal points.)
What is Parker’s regular wage for the pay period? _____
What are the overtime earnings? _____
What is Parker’s gross pay?
P3-14A.
LO 3-7
Rico Musgrove is an 18-year-old worker in the receiving department of 
Trynix, Inc. in Alabama. Rico received $170.00 gross pay for 40 hours of 
work on the first paycheck. Did the employer pay Rico correctly? Explain.
E3-1B.
LO 3-1
A minimum wage worker in Oklahoma is contemplating moving to a state 
with a more favorable minimum wage. Which of the following states should 
be chosen? (Select all that apply.)
1. Texas
2. Arkansas
3. Louisiana
4. New Mexico
Exercises Set B
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch03_118-175.indd 167 07/17/23 04:00 pm
Chapter 3  Gross Pay Computation   167
E3-2B.
LO 3-1
Which one of the following workers is covered by FLSA provisions? (Select 
all that apply.)
1. Factory manager for an international company
2. Part-time babysitter earning $1,000 annually
3. Professional chauffeur earning $25,000 annually
4. Assistant fire chief for a small town
E3-3B.
LO 3-1
Caelen is a tipped employee at Wild Waves in Maine. What is the minimum 
tipped wage for the area, assuming receipt of tips in excess of $30 per pay 
period?
1. $9.35/hour
2. $2.13/hour
3. $6.90/hour
4. $8.25/hour
E3-4B.
LO 3-1
Brett is a waitperson at a diner in Vermont. Brett earns the tipped minimum 
wage. During a 40-hour workweek in February 2023, how much must 
Brett earn in tips to satisfy the minimum wage requirement (without consid￾eration of the tip credit)?
1. $85.20
2. $263.60
3. $190.00
4. $349.80
E3-5B.
LO 3-2
Amari is an interior designer for Only Qex Designs. Amari is paid based on 
the number and complexity of the customer designs generated. What pay 
basis most accurately describes this compensation?
1. Hourly
2. Commission
3. Piece rate
4. Salary
E3-6B.
LO 3-3
Dorian is a stocker at a factory outlet, paid hourly earning $12.45 per hour. 
During a one-week period, Dorian worked 39 hours and 19 minutes. How 
much would the gross pay be under the quarter-hour system? (Round your 
final answer to two decimal places.)
1. $485.55
2. $488.66
3. $489.49
4. $491.78
E3-7B.
LO 3-4
What are the two methods an employer may use to determine a tipped 
employee’s overtime compensation?
1. Compute gross pay based on the minimum cash wage plus tips.
2. Compute gross pay based on an average of the minimum cash wage 
and the maximum tip credit.
3. Compute gross pay based on the minimum cash wage, excluding tips.
4. Compute gross pay based on the minimum cash wage multiplied by the 
overtime rate (i.e., 1.5).
E3-8B.
LO 3-4
Beasley is a salaried nonexempt accounting clerk contracted to work 40 
hours per week. How should overtime be determined, according to FLSA?
1. Any hours worked in excess of 40 during a consecutive 7-day period
2. Any hours worked in excess of 45 during a consecutive 7-day period
3. Any hours worked in excess of 80 during a consecutive 14-day period
4. Any hours worked in excess of 45 during a consecutive 14-day period
E3-9B.
LO 3-5
Of the following items listed, which ones should appear in a payroll regis￾ter? (Select all that apply.)
1. Gross pay
2. Hourly rate
3. Period ending date
4. Office number
Final PDF to printer168   Chapter 3  Gross Pay Computation
lan43463_ch03_118-175.indd 168 07/17/23 04:00 pm
E3-11B.
LO 3-6
Ret is an employee earning a base salary of $27,200 plus an 8 percent 
commission on all sales. Ret is married filing jointly with four dependents, 
three under 17 and one other. During the biweekly pay period that ended 
June 16, Ret made $15,000 in sales. Complete the payroll register for the 
pay period.
E3-12B.
LO 3-7
Averill is 18 years of age, and a new employee in Hendersonville, 
Tennessee. What is the minimum hourly wage that may be received during 
the first 90 days of employment?
1. $9.47 per hour
2. $2.13 per hour
3. $7.25 per hour
4. $4.25 per hour
E3-10B.
LO 3-4, 3-5
Cax is an hourly employee, single with no dependents, and earns $16.25 
per hour. During a biweekly pay period ending February 17, Cax worked 
88.5 hours. Complete the payroll register with the period’s information, 
assuming a 40-hour week. (Note: Round overtime rate computation to 
three decimal places. All earnings should be rounded to two decimal 
places.)
Name
Filing 
Status Dependents Period Salary Sales Reg. Earnings Commission Earnings Gross Earnings
Name
Filing 
Status Dependents
Hourly 
Rate
Overtime 
Rate
No. of 
Regular
Hours
No
Overtime 
Hours
Regular
Earnings
Overtime 
Earnings
Gross 
Earnings
P3-1B.
LO 3-3
Andy worked the following schedule: Monday, 7 hours 42 minutes; Tuesday, 
8 hours 23 minutes; Wednesday, 9 hours 28 minutes; Thursday, 8 hours 12 
minutes; Friday, 8 hours 6 minutes. The employer pays overtime in accor￾dance with FLSA regulations. Determine the total time worked according to 
the (a) quarter-hour method and (b) the hundredth-hour method. Which is the 
more favorable method, quarter-hour or hundredth-hour?
P3-2B.
LO 3-2
Kenete is a salaried exempt employee at Big State College with a contract 
that stipulates 35 hours per week at $57,000 per year. Kenete is mar￾ried, filing jointly, with two dependents under 17. The pay period ending 
December 1 contained two company-paid holidays. Calculate Kenete’s 
biweekly pay based on a standard five-day workweek. Round wages to 
five decimal points. (Hint: Determine Kenete’s hourly wage to determine 
holiday pay.)
Problems Set B
Quarter￾Hour Time
Hundredth￾Hour Time
More Favorable 
Method
Anders
Name
Filing 
Status Dependents Period Salary Hourly Rate
No. of 
Regular 
Hours
No. of 
Holiday 
Hours
Reg. 
Earnings
Holiday 
Earnings
Gross 
Earnings
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch03_118-175.indd 169 07/17/23 04:00 pm
Chapter 3  Gross Pay Computation   169
P3-3B.
LO 3-2
Egon completed 1,750 pieces on a 2,000-piece contract. There is a bonus 
earned if the individual exceeds 115 percent of the piece contract. How 
many more pieces must Egon complete in the remainder of the pay period 
to receive the bonus?
P3-4B.
LO 3-4, 3-5
Charlie is a shared employee who works in the accounting department 
and has been trained to work at the front desk in times of need. During 
one weekly pay period, Charlie was asked to work at the front desk for 
four days for five hours each day. Charlie earns $17.26 per hour in the 
accounting department and $13.75 per hour for working at the front desk. 
Charlie worked a total of 45 hours during the week. Complete the payroll 
register using separate lines for each job classification, and place the over￾time in the accounting department.
Name
Filing 
Status Hourly Rate
No. of 
Regular 
Hours
No. of 
Overtime 
Hours Reg. Earnings
Overtime 
Earnings Gross Earnings
In Out In Out
Total Hours with 
Quarter-Hour
Total Hours with 
Hundredth-Hour
8:10 11:54 12:47 4:52
9:02 12:23 1:11 5:07
7:52 11:48 12:52 4:21
7:58 12:18 1:06 5:17
P3-5B.
LO 3-3
Devin earns $15.30 per hour at Jolly Creamery. Compute the pay under 
both the hundredth-hour and quarter-hour systems. The company is 
considering switching from a quarter-hour method to a hundredth-hour 
method. Devin submitted the following time card. (Hint: Convert times to a 
24-hour clock for ease of computation.)
Devin’s total pay in the hundredth-hour system: _____
Devin’s total pay in a quarter-hour system: _____
Which is the most beneficial for Devin? _____
P3-6B.
LO 3-4
Hayden is the concierge at Hotel Amize and is a nonexempt employee 
earning $18 per hour plus a $250 biweekly bonus based on customer 
reviews. During the pay period of November 26 through December 9, 
Hayden worked 85 hours and earned the entire bonus. What is Hayden’s 
gross pay for the pay period, assuming a 40-hour standard workweek?
P3-7B.
LO 3-4, 3-5
Pat is married, filing jointly with two other dependents, is paid $17.25 per 
hour and receives a commission on sales. No commission is paid out until 
sales exceed $60,000. Once the minimum sales have been reached, a 7 
percent commission on sales applies. For the week ending June 10, Pat 
worked 48 hours and sold $75,000 of medical supplies. Compute Pat’s 
gross pay for the week.
Name
Filing 
Status Dependents
Hourly 
Rate or 
Period 
Wage
No. of 
Regular 
Hours
No. of 
Overtime 
Hours Commissions
Reg. 
Earnings
Overtime 
Earnings
Gross 
Earnings
Final PDF to printer170   Chapter 3  Gross Pay Computation
lan43463_ch03_118-175.indd 170 07/17/23 04:00 pm
P3-8B.
LO 3-1, 3-2
An outside sales representative in Albuquerque, New Mexico, receives a 
4 percent commission on all new policies in the sales territory. During the 
pay period ending April 14, $150,000 of new policies were sold during 40 
hours of work.
What is the gross pay? _____
Is this subject to minimum wage laws? _____
Why or why not? _____
P3-9B.
LO 3-1, 3-2
Outbound sales representatives at Alindu Magazines in Arizona receive a 
$20 commission on all new customers they sign up for new magazine sub￾scriptions. Each Outbound sales representative works 40 hours. During a 
weekly competition, the Outbound sales representative who sold the most 
subscriptions was awarded a $125 bonus. Because these employees are 
paid solely on commission, the employer must ensure that they earn the 
federal minimum wage for 40 hours each week. Compute the gross pay 
for each of the following Outbound sales representatives and the differ￾ence when the commission pay is less than the gross pay at minimum 
wage.
P3-10B.
LO 3-1, 3-2
Determine the gross pay for each of the piece-rate workers at Perigen 
Snowsports. If the employees have a standard 37.5-hour workweek, 
determine their effective hourly rate. Based on the minimum wage for New 
Hampshire, what is the minimum wage they must receive each week? If 
they are not receiving the FLSA minimum wage for the pay period, what is 
the difference that must be paid by the employer? (Remember: Effective 
hourly rate equals the gross pay divided by 37.5 hours.)
Employee
New Customers 
Signed
Total 
Commission
Gross Pay at 
Minimum 
Wage
Difference between 
Commission and 
Minimum Pay (if the 
minimum is not met)
F 35
G 19
H 42
I 29
Worker Number of Items
Rate 
per Item
Gross 
Pay
Gross Pay/
37.5 Hours
Minimum 
Pay
Difference to 
Be Paid by the 
Employer
S 25 snowboards $9.00
A 30 helmets $7.75
L 80 bindings $4.50
P3-11B.
LO 3-4
A piece-rate employee receives $30 for each desktop computer assem￾bled and has a standard 40-hour workweek. During the weekly pay period 
ending December 15, 48 computers were assembled during 44 hours, all 
of which are productive hours. What is the gross pay for this period?
P3-12B.
LO 3-1, 3-2
Parker is the concierge at the Trans-Canada Resort in Michigan. Parker is 
single with one other dependent and receives the standard tipped hourly 
wage for the state. During the week ending June 2, Parker worked 40 
hours and received $105 in tips. Compute Parker’s pay for the period.
Name Filing Status Dependents
Hourly Rate
or Period 
Wage
No. of 
Regular 
Hours Reg. Earnings Tips Gross Earnings
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch03_118-175.indd 171 07/17/23 04:00 pm
Chapter 3  Gross Pay Computation   171
Does the Trans-Canada Resort need to contribute to Parker’s wages to 
meet FLSA minimum wage requirements? _____
If so, how much must the employer contribute? _____
P3-13B.
LO 3-5
Preethi is a salaried, nonexempt administrative assistant and is paid semi￾monthly. Preethi is married filing jointly with five dependents under 17. 
Annual salary is $65,000 with a standard workweek of 37.5 hours, and 
the employer will pay overtime for excess hours over 37.5. During the pay 
period, 10 hours of overtime were worked. Compute the gross pay for the 
period ending August 18.
Name
Filing 
Status
Period
Salary Hourly Rate
Overtime 
Rate
No.of
Overtime
Hours
Reg.
Earnings
Overtime 
Earnings
Gross 
Earnings
P3-14B.
LO 3-7
A 19-year-old accounting clerk with Quijen Accounting Solutions 
(there is not a state minimum wage) received $369.75 for the first 
biweekly pay covering 87 regular hours. Did the employer pay the 
clerk correctly? Explain.
Critical Thinking
3-1. West Virginia State University has a policy of hiring students to work in its bookstores 
and cafeterias. Assuming that 138 students work for the university at minimum wage 
rates, what is the total amount of pay they will receive for a biweekly pay period, 
assuming each works 30 hours per week?
3-2. You are the owner of Veiled Wonders, a firm that makes window treatments. Some mer￾chandise is custom-made to customer specifications, and some are mass-produced 
in standardized measurements. There are production workers who work primarily 
on standardized blinds and some employees who work on custom products on an 
as-needed basis. How should you structure the pay methods for these production 
workers?
In the Real World: Scenario for Discussion
Many states offer incentives to hire individuals with physical or mental disabilities. When 
doing so, the employer must receive a specific waiver allowing them to pay sub-minimum 
wage. This can be a great outreach for the employer in assisting the disabled community 
to obtain independence and a sense of self-worth.
Review two state agencies, determine the wages that may be paid to workers with 
disabilities, and what benefits two different states have. What federal incentives are there 
for hiring disabled workers?
Internet Activities
3-1. Using a search engine such as Google, Yahoo, or Bing, search “commission-based 
pay.” Sites such as the Society for Human Resource Management (www.shrm.com) 
have many articles about commission-based pay and workplace cases. Choose a 
case and find out as much as you can about the company involved. Why do you 
think that commission-based pay is such a popular topic among human resource 
professionals?
3-2. Go to www.accountingtools.com/podcasts and look for payroll-related podcasts. 
Once you have listened to one or more podcasts, what do you feel was the most 
interesting information you learned?
Final PDF to printer172   Chapter 3  Gross Pay Computation
lan43463_ch03_118-175.indd 172 07/17/23 04:00 pm
3-3. Want to learn more about the concepts in this chapter? Check out
www.dol.gov/whd/minwage/america.htm
www.flsa.com/coverage.html
http://webapps.dol.gov/elaws/otcalculator.htm
3-4. Would you like to watch a video to learn more about FLSA’s treatment of minimum 
wage, hours worked, and overtime? Check out the following links:
Topic 2: Minimum Wage
Topic 4: Hours Worked
Topic 5: Overtime
Continuing Payroll Project: Prevosti Farms and Sugarhouse
The first day of work for Prevosti Farms and Sugarhouse for all employees is February 1, 
2023. February 10 is the end of the first pay period and includes work completed during 
the week of February 1–10 (weekdays only). Compute the employee gross pay using 40 
hours as the standard workweek for all employees except Mary Shangraw, who works 20 
hours per week and receives overtime for any time worked past that point per company 
policy. The other hourly employees receive overtime pay when they work more than 40 
hours in one week. Joel Schwartz has made $5,000 in case sales at a 3 percent commis￾sion rate during this pay period. Remember that the employees are paid biweekly. The 
pay frequency for federal income tax purposes is biweekly. For nonexempt employees, 
over 64 hours (8 days at 8 hours per day, except Shangraw who works 4 hours per day) in 
the first payroll will be overtime.
February
Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday
1 2 3 4
5 6 7 8 9 10 11
12 13 14 15 16 17 18
19 20 21 22 23 24 25
26 27 28
When determining the amount an exempt employee receives for partial weeks, take their 
salary divided by the number of weeks times days worked. Annual salary: $35,000/(52 ×
5) = $35,000/260 = $134.61538 (rounded to five decimal points) per day. Once you have 
a per-day rate, multiply it by the number of days worked. Exempt employee salary informa￾tion is as follows:
Name Annual Salary Notes
Millen $35,000
Lewis $32,000
Schwartz $32,000 plus 3% commission on sales
Prevosti $45,000
The hours for the nonexempt employees are as follows:
Name Hourly 
Rate
Hours Worked 
2/1–2/10
Regular 
Time Pay
Overtime 
Pay
Gross Pay
Towle $15.00 64 hours
Long $15.00 66 hours
Shangraw $15.00 32 hours
Success (You) $16.35 65 hours
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch03_118-175.indd 173 07/17/23 04:00 pm
Chapter 3  Gross Pay Computation   173
Complete the payroll register for the period’s gross pay. Pay will be disbursed on February 
14, 2023, starting with check number 6628.
February 24, 2023, is the end of the final pay period for the month and is a full biweekly 
payroll. Schwartz has sold $7,500 of products during this pay period at a 3 percent com￾mission. Complete the payroll register for the period’s gross pay. Pay will be disbursed on 
February 28, 2023, and check numbers will continue from the prior payroll.
The hours for the nonexempt employees are as follows:
Name Hourly Rate Hours Worked 
2/11–2/24
Regular 
Time Pay
Overtime 
Pay
Gross 
Pay
Towle $15.00 83 hours
Long $15.00 80 hours
Shangraw $15.00 42 hours
Success (You) $16.35 81 hours
P/R End Date 
Check Date Company Name: 
Name
Filing 
Status
Type and 
Number of 
Dependents
Hourly Rate 
or Period
Wage
No. of 
Regular 
Hours
No. of 
Overtime 
Hours
No. of 
Holiday 
Hours Commissions
Gross 
Earnings Sec 125 401(k)
Taxable 
Wages for 
Federal and 
State W/H
Totals
Name Gross Earnings
Taxable 
Wages for 
Federal and 
State W/H
Taxable
Wages
for FICA
Federal 
W/H
Social 
Security 
Tax
Medicare 
W/H
State 
W/H
Tax
Garnish￾ment
United
Way Net Pay
Totals
Answers to Stop & Check Exercises
Pay Your Employees Correctly
1. No. Pai should have received time-and-a-half for the additional 8 hours. Her pay 
should have been $667.00 [(80 × 7.25) + (8 × 1.5 × 7.25)].
2. $523.38 (rounded) (39.5 × 13.25)
3. $677.76 (32 × 2 × 10.59)
4. $746.25 (75 × 9.95)
Final PDF to printer174   Chapter 3  Gross Pay Computation
lan43463_ch03_118-175.indd 174 07/17/23 04:00 pm
Computations for Different Bases
1. $6,744.00 ($224,800 × 3%)
2. $1,100.00. Yes, because $1,100.00/90 hours = $12.22 per hour. South Carolina 
has no dictated minimum wage, so federal minimum wage would apply.
3. The current pay would be lower when the employee does not have paid leave avail￾able. An employee with paid leave would only have classification differences but 
would receive their full pay.
Standard salary per biweekly payroll: $57,000/26 = $2,192.310769
($57,000/(40 × 26 × 2)) = $27.40384 per hour × (8 × 3) for unpaid leave of $657.69216
Current pay $2,192.30769 – 657.69216 = $1,534.62 (rounded)
Quarter-Hour vs. Hundredth-Hour
1. A:
Quarter-hour: 8.25 hours
Hundredth-hour: 7.93 hours
B:
Quarter-hour: 8 hours
Hundredth-hour: 8.12 hours
C:
Quarter-hour: 8 hours
Hundredth-hour: 7.82 hours
2. The difference exists because the time worked during a quarter-hour system is 
rounded to the nearest quarter-hour. In a hundredth-hour system, the worker is paid 
for the exact number of minutes worked.
3. It would be beneficial to adopt a hundredth-hour system to reduce payroll inaccura￾cies that may affect both employees and company profits.
How Does Overtime Affect Gross Pay?
1. FLSA Section 7(j) covers the overtime rules for hospital and residential care facilities 
and would fall under the 8 and 80 rule.
2. Since the commissions do not represent more than half of her pay, they have no 
effect on overtime earnings.
3. This employer could include tips by adding them to gross pay based on the cash 
wage. This total with tips becomes the hourly rate used to determine overtime earn￾ings. The other method would be to exclude the tip income, using the cash wage 
only as the basis for overtime computations.
The Payroll Register
1. To document the employees’ time and hours worked as well as to provide totals of 
the compensation by each category.
2. Student answers should include five of the following: Name, marital status, number 
of withholdings, hourly rate, number of regular hours, number of overtime hours, 
commission, piece rate, regular earnings, overtime earnings, and gross earnings.
3. To facilitate calculations of regular and overtime, help ensure accuracy, and allow for 
analysis of overtime worked.
Combination Pay Methods
1. Base pay = $42,000 ÷ 24 = $1,750
Commission = $100 × 5 = $500
Gross pay = $2,250
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch03_118-175.indd 175 07/17/23 04:00 pm
Chapter 3  Gross Pay Computation   175
2. $36,000 ÷ 12 = $3,000 per month
$3,000 × 0.35 = $1,050 mid-month draw
$3,000 – $1,050 draw = $1,950 received at the end of the month
3. $75,000 × 0.03 = $2,250 received in stock
Annual compensation = $75,000 + $2,250 = $77,250
What Is the Correct Pay?
1. 15 hours because compensatory time must be awarded at 1.5 times regular hours.
2. $5.44 per hour ($7.25 × 75%)
Dollar sign made from binary numbers: Ralf Hiemisch/Getty Images
Final PDF to printer176
lan43463_ch04_176-215.indd 176 07/08/23 03:43 pm
Fringe benefits are noncash forms of compensation that employers use 
to reward an employee for company service. Examples of fringe benefits 
include the use of a company car, health and life insurance, dependent care, 
gym memberships, and many other perks offered as a privilege of working 
for a particular employer. Employers are not required to offer fringe bene￾fits, and the presence of certain benefits serves as an incentive for potential 
employees to join the company. By offering fringe benefits, an employer can 
avoid the need to rely on high salary and wage amounts to attract employees 
and build morale. However, the cost of offering fringe benefits can impede 
the company’s cash flow. The challenge is to provide a salary and fringe 
benefit package that attracts the desired employees at a manageable cost.
The IRS classifies fringe benefits as deductible from an employee’s pay 
on either a pre-tax or a post-tax basis, depending on the type of benefit. 
Pre-tax deductions reduce the employee’s current taxable income and may 
be taxed at a later time; for example, contributions to a qualifying retirement 
program would be a pre-tax deduction. Other fringe benefits are deducted 
from an employee’s compensation after computing taxes, making the perk 
a post-tax benefit. The IRS clearly differentiates between taxable and non￾taxable fringe benefits in Publication 15-B.
Fringe Benefits and 
Voluntary Deductions
4
Chapter Four
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying Chapter 4, you should be able to:
LO 4-1 Define Fringe Benefits within the Context of Payroll
LO 4-2 Interpret Cafeteria Plan Types
LO 4-3 Describe Fringe Benefit Exclusion Rules
LO 4-4 Explain Fringe Benefit Valuation Rules
LO 4-5 Differentiate between Pre-tax and Post-tax Deductions
LO 4-6 Apply Rules for Withholding, Depositing, and Reporting Benefits
Final PDF to printerChapter 4  Fringe Benefits and Voluntary Deductions   177
lan43463_ch04_176-215.indd 177 07/08/23 03:43 pm
Employers Must Integrate Benefit Programs 
into Company Culture
With the expansion of hybrid work arrangements, it has become imperative for employers 
to integrate benefit offerings to match the company culture. One way to achieve this inte￾gration is to include employees in the benefits planning because of the disconnect that 
can occur when employers offer benefits without knowing employee needs. Employers 
need to include benefit topics in company meetings to remind employees of benefits they 
may have forgotten.
Wellness benefits are a significant topic that employees may overlook during their 
day-to-day work challenges. “Soft” benefits such as flexible work schedules, massages, 
and financial counseling are popular among employees and lead to better retention. 
One issue with the flexible work schedules that could be solved by integrating benefits 
more intentionally into company culture is the “out of sight, out of mind” phenomenon 
that occurs. Normalization of working from remote locations and team building events 
that include remote workers could alleviate the problem and keep employers aware of 
talented employees when internal job openings arise. One thing is certain: An increase in 
soft benefits leads to employee satisfaction.
(Sources: EBN, SHRM)
fizkes/ShutterStock
Despite the additional cost involved, fringe benefits are an important 
part of attracting and retaining high-quality employees. We will 
explore different types of fringe benefits and their treatment for 
payroll purposes in Chapter 4.
Final PDF to printer178   Chapter 4  Fringe Benefits and Voluntary Deductions
lan43463_ch04_176-215.indd 178 07/08/23 03:43 pm
LO 4-1 Define Fringe Benefits within the Context of Payroll
Payroll has been said to be the intersection of human resources and 
accounting because of the need to include employee information and 
record all financial transactions involving work performed. Fringe ben￾efits are an extension of that notion because these benefits are rewards 
given to employees in return for their service to the company. The corre￾lation between employee satisfaction and retention is often a result of the 
employer’s fringe benefits.
The term fringe was applied to these noncash benefits because they were 
insignificant in total employee compensation. Over time, the Bureau of 
Labor Statistics has found that fringe benefits actually constitute an additional 25–33 percent 
of an employee’s annual compensation. Despite the inherent monetary value, the importance 
of fringe benefits is best seen in terms of employee satisfaction, and long-term increases in 
revenue and net income. This section will examine the purpose of fringe benefits and the 
treatment of this form of noncash compensation as it pertains to pay and taxation.
Purpose of Fringe Benefits
Employees have often been considered one of the costs of conducting business. The employ￾er’s obligation to pay employment taxes and supply additional benefits to entice employee 
engagement was viewed as a necessary, albeit expensive, part of its financial structure. 
Research conducted during the past decade has found that the advantages gained from provid￾ing fringe benefits far outweigh the related costs in terms of employee productivity, creativ￾ity, and revenue production.
Starting in September 2021, a significant number of employees have left their jobs look￾ing for many things, including flexibility, comprehensive benefits, and a supportive, caring 
culture. To employers, what this is looking like is an increase in mental health focus, steady 
wages, and benefits that can foster empathy while maintaining profitability.
stoatphoto/Shutterstock
Employers should continually introduce new or expanded benefit plans to attract, 
develop, and keep good employees, especially during and after COVID. Examples of 
companies offering such benefits include:
• PricewaterhouseCoopers and Fidelity Investments have benefits packages that 
include mental health and child care to support employees who work from home.
• Noodles & Company offered a program called LifeAtNoodles that included a wide 
range of benefits, including expanded, flexible time off, wellness initiatives, family 
planning, and other incentives.
• Prudential included education and support to teach coping methods during the 
pandemic.
• Domino’s offered employees an option to receive their pay on demand at the end of 
daily work shifts.
In addition to a company’s existing benefits, it has been noted that adding an extra 
benefit each year, no matter how small, goes a long way toward employee retention. 
Simple ideas such as the addition of a day to bring your dog to work cost the employer 
nothing, but the payoff in morale is huge.
(Sources: Employee Benefits News1, Employee Benefits News2)
Hallmarks of fringe benefits include the following indicators:
∙ All employees have access to the benefit because of their working relationship with the 
employer.
∙ Employees enjoy improved living conditions as a result of the benefit.
Final PDF to printerChapter 4  Fringe Benefits and Voluntary Deductions   179
lan43463_ch04_176-215.indd 179 07/08/23 03:43 pm
∙ The ability to receive the benefit is not related to employee performance.
∙ Fringe benefits supplement employees’ cash compensation.
∙ These benefits may be deducted either pre- or post-tax.
∙ Fringe benefits promote the welfare of all employees.
∙ Legislative treatment of fringe benefits involves certain mandatory tax deductions from 
employee pay.
Fringe benefits may be included in employee pay, although they are not part of the cash 
compensation package. It is important to note fringe benefits are taxable unless they are spe￾cifically excluded per Publication 15-B. In the next section, we will explore how fringe bene￾fits appear on an employee’s pay advice.
Including Benefits in Pay
In Chapter 3, we discussed the computation of employee gross pay. Some fringe benefits may 
increase employee pay and could be taxable. Examples of this include but are not limited to 
employer-provided vehicles, mileage, leasing, and commuting. The items to be included in 
gross pay are valued at the level as if they were purchased through a third party, often referred 
to as an arms-length transaction.
State laws regarding fringe benefits, while based on IRS regulations, may vary regard￾ing paid sick time and paid time off. Furthermore, employees must receive an annual 
notice that contains details about balances accrued in sick time and paid time off cate￾gories. Employers are not required to disburse cash compensation for the accrued time 
at termination and can decide if the unused time may be rolled over to the next year.
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, the landscape of fringe benefits has changed 
to support differences in employee needs. Health plans were redesigned to address 
employees’ mental and financial health needs. Diversity and inclusion programs were 
recognized as vital elements of employee benefits programs. This new breed of ben￾efits has been termed “lifestyle benefits” because it can be individualized to meet 
employee needs.
(Sources: BenefitsPro; Employee Benefit News)
Fringe Benefits and Payroll Taxes
Certain fringe benefits change tax calculations, such as Federal withholding, Medicare, or 
Social Security taxes. Others do not affect the calculation for taxes and are considered post￾tax benefits. The IRS requires that all fringe benefits that involve deductions from pay or for 
which the employee contributes part of regular compensation must be listed explicitly on the 
employee’s pay advice. A sample pay advice is contained in Figure 4-1. The affected deduc￾tions include Federal withholding (W/H), SSI, Medicare, and State withholding (W/H), and 
the fringe benefits include pre-tax insurance and 401(k) voluntary deductions.
An exception to this requirement involves de minimis benefits. De minimis benefits 
include items with a value that is so minimal that accounting for it would be unnecessary. 
These items include an occasional coffee or an isolated postage stamp, both relatively small 
in value. However, it should be noted that when de minimis items become a regular benefit, 
such as a cup of coffee every day, instead of an occasional one, then the value aggregates to 
become a sum that could be treated as taxable income.
De minimis benefits, according to IRS Publication 15-B, have such minimal account￾ing value that the accounting for it is deemed impractical. Examples of de minimis benefits 
include (but are not limited to):
∙ Employee use of a company copier, as long as personal use does not exceed 15 percent of the 
employee’s total usage of that equipment for business purposes.
Final PDF to printer180   Chapter 4  Fringe Benefits and Voluntary Deductions
lan43463_ch04_176-215.indd 180 07/08/23 03:43 pm
∙ Noncash, low-value holiday or birthday gifts.
∙ Similar gifts for family illnesses or birth celebrations.
∙ Group-term life insurance for the death of a dependent if the life insurance face value does not 
exceed $2,000.
∙ Certain meals, occasional picnics, and parties for employees and their guests.
∙ Occasional tickets to sporting or theater events.
∙ Personal use of an employer-provided cell phone is provided primarily for non-compensatory 
business purposes.
Notice that de minimis benefits are generally classified as occasional use. If the use of a 
fringe benefit becomes more than occasional, such as season tickets to sporting or arts events 
or club memberships, the benefits are not considered de minimis.
(Source: IRS)
FIGURE 4-1
Sample Pay Advice
980.40
Total Deductions 597.23 11,347.37
Hazlitt Industries
2210 Secours Way
Springfield, MA 02312
Stephen Torrisi 11/05/20XX
1,720.00 32,680.00
City/State Zip: Agawam, MA 02249
10/31/20XX Payroll Pay Date 11/05/20XX
Stephen Torrisi Employee Number 42850
Earnings
1,720.00 32,680.00 Federal W/H 275.47 5,233.93
106.64 2,026.16
1,122.77
Payee: Stephen Torrisi
Address: 3230 Longview Drive
One-thousand one-hundred twenty-two and 77/100
199203
YTD Gross Description Deductions YTD Deductions
24.94 473.86
88.58 1,683.02
Pretax Insurance 50.00 950.00
51.60
Date
dollars
Signed:
Payroll End Date Check: 199203
Employee Name Rate 21.50
Description
Regular
Holiday SSI
Commissions Medicare
State W/H
Total Earnings 401(k) 
Benefits offerings often constitute the difference when a jobseeker is choosing 
between employers. The type and amount of benefits offerings communicate the work 
culture, can attract talent, and affect employee engagement and productivity.
(Source: ADP)
Final PDF to printerChapter 4  Fringe Benefits and Voluntary Deductions   181
lan43463_ch04_176-215.indd 181 07/08/23 03:43 pm
Fringe Benefits and Payroll Tax Treatment
Type of Fringe Benefit Income Tax 
Exempt
FICA Taxes 
Exempt
FUTA Tax 
Exempt
Accident and health benefits* XX XX XX
Achievement awards (up to $1,600 for qualified plan awards, $400 for 
nonqualified)
XX XX XX
Adoption assistance XX
Athletic facilities owned or leased by the employer† XX XX XX
De minimis benefits XX XX XX
Dependent care assistance (up to $5,000 annually) XX XX XX
Education (i.e., tuition) assistance (up to $5,250 annually) XX XX XX
Employee discounts (various limits apply) XX XX XX
Employee stock options (depending on the type of option) XX XX XX
Employer-provided cell phone (if not otherwise compensated) XX XX XX
Group-term life insurance XX XX‡ XX
Health savings accounts (HSAs) for qualified individuals XX XX XX
Lodging on the employer’s premises (for the employer’s convenience as a condition 
of employment)
XX XX XX
Meals (exempt if de minimis or for employer convenience on employer premises) XX XX XX
No-additional-cost services XX XX XX
Retirement planning services XX XX XX
Transportation benefits (commuting and rail passes up to $300, exempt if de 
minimis)
XX XX XX
Tuition reduction for undergraduate education (graduate if the employee engages 
in teaching or research)
XX XX XX
Working condition benefits XX XX XX
*Does not include long-term care benefits if they are included in flexible spending accounts.
†
Exempt if substantially all use during the calendar year is by employees, their spouses, and their dependent children. The facility is on the employer’s premises or a location owned or 
leased by the employer.
‡
Up to cost of $50,000 of coverage. The excess over $50,000 must appear on the employee’s Form W-2.
(Source: IRS)
FIGURE 4-2
Fringe Benefits and Payroll Tax Treatment (IRS Publication 15-B)
Voluntary fringe benefits have two basic types of treatments regarding payroll taxes: They 
may be deducted either before or after mandatory deductions (i.e., taxes) have been cal￾culated. The IRS specifies which fringe benefits may be deducted on a pre-tax basis and 
which must be treated as post-tax deductions in Publication 15-B, which is updated annually. 
Employers are responsible for promptly remitting amounts withheld for fringe benefits and 
reporting annual totals to employees on Form W-2. Figure 4-2 details the types of fringe ben￾efits and their payroll tax treatment.
EXAMPLE: FRINGE BENEFIT
Rylan is an employee of Cohen Corporation, a com￾pany that offers undergraduate educational assis￾tance as a fringe benefit. According to the IRS, the first 
$5,250 of Rylan’s tuition assistance is not subject to 
payroll taxes. In 2023, Rylan received reimbursement 
from his employer of $7,250 in education assistance. 
Ground Picture/Shutterstock The additional $2,000 is taxable income for Rylan.
Final PDF to printer182   Chapter 4  Fringe Benefits and Voluntary Deductions
lan43463_ch04_176-215.indd 182 07/08/23 03:43 pm
Examples of qualified insurance benefits include:
• Accident and health benefits.
• Long-term care benefits.
• Group-term life insurance (including costs not excluded from wages).
• Health savings accounts (HSAs).
Fringe Benefits 101
&Check Stop
1. What are the two main categories of fringe benefits?
2. Which of the following benefits is not considered a fringe benefit? (Use Figure 
4-2 as a reference.)
a. Educational assistance for undergraduate students
b. Group-term life insurance over $250,000
c. Overtime hours worked during the year
d. Cell phones for business purposes
e. Retirement planning services
3. Which of the following fringe benefits would also be exempt from Social 
Security and Medicare taxes?
a. Working condition benefits
b. Adoption assistance
c. Qualified health savings accounts
LO 4-2 Interpret Cafeteria Plan Types
The Internal Revenue Code has a special program to assist workers 
with necessary healthcare expenses. Section 125 of the IRS code was 
initially enacted in 1978 and has been revised several times. It permits 
employers to offer employees a choice between two or more cash and 
qualified benefits. The employer must explicitly describe the plan benefit, 
rules governing the benefit, and ways to pay for and obtain the benefits. 
Employee-elected deductions for qualified cafeteria plan benefits are 
withheld on a pre-tax basis.
Cafeteria plans, also known as Section 125 plans, are offered by the employer and are 
usually deducted on a pre-tax basis to make employer-sponsored benefits more affordable 
for employees. In essence, a cafeteria plan allows employees to convert fringe (i.e., non￾cash) benefits into tax savings. Although they often pertain to health coverage, cafeteria plans 
may also include dependent care and other expenses. Participation in cafeteria plans poten￾tially saves employees upward of 7.65 percent (the FICA taxes) and may save more money, 
depending on their income tax bracket. If an employee chooses to receive benefits under the 
cafeteria plan, this does not convert a fringe benefit to a taxable one.
Premium-Only Plan (POP)
A premium-only plan (POP) is a type of cafeteria plan that allows employees to deduct pre￾miums for employer-sponsored group insurance on a pre-tax basis. Deducting the premium 
Rocketclips, Inc./Shutterstock
Final PDF to printerChapter 4  Fringe Benefits and Voluntary Deductions   183
lan43463_ch04_176-215.indd 183 07/08/23 03:43 pm
Health Dental Vision
Prescription Cancer Medicare supplement
Accident Disability Hospital indemnity
Employee group-term life*
*Employee group-term life insurance premiums are subject to a limit of $50,000 per employee and may be subject to a 10-employee minimum.
TABLE 4-1
Types of Insurance that May Be Included in a Premium-Only Plan
on a pre-tax basis allows the employee to have a lower tax liability. A list of POPs that 
employers may provide and that are subject to Section 125 pre-tax provisions is provided in 
Table 4-1. Note that not all employers offer all types of insurance coverage.
Employers benefit from offering POPs because employee premiums deducted on a pre￾tax basis reduce the employer’s FICA tax liability. Offering pre-tax deductions for group 
insurance coverage as part of their employee benefits package is also beneficial to employers 
because participation in health plans has been correlated with reductions in employee sick 
time and related healthcare costs. POPs allow employees to offset the cost of rising healthcare 
premiums by allowing employees to deduct the premiums on a pre-tax basis.
Pre-Tax vs. Post-Tax Premium Deduction
Pre-Tax Post-Tax
Period gross pay $2,500 $2,500
Health insurance premium 250 250
Taxable income $2,250 $2,500
EXAMPLE: PRE-TAX DEDUCTION OF HEALTH INSURANCE PREMIUM
Stevie Hollins, an employee of Wolfe & Associates, has the option to deduct her health 
insurance premium on a pre-tax basis. She consulted her payroll accountant about 
the difference between pre-tax and post-tax premium deductions and received this 
analysis:
The pre-tax deduction would lower taxable income, resulting in less federal, state, 
and local income tax deducted from Stevie’s pay.
Flexible Spending Arrangement (FSA)
Another benefit that can be included in the cafeteria plan is a flexible spending arrangement 
(FSA). FSAs are available to assist in the payment of medical expenses, including certain co￾payments and prescriptions, transportation, and certain childcare expenses. According to IRS 
Publication 502, examples of includible medical expenses are:
∙ Acupuncture
∙ Ambulance service
∙ Automobile expenses when traveling for medical purposes
∙ Braille books and magazines
∙ Chiropractor services
∙ Hearing aids
∙ Lead-based paint removal
∙ Wheelchairs
It should be noted that any employee contributions to an FSA over $3,050 annually (2023 
amount) are treated as taxable income. The FSA’s purpose is not to defer taxable income or to 
avoid paying taxes but to reduce the financial burden of healthcare costs.
Cafeteria plan-based FSAs generally have a “use it or lose it” provision, meaning that any 
unused funds at the end of the plan year may not be accessed afterward. However, the IRS 
Final PDF to printer184   Chapter 4  Fringe Benefits and Voluntary Deductions
lan43463_ch04_176-215.indd 184 07/08/23 03:43 pm
permits employers to roll over up to $500 annually per employee at the employer’s discretion. 
Because of the Taxpayer Certainty and Disaster Tax Relief Act of 2020, the FSA carryover 
increased to 20 percent of the allowable contribution for plans starting after 2020 for COVID￾related expenses. The employee would need to submit documentation that the expenses were 
related to COVID.
EXAMPLE: FSA EFFECT ON ANNUAL GROSS SALARY
For plans that have a year starting after December 31, 2022, the maximum annual 
amount an employee may contribute to an FSA offered under Section 125 is $3,050 
per person. As an example, Frankie is an employee of Kuzmeckis Doors, earns $50,000 
annually, and elects to contribute $2,700 of her annual pay to an employer-sponsored 
FSA. Her taxable pay would be reduced as follows:
Annual pay − FSA election = $50,000 − $2,700 = $47,300
Frankie has $500 remaining out of her annual FSA election at the end of the calendar 
year. Her employer allows her to carry over the balance to next year and requires that 
it be spent by March 15. She would need to spend the remaining balance on qualified 
medical expenses and provide documentation as required to support the expenditures. 
The employee would forfeit any amount remaining from the prior year after March 15.
One benefit of cafeteria plans is that employees may choose two or more benefits that 
consist of cash and noncash elements. For example, they may elect to have health insurance 
premiums and a flexible spending arrangement deducted on a pre-tax basis.
Pre-Tax vs. 
Post-Tax
Premium 
Deduction
Pre-Tax Post-Tax
Period gross pay $2,500 $2,500
Health insurance premium 250 250
FSA ($3,000/24) 125 -0-
Taxable income $2,125 $2,250
EXAMPLE: PRE-TAX VS. POST-TAX WITH A FLEXIBLE SPENDING 
ARRANGEMENT (FSA)
Harley can contribute to an FSA for annual out-of-pocket medical expenses and decides 
to use that to meet cafeteria plan requirements. Harley is paid semimonthly and decides 
to contribute $3,000 to a qualified FSA. The taxable income would be as follows:
Note the difference between the taxable incomes in both situations. The use of pre-tax 
deductions can significantly reduce Harley’s tax liability.
Healthcare costs have been rising, and they affect households differently, depending 
on their income. The following graph depicts how healthcare costs have contributed 
to people’s stress. For people with lower levels of income, approximately 60 percent 
indicated an increased level of financial stress due to healthcare costs.
Final PDF to printerChapter 4  Fringe Benefits and Voluntary Deductions   185
lan43463_ch04_176-215.indd 185 07/08/23 03:43 pm
Health Savings Account (HSA)
Another type of cafeteria plan is a health savings account (HSA) that can pay for qualified 
medical expenses. It is important to note that HSAs may only be used in conjunction with a 
cafeteria plan by employees with a high-deductible health plan (HDHP). The 2023 defini￾tion of a high-deductible health plan includes the following deductible limits:
∙ $1,500 annual deductible (self-coverage)
∙ $3,000 annual deductible (family)
∙ $7,500 out-of-pocket expenses maximum (self-coverage)
∙ $15,000 out-of-pocket expenses maximum (family)
Percentage of U.S. adults reporting the cost of healthcare for them and their family
contributed a lot or some to their stress of 2021, by income
0%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
Percentage of respondents
<$24K $24K≤$48K $48K≤$90K $90K≤$120K $120K≤$180K $180K+
48%
60%
63%
56%
41%
32%
(Source: Gallup)
FSA HSA
Must be offered by an employer. Only permitted for employees with an HDHP (see deductible 
rules).
Independent contractors do not qualify. Independent contractors do not qualify.
Employees may elect to contribute up to $3,050. Employees may contribute to HSAs as follows:
• $3,850 (single)
• $7,750 (married)
• $1,000 (additional catch-up amount for employees over 
age 55)
Employees may use any amount of the annual contribution 
at any time, regardless of how much they have contributed 
for the year.
Functions like a bank account in that the employee owns the 
funds contributed, although employers may also contribute 
funds.
The employer owns the plan, and the employer may retain 
unused balances in annual contributions.
All funds contributed are the property of the employee.
Employers can decide if they want to give employees a 
grace period (up to March 15 of the following year in most 
cases) to use annual elections.
Unused funds roll over each year and continue to grow 
with the account. Unused funds do not affect the yearly 
contribution limits.
Employees must provide receipts or provide evidence to 
support used funds.
Employees may not access more funds than they have 
contributed to the HSA.
FSA contributions are reported on the W-2. Employees must report all used funds with their personal 
income tax returns.
Annual contributions must be elected each year. Employees may change their annual contribution at any time.
FSA vs. HSA
Final PDF to printer186   Chapter 4  Fringe Benefits and Voluntary Deductions
lan43463_ch04_176-215.indd 186 07/08/23 03:43 pm
One aspect of HSAs that differentiates them from FSAs is that the 
amounts employees contribute to an HSA may remain in the account for 
use later in life. These funds may be reserved for medical costs and long￾term care and are not taxable when used for medical expenses. Money 
withdrawn for nonmedical expenses is subject to income taxes. Another 
difference is that anyone with an HDHP may establish an HSA with a 
trustee, even if their employer does not offer the benefit. However, not all 
HSAs can be considered tax-exempt. Only HSAs included as part of the 
company’s qualifying Section 125 cafeteria plan are deemed exempt from 
Social Security, Medicare, and federal income taxes.
Sashkin/Shutterstock
HDHPs are a way for employers to offer affordable insurance premiums for their 
employees. However, many employees have delayed care or have reported increased 
out-of-pocket costs while using an HDHP. Other employees with an HDHP reported 
that their employer offered no other healthcare option. Employees with an HSA as part 
of their HDHP noted an increase in their appreciation for the plan and its flexibility for 
future use.
(Source: PR Newswire)
An issue with cafeteria plans is the exclusion of sole proprietors, partners, and share￾holders in an S corporation who have greater than a 2 percent share in the company, 
and members of limited liability companies (LLCs) who elect to be taxed as partner￾ships. According to Section 125, these individuals may not participate in a cafeteria 
plan. The problem is that 73 percent of business owners fall into one of these exclu￾sions, which means that many people cannot participate in qualified cafeteria plans, 
missing out on the tax benefits.
(Source: Financial Regulation News)
With HSAs, the money contributed to the account may roll over from year to year as long 
as the employee is part of an HDHP. Certain HSA plans allow participants to invest money in 
mutual funds or other investments. It should also be noted HSAs do not have the same restric￾tions for spending as FSAs.
Employers may make tax-exempt contributions to their employees’ HSAs as long as they 
make comparable contributions to all company employee accounts according to the category 
or coverage and the employment category (e.g., full-time, part-time). Employer contributions 
to HSAs are exempt from federal income tax, FICA, and FUTA because sums contributed are 
not considered employee wages.
What Is Served in the Cafeteria Plan?
&Check Stop
1. Which of the following types of insurance may be included in a POP?
a. Cancer
b. Vision
c. Auto
d. Dental
2. What are two of the differences between FSAs and HSAs?
3. What constitutes an HDHP?
Final PDF to printerChapter 4  Fringe Benefits and Voluntary Deductions   187
lan43463_ch04_176-215.indd 187 07/08/23 03:43 pm
LO 4-3 Describe Fringe Benefit Exclusion Rules
Remember that fringe benefits are noncash compensation. We have discussed the tax treat￾ment of benefits deducted from employee income on a pre-tax basis using a cafeteria plan. 
Other fringe benefits may not be included in a cafeteria plan and are generally not reported as 
compensation. Employers routinely offer these excluded fringe benefits, and payroll accoun￾tants need to understand specific tax rules to represent them accurately on employee W-2s.
Excluded fringe benefits exist that are not part of a cafeteria plan and, despite the cash value, 
do not generally constitute a taxable portion of employee pay. The value of these fringe bene￾fits is exempt from federal income tax, FICA taxes, and FUTA tax and is not reported on the 
employee’s W-2. Figure 4-2 contains specific details of fringe benefit exclusions and limita￾tions of the exclusions. This section will examine fringe benefits not specifically addressed in 
Publication 15-B that are commonly offered by companies.
Prizes and Awards
Workplace prizes and awards are ways for employers to influence 
employee morale by offering noncash rewards for winning competitions 
and achieving milestones such as company tenure. In Publication 15-B, 
the cash-value limit on achievement awards is $1,600 annually for those given 
in accordance with a qualified plan; the limit for nonqualified awards is $400. 
A qualified plan is one that considers all employees equally, not favoring 
highly compensated employees. For the purposes of the following examples, 
assume that all achievement awards are on a qualified plan. According to IRS Publication 535, 
these types of achievement awards are for improvements to safety programs and the longevity of 
service to the employer. The following example contains some context for achievement awards.
Tony Tallec/Alamy Stock Photo
ACHIEVEMENT AWARDS
Logan is a sales employee at Austin Trailers and Motorsports. The company offers 
achievement awards regularly to reward sales employees for achieving safety goals 
and longevity of service. All sales staff members are eligible for these awards, includ￾ing the company officers.
NONTAXABLE ACHIEVEMENT AWARD
On April 5, 2023, Logan won a noncash, quarterly achievement award valued at $500 
for achieving the highest safety record during May. According to Publication 15-B, this 
achievement award would not be reported on Logan’s W-2 as taxable income.
TAXABLE PORTION OF ACHIEVEMENT AWARD: NONCASH AWARD
As of December 29, 2023, Logan had won the quarterly award for compiling a com￾prehensive safety plan on four separate occasions during the calendar year. The total 
value of the achievement awards is $500 × 4, or $2,000. Because the achievement 
awards received exceeded $1,600, the additional $400 ($2,000 − $1,600) would be 
reflected as taxable income on Logan’s W-2.
TAXABLE PORTION OF ACHIEVEMENT AWARD: CASH AWARD
In addition to winning the noncash prizes for safety achievement, Logan received cash 
of $1,000 for 10 years of service to the company. As the awards’ values are now 
$3,000, the excess of the value over $1,600 (i.e., $1,400) will be reflected as taxable 
income. Remember that cash awards are always taxable income to the employee.
Gym Memberships
Employee discounts for gym memberships are a common fringe benefit that employers use 
to promote wellness initiatives. If the employer has on-site athletic facilities (either on the 
employer’s premises or other premises owned or leased by the employer) that are restricted to 
Final PDF to printer188   Chapter 4  Fringe Benefits and Voluntary Deductions
lan43463_ch04_176-215.indd 188 07/08/23 03:43 pm
use by employees, their spouses, and their dependents, the benefit would 
be nontaxable. However, if an employer provides gym memberships to 
off-site clubs at no additional cost to employees, the gym membership 
cost is taxable even on a qualified plan. Likewise, if the athletic facility is 
open to the public and employees and their dependents, the value of the 
membership would be taxable.
Kzenon/Shutterstock
Mark Dierker/McGraw-Hill Education
EXAMPLE: OFF-SITE GYM MEMBERSHIP
Carlie is an employee of Althea Productions. The employer offers 
memberships at a local gym as an optional benefit for employees. 
These memberships are at no additional cost to the employee and 
have a $75 per month cash value. Because the gym membership 
has an annual value of $900 and is not an on-site athletic facility, 
it must be counted as income and reported on Carlie’s Form W-2.
Personal Use of Company Vehicle
Company cars are a common fringe benefit given to employees who regu￾larly drive as part of their job. Business use of these company cars is con￾sidered a nontaxable fringe benefit because it is an asset provided to the 
employee for use that specifically benefits the company, much like a com￾puter or office equipment. The taxable portion occurs when the employee 
uses the company-provided vehicle for personal business. Employers 
often request that employees document personal use of the business vehi￾cle at the end of the calendar year to identify taxable income associated 
with the company car properly.
In the case of Scott v. Scott, an issue that arose was the value of fringe benefits used 
to determine the defendant’s income for use in divorce proceedings. The plaintiff con￾tended that the use of a company truck was not calculated into the value of the defen￾dant’s income that was used as the basis for calculating child support. Upon reviewing 
the defendant’s total compensation, including all fringe benefits, the Supreme Court of 
Georgia found that the defendant’s actual monthly income was substantially more than 
previously stated and increased the monthly child support obligation.
(Source: Justia)
Gift Cards
If an employee received gift cards as a fringe benefit, the gift cards’ cash value must be 
included as compensation on the employee’s Form W-2. For example, if an employee entered 
a company-sponsored raffle at company functions during the year and won a $100 gift card 
to a local restaurant, the $100 must be added as compensation to the employee’s Form W-2. 
There is no minimum amount of cash or cash equivalent gift cards that would be excluded 
under de minimis fringe benefits.
Employer-Provided Snacks and Meals
Employers often have coffeemakers and kitchen facilities available for 
employees. If the employer occasionally provides food or beverage as an 
employee perk, the benefit’s cash value is considered de minimis and is 
not taxable. However, if the employer routinely provides food or bever￾ages for employee consumption at no additional charge to the employees, 
then the cash value of those items must be reported as compensation on 
the employee’s Form W-2.
Emilija Manevska/Moment/Getty 
Images
Final PDF to printerChapter 4  Fringe Benefits and Voluntary Deductions   189
lan43463_ch04_176-215.indd 189 07/08/23 03:43 pm
Keep in mind that fringe benefits may appear in many different forms. The payroll accoun￾tant needs to be aware of the perks offered to employees and Publication 15-B guidelines. 
This publication fosters awareness of potential additions to employee compensation and pro￾vides accurate reports to employees and governmental authorities.
EXAMPLE: PIZZA FRIDAYS
Devin works for Excellent Embroidery and Screen Printing. On Fridays, the company 
provides a pizza lunch for all employees. The pizza lunch is intended to promote 
employee morale on Fridays and to celebrate weekly accomplishments. Although the 
weekly value of Friday pizza per employee of Excellent Embroidery is small, it aggre￾gates to an additional $100 per employee over a year. Devin would see an additional 
$100 in compensation added to Form W-2 for this noncash fringe benefit.
For a fringe benefit to be excluded, the employer must be prepared to prove that pro￾viding the benefit, not simply adding it to employee gross pay, substantially improves 
conditions at the firm. For example, the addition of an on-site gym must provide sig￾nificant benefits above what it would cost employers to add the amount associated 
with a gym membership to employee pay. Proving that the benefit is substantial could 
include tracking the number of employees who use the on-site facility versus those 
who request and use an external gym membership.
(Source: Mondaq)
Excluded Fringe Benefits
&Check Stop
1. Glazier Foods, Inc., provides an athletic facility on the premises for employees 
to use. Would this benefit be taxable on employees’ W-2? Why or why not?
2. Parker is an employee of the Moeller Gallery, and she has a company-issued 
vehicle to use to conduct business. Does this vehicle represent a fringe ben￾efit? Why or why not?
LO 4-4 Explain Fringe Benefit Valuation Rules
Now that we have an idea about what fringe benefits are and how they 
fit into a payroll context, it is time to address specific rules about fringe 
benefits valuation. As noted in the case of Scott v. Scott, the value of fringe 
benefits potentially increases the total value of an employee’s income with￾out directly affecting the cash they receive. Note that the details for fringe￾benefit valuation rules appear in Publication 15-B and are updated annually.
Proper valuation of vehicles is essential for benefits evaluation. 
Employers must know the value of the benefits they provide to ensure that 
they withhold appropriate amounts of tax for the use of company property such as vehicles.
General Valuation Rule
The general valuation rule (GVR) is the most common way to determine the value of fringe 
benefits. The GVR uses fair market value (FMV) as the cornerstone of valuation. Fair mar￾ket value is defined as the price a person would need to pay to obtain a good or service from 
a third party in an arm’s-length transaction. In other words, if an employee needed to obtain 
a gym membership, the price paid for that individual membership would constitute the fair 
Zoran Zeremski/Shutterstock
Final PDF to printer190   Chapter 4  Fringe Benefits and Voluntary Deductions
lan43463_ch04_176-215.indd 190 07/08/23 03:43 pm
market value. In this section, we will explore different applications of the GVR with explana￾tions of the method used to determine the value for payroll reporting purposes.
Personal Use of Company Vehicle: Lease-Value Rule
Access to a company car can present a challenge in evaluating the amount 
associated with the personal use of the asset. To compute the value of the 
employee’s personal use of the asset, the IRS uses a complex method that 
involves the car’s age, the fair market value of the asset, and miles driven. 
Three primary methods exist for determining value: the lease-value rule, the 
commuting rule, and the cents-per-mile rule. Figure 4-3 contains an example 
of how a company could derive the valuation using the lease-value method. 
Publication 15-B does provide an annual lease amount for vehicles. After the 
annual amount of the lease has been determined, the amount is then multi￾plied by the percentage of personal use of the vehicle. This amount is considered taxable income 
to the employee. When the employer provides the vehicle’s fuel, this must also be included in the 
previous calculations. Employer-paid fuel is calculated at FMV or 5.5 cents per mile of personal 
use. If the employer does not provide fuel, then there is no addition to the calculation for fuel.
In the form provided in Figure 4-3, the employee, Leith Ofir, claims the use of a company 
car for personal reasons for a total of 25 percent during the calendar year. By obtaining the data 
requested in the form and computing the fringe benefit’s value, Leith has received $2,312.50 
in noncash compensation for this fringe benefit. The company has also provided fuel for the 
vehicle (at 5.5 cents per mile), and the number of personal miles is used to compute the per￾sonal value of fuel consumption. The total value of this benefit for Leith is $2,492.97 and must 
be added to Form W-2 as compensation.
Alex Varlakov/Hemera/Getty Images
FIGURE 4-3
Value of the Personal Use of a Company Car: Lease-Value Rule 
multiplying that total by the percentage of personal use (13,125 × 25% = 3,281.25 miles).
Final PDF to printerChapter 4  Fringe Benefits and Voluntary Deductions   191
lan43463_ch04_176-215.indd 191 07/08/23 03:43 pm
Personal Use of a Company Vehicle: Commuting Rule
Like the situation in the lease-value rule, the employee has a company vehicle for use. 
However, the commuting rule applies to employees strictly forbidden from using the vehicle 
outside of work hours and for personal purposes. The vehicle is only available for transport to 
and from work and during the workday. Under the commuting rule, the employee computes 
the number of miles driven for commuting to and from work and multiplies that by $1.50 to 
determine the valuation for this fringe benefit. Figure 4-4 contains an example of how this 
rule is applied, assuming an 18-mile round-trip commute done each day of the week.
In Figure 4-4, we see that providing a company car and charging an employee based on the 
number of miles in the commute can lead to a higher fringe benefit valuation than seen in the 
lease-value rule.
Personal Use of a Company Vehicle: Cents-per-Mile Rule
Another way to determine a company car’s value as a fringe benefit is to use the IRS standard 
mileage rate. This rate is updated each year. For 2023, the rate is $0.655 per Publication 15-B. 
The cents-per-mile rule uses the number of personal miles driven and multiplies it by the stan￾dard mileage rate to determine the fringe benefit’s value. The purpose of the cents-per-mile 
rule is to consider the costs of maintenance and insurance for the vehicle, both of which 
may increase for the company when the vehicle is driven for personal purposes. Figure 4-5 
contains an example of applying the cents-per-mile rule.
The choice of company car valuation method rule determines the company’s policy and 
the vehicle’s actual use in terms of total miles driven for business, the value of the asset, and 
the primary user of the vehicle. Publication 15-B contains specific details for the payroll 
accountant to determine which method is the most appropriate. No matter which method is 
chosen, it is important to be consistent in the application of personal vehicle use valuations.
Unsafe Conditions
A special rule applies if a company vehicle is provided to an employee only 
because of unsafe conditions. This rule’s foundation is that the employee 
would walk, bicycle, or use public transportation under normal conditions. 
An example of an unsafe condition in which this rule may apply would 
be in the event of a sudden snowstorm that makes the employee’s normal 
travel mode unsafe. In this case, the IRS rule is that the employee is charged $1.50 for a one￾way commute (i.e., to or from home), and this charge should be either subtracted from the 
employee’s wages or reimbursed to the company by the employee.
FIGURE 4-4
Value of the Personal Use of a Company Car: Commuting Rule
Scherbinator/Shutterstock
Final PDF to printer192   Chapter 4  Fringe Benefits and Voluntary Deductions
lan43463_ch04_176-215.indd 192 07/08/23 03:43 pm
Other Transportation Benefits
Another transportation benefit that employers can offer is a transit pass. These provide 
employees access to commuter vehicles (six or more passengers required) through the pass. 
Employers in larger cities, where parking is at a premium, may provide parking subsidies 
to their employees. When there are toll roads present, employers may provide prepaid com￾muter passes to their employees to meet the toll roads’ cost. Employers may exclude up to 
$300 (2023 value) from the employees’ wages for these benefits. Any amount paid by the 
employer of more than $300 for a commuter pass would be taxable income for the employee.
Employers in Seattle with more than 20 employees must offer pre-tax monthly deduc￾tions to employees for transit or vanpool expenses. These monies will then be used to 
reimburse employees for the costs of qualifying expenses.
(Source: APA)
FIGURE 4-5
Value of the Personal Use of a Company Car: Cents-per-Mile Rule
Fringe Benefit Valuations
&Check Stop
1. Ian is a field service representative whose primary job function is to visit cus￾tomer sites. The primary base for computing mileage is Ian’s home. In 2023, a 
total of 30,250 miles were driven in the company car, 15 percent of which was 
for personal use. Using the IRS standard mileage rate of 65.5 cents per mile, 
what is the value of this fringe benefit using the cents-per-mile rule?
2. Turner is a sales representative for a large pharmaceutical company. The com￾pany car is a 2022 Lexus ES, which has a fair market value of $47,000 and a 
lease value of $12,250. Turner has had the use of the vehicle for 180 days in 
2023. Turner drove the vehicle 20 percent for personal use, and the employer 
does not provide fuel. Using the lease value rule, what is the value of the fringe 
benefit? (Round the final figure to two decimal places.)
Final PDF to printerChapter 4  Fringe Benefits and Voluntary Deductions   193
lan43463_ch04_176-215.indd 193 07/08/23 03:43 pm
LO 4-5 Differentiate between Pre-tax and 
Post-tax Deductions
Two classes of deductions exist: pre-tax and post-tax. Pre-tax deductions 
are those deductions withheld from an employee’s gross pay, which is 
the amount of compensation before computing tax liability or applying 
deductions. The effect of pre-tax deductions is that they reduce the tax￾able income of the employee. Pre-tax deductions are voluntary deduc￾tions that have been legislated by the federal government as eligible for 
pre-tax withholding status, including certain types of insurance, retire￾ment plans, and cafeteria plans.
Post-tax deductions are deducted from employee pay after federal, state, 
and local income taxes and FICA taxes have been deducted. Amounts 
deducted on a post-tax basis include both voluntary and court-mandated 
deductions. The voluntary deductions taken on a post-tax basis involve 
fringe benefits such as gym memberships, charitable contributions, repayment of company 
loans, optional insurance (e.g., auto, home), and union dues. Court-mandated deductions 
deducted on a post-tax basis may include child support garnishments, tax liens, credit card gar￾nishments, and other legally directed items.
Insurance
Employers may provide subsidized health insurance coverage for their employees. The 
employees pay a portion of these health insurance expenses out of their paychecks, and the 
company makes up the difference. How much a company pays is determined by the company 
and could vary greatly, depending on the costs of health insurance and the employee’s policy. 
For health insurance plans to qualify for pre-tax status, they must meet the guidelines stated 
in the IRS Code.
Homer W Sykes/Alamy Stock Photo
According to the IRS, the following guidelines are used to determine if a health insur￾ance plan qualifies for pre-tax status:
• Health plans offered through the state’s small or large group market.
• An employer’s self-insured health plan.
• The Department of Defense’s Non-Appropriated Fund Health Benefits Program.
• A governmental plan.
• COBRA health coverage.
• Retiree health coverage.
(Source: IRS)
The IRS specifies these items as pre-tax because it reflects the belief that health insurance 
is necessary, allowing employees to reduce their tax liability and ultimately to reduce the 
financial burden on families and employers by proactively supporting medical care.
EXAMPLE: PRE-TAX MEDICAL PREMIUM
Kell works for Gunderson Associates. Kell’s employer offers medical insurance for 
which the premiums may be taken on a pre-tax basis. Kell is a salaried employee who 
earns $48,000 annually and is paid on a semimonthly basis. The premium for medical 
insurance is $125 per pay period. Consider the following difference in taxable income:
(continued)
Final PDF to printer194   Chapter 4  Fringe Benefits and Voluntary Deductions
lan43463_ch04_176-215.indd 194 07/08/23 03:43 pm
According to the Internal Revenue Service, the Affordable Care Act mandates that indi￾viduals have “minimum essential coverage.”
Examples of minimum essential coverage include:
• Employer-provided health insurance.
• Health insurance purchased through an approved health insurance exchange.
• Coverage provided under federal auspices such as Medicare and Medicaid.
• Privately purchased health insurance.
Minimum essential coverage does not include the following limited benefit or limited￾term coverage plans:
• Vision and dental insurance issued on a stand-alone basis (i.e., not grouped with a 
medical insurance policy).
• Workers’ compensation insurance.
• Accidental death and disability plans maintained by the employer.
(Sources: Tax Cuts and Job Act; IRS)
(concluded)
Medical Insurance 
Deducted on a Pre-Tax Basis
Medical Insurance NOT 
Deducted on a Pre-Tax Basis
Annual salary $48,000 $48,000
Period salary $48,000/24 = $2,000 $48,000/24 = $2,000
Medical insurance 
deduction
$125 $0
Taxable Income $1,875 $2,000
In 2010, the Affordable Care Act was passed, providing small businesses a tax credit for pro￾viding health insurance coverage when their employees are at low- and moderate-income levels. 
The act extended coverage of children until the age of 26 to be included as an option to employ￾ees on a pre-tax basis. This is only for employees covered under a qualifying cafeteria plan.
In response to the Affordable Care Act, IRS Code 6056 changed the reporting require￾ments for employees’ health insurance programs. Employers with more than 50 employees 
are required to file an information return with the IRS and must provide a detailed sum￾mary of health coverage to employees. The value of the insurance coverage contributed by 
the employer must be reported on the employee’s W-2 year-end tax statement within box 
12 using code DD. It should reflect the amounts contributed by both the employee and the 
employer. It is important to remember that the amounts reported on the W-2 for the employ￾er’s contribution to health insurance do not add to the employee’s taxable wages.
Supplemental Health and Disability Insurance
Another option many employers are offering is a flow-through (i.e., the company does not 
cover any of the costs) of supplemental health and disability insurance. One of the largest 
insurance providers is the American Family Life Assurance Company (AFLAC). AFLAC 
comprises a variety of policies with separate treatment for taxation purposes (whether pre- or 
post-tax). The IRS Revision Ruling 2004-55 deals specifically with the tax treatment of short￾and long-term disability, and IRS Code Sections 104(a)(3) and 105(a) deal with the exclu￾sion of short- and long-term disability benefits from employees’ gross wages. Long-term 
disability insurance is excluded from taxable income under the ruling. If an employer pays for 
long-term disability insurance, these amounts may be excluded from or included in gross pay, 
depending upon the company’s election. When determining the tax treatment for supplemen￾tal health insurance, the IRS guidance provides the following: If the income derived will be 
estimated to be tax-free, then the cost associated will also be tax-exempt.
Final PDF to printerChapter 4  Fringe Benefits and Voluntary Deductions   195
lan43463_ch04_176-215.indd 195 07/08/23 03:43 pm
Note: Supplemental health and disability plan premiums are not tax-exempt for the calcu￾lation of Social Security and Medicare taxes.
EXAMPLE: SUPPLEMENTAL HEALTH INSURANCE DEDUCTION
Nichols is a salaried exempt employee of Mark One Restoration Services. Nichols 
earns $78,000 annually and is paid biweekly. The employer offers medical insurance 
and supplemental health insurance with premiums of $150 and $75, respectively. 
Nichols elects to have both premiums withheld on a pre-tax basis.
Salary per period ($78,000/26) $3,000.00
Less: Medical insurance premium 150.00
Less: Supplemental medical insurance premium   75.00
Taxable Income* $2,775.00
*Note: Taxable income computed here pertains to computations of federal income tax. The taxable income for Social Security and 
Medicare taxes would be $2,850 because supplemental medical insurance premiums are not exempt from FICA taxes.
Retirement Plans
Retirement plans were covered under the Employee Retirement Income 
Security Act (ERISA) of 1974 in conjunction with the Internal Revenue Code. 
There are two basic types of retirement plans: defined benefit and defined 
contribution. In a defined benefit plan, the employer guarantees the employee 
a specific income level once retirement has been reached. For example, under 
a defined benefit plan, the employer may guarantee 10 percent of the average 
salary earned in the final five years of employment.
In a defined contribution plan, the individual places money from his 
or her payroll, pre-tax, into a retirement plan, and the company may or may not match to a 
percentage. There are several different types of defined contribution plans, such as 401(k), 
SIMPLE 401(k), 403(b), 457, IRA, SIMPLE, SEP, ESOP, and profit-sharing.
Note: Although some qualified 401(k) plans may be considered cafeteria plans and may 
be excluded from FICA tax liability, the IRS states in Publication 15-B that most retirement 
plans are subject to Social Security and Medicare taxes. For this text’s purposes, we will 
assume that the retirement plans are not included in federal or state tax calculations but are 
included in Social Security and Medicare tax calculations. See Table 4-2 for an explanation 
of the different retirement plan types.
Zerbor/Shutterstock
Type of Plan Description
401(k) A group of investments, typically invested in stock market-based or 
mutual fund-based plans.
403(b) Similar to a 401(k) but offered by nonprofit employers such as 
governmental agencies, hospitals, and schools.
457 Similar to 401(k) and 403(b) but has no penalty for fund withdrawal 
before age 59-1/2. Generally offered to governmental and certain 
nongovernmental employees.
Savings Incentive Match 
Plan for Employees 
(SIMPLE)
The major limitation is employers may not have more than 100 
employees. Funds are specifically set aside for the individual employee 
in a bank, mutual fund account, or stock market SIMPLE 401(k).
Individual Retirement 
Account (IRA)
Funds are specifically set aside for the individual employee in a bank 
or mutual fund account.
Employee Stock 
Ownership Plan (ESOP)
The company offers employees the ability to earn company stock for 
the duration of their employment. ESOP participation is tax-deferred 
while the person is employed.
Simplified Employee 
Pension (SEP)
A tax-favorable IRA is set up by or for the employee, and the 
employer contributes the funds into the account. The SEP is tax￾favorable because it reduces the employee’s income tax liability.
TABLE 4-2
Retirement Plan Types
(Sources: DOL; IRS)
Final PDF to printer196   Chapter 4  Fringe Benefits and Voluntary Deductions
lan43463_ch04_176-215.indd 196 07/08/23 03:43 pm
Post-Tax Deductions
After the employer withholds the pre-tax and mandatory amounts from an employee’s pay, 
other withholdings may apply. These other withholdings, known as post-tax deductions, com￾prise both voluntary and mandated deductions. An example of a voluntary post-tax deduction 
is a charitable contribution elected by the employee. Mandated post-tax deductions include 
garnishments and union dues. Post-tax deductions are amounts that the IRS has declared 
cannot reduce the employee’s tax liability. A general guide to garnishments is in Table 4-3.
Charitable Contributions
Many companies offer to deduct funds for approved charitable organizations directly from 
the employee’s pay. This charitable contribution is typically withheld after taxes have been 
calculated. The individual will report the charitable contribution on his or her itemized tax 
return. There are separate requirements for meeting the deductible percentage outside the 
scope of this text.
Each year, the IRS imposes a cap on pre-tax retirement plan contributions. For 2023, 
the limit on 401(k) contributions is $22,500. People over 50 years of age may contrib￾ute a pre-tax “catch-up” amount of up to $7,500. There are separate limits for SIMPLE 
401(k) plans at $15,500 with the “catch-up” of $3,500 in 2023.
(Source: IRS)
EXAMPLE: RETIREMENT PLAN EMPLOYEE CONTRIBUTION
Whit is a salaried, exempt employee of Hovey Heating and Cooling. Whit is single with one 
dependent under 17 years of age and receives an annual salary of $60,000, paid semi￾monthly. Whit elects to contribute 6 percent per pay period to the company-sponsored 
401(k) plan on a pre-tax basis. Whit’s taxable income would be computed as follows:
Salary per period ($60,000/24) $2,500.00
Less: 6% contribution to 401(k)*     150.00
Taxable Income $2,350.00
*Note: The 401(k) deduction is not exempt from Social Security and Medicare taxes.
Type of Garnishment Maximum percentage of DISPOSABLE income
Child Support or 
Alimony
50% if the employee is supporting another spouse or child.
60% if the employee is not supporting another spouse or child.
NOTE: If child support is >12 weeks in arrears, an additional 5% may 
be added to the garnishment.
U.S. Government Debts 15% of earnings over federal minimum wage weekly earnings.
Student Loans 15% of earnings over federal minimum wage weekly earnings.
Consumer Credit 25% of earnings over federal minimum wage weekly earnings.
Tax Levies See IRS Publication 1494.
Personal Bankruptcy Lower of 25% or 30 times the amount of weekly income over federal 
minimum wage.
Sources: DOL; IRS
TABLE 4-3
Garnishment Rules
EXAMPLE: NET PAY WITH A CHARITABLE CONTRIBUTION
Perri is an employee at Working Environments in Winchester, New Hampshire. Earning 
$29,000 annually, Perri is paid weekly and is single with one withholding allowance. 
Final PDF to printerChapter 4  Fringe Benefits and Voluntary Deductions   197
lan43463_ch04_176-215.indd 197 07/08/23 03:43 pm
Court-Ordered Garnishments
There are several reasons that a court may order an employer to withhold amounts from an 
employee’s pay and redirect those funds to a regulatory agency. The most common garnish￾ments are for child support, alimony, and student loans. Garnishments apply to disposable 
income. The amount of employee pay after legally required deductions such as income taxes 
have been withheld. If an employee has one garnishment order for 10 percent and receives a 
second for 15 percent, any further garnishment requests will be deferred until the disposable 
income is at a level that is available for garnishments.
Consumer credit:
According to Title III of the Consumer Credit Protection Act (CCPA), garnishments 
may not be more than (a) 25 percent of the employee’s disposable earnings OR (b) the 
amount by which an employee’s disposable earnings are greater than 30 times the 
federal minimum wage, or $217.50.
Child support:
Garnishments for child support or alimony may be up to 50 percent of disposable 
income, with an additional 5 percent for any child support that is more than 12 weeks 
in arrears.
Nontax debts owed to federal agencies:
Garnishments for nontax amounts to federal agencies may not total more than 15 percent 
of disposable income.
Union Dues
When employees are part of a union that requires regular dues, the 
employer must withhold those dues from the employee as a post-tax pay￾roll deduction. The union uses dues to fund its activities, which include 
representation in employee-employer negotiations and political activism. 
Some employers may pay the union dues for their employees as part of 
their noncash compensation, but there is no requirement for them to do so.
One of the changes that have come about regarding unions is in right to 
work states, the unions must represent all employees, regardless of their dues payment status. 
Since many individuals realized that they could have the protections of the union without the 
cost of the union, many unions saw a drop in the number of members paying dues but not a 
corresponding loss of the number of members covered.
Luigi Morris/Shutterstock
Additionally, Perri has pre-tax health insurance of $25 and a charitable contribution to 
the United Way of $10 per pay period. Taxable income would be as follows:
Period pay $557.69
Less: Health insurance  25.00
Taxable income $532.69
Note that Perri’s taxable income does not reflect the United Way contribution. Because 
that contribution is computed on a post-tax basis, it does not affect taxable income.
Employees of the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) chose to form a labor union 
in 2021. What distinguished the ACLU union from other labor unions is the ACLU’s 
nonprofit status. Comprising over 300 employees in multiple cities, one purpose is to 
prevent staff turnover and implement robust investment strategies. Other purposes 
include support for employees’ wages and benefits.
(Source: The Washington Post)
Final PDF to printer198   Chapter 4  Fringe Benefits and Voluntary Deductions
lan43463_ch04_176-215.indd 198 07/08/23 03:43 pm
LO 4-6 Apply Rules for Withholding, Depositing, 
and Reporting Benefits
Providing benefits as a condition of employment is an important part of employee compen￾sation. In many cases, amounts of money associated with benefits are quantifiable, such as 
insurance premiums, employee contributions, or specific mandatory deductions. In other 
cases, the fringe benefit valuation rules are needed. The next piece of the puzzle is actually 
withholding, depositing, and reporting the organizations’ benefits.
Rules for Withholding Amounts Related to Benefits
The money associated with employee voluntary withholdings for benefits should be with￾held when the benefit is made available. For example, if an employee voluntarily opts for 
withdrawals for a gym membership benefit, the membership should be available when the 
employee’s deduction occurs. The deduction should coincide with regularly-scheduled pay 
periods. Therefore, any employee contributions to cafeteria plans, FSAs, HSAs, or other ben￾efits should be deducted from regular pay. A best practice is to document the period and 
annual amounts of voluntary deductions in writing for the employee to acknowledge and sign.
Sums of money related to benefits should be deducted from employee pay promptly. The 
IRS stipulates that the value of all noncash benefits must be determined no later than January 31 
of the following year. This deadline facilitates reporting of the fringe benefits on the employ￾ees’ W-2s. It also gives the employer time to deposit any necessary amounts on time.
Summary of Pre-tax and Post-tax Benefit Tax Treatments
Pre-tax Post-tax Either Pre- or Post-Tax*
Flexible spending 
arrangements (FSA)
Short-term disability insurance Health insurance
Health savings account (HSA) Long-term disability insurance Dental insurance
Voluntary additional life 
insurance
Vision insurance
Voluntary retirement plans 
(e.g., 401(k), 403(b), 457, etc.)
*Employees may elect to have these amounts withheld pre- or post-tax.
Pre-tax vs. Post-tax Deductions
&Check Stop
1. Which act offered a small-business tax credit for employees’ health insurance 
premiums?
2. What are examples of different retirement plans that may qualify as pre-tax 
withdrawals?
3. An employee has disposable pay of $1,790.00 for this biweekly pay period. 
The payroll department receives a court-ordered garnishment for credit card 
debt of $15,000. What is the maximum amount that may be withheld from the 
employee’s pay?
4. The employee questioned the amount of the garnishment in question 3, 
claiming that the health insurance of $125 and union dues of $45 must also 
be withheld from their pay before calculating disposable pay. How much 
should be withheld for the garnishment? Explain.
The IRS reported that the number of employer audits had increased because of the 
reporting of fringe benefits and taxes due. According to the IRS, when an audit is 
Final PDF to printerChapter 4  Fringe Benefits and Voluntary Deductions   199
lan43463_ch04_176-215.indd 199 07/08/23 03:43 pm
An exception to the general rule is the IRS’s special accounting rule for noncash benefits 
provided only in the last two months of the calendar year (i.e., November and December). 
Benefits given during this period may be treated as paid during the following calendar year; 
however, only the benefits’ values may be treated as such. Although employers may opt to 
use the special accounting period for specific benefits, all employees who receive that benefit 
must also have it reported in accordance with the special accounting rule.
EXAMPLE: SPECIAL ACCOUNTING RULE
Kris is an employee of Connections, Inc., and drives a company car. According to the 
special accounting rule, the company deferred the taxable amount of Kris’s personal 
use of the company car during November and December 2023 until January 2024. This 
practice would reduce Kris’s taxable income for 2023, but Kris would still be liable for 
the 2024 taxes. Connections, Inc., would be required to notify Kris of its use of the spe￾cial accounting rule for the personal company car use no later than January 31, 2024.
Treatment of Taxable Benefit Withholdings
No matter how the employee receives specific benefits; the employer must treat the benefit as 
though it was paid annually. The rationale for this treatment is to guarantee that taxable benefits 
are reflected appropriately on employee W-2s. The employer may change the timing of any 
amounts withheld for benefits as necessary for the entire company and individual employees.
One caveat to the rules for withholding involves the transfer of property associated with 
benefits. For example, if the benefit involved is an investment, any amount withheld from the 
employee must coincide with the investment transfer.
Regarding the valuation of taxable fringe benefits, employers may choose to add the peri￾odic value of the fringe benefit to period pay and tax it at the employee’s regular tax rate. 
Alternatively, the employer may report the total value and withhold federal income tax at the 
25 percent rate. An example of this practice would involve the valuation of personal company 
car use if reported annually. In that case, the employer may add the full amount of the benefit 
valuation to a single pay period and deduct the taxes at that time.
Employees have found that their “free” fringe benefits may be subject to taxes. 
Wellness programs involving gym memberships, nutritional counseling, and other ser￾vices provided at no cost to employees may be added to an employee’s gross income 
and be subject to income and FICA taxes.
(Source: Forbes)
triggered because of red flags in the computer selection program, one of the first areas 
checked is employer valuation and fringe benefits reporting. Other items considered 
include the employer’s internal control system and workers’ classification as employ￾ees or independent contractors.
(Source: Accounting Today)
Rules for Depositing Amounts Related to Benefits
Employer deposit rules related to benefits are nearly as diverse as the benefits themselves. 
Like the withholdings, the deposit frequency depends on the timing of deductions from 
employee pay and recipient requirements (when applicable). A general rule for taxes with￾held is that the deposit of these amounts must follow employer deposit rules, covered in 
Chapter 6. The employer should estimate the amount of the benefit transmitted on a specific 
date, remit taxes, and transmit any other monies as necessary.
Final PDF to printer200   Chapter 4  Fringe Benefits and Voluntary Deductions
lan43463_ch04_176-215.indd 200 07/08/23 03:43 pm
EXAMPLE: DEPOSIT OF EMPLOYEE 401(K) CONTRIBUTIONS
Bowen, an employee of TMS Physical Therapy, contributes 4 percent of gross pay to 
the employer-sponsored employee stock option benefit. Bowen is paid biweekly and 
earns $52,000 annually. The employer makes quarterly deposits to the stockbroker. 
In this example, Bowen’s contribution is $2,000 × 0.04, or $80, per pay period. The 
employer would deduct this amount from Bowen’s pay and retain it in a liability account, 
which they would deposit with the stockbroker at the appropriate time each quarter.
Depositing taxes for noncash fringe benefits will occasionally require an estimate of the 
taxes due. An example of when such an estimate may occur would be employee meals. The 
employer would estimate the value of the meals and deposit the appropriate amount of tax 
because it would be a taxable fringe benefit. It is important to note that the estimate needs to 
be as accurate as possible. The underpayment of taxes associated with noncash fringe benefits 
will result in IRS penalties.
Rules for Reporting Benefits
Benefit reports occur in two different places: the employee’s Form W-2 and the total compen￾sation report. Each report serves a different purpose.
∙ Form W-2 serves as a report of all wages and associated taxes for a calendar year. All taxable 
benefits are reported as wages on the employee’s Form W-2. This reporting method ensures 
that the employer calculates the correct amount of income taxes and that the employee’s 
annual tax return reflects the proper amounts of income.
∙ The total compensation report is a report given to the employee from the company that details 
all benefits in monetary terms. This report allows employees to have an accurate statement of 
their service’s cash and noncash value to the employer.
Custom benefits software is becoming more popular among employers. Companies 
specializing in employee benefits provide integrated custom platforms that address 
employer withholding, depositing, and reporting needs.
Examples of benefits management software platforms include the following companies:
• BambooHR
• Ceridian
• Workday
These platforms sometimes cost more than $100,000, making them too expensive 
for many small- and some medium-sized employers. Innovations in technology may 
ultimately make these platforms more affordable. Changes in reporting laws certainly 
make them necessary.
(Source: Employee Benefit Adviser)
According to the IRS and the Department of Labor, some of the most common benefits 
errors are:
∙ Incorrectly defined compensation.
∙ Delays in the remittance of employees’ contributions for benefits.
∙ Improper definition of employee eligibility and enrollment in benefit plans.
∙ Incorrect employee vesting in plans.
∙ Benefit forfeitures.
∙ Improper use of loans made to participants.
∙ Incorrect use of hardship distributions.
∙ Incorrectly recorded plan expenses.
Final PDF to printerChapter 4  Fringe Benefits and Voluntary Deductions   201
lan43463_ch04_176-215.indd 201 07/08/23 03:43 pm
The best way to avoid errors is to involve both the payroll and the human resources depart￾ments in benefits determinations to ensure proper implementation and internal classification of 
related monies. Benefit plans should be reviewed annually to ensure accuracy in legal compli￾ance, remittance procedures, and reconciliation of employee contributions with payroll records.
Employee Benefits Reporting
&Check Stop
1. When should employers withhold amounts of money associated with benefits 
from employee pay?
2. Braden McLaughlin is an employee of Creighton Steel and receives several 
fringe benefits due to his employment. He wants to know the value of his 
employment, both cash and noncash. What report should he request from his 
employer?
3. Ali King is an employee of Nabors Drilling. When Form W-2 was distributed in 
January, Ali noticed that gross pay exceeded the annual salary. As the pay￾roll accountant, you are aware of all fringe benefits available to and used by 
employees. What would you tell Ali to help explain the difference?
EMPLOYEE BENEFITS
Employers’ attitudes toward employee benefits have changed since 2019. Benefits have become 
important negotiating tools for employees, which has resulted in the following:
• Large companies such as Google, Facebook, and Costco have developed a reputation for offer￾ing generous benefits.
• Employees are using sites such as Glassdoor and Salary.com to rate prospective employers’ 
total compensation packages.
• Values associated with fringe benefits have risen in proportion to employee salaries.
• Employers are starting to offer financial wellness planning—apart from retirement planning.
• Legislation is in the works to encourage employers and employees to make student loan reduc￾tion payments.
• Many companies are adding fertility benefits for employees.
Future trends to watch include:
• Team-building experiences for in-office and remote workers.
• Employee choice of the available benefits to create customized benefits.
• Coordinated web portals for employees to view pay, personnel, and benefit information.
• Home office stipends to offset the cost of working remotely.
• Changes in the definition of “family member” through legislation for the purpose of benefits.
• Increased participation in company retirement plans because of the student loan payment 
matching provision of the SECURE 2.0 Act.
Trends to Watch
Final PDF to printer202   Chapter 4  Fringe Benefits and Voluntary Deductions
lan43463_ch04_176-215.indd 202 07/28/23 03:18 pm
Summary of Fringe Benefits and Voluntary Deductions
Fringe benefits are an integral part of employee compensation and often significantly influ￾ence an employee’s costs. Common forms of fringe benefits are health insurance and retire￾ment, but they can encompass an endless variety of employee perks. Certain noncash fringe 
benefits are subject to employment taxes, which require an employer to be aware of the taxes 
associated with offering certain types of benefits.
An important category of fringe benefits involves employer-sponsored medical insurance 
plans. Most medical insurance plans may be deducted from an employee’s pay on a pre-tax 
basis, which reduces the employee’s tax liability. Employee medical insurance premiums are 
deducted on a pre-tax basis; this fringe benefit is often part of a cafeteria plan. Other pre-tax 
benefits, such as flexible spending arrangements (FSA), may be included.
Certain types of noncash fringe benefits are excluded from taxation. Commonly excluded 
fringe benefits include de minimis benefits, whose small value would make cost accounting 
for them unrealistic. Other noncash fringe benefits not subject to taxes include items employ￾ers offer for their own convenience, such as on-site meals and company cars. However, per￾sonal use of company cars is subject to tax, based on the employer’s valuation method.
Many voluntary benefits are deducted from employee pay on a post-tax basis. Other post￾tax deductions include court-mandated deductions and garnishments. It is important to note 
the legal limits of garnishing employee pay to deduct an appropriate amount. Employers are 
responsible for withholding, depositing, and reporting all deductions from an employee’s pay, 
especially when those deductions are taxes. The total amount of annual compensation, includ￾ing pay, taxes, and benefits, may be reported on Form W-2 and the total compensation report.
Key Points
• Fringe benefits are an important part of an employee’s compensation package because 
they help attract and retain high-quality employees.
• Fringe benefits have been correlated with increases in employee productivity, reten￾tion, and company revenue.
• Fringe benefits may be statutory or voluntary in nature.
• Pre-tax deductions are used to reduce the taxable wage base for qualified deductions.
• Cafeteria plans allow employees to exclude medical premiums and qualified medical 
expenses from income tax and FICA taxes.
• Certain pre-tax deductions are subject to FICA taxes.
• Excluded fringe benefits are subject to specific IRS rules that govern amounts and 
taxation.
• Personal use of company vehicles is evaluated to determine the amount of income 
employees are taxed on Form W-2.
• Post-tax deductions include garnishments, union dues, and charitable contributions.
• Garnishments are subject to maximum percentages of disposable income, depending 
on the type of garnishment.
• Employer withholding of amounts associated with providing employee benefits varies 
depending on the benefit and is subject to taxes.
• Taxes associated with taxable noncash fringe benefits must be deposited when the 
benefit is transmitted to the employee.
• Employers report the valuation of noncash fringe benefits as part of the employee’s 
Form W-2 and the total compensation report.
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch04_176-215.indd 203 07/08/23 03:43 pm
Chapter 4  Fringe Benefits and Voluntary Deductions   203
401(k)
403(b)
457
Cafeteria plan
Cents-per-mile rule
Charitable contribution
Commuting rule
Compensation
Consumer Credit Protection 
Act (CCPA)
De minimis
Defined benefit
Defined contribution
Disposable income
ESOP
Fair market value (FMV)
Flexible spending arrange￾ment (FSA)
Fringe benefit
Garnishment
General valuation rule 
(GVR)
Health savings account 
(HSA)
High-deductible health plan 
(HDHP)
IRA
Lease-value rule
Mandated deduction
Mandatory deduction
Pay advice
Post-tax deduction
Premium-only plan (POP)
Publication 15-B
Qualified plan
SEP
SIMPLE
SIMPLE 401(k)
Special accounting rule
Union dues
Voluntary deduction
Vocabulary
Review Questions
1. Why do companies offer fringe benefits to their employees?
2. Approximately what percentage of employee compensation includes fringe benefits?
3. What are three examples of voluntary fringe benefits?
4. What are the two reports associated with fringe benefits?
5. What are two examples of voluntary deductions?
6. What are two examples of pre-tax deductions?
7. What are two types of insurance that may be deducted pre-tax under a cafeteria 
plan?
8. What are the four categories of cafeteria plans?
9. How does an FSA affect an employee’s taxable wages?
10. What are three examples of excluded fringe benefits?
11. What are the ways that the value of a company vehicle as a fringe benefit is 
determined?
12. What are garnishments, and how must they be handled?
13. How do post-tax deductions differ from pre-tax deductions?
14. How does the special accounting rule affect the withholding of benefits?
15. How often must employers deposit taxes associated with taxable fringe benefits?
E4-1A.
LO 4-1, 4-4
Harper is a children’s photographer for Cool Cax Digital and would like 
advice about using an FSA for miscellaneous prescriptions and other 
medical expenses. What reason(s) would you give Harper for having an 
FSA account? (Select all that apply.)
a. The monthly amount is deducted on a pre-tax basis.
b. The employee’s income that is subject to income tax(es) is reduced.
c. The income subject to Social Security and Medicare taxes is reduced.
d. The FSA will continue from year to year if not used.
Exercises Set A
Final PDF to printer204   Chapter 4  Fringe Benefits and Voluntary Deductions
lan43463_ch04_176-215.indd 204 07/08/23 03:43 pm
E4-2A.
LO 4-1
Dev is a metalworker at Bartleby’s Metal Shop. Which of the following 
would likely be fringe benefits that the employer would provide because 
they would be needed as part of this job? (Select all that apply.)
a. Heat-resistant gloves
b. On-site cafeteria
c. Welding mask
d. Personal accounting services
E4-3A.
LO 4-2
Gem is wondering what elements are in a qualified health plan. Which of 
the following would be included? (Select all that apply.)
a. Mental health benefits
b. Prescription drugs
c. Pet insurance premiums
d. Preventive and wellness services
E4-4A.
LO 4-2
What is a significant difference between flexible spending arrangements 
(FSAs) and health savings accounts (HSAs)?
a. Only FSAs may be included as part of a cafeteria plan.
b. HSAs may accompany any type of employer-sponsored health 
insurance.
c. Amounts contributed to HSAs may remain in the account for use later 
in life.
d. No annual pre-tax contribution limit exists for FSAs.
E4-5A.
LO 4-1
Silver is an employee who receives educational assistance from their 
employer in the amount of $15,000 per year. How is this amount treated 
for tax purposes?
a. None of it is taxable
b. All of it is taxable
c. $5,250 is taxable
d. $9,750 is taxable
E4-6A.
LO 4-4
Jace is an employee of Wilson In-Home Healthcare. Jace has a company 
vehicle to drive to customer sites. Which of the general valuation rules 
would be appropriate to compute the value of the asset for any personal 
use? (Select all that apply.)
a. Cents-per-mile rule
b. Commuting rule
c. Unsafe conditions rule
d. Lease value rule
E4-7A.
LO 4-5
Which of the following describes the primary difference between a 401(k) 
and a 403(b) retirement plan?
a. The 401(k) is a defined benefit-only plan.
b. The 403(b) is a defined contribution-only plan.
c. The 401(k) is restricted to investments in stocks only.
d. The 403(b) is restricted to use by nonprofit companies.
E4-8A.
LO 4-5
Which of the following is true about fringe benefits? (Select all that apply.)
a. They represent additional cash paid directly to employees.
b. They are only available for employees and their families.
c. They represent additional compensation given for services performed.
d. The amount of the fringe benefit is never subject to income tax.
E4-9A.
LO 4-5
How is disposable income computed?
a. Gross pay less pre-tax deductions
b. Gross pay less pre-tax deductions and income taxes
c. Gross pay less mandatory deductions
d. Gross pay less Social Security and Medicare taxes
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch04_176-215.indd 205 08/08/23 04:13 pm
Chapter 4  Fringe Benefits and Voluntary Deductions   205
E4-10A.
LO 4-6
By what date must a company declare the value of noncash benefits used 
in 2023?
a. January 1, 2024
b. December 31, 2023
c. February 1, 2024
d. January 31, 2024
P4-1A.
LO 4-1,4-2
Sargent is a new employee at Tet Torr Entertainment. The company has 
both a POP with the opportunity for an FSA or an HDHP with an oppor￾tunity for an HSA. The POP premium is $350 per month and the annual 
deductible is $500. For the HDHP, the monthly premium is $200 and the 
annual deductible is $1,200. Explain the options of each to Sargent.
P4-2A.
LO 4-1
Emery is a computer programmer at Biosphere Communications. Emery 
has a garnishment for child support and would like to pay it personally 
and not have it automatically withdrawn from the gross pay. What advice 
should you offer Emery?
P4-3A.
LO 4-1,4-2
Addison is a graphic designer at a large marketing firm and earns 
$56,000 annually, paid biweekly. Addison contributes 5 percent of the 
gross pay to a qualified 401(k) plan on a pre-tax basis and has a pre-tax 
medical premium of $350. What is the taxable income per pay period?
P4-4A.
LO 4-3
Kai is an employee of Dimensionworks Designs in New Mexico who 
received the following achievement awards from her employer during 
2023:
• Best safety plan, Santa Fe County: Set of golf clubs worth: $1,200
• Top emergency plan layout, New Mexico: Television valued at: $1,600
• Ten-year employee award: iPad valued at: $750
The achievement awards are eligible under a qualified plan.
How much of Kai’s achievement award income is taxable?
P4-5A.
LO 4-1,4-3
Jona is an employee at Radiance Senior Living and received the following 
benefits from the employer during 2023 on the company’s location for 
company purposes:
• Personal protective equipment: $50 per month
• Employer-provided cell phone: $50 per month
• Ten-year employee award: iPad valued at: $750
What amount of these benefits is/are taxable for 2023?
P4-6A.
LO 4-4
Dana is an account representative at Ever Pharmaceuticals. Dana has 
a company car for customer visits and uses it to commute from work to 
home on Friday nights and from home to work on Monday mornings, 
50 weeks per year. The commute is 25 miles in each direction. Using the 
commuting rule, what is the valuation of the fringe benefit?
P4-7A.
LO 4-4
Blaine is the vice president of operations for Southern Sweets Bakery. 
Blaine drives a 2023 Toyota Prius as his company car, and it has a fair 
market value of $41,500. The vehicle’s prorated annual lease value per 
Publication 15-B is $10,750. Blaine reported driving 34,750 miles during 
2023, of which 20 percent were for personal reasons. The company pays 
for fuel and charges five cents per mile for fuel charges. Using the lease 
value rule, what is the valuation of Blaine’s company car benefit?
P4-8A.
LO 4-5
Marley is a supervisor at Fantastigifts and receives an annual salary of 
$45,000, paid biweekly, and a garnishment for consumer credit of $375. 
Assuming that the disposable income is 80 percent of the gross pay per 
period, does the garnishment follow the CCPA? If not, what is the maxi￾mum garnishment allowed for Marley’s consumer credit garnishment?
Problems Set A
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY206   Chapter 4  Fringe Benefits and Voluntary Deductions
lan43463_ch04_176-215.indd 206 07/08/23 03:43 pm
P4-9A.
LO 4-1,4-2, 4-5
Shiloh is an employee at Jankoski Cycles and earns an annual salary of 
$37,765, paid semimonthly. Shiloh contributes to the following fringe 
benefits and other deductions:
• Medical insurance: $220 per pay period
• Dental insurance: $15 per pay period
• 401(k): 6 percent of gross pay
• Additional withholding: $125 per month
What is the total annual amount of Shiloh’s fringe benefits and other 
deductions?
P4-10A.
LO 4-6
Jesse is the payroll accountant for Comptech Industries which decided to 
use the special accounting rule for 2023. Which months may be included 
in the special accounting rule?
P4-11A.
LO 4-1,
4-2, 4-3,
4-5
Dallas is the payroll accountant at White Box Builders and is preparing an 
information package about voluntary and fringe benefits. Using the follow￾ing list of fringe benefits, classify each benefit as pre-tax or post-tax and as 
taxable or tax-exempt for federal income taxes.
Employee Benefits
Benefit Pre-tax Post-tax Taxable Tax-Exempt
401(k)
Medical insurance
Off-site gym membership
United Way contributions
AFLAC
Tuition assistance up to $5,250 annually
Commuter passes up to $300 monthly
E4-1B.
LO 4-1
Which of the following fringe benefits is exempt from federal income tax 
but subject to FICA tax?
a. Moving expense reimbursements
b. Tuition reduction for undergraduate education
c. Adoption assistance
d. Working condition benefits
E4-2B.
LO 4-1
Taylor is an employee of New York Boutiques, Inc., and is a traveling 
salesperson who routinely meets with customers at their places of busi￾ness. Which of the following fringe benefits would be appropriate for the 
employer to provide for Taylor to conduct business? (Select all that apply.)
a. Personal stylist
b. Tuition assistance
c. Clothing allowance
d. Cell phone
E4-3B.
LO 4-2
Which of the following is a co-requisite of a health savings account (HSA)?
a. No employer-provided insurance
b. A high-deductible health plan
c. Multiple health insurance plans held by the same employee
d. A flexible spending arrangement
E4-4B.
LO 4-2
What is the annual maximum amount that an employee may contribute to 
a flexible savings arrangement before it becomes taxable income?
a. $2,850
b. $2,950
c. $3,050
d. $3,150
Exercises Set B
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch04_176-215.indd 207 07/08/23 03:43 pm
Chapter 4  Fringe Benefits and Voluntary Deductions   207
E4-5B.
LO 4-3
Marlow is an employee of All-Adventure Tours. All-Adventure Tours offers 
tuition reimbursement as a fringe benefit. What maximum amount may be 
excluded from Marlow’s taxes as a fringe benefit? (Select all that apply.)
a. $4,750
b. $5,000
c. $5,250
d. $5,750
E4-6B.
LO 4-4
Grey is an employee of Convergent Technologies whose job is strictly 
based in the company’s office. The employer has authorized the use of 
a company vehicle for commuting purposes as necessary. Which of the 
general valuation rules would be appropriate to evaluate the value of this 
fringe benefit? (Select all that apply.)
a. Lease value rule
b. Unsafe conditions rule
c. Commuting rule
d. Cents-per-mile rule
E4-7B.
LO 4-2
Casey is the payroll accountant for Glowing Yoga and is preparing a 
Section 125 cafeteria plan presentation. Which of the following items may 
qualify for inclusion in a cafeteria plan? (Select all that apply.)
a. Health benefits
b. Adoption assistance
c. Childcare expenses
d. Education assistance
E4-8B.
LO 4-5
Jamie is the payroll accountant of Central Communications and 
is researching retirement plan options for the employer. Central 
Communications has 135 employees and is a for-profit company. Which 
of the following plans should Jamie consider?
a. IRA
b. 457
c. 403(b)
d. 401(k)
E4-9B.
LO 4-1
Which of the following is/are examples of fringe benefits? (Select all that 
apply.)
a. Education assistance (up to $5,250 annually)
b. Dependent care assistance (up to $5,000 annually)
c. Vacation packages
d. Retirement planning services
E4-10B.
LO 4-5
Which of the following are always post-tax deductions? (Select all that 
apply.)
a. Garnishments
b. Qualified health insurance
c. Charitable contributions
d. Retirement plan contributions
E4-11B.
LO 4-6
To which two months does the special accounting rule pertain?
a. January and February
b. November and December
c. The last two months of the company’s fiscal year
d. December and January of the following year
Final PDF to printer208   Chapter 4  Fringe Benefits and Voluntary Deductions
lan43463_ch04_176-215.indd 208 07/08/23 03:43 pm
P4-1B.
LO 4-1,4-2
Robin is a new employee at Big Tech Computers and is debating whether 
to enroll in a POP with the opportunity for an FSA or an HDHP with an 
opportunity for an HSA. The POP premium is $550 per month and the 
annual deductible is $400. For the HDHP, the monthly premium is $175 
and the annual deductible is $1,400. Explain the options of each to Robin.
P4-2B.
LO 4-1
Quinn is employed as a concierge at Strawberry Lodge, an upscale 
resort in the Adirondack Mountains. Quinn asks the payroll accountant 
which deductions from gross pay are considered voluntary fringe bene￾fits. Where would you tell Quinn to look on the pay stub?
P4-3B.
LO 4-1,4-2
Tate is a manager at Complex Ventures, Inc. Tate contributes $2,750 
annually to an FSA and has medical insurance with a $500 monthly 
premium. Tate earns a salary of $72,200 and is paid biweekly. What is 
the taxable income per period?
P4-4B.
LO 4-3
Windsor is employed at Rockstar Music. Windsor is receiving education 
assistance of $5,750 per year from Rockstar Music to complete a bach￾elor’s degree from an accredited college. How much of that assistance 
is taxable?
P4-5B.
LO 4-1,4-3
Lane is an employee in the office of Salvaggio & Wheelers, Attorneys at 
Law, who received the following benefits during 2023:
• Medical insurance: $250 per month
• Commuter pass: $500 per month
• Employer-paid membership to Anytime Gym: $75 per year
• Dependent care assistance: $3,600 per year
What is the total taxable amount for Lane’s 2023 benefits?
P4-6B.
LO 4-4
Shiloh is a sales representative for American Silk Mills who has a 
company car to visit customer sites. Shiloh drove 25,500 miles during 
2023, of which 15 percent was reported as personal miles. Using the 
cents-per-mile rule, what is the valuation of this benefit for 2023?
P4-7B.
LO 4-4
River, president of Miller Custom Coffee Roasters, drives a 2022 
Mercedes E300 with a fair market value of $57,500. The lease value is 
$14,750. The odometer started at 655 and was reported at 32,855 at 
the end of the year. The car was available all of 2023. River reported driv￾ing 32,200 miles during 2023, of which 9,800 were for personal reasons. 
The company pays all fuel and charges five cents per personal mile for 
fuel costs. What is River’s 2023 valuation using the lease value rule?
P4-8B.
LO 4-5
Hayden is an employee at Finesong Jewelry and earns a salary of 
$38,850 per year, is paid biweekly, and has a credit card garnishment. 
Assuming that Hayden’s disposable income is 85 percent of the gross 
pay, what is the maximum amount per period that may be deducted for 
the garnishment?
P4-9B.
LO 4-5
August is an employee at Ruby Investments, with an annual salary of 
$92,500, paid biweekly. August has the following fringe and voluntary 
benefits:
• Medical insurance: $400 per month
• 401(k): 3 percent of gross pay
• Flexible spending arrangement: $2,550 annually
• Charitable contribution: $65 per pay period
What is the total amount August contributes to fringe benefits and vol￾untary deductions annually?
P4-10B.
LO 4-6
Teagan is the payroll accountant for Penn & Associates Investments. 
The company decided on December 15, 2023, that it would invoke 
the special accounting rule. By what date does Teagan need to notify 
affected employees that the rule is being used?
Problems Set B
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch04_176-215.indd 209 07/08/23 03:43 pm
Chapter 4  Fringe Benefits and Voluntary Deductions   209
Critical Thinking
4-1. Rowan M. is a sales employee of Carefree Pools and Spas, Inc. In 2023, he was 
issued a company car with a fair market value of $35,000 and drove a total of 22,000 
miles; used the car for 2,000 miles for personal use; and the employer paid for fuel, 
charging Rowan 5.5 cents per mile. Under the lease-value rule, what is the amount 
that must be added to Rowan’s gross pay for 2023? (Use the following table for lease 
values.)
4-2. Rowan’s employer offers the option to use the cents-per-mile rule instead of the lease￾value rule for 2023. Which method will yield the lower gross income for Rowan? (Use 
65.5 cents per mile in your calculations.)
P4-11B.
LO 4-1,
4-2, 4-3,
4-5
Kit is reviewing benefits with you, the payroll accountant for Silly Lemon 
Films. Classify the following benefits as pre-tax or post-tax deductions 
and as taxable or tax-exempt for federal income tax.
Benefits
Benefit Pre-Tax Post-Tax Taxable Tax Exempt
Medical insurance
FSA
AFLAC
Graduate school tuition at 
$11,000 annually
On-site meals
(1) Automobile FMV (2) Annual Lease
 $ 0 to 999. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $ 600
  1,000 to 1,999. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 850
  2,000 to 2,999. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1,100
  3,000 to 3,999. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1,350
  4,000 to 4,999. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1,600
  5,000 to 5,999. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1,850
  6,000 to 6,999. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2,100
  7,000 to 7,999. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2,350
  8,000 to 8,999. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2,600
  9,000 to 9,999. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2,850
10,000 to 10,999. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3,100
11,000 to 11,999. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3,350
12,000 to 12,999. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3,600
13,000 to 13,999. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3,850
14,000 to 14,999. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4,100
15,000 to 15,999. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4,350
16,000 to 16,999. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4,600
17,000 to 17,999. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4,850
18,000 to 18,999. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5,100
19,000 to 19,999. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5,350
20,000 to 20,999. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5,600
21,000 to 21,999. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5,850
22,000 to 22,999. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6,100
23,000 to 23,999. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6,350
Final PDF to printer210   Chapter 4  Fringe Benefits and Voluntary Deductions
lan43463_ch04_176-215.indd 210 07/08/23 03:43 pm
In the Real World: Scenario for Discussion
Project labor agreements (PLAs) are used in certain states to promote pay and benefit 
equity for construction workers. Specifically, PLAs ensure that construction workers who 
choose not to join a union have access to the same pay and benefits as their union￾affiliated colleagues. PLAs ensure that the presence or absence of a labor union is not a 
factor in the contract bidding process, therefore encouraging more contractors to bid on 
construction projects. Proponents of PLAs contend that they expand employment oppor￾tunities. Opponents claim that the PLA cannot exist in at-will employment states.
Which side is more correct? How can at-will employment laws exist where PLAs are 
allowed?
Internet Activities
4-1. Health insurance is a rapidly changing and evolving field. Employers have many 
options and concerns to consider. Check out www.npr.org/sections/health-care/ to lis￾ten to podcasts about health insurance and employer issues. What issues do employ￾ers currently face?
4-2. Using a site such as Google, Yahoo, or Safari, search for the term “fringe benefits.” 
Sites such as Zywave and Employee Benefit Adviser contain insights into fringe bene￾fits and guidance about the tax treatment for benefits. Why do you think that fringe 
benefits are important enough to influence an employee’s choice of an employer?
4-3. Go to Talking Benefits and search for benefits-related podcasts. Once you have lis￾tened to one or more podcasts, describe the insights you gained from the information 
presented.
4-4. Want to know more about the topics discussed in this chapter? Go to the following 
links:
www.healthcare.gov/law/index.html
www.aflac.com
www.investopedia.com
(1) Automobile FMV (2) Annual Lease
24,000 to 24,999. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6,600
25,000 to 25,999. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6,850
26,000 to 27,999. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7,250
28,000 to 29,999. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7,750
30,000 to 31,999. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8,250
32,000 to 33,999. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8,750
34,000 to 35,999. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9,250
36,000 to 37,999. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9,750
38,000 to 39,999. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10,250
40,000 to 41,999. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10,750
42,000 to 43,999. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11,250
44,000 to 45,999. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11,750
46,000 to 47,999. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12,250
48,000 to 49,999. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12,750
50,000 to 51,999. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13,250
52,000 to 53,999. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13,750
54,000 to 55,999. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14,250
56,000 to 57,999. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14,750
58,000 to 59,999. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15,250
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch04_176-215.indd 211 07/08/23 03:43 pm
Chapter 4  Fringe Benefits and Voluntary Deductions   211
www.irs.gov/pub/irs-pdf/p15b.pdf
www.dol.gov/general/topic/wages/garnishments
4-5. Can employers charge employees for their uniforms? Check out the U.S. Department 
of Labor video at
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PoZCux0rTN8&feature=youtu.be
Continuing Payroll Project: Prevosti Farms and Sugarhouse
Although the company has already established medical and retirement plan benefits, Toni 
Prevosti wants to consider other benefits to attract employees. As the company’s accoun￾tant, you have been tasked with annotating employee earnings records with benefit elec￾tions for each employee. The following sheet contains details of employee choices. These 
costs are employer-paid and will take effect on the first pay period of March.
Multiply the employee’s annual salary by 1 percent to calculate the life insurance ben￾efit. For example, if an employee earned $50,000 per year, the life insurance would be 
$50,000 × 0.01 = $500.
Employee Flex-Time
Childcare 
Assistance 
(under 
$5,000 
annually)
FSA 
(annual)
Educational 
Assistance 
($4,000 
annually)
Life 
Insurance (at 
1% of annual 
salary value)
Long￾Term Care 
Insurance 
($15 per 
period)
Gym 
Membership 
($15 per 
month)
Millen Yes Yes $500.00 No Yes No Yes
Towle No No 1,200.00 Yes No No Yes
Long Yes Yes 700.00 Yes Yes No Yes
Shangraw Yes No 200.00 No Yes No No
Lewis No No 1,600.00 No Yes Yes No
Schwartz No No 450.00 Yes Yes No Yes
Prevosti Yes No 900.00 No Yes No Yes
Student No No 300.00 Yes No No Yes
Annotate the Employee Earning Records with payroll-related benefit elections. The amount 
per period should be included in the record. As an example, if an employee elected to contrib￾ute $1,300 to his or her FSA, the period payroll deduction would be $1,300/26, or $50. The 
estimated yearly earnings used for insurance purposes for the hourly employees are computed 
as follows: (hourly wages times number of hours worked per week × 52) then divide by 
26 pay periods to get an amount per pay period. For example, if Shangraw worked 20 hours 
per week, the computation is 20 hours × $15/hour × 52 weeks = $15,600 per year. Insurance 
is computed as $15,600 × 1% = $156/26 = $6.00 per pay period.
EMPLOYEE EARNING RECORD
NAME Thomas Millen Hire Date 2/1/2023 Dependent child < 17 3
ADDRESS 1022 Forest School Road Date of Birth 12/16/1992 Dependent other 1
CITY/STATE/ZIP Woodstock, VT 05001 Position Production Manager PT/ FT Step 4a W-4 Info none
TELEPHONE 802-478-5055 Filing Status Married/Joint Step 4b W-4 Info none
SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBER 031-11-3456 Exempt/Nonexempt Exempt Step 4c W-4 Info none
Pay Rate $35,000.00 Hr / Wk / Mo/ Yr
Flex-Time
Child 
Care
FSA 
Amount
Educational 
Assistance Life Ins.
Long-Term 
Care
Gym 
Membership Total Benefit
Final PDF to printer212   Chapter 4  Fringe Benefits and Voluntary Deductions
lan43463_ch04_176-215.indd 212 07/08/23 03:43 pm
EMPLOYEE EARNING RECORD
NAME Avery Towle Hire Date 2/1/2023 Dependent child < 17 0
ADDRESS 4011 Route 100 Date of Birth 7/14/2001 Dependent other 0
CITY/STATE/ZIP Plymouth, VT 05102 Position Production Worker PT/ FT Step 4a W-4 Info none
TELEPHONE 802-967-5873 Filing Status Single Step 4b W-4 Info none
SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBER 089-74-0974 Exempt/Nonexempt Non-exempt Step 4c W-4 Info none
Pay Rate $15.00 Hr / Wk / Mo / Yr
Flex-Time
Child 
Care
FSA 
Amount
Educational 
Assistance Life Ins.
Long-Term 
Care
Gym 
Membership Total Benefit
EMPLOYEE EARNING RECORD
NAME Charlie Long Hire Date 2/1/2023 Dependent child < 17 2
ADDRESS 242 Benedict Road S. Date of Birth 3/16/1997 Dependent other 0
CITY/STATE/ZIP Woodstock, VT 05002 Position Production Worker PT/ FT Step 4a W-4 Info none
TELEPHONE 802-429-3846 Filing Status Married/Joint Step 4b W-4 Info none
SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBER 056-23-4593 Exempt/Nonexempt Non-exempt Step 4c W-4 Info none
Pay Rate $15.00 Hr / Wk / Mo / Yr
Flex-Time
Child 
Care
FSA 
Amount
Educational 
Assistance Life Ins.
Long-Term 
Care
Gym 
Membership Total Benefit
EMPLOYEE EARNING RECORD
NAME Mary Shangraw Hire Date 2/1/2023 Dependent child < 17 0
ADDRESS 1901 Main Street #2 Date of Birth 8/20/1980 Dependent other 1
CITY/STATE/ZIP Bridgewater, VT 05520 Position Administrative Assistant PT /FT Step 4a W-4 Info none
TELEPHONE 802-575-5423 Filing Status Single Step 4b W-4 Info none
SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBER 075-28-8945 Exempt/Nonexempt Non-exempt Step 4c W-4 Info none
Pay Rate $15.00 Hr / Wk / Mo / Yr
Flex-Time
Child 
Care
FSA 
Amount
Educational 
Assistance Life Ins.
Long-Term 
Care
Gym 
Membership Total Benefit
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch04_176-215.indd 213 07/08/23 03:43 pm
Chapter 4  Fringe Benefits and Voluntary Deductions   213
EMPLOYEE EARNING RECORD
NAME Kristen Lewis Hire Date 2/1/2023 Dependent child < 17 2
ADDRESS 840 Daily Hollow Road Date of Birth 4/6/1991 Dependent other 1
CITY/STATE/ZIP Bridgewater, VT 05523 Position Office Manager PT/ FT Step 4a W-4 Info none
TELEPHONE 802-390-5572 Filing Status Married/Joint Step 4b W-4 Info none
SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBER 076-39-5673 Exempt/Nonexempt Exempt Step 4c W-4 Info none
Pay Rate $32,000.00 Hr / Wk / Mo/ Yr
Flex-Time
Child 
Care
FSA 
Amount
Educational 
Assistance Life Ins.
Long-Term 
Care
Gym 
Membership Total Benefit
EMPLOYEE EARNING RECORD
NAME Joel Schwartz Hire Date 2/1/2023 Dependent child < 17 2
ADDRESS 55 Maple Farm Way Date of Birth 5/23/1993 Dependent other 0
CITY/STATE/ZIP Woodstock, VT 05534 Position Sales PT/ FT Step 4a W-4 Info none
TELEPHONE 802-463-9985 Filing Status Married/Joint Step 4b W-4 Info none
SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBER 021-34-9876 Exempt/Nonexempt Exempt Step 4c W-4 Info none
Pay Rate $32,000 + Commiss Hr / Wk / Mo/ Yr
Flex-Time
Child 
Care
FSA 
Amount
Educational 
Assistance Life Ins.
Long-Term 
Care
Gym 
Membership Total Benefit
EMPLOYEE EARNING RECORD
NAME Toni Prevosti Hire Date 2/1/2023 Dependent child < 17 3
ADDRESS 820 Westminster Road Date of Birth 9/19/1987 Dependent other 2
CITY/STATE/ZIP Bridgewater, VT 05521 Position Owner/President PT/ FT Step 4a W-4 Info none
TELEPHONE 802-555-3456 Filing Status Married/Joint Step 4b W-4 Info none
SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBER 055-22-0443 Exempt/Nonexempt Exempt Step 4c W-4 Info none
Pay Rate $45,000.00 Hr / Wk / Mo/ Yr
Flex-Time
Child 
Care
FSA 
Amount
Educational 
Assistance Life Ins.
Long-Term 
Care
Gym 
Membership Total Benefit
Final PDF to printer214   Chapter 4  Fringe Benefits and Voluntary Deductions
lan43463_ch04_176-215.indd 214 07/08/23 03:43 pm
EMPLOYEE EARNING RECORD
NAME Student Success Hire Date 2/1/2023 Dependent child < 17 0
ADDRESS 1644 Smitten Road Date of Birth 1/1/2001 Dependent other 0
CITY/STATE/ZIP Woodstock, VT 05001 Position Accounting Clerk PT/ FT Step 4a W-4 Info none
TELEPHONE 555-555-5555 Filing Status Single Step 4b W-4 Info none
SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBER 555-55-5555 Exempt/Nonexempt Non-exempt Step 4c W-4 Info none
Pay Rate $34,000.00 Hr / Wk / Mo/ Yr
Flex-Time
Child 
Care
FSA 
Amount
Educational 
Assistance Life Ins.
Long-Term 
Care
Gym 
Membership Total Benefit
Answers to Stop & Check Exercises
Fringe Benefits 101
1. Fringe benefits will fall under the pre-tax or post-tax categories.
2. b and c.
3. a, c, and d.
What Is Served in the Cafeteria Plan?
1. a, b, and d.
2. A flexible spending arrangement (FSA) can be taxable when the employee’s contri￾butions are over $3,050 annually. The purpose is to defer, not avoid, paying taxes, 
and there is typically a “use it or lose it” policy where the funds expire at a point in 
time when not used. Health savings accounts (HSAs) may only be used in conjunc￾tion with a cafeteria plan where there is a high deductible, and the funds may be 
available longer for related medical care.
3. An HDHP has the following limits: $1,500 annual deductible (single), $3,000 annual 
deductible (family), $7,500 out-of-pocket expenses maximum (single), and $15,000 
out-of-pocket expenses maximum (family).
Excluded Fringe Benefits
1. No, because it is provided on the employer’s premises and is operated by the com￾pany and is restricted to use by its employees, their spouses, and dependents.
2. A portion of the cost of the car that would represent the personal use portion of 
mileage will be included in Parker’s gross income. However, any amount that is 
directly related to the job would be excluded under the Working Conditions Benefits.
Fringe Benefit Valuations
1. $2,972.06 (30,250 miles × 15% × 0.655).
2. The value of the fringe benefit is $1,208.22, computed as follows (round the final 
figure to two decimals):
Fair market value of the vehicle: $  47,000
Annual lease value: 12,250
Prorated annual lease value:          49.315%
Percent of personal use during the year:       20%
Personal annual lease value: $1,208.22
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch04_176-215.indd 215 07/08/23 03:43 pm
Chapter 4  Fringe Benefits and Voluntary Deductions   215
Pre-tax vs. Post-tax Deductions
1. Affordable Care Act.
2. 401(k); 403(b); Savings Incentive Match Plan for Employees (SIMPLE); Individual 
Retirement Account (IRA); Employee Stock Ownership Plan (ESOP); Simplified 
Employee Pension (SEP).
3. $447.50 calculated as: $1,790 disposable income × 25%.
4. Union dues and health insurance are not legally required and thus would not affect 
the amount of disposable income available for garnishments.
Employee Benefits Reporting
1. Monies should be withheld from the employee when the benefit is made available; 
normal practice is to deduct these as the employees receive their pay (daily, weekly, 
biweekly, semimonthly, monthly, annually).
2. The total compensation report can be given to Braden to explain the total cost of 
benefits and compensation received.
3. There are several fringe benefits that must be included in taxable income of the 
employees. These include personal use of a company-provided vehicle, commuting 
paid by the employer, and lease of a vehicle.
Dollar sign made from binary numbers: Ralf Hiemisch/Getty Images
Final PDF to printer216
lan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 216 06/09/23 04:50 pm
Death and taxes are two certainties in life. Taxes are withheld from employees’ 
earnings and remitted to the governing body. Companies operate as the 
collectors and depositors of income taxes, garnishments, and other deduc￾tions on behalf of the employee. The tax code permits certain qualifying 
deductions to be taken out of an employee’s pay before calculating income 
taxes. These deductions are called pre-tax deductions. Other deductions 
are removed from the employee’s pay after income taxes have been 
calculated; these are called post-tax deductions. Circular E, also known as 
Publication 15 (and all supplemental materials), from the Internal Revenue 
Service provides a comprehensive list of employee taxes, employer 
responsibilities, and guidance for special situations. Publication 15-T was 
introduced in 2020 and contains the wage-bracket tables and percentage 
method computation amounts.
Taxes and both voluntary and mandated deductions all reduce the gross 
pay that we computed in Chapter 3. This chapter will explore the effects of 
these deductions and any other fringe benefits on employee take-home 
pay, also called net pay.
Employee Net Pay and 
Pay Methods
5
Chapter Five
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying Chapter 5, you should be able to:
LO 5-1 Compute Employee Net Pay
LO 5-2 Determine Federal Income Tax Withholding Amounts
LO 5-3 Compute Social Security and Medicare Tax Withholding
LO 5-4 Calculate State and Local Income Taxes
LO 5-5 Apply Post-Tax Deductions
LO 5-6 Discuss Employee Pay Methods
Final PDF to printerChapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods   217
lan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 217 06/09/23 04:50 pm
Flexible Pay Draws Employees to Employers
For decades, waiting until payday to receive the cash for your work has been the norm. 
The concept of living paycheck to paycheck affects over 60 percent of workers and has 
become an aspect of the definition of financial health. Other dire statistics such as the 
notion of how most households could not afford a $400 emergency have also emerged.
Employers started offering flexible pay options, which is the ability to access your pay 
before the set pay date. Ninety percent of employees reported an improvement in their 
financial situation because of the ability to access the money they had earned instead of 
incurring credit card debt or using short-term lenders to meet financial needs. Flexible 
pay is most common among shift workers and other lower-pay occupations because it 
empowers people to control their finances, and 78 percent of workers said they would be 
reluctant to accept a job offer from a company that did not offer such flexible pay options. 
At the Dee Set Group, the employer offered this policy of flexible pay to its employees 
along with access to financial education options. The option for flexible pay and education 
options has resulted in the company attracting more talent to add to its workforce. Flexible 
pay is one aspect of the trend of flexibility as a desired benefit and has already shown 
positive results. 
(Sources: CNBC; Comp and Benefits Today; Employee Benefits)
Naruedol Reelaong/Shutterstock
Net pay computations and payment methods affect employee take￾home pay and access to earned income. Chapter 5 will explore 
the computations of employee net pay and the methods used to 
transmit that pay to the employees.
Final PDF to printer218   Chapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods
lan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 218 06/09/23 04:50 pm
Ground Picture/Shutterstock
EXAMPLE: NET PAY COMPUTATION
Myle receives a salary of $2,000 paid biweekly has earned $46,000 year-to-date, is 
married, filing jointly with one dependent under 17. The checkbox in Step 2 is not 
checked, and the W-4 is from 2020 or later. Myle works for KOR, Inc., in Charleston, 
West Virginia, where the state income tax is 6.5 percent. The pre-tax deductions 
include medical insurance of $50, a cafeteria plan of $75, and a 401(k) of 3 percent 
of gross salary per pay period. There is a charitable contribution of $10, union dues 
of $62, and a court-ordered garnishment of $120. Taxable income computation is the 
same for both federal and state income tax purposes. Let us compute Myle’s net pay 
step by step:
LO 5-1 Compute Employee Net Pay
Now that we have discussed the computation of gross income, it is time to 
focus on the various taxes and miscellaneous voluntary or court-ordered 
deductions withheld and to determine the employee’s net pay, which is 
the amount of cash an employee receives in a physical check, cash, direct 
deposit, or a paycard. The process of computing gross pay involves sev￾eral steps, each of which must be completed accurately. We will explore 
the details of pre-tax deductions, tax computations, and post-tax deductions in the following 
sections of this chapter.
In 2020, the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 led to a new Form W-4 and different tax tables. 
For those who filed the 2020 (or later) Form W-4, an employee’s federal income tax is com￾puted based on the employee’s tax filing status, pay frequency, taxable earnings, and spouse’s 
employment status—a vast difference from prior years. We will be using the current year’s 
Form W-4 exclusively.
Once the employer has computed the employee’s gross pay, the next step is to deduct 
mandatory (i.e., legislated), voluntary, and mandated (i.e., court-ordered or union-regulated) 
amounts. These deductions include federal income tax, Medicare, and Social Security taxes, 
which are the primary mandatory deductions. Other mandatory deductions that the employee 
may be subject to include state income taxes, city or county income taxes, and regional 
taxes. For example, Denver has a “head tax” for those employees working within the city 
and county; Mountain View, California, instituted a similar tax because of Google’s pres￾ence in the city. Federal unemployment tax is the sole employer-only tax. Some states require 
employees to contribute to the state unemployment tax, whereas other states consider it an 
employer-only tax.
Pay Computation Steps
The following steps show the process for computing each employee’s pay:
1. Start with the employee’s gross pay.
2. Subtract the pre-tax deductions to get the total taxable earnings.
3. Compute the taxes to be withheld from the total taxable earnings.
4. Deduct the taxes.
5. Deduct any other voluntary or mandated deductions.
6. The result is the employee’s net pay.
The easiest way to keep track of all deductions and ensure pay accuracy is to use a payroll 
register. In the following examples, we will show the computations and a sample of the pay￾roll register representation. 
Final PDF to printerChapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods   219
lan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 219 06/09/23 04:50 pm
The payroll register for Myle’s pay would appear as follows:
Gross pay $2,000.00
Less: Pre-tax medical insurance deduction −50.00
Less: Cafeteria plan −75.00
Less: 401(k) contribution −60.00
Total taxable earnings $1,815.00
Less: Federal income tax* 0.00
Less: Social Security tax† −116.25
Less: Medicare tax‡ −27.19
Less: West Virginia state income tax§ −117.98
Less: Charitable contribution −10.00
Less: Union dues −62.00
Less: Garnishment −120.00
Net pay $1,361.58
*$1,815 has a tax bracket of $74.00 and the $2,000 credit for a dependent under 17 is divided by 26 
for a per pay period credit amount of $76.92, leaving no federal income tax.
†2,000 − 50 − 75 = 1,875 × 0.062 = 116.25
‡2,000 − 50 − 75 = 1,875 × 0.0145 = 27.19
§
1,815 × 0.065 = 117.98
Name
Filing
Status Dependents
Hourly
Rate or
Period
Wage
No. of
Regular 
Hours
No. of
Overtime 
Hours
No. of
Holiday 
Hours
Gross 
Earnings 401(k) Insurance
Cafeteria
Plan
Taxable
Wages
for
Federal
W/H
Taxable
Wages
for FICA
Myle MJ 1 < 17 2,000.00 2,000.00 60.00 50.00 75.00 1,815.00 1,875.00
Name
Gross
Earning
Taxable
Wages
for
Federal
W/H
Taxable
Wages
for FICA
Federal
W/H
Social
Security
Tax
Medicare
W/H
State
W/H
Tax
Charitable
Contribution
Union
Dues Garnishment Net Pay
Myle 2,000.00 1,815.00 1,875.00 0.00 116.25 27.19 117.98 10.00 62.00 120.00 1,361.58
Grossed-Up Pay
An employer will occasionally want to pay an employee a specific net 
amount, perhaps as a bonus. However, all federal, state, and local taxes 
must be applied. The employee’s pay must be “grossed up” to satisfy tax 
liabilities and achieve the net pay desired. 
Andrey_Popov/Shutterstock
Final PDF to printer220   Chapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods
lan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 220 06/09/23 04:50 pm
In Ada County, Idaho, the highway district examined its commissioner’s compensa￾tion package. When he was hired in 2020, he was given a three-year contract. If the 
commissioner were released from the contract early or resigned, he would receive a 
grossed-up lump sum for his health coverage in addition to the annual $169,750 sal￾ary and other payments.
(Source: Idaho Statesman)
Andrii Yalanskyi/Shutterstock
EXAMPLE: “GROSSING UP” AN EMPLOYEE’S PAY
Sawyer is an employee of Pacifica Enterprises, located in the state of Washington. The 
firm’s president wants to award Sawyer a $150 bonus at the end of the year. Use the 
following steps to compute the gross-up amount:
1. Compute the tax rate for federal income tax and FICA. The tax rate on bonuses is 
22 percent, per Publication 15 (Section 7). Social Security (6.2 percent) and 
Medicare taxes (1.45 percent) must be added to this rate. For bonuses, the total tax 
rate equals 22% + 6.2% + 1.45%, or 29.65%. (For nonbonus gross-up, compute the 
tax rate using amounts from Appendix C.) Add any state or local income tax rates to 
this computation as necessary.
2. To calculate the net tax rate, subtract the tax rate percentage from 100 percent (i.e., 
100% − tax rate) to get the net tax rate. This bonus is 100% – 29.65%, or 70.35%, 
because no state or local income tax rates apply.
3. The gross-up amount equals the net pay divided by the net tax rate.
For example, for Sawyer to receive a $150 bonus, the equation to calculate the 
gross pay is $150/70.35% = $213.22.
Note: Typically, voluntary pre-tax or post-tax deductions are not withheld from bonus checks.
Differentiating between Gross and Net Pay
&Check Stop
1. What is the difference between gross pay and net pay?
2. What are three items that may be deducted from gross pay?
3. What does it mean to “gross up” an amount paid to an employee?
LO 5-2 Determine Federal Income Tax Withholding Amounts
Now let us shift our focus to mandatory deductions that must be withheld 
from employee pay. The first class of mandatory deductions is the federal 
income tax. This is an employee-only tax, meaning that the employer does 
not contribute a matching amount for the federal income tax withheld 
from an employee’s pay. 
Federal Income Taxes
The first tax we will cover is the federal income tax. The federal income 
tax represents amounts to be withheld from employed persons, calculated using the informa￾tion reported by the employee on Form W-4. The withheld tax is the employee’s deposit 
Final PDF to printerChapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods   221
lan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 221 06/09/23 04:50 pm
against income taxes. The employer acts as a collector and depositor for these funds. When 
an individual files the income tax return, the amount withheld from his or her pay during the 
year reduces the amount he or she may have to pay with the return. Federal taxable income is 
reduced by the pre-tax deductions discussed previously.
There are two commonly used methods to calculate the employee’s federal income tax in 
manual systems: wage bracket and percentage. Starting in 2020, the IRS issued Publication 
15-T for the sole purpose of income tax calculations, given that two types of Forms W-4 were 
in use at that time. We will explain the federal income tax computation methods using the 
2023 Form W-4. It is important to note that employees hired prior to the change in income 
tax laws may retain their 2019 or earlier W-4 and new employees need to use the W-4 for the 
year of hire. Regardless of the method used for calculating federal income taxes, the reduc￾tion for pre-tax items will remain the same. Publication 15-T contains tax tables to match the 
new criteria. The following examples reflect how tax deductions affect employee pay.
Federal Income Pre-Tax Computation Examples
$950.00 gross pay
−95.00 401(k) deduction
−56.90 health insurance
$798.10 taxable income
$1,125.00 gross pay
−100.00 401(k) deduction
−113.80 health insurance and AFLAC
$ 911.20 taxable income
$1,125.00
×     0.03
33.75 401(k) contribution
$1,125.00 gross pay
−33.75 401(k) contribution
−113.80 health insurance and AFLAC
$ 977.45 taxable income
EXAMPLE: GROSS PAY LESS 401(K) AND INSURANCE
Bellamy’s gross wages are $950. Bellamy is subscribed to the company’s cafeteria plan 
and has agreed to a 10 percent contribution to a qualified 401(k) plan. Bellamy’s portion 
of the health insurance is $56.90 per pay period. To calculate the taxable pay, we must 
first determine the 401(k) deduction: $950 × 10% = $95. Therefore, taxable pay is:
EXAMPLE: EFFECT OF FIXED AMOUNT VS. PERCENTAGE DEDUCTION 
FOR 401(K) CONTRIBUTION ON TAXABLE WAGES
Channing has gross wages of $1,125, participates in the company’s 401(k) program 
at $100 per pay period, and has health insurance and AFLAC (all pre-tax) totaling 
$113.80. The calculation of Channing’s taxable income is:
If Channing participated in the company’s 401(k) at a percentage instead of a fixed 
dollar amount, the percentage would be calculated before other deductions. For 
instance, if the investment was 3 percent of gross pay, taxable income would be:
Note: Gross pay – Qualified medical = Taxable wages for FICA. $1,125 − 113.80 = $1,011.20 would be the 
taxable amount for Social Security and Medicare because retirement contributions are not exempt from FICA 
taxes.
Final PDF to printer222   Chapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods
lan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 222 06/09/23 04:50 pm
If the employee (and spouse, when applicable) has more than one job, they should 
check the box at Step 2(c) on Form W-4 and
• Complete page 3 of Form W-4 OR
• Use the IRS tax estimator at www.irs.gov/w4app 
4000
4000
155
Starting in 2020, Form W-4 was very different in appearance than in years prior. The 
criteria for amounts withheld from employee payroll focused more on annual taxes than the 
employee’s marital status and the number of dependents. The employee federal income tax 
criteria used starting in 2020 included the following:
∙ Filing status (Single, Married Filing Jointly, Married Filing Separately, and Head of 
Household)
∙ Multiple jobs or spouse’s employment
∙ Dependents under the age of 17 
∙ Other dependents
In prior years, the marital status and number of dependents served as the determinants for 
how much tax should be withheld. This method resulted in too little tax being withheld each 
pay period. The current Form W-4  focuses on marital status, annual income, and dependents. 
The filing status was expanded to match the categories used on the annual tax return. The 
reality of an employee supporting other nonchild dependents was included as part of the form. 
The following examples show how to compute the federal withholding tax using the man￾ual method in Publication 15-T and Form W-4. In the example, the employee is married to a 
spouse who also has a job. No pre-tax deductions are contained in the first example. 
Note: If an employee has more than one job or is married to a spouse who is also employed, 
they should complete Step 4 of Form W-4 to have the appropriate amount of federal income 
tax withheld. Step 4(c) specifically addresses the amount of withholding when the employee 
has a multiple jobs situation.
EXAMPLE: MANUAL PAYROLL TAX COMPUTATION USING FORM W-4, 
NO PRE-TAX DEDUCTIONS
Rene works for Tru-Deal Homebuilders and earns $48,550, paid semimonthly. There 
are no other deductions. Rene is married, filing jointly with two dependents under 
17 years of age. Rene’s spouse earns $42,675 annually, paid biweekly, so the box in 
Step 2(c) has been checked.
Steps 3 through 4 of her W-4 would appear as follows: 
Final PDF to printerChapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods   223
lan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 223 06/09/23 04:50 pm
Notice that the circled result, $3,720, appears on Step 2, line 1 of the Multiple Jobs 
Worksheet.
Note that the extra withholding from line 4(c) is rounded to the nearest dollar. 
Using the wage bracket in Publication 15-T, the federal withholding amount would be 
$163 per pay period. Since Rene has the two dependents under 17, this is reduced 
by $166.67 ($4,000/24) and would give Rene no federal income taxes. However, 
the extra withholding of $155.00 must be added to the amount shown in the wage￾bracket tables or the result of the percentage method. The federal income tax with￾held from Rene’s pay would be $155.00 per pay period.
3720
24
155
Page 4 of Form W-4 gives us the amount to deduct for Rene and the spouse’s jobs. 
Following is an excerpt from page 4 as it pertains to Rene.
This next example shows the manual federal tax computation for a married employee with 
dependents and pre-tax deductions. Form W-4 should be completed first to obtain the IRS 
Withholding Tax Assistant’s data to work properly.
Final PDF to printer224   Chapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods
lan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 224 06/09/23 04:50 pm
6000
6500
221.15
500
5750
26
221.15
EXAMPLE: MANUAL PAYROLL TAX COMPUTATION USING FORM W-4 
AND THE IRS INCOME TAX WITHHOLDING ASSISTANT WITH PRE-TAX 
DEDUCTIONS
Bai is an employee at Benson Architects who earns $75,500 annually, is paid biweekly, 
and is married. Bai’s spouse is employed, earning $54,000 annually, and paid semi￾monthly, so box 2(c) is checked. They have three dependents under the age of 17 and 
one other dependent. Bai has elected to contribute 5 percent of gross pay to a 401(k) 
plan and has pre-tax medical insurance of $250 per pay period. 
Steps 2 through 4 of Bai’s W-4 would appear as follows:
To determine the amount for Step 4(c), Bai would need to complete the Multiple Jobs 
Worksheet on page 3 of Form W-4 as follows:
Final PDF to printerChapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods   225
lan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 225 06/09/23 04:50 pm
Period salary: $75,500/26 $2,903.85
Less: 401(k) at 5% of salary −145.19
Less: Pre-tax medical insurance 250.00
Taxable income $2,508.66*
Federal tax per Publication 15-T $ 3.00**
Additional withholding (Box 4(c) is checked) 221.15
Total federal income tax $ 224.15
To determine the amount on line 1 of the Multiple Jobs Worksheet, Bai would use 
page 4 of Form W-4 as follows: 
Notice that the circled result, $5,750, appears on Step 2, line 1 of the Multiple Jobs 
Worksheet.
Before we compute the federal withholding tax per period, we need to apply the 
pre-tax deductions:
*Note: Gross pay – Qualified medical = Taxable wages for FICA. $2,903.85 − 250.00 = $2,653.85 would be the taxable amount 
for Social Security and Medicare because retirement contributions are not exempt from FICA taxes.
** Since the employee has three dependents under 17 and one other (for a total of three dependents), the resulting federal 
withholding of $253 is reduced by a $250 dependent deduction for a total of $3. 
Wage-Bracket Method
Using the wage-bracket method, the payroll clerk identifies the individual’s marital status, 
number of exemptions, and taxable income level and then follows the chart in Publication 
15-T for the amount to be withheld. If manually calculating the wage-bracket method, it is 
important to apply the appropriate number of withholding variables before calculating the 
tax amounts. The wage-bracket method is useful for manual payroll preparation because the 
process of federal tax withholding is an estimate for the year-end amount of taxes due. To 
determine taxes to withhold using  Appendix C, the payroll clerk may use Publication 15-T. 
If the payroll clerk uses an automated system, periodic checking and ensuring that year-end 
updates do not run before the last payroll are important to ensuring the system’s validity.
EXAMPLE: WAGE-BRACKET COMPUTATION OF FEDERAL INCOME TAX, 
SINGLE, BIWEEKLY
Gerry is an employee at Vosgienne Farms. The employee is single with no depen￾dents and earns $48,000 annually, paid biweekly. Using the wage bracket tables in 
Appendix C, we will determine Gerry’s federal income tax in different situations.
(continued)
Final PDF to printer226   Chapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods
lan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 226 06/09/23 04:50 pm
Period pay ($36,000/24) $1,500.00
Taxable income 1,500.00
Federal income tax $ 101.00
Period pay ($36,000/24) $1,500.00
Less: health insurance 150.00
Taxable income* $1,350.00
Federal income tax $  84.00
Period pay ($48,000/26) $1,846.15
Taxable income   1,846.15
Federal income tax 150.00
Period pay ($48,000/26) $1,846.15
Less: health insurance 75.00
Less: supplemental health insurance 55.00
Taxable income* $1,716.15
Federal income tax $ 133.00
Period pay ($48,000/26)  $1,846.15
Less: health insurance  75.00
Less: supplemental health insurance  55.00
Less: 401(k) contribution 100.00
Taxable income* $1,616.15
Federal income tax $ 121.00
1. NO PRE-TAX DEDUCTIONS
2. PRE-TAX HEALTH INSURANCE, $75, PRE-TAX SUPPLEMENTAL 
HEALTH INSURANCE, $55
3. PRE-TAX HEALTH INSURANCE, $75, PRE-TAX SUPPLEMENTAL 
HEALTH INSURANCE, $55, 401(K) CONTRIBUTION, $100
*Note: The taxable income for Social Security and Medicare tax is $1,846.15 − 75 − 55 = $1,716.15.
(concluded)
EXAMPLE: WAGE-BRACKET COMPUTATION OF FEDERAL INCOME TAX, 
MARRIED FILING JOINT, SEMIMONTHLY PAY PERIOD
Robin is an employee of Centerspot Photo Designs. Robin earns $36,000 per year, is 
paid semimonthly, and is single with no dependents. Box 2 is not checked. Using the 
wage-bracket tables in Appendix C, we will determine Robin’s federal income tax in 
different situations.
1. NO VOLUNTARY PRE-TAX DEDUCTIONS
2. PRE-TAX HEALTH INSURANCE DEDUCTION, $150
When using the wage-bracket tables, it should be noted that many wage amounts are the 
same number as the beginning and the end of a range. If the number is the exact number of 
the range in these events, the next bracket should be used. For example, refer to the below 
image. It is important to notice the language at the top of the column: “And the wages are—
At least. . . But less than.” If the wages were $3,324.99, then the top row would be used. If the 
wages were precisely $3,325, then the second row would be used.  
Final PDF to printerChapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods   227
lan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 227 06/09/23 04:50 pm
Period pay ($36,000/24) $1,500.00
Less: health insurance 150.00
Less: 401(k) contribution   80.00
Taxable income* $1,270.00
Federal income tax $  75.00
3. PRE-TAX HEALTH INSURANCE DEDUCTION, $150, AND 401(K) 
CONTRIBUTION, 4%
*Note: The taxable income for Social Security and Medicare tax is $2,000 − 150 = $1,850.
Percentage Method
There are many tables in IRS Publication 15-T to assist employers with the correct amount 
of withholding. The percentage method for calculating employee withholding is tiered, with 
each layer building upon the previous layer. In 2020, the changes to tax credits drastically 
altered the computation method, focusing on consistency between the annual tax filing and 
the federal income tax per pay period. We will go through an example in which we complete 
the percentage method using a manual system. 
Note that the wage-bracket and percentage methods will yield similar results as to income 
tax withholding. The percentage method shown in Figure 5-1  allows more flexibility for 
calculations involving high-wage earners or uncommon pay periods, but the wage-bracket 
method is simpler for manual payroll computations.
FIGURE 5-1
2023 Percentage Method Tables for Income Tax
(continued)
Final PDF to printer228   Chapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods
lan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 228 06/09/23 04:50 pm
Final PDF to printerChapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods   229
lan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 229 06/09/23 04:50 pm
(continued)
Final PDF to printer230   Chapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods
lan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 230 06/09/23 04:50 pm
(Source: Internal Revenue Service)
The IRS has published guidance for using the percentage method tables manually. The 
process published in 2023 differs significantly from the process that existed prior to 2020 
because of the changes to Form W-4 and income tax laws. 
FIGURE 5-2
2023 Percentage Method Tables Directions
Final PDF to printerChapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods   231
lan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 231 06/09/23 04:50 pm
Using the percentage method can be confusing, so let’s look at a step-by-step example. 
This first example uses data from the employee’s Form W-4 and prior year income tax filing 
information. 
(Source: Internal Revenue Service) 
EXAMPLE: SINGLE EMPLOYEE, PERCENTAGE METHOD
CS is single and has two dependents under the age of 17 reported on Form W-4 
from 2023. CS is paid semimonthly and earns $51,000 per year, does not receive any 
other income, and does not itemize deductions. Form W-4, Step 2 box has not been 
checked. CS has no pre-tax deductions.
The following image is an excerpt from the Percentage Method Tables with an out￾line around the row to be used for Step 2.
(continued)
Step 1: Adjust 
the employee’s 
wage amount
1a Total taxable wages for the period (Note: This 
is the amount after pre-tax deductions for 
insurance, etc.)
$51,000/24 =
$2,125
1b Number of pay periods per year 24
1c Amount from Step 4(a) of CS’s W-4 (other income 
not from jobs)
$0
Final PDF to printer232   Chapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods
lan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 232 06/09/23 04:50 pm
1d Divide the amount on 1c by the number on 1b.  0
1e Add lines 1a and 1d. $2,125
1f Enter the amount from Step 4(b) of the 
employee’s Form W-4.
$0
1g Divide line 1f by the number on line 1b. 0
1h Subtract 1g from 1e. This is the adjusted wage 
amount.
$2,125
Step 2: Figure 
the tentative 
withholding 
amount
2a Since Box 2 on CS’s Form W-4 was not checked, 
use the left-hand tables on the Percentage 
Method Tables for the semimonthly pay period. 
For CS, this is row 3 in the section labeled 
“Single or Married Filing Separately.” Enter the 
amount from Column A of that row.
Column A: 
$1,035
2b Enter the amount of Column C of that row. $45.80
2c Enter the percentage from Column D of  that 
row.
12%
2d Subtract line 2a from 1h. $2,125 − 1,035 
= $1,090
2e Multiply the amount on 2d by the percentage on 
2c.
$1,090 × 12% 
= $130.80
2f Add lines 2b and 2e. This is the tentative 
withholding amount.
$45.80 +
$130.80 
= $176.60
Step 3: Account 
for tax credits
3a Enter the amount from Step 3 of CS’s Form W-4. 
Since CS has two dependents under the age of 
17, the amount would be: 
$2,000 × 2 = $4,000
3b Divide the amount on line 3a by the number of 
pay periods on line 1b.
$4,000/24 =
$166.67
3c Subtract line 3b from line 2f. If zero or less, 
enter–0–.
$176.60 −
$166.67 =
$9.93
Step 4: Figure 
the final amount 
to withhold
4a Enter the additional amount to withhold from 
Step 4(c) of CS’s Form W-4. CS has entered no 
additional amounts.
0
4b Add lines 3c and 4a. This is the amount to withhold 
from the employee’s wages this pay period.
$9.93
(Source: Internal Revenue Service)
(concluded)
The amount of federal income tax withholding may differ slightly between the wage bracket 
and percentage methods. However, the computation method is similar. Let’s revisit the tax 
computation for CS’s tax using the wage-bracket method and compare the two amounts side 
by side. Only the totals from each step are included because the other information remains the 
same in both methods.
EXAMPLE: SINGLE EMPLOYEE, PERCENTAGE METHOD VS. WAGE￾BRACKET TABLE
CS is single and has two dependents under the age of 17 reported on Form W-4 from 
2023. CS is paid semimonthly and earns $51,000 per year, does not receive any other 
income, and does not itemize deductions. Form W-4, Step 2 box has not been checked.
The following image is an excerpt from the wage-bracket method tables with an 
outline around the amount to be used for Step 2.
Final PDF to printerChapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods   233
lan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 233 07/28/23 04:38 pm
zimmytws/iStockphoto/Getty Images
(Source: Internal Revenue Service)
Comparison of Percentage and Wage-Bracket Methods
Percentage method Wage-bracket method
Step 1: Adjusted wage amount $2,125.00 $2,125.00
Step 2: Tentative withholding amount $176.60 $178.00
Step 3: Account for tax credits $166.67 $166.67
Step 4: Figure the final amount to 
withhold
$176.60 − 166.67 =
$9.93
$178.00 − 166.67 =
$11.33
Note that the amount to withhold differs slightly between the percentage method and the wage￾bracket method. The cause for this discrepancy is rounding inherent to the wage-bracket method. 
If using a manual payroll tax system, the wage-bracket method will be simpler to compute 
federal income tax amounts. However, note that the percentage method will yield more accu￾rate results. If the company uses a software package to complete its payroll, the percentage 
method will be used by default.
How Much Tax to Withhold?
&Check Stop
1. Asa earns $75,000 annually, is married filing jointly with two dependents 
not under 17, a spouse that does not work (box 2 is not checked), and is 
paid semimonthly; the W-4 is from 2023. Calculate the amount to be with￾held using (a) the wage-bracket method and (b) the percentage method.
2. If Asa elected to deduct $100 per pay period for a 401(k), how much 
would that change the tax withheld from the paycheck? (Use the wage￾bracket method.)
3. How much would Asa’s federal income tax be if $75 health insurance and 
$55 AFLAC premiums were deducted each pay period pre-tax? (Use the 
wage-bracket method, independent of question 2.)
LO 5-3 Compute Social Security and Medicare 
Tax Withholding
The Social Security Act of 1935 mandated the withholding of certain taxes 
in addition to federal income tax. Employers collect only federal income 
taxes on employees without making a corresponding contribution. Social 
Final PDF to printer234   Chapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods
lan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 234 06/09/23 04:50 pm
Security and Medicare, collectively known as FICA (Federal Insurance Contribution Act) 
taxes, contain both the employer’s and the employee’s portion. When the employer deposits 
the federal withholding tax, it deposits the Social Security and Medicare amounts simulta￾neously. The deposits are usually done online but may be made by standard mail in certain 
circumstances. The report provided to the IRS does not provide a breakdown of tax amounts 
for individual employees. Specific questions about Social Security or Medicare tax situations 
should be directed to the Social Security Administration at www.ssa.gov or via telephone at 
800-772-1213.
Social Security Tax
Social Security tax, formerly known as OASDI, was designed to cover people for illness, 
retirement, disability, and old age. As a social insurance method by which communities will 
help provide for people who are unable to work, Social Security has evolved into a tax that is 
levied upon all employees until their annual income reaches a specified level. The maximum 
income, known as the wage base, for the Social Security tax changes annually. In 2023, the 
wage base is $160,200. This means only the first $160,200 of wages earned are subject to the 
6.2 percent tax. Every dollar earned above $160,200 will not be subject to Social Security tax. 
The tax rate on employee pay is 6.2 percent of eligible wages. Remember that eligible wages 
can be different from gross pay because of pre-tax deductions and the wage base maximum.
An important part of determining Social Security tax when an employee is close to the 
wage base is to compute the amount of year-to-date (YTD) pay. In programs such as 
QuickBooks, this computation occurs automatically. The following is a guide to com￾puting Social Security taxable pay.
You will need the following information to complete this computation:
• Period pay.
• Pay frequency.
• The number of prior pay periods in the calendar year. 
The computation aims to ensure that the employee does not overpay tax as they 
approach the annual wage base.
Note that these computations are used primarily in two instances: 
• Highly paid employees
• Pay periods near the end of the calendar year
Period 
Pay
Pay 
Frequency
Number of 
Prior Pay 
Periods
YTD Pay (Period 
Pay × # of Prior 
Pay Periods)
Social Security Taxable 
Pay for Next Pay 
Period
Employee 
1
$3,500 Weekly 47 $3,500 × 47 = $164,500
–0–
Employee 
2
$6,850 Biweekly 23 $6,850 × 23 =
$157,550
$160,200 − 157,550 =
$2,650
Employee 
3
$7,800 Semimonthly 20 $7,800 × 20 =
$156,000
$160,200 − 156,000 =
$4,200
Final PDF to printerChapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods   235
lan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 235 06/09/23 04:50 pm
With the increase in the retirement age to 67 to qualify for full Social Security benefits 
(anyone born after 1960 or turning 62 in 2023), employers may find more people in 
the workforce longer. This represents the latest increase in the retirement age since 
the 1950s. Semi-retired employees (under qualified retirement age) also need to keep 
an eye on how much they are earning as their Social Security benefits also begin to 
phase out at $19,560, by $1 of benefits for every $2 over the cap. In the year the 
employee reaches the qualified retirement age, he or she may earn up to $51,960, 
and the phase-out is $1 of benefits for every $3 over the cap. Employees over the full 
retirement age do not have a benefits phase-out on their earnings.
Any higher-waged individual who caps out of Social Security ($160,200 for 2023) will 
find the wages over the cap are also not used in calculating future Social Security ben￾efits. Employees working in retirement may also increase their future benefits. 
(Sources: Fox Business; U.S. News Money)
Examples of Social Security Tax Computations
Employee
Period 
Wages
YTD Salary 
at the End of 
Previous Pay 
Period
Social Security 
Tax Computation
Social Security 
Tax Amount to 
Be Withheld
1 $1,700 $ 55,600 $1,700 × 6.2% $105.40
2 2,850 90,000 2,850 × 6.2% 176.70
3 7,200 158,400 1,800 × 6.2%*  111.60
4 8,200 155,800 4,400 × 6.2%†  272.80
5 10,500 195,000 0‡ 0
*The employee’s wage base reaches the maximum during this pay period; thus, only the amount under the $160,200 cap is taxed for Social Security: 
$160,200 – $158,400 = $1,800, so only the $1,800 is taxed.
†The employee’s wage base reaches the maximum during this pay period; thus, only the amount under the $160,200 cap is taxed for Social Security: 
$160,200 – $155,800 = $4,400, so only the $4,400 is taxed.
‡The employee’s wage base maximum was met before the current pay period, so no Social Security taxes are withheld.
The employee earnings record is vital in computing and tracking the Social Security taxes 
due for each employee. Current records allow payroll accountants to keep track of annual 
salaries for each employee to avoid exceeding the maximum wage base, preventing excess 
deductions from employees’ pay.
The employer and employee pay the same amount for the Social Security tax. Remember, 
the Social Security tax has a maximum annual wage amount, known as the wage base, 
for which taxes may be withheld. After reaching that maximum annual wage, neither the 
employee nor the employer pays any more Social Security tax for the remainder of the year.
Medicare Tax
Medicare taxes differ from Social Security taxes in a couple of significant ways. Medicare 
taxes were levied on employers and employees to help provide basic health coverage 
for all individuals qualified to enroll in Medicare benefits. The Medicare tax amount for 
employee wages is 1.45 percent on all wages earned; there is no maximum wage base for 
Medicare taxes. 
The Affordable Care Act of 2010 levied an additional Medicare tax of 0.9 percent on 
certain workers, known as highly compensated employees. Only the employee pays this addi￾tional tax, and no employer match is required. The wage base for this additional Medicare 
tax depends on the marital and tax filing statuses reported on the employee’s Form W-4 as 
follows:
∙ $200,000 for employees who report that they are single, head of household, qualifying 
widow(er) with a dependent child.
∙ $250,000 for employees who report that they are married and file taxes jointly.
∙ $125,000 for employees who report that they are married and file taxes separately.
Final PDF to printer236   Chapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods
lan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 236 06/09/23 04:50 pm
This made the simple computations and tracking for Medicare taxes a little more challeng￾ing for payroll accountants and increased the employee earnings report’s need for accuracy. 
Note the additional Medicare tax is levied only on the employees, so there is no employer 
match. Unless otherwise noted, this text will use $200,000 as the cap.
Examples of Medicare Tax Computations
Employee
Period 
Wages
YTD Salary 
at the End of 
Previous Pay 
Period
Medicare Tax 
Computation
Total Medicare Tax 
Liability (Employee 
and Employer)
1 $ 1,700 $ 55,600 $1,700 × 1.45%  $24.65 × 2 = $ 49.30
2 2,850 90,000  2,850 × 1.45%   41.33 × 2 =    82.66  
3 7,200 112,600  7,200 × 1.45%    104.40 × 2 =  
208.80 
4 6,200 118,000   6,200 × 1.45%   89.90 × 2 = 179.80
5 10,500 195,000 Employee: ($10,500 × 0.0145*) 
+ ($5,500† × 0.009) = $201.75
Employee: $201.75 +
Employer: $152.25‡
Total = $354.00
*10,500 * 0.0145 = 152.25
†195,000 + 10,500 = 205,500. 205,500 − 200,000 = 5,500
‡The employer does not pay the additional Medicare tax.
Remember the applicable wages may have pre-tax deductions. Social Security and 
Medicare taxes apply to the employee’s gross pay if an employee elects to have a 401(k) 
deduction. However, qualified Section 125 (cafeteria) plans are exempt from FICA taxes. 
When computing employee taxes, understanding the pre-tax deductions’ tax effect is impor￾tant in computing accurate FICA deductions.
EXAMPLE: COMPUTATION OF SOCIAL SECURITY AND MEDICARE TAXES 
WITH PRE-TAX DEDUCTIONS
Brooklyn is an employee who earns an annual salary of $58,000, paid biweekly, and is 
single with no dependents. Brooklyn has pre-tax deductions, including $155 for health 
insurance and a contribution of 5 percent of gross pay to a 401(k) plan. Let’s compute 
Brooklyn’s net pay using Publication 15-T to determine federal income tax under the 
wage-bracket method, using the information for Form W-4 after 2020 in Appendix C.
*This taxable income is for federal income tax only.
†Social Security and Medicare taxes are computed on taxable income of $2,230.77 − $155.00 = $2,075.77, then $2,075.77 × 
0.062 (Social Security) and $2,075.77 × 0.0145 (Medicare).
Gross pay per period (58,000/26) $2,230.77
Less: health insurance 155.00
Less: 401(k) (2,230.77 × 0.05)       111.54
Taxable income* $1,964.23
Federal income tax 164.00
Social Security tax† 128.70
Medicare tax†         30.10
Net pay $1,641.43
EXAMPLE: COMPUTATION OF NET PAY, HIGHLY COMPENSATED 
EMPLOYEE
Malone is the CEO and president of Martians Flooring. Malone’s annual salary is 
$320,000, paid biweekly, married with no dependents, files taxes jointly, and has pre￾tax deductions for health insurance of $250 and 401(k) of $1,000; the box in Step 2 is 
not checked.
Final PDF to printerChapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods   237
lan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 237 06/09/23 04:50 pm
Gross pay per period $12,307.69
Less: health insurance 250.00
Less: 401(k)  1,000.00
Taxable income $11,057.69
Total federal income tax $  1,890.47*
*Using the percentage method in 2023 Publication 15-T for Form W-4 after 2020: $11,057.69 − 8,402 = $2,655.69 × 24% = 
$637.37 (rounded) + 1,253.10 = $1,890.47. 
In June, Malone will exceed the Social Security wage base and incur the additional 
Medicare tax in September. Let’s look at the net pay computations on January 14, July 15, 
and October 21.
FEDERAL INCOME TAX COMPUTATION
Federal income tax is computed as follows, using the percentage tables in Publication 
15-T or Appendix C:
JANUARY 14 PAY PERIOD
JULY 15 PAY PERIOD
As of July 1, Malone has earned year-to-date FICA taxable pay of $156,749.97 
($12,057.69 × 13 pay periods). The next payroll will exceed the Social Security wage 
base. Malone’s salary is only taxable for Social Security wages up to the wage base of 
$160,200 (2023 amount), so the amount that may be taxed is $160,200 −$156,749.97 −
$250 = $3,200.03. After the July 15 pay period, there will be no more Social Security tax 
deducted. This net pay for July 15 will be as follows:
OCTOBER 21 PAY PERIOD
As of October 7, Malone has earned year-to-date pay of $241,153.80 (12,057.69 ×
20 pay periods). The next paycheck will be subject to the additional Medicare tax of 
0.9 percent, levied only on employees (i.e., no employer match). Since the employee is 
Gross pay per period $12,307.69
Less: health insurance 250.00
Less: 401(k) 1,000.00
Taxable income* $11,057.69
Federal income tax 1,890.47
Social Security tax† 747.58
Medicare tax† 174.84
Net pay $ 8,244.82
*This taxable income is for federal income tax only.
†Social Security and Medicare taxes are computed using a base of $12,307.69 − 250 = $12,057.69.
Gross pay per period $12,307.69
Less: health Insurance 250.00
Less: 401(k)   1,000.00
Taxable income* $11,057.69
Federal income tax 1,890.47
Social Security tax† 198.40
Medicare tax‡  174.84
Net pay $  8,793.98  
*This taxable income is for federal income tax only.
†Social Security tax is computed as $3,200.03 × 0.062 = $198.40.
‡Medicare tax is computed using a base of $12,057.69 * 0.0145 = $174.84.
(continued)
Final PDF to printer238   Chapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods
lan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 238 06/09/23 04:50 pm
married, the additional Medicare tax applies once their pay reaches $250,000. The net 
pay for October 21 will be computed as follows:
(concluded)
Gross pay per period $12,307.69
Less: health insurance 250.00
Less: 401(k)   1,000.00
Taxable income* $11,057.69
Federal income tax 1,890.47 
Social Security tax –0–
Medicare tax†  203.74
Net pay $ 8,896.48
*This taxable income is for federal income tax only.
†Medicare taxes are computed as: $12,307.69 − $250.00 = $12,057.69 *.0145 = $174.84 and ($12,057.69 * 20 payrolls = 
$253,211.54 − $250,000 = $3,211.54 * .009 = $28.90) for a total Medicare tax of $203.74.
Maintaining accurate records of taxes withheld through payroll registers and employee 
earnings records is a critical part of calculating proper FICA tax deductions. Whether a com￾pany uses a manual system, an automated system, or outsources the payroll duties, it remains 
responsible for the accuracy of the deductions and maintenance of associated records.
FICA Taxes
&Check Stop
1. Peyton is an employee who earned $68,640 before the current pay 
period. The current gross pay for the period is $5,280. What amount must 
be withheld for Social Security tax? For Medicare tax?
2. For Peyton’s FICA taxes, what is the total tax liability, including employee 
and employer share?
3. Shae is the CEO of a company and earns $250,000 per year. The year￾to-date salary for the 19th pay period of the year was $197,916.67. Shae 
is single, contributes 5 percent of gross pay to 401(k), and has a qualified 
Section 125 deduction of $75 per semimonthly pay period.
a. For the 20th pay period, what is the Social Security tax liability? 
Medicare tax liability?
b. For the 21st pay period, what is the Medicare tax liability?
LO 5-4 Calculate State and Local Income Taxes
Many states and localities apply taxes in addition to the federal income tax, Social Security, 
and Medicare. According to the IRS, all but nine states withhold income taxes. As budgets 
become tighter and the unfunded pension liabilities come due, these states may look to income 
tax as a means for covering budget or pension shortfalls. The nine states are:
Alaska New Hampshire*  Tennessee
Florida South Dakota Washington
Nevada Texas Wyoming
*New Hampshire does not charge a payroll tax but obtains revenue from individual taxpayers through taxes on dividends and investments.
(Source: Tax Admin)
Final PDF to printerChapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods   239
lan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 239 06/09/23 04:50 pm
Due to the effect of inflation and other economic influences, 38 states have notable 
changes to personal income tax rates. Eleven states reduced their tax rates on per￾sonal income, and three states changed from a progressive tax structure to a flat tax. 
Only Massachusetts increased its personal income tax rates.
(Source: Tax Foundation)
California ranks as the highest state in per capita
state tax. The marginal tax rate in 2022 ranged from 
1.0 percent to 13.3 percent, depending on income. 
While California has the lowest marginal tax bracket in 
the country (1 percent), the highest tax bracket is 12.3 
percent plus an additional 1 percent mental health tax 
for people whose annual income exceeds $1 million.
Thomas Barwick/Getty Images (Source: World Population Review)
State-Specific Taxes
All states except for the nine just mentioned withhold income tax from their employees, and 
many apply other taxes as well. For instance, employees in California pay State Disability 
Insurance (SDI) of 0.9 percent of gross pay (up to a maximum wage of $153,164 in 2023) 
in addition to the personal income tax (PIT) that the state levies. Like federal income tax, 
California’s PIT amounts vary by income level, pay frequency, and marital status. Like many 
other states, California offers both the wage bracket and the percentage method of determin￾ing the PIT amount due. In contrast, Pennsylvania charges a flat rate of 3.07 percent on all 
employees for its state withholding tax. (See Appendix D for state income tax information.)
If a firm operates only in one state, deciphering state income tax requirements is reason￾ably simple but becomes increasingly complex as it does business in more locations. Due to 
employee mobility in the wake of the COVID pandemic, some firms have employees work￾ing in states different from their previous locations, and it is important to file the appropriate 
state and local taxes for the employee’s work locations. 
State income tax information is readily available through each state’s revenue depart￾ment and most computerized payroll software programs. (See Appendix E for a state revenue 
department list.)
Some states require the collection and remittance of income taxes based on all wages 
earned within their state. This could result in the company having several state employer 
identification numbers, even if it does not have a physical presence in the state. For example, 
if a Floridian paper mill worker is stationed at its St. Marys, Georgia, location, the employer 
could be required to remit the employee’s income taxes in Georgia. Other types of payroll 
taxes can include Oregon’s public transportation payroll tax for any services performed 
within the state, regardless of residency status.
EXAMPLE: NET PAY WITH STATE INCOME TAX
Angel receives wages of $850 per week in Joliet, Illinois. Angel is married, filing jointly 
(box 2 is not checked) with one dependent under 17, and is paid weekly. We will use 
the wage bracket table for Forms W-4 after 2020 in Appendix C to determine federal 
(continued)
Final PDF to printer240   Chapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods
lan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 240 06/09/23 04:50 pm
income tax. There are pre-tax deductions of $50 for qualified insurance and $50 for 
401(k). Using the Illinois state tax rate of 4.95 percent,
The net pay would be computed as follows:
*Federal income tax represents no liability due to dependents.
†Social Security tax: $800 × 0.062. 
††Medicare tax = $800 × 0.0145.
(concluded)
Taxable income ($850 − 50 − 50) $750.00
State income tax ($750 × 0.0495) $  37.13
Name
Gross
Earnings
Taxable
Wages for
Federal
W/H
Taxable
Wages 
for
FICA
Federal
W/H
Social
Security
Tax
Medicare
W/H
Tax
State
W/H 
Tax
Charitable
Contribution
Union
Dues Garnishment Net Pay
Angel 850.00 750.00 800.00 0.00* 49.60† 11.60†† 37.13 651.67
Name
Marital
Status Dependents
Hourly
Rate or
Period
Wage
No. of
Regular
Hours
No. of 
Overtime 
Hours
No. of 
Holiday 
Hours
Gross
Earnings 401(k) Insurance
Cafeteria
Plan
Taxable
Wages for
Federal
W/H
Taxable
Wages 
for
FICA
Angel MJ 1 < 17 850.00 850.00 50.00 50.00 750.00 800.00
Denver, Colorado, has a local tax called the Occupational Privilege Tax (OPT), also 
known as the “head tax.” The OPT is $5.75 per month for employees and $4 for 
employers of any business with any activity in Denver, even if the employee or busi￾ness does not exist or reside in Denver itself, on wages exceeding $500. The local 
income tax is applied after any pre-tax deductions.
(Source: City and County of Denver)
Local Income Taxes
Another mandatory tax is the local income tax levied by certain municipalities and coun￾ties. Payroll accountants need to be aware of any local taxes that apply to their business. 
Information about applicable local taxes may be found through city and county governments, 
often through their Internet sites.
EXAMPLE: NET PAY WITH LOCAL INCOME TAX
Shale is an employee at Keiser and Sons in Denver, Colorado, earns $39,000 annually, 
and is paid biweekly. Shale is married, filing jointly with no dependents, and box 2(c) is 
not checked. Shale has pre-tax deductions, including $100 for health insurance and a 
contribution of 6 percent of gross pay to a 401(k) plan. We will use the Wage-Bracket 
table in Appendix C to compute Shale’s federal income tax. Colorado’s state income 
tax is 4.40 percent. The net pay would be as follows:
Name
Filing
Status Dependents
Hourly
Rate or
Period
Wage
No. of
Regular
Hours
No. of 
Overtime 
Hours
No. of 
Holiday 
Hours
Gross
Earnings 401(k) Insurance
Cafeteria
Plan
Taxable
Wages for
Federal
W/H
Taxable
Wages for
FICA
Shale MJ 0 1,500.00 1,500.00 90.00 100.00 1,310.00 1,400.00
Final PDF to printerChapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods   241
lan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 241 06/09/23 04:50 pm
*$1,400 × 0.062 = $86.80
†$1,400 × 0.0145 = $20.30
‡$1,310 × 0.044 = $57.64
**Occupational privilege − ($5.75/month × 12 months)/26 = $2.65 rounded
Name
Gross
Earnings
Taxable
Wages for
Federal
W/H
Taxable
Wages 
for
FICA
Federal
W/H 
Tax
Social
Security
Tax
Medicare
W/H Tax
State
W/H 
Tax
Denver
OPT
Union
Dues Garnishment Net Pay
Shale 1,500.00 1,310.00 1,400.00 24.00 86.80* 20.30† 57.64‡ 2.65** 1,118.61
State and Local Income Taxes
&Check Stop
1. Ever works as a research scientist in Amasa, Michigan; earns $62,500 
annually; is married filing jointly with no dependents (box 2 is not 
checked); and is paid biweekly. Ever has a pre-tax deduction of $150 for 
a 401(k) and $80 for qualified health insurance. Using the state tax listed 
in Appendix D, what is the state income tax?
2. Jodie works as an accountant in Denver, Colorado. Colorado has a state 
income tax of a flat 4.4 percent. Colorado’s OPT is $5.75 per month per 
employee. If Jodie is paid monthly and earns $2,850 after pre-tax deduc￾tions, what are the state and local taxes?
LO 5-5 Apply Post-Tax Deductions
Once the payroll clerk determines each employee’s gross pay, pre-tax deductions, and taxes 
withheld, the post-tax deductions are applied to the remaining amount. All deductions, both 
voluntary and mandatory, should be listed on an attachment to the paycheck, in both pay 
period and year-to-date amounts.
Post-tax deductions may include court-mandated or governmental 
debts as well as employee repayments of advances or overpayments. This 
section will explore examples of post-tax deductions and how they are 
included in net pay computations.
Charitable Contributions
Employees may choose to contribute part of their pay to charitable orga￾nizations as an automatic deduction. This deduction is taken on a post￾tax basis because the employee may deduct it from gross income on the 
annual tax return.
Rob Byron/Shutterstock
EXAMPLE: CHARITABLE CONTRIBUTION
Jan is an employee at Working Environments in Winchester, New Hampshire; earns 
$29,000 annually; and is paid weekly. Jan is single with no dependents, has a pre￾tax health insurance premium of $25, and a charitable contribution of $10 per pay 
period. The net pay would be as follows using the wage-bracket method for Forms W-4 
after 2020:
(continued)
Name
Filing
Status Dependents
Hourly
Rate or
Period
Wage
No. of
Regular
Hours
No. of 
Overtime 
Hours
No. of 
Holiday 
Hours
Gross
Earnings 401(k) Insurance
Cafeteria
Plan
Taxable
Wages for
Federal
W/H
Taxable
Wages for
FICA
Jan S 0 557.69 557.69 25.00 532.69 532.69
Final PDF to printer242   Chapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods
lan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 242 06/09/23 04:50 pm
(concluded)
Name
Gross
Earnings
Taxable
Wages for
Federal
W/H
Taxable
Wages 
for
FICA
Federal
W/H
Social
Security
Tax
Medicare
W/H
State
W/H 
Tax
Charitable
Contribution
Union
Dues Garnishment Net Pay
Jan 557.69 532.69 532.69 27.00 33.03 7.72 10.00 454.94
Garnishments
Remember garnishments are for court-mandated deductions such as child support obligations, 
liens, and consumer credit repayment. Title III of the CCPA limits the amount or percentage 
of pay deductions for garnishments. These deductions are taken on a post-tax basis because 
they are viewed as an obligation of the employee that must be paid out of post-tax income.
Table 5-1 reflects the maximum that may be garnished based on disposable income and 
pay frequency under Title III. 
Weekly Biweekly Semimonthly Monthly
Less than 
$217.50: $0
Less than 
$435.00: $0
Less than 
$471.25: $0
Less than 
$942.50: $0
$217.50 > $290.00: Only 
the amount over $217.50 
may be garnished
$435.00 > $580.00: 
Only the amount over 
$435.00 may be garnished
$471.25 > $628.33: 
Only the amount over 
$471.25 may be garnished
$942.50 > $1,256.66: 
Only the amount over 
$942.50 may be garnished
Over $290.00: 25% Over $580.00: 25% Over $628.33: 25% Over $1,256.66: 25%
(Source: U.S. DOL)
*In the case of bankruptcy, government tax liens, and child support, these maximums do not apply.
TABLE 5-1
Garnishment Maximum Based on Pay Frequency at the Federal Minimum Wage*
Garnishments are subject to a maximum of 25 percent of disposable income for many situa￾tions. However, child support garnishment may be up to 60 percent, depending on how many 
people are supported financially. Table 5-2 contains an explanation of the type of garnish￾ment and maximum allowed.
Garnishment Type Maximum Percentage 
Child Support or Alimony 50% if the employee is supporting a spouse or child
60% if the employee is not supporting a spouse or child
5% additional if child support is in arrears
Federal Student Loan 15%
Credit Card Debt Up to 25%
Medical Debt Up to 25%
Other Court-Related Judgments Up to 25%
(Source: Nolo)
TABLE 5-2
Garnishments Maximum Percentage by Type
Federal student loan garnishment was suspended because of the COVID-19 pan￾demic until June 20, 2023, pending litigation with the Department of Education. Before 
the garnishment suspension, student loan debt could constitute up to 15 percent of 
an employee’s discretionary income. Although the suspension applied to federal stu￾dent loan garnishments, private student loans were not covered by the suspension 
mandate.
(Source: Student Aid)
Final PDF to printerChapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods   243
lan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 243 06/09/23 04:50 pm
EXAMPLE: CHILD SUPPORT
Ash is an employee of Kennesaw Mills, earns $49,500 annually, and is paid semi￾monthly. Ash is single with one dependent under 17, has a pre-tax health insurance 
deduction of $100, and contributes 3 percent of gross pay to his 401(k) per pay period. 
The state income tax rate is 6 percent. Ash has a court-ordered garnishment of $300 
per pay period for child support. Specific computations used in the payroll register 
follow immediately below the register. Use the percentage method for federal income 
taxes from Publication 15-T or Appendix C. 
DISPOSABLE INCOME: CHILD SUPPORT
It is important to consider Ash’s disposable income to ensure the garnishment does 
not exceed legal maximums. The disposable income is computed as follows:
Name
Filing
Status Dependent
Hourly
Rate or
Period
Wage
No. of
Regular
Hours
No. of 
Overtime 
Hours
No. of 
Holiday 
Hours
Gross
Earnings 401(k) Insurance
Cafeteria
Plan
Taxable
Wages for
Federal
W/H
Taxable
Wages for
FICA
Ash S 1 < 17 2,062.50 2,062.50 61.88 100.00 1,900.62 1,962.50
Name
Gross
Earnings
Taxable
Wages for
Federal
W/H
Taxable
Wages 
for
FICA
Federal
W/H
Social
Security
Tax
Medicare
W/H
State
W/H 
Tax
Charitable
Contribution
Union
Dues Garnishment Net Pay
Ash 2,062.50 1,900.62 1,962.50 66.34 121.68 28.46 114.04 300.00 1,270.10
Payroll Register Computations
Payroll Register Column Computation
Period wage $49,500/24 = $2,062.50
Health insurance $100.00
401(k) $2,062.50 × 0.03 = $61.88
Taxable wages for federal and state $2,062.50 − 61.88 − 100 = $1,900.62 
Taxable wages for FICA $2,062.50 − 100 = $1,962.50
Federal income tax $1,900.62 – column A $1,035 = $865.62 
$865.62 × 12% = $103.87 + column C $45.80 =
$149.67 less credit of $2,000 / 24 = $83.33 for 
federal taxes = $66.34
Social Security tax $1,962.50 × 0.062 = $121.68
Medicare tax $1,962.50 × 0.0145 = $28.46
State income tax $1,900.62 × 0.06 = $114.04
Garnishment $300.00
Net pay $2,062.50 − 61.88 − 100 − 66.34 − 121.68 −
28.46 − 114.04 − 300 = $1,270.10
Gross pay  $2,062.50
Less: federal income tax 66.34
Less: state income tax 114.04
Less: Social Security tax 121.68
Less: Medicare tax     28.46
Total disposable income $1,731.98
Percent of garnishment to disposable income 17.3%*
*$300 / $1,731.98 = 0.1732 = 17.3% (rounded)
Final PDF to printer244   Chapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods
lan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 244 06/09/23 04:50 pm
Consumer Credit
Like other post-tax deductions such as student loans, consumer credit is 
considered an obligation to be paid out of a person’s after-tax earnings. 
The next example shows the effect of a consumer credit garnishment on 
an employee’s wages. In this case, the 25 percent maximum garnishment 
rule applies.
Jelica Videnovic/Shutterstock
EXAMPLE: CONSUMER CREDIT
Marion is an employee of Level Two Gallery in Ogden, Utah; earns $38,500 annually; and is 
paid biweekly. Marion is single with no dependents. The state income tax rate is 4.85 per￾cent, and there are pre-tax deductions of $50 for health insurance and $30 for the 401(k) 
plan. Post-tax deductions include contributing $15 to charity. There is a court-ordered con￾sumer credit garnishment of $100 per pay period. Using the percentage method from 
Publication 15-T or Appendix C, calculating the net pay would appear as follows:
DISPOSABLE INCOME: CONSUMER CREDIT
Let’s ensure Marion’s consumer credit garnishment is within legal guidelines:
Name
Filing
Status Dependents
Hourly
Rate or
Period
Wage
No. of
Regular
Hours
No. of 
Overtime 
Hours
Gross
Earnings 401(k) Section 125
Taxable
Wages for
Federal
W/H
Taxable
Wages for
FICA
Marion S 0 1,480.77 1,480.77 30.00 50.00 1,400.77 1,430.77
Name
Gross
Earnings
Taxable
Wages for
Federal/
State W/H
Taxable
Wages 
for
FICA
Federal
W/H
Social
Security
Tax
Medicare
W/H Tax
State
W/H 
Tax
Charitable
Contribution Garnishment Net Pay
Marion 1,480.77 1,400.77 1,430.77 95.67 88.71 20.75 67.94 15.00 100.00 1,012.70
Payroll Register Computations
Payroll Register Column Computation
Period wage $38,500 / 26 = $1,480.77
401(k) $30.00
Health insurance $50.00
Taxable wages for federal and state $1,480.77 – 30 – 50 = $1,400.77
Taxable wages for FICA $1,480.77 – 50 = $1,430.77
Federal income tax $1,400.77 – column A $956 =
$444.77 × 12% = $53.37 + column C $42.30 =
$95.67
Social Security tax $1,430.77 × .062 = $88.71
Medicare tax $1,430.77 × .0145 = $20.75
State income tax $1,400.77 × .0485 = $67.94
Charitable contribution $15
Garnishment $100
Net pay $1,480.77 – 30 – 50 – 95.67 – 88.71 – 20.75 – 
67.94 – 15 – 100 = $1,012.70
Gross pay $1,480.77
Less: federal income tax 95.67
Less: state income tax 67.94
Less: Social Security tax 88.71
Less: Medicare tax 20.75
Total disposable income $1,207.70
Percent of garnishment to disposable income 8.3%*
*$100 / $1,207.70 = 0.0832 = 8.3% (rounded)
Final PDF to printerChapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods   245
lan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 245 06/09/23 04:50 pm
A discussion topic between the American Payroll Association and the Wage and Hour 
Division of the Department of Labor has been the treatment of lump-sum distributions 
when a garnishment is imposed on an employee. The general guideline for consider￾ing a distribution as subject to garnishment is the concept of “personal service.” If the 
distribution was for services rendered by the employee, then the amount may be gar￾nished. Specific examples of lump-sum distributions that are subject to garnishment 
include the following:
• Sign-on bonuses
• Any performance or productivity bonus
• Commissions
• Holiday pay
• Retroactive pay
• Termination pay
• Any other bonuses or incentive payments
(Source: U.S. Department of Labor)
Union Dues
Employees who belong to a collective bargaining unit usually pay dues to the unit for their 
representation. The CCPA disposable income limits do not pertain to union dues because 
those dues are not court-mandated. The following example shows how union dues affect 
employee pay. It should be noted that the employee’s deduction for union dues is voluntary.
EXAMPLE: UNION DUES
Foster is an employee of Pacific High School in Washington State. Foster takes part 
in a collective bargaining unit (i.e., a labor union) that negotiates salary, benefits, and 
working conditions and has dues of $50 per pay period. Foster earns $67,500 annu￾ally and is paid biweekly, is married filing jointly with 2 dependents under 17 (box 2 
is not checked), and has a 2023 W-4. There are pre-tax deductions of $150 for a 
401(k) plan and $100 for a qualified Section 125 cafeteria plan. Using the wage￾bracket tables from Publication 15-T or Appendix C (remember to adjust for the two 
dependents under 17), the net pay would appear as follows:
Name
Filing
Status Dependents
Hourly
Rate or
Period
Wage
No. of
Regular
Hours
No. of 
Overtime 
Hours
Gross
Earnings 401(k) Section 125
Taxable
Wages for
Federal
W/H
Taxable
Wages for
FICA
Foster MJ 2 < 17 2,596.15 2,596.15 150.00 100.00 2,346.15 2,496.15
Name
Gross
Earnings
Taxable
Wages for
Federal
W/H
Taxable
Wages 
for
FICA
Federal
W/H
Social
Security
Tax
Medicare
W/H Tax
State
W/H Tax
Charitable
Contribution
Union
Dues Net Pay
Foster 2,596.15 2,346.15 2,496.15 0 154.76 36.19 50.00 2,105.20
Employee Advances and Overpayments
Employees may have an opportunity for an advance of money in anticipation of their pay. The 
timing of the repayment of advances depends on the agreement between the employee and 
employer. When the advance becomes due for repayment, it is treated as a post-tax deduction. 
The same concept applies to situations in which the employee is overpaid due to an error in 
computation or reporting.
Final PDF to printer246   Chapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods
lan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 246 06/09/23 04:50 pm
At Maricopa County Community College, a payroll system upgrade caused employees 
to be under- or overpaid, sometimes by thousands of dollars. The new payroll system’s 
rollout caused issues with understanding the differences between the new and old 
systems. Accountants worked with managers and employees to ensure that all dis￾crepancies were addressed promptly.
Another underpayment issue that arose during the COVID-19 pandemic was the omis￾sion of hazard pay to essential workers. Although they remained at work, they often 
did not receive additional pay for working in hazardous conditions. 
(Sources: AZCentral; Brookings)
Post-tax Deductions
&Check Stop
1. Which of the following is a debt that may be collected via wage 
garnishment?
a. Student loans
b. Child support
c. Debt to family members
d. Tax liens
e. Union dues
f. Charitable contributions
2. An electrician who is a member of the IBEW union asks you, the 
payroll accountant, if they may pay the union dues with a personal 
check instead of a post-tax deduction. The IBEW requires that the 
employer remit collected dues. What advice would you offer the 
employee?
LO 5-6 Discuss Employee Pay Methods
Once the net pay is computed, the next step is to give the employees access to their money. 
Four common types of payment methods are available: cash, check, direct deposit, and paycard. 
Each method has its advantages and disadvantages. We will explore each method separately.
Cash
Cash is one of the oldest forms of paying employees but is not widely 
used as a contemporary payroll practice. The most common use of cash 
as a payment method involves paying for day laborers, temporary helpers, 
and odd jobs. Cash is one of the most difficult payroll forms to manage 
because it is difficult to track and control. Payments for wages in cash 
should involve a written receipt signed by the employee. Companies pay￾ing by cash must physically have the cash on hand for payroll, which 
increases the risk of theft from both internal and external sources. Payroll 
taxes must be withheld, which requires prior preparation so that the appropriate amount of 
cash is available to pay precisely what is due for each employee. For employees, cash is a 
very convenient payment method because of its inherent liquidity.
Cash wage payment challenges the security of the funds for both the employer and the 
employee. For the employer, ensuring the employee receives and acknowledges the appro￾priate payment amount is the key. When using cash as a payment method for employees, 
RomarioIen/Shutterstock
Final PDF to printerChapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods   247
lan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 247 06/09/23 04:50 pm
a receipt that contains information about gross pay, deductions, and net pay is important. The 
critical piece is to have the employee sign and date a copy acknowledging the receipt of the 
correct amount of cash on the specific date. Obtaining the employee’s signature and the date 
received can prevent future problems with perceived problems involving timely employee 
compensation payments.
Check
Paper checks are a common method of remitting employee compensa￾tion. For the employer, a paper check offers accounting record traceability 
and simplicity. The use of checks instead of cash means the employer 
does not have to maintain large amounts of cash, reducing the vulnerabil￾ity of keeping currency on hand. QuickBooks and Sage100 Cloud allow 
employers to print paychecks directly from the program on specifically 
designed, preprinted forms. Checks offer a security level that cash does 
not because they are issued to a specific employee, and they are the only person who can 
legally convert the check into cash.
The disadvantage of using paper checks for payroll purposes involves bank account recon￾ciliation. Once issued, the employee may choose not to deposit it into their bank account, which 
can complicate the firm’s reconciliation process. Paper checks could be lost or destroyed, 
requiring voiding the old check and issuance of a new one. Additionally, employees might 
not have a bank account, which makes cashing paychecks challenging and potentially costly. 
Paper checks may soon be phased out of current practice as other employee pay methods grow 
in popularity because of the convenience for both the employer and the employee.
Andrey_Popov/Shutterstock
According to Insider Intelligence, over 208 million people used digital banking in the 
United States as of 2021. This number is expected to increase to nearly 217 million by 
2025. The practice of payroll disbursement using paper checks is declining as people 
shift from traditional banking methods to a culture of electronic money management. It 
is important to remember that payment in cryptocurrencies for normal compensation is 
not covered by the Fair Labor Standards Board as an acceptable method.
(Source: Insider Intelligence)
Forecasted number of digital banking users in the United States from 2021 to 2025
(in millions)
0
250
200
150
100
50
Number of digital banking users in million
2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
196.8 203 208 212.8 216.8
For employers who use paper checks as a compensation method, two significant best 
practices exist: (1) The use of a payroll-only checking account and (2) a procedure for the 
handling of the payroll checks themselves. A separate payroll-dedicated checking account 
Final PDF to printer248   Chapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods
lan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 248 06/09/23 04:50 pm
prevents problems that could occur if the company has difficulties (such as insufficient funds) 
in the business’s main account. It also prevents embezzlement by falsified company checks if 
multiple people are involved in the check creation and approval process.
For the checks themselves, the payroll accountant needs to maintain a record that notes 
the use of each and every check, especially for checks that are voided, lost, or never cashed. 
If a company issues checks, it needs to maintain an unclaimed property account for payroll 
checks that the employee has never cashed. The process of leaving a check uncashed, espe￾cially if it is a payroll check, results in the  escheatment of the payroll check because the 
payee of the check has never claimed the property (i.e., the payroll money) and is subject to 
state laws about the handling and distribution of such unclaimed money. Compliance with 
state escheatment laws is mandatory but not largely enforced—but that does not relieve the 
employer of the obligation to pay its employees. The use of a record in which the payroll 
accountant annotates each check’s use (i.e., cashed, voided, or lost) is imperative.
According to the State Controller of New York’s office, the policy for escheatment is 
that uncashed payroll checks are escheated as of predetermined dates. As of 2023, 
about $17.5 billion in escheated funds remained in the custody of the state. 
(Source: Office of New York State Comptroller)
When a company pays employees by check, the check’s numerical amount must also be repre￾sented in specific words for the bank to accept the check for payment to the payee. It is important 
to note banks pay the check based on the amount written in words on the check. The highlighted 
area in the image in Figure 5-3 shows how the information should appear on the check’s face, 
specifically the written-out amount of the check. Figure 5-3 contains a sample of a paycheck.
FIGURE 5-3
Sample Paycheck
A relevant concept in using checks for payroll is the potential for fraud by manipulating the 
checks’ information. The check issuer (i.e., the employer) may be liable for the funds until the 
fraudulent activity is proven. Some red flags that may indicate check fraud include the following:
∙ Changes in font type between the company’s address and the employee’s name.
∙ Low check numbers (e.g., 1,001–1,500) because payroll fraud often involves new accounts.
∙ Evidence of typewriter use on the check (most payroll checks are generated via computerized 
programs).
Final PDF to printerChapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods   249
lan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 249 06/09/23 04:50 pm
There has been growing interest in receiving pay on demand. Companies such as 
Zelle, Venmo, and Paycor have been working with companies to facilitate prompt pay￾ment from the company to employees. Individuals may request up to a predetermined 
amount of their earned pay from the participating employer ahead of the normally 
scheduled payroll date. This does come with a fee, which can be either paid by the 
employer as part of fringe benefits or passed on to the employee for convenience. 
This can also create tax calculation and remittance issues that the payroll accountant 
should be aware of, such as tax reporting, a lack of visibility into errors in pay disburse￾ment, and the need to issue pay advices to employees who use these services. 
∙ Stains or discolorations on the check.
∙ Notations in the memo line that contain the word “payroll” or “load.”
∙ Handwritten additions to the check, such as the recipient’s phone number.
∙ Absence of the bank’s or the recipient’s address.
∙ The check number is either absent or is the same on all checks.
(Source: Federal Trade Commission)
Paper checks are more vulnerable to fraud than electronic transfers because of the ease of 
obtaining preprinted checks. Many employers are transitioning to either direct deposits or 
paycards to protect company assets.
As of late 2022, a survey by the American Payroll Association found that approxi￾mately 93 percent of employees used direct deposit to receive payroll amounts. The 
remaining percentage comprised paper checks, cash, and paycards. The use of direct 
deposit means that the employee’s paycheck is in their account on payday. Depending 
on the bank, employees may be able to access payroll funds earlier than the pay date. 
(Source: NACHA)
Direct Deposit
Direct deposit of employee compensation into the individual’s bank account offers employ￾ers some of the same advantages as checks. Like checks, employee compensation is traceable 
through both the employer’s bank and the optional paper pay advice issued to the employee. 
Employees often prefer direct deposit because their pay is immediately available in their bank 
account, eliminating the need to travel to the bank to deposit the paper check. However, for 
employees to receive their pay through direct deposit, they must have a bank account.
An advantage of direct deposit is that it prevents paper waste, promot￾ing “green” business practices. According to the Association for Financial 
Professionals, the savings per employee per pay period is approximately 
$5.91 per employee. Although this may seem like a small amount, when 
multiplied by the number of employees and pay periods annually, it creates 
a potentially large saving for employers. These savings come from lower 
waste collection, paper usage, and recycling costs. Not only does direct 
deposit save a company money, but it also reduces the time needed for pay￾roll processing, which frees payroll accountants to complete other tasks.
When using a direct deposit as an employee compensation method, a 
suggested best practice is to grant the employees access to a website or 
online portal by which they can securely view their pay advice and pay 
history, as this may substitute for paper payroll advice. Because direct 
deposit involves electronic data transmittal, the posting of the pay advice 
Comstock/PunchStock
Final PDF to printer250   Chapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods
lan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 250 06/09/23 04:50 pm
the employee an element of self-maintenance in payroll records. The potential pitfall in using 
a website for these susceptible records is the vulnerability of the information to computer 
hacking. Employers who choose to use a website in this manner must take steps to prevent 
hacking through data encryption, identity verification, and site security.
TARIK KIZILKAYA/Getty Images
Paycards have grown in popularity because of their inherent flexibility for sending and 
receiving money. The paycard may be used as a debit card by people without bank 
accounts, which also grants them the ability to participate in online purchases even if 
they cannot qualify for a credit card. For the approximately 10 million unbanked house￾holds in the United States, paycards grant the financial freedom and accessibility they 
may otherwise not have and allow unbanked employees to avoid check-cashing fees.
(Source: American Payroll Association)
Paycards
Paycards have been growing in popularity since the beginning of the 21st 
century. These cards are debit cards onto which an employer electroni￾cally transmits the employee’s pay. The use of payroll cards started in 
the 1990s as a convenient way to compensate over-the-road truck drivers 
who could not be in a predictable place on each payday. Comerica started 
issuing paycards that could be used anywhere a conventional MasterCard 
was accepted, which is nearly everywhere. Unlike the use of paper checks 
or direct deposits, the paycard does not require an employee to maintain 
a bank account to access their pay. The convenience and ease of use for employees make the 
paycard an option that millions of workers in the United States have chosen to use.
nito/Shutterstock
What is the disadvantage of paycard use? Unlike the limits to access that a bank has for its 
account holders, a paycard can be lost or stolen. Some employees may encounter challenges 
such as withdrawal limits or cash back at point-of-sale (POS) purchases. Like paper checks, 
paycards may be subject to state escheatment laws that govern unclaimed funds.
An issue that haunted the early use of paycards was Regulation E of the Federal Deposit 
Insurance Corporation (FDIC), which protects consumers from loss of the availability of their 
funds on deposit in the event of bank losses. Until 2006, Regulation E applied to funds on 
deposit in an FDIC-insured institution. Regulation E was extended to cover payroll funds trans￾ferred to paycards, according to 12 CFR Part 205. As a payment method 
growing in popularity among employers and employees, paycards offer 
more compensation options for employers.
Paycards require different security types than the other types of 
employee compensation, but most elements remain the same. In addition 
to tracking hours and accurately compensating employees based on their 
marital status and withholdings, the employer must keep the employee’s 
paycard number in a secure file. Software such as QuickBooks offers pass￾word encryption abilities for the files of employees who have paycards. 
The Federal Communications Commission (FCC) published guidelines for employer 
data security procedures, especially as it pertains to employee information on websites 
and the use of paycards. The FCC guidelines include advice about selecting data to be 
included on employee-accessible websites, password strength guidelines, update inter￾vals, and data archiving.
(Source: FCC)
Final PDF to printerChapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods   251
lan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 251 06/09/23 04:50 pm
Like any other debit card, the funds are electronically coded to the account number. The card 
issuer (not the employer) must remain compliant with Regulation E as far as card loss or theft 
is concerned. Still, the employer is responsible for ensuring this extra step of payroll security.
Visa, Inc., introduced an improvement to its Visa Advanced Authorization technology, 
making compensation via paycards more secure and reliable. This new technology 
improved real-time fraud detection and was projected to prevent nearly $200 million in 
fraud within a five-year period. Since its inception, technology has evolved to include 
predictive analytics that detect unusual card usage.
(Source: Visa)
Zapp2Photo/Shutterstock
The company BitPay, which started in 2013, offered payroll via cryptocurrency in 2020. 
The service allowed employers to disburse payments without a Bitcoin account. Using 
BitPay, employers transmit payroll directly to the employees’ cryptocurrency wallets 
and charge each party a 1 percent fee for the service. 
(continued)
Cryptocurrency
An emerging wage payment method involves cryptocurrency, such as 
Bitcoin or Ethereum, and  blockchain technology. Cryptocurrency uses 
Internet technology to transmit money securely from one “wallet,” or 
account, to a recipient. The cryptocurrency itself is not a physical currency, 
as it exists only in electronic form. Transmission of wages is thought to be 
secure because blockchain technology makes it very difficult for wages to 
be diverted from the intended recipient. After all, the blockchain involves 
the transmission of packets of data through many computers, making a 
single transaction difficult to isolate. 
The advantage of using cryptocurrency is that it is not subject to international exchange 
rates, and it is transferred almost instantaneously. The disadvantage of using cryptocurrency 
is that no centralized authority oversees the value of the currency, making it extremely vola￾tile in value, which could lead to employees’ underpayment if the currency loses value. In 
addition, the Fair Labor Standards Board does not recommend the use of cryptocurrencies 
since they are not an instrument that is considered “cash or a negotiable instrument at par.” 
There are additional recordkeeping requirements for any employer using cryptocurrencies to 
ensure the value paid out in the cryptocurrency is equivalent to the amount that would be paid 
out in cash or cash equivalents.
In March 2022, President Joe Biden signed Executive Order 14067 to responsibly look 
into the application of cryptocurrencies as a mode of payment by establishing the develop￾ment of a U.S. Central Bank Digital Currency. This marked a governmental awareness and 
potential acceptance of digital assets as a form of payment by connecting digital payments 
to the National Security Agency, the Federal Trade Commission, The Consumer Finance 
Protection Bureau, and other federal bodies. Some state and local governments have started 
implementing the use of cryptocurrencies for accounts payable vendors. From a payroll per￾spective, it is essential that proper record-keeping be followed to avoid issues. If a company 
uses cryptocurrencies as a form of payment, the date, time, transaction amount, and exchange 
rate must all be recorded and retained. Since cryptocurrencies are not (as of the writing of 
this book) backed by the banking industries, this executive order would research and design a 
centralized bank for digital currencies.
Final PDF to printer252   Chapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods
lan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 252 06/09/23 04:50 pm
TAXES AND PAYMENT METHODS
Employee net pay changes each year because of legal developments regarding deductions and 
payment methods. Developments in employee withholdings since 2019 include the following:
• Changes to employee net pay because of the Affordable Care Act health insurance require￾ments for employers.
• Changes to sick-leave compensation at the state and local levels.
• Changes in the amounts that employees may contribute on a tax-deferred basis to pension 
plans.
• Increased public awareness of the effect of pay raises, especially for the cost of living, on net pay.
• Expanded regulatory guidance regarding data privacy and security, similar to the General Data 
Protection Regulation (GDPR) mandated in the European Union, to protect electronic employee 
payroll transmission.
Future trends to watch include:
• Same-day payroll processing and possible shorter payroll cycles due to the use of existing 
technology.
• Increased governmental guidance about the use of earned wage access regarding tax and 
other withholding amounts. 
• On-demand pay through which employees can access earned payroll amounts at their 
discretion.
• Increasing regulation on digital payroll in response to online security and accessibility needs.
• Increased splitting of earned wage and salary payments using both direct deposit and paycards 
that grants flexibility in the way employees receive their pay. 
• Movement toward payment with digital assets.
Trends to Watch
Pay Methods
&Check Stop
1. What are the different employee pay methods?
2. What regulation governs paycard loss or theft?
3. For which pay method(s) must an employee have a bank account?
4. What type of payments may be made to employees through 
cryptocurrencies?
Bitpay announced in 2021 that the use of cryptocurrency worked well as a payment 
for international and gig economy workers. It offers immediate access to funds and 
fosters ease in global payments.
(Sources: CoinDesk; SHRM)
(concluded)
Final PDF to printerChapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods   253
lan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 253 06/09/23 04:50 pm
Summary of Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods
Employee pay is subject to various deductions that can be mandatory, mandated by a court 
or other authority, or voluntary. In 2020, the introduction of the new Form W-4 changed the 
factors by which federal income tax withholding was determined. Deductions such as federal 
income tax and Medicare tax are virtually inescapable. Other taxes such as Social Security, 
state taxes, and local taxes are not applicable in every employee’s situation and depend on 
various factors such as year-to-date pay and state of residence. Of the other deductions, some 
can be withheld from an employee’s pay before taxes are deducted, which benefits employees 
by reducing their payroll tax liability. Other deductions must be taken after taxes are with￾held. Understanding the difference between gross pay and net pay is vital for payroll accoun￾tants because the net pay, not the gross, is the pay that the employee actually receives.
The question of employee pay methods is complex. Which payment method is the best? It 
is not an easy answer. An employer should consider the employees’ needs and the business to 
decide if one method will suit everyone. Sometimes a combination of payment methods is the 
best solution, although it adds complexity for the payroll accountant. The most appropriate 
method for the organization will depend on many different factors. Attention to these fac￾tors, including payroll frequency, employee types, and the nature of the business itself, helps 
inform employer decisions about employee pay methods.
Key Points
• Net pay is gross pay less all deductions.
• Federal income tax applies to all workers, and the changes in federal income tax 
deductions changed because of the implementation of provisions of the Tax Cuts and 
Jobs Act.
• After January 1, 2020, employees are subject to different factors as part of federal 
income tax computation and need to use the new W-4 forms. Employees hired in 2019 
and prior years may continue to use their existing W-4.
• Social Security tax has a maximum wage base that can change each year.
• Medicare tax has no maximum wage base, and an additional Medicare tax is levied on 
highly compensated employees.
• Employees subject to mandated deductions such as garnishments for child support and 
consumer credit liens have certain protections as to the percent of disposable income 
that may be withheld.
• Employees’ pay may be disbursed in cash, by check, by paycard, or via direct deposit.
• Uncashed employee paychecks are turned over to state authorities as escheatments 
and become unclaimed property.
• Electronic means of transmitting pay, such as paycards, continue to grow in popularity 
because of employee access and transmittal ease.
• Cryptocurrency is increasingly used as a way for employers to transmit funds to employ￾ees and state agencies, although the standardization of cryptocurrency rules does not 
yet exist. Funds transmitted cannot be wages or overtime, but can include bonuses or 
commissions. 
Final PDF to printer254   Chapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods
lan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 254 06/09/23 04:50 pm
Additional Medicare tax
Blockchain
Cryptocurrency
Direct deposit
Escheatment
Federal income tax
Local income tax
Percentage method
Regulation E
Social Security tax
State income taxes
Wage base
Wage-bracket method
Vocabulary
Review Questions
1. What factors affect how much federal income tax is withheld from an employee’s pay 
using Form W-4?
2. How should employees complete their Form W-4 if they have multiple jobs or have a 
spouse who works?
3. How is Social Security tax computed? What is the maximum wage base?
4. How is Medicare tax computed? What is the maximum wage base?
5. Name four states that do not have an employee income tax.
6. How is an employee’s net income computed?
7. Why is the difference between gross pay and taxable income important?
8. What are two of the five different payment methods?
9. What are an advantage and a disadvantage of paycards?
10. What are an advantage and a disadvantage of direct deposit?
11. How does the percentage method work using Form W-4 information?
12. When should the percentage method be used instead of the wage-bracket method?
13. What are two examples of garnishments?
14. Why are garnishments deducted on a post-tax basis?
15. Why are union dues not considered a garnishment?
16. How does cryptocurrency function as a payroll payment method?
Exercises Set A
E5-1A.
LO 5-1
The payroll accountant needs to compute net pay for the employees for 
Hay Industries. Place the following steps in the proper order.
a. Compute income taxes.
b. Subtract pre-tax deductions from gross pay.
c. Compute Social Security and Medicare taxes.
d. Subtract taxes and all other deductions from gross pay.
e. Determine gross pay.
Order: _____
E5-2A.
LO 5-1
The owner of Padua Products wants to reward the employees for their work 
during the year and has asked you to gross-up their bonuses so that they 
receive the full amount as net pay. What amount(s) should you consider 
when computing the grossed-up pay? (Select all that apply.)
a. Desired bonus amount
b. Garnishments
c. Court or government-mandated deductions
d. Income tax(es)
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 255 06/09/23 04:50 pm
Chapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods   255
E5-3A.
LO 5-2
A new employee at Financial Technologies, Ltd. is married with children, 
and the spouse works. What items need to be considered for appropriate 
Form W-4 completion? (Select all that apply.)
a. Children’s ages
b. Tax filing status
c. Spouse’s income
d. Spouse’s birthdate
E5-4A.
LO 5-3
Under which circumstances could the percentage method be used to 
determine federal income tax withholding amounts? (Select all that apply.)
a. When the employee’s taxable income exceeds the maximum amount on 
the appropriate wage-bracket table
b. When using a computerized accounting system to compute payroll 
deductions
c. When using a manual accounting system for a small number of low-pay 
employees
d. When computational accuracy is critical
E5-5A.
LO 5-3
Which of the following is true about Social Security and Medicare taxes as 
they pertain to earnings limits?
a. Social Security tax applies only to earnings greater than the wage base.
b. Highly compensated employees are subject to additional Medicare tax 
withholding.
c. Employers must match all Medicare contributions for highly compen￾sated employees.
d. Employees contribute the same percentage of gross pay to Medicare 
regardless of their YTD gross pay.
E5-6A.
LO 5-3
What is the Social Security wage base for 2023?
a. $128,400
b. $142,800
c. $147,000
d. $160,200
E5-7A.
LO 5-4
Which of the following statements are true about state and local income 
taxes? (Select all that apply.)
a. All states tax employee earnings.
b. State tax rates on employee earnings vary among states.
c. Certain states have no personal income tax deduction.
d. Some localities levy income tax on employees.
E5-8A.
LO 5-6
The owner of All Grains Bakery is considering offering additional payroll 
disbursal methods for the employees. Which of the following would be the 
safest for employees without a bank account?
a. Check
b. Paycard
c. Cash
d. Direct deposit
E5-9A.
LO 5-2
What are the two methods payroll accountants use to determine federal 
income tax withholding amounts? (Select all that apply.)
a. Percentage method
b. Salary-bracket method
c. Wage-salary method
d. Wage-bracket method
E5-10A.
LO 5-3
At what income level do many employees contribute an additional percent￾age to their Medicare tax deduction?
a. $150,000
b. $160,200
c. $175,000
d. $200,000
Final PDF to printer256   Chapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods
lan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 256 06/09/23 04:50 pm
Problems Set A 
P5-1A.
LO 5-1, 5-2,
 5-3
Compute the net pay for Briar Khan and Hollis Hart. Assume that they are 
paid a $2,500 salary biweekly, subject to federal income tax (use the wage￾bracket method) in Appendix C and FICA taxes and have no other deduc￾tions from their pay. They have a state tax rate of 3 percent. If they choose 
to participate in the cafeteria plan, the deduction for the pay period is 
$100; otherwise, there is no deduction for the cafeteria plan. The cafeteria 
plan qualifies under Section 125. You do not need to complete the number 
of hours. Additional information for Briar: Box 2 is not checked, and the 
dependents are under 17.
Name
Filing
Status Dependents
Hourly
Rate or
Period
Wage
No. of
Regular
Hours
No. of
Overtime
Hours
No. of
Holiday
Hours
Commiss￾ions
Gross
Earnings
Cafeteria
Plan
Taxable
Wages for
Federal/
State
W/H
Taxable
Wages
for
FICA
Briar Khan—no 
cafeteria plan
MJ 2 < 17 2,500.00
Briar Khan—
cafeteria plan
MJ 2 < 17 2,500.00
Hollis Hart—no 
cafeteria plan
S 0 2,500.00
Hollis Hart—
cafeteria plan
S 0 2,500.00
Name
Gross
Earnings
Taxable
Wages for
Federal/
State W/H
Taxable
Wages
for FICA
Federal
W/H
Social 
Security
Tax
Medicare
W/H Tax
State
W/H Tax Net Pay
Briar Khan—no cafeteria plan
Briar Khan—cafeteria plan
Hollis Hart—no cafeteria plan
Hollis Hart—cafeteria plan
P5-2A.
LO 5-1, 5-2,
5-3, 5-5
Enlightened Eats in Anchorage, Alaska, has six employees who are paid 
semimonthly. Calculate the net pay from the information provided here for 
the November 15 pay date. Assume that all wages are subject to Social 
Security and Medicare taxes. All 401(k) and Section 125 amounts are pre￾tax deductions. Use the percentage method for manual payroll systems 
with Forms W-4 from 2020 or later in Appendix C to compute federal 
income taxes. You do not need to complete the number of hours.
a. W. Packer
Married/Joint, two dependents <17, box 2 checked
Annual pay: $35,500
401(k) deduction: $125 per pay period
b. K. Ela
Married/Separate, two dependents <17, box 2 checked
Annual pay: $53,400
401(k) deduction: $250 per pay period
c. G. Laureano
Single, no dependents, box 2 not checked
Annual pay: $50,400
Section 125 deduction: $75 per pay period
401(k) deduction: $50 per pay period
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 257 06/09/23 04:50 pm
Chapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods   257
d. T. Spraggins
Married/joint, one dependent <17, box 2 not checked
Annual pay: $45,000
Charitable contribution: $50 per pay period
Garnishment: $50 per pay period
e. M. Christman
Single, two dependents <17, one other dependent, box 2 checked
Annual pay: $58,800
Section 125 deduction: $50 per pay period
401(k) deduction: 6 percent of gross pay per pay period
f. J. Cherry
Married/joint, one other dependent, box 2 checked
Annual pay: $48,400
401(k) deduction: $75 per pay period
P5-3A.
LO 5-1,
5-2, 5-3,
5-4, 5-5
The following salaried employees of Mountain Stone Brewery in Fort 
Collins, Colorado, are paid semimonthly. Some employees have union dues 
or garnishments deducted from their pay. Calculate their net pay using the 
percentage method for manual payroll systems with Forms W-4 from 2020 
or later in Appendix C to determine federal income tax. Assume box 2 is 
not checked for any employee. Include Colorado income tax of 4.40 per￾cent of taxable pay. No employee has exceeded the maximum FICA limit. 
You do not need to complete the number of hours.
Name
Filing
Status Dependents
Hourly
Rate or
Period 
Wage
No. of
Regular 
Hours
No. of
Overtime
Hours
No. of
Holiday
Hours
Commiss￾ions
Gross
Earnings 401(k)
Section
125
Taxable
Wages
for
Federal /
State W/H
Taxable
Wages
for
FICA
Name
Gross
Earnings
Taxable 
Wages for 
Federal/ 
State W/H
Taxable
Wages
for FICA
Federal
W/H
Social 
Security
Tax
Medicare
W/H Tax
State
W/H Tax
Garnish￾ments
United
Way Net Pay
Employee
Filing Status, 
Dependents Pay
Union Dues per 
Period
Garnishment per 
Period
S. Bergstrom MJ-0 $1,700 $   50
C. Pare MJ-2 (<17)    3,500 $120
L. Van der Hooven S-1 (Other)    3,225 240  75
S. Lightfoot MJ-0    2,850  100
Final PDF to printer258   Chapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods
lan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 258 06/09/23 04:50 pm
P5-4A.
LO 5-1, 5-2,
5-3, 5-4, 5-5
Lexington is the payroll accountant at All’s Fair Gifts. The employees of All’s 
Fair Gifts are paid semimonthly. Asa comes to Lexington on April 7 and 
requests a pay advance of $1,000, which Asa will pay back in equal parts 
on the April 14 and May 15 paychecks. Asa is single, with one dependent 
under 17, is paid $50,000 per year, contributes 3 percent of gross pay to 
a 401(k), and has $125 per paycheck deducted for a Section 125 plan. 
Compute the net pay on Asa’s April 14 paycheck. The applicable state 
income tax rate is 5.25 percent. Use the wage-bracket method for manual 
payroll systems with Forms W-4 from 2020 or later in Appendix C to deter￾mine the federal income tax. Assume box 2 is not checked.
Name
Filing
Status Dependents
Hourly
Rate or
Period 
Wage
No. of
Regular 
Hours
No. of
Overtime
Hours
No. of
Holiday
Hours
Commiss￾ions
Gross
Earnings 401(k)
Section
125
Taxable
Wages
for
Federal /
State W/H
Taxable
Wages
for 
FICA
Name
Gross
Earnings
Taxable
Wages for
Federal/
State
W/H
Taxable
Wages
for FICA
Federal
W/H
Social 
Security
Tax
Medicare
W/H Tax
State
W/H Tax
Union
Dues
Garnish￾ment Net Pay
Name
Filing
Status Dependents
Hourly
Rate or
Period 
Wage
No. of
Regular 
Hours
No. of
Overtime
Hours
No. of
Holiday
Hours
Commiss￾ions
Gross
Earnings 401(k)
Section
125
Taxable
Wages
for
Federal/
State W/H
Taxable
Wages
for 
FICA
Asa
Name
Gross
Earnings
Taxable
Wages for
Federal/State
W/H
Taxable
Wages
for FICA
Federal
W/H
Social 
Security
Tax
Medicare
W/H Tax
State
W/H Tax Advance Net Pay
Asa
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 259 06/09/23 04:50 pm
Chapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods   259
P5-5A.
LO 5-1, 5-2
Milligan’s Millworks pays its employees weekly. Use the wage-bracket 
tables from Appendix C to compute the federal income tax withholdings 
for the following employees of Milligan’s Millworks. Assume that no pre-tax 
deductions exist for any employee, box 2 is not checked for all employees, 
and a manual payroll system is used.
Employee Filing Status Dependents Weekly Pay Federal Tax
D. Balestreri Single 2 <17 $   845
Y. Milligan Single One Other 1,233
H. Curran Married/Joint 2 < 17, One Other 682
D. Liberti Head of Household 1 < 17 755
P5-6A.
LO 5-2
Moravanti Italian Imports has four employees and pays biweekly. On Form 
W-4, complete Step 2, the Multiple Jobs Worksheet (when applicable) to obtain 
the amount for Step 4(c). Calculate the federal income tax withholding using 
the wage-bracket tables in Appendix C. Assume that box 2 is not checked for 
L. Torabi and R. Beninati and is checked for G. Fisher and J. Tillman.
Employee
Filing 
Status Dependents Annual Salary
Spouse Annual 
Salary/Pay 
Frequency
Federal 
Income Tax 
per Period
L. Torabi S None $39,500 n/a
R. Beninati S One Other 48,500 n/a
G. Fisher MJ 3 < 17 45,300 $75,600/biweekly
J. Tillman MJ 2 < 17 42,000 $27,500/weekly
Final PDF to printer260   Chapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods
lan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 260 06/09/23 04:50 pm
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 261 06/09/23 04:50 pm
Chapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods   261
Final PDF to printer262   Chapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods
lan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 262 07/28/23 03:22 pm
P5-7A.
LO 5-3
The employees of Ethereal Bank are paid on a semimonthly basis. 
Compute the FICA taxes for the employees for the November 30 pay￾roll. All employees have been employed for the entire calendar year. All 
employees are single. There are no pre-tax deductions.
Employee
Semimonthly 
Pay
YTD Pay for 
Nov. 15 Pay 
Date
Social Security Tax for 
Nov. 30 Pay Date
Medicare Tax for 
Nov. 30 Pay Date
R. Bellagio $ 9,500
B. Khumalo    6,700
S. Schriver    6,800
K. Saetang    7,250
T. Ahmad    9,750
M. Petrova    8,100
P5-8A.
LO 5-4
Fannon’s Chocolate Factory operates in North Carolina. Calculate the state 
income tax for each employee using the state income tax rate of 4.75 per￾cent. Assume that no pre-tax deductions exist for any employee.
Employee Amount per Pay Period North Carolina Income Tax
K. Jamieson $   550
D. Macranie 4,895
G. Lockhart 3,225
K. McIntyre 1,795
P5-9A.
LO 5-2
Using the percentage method for manual payroll with W-4s from 2020 or 
later in Appendix C, calculate the federal withholding amounts for the fol￾lowing employees. No information was included in Step 4 of the W-4, and 
no box was checked in Step 2.
Employee
Filing 
Status Dependents Pay Frequency
Amount per 
Pay Period
Federal 
Income Tax
S. Calder MJ 3 < 17 Monthly $10,000
P. Singh HH 1 < 17 Biweekly     3,300
B. Nelson MJ None  Daily      500
P5-10A.
LO 5-6
You are the new accountant for a start-up company, Peaceful Skunk Builders. 
The company has cross-country drivers, warehouse personnel, and office 
staff at the main location. The company is looking at options that allow its 
employees flexibility in receiving their pay. You have been asked to present 
the advantages and disadvantages of the various payment methods for senior 
management. Which would be the best option for each class of workers?
Exercises Set B
E5-1B.
LO 5-1
The payroll accountant needs to compute net pay for the employees of 
Happy Crab Marketing. Place the following steps in the proper order after 
the determination of gross pay has been completed.
a. Compute Social Security and Medicare tax withholding
b. Compute income tax withholding(s)
c. Compute pre-tax deductions
d. Compute post-tax deductions
Order: _____
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 263 06/09/23 04:50 pm
Chapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods   263
E5-2B.
LO 5-1
The payroll accountant has received a court order for garnishment for an 
employee’s student loan payments. What must be considered in computing 
the garnishment? (Select all that apply.)
a. Year-to-date pay
b. Hourly wage
c. Disposable income
d. Pay frequency
E5-3B.
LO 5-2
Lux of Trade Secrets Importing is preparing payroll taxes manually. As Lux 
prepares to use the wage-bracket tables to determine federal income tax 
withholdings for each employee, which information should be available? 
(Select all that apply.)
a. Filing status
b. Job title
c. Year-to-date earnings
d. Age, type, and number of dependents
E5-4B.
LO 5-2
Which of the following are steps in computing federal income tax withhold￾ing using the percentage method? (Select all that apply.)
a. Compute and record dependents.
b. Apply the tax rate to the taxable portion of the earnings.
c. Determine if the employee is exempt or nonexempt.
d. Add the marginal tax.
E5-5B.
LO 5-3
Which of the following is true about Social Security and Medicare tax 
deductions?
a. They are applied to the gross pay.
b. Contributions to a 401(k) plan are exempt from these taxes.
c. Medicare taxes apply to all earnings at the same rate.
d. Certain pre-tax deductions are exempt from Social Security and Medicare 
tax computations.
E5-6B.
LO 5-3
Scout is the vice president for marketing at Sun Field Industries, earns 
$175,000 annually, and is paid on a semimonthly basis. As of November 
15, Scout has year-to-date earnings of $153,125. The Social Security wage 
base is $160,200. What is the maximum amount of taxable earnings that 
may be subject to Social Security tax for the November 30 pay period?
a. $5,833.27
b. $6,235.33
c. $7,291.67
d. $7,074.93
E5-7B.
LO 5-4
Which of the following is(are) true about state and local income tax? (Select 
all that apply.)
a. Pre-tax deduction rules for federal income tax are generally the same for 
state and local income taxes.
b. Nine states do not have a personal income tax on earnings.
c. All localities levy income taxes on employees.
d. State income tax computations vary among states.
E5-8B.
LO 5-6
Which of the following is(are) true about employee pay methods? (Select all 
that apply.)
a. Employees must be able to access the full amount of their net pay on the 
pay date.
b. Employers must keep a record of all pay disbursements.
c. Employees do not need to own a bank account to receive their pay via 
direct deposit.
d. Employees must request the transfer of payroll earnings to their paycard 
each period.
Final PDF to printer264   Chapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods
lan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 264 06/09/23 04:50 pm
E5-9B.
LO 5-4
Which of the following is(are) true about child support garnishments? (Select 
all that apply.)
a. They are based on gross pay.
b. The garnishment may be as high as 65 percent.
c. Only the minimum wage amount of an employee’s pay is subject to 
garnishment.
d. Title III of the CCPA protects employees.
E5-10B.
LO 5-6
You are preparing a training session for your colleagues about payroll check 
fraud. Which of the following may be indicators of check fraud? (Select all 
that apply.)
a. Changes in font type between company address and employee name.
b. Company logo on the face of the check.
c. The check number is missing from the check.
d. Only one signature is required from the company.
P5-1B.
LO 5-1, 5-2,
5-3
Compute the net pay for Merritt Gamal and Cove Green. Assume that they 
are paid biweekly, subject to federal income tax (use the wage-bracket 
method in Appendix C) and FICA taxes, and have no other deductions from 
their pay. Merritt’s deduction with participation in the cafeteria plan is $75; 
Cove’s is $250. There is no deduction if they do not participate in the caf￾eteria plan. The cafeteria plan qualifies for Section 125. There are no state 
income taxes, and you do not need to complete the number of hours. All 
W-4s were received in 2023, and there is no information for Step 4. Cove 
did check the box in Step 2.
Problems Set B
Name
Filing
Status Dependents
Hourly
Rate or
Period 
Wage
No. of
Regular 
Hours
No. of
Overtime
Hours
No. of
Holiday
Hours
Commiss￾ions
Gross
Earnings
Cafeteria
Plan
Taxable
Wages
for
Federal /
State W/H
Taxable
Wages 
for
FICA
Merritt 
Gamal—no 
cafeteria plan
S None 1,600.00
Merritt 
Gamal—
cafeteria plan
S None 1,600.00
Cove Green—
no cafeteria 
plan
MJ 2 < 17 
One Other
1,875.00
Cove Green—
cafeteria plan
MJ 2 < 17 
One Other
1,875.00
Name
Gross
Earnings
Taxable
Wages for
Federal /
State W/H
Taxable
Wages
for FICA
Federal
W/H 
Social 
Security
Tax
Medicare
W/H Net Pay
Merritt Gamal—no cafeteria plan
Merritt Gamal—cafeteria plan
Cove Green—no cafeteria plan
Cove Green—cafeteria plan
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 265 06/09/23 04:50 pm
Chapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods   265
P5-2B.
LO 5-1, 5-2,
5-3, 5-5, 
5-6
Teton Tours in Evanston, Wyoming, has six employees who are paid on a 
biweekly basis. Calculate the net pay from the information provided for the 
July 14 pay date. Assume that all wages are subject to Social Security and 
Medicare taxes. Use the wage-bracket tables in Appendix C to determine 
the federal income tax withholding. You do not need to complete the num￾ber of hours. No one has checked the box in Step 2, and there is no addi￾tional information in Step 4.
a. A. Bowman
Married/joint, two dependents <17
Annual pay $36,320
401(k) deduction: 2 percent of gross pay per pay period
b. J. Raz
Single, no dependents
Annual pay: $46,350
401(k) deduction: $220 per pay period
c. G. Koskoris
Single, one dependent <17, one other dependent
Annual pay: $55,120
Section 125 deduction: $25 per pay period
401(k) deduction: $150 per pay period
d. S. Hays-Smith
Married/joint, three dependents <17
Annual pay: $40,820
United Way deduction: $25 per pay period
Garnishment: $75 per period
e. H. Inhofe
Married/joint, no dependents
Annual pay: $55,000
Section 125 deduction: $100 per period
401(k) deduction: 4 percent of gross pay
f. D. Wong
Single, one other dependent
Annual pay: $38,600
401(k) deduction: $120 per period
Name
Filing
Status Dependents
Hourly
Rate or
Period 
Wage
No. of
Regular 
Hours
No. of
Overtime
Hours
No. of
Holiday
Hours
Gross
Earnings 401(k)
Section
125
Taxable
Wages
for
Federal /
State W/H
Taxable
Wages
for 
FICA
Final PDF to printer266   Chapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods
lan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 266 06/09/23 04:50 pm
Name
Gross
Earnings
Taxable
Wages for
Federal/
State
W/H
Taxable
Wages
for FICA
Federal
W/H
Tax
Social 
Security
Tax
Medicare
Tax
State
Tax
United
 Way Garnishment Net Pay
P5-3B.
LO 5-1, 5-2,
5-3, 5-4, 5-5
The following employees of Concordian Construction of Walla Walla, 
Washington, are paid biweekly. Some employees have union dues or gar￾nishments deducted from their pay. Calculate their net pay. Use the per￾centage method for manual payrolls with Form W-4 from 2020 or later in 
Appendix C to determine federal income tax. No employee has exceeded 
the maximum FICA limits. You do not need to complete the number of 
hours. No one checked the box in Step 2, and there is no additional infor￾mation in Step 4.
Employee Filing Status Dependents
Annual 
Pay
Union Dues 
per Period
Garnishment 
per Period
J. Johnson Married/joint 1 < 17 $45,000 $102
V. Roberson Single None  33,800 $70
T. Major Married/joint None  65,650 110 90
M. Reice Head of household 1 < 17  76,600 45
Name
Filing
Status Dependents
Hourly
Rate or
Period
Wage
No. of
Regular 
Hours
No. of
Overtime
Hours
No. of
Holiday
Hours
Commiss￾ions
Gross
Earnings 401(k)
Section
125
Taxable
Wages
for
Federal/
State W/H
Taxable
Wages
for
FICA
Name
Gross
Earnings
Taxable
Wages for
Federal/
State
W/H
Taxable
Wages
for FICA
Federal
W/H
Social 
Security
Tax
Medicare
W/H Tax
State
W/H
Union
Dues Garnishment Net Pay
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 267 06/09/23 04:50 pm
Chapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods   267
P5-4B.
LO 5-1, 5-2,
5-3, 5-4, 5-5
You are the payroll accountant for Multi Winds Energy of Cornelius, North 
Carolina, whose employees are paid biweekly. An employee, Larson, 
comes to you on September 14 and requests a pay advance of $1,000, 
which will be paid back in equal parts on the September 22 and October 
20 paychecks. Larson is single, has no dependents, is paid $52,500 per 
year, contributes 5 percent of gross pay to a 401(k) plan, and has $250 per 
paycheck deducted for a court-ordered garnishment. Compute the net pay 
for Larson’s September 24 paycheck. The state income tax rate is 4.75 per￾cent. Use the wage-bracket tables in Appendix C to determine the federal 
income tax withholding amount. You do not need to complete the number 
of hours. Assume that no pre-tax deductions exist for the employee and 
box 2 is not checked.
Name
Filing
Status Dependents
Hourly
Rate or
Period 
Wage
No. of
Regular 
Hours
No. of
Overtime
Hours
No. of
Holiday
Hours
Commiss
ions
Gross
Earnings 401(k)
Section
125
Taxable
Wages
for
Federal/
State
W/H
Taxable
Wages
for 
FICA
Larson
Name
Gross
Earnings
Taxable
Wages for
Federal /
State W/H
Taxable
Wages
for FICA
Federal
W/H
Social 
Security
Tax
Medicare
Tax
State
Tax Garnishment Advance Net Pay
Larson
P5-5B.
LO 5-2
Wolfe Industries pays its employees on a semimonthly basis. Using the 
wage-bracket tables in Appendix C, compute the federal income tax 
deductions for the following employees of Wolfe Industries. No informa￾tion was included in Step 4 of any W-4; McCollum checked the box in Step 
2c. Assume that no pre-tax deductions exist for any employee and box 2 
is not checked for all other employees. Do not round intermediate calcula￾tions. Round your final answers to the nearest cent.
Employee Marital Status Dependents Semimonthly Pay Federal Income Tax
T. Canter Single None $1,450
M. McCollum Married/joint   2 < 17   1,690
C. Hai Head of household  1 < 17   1,795
T. Elliott Single     1 other   2,165
P5-6B.
LO 5-2
Country Pet Industries has employees with pay schedules that vary based 
on job classification. Compute each employee’s federal income tax liability 
using the percentage method for manual payroll systems in Appendix C. All 
Form W-4s were received in 2022. No one checked the box in Step 2, and 
there was no additional information in Step 4.
Employee Filing Status Dependents  Pay Frequency Pay Amount
Federal 
Income Tax
X. Gander Married/joint  1 < 17 Biweekly $1,825
M. Stanley Married/separately None Weekly     750
N. Heim Single 1 < 17 Weekly     875
D. Young Head of household 1 Other Semimonthly 2,025
Final PDF to printer268   Chapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods
lan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 268 06/09/23 04:50 pm
P5-7B.
LO 5-3
The employees of Lillian’s Interiors are paid on a semimonthly basis. 
Compute the FICA taxes for the employees for the December 29, 2023, 
pay period. All employees are single and have been employed for the 
entire calendar year.
Employee
Semimonthly 
Pay
YTD Pay for 
Dec. 15 Pay 
Date
Social Security Tax Dec. 
29 Pay Date
Medicare Tax 
for Dec. 29 Pay 
Date
W. Babish $8,325
G. Hanoush   6,275
R. Fezzeti   9,250
T. Gomez  4,550
N. Bertraud  5,705
R. LaPonte 4,950
P5-8B.
LO 5-4
Christensen Ranch operates in Pennsylvania. Calculate the state income 
tax for each employee using the state income tax rate of 3.07 percent. 
Assume that no pre-tax deductions exist for any employee.
Employee Amount per Pay Period Pennsylvania Income Tax
G. Zonis $1,325
V. Sizemore  1,710
R. Dawson    925
C. Couture 2,550
P5-9B.
LO 5-2
Using the wage-bracket method for manual payroll systems with Form 
W-4 from 2020 or later in Appendix C, calculate the federal withholding 
amounts for the following employees. No box was checked in Step 2, and 
no additional information was included in Step 4.
Employee
Filing  
Status Dependents Pay Frequency
Amount per 
Pay Period
Federal 
Income Tax
L. Abbey Head of household 2 < 17 Semimonthly $2,500
G. Narleski Married/joint None Weekly   1,000
T. Leider Single 1 other Monthly   4,000
P5-10B.
LO 5-6
You have been retained as a consultant for Marionet Industries. The com￾pany has had difficulty with its cross-country drivers receiving their pay in 
a timely manner because they are often away from their home banks. The 
company is looking at options that offer its employees flexibility in receiv￾ing their pay. Prepare a presentation for senior management depicting the 
advantages and disadvantages of the various payment methods.
Critical Thinking
For the Critical Thinking problems, use the following steps to compute the gross-up 
amount:
1. Compute tax rate: The tax rate on bonuses is 22 percent. Social Security (6.2 percent) 
and Medicare taxes (1.45 percent) must be added to this rate. For bonuses, the total 
tax rate equals 22% + 6.2% + 1.45%, or 29.65%.
2. Subtract 100 percent – tax rate percentage to get the net tax rate. For bonuses, it is 
100% – 29.65%, or 70.35%.
3. Gross-up amount = net pay / net tax rate. For example, if you want the employee to 
receive a $150 bonus, the equation is $150/70.35% = $213.22.
(Note: Typically voluntary pre-tax and post-tax deductions are not withheld from 
bonus checks.)
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 269 06/09/23 04:50 pm
Chapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods   269
5-1. Arden, an employee of Sweet Shoppe Industries, receives a bonus of $5,000 for 
stellar work this period. Arden’s boss wants the net check to be $5,000. Arden con￾tributes 3 percent to a pre-tax 401(k) deduction. Calculate the gross pay amount that 
would result in $5,000 paid to Arden.
5-2. Your boss approaches you in mid-December and requests that you pay certain 
employees their gross pay amount as if there were no deductions as their year-end 
bonuses. None of the employees have reached the Social Security wage base for the 
year, and the company pays semimonthly. What is the gross-up amount for each of 
the following employees? (Use the tax rate for bonuses and no state taxes.)
Internet Activities
5-1. Did you know that you can use an online calculator to see how your voluntary deduc￾tions will affect your paycheck? Many different payroll calculators exist. Go to one or 
more of the following sites and use the payroll calculator:
www.paycheckcity.com/
www.surepayroll.com/resources/calculator
www.adp.com/tools-and-resources/calculators-and-tools/payroll-calculators.aspx
5-2. Want to know more about the concepts in this chapter? Check out these sites:
https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-pdf/p15t.pdf
www.americanpayroll.org/Visa-Paycard-Portal/
5-3. Would you like to preview employee apps used to enter time and calculate payroll 
disbursements? Check out these links:
DOL Timesheet: https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/dol-timesheet/
id433638193?mt=8
Intuit payroll: https://payroll.intuit.com/additional-services/mobile-payroll-apps/
Sure payroll: https://www.surepayroll.com/payroll/mobile
Employee
Regular Gross 
Pay per Period
Grossed-Up 
Amount
Onyx St. John $2,500 
Indigo Johnson  3,380
Zion Hale   3,178
In the Real World: Scenario for Discussion
The state of Kansas passed legislation that allowed employers to select their employee 
pay method. The legislation was known as the “paperless payroll law,” and many employ￾ers opted to give their employees paycards instead of cash, check, or direct deposit. This 
practice spread to many other states, including New York. In 2017, the law was revoked 
because it made employers into de facto financial institutions.
What are the issues with this practice? What are the benefits?
Continuing Payroll Project: Prevosti Farms and Sugarhouse
For the February 10, 2023, pay period, use the gross pay totals from the end of Chapter 3 
to compute each employee’s net pay. Once you have computed the net pay (use the 
wage-bracket tables in Appendix C), the state withholding tax for Vermont is computed at 
3.35 percent of taxable wages (i.e., gross pay less pre-tax deductions). Note that the first 
pay period comprises only eight days of work during the February 10 pay period. The fed￾eral income tax should be determined using the biweekly tables in Appendix C.
Final PDF to printer270   Chapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods
lan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 270 06/09/23 04:50 pm
Initial pre-tax deductions for each employee are as follows:
Name Deduction
Millen Insurance: $155/paycheck/401(k): 3% of gross pay
Towle Insurance: $100/paycheck/401(k): 5% of gross pay
Long Insurance: $155/paycheck/401(k): 2% of gross pay
Shangraw Insurance: $100/paycheck/401(k): 3% of gross pay
Lewis Insurance: $155/paycheck/401(k): 4% of gross pay
Schwartz Insurance: $100/paycheck/401(k): 5% of gross pay
Prevosti Insurance: $155/paycheck/401(k): 6% of gross pay
You Insurance: $100/paycheck/401(k): 2% of gross pay
February 10 is the end of the first pay period and includes work completed during 
February 1–10. Compute the net pay for the February 10 pay period using the payroll 
register. All insurance and 401(k) deductions are pre-tax for federal and state. Update the 
Employee Earnings Records as of February 10, 2023. Joel Schwartz has made $5,000 in 
case sales at a 3 percent commission rate during this pay period. Recall that this is not a 
complete two-week pay period.
Name
Filing
Status Dependents
Hourly 
Rate 
or Period 
Wage
No. of
Regular
Hours
No. of
Overtime
Hours
No. of
Holiday
Hours
Commis￾sion
Gross
Earnings 401(k) Sec 125
Taxable
Wages for
Federal/ 
State W/H
Taxable
Wages
for
FICA
T. Millen 64
A. Towle 64
C. Long 64 2
M. Shangraw 32
K. Lewis 64
J. Schwartz 64 150.00
T. Prevosti 64
S. Success 64 1
Name
Gross
Earnings
Taxable
Wages for
Federal/
State W/H
Taxable
Wages for
FICA
Federal 
W/H
Tax
Social 
Security 
Tax
Medicare 
W/H Tax
State 
W/H
Tax
Total 
Deduct Net Pay
Check 
No.
February 24, 2023, is the end of the final pay period for the month. Schwartz has sold 
$7,500 of products during this pay period at a 3 percent commission. Complete the pay￾roll register for the period’s gross pay. Pay will be disbursed on February 28, 2023, and 
check numbers will continue from the prior payroll.
February
Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday
1 2 3 4
5 6 7 8 9 10 11
12 13 14 15 16 17 18
19 20 21 22 23 24 25
26 27 28
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 271 06/09/23 04:50 pm
Chapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods   271
Name
Filing
Status Dependents
Hourly 
Rate 
or Period 
Wage
No. of
Regular
Hours
No. of
Overtime
Hours
No. of
Holiday
Hours
Commis￾sion
Gross
Earnings 401(k) Sec 125
Taxable
Wages for
Federal
W/H
Taxable
Wages
for
FICA
T. Millen 80
A. Towle 80 3
C. Long 80
M. Shangraw 40 2
K. Lewis 80
J. Schwartz 80 225.00
T. Prevosti 80
S. Success 80 1
Name
Gross
Earnings
Taxable
Wages for
Federal/
State W/H
Taxable
Wages for
FICA
Federal 
W/H
Tax
Social 
Security 
Tax
Medicare 
W/H Tax
State 
W/H
Tax
Total 
Deduct Net Pay
Check 
No.
T. Millen
A. Towle
C. Long
M. Shangraw
K. Lewis
J. Schwartz
T. Prevosti
S. Success
EMPLOYEE EARNING RECORD
Name Thomas Millen Hire Date 2/1/2023
Address 1022 Forest School Rd Date of Birth 12/16/1992
City/State/Zip Woodstock, VT 05001 Exempt/Nonexempt Exempt
Telephone 802-478-5055 Filing Status Married/joint
Social Security Number 031-11-3456 No. of Dependents 3 < 17; 1 other
Position Production Manager Pay Rate $35,000/year
Flex-Time Child Care FSA Amount Educ. Assist. Life Ins. Long-Term Care Gym
Period 
Ended
Hrs 
Worked Reg Pay OT Pay Holiday Comm Gross Pay 401(k) Sec 125
Taxable 
Wages for 
Federal W/H
Taxable 
Wages for 
FICA
Final PDF to printer272   Chapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods
lan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 272 06/09/23 04:50 pm
Taxable 
Wages for 
Federal
Taxable 
Wages for 
FICA
Federal 
W/H
Social 
Security 
Tax
Medicare 
Tax
State 
W/H
Total 
Deduct Net Pay
YTD Net 
Pay
YTD Gross 
Pay
Benefits 
Election
EMPLOYEE EARNING RECORD
Name Avery Towle Hire Date 2/1/2023
Address 4011 Route 100 Date of Birth 7/14/2001
City/State/Zip Plymouth, VT 05102 Exempt/Nonexempt Nonexempt
Telephone 802-967-5873 Filing Status Single
Social Security Number 089-74-0974 No. of Dependents None
Position Production Worker Pay Rate $15.00/hour
Flex-Time Child Care FSA Amount Educ. Assist. Life Ins. Long-Term Care Gym Total Benefit
Period 
Ended
Hrs 
Worked Reg Pay OT Pay Holiday Comm Gross Pay 401(k) Sec 125
Taxable 
Wages for 
Federal W/H
Taxable 
Wages for 
FICA
Taxable 
Wages for 
Federal
Taxable 
Wages for 
FICA
Federal 
W/H
Social 
Security 
Tax
Medicare 
Tax
State 
W/H
Total 
Deduct Net Pay
YTD Net 
Pay
YTD Gross 
Pay
Benefits 
Election
EMPLOYEE EARNING RECORD
Name Charlie Long Hire Date 2/1/2023
Address 242 Benedict Rd Date of Birth 3/16/1997
City/State/Zip S. Woodstock, VT 05002 Exempt/Nonexempt Nonexempt
Telephone 802-429-3846 Filing Status Married/joint
Social Security Number 056-23-4593 No. of Dependents 2 < 17
Position Production Worker Pay Rate $15.00/hour
Flex-Time Child Care FSA Amount Educational Assistance Life Ins. Long-Term Care Gym Total Benefit
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 273 06/09/23 04:50 pm
Chapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods   273
Taxable 
Wages for 
Federal
Taxable 
Wages for 
FICA
Federal 
W/H
Social 
Security 
Tax
Medicare 
Tax
State 
W/H
Total 
Deduc Net Pay
YTD Net 
Pay
YTD Gross 
Pay
Benefits 
Election
Period 
Ended
Hrs 
Worked
Reg Pay OT Pay Holiday Comm Gross Pay 401(k) Sec 125 Taxable 
Wages for 
Federal W/H
Taxable 
Wages for 
FICA
EMPLOYEE EARNING RECORD
Name Mary Shangraw Hire Date 2/1/2023
Address 1901 Main St #2 Date of Birth 8/20/1980
City/State/Zip Bridgewater, VT 05520 Exempt/Nonexempt Exempt
Telephone 802-575-5423 Filing Status Single
Social Security Number 075-28-8945 No. of Dependents 1 other
Position Administrative Assistant Pay Rate $15.00/hour
Flex-Time Child Care FSA Amount Educational Assistance Life Ins. Long-Term Care Gym Total Benefit
Period 
Ended
Hrs 
Worked Reg Pay OT Pay Holiday Comm Gross Pay 401(k) Sec 125
Taxable 
Wages for 
Federal W/H
Taxable 
Wages for 
FICA
Taxable 
Wages for 
Federal
Taxable 
Wages for 
FICA
Federal 
W/H
Social 
Security 
Tax
Medicare 
Tax
State 
W/H
Total 
Deduct Net Pay
YTD Net 
Pay
YTD Gross 
Pay
Benefits 
Election
Final PDF to printer274   Chapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods
lan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 274 06/09/23 04:50 pm
EMPLOYEE EARNING RECORD
Name Kristen Lewis Hire Date 2/1/2023
Address 840 Daily Hollow Rd Date of Birth 4/6/1991
City/State/Zip Bridgewater, VT 05523 Exempt/Nonexempt Exempt
Telephone 802-390-5572 Filing Status Married/joint
Social Security Number 076-39-5673 No. of Dependents 2 < 17; 1 other
Position Office Manager Pay Rate $32,000/year
Flex-Time Child Care FSA Amount Educational Assistance Life Ins. Long-Term Care Gym Total Benefit
Period 
Ended
Hrs 
Worked Reg Pay OT Pay Holiday Comm Gross Pay 401(k) Sec 125
Taxable 
Wages for 
Federal W/H
Taxable 
Wages for 
FICA
Taxable 
Wages for 
Federal
Taxable 
Wages for 
FICA
Federal 
W/H
Social 
Security 
Tax
Medicare 
Tax
State 
W/H
Total 
Deduct Net Pay
YTD Net 
Pay
YTD Gross 
Pay
Benefits 
Election
EMPLOYEE EARNING RECORD
Name Joel Schwartz Hire Date 2/1/2023
Address 55 Maple Farm Way Date of Birth 5/23/1993
City/State/Zip Woodstock, VT 05534 Exempt/Nonexempt Exempt
Telephone 802-463-9985 Filing Status Married/joint
Social Security Number 021-34-9876 No. of Dependents 2 < 17
Position Sales Pay Rate $32,000/year 
+ commission
Flex-Time Child Care FSA Amount Educational Assistance Life Ins. Long-Term Care Gym Total Benefit
Period 
Ended
Hrs 
Worked Reg Pay OT Pay Holiday Comm Gross Pay 401(k) Sec 125
Taxable 
Wages for 
Federal W/H
Taxable 
Wages for 
FICA
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 275 06/09/23 04:50 pm
Chapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods   275
Taxable 
Wages for 
Federal
Taxable 
Wages for 
FICA
Federal 
W/H
Social 
Security 
Tax
Medicare 
Tax
State 
W/H
Total 
Deduct Net Pay
YTD Net 
Pay
YTD Gross 
Pay
Benefits 
Election
EMPLOYEE EARNING RECORD
Name Toni Prevosti Hire Date 2/1/2023
Address 820 Westminster Rd Date of Birth 9/19/1987
City/State/Zip Bridgewater, VT 05521 Exempt/Nonexempt Exempt
Telephone 802-673-2636 Filing Status Married/joint
Social Security Number 055-22-0443 No. of Dependents 3 < 17; 2 other
Position Owner/President Pay Rate $45,000/year
Flex-Time Child Care FSA Amount Educational Assistance Life Ins. Long-Term Care Gym Total Benefit
Period 
Ended
Hrs 
Worked Reg Pay OT Pay Holiday Comm Gross Pay 401(k) Sec 125
Taxable 
Wages for 
Federal W/H
Taxable 
Wages for 
FICA
Taxable 
Wages for 
Federal
Taxable 
Wages for 
FICA
Federal 
W/H
Social 
Security 
Tax
Medicare 
Tax
State 
W/H
Total 
Deduct Net Pay
YTD Net 
Pay
YTD Gross 
Pay
Benefits 
Election
Final PDF to printer276   Chapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods
lan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 276 06/09/23 04:50 pm
EMPLOYEE EARNING RECORD
Name Student Success Hire Date 2/1/2023
Address 1644 Smitten Rd Date of Birth 1/1/2001
City/State/Zip Woodstock, VT 05001 Exempt/Nonexempt Nonexempt
Telephone (555) 555-5555 Filing Status Single
Social Security Number 555-55-5555 No. of Dependents None
Position Accounting Clerk Pay Rate $34,000/year
Flex-Time Child Care FSA Amount Educational Assistance Life Ins. Long-Term Care Gym Total Benefit
Period 
Ended
Hrs 
Worked
Reg Pay OT Pay Holiday Comm Gross Pay 401(k) Sec 125 Taxable 
Wages for 
Federal W/H
Taxable 
Wages for 
FICA
Taxable 
Wages for 
Federal
Taxable 
Wages for 
FICA
Federal 
W/H
Social 
Security 
Tax
Medicare 
Tax
State 
W/H
Total 
Deduct Net Pay
YTD Net 
Pay
YTD Gross 
Pay
Benefits 
Election
Answers to Stop & Check Exercises
Differentiating between Gross and Net Pay
1. Gross pay consists of wages or commissions earned by the employee before 
deductions. Net pay is the amount of cash the employee receives after all 
deductions.
2. Student answers may vary but could include qualifying medical or dental plans, 
Internal Revenue Code Section 125 plans, 401(k) retirement plans, federal income 
tax, Medicare tax, Social Security tax, state income tax, garnishments, charitable 
contributions, and union dues.
3. To “gross-up” a payroll amount is to calculate the amount of gross pay necessary to 
receive a net pay result. This is most often done for bonuses.
How Much Tax to Withhold?
1. $75,000 paid semimonthly would give per period of $3,125, $75,000/24 = $3,125. 
The dependent deduction of (2 × $500)/24 pay periods is $41.67.
 (a) $220 tentative tax − $41.67 dependents = $178.33; (b) $218.18 tentative tax −
$41.67 dependents = $176.51.
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch05_216-277.indd 277 06/09/23 04:50 pm
Chapter 5  Employee Net Pay and Pay Methods   277
2. $3,125 gross pay − $100 for 401(k) deduction per pay period = $3,025 taxable 
pay. This is the amount used in conjunction with the wage-bracket table to calculate 
the federal income tax withheld of $208 less dependents of $41.67 gives $166.33. 
The difference in taxes with the 401(k) deduction is $12 = $178.33 − $166.33.
3. $3,125 gross pay − $75 health insurance − $55 AFLAC = $2,995 taxable pay. This 
is the new amount used in conjunction with the wage bracket table to calculate the 
federal income tax withheld of $203 less dependents of $41.67 gives $161.33. 
The difference in taxes with the health insurance and AFLAC deductions is $17 =
$178.33–$161.33. 
FICA Taxes
1. Social Security = $327.36 = $5,280 × 0.062; Medicare = $76.56 = $5,280 ×
0.0145.
2. Total liability = $807.84 = ($327.36 + $76.56) × 2.
3. $250,000/24 = $10,416.67 per pay period – $75 for Section 125 deduction =
$10,341.67 subject to FICA taxes each period.
(a) $0 Social Security liability because the maximum amount of wages taxable for 
Social Security is $160,200 and the employee has exceeded that. Year-to-date 
gross wages of $197,916.67 less qualified deduction of $1,425 ($75 × 19) gives 
$196,491.67 of YTD Medicare taxable earnings. Medicare base for this payroll is 
$200,000 − 196,491.67 = $3,508.33 to reach the $200,000 cap and $6,833.34 
($10,416.67 − 3,508.33 − 75.00) that will be charged the surcharge, so ($3,508.33 ×
1.45%) + ($6,833.37 × 2.35%) = $50.87 + 160.58 = $211.45 Medicare tax.
(b) Medicare liability will be: ($10,416.67 − 75.00) × (0.0145 + 0.009) = $243.03.
State and Local Income Taxes
1. Ever’s state income tax: $92.39 ($62,500 annual salary/26 biweekly = $2,403.85 
gross pay − $150 for 401(k) pre-tax deduction − $80 health insurance pre-tax 
deduction = $2,173.85 taxable pay × 4.25% = $92.39 from Appendix D.
2. Jodie’s state income tax: $125.40 ($2,850 × 4.4%) state, $5.75 local.
Post-tax Deductions
1. a, b, d
2. Because the unions typically require that employees’ union dues be remitted by the 
employer, the amount due must be deducted on a post-tax basis from each period 
pay.
Pay Methods
1. Cash, check, direct deposit, paycard, and cryptocurrencies
2. Regulation E
3. Direct deposit
4. Bonuses and commissions (currently)
Dollar sign made from binary numbers: Ralf Hiemisch/Getty Images
Final PDF to printer278
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 278 06/09/23 05:48 pm
All facets of payroll accounting are important because they affect the com￾pany’s success and its employees. An essential piece of the payroll puzzle 
is the employer’s payroll tax responsibility. The reporting and remittance 
of payroll taxes is a significant aspect that requires scrupulous attention to 
detail. Many different tax forms exist that must be filed at regular intervals 
and with varying governmental bodies. Tax filing requires organizational 
skills, time management, and continued accuracy. Tax reporting is a huge 
responsibility for the business and its payroll accountant because of gov￾ernmental oversight. Additionally, employment tax revenue remittances 
represent 70 percent of all federal revenue. Therefore, employment tax 
remittances are a vital part of the U.S. economy.
Employers must also consider payroll responsibilities as part of labor 
planning. Besides taxes, other aspects of an employer’s payroll responsi￾bilities include maintaining workers’ compensation insurance, forwarding 
amounts withheld through employees’ voluntary and mandated deduc￾tions, and determining labor expenses and employee benefits. The Internal 
Revenue Service and state employment departments have websites that 
contain important information about filing requirements, due dates, guide￾lines, and penalties (see Appendix E for state employment department con￾tact information). Insurance responsibilities are a vital consideration when 
determining labor expenses and employee benefits because they are a 
significant element in the cost of doing business.
Employer Payroll Taxes 
and Labor Planning
6
Chapter Six
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying Chapter 6, you should be able to:
LO 6-1 List Employer-Paid and Employee-Paid Obligations
LO 6-2 Discuss Reporting Periods and Requirements for Employer Tax 
Deposits
Final PDF to printerChapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning   279
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 279 06/09/23 05:48 pm
LO 6-3 Prepare Mid-Year and Year-End Employer Tax Reporting and 
Deposits
LO 6-4 Describe Payroll within the Context of Business Expenses
LO 6-5 Relate Labor Expenses to Company Profitability
LO 6-6 Complete Benefit Analysis as a Function of Payroll
Alex-VN / Alamy Stock Photo
Labor Costs Cause Layoffs at Disney
Labor costs are often an employer’s most significant expense. The Walt Disney Corporation 
is famous for its in-character and friendly employees, but the sharp increase in inflation 
during 2022 sparked questions about cost reductions within the company. In early 2023, 
the Disney Corporation announced an impending layoff of 7,000 employees that would 
save the company over $5 billion in labor costs alone.
The Department of Labor announced in early 2023 that labor costs were growing more 
slowly than predicted. The drop in labor costs led to slower economic growth and curbed 
inflation. Disney’s layoffs reflect a part of that trend: By reducing labor costs, Disney could 
redirect that money to other parts of the company that were feeling the effect of rapid eco￾nomic inflation. A reduction in labor costs allowed the company to refrain from increasing 
ticket prices, which might have reduced the number of visitors to theme parks, and poten￾tially prevented a similar contraction in Disney’s streaming media service. The reduction 
in labor costs, either through layoffs or reduced wage and salary increases, all led to rela￾tively lower employer costs across the United States.
(Sources: Variety; Reuters; Bloomberg)
Final PDF to printer280   Chapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 280 06/09/23 05:48 pm
LO 6-1 List Employer-Paid and Employee-Paid Obligations
Employers must pay some of the same taxes that the employees do. 
However, a firm has additional liabilities that employees do not, such as 
certain unemployment taxes and workers’ compensation insurance. A com￾parison of employee-paid and employer-paid taxes is given in Table 6-1.
The taxes an employer must pay are often known as statutory 
deductions, meaning that governmental statutes have made the tax a man￾datory, legally obligated deduction. An important element of employer 
tax responsibility is that it continues after disbursing the employees’ pay, 
often extending well after leaving the firm. Employers must file mandatory reconciliation 
reports detailing the amounts they have withheld from employee pay, track the employees 
throughout the company’s accounting system, and maintain the personnel files for current 
and terminated employees per the firm’s payroll practices and governmental regulations.
Social Security and Medicare Taxes
The FICA taxes, which include both the Social Security and Medicare taxes, are among the 
statutory withholdings employees and employers pay. Employees and employers must each 
contribute 6.2 percent (for a total of 12.4 percent) of the employee’s pay up to the maximum 
withholding amount for Social Security of $160,200 for 2023. Employers must match the 
employees’ payroll deductions for the Medicare tax in the amount of 1.45 percent (for a total 
Labor costs potentially constitute a significant portion of a 
company’s expenses. Employee benefits such as company 
contributions to retirement plans, temporary disability insurance, 
and educational reimbursements represent additional business 
expenses. Chapter 6 will examine employer payroll tax 
responsibilities and how payroll is a tool in labor planning.
Diego Cervo/Shutterstock
Tax Employee Pays Employer Pays
Social Security XX XX
Medicare XX XX
Federal Income Tax XX
Federal Unemployment Tax (FUTA) XX
State Income Tax (where applicable) XX
State Unemployment Tax (SUTA) Sometimes both are responsible 
at different percentages; see your 
local taxation authority for specific 
details.
XX
Local Income Taxes XX
Local Occupational Taxes (where 
applicable)
XX XX
Workers’ Compensation Premiums XX
401(k)/Pension (if a matching policy 
exists)
XX XX
Other Voluntary Deductions XX
TABLE 6-1
Employee-Paid and Employer-Paid Taxes
Final PDF to printerChapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning   281
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 281 06/09/23 05:48 pm
The CARES Act in 2020 offered employers relief from payroll-related income taxes. 
Employers had the option of tax deferrals and tax credit programs to help their busi￾nesses remain solvent during the COVID-19 pandemic. Certain CARES programs 
allowed employers to defer full remittance of payroll taxes until December 2022.
(Source: RSM)
of 2.9 percent) of the employees’ gross pay less any applicable deductions. Remember that 
the Affordable Care Act mandated an additional tax for highly compensated employees. The 
employer does not match this additional Medicare tax.
Let’s look at an example of how the employee’s and the employer’s share of the FICA tax 
works.
Russe’s share of the Social Security tax: $1,384.62 × 6.2% = $ 85.85
The employer’s share of the Social Security tax: $1,384.62 × 6.2% = $ 85.85
Total Social Security tax liability for Russe’s pay this 
period:
$ 171.70
EXAMPLE: EMPLOYEE AND EMPLOYER SHARE, SOCIAL SECURITY TAX
Russe works as an hourly worker who earns an annual salary of $36,000 and is paid 
biweekly. The gross pay is $1,384.62 per pay period ($36,000 per year/26 pay 
periods).
As shown in the example, the employer and employee contribute the same amounts for the 
Social Security tax. Remember, the Social Security tax has a maximum withholding per year 
based on the employee’s salary, which is $160,200 for 2023. After reaching that maximum, 
neither the employee nor the employer contributes any more Social Security tax.
EXAMPLE: EMPLOYEE AND EMPLOYER SHARE SOCIAL SECURITY 
TAXES, HIGHLY COMPENSATED EMPLOYEE
Alix Perry is the vice president of Sunny Glassworks. The annual salary is $243,000, 
which is paid semimonthly. Alix’s gross pay per period is $10,125.00 ($243,000/24 
pay periods), and there are no pre-tax deductions. For the 16th pay period of the year, 
the Social Security tax withholding is as follows:
After the 15th pay period, Alix’s year-to-date pay is $10,125 × 15 = $151,875. 
After the 16th pay period, Alix’s year-to-date pay will be $10,125 × 16 = $162,000. 
The amount subject to Social Security tax for the 17th pay period equals the wage 
base minus the 15th pay period YTD pay:
$160,200 – $162,000 = $200 of Alix’s pay during the 17th pay period is subject 
to Social Security tax. Neither Alix nor his employer will be taxed on the remaining 
amount.
Alix’s share of the Social Security tax: $10,125 × 6.2% =  $   627.75
Sunny Glassworks’ share of Alix’s Social Security tax: $10,125 × 6.2% =        627.75
Total Social Security tax liability for Alix’s pay this period: $1,255.50
Alix’s share of the Social Security tax: $200 × 6.2% =  $12.40
Sunny Glassworks’ share of Alix’s Social Security tax: $200 × 6.2% =  $12.40
Total Social Security tax liability for Alix’s pay this period 
that must be remitted by Sunny Glassworks:
$24.80
Final PDF to printer282   Chapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 282 06/09/23 05:48 pm
Vitalii Vodolazskyi/Shutterstock
Medicare tax, the other piece of the FICA taxes, has no maximum but does have an addi￾tional tax for high-wage employees. Let’s look at Russe’s pay again to see how the Medicare 
tax works and the total FICA tax for the pay period.
EXAMPLE: EMPLOYEE AND EMPLOYER SHARE, MEDICARE TAXES
Russe’s share of the Medicare tax: $1,384.62 × 1.45% = $ 20.08
The employer’s share of the Medicare tax: $ 1,384.62 × 1.45% =    20.08
Total Medicare tax liability for Russe’s pay this period 
that must be remitted by Sunny Glassworks:
$  40.16
Total FICA responsibility from Russe’s pay this period 
($171.70 + $40.16):
$211.86
Medicare tax amounts:
Alix’s standard Medicare tax liability: $10,125 × 1.45% = $ 146.81
Sunny Glassworks’ Medicare tax liability: $10,125 × 1.45% =    146.81
Alix’s additional Medicare tax liability: $2,500 × 0.9% =   22.50
Total Medicare tax liability: $   316.12
Total FICA responsibility for Alix’s pay this period: $   316.12
EXAMPLE: EMPLOYEE AND EMPLOYER SHARE MEDICARE TAXES, 
HIGHLY COMPENSATED EMPLOYEE
As of the 20th pay period of the year, Alix’s YTD pay is $202,500. Amount subject to 
the additional Medicare tax: $2,500.
Remember, no Social Security tax applies because Alix has already exceeded the 
wage base.
Social Security and Medicare amounts may be listed separately when the company makes 
its tax deposit. The employer’s tax deposit will also include the amount deducted from the 
employee for federal income tax.
Maintaining accurate records of taxes withheld through payroll registers and employee 
earnings records is critical in calculating proper FICA tax deductions. Whether a company 
uses a manual system, has an automated system, or outsources payroll duties, it remains 
responsible for the accuracy of the deductions and maintenance of associated records.
Federal and State Unemployment Taxes
Another set of employer-paid payroll taxes includes those mandated by the 
Federal Unemployment Tax Act (FUTA) and State Unemployment Tax 
Act (SUTA). FUTA and SUTA are unemployment compensation funds 
established to provide for workers who have lost their jobs. Generally, the 
FUTA tax rate is lower than that for the SUTA tax because (1) the states 
govern the disbursement of unemployment funds, and (2) unemployment 
rates vary by region. FUTA taxes pay for the administrative expenses of 
the unemployment insurance fund. SUTA tax rates provide a localized 
and individual focus for employer taxes. The unemployment insurance 
fund pays for half of the extended unemployment benefits and provides a 
fund of additional benefits against which states may borrow as necessary to cover unemploy￾ment claims. An interesting note is that FUTA and SUTA are employer-only taxes in all but 
three states: Alaska, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania.
Now let’s look at Medicare and total FICA taxes for Alix. Note the additional Medicare 
tax and how the employer does not match it.
Final PDF to printerChapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning   283
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 283 06/09/23 05:48 pm
FUTA pertains only to U.S. citizens and workers employed by American companies. 
According to the IRS, to be classified as an American company, an employer must meet the 
following criteria:
∙ An individual who is a resident of the United States,
∙ A partnership, if two-thirds or more of the partners are residents of the United States,
∙ A trust, if all of the trustees are residents of the United States, or
∙ A corporation organized under the U.S. laws of any state or the District of Columbia.
American citizens who work for companies outside of the United States who are not 
classified as American employers are not subject to FUTA provisions. Certain resident 
aliens and professions are exempt from FUTA provisions, as stipulated by Income 
Tax Regulation §31.3301-1. The professions from which employee compensation is 
exempt from FUTA provisions are:
• Agricultural workers
• Household employees unless the compensation exceeds $1,000 during any 
calendar quarter of the current year or prior year
• Employees of religious, charitable, educational, or certain other tax-exempt 
organizations
• Employees of the U.S. government or any of its agencies
• Employees of the government of any U.S. state or any of its political subdivisions
• Employees of the government of the District of Columbia or any of its political 
subdivisions
The FUTA tax’s full 2023 tax is 6.0 percent of the first $7,000 of an employee’s wages 
paid during a calendar year. The employer pays FUTA. Employees who move to a differ￾ent company will have the new employer paying additional FUTA taxes. Therefore, if an 
employer has a high turnover rate among its employees (i.e., a large number of employees 
remain employed for only a short period before terminating employment), the firm will pay 
FUTA tax for all employees for the first $7,000 of earnings, including the ones who remained 
in their employ for only a short time.
Due to the COVID-19 outbreak, employers were granted a refundable tax credit of 50 
percent of wages paid between April 2, 2020, and December 31, 2020, by certain 
employers who met the following criteria:
• Operations were suspended, partially or in full, because of the outbreak.
• Gross sales declined 50 percent or more because of the outbreak.*
• Tax-exempt businesses were also eligible for this break.
Also, a payroll tax credit was extended for businesses that continued to pay wages (up to 
$10,000 of compensation per employee, including fringe health benefits paid), as follows:
• For businesses with more than 100 employees, compensation for services not 
provided due to COVID-19 reasons.
• For businesses with fewer than 100 employees, all employee wages qualified for the 
credit.
*The gross sales tax credit eligibility ceased once the business’s sales receipts reached 80 percent of the same 
amount earned during the same quarter of the prior calendar year.
(Source: U.S. Congress)
Final PDF to printer284   Chapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 284 06/09/23 05:48 pm
With the credit, the employer’s FUTA rate will be 0.6 percent on the first $7,000 of every 
employee’s wage. The minimum FUTA tax rate is 0.6 percent, which means that a minimum 
of $42 ($7,000 × 0.006) may be paid per employee. Note that the FUTA tax liability is always 
reported for the prior year, which means that the FUTA tax liability in 2023 will increase with 
the first payroll and reflect both 2022 and 2023 liability if the 940 has not been filed yet. If the 
employer makes quarterly deposits, then the full 2022 liability would not be part of the FUTA 
Tax Payable account in 2023.
EXAMPLE: FUTA TAX COMPUTATION, ALL EMPLOYEES EARNING MORE 
THAN $7,000
Snowborn, Inc., is a company based in Great Falls, Montana. In 2023, the company had 
178 employees, all of whom earned more than $7,000 in wages and salaries. Only 
145 employees remained with the company at the end of the year. The 2023 FUTA tax 
liability for Snowborn, Inc., would be computed as follows:
Note that Snowborn, Inc., is liable for the FUTA tax on all employees who worked for 
the company, even if they left employment with the company. The FUTA tax filing is 
due on January 31, 2024.
Number of Employees 
During 2023
Multiplied by the 
First $7,000 of 
Wages
Multiplied by 0.6% 
Tax Rate
FUTA Tax 
Liability for 
2023
178 $7,000 0.006 $7,476
What happens when the employees earn less than $7,000 during the calendar year? The 
employer is still responsible for the FUTA tax on the employees’ earnings and the amount 
earned during the calendar year.
EXAMPLE: FUTA TAX, EMPLOYEES WITH EARNINGS LESS THAN $7,000 
DURING THE YEAR
Baja Brothers Wines, based in Tucson, Arizona, has 62 employees and the following is 
employee data for FUTA taxes:
Number of Employees 
Who Earned More Than 
$7,000 During 2023
Multiplied by the First 
$7,000 of Wages
Multiplied by 
0.6% Tax Rate
FUTA Tax 
Liability for 
2023
59 $7,000.00 0.006 $ 2,478.00
Employees Who Earned 
Less Than $7,000 
During 2023
Multiplied by the 
Amount of Wages 
Earned in 2023
Multiplied by 
0.6% Tax Rate
Employee A $5,894.00 0.006 $  35.36
Employee B    3,198.00  0.006   19.19
Employee C      975.00 0.006        5.85
Total FUTA tax $2,538.40
The establishment of the SUTA in each state provided states with the local authority to 
offer unemployment or jobless benefits. Designed as an unemployment insurance program 
after the Great Depression of the 1930s, SUTA payments’ remittance follows many of the 
same procedures as other payroll taxes. As a state-run fund, each state can establish its own 
qualification requirements for individual claims and business payments, the wage base for 
employers in the state, and the tax rate. The SUTA wage base and rate fluctuate among states 
Final PDF to printerChapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning   285
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 285 06/09/23 05:48 pm
and can be an incentive for businesses to change operations from one state to another. Note 
that all states’ wage bases exceed the minimum required by the law, but the tax rate is variable.
FUTA Credit Reduction
As we noted, the nominal FUTA tax is 6.0 percent, of which the employer remits 0.6 per￾cent to the federal government. A caveat to this 0.6 percent employer rate involves Title 
XII advances issued from the federal government to assist with payments of unemployment 
liabilities. This can occur when a high period of unemployment happens due to layoffs or 
economic downturns. FUTA is subject to a 5.4 percent reduction, for which employers may 
qualify on two conditions.
1. Employers make SUTA deposits on time and in full.
2. The state is not a credit reduction state.
If a state defaults on its repayment of these federal loans, the credit taken against the 6.0 
percent FUTA rate may be reduced. Each year, states have until November 10 to repay the 
prior year’s loan. If the loan remains unpaid for more than one year, the FUTA credit will 
continue to be reduced in the third and fifth years after the loan is due. An example of the 
FUTA credit reduction follows.
EXAMPLE: FUTA CREDIT REDUCTION
State Z had a loan taken in 2022 to supplement amounts paid for unemployment insur￾ance liabilities. The balance of that loan would be due on November 10, 2023. If the 
balance is not paid by that date, the credit against the FUTA rate for the next calendar 
year would be as follows:
The credit would be reduced further in future years if the loan remains unpaid. Employers 
report the credit reduction on Form 940. In 2023, there are four states and one terri￾tory with a FUTA credit reduction: California, Connecticut, Illinois, and New York have a 
0.3 percent reduction, and the U.S. Virgin Islands has a 3.6 percent reduction.
(Source: Federal Register)
FUTA Rate
Standard FUTA Rate 
after Credit Additional FUTA Tax
FUTA Rate after Credit 
Reduction
6.0% 0.6% 1.8% 2.4%
State Unemployment Taxes
The SUTA is limited to wages collected, and the 5.4 percent rate is a guideline. State rates 
vary based on employee retention and other factors. States examine employee turnover dur￾ing an established period and determine if employers qualify for a credit against the nominal 
SUTA rate. Depending upon the company’s state, this limit may be equal to, higher, or lower 
than the SUTA rate. For example, Alaska’s SUTA wage base is $47,100 in 2023. A chart 
containing the SUTA wage base and rates is shown in Table 6-2.
State Wage Base Min/Max Rate
Alabama $  8,000 0.65%–6.8%
Alaska $47,100 1.0%–5.4%
Arizona $  8,000 0.03%–7.79%
Arkansas $  7,000 0.9%–12.8%
California $  7,000 1.5%–6.2%
Colorado $20,400 0.78%–10.2%
TABLE 6-2
SUTA Wage Base and Rates 2023
(continued)
Final PDF to printer286   Chapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 286 06/09/23 05:48 pm
State Wage Base Min/Max Rate
Connecticut $15,000 1.9%–6.8%
Delaware $10,500 0.3%–8.2%
District of Columbia $ 9,000 1.6%–7.0%
Florida $ 7,000 0.59%–5.4%
Georgia $ 9,500 0.04%–8.1%
Hawaii $56,700 0.2%–5.8%
Idaho $49,900 0.453%–7.5%
Illinois $13,271 0.55%–8.15%
Indiana $ 9,500 0.51%–7.548%+surcharge
Iowa $36,100 0.0%–7.5%
Kansas $14,000 0.09%–9.4%
Kentucky $11,100 1.0%–10.0%
Louisiana $ 7,700 0.10%–6.2%
Maine $12,000 0.89%–8.27%
Maryland $ 8,500 0.3%–7.5%
Massachusetts $15,000 0.79%–11.19%
Michigan $ 9,500 0.26%–10.3%
Minnesota $40,000 0.1%–9.1%
Mississippi $14,000 0.2%–5.4%
Missouri $10,500 0.0%–9.7%
Montana $40,500 0.8%–6.3%
Nebraska $9,000/$24,000* 0.0%–5.4%
Nevada $40,100 0.25%–5.4%
New Hampshire $14,000 1.0%–8.5%
New Jersey $41,100 1.2%–7.0%
New Mexico $30,100 0.1%–5.4%
New York $12,300 1.5%–9.9%
North Carolina $29,600 0.072%–6.912%
North Dakota $40,800 0.16%–9.76%
Ohio $ 9,000 0.3%–10.6%
Oklahoma $25,700 0.2%–7.3%
Oregon $50,900 2.2%–5.4%
Pennsylvania $10,000 2.8%–15.1%
Rhode Island $ 28,200/$29,700* 1.9%–10.0%
South Carolina $14,000 0.089%–7.805%
South Dakota $15,000 0.0%–10.03%
Tennessee $ 7,000 0.15%–19.0%
Texas $ 9,000 0.54%–7.35%
Utah $44,800 1.1%–9.5%
Vermont $13,500 1.3%–8.4%
Virginia $ 8,000 0.52%–6.62%
Washington $67,600 0.02%–7.85%
West Virginia $ 9,000 1.5%–8.5%
Wisconsin $14,000 0.27%–9.8%
Wyoming $29,100 0.63%–10.0%
*Applies only to employers assigned the maximum rate.
(Source: American Payroll Association)
TABLE 6-2
SUTA Wage Base and Rates 2023 (concluded)
Final PDF to printerChapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning   287
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 287 06/09/23 05:48 pm
An employer’s SUTA rate is determined by a mix of state unemployment rates and com￾pany experience ratings. The SUTA rate for company A may be different from the rate for 
company B. For example, a construction company may experience higher unemployment 
claims because of the seasonal nature and higher risk associated with the industry; therefore, 
its rate could be 4.54 percent, whereas a similar-sized company in a professional services 
industry may have an unemployment rate of 3.28 percent. States issue letters annually to 
companies with the individually determined SUTA rate for the following year.
The first example is a company with a SUTA rate of 5.4 percent, and all employees have 
earned more than $7,000 for the year.
EXAMPLE: FUTA AND SUTA LIABILITY; SUTA = 5.4 PERCENT
JayMac Communications, a Tennessee company, has 15 employees, all of whom have 
met the FUTA tax’s $7,000 threshold. The state portion for which JayMac is liable is 
5.4 percent. The unemployment tax obligations are
FUTA: 15 employees × $7,000 × 0.006 = $   630
SUTA: 15 employees × $7,000 × 0.054 =   5,670
Total unemployment tax liability: $6,300
The next example is a company in Georgia with a SUTA rate of 2.3 percent and some 
employees who have earned less than $7,000 during the year.
EXAMPLE: FUTA AND SUTA LIABILITY; SUTA = 2.3 PERCENT
Charmer Industries of Georgia has 20 employees: 18 employees have met the FUTA 
and SUTA thresholds, and 2 employees have not, earning $5,400 and $2,500, respec￾tively. The state obligation for Charmer is 2.3 percent due to a favorable employer rat￾ing. Charmer’s unemployment taxes would be computed as follows:
FUTA: 18 employees × $7,000 × 0.006 = $ 756.00 
($5,400 + $2,500) × 0.006 =   47.40
Total FUTA liability: $ 803.40
SUTA: 18 employees × $9,500 × 0.023 = $3,933.00
($5,400 + $2,500) × 0.023 =      181.70
Total SUTA liability: $4,114.70
Total unemployment tax liability: $4,918.10
Tips to Minimize SUTA Taxes
Experience-Rating System
• Know how your company compares to other similar companies in the same industry in terms of 
hiring and retention of employees.
Experience Rate Charges
• The employer’s account is charged each time a former employee files for unemployment. Be 
careful to avoid improper use of the account by dumping employees into other states to avoid 
SUTA taxation.
Review the SUTA Account Regularly
• Ensure that charges to the employer’s account are accurate, and promptly alert the state 
unemployment office if inaccuracies occur.
Carefully Select New Employees
• All employees should be assessed before hiring to ensure that they are an appropriate fit for 
the company culture and have the needed skills for their job requirements.
Final PDF to printer288   Chapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 288 06/09/23 05:48 pm
Fertnig/Getty Images
Time Temporary or Seasonal Layoffs to Avoid Partial Weeks
• Partial weeks of unemployment can lead to large amounts being charged to the employer’s 
SUTA account.
Employee Separation Review and Documentation
• Maintain documentation about employees’ departure from the company to ensure that they do 
not improperly claim SUTA benefits.
Former Employees and Retirement
• The offer of retirement with the possibility of rehiring can reduce unemployment claims 
because a retired employee cannot claim unemployment insurance.
Use State-Issued Forms if Contesting an Unemployment Claim
• This will make the processing quicker and ensure the accuracy and remediation of any disputes.
Pay SUTA Taxes on Time
• A record of timely SUTA payments adds to the company’s experience rating and allows the 
employer to avoid penalties or other fees.
Use Historical SUTA Reports to Estimate Future Unemployment Charges
• Knowing what to expect ahead of time will help with budgeting, hiring, and estimating future 
labor costs.
Other State and Local Employer-Only Payroll Taxes
Some states have employer-only taxes unique to the area. Delaware, Colorado, Hawaii, and 
several other states have additional taxes remitted under different names. Some examples of 
these types of taxes include:
∙ Maine has an employer-paid Competitive Skills Scholarship Program tax of 0.07 percent and 
a 0.15 percent unemployment program administrative fund assessment.
∙ In California, employers pay an Employment Training Tax (ETT) of 0.1 percent on all wages 
up to the first $7,000 of wages.
As a payroll accountant, you must be familiar with the tax withholding and employer 
responsibilities for each state where the company has employees residing, even if there is not 
a business office located there. It is also important to be aware of any required forms within 
the state where the company has employees.
Individual counties and cities can also impose occupational taxes on businesses within 
their jurisdiction. The reporting periods for the local and city taxes are separate from federal 
or state tax filing requirements. The payroll accountant must review all tiers of taxes to ensure 
compliance in collection, submission, and reporting.
Workers’ Compensation Insurance
Workers’ compensation insurance is another type of employer payroll responsibility. 
Although it is not considered a tax, states enforce workers’ compensation statutes; the Federal 
Employment Compensation Act protects federal employees. Workers’ compensation statutes 
are designed to protect workers who are injured (temporarily or perma￾nently) or killed during the performance of their job-related duties.
Because workers’ compensation is an insurance policy maintained by 
employers, premiums vary based on employees’ job classifications and 
the risk of injury they typically encounter in the normal course of work. 
Premium amounts are expressed as amounts per $100 of payroll for each 
job classification. Premium amounts are estimated based on expected 
payroll amounts for the coming year and then adjusted at the end of the 
year once the actual payroll amounts are finalized.
Final PDF to printerChapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning   289
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 289 06/09/23 05:48 pm
The majority of workers’ compensation insurance claims occur in five main categories 
of injuries:
1. Sprains and strains
2. Punctures or cuts
3. Bruises or other contusions
4. Inflammation
5. Fractured bones
Most work-related injuries can be avoided through employee safety training, attention 
to the facility’s walking and working conditions, and employer diligence.
(Source: Insurance Journal)
Job Classification
Premium per 
$100 of Payroll Estimated Payroll
Premium 
Due Jan. 1
Driver $1.45 $387,500 $  5,618.75*
Loader 2.50   435,200 10,880.00†
Administrative Staff 0.40   320,000  1,280.00‡
Total premium due Jan. 1 $17,778.75
EXAMPLE: WORKERS’ COMPENSATION PREMIUM COMPUTATION
Callaway is the owner of Eastern Freight Lines. The company has three categories of 
employees: drivers, loaders, and administrative staff. The workers’ compensation pre￾mium rates are as follows:
• Drivers: $1.45/$100 of payroll
• Loaders: $2.50/$100 of payroll
• Administrative staff: $0.40/$100 of payroll
For 20XX, the Eastern Freight Lines payroll is expected to be the following:
*($387,500/$100) × $1.45 = $5,618.75
†
($435,200/$100) × $2.50 = $10,880
‡
($320,000/$100) × $0.40 = $1,280
The 20XX premium is adjusted based on the actual payroll. The difference between 
the paid estimated premium and the premium based on actual payroll results must 
either be remitted to the insurance company or refunded to the employer. An analysis 
of the actual payroll as of December 31, 20XX, revealed the following results:
*($410,563/$100) × $1.45 = $5,953.16
†
($478,290/$100) × $2.50 = $11,957.25
‡
($338,945/$100) × $0.40 = $1,355.78
Eastern Freight Lines must remit $1,487.44 to the insurance company due to the 
difference between the estimated and the actual payroll for 20XX.
Job Classification
Premium per 
$100 of Payroll Actual Payroll
Premium 
Due Dec. 31
Driver $1.45 $410,563 $ 5,953.16*
Loader 2.50     478,290 11,957.25†
Administrative staff 0.40     338,945   1,355.78‡
   
Total actual premium due 
December 31
$19,266.19
Less: Premium paid on Jan. 1  17,778.75
Difference to be remitted to 
the insurance company
$ 1,487.44
Workers’ compensation premium rates may also vary based on the employer’s safety 
record. For example, a company with multiple job-related injuries would have a higher pre￾mium than another company with few or no injuries. Employer compliance with OSHA 
guidelines is important to controlling the cost of workers’ compensation insurance.
The majority of workers’ compensation insurance claims occur in five main categories 
of injuries:
1. Sprains and strains.
2. Punctures or cuts.
3. Bruises or other contusions.
4. Inflammation.
5. Fractured bones.
Most work-related injuries can be avoided through employee safety training, attention 
to the facility’s walking and working conditions, and employer diligence.
(Source: Insurance Journal)
Final PDF to printer290   Chapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 290 06/09/23 05:48 pm
Emilija Manevska/Getty Images
FUTA, SUTA, and Workers’ Compensation
&Check Stop
1. AMS Enterprises in New Mexico has 30 employees. Of these, 25 have 
exceeded the FUTA and SUTA wage bases. This is the first quarter of the 
year, and AMS Enterprises has not yet paid FUTA or SUTA taxes for the year. 
The other five employees’ YTD wages are as follows: Employee A, $15,800; 
Employee B, $7,800; Employee C, $11,115; Employee D, $22,800; 
Employee E, $2,575. AMS Enterprises receives the full FUTA tax credit and 
pays a SUTA rate of 4.2 percent (see Table 6-2 for SUTA taxable wage maxi￾mum). How much are AMS Enterprises’ FUTA and SUTA liabilities?
2. Noodle Noggins of Maine has 12 employees and is eligible for the full 
FUTA tax credit; the SUTA rate is 3.26 percent. Ten of the 12 employees 
have exceeded the FUTA wage base. Eight employees have exceeded 
the SUTA wage base (see Table 6-2 for the SUTA taxable wage maxi￾mum). The remaining employees have the following YTD wages: $5,500, 
$6,800, $11,100, and $9,850. Noodle’s YTD total wages are $279,580. 
What are the FUTA and SUTA tax liabilities for Noodle Noggins?
3. High Flyers Jump School has two classifications of employees: clerical 
employees and jump instructors. The workers’ compensation premium 
rates are $0.45/$100 for clerical employees and $3.75/$100 for jump 
instructors. During 20XX, the estimated payroll amounts were $104,550 
for clerical employees and $215,690 for jump instructors. How much 
would the estimated workers’ compensation insurance policy cost High 
Flyers Jump School during 20XX?
LO 6-2 Discuss Reporting Periods and 
Requirements for Employer Tax Deposits
The frequency of depositing federal income tax and FICA taxes depends 
on the size of the company’s payroll. The depositing schedules have noth￾ing to do with a company’s pay frequency, although some of the names 
are similar. The IRS stipulates five different schedules for an employer’s 
deposit of payroll taxes:
1. Annually
2. Quarterly
3. Monthly
4. Semiweekly
5. Next business day
Of these, the most common deposit schedules are monthly and semiweekly. Electronic 
tax deposits are usually processed through the Electronic Federal Tax Payment System 
(EFTPS) website. However, the IRS allows employers to transmit payments through certain 
financial institutions via Automated Clearing House (ACH) or wire transfer. When using the 
EFTPS, the employer must register with the IRS to access the site. The EFTPS is used for 
Form 941 (federal income tax, Social Security tax, and Medicare tax) and annual Form 940 
FUTA tax deposit.
Lookback Period
The frequency of each company’s deposits is determined through a lookback period, which 
is the amount of payroll taxes an employer has reported in the 12-month period before 
June 30 of the previous year. For example, the lookback period that the IRS would use for 
Final PDF to printerChapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning   291
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 291 07/28/23 03:24 pm
Section 2302(a)(1) and (a)(2) of the CARES Act allowed employers to defer eligible 
amounts of Social Security tax remittances in response to cash needs during the 
COVID-19 pandemic as follows:
• 50 percent of the eligible deferred amount must be paid by December 31, 2021.
• If 50 percent of the eligible deferred amount was paid by December 31, 2021, the 
employer could defer the remainder of the eligible amount until December 31, 2022.
(Source: Internal Revenue Service)
Lookback Period for 2023 Taxes
July 1, 2021, 
through
October 1, 2021, 
through
January 1, 2022, 
through
April 1, 2022, 
through
September 30, 2021 December 31, 2021 March 31, 2022 June 30, 2022
(Source: Internal Revenue Service)
TABLE 6-3
Lookback Period
Employers receive notification about their deposit requirements in writing from the IRS in 
October of each year. Table 6-3 shows the lookback period.
Deposit Frequencies
The IRS informs businesses in writing if they need to deposit their payroll taxes annually, 
monthly, or semiweekly based on the deposits during the lookback period. All new compa￾nies are monthly schedule depositors unless they have a total payroll liability over $100,000 
during any pay period. It is important to note that the tax deposit due date is based on the 
payroll disbursement date, not the pay period ending date. For example, if a company’s pay 
period ended on June 28, but the payroll was not disbursed until July 1, the payroll tax deposit 
date would be based on the July 1 disbursement. Table 6-4 outlines the criteria for differences 
among deposit frequencies.
Frequency Criteria Due Date
Annually $1,000 or less in employment taxes to 
be remitted annually with Form 944.
January 31 of the following year.
Quarterly For any amounts not deposited during 
the quarter that may be due to rounding 
errors or other undeposited amounts.
The 15th of the month following the 
end of the quarter.
Monthly $50,000 or less in payroll tax liability 
during the lookback period. The amount 
of total tax liability is also found on 
Form 941, line 10. All new businesses 
are monthly schedule depositors unless 
they accrue more than $100,000 in 
payroll taxes for any pay period. (See 
the Next Business Day rule frequency.)
The 15th of the month following the 
month during which the company 
accrued payroll tax deposits. For 
example, taxes on the March payroll 
would be due on April 15 or the next 
business day if April 15 falls on a 
weekend or a holiday.
Semiweekly More than $50,000 in payroll tax 
liability during the lookback period. The 
amount of total tax liability is also found 
on Form 941, line 10. The exception to 
the semiweekly deposit schedule is the 
Next Business Day rule.
For payroll paid on a Wednesday, 
Thursday, or Friday, the payroll 
tax deposit is due by the following 
Wednesday.
For payroll paid on a Saturday, Sunday, 
Monday, or Tuesday, the payroll tax is 
due by the following Friday.
Next business 
day
$100,000 or more in payroll tax liability 
for any payroll period.
The payroll tax deposit is due on the 
next business day.
TABLE 6-4
Criteria for Deposit Frequencies
Final PDF to printer292   Chapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 292 06/09/23 05:48 pm
Notice the amount of total payroll tax for Generational Coffee. Because the total amount 
was less than $50,000, it is classified as a monthly schedule payroll tax depositor, and the due 
dates are the 15th of the following month.
Because payroll tax deposits for semiweekly depositors are driven by the day of the week 
upon which payroll was paid, deposits may be due either on Wednesday or on Friday. For 
companies with a biweekly payroll frequency, the tax deposit date may remain the same, with 
a few exceptions due to holidays. For companies with semimonthly payroll frequencies, the 
day of the tax deposit will likely vary.
In this example, Cornell Companies is already a semiweekly schedule depositor because 
of its payroll tax liability during the lookback period. Because the company’s tax liability 
exceeds $100,000 for the payroll period, Cornell Companies must deposit those payroll taxes 
by the next business day.
In this example, Wallflower Guitars has a minimal payroll tax liability. It should be noted 
that annual schedule depositors are assumed to have a minimal tax liability. If the com￾pany’s payroll tax liability grows during the calendar year, the schedule depositors should 
be mindful of the monthly schedule deposit rules. However, the company will not become a 
monthly schedule depositor until notified in writing by the IRS.
EXAMPLE: ANNUAL SCHEDULE DEPOSITOR
Wallflower Guitars is based in Ocean Springs, Mississippi. During the lookback period 
ending June 30, 2022, the company had a total payroll tax liability of $954. The payroll 
tax deposit schedule for Wallflower Guitars would be annual because of the small total tax 
liability. As long as the total payroll tax liability remains less than $1,000 during 2023, the 
company may deposit its payroll taxes with its annual payroll tax return using Form 944.
EXAMPLE: NEXT-BUSINESS-DAY DEPOSITOR
Cornell Companies, based in Ohio, is a semiweekly schedule payroll tax depositor 
because of the total payroll tax liability of $693,259 during the lookback period ending 
June 30, 2022. The company had a total payroll tax liability of $110,290 during the 
August 18, 2023, payroll period. August 18 is a Friday, so the payroll deposit would be 
due on Monday, August 21, because it exceeds $100,000.
EXAMPLE: SEMIWEEKLY SCHEDULE DEPOSITOR
Pollak Woolens is a company based in Sault Ste. Marie, Michigan. During the look￾back period ending June 30, 2022, it had $75,984 in total payroll tax liability. Pollak 
Woolens would be a semiweekly schedule depositor. Depending on the payroll date, 
tax deposits are due on either the Wednesday or the Friday following the payroll date.
Notice the total tax liability during the lookback period. For Pollak Woolens, the 
amount exceeded $50,000 but is less than $100,000; this makes it a semiweekly 
schedule depositor.
EXAMPLE: MONTHLY SCHEDULE DEPOSITOR
Generational Coffee is a company based in Wenatchee, Washington. During the look￾back period ending June 30, 2022, the company had $36,549 in total payroll tax lia￾bility. Generational Coffee would be a monthly schedule depositor. Payroll tax deposits 
would be due on the 15th of the following month (e.g., June 15 for May payroll taxes).
Final PDF to printerChapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning   293
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 293 06/09/23 05:48 pm
Reporting Periods
&Check Stop
1. Perry Plastics had $46,986 in payroll taxes during the lookback period. 
How often must the company deposit its payroll taxes?
2. For Perry Plastics, when is the deposit for June payroll taxes due?
3. Charlie’s Kitchens has a payroll tax liability of $126,463 on its Friday pay￾roll. When is the payroll tax deposit due?
LO 6-3 Prepare Mid-Year and Year-End Employer Tax 
Reporting and Deposits
Companies and payroll accountants are responsible for the timely filing of 
the various tax documents required by governmental authorities. Note that 
the dates for depositing and reporting taxes are not always the same. For 
example, an employer may be required to file payroll tax deposits through 
the EFTPS daily, semiweekly, or monthly, depending upon their payroll 
tax liability during the lookback period. However, that same employer 
would not be required to file tax forms until after the quarter. Like personal 
tax reporting, business reporting of statutory tax obligations has specific 
forms that employers must use. The most common forms used to deposit 
federal income tax and FICA taxes are Forms 941 (quarterly) and 944 (annual). An additional 
form used by agricultural businesses is Form 943, which serves the same purpose as Form 941.
Employer tax remittance forms changed significantly during the calendar year 2021 
because of the CARES Act provisions. Since employers had the option to defer certain 
payroll taxes, the accounting for those tax amounts needed to be documented for 
financial tracking purposes.
Form 941
Monthly, semiweekly, and next-business-day payroll tax depositors file Form 941 (see 
Figure 6-1), the employer’s quarterly report of taxes deposited and taxes due. The form is 
used to reconcile the firm’s deposits with the tax liability derived through mathematical com￾putations. It is common to encounter minor adjustments due to rounding differences incurred 
during monthly tax deposits while completing the form. Form 941 has specific instructions for 
its completion, as shown in Table 6-5. Note that the IRS changed Form 941 in July 2021 due 
to revisions in COVID-19 tax credits and changes that went into effect for COBRA premiums 
with the American Rescue Plan Act (ARPA). This new form was mandatory for employer tax 
reporting for the second quarter of 2021 but not for previous reporting periods. 
The IRS again changed Form 941 twice during 2022, and another revision was issued in 
February 2023. The changes to Form 941 are in part related to the COVID-19 tax credits and 
to new changes designed to increase the form’s usability over many years, as has been done 
to other forms.
Schedule B
Semiweekly depositors must file Schedule B (Figure 6-2) in addition to Form 941. This form 
allows firms to enter the details of payroll tax liabilities that occur multiple times during a 
month. On Schedule B, the payroll tax liability is entered on the days of the month on which 
the payroll occurred. The total tax liability for each month is entered in the right column. The 
total tax liability for the quarter must equal line 10 of Form 941.
pattarawat/Shutterstock
Final PDF to printer294
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 294 06/09/23 05:48 pm Part 1: Data for Chalmette Company Finley Wagner is the president of Chalmette Company, EIN 67-3983240, located at 572 Rue Bon Temps, New Orleans, Louisiana, 70116. The company’s phone number is 504-555-2039. The following Form 941 is for the first quarter of the year. Chalmette Company had 12 employees during the first quarter. Name Gross Earning Taxable Wages for Federal W/H Taxable Wages for FICA Taxable Wages for FUTA Total Federal W/H Total Social Security Tax Total Medicare W/H FUTA Tax SUTA Tax Net Pay YTD Totals 128,356.74 128,356.74 94,569.00 84,000.00 18,432.50 11,726.56 2,742.50 504.00 5,106.73 Line # on Form 941
2 5a & 5c 3 5a 5c
Line 1: The number of employees during the quarter reported, as indicated in the box in the upper-right-hand corner.
Line 2: Total wages subject to federal income tax (less pre-tax deductions) for the quarter.
Line 3: Federal income tax withheld from wages paid during the quarter.
Line 4: Check the box only if no wages paid during the quarter were subject to taxes. (This is uncommon.)
Lines 5a–d: Column 1 is for the wages and tips subject to Social Security and Medicare taxes; column 2 is the number of wages multiplied by the tax percent specified 
on the form.
Line 5e: Total of column 2, lines 5a–5d.
Line 5f: Tax on unreported tips.
Line 6: Total taxes due before adjustments.
Lines 7–9: Quarterly tax adjustments.
Line 10: Total tax after adjustments: line 6 minus lines 7, 8, and 9.
Line 11a: Qualified business tax credit for research activities.
Line 11b: CARES Act nonrefundable adjustments.
Line 11c: Reserved for future use.
Line 11d: CARES Act nonrefundable portion of credit for qualified sick and family leave.
Lines 11e–f: Reserved for future use.
Line 11g: Total nonrefundable credits.
Line 12: Total taxes due, after adjustments and credits.
Line 13a: Total taxes deposited during the quarter.
Line 13b: Reserved for future use.
Line 13c: CARES Act refundable adjustments.
Line 13d: Reserved for future use.
Line 13e: Total deposits and refundable credits.
Line 13f: Total advances received from Form(s) 7200 per quarter.
Line 13g: Total deposits and refundable credits less advances.
Lines 13h–i: Reserved for future use.
Line 14: Balance due.
Line 15: Overpayment.
Part 2:
Check the first box if the tax liability for the quarter is less than $2,500.
OR
Check the second box if the tax liability is greater than $2,500 and enter the taxes deposited each month during the quarter.
The total deposits must equal the total liability in Part 1.
If the business is a semiweekly depositor, then Schedule B must be completed.
TABLE 6-5
Instructions for Completing Form 941
Final PDF to printerChapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning   295
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 295 06/09/23 05:48 pm
Pay Date Payroll Tax Liability
January 13 $  41,486.47
January 31    41,486.47
February 15    41,486.47
February 28    41,486.47
March 15    41,486.47
March 31     41,486.47
Total Tax Liability for the Quarter $248,918.82
EXAMPLE: PAYROLL TAX LIABILITY
Jem Katzenberg is the owner of a company that pays its employees on the 15th and the 
last day of the month. All employees are salaried, exempt workers. Pay dates that fall 
on the weekend are paid on the preceding Friday. According to the lookback period, 
the company is required to deposit payroll taxes on a semiweekly basis. Because 
Katzenberg is a semiweekly schedule depositor, the company must file Schedule B in 
addition to Form 941. For the first quarter of 2023, Katzenberg’s company had the fol￾lowing pay dates and payroll tax liabilities:
Note: The payroll tax liability is (a) listed on the payroll date and (b) includes the FICA taxes (employee and 
employer share) and the federal income tax withheld.
State Tax Remittance
Each state that charges income tax has its own form for employee income tax remittance
purposes. State tax forms are similar to federal forms as far as the information included is 
concerned and generally have similar due dates. An important note is that each state has its 
own unique taxes. For example, California has an employee-only State Disability Insurance 
(SDI) tax of 0.9 percent on earnings up to $153,164 per employee (2023 figure). California 
also has an employer-only Employment Training Tax (ETT) of 0.1 percent and an unemploy￾ment insurance tax, both on the first $7,000 of each employee’s earnings. These additional 
taxes are included on the state’s payroll tax return. Figure 6-3 contains an example of a com￾pleted California quarterly tax return. As of 2023, many states require online submission of 
quarterly wage reports. See Appendix E for state revenue office contact information.
Additionally, employers are responsible for reporting any other local or regional taxes. 
Employers must abide by the filing requirements for each of the taxes or face fines or penal￾ties, depending upon the state and local tax codes. The purpose of these taxes can include the 
provision of social services and the funding of infrastructure costs. The Denver Head Tax 
was designed to fulfill both of these purposes in response to the increase in infrastructure 
and municipal programs’ availability for residents. An example of the Denver Occupational 
Privilege Tax Return quarterly form is located in Figure 6-4.
Form 944
Firms with a total annual tax liability of less than $1,000 use Form 944 (see Figure 6-5). Like 
Form 941, the firm enters the details of wages paid and computes the taxes due. The firm 
reports the monthly deposits and liabilities in Part 2. However, instead of entering a quarterly 
liability, the firm enters the annual liability, which is the sum of all the monthly liabilities. 
The IRS must notify a company in writing of the requirement to file Form 944 before its use. 
EXAMPLE: FORM 944
Gavi Jennings owns Forest Dog Walkers. Forest Dog Walkers is a sole proprietorship 
with one part-time employee who works only five months of the year. The IRS has noti￾fied Gavi that Forest Dog Walkers must report federal payroll tax liabilities using Form 
944. The total wages paid to the employee during 2022 were $2,380.78. The federal 
income tax liability was $274, and the total payroll tax liability for the year was $638.26. 
Because the total annual payroll tax liability is less than $1,000, Forest Dog Walkers 
must file an annual return. The due date for Form 944 is January 31 of the following year.
Final PDF to printer296   Chapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 296 06/09/23 05:48 pm
FIGURE 6-1
Form 941 
Final PDF to printerChapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning   297
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 297 06/09/23 05:48 pm
Final PDF to printer298   Chapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 298 06/09/23 05:48 pm
(Source: Internal Revenue Service)
Final PDF to printerChapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning   299
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 299 06/09/23 05:48 pm
FIGURE 6-2
Schedule B for Form 941
(Source: Internal Revenue Service)
Final PDF to printer300   Chapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 300 06/09/23 05:48 pm
FIGURE 6-3
Example of Completed California Quarterly Contribution Return and Report of Wages
(Source: State of California)
Final PDF to printerChapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning   301
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 301 06/09/23 05:48 pm
FIGURE 6-4
Example of a Denver Occupational Privilege Tax Return 
(Source: City of Denver)
Final PDF to printer302   Chapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 302 06/09/23 05:48 pm
FIGURE 6-5
Form 944: Note that a company that files Form 944 has the opportunity to remit payroll taxes using Form 944-V, a payment voucher. 
Final PDF to printerChapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning   303
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 303 06/09/23 05:48 pm
Final PDF to printer304   Chapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 304 06/09/23 05:48 pm
(Source: Internal Revenue Service)
Final PDF to printerChapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning   305
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 305 06/09/23 05:48 pm
Unemployment Tax Reporting
Form 940 is the employer’s annual report of federal unemployment taxes due, based on 
employee wages paid during the year. This report is for a calendar year and is due by January 
31 of the following year.
According to 26 IRC Section 3306, certain fringe benefits are not subject to federal unem￾ployment taxes because they represent non-cash compensation that is not intended to be used 
as disposable income. Specific examples of these fringe benefits are employer contributions 
to employee retirement plans, such as 401(k) and 403(b), and payments for benefits excluded 
under qualified Section 125 cafeteria plans.
Kendall’s contribution $36,500 × 0.04 = $1,460.00
Winterguard’s contribution match Half of the employee’s contribution =  730.00
Amount exempt from FUTA tax $   730.00
EXAMPLE: EMPLOYER CONTRIBUTIONS TO RETIREMENT PLANS
Winterguard Products offers its employees a matching 401(k) contribution of 0.5 per￾cent for each 1 percent of the employee’s salary. In 2023, Kendall Stark, an employee of 
Winterguard Products, contributed 4 percent of the $36,500 annual salary to a 401(k) plan.
The $730 would be listed on line 4 of Form 940 as exempt from FUTA taxes.
Fringe benefits that may be exempt from FUTA taxes are those excluded from cafeteria 
plans, such as the ones in the following example:
EXAMPLE: EXCLUDED FRINGE BENEFITS NOT SUBJECT TO FUTA TAXES
Hutcheson Medical Products offers its employees the following fringe benefits:
Hutcheson Medical Products would list $40,000 on Form 940 line 4, “Payments 
exempt from FUTA tax.”
Benefit Annual Value
Amount Paid during 
the Calendar Year
Adoption assistance $5,000 per employee $ 15,000.00
Achievement awards $250 per employee    10,000.00
Meals $300 per employee    15,000.00
Total the annual value of excluded 
fringe benefits
$40,000.00
Other fringe benefits specifically exempt from FUTA tax and reported on line 4 include:
∙ Dependent care (up to $2,500 per employee or $5,000 per married couple).
∙ Employer contributions to group-term life insurance.
∙ Certain other noncash payments, as outlined in the instructions for Form 940.
For tax reporting purposes, amounts contributed by employees to these exempt items must 
be treated in one of two ways on Form 940:
1. Deducted from Line 3 “Total payments to all employees.”
2. Reported on Line 4 “Payments exempt from FUTA taxes.”
Final PDF to printer306   Chapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 306 06/09/23 05:48 pm
EXAMPLE: ANNUAL FUTA TAX LIABILITY LESS THAN $500
Kimbro Painting has an annual FUTA liability of $392 during 2022. During the first 
three quarters of 2022, it would leave Part 5 blank because the tax liability is less than 
$500, and the liability would roll over to the next quarter. They would complete Part 5 
to report the year-end FUTA deposit.
According to IRS Tax Topic 759, they should deposit since it is year-end: “If your 
total FUTA tax liability for the year is $500 or less, you can either deposit the amount 
or pay the tax with your Form 940 by January 31.” Because they have a total liability 
of $392 for the year, they should have an amount in Section 5 and make the payment 
with the year-end filing.
Name
Gross Earnings (including 
fringe benefits and retirement)
Fringe 
Benefits
Retirement/
Pension
Payments Exempt 
from FUTA
Payments over 
$7,000 per Employee
Taxable 
Wages for 
FUTA FUTA Tax
YTD Totals $364,039.32 $24,868.00 $38,496.00 $63,364.00 $216,675.32 $84,000.00 $504.00
Line on Form 940 3 4 5 7  8 
Total wages $364,039.32
Less: payments exempt from FUTA   (63,364.00)
Less: FUTA wage base ($7,000 × 12 employees) (84,000.00)
Wages over $7,000 $216,675.32
EXAMPLE: FORM 940
London DuVault owns Mustang Motorsports, EIN 79-5312249. London filed the 
Annual FUTA Tax Return (Form 940) to report unemployment tax contributions during 
2022. Mustang Motorsports has 12 employees, all of whom earned over the FUTA 
wage base. Lines 9 through 11 are adjustments to the FUTA deposited, rare, and do 
not apply in this scenario. (See pages 8–10 of Publication 15 for more details.)
Line 1a: If the company pays the unemployment tax in only one state, then the state abbre￾viation is entered here; otherwise, the company must check the box on line 1b and 
complete Schedule A. Mustang Motorsports has only one location, which is in California.
Line 3: All wages paid during the calendar year are entered here ($364,039.32).
Line 4: Payments exempt from the FUTA tax. Mustang Motorsports has fringe benefits 
($24,868.00) and retirement plan contributions ($38,496.00) that are exempt from 
the FUTA tax.
Line 5: Wages for the year that are more than $7,000 per employee are entered here. 
The FUTA wage base is $7,000 per employee. In this example, all employees worked 
for the entire calendar year, so Mustang Motorsports is responsible for the FUTA tax 
of $7,000 per employee. To compute line 5:
Line 6: This is the sum of lines 4 and 5.
Line 7: FUTA taxable wages, which are $84,000 for Mustang Motorsports.
Line 8: FUTA tax ($84,000 × 0.006) or $504.
Line 12: Total FUTA tax of $504.
Line 13: Total FUTA tax deposited during the year. This total must match line 16 (side 2). 
Because all of Mustang Motorsports’ employees exceeded their wage base by the 
end of the second quarter of 2022, all FUTA tax for the year has been deposited 
before the completion of the tax return.
Final PDF to printerChapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning   307
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 307 06/09/23 05:48 pm
Lines 16a and 16b: Tax liability during each quarter. These boxes report the employ￾er’s FUTA tax liability based on wages paid or accrued during the quarter. In this 
case, Mustang Motorsports had a FUTA liability of $350 for the first quarter of 2022 
and $104 for the second quarter of 2022. The sum of these liabilities (and any 
other quarterly liability, which does not exist in this example) is recorded on line 17. 
The total on line 17 must match the total on line 13 (side 1).
An example of Form 940 for Mustang Motorsports is found in Figure 6-6.
Matching Final Annual Pay to Form W-2
One of the more common questions payroll accountants receive following the release of W-2s 
from the employees at the end of the year is, “Why doesn’t this match my final paycheck?” In 
short, it should—if you know how to calculate the income that belongs in each block of the 
W-2. The W-2 reflects all gross wages received by the employee, less any pre-tax deductions: 
health insurance, qualified retirement contributions, and other deductions adding any taxable 
fringe benefits. The total federal income taxes that the employer withheld from the employee 
and remitted as part of the 941 tax deposits also appear on the W-2 and act as supporting 
documentation for the total wages reported on Forms 941 and 940.
As a result of the Affordable Care Act, employers must report their contributions to 
employee health coverage on Form W-2. Amounts contributed by the employer should 
appear in box 12 using code DD to designate the employer’s share of the healthcare premium.
REPORTING OF EMPLOYER-SPONSORED HEALTHCARE COVERAGE
Form W-2, Box 12, Code DD
Type of Coverage Must 
Report
Optional Do Not 
Report
Major medical insurance X
Dental insurance, either as part of major medical or a 
separate, voluntary election
X
Health FSA funded only by salary reduction (reported in 
box 14)
X
Health FSA value over employee salary deduction for 
qualified benefits
X
Health saving arrangement contribution (employer or employee 
funded)
X
Hospital indemnity or specified illness funded by employee pre￾tax deduction or by employer
X
Multi-employer plans X
Domestic partner coverage is included in gross income X
The governmental plan provided for members of the military 
and their families
X
Federally recognized Indian tribal government plans X
Accident or disability income X
Long-term care X
Workers’ compensation X
Excess reimbursement to highly compensated individuals X
Payment or reimbursement of premium to 2 percent 
shareholder-employee, included in gross income
X
Employers are required to file fewer than 250 W-2 forms in the 
preceding calendar year
X
Form W-2 furnished to the terminated employee before the end 
of the calendar year
X
Form W-2 provided by the third-party sick-pay provider to 
employees of other employers
X
(Source: Internal Revenue Service)
Final PDF to printer308   Chapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 308 06/09/23 05:48 pm
FIGURE 6-6
Form 940 
Final PDF to printerChapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning   309
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 309 06/09/23 05:48 pm
(Source: Internal Revenue Service)
Final PDF to printer310   Chapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 310 06/09/23 05:48 pm
Similarly, Form W-2 contains the employee’s Social Security and Medicare wages. These 
wages are not reduced by contributions by the employee to qualified pension accounts (401(k), 
403(b), etc.), and therefore may be higher than box 1. The only difference between boxes 3 and 
5 will come when employees earn more than the maximum Social Security wage in the given 
year, that is, $160,200 for 2023. When this occurs, the Medicare wages reported in box 5 will 
be greater than the Social Security wages displayed in box 3. Boxes 4 and 6 contain the Social 
Security and Medicare taxes withheld from the employee and remitted through 941 deposits.
Tipped employees will have amounts represented in boxes 7 and 8 for their reported tips via 
Form 4070. Box 10 is used to report Dependent Care Benefits. Contributions to nonqualifying 
retirement plans will be represented in box 11. Employee contributions to qualifying plans are 
represented in box 12. An alphabetical code is assigned to the specific type of qualified retire￾ment plan to which the contributions are made (A through EE). Box 13 denotes specific contribu￾tions to deferred compensation plans. Box 14 is used to report other information to employees, 
such as union dues, health insurance premiums (not pre-tax), educational assistance payments, 
and other similar items. State and local taxes and wages are represented in boxes 15 through 20.
The following is an explanation of each box and its contents for Form W-2.
Instructions for Completing Form W-2
Box Explanation
a Employee’s Social Security number, based on their Social Security card and/or Form W-4.
b Employer Identification Number (EIN)
c Employer address: This should match the address reported on other tax reports, such as Form 941 
and Form 940.
d Optional. This could be used for the company’s employee number.
e–f Employee’s name and address as shown on the Social Security card and Form W-4.
1 Wages paid during the calendar year, including any additional amounts from
• Bonuses
• Cash value of prizes
• Awards
• Noncash value of fringe benefits
• Educational assistance programs (over $5,250)
• Group-term life insurance
• Roth contributions made to certain retirement plans
• Payments to statutory employees
• HSA contributions
• Nonqualified moving expenses and expense reimbursements
• Any other compensation
2 Federal income tax withheld during the year.
3 Social Security wages: Wages paid subject to employees’ Social Security tax but not including Social 
Security and allocated tips.
• Educational assistance programs (over $5,250)
4 Social Security tax withheld (employee share only)
5 Medicare wages and tips: This should be the same as the Social Security wages in box 3 unless 
employees reach the Social Security wage cap.
• Educational assistance programs (over $5,250)
6 Medicare tax withheld (employee share only)
7 Social Security tips: Any tips reported to you by the employee go in this box.
8 Allocated tips: Use this box if the company allocates tips among employees.
9 Verification code: Used if the employer participates in the W-2 Verification Code pilot.
10 Dependent care benefits: Report all dependent care benefits paid during the calendar year under a 
dependent care benefit program.
11 Nonqualified plans: Used by the Social Security Administration.
12 Codes (see Figure 6-7)
13 Check the boxes for the following circumstances:
• Statutory employee: Earnings are subject to Social Security and Medicare taxes but not federal 
income tax.
• Retirement plan: If the employee was an active participant in a defined benefit or defined contribution plan.
• Third-party sick pay: Used when reporting sick pay benefits.
14 Other: Used to report the annual lease value of an employee’s company car if the employer paid 
100 percent.
15–20 Used for reporting state and local tax information. Deductions and inclusions would follow state laws.
(Source: Internal Revenue Service)
Final PDF to printerChapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning   311
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 311 06/09/23 05:48 pm
(Source: Internal Revenue Service)
FIGURE 6-7
Box 12 Codes for Form W-2 and Retirement Plan Checkbox Decisions Chart
When completing Form W-2, you will have several copies of the same form. A sample 
Form W-2 is found in Figure 6-8. According to the order in which they print, the copies of 
Form W-2 are as follows:
Which Copy? What Is It For?
Copy A Social Security Administration
Copy 1 State, City, or Local Tax Department
Copy B Filing with the Employee’s Federal Tax Return
Copy C Employee’s Records
Copy 2 State, City, or Local Tax Department
Copy D Employer
Final PDF to printer312   Chapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 312 06/09/23 05:48 pm
EXAMPLE: FORM W-2
Baylor Christopherson, Social Security number 238-90-7653, worked for Sunnystyles 
Senior Community Center in 2023. Baylor’s address is 5978 Route 202, Pawtucket, 
Rhode Island, 02862. Sunnystyles Senior Community Center is located at 228 Maple 
Street, Pawtucket, Rhode Island, 02862, and has an EIN of 23-8907653 and a state ID 
number of 382948374. The following is on Baylor’s W-2 for 2023:
Box 1 contains the wages, tips, and other compensation. Baylor earned $36,523.34 
in 2023.
Box 2 contains the federal income tax withheld: Baylor had $3,671.04 withheld 
based on the W-4 information.
Boxes 3 and 5 contain the Social Security and Medicare wages. Note that these two 
boxes contain a higher amount than box 1. Baylor contributed $2,000 during 2023 
into a retirement plan.
Boxes 4 and 6 contain the Social Security tax withheld ($2,388.45) and the Medicare 
tax withheld ($558.59).
Box 12 contains amounts for nontaxable items. Codes for box 12 are contained in 
Figure 6-7.
Boxes 15–17 contain the state tax information. Baylor had $1,369.63 withheld for 
state taxes based on the state withholding certificate filed in January 2024.
FIGURE 6-8
Form W-2
(Source: Internal Revenue Service)
Figure 6-8 is an example of a Form W-2 for Baylor Christopherson.
Final PDF to printerChapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning   313
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 313 06/09/23 05:48 pm
Form W-3 is the transmittal form that accompanies the submission of Copy A to the Social 
Security Administration. It contains the aggregate data for all W-2s issued by an employer. 
Form W-3 and all accompanying W-2s must be mailed or electronically transmitted by January 
31 of the following year (i.e., W-2s and W-3s for 2023 must be transmitted on or before January 
31, 2024). The total annual wages reported on the W-3 must match the annual wages reported 
on Forms 941 and 940. The following is an explanation of the boxes on Form W-3.
Instructions for Completing Form W-3
Box Explanation
a Control number (optional)
b Kind of payer: The employer indicates if one or more of the following applies:
• Form 941 and no other category applies
• Military
• Form 943 (agricultural employers)
• Form 944 and no other category applies
• CT-1 (railroad employers)
• Hshld. Emp. (household employers)
• Medicare govt. emp. (if Form W-2 is for employees subject only to Medicare tax)
Kind of employer: Employers check the box that applies to them:
• None, if none of the situations apply
• 501c non-govt. (for tax-exempt non-governmental employers, such as private 
foundations, charities, social and recreational clubs, and veterans organizations)
• State/local non-501c (for state/local governments or other entities with governmental 
authority)
• State/local 501c (for state/local governments that have a tax-exempt designation)
• Federal govt. (for federal government entities)
Third-party sick pay: Employers who have indicated on Form W-2 that they issue third￾party sick pay must check this box.
c Total number of Form W-2s submitted with the W-3
d Establishment number: Used to identify separate establishments within the same 
business.
e Employer Identification Number (EIN)
f–g Employer name and address
h Any other EIN used during the year
Employer contact information
1–8 Same as boxes 1–8 on Form W-2. The numbers in these boxes should reflect the total 
of each box for all forms submitted with Form W-3.
9 Leave blank.
10 Dependent care benefits: Report all dependent care benefits paid during the calendar 
year under a dependent care benefit program as a total of all Form W-2s.
11 The total reported in box 11 of Form W-2s
12a Deferred compensation: Enter the total of all amounts reported with codes D-H, S, Y, 
AA, BB, and EE in box 12 of Form W-2s. No code should be entered in box 12a.
13 For third-party sick pay use only. Leave the box blank.
15 State/Employer’s state ID number: Place the two-letter state abbreviation and the ID 
number. If Form W-2s are from more than one state, enter X in this box and omit the ID 
number.
16–19 Enter the state/local total wages and income tax withheld in the corresponding boxes.
EXAMPLE: FORM W-3
Tracy Longston is the owner of Longston Aesthetics, 2849 Water Street, Falls Church, 
Virginia, 22043, EIN 84-9943043, phone number 703-555-0904, fax number 703-
555-0906. The email address is tlongston@longstonaesthetics.com.
Box b: Longston Aesthetics will file Form 941 to report quarterly tax liability, so box 
941 is checked.
(continued)
The following example from Longston Aesthetics depicts the completion of Form W-3 for 
a company (see Figure 6-9).
Final PDF to printer314   Chapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 314 06/09/23 05:48 pm
Box c: Longston Aesthetics had 25 employees who received W-2s.
Box 1: Wages and tips for 2023 were $654,087.35.
Box 2: The amount of federal income tax withheld from 2023 wages was $117,735.
Box 3: Social Security wages were $546,333.35.
Box 4: Social Security tax withheld was $33,872.67.
Box 5: Medicare wages and tips were $546,333.35.
Box 6: Medicare tax withheld was $7,921.83.
Box 7: Social Security tips were $24,505.
Box 12a: Deferred compensation was $83,249.
Box 15: VA; Employer’s state ID number: 66-2245538849A-238.
Box 16: State wages, tips, etc. were $654,087.35.
Box 17: State income tax withheld was $41,403.73.
Note: Taxable tips reported in box 7 should be reported on IRS Form 4070.
(Source: Internal Revenue Service)
(concluded)
FIGURE 6-9
Form W-3
(Source: Internal Revenue Service) 
Employers may occasionally need to correct filed tax forms. In this case, 
the employer should use the X version of the form (i.e., Form 941-X, 
Form 940-X, etc.). Note that any additional tax amounts owed that are 
discovered during the correction process should be remitted as soon as the 
employer completes the correction form. During the correction process, if 
an employer has withheld too much federal income tax or FICA from one 
or more employees, the employee has the option to recover these overages 
Jacob Lund/Shutterstock using IRS Form 843.
Final PDF to printerChapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning   315
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 315 06/09/23 05:48 pm
Tax Forms
&Check Stop
1. Jacobucci Enterprises is a monthly schedule depositor. According to the infor￾mation it reported on Form 941, its quarterly tax liability is $8,462.96. During 
the quarter, it made deposits of $2,980.24 and $3,068.24. How much must it 
remit with its tax return?
2. Cary’s Corrals paid annual wages totaling $278,452.76 to 15 employees. 
Assuming that all employees were employed for the entire year, what is the 
amount of FUTA wages?
3. For Cary’s Corrals in the previous question, what is the FUTA tax liability?
4. Skyrockets, Inc., had the following wage information reported in box 1 of its W-2s:
Employee A: $25,650
Employee B: $30,025
Employee C: $28,550
Employee D: $31,970
What amount must it report as total wages on its Form W-3?
LO 6-4 Describe Payroll within the Context of 
Business Expenses
Taxes and Other Deductions Remittance
Understanding employer payroll expenses are important because of the 
wide range of mandatory activities and lesser-known expenses associ￾ated with maintaining employees. Compensation expenses and employer 
payroll-related liabilities must be accurately maintained in an accounting 
system. The scope of payroll-related employer responsibilities contributes 
to the need for knowledgeable payroll accountants. 
Payroll professionals should consider creating a checklist of the activities they need to com￾plete at year’s end. The following activities are an example of specific activities to consider:
Before Year End After Year End
Check employee data (e.g. pay information, 
Social Security number, etc.) for accuracy
Check for information discrepancies, termi￾nated employee records to be purged, etc.)
Check tax deposits, wages paid and accrued, 
and benefit contribution deposit details
Check the new year’s tax wage, and benefits 
data (e.g., check for new tax rates, discrep￾ancies between company and government 
versions of Forms W-2 and W-3, etc.)
Check any special procedures (e.g. bonuses, 
Special Accounting Rule deferments, issued 
manual paychecks, etc.)
Check on payroll-related dates for the year, 
such as pay dates, holidays, and reporting 
dates.
(Source: ADP)
Andrey_Popov/Shutterstock
According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics in 2022, employers’ average hourly cost 
for employees was $41.86, of which wages were $28.88 and benefits totaled $12.98. 
Wages comprised 69 percent and benefits were the other 31 percent. Additionally, 
worker costs increased by 1.0 percent between September 2022 and December 31, 
2022. Benefits costs rose by 0.8 percent during the same period.
(Source: BLS1, BLS2)
Final PDF to printer316   Chapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 316 06/09/23 05:48 pm
Failure to File
The failure to file penalty applies to amounts on Form 941 and is 5 percent of the unpaid tax due 
with the return. This penalty accrues for each month or partial month that the tax remains unpaid.
The amounts withheld from employee pay and employer liabilities must be deposited 
promptly with the appropriate authorities. The omission of any of the required filings, activi￾ties, or inaccuracies in the accounting system could lead to problems that could include govern￾mental sanctions and penalties. No statute of limitations exists for unpaid taxes. If a company 
outsources its payroll processing, it is still liable for any late or unremitted payroll taxes.
The IRS will waive penalties under two conditions:
1. The shortfall amount does not exceed the greater of 
$100 or 2 percent of the required tax deposit.
2. The amount of the shortfall is deposited either (a) by 
the due date of the period return (monthly and semi￾weekly depositors) or (b) on the first Wednesday or 
Friday that falls after the 15th of the month (semiweekly 
depositors only). jjvallee/123RF
Tax Penalties
Penalties fall into two classifications: (1) failure to deposit and (2) failure to file. The follow￾ing penalties apply:
Failure to Deposit
2% Deposits made 1 to 5 days late.
5% Deposits were made 6 to 15 days late.
10% Deposits were made 16 or more days late. It also applies to amounts 
paid within 10 days of the date of the first notice the IRS sent asking for 
the tax due.
10% Amounts (that should have been deposited) are paid directly to the IRS or 
paid with your tax return. See payment with the return, earlier in this sec- tion, for an exception.
15% Amounts still unpaid more than 10 days after the date of the first notice 
the IRS sent asking for the tax due or the day on which you received 
notice and demand for immediate payment, whichever is earlier.
(Source: Internal Revenue Service)
EXAMPLE: FAILURE TO DEPOSIT PENALTY
Mane Street Hairstylists is a monthly schedule payroll tax depositor. The company 
owed $4,552 in payroll tax liabilities during July. The owner, Darian James, failed to 
deposit the July payroll taxes until August 28.
The failure to deposit penalty would be calculated as follows:
Tax Due Number of Days Late % Penalty Total Penalty
$4,552.00 13 5% $227.60
EXAMPLE: FAILURE TO FILE AND FAILURE TO DEPOSIT PENALTIES
Devin Warren, president of Great Meadows Farms, outsourced the payroll for the com￾pany during October 2023. On February 15, 2024, the company received a notice 
that Form 941 for the fourth quarter of 2023 was not filed. After contacting the payroll 
service, Devin determined that $32,860 in payroll taxes due with Form 941 was never 
deposited. The penalties for this oversight would be as follows:
Final PDF to printerChapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning   317
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 317 06/09/23 05:48 pm
Failure to File Penalty
Tax Due Number of Months Late % Penalty per Month Penalty
$ 32,860 2* 5% $3,286
Failure to Deposit Penalty
Tax Due Number of Days Late % Penalty Penalty
$ 32,860 30 10% $3,286
Total penalties due $6,572
A quick summary of general employer payroll expenses and responsibilities follows: 
Employee Compensation Tax Withholding Tax Matching (FICA taxes only)
Tax remittance Voluntary deductions from 
employee pay
Remittance of voluntary deductions
Tax reporting Tax deposits Accountability
It is important to understand employers’ responsibility for remitting the federal income 
tax and FICA tax amounts withheld from employees. According to IRS §6672, any 
responsible person within the company who willfully does not remit the withheld 
employee taxes—meaning they did not remit the taxes due to something as innocuous 
as a lack of funds—is subject to a 100 percent penalty for those unremitted funds. It is 
important to note this penalty only applies to employee federal income tax and FICA 
taxes, not the employer’s share of the FICA taxes or the FUTA tax. The following dia￾gram explains who is considered a responsible party for payroll tax deposits.
Any signer
on the firm’s
checking
account
Anyone
designated in 
the firm’s by￾laws
Anyone with
the authority
to hire/fire
employees
Any
corporate
ocer
Anyone who
has authority
to sign tax
returns
Who Has the 
Responsibility
to Remit Payroll
Tax withheld
from
Employees?
(Source: Green & Sklarz, LLC)
*The number of months is two because the failure to file penalty is based on both months and partial months. 
Because the notice was issued in February, the penalty would be for two months.
Notice how quickly the penalties can accrue for unfiled and undeposited taxes. The 
maximum penalty rate for failure to file is 25 percent, and the maximum for failure to deposit 
is 15 percent. Also, keep in mind that the penalties may be subject to interest charges.
Final PDF to printer318   Chapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 318 06/09/23 05:48 pm
According to a study conducted by Hundred5, the cost to hire and train new employees 
averages 15 to 25 percent of the employee’s salary. For a manager earning $36,000 
per year, the cost to hire and train employees could total approximately $9,000.
While the employee is being hired and trained, the loss of productive time could range 
from 1 to 2.5 percent of company revenue. Although this may seem to be a minimal 
amount, companies with high turnover could realize a significant revenue loss because 
of training costs.
(Source: Hundred5)
Project-based companies face more challenges than other types of companies. 
Employees could work on multiple projects, and their salaries must be allocated appro￾priately to measure the actual costs of labor used for different projects. Furthermore, 
if bonuses are given for certain projects, those employee payments must be allocated 
correctly for cost analysis purposes.
(Source: ADP)
Employees and Company Framework
Beyond the payroll accounting system’s expenses and responsibilities is 
understanding how the employees fit within the company’s larger frame￾work. Payroll is one part of the cost of employing people. Before the 
employee ever becomes productive for a company, employers will incur 
recruiting, hiring, and training costs that vary based on the company’s 
location and minimum job requirements. Other costs include any tools, 
uniforms, and specific equipment that employees need to perform their 
jobs. Expenses associated with hiring and retaining well-qualified employees may comprise a 
significant amount of a company’s overhead.
Singkham/Shutterstock
Tracking employee payroll expenses is an important duty of payroll accountants. Payroll 
reports foster cost analysis that informs accounting and human resource professionals of spe￾cific details needed for budget purposes. Companies need the information generated by pay￾roll records to ensure profitability and competitiveness.
Payroll-Related Business Expenses
&Check Stop
1. What are the two types of penalties associated with payroll taxes?
2. How do payroll expenses relate to other business functions?
LO 6-5 Relate Labor Expenses to Company Profitability
Compensating employees is far more complex than simply paying the 
hourly wage. The employer’s expenses related to taxes, insurance, and 
benefits are an addition to the employee’s annual salary (see Figure 6-10). 
Having employees affects a company’s profitability but is vital for 
doing business. Managers need to associate the proper amount of payroll 
costs with their department so they can make informed decisions about 
employee productivity and future budgets. Jirapong Manustrong/Shutterstock
Final PDF to printerChapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning   319
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 319 06/09/23 05:48 pm
Compensation 
Component
Civilian 
Workers
Private 
Industry
State and Local 
Government
Wages and salaries 69.0% 70.5% 61.9%
Benefits 31.0 29.5 38.1
Paid leave 7.4 7.4 7.4
Supplemental pay 3.1 3.6 1.0
Insurance 8.3 7.6 11.4
Health benefits 7.8 7.1 11.1
Retirement and savings 5.1 3.4 12.9
Legally required 7.2 7.5 5.4
FIGURE 6-10
Percent of Employee Compensation Component to Total Payroll Expense
(Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics)
The Labor Distribution Report
The number of employees in a department is known as its labor distribution. Payroll account￾ing is a powerful tool for understanding the labor distribution of a company. Accounting 
records facilitate departmental identification of the number and type of employees, time 
worked, overtime used, and benefits paid. Integrating the department information into the 
employee earnings records facilitates labor distribution analysis.
For example, ABD Industries has three departments: administration, sales, and manufac￾turing. The employees are distributed as follows:
Administration: 15 Sales: 10 Manufacturing: 60
Without departmental classification, the payroll costs associated with the 85 employees at 
ABD would be allocated evenly among the departments. This allocation would result in the 
administration and sales departments absorbing an amount of the payroll costs that are dis￾proportionate to the number of employees. The departmental classification yields an accurate 
picture of how labor is distributed across a company.
EXAMPLE: LABOR DISTRIBUTION, NO DEPARTMENTAL CLASSIFICATION
Total payroll amount for ABD Industries = $500,000
Number of departments = 3
Payroll cost assigned to each department:
$500,000/3 = $166,666.67
Assigning payroll costs without departmental classification works when each department 
is composed of an equal number of employees with reasonably similar skills and job titles.
EXAMPLE: LABOR DISTRIBUTION WITH DEPARTMENTAL CLASSIFICATION
Total payroll for ABD: $500,000 or
Payroll cost per employee: $500,000/85 employees = $5,882.35 per employee 
(if allocated evenly per employee).
Departmental allocation:
Administration payroll costs = $5,882.35 × 15 = $88,235.25
Sales payroll costs = $5,882.35 × 10 = $58,823.50
Manufacturing payroll costs = $5,882.35 × 60 = $352,941
Allocating costs according to the number of employees in each department yields a more 
accurate amount than the equal distribution of the labor costs across the three departments 
at ABD. However, allocating by the number of departmental employees assumes that each 
employee has equal compensation, which is improbable. A payroll accounting system allows 
Final PDF to printer320   Chapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 320 06/09/23 05:48 pm
Labor distribution reports may be used to reveal whatever information is important to a busi￾ness. Funding sources, payroll accuracy, and budget projections are three common uses 
of labor distribution reports. Vanderbilt University uses a labor distribution report to ensure 
that payroll costs are linked to appropriate departments and to specific grant funding.
(Source: Small Business Chronicle)
With the growing number of available jobs in the United States, employees are feel￾ing empowered to demand the benefits they want. Health and well-being top the list 
of requested benefits, especially in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic. Diversity, 
equity, and inclusion are not benefits in the original meaning of the word. However, 
employees are seeking more diverse and inclusive workplaces. Access to the benefits 
they want is a large influence among contemporary jobseekers.
(Source: Paychex)
Labor distribution reports are among the tools that managers use to determine the productiv￾ity and costs specifically associated with their department.
Labor Distribution Report
&Check Stop
1. Pine Banks Tree Farms has 10 employees on staff: three office staff, five agri￾cultural workers, and two drivers. The annual payroll expense is $300,000.
a. What would be the labor distribution if Pine Banks Tree Farms uses 
departmental classification?
b. What would be the labor distribution if Pine Banks Tree Farms does 
not use departmental classification?
2. Which method—departmental classification or non-departmental 
classification—is most appropriate? Why?
LO 6-6 Complete Benefit Analysis as a Function of Payroll
The need for companies to offer employee benefits to retain employees 
after the initial hire and to remain competitive within their industry is a 
movement that is gaining momentum at a time when employees can choose 
where they want to work. The problem with offering benefits is that the 
cost of the benefits directly affects a company’s profitability. The challenge 
is to find ways to promote employee engagement, reduce employee turn￾over, and maintain company profitability. Payroll data plays an important 
role in completing an analysis of the benefits offered and their strategic advantage.
Wages and salaries are often a company’s largest employee expense. The second￾largest expense to employers is employee benefits. According to Paychex, employee benefits 
potentially add 25–33 percent to an employee’s base pay. Benefits may include paid time 
off, holiday pay, bonuses, and low-cost insurance. Many companies pay a percentage of the 
employee’s insurance benefits, ranging from 70 percent to 100 percent in some cases. With 
the rising costs and mandatory nature of health insurance for certain employers, employee 
costs have become a major budget concern for many managers.
Payroll-related employee costs need to be compared to the advantages of maintaining the 
employee, namely, the department’s profitability and the company. To achieve the analysis 
required, a benefit analysis report needs to be compiled. Compiling a benefit analysis report 
kentoh/Shutterstock
Final PDF to printerChapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning   321
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 321 06/09/23 05:48 pm
Accurate reporting of the benefits costs to employers provides the management with guid￾ance for budget analysis and employee compensation. A sample benefit analysis report is 
contained in Figure 6-11.
Note the differences between total employee benefit costs and total employer benefit costs. 
Mandatory and voluntary employee payroll deductions represent a significant monetary invest￾ment. When added to the employee’s wages and the costs involved with recruitment and hiring, the 
amount of money dedicated to labor costs becomes a significant portion of a company’s expenses.
Taking the information prepared above, the payroll accountant can determine each 
employee’s cost to the company. This information can also determine the total cost of offer￾ing a particular benefit to the employees. The latter is used when the company is looking at 
annual renewals of health insurance benefits for comparison.
Annual Total Compensation Report
Some companies provide their employees with an annual total compensation report. The 
annual total compensation report is similar to the benefit analysis report because it contains 
a detailed analysis of employee costs. The difference between the two reports is the intended 
audience. The benefit analysis report is an internal report for the company’s management, 
and the annual total compensation report is meant to be distributed to the employee. The 
work going into the total compensation report can come from either the human resources 
department or the accounting department, depending on its structure. Either way, the payroll 
accountant contributes vital information to the report.
IMPORTANCE OF THE BENEFIT 
ANALYSIS REPORT
The analysis of employee benefits considers all of the 
variables that comprise their compensation. Many man￾agers are unaware of the full cost of having an employee 
added to or removed from their department, so the ben￾efit analysis report serves the following purposes:
• Benefit analysis helps employers benchmark their 
employees’ compensation to other companies with 
similar profiles or in certain geographic locations.
• The report helps employers with labor distribution 
and budgeting tasks by providing data for 
decision-making.
• The benefit analysis facilitates managerial 
understanding of departmental impacts before 
hiring or dismissing employees. Sebastiaan Blockmans/Alamy Stock Photo
Total compensation reports are a tool for employers to show employees the complete 
picture of their cash pay plus benefits. Sedgwick started using total compensation 
reports as an employee retention tool in 2014 to demonstrate the full value of their 
compensation packages. These reports illustrate, using facts and visuals, the value 
the employer brings to its employees. Furthermore, transparency about employee pay 
and benefits builds trust between employers and employees and allows employees to 
make informed decisions about their careers.
(Source: EBN)
is an important tool in maintaining a balance between employee retention and profitability. 
The company’s payroll records facilitate the compilation of the benefit analysis report.
Final PDF to printer322   Chapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 322 06/09/23 05:48 pm
FIGURE 6-11
Sample Benefit Analysis Report
Health & Welfare Benefits Annual Employee Cost Annual Employer Cost
Medical/Dental: $  600.00 $  6,000.00
Life insurance: 0 1,200.00
AD&D coverage: 0 980.00
Dependent life insurance: 300.00 600.00
Disability insurance: 600.00    3,000.00
Total health & welfare: $1,500.00 $   11,780
Retirement Plan Benefits: Employee Cost Employer Cost
401(k) employee contribution: $1,324.13 $  662.07
Profit sharing:    0    3,000.00
Total retirement plan: $1,324.13 $  3,662.07
PTO & Holiday Pay: Employee Cost Employer Cost
Paid time off: $    0 $  1,697.60
Holiday pay:    0    1,867.36
Total PTO and holiday pay: $    0 $  3,564.96
Additional Compensation: Employee Cost Employer Cost
Annual bonus: $    0 $  2,500.00
Bereavement pay: 0 509.28
Production bonus: 0 500.00
Tuition reimbursement:    0    5,250.00
Total additional comp: $    0 $  8,759.28
Government-Mandated: Employee Cost Employer Cost
Social Security: $2,736.53 $  2,736.53
Medicare: 640.00 640.00
Federal unemployment: 0 253.28
State unemployment: 0 2,279.53
Workers’ compensation:    0 353.10
Total government mandated: $3,376.53 $  6,262.44
Total cost of benefit provided by WLA 
Industries
$6,200.66 $34,028.75
Total cost of employing H. M. Charette*  $78,166.35*
*44,137.60+34,028.75 = $78,166.35.
Statement for: Hayden M. Charette
Annual Gross Salary: $44,137.60
Total Hours Worked Annually: 2,080 Hours
To prepare the information for the benefit analysis and total compensation 
reports, the payroll accountant will gather information from many sources: 
payroll registers, accounts payable invoices, payroll tax reports, and contri￾butions to retirement programs (when employer matching is involved). The 
payroll accountant will start by printing the annual earnings report for the 
employee in question. A computerized earnings register can be configured 
to include taxes and other deductions from the employee’s pay. When the 
total compensation report covers periods greater than one year, it may be 
necessary for the payroll accountant to obtain Social Security and Medicare 
tax rates for the years in question. Employer portions of unemployment insurance, workers’ 
compensation, and taxes are added to the employees’ benefits in determining the total cost.
The payroll accountant will request copies of invoices for health insurance, life insurance, 
and any other benefits the employer provides, such as on-site meals and gym facilities/mem￾LJSphotography / Alamy Stock Photo
Final PDF to printerChapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning   323
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 323 06/09/23 05:48 pm
employee for benefit analysis could be company-provided awards, meals, clothing, or special 
facilities (break room, locker room, etc.). Once complete, the annual compensation report is 
distributed to employees to inform them of their annual compensation’s total value. A sample 
total compensation report is in Figure 6-12. 
FIGURE 6-12
Total Compensation Report
CASH COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS SUMMARY
The amount of your total compensation from ABC Company is much more than what is indicated in your yearly
earnings statement. In addition to direct pay, it includes the value of your healthcare insurance, disability and
life insurance, retirement benefits, and government-mandated benefits. Below, we break out your total
compensation.
TOTAL COMPENSATION VALUE
The true value of your ABC Company total compensation includes your direct pay, the company’s contribution to
your benefits, and the consequent tax savings to you.
Your Contribution 9.23%
Company Contribution 90.77%
Cash Compensation $52,000
Benefits $7,080
Tax Savings $0
BENEFITS
Medical Insurance
Vision Insurance
Dental Insurance
Plan Coverage
ABC One
ABC Vision
NL Dental
Your
Contribution
$600.00
$0.00
$120.00
$720.00
Company
Contribution
$5,400.00
$600.00
$1,080.00
: $7,080.00Total
CASH COMPENSATION
Base Salary
Total:
Amount
$52,000.00
$52,000.00
Benefit Analysis Report
&Check Stop
1. What are the purposes of compiling a benefit analysis report?
2. What is the difference between a benefit analysis report and an annual 
total compensation report?
Final PDF to printer324
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 324 06/09/23 05:48 pm
EMPLOYER TAXES AND BENEFIT ANALYSIS
Employers’ tax rates and remittance methods tend to change annually based on federal, state, and 
local directives. Some developments in employer taxes that have changed since 2018 include the 
following:
• Continuing focus on employee wellness that includes health incentives as part of employees’ 
total compensation package.
• Flexible scheduling will become the norm instead of the exception for many employees.
• Increased access to Employee Assistance Programs (EAPs) will acknowledge employee mental 
health needs.
• Employee development programs allowing employees to gain skills on demand will become an 
important part of the benefits package.
Future trends to watch include:
• Increased employer focus on diversity and inclusion programs to attract prospective employees
• Employee-driven benefit packages resulting from low unemployment
• Demand for physical and mental health benefits to improve employee retention
• On-demand pay as part of employee benefits packages
• Benefits packages that include retirement fund perks for paying student loans in a timely manner
Trends to Watch
Summary of Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning
Taxes are a part of conducting business. Whether taxes are income or employee-related, a 
business must abide by timely submission and tax reporting regulations. Employers have 
responsibilities for collecting federal income tax, Social Security, and Medicare taxes from 
their employees. The company is also responsible for setting aside federal unemployment 
taxes per employee based on taxable wages. Apart from the federal taxes, employers may 
be liable for collecting, reporting, and submitting state and local income and unemployment 
taxes. Privilege taxes, such as the Denver Head Tax, may also be collected in specific dis￾tricts. Employers who fail to meet the reporting, deposit, or submission requirements may be 
subject to fines and penalties.
Understanding the connection between Form W-2 and the final paycheck of the year can 
save payroll accountants hours of work searching to find the answers to each employee’s 
query. When the payroll accountant can explain the elements of the W-2 with confidence, 
fewer employees will come to ask about the difference, especially if the payroll accountant 
provides a written explanation with the final annual paycheck or W-2.
Although the human resources department could prepare the benefit analysis report, this 
duty can fall to the payroll accountant in smaller companies. Even in larger organizations, the 
human resources department will need specific information from the payroll accountant to 
feed into the benefit analysis report. Managers can examine the benefit analysis to understand 
how much their employees cost their department. Upon receiving a total annual compensa￾tion report, the employee has a complete understanding of the compensation package, thereby 
evoking wage discussions and building a data-driven understanding of cost changes.
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 325 06/09/23 05:48 pm
Chapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning   325
Key Points
• Employers share some of the same tax obligations as their employees. Some examples 
are Social Security, Medicare, and (in some states) SUTA taxes.
• FUTA taxes are paid only on the first $7,000 of each employee’s annual taxable wage; 
SUTA tax wage base limits vary by state.
• Workers’ compensation is a state-mandated insurance that employers carry to protect 
employees injured or killed while performing normal work duties.
• Workers’ compensation insurance premium costs vary according to labor classifications.
• Payroll tax deposit frequency is determined by the amount of payroll taxes paid during 
a “lookback” period.
• All new employers are monthly schedule depositors until the next lookback period.
• Most employers file quarterly payroll tax returns on Form 941.
• Employers who deposit payroll taxes on a semiweekly basis must also file a Schedule B 
with their Form 941.
• Employers with less than $2,500 of annual tax liability file a Form 944 at the end of the 
calendar year.
• Employers report FUTA tax liability on an annual basis by using Form 940.
• Employers file an annual Form W-2 for each employee with the Social Security 
Administration.
• Form W-3 is the transmittal form used to transmit a company’s aggregate annual wages 
and withholdings as reported on Form W-2.
• Labor distribution affects company profitability, and benefit costs are significant in man￾agerial decisions.
• A total annual compensation report is used to communicate to employees the complete 
compensation package that they receive.
• Benefits packages are a strategic part of attracting high-quality candidates.
Annual schedule depositor
Annual total compensation 
report
Automated Clearing House 
(ACH)
Benefit analysis
Departmental classification
Electronic Federal Tax 
Payment System (EFTPS)
Form 940
Form 941
Form 944
Form W-2
Form W-3
Labor distribution
Lookback period
Monthly depositor
Next business day 
depositors
Payroll tax report
Quarterly depositor
Schedule B
Semiweekly depositor
Statutory deductions
Tax remittance
Vocabulary
Final PDF to printer326   Chapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 326 06/09/23 05:48 pm
Review Questions
1. What taxes are paid only by the employer in most states?
2. What taxes are the shared responsibility of the employer and employee?
3. What taxes are paid by the employee only?
4. What determines the deposit requirements for employer taxes?
5. How often must a company report Form 941 earnings/withholdings?
6. How often must a company report Form 940 earnings/withholdings?
7. Which of the mandatory taxes have a maximum wage base?
8. How did the Affordable Care Act change Medicare tax withholding percentages?
9. What is the purpose of Form 941?
10. Which employers must use Schedule B?
11. How do employers know that they must use Form 944?
12. What is the purpose of Form 940?
13. What are three ways employers could reduce their SUTA tax liability?
14. What is the difference between Form W-2 and Form W-3?
15. What are the employer’s payroll responsibilities as far as taxes and other withhold￾ings are concerned?
16. How does payroll relate to a company’s costs of doing business?
17. What is meant by the term labor distribution?
18. How do payroll records inform managers about labor distribution?
19. What is a benefit analysis report?
20. How can a manager use the benefit analysis report in the decision-making process?
21. How do the payroll reports inform managers about department and company 
profitability?
22. How do total compensation reports assist employers with hiring and retention?
E6-1A.
LO 6-1
Which of the following are always employer-only payroll obligations? 
(Select all that apply.)
a. Social Security tax
b. SUTA
c. Employee income tax
d. FUTA
E6-2A.
LO 6-1
As of 2023, which of the following accurately represents the full FUTA rate 
and wage base?
a. 0.6 percent, $160,200
b. Varies by state
c. 6.0 percent, $7,000
d. 0.6 percent, $7,000
Exercises Set A
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 327 06/09/23 05:48 pm
Chapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning   327
E6-3A.
LO 6-1
Dylan Reyes is the accountant for Heads Up Hat Corporation. In prepar￾ing the payroll for the semimonthly pay period ending December 15, 
Dylan notices that some of the year-to-date executives’ salaries have 
exceeded $200,000. What payroll tax responsibilities does Heads Up Hat 
Corporation have, especially regarding FICA taxes? (Select all that apply.)
a. Social Security tax must be deducted from the executives’ pay for those 
under the cap and matched by the corporation.
b. An additional 0.9 percent Medicare tax must be deducted from 
the employees’ pay for those over the base and matched by the 
corporation.
c. An additional 0.9 percent Medicare tax must be deducted from the 
employee pay for those over the base, but no corporate match is 
required.
d. Medicare taxes should be deducted from all employees’ pay and 
matched by the corporation.
E6-4A.
LO 6-2
Phoenix Booker is a payroll clerk at Elemental Exports. The company 
receives written notice from the IRS that the company is a monthly sched￾ule depositor. How is the deposit schedule determined?
a. The age of the company
b. The owner’s choice or remittance frequency
c. The payroll tax liability during the lookback period
d. The total SUTA tax for the previous year
E6-5A.
LO 6-2
Match the amount of payroll tax liabilities from the lookback period with the 
appropriate tax deposit schedule.
a. $205,684 payroll tax for one pay period 1. Monthly
b. $1,000 annual payroll taxes 2. Annually
c. $165,450 annual payroll taxes 3. Semiweekly
d. $48,350 annual payroll taxes 4. Next business day
E6-6A.
LO 6-3
Which form(s) should be prepared and filed by companies with employees 
and payroll tax liabilities exceeding $50,000 as of December 31, 20XX? 
(Select all that apply.)
a. Form 940
b. Form W-4
c. Form 941
d. Form W-2
E6-7A.
LO 6-4
Gold Star Printing made its required tax deposits. However, it filed its third￾quarter Form 941 on December 10, after receiving a written notice from 
the IRS regarding the missing form. What is the failure to file penalty for 
Gold Star Printing?
a. 2 percent
b. 5 percent
c. 10 percent
d. 15 percent
E6-8A.
LO 6-4, 6-5
Which of the following is true about the cost of employees within a busi￾ness context? (Select all that apply.)
a. Employees constitute a high cost of conducting business.
b. Hiring employees involves a significant overhead cost.
c. Costs associated with employees include only salary and limited hiring 
expenses.
d. The cost of providing employee benefits is minimal and of little 
importance.
Final PDF to printer328   Chapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 328 06/09/23 05:48 pm
E6-9A.
LO 6-6
Which of the following represents the purpose(s) of the benefit analysis 
report? (Select all that apply.)
a. Benchmarking with other companies
b. Understanding of employer and employee benefits costs
c. Billing employees for benefits costs
d. Identification of opportunities for increasing profitability
E6-10A.
LO 6-6
Why is it important to prepare the benefit analysis report or the total com￾pensation report? (Select all that apply.)
a. The reports promote employee education about the total value of their 
salary and benefits.
b. The reports inform labor planning and employer cost strategies.
c. The reports may be used as employee contracts.
d. The reports may be used to accompany benefits billing.
E6-11A.
LO 6-1,
6-4
Which of the following is a characteristic of workers’ compensation? (Select 
all that apply.)
a. Workers’ compensation is an insurance policy.
b. Private employers are federally mandated to provide workers’ 
compensation.
c. The cost of workers’ compensation represents a labor expense to the 
business.
d. Workers’ compensation is provided to cover employees who are injured 
or killed while performing work duties.
P6-1A.
LO 6-1
River Signorini works for New & Old Apparel, which pays employees on a 
semimonthly basis. River’s annual salary is $184,000. Calculate the following:
Pay Date
Prior YTD 
Earnings
Social Security 
Taxable Wages
Medicare 
Taxable Wages
Employer Share 
Social Security Tax
Employer Share 
Medicare Tax
October 13
December 29
Problems Set A
P6-2A.
LO 6-1, 6-3
White Lemon Cameras has the following employees:
Employee Name Annual Taxable Wages
M. Haskell $26,000
V. Papadopoulos 35,000
P. Anderson 32,000
C. Billingmeier 29,000
C. Johnson 46,000
White Lemon Cameras’s SUTA tax rate is 5.4 percent and applies to the 
first $8,000 of employee wages. What is the annual amount due for each 
employee?
Employee FUTA Due SUTA Due
M. Haskell
V. Papadopoulos
P. Anderson
C. Billingmeier
C. Johnson
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 329 06/09/23 05:48 pm
Chapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning   329
P6-3A.
LO 6-1, 6-2,
6-3
El Arroyo North has 22 employees within Denver City and County. All the 
employees worked a predominant number of hours within the city. The 
employees earned $17.50 per hour and worked 160 hours each during 
the month. The employer must remit $4.00 per month per employee who 
earns more than $500 per month. Additionally, employees who earn more 
than $500 per month must have $5.75 withheld from their pay. What are 
the employee and company Occupational Privilege Tax for the employees 
of El Arroyo North?
Employee: _____
Employer: _____
P6-4A.
LO 6-1, 6-3
Greer Utsey earned $47,500 in 2023 for a company in Kentucky. Greer 
is single with one dependent under 17 and is paid weekly. Compute the 
following employee share of the taxes using the percentage method in 
Appendix C and the state information in Appendix D. The box in Step 2 
was not checked.
Federal income tax withholding: _____
Social Security tax: _____
Medicare tax: _____
State income tax withholding: _____
P6-5A.
LO 6-3
Using the information from P6-4A, compute the employer’s share of the 
taxes. The FUTA rate in Kentucky for 2023 is 0.6 percent on the first 
$7,000 of employee wages, and the SUTA rate is 5.4 percent with a wage 
base of $11,100.
Federal income tax withholding: _____
Social Security tax: _____
Medicare tax: _____
FUTA tax: _____
SUTA tax: _____
State income tax withholding: _____
P6-6A.
LO 6-2
Veryclear Glassware is a new business owned by Skyler Peoples, the com￾pany president. Skyler’s first year of operation commenced on January 1, 
2023. What schedule depositor would Veryclear Glassware be for the first 
year of operations?
P6-7A.
LO 6-3
Using the information from P6-6A, complete the following Form 941 for the 
first quarter of 2023. The report was signed on April 14, 2023.
EIN: 78-7654398
Address: 23051 Old Redwood Highway, Sebastopol, California, 95482, 
phone 707-555-5555
Number of employees: 7
Wages, tips, and other compensation paid during the first quarter of 2023: 
$244,798
Income tax withheld from employees: $48,000
Social Security tax withheld from employees: $15,177.48
Medicare tax withheld from employees: $3,549.57
Monthly tax liability:
January $28,484.70
February   28,484.70
March   28,484.70
Final PDF to printer330   Chapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 330 06/09/23 05:48 pm
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 331 06/09/23 05:48 pm
Chapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning   331
Final PDF to printer332   Chapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 332 06/09/23 05:48 pm
(Source: Internal Revenue Service)
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 333 06/09/23 05:48 pm
Chapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning   333
P6-8A.
LO 6-3
Using the information from P6-6A and P6-7A for Veryclear Glassware (California 
Employer Account Number 999-9999-9), complete the following State of 
California Form DE-9, Quarterly Contribution, and Report of Wages. Use 5.4 per￾cent as the UI rate with a cap of $7,000 per employee, 0.1 percent as the ETT 
rate with a cap of $7,000 per employee, and 0.9 percent as the SDI rate with 
a cap of $153,164 per employee. All employees have worked the full quarter 
with the company, and all wages are subject to UI, ETT, and SDI. The California 
PIT taxes withheld for the quarter are $4,068. The company has deposited 
$6,656.18 for the quarter. Skyler Peoples submitted the form on 4/15/2023.
(Source: Employment Development Department)
Final PDF to printer334   Chapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 334 06/09/23 05:48 pm
P6-9A.
LO 6-3
The Content Rabbit Graphics Company paid its 25 employees a total of 
$863,428.49 in 2022. Of these wages, $9,850 is exempt from retirement 
benefits (employer contributions to 401(k) plans). All employees have 
worked there for the full calendar year and reached the FUTA wage base 
during the first quarter; taxes were deposited then. The Content Rabbit 
Graphics Company is located at 3874 Palm Avenue, Sebring, Florida, 20394. 
The owner is Eden Parks, EIN is 99-2039485, and the phone number is 461-
555-9485. Complete Form 940, submitting it on January 13, 2023.
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 335 06/09/23 05:48 pm
Chapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning   335
(Source: Internal Revenue Service)
P6-10A.
LO 6-3
Leda, Inc., is located at 433 Augusta Road, Caribou, Maine, 04736, phone 
number 207-555-1212. The Federal EIN is 54-3910394, and it has a 
Maine Revenue Services number of 3884019. Owner Kieran Leda has 
asked you to prepare Form W-2 for each of the following employees of 
Leda, Inc., as of December 31, 2023. The same deductions are allowed for 
state tax as they are for federal tax.
Final PDF to printer336   Chapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 336 06/09/23 05:48 pm
Nova C. Niehaus
122 Main Street, #3
Caribou, ME 04736
SSN: 477-30-2234
Dependent Care Benefit: $1,800.00
Total 2023 wages: $34,768.53
401(k) contribution: $1,043.06
Section 125 contribution: $1,500.00
Federal income tax withheld: $2,028.00
Social Security tax withheld: $2,062.65
Medicare tax withheld: $482.39
State income tax withheld $1,869.08
Kennedy S. Law
1503 22nd Street
New Sweden, ME 04762
SSN: 493-55-2049
Total 2023 wages: $36,729.37
401(k) contribution: $1,469.18
Section 125 contribution: $1,675.00
Federal income tax withheld: none
Social Security tax withheld: $2,173.37
Medicare tax withheld: $508.29
State income tax withheld $1,947.94
Sterling E. Manning
1394 West Highway 59
Woodland, ME 04694
SSN: 390-39-1002
Tuition in excess of $5,250: $1,575.00
(Include in boxes 1, 3, 5, 16)
Total 2023 wages: $30,034.87
401(k) contribution: $712.75
Section 125 contribution: $1,000.00
Federal income tax withheld: none
Social Security tax withheld: $1,897.81
Medicare tax withheld: $443.84
State income tax withheld $1,734.03
Briar A. Hendrix
1387 Rimbaud Avenue
Caribou, ME 04736
SSN: 288-30-5940
Total 2023 wages: $22,578.89
401(k) contribution: $1,354.73
Section 125 contribution: $2,250.00
Federal income tax withheld: $648.00
Social Security tax withheld: $1,260.39
Medicare tax withheld: $294.77
State income tax withheld $1,100.50
Ashton K. Sutter
3664 Fairfield Street
Washburn, ME 04786
SSN: 490-55-0293
Total 2023 wages: $45,908.34
401(k) contribution: $2,754.50
Section 125 contribution: $1,750.00
Federal income tax withheld: $3,288.00
Social Security tax withheld: $2,737.82
Medicare tax withheld: $640.30
State income tax withheld $2,401.42
(Source: Internal Revenue Service)
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 337 06/09/23 05:48 pm
Chapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning   337
P6-11A.
LO 6-3
Using the information from P6-10A for Leda, Inc., completed Form W-3 
must accompany the company’s W-2 forms. Leda, Inc., is a 941 payer and 
is a private, for-profit company. Kieran Leda is the owner; the phone num￾ber is 207-555-1212; no email address to disclose; the fax number is 207-
555-9898. No third-party sick pay was applied for 2023. The form was 
signed on January 19, 2024.
(Source: Internal Revenue Service)
P6-12A.
LO 6-4, 6-6
Park Mischner owns Old Times Buttons, which employs 20 people. Park 
wants to perform a benefits analysis report for one of the employees, 
Avery Bower, for the year. Avery’s benefits package is as follows:
Annual salary: $35,650
401(k) contribution: 6 percent of annual salary. The company match is 
75 percent of the employee’s contribution up to 4 percent.
Medical insurance deduction: $230 per month
Dental insurance: $15 per month
Complete the following Benefits Analysis Report for Avery Bower for 
the year. Do not include the FUTA and SUTA taxes. (Round your final 
answers to two decimal places.)
Final PDF to printer338   Chapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 338 06/09/23 05:48 pm
Yearly Benefit Costs Company Cost Avery’s Cost
Medical insurance $7,200 $
Dental insurance   1,000 $
Life insurance    200   –0–
AD&D  50  –0–
Short-term disability  500  –0–
Long-term disability  250  –0–
401(k) $          $
Social Security $          $
Medicare $          $
Tuition reimbursement  5,200  –0–
Total yearly benefit costs $          $
Avery’s annual salary $         
Total yearly benefit costs $         
The total value of Avery’s compensation $        
P6-13A.
LO 6-4, 6-5
Snow Mountain Equipment has 24 employees distributed among the fol￾lowing departments:
Sales: 5 Factory: 12 Administration: 7
The total annual payroll for Snow Mountain Equipment is $846,000.
Compute the labor distribution based on an equal distribution among the 
departments.
Sales: _____
Factory: _____
Administration: _____
P6-14A.
LO 6-4, 6-5
For Snow Mountain Equipment in P6-13A, compute the labor distribution 
based on the number of employees per department:
Sales: _____
Factory: _____
Administration: _____
P6-15A.
LO 6-1, 6-4
Small Orange Fine Foods is a specialty grocery store. The employees are 
classified according to job titles for workers’ compensation insurance pre￾mium computation purposes.
a. Based on the payroll estimates as of January 1, what is the total esti￾mated workers’ compensation premium for 20XX?
Employee 
Classification
Rate per $100 
of Payroll
Estimated Payroll 
for 20XX
Workers’ Compensation 
Premium
Grocery Clerk $0.75 $192,500
Shelf Stocker    1.90    212,160
Stock Handler    2.40    237,120
Total Premium =
b. The actual payroll for 20XX follows. What is the workers’ compensation 
premium based on the actual payroll?
Employee 
Classification
Rate per $100 
of Payroll
Actual Payroll for 
20XX
Workers’ Compensation 
Premium
Grocery Clerk $0.75 $196,588
Shelf Stocker    1.90   215,220
Stock Handler    2.40   242,574
Total Premium =
c. What is the difference between the actual and the estimated premiums? 
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 339 06/09/23 05:48 pm
Chapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning   339
Exercises Set B
E6-1B.
LO 6-1
Of the following taxes, which one(s) is/are examples of mandatory and vol￾untary employee deductions? (Select all that apply.)
a. Social Security tax
b. Employee federal income tax
c. FUTA
d. 401(k) contributions
E6-2B.
LO 6-1
Which of the following is/are true about FUTA obligations? (Select all that apply.)
a. FUTA is an employer-only tax.
b. FUTA is subject to a 5.4 percent reduction based on employer and state 
factors.
c. FUTA is subject to a $20,000 wage base per employee.
d. FUTA applies to all companies.
E6-3B.
LO 6-1
Of the IRS-stipulated lookback periods, which one(s) is/are the most com￾monly used? (Select all that apply.)
a. Monthly
b. Semiweekly
c. Next business day
d. Annually
E6-4B.
LO 6-2
The Putney Youth Theater has annual payroll taxes of $3,564 during the 
most recent lookback period. Which payroll deposit frequency will the 
company have, based on that lookback period?
a. Quarterly
b. Monthly
c. Semiweekly
d. Annually
E6-5B.
LO 6-3
Shay Kinderton is a new payroll accountant with Sal’s Diamond Mart, Inc., 
in New York, NY. The company had a payroll tax liability of $49,580 during 
the most recent lookback period. For the quarter ending September 30, 
2023, which federal form should be filed to remit payroll taxes? (Select all 
that apply.)
a. Form 940
b. Form W-2
c. Form SS-8
d. Form 941
E6-6B.
LO 6-3
Which of the following is a form that must accompany all Forms W-2 sub￾mitted to the Social Security Administration?
a. Form 941
b. Form 940
c. Form W-3
d. Form W-4
E6-7B.
LO 6-4
What are the penalties associated with the lack of reporting and remitting 
payroll taxes? (Select all that apply.)
a. Failure to report
b. Failure to file
c. Failure to deposit
d. Failure to remit
E6-8B.
LO 6-4
Rory Briggs is the accounting supervisor for Cheeky Cat Furnishings, which 
has chosen to maintain its payroll on an in-house basis. For this purpose, 
they have hired new accounting clerks. Which of the following are the pay￾roll responsibilities of Cheeky Cat Furnishings? (Select all that apply.)
a. Timely remittance of payroll taxes
b. Remittance of voluntary deductions
c. Accountability to employees and governmental agencies
d. Publication of salary data in company-wide publications
Final PDF to printer340   Chapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 340 06/09/23 05:48 pm
E6-9B.
LO 6-5
Which of the following represents the difference between the benefit anal￾ysis report and the annual total compensation report? (Select all that apply.)
a. The benefit analysis report is designed for review by company 
managers.
b. The annual total compensation report’s intended audience is 
employees.
c. The benefit analysis report reflects actual benefit costs, and the annual 
total compensation report includes salary data.
d. The reports are maintained as public records.
E6-10B.
LO 6-5
Which of the following represents the purpose(s) of the labor distribution 
report? (Select all that apply.)
a. Accurate payroll cost allocation among departments
b. Explanation of individual employee costs
c. Evaluation of labor planning efforts
d. Determination of departmental performance
E6-11B.
LO 6-1, 6-4
Sunny Day Flooring has employees in its manufacturing, sales, and admin￾istrative departments. Which department will have the highest rate for its 
workers’ compensation insurance?
a. Manufacturing
b. Sales
c. Administrative
d. All departments will have the same rate.
P6-1B.
LO 6-1
Campbell Whitman works for Schaum, Whitney, & Matte, LLP, in Washington, 
DC, which pays employees on a biweekly basis. Campbell’s annual salary is 
$170,000. The company began operations in 2023. Calculate the following:
Pay Period 
End
Prior YTD 
Earnings
Social Security 
Taxable Wages
Medicare Taxable 
Wages
Employer Share 
Social Security Tax
Employer Share 
Medicare Tax
September 22
December 29
Problems Set B
P6-2B.
LO 6-1, 6-3
Mi Casa Restaurants of Las Cruces, New Mexico, has the following employ￾ees as of December 31. The SUTA rate for Mi Casa is 4.3 percent and 
the cap is $30,100 per employee. Compute the FUTA and SUTA taxes for 
each employee.
Employee Name Annual Taxable Wages
A. Shelby $48,120
M. Gomez   35,975
C. Wardly   22,350
E. Burgess   40,950
S. Black   32,295
Employee FUTA Due SUTA Due
A. Shelby
M. Gomez
C. Wardly
E. Burgess
S. Black
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 341 08/08/23 09:57 am
Chapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning   341
P6-3B.
LO 6-1, 6-2,
6-3
Deep Mouse Designs has 22 employees within Denver City and County. 
The employees earned $13.65 per hour and worked 160 hours each during 
the month. The employer must remit $4.00 per month per employee who 
earns more than $500 per month. Additionally, employees who earn more 
than $500 per month must have $5.75 withheld from their pay. What are the 
employee and company Occupational Privilege Taxes for these employees?
Employee: _____
Employer: _____
P6-4B.
LO 6-1, 6-2,
6-3
Journey Clark earned $55,875 in 2023 for Weather Gurus in Concord, 
New Hampshire. Weather Gurus’ SUTA rate is 2.3 percent and has a wage 
base of $14,000 during 2023. The FUTA rate is 0.6 percent. Compute 
Weather Gurus’ share of Journey’s annual salary.
Social Security tax:_____
Medicare tax:_____
FUTA tax:_____
SUTA tax:_____
P6-5B.
LO 6-2, 6-3
Storm Murphy is the owner of Stormy Banana Films in West Hollywood, 
California. Stormy Banana Films had 15 employees with total annual wages 
of $214,750 in 2023 (no one exceeded the Medicare tax surcharge or 
Social Security cap). The FUTA rate for California in 2023 is 0.6 percent. 
Stormy Banana Films has a SUTA rate of 3.2 percent for 2023 with a wage 
base of $7,000. Compute the following employer taxes:
Social Security tax:_____
Medicare tax:_____
FUTA tax:_____
SUTA tax:_____
P6-6B.
LO 6-1
Peaceful Cat Pet Foods is a new business owned by Wren Hammond. The 
first year of operations commenced on January 1, 2023. What schedule 
depositor would the company be for the first year of operations? Why?
P6-7B.
LO 6-3
Using the information from P6-6B, complete the following form 941 for the 
first quarter of 2023. The form was signed by the owner on April 11, 2023.
EIN: 98-0050036
Address: 1021 Old Plainfield Road, Salina, California, 95670
Phone: 707-555-0303
Number of employees: 8
Wages, tips, and other compensation paid during the first quarter of 2023: 
$302,374
Social Security taxable wages: $280,000
Medicare taxable wages: $280,000
Income tax withheld: $51,000
Monthly tax liability:
January $31,280.00
February   31,280.00
March   31,280.00
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY342   Chapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 342 06/09/23 05:48 pm
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 343 06/09/23 05:48 pm
Chapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning   343
Final PDF to printer344   Chapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 344 06/09/23 05:48 pm
(Source: Internal Revenue Service)
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 345 06/09/23 05:48 pm
Chapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning   345
P6-8B.
LO 6-3
Using the information from P6-6B and P6-7B for Peaceful Cat Pet Foods, 
complete the following State of California Form DE-9, Quarterly Contribution 
Return and Report of Wages. The California employer account number is 
989-8877-1. Use 5.4 percent as the UI rate, 0.1 percent as the ETT rate, 
and 0.9 percent as the SDI rate. California UI and ETT wage caps are 
$7,000, while the SDI cap is $153,164 per employee. No employee has 
reached the SDI limit. All employees have worked with the company since 
January 1. The California PIT taxes withheld for the quarter are $40,000. 
The company has deposited no taxes for the quarter. Form DE-9 was com￾pleted and signed on April 11, 2023, with a due date of April 15, 2023.
P6-9B.
LO 6-3
Jealous Frog Toys paid its nine employees a total of $432,586.40 in 
2022. All employees have worked there for the full calendar year and 
reached the FUTA wage base during the first quarter. Taxes were depos￾ited on time. The employer contributed $12,470 to retirement plans dur￾ing the year (exempt from the FUTA). Jealous Frog Toys is located at 783 
Morehead Street, Fargo, ND, 68383, phone number 701-555-3432. The 
owner is Kyle Jackson, and the EIN is 73-4029848. Complete Form 940. 
The form was signed and submitted on January 6, 2023.
P6-10B.
LO 6-3
Reese Castor, the owner of Castor Corporation, is located at 1310 Garrick 
Way, Sun Valley, Arizona, 86029, phone number is 928-555-8842. The fed￾eral EIN is 20-1948348, and the state employer identification number is 9040-
2038-1. Prepare the Form W-2 for each of the following employees of Castor 
Corporation as of December 31, 2023. The same deductions are allowed for 
state income tax as for federal. The form was submitted on January 12, 2024.
Montana M. Parsons
5834 Moon Drive
Sun Valley, AZ 86029
SSN: 578-33-3049
Total 2023 wages: $47,203.78
401(k) contribution: $2,832.23
Section 125 contribution: $1,400.00
Federal income tax withheld: $1,794.00
Social Security tax withheld: $2,839.83
Medicare tax withheld: $664.15
State income tax withheld: $1,435.25
Taylen Y. Maddox
32 Second Street
Holbrook, AZ 86025
SSN: 734-00-1938
Tuition in excess of $5,250: $750
(Include in boxes 1, 3, 5, 16)
Total 2023 wages: $37,499.02
401(k) contribution: $1,124.97
Section 125 contribution: $500.00
Federal income tax withheld: $1,612.00
Social Security tax withheld: $2,340.44
Medicare tax withheld: $547.36
State income tax withheld: $1,223.24
Sky J. Featherstone
7784 Painted Desert Road
Sun Valley, AZ 86029
SSN: 290-03-4992
Total 2023 wages: $41,904.29
401(k) contribution: $1,885.69
Federal income tax withheld: $3,146.00
Social Security tax withheld: $2,598.07
Medicare tax withheld: $607.61
State income tax withheld: $1,336.62
Dakota L. Clearwater
7384 Ridge Road
Woodruff, AZ 85942
SSN: 994-20-4837
Total 2023 wages: $29,874.37
401(k) contribution: $597.49
Section 125 contribution: $250.00
Federal income tax withheld: $390.00
Social Security tax withheld: $1,836.71
Medicare tax withheld: $429.55
State income tax withheld: $969.50
Woods L. Millen
229 Second Street #4A
Holbrook, AZ 86025
SSN: 477-30-2234
Total 2023 wages: $15,889.04
Federal income tax withheld: $494.00
Social Security tax withheld: $985.12
Medicare tax withheld: $230.39
State income tax withheld: $411.53
P6-11B.
LO 6-3
Using the information from P6-10B for Castor Corporation, complete Form 
W-3, which must accompany the company’s Form W-2s. Castor Corporation 
is a 941 payer and is a private, for-profit company. No third-party sick pay was 
applied for 2023. The W-3 was signed and submitted on January 12, 2024.
Final PDF to printer346   Chapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 346 06/09/23 05:48 pm
(Source: State of California)
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 347 06/09/23 05:48 pm
Chapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning   347
Final PDF to printer348   Chapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 348 06/09/23 05:48 pm
(Source: Internal Revenue Service)
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 349 06/09/23 05:48 pm
Chapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning   349
(Source: Internal Revenue Service)
(Source: Internal Revenue Service) 
Final PDF to printer350   Chapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 350 06/09/23 05:48 pm
P6-12B.
LO 6-5, 6-6
Oak Cove Resorts has eight employees. The owner wants to perform 
a benefit analysis report for the year for one of its employees, Tristan 
Cassidy. Tristan’s benefits package is as follows:
Annual salary: $42,950
401(k) contribution: 8 percent of annual salary; the company match is half 
of the employee’s contribution, up to 5 percent of the employee’s annual 
salary.
Medical insurance deduction: $340 per month
Dental insurance: $21 per month
Complete the following Benefits Analysis Report for Tristan Cassidy for 
2023.
Yearly Benefit Costs Company Cost Tristan’s Cost
Medical insurance $9,600 $
Dental insurance 800 $
Life insurance 1,200 -0-
AD&D 125 -0-
Short-term disability 500 -0-
Long-term disability 250 -0-
401(k) $ $
Social Security $ $
Medicare $ $
Tuition reimbursement $2,500 -0-
Total yearly benefit costs $
Tristan’s annual salary $
Total value of Tristan’s compensation $
P6-13B.
LO 6-4, 6-5
Superfan Sportsgear has 30 employees distributed among the following 
departments:
Sales: 7 Factory: 13 Administration: 10
The total annual payroll for Superfan Sportsgear is $975,580.
Compute the labor distribution based on the equal distribution among the 
departments.
Sales: _____
Factory: _____
Administration: _____
P6-14B.
LO 6-4, 6-5
For Superfan Sportsgear in P6-13B, compute the labor distribution based 
on the number of employees per department:
Sales: _____
Factory: _____
Administration: _____
P6-15B.
LO 6-1, 6-4
At Fox Furniture, employees are classified according to the job title for 
workers’ compensation insurance premium computation purposes.
a. Based on the following payroll estimates as of January 1, what is the 
estimated workers’ compensation insurance premium for the year 
2023?
Employee 
Classification
Rate per $100 
of Payroll
Estimated Payroll 
for 2023
Workers’ Compensation
Premium
Sales Associate $0.55 $213,680
Loader 2.15 155,240
Furniture Builder 2.95 102,590
Total Premium =
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 351 06/09/23 05:48 pm
Chapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning   351
Employee 
Classification
Rate per $100 
of Payroll
Actual Payroll 
for 2023
Workers’ Compensation 
Premium
Sales Associate $0.55 $228,944
Loader 2.15 163,743
Furniture Builder 2.95 105,389
Total Premium =
Critical Thinking
6-1. Burton Book Memorabilia is a semiweekly depositor. Following a special project’s 
success, Keller Burton, the owner, pays each of the 250 employees a $2,000 bonus 
on August 11, 2023. Assume a 22 percent income tax rate. When will Keller need to 
deposit the payroll taxes?
6-2. Kai is the president of Zebra Antiques. An employee, Reese Francis, is due a raise. 
Reese’s current benefit analysis is as follows:
Yearly Benefit Costs
Company Cost 
(Current)
Employee 
Cost (Current)
Medical insurance $ 8,000.00 $ 1,200
Dental insurance 120.00 120
Life insurance 300.00 -0-
AD&D 150.00 -0-
Short-term disability 60.00 -0-
Long-term disability 30.00 -0-
401(k) 750.00  1,500
Social Security 3,018.16 3,018.16
Medicare 705.86 705.86
Tuition reimbursement   2,000.00 -0-
Total yearly benefit costs (employer) 15,134.02
Employee’s annual salary  50,000.00
The total value of employee’s compensation $65,134.02
Yearly Benefit Costs Company Cost (New) Employee Cost (New)
Medical insurance $ $
Dental insurance $ $
Life insurance $300 -0-
AD&D $150 -0-
Short-term disability $60 -0-
Long-term disability $30 -0-
401(k) $ $
Social Security $ $
Medicare $ $
Tuition reimbursement $2,000 -0-
Total yearly benefit costs (employer) $
Dwight’s annual salary $
The total value of the employee’s compensation $
Compute the benefit analysis assuming:
• 3 percent increase in pay.
• Reese will increase the 401(k) contribution to 8 percent with a company match of 50 
percent up to a 3 percent contribution by the employer.
• 15 percent increase in medical and dental insurance premiums.
b. The actual payroll for 2023 is listed below. What is the workers’ compensation pre￾mium based on the actual payroll?
c. What is the difference between the actual and the estimated premiums? 
     
Final PDF to printerConfirming Pages
352   Chapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 352 08/25/23 07:43 am
© McGraw Hill: DRAFT REVIEW COPY – NOT FOR PUBLICATION OR DISTRIBUTION
Number of employees 8
Gross quarterly wages (exclusive of fringe benefits) $38,720.96
Federal income tax withheld 469.00
401(k) contributions 1,514.27
Section 125 withheld 4,080.00
Gym membership (add to all taxable wages, not 
included above)
90.00
Month 1 Deposit –0–
Month 2 Deposit 2,691.49
Month 3 Deposit 3,091.35
In the Real World: Scenario for Discussion
In Shavertown, Pennsylvania, the Wilkes-Barre Bookkeeping LLC owner was indicted for 
embezzling over $376,225 of his clients’ payroll tax remittances between 2010 and 2016 
and for lying to clients about his actions. Additionally, he embezzled nearly $70,000 from 
a nonprofit for which he was the treasurer. He was sentenced to 38 months in prison and 
ordered to pay restitution totaling nearly $500,000. Do you think this was a fair sentence? 
Why or why not?
Internet Activities
6-1. Would you like to know more about the Employment Cost Index? Check out the vid￾eos from the Bureau of Labor Statistics: www.bls.gov/eci/videos.htm
6-2. Go to https://www.firstnonprofit.com/suta-state-unemployment-tax-2023-cost-changes 
and check out the unemployment tax rates for your state.
6-3. Want to know more about the concepts in this chapter? Go to one or more of the 
following sites. What are two or three things you notice about the information on the 
site?
www.smallbusiness.chron.com/example-employee-compensation-plan-10068.xhtml
http://yourbusiness.azcentral.com/labor-cost-distribution-report-26061.xhtml www.
irs.gov/publications/p80/ar02.xhtml
6-4. Check out the employer payroll tax estimation tool at https://gusto.com/tools/
employer-tax-calculator
6-5. Would you like to explore specific topics about being an employer in more depth? 
Check out https://www.employer.gov/
Continuing Payroll Project: Prevosti Farms and Sugarhouse
The first-quarter tax return needs to be filed for Prevosti Farms and Sugarhouse by April 
30, 2023. For the taxes, assume the second February payroll amounts were duplicated 
for the March 10 and March 24 payroll periods, and the new benefit elections went into 
effect as planned (see Chapter 4). The form was completed and signed on April 11, 2023.
Exempt
Benefit Information Federal FICA
Health insurance Yes Yes
Life insurance Yes Yes
Long-term care Yes Yes
FSA Yes Yes
401(k) Yes No
Gym No No
Complete Form 941 for Prevosti Farms and Sugarhouse. Prevosti Farms and Sugarhouse 
was assigned EIN 22-6654454.
Owner’s name: Toni Prevosti Address: 820 Westminster Road, Bridgewater, VT 05520 
Phone: 802-555-3456
ISTUDYlan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 353 06/09/23 05:48 pm
Chapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning   353
Final PDF to printer354   Chapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 354 06/09/23 05:48 pm
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 355 06/09/23 05:48 pm
Chapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning   355
Final PDF to printer356   Chapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 356 06/09/23 05:48 pm
(Source: Internal Revenue Service)
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 357 06/09/23 05:48 pm
Chapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning   357
Answers to Stop & Check Exercises
FUTA, SUTA, and Workers’ Compensation
1. FUTA: $7,000 × 29 × 0.006 = $  1,218.00
$2,575 × 0.006     15.45
FUTA liability $  1,233.45
SUTA: $30,100 × 25 × 0.042 = $31,605.00
$60,090 × 0.042
(under the cap: 15,800 + 7,800 + 11,115 + 22,800 + 2,575)
=    2,523.78
SUTA liability $34,128.78
Total combined FUTA/SUTA liability = $1,218.00 + 34,128.78 = $35,362.23
2. FUTA: $7,000 × 10 × 0.006 = 420.00
($5,500 + 6,800) × 0.006 =     73.80
Total FUTA liability $     493.80
SUTA: $12,000 × 8 × 0.0326 = $  3,129.60
$33,250 × 0.0326
(under the cap: 5,500 + 6,800 + 11,100 + 9,850)
=    1,083.95
Total SUTA liability $  4,213.55
Total FUTA and SUTA = $  4,707.35
3. Job Classification Premium per $100 of Payroll Estimated Payroll Premium Due
Clerical Workers $0.45 $104,550 $470.48
Jump Instructors   3.75   215,690   8,088.38
$8,558.86
Reporting Periods
1. Monthly.
2. July 15.
3. Monday, the next business day.
Tax Forms
1. $2,414.48 = $8,462.96 – 2,980.24 – 3,068.24.
2. $105,000 (15 employees × $7,000).
3. $630.00 ($105,000 (from problem 2) × 0.006 FUTA rate).
4. $116,195 = $25,650 + 30,025 + 28,550 + 31,970.
Payroll-Related Business Expenses
1. Failure to file and failure to deposit penalties.
2. Payroll expenses relate to the company’s profitability, worker productivity analyses, 
employee retention, and business competitiveness.
Labor Distribution Report
1. a. $300,000/10 employees = $30,000 per employee; office, $90,000; agricultural, 
$150,000; drivers, $60,000.
b. Each department would be allocated $100,000 of the payroll.
2. Student answers may vary but should include: Department classification is the most 
appropriate because it matches the costs more closely to each department.
Final PDF to printer358   Chapter 6  Employer Payroll Taxes and Labor Planning
lan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 358 06/09/23 05:48 pm
Benefit Analysis Report
1. Student answers may vary but should include: One of the purposes of compiling a 
benefit analysis report is to represent graphically all of the variables that make up an 
employee’s compensation package. The benefit analysis report provides managers 
and supervisors with a budgetary tool to understand the full cost of hiring or dismiss￾ing employees. Additionally, the benefit analysis allows companies to compare ben￾efits and employee costs to geographic or industry standards.
2. The benefit analysis report is an internal report for the company’s management, and 
the annual total compensation report is meant to be distributed to the employee.
Dollar sign made from binary numbers: Ralf Hiemisch/Getty Images
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch06_278-359.indd 359 06/09/23 05:48 pm
Final PDF to printer360
lan43463_ch07_360-403.indd 360 06/12/23 04:56 pm
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying Chapter 7, you should be able to:
LO 7-1 Connect the Payroll Register to the Employees’ Earnings Records
LO 7-2 Describe Financial Accounting Concepts
LO 7-3 Complete Payroll-Related General Journal Entries
LO 7-4 Generate Payroll-Related General Ledger Entries
This chapter will integrate the payroll register with the employees’ earnings 
records and financial statements. In previous chapters, we have examined 
the effects of payroll on employees, employers, and governmental agen￾cies. This chapter links Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP)
with payroll elements we have explored in Chapters 1–6. We will discuss 
the debits and credits associated with payroll accrual and payment. For 
this chapter, we will use the accrual basis of accounting, which means that 
transactions are recognized when they take place.
Accounting entries are the transactions that place the payroll amounts into 
the correct ledger accounts. In automated systems, the software is designed 
to code each payroll item automatically to the correct General Ledger account. 
However, manual entries are necessary for the payroll accountant to record 
accurate expenses and period-end accruals in the correct month. This is the final 
step of the payroll cycle for each pay period and is the most important piece of 
the process from an accounting perspective. The final piece of this chapter will 
include examining how payroll costs affect a company’s financial reports.
The Payroll Register, 
Employees’ Earnings 
Records, and Accounting 
System Entries
7
Chapter Seven
Final PDF to printerChapter 7  The Payroll Register, Employees’ Earnings Records, and Accounting System Entries   361
lan43463_ch07_360-403.indd 361 06/12/23 04:56 pm
GaudiLab/Shutterstock
The Accountant Shortage Caused by a Perfect 
Storm of Events
There is a shortage of accountants in the United States. The COVID-19 pandemic exac￾erbated the problem with remote working, the Great Resignation, and losses due to the 
disease. The shift of the profession to the use of technology and artificial intelligence (AI) 
affected accountants by causing stress as accountants learned how to use technology in 
ways not previously experienced. The stress caused by all these factors led to burnout 
among accountants, many of whom have left the profession.
Organizations such as the Institute of Management Accountants (IMA), the American 
Institute of Certified Professional Accountants (AICPA), and the American Accounting 
Association (AAA) are keenly aware of this trifecta of issues and is working to attract students 
to the profession. Although the profession may not be perceived as “cool” by outsiders and 
starting salaries are a little lower than those of other white-collar professions, organizations 
within the industry are working to address the issues and make the profession more attractive.
The simple fact is this: Accountants are needed by businesses, movie franchises, and 
people seeking assistance with their income tax filings. The profession is still growing, 
and professional organizations and postsecondary institutions are working to increase the 
number of students preparing to be accountants.
(Sources: AICPA; Going Concern; The CPA Journal)
LO 7-5 Describe Payroll Effects on the Accounting System
LO 7-6 Explain Payroll Entries in Accounting Reports
Accurate reporting of payroll costs in the financial statements is a 
key part of GAAP compliance and decision-making. In Chapter 7, 
we will examine the accounting system entries for payroll costs, the 
effect on the company’s financial reports, and how those reports 
influence managerial decisions.
Final PDF to printer362   Chapter 7  The Payroll Register, Employees’ Earnings Records, and Accounting System Entries
lan43463_ch07_360-403.indd 362 06/12/23 04:56 pm
FIGURE 7-1
Employee Earnings Record 
EMPLOYEE EARNING RECORD
Hire Date
Date of Birth
Position
Filing Status
Pay Rate
Period
Ended
Hrs
Worked Reg Pay OT Pay Holiday Comm Gross Pay Sect 125 401(k)
Taxable
Pay for
Federal 
W/H
Taxable
Pay for
FICA
Pay for
Federal
W/H
Taxable
Pay for
FICA
Fed Inc.
Tax
Social Sec.
Tax Medicare
Total 
Deduc Net Pay
YTD Net
Pay
YTD
Gross
Pay
Current
Taxable
for FUTA
Current
Taxable
for SUTA
Step 4c W-4 Info
Hr/Wk/Mo/Yr
SOCIAL SECURITY 
NUMBER
Step 4a W-4 Info
Step 4b W-4 Info
Dependent child <17
Dependent other
NAME
ADDRESS
CITY/STATE/ZIP
TELEPHONE
LO 7-1 Connect the Payroll Register to the Employees’ 
Earnings Records
In previous chapters, we completed the payroll register, which is the pri￾mary tool used to compute payroll amounts. The payroll register has a 
related set of documents called employee earnings records. Information 
from the payroll register is used to complete payroll accounting entries in 
the General Journal.
Employee earnings records form the link between the accounting 
and the human resource departments and connect closely with the pay￾roll register. The information contained within each row of the payroll 
register is transferred to the employee’s earnings record, as shown in 
Figure 7-1.
The employee earnings record is the master document accountants use to track employees’ 
filing status, deductions (mandatory, voluntary, and court-mandated), and year-to-date earn￾ings. Remember, Social Security, FUTA, and SUTA taxes have annual earnings limits for 
each employee. Accountants update the employees’ earnings records during each pay period 
to track all pay and tax deductions. Any employee changes, including pay rate and filing sta￾tus, should be annotated in the earnings records as soon as possible to ensure the accuracy of 
the payroll.
Andrey_Popov/Shutterstock
Final PDF to printerChapter 7  The Payroll Register, Employees’ Earnings Records, and Accounting System Entries   363
lan43463_ch07_360-403.indd 363 06/12/23 04:56 pm
EXAMPLE: EMPLOYEE EARNINGS RECORD, INDIVIDUAL EMPLOYEE
Using Emerson Quinn’s example at Granite Hill Products, we will enter the data into the 
employee earnings record. Emerson is paid semimonthly.
EMPLOYEE EARNING RECORD
Hire Date
Date of Birth
Position
Filing Status
Pay Rate
Period
Ended
Reg
Hours 
Worked
Regular
Pay
OT Hours
Worked OT Pay Gross Pay 401(k) Section 125
Taxable
Pay for
Federal
Taxable
Pay for
FICA
8/31/20xx 2,500.00 2,500.00 150.00 225.00 2,125.00 2,275.00
Taxable 
Pay for 
Federal
Taxable 
Pay for 
FICA
Fed Inc. 
Tax
Social 
Sec. Tax Medicare
State 
Inc. Tax Net Pay
YTD Net 
Pay
YTD Gross 
Pay YTD FUTA
2,125.00 2,275.00 - 141.05 32.99 82.88 1,868.09 16,085.00 30,000.00 7,000.00
Address 3450 Pine Street 12/15/19XX Dependent other 1
Name Emerson Quinn 3/1/20XX Dependent child <17 2
Telephone 302-555-3948 Married/Joint Step 4b W-4 Info
City/State/Zip Laurel, DE 19956 Manager none
none
none
Step 4a W-4 Info
Social Security 
Number Step 4c W-4 Info 392-20-1030 $2,500 semimonthly
Note how the following employee information is reflected in the employee earnings record:
• Address
• Telephone number
• Social Security number
• Amount paid per month
• Filing status
• Pay basis
• Hire date
• Birthdate
• Position
• Pay rate
• Pay period date
• Year-to-date net pay
• Year-to-date gross pay
These items are common to most employee earnings records because of the connec￾tion between payroll and human resources. The information contained in the employee 
earnings record is used as the basis for the employee’s Form W-2 and other company 
tax and benefits reporting.
The Employees’ Earnings Records and Periodic Tax Reports
Period totals are also included in the earnings record. These totals facilitate the preparation 
of the quarterly and annual reports. Like any payroll record, the earnings records should be 
retained and destroyed simultaneously with other accounting records. Earnings records are 
typically included as supporting documents for internal copies of quarterly filings of Form 941 
and state and local tax returns (where applicable). During a payroll audit, the documentation 
attached to the tax returns verifies the reports’ information. A secondary use is that, in the event 
of a computer data failure, documents attached to payroll records can be used to re-create files.
Final PDF to printer364   Chapter 7  The Payroll Register, Employees’ Earnings Records, and Accounting System Entries
lan43463_ch07_360-403.indd 364 06/12/23 04:56 pm
In the village of Bellows Falls, Vermont, employees of the Windham Northeast 
Supervisory Union, the school district for the area, experienced payroll problems for 
several months. These problems involved overpayment or underpayment of earn￾ings, missing or delayed deposits of retirement deductions, and other anomalies. The 
Supervisory Union attributed the problem to new payroll software with which employ￾ees were undertrained before use. An audit later found that the finance director com￾mitted material financial misstatement.
(Sources: Brattleboro Reformer; VTDigger)
LO 7-2 Describe Financial Accounting 
Concepts
Now that we have explored computing and reporting payroll data prin￾ciples, it is time to connect the information to financial accounting con￾cepts. In financial accounting, the fundamental accounting equation is 
Assets = Liabilities + Owners’ Equity.
Employees’ Earnings Register
&Check Stop 
1. How do the employees’ earnings records relate to the payroll register?
2. Which of the following fields exist in both the payroll register and the 
employees’ earnings records?
a. Name
b. Pay rate
c. Job title
d. Net pay
e. Address
3. What reports and forms use information from the employees’ earnings 
records?
EXAMPLE: FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING CATEGORIES
Assets: Cash or other items used in the business’s operation and amounts owed to the 
business by customers.
Liabilities: Amounts owed by the business to other people or companies.
Owners’ equity: The net investment that the owner has in the business, including earn￾ings kept in the business.
kenchiro168/Shutterstock
Financial business transactions, such as the movement of cash used in paying employees 
and remitting amounts to third parties, are tracked using the accounting system. A fundamen￾tal concept in accounting involves the accounting equation, which must remain in balance at 
all times. As such, transactions will either increase an account (or multiple accounts), decrease 
an account (or multiple accounts), or a combination thereof. To understand the concept of 
equation balance, T-accounts are the first step in understanding the classification process that 
is part of transaction analysis.
Final PDF to printerChapter 7  The Payroll Register, Employees’ Earnings Records, and Accounting System Entries   365
lan43463_ch07_360-403.indd 365 06/12/23 04:56 pm
EXAMPLE: TRANSACTION ANALYSIS USING T-ACCOUNTS
Cassian Rossman, the owner of Rossman Designs, paid an independent contractor 
$4,000 for work done during the course of business on August 1, 2023. Accountants 
classify the transaction into two accounts: Assets and owners’ equity. The cash account 
(asset) would decrease because the money was paid from the business. Cassian’s 
expenses would increase because the company paid a contractor, which appears as 
an expense of the company and decreases the amount of owner’s equity Cassian has 
in the business. Using the T-account approach, the transaction would look like this:
Debits and Credits
If accountants were to maintain T-accounts for all of a business’s transactions, their work 
would be tedious and vulnerable to many errors. To simplify the addition and subtraction 
involved, accountants use the terms debit (abbreviated Dr.) and credit (abbreviated Cr.) to 
explain the transaction. In accounting parlance, debit means “the left side of the T-account,” 
and credit means “the right side of the T-account.” No connotation exists about good or bad 
with the use of these terms in accounting.
EXAMPLE: DEBIT AND CREDIT RULES
Debits Increase: Credits Increase:
Expenses Liabilities
Assets Equity (Capital)
Dividends Revenue
The General Journal
To simplify using T-accounts, accountants use a journal (called the General Journal) to 
record daily financial transactions. The transactions in the General Journal are recorded in 
chronological order. The General Journal is essentially one big T-account, has columns to 
record the debits and credits involved in each transaction, and contains a chronologically 
ordered list of transactions. Complementing the General Journal is the General Ledger, in 
which all journal transactions are recorded chronologically in their specific accounts.
In the transaction above, the transaction would appear in the General Journal as follows:
Contractor Expense
Dr. Cr.
4,000.00
Cash
Dr. Cr.
4,000.00
EXAMPLE: TRANSACTION IN THE GENERAL JOURNAL
Trans. Date
Account Name & 
Description Post Ref Debit Credit
1 8/1/2023 Contractor Expense 501 4,000.00
 Cash 101 4,000.00
  Paid contractor
Final PDF to printer366   Chapter 7  The Payroll Register, Employees’ Earnings Records, and Accounting System Entries
lan43463_ch07_360-403.indd 366 06/12/23 04:56 pm
Despite the increase in accounting software use, the need for payroll accountants 
is growing in importance. Accountants are needed to monitor accuracy in recorded 
transactions and adapt to industry changes, especially the integration of technology 
and the growing use of artificial intelligence. Payroll accountants are particularly in 
demand because of the specific skills involved and the increasing need for complex 
payroll accounting demands.
(Sources: Bloomberg BNA; In the Black)
Note certain accounting conventions present in the journal entry:
∙ The date of the transaction is noted.
∙ The debit part of the transaction is on the first line and is flush left in the column.
∙ The credit part of the transaction is on the second line and is indented slightly.
∙ A brief description of the transaction is on the third line.
∙ Account numbers are annotated in the Post Reference (Post Ref) column.
∙ The post reference in the General Journal is the General Ledger account number.
The General Ledger
Once the transaction has been recorded in the General Journal, the accountant posts the entry 
to corresponding General Ledger accounts. The following table notes that (1) the transaction 
itself is listed, and (2) the balance of each account is adjusted accordingly.
The General Ledger account balances are used to generate the payroll reports discussed 
so far. The elements of the General Ledger and specific posting practices will appear later in 
this chapter.
Financial Accounting Concepts
&Check Stop 
1. What is the fundamental accounting equation?
2. What increases the Wages and Salaries Payable account: a debit or a 
credit?
3. What increases the Wages and Salaries Expense account: a debit or a 
credit?
EXAMPLE: GENERAL LEDGER POSTING
Date Description Post Ref.
Account: 101 – Cash
Debit Credit Balance
8/1/2023 Paid contractor J1 4,000.00 4,000.00
Date Description Post Ref.
Account: 501 – Contractor Expense
Debit Credit Balance
8/1/2023 Paid contractor J1 4,000.00 4,000.00
Final PDF to printerChapter 7  The Payroll Register, Employees’ Earnings Records, and Accounting System Entries   367
lan43463_ch07_360-403.indd 367 06/12/23 04:56 pm
LO 7-3 Complete Payroll-Related General 
Journal Entries
Recording the specific General Journal entries that correspond to payroll 
activities is the next step in the process. General Journal entries are the 
original entry point for events to be recorded within the accounting sys￾tem. A sample period payroll for L&L Grain follows. Cravetiger/Getty Images
The payroll register is the tool used by payroll accountants to create pay-related journal 
entries. Notice the General Journal account in the following table and its connection to the 
payroll register. Here’s how it works:
EXAMPLE: L&L GRAIN PAYROLL DATA
L&L Grain pays its employees biweekly and operates on a calendar fiscal year (i.e., the 
year-end is December 31). The payroll accountant for L&L Grain has completed the 
payroll register for the January 27, 2023, payroll. Paychecks will be issued on January 
31. Payroll totals are as follows:
Gross pay: $18,050.00
Federal income tax withheld: $1,500.00
Social Security tax withheld: $1,084.38
Medicare tax withheld: $253.61
State income tax withheld: $577.60
401(k) contributions withheld: $750.00
Health insurance premiums withheld: $560.00
United Way contributions withheld: $180.00
Net pay: $13,144.41
The totals row of the payroll register would appear as follows:
Name
Gross
Earnings
401(k) 
Contributions Insurance
Federal 
W/H
Social
Security 
Tax
Medicare
Tax
State 
W/H
United
Way Net Pay
Check
No.
Totals $18,050.00 $750.00 $560.00 $1,500.00 $1,084.38 $253.61 $577.60 $180.00 $13,144.41
EXAMPLE: PAYROLL REGISTER TO GENERAL JOURNAL ENTRIES
Payroll Register Column General Journal Account L&L Grain Amount
Gross Earnings Salaries and Wages Expense $18,050.00
401(k) Contributions 401(k) Contributions Payable 750.00
Insurance Health Insurance Premiums Payable 560.00
Federal W/H FIT Payable 1,500.00
Social Security Tax Social Security Tax Payable 1,084.38
Medicare Tax Medicare Tax Payable 253.61
State W/H State Income Tax Payable 577.60
United Way United Way Contributions Payable 180.00
Net Pay Salaries and Wages Payable 13,144.41
As the payroll data is transferred from the payroll register to the General Journal, notice 
the following accounting categories:
∙ Account names ending with the word “expense” are classified as Expense accounts (remember 
Debit increases an expense).
Final PDF to printer368   Chapter 7  The Payroll Register, Employees’ Earnings Records, and Accounting System Entries
lan43463_ch07_360-403.indd 368 06/12/23 04:56 pm
The General Journal entry for the employer’s share of the payroll taxes follows. Notice 
that there is only one entry and that it is on the pay period date. Disbursements to tax authori￾ties are often made at a later date.
∙ Account names ending with the word “payable” are classified as Liability accounts (remem￾ber Credit increases a liability).
Employee Pay-Related Journal Entries
The General Journal entry to record the employees’ portion of the payroll and the issuance 
of the checks to employees is in two parts: the pay period end date and the pay disbursement 
date. In the following example, notice how the Salaries and Wages Payable account on the 
pay period date (January 27) relates to the pay disbursement date (January 31).
Employer Payroll-Related Journal Entries
The employer’s share of the payroll is similarly recorded. L&L Grain’s share of the payroll 
expenses follows:
EXAMPLE: L&L GRAIN EMPLOYER PAYROLL TAX OBLIGATIONS DATA
Social Security tax: $1,084.38
Medicare tax: $253.61
FUTA tax: $104.94
SUTA tax: $944.46
EXAMPLE: L&L GRAIN GENERAL JOURNAL PAYROLL ENTRIES—EMPLOYER 
PAYROLL TAX TRANSACTION
Date Description Account Debit Credit
Jan. 27 Payroll Taxes Expense 512 $2,387.39
 Social Security Tax Payable 222 $1,084.38
 Medicare Tax Payable 223 253.61
 FUTA Tax Payable 228 104.94
 SUTA Tax Payable 229 944.46
EXAMPLE: L&L GRAIN GENERAL JOURNAL PAYROLL ENTRIES—
EMPLOYEE PAYROLL TRANSACTION
Date Description Account Debit Credit
Jan. 27 Salaries and Wages Expense 511 $18,050.00
  FIT Payable 221 $  1,500.00
  Social Security Tax Payable 222 1,084.38
  Medicare Tax Payable 223 253.61
  State Income Tax Payable 224 577.60
  401(k) Contributions Payable 225 750.00
  Health Insurance Premiums Payable 226 560.00
  United Way Contributions Payable 227 180.00
  Salaries and Wages Payable 231 13,144.41
Jan. 31 Salaries and Wages Payable 231 13,144.41
  Cash 101 13,144.41
Final PDF to printerChapter 7  The Payroll Register, Employees’ Earnings Records, and Accounting System Entries   369
lan43463_ch07_360-403.indd 369 06/12/23 04:56 pm
Governmental audits in Louisiana found that although the number of employees 
decreased in 2020, payroll costs rose 5 percent. Auditors found the overall decrease 
in employees was due to employee resignation or retirement. The increase in payroll 
costs resulted from civil service wage and salary increases (averaging 16 percent from 
2013 to 2020), additional overtime resulting from natural disasters during the same 
time period, and the increased use of independent contractors.
(Source: Greater Baton Rouge Business Report)
Other Payroll-Related Journal Entries
What about the other deductions that L&L Grain withheld from its employees’ pay? These 
other deductions, including federal and state income tax, 401(k) contributions, health insur￾ance premiums, and United Way contributions, are liabilities of the company. These amounts 
will remain in the liability accounts until L&L Grain remits them, which means sending 
the collected money to the appropriate entity. Upon remittance, the General Journal entries 
will appear as a debit (decrease) to the Liability account and a credit (decrease) to Cash. An 
example of the January 27 payroll’s voluntary deductions, paid to the appropriate companies 
on January 31, follows:
EXAMPLE: L&L GRAIN GENERAL JOURNAL PAYROLL ENTRIES—
VOLUNTARY DEDUCTIONS REMITTANCE
Date Description Account Debit Credit
Jan. 31 401(k) Contributions Payable 225 $750.00
Health Insurance Payable 226 560.00
United Way Contribution Payable 227 180.00
 Cash 101 $1,490.00
Remember, the remittance for governmental taxes has a specific schedule. The General 
Journal entry for the tax remittances would follow the same pattern as the voluntary deduc￾tions: Debit the liability account(s) and credit Cash.
Payroll Accruals and Reversals
A common occurrence is that a payroll period may be split between two months, as will 
be the case for L&L Grain. For example, most of the pay for the end of March will be paid 
on the March 24, 2023, pay date, but the payroll for March 27–31 will be paid on April 4. 
For accounting purposes, the accountant needs to record the payroll’s accrual for March to 
represent the expenses and liabilities incurred during the period accurately, according to the 
matching principle of accounting. Some companies choose to record the period’s expenses by 
adjusting entries and then reverse the entries after starting the next period to prevent confu￾sion in the payroll accounting process.
Employee payroll data for L&L Grain is given below, followed by the related adjusting 
entry for the end of March:
EXAMPLE: L&L GRAIN ADJUSTING ENTRY—EMPLOYEE PAYROLL DATA
Gross pay: $16,245.00
Federal income tax withheld: $1,350.00
Social Security tax withheld: $1,007.19
Medicare tax withheld: $235.55
State income tax withheld: $519.84
Net pay: $13,132.42
Final PDF to printer370   Chapter 7  The Payroll Register, Employees’ Earnings Records, and Accounting System Entries
lan43463_ch07_360-403.indd 370 06/12/23 04:56 pm
The adjusting entry for March 31, 2023, would be as follows:
EXAMPLE: L&L GRAIN GENERAL JOURNAL—EMPLOYEE DATA 
ADJUSTING ENTRIES
Date Description Account Debit Credit
Mar. 31 Salaries and Wages Expense 511 $16,245.00
  FIT Payable 221 $1,350.00
  Social Security Tax Payable 222 1,007.19
  Medicare Tax Payable 223 235.55
  State Income Tax Payable 224 519.84
  Salaries and Wages Payable 231 13,132.42
The amount for the employer’s share would be as follows:
On April 3, 2023, the accountant could record a reversing entry as follows:
EXAMPLE: L&L GRAIN GENERAL JOURNAL—EMPLOYER PAYROLL TAX 
DATA ADJUSTING ENTRIES
Date Description Account Debit Credit
Mar. 31 Payroll Taxes Expense 512 $2,217.44
  Social Security Tax Payable 222 $1,007.19
  Medicare Tax Payable 223  235.55
  FUTA Tax Payable (16,245 × 0.006) 228 97.47
  SUTA Tax Payable (16,245 × 0.054) 229 877.23
Date Description Account Debit Credit
Apr. 3 FIT Payable 221 $  1,350.00
Social Security Tax Payable 222 1,007.19
Medicare Tax Payable 223 235.55
State Income Tax Payable 224 519.84
Salaries and Wages Payable 231 13,132.42
  Salaries and Wages Expense 511 $16,245.00
EXAMPLE: L&L GRAIN GENERAL JOURNAL—EMPLOYEE DATA 
REVERSING ENTRIES
The reversal of the General Journal entries, used in accrual-based accounting to represent 
accrued employer payroll expenditures and liabilities at the end of the prior month, would be 
as follows:
Date Description Account Debit Credit
Apr. 3 Social Security Tax Payable 222 $1,007.19
Medicare Tax Payable 223 235.55
FUTA Tax Payable 224 97.47
SUTA Tax Payable 229 877.23
  Payroll Taxes Expense 512 $2,217.44
EXAMPLE: L&L GRAIN GENERAL JOURNAL—EMPLOYER PAYROLL TAX 
DATA REVERSING ENTRIES
Final PDF to printerChapter 7  The Payroll Register, Employees’ Earnings Records, and Accounting System Entries   371
lan43463_ch07_360-403.indd 371 06/12/23 04:56 pm
Note that not all companies and accountants use reversing entries. An advantage of using the 
reversing entry is that it simplifies the payroll process by avoiding calculating partial payroll peri￾ods due to the period’s end. A disadvantage is a reversing entry becomes an additional entry that the 
accountant has to journalize and post. The use of reversing entries is at the company’s discretion.
Payroll and the General Journal
&Check Stop 
1. In the following General Journal entry, which account represents the 
employees’ gross pay?
2. Based on the preceding General Journal entry, what would be the entry 
for the employer’s share of the payroll taxes? Omit FUTA/SUTA taxes.
3. Lilac’s Craft Warehouse has created a journal entry to accrue the payroll 
to be paid out in the following period. The accrual amounts are as follows:
What would be the reversing entry?
Description Debit Credit
Wages and Salaries Expense $124,785.00
  Federal Income Tax Payable $15,280.00
  Social Security Tax Payable 7,736.67
  Medicare Tax Payable 1,809.38
  State Income Tax Payable 4,741.83
  Wages and Salaries Payable 95,217.12
Wages and Salaries Expense $42,795.00
  Federal Income Tax Payable $6,234.00
  Social Security Tax Payable 2,653.29
  Medicare Tax Payable 620.53 
  State Income Tax Payable 1,626.21
  Wages and Salaries Payable 31,660.97
LO 7-4 Generate Payroll-Related General Ledger Entries
As mentioned before, the process of updating the General Ledger accounts with the transactions 
that the accountant records in the General Journal is called posting. Each account used in the 
General Journal has a corresponding General Ledger account used to track individual balances.
For the January 27 payroll and January 31 disbursements and remittances for L&L Grain that we 
discussed in the previous section, the General Ledger’s postings would appear as depicted in Figure 
7-2. Note that the entries shown reflect only the payroll entries for the end of January and February. 
April 3, 2023, is used as the reversing entry date because it is the first business day in the month.
Human input and payroll software have been a growing area of concern for computer 
security. Phishing attacks, where a computer hacker tries to breach a company’s soft￾ware security, have been increasing in number and type, including situations in which 
a company’s accounting data is compromised. These attacks have led to an increase in 
training costs for accounting personnel to educate them about the impacts of account￾ing breaches to ensure payroll accuracy.
(Source: ADP)
Final PDF to printer372   Chapter 7  The Payroll Register, Employees’ Earnings Records, and Accounting System Entries
lan43463_ch07_360-403.indd 372 06/12/23 04:56 pm
Account: 101—Cash
Date Description
Post 
Ref Debit Credit
Balance
Debit Credit
Jan 31 Beginning Balance 122,367.43
Jan 31 J1 13,144.41 109,223.02*
Jan 31 J4 1,490.00 107,733.02
*Cash has a normal debit balance. It will decrease when the account is credited. 122,367.43 − 13,144.91 = 109,223.02.
Account: 221—FIT Payable
Date Description
Post 
Ref Debit Credit
Balance
Debit Credit
Jan 27 J1 1,500.00 1,500.00
Mar 31 Accrue Payroll J5 1,350.00  2,850.00*
Apr 3 Reverse Payroll J7 1,350.00 1,500.00
*Payable is a liability account. It will increase with a credit. 1,500 + 1,350 = 2,850.
Account: 222—Social Security Tax Payable
Date Description
Post 
Ref Debit Credit
Balance
Debit Credit
Jan 27 J1 1,084.38 1,084.38
Jan 27 J1 1,084.38 2,168.76
Mar 31 Accrue Payroll J5 1,007.19 3,175.95
Mar 31 Accrue Payroll—Employer J6 1,007.19 4,183.14
Apr 3 Reverse Payroll J7 1,007.19 3,175.95
Apr 3 Reverse Payroll—Employer J7 1,007.19 2,168.76
Account: 223—Medicare Tax Payable
Date Description
Post 
Ref Debit Credit
Balance
Debit Credit
Jan 27 J1 253.61 253.61
Jan 27 J1 253.61 507.22
Mar 31 Accrue Payroll J5 235.55 742.77
Mar 31 Accrue Payroll—Employer J6 235.55 978.32
Apr 3 Reverse Payroll J7 235.55 742.77
Apr 3 Reverse Payroll—Employer J8 235.55 507.22
Account: 224—State Income Tax Payable
Date Description
Post 
Ref Debit Credit
Balance
Debit Credit
Jan 27 J1 577.60 577.60
Mar 31 Accrue Payroll J5 519.84 1,097.44
Apr 3 Reverse Payroll J7 519.84 577.60
Account: 225—401(k) Contributions Payable
Date Description
Post 
Ref Debit Credit
Balance
Debit Credit
Jan 27 J1 750.00 750.00
Jan 31 J4 750.00 —
FIGURE 7-2
L&L Grain’s General Ledger
Final PDF to printerChapter 7  The Payroll Register, Employees’ Earnings Records, and Accounting System Entries   373
lan43463_ch07_360-403.indd 373 06/12/23 04:56 pm
Account: 226—Health Insurance Payable
Date Description
Post 
Ref Debit Credit
Balance
Debit Credit
Jan 27 J1 560.00 560.00
Jan 31 J4 560.00 —
Account: 227—United Way Contributions Payable
Date Description
Post 
Ref Debit Credit
Balance
Debit Credit
Jan 27 J1 180.00 180.00
Jan 31 J4 180.00 —
Account: 228—FUTA Tax Payable
Date Description
Post 
Ref Debit Credit
Balance
Debit Credit
Jan 27 J1 104.94 104.94
Mar 31 Accrue Payroll—Employer J6 97.47 202.41
Apr 3 Reverse Payroll—Employer J8 97.47 104.94
Account: 229—SUTA Tax Payable
Date Description
Post 
Ref Debit Credit
Balance
Debit Credit
Jan 27 J1 944.46 944.46
Mar 31 Accrue Payroll—Employer J6 877.23 1,821.69
Apr 3 Reverse Payroll—Employer J8 877.23 944.46
Account: 231—Salaries and Wages Payable
Date Description
Post 
Ref Debit Credit
Balance
Debit Credit
Jan 27 J1 13,144.41 13,144.41
Jan 31 J1 13,144.41 —
Mar 31 Accrue Payroll J5 13,132.42 13,132.42
Apr 3 Reverse Payroll J7 13,132.42 —
Account: 512—Payroll Taxes Expense
Date Description
Post 
Ref Debit Credit
Balance
Debit Credit
Jan 27 J1 2,387.39 2,387.39
Mar 31 Accrue Payroll J6 2,217.44 4,604.83
Apr 3 Reverse Payroll J7 2,217.44 2,387.39
Account: 511—Salaries and Wages Expense
Date Description
Post 
Ref Debit Credit
Balance
Debit Credit
Jan 27 J1 18,050.00 18,050.00
Mar 31 Accrue Payroll J6 16,245.00 34,295.00
Apr 3 Reverse Payroll J7 16,245.00 18,050.00
Final PDF to printer374   Chapter 7  The Payroll Register, Employees’ Earnings Records, and Accounting System Entries
lan43463_ch07_360-403.indd 374 06/12/23 04:56 pm
General Ledger Posting Practices
Note that the columns in the General Ledger are similar to those in the General Journal. Some 
specific practices in the General Ledger are worth noting:
∙ Each line has a date. (In the General Journal, only the first line of each transaction is dated, 
except for month and year changes.)
∙ The description is usually left blank, except for adjusting, closing, and reversing entries.
The post reference number is a combination of letters and numbers. 
The letters denote the journal with which the entry correlates. In this case, 
“J” means that the original entry may be found in the General Journal. The 
number in the Post Ref column reflects the journal’s page on which the 
entry is recorded.
The first pair of Debit and Credit columns is used to record the General 
Journal entry. If the account had a debit in the General Journal transaction, 
then the amount would appear in the Debit column in the first pair of col￾umns in the General Ledger. The same practice is used for credits.
Jeanette Landin
wk1003mike/Shutterstock
The second pair of Debit and Credit columns is used to maintain a running balance of 
the account’s total. These account balances are the foundation for the accountant’s finan￾cial reports and are reviewed by managers, officers, customers, vendors, and governmental 
agencies.
Payroll Account Reconciliation
It is necessary for accountants to reconcile the payroll to ensure accuracy. If the payroll regis￾ter has been completed correctly, then the reconciliation process should be smooth. However, 
errors could occur, and changes may need to be made after the payroll period ends. Since 
payroll accuracy is vital, the reconciliation process is strongly recommended. The following 
steps will help you reconcile your payroll:
Step Actions
1. Review hours worked 
and pay rate
Check the accuracy of the employees’ information, especially the 
hours worked and pay rate. If the firm has more than 20 employ￾ees, it may be best to check for new employees only.
2. Review deductions Ensure that all deductions are accurate. It would be worthwhile to 
review the W-4s, especially for new employees, to make sure their 
tax deductions are correct. Check the computation of the deduc￾tions to ascertain the net pay figures.
Final PDF to printerChapter 7  The Payroll Register, Employees’ Earnings Records, and Accounting System Entries   375
lan43463_ch07_360-403.indd 375 06/12/23 04:56 pm
LO 7-5 Describe Payroll Effects on the 
Accounting System
Entries in the payroll system are posted in the General Ledger. When a 
company has an automated payroll system, the previously updated jour￾nal entries are automatically updated in the General Ledger. A payroll 
accountant needs to understand how the accounts should look after a pay￾roll period is completed to ensure the automated system has performed 
correctly. Glitches within computer programs, although uncommon, may 
cause the payroll entry to be one-sided, in which only the debit or credit 
entry will flow through to the General Ledger. When this occurs, the payroll accountant 
must discover what has not been posted to ensure the entire transaction posts correctly.
Payroll-Related Business Expenses
Payroll represents an expense to the business. As such, it reduces the company’s profitability 
proportional to the wages earned and taxes paid. When the payroll accountant accrues the 
payroll expenses, the company’s expenses will also increase. Companies that operate using a 
cash basis (i.e., recording activities only when cash is received or spent) will see the effect of 
payroll expenses because those expenses reduce the income when wages and salaries are paid 
to the employees, when taxes are remitted to governmental agencies, and when other contribu￾tions are remitted.
Step Actions
3. Verify the General 
Journal and General 
Ledger
Make sure your payroll entries are correct in both the General 
Journal and the General Ledger. Remember that the pay disbursed 
is a debit and that all deductions from employee pay are credits.
4. Check your pay period 
and deposit schedule 
tax amounts
Run or create a report in which you check your payroll taxes for 
monthly, semiweekly, or next-business-day tax deposits. This 
involves reviewing the General Ledger entries and checking them 
against the employees’ payroll deductions. This will help prevent 
tax reporting errors.
5. At the end of the quar￾ter, check your tax 
deposits again
Double-check your deposited tax amounts in your General Ledger 
and verify that you are depositing the correct amount with the 
quarterly return (if applicable).
6. Verify the accuracy of 
each employee’s W-2
You should check the W-2 against the previous year’s form to 
check for any discrepancies. Run a payroll register for the entire 
year to make sure that all deductions match the W-2s. You can 
also verify this information against the quarterly tax deposits, when 
applicable. Once you have verified the accuracy of the W-2s, 
ensure that Form W-3 accurately reports all amounts by verifying 
totals against the year’s payroll register.
General Ledger Entries
&Check Stop
1. The Medicare Tax Payable account for Gulf Coast Shrimp had a credit 
balance on June 23 of $2,540. As of the June 30 payroll, credits totaling 
$220 were posted to the Medicare Tax Payable account. What is the bal￾ance in the account as of June 30?
2. The post reference for the June 30 journal entry is J34. What does this 
post reference mean?
create jobs 51/Shutterstock
(Source: Nowsta)
Final PDF to printer376   Chapter 7  The Payroll Register, Employees’ Earnings Records, and Accounting System Entries
lan43463_ch07_360-403.indd 376 06/12/23 04:56 pm
The pandemic created many opportunities for companies to utilize technology that expe￾dited the move toward artificial intelligence (AI). A 2020 Deloitte survey showed that over 
70 percent of organizations were either using or moving toward cloud-based payroll pro￾cessing. AI can make many data entry and verification processes quicker and more accu￾rate. AI can also assist employees by increasing the ability to offer early wage access. 
Compliance can also be improved through the increased use of automation for calculations 
and scheduling of deposits or auditing. With the increased number of remote workers, AI 
can also be useful for monitoring time reporting and labor expenses for any anomalies.
AI was designed to solve many problems with data entry, such as human error and the 
time needed to ensure accuracy. Automating these transactions enables payroll accoun￾tants to strengthen their skill set and become better suited for higher critical thinking 
components of the payroll planning process. Creating a value-added component to the 
payroll accounting staff enables growth and positive employee morale and motivation.
(Source: Oracle)
Besides administering specific payroll tasks, the payroll accountant’s responsibility 
is to allocate employee expenses to specific accounts, departments, or business activities. 
Regardless of the employee’s job description, some time can be allocated to jobs or custom￾ers. For example, a fabric manufacturing company will have sewing, accounting, and mana￾gerial staff. The bulk of the sewing staff’s time will be allocated to specific jobs; however, 
some time will be considered overhead, such as cleaning or meetings, for example. The bulk 
of the accounting department’s time will be considered overhead. However, if the accoun￾tant is working on analyzing a specific client’s project, that time may be billed to the client. 
Managerial positions may also have specific times allocated to jobs depending on the client’s 
needs and the position.
Payroll-Related Liabilities
Unpaid payroll obligations represent a liability to the company. These 
liabilities include amounts due to employees and money to be remitted 
for voluntary, mandatory, and mandated deductions. Until the money is 
remitted, the company holds it in its accounts. Specific examples of pay￾roll liabilities include, but are certainly not limited to, the following:
∙ Federal income tax
∙ FICA taxes
∙ Health insurance premiums
∙ Retirement plan contributions
∙ Child support garnishments
∙ Union dues
Employers have a fiduciary responsibility to remit all amounts withheld from employee pay. 
Remember that the Current Tax Payment Act requires employers to remit taxes promptly, accord￾ing to governmental guidelines. For the other deductions, according to 29 CFR 2510, employers 
are subject to ERISA provisions to protect all amounts due to employees and other recipients.
Natee Meepian/Shutterstock
The Employee Benefits Security Administration, a division of the Department of Labor, 
oversees employee contributions and estimated that there were approximately 73,000 
employer-sponsored 401(k) plans in which employees had invested nearly $445 billion 
during 2020. The number of participants has historically increased at a rate of about 
3 percent per year since 1975.
(Source: DOL)
Final PDF to printerChapter 7  The Payroll Register, Employees’ Earnings Records, and Accounting System Entries   377
lan43463_ch07_360-403.indd 377 06/12/23 04:56 pm
LO 7-6 Explain Payroll Entries in 
Accounting Reports
When examining the income statement, balance sheet, and post-closing 
trial balance (Figures 7-3, 7-4, 7-5), payroll accountants must know what 
effect their work has on each statement. The financial statements are the key 
to integrating payroll accounting data and human resources information.
Let’s start with the income statement, which reports all revenue and expenses for a specific 
time period. These periods are usually monthly, quarterly, and annually. The income state￾ment’s function is to correlate all money received during the course of business operations with 
the money spent to earn that income. Within the expense section of the income statement, you 
will see several accounts that relate to payroll. The Salaries and Wages Expense represents the 
gross pay from the period. Each of the taxes we have discussed is listed. Note the expenses 
related to the taxes are paid by the employer and forwarded to the taxing authority; thus, there is 
no accrued federal income tax expense. Expenses related to the employer portion of retirement 
fund matching, health benefits, or other benefits are also located within the income statement.
The Business Effects of Payroll
&Check Stop 
1. Does the payment of employee wages increase or decrease the profit￾ability of a business?
2. Why is it important to allocate payroll-related expenses properly?
Natee Meepian/Shutterstock
The balance sheet is prepared for a single date, unlike the income statement. In the bal￾ance sheet, any unpaid liabilities to be paid during the next 12 months will be reported in the 
current liability section. In accrual accounting, there may also be end-of-period entries to 
accrue for payroll earned by the employees. Additional liability accounts for accrued salaries, 
accrued hourly wages, accrued holiday pay, and accrued paid time off could also appear, 
depending on the end of the period and the types of employees and benefits which the com￾pany operates. If employees have taken payroll advances, which are amounts to be repaid by 
the employee, these are reported in the current assets section as receivables.
The trial balance contains all accounts the company uses, spanning all of the financial state￾ments. Like the balance sheet, the trial balance is a report on a single date. The accounts listed 
on the trial balance appear in the order of the chart of accounts. In the United States, these are 
L&L Grain
Income Statement
For the Quarter Ended March 31, 2023
Revenue:
    Sales Revenue $78,303.40
Expenses:
 Salaries and Wages Expense $34,295.00
 Payroll Taxes Expense 4,604.83
 Utilities Expense 1,725.00
 Telephone Expense 884.00
 Rent Expense 5,175.00
Total Expenses     46,683.83
Net Income for Quarter $31,619.57
FIGURE 7-3
Income Statement Presentation (Partial)
Final PDF to printer378   Chapter 7  The Payroll Register, Employees’ Earnings Records, and Accounting System Entries
lan43463_ch07_360-403.indd 378 06/12/23 04:56 pm
L&L Grain
Balance Sheet
March 31, 2023
Assets:
 Cash $110,058.03
 Accounts Receivable 39,723.67
 Equipment 15,289.00
 Inventory 225,960.00
Total Assets $391,030.70
Liabilities:
 Accounts Payable 4,085.27
 FIT Payable 2,850.00
 Social Security Tax Payable 4,183.14
 Medicare Tax Payable 978.32
 State Income Tax Payable 1,097.44
 Health Insurance Payable 560.00
 FUTA Tax Payable 202.41
 SUTA Tax Payable 1,821.69
 Salaries and Wages Payable 13,132.42
Total Liabilities 28,910.69
Owners’ Equity
 L. Wilson, Capital 330,500.74
 Retained Earnings 31,619.27
Total Owners’ Equity 362,120.01
Total Liabilities and Owners’ Equity $391,030.70
FIGURE 7-4
Balance Sheet Presentation (Partial)
L&L Grain
Post-Closing Trial Balance
March 31, 2023
Account Debit Credit
Cash $110,058.03
Accounts Receivable 39,723.67
Inventory 225,960.00
Equipment   15,289.00
Accounts Payable $ 4,085.27
FIT Payable 2,850.00
Social Security Tax Payable 4,183.14
Medicare Tax Payable 978.32
State Income Tax Payable 1,097.44
Health Insurance Payable 560.00
FUTA Tax Payable 202.41
SUTA Tax Payable 1,821.69
Salaries and Wages Payable 13,132.42
L. Wilson, Capital 330,500.74
Retained Earnings 31,619.27
$391,030.70 $391,030.70
FIGURE 7-5
Post-Closing Trial Balance Presentation
Final PDF to printerChapter 7  The Payroll Register, Employees’ Earnings Records, and Accounting System Entries   379
lan43463_ch07_360-403.indd 379 06/12/23 04:56 pm
short-term and then long-term. Equity accounts are listed next, followed by revenues and 
expenses. When examining the trial balance, the important thing to remember is that it must 
balance: Debits must equal credits. Should one side not balance with the other, the accoun￾tant must determine why and correct the error. A post-closing trial balance will have already 
closed the revenue, expense, and dividends accounts into the retained earnings account.
The purpose of all financial statements is to provide information to the stakeholders of a 
company. Stakeholders of a company include (but are certainly not limited to) company man￾agers, governmental agencies, creditors, and employees who use the information to decide 
the business. Financial statements are prepared per GAAP guidelines to facilitate the presen￾tation of the statements among various businesses. Managers of a company, in particular, use 
financial reports to make decisions about labor and benefits planning.
Companies are increasingly using application programming interfaces (APIs) to inte￾grate financial data among their departments. The use of APIs fosters the sharing of 
information to improve company performance, employee access to their payroll and 
employment records, and transparency of financial data within the business. This soft￾ware also allows payroll accountants to engage more fully in decision-making and 
other functions that involve critical thought and planning.
(Source: What’s Next Media)
Andrey_Popov/Shutterstock
Labor Reports
The payroll accountant may provide specific labor reports to manage￾ment or department heads. These reports may have a variety of names and 
content depending on the needs of the business.
∙ The labor usage report designates where the labor is used within 
the company. When a company has several employees who work in 
different departments, the labor usage report can help determine overhead 
allocations by the department and the need for increased or decreased 
staff within a specific department.
∙ The billable vs. nonbillable report tracks the time employees have spent specifically on proj￾ects for which customers are paying. This report allows managers to determine if the time 
allocated to the job-costing process is accurate, if the company is operating efficiently, or if 
the employee is taking too long on a specific job.
∙ Overtime reports allow managers to determine how much overtime has been paid to employ￾ees during a specified time period. This report allows managers to monitor labor distribution 
and scheduling to ensure adherence to budget guidelines.
∙ Employers can also make use of trend reports for payroll staffing needs. Trend reports of 
income over the period of a year or two can reveal seasonal increases or decreases in business. 
An informed business manager will know if the company needs to have seasonal or temporary 
workers for short-term increases. If the trend reflects a steady increase in business, the man￾ager may determine that hiring a new employee would be beneficial. Analyzing the company’s 
staffing needs compared to income projections may also lead managers to know if they need to 
lay off personnel, reduce the hours of existing employees, or restructure company operations.
As of 2022, over 164 million Americans were employed and worked at least 15 hours per 
week. According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the level of employment in the United 
States has grown since 2010 and is projected to continue doing so through 2029. Because 
the number and type of employees are increasing, payroll accounting will become more 
complex. Understanding payroll accounting is a vital skill needed by all industries, govern￾ment employers, and private-sector companies. It is safe to state that payroll accounting is 
a profession that will continue to be needed for the foreseeable future.
(Source: BLS)
Final PDF to printer380   Chapter 7  The Payroll Register, Employees’ Earnings Records, and Accounting System Entries
lan43463_ch07_360-403.indd 380 06/12/23 04:56 pm
FIGURE 7-6
Payroll Process Flowchart 
Is it payday?
How much should each employee be paid?
Is managerial approval needed?
Pre-tax deductions?
Mandatory deductions?
Voluntary deductions? 
Mandated deductions?
Total, prove, and rule?
Approval for pay disbursement?
Correct pay method selected?
Pay disbursed at the right time?
Payroll tax deposits and remittance forms completed?
Forms and remittances checked for accuracy?
Payroll taxes deposited on time?
Are all outgoing remittances verified?
Are all outgoing remittances submitted on time?
Journalize and post employee payroll?
Journalize and post the employer’s share of the payroll?
Employee earnings records updated?
Are all financial statements completed?
Company with
employees?
Computed
deductions?
Payroll register
completion?
Payroll tax
remittance?
Voluntary
deductions
remittances?
Accounting
entries?
Labor Reports
&Check Stop
1. Which of the following reports are affected by the payroll of an organization?
a. Trial balance
b. Statement of owners’ equity
c. Interest statement
d. Income statement
e. Balance sheet
2. What is a specific type of report that the payroll accountant provides to 
managerial staff?
3. What are trend reports?
Final PDF to printer381
lan43463_ch07_360-403.indd 381 07/28/23 03:25 pm
ECONOMIC EFFECTS OF PAYROLL
Although payroll accounting principles remain relatively stable, the role that payroll plays in the 
broader context of a business are subject to change. Some developments in payroll accounting in 
the business context that have changed since 2018 include the following:
• Accountants seeking roles as consultants (as opposed to technicians) because of increases in 
automation and technology that foster lower-level work completion.
• Increases in labor costs for employers resulting from changes to the minimum wage.
• Expansion of the gig economy has led to judicial review of employment practices.
• Expanded integration of financial technology to improve the automation of accounting 
transactions.
• Changes to federal reporting requirements to streamline and standardize company submissions.
Future trends to watch include:
• Payroll accounting will become more centralized to work with a remote workforce.
• Increased automation will lead to added transparency and communication among company 
personnel.
• Company resource allocation will adjust because of increased automation of tasks.
• Company growth will change because of remote work abilities.
Trends to Watch
Summary of the Payroll Register, Employees’ Earnings Records, and 
Accounting System Entries
The payroll register and employees’ earnings records are two tools that payroll accountants 
need to accurately maintain their work. Both records track employee compensation and contain 
information about company liabilities to governmental agencies and other organizations. These 
records also provide information for company decision-makers by yielding data about labor dis￾tribution and cost allocation. Payroll records provide information about benefits given to employ￾ees and how those benefits affect a business’s profitability. Information contained in these sources 
and tools used by payroll accountants provides integral insights for managerial functions.
The final piece of the payroll cycle is the creation of accounting system entries. Like other 
business transactions, recording, paying the payroll, and remitting money to governmental 
agencies and other firms require General Journal and General Ledger entries. Business own￾ers and departmental managers use this accounting information to measure business plans’ 
effectiveness and plan both short- and long-term strategies. As an integral part of business 
operations, payroll-related expenses and liabilities represent an employer’s financial duty, 
affect the financial reports, and influence its viability.
With this chapter’s explanation of accounting system entries, we have now completed our 
journey through the payroll process. We have investigated the history of payroll, its many 
aspects and functions, and the importance of employee compensation within a business context.
We hope that after finishing this book, you will understand that payroll accounting is com￾plex, involves many different decisions along the way, and deserves your close attention.
Key Points
• The payroll register connects directly to the employees’ earnings records.
• The employees’ earnings records link accounting and human resources and contain 
information from the payroll register.
• Accounting principles assist in the classification of payroll costs and organizational 
performance.
Final PDF to printer382   Chapter 7  The Payroll Register, Employees’ Earnings Records, and Accounting System Entries
lan43463_ch07_360-403.indd 382 06/12/23 04:56 pm
• Payroll transactions are recorded in the General Journal and posted to General Ledger 
accounts.
• The balances in the General Ledger accounts form the foundation of financial reports.
• Payroll costs represent an expense of the business.
• Employees are assigned to departments to foster accurate measurements of business 
segment profitability.
• Accounting reports provide managers with insights into company profitability and stability.
• Payroll-related transactions contain both the expenses and liabilities of a company.
• Employers have a fiduciary duty to ensure that all amounts deducted from employee 
pay are remitted to the appropriate entity.
• The increase in the automation of accounting information points to a need for edu￾cated, competent payroll professionals.
• Trend reports offer business leaders insight into changes in labor costs over a period.
• Financial reports contain the data that connects the payroll and human resources func￾tions within a company.
Accrual
Adjusting entries
Allocation
Asset
Balance sheet
Credit
Debit
Expense
Fiduciary
General Journal
General Ledger
Generally Accepted 
Accounting Principles 
(GAAP)
Income statement
Labor usage
Liability
Owners’ equity
Posting
Remit
Reversal
Trial balance
Trend Report
Vocabulary
Review Questions
1. What types of accounts does a debit increase?
2. What types of accounts does a credit increase?
3. Where are the first accounting entries recorded?
4. Once recorded, where are the entries posted?
5. What is the purpose of the payroll register?
6. What information is contained in employees’ earnings records?
7. How are the payroll register and the employees’ earnings records related?
8. What type of account is debited for the gross pay?
9. What are three of the accounts that may be credited for the employee payroll?
10. What two accounts are affected upon issuance of paychecks?
11. What accounts are debited and credited for the employer’s share of the payroll expenses?
12. How do payroll expenses affect the income statement and balance sheet?
13. How can companies use payroll information that is reported in the financial state￾ments to determine labor distribution?
14. How can a company’s payroll information contained in financial reports assist in cor￾porate planning?
15. How do the payroll register and employees’ earnings records help employers meet their 
responsibilities to different groups, such as the employees and governmental agencies?
16. What is the term for the responsibility that employers have for payroll deductions 
under ERISA?
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch07_360-403.indd 383 06/12/23 04:56 pm
Chapter 7  The Payroll Register, Employees’ Earnings Records, and Accounting System Entries   383
E7-1A.
LO 7-1
Which column exists in the employees’ earnings records but not in the pay￾roll register?
a. Gross pay
b. Net pay
c. YTD net pay
d. 401(k) contributions
E7-2A.
LO 7-1
What is the connection between the employees’ earnings records and pay￾roll tax reporting? (Select all that apply.)
a. Employees’ earnings records do not connect with payroll tax reporting.
b. Employees’ earnings records may be used to ensure the accuracy of 
payroll tax reporting.
c. Employees’ earnings records contain details of payroll tax reporting and 
may be considered as source documents.
d. Employees’ earnings records contain year-to-date gross pay, which 
reflects when employees reach tax bases.
E7-3A.
LO 7-2
A credit increases which of the following types of accounts? (Select all that 
apply.)
a. Liabilities
b. Expenses
c. Revenues
d. Assets
E7-4A.
LO 7-3
Which amounts on the payroll register reduce federal withholding tax but 
are not deducted for FICA tax computations? (Select all that apply.)
a. Charitable contributions
b. Nonqualified pre-tax insurance
c. Retirement plan (e.g., 401(k)) contributions
d. Garnishments
E7-5A.
LO 7-4
What is always true about the General Ledger? (Select all that apply.)
a. The process of transferring amounts from the General Journal to the 
General Ledger is called posting.
b. The General Ledger is a way to represent monthly groupings of entire 
General Journal entries.
c. The General Ledger contains information about the individual accounts 
used in General Journal transactions.
d. A debit to an account in a General Journal transaction is a debit to that 
account in the General Ledger.
E7-6A.
LO 7-4, 7-5,
7-6
How does a payroll accountant use the information in the General Ledger? 
(Select all that apply.)
a. The account balances form the basis for accounting reports.
b. The payroll accountant uses General Ledger balances to determine the 
effectiveness of individual employees.
c. General Ledger account balances aggregate data to determine payroll 
costs.
d. Payroll expenses contained in the General Ledger are not used to make 
personnel decisions.
E7-7A.
LO 7-6
Which of the following accounts would appear on the balance sheet? 
(Select all that apply.)
a. Payroll taxes expense
b. 401(k) contributions payable
c. 401(k) employer contributions expense
d. Social Security tax payable
Exercises Set A
Final PDF to printer384   Chapter 7  The Payroll Register, Employees’ Earnings Records, and Accounting System Entries
lan43463_ch07_360-403.indd 384 06/12/23 04:56 pm
E7-8A.
LO 7-6
What is always true about the income statement? (Select all that apply.)
a. Only accounts with balances at the end of the period are included.
b. All income and expense accounts are included in the report.
c. All liabilities are included in the report.
d. The report is prepared for a single date.
E7-9A.
LO 7-6
The purpose of a labor report is to do what? (Select all that apply.)
a. Report an individual employee’s regular time and overtime.
b. Reflect all expenses of a firm.
c. Promote analysis of payroll expenses.
d. Update managers about payroll on a daily basis.
E7-10A.
LO 7-5, 7-6
Which law governs the fiduciary responsibility that employers have with 
regard to employees’ payroll deductions?
a. FICA
b. FLSA
c. ERISA
d. ACA
Name Filing Status Dependents
Hourly 
Rate or 
Period 
Wage
No. of 
Regular 
Hours
No. of 
Overtime 
Hours
No. of 
Holiday 
Hours Commissions
Gross 
Earnings 401(k)
Sect. 
125
Taxable 
Wages for 
Federal 
W/H
Taxable 
Wages 
for FICA
Rosenberg, A. Single 2 < 17 $16.25 40 $50.00
Cintron, G. Married/Joint 2 < 17; 1 Other $18.20 39.25 $75.00
Freeman, S. Married/Joint 1 Other $17.55 36
Crosby, L. Single None $19.25 40 4
Kepes, T. Single 2 Other $16.75 37.5 $60.00 $20.00
Hankard, J. Married/Joint 2 < 17 $18.45 40 $75.00
Nguyen, L. Single 1 < 17 $15.75 40 7 $15.00
Totals
P7-1A.
LO 7-1
Harper Morgan owns White Mountain Assessments in Laconia, New 
Hampshire. The standard workweek is 40 hours. For the weekly payroll end￾ing September 8, 2023, disbursements dated September 13, 2023, com￾plete the payroll register. Use the wage-bracket method in the federal tax 
table from Appendix C. No employee has exceeded the Social Security tax 
wage base. All employees submitted a 2023 Form W-4, and no box was 
checked in Step 2. Total, prove, and rule the entries.
Problems Set A
P/R End Date 9/8/2023 Company Name White Mountain Assessments
P/R Date 9/13/2023 Disbursement Date
Name
Gross 
Earnings
Taxable 
Wages 
for Federal 
W/H
Taxable 
Wages 
for FICA
Federal 
W/H
Social 
Security 
Tax
Medicare 
Tax
State 
W/H Garnishment
United 
Way
Net 
Pay
Check 
No.
Rosenberg, A.
Cintron, G. $10.00
Freeman, S. $100.00
Crosby, L. $25.00
Kepes, T.
Hankard, J. $10.00
Nguyen, L.
Totals
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch07_360-403.indd 385 06/12/23 04:56 pm
Chapter 7  The Payroll Register, Employees’ Earnings Records, and Accounting System Entries   385
P7-2A.
LO 7-1
The employee earnings record for Lyric Crosby of White Mountain 
Assessments is listed below. Record the earnings from the September 8 
weekly pay in P7-1A.
EMPLOYEE EARNING RECORD
NAME Lyric Crosby Hire Date April 1, 2018 Dependent child <17 0
ADDRESS 1856 Henniker Road Date of Birth February 1, 1985 Dependent other 0
CITY/STATE/ZIP Weare, NH 03558 Position Assessor Step 4a W-4 Info none
TELEPHONE 603-555-7895 Filing Status Single Step 4b W-4 Info none
SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBER 634-98-1463 Pay Rate $19.25/hour Step 4c W-4 Info none
Period 
Ended
Regular Hours 
Worked
Overtime 
Hours Worked Regular Pay Overtime Pay Gross Pay 401(k)
Section 
125
Taxable Wages for 
Federal W/H
Taxable 
Wages for FICA
9/1/2023 40 $770.00 $770.00 — — $770.00 $770.00
9/8/2023
Taxable 
Wages for 
Federal W/H
Taxable 
Wages for 
FICA W/H
Fed 
W/H
Social 
Sec. Tax
Medicare
Tax State W/H
United 
Way Net Pay
YTD 
Net Pay
YTD 
 Gross Pay
$770.00 $770.00 $56.00 $47.74 $11.17 — $25.00 $627.09 $22,748.15 $27,750.00
P7-3A.
LO 7-2, 7-3
Using the payroll register from P7-1A for White Mountain Assessments, com￾plete the General Journal entry for the employees’ pay for the September 8 
pay date. Paychecks will be issued on September 13.
Date Description Post Ref. Debit Credit
1 1
2 2
3 3
4 4
5 5
6 6
7 7
8 8
9 9
10 10
11 11
12 12
P7-4A.
LO 7-2, 7-3
Using the payroll register from P7-1A for White Mountain Assessments, 
complete the General Journal entry for the employer’s share of the payroll 
taxes for the September 8 payroll end date. Assume 5.4 percent SUTA and 
0.6 percent FUTA tax rates and that only $3,542.50 is subject to FUTA and 
SUTA taxes.
Final PDF to printer386   Chapter 7  The Payroll Register, Employees’ Earnings Records, and Accounting System Entries
lan43463_ch07_360-403.indd 386 06/12/23 04:56 pm
P7-5A.
LO 7-2, 7-3
Using the employee payroll entry from P7-3A, post the September 8 
employee pay for White Mountain Assessments to the selected General 
Ledger accounts shown next. This will have a Posting Reference of J4.
Date Description Post Ref. Debit Credit
1 1
2 2
3 3
4 4
5 5
6 6
7 7
8 8
9 9
Account: Employee Federal Income Tax Payable
Date Description
Post 
Ref. Debit Credit
Balance
Debit Credit
1 1
2 2
3 3
4 4
5 5
6 6
Account: Social Security Tax Payable
Date Description
Post 
Ref. Debit Credit
Balance
Debit Credit
1 1
2 2
3 3
4 4
5 5
6 6
Account: Medicare Tax Payable
Date Description
Post 
Ref. Debit Credit
Balance
Debit Credit
1 1
2 2
3 3
4 4
5 5
6 6
Date Description
Post 
Ref. Debit Credit
Balance
Debit Credit
1 1
2 2
3 3
4 4
5 5
6 6
Account: Salaries and Wages Payable
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch07_360-403.indd 387 06/12/23 04:56 pm
Chapter 7  The Payroll Register, Employees’ Earnings Records, and Accounting System Entries   387
Account: Salaries and Wages Expense
Date Description
Post 
Ref. Debit Credit
Balance
Debit Credit
1 1
2 2
3 3
4 4
5 5
6 6
7 7
P7-6A.
LO 7-2, 7-3
Using the employee payroll entry from P7-3A, complete the General Journal 
entry for the issuance of the pay for the September 8 payroll end date. The 
date of the checks is September 13, 2023.
Date Description Post Ref. Debit Credit
1 1
2 2
3 3
4 4
5 5
P7-7A.
LO 7-2, 7-3,
7-4
Using the employer payroll entry from P7-4A, post the employees’ share of 
the Social Security and Medicare taxes along with the employer’s share of 
payroll taxes for September 8 pay at White Mountain Assessments to the 
appropriate General Ledger accounts.
Account: Social Security Tax Payable
Date Description
Post 
Ref. Debit Credit
Balance
Debit Credit
1 1
2 2
3 3
4 4
5 5
6 6
7 7
Account: Medicare Tax Payable
Date Description
Post 
Ref. Debit Credit
Balance
Debit Credit
1 1
2 2
3 3
4 4
5 5
6 6
7 7
Final PDF to printer388   Chapter 7  The Payroll Register, Employees’ Earnings Records, and Accounting System Entries
lan43463_ch07_360-403.indd 388 06/12/23 04:56 pm
Account: Federal Unemployment Tax Payable
Date Description
Post 
Ref. Debit Credit
Balance
Debit Credit
1 1
2 2
3 3
4 4
5 5
6 6
7 7
Account: State Unemployment Tax Payable
Date Description
Post 
Ref. Debit Credit
Balance
Debit Credit
1 1
2 2
3 3
4 4
5 5
6 6
7 7
Account: Payroll Taxes Expense
Date Description
Post 
Ref. Debit Credit
Balance
Debit Credit
1 1
2 2
3 3
4 4
5 5
6 6
7 7
P7-8A.
LO 7-2, 7-3
KMH Industries is a monthly schedule depositor of payroll taxes. For the 
month of August 2023, the payroll taxes (employee and employer share 
combined) were as follows:
Social Security tax: $3,252.28
Medicare tax: $760.61
Employee federal income tax: $2,520.00
Create the General Journal entry for the remittance of the taxes. The entry 
should be dated September 13, 2023. Use check 2052 in the description.
Date Description Post Ref. Debit Credit
1 1
2 2
3 3
4 4
5 5
6 6
7 7
8 8
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch07_360-403.indd 389 06/12/23 04:56 pm
Chapter 7  The Payroll Register, Employees’ Earnings Records, and Accounting System Entries   389
P7-9A.
LO 7-2, 7-3
Oakley Breeders has the following voluntary withholdings to remit:
AFLAC payable: $560.00
401(k) payable: $1,280.00
Garnishments payable: $375.00
United Way contributions payable: $200.00
Create the General Journal entry on June 9, 2023, for the remittance of 
these withheld amounts.
P7-10A.
LO 7-5, 7-6
Brighton Rowe is the payroll accountant for Great Lake Lamps. The com￾pany’s management has requested an analysis of the payroll effects on 
the expenses of the company. Explain which accounting report(s) Brighton 
would use to construct the analysis. How would Brighton explain the pur￾pose of labor expenses as they affect company productivity?
P7-11A.
LO 7-6
The new vice president of marketing for your company has asked to meet 
with you regarding the purpose and location of payroll entries in accounting 
reports. What is your response to the vice president?
Date Description Post Ref. Debit Credit
1 1
2 2
3 3
4 4
5 5
6 6
7 7
Exercises Set B
E7-1B.
LO 7-1
Which of the following exists in both the employees’ earnings records and 
the payroll register? (Select all that apply.)
a. Employee birthdate
b. Social Security number
c. Hourly rate or period wage
d. Employee name
E7-2B.
LO 7-1
How do the payroll register and employees’ earnings records connect with 
payroll tax determination and remittance? (Select all that apply.)
a. Payroll register column totals contain information about pay period tax 
withholdings.
b. Employees’ earnings records have pertinent information to determine 
individual taxable wage base attainment.
c. Payroll registers records reflect which employees have reached the 
Medicare additional tax.
d. Payroll registers contain specific information about each employee’s 
raise history.
E7-3B.
LO 7-2
Which of the following are categories contained in the fundamental 
accounting equation? (Select all that apply.)
a. Liabilities
b. Revenues
c. Expenses
d. Owners’ equity
Final PDF to printer390   Chapter 7  The Payroll Register, Employees’ Earnings Records, and Accounting System Entries
lan43463_ch07_360-403.indd 390 06/12/23 04:56 pm
E7-4B.
LO 7-2
Which of the following principles are always true about financial account￾ing? (Select all that apply.)
a. Transactions are posted first to the General Ledger.
b. Debits = Credits.
c. Each transaction involves at least two accounts.
d. The balance sheet contains all accounts.
E7-5B.
LO 7-3
What is true about expenses and liabilities? (Select all that apply.)
a. Expenses usually have the word “expense” in the account title.
b. Expenses represent additional sums earned by the company.
c. Liabilities represent sums of money owed by third parties to the 
company.
d. Liabilities usually have the word “payable” in the account title.
E7-6B.
LO 7-3, 7-4,
7-5
How do payroll-related expenses affect financial statements? (Select all that 
apply.)
a. Payroll expenses may be allocable to work performed for a firm’s 
vendors.
b. Payroll expense accounts are reported on the income statement.
c. The period’s gross earnings are reported on the balance sheet.
d. Payroll expenses reduce the net income of a company.
E7-7B.
LO 7-6
Which of the following payroll-related accounts appear on the balance 
sheet? (Select all that apply.)
a. Wages and salaries payable
b. Medicare tax expense
c. Employee federal income tax payable
d. FUTA tax expense
E7-8B.
LO 7-2, 7-5
What is the purpose of payroll-related accrual and reversal entries on finan￾cial statements? (Select all that apply.)
a. Accrual entries represent payroll amounts incurred but not yet paid.
b. Reversing entries represent the disbursement of accrued payroll prior to 
the end of the payroll period.
c. Accrual entries are used to improve the accuracy of the net income for a 
period.
d. Reversing entries are omitted from financial statements.
E7-9B.
LO 7-6
Managers use labor reports to do which of the following? (Select all that 
apply.)
a. Analyze labor trends
b. Determine staffing needs
c. Ensure FLSA wage and hour compliance
d. Formulate strategic plans for the company
E7-10B.
LO 7-5, 7-6
To which parties does an employer have a fiduciary duty when it incurs pay￾roll liabilities? (Select all that apply.)
a. Customers
b. Employees
c. Government
d. Vendors
P7-1B.
LO 7-1
Nat Crossman owns Appalachian Limited Home Design in Versailles, 
Kentucky. Complete the payroll register for the weekly payroll dated March 
10, 2023. Checks will be issued on March 15, 2023. Use the wage-bracket 
method in the federal tax table in Appendix C. Assume 5 percent state 
income tax, and the same deductions for federal tax apply to the state. No 
employee has exceeded the Social Security wage base. Assume all employ￾ees submitted a 2023 Form W-4. For employees with M/S (Married, filing 
Problems Set B
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch07_360-403.indd 391 06/12/23 04:56 pm
Chapter 7  The Payroll Register, Employees’ Earnings Records, and Accounting System Entries   391
P7-2B.
LO 7-1
The employee earnings record for Carson Ito of Appalachian Limited Home 
Design follows. Record the earnings during the March 10, 2023, pay period 
from P7-1B.
Name Filing Status Dependents
Hourly 
Rate or 
Period 
Wage
No. of 
Regular 
Hours
No. of 
Overtime 
Hours
No. of 
Holiday 
Hours Commissions
Gross 
Earnings 401(k)
Sect. 
125
Taxable 
Wages for 
Federal 
W/H
Taxable 
Wages 
for FICA
Brooks, S. Single 2 < 17 $15.25 40 $50.00
Choi, L. Married/Joint 3 < 17, 1 Other $19.70 40 4 $20.00
Hammersmith, R. Married/Single 1 < 17, 2 Other $17.25 38 $35.00 $10.00
Agarwal, K. Single 1 < 17 $18.20 36 $20.00
Potter, D. Married/Joint 1 Other $15.50 40 7
Ito, C. Single None $16.85 40
Crocker, T. Married/Joint 2 < 17 $15.00 38.5 $45.00 $10.00
Kollie, A. Married/Joint None $18.10 40 $25.00
Totals
P/R End Date 3/10/2023 Company Name Appalachian Limited Home Design
Check Date 3/15/2023 Check Date
Name
Gross 
Earnings
Taxable 
Wages 
for Federal 
W/H
Taxable 
Wages 
for FICA
Federal 
W/H
Social 
Security 
Tax
Medicare 
W/H
State 
W/H
Tax Garnishment
United 
Way
Net 
Pay
Check 
No.
Brooks, S. $10.00
Choi, L.
Hammersmith, R.
Agarwal, K. $60.00
Potter, D. $50.00
Ito, C.
Crocker, T.
Kollie, A.
Totals
Period 
Ended
Hrs 
Worked Reg Pay OT Pay Holiday Comm
Gross 
Pay 401(k)
Sect. 
125
Taxable 
Pay for 
Federal W/H
Taxable 
Pay for 
FICA
3/3/2023 40 $674.00 $674.00 $674.00 $674.00
Taxable 
Pay for 
Federal W/H
Taxable 
Pay for FICA Fed Inc. 
Social 
Sec. Tax Medicare
State Inc. 
Tax Garnishment
United 
Way Net Pay
YTD 
Net 
Pay
YTD 
Gross 
Pay
$674.00 $674.00 $44.00 $41.79 $9.77 $33.70 $544.74 $5,447.40 $6,740.00
EMPLOYEE EARNINGS RECORD
NAME Carson Ito Hire Date 7/1/2018 Dependents <17 0
ADDRESS 150 Palomino Drive Date of Birth 8/28/1994 Dependents other 0
CITY/STATE/ZIP Versailles/KY/42235 Position Graphic Designer Step 4a W-4 Info none
TELEPHONE 502-555-4395 Filing Status Single Step 4b W-4 Info none
SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBER 789-25-6431 Pay Rate $16.85/hour Step 4c W-4 Info none
Final PDF to printer392   Chapter 7  The Payroll Register, Employees’ Earnings Records, and Accounting System Entries
lan43463_ch07_360-403.indd 392 06/12/23 04:56 pm
P7-3B.
LO 7-1, 7-2,
7-3
Using the payroll register from P7-1B for Appalachian Limited Home Design, 
complete the General Journal entry for the employees’ pay for the March 10, 
2023, payroll end date. Employees’ paychecks will be issued on March 15.
Date Description Post Ref. Debit Credit
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Date Description Post Ref. Debit Credit
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
P7-4B.
LO 7-1, 7-2,
7-3
Using the payroll register from P7-1B for Appalachian Limited Home Design, 
complete the General Journal entry for the employer’s share of the payroll 
taxes for the March 10, 2023, pay date. Assume a 5.4 percent SUTA rate 
and 0.6 percent FUTA rate, and assume that only $2,721.85 of the gross 
pay is subject to SUTA and FUTA taxes.
P7-5B.
LO 7-3, 7-4
Using the employee payroll entry from P7-3B, post the March 10 employee 
payroll end date for Appalachian Limited  Home Design to the selected 
General Ledger accounts. The Posting Reference will be J1.
Account: Salaries and Wages Payable
Date Description
Post 
Ref. Debit Credit
Balance
Debit Credit
1
2
3
4
5
6
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch07_360-403.indd 393 06/12/23 04:56 pm
Chapter 7  The Payroll Register, Employees’ Earnings Records, and Accounting System Entries   393
Account: Employee Federal Income Tax Payable
Date Description
Post 
Ref. Debit Credit
Balance
Debit Credit
1
2
3
4
5
6
Account: Social Security Tax Payable
Date Description
Post 
Ref. Debit Credit
Balance
Debit Credit
1
2
3
4
5
6
Account: Medicare Tax Payable
Date Description
Post 
Ref. Debit Credit
Balance
Debit Credit
1
2
3
4
5
6
Account: Employee State Income Tax Payable
Date Description
Post 
Ref. Debit Credit
Balance
Debit Credit
1
2
3
4
5
6
Account: Salaries and Wages Expense
Date Description
Post 
Ref. Debit Credit
Balance
Debit Credit
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Final PDF to printer394   Chapter 7  The Payroll Register, Employees’ Earnings Records, and Accounting System Entries
lan43463_ch07_360-403.indd 394 06/12/23 04:56 pm
P7-6B.
LO 7-3, 7-4
Using the employee payroll entry from P7-3B, complete the General Journal 
entry for the issuance of Appalachian Limited Home Design pay on March 
15, 2023.
Date Description Post Ref. Debit Credit
1 1
2 2
3 3
4 4
5 5
P7-7B.
LO 7-3, 7-4
Using the employer payroll entry from P7-4B, post the employer’s share 
of payroll taxes for the March 10 pay period at Appalachian Limited Home 
Design to the appropriate General Ledger accounts. Employees are paid 
weekly. Assume a 5.4 percent SUTA rate and 0.6 percent FUTA rate, and 
assume that only $954.05 of the gross pay is subject to SUTA and FUTA 
taxes. Note: FUTA and SUTA taxes are only employer share.
Account: Payroll Taxes Expense
Date Description
Post 
Ref. Debit Credit
Balance
Debit Credit
1 1
2 2
3 3
4 4
5 5
6 6
7 7
Account: Social Security Tax Payable
Date Description
Post 
Ref. Debit Credit
Balance
Debit Credit
1 1
2 2
3 3
4 4
5 5
6 6
7 7
Account: Medicare Tax Payable
Date Description
Post 
Ref. Debit Credit
Balance
Debit Credit
1 1
2 2
3 3
4 4
5 5
6 6
7 7
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch07_360-403.indd 395 06/12/23 04:56 pm
Chapter 7  The Payroll Register, Employees’ Earnings Records, and Accounting System Entries   395
Account: Federal Unemployment Tax Payable
Date Description
Post 
Ref. Debit Credit
Balance
Debit Credit
1 1
2 2
3 3
4 4
5 5
6 6
7 7
Account: State Unemployment Tax Payable
Date Description
Post 
Ref. Debit Credit
Balance
Debit Credit
1 1
2 2
3 3
4 4
5 5
6 6
7 7
P7-8B.
LO 7-2, 7-3
Legends Leadworks is a monthly schedule depositor of payroll taxes. For 
the month of April 2023, the payroll taxes (employee and employer share) 
were as follows:
Social Security tax: $5,386.56
Medicare tax: $1,259.76
Employee federal income tax: $4,978.00
Create the General Journal entry for the remittance of the taxes on May 13, 
2023. Use check 1320 in the description.
Date Description Post Ref. Debit Credit
1 1
2 2
3 3
4 4
5 5
6 6
7 7
8 8
P7-9B.
LO 7-2, 7-3
Candy Café has the following voluntary withholdings to remit as of 
September 30, 2023:
AFLAC payable: $687.00
Workers’ compensation insurance payable: $1,042.00
401(k) contributions payable: $2,104.00
Garnishments payable: $450.00
U.S. savings bonds payable: $200.00
Create the General Journal entry for the remittance of these withheld 
amounts on October 13, 2023.
Final PDF to printer396   Chapter 7  The Payroll Register, Employees’ Earnings Records, and Accounting System Entries
lan43463_ch07_360-403.indd 396 06/12/23 04:56 pm
P7-10B.
LO 7-5, 7-6
Pax Martinson is the controller for HHT Industries. Pax has been asked to 
explain the payroll accounts on the financial statements for the preced￾ing month. What information is available about payroll on the financial 
statements?
P7-11B.
LO 7-5, 7-6
You are interviewing for a position with Limelight Photography. The presi￾dent of the company asks you to explain how payroll is both an expense and 
a liability of the company. How will you answer?
Date Description Post Ref. Debit Credit
1 1
2 2
3 3
4 4
5 5
6 6
7 7
8 8
Date Description Post Ref. Debit Credit
1 1
2 2
3 3
4 4
5 5
6 6
7 7
Critical Thinking
7-1. Your boss asks you for a five-year labor cost trend chart. The labor costs per year are 
as follows:
2019 $175,248
2020 165,225
2021 151,250
2022 170,312
2023 161,344
 Construct a line chart to depict the data. What conclusions can you derive from 
the data about labor costs and trends over the past five years? Why?
7-2. Giblin’s Goodies pays employees weekly on Fridays. However, the company notices 
that May 31 is a Wednesday, and the pay period will end on June 2. The payroll data 
for May 30–31 is as follows:
 Gross pay: $4,500.00
 Federal income tax: $520.00
 Social Security tax: $279.00
 Medicare tax: $65.25
 State income tax: $90.00
 Federal unemployment tax: $27.00
 State unemployment tax: $243.00
 Give the adjusting entry in the General Journal to recognize the employee and 
employer share of the payroll for May 30–31. The date of the entry is May 31. Then 
record the journal entry to reverse the adjustment on June 1, 2023.
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch07_360-403.indd 397 06/12/23 04:56 pm
Chapter 7  The Payroll Register, Employees’ Earnings Records, and Accounting System Entries   397
Date Description Post Ref. Debit Credit
8 8
9 9
10 10
11 11
12 12
13 13
14 14
15 15
16 16
17 17
18 18
19 19
20 20
21 21
22 22
23 23
24 24
25 25
26 26
27 27
28 28
29 29
30 30
In the Real World: Scenario for Discussion
An ongoing discussion among business managers is the return on employee investment 
(ROEI). Employers want to maximize business profitability, and employees are a signifi￾cant part of organizational success. Investments in employee training and professional 
development constitute a significant part of many companies’ budgets. Measures includ￾ing providing tablet computers for employees to pursue flexible learning opportunities 
and self-paced classes allow employers to reduce training and development costs. What 
are the pros and cons of this practice?
Internet Activities
7-1. Would you like to know about personal experiences as a payroll accountant? How about 
videos that detail the completion of payroll-related forms? Go to www.youtube.com and 
search the term payroll accounting to read personal perspectives about payroll prac￾tice, outsourcing, and tax form completion. What were three insights new to you?
7-2. Would you like to build your own favorites list of payroll accounting tools? Go to one 
or more of the following sites. What are three important items you noticed?
www.accountingtools.com
www.accountantsworld.com
www.americanpayroll.org
7-3. Join a conversation about payroll accounting with industry professionals. Go to www.
linkedin.com and establish a profile (if you do not have one). Search groups for payroll 
accounting and follow the conversations. Which topics did you choose? Why?
7-4. Want to know more about the concepts in this chapter? Check out:
www.moneyinstructor.com/lesson/accountingconcepts.asp
https://www.accountingcoach.com/accounting-basics/outline
Final PDF to printer398   Chapter 7  The Payroll Register, Employees’ Earnings Records, and Accounting System Entries
lan43463_ch07_360-403.indd 398 06/12/23 04:56 pm
Continuing Payroll Project: Prevosti Farms and Sugarhouse
Complete the Payroll Register for the February and March biweekly pay periods, assuming 
benefits went into effect as anticipated.
Use the Wage-Bracket Method Tables for Income Tax Withholding in Appendix C (or the 
IRS federal income tax withholding assistant). Complete the General Journal entries as 
follows:
Date Description Post Ref. Debit Credit
1 1
2 2
3 3
4 4
5 5
6 6
7 7
8 8
9 9
10 10
11 11
12 12
13 13
14 14
15 15
16 16
17 17
18 18
19 19
20 20
21 21
22 22
23 23
February 10 Journalize the employee pay.
February 10 Journalize the employer payroll tax for the February 10 pay period. Use 5.4 percent 
SUTA and 0.6 percent FUTA. No employees will exceed the FUTA or SUTA wage base.
February 14 Issue the employee pay.
February 24 Journalize the employee pay.
February 24 Journalize the employer payroll tax for the February 24 pay period. Use 5.4 percent 
SUTA and 0.6 percent FUTA. No employee will exceed the FUTA or SUTA wage base.
February 28 Issue the employee pay.
February 28 Issue payment for the payroll liabilities.
March 10 Journalize the employee pay.
March 10 Journalize the employer payroll tax for the March 10 pay period. Use 5.4 percent 
SUTA and 0.6 percent FUTA. No employees will exceed the FUTA or SUTA wage base.
March 14 Issue the employee pay.
March 24 Journalize the employee pay.
March 24 Journalize the employer payroll tax for the March 24 pay period. Use 5.4 percent 
SUTA and 0.6 percent FUTA. No employees will exceed the FUTA or SUTA wage base.
March 28 Issue the employee pay.
March 28 Issue payment for the payroll liabilities.
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch07_360-403.indd 399 06/12/23 04:56 pm
Chapter 7  The Payroll Register, Employees’ Earnings Records, and Accounting System Entries   399
Date Description Post Ref. Debit Credit
24 24
25 25
26 26
27 27
28 28
29 29
30 30
31 31
32 32
33 33
34 34
35 35
Post all journal entries to the appropriate General Ledger accounts.
Account: Cash 101
Date Description
Post 
Ref. Debit Credit
Balance
Debit Credit
1 Beg. Bal. 47 0 0 0 00 1
2 2
3 3
4 4
5 5
6 6
Account: Employee Federal Income Tax Payable 203
Date Description
Post 
Ref. Debit Credit
Balance
Debit Credit
1 1
2 2
3 3
4 4
5 5
6 6
Account: Social Security Tax Payable 204
Date Description
Post 
Ref. Debit Credit
Balance
Debit Credit
1 1
2 2
3 3
4 4
5 5
6 6
Final PDF to printer400   Chapter 7  The Payroll Register, Employees’ Earnings Records, and Accounting System Entries
lan43463_ch07_360-403.indd 400 06/12/23 04:56 pm
Account: Medicare Tax Payable 205
Date Description
Post 
Ref. Debit Credit
Balance
Debit Credit
1 1
2 2
3 3
4 4
5 5
6 6
Account: Employee State Income Tax Payable 206
Date Description
Post 
Ref. Debit Credit
Balance
Debit Credit
1 1
2 2
3 3
4 4
5 5
6 6
Account: 401(k) Contributions Payable 208
Date Description
Post 
Ref. Debit Credit
Balance
Debit Credit
1 1
2 2
3 3
4 4
5 5
6 6
Account: Health Insurance Payable 209
Date Description
Post 
Ref. Debit Credit
Balance
Debit Credit
1 1
2 2
3 3
4 4
5 5
6 6
Account: Salaries and Wages Payable 210
Date Description
Post 
Ref. Debit Credit
Balance
Debit Credit
1 1
2 2
3 3
4 4
5 5
6 6
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch07_360-403.indd 401 06/12/23 04:56 pm
Chapter 7  The Payroll Register, Employees’ Earnings Records, and Accounting System Entries   401
Account: FUTA Tax Payable 211
Date Description
Post 
Ref. Debit Credit
Balance
Debit Credit
1 1
2 2
3 3
4 4
5 5
6 6
Account: SUTA Tax Payable 212
Date Description
Post 
Ref. Debit Credit
Balance
Debit Credit
1 1
2 2
3 3
4 4
5 5
6 6
Account: Payroll Taxes Expense 514
Date Description
Post 
Ref. Debit Credit
Balance
Debit Credit
1 1
2 2
3 3
4 4
5 5
6 6
Date Description
Post 
Ref. Debit Credit
Balance
Debit Credit
1 1
2 2
3 3
4 4
5 5
6 6
Account: Salaries and Wages Expense 515
Answers to Stop & Check Exercises
Employees’ Earnings Records
1. The payroll register contains the period payroll information for all employees. The 
employees’ earnings record lists all payroll data for a single employee.
2. a. Name
b. Pay rate
d. Net pay
3. Quarterly and annual tax reports use the totals from the employees’ earnings records.
Final PDF to printer402   Chapter 7  The Payroll Register, Employees’ Earnings Records, and Accounting System Entries
lan43463_ch07_360-403.indd 402 06/12/23 04:56 pm
Financial Accounting Concepts
1. Assets = Liabilities + Owners’ Equity
2. Credit
3. Debit
Payroll and the General Journal
1. Wages and Salaries Expense
2. Account Debit Credit
Payroll Taxes Expense $9,546.05
 Social Security Tax Payable $7,736.67
 Medicare Tax Payable $1,809.38
3. Account Debit Credit
Federal Income Tax Payable $ 6,234.00
Social Security Tax Payable 2,653.29
Medicare Tax Payable 620.53
State Income Tax Payable 1,626.21
Wages and Salaries Payable 31,660.97
 Wages and Salaries Expense $42,795.00
General Ledger Entries
1. $2,760 Cr.
2. The transaction may be found in the General Journal earlier in this section.
The Business Effects of Payroll
1. The payment of employee wages decreases profitability because it increases the 
expenses of a business.
2. Allocation of payroll expenses to specific jobs, clients, and so on allows the com￾pany to understand the costs associated with the activity.
Labor Reports
1. a. Trial balance
b. Statement of owners’ equity
d. Income statement
e. Balance sheet
2. Labor reports
3. Trend reports are used by managers to identify business patterns, needs, and 
opportunities.
Dollar sign made from binary numbers: Ralf Hiemisch/Getty Images
Final PDF to printerlan43463_ch07_360-403.indd 403 06/12/23 04:56 pm
Final PDF to printer404
lan43463_appA_404-447.indd 404 06/06/23 06:38 pm
Comprehensive Payroll 
Project: Wayland Custom 
Woodworking
Wayland Custom Woodworking is a firm that manufactures custom cabinets and woodwork 
for business and residential customers. Students will have the opportunity to establish payroll 
records and complete a month of payroll information for Wayland.
Wayland Custom Woodworking is located at 12850 Old Highway 50, Glenbrook, Nevada, 
89413, phone number 775-555-9877. The owner is Mark Wayland. Wayland’s EIN is 
91-7444533, and the Nevada Employer Account Number is E6462582020-6. Wayland has 
determined it will pay its employees on a semimonthly basis. Federal income tax should be 
computed using the percentage method for manual payrolls with Forms W-4 from 2020 or 
later.
Students will complete the payroll for the final quarter of 2023 and will file the fourth 
quarter and annual tax reports on the appropriate dates. At the instructor’s discretion, students 
may complete a short version, which contains the payroll transactions beginning December 1. 
Directions for completion of the short version follow the November 30 transactions.
Rounding can create a challenge. For these exercises, the rate for the individuals is not 
rounded. Take the employee’s salary and divide it by 2,080 (52 weeks at 40 hours per week) 
for full-time, nonexempt employees. Note: Leave the hourly rate rounded to five decimal 
places, as shown in the next example. After the gross pay has been calculated, then round the 
result to two decimal points before calculating taxes or other withholdings.
Appendix A A
EXAMPLE: ANNUAL SALARY TO AN HOURLY RATE, NONEXEMPT EMPLOYEE
Employee Cooper’s annual salary is $62,000 and he is a nonexempt employee.
Hourly rate = $62,000/(52 × 40) = $62,000/2,080
Hourly rate = $29.80769 per hour
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYAppendix A  Comprehensive Payroll Project: Wayland Custom Woodworking   405
lan43463_appA_404-447.indd 405 06/06/23 06:38 pm
EXAMPLE: PERIOD GROSS PAY, SALARIED EMPLOYEE
Employee Chinson earns an annual salary of $48,000 and is paid semimonthly.
Period gross pay = $48,000/24 = $2,000 gross pay
For pay periods with holiday hours: determine the amount paid per day, and multiply 
by the number of days applicable to each pay period.
Annual salary: $48,000/(52 × 5) = $48,000/260 = $184.61538 (rounded to five deci￾mal points) per day. Once you have the holiday pay, subtract it from their salary for the 
period for regular time.
Employees are paid for the following holidays occurring during the final quarter:
∙ Thanksgiving day and the day after, Thursday and Friday, November 23–24.
∙ Christmas is on Monday. Employees receive holiday pay for Monday, December 25.
For the completion of this project, students will use the percentage method for federal 
income tax located in Appendix C. Employees’ 401(k) and insurance are pre-tax for federal 
income tax. The SUTA (UI) rate for Wayland Custom Woodworking is 2.95 percent on the 
first $40,100 of employee wages. There is an additional 0.05 percent for Career Enhancement 
Program (CEP). FUTA, SUTA, and CEP allow for a deduction for Section 125 contributions, 
not for 401(k) contributions. Employer contribution of Section 125 is 1.5 times the employee 
portion and should be added to the wages for the completion of FUTA and SUTA forms.
No employee has additional information in Step 4 of their W-4s, all W-4s were received in 
2023, and Box 2c has not been checked.
Semimonthly Federal Percentage Method for Manual 
Payrolls with Forms W-4 from 2020 or Later Tax Table Appendix C
Federal Unemployment Rate (employer only) 
(less Section 125)
0.6% on the first $7,000 of wages
State Unemployment Rate (employer only) 
(less Section 125)
2.95% on the first $40,100 of 
wages
Career Enhancement Program (employer only) 
(less Section 125)
0.05% on the first $40,100 of 
wages
October 1
Wayland Custom Woodworking (WCW) pays its employees according to their job classifica￾tion. Wayland’s staff comprises the following employees:
Employee Number Name and Address Payroll Information
00-Chins Anthony Chinson Married/Joint; 2 < 17
530 Chimney Rock Road Exempt
Stateline, NV 89449 $48,000/year + commission
775-555-1212 Start Date: 10/1/2023
Job title: Account Executive SSN: 511-22-3333
00-Wayla Mark Wayland Married/Joint; 3 < 17, 1 Other
1650 Power House Drive Exempt
Glenbrook, NV 89413 $85,000/year
775-555-1110 Start Date: 10/1/2023
Job title: President/Owner SSN: 505-33-1775
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY406   Appendix A  Comprehensive Payroll Project: Wayland Custom Woodworking
lan43463_appA_404-447.indd 406 06/06/23 06:38 pm
Employee Number Name and Address Payroll Information
01-Peppi Sylvia Peppinico Married/Joint; 1 < 17, 1 Other
1575 Flowers Avenue Exempt
Glenbrook, NV 89413 $58,500/year
775-555-2244 Start Date: 10/1/2023
Job title: Craftsman SSN: 047-55-9951
01-Coope Stevon Cooper Single; None
2215 Lands End Drive Nonexempt
Glenbrook, NV 89413 $62,000/year
775-555-9981 Start Date: 10/1/2023
Job title: Craftsman SSN: 022-66-1131
02-Hisso Leonard Hissop Single; 1 Other
333 Engine House Circle Nonexempt
Glenbrook, NV 89413 $51,500/year
775-555-5858 Start Date: 10/1/2023
Job title: Purchasing/Shipping SSN: 311-22-6698
Voluntary deductions for each employee are as follows:
Name Deduction
Chinson Insurance: $50/paycheck
401(k): 3% of gross pay
Wayland Insurance: $75/paycheck
401(k): 6% of gross pay
Peppinico Insurance: $75/paycheck
401(k): $50 per paycheck
Cooper Insurance: $50/paycheck
401(k): 4% of gross pay
Hissop Insurance: $75/paycheck
401(k): 3% of gross pay
Success Insurance: $50/paycheck
401(k): 3% of gross pay
Pre-tax Deductions—Federal Income, FICA, State Income 
&Check Stop
1. Should the insurance be excluded when calculating federal and state tax￾able wages? FICA taxable wages?
2. Should the 401(k) be excluded when calculating federal and state income 
taxable wages? FICA taxable wages?
Complete the headers of the Employee Earnings Record for all company employees. Enter 
the YTD earnings for each employee. The departments are as follows:
Department 00: Sales and Administration
Department 01: Factory Workers
Department 02: Delivery and Customer Service
1. You have been hired as of October 2 as the new accounting clerk. Your employee num￾ber is 00-SUCCE. Your name is STUDENT SUCCESS. Your address is 16 Kelly Circle 
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYAppendix A  Comprehensive Payroll Project: Wayland Custom Woodworking   407
lan43463_appA_404-447.indd 407 06/06/23 06:38 pm
#2, Glenbrook, NV 89413. Your phone number is 775-556-1211, you were born on July 16, 
2001, your Nevada driver’s license number is 168575381944 expiring on your birthday in 
2027, and your Social Security number is 555-55-5555. You are nonexempt and paid at a rate 
of $42,000 per year as an accounting clerk. Complete Form W-4 and, using the given infor￾mation, complete the I-9 form to start your employee file. The forms were reviewed by Mark 
Wayland. Complete it as if you are single with no dependents or other income, you contribute 
3 percent to a 401(k), and health insurance is $50 per pay period.
The balance sheet for WCW as of September 30, 2023, is as follows:
Wayland Custom Woodworking 
Balance Sheet 
September 30, 2023
Assets Liabilities & Equity
Cash $1,125,000.00 Accounts Payable $  112,490.00
Supplies 27,240.00 Salaries and Wages Payable
Office Equipment 87,250.00 Federal Unemployment Tax Payable
Inventory 123,000.00 Social Security Tax Payable
Vehicle 25,000.00 Medicare Tax Payable
Accumulated Depreciation, Vehicle State Unemployment Tax Payable
Building 164,000.00 Career Enhancement Program Payable
Accumulated Depreciation, Building Employee Federal Income Tax Payable
Land   35,750.00 Employee State Income Tax Payable
Total Assets 1,587,240.00 401(k) Contributions Payable
Employee Medical Premiums Payable
Notes Payable 224,750.00
Total Liabilities 337,240.00
Owners’ Equity 1,250,000.00
Retained Earnings —
Total Equity 1,250,000.00
Total Liabilities and Equity 1,587,240.00
October 15
October 15 is the end of the first pay period for the month of October. Employee pay will be 
disbursed on October 18, 2023. Any time worked in excess of 80 hours during this pay period 
is considered overtime for nonexempt employees. Remember that the employees are paid on 
a semimonthly basis. The hours for the employees are as follows:
Name
Hourly Rate or 
Period Wage 
(round to 5 
decimals)
Pay Period 
Hours 
10/1–10/15
Regular 
(round to 
2 decimals)
Overtime 
(round to 
2 decimals) Commission
Chinson 80 hours 
(exempt)
$1,500.00
Wayland 80 hours 
(exempt)
Peppinico 80 hours 
(exempt)
Cooper 80 hours
Hissop 85.25 hours
Success 82 hours
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY408   Appendix A  Comprehensive Payroll Project: Wayland Custom Woodworking
lan43463_appA_404-447.indd 408 06/06/23 06:38 pm
October 2023
Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
8 9 10 11 12 13 14
15 16 17 18 19 20 21
22 23 24 25 26 27 28
29 30 31
Complete the Payroll Register for October 15. Round wages to five decimal points and all 
other final answers to two decimal points. Update the Employee Earnings Records for the 
period’s pay and update the YTD amounts. Insurance qualifies for Section 125 treatment. 
Use the percentage method for manual payroll systems with Forms W-4 from 2020 or later in 
Appendix C for the federal income tax. The starting check number is 4215.
Voluntary deductions for each employee are as follows:
Name Deduction
Chinson Insurance: $50/paycheck
401(k): 3% of gross pay
Wayland Insurance: $75/paycheck
401(k): 6% of gross pay
Peppinico Insurance: $75/paycheck
401(k): $50 per paycheck
Cooper Insurance: $50/paycheck
401(k): 4% of gross pay
Hissop Insurance: $75/paycheck
401(k): 3% of gross pay
Success Insurance: $50/paycheck
401(k): 3% of gross pay
EXAMPLE: CALCULATING AN EMPLOYEE’S NET INCOME WITH 
DEDUCTIONS:
1. Determine employee gross wages by taking their annual salary and dividing it by 
the number of pay periods ($48,000/24 pay periods = $2,000 per pay period). 
Or when the employee is nonexempt, take this one step further to determine the 
hourly rate ($48,000/(52 weeks × 40 hours per week)) = $23.07692 per hour.
2. Multiply the hourly rate by the number of regular hours worked by hourly employees. 
80 hours × $23.07692 = $1,846.15 in regular wages.
3. Multiply any overtime worked by the overtime rate. 3 hours × $23.07692 × 1.5 =
$103.85 in overtime wages.
4. Total wages earned: $1,846.15 + 103.85 = $1,950.00.
5. Determine federal and state taxable wages: $1,950 − 50 (insurance) − 58.50 (3% 
of gross for 401(k) plan deduction) = $1,841.50.
6. Determine FICA taxable wages: $1,950 − 50 (insurance) = $1,900.00.
7. Find the federal taxes in the appropriate tax table in Appendix C.
8. Multiply the FICA taxable wages by the Social Security rate (6.2%).
9. Multiply the FICA taxable wages by the Medicare rate (1.45%).
10. Multiply the federal taxable wages by the state tax rate.
11. Subtract all deductions from gross wages to obtain net income.
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYAppendix A  Comprehensive Payroll Project: Wayland Custom Woodworking   409
lan43463_appA_404-447.indd 409 06/06/23 06:38 pm
Complete the Payroll Register for October 15
P/R End Date Company Name Wayland Custom Woodworking
Check Date
Name
Filing
Status Dependents
Hourly
Rate or
Period
Wage
No. of
Regular
Hours
No. of
Overtime
Hours
No. of
Holiday
Hours Commissions
Gross
Earnings Sec 125 401(k)
Taxable
Wages
for
Federal
W/H
Taxable 
Wages
for
FICA
Anthony Chinson
Mark Wayland
Sylvia Peppinico
Stevon Cooper
Leonard Hissop
Student Success
Totals
Name
Gross
Earnings
Taxable
Wages for
Federal
W/H
Taxable
Wages
for FICA
Federal
W/H
Social 
Security
Tax
Medicare
W/H
Total 
Deduc. Net Pay
Check
No.
Anthony Chinson 4215
Mark Wayland 4216
Sylvia Peppinico 4217
Stevon Cooper 4218
Leonard Hissop 4219
Student Success 4220
Totals
EMPLOYEE EARNING RECORD
Hire Date
Date of Birth
Position
Filing Status
Pay Rate
Period
Ended
Hrs
Worked Reg Pay OT Pay Holiday Comm Gross Pay Ins 401(k)
Taxable
Pay for
Federal
Taxable
Pay for
FICA
Taxable Pay
for Federal
Taxable
Pay for
FICA Fed Inc. Tax
Social Sec.
Tax Medicare
Total 
Deduc Net Pay
YTD Net
Pay
YTD Gross
Pay
Current 
Taxable for
FUTA
Current
Taxable for
SUTA
Step 4c W-4 Info
Hr/Wk/Mo/Yr
SOCIAL SECURITY 
NUMBER
Step 4a W-4 Info
Step 4b W-4 Info
Dependent child <17
Dependent other
NAME
ADDRESS
CITY/STATE/ZIP
TELEPHONE
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY410   Appendix A  Comprehensive Payroll Project: Wayland Custom Woodworking
lan43463_appA_404-447.indd 410 06/06/23 06:38 pm
EMPLOYEE EARNING RECORD
Hire Date
Date of Birth
Position
Filing Status
Pay Rate
Period
Ended
Hrs
Worked Reg Pay OT Pay Holiday Comm Gross Pay Ins 401(k)
Taxable
Pay for
Federal
Taxable
Pay for
FICA
Taxable Pay
for Federal
Taxable
Pay for
FICA Fed Inc. Tax
Social Sec.
Tax Medicare
Total 
Deduc Net Pay
YTD Net
Pay
YTD Gross
Pay
Current 
Taxable for
FUTA
Current
Taxable for
SUTA
Step 4c W-4 Info
Hr/Wk/Mo/Yr
SOCIAL SECURITY 
NUMBER
Step 4a W-4 Info
Step 4b W-4 Info
Dependent child <17
Dependent other
NAME
ADDRESS
CITY/STATE/ZIP
TELEPHONE
EMPLOYEE EARNING RECORD
Hire Date
Date of Birth
Position
Filing Status
Pay Rate
Period
Ended
Hrs
Worked Reg Pay OT Pay Holiday Comm Gross Pay Ins 401(k)
Taxable
Pay for
Federal
Taxable
Pay for
FICA
Taxable Pay
for Federal
Taxable
Pay for
FICA Fed Inc. Tax
Social Sec.
Tax Medicare
Total 
Deduc Net Pay
YTD Net
Pay
YTD Gross
Pay
Current 
Taxable for
FUTA
Current
Taxable for
SUTA
Step 4c W-4 Info
Hr/Wk/Mo/Yr
SOCIAL SECURITY 
NUMBER
Step 4a W-4 Info
Step 4b W-4 Info
Dependent child <17
Dependent other
NAME
ADDRESS
CITY/STATE/ZIP
TELEPHONE
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYAppendix A  Comprehensive Payroll Project: Wayland Custom Woodworking   411
lan43463_appA_404-447.indd 411 06/06/23 06:38 pm
EMPLOYEE EARNING RECORD
Hire Date
Date of Birth
Position
Filing Status
Pay Rate
Period
Ended
Hrs
Worked Reg Pay OT Pay Holiday Comm Gross Pay Ins 401(k)
Taxable
Pay for
Federal
Taxable
Pay for
FICA
Taxable Pay
for Federal
Taxable
Pay for
FICA Fed Inc. Tax
Social Sec.
Tax Medicare
Total 
Deduc Net Pay
YTD Net
Pay
YTD Gross
Pay
Current 
Taxable for
FUTA
Current
Taxable for
SUTA
Step 4c W-4 Info
Hr/Wk/Mo/Yr
SOCIAL SECURITY 
NUMBER
Step 4a W-4 Info
Step 4b W-4 Info
Dependent child <17
Dependent other
NAME
ADDRESS
CITY/STATE/ZIP
TELEPHONE
EMPLOYEE EARNING RECORD
Hire Date
Date of Birth
Position
Filing Status
Pay Rate
Period
Ended
Hrs
Worked Reg Pay OT Pay Holiday Comm Gross Pay Ins 401(k)
Taxable
Pay for
Federal
Taxable
Pay for
FICA
Taxable Pay
for Federal
Taxable
Pay for
FICA Fed Inc. Tax
Social Sec.
Tax Medicare
Total 
Deduc Net Pay
YTD Net
Pay
YTD Gross
Pay
Current 
Taxable for
FUTA
Current
Taxable for
SUTA
Step 4c W-4 Info
Hr/Wk/Mo/Yr
SOCIAL SECURITY 
NUMBER
Step 4a W-4 Info
Step 4b W-4 Info
Dependent child <17
Dependent other
NAME
ADDRESS
CITY/STATE/ZIP
TELEPHONE
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY412   Appendix A  Comprehensive Payroll Project: Wayland Custom Woodworking
lan43463_appA_404-447.indd 412 06/06/23 06:38 pm
EMPLOYEE EARNING RECORD
Hire Date
Date of Birth
Position
Filing Status
Pay Rate
Period
Ended
Hrs
Worked Reg Pay OT Pay Holiday Comm Gross Pay Ins 401(k)
Taxable
Pay for
Federal
Taxable
Pay for
FICA
Taxable Pay
for Federal
Taxable
Pay for
FICA Fed Inc. Tax
Social Sec.
Tax Medicare
Total 
Deduc Net Pay
YTD Net
Pay
YTD Gross
Pay
Current 
Taxable for
FUTA
Current
Taxable for
SUTA
Step 4c W-4 Info
Hr/Wk/Mo/Yr
SOCIAL SECURITY 
NUMBER
Step 4a W-4 Info
Step 4b W-4 Info
Dependent child <17
Dependent other
NAME
ADDRESS
CITY/STATE/ZIP
TELEPHONE
Employee Earnings Records
&Check Stop
1. What is the purpose of the Current Taxable for FUTA column?
2. What is the purpose of the Dependent information?
General Journal Entries
Complete the General Journal entries as follows:
15-Oct Journalize employee pay.
15-Oct Journalize employer payroll tax for the October 15 pay date.
18-Oct Journalize the payment of payroll.
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYAppendix A  Comprehensive Payroll Project: Wayland Custom Woodworking   413
lan43463_appA_404-447.indd 413 06/06/23 06:38 pm
Post all journal entries to the appropriate General Ledger accounts.
Date Description Post Ref. Debit Credit
October 31
October 31 is the end of the final pay period for the month. Employee pay will be disbursed 
on November 3, 2023. Due to customer demand, all employees worked some hours on 10/21 
in addition to normal weekdays. Any hours exceeding 96 during this pay period are consid￾ered overtime for nonexempt employees. Compute the employee pay. Update the Employee 
Earnings Records for the period’s pay and update the YTD amount.
Complete the Payroll Register for October 31. Round wages to five decimal points and all 
other final answers to two decimal points.
The hours for the employees are as follows:
Name
Hourly Rate or 
Period Wage 
(round to 
5 decimals)
Hours Worked 
10/16–10/31
Regular (round to 
2 decimals)
Overtime (round to 
2 decimals) Commission
Chinson 96 hours (exempt) $ 1,750.00
Wayland 96 hours (exempt)
Peppinico 96 hours (exempt)
Cooper 98 hours
Hissop 97 hours
Success 99 hours
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY414   Appendix A  Comprehensive Payroll Project: Wayland Custom Woodworking
lan43463_appA_404-447.indd 414 06/06/23 06:38 pm
October 2023
Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
8 9 10 11 12 13 14
15 16 17 18 19 20 21
22 23 24 25 26 27 28
29 30 31
Complete the Payroll Register for October 31.
P/R End Date Company Name Wayland Custom Woodworking
Check Date
Name
Filing
Status Dependents
Hourly
Rate or
Period
Wage
No. of
Regular
Hours
No. of
Overtime
Hours
No. of
Holiday
Hours Commissions
Gross
Earnings Sec 125 401(k)
Taxable
Wages
for
Federal
W/H
Taxable 
Wages
for
FICA
Anthony Chinson
Mark Wayland
Sylvia Peppinico
Stevon Cooper
Leonard Hissop
Student Success
Totals
Name
Gross
Earnings
Taxable
Wages for
Federal
W/H
Taxable
Wages
for FICA
Federal
W/H
Social 
Security
Tax
Medicare
W/H
Total 
Deduc. Net Pay
Check
No.
Anthony Chinson 4221
Mark Wayland 4222
Sylvia Peppinico 4223
Stevon Cooper 4224
Leonard Hissop 4225
Student Success 4226
Totals
General Journal Entries
Complete the General Journal entries as follows:
31-Oct Journalize employee pay.
31-Oct Journalize employer payroll tax for the October 31 pay date.
03-Nov Journalize the payment of payroll to employees. (Use one entry for all 
disbursements.)
03-Nov Journalize remittance of 401(k) and Section 125 health insurance premiums 
deducted.
03-Nov Journalize remittance of monthly payroll taxes.
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYAppendix A  Comprehensive Payroll Project: Wayland Custom Woodworking   415
lan43463_appA_404-447.indd 415 06/06/23 06:38 pm
Post all journal entries to the appropriate General Ledger accounts.
Date Description Post Ref. Debit Credit
Employer’s Role
&Check Stop
Explain the employer’s role in the collection and remittance of payroll with￾holdings for taxes, insurance, and 401(k) plans.
November 15
Compute the pay for each employee. Update the Employee Earnings Record for the period’s 
pay and the new YTD amount. Employee pay will be disbursed on November 20, 2023. Any 
hours exceeding 88 during this pay period are considered overtime for nonexempt employees. 
Remember that the employees are paid semimonthly.
Complete the Payroll Register for November 15. Round wages to five decimal points and 
all other final answers to two decimal points.
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY416   Appendix A  Comprehensive Payroll Project: Wayland Custom Woodworking
lan43463_appA_404-447.indd 416 06/06/23 06:38 pm
The hours for the employees are as follows:
Name
Hourly Rate or 
Period Wage 
(round to 
5 decimals)
Pay Period Hours 
11/01–11/15
Regular 
(round to 
2 decimals)
Overtime 
(round to 
2 decimals) Commission
Chinson 88 hours (exempt) $1,050.00
Wayland 88 hours (exempt)
Peppinico 88 hours (exempt)
Cooper 90 hours
Hissop 91 hours
Success 92 hours
November 2023
Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday
1 2 3 4
5 6 7 8 9 10 11
12 13 14 15 16 17 18
19 20 21 22 23 24 25
26 27 28 29 30
Complete the Payroll Register for November 15
P/R End Date Company Name Wayland Custom Woodworking
Check Date
Name
Filing
Status Dependents
Hourly
Rate or
Period
Wage
No. of
Regular
Hours
No. of
Overtime
Hours
No. of
Holiday
Hours Commissions
Gross
Earnings Sec 125 401(k)
Taxable
Wages
for
Federal
W/H
Taxable 
Wages
for
FICA
Anthony Chinson
Mark Wayland
Sylvia Peppinico
Stevon Cooper
Leonard Hissop
Student Success
Totals
Name
Gross
Earnings
Taxable
Wages for
Federal
W/H
Taxable
Wages
for FICA
Federal
W/H
Social 
Security
Tax
Medicare
Tax
Total 
Deduc. Net Pay
Check
No.
Anthony Chinson 4227
Mark Wayland 4228
Sylvia Peppinico 4229
Stevon Cooper 4230
Leonard Hissop 4231
Student Success 4232
Totals
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYAppendix A  Comprehensive Payroll Project: Wayland Custom Woodworking   417
lan43463_appA_404-447.indd 417 06/06/23 06:38 pm
General Journal Entries
Complete the General Journal entries as follows:
15-Nov Journalize employee pay.
15-Nov Journalize employer payroll tax for the 
November 15 pay date.
18-Nov Journalize payment of payroll to employees.
Post all journal entries to the appropriate General Ledger accounts.
Date Description Post Ref. Debit Credit
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY418   Appendix A  Comprehensive Payroll Project: Wayland Custom Woodworking
lan43463_appA_404-447.indd 418 06/06/23 06:38 pm
November 30
Compute the Net Pay for each employee. Employee pay will be disbursed on December 5, 
2023. Update the Employee Earnings Records with the November 30 pay and the new YTD 
amount.
The company is closed and pays for the Friday following Thanksgiving. The employees 
will receive holiday pay for Thanksgiving and the Friday following. All the hours over 88 are 
eligible for overtime for nonexempt employees because they were worked during the non￾holiday week.
The hours for the employees are as follows:
Name
Hourly Rate or 
Period Wage 
(round to 5 
decimals)
Pay Period Hours 
11/16—11/30
Regular 
(round to 
2 decimals)
Overtime 
(round to 
2 decimals)
Holiday 
(round to 
2 decimals) Commission
Chinson 88 hours (exempt—16 hours 
holiday)
$2,325.00
Wayland 88 hours (exempt—16 hours 
holiday)
Peppinico 88 hours (exempt—16 hours 
holiday)
Cooper 90 hours (16 hours holiday)
Hissop 91 hours (16 hours holiday)
Success 89 hours (16 hours holiday)
EXAMPLE
Holiday pay can result in less overtime for nonexempt employees. Since hours must 
be worked to be considered for overtime, it is important to know when the employees 
entered overtime during the pay period.
• Employee A worked overtime for this pay period during the week preceding the 
holiday; therefore, the hours worked would be eligible for overtime pay. Employee 
A worked 42 hours in the week preceding the holiday; during a standard 40-hour 
week, the two additional hours would be at the overtime premium.
• Employee B worked the extra hours for this pay period during the week with the 
holiday; as a result, the number of hours worked would not be eligible for overtime. 
Employee B worked 33 hours in the week that had an 8-hour holiday included; 
therefore, the employee would not be eligible for overtime.
November 2023
Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday
1 2 3 4
5 6 7 8 9 10 11
12 13 14 15 16 17 18
19 20 21 22 23 24 25
26 27 28 29 30
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYAppendix A  Comprehensive Payroll Project: Wayland Custom Woodworking   419
lan43463_appA_404-447.indd 419 06/06/23 06:38 pm
Complete the Payroll Register for November 30. Round wages to five decimal points and 
all other final answers to two decimal points.
Complete the Payroll Register for November 30
P/R End Date Company Name Wayland Custom Woodworking
Check Date
Name
Filing
Status Dependents
Hourly
Rate or
Period
Wage
No. of
Regular
Hours
No. of
Overtime
Hours
No. of
Holiday
Hours Commissions
Gross
Earnings Sec 125 401(k)
Taxable
Wages
for
Federal
W/H
Taxable 
Wages
for
FICA
Anthony Chinson
Mark Wayland
Sylvia Peppinico
Stevon Cooper
Leonard Hissop
Student Success
Totals
Name
Gross
Earnings
Taxable
Wages for
Federal
W/H
Taxable
Wages
for FICA
Federal
W/H
Social 
Security
Tax
Medicare
Tax
Total 
Deduc. Net Pay
Check
No.
Anthony Chinson 4233
Mark Wayland 4234
Sylvia Peppinico 4235
Stevon Cooper 4236
Leonard Hissop 4237
Student Success 4238
Totals
General Journal Entries
Complete the General Journal entries as follows:
30-Nov Journalize employee pay.
30-Nov Journalize employer payroll tax for the November 30 pay date.
05-Dec Journalize payment of payroll to employees.
05-Dec Journalize remittance of 401(k) and health insurance premiums deducted.
05-Dec Journalize remittance of monthly payroll taxes.
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY420   Appendix A  Comprehensive Payroll Project: Wayland Custom Woodworking
lan43463_appA_404-447.indd 420 06/06/23 06:38 pm
Post all journal entries to the appropriate General Ledger accounts.
Date Description Post Ref. Debit Credit
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYAppendix A  Comprehensive Payroll Project: Wayland Custom Woodworking   421
lan43463_appA_404-447.indd 421 06/06/23 06:38 pm
Short Version, One-Month Option:
Wayland Custom Woodworking 
Balance Sheet 
November 30, 2023
Assets Liabilities & Equity
Cash $1,075,351.27 Accounts Payable $ 112,747.25
Supplies 42,240.11 Salaries and Wages Payable 14,120.74
Office Equipment 87,250.00 Federal Unemployment Tax Payable 60.37
Inventory 167,068.96 Social Security Tax Payable 4,004.50
Vehicle 25,000.00 Medicare Tax Payable 936.58
Accumulated Depreciation, Vehicle State Unemployment Tax Payable 952.68
Building 164,000.00 Career Enhancement Program Payable 16.15
Accumulated Depreciation, Building Employee Federal Income Tax Payable 1,290.47
Land 35,750.00 401(k) Contributions Payable 1,211.83
Total Assets $1,596,660.34 Employee Medical Premiums Payable 750.00
Notes Payable 210,569.77
Total Liabilities 346,660.34
Owner’s Equity 1,250,000.00
Retained Earnings —
Total Equity 1,250,000.00
Total Liabilities and Equity $1,596,660.34
Students will complete the payroll for the final month of 2023 and will file the fourth 
quarter and annual tax reports on the appropriate dates. Wayland Custom Woodworking is 
located at 12850 Old Highway 50, Glenbrook, Nevada, 89413, phone number 775-555-9877. 
The owner is Mark Wayland. Wayland’s EIN is 91-7444533. Wayland has determined it will 
pay its employees on a semimonthly basis. Federal income tax should be computed using the 
percentage method for manual payrolls with Forms W-4 from 2020 or later.
Rounding can create a challenge. For these exercises, the rate for the individuals is not 
rounded. For full-time, exempt employees, take their salary and divide it by 24 pay periods to 
get a period wage. For full-time, nonexempt employees, take their salary and divide by 2,080 
(52 weeks at 40 hours per week). Note: Leave the hourly rate rounded to five decimal places, 
as shown in the example at the start of Appendix A. After the gross pay has been calculated, 
then round the result to two decimal points prior to calculating taxes or other withholdings.
December 15
Compute the net pay and update the Employee Earnings Records with the December 15 pay 
and the new YTD information. Employee pay will be disbursed on December 20, 2023. Any 
hours worked in excess of 88 hours during this pay period are considered overtime for non￾exempt employees.
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY422   Appendix A  Comprehensive Payroll Project: Wayland Custom Woodworking
lan43463_appA_404-447.indd 422 06/06/23 06:38 pm
The hours for the employees are as follows:
Name
Hourly Rate or 
Period Wage 
(round to 
5 decimals)
Pay Period 
Hours 
12/01–12/15
Regular 
(round to 
2 decimals)
Overtime 
(round to 
2 decimals)
Holiday 
(round to 
2 decimals) Commission
Chinson 88 hours 
(exempt)
$1,680.00
Wayland 88 hours 
(exempt)
Peppinico 88 hours 
(exempt)
Cooper 92 hours
Hissop 88 hours
Success 91 hours
December 2023
Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday
1 2
3 4 5 6 7 8 9
10 11 12 13 14 15 16
17 18 19 20 21 22 23
24 25 26 27 28 29 30
31
Determining Overtime
&Check Stop
When employers pay under a semimonthly cycle, there can be more than 10 
days in the pay period. For the first December pay period, how many hours 
are available under regular hours? How would you keep track of the number 
of hours in a pay period under the semimonthly cycle?
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYAppendix A  Comprehensive Payroll Project: Wayland Custom Woodworking   423
lan43463_appA_404-447.indd 423 06/06/23 06:38 pm
Complete the Payroll Register for December 15. Round wages to five decimal points and all 
other final answers to two decimal points.
Complete the Payroll Register for December 15.
P/R End Date Company Name Wayland Custom Woodworking
Check Date
Name
Filing
Status Dependents
Hourly
Rate or
Period
Wage
No. of
Regular
Hours
No. of
Overtime
Hours
No. of
Holiday
Hours Commissions
Gross
Earnings Sec 125 401(k)
Taxable
Wages
for
Federal
W/H
Taxable 
Wages
for
FICA
Anthony Chinson
Mark Wayland
Sylvia Peppinico
Stevon Cooper
Leonard Hissop
Student Success
Totals
Name
Gross
Earnings
Taxable
Wages for
Federal
W/H
Taxable
Wages
for FICA
Federal
W/H
Social 
Security
Tax
Medicare
W/H
Total 
Deduc. Net Pay
Check
No.
Anthony Chinson 4239
Mark Wayland 4240
Sylvia Peppinico 4241
Stevon Cooper 4242
Leonard Hissop 4243
Student Success 4244
Totals
General Journal Entries
Complete the General Journal entries as follows:
15-Dec Journalize employee pay.
15-Dec Journalize employer payroll tax for the December 15 pay date.
20-Dec Journalize payment of payroll to employees.
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY424   Appendix A  Comprehensive Payroll Project: Wayland Custom Woodworking
lan43463_appA_404-447.indd 424 06/06/23 06:38 pm
Post all journal entries to the appropriate General Ledger accounts.
Date Description Post Ref. Debit Credit
December 31
The final pay period of the year will not be paid to employees until January 4, 2024. The 
company will accrue the wages for the final pay period only. Since the pay period is complete, 
there will not be a reversing entry for the accrual.
The company pays holiday pay for December 25, 2023. Due to demand, the employees 
worked extra hours on Wednesday, December 27. Reminder: Holidays and vacations are not 
included as hours worked for the calculation of overtime.
Employee pay will be disbursed and reflected on the Employee Earnings Record when 
paid. The remainder of the employer liability will be paid with the final filing for the year. 
Complete all state and federal tax forms for the year-end. Generate Forms W-2 and W-3 for 
employees, and recall that these forms only reflect wages actually paid during the calendar 
year. Employer amounts for health coverage should be reported as 1.5 times the employee’s 
premium in Box 12, using Code DD. The forms will be signed on January 12, 2024.
The hours for the employees are as follows:
Name
Hourly Rate  
or Period 
Wage (round 
to 5 decimals)
Pay Period Hours 
12/16–12/31
Regular 
(round to 
2 decimals)
Overtime 
(round to 
2 decimals)
Holiday 
(round to 
2 decimals) Commission
Chinson 80 hours 
(exempt—8 hours holiday)
$1,015.00
Wayland 80 hours 
(exempt—8 hours holiday)
Peppinico 80 hours 
(exempt—8 hours holiday)
Cooper 82 hours
(8 hours holiday)*
Hissop 81 hours
(8 hours holiday)*
Success 83 hours
(8 hours holiday)*
*Employees worked extra hours on Wednesday, 12/28. Reminder, holidays and vacations are not included as hours worked for calculation of overtime.
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYAppendix A  Comprehensive Payroll Project: Wayland Custom Woodworking   425
lan43463_appA_404-447.indd 425 06/06/23 06:38 pm
December 2023
Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday
1 2
3 4 5 6 7 8 9
10 11 12 13 14 15 16
17 18 19 20 21 22 23
24 25 26 27 28 29 30
31
Complete the Payroll Register for December 31.
Run Date Company Name Wayland Custom Woodworking
P/R Date
Name
Filing
Status Dependents
Hourly
Rate or
Period
Wage
No. of
Regular
Hours
No. of
Overtime
Hours
No. of
Holiday
Hours Commissions
Gross
Earnings Sec 125 401(k)
Taxable
Wages
for
Federal
W/H
Taxable 
Wages
for
FICA
Anthony Chinson
Mark Wayland
Sylvia Peppinico
Stevon Cooper
Leonard Hissop
Student Success
Totals
Name
Gross
Earnings
Taxable
Wages for
Federal
W/H
Taxable
Wages
for FICA
Federal
W/H
Social 
Security
Tax
Medicare
W/H
Total 
Deduc. Net Pay
Check
No.
Anthony Chinson 4245
Mark Wayland 4246
Sylvia Peppinico 4247
Stevon Cooper 4248
Leonard Hissop 4249
Student Success 4250
Totals
General Journal Entries
Complete the General Journal entries as follows:
31-Dec Accrue employee pay.
31-Dec Accrue employer payroll tax for the December 31 pay date.
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY426   Appendix A  Comprehensive Payroll Project: Wayland Custom Woodworking
lan43463_appA_404-447.indd 426 06/06/23 06:38 pm
Post all journal entries to the appropriate General Ledger accounts.
Date Description Post Ref. Debit Credit
Handling Accruals
&Check Stop
There are two typical ways of handling accruals in the following period: 
reversing the accrual in total or adjusting the accrual for the actual amount. 
What are the benefits of each method?
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYAppendix A  Comprehensive Payroll Project: Wayland Custom Woodworking   427
lan43463_appA_404-447.indd 427 06/06/23 06:38 pm
(Source: USCIS)
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY428   Appendix A  Comprehensive Payroll Project: Wayland Custom Woodworking
lan43463_appA_404-447.indd 428 06/06/23 06:38 pm
(Source: USCIS)
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYAppendix A  Comprehensive Payroll Project: Wayland Custom Woodworking   429
lan43463_appA_404-447.indd 429 06/06/23 06:38 pm
(Source: USCIS)
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY430   Appendix A  Comprehensive Payroll Project: Wayland Custom Woodworking
lan43463_appA_404-447.indd 430 06/06/23 06:38 pm
(Source: IRS)
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYAppendix A  Comprehensive Payroll Project: Wayland Custom Woodworking   431
lan43463_appA_404-447.indd 431 06/06/23 06:38 pm
(Source: IRS)
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY432   Appendix A  Comprehensive Payroll Project: Wayland Custom Woodworking
lan43463_appA_404-447.indd 432 06/06/23 06:38 pm
(Source: IRS)
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYAppendix A  Comprehensive Payroll Project: Wayland Custom Woodworking   433
lan43463_appA_404-447.indd 433 06/06/23 06:38 pm
(Source: State of Nevada)
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY434   Appendix A  Comprehensive Payroll Project: Wayland Custom Woodworking
lan43463_appA_404-447.indd 434 06/06/23 06:38 pm
Account: Cash 101
Date Description Post Ref. Debit Credit
Balance
Debit Credit
Beg 
Bal
1 1
2 2
3 3
4 4
5 5
6 6
7 7
8 8
9 9
10 10
11 11
12 12
13 13
14 14
15 15
Account: Employee Federal Income Tax Payable 203
Date Description Post Ref. Debit Credit
Balance
Debit Credit
1 1
2 2
3 3
4 4
5 5
6 6
7 7
8 8
9 9
Account: Social Security Tax Payable 204
Date Description Post Ref. Debit Credit
Balance
Debit Credit
1 1
2 2
3 3
4 4
5 5
6 6
7 7
8 8
9 9
10 10
11 11
12 12
13 13
14 14
15 15
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYAppendix A  Comprehensive Payroll Project: Wayland Custom Woodworking   435
lan43463_appA_404-447.indd 435 06/06/23 06:38 pm
Account: Medicare Tax Payable 205
Date Description Post Ref. Debit Credit
Balance
Debit Credit
1 1
2 2
3 3
4 4
5 5
6 6
7 7
8 8
9 9
10 10
11 11
12 12
13 13
14 14
15 15
Date Description Post Ref. Debit Credit
Balance
Debit Credit
1 1
2 2
3 3
4 4
5 5
6 6
7 7
8 8
9 9
10 10
Account: 401(k) Contributions Payable 208
Date Description Post Ref. Debit Credit
Balance
Debit Credit
1 1
2 2
3 3
4 4
5 5
6 6
7 7
8 8
9 9
10 10
Account: Employee Medical Premiums Payable 209
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY436   Appendix A  Comprehensive Payroll Project: Wayland Custom Woodworking
lan43463_appA_404-447.indd 436 06/06/23 06:38 pm
Date Description Post Ref. Debit Credit
Balance
Debit Credit
1 1
2 2
3 3
4 4
5 5
6 6
7 7
8 8
9 9
10 10
Account: Federal Unemployment Tax Payable 211
Date Description Post Ref. Debit Credit
Balance
Debit Credit
1 1
2 2
3 3
4 4
5 5
6 6
7 7
8 8
9 9
10 10
11 11
12 12
Account: Salaries and Wages Payable 210
Date Description Post Ref. Debit Credit
Balance
Debit Credit
1 1
2 2
3 3
4 4
5 5
6 6
7 7
8 8
9 9
10 10
Account: State Unemployment Tax Payable 212
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYAppendix A  Comprehensive Payroll Project: Wayland Custom Woodworking   437
lan43463_appA_404-447.indd 437 06/06/23 06:38 pm
Date Description Post Ref. Debit Credit
Balance
Debit Credit
1 1
2 2
3 3
4 4
5 5
6 6
7 7
8 8
9 9
10 10
Account: Payroll Taxes Expense 514
Date Description Post Ref. Debit Credit
Balance
Debit Credit
1 1
2 2
3 3
4 4
5 5
6 6
7 7
8 8
9 9
10 10
Account: Salaries and Wages Expense 515
Date Description Post Ref. Debit Credit
Balance
Debit Credit
1 1
2 2
3 3
4 4
5 5
6 6
7 7
8 8
9 9
10 10
Account: Career Enhancement Program Payable 213
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY438   Appendix A  Comprehensive Payroll Project: Wayland Custom Woodworking
lan43463_appA_404-447.indd 438 06/06/23 06:38 pm
(Source: Internal Revenue Service)
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYAppendix A  Comprehensive Payroll Project: Wayland Custom Woodworking   439
lan43463_appA_404-447.indd 439 06/06/23 06:38 pm
(Source: Internal Revenue Service)
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY440   Appendix A  Comprehensive Payroll Project: Wayland Custom Woodworking
lan43463_appA_404-447.indd 440 06/06/23 06:38 pm
(Source: Internal Revenue Service)
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYAppendix A  Comprehensive Payroll Project: Wayland Custom Woodworking   441
lan43463_appA_404-447.indd 441 06/06/23 06:38 pm
(Source: Internal Revenue Service)
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY442   Appendix A  Comprehensive Payroll Project: Wayland Custom Woodworking
lan43463_appA_404-447.indd 442 06/06/23 06:38 pm
(Source: Internal Revenue Service)
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYAppendix A  Comprehensive Payroll Project: Wayland Custom Woodworking   443
lan43463_appA_404-447.indd 443 06/06/23 06:38 pm
(Source: Internal Revenue Service)
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY444   Appendix A  Comprehensive Payroll Project: Wayland Custom Woodworking
lan43463_appA_404-447.indd 444 06/06/23 06:38 pm
(Source: Internal Revenue Service)
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYAppendix A  Comprehensive Payroll Project: Wayland Custom Woodworking   445
lan43463_appA_404-447.indd 445 06/06/23 06:38 pm
(Source: State of Nevada)
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY446   Appendix A  Comprehensive Payroll Project: Wayland Custom Woodworking
lan43463_appA_404-447.indd 446 06/06/23 06:38 pm
(Source: Internal Revenue Service)
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDYAppendix A  Comprehensive Payroll Project: Wayland Custom Woodworking   447
lan43463_appA_404-447.indd 447 06/06/23 06:38 pm
(Source: Internal Revenue Service)
Final PDF to printer
ISTUDY448
lan43463_appB_448-454.indd 448 06/06/23 06:37 pm
Special Classes 
of Federal Tax 
Withholding
Special Classes of 
Employment and Special 
Types of Payments
Treatment under Employment Taxes
Income Tax 
Withholding
Social Security and Medicare 
(Including Additional Medicare 
Tax When Wages Are Paid in 
Excess of $200,000) FUTA
Aliens, Nonresident See Publication 515, “Withholding of Tax on Nonresident Aliens and Foreign Entities,” 
and Publication 519, “U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens.”
Aliens, Resident
1. Service performed in the 
United States
Same as U.S. 
citizens.
Same as U.S. citizens. (Exempt 
if any part of service as a crew 
member of foreign vessel or 
aircraft is performed outside the 
United States.)
Same as U.S. citizens.
2. Service performed outside 
the United States
Withhold Taxable if (1) working for an 
American employer or (2) an 
American employer by agree￾ment covers U.S. citizens and 
residents employed by its for￾eign affiliates.
Exempt unless on or in connec￾tion with an American vessel or 
aircraft and performed under 
a contract made in the United 
States, or alien is employed on 
such vessel or aircraft when it 
touches U.S. port.
Cafeteria Plan Benefits under 
Section 125
If an employee chooses cash, subject to all employment taxes. If an employee chooses 
another benefit, the treatment is the same as if the benefit was provided outside the plan. 
See Publication 15-B for more information.
Deceased Worker
1. Wages paid to beneficiary or 
estate in the same calendar 
year as worker’s death. See 
the “Instructions for Forms 
W-2 and W-3” for details.
Exempt Taxable Taxable
2. Wages paid to beneficiary or 
estate after calendar year of 
worker’s death
Exempt Exempt Exempt
Appendix B B
Final PDF to printerAppendix B  Special Classes of Federal Tax Withholding   449
lan43463_appB_448-454.indd 449 06/06/23 06:37 pm
Special Classes of 
Employment and Special 
Types of Payments
Treatment under Employment Taxes
Income Tax 
Withholding
Social Security and Medicare 
(Including Additional Medicare 
Tax When Wages Are Paid in 
Excess of $200,000) FUTA
Dependent Care Assistance 
Programs
Exempt to the extent it is reasonable to believe amounts are excludable from gross 
income under Section 129.
Disabled Worker’s Wages paid 
after the year in which worker 
became entitled to disability 
insurance benefits under the 
Social Security Act.
Withhold Exempt, if the worker did not 
perform service for the employer 
during the period for which pay￾ment is made.
Taxable
Employee Business Expense 
Reimbursement
1. Accountable plan
a. Amounts not exceeding 
specified government 
rate for per diem or stan￾dard mileage
Exempt Exempt Exempt
b. Amounts in excess of 
specified government 
rate for per diem or stan￾dard mileage.
Withhold Taxable Taxable
2. Nonaccountable plan. See 
Section 5 of IRS Publication 
15 for details.
Withhold Taxable Taxable
Family Employees
1. A child employed by the par￾ent (or partnership in which 
each partner is a parent of 
the child)
Withhold Exempt until age 18; age 21 for 
domestic service.
Exempt until age 21.
2. Parent employed by a child Withhold Taxable if in course of the son’s 
or daughter’s business. For 
domestic services, see Section 3 
of IRS Publication 15.
Exempt
3. Spouse employed by a 
spouse. See Section 3 of 
IRS Publication 15 for more 
information.
Withhold Taxable if in course of a 
spouse’s business.
Exempt
Fishing and Related Activities See Publication 334, “Tax Guide for Small Business.”
Foreign Governments and 
International Organizations
Exempt Exempt Exempt
Foreign Service by U.S. 
Citizens
1. As U.S. government 
employees
Withhold Same as within the United 
States.
Exempt
2. For foreign affiliates of 
American employers and 
other private employers
Exempt if at the time 
of payment (1) it is 
reasonable to believe 
the employee is 
entitled to an exclu￾sion from income 
under Section 911 
or (2) the employer is 
required by the law 
of the foreign country 
to withhold income 
tax on such payment.
Exempt unless (1) an American 
employer by agreement covers 
U.S. citizens employed by its for￾eign affiliates or (2) U.S. citizen 
works for an American employer.
Exempt unless (1) on American 
vessel or aircraft and work is 
performed under contract made 
in United States or worker is 
employed on vessel when it 
touches U.S. port or (2) U.S. 
citizen works for American 
employer (except in a con￾tiguous country with which the 
United States has an agreement 
for unemployment compensa￾tion) or in the U.S. Virgin Islands.
Final PDF to printer450   Appendix B  Special Classes of Federal Tax Withholding
lan43463_appB_448-454.indd 450 06/06/23 06:37 pm
Special Classes of 
Employment and Special 
Types of Payments
Treatment under Employment Taxes
Income Tax 
Withholding
Social Security and Medicare 
(Including Additional Medicare 
Tax When Wages Are Paid in 
Excess of $200,000) FUTA
Fringe Benefits Taxable on the excess of the fair market value of the benefit over the sum of an amount 
paid for it by the employee and any amount excludable by law. However, special valuation 
rules may apply. Benefits provided under cafeteria plans may qualify for exclusion from 
wages for Social Security, Medicare, and FUTA taxes. See Publication 15-B for details.
Government Employment
State/local governments 
and political subdivisions, 
employees of
1. Salaries and wages (includes 
payments to most elected 
and appointed officials)
Withhold Generally taxable for (1) services 
performed by employees who 
are either (a) covered under a 
Section 218 agreement or (b) 
not covered under a Section 
218 agreement and not a mem￾ber of a public retirement sys￾tem (mandatory Social Security 
and Medicare coverage), and 
(2) (Medicare tax only) services 
performed by employees hired 
or rehired after 3/31/86 who 
are not covered under a Section 
218 agreement or the manda￾tory Social Security provisions, 
unless specifically excluded by 
law. See Publication 963.
Exempt
2. Election workers. Election 
workers are individuals who 
are employed to perform 
services for state or local 
governments at election 
booths in connection with 
national, state, or local 
elections.
Note: File Form W-2 for 
payments of $600 or more 
even if no Social Security or 
Medicare taxes were withheld.
Exempt Taxable if paid $2,000 or more 
in 2023 (lesser amount if speci￾fied by a Section 218 Social 
Security agreement). See 
Revenue Ruling 2000-6.
Exempt
3. Emergency workers. 
Emergency workers who 
were hired on a temporary 
basis in response to a specific 
unforeseen emergency and 
are not intended to become 
permanent employees.
Withhold Exempt if serving on a tempo￾rary basis in case of fire, storm, 
snow, earthquake, flood, or simi￾lar emergency.
Exempt
U.S. federal government 
employees
Withhold Taxable for Medicare. Taxable 
for Social Security unless hired 
before 1984. See Section 
3121(b)(5).
Exempt
Homeworkers (Industrial, 
Cottage Industry)
1. Common-law employees Withhold Taxable Taxable
2. Statutory employees. See 
Section 2 of IRS Publication 
15 for details.
Exempt Taxable if paid $100 or more in 
cash in a year.
Exempt
Final PDF to printerAppendix B  Special Classes of Federal Tax Withholding   451
lan43463_appB_448-454.indd 451 06/06/23 06:37 pm
Special Classes of 
Employment and Special 
Types of Payments
Treatment under Employment Taxes
Income Tax 
Withholding
Social Security and Medicare 
(Including Additional Medicare 
Tax When Wages Are Paid in 
Excess of $200,000) FUTA
Hospital Employees
1. Interns Withhold Taxable Exempt
2. Patients Withhold Taxable (exempt for state or 
local government hospitals).
Exempt
Household Employees
1. Domestic service in 
private homes. Farmers, 
see Publication 51 
(Circular A).
Exempt (withhold if 
both employer and 
employee agree)
Taxable if paid $2,600 or more 
in cash in 2023. Exempt if per￾formed by an individual younger 
than age 18 during any portion 
of the calendar year and is not 
the principal occupation of the 
employee.
Taxable if the employer paid 
total cash wages of $1,000 
or more in any quarter in 
the current or preceding 
calendar year.
2. Domestic service in 
college clubs, fraternities, 
and sororities
Exempt (withhold if 
both employer and 
employee agree)
Exempt if paid to regular 
students; also exempt if an 
employee is paid less than $100 
in a year by an income-tax￾exempt employer.
Taxable if the employer paid 
total cash wages of $1,000 or 
more in any quarter in the 
current or preceding 
calendar year.
Insurance for Employees
1. Accident and health insur￾ance premiums under a plan 
or system for employees 
and their dependents gener￾ally or for a class or classes 
of employees and their 
dependents
Exempt (except 
2% shareholder￾employees of S 
corporations)
Exempt Exempt
2. Group-term life insurance 
costs. See Publication 15-B 
for details.
Exempt Exempt, except for the cost of 
group-term life insurance includ￾ible in the employee’s gross 
income. Special rules apply to 
former employees.
Exempt
Insurance Agents or Solicitors
1. Full-time life insurance 
salesperson
Withhold only if an 
employee under 
common law. See 
Section 2 of IRS 
Publication 15.
Taxable Taxable if (1) employee under 
common law and (2) not paid 
solely by commissions.
2. Other salespeople of 
life, casualty, and so on, 
insurance
Withhold only if an 
employee under 
common law.
Taxable only if an employee 
under common law.
Taxable if (1) employee under 
common law and (2) not paid 
solely by commissions.
Interest on Loans with Below￾Market Interest Rates (forgone 
interest and deemed original 
issue discount)
See Publication 15-A, “Employer’s Supplemental Tax Guide.”
Leave-Sharing Plans Amounts 
paid to an employee under a 
leave-sharing plan
Withhold Taxable Taxable
Final PDF to printer452   Appendix B  Special Classes of Federal Tax Withholding
lan43463_appB_448-454.indd 452 06/06/23 06:37 pm
Special Classes of 
Employment and Special 
Types of Payments
Treatment under Employment Taxes
Income Tax 
Withholding
Social Security and Medicare 
(Including Additional Medicare 
Tax When Wages Are Paid in 
Excess of $200,000) FUTA
Newspaper Carriers and 
Vendors
Newspaper carriers younger 
than age 18; newspaper and 
magazine vendors buying 
at fixed prices and retaining 
receipts from sales to custom￾ers. See Publication 15-A for 
information on statutory non￾employee status.
Exempt (withhold if 
both employer and 
employee voluntarily 
agree)
Exempt Exempt
Noncash Payments
1. For household work, agricul￾tural labor, and service not in 
the course of the employer’s 
trade or business
Exempt (withhold if 
both employer and 
employee voluntarily 
agree)
Exempt Exempt
2. To certain retail commission 
salespersons ordinarily paid 
solely on a cash commission 
basis
Optional with the 
employer, except to 
the extent employ￾ee’s supplemental 
wages during the 
year exceed 
$1 million.
Taxable Taxable
Nonprofit Organizations See Publication 15-A.
Officers or Shareholders of an 
S-Corporation
Distributions and other pay￾ments by an S-corporation to a 
corporate officer or shareholder 
must be treated as wages to 
the extent the amounts are rea￾sonable compensation for ser￾vices to the corporation by an 
employee. See the instructions 
for Form 1120-S.
Withhold Taxable Taxable
Partners: Payments to gen￾eral or limited partners of a 
partnership. See Publication 
541, “Partnerships,” for partner 
reporting rules.
Exempt Exempt Exempt
Railroads: Payments subject 
to the Railroad Retirement Act. 
See Publication 915, Social 
Security and Equivalent Railroad 
Retirement Benefits, and the 
instructions for Form CT-1 for 
more details.
Withhold Exempt Exempt
Religious Exemptions See Publication 15-A and Publication 517, “Social Security and Other Information for 
Members of the Clergy and Religious Workers.”
Final PDF to printerAppendix B  Special Classes of Federal Tax Withholding   453
lan43463_appB_448-454.indd 453 06/06/23 06:37 pm
Special Classes of 
Employment and Special 
Types of Payments
Treatment under Employment Taxes
Income Tax 
Withholding
Social Security and Medicare 
(Including Additional Medicare 
Tax When Wages Are Paid in 
Excess of $200,000) FUTA
Retirement and Pension Plans
1. Employer contributions to a 
qualified plan
Exempt Exempt Exempt
2. Elective employee contribu￾tions and deferrals to a plan 
containing a qualified cash 
or deferred compensation 
arrangement (for example, 
401(k))
Generally exempt, 
but see Section 
402(g) for limitation.
Taxable Taxable
3. Employer contributions 
to individual retirement 
accounts under a simplified 
employee pension plan (SEP)
Generally exempt, 
but see Section 
402(g) for sal￾ary reduction SEP 
limitation.
Exempt, except for amounts con￾tributed under a salary reduction 
SEP agreement.
Exempt, except for amounts 
contributed under a salary 
reduction SEP agreement.
4. Employer contributions to 
Section 403(b) annuities
Generally exempt, 
but see Section 
402(g) for limitation.
Taxable if paid through a salary 
reduction agreement (written or 
otherwise).
Taxable if paid through a salary 
reduction agreement (written or 
otherwise).
5. Employee salary reduction 
contributions to a SIMPLE 
retirement account
Exempt Taxable Taxable
6. Distributions from qualified 
retirement and pension plans 
and Section 403(b) annuities.
 See Publication 15-A for 
information on pensions, 
annuities, and employer 
contributions to nonquali￾fied deferred compensation 
arrangements.
Withhold, but the 
recipient may elect 
exemption on Form 
W-4P in certain 
cases; mandatory 
20% withholding 
applies to an eligible 
rollover distribution 
that is not a direct 
rollover; exempt for 
a direct rollover. See 
Publication 15-A.
Exempt Exempt
7. Employer contributions to a 
Section 457(b) plan
Generally exempt, 
but see Section 
402(g) limitation.
Taxable Taxable
8. Employee salary reduction 
contributions to a Section 
457(b) plan
Generally exempt, 
but see Section 
402(g) salary reduc￾tion limitation.
Taxable Taxable
Salespersons
1. Common-law employees Withhold Taxable Taxable
2. Statutory employees Exempt Taxable Taxable, except for full-time life 
insurance sales agents.
3. Statutory nonemployees 
(qualified real estate agents, 
direct sellers, and certain 
companion sitters). See 
Publication 15-A for details.
Exempt Exempt Exempt
Scholarships and Fellowship 
Grants (Includible in Income 
under Section 117(c))
Withhold Taxability depends on the nature of employment and the status of 
the organization. See Students, Scholars, Trainees, Teachers, etc., 
below.
Severance or Dismissal Pay Withhold Taxable Taxable
Final PDF to printer454   Appendix B  Special Classes of Federal Tax Withholding
lan43463_appB_448-454.indd 454 06/06/23 06:37 pm
Special Classes of 
Employment and Special 
Types of Payments
Treatment under Employment Taxes
Income Tax 
Withholding
Social Security and Medicare 
(Including Additional Medicare 
Tax When Wages Are Paid in 
Excess of $200,000) FUTA
Service Not in the Course 
of the Employer’s Trade or 
Business (Other Than on a 
Farm Operated for Profit or 
for Household Employment in 
Private Homes)
Withhold only if an 
employee earns $50 or 
more in cash in a quar￾ter and works on 24 
or more different days 
in that quarter or in the 
preceding quarter.
Taxable if an employee receives 
$100 or more in cash in a calen￾dar year.
Taxable only if an employee 
earns $50 or more in cash in 
a quarter and works on 24 or 
more different days in that quar￾ter or in the preceding quarter.
Sick Pay
See Publication 15-A for more 
information.
Withhold Exempt after the end of 6 calendar months after the calendar 
month employee last worked for the employer.
Students, Scholars, Trainees, 
Teachers, etc.
1. A student enrolled and regu￾larly attending classes, per￾forming services for
a. Private school, college, or 
university
Withhold Exempt Exempt
b. The auxiliary nonprofit 
organization operated 
for and controlled by 
the school, college, or 
university
Withhold Exempt unless services are cov￾ered by a Section 218 (Social 
Security Act) agreement.
Exempt
c. Public school, college, or 
university
Withhold Exempt unless services are cov￾ered by a Section 218 (Social 
Security Act) agreement.
Exempt
2. Full-time student performing 
service for academic credit, 
combining instruction with 
work experience as an inte￾gral part of the program
Withhold Taxable Exempt unless the program was 
established for or on behalf 
of an employer or group of 
employers.
3. Student nurses performing 
part-time services for nomi￾nal earnings at a hospital 
as an incidental part of the 
training
Withhold Exempt Exempt
4. A student employed by orga￾nized camps
Withhold Taxable Exempt
5. Student, scholar, trainee, 
teacher, and so on, as nonim￾migrant alien under Section 
101(a)(15)(F), (J), (M), or (Q) of 
Immigration and Nationality 
Act (that is, aliens holding 
F-1, J-1, M-1, or Q-1 visas).
Withhold unless 
excepted by 
regulations.
Exempt if service is performed for the purpose specified in Section 
101(a)(15)(F), (J), (M), or (Q) of Immigration and Nationality Act. 
However, these taxes may apply if the employee becomes a resi￾dent alien. See the special residency tests for exempt individuals 
in Chapter 1 of Pub. 519, Tax Guide for Aliens.
Supplemental Unemployment 
Compensation Plan Benefits
Withhold Exempt under certain conditions. See Publication 15-A.
Tips
1. If $20 or more in a month Withhold Taxable Taxable for all tips reported in 
writing to the employer.
2. If less than $20 in a month. 
See Section 6 of IRS Publication 
15 for more information.
Exempt Exempt Exempt
Workers’ Compensation Exempt Exempt Exempt
(Source: Internal Revenue Service)
Final PDF to printerlan43463_appC_455-512.indd 455 05/12/23 02:54 pm
455
Federal Income Tax 
Tables*
The following is information about federal income tax withholding for 2023 using Publication 
15-T. Specific questions about federal income taxes and business situations may be directed to 
the Internal Revenue Service via the IRS website at https://www.irs.gov/businesses.
Appendix C C
*Note: Appendix C is derived from IRS Publication 15-T. A comment to refer to pages 44 and 47 exists at the 
section end for wage-bracket tables when the taxable wages exceed the table. These page references are for 
Publication 15-T itself and not to pages within this text.
Final PDF to printer456   Appendix C  Federal Income Tax Tables
lan43463_appC_455-512.indd 456 05/12/23 02:54 pm
Final PDF to printerAppendix C  Federal Income Tax Tables   457
lan43463_appC_455-512.indd 457 05/12/23 02:54 pm
(Source: Internal Revenue Service)
Final PDF to printer458   Appendix C  Federal Income Tax Tables
lan43463_appC_455-512.indd 458 05/12/23 02:54 pm
Final PDF to printerAppendix C  Federal Income Tax Tables   459
lan43463_appC_455-512.indd 459 05/12/23 02:54 pm
Final PDF to printer460   Appendix C  Federal Income Tax Tables
lan43463_appC_455-512.indd 460 05/12/23 02:54 pm
Final PDF to printerAppendix C  Federal Income Tax Tables   461
lan43463_appC_455-512.indd 461 05/12/23 02:54 pm
Final PDF to printer462   Appendix C  Federal Income Tax Tables
lan43463_appC_455-512.indd 462 05/12/23 02:54 pm
Final PDF to printerAppendix C  Federal Income Tax Tables   463
lan43463_appC_455-512.indd 463 05/12/23 02:54 pm
Final PDF to printer464   Appendix C  Federal Income Tax Tables
lan43463_appC_455-512.indd 464 05/12/23 02:54 pm
Final PDF to printerAppendix C  Federal Income Tax Tables   465
lan43463_appC_455-512.indd 465 05/12/23 02:54 pm
Final PDF to printer466   Appendix C  Federal Income Tax Tables
lan43463_appC_455-512.indd 466 05/12/23 02:54 pm
Final PDF to printerAppendix C  Federal Income Tax Tables   467
lan43463_appC_455-512.indd 467 05/12/23 02:54 pm
Final PDF to printer468   Appendix C  Federal Income Tax Tables
lan43463_appC_455-512.indd 468 05/12/23 02:54 pm
Final PDF to printerAppendix C  Federal Income Tax Tables   469
lan43463_appC_455-512.indd 469 05/12/23 02:54 pm
Final PDF to printer470   Appendix C  Federal Income Tax Tables
lan43463_appC_455-512.indd 470 05/12/23 02:54 pm
Final PDF to printerAppendix C  Federal Income Tax Tables   471
lan43463_appC_455-512.indd 471 05/12/23 02:54 pm
Final PDF to printer472   Appendix C  Federal Income Tax Tables
lan43463_appC_455-512.indd 472 05/12/23 02:54 pm
(Source: Internal Revenue Service)
Final PDF to printerAppendix C  Federal Income Tax Tables   473
lan43463_appC_455-512.indd 473 05/12/23 02:54 pm
Final PDF to printer474   Appendix C  Federal Income Tax Tables
lan43463_appC_455-512.indd 474 05/12/23 02:54 pm
Final PDF to printerAppendix C  Federal Income Tax Tables   475
lan43463_appC_455-512.indd 475 05/12/23 02:54 pm
Final PDF to printer476   Appendix C  Federal Income Tax Tables
lan43463_appC_455-512.indd 476 05/12/23 02:54 pm
Final PDF to printerAppendix C  Federal Income Tax Tables   477
lan43463_appC_455-512.indd 477 05/12/23 02:54 pm
Final PDF to printer478   Appendix C  Federal Income Tax Tables
lan43463_appC_455-512.indd 478 05/12/23 02:54 pm
Final PDF to printerAppendix C  Federal Income Tax Tables   479
lan43463_appC_455-512.indd 479 05/12/23 02:54 pm
Final PDF to printer480   Appendix C  Federal Income Tax Tables
lan43463_appC_455-512.indd 480 05/12/23 02:54 pm
Final PDF to printerAppendix C  Federal Income Tax Tables   481
lan43463_appC_455-512.indd 481 05/12/23 02:54 pm
Final PDF to printer482   Appendix C  Federal Income Tax Tables
lan43463_appC_455-512.indd 482 05/12/23 02:54 pm
Final PDF to printerAppendix C  Federal Income Tax Tables   483
lan43463_appC_455-512.indd 483 05/12/23 02:54 pm
Final PDF to printer484   Appendix C  Federal Income Tax Tables
lan43463_appC_455-512.indd 484 05/12/23 02:54 pm
Final PDF to printerAppendix C  Federal Income Tax Tables   485
lan43463_appC_455-512.indd 485 05/12/23 02:54 pm
Final PDF to printer486   Appendix C  Federal Income Tax Tables
lan43463_appC_455-512.indd 486 05/12/23 02:54 pm
Final PDF to printerAppendix C  Federal Income Tax Tables   487
lan43463_appC_455-512.indd 487 05/12/23 02:54 pm
Final PDF to printer488   Appendix C  Federal Income Tax Tables
lan43463_appC_455-512.indd 488 05/12/23 02:54 pm
Final PDF to printerAppendix C  Federal Income Tax Tables   489
lan43463_appC_455-512.indd 489 05/12/23 02:54 pm
Final PDF to printer490   Appendix C  Federal Income Tax Tables
lan43463_appC_455-512.indd 490 05/12/23 02:54 pm
Final PDF to printerAppendix C  Federal Income Tax Tables   491
lan43463_appC_455-512.indd 491 05/12/23 02:54 pm
Final PDF to printer492   Appendix C  Federal Income Tax Tables
lan43463_appC_455-512.indd 492 05/12/23 02:54 pm
Final PDF to printerAppendix C  Federal Income Tax Tables   493
lan43463_appC_455-512.indd 493 05/12/23 02:54 pm
Final PDF to printer494   Appendix C  Federal Income Tax Tables
lan43463_appC_455-512.indd 494 05/12/23 02:54 pm
Final PDF to printerAppendix C  Federal Income Tax Tables   495
lan43463_appC_455-512.indd 495 05/12/23 02:54 pm
Final PDF to printer496   Appendix C  Federal Income Tax Tables
lan43463_appC_455-512.indd 496 05/12/23 02:54 pm
Final PDF to printerAppendix C  Federal Income Tax Tables   497
lan43463_appC_455-512.indd 497 05/12/23 02:54 pm
Final PDF to printer498   Appendix C  Federal Income Tax Tables
lan43463_appC_455-512.indd 498 05/12/23 02:54 pm
Final PDF to printerAppendix C  Federal Income Tax Tables   499
lan43463_appC_455-512.indd 499 05/12/23 02:54 pm
Final PDF to printer500   Appendix C  Federal Income Tax Tables
lan43463_appC_455-512.indd 500 05/12/23 02:54 pm
Final PDF to printerAppendix C  Federal Income Tax Tables   501
lan43463_appC_455-512.indd 501 05/12/23 02:54 pm
(Source: Internal Revenue Service)
Final PDF to printer502   Appendix C  Federal Income Tax Tables
lan43463_appC_455-512.indd 502 05/12/23 02:54 pm
Final PDF to printerAppendix C  Federal Income Tax Tables   503
lan43463_appC_455-512.indd 503 05/12/23 02:54 pm
Final PDF to printer504   Appendix C  Federal Income Tax Tables
lan43463_appC_455-512.indd 504 05/12/23 02:54 pm
Final PDF to printerAppendix C  Federal Income Tax Tables   505
lan43463_appC_455-512.indd 505 05/12/23 02:54 pm
Final PDF to printer506   Appendix C  Federal Income Tax Tables
lan43463_appC_455-512.indd 506 05/12/23 02:54 pm
Final PDF to printerAppendix C  Federal Income Tax Tables   507
lan43463_appC_455-512.indd 507 05/12/23 02:54 pm
(Source: Internal Revenue Service)
Final PDF to printer508   Appendix C  Federal Income Tax Tables
lan43463_appC_455-512.indd 508 05/12/23 02:54 pm
Final PDF to printerAppendix C  Federal Income Tax Tables   509
lan43463_appC_455-512.indd 509 05/12/23 02:54 pm
Final PDF to printer510   Appendix C  Federal Income Tax Tables
lan43463_appC_455-512.indd 510 05/12/23 02:54 pm
Final PDF to printerAppendix C  Federal Income Tax Tables   511
lan43463_appC_455-512.indd 511 05/12/23 02:54 pm
Final PDF to printer512   Appendix C  Federal Income Tax Tables
lan43463_appC_455-512.indd 512 05/12/23 02:54 pm
Final PDF to printerlan43463_appD_513-517.indd 513 06/06/23 06:45 pm
513
State Income Tax 
Information
The employee income tax rates for each state for 2023 are presented below. Tax Bracket refers 
to the year-to-date earnings of the individual. Marginal Tax Rate refers to the amount of tax 
actually collected on each dollar the employee earns and is subject to change as the employ￾ee’s earnings increase during the year. Note that the tax bracket, although generally pertaining 
to payroll-related income, also applies to other sources of personal revenue such as interest 
and dividends. With the exception of states with no income tax, each state’s revenue tables 
were the sources for this table.
State Tax Bracket (Single) Tax Bracket (Married) Marginal Tax Rate
Alabama $0+
$500+
$3,000+
$0+
$1,000+
$6,000+
2.0%
4.0%
5.0%
Alaska $0+ $0+ 0%
Arizona $0+ $0+ 2.5%
Arkansas $0+
$4,800+
$9,500+
$14,300+
$23,600+
$39,700+
$0+
$4,800+
$9,500+
$14,300+
$23,600+
$39,700+
0.0%
2.0%
3.0%
3.4%
5.0%
5.9%
California $0+
$10,099+
$23,942+
$37,788+
$52,455+
$66,295+
$338,639+
$406,364+
$677,275+
$1,000,000+
$0+
$20,198+
$47,884+
$75,576+
$104,910+
$132,590+
$677,278+
$812,728+
$1,000,000+
$1,354,550+
1.1%
2.2%
4.4%
6.6%
8.8%
10.23%
11.33%
12.43%
13.53%
14.63%
Colorado $0+ $0+ 4.40%
Appendix D D
(continued)
Final PDF to printer514   Appendix D  State Income Tax Information
lan43463_appD_513-517.indd 514 06/06/23 06:45 pm
State Tax Bracket (Single) Tax Bracket (Married) Marginal Tax Rate
Connecticut $0+
$10,000+
$50,000+
$100,000+
$200,000+
$250,000+
$500,000+
$0+
$20,000+
$100,000+
$200,000+
$400,000+
$500,000+
$1,000,000+
3.0%
5.0%
5.50%
6.0%
6.50%
6.90%
6.99%
Delaware $2,000+
$5,000+
$10,001+
$20,000+
$25,000+
$60,000+
$2,000+
$5,000+
$10,001+
$20,000+
$25,000+
$60,000+
2.20%
3.90%
4.80%
5.20%
5.50%
5.95%
District of Columbia $0+
$10,000+
$40,000+
$60,000+
$250,000+
$500,000+
$1,000,000+
$0+
$10,000+
$40,000+
$60,000+
$250,000+
$500,000+
$1,000,000+
4.0%
6.0%
6.50%
8.50%
9.25%
9.75%
10.75%
Florida $0+ $0+ 0%
Georgia $0
$750+
$2,250+
$3,750+
$5,250+
$7,000+
$0+
$1,000+
$3,000+
$5,000+
$7,000+
$10,000+
1.0%
2.0%
3.0%
4.0%
5.0%
5.75%
Hawaii $0+
$2,400+
$4,800+
$9,600+
$14,400+
$19,200+
$24,000+
$36,000+
$48,000+
$150,000+
$175,000+
$200,000+
$0+
$4,800+
$9,600+
$19,200+
$28,800+
$38,400+
$48,000+
$72,000+
$96,000+
$300,000+
$350,000+
$400,000+
1.40%
3.20%
5.50%
6.40%
6.80%
7.20%
7.60%
7.90%
8.25%
9.00%
10.00%
11.00%
Idaho $0+
$1,588
$4,763+
$7,939+
$0+
$3,176
$9,526+
$15,878+
1.0%
3.0%
4.5%
6.625%
Illinois $0+ $0+ 4.95%
Indiana $0+ $0+ 3.15%
Final PDF to printerAppendix D  State Income Tax Information   515
lan43463_appD_513-517.indd 515 06/06/23 06:45 pm
State Tax Bracket (Single) Tax Bracket (Married) Marginal Tax Rate
Iowa $0+
$6,001+
$30,001+
$75,0001+
$0+
$12,001+
$60,001+
$150,001+
4.4%
4.82%
5.7%
6.0%
Kansas $0+
$15,000+
$30,000+
$0+
$30,000+
$60,000+
3.10%
5.25%
5.70%
Kentucky $0+ $0+ 4.5%
Louisiana $0+
$12,500+
$50,000+
$0+
$25,000+
$100,000+
1.85%
3.50%
4.25%
Maine $0+
$24,500+
$58,850+
$0+
$49,050+
$116,100+
5.80%
6.75%
7.15%
Maryland $0+
$1,000+
$2,000+
$3,000+
$100,000+
$125,000+
$150,000+
$250,000+
$0+
$1,000+
$2,000+
$3,000+
$150,000+
$175,000+
$225,000+
$300,000+
2.00%
3.00%
4.00%
4.75%
5.00%
5.25%
5.50%
5.75%
Massachusetts $0+ $0+ 5.0%
Michigan $0+ $0+ 4.05%
Minnesota $0+
$30,070+
$98,760+
$183,340+
$0+
$43,950+
$174,610+
$304,970+
5.35%
6.80%
7.85%
9.85%
Mississippi $0+
$4,000+
$5,000+
$10,000+
$0+
$4,000+
$5,000+
$10,000+
0%
3.0%
4.0%
5.0%
Missouri $0+
$1,207+
$2,414+
$3,621+
$4,828+
$6,035+
$7,242+
$8,449+
$0+
$1,207+
$2,414+
$3,621+
$4,828+
$6,035+
$7,242+
$8,440+
0%
2.0%
2.5%
3.0%
3.5%
4.0%
4.5%
4.95%
Montana $0+
$7,630+
$16,350+
$130,790+
$0+
$7,630+
$16,350+
$130,790+
1.8%
4.4%
6.0%
6.6%
(continued)
Final PDF to printer516   Appendix D  State Income Tax Information
lan43463_appD_513-517.indd 516 06/06/23 06:45 pm
State Tax Bracket (Single) Tax Bracket (Married) Marginal Tax Rate
Nebraska $0+
$3,660+
$5,990+
$19,470+
$28,210+
$35,820+
$33,635
$0+
$7,530+
$11,610+
$28,910+
$44,980+
$55,810+
$74,010+
0%
2.26%
3.22%
4.91%
6.20%
6.39%
6.75%
Nevada $0+ $0+ 0%
New Hampshire $0+ $0+ 0%
New Jersey $0+
$20,000+
$35,000+
$40,000+
$75,000+
$500,000+
$1,000,000+
$0+
$20,000+
$50,000+
$70,000+
$80,000+
$150,000+
$500,000+
$1,000,000+
1.40%
1.75%
3.50%s*/2.45%m**
5.525%s/3.50%m
6.37%s/5.525%m
8.97%s/6.37%m
10.75%s/8.97%m
10.75%
New Mexico $0+
$6,925+
$12,425+
$17,925+
$22,925+
$216,925+
$0+
$13,850+
$21,850+
$29,850+
$37,850+
$328,850+
0%
1.70%
3.20%
4.70%
4.90%
5.90%
New York 
(See New York 
Income tax booklet)
$0+
$8,500+
$11,700+
$13,900+
$80,650+
$96,800+
$107,650+
$157,650+
$215,400+
$265,400+
$1,077,550+
$5,000,000+
$25,000,000+
$0+
$8,500+
$11,700+
$13,900+
$80,650+
$96,800+
$107,650+
$157,650+
$211,550+
$323,200+
$373,200+
$1,077,550+
$2,155,350
$5,000,000
$5,000,000
4.00%
4.50%
5.25%
5.50%
6.00%
7.14%s/6.67%m
7.64%s/7.17%m
6.50%s/8.11%m
11.01%s/6.50%m
6.50%s/12.84%m
7.35%m
10.45%s/7.65%m
10.45%m
11.10%
11.70%
North Carolina $0+ $0+ 4.75%
North Dakota $0+
$6,950+
$51,650+
$98,100+
$115,250+
$498,275+
$0+
$13,850+
$51,225+
$104,125+
$151,400+
$259,525+
0%
1.10%
2.04%
2.27%
2.64%
2.90%
Final PDF to printerAppendix D  State Income Tax Information   517
lan43463_appD_513-517.indd 517 06/06/23 06:45 pm
State Tax Bracket (Single) Tax Bracket (Married) Marginal Tax Rate
Ohio $26,050+
$46,100+
$92,150+
$115,300+
$26,050+
$46,100+
$92,150+
$115,300+
2.765%
3.226%
3.688%
3.990%
Oklahoma $0+
$6,350+
$7,350+
$8,850+
$11,250+
$13,550+
$0+
$12,700+
$14,700+
$17,700+
$22,500+
$24,900+
0.25%
0.75%
1.75%
2.75%
3.75%
4.75%
Oregon $0+
$4,050+
$10,200+
$125,000+
$0+
$8,100+
$20,400+
$250,000+
4.75%
6.75%
8.75%
9.90%
Pennsylvania $0+ $0+ 3.07%
Rhode Island $0+
$73,450+
$166,950+
$0+
$73,450+
$166,950+
3.75%
4.75%
5.99%
South Carolina $0+
$3,300+
$16,880+
$0+
$3,300+
$16,880+
0%
3.0%
6.5%
South Dakota $0+ $0+ 0%
Tennessee $0+ $0+ 0%
Texas $0+ $0+ 0%
Utah $0+ $0+ 4.85%
Vermont $0+
$3,500+
$48,900+
$113,550+
$233,050+
$0+
$10,538+
$86,388+
$193,938+
$289,988+
0%
3.35%
6.60%
7.60%
8.75%
Virginia $0+
$3,000+
$5,000+
$17,000+
$0+
$3,000+
$5,000+
$17,000+
2.0%
3.0%
5.0%
5.75%
Washington $0+ $0+ 0%
West Virginia $0+
$10,000+
$25,000+
$40,000+
$60,000+
$0+
$6,000+
$15,000+
$24,000+
$36,000+
3.0%
4.0%
4.5%
6.0%
6.5%
Wisconsin $0+
$12,760+
$25,520+
$280,950+
$0+
$17,010+
$34,030+
$374,600+
3.54%
4.65%
5.30%
7.65%
Wyoming $0+ $0+ 0%
*s = single
**m = married
Final PDF to printer518
lan43463_appE_518-522.indd 518 05/12/23 03:03 pm
State Revenue Department 
or Labor Information
The following are state revenue or labor offices. Where possible, the email address is 
included. Many states have an Internet email submission form or live chat availability to 
answer questions.
Appendix E E
Alabama
Department of Revenue
50 North Ripley Street
P.O. Box 303500
Montgomery, AL 36130
334-242-1170
www.revenue.alabama.gov
Alaska
Department of Revenue
P.O. Box 110400
Juneau, AK 99811-0400
907-465-2300
www.dor.alaska.gov
Arizona
Department of Revenue
1600 West Monroe Street
Phoenix, AZ 85007
602-255-3381
www.azdor.gov
Arkansas
Department of Finance and 
Administration
1900 W 7th, Ste 2047
Little Rock, AR 72201
501-682-7025
www.dfa.arkansas.gov
California
Employment Development 
Department
3321 Power Inn Road, Suite 220
Sacramento, CA 95826
888-745-3886
www.edd.ca.gov
Colorado
Department of Revenue
1881 Pierce Street, Entrance B
Lakewood, CO 80214
303-238-7378
cdor.colorado.gov/
Final PDF to printerAppendix E  State Revenue Department or Labor Information   519
lan43463_appE_518-522.indd 519 05/12/23 03:03 pm
Connecticut
Department of Labor
200 Folly Brook Blvd.
Wethersfield, CT 06109
860-263-6000
www.portal.ct.gov/DRS
Delaware
Division of Revenue - Wilmington 
Office
820 N. French Street
Wilmington, DE 19801
302-577-8200
www.revenue.delaware.gov
District of Columbia
Office of Tax and Revenue
1101 4th Street, SW Suite 270
West, Washington, DC 20024
202-727-4829
https://otr.cfo.dc.gov/
Florida
Department of Revenue
5050 West Tennessee Street
Tallahassee, FL 32399
850-717-6570
www.floridarevenue.com
Georgia
Department of Revenue
1800 Century Boulevard, NE, 
Suite 12000
Atlanta, GA 30345
877-423-6711
www.dor.georgia.gov
Hawaii
Department of Taxation
830 Punchbowl Street
Honolulu, HI 96813
808-587-1418
www.tax.hawaii.gov
Idaho
State Tax Commission
11321 W. Chinden Blvd.
Boise, ID 83714
208-334-7660
www.tax.idaho.gov
Illinois
Department of Revenue
555 West Monroe, Suite 1100
Chicago, IL 60661
800-732-8866
www.illinois.gov/agencies/agency.
idor.html
Indiana
Department of Revenue
100 N Senate Avenue, IGCN, 
Room N105
Indianapolis, IN 46204
317-232-2240
www.in.gov/dor
Iowa
Department of Revenue
Hoover State Office Building - 1st 
Floor
1305 E. Walnut
Des Moines, IA 50319
515-281-3114
www.tax.iowa.gov
Kansas
Department of Revenue
P.O. Box 3506
Topeka, KS 66625-3506
785-368-8222
www.ksrevenue.gov
Kentucky
Department of Revenue
501 High Street
Frankfort, KY 40601
502-564-4581
www.revenue.ky.gov
Final PDF to printer520   Appendix E  State Revenue Department or Labor Information
lan43463_appE_518-522.indd 520 05/12/23 03:03 pm
Louisiana
617 North Third Street
Baton Rouge, LA 70802
855-307-3893
www.revenue.louisiana.gov
Maine
Department of Revenue Services
51 Commerce Drive
Augusta, ME 04330
207-626-8475, option 4
www.maine.gov/revenue
Maryland
Comptroller of Maryland
301 W. Preston Street, Room 206
Baltimore, MD 21201-2384
410-767-1306
www.marylandtaxes.gov
Massachusetts
Department of Revenue
100 Cambridge Street, 2nd Floor
Boston, MA 02114
617-626-2700
www.mass.gov/orgs/massachusetts￾department-of-revenue
Michigan
Department of Treasury
P.O. Box 30059
Lansing, MI 48909
517-636-6925
www.michigan.gov/treasury
Minnesota
Department of Revenue
600 North Robert St.
St. Paul, MN 55146
651-282-9999
www.revenue.state.mn.us
Mississippi
Department of Revenue
500 Clinton Center Drive
Clinton, MS 39056
601-923-7300
www.dor.ms.gov
Missouri
Department of Revenue
PO Box 3375
Jefferson City, MO 65105-3375
573-522-0967
www.dor.mo.gov
Montana
Department of Revenue
P.O. Box 5835
Helena, MT 59604
406-444-6900
www.mtrevenue.gov
Nebraska
Department of Revenue
P.O. Box 94818
Lincoln, NE 68509
402-471-5729
www.revenue.nebraska.gov
Nevada
Department of Taxation
1550 College Parkway, Suite 115
Carson City, NV 89706
775-684-2000
tax.nv.gov
New Hampshire
Department of Revenue 
Administration
109 Pleasant Street (Medical & 
Surgical Building)
Concord, NH 03301
603-230-5000
www.revenue.nh.gov
Final PDF to printerAppendix E  State Revenue Department or Labor Information   521
lan43463_appE_518-522.indd 521 05/12/23 03:03 pm
New Jersey
Division of Taxation
P.O. Box 281
Trenton, NJ 08695
609-292-6400
www.state.nj.us/treasury/taxation
New Mexico
Taxation and Revenue 
Department
1200 South St. Francis Drive
Santa Fe, NM 87505
866-285-2996
www.tax.newmexico.gov
New York
Department of Taxation and 
Finance
State Office Campus, Building 12, 
Room 266B
Albany, NY 12240
518-485-6654
www.tax.ny.gov
North Carolina
Department of Revenue
4701 Atlantic Avenue, Suite 118
Raleigh, NC 27604
919-707-0880
www.ncdor.gov
North Dakota
Office of State Tax Commissioner
600 E. Boulevard Ave., Dept. 127
Bismarck, ND 58505-0599
701-328-7088
www.nd.gov/tax
Ohio
Department of Taxation
Attn: Compliance Business Tax 
Division
P.O. Box 1090
Columbus, OH 43216-21090
888-405-4039
www.tax.ohio.gov
Oklahoma
Tax Commission
2501 N Lincoln Blvd
Oklahoma City, OK 73194
405-521-3160
www.oklahoma.gov/tax
Oregon
Department of Revenue
955 Center St. NE
Salem, OR 97301-2555
503-945-8091
www.oregon.gov/DOR
Pennsylvania
Department of Revenue
P.O. Box 280904
Harrisburg, PA 17128-0904
717-787-1064
www.revenue.pa.gov
Rhode Island
Division of Taxation
One Capitol Hill
Providence, RI 02908
401-574-8829
www.tax.ri.gov
South Carolina
Department of Revenue
300A Outlet Pointe Boulevard
Columbia, SC 29210
844-898-8542
www.dor.sc.gov
South Dakota
Department of Revenue
445 East Capitol Ave.
Pierre, SD 57501-3185
605-773-3311
dor.sd.gov
Tennessee
Department of Revenue
500 Deaderick Street
Nashville, TN 37242
615-253-0600
Final PDF to printer522   Appendix E  State Revenue Department or Labor Information
lan43463_appE_518-522.indd 522 05/12/23 03:03 pm
Texas
Comptroller of Public Accounts
Lyndon B. Johnson State Office 
Building
111 East 17th Street
Austin, Texas 78774
800-252-5555
www.comptroller.texas.gov
Utah
State Tax Commission
210 North 1950 West
Salt Lake City, UT 84134
801-297-2200
www.tax.utah.gov
Vermont
Department of Taxes
133 State Street, First Floor
Montpelier, VT 05633
802-828-2551
www.tax.vermont.gov
Virginia
Virginia Tax
Office of Customer Services
P.O. Box 1115
Richmond, VA 23218-1115
804-367-8037
www.tax.virginia.gov
Washington
Department of Revenue
2101 4th Ave Suite 1400
Seattle, WA 98121
360-705-6705
www.dor.wa.gov
West Virginia
Department of Revenue
1001 Lee Street East
Charleston, WV 25301
304-558-3333
www.revenue.wv.gov
Wisconsin
Department of Revenue
2135 Rimrock Road
Madison, WI 53713
608-266-2772
www.revenue.wi.gov
Wyoming
Department of Revenue
122 West 25th Street, Suite E301
Herschler Building East
Cheyenne, WY 82002
307-777-5275
revenue.wyo.gov
Final PDF to printerlan43463_appF_523-526.indd 523 05/12/23 03:10 pm
523
Payroll Certification 
Information
Payroll certification examinations are available to document mastery of payroll account￾ing topics. The National Association of Certified Professional Bookkeepers (NACPB), 
the American Institute of Professional Bookkeepers (AIPB), and the American Payroll 
Association (APA) each offer certification exams. Contact details for each examination are at 
the end of this appendix.
Correlation of Certification Exam Topics and 
Specific Learning Objectives
The following table contains information about the topics covered by each payroll certifica￾tion and the location of that information in this text.
Payroll Certification Exam Topics Learning Objective
401(k) plans 4-2, 4-5
Account classification 7-2, 7-3
Accounting terminology 7-2
Additional Medicare tax—highly compensated employees 1-2, 5-3
Advances and overpayments 5-5
Affordable Care Act Form 1095 1-2
Benefits costs and benchmarking 6-6, 7-6
Bonuses and commissions 3-2, 3-6
Cafeteria (Section 125) plans 4-2
Calculation of FICA taxes (Social Security and Medicare): Employee 5-3
Calculation of FICA taxes (Social Security and Medicare): Employer 6-1, 6-3
Calculation of involuntary (mandated) deductions 4-5, 5-5
Communication with IRS and SSA 2-2, 4-6
Cybersecurity 2-5
Data privacy 1-4
Data retention 2-5
De minimis fringe benefits 4-1, 4-3
Deceased employee pay 3-7
Deferred compensation 3-6
Docking exempt employee pay 3-2
Employee benefits 4-1, 4-2
Appendix F F
Final PDF to printer524   Appendix F  Payroll Certification Information
lan43463_appF_523-526.indd 524 05/12/23 03:10 pm
Payroll Certification Exam Topics Learning Objective
Employee classification 1-6
Employee vs. independent contractor 1-2, 1-6, 2-2
Employer-provided benefits: Cafeteria plan, awards, personal use of 
company vehicle, group-term life insurance
4-2, 4-3, 4-4
Employment forms 2-2
Enterprise test 3-1
Exempt vs. nonexempt 1-6
Expatriate taxation 2-2
Fair Labor Standards Act 1-2
Federal forms 1-4, 6-3
Federal income tax calculation: Taxable wages, tax computation 5-2
Fiduciary responsibility 7-5
FLSA provisions 1-2
Form W-4: Additional withholding, employee changes 2-2
Form 843 treatment 6-3
Fringe benefits 4-1, 4-3, 4-4
FUTA, including credit reduction states 5-3
General Journal entries 7-3
General Ledger entries 7-4
Global payroll 2-2
Gross pay calculation 3-2, 3-3, 3-4, 3-5, 3-6
Gross-up of compensation 5-1
Identifying payroll job requirements 3-2, 3-4, 6-1, 6-2, 7-2
Internal controls 2-4
IRS regulations 5-2, 6-1, 6-2
Jury duty 3-7
Leased employees 2-3
Legislation affecting payroll, contract acts 1-1, 1-2
Multiple worksite reporting 1-4, 1-5, 2-2
Net pay calculations 5-1, 5-2, 5-3, 5-4, 5-5
New hire documentation 2-2
Nonproductive time 3-7
Nonqualified deferred compensation 3-7
Nonqualified plans 4-2, 4-3
Nontaxable benefits 4-3
On-premises benefits: Athletic facilities, child care, etc. 4-3
Overtime premium calculation: FLSA, weighted average, commission, 
salary, piece-rate
3-4
Pay calculation: Regular, tipped, time worked, other pay situations 3-2, 3-3, 3-5, 3-6
Payment methods: Cash, check, direct deposit, paycard 5-6
Payroll account reconciliation 7-4, 7-6
Payroll audit 2-5, 7-6
Payroll in the United States: Employee documentation 2-2
Payroll practices, confidentiality 1-4, 1-5, 2-3
Payroll systems 1-4, 1-5, 7-5
Payroll: Process and challenges 1-4, 1-5, 7-5, 7-6
Payroll technology 1-4, 1-5, 5-6
Payroll trending 7-6
Penalties 6-4
Pension payments and withholding 4-1, 4-6
Planning and organizing payroll operations 1-4, 1-5, 2-1
Qualified employee discounts 4-3, 4-4
Qualified moving expenses 4-3, 4-4
Reconciling wages and taxes 6-3
Recording accruals and reversals 7-4, 7-5
Recordkeeping requirements, including retention
Final PDF to printerAppendix F  Payroll Certification Information   525
lan43463_appF_523-526.indd 525 05/12/23 03:10 pm
Payroll Certification Exam Topics Learning Objective
Repaying employer loans 5-5
Resident nonalien 2-2
Retirement plans: Qualified 4-2
Retroactive pay 3-7
State wage and hour laws 3-1
State withholding certificates 2-2
Stock compensation 3-2, 3-6
Tax deposits: Requirements, lookback period, deposits 6-2, 6-3
Taxable tips 3-1, 6-3
Temporary employees 2-3
Time management 1-4, 1-5
Trends: Technology 1-4, 1-5
Unemployment and disability taxes 6-1, 6-3
Voluntary deductions/other deductions calculations computation 4-5, 4-6
Withholding taxes, FICA taxes 5-2, 5-3, 5-4
Contact Information for Payroll Certifications
National Association of Certified Professional Bookkeepers
 844-249-3551
info@certifiedpublicbookkeeper.org
National Association of Certified Public Bookkeepers (NACPB), LLC 1838 N 1075 
W, Suite 300 
Farmington, UT 84025
https://nacpb.org/bookkeeping-school/licenses/certified-public-bookkeeper/
Requirement
∙ Successful completion of the NACPB Payroll Certification Exam.
American Institute of Professional Bookkeepers
 800-622-0121
info@aipb.org
AIPBSuite 5006001 Montrose Road
Rockville, MD 20852
https://aipb.org/certification-program/
Requirements
∙ A minimum of two years of professional full-time (or part-time equivalent) experience may be 
obtained before or after the exam.
∙ Successful completion of a two-part exam.
∙ Signed acknowledgment of the AIPB’s Code of Ethics.
American Payroll Association
 (210) 224-6406
 American Payroll Association
 660 North Main Avenue, Suite 100
 San Antonio, Texas, 78205
 http://www.americanpayroll.org/certification
Two levels of payroll certification are available from the American Payroll Association: 
Certified Payroll Professional (CPP) and Fundamental Payroll Certification (FPC). The fol￾lowing are the criteria for eligibility for each certification available from the APA.
Final PDF to printer526   Appendix F  Payroll Certification Information
lan43463_appF_523-526.indd 526 05/12/23 03:10 pm
Certified Payroll Professional
The Certification Board of the American Payroll Association (APA) requires that payroll 
professionals fulfill ONE of the following criteria before they take the Certified Payroll 
Professional Examination.
Criteria 1
The payroll professional has been practicing a total of three (3) years out of the five (5) years 
preceding the date of the examination. The practice of payroll is defined as direct or related 
involvement in at least one of the following:
∙ Payroll production, payroll reporting, and payroll accounting.
∙ Payroll systems and payroll taxation.
∙ Payroll administration.
∙ Payroll education/consulting.
Criteria 2
Before a candidate takes the examination, the payroll professional has been employed in the 
practice of payroll as defined in Criteria 1 for at least the past 24 months and has completed 
within the last 24 months ALL of the following courses within ONE of the following three 
options offered by the APA:
Option 1
∙ Payroll Practice Essentials (three-day course: live or virtual) and
∙ Intermediate Payroll Concepts (two-day course: live or virtual) and
∙ Advanced Payroll Concepts (two-day course: live or virtual) and
∙ Strategic Payroll Practices (two-day course: live or virtual)
Option 2
∙ Payroll 101: Foundations of Payroll Certificate Program and
∙ Payroll 201: The Payroll Administration Certificate Program
Option 3
Certified Payroll Professional Boot Camp
Criteria 3
Before a candidate takes the examination, the payroll professional has been employed in the 
practice of payroll as defined in Criteria 1 for at least the past 18 months, has obtained the 
Fundamental Payroll Certification (FPC), and has completed within the past 18 months 
ALL of the following courses within ONE of the following two options offered by the APA:
Option 1
∙ Intermediate Payroll Concepts (two-day course: live or virtual) and
∙ Advanced Payroll Concepts (two-day course: live or virtual) and
∙ Strategic Payroll Practices (two-day course: live or virtual)
Option 2
Payroll 201: The Payroll Administration Certificate Program
Fundamental Payroll Certification (FPC)
The Fundamental Payroll Certification (FPC) is open to all those who wish to demonstrate a 
baseline of payroll competency. The FPC is designed for all of the following:
∙ Entry-level payroll professionals.
∙ Sales professionals/consultants serving the payroll industry.
∙ Systems analysts/engineers writing payroll programs.
∙ Payroll Service Bureau client representatives.
APA membership and payroll experience are not required to take the FPC examination.
Final PDF to printer527
lan43463_glo_527-532.indd 527 06/06/23 06:47 pm
401(k) A defined contribution plan in which employees may 
contribute either a specific amount or a percentage of their gross 
pay on a pre-tax or post-tax basis through payroll deductions.
403(b) A retirement plan designed for employees of certain 
nonprofit organizations.
457 A retirement plan offered by governmental and certain 
nongovernmental employers in which contributions are deducted 
on a pre-tax basis.
A
Accrual An accounting method in which revenues and 
expenses are recorded when they occur, not necessarily when 
any cash is exchanged.
Additional Medicare tax An additional 0.9 percent Medicare 
tax levied upon employees who earn in excess of a certain 
amount per year, as mandated by the Affordable Care Act.
Adjusting entries Journal entries created at the end of an 
accounting period to allocate income and expenses to the 
proper accounts.
Affordable Care Act (ACA) Mandated health care coverage 
for all Americans regardless of employment status.
Age Discrimination in Employment Act (ADEA) The Age 
Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 protects workers 
over age 40 from age-based discrimination.
Allocation The storing of costs in one account and then 
dividing the costs based on a quantifiable activity.
American Recovery Plan Act (ARPA) Legislation designed 
to stimulate the economy by creating jobs and prescribing 
transparency by employers.
American Rescue Plan Act (ARPA) of 2021 Extended 
employee retention credits, family and sick related leave for 
COVID-19–related items.
American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 Extended employee 
retention credits, family and sick related leave for COVID-19–
related items.
American Taxpayer Relief Act of 2012 (ATRA) Legislation 
that prevented the expirations of tax cuts that would have 
affected employees.
Americans with Disabilities Act Amendments Act 
(ADAAA) Legislation that extended the definition of 
disabilities to protect workers from discrimination in the 
workplace.
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA) Legislation 
protecting the antidiscrimination rights of American workers 
with disabilities as an extension of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
Annual depositor Employers who have an annual payroll tax 
liability of less than $1,000 during the lookback period and are 
notified in writing by the IRS that they submit Form 944 and 
remit taxes on an annual basis.
Annual total compensation report A list of all compensation 
that an employee earns per year, including (but not limited 
to) salary, commissions, bonuses, and all fringe benefits; 
examples include health insurance, employer contributions 
to the employee’s retirement plan, life insurance, and tuition 
reimbursement.
Asset An item of value that a business uses in the course of its 
operations and from which it expects future economic benefit.
Automated Clearing House (ACH) The electronic network 
of financial institutions in the United States through which 
monetary transactions are transmitted in batches.
B
Balance sheet A financial statement that lists the totals in the 
assets, liabilities, and owners’ equity accounts of a firm for a 
specific date.
Benefit analysis A calculation of the costs and benefits of a 
company, department, project, or employee.
Biweekly payroll A pay frequency in which employees are 
paid 26 times per year.
Blockchain A digital means of transferring electronic 
currency using small amounts of data transmitted via multiple 
computers.
C
Cafeteria plan A benefit plan pursuant to Section 125 of 
the Internal Revenue Code that allows employees to designate 
specific amounts to be deducted from their payroll to pay for 
health and child care expenses on a pre-tax basis.
Cents-per-mile rule A method used to determine the value of 
a company car fringe benefit based on a fixed amount times the 
number of miles driven for personal purposes.
Certified payroll A report mandated for certain federal 
government contracts that verifies the accuracy of labor 
expenses incurred during completion of contract-related 
activities.
Charitable contribution A payroll deduction in which an 
employee designates a specific amount of gross pay to be paid 
to community, religious, educational, or another IRS-designated 
charitable organization.
Circular E See Publication 15.
Civil Rights Act of 1964 Federal legislation that protects 
employees from discrimination based on race, color, religion, 
sex, or national origin.
Civil Rights Act of 1991 Federal law that instituted monetary 
penalties for companies found guilty of discrimination as 
described under the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
Combination pay Employee compensation that reflects two or 
more discrete pay bases during the same pay period.
Commission Employee compensation paid upon completion 
of a task, often pertaining to sales-based activities.
Commuting rule A valuation method used to determine the 
value of personal use of a company vehicle based on the number 
of miles driven for commuting to and from work.
Glossary
Final PDF to printerlan43463_glo_527-532.indd 528 06/06/23 06:47 pm
528   Glossary
Compensation The total amount of cash and noncash salary/
wages and benefits that an employee receives in return for 
working for a company.
Compensatory (comp) time Paid time off granted to 
employees instead of paid overtime.
Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2018 Signed into law 
in March 2018, this act increased the funding for the E-Verify 
program, which is an Internet-based system that offers employers 
instant verification of an employee’s eligibility to work in the 
United States. It is important to note that the E-Verify program 
does not replace the need for the completion of Form I-9 upon 
employee hire because it is a voluntary service.
Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reformation Act of 1985 
(COBRA) Provided continuance of employee medical benefits 
after separation from the company.
Consumer Credit Protection Act (CCPA) Federal law that 
pertains to the percentage of wage garnishment that may be 
withheld from employee pay to satisfy legal obligations.
Copeland Anti-Kickback Act Federal legislation enacted in 
1934 that prohibits a federal contractor or subcontractor from 
inducing an employee to forgo a portion of the wages guaranteed 
by the contract.
Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Stimulus (CARES) 
Act of 2020 Provided economic support and payroll tax relief 
during the SARS COV-2 (COVID-19) pandemic to encourage 
employers to retain their employees and tax relief for businesses.
Credit The right side of the T-account.
Cryptocurrency A form of currency that is digitally 
encrypted and transmitted.
Current Tax Payment Act (CTPA) of 1943 Federal law 
enacted in 1943 that required employers to submit a timely 
remittance to the government of any taxes withheld from 
employee pay.
D
Daily payroll A pay frequency in which employees are paid 
each business day.
Davis–Bacon Act of 1931 Federal legislation enacted in 1931 
that requires federal contractors to pay employees an amount 
commensurate with the prevailing local wage.
De minimis A benefit with a very small monetary value that 
is deemed impractical in terms of tracking using an accounting 
system.
Debit The left side of the T-account.
Defense of Marriage Act of 1996 (DOMA) Legislation, 
which was repealed in 2013, that prevented same-sex marriages 
and related employment benefits.
Defined benefit A company-sponsored pension plan that 
uses the employee’s salary and length of service to compute the 
amount of the benefit.
Defined contribution A retirement plan to which the 
employee, and sometimes the employer, makes a regular 
contribution.
Departmental classification The division of payroll-related 
costs by employee function or organizational department.
Direct deposit The electronic transmission of employee wages 
from the employer to the employee’s account at a financial 
institution.
Disposable income The amount of employee wages remaining 
after withholding federal, state, and local taxes.
Document destruction The act of destroying documents that 
contain sensitive payroll and employee information.
Draw A loan against future earnings that employees will repay 
from commissions.
Due care The caution that a reasonable person would exercise 
to avoid being charged with negligence.
E
E-Verify An Internet-based system that allows employers to 
verify an employee’s legal eligibility to work inside the United 
States by checking Social Security and Department of Homeland 
Security databases electronically. It does not replace the legal 
requirement to file the I-9.
Eight and Eighty (8 and 80) A two-week, 80-hour pay 
period used to determine overtime for employees who work for 
hospitals and emergency providers.
Electronic Federal Tax Payment System (EFTPS) The 
Electronic Federal Tax Payment System, a free tax payment 
service provided for use for employers in the United States.
Employee Retirement Income Security Act 
(ERISA) Legislation provided protection for employees’ 
retirement savings, preventing employers from using employee 
savings to satisfy business expenses.
Employer Identification Number (EIN) A number assigned 
to employers by the IRS for tax reporting.
Enterprise coverage Firms explicitly covered under FLSA.
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) An 
entity of the federal government created as part of the Civil 
Rights Act of 1984, the EEOC enforces civil rights provisions in 
the workplace.
Equal Pay Act of 1963 Federal legislation mandating that males 
and females receive equal compensation for comparable work.
Escheatment The transfer of personal property to the 
employee’s state of residence when no legal owner claims the 
property.
ESOP Employee Stock Ownership Plan.
Ethics An individual’s definition of right and wrong.
Exempt An employee who is not subject to the overtime 
provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act.
Expense The cost of doing business, which may contain both 
cash and noncash amounts.
F
Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) The law established the 
idea of minimum hourly wage and maximum weekly hours for 
hourly employees, among other employee-centered items.
Fair market value (FMV) The amount of money that a person 
would spend to obtain a good or service in an arm’s-length 
transaction.
Final PDF to printerlan43463_glo_527-532.indd 529 06/06/23 06:47 pm
Glossary   529
Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (FMLA) Legislation 
provided protection for employees to take unpaid leave with 
employer-provided benefits and still retain their original job or a 
similar one with the same pay rate upon return to work.
Federal income tax A tax levied by the federal government on 
individuals.
Federal Insurance Contributions Act (FICA) Legislation 
that provided funding for social welfare benefits including Social 
Security and Medicare.
Federal Unemployment Tax Act (FUTA) Legislation that 
pays for the federal administration of unemployment laws, which 
are managed by each state.
FICA (Federal Insurance Contribution Act) tax The collective 
term for the combination of Social Security and Medicare taxes.
Fiduciary A relationship, specifically financial, built on trust 
between a trustee and a beneficiary.
File maintenance The application of all transactions, 
including any necessary modifications, to an employee’s file.
File security The protection of sensitive payroll information 
by restricting access and securely storing files.
Flexible spending arrangement (FSA) A tax-advantaged 
employee spending account as designated by the Internal 
Revenue Code.
Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act (FATCA) Federal law 
that regulates the income tax withholdings of foreign employees.
Form 940 The employer’s annual federal unemployment tax return.
Form 941 The employer’s quarterly federal tax return.
Form 944 The employer’s annual federal tax return.
Form SS-8 The form used by the IRS to determine if a worker 
is an employee or an independent contractor.
Form W-2 Wage and tax statement.
Form W-3 Transmittal of wage and tax statements.
Fringe benefit A company-sponsored benefit that 
supplements an employee’s salary, usually on a noncash basis.
FTE FTE is a calculation tool whereby the number of hours 
that an employee works is divided by the number of standard 
hours for the employer.
G
Garnishment A legal procedure for the collection of money 
owed to a plaintiff through payroll deductions.
General Journal A chronological record of a firm’s financial 
transactions.
General Ledger A record of a firm’s financial transactions, 
grouped by account.
General Valuation Rule (GVR) The method used to determine 
the value of most fringe benefits using fair market value.
Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP) A 
framework relating to accounting practice including rules, 
procedures, and standards defined by industry professionals and 
used by U.S. companies.
Gross pay The amount of wages paid to an employee based on 
work performed, prior to any mandatory or voluntary deductions.
H
H-1B visa A program that allows employers to temporarily 
hire foreign workers who possess specialized expertise and have 
earned a bachelor’s degree or higher.
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 
1996 (HIPAA) Legislation that protects confidential personal 
medical records.
Health savings account (HSA) A savings account that 
provides tax advantages for individuals with health plans that 
have high deductions via pre-tax payroll deductions.
High-deductible health plan (HDHP) A health care 
plan with an annual deductible that is at least $1,500 for 
self-coverage and $3,000 for family coverage; annual 
out-of-pocket limits are $7,500 for self-coverage and 
$15,000 for family coverage.
Hiring packet A package of forms that a firm issues to new 
employees; examples are Form W-4, Form I-9, and health 
insurance enrollment.
Hourly Wage determination based on the number of complete 
and partial hours during which an employee performs work￾related tasks.
Hundredth-hour system The division of an hour into 100 
increments used to compute employee wages as accurately as 
possible.
I
I-9 The Employment Eligibility Verification form issued by 
U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services.
Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986 
(IRCA) Legislation requiring employers to verify the 
employee’s eligibility to work in the United States or to sponsor 
their ability to work.
Incentive stock option (ISO) A type of employee 
compensation in which the employee receives a firm’s stock on a 
tax-advantaged basis.
Income statement A financial report used to determine a 
firm’s net income by computing the difference between revenues 
and expenses for a period; also known as the profit and loss 
statement.
Independence The ability of an accountant to act 
professionally without external pressures that would 
cause a third party to question the integrity of actions 
and decisions.
Independent contractor An individual who contracts to do 
work for a firm using his or her own tools and processes without 
being subject to direction by a firm’s management.
Individual coverage FLSA coverage for employees 
whose firms do not meet the requirements for enterprise 
coverage.
Integrity Possessing honesty and high moral principles.
Internal control A firm’s process of maintaining efficiency 
and effectiveness, work quality, accurate and reliable financial 
reports, and legal compliance.
IRA Individual Retirement Account.
Final PDF to printerlan43463_glo_527-532.indd 530 06/06/23 06:47 pm
530   Glossary
L
Labor distribution The classification of a firm’s labor by 
internally designated classifications.
Labor usage Report that contains details about the number of 
hours worked and the wages paid to employees.
Lease-value rule A method of determining the value of a 
company car as a fringe benefit using the fair market value and 
the annual lease as the basis.
Leased employee A person who provides services for a 
company subject to the provisions of IRS code section 414(n).
Liability A financial obligation of the firm arising from 
revenues received in advance of services or sales or expenses 
incurred but not paid.
Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act of 2009 Federal law that 
removed the 180-day statute of limitations in allegations of 
unfair pay practices.
Living wage The minimum amount that a family would need 
to live comfortably for a normal standard of living.
Local income taxes Payroll taxes levied by a city or county 
government.
Lookback period The time frame used by the IRS to 
determine the payroll tax deposit schedule for a firm.
M
Mandated deduction Post-tax payroll deduction ordered by a 
court of law or otherwise nonvoluntary in nature.
Mandatory deduction Payroll deduction over which the 
employee has no control; examples include taxes, garnishments, 
and certain retirement contributions.
Marketplace A service provided through the Affordable Care 
Act of 2010 in which people may shop for and select health care 
plans.
Medicare tax A payroll tax mandated to be paid by all 
employees of a firm to fund the Medicare and Medicaid programs.
Minimum wage The minimum hourly amount that employers 
may legally pay to employees.
Monthly depositor A firm that must deposit its federal 
income tax and FICA payroll withholdings and contributions on 
a monthly basis, based on the lookback period.
Monthly payroll A pay frequency in which employees are 
paid 12 times per year.
N
Net pay An employee’s wages or salary less all mandatory and 
voluntary deductions.
New-hire reporting A process by which a firm notifies 
governmental authorities of any new hires shortly after the 
hire date.
Next business day depositor A semiweekly schedule 
depositor whose payroll tax liabilities exceed $100,000 for any 
pay period.
Nonexempt An employee who is subject to all overtime provisions 
of the Fair Labor Standards Act; generally, an hourly employee.
O
Objectivity Making decisions that are free from bias or 
subjectivity.
Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (OSHA) The 
legislation that provided guidance for safe workplace conditions.
Old-Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance 
(OASDI) Synonymous with Social Security, this is the 
original name for the social welfare structure.
On-call time The nonwork time that an employee is expected 
to be available for workplace-related emergencies.
Outsourced vendor A party external to a firm that provides 
goods or services.
Overtime Time that an employee works beyond his or her 
normal working hours.
Owners’ equity The financial investment and any 
accumulated profits or losses of the owner of a firm.
P
Pay advice A document detailing employee pay and 
deductions that either accompanies the paycheck or notifies the 
employee of the direct deposit of net pay.
Pay period The recurring period during which a firm collects 
employee labor data and pays employees in accordance with 
wage or salary agreements.
Paycard A debit card, issued to employees, that contains 
electronically transmitted wages.
Payroll audit An examination of a firm’s payroll records to 
determine legal compliance.
Payroll register The payroll accountant’s internal tool that 
helps ensure the accuracy of employee compensation and 
includes each employee’s earnings information for a 
pay period.
Payroll review Verification of payroll accuracy for a period.
Payroll tax report Report offering details of the period’s 
tax liability that an employer must file with governmental 
authorities.
Percentage method A method used to compute an employee’s 
income tax liability that involves computations based on the 
employee’s wages, marital status, pay frequency, and number of 
withholdings claimed on Form W-4.
Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity 
Reconciliation Act of 1996 (PRWOR) Legislation that 
provided social welfare relief for a limited time.
Personal Responsibility, Work and Family Promotion Act of 
2002 Act that reauthorized PRWOR when it expired.
Piece rate Employee compensation based on production 
of units or completion of an action during a specified time 
period.
Post-tax deduction Amount deducted from employee pay 
after all income and FICA taxes have been deducted; amounts 
may be voluntary or court mandated.
Posting Transferring the details of General Journal entries to 
the General Ledger accounts.
Final PDF to printerlan43463_glo_527-532.indd 531 06/06/23 06:47 pm
Glossary   531
Premium-only plan (POP) A form of cafeteria plan in which 
employee portions of employer-provided insurance plans may be 
deducted on a pre-tax basis.
Privacy Act of 1974 Protecting employees by removing 
personal identifiers from payroll records and restricting access to 
personnel records.
Professional competence The continuing capability to perform 
professional duties with an agreed-upon standard of quality.
Professionalism A process reflecting the transparency and 
public accountability of accounting records.
Protecting Americans from Tax Hikes (PATH) Act An act to 
prevent tax fraud that extended the Work Opportunity Tax Credit.
Prove Ensuring that the sum of the rows of the payroll register 
equals the sum of the columns.
Publication 15 The Employer’s Tax Guide published by the 
Internal Revenue Service; also known as Circular E.
Publication 15-B The IRS Employer’s Guide to Fringe Benefits.
Publication 15-T The Federal Income Tax Withholding 
Methods.
Q
Qualified plan A written plan for the issuance of employee 
achievement awards that does not favor highly compensated 
employees.
Quarter-hour system The division of an hour into 15-minute 
increments as a means of computing hourly work.
Quarterly depositor A monthly schedule depositor who has 
a payroll tax liability of less than $2,500 during the preceding 
or current quarter may remit the payroll tax liability when filing 
Form 941.
R
Regulation E Federal legislation protecting consumers who 
use electronic funds transfer to access their net pay.
Remit To send money in payment of an obligation.
Resignation Voluntary termination of employment, usually 
initiated by the employee.
Respect for Marriage Act of 2022 Legalized all marriages, 
including same-sex and interracial, at the federal level.
Reversal A general journal entry recorded at the start of the 
following month to undo the accruals recorded in the prior 
month.
Review process Examination and analysis of accounting 
records to ensure accuracy and completeness.
Rule The accounting practice in which the final totals of 
financial reports are double-underlined.
S
Salary A fixed amount paid to an employee on a regular basis, 
often expressed in annual terms.
Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002 (SOX) Public Law 107-204 
concerning publicly owned companies and auditing firms; requires 
appropriate internal controls and the integrity of financial statements.
Schedule B The report of tax liability for semiweekly depositors.
SECURE 2.0 Act An act passed as part of the Consolidated 
Appropriations Act of 2022 that expanded the SECURE Act of 
2019 by improving employee retirement savings and offering 
employer incentives.
Semimonthly payroll The payroll frequency in which 
employees are paid 24 times per year.
Semiweekly depositor A firm that must deposit its federal 
income tax and FICA payroll withholdings and contributions 
within three days of the pay date, based on the lookback period.
SEP A Simplified Employee Pension individual retirement 
account.
Separation of duties An internal control method in which 
payroll duties are spread among two or more employees.
Setting Every Community Up for Retirement Enhancement 
(SECURE) Act Act that incentivizes small employers to offer 
retirement plans, either alone or collectively with other small 
employers, to improve retirement security for U.S. workers.
SIMPLE The Savings Incentive Match Plan for Employees.
SIMPLE 401(k) A retirement plan for employees of companies 
that employ 100 or fewer workers. An annual investment limit of 
$11,500 exists for this type of retirement plan.
Sixteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution Allowed the 
U.S. government to levy and collect income taxes on individuals.
Sleep time Employees who are required to be on duty for 24 
hours or more may be allowed up to 5 hours of sleep without a 
reduction in pay.
Social Security Act (SSA) An act that was passed to promote 
social welfare for old-age workers and surviving families of 
workers who had been disabled or deceased in the course of 
their employment.
Social Security tax A tax paid by both employers and 
employees that is used to fund the Social Security program.
SOX The Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002. Public law 107-204, 
concerning publicly owned companies and auditing firms to ensure 
appropriate internal controls and the integrity of financial statements.
Special accounting rule Employers may elect to treat 
employee amounts for noncash fringe benefits used during 
November and December as not being paid until January of the 
following year; employees must be notified in writing by January 
31 of the following year if the special accounting rule was used.
State income taxes Income taxes levied by a state government 
on employee payroll.
State Unemployment Tax Act (SUTA) Employment tax 
requiring employers to provide monetary benefits for workers 
who are displaced through no fault of their own.
Statutory deductions Payroll deductions mandated by law.
Statutory employee A special class of employees who run their 
own business but must be treated as employees for tax reasons.
T
Tax Cuts and Jobs Act An act to provide a budget resolution 
that represented changes to individual and business tax rates.
Tax remittance The payment of a firm’s payroll tax liability.
Final PDF to printerlan43463_glo_527-532.indd 532 06/06/23 06:47 pm
532   Glossary
Taxpayer Certainty and Disaster Tax Relief Act (TCDRA) of 
2020 Modifications to the CARES Act of 2020 that extended 
the employee retention credits (ERC) through June 30, 2021; 
increased qualified ERC amount per employee to $14,000; 
changed definition of qualified wages for both over and under 
500 employees.
Temporary employee A worker who is employed by a 
temporary staffing agency and works under the direction of the 
agency on a temporary basis for different companies.
Termination Cessation of employment with a firm initiated 
by the employer.
Time card A record of the time worked during a period for an 
individual employee.
Tip credit The difference between the tipped employee 
minimum wage and the federal minimum wage.
Tipped employee An employee who engages in an occupation 
in which he or she customarily and regularly receives more than 
$30 per month in tips.
Tipped wage The base wage paid to employees who earn the 
majority of their income through customer tips.
Total Computing the sum of each row and each column of the 
payroll register.
Travel time Time that an employee spends traveling for the 
employer’s benefit.
Trend Report A report showing the increases and decreases 
of expenses or revenues within a business over time.
Trial balance An internal accounting statement in which the 
accountant determines that the debits equal the credits for the 
amounts in the General Ledger.
U
Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights 
Act of 1994 (USERRA) Legislation protecting the job rights 
of employees called to full-time service by the U.S. military.
Union dues Amounts paid on a regular basis by employees 
who are required to be part of a union as a condition of their 
employment.
V
Virtual private network (VPN) A method to provide 
employees with secured Internet connections when working 
from remote locations.
Voluntary deduction Amount that an employee elects to 
have deducted from his or her paycheck and remitted to a third 
party; examples include charitable contributions, savings bond 
purchases, and health club fees.
W
W-4 The Employee Withholding Allowance Certificate.
Wage base The maximum annual salary that is subject to tax 
liability, commonly used for Social Security, FUTA, and SUTA 
taxes.
Wage-bracket method The use of tax tables located in 
federal and state publications that facilitate the determination of 
employee income tax deductions for payroll.
Wait time The time that an employee is paid to wait on the 
employer’s premises for the benefit of the employer.
Walsh–Healey Public Contracts Act Legislation enacted 
in 1936 that required employers working on federal contracts 
in excess of $10,000 to pay employees the federal minimum 
wage and follow the overtime provisions of the Fair Labor 
Standards Act.
Weekly payroll The payroll frequency in which employees are 
paid 52 times per year.
Workers’ compensation A mandatory insurance policy paid 
by employers that provides wage replacement and medical 
benefits to employees who are injured in the course of their 
employment.
Final PDF to printer533
lan43463_idx_533-554.indd 533 06/22/23 03:55 pm
Index
A
AARP. See American Association for Retired Persons 
(AARP)
AB 1513, 133
ACA of 2010. See Affordable Care Act (ACA) of 2010
Accountants. See also Payroll accountants
certification, 523–526
confidentiality, 20
integrity, 20
professionalism, 20
responsibilities of, 376
Accountant shortage, 361
Accounting
ethical guidelines for, 19–21
human resources and, 178
trends in, 381
types of, 4
Accounting data software, 81
Accounting entries, 360
Accounting equation, 364
Accounting reports, payroll entries in, 377–380
Accounting software programs, 145, 366
Accrual, in payroll, 369–370
ACH (Automated Clearing House), 290
Achievement awards, 187
ADA. See Americans with Disabilities Act of 
1990 (ADA)
ADAAA. See Americans with Disabilities Act 
Amendments Act (ADAAA)
Additional Medicare tax, 235
ADEA. See Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 
1967 (ADEA)
Adequate payroll system design, 88
Adjusting entries, 369
Administrative exemption, 65
ADP, 23
Affordable Care Act (ACA) of 2010, 16, 194, 235
employer contributions to, on Form W-2, 307
required reporting by employers, 307
Age discrimination, 5
Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 
(ADEA), 5
Agricultural workers, 283
AICPA. See American Institute of Certified Public 
Accountants (AICPA)
AICPA Code of Ethics Section 17, 21
Alabama, state revenue department information, 518
Alaska, state revenue department information, 518
Aliens, resident and nonresident, 283, 448
Allocations, overhead, 379
Alphabet, 28
American Accounting Association (AAA), 361
American Association for Retired Persons (AARP), 5
American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU), 197
American Institute of Certified Professional Accountants 
(AICPA), 361
American Institute of Certified Public Accountants 
(AICPA), 19
Code of Ethics guidelines of, 19, 20
American Institute of Professional Bookkeepers, 525
American Payroll Association, 81, 245, 249, 525–526
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 
(ARRA), 10
American Rescue Plan Act (ARPA), 18, 293
Americans with Disabilities Act Amendments Act 
(ADAAA), 7
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA), 7
American Taxpayer Relief Act of 2012 (ATRA), 10
Annual schedule depositors, 291, 292
Annual total compensation report, 321–323
Appendix E, 85
Apple, 28
Arizona, state revenue department information, 518
Arkansas, state revenue department information, 518
Arms-length transaction, 179
ARPA. See American Rescue Plan Act (ARPA)
ARRA. See American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 
2009 (ARRA)
Assets, in financial accounting, 364–365
Assets = Liabilities + Owners’ Equity, 364
ATRA. See American Taxpayer Relief Act of 2012 
(ATRA)
Audit, 25
example of, 363
of payroll records, 363
Auditors, 81
Audit payroll records, 83
Automated Clearing House (ACH), 290
Automated systems, 72
Awards, 187
B
Balance sheet, 377, 378
Behavioral control, 52
Final PDF to printerlan43463_idx_533-554.indd 534 06/22/23 03:55 pm
534   Index
Benefit analysis, as function of payroll, 320–323
Benefit analysis report, 320–321
Benefit reports rules, 200–201
Benefits
importance of analysis report, 321
second largest expense to employers, 320
Bermudez Vaquero v. Stoneledge Furniture LLC, 150
Biden, Joe, 251
Billable vs. nonbillable report, 379
BitPay, 251–252
Biweekly payroll, 49
Blockchain technology, 251
Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), 66
Businesses
large, 28–29
payroll processing for, 28–35
Business expenses
payroll in context of, 315–318
pay-roll related entries and, 375–376
C
Cafeteria plans, 182–186
benefit of, 184
definition, 182
federal tax withholding and, 448
CalculateHours, 72
California
Employment Training Tax (ETT) in, 288, 295
quarterly contribution return and report of wages, 300
State Disability Insurance (SDI) in, 295
state revenue department information, 518
California Labor Code 226.2, 133
Capital One 360, 23
CAPTCHA programs, 28
CARES Act of 2020. See Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and 
Economic Stimulus (CARES) Act of 2020
Cash, 246–247
Cash award, 187
CCPA. See Consumer Credit Protection Act (CCPA)
CCPA disposable income, 245
Cents-per-mile rule, 190, 191
Certification information, 523–526
Certified payroll, 33–34
Certified payroll professional (CPP), 526
CFAA of 1986. See Computer Fraud and Abuse Act 
(CFAA) of 1986
Charitable contributions, 196, 241–242
net pay with, 196–197
Checks, 247–249
Chipotle Mexican Grill Inc. (CMG), 22
Circular E, 32, 216
Civil Rights Act of 1964, 5
prohibited discrimination, 5
Civil Rights Act of 1991, 8
Class-action lawsuit, 23
ClockShark, 72
Cloud-based accounting system, 30
Cloud-based computing, 33
CMG. See Chipotle Mexican Grill Inc. (CMG)
COBRA. See Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reformation 
Act of 1985 (COBRA)
Code of Ethics
American Institute of Certified Public Accountants 
(AICPA), 19, 20
basic guidelines for, 19
Code section 414(n), 67
Colorado, state revenue department information, 518
Combination pay, 149
Combination pay methods, 149–152
base salary plus commission, 149–150
different, 150
incentive stock options (ISOs), 152
payroll draw, 150
salary plus commission and draw, 151
Commission-based compensation, 131
Commission-based employees, 132–133
Commissions, 71, 118
base salary plus, 149–150
employee ineligible for, 151
salary plus, 151
tracking sheet, 132
work, gross pay, 131–133
Common-Law Privacy Act, 25
Commuting rule, 190, 191
Company culture, 177
Company framework, employees and, 318
Company policy, 154
Company profitability, labor expenses and, 318–320
Compensation, 178
Compensation laws, 153
Compensation method, 247
Compensatory (comp) time, 153
Computation method, 232
Computer-based accounting systems, 30–31
Computer Fraud and Abuse Act (CFAA) of 1986, 25
Computer glitches, 375
Computerized systems, 75
Confidential business documents, 85
Confidentiality, payroll accountant, 20
Confidential records, 26
Final PDF to printerlan43463_idx_533-554.indd 535 06/22/23 03:55 pm
Index   535
Connecticut, state revenue department information, 519
Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2018, 6, 18
Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reformation Act of 1985 
(COBRA), 6–7
Consumer credit, 244–245
Consumer Credit Protection Act (CCPA), 197
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB), 77
Contemporary payroll practices, 22–26
Contribution-based fund, 13
Copeland Anti-Kickback Act of 1934, 24
Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Stimulus 
(CARES) Act of 2020, 18
Cottage industry, 450
Court-mandated deductions, 193
Court-ordered garnishments, 197
COVID-19 pandemic, 3, 7, 119, 130, 142, 184, 239, 281, 
283, 291, 320
ARPA of 2021, 18
benefit plans, 178, 179
federal student loan garnishment, 242
Form 941, 293
HIPAA, 9
OSHA, 5–6
payroll accountants, 361
payroll system, 25
SUTA, 14
underpayment issue, 246
workers’ compensation, 16
CPP. See Certified payroll professional (CPP)
Credit
in financial accounting, 365
on T-account, 365
Credit reduction, FUTA and, 285
Cross-training, 78
Cryptocurrency, 251–252
advantage, 251
definition, 251
disadvantage, 251
Current Tax Payment Act (CTPA) of 1943, 15, 376
Cyberattacks, 78
Cybersecurity, 77–78
D
Daily payroll, 49
Data adjusting entries, 369, 370
Data privacy, 77
Davis-Bacon Act, 12, 24, 33
Debit
in financial accounting, 365
on T-account, 365
Deceased employees, wages for, 448
Deductions. See also Post-tax deductions; Pre-tax 
deductions
statutory, 280
Defense of Marriage Act (DOMA)
of 1996, 10
in 2013, 7
Defined benefit plan, 195
Defined contribution plan, 195
Delaware, state revenue department information, 519
De minimis fringe benefits, 179, 180, 188, 202
Denver, Colorado, head tax (Occupational Privilege Tax 
[OPT]), 295, 324
Departmental classification, 319
Department of Defense Data Wipe Method, 87
Department of Health and Human Services, 14
Department of Homeland Security, 58
Department of Labor, 279
Department Supervisor, 120
Dependent care assistance programs, 449
Deposit frequencies, 291–292
Depositing rules, 199–200
Diane B. Allen Equal Pay Act, 20
Digital copies, 68
Digitization, of payroll functions, 68
Digitized employee records, 68
Direct deposit, 249–250
Disability, definitions of, 7
Disability plan premiums, 194–195
Disabled worker, 157
wages, 449
Discrimination
based on age, 5
Civil Rights Act of 1964 prohibited, 5
Diane B. Allen Equal Pay Act, 20
Dismissal pay, 453
Disney, layoff at, 279
Disposable income, 197
District of Columbia, 519
Documentation. See also Employee documentation
internal controls and record retention, 73–84
laws and types of, 83
pay records and employee file maintenance, 68–73
retention requirements, 81–83
types of, 68
Documentation controls, 75
Document destruction, 85–87
best practice in, 87
defined, 85
procedures, 84–87
Final PDF to printerlan43463_idx_533-554.indd 536 06/22/23 03:55 pm
536   Index
Dodd-Frank Act, 10
DoD 5220.22-M, 87
DOMA. See Defense of Marriage Act (DOMA)
Domestic service workers, 451
Draw
definition, 150
payroll, 150
salary plus commission and, 151
Due care, 21
Duties, alternating, 78
E
EAD. See Employment authorization document (EAD)
EEOC. See Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
(EEOC)
eFileCabinet, 68
EFTPS. See Electronic Federal Tax Payment System 
(EFTPS)
Eight and Eighty (8 and 80) overtime, 142
EINs. See Employer Identification Numbers (EINs)
Electronic accounting records, 87
Electronic Federal Tax Payment System (EFTPS), 
290, 293
Electronic Fund Transfer Act of 1978, 77
Electronic records, 79–80, 85
and remote workers, 88
Ellis v. Google, LLC, 5
Employee(s). See also entries for specific types of 
employees
advances and overpayments, 245–246
American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU), 197
business expense reimbursement, 449
class, 118
commission-based, 132–133
company framework and, 318
compensated, 236–238
compensation using payroll register, 147–148
cross-training, 78
deceased, wages for, 448
disabled, 449
earnings record, 235
family, 449
federal income tax, 221, 222
file maintenance, practices involved in, 79
Form W-4, 235
gross pay, 118, 128, 218
hospital, 451
hourly rate, 147
income tax rates, 513
vs. independent contractors, 51–54, 64
ineligible for commission, 151
methods of separation, 84
net pay. See Net pay
overtime hospitals and residential care facilities, 
141–142
part-time, 295
pay methods. See Pay methods
payroll, 71
payroll register for multiple, 148
pay transparency puts pressure on, 119
personal information, 88
piece-rate, 118
primary classifications, 120
resident alien, 283, 448
salaried nonexempt worker, 144
specific payroll information, 145
supervisor, 76
termination, 84–85
tipped, 310
with two different pay rates for different functions, 
144–145
wages for deceased, 159
W-2 year-end tax statement, 194
Employee Benefits Security Administration (Department 
of Labor), 376
Employee business expense reimbursement, 449
Employee compensation plans, 152
Employee 401(K) contributions, 200
Employee demands, 3
Employee documentation, 51–65. See also Documentation
employee database information, 64
employees vs. independent contractors, 51–54
foreign workers, 59–63
hiring packets, 58–59
new-hire reporting, 59, 60
statutory employees, 63–64
U.S. workers in foreign subsidiaries, 63
withhold additional, 58
Employee earnings records
defined, 363
example of, 363
explanation of, 362–364
on Form 941, 363
function of, 362–363
General Journal and, 365–366
payroll register and, 362–364
periodic tax reports and, 363
summary of, 381
uses of, 363
Wayland Custom Woodworking, 412–426
Employee file maintenance, 68–73, 79
Employee Information Form, 48
Final PDF to printerlan43463_idx_533-554.indd 537 06/22/23 03:55 pm
Index   537
Employee-paid taxes, 280
Employee pay, 118
Employee pay-related General Journal entries, 368
Employee payroll tax requirements, 290–292
Employee retention credits (ERC), 18
Employee retirement funds, 6
Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 
(ERISA), 6, 376
Employee safety programs, 5
Employee Stock Ownership Plan (ESOP), 195
Employee’s Withholding Certificate (Form W-4), 18
Employee termination, dismissal pay for, 453
Employee wages, 66
Employer Identification Numbers (EINs), 26, 48
Employer obligation, 15
Employer-paid taxes, 280
Employer payroll-related General Journal entries, 368–369
Employer payroll tax responsibilities
benefit analysis, as a function of payroll, 320–323
Disney’s layoffs, 279
federal unemployment taxes and, 282–285
labor expenses and company profitability, 318–320
local employer-only payroll taxes and, 288
mid-year and year-end tax reporting and deposits, 
293–315
overview of, 278, 280
payroll as business expense and, 315–318
reporting periods and requirements for tax deposits and, 
290–292
Social Security and Medicare taxes and, 280–282
state unemployment taxes and, 282, 285–288
summary of, 324
trends in, 324
workers’ compensation insurance and, 288–289
Employer-provided snacks and meals, 188–189
Employers
and employee. See Employee(s)
fiduciary responsibility to remit withholdings from 
employee pay, 376
payroll-related General Journal entries and, 368
remittance, 15
tax deposits by, 290–292
Employer’s Annual Federal Unemployment (FUTA) Tax 
Return (Form 940), 290, 305–307, 313, 440–444
Employer-sponsored healthcare coverage, reporting, 307
Employer tax reporting and deposits, mid-year and year-end
explanation of, 293
Form 940 (Employer’s Annual Federal Employment 
[FUTA] Tax Return, 305–309, 313
Form 941 (Employer’s Quarterly Federal Tax Return), 
293, 294, 296–299, 313
Form 944 (Employer’s Annual Federal Tax Return), 
295, 302–304
matching final annual pay to Form W-2, 307, 310–312
Schedule B, 293, 295, 299
state tax remittance, 295, 300, 301
unemployment tax reporting, 295, 305–307
Employment authorization document (EAD), 47
Employment, growing level of, 379
Employment legislation, 4
Employment Standards Administration Wage, 13
Employment tax revenue remittances, 278
Employment termination, 84–87
Employment Training Tax (ETT; California), 288, 295
Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP), 31
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC), 5, 
24, 49
Equal Pay Act of 1963, 4, 5
ERISA. See Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 
1974 (ERISA)
ERP. See Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP)
Errors, 80
Escheatment, 248
ESOP. See Employee Stock Ownership Plan (ESOP)
Ethical principles, 20
Ethics, 19
Ethisphere, 20
E-Verify program, 7, 18, 58
ExakTime, 28
Excluded fringe benefits, 187–189
employer-provided snacks and meals, 188–189
gift cards, 188
gym memberships, 187–188
personal use of company vehicle, 188
prizes and awards, 187
Executive exemption, 65
Executive Order 11478, 5
Executive Order 13765, 16
Executive Order 14026, 12
Executive Order 14067, 251
Exempt workers, 15, 65, 118, 120, 127
leased and temporary employees, 67
and nonexempt workers, 65–67
U.S. Department of Labor guidelines for, 120
Expense accounts, 367
Expenses, 369
External payroll management, 32–33
F
Fact Sheet #13, 52
Failure to deposit penalty, 316–317
Failure to file penalty, 316–317
Final PDF to printerlan43463_idx_533-554.indd 538 06/22/23 03:55 pm
538   Index
Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) of 1938, 4, 14, 48, 71
exempt employees, 127
guidelines, 14
hourly employees, 130
legal protections under, 15
methods, 158–159
minimum wage poster, 50
minimum wage standards, 133
modified in 1974, 120
overtime calculator, 145
payroll records, 82
piece-rate workers, 135
provisions of, 120
public-sector employees, 153
regulation, 15
salaried employees, 118
salaried nonexempt worker for, 129
Section 13(a)(1), 127
Section 14(c), 157
section 7(j) applies, 141
Section 13(a)(17) of, 127
Section 14(a) of, 157
3(s)(1)(c) of, 153
U.S. Department of Labor, 129
wage and hour provisions, 131
Fair market value (FMV), 189
Fair v. Communications Unlimited Inc., 15
Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (FMLA), 8
Family employees, 449
Family leave legislation, 8
FATCA. See Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act (FATCA)
FCC. See Federal Communications Commission (FCC)
FDIC. See Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC)
Federal Communications Commission (FCC), 250
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), 250
Federal Employment Compensation Act, 288
Federal income tax, 11, 12, 220–221
computation, 237–238
definition, 220
employer deposits for, 290–292
percentage method for wages paid in 2020, 404
special classes of withholding, 448–454
withholding amounts, 220–233
Federal income tax tables, 455–512
married persons-biweekly payroll period, 487–489
married persons-daily payroll period, 505–506
married persons-monthly payroll period, 499–501
married persons-semimonthly payroll period, 493–495
married persons-weekly payroll period, 481–483
percentage method (2019 or earlier), 477–479
percentage method (2020 or later), 456–461
single persons-biweekly payroll period, 490–492
single persons-daily payroll period, 507–508
single persons-monthly payroll period, 502–504
single persons-semimonthly payroll period, 496–498
single persons-weekly payroll period, 484–486
wage-bracket method (2019 or earlier), 480–509
wage-bracket method (2020 or later), 462–476
withholding on distributions, 509
Federal Insurance Contributions Act (FICA) taxes, 13, 
234, 236, 238, 280–281. See also Medicare taxes; 
Social Security tax
Federal laws, 29
Federally mandated payroll laws, 11
Federal minimum wage, 120, 123
tipped employee minimum wage and, 123
Federal privacy laws, 85
Federal tax withholding, special classes of, 448–454
Federal unemployment tax, 218
Federal Unemployment Tax Act (FUTA), 13
credit reduction and, 285
employer responsibility for, 282–285
examples of, 284
explanation of, 282
full 2023 rate, 283
professions exempt from, 283
U.S. citizens only, 283
Federal wage, 121
Federal withholding, 179
Fellowship grants, 453
FICA. See Federal Insurance Contributions Act (FICA) taxes
Fiduciary responsibility, of employers, 376
Fiedziuszko, Slawomir, 64
File maintenance
defined, 79
practices involved in, 79
File security, 76–77
Final rule, 123
Financial accounting concepts
categories of, 364
debits and credits, 365
example, 364, 365
explanation of, 364–365
General Journal, 365–366
General Ledger, 366
Financial business transactions, 364, 365
Financial control, 52
Fixed amount vs. percentage deduction, 221
Flexible pay, 217
Flexible spending arrangement (FSA), 183–185
cafeteria plan-based, 183
definition, 183
Final PDF to printerlan43463_idx_533-554.indd 539 06/22/23 03:55 pm
Index   539
effect on annual gross salary, 184
vs. health savings account, 185
pre-tax vs. post-tax with, 184
Florida, state revenue department information, 519
FLSA of 1938. See Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) of 1938
Fluctuating workweek, 71
FMLA. See Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993
FMV. See Fair market value (FMV)
Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act (FATCA), 63
Foreign governments and international organizations, 
treatment under employment taxes, 449
Foreign service by U.S. citizens, 449
Foreign subsidiaries, U.S. workers in, 63
Foreign workers, 59–63
Form 673, 63
Form 940 (Employer’s Annual Federal Employment 
[FUTA] Tax Return), 290, 305–309, 440–444
Form 941 (Employer’s Quarterly Federal Tax Return), 
290, 293–299, 313, 438–441
Form 944 (Employer’s Annual Federal Tax Return), 295, 
302–304
Form 1095-A (IRS), 16
Form 1095-B (IRS), 16
Form 1095-C (IRS), 16
Form I-9 (Employee Eligibility Verification Form), 7, 
54, 56–58
by Department of Homeland Security, 58
E-Verify program, 7, 18, 58
payroll accountant, 58
Wayland Custom Woodworking, 427–428
Form SS-4, 26, 27
Form SS-8, 15, 51, 53
Form W-2 (wage and tax statement), 26, 31, 58, 181, 
200, 446
Form W-3 (Transmittal of Wage and Tax Statements), 58, 
313–315, 447
Form W-4 (Employee Withholding Allowance 
Certificate), 54, 55, 58, 218, 220–222, 231, 430–432
payroll tax computation using, 222–224
Form WH-347 certified payroll, 33
401(k) retirement plans, 195
number of participants and dollar contributions in, 376
403(b) retirement plans, 195
414(n) code section, 67
457 retirement plans, 195
FPC. See Fundamental Payroll Certification (FPC)
Fraudulent activity, 81, 82
Fringe benefits
within context of payroll, 178–182
definition, 176
de minimis, 188
excluded from cafeteria plans, 305
excluded, not subject to FUTA taxes, 305
exclusion rules, 187–189
flexible spending arrangement (FSA), 183–185
hallmarks, 178
health savings account (HSA), 185–186
interpret cafeteria plan types, 182–186
noncash, 202
in pay, 179
and payroll taxes, 179–181
post-tax deductions, 196–198
premium-only plan (POP), 182–183
pre-tax deductions, 193–196
purpose, 178–179
rules for withholding, depositing, and reporting 
benefits, 198–201
summary, 202
treatment under employment taxes, 450
types, 181
valuation rules, 189–192
voluntary, 181
FSA. See Flexible spending arrangement (FSA)
Full-time equivalent (FTE), 16
Full-time student wage, 157–158
Fundamental accounting equation, 364
Fundamental Payroll Certification (FPC), 526
Fund protection, 77
FUTA. See Federal Unemployment Tax Act (FUTA)
G
Garnishment rules, 196
Garnishments, 196, 242–243
court-ordered, 197
GDPR. See General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)
GE. See General Electric (GE)
General Accounting Office, 26
General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), 63
General Electric (GE), 28
General Journal
accounting conventions in, 366
completing payroll-related entries in, 367–371
defined, 365
employee pay-related entries in, 368
employer payroll-related entries in, 368
explanation of, 365–366
payroll accruals and reversals in, 369–371
payroll period, sample, 367
payroll register and, 367
payroll-related entries in, 368
transaction in, example, 365
Wayland Custom Woodworking, 412–426
Final PDF to printerlan43463_idx_533-554.indd 540 06/22/23 03:55 pm
540   Index
General Ledger
example of, 372–373
explanation of, 366, 371
payroll entries in, 372–373
posting example of, 366
posting practices for, 374
Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP), 
360, 379
General valuation rule (GVR), 189–191
Georgia, state revenue department information, 519
Gift cards, 188
Gig economy, 53, 381
Google Authenticator app, 78
Government employment, treatment under employment 
taxes, 450
Graziadio v. Culinary Institute of America
(2016), 84
Great Depression (1929), 120
Great Depression (1930), 12, 284
Gross pay. See also Minimum wage
calculation of hours and fractions of hours, 136–140
for commission-based employees, 132–133
commission work, 131–133
compensatory time, 153
definition, 118, 193
for different pay bases, 127–135
employee, 128, 218
full-time student wage, 157–158
for hourly workers, 130
for hourly workers in more than one job classifica￾tion, 130
jury duty, 155
and net pay, 118
nonqualified deferred compensation, 158
on-call time, 153–154
payroll register, 145–149
pension payments, 158
piece-rate work, 133–135
retroactive pay, 158–159
for salaried workers, 127–130
sleep time, 154–155
special pay situations, 153–159
subminimum wage situations, 156
summary, 160
travel time, 154–155
vacation and holiday hours, 155–156
wait time, 154–155
Group insurance coverage, 183
Gusto, 30
Gym memberships, 187–188
H
Hawaii, state revenue department information, 519
H-1B visas, 47, 59, 63
HDHP. See High-deductible health plan (HDHP)
Head tax (Denver), 240, 295, 324
Health and disability insurance, 194–195
Healthcare costs, 184
Health insurance coverage, 16
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 
1996 (HIPAA), 9
Health insurance premium, pre-tax deduction of, 183
Health savings account (HSA), 185–186
Healthy work-life policies, 3–11
High-deductible health plan (HDHP), 185, 186
Highly compensated employees
Medicare taxes and, 282
Social Security taxes and, 281
HIPAA. See Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA)
Hiring packets, 58–59
Holiday hours, 155–156
Holiday time pay, 137, 320
Homeworkers, 450
Hospital employees, 451
Hosted payroll accounting software, 29
Hourly calculations of pay, 137
Hourly employees. See also Tipped employees
calculating pay for, 136–140
defined, 118
hourly pay with different rates, 131
in more than one job classification, 130
overtime pay and, 140
pay with different rates, 131
salary translation to hourly rates, 128–129
Hourly nonexempt employees, 66
Hourly rate
computations, 128
salary translation to, 128–129
Hourly workers, 130
in more than one job classification, 130
Household employees, 120, 451
HSA. See Health savings account (HSA)
Human resources information system, 68, 178
Hundred, 318
Hundredth-hour system, 138–139
I
IC. See Independent contractor (IC)
Idaho, state revenue department information, 519
Final PDF to printerlan43463_idx_533-554.indd 541 06/22/23 03:55 pm
Index   541
IFAC. See International Federation of Accountants 
(IFAC)
I-9 Form. See Form I-9 (Employee Eligibility 
Verification Form)
Illinois, state revenue department information, 519
IMA. See Institute of Management Accountants (IMA)
Immigrant labor, 47
Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986 
(IRCA), 7, 59
Incentive stock options (ISOs), 152
executive salary with, 152
Income statement, 377
Income Tax Regulation §31.3301-1, 283
Independence, 21
Independent contractor (IC), 15, 52
employees vs., 51–54, 64
payment records for, 52
Independent Contractor Status, 53
Indiana, state revenue department information, 519
Individual membership, 189
Individual Retirement Account (IRA), 195
Industrial Revolution, 11
Industrial workers, 450
In-house employees, 120
Institute of Management Accountants (IMA), 19, 361
Insurance, 193
for employees, treatment under employment taxes, 449
federal income, 221
health and disability, 194–195
types of, 183
Insurance agents or solicitors, 451
Integrated software packages, 22
Integrity, 20
Interest loans with below-market interest rates, 451
Internal controls, 73–84
alternating duties and, 78
authorized signers, 74
critical issue for, 74
cross-training and, 78
cybersecurity and payroll, 77–78
definition, 73
documentation controls and, 75
document retention requirements, 81–83
electronic records and, 79–80
employee file maintenance, 79
file security, 76–77
leave of absence, 76
overtime approval and, 75–76
overview, 73–75
payroll as a non-solo effort, 80–81
review of time collected and, 75
unpaid time off, 76
Internal errors, 4
Internal Revenue Code, 182
Internal Revenue Service (IRS), 4, 6, 10, 18, 26
on classification as American company, 283
code section 414(n), 67
common-law tests, 52
employer payroll tax deposit schedule, 290–292
Form 843, 314
Form SS-8, 51, 53
Form W-4, 54
income tax withholding assistant, 224–225
on payroll deposit frequencies, 291
Procedure 98-25, 1998-1 CB 689, 77, 79
Publication 15 (Circular E), 216
Publication 502, 183
Publication 535, 187
Publication 1494, 196
Publication 1779, 53
Publication 15-B, 179, 181, 195
Publication 15-T, 227
Section 409(a), 158
Section 125 of, 182
§6672, 317
special accounting rule, 199
statutory employees, 63
26 CFR 1.6001, 79, 81, 82
waiving of penalties for failure to deposit and file, 316
International Federation of Accountants (IFAC), 19
Internet, 26
Internet-based accounting software, 31
Internet-based systems, 31–32
Internet-connected devices, 22
Interpret cafeteria plan types, 182–186
Intuit Payroll, 30
Investigative information, 87
Iowa, state revenue department information, 519
IRA. See Individual Retirement Account (IRA)
IRCA. See Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986 
(IRCA)
Iron Mountain, 85
IRS. See Internal Revenue Service (IRS)
IRS Code 6056, 194
IRS Fact Sheet 23, 72
IRS Foreign Earned Income Exclusion, 63
IRS Form 4070
for tipped employees, 123
ISOs. See Incentive stock options (ISOs)
iTookOff, 72
Final PDF to printerlan43463_idx_533-554.indd 542 06/22/23 03:55 pm
542   Index
J
Jessie Chavez v. PVH Corporation (2013), 77
Job leveling, 127
Jury duty, 155
K
Kansas, state revenue department information, 519
Kentucky, state revenue department information, 519
Knowledge-based employment, 153
Kronos company payroll processing, 33
L
Labor costs, layoffs at Disney, 279
Labor distribution, 319–320
Labor distribution report, 319–320
Labor expenses, company profits and, 318–320
Labor reports, 379
Labor trends, 379
Labor usage report, 379
Leased employees, 67
Lease-value rule, 190
Leave-sharing plans, 451
Ledbetter, Lilly, 5
Legal framework, 11
governmental contracts and, 12
minimum wage and, 12
to payroll accounting, 11–18
social welfare system, 12
timeline of, 12
Liabilities
in financial accounting, 364
payroll-related, 376
Liability accounts, 368
Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act of 2009, 4, 5, 82
Limited liability companies (LLCs), 186
Living wage, 14
Local employer-only payroll taxes, 288
Local income taxes, 240–241
Long-term disability insurance, 194
Lookback period, 290–291
Louisiana, state revenue department information, 520
Lump-sum distributions, 245
M
Maine
employer-paid Competitive Skills Scholarship Program 
tax, 288
state revenue department information, 520
Maintenance, 88
of employee files, 79
Mandated deductions, 196, 216
Mandatory deductions, 181, 220
Manual payroll accountants, 32
Manual payroll systems, 29, 32, 233
Manual systems, federal income tax in, 221
Marginal tax rate, 513
Marketplace, 7
Maryland, state revenue department information, 520
Massachusetts, state revenue department 
information, 520
Material contribution, 52
McDonald’s Corporation, 25
McElrath v. Uber Technologies, 152
Meat-packing plants, 15
Medical expenses, 183
Medicare, 13
Medicare and Medicaid Act of 1965, 13
Medicare taxes, 235–236
employee and employer responsibilities, 280–282
special classes of federal tax withholding and, 
448–454
Michigan, state revenue department information, 520
Microsoft, 3, 28
Microsoft Dynamics 365 GP, 30, 31
Mid-year employer tax reporting and deposits, 
293–315
“Mini-COBRA” plans, 7
Minimum wage, 14, 118, 120–123
definition, 120
Fair Labor Standards Act, 129
federal, 120, 123
hourly rates by state, 122
inside sales representative, 132
no state, 122
outside sales representative, 132
overtime for, 130
pay for nonexempt workers, 120–126
piece-rate pay, 134
salaried wage compared to, 129–130
salaried workers compared to, 129–130
state, 123
for tipped employees, 121, 123–126
Minimum wage rates, 69
Minnesota, state revenue department information, 520
Mississippi, state revenue department information, 520
Missouri, state revenue department information, 520
Montana, state revenue department information, 520
Monthly payroll, 49
Monthly schedule depositors, 291
Multifactor authentication, 78
Multistate employer registration form, 61–63
Final PDF to printerlan43463_idx_533-554.indd 543 06/22/23 03:55 pm
Index   543
MyPayrollHR, 75
myPay Solutions, 23, 29
N
Nebraska, state revenue department information, 520
Net pay, 118
with charitable contribution, 196–197
computation, 218–220, 236
federal income tax withholding amounts, 220–233
grossed-up pay, 219
local income taxes, 240–241
Medicare taxes, 235–236
percentage method, 227–233
post-tax deductions, 241–246
Social Security and Medicare, 233–238
with state income tax, 239–240
state-specific taxes, 239–240
summary, 253
wage-bracket method, 225–227
Nevada, state revenue department information, 520
New employees, reporting, 54–64
New Hampshire, state revenue department informa￾tion, 520
New-hire reporting, 48, 59, 60
New Jersey
Diane B. Allen Equal Pay Act, 20
state revenue department information, 521
New Mexico, state revenue department information, 521
Newspaper carriers and vendors, 452
New York, state revenue department information, 521
Next business day schedule depositors, 291, 292
Nintendo, 3
Noncash award, 187
Noncash compensation, 187
Noncash fringe benefits, 202
Noncash payments, treatment under employment 
taxes, 452
Nonexempt employees, 71, 72, 118, 120, 127, 129
overtime, 140
Nonexempt salaried workers
minimum wage pay for, 120–126
salaried, 127
Nonexempt workers, 15, 65
exempt vs., 65–67
Nonproductive time, 133
Nonprofit organizations, 452
Nonqualified deferred compensation, 158–159
Nonresident aliens, 448
Non-solo effort, payroll as, 80–81
Nontaxable achievement award, 187
Normal business hours, 72
North Carolina, state revenue department informa￾tion, 521
North Dakota, state revenue department information, 521
O
OASDI. See Old-Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance 
(OASDI)
Obergefell v. Hodges (2015), 10
Objectivity, 21
Occupational Privilege Tax (OPT; head tax; Denver), 240, 
295, 324
Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (OSHA), 
5, 289
Office of Child Support Enforcement (OSCE), 9
Office of Management and Budget (OMB), 59
Off-site gym membership, 188
Ohio, state revenue department information, 521
Oklahoma
state revenue department information, 521
tipped employees in, 126
Old-Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance (OASDI), 
13, 234
OMB. See Office of Management and Budget (OMB)
On-call time, 153–154
Online accounting software, 23
Online banks, 23
OnPay, 30
OPT. See Occupational Privilege Tax (OPT)
Oregon, state revenue department information, 521
OSCE. See Office of Child Support Enforcement (OSCE)
OSHA. See Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 
(OSHA)
Outsourced payroll systems, 32–33, 316
Outsourced vendor, 30
Outsourcing payroll activities, 29
Overhead allocations, 379
Overpayments, 245–246
Overtime, 118, 130
nonexempt employee, 140
wage payment with, 147–148
Overtime Earnings columns, 148
Overtime hours, 137
Overtime pay
for employees of hospitals and residential care facilities, 
141–142
for employees who work in two or more separate func￾tions, 144–145
piece-rate employee, 143
salaried nonexempt worker, 144
standard, 140–141
for tipped employees, 142–143
Final PDF to printerlan43463_idx_533-554.indd 544 06/22/23 03:55 pm
544   Index
Overtime reports, 379
Owners’ equity, in financial accounting, 364
P
Paid time off, 320
Paper-based payroll data, 76
Paper checks, 247, 249
Partners, 452
Part-time employees, 295
PATH Act. See Protecting Americans from Tax Hikes 
(PATH) Act
Pay advice, 179, 180, 249
Pay calculations
hundredth-hour system for, 138–139
for piece-rate employees, 134, 135
quarter-hour system for, 137–138
of weekly regular time and overtime, 72
Paycards, 31, 77, 250–251
Paychex, 23, 30, 33, 320
Paychex Flex, 28, 76
Pay cycles, 48–51
Pay employment taxes, 178
Pay methods
cash, 246–247
checks, 247–249
cryptocurrency, 251–252
direct deposit, 249–250
paycards, 250–251
summary, 253
Pay periods, 48, 51
computation, 69
Pay rate, 69–71
Pay records, 68–73
calculations of weekly regular time and 
overtime in, 72
documentation, 68
entering hours in, 71–72
pay rate and, 69–71
technological advances and, 69
Payroll, 77–78
benefit analysis as function of, 320–323
as business expense, 315–318
cybersecurity and, 77–78
department, 48
documentation regulations, 48
economic effects of, 381
employee, 71
fraud, 81
fringe benefits within context of, 178–182
as non-solo effort, 80–81
record-keeping and maintenance, 88
steps to ensure accurate, 74
time-tracking applications, 72
Payroll accountants, 19, 26, 46, 72, 136, 189
certification, 523–526
certified payroll, 33–34
computer-based systems, 30–31
confidentiality, 20
Form I-9 (Employee Eligibility Verification Form), 58
integrity, 20
internal tool, 145
Internet-based systems, 31–32
large businesses, 28–29
local income tax, 240
manual payroll systems, 32
Medicare tax, 236
objectivity and independence, 21
outsourced payroll systems, 32–33
payroll preparation method, 23
professional competence and due care, 21
professionalism, 20
quarter-hour system for, 137
small businesses, 29–30
Payroll accounting, 85
in COVID-19 pandemic, 361
due care, 21
ethical guidelines for, 19–21
by Internal Revenue Code, 80
legal framework to, 11–18
reconciliation, 374–375
Payroll apps, 68
Payroll audit, 81, 363
Payroll audit process, 74
Payroll certification information, 523–526
Payroll checks, 81
Payroll cycles, 50
Payroll data, 76
Payroll disbursement, 77
Payroll documentation regulations, 48
Payroll draw, 150
Payroll effects, on the accounting system, 
375–376
Payroll entries, in accounting reports, 377–380
Payroll errors, 4, 24
Payroll fraud, 21
Payroll functions, digitization of, 68
Payroll information
confidentiality, 73
Payroll outsourcing companies, 145
Payroll practices. See also Payroll accounting; Payroll 
processing
healthy work-life policies, 3–11
Final PDF to printerlan43463_idx_533-554.indd 545 06/22/23 03:55 pm
Index   545
identify contemporary, 22–26
integrated software packages, 22
in large businesses, 28–29
modern tools, 22
preparation options and, 23–25
privacy protection and, 25–26
in small businesses, 29–30
and system fundamentals, 35
Payroll preparation methods, 23–25
Payroll procedures, 46
document destruction procedures, 84–87
employee documentation and, 51–65
employee file maintenance, 68–73
employment termination, 84–87
establishment, 88
exempt and nonexempt workers, 65–67
internal controls and record retention for, 73–84
and pay cycles, 48–51
pay periods, 51
pay records, 68–73
payroll cycles, 50
reporting new employees, 54–64
summary, 88
Payroll process flowchart, 380
Payroll processing
certified payroll, 33–34
computer-based systems, 30–31
for different businesses, 28–35
Internet-based systems, 31–32
large businesses, 28–29
manual payroll systems, 32
outsourced payroll systems, 32–33
small businesses, 29–30
trend in, 31
Payroll professionals, cross-training of, 78
Payroll records, 76
audit, 83
maintenance, 79
Payroll record security, 77
Payroll register, 82, 145–149
with annotations, 146
data, 145–147
data for, 284
employee earnings records and, 362–364
explanation of, 362–364
function of, 377
to General Journal entries, 367
method to complete, 367–371
for multiple employees, 148
purpose, 146
summary of, 381
track employee compensation using, 147–148
Payroll-related business expenses, 375–376
Payroll-related liabilities, 376
Payroll review process, 74
Payroll specialist, 21
Payroll systems, 2, 68
basic elements of, 28
computerized, 30
employers’, 4
internal controls and record retention for, 73–84
manual, 29, 32
outsourced, 32–33
responsibilities within, 24
security, 26
Payroll taxes, 179–181
computation using Form W-4, 222–224
public transportation, 239
Payroll tax reports, 322
Pay transparency laws, 18
PCAOB. See Public Company Accounting Oversight 
Board (PCAOB)
Penalties for failure to deposit and failure to file, 
316–317
Pennsylvania, state revenue department 
information, 521
Pension payments, 158
Pension plans, 453
PEOs. See Professional Employer Organizations (PEOs)
Percentage method, 227–233
for manual payrolls with Forms W-4, 404
manual payroll system, 456–461
vs. wage-bracket method, 232–233
Periodic tax reports, 363
Period totals, 363
Personal protective equipment, 5
Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity 
Reconciliation Act of 1996 (PRWOR), 9
Personal Responsibility, Work and Family Promotion Act 
of 2002, 9
Personal service, 245
Piece rate, 71
Piece rate compensation, 71
Piece-rate employees, 118, 135
overtime, 143
Piece-rate workers, 133–135
overtime rates for, 135
Pizza Fridays, 189
Point-of-sale (POS) purchases, 250
POP. See Premium-only plan (POP)
Post-closing trial balance, 377, 378
Posting practices, for General Ledger, 371, 374
Final PDF to printerlan43463_idx_533-554.indd 546 06/22/23 03:55 pm
546   Index
Post-tax deductions, 196–198, 216, 241–246
charitable contributions, 241–242
consumer credit, 244–245
definition, 193
employee advances and overpayments, 245–246
garnishments, 242–243
pre-tax deductions vs. See Pre-tax deductions
supplemental health and disability insurance, 194–195
union dues, 245
Preferred destruction methods, 85
Premium-only plan (POP), 182–183
Pre-tax deductions, 193–196, 216, 221, 234, 236
federal income, 221–225
post-tax deductions vs. See Post-tax deductions
provisions, 183
Social Security and Medicare taxes with, 236
tax effect, 236
Pre-tax medical premium, 193–194
Pre-tax vs. post-tax, with FSA, 184
Privacy Act 09-40-0006, 25
Privacy Act of 1974, 24, 25
Privacy acts, 25
Privacy protection, 25–26
Private personnel information, 87
Private sector employees, 153
Privilege taxes, 295, 301, 324
Prizes, 187
Professional competence, 21
Professional Employer Organizations (PEOs), 67
Professional ethics, 19
Professional exemption, 65–66
Professionalism, 20
ProShred, 85
Protecting Americans from Tax Hikes (PATH) Act, 11
Prove, 147
PRWOR. See Personal Responsibility and Work 
Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996 (PRWOR)
Publication 15, 32, 216, 220
Publication 502, 183
Publication 1779, 53
Publication 15-B, 179, 181, 187, 189, 190, 195
Publication 15-T, 32, 455
Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB), 21
Public-sector employees, 153
compensatory time, 153
Public transportation payroll tax, 239
Q
Qualified insurance benefits, 182
Qualified plan, 187
Qualified wages, 18
Quarter-hour system, 137–138
Quarterly schedule depositors, 291
QuickBooks, 22, 23, 30, 31, 247, 250
Qui tam rewards, 10
R
Railroad Retirement Act, 452
Record-keeping, 88
Record retention, 73–84
Refugees, 47
Regular Earnings column, 147
Regular hours, 137
Regulation E, 77, 250
Regulation Z, 77
Relationship of the parties, 52
Religious exemptions, 452
Remits, 369
Reporting new employees, 54–64
Reporting periods, employer, 290–292
Resident aliens, 283, 448
Resignation, 84
Resilient payroll system design, 35
Respect for Marriage Act in 2022, 5, 7, 10
Retention period, 82
Retirement plans, 195–196
employee contribution, 196
employer contributions to, 305
treatment under employment taxes, 453
Retroactive pay, 158–159
Reversal, of General Journal entries, 370–371
Review process, 74
Rhode Island, state revenue department information, 521
Right-to-work laws, 11
Rounding, 404
Rule, 147
S
Sage 100, 22, 23, 30, 31, 247
Salaried employees, 118, 151
Salaried exempt employee, 118, 148, 149
Salaried nonexempt employee, 118, 127, 129–130, 133
Salaried nonexempt overtime, 144
Salaried workers
gross pay for, 127–130
hourly wage computation, 137
and minimum wage comparisons, 129–130
salary translation to hourly rates, 128
unpaid leave, 129
Salary
definition of, 118
to hourly rate computations, 128
Final PDF to printerlan43463_idx_533-554.indd 547 06/22/23 03:55 pm
Index   547
payment, 148
translation to hourly rates, 128–129
Salespersons, 452, 453
Same-sex spouses, 7
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 (SOX), 10, 19, 24, 78
Savings Incentive Match Plan for Employees 
(SIMPLE), 195
Schedule B, for Form 941, 293, 295, 299
Schedule deposit frequencies, 291–292
Scholars, 454
Scholarships, 453
S corporation, 451
SEC regulations. See Securities and Exchanges 
Commission (SEC) regulations
Section 14(a), 157
Section 125 plans, 182, 183, 448
Section 409(a), 158
SECURE Act. See Setting Every Community Up for 
Retirement Enhancement (SECURE) Act
SECURE 2.0 Act, 6
Secure sockets layer (SSL) encryption, 28
Securities and Exchanges Commission (SEC) regula￾tions, 14
Semimonthly payroll, 49
Semiweekly schedule depositors, 291, 292
SEP. See Simplified Employee Pension (SEP)
Separation of duties, 81
SEP plans, 195
Setting Every Community Up for Retirement 
Enhancement (SECURE) Act, 6
7(j) section applies, 141
Severance pay, 453
Shareholders, 452
Shavertown, Pennsylvania, 352
Sick pay, 454
Sick time, 85, 137
SIMPLE. See Savings Incentive Match Plan for 
Employees (SIMPLE)
SIMPLE plans, 195
SIMPLE 401(k) plans, 195
Simplified Employee Pension (SEP), 195, 453
Sixteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, 11
Sleep time, 154–155
Small and medium-sized employers, 119
Small businesses, 29–30
Social and financial distress, 13
Social obligations, 21
Social Security Act (SSA), 13, 233
Social Security and Medicare, 233–238
taxes with pre-tax deductions, 236
Social Security and Medicare taxes, 195
Social Security fund, 13
Social Security Number, 26
Social Security tax, 13, 234–235
deposit schedules for, 291–292
employee and employer responsibilities, 280–282
highly compensated employees and, 282
special classes of federal tax withholding and, 448–454
Social Security wage base, 18
Social welfare legislation, 13
“Soft” benefits, 177
Software
for accounting, 360, 366
artificial intelligence (AI), 366
increase in use of, 366
Sophisticated payroll systems, 25
South Carolina, state revenue department information, 521
South Dakota, state revenue department information, 521
SOX. See Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 (SOX)
Special accounting rule, 199
Spreadsheet program, 145
Square Payroll, 68
SSA. See Social Security Act (SSA)
SSL encryption. See Secure sockets layer (SSL) 
encryption
Stakeholders, 379
State-based minimum wage, 140
State Disability Insurance (SDI; California), 295
State income taxes, 218
State income tax information, 513–517
State income tax, net pay with, 239–240
State laws, 179
State payday requirements, 70
State revenue department or labor information, 518–522
State-specific taxes, 239–240
State’s privacy law, 25
States’ termination and resignation pay guidelines, 86
State tax remittance, 295, 300, 301
State Unemployment Tax Act (SUTA), 13, 14
examples of, 287
explanation of, 282, 285, 287
purpose of, 282
requirements of, 284
state variations in, 282, 285–287
tips to minimize taxes, 287–288
wage base and rates of (2023), 285–286
wage base of, 284–285
Statutory deductions, 280
Statutory employees, 63–64
Straight-time compensation, 127
Strategic planning, 73
Students, treatment under employment taxes, 454
Final PDF to printerlan43463_idx_533-554.indd 548 06/22/23 03:55 pm
548   Index
Subminimum wage situations, 156
Supplemental health and disability insurance, 
194–195
Supplemental health insurance deduction, 195
Supplemental Unemployment Compensation Plan 
Benefits, 454
SurePayroll, 30
SUTA. See State Unemployment Tax Act (SUTA)
T
T-accounts, 365
Taxable benefit withholdings, 199
Tax bracket, 513
Tax credit, 18
Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (TCJA), 8–9, 18, 67, 218
Tax deposits, employer
deposit frequencies, 291–292
lookback period, 290–291
Taxes, 216
employee-and employer-paid, 280
Taxes and other deductions remittance, 315–316
Tax guide (Publication 15-T), 18
Taxpayer Certainty and Disaster Tax Relief Act (TCDRA) 
of 2020, 18, 184
Tax penalties, 316–317
Tax remittance, 83, 295
Tax reports, periodic, 363
Taylor, Frederick, 133
TCDRA of 2020. See Taxpayer Certainty and Disaster 
Tax Relief Act (TCDRA) of 2020
Teachers, 454
Technology
artificial intelligence (AI), 366
changes due to, 381
documentation, 87
for tracking employee attendance and calculating 
pay, 72
vulnerability of company data caused by, 74
Temporary employees, 67
Tennessee, state revenue department information, 521
Termination, 82, 84
Texas, state revenue department information, 522
3(s)(1)(c), 153
Time-and-a-half, 75
Time cards, 129
Time-collection systems, 28, 75
TimeDock, 72
Timekeeping system, 140
Time off, 320
TimeStation, 72
Time theft, 138
Tip credit, 123, 124
Tipped employees, 121, 123–126
Form W-2 for, 310
IRS Form 4070 for, 123
minimum hourly wages for, 124–125
minimum wage, 123
in Oklahoma, 126
overtime pay for, 142–143
Rhode Island, 126
Tipped wages, 123
Tips, 454
Title III, 197
Total, 147
Total compensation report, 200, 321–323
Tracking, of employee payroll expenses, 318
Trainees, 454
Transaction analysis, using T-accounts, 365
Transparency, 379
Travel time, 154–155
Trend reports, 379
Trial balance, 377–379
TriNet, 68
12 CFR Part 205, 250
26 IRC Section 3306, 305
29 CFR 525.12(h)(2)(ii), 135
29 CFR 785, 155
29 CFR 790.6, 155
29 CFR 778.111, 143
29 CFR 778.113(a), 129
29 CFR 778.114, 127
29 CFR 2510, 376
26 CFR 1.6001, 79, 81, 82
U
UKG, 28
Ultimate Kronos Group, 78
Unemployment tax reporting, 295, 305–307
Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment 
Rights Act of 1994 (USERRA), 9
Union dues, 196, 197, 245
United Furniture Industries Inc., 85
United States
ethical and legal conflicts in, 20
workers in foreign subsidiaries, 63
Unpaid leave, 129
U.S. Bank, 23
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics
accounting jobs, 4
U.S. Central Bank Digital Currency, 251
U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services, 59
U.S. Department of Labor, 12, 52, 58, 144
Final PDF to printerlan43463_idx_533-554.indd 549 06/22/23 03:55 pm
Index   549
Employee Benefits Security Administration, 376
for exempt employees, 120
Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA), 129
USERRA. See Uniformed Services Employment and 
Reemployment Rights Act of 1994 (USERRA)
U.S. v. Windsor, 10
Utah, state revenue department information, 522
V
Vacation, 85
and holiday hours, 155–156
Valuation rules, 189–192
general valuation rule, 189–191
other transportation benefits, 192
unsafe conditions, 191–192
Vanderbilt University, 320
Vermont, state revenue department information, 522
Virginia, state revenue department information, 522
Virtual private network (VPN), 28
Vocational education program, 157–158
Voluntary deductions, 193, 216, 406, 408
pre-tax vs. post-tax deductions, 193–198
summary, 202
Voluntary fringe benefits, 181
Voluntary post-tax deduction, 196
VPN. See Virtual private network (VPN)
W
Wage and Hour Division, 53
Wage base, 234, 235
Wage-bracket method, 225–227, 232
percentage method vs., 232–233
Wage payment, 147–148
Wages
in cash, 246–247
for deceased employees, 159
Wait time, 154–155
Walsh-Healey Public Contracts Act, 12–13
Walt Disney Corporation, 279
Warehouse Manager, 120
Washington, state revenue department information, 522
Wave, 31
Wayland Custom Woodworking (continuing payroll project)
forms used for, 427–447
general information about, 404–412
General Journal entries, 412–426
Web-based applications, 72
Web-based portals, 28
Web-based services, 76
Weekly payroll, 49
Well-designed payroll system, 2
Wells Fargo, 23
West Virginia, state revenue department information, 522
W-4 Form. See Form W-4 (Employee Withholding 
Allowance Certificate)
WhenIWork, 28
Wilkes-Barre Bookkeeping LLC, 352
Wire transfers, 290
Wisconsin, state revenue department information, 522
Withheld tax, 220
Withholding amounts, federal income tax, 220–233
Withholding rules, 198–199
Work direction, 52
Workers’ compensation (workers’ comp), 15, 16, 454
categories of injuries for, 289
employer requirements for, 288–290
laws by state, 17
premium computation for, 289
Work Opportunity Tax Credit, 11
W-2 Wage and Tax Form
example of, 312
explanation of, 310, 311
matching final annual pay to, 307
retirement plan checkbox decision chart, 311
Social Security and Medicare wages on, 310
for tipped employees, 310
Wyoming, state revenue department information, 522
Y
Year-end employer tax reporting and deposits, 293–315
Z
Zeller Law Group, 82
Zenefits, 76
Final PDF to printerlan43463_idx_533-554.indd 550 06/22/23 03:55 pm
Final PDF to printerlan43463_idx_533-554.indd 551 06/22/23 03:55 pm
Final PDF to printerlan43463_idx_533-554.indd 552 06/22/23 03:55 pm
Final PDF to printerlan43463_idx_533-554.indd 553 06/22/23 03:55 pm
Final PDF to printerlan43463_idx_533-554.indd 554 06/22/23 03:55 pm
Final PDF to printer
